Springer Monographs in Mathematics
Topological Vector 
Spaces and Their 
Applications
V.I. Bogachev
O.G. Smolyanov

Springer Monographs in Mathematics
Editors-in-Chief
Isabelle Gallagher, Paris, France
Minhyong Kim, Oxford, UK

This series publishes advanced monographs giving well-written presentations of 
the “state-of-the-art” in fields of mathematical research that have acquired the  
­maturity needed for such a treatment. They are sufficiently self-contained to be 
accessible to more than just the intimate specialists of the subject, and sufficiently 
­comprehensive to remain valuable references for many years. Besides the ­current  
state of knowledge in its field, an SMM volume should ideally describe its 
­relevance to and interaction with neighbouring fields of mathematics, and give 
pointers to future directions of research.
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/3733

V.I. Bogachev · O.G. Smolyanov
1 3
Topological Vector Spaces 
and Their Applications

V.I. Bogachev
Department of Mechanics  
and ­Mathematics 
Moscow State University 
Moscow  
Russia
and 
Higher School of Economics
National Research University 
Moscow
Russia
ISSN  1439-7382	
ISSN  2196-9922  (electronic)
Springer Monographs in Mathematics
ISBN 978-3-319-57116-4	
ISBN 978-3-319-57117-1  (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-57117-1
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017939903
Mathematics Subject Classification: 46A03, 58C20, 28C20
O.G. Smolyanov
Department of Mechanics  
and Mathematics 
Moscow State University 
Moscow 
Russia
The book is an expanded and revised version of the Russian edition under the same title, published in 
Regular and Chaotic Dynamics, Moscow-Izhevsk, 2012.
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part 
of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, 
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission  
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar 
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this 
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from 
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this 
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the  
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or  
for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Contents
Preface
ix
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory of topological
vector spaces
1
1.1.
Linear spaces and topology
1
1.2.
Basic definitions
11
1.3.
Examples
17
1.4.
Convex sets
29
1.5.
Finite-dimensional and normable spaces
35
1.6.
Metrizability
41
1.7.
Completeness and completions
45
1.8.
Compact and precompact sets
53
1.9.
Linear operators
59
1.10.
The Hahn–Banach theorem: geometric form
63
1.11.
The Hahn–Banach theorem: analytic form
71
1.12.
Complements and exercises
81
Uniform spaces (81). Convex compact sets (84). Fixed point theorems (86).
Sequence spaces (89). Duals to Banach spaces (90). Separability properties (91).
Continuous selections and extensions (93). Exercises (94).
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing topological
vector spaces
101
2.1.
Projective topologies
101
2.2.
Examples of projective limits
104
2.3.
Inductive topologies
109
2.4.
Examples of inductive limits
113
2.5.
Grothendieck’s construction
119
2.6.
Strict inductive limits
125
2.7.
Inductive limits with compact embeddings
127
2.8.
Tensor products
130
2.9.
Nuclear spaces
134
2.10.
Complements and exercises
139
Properties of the spaces D and D′ (139). Absolutely summing operators (143).
Local completeness (145). Exercises (147).
v

vi
Contents
Chapter 3. Duality
153
3.1.
Polars
153
3.2.
Topologies compatible with duality
158
3.3.
Adjoint operators
162
3.4.
Weak compactness
164
3.5.
Barrelled spaces
170
3.6.
Bornological spaces
175
3.7.
The strong topology and reflexivity
180
3.8.
Criteria for completeness
186
3.9.
The closed graph theorem
193
3.10.
Compact operators
199
3.11.
The Fredholm alternative
205
3.12.
Complements and exercises
208
Baire spaces (208). The Borel graph theorem (211). Bounding sets (212).
The James theorem (213). Topological properties of locally convex spaces (214).
Eberlein–ˇSmulian properties (218). Schauder bases (219). Minimal spaces
and powers of the real line (221). Exercises (224).
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
243
4.1.
Differentiability with respect to systems of sets
244
4.2.
Examples
251
4.3.
Differentiability and continuity
257
4.4.
Differentiability and continuity along a subspace
261
4.5.
The derivative of a composition
263
4.6.
The mean value theorem
273
4.7.
Taylor’s formula
275
4.8.
Partial derivatives
278
4.9.
The inversion of Taylor’s formula and the chain rule
279
4.10.
Complements and exercises
289
The inverse function theorem (289). Polynomials (291). Ordinary differential
equations in locally convex spaces (294). Passage to the limit in derivatives (297).
Completeness of spaces of smooth mappings (300). Differentiability via
pseudotopologies (305). Smooth functions on Banach spaces (307). Exercises (308).
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
311
5.1.
Cylindrical sets
311
5.2.
Measures on topological spaces
313
5.3.
Transformations and convergence of measures
321
5.4.
Cylindrical measures
327
5.5.
The Fourier transform
333
5.6.
Covariance operators and means of measures
337
5.7.
Gaussian measures
345
5.8.
Quasi-measures
354
5.9.
Sufficient topologies
357
5.10.
The Sazonov and Gross–Sazonov topologies
359

Contents
vii
5.11.
Conditions for countable additivity
366
5.12.
Complements and exercises
372
Convolution (372). 0–1 laws (376). Convex measures (378). The central limit
theorem (381). Infinitely divisible and stable measures (383). Banach supports
of measures (391). Infinite-dimensional Wiener processes (393). Prohorov locally
convex spaces (394). Measurable linear and polylinear functions (399). Relations
between different σ-algebras (409). Radonifying operators (412). Measurable
norms (412). Exercises (413).
Comments
419
Bibliography
425
Author index
447
Subject index
451

Preface
This book gives a concise exposition of the fundamentals of the theory of topo-
logical vector spaces, complemented by a survey of the most important results of a
more subtle nature, which cannot be qualified as basic, but knowledge of which is
useful for applications, and, finally, some of such applications connected with dif-
ferential calculus in infinite-dimensional spaces and measure theory. Almost half
of the book is devoted to these applications, which makes it very different from
the whole series of known texts on topological vector spaces. Another notable dif-
ference between this book and known treatises like Bourbaki [87], Edwards [150],
Grothendieck [207], Jarchow [237], Kelley, Namioka [270], K¨othe [292], Nar-
ici, Beckenstein [365], P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385], Robertson, Robertson [420],
Schaefer [436], Tr`eves [530], and Wilansky [567] is that we decided to include also
some results without proofs (this does not concern the fundamentals, of course)
with references instead, which enables us to inform the reader about many rela-
tively recent achievements; some of them are disguised as exercises (with refer-
ences to the literature), such exercises should not be confused with usual exercises
marked by the symbol ◦. Thus, with respect to the presented information, our book
is not covered by any other book on this subject (though, we cannot claim that it
covers any such book).
Chapter 1 contains the fundamentals of the theory, including a large list of
concrete examples, some general concepts (convex sets, seminorms, linear map-
pings) and a number of facts, the most important of which is the Hahn–Banach
theorem on extensions of functionals in its diverse versions.
The main material of Chapter 2 is connected with projective and inductive
limits (including strict inductive limits and inductive limits with compact em-
beddings, which is not sufficiently discussed in the existing literature), and also
Grothendieck’s method of constructing Banach spaces embedded into locally con-
vex spaces.
Chapter 3 contains the classical material related to the so-called duality theory,
i.e., introduction of different locally convex topologies on a given space giving the
same set of continuous linear functionals. The central topics here are the Mackey–
Arens theorem on topologies compatible with duality, the results on weak com-
pactness, including the Eberlein–ˇSmulian and Krein–ˇSmulian theorems, and also
some concepts and facts connected with completeness of locally convex spaces.
ix

x
Preface
Chapter 4 is devoted to the fundamentals of the differentiation theory in lo-
cally convex spaces. It presents a general scheme of differentiability with respect
to a system of sets (partial cases of which are Gˆateaux, Hadamard and Fr´echet
differentiabilities) and a thorough discussion of important for applications differ-
entiabilities with respect to systems of bounded and compact sets.
Chapter 5 gives a concise introduction to measure theory on locally convex
spaces. Here we discuss extensions of cylindrical measures, the Fourier trans-
form and conditions for the countable additivity in its terms (in particular, the
Minlos and Sazonov theorems and their generalizations), covariance operators,
measurable linear functionals and operators, measurable polynomials, and some
important classes of measures (such as Gaussian, stable, and convex).
Each chapter opens with a brief synopsis of its content. All chapters contain
many additional subsections with some more specialized information related to
the main themes of the chapter, and also many exercises are given (more difficult
ones are provided with hints or references).
The book ends with the historic-
bibliographic comments, the list of references (with indication of page numbers of
citing the included works), and the author and subject indices.
The prerequisites for the first chapter of this book are just a grasp knowledge
of calculus and linear algebra and some experience with basic concepts of topol-
ogy, but for a thorough study it is advisable to be acquainted with a university
course of functional analysis (following any text, e.g., Kolmogorov, Fomin [284]
or Rudin [425]).
We are very grateful to T.O. Banakh, E.D. Kosov, I. Marshall, S.N. Popova,
A.V. Shaposhnikov, A.S. Tregubov and E.V. Yurova for useful remarks and cor-
rections.
Our work on this book began 25 years ago by the initiative of Vladimir
Ivanovich Sobolev (1913–1995), the author of a series of widely known texts on
functional analysis (including one of the first Russian texts, published as early as
in 1951), and its completion is a tribute to the memory of this remarkable scientist
and teacher.

CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the theory of topological vector
spaces
In this chapter we present basic concepts and examples connected with topo-
logical vector spaces.
1.1. Linear spaces and topology
A topological vector space is a linear (or vector) space equipped with a topol-
ogy which agrees with the linear structure. So we first recall separately basic
concepts related to linear spaces and topological spaces. Let K be an algebraic
field (throughout we deal with the field IR of real numbers or with the field C
of complex numbers; so a reader not acquainted with the general notion of an
algebraic field can safely ignore it). A set E is called a linear (or vector) space
over the field K if the elements of E (called vectors) can be added and multiplied
by the elements of K, i.e., we are given mappings
E×E →E, (u, v) →u + v,
K×E →E, (λ, v) →λv
satisfying the following conditions:
(i) u + v = v + u for all u, v ∈E,
(ii) there is a unique element 0 ∈E (the zero element) for which v + 0 = v
for all v ∈E,
(iii) for every v ∈E there is a unique element −v for which v + (−v) = 0,
(iv) λ(u+v) = λu+λv, λ(μv) = (λμ)v, (λ+μ)u = λu+μu and 0v = λ0 = 0
for all u, v ∈E and λ, μ ∈K.
Below we often omit the explicit mentioning the field K and its elements will
be called scalars, and in case of K ⊂C they will be called numbers. About general
fields, see Kurosh [306].
1.1.1. Example. Let K = IR and let T be a nonempty set. Let IRT be the set
of all real functions on T, where the linear operations are defined pointwise:
(f + g)(t) := f(t) + g(t),
(λf)(t) := λf(t).
Then IRT is a linear space; it is called the product of T copies of the real line or
a power of the real line.
1
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
V.I. Bogachev and O.G. Smolyanov, Topological Vector Spaces
and Their Applications, Springer Monographs in Mathematics,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-57117-1_1

2
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
Throughout, if it is not explicitly stated otherwise, we assume that K is a
nondiscrete normed field. A norm on the field K is a mapping K →[0, +∞) (its
value on the element x ∈K is denoted by |x|) such that the following conditions
are fulfilled: |x| > 0 for x ∈K \ {0} (nondegeneracy), |0| = 0, |xy| = |x| |y|
(multiplicativity) and |x + y| ⩽|x| + |y| (the triangle inequality) for all x, y ∈K.
A field equipped with a norm is called a normed field. For example, the field C
of complex numbers is normed if |a| is the usual absolute value of the number
a ∈C. A field is nondiscrete if it has an element k ̸= 0 with |k| ̸= 1.
A seminorm on a vector space E is a function p: E →[0, ∞) such that
(1) p(kx) = |k|p(x) ∀k ∈K, x ∈E;
(2) p(x1 + x2) ⩽p(x1) + p(x2) ∀x1 ∈E, x2 ∈E.
A seminorm p is called a norm if p(x) > 0 whenever x ̸= 0. For example,
∥x∥= (x, x)1/2 is a norm on a Euclidean space E with an inner product ( · , · ),
i.e., x →(x, y) is linear, (x, y) ≡(y, x) for real E and (x, y) ≡(y, x) for
complex E, (x, x) ⩾0 and (x, x) = 0 only for x = 0.
Two norms p and q are called equivalent if for some numbers c1, c2 > 0 and
all x the inequality c1p(x) ⩽q(x) ⩽c2p(x) holds.
A collection of vectors in a linear space is called linearly independent if the
equality λ1v1 +· · ·+λnvn = 0, where vi are distinct vectors in this collection and
λi are scalars, implies that λi = 0 for all i = 1, . . . , n; otherwise this collection is
linearly dependent.
A linearly independent collection of vectors vα is called an algebraic basis
(Hamel’s basis) in the space X if every vector in X is a finite linear combination
of the vectors vα. In the zero space the zero element is a basis by definition.
Below we prove the existence of a Hamel basis in every linear space; moreover,
different Hamel bases have the same cardinality. The cardinality of a Hamel basis
is called the dimension of the space.
Let E and F be two vector spaces over the same field. A mapping A: E →F
is called linear (or a linear operator) if
A(λu + μv) = λA(u) + μA(v)
for all vectors u, v ∈E and all scalars λ, μ. A linear mapping with values in the
field of scalars is called a linear functional.
The set Ker A := A−1(0) is called the kernel of the linear mapping A and the
set Ran A := A(E) is called the range of A.
For every vector space E, the symbol E∗denotes the vector space of all linear
functions on E; it is called the algebraic dual to E. The algebraic dual space
should not be confused with the topological dual considered below and consisting
of all continuous linear functions. For the general theory and applications, the
topological dual spaces are most important, but the algebraic dual is useful for
some examples and constructions.
The quotient (or the factorspace) E/E1 of a vector space E by its its subspace
E1 is defined as follows: the elements of E/E1 are equivalence classes of the
set E, where x ∼z ⇐⇒x −z ∈E1. Thus, if Z ∈E/E1, then there exists (non

1.1. Linear spaces and topology
3
unique) z ∈E such that Z = z+E1. The linear operations in E/E1 are defined as
follows: suppose that X = x+E1, Z = z+E1, λ ∈K; then X+Z = (x+z)+E1,
λX = λx + E1.
The dimension of the space E/E1 is called the codimension of the subspace
E1 in the space E. A hypersubspace in a vector space E is its subspace G with
dim E/G = 1, i.e., there exists a nonzero vector v such that every vector in E
is a linear combination of v and some vector in G. In this case, we say that the
codimension of G in E is one.
A subset Γ in a vector space E is called a hyperplane if E contains a hyper-
subspace G and an element a such that a + G = Γ (then a ∈Γ). In other words, a
subset Γ in vector space E is called a hyperplane precisely when for some (hence
for any) element b ∈Γ the set Γ −b is a hypersubspace (a hypersubspace is a
hyperplane passing through the origin).
A subset A in a vector space E is called an affine subspace or a linear
manifold if it is nonempty and for all a, b ∈A and every t ∈K one has the
inclusion ta + (1 −t)b ∈A. The set {ta + (1 −t)b: t ∈K} is (for a ̸= b)
the straight line passing through a and b. In other words, the set A is an affine
subspace if it has the form a + L for some vector subspace L and some (then for
any) element a ∈A.
The linear span of A is the smallest linear subspace containing A.
1.1.2. Definition. A set V in a real or complex vector space is called convex
if tu + (1 −t)v ∈V for all u, v ∈V and t ∈[0, 1].
In other words, a set is convex if along with every two its points it contains
the interval joining them. The interval [a, b] with the endpoints a and b is defined
by the equality
[a, b] := {x: x = ta + (1 −t)b, t ∈[0, 1]}.
Set also
(a, b) := [a, b]\{a, b},
[a, b) := [a, b]\{b},
(a, b] := [a, b]\{a}.
The convex hull (or convex envelope) of a nonempty set A in a real or complex
vector space E is the intersection conv A of all convex sets containing A.
Thus, the convex hull of the set A is the smallest convex sets containing A. It
is readily verified that it consists of all possible sums of the form t1a1+· · ·+tnan,
where ai ∈A, ti ⩾0, t1 + · · · + tn = 1.
1.1.3. Definition. A set M is called circled or balanced if λx ∈M for all
x ∈M and |λ| ⩽1.
A convex circled set is also called absolutely convex.
The circled and convex circled (or absolutely convex) hulls of a set A in
a linear space are, respectively, the smallest circled set and the smallest convex
circled set abs conv A containing A.
1.1.4. Definition. If A and B are sets in a linear space E, then we say that
A absorbs B (or that the set B is absorbed by the set A) if there exists a number
r > 0 such that kB ⊂A whenever |k| < r, k ∈K.

4
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
A set in E is called absorbing (or absorbent) if it absorbs every singleton
(and then every finite set) in E.
A simple example of a set which does not absorb itself is K \ {0}; every
balanced set absorbs itself (take r = 1). If a normed field K is discrete, then the
property to absorb, although formally meaningful, has no useful content since then
{0} absorbs every set with r = 1.
For nonempty sets A and B in a vector space and a scalar λ, we set
A + B := {a + b: a ∈A, b ∈B},
λA := {λa: a ∈A};
A + B is the algebraic (vector) sum of sets. Further,
A −B = A + (−B) = {a −b: a ∈A, b ∈B}.
Throughout we also use two set-theoretic concepts: the equivalence relation
and the partial ordering relation.
Suppose that a certain set R if pairs of elements in the set X is given, i.e.,
a subset R ⊂X×X. We say that R defines an equivalence relation on the set X
and write x ∼y for (x, y) ∈R if
(i) x ∼x for all x ∈X,
(ii) if x ∼y, then y ∼x,
(iii) if x ∼y and y ∼z, then x ∼z.
The reader can easily see by simple examples that these three conditions are
independent.
The equivalence relation splits X into disjoint equivalence classes consisting
of pairwise equivalent elements. For example, if x ∼y only when x = y, then
every class consists precisely of a single element; if, in the opposite direction, all
elements are equivalent, then we obtain only one equivalence class. Yet another
example: let x ∼y for x, y ∈IR1, if x −y ∈Q. Then the equivalence classes
are countable. If is often useful to be able to choose a representative in every
equivalence class. It turns out that for realizing this, at the first glance absolutely
innocent desire, a special axiom is required.
The axiom of choice.
If we are given a collection of nonempty pairwise
disjoint sets, then there exists a set containing precisely one element from each of
these sets.
The use of this axiom is essential for many issues in functional analysis, and
without this axiom at least for countable collections very little remains from the
continuous mathematics at all. Nevertheless, it is useful to remember that this is
indeed an axiom that does not follow from the so-called naive set theory.
We say that a set X is equipped with a partial order or partial ordering if a
certain collection P of pairs (x, y) ∈X ×X is distinguished, for which we write
x ⩽y, such that (i) x ⩽x, (ii) if x ⩽y and y ⩽z, then x ⩽z. If x ⩽y, then we
also write y ⩾x. Note that we do not include the equality x = y in the case where
x ⩽y and y ⩽x, unlike some other authors (though, one can pass to this case
by identifying such elements). For example, our definition applies to the relation
f ⩽g almost everywhere for measurable functions on an interval.

1.1. Linear spaces and topology
5
It is not required that all elements be pairwise comparable. For example, the
plane IR2 can be partially ordered in the following way:
x = (x1, x2) ⩽y = (y1, y2) if x1 ⩽y1 and x2 ⩽y2.
If all elements of X are pairwise comparable, then X is called linearly or-
dered.
For example, the real line with its usual ordering is linearly ordered, and the
aforementioned coordinate-wise ordering of the plane is not linear. However, the
plane can be naturally linearly ordered: take the so-called lexicographic order,
when x ⩽y if either x1 < y1 or x1 = y1 and x2 ⩽y2.
In a partially ordered set some parts can be linearly ordered. Such parts are
called chains. For example, the real line as a part of the plane with the coordinate-
wise order is a chain.
If X is a partially ordered set and M ⊂X, then an element μ ∈X is called
an upper bound of the set M if m ⩽μ for all m ∈M. If m is an upper bound
of M such that m ⩽m for every other upper bound m of the set M, then m is
called the least upper bound M. An element m ∈X is called maximal if there is
no element m′ ∈X such that m ⩽m′. It is not required that all elements of X
be smaller than m. For example, if x ⩽y only when x = y, then every element
is maximal. Similarly one defines a lower bound, the greatest lower bound and a
minimal element.
A linearly ordered set X is called completely ordered if every nonempty part
of X has a minimal element.
For example, the set of natural numbers with its natural order is completely
ordered, but the sets of rational and real numbers are not.
The axiom of choice is equivalent to the following assertion (if we accept
it as an axiom, then the axiom of choice becomes a theorem); for a proof, see
Kolmogorov, Fomin [284], Kurosh [306].
The Zermelo theorem. Every nonempty set can be completely ordered.
Let us give yet another corollary of the axiom of choice (equivalent to it).
The Zorn (or Kuratowski–Zorn) lemma. If every chain in a partially or-
dered set has a majorant, then this set contains a maximal element.
We recall that a maximal element need not be unique. Let us give an example
of how Zorn’s lemma works.
1.1.5. Proposition. Every real or complex linear space possesses an algebraic
basis. Moreover, any two such bases have the same cardinality. In addition, any
algebraic basis in a linear subspace can be complemented to an algebraic basis
of the whole space.
PROOF. We assume that our space X contains nonzero vectors.
Then X
contains systems of algebraically independent vectors. Let Λ denote the collection
of all such systems and let us introduce in Λ the following relation: λ1 ⩽λ2
if λ1 ⊂λ2. Clearly, we obtain a partial order. We have to show that the set
Λ has a maximal element, i.e., a system λ of algebraically independent vectors

6
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
that is not a proper subset of any other system of independent vectors. Such a
maximal system will be a basis, since the existence of a vector v not representable
as a linear combination of vectors in λ would mean that the system λ ∪v is also
independent, which contradicts the maximality of λ. The existence of a maximal
element follows from Zorn’s lemma, but in order to apply it we have to show
that every chain Λ0 in Λ has an upper bound. In other words, having a set Λ0 of
independent collections of vectors such that every two collections are comparable
(i.e., one of the two is contained in the other), we have to find an independent
system of vectors containing all systems from Λ0. For such a system we simply
take the union Λ1 of all systems from Λ0. The fact that the obtained system is
independent is clear from the following. If vectors v1, . . . , vn belong to Λ1, then
there exist systems λ1, . . . , λn ∈Λ0 such that vi ∈λi for i = 1, . . . , n. Since
the systems λi are pairwise comparable, among them there is the largest one λi0.
Then all vi belong to λi0 and hence are linearly independent.
A minor modification of this reasoning enables us to complement algebraic
bases in a subspace to bases of the whole space: it suffices to take for elements Λ
independent systems containing a fixed basis in the given subspace. By the way,
this reasoning is true for every field.
Finally, the assertion about the equicardinality of algebraic bases in the space
X in the case of a finite-dimensional space is known from linear algebra.
If
X is infinite-dimensional and γ1 and γ2 are two its algebraic bases, then the
cardinality of γ2 does not exceed the cardinality of γ1. Indeed, every element
v ∈γ2 corresponds to a finite set of elements S ⊂γ1 through which it is linearly
expressed. This finite set S is associated to at most finitely many elements in γ2
(not more than the cardinality of S, since by using k vectors we cannot linearly
express more than k linearly independent vectors). Hence the cardinality of γ2
does not exceed the cardinality of the set of finite subsets of γ1, which has the
same cardinality as γ1 (see Hrbacek, Jech [229, p. 136]). Thus, the cardinality of
γ2 does not exceed the cardinality of γ1, and the opposite inequality is true.
□
With the aid of this result any linear mapping T defined on a linear subspace
E0 of a vector space E and taking values in a vector space F can be extended to a
linear mapping of the whole space E to F. It suffices to complement an algebraic
basis in E0 to a basis of the whole space E, define T by zero on the additional
elements of the basis and then define by linearity on all vectors.
Let us now proceed to necessary topological concepts.
For more details,
see Arkhangel’ski˘ı, Ponomarev [22], Bogachev, Smolyanov [72], Edwards [150],
Engelking [154], and Kelley [268].
A topology on a set X is a family τ of subsets of this set possessing the
following properties:
(i) X, ∅∈τ;
(ii) if V1, V2 ∈τ, then V1 ∩V2 ∈τ;
(iii) the union of every collection of sets from τ belongs to τ.
Hence the minimal topology is (X, ∅) and the maximal topology is 2X, the
class of all subsets of X.

1.1. Linear spaces and topology
7
A topological space is a pair (X, τ), where X is a set, called the set of
elements of this topological space, and τ is a topology on X. The elements of τ
are called open subsets of the topological space X.
A subset of a topological space is called closed if its complement is open. The
topology in X can be also defined by introducing the class F of all closed sets,
which must satisfy the following conditions:
(i) X, ∅∈F;
(ii) if F1, F2 ∈F, then F1 ∪F2 ∈F;
(iii) the intersection of every collection of sets from F belongs to F.
An important subclass of the class of topological spaces is formed by metric
spaces. Although a grasp knowledge of them is assumed, we recall that a metric
space (M, d) is a pair, where M is a set and d: M×M →[0, +∞) is a function,
called a metric, that satisfies the following conditions:
(i) d(a, b) = d(b, a), in addition, d(a, b) = 0 if and only if a = b,
(ii) d(a, c) ⩽d(a, b) + d(b, c) (the triangle inequality).
A linear space with a norm ∥· ∥(a normed space) is a metric space with the
metric d(x, y) = ∥x −y∥.
Let a ∈M and r > 0. The set
{x ∈M : d(x, a) < r}
is called the open ball with the center a and radius r. If we define open sets in M
as arbitrary unions of open balls (with arbitrary centers and radii) and the empty
set, then we obtain a topological space (a simple verification is left as an exercise).
Here any open ball will be an open set (which is easily verified with the aid of the
triangle inequality). The closed ball with the center a and radius r is defined as
the set
{x ∈M : d(x, a) ⩽r}
The topological space is called metrizable if its topology is obtained in the in-
dicated way from some metric on it.
Different metrics can generate the same
topology. For example, the usual metric on the real line generates the same topol-
ogy as the bounded metric d(x, y) = min(1, |x −y|). Below we encounter many
examples of nonmetrizable spaces, so we do not give artificial examples of this
sort. The discrete topology on X is τ = 2X.
We assume that the concept of a complete metric space is known (anyway, we
recall it in § 1.7).
A pseudometric on a set M is a function ϱ: M ×M →[0, ∞) with the
following properties:
(1) ϱ(x, x) = 0;
(2) ϱ(x, y) = ϱ(y, x);
(3) ϱ(x, y) ⩽ϱ(x, z) + ϱ(z, y).
If the triangle inequality (3) is written as
(3′) ϱ(x, y) ⩽ϱ(x, z) + ϱ(y, z),
then conditions (2) and (3) together will be equivalent to the pair of conditions (2)
and (3′), but (2) will follow from (1) and (3′) by replacing z in (3′) with x.

8
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
The pseudometric ϱ on a nonempty set M generates a topology on this set in
the same way as a metric: a set V ⊂M is called open in the topology generated
by the pseudometric ϱ if for each x ∈V there is ε > 0 such that {z : ϱ(z, x) < ε}
is contained in V . In addition, any pseudometric generates a metric on the set of
equivalence classes if we set x ∼y when d(x, y) = 0.
Every subset X0 of a topological space X becomes itself a topological space
if we define open sets in X0 to be the sets of the form U ∩X0, where U is open
in X. Certainly, such sets need not be open in X (if X0 itself was not open in X).
This topology on X0 is called the induced topology.
An open neighborhood of a point x is any open set containing x. Sometimes it
is useful to employ a broader concept of a neighborhood of a point (not necessarily
open!) as an arbitrary set containing some open neighborhood of this point. For
example, it becomes possible to speak of closed neighborhoods in this sense.
A base of the topology (topology base) is any collection of open sets with
the property that all possible unions of the elements of this collection give all
nonempty open sets.
A base of the topology at a point x or a fundamental system of neighbor-
hoods of the point x is any collection of open neighborhoods of the point x with
the property that every neighborhood of x contains an element of this collection.
Sometimes, similarly to neighborhoods, bases of not necessarily open neighbor-
hoods are used. A prebase of neighborhoods of a point in a topological space is
a family of neighborhoods of this point finite intersections of elements of which
form a base of its neighborhoods.
A point x in a topological space X is called a limit point of a set A ⊂X (or an
accumulation point of A) if every neighborhood of x contains a point of A distinct
from x. If every neighborhood of x intersects A, then x is called a cluster point
of A. The closure A of a set A (the intersection of all closed sets containing A) is
exactly the set of all its cluster points. The points of A that are not limit are called
isolated.
If X = A, then A is called everywhere dense in X. If X contains an at most
countable everywhere dense set, then X is called separable.
If we are given a collection of nonempty topological spaces Xt, where t ∈T,
then the product 
t∈T Xt is equipped with the Tychonoff product topology, in
which open sets are all possible unions of the sets of the form 
t∈T Ut, where
every Ut is open in Xt, but only for finitely many indices t the set Ut differs
from Xt. See Exercise 2.10.26 about the competing box topology.
A mapping f : X →Y between topological spaces is called continuous if,
for every open set V in the space Y , the set f −1(V ) is open in X. The continuity
at a point x0 ∈X is defined as follows: for every open set V containing f(x0),
there exists an open set U containing x0 such that f(U) ⊂V .
The continuity of f is equivalent to the continuity at every point. Indeed, if f
is continuous and V is an open set containing f(x0), then U = f −1(V ) is open,
x0 ∈U and f(U) ⊂V . Conversely, let f be continuous at every point x and
let V ⊂Y be open. For every point x ∈U := f−1(V ) there exists an open

1.1. Linear spaces and topology
9
set Ux ∋x such that f(Ux) ⊂V . Then the set W := 
x∈U Ux is open. Since
f(W) ⊂V and U ⊂W, we have W = U.
If X and Y are topological spaces, then a mapping F : X →Y is called a
homeomorphism if it is one-to-one, F(X) = Y and both mappings F and F −1
are continuous; in this case X and Y are called homeomorphic.
Let us introduce certain separation properties. A topological space (X, τ) is
called a Kolmogorov space or a T0-space if, for every two its different points, there
exists an open set containing precisely one of them; (X, τ) is called a T1-space
if, for every two different points a, b in X, there are open sets A, B ∈τ such
that a ∈A \ B and b ∈B \ A; (X, τ) is called a Hausdorff or separated space
(or a T2-space) if, for every two different points a, b ∈X, there are open sets
A, B ∈τ such that A ∩B = ∅, a ∈A, b ∈B; a regular space (or a T3-space)
is a T1-space every point of which possesses a base of closed neighborhoods. In
a Hausdorff space every point is closed. A completely regular space is a space
with the following property: for every closed set F ⊂X and every point x /∈F,
there is a continuous function g: X →[0, 1] such that g(x) = 0 and g = 1 on F.
A Tychonoff space (or a T3 1
2 -space) is a Hausdorff completely regular space. If a
pseudometric is not a metric, then the topology generated by it is not Hausdorff.
We shall see below that topological vector spaces are completely regular.
A cover of a set is any collection of sets whose union contains this set.
1.1.6. Definition. A subset of a topological space X is called compact if
every cover of this set by open sets contains a finite subcover. If this is true for the
whole space X, then X is called a compact or a compact space.
A topological space is called locally compact if every point in it possesses a
fundamental system of neighborhoods consisting of compact sets.
A subset of a topological space is called relatively compact if its closure is
compact. This is equivalent to the following: this subset is contained in a compact
set.
A topological space is called connected if it cannot be represented as a union
of two disjoint nonempty open sets, or, which is the same, it cannot be represented
as a union of two disjoint nonempty closed sets.
Useful tools for working with topological spaces are the concepts of a net and
a filter. For the reader’s convenience, we briefly explain these concepts, which are
sometimes used below.
1.1.7. Definition. A partially ordered set T is called directed if, for every two
elements t, s ∈T, there exists an element τ ∈T such that t ⩽τ and s ⩽τ.
A net in a given set X is a family {xt}t∈T of its elements indexed by a directed
set T.
For example, the plane with the lexicographic order and the set of all neigh-
borhoods of a given point in a topological space partially ordered by the inverse
inclusion are directed sets. The set of all nonempty open subsets of the real line,
partially ordered by the inverse inclusion, is not directed (two disjoint open sets
have no common upper bound).

10
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
In a somewhat peculiar way (as compared to sequences) one introduces the
notion of a subnet {ys}s∈S of a net {xt}t∈T : it is required that there is a mapping
F : S →T such that ys = xF (s) for all s ∈S and, for each t ∈T, there is st ∈S
such that F(s) > t whenever s > st (certainly, a subsequence in a sequence
satisfies this condition).
For example, in the countable net Z of integer numbers (indexed by the same
set Z with its usual order) the subset of negative numbers is not a subnet, but the
subset of natural numbers is a subnet. A subnet of a countable sequence can be
uncountable.
Not every countable net is isomorphic to a sequence indexed by natural num-
bers with its usual order (say, it can occur in a countable net that for every index
there are infinitely many smaller indices).
1.1.8.
Definition. A net {xt}t∈T in a topological space X converges to
a point x if, for every neighborhood U of the point x, there exists an index τ ∈T
such that xt ∈U whenever t ⩾τ.
Note that the set of indices t ∈T such that xt ̸∈U can be infinite. Hence
even for countable sets T convergence of nets does not reduce to convergence of
sequences. For example, if on IN we introduce the order such that all odd numbers
are smaller than 2 and on even and odd numbers separately the usual order is kept,
then we obtain a directed countable set; the net {xn} in which xn = 0 for even n
and xn = 1 for odd n converges to zero. One can give an example of a convergent
countable net in a topological space that does not contain convergent subsequences
(Exercise 1.12.27).
If b is an accumulation point of the set A, then there exists a net {at} of
elements of A converging to b. Indeed, let T be the collection of all neighborhoods
of b, partially ordered by the inverse inclusion. Every such neighborhood of t by
condition contains a point at ∈A. The obtained net converges to b, since for every
fixed neighborhood of τ ∈T we have at ∈t ⊂τ if t ⩾τ.
1.1.9. Definition. A filter on a set X is any nonempty set Φ of nonempty
subsets of X satisfying the following conditions:
(i) if A, B ∈Φ, then A ∩B ∈Φ,
(ii) if B ∈Φ and B ⊂C, then C ∈Φ.
A filter basis (base) on a set X is any nonempty set B of nonempty subsets
of X such that the following condition is fulfilled: for every pair of sets B1, B2 ∈B,
there exists B3 ∈B with B3 ⊂B1 ∩B2.
A filter Φ is majorized by a filter Ψ if Φ ⊂Ψ.
A filter basis is an integral term (not assuming any filter).
Among all filters containing a given filter basis B there exists the (unique)
minimal filter ΦB, which is called the filter generated by the filter basis B. Then
B is called a basis of the filter ΦB. The minimal filter is the intersection of all
filters containing B (such filters exist, for example, the class of all sets containing
at least one set from B). If τ is a topology on the set X and x ∈X, then the
set of all (not necessarily open) neighborhoods of the point x is a filter on X,

1.2. Basic definitions
11
called the filter of neighborhoods of this point with respect to τ and denoted by
the symbol Φx
τ. Thus, a fundamental system of neighborhoods of zero is a basis
of the filter of all neighborhoods of zero.
1.1.10. Definition. A filter in X is called converging to a point x in the
topology τ if it majorizes the filter of neighborhoods of this point.
Maximal elements of the system of all filters on the set X, partially ordered
by the relation of majorizing by inclusion, are called ultrafilters on X. One can
deduce from the axiom of choice that every filter on X is majorized by some
ultrafilter on X. A filter Ψ on X is an ultrafilter precisely when the conditions
A ∪B = X and A /∈Ψ imply that B ∈Ψ. As a simple example of application
of filters we mention the following assertions, the proof of which we leave as an
exercise.
1.1.11. Proposition. A mapping f of topological spaces is continuous at a
point x precisely when, for every filter Ψ converging to x, the filter generated by
the filter basis f(Ψ) converges to f(x).
Note that the image of a filter need not be a filter, but is always a filter basis.
The proof is left as an exercise.
1.1.12. Proposition. A subset of a topological space is compact if and only if
every ultrafilter containing it converges to some element of this subset.
1.2. Basic definitions
Here we give basic definitions connected with topological vector spaces and
prove some simplest facts, but examples will be considered in the next section.
Although in our discussion the field K is usually IR or C (and occasionally nondis-
crete normable), we give a general definition.
1.2.1. Definition. A topological vector space over a topological field K is
a vector space E over K equipped with a topology with respect to which the
following two mappings are continuous, where E×E and K×E are equipped with
the products of the corresponding topologies: 1) (x1, x2) →x1 + x2, E×E →E
(addition of vectors), 2) (k, x) →kx, K×E →E (multiplication of vectors by
scalars).
Such a topology on E is called compatible with the vector space structure (or
we say that it agrees with the vector space structure). A topological vector space
E with the topology τ is denoted by the symbol (E, τ). We observe that in the
definition of a topological field one requires the same conditions with K in place
of E and the continuity of k →k−1 outside of zero.
Two topological vector spaces over the same field are called isomorphic if
there exists a continuous linear one-to-one mapping of one of the two spaces
onto the other such that the inverse mapping is also continuous (i.e., a linear
homeomorphism).
The dimension of a topological vector space (E, τ) is the
dimension of the vector space E.

12
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
The continuity of the mapping 1) implies that the topology of any topological
vector space (E, τ) is invariant with respect to translations (i.e., for every a ∈E
the mapping x →x + a is a homeomorphism of E); hence the topology of a
topological vector space can be reconstructed if we know a fundamental system of
neighborhoods of zero.
If U is a base of neighborhoods of zero and a ∈E, then the collection of
sets of the form a + V , where V ∈U, is a base of neighborhoods of the point a.
Thus, for defining a topology of a topological vector space it suffices to define a
base of neighborhoods of zero; this is usually done in most of applications of the
theory of topological vector spaces. However, not every system of subsets of a
vector space can serve as a base of neighborhoods of zero of a topology compat-
ible with the vector space structure; conditions sufficient for this are indicated in
Proposition 1.2.7.
Before we proceed to that proposition, it is useful to prove the following
result, according to which among fundamental systems of neighborhoods of zero
in a topological vector space there are systems with particularly nice properties.
1.2.2. Proposition. (a) Every base of neighborhoods of zero U in a topologi-
cal vector space has the following properties:
(1) for every V ∈U there exists a set W ∈U such that W + W ⊂V ;
(2) every V ∈U is an absorbent set.
(b) In every topological vector space there exists a base of neighborhoods of
zero U0 having also the following properties:
(3) every V ∈U0 is a circled closed set;
(4) if V ∈U0, then kV ∈U0 for every k ∈K, k ̸= 0.
PROOF. Let U be a base of neighborhoods of zero in a topological vector
space E. Since the mapping (x1, x2) →x1 + x2, E×E →E is continuous at the
point (0, 0) by Axiom 1, we obtain that U has property (1). Further, by Axiom 2
for every a ∈E the mapping k →ka, K →E is continuous at the point 0 ∈K;
so if V is a neighborhood of zero in E and x ∈E, then there exists ε > 0 such
that kx ∈V whenever |k| < ε, so that an arbitrary neighborhood of zero V in E
is an absorbent set. This means that U possesses property (2). Thus, part (a) of
the proposition is proven.
For the proof of part (b) it suffices to show that the set U0 of all closed
circled neighborhoods of zero in E is a base of neighborhoods of zero in E, since
properties (3) and (4) are easily verified. Indeed, it is clear from the definition
of the set U0 that it possesses property (3). By Axiom 2, for every fixed nonzero
k ∈K, the mapping x →kx is a linear homeomorphism of E. It follows that if V
is a neighborhood of zero in E, then kV , where k ∈K, k ̸= 0, is a neighborhood of
zero, moreover, if the set V is closed and balanced, then kV has both properties, so
that U0 possesses property (4). In order to verify that U0 is a base of neighborhoods
of zero in E, we show that every neighborhood of zero in E contains a closed
circled neighborhood of zero. Let W be an arbitrary neighborhood of zero in E.
By the continuity at zero of the mapping (x1, x2) →x1 −x2, E ×E →E,
which follows from Axioms 1 and 2, there is a neighborhood of zero W1 such that

1.2. Basic definitions
13
W1 −W1 ⊂W. We show that W 1 ⊂W. To this end, we verify that if x /∈W,
then x /∈W 1. The set x+W1 is a neighborhood of the point x not intersecting W1
(if z ∈W1 ∩(x + W1), then z = x + y, y ∈W1 and x = z −y ∈W1 −W1 ⊂W,
but x /∈W). The existence of such neighborhood means that x /∈W 1. Further, by
the continuity of the mapping (k, x) →kx, K×E →E at the point (0, 0) there
exist ε > 0 and a neighborhood of zero W2 in E such that if |k| < ε and x ∈W2,
then kx ∈W1. Hence the set W3 = 
|k|<ε kW2 is a circled neighborhood of zero
in E contained in W1 (the fact that W3 is a neighborhood of zero follows from the
condition that K is not discrete, so there exists k ̸= 0 with |k| < ε). The closure
of a circled set is a circled set. Indeed, if |k| ⩽1 and G is a circled set, then
kG ⊂G, hence kG ⊂kG ⊂G (if k ̸= 0, then kG = kG). Hence W 3 is a closed
circled neighborhood of zero and W 3 ⊂W 1 ⊂W.
□
1.2.3. Remark. (i) In the proof we have actually shown that the family of
closures of all possible sets in a base of neighborhoods of zero in a topological
vector space is again a base of neighborhoods of zero (in fact, this is true for any
topological group).
(ii) It has been also shown that every neighborhood of zero in a topological
vector space is an absorbent set; this fact will be used all the time below.
(iii) Proposition 1.2.2 remains true if in its formulation in part (b) the word
“closed” is replaced by the word “open”: in other words, in every topological
vector space there exists a base of neighborhoods of zero U having properties (1)
and (4) and the following property (3′): every V ∈U is a circled absorbent open
set. The proof essentially coincides with the proof of Proposition 1.2.2, but is even
simpler. As above, we verify that E has a base consisting of open circled sets.
The existence of such a base follows from the fact that for every neighborhood of
zero W ⊂E there exist ε > 0 and an open neighborhood of zero W1 such that if
k ∈K, |k| < ε and x ∈W1, then kx ∈W. Hence the set W2 = 
|k|<ε kW1 is
an open circled neighborhood of zero contained in W.
Let us give some corollaries of the proven proposition.
1.2.4. Corollary. Each point in a topological vector space possesses a base
of neighborhoods consisting of closed sets (i.e., every topological vector space is
a regular topological space, as well as any topological group).
PROOF. Indeed, if U is a base of closed neighborhoods of zero, then a + U is
a base of closed neighborhoods of the point a for every a.
□
1.2.5. Corollary. A topological vector space is a T3-space (hence Hausdorff)
if and only if it is a T0-space.
PROOF. By the previous corollary and the definition of a T3-space it suffices
to show that in a given space E the axiom T1 is fulfilled. Suppose that a1, a2 ∈E.
Since the axiom T0 holds by assumption, for one of these points — let it be a1 —
there exists a neighborhood of zero W such that a1 +W ̸∋a2. Then a2 −W ̸∋a1,
since otherwise for some z ∈W we have a2 = z + a1, i.e., a2 ∈a1 + W. Thus,
a2 −W is a neighborhood of the point a2 not containing a1.
□

14
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
Actually, more is true: a Hausdorff topological vector space is completely
regular, which will be established in § 1.6.
1.2.6. Corollary. A topological vector space is Hausdorff if and only if the
intersection of all its neighborhoods of zero is the zero element of this space.
PROOF. The sufficiency follows from the previous corollary; the necessity is
obvious.
□
The next result can be used for constructing vector topologies.
1.2.7. Proposition. Let B be a filter basis in a vector space E consisting of
circled sets and having the following properties (analogous to properties 1, 2, 4
from Proposition 1.2.2):
(1)′ for every V ∈B there is W ∈B such that W + W ⊂V ;
(2)′ every V ∈B is an absorbent set;
(4)′ if V ∈B, then kV ∈B for every k ∈K, k ̸= 0.
Then, there exists a unique topology in E compatible with the vector space
structure such that B is a base of neighborhoods of zero (not necessarily closed or
open).
PROOF. Let τ be the family of subsets of E defined as follows: V ∈τ
precisely when for every a ∈V there exists a set W in B such that a + W ⊂V .
Then τ is a topology in E. Indeed, the inclusions ∅∈τ and E ∈τ and the
stability of τ with respect to formation of arbitrary unions follow directly from the
definition of τ. We show that τ is stable with respect to finite intersections. Let
V1, V2 ∈τ; we have to show that V1 ∩V2 ∈τ. Let a ∈V1 ∩V2. Hence there exist
sets W1, W2 ∈B such that a+Wi ⊂Vi, i = 1, 2. Then a+(W1 ∩W2) ⊂V1 ∩V2.
Therefore, if W3 ⊂W1 ∩W2, W3 ∈B (such W3 exists, since B is a filter basis),
then a + W3 ⊂V1 ∩V2.
We show that the topology τ agrees with the vector space structure in E. We
first show that B is a base of neighborhoods of zero in the topology τ. By the
definition of the topology τ, if V is an open neighborhood of zero in τ, there is a
set W ∈B such that W ⊂V . Hence it suffices to show that every set that is an
element of B turns out to be a neighborhood of zero in the topology τ. Thus, let
W ∈B. Let W 0 denote the set defined as follows: x ∈W 0 if and only if there
exists a set W1 ∈B such that x + W1 ⊂W. Since the zero element of the space
E is contained in every set from the system B (these sets are circled), we have
0 ∈W 0 ⊂W.
We now show that W 0 is open in the topology τ; this will mean that W is
a neighborhood of zero in this topology. It suffices to be able, for every given
a ∈W 0, to find a set W2 ∈B such that a + W2 ⊂W 0. Let a ∈W 0. Then by the
definition of W 0 there exists a set W1 ∈B such that a+W1 ∈W; by property (1)
there exists W2 ∈B such that W2 + W2 ⊂W1, i.e., (a + W2) + W2 ⊂W. This
means that a + W2 ⊂W 0.
Since by the very definition the topology τ is translation invariant, for every
vector a ∈E the family of the sets of the form a + V , where V ∈B, is a base
of neighborhoods of the point a. Hence for the proof of continuity in τ of the

1.2. Basic definitions
15
operation of addition (i.e., verification of Axiom 1 in Definition 1.2.1) it suffices
to show that if a = x1 + x2 and W ∈B, then there exists a set W1 ∈B such that
(x1 + W1) + (x2 + W1) ⊂a + W.
By Axiom 1′ there exists W1 such that W1 + W1 ⊂W; this W1 satisfies the
necessary relation.
Let us proceed to the proof of continuity of the operation of multiplication
(i.e., verification of Axiom 2 from Definition 1.2.1). Let a ∈E, k ∈K and
W ∈B be given. We have to prove the existence of W1 ∈B and ε > 0 such
that if a1 ∈a + W1 and |k1 −k| < ε, then k1a1 ∈ka + W. Since the addition
operation is continuous, as we have just proved, there exists a set W2 ∈B such
that W2 + W2 + W2 ⊂W. Since
k1a1 −ka = (k1 −k)a + (k1 −k)(a1 −a) + k(a1 −a),
the required properties hold for the set W1 and the number ε > 0 such that the
inclusion a1 ∈a + W1 and the inequality |k1 −k| < ε imply that
(k1 −k)a ∈W2, (k1 −k)(a1 −a) ∈W2, k(a1 −a) ∈W2.
Since the set W2 ∈B is circled, the relations |k1 −k| < 1, a1 −a ∈W2 yield that
(k1 −k)(a1 −a) ∈W2; since the set W2 is absorbing, there exists ε1 ∈(0, 1) such
that (k1−k)a ∈W2 if |k1−k| < ε1. Finally, if k = 0, then we can take W1 = W2;
if k ̸= 0, then we find a neighborhood W1 ∈B such that W1 ⊂W2 ∩k−1W2.
Thus, in both cases W1 ∈B, and at the same time the inclusion a1 −a ∈W1
yields that k(a1 −a) ∈W2. Therefore, we can set ε = ε1.
Let us verify the uniqueness of the indicated topology. Let t be yet another
topology in E compatible with the vector space structure for which B is a base
of neighborhoods of zero. Then all sets of the form x + W, where x ∈E and
W ∈B, give a base of both topologies, whence t = τ.
□
1.2.8. Remark. The last but one paragraph of this proof yields that condition
(4)′ of the proven proposition can be replaced with the following weaker condition:
for every s ∈K \ {0} and every V ∈B there exists a set V1 ∈B such that
V1 ⊂sV . However, in the case where Q ⊂
K ⊂C, this last condition is a
corollary of Axiom 1 along with the fact that all sets in B are circled. Indeed,
Axiom 1 implies that for any natural number n and a set W ∈B, there exists
V ∈B such that
2nV ⊂V + V + · · · + V



2ntimes
⊂W,
i.e., that V ⊂2−nW. Hence if we are given ε > 0 and W ∈B and a number
n ∈IN is such that 2−n < ε, there exists V ∈B such that V ⊂2−nW ⊂εW (the
last inclusion follows from the fact that the set W is circled). Thus, if K ⊂C, then
for the validity of the conclusion of the proposition above it suffices to require that
B be a filter basis in E possessing properties (1) and (2) and consisting of circled
sets.

16
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
1.2.9. Corollary. Let E be a vector space over a field K and let τ be a
translation invariant topology in E possessing a basis of neighborhoods of zero
B consisting of circled sets and having properties (1)′, (2)′, (4)′ from Proposi-
tion 1.2.7 (and in case where K ⊂C, just properties (1) and (2)). Then τ is
compatible with the vector structure in the space E.
PROOF. By Proposition 1.2.7 and the previous remark in this case in E there
exists a topology τ1 compatible with the vector structure such that B is a base of
neighborhoods of zero. Since τ1 is translation invariant, we have τ = τ1.
□
Among topological vector spaces over the fields of real and complex numbers,
the most important for applications class is formed by locally convex spaces, the
definition of which will be now given.
Note that the closure A of a convex subset A in a topological vector space is
convex, since by the continuity of the vector operations we have
tA + (1 −t)A ⊂tA + (1 −t)A ⊂tA + (1 −t)A ⊂A.
Further, the convex hull conv W of an open set W is again open: this follows
from the fact that conv W is the union of all possible sets of the form 	n
k=1 αkW,
where n∈IN, αk ⩾0, 	n
k=1 αk = 1, each of which is open by the continuity of
the operations of addition and multiplication by scalars.
In addition, the interior ˘A of any convex subset A in a topological vector
space is convex. Indeed, if a, b ∈˘A, then ˘A is a neighborhood of the points a
and b, and the set t ˘A+(1−t) ˘A is an open neighborhood of the point ta+(1−t)b
contained in A for every t ∈[0, 1] (see also Proposition 1.4.2).
1.2.10. Definition. A locally convex topological vector space is a topological
vector space over IR or C possessing a base of convex neighborhoods of zero.
In place of the term a “locally convex topological vector space” it is customary
to use the term a locally convex space or the abbreviation LCS. A topology τ in
a vector space E (over IR or C) is called locally convex if the space (E, τ) is
locally convex. In the definition of a locally convex space the Hausdorff separation
property is often included, but we do not do this, although in most of the results
in this book we shall consider separated spaces.
1.2.11. Proposition. Let K = IR or K = C.
(i) Every locally convex space E over K has a base of neighborhoods of zero
consisting of closed circled convex absorbent sets and invariant with respect to
multiplication by nonzero numbers from K.
(ii) If τ is a topology in a vector space E over K invariant with respect to
translations and possessing a base of neighborhoods of zero that consists of circled
convex absorbent sets and contains along with each set V the set 2−1V , then E
is a locally convex space.
(iii) If B is a filter basis in a vector space over K consisting of circled convex
absorbent sets and containing along with each set V the set 2−1V , then in E there
is a unique topology making E a locally convex space such that B is a base of
neighborhoods of zero.

1.3. Examples
17
PROOF. If B is some base of neighborhoods of zero in E consisting of convex
sets, then every set of the form WV = V ∩(−V ), where V ∈B, is a convex cir-
cled neighborhood of zero in E in case of K = IR; in case of K = C for a convex
circled neighborhood WV ⊂V (for V ∈B) we take WV = 
|z|=1 zV . This is
indeed a neighborhood (not necessarily open), since there are a neighborhood U
and ε > 0 such that kU ⊂V if |k| ⩽ε, whence εU ⊂WV . In both cases the
collection of all sets WV is a base of neighborhoods of zero in E; by Remark 1.2.3
the same is true for the collection B of their closures, which are again convex and
circled. Hence the family of all sets of the form kV , where V ∈B, k ∈K, k ̸= 0,
is a base of neighborhoods of zero in E, the existence of which is asserted in (i)
(as already noted, every neighborhood of zero is an absorbent set).
The remaining assertions (ii) and (iii) follow from Proposition 1.2.7 and Corol-
lary 1.2.9. It suffices to verify that the sets B mentioned in these assertions have
property (1) from Proposition 1.2.7.
Let V ∈B.
Then 2−1V ∈B.
By the
convexity of V we have 2−1V + 2−1V = V .
□
1.2.12. Remark. Similarly one can prove that every locally convex space has
a base of neighborhoods of zero consisting of open circled convex absorbent sets
and invariant with respect to multiplication by nonzero numbers in K. Indeed, let
intA be the interior of A.
If V is a convex neighborhood of zero and W ⊂V is an open neighborhood of
zero, then its convex hull conv W is open and is contained in V by the convexity
of V . Since W ⊂conv W, the set conv W is an open convex neighborhood of
zero contained in V and the set W0 = conv W ∩(−conv W) in the real case and
the set W0 = int 
|z|=1 conv (zW) in the complex case is an open convex circled
neighborhood of zero (observe that there are ε > 0 and an open neighborhood of
zero W1 such that if k ∈C and |k| ⩽ε, then kW1 ⊂W; so εW1 ⊂W0), and we
also have W0 ⊂V . Hence the family U0 of all such neighborhoods of zero is a
base of neighborhoods of zero. The same is true for the family of all sets of the
form kV , where k ∈K, k ̸= 0, V ∈U0.
1.3. Examples
Here we present a rich collection of model examples.
1.3.1. Example. Every algebraic field K is a one-dimensional vector space
over K with respect to the operations of addition and multiplication in K; this one-
dimensional vector space over K is denoted by K1. If K is a topological field with
respect to a topology τ, then K1 is a one-dimensional topological vector space
over K with respect to the same topology; it is denoted again by K1 or K.
1.3.2. Example. Let K be an arbitrary topological field, let T be a nonempty
set, and let KT be the vector space over K that is the product of T copies of K
equipped with the product topology; so KT is the set of all functions x: T →K
with the topology of pointwise convergence whose base consists of the sets
Ux0,t1,...,tn,V = {x: x(ti) −x0(ti) ∈V, i = 1, . . . , n},

18
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
where x0 ∈KT , ti ∈T and V is a neighborhood of zero in K. Then KT is a
topological vector space. More generally, the product of any family of topological
vector spaces over the field K is again a topological vector space over K with
respect to the product topology of the factors.
For T = IN and K = IR we obtain IR∞, the space of all real sequences with
the topology of coordinate-wise convergence; it can be defined by the metric
d(x, y) =
∞

n=1
2−n min(|xn −yn|, 1),
where x = (xn), y = (yn).
1.3.3. Example. If the topology of a topological field K is discrete, then every
vector space E over K equipped with a topology compatible with the structure of
its additive group (this means the continuity of the mapping (x1, x2) →x1 −x2,
E × E →E) and invariant with respect to the operation of multiplication by
nonzero elements of K is a topological vector space over K (in particular, this
condition is fulfilled for the discrete topology on E). Topological vector spaces
over fields with the discrete topology are called topological vector groups.
Throughout we assume that the field K is not discrete. In most of the examples
K = IR or K = C.
1.3.4. Example. Let E be a vector space over a nondiscrete normed field K
and let P be a family of seminorms on E. The open ball of radius r > 0 with the
center at zero with respect to a seminorm p on E is the set {x ∈E : p(x) < r}.
The collection of the intersections of all possible finite families of open balls of
positive radii with respect to seminorms from the family P is a base of neighbor-
hoods of zero for some topology τP in E that agrees with the vector structure; it
is customary to say that this topology is given (or defined) by the family of semi-
norms P. Thus, the collection of open balls of all possible positive radii (for all
given seminorms) is a pre-base of neighborhoods of zero in the topology τP. Note
that all seminorms in P are continuous in this topology. If K = IR or K = C,
the topology τP is locally convex, since the sets {x: p(x) < r} are convex; it
is shown in § 1.4 that the topology of every locally convex space (over IR or C)
is defined by some family of seminorms. A topological vector space is called
normable if its topology can be given by a single norm. A Banach space is a
normed space that is complete with respect to the metric generated by the norm
(the concept of completeness is recalled in § 1.7). A Hilbert space is a complete
Euclidean space. A criterion of normability of a topological vector space over IR
or C (discovered by A.N. Kolmogorov) will be given in § 1.5.
1.3.5. Example. Let n ∈IN. The topology in Kn is generated by the norm
given by the equality ∥(x1, . . . , xn)∥= maxi=1,...,n |xi|, where the symbol | · |
denotes the norm in K. We could also take here 	n
i=1 |xi| or
	n
i=1 |xi|21/2,
but below we need the fact that the set of values of the norm maxi=1,...,n |xi|
coincides with the set of values of the norm k →|k|. It will be shown in § 1.5 that
if the field K is complete, then every n-dimensional separated topological vector
space over K is isomorphic to the space Kn (for n = 1 this is also true without

1.3. Examples
19
the assumption of completeness of K), and if the field K is locally compact, then
a separated topological vector space over K is finite-dimensional precisely when
it possesses a precompact neighborhood of zero. The first part of the last sentence
means that in a n-dimensional real or complex topological vector space there
exists precisely one separated topology compatible with the vector structure; this
topology will be further called standard.
1.3.6. Example. Let Q be the field of rational numbers (with its usual topol-
ogy defined by the norm equal to the absolute value of a number) and let α be an
irrational real number. The set {αq1 + q2 : q1, q2 ∈Q} in IR with the topology
induced by the usual topology of the real line is a two-dimensional topological
vector space over Q that is not isomorphic to the topological vector space Q2
(Exercise 1.12.26).
1.3.7. Definition. A pseudonorm on a vector space E is a nonnegative func-
tion p: E →[0, ∞) such that
(1) p(0) = 0, (2) p(−x) = p(x), (3) p(x1 + x2) ⩽p(x1) + p(x2).
The pseudonorm p is called nondegenerate if p(x) = 0 only for x = 0.
Note that our definition differs from the one given in the book Schaefer [436],
where the nondegeneracy is required along with the estimate p(λx) ⩽p(x) when-
ever |λ| ⩽1. Though, for defining vector topologies this distinction is not impor-
tant (see the end of the proof of Theorem 1.6.1).
Thus, a seminorm is a pseudonorm q having the following property, which is
more restrictive than (2) and (1) together:
(2′) q(αx) = |α|q(x)
∀α ∈K.
Unlike a norm, a seminorm can be zero on nonzero elements. For example,
the identically zero function is a seminorm.
If p is a pseudonorm on a vector space E, then the equality
ϱ(x1, x2) = p(x1 −x2)
defines a pseudometric invariant with respect to translations; this pseudometric, in
turn, generates a topology on E compatible with the structure of an additive group
of the space E; the pseudometric ϱ becomes a metric precisely when p(x) = 0
only for x = 0.
If E is a topological vector space the topology τ of which is metrizable, then
on E there is a pseudonorm generating this topology in the described way (this
will be proved in § 1.6). A criterion of metrizability of a topological vector space
will be also given in § 1.6.
Note also that if p is an arbitrary pseudonorm on a vector space E, then
the topology generated by p need not be compatible with the vector structure
(give an example); in order it be compatible with the vector structure, it suffices
(and is obviously necessary) that the pseudonorm p have the following additional
properties:
(4) if xn ∈E, t ∈K, p(xn) →0, then p(txn) →0;
(5) if x ∈E, tn ∈K, tn →0, then p(tnx) →0;
(6) if xn ∈E, tn ∈K, tn →0, p(xn) →0, then p(tnxn) →0.

20
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
Property (6), as one can show, follows from properties (4) and (5); we leave
the proof to the reader; these properties hold if and only if the operation of mul-
tiplication by scalars is continuous with respect to the topology generated by the
pseudonorm p.
1.3.8. Definition. A quasi-norm is a pseudonorm possessing properties (4)
and (5) (hence also property (6)). Thus, a pseudonorm p defining the topology of
a metrizable topological vector space is automatically a quasi-norm (having the
property p(x) ̸= 0 for all x ̸= 0).
1.3.9. Example. Let E be a vector space and let P be a family of quasi-
norms on E. The open ball of radius r > 0 with the center at zero with respect
to the quasi-norm p ∈P is the set {x ∈E : p(x) < r}; the collection of all
open balls of all possible positive radii with respect to the quasi-norms in P is
a prebase of neighborhoods of zero of some topology in E compatible with the
vector structure; this topology is called the topology generated by the family P of
quasi-norms. It will be shown in § 1.6 that the topology of every topological vector
space can generated by a suitable family of quasi-norms. Note that all quasi-norms
of a family defining the topology are continuous in this topology.
1.3.10. Example. Let (E, τ) be a topological vector space, let E1 ⊂E be
a vector subspace, and let τ1 be the topology induced in E1 by the topology τ.
The topology τ1 agrees with the vector structure. The topological vector space
(E1, τ1) is called a topological vector subspace of the topological vector space E.
If U is a base (or prebase) of neighborhoods of zero in (E, τ), then the family
{V ∩E1 : V ∈U} is a base (respectively, a prebase) of neighborhoods of zero in
the space (E1, τ1). If (E, τ) is Hausdorff (or metrizable, or locally convex), then
(E1, τ1) has the respective property. If the topology τ is given by some set of
seminorms (or pseudonorms), then the topology τ1 is defined by their restrictions
to the subspace E1.
The following sufficient condition for the closedness of E1 as a subset in the
topological vector space E is useful.
1.3.11. Lemma. Let a vector subspace F in a Hausdorff topological vector
space E be complete with respect to some metric defining the topology of this
subspace. Then F is closed in E.
PROOF. A very short proof of a generalization of this lemma can be given by
means of the concept of a Cauchy filter (see Proposition 1.7.8); here we give a
direct justification, which will be used also in the first proof of Theorem 1.5.1. We
show that every point y in the closure F of the subspace F in E actually belongs
to F. Let {Vj : j ∈IN} be a base of neighborhoods of zero in the metric topology
of the subspace F. For every j ∈IN, let Wj and W ′
j be neighborhoods of zero in
E such that Vj = Wj ∩F and W ′
j −W ′
j ⊂Wj and also W ′
j+1 ⊂W ′
j. Then, for
every j ∈IN, we obviously have

(y + W ′
j) ∩F

−

(y + W ′
j) ∩F

⊂Wj ∩F = Vj.

1.3. Examples
21
Hence arbitrarily picked points xj ∈(y + W ′
j) ∩F form a Cauchy sequence in F
converging to some point x ∈F by the completeness of F. It remains to verify
that the same sequence converges also to y.
Let U be a neighborhood of zero in E; first we choose a neighborhood of
zero U ′ in E such that U ′ + U ′ ⊂U, then we take a number k = k(U) such that
Vk ⊂U ′ ∩F, hence Vk ⊂U ′. Finally, we pick an element z in the nonempty set
(y + U ′) ∩

(y + W ′
k) ∩F

. Then, for every j ⩾k, we have
xj −z ∈

(y + W ′
j) ∩F

−

(y + W ′
k) ∩F

⊂(W ′
j −W ′
k) ∩F ⊂
⊂(W ′
k −W ′
k) ∩F ⊂Vk ⊂U ′.
Therefore,
xj = y + (xj −y) = y + (xj −z) + (z −y) ∈y + U ′ + U ′ ⊂y + U,
so that for every j ⩾k(U) we have xj ∈y + U, which proves convergence of
{xj} to y. Since E is Hausdorff, we obtain y = x ∈F.
□
In the case of locally convex spaces the topology induced in a subspace pos-
sesses the following property.
1.3.12. Lemma. Let E be a locally convex space, let E1 be its vector sub-
space with the induced topology, and let U be an absolutely convex neighborhood
of zero in E1. Then, there exists an absolutely convex neighborhood of zero V
in E such that V ∩E1 = U.
If x0 ∈E\E1, then V can be taken such that x0 ̸∈V .
PROOF. By the definition of the induced topology there is an absolutely con-
vex neighborhood of zero W ⊂E for which W ∩E1 ⊂U. Let V be the absolutely
convex hull of W ∪U. Then U ⊂V ∩E1. If v ∈V ∩E1, then v = tw + su,
where w ∈W, u ∈U, |t| + |s| ⩽1. In addition, tw = v −su ∈E1. If t = 0,
then we obtain at once that v = su ∈U, since U is absolutely convex. If t ̸= 0,
then w ∈E1, whence we obtain w ∈E1 ∩W ⊂U and hence v ∈U. Thus,
V ∩E1 ⊂U, i.e., V ∩E1 = U.
If x0 ∈E\E1, then we take W such that (x0 + W) ∩E1 = ∅. Therefore,
x0 ̸∈V , since otherwise, as above, we have x0 = tw + su, whence we obtain
x0 −tw ∈E1 and x0 −tw ∈x0 + W, which is impossible.
□
1.3.13. Example. Let (E, τ) and E1 be the same as in Example 1.3.10 and
let E/E1 be the quotient of the vector space E by its subspace E1. The topology
τ2 in the space E/E1, called the quotient topology, is defined as follows: a set
V ⊂E/E1 is open in τ2 precisely when its preimage under the canonical mapping
E →E/E1 is open in τ.
Moreover, the canonical mapping E →E/E1 is open, i.e., it takes every
open set to an open set. The topological vector space (E/E1, τ2) is called the
topological vector quotient of the space (E, τ).
PROOF. We show that, given a base U of neighborhoods of zero in (E, τ),
the family of images of its elements under the canonical mapping E →E/E1 is a
base of neighborhoods of zero in the space (E/E1, τ2) (for prebases this is not true

22
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
in the general case). First we show that the canonical mapping f : E →E/E1 is
open, i.e., takes open sets into open sets. Let V ⊂E and let V be open in τ. Then
the set
V + E1 =

a∈E1
(V + a)
is open in the topology τ as a union of open sets (obtained from the open set V
by translations). We have f −1
f(V )

= V + E1, so that the set f(V ) is open by
the definition of the topology τ2.
If now U is a base of neighborhoods of zero in E, then, according to what
we have proved, all sets f(V ) are neighborhoods of zero; in addition, if W is an
arbitrary neighborhood of zero in (E/E1, τ2), then W = f

f −1(W)

, moreover,
f −1(W) is a neighborhood of zero in (E, τ) (since by the definition of the topol-
ogy τ2 the mapping f is continuous). Hence there exists a set V in U contained
in f −1(W), i.e., f(V ) ⊂W. The fact that f(U) is a base of neighborhoods
of zero in the quotient topology yields that the quotient topology agrees with the
vector structure in E/E1.
□
The quotient is not always Hausdorff.
1.3.14. Lemma. The topological vector space (E/E1, τ2) is Hausdorff if and
only if the subspace E1 is closed in the space (E, τ).
PROOF. The singletons in any Hausdorff topological space are closed. Hence
our assumption that (E/E1, τ2) is Hausdorff implies that zero is closed. Hence its
preimage E1 = f −1(0) under the canonical mapping f is closed, since the latter
is continuous.
Suppose now that E1 is closed in (E, τ) and show that the topological vector
quotient (E/E1, τ2) is Hausdorff (even if E itself is not). It suffices to show that
E/E1 is a T0-space. To this end, by the invariance of the topology with respect to
translations it suffices to show that every nonzero element a in E/E1 possesses a
neighborhood not containing zero. Let a ∈E/E1, a ̸= 0 and b ∈f −1(a). Then
b /∈E1. By the closedness of E1 there exists an open neighborhood V of the
point b such that V ∩E1 = ∅. Hence f(V ) is an open neighborhood of the point
a = f(b) not containing zero of the space E/E1. The fact that 0 /∈f(V ) follows
from the equality
f −1
f(V )

∩f −1(0) = (V + E1) ∩E1 = ∅,
which is a corollary of the equality V ∩E1 = ∅. The set f(V ) is open (E/E1, τ2),
since V is open.
□
If E is an arbitrary (possibly, not Hausdorff) topological vector space, then
the closure E0 = {0} of the singleton {0} is a vector subspace in E; the Hausdorff
topological vector quotient E/E0 is called the Hausdorff topological vector space
associated with E. Certainly, if E itself is Hausdorff, then the associated Hausdorff
topological vector space is isomorphic to it.

1.3. Examples
23
The factorpace of an arbitrary locally convex space E by its arbitrary vector
subspace E1 is locally convex; this follows from the fact that the canonical map-
ping f : E →E/E1 takes any base of convex neighborhoods of zero in E to a
base of convex neighborhoods of zero in E/E1.
Note also that if the space E is metrizable and the subspace E1 is closed, then
E/E1 is also metrizable (this follows from the following criterion of metrizability
of a Hausdorff topological vector space proven below: the existence of a count-
able base of neighborhoods of zero). If E is normable, then the quotient is also
normable.
1.3.15. Example. If a topological vector space E is the algebraic sum of its
vector subspaces E1 and E2, i.e., E1∩E2 = 0 and E1+E2 = E, one can consider
the natural algebraic projections p1 : E →E1, p2 : E →E2; the subspaces E1
and E2 are called algebraic complements of each other.
If the projections p1
and p2 are continuous, then E1 and E2 are called topological complements of
each other. We shall see in § 3.9 that in a number of important cases algebraic
complements are automatically topological ones; for example, this is the case for
closed subspaces of complete metrizable topological vector spaces. In the general
case the projections can be discontinuous.
For example, this happens if E1 is the kernel of a discontinuous linear func-
tion and E2 is an algebraically complementing one-dimensional subspace. There
are also examples of closed algebraically mutually complementary subspaces E1
and E2 in an incomplete normed space with discontinuous projections.
1.3.16.
Example. Let L0 = L0(λ) be the vector space of all Lebesgue
measurable real functions everywhere defined on [0, 1], let λ be Lebesgue measure
on this interval, and let
Vn =

f ∈L0 : λ

t ∈[0, 1]: |f(t)| > 1/n

< 1/n

,
n ∈IN.
The family U = {Vn} is a base of neighborhoods of zero of some (non-Hausdorff)
topology τ in L0 that agrees with the vector structure. Let L0 be the Hausdorff
topological vector space associated with (L0, τ). It is metrizable, but is not lo-
cally convex (Exercise 1.12.29). It can be identified (as a vector space) with the
space of the classes of λ-equivalent λ-measurable real functions on [0, 1]; conver-
gence of sequences in (L0, τ) and in L0 is convergence in measure (of individual
functions or equivalence classes of measurable functions). For a general bounded
nonnegative measure μ on a measurable space (Ω, B) the spaces L0(μ) and L0(μ)
are defined similarly. Convergence in measure can be defined by the metric
d(f, g) =

Ω
min(|f(ω) −g(ω)|, 1) μ(dω).
In the remaining examples K = IR or K = C.
1.3.17. Example. Let n be a natural number and let K(IRn) be the vector
space of all continuous functions f : IRn →K with compact support (a function on
IRn is with compact support if it vanishes outside of some bounded set); another
notation: C0(IRn). Let Fn denote the set of all continuous positive functions

24
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
f : IRn →(0, +∞) (certainly, Fn is not a vector space and Fn ∩K(IRn) = ∅).
For any f ∈Fn, consider the set
Vf =

ϕ ∈K(IRn): |ϕ(x)| < f(x) ∀x ∈IRn
.
The family of all sets of such a form is a base of neighborhoods of zero for some
Hausdorff locally convex topology τK in K(IRn); below we assume, if it is not
stated otherwise, that K(IRn) is equipped with this topology. Let us also describe
a family of norms defining this topology. For every function f ∈Fn let pf denote
the norm on the space K(IRn) defined by the equality pf(ϕ) = maxx |f(x)ϕ(x)|
and set PK = {pf : f ∈Fn}. The family of norms PK defines the introduced
topology τK. The space

K(IRn), τK

is not metrizable. A sequence {ϕi} of
elements of the space K(IRn) converges to 0 if and only if the following two
conditions are fulfilled:
(i) maxx∈IRn |ϕi(x)| →0,
(ii) there exists a bounded set B in IRn outside of which all the functions ϕi
vanish.
Indeed, if xi ∈IRn, |xi| →∞, and Ci →∞, then there is f ∈Fn
with f(xi) = Ci. There is no metric on K(IRn) with respect to which conver-
gence of sequences coincides with convergence of sequences in the topology τK
(this assertion, the subject of Exercise 1.12.30, is stronger than the assertion that
K(IRn) is not metrizable).
1.3.18.
Example. Let E be a vector space over K, let P0 be the family
of all seminorms on E, and let P1 be the family of all quasi-norms on E. The
topology in E defined by the family of seminorms P0 is the strongest among all
locally convex topologies in E (it is called the strongest locally convex topology
in E); the topology in E defined by the family of quasi-norms P1 is the strongest
among all topologies in E that agree with the vector structure. One can prove
(Exercise 1.12.32) that if the algebraic dimension of the space E over K is at most
countable, then these two topologies coincide; otherwise they are distinct.
Note that in the strongest locally convex topology all seminorms on E are
continuous, hence are continuous all linear functions and all linear mappings to
any locally convex spaces.
It is instructive to find smaller classes of seminorms defining the strongest
locally convex topology. For example, taking a Hamel basis {eα} in E and a
positive function ϕ on the set of indices α we can introduce seminorms of the
form
pϕ(x) =

α
ϕ(α)|xα|,
where
x =

α
xαeα.
The family of all seminorms of such a form also defines the strongest locally
convex topology in E, since for every seminorm p on the space E we have the
obvious estimate p(x) ⩽	
α |xα|p(eα) ⩽pϕ(x), where ϕ(α) = p(eα) + 1.
1.3.19. Example. Let Σ be the space of rapidly decreasing sequences, i.e.,
real sequences x = (xn) with finite norms
pk(x) = sup
n nk|xn|,
k ∈IN.

1.3. Examples
25
The same topology is defined by Euclidean norms qk defined by
qk(x)2 =
∞

n=1
n4k|xn|2.
1.3.20. Example. Let S(IRn) be the Schwartz space of all infinitely differen-
tiable K-valued functions ϕ (here K = IR or C) defined on IRn and satisfying the
following condition (further we set t = (t1, . . . , tn)):
prk(ϕ) = max
t (1 + |t|r)∥ϕ(k)(t)∥< ∞
for all k, r ∈IN,
where |t| =
	n
k=1 |tk|21/2
, ∥ϕ(0)(t)∥= maxt∈IRn |ϕ(t)|,
∥ϕ(k)(t)∥= max

∂kϕ(t)
∂tk1
1 . . . ∂tkn
n
 : k1 + · · · + kn = k, ki ⩾0

.
Each of the functions prk is a norm on S(IRn); let PS denote the set all such
norms and let τS be the topology in S(IRn) defined by this family of norms.
The topology in S can be defined also by Euclidean norms. For example, for
n = 1 we can take Euclidean norms qrk defined by
q2
rk(ϕ) =
 +∞
−∞
(1 + t2)r|ϕ(k)(t)|2 dt.
Everywhere below we assume, if it is not stated otherwise, that the space
S(IRn) is equipped with the topology τS. The space S(IRn) turns out to be a
complete metrizable locally convex space (verify completeness!); such a space is
called a Fr´echet space. The space S(IRn) plays an important role in the theory
of distributions (generalized functions). It is worth noting that on S(IRn) there
is no norm making it a Banach space in the topology of which every function
Ψt : ϕ →ϕ(t), t ∈IRn, is continuous. Since in the topology τS all such functions
are continuous, this yields that the topology τS is not normable (though, this
property of τS follows immediately from Kolmogorov’s criterion of normability
of a topological vector space proved below). In applications of the space S(IRn)
in analysis one usually needs the continuity of the mappings Ψt, so the absence on
S(IRn) of a Banach norm with respect to which they are continuous is an example
demonstrating insufficiency of the theory of Banach spaces for the purposes of
analysis.
1.3.21.
Example. Let D(IRn) be the space of all infinitely differentiable
functions ϕ: IRn →K with compact support and let Fn = {g ∈C(IRn): g > 0}.
For every pair of functions f, r in Fn, let qf,r denote the norm on D(IRn) defined
as follows:
qf,r(ϕ) = max
t
f(t)ϕ([r(t)])(t)
,
where [a] is the integer part of a number a (the notation ∥ϕ(k)(t)∥is introduced
in the previous example). Below we assume that D(IRn) is equipped with the
topology τD, defined by the family of norms PD = {qf,r : f, r ∈Fn}. Then

26
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
D(IRn) is a nonmetrizable locally convex space (Exercise 1.12.31). For n = 1
this topology is defined by the family of seminorms
p{αk},{rk}(ϕ) =
∞

k=−∞
αk
max
t∈[k,k+1] |ϕ(rk)(t)|, αk ∈IN, rk ∈IN ∪{0}.
1.3.22.
Example. Let E(IRn) be the space of all infinitely differentiable
functions on IRn taking values in K and, for every n ∈IN, let us define a seminorm
pm on E(IRn) by the equality
pm(ϕ) = max

∥ϕ(k)(t)∥: k = 0, 1, . . . , m; ∥t∥⩽m

.
Below we assume, if it is not explicitly stated otherwise, that the space E(IRn) is
equipped with the topology τE defined by the seminorms PE = {pm : m ∈IN}.
Then E(IRn) is a complete metrizable locally convex space (verify this!). Note
that the topology τE cannot be defined by means of norms; moreover, on E(IRn)
there is no any continuous norm (in fact, these two assertions are equivalent).
Below, when we discuss properties of the spaces K(IRn), S(IRn), D(IRn), and
E(IRn) independent of the dimension n of the space IRn, symbols like D(IRn),
S(IRn) will be frequently abbreviated to D, S, etc. As a rule, the considered
properties of these spaces will not depend on our choice of the real or complex
field; this is why in the previous examples the spaces of complex functions (over
the field C) and real functions (over the field IR) were denoted by the same
symbols. Below in our discussion of the properties of the spaces K, S, etc. we do
not mention the field of scalars at all if the discussed properties do not depend on
it. In other cases we shall use expressions like “the complex space S” or “the real
space S”. Similarly we shall act dealing with the topological duals of these spaces
D′(IRn), S′(IRn), etc. These spaces of linear functionals play a very important role
in applications and are called “spaces of distributions” or “spaces of generalized
functions” (the spaces D, S, etc., are often called “spaces of test functions”). The
terminology is explained by the fact that “usual” functions define distributions by
means of integration. For example, every locally integrable function f on IRn
defines an element of D′ the action of which on ϕ ∈D is the integral of ϕf
over IRn. If f estimated (in the absolute value) by a polynomial, then f defines
also a generalized function of class S′.
1.3.23. Example. This example can be considered as an introduction to the
duality theory. Let E be an arbitrary vector space over K (always non-discrete) and
let G be some vector space of K-linear functionals on E, i.e., K-linear mappings
from E to K. Then, on E there exists a topology τ possessing the following
properties:
(a) it agrees with the vector structure;
(b) every functional g belonging to G is continuous as a mapping from (E, τ)
to K;
(c) every K-linear continuous functional on (E, τ) is an element of G.
Moreover, among all topologies in E possessing property (b) there exists
the weakest one and it automatically possesses also properties (a) and (c); this

1.3. Examples
27
topology, called the weak topology in E defined by the elements of G, will be now
defined. Convergence in it is called weak convergence.
For every g ∈G, let pg denote the seminorm on E defined by the formula
pg(ϕ) = |g(ϕ)|.
We now prove that the topology in E defined by the whole family of seminorms
PG = {pg : g ∈G} is the desired one. This topology will be denoted by the
symbol σ(E, G). Clearly, the topology σ(E, G) possesses property (a).
If g ∈G, then |g(ϕ)| < ε whenever pg(ϕ) < ε; this means that the functional
g is continuous at zero; since it is linear, we obtain its continuity at every point, so
that τ = σ(E, G) possesses property (b). Let now f be an arbitrary continuous K-
linear functional on

E, σ(E, G)

. We have to show that f ∈G. By the continuity
of f at zero in the space

E, σ(E, G)

, there exist elements g1, . . . , gn in the space
G such that if |g1(a)| < ε, . . . , |gn(a)| < ε, then |f(a)| < 1. It follows that
Ker f ⊃
n

k=1
Ker gk(ϕ).
(1.3.1)
Indeed, if this is not true and there exists an element a ∈E such that f(a) ̸= 0, but
g1(a) = · · · = gn(a) = 0, then, using that the field K is not discrete, we choose an
element k ∈K such that |k| > 1. We have the relation
f

ka/f(a)
 = |k| > 1,
although
gj

ka/f(a)
 =
kgj(a)/f(a)
 = 0 < ε, j = 1, 2, . . . , n.
However, inclusion (1.3.1) yields (this will be proved in the next lemma, some-
times called the lemma on three homomorphisms) that f is a linear combination
of the functionals gj. Since G is a vector space, this means that f ∈G. Certainly,
one could also prove directly that f is a linear combination of g1, . . . , gn. If n = 1
and there is v with g1(v) = 1, then f = f(v)g1. For n > 1 we argue by induction
and represent f as c1g1 + · · · + cn−1gn−1 on Ker gn. Taking v with gn(v) = 1,
we find the final representation with cn = f(v) −c1g1(v) −· · · −cn−1gn−1(v).
1.3.24. Lemma. Let E1, E2, and E3 be vector spaces and let
f12 : E1 →E2
and
f13 : E1 →E3
be linear mappings such that Ker f13 ⊃Ker f12.
Then, there exists a linear
mapping f23 : E2 →E3 such that f13 = f23◦f12.
PROOF. The mapping f23 is first defined on the subspace f12(E1) in E2 by
the equality f23(x) = f13

f −1
12 (x)

; the fact that f23 is well-defined and lin-
ear follows from the linearity of the mappings f12 and f13 and the inclusion
Ker f13 ⊃Ker f12. Next the mapping f23 is extended in an arbitrary way as a
linear mapping on the whole space E2 (which can be easily done by using a Hamel
basis, see § 1.1). This extension is the desired mapping.
□
Now, returning to Example 1.3.23, in order to establish the relation
f =
n

j=1
kjgj,

28
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
it suffices to take E1 = E, E3 = K, E2 = Kn, f13 = f and define the mapping
f12 as follows: f12(x) =

g1(x), . . . , gn(x)

. By the lemma above there exists a
K-linear functional f23 : Kn →K such that f = f23◦f12. Every linear functional
on Kn is defined by a collection (k1, . . . , kn) of n elements of the field K such
that f23(h1, . . . , hn) = 	n
j=1 kjhj. Hence we obtain f(x) = 	n
j=1 kjgj(x), i.e.,
we have f = 	n
j=1 kjgj.
Thus, the topology σ(E, G) possesses property (c).
We now show that
σ(E, G) is the weakest topology with property (b). If τ is an arbitrary topol-
ogy with this property, then the sets of the form

x ∈E : |gk(x −xk)| < εk, k = 1, 2, . . . , n

, n ∈IN, xk ∈E, gk ∈G,
are open in it. Since these sets form a base of the topology σ(E, G), the topology
σ(E, G) is majorized by the topology τ (if S and T are two systems of sets such
that S ⊂T, we say that the system T majorizes the system S and that S is
majorized by the system T). Justification of Example 1.3.23 is complete.
It is the right place to introduce the dual to a topological vector space. More
precisely, we introduce even two duals: the algebraic and topological, the latter
being particularly important.
1.3.25. Definition. Let E a topological vector space over the field K. The
space of all continuous linear functions on E with values in K is called the dual
(or topological dual) space to E and is denoted by the symbol E′.
We emphasize that usually E′ is much more narrow that the algebraic dual
to E consisting of all linear functions and denoted in this book by E∗. Note that
in many books (including our [72]) the notation is the opposite; we have decided
to keep here the notation that is more traditional in the literature on topological
vector spaces. It may happen that E′ = {0}, but on Hausdorff locally convex
spaces, as we shall see from the Hahn–Banach theorem, the topological dual E′
separates the points of the space E.
If E is a locally convex space and G = E′, then the topology σ(E, E′) is
called the weak or the weakened topology in E; note that

E, σ(E, E′)
′ = E′.
The described situation can be regarded as symmetric with respect to E and G.
Namely: every element x ∈E can be identified with some linear functional Fx
on the space G defined as follows: Fx(g) = g(x), x ∈E, g ∈G. Then the whole
space E is identified with some vector space of linear functionals on G. If E is
locally convex, the weak topology (or weak-∗) in E′ is the topology σ(E′, E).
1.3.26. Example. This is a generalization (actually, only formal) of the previ-
ous example. We shall say that two vector spaces E and G are in duality (or that
they form a dual pair) if a bilinear function b: E×G →K (or a “bilinear form”;
we say that it establishes a duality between the spaces E and G) is given with the
following properties:
(1) if x ∈E, x ̸= 0, then there is g ∈G with b(x, g) ̸= 0;
(2) if g ∈G, g ̸= 0, then there is x ∈E with b(x, g) ̸= 0.

1.4. Convex sets
29
Suppose that, as in the previous example, E is a vector space, G is some
vector space of linear functionals on E such that if x ∈E, x ̸= 0, then there is
g ∈G with g(x) ̸= 0, i.e., as we shall say, the set G separates the points in E.
The bilinear form b on E ×G defined by the equality b(x, g) = g(x) possesses
properties (1) and (2), hence establishes a duality between the spaces E and G
(this bilinear form is called canonical).
Actually, the general case of two vector spaces in duality coincides with this
special one. Namely, let E and G be two vector spaces in duality defined by a
bilinear form b. Then every vector x ∈E defines a linear functional g →b(x, g)
on the space G and every element g ∈G defines a linear functional x →b(x, g)
on E. Thus, we have defined linear mappings E →G∗, x →[g →b(x, g)] and
G →E∗, g →[x →b(x, g)].
It is readily verified (with the aid of properties (1) and (2) of the mapping b)
that both mappings are linear and injective, i.e., are linear isomorphisms onto
their ranges. Hence the space E can be identified with its image under the first
of these isomorphisms, i.e., with some space of linear functionals on G, and the
space G can be identified with its image under the second of these isomorphisms,
i.e., with some space of linear functionals on E. In this way we shall act (even
without special notice) when considering pairs of spaces in duality. In particular,
elements of E will be called (linear) functionals on G and elements of G will be
called (linear) functionals on E. Therefore, the construction from the previous
example yields two “weak topologies defined by the duality between E and G”:
the topology σ(E, G) on E and the topology σ(G, E) on G.
One more remark about notation. Throughout the bilinear form establishing a
duality between the spaces E and G will be usually denoted by the symbol ⟨·, ·⟩;
in particular, even in the case where, say, the vector space G is from the very
beginning defined as a space of linear functionals on E, we shall often replace the
symbol g(x), where g ∈G, x ∈E, by the symbol ⟨g, x⟩(or ⟨x, g⟩). The symbol
⟨·, · ⟩should not be confused with an inner product.
1.4. Convex sets
In this section we assume that the field of scalars is IR. The closed convex
hull or closed convex envelope of a set A in a topological vector space is defined
as the intersection of all closed convex sets containing A. The notation: conv A.
Similarly, we define the closed absolutely convex hull abs conv A of the set A as
the intersection of all closed absolutely convex sets containing A.
1.4.1. Proposition. Let E be a topological vector space, let V ⊂E be a
convex set, and let ˘V and V be the interior and closure of V , respectively. Then,
for any points a ∈˘V and b ∈V , the set ˘V contains the set
[a, b) := {ta + (1 −t)b: t ∈(0, 1]}.
PROOF. We first consider the case where b ∈V ; as assume that b = 0 (in
order to get this, it suffices to replace V with V −b; since the translation is a
homeomorphism, it takes the interior of the set into the interior of its image, the

30
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
closure into the closure, etc.). Let x ∈[a, 0), i.e., x = λa, λ ∈(0, 1]. The set ˘V is
an open neighborhood of the point a belonging to V . Then the set λ ˘V is an open
neighborhood of the point x and λ ˘V ⊂V by the convexity of V .
Let us consider the general case. Now, unlike the previous case, we assume
that x = 0 (and not that b = 0), where x is a point in the interval
(a, b) := {ta + (1 −t)b: t ∈(0, 1)};
if x = a, then there is nothing to prove, since a ∈˘V by assumption. Thus, b = νa,
where ν < 0. The set ν ˘V is a neighborhood of the point b. Moreover, since b ∈V ,
there exists z ∈V ∩(ν ˘V ), i.e., z/ν ∈˘V . Therefore, the relation x = 0 ∈[z/ν, z)
yields that x ∈˘V according to what is already proved.
□
1.4.2. Proposition. Let V be a convex set in a topological vector space E.
Then the sets ˘V and V are also convex. If ˘V ̸= ∅, then ˘V = V and ˘V = ˘V .
PROOF. The convexity of ˘V and the equality ˘V = V (under the assump-
tion that ˘V is not empty) are direct corollaries of the previous proposition. The
convexity of V follows from the continuity of the mapping Φt : E ×E →E,
(x, z) →tx + (1 −t)z for every t ∈[0, 1]. Indeed, by the continuity of Φt we
have Φt(V ×V ) = Φt(V ×V ) ⊂V ; these inclusions mean the convexity of V .
Let us verify that ˘V = ˘V . Since ˘V ⊂˘V , it suffices to verify that also the
opposite inclusion is valid.
Let a ∈˘V and b ∈˘V (̸= ∅).
We shall assume
that b = 0 (as already noted, this does not restrict the generality). Then by the
continuity of the mapping ϕ: t →ta the equality ϕ(1) = a and the openness of
˘V yield the existence of ε > 0 such that ϕ(1 + ε) = (1 + ε)a ∈˘V ⊂V . Thus,
a ∈[0, (1 + ε)a), 0 ∈˘V and (1 + ε)a ∈V . Hence by the previous proposition we
have a ∈˘V .
□
1.4.3. Remark. (i) For further references we note the following obvious fact:
if E is a vector space, V and W are its convex subsets, and α, β ∈K, then the set
αV + βW is also convex and (α + β)V ⊂αV + βV , and if αβ > 0, then this
inclusion becomes the equality (α + β)V = αV + βV .
(ii) The assumption that ˘V is not empty is essential for the validity of the
proven proposition. For example, let E be a topological vector space on which
there exists a discontinuous linear functional (this property holds, in particular, for
all infinite-dimensional normed spaces and even all infinite-dimensional metrizable
space, see Example 1.9.10). Then the kernel V of this functional is an everywhere
dense vector subspace (hence a convex set) with the empty interior, so that V = E,
˘V = E ̸= ˘V = ∅.
Let us discuss connections between convex sets and sublinear functions.
Let E be a vector space over the field of real numbers. A function (functional)
p: E →IR1 ∪{+∞} is called sublinear or homogenously convex if
(1) p(x + y) ⩽p(x) + p(y),
(2) p(0) = 0, p(λx) = λp(x), λ > 0.

1.4. Convex sets
31
If p does not assume the value +∞, the latter equality holds also for λ = 0.
A sublinear function is convex. We recall that a function f on a convex set V
in a linear space is called convex if
f

λu + (1 −λ)v

⩽λf(u) + (1 −λ)f(v)
∀u, v ∈V, λ ∈[0, 1].
A function g is calledconcave if −g is convex.
Note that every linear functional f on E is sublinear; the functional |f|, where
|f|(x) = |f(x)|, x ∈E, is also sublinear; every seminorm on a vector space is a
sublinear functional.
Our nearest goal is to describe the connection between nonnegative sublinear
functionals and convex subsets in E containing zero.
1.4.4. Definition. Let E be a vector space and A ⊂E. The Minkowski
functional or the gauge function of the set A is the function
pA : E →IR+ ∪{+∞}
defined by the equality
pA(x) = inf{λ > 0: x ∈λA},
where pA(x) = +∞if there is no such λ.
1.4.5. Definition. A subset in a topological vector space is called bounded if
it is absorbed by every neighborhood of zero.
One should bear in mind that even if the topology of a topological vector space
is defined by a metric, the boundedness in the sense of the previous definition does
not reduce to the boundedness with respect to the metric. For example, the standard
topology of the real line can be defined by a bounded metric. On the other hand,
a bounded set in a topological vector space need not be bounded with respect to
the metric defining the topology (see Exercise 1.12.36).
1.4.6.
Proposition. A set B in a topological vector space E is bounded
precisely when for every sequence {an} ⊂B and every sequence of scalars {tn}
converging to zero, the sequence {tnan} converges to zero in E.
PROOF. If B is bounded, an ∈B, scalars tn tend to zero, V is a neighborhood
of zero in E, and λ > 0 is such that tB ⊂V whenever |t| < λ, then tnan ∈V
for n so large that |tn| < λ. Hence tnan →0 in E.
Conversely, let the condition in this criteria of boundedness be fulfilled for the
set B. If B is not bounded, then there exists a neighborhood of zero V ⊂E such
that for every n ∈IN there is a number tn such that |tn| < 1/n and (tnB)\V ̸= ∅.
Hence there exist points an ∈B with tnan ∈(tnB \V ). Clearly, the vectors tnan
do not converge to zero, although tn →0.
□
Let us study the relations between the function pA and the set A.
1.4.7. Proposition. (i) If x ∈E and there is λ ∈(0, ∞) such that x ∈λA,
then pA(x) < ∞. Hence if A is an absorbent set, then pA(x) < ∞for every
x ∈E. If the set A is convex and the function pA is finite, then A is an absorbent
set.

32
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
(ii) If x ̸= 0 and the set Ax = A∩{z ∈E : z = λx, λ ⩾0} is bounded in the
standard topology of the one-dimensional subspace generated by the element x,
then pA(x) > 0. In particular, if A is bounded in some Hausdorff topology in the
space E compatible with the vector structure, then pA(x) > 0 for all x ̸= 0.
(iii) If c > 0, then pA(cx) = cpA(x); if 0 ∈A and pA(x) < ∞, then we have
pA(cx) = cpA(x) for all c ⩾0.
(iv) If the set A is convex, then
pA(x1 + x2) ⩽pA(x1) + pA(x2) ∀x1, x2 ∈E.
(v) If A is circled, then pA(cx) = |c|pA(x) for all c ∈IR.
PROOF. All assertions are obvious except for (iv), in the justification of
which we can assume that pA(x1) and pA(x2) are finite, since otherwise there
is nothing to prove. Let a1 > pA(x1), a2 > pA(x2); then there exist numbers
a′
i ∈

pA(xi), ai

such that x1 + x2 ∈a′
1A + a′
2A ⊂(a′
1 + a′
2)A. This means that
pA(x1 + x2) ⩽a′
1 + a′
2 ⩽a1 + a2.
Since the numbers a1 and a2 can be made as close to pA(xi) as we wish, we have
pA(x1 + x2) ⩽pA(x1) + pA(x2).
□
1.4.8. Proposition. (i) If A is a convex set and 0 ∈A, then we have the
inclusion {x ∈A: pA(x) < 1} ⊂A.
(ii) We have A ⊂{x: pA(x) ⩽1}.
(iii) If the intersection of A with every one-dimensional subspace of the space
E is closed (in the standard topology of the one-dimensional space) and A is
convex and absorbing, then A = {x: pA(x) ⩽1}.
(iv) If A is convex, 0 ∈A and the intersection of A with every one-dimensional
subspace in E is open (in the standard topology of the one-dimensional space),
then {x ∈E : pA(x) < 1} = A.
(v) Let p be a nonnegative sublinear function on the space E. Then the sets
A1 = {x: p(x) < 1} and A2 = {x: p(x) ⩽1} are convex and contain zero, in
addition, pA1(x) = pA2(x) = p(x) for all x ∈E.
(vi) Under the assumptions in (v), if the function p is everywhere finite, then
A1 is open and A2 is closed in the strongest locally convex topology of the space E
(see Example 1.3.18).
PROOF. (i) If pA(x) < 1, then there is λ ∈(0, 1) such that x ∈λA, i.e.,
x/λ ∈A. Since 0 ∈A and A is convex, we have λx/λ + (1 −λ)0 = x ∈A.
Assertion (ii) is obvious.
For the proof of assertion (iii) it suffices to show that we have the inclusion
{x: pA(x) = 1} ⊂A, since under our assumptions about A we have
{x: pA(x) < 1} ⊂A ⊂{x: pA(x) ⩽1}.
Let pA(x) = 1, i.e., for every natural number n there exists a number λn ⩾1
such that x/λn ∈A and λn −1 < 1/n. This means that xn = x/λn →x
in the one-dimensional space generated by the element x, moreover, we have
xn ∈A ∩{λx: x ∈IR} for each n, and the latter set is closed by assumption.

1.4. Convex sets
33
(iv) Since the set in the left-hand side of this equality is contained in the set in
the right-hand side according to what has been proved above, it suffices to show
that if x ∈A, then pA(x) < 1. So, let x ∈A; we have to show that pA(x) < 1.
If x = 0, then this is true. Let x ̸= 0 and let M be the one-dimensional subspace
in E generated by x. Then M ∩A is open in M. The inclusion x ∈A, which is
true by assumption, yields that x/λ ∈A for some number λ ∈(0, 1). This means
that pA(x) < 1.
(v) Clearly, 0 ∈A1 ⊂A2. If z = tx1 + (1 −t)x2, where x1, x2 ∈A1,
t ∈[0, 1], then
p(z) = p(tx1 + (1 −t)x2) ⩽tp(x1) + (1 −t)p(x2) < t + (1 −t) = 1,
so that z ∈A1. Similarly we verify the convexity of A2. Let us prove the equality
pA1(x) = p(x). Let pA1(x0) = α, p(x0) = β. We consider two cases: α < β and
β < α. In the first case, there exists ε > 0 such that α + ε < β. Then, on the one
hand, pA1

x0/(α + ε)

= α/(α + ε) < 1, so that x0/(α + ε) ∈A1. On the other
hand, p

x0/(α + ε)

= β/(α + ε) > 1, so that x0/(α + ε) /∈A1. In the second
case (α > β), there exists δ > 0 such that β + δ < α. Then p

x0/(β + δ)

< 1,
so that x0/(β + δ) ∈A1, and pA1

x0/(β + δ)

> 1, i.e., x0/(β + δ) /∈A1, which
contradicts the previous inclusion. Similarly we prove the equality p(x) = pA2(x).
Assertion (vi) follows from the fact that every finite sublinear function on a
vector space is continuous in this topology. Let us prove this. Let g be a sublinear
function on E. Then the function f : x →max{|g(x)|, |g(−x)|} is, as one can
readily verify, a seminorm on E, so that the set {x: f(x) ⩽1} turns out to
be convex, absorbent and circled, i.e., a neighborhood of zero in the strongest
locally convex topology on E. This means that the seminorm f is continuous.
By the inequality |g(x1) −g(x2)| ⩽f(x1 −x2) also the sublinear function g is
continuous.
□
The next result is often taken as a definition of a locally convex space.
1.4.9. Theorem. The topology of any locally convex space over the field IR
or C can be defined by a family of seminorms.
PROOF. Let E be a locally convex space and let B be a base of its neigh-
borhoods of zero consisting of convex circled sets (such a base of neighbor-
hoods of zero exists by Proposition 1.2.11). For every set V in the base B, let
pV denote its Minkowski functional and let τ be the topology defined by the
family of seminorms {pV : V ∈B}. The topology τ coincides with the orig-
inal topology of the space E. Indeed, on the one hand, every set of the form
{x ∈E : pV (x) < ε} = εV , where ε ∈(0, ∞), V ∈B, is a neighborhood of zero
in the original topology; these sets form a prebase (see Example 1.3.9), which in
this case is a base of neighborhoods of zero in τ. On the other hand, if W is an
arbitrary neighborhood of zero in the original topology and V0 is a set in the base
B such that V0 ⊂W, then we have {x: pV0(x) < 1} = V0 ⊂W.
□
It is worth noting that the topology of a locally convex space can be defined
by a family of seminorms of the minimal possible cardinality (Exercise 1.12.25).

34
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
1.4.10.
Remark. (i) Even in the case where our locally convex space is
Hausdorff, its topology is not always defined by a family of norms. Indeed, every
norm in such a collection is continuous in the topology defined by this family,
but there exist Hausdorff locally convex spaces on which there are no continuous
norms. For example, any infinite power of the real line with the usual product
topology and the space E(IRn) have this property (Example 1.3.22). Normability
is discussed in § 1.5.
(ii) It is readily seen that the property to be Hausdorff for a locally convex
space is equivalent to the following property: for every x ̸= 0 there is a continuous
seminorm p such that p(x) ̸= 0.
(iii) The locally convex topology defined by a family of seminorms Q is
stronger than the locally convex topology defined by the family of seminorms P
precisely when for for every seminorm p ∈P there exist seminorms q1, . . . , qn
in Q and a number C > 0 for which p(x) ⩽C[q1(x) + · · · + qn(x)] for all x.
Indeed, if this condition is fulfilled, then the topology generated by Q is
stronger than the one generated by P. On the other hand, if every neighborhood of
zero in the second topology contains a neighborhood of zero in the first topology,
the set {x: p(x) < 1} must contain a set of the form {x: qi(x) < r, i = 1, . . . , n}
for some q1, . . . , qn ∈Q and r>0. Then p ⩽r−1(q1+· · ·+qn), since otherwise by
homogeneity of both sides there is an element x for which q1(x)+· · ·+qn(x)<r,
but p(x) > 1.
Therefore, two collections of seminorms P and Q on a given space define the
same locally convex topology precisely when in addition to the indicated condition
also the symmetric condition is fulfilled: for every seminorm q in Q there exist
seminorms p1, . . . , pk ∈P and M > 0 for which q(x) ⩽M[p1(x) + · · · + pk(x)].
In locally convex spaces, there is the following simple description of bound-
edness.
1.4.11. Proposition. A set B in a locally convex space E is bounded if and
only if every seminorm from some system of seminorms defining the topology of E
is bounded on B. Hence every continuous seminorm on E is bounded on every
bounded set.
PROOF. If p is a continuous seminorm on E, then Vp = {x ∈E : p(x) ⩽1}
is a neighborhood of zero in E and hence for sufficiently large (in absolute value)
scalars t we have t−1B ⊂V if B is bounded. This means that p(x) ⩽1 if
x ∈t−1B, i.e., p(z) ⩽|t| if z ∈B. Thus, the boundedness on B of every
continuous seminorm is proved.
Let now P be some system of seminorms on E defining the topology. Let
us set αp = supx∈B p(x) < ∞for every seminorm p ∈P; thus, if |t| > αp,
then B ⊂tVp. Since the sets Vp form a prebase of neighborhoods of zero, every
neighborhood of zero in E absorbs B, i.e., the set B is bounded. Another proof
can be easily extracted from Proposition 1.4.6.
□
1.4.12. Proposition. The closure and the circled hull of every bounded subset
in a topological vector space are bounded. The convex hull of every bounded
subset in a locally convex space is also bounded.

1.5. Finite-dimensional and normable spaces
35
PROOF. Our reasoning is based on the fact that any topological vector space
possesses a base of neighborhoods of zero consisting of circled closed sets, and
every locally convex space has a base of neighborhoods of zero consisting of
convex sets. Hence, in order to verify that a set is bounded, it suffices, in the
case of an arbitrary topological vector space, to verify that it is absorbed by every
circled closed neighborhood of zero, and in the case of a locally convex space to
verify that it is absorbed by every convex neighborhood of zero.
Thus, let B be a bounded subset of a topological vector space E, let B be
its closure, let ΓB be its circled hull, and let conv B be its convex hull. If V is
a closed circled neighborhood of zero in E and for some number t we have the
inclusion B ⊂tV , then also the inclusions B ⊂tV and ΓB ⊂tV hold (since,
e.g., B is the intersection of all closed sets containing B and tV is one of such
sets). If E is a locally convex space and V is a convex neighborhood of zero in E
and again B ⊂tV , then conv B ⊂tV , since conv B is the intersection of all
convex set containing B and tV is one of them.
□
The convex hull of a bounded set in a topological vector space that is not
locally convex is not always bounded (an example: the ball in the space from
Example 1.3.16 or in the spaces L1/2 and l1/2 described before Corollary 1.11.14).
Note that this proposition immediately yields that the circled closed hull of a
bounded subset in a topological vector space is also bounded; the same is true for
the absolutely convex closed hull of a bounded subset of a locally convex space.
The situation is more complicated with the preservation of compactness under such
operations, which is discussed in § 1.8.
1.5. Finite-dimensional and normable spaces
In this section we prove the criteria of the membership of a topological vector
space in the classes of spaces listed in the title; in addition, we prove that for every
natural n, up to an isomorphism, there exists precisely one Hausdorff topological
vector space of dimension n over K if K is a complete normed field.
A family of subsets of an arbitrary set is called centered if it is not empty and
the intersection of every finite collection of its elements is also nonempty.
1.5.1. Theorem. Every Hausdorff topological vector space of finite dimension
n over a complete nondiscrete normed field K is isomorphic to the space Kn (the
product of n copies of the field K regarded as a one-dimensional topological
vector space over K).
PROOF. We give three proofs. The first one will work in the general case;
the other two — in the case of a locally compact field K. Since every two vector
spaces of the same dimension over the same field are isomorphic as vector spaces,
it suffices to prove that an arbitrary Hausdorff topology τ in the space Kn mak-
ing it a topological vector space coincides with the product topology, which we
denote by τ0. To this end, we show the continuity at the point (0, . . . , 0) (hence
everywhere) of the identity mappings
f n
1 : (Kn, τ0) →(Kn, τ)
and
f n
2 : (Kn, τ) →(Kn, τ0).

36
Chapter 1. Introduction to theory
We verify that the continuity of the mapping f n
1 follows from the definition of the
product topology and the axioms of a topological vector space. Indeed, let W be
a neighborhood of zero in τ and let W1 be a neighborhood of zero in τ such that
W1 + · · · + W1 (n terms) is contained in W.
Denote by ej the element (0, . . . , 0, 1, 0, . . . 0) ∈Kn (the unit of the field K
stands at the jth place). Let αj be positive numbers such that kjej ∈W1 whenever
|kj| < αj (such numbers exist since every neighborhood of zero in a topological
vector space is an absorbent set). For ε > 0 let Vε = {x ∈Kn : ∥x∥< ε}, where
∥x∥= maxj=1,...,n |xj| is the norm introduced in Example 1.3.5, so that Vε is
a neighborhood of zero in the space (Kn, τ0). Let also α = min{α1, . . . , αn}.
Then, whenever x = (x1, . . . , xn) ∈Vα (which means that |xj| < αj for each
index j ∈{1, 2, . . . , n}) we have x ∈W1 + · · · + W1 ⊂W. Thus, the continuity
of the mapping f n
1 at the point (0, . . . , 0) is proved.
We now prove the continuity of the mapping f n
2 at the same point. Since
the sets {Vε : ε > 0} form a base of neighborhoods of zero in τ0, it suffices to
show that for every ε > 0 there exists a neighborhood of zero W in τ such that
W ⊂Vε. We argue by induction. Suppose first that n = 1. Let ε > 0, k ∈Vε (i.e.,
|k| < ε), k ̸= 0; such an element k exists, because the field K is not discrete. The
space (K1, τ) is Hausdorff, which yields the existence of a circled neighborhood
of zero W not containing the element k. We have W ⊂Vε. Indeed, otherwise
there is an element k1 ∈W\Vε. Then |k1| ⩾ε, |k/k1| < 1. Since W is circled,
we must have k =
k
k1 k1 ∈W, but this is not true. Thus, for n = 1 the theorem is
completely proved (without using the completeness of the field K).
We now prove that if the theorem is valid for some n ∈IN, then it will be valid
also for n + 1. It suffices to show that (under this assumption) the mapping f n+1
2
is continuous. We observe that every space (Kn, τ0) is complete due to the com-
pleteness of the field K; the completeness of the product of complete topological
vector spaces is proved below in Proposition 1.7.10, but in the case under consid-
eration we are concerned with the product of complete metric (normed) spaces, the
completeness of this product is a standard fact in elementary functional analysis.
Hence every n-dimensional topological vector subspace in the space (Kn+1, τ) is
complete, since by the inductive assumption it is isomorphic to the space (Kn, τ0).
By Lemma 1.3.11 we obtain that in (Kn+1, τ) every n-dimensional vector sub-
space is closed.
For ε>0 and j ∈{1, 2, . . . , n + 1}, the set

(k1, . . . , kn+1)∈Kn+1: |kj|<ε

will be denoted by V j
ε . Since the sets V j
ε form a prebase of neighborhoods of
zero in (Kn+1, τ0), for the proof of the continuity of the mapping f n+1
2
(at the
point (0, . . . , 0), hence everywhere) it suffices to show that for any ε > 0 and
j ∈{1, 2, . . . , n + 1} there exists a neighborhood of zero W in the topology
τ such that W ⊂V j
ε . The condition that the field K is not discrete yields the
existence of k ∈K, k ̸= 0 such that kej ∈V j
ε (i.e., |k| < ε). By the closedness
in τ of the subspace Gj = {(k1, . . . , kn+1) ∈Kn+1 : |kj| = 0} there is a circled
neighborhood of zero W0 in the topology τ such that (kej + W0) ∩Gj = ∅.
Therefore,
kej ̸∈Gj + W0.
(1.5.1)

1.5. Finite-dimensional and normable spaces
37
We derive from this that W0 is a neighborhood of zero in τ contained in V j
ε . This
is proved with the aid of a reasoning similar to the one used above in the proof
of the inclusion W ⊂Vε. Let a = (k1, . . . , kn+1) ∈W0, a /∈V j
ε . Since W0 is
circled, we have ka/kj ∈W0 (because |k/kj| ⩽1 due to the fact that |k| < ε,
|kj| ⩾ε); but this contradicts (1.5.1), since ka/kj ∈kej + Gj. The first proof of
the theorem is complete.
Two other proofs differ from the given one by their nontrivial parts concerned
with the verification of the continuity of the mapping f n
2 . However, these proofs
apply only to the case where the topological field K is locally compact. The local
compactness of the field K yields the local compactness of the space (Kn, τ0),
a corollary of which is the compactness in the topology τ0 of every closed ball
Wε = {x ∈Kn : ∥x∥⩽ε}, which will be used below. The first of these differ-
ent proofs is based on the concept of a filter, due to this it applies not only to
topological vector spaces, but also to pseudotopological vector spaces (the def-
inition of a pseudotopological space can be found in § 4.10(vi) or in the book
Smolyanov [489]).
Thus, suppose that the mapping f n
2 is not continuous (by its linearity this is
equivalent to the property that f n
2 is not continuous at zero) and obtain a contra-
diction. Since f n
2 is discontinuous at zero, in Kn there exists a filter Φ converging
to zero in the topology τ, but not convergent in the topology τ0. The latter, in
turn, means that there exists ε0 > 0 such that for every ϕ ∈Φ we have
ϕ ∩(Kn \ Vε0) ̸= ∅,
(1.5.2)
where Vε := {x ∈Kn : ∥x∥< ε}, ε > 0.
We now consider two cases. Suppose first that there exists c > ε0 such that
for all ϕ ∈Φ we have (Wc \ Vε0) ∩ϕ ̸= ∅. Then {(Wc \ Vε0) ∩ϕ: ϕ ∈Φ} is a
filter basis in Kn; if Φ1 is some ultrafilter majorizing the filter Φc generated by this
basis, then Φ1 majorizes the filter Φ. In addition, since the set Wc \Vε0 is compact
in (Kn, τ0), the ultrafilter Φ1 converges in the topology τ0 to some element a of
the set Wc \ Vε0. Since we earlier proved that the mapping f n
1 is continuous,
the ultrafilter Φ1 converges to a also in the topology τ.
This contradicts the
assumption that τ is Hausdorff, since Φ1 must converge in the topology τ to zero,
because Φ1 majorizes the filter Φ converging to zero. The obtained contradiction
means that for every c > ε0 there exists ϕ ∈Φ such that (Wc \ Vε0) ∩ϕ = ∅
(and (1.5.2) holds). In particular, for every c > 0 and every ϕ ∈Φ we have
(Kn \ Wc) ∩ϕ ̸= ∅(verify this); in other words, all elements of the filter are
unbounded in the norm.
Next, for η > 0 we set W 1
η = {k ∈K: |k| ⩽η}. Let us show that if η > 0,
ϕ ∈Φ and a real number c0 > ε0 > 0 is such that there exists an element k0 ∈K
with |k0| = c0 (such c0 exists, since the normed field K is not discrete), then
(W 1
η · ϕ) ∩(Wc0 \ Vε0) ̸= ∅.
Indeed, by the unboundedness of the set ϕ there is a point x0 ∈ϕ such that
∥x0∥⩾c0/η0 > 0, where 0 < η0 ⩽η, and there exists an element kη ∈K for

38
Chapter 1. Introduction to theory
which |kη| = η0, moreover, there exists also an element k′ ∈K such that
|k′| = ∥kη · x0∥= η0∥x0∥⩾c0 = ∥k0∥> 0.
Hence
|k0kη/k′| = (|k0|/|k′|) · |kη| = (|k0|/|k′|)η0 ⩽1 · η = η,
whence we obtain that k0kη/k′ ∈W 1
η , (k0kη/k′)x0 ∈W 1
η · ϕ and
∥(k0kη/k′)x0∥= c0 · (1/|k′|) · ∥kηx0∥= c0.
Hence the family of sets

(W 1
η · ϕ) ∩(Wδ0 \ Vε0): η ∈IR, η > 0, ϕ ∈Φ

forms a filter basis in Kn, which by the continuity of multiplication also converges
to zero in the topology τ. The filter generated by this basis possesses all those
properties of the filter Φ which we used in the previous part of the proof. As we
have seen, they yield that the topology τ is not Hausdorff. The second proof of the
continuity of the mapping f n
2 , hence also of the theorem, in the case of a locally
compact field is complete.
The third proof of the continuity of the mapping f n
2 , which we now give, at
the level of ideas is very close to the second one, but it does not use the concept of
a filter. We give it in the case where K = C or K = IR, although it can be easily
adapted to the general case of a locally compact field (we leave this to the reader).
Suppose again that the mapping f n
2 is discontinuous. This means that there exists
ε > 0 such that the set Wε contains no neighborhood of zero in the topology τ. In
particular, for any closed circled neighborhood of zero V in this topology we have
V ̸⊂Wε. It follows that V has a nonempty intersection with the set Sε = Wε \Vε.
Indeed, Sε is a sphere in Kn with respect to the norm ∥· ∥. Since there exists
an element a ∈V such that a /∈Wε, we have ∥a∥= α > ε. Using that V is
circled and a ∈V , we obtain εa/α ∈V , but ∥εa/α∥= ε, i.e., εa/α ∈Sε and
V ∩Sε ̸= ∅. The set Wε is compact in τ0 by the local compactness of the field K.
Hence the set Sε is compact in τ0. Since the mapping f n
1 is continuous (which has
been proved earlier), the set Sε is compact in the topology τ. On the other hand,
the intersection of two neighborhoods of zero is again a neighborhood of zero.
Hence the sets of the form V ∩Sε, where V is a closed circled neighborhood of
zero in τ, form a centered family of closed subsets of the set Sε, which is compact
in the topology τ. Hence the intersection of all these sets is nonempty; let a be
its element. Then a belongs to every neighborhood of zero in the topology τ,
which contradicts that it is Hausdorff.
The third proof of the theorem is also
complete.
□
1.5.2. Corollary. Every finite-dimensional subspace in a Hausdorff topologi-
cal vector space over a complete field is closed.
PROOF. In this case Kn is complete.
□
1.5.3. Corollary. Let F be a closed vector subspace of finite codimension in
a Hausdorff topological vector space E. Then every algebraic complement G of
the subspace F in E is also a topological complement (see Example 1.3.15).

1.5. Finite-dimensional and normable spaces
39
PROOF. The quotient space E/F is Hausdorff and finite-dimensional and the
natural projection π: E →E/F is continuous. Its restriction π|G to G is an
algebraic, hence by the proven theorem also a topological isomorphism between
G and E/F. The projection pG : E →G has the form pG = (π|G)−1◦π, hence
is continuous.
□
1.5.4. Definition. A subset A of a topological vector space E is called pre-
compact or totally bounded if, for every neighborhood of zero V in E, one can
find a finite set {a1, . . . , an} in E such that A ⊂n
k=1(ak + V ).
The set {a1, . . . , an} is called a finite V -net (or an ε-net if V is a ball of
radius ε in a metric space). It is easily seen that every compact set in a topological
vector space is precompact. We observe (this fact is not needed now, so it will
be proven in § 1.8 after we discuss completions of topological vector spaces) that
a subset of a topological vector space is precompact precisely when its closure in
the completion of this topological vector space is compact. However, the closure
of a precompact set in an incomplete space may fail to be compact.
1.5.5. Lemma. Every precompact subset of a topological vector space is
bounded.
PROOF. Let A be a precompact subset of a topological vector space E and
let V be a neighborhood of zero in E; we have to prove that there exists ν > 0
such that A ⊂tV if |t| > ν. Let W be a circled neighborhood of zero such that
W + W ⊂V and let a1, . . . , an be elements of E for which A ⊂n
k=1(ak + W).
Let ν > 1 be such that {a1, . . . , an} ⊂tW if |t| > ν. Then for such numbers t
we have
A ⊂
n

k=1
(ak + W) ⊂tW + W ⊂tW + tW = t(W + W) ⊂tV,
which shows that A is bounded.
□
1.5.6. Theorem. A Hausdorff topological vector space E over the field IR or
C is finite-dimensional if and only if it possess a compact neighborhood of zero.
Moreover, it is sufficient that it possess a precompact neighborhood of zero.
PROOF. The necessity is clear from Theorem 1.5.1, since any Hausdorff topo-
logical vector space (over a nondiscrete complete normed field K) of finite dimen-
sion n is isomorphic (as a topological vector space) to the space Kn, and if S
is a compact neighborhood of zero in K, then the product of n copies of S is a
compact neighborhood of zero in Kn.
Let us prove the sufficiency (the given proof is due to Gleason). Let V be a
precompact neighborhood of zero in E and let a1, . . . , an ∈E be elements such
that
V ⊂
n

k=1

ak + 1
2V

.
(1.5.3)
We show that the linear span of the set A = {a1, . . . , an} coincides with the
whole space, i.e., that every element in E is a linear combination of elements of

40
Chapter 1. Introduction to theory
the set A. Thus, let b ∈E and let t ∈IR\0 be such that tb ∈V . By (1.5.3)
there exists an element ak1 ∈A such that tb −ak1 ∈V/2. If for some natural
number r we have already proved that there exist ak1, . . . , akr ∈A such that
tb −	r
j=1 21−jakj ∈2−rV (for r = 1, as we have just noted, this is true), then
by the relation
2−rV ⊂
n

k=1
(2−rak + 2−r−1V ),
which follows from (1.5.3), there exists an element akr+1 ∈A such that
tb −
r+1

j=1
21−jakj ∈2−r−1V.
Since the precompact set V is bounded, it follows that the sum of the series of
21−jakj is tb. Indeed, let W be an arbitrary neighborhood of zero in E and let a
number r0 > 0 be such that 2−rV ⊂W if r > r0. Then for any r > r0 we have
tb −
r

j=1
21−jakj ∈2−rV ⊂W.
On the other hand, 	r
j=1 21−jakj = 	n
i=1 νr
i ai for each natural number r,
where νr
i = 	
k∈Bir 21−k, Bir = {j : kj = i, j ⩽r}. Hence there exist numbers
νi ∈K, i = 1, . . . , n, such that νr
i →νi as r →∞for every i ∈{1, . . . , n} (every
number νi is the sum of a series the elements of which form a subsequence of the
sequence 2−n). The axioms of a topological vector space yield that 	r
j=1 21−jakj
converges to 	n
i=1 νiai as r →∞. In any Hausdorff topological vector space a
sequence can converge to a unique limit, hence we obtain that tb = 	n
i=1 νiai.
□
A.N. Kolmogorov [279] discovered the following important fact.
1.5.7. Theorem. A real or complex topological vector space is normable if
and only if it is Hausdorff and possesses a convex bounded neighborhood of zero.
PROOF. If p is a norm on a topological vector space E generating its topology,
then (by the definition of the topology generated by a norm) the collection of all
sets {x ∈E : p(x) < ε}, each of which is convex, forms a base of neighborhoods
of zero in E; since each of them is obtained from every other one by multiplying
by a scalar, these sets are bounded in E. The topology in E is Hausdorff: the norm
vanishes only at zero, hence if x ∈E, p(x) ̸= 0, then x /∈{z : p(z) < p(x)}.
Thus, the necessity of the indicated conditions is proven.
Let us prove the sufficiency. Let V be a convex bounded neighborhood of zero
in E. By Proposition 1.2.2 there exists a circled neighborhood of zero W0 ⊂V .
Its convex hull W is a convex circled neighborhood of zero; it is contained in V
and hence is bounded. The Minkowski functional pW of the set W is a norm on
E generating the original topology. The fact that pW is a norm follows from the
properties of W: pW (x) is finite for every x ∈E, since W is absorbing. The
convexity of W gives the semiadditivity of pW . The equality p(tx) = |t|p(x) for
all t ∈K and x ∈E holds, since W is circled. The boundedness of W implies the

1.6. Metrizability
41
positivity of pW on nonzero elements. Finally, the most important property that
this norm generates the original topology follows from the fact that the topology
generated by the norm pW possesses a base of neighborhoods of zero consisting
of all possible sets of the form {x ∈E : pW (x) < ε}, ε ∈(0, ∞). Indeed, on the
one hand, each of these sets is a neighborhood of zero in the original topology (this
follows from the inclusion εW/2 ⊂{x ∈E : pW (x) < ε} for every ε); on the
other hand, an arbitrary neighborhood of zero V0 in the original topology contains
one of these sets, since by the boundedness of the set W we have the inclusion
{x ∈E : pW (x) < δ} ⊂δW ⊂V0 for a sufficiently small number δ > 0.
□
The convexity of the neighborhood of zero in the formulation is important:
the nonnormable space l1/2 (see p. 79) has bounded balls.
1.6. Metrizability
Here we obtain a condition of metrizability of a topological vector space, but
before that we establish a connection with metrics for every vector topology.
1.6.1. Theorem. The topology of every topological vector space can defined
by a family of quasi-norms.
PROOF. First we shall show that if (E, τ) is a topological vector space and
B = {Vn} is a sequence of circled neighborhoods of zero such that
Vn+1 + Vn+1 ⊂Vn
∀n ∈IN,
(1.6.1)
then the vector space E can be equipped with a quasi-norm q such that

x ∈E : q(x) ⩽
1
2n+1

⊂Vn ⊂

x ∈E : q(x) ⩽1
2n

.
(1.6.2)
Let k(IN) denote the set of finite subsets IN and let Q1 be the set of binary-rational
numbers in [0, 1), i.e., the numbers r ∈Q1 have the form
r =

k∈Φ(r)
2−k, where Φ(r) ∈k(IN);
if r = 0, then Φ(r) = ∅. We define a mapping W of the set Q1 to the set of
subsets in the space E as follows:
W(r) =

n∈Φ(r)
Vn.
In particular, for r = 2−n we have W(r) = Vn; W(0) = {0}. Thus, W(r) is a
circled neighborhood of zero in E if 0 ̸= r ∈Q1.
For x ∈E set
q(x) := inf

r ∈Q1 : x ∈W(r)

if x ∈
r W(r), q(x) = 1 if x /∈
r W(r). We show that q is a quasi-norm on E.
We first verify that q is a pseudonorm. It follows directly by the definition of q
that q(0) = 0 and q(x) ∈[0, 1] for all x ∈E. Since the sets W(r) are circled, it
follows that q(x) = q(−x) for all x ∈E. We now show that
q(x1 + x2) ⩽q(x1) + q(x2)
∀x1, x2 ∈E.
(1.6.3)

42
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
If q(x1) + q(x2) ⩾1, then (1.6.3) holds, since q(z) ⩽1. Let q(x1) + q(x2) < 1.
For the proof of inequality (1.6.3) in this case we show that
q(x1 + x2) ⩽q(x1) + q(x2) + 2ε
∀ε > 0.
(1.6.4)
Thus, let ε > 0 and q(x1)+q(x2)+2ε < 1. Then there exist r1, r2 ∈Q1 such that
ri < q(xi) + ε, xi ∈W(ri), i = 1, 2 (without loss of generality we can assume
that r2 ⩽r1, hence r2 < 1/2). For the proof of (1.6.4) it suffices to verify the
inclusion
x1 + x2 ∈W(r1 + r2),
because then q(x1 + x2) ⩽r1 + r2 < q(x1) + q(x2) + 2ε. For this, in turn, it
suffices to prove the inclusion
W(r1 + r2) ⊃W(r1) + W(r2).
(1.6.5)
Note that directly from the definition of W (and also from (1.6.1)) we obtain
(1.6.5) in the case where r2 = 0 and r1 = r2; in turn, (1.6.5) yields the monotonic-
ity of the function W(·), i.e., W(r1) ⊂W(r1 + r2) if ri ∈Q1.
We now proceed to the general case. Set
r = r1 + r2, r1
i = ri, i = 1, 2
and construct by induction a finite sequence of some length s0 ∈IN the elements
of which are pairs (rs
1, rs
2) of numbers in Q1 such that for every s ∈{1, . . . , s0}
we have
rs
1 + rs
2 = r,
(1.6.6)
W(rs
1) + W(rs
2) ⊃W(r1) + W(r2),
(1.6.7)
where rs0
2 = 0 and hence rs0
1 = r (the value of the last number s0 in this sequence
will be defined at the last step of our construction and the very fact that it exists
will be proved after we describe the inductive process).
The construction of such a sequence will give the proof of inclusion (1.6.5),
since for s = s0 inclusion (1.6.7) coincides with it. Suppose that j ∈IN, j ⩾2
and for all s ∈IN, where s < j, we have already constructed pairs of numbers
(rs
1, rs
2) from Q1 for which (1.6.6) and (1.6.7) hold. We define rj
1 and rj
2 by the
relations
Φ(rj
1) =

Φ(rj−1
1
) ∪Φ(rj−1
2
)

\

Φ(rj−1
1
) ∩Φ(rj−1
2
)

,
Φ(rj
2) =

Φ(rj−1
1
) ∩Φ(rj−1
2
)

−1 =

n ∈IN: n + 1 ∈Φ(rj−1
1
) ∩Φ(rj−1
2
)

.
Let us show that also for s = j relations (1.6.6) are (1.6.7) are true. Equality (1.6.6)
follows from the similar equality for s = j −1 and the definition of the sets Φ(rj
i ).
Note that if s ∈Q1, s < 1/2, then Φ(s) −1 = Φ(2s).
In the case under
consideration, this and the relation rj−1
1
+ rj−1
2
= r < 1 yield that rj
2 = 2sj−1,
where the number sj−1 is defined by the equality Φ(sj−1) = Φ(rj−1
1
) ∩Φ(rj−1
2
)

1.6. Metrizability
43
(so that sj−1 < 1/2). Inclusion (1.6.7) follows from the next chain of relations:
W(r1) + W(r2) ⊂W(rj−1
1
) + W(rj−1
2
)
=

n∈Φ(rj−1
1
)
W(2−n) +

n∈Φ(rj−1
2
)
W(2−n) =
=

n∈Φ(rj−1
1
)\Φ(rj−1
2
)
W(2−n) +

n∈Φ(rj−1
1
)∩Φ(rj−1
2
)
W(2−n)
+

n∈Φ(rj−1
1
)∩Φ(rj−1
2
)
W(2−n) +

n∈Φ(rj−1
2
)\Φ(rj−1
1
)
W(2−n)
⊂

n∈Φ(rj
1)
W(2−n) +

n∈Φ(rj
2)
W(2−n) = W(rj
1) + W(rj
2),
where the last inclusion follows from (1.6.1). If the set Φ(rj
2) is nonempty, i.e.,
rj
2 ̸= 0, then Φ(rj−1
2
) is also nonempty and the maximal value of the elements
in the set Φ(rj
2) is strictly smaller than the maximal value of the elements in the
set Φ(rj−1
2
). Hence there exists j ∈IN such that Φ(rj
2) = ∅(hence Φ(rj+k
2
) = ∅
for all integers k ⩾0). We define s0 to be the smallest of such numbers j; this
brings our construction of the required sequence to the end. Thus, the proof of the
fact that q is a pseudonorm is complete.
Let us verify that for q we have inclusions (1.6.2). The second one follows
from the definition of q. The first one follows from the definition of q and (1.6.1).
Indeed, if q(x) ⩽2−n−1, then there exists r ∈Q1 such that x ∈W(r) and
r < 2−n. This means that all numbers in the set Φ(r) are larger than n, whence
on account of (1.6.1) we obtain that
x ∈W(r) =

k∈Φ(r)
W(2−k) ⊂Vn.
We now prove that the pseudonorm q is a quasi-norm. Property (5) in the
definition of a quasi-norm (Example 1.3.6) follows from the fact that all sets
W(r) (r ̸= 0) are absorbing, and property (6) is seen from the fact that they are
circled.
Next, we show that q has property (4) from Example 1.3.6.
Let t ∈IR
and {xn} ⊂E be a sequence such that q(xn) →0; we have to prove that
q(txn) →0, and for this it suffices to verify that for every fixed j ∈IN the
inequality q(txn) < 2−j holds for sufficiently large n ∈IN. Since the sets W(r)
used in the definition of q are circled, we can assume that t > 0. Let nt denote
an (arbitrary) integer number greater than t, and let j ∈IN, j0 = j + nt. Then by
(1.6.1) we have
Vj0 + Vj0 + · · · + Vj0 ⊂Vj
if the number of terms in the left-hand side is 2nt. Let i0 ∈IN be such that
q(xi) < 2−j0−1 whenever i > i0. Then, for such i, by (1.6.2) we have xi ∈Vj0,
whence
txi = t
nt
ntxi ∈t
nt
ntVj0 ⊂t
nt
2ntVj0 ⊂t
nt
Vj ⊂Vj,

44
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
so that q(txi) < 2−j.
Thus, q is a quasi-norm; we observe that property (6)
follows, as noted above, by properties (4) and (5), but for the constructed function
q this property is very easy to verify directly, which has been done.
We continue the proof of the theorem. Let U be an arbitrary base of circled
neighborhoods of zero in E. For any V ∈U, let BV denote the sequence {Vn} of
elements U with property (1.6.1) for which V1 = V , and let qV be the quasi-norm
q on E constructed for this sequence as we have just described. Then, by (1.6.2),
the family of quasi-norms {qV : V ∈U} defines the original topology. We finally
observe that the constructed quasi-norms possess the property that q(λx) ⩽|λ|q(x)
whenever |λ| ⩽1.
□
1.6.2. Remark. The proven theorem asserts that on the space E there exists
a family P of quasi-norms such that the balls centered at zero with respect to the
quasi-norms in P form a prebase of neighborhoods of zero in E. Actually we
have proved that such balls form even a base of neighborhoods of zero in E.
1.6.3. Theorem. If a topological vector space E possesses a countable base
of neighborhoods of zero, then there a exists a quasi-norm on E generating its
topology.
PROOF. Let U = {V 1
n } be a countable base of circled neighborhoods of zero
in E. Let V1 = V 1
1 ; if the set Vn is already defined, then let Vn+1 be an element
of U such that Vn+1 + Vn+1 ⊂Vn and Vn+1 ⊂
n+1
i=1 V 1
i . Let q be the quasi-
norm defined by the sequence B = {Vn} in the same way as it has been done
in the proof of the previous theorem. Then q defines the original topology in the
space E.
□
We now obtain a simple criterion of metrizability.
1.6.4. Corollary. The topology of a topological vector space E can be de-
fined by a metric precisely when E is Hausdorff and has a countable base of
neighborhoods of zero. Moreover, the corresponding metric can be taken transla-
tion invariant. If the space E is locally convex, then its topology is defined by a
countable family of seminorms {pn} and for a metric generating the topology one
can take d(x, y) = 	∞
n=1 2−n min

pn(x −y), 1

.
PROOF. The necessity of the stated conditions is obvious. Let us prove the
sufficiency. If the space E has a countable base of neighborhoods of zero, then by
the above theorem its topology is defined by a single quasi-norm q. This means
that the topology of E is generated by the pseudometric ϱ(x1, x2) = q(x1 −x2).
This pseudometric is a metric, since E is Hausdorff. It is clear that ϱ is translation
invariant.
If E is locally convex, then its topology is defined by a family of
seminorms (Theorem 1.4.9), among which we can choose a countable part due
to the existence of a countable base of neighborhoods of zero. Taking such a
part {pn}, it is easy to verify that d is a metric that defines the same topology
as {pn}.
□
1.6.5. Theorem. Every topological vector space is completely regular and
every Hausdorff topological vector space is Tychonoff.

1.7. Completeness and completions
45
PROOF. Let F be be a closed set in a topological vector space E, let x0 /∈F,
and let V be an open neighborhood of the point x0 disjoint with F. Let us take a
quasi-norm q on E such that {x: q(x) < 1} ⊂V −x0 (its existence follows from
Remark 1.6.2). The function f(x) = min

q(x −x0), 1

is continuous on E and
possesses the following properties: 0 ⩽q ⩽1, q(x0) = 0, q(x) = 1 if x ∈F.
□
1.7. Completeness and completions
We recall that a sequence {an} in a metric space (M, ϱ) is called funda-
mental or a Cauchy sequence if for every ε > 0 there exists n0 ∈IN such that
ϱ(ak, an) < ε for all k, n > n0. It is obvious that every convergent sequence is
Cauchy. If A is a subset of (M, ϱ) and every Cauchy sequence in A converges to
an element of A, then A is called complete. If this is true for A = M, then M
itself is called a complete space.
For arbitrary topological spaces, the concept of a Cauchy sequence, hence
also the given definition of completeness is not meaningful.
Moreover, it can
happen that on the same set E one can introduce two metrics ϱ1 and ϱ2 generating
the same topology such that under one of these metrics E is a complete metric
space, but under the other one is not. For example, E = IR1 with respect to
the usual metric ϱ1(x, y) = |x −y| is complete, but with respect to the metric
ϱ2(x, y) = arctg|x −y| is not, although the topologies induced by both metrics
coincide.
At the same time there exist “geometric” objects close to topological spaces,
but possessing many features common with metric spaces: the so-called uniform
spaces introduced by A. Weil in 1938. Their special cases are topological groups
and topological vector spaces. More precisely, a topological group or a topolog-
ical vector space can be equipped (but not in a unique way) with a uniformity
generating the original topology (under the additional requirement of the transla-
tion invariance this uniformity is unique). We do not consider arbitrary uniform
spaces (see Bourbaki [88], Kelley [268], and Engelking [154] and a brief discus-
sion in § 1.12(i)); all necessary results about topological vector spaces that are
actually special cases of theorems about uniform spaces will be proved directly
(though, the proofs of such theorems for arbitrary uniform spaces differ very little
from the proofs of their specializations for topological vector spaces). Throughout
this section (E, τ) is a topological vector space over the field of real or complex
numbers.
1.7.1. Definition. A sequence {an} ⊂E is called a Cauchy sequence (or
a fundamental sequence) if for every neighborhood of zero V in E there exists
n0 ∈IN such that an −ak ∈V whenever n, k ⩾n0.
A subset A ⊂E is called sequentially complete if every Cauchy sequence
consisting of its elements converges to some element of A.
A net {at}t∈T ⊂E is called a Cauchy net (or a fundamental net) if for every
neighborhood of zero V in E there exists an index t0 ∈T such that at −as ∈V
whenever t, s ⩾t0.

46
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
A net {at}t∈T in a locally convex space is Cauchy if and only if for every
seminorm p from a family defining the topology and every ε > 0 there is t0 ∈T
such that p(at −as) < ε whenever t, s ⩾t0.
A filter Φ of subsets of E is called a Cauchy filter (or a fundamental filter)
if for every neighborhood of zero V in E there exists a set F ∈Φ such that
F −F ∈V (a set F for which the latter is true is called small of order V ).
In particular, a sequence {an} ⊂E is Cauchy if the corresponding elementary
filter (whose basis consists of all sets Fn = {ak : k ⩾n}) is a Cauchy filter. Other
examples of Cauchy filters are arbitrary convergent filters, in particular, the filter
of all neighborhoods of an arbitrary point. Note also that a filter Φ of subsets of E
is a Cauchy filter precisely when the filter Φ −Φ (this is the filter in E generated
by the basis {A −B : A, B ∈Φ}) converges to zero. Hence any filter majorizing
a Cauchy filter is a Cauchy filter as well.
1.7.2. Definition. A subset A ⊂E is called complete if every Cauchy filter
in E containing A as an element converges to some element of A.
If every Cauchy filter in E converges, then E is called a complete space.
A space E is called quasi-complete if every bounded subset of E is contained
in a complete set.
A complete metrizable locally convex space is called a Fr´echet space.
Below we prove that the completeness of A is equivalent to convergence of
all Cauchy nets in A. Hence any complete topological vector space is sequentially
complete (but not conversely). Furthermore, for a subset of a metrizable topolog-
ical vector space E the sequential completeness and completeness are equivalent
(this is seen from the existence of a countable base of zero); it is easy to verify
that if ϱ is a translation invariant metric on E defining the topology (which exists
by Corollary 1.6.4), then the completeness of E as a topological vector space and
the completeness of the metric space (E, ϱ) are also equivalent properties. It is
readily seen that any closed part of a complete set is complete. Hence the quasi-
completeness of E is equivalent to the completeness of all closed bounded sets
in E.
1.7.3. Proposition. If Φ and Ψ are two filters in a topological vector space E,
Φ ⊂Ψ, Φ is a Cauchy filter and Ψ converges to an element x ∈E, then Φ
converges to x as well.
PROOF. Let V be a neighborhood of zero in E. We show that F ⊂V + x
for some F ∈Φ (then V + x ∈Φ). Let W be a neighborhood of zero in E
such that W + W ⊂V . Since Φ is a Cauchy filter, there exists F1 ∈Φ such
that F1 −F1 ⊂W, and since Ψ converges to x, there exists F2 ∈Ψ such that
F2 ⊂x + W, hence F2 −x ⊂W. Let F3 = F1 ∩F2. Then we have F3 ∈Ψ (and
hence F3 ̸= ∅). We have F1 −x ⊂F1 −F3 + F3 −x ⊂W + W ⊂V , so that we
can take F = F1.
□
Note that this proposition is a generalization of the following fact: every
Cauchy sequence of elements of a topological vector space or a metric space
containing a convergent subsequence converges itself to the same limit.

1.7. Completeness and completions
47
1.7.4. Corollary. A set A in a topological vector space E is complete pre-
cisely when every Cauchy ultrafilter in A converges.
PROOF. The necessity is obvious; on the other hand, if Φ is an arbitrary
Cauchy filter in A, then by the previous proposition its convergence follows from
convergence of a majorizing ultrafilter, which is automatically a Cauchy filter.
□
We now describe the completeness of topological vector spaces in terms of
nets (which may be intuitively more clear due to some analogy with sequences).
1.7.5. Corollary. A set A in a topological vector space is complete precisely
when in A every Cauchy net is converging.
PROOF. Let A be complete and let {xt}t∈T be a Cauchy net in A. Let us con-
sider the filter Φ whose base are the set A and all possible sets Fs := {xt : t ⩾s},
where s ∈T is a fixed element. It is clear from the definition that this filter is
fundamental. By the completeness of A it converges to some point x ∈A. Let
V be a neighborhood of x. Then, by the definition of convergence of a filter,
we have V ∈Φ. This means that V contains some of the sets Ft, which proves
convergence of {xt} to x.
Conversely, suppose that in A every Cauchy net is converging. We verify that
every Cauchy ultrafilter Φ in A converges. We use it to construct a Cauchy net
in A. Let us take Φ for the index set equipped with the natural partial order by the
inverse inclusion, i.e., ϕ ⩽ψ if ψ ⊂ϕ. Since ϕ ∩ψ ∈Φ for all Φ, we obtained a
directed set. In each set ϕ ∈Φ we choose an element xϕ. Let us show that the net
{xϕ} is Cauchy. Let V be a neighborhood of zero in E. Since Φ is fundamental,
there exists a set ϕ ∈Φ with ϕ −ϕ ⊂V . Then, whenever t, s ⩾ϕ, we have
xt ∈t ⊂ϕ, xs ∈s ⊂ϕ, whence xt −xs ∈V . Hence {xϕ} is fundamental and
converges to some x ∈A. Then also the ultrafilter Φ converges to x. Indeed,
let W be a neighborhood of the point x. We have to show that W ∩A ∈Φ.
If this is false, then A\W ∈Φ, as explained in § 1.1. By convergence of {xϕ}
to x there is ϕ1 such that xϕ ∈W for all ϕ ⩾ϕ1, i.e., whenever ϕ ⊂ϕ1. In
particular, for all ψ = ϕ1 ∩(A\W) we must have xψ ∈W, which is impossible,
since xψ ∈A\W.
□
Suppose that E is a metrizable locally convex space and let its topology be
defined by a countable family of seminorms {pn}. It follows from what has been
said above that E is a Fr´echet space precisely when it is complete with respect to
the metric d(x, y) = 	∞
n=1 2−n min

pn(x −y), 1

.
1.7.6. Proposition. Let A be a complete subset of a locally convex space E.
Then A is complete in every locally convex topology on E that is stronger than
the original one and possesses a base of neighborhoods of zero consisting of sets
closed in the original topology.
PROOF. Let τ0 be the original topology and let τ be a stronger topology with
the indicated properties. If a net {at} ⊂A is Cauchy in the topology τ, then it
is Cauchy and hence converges to some a ∈A also in the topology τ0. We show
that at →a in τ. Let V be a τ0-closed neighborhood of zero in τ. By condition

48
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
there exists an index t1 such that at −as ∈V for all t, s ⩾t1. Since as →a in τ0
and A is closed in τ0, we have at −a ∈V for all t ⩾t1, i.e., at →a in τ.
□
1.7.7. Corollary. In any locally convex space every set complete in the weak
topology is complete.
The properties to be closed and complete are connected in the following way.
1.7.8. Proposition. A subset A of a complete Hausdorff topological vector
space E is closed if and only if it is complete.
PROOF. Indeed, if A is closed and Φ is a Cauchy filter in E such that A ∈Φ,
then Φ converges in E by the completeness of E and the limit belongs to A,
because A is closed. On the other hand, if A is complete, a is a cluster point of
the set A and U is the filter of neighborhoods of zero in E, then (a + U) ∩A is a
basis of the Cauchy filter Φ in E containing the set A as an element. Since the set
A is complete, this filter must converge to some element b∈A. At the same time
it converges to a; since E is Hausdorff, we have a = b.
Another proof can be given in terms of nets. Namely, if we have a Cauchy
net in A, then it converges in E due to completeness, and the limit belongs to A
because A is closed. In the opposite direction, if A is complete and x ∈E is its
cluster point, then there is a net in A converging to x. By completeness of A this
net must converge to a point of A, so x ∈A, since E is Hausdorff.
□
1.7.9. Proposition. A subset of a sequentially complete Hausdorff topological
vector space E is sequentially closed (i.e., contains the limits of all convergent
sequences of its points) if and only if it is sequentially complete.
PROOF. The justification of this proposition is similar to the previous one;
the only difference is that in place of filters (or nets in the second proof) one has
to consider sequences.
□
In relation to the following proposition on products of topological vector
spaces we observe that the product of an arbitrary family of topological vector
spaces equipped with the product topology (Tychonoff’s topology) is a topological
vector space (in more detail products of topological vector spaces are discussed in
Chapter 2).
1.7.10. Proposition. The product of a nonempty family of topological vec-
tor spaces is complete if and only if every space in this family is complete. In
particular, every power IRT of the real line is complete.
PROOF. In order to prove that the completeness of the spaces Eα yields the
completeness of their product E it suffices to observe that if Φ is a Cauchy filter
in E, then its projection to each of the spaces Eα is again a Cauchy filter and
that a filter in E converges precisely when all filters obtained as its projections
converge. On the other hand, if one of the spaces in the family {Eα}, say, Eα0, is
not complete, then let Φα0 be a Cauchy filter in it that has no limit and, for every
α ̸= α0, let Φα be the filter of all neighborhoods of zero in Eα. Then the product-
filter is a Cauchy filter in E without limit. An alternative justification employs

1.7. Completeness and completions
49
nets: if we have a Cauchy net in the product, then the projects form Cauchy nets
in the factors, hence converge, which implies convergence of the original net in
the product topology.
□
1.7.11. Example. Every infinite-dimensional normed space B with the weak
topology σ(B, B′) is not complete.
PROOF. We show that for every linear functional F ∈(B′)∗there exists a net
xα ∈B such that l(xα) →F(l) for all l ∈B′. Then, taking a discontinuous func-
tional F on B′ (existing on every infinite-dimensional normed space), we obtain a
net in B that is Cauchy in the topology σ(B, B′) and has no limit in B. For con-
structing {xα} it suffices to verify that for every finite collection l1, . . . , ln ∈B′
there exists a vector z ∈B with F(li) = li(z). The existence of such a vec-
tor z follows from the Hahn–Banach theorem proved in § 1.11, which we apply to
the space

B′, σ(B′, B)

, taking into account that the space of continuous linear
functionals on

B′, σ(B′, B)

is exactly B (see Example 1.3.23).
□
Let us give a rather exotic example of a complete locally convex space.
1.7.12. Example. Any locally convex space E is complete in its strongest
locally convex topology (see Example 1.3.18).
PROOF. We recall that, given a Hamel basis {eα}α∈A in E, the strongest
locally convex topology can be defined by the family of seminorms of the form
pϕ(x) =

α
ϕ(α)|xα|,
where
x =

α
xαeα,
with all possible positive functions ϕ on the set of indices α. Suppose that a
net {vt}t∈T is Cauchy in every such seminorm.
We verify that it converges.
Let vt = 	
α vt,αeα. For every fixed α we obtain that the coordinates {vt,α}
are fundamental. Hence this net converges to some scalar cα. We observe that
only finitely many scalars cα are nonzero. Indeed, if there is an infinite sequence
cαn ̸= 0, then we take the function ϕ for which ϕ(αn) = n|cαn|−1 and ϕ(α) = 0
for the remaining indices. Since {vt} is Cauchy in the seminorm pϕ, there exists
an index t0 such that pϕ(vt −vt0) ⩽1 for all t ⩾t0. Hence for all t ⩾t0
we have 	∞
n=1 n|cαn|−1|vt,αn −vt0,αn| ⩽1. There are finitely many nonzero
numbers vt0,αn, so for some m > 1 we have vt0,αn = 0 for all n ⩾m. Thus,
	∞
n=m n|cαn|−1|vt,αn| ⩽1 for all t ⩾t0. In particular, m|cαm|−1|vt,αm| ⩽1 for
all t ⩾t0, whence in the limit we obtain the false estimate m|cαm|−1|cαm| ⩽1.
Thus, we can define the vector v = 	
α cαeα. We have pϕ(vt −v) →0 for
every seminorm pϕ of the indicated form. Indeed, given ε > 0, taking t0 such
that pϕ(vt −vs) < ε for all t, s ⩾t0, we obtain that p(vt −v) ⩽ε for all t ⩾t0.
Indeed, if t ⩾t0 is fixed, taking all nonzero coordinates vt,α and cα of the vectors
vt and v (the corresponding finite set of indices will be denoted by M), we find
that p(vt −v) = 	
α∈M ϕ(α)|vt,α −cα| ⩽ε, since in the inequality with finitely
many terms 	
α∈M ϕ(α)|vt,α −vα,s| < ε for s ⩾t0 we can pass to the limit
in s.
□

50
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
1.7.13. Definition. A mapping f of a subset A in a topological vector space
E to a topological vector space G is called uniformly continuous on A if for every
neighborhood of zero W in G there exists a neighborhood of zero V in E such
that if x1 −x2 ∈V , x1, x2 ∈A, then f(x1) −f(x2) ∈W.
It follows directly from this definition that any uniformly continuous mapping
takes Cauchy filters in the space E consisting of subsets of E intersecting A to
Cauchy filters in the space G and so this mapping is continuous (takes convergent
filters to convergent ones). Certainly, the continuity is even more clear without
filters (we leave it to the reader).
Note that every linear mapping of a topological vector space to a topological
vector space is uniformly continuous if it is continuous (in particular, if it takes
Cauchy filters to Cauchy filters); for multilinear mappings this is not true: the
function f(x, y) = xy for x, y ∈IR takes Cauchy filters to Cauchy filters (hence
is continuous), but is not uniformly continuous. Finally, the continuity of a map-
ping f of a part of a topological vector space to a topological vector space, in
general, does not imply that it takes Cauchy filters to Cauchy filters (an elemen-
tary example: f(x) = tan x), but for mappings defined on a complete subset of a
topological vector space the continuity is equivalent to the property to take Cauchy
filters to Cauchy filters.
1.7.14. Proposition. Let E be a topological vector space, let H be its every-
where dense subset (not necessarily a vector space), and let f be a mapping from
H to a complete Hausdorff topological vector space G. If f is uniformly continu-
ous on H, then it can be uniquely extended to a continuous mapping F : E →G.
Moreover, F will be automatically uniformly continuous.
PROOF. The uniqueness of an extension, if it exists, follows from the fact
that two continuous mappings f and g that coincide on an everywhere dense set
coincide everywhere. Indeed, if f(a) ̸= g(a), then, since G is Hausdorff, there
exist disjoint open sets U ∋f(a) and V ∋g(a). Taking a neighborhood W of the
point a such that f(W) ⊂U and g(W) ⊂V , we obtain that W contains no points
where f and g are equal.
We prove the existence of a mapping F. Let us fix a point x. There is a net
of points xt ∈H converging to it. By the uniform continuity of the mapping f the
net of points f(xt) is Cauchy in G and hence converges to some element y ∈G.
Set F(x) := y. It is readily seen that y does not depend on our choice of a net
converging to x. This also yields the uniform continuity of F.
□
1.7.15. Remark. Similarly it is proved that if A is a subset of a topological
vector space, H is a dense subset of A and f is a uniformly continuous mapping
defined on H and taking values in a complete subset G of some topological vector
space, then there exists its unique extension to a continuous mapping F : A →G;
this extension is uniformly continuous.
Note also that one can define the uniform continuity for mappings from metric
spaces to metric spaces, from metric spaces to topological vector spaces, and from
topological vector spaces to metric spaces. For example, a mapping f : E →G

1.7. Completeness and completions
51
from a metric space (E, ϱ1) to a metric space (G, ϱ2) is called uniformly contin-
uous if for every ε > 0 there exists δ > 0 such that the inequality ϱ1(x1, x2) < δ
yields the inequality ϱ2

f(x1), f(x2)

< ε. For all these cases, there are analogs
of the proven proposition with very similar proofs; one has just to replace in ap-
propriate places the inclusion x1 −x2 ∈V , where V is a suitable neighborhood
of zero, with inequalities of the type ϱ(x1, x2) < ε.
In fact, all these facts are partial cases of a general result for mappings of uni-
form spaces to uniform spaces (see Bourbaki [88], Kelley [268], Engelking [154]).
The rest of this section will be devoted to the proof of the theorem on the
completion of a topological vector space, according to which every Hausdorff
topological vector space can be embedded as an everywhere dense topological
vector subspace in a complete Hausdorff topological vector space defined up to an
isomorphism.
1.7.16. Definition. A completion of a topological vector space E is a com-
plete Hausdorff topological vector space E with the following property: E is a
topological vector subspace of the space E and is everywhere dense in E.
For a metric space E, such a completion is not the same as a completion in
the category of metric spaces, when a dense embedding E →E must preserve the
distance, since now also the linearity is required, but the standard construction of
a completion of a metric space can be modified.
1.7.17. Theorem. Every Hausdorff topological vector space E possesses a
completion, moreover, if G1 and G2 are two its completions, then there exists a
unique linear homeomorphism of G1 onto G2 leaving all elements of E fixed.
PROOF. Suppose first that E is metrizable.
Let p be a quasi-norm on E
defining a translation invariant metric ϱ on E that generates the original topol-
ogy. According to a standard theorem in mathematical analysis (see, for example,
Dieudonn´e [130]), there exists a complete metric space G that is a completion of
the metric space (E, ϱ). We show that one can introduce a structure of a vector
space in G that agrees with the topology τ defined by its metric such that the
original topological vector space E will be a topological vector subspace in the
topological vector space (G, τ); this will mean that G is the completion of E.
The operations of the multiplication of elements of G by scalars and the addi-
tion of elements of G are defined by the extension by continuity of the operations
in the topological vector space E. The existence and uniqueness of such extensions
follow by Remark 1.7.15. On the other hand, the metric ϱG on the completion is
the extension by continuity of the metric ϱ on the space E. Since the quasi-norm
p also possesses the extension by continuity to all of G and both extensions are
unique, all identities used below in this reasoning that are valid for the functions
that we extend will remain valid for their extensions. In particular, the extension
pG of the pseudonorm p will be a pseudonorm on G connected with the metric ϱG
on G by the equality ϱG(x1, x2) = pG(x1 −x2). Hence the topology generated
by ϱG on G agrees with the structure of the additive group of the vector space.
For the proof that it agrees with the vector structure it suffices to verify the
continuity of the operation of multiplication. Let k, q ∈K and x, z ∈G. Then

52
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
(k + q)(x + z) −kx = q · z + q · x + k · z. Hence for the proof of the continuity
of the operation of multiplication by scalars it suffices to verify that for fixed k
and x the mappings z →k · z, G →G, q →q · x, K →G, and also the mapping
(q, z) →q · z, K×G →G are continuous at zero of the corresponding space.
The continuity (even uniform) of the first of them follows by its definition as the
extension by continuity of the uniformly continuous mapping of the multiplication
by a fixed scalar. Let us prove the continuity of two remaining mappings.
We start with the mapping q →q·x, K →G, where x is a fixed element of G.
Let a sequence {xn} ⊂E converge to x, let V be a closed neighborhood of zero
in G, and let W be a circled neighborhood of zero in E such that W + W ⊂V .
The convergent sequence {xn} is a Cauchy sequence, hence there exists a number
n0 ∈IN such that xs −xr ∈W for all s, r ⩾r0. Since E is a topological vector
space, there exists ε > 0 such that if t ∈K, |t| < ε, then txr0 ∈W. Hence, for
all t ∈K such that |t| < min(1, ε) if r ⩾r0, we have
txr = txr0 + t(xr −xr0) ∈W + tW ⊂W + W ⊂V ∩E.
For any fixed t the mapping x →tx is continuous, as already noted, hence we have
tx = t lim
r→∞xr = lim
r→∞(txr) ⊂V ∩E ⊂V if |t| < min(1, ε). The continuity of
the mapping q →q · x is proved.
For the proof of the continuity at zero of the mapping
(q, z) →q · z,
K×G →G
it suffices to observe that if V is a closed neighborhood of zero in G, then there
exist ε > 0 and a neighborhood of zero W in E such that q · z ∈V ∩E whenever
|q| < ε, z ∈W. Indeed, then, by the continuity of the mapping z →q · z (for
any fixed q), for each q satisfying the inequality |q| < ε we have the inclusion
qW ⊂V ∩E ⊂V and it remains to observe that W (the closure of the set W
in G) is a neighborhood of zero in G. Thus, under the assumption of metrizability
of E the existence of its completion is proved (one can give other justifications
using standard explicit constructions of completions of metric spaces).
Let now E be an arbitrary Hausdorff topological vector space and let P be
a set of quasi-norms defining its topology.
For every quasi-norm p ∈P let
Ep denote the vector space E equipped with the topology defined by the quasi-
norm p and let Ep be the topological vector quotient of the space Ep by its
closed subspace p−1(0). Its topology is generated by the quasi-norm p1 defined as
follows: if z ∈Ep, then p1(z) = inf{p(x): x ∈z}. This fact, as well as that p1 is
indeed a quasi-norm, is verified directly. Using that the quotient Ep is Hausdorff,
we see that p1 vanishes only at the zero element. Hence the topology of the space
Ep is metrizable. Let Ep denote its completion; for every element x ∈E, let xp
denote its canonical image in Ep.
Set G = 
p∈P Ep. The space G is complete as the product of complete
topological vector spaces. The mapping F : E →G that to every vector x ∈E
associates the element (xp) ∈G is a linear homeomorphism of E onto its image
in G equipped with the topology induced from G. This follows directly from
the definition of the product topology and the topology defined by a family of

1.8. Compact and precompact sets
53
pseudonorms. We identify E with its image F(E) and assume that E itself is a
subspace of the space G. This means that we replace the topological vector space
E by the isomorphic topological vector space E1 = F(E); below we denote it
by the same symbol E. Then the topological vector subspace E of the space G
defined as the closure in G of the subspace E satisfies all conditions needed in
order that E be a completion of the topological vector space E. Thus, the existence
of a completion for an arbitrary Hausdorff topological vector space is proved.
Let us prove its uniqueness. Let E1 and E2 be two completions of the topo-
logical vector space E and let I be the identical mapping of E into itself. Since E
is everywhere dense in E1 as well as in E2, the uniformly continuous mappings
I and J = I−1 extend to continuous mappings I : E1 →E2 and J : E2 →E1.
We show that I (hence also J) is an isomorphism of topological vector spaces. In
order to see this, it suffices to observe that J◦I and I◦J are the identity mappings
of the spaces E2 and E1 onto themselves, respectively, since they are continuous
and are identities on everywhere dense sets.
□
From the proof one can see the following fact.
1.7.18. Corollary. Every Hausdorff locally convex space possesses a unique
(up to an isomorphism) completion that is a locally convex space.
In the category of locally convex spaces, one can construct the completion by
specifying a certain subspace in (E′)∗(see § 3.8). In the category of metrizable
topological vector spaces, the completion can be constructed by employing the
standard method of completing metric spaces (Exercise 1.12.70).
1.8. Compact and precompact sets
In this section we give a summary of the main results on compact and precom-
pact subsets of topological vector spaces. Some additional results will be presented
in § 1.12.
We recall once again that a subset K of a topological vector space E is called
precompact (or totally bounded) if it can be covered by the union of finitely many
shifts of every neighborhood of zero of this space. As already noted, compact
sets are precompact. It is obvious that the precompact sets possess the following
properties:
every subset of a precompact set is precompact,
the homothetic images and shifts of precompact sets are precompact,
the union of finitely many precompact sets in the same space is precompact.
It was shown in Lemma 1.5.5 that any precompact set is bounded.
Let us establish a bit less obvious properties of precompact sets in topological
vector spaces.
1.8.1. Proposition. (i) The closure of a precompact set is precompact.
(ii) The image of a precompact set under a uniformly continuous mapping
with values in a topological vector space is precompact.
(iii) The vector sum of finitely many precompact sets is precompact.
(iv) The circled hull of a precompact set is precompact.

54
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
PROOF. (i) Let S be a precompact set, let S be its closure, and let U be a
neighborhood of zero. By the continuity of addition there is a neighborhood of
zero V such that v1 +v2 ∈U for all v1, v2 ∈V . Let us take points s1, . . . , sn ∈S
for which S ⊂n
i=1(si + V ). We show that S ⊂n
i=1(si + V ). Let x ∈S.
By definition there exists an element s ∈S with x −s ∈V . Taking i such that
s ∈si+V , i.e., s = si+v, v ∈V , we obtain x = s+x−s = si+v+x−s ∈si+U.
Assertion (ii) is easily seen from the definitions, assertions (iii) and (iv) are
deduced from it in the following way. If A and B are totally bounded in E, then
A + B is the image of the set A×B in E×E under the mapping (u, v) →u + v
from E ×E to E. It is obvious that A×B is precompact and that the indicated
mapping is uniformly continuous. Similarly, the circled hull of S is the image of
S×[−1, 1] under the mapping (x, t) →tx, which is uniformly continuous on every
set of the form M ×[−1, 1], where M is bounded in E.
□
Let us consider separately convex hulls.
1.8.2. Proposition. The convex hull, the absolutely convex hull and the closed
absolutely convex hull of a precompact set in a locally convex space are precom-
pact.
PROOF. Let K be a precompact subset of a locally convex space E and
let conv K be its convex hull. We show that for every open absolutely convex
neighborhood of zero V in E there exists a collection {a1, . . . , an} ⊂conv K
such that conv K ⊂n
i=1(ai+V ). By the precompactness of the set K there exist
points c1, . . . , cr ∈K such that K ⊂r
i=1(ci+V/2). Let K1 be the convex hull of
the points c1, . . . , cr. The set K1 is compact in the finite-dimensional subspace of
the space E generated by the elements c1, . . . , cr, hence also in the whole space E.
Hence there exist elements a1, . . . , an ∈K for which K1 ⊂n
i=1(ai+V/2). Then
conv K ⊂n
i=1(ai + V ).
Indeed, every element in the set conv K has the form x = 	s
j=1 tjbj, where
bj ∈K, 	 tj = 1, tj ⩾0. For every j = 1, 2, . . . , s, we choose an index r(j)
such that bj −cr(j) ∈V/2. Then
v :=
s

j=1
tjcr(j) ∈K1
and
v −x =
s

j=1
tj(cr(j) −bj) ∈V/2
by the convexity of V . Since the inclusion v ∈K1 yields the existence of an
element ai ∈K1 such that v −ai ∈V/2, we have
x −ai = d −ai −(v −x) ∈V/2 −V/2 = V/2 + V/2 = V,
where the last two equalities are valid by the absolute convexity of V . Thus, we
have proved that x ∈n
i=1(ai + V ).
The assertions about the absolutely convex hull and the closed absolutely
convex hull follow from what is already proved.
□
1.8.3. Example. Let L0 be the space of all real measurable functions on
[0, 1] with the topology of convergence in measure (Example 1.3.16). Let {εn}
be a sequence of real numbers such that εn ∈(0, 1), εn →0, 	∞
n=1 εn = ∞.

1.8. Compact and precompact sets
55
For every n we define a function ϕn ∈L0 as follows: if Sn = 	n
r=1 εr(mod 1)
and Sn < Sn+1, then ϕn = 10nγn, where γn is the indicator of the compact
interval [Sn, Sn+1]. If Sn > Sn+1, then ϕn = 10nχn, where χn is the indicator
of the union of the intervals [0, sn+1] and [sn, 1]. The set
{0} ∪{ϕn : n ∈IN} ∪{−ϕn : n ∈IN}
is compact, but its convex closed hull coincides with the whole space L0, hence
is not compact and even is not bounded. Note that the associated Hausdorff space
L0 is metrizable, but not locally convex.
1.8.4. Example. Let c0 be the Banach space of sequences of real numbers
tending to zero equipped with its standard norm ∥(xn)∥= maxn |xn| and let E
be its linear subspace consisting of all finite sequences (i.e., sequences with fi-
nitely many nonzero elements) with the same norm. Let us consider the vectors
en = (0, . . . , 0, 1, 0, . . . ), where the unit stands at the nth place and all other coor-
dinates are zero. The set K consisting of the sequence {en/n}, which converges
to zero, and zero itself is compact. However, the convex hull conv K of this set
is closed and coincides with the closed convex hull, but is not compact. Regarded
as a subset of c0, the set K, certainly, is also compact, but the set conv K is not
closed in c0.
1.8.5. Proposition. A subset of a topological vector space is compact pre-
cisely when it is precompact and complete.
PROOF. It is clear that the compactness yields the precompactness. We show
that any compact subset A of a topological vector space is complete. Let Φ be a
Cauchy filter in E with A ∈Φ and let Ψ be an ultrafilter majorizing Φ. Then Ψ
converges (since every ultrafilter containing a compact set converges to a point of
this set, see Exercise 1.12.28). By Proposition 1.7.3 we have convergence of the
filter Φ. One can also use nets: if we have an infinite Cauchy net {xt} in A, then
it has a limit point in A by compactness; hence it converges to this limit point.
We now show that if a subset A of a topological vector space E is precompact
and complete, then it is compact. Let Ψ be an ultrafilter in E with A ∈Ψ. By the
precompactness of A for every neighborhood of zero V in the space E there exist
elements a1, . . . , an in E such that A ⊂n
i=1(ai + V ). Since Ψ is an ultrafilter ,
there is i with ai + V ∈Ψ (otherwise E\(ai + V ) ∈Ψ for all i, whence A ̸∈Ψ).
It follows that Ψ is a Cauchy filter. By the completeness of A it converges to an
element of A.
□
The proven proposition is an analog of the known result for subsets of metric
spaces.
1.8.6. Corollary. A subset of a topological vector space E is precompact
precisely when it is relatively compact in the completion of the space E.
In terms of filters the following condition is available.
1.8.7. Proposition. A subset A of a topological vector space E is precompact
precisely when every ultrafilter in E containing A is a Cauchy filter.

56
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
PROOF. We have seen above that every ultrafilter containing a precompact set
is a Cauchy filter. Let us prove the converse. Suppose that A is not precompact.
Then there exists a neighborhood of zero V in E such that no finite family of sets
of the form a + V , where a ∈E, covers A. Hence the finite intersections of the
sets A \ (a + V ), where a ∈E, form a filter basis in E. If Ψ is some ultrafilter
majorizing the filter generated by this basis, then by assumption it must be a
Cauchy filter. Hence there exists an nonempty set F ∈Ψ such that F −F ⊂V .
Hence F −a ⊂V for some a ∈F, i.e., F ⊂a + V , so that a + V ∈Ψ. This
contradicts the fact that the filter Ψ contains the complements of all sets of the
form a + V , where a ∈E.
□
1.8.8. Corollary. A subset A in a topological vector space E is precompact
precisely when every filter in E containing A is majorized by a Cauchy filter.
This is an analog of the known result in the theory of metric spaces according
to which a subset of a metric space is precompact (totally bounded) precisely when
every sequence of its elements contains a Cauchy subsequence. These assertions
can be formulated in terms of nets.
1.8.9. Proposition. Let E be a topological vector space and A ⊂E. The
set A is totally bounded precisely when every net of its elements contains a Cauchy
subnet.
The set A is compact precisely when every net of its elements contains a
subnet converging in A.
Taking into account what we have proved in § 1.7, we obtain the following
fact.
1.8.10. Corollary. Any compact set in a topological vector space is complete.
Hence weakly compact sets are complete.
For compact sets in topological vector spaces there are analogs of assertions
proved above for precompact sets.
1.8.11. Proposition. (i) Any homothetic image, any shift and the circled hull
of a compact subset in an arbitrary topological vector space are compact.
(ii) The union and the vector sum of finitely many compact subsets of a topo-
logical vector space are compact.
(iii) The convex hull of the union of finitely many convex compact subsets of
a topological vector space is compact.
(iv) The vector sum of a closed set and a compact set in a topological vector
space is closed.
PROOF. Assertions (i)–(iii) are proved similarly to the case of precompact
sets.
We prove only (iv).
Let A be compact, let B be closed and let a net
{wα} ⊂A + B converge to some element x. Since wα = aα + bα, where aα ∈A
and bα ∈B, by compactness of A there exists a subnet {aβ} converging to an
element a ∈A. Then {bβ} converges to x −a and x −a ∈B, since B is closed.
Thus, we have x ∈A + B.
□

1.8. Compact and precompact sets
57
From Propositions 1.8.2 and 1.8.5 and Corollary 1.8.10 we obtain the follow-
ing assertion.
1.8.12. Corollary. In any locally convex space, the closed absolutely convex
hull of a precompact set is compact precisely when it is weakly compact.
1.8.13.
Proposition. The closed convex hull of a precompact subset of a
complete or quasi-complete locally convex space is compact.
PROOF. The closed convex hull of a set K is the closure of its convex hull.
The latter is precompact for precompact K. The closure is complete if the whole
space is complete or quasi-complete (in the latter case it is also important that
any totally bounded set is bounded). However, the sequential completeness is not
sufficient (Exercise 5.12.101).
□
1.8.14. Proposition. Every totally bounded set in a metrizable locally convex
space lies in the closed convex hull of some sequence converging to zero.
PROOF. The metrizable topology of the given locally convex space E is given
by a sequence of seminorms pn (see § 1.6). We can always assume that pn ⩽pn+1
passing to the sums p1 + · · · + pn. Let K be totally bounded in E. For every
seminorm pn there is a finite 4−n−1-net Kn ⊂K, i.e., for every point k ∈K
there exists vk ∈Kn with pn(k −vk) ⩽4−n−1. The set ∞
n=1 Kn is dense in K.
Let S1 := 2K1. For each n > 1 we choose a finite set Sn in E as follows: for
every element v ∈Kn we find an element u ∈Kn−1 with pn−1(v −u) ⩽4−n
and take the element x := 2n(v −u) ∈E. The cardinality of the set Sn of points x
obtained in this way does not exceed the cardinality of Kn. The sequence {xn}
obtained by the successive enumeration of the points in S1, S2, . . . converges to
zero in every seminorm pm, since pn−1

2n(v −u)

⩽2−n, i.e., pn−1(x) ⩽2−n
for all x ∈Sn. It is not difficult to verify that every element v ∈Kn has the form
v = 2−1xi1 + · · · + 2−nxin and hence belongs to the absolutely convex hull of
the sequence {xi} = ∞
n=1 Sn. Hence ∞
n=1 Kn belongs to the closed convex
hull of {xn} ∪{−xn}. Moreover, K lies in the closure of ∞
n=1 Kn. See also
Example 3.12.35.
□
1.8.15. Proposition. If K is a compact set in a topological vector space E
and V is an open cover of this set, then there exists a neighborhood of zero W in
E such that for every x ∈K the set x + W is contained in one of the sets of the
family V.
PROOF. For every x ∈K, let Vx be a neighborhood of zero in E such that
x+Vx ⊂V for some V ∈V. For every x ∈K there exists an open neighborhood
of zero Wx in E such that Wx + Wx ⊂Vx. The family of sets {x + Wx : x ∈K}
forms an open cover of the set K. By the compactness of K this cover contains
a finite subcover {xi + Wxi : i = 1, 2, . . . , n}. Set W = 
n
i=1 Wxi. For every
x ∈K there exists xi such that x ∈xi + Wxi. Moreover,
x + W ⊂x + Wxi ⊂xi + Wxi + Wxi ⊂xi + Vxi ⊂V
for some V ∈V.
□

58
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
1.8.16.
Theorem. If K and F are disjoint sets in a topological vector
space E such that K is compact and V is closed, then exists a continuous function
f : E →IR with the following properties: if x ∈F, then f(x) = 0; if x ∈K, then
f(x) = 1; 0 ⩽f(x) ⩽1 for all x ∈E.
PROOF. Since by Theorem 1.6.5 every topological vector space is completely
regular, for every x ∈K there exists a continuous function fx : E →IR equal to 0
on F and equal to 1 at the point x such that 0 ⩽fx(z) ⩽1 for all z ∈E. For every
point x ∈E the set Vx = {z ∈E : fx(z) > 1/2} is open and K ⊂
x∈K Vx.
By the compactness of K, there exists a finite family {x1, . . . , xn} ⊂K such that
n
i=1 Vxi ⊂K. The function f on E defined by the equality
f(z) = 2 min

2−1,
n

i=1
fxi(z)

,
is the required one.
□
1.8.17. Corollary. Under the assumptions of the previous theorem, there exist
disjoint open sets VF and VK such that F ⊂VF , K ⊂VK.
Actually, since in the proof of this theorem we never used the circumstance
that E is a topological vector space, the established property holds for every
completely regular topological space.
1.8.18. Proposition. Every continuous mapping from a compact subset of a
topological vector space to a topological vector space is uniformly continuous.
PROOF. Let K be a compact set in a topological vector space E, let f be
a continuous mapping from K to a topological vector space G, let W be a
neighborhood of zero in G, and let V be a balanced neighborhood of zero in
G such that V + V ⊂W.
By the continuity of f, for every point x ∈K
there exists an open set Vx ⊂E such that f(Vx) ⊂f(x) + V . The sets Vx,
where x ∈K, form a cover of the set K. By Proposition 1.8.15 there exists
a neighborhood of zero H in E such that for every z ∈K set z + H is con-
tained in some of the sets of this cover. If x1, x2 ∈K, x1 −x2 ∈H, then
x1 ∈x2 + H ⊂Vx for some x ∈K. Hence f(x1) ∈f(Vx), f(x2) ∈f(Vx) (the
last inclusion follows from the inclusion x2 ∈x2 + H ⊂Vx), whence we obtain
f(x1) −f(x2) ∈f(Vx) −f(Vx) ⊂V −V ⊂W.
□
Let us introduce some other useful concepts related to compactness. Let T be
a topological space (not necessarily vector) and K ⊂T.
1.8.19. Definition. The set K is called countably compact if every infinite
subset of K possesses a limit point in K.
The set K is called relatively countably compact if every infinite subset of K
possesses a limit point in T (it can happen that no limit point belongs to K).
The set K is called sequentially compact if every infinite sequence of its
elements contains a subsequence converging to an element of K.
The set K is called relatively sequentially compact if every infinite sequence
of its elements contains a subsequence converging in T.

1.9. Linear operators
59
It is known that for subsets of metric spaces the compactness, countable com-
pactness and sequential compactness are equivalent and the same is true for the
corresponding relative notions.
In the general case (as one can easily verify)
the countable compactness follows from the sequential compactness and from the
compactness, but there are no other possible implications between these properties
(see § 3.4).
1.9. Linear operators
Here we present some basic facts related to linear operators on topological
vector spaces. We start with a criterion of continuity of linear and multilinear map-
pings between topological vector spaces (over an arbitrary topological field K).
Let k ∈IN and let E1,. . . ,Ek and G be vector spaces over the same field;
a mapping
b: E1×· · ·×Ek →G
is called multilinear (k-linear) if for every j ∈{1, . . . , k} for all fixed xi ∈Ei,
where i ∈{1, . . . , k} \ {j}, the mapping
Ej →G,
x →b(x1, . . . , xj−1, x, xj+1, . . . , xk)
is linear. Note that k = 1 is not excluded, so that a linear mapping is a partial case
of a multilinear mapping.
1.9.1. Proposition. A multilinear mapping from the product of topological
vector spaces E1×· · ·×Ek to a topological vector space is continuous precisely
when it is continuous at the point (0, . . . , 0).
PROOF. For notational simplicity we give a proof for a bilinear mapping. Let
(x1, x2) ∈E1×E2; we show that b is continuous at the point (x1, x2) once it is
continuous at the point (0, 0). Let W0 be a neighborhood of zero in G and let
W be a neighborhood of zero in G such that W + W + W ⊂W0. There are
neighborhoods of zero V1 and V2 in E1 and E2 such that if h1 ∈V1, h2 ∈V2,
then b(h1, h2) ∈W. We now use the equality
b(z1, z2) −b(x1, x2) = b(z1 −x1, x2) + b(x1, z2 −x2) + b(z1 −x1, z2 −x2),
which is valid by the bilinearity of b. Let k1, k2 ∈K\{0} be such that k1x1 ∈V1,
k2x2 ∈V2, V ′ = V1 ∩(k2V1), and V ′′ = V2 ∩(k1V2). If we are given elements
z1 ∈x1 + V ′, z2 ∈x2 + V ′′, then
b(z1, z2) −b(x1, x2)
= b

k−1
2 (z1 −x1), k2x2

+ b

k1x1, k−1
1 (z2 −x2)

+ b(z1 −x1, z2 −x2),
which belongs to W +W +W ⊂W0, since k−1
2 (z1 −x1)∈V1, k−1
1 (z2 −x2)∈V2.
This means that b is continuous at (x1, x2). For k = 1 the justification is even
simpler: b(x + h) = b(x) + b(h).
□
A mapping f is called sequentially continuous if f(x) = lim
n→∞f(xn) when-
ever x = lim
n→∞xn. This property is weaker than continuity (see Exercise 1.12.51).

60
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
1.9.2. Proposition. Every sequentially continuous multilinear mapping from
a finite product of topological vector spaces to a topological vector space takes
bounded sets to bounded sets. In particular, this is true for sequentially continuous
linear mappings (hence for all continuous linear mappings).
PROOF. Our assertion is clear from Proposition 1.4.6: if a set B is bounded
in E = E1 × · · · × Ek and a multilinear mapping f : E →G is sequentially
continuous, then for every sequence of elements f(bn) in f(B) and any sequence
of numbers tn →0 we have tnf(bn) →0 by the sequential continuity, since
tnf(bn) = f(|tn|1/kbn)sign tn and |tn|1/kbn →0 (in the case of IR; the case of
C is similar).
□
1.9.3. Theorem. Let E and G be locally convex spaces whose topologies
are defined by collections of seminorms {pα} and {qβ}, respectively. A linear
mapping T : E →G is continuous precisely when for every β there exist a finite
family pβ,α1, . . . , pβ,αn in the collection {pα} and a number Cβ such that
qβ(Tx) ⩽Cβ[pβ,α1(x) + · · · + pβ,αn(x)]
∀x ∈X.
In particular, the continuity of a linear functional l on E is equivalent to the
estimate |l| ⩽C(pα1 + · · · + pαn) for some C ⩾0 and α1, . . . , αn.
PROOF. The indicated estimate yields the continuity of T at zero, and then at
every other point. If T is continuous, then for each β the set {x: qβ(Tx) < 1}
contains a neighborhood of zero of the form {x: pα1(x)<ε, . . . , pαn(x)<ε}.
Hence the condition pα1(x) + · · · + pαn(x) < ε yields the inequality qβ(Tx) < 1.
Therefore, for Cβ we can take ε−1.
□
This theorem hints some ways of introducing locally convex topologies on
spaces of linear operators from a locally convex space E to a locally convex
space G. Let L(E, G) be the set of all continuous linear operators from E to G, let
B(E, G) be the space of bounded linear mappings from E to G (which is broader
in the general case), i.e., taking bounded sets to bounded sets, and let L(E, G)
be the subspace in B(E, G) consisting of sequentially continuous linear mappings
(the boundedness of a sequentially continuous linear mapping follows from Propo-
sition 1.9.2). The inclusion L(E, G) ⊂B(E, G) is obvious from the definitions.
In general, L(E, G) ̸= L(E, G) even for G = IR (see Exercise 1.12.51). In the
case of general topological vector spaces, the same notions and notation are used.
Let B be some class of bounded sets in the space E and let Q be some class of
continuous seminorms on G. Then on L(E, G) we have the following seminorms:
pB,q(T) = sup{q(Tx): x ∈B},
B ∈B, q ∈Q.
If Q is the class of all continuous seminorms on Y , then we obtain the topology
of uniform convergence on the class B. For the class B of all finite sets this gives
the topology of pointwise convergence in L(E, G). Two other frequently applied
topologies are the topologies of uniform convergence on totally bounded sets and
on compact sets. If X and Y are normed spaces, B consists of the unit ball in X
and the only element in Q is the norm of Y , then we arrive at the operator norm

1.9. Linear operators
61
on L(X, Y ). In Chapter 3 we shall consider an important partial case: a topology
on E′.
1.9.4. Definition. Let E and G be topological vector spaces. A set F in the
space L(E, G) is called equicontinuous if, for every neighborhood of zero V in G,
there is a neighborhood of zero U in E such that f(u) ∈V for all f ∈F, u ∈U.
In particular, a set F ⊂E′ is equicontinuous if, for every ε > 0, there exists
a neighborhood of zero U ⊂E such that |f(u)| < ε for all u ∈U, f ∈F.
A set F ⊂L(E, G) is called pointwise bounded if, for each x ∈E, the set
{f(x): f ∈F} is bounded in G.
1.9.5.
Proposition. Let E and G be locally convex.
The closure of any
equicontinuous set F ⊂L(E, G) in the topology of pointwise convergence is
equicontinuous, and if G is quasi-complete, then this closure is complete.
In addition, the restriction to F of the topology of pointwise convergence
coincides with the restriction of the topology of pointwise convergence on a given
set with a dense linear span, and also with the restriction of the topology of
uniform convergence on totally bounded sets.
If E is separable, then any equicontinuous set in E′ with the topology of
pointwise convergence is metrizable.
PROOF. The first assertion is obvious from the definitions. Let F be closed
and let G be quasi-complete. If a net {Fα} in F is Cauchy, i.e., for every x ∈E
the net {Fαx} is Cauchy, then {Fα} converges by the quasi-completeness of G,
since it is bounded as a subset of the set {Fx: F ∈F}, which is bounded by the
equicontinuity of F. The continuity of the limiting linear mapping F also follows
from the equicontinuity of F. Finally, F ∈F, since F is closed.
We now show that the restriction to F of the topology of uniform convergence
on totally bounded sets is majorized by the restriction of the topology of pointwise
convergence on an arbitrary set A with a dense linear span in E. Let S be totally
bounded in E and let a net {Fα} in F converge to F ∈F on every a ∈A. We
verify that convergence is uniform on S. We can assume that F = 0. Let us fix a
convex neighborhood of zero V in G and find a neighborhood of zero U in E for
which Fα(U) ⊂V/2 for all α. We pick points b1, . . . , bn in the linear span of A
such that S ⊂n
i=1(U + bi), which is possible under our assumptions.
Let us take α0 such that Fαbi ∈V/2 whenever α ⩾α0, i = 1, . . . , n. Then
Fα(S) ∈V for any α ⩾α0, since for any s ∈S we have s ∈bi + U for some
index i ⩽n, whence we obtain Fαs ∈Fαbi + Fα(U) ⊂V .
If E contains a countable everywhere dense set {an}, then on E′ we can de-
fine a metric d(f, g) = 	∞
n=1 2−n min

|f(an)−g(an)|, 1

. This metric generates
the topology of pointwise convergence on the elements of {an}, hence on equicon-
tinuous sets it generates the topology of pointwise convergence. A somewhat more
general fact will be established in Proposition 1.12.16.
□
Here is a criterion of continuity of linear functionals.
1.9.6. Proposition. A linear function f on a topological vector space E is
continuous precisely when its kernel is closed.

62
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
PROOF. If the function f is continuous, then the set f −1(0) is closed. Con-
versely, suppose that the set G = Ker f (which is a vector subspace in E) is closed.
If G = E, then f(x) = 0 for all x ∈E. If G ̸= E and a ∈E \G, then there exists
a circled neighborhood of zero V such that (a+V )∩G = ∅, because G is closed.
We show that the functional f on V is bounded; this will mean that f is continu-
ous. Set f(a) = α. If the set of values of the functional f on V is not bounded,
then there exists an element z ∈V such that |f(z)| > |α|. Hence |α/f(z)| < 1,
whence z1 = −αz/f(z) ∈V , since V is circled. Thus, a + z1 ∈a + V . This
inclusion contradicts the equality f(a + z1) = f(a) −αf(z)/f(z) = 0, which
means that a + z1 ∈G (recall that (a + V ) ∩G = ∅).
□
1.9.7. Remark. We have just given a direct proof. It can be, however, some-
what simplified by using the quotient. Namely, if G = Ker f is a closed subspace
in E, then f is the composition of two mappings: the continuous canonical map-
ping from E to the Hausdorff (since G is closed) quotient E/G and some linear
functional g on E/G that is continuous, since E/G is one-dimensional.
The next proposition strengthens the previous one.
1.9.8. Proposition. Let E be a topological vector space, let A be its convex
circled subset, and let f be a linear functional on E. In order that the restriction
of f to A be continuous in the topology induced from the space E it is necessary
and sufficient that the set A ∩Ker f be closed in A in the induced topology.
PROOF. The necessity is obvious. Let us prove the sufficiency. If f = 0
on A, then there is nothing to prove. Suppose that there exists an element x ∈A
with f(x) ̸= 0. We first prove that for every ε > 0 there exists a neighborhood of
zero V in E such that |f(x)| < ε for all x ∈A ∩V . This will mean the continuity
of f|A (the restriction of f to A) at zero; next we show that the continuity of
the functional f|A at zero yields its continuity everywhere. Since A is circled,
there exists a ∈A such that 0 < f(a) < ε. Then a /∈(2A) ∩Ker f, since
(2A) ∩Ker f = 2(A ∩Ker f) and the latter set is closed in 2A. Hence there
exists a neighborhood of zero V in E such that the set a + V has no intersection
with (2A) ∩Ker f. It follows that whenever x ∈V ∩A we have |f(z)| < |f(a)|.
Indeed, otherwise due to the fact that the set V ∩A is circled there exists an element
z ∈V ∩A such that f(z) = −f(a). Moreover, f(z+a) = 0, so that z+a ∈Ker f;
at the same time, since the set A is convex, we have z + a ∈(2A) ∩(a + V ),
which contradicts the relation (a+V )∩

(2A)∩Ker f

= ∅. Thus, the continuity
of the functional f|A at zero is proved.
We now show that the continuity of f|A at zero yields the continuity on A. Let
V be a circled neighborhood of zero in E such that |f(x)| < ε for all x ∈V ∩A
and let W be a circled neighborhood of zero in E for which W + W ⊂V . We
claim that if a ∈A, x ∈(a + W) ∩A, then |f(x) −f(a)| < 2ε (which means the
continuity of f|A at the point a). Indeed, if x ∈(a + W) ∩A, then
x −a ∈

(a + W) −(a + W)

∩(A −A) ⊂V ∩(2A) = 2(2−1V ∩A).
Hence the desired estimate holds.
□

1.10. The Hahn–Banach theorem: geometric form
63
In the proof of the fact that the continuity of f

A at zero yields its continuity
everywhere on A it is possible (by using neighborhoods of zero) to avoid the
condition that f takes scalar values; a suitably modified proof applies to a linear
mapping f to any topological vector space. Therefore, for the continuity of the
restriction of such a mapping to a circled convex subset it suffices to have the
continuity of this restriction at zero. Proposition 1.9.6 remains true for mappings
to IRn (Exercise 1.12.50).
Let us note an interesting property of hypersubspaces. We recall that a set is
nowhere dense if its closure contains no nonempty open set.
1.9.9. Proposition. A hypersubspace in a topological vector space is either
everywhere dense or closed and then nowhere dense.
PROOF. Let G be a hypersubspace in a topological vector space E such that
we have G ̸= G.
Since G is a vector subspace in E (Exercise 1.12.34) and
G ⊂G, we have G = E (a vector subspace in a vector space F containing some
hypersubspace but not equal to it must coincide with F).
If G is closed, then it is nowhere dense (as any closed proper vector subspace).
Indeed, if V is a nonempty open set in E such that V ⊂G and a ∈V , then
V1 = V −a is an open neighborhood of zero in E contained in G. Hence we have
E = ∞
n=1 nV1 ⊂G, i.e., E = G.
□
1.9.10. Example. On every infinite-dimensional metrizable topological vector
space there is a discontinuous linear functional: taking linearly independent vectors
vn →0 and setting l(vn) = n, we can define l by linearity (complementing {vn}
to a Hamel basis).
1.10. The Hahn–Banach theorem: geometric form
In different areas of mathematics an important role is played by theorems
on extension of mappings. In functional analysis, one often uses theorems on
extensions of linear functionals originally defined on vector subspaces of vector (or
topological vector) spaces and satisfying certain conditions such as continuity or
some inequalities. These theorems can be reformulated as theorems on extensions
of vector subspaces not intersecting a given convex subset to hypersubspaces.
Various versions of such theorems are usually called Hahn–Banach theorems, and
theorems of the first kind are called Hahn–Banach theorems in analytic form, while
theorems of the second kind are called Hahn–Banach theorems in geometric form.
Close to Hahn–Banach theorems in geometric form is the Kakutani theorem on
extensions of disjoint convex subsets of vector spaces (a geometric form of the
Hahn–Banach theorem can be obtained as its corollary). All these theorems are
discussed below. Many of them even do not use any topology.
In most of the texts on functional analysis, usually a version of the analytic
form of the Hahn–Banach theorem is proved and then as a corollary one obtains
the Hahn–Banach theorem in the geometric form; sometimes the opposite order
is preferred.
We have chosen to start with the Kakutani theorem as the most
“geometric” one; then as a corollary we obtain the geometric version of the Hahn–
Banach theorem from which we deduce the Hahn–Banach theorem in the analytic

64
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
form. We also give independent proofs of the two last theorems, as well as a
derivation of the geometric version of the Hahn–Banach theorem from the analytic
version (which, in particular, establishes their equivalence). A similar method of
proof of the Hahn–Banach theorem is employed in the book Hille, Phillips [222].
If A, B, C, D are some sets in a common space, then we shall say that the
pair (A, B) is contained in the pair (C, D) and write (A, B) ⊂(C, D) if A ⊂C
and B ⊂D.
1.10.1. Theorem. (THE KAKUTANI THEOREM) Let E be a real vector space
and let V and W be two its disjoint convex subsets. Then, there exist disjoint
convex subsets V1 and W1 in the space E such that V ⊂V1, W ⊂W1 and
V1 ∪W1 = E.
PROOF. Our reasoning consists of two parts: one is set-theoretic and the other
one is geometric. The set-theoretic part is the proof of the fact that the set P of
all pairs of disjoint convex subsets of the space E containing the pair (V, W)
and partially ordered by the relation ⊂introduced before the theorem possesses a
maximal element; the geometric part is the proof that such an element is a pair of
sets whose existence is asserted in the theorem.
For the proof of existence of maximal elements it suffices to verify that P
satisfies the hypotheses of Zorn’s lemma: if P1 = {(Vα, Wα)}α∈Λ is a linearly
ordered part in P, then the pair (V, W), where V = 
α Vα, W = 
α Wα, is an
upper bound for P1. Indeed, it follows directly from the definition of this pair that
we have (Vα, Wα) ⊂(V, W) for every α ∈Λ. Thus, it remains to verify that
the sets V and W are convex and disjoint. If a, b ∈V , then there exist indices
α, β ∈Λ such that a ∈Vα and b ∈Vβ; since the set P1 is linearly ordered,
we see that either Vα ⊂Vβ or Vβ ⊂Vα.
In the first case a, b ∈Vβ, hence
[a, b] ⊂Vβ ⊂V ; in the second case a, b ∈Vα and [a, b] ⊂Vα ⊂V , so that the set
V is convex. In the same manner we prove the convexity of the set W.
We now show that V ∩W = ∅.
If a ∈V ∩W, then a ∈Vα ∩Wβ for
some indices α, β ∈Λ. Since the set P1 is linearly ordered, it follows that either
(Vα, Wα) ⊂(Vβ, Wβ) or (Vβ, Wβ) ⊂(Vα, Wα). Then either
a ∈Vα ∩Wβ ⊂Vβ ∩Wβ
or
a ∈Vα ∩Wα.
Each of these inclusions contradicts the fact that Vγ ∩Wγ = ∅for every γ ∈Λ
by the definition of the set P.
Thus, for P the hypotheses of Zorn’s lemma
are fulfilled. Hence the set of maximal elements in the set P is nonempty; let
(V∞, W∞) be one of them. By the definition of P the sets V∞and W∞are
convex and disjoint. Hence in order to verify that the pair (V∞, W∞) is a desired
one, it suffices to verify the equality V∞∪W∞= E.
We show that if this equality does not hold, then the pair (V∞, W∞) is not a
maximal element in P. Thus, let x ∈E and x /∈V∞∪W∞. Let V c
∞and W c
∞
denote the convex hulls of the sets {x} ∪V∞and {x} ∪W∞.
Below we show that at least one of the equalities V c
∞∩W∞=∅, V∞∩W c
∞=∅
is valid. In the first case the pair (V c
∞, W∞) will belong to the set P and majorize
the pair (V∞, W∞), not being equal to it; in the second case the same will be true
for the pair (V∞, W c
∞). Thus, in any case it turns out that the pair (V∞, W∞) is

1.10. The Hahn–Banach theorem: geometric form
65
not maximal contrary to its choice. We now proceed to the proof of the fact that
V c
∞∩W∞= ∅or V∞∩W c
∞= ∅. Suppose that this is false, i.e., there exist
elements c ∈V c
∞∩W∞and d ∈V∞∩W c
∞. Since by the last equality the set
V∞is nonempty, we have the equality V c
∞= 
z∈V∞[x, z], hence there exists an
element a ∈V∞such that c ∈[x, a]; similarly, d ∈[x, b] for some b ∈W∞.
Without loss of generality we can assume that x = 0 (in order to achieve this
it suffices to replace all considered sets and elements by their images under the
shift z →z −x; the image of x will be zero).
Thus, c ∈[0, a], d ∈[0, b], so that c = λa, d = νb, λ, ν ∈[0, 1] (we observe,
although this is not used below, that actually λ, ν ∈(0, 1)). Let us show that the
intervals [c, b] and [d, a] intersect; since [c, b] ⊂W∞and [d, a] ⊂V∞(by the
convexity of the sets W∞and V∞), this means that also the sets W∞and V∞
intersect contrary to the inclusion (V∞, W∞) ∈P.
Our next goal is to prove that there exists z ∈[c, b] ∩[d, a]. The inclusion
z ∈[c, b] is equivalent to the equality
z = tc + (1 −t)b = tλa + (1 −t)b,
t ∈[0, 1],
and the inclusion z ∈[d, a] is equivalent to the equality
z = τd + (1 −τ)a = τνb + (1 −τ)a,
τ ∈[0, 1].
Thus, for the proof of existence of an element z in [c, b]∩[d, a] it suffices to prove
that there are numbers t, τ ∈[0, 1] such that
tλa + (1 −t)b = τνb + (1 −τ)a.
In turn, it suffices to have simultaneously the equalities
tλ = 1 −τ,
τν = 1 −t.
This system of equations coincides with the following one:
τ + tλ = 1,
τν + t = 1.
This latter system is solvable for any ν, λ ∈[0, 1], moreover, one can find a
solution (τ, t) such that τ ∈[0, 1], t ∈[0, 1]. Indeed, if ν, λ ∈[0, 1], then the
determinant 1−νλ of this system vanishes only in the case ν = λ = 1, i.e., where
both equations coincide (actually, as it follows from what has been said above this
case is impossible), and then τ = t = 1/2 is a solution of the system satisfying
the condition τ ∈[0, 1], t ∈[0, 1]. If 1 −λν ̸= 0, then a solution of the system
is given by τ =
1−λ
1−λν ,
t =
1−ν
1−λν . Since λ, ν ∈[0, 1], 0 ⩽1 −λ ⩽1 −λν,
0 ⩽1 −ν ⩽1 −λν, we have τ, t ∈[0, 1]. Thus, the intervals [c, b] and [d, a]
intersect. The proof of the theorem is complete.
□
1.10.2. Theorem. Let V and W be nonempty convex subsets in a real topo-
logical vector space E such that V ∩W = ∅, V ∪W = E and G = V ∩W.
Then either G = E or G is a hyperplane in E.
PROOF. We show first that G is a linear manifold. Suppose that a, b ∈G and
prove that for every t ∈IR one has c(t) = ta + (1 −t)b ∈G. If this is not true,
then for some t0 ∈IR we obtain c(t0) = t0a + (1 −t0)b /∈G; we can assume that

66
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
c(t0) /∈V (similarly one can consider the case c(t0) /∈W). Thus, c(t0) is an
element of the open set E \V , which is contained (by the equality V ∪W = E) in
the interior ˘W of the set W, i.e., we have c(t0) ∈˘W. We observe that t0 /∈[0, 1],
since otherwise we would have c(t0) ∈G (by the convexity of G). We consider
two cases: t0 > 1 and t0 < 0. In the first case
a = t−1
0 c(t0) −t−1
0 (1 −t0)b,
t−1
0
+ t−1
0

−(1 −t0)

= 1,
so that a ∈[c(t0), b); in the second case
b = (1 −t0)−1c(t0) −(1 −t0)−1t0a,
(1 −t0)−1 + (1 −t0)−1(−t0) = 1,
so that b ∈

c(t0), a

. Since c(t0) ∈˘W and b ∈W, by Proposition 1.4.1 in the
first case we have a ∈˘W. Hence by the equality V ∩W = ∅, which is part of
the hypotheses of the theorem, we have a /∈V , which contradicts the inclusion
a ∈G = V ∩W. Similarly, in the second case the same proposition and the
inclusion c(t0) ∈˘W yield that b ∈˘W, which contradicts the inclusion b ∈G.
Thus, we have proved that G is a linear manifold.
We now show that if G ̸= E, then G is a hyperplane in E. Let a ∈E \ G
and let a /∈W, so that a ∈˘V , since V ∪W = E. The latter equality yields
that G = V ∩W ̸= ∅, because any topological vector space is connected and
the sets V and W are nonempty. Let b ∈G. Without loss of generality we can
assume that b = 0, so that G is a vector subspace. In order to prove that G is a
hyperplane, it suffices to verify that for every z ∈E there exist elements c0 ∈G
and t ∈IR such that z = c0 + ta. Since a ∈˘V , we have −a /∈V (i.e., −a ∈˘W),
because the inclusions −a ∈V and a ∈˘V yield (by the same Proposition 1.4.1)
that a/2 + (−a)/2 = 0 ∈˘V , but in fact we have 0 ∈G ⊂W ⊂E \ ˘V . We
can assume that z ∈V (the case z ∈W is considered similarly). Then the set
[−a, z]∩G is nonempty. Indeed, [−a, z]∩G = ([−a, z]∩V )∩([−a, z]∩W), where
the set in the brackets in the right-hand side are closed in [−a, z] and nonempty,
their union coincides with [−a, z], and the interval [−a, z] is a connected set. Let
d ∈[−a, z] ∩G. Then d = τz + (1 −τ)(−a) for some τ ∈[0, 1]. Since −a /∈V ,
we have τ ̸= 0. Hence z = d/τ + (1 −τ)a/τ, as required.
□
Note that the theorem contains no topological restrictions on V and W.
1.10.3. Remark. At the end of the proof of this theorem we have shown that
if in its hypotheses v1 ∈W, v2 ∈V , then [v1, v2] ∩G ̸= ∅.
1.10.4. Remark. If E is a real vector space, then a set A ⊂E is called
finitely open (see Hille, Phillips [222, p. 14]) if its intersection with each finite-
dimensional linear subspace is open (in the unique Hausdorff topology of this
subspace making it a topological vector space, i.e., in the usual Euclidean topol-
ogy).
The set of all finitely open subsets of a vector space E forms a topology τ0 in
E called finitely open; it is the strongest topology among all topologies that induce
the Euclidean topology in every finite-dimensional subspace.
Denote by τ1 the strongest topology among all locally convex topologies in
E and by τ2 the strongest topology among all topologies in E that agree with the

1.10. The Hahn–Banach theorem: geometric form
67
vector structure. One can show that if E possesses an at most countable algebraic
basis, then all these three topologies coincide; otherwise they are all distinct (see
Exercise 1.12.32 and Example 2.3.3). But also in the latter case the collection of
open convex sets is the same in all these three topologies.
1.10.5. Definition. A point a ∈E is called c-inner (or algebraically inner)
for a set A ⊂E if the following condition is fulfilled:
∀x ∈E ∃ε > 0: (a −εx, a + εx) ⊂A.
The algebraic kernel of a set is the set of all its algebraically inner points.
A set is called c-open (or algebraically open) if all its point are c-inner (i.e., it
coincides with its algebraic kernel). In other words, a set is c-open if its intersec-
tion with each one-dimensional linear variety in E in open in this variety equipped
with the standard Euclidean topology.
Even in the usual plane IR2 there are c-open sets that are not open.
For
example, the complement to the set {(x1, x2) ∈IR2 : x2 = x2
1, x1 > 0} has this
property. However, every c-open convex subset of an arbitrary vector space is
open in each of the just defined topologies τ0, τ1, and τ2. Moreover, every c-inner
point of a convex subset of a vector space is at the same time an inner point in the
locally convex topology τ1. If a convex set has topologically inner points, then its
topological interior coincides with the algebraic interior (Exercise 1.12.82).
One can show (we leave as an exercise) that Γ is a hyperplane in E precisely
when there exist a (nonzero) linear functional f on E and a scalar α for which
Γ = {x ∈E : f(x) = α}. If the hyperplane Γ is not a vector subspace, i.e., if
α ̸= 0, then the latter relation uniquely defines the functional f.
If Γ is a hyperplane in a vector space E and f is the functional men-
tioned above, then the sets {x: f(x) ⩾α} and {x: f(x) ⩽α} are called the
closed halfspaces defined by the hyperplane Γ and the sets {x: f(x) < α} and
{x: f(x) > α} are called the open halfspaces defined by it (even if there is no
topology in E).
The first two halfspaces are indeed closed and the latter two are open in the
strongest locally convex topology on E (in this topology all vector subspaces are
closed). However, the property that in a locally convex space E all vector sub-
spaces are closed does not yield that there is no stronger locally convex topology
in E.
If E is a nonzero topological vector space and a hyperplane Γ is closed in E,
then the closed halfspaces defined by it are closed and the open halfspaces are
open also in the original topology of E; moreover, these closed halfspaces are the
closures of the open ones (Exercise 1.12.41). We recall (see Proposition 1.9.6) that
the continuity of a linear function f is equivalent to the property that its kernel is
closed, which is the same that the hyperplane {x: f(x) = α} is closed for some
(then for all) α.
Let us introduce one more important concept.
1.10.6. Definition. Let E be a topological vector space, let Γ be a closed
hyperplane in E, and let A and B be subsets of E. We shall say that Γ separates

68
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
the sets A and B if A and B are contained in the different closed halfspaces
defined by Γ. If A and B are contained in the different open halfspaces defined
by Γ, then we shall say that Γ strictly separates A and B.
1.10.7. Remark. (i) If the sets A and B are open, then any separating hyper-
plane strictly separates them.
(ii) It follows from the definition that sets A and B in a topological vector
space E can be separated by a closed hyperplane precisely when on the space E
there exists a continuous linear functional f such that f(a) ⩽f(b) for all a ∈A
and b ∈B; these sets can be strictly separated by a hyperplane precisely when
f(a) < f(b) for all a ∈A, b ∈B.
(iii) A closed hyperplane H passing through a point of a set A is called
supporting if A entirely belongs to one of the two halfspaces defined by H.
Here is the main result on separation of convex sets.
1.10.8. Theorem. Let A and B be convex sets in a real topological vector
space E such that the set B and the interior ˘A of the set A are nonempty and
disjoint. Then, there exists a closed hyperplane Γ separating A and B.
PROOF. We know that there exist disjoint convex sets V, W ⊂E for which
A ⊂V , B ⊂W, and V ∪W = E. Set G = V ∩W. Since ˘V ∩W = ∅, hence
˘V ∩G = ∅, by the condition that ˘A is nonempty we obtain that G ̸= E. It follows
from the previous theorem that G is a hyperplane in E (it is important here that
W and V are nonempty). We can assume that G is a hypersubspace. Let f be a
linear functional the kernel of which is G. Since ˘V ∩G = ∅, on the convex set ˘V
the functional f has a constant sign; we can assume that f(x) > 0 for all x ∈˘V
(so f(x) > 0 for all x ∈˘A). Since ˘V ∩G = ∅and ˘V ̸= ∅, the hypersubspace G
is not everywhere dense, therefore, it is closed. Each point x ∈A is a limit point
of the interval (x, a], where a ∈A, which is contained in ˘A, because A is convex.
Hence f(x) ⩾0 for all x ∈A. By the way, this reasoning uses only the continuity
of the restriction of f to the interval [x, a] and does not use the continuity of f
on E (although it takes place, since G is closed); on the one-dimensional space
every linear functional is continuous. Thus, in order to show that G separates A
and B it remains to prove that f(x) ⩽0 for all x ∈B. If f(b) > 0 for some
vector b ∈B, then, for every x ∈˘A, on the interval [x, b] the functional f has
no zero (it is linear and its values at the endpoints of the interval are of the same
sign). This means that [x, b] ∩G = ∅, which contradicts Remark 1.10.3.
□
Our assumption that the interior of at least one of the sets A and B is nonempty
is essential in this theorem.
1.10.9. Example. Let IR(∞) be the topological direct sum of a countable fam-
ily of real lines, i.e., the set of all real sequences of the form (x1, . . . , xn, 0, 0, . . .),
equipped with the strongest locally convex topology generated by all seminorms
(general direct sums are discussed in the next chapter).
Let A be the subset
of IR(∞) consisting of all vectors (xn) whose last nonzero component is positive.
This set is convex, since if x, y ∈A have the last nonzero components xn > 0

1.10. The Hahn–Banach theorem: geometric form
69
and ym > 0, where n ⩾m, then xn + yn > 0. If G is a hyperplane in IR(∞)
(we observe that every hyperplane in IR(∞) is closed, since every linear function
on IR(∞) is continuous due to our choice of the topology), V and W are the
corresponding open halfspaces, then A ∩V ̸= ∅and A ∩W ̸= ∅. See also
Exercise 1.12.73 for an example of closed convex sets in the spaces l1 and l2 that
cannot be separated.
Let us give a condition for the strict separation.
1.10.10. Theorem. Let F and K be nonempty convex subsets of a real locally
convex space E such that F is closed, K is compact and K ∩F = ∅. Then, there
exists a closed hyperplane in E strictly separating F and K. In particular, if E is
Hausdorff, then any two points can be strictly separated.
PROOF. Since F is closed, for every point a ∈K there exists a convex circled
neighborhood of zero V such that
(a + V ) ∩(F + V ) = ∅.
(1.10.1)
Indeed, since F is closed, there exists a convex circled neighborhood of zero W
such that
(a + W) ∩F = ∅.
(1.10.2)
In order to obtain (1.10.1), it suffices to take V = W/2. Indeed, in this case, if
there is z ∈(V + F) ∩(a + V ), then there exist three elements z1 ∈V , z2 ∈V ,
x ∈F such that a + z1 = z = z2 + x, i.e., a + z1 −z2 = x. Since
a + z1 −z2 ∈a + W/2 −W/2 ⊂a + W,
this contradicts (1.10.2).
For each a ∈K we find a circled convex open neighborhood of zero Wa
such that (a + Wa) ∩(F + Wa) = ∅. The sets a + Wa form an open cover
of the compact set K.
Let {ai + Wai}i⩽n be some finite subcover.
For the
neighborhood Wf = 
n
i=1 Wai we have (F + Wf) ∩
n
i=1(ai + Wai)

= ∅.
Thus, (F + Wf) ∩K = ∅.
Let W ′ = Wf/2. Then (K + W ′) ∩(F + W ′) = ∅; the proof of this is
completely analogous to the proof of the relation (1.10.1) for V = W ′/2. Let G
be a closed hyperplane separating the open convex sets K + W ′ and F + W ′.
According to Remark 1.10.7(i) it strictly separates these sets; hence it strictly
separates K and F.
□
1.10.11.
Remark. By Remark 1.10.7(i) the conclusion of this theorem is
equivalent to the existence of a continuous linear functional f on E such that
f(x1) < f(x2) for all x1 ∈K, x2 ∈F. Actually, under the hypotheses of this
theorem we have a stronger conclusion: in this case there exists a continuous linear
functional f on E such that
sup
x∈K
f(x) < inf
x∈F f(x).
Indeed, let G and W ′ be the same as in the proof of the theorem and let f be a
continuous linear functional on E the kernel of which is a shift of G and which is

70
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
positive on the open halfspace containing F. Set γ = supx∈K f(x). Let a be an
element of K such that f(a) = γ. There is an element b ∈W ′ such that f(b) ̸= 0,
since the closed hyperplane is nowhere dense. We can assume that f(b) > 0,
otherwise replacing b by −b. Since G separates the sets K + W ′ and F + W ′, for
all x1 ∈K, x2 ∈F we have
f(x1) ⩽γ < γ + f(b) = f(a) + f(b) = f(a + b) < f(x2),
where a + b ∈K + W ′, so that the desired inequality holds.
1.10.12. Theorem. (THE HAHN–BANACH THEOREM IN THE GEOMETRIC
FORM) Let E be a real topological vector space, let V ⊂V be a nonempty open
convex set, and let G be a closed linear variety in E disjoint with V . Then, there
exists a closed hyperplane in E containing G and also disjoint with V .
PROOF. By Theorem 1.10.8, there exists a closed hyperplane H0 separating
V and G. This hyperplane does not intersect V , since V is open.
Let g be a continuous linear functional on E such that
H0 = {x ∈H : g(x) = α},
where α ∈IR,
and, for example, g(x) > α for all x ∈V and g(x) ⩽α for all x ∈G. Then,
there exists β ∈IR such that g(x) = β for all x ∈G. Indeed, if the linear function
g is not constant on the linear manifold G, then the set of its values is IR1, which
is impossible, since g ⩽α on G. Clearly, β ⩽α. The set {x ∈E : g(x) = β} is
a hyperplane containing G and disjoint with V .
Let us give yet another (“direct”) proof of this theorem. Denote by P0 the
partially ordered set of all vector subspaces of the space E containing the subspace
G and disjoint with V . It is readily verified (do this) that the set P0 satisfies the
conditions of the Kuratowski–Zorn theorem; hence P0 has maximal elements; let
Gm be one of them. Thus, Gm is a vector subspace of the space E with the
following properties:
(a) G ⊂Gm; (b) Gm ∩V = ∅; (c) if L is a vector subspace of the space E
containing Gm and disjoint with V , then L = Gm.
We show that these three properties yield that Gm is a hypersubspace the
existence of which is asserted in the theorem. Let E0 be the topological vector
quotient of the space E by its subspace Gm. Then Gm is a hypersubspace precisely
when E0 is one-dimensional. Thus, in order to prove that Gm is a hypersubspace,
it suffices to show that dim E0 = 1. We now do this. It follows from (b) and
(c) that Gm is closed. Indeed, the closure Gm of the subspace Gm is a vector
subspace of the space E containing Gm and disjoint with V (since the latter is
open and Gm does not intersect it). Hence Gm = Gm by (b). Therefore, the space
E0 is Hausdorff. Let V0 denote the image of V in E0 with respect to the canonical
mapping Φ: E →E0; then V0 is an open convex subset of E0 and 0 /∈V0, since
we have V ∩Gm = ∅.
Suppose now that dim E0 > 1 and show that E0 contains a nontrivial vector
subspace G0 disjoint with V0. Its preimage Φ−1(G0) with respect to the canonical
mapping will be a vector subspace in E containing Gm and disjoint with V (since
G0 ∩V0 = ∅, we have Φ−1(G0) ∩Φ−1(V0) = ∅, and since V ⊂Φ−1(V0),

1.11. The Hahn–Banach theorem: the analytic form
71
we have Φ−1(G0) ∩V = ∅). Hence by (c) we have Φ−1(G0) = Gm, but this
contradicts the relations Gm = Φ−1(0), G0 ̸= {0}.
Thus, it remains to show that if dim E0 > 1, then E0 contains a vector
subspace G0 of positive dimension disjoint with V0. Let e1 and e2 be linearly
independent elements in E0 and let L(e1, e2) be the subspace in E0 generated by
them. If L(e1, e2) ∩V0 = ∅, then we can take just G0 = L(e1, e2). Suppose now
that L(e1, e2) ∩V0 = V1 ̸= ∅and show that L(e1, e2) contains a one-dimensional
subspace disjoint with V1. For every ϕ ∈[0, 2π), let k(ϕ) denote the following
set (the ray): {λ(e1 cos ϕ + e2 sin ϕ): λ > 0}. Since V1 is convex and 0 /∈V1, for
every ϕ we have at least one of the equalities k(ϕ)∩V1 = ∅or

−k(ϕ)

∩V1 = ∅.
Indeed, if this is not true and we have λ1a(ϕ) ∈V1, λ2a(ϕ) ∈V1, where
a(ϕ) = e1 cos ϕ + e2 sin ϕ, λ1 > 0, λ2 < 0 (the equality λi = 0 is excluded,
because 0 /∈V1), then, since the convex combination
|λ2|
λ1 + |λ2|λ1a(ϕ) +
λ1
λ1 + |λ2|λ2a(ϕ)
of the elements λ1a(ϕ) and λ2a(ϕ) vanishes, it turns out that 0 ∈V1, but this is
false. In particular, we have at least one of the two equalities k(0) ∩V1 = ∅and

−k(0)

∩V1 = ∅. Changing the notation if necessary, we can assume that the
first equality holds.
Set now
ϕm = sup

ϕ ∈[0, 2π): k(ϕ1) ∩V1 = ∅∀ϕ1 ∈[0, ϕ]

and show that

−k(ϕm) ∪k(ϕm)

∩V1 = ∅. This will mean that V1 is disjoint
with the one-dimensional space generated by the element a(ϕm); this subspace is
the set {0}∪k(ϕm)∪

−k(ϕm)

. The assumption that k(ϕm)∩V1 ̸= ∅contradicts
the definition of ϕm, since V1 is open. Indeed, if λa(ϕm) ∈V1 and λ > 0, then,
by the continuity of the mapping ϕ →a(ϕ), [0, 2π) →L(e1, e2), there exists
ε > 0 such that λa(ϕm −ε) ∈V1.
Further, if −λa(ϕm) ∈V1, then, since V1 is open, there exists δ > 0 such that
for all ε ∈[0, δ) we have −λa(ϕm + ε) ∈V1. At the same time, according to the
definition of ϕm, among such numbers ε there is ε′ for which k(ϕm+ε′)∩V1 ̸= ∅,
i.e., λ1a(ϕm + ε′) ∈V1 for some λ1. The last two inclusions, with the aid of a
calculation based on the convexity of V1 and similar to the one given above, yield
the false inclusion 0 ∈V1. Hence it is proved that the set L(e1, e2) contains a
subspace disjoint with the set V1 = V0 ∩L(e1, e2); it can be taken for G0. Thus,
the second proof of the theorem is complete.
□
In the next section we discuss another approach to extensions.
1.11. The Hahn–Banach theorem: the analytic form
The results presented above on separation of convex sets can be restated in
the form of certain inequalities; for this reason one can speak of the Hahn–Banach
theorem in the analytic form.

72
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
1.11.1. Theorem. Suppose that E is a real vector space and E0 is its vector
subspace. Let p be a sublinear function (see § 1.4) on E with finite values and let
f be a linear functional on E0 such that for every x ∈E0 we have
f(x) ⩽p(x).
(1.11.1)
Then, there exists a linear functional f on E whose restriction to E1 coincides
with f and which everywhere on E satisfies the inequality f(x) ⩽p(x). In other
words, f can be extended to the whole space E with the preservation of (1.11.1).
PROOF. We set
G = E×IR, G0 = E0×IR, V = {(x, t) ∈G: x ∈E, p(x) < t}
and denote by τE and τG the strongest locally convex topologies in E and G,
respectively. We verify that V is convex and open in the topology τG. If
(x1, t1), (x2, t2) ∈V, λ ∈[0, 1], (x3, t3) = λ(x1, t1) + (1 −λ)(x2, t2),
then p(x3) ⩽λp(x1) + (1 −λ)p(x2), t3 = λt1 + (1 −λ)t2. Since, in addition,
p(x1) < t1, p(x2) < t2, we have p(x3) ⩽λp(x1) + (1 −λ)p(x2) < t3, because
(x3, t3) ∈V . Hence V is convex.
The fact that V is open in the topology τG follows from the continuity in
this topology of the function (x, t) →t −p(x) from E×IR to IR, which follows
from the continuity on (E, τE) of the sublinear function p (see Exercise 1.12.39).
The established properties of the set V will be needed in order to apply Theo-
rem 1.10.12.
Denote by Γ the graph of f on E0; Γ is a hypersubspace in G0. We observe
that the estimate f(x) ⩽p(x) for x ∈E0 yields that
Γ ∩V = Γ ∩(V ∩G0) = ∅.
Indeed, if (x, t) ∈Γ ∩V , then p(x) < t, since (x, t) ∈V . On the other hand,
t = f(x), since (x, t) ∈Γ, so that f(x) > p(x) for some x ∈E0, which is
impossible.
By Theorem 1.10.12 there exists a hypersubspace Γm of the space G contain-
ing Γ and disjoint with V (the set Γ is closed in the topology τG). We show that
Γm is the graph of a linear functional f on E that is an extension of f and satisfies
the inequality f(x) ⩽p(x) for all x ∈E.
It suffices to verify the following three things:
(a) that Γm is the graph of a function E →IR; then, due to the fact that Γm
is a vector subspace, this function will be automatically linear;
(b) the equality Γm ∩G0 = Γ; then this functional will be an extension of f;
(c) the required inequality for f for all x ∈E.
In order to verify (a) we show that if (x0, t1)∈Γm, (x0, t2)∈Γm, then t1 = t2.
If this is not true, then p(x0) < λt1 + (1 −λ)t2 for some λ ∈IR. For example, in
case t1 > t2 this inequality holds if
λ =

p(x0) −2t2 + t1

/(t1 −t2).

1.11. The Hahn–Banach theorem: the analytic form
73
Hence

x0, λt1 + (1 −λ)t2

∈V , but by the relation V ∩Γm = ∅this contradicts
the inclusion

x0, λt1 + (1 −λ)t2

∈Γm that follows, in turn, from the inclusion
(x0, t1) ∈Γm, (x0, t2) ∈Γm and the linearity of Γm.
Let us prove (b). First of all, we have Γ ⊂Γm ∩G0, since Γ ⊂Γm, Γ ⊂G0.
Thus, it suffices to show that Γ ⊃Γm ∩G0. Let x ∈(Γm ∩G0)\Γ. Since Γ is a
hypersubspace in G0, the smallest subspace T of the space G1 containing Γ and x
coincides with G0 and hence intersects V (it even contains V ∩G0). However,
this contradicts the fact that Γm ∩V = ∅, T ⊂Γm (this inclusion follows from
the inclusion x ∈Γm, Γ ⊂Γm).
Finally, the estimate f(x) ⩽p(x) for all vectors x ∈E follows from the
equality V ∩Γm = ∅, since if f(x0) > p(x0), then

x0, f(x0)

∈V , which by
the inclusion

x0, f(x0)

∈Γm contradicts the equality just stated.
□
Obviously, the hypothesis of the theorem explicitly employs the condition that
we consider real spaces. Complex spaces will be discussed below.
If p is a seminorm, then (1.11.1) is equivalent to the estimate |f| ⩽p, but this
case will be specially mentioned below in Theorem 1.11.7.
The proven theorem in most of the texts on functional analysis is called the
Hahn–Banach theorem (in full accordance with the historic order of the discovery
of these results). For this reason it seems wise to give its direct proof (not based
on the geometric version of this theorem). Normally, such a proof is given in
standard texts.
Let P be the partially ordered set consisting of all possible pairs (g, F), where
F is a linear subspace in E containing E1, g is a linear functional on F that is
an extension of the functional f and satisfies the inequality g(x) ⩽p(x) for every
point x ∈F.
The order in P is introduced as follows: (g1, F1) < (g2, F2) if F1 ⊂F2 and
g2 is an extension of g1. It is readily verified that P satisfies the hypothesis of the
Kuratowski–Zorn theorem. Hence P has maximal elements; denote by (g0, F0)
one of them and show that F0 = E. This will mean that the domain of definition
of the functional g0 is the whole space E, i.e., that g0 is the desired extension of
the functional f.
If F0 ̸= E, then there is x0 ∈E with x0 /∈F0. Denote by F1 the subspace in
E generated x0 and F0, and show that contrary to the maximality of (g0, F0) there
exists an extension g1 of the functional g0 to F1 such that (g1, F1) ∈P. If z ∈F1,
then there exist (uniquely defined) a ∈F0 and α ∈IR such that z = a + αx0.
Next, if g1 is a functional on F1 whose existence we want to prove, then
g1(z) = g0(a) + αg1(x0) ⩽p(a + αx0),
(1.11.2)
since g0(x) = g1(x) on F0 and a ∈F0. On the other hand, if we can pick g1(x0)
such that the latter inequality holds for all α and a, then the functional defined by
means of (1.11.2) will be the desired one.
Let us show that such a choice of g1(x0) is possible indeed. To this end, we
consider (1.11.2) separately for α > 0 and α < 0 (for α = 0 this inequality is
fulfilled for any choice of g1(x0), since (g0, F0) ∈P). If α > 0, then (1.11.2) is

74
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
equivalent to the inequality
g1(x0) ⩽p
 a
α + x0

−g0
 a
α

;
if α < 0, then it can be rewritten as
g0
 a
−α

−g1(x0) ⩽p
 a
−α −x0

,
which is equivalent to the inequality
g1(x0) ⩾−p
 a
−α −x0

−g0
 a
α

.
Thus, the number g1(x0) must be picked in such a way that for all a1, a2 ∈F0
and α1, α2 ∈(0, ∞) the following inequalities be true:
p
 a2
α2
+ x0

−g0
 a2
α2

⩾g1(x0) ⩾−p
 a1
−α1
−x0

−g0
 a1
α1

.
In order this choice be possible (recall that x0 is a fixed element of E), it is
necessary and sufficient that
inf

p(b + x0) −g0(b): b ∈F0

⩾sup

−p(−b −x0) −g0(b): b ∈F0

,
or, which is equivalent, for every b1, b2 ∈F0 the inequality
p(b1 + x0) −g0(b1) ⩾−p(−b2 −x0) −g0(b2)
holds. The latter inequality is true, since
g0(b1) −g0(b2)⩽p(b1 −b2)=p(b1 + x0 −b2 −x0)⩽p(b1 + x0) + p(−b2 −x0),
because p is sublinear.
1.11.2. Remark. The condition that the functional p is finite is essential for
the validity of the Hahn–Banach theorem in the analytic form. Indeed, let E = IR2
and let the functional p: IR2 →IR
+ be defined as follows: p(x1, x2) = 0 if
x2 > 0 or if x2 = 0 and x1 ⩾0; in all other cases p(x1, x2) = ∞(this is precisely
the Minkowski functional of the set {(x1, x2) ∈IR2 : p(x1, x2) < 1}). Let us set
E1 = {(x1, 0): x1 ∈IR} and f(x1, 0) = −x1. Then
f(x) ⩽p(x)
for x = (x1, x2) ∈E1,
however, there is no linear functional on E extending f and satisfying the cor-
responding inequality.
This follows from the fact that E contains no straight
line (“hyperplane”) passing through the point (−1, 0) and not intersecting the set
{(x1, x2): p(x1, x2) < 1}.
We have given two proofs of the Hahn–Banach theorem in the analytic form:
a direct proof (the last one) and the one based on the geometric form of this
theorem; in turn, this latter form has been proved also in two ways: with the aid
of the Kakutani theorem and again “directly”. Thus, we have actually given even
three different proofs of the Hahn–Banach theorem in the analytic form. Each of
these proofs consisted of two parts: a set-theoretic part based on the Kuratowski–
Zorn theorem and an elementary part concerned in fact with the geometry of

1.11. The Hahn–Banach theorem: the analytic form
75
two-dimensional spaces, so that at the level of main ideas all these three different
proofs are very close.
Let us now derive the geometric form of the Hahn–Banach theorem from the
analytic one.
Let V be a nonempty open convex subset of a topological vector space E and
let G be a closed vector subspace in E not intersecting V . We have to prove that
E contains a closed hypersubspace F also not intersecting V .
Let a ∈V (a ̸= 0), Va = V −a, Ga = G−a, let p be the Minkowski functional
of the set Va, and let E0 be the vector subspace in E generated by Ga. In E0 the
subset Ga is a hyperplane (not containing the zero element). Let f0 be a functional
on E0 for which Ga = f −1
0 (1). Then f0(x) ⩽p(x) for all x ∈E0. Indeed, if for
some x0 ∈E0 this is false, i.e., f0(x0) > p(x0), then the vector z = x0/f(x0)
satisfies the relation f0(z) = 1 > p(z), but the equality here means that z ∈Ga,
while the inequality says that z ∈Va; thus, these inclusions contradict the equality
(G −a) ∩(V −a) = ∅. Let f be an extension of f0 to all of E satisfying
the inequality from the formulation of Theorem 1.11.1, G′ = {x∈E : f(x) = 1}.
Then Ga ⊂G′ and G′ ∩Va = ∅. The inclusion is obvious; the equality can be
shown as follows. Let x ∈G′ ∩Va. Then f(x) = 1 and p(x) < 1 by the condition
that Va is open, which contradicts the inequality f ⩽p. Now for completing the
proof it suffices to set F = G′ + a.
We now proceed to discussing the Hahn–Banach theorem for complex spaces.
Here some nuances appear connected with the linearity over IR and C.
Let X be a complex topological vector space. Denote by XR the real topo-
logical vector space which consists of the same elements as X, i.e., XR and X
coincide as sets, but in XR only the multiplication by real numbers is allowed.
Hence if x ∈XR, x ̸= 0, then also ix ∈XR, but in XR the element ix is not the
product of x by the number i (this product is not defined in XR); moreover, the
elements x and ix in XR are linearly independent.
The families of neighborhoods of zero, hence, the closed and open sets in
X and XR are the same. Since the definition of convexity involves only real
numbers, any set convex in X is convex in XR (and conversely). Thus, if X is a
locally convex space, then XR is also a locally convex space.
Note also that any set balanced in X will be balanced in XR, but the converse
can be false. Here is an example: the interval [−x, x].
The space XR is called the real topological vector space associated with the
complex topological vector space X (or the real structure of X). In the space
X we can consider complex and real linear manifolds, the latter ones are linear
manifolds in XR. In particular, we shall consider complex and real hyperplanes.
For example, C1 is a complex hyperplane in C2, but not real (its real codimension
is two).
A real linear variety is not, in general, a complex linear manifold. For exam-
ple, the complex straight line passing through the points 0 and x ̸= 0 contains the
point ix, but the real straight line passing through the same points does not contain

76
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
the point ix. Nevertheless, there is a close connection between complex and real
planes, a partial case of which is described by the following lemma.
1.11.3. Lemma. Every complex hyperplane H in X is the intersection of two
real hyperplanes and the latter are closed in case of closed H.
PROOF. Let f be a linear functional on X such that
H = {x: f(x) = α + iβ}.
Set ϕ(x) = Re f(x) and ψ(x) = Im f(x), x ∈X. It is readily verified that ϕ
and ψ are linear real functionals on XR. It is clear that H = H1 ∩H2, where
H1 = {x: ϕ(x) = α} and H2 = {x: ψ(x) = β}. In order to show that H1 and
H2 are closed for closed H we have to show that the continuity of f implies the
continuity of ϕ and ψ. This is also clear, since if there exists a neighborhood of
zero V in X such that |f(x)| < ε for all x ∈V , then we have |ϕ(x)| < ε and
|ψ(x)| < ε for all such x.
□
1.11.4.
Lemma. For every real linear functional ϕ on X, there exists a
unique complex linear functional f such that ϕ(x) = Re f(x) for all x ∈X,
moreover, if the functional ϕ is continuous, then f is also continuous.
PROOF. Set f(x) = ϕ(x) −iϕ(ix). Then
f(x1 + x2) = ϕ(x1) + ϕ(x2) −iϕ(ix1) −iϕ(ix2) = f(x1) + f(x2).
If λ is real, then it is clear that f(λx) = λf(x). Finally,
f(ix) = ϕ(ix) −iϕ(−x) = i[ϕ(x) −iϕ(ix)] = if(x),
f(α + iβ)x = f(αx) + f(iβx) = αf(x) + if(βx) = (α + iβ)f(x).
Suppose that there exists another complex linear functional f1 on X such that
f1(x) = ϕ(x) + iψ(x). Then
f1(ix) = ϕ(ix) + iψ(ix) = if1(x) = i[ϕ(x) + iψ(x)],
i.e., ψ(x) = −ϕ(ix), and the uniqueness of f is proved. If the functional ϕ is
continuous, then for every ε > 0 there exists a circled neighborhood of zero V
such that |ϕ(x)| < ε/2 for all x ∈V . Then ix ∈V and hence |iϕ(ix)| < ε/2,
whence we obtain |f(x)| < ε.
□
1.11.5. Corollary. If H0 is a hypersubspace in X, then H = H0 ∩iH0 is a
complex hypersubspace in X, moreover, H is closed if H0 is closed.
PROOF. Let ϕ(x) = 0 be an equation defining H0. If x ∈iH0, then x = iy,
y ∈H0. Hence we have ϕ(ix) = ϕ(−y) = 0. On the other hand, if ϕ(ix) = 0,
then ix = z ∈H0 and hence x = −iz. Therefore, the equation defining the
subspace iH0 has the form ϕ(ix) = 0. If the functional f is defined by the equality
f(x) = ϕ(x) −iϕ(ix), then the subspace H = {x: f(x) = 0} consists of exactly
those points x ∈X for which ϕ(x) = 0 and ϕ(ix) = 0, i.e., H = H0 ∩iH0.
□
We proceed to the proof of the geometric form of the Hahn–Banach theorem
for complex topological vector spaces. The analytic form will be considered below.

1.11. The Hahn–Banach theorem: the analytic form
77
1.11.6. Theorem. Let X be a complex topological vector space, let A be a
nonempty open convex set in X, and let P be a complex closed linear variety not
intersecting A. Then, there exists a closed complex hyperplane H in X containing
P and not intersecting A.
PROOF. By shifting we can assume that P contains zero. In this case iP = P.
In the real space XR associated with X the set A is open and convex and P is a
closed linear subspace. Therefore, by the Hahn–Banach theorem for the real case
there exists a real closed hyperplane H0 passing through zero and containing P
and not intersecting A. By Corollary 1.11.5 the intersection H = H0 ∩iH0 is
a closed hyperplane in X passing through zero. Clearly, A ∩H = ∅, and since
P = iP ⊂iH0, we have P ⊂H.
□
The analytic form of the Hahn–Banach theorem has been proved above only
for real spaces. For complex spaces there is a somewhat weaker version of the
analytic form of the Hahn–Banach theorem, which will be now proved without
using the analytic form of this theorem for real spaces (although there is a proof
that uses the latter, see Bogachev, Smolyanov [72]). More precisely, the theorem
which will be now given is true both for real and complex spaces.
1.11.7. Theorem. Let E be a vector space over the field of real or complex
numbers, let p be a seminorm on E, let E0 be a vector subspace of the space E,
and let f be a linear functional on E0 such that |f(x)| ⩽p(x) for all x ∈E0.
Then, there exists a linear functional f on E with the following properties:
f(x) = f(x)
for x ∈E0,
| f(x)| ⩽p(x)
for x ∈E.
PROOF. We equip E with the topology τp generated by the seminorm p. We
shall assume that f ̸= 0 (otherwise the theorem is trivial). Hence there exists an
element a ∈E0 such that f(a) = 1. Then
E0 = {λa: λ ∈IR} + L,
where L = Ker f.
Let us take the set A = a + V , where V = {x∈E : p(x) < 1} is a convex
circled absorbent set; the set A is open in the topology τp. If x ∈A ∩L, then
we have x = a + y, y ∈V and f(x) = f(a) + f(y) = 1 + f(y) ̸= 0, since
|f(y)| ⩽p(y) < 1. Hence L ∩A = ∅. By Theorem 1.10.12 and Theorem 1.11.6
there exists a closed hypersubspace H0 ⊃L not intersecting A. Since a /∈H0, we
have H0 + {λa} = E.
Let f(x) = λ if x = λa+z, z ∈H0. Then f is a continuous linear functional
on E. Clearly, f(x) = f(x) on E0. It remains to prove that | f(x)| ⩽p(x) for
all vectors x ∈E. If x ∈E and p(x) < 1, i.e., x ∈V , then | f(x)| < 1, since if
| f(x)| ⩾1 we can take x = −x/ f(x) and obtain that x ∈V because V is circled.
Therefore, a + x ∈A. At the same time we have f(a + x) = 1 −f(x)/ f(x) = 0,
i.e., A ∩H0 ̸= ∅, which is impossible.
If now x ∈E and | f(x)| > p(x), then there exists a number α > 0 such that
p(x) < α < | f(x)|, whence p(x/α) < 1, but | f(x/α)| > 1, which is impossible
according to what has been proved.
□

78
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
1.11.8. Corollary. If E is a locally convex space and E0 is its vector subspace
with the induced topology, then every continuous linear functional f on E0 has
an extension to a functional f ∈E′. If E is a normed space, then there exists an
extension f ∈E′ such that ∥f∥= ∥f∥.
PROOF. The first assertion follows from the fact that |f| ⩽p on E0, where
p is some continuous seminorm (see Theorem 1.9.3). Hence the functional f on
E given by the previous theorem is the desired one. In the second assertion we
can assume that ∥f∥= 1 (if f ̸= 0). Taking p(x) = ∥x∥, we obtain |f(x)| ⩽p(x)
for all x ∈E0. For any extension with | f(x)| ⩽∥x∥we have ∥f∥⩽∥f∥. Since
∥f∥⩾∥f∥, we obtain ∥f∥= ∥f∥.
□
1.11.9. Remark. This corollary says that the functional f extends to all of
E with the same norm. Such an extension of the functional f is not unique in
the general case. Note, however, the following three cases where this extension is
unique (a justification is left as Exercise 1.12.46):
(i) E is a Euclidean space and E0 is its arbitrary vector subspace;
(ii) E = l∞, E0 = c0 (see § 1.12(v));
(iii) E is the space of all continuous linear operators on a Hilbert space H
equipped with the usual operator norm, E0 is the subspace of compact operators.
1.11.10. Theorem. A topological vector space E possesses a nonzero contin-
uous linear functional precisely when E has a convex neighborhood of zero that
is not the whole space E.
PROOF. Let f be such functional. Then the set V = {x: |f(x)| < 1} is
a convex neighborhood of zero by the continuity of f. The inequality V ̸= E
follows from the fact that if f(x) ̸= 0, then |f(λx)| ⩾1 for λ with a sufficiently
large absolute value, therefore, λx /∈V . Conversely, let V be a convex neighbor-
hood of zero, which without loss of generality can be taken open and symmetric
(by passing to V ∩(−V )), and let x0 /∈V . On the linear span of x0 the functional
f0(tx0) = t is estimated by the Minkowski functional pV of the set V . The Hahn–
Banch theorem gives a linear functional f on E with f(x0) = 1 and f ⩽pV . For
all x ∈V we have |f(x)| ⩽1, which means the continuity of f.
□
1.11.11. Theorem. For every point a in a locally convex space E and every
seminorm p on E, there exists a linear functional f such that
f(a) = p(a),
|f(x)| ⩽p(x)
∀x ∈E.
If the seminorm p is continuous, then the functional f is also continuous.
PROOF. On the one-dimensional subspace Da = {λa} we define the linear
functional ϕ(λa) = λp(a).
Any extension of ϕ from Da to all of E by the
Hahn–Banach theorem yields a functional f with the desired properties.
□
We emphasize that this theorem is not obvious even for the two-dimensional
plane.

1.11. The Hahn–Banach theorem: the analytic form
79
1.11.12. Corollary. Let E be a Hausdorff locally convex space and a ∈E.
If for every continuous linear functional f on E we have f(a) = 0, then a = 0.
We recall (see Definition 1.3.25) that the dual (the topological dual) to a topo-
logical vector space E is the vector space of all linear continuous functionals on E;
it is denoted by the symbol E′. We emphasize that the space E′ is not a priori
given any topology; various topologies on E′ will be discussed in Chapter 3. We
also recall that the algebraic dual to the vector space E is the space of all linear
functionals on E; in this book it is denoted by the symbol E∗.
From Corollary 1.11.12 and Example 1.3.26 we obtain the following fact.
1.11.13. Corollary. If E is a Hausdorff locally convex space, then the canon-
ical bilinear form
(f, x)→f(x),
E′×E →K
establishes a duality between the vector spaces E and E′.
Let us remark that for an arbitrary vector space E the same bilinear form
establishes a duality between the spaces E and E∗; this purely algebraic fact is
not connected with the Hahn–Banach theorem and is an obvious corollary of the
fact that every linear functional defined on a vector subspace of a vector space can
be extended to a linear functional on the whole space.
Note also that the local convexity of the space is essential, but not neces-
sary for the validity of the conclusion of Corollary 1.11.13. In particular, on the
topological vector space L0 from Example 1.3.16 there are no nonzero continuous
linear functionals (Exercise 1.12.29), so that in this case (L0)′ = {0}, hence L0
and (L0)′ cannot be put in duality by a bilinear form.
The same is true for the topological vector space Lp[0, 1] with 0 < p < 1 con-
sisting of measurable functions f on [0, 1] such that the function |f|p is integrable
on [0, 1]; the topology in Lp[0, 1] is defined by the quasi-norm
∥f∥p :=
 1
0
|f|p dt.
This space is not Hausdorff, but the associated Hausdorff space also has the trivial
zero dual: the convex hull of every ball Ur = {f : ∥f∥p < r} coincides with the
whole space Lp[0, 1]. Indeed, let f ∈Lp[0, 1]. Then f = (f1 + · · · + fn)/n,
where fj = nfI[sj,sj+1] and points 0 = s1 < s2 < · · · < sn+1 = 1 are such that
the integral of |f|p over [sj, sj+1] equals ∥f∥p
p/n. Hence ∥fj∥p
p = np−1∥f∥p
p and
fj ∈Ur for large n. For an example of a non locally convex topological vector
space E for which E and E′ are in duality by the canonical bilinear form one can
take the space lp, 0 < p < 1, consisting of infinite real sequences x = {xn} such
that 	∞
n=1 |xn|p < ∞; the topology in the space lp is defined by the quasi-norm
∥x∥p := 	∞
n=1 |xn|p.
1.11.14. Corollary. Let B be a closed absolutely convex subset of a real or
complex locally convex space E. Then, for every a /∈B, there exists a continuous
linear functional f on E such that |f(a)| > supx∈B |f(x)|.

80
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
PROOF. If E is real, then this is a partial case of Remark 1.10.11.
If E
is complex, then let f be a real linear functional on E satisfying the required
inequality. Then the complex functional corresponding to it by Lemma 1.11.4 is
the one we need.
□
1.11.15. Theorem. Let E be a real or complex locally convex space and let
V ⊂E be a convex set. Then V is closed in the weak topology σ(E, E′) precisely
when it is closed in the original topology of E. In addition, for every A ⊂E, the
boundedness of A is equivalent to the boundedness in the topology σ(E, E′).
PROOF. Since the topology σ(E, E′) is majorized by the original one, the
closedness of V in σ(E, E′) yields the closedness in the original topology. Sup-
pose now that V is closed in the original topology in E and a /∈V . Let us take
a functional f ∈E′ such that |f(a)| > α, α = sup{|f(x)|: x ∈V }. Then the
set {x ∈E : |f(x)| > α} is an open neighborhood of the point a in the topol-
ogy σ(E, E′) and does not intersect V . Similarly we prove the boundedness of A
bounded in σ(E, E′), since the closed absolutely convex hull of A is also bounded
in σ(E, E′).
□
Thus, the classes of convex closed sets in the space

E, σ(E, E′)

and in the
space E with the original topology coincide (but this does not mean the coinci-
dence of the classes of convex open sets!). In addition, we have the coincidence of
the classes of sets bounded in the original topology and in the topology σ(E, E′);
the latter are called weakly bounded.
The Hahn–Banach theorem enables us to construct topological complements to
finite-dimensional subspaces of locally convex spaces. If we are given a nonzero
vector v in an infinite-dimensional topological vector space E, then, certainly,
there is a linear subspace E0 not containing v and generating along with v the
whole space E (an algebraic complement of the linear span of v) . However, the
arising operator p: E →E0 of the algebraic projection onto E0 can be discontin-
uous. For example, this will be the case if on E there are no nonzero continuous
linear functions (since if x = x0+tv, where v0 ∈E0, then the functional l(x) := t
is continuous as soon as p: x →x0 is continuous).
1.11.16. Theorem. Let E be a Hausdorff locally convex space and let E0
be a finite-dimensional linear subspace in E. Then, there exists a closed linear
subspace E1 ⊂E such that E0 ∩E1 = {0}, E = E0⊕E1 and the operators of the
algebraic projection to E0 and E1 are continuous. Moreover, the latter is true for
every closed linear subspace E1 that gives E in the direct algebraic sum with E0.
PROOF. Let e1, . . . , en be a basis in E0. According to what has been proved
above, we can find functionals f1, . . . , fn ∈E′ such that fi(ej) = δij, i, j ⩽n.
Set E1 = 
n
i=1 f −1
i
(0). Then E1 is closed and E = E0⊕E1. Clearly, the operators
p0(x) = f1(x)e1 + · · · + fn(x)en and p1(x) = x −p1(x) are continuous and are
the projection operators to the subspaces E0 and E1.
Let now E1 be some closed linear subspace in E algebraically complement-
ing E0. Again we take a basis e1, . . . , en in E0. Since E1 is closed, for each ei the
subspace Hi that is the direct sum of E1 and the linear span of the vectors ej with

1.12. Complements and exercises
81
j ̸= i is also closed. Moreover, ei ̸∈Hi. Hence there exists a functional li ∈E′
such that li|Hi = 0 and li(ei) = 1. It is readily seen that E1 = 
n
i=1 l−1
i
(0), so
the functionals li play the role of fi in the first part of the proof.
□
In the general case the projection operators to the closed subspaces giving in
the direct sum the whole space can be discontinuous. However, there are important
classes of spaces for which such projection operators are automatically continuous
(see § 3.9).
Let us give yet another result complementing Proposition 1.9.8 (for a different
justification, see Kelley, Namioka [270, Section 16.8, p. 144]).
1.11.17. Theorem. Let A be an absolutely convex set in a locally convex
space E. The restriction of a linear function f ∈E∗to A is continuous precisely
when there exists a sequence of functionals fn ∈E′ uniformly converging to f on
the set A.
PROOF. Only the necessity of the indicated condition is not obvious. Passing
to the linear span of A, we can assume that E coincides with this linear span.
Then the Minkowski functional pA of the set A is a seminorm on E. Let ε > 0.
We have to find fε ∈E′ with supx∈A |f(x) −fε(x)| ⩽ε. It suffices to do this
for ε = 1, passing to f/ε. The continuity of f on A gives an absolutely convex
neighborhood of zero U with |f(x)| ⩽1 for all x ∈A ∩U. Hence
|f(x)| ⩽pA(x) + pU(x),
x ∈E.
Furthermore, pU(x−y)+f(y)+pA(y) ⩾−pU(x)+pU(y)+f(y)+pA(y), which
is estimated from below by −pU(x). Let us consider the function
p(x) := inf
y∈E[pU(x −y) + f(y) + pA(y)] ⩾−pU(x).
It is clear that p(0) = 0. In addition, the function p is sublinear. Indeed, we have
p(λx) = λp(x) for all λ > 0, since in the formula for p(λx) we can replace the
element y by λy. We have p(x1 + x2) ⩽p(x1) + p(x2) by the estimate
pU(x1 + x2 −y1 −y2) + f(y1 + y2) + pA(y1 + y2)
⩽pU(x1 −y1) + f(y1) + pA(y1) + pU(x2 −y2) + f(y2) + pA(y2)
for all x1, x2, y1, y2. Since pU(0) = pA(0) = 0, we have p(x) ⩽pU(x) and also
p(x) ⩽f(x) + pA(x). By the Hahn–Banach theorem there exists a functional
g ∈E∗with g ⩽p, moreover, g ∈E′, since p ⩽pU. Therefore, g ⩽f + pA.
Hence |f(x) −g(x)| ⩽1 for all x ∈A.
□
1.12. Complements and exercises
(i) Uniform spaces (81). (ii) Convex compacts (84). (iii) Fixed point theorems (86). (iv) Sequence
spaces (89). (v) Duals to Banach spaces (90). (vi) Separability properties (91). (vii) Continuous
selections and extensions (93). Exercises (94).
1.12(i). Uniform spaces
Topological vector spaces belong to a broader category of uniform spaces.
A space X is called uniform if it is endowed with a system X of subsets of the

82
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
product X ×X, called a uniformity or a system of entourages of the diagonal
ΔX = {(x, x): x ∈X}, satisfying the following conditions:
(i) ΔX ⊂U for all U ∈X,
(ii) if U, V ∈X, then U ∩V ∈X, and if U ∈X and U ⊂W ⊂X×X, then
one has W ∈X,
(iii) if U ∈X, then U −1 := {(y, x): (x, y) ∈U} ∈X,
(iv) for every U ∈X, there exists V ∈X such that, whenever (x, y) ∈V and
(y, z) ∈V for some x, y, z, then (x, z) ∈U.
A topological vector space E is equipped with the following uniformity: the
class X consists of all sets in E×E containing a set of the form {(x, y): x−y ∈U},
where U is a neighborhood of zero in E. Every metric space (not necessarily
vector) also possesses a natural uniformity formed by all sets containing subsets
of the form {(x, y): d(x, y) < r}, where r > 0 and d is the metric of the given
space.
Thus, this new category of spaces embraces both topological vector spaces
(and also topological groups) and metric spaces without any algebraic structure.
On the other hand, every uniform space X can be equipped with a topology
generated by the uniformity in the following way: the base of neighborhoods (not
necessarily open) of the point x in this topology consists of the sets of the form
U(x) := {y: (x, y) ∈U}, where U ∈X. Thus, a set W is open if every point
w ∈W is contained in W along with a neighborhood of such a form. However, not
every topology can be obtained from some uniformity: it is known that a topology
is generated by a uniformity precisely when the space is completely regular (see
Engelking [154, Chapter 8]).
A subset A of a uniform space (X, X) is equipped with the induced uniformity
consisting of the intersections A×A with the sets from X.
In uniform spaces some concepts encountered above become meaningful:
Cauchy (fundamental) nets, completeness, precompactness. A net {xt} in a uni-
form space (X, X) is called Cauchy if, for every U ∈X, there exists an index t0
such that (xt, xs) ∈U for all t, s ⩾t0. Convergence of a net is understood as
convergence in the generated topology. Hence one can introduce the notion of
a complete uniform space similarly to that of a topological vector space (in the
category of uniform spaces also arise completions). Similarly we introduce the
notion of a precompact or totally bounded set: this is a set A ⊂X such that for
every U ∈X there exists a finite cover of the set A by sets A1, . . . , An with the
property that Ai×Ai ⊂U.
By means of basis neighborhoods U(x) this can be expressed as follows: there
exist a1, . . . , an ∈A such that A ⊂n
i=1 U(ai).
For a topological vector space these notions coincide with earlier defined. In
more detail uniformities are discussed in the books Bourbaki [88], Edwards [150],
Engelking [154], and Kelley [268]. We mention here only few facts useful in
relation with the results discussed, especially connected to completeness and com-
pactness.

1.12. Complements and exercises
83
As in the case of topological vector spaces, compactness in a uniform space
is equivalent to precompactness and completeness.
1.12.1. Lemma. Let (X, X) be a uniform space.
(i) Every set A ⊂X with the property that each its infinite sequence has a
limit point in X is precompact. In particular, this is true if A is countably compact.
(ii) A set A in X has compact closure precisely when its closure is complete
and every infinite sequence in A possesses a limit point in X.
PROOF. (i) If A is not precompact, then there exist an entourage U ∈X
and an infinite sequence of points an ∈A for which an+1 ̸∈n
i=1 U(ai), where
U(a) := {x: (a, x) ∈U}. Thus, (ai, an+1) ̸∈U whenever i ⩽n. By assumption
this sequence has a limit point p ∈X. There is an entourage V ∈X with the
property that if (x, y) ∈V and (y, z) ∈V , then (x, z) ∈U. Passing to V ∩V −1,
we can assume that V = V −1. There is also some element am in the neighbor-
hood V (p), i.e., (p, am) ∈V , hence (am, p) ∈V . Then for all n > m we obtain
an ̸∈V (p), since the inclusion an ∈V (p), which means that (p, an) ∈V , implies
the inclusion (am, an) ∈U, which is false if m < n.
(ii) It is easy to verify that any compact set in the topology generated by a
uniformity is complete in the sense of uniform spaces. In addition, any compact
set is countably compact. If the set A has a complete closure and each its infi-
nite sequence possesses a limit point, then A is precompact, which implies the
precompactness of its closure, which by completeness is compact.
□
In particular, this assertion is true for topological vector spaces. We draw the
reader’s attention to the important circumstance that assertion (ii) does not mean
the equivalence of the countable compactness and compactness (unlike the case
of metric spaces). The point is that the countable compactness does not imply
completeness (but for complete sets equivalence holds by Proposition 1.8.5).
Let us consider such examples (recall that the sequential compactness implies
the countable compactness, but does not imply compactness and also does not
follow from compactness); we shall be interested in sets in locally convex spaces.
1.12.2. Example. (i) We construct a noncompact absolutely convex closed
sequentially compact set V in a sequentially complete locally convex space.
In the space IRIR take the subspace E of all functions that are nonzero in at
most countably many points. This subspace is sequentially complete, and the re-
quired set V consists of all functions x ∈E satisfying the condition supt |x(t)|⩽1.
The sequential compactness follows from the fact that every sequence of functions
in E is concentrated on a countable set, and the noncompactness of V is clear
from that the closure of V in IRIR consists of all functions x with supt |x(t)| ⩽1.
(ii) We construct an absolutely convex sequentially compact set V in a locally
convex space whose closure is not countably compact.
Let us take for E the linear subspace in IRIR consisting of all functions x such
that for some n ∈IN the set {t ∈[n, ∞): x(t) ̸= 0} is at most countable. Let
V be the set of all functions x ∈E that are nonzero in at most countably many
points and satisfy the inequality supt |x(t)| ⩽1. This absolutely convex set is

84
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
sequentially compact, but its closure is not, moreover, the closure is not countably
compact since it contains the sequence of functions xn = I(−∞,n] (the indicators
of (−∞, n]), which has no limit points in E, being converging in the space IRIR
to the function x(t) = 1 that does not belong to E.
1.12(ii). Convex compact sets
1.12.3. Definition. A point x of a set K in a real linear space E is called
an extreme point of this set if it is not contained in any interval (a, b) entirely
contained in K.
If the set K is convex, then a vector x ∈K is an extreme point precisely
when the equality x = ta + (1 −t)b, where t ∈[0, 1] and a, b ∈K, yields that
x = a or x = b.
More generally, a subset A of a convex set K is called an extreme subset of
the set K if the equality ta + (1 −t)b ∈A for some t ∈(0, 1) and some a, b ∈K
yields that a, b ∈A. Obviously, if an extreme set consists of a single point, then
this point is extreme.
In the three-dimensional Euclidean space the vertices of a closed cube are its
extreme points and its edges and faces are its extreme sets. Inner points of edges
and faces are not extreme points. An open cube has no extreme points.
1.12.4. Lemma. Let E be a real locally convex space, let K ⊂E be a
nonempty compact set, and let f be a continuous linear functional on E. Set
α := sup{f(x): x∈K}.
Then A = {x∈K : f(x) = α} is a nonempty extreme subset of the set K.
PROOF. Since K is compact and the functional f is continuous, there exists
x ∈K such that f(x) = α, i.e., the set A is nonempty. Suppose that for some
a, b ∈K, t ∈(0, 1) we have ta + (1 −t)b ∈A. We show that a, b ∈A. If, for
example, f(a) < f(b), then f(a) < α, hence
f(ta + (1 −t)b) = tf(a) + (1 −t)f(b) < tα + (1 −t)α = α,
which contradicts the inclusion ta + (1 −t)b ∈A.
□
The next result is classical in convex analysis.
1.12.5. Theorem. (THE KREIN–MILMAN THEOREM) Every nonempty con-
vex compact set in a real Hausdorff locally convex space is the closed convex hull
of the set of its extreme points.
PROOF. We show first that every nonempty compact set K in a Hausdorff
locally convex space E possesses extreme points. We prove that K contains at
least one extreme point. Denote by M the set of all nonempty closed extreme sub-
sets of K ordered in the following way: if A, B ∈M, then A ⩽B ⇐⇒A ⊃B.
Since K ∈M, we have M ̸= ∅.
Furthermore, if M0 ⊂M is a linearly ordered part, then the set 
A∈M0 A is
nonempty as the intersection of a family of compact subsets every finite subfamily

1.12. Complements and exercises
85
of which has a nonempty intersection. Thus, M satisfies the hypotheses of the
Kuratowski–Zorn theorem (it follows directly from the definition of an extreme
set that the intersection of any family of extreme sets is an extreme set). Hence
M has maximal elements.
Let B be one of them. Thus, B is a nonempty compact extreme subset in K
such that no proper closed subset of B is extreme in K. We now prove that B
contains precisely one point; this point will be extreme. Suppose that a, b ∈B,
a ̸= b. The Hahn–Banach theorem yields that there exists a continuous linear
functional f on E such that f(a) < f(b). By the lemma proven above the set
B1 = {x ∈B : f(x) = maxz∈B f(z)} is an extreme subset of the extreme subset
B of K, hence is an extreme subset of K itself. At the same time a /∈B1, so that
B1 is a proper subset of B. This contradicts the maximality of B.
Let now K be a convex compact set in a locally convex space E and let
C be the set of all extreme points of K. We have to prove that conv C = K.
To this end it suffices to show that K ⊂conv C (the inverse inclusion follows
immediately by the convexity and closedness of K and the inclusion C ⊂K).
Let a ∈K, a /∈conv C. By the Hahn–Banach theorem, there exists a continuous
linear functional g on E such that g(a) > max{g(x): x ∈conv C}. Then the set
{x ∈K : g(x) = max
x∈K g(x)}
is extreme in K. As shown above, it contains some extreme point, which at the
same time is an extreme point of K, being an extreme point of an extreme subset
of K. Let b be one of such points, then b /∈conv C, since
g(b) ⩾g(a) > max{g(x): x ∈conv C}.
Hence b /∈C. Thus, we have obtained a contradiction. This theorem is not obvious
even in IRn.
□
The following result of D.P. Milman is also of interest.
1.12.6. Theorem. Let K be a compact set in a locally convex space E such
that its closed convex hull C is compact (which holds automatically if E is quasi-
complete). Then every extreme point of the set C belongs to K.
PROOF. Let x be an extreme point of C and let U be a convex neighborhood
of zero. There exists points x1, . . . , xn in K with K ⊂n
i=1(xi + U). Let Vi be
the closed convex hull of K ∩(xi + U). The sets Vi are contained in C and
hence are compact. Therefore, the convex hull of their union is also compact and
hence equals C. Thus, x = 	n
i=1 λivi, where vi ∈Vi, λi ⩾0 and 	n
i=1 λi = 1.
Since x is an extreme point of C, we have x = vi for some i, whence we obtain
x ∈xi + U ⊂K + U. Since U was arbitrary and K is closed, we obtain x ∈K.
Finally, let us recall that by Proposition 1.8.13 in a quasi-complete space the closed
convex hull of any compact set is compact.
□
1.12.7.
Example. (i) In the space c0 the closed ball of a positive radius
has no extreme points. It follows that c0 is not the dual to any Banach space.
More precisely: there is no Banach space the dual of which can be linearly and

86
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
isometrically mapped onto c0. Indeed, if c0 could be identified as a Banach space
with the dual to some Banach space E (equipped with the dual norm), then the
unit ball in c0 would be compact in the topology σ(c0, E) by Theorem 3.1.4, hence
the Krein–Milman theorem could be applied to it. Moreover, the space c0 cannot
be linearly homeomorphic to the dual of a Banach space, but this is proved by a
different method (see Exercise 1.12.87).
(ii) More generally, an infinite-dimensional Banach space B is not linearly
isometric to the dual of a Banach space if its closed unit ball centered at zero has
only finitely many extreme points: in this case their closed convex hull is finite-
dimensional. Since the unit ball of the space C[a, b] of continuous functions on
[a, b] with the norm maxt |x(t)| has precisely two extreme points (ϕ(t) = 1 and
ψ(t) = −1), then C[a, b] is not a dual Banach space. Moreover, C[a, b] is not
even linearly homeomorphic to a dual space (see Exercise 1.12.87).
On convex compact sets, see also § 5.6.
1.12(iii). Fixed point theorems
For mappings of convex compact sets there are important fixed point theorems
(see also Exercise 1.12.86), which generalize the classical Bohl–Brouwer theorem
for IRn (see Dunford, Schwartz [145, p. 468]).
1.12.8. Theorem. (SCHAUDER–TYCHONOFF THEOREM) If E is a Hausdorff
locally convex space, K ⊂E is a convex compact set and f : K →K is a
continuous mapping, then there exists an element a ∈K such that f(a) = a (this
element is called a fixed point of the mapping f).
PROOF. Let P be the family of all continuous seminorms on E. We show
that for every seminorm p ∈P the set Fp :=

z ∈K : p

f(z) −z

= 0

is nonempty.
If this is done, then it remains to observe that the sets Fp are
closed (by the continuity of f and p), hence they are compact, moreover, for every
finite collection p1, . . . , pn the intersection Fp1 ∩· · · ∩Fpn is nonempty, since
p1 + · · · + pn ∈P. Hence the intersection of all Fp is nonempty as well, and any
its element is a fixed point.
Thus, we fix p ∈P. It suffices to verify that for every ε > 0 there exists
a point zε with p

f(zε) −zε

< ε, since then the sequence {z1/n} has a limit
point z ∈K, for which by the continuity of f and p we obtain p

f(z) −z

= 0.
By the compactness of K there exist points a1, . . . , an ∈K such that the sets
Ui := {x: p(x −ai) < ε/2} cover K. For every i = 1, . . . , n we define a
function ψi on E as follows: ψi(x) = ε −p(x −ai) if p(x −ai) ⩽ε, ψi(x) = 0
if p(x −ai) > ε. It is readily seen that the functions ψi are continuous, moreover,
at every point of K at least one of them does not vanish. Therefore, the functions
αi(x) := ψi(x)/Ψ(x), Ψ(x) = 	n
j=1 ψj(x) are continuous on the set K. We
observe that 0 ⩽αi(x) ⩽1 and 	n
i=1 αi(x) = 1 on K. The mapping
g(x) :=
n

i=1
αi

f(x)

ai

1.12. Complements and exercises
87
is also continuous and takes K to the finite-dimensional convex set V generated
by the points a1, . . . , an. By the aforementioned Bohl–Brouwer theorem for IRn
there exists a point y ∈V ⊂K with g(y) = y. We have
f(y) −y = f(y) −g(y) =
n

i=1
αi

f(y)

[f(y) −ai],
since 	n
i=1 αi

f(y)

= 1. Therefore,
p

f(y) −y

⩽
n

i=1
αi

f(y)

p

f(y) −ai

.
In the latter sum we have αi

f(y)

= 0 whenever p

f(y) −ai

> ε. Therefore,
p

f(y) −y

⩽ε, as required.
□
1.12.9. Corollary. Let V be a closed convex set in a complete (or quasi-com-
plete) locally convex space and let f : V →V be a continuous mapping such that
f(V ) has compact closure. Then, there is an element a ∈V such that f(a) = a.
PROOF. The closed convex hull of f(V ) is compact by the completeness
of E (quasi-completeness is also enough, see Proposition 1.8.13), moreover, it is
mapped into itself by f. By the previous theorem there is a fixed point in it.
□
The following Markov–Kakutani theorem deals with affine mappings.
1.12.10. Theorem. Let K be a convex compact set in a Hausdorff topological
vector space E and let G be a family of pairwise commuting continuous mappings
from K to K such that
g

λx + (1 −λ)y

= λg(x) + (1 −λ)g(y)
for all x, y ∈K, g ∈G.
Then, there exists x0 ∈K with g(x0) = x0 for all g ∈G.
PROOF. For every g ∈G and n ∈IN we define a mapping gn : K →K by
the formula gn = n−1(I+g+g2+· · ·+gn−1). This is a continuous affine mapping.
Let us consider the set G0 of transformations of K that are compositions of finitely
many mappings of the form gn for all possible elements g ∈G and n ∈IN. It
is clear that the class G0 satisfies the same conditions as G. We show that the
intersection of the compact sets f(K), where f ∈G0, is nonempty.
To this
end, it suffices to observe that the intersection of every finite collection of such
sets is nonempty, since if f1, . . . , fm ∈G0, then f = f1 ◦· · ·◦fm ∈G0 and
f(K) ⊂fi(K) for all i ⩽m by the commutativity of fi. Let us take any element
x0 in the indicated intersection and show that it is the required one. Fix g ∈G.
For every n, by construction there exists an element y ∈K such that
x0 = gn(y) = n−1
y + g(y) + · · · + gn−1(y)

.
Hence g(x0) = n−1
g(y) + g2(y) + · · · + gn(y)

, whence we obtain
g(x0) −x0 = n−1
gn(y) −y

∈n−1(K −K).
Since this inclusion is true for all n, we have g(x0) = x0 by the condition that
E is Hausdorff, because for every balanced neighborhood of zero V and every
compact set Q there exists n such that n−1Q ⊂V by the boundedness of Q.
□

88
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
Kakutani showed that the commutativity of the mappings can be omitted if
they are equicontinuous. This holds if E is a normed space and G ⊂L(E) is
bounded. For a proof, see Dunford, Schwartz [145, p. 457].
1.12.11. Theorem. Let K be a convex compact set in a Hausdorff locally con-
vex space E and let G be a group of linear mappings from K to K equicontinuous
on K. Then, there exists x0 ∈K with g(x0) = x0 for all g ∈G.
The following theorem due to Kakutani–Ky Fan generalizes the Schauder–
Tychonoff theorem to multivalued mappings (the included proof gives also another,
though close, justification of the latter).
1.12.12. Theorem. Let K be a convex compacts set in a Hausdorff locally
convex space E and let Φ be a multivalued mapping associating to every x ∈K a
nonempty convex compact set Φ(x) ⊂K. Suppose that Φ is upper semicontinuous
in the sense that if x ∈K and an open set U contains Φ(x), then there is a
neighborhood V of the point x such that Φ(v) ⊂U for all v ∈V ∩K. Then, there
exists a point x0 ∈K such that x0 ∈Φ(x0).
PROOF. We slightly modify our proof of the Schauder–Tychonoff theorem.
For any fixed seminorm p ∈P and r > 0 let Kp,r denote the set of points
z ∈K such that z ∈Φ(z) + rV , V = {p < 1}. This set is closed, which is
easily deduced from the upper semicontinuity of Φ. If all sets Kp,r are nonempty,
then, as in the proof of the Schauder–Tychonoff theorem, their intersection will be
nonempty. Using the closedness of Φ(x) we then obtain that any element in this
intersection is the required one. We now verify that Kp,r is nonempty. By the
upper semicontinuity there is a neighborhood of zero W = {q < 1}, where q ∈P,
such that
Φ(x0 + w) ⊂Φ(x0) + rV/2
for all w ∈W.
Set U = W ∩V . Let ε > 0. Let us take a1, . . . , an such that
K ⊂
n

i=1
(ai + ε2−1U).
Take any yi ∈Φ(ai) and continuous bump functions αi corresponding to the
neighborhoods ai + ε2−1U as in the proof of the Schauder–Tychonoff theorem.
The mapping gε(x) = 	n
i=1 αi(x)yi is continuous and has a fixed point xε. Let
x0 be a limit point of {x1/m}. Let us show that x0 ∈Kp,r. We shall deal only
with indices m for which x1/m ∈x0 + U. Among them there exists m > 4/r
with x1/m ∈x0 + U/4. If αi(x1/m) > 0, then x1/m ∈ai + m−1U, whence
x0 −ai ∈W and yi ∈Φ(x0) + rV/2. Hence x1/m is a convex combination of
the vectors αi(x1/m)yi, where yi ∈Φ(x0) + rV/2. Hence x0 ∈Φ(x0) + rV .
□
1.12.13. Corollary. Let S be one more convex compact set in E and let a
continuous function f on K×S be such that the functions x →f(x, y) are convex
and the functions y →f(x, y) are concave, i.e., the functions y →−f(x, y) are
convex. Then
min
x∈K max
y∈S f(x, y) = max
y∈S min
x∈K f(x, y).

1.12. Complements and exercises
89
PROOF. Let us apply the previous theorem to the map Φ: (x, y) →(Ay, Bx),
where
Ay = {u ∈K : f(u, y) = min
k∈K f(k, y)},
Bx = {z ∈S : f(x, z) = max
s∈S f(x, s)}.
It follows from our assumptions that Ay and Bx are nonempty, convex and closed.
We verify that Φ is upper semicontinuous. Let x ∈K and let Bx belong to an
open set U. The function g(u) = maxs∈S f(u, s) is continuous on K. If there
is no neighborhood V ∋x such that Bv ⊂U for all v ∈V , then there exists
a net xα →x for which there are yα ∈S\U with f(xα, yα) = g(xα). By the
compactness of S\U we can assume that yα →y ∈S\U, passing to a subnet.
Then f(x, y) = g(x) contrary to the fact that y ̸∈U. The reasoning with Ay is
similar. Thus, the previous theorem gives a point (x0, y0) for which
f(x0, y0) = min
k∈K f(k, y0) = max
s∈S f(x0, s).
This is the required point, since the left side of the equality to be proven is always
not smaller than the right side by the inequality f(x, y) ⩾mins∈S f(x, s) for all
elements x ∈K, y ∈S, and the previous relation gives the desired estimates
f(x0, y0) ⩽maxs∈S mink∈K f(k, s), f(x0, y0) ⩾mink∈K maxs∈S f(k, s).
□
1.12(iv). Sequence spaces
In addition to the already encountered spaces of all sequences IR∞and rapidly
decreasing sequences Σ (Example 1.3.19) and Banach spaces lp and c0, in the
theory and applications some other locally convex spaces of sequences are used.
1.12.14. Example. The important class of K¨othe spaces of sequences is con-
structed by the following method. A set P of real sequences α = (αn) is called a
K¨othe set if αn ⩾0 and for every n ∈IN there exists α ∈P with αn > 0, and for
every two elements α, β ∈P there exists γ ∈P with max(αn, βn) ⩽γn for all n.
This K¨othe set is used to form the K¨othe space of sequences (real or complex)
Λ(P) :=

x = (xn): (αnxn) ∈l1 ∀α ∈P

.
A natural collection of seminorms on the K¨othe space Λ(P) consists of the func-
tions pα(x) = 	∞
n=1 |αnxn|.
For example, if P consists of the single sequence of units, then Λ(P) = l1,
and if we take all sequences of the form αn = nk, k ∈IN, then we obtain the
space Σ from Example 1.3.19.
Various classes of abstract spaces can be often described by means of K¨othe
spaces and their subspaces (see Jarchow [237], Meise, Vogt [339], Pietsch [388]).
Let us give one important and typical example.
Let C∞[0, 1] be the space of all infinitely differentiable functions on [0, 1], let
C∞
0 [0, 1] be its subspace consisting of functions vanishing with all derivatives at
the endpoints, and let C∞
2π be the space of all infinitely differentiable functions f
on [0, 2π] for which f (k)(0) = f (k)(2π) for all k ⩾0. In all these spaces we
consider the topology of uniform convergence of all derivatives.

90
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
1.12.15.
Theorem. The spaces S(IR1), C∞
2π, C∞[0, 1] and C∞
0 [0, 1] are
isomorphic to the space Σ.
The same is true for similarly defined spaces of
functions of n variables.
PROOF. For simplicity we consider the one-dimensional case. An isomor-
phism between Σ and C∞
2π is defined by means of the Fourier expansion:
f(t) = a0 +
∞

n=1
[an cos nt + bn sin nt],
j(f) = (a0, a1, b1, a2, b2, . . .).
Isomorphisms with other spaces are constructed in a more complicated way, but
also by means of suitable bases (see details in Jarchow [237], Pietsch [388], and
Vladimirov [549]). For example, in the space S(IR1) one can use the basis of
Hermite functions.
□
1.12(v). Duals to Banach spaces
For most of Banach spaces used in applications sufficiently explicit descrip-
tions of the dual spaces are known. Here we mention a number of such results;
their proofs can be found in many texts (including [65] and [72]).
The following spaces are Banach:
l∞is the space of bounded sequences (real or complex) with finite norm
x = (xn) →supn |xn|;
c0 is the closed subspace in l∞consisting of all sequences with lim
n→∞xn = 0;
lp, where 1 ⩽p < ∞, is the space of sequences x = (xn) (real or complex)
for which
∥x∥p :=
 ∞

n=1
|xn|p1/p
< ∞;
the function x →∥x∥p is a norm on lp;
the space l2 is even Hilbert with the scalar product
(x, y) =
∞

n=1
xnyn;
the space Cb(T) of bounded continuous functions on a topological space T
with the norm ∥x∥= supt∈T |(x(t)|;
the space Lp(μ), where 1 ⩽p < ∞and μ is a nonnegative measure on a space
(T, A), consists of the equivalence classes (f ∼g if f = g almost everywhere) of
measurable functions f for which the function |f|p is integrable with respect to μ;
the norm on Lp(μ) is given by the formula
∥f∥p =

T
|f(t)|p μ(dt)
1/p
;
this expression does not depend on our choice of a representative in a equivalence
class; in a special way one defines the space L∞(μ) consisting of equivalence
classes of measurable functions having a bounded modification; we set
∥f∥∞= inf
f∼f
sup
t∈T
| f(t)|.

1.12. Complements and exercises
91
There are canonical isomorphisms
c′
0 = l1, (l1)′ = l∞, (Lp)′ = Lq, p−1 + q−1 = 1, p ∈[1, ∞),
and the general form of a continuous functional is this:
on c0: l(x) = 	∞
n=1 xnyn, (yn) ∈l1,
on l1: l(x) = 	∞
n=1 xnyn, (yn) ∈c0,
on lp, p ∈[1, ∞): l(x) = 	∞
n=1 xnyn, (yn) ∈lq, p−1 + q−1 = 1,
on Lp(μ), p∈(1, ∞): l(x) =

T
x(t)y(t) μ(dt), y∈Lq(μ), p−1 + q−1 = 1,
on L1(μ) for a finite or σ-finite measure:
l(x) =

T
x(t)y(t) μ(dt),
y ∈L∞(μ),
on C(K) = Cb(K) for compact K:
l(x) =

T
x(t) μ(dt), where μ is a
bounded Borel measure on K.
The duals to l∞and L∞(μ), where μ is Lebesgue measure, are not isomorphic
to l1 and L1(μ), respectively; they can be described by means of finitely additive
measures.
1.12(vi). Separability properties
Here we prove two useful results for separable spaces.
1.12.16. Proposition. Let E and F be topological vector spaces such that F
is metrizable and let H be an equicontinuous set in L(E, F). If E is separable,
then the uniform structure of pointwise convergence in H is metrizable. If F is
also separable, then H is separable in the topology of pointwise convergence.
PROOF. Let {an} be a countable everywhere dense set in E and let d be a
translation invariant metric on F defining its topology. Set
d0(f, g) =
∞

n=1
2−n min

1, d

f(an), g(an)

,
f, g ∈H.
For a neighborhood of zero U = {f : d

f(xi), 0

< ε, i = 1, . . . , n} in L(E, F),
where xi ∈E and ε > 0, we can find an open ball W in the metric d0 centered
at zero such that if f, g ∈H and f −g ∈W, then f −g ∈U. Indeed, the equi-
continuity of H gives a neighborhood of zero V ⊂E such that d

f(v), 0

< ε/4
for all v ∈V and f ∈H. Let us take k such that the points x1, . . . , xn are covered
by the sets a1 + V, . . . , ak + V . Finally, let r = 2−kε/4. If now f, g ∈H and
d0(f, g) < r, then we obtain d

f(xi), g(xi)

< ε for all i ⩽n. Indeed, for every
i ⩽n there exists a point aj with some j ⩽k such that xi ∈aj + V , whence on
account of the equality d(u, v) = d(u −v, 0) we find that
d

f(xi), g(xi)

⩽d

f(xi), f(aj)

+ d

f(aj), g(aj)

+ d

g(aj), g(xi)

⩽ε/4 + 2kr + ε/4 < ε.

92
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
It is also clear that every ball W in the metric d0 centered at zero contains a
neighborhood of zero U of the indicated form.
The second assertion follows from the fact that the countable power of a
separable metric space is separable.
□
1.12.17. Proposition. Let E be a separable locally convex space E and let
p be a continuous seminorm on E. Set U = {x: p(x) ⩽1}. Then, there exists a
sequence {fn} ⊂U ◦:= {f ∈E′ : supu∈U |f(u)| ⩽1} such that
p(x) = sup
n |fn(x)|,
x ∈E.
PROOF. The space E contains an everywhere dense sequence {xn}.
For
every n by the Hahn–Banach theorem we have p(xn) = sup{|f(xn)|: f ∈U ◦}.
Hence U ◦contains a sequence fnm such that p(xn) = supm |fnm(xn)|.
The
constructed countable set can be enumerated as a single sequence {fn}. It is clear
that we have
q(x) := sup
n |fn(x)| ⩽p(x)
for all x ∈E
and that q(xn) = p(xn) for all n. On the other hand, for every x ∈E for any
fixed ε > 0 there exists an element xm with p(x −xm) < ε, hence
p(x) < p(xm) + ε = q(xm) + ε ⩽q(xm −x) + q(x) + ε
⩽p(xm −x) + q(x) + ε ⩽q(x) + 2ε,
which gives the estimate p(x) ⩽q(x), since ε was arbitrary.
A shorter justification follows from the results in § 3.2: the set U ◦is metriz-
able compact in the topology σ(E′, E), hence taking a countable everywhere dense
subset {fn}, we obtain the desired representation. Indeed, p ⩽supn |fn|. On the
other hand, if x ∈U, then there is f ∈E′ with f(x) = p(x) and |f| ⩽p, i.e.,
f ∈U ◦, which gives a subsequence {ni} with p(x) = f(x) = lim
i→∞fni(x).
□
1.12.18. Proposition. Let E be a normed space, let F be a norm separable
linear subspace in E′, and let ξ be a norm continuous linear function on F. Then,
there is a sequence {xn} ⊂E such that
ξ(f) = lim
n→∞f(xn)
∀f ∈F.
PROOF. We can assume that ∥ξ∥⩽1.
Let us take a sequence of ele-
ments {fk} ⊂F of unit norm the linear span of which is dense in F. Next,
by induction we construct a sequence {xn} in the unit ball U in E such that
ξ(fk) = lim
n→∞fk(xn) for each k. Set x1 = 0. If x1, . . . , xn are already found, we
take xk+1 ∈U such that
|ξ(fi) −fi(xk+1)| ⩽k−1
for i = 1, . . . , k + 1.
This is possible, since by the Hahn–Banach theorem there is an element η ∈E′′ for
which ∥η∥⩽1 and ξ = η|F . Moreover, η belongs to the closure of the image of
U under the canonical embedding E ⊂E′′ in the topology σ(E′′, E′). Otherwise
we could find an element g ∈E′ such that |g(u)| ⩽1 for all u ∈U and η(g) > 1;
then we would have ∥g∥⩽1, hence ∥η∥> 1. Therefore, the neighborhood of

1.12. Complements and exercises
93
η defined by the inequalities |ζ(fi) −η(fi)| < k−1, i = 1, . . . , k + 1, contains
a vector from the image of U, so that the corresponding vector from U can be
taken for xk+1.
Since the linear span of {fk} is dense in F, we obtain that
ξ(f) = η(f) = lim
n→∞f(xn) for all functionals f ∈F.
□
1.12(vii). Continuous selections and extensions
Here we present a number of useful results connected with constructing in-
verse mappings to non injective mappings and extensions of continuous mappings.
Suppose we are given a surjective mapping f : X→Y . A mapping g: Y →X is
called a right inverse for the mapping f if f

g(y)

= y for all y ∈Y . It is often of
interest to have continuous right inverse mappings for continuous mappings, which
is closely related to constructing single-valued branches of multi-valued mappings
(such single-valued branches are called selections). A classical result in this area is
the following Michael selection theorem (see Michael [342] or Repovˇs, Semenov
[415, p. 190]).
1.12.19. Theorem. Let M be a metrizable space, let P be a complete metriz-
able closed subset of a locally convex space E, and let Φ: M →2P be a lower
semicontinuous mapping with values in the set of nonempty convex closed subsets
of P, i.e., for every open set U ⊂P the set Φ−1(U) := {x ∈M : Φ(x)∩U ̸= ∅}
is open. Then, there is a continuous mapping f : M →P such that f(x) ∈Φ(x)
for all x.
It was shown by Filippov [169], [170] that the closedness of P cannot be
omitted even if P is a Gδ-set in l2 (hence is complete with some metric defining
the same topology).
1.12.20. Corollary. Let T : P →M be a continuous affine mapping from a
complete metrizable closed convex set P in a locally convex space to a metrizable
set M in a locally convex space such that T is open, i.e., takes open sets to open
sets. Then T possesses a continuous right inverse mapping.
PROOF. We verify that the mapping from the space M to 2P taking x to the
set Φ(x) := T −1(x) satisfies the hypotheses of Michael’s theorem. The sets Φ(x)
are closed in P by the continuity of T and are convex, since T is affine. Let us
verify that if U ⊂P is open, then the set Φ−1(U) indicated in the theorem is open
in M. For every x ∈Φ−1(U), there is u ∈Φ(x) ∩U, i.e., Tu = x, but T(U)
is open in M by assumption, hence the point x is contained in T(U) along with
some neighborhood V , whence V ⊂Φ−1(U), which is easily verified.
□
The following corollary is also useful.
1.12.21. Corollary. Let X0 be a closed linear subspace of a Fr´echet space X
and let π: X →X/X0 be the canonical projection onto the quotient . Then π
has a continuous right inverse mapping (possibly, nonlinear).
1.12.22. Example. In the situation of the previous corollary, for every com-
pact set K ⊂X/X0 there exists a compact set S ⊂X such that π(S) = K.
Indeed, taking a continuous right inverse mapping ϕ to π, we can set S = ϕ(K).

94
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
In Exercise 1.12.84 the reader is suggested to obtain the last assertion directly,
moreover, even without the condition that the space is locally convex. In Corol-
lary 3.9.14 and Example 3.9.15 the result will be extended to general continuous
linear surjections of Fr´echet spaces.
The next important result is the Dugundji extension theorem [142].
1.12.23. Theorem. Let Z be a closed subset of a metric space M, let E be
a locally convex space, and let f : Z →E be a continuous mapping. Then, there
exists a continuous mapping f from the space M to the convex hull of f(Z) such
that f coincides with f on Z.
A detailed proof can be found in Borsuk [85, Chapter III, § 7].
If E is a Fr´echet space and extensions may take values in the closure of
the convex hull of f(Z) (no closure is taken in the theorem), then this assertion
follows at once from Michael’s selection theorem: it suffices to set Φ(x) = f(x)
for all x ∈Z and for any x ̸∈Z take for Φ(x) the closed convex hull of f(Z). It
is easy to verify that Φ is lower semicontinuous.
The following corollary is useful in applications.
1.12.24. Corollary. For every closed convex set V in a metrizable locally
convex space E, there exists a continuous mapping r: E →V that is identical
on V (such a mapping is called a retraction and V is called a retract).
Borges [84] extended the Dugundji theorem to the broader class of stratifiable
spaces (see § 3.12(v)), whence it follows that every closed convex set in a stratifi-
able locally convex space is its retract. However, not every convex compact set in
an arbitrary locally convex space is its retract (see Sipacheva [467]).
Exercises
1.12.25.◦Show that the topology of a locally convex space can be defined by a family
of seminorms of the minimal possible cardinality.
HINT: using Zorn’s lemma in a given family of seminorms generating the topology
pick a maximal subfamily M with the property that no seminorm in M is dominated by a
constant multiplied by a sum of finitely many other seminorms in M. Check that any two
such maximal families are of the same cardinality (use the fact that the set of finite subsets
of an infinite set has the same cardinality as the given set).
1.12.26.◦Justify Example 1.3.6.
1.12.27.◦Give an example of a convergent net in a topological space such that this net
consists of countably many elements, but does not contain a convergent subsequence.
HINT: in the space of all functions on [0, 1] with the topology of pointwise convergence
take the countable set of functions sin(nt) and observe that the zero function is its limit
point, which gives a convergent net of these functions.
Show that no subsequence in
{sin(nt)} converges pointwise.
1.12.28.◦Prove that every ultrafilter containing a compact set converges to a point of
this set.
1.12.29.◦Prove that on the topological vector space L0 from Example 1.3.16 there are
no nonzero continuous linear functionals.

1.12. Complements and exercises
95
1.12.30.◦Show that on the space K(IRn) introduced in Example 1.3.17 there is no
metric with respect to which convergence of sequences coincides with convergence of
sequences in the topology τK.
HINT: take a nonzero element ϕ and for each k ∈IN take the sequence of functions
ϕk,j(x) = j−1ϕ(x/k) converging to zero in K(IRn); observe that one cannot choose
jk →∞such that ϕk,jk →0.
1.12.31.◦Show that the space D(IRn) is not metrizable by considering the functions
ϕj,k(x) = k−1ϕ(x/j), where ϕ ∈D(IRn), ϕ ̸≡0, and observing that ϕj,k →0 as
k →∞, but {ϕj,kj} does not converge whenever kj →∞.
1.12.32. Let E be a vector space, let P0 be the set of all seminorms on E, and let P1
be the set of all quasi-norms on E. Prove that if the algebraic dimension of E is finite or
countable, then the topologies in E defined by the family of seminorms P0 and the family
of quasi-norms P1 coincide.
1.12.33.◦Prove that the closure of a set A in a topological vector space E coincides
with the intersection 
U∈U(A + U), where U is a basis of neighborhoods of zero in E.
1.12.34.◦Prove that the closure of a linear subspace in a topological vector space is a
linear subspace.
1.12.35. Let E0 be a linear subspace in a real linear space E, let p be a seminorm
on E, and let p0 be a seminorm on E0 such that p0(x) ⩽p(x) for all x ∈E0. Prove that
there exists a seminorm p1 on E such that p1|E0 = p0 and p1 ⩽p.
HINT: consider the Minkowski functional of the absolutely convex hull of the union
of the sets {p0 ⩽1} and {p1 ⩽1}.
1.12.36. (i) Let M be a bounded set in a topological vector space E the topology of
which is defined by a translation invariant metric. Prove that M is bounded with respect to
this metric. (ii) (A.V. Shaposhnikov) Construct a metric d on l2 defining the same topology
as the usual norm on l2, but having the property that the unit ball with respect to the usual
metric is unbounded with respect to the metric d.
HINT: (ii) take continuous functions fn : l2 →[0, n] with supports in the balls of
radius 1 centered at 3en such that fn(3en) = n, where {en} is the standard basis; set
f = 	∞
n=1 fn and consider the metric d(x, y) = ∥F(x) −F(y)∥, where F : l2 →l2,
F(x) =

f(x), x1, x2, . . .

, x = (xn).
1.12.37.◦Prove that in any topological vector space any Cauchy sequence is bounded.
1.12.38.◦Prove that a set in a locally convex space is bounded precisely when every
continuous seminorm is bounded on it.
1.12.39.◦Show that any sublinear functional on a vector space with finite values is
continuous in the strongest locally convex topology.
1.12.40.◦Prove that a convex set in IRn is closed precisely when its intersections with
all closed intervals are closed.
1.12.41.◦Let E be a nonzero topological vector space and let Γ be a closed hyperplane
in E. Prove that the corresponding closed halfspaces are closed and the corresponding open
halfspaces are open, moreover, the closed halfspaces are the closures of the open ones.
1.12.42.◦Let V be a convex everywhere dense set in a real topological vector space.
Prove that for every closed hyperplane H the set H ∩V is dense in H.

96
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
1.12.43. (i) Prove that in every locally convex space E on which there is a discontinu-
ous linear functional (for example, in every infinite-dimensional metrizable locally convex
space) there exist two disjoint everywhere dense convex sets A and B such that A∪B = E.
(ii) Show that the space IR∞
0
of all finite sequences (the union of all IRn) with the
strongest locally convex topology can be also represented as the union of two disjoint
everywhere dense convex sets, although all functionals on this spaces are continuous.
(iii) Show that every Hausdorff separable locally convex space admits the above rep-
resentation.
HINT: (i) take A = {f < 0} and B = {f ⩾0}, where f is a discontinuous
linear function. (ii) In IR∞
0
consider the set A of all vectors with a positive last nonzero
coordinate and the set B of all vectors with a non-positive last coordinate. (iii) Modify
the construction in (ii) as follows (see Bourbaki [87, Chapter II, § 1, Exercise 19]): take
a linearly independent countable dense set {vn} in E (one can assume that all functionals
on E are continuous, so we can equip E with the strongest locally convex topology),
consider the set A1 of finite sums 	 cnvn with cN > 0, where N is the maximal number
of nonzero coefficients, take B1 correspondingly. Finally, apply Theorem 1.10.1.
1.12.44. Prove that in any topological vector space the boundary of any convex set
with a nonempty interior is nowhere dense.
1.12.45. Let V be a connected closed set in a Hausdorff topological vector space such
that every point x ∈V has a closed neighborhood W such that W ∩V is convex. Prove
that V is convex.
1.12.46. Justify Remark 1.11.9.
1.12.47.◦Prove that the set of inner points of any balanced set in a topological vector
space is balanced.
1.12.48.◦Let X and Y be topological vector spaces and let T : X →Y be a linear
mapping taking some neighborhood of zero to a bounded set. Prove that T is continuous.
1.12.49.◦Let a seminorm p on a locally convex space be bounded on some nonempty
open set. Prove that p is continuous.
1.12.50.◦Prove that a linear mapping A from a topological vector space to IRn is
continuous if its kernel Ker A is closed.
1.12.51. (i) Let E = C1
0(IR) be the space of all continuously differentiable functions
with compact support equipped with the family of seminorms supt |f ′(t)|, supt |g(t)f(t)|,
where g ∈C(IR). Show that E is complete and l(f) = 	∞
n=1 f ′(n) is a discontinuous
linear function that is weakly sequentially continuous, i.e., takes sequences weakly converg-
ing to zero to sequences weakly converging to zero. (ii) Show that this is impossible in a
Banach space with the weak topology.
HINT: (i) if {fα} is a Cauchy net, then it converges uniformly along with derivatives
to a function f ∈C1(IR). Moreover, f has compact support, since otherwise one can find
g ∈C(IR) with g(tn)f(tn) = 1 for some sequence tn > n. Hence fα →f in E. For a
similar reason, any convergent sequence in E has uniformly bounded supports, which yields
the sequential continuity of l. However, l is not continuous, since it cannot be estimated via
finitely many seminorms of the indicated form. One can also use the space D(IR1) with
the topology τ2 from Exercise 2.10.49(ii). (ii) A sequentially continuous functional on a
Banach space with the weak topology is norm continuous, hence is weakly continuous.

1.12. Complements and exercises
97
1.12.52. Prove that a locally convex space is sequentially complete precisely when
in this space all sequences fundamental with respect to each seminorm from some family
generating its topology converge. This is also equivalent to convergence of all sequences
fundamental with respect to each continuous seminorm.
1.12.53. Let B be a nonempty closed convex set in a Hausdorff topological vector
space E, let K ⊂E be a nonempty compact set, and let A ⊂E be a set such that
A + K ⊂B + K. Prove that A ⊂B. In particular, if A is also nonempty, closed and
convex and A + K = B + K, then A = B.
HINT: it suffices to consider the case A = {0}; then one can take k1 ∈K and find
inductively points kn ∈K and bn ∈B such that kn = bn + kn+1; observe that we have
n−1(b1 + · · · + bn) = n−1(k1 −kn+1) →0, hence 0 ∈B, since B is convex and closed.
1.12.54. Let A be a convex compact set and let B be a closed bounded convex set in
a Hausdorff locally convex space. Prove that the convex hull of A ∪B is closed.
HINT: consider a limit point z of this convex hull, assume that z = 0, observe
that there are a convex neighborhood of zero V and r ∈(0, 1) for which the inclusion
tx + (1 −t)y ∈V with x ∈K, y ∈B, t ∈[0, 1] yields that t ⩽r (otherwise 0 ∈K);
finally, for each convex neighborhood of zero W consider the set of triples (t, x, y) such
that tx + (1 −t)y ∈W ∩V , t ∈[0, r], x ∈K, y ∈B, and pick a net of points of this
form converging to zero.
1.12.55. Let S be a compact set of diameter d in a normed space E. Show that the
distance between any two supporting hyperplanes to S is not greater than d, and there exist
points a, b ∈S such that ∥a−b∥= d and there are supporting hyperplanes passing through
them and having distance d between them.
HINT: the first assertion is obvious. For the proof of the second take a, b ∈S with
∥a −b∥= d and find f ∈E′ with ∥f∥= 1 and f(b −a) = d. Let α = minx∈S f(x),
β = maxx∈S f(x). Then L1 = f −1(α) and L2 = f −1(β) are supporting hyperplanes
such that the distance between them equals β −α ⩾f(b) −f(a) = d. Hence this distance
is d and a ∈L1, b ∈L2.
1.12.56. Show that on every infinite-dimensional normed space there exist norms
defining strictly stronger and strictly weaker topologies, respectively.
1.12.57. Prove that the product of any collection of quasi-complete spaces is quasi-
complete.
1.12.58. Let E0 be a linear subspace in a topological vector space E such that every
point of E belongs to the closure of some bounded set in E0. Prove that every continuous
linear mapping from E0 to a quasi-complete Hausdorff topological vector space G extends
uniquely to a continuous linear mapping from E to G.
1.12.59.◦Suppose that the topology of a locally convex space E is defined by a se-
quence of seminorms pn such that pn ⩽pn+1. Show that this topology can be defined by
a single seminorm precisely when there exists k such that for some numbers Cn > 0 one
has pn ⩽Cnpk for all n.
1.12.60. Let E be a metrizable locally convex space and let S be a balanced set in E
absorbing all sequences converging to zero. Prove that S contains a neighborhood of zero.
HINT: if an →0, an ̸∈S, then there exist Cn →+∞with Cnan →0, which leads
to a contradiction, since S absorbs {Cnan}.
1.12.61. Show that in a locally convex space a sequence {xn} is Cauchy precisely
when for every its subsequence {xnk} the sequence {xnk+1 −xnk} converges to zero.

98
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
1.12.62. Let V be a convex set with a nonempty interior in a locally convex space E.
Prove that V is open precisely when for every nonzero continuous linear functional f on E
the set f(V ) is open.
HINT: if V is open, then f(V ) is open for nonzero f; if x0 ∈V is not an inner point,
then take f ∈E′ with f(u) ⩽f(x0) for all u from the interior of V ; show that f(x0) is
an inner point of f(V ).
1.12.63. (Fichtenholz [168]) Let p and q be seminorms on a linear space E and let E′
p
and E′
q be the subspaces in E∗corresponding to the functionals continuous with respect
to p and q, respectively. Show that E′
p ⊂E′
q precisely when p ⩽cq for some c > 0.
1.12.64. Let E and F be locally convex spaces, let two sets A ⊂E and B ⊂F be
absolutely convex, and let f be a real bilinear function on E ×F such that its restriction
to A×B is continuous at zero. (i) Prove that the restriction of f to A×B is continuous.
(ii) Prove that if A is precompact and B is compact, then the restriction of f to A×B is
uniformly continuous.
1.12.65. Prove that a compact space K is metrizable precisely when there is a count-
able family of continuous functions fn on K separating points in the following sense: if
x ̸= y, then for some n we have fn(x) ̸= fn(y). In this case, one can use the metric
d(x, y) = 	∞
n=1 2−n min

|fn(x) −fn(y)|, 1

.
1.12.66.◦Prove that a Hausdorff compact space K is metrizable precisely when the
space C(K) with its usual sup-metric is separable.
1.12.67. Let X be a metrizable compact space and let f : X →Y be a continuous
mapping to a Hausdorff space Y . Prove that the compact set f(X) is also metrizable.
HINT: the space C(X) is separable and C

f(X)

can be embedded into it isometri-
cally by means of the mapping ϕ →ϕ◦f. Hence C

f(X)

is also separable, which gives
the metrizability of f(X).
1.12.68. Prove that a set A in a Hausdorff topological vector space E is precompact
precisely when every infinite sequence in A has a limit point in the completion of E.
HINT: see Lemma 1.12.1.
1.12.69. Let A be a locally compact closed convex set in a topological vector space.
Prove that if A is bounded, then it is compact.
HINT: show that A is totally bounded arguing as follows: otherwise one can take a
balanced neighborhood of zero V such that an −ak ̸∈V for some sequence {an} ⊂A,
then the convexity of A can be used.
1.12.70. Let E be a metrizable topological vector space, let d be a translation invariant
metric on it defining its topology, and let E be the space of all equivalence classes of
infinite Cauchy sequences x = (xn) in E, where x ∼y if the sequence (x1, y1, x2, y2, . . .)
is Cauchy. Let d(x, y) := lim
n→∞d(xn, yn). Show that E is a complete metric topological
vector space that serves as a completion of E.
1.12.71.◦Prove that every countable everywhere dense set in an infinite-dimensional
metrizable topological vector space contains a dense linearly independent subset.
1.12.72. Prove that there is no continuous norm on IR∞.
1.12.73. In the Banach space l1 consider the straight line L defined by the conditions
xn = 0, n ⩾2, and also the set A := {x = (xn): |n3xn −n| ⩽x1 ∀n ⩾2}. Show

1.12. Complements and exercises
99
that A is closed and convex and A ∩L = ∅, but A and L cannot be separated by a
closed hyperplane (observe that the set A −L cannot be separated from zero by a closed
hyperplane, since this set is everywhere dense). An analogous fact is true for l2.
1.12.74. Consider the Banach space l1 = (c0)′ equipped with the topology σ(l1, c0),
in which the closed unit ball U is compact (see § 3.1). Show that no point u in the unit
sphere with infinitely many nonzero coordinates has a closed supporting hyperplane to U.
1.12.75. Show that the closed unit ball of the Banach space c0 of sequences tending
to zero (with its natural sup-norm) has no supporting hyperplanes parallel to the closed
hyperplane f −1(0), where f is defined by the formula f(x) = 	∞
n=1 2−nxn.
1.12.76. Let us take the compact set K :=

(xn): 	∞
n=1
√nx2
n ⩽1

in l2 and the
point a ∈K, where an = cn−1, c > 0, 	∞
n=1 c2n−3/2 = 1. Prove that a is an extreme
point of K, but there is no supporting hyperplane to K passing through a.
HINT: if this hyperplane has the form (x, y) = 1, then yn = c√nan.
1.12.77. The space M = C[0, 1]′ of all Borel measures on [0, 1] is equipped with the
topology σ

M, C[0, 1]

. Let λ be Lebesgue measure, let D be the set of Dirac measures
δa, a ∈[0, 1], and let E be the linear subspace in M generated by D and λ and equipped
with the induced topology. Show that D is compact in E and λ is an extreme point of the
closed convex hull of the set D in E, but does not belong to the convex hull of D.
1.12.78. For each n ∈IN, let en be the sequence of numbers with 1 on the nth place
and 0 on all other places. Show that the set K that is the closed convex hull of the sequence
{(n + 1)−1en} in the Banach space l∞is compact, but does not coincide with the convex
hull of its extreme points.
1.12.79. Let K be a convex compact set in a real locally convex space. Prove that
every continuous linear functional assumes its minimal and maximal values on K at some
extreme points of K.
1.12.80. (i) Let H be a closed hyperplane in a Hausdorff locally convex space E and
let A be an absolutely convex set in E. Prove that A ∩H = A ∩H. Give an example of a
convex, but not absolutely convex set A in IR2 for which this is false.
(ii) Deduce from (i) that an absolutely convex set in E is closed precisely when its
intersections with all closed hyperplanes in E are closed.
HINT: if h ̸∈H and a net of vectors hα + cαh ∈A, where hα ∈H and cα ̸= 0,
converges to b ∈H, then the vectors aα = −tα(hα1 + cα1h) + (1 −tα)(hα + cαh) ∈A
also converge to b if tα →0; observe that aα ∈H if cα1tα = cα(1 −tα).
1.12.81. (i) Let A be an absolutely convex subset of a locally convex space E equipped
with the strongest locally convex topology. Show that A ∩L = A ∩L for every linear
subspace L ⊂E. (ii) Let A be an absolutely convex subset of E×F, where E and F are
locally convex spaces and F is equipped with the strongest locally convex topology. Show
that A ∩(E×{0}) = A ∩(E×{0}).
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, p. 110].
1.12.82. Let V be a convex set in a topological vector space. Prove that if V has at
least one inner point, then its topological interior coincides with the algebraic kernel.
1.12.83. Let E be a normed space and let F be a separable and norm closed linear
subspace in E′. Show that there exists a separable closed linear subspace E0 ⊂E for
which there exists a linear isometry j of the subspace F to a closed linear subspace in the
Banach space E′
0.

100
Chapter 1. Introduction to the theory
HINT: take in F a norm dense sequence {fn} and vectors an ∈E such that ∥an∥⩽1,
|fn(an)| = (1 −n−1)∥fn∥; let E0 be the closed linear subspace in E generated by {an};
observe that ∥f∥= supn |f(an)| for all f ∈F; for f ∈F define j(f) as f|E0, i.e.,
j(f)(x) = f(x) whenever x ∈E0, ∥j(f)∥= sup{|f(x)|: x ∈E0, ∥x∥⩽1} = ∥f∥.
1.12.84. Let X be a Fr´echet space, let X0 be its closed linear subspace, and let
π : X →X/X0 be the canonical projection to the quotient . Prove that for every compact
set K ⊂X/X0, there exists a compact set S ⊂X such that π(S) = K. Exercise 3.12.148
gives a generalization.
HINT: see Edwards [150, Lemma 9.6.9, p. 671].
1.12.85. Let Φ be a multivalued mapping of a topological space T to the set of
nonempty subsets of a compact space K having a closed graph. Prove that Φ is upper
semicontinuous, i.e., if t0 ∈T and Φ(t0) belongs to an open set W, then there exists a
neighborhood U ∋t0 such that Φ(t) ⊂W for all t ∈U.
1.12.86. (Millionschikov [347]) Let V be a closed convex set in a complete Hausdorff
locally convex space E, let f1 : V →E be a contraction, i.e., for each seminorm p in a
collection defining its topology there is λ < 1 such that p

f1(x)−f1(y)

⩽λp(x−y), and
let f2 : V →E be continuous and such that f(V ) is contained in a compact set. Suppose
that f = f1 + f2 maps V to V . Then, there exists x0 ∈V with f(x0) = x0.
1.12.87. Prove that there is no Banach space whose dual is linearly homeomorphic to
the space c0 of sequences tending to zero (cf. Example 1.12.7). Prove the same for C[a, b].
HINT: find a sequence of vectors vn ∈c0 (and also in C[a, b]) such that for each
continuous linear functional l there is a finite limit
lim
n→∞l(vn), but there is no vector
v ∈c0 such that this limit equals l(v) for all l.
1.12.88. Prove that on the space of on the spaces of continuous functions on [0, 1]
convergence almost everywhere cannot be generated by a topology.
HINT: use that there is a sequence of polynomials that converges at no point of
[0, 1], but converges in measure and also that any sequence converging in measure has a
subsequence converging almost everywhere.
1.12.89. Show that there is a sequence of functions fn on IR for which there are no
numbers εn > 0 such that lim
n→∞εnfn(x) = 0 for every x.
HINT: identify IR with the space of all sequences η = (ηn) of natural numbers,
consider fn(η) = ηn, and observe that for each sequence of numbers εn > 0 there are
ηn ∈IN with εnηn > 1.

CHAPTER 2
Methods of constructing topological vector spaces
In this chapter we consider projective limits (in particular, products) of fami-
lies of topological vector spaces, inductive limits (in particular, topological direct
sums) of families of locally convex spaces, including strict inductive limits and in-
ductive limits with compact embeddings, tensor products of locally convex spaces,
and nuclear spaces.
Throughout this chapter the symbol K denotes (if it is not explicitly stated
otherwise) the field of complex or the field of real numbers; it is assumed that all
considered vector and topological vector spaces are spaces over K.
2.1. Projective topologies
We define projective limits for topological vector spaces, but the construction
applies to general topological spaces.
2.1.1. Definition. Let E be a vector space and let A be some index set.
Suppose that for every α ∈A we are given a topological vector space Eα and a
linear mapping gα : E →Eα. The projective topology of the family of spaces
{Eα} with respect to the family of mappings {gα} is the weakest topology in E
with respect to which all mappings {gα} are continuous. The projective limit of
the family {Eα} with respect to the family of mappings {gα} is the vector space E
equipped with this topology.
We verify that the topology in this definition is well-defined, i.e., we prove
that the projective topology of the family of spaces {Eα} with respect to the family
{gα} of mappings exists. The proof is an explicit description of this topology. For
every index α ∈A let Wα be the class of all sets of the form gα−1(V ), where V is
an open subset in Eα. Set W = 
α Wα. Then the collection P of the intersections
of all possible finite families of sets from W forms a base of a topology τ in E
possessing the required properties, i.e., the weakest topology t in E for which all
mappings gα : (E, t) →Eα are continuous.
In order to see this, we have to verify the following assertions:
(1) P is a base of some topology τ in E; (2) all mappings gα : (E, τ) →Eα
are continuous; (3) the topology τ is majorized by every topology t in E for which
all mappings gα : (E, t) →Eα are continuous.
The validity of (1) follows from the fact that the intersection of every finite
collection of subsets from P belongs to P, so that the collection of all subsets
101
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
and Their Applications, Springer Monographs in Mathematics,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-57117-1_2
V.I. Bogachev and O.G. Smolyanov, Topological Vector Spaces

102
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing topological vector spaces
of the space E each of which is the union of some family of sets in P forms a
topology. It will be denoted by τ. It is clear that P is a base of this topology (the
family W is a prebase).
If now α ∈A and V is an open subset in Eα, then g−1
α (V ) ∈W ⊂P ⊂τ
by the definition of W, P and τ, so that the mappings gα : (E, τ) →Eα are
continuous, i.e., (2) holds.
Let us verify (3). Let t be a topology in E such that for every α ∈A the
mapping gα : (E, t) →Eα is continuous. Then every set in W is open in t, i.e.,
we have W ⊂t. Hence τ ⊂t by the definition of τ.
2.1.2. Remark. So far we have never used that for every α ∈A the topology
of the space Eα agrees with the structure of a vector space and that all mappings gα
are linear, as well as that E and Eα are vector spaces. Thus, the definition of the
projective limit is meaningful and remains correct without these assumptions (i.e.,
in the case where E is an arbitrary set, {Eα} is an arbitrary family of topological
spaces and {gα} is an arbitrary family of mappings from E to Eα).
2.1.3. Proposition. Under the assumptions of Definition 2.1.1 the projective
topology τ agrees with the vector structure of the space E.
PROOF. This follows from Corollary 1.2.9. Indeed, all Eα are topological
vector spaces, all mappings gα are linear.
Hence every family of sets Wα is
invariant with respect to translations; then the families W and P are also invariant
with respect to translations, hence the topology τ is invariant as well.
Further, by the very definition of the topology τ the set O of all subsets of
the space E each of which is the intersection of some finite family of sets of the
form g−1
α (V ), where V is an open circled neighborhood of zero in Eα, is a base of
neighborhoods of zero in the topology τ, moreover, this base possesses properties
(1) and (2) from Proposition 1.2.2. Hence by Corollary 1.2.9 the topology τ agrees
with the structure of a vector space.
□
The term the “projective limit” is often used for a more special construction
(which will be discussed below); on the other hand, projective topologies in our
sense are also called “initial”.
2.1.4. Proposition. If in Proposition 2.1.1 all topological vector spaces Eα
are locally convex, then the topology τ is locally convex as well.
PROOF. The justification is similar to the proof of Proposition 2.1.3; we have
only replace the words “an open circled neighborhood” by the words “an open
convex circled neighborhood”.
□
2.1.5. Proposition. Let E be a topological vector space that is the projective
limit of a family {Eα : α ∈A} of topological vector spaces with respect to linear
mappings {gα : α ∈A}. A mapping f of an arbitrary topological space G to the
topological vector space E is continuous at a point x ∈G precisely when for
every α ∈A the mapping gα◦f : G →Eα is continuous at this point.
PROOF. Since the composition of continuous (at the corresponding points)
mappings is continuous, it suffices to prove that the continuity of the mappings

2.1. Projective topologies
103
gα ◦f (α ∈A) implies the continuity of f. Let V be an open neighborhood of
the point f(x). We have to show that there exists a neighborhood W of the point
x such that f(W) ⊂V . By the definition of the projective topology there exist
indices α1, . . . , αn ∈A and open subsets V1, . . . , Vn of the spaces Eα1, . . . , Eαn
for which f(x) ∈
n
i=1 g−1
αi (Vi) ⊂V . Since every mapping gαi ◦f is continuous,
there exists an open neighborhood Wi of the point x such that (gαi ◦f)(Wi) ⊂Vi
for every index i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n}. This means that f(Wi) ⊂g−1
αi (Vi) for every
such i. Hence f(∩iWi) ⊂g−1
αi (Vi) for all i. Therefore, if W = 
n
i=1 Wi, then we
have f(W) ⊂
n
i=1 g−1
αi (Vi).
□
If E is a locally convex space and p is a continuous seminorm on E, then
the symbol Ep or (Ep, p) denotes the normed space defined as follows: the vector
space Ep is the vector factor-space of the vector space E by its subspace p−1(0);
in addition, p is the norm on Ep defined as follows: if x ∈Ep and x1 is a
representative of the class x, then p(x) = p(x1).
Note that the canonical mapping gp : E →Ep is continuous as the composi-
tion of two continuous mappings: the identity mapping of the space E equipped
with the original topology to E equipped with the topology defined by the semi-
norm p (the latter is denoted by the symbol (E, p)) and the canonical mapping of
(E, p) to the quotient Ep (actually this is the same mapping gp, but considered as
a mapping from (E, p) to the space Ep).
A general projective limit is a very universal object.
2.1.6. Proposition. Every locally convex space E is the projective limit of
the family {Ep : p ∈P} of normed spaces with respect to the canonical mappings
{gp : p ∈P}, where P is the set of all continuous seminorms on E.
PROOF. This follows from the fact that every locally convex topology is de-
fined by the set of all continuous seminorms on this space.
□
2.1.7. Remark. A similar proposition is valid for arbitrary topological vec-
tor spaces (i.e., spaces that are not locally convex).
It suffices to replace the
word “seminorm” by the word “quasi-norm” and the word “normed” by the word
“metrizable” in the formulation of the proposition above.
2.1.8. Remark. For every seminorm p on E we denote by Ep the Banach
space serving as the completion of the normed space Ep. It follows from the
previous proposition that every locally convex space is the projective limit of
the family of Banach spaces {Ep} with respect to the corresponding canonical
mappings. A similar proposition is valid for arbitrary topological vector spaces,
i.e., not necessarily locally convex (in this case the role of Banach spaces is played
by complete metrizable topological vector spaces).
2.1.9.
Remark. If τ is the projective topology in a vector space E with
respect to a certain family {Eα : α ∈A} of topological vector spaces and linear
mappings {gα ∈L(E, Eα): α ∈A}, then in order that τ be separated, it is
necessary and sufficient that for every nonzero element x ∈E one could find
α ∈A and a neighborhood of zero Vα in Eα such that gα(x) /∈Vα. In particular,

104
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing topological vector spaces
if all topological vector spaces Eα are separated, then in order that E be also
separated, it is necessary and sufficient that for every nonzero element x ∈E one
could find an index α ∈A such that gα(x) ̸= 0. Both assertions follow directly
from the definition.
2.2. Examples of projective limits
Let us consider some examples of projective limits.
2.2.1. Example. (The least upper bound of a family of topologies in a vector
space.) Let E be a vector space and let A be an index set such that for every
α ∈A we are given a topology τα in E compatible with the structure of a vector
space. Then there exists a topology τ in E that is the least upper bound of the set
{τα : α ∈A} in the set of all topologies in E, i.e., the weakest among topologies
in E each of which majorizes every topology τα. The topology τ agrees with the
structure of a vector space and is locally convex if so are all τα.
Indeed, the required property holds for the topology of the projective limit of
the family of topological vector spaces {Eα : α ∈A} with respect to the family
of mappings {gα : α ∈A}, where for every α ∈A we take Eα = (E, τα), and
gα is the identity mapping of the space E. The locally convex case follows from
Proposition 2.1.4.
2.2.2. Example. (Subspaces, see Example 1.3.10). Let E be a topological
vector space, let E1 be its topological vector subspace (i.e., a vector subspace
equipped with the induced topology), and let g: E1 →E be the canonical em-
bedding. Then E1 is the projective limit of the one-element family of topological
vector spaces {E} with respect to the one-element family of mappings {g}.
2.2.3.
Example. (The product of topological vector spaces.)
Let A be a
nonempty set and let (Eα, τα) be a topological vector space, α ∈A. Let E be
the vector space that is the product of the family of vector spaces {Eα : α ∈A}.
Thus, the set of elements of E is the set of all functions f on the set A with values
in the set 
α∈A Eα such that f(α) ∈Eα for every α ∈A; the structure of a
vector space in E is introduced by the relations
(λ1f1 + λ2f2)(α) = λ1f1(α) + λ2f2(α),
λ1, λ2 ∈K, f1, f2 ∈E.
For every α ∈A let prα denote the projection of E onto Eα defined as follows:
if f ∈E, then prα(f) = f(α). The topology (in E) of the projective limit of the
family {Eα : α ∈A} of topological vector spaces with respect to the family of
mappings {prα : α ∈A} coincides with the topology of Tychonoff’s product; this
follows from their definitions. Throughout the product of a family of topological
vector spaces will be understood as their product of vector spaces equipped with
the Tychonoff product topology; if {Gα} is the corresponding family of topologi-
cal vector spaces, then the symbol 
α∈A Gα will denote their product.
2.2.4. Proposition. Suppose that E is the projective limit of a certain family
{Eα : α ∈A} of topological vector spaces with respect to a certain family of
mappings {gα ∈L(E, Eα): α ∈A}; assume that its topology is separated. Then

2.2. Examples of projective limits
105
E is isomorphic — as a topological vector space — to some topological vector
subspace in the product G of a family topological vector spaces {Eα : α ∈A}.
PROOF. The mapping Ψ: E →G defined by: Ψ(x)(α) = gα(x) is linear by
the linearity of all gα. This mapping is injective, since, due to the assumption that
E is separated, for every x ∈E there exists α ∈A such that gα(x) ̸= 0. Further,
for every α ∈A the composition prα◦Ψ coincides with the mapping gα, hence is
continuous. By Proposition 2.1.5 the mapping Ψ is continuous. For completing the
proof it remains to verify that the mapping Ψ−1 : Ψ(E) →E is also continuous
(assuming that the vector subspace Ψ(E) of the space G is equipped with the
topology induced by the topology of the space G).
For every index α ∈A
the composition of the mapping Ψ−1 taking the element g(x) (i.e., the function
α →gα(x)) of the space Ψ(E) to the element x ∈E and the mapping gα coincides
with the restriction to Ψ(E) of the projection mapping prα : g(x) →gα(x) and
hence is continuous by the definition of the product topology. Hence — again by
Proposition 2.1.5 — the mapping Ψ−1 is also continuous. Thus, the mapping Ψ is
a linear homeomorphism of E onto the topological vector subspace Ψ(E) of the
space 
α Eα.
□
2.2.5. Corollary. Every Hausdorff locally convex space E is isomorphic to
a topological vector subspace of the product 
p∈P Ep, where P is the set of all
continuous seminorms on E.
This fact follows from Propositions 2.1.6 and 2.2.4.
2.2.6.
Example. (Weak topologies, Example 1.3.23).
Let E be a vector
space, let G be a vector subspace in E∗, and, for every g ∈G, let Eg be a copy
of the field K considered as a one-dimensional topological vector space (over the
field K). Then the topology of the projective limit of the family of topological
vector spaces {Eg : g ∈G} with respect to the family of mappings {g: g ∈G}
is the weak topology in E defined by the elements of the set G.
2.2.7. Example. (Limits of inverse spectra of topological vector spaces.) Let
A be a directed set. A family {Eα : α ∈A} of topological vector spaces is called
the inverse spectre of topological vector spaces Eα if, for every pair of indices
α, β ∈A with α ⩽β, a continuous linear mapping ψαβ : Eβ →Eα is given.
The limit of such inverse spectre is the topological vector subspace in the product

α Eα denoted by the symbol lim
←−Eα and consisting of elements g ∈
α Eα
such that g(α) = ψαβg(β) whenever α, β ∈A, α ⩽β. For example, if Eβ ⊂Eα
whenever α < β and the natural embedding Eβ →Eα is continuous, then 
α Eα
is the limit of the inverse spectre of the spaces Eα.
Every topological vector subspace of the product of an arbitrary family of
topological vector spaces is the projective limit of this family with respect to the
family of mappings of the regarded space to the factors that are the restrictions of
the projection mappings of the product to these factors. Therefore, in particular,
the space lim
←−Eα is the projective limit of the family of topological vector spaces

106
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
{Eα : α ∈A} with respect to the family of mappings that are the restrictions of
the corresponding projections.
Note also that by the continuity of the mappings ψαβ the topological vector
space lim
←−Eα is a closed subspace in the product 
α Eα (verify this). Since, in
addition, any closed subset in a complete topological vector space is complete,
and the product of an arbitrary family of complete topological vector spaces is
a complete topological vector space, the limit of an inverse spectre of complete
topological vector spaces is a complete topological vector space. An analogous
assertion is valid also for quasi-complete topological vector spaces.
Let us introduce one more interesting class of spaces.
2.2.8. Example. (Countably normed spaces.) This term is used for locally
convex spaces that are limits of inverse spectra of Banach spaces possessing the
following properties: (a) the index set is the set of natural numbers with its usual
order; (b) all mappings ψnj (defined for j ⩾n) are injective.
The notion of a countably normed space was introduced by Gelfand and Shi-
lov [193] by means of another definition: in their book a topological vector space
is called countably normed if it is locally convex, metrizable, complete, and its
topology can be defined by a countable family of compatible norms. Here two
norms on a vector space E are called compatible if every sequence of elements
in this space that is Cauchy with respect to both norms and converges to zero with
respect to one of them must converge to zero with respect to the other.
As an example of incompatible norms on an infinite-dimensional Banach
space X we can take the original norm ∥· ∥on X and the norm x →∥x∥+|l(x)|,
where l is any discontinuous linear functional on X. Then one can always find
vectors xn ∈X such that ∥xn∥→0 and l(xn) = 1.
We shall call our definition of countably normed spaces Definition I, and the
definition from the book [193] will be called Definition II.
We now show that these definitions are equivalent. First we show that the
requirements of Definition I imply the requirements of Definition II. Thus, let
us consider the inverse spectre {En : n ∈IN} of Banach spaces satisfying the
conditions in Definition I.
For every j ∈IN, the norm of Ej will be denoted by the symbol ∥· ∥j. Since
all mappings ψnj : Ej →En are injective, every space En can be identified as
a vector space with a subspace of each space Ei (i < n) with smaller indices.
Thus, replacing the words “is a vector subspace” by the symbol ⊂⊂, we obtain
the following chain of relations:
· · · ⊂⊂En ⊂⊂En−1 ⊂⊂· · · ⊂⊂E1.
Here the mappings ψjr will coincide with the corresponding (identical) embed-
dings. We emphasize that in general the spaces Er are not topological vector
subspaces of the spaces Ej with smaller indices j, they are merely vector sub-
spaces.
Therefore, the space lim
←−En can be identified as a vector space with the
intersection 
n En of the spaces En. Indeed, g ∈lim
←−En precisely when for

2.2. Examples of projective limits
107
all j ⩾n we have the equality ψnj

g(j)

= g(n).
Since ψnj is an embed-
ding, these equalities actually mean that g(1) = g(2) = · · · = g(n) = · · · ,
so that a natural identification of lim
←−En and 
n En can be defined as follows:
g ∈lim
←−En ⇐⇒g(1) ∈
n En.
Thus, we have shown that lim
←−En coincides with 
n En as a vector space.
As we have observed before Example 2.2.8, the topology of the space lim
←−En
is the topology of the projective limit of the family of topological vector spaces
{Ej : j ∈IN} with respect to the family of mappings that are the restrictions to
lim
←−En of the mappings prj : 
n En →Ej. Identifying lim
←−En and 
n En, we
can assume that the mappings prj are defined on 
n En; each of these mappings
is an embedding into the respective space; say, prj coincides on 
n En with the
identical embedding inj : 
n En →Ej.
Hence if we equip 
n En with the
topology τ of the projective limit of the family of Banach spaces {En : n ∈IN}
with respect to the mappings inj, then the identification of the spaces lim
←−En and

n En described above will be their identification as topological vector spaces.
It follows from Definition I that the topology of the projective limit in 
n En
defined above is given by the family of norms ∥· ∥n (more precisely, by the
restrictions of these norms to 
n En). We show that these norms are compatible.
Suppose that a sequence {xk} ⊂
nEn is Cauchy in both norms ∥· ∥j, ∥· ∥n
and ∥xk∥n →0. If n > j, then the relation ∥xk∥j →0 follows from the continuity
of the embedding ψjn : En →Ej. If n < j, then {xk} converges to some x in
Ej by the completeness of Ej, which gives the equality x = 0 by the continuity
and the injectivity of ψnj. Thus, it is shown that the space (
n En, τ), hence also
the space lim
←−En that coincides with it, is a countably normed space in the sense
of Definition II.
Suppose now that the space E satisfies the conditions of Definition II and
let {pj} be compatible norms defining the topology of this space. Replacing, if
necessary, the norms pj by the norms p′
j = 	j
n=1 pn (which define the same
topology) and keeping the previous notation we can assume that for all x ∈E
and n we have pn(x) ⩽pn+1(x); the consistence of norms is preserved.
Further, let En be the completion of E with respect to the norm pn, n ∈IN.
For each pair n, j ∈IN we define a continuous linear mapping ψn,n+j : En+j →En
as the extension by the continuity of the identity mapping (such an extension exists
according to Proposition 1.7.14).
The consistency of our norms yields the injectivity of these mappings, i.e., the
equality ψn,n+j(x) = 0, where x ∈En+j, yields that x = 0. Indeed, there exists
a sequence {xi} ⊂E converging in En+j to x. This sequence is fundamental in
the norm pn+j, moreover, pn(xi) →0, since ψn,n+j(x) = 0. By the consistency
of these norms pn+j(xi) →0, whence x = 0.
Thus, the family {En : n ∈IN} of Banach spaces forms a spectre with respect
to the injective mappings {ψns : n ⩽s} (ψnn is the identity mapping of En to En,
which, as above, is assumed to be an embedding of vector spaces).

108
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
As we have shown above, the space lim
←−En can be identified with the vector
space 
n En equipped with the topology defined by the family of norms pn.
Thus, for the proof of the fact that E is a countably normed space in the sense of
Definition I, it remains to verify that the set 
n En coincides as a vector space
with E.
Since the inclusion E ⊂
n En is true by definition (all spaces En are com-
pletions of E), we have to prove the opposite inclusion. Let x ∈
n En. This
means that for every n ∈IN there is a sequence {xn
j } ⊂En converging to x in En,
i.e., in the norm pn. Then we can choose a “quasi-diagonal” sequence {xn
j(n)}
converging in every space En, hence fundamental in every norm pn. Since they
define the topology in E, this means that the sequence {xn
j(n)} is Cauchy in E
and by the completeness of E it converges to some element z ∈E. This sequence
converges to z also in the space E1 (being converging in E, it converges in every
norm pn). However, {xn
j(n)} is a subsequence of the sequence {x1
j} converging
to x in E1 and hence also converges in this space to x. Thus, x = z, i.e., x ∈E.
This completes the proof of the equivalence of both definitions.
2.2.9. Remark. Let us note the following fact established in Example 2.2.8.
Suppose we are given a sequence of embedded Banach spaces En+1 ⊂⊂En (as
above, the symbol ⊂⊂means that the left space is a vector subspace in the right
space), where all embeddings are continuous. Such a family can be regarded as the
inverse spectre of these spaces the index set of which is the set of natural numbers
and the role of the mappings ψnj is played by the embeddings.
Then the limit of such inverse spectre is (as a vector space) the intersection of
all spaces En and its topology is defined by means of the restrictions to 
n En of
the norms pn of the Banach spaces En.
2.2.10. Example. Certainly, not every Fr´echet space is countably normed.
For example, the countable product of the real lines IR∞is not, since on it there
are no continuous norms at all (every neighborhood of zero in this space contains
some infinite-dimensional vector subspace).
2.2.11. Example. More interesting is the fact that even a Fr´echet space whose
topology is defined by a countable collection of norms need not be countably
normed (observe by the way that in order the topology of a locally convex space,
not necessarily metrizable, could be defined by a family of norms it is sufficient
that this space had at least one continuous norm).
A Fr´echet space in question can be defined as follows. Let E be the space of
all continuously differentiable real functions f on the real line with the following
property: |f(t)| + |f ′(t)| →0 as |t| →∞. For every natural number n denote by
pn the norm on E defined by the equality
pn(f) = max
t∈IR1 |f(t)| +
max
t∈[−n,n] |f ′(t)|
+ max
f ′
r + 1/(2k)
: r ∈Z; |r| > n; k = 1, 2, . . . , n

.

2.3. Inductive topologies
109
Let τ be the topology in the space E defined by the countable family of norms
P = {pn : n ∈IN}; then (E, τ) is a Fr´echet space.
We show that on this space there exists no countable family of compatible
norms defining its topology. First of all, no two norms in the family P are com-
patible (verify this!).
Suppose now that E possesses a family P1 of compatible norms defining the
topology of E. We can assume that these norms are increasing, so that the set
of the corresponding balls {x ∈E : qj(x) < ε} is a base (not only a prebase)
of neighborhoods of zero.
Let q ∈P1.
Then there exist two distinct norms
pj1, pj2 ∈P such that q(x) ⩽Cpj1(x) ⩽Cpj2(x) for every x ∈E, where C > 0
is some number. We can assume that C = 1. Certainly, the norms pj1 and pj2 are
not compatible . We can also find a norm q′ ∈P1 and a norm pj3 ∈P for which
q′ ⩽C′pj3, so that without loss of generality we can assume that
q(x) ⩽pj1(x) ⩽pj2(x) ⩽q′(x) ⩽pj3(x)
for all x ∈E.
Certainly, the norms pj1 and pj3 are not compatible as well.
We now show that the norms q and q′ are not compatible. Let {an} be a
sequence of elements in E fundamental in the norm pj3, hence also in the norms
pj1 and pj2, and converging to zero in the norm pj1, but not converging to zero
in the norm pj2 (hence in the norm pj3). The fact that the topology τ cannot
be defined by a family of pairwise compatible norms is implied by the property
of P that, for every three norms pj1, pj2, pj3 with pj1 ⩽pj2 ⩽pj3, there is a
sequence converging to zero in the first norm, fundamental in all the three norms,
but not converging to zero in the last two norms. Since pj1(an) ⩾q(an), we have
q(an) →0. By the inequality q′ ⩽pj3 the sequence {an} is fundamental in the
norm q′. Finally, the inequality pj2 ⩽q′ yields that it cannot converge to zero in
the norm q′, since otherwise it would converge to zero in the norm pj2.
Note also that the relation |f(t)| + |f ′(t)| →0 as |t| →∞, which is valid for
every function f ∈E, yields that the space (E, τ) is separable.
2.3. Inductive topologies
The concept of an inductive topology is dual to that of a projective topol-
ogy, but the corresponding results related to one or the other topology are not
completely symmetric; the nature of this asymmetry will be clear below.
2.3.1. Definition. Let E be a vector space and let A be a nonempty index set
such that for every α ∈A we are given a locally convex space Eα and a linear
mapping gα : Eα →E. The inductive topology of the family of spaces {Eα} with
respect to the family of mappings {gα} (more precisely, the inductive topology in
the category of locally convex topologies) is the strongest locally convex topology
in E with respect to which all mappings gα are continuous. The inductive limit of
the family {Eα} with respect to the mappings {gα} is the vector space E equipped
with this topology. Notation: E = indαEα.
2.3.2. Remark. (i) Let V be the set of all convex circled absorbent sets V
in the space E such that g−1
α (V ) is a neighborhood of zero in Eα for each α∈A.

110
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
Then V is a base of neighborhoods of zero in the inductive topology of the fam-
ily {Eα} with respect to the family of mappings {gα}.
Indeed, according to
Proposition 1.2.11, the set V is a base of neighborhoods of zero of some locally
convex topology τ in E. It follows from the definition of V that all mappings
gα : Eα →(E, τ) are continuous. If τ1 is an arbitrary locally convex topology
in E for which all mappings gα : Eα →(E, τ1) are continuous and V1 is a base
of its neighborhoods of zero consisting of circled convex sets (certainly, they are
all absorbing), then for every α ∈A and every V ∈V1 the set g−1
α (V ) is a neigh-
borhood of zero in Eα, which by the definition of V yields that V1 ⊂V, hence we
have τ1 ⊂τ.
Thus, if Eα is a locally convex space with a basis of absolutely convex neigh-
borhoods of zero Vα, then the set V of absolutely convex envelopes of all possible
sets of the form 
α gα(Vα), where Vα ∈Vα, is a basis of neighborhoods of zero
in the space E.
(ii) If Eα are general topological vector spaces, then the inductive topology
on the space E in the category of topological vector spaces is introduced as the
strongest vector topology for which all mappings gα are continuous. This topology
also exists. According to Example 2.2.1, the set T of all vector topologies in E
for which all maps gα are continuous is nonempty, moreover, it has the weakest
topology.
One can verify that T has the required strongest topology, but one
can also define explicitly the corresponding base of neighborhoods of zero (see
Jarchow [237, § 4.1]). For simplicity we assume that E is the union of gα(Eα). In
every space Eα we take a basis Uα of circled neighborhoods of zero and introduce
in E a base of zero U consisting of the sets of the form
U =
∞

n=1
n

k=1

α∈A
gα(Uα,k),
Uα,k ∈Uα,
where 	 denotes a vector sum. For a countable collection of En we can take
the sets U = 
K∈K
	
k∈K gk(Uk), where Uk ∈Uk and K is the set of all finite
subsets of IN. It is clear that U is circled and absorbent and that there exists V ∈U
with V +V ⊂U (one can take Vα,k ⊂Uα,2k ∩Uα,2k−1 in Uα). By Corollary 1.2.9
the class U is a base of neighborhoods of zero of a vector topology τ2 in E. The
continuity of gα : Eα →(E, τ) is obvious. The maximality of τ2 is seen from the
fact that if all gα are continuous when E is equipped with a vector topology τ0
and W0 is a balanced neighborhood of zero in it, then we can find U ∈U with
U ⊂W by taking Wk ∈τ0, Wk + Wk ⊂Wk−1, Uα,k ⊂g−1
α (Wk). If En are
locally convex, then so is the topology τ2, but for uncountable A this is false (see
an example below).
In addition to inductive topologies in the categories of locally convex spaces
and topological vector spaces, the space E can be equipped with the strongest
topology (not necessarily vector) with the property that all mappings gα are con-
tinuous. It turns out that even if all Eα are locally convex, these three topologies
can be distinct.

2.3. Inductive topologies
111
2.3.3.
Example. Let E be a real vector space with an algebraic basis of
cardinality of the continuum, let F be the set of all its finite-dimensional vector
subspaces each of which is equipped with the standard topology, and let gF be
the canonical embedding of F into E for every F ∈F (so here the index set
is F itself).
Let τ1 be the strongest locally convex topology in E for which
all gF are continuous (i.e., the locally convex inductive topology), let τ2 be the
strongest vector topology in which all gF are continuous, finally, let τ3 be the
strongest topology in E (not necessarily vector) for which the same mappings are
continuous.
Then, obviously, τ3 ⊃τ2 ⊃τ1. We show that τ3 ̸= τ2 ̸= τ1.
For the proof of the inequality τ2 ̸= τ1 we observe that the topology τ1 can
be defined by the set of all seminorms E and the topology τ2 can be defined by
the set of all quasi-norms on E. Let P be a Hamel basis in E and let q be the
quasi-norm on E defined by the equality
q

e∈P
ce · e

=

e∈P

|ce|
2
.
Certainly, the set of nonzero coefficients in the sum 	
e∈P ce · e is finite.
We show that on E there is no seminorm p such that
{x ∈E : p(x) ⩽1} ⊂{x ∈E : q(x) ⩽1}.
Indeed, if p is such a seminorm on E, then for every a ∈E with p(a) ⩽1
we have the inequality q(a) ⩽1. On the other hand, for some C > 0 the set
PC = {e ∈P : p(e) ⩽C} is infinite, since if such C > 0 does not exist, then the
set P is at most countable, which is false by assumption. Thus, for every n we
can find n different elements e1, . . . , en ∈PC. Then for ηj = C−1ej we have
the estimate p

n−1 	n
j=1 ηj

⩽1, while q

n−1 	n
j=1 ηj

= C−1n. Hence for
a sufficiently large n we obtain the inequality q

n−1 	n
j=1 ηj

> 1 contradicting
the aforementioned estimate. Therefore, τ2 ̸= τ1. A simpler assertion is proven.
Let us proceed to the proof of the inequality τ3 ̸= τ2.
Let ∥· ∥be the
norm on E defined by the equality ∥	
e∈P ce · e∥= maxe∈P |ce|, where we
use the previous notation. For every positive function ϕ on the set P ×P we
choose a neighborhood of zero Vϕ in the topology τ3 with the following property:
if ∥λ(e1 + e2)∥⩾ϕ(e1, e2), then λ(e1 + e2) is not contained in Vϕ. Such a
neighborhood of zero in τ3 exists, since a set is open in the topology τ3 precisely
when its intersection with each finite-dimensional subspace in E is open in the
standard topology of this finite-dimensional subspace; for the neighborhood Vϕ
we can take E \ 
e,b∈P

λ(e + b): ∥λ(e + b)∥⩾ϕ(e, b)

.
In order to prove that the topology τ3 is stronger than τ2, it suffices to show
that there exists a function ϕ: P×P →IR+ for which there is no quasi-norm q on
E such that if W = {x ∈E : q(x) ⩽1}, then W +W ⊂Vϕ. We prove a formally
stronger assertion: for some function ϕ: P ×P →IR+ there is no neighborhood
of zero W in the topology τ3 such that W + W ⊂Vϕ. For every neighborhood of
zero W in the topology τ3 we choose some positive function ψW on P with the
following property: for every e ∈P one has {λe: ∥λe∥< ψW (e)} ⊂W. Since

112
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
the inclusion W + W ⊂Vϕ yields that min

ψW (e1), ψW (e2)

⩽ϕ(e1, e2) for all
e1, e2 ∈P (by our choice of Vϕ), it suffices to find a function ϕ: P×P →IR+
for which the inequality
min

ψ(e), ψ(b)

⩽ϕ(e, b)
cannot hold for all e, b ∈P at once, whatever a function ψ: P →IR+ be.
A function ϕ with this property can be constructed in the following way. Let
{ej} be some countable subset of the set P, let S be the set of all sequences
of positive real numbers, and let P0 be some subset of P of cardinality of the
continuum. Let g be a one-to-one mapping of P0 onto S. For e ∈P0 we set
ϕ(e, ej) = g(e)j, where

g(e)
∞
j=1 is the sequence in S that is the image of the
element e under the mapping g. For other pairs (e, b) ∈P ×P we define ϕ(e, b)
in an arbitrary way. Then, given an arbitrary a positive function ψ on P, we
obtain that ϕ(e, b) ⩽min

ψ(e), ψ(b)

for some e, b. This follows from the fact
that the set g(P0) contains all sequences of positive numbers, in particular, the
sequence of the numbers αj = ψ(ej)/j. It is clear that if g(e)j = αj, then we
have ϕ(e, ej) ⩽min

ψ(e), ψ(ej)

for all sufficiently large j (for arbitrary ψ(e)).
Hille and Phillips [222] introduced the “finitely open” topology in a vector
space in which a set is open precisely when its intersection with every finite-
dimensional subspace is open in the standard topology of this subspace (see Re-
mark 1.10.4); thus, this topology coincides with our topology τ3 (as already noted
above). It was mentioned in [222] that the authors were unaware whether this
topology agrees with the vector structure; a negative answer was given later in
Kakutani, Klee [254].
The proof of the noncoincidence of the topologies τ3 and τ2 given above is
actually a proof of the fact that if the algebraic dimension of a vector space is at
least of cardinality of the continuum, then the finitely open topology in it is not
compatible with the vector structure.
2.3.4. Remark. The term “an inductive limit” is often used for a more special
construction (which will be described below).
On the other hand, if E is an
arbitrary set, {Eα : α ∈A} is a family of topological spaces such that for every
α ∈A a mapping gα : Eα →E is given, then in E there exists the strongest
topology for which all these mapping are continuous.
This topology is called
the inductive topology (in the class of all topologies) of the family of topological
spaces {Eα} with respect to the family of mappings {gα}; sometimes this topology
is also called final. Throughout, however, the terms an inductive limit and an
inductive topology are used only in the sense of our definition.
The following simple result is frequently used.
2.3.5. Proposition. Let a locally convex space E be the inductive limit of
some family {Eα : α ∈A} of locally convex vector spaces with respect to linear
mappings gα : Eα →E. A linear mapping f from the space E to a locally convex
space G is continuous precisely when for every α ∈A the mapping f ◦gα is
continuous. Therefore, sequentially continuous linear mappings of inductive limits
of metrizable spaces are continuous.

2.4. Examples of inductive limits
113
PROOF. As in Proposition 2.1.5, it suffices to show that the continuity of the
mappings f ◦gα implies the continuity of the mapping f. To this end we have to
show that if V is a convex circled neighborhood of zero in G, then f −1(V ) is a
neighborhood of zero in E. The set f −1(V ) is convex, circled and absorbent by
the linearity of f. Finally, the continuity of all mappings gα implies that all sets
g−1
α

f −1(V )

are neighborhoods of zero in the respective spaces. Now it remains
to use Remark 2.3.2.
□
This proposition is not completely symmetric to Proposition 2.1.5, dual to
which it is: here we assume (unlike Proposition 2.1.5) that f is linear and that G
is locally convex. Neither of these assumptions can be dropped (the circumstance
that now we consider the continuity everywhere and not at a point is not essential,
since for linear mappings this is the same). Note also that this proposition does
not extend to closed linear subspaces of inductive limits even for linear functionals
(see Exercise 2.10.63).
2.4. Examples of inductive limits
We consider some more examples of inductive topologies.
2.4.1. Example. (The least lower bound of a set of locally convex topologies
in a vector space.) Let E be a vector space such that for every α from some index
set A we have a locally convex topology τα in E. Then among all locally convex
topologies in E majorized by the topologies of the family {τα} there exists the
strongest one — the inductive topology τ of the family of locally convex spaces
(E, τα) with respect to the family of the “canonical” mappings (E, τα) →E (each
of which is the identical mapping of the vector space E into itself). If Vα is the
class of all neighborhoods of zero in the topology τα, then 
α Vα is the class of
all neighborhoods of zero in the topology τ (Remark 2.3.2).
2.4.2. Example. (Quotients.) Let E be a locally convex space and let E1
be its vector subspace.
Then the topology in the quotient E/E1 making it a
topological quotient is the inductive topology of the (one-element) family of locally
convex spaces {E} with respect to the (one-element) family of mappings from E
to E/E1 whose unique element is the canonical mapping of E onto E/E1 (see
Example 1.3.13).
2.4.3.
Example. (Topological direct sums of locally convex spaces.)
Let
(E, τ) be a locally convex space such that the vector space E is a direct sum of
a family {Eα} of its vector subspaces and every Eα is equipped with the locally
convex topology τα induced by the topology τ. The space (E, τ) is called the
topological direct sum of the family of its topological vector subspaces (Eα, τα)
if the topology τ is the inductive limit of the topological vector spaces (Eα, τα)
with respect to the canonical embeddings Eα →E.
In the just described situation we assume in advance that the topological vector
space (E, τ) is given; so we consider the topological direct sum of a family of
topological vector subspaces.

114
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
Suppose now that we are given a family {(Eα, τα)} of locally convex spaces
about which we do not assume in advance that they are subspaces of some vector
space.
In this case the topological direct sum of the family {(Eα, τα)} of locally
convex spaces is the locally convex space (E, τ) defined as follows. The vector
space E is the vector subspace in the product 
α Eα of the family {Eα} of vector
spaces consisting of all functions f ∈
α Eα (defined on the index set A) each of
which does not vanish in at most finitely many points; τ is the inductive topology
of the family of locally convex spaces {(Eα, τα)} with respect to the “canonical”
embeddings gα : (Eα, τα) →E, where gα(x) = f ∈E for all α ∈A and x ∈Eα,
and f is defined by f(α) = x, f(β) = 0, whenever β ̸= α.
The topological direct sum of the family of locally convex spaces (Eα, τα) is
denoted by
 
α Eα,  
α τα

. Thus,
 
α Eα,  
α τα

is the topological direct
sum of its topological vector subspaces gα(Eα).
Throughout we identify every locally convex space Eα with its image gα(Eα)
in the sum  
α Eα, assuming that the spaces Eα are topological vector subspaces
in their topological direct sum.
It follows that the topological direct sum of a finite family of locally convex
spaces and their product are the same object. For infinite families of topological
vector spaces that are not locally convex, topological direct sums are considered
very seldom (however, see Jarchow [237, § 4.3]).
2.4.4. Definition. The topological vector space E equal the direct sum of
its topological vector subspaces E1, . . . , En is called the topological direct sum
of the family {E1, . . . , En} of its subspaces if E is canonically isomorphic to the
product n
j=1 Ej of the topological vector spaces Ej.
This means that the topology of E is the strongest one among all vector
topologies in E for which all canonical embeddings Ej →E are continuous.
2.4.5. Proposition. Let Eγ, where γ ∈Γ, be a collection of locally convex
spaces. Then the dual to their direct sum is the product of the dual spaces and the
dual to their product is the direct sum of the dual spaces, i.e.,
!
γ
Eγ
′
=
"
γ
E′
γ,
"
γ
Eγ
′
=
!
γ
E′
γ.
Moreover, a set is bounded in  
γ Eγ precisely when it is contained and is bounded
in the sum of finitely many spaces Eγ; a set is bounded in 
γ Eγ precisely when
it is contained in the product of bounded sets in the factors.
In particular, (IRT )′ is the direct sum of T copies of the real line.
PROOF. The first equality for the dual spaces is obvious. For verifying the
second one we observe that if a linear function f on the product of the spaces Eγ
is bounded on a basis neighborhood of zero of the form U ×
γ̸∈Γ0, where Γ0 is
finite, then f ∈ 
γ∈Γ0 E′
γ.
Let A ⊂ 
γ Eγ be bounded. If there are infinitely many indices γn for which
the projections of A to Eγ contain nonzero vectors vn, then, taking fn ∈E′
γn such

2.4. Examples of inductive limits
115
that fn(vn) = n, we obtain a continuous linear functional unbounded on A. The
last assertion of the proposition is obvious.
□
2.4.6. Proposition. Let E be the inductive limit of a family {Eα : α ∈A} of
locally convex spaces with respect to a family {gα ∈L(Eα, E): α ∈A} of linear
mappings such that the linear span of the set 
α gα(Eα) coincides with E. Then
E is isomorphic as a topological vector space to some topological vector quotient
of the topological direct sum
 
α Eα,  
α τα

.
PROOF. Let G =
 
αEα,  
α τα

and let Φ: G →E be the linear mapping
defined by the formula Φ(g) = 	
α g(α); in the latter sum the number of nonzero
terms is finite. The surjectivity of Φ follows from the coincidence of the linear
span of 
α gα(Eα) with E. The mapping Φ is continuous according to Proposi-
tion 2.3.5, since gα = Φ◦imα, where imα is the canonical embedding of Eα to
 
α Eα defined in Example 2.4.3, where it is denoted by gα. Let Ψ1 denote the
canonical mapping of the space G onto G/Ker Φ and let Ψ2 be the linear one-to-
one mapping of the space G/Ker Φ onto E defined by the equality Ψ2◦Ψ1 = Φ.
We show that Ψ2 and Ψ−1
2
are continuous; this will prove that E is isomorphic
(as a topological vector space) to the space G/Ker Φ .
The continuity of Ψ2 follows from Proposition 2.3.5 and the continuity of Ψ1
and Φ; here the role of the inductive limit mentioned in Proposition 2.3.5 is played
by the quotient G/Ker Φ (it is the inductive limit of the family of spaces {Eα}
with respect to the family of mappings {Ψ1◦gα}). The continuity of Ψ−1
2
follows,
again according to Proposition 2.3.5, by the fact that Ψ−1
2 ◦gα = Ψ1◦imα, where all
mappings Ψ1◦imα are continuous (now the role of the inductive limit mentioned
in Proposition 2.3.5 is played by E itself).
□
In Chapter 3 we shall consider the duality between inductive and projective
limits under various topologies on the dual space.
2.4.7. Example. (Limits of direct spectra of locally convex spaces.) Let A
be a directed set. A direct spectre of locally convex spaces with the index set
A is a family {(Eα, τα): α ∈A} of locally convex spaces (with this index set)
provided that to every pair α, β ∈A of indices with α ⩽β a continuous mapping
Aβα : Eα →Eβ is associated.
The limit of such direct spectre is the topological vector quotient of the topo-
logical direct sum
 
α Eα,  
α τα

by its vector subspace generated by the
set G defined as follows: f ∈G if there exist α, β ∈A such that α ⩽β,
f(β) = Aβαf(α) and f(γ) = 0 whenever γ /∈{α, β}.
Every topological vector quotient of the topological direct sum of an arbitrary
family of locally convex spaces is the inductive limit of this family with respect
to the family of mappings that are the compositions of the canonical embeddings
of the spaces in the family into their sum and the canonical mapping of the latter
onto its quotient (this fact was used also in the proof of Proposition 2.4.6). Hence
the limit of a direct spectre of locally convex spaces — we shall denote it by
the symbol lim
−→Eα — is the inductive limit of the family {(Eα, τα): α ∈A} of

116
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
locally convex spaces with respect to the just described family of mappings. Note
also that here, unlike the case of limits of inverse spectra, in general one cannot
assert that the space lim
−→Eα is complete if all spaces (Eα, τα) are complete (see
Exercise 2.10.23).
In Schaefer’s book [436], the object called above “the limit of a direct spectre”
is called “an inductive limit”; thus, the meaning of the term an “inductive limit” is
broader here than in [436] (where it corresponds to an “inductive topology”).
Let us now consider one special — but the most important for applications —
class of direct spectra.
2.4.8. Example. Suppose that the index set A is the set of natural numbers IN
with its usual order and that all mappings Aij : Ej →Ei (defined for j ⩽i) are
injective. Due to the latter assumption we can assume that every locally convex
space Ei is a vector subspace in Ei+n (notation: Ei ⊂⊂Ei+n). By the continuity
of the mappings Aij the topology induced on Ei by the topology τi+n of the
space Ei+n is majorized by the original topology τi of the space Ei.
Thus, we assume that E1 ⊂⊂E2 ⊂⊂. . . ⊂⊂En ⊂⊂. . . and E = ∞
j=1 Ej;
the set E has a naturally defined structure of a vector space: if x1, x2 ∈E,
then x1, x2 ∈En for some n ∈IN, and λ1x1 + λ2x2 in E is defined as the
corresponding linear combination in En; since En ⊂⊂En+j, this definition does
not depend on our choice of En.
Under the stated conditions the vector space E equipped with the inductive
topology of the family {En : n ∈IN} with respect to the embeddings En →E is
“canonically isomorphic” to the space lim
−→En.
This isomorphism Ψ: E →lim
−→En can be described as follows. Let x ∈E,
i.e., x ∈En for some n ∈IN. Then Ψ(x) is an element of the space lim
−→En (that
is a quotient of the space  
n En) which is the image under the canonical mapping
Φ:  
n En →lim
−→En of the element gn
x ∈ 
n En defined as follows: gn
x(j) = 0
if j ̸= n; gn
x(n) = x. This definition is independent of our choice of n, since if
j ⩾n, then Ajn(x) = x and hence Φ(gn
x) = Φ(gj
x). The mapping Ψ is surjective:
if a ∈lim
−→Rn, g ∈Φ−1(a), then Ψ
	
n g(n)

= a (the set {n: g(n) ̸= 0} is
finite).
Finally, the mappings Ψ and Ψ−1 are continuous; the proof of this is similar
to the proof of Proposition 2.4.6.
Thus, the space E, equipped with the inductive topology defined above is a
realization of a direct spectre. This realization will be denoted by the symbols
ind En or indnEn; the locally convex space ind En will be called the inductive
limit of the increasing sequence of locally convex spaces En.
Note that it often happens that it is not E that is constructed by means of a pri-
ori defined spaces En, but the spaces En are defined as suitable vector subspaces
(with locally convex topologies) of an a priori given space E (without topology)
that is their set-theoretic union. the term the “inductive limit of an increasing
sequence of locally convex spaces En” means precisely the same as the term the

2.4. Examples of inductive limits
117
“inductive limit of a family {En} of locally convex spaces with respect to embed-
dings En →E”. Though, once the space ∞
n=1 En is introduced, the difference
between the latter and the former situations disappears. One should have in mind
that even the inductive limit of a sequence of Banach spaces can be non-separated
(Exercise 2.10.24). The inductive limit of a sequence of Fr´echet spaces is called
an LF-space.
2.4.9. Example. Let D be the vector space of all infinitely differentiable (real)
functions on IR1 with compact support. For every n ∈IN let Dn := D[−n, n] de-
note the subspace consisting of all functions vanishing outside of [−n, n] equipped
with the topology defined by the norms
pi(ϕ) =
max
j∈{0,1,...,i} max
t
|ϕ(j)(t)|.
Then D[−1, 1] ⊂⊂D[−2, 2] ⊂⊂· · · ⊂⊂D[−n, n] ⊂⊂· · · and 
n D[−n, n] = D,
so that we are in the situation described in the second part of the previous example.
The inductive topology in D of the family of locally convex spaces D[−n, n],
where n ∈IN, with respect to the family of embeddings D[−n, n] →D coincides
with the topology in D introduced in Example 1.3.21. Thus, D = lim
−→D[−n, n].
This topology in D is regarded as the standard one; if it is not stated otherwise,
it is assumed (in this book and also in other books) that D is equipped with this
topology.
The space D[−n, n] can be naturally identified with the space of all infin-
itely differentiable functions on the interval [−n, n] vanishing with all derivatives
at the points ±n; to every function in the first space we associate its restric-
tion to the interval [−n, n], and every function in the second space is associated
with its extension by zero from [−n, n] to IR1.
For the second space we use
the same notation D[−n, n] and equip it with the topology defined by the same
norms p′
j(ϕ) = maxi⩽j maxt |ϕ(i)(t)|. Although now D[−n, n] is not formally a
subspace in D[−n −j, n + j], we obtain the same inductive limit.
2.4.10.
Remark. (i) For every j ∈{0, 1, 2, . . . } and every natural n let
Kj
[−n,n] denote the vector space of all j-fold continuously differentiable real func-
tions on IR1 (for j = 0 we obtain just continuous functions) vanishing outside the
interval [−n, n] and equipped with the topology generated by the norms qj defined
by the equality
qj(ϕ) = max

max
t
|ϕ(i)(t)|: i = 0, 1, . . . , j

.
Then, for every n ∈IN, the family {Kj
[−n,n] : j = 0, 1, . . . } is the inverse spec-
tre with respect to the embeddings Kj+1
[−n,n] →Kj
[−n,n], moreover, the spaces
lim
←−jKj
[−n,n] and D[−n, n] coincide as locally convex spaces (Example 2.4.9). At
the same time, for every j ⩾0 the family {Kj
[−n,n] : n ∈IN} forms a direct
spectre with respect to the embeddings Kj
[−n,n] →Kj
[−n−1,n+1]. For every j ⩾0
the set Kj = ind
n Kj
[−n,n] (in place of the symbol K0 we shall usually use the

118
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
symbol K). The locally convex spaces {Kj : j ⩾0} form an inverse spectre with
respect to the embeddings Kj+1 →Kj, and the locally convex space lim
←−Kj can
be identified as a vector space with the space 
∞
j=1 Kj, which coincides as a vector
space with D. However, as locally convex spaces the space D with the standard
topology and the space lim
←−Kj are not isomorphic. When we identify them as
vector spaces the topology of the space D turns out to be strictly stronger than the
topology of the space lim
←−Kj. Note that no linear mapping of one of these spaces
onto the other can be continuous in both directions (i.e., is not an isomorphism
of topological vector spaces) at least for the reason that the locally convex space
D with the standard topology is barrelled, but the locally convex space lim
←−Kj is
not (the definition of a barrelled space is given in § 3.5, the proof of the fact that
lim
←−Kj is not barrelled is delegated to Exercise 3.12.55).
Taking into account the definition of the standard topology in D, the observa-
tions made above can be summarized as the inequality
lim
←−j

ind
n Kj
[−n,n]

̸= ind
n

lim
←−jKj
[−n,n]

.
Thus, the operations of forming direct and inverse spectra do not commute.
(ii) So far we have considered spaces of functions with compact support on IR1
(for simplicity we had in mind real functions, but nothing changes if we consider
complex spaces of complex functions). Completely analogous constructions apply
to spaces of functions on IRn and even on domains in IRn.
Namely, let Ω be an open set in IRn. A function on Ω has compact support
if it vanishes outside a compact set in Ω (we consider real or complex functions).
Let K1 ⊂K2 ⊂K3 ⊂· · · be an increasing sequence of compact subsets of Ω
such that ∞
m=1 Km = Ω. If in the previous discussion of Example 2.4.9, the
symbols [−n, n] and IR1 are replaced with Km and Ω, the words “compact inter-
val” by the word “compact”, and the symbols Kj and D with the symbols Kj(Ω)
and D(Ω) denoting the spaces of all j-fold differentiable and all infinitely differ-
entiable functions with compact support in Ω, respectively, and assume that the
symbols |ϕ(j)(x)| denote (certain) norms on the spaces to which belong the ele-
ments ϕ(j)(x), say, the sums of all mixed partial derivatives of order j, then all
our definitions remain meaningful and all our assertions will be valid. For exam-
ple, D(IRn) is the inductive limit of the spaces Dm(IRn) of smooth functions with
support in the ball Km = {x: |x| ⩽m}.
2.4.11. Example. (The strongest locally convex topology in a vector space.)
Let E be a vector space. Then the inductive topology in E of the empty family of
locally convex spaces with respect to the empty family of mappings is the strongest
locally convex topology in E; a base of neighborhoods of zero is, for example,
the set of all convex circled absorbent subsets of the space E. This topology
can be defined by the set of all seminorms on E. Note that the strongest locally
convex topology in a vector space has already been considered in Examples 1.3.18
and 2.4.1. An interesting situation arises if we take for E the space IR∞
0
of all
finite sequences, i.e., the union of IRn. On this space the strongest locally convex

2.5. Grothendieck’s construction
119
topology coincides with the topology of the inductive limit of IRn (this is clear
from Proposition 2.3.5).
2.4.12. Example. (Spaces of germs of continuous, infinitely differentiable
and analytic functions at a fixed point.) We consider only the case of analytic
functions, other cases are similar.
Let z ∈C and let E1 be the set of all complex functions each of which is
defined in some neighborhood of the point z and is analytic in this neighborhood
and let ∼be the equivalence relation in E1 defined as follows: f ∼g if and only
if there exists a neighborhood V of the point z such that f and g are defined in V
and f(x) = g(x) for all x ∈V .
Finally, let E be the quotient of E1 with respect to this equivalence relation.
Then E is naturally equipped with a vector structure; its elements are called germs
of analytic functions at the point z.
For every n ∈IN we take the space En of all complex functions continuous
on the disc Sn = {x ∈C: |x −z| ⩽1/n} and analytic inside Sn and equip it
with the topology defined by the norm
p(ϕ) = max{|ϕ(x)|: |x −z| ⩽1/n}.
Let gn be the embedding of En into E associating to every function ϕ ∈En the
germ containing it (note that in the remaining three cases mentioned above, similar
mappings are not embeddings). We define similarly an embedding En →En+1:
to every function in En we associate its restriction to Sn+1.
Thus, E1 ⊂⊂E2 ⊂⊂· · · ⊂⊂En ⊂⊂· · · , En ⊂⊂E, and E = ∞
n=1 En. Let
us equip E with the inductive topology of the family of locally convex spaces En
with respect to the embeddings gn.
This makes E the inductive limit of the
increasing sequence of locally convex spaces En.
Finally, note that spaces like D can be defined on smooth manifolds, and
spaces of germs of holomorphic functions can be considered on complex mani-
folds.
In § 2.6 and § 2.7 we describe two classes of inductive limits of increasing
sequences of locally convex spaces most often encountered in applications: strict
inductive limits and inductive limits of increasing sequences of locally convex
spaces with compact embeddings.
2.5. Grothendieck’s construction
In this section we consider a method of constructing normed spaces associated
with absolutely convex sets in topological vector spaces.
This method, which
became popular after Grothendieck’s works and found numerous applications in
the theory of locally convex spaces, the theory of Banach space, the operator
theory, and measure theory, consists in the following procedure.
Let E be a Hausdorff topological vector space and let B be its bounded
absolutely convex subset. Denote by EB the vector subspace ∞
n=1 nB (the fact
that this is indeed a vector space follows from the absolute convexity of the set B)
equipped with the norm pB that is the Minkowski functional of the set B. The

120
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
space EB is also equipped with the topology generated by this norm. The fact that
the Minkowski functional is a seminorm on EB follows from the condition that
B is an absolutely convex absorbent subset of the vector space EB; the condition
that B is a bounded subset of a Hausdorff topological vector space yields that the
regarded Minkowski functional is a norm.
The set EB is a vector subspace of the vector space E. However, in the
general case, it is not a topological vector subspace in E, i.e., the topology induced
on EB by the topology of the space E does not coincide with the just defined
topology of the normed space EB. The boundedness of the set B implies that the
canonical embedding of EB into E is continuous; this is equivalent to saying that
the topology induced in EB from E is weaker than the norm topology in EB. See
also § 2.10(iii).
2.5.1. Proposition. If B is an absolutely convex bounded sequentially com-
plete subset of a Hausdorff topological vector space E, then the normed space EB
is complete, i.e., is a Banach space.
PROOF. Let a sequence {an} ⊂EB be Cauchy in the norm pB. This means
that for every ε > 0 there exists n0 ∈IN such that pB(ak −aj) < ε for all
k, j > n0. Since the topology induced in EB by the topology of the space E is
majorized by the topology defined by the norm pB, the sequence {an} is Cauchy
also in E. Hence for every fixed k ∈IN the sequence {ak −aj} is Cauchy in
the topology of the space E. Since the inequality pB(ak −aj) < ε yields that
ak −aj ∈εB, it follows that ak −aj ∈εB whenever k, j > n0. The set εB
is sequentially complete in E, hence the Cauchy sequence {ak −aj}∞
j=1 of its
elements converges in the topology of the space E to some element bk ∈B.
Hence the sequence {an} converges in the topology of E, moreover, if a is its
limit, then ak −a = bk ∈εB ⊂EB for all k > n0.
Since ak ∈EB, we have a ∈EB. In addition, the inclusion ak −a ∈εB
(fulfilled for all k > n0) yields that for such k we have pB(ak −a) ⩽ε. This
means that ak →a in EB, because ε was arbitrary.
□
Similarly one can prove that if E is a vector space and τ1 and τ2 are two
Hausdorff topologies in E compatible with the vector structure and τ1 is stronger
than τ2 and possesses a base of neighborhoods of zero sequentially complete (or
complete) in the topology τ2, then the topological vector space (E, τ1) is sequen-
tially complete (respectively, complete).
2.5.2. Definition. A Banach disc in a topological vector space E is an ab-
solutely convex bounded subset B of the space E for which the space EB is
complete.
The proposition above yields the following fact:
in order that an absolutely convex bounded subset B of a topological vector space
be a Banach disc it is sufficient that it be sequentially complete (which holds,
in particular, if B is compact); moreover, it is sufficient that B be sequentially
complete in a topology in E that agrees with the duality between E and E′; in
particular, it is sufficient that this set be compact in some of such topologies.

2.5. Grothendieck’s construction
121
Neither of the aforementioned conditions is necessary.
2.5.3. Example. (i) The subset

x = (xn) ∈c0 : (nxn) ∈c0, |xn| ⩽1/n ∀n

of the space c0 is a Banach disc, although it is not compact in any topology that
agrees with the duality between c0 and (c0)′ = l1.
(ii) the closed unit ball U of C[0, 1] is a Banach disc in L2[0, 1] which is
not closed and not precompact. The closure of U in L2[0, 1] is also a Banach
disc for which the associated Banach space is L∞[0, 1], where C[0, 1] has infinite
codimension.
(iii) The space E = l1 is naturally embedded into l2; let A be its closed unit
ball. Let us take the functional f ∈l∞defined by the sequence (1, 1, . . .). Set
B = A ∩f −1(0) and obtain a Banach disc. Certainly, it is easy to describe B
explicitly: this is the set of sequences x = (xn) such that 	∞
n=1 |xn| ⩽1 and
	∞
n=1 xn = 0. The set B is the closed unit ball in the Banach space EB, that
is a closed hyperplane in l1. But in l2 the set B is not closed. For example,
the vector h = (2−1, 0, 0, . . .) ̸∈B is the limit in l2 of the sequence of vectors
hk ∈B of the form

2−1, −(2k)−1, . . . , −(2k)−1, 0, 0, . . .

, where the number of
components −(2k)−1 equals k; here ∥h −hk∥2
l2 = (4k)−1.
A similar property holds for the non-closed precompact set
{x = (xn) ∈l2 : |xn| ⩽2−n, lim
n→∞2nxn = 0}.
In fact, such examples are quite common.
2.5.4. Example. In every infinite-dimensional Fr´echet space F there is a non-
closed Banach disc B that serves as the closed unit ball of the Banach space EB.
In addition, we can take B totally bounded in F.
PROOF. The assertion reduces to the case F = l2, since one can find an
infinite-dimensional separable Hilbert space continuously embedded into F (then
the previous example can be used). To this end it suffices to take in F a bounded
sequence {vn} of linearly independent vectors and set Tx = 	∞
n=1 2−nxnvn,
x = (xn) ∈l2. The orthogonal complement to the kernel of T is injectively
mapped to F and the image of the obtained mapping contains {vn}. We observe
that the constructed embedding is compact.
□
Clearly, a similar example exists in every locally convex space to which one
can continuously embed an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space.
It is rather surprising that the closure of a Banach disc is not always a Banach
disc (see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, Remark 8.3.21]).
Let us give a simple application of the notion of a Banach disc.
2.5.5. Example. Let B be a Banach disc in a topological vector space E and
let S ⊂E be an absolutely convex closed set such that its linear span contains B.
Then there exists t > 0 such that tB ⊂S.
Indeed, the set S ∩EB is closed in the Banach space EB with norm pB and
the latter is the union of the closed sets n(S ∩EB). By the classical Baire category

122
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
theorem (see Bogachev, Smolyanov [72, § 1.5] or Rudin [425, p. 43]) for some n
the set n(S ∩EB) has inner points (in the topology of the norm pB). Hence this is
true also for the set S ∩EB, which by its absolute convexity proves our assertion.
Let us introduce one more important concept.
2.5.6. Definition. A barrel in a locally convex space E is a closed absolutely
convex absorbent set.
The next simple but useful fact following from the previous example is called
the Banach–Mackey theorem.
2.5.7. Theorem. In every locally convex space every barrel absorbs every
Banach disc.
2.5.8. Proposition. Let S be a convex subset of a locally convex space E
such that every infinite sequence of its elements has a limit point in E. Then S is
contained in some Banach disc. In particular, S is absorbed by every barrel.
PROOF. In analogy with the usual l1 we introduce the Banach space l1(S)
consisting of real functions ξ on S non-vanishing in at most countably many
points and having a finite norm ∥ξ∥= 	
s |ξ(s)|.
Let E denote the completion of E. Consider the mapping T : l1(S) →E,
Tξ = 	
s∈S ξ(s)s; for every x ∈l1(S) there are only countably many points
sn for which ξ(sn) ̸= 0, hence the series 	∞
n=1 ξ(sn)sn converges in E by the
completeness of E and boundedness of S following from our assumptions. It is
also seen from this that T is continuous. The desired disc will be the image of the
closed unit ball U in l1(S) if we verify that S ⊂T(U) and T(U) ⊂E. The former
is obvious, since s = T(es), where es is the indicator function of the point s. For
proving the latter it suffices to show that Tξ ∈E for all ξ ∈U such that ξ(sn) > 0
for all points in the support of ξ. In this case vN = M −1
N
	N
n=1 ξ(sn)sn ∈S by
convexity, where MN := 	N
n=1 ξ(sn). By our assumption, the sequence {vN}
has a limit point v ∈E, but MN →∥ξ∥and MNvN →Tξ in E, whence it
follows that ∥ξ∥v = Tξ. Hence Tξ ∈E.
□
2.5.9. Theorem. Let F be a metrizable locally convex space and let A ⊂F be
a bounded set. Then there exists a bounded closed absolutely convex set B ⊂F
such that A ⊂B and the normed space EB induces on A the same topology as F.
If A is precompact or compact in F, then it will retain this property in EB.
In addition, for every sequence of bounded sets An ⊂F there is a bounded
closed absolutely convex set D such that all sets An are bounded in ED.
PROOF. Passing to the absolutely convex hull of A, we can assume that A
is absolutely convex. In this case it suffices to find a bounded closed absolutely
convex set B ⊂F containing A for which EB and F induce the same neigh-
borhoods of zero in A, which reduces to showing that, given a base {Vn} of
absolutely convex closed neighborhoods of zero in F, for every λ > 0 we can
find n with A ∩Vn ⊂λB.
If this is done, then for every point a ∈A and
every λ > 0 we can take Vm such that A ∩(a + Vm) ⊂a + λB. Indeed, let

2.5. Grothendieck’s construction
123
Vm be such that A ∩Vm ⊂2−1λB. If a1 = a + v ∈A, where v ∈Vm, then
v/2 = (a1 −a)/2 ∈A∩Vm ⊂2−1λB and hence a1 −a ∈λB, i.e., a1 ∈a+λB.
By the boundedness of A there are numbers λn >0 for which A⊂
∞
n=1 λnVn.
Clearly, we can assume that λn →+∞. Let us set B := 
∞
n=1 λ2
nVn. Then B is
absolutely convex, closed and bounded (since we have λ−2
n B ⊂Vn), A ⊂B.
If λ > 0, then there exists n0 such that λλn ⩾1 for all n ⩾n0. Then
A ⊂λλ2
nVn for all n ⩾n0. Since there exists m such that Vm ⊂
k⩽n0 λλ2
kVk,
we have A∩Vm ⊂λλ2
nVn for all n, whence we obtain A∩Vm ⊂λB, as required.
Let us prove the last assertion. Let {Vn} be a basis of closed neighborhoods
of zero consisting of absolutely convex sets such that Vn+1 ⊂Vn. For every n
there exists cn > 0 such that cnAn ⊂Vn. For D we can take the closed absolutely
convex hull of the union of cnAn.
□
Note that the spaces EB and F induce on B also the same uniform structure
(see § 1.12(i)).
Even if V is a convex balanced compact set in a Hilbert space, the Banach
space (EV , pV ) is not always separable.
For example, this happens with the
convex compact set V = {(xn): supn |xn| ⩽1} in the weighted Hilbert space
E =

x = (xn): ∥x∥2 :=
∞

n=1
n−2x2
n < ∞

.
In this case EV coincides with l∞. However, the following assertion is valid.
2.5.10. Theorem. Let E be a complete metrizable locally convex space and
let K be a compact set in E. Then there exists a convex balanced compact set V
containing K such that the Banach space (EV , pV ) is separable and K is compact
with respect to the norm pV .
PROOF. Due to the completeness of E and two previous theorems, there
exists a balanced convex compact set W0 containing K such that K is compact as
a subset of the Banach space EW0. Then the linear span of K in EW0 is separable
with respect to the norm pW0. The closure E0 of this linear span with respect to
the norm pW0 in EW0 gives the desired separable Banach space EW , whose unit
ball is the set W := W0 ∩E0.
□
One can go further and obtain the following useful assertion — the Davies–
Figiel–Johnson–Pe	lczy´nski theorem, a proof of which and of its corollary can
be found in Diestel [120, Chapter V, § 4], Bogachev, Smolyanov [72, Theo-
rem 8.6.24]. On reflexivity, see § 3.7.
2.5.11. Theorem. Let X be a Banach space and let K be a convex balanced
weakly compact set in X. Then there exists a bounded closed balanced convex
set W containing K such that the Banach space (EW , pW ) is reflexive. If K is
compact, then W can be chosen compact and EW can be made separable.
2.5.12.
Corollary. In the situation of Theorem 2.5.10 the Banach space
(EV , pV ) can be chosen separable reflexive.

124
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
As shown in Fonf, Johnson, Pisier, Preiss [173], it is not always possible
to take for the space EW a space with a Schauder basis (see the definition in
Chapter 3).
In the case of compact V the topology of the space EV is much stronger than
the original topology of E. Nevertheless, as the following result shows, on the
Banach space EV there are sufficiently many linear functionals continuous with
respect to this original topology.
2.5.13.
Proposition. Let V be a compact, convex and balanced set in a
locally convex space E and let B∗be the unit ball in the dual to the Banach
space EV . Then the set of all functionals in B∗continuous with respect to the
topology induced from E is dense in B∗in the topology of uniform convergence
on compact sets in EV .
For a proof, see Bogachev, Smolyanov [72, Proposition 8.6.26].
2.5.14. Proposition. Let {xn} be a sequence in a locally convex space con-
verging to zero. Its closed absolutely convex hull K is compact precisely when the
space EK is Banach. In this case the compact K is metrizable.
PROOF. If K is compact, then EK is Banach. Conversely, let EK be com-
plete. Consider the linear mapping T : l1 →EK, T(yn) = 	∞
n=1 ynxn, which is
defined and continuous, since the vectors xn belong to the unit ball of EK. Let
U be the closed unit ball in l1. Since l1 = c∗
0, the set U is a metrizable compact
in the topology σ(l1, c0), see Theorem 3.1.4.
We show that T is continuous on U with this topology (on all of l1 this can
be false). If vectors vi = (vi
n) ∈U converge to v = (vn) ∈U coordinate-wise,
then for every continuous seminorm p on E and every ε > 0 we find a number m
with the property that p(xn) < ε for all n ⩾m, and then take a number M such
that |vi
n −vn| < ε

p(x1) + · · · + p(xm) + 1
−1 for all n = 1, . . . , m and i ⩾M.
Then whenever i ⩾M we obtain the estimate
p(Tvi −Tv) ⩽
m

n=1
|vi
n −vn|p(xn) + ε
∞

n=1

|vi
n| + |vn|

⩽3ε,
which proves the continuity of T on U in the topology σ(l1, c0). Therefore, T(U)
is a metrizable compact set in E. This yields at once also the compactness and
metrizability of K, since {xn} ⊂T(U), but actually we have K = T(U), which
is easily verified by observing that the absolutely convex hull of {xn} is dense
in T(U).
□
2.5.15. Theorem. In every locally convex space whose algebraic basis is
at most of cardinality of the continuum there exists a hyperplane not containing
Banach discs with an infinite-dimensional linear span.
For a proof, see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, Theorem 6.3.11].
A compact set K in a Banach space X is called s-compact if it is contained in
the closed absolutely convex hull of some sequence {xn} in X with the following
property: for every p ∈IN the sequence {npxn} converges to zero.

2.6. Strict inductive limits
125
2.5.16. Theorem. For every s-compact set K in a Banach space X there
exists an s-compact Banach disc C such that EC is a separable Hilbert space, the
embedding EC →X is a nuclear operator (see the definition in § 2.9), and K
remains s-compact also in EC.
For a proof, see [385, Theorem 6.5.4].
2.6. Strict inductive limits
Let {En} be an increasing sequence of locally convex spaces:
E1 ⊂⊂E2 ⊂⊂. . . ⊂⊂En ⊂⊂. . .
such that for each index n the embedding En ⊂En+1 is continuous, where ⊂⊂
means “a linear subspace”, as above.
The union E = ∞
n=1 En is equipped
with the strongest locally convex topology in which the embeddings En →E
are continuous; for a base of neighborhoods of zero in it we can take convex
sets V ⊂E such that every intersection V ∩En is a neighborhood of zero in En.
The space E is called the inductive limit of the sequence {En} and denoted by
the symbol indnEn (see § 2.4). We shall see in § 2.10(i) that such inductive limit
cannot be an inductive limit in the category of topological spaces, i.e., indnEn can
contain non-closed sets (even convex) whose intersections with all En are closed.
Two increasing sequences of locally convex spaces En and Fn are called
equivalent if for every m there exist p and q such that Em ⊂Fp, Fm ⊂Eq, and
these embeddings are continuous.
It is readily seen that indnEn = indnFn for two such sequences.
2.6.1. Definition. If for all n the topology in En coincides with the topology
induced from En+1 and En ̸= En+1, then the inductive limit of {En} is called
strict.
The canonical example is the space D (see Example 2.4.9) represented as the
union of the closed subspaces Dn.
Let us show that the topology in En is induced by the topology in E.
2.6.2. Lemma. If E = indnEn is a strict inductive limit, then the topology
in En is induced by the topology in E.
If all spaces En are separated, then E is Hausdorff as well.
PROOF. It is clear that the topology in En is not weaker than the induced
topology. Conversely, let U be an absolutely convex neighborhood of zero in En.
Lemma 1.3.12 gives an absolutely convex neighborhood of zero Un+1 in En+1
such that Un+1 ∩En = U. By induction we obtain increasing absolutely convex
neighborhoods of zero Uk ⊂Ek with k > n such that Uk+1 ∩Ek = Uk. Then
V = ∞
k=n+1 Uk is a neighborhood of zero in E and V ∩En = U. It is also seen
from this that if all spaces En are separated, then so is E.
□
2.6.3. Proposition. Let E be the strict inductive limit of separated locally
convex spaces En such that every En is closed in En+1.
(i) A set A is bounded in E if and only if A is contained in some space En
and is bounded in it.

126
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
(ii) Every compact set in E is a compact subset of some En, and similarly for
totally bounded sets. In particular, every countable sequence converging in E is
contained and converges in some of the spaces En.
(iii) All subspaces En are closed in E.
PROOF. (i) It is clear that if A is bounded in En, then it is bounded in E.
Conversely, let A ⊂E be bounded. If A is contained in no En, then there exist
increasing numbers kn and points an ∈(Ekn∩A)\Ekn−1. By using Lemma 1.3.12
and induction we find absolutely convex neighborhoods of zero Vn ⊂Ekn such
that n−1an ̸∈Vn+1 and Vn+1 ∩Ekn = Vn for all n. The set V = ∞
n=1 Vn is a
neighborhood of zero in E, but n−1an ̸∈V , which contradicts the boundedness
of A. Thus, A must belong to one of the sets En, and then it is bounded in it
due to the coincidence of the topology in En with the induced one. Assertion (ii)
follows at once by (i). Finally, (iii) follows from the previous lemma, since if a net
of elements xα ∈En converges to a point x ∈E, then x ∈Em for some m ⩾n,
but En is closed in Em by the closedness of En in En+1.
□
Note that for general inductive limits these assertions are false (see Exer-
cise 2.10.25). In addition, one should bear in mind that not every subspace L ⊂E
is the inductive limit of L ∩En (see Proposition 2.10.7 and Exercise 2.10.63).
2.6.4. Corollary. In the situation of the previous proposition the space E is
not metrizable.
PROOF. If E is metrizable, then, taking a basis of decreasing neighborhoods
of zero Un in E and choosing a vector an ∈Un\En for each n, we obtain a
sequence converging to zero, which contradicts the proven proposition.
□
2.6.5. Proposition. The strict inductive limit E of complete separated locally
convex spaces En is complete.
PROOF. Suppose that there is a point z ̸∈E in the completion E of the
space E. We observe that En is closed in E by the completeness of En. Hence
for each n there exists an absolutely convex neighborhood of zero Wn such that
(z + Wn) ∩En = ∅. These neighborhoods can be chosen in such a way that
Wn+1 ⊂Wn for all n.
The convex hull of the set ∞
n=1(2−1Wn ∩En) will be denoted by U. Then
U is a neighborhood of zero in E, therefore, its closure U in E is a closed
neighborhood of zero in E.
Since E is dense in E, the set (z + U) ∩E is
nonempty; hence for some n there exists v ∈(z + U) ∩En, i.e., v = z + u ∈En,
where u ∈U. We show that U ⊂Wn+En, whence it will follow that u = wn+y,
where wn ∈Wn, y ∈En, but this will give the inclusion z + wn = v −y ∈En
contradicting our choice of Wn.
Thus, let x ∈U. Then x ∈U + 2−1Wn, so x = u + wn/2, where u ∈U,
wn ∈Wn. Hence x = λ1x1 + · · · + λkxk + wn/2, where xj ∈2−1Wj ∩Ej,
|λ1| + · · · + |λk| = 1. We can assume that k ⩾n. We have
λ1x1 + · · · + λnxn ∈En,
λn+1xn+1 + · · · + λkxk ∈2−1Wn,

2.7. Inductive limits with compact embeddings
127
since Wj ⊂Wn for j > n and the neighborhood Wn is absolutely convex. Thus
λ1x1 + · · · + λkxk ∈En + 2−1Wn, whence we obtain that x ∈En + Wn, as
required.
□
For example, D(IRn) is complete. Some additional interesting information
can be found in P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, Chapter 8].
2.7. Inductive limits with compact embeddings
We now turn to another important case where the topology of En is a priori
strictly stronger than the induced topology of En+1.
We shall say that an increasing sequence of Hausdorff locally convex spa-
ces En is regular if, for each n, there is a closed neighborhood of zero in En with
compact closure in En+1. If one can find a closed neighborhood of zero in En
compact in En+1, then we shall say that we have a strongly regular sequence.
It is easy to see that a regular sequence is not always strongly regular.
Recall that the equivalence of sequences of embedded spaces are defined
in § 2.6.
2.7.1. Lemma. Every regular sequence {En} is equivalent to some strongly
regular sequence of separable reflexive Banach spaces.
PROOF. For every n we find in En a closed absolutely convex neighborhood
of zero Vn whose closure Kn is compact in En+1 and set Xn := EKn (see § 2.5).
Then Xn is a Banach space, En ⊂Xn ⊂En+1 ⊂Xn+1, and these embeddings
are continuous. Hence the closed unit ball of Xn (i.e., Kn) is compact in Xn+1.
Thus, the sequences {En} and {Xn} are equivalent and {Xn} is strongly regular.
Now with the aid of Corollary 2.5.12 we can obtain an equivalent sequence
of separable reflexive Banach spaces.
□
A sequence of absolutely convex compacts Kn in a locally convex space E
will be called regular if E = ∞
n=1 Kn, every Kn is contained in the algebraic
kernel of Kn+1 (see § 1.10) and is compact in the Banach space EKn+1.
2.7.2. Lemma. Let {Kn} be a regular sequence of absolutely convex compact
sets. Then for each m and each scalar λ there exists a number n such that λKm
is contained in the algebraic kernel of Kn.
PROOF. For n > m let Gn be the algebraic kernel of Kn ∩EKm+1. Zero be-
longs to the topological interior of the set Kn∩EKm+1 in the Banach space EKm+1.
Hence the algebraic kernel of this set coincides with the topological one in the
space EKm+1 (Exercise 1.12.82). Thus, the sets Gn are open in EKm+1. They
cover λKm, since the algebraic kernels of Kn cover E (since Kn is contained
in the algebraic kernel of Kn+1), moreover, Km is compact in this space. Hence
λKm is contained in some Gn and so belongs to the algebraic kernel of Kn.
□
2.7.3. Lemma. Let {Kn} be a regular sequence of absolutely convex compact
sets. Then each absolutely convex compact set K ⊂E is contained in some Kn.

128
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
PROOF. By the continuity of the embedding EK →E we obtain that the
absolutely convex set set Kn ∩EK is closed in the Banach space EK. Hence
some intersection Km ∩EK contains a neighborhood of zero in EK. Therefore,
there exists λ > 0 such that K ⊂λKm. By the previous lemma K belongs to
some Kn.
□
2.7.4.
Lemma. In every regular inductive limit of a sequence of locally
convex spaces there is a regular sequence of absolutely convex compact sets.
PROOF. We represent the given space in the form of a regular limit of some
sequence of Banach spaces Xn in which increasing closed unit balls Un are com-
pact in Xn+1. Then we can take Kn = nUn.
□
2.7.5. Lemma. Let E = indnEn be a regular inductive limit of some se-
quence of locally convex spaces En, let {Kn} be an arbitrary regular sequence of
absolutely convex compacts in E. Then E is the inductive limit of the sequence of
Banach spaces EKn.
PROOF. Let us take the same Xn and Un as in the previous proof. Then the
sequences {Xn} and {EKn} are equivalent by Lemma 2.7.3.
□
We shall say that a topological space X is a free union of a sequence of its
subspaces Xn if X = ∞
n=1 Xn and the closed sets in X are exactly those sets
whose intersection which each Xn is closed in Xn in the induced topology. Thus,
the space X is the inductive limit of the subspaces Xn in the category of general
topological spaces. It is important to emphasize that if Xn are increasing locally
convex spaces continuously embedded into embracing spaces, then the topology
of the inductive limit in the category of general topological spaces can be strictly
stronger than the topology of the inductive limit in the category of locally convex
spaces. This happens in the case of the space D(IR1): as we shall see below, it is
not a free union of its closed subspaces D[−n, n]. There is a principal difference
between the next theorem and the case of strict inductive limits.
2.7.6. Theorem. The inductive limit E = indnEn of a regular sequence of
locally convex spaces is a free union of any regular sequence of its absolutely
convex compact subsets.
PROOF. Let {Kn} be a regular sequence of absolutely convex compacts in
E and let A be a set such that all intersections A ∩Kn are closed. We show that
A is closed. Let x0 ̸∈A. By assumption there exists a number p for which x0 is
contained in Kp−1, hence also in the algebraic kernel of Kp. By induction we find
an increasing sequence of sets Vn, n ⩾p, with the following properties: 1) Vn is a
closed absolutely convex neighborhood of zero in EKn and is compact in EKn+1,
2) x0 + Vn ⊂Kn, 3) (x0 + Vn) ∩A = ∅.
For the set Vp we take a closed ball of a sufficiently small radius in EKp; this
is possible, since A ∩(A ∩EKp) is closed in EKp, x0 ̸∈A ∩(A ∩EKp) and x0 is
contained in the algebraic kernel of Kp. If increasing absolutely convex compact
sets Vp, . . . , Vn with the desired properties are already picked in the respective
spaces up to EKn, then Vn+1 is constructed as follows.

2.7. Inductive limits with compact embeddings
129
The set A ∩Kn+1 is closed in EKn+1 by the closedness in E and continuity
of the embedding EKn+1 →E.
The set x0 + Vn is disjoint with A ∩Kn+1
and with the unit sphere Sn+1 in EKn+1 (since along with Kn it is contained in
the algebraic kernel of Kn+1). Since x0 + Vn is compact in EKn+1 and the set
(A ∩Kn+1) ∪Sn+1 is closed in the Banach space EKn+1, the distance d between
them in the norm of EKn+1 is positive.
Therefore, setting Vn+1 = Vn + 2−1dKn+1, we obtain an absolutely convex
set compact in EKn+2 due to the compactness of Vn and Kn+1 in EKn+2. It is
clear that Vn ⊂Vn+1 for all n and Vn+1 is a closed neighborhood of zero in the
space EKn+1. Finally, x0 + Vn+1 ⊂Kn+1 and (x0 + Vn+1) ∩A = ∅due to our
choice of d.
Thus, the sets Vn are constructed. Then the set V = ∞
n=p Vn is a closed
absolutely convex neighborhood of zero in E and (x0 + V ) ∩A = ∅. Therefore,
E\A is open in E, i.e., A is closed.
□
2.7.7.
Corollary. A set A in a regular inductive limit indnEn is closed
precisely when every intersection A ∩En is closed in En.
PROOF. Let A ∩En be closed in En for all n. Taking a regular sequence of
absolutely convex compact sets Kn, we obtain that A ∩Kn is closed, which gives
the closedness of A. The converse is obvious.
□
2.7.8.
Corollary. A set A in a regular inductive limit indnEn is closed
precisely when it is sequentially closed, i.e., contains the limits of all its convergent
countable sequences.
PROOF. Let A be sequentially closed in E.
We represent E as a regular
inductive limit of a sequence of Banach spaces Xn. Then A ∩Xn is sequentially
closed in each Banach space Xn, which implies that A is closed in E.
The
converse is obvious.
□
We observe that the previous two corollaries are not true for strict inductive
limits (considered in § 2.6), but the next corollary is true for them.
2.7.9. Corollary. In the situation of the theorem above, every compact set
in the space E is contained in some subspace En. In addition, every convergent
sequence in E is contained and converges in some En.
Moreover, every bounded set in E is contained in some En and has compact
closure there.
PROOF. It is clear that we can choose a regular sequence of absolutely convex
compact sets Kn such that 2Kn ⊂Kn+1 for all n.
Suppose that for every
n there is a point an of a given bounded set A not belonging to K2n.
Then
2−nan ̸∈Kn, since Kn ⊂2−nK2n. The countable set {2−nan} has a finite
intersection with each Kn and according to the results above turns out to be
closed in E. However, this is impossible, since by the boundedness of the set A
the sequence {2−nan} converges to zero that does not belong to this sequence.
Thus, the set A is contained in some Km, but we already know that the set Km is
contained and compact in some En.
□

130
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
If the spaces En are distinct, then we see on account of the obtained results
that the corresponding regular inductive limit is not metrizable. The proof of the
following fact is delegated to Exercise 2.10.28.
2.7.10. Corollary. Any regular inductive limit is complete.
2.7.11. Example. Let E be the inductive limit of an increasing sequence
of reflexive Banach spaces Xn with compact embeddings. Then E is a regular
inductive limit. In particular, this is true if all spaces Xn are Hilbert. If all Xn are
finite-dimensional, then this is true also in the case of continuous embeddings.
Indeed, any closed ball in Xn is compact in Xn+1 by the weak compactness
(which follows from the reflexivity) and totally bounded (which follows from the
compactness of the embedding).
Here is yet another property of regular inductive limits that is not possessed
by strict inductive limits (see Exercise 2.10.63).
2.7.12. Proposition. Any closed linear subspace of a regular inductive limit
indnEn equipped with the induced topology is again a regular inductive limit.
PROOF. Suppose that F is a closed linear subspace in a regular inductive
limit E = indnEn. We can assume that En are reflexive Banach spaces such
that the closed unit ball Kn of En is contained and is compact in the unit ball
Kn+1 of En+1. We show that Qn = Kn ∩F is a regular sequence of compact
sets in F. It is clear that Qn is an absolutely convex compact set in F, closed
in EQn+1. In addition, the set Qn is totally bounded in EQn+1. Indeed, it is
compact in EKn+1, so for every ε > 0 there exist points x1, . . . , xm ∈Qn for
which Qn ⊂m
i=1(xi + εKn+1), whence Qn ⊂m
i=1(xi + εQn+1). Therefore,
{Qn} is a regular sequence of compact sets in the subspace F. We now verify that
F with the induced topology coincides with the regular inductive limit indnEQn.
Let A⊂F be such that all A ∩Qn are closed. Then A ∩Kn is closed as well,
whence it follows that A is closed in E, hence also in F with the induced topology.
The converse is also true: if A is closed in F with the induced topology, then all
sets A ∩Qn are closed. Thus, F with the induced topology is a free union of Qn
and hence coincides with indnEQn.
□
2.8. Tensor products
Let E1 and E2 be two locally convex spaces. The algebraic tensor product
E1⊗E2 is usually defined as the natural quotient of the linear space formally
generated by expressions of the form x⊗y, where x ∈E1, y ∈E2, but here it will
be convenient to define E1⊗E2 from the very beginning as the linear subspace
in the algebraic dual to the space B(E1, E2) of bilinear functions on E1 ×E2
generated by the elements
x⊗y: b →b(x, y),
b ∈B(E1, E2).
When using this embedding the necessary factorization is done automatically.

2.8. Tensor products
131
The space E1⊗E2 can be equipped with different locally convex topologies.
The projective topology τπ is defined as the strongest locally convex topology in
which the canonical bilinear mapping E1×E2 →E1⊗E2 is continuous.
It is readily verified (see Schaefer [436, p. 93]) that the dual to the space
(E1⊗E2, τπ) can be identified with the space of all continuous bilinear functions on
E1×E2 in such a way that equicontinuous subsets in (E1⊗E2, τπ)′ will correspond
to equicontinuous sets of bilinear functions on E1×E2. In order to define τπ by
means of seminorms the following construction of the tensor product of seminorms
p and q on E1 and E2 is used. For w ∈E1⊗E2 set
p⊗q(w) = inf

i
p(xi)q(yi): w =

i
xi⊗yi

,
where inf is taken over all representations of w in the indicated form. It is readily
verified that p⊗q(x⊗y) = p(x)q(y).
Any locally convex topology can be always defined by a directed family of
seminorms P, i.e., in such a way that for any seminorms p1, p2 ∈P there exists
p3 ∈P with p1 ⩽p3, p2 ⩽p3 (for example, one can take all possible finite sums
of the original seminorms and their products by positive numbers). Let us take
directed families of seminorms P1 and P2 on E1 and E2 defining the topologies.
Then the collection of all seminorms p1⊗p2, where p1 ∈P1, p2 ∈P2, defines the
projective topology τπ. The completion of the space (E1⊗E2, τπ) will be denoted
by E1#
⊗πE2. The following result was obtained by Grothendieck.
2.8.1. Theorem. If E1 and E2 are metrizable locally convex spaces, then
every element w ∈E1#
⊗πE2 can be represented in the form
w =
∞

i=1
λixi⊗yi,
where
∞

i=1
|λi| < ∞,
where xi →0 and yi →0 in E1 and E2, respectively.
PROOF. Let us take in E1 and E2 increasing sequences of seminorms pn
and qn generating the topologies. Set rn = pn ⊗qn and extend rn to E1#
⊗πE2.
There exist wn ∈E1⊗E2 such that rn(w −wn) ⩽n−22−n−1 and w1 = 0. Let
wn = 	in
i=1 λixi⊗yi and vn = wn+1 −wn. Then
rn(vn) ⩽rn(w −wn) + rn(w −wn+1)
⩽rn(w −wn) + rn+1(w −wn+1) ⩽n−22−n.
It follows from the definition of rn that there exist increasing numbers in, n∈IN
and representations vn = 	in+1
i=in+1 λiλixi ⊗yi such that 	in+1
i=in+1 |λi| ⩽2−n,
pn(xi)⩽n−1, qn(yi) ⩽n−1 for all in < i ⩽in+1. Indeed, take a representa-
tion of the form vn = 	in+1
i=in+1 ui ⊗zi with 	in+1
i=in+1 pn(ui)qn(zi) ⩽n−22−n,
where pn(ui) > 0 and qn(zi) > 0.
Now we can take xi = ui

npn(ui)
−1,
yi = zi

nqn(zi)
−1, λi = n2pn(ui)qn(zi). Thus, the required representation is
given by w = 	∞
n=1 vn = 	∞
i=1 λixi⊗yi.
□

132
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
Taking absolutely convex neighborhoods of zero U ⊂E1 and V ⊂E2, we can
define the following seminorm on E1⊗E2:
pU,V (w) = sup

i
f(xi)g(yi): w =

i
xi⊗yi, f ∈U ◦, g ∈V ◦
,
where sup is taken over all representations of w in the indicated form.
It is
readily verified that pU,V (w) ⩽pU ⊗pV . Hence the topology τε generated by
such seminorms is weaker than τπ. This weaker topology is called the topology of
equicontinuous convergence.
The completion of (E1⊗E2, τε) will be denoted by the symbol E1#
⊗εE2.
We shall see in the next section that for a given locally convex space E the
equality E #
⊗εF =E #
⊗πF holds for all locally convex spaces F precisely when E is
nuclear (which is also defined in the next section). Actually, it suffices to have this
equality for all Banach spaces. Since infinite-dimensional Banach spaces are not
nuclear, it is easy to give examples where the equality fails. Below we describe
these two topologies explicitly in case of Hilbert spaces.
Yet another projective topology on the tensor product E1⊗E2 is called induc-
tive. It is denoted by the symbol τi and is defined as the strongest locally convex
topology on E1⊗E2 such that the canonical bilinear mapping E1×E2 →E1⊗E2
is separately continuous. Hence the projective and inductive topologies coincide
if all separately continuous bilinear mappings on E1×E2 are continuous. For ex-
ample, the projective tensor topology on D(IR)⊗D(IR) is strictly weaker than the
inductive topology, since there is a discontinuous separately continuous bilinear
form on D(IR), see Exercise 2.10.49.
It is instructive to examine the case of Hilbert spaces E1 and E2. The projec-
tive tensor topology is generated by the so-called nuclear norm
∥w∥N = inf

i
∥xi∥∥yi∥: w =

i
xi⊗yi

,
the completion with respect to which in case E1 = E2 = H gives the space N(H)
of nuclear (or trace class) operators on H, i.e., H#
⊗πH = N(H). The inductive
topology gives the same. The topology τε is generated by the norm
∥w∥∞= sup

i
f(xi)g(yi): w =

i
xi⊗yi, ∥f∥E′
1 ⩽1, ∥g∥E′
2 ⩽1

,
which is the operator norm, and in case E1 = E2 = H the completion of H#
⊗εH
is the space K(H) of compact operators on H. Actually, both constructions apply
to any Banach spaces (where the elements x⊗y are regarded as operators from E′
1
to E2 acting by the formula l →l(x)y). However, in the Hilbert case the space
E1⊗E2 can be equipped with the Hilbert–Schmidt norm (when we identify ele-
ments of E1⊗E2 with operators from E1 to E2), which in case E1 = E2 = H after
completing leads to the space H(H) of Hilbert–Schmidt operators (p. 144). This
latter tensor product is called the Hilbert tensor product and is denoted by E1⊗2E2.
Note that in these examples the regarded norms on elements x⊗y equal ∥x∥∥y∥;
such norms on E1⊗2E2 are called cross-norms. The operator norm and nuclear

2.8. Tensor products
133
norm are extreme cross-norms. Using other norms on E1⊗2E2 we obtain different
tensor products as completions.
Tensor products can be introduced in the language of categories, and they
are connected with the so-called representable functors. We make brief remarks
in this direction, although categories are never used in this book. In the theory
of categories (see Mac Lane [326]), it is customary to consider along with usual
sets certain “very large sets”, called “classes” to distinguish them from sets, in
order to use expressions like “the class of all locally convex spaces” (we recall
that the concept “the set of all sets” is contradictory). A category is a class E
whose elements are called objects of the category, and it is assumed that for each
pair A, B of objects we are given a set hom(A, B) whose elements are called
morphisms from A to B, provided that they satisfy certain natural axioms.
For example, in the category of sets morphisms are arbitrary mappings. An-
other relevant example is the category LCS of real locally convex spaces; mor-
phisms are continuous linear mappings. Certainly, one can also consider the cat-
egory of complex locally convex spaces. In the category of topological spaces
morphisms are continuous mappings.
We say that there is a covariant functor from a category E1 to a category E2 if
to every object A of E1 an object F(A) of E2 is defined and for every morphism
ϕ ∈hom(A, B), where A, B ∈E1, a morphism F(ϕ) ∈hom

F(A), F(B)

is defined such that the identity mappings are taken to identity mappings and
F respects compositions (provided they are defined). Contravariant functors are
defined similarly, but F(ϕ) ∈hom

F(B), F(A)

.
For example, let S be the category of sets and let E be some category. The
mapping hA : C →hom(A, C), where A, C ∈E, along with the class of naturally
defined mappings of sets hom(A1, C) to sets hom(A2, C) is a covariant functor
from E to S.
Isomorphisms of functors are defined in a natural way. A covariant functor
F from a category E to the category of sets S is called representable if, for some
object A ∈E, there is an isomorphism of functors f : hA →F; then we say that
the object A represents the functor F.
Let us return to the category LCS of real locally convex spaces. Suppose
that we are given E, G ∈LCS. For each space K ∈LCS let B(E ×G, K)
be the set of all continuous bilinear mappings from E ×G to K. The category
T will be defined as follows: its objects are pairs (K, B), where K ∈LCS,
B ∈B(E ×G, K), and morphisms between objects (K1, B1) and (K2, B2) are
linear operators ψ: K1 →K2 such that ψ◦B1 = B2. Another category is obtained
by using the set Bs(E×G, K) of all separately continuous bilinear mappings.
One can verify that in both cases we obtain a representable covariant functor
from the category LCS to the category of sets S. In the first case (continuous
bilinear mappings) the representing object is the completion of the tensor product
E1 ⊗E2 with the projective topology. The functor isomorphism f : hE⊗G →F
takes the set of continuous linear operators from E ⊗G to K to the set of their
compositions with the canonical bilinear mapping from E×G to E⊗G, which is
continuous in this case.

134
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
In the second case (separately continuous bilinear mappings) the representing
object is the completion of the tensor product E1⊗E2 with the inductive topology.
The functor isomorphism is described similarly
2.9. Nuclear spaces
Let X and Y be two normed spaces. An operator T ∈L(X, Y ) is called
nuclear if it can be represented in the form
Tx =
∞

i=1
ui(x)vi,
where ui ∈X′, vi ∈Y,
∞

i=1
∥ui∥∥vi∥< ∞.
The infimum of the sums 	∞
i=1 ∥ui∥∥vi∥over all possible representations of T is
called the nuclear norm of T and is denoted by the symbol ∥T∥N . It is obvious
that any nuclear operator between Banach spaces is compact (see the definition
in § 3.10).
The concept of nuclear operator is naturally extended to locally convex spaces.
If V is an absolutely convex neighborhood of zero in a locally convex space E,
then the Minkowski functional pV of the set V is a seminorm and generates a norm
on the quotient E/p−1
V (0). The completion of this normed space will be denoted
by EV . The norm in EV will be also denoted by the symbol pV . If p−1
V (0) = 0,
then EV is the completion of the usual space (EV , pV ). We recall that the latter
is complete if V is bounded and sequentially complete. However, in typical cases
the set V is not bounded and p−1
V (0) ̸= 0. The natural mapping jV : E →EV
is continuous. Note also that if V contains an absolutely convex neighborhood of
zero W, then the operator πV,W : EW →EV generated by the natural inclusion
p−1
W (0) ⊂p−1
V (0) and the surjection E/p−1
W (0) →E/p−1
V (0), is continuous.
Let E and F be two locally convex spaces and let T : E →F be a linear
mapping such that for some absolutely convex neighborhood of zero V ⊂E the
set T(V ) is contained in some Banach disc B ⊂F. Let ψB : FB →F be the
natural embedding. Since Tx = 0 if pV (x) = 0 (by the boundedness of T(V )),
the operator T can be written in the form T = ψB ◦T ◦jV , where T : EV →FB
is a continuous linear operator. If we can choose V and B in such a way that the
operator T between the indicated Banach spaces becomes nuclear, then T is called
nuclear. This yields at once that any nuclear operator is compact also in the case
of locally convex spaces (see § 3.10). For normed spaces this gives the previous
concept.
One can verify that nuclear mappings are characterized in the following way
(see Schaefer [436, Theorem 7.1]).
2.9.1. Theorem. An operator T ∈L(E, F) is nuclear precisely when it has
the form
Tx =
∞

n=1
λnln(x)yn,
where 	∞
n=1 |λn|<∞, {ln} is an equicontinuous sequence in E′ and {yn}⊂F is
a sequence contained in some Banach disc.

2.9. Nuclear spaces
135
2.9.2. Definition. A locally convex space E is called nuclear if it possesses
a basis V of absolutely convex neighborhoods of zero with the property that for
every neighborhood V ∈V the canonical mapping jV : E →EV is nuclear.
The previous theorem implies that the canonical mappings jV must have the
form
jV x =
∞

n=1
λnln(x)yn,
where 	∞
n=1 |λn|<∞, {ln} is an equicontinuous sequence in E′ and {yn}⊂V .
It is readily verified that a locally convex space is nuclear precisely when its
completion is nuclear.
As an example of an infinite-dimensional nuclear space one can take an infi-
nite power IRT of IR; for a basis of neighborhoods of zero we can take the sets
V = {x: |x(ti)| < ε, i = 1, . . . , n}, so p−1
V (0) = {x: x(ti) = 0, i = 1, . . . , n},
hence the quotient IRT /p−1
V (0) is finite-dimensional.
2.9.3. Theorem. The following properties of a locally convex space E are
equivalent:
(i) E is nuclear;
(ii) for every Banach space X, every operator T ∈L(E, X) is nuclear;
(iii) every absolutely convex neighborhood of zero V in the space E contains
an absolutely convex neighborhood of zero U such that the associated operator
πV,U : EU →EV is nuclear.
PROOF. If E is nuclear and X is a Banach space with the open unit ball U,
then V = T −1(U) is a neighborhood of zero in E, so the mapping jV : E →EV is
nuclear. Hence it has the form 	∞
n=1 λnln(x)yn, where {ln} is an equicontinuous
sequence in E′, {λn} ∈l1, {yn} is contained in a Banach disc in EV . We observe
that Tx = 	∞
n=1 λnln(x)Tyn, where {Tyn} is contained in a Banach disc in X.
It is clear that (iii) implies (i).
Let (ii) hold and let V be an absolutely
convex neighborhood of zero in E. Then the operator jV : E →EV has the form
indicated above. By the equicontinuity of {ln} there exists an absolutely convex
neighborhood of zero W for which |ln(w)| ⩽1 for all w ∈W, n ⩾1. Let us take
U = W ∩V . It is straightforward to verify that the operator πV,U is nuclear, since
it has the form πV,U z = 	∞
n=1 ln(z)yn, where the functional ln ∈E′
U generated
by the functional ln (the estimate |ln(w)| ⩽1 on W means that the norm of ln
does not exceed 1) and the sequence {yn} is bounded in EV .
□
Property (iii) and the compactness of nuclear operators yield the following
important fact.
2.9.4. Corollary. Every bounded set in any nuclear space is precompact.
It is obvious from Property (ii) that a normed space is nuclear only when it is
finite-dimensional. Nevertheless, as we shall now see, nuclear spaces are closely
connected with Hilbert spaces.

136
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
2.9.5. Theorem. Let U be a neighborhood of zero in a nuclear space E.
Then there exist an absolutely convex neighborhood of zero V ⊂U, W ⊂V such
that the Banach spaces EV and EW are linearly isometric to l2 or IRn and the
operator πV,W : EW →EV is nuclear. Hence the topology of E is generated by
a family of seminorms defined by nonnegative definite Hermite forms.
PROOF. We shall show that there exists an operator A ∈L(E, l2) such that
V = A−1(B)⊂U, where B is the open unit ball in l2. We can assume that U
is absolutely convex. Then jU : E →EU has the form jU x = 	∞
n=1 λnln(x)yn,
where λn > 0, 	∞
n=1 λn = 1, ∥yn∥= 1 in EU and {ln} is equicontinuous in E′.
Set Ax =
√λnln(x)

. The equicontinuity of {ln} yields that A(U) is bounded
in l2. We have
pU(jU x) ⩽
∞

n=1
λn|ln(x)| ⩽
 ∞

n=1
λn|ln(x)|21/2
= ∥Ax∥l2.
Thus, V := A−1(B) ⊂U.
Finally, the quotient E/p−1
V (0) with norm pV is
linearly isometric to the Euclidean space A(E), which gives a linear isometry
between EV and the closure of A(V ) in l2.
It remains to apply the previous
theorem.
□
Note that in place of the Hilbert space l2 in this theorem one can take any
space lp, 1 ⩽p ⩽+∞. A justification is similar.
Let Λ be a set that has the cardinality equal to the minimal possible cardinality
of a base of neighborhoods of zero in the space E.
2.9.6. Corollary. If E is nuclear and {Hλ}λ∈Λ is a family of infinite-dimen-
sional Hilbert spaces, then there exist linear mappings Tλ : E →Hλ such that
the topology of E is the weakest one in which all Tλ are continuous.
2.9.7. Corollary. If a nuclear space E is complete, then it is isomorphic to a
projective limit of a family of cardinality Λ of Hilbert spaces.
A Fr´echet space is nuclear precisely when it can be represented in the form
of the projective limit E = lim
←−Hn of a sequence of separable Hilbert spaces Hn
with nuclear mappings ψmn : Hm →Hn for m < n. In this case it is separable.
PROOF. The first assertion follows from what we have proved above. Let now
E be a nuclear Fr´echet space. We already know that E has a base of absolutely
convex neighborhoods of zero Vn for which the spaces Hn = EVn are Hilbert. We
can assume that Vn+1 ⊂Vn and that all canonical mappings ψn,n+1 : EVn+1 →EVn
are nuclear. This gives the required representation. Conversely, let E have the
indicated form. Then E is the subspace in ∞
n=1 Hn determined by the conditions
ψmnxm = xn, m < n, and its base of neighborhoods of zero is formed by the
products V = m
i=1 Bi×∞
j=m+1 Hj, where Bi is a ball centered at the origin
in Hi. Hence the canonical mapping E →EV can be identified with the projection
of E to m
i=1 Hi. This projection has the form p = (p1, . . . , pm), where pi is the
projection of E to Hi. Since pi = ψin◦pn for n > m, the mapping p is nuclear.
□

2.9. Nuclear spaces
137
2.9.8. Theorem. (i) Any vector subspace and any Hausdorff quotient space
of a nuclear space are nuclear.
(ii) The product of any family of nuclear spaces and a locally convex direct
sum of a countable collection of nuclear spaces are nuclear.
(iii) The projective limits of arbitrary families of nuclear spaces and the in-
ductive limits of countable collections of nuclear spaces are nuclear.
(iv) The projective tensor product of two nuclear spaces is nuclear.
For a proof, see Schaefer [436, Chapter III, Theorem 7.4 and Theorem 7.5,
p. 103, 105]. In terms of projective topologies the following characterization is
known (see [436, p. 172, 184]).
2.9.9. Theorem. A locally convex space E is nuclear precisely when we have
E #
⊗πF = E #
⊗εF for every locally convex space F. Moreover, it suffices to have
this equality for all Banach spaces F.
Let us consider some examples of nuclear spaces.
2.9.10. Example. The following spaces are nuclear.
(i) Any vector subspace in any product IRT with the induced topology, in
particular, any locally convex space with the weak topology.
(ii) The space Σ of rapidly decreasing sequences (Example 1.3.19).
(iii) The space C∞
0 (U) of smooth functions vanishing outside of a ball U with
the topology of uniform convergence of all derivatives.
(iv) The spaces D(IRn) and S(IRn).
(v) The space C∞(IRn) of smooth functions on IRn with the topology of
uniform convergence of all derivatives on compact sets. The space C∞(U) is also
nuclear for any open set U.
(vi) The space H(U) of functions holomorphic in an open set U ⊂C with
the topology of uniform convergence on compact sets in U.
PROOF. Assertion (i) follows from what has been said above. The nuclear-
ity of Σ is seen from the fact that the same topology is generated by Euclidean
norms qk (see Example 1.3.19) for which the corresponding operators between
Hilbert spaces are nuclear. In (iii) we consider for simplicity the case n = 1.
For norms on C∞
0 [0, 1] we take the L2-norms of the even order derivatives. It is
straightforward to verify that the corresponding operators are nuclear. It would be
also possible to employ an isomorphism with Σ (Theorem 1.12.15). The nuclear-
ity of D(IRn) follows from the previous theorem and (iii). The space S(IRn) is
nuclear, since is isomorphic to the space Σ (Theorem 1.12.15). Finally, H(U) is a
closed subspace in the complex space C∞(U).
□
Let us mentioned some other classical results on nuclear spaces. Their proofs
can be found, e.g., in Jarchow [237], where additional information is given.
The following important fact was established by B.S. Mityagin [350].
2.9.11. Theorem. The spaces C∞(IRn) and Σ∞are isomorphic.
The indicated spaces are universal in the following sense.

138
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
2.9.12. Theorem. (K¯omura, K¯omura [287]) A locally convex space is nuclear
precisely when it is isomorphic to a vector subspace with the induced topology in
the space ΣA for some set A.
A Fr´echet space is nuclear precisely when it is isomorphic to a subspace of
the space Σ∞(and also to a subspace of the space C∞(IR1)).
B.S. Mityagin [350] obtained a criterion of nuclearity of a Fr´echet space in
terms of the ε-entropy of compact sets in it.
2.9.13. Theorem. A Fr´echet space E is nuclear precisely when for every
compact set and every neighborhood of zero in it one has the equality
lim sup
ε→0
log log N(K, εU)/ log 1
ε = 0,
where N(K, εU) = inf

N : K ⊂N
i=1(xi + εU), xi ∈E

.
There is also an interesting criterion of nuclearity of a Fr´echet space in terms
of unconditionally convergent series, i.e., series converging for all permutations of
its elements, and absolutely convergent series, i.e., series with a general term xn
such that 	∞
n=1 p(xn) < ∞for every continuous seminorm p.
2.9.14. Theorem. A Fr´echet space is nuclear precisely when every uncondi-
tionally series in it is absolutely converging.
The next result is known as the Dvoretzky–Rogers theorem.
2.9.15. Corollary. A Banach space in which every unconditionally series
converges absolutely is finite-dimensional.
The next so-called Schwartz kernel theorem gives a characterization of nuclear
spaces in terms of bilinear forms.
2.9.16. Theorem. A locally convex space E is nuclear precisely when for
every locally convex space F every continuous bilinear function B on the space
E×F is nuclear, i.e., admits a representation
B(x, y) =
∞

n=1
ln(x)fn(y),
where ln ∈E′, fn ∈F ′ and there exist absolutely convex neighborhoods of zero
U ⊂E and V ⊂F such that 	∞
n=1 pU◦(ln)pV ◦(fn) < ∞.
There is another “kernel theorem” also due to Laurent Schwartz for the con-
crete space D(IRn); see H¨ormander [227, Theorem 5.2.1] for a proof.
2.9.17. Theorem. A bilinear form B on D(IRn) is separately continuous if
and only if it admits the representation
B(ϕ, ψ) = F(ϕ⊗ψ)
with F ∈D′(IR2n), where (ϕ⊗ψ)(x, y) = ϕ(x)ψ(y).
In § 3.7 we present some other facts related to the nuclearity of dual spaces.
For connections with measure theory, see § 5.10.

2.10. Complements and exercises
139
2.10. Complements and exercises
(i) Properties of the spaces D and D′ (139). (ii) Absolutely summing operators (143). (iii) Local
completeness (145). Exercises (147).
2.10(i). Properties of the spaces D and D′
Here we discuss a number of rather exotic properties of the spaces D and D′.
At the beginning of the 1950s it was even unknown whether there exist spaces with
such properties at all, then an impressive ingenuity was recruited for constructing
some artificial examples, and, finally, it was realized that the classical spaces D
and D′ serve as examples. Though, a verification of this turns out highly non-
trivial.
One of the first questions arising at a closer look at the topology of the space D
is this: why do not we introduce in D the topology τtop in which closed sets are
exactly the sets having closed intersections with all Dn? This topology (of the
inductive topological limit) is not weaker than the one we introduced. However, it
is different: the indicated stronger topology makes continuous all those functions
whose restrictions to all Dn are continuous. The standard topology of D has no
this property: the quadratic form
F(ϕ) =
∞

n=1
ϕ(n)ϕ(n)(0)
is discontinuous in this topology (Exercise 2.10.49), but is obviously continuous
on all subspaces Dn. Though, both topologies have equal supplies of continuous
linear functions. However, a decisive drawback of the topology τtop is that it does
not make D a topological vector space: the addition operation is discontinuous.
Otherwise it would follow by Remark 2.3.2(ii) that τtop coincides with the standard
topology (since the base of zero mentioned in that remark for countable collections
of spaces with bases of absolutely convex sets consists of convex sets). The proofs
of the results stated below can be found in Smolyanov [480], [484], [486], [492],
[493], [494].
A set is called sequentially closed if it contains the limits of all its convergent
sequences. A Fr´echet–Uryson space is a space in which for every set A every
point in its closure is the limit of a sequence of points in A (not necessarily dis-
tinct). Such spaces belong to the broader class of sequential spaces in which the
sequential closedness is equivalent to the usual closedness (see Engelking [154]).
Let [A] denote the closure of A (denoted in other places by A, but here another
notation will be more convenient), let [A]s denote the sequential closure (the small-
est sequentially closed set containing A), and let [A]ss denote the set of all limits
of countable sequences of elements in A. For example, every metric space is a
Fr´echet–Uryson space, but the product of a continuum of real lines is not. As an
example of a nonmetrizable Fr´echet–Uryson space take any weakly compact set in
a Banach space that is not metrizable in the weak topology, e.g., the closed ball in
a non-separable Hilbert space (Theorem 3.4.11 and Exercise 3.12.50). Any regular
inductive limit (see § 2.7) is a nonmetrizable sequential locally convex space, but

140
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
this limit is not a Fr´echet–Uryson space. A subset S of a locally convex space E
will be called a standard countable sequentially closed non-closed set if
(i) 0 /∈S, 0 ∈[S];
(ii) 0 is a unique non-isolated limit point of S (so that, in particular, all points
of S are islolated);
(iii) every convergent sequence of elements of the set S is stationary (this
yields the sequential closedness of S).
2.10.1. Proposition. Let
S1 = {k−1δ(n)(·) + δ(k)(· −n): k, n ∈IN} ⊂D′.
Then S1 is a standard countable sequentially closed non-closed subset of the space
D′ with the topology of uniform convergence on bounded sets in D, i.e., β(D′, D).
PROOF. It is clear that 0 /∈S1. Let V be a neighborhood of zero in D′. This
means that there exist a bounded subset B in D and ε > 0 such that
V ⊃V1 = {g ∈D′ : |⟨g, ϕ⟩| < ε ∀ϕ ∈B}.
Since B is bounded, there exists α > 0 such that the interval [−α, α] contains
the supports of all functions in B. Let n ∈IN, n > α and let k ∈IN be such
that k−1δ(n) ∈V1 (such k exists because V1 is a neighborhood of zero). Then for
every ϕ ∈B we have
(k−1δ(n), ϕ) + (δ(k)(· + n), ϕ) = (k−1δ(n), ϕ) < ε,
so that k−1δ(n)(·) + δ(k)(· −n) ∈V1 ⊂V , i.e., 0 ∈[S]. We now verify that 0 is
a unique limit point of the set S1. Let g ∈[S1], g /∈S1, g ̸= 0. Then
g =
n

j=1
αjδ(j) +
∞

n=1
r(n)

r=1
βrnδ(r)(· −n),
since the support of the limit point of the set S1 must belong to the union of
supports of the elements of this set. If βrn ̸= 0 for some r, n, then by the inclusion
g ∈[S1] we have βrn = 1 and βij = 0 for every pair (i, j) that differs from the
pair (r, n); it follows (again by the inclusion g ∈[S1]) that αn = 1/r and αj = 0
if j ̸= n. Thus, g ∈S1, which contradictions our assumption. For completing the
proof of property (ii) it remains to observe that all points of the set S1 are isolated.
Let us now prove property (iii). Suppose that for some j we have the equality
aj = k−1
j δ(nj) + δ(kj)(· −nj),
and suppose that the sequence {aj} converges in D′. Then we have supj nj < ∞,
therefore, supj kj < ∞. Hence the set of different elements in the sequence {an}
is finite. Since this sequence converges, there exists n ∈IN such that aj1 = aj2
whenever j1, j2 > n, i.e., the sequence {aj} is stationary.
□
Similarly one can show that also the set
S1′ = {k−1δ(n)(·) + kδ(· −n): k, n ∈IN}

2.10. Complements and exercises
141
possesses the properties analogous to those of S1. Moreover, both the convex hull
of the set S1 and the convex hull of S1′ are sequentially closed, but not closed.
Note also (this will be used below) that the set S1 (hence its convex span)
is contained in a subspace of the space D′ isomorphic to the product of IR∞
(the countable power of IR1) and the topological direct sum IR(∞) of a countable
family of real lines. Since the space IR∞is metrizable and IR(∞) is sequential, we
see that the product of two locally convex spaces, one of which is a Fr´echet space
and the other one is sequential, need not be a sequential space.
2.10.2. Proposition. Let akn(t) = g(t)(k + 1)−n sin(kt), where k, n ∈IN,
g ∈D[−1,1], g ̸= 0, and b1
nk(t) = k−1p(t−n), where p ∈D and supp p ⊂[1, ∞).
Then the set S2 = {akn +b1
nk : n, k ∈IN} is a standard sequentially closed closed
subset of the space D.
2.10.3. Proposition. Let G be the closed vector subspace of the space D′
consisting of all generalized functions concentrated at zero, let E = D[−1,1], and
let k, n ∈IN, b2
nk = k−1δ(n) ∈G, akn ∈E be the same as in the previous
proposition. Then the set S3 = {akn + b2
nk : n, k ∈IN} is a standard sequentially
closed non-closed subset in the topological direct sum E⊕G.
2.10.4. Remark. The topological direct sum of a countable collection of real
lines is not a space Fr´echet–Uryson space, i.e., it contains sets some limit points
of which are not limits of convergent sequences of its elements. Among such sets
there exist even countable sets.
Indeed, let us realize such topological direct sum as the space G from the
previous proposition. Set
S4 = {n−1δ + k−1δ(n) : n, k ∈IN}.
Then 0 /∈S4, 0 ∈[S4], but there is no sequence of elements in the set S4 converg-
ing to zero. Certainly, S4 is not sequentially closed, since [S4] ̸= S4. Hence G is
not sequential. Note also that [S4]ss ̸= [S4]s = [S4]. Similarly one can show that
the infinite-dimensional Hilbert space with the weak topology is not sequential.
Indeed, let {en} be a countable orthonormal family in this space and let
A = {k−1en + ken+1 : k, n ∈IN}.
Then 0 ∈[A], 0 /∈A (verify this!), but no sequence of elements of the set A
converges to zero. This example goes back to von Neumann.
Below for a subset A of a locally convex space the symbol M(A) denotes the
affine variety generated by A and the symbol L(A) denotes the vector subspace
generated by A.
2.10.5. Proposition. For k, n, m ∈IN set
b3
nk = (k + 1)−1δ(n)(· −k−1), a0
kn = δ(k)(· −n),
Cm = {a0
kn + b3
nk : k ∈IN, n = 1, 2, . . . , m} ⊂D′,
M =
∞

m=1
M(Cm).

142
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
Then 0 /∈M, 0 ∈[M], [M] = M ∪{0} and [M]s = M, so that M is a sequentially
closed non-closed affine subvariety in the space D′. Moreover, the vector subspace
L(M) of the space D′ is closed and the linear functional f : L(M) →IR defined
by the equality f(M) = 1 is sequentially continuous, but not continuous in the
induced topology.
2.10.6. Proposition. For k, n ∈IN set
b4
nk = (k + 1)−1δ(n)(· −k−1) ∈D′
[−1,1]
and take elements a1
kn of the space D[−1,1] defined by
a1
kn(t) = (k + 1)−1 sin(lknt)f(t),
where f ∈D[−1,1], f ̸= 0, lkn ∈IN, and lk1n1 = lk2n2 precisely when k1 = k2
and n1 = n2. For every m ∈IN let
Cm = {a1
kn + b4
nk : k ∈IN, n = 1, 2, . . . , m}
and M1 = ∞
m=1[M(Cm)].
Then 0 /∈M1, 0 ∈[M1], [M1] = M1 ∪{0},
[M1]s = M1. Therefore, M1 is a sequentially closed non-closed affine subvariety
in the space D[−1,1] × D′
[−1,1] and the linear functional f on L(M1) defined by
the equality f(M1) = 1 is discontinuous, but sequentially continuous.
2.10.7. Proposition. Let a1
kn be the elements of D defined by the equality from
the previous proposition and let b5
nk ∈D be defined by b5
nk(t) = 2(−2k)g

2k(t −
n)

, where g ∈D, supp g ∈[1, ∞), g ̸= 0. For every m ∈IN let
C1
m = {a1
kn + b5
nk : k ∈N, n = 1, 2, . . . , m}.
Then M2 = ∞
m=1[M(C1
m)] is a sequentially closed non-closed affine variety in
D and the linear functional f on L(M2) such that f(M2) = 1 is discontinuous,
but sequentially continuous.
It follows from this proposition that the subspace L(M2) is not the inductive
limit of the intersections L(M2) ∩Dn.
2.10.8. Proposition. Let {rj} be the sequence of all rational numbers, let
(p, j, s) →n(p, j, s) be a one-to-one mapping of IN3 onto (2, 3, . . .), and let FD′
be the subvariety in the space D′ generated by the set

rpδ(· −rj) + k−1δ(n(p,j,s))(· −k−1) + δ(k+1)
· −n(p, j, s)

: p, k, j, s ∈IN

.
Then the subspace FD′ is sequentially closed and dense in D′, but is not closed
(one has 0 ∈[FD′], 0 /∈FD′), so that FD′ −a, where a ∈FD′, is a sequentially
closed non-closed everywhere dense vector subspace in D′.
2.10.9. Proposition. Let (k, n) →l(k, n) and (j, s) →n(j, s) be two bijec-
tions of IN2 onto IN and let {fj} be a sequence of elements of D such that
(1) if mins n(j, s) = a(j) and mink,s l

k, n(j, s)

= b(j), then f (a(j))
j
(x) = 0
for x ∈

0, 2π/b(j)

;
(2) supp fj ⊂

−∞, a(j)

; (3) [{fj}] = D.

2.10. Complements and exercises
143
The existence of such a sequence follows from the relations a(j) →∞, b(j) →∞.
For each triple k, j, s ∈IN consider the function
ϕk,j,s(t) = fj(t)+f(t)(k+1)n(j,s) sin

l

k, n(j, s)

t

+2−2kg

2k
t−n(j, s)

,
where g ∈D, supp g ⊂[1, ∞), f ∈D, supp f ⊂(−∞, 1], f(t) = 1 for all points
t ∈(0, 1/2). Then the sequentially closed affine subvariety FD of the space D
generated by the set {ϕk,j,s : k, j, s ∈IN} is not closed and is everywhere dense,
so that FD −a, where a ∈FD, is a non-closed everywhere dense sequentially
closed vector subspace in D.
2.10.10. Remark. A similar method can be applied for constructing a sequen-
tially closed non-closed everywhere dense vector subspace in D[−1,1] ⊕D′
[−1,1].
2.10(ii). Absolutely summing operators
A series 	∞
n=1 xn in a Hausdorff locally convex space X is called uncon-
ditionally convergent if it converges for all permutations of indices. For a scalar
series this is equivalent to absolute convergence; thus, the sum does not depend
on a permutation. Hence if s is the sum of this series, then for every continuous
seminorm q on X and every ε > 0 there exists N such that for every finite set of
indices M containing {1, . . . , N} we have q

s −	
i∈M xi

< ε.
More generally, a family of vectors xγ ∈X indexed by some set Γ is called
summable to a vector s ∈X if, for every continuous seminorm q on X and every
ε > 0, there exists a finite subfamily Γ0 ⊂Γ such that q

s −	
γ∈Γ1 xγ

< ε for
every finite family Γ1 containing Γ0.
If 	∞
γ∈Γ q(xγ) < ∞for every continuous seminorm q, then the family
{xγ}γ∈Γ is called absolutely summable. For Γ = IN we say of an absolutely
convergent series.
In the finite-dimensional space unconditional convergence of a series is equiv-
alent to its absolute convergence. For example, the sign alternating series with a
general term (−1)nn−1 converges, but not unconditionally. In the Hilbert space l2
the series of vectors xn = n−1en, where {en} is the standard basis, does not con-
verges absolutely, but converges unconditionally, since whenever k1, . . . , km > n
we have ∥xk1 + · · · + xkm∥2 < 	∞
k=n k−2.
Let p ∈[1, +∞). A family of vectors {xγ}γ∈Γ is called weakly p-summable
if 	
γ∈Γ |l(xγ)|p < ∞for all l ∈X′.
If 	
γ∈Γ q(xγ)p < ∞for every continuous seminorm q on X, then {xγ}γ∈Γ
is called absolutely p-summable.
2.10.11. Lemma. Suppose that a sequence {xn} in a normed space X is
weakly p-summable. Then there exists C > 0 such that
sup
l∈X′, ∥l∥⩽1
∞

n=1
|l(xn)|p ⩽C.
PROOF. Let us consider the linear mapping S : X′ →lp, Sl =

l(xn)
∞
n=1.
We have to show its boundedness. Since X′ and lp are Banach spaces, it suffices

144
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
to verify that the graph of S is closed (see § 3.9). Let lj →l in X′ and Slj →v
in lp, where v = (vn). Then lj(xn) →l(xn) for every fixed n. On the other hand,
we have lj(xn) →vn, whence l(xn) = vn, i.e., v = Sl, as required.
□
2.10.12. Definition. Let X and Y be two locally convex spaces. An operator
T ∈L(X, Y ) is called absolutely p-summing if it takes weakly p-summing families
to absolutely p-summing families.
An operator T is called absolutely summing if it takes summing families to
absolutely summing families.
It is readily seen that in these definitions it suffices to consider countable
collections of vectors.
If X and Y are normed spaces, then T ∈L(X, Y ) is absolutely p-summing if
the condition 	∞
n=1 |l(xn)|p <∞for all l∈X′ implies that 	∞
n=1 ∥T(xn)∥p
Y <∞.
In this case there is a number C > 0 such that
∞

n=1
∥Txn∥p
Y ⩽C sup
∥l∥⩽1
∞

n=1
|l(xn)|p
(2.10.1)
for every sequence {xn} ⊂X. Indeed, otherwise for every m we could find a
finite set xm,1, . . . , xm,k for which
sup
∥l∥⩽1
k

i=1
|l(xm,i)|p ⩽2−m
and
k

i=1
∥Txm,i∥p
Y ⩾1,
which leads to a contradiction. The smallest possible C is denoted by πp(T).
These classes are stable under left and right compositions with bounded
operators.
By the Dvoretzky–Rogers theorem (Corollary 2.9.15) each infinite-
dimensional Banach space X contains an unconditionally, but not absolutely con-
verging series. If X has no subspaces isomorphic to c0 (and only in this case),
then unconditional convergence of the series of xn is equivalent to the weak
1-summability of {xn} (see Kadec, Kadec [244, Chapters 3, 4]). If X and Y
are two Hilbert spaces, then the class of absolutely summing operators coincides
with the class of absolutely 2-summing operators and with the class of Hilbert–
Schmidt operators, i.e., operators T ∈L(X, Y ) such that 	
α ∥Teα∥2
Y < ∞for
some (and then every) orthonormal basis {eα} in X, see Bogachev, Smolyanov
[72, Proposition 7.10.26] or Pietsch [388, § 2.5].
Let us describe one important special absolutely 2-summing embedding (see
[72, Theorem 7.10.27] or Pietsch [389, § 17.3]).
2.10.13. Theorem. Let μ be a probability measure. Then the identical em-
bedding L∞(μ) →L2(μ) is absolutely 2-summing. In particular, if μ is a Radon
measure on a topological space, then the embedding Cb(Ω) →L2(μ) is absolutely
2-summing.
It is worth noting (see Pietsch [388, Lemma 3.3.4]) that every absolutely sum-
ming mapping T : X →Y between Banach spaces can be written as a composi-
tion T = T1◦j◦T2, where j : C(Ω) →L2(μ) is the identical embedding for some
Radon measure μ on a compact space Ω, T1 ∈L

X, C(Ω)

, T2 ∈L

L2(μ), Y

.

2.10. Complements and exercises
145
As the following theorem due to Pietsch shows, in the case of general Ba-
nach spaces absolutely 2-summing operators are also connected with the space L2
(about measures, see Chapter 5).
2.10.14. Theorem. Let X and Y be two Banach spaces, let B′ be the closed
unit ball in the space X′ equipped with the topology σ(X′, X) (making it com-
pact), and let σ

C(B′)

be the σ-algebra generated by continuous functions on the
compact space B′. An operator T ∈L(X, Y ) is absolutely 2-summing precisely
when there exists a bounded nonnegative measure μ on σ

C(B′)

such that
∥Tx∥2
Y ⩽

B′ |ξ(x)|2 μ(dξ).
Any nuclear operator between normed spaces is absolutely summing. Indeed,
let {xi} be a weakly absolutely summing sequence and let Tx = 	∞
n=1 λnln(x)yn
be a nuclear operator, where λn ⩾0, 	∞
n=1 λn < ∞, ∥ln∥⩽1, ∥yn∥⩽1. As we
have shown in the lemma above, there exists C > 0 such that
sup
n
∞

i=1
|ln(xi)| ⩽C.
Therefore,
∞

i=1
∥Txi∥⩽
∞

i=1
∞

n=1
λn|ln(xi)| ∥yn∥⩽C
∞

n=1
λn.
In Pietsch [388, Chapter 3] one can find the proof of the following theorem due to
Grothendieck.
2.10.15. Theorem. The composition of two absolutely summing operators
between normed spaces is nuclear.
With the aid of absolutely summing operators one can characterize nuclear
spaces. For example, according to Theorem 2.9.14, a Fr´echet space is nuclear
precisely when all unconditionally converging series in it converge absolutely, i.e.,
the identity operator is absolutely summing.
2.10(iii). Local completeness
In relation to Grothdieck’s construction discussed in § 2.5 the following useful
property of completeness emerged. For simplicity of terminology, we shall use
here the term a disc to denote a bounded absolutely convex set in a topological
vector space.
2.10.16. Definition. A Hausdorff locally convex space is called locally com-
plete if every closed disc in it is a Banach disc.
It follows from the results in § 2.5 that the sequential completeness yields the
local completeness, but the converse is false. For example, the space c0 of all
sequences converging to zero equipped with the weak topology σ(c0, l1) is not
sequentially complete, but it is locally complete, since it is Banach with respect to
its standard norm and weakly bounded sets are norm bounded.

146
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
2.10.17. Definition. We shall say that a sequence {xn} in a locally convex
space E converges to x in the sense of Mackey, or is Mackey convergent, if there
is a disc B ⊂E such that pB(x −xn) →0. Similarly, a sequence is called
Mackey fundamental if for some disc B it is fundamental in EB.
2.10.18. Lemma. A sequence {xn} in a locally convex space E Mackey
converges to zero precisely when there exists an increasing sequence of positive
numbers λn →+∞for which λnxn →0 in E.
PROOF. If {xn} is Mackey converging to zero, then such numbers obviously
exist: whenever pB(xn) > 0 we can take λn = pB(xn)−1/2. Conversely, if such
a sequence {λn} exists, then the closed absolutely convex hull B of the sequence
{λnxn} is a closed disc and pB(xn) = λ−1
n
→0.
□
It follows from this lemma that in any metrizable locally convex space con-
vergence of a sequence is equivalent to its Mackey convergence.
2.10.19. Proposition. The following conditions for a Hausdorff locally convex
space E are equivalent:
(i) the space E is locally complete;
(ii) every Mackey fundamental sequence in E is Mackey convergent;
(iii) every bounded set in E is contained in some Banach disc.
PROOF. The implications (i)⇒(ii)⇒(iii) are trivial. In order to prove (iii)⇒(i),
given a closed disc D we find a Banach disc B containing it. Then the closure of
D in EB will be a Banach disc. We observe that D coincides with this closure,
since every limit point for D in EB will be a limit point in E, but D is closed.
□
2.10.20. Corollary. Any locally complete space E will remain locally com-
plete in all locally convex topologies on E for which the dual space remains E′.
The description of such topologies that agree with the given duality will be
obtained in § 3.2.
2.10.21. Theorem. The following conditions for a Hausdorff locally convex
space E are equivalent:
(i) the space E is locally complete;
(ii) every sequence in E that is Mackey converging to zero has a compact
closed absolutely convex span;
(iii) every sequence converging to zero in σ(E, E′) has a σ(E, E′)-compact
closed absolutely convex span;
(iv) every sequence converging to zero in E has a compact closed absolutely
convex span.
PROOF. We verify the implication (i)⇒(iii). Let xn →0 in σ(E, E′) and
let B be the closed absolutely convex hull of {xn} in the topology σ(E, E′).
Then B is bounded and closed in the original topology, hence is a Banach disc.
Proposition 2.5.14 gives the compactness of B in the topology σ(E, E′).
The implication (iii)⇒(iv) is clear from the fact that the closed absolutely
convex hull of any sequence {xn} converging to zero in E is weakly compact

2.10. Complements and exercises
147
by condition (iii), and since it is precompact, by Corollary 1.8.12 we obtain its
compactness in the original topology.
The implication (iv)⇒(ii) is trivial. Let us deduce (i) from (ii). Let B be a
closed disc in E and let a sequence {xn} be Cauchy in EB. We show that it has a
limit in EB. Passing to a subsequence, we can assume that pB(xn+1−xn) ⩽2−2n,
i.e., xn+1 −xn ∈2−2nB. Set yn = 2n(xn+1 −xn). Then pB(yn) ⩽2−n. By
condition (ii) the absolutely convex hull K of the sequence {yn} is compact in E.
The sequence xk+1−x1 = 	k
n=1 2−nyn is contained in K, hence has a limit point
in K. Hence {xn} has a limit point x ∈K. We observe that then pB(xn−x) →0.
Indeed, let ε > 0. For all n, k ⩾m, where 2−m < ε, we have xn −xk ∈εB.
Since B is closed and x is a limit point of {xk}, we obtain xn −x ∈εB for all
indices n ⩾m, i.e., pB(xn −x) ⩽ε, as required.
□
2.10.22. Example. For metrizable locally convex spaces the local complete-
ness is equivalent to completeness. Indeed, if a sequence {xn} is Cauchy in a
locally complete metrizable space E, then it converges in the completion of E.
Hence in the completion it is Mackey convergent, hence is Mackey fundamental,
which yields that it is Mackey fundamental in E, then it is Mackey converging
in E.
The Mackey convergence and its desription by Lemma 2.10.18 will be used
in § 4.3. See P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, Chapter 5] for additional information.
Exercises
2.10.23. Construct an example of an incomplete direct spectre lim
−→Eα of complete
spaces (Eα, τα).
2.10.24. (i) There exists an incomplete separated inductive limit of an increasing se-
quence of separable Banach spaces Bn with continuous embeddings Bn ⊂Bn+1.
(ii) There exists a separated inductive limit of an increasing sequence of separable
Banach spaces Bn with continuous embeddings Bn ⊂Bn+1 in which there is a bounded
set contained entirely in no Bn.
(iii) There exists a separated inductive limit of an increasing sequence of separable
Banach spaces Bn with continuous embeddings Bn ⊂Bn+1 in which there is a bounded
set contained in B1 which is unbounded in each Bn.
(iv) There exists an inductive limit of strictly increasing sequence of separable Banach
spaces Bn with continuous embeddings Bn ⊂Bn+1 in which there is no neighborhood of
zero distinct from the whole space.
HINT: in (i), (ii) consider the following example (see Makarov [331], [332]). Let Bn
be the space of double sequences x = (xi,j) with a finite limit lim
j→∞xi,j for all i > n
such that one has lim
j→∞xi,j/(1 + j) = 0 for i ⩽n, set ∥x∥n = supi,j |xi,j|/ci,j,n,
ci,j,n = 1 + j if i ⩽n, ci,j,n = 1 if i > n; consider the countable set A of elements ak,n,
where ak,n = (ak,n
i,j ), ak,n
i,j = −1 if j = 2m, m ⩽k, i ⩽n, ak,n
i,j = 1 in other cases;
verify that A is bounded in B1, but the closure of A contains {yn}, where yn
i,j = −1 if
j = 2m, i ⩽n, yn
i,j = 1 in other cases, and yn ∈Bn\Bn−1; verify that the sequence of
partial sums of the series of n−1yn is fundamental, but does not converge. For examples
in (iii), (iv), see [332].

148
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
2.10.25. Generalize the example (ii) as follows. Suppose that for every k ∈IN we
have a sequence of numbers ak
n >0 with ak
n ⩽ak+1
n
. Denote by Ek the Banach space
of sequences x = (xn) for which xn/ak
n →0 as n →∞, equipped with the norm
∥x∥k = supn |xn/ak
n|. Let E = indkEk. In place of an index n we now use a pair (m, n)
and define ak
(m,n) as follows: ak
(m,n) = n if m < k, ak
(m,n) = 1 in other cases. Let vectors
vk be such that v1
(m,n) = 0 for all m, n, vk
(m,n) = k−1 if m = k −1, vk
(m,n) = 0 in other
cases. Show that vk ∈Ek, vk+1 ̸∈Ek and vk →0 in E. Thus, we obtain a sequence
converging in indkEk, but contained in no Ek.
2.10.26. On the product X = 
t∈T Xt of nonempty topological spaces the box
topology is generated by a base consisting of the products of the form 
t∈T Ut, where
Ut is a nonempty open subset of T (not necessarily equal to Xt for all t except for a finite
number as in Tychonoff’s topology). (i) Investigate whether an infinite power of a compact
interval is compact in the box topology. (ii) Let Et, where t ∈T, be an infinite family of
separated nonzero topological vector spaces over IR or C. Let us equip their product with
the box topology. Show that this topology does not agree with the vector structure. Does it
agree with the structure of an additive group?
HINT: (i) observe that the box topology is stronger than Tychonoff’s topology; (ii) if
x(tn) > 0 for infinitely many tn ∈T, then take a box neighborhood of zero W such that
λx ̸∈W for all λ ∈(0, 1).
2.10.27. Let E be a locally convex space in which there is a closed linear subspace E0
such that E0 and E/E0 are metrizable. Prove that E is metrizable as well. Show that if
E0 and E/E0 are Fr´echet spaces, then E is a Fr´echet space as well.
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, p. 51].
2.10.28. Prove Corollary 2.7.10.
2.10.29. Let A be a bounded complete subset of a separated locally convex space E.
Show that there exists a closed absolutely convex set D such that A is complete in ED.
HINT: let D be the closed absolutely convex hull of A and let B be the closure of
D in the completion of E; observe that A is closed in the Banach space EB and ED is a
linear subspace in EB with the same norm.
2.10.30. Let V be a complete bounded convex set in a Hausdorff locally convex
space E. Show that its absolutely convex hull is a Banach disc.
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, p. 88].
2.10.31. Let m0(Ω) be the space of all functions with finitely many values on a
nonempty set Ω equipped with the norm ∥x∥= supω |x(ω)|. Show that every Banach disc
in m0(Ω) is finite-dimensional. Prove that in any infinite-dimensional separable Banach
space there exists a hypersubspace F not containing infinite-dimensional Banach discs.
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, p. 90].
2.10.32. Let D be a closed disc in a locally convex space E and let A ⊂D be an
absolutely convex and precompact set in ED. Prove that the closures of A in E and ED
coincide.
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, p. 169].
2.10.33. A set A in a locally convex space E will be called hyperprecompact if there
exists a closed disc D such that A is precompact in ED. (i) Prove that the closed absolutely
convex hull of any hyperprecompact set is hyperprecompact. (ii) Prove that if a sequence
{xn} converges to zero in ED for some disc D, then its closed absolutely convex hull

2.10. Complements and exercises
149
in E is hyperprecompact. (iii) Prove that every hyperprecompact set is contained in the
closed absolutely convex hull of some sequence which, for some disc D, tends to zero
in ED. (iv) Prove that for every hyperprecompact set A there is a closed absolutely convex
hyperprecompact set C such that A is precompact in EC.
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, Proposition 6.1.13].
2.10.34. Let a normed space B be continuously embedded into a sequentially complete
locally convex space X such that the closed unit ball of B is closed in X. Prove that B is
complete.
HINT: apply Theorem 2.5.1.
2.10.35. Construct an example of a Banach space X and an incomplete normed
space E continuously embedded into X by means of an injective operator T for which
the extension of T by continuity to the completion of E is not injective.
2.10.36. Let E be the inductive limit of an increasing sequence of Hausdorff locally
convex spaces En such that in each En there is an absolutely convex neighborhood of zero
with weakly compact closure in En+1. Show that if a set A is such that A ∩En is weakly
closed in En for all n, then A is closed in E (if A is convex, then it suffices to have the
closedness of A ∩En in En in the original topology of En). Hence if En are reflexive
Banach spaces and Z is a closed subspace in E, then all sequentially continuous linear
functions on Z are continuous.
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, Proposition 8.5.28].
2.10.37. Let E be the inductive limit of an increasing sequence of Hausdorff locally
convex spaces En such that every bounded set in E is contained and bounded in some En.
Prove that for every continuous linear operator T from a metrizable locally convex space
F to E there exists n such that T(F) ⊂En and the mapping T : F →En is continuous.
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, Proposition 8.5.38].
2.10.38. Let E be a Hausdorff inductive limit of an increasing sequence of Haus-
dorff locally convex spaces En such that there exist absolutely convex neighborhoods of
zero Un ⊂En with Un ⊂Un+1. Prove that if a set A is bounded in E, then there exists n
such that A ⊂nUn, where the closure is taken in E.
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, Proposition 8.5.20].
2.10.39. (i) Let E be a topological vector space and let Q be a sequentially closed
convex set in E which for some β > 0 contains all sets αQ with |α| < β. Prove that
if Q absorbs every point of some absolutely convex sequentially complete set A, then Q
absorbs A.
(ii) Deduce from (i) that if E is sequentially complete and Q is an absolutely convex
sequentially closed absorbent set, then it absorbs every bounded absolutely convex set.
HINT: see Edwards [150, Proposition 7.4.1, Corollary 7.4.2].
2.10.40. (i) Suppose that E is a nuclear locally convex space and V ⊂E is an
absolutely convex neighborhood of zero. Show that the space EV is separable. (ii) Show
that if E′ is metrizable in the strong topology, then E is separable.
2.10.41. Let E and F be two vector spaces in duality, let E be equipped with the
topology σ(E, F), let V be a barrel in E, and let EV be the completion of the normed
space (EV , pV ), where pV is the Minkowski functional of the set V .
Prove that the
canonical mapping jV : E →EV has a closed graph and V = j−1
V

jV (V )

.
HINT: if pV (xα) →0 and xα →x, where x ̸∈V/n, then x and V/n are separated
by a hyperplane.

150
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
2.10.42. Let F be a Fr´echet space. Prove that F is linearly homeomorphic to a closed
subspace in a countable product of Banach spaces.
HINT: let the topology of F be defined by seminorms pn and let Xn be the completion
of X/p−1
n (0) with respect to the norm generated by pn; the embedding of F into ∞
n=1 Xn
is defined by the formula x →(x, x, . . .).
2.10.43. Let X be an infinite-dimensional Banach space. Prove that for every separa-
ble Banach space E there exists an injective continuous linear operator A: E →X. Prove
also that such an operator exists from l∞to X.
HINT: construct a continuous linear operator T : l2 →X with an infinite-dimensional
range and restrict it to the orthogonal complement of the kernel; construct explicitly an
injective operator from l∞to l2; verify that every separable Banach space can be injectively
embedded into l∞.
2.10.44. Show that the vector sum of two Banach discs is again a Banach disc, the
intersection of any family of Banach discs is a Banach disc, and the image of a Banach disc
under a continuous linear operator to a Hausdorff locally convex space is a Banach disc.
2.10.45.◦Prove that the topology of the spaces S(IRn), H(U) and C∞(U) from
Example 2.9.10 (see also § 1.3) cannot be defined by a norm.
2.10.46. Justify the examples from the propositions in § 2.10(i).
2.10.47.◦Let E be a sequentially complete locally convex space and let a sequence
{xn} converge to zero in the topology σ(E, E′). Show that its closed absolutely convex
hull coincides with the set
	∞
n=1 λnxn : 	∞
n=1 |λn| ⩽1

.
2.10.48. Let Fj ∈D′(IR1), j ∈IN and Fj(ϕ) →0 for every ϕ ∈D(IR1). Prove that
there exist a seminorm p of the form indicated in Example 1.3.21 and numbers εj →0 for
which |Fj(ϕ)| ⩽εjp(ϕ) for all j.
HINT: show first that this is true for each space Dk in place of D(IR), since by
the Banach–Steinhaus theorem there exist r ∈IN and C > 0 such that |Fj(ϕ)| does not
exceed C maxt∈[−k,k] |ϕ(r)(t)| for all j. By the compactness of the natural embedding
Cr+1
0
[−k, k] →Cr
0[−k, k] one has supj |Fj(ϕ)| →0 uniformly on the set of functions
ϕ ∈Dk with maxt∈[−k,k] |ϕ(r+1)(t)| ⩽1. Find functions ζk ∈C∞
0 (k −2/3, k + 2/3),
k ∈Z, with 0 ⩽ζk ⩽1 and 	∞
k=−∞ζk = 1. Use numbers εk,j →0 and rk ∈IN
for which |Fj(ϕ)| ⩽εk,j maxt∈[−k,k] |ϕ(rk)(t)| for all ϕ ∈Dk and all j to construct the
desired numbers εj. To this end, estimate |F(ϕ)| by the series of |F(ζkϕ)|.
2.10.49.◦(i) Justify the assertions in § 2.10(i) by proving that the topology τ on the
space D(IR1) introduced there is strictly weaker than the topology τtop on D(IR1) in
which open sets are by definition those sets that give open intersections with all Dn. To
this end show that the quadratic function F(ϕ) = 	∞
n=1 ϕ(n)ϕ(n)(0) is discontinuous in
the topology τ, but is continuous in the topology τtop.
(ii) Prove that the topology τ is strictly stronger than the topology τ2 on D(IR1)
generated by the norms pψ(ϕ) = sup |ψ(x)ϕ(m)(x)|, where we take arbitrary nonnegative
integer numbers m and positive locally bounded functions ψ. To this end, verify that the
linear function F(ϕ) = 	∞
n=1 ϕ(n)(n) is continuous in the topology τ, but is discontinuous
in the topology τ2.
Therefore, the topologies on D used in Kirillov, Gvishiani [271] and Kolmogorov,
Fomin [284] differ from the standard one and are distinct.

2.10. Complements and exercises
151
2.10.50. Let L be a linear subspace in D(IR1) of finite codimension such that all
intersections L ∩Dm are closed. Prove that L is closed.
HINT: assuming for simplicity that L is of codimension 1, find k such that L ∩Dk
is of codimension 1, i.e., has the form Dk ∩f −1
k (0) for some fk ∈D′. Next, there is
fk+1 ∈D′ with L ∩Dk+1 = DDk+1 ∩f −1
k+1(0). Hence fk+1 and fk are proportional
on Dk and fk+1 can be taken such that fk+1 = fk on Dk. Continuing inductively we find
functionals fn ∈D′, n > k, such that fn+1 = fn on Dn and L ∩Dn = Dn ∩f −1
n (0).
This yields a functional f ∈D′ such that L is its kernel.
2.10.51. Show that every complete Hausdorff locally convex space is linearly homeo-
morphic to a closed linear subspace in some product of Banach spaces.
2.10.52. (i) Let E be a Hausdorff locally convex space and let C ⊂E be a closed
convex balanced set. Show that if the restriction of a linear function f to C is continuous
in the original topology, then it is continuous in the topology σ(E, E′).
(ii) Construct an example showing that even for a Banach space E the restriction of f
to the linear space generated by C need not be continuous.
HINT: (i) use Theorem 1.11.17; (ii) consider the space E = l1 with the standard
norm and C = {(xn) ∈l1 : |xn| ⩽4−n}. Let EC be the linear span of C and define
f by f(x) = 	∞
n=1 2nxn if x ∈EC. Extend f by linearity to all of E. Then f is not
continuous on EC in the topology of E, since f(2−nen) = 1, where {en} is the standard
basis in l1, but 2−nen →0 in l1. However, f is continuous on C. Indeed, let x ∈C.
Then, whenever y ∈C and ∥x −y∥< 4−k, one has |f(y) −f(x)| < 3 · 2−k.
2.10.53.◦Let E and F be Hausdorff locally convex spaces and let S : E →F be a
sequentially continuous linear mapping. Prove that S takes Cauchy sequences to Cauchy
sequences.
2.10.54. Give an example of an absolutely convex precompact set V in l2 with the
closure V such that V is not dense in V with respect to the norm pV .
HINT: take the set V of vectors x = (xn) with finitely many nonzero coordinates
such that |xn| ⩽n−1 for all n; observe that pV (x) = supn |nxn| and v = (n−1) ∈V
does not belong to the closure of V in the norm pV .
2.10.55. Show that in any locally convex space any sequentially closed convex set
with a nonempty interior is closed. Show that this is false without the assumption about
interior points.
HINT: assuming that 0 is in the interior of the given set V , verify that V = {pV ⩽1};
consider the topological dual to l2 in the algebraic dual.
2.10.56.◦Show that a linear functional on a topological vector space bounded on pre-
compact sets is bounded. Verify also that if in two vector topologies precompact sets are
the same, then also bounded sets are the same.
2.10.57.◦A sequence in a locally convex space converges weakly to zero precisely
when zero is contained in the closed convex hull of every subsequence in this sequence.
2.10.58. (Gorin, Mityagin [198]) Let F be a Fr´echet space whose topology is defined
by norms pn with pn ⩽pn+1 compatible in the following sense: any sequence Cauchy
in pn and converging to zero in pn+1 also converges to zero in pn. Suppose that bounded
sets in F are precompact. Then one can find two collections of norm {qn} and {rn}
defining the original topology and possessing the following property: for every f ∈F ′ we
have lim
n→∞∥f∥q∗n = 0, lim
n→∞∥f∥r∗n > 0 if f ̸= 0, where ∥f∥q∗n and ∥f∥r∗n denote the
norms of f on (F, qn) and (F, rn).

152
Chapter 2. Methods of constructing
2.10.59. (Banaszczyk [41], [43]) Let F be a Fr´echet space. Suppose that the series
of vectors ϕn ∈F converges to s0 ∈F, G is the subspace in F ′ consisting of all
functionals f with 	∞
n=1 |f(ϕn)| < ∞, and S({ϕn}) is the set of all sums of convergent
rearrangements of the series of the vectors ϕn. Then the nuclearity of F is equivalent to
the equality S({ϕn}) = s0 + G◦
F for all series of ϕn converging in F.
2.10.60. (i) (Drewnowski [136]) Let E be a Hausdorff locally convex space and let
A be its subset that is separable and metrizable in the induced topology. Then on the linear
span of A there is a metrizable locally convex topology that is majorized by the original
topology and the restriction of which to A coincides with the original topology.
(ii) (Larman, Rogers [310]) If, in addition, A is locally bounded (for every a ∈A there
is a neighborhood of zero U such that (a + U) ∩A is bounded), then on the linear span
of A there is a norm generating on A the original topology (but the topology generated by
this norm is not always majorized by the original topology on the linear span of A).
2.10.61. Let C be a convex closed set in a normed space with a closed unit ball U
and let qU ⊂C + U for some q > 1. Show that C has a nonempty interior.
HINT: let x1 ∈U. By condition there exist vectors y1 ∈C, x2 ∈U for which
qx1 = y1 + x2,i.e., x1 = (y1 + x2) = q. By induction construct xn ∈U and yn ∈C
with qxn = yn + xn+1. Then x1 = y1/q + y2/q2 + · · · + yn/qn + xn+1/qn+1. Set
zn = y1/q + y2/q2 + · · · + yn/qn + y1/(qn(q −1)). Then zn ∈C/(q −1) since C is
convex and the sum of the coefficients at the elements yi ∈C is 1/(q −1). The sequence
{zn} converges to x1 by the estimate
Z −n −x1∥=

y1
qn(q −1) −xn+1
qn
 ⩽
∥y1∥
qn(q −1) + 1
qn →0.
Since C is closed, x1 ∈C/(q −1). It follows that U ⊂C/(q −1), hence C has inner
points.
2.10.62. A locally convex space E is locally complete precisely when, for every
sequence xn converging to zero in E and every absolutely convergent series of num-
bers λn, the series 	∞
n=1 λnxn converges in E. This is also equivalent to convergence of
such series for all bounded sequences {xn}. One more equivalent description: convergence
of the series 	∞
n=1 λnxn for all {λn} ∈l2 and all {xn} ∈E such that {p(xn)} ∈l2 for
all continuous seminorms p.
HINT: see Qiu [401], Saxon, S´anchez Ruiz [433].
2.10.63. (Slowikowski [470]) The space D(IR1) possesses a closed linear subspace Z
on which there is a discontinuous sequentially continuous linear function (hence it cannot
be extended to a sequentially continuous linear function on all of D(IR1)). Therefore, Z is
not the inductive limit of Z ∩Dn. Cf. Exercise 2.10.36.
2.10.64. Let F(ϕ) = min
	∞
n=1

|ϕ(n)ϕ(n)(0), maxt |ϕ(t)|

, ϕ ∈D(IR). Then
0 ⩽F(ϕ) ⩽maxt |ϕ(t)|, F(tϕ) = |t|F(ϕ) and F is sequentially continuous. Show that
F is not continuous.
HINT: take ϕ0 ∈D(IR) with |ϕ0| ⩽1, ϕ0(0) = 1, ϕ0(n) = ϕ(n)
0
(0) = 0 for all
n ∈IN. Observe that every neighborhood of ϕ0 in D(IR) contains a function ϕ such
that F(ϕ) > 1/2.

CHAPTER 3
Duality
A powerful method of proving a great number of results in the theory of
locally convex spaces employs passage from some subsets in such spaces to their
polars, which are subsets of the dual spaces. Moreover, in place of properties of
the original sets certain properties of their polars are studied and then one returns
back, more precisely, to the polars of polars (the so-called bipolars), which are
absolutely convex closed hulls of the original sets.
About such a method of proof it is customary said that it employs duality in
locally convex spaces; sometimes it is also said about the duality theory, although
in fact there is no “duality theory” and everything reduces to the procedure de-
scribed in the previous phrase. Nevertheless a systematic use of this procedure is
a typical feature of the theory of locally convex spaces, so that it can be called
indeed one of the principal methods of this theory (although, when speaking of
“principal methods”, one should not forget that one key cannot open many doors).
In this chapter we have collected the fundamental results of the theory of real
(or complex) locally convex spaces based on duality.
3.1. Polars
Let E be a vector space and let G be some vector space of linear functionals
on E separating points in E, i.e., such that for every nonzero element x of the
space E there exists a functional g ∈G for which g(x) ̸= 0.
The polar in G of a set A ⊂E is the subset of the space G denoted by the
symbol A◦
G and defined by the equality
A◦
G =

g ∈G: |⟨g, x⟩| ⩽1 ∀x ∈A

, ∅◦:= G;
usually in place of the symbol A◦
G we shall use the symbol A◦.
The polar in E of a set B ⊂G is the subset of the space E denoted by the
symbol B◦
E (or by the symbol B◦without the lower index) defined by
B◦
E =

x ∈E : |⟨g, x⟩| ⩽1 ∀g ∈B

.
Usually so defined polars are called absolute polars, and polars (not absolute)
of the same sets are defined, respectively, as the sets

g ∈G: Re⟨g, x⟩⩽1 ∀x ∈A

,

x ∈E : Re⟨g, x⟩⩽1 ∀g ∈B

.
153
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
and Their Applications, Springer Monographs in Mathematics,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-57117-1_3
V.I. Bogachev and O.G. Smolyanov, Topological Vector Spaces

154
Chapter 3. Duality
An advantage of absolute polars is that they do not explicitly involve the complex
structure. In addition, in the definition of the absolute polar there is no that element
of arbitrariness which is seen in the definition of non-absolute polars: such a polar
for a set A ⊂E could be also defined as the set

g ∈G: Re⟨g, x⟩⩾−1 ∀x ∈A

.
Certainly, this second definition will not be equivalent to the previous one. Many
of the results given below can be easily transferred to non-absolute polars.
Let us state some simple properties of polars directly following from the
definition. We consider here only polars (in G) of subsets of the space E; for
polars (in E) of subsets of the space G the picture is completely similar.
1. If A ⊂B, then B◦⊂A◦; in particular, ∅◦= {0}◦= G, E◦= {0}.
2. If t ̸= 0, then (tA)◦= t−1A◦;
3. the polar of any set A ⊂E is a convex circled σ(G, E)-closed subset
of G. Indeed, the absolute convexity of A◦is obvious; its σ(G, E)-closedness
follows from the fact that it is the intersection of the family of σ(G, E)-closed
sets {g ∈G: |⟨g, x⟩| ⩽1} (x ∈A). Note also that for obtaining an analog of
this properties for non-absolute polars one should omit the word “circled” in the
previous sentence.
4. The polar of the union of any family of sets {Aα} is the intersection of
their polars:

α
Aα
◦
=

α
A◦
α.
5. If a set A absorbs a set B (i.e., if for all scalars t sufficiently large in
absolute value we have the inclusion tA ⊃B), then B◦absorbs the set A◦.
6. The polar A◦◦= (A◦
G)◦
E of the polar A◦of a set A is called its bipo-
lar; similarly we define the notion of a bipolar for subsets of the space G. The
following important fact is called the bipolar theorem.
3.1.1. Theorem. The bipolar of every nonempty set A is its σ(E, G)-closed
absolutely convex hull, i.e., the smallest absolutely convex σ(E, G)-closed set in E
containing A. Hence A = A◦◦for any absolutely convex σ(E, G)-closed set A.
PROOF. By property 3 of polars the set A◦◦is absolutely convex and closed.
Let abs conv A be the σ(E, G)-closed absolutely convex hull of the set A. Since
abs conv A is the intersection of all absolutely convex σ(E, G)-closed sets con-
taining A, and A◦◦is one of them, the inclusion abs conv A ⊂A◦◦is obvious.
If abs conv A ̸= A◦◦, then there exists a ∈A◦◦\ abs conv A, and since
A ̸= ∅, one has a ̸= 0. Hence there exists a linear functional f on E continuous
in the topology σ(E, G) (i.e., an element of the space G) such that |f(a)| > 1
and |f(x)| ⩽1 for every x ∈abs conv A. Since this yields |f(x)| ⩽1 for every
x ∈A, we obtain f ∈A◦, hence the inequality |f(a)| > 1 means that a /∈A◦◦
contrary to our assumption.
□
If we consider non-absolute polars, then the bipolar of a set will be the
σ(E, G)-closed convex hull of the union of this set and zero.
7. It follows from the previous property and property 3 that A◦◦◦= A◦(even
if A = ∅).

3.1. Polars
155
8. The polar of the intersection of an arbitrary family {Aα} of absolutely
convex σ(E, G)-closed subsets of the space E is the σ(E, G)-closed absolutely
convex hull of the union of their polars.
Indeed, by property 6 for every set Aα we have the equality A◦◦
α
= Aα.
Hence by property 4 (more precisely, by its analogs for subsets of G) we obtain
that (
α A◦
α)◦= 
α A◦◦
α = 
α Aα; now, again applying property 6, we obtain

α
Aα
◦
=

α
A◦
α
◦◦
= abs conv

α
A◦
α

.
9. If A is a linear subspace of the space E, then
A◦=

f ∈G: f(x) = 0 ∀x ∈A

.
3.1.2.
Theorem. The collection of all barrels (see Definition 2.5.6) in a
locally convex space E coincides with the class of the polars of weakly bounded
sets in E′.
PROOF. It is obvious that the polar of a weakly bounded set A in E′ is a
closed absolutely convex absorbent set in E, i.e., a barrel. Conversely, let B be a
barrel in E. Then B = (B◦)◦, where the set B◦is weakly bounded in E′, because
if a ∈λB, then |f(a)| ⩽λ for all f ∈B◦.
□
3.1.3. Remark. It is obvious from Definition 1.9.4 that the equicontinuous
sets in the dual E′ to a locally convex space E are precisely the subsets of the
polars of neighborhoods of zero in E.
The following important property of polars is called the Banach–Alaoglu–
Bourbaki theorem.
3.1.4. Theorem. Let E be a locally convex space. Then the polar of any
neighborhood of zero in E is compact in the topology σ(E′, E).
Hence any
equicontinuous set in E′ is relatively compact in the topology σ(E′, E). If E is
separable, then they are metrizable in this topology.
PROOF. This assertion is a corollary of Tychonoff’s theorem on the compact-
ness of any product of compact spaces. Let V be a neighborhood of zero in E
and let pV be its Minkowski functional. For every x ∈E let Sx denote the closed
disc in the complex plane centered at the origin and having the radius pV (x); it
is equipped with the standard topology. Let T be the product of the family of
compacts {Sx : x ∈E}, i.e., the collection of all complex functions f on E such
that f(x) ∈Sx for every x ∈E.
The polar V ◦of the set V also consists of (some) functions on E and if
f ∈V ◦, then for every x ∈E we have |f(x)| ⩽pV (x), since this is true on V .
Thus, we can assume that V ◦⊂T. In this case the topology induced in V ◦by the
topology of the space T and the topology induced in V ◦by the topology σ(E′, E)
coincide (verify this fact!).
Due to the fact that by Tychonoff’s theorem T is compact, for the proof of
compactness of V ◦it suffices to show that V ◦is closed in T. Assuming that E is

156
Chapter 3. Duality
complex (in order to include also the complex case), we observe that
V ◦=

f ∈T : f(t1x1 + t2x2) = t1f(x1) + t2f(x2) ∀x1, x2 ∈E, t1, t2 ∈C

.
Thus, V ◦is the intersection of all subsets of T of the form

f ∈T : f(t1x1 + t2x2) −t1f(x1) −t2f(x2) = 0

,
where t1, t2 ∈C, x1, x2 ∈E. Each of these sets is closed in T by the continuity
on T of the functions
f →f(t1x1 + t2x2) −t1f(x1) −t2f(x2),
which follows from the definition of the product topology. Finally, if F ⊂E′ is
equicontinuous, then F ⊂U ◦, where U ⊂E is a neighborhood of zero.
The metrizability of the polars of neighborhoods of zero in the topology
σ(E′, E) in the case of separable E follows from Proposition 1.9.5.
□
3.1.5.
Corollary. If E is metrizable and separable, then the space E′ is
separable in the topology σ(E′, E).
PROOF. We have E′ = ∞
n=1 U ◦
n, where {Un} is a base of neighborhoods of
zero in E, and each U ◦
n is a metrizable compact.
□
3.1.6.
Corollary. The polars of neighborhoods of zero are compact also
in the topology τP of uniform convergence on precompact sets. Therefore, this
topology coincides with the topology σ(E′, E) on the polars of neighborhoods of
zero, hence on all equicontinuous sets.
PROOF. Let V be a neighborhood of zero in a locally convex space E. Since
the polar V ◦is compact in E′ with the topology σ(E′, E), it suffices to verify
that if a net {fα} converges in V ◦to some functional f in the topology σ(E′, E),
then convergence holds also in the topology τP . Let S be a precompact set in E
and let ε > 0. Take points s1, . . . , sn ∈S such that S ⊂n
i=1(si + εV ). Next,
we take α0 such that |f(si) −fα(si)| < ε for all i = 1, . . . , n and α ⩾α0. Then
we obtain sups∈S |f(s) −fα(s)| < 3ε whenever α ⩾α0, since for every s ∈S
there exists a number i such that s −si ∈εV , whence we obtain |f(s −si)| ⩽ε
and |fα(s −si)| ⩽ε by the inclusions f, fα ∈V ◦.
□
Let us now discuss a property of the weak topology connected with polars. If
E and G are two finite-dimensional vector spaces in duality (as usual, depending
on the situation we either regard E as a space of linear functionals on G or
regard G as a space of linear functionals on E; the bilinear form establishing a
duality between these spaces will be denoted by the symbol ⟨·, ·⟩), then any vector
subspace E1 of the space E is connected by the natural duality with the quotient
G/E◦
1 of the space G; in this case
E◦
1 = {g ∈G: ⟨g, x⟩= 0 ∀x ∈E1}.
In other words, the space of all linear functions on E1 is naturally isomorphic
to the space G/E◦
1 and the space of all linear functions on the quotient G/E◦
1
is isomorphic to the space E1 (in the finite-dimensional case the existence of the

3.1. Polars
157
latter isomorphism follows from the existence of the former one, but we want to
describe both isomorphisms explicitly).
If E1 is a vector subspace in E and g is a linear functional on E1, then the
first of the aforementioned isomorphisms, denoted by F, associates with it the
element F(g) of the space G/E◦
1 having the form g1 + E◦
1, where g1 ∈G is a
linear functional on E extending g. The fact that the mapping F : E′
1 →G/E◦
1
is indeed an isomorphism is verified directly; in particular, its surjectivity follows
from the property that if g1 ∈G/E◦
1, then g1 = F(g), where g is the linear
functional on E obtained as the restriction to E1 of an arbitrary representative of
the class of functionals on E that represents the element g1. The second of the
considered isomorphisms, denoted by Φ, is defined as follows. If x1 ∈(G/E◦
1)′,
then Φ(x1) is the linear functional on G (i.e., in accordance with our agreement,
an element of E) which is the composition of x1 and the canonical mapping of the
space G onto G/E◦
1 (we shall denote this mapping by Ψ); we have Φ(x1) ∈E1,
since Φ(x1)(g) = 0 for g ∈E◦
1, hence Φ(x1) ∈E◦◦
1 , and E◦◦
1
= E1, because E1
is finite-dimensional. The property that E and G are finite-dimensional has already
been used implicitly twice: it yields that G is the set of all linear functionals on E
and that E is the set of all linear functionals on G.
It turns out that if we equip the spaces E and G with the topologies σ(E, G)
and σ(G, E), respectively, and consider not all linear functionals, but only con-
tinuous (and, in addition, assume that the subspace E1 is closed), then also in the
infinite-dimensional case similar assertions will be valid.
3.1.7. Theorem. Let E and G be two spaces in duality defined by a bi-
linear form ⟨·, ·⟩. The space E is equipped with the topology σ(E, G) and G
is equipped with the topology σ(G, E). Let E1 be a closed subspace in E and
let E◦
1 be its polar in G equipped with the topology induced from G. Then the
space

E′
1, σ(E′
1, E1)

is canonically isomorphic to the topological vector quo-
tient G/E◦
1 and the space

E1, σ(E1, E′
1)

is canonically isomorphic to the dual
of the quotient G/E◦
1 equipped with the weak topology (these isomorphisms will
be defined in the proof).
PROOF. An isomorphism between

E′
1, σ(E′
1, E1)

and G/E◦
1, denoted by F,
is defined as follows: if g ∈E′
1, then F(g) = g1 + E◦
1 ∈G/E◦
1, where g1 is a
continuous linear functional on E that is an extension of the functional g (an
extension exists by the Hahn–Banach theorem). Every element g1 + E◦
1 of the
space G/E◦
1 is the image of some element of E′
1. Indeed, if g is the restriction
to E1 of a functional from the set g1 + E◦
1, then F(g) = g1 + E◦
1. The property
that F is injective and linear is also easily verified, which is omitted.
It remains to prove that F is a homeomorphism. To this end we observe
that if Ψ is the canonical mapping of G onto G/E◦
1, then for all n ∈IN and
x1, . . . , xn ∈E1 we have the equality
F

{g∈E′
1 : |⟨g, xj⟩| < 1, j ⩽n}

= Ψ

{g∈G: |⟨g, xj⟩| < 1, j ⩽n}

.
The set in the brackets in the left side is an arbitrary set from a base of neighbor-
hoods of zero in the topology σ(E′
1, E1) and the set in the right side is an arbitrary

158
Chapter 3. Duality
set from a base of neighborhoods of zero of the space G/E◦
1. Thus, we have
proved that (E′
1)σ and G/E◦
1 are isomorphic, moreover, an explicit isomorphism
(called canonical) between them is described. We now define an isomorphism
between the spaces

(G/E◦
1)′, σ

(G/E◦
1)′, G/E◦
1

and E1, denoted by Φ. This
definition actually does not differ from the one used above in the finite-dimensional
case; the only difference concerns the verification of the fact that the definition is
correct (certainly, the proof of the continuity of the constructed mapping and its
inverse is also different).
If x ∈(G/E◦
1)′, then, as above, we define Φ(x) as the composition of x
and Ψ. The mapping x◦Ψ is continuous in the topology σ(G, E) as the composition
of two continuous mappings, one is the mapping Ψ: G →G/E◦
1 and the other
one is the functional x. Hence x◦Ψ ∈E. In addition, since ⟨g, (x◦Ψ)⟩= 0
for every g ∈E◦
1, we have the inclusion x◦Ψ ∈E◦◦
1 . Since E1 = E◦◦
1
by the
closedness of E1, this yields that Φ(x) ∈E1.
The injectivity and linearity of Φ are obvious. In order to show that Φ is
surjective, we observe that if x1 ∈E1, then x1 is a linear functional on G vanishing
on the polar E◦
1. Hence there exists a unique linear functional x on G/E◦
1 such
that x1 = x◦Ψ. It follows from the definition of the quotient topology and the
continuity of x1 that the functional x is continuous; the definition of the mapping
Φ yields that Φ(x) = x1.
Let us prove that Φ is a homeomorphism. Since the sets of the form
Uf1,...,fn := {x ∈E1 : |⟨fj, x⟩| < 1, j ⩽n},
where f1, . . . , fn ∈G, n ∈IN, form a base of neighborhoods of zero in E1,
the sets of the form Wf1,...,fn := {x ∈(G/E◦
1)′ : |⟨fj, x◦Ψ⟩| < 1, j ⩽n},
where f1, . . . , fn ∈G, form a base of neighborhoods of zero in the space (G/E◦
1)′
σ.
Now in order to show that Φ is an homeomorphism , it suffices to observe that
Φ(Wf1,...,fn) = Uf1,...,fn for all functionals f1, . . . , fn ∈G.
□
3.2. Topologies compatible with duality
Let E and G be vector spaces in the duality defined by a bilinear form ⟨·, ·⟩
(see Example 1.3.26). We shall identify E with a subspace in G∗and G is a
subspace in E∗; thus, the elements of E become functionals on G. We recall
(see p. 60) that every family of σ(G, E)-bounded sets B in E defines in G the
topology τB of uniform convergence on the class B by means of the seminorms
pB(g) = supx∈B |g(x)|, B ∈B. Similar topologies are defined in E.
3.2.1. Definition. We shall say that a topology τ in the space E is compatible
(or agrees) with the duality between E and G if it is locally convex and the space
of all continuous linear functionals on (E, τ) coincides with G.
We emphasize again that in this definition it is meant that G is identified with
some vector space of linear functionals on E by means of the mapping G →E∗
that to an element g associates the functional x →⟨g, x⟩. Thus, a locally con-
vex topology τ agrees with the duality between E and G precisely when every

3.2. Topologies compatible with duality
159
functional x →⟨g, x⟩, where g ∈G, is continuous in this topology and every con-
tinuous linear functional on (E, τ) has a such form. Similarly we define topologies
in G that agree with the duality between G and E.
3.2.2. Theorem. Every topology τ in E that agrees with the duality between
E and G is the topology of convergence on polars in G of all possible neighbor-
hoods of zero in E.
PROOF. For every neighborhood of zero V in the topology τ we take the
seminorm pV on E defined by the formula
pV (x) := sup{|g(x)|: g ∈V ◦}.
We verify that the obtained system of seminorms defines the topology τ. On the
one hand, V is contained in the set {x: pV (x) ⩽1}. On the other hand, every
neighborhood of zero W contains a set of the form {x: pV (x) ⩽1}. To this end
it suffices to take an absolutely convex neighborhood of zero V ⊂W such that
its closure V τ in the topology τ also belongs to W. By Theorem 1.11.15 the set
V τ is closed in the topology σ(E, G). Moreover, as noted in § 3.1, the bipolar of
the set V is the absolutely convex σ(E, G)-closed hull of V . Hence this bipolar,
which equals {x: pV (x) ⩽1}, coincides with V τ and is contained in W.
□
We recall that by Theorem 3.1.4 the aforementioned polars are absolutely
convex and σ(G, E)-compact in the space G.
It is shown in Example 1.3.23 that among all topologies in the space E for
which the set of linear continuous functionals on E coincides with G there exists
the weakest one that is automatically locally convex (see also § 2.1); it follows
that among all topology compatible with the duality between E and G there exists
the weakest one. It turns out that among them there is also the strongest topology.
3.2.3. Theorem. (THE MACKEY–ARENS THEOREM) Among all topologies
in E that are compatible with the duality between E and G there exists the
strongest one. This topology τ(E, G) is called the Mackey topology and is the
topology of convergence on the class of all absolutely convex σ(G, E)-compact
subsets of the space G. A similar assertion is true if we interchange the roles of
the spaces E and G.
PROOF. As shown above, every topology τ in E compatible with the duality
between E and G is a topology of convergence on polars of some neighborhoods
of zero in the space E, moreover, these polars are absolutely convex σ(G, E)-
compact subsets of G. It follows from this that the Mackey topology majorizes
any such topology τ.
We show that the Mackey topology agrees with the duality between E and G,
i.e.,

E, τ(E, G)
′ = G. The consistency of the Mackey topology with the vector
structure follows from the fact that every compact set in the topology σ(G, E) is
bounded in this topology. It is obvious that the Mackey topology is locally convex.
We now prove that if g ∈

E, τ(E, G)
′, then g ∈G. We have to show that
if a functional g from the space E∗of all linear functions on E is continuous on
E in the topology τ(E, G), then g ∈G. There is a neighborhood of zero V in

160
Chapter 3. Duality
the topology τ(E, G) such that |g(x)| ⩽1 for all x ∈V . It follows from the
definition of the topology τ(E, G) that there exists a σ(G, E)-compact absolutely
convex subset K of the space G such that K◦⊂V . Hence |g(x)| ⩽1 for all
vectors x ∈K◦. The latter means that g ∈(K◦)◦
E∗.
We emphasize that the polar (K◦)◦
E∗of the set K◦is its polar in the algebraic
dual space E∗, not in G (because a priori we are not given that g ∈G; on the
contrary, this is what we prove).
We now show that (K◦)◦
E∗⊂G; this will prove the inclusion g ∈G. To
this end we observe that the topology on K induced by the topology σ(G, E) of
the space G coincides with the topology induced by the topology σ(E∗, E) of the
space E∗(certainly K ⊂E∗, since G ⊂E∗). Hence the set K is compact also
as a subset of the space

E∗, σ(E∗, E)

. By the fact that the topology σ(E∗, E)
is Hausdorff it follows that K is closed in this space. Since, in addition, the set
K is absolutely convex, by property 6 of polars from § 3.1 we obtain the desired
inclusion (K◦)◦
E∗= K ⊂G.
□
3.2.4. Remark. (i) A locally convex space E is called a Mackey space if its
topology is the Mackey topology τ(E, E′). Examples of topologies that are (and
are not) Mackey topologies will be given below. For example, we shall see in
§ 3.6 that all metrizable locally convex spaces are Mackey spaces. The Mackey
topology is also denoted by the symbol μ(E, E′).
(ii) The Mackey topology could be also defined as the topology of conver-
gence on the class of all convex σ(G, E)-compact subsets of the space G.
Indeed, every such set is contained in an absolutely convex σ(G, E)-compact
set: its absolutely convex hull, since the absolutely convex hull of a convex set K
is the convex hull of the union of the sets K and (−K) and the convex hull of
finitely many convex compacts is compact, see Proposition 1.8.11.
(iii) If dim E > 0, then in the space E there exists a topology stronger than
τ(E, G) that does not agree with the vector structure, but nevertheless possesses
the property that the set of all linear functionals on E continuous in this topology
coincides with G. If E = G = IR1, then the discrete topology (in which all sets
are simultaneously open and closed) possesses this property.
We observe that Theorem 1.11.15 applied above can be formulated as follows.
3.2.5. Proposition. In all topologies on E compatible with the duality be-
tween E and G closed convex sets are the same.
A similar fact for bounded (but not necessarily closed) sets is presented in the
next theorem; along with the aforementioned Theorem 1.11.15 it belongs to the
most frequently used results.
3.2.6. Theorem. A set B ⊂E is bounded in the Mackey topology τ(E, G)
precisely when it is bounded in the weak topology σ(E, G). More generally (with-
out the separation condition), if a set in a locally convex space E is bounded in
the topology σ(E, E′), then it is bounded.
PROOF. We first give a proof based on duality. If B is bounded in the topol-
ogy τ(E, G), then it is bounded in σ(E, G). Let us prove that if B is bounded

3.2. Topologies compatible with duality
161
in σ(E, G), then any neighborhood of zero V in τ(E, G) absorbs B. Let W
be a closed absolutely convex neighborhood of zero in

E, τ(E, G)

such that
W ⊂V .
By Theorem 1.11.15 the set W is closed in σ(E, G).
Now it suf-
fices to show that W absorbs B. To this end we show that B◦absorbs W ◦, i.e.,
tB◦⊃W ◦for all t sufficiently large in absolute value. Then by the properties of
polars t−1B◦◦⊂W ◦◦. Since W ◦◦= W, we have B◦◦⊂tW for all t sufficiently
large in absolute value. Since B ⊂B◦◦, we see that B ⊂tW. It remains to show
that B◦absorbs W ◦. By Theorem 3.1.4 the absolutely convex set W ◦is compact
in the topology σ(G, E) and hence is complete. By Proposition 2.5.1 it is a Banach
disc (see Definition 2.5.2). At the same time B◦is a closed absolutely convex set
in the space

G, σ(G, E)

absorbing W ◦. Hence so is the set B◦∩EW ◦in the
space EW ◦. Therefore, B◦absorbs W ◦according to Example 2.5.5.
Let us now give a direct justification. We show that if q is a seminorm and
supx∈B |f(x)| < ∞for every functional f with |f| ⩽q, then supx∈B |q(x)| < ∞.
Suppose that this is false. Let U be the set of all functionals f with |f| ⩽q. By the
Hahn–Banach theorem supf∈U,x∈B |f(x)|=∞. Then supf∈rU+g,x∈B |f(x)|=∞
for all r > 0 and g ∈U. We find f1 ∈U/2 and b1 ∈B with f1(b1) > 2. If
f ∈U and |f1 −f| ⩽q(b1)−1q, then f(b1) ⩾1, i.e., for f ∈U1 = f1 +q(b1)−1U
we have f(b1) ⩾1.
Let is find f2 ∈U1 and b2 ∈B with f2(b2) > 4 and
set U2 = f2 + q(b2)−1q. By induction we obtain fn+1 ∈Un = fn + εnU and
bn+1 ∈B such that εn < 2−n, fn+1(bn+1) > 2n+1. The limit f(x) = lim
n→∞fn(x)
exists and defines a functional from U. By construction f(bn) ⩾n for all n, which
is impossible by condition.
□
Since τ(E, G) and σ(E, G) are the strongest and the weakest topologies com-
patible with the duality between E and G, this theorem can be reformulated as
follows.
3.2.7. Corollary. In all topologies on E compatible with the duality between
E and G bounded sets are the same.
3.2.8. Remark. Bounded sets can be the same also in comparable locally
convex topologies with different dual spaces. Let E be the Banach space l1 with
its usual norm and E′ = l∞and let G = c0. Then bounded sets in the topologies
σ(E, E′) and σ(E, G) in E are the same (i.e., norm bounded sets, which follows
from the classical Banach–Steinhaus theorem, see Theorem 3.5.4), although the
dual space

E, σ(E, G)
′ = G = c0 does not coincide with

E, σ(E, E′)
′ = l∞.
3.2.9.
Theorem. A linear mapping T : X →Y between locally convex
spaces is continuous with respect to the Mackey topologies τ(X, X′) and τ(Y, Y ′)
precisely when it is continuous with respect to the weak topologies σ(X, X′)
and σ(Y, Y ′) or with respect to the topologies τ(X, X′) and σ(Y, Y ′).
PROOF. If T is continuous with respect to the Mackey topologies, then for
every f ∈Y ′ the functional f ◦T is continuous in the topology τ(X, X′), hence
also in σ(X′, X), which gives the weak continuity of T.
Conversely, if T is
weakly continuous, then for every absolutely convex σ(Y ′, Y )-compact set Q

162
Chapter 3. Duality
in Y ′ the set K := {l◦T : l ∈Q} ⊂X′ is absolutely convex. It is σ(X′, X)-
compact, since every net {lα ◦T} in it contains a pointwise convergent subnet,
because we can first select such subnet in {lα}. Since for all x ∈X we have
supl∈Q |l(Tx)| = supf∈K |f(x)|, we obtain the continuity of the operator T in
the Mackey topologies. The same reasoning applies in the case of the continuity
of T from the topology τ(X′, X) to the topology σ(Y ′, Y ) in Y , since K ⊂X′
also in this case.
□
One should bear in mind that this theorem does not extend to intermediate
topologies (see Exercise 3.12.82).
On the Mackey topologies of products, sums, projective and inductive limits,
see Exercises 3.12.137, 3.12.138, and 3.12.139.
3.3. Adjoint operators
An important concept is that of a dual or adjoint operator.
3.3.1. Definition. Let E and G be two locally convex spaces with the duals
E′ and G′ and let T : E →G be a linear mapping. A mapping T ∗: G′ →E′ is
called dual or adjoint to the mapping T if g(Bx) = (B∗g)(x) for all x ∈E and
g ∈G, i.e., ⟨g, Bx⟩= ⟨B∗g, x⟩.
As above, the value of a functional g on a vector x will be occasionally
denoted by the symbols ⟨g, x⟩or ⟨x, g⟩(resembling the notation for the inner
product).
3.3.2. Proposition. Let T : E →G be a linear mapping between locally
convex spaces. A dual mapping T ∗: G′ →E′ exists precisely when the mapping
T is continuous provided that the spaces E and G are equipped with the topologies
σ(E, E′) and σ(G, G′), respectively (so that it is sufficient to have continuity of T
for the original topologies of E and G).
In that case T ∗is continuous as a
mapping from

G′, σ(G′, G)

to

E′, σ(E′, E)

.
PROOF. Let T :

G′, σ(G′, G)

→

E′, σ(E′, E)

be continuous. Then the
mapping T ∗is defined by
⟨T ∗g, x⟩= ⟨g, Tx⟩.
This definition is meaningful, since the right-hand side of the equality is linear in
x and continuous in the topology

E′, σ(E′, E)

. The linearity of the mapping
T ∗: G′ →E′ is verified directly.
If a dual mapping T ∗: G′ →E′ exists, then it is linear and continuous when
the spaces G′ and E′ are equipped with the topologies σ(G′, G) and σ(E′, E),
respectively. Indeed, the first of these topologies is defined by the seminorms of
the form qz(g) = |g(z)|, where g ∈G′, z ∈G, and the second topology is defined
by the seminorms of the form px(l) = |l(x)|, where l ∈E′, x ∈E, whence we
obtain
px(T ∗g) = |T ∗g(x)| = |g(Tx)| = qT x(g).
In addition, the original mapping T is continuous when E and G are equipped with
the topologies σ(E, E′) and σ(G, G′), respectively. Indeed, the former topology

3.3. Adjoint operators
163
is defined by the system of all seminorms pl(x) = |l(x)|, where l ∈E′, and the
latter by the system of seminorms qg(x) = |g(x)|, where g ∈G′. The equality
|g(Tx)| = |T ∗g(x)| for g ∈G′, x ∈E means that the seminorm qg(Tx) is
estimated by the seminorm pT ∗g (even coincides with it).
□
The property that the mapping T : E →G is continuous when we equip the
spaces E and G with the topologies σ(E, E′) and σ(G, G′) does not yield that it
is continuous also with respect to the original topologies of the spaces E and G:
for example, if E is a locally convex space such that its weak topology is strictly
weaker than the original one, denoted by the symbol τ (for example, E is an
infinite-dimensional Hilbert space), then the identity mapping E →E is not con-
tinuous as a mapping from the space

E, σ(E, E′)

to the space (E, τ), although
it is certainly continuous as a mapping from

E, σ(E, E′)

to

E, σ(E, E′)

and
for this reason possesses a dual mapping. Nevertheless, the following proposition
is valid, for which some additional terminology is needed (see § 1.9). Let X and
Z be two locally convex spaces, let A be some family of bounded subsets of the
space X, and let L(X, Z) be the space of all continuous linear mappings from X
to Z. The topology in L(X, Z) of convergence on the family of sets A is defined
by the family P of seminorms of the form
p(f) = sup
x∈A
q

f(x)

,
where q is a continuous seminorm on Z and A ∈A.
3.3.3. Proposition. Let E and G be locally convex spaces and let T : E →G
be a linear mapping continuous when we equip E and G with the topologies
σ(E, E′) and σ(G, G′). If B is some family of bounded sets in

G′, σ(G′, G)

,
T ∗(B) is the family of their images in

E′, σ(E′, E)

with respect to the map-
ping T ∗, then T is continuous when we equip the spaces E and G with the
topologies of convergence on the families of sets T ∗(B) and B, respectively .
The proof is obvious.
Note that for an arbitrary set L ⊂G′ we have the equality

T ∗(L)
◦
E =

x ∈E : |⟨f, x⟩| ⩽1 ∀f ∈T ∗(L)

=

x ∈E : |⟨l, Tx⟩| ⩽1 ∀l ∈L

(3.3.1)
= T −1
g ∈G: |⟨l, g⟩| ⩽1 ∀l ∈L}) = T −1(L◦
G).
Similarly one easily verifies that for every set K ⊂E there holds the equality

T(K)
◦
G′ = (T ∗)−1(K◦
E′).
(3.3.2)
These relations yield that
(Ran T)◦= Ker T ∗,
(Ran T ∗)◦= Ker T.
Since Ran T and Ran T ∗are vector spaces, for their closures (taken in arbitrary
topologies compatible with the duality between E and E′ and between E′ and E)
we have (Ran T)◦◦= Ran T, (Ran T ∗)◦◦= Ran T ∗. Therefore,
Ran T = ( Ker T ∗)◦,
Ran T ∗= ( Ker T)◦.
(3.3.3)

164
Chapter 3. Duality
These equalities are infinite-dimensional analogs of the property that the range
of an operator on IRn is orthogonal to the kernel of its adjoint.
3.4. Weak compactness
Here we obtain criteria of compactness in the weak topology (called also
weakened). These criteria will employ the terms “the countable compactness” and
“the sequential compactness” introduced in Definition 1.8.19. Although the prin-
cipal results of this section establish the coincidence of these types of compactness
in a number of important cases, we start with examples of their non-coincidence
in the general case.
3.4.1. Example. If T is the product of the continuum of copies of the real line,
realized as the space of all real functions on the interval [0, 1] with the topology
of pointwise convergence, then its subset K = {g ∈T : supt |g(t)| ⩽1} is
compact, hence countably compact, but is not sequentially compact, since the
sequence {gn}, where gn(t) = sin(nt), contains no convergent subsequences.
Further, if K0 is the set formed by all functions in K that do not vanish on an at
most countable set of points (depending on the function), then K0 is sequentially
compact, but not compact.
If a subset of a topological space is sequentially or countably compact, then
this set equipped with the induced topology is a sequentially (respectively, count-
ably) compact topological space. In particular, the two sets in the example above,
one of which is sequentially compact, but not compact, and the other is compact,
but not sequentially compact, give examples of topological spaces with the respec-
tive properties. The product of these topological spaces is a countably compact
space that is neither compact, nor sequentially compact.
Below we prove the theorems of Eberlein and ˇSmulian showing that under
rather broad assumptions for subsets of locally convex spaces equipped with the
weak topology the relative versions of compactness, sequential compactness, and
countable compactness are equivalent; these theorems find numerous applications
(and also considerably ease to verify the conditions for semireflexivity).
The next fact is much more elementary (although rather useful).
3.4.2. Proposition. Every bounded subset of a locally convex space E is
precompact in the topology σ(E, E′).
PROOF. It suffices to verify that any bounded set B ⊂E can be covered
by finitely many shifts of every neighborhood of zero in E of the standard form
U = {x ∈E : |fi(x)| < 1, i = 1, . . . , n}, where fi ∈E′ are linearly independent.
Since |fi(x)| ⩽M for all x ∈B and i ⩽n for some M > 0, the assertion follows
from the fact that the cube [−M, M]n can be covered by finitely many shifts of
the cube (−1, 1)n by vectors a1, . . . , ak ∈IRn: then B ⊂k
i=1(bj + U), where
vectors bj ∈E are such that

f1(bj), . . . , fn(bj)

= aj.
□
However, even closed in the topology σ(E, E′) bounded sets are still far
from compact sets in this topology, since a bounded σ(E, E′)-closed set is not

3.4. Weak compactness
165
always σ(E, E′)-complete. For example, the closed unit ball in a non-reflexive
Banach space E (say, in l1) is not complete in the topology σ(E, E′). The next
proposition plays a key role in the proof of the Eberlein theorem.
About the
topology of pointwise convergence see p. 17, 60.
3.4.3. Proposition. Let K be compact, let F(K) be the space of all real func-
tions on K equipped with the topology of pointwise convergence, and let Cp(K)
be the topological vector subspace of the space F(K) consisting of continuous
functions (where Cp(K) is equipped with the topology induced from F(K), i.e.,
also with the topology of pointwise convergence). If a set G ⊂Cp(K) is relatively
countably compact in Cp(K), then its closure in F(K) is contained in Cp(K) and
is compact.
PROOF. The relative countable compactness of a set G in C = Cp(K) yields
the relative countable compactness of this set in F = F(K), hence its boundedness
in F; the boundedness of G in F implies the relative compactness of G in F, hence
it remains to prove that the closure G of the set G in F is contained in C.
Suppose that exists a discontinuous function g ∈G (i.e., g /∈C), and let a
be its discontinuity point. Thus, there exists ε > 0 such that every neighborhood
V of the point a contains a point x = xV for which we have |g(x) −g(a)| > ε.
Using this we prove below the existence of a sequence of functions gn ∈G
and a sequence of points xn ∈K such that |gn(xk) −g(a)| > ε if k ⩽n and
|gn(xk) −g(a)| < ε/2 for all k > n.
Suppose that this is done and complete the proof of the proposition. Since
the set of elements of the sequence {xn} is infinite, by the compactness of K it
possesses a limit point b. Since every function gn is continuous, its value at the
point b is a limit point of the sequence {gn(xk)} (we emphasize that this is not
the same as being a limit point of the set of values of the elements of the latter
since this set can be finite). Since |gn(xk) −g(a)| < ε/2 for all k > n, we have
|gn(b) −g(a)| ⩽ε/2.
Thus, if ϕ is a function in C that is a limit element of the set {gn} (the
existence of ϕ is ensured by the supposed relative countable compactness of G
in C), then |ϕ(b) −g(a)| ⩽ε/2. On the other hand, since for all n ⩾k we
have |gn(xk) −g(a)| > ε, for all k the limit function ϕ satisfies the inequality
|ϕ(xk)−g(a)| ⩾ε. By the continuity of the function ϕ its value at the point b (that
is a limit point of the set {xk}), must be a limit point of the sequence {ϕ(xk)};
the above inequalities show that this is false.
For completing the proof of the proposition it remains to establish the ex-
istence of the aforementioned sequences {xk} and {gn}.
Let V1 be an arbi-
trary neighborhood of the point a. Then there exists a point x1 ∈V1 such that
|g(x1) −g(a)| > ε. Since g ∈G, there exists a function g1 ∈G such that
|g1(a) −g(a)| < ε/2, |g1(x1) −g(a)| > ε,
and since the function g1 is continuous, there exists a neighborhood V2 of the
point a such that for all x ∈V2 we have
|g1(x) −g(a)| < ε/2.

166
Chapter 3. Duality
Further, in the same neighborhood there is a point x2 for which |g(x2)−g(a)| > ε.
By the inclusion g ∈G there exists a function g2 ∈G for which
|g2(a) −g(a)| < ε/2, |g2(x1) −g(a)| > ε, |g2(x2) −g(a)| > ε.
Suppose that for some n ⩾1 we have already found functions g1, . . . , gn ∈G and
points x1, x2, . . . , xn ∈K with the following properties:
|gk(a) −g(a)| < ε/2
for all k,
|gn(xk) −g(a)| > ε
for k ⩽n,
|gn(xk) −g(a)| < ε/2
for all k > n.
Then xn+1 and gn+1 are picked in the following way. Let Vn+1 be a neighborhood
of the point a such that |gk(a) −g(a)| < ε/2 for all k ⩽n and x ∈Vn+1. Let
xn+1 be any point in Vn+1 for which |g(xn+1) −g(a)| > ε, and let gn+1 be any
function in G for which |gn+1(a)−g(a)| < ε/2 and |gn+1(xk)−g(a)| > ε for all
k > n + 1. The existence of Vn+1 follows from the continuity of the functions gj
and the existence of gn+1 is ensured by the inclusion g ∈G. Thus, we have proved
the existence of the desired sequences {xk} and {gn}, hence the proposition is
proven.
□
3.4.4. Theorem. (EBERLEIN’S THEOREM) Let E be a locally convex space
and let A ⊂E be relatively countably compact in the topology σ(E, E′). If the
closed convex hull of A is complete in the Mackey τ(E, E′) topology, then the set
A is relatively compact in the topology σ(E, E′).
PROOF. Let B be the closed convex hull of the set A. We recall that in all
topologies that agree with the same duality closed convex sets are the same, so it is
makes no difference here with which topology we equip the space E — the original
one or some of the topologies σ(E, E′) and τ(E, E′). Let E be the locally convex
space that is the completion of E in the Mackey topology. Certainly, the spaces
E′ and E′ coincide. Note that since the set B is supposed to be complete in the
space

E, τ(E, E′)

, it is closed also in
 E, τ( E, E′)

.
In addition, since by the countable compactness of

E, σ(E, E′)

the set
A is bounded in it, it is bounded also in the space

E′ ∗, σ(E′ ∗, E′)

, hence
is precompact in it by Proposition 3.4.2. Since the space

E′ ∗, σ(E′ ∗, E′)

is
obviously complete, this means that the closure A of the set A in this space is
compact.
Now for completing the proof of the theorem it suffices to show that A ⊂B,
since B ⊂E. To this end, in turn, it suffices to verify that A ⊂E, since B is
closed in
 E, τ( E, E′)

, hence also in
 E, σ( E, E′)

, and the topology σ( E, E′)
on E is induced by the topology σ(E′ ∗, E′). Thus, let a ∈A. Then for every
neighborhood of zero V in
 E, σ( E, E′)

the restriction a|V ◦of the functional a to
the compact set V ◦= V ◦
E′ in

E′, σ(E′, E)

(its compactness follows from Theo-
rem 3.1.4) belongs to the closure (in the space F(V ◦)) of the set A|V ◦, consisting
of the restrictions to V ◦of linear functionals belonging to A. All these functionals
are continuous in the topology induced on V ◦by the topology σ(E′, E). Since in
this topology V ◦is compact, it follows from Proposition 3.4.3 that the function a

3.4. Weak compactness
167
is continuous. This proposition is applicable, since the relative countable compact-
ness in

E, σ(E, E′)

of the set A yields the relative countable compactness in
Cf(V ◦) of the set A|V ◦. Thus, we have proved that for any neighborhood of zero
V in
 E, τ( E, E′)

the restriction of a to V ◦is continuous in the topology induced
on V ◦by the topology σ(E′, E). Since the space
 E, τ( E, E′)

is complete, this
implies that a ∈E.
□
3.4.5. Theorem. (THE ABSTRACT ˇSMULIAN THEOREM) Let E be a vector
space and let G be some vector space of linear functions on E such that E
contains a countable set everywhere dense in the topology σ(E, G), which is not
assumed to be separated. Then every relatively countably compact subset of the
space

G, σ(E, G)

is relatively sequentially compact.
PROOF. Let {xn} be a countable subset of the space E everywhere dense
in the topology σ(E, G), let A be a relatively countably compact subset of the
space

G, σ(G, E)

, and let {gn} ⊂A. The relative countable compactness of
the set A yields that it is bounded in

G, σ(G, E)

. Hence for every x ∈E the
set of numbers {gn(x)} is bounded. It follows that there exists a subsequence
{gnj} in {gn} for which the sequence of numbers {gnj(x1)} converges. Further,
there exists a subsequence {gnjk } in {gnj} for which the sequence {gnjk (x2)}
converges, and so on. Thus, for every j ∈IN there exists a subsequence {gj
n}
of the sequence {gn} with the following properties: if j1 < j2, then {gj2
n } is a
subsequence in {gj1
n } and for every j the sequence {gnj(xj)} converges. Hence
the “diagonal” sequence {gn
n} possesses the following property: the sequence
{gn
n(xj)} converges for each j.
It follows that the set of limit points of this
sequence in the space

G, σ(G, E)

contains precisely one element. Indeed, let f1
and f2 be two its limit points. Then we have f1(xj) = lim
n→∞gn
n(xj) = f2(xj) for
every j, hence the values of the functionals f1 and f2, which are continuous in
the topology σ(E, G), coincide on the elements of the set {xn} that is everywhere
dense in this topology. This means that f1 = f2.
Let f be a (unique) limit point of the sequence {gn
n}. We show that gn
n →f
in

G, σ(G, E)

; this will complete the proof of the theorem. Assume that the
sequence {gn
n} does not converge in the space

G, σ(G, E)

to f. Then there
exist an open neighborhood V of the element f and a subsequence {gni
ni} no
element of which is contained in V . Hence the limit points of this subsequence
(existing by the relative countable compactness of the set A) do not belong to the
neighborhood V , but these limit points are at the same time limit points of the
original sequence, hence must coincide with f.
□
We observe that this theorem applies to weakly compact sets, which is one of
the most important cases for applications.
3.4.6. Corollary. Let E be a separable quasi-complete locally convex space.
A set S ⊂E is relatively weakly compact precisely when it is relatively sequen-
tially compact in the topology σ(E, E′), which is also equivalent to its relative
countable compactness in σ(E, E′).

168
Chapter 3. Duality
PROOF. If S is relatively countably compact in the weak topology, then by
Eberlein’s theorem 3.4.4 it is weakly relatively compact, because S is bounded,
hence its closed convex hull is complete by our assumption that E is quasi-
complete. Moreover, by the previous theorem (which requires that E be sepa-
rable), the set S is relatively sequentially compact in the weak topology. On the
other hand, if S is relatively weakly compact, then it is always relatively countably
compact in the weak topology.
□
3.4.7. Theorem. ( ˇSMULIAN’S THEOREM) Let E be a locally convex space
such that on E there exists a metrizable locally convex topology weaker than
the original one. Then every relatively countably compact subset of the space

E, σ(E, E′)

is relatively sequentially compact in it.
PROOF. It suffices to prove this fact for countable sets. So let A be a count-
able subset of the space E relatively countably compact in σ(E, E′). Let G be
the closed vector subspace in the space

E, σ(E, E′)

generated by the set A (or,
equivalently, in the space E equipped with the original topology). Let τ1 be the
topology in G induced by the original topology of the space E and let τ2 be the
topology in G induced by the metrizable locally convex topology in E mentioned
in the theorem.
Since the topology σ(G, G′) in G coincides with the topology induced in G
by the topology σ(E, E′) (this follows from the Hahn–Banach theorem, according
to which every element in the space G′ is the restriction to G of some functional
from E′), for the proof of the theorem it suffices to show that the set A is rela-
tively sequentially compact in the space

G, σ(G, G′)

. We observe that (again by
the coincidence of the topology σ(G, G′) and the topology induced by the weak
topology σ(E, E′)) the set A is relatively countably compact in

G, σ(G, G′)

.
In addition, as we prove below, the space

G′, σ(G′, G)

is separable. Thus,
the spaces G and G′ and the set A ∈G satisfy the conditions of the previous
theorem (here the role of the space E from the theorem is played by the space G′).
It follows that A is relatively sequentially compact in

G, σ(G, G′)

. Thus, it
remains to prove that

G′, σ(G′, G)

is separable. Let {Vn} be a base of neigh-
borhoods of zero in the topology τ2 consisting of absolutely convex closed sets (in
the topology τ2, hence also in τ1). We can assume, in addition, that Vn ⊂Vj for
all j > n. According to property 8 of polars, established in § 3.1, we have
 ∞

n=1
Vn
◦
=
∞

n=1
V ◦
n ,
where the polars are taken in G′ and the bar means the closure in the space

G′, σ(G′, G)

. It suffices to prove that each of the sets V ◦
n contains a countable
set everywhere dense in the topology σ(G′, G). To this end, we first observe
that each of these sets is compact in the topology σ(G′, G) (Theorem 3.1.4).
Further, if GA is a vector subspace in the space G generated by the set A, then
the topology σ(G′, GA) in G′ is metrizable (since the dimension of GA is at most
countable), hence possesses a countable base of neighborhoods of zero. Since
GA is everywhere dense in

G, σ(G, G′)

, the topology σ(G′, GA) is separated.

3.4. Weak compactness
169
Since it is majorized by the topology σ(G′, G), in which the set V ◦
n is compact,
the topology induced by the topology σ(G′, GA) on the set V ◦
n coincides with the
topology induced by the topology σ(G′, G). Thus, V ◦
n as a topological subspace
of the space

G′, σ(G′, G)

is metrizable compact, hence is separable.
□
3.4.8. Example. The hypotheses of the proven theorem are fulfilled for strict
inductive limits of metrizable locally convex spaces (Exercise 3.12.135).
Applying it to the weak topologies of Banach spaces we obtain the following
assertion (frequently called the Eberlein–ˇSmulian theorem).
3.4.9. Theorem. Let A be a set in a Banach space X. Then the following
conditions are equivalent:
(i) the set A has compact closure in the weak topology;
(ii) every sequence in A has a subsequence weakly converging in X;
(iii) every infinite sequence in A has a limit point in X in the weak topology
(a point each neighborhood of which contains infinitely many elements of this
sequence).
In particular, for sets in a Banach space with the weak topology, compactness
is equivalent to the sequential compactness and also equivalent to the countable
compactness.
In [72, § 6.10(ii)] there is a direct proof using specific features of this special
case.
3.4.10. Lemma. Let T be compact. If f0 ∈C(T) belongs to the closure of
a set F ⊂C(T) in the topology of pointwise convergence, then f0 is contained in
the closure of some countable part of F in this topology.
PROOF. For fixed n, m ∈IN and f ∈F the set
W(m, n, f) =

(t1, . . . , tm) ∈T m : sup
i⩽m
|f(ti) −f0(ti)| < n−1
is open.
Their union in f ∈F is T m, since f0 belongs to the closure of F
in the topology of pointwise convergence. Hence there exists a finite collection
Fn,m ⊂F for which the corresponding sets cover T m. Then f0 is contained
in the closure of the union Fn,m over all n and m in the topology of pointwise
convergence.
□
3.4.11. Theorem. Let E be a metrizable locally convex space and let A ⊂E.
(i) If a point x belongs to the closure of A in the weak topology, then x belongs
to the weak closure of some countable subset in A.
(ii) If A is a subset of a weakly compact set in E and a point x belongs to the
closure of A in the weak topology, then x is a limit of some sequence {an} ⊂A
in the weak topology.
PROOF. (i) Let {Un} be a base of neighborhoods of zero in E. Then E′
is the union of σ(E′, E)-compact sets U ◦
n. For each n we apply the previous
lemma to A and x, considered as contained in C(U ◦
n) by means of duality. This
gives a countable part An ⊂A the closure of which in the topology of pointwise

170
Chapter 3. Duality
convergence on U ◦
n contains x. It remains to observe that x is contained in the
σ(E, E′)-closure of the set ∞
n=1 An.
(ii) According to what is already proved we can pass to a countable set A.
Then, replacing E by the linear span of A, we arrive at the case of separable E. By
Corollary 3.1.5, E′ contains a countable σ(E′, E)-dense set {fk}. By the diagonal
procedure we can extract a sequence {an} in A for which fk(an) →fk(x) for
every k. By the ˇSmulian theorem we can extract a further weakly convergent
subsequence, but due to the density of {fk} its limit will be precisely x.
□
An important characterization of weak compactness, obtained by James, is
given in § 3.12(iv).
3.5. Barrelled spaces
In this section we consider an interesting class of the so-called barrelled spaces
related to bounded sets. We recall that it was shown in Proposition 1.9.2 that se-
quentially continuous linear mappings take bounded sets to bounded sets. Through-
out this section we assume that all considered locally convex spaces are Hausdorff.
As usual, given two topological vector spaces E and G, the symbol L(E, G)
denotes the space of all linear continuous mappings from E to G. We recall (see
Definition 1.9.4) that a set F is called equicontinuous if for every neighborhood
of zero V in G one can find a neighborhood of zero U in the space E such that
{f(u): f ∈F, u ∈U} ⊂V .
A set F ⊂L(E, G) is called pointwise bounded if, for every x ∈E, the set
{f(x): f ∈F} is bounded in G.
3.5.1. Definition. A locally convex space E is called barrelled if, for every lo-
cally convex space G, every pointwise bounded set of continuous linear mappings
from E to G is equicontinuous.
3.5.2. Corollary. The limit of a pointwise convergent sequence of continuous
linear operators from a barrelled space to a locally convex space is continuous.
This definition is meaningful also in the category of topological vector spaces
(not necessarily separated), but in our consideration of barrelled and other close
spaces we shall deal with Hausdorff locally convex spaces. Nevertheless, although
the requirement that the spaces considered in this section are Hausdorff is always
meant, sometimes we repeat it explicitly. The meaning of a somewhat strange term
“barrelled space” (espace tonnel´e introduced by Bourbaki) will be soon clarified.
3.5.3. Proposition. If a locally convex space E is barrelled, then for every
locally convex space G every pointwise bounded subset L(E, G) is uniformly
bounded on every bounded subset of the space E.
PROOF. Let B ⊂E be bounded, let W be a neighborhood of zero in G,
and let V be a neighborhood of zero in E such that F(V ) ⊂W (the latter exists
according to the definition of barrelledness). Since B is bounded, we have tV ⊃B
for some number t > 0. Then we have tW ⊃tF(V ) = F(tV ) ⊃F(B). Thus,
the boundedness of the set F(B) is proved.
□

3.5. Barrelled spaces
171
It will be shown below that every Fr´echet space (hence every Banach space)
is barrelled. Hence in Proposition 3.5.3 one can take for E an arbitrary Banach
space; in this case this proposition becomes the following classical theorem.
3.5.4.
Theorem. (THE BANACH–STEINHAUS THEOREM) Any pointwise
bounded family of continuous linear mappings from a Banach space X to a normed
space Y is norm bounded, i.e., is uniformly bounded on the unit ball in X.
Thus, we can say that barrelled spaces are those spaces for which there holds
a suitably generalized Banach–Steinhaus theorem. Such a suitable generalization
is the content of the foregoing definition of barrelled spaces.
We shall now establish a criterion of barrelledness of a space. We recall (see
Definition 2.5.6) that a barrel in a locally convex space is any closed absolutely
convex absorbent set. Proposition 1.2.11 shows that in every locally convex space
there exists a base of neighborhoods of zero consisting of barrels (but not every
barrel must be a neighborhood of zero).
3.5.5. Theorem. A Hausdorff locally convex space is barrelled precisely when
every barrel in it is a neighborhood of zero.
PROOF. Suppose that every barrel in a Hausdorff locally convex space E
is a neighborhood of zero and show that E is barrelled.
Let G be one more
locally convex space and let F be a pointwise bounded subset in L(E, G). We
have to show that F is equicontinuous. Let W be a neighborhood of zero in
G and let W0 ⊂W be an absolutely convex closed neighborhood of zero. Set
V = 
f∈F f −1(W0) and show that V is a barrel in E.
Since all mappings f ∈F are continuous and W0 is closed, the sets f −1(W0)
are closed, hence their intersection V is closed too. The linearity of all f ∈F and
the absolute convexity of the set W0 yield that V is absolutely convex.
We now show that the set V is absorbing in E.
Indeed, if x ∈E, then
the set F(x) := {f(x): f ∈F} is bounded in G (this is exactly the pointwise
boundedness). Hence there exists a number λ > 0 such that if |t| > λ, then
tW0 ⊃F(x), i.e., W0 ⊃F(x/t). This means that for every mapping f ∈F we
have f(x/t) ∈W0, i.e., x/t ∈f −1(W0), whence x/t ∈V . Thus, the set V is
absorbent and so is a barrel. The definition of V yields that f(V ) ⊂W0 ⊂W
whenever f ∈F; this means the equicontinuity of F.
Suppose now that the space E barrelled and prove that every barrel in it is a
neighborhood of zero. To this end we apply the definition in the situation where
G is the field of scalars, i.e., L(E, G) = E′. Let V be a barrel in E. Show that its
polar is a bounded set in

E′, σ(E′, E)

, i.e., a pointwise bounded set in E′. We
recall that the topology σ(E′, E) is defined by the system of all seminorms of the
form g →|g(x)|, where x ∈E. Thus, it suffices to show that for every x ∈E the
function g →|g(x)| is bounded on V ◦. However, this follows at once from the
fact that V is an absorbent set, since tx ∈V for all numbers t sufficiently small
in absolute value, whence |g(tx)| ⩽1 for all g ∈V ◦and hence |g(x)| ⩽1/|t|.
Thus, we have proved that the set V ◦is pointwise bounded in E′.
The pointwise boundedness of V ◦and barrelledness of E yield the equicon-
tinuity of V ◦. Hence there exists an absolutely convex and closed neighborhood

172
Chapter 3. Duality
of zero W in E such that if x ∈W and g ∈V ◦, then |g(x)| ⩽1. In other words,
W ◦⊃V ◦. Then W = W ◦◦⊂V ◦◦= V , i.e., V is a neighborhood of zero.
□
We recall that by Theorem 3.1.2 barrels in E are precisely the polars of
bounded sets in

E′, σ(E′, E)

.
The criterion of barrelledness from the proven theorem is often taken for the
definition; then our definition becomes a theorem (which is called the Banach–
Steinhaus theorem).
3.5.6. Definition. A topological vector space is called a Baire space if it
cannot be represented as a countable union of nowhere dense sets.
It is known from the university course that every complete metric space is a
Baire space (Baire’s theorem, see Bogachev, Smolyanov [72]); in particular, all
Fr´echet spaces, hence all Banach spaces, are Baire spaces.
In § 3.12(i), one can find some additional information about Baire spaces in
the case of general topological spaces.
3.5.7. Proposition. Every Baire Hausdorff locally convex space is barrelled.
Hence all Fr´echet spaces (so all Banach spaces) are barrelled.
PROOF. Let V be a barrel in a Baire (separated) locally convex space E. Then
we have E = ∞
n=1 nV , and since E is a Baire space, there exists n ∈IN such
that nV is not nowhere dense. Since V is closed, this means that nV contains
some open set W, which, in turn, contains a set of the form a + W0, where
W0 is an absolutely convex neighborhood of zero in E. Therefore, by the absolute
convexity of nV we have 1
2(a + W0 −a −W0) = W0 ⊂nV . Hence V is a
neighborhood of zero.
□
The space D(IR1) is barrelled, but is not Baire; Theorem 3.12.4 gives a
normed barrelled space that is not Baire.
In practice, the criterion of barrelledness from Theorem 3.5.5 is seldom used
to verify barrelledness (an exception, by the way, is delivered by the proposition
below); usually barrelledness of concrete spaces is discovered by using the fact
that the class of barrelled spaces is closed with respect to certain operations.
3.5.8. Proposition. Let E be a barrelled locally convex space. Then every
linear subspace in it of finite or countable codimension is barrelled.
PROOF. We first consider in E a linear subspace E0 of codimension 1. Let
B be a barrel in E0. Let us take a vector v ∈E\E0. If the closure B of the set B
in E contains a nonzero vector of the form tv, then B turns out to be a barrel in
E and hence contains a neighborhood of zero U, which gives the neighborhood of
zero U ∩E0 in E0. Moreover, U ∩E0 ⊂B by the closedness of B in E0. If there
is no such nonzero vector, then B = B. Then the sum of B and the compact set
{tv: |t| ⩽1} turns out to be a barrel in E and this sum contains a neighborhood
of zero U. As above, U ∩E0 ⊂B, since every element in U has the form b + tv,
where b ∈B, which gives t = 0 in the case where b + tv ∈E0. By induction we
obtain our assertion in the case of any finite codimension. The case of countable
codimension is delegated to Exercise 3.12.58.
□

3.5. Barrelled spaces
173
3.5.9. Example. In an infinite-dimensional Banach space, the kernel of any
discontinuous linear functional is a barrelled subspace (this subspace is an incom-
plete barrelled normed space).
3.5.10. Theorem. (i) Inductive limits and direct sums of barrelled spaces are
barrelled. (ii) Any Hausdorff locally convex space that is the image of a barrelled
space under an open (taking open sets to open sets) continuous linear mapping is
barrelled. (iii) Any Hausdorff quotient of a barrelled space is barrelled.
PROOF. (i) If B is a barrel in the inductive limit E of barrelled spaces Eα
with mappings gα : Eα →E, then g−1
α (B) is a barrel in Eα, hence contains a
neighborhood of zero in Eα, whence it follows that B contains a neighborhood
of zero in E. Thus, in the case of direct sums it suffices to consider finite sums,
which reduces everything to the sum of two barrelled spaces E1 and E2. Then
the intersections of the barrel B with the summands are barrels, hence contain
neighborhoods of the origins in the summands, which gives a neighborhood of
zero in B.
(ii) The preimage of any barrel under a linear mapping is a barrel, hence
contains a neighborhood of zero, and the image of the latter is open under an open
mapping. This yields also (iii), since the projection onto the quotient is open.
□
3.5.11. Theorem. Let E be a Hausdorff locally convex space. The following
assertions are equivalent:
(i) the space E is barrelled;
(ii) all σ(E′, E)-bounded sets in E′ are equicontinuous (i.e., the topology
of E coincides with β(E, E′));
(iii) all σ(E′, E)-bounded sets in E′ are relatively weakly compact and the
topology in E coincides with τ(E, E′).
Thus, barrelled spaces are Mackey spaces.
PROOF. The implication (i)⇒(ii) is trivial. Let (ii) be fulfilled. Then every
weakly bounded set B in E′ is relatively weakly compact, since by Proposi-
tion 3.4.2 it is precompact in the topology σ(E′, E), In addition, the equicon-
tinuity ensured by condition (ii) gives completeness, hence compactness of the
closure of B according to Proposition 1.9.5. Moreover, the original topology is
the Mackey topology, since every absolutely convex σ(E′, E)-compact set Q is
weakly bounded, so under condition (ii) it is equicontinuous, which gives a neigh-
borhood of zero U in the original topology with Q ⊂U ◦, whence U ⊂Q◦, i.e.,
the original topology majorizes the Mackey topology. Finally, if (iii) holds, then
the polar of any barrel B is weakly compact, which by the properties of polars
(see § 3.1) means that B is the polar of an absolutely convex σ(E′, E)-compact
set, i.e., a neighborhood of zero in the Mackey topology. By the way, it follows
from the theorem that any Fr´echet space is a Mackey space, but this is true even
without completeness (see Corollary 3.6.12).
□
3.5.12. Corollary. If E is barrelled (say, is a Fr´echet space), then E′ is
quasi-complete in the weak topology σ(E′, E).

174
Chapter 3. Duality
PROOF. Closed and bounded in the topology σ(E′, E) sets are weakly com-
pact by (iii), so they are weakly complete. See also Exercise 3.12.154.
□
3.5.13. Corollary. The product of any family of barrelled spaces is barrelled.
PROOF. The dual to the product is the direct sum of the duals (Proposi-
tion 2.4.5), any bounded set in it is contained in the sum of finitely many sum-
mands.
□
3.5.14. Proposition. Suppose that a barrelled space E is the union of an
increasing sequence of linear subspaces En. Then E is the inductive limit of the
spaces En with the induced topologies.
PROOF. The original topology of the space E is majorized by the topology τ1
of the inductive limit of the spaces En.
Let us verify the converse.
By bar-
relledness E is a Mackey space, so it suffices to verify that (E, τ1)′ = E′. Let
f ∈(E, τ1)′. Then f|En ∈E′
n. By the Hahn–Banach theorem there exists func-
tionals fn ∈E′ for which f|En = fn|En. Since E = ∞
n=1 En, the functionals
fn converge pointwise. By the barrelledness of E the sequence {fn} is equicon-
tinuous, which yields the continuity of f in the original topology.
□
There is also the following “negative” characterization.
3.5.15. Proposition. A Hausdorff locally convex space E is barrelled pre-
cisely when there is no nowhere dense absolutely convex set B in E such that one
has E = ∞
n=1 nB.
PROOF. If E = ∞
n=1 nB for some absolutely convex set B, then B is a
barrel, hence in the case of barrelled E it contains a neighborhood of zero. If E
is not barrelled, then there is a barrel B that is not a neighborhood of zero, hence
it has no interior points due to its absolute convexity. Hence B is nowhere dense.
In addition, we have E = ∞
n=1 nB.
□
A locally convex space is called quasi-barrelled (or infrabarrelled) if every
barrel in this space absorbing all bounded sets is a neighborhood of zero.
A topological vector space with a topology t (not necessarily locally convex) is
called ultrabarrelled if every vector topology in E having a base of neighborhoods
of zero consisting of t-closed sets is weaker than t.
One can show (see Edwards [150, Theorem 6.2.1]) that a locally convex space
(E, t) is barrelled precisely when every locally convex topology in E having a
base of neighborhoods of zero consisting of t-closed sets is weaker than t. Hence
all ultrabarrelled locally convex spaces are barrelled (but there are examples of
barrelled spaces which are not ultrabarrelled). A closed subspace of a barrelled
space need not be barrelled (Exercises 3.12.61, 3.12.62, and 3.12.63).
3.5.16. Theorem. Let E be a metrizable barrelled space, let F be a locally
convex space, let T be a metric space, and let M be a set of mappings from E×T
to F satisfying the following conditions:
(i) for every t ∈T, the set of mappings x →f(x, t), where f ∈M, is
equicontinuous in L(E, F);

3.6. Bornological spaces
175
(ii) for every x ∈E, the set of mappings t →f(x, t), where f ∈M, is
equicontinuous.
Then M is equicontinuous.
For a proof, see Bourbaki [87, Chapter III, § 3, Theorem 3].
There is a characterization of barrelledness by means of the local complete-
ness, introduced in § 2.10(iii) (see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, § 5.1]).
3.5.17. Proposition. A locally convex space E is barrelled precisely when it
is quasi-barrelled and the space

E′, σ(E′, E)

is locally complete.
3.6. Bornological spaces
Here we consider one more interesting (and more narrow than the previous
one in the case of quasi-completeness) class of separated spaces.
3.6.1.
Definition. A linear mapping between topological vector spaces is
called bounded if it maps every bounded set to a bounded set.
It has already been noted in § 1.9 that continuous (or sequentially continuous)
linear mappings are bounded.
3.6.2. Definition. Let E be a Hausdorff locally convex space. The space E
is called bornological if, for every locally convex space G, every bounded linear
mapping from E to G is continuous.
The space E is called ultrabornological if, for every locally convex space G,
for the continuity of linear mappings from E to G it is sufficient to have their
boundedness on every Banach disc.
The definition of Banach discs is given in § 2.5.
3.6.3. Remark. It is obvious that every ultrabornological space is bornologi-
cal, so that the introduced terminology is consistent. In addition, any sequentially
complete bornological space is ultrabornological, since the closed absolutely con-
vex hull of any bounded set in this space is a Banach disc (see § 2.5). Thus, every
quasi-complete bornological space is ultrabornological.
3.6.4. Definition. A locally convex space is said to satisfy the Mackey con-
vergence condition if, for every sequence {an} of its elements converging to zero,
one can find a real sequence {tn} such that tn →∞, but tnan →0.
The Mackey convergence condition is equivalent to the property that, for
every sequence {xn} in E converging to zero, there exists a disc D such that
{xn} converges to zero in ED. Indeed, if such a disc D exists, then we can
take tn = pD(xn)−1/2. In the opposite direction, if we have numbers tn →∞
for which tnan →0, then for D we can take the closed absolutely convex hull
of {tnan}; then pD(tnan) ⩽1, whence pD(an) ⩽|tn|−1.
3.6.5. Example. Any metrizable locally convex space satisfies the Mackey
convergence condition.
Indeed, let {an} be a sequence in a metrizable locally convex space E con-
verging to zero and let {pk} be a sequence of seminorms defining the topology

176
Chapter 3. Duality
of E. We can assume that pk ⩽pk+1. Let us find increasing numbers nk such
that pk(an) < 4−k whenever n ⩾nk. Set cn = 1 if n ⩽n1, cn = 2−k if
nk < n ⩽nk+1. Then cn →0 and pk(an/cn) →0 for each fixed k.
An example of a space for which this condition is not fulfilled is the infinite-
dimensional Hilbert space H with the weak topology, i.e., the topology σ(H, H)
defined by the natural duality of H with itself given by the inner product. In this
space any orthonormal sequence {en} (i.e., ∥en∥= 1 and (en, em) = 0 if m ̸= n)
converges to zero, but after multiplication by a sequence tending to infinity it does
not converge.
3.6.6.
Proposition. Every sequentially continuous linear mapping from a
bornological locally convex space to an arbitrary locally convex space is contin-
uous.
If a locally convex space E satisfies the Mackey convergence condition and
all its sequentially continuous linear mappings to locally convex spaces are con-
tinuous, then E is a bornological space.
PROOF. We show that every sequentially continuous linear mapping f from
an arbitrary topological vector space E to an arbitrary topological vector space G
is bounded. This will prove the first assertion. Let B be a bounded set in E. We
have to prove that the set f(B) is bounded in G. For this it suffices to show that
if {an} ⊂f(B) and a real sequence {tn} converges to zero, then tnan →0. We
have an = f(bn), where bn ∈B. Since B is bounded, we have tnbn →0. Hence
tnan = tnf(bn) = f(tnbn) →0 by the sequential continuity of f.
Let now E be a locally convex space satisfying the Mackey convergence
condition and such that all sequentially continuous linear mappings from E to
locally convex spaces are continuous. We have to prove that for every locally
convex space G every bounded linear mapping f : E →G is continuous. By our
condition it suffices to show that f is sequentially continuous.
Let an →0 in E.
Since E satisfies the Mackey convergence condition,
there exists a sequence of numbers tn > 0 such that tn →∞and tnan →0. Since
the sequence {tnan} is bounded in E, the sequence {f(tnan)} is bounded in G.
Hence f(an) = t−1
n f(tnan) →0.
□
3.6.7.
Corollary. Every metrizable locally convex space is bornological.
Every Fr´echet space is ultrabornological.
PROOF. Every sequentially continuous mapping of a metrizable space to a
topological space is continuous.
□
In particular, the space IR∞is ultrabornological, and its subspace IR∞
0
con-
sisting of finite sequences is bornological, but not ultrabornological, since every
Banach disc in it is contained in a finite-dimensional subspace (because an infinite-
dimensional Banach space cannot be of countable algebraic dimension).
3.6.8. Theorem. A locally convex space is bornological precisely when every
absolutely convex subset of this space absorbing all bounded sets is a neighbor-
hood of zero. A locally convex space is ultrabornological precisely when every

3.6. Bornological spaces
177
absolutely convex subset of this space absorbing every Banach disc is a neighbor-
hood of zero.
PROOF. We prove only the first part, since the proof of the second is com-
pletely similar. Let E be a locally convex space in which every absolutely convex
subset absorbing all bounded sets is a neighborhood of zero. Let G be one more
locally convex space and let f : E →G be a bounded linear mapping. We prove
that f is continuous. Let V be a neighborhood of zero in G; we have to prove that
f −1(V ) is a neighborhood of zero in E. Let V0 be an absolutely convex neigh-
borhood of zero in G contained in V . It suffices to prove that the set f −1(V0)
is a neighborhood of zero in E. This set is absolutely convex. The boundedness
of f yields that f −1(V0) absorbs every bounded subset of E. Indeed, if B ⊂E
is bounded, then f(B) is bounded in G. Hence for numbers t sufficiently large
in absolute value we have the inclusion f(B) ⊂tV0. Then for such t we have
also B ⊂f −1
f(B)

⊂tf −1(V0). Thus, by our condition on E, f −1(V0) is a
neighborhood of zero in E.
We prove that if E is a bornological locally convex space, then every ab-
solutely convex set in it absorbing every bounded set is a neighborhood of zero.
Let B be the class of all absolutely convex subsets of E each of which absorbs
all bounded sets. According to Proposition 1.2.11, the class B is a base of neigh-
borhoods of zero of some locally convex topology τ in E (which majorizes the
original topology, since every absolutely convex neighborhood of zero in the lat-
ter is an element of the class B). The identity mapping of the space E with the
original topology to the space (E, τ) is bounded and hence continuous by our as-
sumption that E is bornological. This means that every element of the class B is
a neighborhood of zero in the original topology of E.
□
Let us give yet another simple criterion of being a bornological space.
3.6.9. Corollary. A locally convex space is bornological precisely when all
seminorms on it bounded on bounded sets are continuous.
PROOF. If the given space E is bornological and a seminorm p is bounded
on bounded sets, then the set {p < 1} absorbs bounded sets and by the previous
theorem is a neighborhood of zero, which implies the continuity of p.
Suppose now that the boundedness of a seminorm on bounded sets in E
implies its continuity.
Then, for every linear mapping T from E to a locally
convex space F that is bounded on bounded sets, we obtain the boundedness of
the seminorm p◦T on bounded sets for each seminorm p from a family defining
the topology in F. This yields the continuity of p◦T, which means the continuity
of the mapping T.
□
3.6.10. Remark. (i) The criteria of being bornological and ultrabornological
for a locally convex space, contained in the proven theorem, are usually taken as
the definitions of the corresponding classes of spaces. The previous corollary is
also often used to define bornological spaces.
(ii) The proven theorem is similar to Theorem 3.5.5, but one should pay atten-
tion to the following difference in their proofs: in the proof of the fact that in any

178
Chapter 3. Duality
barrelled space every barrel is a neighborhood of zero, it was sufficient to apply
the definition of barrelledness to the family of linear functionals on the considered
space. Here the definition of bornological spaces is applied to linear mappings
from the considered bornological space to locally convex spaces different from the
field of scalars. This difference is essential indeed. While for the barrelledness of
a Hausdorff locally convex space E it is sufficient that every pointwise bounded
set of linear continuous functionals on it be equicontinuous, the property to be
bornological for E does not follow from the fact every bounded linear functional
on it is continuous (but it follows from the fact that, for every Banach space G,
all bounded linear mappings from E to G are continuous).
For example, any
infinite-dimensional normed space E equipped with the topology σ(E, E′) is not
bornological, although every bounded functional on it is continuous. However, as
observed in Shirota [451], the situation changes for the Mackey topology.
3.6.11. Theorem. A locally convex space E is bornological precisely when
its topology is the Mackey topology τ(E, E′) and E′ coincides with the space of
all linear functions on E bounded on bounded sets.
PROOF. If E is bornological, then it is a Mackey space, since its identity
embedding into E with the Mackey topology is bounded and hence is continuous
by the definition of bornological spaces. Conversely, suppose that on E with the
Mackey topology all bounded functionals are continuous. Let F be a Banach space
and let a linear mapping T : E →F be bounded. For every f ∈F ′, the functional
f ◦T is bounded, hence continuous. Theorem 3.2.9 gives the continuity of T.
□
There are Mackey spaces that are not bornological (see Example 3.6.16).
3.6.12. Corollary. All metrizable locally convex spaces are Mackey spaces.
3.6.13. Theorem. Inductive limits of bornological spaces are bornological
spaces.
The quotient of a bornological space by any vector subspace is a bornological
space.
An easy proof of this assertion can be found in Edwards [150, Theorem 7.3.3].
3.6.14. Theorem. All bornological spaces are quasi-barrelled and all ultra-
bornological spaces are barrelled. Hence all sequentially complete bornological
spaces are barrelled.
PROOF. The first assertion is obvious, since if E is a bornological space and
V is a barrel in it absorbing every bounded set, then by the absolute convexity
V is a neighborhood of zero, which means that E is quasi-barrelled. The sec-
ond assertion follows from Theorem 2.5.7, and the last assertion follows from
Remark 3.6.3.
□
3.6.15. Example. Let E be an infinite-dimensional normed space having a
countable Hamel basis such that the coefficients of the expansion with respect to
it are continuous (say, let us take the space of finite sequences in l2). Then E is

3.6. Bornological spaces
179
a bornological locally convex space that is not barrelled. Indeed, let {en} be a
Hamel basis with the indicated property consisting of unit vectors. Then the set
 n

j=1
tjej : n ∈IN, |tj| ⩽j−1 ∀j ∈IN

is a barrel in E that is not a neighborhood of zero. The described bornological
space is not ultrabornological, since it is not barrelled.
3.6.16. Example. Let F = IR[0,1] be the space of all real functions on the
interval [0, 1] equipped with the topology of pointwise convergence and let F0 be
its subspace consisting of those functions each of which assumes nonzero values
only at countably many points. Let also E be the subspace in F generated as a
vector space by the space F0 and an element x ∈F \F0. The space E is barrelled,
but not bornological (this example is due to M. Valdivia). The barrelledness of E
can be proved, for example, as follows: first we verify directly that F0 is barrelled,
then we use the fact that the codimension of F0 in E equals one. The fact that
E is not bornological follows from that the linear functional on E the kernel of
which is the subspace F0 is sequentially continuous, but not continuous.
Note also that the space F0 not only is barrelled, but is also ultrabornological
(Exercise 3.12.66).
3.6.17. Example. It is possible to give an example of a space that is simulta-
neously barrelled and bornological, but not ultrabornological. Namely, it is possi-
ble to prove (Exercise 2.10.31) that in any infinite-dimensional separable Banach
space there exists a hypersubspace F not containing infinite-dimensional (i.e., with
an infinite-dimensional linear span) Banach disc. This hypersubspace in E with the
induced topology is barrelled and bornological, but is not ultrabornological, since
Banach discs in F are finite-dimensional, which gives boundedness on them for
all linear mapping, including discontinuous linear functionals (obviously, existing
on F). The product of the spaces from this example and Example 3.6.16 delivers
an example of a quasi-barrelled space that is neither barrelled, no bornological.
It is known (see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, p. 183–185]), that any closed
subspace of finite or countable codimension in an ultrabornological space is ul-
trabornological, but if an ultrabornological space is not equipped with the the
strongest locally convex topology, then it contains a dense hyperplane which is
bornological and barrelled, but not ultrabornological.
We recall that a cardinality κ is called two-valued measurable if on the set
of all subsets of a space of cardinality κ there is a nonzero measure with values
0 and 1 vanishing on all singletons. The answer to the question about existence
of such cardinalities is connected with using additional set-theoretic axioms (the
usual axioms do not contradict the assertion that there is no such cardinality).
It is known that if a cardinality κ is not two-valued measurable, then so is the
cardinality 2κ (see Bogachev [65, Proposition 1.12.43]). Hence the cardinality of
the continuum is not two-valued measurable.
A proof of the following fact can be found in P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385,
Theorem 6.2.23].

180
Chapter 3. Duality
3.6.18. Theorem. The space IRκ is bornological precisely when κ is not
two-valued measurable.
Note that the classes of bornological and ultrabornological spaces are closed
with respect to finite products and arbitrary direct sums and also with respect to
formation of separated inductive limits (see [385, § 6.2]). In terms of inductive
limits these classes can be described as follows (see Schaefer [436, Theorem 8.4]
or [385, Corollary 6.2.3]).
3.6.19. Theorem. Bornological spaces are precisely the inductive limits of
normed spaces, and ultrabornological spaces are precisely the inductive limits of
Banach spaces. In particular, every sequentially complete bornological space is
an inductive limit of Banach spaces.
PROOF. We only explain a representation of a bornological space E as an
inductive limit of normed spaces (more detailed proofs can be found in the cited
books).
The family B of all absolutely convex closed bounded sets in E can
be partially ordered by inclusion. Each such set B generates the corresponding
normed space (EB, pB). The inductive limit of this family coincides with E. In
the case of a sequentially complete E the spaces (EB, pB) are Banach.
□
One can show that normed spaces in these inductive limits can be always
taken separable (see Jarchow [237, § 13.2]).
Additional information about spaces like bornological can be found in P´erez
Carreras, Bonet [385, Chapter 6].
3.7. The strong topology and reflexivity
If E is a normed vector space and E′ is its topological dual, then the equality
∥f∥= sup{|f(x)|: x ∈E, ∥x∥⩽1}, where f ∈E′, defines a norm on E′. With
this norm E′ becomes a Banach space called the Banach dual to the space E; the
second Banach dual to the normed space E is the Banach dual to its Banach dual.
If E is a Hausdorff locally convex space and E′ is its dual space, then the
canonical bilinear form on E′ ×E, (f, x) →f(x) ≡⟨f, x⟩puts the spaces E
and E′ in duality (see Chapter 1). Therefore, we can identify elements of the
space E with linear functionals on E′ (an element x ∈E is identified with the
functional f →⟨f, x⟩).
If E is a normed space and E′ and E′′ are its first and second Banach duals,
then we have an inclusion E ⋐E′′. If this inclusion is the equality E = E′′,
then E is called reflexive; in the case of a strict inclusion the space E is called
nonreflexive.
3.7.1. Remark. Nonreflexivity means that E′′ contains elements not associ-
ated by the described procedure with any vectors from E. However, it can happen
in this case that E and E′′ are isomorphic as Banach spaces (the first example of
such situation was constructed by James, see Exercise 3.12.79).
In the case where E is a general Hausdorff locally convex space, the question
arises which topology in E′ should be regarded as a natural analog of the topology

3.7. The strong topology and reflexivity
181
of the Banach dual to a normed space. Since the latter is the topology of con-
vergence on the system of all bounded subsets of the original space, it is natural,
at least in the class of topologies of uniform convergence on systems of bounded
sets, to take it as a reasonable analog of the topology of the Banach dual. It is this
definition that is used in the theorems concerned with conditions for reflexivity of
arbitrary locally convex spaces, and the fact that these theorems and their proofs
are very elegant and at the same time considerably clarify the situation also in
the Banach case shows that this choice of the path from Banach spaces to locally
convex spaces has been right.
Thus, let E be a locally convex space and let E′ be its dual. It has already
been noted that every class B of bounded sets in E generates the topology τB on
E′ of convergence on the class B, defined by the seminorms l →supx∈B |l(x)|,
where B ∈B. The largest possible class B consists of all bounded sets. According
to Theorem 3.2.6, the system of σ(E, E′)-bounded sets coincides with the system
of sets bounded in every other topology in E compatible with the duality between
the spaces E and E′. Certainly, the topology τB does not always agree with the
duality between E′ and E; examples will be given below.
3.7.2. Definition. The strong topology in the dual space E′ is the topology of
convergence on the system of all σ(E, E′)-bounded sets in E. It is denoted by the
symbol β(E′, E) and defined by the seminorms of the form q(l) = supx∈B |l(x)|,
where B is a bounded set in E.
Below we consider only Hausdorff spaces. Since the situation is completely
symmetric with respect to the spaces E and E′, we can define the strong topology
β(E, E′) also in the space E. Thus, β(E, E′) is the topology in the space E of uni-
form convergence on the class of all bounded subsets of the space

E′, σ(E′, E)

.
Since the original topology of E is the topology of convergence on the system
of all equicontinuous subsets of the space E′ and every equicontinuous set in E′
is obviously bounded in the topology σ(E′, E), the topology β(E, E′) majorizes
the original topology in E (this is why it is called strong), and it can happen that
β(E, E′) does not agree with the duality between E and E′, i.e., it can happen
that

E, β(E, E′)
′ ̸= E′.
Thus, in addition to the original topology in E, one can introduce three
more natural topologies: the just defined topology β(E, E′); the weak topol-
ogy σ(E, E′), which, unlike the topology β(E,E′), always agrees with the duality
between E and E′; and also the Mackey topology τ(E, E′).
If we denote the original topology of the space E by the symbol τE, then we
obtain the inclusions
σ(E, E′) ⊂τE ⊂τ(E, E′) ⊂β(E, E′);
certainly, these inclusions need not be strict.
The space E′ can be also equipped with three similar topologies (we recall
that no “original” topology is defined in E′): the strong topology β(E′, E), the
Mackey topology τ(E′, E), and the weak topology σ(E′, E). Again we have the
inclusions
σ(E′, E) ⊂τ(E′, E) ⊂β(E′, E),

182
Chapter 3. Duality
the last of which explains why the topology β(E′, E) is called strong. The topol-
ogy β(E′, E) does not always agree with the duality between E′ and E, but the
other two, certainly, agree. For example, if E is a Banach space c0, then E′ = l1,
the topology β(E′, E) is just the norm topology in l1, and the dual to l1 with this
topology is l∞, but not c0.
Below we use the following notation. If E is a locally convex space, then the
space

E, σ(E, E′)

will be denoted by the symbol Eσ, the space

E, τ(E, E′)

by the symbol Eτ, and the space

E, β(E, E′)

by Eβ. Similarly we set

E′, σ(E′, E)

= E′
σ,

E′, τ(E′, E)

= E′
τ,

E′, β(E′, E)

= E′
β.
Thus, E′ is the dual to the space E ≡(E, τE), so far not equipped with any
topology; the dual to the space Eβ will be denoted by the symbol (Eβ)′; again,
the latter is not assumed to be equipped with a topology (unlike E′
β, which is a
locally convex space; though, as vector spaces they also need not coincide).
The sets in E′ bounded in the strong topology β(E′, E) are called strongly
bounded.
If E is barrelled, then σ(E′, E)-bounded sets are strongly bounded
(Proposition 3.5.3).
Although always (Eσ)′ = (Eτ)′ = E′ and (Eβ)′ ⊃E′, in the general case
(Eβ)′ ̸= E′. Certainly, the space (Eβ)′ can be also equipped with various topolo-
gies, but we do not do this here. However, we shall consider topologies in (E′
β)′;
here we again apply our previous conventions, just the role of E is played by E′
β.
For every locally convex space E, the space E′
σ is called the weak dual, the
space E′
β is called the strong dual, and the space E′
τ is called the Mackey dual.
The space (E′
β)′
β is called the second strong dual; the similarly defined spaces
(E′
σ)′
σ and (E′
τ)′
τ are not called “the second weak dual” and “the second Mackey
dual”, since these spaces coincide, respectively, with Eσ and Eτ.
In the space E′, along with the topology σ(E′, E) (with it this space is denoted
by the symbol E′
σ), it is also useful to consider the topology σ

E′, (E′
β)′
. This
is the “weakened topology in the strong dual”; equipped with it, this space should
be denoted, according to our notation, by the symbol (E′
β)σ.
3.7.3.
Definition. A locally convex space E is called semireflexive if the
spaces (E′
β)′ and E coincide as vector spaces without topologies.
A locally convex space E is called reflexive if (E′
β)′
β = (E, τE), i.e., if it is
semireflexive and the topology β(E, E′) coincides with the original topology of E.
In terms of the Mackey topology, the semireflexivity of E is the equality
τ(E′, E) = β(E′, E). If E is semireflexive, then the weak topology σ(E, E′) in
E coincides with the weak topology which can be introduced in the space (E′
β)′,
and the same is true for E′
β. The weak topology σ(E′, E) in E′ is often called the
weak-∗topology (this is especially popular in the case of normed spaces).
Certainly, to avoid confusion it is preferable to use the detailed notation like
σ(E′, E) and σ(E, E′).
3.7.4. Theorem. A Hausdorff locally convex space E is semireflexive pre-
cisely when every bounded subset in E is relatively compact in the weak topol-
ogy σ(E, E′) (here we mean boundedness in the original topology, but since the

3.7. The strong topology and reflexivity
183
collection of bounded sets in all topologies compatible with duality between E and
E′ is the same, we can assume that boundedness is meant in any of them, say, in
the weak topology σ(E, E′)).
PROOF. This is a corollary of the Mackey–Arens theorem (Theorem 3.2.3),
since to say that a locally convex space E is semireflexive is equivalent to saying
that the topology β(E′, E) in the space E′ agrees with the duality between E′
and E. Since the Mackey topology τ(E′, E) is the strongest among all topologies
in E′ compatible with the duality between E′ and E and the topology β(E′, E)
majorizes it, the topology β(E′, E) agrees with the duality between E′ and E pre-
cisely when it coincides with the Mackey topology. Thus, it remains to show that
the condition of this theorem is equivalent to the equality β(E′, E) = τ(E′, E),
which, in turn, is equivalent to the inclusion β(E′, E) ⊂τ(E′, E) by the fact that
β(E′, E) majorizes τ(E′, E).
Thus, suppose that every bounded subset of the space E is relatively compact
in the topology σ(E, E′); we prove that β(E′, E) ⊂τ(E′, E).
Let V be a
neighborhood of zero in the topology β(E′, E).
Then there exists a bounded
subset B in E such that B◦⊂V . However, B◦= (B◦◦)◦(see § 3.1), moreover,
the set B◦◦is absolutely convex and closed (in the topology σ(E, E′), hence also
in every other topology compatible with the duality between E and E′) hull of the
bounded set B, hence is also bounded, hence is relatively compact in the weak
topology σ(E, E′). Its closedness means that it is compact in this topology. Hence
the set (B◦◦)◦= B◦is a neighborhood of zero in τ(E′, E). Thus, we have proved
that β(E′, E) ⊂τ(E′, E).
We now show that the last inclusion yields that every bounded subset of the
space E (or, equivalently, of the space Eσ) is relatively compact in Eσ.
Suppose that this inclusion holds. The polar B◦of any bounded set B in E is a
neighborhood of zero in the topology β(E′, E), hence there exists a neighborhood
of zero W in the topology τ(E′, E) such that W ⊂B◦. Then the definition of the
topology τ(E′, E) yields that there exists an absolutely convex compact subset K
of the space Eσ such that K◦⊂W. This means that K = K◦◦⊃B◦◦⊃B, so
that the set B is relatively compact in Eσ.
□
Certainly, for the semireflexivity it is sufficient to have relative compactness
of bounded sets in the topology τ(E, E′).
3.7.5. Corollary. Every semireflexive locally convex space is quasi-complete
and hence is sequentially complete.
Moreover, any semireflexive locally convex space E is quasi-complete and
sequentially complete in the topology σ(E, E′).
PROOF. By the proven theorem, every closed bounded subset in any semi-
reflexive space E is contained in a set that is compact in the topology σ(E, E′),
hence is complete in this topology. Clearly, the latter set is complete in the origi-
nal topology. Hence the original set is also complete in it as a closed subset of a
complete set. This is also true for the topology σ(E, E′) (since it can be regarded
as the original one).
□

184
Chapter 3. Duality
Since for metrizable locally convex spaces the sequential completeness is
equivalent to completeness, it follows that semireflexive metrizable locally convex
spaces are Fr´echet spaces (i.e., are complete).
3.7.6.
Theorem. The topology induced in a space E by the topology of
its second strong dual space coincides with the original topology of this space
precisely when E is quasi-barrelled (it is meant here that E is considered as a
subspace of the space of linear functionals on E′ and that E ⊂(E′
β)′).
PROOF. The quasi-barrelledness of E means that every barrel in E absorbing
all bounded sets is a neighborhood of zero. The topology induced in E by the
topology of the space (E′
β)′
β, i.e., the topology β

(E′
β)′, E′
, possesses a base of
neighborhoods of zero consisting of the polars in E of subsets of the space E′
bounded in the topology β(E′, E) (i.e., the so-called strongly bounded subsets).
A set A ⊂E′ is strongly bounded precisely when it is absorbed by the polar B◦
of every bounded set B ⊂E (since these polars form a base of neighborhoods
of zero of the topology β(E′, E)); but if the set A is absorbed by the polar B◦,
then A◦absorbs the set B◦◦⊃B and hence absorbs B. Since A◦is a barrel
in the original topology of E, being the polar of a set bounded in the strong
topology β(E′, E), hence also in the weaker topology σ(E′, E), the set A◦turns
out to be a neighborhood of zero in the original topology of the space E.
Thus, every neighborhood of zero from a base of neighborhoods of zero of the
topology induced in E by the topology β

(E′
β)′, E′
is a neighborhood of zero in
the original topology of this space, hence the latter is not weaker than the induced
topology. However, it is also not stronger, since the polar V ◦of any neighborhood
of zero V of the space E is bounded in E′
β. Indeed, V absorbs every bounded
subset B ⊂E. Hence the polar B◦of every such set (these polars form a base
of neighborhoods of zero in the topology β(E′, E)) absorbs the set V ◦, which
means that it is bounded. Hence every absolutely convex closed neighborhood of
zero in E, being the polar of its polar, is a neighborhood of zero in the topology
induced in E by the topology β

(E′
β)′, E′
.
Assume now that the topology induced in E by the topology β

(E′
β)′, E′
co-
incides with the original one and prove that E is quasi-barrelled. Let V be a barrel
in E absorbing every bounded subset. We show that V must be a neighborhood of
zero in E. The polar V ◦of V is absorbed by the polar of every bounded set, hence
is a bounded subset of E′
β. Hence the bipolar of V ◦◦(which coincides with V ) is a
neighborhood of zero in the topology induced in E by the topology β

(E′
β)′, E′
,
hence is a neighborhood also in the original topology of E.
□
There is an efficient criterion of reflexivity.
3.7.7.
Theorem. A locally convex space E is reflexive precisely when E
is quasi-barrelled and every bounded set in it is relatively compact in the weak
topology σ(E, E′). Every reflexive locally convex space is barrelled.
PROOF. The first assertion follows from the two previous theorems. It re-
mains to prove that if E is reflexive, then it is barrelled. Since E is semireflexive,

3.7. The strong topology and reflexivity
185
the weakly and strongly bounded subsets of the space E′ are the same (the weak
boundedness is boundedness in the space E′
σ, the strong boundedness is bounded-
ness in E′
β). Therefore, if V is a barrel in E, then its polar V ◦, being a bounded
subset in E′
σ, is bounded in E′
β. Hence V ◦◦= V is a neighborhood of zero in the
topology β(E, E′), then also in the original topology.
□
3.7.8. Corollary. If a space E is semireflexive, then its topological dual space
E′ is barrelled in the strong topology (which coincides with τ(E′, E)). Conversely,
if

E′, τ(E′, E)

is barrelled, then E is semireflexive. If the space E is reflexive,
then E′ with the strong topology is also reflexive.
PROOF. This follows from the previous results taking into account that the
polar of any bounded set in E is a barrel in E′.
□
The obtained results can be represented in a more symmetric form.
3.7.9. Theorem. For a locally convex space E with the dual space E′ the
following conditions are equivalent:
(i) the space

E, τ(E, E′)

is reflexive;
(ii) the space

E′, τ(E′, E)

is reflexive;
(iii) both spaces

E, σ(E, E′)

and

E′, σ(E′, E)

are semireflexive;
(iv) both spaces

E, τ(E, E′)

and

E′, τ(E′, E)

are barrelled.
3.7.10. Remark. (i) Since the class of bounded subsets in a locally convex
space E is not determined directly by its topology, but rather by its dual space
E′ as a vector space, the property to be (or not to be) semireflexive and also the
topology induced in E from its second strong dual depend only on the pair (E, E′)
of vector spaces. Thus, for all topologies E compatible with the duality between
E and E′, the space E is (or is not) simultaneously semireflexive, and for all these
topologies, the topologies induced in E from the second strong dual to E coincide.
(ii) Since any normed space is bornological and hence quasi-barrelled, the
topology induced in it by the topology of its second strong dual coincides with the
original one, so that for normed spaces the reflexivity and semireflexivity are the
same property. However, for the weak topology this is not true: l2 with the weak
topology is semireflexive, but not reflexive. By the way, note that the topology of
the first strong dual to a normed space is the topology of its Banach dual; the same
is true for the second strong dual. The reflexivity of a Banach space is equivalent
to the weak compactness of its closed unit ball.
3.7.11. Example. (i) The spaces Lp with 1 < p < ∞are reflexive, but the
spaces c0, l1, C[0, 1], and L1[0, 1] are not reflexive.
(ii) The space that is the strict inductive limit of an increasing sequence of
its closed reflexive subspaces is itself reflexive. The inductive limits of increasing
sequences of spaces with compact embeddings are reflexive (see § 2.6, § 2.7).
(iii) The spaces Dn, D, D′, S, S′, E, E′, and IRT are reflexive.
The requirement of the relative compactness of bounded sets in the weak
topology, contained in Theorems 3.7.4 and 3.7.7, is rather subtle, since every

186
Chapter 3. Duality
bounded set in an arbitrary locally convex space is weakly precompact (Propo-
sition 3.4.2).
In order to verify weak compactness, the Eberlein and ˇSmulian
theorems discussed in § 3.4 are useful.
There are incomplete reflexive locally convex spaces, even with relatively
compact bounded sets (Knowles and Cook [277] corrected an example from Ame-
miya, K¯omura [16]; see also K¯omura [288]). Some information about the dual
space E′ with the strong topology β = β(E′, E) is given in Edwards [150, § 8.4];
there the notion of a distinguished space is used, i.e., a Hausdorff locally convex
space X such that every σ(X′′, X)-bounded set in X′′ is contained in the closure
of some σ(X′′, X)-bounded set in X. For example, (E′, β) is barrelled precisely
when it is distinguished; this is equivalent to saying that E is distinguished. If E is
a Fr´echet space with a decreasing base of closed absolutely convex neighborhoods
of zero Vn, then E is distinguished precisely when the topology β on E′ coincides
with the topology of the inductive limit of the increasing Banach spaces EV ◦
n .
The next result follows from Theorem 2.9.12, but is easily proved directly.
3.7.12. Theorem. Every nuclear Fr´echet space is reflexive.
The strong dual to a nuclear space need not be nuclear, but the following facts
are true.
3.7.13.
Theorem. A metrizable locally convex space is nuclear precisely
when its strong dual is nuclear. Similarly, a locally convex space with a metrizable
strong dual is nuclear precisely when its strong dual is nuclear.
3.7.14. Theorem. If a locally convex space E has a nuclear strong dual and
a locally convex space F is nuclear, then the space Lb(E, F) of continuous linear
operators from E to F with the topology of uniform convergence on bounded sets
is nuclear.
For proofs, see Schaefer [436, Chapter 3, § 7, Chapter 4, § 9].
3.8. Criteria for completeness
In this section, we prove a number of results containing criteria for com-
pleteness of locally convex spaces. These results were first obtained by Banach
for normed spaces and later extended by Grothendieck to arbitrary locally convex
spaced.
Suppose that in a space E dual to a locally convex space G, we are given
a family γ of bounded (in the topology σ(E, G)) subsets such that the family of
polars of the elements of γ is a prebase of neighborhoods of zero in G. We shall
called γ a saturated family if it covers E and the inclusions A ∈γ and B ⊂A
imply that B ∈γ. For any space F dual to E (for example, for G), the topology
of uniform convergence on the elements of γ (generally speaking, not compatible
with the vector structure in F, but compatible with the structure of a vector group)
is denoted by the symbol τγ.
3.8.1. Theorem. Let E be a locally convex space, let E′ be its topological
dual equipped with the topology τγ of convergence on some saturated family γ

3.8. Criteria for completeness
187
of bounded sets in E. The space (E′, τγ) is complete precisely when a linear
functional on E is continuous provided that its restriction to every set in γ is
continuous in the topology induced from E.
PROOF. The sufficiency is almost obvious. Indeed, let {fα} be a Cauchy
net in E′.
Since every singleton belongs to γ, for every x ∈E, there exists
lim
α fα(x) = f(x). The function f defined by this equality is linear on E. Since
the net {fα} converges to f uniformly on the sets from the family γ, the restriction
of f to any set from γ is continuous. By the hypothesis of the theorem this means
that f is continuous on E. Hence f ∈E′ and fα →f in E′.
We prove the necessity. Suppose that E′ is complete and f is a linear func-
tional on E the restriction of which to every set from γ is continuous. We verify
that f ∈E′. To this end, we show that every neighborhood of the function f,
considered as an element of the space E∗with the topology of convergence on
the family γ, contains some element of the space E′. Since E′, being complete,
is closed in E∗(the topology induced in E′ by the topology that we introduced
in E∗coincides with the one introduced in E′), this will mean that f ∈E′.
Thus, let V be some neighborhood of f in the space E∗. Then, there exists
a set B ∈γ such that f + B◦
E∗⊂V (since the sets of the type B◦
E∗form
a base of neighborhoods of zero in the space E∗in the topology τγ). We can
assume that B is closed and absolutely convex due to the equality of the polars
of B and abs conv B. By the continuity of the function f|B there is a closed and
absolutely convex neighborhood of zero W in the space E such that |f(x)| < 1
whenever x ∈B ∩W, i.e., f ∈(B ∪W)◦
E∗. We have
(B ∪W)◦
E∗= conv (B◦
E∗∪W ◦
E∗) ⊂B◦
E∗+ W ◦
E∗,
so that f ∈B◦
E∗+ W ◦
E∗, i.e., there exists an element a ∈W ◦
E∗such that f is
contained in B◦
E∗+ a, or, which is the same, a ∈f + B◦
E∗. Since W ◦
E∗⊂E′, the
point a ∈E′ is the required element in the neighborhood of f.
□
Note that the property of the space (E′, τγ) to be complete depends not di-
rectly on the topology of the space E, but only on the pair (E, E′) and, certainly,
on the system of sets γ. The proof gives the following description of the comple-
tion of the space (E′, τγ).
3.8.2. Theorem. Let E be a locally convex space, let E′ be its dual equipped
with the topology τγ of convergence on some family γ of bounded subsets of the
space E. Then, the completion of the space E′ can be realized as the vector
space Γ of all linear functionals on E continuous on every set in the system γ with
respect to the topology in E, where Γ is equipped with the topology of convergence
on the family of sets γ.
PROOF. It has been shown in the proof of the second part of the previous
theorem that if f is a linear functional on E continuous on an absolutely convex
closed bounded set B ⊂E (in the topology induced from E), then there exists
an element a ∈E′ such that a ∈f + B◦
E∗. This means that such a functional
is bounded on B. Indeed, since a −f ∈B◦
E∗, we see that the absolute value of

188
Chapter 3. Duality
the functional a −f ∈E∗is bounded by one on B. In addition, the continuous
functional a is bounded on B.
Thus, every functional in Γ is bounded on every subset B ∈γ. Hence the
topology of convergence on the system of sets γ agrees with the vector structure
in Γ. Now the completeness of Γ is proved precisely in the same way as the first
part of the previous theorem (with the difference that now there is no need to use
the fact that the continuity of a functional f ∈E∗on every set in γ implies its
continuity on all of E).
Next, the fact used above that for every functional f ∈E∗continuous on an
absolutely convex closed bounded set B ⊂E, there exists a functional a ∈E′ for
which a −f ∈B◦
E∗means that the set E′ is everywhere dense in (Γ, τγ). By the
completeness of the space (Γ, τγ) we conclude that (Γ, τγ) is a completion of the
space (E′, τγ).
□
3.8.3. Remark. In a similar way one can prove a completeness criterion and
describe the completion for the space Lγ(E, G) of all linear continuous mappings
from an arbitrary locally convex space E to a complete locally convex space G
with respect to the topology of convergence on a system γ of bounded subsets
in E. Namely, this space is complete precisely when the continuity of a linear
mapping f : E →G on every set in the system γ implies the continuity on all
of E. Furthermore, the completion of Lγ(E, G) can be realized as the vector
space of all linear mappings from E to G continuous on every set in the system γ,
where Lγ(E, G) is equipped with the topology of convergence on the system γ
(prove this).
The next result is important in applications. It deals with completeness, not
merely sequential completeness, and is not trivial even for Fr´echet spaces.
3.8.4.
Theorem. Let E be a Hausdorff bornological space.
Then E′ is
complete with the strong topology β(E′, E). If E is sequentially complete, then
the dual space E′ is complete also in the Mackey topology τ(E′, E). For example,
this is true if E a Fr´echet space.
PROOF. The first assertion follows from Theorem 3.6.11. Let E be sequen-
tially complete and let a linear function f ∈E∗be the limit of a net of elements
fα ∈E′ converging uniformly on absolutely convex weakly compact sets in E.
We show that f ∈E′. Since E is bornological, it suffices to verify the bounded-
ness of f. Assuming that f is not bounded, we obtain a bounded sequence {an}
with f(an) →+∞. Passing to a subsequence, we can assume that f(an) ⩾4n,
i.e., f(2−nan) ⩾2n. This leads to a contradiction, since {2−nan} is contained in
the absolutely convex compact set that is the image of the closed unit ball in l2 un-
der the operator A: l2 →E, (xn) →	∞
n=1 2−nxnan; convergence of the series
follows from the boundedness of {an} and the sequential completeness of E.
□
Regarding the original locally convex space as the vector space of linear
functionals on E′ equipped with the topology of convergence on the system βe of
all equicontinuous subsets of the space E′, we obtain the following criterion of
completeness of a locally convex space.

3.8. Criteria for completeness
189
3.8.5. Theorem. A locally convex space E is complete precisely when every
linear functional on E′ continuous in the topology σ(E′, E) on every equicontin-
uous set in E′ is an element of E.
The completion of the locally convex space E can be realized as the space of
all linear functionals on E′ having continuous restrictions to all equicontinuous
subsets, where E is equipped with the topology of convergence on all equicontin-
uous sets in E′.
Since for separable E the topology σ(E′, E) is metrizable on equicontinuous
subsets in E′ (Proposition 1.9.5), the following useful fact holds.
3.8.6. Corollary. If a locally convex space E is separable and complete,
then for the continuity of a linear function Λ on E′ in the topology σ(E′, E) it
is sufficient that, for every sequence {fn} ⊂E′ pointwise converging to zero, we
have Λ(fn) →0.
3.8.7. Proposition. Let E be a locally convex space. For any A ⊂E, let
(A◦)◦
E′ ∗denote the polar in the space E′ ∗(the algebraic dual of E′) of the polar
of A in E′. If E is the completion of the space E, then we have the following
equality of vector spaces:
E =

V ∈τ0

E + (V ◦)◦
E′ ∗

,
where τ0 is the set of all neighborhoods of zero in E. Similarly, the completion
of the space E′ equipped with the topology of convergence on some class A of
bounded sets in E the union of which covers E is the vector subspace
#
E′
A =

A∈A
(E′ + A◦)
in the algebraic dual E∗equipped with the topology of convergence on A, where
polars are taken in E∗.
PROOF. This follows from Theorem 3.8.1 and Theorem 3.8.5.
Indeed, if
f ∈E, then f is a functional on E′ the restriction of which to every set V ◦,
where V ∈τ0, is continuous in the topology induced on V ◦by the weak topo-
logy σ(E′, E). Therefore, according to the reasoning given at the very end of the
proof of Theorem 3.8.1, f ∈a + (V ◦)◦
E′ ∗, where a ∈E, i.e., f ∈E + (V ◦)◦
E′ ∗.
Since this is true for every V ∈τ0, we have f ∈
V ∈τ0

E + (V ◦)◦
E′ ∗

.
Assume now that the latter inclusion holds. This means that for every neigh-
borhood of zero in E′ ∗of the form (V ◦)◦
E′ ∗, where V ∈τ0 (such neighborhoods
form a base of zero in the space E′ ∗in the topology of convergence on the family
of all subsets of E′ of the type V ◦, where V ∈τ0), there exists an element a ∈E
such that a ∈f +(V ◦)◦
E′ ∗. Thus, every neighborhood of the functional f contains
elements from E. In other words, for any set V ∈τ0, the restriction of f to V ◦
can be uniformly approximated by the restrictions to V ◦of functionals that are
elements of E (verify that this follows from the previous sentence). Hence by
Theorem 3.8.5 we obtain f ∈E. The second assertion of the theorem obviously
follows from the first one.
□

190
Chapter 3. Duality
3.8.8. Remark. Theorem 3.8.5 yields the fact, established in Example 1.7.11,
that no infinite-dimensional Banach space B (hence no normed space) is complete
in the weak topology σ(B, B′), because there exist discontinuous functionals on
the Banach dual B′, which are discontinuous in the topology σ(B′, B′′), hence
in the topology σ(B′, B). Indeed, the polar of any neighborhood of zero in the
space

B, σ(B, B′)

, taken in the space B′, is contained in a finite-dimensional
subspace of the latter, so the restriction to it of every linear functional on E′
is continuous in the topology induced by an arbitrary Hausdorff locally convex
topology on the space B′.
Similarly, the fact that on every infinite-dimensional metrizable locally convex
space there exist discontinuous linear functionals yields that the dual to such a
space equipped with the weak topology cannot be complete.
In relation to these facts we mention that in the old literature (for example, in
the book by Dunford and Schwarz [145]), the term a “weakly complete Banach
space” means a “Banach space sequentially complete in the weak topology”.
All reflexive Banach spaces are sequentially complete in the weak topology
(why?); nonreflexive Banach spaces can be sequentially complete or incomplete
in this topology. An example of the first type is the space l1, an example of the
second is the space c0.
3.8.9. Theorem. A locally convex space is complete precisely when every
hypersubspace of its dual possessing weakly closed intersections with the polars
of all neighborhoods of zero in the original space is itself closed in the weak
topology.
For the proof it suffices to apply Theorem 3.8.5 and Proposition 1.9.6.
In the formulation of this theorem the term “hypersubspace” can be replaced
by the term “hyperplane”.
3.8.10. Definition. Let E be a locally convex space and let E′ be its dual.
A set A ⊂E′ is called almost closed if, for every neighborhood of zero V in E,
the set A ∩V ◦is closed in the topology σ(E′, E).
Using this definition, the previous theorem can be reformulated as follows.
3.8.11. Theorem. A locally convex space E is complete precisely when every
almost closed hypersubspace of its dual E′ is closed in the topology σ(E′, E) (or
every almost closed hyperplane in its dual is closed in the same topology).
3.8.12. Definition. A locally convex space E is called fully complete if every
almost closed vector subspace of its dual space is closed in the topology σ(E′, E).
The classes of Br-complete spaces, hypercomplete spaces, and the Krein–ˇSmulian
spaces are defined by replacing the term “almost closed subspace” by the terms
“almost closed everywhere dense in the topology σ(E′, E) vector subspace”, “al-
most closed absolutely convex subset”, and “almost closed convex subset”, re-
spectively.
It follows from Theorem 3.8.9 that every Br-complete space is complete. In
addition, the definition given above yields that the classes of spaces introduced in
it have the following relations:

3.8. Criteria for completeness
191
Br-complete locally convex spaces ⊃fully complete locally convex spaces
⊃hypercomplete locally convex spaces ⊃Krein–ˇSmulian locally convex spaces.
Any infinite-dimensional Banach space with the strongest locally convex
topology is complete, but not Br-complete (Exercise 3.12.142); the spaces D
and D′ are also complete, but not Br-complete, since by Proposition 2.10.8 and
Proposition 2.10.9 they contain non-closed dense sequentially closed linear sub-
spaces (sequentially closed sets in these spaces are almost closed, since weakly
compact sets in them are metrizable).
The product of the countable power of
the real line and the countable direct sum of the real lines is hypercomplete, but
is not a Krein–ˇSmulian space (Exercise 3.12.164). A long standing problem of
distinguishing the classes of Br-complete and fully complete spaces was solved
by Valdivia [544], who constructed an example of a Br-complete space that is
not fully complete (this example is also described in the book P´erez Carreras,
Bonet [385, § 7.4]). It is still not known whether the classes of fully complete and
hypercomplete spaces are different.
Fully complete locally convex spaces are also called B-complete or Ptak
spaces. Significance of Br-complete and B-complete spaces is explained by their
role in the closed graph theorem and the open mapping theorem; this is discussed
below in § 3.9.
The next result is classical in the theory of locally convex spaces.
3.8.13. Theorem. (THE KREIN– ˇSMULIAN THEOREM) Every Fr´echet space
is a Krein–ˇSmulian space.
PROOF. Let E be a Fr´echet space and let T be the topology in E′ defined as
follows: a set A ⊂E′ is closed precisely when it is almost closed (verify that this
definition is correct!). To prove the theorem, it suffices to verify that this topology
is locally convex and agrees with the duality between E′ and E. If this is done
and A ⊂E′ is an almost closed convex set, then A is closed in the topology T,
hence, by its convexity, in every other topology in E′ compatible with the duality
between E′ and E, in particular, in the topology σ(E′, E).
In order to prove that the topology T is locally convex, it suffices to show
that, for every T-open set W ⊂E′ and every point a ∈W, there exists a T-open
convex set Wa such that a ∈Wa ⊂W.
The set F = E′ \ W is closed in the topology T, i.e., is almost closed. Our
goal is to prove the existence of a T-open convex set B such that a ∈B and
B ∩F = ∅.
Let V1 ⊃V2 ⊃V3 ⊃· · · be a base of absolutely convex neighborhoods of
zero in E; then ∞
j=1 V ◦
j = E′. Thus, a ∈V ◦
n for some n; clearly, we can assume
that n = 1. Let B1 ∋a be a σ(E′, E)-open convex set in E′ the closure B1 of
which in the topology σ(E′, E) is disjoint with V ◦
1 ∩F. Such a set B1 exists,
since V ◦
1 ∩F is closed in the topology σ(E′, E). We have
B1 ∩(V ◦
1 ∩F) = (B1 ∩V ◦
1 ) ∩F,
moreover, B1 ∩V ◦
1 = B1 ∩V ◦
1 by the compactness of the polar V ◦
1 in the topo-
logy σ(E′, E). Thus, W1 = B1 ∩V ◦
1 is a neighborhood of a in the space V ◦
1 with

192
Chapter 3. Duality
the topology induced by the topology σ(E′, E), and the closure of this neighbor-
hood in V ◦
1 is disjoint with F.
Suppose that we have constructed a finite number W1 ⊂W2 ⊂· · · ⊂Wn of
convex sets in E′ with the following properties: for every j ⩽n, the set Wj+1 is
an open neighborhood of the set Wj in the space V ◦
j+1 equipped with the topology
induced by the topology σ(E′, E), and the closure of the set Wj in V ◦
j is disjoint
with F. Then Wn+1 is the intersection of the set V ◦
n+1 with some open convex
neighborhood of the set Wn in the space

E′, σ(E′, E)

the closure of which in
the topology σ(E′, E) is disjoint with F. Hence the set ∞
n=1 Wn is convex and
open in the topology T (since its complement in E′ is almost closed).
It remains to prove that the topology T agrees with the duality between
E′ and E.
This topology majorizes σ(E′, E) (every set closed in the topol-
ogy σ(E′, E) is automatically almost closed), so that every element of the space
E is continuous as a functional on (E′, T). On the other hand, if a linear func-
tion f on E′ is continuous in the topology T, then its kernel is closed in this
topology, i.e., is almost closed.
Hence f is continuous on every set V ◦
j
with
the topology σ(E′, E) (Proposition 1.9.8). By the completeness of E we have
f ∈

E′, σ(E′, E)
′ = E by Theorem 3.8.5.
□
In a Banach space, it suffices to check the polar of a single ball, which gives
the following fact.
3.8.14. Corollary. Let X be a Banach space and let V ⊂X′ be convex. If
the intersection of V with every closed ball of radius n centered at zero is closed
in the topology σ(X′, X), then V is also closed in σ(X′, X).
If X is separable, then in order the set V be closed in the topology σ(X′, X),
it is sufficient that V contain the limits of all its weak-∗convergent countable
sequences.
Note that the definition of the topology T and the proof of its local convex-
ity do not use the completeness of the metrizable locally convex space E. The
question arises whether metrizability is essential.
There is an example due to
Collins (see Exercise 3.12.146) showing that for general locally convex spaces the
topology T may fail to be locally convex. However, even without the complete-
ness assumption of the metrizable space E the topology T admits a very simple
description, which is given by the following Banach–Dieudonn´e theorem.
Let P be the class of all precompact sets in a locally convex space E and let
S be the class of all sequences in E converging to zero. It is clear that S ⊂P.
3.8.15. Theorem. Let E be a metrizable locally convex space. Then, on
the space E′, the topologies of uniform convergence on the classes P and S
coincide with the strongest topology T on E′ that coincides with σ(E′, E) on all
equicontinuous sets.
If E is complete, then the indicated identical topologies are compatible with
the duality between E′ and E.
PROOF. The topologies τP and τS of convergence on the classes P and S co-
incide by Proposition 1.8.14. On the polars of neighborhoods of zero all the three

3.9. The closed graph theorem
193
considered topologies coincide (see Corollary 3.1.6). Hence τP is majorized by
the topology T. We show that the inverse relation is also true (for complete E this
is clear from the previous theorem). We already know that T is locally convex. Let
W be a T-neighborhood of zero in E′. We construct a sequence S in E converging
to zero such that S◦⊂W. By induction we find nonempty finite sets Fn ⊂Vn
such that V ◦
n+1 ∩H◦
n ⊂W, where Hn = F1 ∪· · · ∪Fn. Then for S we shall take
the elements of the sets Fn numbered consecutively; since S◦∩V ◦
n+1 ⊂W for
all n and E′ = ∞
n=1 V ◦
n , we shall obtain S◦⊂W. A set F1 exists, since W ∩V ◦
1
is open in the topology σ(E′, E) and contains the intersection of V ◦
1 with the
polar of some finite set. Suppose that F1, . . . , Fn are already picked. We need a
nonempty finite set Fn+1 ⊂Vn+1 such that V ◦
n+2 ∩(H1 ∪Fn+1)◦⊂W. Suppose
that for every nonempty finite set F ⊂Vn+1, the set V ◦
n+2 ∩(Hn ∪F)◦\W is non-
empty. This set is σ(E′, E)-closed in V ◦
n+2 by the coincidence of the considered
topologies on V ◦
n+2, hence it is σ(E′, E)-compact by the compactness of V ◦
n+2.
The collection of the obtained nonempty compact sets possesses the property that
the intersection of every its finite subcollection is nonempty. Therefore, the inter-
section of all these compact sets is nonempty. Since (Hn∪F)◦= H◦
n∩F ◦and the
intersection of the sets F ◦over all finite F ⊂Vn+1 is V ◦
n+1, the set H◦
n∩V ◦
n+1\W
is nonempty. This contradicts the assumption that H◦
n ∩V ◦
n+1 ⊂W. In the case of
complete E we can take only absolutely convex compact sets, since in that case
every totally bounded set is contained in an absolutely convex compact set.
□
Note that by Theorem 3.8.5 the completeness of the space E is also necessary
in order that the indicated topologies agree with the duality between E′ and E.
3.9. The closed graph theorem
Here we briefly discuss the closed graph theorem and two close results: the
inverse mapping theorem and the open mapping theorem. These classical results
go back to the works of Banach and Schauder and were originally obtained for
complete metrizable topological vector spaces. The formulations given in univer-
sity courses of functional analysis are these.
We recall that the graph of a mapping T : X →Y is the set
ΓT = {(x, Tx): x ∈X} ⊂X×Y.
3.9.1. Theorem. Let X and Y be complete metrizable topological vector
spaces and let T : X →Y be a linear mapping.
(i) If T is continuous and surjective, then, for every open set U ⊂X, the set
T(U) is open in Y .
(ii) If T is continuous and one-to-one, then T −1 is also continuous.
(iii) The continuity of T is equivalent to the closedness of its graph.
3.9.2. Corollary. (i) If a complete metrizable topological vector space E is
equipped with a stronger vector topology with respect to which E is also complete
and metrizable, then both topologies coincide.

194
Chapter 3. Duality
(ii) If a complete metrizable topological vector space is a direct algebraic sum
of two its closed linear subspaces, then the algebraic projections onto them are
continuous, hence the sum is topological.
We do not repeat the proofs given in many books (see, e.g., [72]), but prove
instead more general results for locally convex spaces. We just note some impli-
cations between assertions (i)–(iii). It is clear that (ii) follows at once from (i).
On the other hand, assertion (ii) yields (i) by passing to the quotient X/Ker T,
which in the case of continuous T is mapped one-to-one onto Y . Certainly, asser-
tion (iii) implies (ii) due to the fact that the graph of a one-to-one operator T is
obtained from the graph of T −1 under the linear homeomorphism X×Y →Y ×X,
(x, y) →(y, x). Finally, in the case of complete metrizable spaces X and Y as-
sertion (iii) follows from (ii), since X ×Y is the space of the same class, hence
the same is true for its closed subspace ΓT , which gives the continuity of the op-
erator inverse to a one-to-one projection P : ΓT →X, hence also the continuity
of T (observe that T is the composition of P −1 and the continuous projection
onto Y ). However, in this last assertion we have used the closedness of the given
class of spaces with respect to finite products and passage to closed subspaces,
and for the implication (ii)⇒(i) it has been important to pass to quotients. This
circumstance becomes essential in generalizations of all the three assertions. Such
generalizations are very numerous (see also Exercise 3.12.87–3.12.92) and have
been obtained in the following directions.
1) One is interested in two possibly broader classes of locally convex spaces
X and Y for elements X and Y of which some of the stated assertions are true.
2) One fixes some class Y of spaces Y and is interested in a possibly broader
class X of spaces X for mappings of which to all spaces Y ∈Y such assertions
are true. 3) One fixes some class X of spaces X and is interested in a possibly
broader class Y of spaces Y for mappings to which from all spaces X ∈X some
of the above assertions are true.
Certainly, one can expect in advance that for assertions (ii) (or (i)) and (iii)
different results will be obtained. Indeed, in case (ii) we shall conclude that the
spaces X and Y are isomorphic, while the closed graph theorem does not expect
this at all. For this reason, we shall mainly concentrate on this theorem.
We shall further consider Hausdorff spaces.
3.9.3. Theorem. (i) Let X be a barrelled space and let Y be Br-complete.
Then any linear operators from X to Y with a closed graph is continuous. In
particular, every linear mapping with a closed graph from a barrelled space to a
Fr´echet space is continuous.
(ii) If a locally convex space X is such that for every Banach space Y every
linear mapping with a closed graph from X to Y is necessarily continuous, then
X is barrelled.
For a proof, see Schaefer [436, § IV.8], where one can find related results
about open mappings.
Thus, if a locally convex space E is not barrelled, then there exist a Banach
space F and a discontinuous linear mapping A: E →F with a closed graph.

3.9. The closed graph theorem
195
This theorem exhibits asymmetry between properties of X and Y . Say, it
is impossible to interchange the properties of the spaces: the theorem fails for
mappings of Banach spaces to barrelled spaces. For example, if X is an infinite-
dimensional Banach space and Y is the same space with the strongest locally
convex topology, then Y is a complete barrelled space (Example 1.7.12 and Ex-
ercise 3.12.53), the identity mapping from X to Y has a closed graph (since the
inverse is continuous), but is discontinuous.
If we wish to apply this theorem to an operator T : X →X in a space X that
is not a Fr´echet space, then so far we can only do this under the assumption that
it is barrelled and Br-complete. As we have already noted, the classical spaces D
and D′ are not Br-complete. However, it turns out that the closed graph theorem
is applicable to them.
Let UF denote the class of all Hausdorff locally convex spaces Y repre-
sentable in the form Y = ∞
n=1 Yn, where Yn is a linear subspace in Y possessing
a topology of a Fr´echet space majorizing the topology induced from Y . Thus, Y
becomes a countable union of continuously embedded Fr´echet spaces. Note that
we do not require that Y be the inductive limit of the spaces Yn (although these
spaces can be made increasing). For example, in the inductive limit of an increas-
ing sequence of Fr´echet spaces we can take a weaker locally convex topology.
Grothendieck [206], [207, p. 147–149] proved the following important result
(a proof can be read also in Ra˘ıkov [409], an appendix to the Russian edition of
Robertson, Robertson [420]). We recall that ultrabornological spaces are precisely
the inductive limits of Banach spaces, hence the continuity of linear operators
on them follows from the continuity of the restrictions to the respective Banach
spaces.
3.9.4. Theorem. The closed graph theorem holds for mappings from ultra-
bornological spaces to spaces of class UF.
In addition, if Y = ∞
n=1 Yn, where each Yn is a Fr´echet space continu-
ously embedded into Y , then any Fr´echet space continuously embedded into Y is
contained in some of the subspaces Yn.
This theorem (in which the hypotheses about the domain of definition and
range are also asymmetric) already applies to operators from D to D, but is still
unapplicable to D′. Raikov [408] substantially enlarged the class of spaces for
mappings into which of Banach spaces the closed graph theorem is true, so that
D′ also belongs to this class. Let us give a partial case of his result, a proof of
which can be read in [409].
3.9.5. Theorem. Suppose that a Hausdorff space Y is the image under an
open continuous linear mapping of a closed linear subspace in a countable product
of spaces of class UF. Then the closed graph theorem holds for mappings from
all ultrabornological spaces to the space Y .
In § 3.12(ii) we consider a generalization of the closed graph theorem in an-
other direction, where Y is a Souslin space (Definition 5.2.9).
For separable
spaces, the classes considered above belong to the class of Souslin spaces (separa-
bility is also necessary for that), since the latter is closed with respect to countable

196
Chapter 3. Duality
products and passage to closed subspaces and continuous images. Let us give here
a particular case of Corollary 3.12.9.
3.9.6. Theorem. A linear mapping with a closed graph from a Fr´echet space
to a Souslin locally convex space is continuous.
Analogs of this result for spaces built by means of more general schemes
similar to Souslin schemes are obtained in De Wilde [110], [112], [111], Ferrando,
K¸akol, L´opez Pellicer [161], Ferrando, K¸akol, L´opez Pellicer, ´Sliwa [164], K¸akol,
Kubi´s, L´opez-Pellicer [245], and Smirnov [471].
A Hausdorff locally convex space E is called a webbed space if it is equipped
with a family of absolutely convex sets Wn1n2...nk indexed by all possible finite
collections of natural numbers (n1, . . . , nk) such that the following conditions are
fulfilled:
(i) the set ∞
n=1 Wn is absorbing,
(ii) for every multiindex (n1, . . . , nk), all sets Wn1n2...nkj with j ⩾1 are con-
tained in the set Wn1n2...nk/2 and the set ∞
j=1 Wn1n2...nkj absorbs Wn1n2...nkj,
(iii) whenever we take increasing collections n1, (n1, n2), . . . and arbitrary
vectors xk ∈Wn1,...,nk, the series 	∞
k=1 xk converges in E.
A family of discs with the same number of indices is called a slice (so that
there is the first slice {Wn}, the second slice {Wnk} and so on), and a thread is a
sequence of sets of the form Wn1, Wn1n2, Wn1n2n3 and so on. Thus, in (iii) we
are concerned with convergence of the series of elements of a thread.
In a Hausdorff topological vector space E, a web is defined similarly, just in
place of the absolute convexity of the sets Wn1n2...nk we require that they must
be circled, and condition (ii) is written in the following form: for all indices j one
has Wn1n2...nkj + Wn1n2...nkj ⊂Wn1n2...nk.
3.9.7. Example. (i) Any Banach space is a webbed space with the web in
which all discs of the first slice with number k are the same disc 2−kU, where
U is the closed unit ball.
Similarly, an arbitrary Fr´echet space F possesses a
web in which Wn1...nk = Uk, Uk = {p1 + · · · + pk ⩽2−k}, where {pk} is
a sequence of seminorms defining the topology such that pk ⩽pk+1.
In the
category of topological vector spaces, all complete metrizable spaces possess the
corresponding webs.
(ii) The strong dual to a metrizable locally convex space E has a web of the
form Wn = U ◦
n, Wnk = 2−1U ◦
n, Wn1...nk = 2−kU ◦
n, where {Un} is a decreasing
base of absolutely convex neighborhoods of zero in E.
A web exists also in the strong dual of any strict inductive limit of a se-
quence of metrizable locally convex spaces (Exercise 3.12.165). Other properties
of webbed spaces are mentioned in Exercise 3.12.166. Baire webbed spaces are
precisely complete metrizable spaces (Exercise 3.12.167).
3.9.8. Theorem. Any linear mapping T with a sequentially closed graph from
a Fr´echet space X to a webbed locally convex space Y is continuous.
PROOF. Let us take a base of absolutely convex neighborhoods of zero Un
in X such that 2Un+1 ⊂Un. Let {Wn1...nk} be a web in Y . It follows from

3.9. The closed graph theorem
197
the definition of a web that ∞
n=1 T −1(Wn) is an absorbent set in X. By Baire’s
theorem there exists n1 for which the closure of T −1(Wn1) has inner points. Next,
∞
k=1 T −1(Wn1k) absorbs T −1(Wn1). Hence there is n2 for which T −1(Wn1n2)
has inner points. Continuing by induction, we obtain a thread wn1, Wn1n2,. . . , for
which the closures of the sets T −1(Wn1...nk) have inner points, but owing to its
absolute convexity the closure of every such set contains some neighborhood of
zero Umk.
We observe that, for every thread {Wn1...nk}, every closed neighborhood
of zero V ⊂Y contains entirely some Wn1...nk.
Indeed, if there are vectors
y1 ∈V \Wn1, y2 ∈V \Wn1n2, y3 ∈V \Wn1n2n3 and so on, then the series
of yk must converge, which is impossible, since yk ̸→0. Thus, the closure of
T −1(V ) has a nonempty interior.
We show that actually T −1(V ) itself has a
nonempty interior, whence the continuity of T follows at once. To this end, we
take Wn1...nk ⊂V and verify that Umk+1 ⊂T −1(V ). It is readily verified that for
all l the closure of T −1(Wn1...nl) is contained in T −1(Wn1...nl) + Uml+1. Hence
we have Uml ⊂T −1(Wn1...nl) + Uml+1.
Let us fix z ∈Ukm+1 and show that z ∈T −1(V ), i.e., Tz ∈V . There are
vectors x1 ∈T −1(Wn1...nk+1) and z1 ∈Umk+2 with z = x1 + z1.
Next we find x2 ∈T −1(Wn1...nk+2) and z2 ∈Umk+3 with z1 = x2 + z2, i.e.,
z = x1 + x2 + z2. By induction we find zj ∈T −1(Wn1...nk+j) and xj ∈Umk+1+j
with z = zj+1 + x1 + · · · + xj. Since zj →0, the series of xj converges to z.
In addition, the series of Txj converges to some y ∈Y (property (ii) of webs).
Since Wn1...nl+1 ⊂Wn1...nl/2, the partial sums of the series of Txj belong to V ,
so y ∈V . Finally, for completing the proof it remains to observe that y = Tz. It
is here that we need the sequential closedness of the graph.
□
It is seen from the proof that in place of completeness of X it is sufficient that
X be Baire and metrizable. The theorem easily yields the next fact. Moreover, the
metrizability can be dropped if we require the usual closedness of the graph (see
below).
3.9.9. Corollary. Any linear mapping with a sequentially closed graph from
an ultrabornological space (i.e., an inductive limit of Banach spaces) to a webbed
locally convex space is continuous.
In the category of topological vector spaces the situation is completely similar,
moreover, also a justification is similar (see Jarchow [237, § 5.4]).
3.9.10. Theorem. If a topological vector space X is the inductive limit of a
family of Baire topological vector spaces Xα and Y is a webbed topological vector
space, then any linear mapping from X to Y with a closed graph is continuous.
If all Xα are metrizable, then it suffices to that the graph be just sequentially
closed.
It is seen from the presented results that the requirement of the validity of
the closed graph theorem for all operators on a space X with a too large class
of range spaces (say, all Banach spaces) turns out to be rather restrictive. This
becomes especially obvious in those cases where we take for X the dual to a

198
Chapter 3. Duality
nonnormable space. In applications one usually deals with a rather narrow class
of range spaces. Let us mention some results useful in this situation (about local
completeness, see § 2.10(iii)).
3.9.11. Theorem. Let X be locally convex. The space

X′, σ(X′, X)

is
locally complete precisely when every linear mapping T : X →l2 with a closed
graph is continuous.
The proof is given in Valdivia [539].
3.9.12.
Theorem. Let X be a locally complete locally convex space (for
example, sequentially complete), let Y be a locally convex space such that Y ′ is
metrizable in the Mackey topology τ(Y ′, Y ) (which is fulfilled if Y is a reflexive
Banach space), and let T : X′ →Y be a linear mapping. Then T is continuous
for X′ equipped with the Mackey topology τ(X′, X) if the graph of T is closed
in

X′, τ(X′, X)

×Y . For example, the latter is true if Y possesses a weaker
Hausdorff topology τ0 such that T is continuous from

X′, τ(X′, X)

to (Y, τ0).
We emphasize that τ0 need not be a vector topology.
PROOF. It is clear that the continuity of T from

X′, τ(X′, X)

to (Y, τ0)
ensures the closedness of the graph in

X′, τ(X′, X)

×Y . The space X′ with
the topology τ(X′, X) will be denoted by G. By Theorem 3.2.9, it suffices to
verify the continuity of the mapping T : G →

Y, σ(Y, Y ′)

. Let L be the set
of all functionals l ∈Y ′ for which the functional l◦T is continuous in the topo-
logy σ(G, X), i.e., is given by an element of X (we recall that by the Mackey
theorem G′ = X). We have to show that L = Y ′.
The set L is a linear subspace. It is everywhere dense in Y ′ with the metrizable
(by assumption) topology τ(Y ′, Y ), since it is dense in the topology σ(Y ′, Y ).
Indeed, otherwise we could find a nonzero element y0 ∈Y with the property that
l(y0) = 0 for all l ∈L. The element (0, y0) does not belong to the graph of T,
which is a closed linear subspace in G×Y . By the Hahn–Banach theorem there is
a continuous linear functional on G×Y vanishing on the graph of T and equal to 1
at (0, y0). This functional has the form (g, y) →g(a) + f(y), where a ∈X = G′
and f ∈Y ′, and we have f(y0) = 1 and g(a) + f(Tg) = 0 for all g ∈G.
Therefore, f ◦T ∈L, but then f(y0) = 0 contrary to the equality f(y0) = 1.
Thus, on the everywhere dense linear subspace L ⊂Y ′ we obtain a mapping
A: l →vl with values in X, where vl ∈X is a vector generating the functio-
nal l◦T. This mapping is linear. We verify its continuity in the topology induced
by τ(Y ′, Y ). By the assumed metrizability of the latter, it suffices to show that
convergence of a sequence {ln} to zero yields convergence of {Aln} to zero
in X, and for this it suffices to verify that A takes every bounded set V in L
to a bounded set in X. This amounts to showing the boundedness of the set of
numbers {g(Al): l ∈V } for every fixed g ∈G. The latter holds indeed, since
g(Al) = l(Tg) and the set V is bounded also in the topology σ(G, Y ).
It is now time to use the local completeness of X, which enables one to extend
A to a continuous linear operator A: Y ′ →X (Exercise 3.12.136). Finally, we
observe that for every l ∈Y ′ we have l(Tg) = g( Al) for all g ∈G, since for

3.10. Compact operators
199
any fixed g both sides are continuous in l on Y ′ and are equal on the dense set L.
Thus, we have L = Y ′.
□
3.9.13. Example. Let X be a locally complete locally convex space and let
a linear mapping T : X′ →Lp(μ), where p ∈(1, +∞) and μ is a finite measure,
be continuous on X′ with the topology τ(X′, X) provided that Lp(μ) is equipped
with the topology of convergence in measure. Then T is continuous also when
Lp(μ) is equipped with the standard norm.
Note an interesting corollary of the open mapping theorem and Michael’s se-
lection theorem 1.12.19 (a partial case has already been given in Corollary 1.12.21).
3.9.14.
Corollary. Let T : X →Y be a continuous linear surjection of
Fr´echet spaces. Then T has a continuous right inverse (possibly, nonlinear).
3.9.15. Example. In the situation of this corollary, for every compact set
K ⊂Y , there exists a compact set S ⊂X such that T(S) = K. Indeed, taking a
continuous right inverse R for T, we can set S = R(K).
3.10. Compact operators
Here we consider an important class of linear operators: the so-called compact
operators. Their theory in case of Banach spaces goes back to Riesz and Schauder,
who, in turn, developed the classical theory of integral operators due to Fredholm,
Hilbert, Carleman, and others.
3.10.1. Definition. A linear mapping A from a topological vector space E to
a topological vector space G is called compact if it maps some neighborhood of
zero V in the space E to a relatively compact subset of the space G.
Since relatively compact sets are bounded, for every neighborhood of zero
W in G, there exists a number α > 0 such that A(αV ) = αA(V ) ⊂W. Hence
any compact linear mapping is continuous at the origin of the space E, therefore,
also everywhere. Certainly, not every continuous linear mapping is compact (an
example is the identity mapping of any Hausdorff infinite-dimensional topological
vector space).
Compact mappings are also called completely continuous (note
that some authors use these two terms — compact and completely continuous —
in different meanings; see, for example, Pietsch [389]). The class of compact
operators is denoted by K(E, G).
Throughout this section E is a Hausdorff topological vector space over IR
or C (in some results it will be locally convex), I is the identity operator from E
to E, A is a compact linear operator from E to E, λ ∈C or λ ∈IR in the real
case,
Tλ = A −λI,
T := A −I.
The mapping T possesses the properties close to the properties of linear mappings
in finite-dimensional spaces. Our next goal is the proof of the following theorem.
3.10.2. Theorem. If Ker T ={0}, then T is a linear homeomorphism from E
onto E.

200
Chapter 3. Duality
For general operators in infinite-dimensional spaces the injectivity does not
imply the surjectivity. In the next section we reinforce the stated assertion by
proving that for the operators of the considered form the surjectivity implies the
injectivity.
The proof of this theorem is rather involved and is based on the following
lemmas.
3.10.3. Lemma. The subspace T(E) is closed in E and T is an open mapping
from E onto T(E) (the images of open sets are open in T(E)). If T is injective,
then T is a linear homeomorphism from E onto T(E).
PROOF. Everything reduces to the case of injective T, since the kernel of T
is finite-dimensional (on the kernel of T, the compact operator A is the identity
operator), hence there is a closed linear subspace E1 for which E = E1⊕Ker T and
the projections onto the summands are continuous. Thus, let Ker T = 0. Suppose
that a net {Txα} converges to some y. By assumption, there is a quasi-norm d in
some family defining the topology such that the corresponding balls centered at the
origin are balanced and A(U), where U = {d ⩽1}, has compact closure. Suppose
first that some subnet in {xα} is contained in kU for some k > 0. We can assume
that this is the original net. Then {Axα} is contained in a compact set, hence
we can pass to a convergent subnet, which gives the subnet xβ = Axβ −Txβ
converging to some x ∈E. Hence y = Tx.
It remains to consider the case where pU(xα) →+∞. We show that this is
impossible. Indeed, in this case for the net zα = xα/pU(xα) we have Tzα →0
and pU(zα) = 1. As shown at the previous step, this yields the existence of a
subnet {zβ} converging to some z ∈E such that Tz = 0. By the injectivity
of T we obtain z = 0, which contradicts the equality p(z) = 1. Thus, we have
proved that the set T(E) is closed. Moreover, it follows from what has been said
that T −1 is continuous on T(E). Indeed, we have seen that for every convergent
net of vectors yα = Txα in T(E) the net xα = T −1yα has a convergent subnet.
However, by the injectivity of T all such subnets must have a common limit,
which means convergence of the whole net {xα}. The continuity of T −1 yields
that T is open.
□
3.10.4. Lemma. Let G be a vector subspace of a topological vector space F
and let W be a neighborhood of zero in F with G + W ̸= F. Then, there exists
an element a ∈2W such that a ̸= G + W, i.e., 2W ̸⊂G + W.
PROOF. If 2W ⊂G + W, then for every n ∈IN we have
2nW = 2n−12W ⊂2n−1(G + W) ⊂G + 2n−1W,
which is contained in G + G + 2n−2W. Continuing, we obtain 2W ⊂G + W.
Since ∞
n=1 2nW = F, it follows that F = G + W, which contradicts our as-
sumption.
□
3.10.5. Lemma. Let F be a topological vector space, G its proper closed
vector subspace, B : F →F a compact linear operator such that (B −I)(F)⊂G,

3.10. Compact operators
201
and let W be a neighborhood of zero in F such that the set B(W) is relatively
compact. Then G + W ̸= F.
PROOF. If G + W = F, then for every ε > 0 we have
F = εF = εG + εW = G + εW = G −ε(B −I)(W) + εB(W)
⊂G −εG + εB(W) = G + εB(W).
Since the set B(W) is relatively compact and hence bounded, for every neigh-
borhood of zero U in the space F we have εB(W) ⊂U for sufficiently small
numbers ε > 0. Hence for such ε we have the inclusion F ⊂G + U. Since G is
closed, this means that F = G.
□
PROOF OF THEOREM 3.10.2.
By Lemma 3.10.3 it suffices to prove the
equality T(E) = E. Suppose that T(E) ̸= E. By the injectivity of the operator T,
in the chain of subspaces E ⊃T(E) ⊃T 2(E) ⊃· · · all inclusions are strict.
Let V be a neighborhood of zero in E such that the set A(V ) is com-
pact.
We show that for every natural number n there exists an element
an ∈(2V ) ∩T n−1(E) not contained in T n(E) + V , where we set T 0(E) = E.
To this end, we verify that, for every fixed n, the subspace F = T n−1(E) of the
space E, the subspace G = T n(E) of the space F and the neighborhood of zero
W = V ∩F in the space F satisfy the conditions in Lemma 3.10.4.
Clearly, it suffices to verify that G + W ̸= F. The latter inequality follows
from Lemma 3.10.5. Indeed, by Lemma 3.10.3 the set T(E) is closed and T is
a linear homeomorphism.
Hence G = T n(E) is a closed vector subspace in
F = T n−1(E). In order to apply Lemma 3.10.5, we have to take B = A

T n−1(E),
i.e., B is the restriction of A to T n−1(E). As noted above, the assumption that
T(E) ̸= E made at the very beginning yields that F ̸= G. Thus, all conditions in
Lemma 3.10.5 are fulfilled. Thus, there exists a sequence {an} mentioned at the
beginning of the proof.
The vectors A(an) with n > 1 are contained in the relatively compact
set A(V ). In addition, for all n, r ∈IN with n > r we have
A(an) −A(ar) = an + Tan −ar −Tar ∈−ar + T rE,
i.e., ar ∈A(ar) −A(an) + T rE. This yields that A(ar) −A(an) /∈V , since
ar /∈T rE + V . We obtain a contradiction with the fact that the set {A(an)} is
precompact. The theorem is proven.
3.10.6. Definition. The spectre of a continuous linear operator A in a com-
plex topological vector space E is the set σ(A) consisting of λ ∈C such that
A −λI is not a topological isomorphism of E.
If E is a Fr´echet space, then σ(A) consists of the eigenvalues, i.e., numbers
λ for which Ker (A −λI) ̸= 0, and numbers λ such that (A −λI)(E) ̸= E (see
Theorem 3.9.1). A nonzero vector v is called an eigenvalue if Av = λv.
3.10.7. Corollary. The spectre of a compact linear operator in an infinite-
dimensional topological vector space consists of the nonzero eigenvalues (which
may be absent) and the zero point.

202
Chapter 3. Duality
PROOF. The main theorem is also true for the operator Tλ = A −λI with
any λ ̸= 0, since it differs from the operator λ−1Tλ by a constant factor. This
means that if λ ̸= 0 is not an eigenvalue, then this operator has a continuous
inverse.
Finally, it is clear that a compact operator in an infinite-dimensional
space cannot be a homeomorphism, hence its spectre contains the zero point.
□
A more complete description of the spectre of a compact operator is contained
in the following theorem.
3.10.8. Theorem. The set of eigenvalues of a compact operator in a Haus-
dorff topological vector space is either finite or they form a sequence converging
to zero; the multiplicity of every nonzero eigenvalue is finite.
PROOF. We first observe that the eigenvectors corresponding to different
eigenvalues are linearly independent (Exercise 3.12.168). Let us proceed to the
proof of the theorem. Suppose that it is false. Then either the multiplicity of some
nonzero eigenvalue is infinite or there exists ε > 0 such that the set of eigenval-
ues with absolute values greater than ε is infinite. The first possibility is ruled
out simply: the nonzero operator λI cannot be compact in an infinite-dimensional
space.
We now show that the existence of infinitely many (different) eigenvalues with
absolute values greater than ε is also impossible. Indeed, let {λn} be a sequence
of pairwise different numbers with absolute values greater than ε and let {xn} be a
sequence of nonzero vectors in E with Axn = λnxn. Let Hn denote the subspace
generated by x1, . . . , xn. By the linear independence of vectors corresponding to
different eigenvalues we have Hn ⊂Hn+1, Hn ̸= Hn+1 for every n, and all
spaces Hn are finite-dimensional, hence closed.
Let V be a circled neighborhood of zero in E such that the set A(V ) is
relatively compact. By using a procedure similar to the one employed in the proof
of the main theorem of this section we show that, for every n ∈IN, there exists an
element an ∈(2V ∩Hn+1)\(Hn + V ).
Set G = Hn, F = Hn+1, W = F ∩V and show that all conditions of
Lemma 3.10.4 are fulfilled. Let us use Lemma 3.10.5. Let B = (λ−1
n+1A)

Hn+1;
one has T(Hn+1) ⊂Hn. Then G, being finite-dimensional, is closed in F, and
the set B(W) is relatively compact in Hn+1, hence G+W ̸= F by Lemma 3.10.5,
so that Lemma 3.10.4 is applicable. Thus, the existence of elements an is proved.
Now, for all n, r ∈IN with n > r we have
A(an) −A(ar) = λn+1B(an) −λn+1B(ar)
= λn+1an −λn+1T(an) −λn+1ar + λn+1T(ar) ∈λn+1an + Hn,
i.e., λn+1an ∈

A(an) −A(ar)

+ Hn. This means that A(an) −A(ar) /∈εV ,
since λn+1an /∈Hn + εV (this relation follows from the relation an /∈Hn + V
and the condition that V is circled). The obtained relation contradicts the condition
that A(V ) is precompact.
□
We now turn to locally convex spaces, where one can use adjoint operators.

3.10. Compact operators
203
3.10.9. Theorem. If A is a compact linear mapping from a locally convex
space E to a locally convex space G, then its adjoint operator is compact provided
that we equip the spaces E′ and G′ with the topologies of uniform convergence on
the classes of all precompact subsets in the spaces E and G. This is also true for
the topologies of uniform convergence on the classes of all compact subsets.
PROOF. Let τE and τG be the topologies in E′ and G′ of one of the two types
mentioned in the formulation. Let V be a neighborhood of zero in E such that
A(V ) has compact closure A(V ) in G. Then W =

A(V )
◦is a neighborhood
of zero in the topology τG of the space G′.
By (3.3.2) we have the equality
(A∗)−1(V ◦) =

A(V )
◦= W, so that A∗(W) ⊂V ◦, but the last set is compact
in the topology τE by Corollary 3.1.6.
□
It is worth noting that if we equip the dual spaces with other topologies, then
the adjoint to a compact linear operator can fail to be compact.
For example, let E = H⊕H1, where H is an infinite-dimensional Hilbert
space with the topology generated by its norm, let H1 be the same vector space
equipped with the weak topology, and let A: E →E, A(x, y) = (0, x). Then A
is compact by the weak compactness of the unit ball, but A∗is not compact if we
equip E′ with the strong topology (which in the considered case coincides with
the Mackey topology). Indeed, A∗(f, g) = (g, 0). Note that A∗is continuous,
but for the compact identity embedding H →H1 the adjoint operator is not even
continuous from the weak to the norm topology.
It follows from this example that the classical Schauder theorem, according
to which a continuous linear operator between Banach spaces is compact pre-
cisely when its adjoint is compact (acting between the Banach duals to the original
spaces), does not extend to arbitrary locally convex spaces. Nevertheless, some
analog of the Schauder theorem for arbitrary locally convex spaces, containing this
theorem as a partial case, still exists. This analog is as follows.
3.10.10. Proposition. Let E and G be locally convex spaces, let T : E →G be
a continuous linear operator, and let A and B′ be the families of all bounded sets
in the spaces

E, σ(E, E′)

and

G′, σ(G′, G)

, respectively. Then all sets T(A),
where A ∈A, are precompact in the topology of convergence on the family B′
precisely when all sets T ∗(B), where B ∈B′, are precompact in the topology of
convergence on the family A.
PROOF. If the set T(A), where A ∈A, is precompact in the topology of
B′-convergence in G, then for every B ∈B′ there exist elements a1, . . . , an in E
such that
T(A) ⊂
n

j=1

g(aj) + B◦
.
It follows from this inclusion (show this) that
A ⊂
n

j=1

aj +

g∗(B)
◦
.

204
Chapter 3. Duality
This means that every set A ∈A is precompact in the topology of convergence
on the family {T ∗(B): B ∈B′} of subsets of the space E′. According to Corol-
lary 3.10.12 proved below, every set in the latter family is precompact in the topol-
ogy of convergence on the family A. Thus, one implication in the proposition is
proved; the reverse implication is proved similarly.
□
3.10.11.
Lemma. Let E be a locally convex space and let sets A ⊂E
and B ⊂E′ be bounded in

E, σ(E, E′)

and

E′, σ(E′, E)

, respectively, and
possess the following property: for every ε > 0 there exists a finite set Kε ⊂E
such that A ⊂Kε + εB◦. Then, for every ε > 0, there exists a finite set Lε ⊂B
such that B ⊂Lε + εA◦.
PROOF. According to Proposition 3.4.2, the boundedness of B in the topology
σ(E′, E) implies that for the finite set Kε/4 ⊂E there exists a finite set Lε ⊂E′
such that B ⊂Lε + 2−1εK◦
ε/4; it is clear that here we can take Lε ⊂B. Let us
verify that B ⊂Lε + εA◦. Let b ∈B. Choose l ∈Lε such that b −l ∈2−1εK◦
ε/4.
By assumption, for every a ∈A there is a vector k ∈Kε/4 such that we have
v := a −k ∈4−1εB◦. Therefore,
|⟨b −l, a⟩| = |⟨b −l, v + k⟩| ⩽|⟨b, v⟩| + |⟨l, v⟩| + |⟨b −l, k⟩| < ε
4 + ε
4 + ε
2,
since b, l ∈B, v ∈4−1εB◦, b −l ∈2−1εK◦
ε/4, k ∈Kε/4. Thus, b −l ∈A◦, as
required.
□
We now justify the assertion used in Proposition 3.10.10.
3.10.12. Corollary. Let E be a locally convex space and let A and B be
some families of bounded subsets of the spaces E and E′, respectively. Let α be
the topology of convergence on the system of sets A in E′ and let β be the
topology of convergence on the system of sets B in E.
Then every set in the
system A is precompact in the topology β precisely when every set in the system
B is precompact in the topology α. Moreover, on the sets in A the topology β
coincides with σ(E, E′) and similarly for B.
PROOF. This follows directly from the lemma and the definition of the topol-
ogy of convergence on a system of sets.
□
We now show that the Schauder theorem (formulated above) is indeed a corol-
lary of what has been just proved. Thus, let E and G be two Banach spaces and
let T : E →G be a compact linear operator. Then T is continuous, hence the
adjoint operator T ∗: G′ →E′ is defined, where E′ and G′ are Banach duals
to the spaces E and G and are equipped with the corresponding norms and the
topologies generated by these norms.
It follows from the compactness of the operator T that it takes every bounded
subset of the space E to a relatively compact subset of the space G. According to
what has been proved above, the mapping T ∗takes every norm bounded subset of
the space G′ to a precompact subset of the space E′; we use that the topology of
the space E is the topology of uniform convergence on the family of all balls in
the space E′, and the topology in G is the topology of convergence on the set of

3.11. The Fredholm alternative
205
all balls in G′ (certainly, in place of the family of all balls one can deal with the
single unit ball). Since E′ is complete, every its precompact subset is contained
in some compact set (for example, its closure). Thus, one of the two parts of the
Schauder theorem is proved; the second one is proved similarly. Certainly, there
is also an easy direct proof of the Schauder theorem for Banach spaces.
3.11. The Fredholm alternative
Let us apply the results presented above to finding conditions for solvability
of linear equations containing compact linear operators in locally convex spaces.
In particular, we prove here that for the operators of the form T = I −A with
compact A the so-called Fredholm alternative is valid, i.e., precisely one of the
following two assertions is true: either the homogeneous equation Ax −x = 0
has a nonzero solution in E or the non-homogeneous equation Ax −x = z with
respect to x is solvable in E for every right-hand side in E (and then a solution
is unique). In other words, for T the injectivity is equivalent to surjectivity. For
arbitrary continuous linear operators these assertions are not mutually excluding
(for example, T can be injective, but not surjective, and can be surjective not being
injective). We have seen in the previous section that if the operator (A −I)−1
exists and is everywhere defined, then it must be continuous. Throughout this
section E is a Hausdorff locally convex space.
3.11.1. Theorem. For a given vector z ∈E, the equation
Ax −λx = z
is solvable with respect to x precisely when for every g ∈Ker (A∗−λI) we have
the equality ⟨g, z⟩= 0.
PROOF. Our assertion is a direct corollary of the equality
Ran (A −λI) =

Ker (A∗−λI)
◦,
which is valid by the closedness of the subspace Ran (A −λI), which follows
from the compactness of the operator A.
□
3.11.2. Theorem. For a given functional f ∈E′, the equation
A∗g −λg = f
is solvable with respect to g precisely when for every element x ∈Ker (A −λI)
we have the equality ⟨f, x⟩= 0.
PROOF. The equality
Ran (A −λI)∗=

Ker (A −λI)
◦
yields the equality
Ran (A −λI)∗=

Ker (A −λI)
◦.
Indeed, the operator A∗is compact if we equip E′ with the topology of uniform
convergence on compact sets (Theorem 3.10.9). Hence the range of λI −A∗is
closed in the indicated topology in E′, whence by linearity we obtain its closedness
in the topology σ(E′, E).
□

206
Chapter 3. Duality
3.11.3. Corollary. If the equation Ax −λx = 0 has only zero solution, then
the non-homogeneous equation A∗g−λg = f is solvable for every right-hand side
f ∈E′; if the equation A∗g −λg = 0 has only zero solution, then the equation
Ax −λx = z is solvable for every right-hand side z ∈E.
3.11.4. Theorem. If λ ̸= 0, then the linear subspaces
Nλ = Ker (A −λI)
and
N ′
λ = Ker (A∗−λI)
have the same finite dimension.
PROOF. Since the operator A is compact, we have dim Nλ < ∞. By The-
orem 3.10.9, if we equip E′ with the topology of uniform convergence on pre-
compact sets, the adjoint operator A∗becomes compact. Hence dim N ′
λ < ∞.
For the proof of the equality dim Nλ = dim N ′
λ it suffices to prove the inequality
dim Nλ ⩾dim N ′
λ. Indeed, suppose we have proved that dim Nλ ⩾dim N ′
λ.
Then for the operator A∗∗−λI we obtain dim Ker (A∗∗−λI) ⩽dim N ′
λ.
Since A is the restriction of the operator A∗∗to E (Exercise 3.12.77), we have
Nλ ⊂Ker (A∗∗−λI), hence dim Nλ ⩽dim N ′
λ.
Let dim Nλ = n < dim N ′
λ. Choose in Nλ a basis e1, . . . , en. There is a
closed linear subspace E0 ⊂E such that E is the direct sum of E0 and Nλ and the
natural projections onto these subspaces are continuous (Theorem 1.11.16). Let us
define a finite-dimensional operator K : E →E as follows: if x = y +z, y ∈E0,
z ∈Nλ, then Kx = z, i.e., K = 0 on E0 and K = I on Nλ. It is clear that
the operator K is compact. Then the operator A1 = A + K is compact as well.
Obviously, the kernel of A1 −λI is trivial. Hence (A1 −λI)(E) = E. On the
other hand,
(A1 −λI)(E) = (A −λI)(E) ⊕K(E) = (A −λI)(E) ⊕Nλ.
Thus, the range of A−λI has codimension n, which leads to a contradiction, since
this range is the annihilator of the kernel of A∗−λI and hence has codimension
dim N ′
λ.
□
3.11.5. Example. For λ = 0 the equality dim N ′
λ = dim Nλ is false. Indeed,
let E = l2,
A: (x1, x2, . . .) →(x2, x3/3, x4/4, . . .).
Then the kernel of A is one-dimensional, but the kernel of A∗is trivial.
It has been actually shown in the proof of Lemma 3.10.3 above that the chain
TλE ⊃T 2
λE ⊃· · · of closed subspaces of the space E (with λ ̸= 0) must
stabilize, i.e., there exists a number k ∈IN such that T k
λ E = T k+j
λ
E for all
numbers j ∈IN. Similarly one can show that also the following chain of closed
subspaces stabilizes: T −1
λ (0) ⊂T −2
λ (0) ⊂· · · (λ ̸= 0).
Let now k be the minimal natural number for which T k
λ E = T k+1
λ
E (then
also T k
λ E = T k+j
λ
E for all j ∈IN) and let n be the minimal natural number for
which T −n
λ
(0) = T −n−1
λ
(0) (then also T −n
λ
(0) = T −n−j
λ
(0) for all j ∈IN). Then
n = k and E is the algebraic direct sum of its subspaces T −n
λ
(0) and T n
λ E.

3.11. The Fredholm alternative
207
The last fact is purely algebraic (its proof will be given below). It follows
from Lemma 3.10.3 that all subspaces T k
λ E are closed: this is seen from the fact
that by the equality
T k
λ = Ak −kλAk−1 + · · · + (−λ)kI
the mapping T k
λ , as well as the mapping Tλ, is the sum of two mappings (compact
and a multiple of the identity). Hence the algebraic direct sum T −n
λ
(0) ⊕T n
λ E of
two subspaces, one of which is closed and finite-dimensional, is also the topolog-
ical direct sum.
Using again that the operators T j
λ with λ ̸= 0 are sums of compact operators
and multiples of the identity, we obtain that for every natural j one has
dim T −j
λ (0) = dim (T ∗
λ)−j(0).
We now prove that E = T −n
λ
(0) ⊕T n
λ (E). First we observe that the equalities
T s(E) = T s+r(E),
(3.11.1)
T r(E) ⊕T −s(0) = E
(3.11.2)
are equivalent. Indeed, if the first one is fulfilled and x ∈E, then there exists
z ∈E such that T sx = T s+rz, but this means that T s(x −T rz) = 0, i.e., we
have x −T rz ∈T −s(0). Thus, x = T rz + (x −T rz), so that (3.11.2) holds.
We verify that (3.11.2) implies (3.11.1). If (3.11.2) is valid and x ∈E, then
there exist elements z, z1 ∈E such that x = T rz + z1, where T sz1 = 0, so that
we have T sx = T s+rz; this means that (3.11.1) holds.
Let us prove the equivalence of the equalities
T −r(0) = T −s−r(0),
(3.11.3)
T r(E) ∩T −s(0) = {0}.
(3.11.4)
Let (3.11.3) be valid and x ∈T r(E) ∩T −s(0). Then T sx = 0. On the other
hand, there exists z ∈E such that x = T rz, so we have T r+sz = 0. Hence
we obtain z ∈T −s−r(0). Therefore, by equality (3.11.3) we obtain z ∈T −r(0),
which means that x = T rz = 0. Thus, (3.11.4) is proved.
Suppose now that (3.11.4) holds and prove that (3.11.3) is true. It suffices
to show that if z ∈T −s−r(0), then z ∈T −r(0). The first inclusion means that
we have T r+sz = 0, i.e., T rz ∈T −s(0). It follows from equality (3.11.4) that
T rz = 0, so we have z ∈T −r(0).
We proceed to the proof of the equalities k = n and T n(E) ⊕T −n(0)=E. If
the first one is proved, then the second will be a direct corollary of the equalities
T n(E) + T −n(0) = E, T n(E) ∩T −n(0) = {0} (which hold in this case; they are
partial cases of equalities (3.11.2) and (3.11.4)).
The equality k = n is proved in the following way. Since by the definition
of n we have T −n(0) = T −n−1(0), we obtain T n(E) ∩T −1(0) = {0}.
If k ⩽n, then again by the definition (this time of the number k) we have
the equality T k(E) = T n(E). Hence the previous equality can be replaced by
the following one: T k(E) ∩T −1(0) = {0}. According to (3.11.3) and (3.11.4),
this means that T −k(0) = T −k−1(0); the last equality means, in turn, that k ⩾n.
Thus we obtain that k = n.

208
Chapter 3. Duality
Let n ⩽k. By the definition of k we have T k(E) = T k+1(E). Since (3.11.1)
implies (3.11.2), we have T(E) + T −k(0) = E. Since now n ⩽k, by definition
we have T −n(0) = T −k(0), hence T(E) + T −n(0) = E. Since (3.11.2) implies
(3.11.1), we have T n(E) = T n+1(E), so that n ⩾k. Hence again we have n = k.
We recall that a nonzero vector a ∈E is called an adjoint vector of a linear
operator A: E →E associated to a number λ if (A−λI)na = 0 for some n ∈IN;
the smallest number n with this property is called the order of the adjoint vector.
In particular, all eigenvectors are adjoint of the first order. Usually, eigenvectors
are not included into adjoint vectors.
It is known that the Jordan form of the matrix of a linear operator in a finite-
dimensional space is constructed by using a basis consisting of the eigenvectors
and adjoint vectors of this operator. To every Jordan block there corresponds a
collection of the basis vectors consisting of one eigenvector and several adjoint
vectors associated with the same eigenvalue; the maximal order of these adjoint
vectors coincides with the number of the diagonal elements in this Jordan block.
As one can show, it follows from what has been said above about the sub-
spaces T −n
λ
(0) and T n
λ (E) that they are invariant subspaces of the operator A,
moreover, the subspace T −n
λ
(0) is finite-dimensional and contains a basis con-
sisting of eigenvectors and adjoint vectors of the operator A of order not greater
than n, associated with the eigenvalue λ. However, this does not imply that in an
infinite-dimensional space there is a basis (at least algebraic) consisting of eigen-
vectors and adjoint vectors of the operator A. Even in a separable Hilbert space
not every compact operator possesses a Hamel basis consisting of eigenvectors
and adjoint vectors; the simplest example is the Volterra operator
Af(t) =
 t
0
f(s) ds
in L2[0, 1], which has no eigenvectors and adjoint vectors.
3.11.6. Remark. Almost all results on compact operators presented above
remain valid for any operator a nonzero polynomial of which is compact. An
exception is the structure of its spectre: if the operator ϕ(A), where ϕ is a nonzero
polynomial, is compact, then the spectre of ϕ(A) is still finite or countable, but
the set of its limit points must belong to the set of zeros of the polynomial ϕ (say,
zero need not be a limit point of the spectre of such an operator). The proof of this
(which does not differ much from the reasoning given above) is left as an exercise.
3.12. Complements and exercises
(i) Baire spaces (208). (ii) The Borel graph theorem (211). (iii) Bounding sets (212). (iv) The
James theorem (213). (v) Topological properties of locally convex spaces (214). (vi) The Eberlein–
ˇSmulian properties (218). (vii) Schauder bases (219). (viii) Minimal spaces and powers of the real
line (221). Exercises (224).
3.12(i). Baire spaces
Here we present some additional information about Baire spaces. In general
topology, Baire spaces are defined as follows.

3.12. Complements and exercises
209
3.12.1. Definition. A topological space X is called Baire if no its nonempty
open subset can be represented as a countable union of nowhere dense sets.
Countable unions of nowhere dense sets are called first category sets, all other
sets are called second category sets. Thus, in a Baire space all nonempty open sets
(hence the space itself) are second category sets. A somewhat weaker condition
is that the whole space is a second category set. Though, for topological vector
spaces both properties are equivalent, since if a neighborhood of a point is a first
category set, then the neighborhood of zero obtained by shifting this point to zero
will be also a first category set, then the whole space will be a first category set as
well. Certainly, in general spaces there is no such equivalence: for example, the
union of [0, 1] with the set of rational numbers in [2, 3] is not a Baire space in the
sense of the above definition, although it is a second category set.
The space is Baire precisely when the intersection of every sequence of every-
where dense open sets is everywhere dense. Indeed, if open sets Gn are every-
where dense in a Baire space X, then 
∞
n=1(Gn ∩U) ̸= ∅for every nonempty
open set U, since otherwise the closed sets X\Gn are nowhere dense and cover U.
In the opposite direction, if an open set U is the union of nowhere dense sets Fn,
then the sets Gn = X\Fn are open and everywhere dense (the closures of Fn are
nowhere dense too), but their intersection does not meet U, hence this intersection
is not everywhere dense.
More detailed information about Baire spaces can be found in Haworth,
Mccoy [216] (see also Bourbaki [88], P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385], and Valdi-
via [543]). We only mention some facts related to products.
Let X and Y be two Baire spaces. Then X ×Y is Baire in either of the
following cases:
(i) Y has a countable topology base;
(ii) X and Y are metrizable and Y is complete.
In addition, the following fact holds.
3.12.2. Theorem. The product of any collection of metrizable separable Baire
spaces is Baire. The product of any collection of complete metric spaces is Baire.
For example, IRT is Baire.
Oxtoby [377] constructed an example of a completely regular Baire space such
that its square is not Baire (he used the continuum hypothesis, but without it an
example was constructed in Cohen [103]). Later examples of metric spaces with
such a property were found (see Krom [300]), and Arias de Reyna [23] constructed
an example of two Euclidean Baire spaces X and Y for which X×Y is not Baire.
Let us give a result from Saxon [430].
3.12.3. Theorem. A topological vector space E is Baire precisely when every
absorbing closed balanced set in E has an inner point.
PROOF. If V be a set with the indicated properties in a Baire space E, then
the closed sets nV cover E, hence some of them has an inner point.
Suppose now that E is not Baire. Then E can be represented as the union of a
sequence of increasing closed sets Fn without inner points. We can assume that E

210
Chapter 3. Duality
is real (the complex case is slightly more difficult, see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385,
p. 14]). We can also assume that Fn = −Fn, since the sets Fn ∪(−Fn) are also
closed and nowhere dense. Let us take a nonzero vector v0 and a balanced closed
neighborhood of zero W not containing v0 (which always exists in a Hausdorff
nonzero space, but in our special case we actually do not need the assumption
that E is Hausdorff, since otherwise Fn = E). We can find a balanced closed
neighborhood of zero U with U + U ⊂W.
Let us show that the set A = ∞
n=1 n−1(Fn ∩U) is nowhere dense and
is absorbing. Then the set B that equals the closure of the set of all centrally
symmetric closed intervals contained in A will be closed, nowhere dense, balanced
and absorbent (for every x ∈E, there is a closed interval of the form [−εx, εx]
contained in A).
If A is not nowhere dense, then the closure of A is dense in some open set G.
For every k ⩾1, the closure of A is the union of the sets n−1(Fn ∩U) over
all n ⩽k −1 and the closure of Ak := ∞
n=k n−1(Fn ∩U). Then the open set
G\Ak is contained in the union of the sets n−1(Fn ∩U) with n ⩽k −1, which is
nowhere dense. Hence this open set is empty, i.e., G ⊂Ak ⊂k−1U for all k.
Taking any element g ∈G, we obtain that g + tv0, g −tv0 ∈G with some
number t > 0, whence 2tv0 ∈k−1U + k−1U ⊂k−1W for all k. Taking k such
that 2tk ⩾1, we obtain from the inclusion 2tkv0 ∈W and the condition that W
is balanced that v0 ∈W, which is a contradiction. Thus, A is nowhere dense.
Let us show that A is absorbent. Let e ∈E, e ̸= 0. The closed interval
U ∩IR1e is covered by the closed sets Fn ∩U, hence there exist p ∈IN, z ∈IR1
and ε > 0 such that te ∈Fp ∩U for all t ∈[z −ε, z + ε]. If z = 0, then we
obtain that se ∈A whenever |s| < δ, where a positive number δ < ε/p is such
that (−δe, δe) ∈p−1U.
Let z ̸= 0. We can assume that ε ⩾(p + 1)−1z (increasing p) and that z > 0.
Let 0 < s ⩽p−1ε. Choose n ⩾p such that (n + 1)−1z ⩽s ⩽n−1z. Then
z −ε ⩽ns ⩽z + ε, since z −ε ⩽n(n + 1)−1z. Hence nse ∈Fp ⊂Fn, whence
we obtain sz ∈n−1(Fn ∩U) ⊂A. Since A is centrally symmetric, we have
se ∈A also for s ∈[−p−1ε, 0). Finally, 0 ∈A.
□
For the proof of the next theorem, see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, p. 17].
3.12.4. Theorem. Let E be a separable infinite-dimensional Baire topological
vector space.
Under the assumption of the continuum hypothesis (or Martin’s
axiom, according to which the union of less than the continuum of sets of measure
zero on the real line has also measure zero), there exists an everywhere dense
hyperplane in E that is not a Baire space.
We shall need one more concept related to Baire’s name: we shall say that a
set A in a topological space X has the Baire property if there exists an open set U
such that U △A is a first category set.
It is clear that all open sets have the Baire property and that the class B(X) of
all sets in X with this property is closed with respect to taking complements and
countable unions. Therefore, the class B(X) is a σ-algebra containing the Borel
σ-algebra, which is the smallest σ-algebra containing all open sets (see § 5.1).

3.12. Complements and exercises
211
Actually, this is the smallest σ-algebra containing all Borel sets and all first
category sets.
3.12.5. Lemma. Let A be a second category set with the Baire property in a
topological vector space. Then A −A contains a neighborhood of zero.
PROOF. By assumption, there is an open set U for which U △A is a first
category set. In addition, U −U is a neighborhood of zero.
We show that U −U ⊂A −A.
Let x ∈U −U.
Then x = u −v,
where u, v ∈U, whence we obtain v ∈(x + U) ∩U. Since the set U\A is
a first category set, its shift (U + x)\(A + x) is also a first category set.
It
readily follows from this (Exercise 3.12.71) that A ∩(A + x) ̸= ∅, which gives
the inclusion x ∈A −A.
□
By the way, it follows from this result that a second category set with the
Baire property on the real line must have the cardinality of the continuum.
3.12.6. Example. Let us consider an example of a closed subspace in a Baire
space that is not Baire.
In the space X = ∞
n=1 Xn, where Xn = IR∞, take some linear subspace D
algebraically complementing the sum of Xn; the latter sum consists of all se-
quences (x1, . . . , xn, 0, 0, . . .), xn ∈Xn, where we regard Xn embedded into X
as the set of vectors with zero components on the positions with numbers k ̸= n.
Let En be the direct sum of D and X1, . . . , Xn. Since the union of En is X, we
obtain by Exercise 3.12.68 that for some n the subspace En is dense and Baire.
Let us take in Xn+1 a subspace L of countable dimension and set E = En + L.
Then E is Baire (since En is dense in E and is Baire), L = E ∩Xn+1 is closed
in E by the closedness of Xn+1 in X, but is not Baire.
3.12(ii). The Borel graph theorem
For the definition of a Borel mapping, see § 5.2. Here we discuss an interesting
generalization of the closed graph theorem.
3.12.7. Theorem. Let E be a Baire topological vector space, let F be a
locally convex space, and let T : E →F be a Borel linear mapping. Then T is
continuous. In particular, every Borel linear function on E is continuous.
PROOF. Let V ⊂F be a closed absolutely convex neighborhood of zero.
Then B = T −1(V ) is an absorbent absolutely convex Borel set in E. Being Borel,
the set B possesses the Baire property. By Lemma 3.12.5 the set 2B = B −B
contains a neighborhood of zero. Hence B also does, which gives the continuity
of T.
□
3.12.8. Theorem. Let E and F be Souslin locally convex spaces, where E is
Baire, and let T : E →F be a linear mapping with a Borel graph. Then T is
continuous.
PROOF. In order to apply the previous theorem we verify that T is Borel. First
observe that E×F is also a Souslin space, hence the graph Γ of the mapping T is
a Souslin set (see Bogachev [65, Corollary 6.6.7]).

212
Chapter 3. Duality
Let B ⊂F be a Borel set. Let π1 and π2 denote the projection operators from
E ×F onto E and F. These projection operators are continuous and hence are
Borel measurable. Hence π−1
2 (B) ∩Γ is a Borel set, then also a Souslin set in Γ.
Hence T −1(B) = π1

π−1
2 (B) ∩Γ

is a Souslin set in E. Since this is true also
for E\T −1(B) = T −1(F\B), we see that T −1(B) is a Borel set by a classical
result (see [65, Corollary 6.6.10]).
□
This theorem is applicable if, say, E is a separable Fr´echet space. However,
in this case separability is not needed.
3.12.9.
Corollary. Let E be a Fr´echet space, let F be a Souslin locally
convex space, and let T : E →F be a linear mapping with a Borel graph. Then
T is continuous.
PROOF. It suffices to verify the continuity for restrictions to separable closed
subspaces E0 ⊂E, and the graph of this restriction is a Borel set, being the
intersection of the original graph with E0×F.
□
3.12.10. Corollary. Let E and F be Souslin locally convex spaces such that
E is Baire and let Λ: F →E be a continuous one-to-one linear mapping. Then
Λ−1 : E →F is also continuous.
PROOF. The graph of the continuous mapping Λ is Borel in F ×E, hence the
graph of its inverse (the same set, but in E×F) is Borel.
□
3.12.11. Corollary. Let E be a Fr´echet space and let E0 be a Souslin linear
subspace of finite codimension. Then E0 is closed. The same is true if E0 is of
countable codimension.
PROOF. Let E1 be a finite-dimensional subspace in E complementing E0.
We observe that E = E0
 E1 is separable. The space E0 ×E1 is Souslin, the
mapping (u, v) →u + v from E0×E1 to E is one-to-one and continuous. By the
previous corollary the inverse is also continuous, which implies that E0 is closed.
If E0 has countable codimension and {an} is a countable basis in the algebraic
complement, then, according to what we have proved, all subspaces En generated
by E0 and ai with i ⩾n are closed . Their intersection is E0.
□
It is clear from the proof that it is sufficient that E be Baire (it will be also
Souslin, since E = E0
 E1).
It follows from the last corollary that any Souslin hyperplane in a Fr´echet
space is closed.
3.12(iii). Bounding sets
3.12.12. Definition. A subset B of a topological space T is called bounding
if every continuous function on T is bounded on B.
The space T itself is bounding if it is pseudocompact, i.e., all continuous
functions on T are bounded.
It is clear that if every infinite sequence in B has a limit point in T, then B is
bounding. Every part of a compact set is a bounding set. The space of all countable

3.12. Complements and exercises
213
ordinal numbers with the order topology is not compact, but is countably compact
and hence pseudocompact. The Tychonoff plane ([1, ω0]×[1, ω1])\(ω0, ω1), where
ω0 is the smallest countable ordinal and ω1 is the smallest uncountable ordinal,
where the intervals of ordinals are equipped with the order topology, gives an
example of a pseudocompact space that is not countably compact.
It is of interest to find conditions for relative compactness of bounding sets
in locally convex spaces. We include some results on this topic, their proofs and
related references can be found in Floret [171]. Note that the notion of bounding
sets involves nonlinear functions.
For a general completely regular space T, the Shirota–Nachbin theorem as-
serts that every bounding set in T is relatively compact precisely when the space
C(T) of continuous functions on T with the topology of uniform convergence
on compact sets is barrelled (see, e.g., Schmets [438]). M. Valdivia proved the
following result.
3.12.13. Theorem. Let E be a locally convex space such that E′ is separable
in the topology σ(E′, E). Then every σ(E, E′)-bounding set in E is relatively
compact in σ(E, E′).
3.12.14. Corollary. In a quasi-complete locally convex space E, a set is
bounding in the topology σ(E, E′) precisely when it is relatively compact in this
topology.
This yields the result of Pt´ak on the relative weak compactness of weakly
pseudocompact sets in quasi-complete locally convex spaces.
3.12.15. Corollary. A quasi-complete locally convex space E is semireflexive
precisely when every σ(E, E′)-continuous function is bounded on all bounded sets.
3.12.16. Corollary. If a bounding set A in a locally convex space E has
a complete in the Mackey topology τ(E, E′) closed convex envelope or if E′ is
separable in the topology σ(E′, E), then A is relatively compact.
3.12(iv). The James theorem
Let us give without proof the important James theorem [234] (extended to
locally convex spaces by James himself and also by Pryce [396]), a proof of
which can be also found in Floret [171, p. 59].
3.12.17. Theorem. A weakly closed set A in a quasi-complete locally convex
space is weakly compact precisely when every continuous linear functional has a
maximum on A.
3.12.18.
Corollary. A Banach space X is reflexive precisely when every
continuous linear functional on X has a maximum on the closed unit ball.
3.12.19. Corollary. Let E be a quasi-complete locally convex space, let A be
some σ-algebra of subsets of a set Ω, and let ν : A →E be a vector measure on A,
i.e., ν(A) = 	∞
n=1 ν(An) if An ∈A are pairwise disjoint and A = ∞
n=1 An.
Then the set of values of ν is relatively weakly compact. In particular, this is true
for Banach spaces E.

214
Chapter 3. Duality
PROOF. Since the set of values of every countably additive real measure on
the σ-algebra A is bounded, the set M = {ν(A): A ∈A} is weakly bounded.
Let C be its weak closure. In order to verify weak compactness of C we apply
the James theorem and show that every functional f ∈E′ has a maximum on C.
This reduces to showing that the measure f(ν) on A assumes its maximal value;
but this is a known fact in measure theory (see Bogachev [65, § 3.1]).
□
A derivation of the next assertions from the James theorem can be found in
Floret [171, p. 87, 88].
3.12.20. Theorem. A quasi-complete locally convex space is semireflexive
precisely when every two disjoint closed bounded convex sets can be strictly sep-
arated by a closed hyperplane.
3.12.21.
Theorem. An absolutely convex bounded closed set in a quasi-
complete locally convex space is weakly compact precisely when it can be strictly
separated by a closed hyperplane from every closed bounded convex set disjoint
with it.
Hence a Banach space is reflexive precisely when its closed unit ball can be
strictly separated by a closed hyperplane from every closed bounded convex set
disjoint with it. For example, in C[0, 1] there is a bounded closed convex set
which is disjoint with the closed unit ball, but cannot be strictly separated from it
by a hyperplane.
The James theorem gives the following nonlinear characterization of weak
compactness (see Floret [171, p. 91]).
3.12.22. Proposition. Let V be a bounded convex set in a locally convex
space that is complete in the Mackey topology. Weak compactness of V is equiv-
alent to that every mapping Φ: V →V continuous in the weak topology has a
fixed point.
A close result of D.P. Milman and V.D. Milman asserts that weak compactness
of V is equivalent to the property that for every convex closed subset W ⊂V all
affine continuous mappings from W to W have fixed points.
3.12(v). Topological properties of locally convex spaces
General topology considers various properties of topological spaces gener-
alizing the properties of metric spaces. In this way, normal, perfectly normal,
paracompact, and other spaces arise. Here we give some basic information about
locally convex spaces in these classes. It becomes often necessary to apply a result
in general topology to a concrete locally convex space, which requires membership
in a particular class of general topological spaces. Usually, this concrete space is
obtained from some simpler spaces (say, metrizable) by operations like inductive
or projective limits in the category of locally convex space. Since such topologies
are weaker than those in the category of general topological spaces (recall that D
is not the topological inductive limit of Dn), such questions turn out to be rather
subtle. Another example: spaces (even Banach) with weak topologies.

3.12. Complements and exercises
215
We already know that Hausdorff topological vector spaces are Tychonoff. The
next by power property is normality. A Hausdorff space T is called normal if for
every pair of disjoint closed sets A and B in T there exists a pair of disjoint
open sets U and V such that A ⊂U, B ⊂V . Such spaces are completely reg-
ular. A more narrow class consists of perfectly normal spaces: Hausdorff spaces
in which every closed set has the form f −1(0) for some continuous function f.
Any uncountable power of the real line is not a normal space (see Arkhangel’ski˘ı,
Ponomarev [22, Chapter II, § 5, Problem 392] or Engelking [154, Problem 2.7.16]).
A topological space is called Lindel¨of if every its cover by open sets contains an
at most countable subcover. For metric spaces, this is equivalent to separability.
Any Lindel¨of Hausdorff topological vector space is normal (Exercise 3.12.189).
A Hausdorff space is called paracompact if in every its open cover one can in-
scribe a locally finite open subcover. It is known (see Engelking [154, § 5.1]) that
the class of such spaces contains all compact spaces, metrizable spaces, Lindel¨of
spaces and is contained in the class of normal spaces. In addition, it is contained in
a more narrow class of collectively normal spaces, i.e., Hausdorff spaces in which,
for every discrete collection of closed sets Fs, there is a discrete collection of open
sets Us ⊃Fs (a collection of sets is discrete if every point has a neighborhood
meeting at most one of them).
The results of D.P. Baturov and E.A. Reznicheno (see Arkhangelskii [21],
Reznichenko [418]) yield the following remarkable fact.
3.12.23.
Theorem. For a metrizable locally convex space with the weak
topology, the normality and the Lindel¨of property are equivalent.
In addition, it is shown in [418] that if in a locally convex space E there is
a stronger metrizable locally convex topology, then for the space

E, σ(E, E′)

normality and collective normality are equivalent (then also equivalent to paracom-
pactness). These matters are closely connected with the study of the space Cp(T)
of continuous functions on a topological space T equipped with the topology of
pointwise convergence.
For example, a Banach space X with the weak topology is linearly homeo-
morphic to a closed linear subspace in Cp(T) with compact T equal the unit ball in
X′ equipped with the topology σ(X′, X). Similarly, a metrizable locally convex
space E with the weak topology can be embedded as a closed linear subspace of
Cp(T) with the σ-compact space T equal the union of the polars of the elements
of a countable base of neighborhoods of zero in E.
The following sufficient condition for the Lindel¨of property in the weak topol-
ogy is due to Talagrand [510]. Certainly, the simplest sufficient condition is sepa-
rability with respect to the norm.
3.12.24. Theorem. If a Banach space X contains a weakly compact set with
a dense linear span, then X with the weak topology is Lindel¨of.
The hypothesis of this theorem is fulfilled for every Hilbert space (and every
reflexive Banach space).
In relation to the problem of extending mappings (see Theorem 1.12.23), let us
mention the following interesting class of stratifiable spaces: these are Hausdorff

216
Chapter 3. Duality
spaces such that for every closed set Z one can choose a sequence of open sets
Un(Z) ⊃Z with
Z =
∞

n=1
Un(Z) =
∞

n=1
Un(Z),
and if Z ⊂Z′, where Z′ is closed, then Un(Z) ⊂Un(Z′).
For example, in a metric space for Un(Z) one can take the open 1/n-neigh-
borhood of Z.
A functional characterization of stratifiable spaces (from which their perfect
normality follows at once) is this: to every open set U one can associate a contin-
uous function fU with values in [0, 1] such that U = {fU ̸= 0} and if V ⊂U is
also open, then fV ⩽fU.
A Hausdorff space is called monotonically normal if, to every pair of sets
F ⊂U, where F is closed and U is open, one can associate an open set V (F, U)
such that F ⊂V (F, U)⊂V (F, U)⊂U, and for every pair of sets F ′ ⊂U ′ such that
F ′ is closed and U ′ is open and F ′ ⊂F, U ′ ⊂U we have V (F ′, U ′) ⊂V (F, U).
It is known (see Gruenhage [208]) that a space is stratifiable precisely when
its product with any convergent sequence is monotonically normal. As observed
by S.A. Shkarin [461], this yields that for locally convex spaces both properties are
equivalent. His paper [458] contains the following important result giving broad
classes of nonmetrizable stratifiable locally convex spaces.
3.12.25. Theorem. (i) A direct sum of stratifiable locally convex spaces is
stratifiable. (ii) A strict inductive limit of a sequence of metrizable locally convex
space is stratifiable. (iii) If in the dual F ′ of a Fr´echet space F all bounded sets
are metrizable, then F ′ with the Mackey topology is stratifiable.
Thus, the class of stratifiable (hence also perfectly normal) spaces contains D,
D′, S, and S′.
However, the situation with weak topologies is more complicated: a Banach
space with the weak topology can be stratifiable only if it is finite-dimensional; the
space Cp(T) of continuous functions on a topological space T with the topology
of pointwise convergence is stratifiable only for countable T. However, if T is
a complete separable metric space, then the space Ck(T) of continuous functions
on T is stratifiable in the topology of uniform convergence on compact sets. It
remained open for quite a long time whether the space Ck(Q) is stratifiable, but
Reznichenko [419] proved that a separable metrizable space X is Polish if and
only if the function space Ck(X) is stratifiable. For a survey of results on this
topic and further references, see Gruenhage [208].
Let us also mention the following characterization of Fr´echet–Urysohn spaces
(in which all limit points of a set are the limits of convergent sequences of its
elements) obtained in K¸akol, L´opez Pellicer, Todd [249] (see also Cascales, K¸akol,
Saxon [96] and K¸akol, Kubi´s, L´opez-Pellicer [245]).
3.12.26. Theorem. For topological vector space E, the following conditions
are equivalent: (i) E is a Fr´echet–Urysohn space; (ii) if a point belongs to the
closure of a set A ⊂E, then it belongs to the closure of some bounded set B ⊂A;

3.12. Complements and exercises
217
(iii) if we are given a sequence of sets An ⊂E the closures of which contain
zero, then there exists a sequence of sets Bn ⊂An for which ∞
n=1 Bn is bounded
and zero belongs to the closure of the union ∞
n=m Bn for all m.
The existence of nonmetrizable separable locally convex Fr´echet–Urysohn
spaces depends on additional set-theoretic assumptions. Such spaces exist if we
assume Martin’s axiom; for broad classes of locally convex spaces metrizability
follows from the Fr´echet–Urysohn property (see [245] and [249]). It is known that
all sequentially complete Fr´echet–Urysohn spaces are Baire; it follows from this,
for example, that the inductive limit of the increasing sequence of IRn is not a
Fr´echet–Urysohn space (although is a sequential space).
The topological classification of Fr´echet spaces is completely established. An
outstanding achievement here is the following result of Kadec [242] and An-
derson [17] (the former proved that all infinite-dimensional separable Banach
spaces are homeomorphic, and the latter constructed a homeomorphism between l2
and IR∞). A proof is also given in Bessaga, Pe	lczy´nski [52], and Toru´nczyk [528].
3.12.27.
Theorem. Every infinite-dimensional separable Fr´echet space is
homeomorphic to IR∞.
The proof employs the next fact that is of independent interest.
3.12.28.
Theorem. Every infinite-dimensional separable Banach space is
homeomorphic to its closed unit ball and also to the unit sphere.
In any infinite-dimensional Fr´echet space F, every closed convex set with
a nonempty interior is homeomorphic to F. Certainly, it is important to have a
nonempty interior (a compact set is not homeomorphic to F). As shown in Banakh,
Cauty [39], every nonseparable convex set in F that is metrizable by a complete
metric is homeomorphic to some Hilbert space. For convex compact sets, there
is another fact establish by Keller [267]: every convex compact set in a Fr´echet
space with an infinite-dimensional linear span is homeomorphic to the Hilbert
cube [0, 1]∞(actually, in the cited paper this is proved for compact sets in l2, to
which the general case easily reduces, see Exercise 3.12.191). The same work
contains the following remarkable result: for every two points x, y in the Hilbert
cube [0, 1]∞, there exists a homeomorphism h: Q →Q such that Q(x) = y. In
the case of arbitrary Fr´echet spaces Toru´nczyk obtained the following nice result
(see Toru´nczyk [528]).
3.12.29. Theorem. Each Fr´echet space is homeomorphic to a Hilbert space.
Thus, two Fr´echet spaces are homeomorphic precisely when they have equal
minimal cardinalities of families of everywhere dense sets.
An example of a
closed hyperplane in an incomplete infinite-dimensional Euclidean space that is
not homeomorphic to the whole space is constructed in van Mill [344].
The following classical theorem is due to A.A. Milyutin (see [343]; a proof
can be also found in Pe	lczy´nski [382]).
3.12.30. Theorem. Let K be an uncountable metric compact space. Then the
spaces C(K) and C[0, 1] are linearly homeomorphic.

218
Chapter 3. Duality
3.12(vi). The Eberlein–ˇSmulian properties
Here we give some additional results related to the Eberlein–ˇSmulian theorem.
3.12.31. Definition. A Hausdorff topological space T is called angelic if
every set S ⊂T with the property that every infinite sequence of its elements has
a limit point in T, possesses also the following properties: S is relatively compact
and each point in the closure of S is the limit of some sequence in S.
In angelic spaces, the properties of compactness, countable compactness and
sequential compactness coincide. In addition, the closure of a relatively compact
set is exhausted by the limits of sequences of points in this set. Certainly, not
every compact is an angelic space, but it is interesting that there is an example of
two angelic compact spaces the product of which is not angelic. It is also known
that if a regular space X can be continuously injected into an angelic space Y ,
then X is also angelic. The proofs of these assertions and the following theorem
can be found in Floret [171, § 3].
3.12.32. Theorem. Let a topological space X be the closure of the countable
union of sets Kn with the property that every infinite sequence in Kn has a limit
point in X. Then, for every metric space Z, the space C(X, Z) with the topology
of pointwise convergence is angelic.
If all Kn are compact, then, for every set A ⊂C(X, Z), every point in the
closure of A in the indicated topology belongs to the closure of some at most
countable part of A.
When applied to metrizable locally convex spaces, this gives the assertion
already known from Theorem 3.4.11: if A is a set in a metrizable locally convex
space, then every point in the weak closure of A is contained in the weak closure
of some at most countable part of A.
By using the results presented above, one can also prove the following facts.
3.12.33. Theorem. (i) If a locally convex space E is metrizable or admits a
weaker metrizable locally convex topology, then it is angelic for the weak topo-
logy σ(E, E′). In particular, this is true for all subspaces of IR∞with locally
convex topologies majorizing the topology of coordinate-wise convergence.
(ii) Strict inductive limits and inductive limits with weakly compact embed-
dings of sequences of Fr´echet spaces are angelic for the weak topology.
The following theorem is due to Grothendieck.
3.12.34. Theorem. Let K be compact. A set F ⊂C(K) is weakly com-
pact precisely when it is norm bounded and compact in the topology of pointwise
convergence.
PROOF. One implication is obvious. Let F be bounded and compact in the
topology of pointwise convergence. Since C(K) is angelic in both considered
topologies, it suffices to verify that every uniformly bounded pointwise converging
sequence in C(K) is weakly converging.
This is obvious from the Lebesgue
dominated convergence theorem and the fact that C(K)∗is identified with the
space of Radon measures on K.
□

3.12. Complements and exercises
219
Recall that by Proposition 1.8.14 any compact set in a metrizable space is
contained in the closed absolutely convex envelope of a sequence converging to
zero. This fact does not extend to metrizable compact sets in nonmetrizable spaced.
3.12.35.
Example. The unit ball in the space l2 with the weak topology
is compact and metrizable, but cannot belong to the closed absolutely convex
envelope of a sequence {an} weakly converging to zero. Indeed, otherwise by
Exercise 2.10.47 the operator A: (λn) →	∞
n=1 λnan from l1 to l2 would be
surjective, hence the range of A∗would be closed (Exercise 3.12.181), but we have
A∗(l2) ⊂c0, since (A∗x)n = (x, an) →0, which is impossible, since c0 contains
no infinite-dimensional closed Hilbert subspaces (see Lindenstrauss, Tzafriri [318,
Proposition 2.a.2]).
3.12(vii). Schauder bases
It is known from the university course that the most important attribute of
Hilbert spaces are orthogonal bases. For more general spaces the concept of a
topological basis is introduced. We shall consider here only Hausdorff locally
convex spaces.
3.12.36. Definition. A sequence {hn} in a locally convex space X is called
a topological basis if, for every x ∈X, there is a unique sequence of numbers
{cn(x)} such that x = 	∞
n=1 cn(x)hn, where the series converges in X. If all
functionals x →cn(x) are continuous, then {hn} is called a Schauder basis.
Topological bases and Schauder bases in the weak topology are called respec-
tively weak topological bases and weak Schauder bases.
It is clear that any topological basis is a linearly independent set.
In an
infinite-dimensional Banach space a topological basis cannot be an algebraic basis
(a Hamel basis), since the latter is always uncountable. In the Banach space C[0, 1]
a topological basis was constructed by Faber already in 1910. After appearance
of general Banach spaces such bases became an object of intensive investiga-
tions (Banach, Mazur, Schauder and other eminent mathematician were involved
in these investigations). In some spaces the existence of bases remained unknown
for a long time. For example, in 1974 S.V. Bochkarev solved Banach’s problem
of constructing a Schauder basis in the space of functions analytic in the open
disc and continuous on the closed disc equipped with the sup-norm. For several
decades it was an open problem whether a Schauder basis exists in every sep-
arable Banach space. This was one of the most famous problems in the theory
of Banach spaces. Finally, in 1973 P. Enflo published his celebrated counterex-
ample. Simultaneously he solved another old difficult problem of existence of a
separable Banach spaces without the approximation property. A Banach space X
is said to possess the approximation property if, for every compact set K ⊂X
and every ε > 0, there exists a continuous finite-dimensional operator T such that
∥x −Tx∥< ε for all x ∈K. This is equivalent to the following property: for
every Banach space Z, the set of finite-dimensional operators is norm dense in the
space K(Z, X) of compact operators. If X has a Schauder basis {hn}, then the

220
Chapter 3. Duality
projection operators x →	n
i=1 xihi converge to the identity operator uniformly
on compact sets, hence X has the approximation property. However, there is a
space with the approximation property, but without Schauder bases. It is known
that spaces without the approximation property (hence without Schauder bases)
exist even among closed subspaces of c0 and lp with p > 2 (certainly, they exist
also among closed subspaces of the universal space C[0, 1]). Some brief informa-
tion about Schauder bases can be found in Bogachev, Smolyanov [72, § 6.10(iv)],
where the corresponding references are given. Here we only mention several key
results for more general spaces. In this circle of problems, one of the most im-
portant positive results is the following fact (going back to Banach for Banach
spaces). For its proof, see Edwards [150, § 6.8], Jarchow [237, Chapter 14].
3.12.37.
Theorem. In any Fr´echet space and in any inductive limit of a
sequence of Fr´echet spaces, every weak topological basis is a Schauder basis in
the original topology.
It is easy to construct an example of an incomplete normed space with a
topological basis that is not a Schauder basis: one can take a space with a countable
Hamel basis {hn} for which the first coefficient c1 (or even each coefficients cn)
is discontinuous. Say, take a discontinuous linear functional l, a vector h1 with
l(h1) = 1, and a basis h2, h2, . . . in l−1(0).
Dieudonn´e [127] proved that any weak Schauder basis in a barrelled space is
a Schauder basis (his proof can be also found in Jarchow [237, Chapter 14]).
A Schauder basis {hn} in X is called absolute if, for every continuous semi-
norm p on X, there is a continuous seminorm q such that
∞

n=1
|cn(x)|p(hn) ⩽q(x)
for all x.
An infinite-dimensional Banach space with an absolute basis is isomorphic to l1.
This is false for Fr´echet spaces.
Dynin and Mityagin [146] (see also Mitya-
gin [350]) proved that in any nuclear Fr´echet space every Schauder basis is ab-
solute.
3.12.38. Theorem. Let F be a Fr´echet space with a Schauder basis. The
following conditions are equivalent: (i) F is nuclear, (ii) F and F ′
β possess ab-
solute bases, (iii) if {hn} is a Schauder basis in F with the respective coordinate
functionals {cn}, then {hn} is an absolute basis in F and {cn} is an absolute
basis in the space F ′
β.
For a proof, see [237, § 21.10].
It is known (Wojty´nski [572]) that if in
a Fr´echet space with a Schauder basis every such basis is absolute, then this
space is nuclear.
It was unknown for a long time whether there exist nuclear
Fr´echet spaces without Schauder bases. The first example of such a space was
constructed by Mityagin and Zobin [582]. Later their construction was simpli-
fied (see [237, § 21.10]).
About bases in Fr´echet spaces, see Dragilev [134],
Dragilev, Chalov [135], Korobeinik [290], Dubinsky [138], [139], Taskinen [519],
Valdivia [546], and Vogt [555], [556].

3.12. Complements and exercises
221
3.12(viii). Minimal spaces and powers of the real line
A Hausdorff topological vector space E is called minimal if it has no strictly
weaker Hausdorff vector topology. Similarly in the category of locally convex
spaces one defines minimal locally convex spaces. Below we consider only Haus-
dorff spaces.
3.12.39. Example. Any power of the real line IRT is minimal.
PROOF. Suppose that a Hausdorff locally convex topology τ on IR∞is ma-
jorized by the product topology. In order to show the coincidence of these topolo-
gies, it suffices to establish the continuity in the topology τ of all coordinate
functionals ln(x) = xn. In other words, we have to prove the following fact of
the infinite-dimensional linear algebra: if the linear space IR∞
0 generated by all ln
contains a linear subspace L separating points in IR∞, then L = IR∞
0 . Suppose
that this is false. Then, there exists a nonzero functional l on IR∞
0 vanishing on L.
As any functional on IR∞
0 , l is given by a sequence (yn) ∈IR∞. Hence yn = 0,
since L separates points. The obtained contradiction means that L = IR∞
0 . The
general case follows from the proven fact. Indeed, if T is uncountable, then it
also suffices to verify the continuity of the coordinate functionals lt : x →x(t)
in every Hausdorff locally convex topology τ on IRT . If the set T0 of all t ∈T
such that the functionals lt are discontinuous in τ is nonempty, then it is infinite
(otherwise already on IRn we obtain a separated locally convex topology different
from the standard one), hence we can pass to a countable part of T0 and apply the
proven fact.
□
As we shall see below, there are no other minimal locally convex spaces.
3.12.40. Lemma. A locally convex space is minimal precisely when all its
one-to-one continuous linear mappings onto locally convex space are homeomor-
phisms. A similar assertion is true in the class of topological vector spaces.
PROOF. Let E be minimal and let T : E →F be a continuous one-to-one
linear mapping onto a locally convex space F. If T −1 is not continuous, then the
collection of seminorms of the form q◦T, where q ∈Q and Q is some collection of
seminorms defining the topology of F, generates in E a Hausdorff locally convex
topology that is majorized by the original topology. Hence this topology coincides
with the original one, which gives the continuity of the operator T −1.
Conversely, let E be not minimal, i.e., on E there is a strictly weaker Haus-
dorff locally convex topology τ. Then the identity mapping from E to (E, τ)
cannot be a homeomorphism. A similar reasoning applies in the category of topo-
logical vector space.
□
3.12.41. Proposition. Let E be a Hausdorff topological vector space.
(i) If E is minimal, then E is complete.
(ii) If E is minimal, then every closed vector subspace in E is minimal.
(iii) If F is a closed linear subspace in E and G is a minimal vector subspace
in E such that F ∩G = 0, then F + G is closed and its topology coincides with
the topology of the direct sum of F and G.

222
Chapter 3. Duality
PROOF. (i) Let E be the completion of E. Suppose that there is v ∈E\E.
Let L = IR1v. We obtain a continuous linear operator of the canonical projection
P : E →E/L, which is injective on E. By the minimality of E this operator
gives a topological isomorphism between E and P(E). However, taking a net
{vα} in E converging to v, we obtain the net {Pvα} in P(E) converging to zero,
which means convergence to zero of the net {vα}, hence we obtain a contradiction.
(ii) If a closed subspace F in E is not minimal, then on F there is a strictly
weaker vector topology s, by using which one can equip E with the following
vector topology τ: a base of neighborhoods of zero in this topology is formed by
the sets U + V , where U is a neighborhood of zero in E in the original topology
and V is a neighborhood of zero in F in the topology s. It is readily verified that
we have obtained a separated vector topology the restriction of which to F is s;
thus, τ is strictly weaker than the original topology, contrary to its minimality.
(iii) Let P : E →E/F be the canonical projection. Then P(G) is a minimal
subspace in E/F, hence by assertion (i) it is complete, hence is closed. Hence
G + F = P −1
P(G)

is closed in E.
Let Q be the canonical projection of
F + G onto (F + G)/F and let q be the restriction of Q to G.
Then q is
continuous, injective, surjective and linear. By the minimality of G the operator q
is an isomorphism.
□
3.12.42. Theorem. (i) The minimal real Hausdorff locally convex space are
precisely the powers of IR1.
(ii) Every closed linear subspace in IRT is isomorphic to some IRS.
(iii) If a linear subspace of a Hausdorff locally convex space is minimal, then
it is complemented.
PROOF. (i) We know that any power of IR1 is a minimal space. By the pre-
vious theorem a minimal real Hausdorff locally convex space E with the weak
topology w is complete. The algebraic dual space to E′ is isomorphic to IRT ,
where T is the index set for a Hamel basis {ft} in E′.
The natural embed-
ding (E, w) →(E′)∗is linear and continuous, hence by the minimality of E
it must be a topological isomorphism between (E, w) and E with the topology
from σ

(E′)∗, E′
. Since (E, w) is complete (as noted above) and E is dense in
(E′)∗with the indicated topology, we obtain that E = (E′)∗, i.e., E is isomorphic
to IRT . Assertion (ii) follows from (i) and the previous theorem.
(iii) Suppose that a linear subspace F in a Hausdorff locally convex space
E is minimal. We know that F is isomorphic to IRT for some nonempty set T.
For every t ∈T, the functional x →x(t) on F obtained from this isomorphism
extends to a continuous linear functional ft on E by the Hahn–Banach theorem.
The mapping P : E →F = IRT , x →

ft(x)

t∈T is linear and continuous, on F
it coincides with the identity operator. Hence G = P −1(0) is a closed subspace
in E algebraically complementing F.
Applying assertion (iii) of the previous
theorem, we complete the proof.
□
3.12.43.
Corollary. If a locally convex space E is complete in the weak
topology σ(E, E′), then it is minimal and isomorphic to a power of the real line.

3.12. Complements and exercises
223
PROOF. Let Λ = E′ and let T : E →IRΛ be the embedding defined by
the formula Tx(λ) = λ(x). As it follows from the definition of the weak topo-
logy σ(E, E′), this embedding is a topological isomorphism. By the completeness
of E the subspace T(E) is closed in IRΛ.
Indeed, if a net {Txα} converges
to y ∈IRΛ, then the net {xα} is Cauchy in the topology σ(E, E′) and hence
converges weakly to some element x ∈E, which gives y = Tx. It remains to
apply Proposition 3.12.41(ii).
□
3.12.44. Theorem. For any infinite-dimensional Fr´echet space F the follow-
ing conditions are equivalent:
(i) there are no continuous norms on F;
(ii) there is a closed linear subspace in F isomorphic to the space IR∞;
(iii) there is a complemented closed linear subspace in F isomorphic to IR∞.
PROOF. It is clear that (ii) implies (i), since there are no continuous norms
on IR∞(Exercise 1.12.72).
Suppose that (i) is true. Let us take an increasing sequence of seminorms pn
defining the topology of F. We can assume that p−1
n (0) ̸= F and the set p−1
n+1(0) is
strictly contained in p−1
n (0). Choose vectors hn ∈p−1
n (0)\p−1
n+1(0). We observe
that for every real sequence {xn} the series 	∞
n=1 xnhn converges in F, since
pk(hn) = 0 whenever n ⩾k. Thus, we have a linear mapping T : IR∞→F,
(xn) →	∞
n=1 xnhn. This mapping is continuous by the continuity of all finite
sums. In addition, it is obviously injective. It follows from Theorem 3.12.42 that T
is a homeomorphism between IR∞and T(IR∞). Finally, T(IR∞) is closed, since
if a sequence of vectors yn = Tvn converges in IR∞to y, then it is fundamental,
hence by the continuity of T −1 the sequence {vn} is Cauchy as well. Therefore,
vn →v in IR∞, whence y = Tv. Thus, we have proved (ii), but actually also (iii)
is proved, since identifying IR∞with a subspace in F we can extend the coordinate
functionals to elements un ∈F ′, which gives a mapping P : x →	∞
n=1 un(x)hn.
This mapping is continuous and is a projection on IR∞.
□
3.12.45. Theorem. (Eidelheit [152]) Let F be a nonnormable Fr´echet space.
Then there exists a continuous linear surjection of the space F onto IR∞.
PROOF. Let us take a sequence of seminorms pn on F defining the topology
such that pn ⩽pn+1, but pn+1 is not estimated by Cpn (the latter is possible,
because the topology of F is not defined by a single norm). Let us take a nonzero
functional f1 ∈F ′ for which f1 ⩽p1. We observe that the space E′
n of all
linear functionals on F continuous with respect to the seminorm pn (i.e., admitting
estimates |f| ⩽const pn) is strictly contained in E′
n+1. Hence we can construct
a sequence of functionals fn+1 ∈E′
n+1\E′
n. It is clear that fn+1 ∈F ′ and the
function fn+1 is unbounded on the set {pn ⩽1}.
We show that the mapping T : x →

fn(x)

n⩾1, which is linear and contin-
uous, maps F onto the whole IR∞. Let us fix {yn} ∈IR∞. By induction we
construct vectors xn ∈F with the following properties:
1) f1(x1) = 1, fn(xn) = zn −	n−1
i=1 fn(xi), n > 1;
2) xn ∈
n−1
i=1 f −1
i
(0) ∩{x: pn−1(x) ⩽2−n}, n > 1.

224
Chapter 3. Duality
Let us take a vector x1 ∈F such that f1(x1) = 1. Since the function f2 is
not bounded on the set {x: p1(x) ⩽2−1} and its kernel does not coincide with
the kernel of f1 (otherwise f2 would have the form cf1), there exists a vector
x2 in f −1
1 (0) ∩{x: p1(x) ⩽2−1} for which f1(x2) = z2 −f2(x1). Suppose
that x1, . . . , xn with the indicated properties are already chosen. The function
fn+1 is not bounded on the set {x: pn(x) ⩽2−n−1} and does not vanish on
the intersection of the kernels f1, . . . , fn (otherwise fn+1 would be their linear
combination). It is readily seen that it is not bounded on the absolutely convex set

n
i=1 f −1
i
(0)∩{x: pn(x) ⩽2−n−1} and assumes on it all real values. Hence this
set contains a vector xn+1 for which fn+1(xn+1) = zn+1 −	n
i=1 fn+1(xi). We
now observe that the series 	∞
n=1 xn converges in F, since for any fixed k we
have pk(xm) ⩽pm(xm) ⩽2−m−1 for all m ⩾k. For the sum x of this series we
obtain fk(x) = zk for all k, since fk(xn) = 0 if n ⩾k+1, fk(x1 +· · ·+xk) = zk
by our construction of the vectors xn.
□
Certainly, this result does not assert that any nonnormable Fr´echet space is
isomorphic to IR∞(which is obviously false even for separable spaces). See also
Moscatelli [353].
Exercises
3.12.46.◦Let E be a locally convex space. The Arens topology κ(E′, E) is the topology
in E′ a base of neighborhoods of zero in which are the polars of absolutely convex compacts
in E. Show that this topology is locally convex and σ(E′, E) ⩽κ(E′, E) ⩽τ(E′, E),
but it can be strictly weaker than the Mackey topology τ(E′, E).
3.12.47. Prove that the completion of any Hausdorff barrelled space is barrelled.
3.12.48.◦Give an example of a pointwise convergent sequence in C[0, 1] that is not
uniformly bounded (so does not converge weakly).
3.12.49. Show that on the unit sphere in a Hilbert space the weak topology coincides
with the norm topology, although this is not true for the ball.
3.12.50.◦Give an example of a weakly compact set in a Banach space that is not
metrizable in the weak topology.
3.12.51. Prove that a Banach space is reflexive if it is the union of a countable collec-
tion of weakly compact sets.
HINT: apply Baire’s theorem.
3.12.52. Let E be an infinite-dimensional separable Hausdorff locally convex space.
Prove that there exist sequences {xn} ⊂E and {fn} ⊂E′ such that fn(xk) = δnk and
the linear span of {xn} is dense in the space E.
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, p. 44].
3.12.53. Let E be a vector space and let E∗be the space of all linear functions
on E.
Prove that the Mackey topology τ(E, E∗) coincides with the strongest locally
convex topology on E and that E is barrelled in this topology. Show that if E is infinite-
dimensional, then τ(E, E∗) ̸= σ(E, E∗).
HINT: see Edwards [150, subsection 8.3.7].

3.12. Complements and exercises
225
3.12.54. Let E be a Hausdorff quasi-complete bornological locally convex space.
Then for the coincidence of the topologies σ(E′, E) and τ(E′, E) in E′, it is necessary
and sufficient that the topology of E be its strongest locally convex topology.
HINT: show that every bounded subset of E is fnite-dimensional.
3.12.55. Show that the space lim
←−Kj described in Remark 2.4.10 is not barrelled.
3.12.56.◦Show that the space l1 with the norm from l2 is not barrelled, although is
bornological.
3.12.57. Show that a Hausdorff locally convex space with a countable algebraic basis is
barrelled precisely when its topology coincides with the strongest locally convex topology.
HINT: it follows by Theorem 1.11.16 that the given space E has a Hamel basis such
{en} that the coefficients of the expansion x = 	
n xnen are continuous linear functionals.
Let E be equipped with its strongest locally convex topology. We show that it is barrelled
by verifying that each pointwise bounded set F ⊂E′ is equicontinuous. For each n we
have cn = supf∈F |f(en)| < ∞. The seminorm p(x) = 	
n cn|xn| is continuous in
the strongest locally convex topology and |f(x)| ⩽p(x) for all f ∈F, which yields the
equicontinuity. Conversely, let E be barrelled. In order to verify that the original topology is
the strongest locally convex one, it suffices to show that each seminorm q(x) = 	
n αn|xn|
is continuous. Let F be the set of all functionals of the form f(x) = ε1α1x1+· · ·+εnα1xn,
where εi ∈{−1, 1}. This set is pointwise bounded, hence there is a continuous seminorm
q0 such that supf∈F |f(x)| ⩽q0. Then q(x) ⩽q0(x), hence q is continuous.
3.12.58. Show that a vector subspace of countable codimension in a barrelled space is
itself barrelled.
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, Theorem 4.3.6].
3.12.59. Show that in any barrelled space the closed linear subspace of countable
codimension is complemented.
HINT: see Wilansky [567, p. 222].
3.12.60. (i) Let us equip the space IR[0,1] with the box topology τ0, a base of which
are all possible products of open sets in the factors (this topology is not vector, see Exer-
cise 2.10.26). Show that the subspace X ⊂IR[0,1] of all functions that are nonzero only
on finite sets equipped with the topology τ0 is a complete locally convex space that is not
barrelled. To this end, observe that the topology in X is given by the seminorms of the
form pψ(x) = supt |ψ(t)x(t)|, where ψ is a positive function; consider the following set:
A =

x ∈X : 	
t |x(t)| ⩽1

.
(ii) Show that in X with the topology τ0 the family of bounded sets is the same as in
the strongest locally convex topology on X and that (X, τ0) is not infrabarrelled.
(iii) Show that the strong dual to X is not complete.
3.12.61. Construct an example of a closed linear subspace in a barrelled space that is
not barrelled.
HINT: use the space X from Exercise 2.10.51 and the fact that every locally convex
space is isomorphic to a subspace in the product of Banach spaces, which follows from
Corollary 2.2.5, bearing in mind that any product of Banach spaces is barrelled.
3.12.62. Show that every Hausdorff locally convex space E is isomorphic to a closed
linear subspace in some barrelled space.
HINT: take a basis V of absolutely convex closed neighborhoods of zero in E, for
every V ∈V take the Banach space E(V ) obtained by factorizing and completing the space

226
Chapter 3. Duality
E with the seminorm pV (the Minkowski functional of V ); embed E into the barrelled
space F = 
V ∈V E(V ), take a Hamel basis {eα} in the algebraic complement of E in F
and for every α consider the hyperplane Hα in F obtained as the linear span of E and all
eβ with β ̸= α. Finally, observe that the space E is isomorphic to a closed subspace in the
space 
α Hα, which is barrelled by the barrelledness of all Hα.
3.12.63. Let m0 be the linear span in l∞of all sequences of zeros and ones. Then m0
with the norm from l∞is barrelled, but its closed subspace m0 ∩c0 is not barrelled.
HINT: for proving the barrelledness of m0 one has to verify boundedness of every
σ(Λ, m0)-bounded set B in Λ = (l∞)′; identifying Λ with the space of additive measures
of bounded variation on IN, this can be easily deduced from the Phillips lemma, according
to which for any sequence of bounded additive set functions mn on the σ-algebra of all
subsets of IN such that lim
n→∞mn(A) = 0 for each A ⊂IN, one has lim
n→∞∥mn∥= 0, where
∥μn∥is the total variation (see Bogachev [65, Lemma 4.7.41]); in order to see that the
normed space m0 ∩c0 consisting of finite sequences is not barrelled, it suffices to verify
that the set A =

(xn): |xn| ⩽1/n

is a barrel.
3.12.64. Give an example of a bounded absolutely convex set A in a Banach space
for which the normed space EA is barrelled, but is not complete.
HINT: take a barrelled incomplete normed space, for example, a non-closed hyperplane
in a Banach space.
3.12.65. (Antosik, Burzyk [18]) Let E be a locally convex space such that all sequen-
tially continuous seminorms on E are continuous and every sequence converging to zero
contains a subsequence of vectors the series of which converges. Prove that E is barrelled
and bornological. Cf. Exercise 3.12.70.
3.12.66. Show that the space of all real functions on the interval [0, 1] each of which
vanishes outside of some countable set, equipped with the topology of pointwise conver-
gence, is ultrabornological.
3.12.67. Suppose that a topological vector space E has a dense linear subspace that is
Baire. Show that E itself is Baire.
HINT: suppose that E0 is a dense Baire linear subspace and E = ∪∞
n=1An, where the
sets An are nowhere dense. One can take them closed. Since E0 is Baire, there is n such
that An ∩E0 contains U ∩E0 for some open set U in E. Then An is dense in U. Indeed,
let u ∈U and let V be a neighborhood of zero. Since the subspace E0 is dense, there is a
vector y ∈E0 ∩(x + V ) ∩U. Then y ∈An.
3.12.68. Suppose that a Baire topological vector space is covered by a sequence of
vector subspaces. Prove that at least one of them is Baire and everywhere dense.
3.12.69. Deduce from the previous exercise that in every infinite-dimensional Baire
topological vector space there is a proper Baire everywhere dense vector subspace.
3.12.70. Let E be a metrizable topological vector space such that, for every sequence
{xn} converging to zero in E, there exists a subsequence {xnk} for which the series of xnk
converges. Prove that E is Baire.
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, p. 20].
3.12.71. Let E be a Baire topological vector space, A, B ⊂E, and let U, V ⊂E
be open sets such that U ∩V ̸= ∅, U\A and V \B are first category sets. Prove that
A ∩B ̸= ∅.

3.12. Complements and exercises
227
3.12.72. Show that any sequentially closed hyperplane in a bornological space is
closed.
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, Proposition 6.2.15].
3.12.73. Show that any subspace of finite codimension in a bornological space is
bornological.
HINT: see [385, Corollary 6.3.4]; for countable codimension this is false (Dierolf,
Lurje [119]).
3.12.74. Show that a Hausdorff locally convex space E is bornological precisely when
for every locally convex space F all linear mappings from E to F bounded on compact
sets are continuous.
3.12.75. Let E be a sequentially complete locally convex space. (i) Show that every
barrel in E absorbs every absolutely convex bounded set. (ii) Show that if E infrabarrelled,
then it is barrelled.
HINT: apply Theorem 2.5.7.
3.12.76. Show that on l∞with the topology τ(l∞, l1) all sequentially continuous
linear functionals are continuous, although this space is not bornological.
HINT: l∞with the topology τ(l∞, l1) is not bornological since its dual is l1, but
the Banach dual of l∞contains a functional L not belonging to l1, and this functional is
bounded on τ(l∞, l1)-bounded sets (which are norm bounded sets by the Banach–Steinhaus
theorem). Any sequentially continuous functional F in the topology τ(l∞, l1) is continuous
in this topology, i.e., is generated by an element of l1. This follows from the fact that for
every x = (xn) ∈l∞the vectors xn = (x1, . . . , xn, 0, 0, . . .) converge to x in τ(l∞, l1).
The latter follows from the property of l1 that weakly compact sets are norm compact.
3.12.77. Let A: E →G be a continuous linear mapping of separated locally convex
spaces and let A∗∗: E′′ →G′′ be the operator adjoint to A∗: G′ →E′, where G′ and E′
are equipped with the strong topologies β(G′, G) and β(E′, E). Show that the restriction
of A∗∗to E coincides with A.
3.12.78. Suppose that A and B are bounded operators in a Hilbert space H such that
|(Ax, Bx)| ⩽k∥Ax∥∥Bx∥for all x some k < 1. Prove that the operator ranges satisfy
the equality (A∗+ B∗)(H) = A∗(H) + B∗(H).
HINT: see Edwards [150, Exercise 8.37, p. 613].
3.12.79. (The James space [231]) Let J be the linear subspace in c0 consisting of all
elements with finite norm
∥x∥J := sup

(xj2 −xj1)2 + · · · + (xj2m −xj2m−1)2 + (xj2m+1)21/2,
where sup is taken over all finite sets of indices 1 ⩽j1 < j2 < · · · < j2m+1. Prove
that the space J under the canonical embedding into J′′ is of codimension 1 and hence is
nonreflexive, but is linearly isometric to J′′. Deduce from this that J cannot be isomorphic
to X⊕X for a Banach space X. In particular, J is not isomorphic to J ⊕J.
3.12.80. (The Goldstine theorem) Let X be a normed space, let UX and UX′′ be the
closed unit balls in X and X′′, respectively, and let J : X →X′′ be the canonical embed-
ding. Prove that the set J(UX ) is everywhere dense in UX′′ in the topology σ(X′′, X′).
Hence J(X) is everywhere dense in X′′ in the topology σ(X′′, X′).
HINT: see Bogachev, Smolyanov [72, Theorem 6.7.6] or Day [109, Chapter II, § 5,
Theorem 4].

228
Chapter 3. Duality
3.12.81. Let E be a Banach space. Show by example that the unit ball UE′′ in E′′
can contain elements that are not limits of sequences from the unit ball UE in E in the
weak topology σ(E′′, E′), although by the Goldstine theorem the ball UE is always dense
in UE′′ in this topology.
HINT: consider the space E = l1 with E′ = l∞and use the fact that weakly funda-
mental sequences in l1 are norm convergent.
3.12.82. (i) Let X be a normed space and let τ be some locally convex topology
on X intermediate between the weak topology and the norm topology. Show that if a
linear mapping A: X →X is continuous as a mapping from (X, τ) to (X, τ), then it is a
bounded operator.
(ii) Show that the assertion converse to (i) is not always true, by constructing a unitary
operator A in a Hilbert space H that is discontinuous as a mapping from (H, τ) to (H, τ)
for some locally convex topology on H intermediate between the weak topology and the
norm topology.
HINT: (i) follows from the proof of Theorem 3.2.9. In (ii) we can take H = L2(IR1)
and the Fourier transform for A, defining the topology τ by adding to the seminorms of
the weak topology x →|(x, y)| one more seminorm p(x) := ∥I[0,1]x∥. On the subspace
H0 of functions with support in [0, 1], for no C > 0 and y1, . . . , yn ∈L2(IR1), the
estimate p(Ax) ⩽C[p(x)+|(x, y1)|+· · ·+|(x, yn)|] can be valid, since p(x) = 0 on H0,
p(Ax) > 0 for nonzero x ∈H0, because Ax is an analytic function, and for x one can take
a function orthogonal to y1, . . . , yn.
3.12.83. (Bogachev, Smolyanov [71]) Let f be a measurable function on IR1 such that
the linear subspace L := {ϕ ∈D(IR1): fϕ ∈L1(IR1)} is of finite codimension. Prove
that there exists a generalized function F ∈D′(IR1) acting on ϕ ∈L as the integral of fϕ.
HINT: considering separately f + and f −, we can assume that f ⩾0; let us set
fn = min(f, n) and let E be the set of all ϕ ∈D(IR1) for which there exists a finite limit
l(ϕ) of the integrals of fnϕ as n →∞; then E is a linear subspace of finite codimension,
since L ⊂E. Observe that the intersections E ∩Dm are Borel sets in Dm; apply to them
Corollary 3.12.11, which gives their closedness and the continuity of l.
3.12.84. Let X be an infinite-dimensional normed space. Let us consider the topology
bw∗on X′ (related to Corollary 3.8.14) defined as follows: a set is bw∗-closed in X′ if its
intersection with each closed ball is closed in the weak-∗topology.
(i) Prove that the topology bw∗is strictly stronger than the topology σ(X′, X) and
strictly weaker than the norm topology, and if X is Banach, then it is not defined by a
metric.
(ii) Give an example of a locally convex topology τ on X′ such that it does not
majorize σ(X′, X), but on all bounded sets induces the same topology as σ(X∗, X) (hence
the same as bw∗); for this purpose consider c′
0 with the topology σ(c′
0, L), where L is the
space of finite sequences.
(iii) Let X, Y be Banach spaces and T ∈L(X, Y ). Prove that the operator T is
compact precisely when the operator T ∗is continuous from the topology bw∗on Y ′ to the
norm topology on X′.
HINT: see Megginson [338, § 2.7, § 3.4].
3.12.85. Suppose that a Banach space E is continuously embedded into the space of all
real functions on [0, 1] with the topology of pointwise convergence and contains C∞[0, 1].
Prove that E contains Ck[0, 1] for some k.

3.12. Complements and exercises
229
3.12.86. Let X and Y be Hausdorff topological spaces and let a mapping f : X →Y
have a closed graph. Prove that, for every compact set K ⊂Y , the set f −1(K) is closed
in X and that, for every open set U ⊂Y , the set f −1(K) ∩f −1(U) is open in f −1(K).
3.12.87. Let E and F be locally convex spaces such that E is Souslin and F is Baire,
and let T : E →F be a continuous linear surjection. Show that T is an open mapping,
i.e., takes open sets to open sets.
HINT: reduce to the case of an injective mapping and consider the graph of the inverse
mapping (see also P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, p. 27]).
3.12.88. Let E be a complete metrizable topological vector space and let F be a Baire
topological vector space. Prove that every continuous linear surjection T : E →F is open.
3.12.89. (i) (The Grothendieck theorem) Let E be a Hausdorff topological vector space
over IR. Suppose that for every n ∈IN we are given a continuous linear mapping Tn from
a complete metrizable topological vector space En to E, and that E = ∞
n=1 Tn(En).
Then every continuous linear surjection of the space E onto a Fr´echet space is open.
(ii) Every continuous linear surjection T of a Souslin locally convex space E onto a
Fr´echet space F is open. In particular, this yields (i) for separable Fr´echet spaces En.
HINT: (ii) observe that the quotient space E0 = E/Ker T is Souslin (as the projection
of E) and apply Theorem 3.9.6 to the mapping from F to E0 generated by T.
3.12.90. (The Raikov–Pt´ak theorem) Suppose that E and F are Hausdorff locally
convex spaces such that E is a quasi-complete space in which the closedness of a set
follows from the closedness of its intersections with all absolutely convex compact sets
and F is the union of an increasing sequence of absolutely convex compact sets. Then
every linear mapping T : E →F with a closed graph is continuous.
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, Theorem 8.3.59].
3.12.91. Let E be a Hausdorff locally convex space such that all linear mappings
from E to Banach spaces with sequentially closed graphs are continuous. Prove that E is
barrelled.
3.12.92. (i) (McIntosh [337]) Let E and F be Mackey spaces such that E is sequen-
tially complete, E′
β is complete, and F is semireflexive. Then, for the continuity of a linear
operator T : E →F with a closed graph, it is sufficient that either F be Souslin or F be
an inductive limit of a sequence of fully complete spaces.
(ii) (Kalton [256]) The closed graph theorem is also true if E is a Mackey space
with sequentially complete

E′, σ(E′, E)

and F is separable and Br-complete (see also
Wilansky [567, p. 203]).
3.12.93. Suppose that E and F are reflexive Fr´echet spaces, L: F ′ →E′ is a linear
mapping the graph of which is sequentially closed in F ′×E′ with respect to the product of
the strong topologies. Show that L is continuous with respect to the strong topologies.
HINT: apply Exercise 3.12.123; see Edwards [150, Subsection 8.4.19].
3.12.94. Let X be a nonreflexive Banach space such that X′ is separable. Show that
the identity mapping of X′ from the topology τ(X′, X) to the norm topology has a closed
graph, but is discontinuous.
3.12.95. Let (X, ∥· ∥) be an infinite-dimensional Banach space. Prove that there is a
norm q on X such that q(x) ⩽∥x∥, but X is not complete with this norm.
HINT: consider first the case of separable X and use an injective operator from X to
l2 with a dense range not equal to l2.

230
Chapter 3. Duality
3.12.96. Let E be a vector space over IR or C and let E∗be its algebraic dual. Equip
E with the topology σ(E, E∗).
(i) Prove that bounded sets in this topology are finite-dimensional and that all linear
subspaces are closed.
(ii) Prove that if E is infinite-dimensional, then the completion of

E, σ(E, E∗)

contains a compact set not contained in the closure of any bounded set in E.
(iii) Prove that τ(E, E∗) is the strongest locally convex topology in E and that
τ(E∗, E) coincides with σ(E∗, E).
HINT: see Bourbaki [87, Chapitre IV, § 1, Exercice 11, p. 60, § 2, Exercice 6, p. 80]
(in the English translation TVS IV.48).
3.12.97. Let F = IR∞
0
be the space of finite sequences with the topology σ(F, l1).
Show that in this topology all convex compact sets are finite-dimensional, but there exist
infinite-dimensional nonconvex compact sets. Deduce from this that σ(l1, F) = τ(l1, F)
and τ(l1, F) does not coincide with the topology of convergence on weakly compact sets
in the space F.
3.12.98. Let E be an infinite-dimensional metrizable locally convex space over IR.
Prove that the topologies σ(E, E′) and τ(E, E′) in E coincide i and only if E is isomorphic
to an everywhere dense subspace in IR∞.
HINT: the latter is sufficient for the equality σ(E, E′) = τ(E, E′) since the weak
topology of IR∞is metrizable, hence is the Mackey topology. Conversely, if σ(E, E′)
coincides with τ(E, E′), then these topologies coincide with the metrizable original topol-
ogy. Therefore, there is a countable family of functionals fn ∈E′ for which the sets
{x: |fi(x)| < 1/k, i = 1, . . . , n} form a topology base of at zero. It follows that E′
equals the linear span of {fn}, hence it has a countable Hamel basis {gi}. The map-
ping x →

gi(x)
∞
i=1 to IR∞has a dense range and establishes a linear homeomorphism
between E and its image.
3.12.99. Let F be a separable Fr´echet space and let W ⊂F ′ be a convex set. Prove
that W is closed in the topology σ(F ′, F) precisely when W contains the limits of all
sequences in W converging in the topology σ(F ′, F).
HINT: use the Krein–ˇSmulian theorem and that the polar of any neighborhood of zero
in F is metrizable in the topology σ(F ′, F), since F is separable.
3.12.100. Let E be a locally convex space such that every convex set absorbing all
bounded sets contains a neighborhood of zero. Prove that the strong dual to E is complete.
In particular, this is true if E is metrizable.
HINT: given a net of functionals fα ∈E′ Cauchy in the topology β(E′, E), verify
that its pointwise limit f has the property that the set f −1(−1, 1) absorbes bounded sets.
3.12.101. Prove that a quasi-complete Hausdorff locally convex space is semireflexive
precisely when every closed separable subspace in it is semireflexive.
HINT: use Theorem 3.7.4 and Corollary 3.4.6.
3.12.102. Prove that if a quasi-complete Hausdorff locally convex space is not semire-
flexive, then it contains two convex closed bounded sets the convex envelope of the union
of which is not closed.
HINT: see Bourbaki [87, Chapitre IV, § 3, Exercice 9, p. 93].
3.12.103. Let E be a metrizable locally convex space with the strong dual E′
β.
(i) Prove that

E′′, β(E′′, E′)

is a complete metrizable locally convex space.

3.12. Complements and exercises
231
(ii) Let E′
β be separable. Prove that E is separable and E′ is barrelled and bornological
in the strong topology.
HINT: (i) see Schaefer [436, Chapter IV, § 6.5, Corollary 2, § 6, Theorem 6.6]; (ii)
see [436, Chapter IV, § 6, Theorem 6.6, Corollary 2].
3.12.104. Let X be a Banach space and let U be its closed unit ball.
(i) Let F1 and F2 be two linear subspaces in X′ everywhere dense in the weak topol-
ogy σ(X′, X). Prove that the topologies σ(X, F1) and σ(X, F2) induce on U the same
topology precisely when F1 and F2 have equal norm closures. In particular, the restriction
of σ(X, F1) to U coincides with the restriction of σ(X, X′) to U precisely when F1 is
norm dense in X′.
(ii) Show that every point in U has a countable fundamental system of neighborhoods
in the topology σ(X, X′) on U only in the case where X′ is norm separable.
(iii) Suppose that a linear subspace F ⊂X′ is everywhere dense in the topology
σ(X′, X) and let G be the linear subspace in X′ generated by the closure of the set
F ∩{x′ ∈X′ : ∥x′∥⩽1} in the topology σ(X′, X). Prove that G = X′ precisely when
the indicated closure contains a ball of positive radius with respect to the norm in X′.
HINT: see Bourbaki [87, Chapitre IV, § 5, p. 121] (or TVS IV.55 in the English
translation).
3.12.105. Suppose that E is a locally convex space such that E′ is separable in the
topology σ(E′, E). Prove that if z ∈(E′)∗\E and F is the linear space generated by E
and z, then E′ is separable also in the topology σ(E′, F).
HINT: see Floret [171, p. 22].
3.12.106. In the subspace E of the space IRIR formed by all functions with finite
or countable supports consider the subset A formed by the indicator functions of at most
countable sets. Show that A is sequentially compact, but the closure of A is noncompact.
3.12.107. Prove that in a uniform space every bounding set is precompact.
3.12.108. Prove that on a pseudocompact space every continuous function attains its
maximum.
3.12.109. Show that in any quasi-complete locally convex space all pseudocompact
sets are relatively compact.
3.12.110. Prove that every pseudocompact normal space is countably compact.
3.12.111. Show that there is a locally convex space having a subset that is pseudo-
compact and closed in the weak topology, but not weakly countably compact. Deduce from
this that there are locally convex spaces that are not normal in the weak topology.
3.12.112. Show that a set in a locally convex space is precompact precisely when it
is bounded and the induced uniform structure on it coincides with the uniform structure
induced by the weak topology.
HINT: see Edwards [150, Proposition 9.1.2].
3.12.113. Let E be a Hausdorff locally convex space such that E′ is separable in the
topology σ(E′, E) and let A ⊂E be a set such that every infinite sequence of its elements
has a weak limit point in E. Show that the weak closure of A is metrizable in the weak
topology σ(E, E′).
HINT: passing to a completion, one can assume that E is complete; by Eberlein’s
theorem the closure of A in the topology σ(E, E′) is compact; use a countable set {fn}
dense in

E′, σ(E′, E)

to define a metric on this closure generating the topology σ(E, E′).

232
Chapter 3. Duality
3.12.114. Let E be a separable locally convex space and let F ⊂E′ be a set such
that every infinite sequence of its elements has a limit point in E′ in the strong topology
β(E′, E). Prove that every sequence in F contains a subsequence converging in β(E′, E).
3.12.115. Let μ be a measure such that the space L1(μ) is separable. Prove that the
space L∞(μ) with the topology σ

L∞(μ), L1(μ)

is angelic (see definition on p. 218).
3.12.116. Let A: H →H be a nuclear operator on a separable Hilbert space H.
Prove that for every infinite-dimensional separable Banach space X there exist continuous
linear operators T : H →X and S : X →H such that A = ST.
HINT: use the following fact (see Lindenstrauss, Tzafriri [318, p. 44]): there is a
biorthogonal sequence {xn} ⊂X, {fn} ⊂X′ (i.e., fi(xj) = δij) for which the linear span
of {xn} is dense in X, the linear span of {fn} is dense in X′ with the topology σ(X′, X),
∥xn∥= 1, supn ∥fn∥< ∞; Ah = 	∞
n=1 αn(h, en)ϕn, where {en} and {ϕn} are
orthonormal bases in H, λn ⩾0, 	∞
n=1 λn < ∞. Finally, set Th = 	∞
n=1 λ1/2
n (h, en)xn
and Sx = 	∞
n=1 λ1/2
n fn(x)ϕn.
3.12.117. (Schreier [439]) Prove that there is a sequence of continuous functions fn
on [0, 1] with the following properties: 0 ⩽fn ⩽1, lim
n→∞fn(x) = 0 for each x ∈[0, 1],
but there is no increasing sequence of indices nk such that

fn1(x)+ · · ·+fnk(x)

/nk →0
for all x.
3.12.118. (i) Let U be the closed unit ball in c0 and let L be the closed subspace in
c0 consisting of all sequences x = (xn) for which 	∞
n=1 2−nxn = 0. Prove that the set
U + (U ∩L) is not closed.
(ii) Let U be the closed unit ball in C[0, 1]. Prove that in C[0, 1] there exist closed
linear subspaces L1 and L2 such that the set (U ∩L1) + (U ∩L2) is not closed.
3.12.119. A vector space E is equipped with two topologies each of which makes it a
Fr´echet space such that there is a collection of linear functions on E separating points and
continuous in both topologies. Prove that these topologies coincide by applying the closed
graph theorem.
3.12.120. Let E be a locally convex space and let B ⊂E be a bounded set such that
its polar B◦is separable in the strong topology in E′. Prove that B is separable in the
original topology.
3.12.121. Let E and F be locally convex spaces, let T : E →F be a linear mapping,
and let T ∗be its algebraic adjoint. Consider the following conditions: (1) T is continuous;
(2) T is bounded; (3) T ∗(F ′) ⊂E′.
Prove that (1) implies (2) and (3) and that (3) implies (2). Deduce from this that for a
bornological space E all the three conditions are equivalent.
3.12.122. Let E be a Fr´echet space that is not semireflexive. Prove that E in E′′ is a
countable union of nowhere dense sets.
HINT: otherwise the embedding E →E′′ is surjective by the open mapping theorem.
3.12.123. Let {Uα} be a base of absolutely convex neighborhoods of zero in a locally
convex space E, Wα = U ◦
α, and let Xα be the Banach space obtained by equipping
the linear span of Wα by the norm pWα (the gauge function of Wα). Introduce in E′
the topology λ of the inductive limit of Banach spaces Xα with respect to the natural
embeddings Xα →E′.
(i) Show that the strong topology β(E′, E) is majorized by the topology λ.

3.12. Complements and exercises
233
(ii) Show that if E is infrabarrelled, then β(E′, E) and λ have the same bounded sets.
(iii) Show that if E is infrabarrelled, then λ = β(E′, E) precisely when E′ is
bornological with the topology β(E′, E).
(iv) Show that if E′ with the topology β(E′, E) is barrelled and has a base of
β(E′, E)-closed neighborhoods of zero in the topology λ, then λ = β(E′, E).
(v) Show that E′ with the topology β(E′, E) is barrelled precisely when E is distin-
guished, i.e., every σ(E′′, E′)-bounded set in E′′ is contained in the σ(E′′, E′)-closure of
some bounded set in E.
(vi) Let F be a Fr´echet space. Show that F is distinguished precisely when we have
λ = β(F ′, F). In this case

F ′, β(F ′, F)

is an inductive limit of an increasing sequence
of Banach spaces. For example, this is true if F is reflexive.
HINT: see Edwards [150, § 8.4, p. 511, 512].
3.12.124. The topological dual F ′ to a Fr´echet space F is fully complete in every
locally convex topology between the Arens topology κ(F ′, F) and the Mackey topol-
ogy τ(F ′, F).
HINT: see Edwards [150, Proposition 8.10.7, p. 540].
3.12.125. Let F be a reflexive Fr´echet space. Show that F ′ is fully complete in the
strong topology and that every strongly closed linear subspace in F ′ is Br-complete in the
induced topology.
3.12.126. Let E be a separable Banach space. Prove the equivalence of the following
two assertions:
(i) every weakly compact set in E is compact;
(ii) if xn →0 in the topology σ(E, E′) and fn →0 in the topology σ(E′, E), then
one has fn(xn) →0.
An example of a space in which these assertions are true is l1, but in l2 they are false.
See also Exercises 3.12.151 and 4.10.53.
3.12.127. Let E be a Banach space such that E′ is norm separable. Prove that there
exist two sequences {xn} ⊂E and {fn} ⊂E′ such that xn →0 in the topology σ(E, E′),
fn →0 in the topology σ(E′, E), but fn(xn) = 1. The separability of E′ is important,
since for E = l1 there are no such sequences.
HINT: let {gn} be a norm dense sequence in E′. For each n there is a vector xn ∈E
with ∥xn∥= 1 and g1(xn) = · · · = gn(xn) = 0. Then xn →0 in σ(E, E′). Indeed,
let f ∈E′ and ε > 0. There is k such that ∥f −gk∥< ε. For all n ⩾k we have
|f(xn)| = |f(xn) −gk(xn)| < ε. Next, by the separability of E′ the space E is also
separable and contains a dense sequence {yi}. For each n take in > n such that xin does
not belong to the linear span En of y1, . . . , yn. By the Hahn–Banach theorem there is
fn ∈E′ such that ∥fn∥= 1, fn|En = 0, fn(xin) = 1. Then {fn} and {xin} are required
sequences. For l1 such sequences do not exist since weak convergence to zero implies norm
convergence.
3.12.128. Let X be a Banach space. Prove that every reflexive closed subspace in X′
is closed in the topology σ(X′, X).
HINT: verify the closedness in the indicated topology of all closed balls in this sub-
space.
3.12.129. Let E be a complete metrizable topological vector space and let C be a
closed cone (i.e., C is convex and λC ⊂C for all numbers λ ⩾0) such that E = C −C.
Prove that if a linear function f on E is nonnegative on C, then f is continuous.

234
Chapter 3. Duality
HINT: take a quasi-norm p defining the topology such that (E, p) is complete and
p(tx) ⩽p(x) if |t| ⩽1. Set
q(x) = inf{p(x1) + p(x2): x = x1 −x2, x1, x2 ∈C}.
Then q is a quasi-norm and p ⩽q. Moreover, p = q on C. It is not difficult to verify
that (E, q) is complete, whence it follows that q defines the same topology. Finally, f is
continuous on (E, q). Indeed, otherwise there are xn such that q(xn) →0 and f(xn) ⩾1.
Hence one can find zn ∈C with 	∞
n=1 p(zn) ⩽1 and f(zn) ⩾1. Since (E, p) is
complete, the series of zn converges to some z ∈E. Since C is a convex closed cone,
z ∈C and 	∞
n=N+1 zn ∈C for all N. By assumption f ⩾0 on C, hence we have the
bound f(z) ⩾f(z1 + · · · + zN) ⩾N, which is impossible.
3.12.130. Prove that in every infinite-dimensional Banach space there exist two closed
linear subspaces X1 and X2 such that X1 ∩X2 = 0 and X1 + X2 is not closed.
HINT: see P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385, p. 48].
3.12.131. Prove that if a locally convex space E is sequentially complete, then all
σ(E′, E)-bounded sets are strongly bounded.
HINT: apply Proposition 2.5.1 and Theorem 3.5.4.
3.12.132. Let E and F be two locally convex spaces such that E is sequentially
complete.
Show that if a family T ⊂L(E, F) is pointwise bounded, then, for every
bounded set B ⊂E, the set {Tx: T ∈T , x ∈B} is bounded in F. In particular, every
weakly bounded set in E′ is strongly bounded (Exercise 3.12.131).
HINT: see Exercise 3.12.131 or Edwards [150, Theorem 7.4.4].
3.12.133. Let X and Y be Banach spaces and let A: X →Y be a continuous linear
operator such that A(X) be dense in Y . Then A(X) = Y precisely when A∗∗(X′′) = Y ′′.
HINT: see Edwards [150, Corollary 8.7.4].
3.12.134. (A. Grothendieck) Let μ be a probability measure, let V ⊂L∞(μ) be a
convex set, and let f ∈L∞(μ) belong to the closure of V in the topology σ(L∞, L1).
Prove that there is a sequence {fn}⊂V such that fn →f in Lp(μ) for all p∈[1, +∞).
Prove that if V is bounded, then the converse is also true. Observe also that one can
take {fn} converging to f almost everywhere.
HINT: see Edwards [150, Example 8.3.6, p. 506, Exercises 8.5, 8.6, 8.7, p. 608],
Grothendieck [207, p. 67].
3.12.135. Let E be a strict inductive limit of a sequence of metrizable locally convex
spaces. Prove that there exists a weaker metrizable locally convex topology on E, hence
for E the conclusion of Theorem 3.4.7 is true.
3.12.136. Let E be a metrizable locally convex space, let G be a locally complete
locally convex space, let L ⊂E be an everywhere dense linear subspace, and let A: L→G
be a continuous linear mapping. Prove that A extends to a continuous linear mapping of E
to G.
HINT: extend A to a continuous linear operator 
A from E to the completion G of the
space G; then 
Ax ∈G for all x ∈E. Indeed, we can take xn ∈L such that xn →x,
then take numbers Cn →+∞for which Cn(xn −x) →0 in E (which is possible by the
metrizability of E). Then Cn 
A(xn −x) →0 in G, hence pB
 
A(xn −x)

→0, where B is
the closed absolutely convex hull of { 
A(xn −x)} in G. Therefore, the sequence {Axn} is
Cauchy with respect to the norm pC, where C = B ∩G is a closed disc in G. By the local
completeness of G there is a limit y ∈G of this sequence with respect to the norm pC;
then Axn →y in G, whence y = Ax ∈G.

3.12. Complements and exercises
235
3.12.137. Let Et be locally convex spaces and E = 
t Et, E0 =  
t Et. Then for
the Mackey topologies the following equalities hold:
τ(E, E′) =
"
t
τ(Et, E′
t), τ(E′, E) =
!
t
τ(E′
t, Et),
τ(E0, E′
0) =
!
t
τ(Et, E′
t), τ(E′
0, E0) =
"
t
τ(E′
t, Et).
HINT: see Schaefer [436, § IV.4].
3.12.138. (i) Let E be the inductive limit of locally convex spaces Eα with mappings
hα : Eα →E; assume that E is separated. Then E′ as a vector space can be identified
with the projective limit of the spaces E′
α with mappings h∗
α : E′ →E′
α.
(ii) If in (i) every space Eα is equipped with the topology of convergence on some
class Aα of bounded sets covering Eα, then the topology of the projective limit of the
spaces E′
α is the topology of convergence in E′ on the class A of all sets of the form
hα1(A1) ∪· · · ∪hαn(An), where Ai ∈Aαi. Hence if the projective limit of the spaces
E′
α is a Mackey space, then it coincides with the projective limit of

E′
α, τ(E′
α, Eα)

.
For example, if E is the strict inductive limit of increasing Mackey spaces En such
that En is closed in En+1 (or if E is the inductive limit of such spaces with compact
embeddings), then the Mackey topology τ(E′, E) is the projective limit of the spaces

E′
n, τ(E′
n, En)

, since every absolutely convex weakly compact set in E is contained and
weakly compact in some of En (and conversely).
(iii) The space E′ with the strong topology β(E′, E) need not be the projective limit
of

E′
α, β(E′
α, Eα)

.
HINT: (i), (ii) see Robertson, Robertson [420, Chapter V, § 4, Proposition 15, p. 85],
Schaefer [436, § IV.4]; (iii) see Kelley, Namioka [270, p. 196].
3.12.139. (i) Let E be the projective limit of locally convex spaces Eα with mappings
hα : E →Eα. Assume that E is separated. Then E′ as a vector space can be identified
with the inductive limit of the spaces E′
α with mappings h∗
α : E′
α →E′.
(ii) The inductive limit of

E′
α, τ(E′
α, Eα)

is

E′, τ(E′, E)

.
(iii) The space E′ with the strong topology β(E′, E) need not be the inductive of limit
of

E′
α, β(E′
α, Eα)

.
HINT: (i), (ii) see Robertson, Robertson [420, p. 85], Schaefer [436, § IV.4]; (iii) see
Kelley, Namioka [270, p. 221].
3.12.140. (i) Let E be a locally convex space and let E′ be equipped with the topology
of convergence on some class A of bounded sets covering E. Let $
E′
A denote the completion
of E′ in this topology. Show that the topologies σ(E, E′) and σ(E, $
E′
A) coincide on all
sets in A.
(ii) Deduce from this that if we equip E′ with the Mackey topology τ(E′, E), then
the topology of the completion will be τ(#
E′τ, E).
(iii) Show that if E is a Hausdorff bornological space and every compact set is con-
tained in some set from the class A, then E′ with the topology of convergence on A is
complete.
3.12.141. Use Proposition 3.8.7 to show that if E is a locally convex space and E′
is equipped with the strong topology β(E′, E), then the topology of its completion #
E′
β is
exactly β( #
E′
β, E).
3.12.142. Show that any infinite-dimensional Banach space with its strongest locally
convex topology is complete, but not Br-complete.

236
Chapter 3. Duality
3.12.143. Let E be a locally convex space such that its dual space E′ is the union of
increasing convex sets An. Prove that every bounded linear functional f on E is contained
in some set nA∗
n, where A∗
n is the closure of An in the algebraic dual space E∗with the
topology σ(E∗, E).
HINT: increasing convex sets An ∩(−An) also cover E′; so we can assume that
An = −An; if f ̸∈nA∗
n, then there exists xn ∈E such that f(xn) = 1, |g(xn)| < 1
for all g ∈nA∗
n, whence f(nxn) = n, which contradicts the boundedness of f by the
boundedness of the sequence {nxn}. The latter follows from the fact that for every l ∈E′
we have l ∈Bn for all n ⩾nl, then |l(nxn)| = |nl(xn)| < 1, since nl ∈nA∗
n if n ⩾nl.
3.12.144. Let E be the completion of a locally convex space E. Suppose that every
sequence in

E′, σ(E′, E)

Mackey converging to zero is equicontinuous. Prove that every
element in E is a bounded linear functional on

E′, σ(E′, E)

.
3.12.145. (i) Suppose that a barrelled space E is the union of an increasing sequence
of its absolutely convex closed subsets An and that the completion of E is a Baire space
(say, E is metrizable). Prove that there exists An with a nonempty interior.
(ii) Suppose that a locally convex space E is the union of an increasing sequence of
its convex subsets An. Suppose that every sequence in

E′, σ(E′, E)

Mackey converging
to zero is equicontinuous. Prove that the completion of E is the union of the completions
of An.
(iii) Suppose that a Mackey space E is the union of an increasing sequence of its con-
vex complete subsets An. Suppose that E′ is locally complete. Prove that E is complete.
HINT: see Valdivia [543, Chapter 1, § 3].
3.12.146. (Collins [104]) Let us consider the strongest locally convex topology τ
on the space E = l2. Let us equip the space E∗= (E, τ)′ with the topology T from
Theorem 3.8.13. Show that it is not locally convex.
HINT: E′ is T-closed in E∗; if the topology T is locally convex, then it agrees with
the duality between E and E∗, which follows from the completeness of (E, τ); then E′
is closed in the topology σ(E∗, E), which is impossible, since E′ is dense in E∗in this
topology.
3.12.147. Let E be a metrizable locally convex space and let E′
β be its dual with the
strong topology.
(i) Show that if E′
β is metrizable, then E is normable. (ii) Give an example of a
Fr´echet space E for which E′
β is not barrelled (take C∞(IR) ∩L1(IR)). (iii) Prove that if
a sequence of convex neighborhoods of zero Vn in E′
β has the property that V = 
∞
n=1 Vn
absorbs strongly bounded sets, then V is a neighborhood of zero. (iv) Show that every
countable bounded set in the second strong dual E′′ is equicontinuous.
(v) Prove that
the second strong dual E′′ is a Fr´echet space and is sequentially complete in the topo-
logy σ(E′′, E′′′). (vi) Show that E′
β is barrelled precisely when it is quasi-barrelled and
that this is also equivalent to the property that it is bornological. (vii) Show that if E is a
reflexive Fr´echet space, then E′
β is bornological. In addition, if E′
β is separable, then it is
bornological.
HINT: see Schaefer [436, § IV.6, 6.5, 6.6], Bierstedt, Bonet [54].
3.12.148. Let T : X →Y be a continuous linear surjection of complete metrizable
topological vector spaces. Prove that for every compact set K ⊂Y there exists a compact
set S ⊂X such that T(S) = K.
HINT: apply Exercise 1.12.84 and the fact that T generates an isomorphism between
Y and X/Ker T.

3.12. Complements and exercises
237
3.12.149. Following Grothendieck, a locally convex space E is called a (DF)-space
if it possesses a fundamental sequence of bounded sets Bn (so that every bounded set is
contained in some Bn) and every strongly bounded countable union of equicontinuous sets
in E′ is equicontinuous.
(i) Show that this class of spaces contains the strong duals to metrizable spaces, normed
spaces, and quasi-barrelled spaces with fundamental sequences of bounded sets.
(ii) Show that a convex set V in a (DF)-space is a neighborhood of zero precisely
when for every absolutely convex bounded set B the intersection B ∩V is a neighborhood
of zero in B.
HINT: see Schaefer [436, § IV.6, 6.7].
3.12.150. (Grothendieck [205, Theorem 9]) Let E be the inductive limit of a sequence
of normed spaces Ei with respect to mappings gi : Ei →E. Then every bounded set in E
is contained in the closed convex hull of finitely many images of balls in Ei.
More generally, let Ei be a (DF)-space. Then E is also a (DF)-space, the strong
topology in E′ is the topology of uniform convergence on sets of the form gi(Bi), where
Bi is bounded in Ei, and every bounded set in E is contained in the closed convex hull of
finitely many such sets.
3.12.151. (I.M. Gelfand [189]) Let X be a separable Banach space. Prove that a set A
in X is totally bounded precisely when every sequence of functionals fn ∈X′ pointwise
converging to zero converges uniformly on A.
HINT: show first that A is bounded; next, assuming that A is contained in the unit ball,
suppose that there is a sequence of elements ai ∈A with ∥ai −aj∥⩾r > 0 for i ̸= j, take
a dense countable set {xn} in the unit ball and pick functionals fn ∈X′ and numbers in
for which fn(xi) = 0 for i = 1, . . . , n, fn(ain) = 1, ∥fn∥⩽2/r; to this end observe that
for every finite-dimensional subspace L there exists an index in with dist (ain, L) ⩾r/2.
See also Exercise 4.10.53.
3.12.152. Suppose that a sequence of continuous functions fn on a Baire space con-
verges pointwise. Prove that it is uniformly bounded on some nonempty open set.
3.12.153. Let E be a complete locally convex space and let {ai,n}, {an}, {bi} be its
countable subsets such that lim
n→∞ai,n = bi in the weak topology for all i, lim
i→∞ai,n = an
in the original topology uniformly in n. Prove that there exists an element a ∈E such that
lim
n→∞an = a in the weak topology and lim
i→∞bi = a in the original topology.
HINT: see Edwards [150, § 6.8, Lemma 1, p. 454].
3.12.154. (i) Let E be a barrelled space. Prove that E′ with the strong topology
β(E′, E) is quasi-complete.
(ii) Let E be a barrelled space, let F be a Hausdorff quasi-complete space, and let
B be some class of bounded sets covering E. Prove that the space LB(E, F) of continuous
linear mappings from E to F with the topology of uniform convergence on B is Hausdorff
and quasi-complete. In particular,

E′, σ(E′, E)

is quasi-complete; for example, this is
true if E is a Fr´echet space.
HINT: see Definition 3.5.1 or Bourbaki [87, Chapter III, § 3.8, Chapter III, §.3.2] and
Schaefer [436, Chapter IV, § 6].
3.12.155. Let E be a locally convex space and let τ0 be a locally convex topol-
ogy on E′ such that (E′, τ0)′ ⊂E. Prove that τ0 is majorized by the Mackey topol-
ogy τ(E′, E).

238
Chapter 3. Duality
3.12.156. Let E and F be two metrizable topological vector spaces and let E be
barrelled. Prove that every bilinear mapping Ψ: E×F →G to a locally convex space G
that is continuous in every variable separately is continuous.
HINT: see Schaefer [436, Chapter III, § 5.1, p. 88].
3.12.157. Let E and F be two Fr´echet spaces and let E be nuclear. Prove that every
separately continuous bilinear function on E′
β×F ′
β is continuous.
HINT: see Schaefer [436, Chapter IV, Section 9.9].
3.12.158. Deduced from Theorem 3.12.17 the following Dieudonn´e–ˇSmulian theorem:
a weakly closed set A in a quasi-complete locally convex space is weakly compact precisely
when for every sequence of closed convex sets Cn such that all sets A ∩C1 ∩· · · ∩Cn are
nonempty, the intersection of A with 
∞
n=1 Cn is also nonempty.
HINT: see Bourbaki [87, Chapitre IV, § 2, Exercice 16].
3.12.159. A Montel space is a Hausdorff barrelled space E such that every bounded
set in E is contained in a compact set.
(i) Prove that IR∞, D(IRn), S(IRn), and the space H(U) of holomorphic functions
on an open set U ⊂C1 with the topology of uniform convergence on compact sets are
Montel spaces.
(ii) Prove that every Montel space E is reflexive and E′ with the strong topology
β(E′, E) is also Montel.
(iii) (Dieudonn´e [128]) Every Montel Fr´echet space is separable.
HINT: (ii) see Schaefer [436, Chapter IV, § 5.6, p. 145, § 5.9, p. 147]; (iii) see K¨othe
[292, p. 370].
3.12.160. A Hausdorff locally convex space E is called a Schwartz space if in this
space for every absolutely convex neighborhood of zero U there exists an absolutely convex
neighborhood of zero V that is a totally bounded set with respect to the seminorm pU.
(i) Show that in any Schwartz space every bounded set is totally bounded. (ii) Show that
a complete quasi-barrelled Schwartz space is Montel. (iii) There exists a Montel Fr´echet
space that is not a Schwartz space.
HINT: see Meise, Vogt [339, p. 286, 338].
3.12.161. (Bonet, Lindstr¨om, Valdivia [77]) Let F be a Fr´echet space. (i) F is Montel
if and only if every sequence in F ′ converging to zero in the topology σ(F ′, F) converges
in the topology β(F ′, F) (for the case of separable F, see K¨othe [292, p. 370]). (ii) F is
a Schwartz space precisely when every sequence in F ′ converging to zero in the topology
σ(F ′, F) converges uniformly on some neighborhood of zero in F. (iii) The space F does
not contain a copy of l1 precisely when convergence of a sequence of functionals in the
Mackey topology τ(F ′, F) implies convergence in the strong topology β(F ′, F).
3.12.162. (Grothendieck [205, p. 84]) Let E be a metrizable locally convex space.
Then every bounded separable set A in its completion E is contained in the closure in E of
some bounded set from E. This assertion is false without the assumption about separability
of A (Dieudonn´e [129], Amemiya [15], K¨othe [292, v. 1, p. 404]).
3.12.163. (Dieudonn´e [129]) Under the assumption of the continuum hypothesis there
exists a nonseparable metrizable locally convex space in which all bounded sets are sepa-
rable.
3.12.164. Show that the product of the countable power of the real line and the count-
able sum of the real lines is hypercomplete, but is not a Krein–ˇSmulian space.

3.12. Complements and exercises
239
3.12.165. Prove that in the strong dual to the strict inductive limit of a sequence of
metrizable locally convex spaces there is a web (see Definition on p. 196).
3.12.166. Show that the class of webbed spaces (in the category of locally convex
spaces as well as in the category of topological vector spaces) is closed with respect to
the following operations: (i) passage to sequentially closed subspaces, (ii) passage to sep-
arated images under sequentially continuous linear mappings, (iii) countable products and
countable direct sums, (iv) projective limits of countable sequences, (v) separated inductive
limits of countable sequences.
HINT: see Jarchow [237, § 5.4].
3.12.167. Prove that a topological vector space is complete metrizable precisely when
it is Baire and has a web.
HINT: see Jarchow [237, § 5.4, Theorem 4].
3.12.168.◦Show that eigenvectors corresponding to different eigenvalues of a linear
mapping in a linear space are linearly independent.
3.12.169. Let E be a Baire topological vector space and let F be a topological vector
space. Show that every pointwise bounded family of continuous linear operators from E to
F is equicontinuous.
3.12.170. (Drewnowski [137]) Let K be a compact set in a topological vector space X
such that its closed absolutely convex hull abs conv K is compact and contained in the
linear span of K. If a linear mapping T from X to a topological vector space Y has a
continuous restriction to K, then its restriction to abs conv K is continuous as well.
3.12.171. (Drewnowski [137]) A resolution of a set A is its cover by subsets Aα
indexed by elements α ∈IN∞and satisfying the following condition: if α ⩽β coordi-
natewise, then Aα ⊂Aβ. Let X be a complete metrizable topological vector space with
some resolution {Xα}. If a linear mapping T from X to a topological vector space Y has
a continuous restriction to every set Xα, then T is continuous.
3.12.172. Let E be a locally convex space and let a set A in E′ be bounded in the
topology σ(E′, E). Give an example in which A is not bounded in β(E′, E).
HINT: consider the space l2
0 of finite sequences with the norm from l2 and the func-
tionals ln(x) = nxn.
3.12.173. Let V be a closed convex set without inner points in a Hausdorff locally
convex space E such that the convex hull of A and the zero element has inner points. Show
that V is contained in a closed hyperplane.
HINT: Valdivia [543, p. 18].
3.12.174. Show that every infinite-dimensional Baire topological vector space contains
an everywhere dense linear subspace that is not Baire.
HINT: take a Hamel basis Γ, pick its countable part {vn}, consider the linear span of
Γ\{vn} and v1, . . . , vn.
3.12.175. Let E = l∞
0
be the subspace of finite sequences with the norm from l∞,
E′ = l1, S = {nln}∪{0}, ln(x) = xn. Show that S is compact in the topology σ(E′, E),
but S◦is not a neighborhood of zero in the topology τ(E, E′), since S◦◦is not compact
in σ(E′, E).
3.12.176. (i) (Grothendieck [205]) There exists a reflexive (even Montel) Fr´echet space
possessing a quotient isomorphic to the space l1.

240
Chapter 3. Duality
(ii) (Valdivia [545]) Let F be a Fr´echet space. All its quotients are reflexive precisely
when F is isomorphic to a closed subspace in a countable product of reflexive Banach
spaces.
3.12.177. (Kadec, Kadec [243]) Let F be a Fr´echet space and let p be a continuous
norm on F such that every continuous linear functional bounded on U = {p ⩽1} attains
its maximum on U. Then F is a Banach space.
3.12.178. (i) (Smolyanov [478]) There is a locally convex space of countable algebraic
dimension that is not nuclear, but has the property that all bounded sets in it are finite-
dimensional. (ii) (Gutnik [213]) There is a complete locally convex space not containing
the direct sum of countably many one-dimensional spaces such that all its bounded subsets
are finite-dimensional. In addition, there exists a locally convex Mackey space in which all
bounded sets are finite-dimensional, but its completion has no such a property.
3.12.179. (Raikov [403]) Let F be a nuclear countably normed Fr´echet space (see
Example 2.2.8) the topology of which is defined by an increasing sequence of compatible
norms pn, and let fn ∈F ′ be such that 	∞
n=1 |fn(x)| < ∞for all x. Then there exists
m such that 	∞
n=1 ∥fn∥m < ∞, where ∥f∥m = sup{|f(x)|: pn(x) ⩽1}. This property
of series was considered in Gelfand, Kostyuchenko [192] and Gelfand [190] (in [190] this
property of series is given as the definition of nuclear spaces attributed to Grothendieck,
although he used another definition).
3.12.180. (Retakh [416]) Let X and Y be locally convex spaces and let A ∈L(X, Y )
be a surjective operator. Suppose that the space K = A−1(0) is metrizable in the induced
topology and that for every neighborhood of zero U ⊂K there exists a neighborhood of
zero V ⊂K with the property that for every neighborhood of zero W and every ε > 0
there is α > 0 for which V ⊂εU + αW. Then A∗(Y ′) = X′. In particular, this is true
if X is a metrizable Schwartz space, which reinforces the result of Grothendieck obtained
in [205].
3.12.181. Let X and Y be Fr´echet spaces and T ∈L(X, Y ). Then the closedness of
T(X) is equivalent to the closedness of T ∗(Y ′) in the topology σ(X′, X), and if X and
Y are Banach spaces, then in the norm of X′.
HINT: see Schaefer [436, Chapter IV, Theorem 7.7, p. 160], Bogachev, Smolyanov
[72, p. 291].
3.12.182. (Shkarin [454]) Let F be a Fr´echet space, {fn} ⊂F ′, and let L be the
linear span of {fn}. The following conditions are equivalent:
(i) for arbitrary real numbers cn there is a vector x ∈F with fn(x) = cn for all n;
(ii) for every sequence of real numbers cn > 0 there exists a vector x ∈F with
fn(x) ̸= 0 and |fn+1(x)/fn(x)| ⩾cn for all n;
(iii) the sequence {fn} is linearly independent and there are no linearly independent
sequence {gn} in the subspace L and a sequence of real numbers mn > 0 such that
supn |gn(x)|/an < ∞for all x;
(iv) the topology in F can be defined by an increasing sequence of seminorms pn such
that every functional fn is continuous with respect to the seminorm pn+1, i.e., satisfies the
estimate |fn| ⩽Cnpn+1, but is discontinuous with respect to pn;
(v) the sequence {fn} is linearly independent and every functional f ∈F ′ vanishing
on 
∞
n=1 f −1
n (0) belongs to L.
3.12.183. (Valdivia [542]) Suppose that a Hausdorff locally convex space E is the
strict inductive limit of an increasing sequence of its closed linear subspaces En. Then the
following is true.

3.12. Complements and exercises
241
(i) If a linear subspace L ⊂E has the property that all intersections L∩En are weakly
complete, then L is the inductive limit of L ∩En and is complementable, i.e., there is a
closed linear subspace K such that E is a direct topological sum of L and K.
(ii) There is a complementable closed subspace in E isomorphic to the direct countable
topological sum of one-dimensional subspaces.
(iii) If an absolutely convex set A has the property that all intersections A ∩En are
weakly complete, then A is closed. As a corollary we obtain that the product of IR∞and
the direct countable sum of the real lines is hypercomplete. See also Exercise 3.12.164.
3.12.184. Show that an infinite-dimensional Banach space cannot be covered by a
sequence of balls with radii tending to zero.
3.12.185. Prove that every weakly fundamental sequence in l1 converges in the norm.
Deduce from this the norm compactness of weakly compact sets in l1. Does the weak
topology in l1 coincide with the norm topology on the unit ball?
3.12.186. Show that every continuous linear operator T : l2 →l1 is compact.
HINT: use that the closed unit ball U in l2 is weakly compact, hence T(U) is weakly
compact in l1, apply the previous exercise.
3.12.187. Prove that every continuous linear operator T : c0 →l2 is compact, hence
there is no continuous linear surjection from c0 onto l2.
HINT: apply the previous exercise to the adjoint operator from l2 to l1.
3.12.188. Prove that there exists a continuous linear surjection T : C[0, 1] →L2[0, 1].
HINT: H = L2[0, 1] is isomorphic to a closed linear subspace in L1[0, 1] (take the
closure of the linear span of a sequence of independent standard Gaussian random vari-
ables); hence H is isomorphic to a closed linear subspace in C[0, 1]′; this subspace is
closed in the topology σ

C[0, 1]′, C[0, 1]

by Exercise 3.12.128; take the operator dual to
this embedding.
3.12.189. Prove that every Lindel¨of regular topological space is normal.
HINT: see Engelking [154, Lemma 1.5.14 and Theorem 3.8.2].
3.12.190. Show that there exists a Banach space that is not Lindel¨of in the weak
topology. Consider l∞.
3.12.191. Let K be a convex compact set in a topological vector space E such that
there is a sequence {fn} ⊂E′ separating points in K. Prove that K is affine homeomor-
phic to a convex compact set in l2.
HINT: take x →

fn(x)
∞
n=1, where fn ∈E′, supK |fn(x)| ⩽n−1.
3.12.192. (Grothendieck’s theorem, see Floret [171, p. 15]) Let V be a convex and
complete set in a locally convex space E. A set A ⊂V has σ(E, E′)-compact closure
precisely when it is bounded and for every equicontinuous set S ⊂E′ the equality
lim
m→∞lim
n→∞fm(xn) = lim
n→∞lim
m→∞fm(xn)
holds for all sequences {xn} ⊂A and {fm} ⊂S such that both limits exist.
3.12.193. Let E be an infinite-dimensional locally convex space and let W = {f >0},
where f ∈E′, f ̸= 0. Prove that there exists a homeomorphism h: W ∪{0} →E such
that h(x) = x whenever f(x) ⩾1.
HINT: see Bessaga, Pelczy´nski [52, p. 114].

242
Chapter 3. Duality
3.12.194. (Smolyanov [476]) Suppose that a topological vector space E is the union of
a strictly increasing sequence of its linear subspaces En and that every sequence converging
in E is contained in some of En. Then E contains a set A such that not all its limit points
are limits of sequences of points in A.
3.12.195. (Mankiewicz [333]) Every LF-space (the inductive limit of an increasing
sequence of Fr´echet spaces) is homeomorphic to one of the following spaces:
(i) IR(∞) (the inductive limit of IRn),
(ii) l2(κ) for some cardinality κ,
(iii) l2(κ)×IR(∞) for some infinite cardinality κ,
(iv)  ∞
i=1 l2(κi) for some strictly increasing sequence of infinite cardinality κi.
See also Banakh, Repovˇs [40], Sakai [427].
3.12.196. (Corson [108], Haydon [217]) Suppose that K is a convex compact set in
a Hausdorff locally convex space such that the set of its extreme points is the image of a
separable metric space under a continuous mapping. Then K is metrizable.
3.12.197. (Schl¨uchtermann, Wheeler [437]) An infinite-dimensional Banach space
with the weak topology is not a k-space.
3.12.198. (Gabriyelyan, K¸akol, Kubzdela, L´opez-Pellicer [182]) Let E be a metrizable
locally convex space. Every bounded subset of E is a Fr´echet-Urysohn space in the weak
topology if and only if every bounded sequence in E has a Cauchy subsequence in the
weak topology.
3.12.199. (Ruess [426]) Let E be a complete locally convex space in which every
bounded set is metrizable. Then E has no closed subspaces linearly homeomorphic to l1 if
and only if every bounded sequence in E has a Cauchy subsequence in the weak topology.
3.12.200. (Gabriyelyan, K¸akol, Plebanek [183]) A Banach space X has no closed
subspaces linearly homeomorphic to l1 if and only if every real sequentially continuous
function on the unit ball with the weak topology is continuous in the weak topology.
3.12.201. (Banakh [38]) (i) The space D′(IR1) is homeomorphic to the countable
power of the inductive limit of the spaces IRn.
(ii) The strong dual to a nuclear LF-space is homeomorphic to one of the spaces IR∞,
IR(∞), IR∞×IR(∞), (IR(∞))∞, and [0, 1]∞×IR(∞).

CHAPTER 4
Differential calculus
The concept of differentiable mapping from a topological vector space to a
topological vector space was worked out relatively recently. In the mid 60s of the
XX century the number of existing definitions of differentiability of mappings of
topological vector spaces was very large and was comparable (if not greater) with
the number of papers devoted to the study of such mappings.
Nevertheless no differential calculus for mappings of such spaces did actually
exist that time, and it seemed natural to expect that no unified differential calcu-
lus for them could exist and that to every definition of differentiability its own
differential calculus must correspond. However, it was soon discovered that the
collection of non-equivalent definitions of (one-fold) differentiability in topolog-
ical vector spaces is quite manageable and can be arranged in a simple scheme.
Moreover, it turned out that there actually exist precisely two types of infinitely
differentiable mappings of locally convex spaces (the same is true also for n > 1
times differentiable mappings if we ignore a possible decrease of the order of
differentiability by one).
It was this discovery that enabled one to construct a unified and in essence
very simple differential calculus for mappings of topological vector spaces. The
basics of this calculus are presented in this chapter.
A key role is played by
differentiability with respect to a system of sets. In this approach two series of de-
finitions of differentiability arise that cover in total all principal known definitions;
each of these series contains precisely one definition of infinite differentiability.
A description of differentiable mappings corresponding to one of these series in-
volves filters (or nets) and the language of the theory of pseudo-topological spaces
(but not this theory itself). A detailed presentation is given in Smolyanov [489],
here we only give some minimal information in § 4.10(vi). In the main part of
the chapter we consider only the results related to the other series of definitions of
differentiability whose description does not require any use of pseudo-topologies.
Nevertheless we observe that the language using concepts of the theory of pseudo-
topological spaces, especially the notion of a filter, is rather flexible and expressive
and is not more difficult than the standard language of the theory of topological
vector spaces (employing the concepts of bounded and open sets and also con-
vergent sequences). At the same time, all proofs using the language of pseudo-
topologies are completely similar to the proofs in the case of the series of defi-
nitions of differentiability in the main text which do not use that language, and,
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
and Their Applications, Springer Monographs in Mathematics,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-57117-1_4
243
V.I. Bogachev and O.G. Smolyanov, Topological Vector Spaces

244
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
with some training, can be obtained by a simple translation from one language to
another (certainly, the meaning of proofs will change in this procedure). Probably,
it is even possible to prove a “meta-theorem” formalizing this.
Throughout this chapter, we assume, if it is not explicitly stated otherwise,
that the field of scalars is the field of real numbers.
If P and Q are two sets, then by F(P, Q) or by QP we denote the set of all
mappings of the set P to the set Q; if Q is a vector space, then we assume that the
set QP is equipped with its natural vector structure. If we are given a topology
τ(P, Q) in F(P, Q), then Fτ(P, Q) will denote the topological space obtained by
equipping F(P, Q) with the topology τ(P, Q). If S is a part of F(P, Q), then Sτ
will denoted the set S with the topology τ(P, Q) restricted to it. Mainly τ(P, Q)
will be the topology of uniform convergence on sets from some class of sets A in
a topological vector space P; then we shall use the notation FA(P, Q).
If P and Q are vector spaces, then Lin(P, Q) will denote the vector space of
all linear mappings from P to Q. If P and Q are topological vector spaces, then
the symbol L(P, Q) will denote the vector space of all continuous linear mappings
from P to Q.
The symbol L(P, Q) denotes the vector space of all sequentially continuous
linear mappings from P to Q and the symbol B(P, Q) will denote the space of
all bounded linear mappings from P to Q. Finally, if A is some class of bounded
sets in P, then LA(P, Q) will denote the class of all linear mappings from E to
F bounded on the sets from A. We shall equip LA(P, Q) with the topology of
uniform convergence on the class A. Thus, B(P, Q) ⊂LA(P, Q).
Note that B(P, Q) ⊃L(P, Q) ⊃L(P, Q) for any topological vector spaces P
and Q; B(P, Q) = L(P, Q) = L(P, Q) if P is a bornological space.
For the space of scalars E = IR we shall usually identify the space L(E, G)
(= L(E, G) = B(E, G)) with the target space G; in this case every linear mapping
f ∈L(E, G) is identified with the element f(1) of the space G such that we have
f(a) = af(1) for all a ∈IR.
4.1. Differentiability with respect to systems of sets
In this section we introduce the series of definitions of differentiability of
mappings of topological vector spaces that does not employ the language of
pseudo-topologies (the approach based on pseudo-topologies will be briefly out-
lined in § 4.10(vi)).
Let E and G be topological vector spaces and let H(E, G) and R(E, G)
be some vector subspaces in the space F(E, G) of all mappings from E to G
satisfying the following conditions:
(C) if U is a neighborhood of zero in E, L ∈H(E, G), r ∈R(E, G) and
L(x) = r(x) for all x ∈U, then L = 0.
Concrete examples of such pairs will be given below. As a trivial example,
note that (C) is fulfilled if R(E, G) consists of the zero element and H(E, G) is
the class of all bounded linear mappings.

4.1. Differentiability with respect to systems of sets
245
4.1.1. Definition. A mapping f of an open set V in a topological vector space
E to a topological vector space G is called HR-differentiable at a point x0 ∈V
if there exist an element of the space H(E, G), called an HR-derivative of the
mapping f at the point x0 and denoted by the symbol f ′(x0), a neighborhood of
zero V0 ⊂E and a mapping r ∈R(E, G), called R-small, such that x0 +V0 ⊂V
and for all h ∈V0 we have
f(x0 + h) −f(x0) = f ′(x0)h + r(h).
(4.1.1)
Thus, the symbols H and R are not shown in the notation for the correspond-
ing derivatives.
The requirements imposed on the pair

H(E, G), R(E, G)

yield that for,
every point a ∈V , any linear combination of mappings that are HR-differentiable
at the point a (and defined on the intersection of the their domains of definition,
so also defined in a neighborhood of a) is also HR-differentiable at a and its
derivative is the corresponding linear combination of the derivatives of the given
mappings. Furthermore, a mapping can have at most one derivative at a given
point and every mapping r ∈R(E, G) is HR-differentiable at the origin with
r′(0) = 0. Certainly, the converse is also true: if a mapping f from E to G is
HR-differentiable at zero and f ′(0) = 0, then f ∈R(E, G).
Thus, the problem of differentiation is a kind of the approximation problem:
the derivative of a mapping at a given point is a mapping from a specific class
approximating the increment of the regarded mapping up to a mapping from some
other class. For defining a differentiation (on a set of mappings between two topo-
logical vector spaces) it suffices to define two spaces of mappings of the first space
to the second: a space of mappings (it is denoted above by the symbol H(E, G))
that will serve as derivatives, and also a space of mappings (denoted by the sym-
bol R(E, G)) that will be considered as “small”. This scheme applies also to
global Sobolev type differentiabilities not discussed here (see Bogachev [66]).
Below, if it is not explicitly stated otherwise, we assume that, given two
topological vector spaces E and G, the space H(E, G) coincides with one of the
operator spaces L(E, G), L(E, G) and B(E, G); sometimes we shall also use the
space LA(E, G). For specifying spaces R(E, G) in this section we use topologies
of uniform convergence on various families of bounded sets in E; these topologies
are introduced in the space F(E, G).
Let σ be some class of bounded subsets of the space E containing all finite
subsets.
4.1.2. Definition. Let n ∈IN. A mapping r from a topological vector space
E to a topological vector space G is called σ-small of order n if for every set
B ∈σ we have r(th)/tn →0 in G uniformly in h ∈B as t →0. A mapping that
is σ-small of the first order will be called σ-small.
The set of all σ-small of order n mappings from E to G will be denoted
by Rn,σ(E, G). Thus, r ∈Rn,σ(E, G) precisely when for every neighborhood of
zero V ⊂G and for every set B ∈σ there exists ε > 0 such that if t ∈(−ε, ε)\{0}
and h ∈B, then t−nr(th) ∈V . The symbol Rσ(E, G) will denote the same
object as the symbol R1,σ(E, G).

246
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
The symbol Fσ(E, G) will denote the space F(E, G) equipped with the topol-
ogy of uniform convergence on the sets of the system σ (if G is Hausdorff and is
of positive dimension, then Fσ(E, G) is a topological vector space precisely when
the family σ contains no infinite sets).
The next proposition is a reformulation of the definition that justifies what has
been said above about defining spaces of small mappings by means of topologies.
Given two vector spaces E1 and E2, a mapping r ∈F(E1, E2), and a number
t ∈IR\{0}, the symbol rt will denote the mapping of E1 to E2 defined by the
equality rt(x) = t−1r(tx) (x ∈E1), and the symbol r0 will denote the zero
mapping of E1 to E2, i.e., r0(x) = 0 for all x ∈E1.
4.1.3. Proposition. A mapping r from a topological vector space E to a
topological vector space G is σ-small if and only if the mapping t →rt from IR
to Fσ(E, G) is continuous at zero.
The next simple proposition will be frequently used below.
4.1.4. Proposition. In order that a mapping r from a topological vector space
E to a topological vector space G be σ-small it is necessary and sufficient that
it satisfy the following condition: whatever be a set A ∈σ, if {an} is a sequence
of its elements and {tn} is a sequence of nonzero numbers converging to zero, we
have t−1
n r(tnan) →0 in the space G as n →∞.
This proposition follows at once from the previous one and the following
assertion.
4.1.5. Proposition. If Q is a topological commutative group, P is a set, and
σ is a system of subsets of the set P, then a sequence of elements gn of the space
Fσ(P, Q) converges in this space to g ∈F(P, Q) precisely when for every set
A ∈σ and every sequence {hn} ⊂A we have gn(hn) −g(hn) →0 in Q.
PROOF. It is clear that convergence of a sequence {gn} in Fσ(P, Q) implies
the property stated above. If a sequence {gn} in Fσ(P, Q) does not converge in
this space, then for every g ∈Fσ(P, Q) there exist a neighborhood of zero V in
Q and a set A ∈σ such that for every n ∈IN there is an element hn ∈A with
gn(hn) −g(hn) /∈V . Thus, gn(hn) −g(hn) ̸→0 in the group Q.
□
Until the end of this section the symbols E and G denote Hausdorff topolog-
ical vector spaces and the symbol σ is used to denote a family of bounded subsets
of the space E containing all finite sets.
If R(E, G) = Rσ(E, G), H(E, G) is one of the three spaces indicated above,
then all requirements on the pair

H(E, G), R(E, G)

are fulfilled (this is verified
directly), so that Definition 4.1.1 applies.
In place of the term the HRσ-derivative (or differentiability) we shall use the
term the Hσ-derivative and same with differentiability. Additional abbreviations
will be used for Lσ- and Lσ-derivatives: the first will be called the σ-derivative
and the second will be called the ¯σ-derivative; similarly the terms σ- and ¯σ-
differentiability will be used.

4.1. Differentiability with respect to systems of sets
247
Let us give a straightforward definition of σ- and ¯σ-differentiability and also
A-differentiability generated by a class A of bounded sets taken for σ when for
the class of operators H(E, G) we take the class LA(E, G) of all linear operators
bounded on the sets in A.
4.1.6. Definition. A mapping f from a nonempty set V ⊂E in G is called
σ-differentiable at a point x0 ∈V if there exist a continuous linear mapping from
E to G, called a σ-derivative of the mapping f at the point x0 and denoted by the
symbol f ′(x0), a neighborhood of zero V0 ⊂E and a σ-small mapping r: E →G
such that x0 + V0 ⊂V and for all h ∈V0 equality (4.1.1) holds.
Similarly we introduce the ¯σ-differentiability and ¯σ-derivatives, but in place
of continuity of f ′(x0) only its sequential continuity is required. If σ = A is some
class of bounded sets and in place of continuity of the derivative we require only
that f ′(x0) ∈LA(E, G), then we obtain 
A-differentiability.
Thus, in order that a mapping f of a subset of E to G be σ-differentiable at
a point x0 ∈V in the sense of this definition it is necessary that this point be
interior; if this is the case, then the mapping f is σ-differentiable at the point x0
precisely when every extension of f to a mapping on all of E is σ-differentiable
at this point; if ¯f is such an extension, then ¯f ′(x0) = f ′(x0). Hence it is natural
to introduce the following less restrictive definition of σ-differentiability.
4.1.7. Definition. Let V ⊂E. A mapping f : V →G is called σ-differentiable
(respectively, ¯σ-differentiable) at a point x0 ∈V if at this point every extension of
this mapping to a mapping of the whole space E is σ-differentiable (respectively,
¯σ-differentiable) in the sense of Definition 4.1.6. In this case the σ-derivative (the
¯σ-derivative) of the mapping f at x0 is defined as the σ-derivative (respectively,
the ¯σ-derivative) at this point of an arbitrary extension of f to all of E.
4.1.8. Remark. If f is differentiable at a point x0 ∈V in the sense of Defi-
nition 4.1.7, then its derivative at this point is defined uniquely (prove this). Note
also that for every inner point x0 in the domain of definition of the function f
Definitions 4.1.6 and 4.1.7 are equivalent; however, a mapping can be differen-
tiable in the sense of Definition 4.1.7 also at a point that is not inner. At the same
time, if E is a locally convex space, τ is its original topology and τ1 is a locally
convex topology in E (different from τ) such that (E, τ)′ = (E, τ1)′, then a real
function g defined on a subset V of E is σ-differentiable at a point x0 ∈V in
the sense of Definition 4.1.7 as a mapping on a subset of the space (E, τ) pre-
cisely when it is σ-differentiable at this point in the sense of the same definition
as a mapping of the space (E, τ1) (why?). If E is an infinite-dimensional normed
space, τ = σ(E, E′), τ1 is the topology in E defined by its norm, V is the unit
ball centered at the origin in E, and f is the restriction to V of a continuous linear
functional on E, then the function f considered as a function on the set V in (E, τ)
turns out to be σ-differentiable at the origin in the sense of Definition 4.1.7, but
not in the sense of Definition 4.1.6 (the ball has no interior in the weak topology).
At the same time f is differentiable both in the sense of Definition 4.1.6 and in
the sense of Definition 4.1.7 as a function on the subset V of the space (E, τ1).

248
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
Below, if it is not explicitly stated otherwise, σ- or ¯σ-differentiability will
mean σ- or ¯σ-differentiability in the sense of Definition 4.1.7. When speaking of
differentiability of functions defined on proper subsets of the space E, where it
becomes necessary in accordance with Definition 4.1.7 to consider extensions of
these functions to all of E, we shall use without additional comments the same
notation for such extensions as for the original functions.
In the next three definitions we consider differentiability on sets (not only at
points), higher derivatives, and the differentiability along subspaces.
4.1.9.
Definition. A mapping f from a subset of E to G is called
σ-differentiable (respectively, ¯σ-differentiable) on a set V if it is σ-differentiable
(respectively, ¯σ-differentiable) at each point x ∈V .
A mapping f ′ : x →f ′(x), V →Lσ(E, G) (respectively, V →Lσ(E, G)) is
called a σ-derivative (respectively, a ¯σ-derivative) of the mapping f on the set V .
Define inductively the spaces Lk
σ(E, G) = Lσ

E, Lk−1
σ
(E, G)

by setting
L1
σ(E, G) = Lσ(E, G), L2
σ(E, G) = Lσ

E, Lσ(E, G)

.
4.1.10. Definition. Let n > 1 and V ⊂E. A mapping f : V →G is called n
times σ-differentiable at a point x0 ∈V if it is n−1 times σ-differentiable on some
set V0 containing x0 and its (n −1)th σ-derivative f (n−1) : V0 →Ln−1
σ
(E, G) is
σ-differentiable at the point x0. In this case the nth σ-derivative of the mapping
f at the point x0 is defined as the first order σ-derivative of the mapping f (n−1)
at this point: f (n)(x0) = (f (n−1))′(x0). The mapping f is called infinitely σ-
differentiable at the point x0 if f is differentiable at this point n times for every n.
Similarly one defines ¯σ- and 
A- derivatives of order n and the respective
n-fold ¯σ- and 
A-differentiability.
Everywhere the difference between ¯σ and σ is concerned with the sequential
continuity of operators in place of the usual continuity.
The symbol A in the notation for differentiability and derivative indicates that
we deal with a certain class A of bounded sets and that linear mappings arising
as derivatives must be bounded on sets in A. If A is the class of all bounded
sets, then these are bounded linear mappings (sequentially continuous operators
are bounded, but not conversely).
We shall always assume that f (0) = f. Suppose now that a topological vector
space E is a vector subspace in some vector space E0 and W is a subset of E0.
4.1.11. Definition. A mapping f : W →G is called n-fold σ-differentiable
at a point x0 along the subspace E, or σE-differentiable, if the mapping fx0 from
the set (W −x0) ∩E to G defined by the equality fx0(x) = f(x0 + x) is n-fold
σ-differentiable at zero. In this case the nth σ-derivative of f at x0 along the
subspace E is defined as the nth σ-derivative of the mapping fx0 at zero; the
nth σ-derivative of the mapping f at the point x0 along the subspace E will be
denoted by f (n)
E (x0).
A mapping f : W →G is called n-fold σ-differentiable on a set W1 ⊂W
along the subspace E (or σE-differentiable) if it is n-fold σ-differentiable at every

4.1. Differentiability with respect to systems of sets
249
point in W1; in this case the mapping
f (n)
E
: x →f (n)
E (x),
W →Ln
σ(E, G)
is called the nth σ-derivative of the mapping f on the set W1 along the sub-
space E. Similarly one defines the n-fold ¯σ-differentiability.
Thus, by our definition, f (n)
E (x0) = (fx0)(n)(0) for each n. In particular, if
E = E0, then the nth σ-derivative of the mapping f along the subspace E coin-
cides with its nth σ-derivative (at the same point) in the sense of Definition 4.1.10;
below in this case we shall use a shorter term and the corresponding notation (i.e.,
f (n) in place of f (n)
E ).
Let σE
ﬁn be the family of all finite subsets of the space E, let σE
b be the family
of all bounded sets, let σc be the family of all compact sets, and let σE
s be the
family of all sets consisting of elements of convergent sequences. If this does
not lead to ambiguity, in place of the symbols σE
b , σE
c , and σE
s we shall use the
symbols σb, σc, and σs, or even b, c, and s. In place of the term σ-differentiability
it is customary to use the term differentiability with respect to the system of sets σ.
For example, b-differentiability is differentiability with respect to the system of all
bounded sets and ¯b-differentiability is its version with the sequential continuity of
derivatives.
The terms σﬁn-differentiability, b-differentiability, c-differentiability, and
s-differentiability will be often replaced by the terms Gˆateaux differentiability,
Fr´echet differentiability, differentiability with respect to the system of compact sets
and sequential differentiability (we emphasize that the latter is not the same as
differentiability with respect to the system of all compact sets if the space is not
metrizable); ¯b-differentiability will be also called bounded differentiability. Similar
conventions are in force for the terms containing the word “derivative”.
In metrizable spaces, c-differentiability coincides with s-differentiability. In
the case of normed (or metrizable) spaces differentiability with respect to the
system of compact sets is called Hadamard differentiability.
It follows from the definition that σb-differentiability yields σﬁn-differentiabi-
lity and the corresponding derivatives coincide. Below the symbol E ⋐E0 means
that E is a vector subspace of the space E0.
In the case of differentiability with respect of a system A of bounded sets in
E it is convenient to introduce inductively defined spaces
Lk := LA(E, Lk−1),
where L0 = G,
with the topology of uniform convergence on A. Let Lk
A(E, G) be the linear space
of k-linear mappings from E to G with the topology of uniform convergence
on the sets of the form A1 ×· · ·×Ak, where Ai ∈A. The space Lk can be
identified with Lk
A(E, G). For example, an element Ψ ∈L2 defines an element
Ψ2 ∈L2
A(E, G) by the formula Ψ2(u, v) = Ψu(v), where the right-hand side is
bounded in u ∈A, v ∈B for all A, B ∈A, which follows from the definition of
the topology in L2. Conversely, every element Ψ2 ∈L2
A(E, G) defines Ψ ∈L2
by the formula Ψu(v) = Ψ2(u, v).

250
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
The A-derivative of order k of a mapping f at a point x will be denoted by
the symbol Dk
Af(x); it can be regarded as a k-linear mapping from Xk to Y .
Then Dk
Af(x) ∈Lk
A(X, Y ).
We recall that a mapping F between normed spaces is Lipschitzian if
∥F(x) −F(y)∥⩽L∥x −y∥,
where L is a constant. For locally Lipschitzian (i.e., Lipschitzian in a neighborhood
of every point) mappings of normed spaces, Gˆateaux and Hadamard differentiabil-
ities coincide.
4.1.12. Theorem. Let X and Y be normed spaces and let F : X →Y be
locally Lipschitzian. If F is Gˆateaux differentiable at a point x, then at this point
F is Hadamard differentiable and the corresponding derivatives coincide.
PROOF. Let K be compact in X and let ε > 0. Let F satisfy the Lipschitz
condition with constant L on the ball B(x, r) with r > 0, let K be contained
in the ball B(0, R), and let M := max(L, R, ∥DF(x)∥). We find a finite ε-net
h1, . . . , hm in K. There is a number δ ∈(0, r/R) such that, whenever |t| < δ, for
every i = 1, . . . , m we have
∥F(x + thi) −F(x) −tDF(x)(hi)∥⩽ε|t|.
Then, whenever |t| < δ, for every h ∈K we obtain
∥F(x + th) −F(x) −tDF(x)(h)∥⩽ε|t| + 2Mε|t|,
since there exists hi with ∥h −hi∥⩽ε, whence
∥F(x + th) −F(x + thi)∥⩽M∥th −thi∥⩽Mε|t|
and ∥tDF(x)h −tDF(x)hi∥⩽Mε|t|. Thus, F is Hadamard differentiable at x.
Clearly, the Hadamard derivative serves as the Gˆateaux derivative, since the latter
is unique.
□
In infinite-dimensional Banach spaces (and many other spaces), Fr´echet dif-
ferentiability is strictly stronger than Hadamard differentiability.
4.1.13. Proposition. Let E be a separable locally convex space in which there
is a bounded sequence {hn} that is not precompact. Then, for every sequence of
nonzero numbers tn →0, there exists a continuous ¯c-differentiable function f
on E (even with a derivative f ′ that is continuous in the topology of convergence
on compact sets in E′) such that f(0) = 0, f ′(0) = 0, but there is no limit of the
sequence f(tnhn)/tn.
PROOF. Applying Exercise 4.10.53 and passing to a subsequence in {hn},
we find an equicontinuous sequence {fn} ⊂E′ pointwise converging to zero such
that fn(hn) = 1, fn(hi) when i < n. This sequence converges to zero uniformly
on compact sets. Choosing a subsequence in {tn}, we can also assume that
|tn|

i=1
|ti|−1 < 4−n sup{|fj(hi)|: i, j ∈IN}.

4.2. Examples
251
Let us take ϕ1, ϕ2 ∈C∞(IR) such that |ϕ1| ⩽1, ϕ1(t) = 1 if |t| ⩽1/4, ϕ1(t) = 0
if |t| ⩾1/2, ϕ2(t) = 0 if |t| ⩽1/2, ϕ2(1) = 1. Set
f(x) =
∞

n=1
(−1)ntnϕ1

f1(x)/t1

· · · ϕ1

fn−1(x)/tn−1

ϕ2

fn(x)/tn

.
By the disjointness of supports of ϕ1 and ϕ2, for every x only one term can be
nonzero; the same is true for the series of the derivatives along any fixed vector h.
For the same reason these series converge uniformly in x. Moreover, for every
compact set K ⊂E, the series of the derivative along h converges uniformly in
x ∈E, h ∈K, which is easily deduced from the indicated conditions on fn, tn.
Thus, we obtain the continuity of f and the continuity of f ′ : E →E′ when E′
is equipped with the topology of convergence on compact sets. Finally, we have
f(0) = 0, f ′(0) = 0, f(tnhn) = (−1)ntn.
□
4.1.14.
Corollary. On every infinite-dimensional separable normed space
there is an Hadamard differentiable function that has no Fr´echet derivative at the
origin.
It should be noted, however, that if a real function f on a Hilbert space X
is everywhere Hadamard differentiable, then its derivative is bounded on some
ball (this follows from Exercise 3.12.152), hence f is Lipschitzian on this ball,
therefore, by a famous result of Preiss, has points of Fr´echet differentiability (see
Preiss [392] or Benyamini, Lindenstrauss [50]).
4.2. Examples
Here we consider a collection of illuminating examples of functions possess-
ing (or failing to possess) various differentiability properties. By E and G we
denote topological vector spaces (locally convex when this is appropriate).
4.2.1. Example. If E ⋐E0 is one-dimensional, then σb-differentiability and
σﬁn-differentiability along the subspace E of a mapping from E0 to an arbitrary
topological vector space are equivalent. Hence in the case dim E = 1 we shall
call σ-differentiable (along the subspace E) mappings just differentiable.
4.2.2. Example. Let E0 be a vector space, let h ∈E0, and let E be the
one-dimensional subspace generated by h (as usual, equipped with the standard
topology).
A mapping f : E0 →G is called differentiable along the vector h
if it is differentiable along the subspace E; the derivative of f along h is the
element ∂hf(x0) := f ′(x0)h of the space G; it is clear that it is given by
∂hf(x0) = lim
t→0[f(x0 + th) −f(x0)]/t. If E = E0 = IR, then in accordance with
the above convention the space L(E, G) is identified with G; the derivative f ′(x0)
is identified with the element f ′(x0)1 ∈G. Since
f ′(x0)1 = lim
τ→0[f(x0 + τ) −f(x0)]/τ,
this means that for E = E0 = G = IR the derivative f ′(x0) is identified with
the derivative (in the sense of elementary calculus) of a real function of a real

252
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
argument. Thus, the usual derivative of a real function of a real argument is the
derivative of a mapping from IR to IR along 1.
4.2.3. Example. If E = IRn and G = IR, then compact differentiability of
a mapping f : IRn →IR, its Fr´echet differentiability and differentiability in the
sense of elementary calculus are the same.
4.2.4. Remark. In elementary calculus, along with a derivative, one defines
also the so-called differential; its standard definition in old textbooks is this: “a
differential is the main linear part of the increment of the function”. Thus, the
differential in the sense of old textbooks of calculus for a given value of the
increment of the argument h = (Δx1, . . . , Δxn) ∈IRn (we now consider the
case of a finite-dimensional space E) is the value of the Fr´echet derivative at the
element h, so that it seems to be preferable, when using the term “differential” in
this sense, to apply it in combinations like “differential at a given increment of the
argument”.
The term “differential” is employed also in modern mathematical texts, but
mostly as a synonym for a derivative (usually, for mappings of normed spaces);
yet another synonym is a tangent mapping.
Though, both terms are usually used not in the theory of smooth mappings
of infinite-dimensional spaces, but in the theory of smooth manifolds. However,
the term a “mapping tangent to zero” is used in the theory of smooth mappings
(between normed spaces) as a synonym of a “σb-small mapping”.
4.2.5.
Example. If ϕ is a constant mapping of E to G (i.e., a mapping
assuming the same value at all points), then ϕ is everywhere σb-differentiable and
its derivative equals zero (i.e., the mapping taking every element of E to the zero
element of G).
4.2.6. Example. If ϕ ∈L(E, G), then ϕ is everywhere σb-differentiable and
ϕ′(x) = ϕ for all x ∈E. If ϕ ∈L(E, G), then the operator ϕ is everywhere
¯σb-differentiable and ϕ′(x) = ϕ.
4.2.7. Example. Let ϕ be a linear mapping from E to G that is not contin-
uous. Then ϕ is σb-differentiable at every point along every finite-dimensional
subspace of E, but at no point is σﬁn-differentiable (along the whole space E).
4.2.8. Example. Let g be a multilinear continuous real function on the product
E ×· · ·×E of several copies of E. Then the function g1 : x →g(x, . . . , x) is
σb-differentiable at every point and
g′
1(x)h = g(h, x, . . . , x) + g(x, h, . . . , x) + · · · + g(x, x, . . . , h).
4.2.9. Example. Let r, ϕ be polar coordinates on the Euclidean plane. The
function (r, ϕ) →r sin3 ϕ, defined everywhere on IR2, is differentiable at every
point along every vector, but at the origin is not even Gˆateaux differentiable.
4.2.10. Example. Define a function g: IR2 →IR as follows. For any vector
x = (x1, x2) ∈IR2 with x ̸= 0 and x2 = x2
1 let g(x) = 1; else g(x) = 0. Then
at the origin the function g is Gˆateaux differentiable (and g′(0) = 0), but is not
Fr´echet differentiable.

4.2. Examples
253
4.2.11. Example. Let r, ϕ be polar coordinates on the Euclidean plane and
let g be the real function on IR2 defined by
g(r, ϕ) =
r2
| sin ϕ| exp

−
r
| sin ϕ|

if ϕ ̸= πk,
g(r, ϕ) = 0if ϕ = πk
(k ∈Z).
This function is Gˆateaux differentiable at every point, but is not Fr´echet differen-
tiable at zero.
4.2.12. Example. Let H be a real Hilbert space. The real function f on H de-
fined by the equality f(x) = ∥x∥is Fr´echet differentiable at every point excepting
zero and f ′(x) = x/∥x∥, i.e., f ′(x)h = (x, h)/∥x∥.
4.2.13.
Example. Let f be the function on a separable Hilbert space H
defined as follows: if x = ten, where {en} is an orthonormal basis in H, then
f(x) = t1+1/n; f(x) = 0 at all other points x ∈H. The function f is compactly
differentiable at the point x = 0, but is not Fr´echet differentiable at this point.
4.2.14. Example. The function
f : L1[0, 1] →IR1,
f(x) =
 1
0
sin x(s) ds
(4.2.1)
is everywhere Hadamard differentiable, but nowhere Fr´echet differentiable. The
same is true for the mapping
F : L2[0, 1] →L2[0, 1],
F(x)(s) = sin x(s).
(4.2.2)
PROOF. When proving differentiability it is often useful to find a candidate
for the derivative, which is done by evaluating partial derivatives. For the function
f we have the following equality:
f(x + th) =
 1
0
sin[x(s) + th(s)] ds.
It can be differentiated in t with the aid of the Lebesgue dominated convergence
theorem, which gives
∂hf(x) =
 1
0
h(s) cos x(s) ds.
Clearly, the Gˆateaux derivative exists and is given by the functional
Df(x)h =
 1
0
h(s) cos x(s) ds.
Since ∥Df(x)∥⩽1, by the aid of the mean value theorem for functions on the
real line we conclude that the function f is Lipschitzian (certainly, this can be
verified directly). By Theorem 4.1.12 we obtain its Hadamard differentiability.
For the mapping F the reasoning is similar. Here we have the operators DF(x)
in L2[0, 1] such that

DF(x)h

(s) =

cos x(s)

h(s).

254
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
Let us investigate whether f and F are Fr´echet differentiable.
Let x = 0.
Then f(x) = 0. For Fr´echet differentiability, we have to check if the relation
f(h) −Df(0)h = o(∥h∥) is true. The left-hand side equals
 1
0
[sin h(s) −h(s)] ds.
Since the Taylor expansion of sin h(s) −h(s) begins with h3 and our space is L1,
we may suspect that there is no Fr´echet differentiability here. To justify this, we
take for h elements of the unit ball on which f(th)−tDf(0)h is not uniformly o(t).
Namely, let hk(s) = k if 0 ⩽s ⩽1/k and hk(s) = 0 if s > 1/k. Then
f(thk) −tDf(0)hk = k−1 sin kt −t.
This quantity is not o(t) uniformly in k: it suffices to set t = k−1, which gives
the value t(sin 1 −1). For an arbitrary point x our reasoning is similar. We fix a
version of x and consider
 1
0

sin

x(s) + th(s)

−sin x(s) −th(s) cos x(s)

ds.
The functions cos x(s) and sin x(s) have a common Lebesgue point s0 ∈(0, 1). For
every ε this point is a Lebesgue point also for sin

x(s)+ε

−sin x(s)−ε cos x(s).
Choose a number ε ∈(0, 1) such that sin

x(s0)+ε

−sin x(s0)−ε cos x(s0) ̸= 0.
Now let us set hk = kIEk, where Ek = (s0 −k−1, s0 + k−1). For t = εk−1 we
obtain the quantity

Ek

sin

x(s) + ε

−sin x(s) −ε cos x(s)

ds
of order of smallness Lk−1 = L−1t, where L ̸= 0 is some number, since the limit
of this quantity multiplied by k/2 equals
sin

x(s0) + ε

−sin x(s0) −ε cos x(s0) ̸= 0
as k →∞.
Similar estimates work in the case of F.
□
It is interesting to note that if the function f is considered not on L1, but
on L2, then it becomes Fr´echet differentiable.
4.2.15. Example. The function f defined by formula (4.2.1) on the space
L2[0, 1] is everywhere Fr´echet differentiable. The mapping F defined by formula
(4.2.2) on C[0, 1] is everywhere Fr´echet differentiable.
PROOF. A nuance making difference between the properties of f on the
spaces L1 and on L2 is that, due to the bound | sin(x + h) −sin x −h cos x| ⩽h2,
the quantity |f(x + h) −f(x) −Df(x)h| is estimated by the integral of h2,
which equals the square of the L2-norm (infinite for some h in L1). A simi-
lar reasoning applies to the mapping F on the space C[0, 1]. Here the quantity
∥F(x + h) −F(x) −DF(x)h∥is estimated by ∥h∥2 in the case of the sup-norm,
but not in the case of the L2-norm, where the indicated estimate leads to the
integral of h4.
□

4.2. Examples
255
Let us consider yet another instructive infinite-dimensional example. It em-
ploys a function that is frequently used in applications: the distance to a set.
4.2.16. Example. Let X be an infinite-dimensional normed space and let
K be a compact set. Set
f(x) = dist(x, K) = inf{∥x −y∥: y ∈K}.
Then the function f satisfies the Lipschitz condition, but is not Fr´echet differen-
tiable at the points of K.
If K has the property that αK ⊂K whenever |α| ⩽1 and the set ∞
n=1 nK
is everywhere dense in X, then f has a zero Gˆateaux derivative at the point 0 ∈K.
For example, one can take for K the ellipsoid
K =
%
(xn) ∈l2 :
∞

n=1
n2x2
n ⩽1
&
in the Hilbert space l2.
PROOF. Let x ∈K.
Then f(x) = 0.
Suppose that at x there exists a
Fr´echet derivative f ′(x). This derivative can be only zero, since, for any nonzero
vector h, the function t →f(x + th) has minimum at t = 0. We arrive at a
contradiction if we show that f(x+h)−f(x)−f ′(x)h = f(x+h) is not o(∥h∥).
For every n ∈IN we find a vector hn such that ∥hn∥⩽1/n and the ball of
radius ∥hn∥/4 centered at x+hn does not intersect K. This will give the estimate
f(x + hn) ⩾∥hn∥/4. The compact set K can be covered by finitely many balls
of radius (4n)−1 with centers at some points a1, . . . , ak. Let L be the finite-
dimensional linear space generated by these centers. There is a vector hn with
∥hn∥= 1/n and dist (hn, L) = 1/n. This vector is what we look for. Indeed,
if there is a vector y ∈K ∩B(x + hn, ∥hn∥/4), then we obtain the following
decomposition: x = u + l1, y = v + l2, where l1, l2 ∈L, ∥u∥⩽(4n)−1,
∥v∥⩽(4n)−1 and ∥x + hn −y∥⩽∥hn∥/4. Therefore,
∥hn −(l2 −l1) + u −v∥⩽(4n)−1
and hence ∥hn −(l2 −l1)∥⩽3(4n)−1, contrary to our choice of hn, since we
have l2 −l1 ∈L.
Suppose now that K satisfies the indicated additional conditions. We show
that at the point 0 ∈K the Gˆateaux derivative exists and equals zero. To this end
we have to verify that for any fixed h ∈X we have the equality lim
t→0 t−1f(th) = 0.
Let ε > 0. By assumption there exists a vector v ∈nK such that ∥h −v∥⩽ε.
Since tv ∈K whenever |t| ⩽n−1 by our condition, we have f(tv) = 0 for such t.
Hence |t−1f(th)| ⩽ε by the estimate |f(th) −f(tv)| ⩽∥th −tv∥⩽|t|ε, that
holds by the Lipschitzness of f.
□
It is suggested in Exercise 4.10.43 to verify that if the set K is convex, then
f has zero Gˆateaux derivative at all points of 
0⩽t<1 tK.
4.2.17. Example. Let E be the product of the continuum copies of IR re-
alized as the space of all real functions on [0, 1] with the topology of pointwise

256
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
convergence and let K = {xn} be the countable subset of E consisting of the
indicators of sets that are unions of finitely many intervals in [0, 1] with rational
endpoints and having Lebesgue measure greater than 1/2. The set K is relatively
compact in E; at the same time, there is a sequence of elements of the set K not
containing Cauchy subsequences. If x = txn, then we set f(x) = t1+1/n; at all
other points x ∈E we set f(x) = 0. The function f is sequentially differentiable
(i.e., s-differentiable) at the point x = 0, but is not differentiable at this point with
respect to the system of compact sets.
4.2.18. Example. Let D be the space of all infinitely differentiable functions
with compact support on the real line, let τ1 be its standard topology, and let τ2 be
the topology σ(D, D′). Then the quadratic mapping f : (D, τ2) →(D, τ1) taking
the function ϕ from D to the function ϕ2 = [t →ϕ2(t)] is Fr´echet differentiable
at the point 0 ∈D, but is continuous at no point.
4.2.19. Example. Let D and τ1 be the same as in the previous example and
let ϕ ∈D, ϕ ̸= 0. For all numbers m, k ∈IN and t ∈IR we set xmk(t) =
m−1ϕ(t) + k−1ϕ(t −m). Then the indicator function of the set S = {xmk} is a
real function on the space (D, τ1) that is Fr´echet differentiable at the point 0, but
is not continuous at this point.
4.2.20. Example. Let D and τ1 be the same as in the previous two examples
and let D′ be the dual to (D, τ1) equipped with the strong topology; in place
of the symbol (D, τ1) we shall now use the symbol D. The bilinear function
Φ: D′×D →IR, (g, x) →g(x) is discontinuous at every point, but is everywhere
infinitely Fr´echet differentiable. Moreover, we have the easily verified equalities
Φ′(g, x) = [(h, k) →h(x) + g(k)], Φ′′(g, x) = Φ′, Φ(n) = 0 if n > 2, so that all
derivatives are continuous as mappings from D′×D to Ln
b (D′×D, IR).
4.2.21. Example. Let E be a topological vector space that is a vector sub-
space of the vector space E0, E1 a topological vector subspace in E, f a mapping
of a set W in E0 to a topological vector space G, σ and σ1 some systems of
bounded subsets of E containing all finite subsets, and σ′ = E1 ∩σ. Then the σE-
differentiability of the mapping f at a point x ∈W yields its σ1E-differentiability
at the same point if σ1 is one of the following systems of sets:
1) a subsystem of σ;
2) the system of unions of some finite collections of sets in σ;
3) the system of images of the sets in σ under all homotheties of the space E;
4) the system of circled envelopes of sets in σ.
It is worth noting that it is not always possible to replace σ by the system of
closures of all sets in σ or by the system of their convex envelopes.
If σ2 ⊂σ′, then the σE-differentiability (at a point x ∈W) of the mapping f
yields its σ2E1-differentiability at this point.
4.2.22. Example. Let E be an infinite-dimensional barrelled locally convex
space, let Eσ be the same vector space equipped with the weak topology σ(E, E′),
and let E′ be the dual to E equipped with the topology σ(E′, E). The mapping
E′ ×E →IR, (g, x) →g(x) is everywhere discontinuous, everywhere Fr´echet

4.3. Differentiability and continuity
257
differentiable, everywhere infinitely ¯b-differentiable, but is twice Fr´echet differen-
tiable at no point.
4.3. Differentiability and continuity
In the previous section some examples have been given demonstrating that
even everywhere infinitely Fr´echet differentiable real functions can be everywhere
discontinuous. Here, among other things, we describe the class of all spaces for
mappings of which to an arbitrary topological vector space Fr´echet differentiability
at a given point yields the continuity at this point. This class contains all metrizable
spaces, but not only such spaces.
4.3.1. Proposition. Let dim G > 0. Every mapping from E to G that is
¯s-differentiable at a given point is sequentially continuous at this point precisely
when E satisfies the following condition:
(A1) for every sequence {an} of elements of the space E converging to zero,
there exist its subsequence {ank} and a sequence {λk} of real numbers such that
λk →∞and λkank →0.
PROOF. Let f : E →G be ¯c-differentiable at a point x0 ∈E. We show
that if condition (A1) is fulfilled, then f is sequentially continuous at x0. We can
assume that f ∈Rs(E, G) (i.e., that x0 = 0, f(0) = 0, f ′(0) = 0). Let {hn} be
a sequence of elements of E converging to zero. If f(hn) ̸→0, then there exists
a strictly increasing sequence {nk} of natural numbers such that no subsequence
in the sequence {f(hnk)} converges to zero. However, by condition (A1) there
exist a subsequence {nk(i)} in {nk} and a sequence {λi} of real numbers such
that λi →∞and λihnk(i) →0. These relations and the inclusion f ∈Rs(e, G)
yield that
f(hnk(i)) = λ−1
i λif

λ−1
i (λihnk(i))

→0
as i →∞,
which contradicts our choice of the sequence {nk}.
Suppose now that condition (A1) is not fulfilled and that {hn} is a sequence of
nonzero elements of E converging to zero such that if a sequence of real numbers
{λi} tends to infinity and {ni} is a strictly increasing sequence of natural numbers,
then λihni ̸→0. Let S be the set of all elements of the sequence {hn}, IS its
indicator function, a ∈G, a ̸= 0, and g(x) = IS(x)a, x ∈E. Then the mapping
g: E →G is ¯s-differentiable (and even ¯b-differentiable) at the origin, but is not
sequentially continuous at this point.
□
4.3.2.
Remark. As the proof of the proposition above shows, it remains
valid if in the formulation the term “¯s-differentiability” is replaced by the term
“¯b-differentiability”.
Note that a topological vector space E satisfies condition (A1) if it satisfies
the “Mackey convergence condition” from Definition 3.6.4 (and Lemma 2.10.18):
for every sequence {xn} of elements of E converging to zero, there exists a
sequence {rn} of real numbers such that rn →∞, but rnxn →0.
We do not know whether these two conditions are equivalent.

258
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
We recall (see § 2.10(i)) that a topological space is called a Fr´echet–Urysohn
space if, for every part A of this space and every point a in the closure of A, there
exists a sequence of elements of the set A converging to a.
The sequential continuity of a mapping from a Fr´echet–Urysohn space implies
its continuity, since the preimage of every closed set is closed.
4.3.3. Lemma. Let E be a Fr´echet–Urysohn topological vector space. Sup-
pose that for every k ∈IN we are given a sequence {ak
n} of elements in E con-
verging to zero. Then, there exist strictly increasing sequences of natural numbers
{k(r)} and {n(r)} for which ak(r)
n(r) →0 as r →∞.
PROOF. We can assume that dim E ̸= 0. Let x0 ∈E, x0 ̸= 0. For any
n, k ∈IN we set xnk = k−1x0 + an+kk if k−1x0 ̸= −ak
n+k and xnk = k−1x0
otherwise. Let also A = {xnk}. Then 0 ∈A\A. It is obvious that 0 /∈A.
Let now V be a neighborhood of zero in E. Then, there exists a neighborhood
of zero V0 in E such that V0 + V0 ⊂V . Let k and n be natural numbers for which
kx0 ∈V0 and ak
n+k ∈V0 (the existence of n for which the latter inclusion is valid
follows from the fact that ak
n+k →0 as n →∞). Then xnk = k−1x0+ak
n+k ∈V .
Since E is a Fr´echet–Urysohn space, there are sequences {k1(r)} and {n1(r)}
of natural numbers such that xn1(r)k1(r) →0. We have k1(r) →∞. Indeed,
otherwise, passing to a subsequence in {k1(r)}, we could assume that k1(r) = k0
is constant.
Then we would get n1(r) →∞, hence ak0
n1(r) →−k0x0 ̸= 0,
which contradicts the fact that by condition we have ak0
n+k0 →0.
Passing to
a subsequence, we can assume that k1(r) < k1(r + 1) and n1(r) + k1(r) <
n1(r + 1) + k1(r + 1) for all r. Set now k(r) = k1(r) and n(r) = k1(r) + n1(r).
Then ak(r)
n(r) →0 as r →∞, and the sequences of indices strictly increase.
□
A sequence {ak(r)
n(r)} for which n(1) < n(2) < · · · and k(1) < k(2) < · · · is
naturally called quasi-diagonal. Thus, the lemma asserts that from any sequence
of sequences converging to zero one can extract a quasi-diagonal sequence also
converging to zero. Not every space has this property.
4.3.4. Corollary. Every Fr´echet–Urysohn topological vector space satisfies
condition (A1) from Proposition 4.3.1.
PROOF. Let {xn} be a sequence of elements of a topological vector Fr´echet–
Urysohn space converging to zero.
In order to prove that there exist its sub-
sequence {xni} and a sequence {λi} of real numbers for which λi →∞and
λixni →0, it suffices to apply the lemma to the sequence of sequences {kxn}
converging to zero (for each fixed k).
□
4.3.5. Theorem. Let E and G be topological vector spaces, dim G > 0, and
let β be some system of bounded subsets E such that β ⊃σE
s . In order that every
mapping from E to G that is β-differentiable at some point be continuous at this
point it is necessary and sufficient that E be a Fr´echet–Urysohn space.
PROOF. Let E be a Fr´echet–Urysohn space and let a mapping f from E
to G be β-differentiable at a point x0 ∈E.
Since β ⊃σE
s , this mapping is

4.3. Differentiability and continuity
259
¯s-differentiable at the point x0.
By the above corollary, the space E satisfies
condition (A1) from Proposition 4.3.1, therefore, the mapping f is sequentially
continuous at the point x0. Since E is a Fr´echet–Urysohn space, it follows that f
is continuous at this point.
Suppose that E is not a Fr´echet–Urysohn space. Let A ⊂E have a limit
point x0 that is not a limit of a convergent sequence of elements of A. Let IA be
the indicator of A, b ∈G, b ̸= 0. Then the function
g: x →IA(x)b,
E →G,
is obviously discontinuous at the point x0 and is β-differentiable at this point.
Since σE
b ⊃β, it is sufficient to prove that f is b-differentiable at x0. Let {tn} be
a sequence of nonzero real numbers converging to zero and let {hn} be a bounded
sequence of elements of E. Since the set A can contain only finitely many points
of the sequence {x0+tnhn}, we have t−1
n

g(x0+tnhn)−g(x0)

→0 as n →∞.
This means that the mapping g is b-differentiable at the point x0 (and has the
derivative at this point).
□
Yet another condition close to condition (A1) and the Mackey condition will
be used in § 4.10(i).
It has been shown above that only for mappings defined on Fr´echet–Urysohn
topological vector spaces s-differentiability at a point implies the continuity at
this point (hence this is also true for differentiability with respect to the system
of bounded sets). However, it can happen that a topological vector space E has
the following property: c-differentiability of an arbitrary mapping from E to an
arbitrary topological vector space G at a single point does not imply its continuity,
but s-differentiability at every point of an arbitrary open set already implies the
continuity on this set. One class of topological vector spaces possessing such a
property is described below.
4.3.6. Theorem. Let E be the inductive limit of an increasing sequence of
Banach spaces En such that the embeddings En →En+1 are compact. Then
every mapping f from the space E to a topological vector space G that is s-
differentiable in some neighborhood of a point x ∈E is continuous at this point.
PROOF. Suppose that a mapping f : E →G is s-differentiable at all points
of some neighborhood of the point x0. Let us take in this neighborhood a closed
neighborhood V of x0. We prove that the restriction of f to V is continuous (this
will give the continuity of the original mapping in every inner point of V ).
Suppose the contrary.
Then G contains a closed set B such that the set
A = f −1(B) ∩V is not closed in V ; then it is not closed in E.
Under the
assumptions of the theorem, a subset F of the space E is closed precisely when
for every n the intersection F ∩En is closed in En (Corollary 2.7.7). Hence for
some n the set A∩En is not closed in En. This means that the set A∩(V ∩En) is
not closed in V ∩En, therefore, the restriction fn of the mapping f to the subspace
En is not a continuous function on the set V ∩En. However, the mapping fn is
obviously s-differentiable at every point of the set V ∩En in the Banach space En.

260
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
By the previous theorem it must be continuous on the set V ∩En. The obtained
contradiction completes the proof.
□
The space E in this theorem is a Fr´echet–Urysohn space precisely when it is
finite-dimensional. Hence inductive limits of infinite-dimensional strictly increas-
ing Banach spaces with compact embeddings form a class of spaces mentioned
before the theorem. Indeed, if E is infinite-dimensional, then En ̸= En+1 for
infinitely many indices n (otherwise not all canonical embeddings En →En+1
are compact). We can assume that En ̸= En+1 for all n. Let xn ∈En+1\En for
every natural number n. If E is a Fr´echet–Urysohn space, then by Lemma 4.3.3
applied to the sequence of sequences {k−1xn}∞
k=1 converging to zero, there ex-
ist strictly increasing sequences {n(i)} and {k(i)} of natural numbers such that
k(i)−1xn(i) →0 in E. Then there exists m such that k(i)−1xn(i) ∈Em for all i
(Corollary 2.7.9), which contradicts the fact that n(i) →∞.
4.3.7. Remark. We have discussed above a possibility to obtain the usual
continuity from rather weak (in nonnormable spaces) forms of differentiability; it
does not come as a surprise that this is not always possible. However, the situation
changes if we weaken the concept of continuity. Suppose we are given a class
A of bounded sets in a topological vector space X. A sequence {xn} will be
called A-converging to x if there is a sequence of numbers tn →0 such that
(xn −x)/tn ∈A for some A ∈A.
Notation: xn
A
→x.
For example, the Mackey convergence from Definition 2.10.17 corresponds
to A equal to the class of all Banach discs (see Lemma 2.10.18). In a metrizable
space, the usual convergence is equivalent to A-convergence for every system A
containing all compact sets (this is true for the broader class of spaces satisfying
the Mackey convergence condition mentioned on page 257). In the general case,
A-convergence obviously yields convergence in the topology of X.
A mapping f from X to a locally convex space Y will be called A-continuous
at x0 if f(xn) →f(x0) as xn
A
→x0. For spaces satisfying the Mackey conver-
gence condition, A-continuity is equivalent to the sequential continuity if s ⊂A.
On an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space equipped with the weak topology, the
function f(x) = (x, x) is discontinuous, but is A-continuous for the class A of all
bounded sets.
Note that 
A-differentiability of f at x0 implies A-continuity at this point.
Indeed, assuming that x0 = 0 and f(x0) = 0, whenever hn
A
→0, we obtain
f(hn) = f(tnhn/tn) = f ′(0)(tnhn/tn)+r(tnhn/tn) for the corresponding num-
bers tn →0 such that hn/tn ∈A, where A ∈A. Since f ′(0) ∈LA(X, Y ), we
obtain that f(hn) →0.
For an open set U ⊂E, by induction we introduce the classes Cn
A(U, G) of
mappings n-fold 
A-differentiable in U and having A-continuous derivatives. For
example, C1
A(U, G) consists of 
A-differentiable mappings f such that the mapping
x →f ′(x) from U to LA(E, G) is A-continuous. Then f ∈Cn
A(U, G) provided
that f ∈C1
A(U, G) and f ′ ∈Cn−1
A
(U, Ln−1).

4.4. Differentiability and continuity along a subspace
261
For normed spaces and the class A = b, this leads to the usual class of
mappings Cn(U, G) possessing n continuous Fr´echet derivatives.
4.4. Differentiability and continuity along a subspace
Let E0 be a vector space and let E and G be topological vector spaces such
that E is a vector subspace in E0.
4.4.1. Definition. A mapping f : E0 →G is called continuous at a point
x ∈E0 along the subspace E (or E-continuous) if the mapping h →f(x + h)
from E to G is continuous at zero. A similar terminology is introduced for the
sequential continuity.
4.4.2. Definition. A mapping f : E0 →G is called σ-continuous at a point
x ∈E0 along the subspace E (or σE-continuous at x) if, for every set B ∈σ, we
have f(x + th) →f(x) as t →0 uniformly in h ∈B.
If E = E0, then in place of the term “σE-continuity” we use the term
“σ-continuity”.
Note that σE-continuity at a point x ∈E0 is equivalent to the continuity at
the point t = 0 of the mapping t →[h →f(x + th)], IR →Fσ(E, G). In the
language of the theory of pseudotopological spaces one can similarly reformulate
Definition 4.4.1; this will be noted below.
Definitions 4.4.1 and 4.4.2 are actually local and can be easily formulated for
mappings defined on the set V +x, where V ⊂E is a neighborhood of zero. Note
also that the mappings σ-continuous at a given point form a vector space and that
the same is true for the mappings σE-continuous at a given point.
The next assertions are analogs of the results obtained above for differentiable
mappings.
4.4.3. Proposition. In order a mapping f : E0 →G be E-continuous at a
point x ∈E0, the following conditions are necessary and sufficient: whatever be a
set B ∈σ, a sequence {hn} of its elements and a sequence of real numbers {tn}
converging to zero, one has f(x + tnhn) →f(x) in G as n →∞.
The proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 4.3.1.
4.4.4. Proposition. (i) Every sequentially continuous mapping from E to G is
σ-continuous. (ii) Every E-continuous mapping from E0 to G is σE-continuous.
(iii) Every bounded linear mapping from E to G is σ-continuous.
All these assertions follow immediately from the definitions (for the proof of
(ii) one should also use that the continuity implies the sequential continuity).
The next fact is also a straightforward corollary of the definition.
4.4.5. Proposition. Any mapping f : E0 →G that is σE-differentiable at
some point is σE-continuous at this point.
4.4.6. Proposition. Let dim G > 0. Then all mappings from E0 to G that
are sE-continuous at a given point are E-sequentially continuous at this point
precisely when E satisfies Condition (A1) from Proposition 4.3.1.

262
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
The proof of this proposition is similar to the proof of Proposition 4.3.1 above.
4.4.7. Theorem. Let dim G > 0 and σ ⊃σE
s . Then every mapping from E0
to G that is σE-continuous at a given point is E-continuous at this point precisely
when E is a Fr´echet–Urysohn space.
The proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 4.3.5.
In connection with continuity, let us prove a result on differentiability of the
inverse mapping. Some additional remarks will be made in the last section. For
arbitrary topological vector spaces, the theorem on existence of a (local) mapping
inverse for a differentiable mapping and the theorem on differentiability of the
inverse mapping are false (for the regarded definitions of differentiability); the
corresponding examples will be given later. Here we prove a simple assertion the
main advantage of which is that it is valid for all topological vector spaces.
Let E be a topological vector space, σ some system of its bounded subsets
containing all singletons. A mapping g: E →E is called strongly σ-continuous
at a point x ∈E if, for every set B ∈σ, every sequence of real numbers {tn}
converging to zero and every sequence {hn} ⊂B, there exists a set P ∈σ such
that we have the inclusion g(x + tnhn) ∈g(x) + tnP.
If σ ⊃σE
s , then every mapping that is σ-differentiable at a point x ∈E is
strongly σ-continuous at this point; in addition, the strong σ-continuity implies
σ-continuity. However, even for the space E = IR the strong σ-continuity does
not follow from continuity.
4.4.8. Theorem. Let g be a one-to-one mapping from an open subset V of a
topological vector space E onto an open subset W of the same space. Suppose
that the mapping g is σ-differentiable at a point x ∈V , that g′(x) is a linear
homeomorphism of the space E, and that the mapping g−1 inverse to g is strongly
σ-continuous at the point z = g(x). Then the mapping g−1 is σ-differentiable at
the point z and (g−1)′(z) =

g′(x)
−1.
PROOF. Without loss of generality we can assume that x = z = 0 and that
g′(x) is the identity mapping. Thus, g(h) = h + r(h) and r ∈Rσ(E, E). Set
g−1(p) = p + s(p). We have to show that s ∈Rσ(E, E). Clearly, we have
s(p) = −r

g(p)

.
Let Q ∈σ, pn ∈Q, tn ∈IR, tn ̸= 0, tn →0.
Since
the mapping g−1 is strongly σ-continuous at zero, there exists B ∈σ such that
t−1
n g−1(tnpn) ∈B for all n. Therefore,
t−1
n s(tnpn) = −t−1
n r

tn

t−1
n g(tnpn)

→0
as n →0.
This proves that s ∈Rσ(E, E).
□
4.4.9. Remark. If σ = σE
b and E is a normed space, then the assumption of
the strong σ-continuity of the mapping g−1 in the theorem can be replaced by the
assumption of its continuity. In the general case, as we shall see in § 4.10(i), this
is impossible.
Note also that the conditions of the theorem do not imply the continuity of the
mapping g.

4.5. The derivative of a composition
263
4.4.10. Example. As in Example 4.2.19, let
xmk(t) = m−1ϕ(t) + k−1ϕ(t −m), ϕ ∈D, ϕ ̸= 0, m, k ∈IN, t ∈IR,
zmk(t) = k−1ϕ(t −m).
Let Φ: D →D be defined as follows: Φ(xmk) = zmk, Φ(zmk) = xmk, Φ(x) = x
at other points. Then Φ is a one-to-one mapping of D onto D, but Φ and Φ−1 are
σb-differentiable at zero and discontinuous at zero.
4.5. The derivative of a composition
In this section, given a topological vector space E, the symbol σE will be
used to denote a family of its bounded subsets containing all finite subsets (not
necessarily all bounded subsets, which is the largest possible family) and the sym-
bol E will be used to denote a fixed class of topological vector spaces. We shall
say that in the class E the chain rule holds for σ-derivatives of order n if the fol-
lowing condition is fulfilled: whatever are E, G, F ∈E, a mapping f : E →G
that is n-fold σ-differentiable at a point x ∈E and a mapping g: G →F that
is n-fold σG-differentiable at the point f(x), the composition g◦f : E →F is
n-fold σE-differentiable at the point x. Below in place of the symbol σE we
usually employ the shortened symbol σ. Our discussion of compositions will be
continued in § 4.9, where we consider the converse problem of characterization of
differentiability of mappings through differentiability of its compositions (left or
right).
(i) First order derivatives
We start with a result related to differentiability with respect to the system
of compact sets (with an additional requirement of the sequential continuity of
derivatives) that is readily verified directly (see Bogachev, Smolyanov [72, Theo-
rem 12.2.3]).
4.5.1. Theorem. Let X, Y and Z be three Hausdorff locally convex spaces,
Ψ = G ◦F : X →Z, where F : X →Y and G: Y →Z, x0 ∈X and
y0 = F(x0). Suppose that F and G are ¯c-differentiable at points x0 and y0,
respectively, and the operator F ′(x0) takes compact sets to compact sets. Then Ψ
is also ¯c-differentiable at x0, and Ψ′(x0) = G′(y0)F ′(x0).
A similar assertion is true if both mappings are b-differentiable and the oper-
ator F ′(x0) takes bounded sets to bounded sets. Finally, if F is Gˆateax differen-
tiable at x0 and G is ¯c-differentiable at y0, then Ψ is Gˆateax differentiable at x0
and the same formula holds for Ψ′(x0).
A similar assertion is true in the case of differentiability with respect to the
system of sequentially compact sets, since F ′(x0) is sequentially continuous (but
in this case we do not require that the operator F ′(x0) must take compact sets to
compact sets).
The composition of two Gˆateax differentiable mappings need not be Gˆateax
differentiable (Exercise 4.10.36).

264
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
4.5.2. Proposition. Let E be some class of topological vector spaces. The
following conditions are sufficient in order that the chain rule be valid in the class
E for the first order σ-derivatives:
(a) if E, G, F ∈E, r ∈Rσ(E, G), l ∈L(G, F), then l◦r ∈Rσ(E, F);
(b) if E, G, F ∈E, r ∈Rσ(G, F) and a mapping θ: E →G is σ-differenti-
able at the point 0 with θ(0) = 0, then r◦θ ∈Rσ(E, F).
If a mapping f : E →G is σ-differentiable at the point x0 ∈E, a mapping
g: G →F is σ-differentiable at the point f(x0), where E, G, F ∈E, then
(g◦f)′(x0) = g′
f(x0)

◦f ′(x0).
PROOF. We verify that if f : E →G, g: G →F, where both mappings are
σ-differentiable at zero ( in the corresponding spaces), f(0) = 0, g(0) = 0, then
the composition g ◦f is σ-differentiable at the point 0 ∈E. Under the stated
assumptions, if h ∈E, then
g

f(h)

= g′(0)f(h) + rg

f(h)

= g′(0)f ′(0)h + g′(0)rf(h) + rg

f ′(0)h + rf(h)

,
where rg ∈Rσ(G, F), rf ∈Rσ(E, G), therefore, by Conditions (a) and (b)

h →g′(0)rf(h) + rg

f ′(0)h + rf(h)
'
∈Rσ(E, G).
The last assertion is obvious from the proof.
□
4.5.3. Remark. Similar assertions are valid for ¯σ-derivatives (in which in
place of continuous linear operators we consider sequentially continuous ones)
and A-derivatives.
4.5.4. Corollary. For first order b-, c-, s-, ¯b- and ¯s-derivatives the chain rule
is valid in the class of all topological vector spaces.
PROOF. Let us verify, for example, Conditions (a) and (b) for b-differentiabi-
lity. Let F, E, G ∈E, r ∈Rb(E, G), l ∈L(G, F), Q ∈σE
b , {hn} ⊂Q, and let
{tn} be a sequence of nonzero numbers converging to zero. Then
t−1
n

l

r(tnhn)
'
= l

t−1
n r(tnhn)

→0
as n →0, hence l◦r ∈Rb(E, F). If θ is a b-differentiable mapping from E to G
and θ(0) = 0, r ∈Rb(G, F), {hn} ⊂Q ∈σE
b , then θ = A + rθ, A ∈L(E, G),
rθ ∈Rb(E, G) and
t−1
n r

θ(tnhn)

= t−1
n r

tn

Ahn + t−1
n rθ(tnhn)
'
→0,
since {Ahn} ∈σE
b and t−1
n rθ(tnhn) →0. Thus, r◦θ ∈Rb(E, G).
□
Note that this list does not include ¯c-derivative, because the image of a com-
pact set under a sequentially continuous operator need not be compact (certainly,
in nonmetrizable spaces). For example, the identity operator from D(IR) with
the weak topology to D(IR) with the standard topology is not continuous, but is
sequentially continuous.

4.5. The derivative of a composition
265
(ii) Higher order derivatives.
The case of arbitrary topological vector
spaces
4.5.5. Lemma. Let E, F, and G be topological vector spaces, ηEG and
ηGF some families of bounded subsets of the spaces Lσ(E, G), and Lσ(G, F),
respectively, and η the family of all subsets of the space Lσ(E, G)×Lσ(G, F)
each of which is contained in some set (depending on the considered subset) of
the form C1×C2, where C1 ∈ηEG, C2 ∈ηGF . Suppose also that, for any sets
CEG ∈ηEG, C ∈σE and any mapping g ∈Lσ(E, G), we have CEG(C) ∈σG,
g(C) ∈σG. Then the mapping
ψ: (f1, f2) →f2◦f1,
Lσ(E, G)×Lσ(G, F) →Lσ(E, F)
is σ-differentiable at every point and for all pairs (f1, f2), (g1, g2) in the space
Lσ(E, G)×Lσ(G, F) we have
ψ′(f1, f2)(g1, g2) = ψ(f1, g2) + ψ(g2, f1) = g2◦f1 + f2◦g1.
PROOF. Since
ψ(f1 + g1, f2 + g2) = ψ(f1, f2) + ψ(f1, g2) + ψ(g1, f2) + ψ(g1, g2),
it suffices to show that, for every fixed f1 and f2, the linear mapping
Φ1 : (g1, g2) →(g2◦f1 + f2◦g1),
Lσ(E, G)×Lσ(G, F) →Lσ(E, F)
is sequentially continuous and the mapping
ψ: (g1, g2) →g2◦g1, Lσ(E, G)×Lσ(G, F) →Lσ(E, F)
is η-small. In order to prove the sequential continuity of Φ1, we show the sequen-
tial continuity of the mappings
Φ2 : g2 →g2◦f1, Lσ(G, F) →Lσ(E, F),
Φ3 : g1 →f2◦g1, Lσ(E, G) →Lσ(E, F).
Let ϕn →0 in Lσ(G, F). In order to justify convergence Φ2(ϕn) →0 in Lσ(E, F)
it suffices to verify that if Q ∈σE and {hn} ⊂Q, then we have Φ2(ϕn)(hn) →0
in F (see Proposition 4.1.5). Since under these conditions {f1(hn)} ∈σG and
ϕn →0 in Lσ(G, F), we obtain convergence Φ2(ϕn)(hn) = ϕn

f1(hn)

→0
in F (see Proposition 4.1.5). Thus, the sequential continuity of Φ2 is proved.
Next, if γn →0 in Lσ(E, G) and {hn} ⊂B ∈σE, then, again by Proposi-
tion 4.1.5, we have convergence γn(hn) →0 in the space G, whence it follows
that Φ3(γn)(hn) = f2

γn(hn)

→0 in F by the sequential continuity of f2.
Hence Φ3(γn) →0 in Lσ(E, F) (we use again the same proposition). The se-
quential continuity of Φ1 is proved.
For the proof of the inclusion
ψ ∈Rη
Lσ(E, G)×Lσ(G, F), Lσ(E, F)

it suffices to show that if {γn, ϕn} is a sequence of elements of some set in the
system η and {tn} is a sequence of nonzero real numbers, then tnϕn ◦γn →0
in Lσ(E, F), i.e., that tnϕn

γn(hn)

→0 in F for every sequence {hn} in Q∈σE.

266
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
The inclusion indicated in the hypotheses of the lemma and the fact that the ele-
ments γn belong to some of the sets ηEG (since {(γn, ϕn)} is contained in some of
the sets of the system η) yield that the elements γn(hn) are contained in some of
the sets of the system σG. Since the elements ϕn belong to some of the sets of the
system ηGF and for this reason the sequence {ϕn} is bounded in Lσ(G, F), the
sequence

ϕn

γn(hn)

is bounded in F, hence tnϕn

γn(hn)

→0 in F.
□
4.5.6. Remark. The proposition obtained by replacing in the formulation of
the lemma of all symbols Lσ( · ) by the symbols Lσ( · ) is also true. We leave the
proof of this assertion as an exercise.
4.5.7. Proposition. For b-, c-, s-, ¯b- and ¯s-derivatives of the second order the
chain rule is valid in the class of all topological vector spaces.
PROOF. Let f : E →G and g: G →F be two mappings such that f is twice
b-differentiable at a point x ∈E and g is twice b-differentiable at f(x). Hence
the mapping x →f ′
g(x)

, E →Lσ(G, F) is one-fold b-differentiable at x (as
a composition of two differentiable mappings: the mapping x →g(x), E →G,
and the mapping z →f ′(z), G →Lσ(G, F)). Since the mapping x →g′(x),
E →Lσ(E, G) is also differentiable at x (because g is twice differentiable at x),
the mapping
x →

f ′
g(x)

, g′(x)

,
E →Lσ(G, F)×Lσ(E, G)
(4.5.1)
is differentiable as well (this follows from Exercise 4.10.34, but can be also ver-
ified directly).
The mapping x →f ′
g(x)

◦g′(x), E →Lσ(E, F), i.e., the
derivative of the mapping f ◦g, is the composition of the mapping (4.5.1) and
the mapping the differentiability of which was proved in Lemma 4.5.5. Hence by
Proposition 4.5.2 this mapping is also differentiable at x and its derivative is given
by the equality
(f ◦g)′′(x) =
(
h1 →

h2 →f ′′
g(x)

g′(x)h1g′(x)h2 + f ′
g(x)

g′′(x)h1h2
')
.
For other types of differentiability mentioned in the formulation proofs are com-
pletely similarly.
□
4.5.8. Lemma. Let E, G, and F be topological vector spaces such that the
space G satisfies Condition (A1) in Proposition 4.3.1. Then the mapping ψ from
Lemma 4.5.5 is infinitely ¯b-differentiable.
PROOF. By Lemma 4.5.5 it suffices to show that the linear mapping
ψ′ : Lb(E, G)×Lb(G, F) →Lb

Lb(E, G)×Lb(G, F), Lb(E, F)

defined by the equality
(f1, f2) →

(g1, g2) →g2◦f1 + f2◦g1
'
is sequentially continuous. Let {ϕn} and {γn} be sequences of elements of the
spaces Lb(E, G) and Lb(G, F) converging to zero in these spaces. We have to
prove that the sequence of mappings

(g1, g2) →g2◦ϕ1+γn◦g1
'
converges to zero
in the space Lb

Lb(E, G)×Lb(G, F), Lb(E, F)

. We use again Proposition 4.1.5.

4.5. The derivative of a composition
267
Let {αn} and {χn} be bounded sequences in the spaces Lb(E, G) and Lb(G, F).
It suffices to show that the sequence of sums χn◦ϕn + γn◦αn of elements of the
space Lb(E, F) converges to zero in this space. In turn, it suffices to prove that if
{hn} is a bounded sequence in E, then
χn

ϕn(hn)

+ γn

αn(hn)

→0
in F.
The boundedness of {αn} and {hn} yields that the sequence {αn(hn)} is bounded
in G. Hence by convergence γn →0 in Lb(G, F) we have γn

αn(hn)

→0 in F.
Thus, it remains to show that χn

ϕn(hn)

→0 in F. If this is not true,
then there exists a subsequence in the latter sequence containing no convergent
subsequence. We shall see that this leads to a contradiction. By condition (A1) in
Proposition 4.3.1 and convergence ϕn(hn) →0 in G, for every sequence {nj} of
natural numbers there are its subsequence {nj(i)} and a sequence {ti} of nonzero
real numbers such that ti →∞, but tiϕnj(i)(hnj(i)) →0. Then the sequence of
elements χnj(i)

tiϕnj(i)(hnj(i))

is bounded in F. Therefore,
χnj(i)

ϕnj(i)(hnj(i))

= t−1
i

χnj(i)

tiϕnj(i)(hnj(i))

→0,
which is a contradiction.
□
4.5.9. Lemma. If E, G, and F are topological vector spaces, then the map-
ping
ψ: Ls(E, G)×Ls(G, F) →Ls(E, F),
(f1, f2) →f2◦f1
is infinitely ¯s-differentiable.
The proof is completely similar to the proof of the previous lemma.
4.5.10.
Remark. It is interesting that the natural analogs of the last two
lemmas for b- and s-differentiable mappings are false.
4.5.11.
Theorem. In the class of all topological vector spaces the chain
rule is valid for ¯c-derivatives of any order.
In the class of topological vector
spaces satisfying Condition (A1) in Proposition 4.3.1 the chain rule is valid for
¯b-derivatives of any order.
PROOF. These assertions are deduced by a standard reasoning from Corol-
lary 4.5.4 and Lemmas 4.5.8 and 4.5.9. For example, let us prove the second
assertion.
Let E, G, and F be three topological vector spaces such that G satisfies
Condition (A1), let f : E →G be n-fold ¯b-differentiable at a point x0, and let
g: G →F be n-fold ¯b-differentiable at the point f(x0); we show that the compo-
sition g◦f is n-fold ¯b-differentiable at the point x0.
By Corollary 4.5.4 the composition g ◦f is one-fold ¯b-differentiable at the
point x0. Hence we can use induction on n. Let n > 1 and let the mapping
x →g′
f(x)

from E to Lb(G, F) be (n −1)-fold ¯b-differentiable at this point.
Since this is certainly true also for the mapping x →f ′(x) from E to Lb(E, G),
the mapping
x →
*
f ′(x), g′
f(x)
+
,
E →Lb(E, G)×Lb(G, F)

268
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
is (n−1)-fold ¯b-differentiable at the point x0 Since by Lemma 4.5.8 the mapping ψ
of taking the composition is everywhere infinitely differentiable, by the inductive
assumption it follows that the mapping x →g′(f(x))◦f ′(x), E →Lb(E, F),
is (n −1)-fold ¯b-differentiable at the point x0, but this mapping is (where it is
defined) the first ¯b-derivative of the mapping x →g

f(x)

, E →F. This means
that the latter mapping is n-fold ¯b-differentiable at x0.
□
Our reasoning yields the following fact.
4.5.12. Corollary. Let E, G, and F be topological vector spaces such that
G satisfies Condition (A1) and E satisfies the following condition:
(A2) all sequentially continuous mappings from E to all topological vector
spaces are continuous.
If a mapping f : E →G is n-fold b-differentiable at a point x0 and a mapping
g: G →F is n-fold b-differentiable at the point f(x0), then the composition g ◦f
is n-fold b-differentiable at x0. A similar assertion is valid for c-derivatives.
We do not know whether the chain rule is valid for b-, ¯b- and s-derivatives in
the class of all topological vector spaces; in the class of all locally convex spaces,
it holds in all these cases, as we show in the next subsection.
(iii) Higher order derivatives.
Spaces possessing sufficient supplies of
continuous linear functionals
Let E, F and G be topological vector spaces and l ∈L(G, F). For every
n ∈IN, let ln
∗denote the linear mapping from the space L
n
σ(E, G) to L
n
σ(E, F)
defined as follows: if f∈L
n
σ(E, G) and x1, . . . , xn∈E, then

ln
∗(f)

(x1, . . . , xn) = l

f(x1, . . . , xn)

.
In addition, we set l0
∗= l.
Next, if E and G are topological vector spaces and n ∈IN, then Bn
σ(E, G)
will denote the subspace of the space L
n
σ(E, G) consisting of mappings which
correspond to symmetric mappings under the canonical embedding of this space
to the space of all n-linear mappings from E ×. . .×E to G. This subspace is
equipped with the induced topology.
Thus, Φ ∈Bn
σ(E, G) precisely when Φ ∈L
n
σ(E, G) and
Φ(x1, . . . , xn) = Φ(xs(1), . . . , xs(n))
for each permutation s of {1, 2, . . . , n}. In addition, let B0
σ(E, G)=L
0
σ(E, G)=G.
4.5.13. Lemma. If n ∈IN and g: E →G is n-fold ¯σ-differentiable at a
point x0 ∈E, then, for every l ∈L(G, F), the composition l◦g is also n-fold
¯σ-differentiable at x0 and
(l◦g)(n)(x0) = ln
∗

g(n)(x0)

.
The proof of this lemma is straightforward. A similar assertion is valid for
σ-differentiable mappings.

4.5. The derivative of a composition
269
4.5.14. Proposition. Let E be a topological vector space and let G be a
Hausdorff locally convex space.
Assume that a given system σE includes the
class of bounded subsets of E contained in finite-dimensional subspaces of E. If
g: E →G is n-fold ¯σ-differentiable at a point x0 ∈E, then
g(n)(x0) ∈Bn
σ(E, G).
PROOF. We can assume that x0 = 0. Let h1, . . . , hn ∈E, let g be the restric-
tion of g to the subspace En ⊂E generated by h1, . . . , hn, and let l ∈L(G, IR).
By the previous lemma the composition l◦g is a real function defined on a finite-
dimensional space and n-fold ¯σ-differentiable, i.e., differentiable in the classical
sense. Hence by the corresponding classical theorem
(l◦g)(n)(0)(h1, . . . , hn) = (l◦g)(n)(0)(hs(1), . . . , hs(n))
(4.5.2)
for every permutation s of the numbers 1, 2, . . . n. Indeed, if ψ: IRn →IR is
defined by the equality ψ(t1, . . . , tn) = l

g
	n
i=1 tihi

, then, as it follows from
the definition of ¯σ-differentiability, this mapping is n-fold differentiable in the
classical sense and
∂nψ(0)
∂t1 . . . ∂tn
=
∂nψ(0)
∂ts(1) . . . ∂ts(n)
.
The left-hand side of this equality coincides with the left-hand side of (4.5.2),
and its right-hand side coincides with the right-hand side of equality (4.5.2) (this
follows directly from the definition of ¯σ-differentiability). It follows from (4.5.2)
and the previous lemma that
l

g(n)(0)(h1, . . . , hn)

= l

g(n)(0)(hs(1), . . . , hs(n))

.
Since l was an arbitrary element of L(G, IR), we have
g(n)(0)(h1, . . . , hn) = g(n)(0)(hs(1), . . . , hs(n))
by the Hahn–Banach theorem.
□
4.5.15. Remark. An analog of the proven proposition remains valid with the
same proof also for σ-differentiable mappings. The proposition will be also true
if the assumption that the space G is locally convex is replaced by the weaker
condition of the existence of a set of continuous linear functionals on G separating
points.
We need two rather technical lemmas.
4.5.16. Lemma. Let E, G, and F be topological vector spaces such that
the space F is Hausdorff locally convex, let k ∈IN, and let n0, n1, . . . , nk be
nonnegative integer numbers such that n1 + · · · + nk = n0. Suppose that the
following condition is fulfilled:
(A3) if Ai ∈σ

L
ni
σ (E, G)

, A1
E ∈σE, . . . , Ani
E ∈σE for all i ∈{1, 2, . . . , k},
b ∈L
n
σ(E, G), then Ai(A1
E, . . . , Ani
E ) ∈σG, b(A1
E, . . . , Ani
E ) ∈σG.

270
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
Finally, let
β =

B| ∀i ∈{0, 1, . . . , k} ∃Ai ∈σ

L
ni
σ (E, G)

,
A0 ∈σ

Bk
σ(G, F)

: B ⊂A0×
k
"
i=0
Ai
.
If ni = 0, then we set Ai(A1
E, . . . , Ani
E ) := Ai, bni( · ) := bni; we also use other
similar relations. Then the mapping
s: Bk
σ(G, F)×
k
"
i=0
L
ni
σ (E, G) →Bn0
σ (E, F),
s: (˜b, bn1, . . . , bnk) →

(x1, . . . , xn) →˜b

bn1(x1, . . . , xn1),
bn2(xn1+1, . . . , xn1+n2), . . . , bnk(xn1+···+nk−1+1,...,xnk )
'
is ¯β-differentiable at every point and the value of its derivative at (˜b1, bn1
1 , . . . , bnk
1 )
is the mapping
s′(˜b1, bn1
1 , . . . , bnk
1 ): (˜b2, bn1
2 , . . . , bnk
2 ) →s(˜b2, bn1
1 , . . . , bnk
1 )
+ s(˜b1, bn1
2 , . . . , bnk
1 ) + · · · + s(˜b1, bn1
1 , . . . , bnk
2 ).
PROOF. We show first that, for every number i ∈{1, 2, . . . , k} for any fixed
elements ˜b1, bn1
1 , . . . , bni−1
1
, bni+1
1
, . . . , bnk
1 , the mapping
s′
i : bni
2 →s(˜b1, bn1
1 , . . . , bni−1
1
, bni
2 , bni+1
1
. . . , bnk
1 ),
L
ni
σ (E, G) →L
n
σ(E, F).
is sequentially continuous.
Suppose that a sequence {ϕr} in L
ni
σ (E, G) con-
verges to zero.
We show that the sequence s′
i(˜b1, bn1
1 , . . . , ϕr, . . . , bnk
1 ) in the
space L
n
σ(E, F) converges to zero, i.e., that
s′
i(˜b1, bn1
1 , . . . , ϕr, . . . , bnk
1 )(α1
r, α2
r, . . . , αn
r ) →0
(4.5.3)
in F for every all j ∈{1, 2, . . . , n}, {αj
r} ⊂Q ∈σE. Using the symmetry of b1,
we can rewrite the expression in (4.5.3) in the following form:
˜b1(ϕr(αn1+···+ni−1+1
r
, . . . , αn1+···+ni
r
), bn1
1 (α1
r, . . . , αn1
r ), . . .
. . . , bnk
1 (αn1+···+nk+1
r
, . . . , αn
r ).
Since ϕr(αn1+···+ni−1+1
r
, . . . , αn1+···+ni
r
) →0 in G and for every i the sequence
bni
i ( · ) is an element of some set in σG, relation (4.5.3) holds indeed.
We show that for every fixed collection bn1
1 , bn2
1 , . . . , bnk
1
the mapping
s′
0 : ˜b2 →s(˜b2, bn1
1 , . . . , bnk
1 ),
Bk
σ(G, F) →Bk
σ(E, F)

4.5. The derivative of a composition
271
is sequentially continuous. If a sequence {gr} in the space Bk
σ(G, F) converges to
zero and for every i = 1, 2, . . . , n we are given a sequence {αi
r} ⊂E contained
in some set from σE, then
gr

bn1
1 (α1
r, . . . , αn1
r ), . . . , bnk
1 (αn1+···+nk+1
r
, . . . , αn
r )

→0
in F, since by the assumption of the lemma for every i the sequence bni
1 ( · ) is
contained in one of sets of the system σG. This means that the mapping s′
0 is
sequentially continuous.
The sequential continuity of the mappings s′
i with i ⩽k yields the continuity
of the mapping 	k
i=0 s′
i. Thus, for completing the proof of the lemma it remains
to show that, for fixed ˜b1, bn1
1 , bn2
1 , . . . , bnk
1 , the mapping
Bk
σ(G, F)×
k
"
i=1
L
ni
σ (E, G) →Bn
σ(E, F)
sending the element (˜b2, bn1
2 , bn2
2 , . . . , bnk
2 ) to
s(˜b1 + ˜b2, bn1
1 + bn1
2 , . . . , bnk
1
+ bnk
2 ) −s(˜b1, bn1
1 , . . . , bnk
1 )
−s(˜b1, bn1
2 , bn2
1 , . . . , bnk
1 ) −s(˜b1, bn1
1 , bn2
2 , . . . , bnk
1 )
−· · · −s(˜b1, bn1
1 , bn2
1 , . . . bnk
2 ) −s(˜b2, bn1
1 , . . . , bnk
1 ),
is β-small. This mapping is the sum of finitely many mappings of the form
(˜b2, bn1
2 , . . . bnk
2 ) →s(˜b1, p1, . . . pk)
(4.5.4)
or
(˜b2, bn1
2 , . . . bnk
2 ) →s(˜b2, p1, . . . pk),
(4.5.5)
where pi = bni
2 or pi = bni
1 , in case of (4.5.4) the last equality is valid for at least
two values of the index i, and in case of (4.5.5) for at least one. Thus, it remains
to establish that the mappings (4.5.4) and (4.5.5) are β-small. The proof of this is
completely similar to the just given justification of the sequential continuity of the
mappings s′
0, s′
1, . . . , s′
k.
□
Let us proceed to the second technical assertion about differentiability of com-
positions of derivatves.
4.5.17. Lemma. Let E, G, F, k, and ni be the same as in the previous
lemma. Suppose that for i = 0, 1, . . . k the mapping fi : E →G is (ni + 1)-
fold ¯b-differentiable at a point x0 ∈E, the mapping g: G →F is (k + 1)-fold
¯b-differentiable at the point f0(x0). Then the mapping
Ψ: x →

(h1, . . . , hn) →g(k)
f0(x)

f (n1)
1
(x)(h1, . . . , hn1), . . .
. . . , f (nk)
k
(x)(hn1+n2+···+nk−1+1, . . . , hnk)
'

272
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
from E to Bn
σ(E, F) is ¯b-differentiable at the point x0 and if h ∈E, then
Ψ′(x0)h =

(h1, . . . , hn) →g(k+1)
f0(x0)

f ′
0(x0)h, f (n1)
1
(x0)(h1, . . . , hn1),
. . . , f (nk)
k
(x0)(hn1+n2+···+nk−1+1, . . . , hnk)

+ g(k)
f0(x0)

f (n1+1)
1
(x0)(h, h1, . . . , hn1),
. . . , f (nk)
k
(x0)(hn1+n2+···+nk−1+1, . . . , hnk)

· · · + g(k)
f0(x0)

f (n1)
1
(x0)(h1, . . . , hn1),
. . . , f (nk+1)
k
(x0)(h, hn1+n2+···+nk−1+1, . . . , hnk
'
.
This follows from Lemma 4.5.16, Proposition 4.5.14 and Corollary 4.5.4.
4.5.18. Theorem. Let E, G, and F be topological vector spaces such that F
is Hausdorff locally convex. Let f : E →G be n-fold ¯b-differentiable at a point
x0 ∈E and let g: G →F be n-fold ¯b-differentiable at the point f(x0). Then the
composition g ◦f is n-fold ¯b-differentiable at the point x0 and
(g◦f)(n)(x0)(h1, . . . , hn) =
n

k=1

g(k)
f(x0)

f (r1)(x0)(hi1
1, . . . , hi1
r1),
. . . , f (rk)(x0)(hik
1, . . . , hik
rk )

,
(4.5.6)
where the inner sum is taken over all partitions of the set {h1, . . . , hn} into k
disjoint sets {hi1
1, . . . , hi1
r1}, . . . , {hik
1, . . . , hik
rk }, and r1 + · · · + rk = n, rj > 0,
ij
1 < ij
2 < · · · < ij
rj, j = 1, 2, . . . , k, i1
1 < i2
1 < · · · < ik
1.
PROOF. For n = 1 this is true by Corollary 4.5.4. We can pass from n to
n + 1 for ¯b- and ¯s-derivatives by Lemma 4.5.17. The validity of this theorem for
¯b- and ¯s-derivatives yields that it is valid also for b- and s-derivatives. Similar
assertions are true in case of b-, ¯s- and s-differentiabilities.
□
4.5.19. Remark. In all previous propositions the requirement of local con-
vexity of the space F can be replaced by the requirement of existence of a set of
continuous linear functionals on F separating points.
Equality (4.5.6) for E = F = G = IR1 becomes the so-called Fa`a di Bruno
formula.
4.5.20. Proposition. Let ϕ be a continuous bilinear mapping from the product
E1×E2 of two topological vector spaces to a topological vector space F. Suppose
that mappings gi : G →Ei, i = 1, 2, are n-fold σ-differentiable at a point x0 ∈G.
Then the mapping f : x →ϕ

g1(x), g2(x)

, G →F is n-fold σ-differentiable at
the point x0 ∈G and
f (n)(x0)(h1, . . . , hn)=

ϕ

g(k1)
1
(x0)(hi1, . . . , hik1), g(k2)
2
(x0)(hj1, . . . , hjk2)

,
where the sum is taken over all partitions of {h1, . . . , hn} in disjoint pairs of sets
{hi1, . . . , hik1} and {hj1, . . . , hjk2}, k1 + k2 = n, i1 < · · · < ik1, j1 < · · · < jk2.
This proposition is proved by induction on the order of differentiability n.

4.6. The mean value theorem
273
4.6. The mean value theorem
A mapping f of a set V on the real line to a topological vector space G is
called right differentiable at a point x0 ∈V if the point x0 belongs to the closure
of the set V ∩(x0, ∞) and there exists a limit
lim
t↓0, x0+t∈V t−1
f(x0 + t) −f(x0)

;
this limit denoted by f ′
+(x0) is called the right derivative of the mapping f at the
point x0. Similarly one defines left differentiability and left derivatives.
4.6.1. Theorem. Let S be an at most countable subset of [a, b], G a Hausdorff
locally convex space, B is a convex closed subset, f : [a, b] →G a continuous
mapping, and g a continuous nonincreasing real function on [a, b] such that at
every point t ∈[a, b]\S the functions f and g are right differentiable and
f ′
+(t) ∈g′
+(t)B.
(4.6.1)
Then
f(a) −f(b) ∈

g(b) −g(a)

B.
(4.6.2)
This theorem follows (as we shall see below) from the next lemma.
4.6.2. Lemma. Let a, b and S be the same as in the theorem above and let
ϕ and ψ be continuous real functions on [a, b] right differentiable ar every point
in the set [a, b]\S. Suppose that ψ is increasing and at each point t ∈[a, b]\S the
inequality ϕ′
+(t) ⩽ψ′
+(t) holds. Then ϕ(b) −ϕ(a) ⩽ψ(b) −ψ(a).
PROOF. Let S = {tn}. For every point t in [a, b] let Nt denote the set of all
natural numbers n for which tn < t. It suffices to show that for every ε > 0 we
have
ϕ(b) −ϕ(a) ⩽ψ(b) −ψ(a) + ε

n∈Nt
2−n + ε(t −a) + ε.
(4.6.3)
Suppose that for some ε > 0 inequality (4.6.3) is false. By continuity, for any
t ∈[a, b] sufficiently close to b we have
ϕ(t) −ϕ(a) > ψ(t) −ψ(a) + ε

n∈Nt
2−n + ε(t −a) + ε.
(4.6.4)
Let c be the infimum of the set T of points t for which inequality (4.6.4) is true.
Then c /∈T, since, by the continuity of both functions, along with every point t
the set T contains all sufficiently close points smaller than t. If now c ∈S, then
again by continuity there exists δ > 0 such that for every point t in the interval
[c, c + δ] we have
ϕ(t) −ϕ(a) ⩽ψ(t) −ψ(a) + ε

n∈Nt
2−n + ε(t −a) + ε.
which contradicts the equality c = inf{t: t ∈T}.

274
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
If c /∈S, then at c both functions are right differentiable and ϕ′
+(c) ⩽ψ′
+(c)
by assumption. Therefore, there exists η > 0 such that if t ∈(c, c + η], then
ϕ′
+(c) = ϕ(t) −ϕ(c)
t −c
−ε
2,
ψ′
+(c) ⩽ψ(t) −ψ(c)
t −c
−ε
2.
The last three inequalities yield that
ϕ(t) −ϕ(c) ⩽ψ(t) −ψ(c) + ε(t −c).
Since c /∈T, we have
ϕ(c) −ϕ(a) ⩽ψ(c) −ψ(a) + ε

n∈Nt
2−n + ε(t −a) + ε.
The last two inequalities imply that
ϕ(t) −ϕ(a) ⩽ψ(t) −ψ(a) + ε

n∈Nt
2−n + ε(t −a) + ε.
Thus, if t ∈(c, c + η], then t /∈T contrary to the definition of c. Hence inequality
(4.6.3) is true for every ε > 0.
□
PROOF OF THEOREM 4.6.1.
If the inclusion (4.6.2) is false, then by the
Hahn–Banach theorem there exists a continuous linear functional l on G such that
l

f(b) −f(a)

> sup
z∈B
l

g(b) −g(a)

z

.
(4.6.5)
Set d = sup
z∈B
l(z), ψ(t) = dg(t), ϕ(t) = l

f(t)

. By (4.6.1) the functions ϕ and ψ
satisfy the conditions of the lemma proved above, whence
l

f(b) −f(a)

>

g(b) −g(a)

sup
z∈B
l(z).
Since g(b) −g(a) ⩾0, the right-hand side of the last inequality equals the right-
hand side of inequality (4.6.5). The obtained contradiction proves the theorem.
4.6.3. Remark. Certainly, a similar assertion is valid for the left differentia-
bility. To show this it suffices to observe that the change of variable t →−t takes
left differentiable functions to right differentiable functions.
4.6.4. Corollary. (THE MEAN VALUE THEOREM) Let S be an at most count-
able subset of the interval [a, b], let G be a Hausdorff locally convex space, and
let f : [a, b] →G be a continuous mapping differentiable at each point of [a, b]\S.
Then
f(b) −f(a) ∈conv {f ′(θ)(b −a): θ ∈(a, b)\S}.
PROOF. It suffices to apply the theorem, taking the mapping g(t) = t(b −a)
and the set B = conv {f ′(θ)(b −a): θ ∈(a, b)\S}.
□
4.6.5. Corollary. Let V be an open connected set in a topological vector
space E and let f be a mapping from V to a Hausdorff locally convex space G
that is Gˆateax differentiable at every point of the set V . If f ′(x) = 0 for every
point x ∈V , then f(x) ≡c ∈G.

4.7. Taylor’s formula
275
The mean value theorems proved in this section belong to the most important
results in the differentiation theory, in spite of their trivial justifications.
4.7. Taylor’s formula
We first consider Taylor’s formula with the remainder in the Lagrange form.
4.7.1. Theorem. Let S be an at most countable subset of the interval [a, b],
n ∈{0} ∪IN, G a Hausdorff locally convex space, and f : [a, b] →G a mapping
which is n-fold continuously differentiable everywhere on [a, b] and (n + 1)-fold
differentiable at every point of the set [a, b]\S. Then the following relation (called
Taylor’s formula with the remainder in the Lagrange form) is valid:
f(b) −f(a) −
n

i=1
1
i!f (i)(a)(b −a)i
∈conv

1
(n + 1)!f (n+1)(θ)(b −a)n+1 : θ ∈(a, b)\S

.
(4.7.1)
PROOF. For n = 0 our assertion coincides with the mean value theorem from
the previous section. Suppose that it is already proven for some integer n = m ⩾0
and prove that it remains valid for n = m + 1. By the mean value theorem for the
function
t →f(t) −
m+1

i=1
1
i!f (i)(a)(t −a)i
we have the inclusion
f(b) −f(a) −
m+1

i=1
1
i!f (i)(a)(b −a)i ∈conv
%
f ′
a + θ(b −a)

−f ′(a)
−
m

i=1
1
i!f (i+1)(a)

θ(b −a)
i
(b −a): 0<θ<1
&
.
By the inductive assumption applied to the map f ′ : [a, a + θ(b −a)] →G, which
satisfies the corresponding conditions, we obtain
f ′
a + θ(b −a)

−f ′(a) −
m

i=1
1
i!f (i+1)(a)

θ(b −a)
i
∈conv

f (m+2)
a+αθ(b−a)

θ(b−a)
m+1 : a+αθ(b−a) /∈S, 0 < α < 1

.
The last two inclusions yield
f(b) −f(a) −
m+1

i=1
1
i!f (i)(a)(b −a)i
∈conv

f (m+2)
a + αθ(b −a)

·

θm+1(b −a)m+2
:
a + αθ(b −a) /∈S, 0 < α < 1, 0 < θ < 1

,
as required.
□

276
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
4.7.2. Corollary. Suppose that E is a topological vector space, G is a Haus-
dorff locally convex space, x1, x2 ∈E, [x1, x2] is the compact interval joining
x1 and x2, n ∈IN, and f : E →G is a mapping continuous at every point
of [x1, x2] and (n + 1)-fold weakly differentiable at every point of the inter-
val (x1, x2) = [x1, x2]\{x1, x2} such that the mapping x →f (n)(x1 −x2),
[x1, x2] →G is continuous. Then
f(x2) −f(x1) −
n

i=1
1
i!f (i)(x1)(x2 −x1) . . . (x2 −x1)
∈conv

1
(n + 1)!f (n+1)(x)(x2 −x1) . . . (x2 −x1): x ∈(x1, x2)

.
PROOF. We apply the theorem to the mapping t →f

x1 + t(x2 −x1)

from
the interval [0, 1] to G.
□
We now turn to Taylor’s formula with the remainder in the Peano form. Tay-
lor’s formula proved above with the remainder in the Lagrange form is applicable
to (n + 1)-fold σ-differentiable mappings of arbitrary topological vector spaces
to arbitrary Hausdorff locally convex spaces; the properties of the remainder do
not depend on σ. In contrast, the properties of the remainder in the Peano form
explicitly depend on the system of sets σ; this remainder is a σ-small mapping of
the corresponding order.
4.7.3. Theorem. Suppose that a mapping g from a topological vector space E
to a Hausdorff locally convex space G is n-fold σ-differentiable at a point x0 ∈E.
Then there exists a σ-small mapping r: E →G of order n such that for all h ∈E
one has
g(x0 + h) −g(x0) =
n

i=1
1
i!g(i)(x0)(h, . . . , h
  
i
) + r(h).
(4.7.2)
PROOF. We observe first of all that if n > 1 and s is a mapping from E to
Ln−1
σ
(E, G) equal to the nth derivative (at some point) of some mapping from E
to G, then ϕs : x →s(x, . . . , x) is a σ-small mapping. This follows from the fact
that all spaces Ln
σ(E, G) (to which the values of derivatives belong) are topological
vector, hence in each of them every neighborhood of zero is an absorbent set; for
this reason the mapping
IR1\{0} ∋t →[x →t−1ϕs(tx)] = [x →tn−1ϕs(x)], 0 →0
from IR1 to Fσ(E, G) is continuous at zero.
We show that if s = g(n)(x0), then the mapping
ϕs : x →s(x, . . . , x),
E →G
is infinitely σ-differentiable at every point and for every natural number i ⩽n one
has the equality (recall that in accordance with our agreement L0
σ(E, G) = G,
ϕ(0)
s
: x →s(x, . . . , x) ∈G and so on)
(ϕs)(i)(x) =

(h1, . . . , hi) →n(n −1) · · · (n −i + 1)s(x, . . . , x, h1, . . . , hi)
'
,

4.7. Taylor’s formula
277
and for every natural number i > n we have ϕ(i)
s
= 0. First of all, the mapping
ϕs is one-fold σ-differentiable and for i = 1 we have equality (4.7.2). Indeed, the
mapping
ψ: h →ϕs(x + h) −ϕs(x) −ns(x, . . . , x
  
n−1
, h)
is (by the symmetry of the mapping s proved in Proposition 4.5.14) a linear com-
bination with positive integer coefficients of the mappings
sk
x : h →s(x, . . . , x
  
n−k
, h, . . . , h
  
k
),
where k ∈{2, 3, . . . , n}. The fact that each of these mappings is σ-small follows
from what has been said at the beginning of the proof, because
sk
x(h) =

g(n−k)(k)(x0)(h, . . . , h
  
k
)(x, . . . , x
  
n−k
)
and the mapping
h →

g(n−k)(k)(x0)(h, . . . , h),
E →Ln−k
σ
(E, G)
is σ-small, since it is the derivative of the mapping g(n−k). Hence it is σ-small as
a mapping from E to Ln−k
f
(E, G) (the topology of convergence on the sets of the
system σE is stronger than the topology of pointwise convergence in the space of
mappings from E to an arbitrary topological vector space). Further, suppose that
for some i ⩽n −2 (n > 2) the assertions about the i-fold σ-differentiability of
the mapping ϕs and the value of its ith σ-derivative are already proven. Then the
differentiability of the mapping ϕ(i)
s
follows from the above reasoning taking into
account the equality

(h1, . . . , hi) →s(x, . . . , x
  
n−i
, h1, . . . , hi)
'
=

g(i)(n−i)(x0)(x, . . . , x
  
n−i
)
and the σ-smallness of the mapping that is the σ-derivative of order j > 1 of
some other mapping at the given point. Finally, if our assertion about differential
properties of ϕs is already established for i = n −1, then its validity for all larger
natural i follows from (4.7.2) and the linearity and continuity of the mapping
h →

g(n−1)′(x0)h,
E →Ln−1
σ
(E, G).
Thus, for every number i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n} the mapping x →g(i)(x0)(x, . . . , x)
is infinitely σ-differentiable and all its derivatives, excepting the ith derivative,
vanish at the point 0 and its ith derivative equals i!g(i)(x0). Hence for the mapping
r: E →G defined by equality (4.7.2) we have r(0)=0, r′(0)=0, . . . , r(n)(0)=0
(the symbols of differentiation denote σ-derivatives of the corresponding orders),
therefore, as we shall now show, r ∈Rnσ(E, G). Since for n = 1 this is true
by definition, we can use induction on n. Suppose that n ⩾2 and the previous

278
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
assertion is true for n −1. The n-fold σ-differentiability of the mapping r at the
point 0 yields that for all h ∈E we have
t−nr(th) ∈conv

t−(n−1)r′(θth)h: 0 < θ < 1

(4.7.3)
for all nonzero t ∈IR1 with sufficiently large absolute values. By the inductive
assumption, if {tj} is a sequence of nonzero real numbers converging to zero and
{hj} is a sequence of elements of the set Q ∈σ, then t−(n−1)
j
r′(tjhj) →0 in the
space Lσ(E, G). But this and inclusion (4.7.3) yield by the local convexity of the
space G that t−1
j r(tjhj) →0 in G, i.e., that r ∈Rnσ(E, G).
□
4.8. Partial derivatives
The next theorem is an analog of the classical assertion that for differentiabil-
ity of a real function of n real variables at a given point (in the classical sense,
i.e., in the sense of Fr´echet) it is sufficient that all its partial derivatives exist in
some neighborhood of the given point and be continuous at this point.
4.8.1. Theorem. Let E = E1×. . .×En, where E1, . . . , En are topological
vector spaces, and let β be some family of bounded subsets of E such that β ⊃σE
ﬁn.
For every i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n} let βi denote the family of all subsets Ei that are
projections onto Ei of the sets in β. Let G be a vector space and let τ1 and τ2 be
two Hausdorff locally convex topologies on G possessing the same supplies of
closed convex sets.
If g: E →G is ¯β-differentiable along the subspace E1 at the point x0 as a
mapping from E to (G, τ1) and for i = 1, 2, . . . , n is Gˆateax differentiable along
the subspace Ei in some neighborhood of x0 as a mapping from E to (G, τ2),
moreover, g′(x) ∈Lβi

E, (G, τ1)

for every point x ∈E and the mappings
x →g′
Ei(x) from E to Lβi

E, (G, τ1)

are sequentially continuous at the point x0,
then g is β-differentiable at x0 and
g′(x0)h =
n

i=1
g′
Ei(x0)hi.
PROOF. We consider the case n = 2; the general case can be obtained by
induction on n. If h = (h1, h2) ∈E, then
r(h) = g(x0 + h) −g(x0) −g′
E1(x0)h1 −g′
E2(x0)h2
=

g

x0 + (h1, h2)

−g(x0 + (h1, 0)) −g′
E2(x0)h2
'
+

g

x0 + (h1, 0)

−g(x0) −g′
E1(x0)h1
'
.
Let r2(h) be the expression in the square brackets. It follows from the hypotheses
of the theorem that r2 ∈Rβ(E, G). Hence it remains to prove that if r1(h) is the
expression in the first square brackets, then r1 ∈Rβ(E, G). By the mean value
theorem, as t ∈IR1, t ̸= 0, we have
t−1r(th) ∈conv

g′
E2

x0 + t(h1, 0) + θt(0, h2)

h2 −g′
E2(x0)h2 : 0 < θ < 1

.
Taking into account the sequential continuity of the mapping x →g′
E2(x) from E
to Lβ(E2, G), we obtain that r1 ∈Rβ(E, G).
□

4.9. Inversion of Taylor’s formula and the chain rule
279
It is clear from the proof that an analog of this theorem is also true for β-
differentiable mappings.
4.9. Inversion of Taylor’s formula and the chain rule
It is well-known (see also Exercise 4.10.57) that the continuity of the mapping
f : X →Y between normed spaces is equivalent to the continuity of all compo-
sitions f ◦ϕ for continuous mappings ϕ: IR →X and is also equivalent to the
continuity of the compositions ψ◦f for all continuous functions ψ: Y →IR. Here
we discuss analogs of such descriptions of differentiability. In particular, it will
be shown that for a number of important types of differentiability a mapping f on
an infinite-dimensional space X belongs to the class Cn if the composition f ◦ϕ
belongs to the class Cn for every C∞-mapping ϕ from IR2 to X. However, we
first give some examples showing that the situation with differentiability is more
subtle.
4.9.1. Example. Let f : IR2 →IR1, f(x, y) = y3/(x2 + y2), f(0, 0) = 0.
Then the function f is not Gˆateax differentiable at the origin, although for every
mapping ϕ ∈C1(IR1, IR2) we have f ◦ϕ ∈C1(IR1).
PROOF. We have ∂e1f(0, 0) = 0, ∂e2f(0, 0) = 1, ∂e1+e2f(0, 0) = 1/2 for
the standard basis vectors e1 and e2, hence f has no Gˆateax derivative at the origin.
Let ϕ ∈C1(IR1, IR2), ϕ = (ϕ1, ϕ2). Let us verify the continuous differentiability
of f ◦ϕ in a neighborhood of the origin. We can assume that ϕ(0) = (0, 0),
otherwise there is no problem. If ϕ′
2(0) ̸= 0, then by a straightforward evaluation
we obtain the equality
(f ◦ϕ)′(0) =

ϕ′
2(0)
3
|ϕ′
1(0)|2 + |ϕ′
2(0)|2−1.
In this case ϕ2(t) ̸= 0 if t ̸= 0 in a neighborhood of zero, whence we can easily
obtain the claim. Suppose now that ϕ′(0) = (0, 0). Then (f ◦ϕ)′(0) = (0, 0),
since |f

ϕ(t)

/t| ⩽|ϕ2(t)/t| →0. Thus, we have established differentiability
of composition in all cases. If in a neighborhood of zero we have ϕ(t) ̸= (0, 0)
whenever t ̸= 0, then
(f ◦ϕ)′ = ∂xf(ϕ)ϕ′
1 + ∂yf(ϕ)ϕ′
2,
which tends to zero as t →0, since a simple verification shows the boundedness
of ∂xf and ∂yf. Hence the composition has a continuous derivative. If the origin
is not an isolated zero of ϕ, then, as above, the derivative of the composition at
zero is zero. Hence we have to verify that (f ◦ϕ)′(tn) →0 as tn →0. Here it
suffices to consider only those points at which (f ◦ϕ)′(tn) ̸= 0. It follows that
ϕ′
2(tn) ̸= 0. If ϕ(tn) ̸= (0, 0), then
(f ◦ϕ)′(tn) = ∂xf

ϕ(tn)

ϕ1(tn)′ + ∂yf

ϕ(tn)

ϕ′
2(tn) →0,
since ϕ′
1(tn) →0 and ϕ′
2(tn) →0 by the equality ϕ′
1(0) = ϕ′
2(0) = 0 (the origin
is not an isolated point). In the remaining case ϕ(tn) = (0, 0) we obtain as above
(f ◦ϕ)′(tn) =

ϕ′
2(tn)
3
|ϕ′
1(tn)|2 + |ϕ′
2(tn)|2−1 →0,
which completes the proof.
□

280
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
4.9.2. Example. Let X = L1[0, 1] and let
f(x) =
 1
0
sin x(t) dt.
Then f has no Fr´echet derivative at any point (Example 4.2.14), but for all n ∈IN
for every ϕ ∈C1(IRn, X) the inclusion f ◦ϕ ∈C1(IR1) holds, which is verified
directly.
We now consider three examples with outer compositions (i.e., left composi-
tions).
4.9.3. Example. Let f : IR1 →c0, f(t) =

n−1 sin(nt)
∞
n=1. Then f is not
differentiable at any point even in the weak topology, although ψ◦f ∈C1(IR1)
for all ψ ∈C1(c0), in particular, l(f) ∈C1(IR1) for all l ∈c′
0 = l1.
PROOF. If f is differentiable at least in the weak topology, then we have the
equality f ′(0) =

cos(nt)
∞
n=1, which is not an element of c0 for any t. For
λ = (λn) ∈l1 = c′
0 we have l(f)(t) = 	∞
n=1 n−1λn sin(nt), which is a continu-
ously differentiable function on the real line. It follows from Corollary 4.5.4 that
ψ◦f ∈C1(IR1) for all functions ψ ∈C1(c0, IR1).
□
4.9.4. Example. Let us define a mapping f : IR1 →l2 by f(t)=

tη(2nt)
∞
n=1,
where η ∈C∞(IR1), η(0) = 0 if t ̸∈[3/4, 5/4], η(1) = 1.
Then f is not
differentiable at zero, is continuously differentiable in the weak topology and
ψ◦f ∈C1(IR1) for all ψ ∈C1(l2, IR1).
If we set f(t) =

tmη(2nt)
∞
n=1, where m ∈IN, m ⩾2, then ψ◦f ∈Cm(IR1)
for all ψ ∈Cm(l2, IR1), moreover, f ∈Cm−1(IR1, l2), but f ̸∈Cm(IR1, l2).
PROOF. For λ = (λn) ∈l2 we obtain a real function
l(f)(t) =
∞

n=1
λntη(2nt).
This convergent series can be differentiated term-by-term, which produces the se-
ries 	∞
n=1 λn[η(2nt) + t2nη′(2nt)], since the latter series (as the original one)
converges uniformly, because the functions η(2nt) have disjoint supports for dif-
ferent numbers n and λn →0. As in the previous example, this gives the con-
tinuous differentiability of ψ ◦f ∈C1(IR1) for all ψ ∈C1(c0, IR1). However,
there is no derivative at zero in the norm topology, because for tn = 2−n we have
∥f(tn)−f(0)∥/tn = 1, although the derivative at zero in the weak topology exists
and is zero: the ratio f(t)/t tends to zero coordinate-wise and is norm bounded.
The case m > 1 is similar.
□
In the last example both spaces are infinite-dimensional Hilbert.
4.9.5. Example. Let X = L2[0, 1] and let F : X →X be defined by the
formula F(x)(t) = sin x(t). Then F is Fr´echet differentiable at no point (Exam-
ple 4.2.15), but ψ◦F ∈C1(X) for all ψ ∈C1(X) and F ◦ϕ ∈C1(IRn, X) for all
ϕ ∈C1(IRn, X) for all n, which is verified directly.

4.9. Inversion of Taylor’s formula and the chain rule
281
Let us proceed to positive results. They admit a unified description in terms
of differentiability with respect to a system A of subsets of a Hausdorff locally
convex space X satisfying the following conditions: A contains all finite sets
(hence A-differentiability implies Gˆateax differentiability; if A-continuity yields
the continuity of linear operators, then also 
A-differentiability implies Gˆateax dif-
ferentiability), is closed with respect to multiplication by scalars, and the union of
any two sets in A is contained in a set from A. These conditions are fulfilled for
the systems of finite sets, bounded sets, compact sets, sequentially compact sets,
and also Banach discs. The class of convergent sequences does not satisfy the
latter condition, but the results presented below can be extended also to this class
by using sequential compactness of all sets in this class. For metrizable spaces,
one can have in mind differentiability with respect to the system of bounded sets
or the system of compact sets.
We recall (see § 4.1) that the symbol LA(X, Y ) denotes the linear space of
all linear A-continuous operators from X to Y equipped with the topology of
uniform convergence on the class A, and that the definition of A-differentiability
of a mapping f : X →Y at a point x0 is introduced by replacing the requirement
that the operator f ′(x0) belongs to the class L(X, Y ) of continuous operators
or to the class L(X, Y ) of sequentially continuous operators by the inclusion
f(x0) = f ′(x0) ∈LA(X, Y ).
For an open set U ⊂X, the class Cn
A(U, Y ) consists of n-fold A-continu-
ously differentiable mapping. Let Dn
Af denote 
A-derivative of order n. In the
case of normed spaces and the class A of all bounded sets, 
A-differentiability is
Fr´echet differentiability and the class Cn
A(U, Y ) is the usual class of n-fold Fr´echet
differentiable mappings with continuous derivatives up to order n. We now obtain
the inversion of Taylor’s formula.
For a k-linear mapping Ψ we set Ψhk := Ψ(h, . . . , h).
4.9.6. Theorem. Suppose that f is an A-continuous mapping from U to a
Hausdorff locally convex space Y and, for some n ∈IN, for each x ∈U and each
k = 1, . . . , n there is a symmetric k-linear mapping Ψk(x): Xk →Y such that
the mapping rn defined by the formula
f(x + h) −f(x) =
n

k=1
1
k!Ψk(x)hk + rn(x, h),
has the following properties: rn(x, 0) = 0 and for every A, B ∈A uniformly
in v ∈A and h ∈B as t →0 we have rn(x + tv, th)/tn →0. Then we have
f ∈Cn
A(U, Y ) and Dk
Af(x) = Ψk(x).
PROOF. Taking n different numbers αj ∈(0, 1), we can linearly express
Ψk(x)hk through f(x + αjh) −f(x) −rn(x, αjh) from the equalities
f(x + αjh) −f(x) −rn(x, αjh) =
n

k=1
αk
j Ψk(x)hk/k!.
The condition implies A-continuity of f(x + αjh) and rn(x, αjh) in h at zero.
This gives A-continuity of Ψk(x)hk in h, whence by the symmetry we obtain

282
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
A-continuity of the mapping Ψk(x). Assuming that the theorem is true for n −1,
we show that it holds for n. Writing expansions for f(x + h + w) in two ways for
x + (h + w) and for (x + h) + w, we obtain
n

k=1
1
k!Ψk(x + h)wk + rn(x + h, w) =
n

k=1
1
k!Ψk(x)(h + w)k + rn(x, h + w),
whence we find
σ(x, h, w) : = rn(x + h, w) −rn(x, h + w)
= g1(x, h)w + · · · + gn(x, h)wn, where gk(x, h)∈Lk
A(X, Y ).
This is verified by using that Ψk is k-linear. For example,
g1(x, h)w = Ψ1(x + h)w −
n

k=1
1
k!Ψk(x)(hk−1, w).
(4.9.1)
Now we have to verify that the inductive assumption is applicable to the mapping
Ψ1 : U →LA(X, Y ). To this end, we have to show that this mapping is A-
continuous and that for all A, B ∈A uniformly in v ∈A and h ∈B we have
g1(x + tv, th)/tn−1 →0 in LA(X, Y ) as t →0. To do this, we observe that, as
t →0 we have
σ(x + tv, th, tw)
tn
= rn(x + tv + th, tw) −rn(x + tv, th + tw)
tn
→0
uniformly in v ∈A, h ∈B, w ∈C for any fixed A, B, C ∈A. As above, the
elements gk(x, h)wk can be linearly express through σ(x, h, αjw) from the system
	n
k=1 αk
j gk(x, h)wk = σ(x, h, αjw). Due to the noted property of σ this yields
uniform convergence of
g1(x + tv, th)w/tn−1 = g1(x + tv, th)(tw)/tn
to zero as t →0. Along with (4.9.1) and the continuity of the k-linear mappings
Ψk(x) this yields the continuity of the mapping x →Ψ1(x). Finally, it is easy to
verify by definition that f ′ = Ψ1.
□
Let X and Y be Hausdorff locally convex spaces, n ∈IN, Cn
b (X, Y ) the class
of mappings g: X →Y that are n-fold differentiable with respect to the system of
bounded sets and have the property that for each k ⩽n the mapping x →g(k)(x)
is sequentially continuous if we equip the space of k-linear sequentially continuous
mappings from Xk to Y with the topology of convergence on bounded sets. Let
A be a class of bounded sets in X satisfying the conditions indicated above.
4.9.7. Theorem. Let n ∈IN. (i) If f : U →Y is such that for every infinitely
Fr´echet differentiable mapping ϕ: IR2 →U the composition f ◦ϕ is (n + 1)-fold
continuously differentiable, then f ∈Cn
b (U, Y ).
(ii) If for all A, B ∈A the set 
a∈A,b∈B,t∈[0,1](a + tb) is contained in A
and every infinite sequence in A contains an A-converging subsequence, then the
condition that f ◦ϕ ∈Cn(IR2, Y ) for all functions ϕ ∈C∞(IR2, U) implies that
we have f ∈Cn
A(U, Y ).

4.9. Inversion of Taylor’s formula and the chain rule
283
PROOF. In order to apply the previous theorem we construct the required
k-linear mappings Ψk. Let D1 and D2 be the operators of differentiation with
respect to the first and second variables for functions on IR2 and let D be the
differentiation operator for functions on the real line. Fix h1, . . . , hn+1 ∈X. Set
Ψ1(x)h1 = D1(f ◦ϕ)(0, 0),
where ϕ(t1, t2) = x + t1h1,
Ψ2(x)(h1, h2) = D2D1(f ◦ϕ)(0, 0),
where ϕ(t1, t2) = x + t1h1 + t2h2.
We observe that Ψ2(h1, h2) = DΨ1(x + th2)h1(0). The mapping Ψ1(x) is linear
for every x, because letting τ1 = λ1t1, τ2 = λ2t2, α(t1, t2) = x+t1(λ1h1+λ2h2),
β(t1, t2) = x + τ1h1 + τ2h2 we have
Ψ1(x)(λ1h1 + λ2h2) = D1(f ◦α)(0, 0)
= D1(f ◦β)(0, 0)D1τ1(0, 0) + D2(f ◦β)(0, 0)D1τ2(0, 0)
= λ1Ψ1(x)h1 + λ2Ψ1(x)h2.
The mapping h1 →Ψ2(x)(h1, h2) is linear as the derivative of a mapping linear
in h1, hence it is linear also in h2 by the symmetry of the mixed derivative.
Suppose that for some number k > 1 we have multilinear mappings Ψj(x),
where j = 1, . . . , k, such that
Ψk(x)(h1, . . . , hk) = DΨk−1(x + thk)(h1, . . . , hk−1)(0),
Ψj(x)(h1, . . . , hk) =
nk

i=1
λiΨk(x)vk
i ,
(4.9.2)
where vi is some linear combination of h1, . . . , hk with constant coefficients
(depending along with coefficients λi on j), and, moreover, similar relations
hold for all smaller k.
Then, as one can readily verify, we have the equality
Ψk(x)vk
i = Dk
1(f ◦α)(0, 0), where α(t1, t2) = x + t1vi + t2hk+1. Hence the
mapping t →Ψk(x + thk+1)vk
i is differentiable and
DΨk(x + thk+1)vk
i (0) = D2Dk
1(f ◦α)(0, 0).
(4.9.3)
Set
Ψk+1(x)(h1, . . . , hk+1) = DΨk(x + thk+1)(h1, . . . , hk)(0).
We observe that the operator D2Dk
1 can be written as a linear combination of
operators of differentiation of the form ∂m
ui, where ui ∈IR2. For this purpose we
can use the identity
m
"
i=1
zi = 1
m!
m

r=1
(−1)m−r

i1<i2<···<ir
(zi1 + · · · + zir)m,
which holds for commuting elements of an arbitrary ring. This identity applies to
the differential operators z1 = D2, zi = D1, i > 1, which gives in the right-hand
side some powers of the differentiations along vectors of the form k1e1+(r−k1)e2.
From this on account of (4.9.2) and (4.9.3) we obtain the representation
Ψk+1(x)(h1, . . . , hk+1) =
nk+1

i=1
μiΨk+1(x)wk+1
i
,

284
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
where wi is some linear combination of h1, . . . , hk+1 with constant coefficients.
Thus, (4.9.2) is fulfilled for k + 1. The linearity of Ψk(x) in h1, . . . , hk yields
the linearity of Ψk+1(x) with respect to these variables, and the linearity in hk+1
follows from (4.9.3) and the linearity of D2(f◦α)(0) in hk+1. Thus, the inductive
step is justified. Hence for all k ⩽n + 1 we can determine the element Ψk(x),
moreover,
Ψk(x + thk)(h1, . . . , hk) = DΨk−1(x + thk)(h1, . . . , hk−1),
whence Ψk(x + th)hk = Dkf(x + th).
Let us prove the A-continuity of the mapping (x, h) →Ψk(x)hk (here A is
the class of all bounded sets in case (i)). Let xi
A
→x0 and hi
A
→h0. Suppose that
the elements Ψk(xi)hk
i do not converge to Ψk(x0)hk
0. Passing to a subsequence,
we can assume that they all do not belong to some neighborhood of Ψk(x0)hk
0. Us-
ing Exercise 4.10.44, we obtain infinitely differentiable mappings x, h: IR1 →X
and numbers ti →0 such that x(ti) = xi and h(ti) = hi for infinitely many i. Let
α(τ, t) = x(t) + τh(t). Then Ψk

x(t)

hk(t) = Dk
1(f ◦α)(0, t). By assumption,
f ◦α ∈Cn+1(IR2, Y ), therefore, the mapping t →Ψk

x(t)

hk(t) is continu-
ous and Ψk

x(ti)

hk(ti) converges to Ψk

x(t0)

hk(t0), which contradicts our
assumption. Thus, we have proved the A-continuity of (x, h) →Ψk(x)hk.
Let us now apply the inversion of Taylor’s formula. To this end, setting
rn(x, h) = f(x + h) −f(x) −
n

k=1
1
k!Ψk(x)hk,
we have to verify that, as t →0, we have rn(x + tw, th)/tn →0 uniformly in w
and h in any fixed sets in A. The function t →rn(x, th) belongs to Cn(IR1, Y ).
Taylor’s formula for functions of a real variable gives the inclusion
rn(x, th) ∈tn
n!conv

Ψn(x + θth)hn −Ψn(x)hn : θ ∈(0, 1)

,
whence in case (i), where the compositions belong to Cn+1(IR2, U), we obtain the
inclusion
rn(x + tw, th)/tn ∈tn
n!conv

Ψn+1(x + tw + θ1th)(θth, hn): θ, θ1 ∈(0, 1)

.
Taking into account the A-continuity of Ψn+1, we obtain the desired uniform rela-
tion. In case (ii) our conditions on A (including the existence of an A-converging
subsequence in every sequence in a fixed set in A) show that, as t →0,
Ψn(x + tw + θth)hn −Ψn(x + tw)hn →0
uniformly in w and h in any fixed sets in A and uniformly in θ ∈(0, 1). Thus, the
conditions of the previous theorem are fulfilled, hence we conclude that f belongs
to Cn
A(U, Y ).
□
Our conditions on A are fulfilled if X is metrizable and A is the class of all
compact sets. It is seen from Examples 4.9.2 and 4.9.5 that in case (i) we must
admit that the order of differentiability can be lower by one, even if we admit all
possible ϕ of class C1, not only C∞(hence the major role in (i) is played by the

4.9. Inversion of Taylor’s formula and the chain rule
285
condition of A-sequential compactness of the sets in A). Example 4.9.2 shows that
we cannot replace IR2 by IR1 (however, see Exercise 4.10.37). Exercise 4.10.47
shows that it is not sufficient to consider the restrictions to all possible closed
hyperplanes.
The next result follows immediately from the theorem.
4.9.8. Corollary. (i) If the space X is metrizable, then f ∈Cn
c (X, Y ) pre-
cisely when we have f ◦ϕ ∈Cn(IR2, Y ) for every infinitely Fr´echet differentiable
mapping ϕ: IR2 →X.
(ii) If X is normable, then f ∈Cn(U, Y ) precisely when f◦ϕ ∈Cn+1(IR2, Y )
for every infinitely Fr´echet differentiable mapping ϕ: IR2 →X. Hence the inclu-
sion f ∈C∞(U, Y ) is equivalent to the inclusion f ◦ϕ ∈C∞(IR2, Y ) for every
infinitely Fr´echet differentiable mapping ϕ: IR2 →X.
Note that the obtained result is not obvious at all even for mappings of finite-
dimensional Euclidean spaces.
Let us turn to outer compositions ψ ◦f. We first consider an important partial
case of continuous linear functionals.
4.9.9. Theorem. Let Y be sequentially complete for the Mackey topology and
let n ∈IN. If l(f) ∈Cn
A(U) for all l ∈Y ′, then f ∈Cn−1
A
(U, Y ), and if Y is
sequentially complete for the topology σ(Y, Y ′), then f ∈Cn
A(U, Yσ). If bounded
sets are relatively compact in Y , then f ∈Cn
A(U, Y ).
PROOF. Let x ∈U, A ∈A, l ∈Y ′. By the mean value theorem for l(f) we
have
,
l, f(x + th) −f(x)
t
−f(x + τh) −f(x)
τ
-
= (l◦f)′(x + αth)h −(l◦f)′(x + βτh)h →0
(4.9.4)
as t, τ →0 uniformly in h ∈A (here α, β ∈(0, 1)). Hence for any sequence of
nonzero numbers tn →0 the sequence yn =

f(x + tnh) −f(x)

/tn is weakly
fundamental uniformly in hn ∈A. Thus, the set of its elements is bounded in the
Mackey topology. Therefore, f(x + th) →f(x) as t →0 uniformly in h ∈A,
which shows the A-continuity of f.
If Y is weakly sequentially complete, then {yn} has a weak limit y ∈Y
uniformly in h ∈A, moreover, this limit does not depend on {tn}, because
l(y) = (l◦f)′(x)h for all l ∈Y ′. Set f ′(x)h := y. The mapping h →f ′(x)h is
linear and weakly bounded on all sets in A, i.e., f ′(x) ∈LA(X, Yσ). The equality
⟨l, f ′(x)h⟩= (l◦f)′(x)h yields the inclusion f ∈C1
A(U, Yσ).
Let n ⩾2. Applying in (4.9.4) the mean value theorem once again, for t ̸= τ
we find that
1
t −τ
,
l, f(x + th) −f(x)
t
−f(x + τh) −f(x)
τ
-
= αt −βτ
t −τ
(l◦f)′′
x + βτh + θ(αt −βτ)h

h2,

286
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
which is bounded uniformly in h ∈A as t, τ →0. Hence for every sequence of
nonzero numbers tn →0 the sequence of vectors
yn =

f(x + tnh) −f(x)

/tn
is Cauchy in the Mackey topology uniformly in h ∈A.
If Y is sequentially
complete in the Mackey topology, then {yn} has a limit y ∈Y uniformly in
h ∈A and this limit does not depend on {tn}. This gives A-differentiability of f
and the equality y = f ′(x)h. Taking into account the inclusion l(f) ∈C2
A(U) for
all l ∈Y ′ and the boundedness of weakly bounded sets, we obtain that, for every
fixed A, B ∈A, as t →0, the ratio

f ′(x+tw)h−f ′(x)h

/t is bounded uniformly
in h ∈A, w ∈B. This gives the A-continuity of f ′. Thus, f ∈C1
A(U, Y ).
In order to extend this to all n we shall apply again Theorem 4.9.6. To this
end, we construct mappings Ψk(x) ∈Lk
A(X, Y ) for k ⩽n −1, and, if Yσ is
sequentially complete, also for k = n, by setting Ψ1(x)h1 = d
dtf(x + th1)

t=0,
Ψk(x)(h1, . . . , hk) = d
dtΨk−1(x + thk)(h1, . . . , hk−1)

t=0, k > 1.
This construction is well-defined, since for any l ∈Y ′ we have
l(gk−1)(x) = (l◦f)(k−1)(x)(h1, . . . , hk−1),
where gk−1 is defined by gk−1(x) = Ψk−1(x)(h1, . . . , hk−1). By construction we
have the equality ⟨l, Ψk(x)hk⟩= (l◦f)(k)(x)hk. Hence if we write
f(x + h) −f(x) =
n−1

k=1
Ψk(x)hk/k! + rn−1(x, h),
then for any l ∈Y ′ the usual Taylor formula with the remainder in the Lagrange
form yields that ⟨l, rn−1(x, h)⟩= (l◦f)(n)(x)hn/n!. Therefore, as t →0, the
elements t−n⟨l, rn−1(x + tw, th)⟩= (l◦f)(n)(x + tw + θth)hn/n! are bounded
uniformly in w and h in any fixed sets of class A. Theorem 4.9.6 yields that we
have f ∈Cn−1
A
(U, Y ).
If Yσ is sequentially complete, we obtain also the inclusion f ∈Cn
A(U, Yσ)
similarly to the case n = 1.
Finally, if all bounded sets in the space Y are relatively compact, then we have
f ∈Cn
A(U, Y ). Indeed, in this case Y is weakly sequentially complete, hence we
have f ∈Cn
A(U, Y ). By Taylor’s formula for the weak topology we obtain
f(x + h) −f(x) =
n

k=1
f (k)(x)hk + rn(x, h),
where rn(x, h) belongs to the closed convex hull of the vectors
[f (n)(x + θh)hn −f (n)(x)hn]/n!,
θ ∈(0, 1).
This implies that rn(x + tw, th)/tn →0 uniformly in w and h in any fixed sets
in A, since this holds for the weak topology, but in the considered case every
weakly bounded set in Y is contained in a compact set in the original topology
and on compact sets the weak topology coincides with the original one. Similarly
we verify the A-continuity of f(n).
□

4.9. Inversion of Taylor’s formula and the chain rule
287
4.9.10. Corollary. If X the satisfies the Mackey convergence condition, Y is
sequentially complete, and for each l ∈Y ′ the function l(f) is (n + 1)-fold ¯c-
differentiable in U, then f has a ¯b-derivative of order n in U.
PROOF. The theorem gives the inclusion f ∈Cn
¯c (U, Yσ). Let us verify that
the ¯c-derivative of order n at the point x0 ∈U serves as the ¯b-derivative of order n.
We can assume that for the derivatives of lower orders this is already known. We
have to show that
f (n−1)(x0 + th)(h1, . . . , hn−1) −f (n−1)(x0)(h1, . . . , hn−1)
= tf (n)(x0)(h1, . . . , hn−1, h) + r(th),
where r(th)/t →0 uniformly in h, h1, . . . , hn−1 in every fixed bounded set. By
the mean value theorem the vector r(th)/t is contained in the closed convex hull
of the vectors
[f (n)(x0 + θth) −f (n)(x0)](h1, . . . , hn−1, h),
where θ ∈(0, 1).
Suppose that there are a sequence of nonzero numbers tj →0, numbers θj ∈(0, 1),
and vectors hj, hj
1, . . . , hj
n−1 in a bounded set A for which
[f (n)(x0 + θjtjhj) −f (n)(x0)](hj
1, . . . , hj
n−1, hj) ̸→0.
We can assume that tj > 0. The condition yields the weak boundedness of the
sequence
[f (n)(x0 + θjt1/2
j
t1/2
j
hj) −f (n)(x0)](εjhj
1, . . . , εjhj
n−1, εjhj)/(θjt1/2
j
),
where εn
j = t1/4
j
, since εjhj
i →0. Since θjt1/4
j
→0, we arrive at a contradiction.
Finally, by the Mackey convergence condition for X and Exercise 4.10.54 we
obtain the inclusion f (n)(x0) ∈Ln
b (X, Y ).
□
This corollary can be proved directly without using the previous theorem. In
addition, for the existence of the last ¯b-derivative at the point x0 it suffices to have
the existence of the ¯c-derivative of order n + 1 at this point for the functions l(f)
(Exercise 4.10.55).
Note also that in these results in place of open sets U it is sufficient that U be
the complement of a sequentially closed set.
4.9.11. Corollary. Let X be bornological and satisfy the Mackey convergence
condition. In order that f be n-fold b-differentiable in U it is sufficient that f be
(n + 1)-fold ¯c-differentiable as a mapping to Yσ.
4.9.12. Corollary. For mappings between Fr´echet spaces, the infinite Fr´echet
differentiability is equivalent to the infinite Hadamard differentiability.
In the case of the one-fold Hadamard differentiability there is no loss of dif-
ferentiability as compared to compositions.
4.9.13. Theorem. Let Y be separable and sequentially complete and let A be
the class of all compact sets in X. If ψ◦f ∈C1
A(U) for all functions ψ ∈C1
c (Y ),
then f ∈C1
A(U, Y ).

288
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
PROOF. Let x ∈U. We can assume that x = 0 and f(x) = 0. The condition
implies that l(f) ∈C1
c (U) for all l ∈Y ′.
Therefore, for every sequence of
nonzero numbers tn →0 and every fixed h ∈X, the sequence yn = f(tnh)/tn is
weakly fundamental and hence is bounded. If it is precompact, then it converges
in the original topology of Y by the sequential completeness of Y . This shows
the differentiability of f along h.
If the precompactness fails, we arrive at a
contradiction, since Proposition 4.1.13 gives a function ψ ∈C1
c (Y ) for which
ψ(0) = 0, ψ′(0) = 0, but ψ(tnyn)/tn has no limit, which contradicts the existence
of a limit of ψ

f(tnh)

/tn. We observe that in this reasoning in place of tnh one
can take tnhn for an arbitrary sequence of vectors hn in any fixed compact set.
This proves the A-continuity of f. The inclusion l(f) ∈C1
c (U) yields the linearity
of ∂hf(x) in h and also the inclusion f ∈C1
c (U, Yσ).
We show that for every compact set A ⊂X and every sequence {xn} ⊂U
that A-converges to x0 ∈U, the set S = {f ′(xn)h: h ∈A, n ∈IN} is precompact
in Y . This set is weakly bounded, hence bounded in the Mackey topology. If it is
not precompact, then by using Exercise 4.10.53 we obtain an equicontinuous se-
quence {fn} ⊂Y ′ converging to zero uniformly on precompact sets, and also vec-
tors ym =f ′(xnm)hm, hm ∈A such that fm(ym)=1, fm(yk)=0 whenever k<m.
Below we assume that nm = m and x0 = 0, f(x0) = 0. Let zn = f(xn). Here we
can pass to the case τn = fn(zn) ̸= 0, fn(yn) > 1/2. Indeed, if fn(zn) = 0 for
some number, then the equality f(xn + thn) = f(xn) + tf ′(xn)hn + r(xn, thn)
and the properties of fn enable us to choose a sequence tn →0 such that for the
vectors zn = f(xn + tnhn) and yn = f ′(xn + tnhn)hn we obtain fn(zn) ̸= 0
and fn(yn) = fn(yn) + [fn(yn) −fn(yn)] > 1/2. The condition that xn
A
→0 is
preserved, since tn →0 and hn ∈A. Below we assume that we have passed to
this case. We observe that the sequence Z = {zn = f(xn)} is precompact, since
it converges to f(0) = 0 by the established A-continuity of f. Hence τn →0.
We now use a reasoning similar to the proof of Proposition 4.1.13. Picking a
subsequence in {tn}, we can assume that
|tn|

i=1
|ti|−1 < 4−n sup{|fj(z)|: j ∈IN, z ∈Z}.
For the same functions ϕ1 and ϕ2 as in Proposition 4.1.13, but with the additional
condition ϕ′
2(1) = 1, let
ψ(y) =
∞

n=1
(−1)nτnϕ1

f1(y)/τ1

· · · ϕ1

fn−1(y)/τn−1

ϕ2

fn(y)/τn

.
As in the cited proposition, we have ψ ∈C1
c (Y ).
Differentiating the series
termwise, it is easy to verify that ψ′(y) ∈Y ′, ψ′(0) = 0 and ψ′(zn)yn > 1/2.
Since by construction
ψ′(zn)yn = ψ′
f(xn)

f ′(xn)hn = (ψ◦f)′(xn)hn
and (ψ◦f)′(0) = ψ′(0)f ′(0) = 0, we obtain a contradiction with the condition
that ψ ◦f ∈C1
c (U). Thus, precompactness of the set S is established. If we
now admit that the sequence of vectors f ′(xn)h −f ′(x0)h does not converge to

4.10. Complements and exercises
289
zero uniformly in h ∈A, then there exists a sequence {hn} ⊂A such that the
sequence of vectors zn = f ′(xn)hnf ′(x0)hn does not converge to zero in Y ,
but is precompact and has only zero limit point (since zn →0 weakly), which is
impossible. Thus, the mapping f ′ : U →LA(X, Y ) is A-continuous.
□
Lobanov [321] showed that there is no gain in Theorem 4.9.9 if in place of
linear functionals we use nonlinear outer functions. More precisely, the following
is true.
4.9.14.
Theorem. If in Theorem 4.9.9 we have l(f) ∈Cn
A(U) for every
bounded linear functional l on Y , then ψ◦f ∈Cn
A(U) for all ψ ∈Cn
b (Y ), where
b is the class of all bounded sets.
If n > 1, the sets in A are A-sequentially compact and l(f) ∈Cn
A(U) for all
functionals l ∈Y ′, then ψ◦f ∈Cn
A(U) for all ψ ∈Cn
c (Y ), where c is the class of
all compact sets.
In the same paper the inversion of Taylor’s formula was employed to prove
a result on differentiability of compositions, giving an important addition to the
results in § 4.5. Let Z be one more Hausdorff locally convex space, V an open set
in the space Y , f : U →V , g: V →Z.
4.9.15. Theorem. Let n ⩾1, f ∈Cn
A(U, Y ), g ∈Cn
c (V, Z). If n > 1 and all
sets in A are A-sequentially compact, then g◦f ∈Cn
A(U, Z). In case n = 1, the
same is true under the additional condition that either Y ′ coincides with the space
of bounded linear functionals or Y satisfies the Mackey convergence condition.
It should be noted that our conditions on f and g are not symmetric: say, if
n = 1, X = Z = IR1, Y = IR2 and A is the class of all bounded sets, then the
condition g ∈C1
A(V, Z) is not sufficient, which is seen from Example 4.2.11.
4.10. Complements and exercises
(i) The inverse function theorem (289). (ii) Polynomials (291). (iii) Ordinary differential equations
in locally convex spaces (294). (iv) Passage to the limit in derivatives (297). (v) Completeness of
spaces of smooth mappings (300). (vi) Differentiability via pseudotopologies (305). (vii) Smooth
functions on Banach spaces (307). Exercises (308).
4.10(i). The inverse function theorem
It is well-known that the classical inverse function theorem remains true for
Fr´echet differentiable mappings of Banach spaces (see [72, Chapter 12]). A typi-
cal formulation is this: if a continuously differentiable mapping on a domain in a
Banach space has an invertible derivative at some point, then in a neighborhood
of this point the mapping is invertible (moreover, the inverse mapping is differ-
entiable). A weaker version of this theorem (which can be called the theorem on
differentiability of the inverse function) asserts that if an a priori invertible map-
ping f of a Banach space is differentiable at a point a and the inverse mapping f −1
is continuous at f(a) and the operator f ′(a) is invertible, then f −1 is differentiable
at f(a). Though, this version is not a corollary of the former theorem, but in ap-
plications it is often important to have a local invertibility of a nonlinear mapping

290
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
with an invertible derivative. Naturally, the question arises about analogs of these
results for more general space. Certainly, here one can also consider different for-
mulations. For example, one can seek for conditions for invertibility of nonlinear
mappings with invertible derivatives or for differentiability of inverse mappings
under the assumption of their existence. It turns out that for nonnormable spaces
the situation becomes more complicated in all settings of the problem. First of all,
the invertibility of the derivative does not always ensure a local invertibility of the
mapping itself.
4.10.1. Example. Let ϕ be a smooth function on the real line with support
in [1/4, 3/4] such that ϕ(1/2) = 1. We define a mapping f : IR∞→IR∞by the
formula

f(x)

n = xn −ϕ(xn). It is everywhere differentiable with respect to
the system of bounded sets (which coincides here with the system of precompact
sets), f ′(0) = I, and the mapping x →f ′(x) is continuous if we equip the
space of operators with the topology of convergence on bounded sets; it suffices
to observe that if for each n we have xn,k →xn and hn,k →hn as k →∞, then
ϕ′(xn,k)hn,k converges to ϕ′(xn)hn. However, in no neighborhood of zero can f
be injective, since in any such neighborhood there is a point x with xn = 1/2 and
xk = 0 for all k ̸= n.
The invertibility of a derivative does not imply even a local surjectivity of f
(Exercise 4.10.42).
Secondly, even for differentiable homeomorphisms with invertible derivatives
the inverse mappings can be nondifferentiable. Let us mention an impressive result
due to Yu.I. Prostov [395].
4.10.2. Theorem. For every nonnormable Fr´echet space X there exists a
homeomorphism f : X →X such that f(0) = 0, at the origin f has an invertible
derivative with respect to the system of bounded sets, but the mapping f −1 has
no derivative at the origin even with respect to the system of compact sets. For
X = IR∞such a homeomorphism can be made even real-analytic.
In Smolyanov [487], there is a description of the class of all spaces in which
the theorem on differentiability of the inverse function is true.
4.10.3. Theorem. The following conditions are equivalent for any Hausdorff
locally convex space X:
(i) for every sequence of vectors an ̸= 0 converging to zero in X there exist
numbers λn such that the sequence {λnan} is bounded, but does not converge to
zero;
(ii) if a one-to-one mapping f : X →X is differentiable at a point x with
respect to the system of bounded sets, the mapping f −1 is continuous at the
point f(x), and the operator f ′(x) is a linear homeomorphism, then f −1 is dif-
ferentiable at f(x) with respect to the system of bounded sets.
The class of spaces satisfying condition (i) contains all normed spaces and is
closed with respect to formation of strict inductive limits of increasing sequences
of spaces. On the contrary, nonnormable metrizable spaces do not satisfy this
condition (Exercise 4.10.35).

4.10. Complements and exercises
291
It is shown in Shavgulidze [450] that every infinite-dimensional real locally
convex space is C∞-diffeomorphic to the complement of some its closed sub-
space, and if the dual of the given space is weakly separable, then for such a
subspace one can take any finite-dimensional subspace. For nonnormable Fr´echet
spaces a number of deep theorems on inverse functions is known oriented towards
applications to concrete spaces (see Nirenberg [372] and Ekeland [153]).
4.10(ii). Polynomials
Let E and F be linear spaces over the field IR. In this subsection we consider
only separated locally convex spaces.
4.10.4. Definition. A mapping f : E →F is called homogeneous polynomial
(or a homogeneous polynomial) of degree (or order) k ∈IN if
f(x) = Wk(x, . . . , x),
where the mapping Wk : Ek →F is linear in every variable separately. A homo-
geneous polynomial of degree k = 0 is a constant mapping.
A polynomial (or a polynomial mapping) of degree n on E is a mapping of the
form f = fn + · · · + f1 + f0, where fk is a homogeneous polynomial of degree k
for all k ⩽n. The smallest possible n in such a representation is the exact degree
of the polynomial.
It is clear that a k-linear mapping Wk generating a homogeneous polynomial
of degree k can be chosen symmetric, passing to the mapping
Vk(x1, . . . , xk) = 1
k!

Wk(xi1, . . . , xik),
where summation is taken over all permutations of 1, . . . , k.
4.10.5. Proposition. Let fk be a homogeneous polynomial of degree k. Then
the symmetric k-linear mapping generating this polynomial is uniquely determined
by the formula
Vk(x1, . . . , xk) = 1
k!

ε1,...,εk∈{0,1}
(−1)k−ε1−···−εkfk(x0 + ε1x1 + · · · + εkxk),
(4.10.1)
where x0 ∈E is an arbitrary point.
The proof is delegated to Exercise 4.10.45. The reader is offered to prove also
the following elementary, but not quite trivial fact.
4.10.6. Lemma. If a function f on IRn is polynomial in every variable for all
fixed values of other variables, then it is a polynomial. In particular, the degrees
of polynomials obtained by fixing n −1 variables are uniformly bounded.
4.10.7. Lemma. Suppose that a mapping f : E →F is polynomial on every
affine line. Then there exists a sequence of polynomial mappings fk : E →F,
k = 0, 1, . . ., homogeneous of order k, such that f(x) = 	∞
k=0 fk(x), where for
each x only finitely many terms are nonzero.

292
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
PROOF. For every vector x the mapping t →f(tx) is polynomial. Hence we
have f(tx) = 	∞
k=0 tkfk(x), where fk(x) ∈F and only finitely many terms are
nonzero. Since
f(stx) =
∞

k=0
sktkfk(x) =
∞

k=0
skfk(tx),
we have fk(tx) = tkfk(x).
We show that fk is a homogeneous polynomial
of order k.
Let us define Vk via fk according to formula (4.10.1).
Then we
have fk(x) = Vk(x, . . . , x), hence it suffices to verify that Vk is k-linear. This
follows from Lemma 4.10.6, since the proof of the linearity of the mapping Vk in
every variable reduces everything to some finite-dimensional subspace, but on this
subspace f is a polynomial.
□
We need the following interesting algebraic fact.
4.10.8. Lemma. Let f : E →F be a homogeneous polynomial mapping, let
U ⊂E be a balanced set, and let V ⊂F be an absolutely convex set such that
f(U + a) ⊂V for some a ∈E. Then f

(2e)−1U

⊂V .
PROOF. Let f be homogeneous of order k. Then (4.10.1) yields the equality
f(x) = 1
k!
k

m=0
(−1)k−mCm
k f(a + mx).
For x ∈U/k and m ⩽k we have (−1)k−mf(a + mx) ∈V . Hence f(x) ∈λV
if x ∈U/k, λ = 	k
m=0 Cm
k /k! = 2k/k!. Hence for x ∈U we have the inclusion
f(x) ∈(2k)kV/k! ⊂(2e)kV . In place of (2e)−1 one can take 1/2, for the proof
one has to apply an estimate due to Chebyshev (see [145, Exercise 78, p. 369]).
□
We shall now see that the continuity of a polynomial is equivalent to its
continuity at one point.
4.10.9.
Proposition. Let E and F be real locally convex spaces and let
f : E →F be a homogeneous polynomial mapping of order k. Then the following
assertions are equivalent:
(i) the mapping f is continuous,
(ii) the mapping f is continuous at some point,
(iii) for every continuous seminorm q on F, the function q ◦f is bounded on
some nonempty open set.
If E is metrizable, then the continuity of f is equivalent to the continuity of
the compositions l◦f for all l ∈F ′.
PROOF. With the aid of the previous lemma it is easy to verify that the bound-
edness of q ◦f on some neighborhood gives boundedness on a neighborhood of
zero, whence it is easy to obtain the continuity at zero. The remaining implications
are trivial.
If E is metrizable, then the absence of a neighborhood of zero on which the
function q ◦f is bounded gives a sequence an →0 for which {f(an)} is not
bounded, but then there exists a functional l ∈F ′ for which the sequence of
numbers l

f(an)

is not bounded.
□

4.10. Complements and exercises
293
4.10.10.
Corollary. A real polynomial f on a locally convex space E is
continuous precisely when it is bounded on some neighborhood of zero. This is
also equivalent to the continuity of its homogeneous components (and of their
generating symmetric k-linear functions). The latter is also true for polynomial
mappings to locally convex spaces F.
PROOF. Suppose that a polynomial f of degree k is bounded on an absolutely
convex neighborhood of zero U. Then the family of polynomials px(t) = f(tx)
of degree k, where x ∈U, is uniformly bounded on [−1, 1]. Hence their deriv-
atives at zero are uniformly bounded, which gives the boundedness on U of the
homogeneous part f of order k, whence its continuity follows. The continuity
of the generating k-linear functions is clear from (4.10.1). If f takes values in
F and q is a continuous seminorm on F, then, taking a neighborhood of zero U
on which the function q(f) is bounded, we obtain the boundedness on U of the
polynomials l(f), where l ∈F ′ and |l| ⩽q. For the homogeneous components Vk
of the mapping f this gives the boundedness on U of the functions l(Vk), hence
also of q(Vk).
□
4.10.11. Corollary. Any continuous real polynomial on a dense linear sub-
space in a locally convex space extends to a continuous polynomial on the whole
space. This is also true for polynomial mappings with values in complete locally
convex spaces.
PROOF. The previous corollary reduces this to extensions of k-linear func-
tions generating the homogeneous components, hence to extensions of continuous
linear functionals or operators.
□
4.10.12. Theorem. Let E and F be two real locally convex spaces such
that E is Baire and let a mapping f : E →F be continuous and polynomial on
every affine line. Then f is a polynomial mapping. In addition, the homogeneous
components of f are continuous.
PROOF. By Lemma 4.10.7 there are homogeneous of order k polynomial
mappings fk for which f = 	∞
k=0 fk pointwise. We observe that each fk is
continuous. This is verified by induction. Indeed, if f1, . . . , fk−1 are continuous,
then we have fk(x) = lim
n→∞gn(x),
gn(x) = nk
f(n−1x) −f(0) −f1(n−1x) −· · · −fk−1(n−1x)

.
The mappings gn are continuous. Hence, by the Baire property of E, for every
continuous seminorm q on F the sequence of functions q◦gn is uniformly bounded
on some neighborhood (Exercise 3.12.152). The previous proposition gives the
continuity of fn. The sets Mn = {x ∈E : fk(x) = 0 ∀k > n} are closed and
cover E. Using the Baire property of E once again, we find Mn with a nonempty
interior. It is clear from Lemma 4.10.8 that fk ≡0 if k > n.
□
Certainly, the Baire property of E is important. For example, on the space of
finite sequences the function f(x) = 	∞
k=0 xk
k is not polynomial, although it is
polynomial on every affine line.

294
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
4.10(iii). Ordinary differential equations in locally convex spaces
Here we give a very short survey of the principal results related to ordinary
differential equations in Hausdorff locally convex spaces. A much more detailed
account and extensive bibliography can be found in Bogachev [62] and Lobanov,
Smolyanov [322].
Let E be a locally convex space and let f : E →E be continuous. Consider
the ordinary differential equation
x′(t) = f

x(t)

,
x(0) = x0 ∈E.
(4.10.2)
Its solution is a continuous mapping f : [0, δ) →E on some semiopen interval
[0, δ) that is differentiable in (0, δ) and satisfies (4.10.2). Certainly, one can con-
sider solutions on any interval [t0, t0 + δ) in place of [0, δ). The classical result
(Peano’s theorem) asserts that in the case E = IRn this equation is solvable on
some [0, δ). The situation is completely different in infinite-dimensional spaces.
4.10.13. Example. (i) (Dieudonn´e’s example) Let E = c0 and
f(x) =

fn(xn)

, fn(z) = |z|1/2.
Then f is continuous in E, but (4.10.2) has no solutions for x0 = (an) with
infinitely many positive coordinates. Indeed, if x(t) = (xn(t)) is a solution on the
interval [0, δ), then we have t = 2|xn(t)|1/2 −2a1/2
n
→0 as n →∞, where we
take only n with an > 0.
(ii) Let E = IR∞and f(x) =

fn(xn)

, fn(z) = z2 + n2. Then the interval
of existence of a solution to the one-dimensional ordinary differential equation
y′(t) = y(t)2 + n2, y(0) = 0 tends to zero, hence there is no common interval of
existence of all these solutions.
(iii) Let E = C∞
0 [−1, 1] be the space of all infinitely differentiable functions
ϕ with support in the closed interval [−1, 1], equipped with the system of norms
pn(ϕ) = supt |ϕ(n)(t)|. Then E is a nuclear Fr´echet space, the differential opera-
tor f : ϕ →ϕ′′ is linear and continuous, but the equation (4.10.2) is solvable only
for x0 = 0. Indeed, if ϕ(t) is a solution with nonzero ϕ(0), then g(t, x) = ϕ(t)(x)
satisfies the equation
∂g
∂t = ∂2
xg, g(0, x) = ϕ(0).
This follows from the fact that convergence in E implies pointwise convergence.
However, all solutions of the latter equation are analytic and cannot have bounded
support, with the exception of the case g ≡0.
It turns out that example (i) is typical for Banach spaces. A.N. Godunov [196]
established a remarkable fact: on every infinite-dimensional Banach space there
is a continuous mapping f for which equation (4.10.2) has no solutions. Later
S.A. Shkarin [455] observed that this theorem extends to all Fr´echet spaces, more-
over, the case of nonnormable Fr´echet spaces turned out even much simpler. By
Theorem 3.12.44, every such space E has a complemented subspace E0 isomor-
phic to IR∞; let P : E →E0 be the corresponding projection. By Corollary 3.9.14
of Michael’s selection theorem there exists a continuous mapping S : E0 →E

4.10. Complements and exercises
295
such that PS(x) = x for all x ∈E0.
This gives a mapping F : E →E,
F(x) = S

f(Px)

, where f is the mapping on E0 = IR∞constructed above,
for which (4.10.2) has no solutions. Then the equation x′(t) = F

x(t)

with
zero initial condition has no solutions in E, since otherwise the projection of a
solution to E0 would be a solution in E0 due to our choice of S. Moreover,
Shkarin [456] modified this construction in such a way that the following final
result was obtained.
4.10.14. Theorem. On every infinite-dimensional Fr´echet space there exists
a continuous mapping f such that the equation x′(t) = f

x(t)

, x(t0) = x0 has
no solutions at all for any t0 and x0.
Let us mention a number of positive results. The first general existence theo-
rems were obtained by A.N. Tychonoff for continuous mappings of the space IRT
with bounded image and by R. Phillips for continuous mappings of Fr´echet spaces
with precompact image. The existence and uniqueness theorem for solutions to
equations with Lipschitzian f extends obviously to Banach spaces. The following
theorem from Astala [28] has the interesting feature that it covers all continuous
mappings of a given space.
4.10.15. Theorem. If a sequentially complete locally convex space E contains
a compact or sequentially compact barrel, then Peano’s theorem holds in E.
S.V. Shkarin conjectured that the validity of Peano’s theorem in a sequentially
complete locally convex space E is equivalent to the property that E possesses a
countably compact barrel, but this conjecture remains open. An important general
result is the following theorem due to V.M. Millionstchikov [347], which combines
Lipschitzness and compactness (we formulate it for autonomous equations).
4.10.16. Theorem. Let E be a sequentially complete locally convex space
and let f : E →E.
(i) Suppose that for every seminorm p in some collection P defining the topol-
ogy, we have p

f(x) −f(y)

⩽Kp(x −y) in a neighborhood U of a point x0.
Then equation (4.10.2) has a solution on some interval.
(ii) The same is true if f is continuous and has the form f = f1 + f2, where
f1 satisfies the conditions in (i), f2 is continuous in U and f2(U) is contained in
a compact set.
In particular, Peano’s theorem is true for continuous mappings of sequentially
complete spaces with relatively compact images.
It is interesting that in the space IR∞, unlike C∞
0 [−1, 1], every linear equa-
tion (4.10.2) is solvable. This nontrivial result with a misleadingly elementary
formulation was proved by Shkarin [452].
4.10.17. Theorem. Let A be a continuous linear operator in IR∞and let a
mapping f : [0, 1] →IR∞be continuous. Then the equation x′(t) = Ax(t) + f(t)
is solvable for every initial condition.
It should be noted that there might be no uniqueness of solution in this case.

296
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
4.10.18. Example. Let (Ax)n = xn+1. Then the linear equation x′(t) = Ax,
x(0) = 0 has nonzero solutions in IR∞. Indeed, for every infinitely differentiable
function ϕ on the real line the formula xn(t) = ϕ(n)(t) defines a solution to
the equation x′(t) = Ax(t) with the initial condition

ϕ′(0), . . . , ϕ(n)(0), . . .

. It
remains to take a nonzero function ϕ such that ϕ(n)(0) = 0 for all n.
The following useful fact was first observed by A.N. Godunov.
4.10.19. Proposition. Let A be a continuous linear operator on a locally
convex space E and let z ∈E. Suppose that the Cauchy problem x′(t) = Ax(t),
x(0) = z has a solution in the weak topology σ(E, E′). Then this solution is a
solution in the Mackey topology.
PROOF. Let x: [0, c) →E be a solution in the weak topology. We have to
verify the differentiability of the mapping x in the Mackey topology. Let t ∈(0, c).
The set x([t −r, t + r]), where [t −r, t + r] ⊂(0, c), is weakly compact. If
0 < |h| < r, then by the mean value theorem
x(t + h) −x(t)
h
−Ax(t) ∈abs conv {Ax(t + s) −Ax(t): s ∈[t −r, t + r]},
and, for every neighborhood of zero V in the Mackey topology, the set in the right-
hand side is contained in V for sufficiently small r. Therefore,

x(t+h)−x(t)

/h
converges to Ax(t) in the Mackey topology as h →0.
□
We shall say that a locally convex space E possesses property (P) if conver-
gence xn →0 in E and convergence yn →0 in E′ in the topology σ(E′, E) yield
convergence ⟨yn, xn⟩→0.
Property (P) is shared by all barrelled spaces (more generally, by Mackey
spaces for which E′ is sequentially complete in the topology σ(E′, E), see Exer-
cise 4.10.52).
4.10.20. Proposition. If E has property (P) and u ∈E′ is such that the
Cauchy problem y′(t) = A∗y(t), y(0) = u in E′ is solvable, then ⟨u, x(t)⟩= 0
for every solution x to the Cauchy problem x′(t) = Ax(t), x(0) = 0. Hence if the
Cauchy problem for A∗has a solution for all u ∈E′, then the Cauchy problem
for A has at most one solution.
We shall say that an operator A ∈L(E, E) has exponent if for every x ∈E
for all t ∈IR the series exp(tA)x := 	∞
n=1 tnAnx/n! converges in the space E.
If E is barrelled, then the operator exp(tA) is continuous. For convergence of
this series in the Mackey topology for all t it suffices to have weak convergence
(Exercise 4.10.40). It is verified directly that exp(tA)z is a solution to the Cauchy
problem x′(t) = Ax(t), x(0) = z.
However, the unique solvability of these
Cauchy problems does not imply the existence of exponent.
4.10.21. Example. Let E = D(IR1), Af = f ′. Then, for every z ∈D(IR),
the Cauchy problem x′(t) = Ax(t), x(0) = z has a unique solution defined by
the formula x(t)(s) = z(t + s), but exp(tA)z exists only for z = 0. Indeed, it
is readily verified that a similar formula gives a solution to the Cauchy problem

4.10. Complements and exercises
297
for A∗in D′, which by the previous proposition ensures the unique solvability of
the Cauchy problem for A. The existence of exp(tA)z yields the analyticity of
z(t + s) in t, which is only possible for z = 0 due to compactness of support.
4.10.22. Proposition. If E has property (P) (say, is barrelled) or is locally
complete (say, is sequentially complete), then the existence of exp(tA)z for all t
and z implies the unique solvability of the Cauchy problem for A for all initial
conditions.
PROOF. If E is barrelled, then it suffices to observe that R(t)u = exp(tA)∗u
gives a solution to the Cauchy problem y′(t) = A∗y(t), y(t) = u. In the general
case we cannot use the existence of R(t), since the operator exp(tA) need not be
continuous. Let x′(t) = Ax(t), x(0) = 0. We show that x(t) = 0. We observe
that it suffices to verify that for every τ > 0 and every y ∈E′ the function
t →
∞

n=1
tn⟨(A∗)ny, x(τ −t)⟩/n!
has the zero derivative (this function equals 0 at t = τ and ⟨y, x(τ)⟩at t = 0).
By the equality x(τ −t)′ = −Ax(τ −t) the formal differentiation gives the
desired result, but we have to justify this. To this end, it suffices to verify uniform
convergence of the series of the derivatives on compact intervals. The derivative
of the nth partial sum of the series equals
−tn⟨(A∗)n+1y, x(τ −t)⟩/n! = −tn⟨(A∗)ny, Ax(τ −t)⟩/n!.
If t ∈[−c/4, c/4], where c > 0, then the values x(τ −t) belong to a compact set
in E, which in the case of locally complete E is contained in a Banach disc B.
The existence of exp(tA) yields that for every v ∈E there is a number k(v) > 0
such that
|⟨(A∗)ny, v⟩| ⩽k(v)c−nn!.
The functionals (A∗)ny are continuous on EB, hence the Banach–Steinhaus theo-
rem shows that the numbers k(v) can be chosen uniformly bounded for all v ∈B,
hence for all v = x(τ −t) with t ∈[−c/4, c/4]. This ensures uniform convergence
of the derivatives of the terms of our series. If in place of the local completeness
we have property (P), then the functionals tn(A∗)ny/n! converge pointwise to
zero by the existence of exp(tA). Hence for every convergent sequence of num-
bers tn →t one has tn
n⟨(A∗)ny, Ax(τ −tn)⟩/n! →0, whence the desired uniform
convergence follows.
□
For additional results, see Leonov, Shkarin [313], Shkarin [460], [462], [463].
Smolyanov [490] developed an analog of Holmgren’s method of proving unique-
ness of solutions to nonlinear differential equations in locally convex spaces.
4.10(iv). Passage to the limit in derivatives
Here we discuss convergence of differentiable mappings.
4.10.23. Theorem. Let E be a topological vector space, let G be a locally
convex space, and let β be some system of bounded subsets of E with the following
properties:

298
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
(1) if {hn} is a sequence converging in E, then the set of its elements is an
element of the system β;
(2) if B ∈β, {λn} is a convergent real sequence and {hn} ⊂B, then the set
of all elements of the sequence {λnhn} is an element of the system β;
(3) if x ∈E and B ∈β, then x + B ∈β.
Let fn : E →G, where n ∈IN, be ¯β-differentiable mappings and let f ′
n be
the ¯β-derivative of fn. Then the following assertions are true:
(I) if the sequence {fn} converges in Fβ(E, G) to a mapping f and the se-
quence {f ′
n} converges in Fβ

E, Lβ(E, G)

to some mapping g, then the mapping
f is ¯β-differentiable and f ′ = g;
(II) if the sequence {f ′
n} converges in Fβ

E, Lβ(E, G)

to a mapping g
and the sequence {fn(x0)} converges in G for some x0 ∈E, then, in case of
sequentially complete G, there exists a ¯β-differentiable mapping f : E →G such
that f ′ = g and one has convergence fn →f in Fβ(E, F).
PROOF. We first prove (II). Let {hk} be a sequence of elements of some set
B ∈β, {tk} a bounded sequence of nonzero real numbers. For every collection
(m, n, k) of natural numbers we set
bm,n;k = t−1
k

fm(x0 + tkhk) −fm(x0)

−t−1
k

fn(x0 + tkhk) −fn(x0)

.
Then
bm,n;k ∈conv

f ′
m(x0 + θtkhk)hk −f ′
n(x0 + θtkhk)hk : 0 < θ < 1

for all admissible m, n, k. Since by condition (2) on the system β the set of
all elements of the sequence {λnhn} is an element of the system β for every
convergent real sequence {λn} and since f ′
m −f ′
n →0 in Fβ

E, Lβ(E, G)

as
n, m →∞, we have
f ′
m(x0 + λkhk)hk −f ′
n(x0 + λkhk)hk −−−−−−−→
m,n,k→∞0
(4.10.3)
in G, provided that the sequence {λk} converges in IR1. Hence for every neigh-
borhood of zero V in the space G, there exist natural numbers n0, m0, k0 such
that if n > n0, k > k0 and m > m0, then
cm,n;k ≡{f ′
m(x0 + θtkhk)hk −f ′
n(x0 + θtkhk)hk : 0 < θ < 1} ⊂V, (4.10.4)
since otherwise for some neighborhood of zero V0 in G we could find strictly
increasing sequences {ni}, {mi}, {ki} of natural numbers and a sequence {θi} of
real numbers such that the real sequence {tkiθi} converges and
f ′
mi(x0 + θitkihki)hki −f ′
ni(x0 + θitkihki)hki /∈V0
for all i, but this contradicts (4.10.3).
If the set V is closed and convex, then (4.10.4) yields that conv cm,n;k ⊂V
for such m, n, k; since the space G is locally convex, it follows that in G we have
bm,n;k −−−−−−−→
m,n,k→∞0.
(4.10.5)

4.10. Complements and exercises
299
Since by our hypothesis there exists a point z0 ∈G such that fn(x0) →z0, we
have amn ≡fm(x0) −fn(x0) →0 in G as m, n →∞. It follows from this
convergence along with (4.10.5) (if we set tk = 1 for all k) that
fm(x0 + hk) −fn(x0 + hk) −−−−−−−→
m,n,k→∞0.
(4.10.6)
Therefore, for every x ∈E we obtain
fm(x) −fn(x) −−−−−→
m,n→∞0,
(4.10.7)
since we can assume that hk = x −x0 for every k.
It follows from (4.10.7) by the sequential completeness of G that there exists
a mapping f : E →G such that fm(x) −f(x) →0 for every vector x ∈E. In
particular, for every k we have
fm(x0 + hk) −f(x0 + hk) −−−−→
m→∞0.
(4.10.8)
Relations (4.10.6) and (4.10.8) and Corollary 4.5.4 yield that
fm(x0 + hk) −f(x0 + hk) →0
as m, k →∞.
This means that one has fm →f in Fβ(E, G).
We now prove that f is β-differentiable at every point x ∈E and f ′ = g.
Since it is already proved that the sequence {fm(x)} converges for all x ∈E, we
can assume without loss of generality that x = x0.
For every pair i, j of natural numbers set
cij = t−1
j

fi(x0 + tjhj) −fi(x0)

,
cj = t−1
j

f(x0 + tjhj) −f(x0)

.
According to (4.10.5) we have cmk −cnk →0 as m, n, k →∞and according to
(4.10.8) we have cmk −ck →0 as m →∞for each k. Hence
cmk −ck −−−−−→
m,k→∞0.
(4.10.9)
This fact is verified directly.
Now, for every pair i, j of natural numbers we set
dij = cij −f ′
i(x0)hj,
dj = cj −g(x0)hj.
Since by convergence of the sequence {f ′
i} in the space F

E, Lβ(E, G)

we have
the relation
f ′
i(x0)hj −g(x0)hj −−−−→
i,j→∞0,
it follows from (4.10.9) that
dij −dj −−−−→
i,j→∞0.
(4.10.10)
In addition, the differentiability of every function fi implies that
dij −−−→
j→∞0.
(4.10.11)
It follows from (4.10.10) and (4.10.11) that dj →0. This means that the mapping
r: h →f(x0 + h) −f(x0) −g(x0)h is β-small. Thus, in order to establish ¯β-
differentiability of the mapping f at the point x0 and the equality f ′(x0) = g(x0),
it suffices to show that g(x0) ∈L(E, G). This inclusion is a corollary of the fact

300
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
that the limit in Fβ(E, G) of any sequence of sequentially continuous mappings is
a sequentially continuous mapping. Let us prove the latter assertion. Let sn →s
in Fβ(E, G), let {hk} be a convergent sequence of elements of E, and let x0 ∈E.
Since the set of all elements of the sequence {hk} belongs to the family β, we
have
fm(x0 + hk) −f(x0 + hk) −−−−−→
m,k→∞0,
fm(x0 + hk) −f(x0) −−−−→
k→∞0 ∀m,
fm(x0) −−−−→
m→∞f(x0).
By assertion (II) proved above these relations yield that f(x0 + hk) →f(x0).
This means that f is sequentially continuous. Thus, assertion (II) of the theorem is
proven. The part of our reasoning concerned with establishing ¯β-differentiability
of f proves at the same time assertion (I).
□
4.10.24. Remark. The conditions imposed in Theorem 4.10.23 on the system
β are satisfied for the systems σE
b and σE
c .
4.10(v). Completeness of spaces of smooth mappings
If E and G are topological vector spaces and β is some class of bounded sub-
sets of E, then the symbol C0
β(E, G) will denote the set of all sequentially contin-
uous mappings from E to G equipped with the topology induced from Fβ(E, G);
it is easy to see that C0
β(E, G) is a topological vector group. Let Ck
β(E, G), where
k ∈IN, denote the topological vector group defined as follows:
Ck
β(E, G) consists of mappings f ∈C0
β(E, G) such that f is k-fold β-dif-
ferentiable at every point x and the mapping x →f (j)(x), E →L
j
β(E, G) is
sequentially continuous for every j ∈{1, 2, . . . , k}. The topology in Ck
β(E, G) is
the projective topology with respect to the mappings
Ck
β(E, G) →F

E, L
j
β(E, G)

,
f →f (j).
Let Ck
β(E, G), where k ∈{0, 1, 2, . . . }, denote the subspace of the topological
vector space Ck
β(E, G) consisting of all mappings f such that for every j in
{0, 1, 2, . . . , k} the mapping x →f (j)(x), E →L
j
β(E, G) is bounded in the
sense that it takes bounded sets to bounded and is equipped with the induced
topology. It is obvious that all Ck
β(E, G) are topological vector spaces.
Let C∞
β (E, G) denote the projective limit of the sequence of spaces Ck
β(E, G)
with respect to the canonical mappings.
4.10.25. Theorem. Let E and G be topological vector spaces such that G
is sequentially complete. Then the topological vector space Ck
β(E, G) is sequen-
tially complete. If β is a class of bounded subsets of E satisfying the hypotheses
of Theorem 4.10.23, then the topological vector group Ck
β(E, G) is sequentially
complete, where k = 0, 1, 2, . . . .
PROOF. The first assertion is easily verified directly and the second one fol-
lows from Theorem 4.10.23.
□

4.10. Complements and exercises
301
Let us study the differentiability of the composition mapping. We need the
following lemma.
4.10.26. Lemma. Let E0 and G0 be topological vector spaces, where G0 sat-
isfies the Mackey convergence condition from Remark 4.3.2.
and let T0 be a
Hausdorff locally convex space. Suppose that L is a topological vector subspace
in C0
b (E0, G0), a mapping F ∈C1
b (G0, T0) is everywhere twice ¯b-differentiable
and the mapping F ′′
0 is bounded in the sense above. Let F∗: L →C0
b (G0, T0) be
defined as follows: if ϕ ∈L, then F∗(ϕ)(x) = F

ϕ(x)

. Then F∗is everywhere
sequentially continuous and ¯b-differentiable and for any ϕ, h ∈L and x ∈E have
(F∗)′(ϕ)(h)(x) = F ′
ϕ(x)

h(x)

.
(4.10.12)
PROOF. By the Mackey convergence condition imposed on G0, the bound-
edness and sequential continuity of the mapping z →F ′(z), G0 →L
1
b(G0, T0)
yield that, for every mapping ϕ ∈C0
b (E0, G0), the mapping
h →

x →F ′
ϕ(x)

h(x)
'
,
L →C0
b (E0, T0)
is well-defined and sequentially continuous. Suppose now that ϕ∈L, {xn} is a
bounded sequence in E, {hn} is a bounded sequence in L and {tn} is a sequence
of nonzero numbers converging to zero. Then the elements
t−1
n

F

ϕ(xn) + tnhn(xn)

−F

ϕ(xn)

−F ′
ϕ(xn)

hn(xn)

belong to the set
conv

F ′
ϕ′(xn) + θtnhn(xn)

hn(xn) −F ′
ϕ(xn)hn(xn)

: 0 <θ< 1

⊂conv

F ′′
ϕ(xn) + λθtnhn(xn)

· tnhn(xn) · hn(xn): 0 < λ, θ < 1

.
The boundedness of the sequences {hn} and {xn} yield that, for any choice of
sequences {λn} and {θn} in [0, 1], the sequences {ϕ(xn) + λnθntnhn(xn)} and
{hn(xn)} are bounded in G. Since tn →0, it follows that for such sequences
{λn} and {θn} we have
F ′′
ϕ(xn) + λnθntnhn(xn)

· tnhn(xn) · hn(xn) →0
in T0 as n →∞. This means that we have
t−1
n

F∗(ϕ + tnhn) −F∗(ϕ)

−F ′
ϕ(·)

hn(·) →0 as n →∞
in C0
b (E0, T0), i.e., the mapping F∗is ¯b-differentiable at the point ϕ and equal-
ity (4.10.12) holds.
□
Let E, G, and T be topological vector spaces, where T is locally convex, and
let Com be the composition mapping:
Com : (f, g) →f ◦g,
F(E, G)×F(G, T) →F(E, T).
Suppose that p is a natural number, q is a nonnegative integer number, c1 is
the restriction of the mapping Com to Cq
c (E, G)×Cq+p+1
s
(G, T) and c2 is the
restriction of the mapping Com to Cq
b (E, G)×Cq+p+1
b
(G, T).

302
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
4.10.27. Theorem. The mapping c1 is sequentially continuous and p-fold ¯s-
differentiable as a mapping from its domain of definition to the space Cq
s(E, T).
The mapping c2 is sequentially continuous and p-fold Bb-differentiable as a map-
ping from its domain of definition to the space Cq
b (E, T), and if the space G
satisfies the Mackey convergence condition from Remark 4.3.2, then the mapping
c2 is p-fold ¯b-differentiable. If in this situation r ∈{1, 2, . . . , p} and
(g, f), (k1, h1), . . . , (kr, hr) ∈Cq
b (E, G)×Cq+p+1
b
(G, T),
then with the natural notation
c(r)
2 (g, f)

(k1, h1), . . . , (kr, hr)

(4.10.13)
=
r

i=1
h(r−1)
i
(g)(kr, . . . , ki+1, ki−1, . . . , k1) + f (r)(g)(kr, . . . , k1);
if (g, f), (k1, h1), . . . , (kr, hr) ∈Cq
s(E, G)×Cq+p+1
s
(G, T), then there holds the
equality obtained from equality (4.10.13) by replacing the symbol c2 by c1.
PROOF. The fact that the images of the mappings c2 and c1 belong to the
corresponding spaces follows from the results in § 4.5. The sequential continuity
of the mapping
c2 : Cq
b (E, G)×Cq+p+1
b
(G, T) →Cq
b (E, T)
follows from Theorem 4.5.18 (verify this).
It follows almost directly from the lemma above that the mapping c2 is one-
fold ¯b-differentiable for p = 1, q = 0. Indeed, this lemma asserts that the mapping
c2 in this case is ¯b-differentiable along the subspace C0
b (E, G). In addition, the
linearity and continuity of the mapping
C2
b (G, T) ∋ϕ →ϕ◦f ∈C0
b (E, T)
mean that c2 is ¯b-differentiable along the subspace C2
b

Cq
b (E, G)×Cq+p+1
b
(G, T)

.
Hence the sequential continuity of the mapping
C0
b (E, G)× C2
b (G, T) →L
1
b
 C0
b (E, G)× C2
b (G, T), C0
b (E, T)

,
(f1, f2) →

(ϕ1, ϕ2) →ϕ2◦f1
'
(which is a corollary of the fact that the space G satisfies the Mackey convergence
condition) and Theorem 4.8.1 imply that the mapping c2 is ¯b-differentiable and for
the corresponding variables we have
(c2)′(g, f)(k, h) = h

g(·)

+ f

g(·)

k(·)

.
(4.10.14)
Let now s ⩾1, p = 1. Using Lemma 4.5.17, one can show that the linear mapping
Cq
b (E, G)× Cq+2
b
(G, T) →Cq
b (E, T),
(k, h) →h◦g + f ′
g(·)

k(·)
is sequentially continuous for any fixed g and f in the corresponding spaces.
Hence for the proof of ¯b-differentiability of the mapping c2 and equality (4.10.13)
it suffices to show that if kn, g ∈Cq
b (E, G), hn, f ∈Cq+2
b
(G, T), n ∈IN and the

4.10. Complements and exercises
303
sequences {kn} and {hn} are bounded in the corresponding spaces, then with the
natural notation we have
t−1
n

(f + tnhn)◦(g + tnkn) −f ◦g

−hn◦g −f ′
g(·)

◦kn(·) →0
in Cq
b (E, T), provided that tn →0, tn ∈IR1\{0}. For this it suffices to show
(by (4.10.14)) that for every j ∈{1, 2, . . . , q} the sequence of ¯b-derivatives of
order j of the mappings
x →(f + tnhn)

(g + tnkn)(x)

−f

g(x)

tn
−hn

g(x)

−f ′
g(x)

kn(x)
converges to some mapping from E to L
j
b(E, T) uniformly on bounded sets in E,
since by Theorem 4.10.23 and relation (4.10.14) this mapping will be identically
zero. The latter assertion will be proved if we show that (for each indicated j) the
mapping
Φ: (g, f) →(f ◦g)(j),
Cq
b (E, G)× Cq+2
b
(G, T) →C0
b

E, L
j
b(E, T)

is ¯b-differentiable. In this case (again by Theorem 4.10.23) the ¯b-derivative of this
mapping at the point (g, f) at the increment (k, h) will automatically equal the jth
derivative of the mapping in the right-hand side of (4.10.14).
By Theorem 4.5.18 the mapping Φ is the sum of finitely many mappings;
each of these mappings is determined by natural numbers m ∈{1, 2, . . . , j} and
n1, . . . , nm, n1 + · · · + nm = j; the mapping determined by these numbers is
defined as follows:
(g◦f) →f (m)
g(·)

g(n1)(·), . . . , g(nm)(·)

∈C0
b

E, L
j
b(E, T)

.
Let us denote the latter mapping by Ψ; thus, everything reduces to proving its
¯b-differentiability.
Let V = G×L
n1
b (E, G)×· · ·×L
nm
b
(E, G), f ∈Cq+2(G, T), and let the
mapping FV f from V to L
j
b(E, T) be defined as follows:
FV f(z, l1, . . . , lm) = f (m)(z)

l1(·), . . . , lm(·)

.
By Lemma 4.5.16 we obtain that the mapping FV f is infinitely ¯b-differentiable
along the subspace L
n1
b (E, G)×· · ·×L
nm
b
(E, G). The two-fold ¯b-differentiability
of the mapping f (m) : G →L
m
b (G, T) and the sequential continuity and bound-
edness (on bounded sets) of its first two derivatives yield that the derivative of the
mapping FV f along the subspace L
n1
b (E, G)×· · ·×L
nm
b
(E, G) is ¯b-differentiable
along the subspace G and that the mapping FV f itself is twice ¯b-differentiable
along the subspace G. Moreover, again by Lemma 4.5.16, the ¯b-derivative of
the mapping FV f along the subspace G turns out to be ¯b-differentiable along the
subspace L
n1
b (E, G)×· · ·×L
nm
b
(E, G).
All the listed derivatives are sequentially continuous as mappings to the re-
spective spaces. The indicated properties of the mapping FV f and Theorem 4.8.1
yield that this mapping is twice ¯b-differentiable. Finally, the fact that the val-
ues of the first two derivative of the mapping f (m) are bounded on bounded sets
implies that the same is true for the first two derivative of FV f (to observe this

304
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
one has to use the explicit expressions for these derivatives established by using
Lemma 4.5.16).
It follows from what has been said in the last sentence that the mapping Ψ is
¯b-differentiable along the subspace Cq(E, G). Indeed, if f ∈Cq+2(G, T), then
the mapping g →Ψ(g, f) is the composition of two mappings:
Cq
b (E, G)
Λ−→Cq−m
b
(E, V )
(FV f )∗
−−−−→C0
b

E, L
j
b(E, T)

;
here Λ =

g →(g(·), g(n1)(·), . . . , g(nm)(·)
'
and the symbol (·)∗is defined in the
lemma above.
The mapping Λ is linear and continuous, hence it is infinitely ¯b-differentiable.
By the cited lemma the mapping (FV f)∗is also ¯b-differentiable. Hence by The-
orem 4.5.11 the mapping g →Ψ(g, f) is ¯b-differentiable as well. Since the map-
ping Ψ is linear and continuous in the second argument, it is ¯b-differentiable along
the subspace Cq+2(G, T). The Mackey convergence condition, imposed on the
space G, implies, as one can easily see, that the mapping
(g, f) →Ψ′
2(g, f),
Cq
b (E, G)× Cq+2
b
(G, T)→L
1
b

Cq
b (E, G)× Cq+2
b
(G, T), C0
b

E, L
j
b(E, T)

,
Ψ′
2(·, ·) = Ψ′

Cq+2
b
(G,T )(·, ·)
is sequentially continuous. By Theorem 4.8.1 the mapping Φ is ¯b-differentiable.
Thus, it is proved that the mapping c2 is one-fold ¯b-differentiable for every s and
also that for r = 1 equality (4.10.13) holds.
Suppose now that p ⩾2, j ∈{1, 2, . . . , p −1} and that it is already proved
that the mapping
c3 : Cq
b (E, G)× Cq+p+1
b
(G, T) →Cq
b (E, T)
is j-fold ¯b-differentiable and for r = j and the corresponding values of variables
we have equality (4.10.13). Let us prove that the same will be true for j + 1.
It suffices to show that the mapping
G1 : Cq
b (X, Y )× Cq+p+1
b
(Y, Z) →L
j Cq
b (X, Y )× Cq+p+1
b
(Y, Z), Cq
b (X, Z)

,
G1(g, f): (k1, . . . , kj) →f (j)(g)(kj, . . . , k1)
and the mappings
Qi : Cq
b (X, Y ) →L
j Cq
b (X, Y )× Cq+p+1
b
(Y, Z), Cq
b (X, Z)

,
Qi(g): (k1, . . . , ki−1, ki+1, . . . , kj, hi) →h(j−1)
i
(g)(kj, . . . , k1)
with i ⩽j are one-fold b-differentiable and
G′
1(g, f)(k, h): (k1, . . . , kj) →h(j)(g)(kj, . . . , k1) + f (j+1)(g)(k, kj, . . . , k1),
Q′
1(g)(k): (k1, . . . , ki−1, ki+1, . . . , kj, hi) →h(j)
i (g)(k, kj, . . . , k1).
For the proof of ¯b-differentiability of the mappings Qi and G1 we use that the
assertion of the theorem is already proven for p = 1. Namely, the mapping G1

4.10. Complements and exercises
305
is the composition of the following mappings: (g, f) →(g, f (j)) →f (j)(g); ¯b-
differentiability of the first of these mappings is obvious and ¯b-differentiability of
the second one follows from the already proven part of the theorem. Suppose now
that i ⩽j and hi is a fixed element of the space Cq+p+1
b
(Y, Z). Then the mapping
g →[(k1, . . . , ki−1, ki+1, . . . , kj) →h(j−1)
i
(g)(kj, . . . , k1)]
from Cq
b (X, Y ) to L
j
b
 Cq
b (X, Y ), Cq
b (X, Z)

is ¯b-differentiable by the already
proven part of the theorem. This means that Q1 is also ¯b-differentiable as a map-
ping to the space that coincides with L
j
b
 Cq
b (X, Y )× Cq+p+1
b
(Y, Z), Cq
b (X, Z)

as a set, but is equipped with the topology of pointwise convergence. It follows
from Theorem 4.8.1 that Qi is also ¯b-differentiable (the verification of one of the
conditions of this theorem, namely, the continuity of the corresponding derivative,
employs the Mackey convergence condition). The assertion of the theorem on
¯b-differentiability is proven.
The assertion on ¯s-differentiability is proved similarly; here the assertions
analogous to those which proofs employed the Mackey convergence condition
turn out to be true without this condition.
Finally, the proof of the remaining part of the theorem on Bb-differentiability
is also close to the given proof of its last part; some difference is that in place
of the Mackey convergence condition one has to verify directly membership of
the arising mappings in the required spaces.
In addition, the linear mappings
that are derivatives (of the corresponding mappings) are merely bounded, but not
necessarily sequentially continuous.
□
Let us consider the so-called exponential law for spaces of smooth mappings.
Let X and Y be two topological vector spaces and let β(X) be some class of
bounded subsets of X.
We say that β-differentiable mappings of the spaces X and Y satisfy the expo-
nential law if, for every locally convex space Z, the mapping from C∞
β (X×Y, Z)
to C∞
β

X, C∞
β (Y, Z)

taking a mapping f to the mapping x →Ff defined by
Ff(x)(y) = f(x, y), is an isomorphism of these spaces.
4.10.28. Theorem. The exponential law is fulfilled for b-differentiable map-
pings of arbitrary topological vector spaces satisfying the Mackey convergence
condition.
The proof can be read in Smolyanov [489, p. 57].
Diverse results connected with constructions and extensions of smooth func-
tions on locally convex spaces can be found in Atkin [29], Colombeau [105],
Shkarin [457], [459].
4.10(vi). Differentiability via pseudotopologies
Here we briefly explain the approach to differentiability based on pseudo-
topologies mentioned at the beginning of the chapter. The set of all filters on a
nonempty set P will be denoted by Φ(P); 2Φ(P ) is the set of all subsets of Φ(P).

306
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
4.10.29. Definition. A pseudotopology on P is a mapping τ : P →2Φ(P )
such that (i) the filter Φx of all subsets containing x belongs to τ(x) for all x,
(ii) for every point x we have ϕ ∩ψ ∈τ(x) for all ϕ, ψ ∈τ(x) and if a filter
η ∈Φ(P) contains an element of τ(x), then η ∈τ(x).
A space equipped with a pseudotopology is called pseudotopological. Every
topological space becomes pseudotopological if τ(x) is defined as the collection
of all filters converging to x.
A filter ϕ in a pseudotopological space P converges to a point p ∈P if
ϕ ∈τ(p). A mapping f : P →Q of pseudotopological spaces is called continuous
at a point p if it takes filters converging to p to filters converging to f(p).
The product of two pseudotopological spaces (P, τP ) and (Q, τQ) is equipped
with the pseudotopology τP ×Q = τP ×τQ that is the weakest pseudotopology
among all pseudotopologies on P ×Q for which the projections on the factors are
continuous. Convergence of a filter η in this pseudotopology to (p, q) means that
η contains ϕ×ψ, where a filter ϕ converges to p in τP and a filter ψ converges
to q in τQ.
The notion of a pseudotopological linear space (X, τ) is now introduced as a
linear space for which the linear structure agrees with the pseudotopology in the
sense that the operations (x, y) →x−y and (λ, x) →λx are continuous on X×X
and IR1×X, respectively. Let τtv denote the strongest vector topology on X for
which the generated pseudotopology is majorized by the pseudotopology τ and
let Xtv = (X, τtv).
Suppose we are given two pseudotopological linear spaces X and Y . Suppose
that the space F(X, Y ) of mappings from X to Y is also equipped with some
pseudotopology τ. We shall say that a mapping r: X →Y is τ-small of the first
order if the following mapping t →rt, IR1 →F(X, Y ) is continuous at zero:
rt(x) = t−1r(tx) if t ̸= 0, r0(x) = 0. Certainly, we can assume that we consider
only mappings in a subset of F(X, Y ) equipped with a pseudotopology.
Suppose also that we are given linear subspaces H(X, Y ) and R(X, Y ) in
F(X, Y ) such that R(X, Y ) consists of mapping that are τ-small of the first order
and if L ∈H(X, Y ), r ∈R(X, Y ) and L(x) = r(x) for all x in some neighbor-
hood of zero in τtv, then L = 0. The role of H(X, Y ) is usually played by some
space of linear mappings. Let x0 ∈V ⊂X. Assume that there is a neighborhood of
zero V0 ∈τtv such that x0 + V0 ⊂V .
4.10.30. Definition. A mapping f : V →Y is called Hτ-differentiable at x0 if
there is a mapping f ′(x0)∈H(X, Y ) with f(x0 + h) −f(x0)=f ′(x0)(h) + r(h),
where r ∈R(X, Y ).
Various kinds of differentiability can be obtained by varying parts of F(X, Y ),
on which different pseudotopologies τ are defined, and choosing different classes
H(X, Y ) and R(X, Y ). In detail these questions are discussed in the book Smo-
lyanov [489]. It is shown in Smolyanov [488] that for a broad class of locally
convex spaces a large part of the known definitions of infinite differentiability
splits into two series, each consisting of equivalent definitions. Note that such
differentiabilities do not always imply continuity.

4.10. Complements and exercises
307
4.10(vii). Smooth functions on Banach spaces
Let us mention some interesting facts connected with smooth functions on
Banach spaces. This case is so special that one could hardly find appropriate to
discuss it in a book on general topological vector spaces, but still some information
is worth including. We touch three questions: approximations by smooth functions,
existence of smooth functions with bounded support and Sard’s theorem. In much
more detail this direction is discussed in the books Benyamini, Lindenstrauss [50],
Deville, Godefroy, Zizler [118], Fabian et al. [155], [156], Llavona [319], and the
papers Nemirovskii, Semenov [368], Tsar’kov [531], and Bogachev [61], where
one can find also the proofs of the presented facts and further references.
We start with some remarks on approximations by differentiable mappings in
infinite-dimensional spaces. Let X be a separable Banach space with the closed
unit ball U.
4.10.31. Theorem. Every uniformly continuous real function f on U is uni-
formly approximated by Lipschitzian functions that are Hadamard differentiable.
However, on the space C[0, 1] even the norm is not approximated uniformly
on U by Fr´echet differentiable functions.
4.10.32. Theorem. On a Hilbert space, uniformly continuous functions are
uniformly approximated by functions with bounded and continuous second Fr´echet
derivatives, but there is a Lipschitzian function on l2 which is not uniformly ap-
proximated on U by functions with uniformly continuous second derivatives.
Thus, even in the case of a Hilbert space the border between positive and
negative results runs between the continuity and the uniform continuity of bounded
second derivatives of approximating functions.
The situation with approximation of infinite-dimensional mappings is even
more complicated.
There are uniformly continuous mappings from separable
Banach spaces to l2 which cannot be uniformly approximated by Lipschitzian
mappings.
However, uniformly continuous mappings between Hilbert spaces
possess uniform Lipschitzian approximations with bounded Fr´echet derivatives.
Some problems in constructing approximations are connected with the existence
of smooth functions with bounded support. Let us mention some interesting facts.
4.10.33. Theorem. (i) There are no nonzero Fr´echet differentiable functions
on C[0, 1] with bounded support.
(ii) If a Banach space X and its dual possess nonzero functions with bounded
support and locally Lipschitzian derivatives, then X is isomorphic to a Hilbert
space.
(iii) The existence of nonzero functions with bounded support and Lipschitzian
derivatives is equivalent to the existence of an equivalent norm with a Lipschitzian
derivative on the unit sphere.
(iv) On c0 there is a nonzero C∞-function with bounded support (on c0 there
is even an equivalent norm that is real-analytic outside of the origin).
(v) If X possesses a nonzero Ck-function with bounded support, then X
contains an isomorphic copy either of c0 or of lk.

308
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
On Rolle’s theorem in infinite-dimensional spaces (including some counter-
examples), see Shkarin [453]. We end this excursion by mentioning Sard’s theo-
rem, according to which a smooth mapping of finite-dimensional spaces takes the
set of its critical points (i.e., points where the derivative is not a surjective oper-
ator) to a measure zero set. This theorem has a number of infinite-dimensional
analogs, but these analogs require various additional conditions. For example, Ex-
ercise 4.10.48 exhibits a polynomial of the third degree on l2 for which the image
of the set of critical points fills in the whole interval, and also a polynomial map-
ping of the third degree in C[0, 1] for which the image of the set of critical points
has a nonempty interior. See also Bates [45] and Exercise 4.10.51.
Exercises
4.10.34.◦Prove the differentiability of the mapping (4.5.1).
4.10.35. Let X be a nonnormable metrizable locally convex space. Show that X
contains a sequence of nonzero vectors an converging to zero such that, for any sequence
of numbers λn, the sequence of vectors λnan either converges to zero or is unbounded.
4.10.36.◦Give an example of two Gˆateaux differentiable mappings of the plane the
composition of which is not Gˆateaux differentiable.
4.10.37. Prove that the mapping F : X →Y of normed spaces is Hadamard dif-
ferentiable at x0 ∈X precisely when there exists an operator L ∈L(X, Y ), such that,
for every differentiable mapping ϕ: IR1 →X with ϕ(0) = x0 differentiable at zero, the
composition F ◦ϕ: IR1 →Y is differentiable at the point 0 and (F ◦ϕ)′(0) = Lϕ′(0).
HINT: see Bogachev, Smolyanov [72, Theorem 12.2.5].
4.10.38.◦(i) Prove that the intersection of affine subspaces of a vector space is an affine
subspace.
(ii) Let X and Y be two linear spaces and M let be an affine subspace in X×Y . Prove
that the set My = {x ∈X : (x, y) ∈M} is an affine subspace in X for every y ∈Y .
4.10.39. (S.A. Shkarin) Let E be a sequentially complete locally convex space and let
F : E×[0, 1] →E be such that for every x ∈E the mapping t →F(x, t) is Lipschitzian
(in every seminorm on E from some family defining the topology) and for every t ∈[0, 1]
the mapping x →F(x, t) is linear and sequentially continuous. Prove that F is sequentially
continuous in both variables.
4.10.40.◦Let E be a locally convex space and let {vn} ⊂E be such that for every
point t ∈(−1, 1) the series 	∞
n=1 tnvn converges in the topology σ(E, E′). Prove that it
converges in the Mackey topology.
4.10.41. (Astala [28]) Prove that for a locally convex space E the following conditions
are equivalent: (i) the space E is sequentially complete and contains a compact barrel;
(ii) it has the form (X′, τ), where X′ is the dual to the barrelled normed space X equipped
with the locally convex topology τ intermediate between σ(X′, X) and the topology of
convergence on precompact sets in X.
4.10.42.◦(i) Let X = C(IR1) be equipped with the topology of uniform convergence
on compact sets and f(x)(t) = exp x(t). Show that f a has derivative f ′ with respect to
the system of compact sets and this derivative is continuous with respect to the topology of

4.10. Complements and exercises
309
convergence on compact sets, f ′(0) = I, but no neighborhood of f(0) belongs completely
to the image of f.
(ii) Construct a similar example of a mapping f : IR∞→IR∞.
4.10.43.◦Suppose that in the situation of Example 4.2.16 the set K is compact, convex
and balanced and that ∞
n=1 nK is dense in X. Show that f has zero Gˆateaux derivative
at all points of 
0⩽t<1 tK.
4.10.44. Suppose that {xn} is a sequence in a locally convex space E such that
there exist numbers λn →+∞for which λnxn →0. Show that there exist a function
f ∈C∞(IR1, E) and numbers tn →0 such that f(tn) = xn for infinitely many n.
HINT: note that passing to a subsequence one can assume that 2n2xn →0; consider
the mapping f(t) = 	∞
n=1 ϕ1(2n−1t)ϕ2(2nt)xn, where ϕ1, ϕ2 ∈C∞(IR1), ϕ1(t) = 1
if t ⩽1/2, ϕ1(t) = 0 if t ⩾3/4, ϕ2(t) = 0 if t ⩽3/4, ϕ2(t) = 1 if t ⩾1; then we
have f(2−n) = xn.
4.10.45. Prove Proposition 4.10.5 and Lemma 4.10.6.
4.10.46. (Lobanov [321]) Suppose that a separable locally convex space E contains
a bounded set that is not precompact. Then, for every m ∈IN and every precompact set
K ⊂E, there exists a function f ∈Cm
c (E) for which the derivative of order m with
respect to the system of bounded sets exists at no point of K.
HINT: modify the proof of Proposition 4.1.13 as follows: take
τn = sup{|fi(x)|: i ⩾n, x ∈K},
replace 4−n by 8−n in the estimate for tn, pass to the case τn < tn/8, in the formula
for f(x) replace tn by tm
n , and take the function ϕ2 with the additional condition that
ϕ(m−1)
2
(t) = 1 if |t −1| ⩽1/8.
4.10.47. (Lobanov [320]) Let ϕ: IR →l2, t →{tn/n!}∞
n=1 and let Uk be the ball
in l2 of radius 8−k2 centered at the point ak = ϕ(2−k). Then the function f on l2 that
vanishes outside of all Uk and on each Uk is infinitely Fr´echet differentiable with support
strictly inside Uk such that f(ak) = 1, is discontinuous at zero, but its restriction to every
closed hyperplane is infinitely Fr´echet differentiable.
4.10.48. (Bonic [79]) Let ϕ(t) = 3t2 −2t3, ϕn(t) = 21−nϕ(2n/4t). (i) Show that the
function f on l2 defined by the formula f(x) = 	∞
n=1 ϕn(xn) is a continuous polynomial
of the third degree and the image of the set of its critical points contains [0, 2].
(ii) Verify that the mapping f : x →x3 of the space C[0, 1] has for the set of critical
points the set S of functions x having zeros, S possesses inner points and f(S) = S.
4.10.49. (Bonic [79]) Let F : l2 →l2, F(x) = (x2
1, x2
n, . . .). Show that F is a con-
tinuous second order polynomial mapping, but it is not true that it takes weakly convergent
sequences to norm convergent, although all derivatives F ′(x) are compact operators.
4.10.50. Let F be a Fr´echet space, let u0 ∈F and suppose that for every n ∈IN we
are given a continuous n-linear symmetric mapping un : IRn →F. Prove that there exists
an infinitely differentiable mapping u: IR1 →F such that u(n)(0) = un for all n ⩾0.
For more general results, see Colombeau [105] and Shkarin [454].
4.10.51. (Bates [46]) Let X be an infinite-dimensional Banach space. Prove that there
exists an infinitely Fr´echet differentiable surjective mapping f : X →IR2 such that the
derivative f ′(x) is surjective at no point x.

310
Chapter 4. Differential calculus
4.10.52. Show that if E is a Mackey space such that E′ is sequentially complete in
the topology σ(E′, E) (which is true for barrelled E), then convergence xn →0 in E and
convergence yn →0 in the topology σ(E′, E) imply convergence ⟨yn, xn⟩→0.
4.10.53. Suppose that a set A is bounded, but not precompact in a separable locally
convex space E.
Prove that there exist a sequence {an} ⊂A and an equicontinuous
sequence {fk} ⊂E′ pointwise converging to zero for which fn(an) = 1 and fm(an) = 0
whenever m > n. Cf. Exercise 3.12.151.
HINT: there exist an absolutely convex neighborhood of zero W and a sequence
{an} ⊂A for which ai −aj ̸∈W for all i ̸= j; let {bi} be an everywhere dense
sequence in E; passing to a subsequence in {an}, we can assume that pW (an −ai) ⩾1
and pW (an −bi) ⩾1 if n > i; on the linear span of a1, . . . , an and b1, . . . , bn−1 there is
a linear functional fn ⩽pW such that fn(an) = 1, fn(ai) = fn(bi) = 0 if i < n; one can
extend fn to E and observe that {fn} ⊂W ◦and fn(bi) →0 for every fixed i.
4.10.54. Suppose that a locally convex space X satisfies the Mackey convergence
condition. Show that for every locally convex space Y every n-linear mapping L: X →Y
that is bounded on sequences converging to zero is also bounded on bounded sets.
HINT: if sequences {hj
1}, . . . , {hj
n} are bounded in X, but {L(hj
1, . . . , hj
n)} is un-
bounded in Y , then there exist numbers cj →0 for which the sequence {L(cjhj
1, . . . , hj
n)}
is unbounded; taking numbers Tj →∞such that Tjcjhj
1 →0 in X, observe that
T −1/n
j
hj
k →0, whence one obtains that L(cjTjT −1/n
j
hj
1, T −1/n
j
hj
2, . . . , T −1/n
j
hj
n) →0.
4.10.55. Prove the following analog of Corollary 4.9.10: if X satisfies the Mackey
convergence condition and Y is sequentially complete, then for the existence of ¯b-derivative
of f : X →Y of order n at the point x0 it suffices that all functions l(f), where l ∈Y ′,
have ¯c-derivatives of order n + 1 at this point.
4.10.56. Let us equip the space E of finite sequences with the topology of the strict
inductive limit of the spaces IRn. Let en ∈E, en = (0, . . . , 0, 1, 0, . . .) with 1 in the nth
place. Let a functional fn be defined by the formula fn(x) = xn, x = (xn). Show that
the operator Ax = 	∞
n=1 fn(x)en+1 is continuous in E, but the equation x′(t) = Ax(t),
x(0) = z is solvable only for z = 0.
HINT: use the fact that every compact set in E is contained in some IRn.
4.10.57.◦Let X and Y be normed spaces. Show that the continuity of a mapping
f : X →Y is equivalent to the continuity of all compositions f◦ϕ for continuous mappings
ϕ: IR →X and is also equivalent to the continuity of the compositions ψ ◦f for all
continuous functions ψ: Y →IR.
4.10.58. (Tsar’kov, Shavgulidze [532]) (i) Let S be the unit sphere in l2. Then there
exists an infinitely Fr´echet differentiable isometry F : l2 →S with bounded derivatives of
all orders.
(ii) For every separable Banach space X, there exists an infinitely Fr´echet differen-
tiable isometry from X to the unit sphere in C[0, 1] with bounded derivatives of all orders.
4.10.59. (The Peetre theorem) A linear mapping L: C∞(IRn) →C∞(IRn) such that
supp Lf ⊂supp f is a differential operator of a locally finite order with smooth coefficients.
HINT: see Peetre [381], Narasimhan [363, Theorem 3.3.3].
4.10.60. (Ekeland [153]) Let f : X →Y be a continuous Gˆateaux differentiable
mapping of Banach spaces such that f(0) = 0 and, whenever ∥x∥⩽1, the operators f ′(x)
are invertible and

f ′(x)
−1 ⩽M. Then, for every y with ∥y∥< 1/M, there exists x
with ∥x∥< 1 and f(x) = y.

CHAPTER 5
Measures on linear spaces
In this chapter we give a brief account of measure theory on linear spaces.
We assume some acquaintance with basics of the Lebesgue theory of measure and
integral (see, for example, Chapters 2 and 3 in [72]). We present the fundamental
facts of the theory of Gaussian measures, discuss weak convergence of measures
and the Fourier transform of measures.
5.1. Cylindrical sets
Let E and G be two real linear spaces in duality; the bilinear form defining
the duality will be denoted by ⟨, ⟩; i.e., the action of a functional g ∈G on an
element x ∈E is ⟨g, x⟩, and the same formula makes x a linear functional on G.
Sets of the form
Cg1,...,gn,B :=

x ∈E :

g1(x), . . . , gn(x)

∈B

,
where g1, . . . , gn ∈G and B is contained in the Borel σ-algebra B(IRn) (see § 5.2),
are called G-cylindrical sets or G-cylinders in the space E generated by the duality
with G. If E is a locally convex space and G = E′, we use the terms a cylindrical
set or a cylinder in E without indicating the space of functionals.
Certainly, sets of such a form can be considered for an arbitrary collection G
of linear functions on E, not necessarily forming a linear space.
The class of all G-cylinders is denoted by the symbol AG.
It is readily
seen that AG is an algebra. Indeed, the complement of a cylinder Cg1,...,gn,B
is the cylinder Cg1,...,gn,IRn\B and the union of any two cylinders Cg1,...,gn,B1
and Cf1,...,fk,B2, where B1 ∈B(IRn) and B2 ∈B(IRk), can be written in the
following form: we first observe that
Cg1,...,gn,B1 = Cg1,...,gn,f1,...,fk,B1×IRk,
Cf1,...,fk,B2 = Cg1,...,gn,f1,...,fk,IRn×B2,
where the sets B3 := B1×IRk and B4 := IRn×B2 are Borel in IRn+k; then it is
clear that
Cg1,...,gn,B1 ∪Cf1,...,fk,B2 = Cg1,...,gn,f1,...,fk,B3∪B4.
The σ-algebra generated by all G-cylindrical sets is denoted by the sym-
bol σ(G).
Given a linear mapping (g1, . . . , gn): E →IRn, denoted by Pg1,...,gn, we
can take a finite-dimensional linear space H ⊂E which gives E in the direct
311
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
and Their Applications, Springer Monographs in Mathematics,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-57117-1_5
V.I. Bogachev and O.G. Smolyanov, Topological Vector Spaces

312
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
sum with the closed subspace L := 
n
i=1 g−1
i
(0) = Ker Pg1,...,gn. The cylinder
Cg1,...,gn,B1 = P −1
g1,...,gn(B) can be written in the following geometrically trans-
parent form:
Cg1,...,gn,B1 = P −1
g1,...,gn(B) = C + L,
where C is a Borel set in the finite-dimensional space H (equipped with its unique
locally convex topology). Indeed, let d be the dimension of Pg1,...,gn(E); then the
dimension of H also equals d and Pg1,...,gn|H is a linear isomorphism between H
and Pg1,...,gn(E). Now for C we take Pg1,...,gn|−1
H (B).
Conversely, every set of the form C + L, where C ∈B(H), is a cylinder and
has the form Cg1,...,gn,B, where B = Pg1,...,gn(C).
Thus, a “geometric” description of G-cylindrical sets is this: these are sets of
the form
C + L,
where L is the intersection of kernels of finitely many elements of G and C is a
Borel set in a finite-dimensional space algebraically complementing L. If E is a
locally convex space and G = E′, then the subspaces L of the indicated form are
all possible closed linear subspaces of finite codimension.
The set C is called a base of the considered cylinder.
It is clear that the sets L and C are not uniquely determined by the cylinder
C + L, but if we take for L a space of the minimal possible codimension, then
L is defined uniquely. Certainly, a choice of the set C still remains non-unique,
since L can be complemented by different subspaces.
5.1.1. Example. Let T be a nonempty set, E = IRT , G = E′. Then E′ = IRT
0
and the cylinders in E are all sets of the form

x ∈IRT :

x(t1), . . . , x(tn)

∈B

,
where B ∈B(IRn), t1, . . . , tn ∈T.
5.1.2. Example. Let E be a Hilbert space and let G = E′. Then the cylinders
in E are all sets of the form
{x ∈E : Px ∈B},
where P is an orthogonal projection on some finite-dimensional linear subspace
in E and B is a Borel set in this subspace.
5.1.3. Remark. Note that if a family G of linear functionals on E is not a
linear space, then the generated algebra of cylinders coincides with the algebra
of cylinders generated by the linear span Lin G of the set G. Indeed, every set
Cf1,...,fn,B in ALin G can be written as Cg1,...,gn,C, where gi ∈G and C ∈B(IRn),
since there exist elements g1, . . . , gn ∈G such that the functionals fi are their
linear combinations, i.e., fi = αi,1g1 + · · · + αi,ngn, which enables us to take
for C the Borel set A−1(B), where A is the linear operator in IRn defined by the
matrix (αi,j).
5.1.4. Proposition. Let F ⊂G be such that every functional in G is a limit of
some pointwise convergent sequence of functionals from F. Then σ(G) = σ(F).

5.2. Measures on topological spaces
313
PROOF. It is known that the measurability with respect to a σ-algebra is
preserved by pointwise limits of sequences, hence for every g ∈G the set
{x: g(x) < c} belongs to σ(F). Hence the σ-algebra generated by such function-
als is contained in σ(F).
□
We shall see below that the σ-algebra generated by cylinders plays an impor-
tant role in measure theory.
5.2. Measures on topological spaces
We recall that a σ-algebra A in a space X is a class of sets containing X and
closed with respect to taking complements and countable unions and intersections.
Below the term a “measure on a measurable space (X, A)” will mean a real (finite)
countably additive measure on a σ-algebra A in X (see [72, Chapter 2]). When
speaking of cylindrical measures that need not be countably additive we shall
always use the extra term “cylindrical”.
A real-valued function f is called measurable with respect to a σ-algebra A
if for each c ∈IR1 we have {x: f(x) < c} ∈A.
For every measure μ on a σ-algebra A in X there exists a decomposition
μ = μ+ −μ−,
called the Hahn–Jordan decomposition, in which the measures μ+ and μ−are
nonnegative and concentrated on disjoint sets X+, X−∈A with X = X+ ∪X−.
It is clear that the latter condition uniquely determines the measure μ+ and μ−.
Let |μ| denote the variation of μ, i.e., the sum
|μ| := μ+ + μ−.
If μ ⩾0 and μ(X) = 1, then μ is called a probability measure. If μ ⩾0, then
μ∗(S) := inf

μ(A): S ⊂A, A ∈A

is called the outer measure generated by μ.
Set ∥μ∥:= |μ|(X). The space of all bounded measures on A is Banach with
the norm μ →∥μ∥.
For a nonnegative measure μ let Aμ denote the Lebesgue completion of A
with respect to μ, i.e., the class of all sets of the form A ∪C, where A ∈A
and C has outer measure zero. Sets in Aμ are called μ-measurable. For a signed
measure μ the class Aμ is defined as A|μ|. A set E is called a set of full μ-measure
if |μ|(X\E) = 0. A measure μ ⩾0 is called atomless if every set of positive
measure has a subset of a strictly smaller nonzero measure.
Usually Aμ is larger than A, so there are more Aμ-measurable functions
than A-measurable functions. It is useful to introduce a bit broader concept of
μ-measurable function: this is a function f on X that is defined and finite on a set
E ⊂X of full μ-measure and is Aμ-measurable on E, i.e., {x∈E : f(x) < c}∈Aμ
for all c ∈IR1; outside of E the function f need not be defined at all or can assume
infinite values. The terms “almost everywhere”, “a.e.” or “μ-a.e.” mean “outside
of a measure zero set”.

314
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
The class of all μ-measurable functions is denoted by L0(μ), and the sub-
class of functions integrable to power p ∈(0, +∞) is denoted by Lp(μ). The
class L∞(μ) consists of bounded everywhere defined μ-measurable functions. If
f = g almost everywhere, then f and g are called equivalent and also versions or
modifications of each other; the notation f ∼g is used. The space of all equiv-
alence classes of functions from Lp(μ) is denoted by Lp(μ), p ∈(0, +∞]. For
a signed measure μ, the integrability of f with respect to μ is understood as the
|μ|-integrability.
We set by definition

X
f(x) μ(dx) :=

X+ f(x) μ+(dx) −

X−f(x) μ−(dx).
For p ∈[1, +∞) the space Lp(μ) is equipped with the norm
∥f∥Lp(μ) := ∥f∥p :=

X
|f(x)|p |μ|(dx)
1/p
.
The standard norm on L∞(μ) is introduced by ∥f∥∞:= infg∼f supx∈X |g(x)|,
where inf is taken over all functions g equivalent to f.
For a signed measure μ the symbol (f, g)L2(μ) is understood as (f, g)L2(|μ|).
If X is a Banach space, then Lp(μ, X) denotes the space of μ-measurable
mappings f with values in X such that f takes values in a separable subspace
(dependent of f) and ∥f(·)∥∈Lp(μ), where p ∈[1, +∞). The space Lp(μ, X)
of equivalence classes in Lp(μ, X) is equipped with the norm
∥f∥p =

∥f(x)∥p |μ|(dx)
1/p
,
with respect to which it is Banach.
Suppose we are given two measures μ and ν on a σ-algebra A in a space X.
The measure ν is called absolutely continuous with respect to μ, which is denoted
by ν ≪μ, if ν(A) = 0 for all sets A ∈A with |μ|(A) = 0. According to the
Radon–Nikodym theorem, this is equivalent to the property that ν has the form
ν = ϱ · μ, ϱ ∈L1(μ), i.e., one has
ν(A) =

A
ϱ(x) μ(dx),
A ∈A.
The function ϱ is called a density of ν with respect to μ (or the Radon–Nikodym
density) and is denoted by dν/dμ. If ν ≪μ and μ ≪ν, then the measures μ and
ν are called equivalent; notation: μ ∼ν. This is equivalent to the property that
ν ≪μ and |μ|-a.e. dν/dμ ̸= 0.
If there is a set A0 ∈A such that |μ|(A0) = |μ|(X), |ν|(X\A0) = |ν|(X),
then μ and ν are called mutually singular, which is denoted by μ ⊥ν. In the
general case there is a decomposition ν = ν1 + ν2, where ν1 ≪μ and ν2 ⊥μ.
Let λ ⩾0 be a measure on A such that μ = f · λ and ν = g · λ (for example,
we can take λ = |μ| + |ν|). Then
∥μ −ν∥=

X
|f −g| dλ.

5.2. Measures on topological spaces
315
The Borel σ-algebra B(X) of a topological space X is the smallest σ-algebra
containing all open sets. Functions measurable with respect to B(X) are called
Borel or Borel measurable. Sometimes the Baire σ-algebra Ba(X) of the topo-
logical space X is used, i.e., the smallest σ-algebra with respect to which all
continuous functions on X are measurable.
If X is a locally convex space, it is customary to use also the σ-algebra σ(X′)
generated by all sets of the form {x: l(x) ⩽c}, where l ∈X′ and c ∈IR1, i.e.,
the smallest σ-algebra with respect to which all functionals l ∈X′ are measurable.
This is the σ-algebra generated by all cylinders. Below we shall deal with such
σ-algebras.
We shall also deal with σ-algebras generated by families of sets: for every
family of sets M in a given space there is the smallest σ-algebra containing M,
denoted by the symbol σ(M) and called the σ-algebra generated by M (one
should not try to imagine elements of σ(M) somehow constructively expressed
via sets in M). Every set A ∈σ(M) actually belongs to the more narrow σ-
algebra σ({Mn}) generated by some countable family {Mn} ⊂M; this follows
from the observation that the union of all such countably generated σ-algebras is
a σ-algebra. The product of two σ-algebras A and B in two spaces X and Y is
the σ-algebra A⊗B in X×Y generated by the sets A×B, where A ∈A, B ∈B.
For every class F of functions on a given space, there exists the smallest
σ-algebra σ(F) with respect to which all functions from F are measurable: this is
the σ-algebra generated by the sets {x: f(x) < c} (it suffices to take only ratio-
nal c). It follows from what has been said above that every function g measurable
with respect to σ(F) is measurable with respect to σ({fn}) for some countable
collection {fn} ⊂F and it has the form g = ψ(f1, f2, . . .), where ψ is a Borel
function on IR∞(Exercise 5.12.77).
For example, every set from σ(X′) belongs to σ({ln}) for some countable col-
lection {ln} ⊂X′; it has the form

x ∈X :

l1(x), l2(x), . . .

∈B

, where B is
a Borel set in IR∞. Another example: the Baire σ-algebra Ba(X) is generated by
the class Cb(X) of bounded continuous functions on X, and every function f mea-
surable with respect to this σ-algebra has the form f(x) = ψ

f1(x), f2(x), . . .

,
where ψ is a Borel function on IR∞and {fn} ⊂Cb(X).
If X is a metric space, then the Borel and Baire σ-algebras coincide, since
every closed set can be represented as the set of zeros of a continuous function
(for example, the distance to this set). In the general case the Borel σ-algebra is
broader than the Baire one even for compact spaces. For example, if X = [0, 1]c is
the product of the continuum of copies of the unit interval, then every continuous
function on X is a function of countably many coordinates, i.e., it has the form
f(x) = f0

π(x)

, where π is the projection from X to some countable product
of intervals and f0 is a continuous function on this countable product (this is clear
from the Stone–Weierstrass theorem, since the functions of the indicated type
form a closed algebra and separate points). Therefore, such a simple Borel set as
a singleton is not a Baire set here. One can also verify that on the product of the
continuum of real lines the Borel σ-algebra is broader than the Baire one for a
similar reason.

316
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
If X is a locally convex space, then σ(X′) is contained in the Baire σ-algebra,
but the inclusion can be strict. For example, if X is a nonseparable Hilbert space,
its singletons and closed balls do not belong to σ(X′). Indeed, if B ∈σ(X′), then
B ∈σ({ln}) for some countable collection of functionals ln. The subspace L
equal to the intersection of the kernels of ln is infinite-dimensional, since the
functionals ln have the form ln(x) = (x, hn), where hn ∈X, so L is the orthog-
onal complement to the linear span of {hn}, which is infinite-dimensional, since
otherwise X would be separable. Now observe that B = B + L (if B is empty,
then B +L is also). This follows from the fact that the indicator of B is a function
of {ln} (as noted above). Thus, σ(X′) has no nonempty bounded sets.
5.2.1. Proposition. Let E be a separable metrizable locally convex space.
Then σ(E′) = B(E), and there is a countable set Γ ⊂E′ for which σ(Γ) = B(E).
If E is complete, then this is true for any collection Γ ⊂E′ separating points in
the space E.
PROOF. Passing to the completion we can assume that E is complete. By
the separability of E there is a countable part of E′ separating points. Moreover,
for every such countable part Γ we have σ(Γ) = B(E), which follows from a
more general result contained in [65, Theorem 6.8.9] (see also Theorem 5.12.74
below).
□
5.2.2. Definition. A Borel measure on a topological space is a measure on
the Borel σ-algebra. A Baire measure on a topological space is a measure on the
Baire σ-algebra.
5.2.3. Definition. A Borel measure μ on a Hausdorff space is called a Radon
measure if, for every Borel set B and every ε > 0, there is a compact set K in B
such that |μ|(B\K) ⩽ε.
Every Radon measure has a topological support, i.e., the smallest closed set of
full measure. This follows from the fact that for any nonnegative Radon measure
the union of any family of open sets of measure zero is also a measure zero set
(since every compact in this union is covered by finitely many of these open sets
of measure zero).
The set of all Radon measures on a Hausdorff space X is denoted by Mr(X),
and its subset consisting of probability measures is denoted by Pr(X).
Any Radon measure μ is regular: for every B ∈B(X) and every ε > 0, there
exist a closed set Z ⊂B and an open set U ⊃B with |μ|(U\Z) < ε. However,
the regularity is not equivalent to the Radon property.
5.2.4.
Proposition. Every Borel measure μ on an arbitrary metric space
(X, d) is regular.
PROOF. We can assume that μ ⩾0. Let E be the class of all sets B ∈B(X)
for which for every ε > 0 there exist a closed set Z and an open set U with
Z ⊂B ⊂U and μ(U\Z) < ε. All closed set belong to E, because for a closed B
we can take Z = B and for an open set we can take Un := {x: dist(x, B) < 1/n}
for some n, since the sets Un decrease to B. The class E is obviously closed with

5.2. Measures on topological spaces
317
respect to complements. In addition, B = ∞
n=1 Bn ∈E if Bn ∈E. Indeed, for
any ε > 0 we can find open sets Un ⊃Bn with μ(Un\Bn) < ε4−n and take
U = ∞
n=1 Un. Next, we find N such that μ

B\ N
n=1 Bn

< ε/4 and take the
closed set Zn ⊂Bn with μ(Bn\Zn) < ε4−n. The set Z = N
n=1 Zn ⊂B is
closed and we have μ(U\Z) < ε. Hence E is a σ-algebra containing all closed
sets, i.e., E = B(X).
□
5.2.5. Remark. It is seen from the proof that the class E is a σ-algebra also
in the case of a topological space. The metrizability of X is needed in order to
conclude that E contains all closed sets.
Let us take a set X ⊂[0, 1] that is nonmeasurable with respect to Lebesgue
measure λ and λ∗(X) = 1. Then the formula μ(B ∩X) := λ(B) defines a
probability Borel measure on X. Indeed, it is easy to verify that any Borel subset
of X has the form B ∩X, where B is a Borel set in [0, 1]. In addition, we have
λ(B1) = λ(B2) if B1 ∩X = B2 ∩X, since λ∗(X) = 1. As shown above, the
measure μ is regular, but it is not Radon, since X is nonmeasurable in [0, 1], but
compact subsets of X are compact also in [0, 1].
Any Radon measure μ is tight in the sense of the following definition.
5.2.6. Definition. A nonnegative set function ν on some domain of definition
A in a topological space X is called tight if for every ε > 0 there exists a compact
set Kε ⊂X such that ν(A) < ε for every set A ∈A disjoint with Kε. A signed
measure μ on a σ-algebra is called tight if its total variation is tight.
However, again this is not equivalent to the Radon property: there are ex-
amples of nonregular Borel measures on nonmetrizable compact spaces. Only the
combination of the regularity and tightness is equivalent to being Radon. On most
of the spaces encountered in applications all Borel measures are Radon (although
there are exceptions, for example, the product of the continuum of intervals). In
particular, the following Ulam theorem holds.
5.2.7. Theorem. On every complete separable metric space all Borel mea-
sures are Radon.
PROOF. Let μ be a nonnegative Borel measure on a complete separable metric
space X. We already know that this measure is regular. By using the separability
and completeness of X we establish its tightness.
Let ε > 0 and {xn} be a
countable everywhere dense set in X. For every k ∈IN the union of the open balls
B(xn, 1/k) of radius 1/k is the whole space X. Hence there exists Nk such that
μ

X\ Nk
n=1 B(xn, 1/k)

< ε2−k. Let us now set B := 
∞
k=1
Nk
n=1 B(xn, 1/k).
Then μ(X\B) ⩽ε. The set B is totally bounded, since for every k it is covered by
finitely many balls of radius 1/k. Hence, by completeness of X, B has compact
closure with the desired property.
□
5.2.8. Theorem. (LUSIN’S THEOREM) If μ is a Radon measure on a Ty-
chonoff space X and f is a μ-measurable function, then, for every ε > 0, there is
a continuous function fε such that |μ|

x: f(x) ̸= fε(x)

< ε.

318
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
Among the most important results in measure theory on topological spaces one
should mention the following theorem on the universal measurability of Souslin
sets, going back to Lusin.
5.2.9. Definition. Souslin sets in a Hausdorff topological space X are defined
to be the images of complete separable metric spaces under continuous mappings
with values in X.
Borel sets in complete separable metric spaces are Souslin, but in every un-
countable complete separable metric space there is a Souslin set that is not Borel
(for the proofs of all these facts, see Bogachev [65, Chapters 6, 7]). Souslin sets
in complete separable metric spaces can be also described by means of the Souslin
operation over closed (or open) sets.
Let E be some class of subsets of a space X. If to every finite sequence of
natural numbers (n1, . . . , nk) we associate a set An1,...,nk ∈E, then we say that
a Souslin scheme (or table) of sets {An1,...,nk} with values in E is defined. The
Souslin operation (or A-operation) over the class E is the mapping which to every
Souslin table {An1,...,nk} with values in E associates the set
A =

(ni)∈IN
∞
∞

k=1
An1,...,nk.
Sets of this form along with the empty set are called E-Souslin or E-analytic. Their
collection is denoted by S(E). It turns out that if we apply the Souslin operation
to the class of closed (or open) sets in a complete separable metric space, then
we obtain exactly the class of Souslin sets. In the case of the real line it suffices
to apply the Souslin operation to the class of intervals. Yet another equivalent
description of E-Souslin sets characterizes them as the projections to X of the
sets in X ×[0, 1] representable as countable intersections of countable unions of
products of the form E×[a, b], where E ∈E and [a, b] ⊂[0, 1]. The same class
coincides with the projections of the sets in E ⊗B([0, 1]).
For example, a set
A ⊂IR1 is Souslin precisely when it is the projection of a Borel set on the plane.
It is important to bear in mind that such projections need not belong to the class
of Borel sets.
5.2.10. Theorem. (i) Let μ be a measure on a measurable space (X, A).
Then, applying the Souslin operation to sets from Aμ we obtain sets from Aμ, i.e.,
the Souslin operation preserves measurability.
(ii) In any Hausdorff space X all Souslin sets are measurable with respect to
every Radon measure on X. If X is Souslin, then every Borel measure on X is
Radon.
(iii) All Borel mappings between Souslin spaces take Souslin sets to Souslin
sets.
Assertion (i) is obviously nontrivial: in the formation of a set by means of the
Souslin operation we use an uncountable union over all infinite sequences (ni) of
natural numbers! Let us give one more useful result in this area (see Bogachev
[65, Corollary 6.10.10]).

5.2. Measures on topological spaces
319
5.2.11. Theorem. Let (X, E) be a measurable space and let Y be a Souslin
space. Then the projection onto X of every set from S

E⊗B(Y )

belongs to S(E)
and hence is measurable with respect to each measure on (X, E).
For example, if X is a Hausdorff topological space and E = B(X), then for
any Souslin space Y we have the equality (see [65, Lemma 6.4.2])
B(X×Y ) = B(X)⊗B(Y ).
(5.2.1)
Hence for every set B from B(X ×Y ), its projection onto X is measurable with
respect to all Borel measures on X, although even in the case X = Y = [0, 1] this
projection need not be Borel.
It is known that if μ and ν are two Radon measures on a Tychonoff space X
such that

X
f(x) μ(dx) =

X
f(x) ν(dx)
for all functions f from the class Cb(X) of bounded continuous functions on X,
then μ = ν. A bit stronger assertion is valid.
5.2.12. Lemma. If the foregoing equality, where μ and ν are Radon measures,
is true for all functions from some class F ⊂Cb(X) with the property that for
every pair of distinct points x, y ∈X there is a function f ∈F with f(x) ̸= f(y),
then μ = ν.
PROOF. The weakest topology on X in which all functions from F are con-
tinuous is completely regular and the measures μ and ν are Radon in it, since
compact sets in the original topology are compact also in the new topology. Hence
the values of these measures coincide on all compact sets in the new topology, in
particular, on the compact sets in the original topology, whence it follows that our
measures coincide on all Borel sets in the original topology.
□
In conclusion we briefly discuss an important question about the existence of
Radon extensions of measures originally defined on more narrow σ-algebras or
even algebras. The next theorem and its corollary are very useful in applications.
The proof, which can be found in Bogachev [65, § 7.3], employs the inner mea-
sure μ∗constructed from a nonnegative additive set function μ on an algebra A
by the formula
μ∗(E) = sup{μ(A): A ∈A, A ⊂E}.
5.2.13. Theorem. Suppose that A is some algebra of subsets of a Hausdorff
space X containing a base of the topology and μ is a regular additive set function
of bounded variation on A. If the measure μ is tight, then it admits a unique
extension to a Radon measure on X.
In the case where μ ⩾0, the extension for all sets B ∈B(X) is given by the
formula
μ(B) = inf

μ∗(U): U open in X and B ⊂U

.
(5.2.2)

320
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
It is important to bear in mind that this theorem principally differs from the
known theorem in the university course on the extension of a countably additive
measure from an algebra to the generated σ-algebra: the latter theorem can be
insufficient for obtaining an extension to the whole Borel σ-algebra. Let us con-
sider the following simple example of a tight Baire measure for which the Radon
extension to the Borel σ-algebra exists, but cannot be obtained by means of the
Lebesgue completion of Ba(X).
5.2.14. Example. Let X = IRT , where T is an uncountable set (say, an
interval of the real line) and let x0 be any element of X (for example, the iden-
tically zero function). Let ν be the measure on the σ-algebra Ba(X) defined by
the formula ν(B) = 1 if x0 ∈B and ν(B) = 0 otherwise (i.e., ν is Dirac’s
measure δx0 at x0). Clearly, this measure is tight and by the same formula can be
extended to B(X). However, the singleton set {x0} is not measurable with respect
to the Lebesgue completion of the measure ν on Ba(X). Indeed, otherwise this
set would be the union of some set from Ba(X) and some set of outer measure
zero with respect to ν on Ba(X), which is impossible, since no singleton is Baire
in our space, while the point x0 has outer measure 1.
Here is a typical application of Theorem 5.2.13.
5.2.15. Example. Every tight Baire measure on a Tychonoff space X has a
unique Radon extension. This follows from the fact that Baire sets of the type
{x: f(x) > 0}, where f is a continuous function on X, form a topology base,
since X is completely regular.
In particular, this example applies to Hausdorff locally convex spaces, but here
it would be nice to have Radon extensions of all tight cylindrical measures (such
measures are discussed in § 5.4). A straightforward application of Theorem 5.2.13
does not imply this, since the algebra of cylinders seldom contains a topology base
(if this is not the weak topology). However, one can derive from this theorem the
following useful fact (see Bogachev [65, § 7.3]).
5.2.16. Corollary. Let X be a Tychonoff space and let Γ be some family of
continuous functions on X separating the points in X. Then, every tight measure
μ on the σ-algebra σ(Γ) generated by Γ admits a unique extension to a Radon
measure on X. Moreover, the same is true if μ is a regular and tight additive set
function of bounded variation on the algebra A(Γ) generated by Γ.
This result obviously applies to the algebra of cylinders, which will be done
in Theorem 5.4.10.
It should be noted that a tight Baire measure on a Tychonoff space can have
Borel extensions that are not Radon (this happens even for compact spaces, on
which all Baire measures are tight); if a Baire measure is not tight, then it can
fail to have Borel extensions (see [65, Example 7.3.9]). Although the Lebesgue
completion of the algebra of cylinders need not contain all Borel sets, the following
important fact is true.

5.3. Transformations and convergence of measures
321
5.2.17. Proposition. Let μ be a Radon measure on a Hausdorff locally convex
space E and let B ∈B(E). Then, for every ε > 0, there exists an open cylindrical
set Cε such that |μ|(B △Cε) < ε.
If B is compact, then Cε can be taken to contain B and μ(B) = inf μ(B+H),
where inf is taken over all closed subspaces H of finite codimension.
PROOF. Clearly, it suffices to verify the second assertion, where B is com-
pact. We can find a compact set Kε ⊃B such that |μ|(E\Kε) < ε/2. In addition,
we can find an open set Uε ⊃B for which |μ|(U\B) < ε. On the compact set Kε,
the original topology coincides with σ(E, E′). Hence there exists a σ(E, E′)-open
set Vε such that Vε ∩Kε = Uε ∩Kε. The set Vε is the union of some collection of
open cylindrical sets, hence by the compactness of B one can take a finite union
of these cylinders contained in Vε and covering B. This union Cε is the desired
set, since
|μ|(Cε\B) ⩽|μ|(Vε\B) ⩽|μ|(Uε\B) + ε/2 < ε.
Finally, if a cylinder C contains the compact set B, we take a finite-dimensional
subspace L containing the base of C and a continuous projection P onto L. Let
H = P −1(0), K = P(B). Then the cylinder K+H = P(K)+H = P −1
P(K)

with a compact base contains B and is contained in C.
□
It would be interesting to know whether one can take for Cε a convex set if B
is convex (if B is convex and compact, then this is true). Note that the justification
of this offered in Bogachev [63, Lemma 2.6.7] contains a gap.
5.2.18. Corollary. For a Radon measure μ on a locally convex space E,
the set of bounded cylindrical functions is everywhere dense in Lp(μ) for all
p ∈[1, +∞).
Moreover, the set of functions of the form ϕ(l1, . . . , ln), where
ϕ ∈C∞
0 (IRn) and li ∈E′, is everywhere dense.
5.2.19. Remark. A useful abstract generalization of the concept of a Radon
measure is a measure with a compact approximating class. A class K of subsets
of a set X is called compact if, for every sequence of sets Kn ∈K with the
property that all finite intersections 
N
n=1 Kn are nonempty, the set 
∞
n=1 Kn is
also nonempty. Any class consisting of compact sets in a topological space is
compact, but this concept does not employ topologies.
A compact class K in X is called approximating for an additive function
μ⩾0 on an algebra of sets A0 in X if, for every A ∈A0 and ε > 0, there exist
Kε ∈K and Aε ∈A0 such that Aε ⊂Kε ⊂A and μ(A\Aε) < ε. It is easy to
verify that this yields the countable additivity of μ on A0. Although there exist
countably additive measures on σ-algebras without approximating compact classes
(see [65, Example 7.5.3 and Theorem 7.5.6]), for the measures encountered in real
applications such classes usually exist.
5.3. Transformations and convergence of measures
Let (X, A) and (Y, B) be two measurable spaces, i.e., spaces equipped with
σ-algebras. A mapping f : X →Y is measurable with respect to the pair of

322
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
σ-algebras (A, B) (or (A, B)-measurable) if we have
f −1(B) ∈A
for all
B ∈B.
If (Y, B) is the real line IR1 with its Borel σ-algebra B = B(IR1), then (A, B)-
measurable functions are precisely A-measurable functions: A-measurability of
a real function f is equivalent to the inclusion f −1(B) ∈A for all Borel sets
B ⊂IR1. If X and Y are topological spaces, then

B(X), B(Y )

-measurable
mappings are called Borel mappings.
The image of a measure μ on (X, A) under a μ-measurable mapping f from X
to (Y, B), i.e., (Aμ, B)-measurable (for example (A, B)-measurable), is denoted by
μ◦f −1 and defined by the equality
μ◦f −1(B) = μ

f −1(B)

.
This definition yields the following change of variables formula:

X
ϕ

f(x)

μ(dx) =

IR1 ϕ(t) μ◦f −1(dt),
(5.3.1)
valid for every bounded B-measurable function ϕ; more generally, this formula is
true for every B-measurable function ϕ integrable with respect to the nonnegative
measure |μ|◦f −1.
The product of two measure spaces (X, A, μ) and (Y, B, ν) is usually denoted
by (X×Y, A⊗B, μ⊗ν), see Bogachev [65, Chapter 3].
Transformations of measures are related to the concept of conditional mea-
sures, which we discuss for the case of Souslin spaces (proofs and additional
details can be found in [65, Chapter 10]).
Let X and Y be two Hausdorff spaces such that X is Souslin (for example,
complete separable metrizable), let μ be a nonnegative Radon measure on X×Y ,
and let μY be the projection of μ to Y . Then, for every y ∈Y , there exists a
Radon probability measure μy on X×{y} such that for every set A ∈B(X×Y )
the function y →μy
A ∩(X×{y})

is measurable with respect to μY and
μ(A) =

Y
μy
A ∩(X×{y})

μY (dy).
(5.3.2)
A similar equality is true also for signed measures with the difference that in place
of the measure μY we take the projection |μ|Y of the measure |μ| on Y , and
measures μy can be signed; they satisfy the condition ∥μy∥= 1. To this end, it
suffices to write the measure μ as μ = ϱ·|μ|, where |ϱ| = 1, and take the measures
μy = ϱ·|μ|y. Measures μy are called conditional or regular conditional measures.
The conditional measures μy on X×{y} are defined μY -uniquely: two families of
such measures coincide μY -a.e. If the space Y is also Souslin (which is the case
in most of applications), then the conditional measures μy can be chosen in such
a way that the functions y →μy
A ∩(X×{y})

will be Borel measurable for all
Borel sets A ∈B(X×Y ).
In place of measures μy on the slices X×{y} it is possible to define conditional
measures μy on X, see (5.3.6) below.

5.3. Transformations and convergence of measures
323
For any sets A ∈B(X)⊗B(Y ) and B ∈B(Y ), (5.3.2) yields the equality
μ

A ∩(X×B)

=

B
μy
A ∩(X×{y})

μY (dy).
(5.3.3)
It also follows from (5.3.2) that for every |μ|-integrable Borel function f one
has the equality

X×Y
f dμ =

Y

X×{y}
f(x, y) μy(dx) |μ|Y (dy),
(5.3.4)
where the repeated integral exists in the following sense: for |μ|Y -a.e. y∈Y the
function x →f(x, y) is integrable with respect to the conditional measure μy and
the obtained integral is a |μ|Y -integrable function.
Let us note a useful corollary of the last formula. Let ν be a Radon measure
on X × Y such that ν ≪μ. Then ν can be represented in the form
ν(A) =

Y

X×{y}
σy
A ∩(X×{y})

|μ|Y (dy),
(5.3.5)
where σy is a Radon measure on the space X×{y} for each y ∈Y and the
functions y →∥σy∥and y →σy(A) for any A ∈B(X) are integrable with
respect to |μ|Y . Indeed, we can assume that μ ⩾0. By the Radon–Nikodym
theorem ν = ϱ · μ, where ϱ ∈L1(μ) is a Borel function. By formula (5.3.4) we
find that
ν(A) =

X×Y
IAϱ dμ =

Y

X×{y}
IA(x, y)ϱ(x, y) μy(dx) μY (dy)
=

Y
σy
A ∩(X×{y})

μY (dy),
where σy := ϱ( · , y) · μy. The measures σy with the indicated properties are also
defined uniquely up to a redefinition of such measures for points y from some set
of |μ|Y -measure zero.
Sometimes it becomes useful to represent a measure μ on X×Y in the form
μ(B) =

Y
μy(By) σ(dy),
By := {x ∈X : (x, y) ∈B},
(5.3.6)
where μy are Borel measures on X, σ is some nonnegative Radon measure on Y
for which μY ≪σ, and the functions y →μy(By) and y →∥μy∥are integrable
with respect to the measure σ. Measures μy are defined uniquely up to a redefin-
ition for points y from a set of σ-measure zero. If we are given two measures μ
and ν on the product X×Y and the measure ζ := |μ| + |ν| possesses conditional
measures ζy on X, then we can take σ = ζY and obtain representations of the
form (5.3.6) for μ and ν with a common measure σ. A similar representation is
possible for a countable collection of measures.
5.3.1. Proposition. (i) The relation μ ≪ν is equivalent to the property that
μy ≪νy for σ-a.e. y. (ii) The relation μ ⊥ν is equivalent to the property that
μy ⊥νy for σ-a.e. y.

324
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
PROOF. Let μ, ν, σ be probability measures. If μy ≪νy for σ-a.e. y, then
we have μ ≪ν. Let μ ≪ν and f = dμ/dν. Then the measure μ is represented
both by means of the measures f( · , y) · νy and by means of the measures μy,
whence μy = f( · , y) · νy for σ-a.e. y by the essential uniqueness of representing
measures. If μ ⊥ν, then there exists a set B with μ(B) = 0 and ν(B) = 1. Then
μy(By) = 0 and νy(By) = 1 σ-a.e., i.e., μy ⊥νy. Conversely, let μy ⊥νy
σ-a.e. If it is not true that μ ⊥ν, then μ = μ1 + μ2, where μ1 ≪ν, μ2 ⊥ν. Then
μy = μy
1 + μy
2 by uniqueness, moreover, μy
1 ≪νy and μy
2 ⊥νy as shown above.
Since μy ⊥νy, we have μy
1 = 0 σ-a.e., i.e., μ1 = 0. The case of signed measures
reduces to the considered one by using the Hahn decomposition.
□
An important partial case arises when a locally convex space X with a Radon
measure μ is represented as a direct sum X = X0 ⊕Y , where Y is a finite-
dimensional linear subspace and X0 is a closed linear subspace complementing Y ;
such X0, as we known, always exists for any finite-dimensional Y .
The results about conditional measures can be represented in a more general
form. For simplicity suppose that π: X →Y is a Borel mapping of Souslin
spaces. Let μ be a Borel probability measure on X and let ν = μ◦π−1. Then, on
the sets π−1(y), where y ∈Y , there exist probability measures μy such that for
every set B ∈B(X) the function y →μy
B ∩π−1(y)

is measurable with respect
to ν and
μ(B) =

Y
μy
B ∩π−1(y)

ν(dy).
(5.3.7)
For any μ-integrable Borel function f we have the equality

X
f dμ =

Y

X
f(x) μy(dx) ν(dy).
One can make all functions y →μy(B) Borel measurable if the measures μy are
allowed to concentrate on π−1(y) not for all y, but just for ν-a.e. y. In the general
case, it is impossible to combine the requirement of the Borel measurability of all
such functions with the equality μy
π−1(y)

= 1 for all y even for Borel functions
π on [0, 1]. If X and Y are Borel sets in Polish spaces, then both requirements can
be combined only when π(X) is a Borel set and π possesses a Borel selection,
i.e., there exists a Borel mapping g: π(X) →X with π

g(y)

= y (see the
results of Blackwell and Ryll-Nardzewski described in [65, Exercise 10.10.55]).
The existence of the required conditional measures in the presence of the indicated
mapping g is proved simply. Let us take conditional measures μy such that the
function y →μy(B), B ∈B(X), are Borel and μy
π−1(y)

= 1 for all y ∈Y0,
where Y0 ⊂π(X) is a Borel set of full ν-measure. For every y ∈π(X)\Y0 let us
set μy := δg(y). It is readily seen that the functions y →δg(y)(B), B ∈B(X), are
Borel. A Borel selection does not always exist (see [65, § 6.9]). If X and Y are
Polish space, then for its existence it is sufficient that the sets π−1(y) be countable
unions of compact sets.
The Hahn–Jordan decomposition gives (5.3.7) for a signed measure μ with
ν = |μ|◦π−1, and the measures μy on π−1(y) are defined uniquely ν-a.e. (for
uniqueness a.e. it is sufficient that B(X) be countably generated).

5.3. Transformations and convergence of measures
325
The case of products considered above is a partial case in which π is a pro-
jection from the product to a factor. In turn, it is easy to derive the general case
from this partial one. To this end we pass to the space X ×Y equipped with the
measure μ0 on the graph of π obtained as the image of the measure μ under the
mapping x →

x, π(x)

from X to X ×Y . The projection of this measure to Y
equals ν = μ◦π−1. According to (5.3.2), there are conditional measures μy
0 on the
slices X×{y}. For ν-a.e. y, these measures are concentrated on the intersections
of the slices with the graph of π, i.e., on the sets π−1(y)×{y}, which enables one
to define the required measures μy on π−1(y) for ν-a.e. y. In the case of arbitrary
spaces these formulations are not equivalent, moreover, conditional measures need
not exist.
To the most important concepts of measure theory on topological spaces be-
longs also weak convergence of measures. Let us give some basic facts (for proofs,
see Bogachev [65, Chapter 8], [69]). Let Cb(X) be the space of bounded continu-
ous functions on a topological space X. A sequence of Radon measures μn on X
is called weakly converging to a Radon measure μ if for every function f ∈Cb(X)
we have
lim
n→∞

X
f(x) μn(dx) =

X
f(x) μ(dx).
Similarly one defines weak convergence of a net of measures μα to μ. These
concepts are meaningful for completely regular topological spaces and can be
defined also for Baire measures. Weak convergence is convergence in the topology
σ

M, Cb(X)

on the space of measures M (Baire, Borel or Radon), which is
called weak, where each f ∈Cb(X) defines a functional on the space M just as
the integral of f against measures from M.
For probability measures, there is the following criterion of weak convergence,
obtained by A.D. Alexandroff.
5.3.2. Theorem. Suppose we are given a Tychonoff topological space X, a se-
quence of probability Radon measures {μn} and a probability Radon measure μ
on X. Then the following conditions are equivalent:
(i) the sequence {μn} converges weakly to μ;
(ii) for every closed set F one has the inequality lim sup
n→∞μn(F) ⩽μ(F);
(iii) for every open set U one has the inequality lim inf
n→∞μn(U) ⩾μ(U).
The same is true for nets of measures.
Note that in the sufficiency part in conditions (ii) and (iii), in place of arbitrary
closed and open sets one can take functionally closed and functionally open sets,
i.e., sets of the form {x: ϕ(x) = 0} and {x: ϕ(x) ̸= 0}, respectively , where ϕ
belongs to Cb(X). Actually, this theorem is true also for Baire measures if in its
formulation we consider functionally open and closed sets. It is easy to modify
this theorem for nonnegative measures not necessarily of the same total mass.
Another important result of A.D. Alexandroff asserts the sequential complete-
ness of the space of Baire measures Mσ in the weak topology σ

Mσ, Cb(X)

.

326
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
5.3.3. Theorem. If a sequence of Baire measures μn on X is weakly funda-
mental (i.e., the integrals of every function f ∈Cb(X) against the measures μn
have a finite limit), then {μn} converges weakly to some Baire measure μ.
The space of Radon (or tight) measures is not always weakly sequentially
complete: the weak limit of a sequence of Radon measures need not be a tight
measure (Exercise 5.12.79). Certainly, such problems do not arise if all Baire
measures on X have Radon extensions.
Since Cb(X) is a Banach space with respect to the sup-norm, the question
arises about the connection of its Banach dual with the space of measures (of
course, its dual for the topology σ

Cb(X), M)

will be always M). The principal
fact here is the following Riesz theorem.
5.3.4. Theorem. For any compact space X, the dual to the space Cb(X)
with the sup-norm can be identified with the space of Radon measures on X, i.e.,
every continuous linear functional on Cb(X) is given as the integral with respect
to some Radon measure.
The compactness of the space X is important.
5.3.5. Example. There is a continuous linear functional on the space Cb(IR1)
that cannot be represented as the integral with respect to a Borel measure on IR1.
For example, one can take an extension with the preservation of norm of the func-
tional l(f) =
lim
t→+∞f(t) on the subspace of functions having a limit at infinitity.
In the general case, the following fact is true.
5.3.6. Theorem. (i) Let X be a topological space. A continuous linear func-
tional l on Cb(X) is represented as the integral with respect to a Baire measure
precisely when l(fn) →0 for every sequence {fn} ⊂Cb(X) pointwise decreasing
to zero.
(ii) Let X be a Tychonoff space. A continuous linear functional l on Cb(X)
is represented as the integral with resect to a Radon measure precisely when for
every ε > 0 there exists a compact set Kε such that |l(f)| ⩽ε supx |f(x)| for
every function f ∈Cb(X) vanishing on Kε.
Assertion (ii) yields that for every functional l ∈Cb(X)′, where X is a
Tychonoff space, there is a Radon measure ν on the Stone– ˇCech compactification
βX of the space X (see Engelking [154, § 3.6]) for which l(f) is the integral
against the measure ν of the extension of f to βX.
For applications it is very important to have efficient criteria for a given
sequence of measures to contain a weakly convergent subsequence. The main
general result here was obtained by Yu.V. Prohorov.
5.3.7. Theorem. Let X be a complete metric space and let {μn} be a se-
quence of Radon measures on X. Every subsequence in {μn} contains a further
subsequence weakly converging to a Radon measure if and only if the sequence
{μn} is uniformly bounded in variation and uniformly tight, i.e., for every ε > 0,
there exists a compact set Kε such that |μn|(X\Kε) < ε for all n.

5.4. Cylindrical measures
327
5.3.8. Theorem. Let X be a Fr´echet space and let M be a uniformly tight
family of Radon measures on X. Then, there exists a separable reflexive Banach
space E compactly embedded into X such that |μ|(X\E) = 0 for all μ ∈M
and the restrictions of the measures from M to E form a uniformly tight set
of measures with respect to the norm of the space E.
Hence for any weakly
convergent sequence of measures μn on X, the space E with the stated properties
can be chosen in such a way that the measures μn|E will be weakly converging on
the Banach space E.
For Tychonoff spaces, we have the following fact.
5.3.9. Theorem. Any uniformly bounded and uniformly tight family of Radon
measures on a Tychonoff space is contained in a set compact in the weak topology.
5.4. Cylindrical measures
Let E be a real vector space, let G be a subset of its algebraic dual, and let
AG be the algebra of G-cylindrical sets in E.
5.4.1.
Definition. A cylindrical measure on (E, AG), or a G-cylindrical
measure, on E is a function ν: AG →IR1 the restriction of which to every σ-
algebra AF , where F ⊂G is finite, is countably additive.
If ν ⩾0 and ν(E) = 1, then ν is called a probability G-cylindrical measure.
Similarly one defines complex cylindrical measures and also cylindrical mea-
sures with values in a locally convex space T.
We shall be mostly concerned with bounded (i.e., having bounded sets of
values) cylindrical measures.
Note that any cylindrical measure on (E, AG) is additive. This is obvious
from the fact that any two sets in (E, AG) belong to one of the algebras AF .
However, it is very important that this measure need not be countably additive on
the whole algebra AG (the countable additivity holds only for cylinders with bases
in a common finite-dimensional space).
We recall a general fact (see Dunford, Schwartz [145, Chapter IV]) valid for
any bounded additive real function ν on an algebra A: the Jordan decomposition
theorem according to which ν = ν+ −ν−, where for every A ∈A we have
ν+(A) = sup{ν(B): B ⊂A, B ∈A}, ν−(A) = (−ν)+(A),
(5.4.1)
and the functions ν+ and ν−on A are additive.
Every finite collection g1, . . . , gn ∈G generates the finite-dimensional oper-
ator Px =

g1(x), . . . , gn(x)

and the projection μP of the cylindrical measure μ
on IRn by the formula
μP (B) = μ

P −1(B)

,
B ∈B(IRn).
This projection is countably additive by definition.
5.4.2. Lemma. Let ν be a bounded real G-cylindrical measure on E and let
ν = ν+ −ν−be its the Jordan decomposition . Then ν+ and ν−are bounded
G-cylindrical measures on E.

328
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
PROOF. The cylindrical measure ν is bounded, hence the Jordan decompo-
sition holds for it, but the question arises about the countable additivity of its
finite-dimensional projections. For every set A ∈AG, we have equality (5.4.1)
with A = AG. We have to show that for every mapping P : E →IRk, where P
has the form P = (g1, . . . , gk), gi ∈G, and every sequence of pairwise disjoint
sets Bn ∈B(IRk) with the union B we have the inequality
ν+
P −1(B)

⩽
∞

n=1
ν+
P −1(Bn)

.
Let us fix ε > 0. By definition, there exists a G-cylinder C ⊂P −1(B) such that
ν+
P −1(B)

⩽ν(C)+ε. Increasing k, we arrive at the case where C = P −1(D),
D ∈B(IRk). Then by the countable additivity of ν◦P −1 we obtain
ν(C) =
∞

n=1
ν

P −1(D ∩Bn)

⩽
∞

n=1
ν+
P −1(Bn)

,
which, since ε was arbitrary, gives the desired inequality proving the countable
additivity of ν+◦P −1. The countable additivity of the projections of ν−follows
from the equality ν−= (−ν)+.
□
The function ν →∥ν∥:= ν+(E)+ν−(E) is a norm on the space of bounded
cylindrical measures, with which this space is complete.
5.4.3. Definition. A mapping f from E to a locally convex space Y is called
G-cylindrical if there exist a number n ∈IN, functionals g1, . . . , gn ∈G and a
map ϕ: IRn →Y such that f(x) = ϕ

g1(x), . . . , gn(x)

for all x ∈E.
Real or complex cylindrical mappings are called cylindrical functions.
If the mapping ϕ from this definition is Borel, i.e., measurable as a mapping
from the measurable space

IRn, B(IRn)

to the measurable space

Y, B(Y )

, then
the cylindrical mapping is measurable as a mapping from the measurable space
(E, A{g1,...,gn}) to the measurable space

Y, B(Y )

; such cylindrical mappings
will be called Borel cylindrical.
Since the restriction of any G-cylindrical measure to the σ-algebra AF with
finite F ⊂G is countably additive, for real (or complex) Borel G-cylindrical
functions the notion of the Lebesgue integral with respect to a real or complex
G-cylindrical measure is meaningful. For every bounded cylindrical function f
one has the equality

E
f(x) μ(dx) =

IRn ϕ(y) μP (dy),
(5.4.2)
where P = (g1, . . . , gn), μP is the corresponding projection of μ and ϕ is the
function used in the above representation of f. This equality can be taken as the
definition of the integral in the left side.
In the case E = IRT , to define a cylindrical measure μ means, in the lan-
guage of the theory of random processes, to define “a consistent system of finite-
dimensional distributions”, i.e., to define, for every finite collection of different

5.4. Cylindrical measures
329
points t1, . . . , tn in T, a finite countably additive measure μt1,...,tn on IRn satisfy-
ing the following consistency conditions:
(i) the projection of the measure μt1,...,tn to IRn−1 equals μt1,...,tn−1,
(ii) if a collection of points s1, . . . , sn ∈T is a permutation of the collection
t1, . . . , tn, then the measure μs1,...,sn is the image of μt1,...,tn under the map-
ping IRn generated by the corresponding permutation of coordinates.
For example, the measure μt2,t1 is the image of the measure μt1,t2 under the
mapping (x1, x2) →(x2, x1).
The same notions are meaningful if we consider the product of arbitrary non-
empty measurable spaces (Xt, At). Certainly, in this case the product (consisting
of all collections of the form (xt), where xt ∈Xt) need not be a linear space or
topological space, but we still have the σ-algebra A = .
t At generated by the
products 
t At, where only finitely many sets At can differ from Xt and At ∈At
for all t.
If a measure μ is defined on the σ-algebra A, then its projections μt1,...,tn are
defined on Xt1,...,tn = Xt1 ×· · ·×Xtn in place of IRn. These projections satisfy
the consistency conditions (i) and (ii), which are introduced similarly; certainly
in condition (ii), permutations of indices σ: {t1, . . . , tn} →{t1, . . . , tn} yields
mappings of the spaces Xt1,...,tn →Xσ(t1),...,σ(tn).
In this area an important role is played by the following celebrated Kol-
mogorov theorem on consistent distributions. The definition of a compact ap-
proximating class in its second part (obtained by E. Marczewski) is given in Re-
mark 5.2.19.
5.4.4. Theorem. Suppose that T is a nonempty set and we are given a con-
sistent family of probability distributions μt1,...,tn on the spaces IRn. Then, there
exists a probability measure μ on the σ-algebra generated by the cylindrical sets
in IRT such that, for every collection of different points t1, . . . , tn in T, the mea-
sure μt1,...,tn coincides with the image of the measure μ under the corresponding
projection x →

x(t1), . . . , x(tn)

.
A similar assertion is true for measures on products of abstract measurable
spaces (Xt, At) under the additional condition that the measures μt on Xt possess
compact approximating classes.
A relatively simple proof of this classical theorem can be found in many texts
on the theory of random processes (see, for example, Gihman, Skorohod [194],
Neveu [371, Section III.3], Wentzel [564]), so we do not include it.
Some comments are in order. The Kolmogorov theorem deals with different
points ti, but this is not important. In place of collections of different points one
can consider finite subsets S ⊂T and the corresponding measures μS on the
finite-dimensional spaces IRS. Then only one condition remains: if S1 ⊂S2,
then the measure μS1 must coincide with the projection of μS2 under the natural
projection of IRS2 onto IRS1, which associates to a function on S2 its restriction
to S1. The second condition in the given formulation tells exactly this: one can
define the measure μS by numbering the points of S in some order s1, . . . , sn and
the measure μS will not depend on this numeration.

330
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
Certainly, in the described alternative approach in terms of finite subsets the
points are automatically different.
However, having the measures μt1,...,tn for
distinct points ti, one can easily define the measures μs1,...,sm for all collections
with possibly repeating points: if, for example, the points s1, . . . , sn are distinct
and sn = sn+1 = · · · = sm, then for μs1,...,sm one should take the image of
the measure μs1,...,sn under the mapping IRn →IRm that takes (x1, . . . , xn) to
(x1, . . . , xn, xn, . . . , xn). Thus, we arrive at the situation considered above, when
we could take mappings (g1, . . . , gn) with possibly repeating gi ∈G; in the present
case for the collection of functionals G on IRT we take the evaluation functionals
x →x(t) for all possible points t ∈T.
Moreover, since every continuous linear functional on E = IRT (with the
product topology) has the form
x →c1x(t1) + · · · + cnx(tn)
with some ci ∈IR and ti ∈T, the measures μt1,...,tn enable one to uniquely
reconstruct the measures μl1,...,lk, li ∈E′. Indeed, if li = ci,1t1 + · · · + ci,ntn,
where t1, . . . , tn ∈T are all points used for defining l1, . . . , lk, then for μl1,...,lk
we take the image of μt1,...,tn under the linear mapping from IRn to IRk defined
by the formula P(x1, . . . , xn) = (y1, . . . , yk), yi = ci,1x1 + · · · + ci,nxn. Thus,
we obtain a E′-cylindrical measure on E = IRT .
We emphasize that the aforementioned facts are also valid for signed mea-
sures. Thus, the definition by means of families of consistent measures μt1,...,tn
turns out to be equivalent to the definition of a cylindrical measure on IRT . The
boundedness of this cylindrical measure is equivalent to the uniform boundedness
of the variations of the measures μt1,...,tn; this is seen from the fact that the varia-
tion of the measure μl1,...,lk considered above does not exceed the variation of the
measure μt1,...,tn.
5.4.5. Corollary. The Kolmogorov theorem remains valid for any consistent
system of countably additive measures μt1,...,tn on the spaces IRn having uniformly
bounded variations.
PROOF. As explained above, the system of measures μt1,...,tn generates a
cylindrical measure μ on IRT with projections μt1,...,tn. Moreover, μ is bounded
by the uniform boundedness of variations of the given measures, as we have
noted.
Hence we obtain nonnegative cylindrical measures μ+ and μ−, which
are countably additive by the Kolmogorov theorem. Then their difference μ is
countably additive as well.
□
The Kolmogorov theorem deals with the situation in which each bounded
cylindrical measure on a given space is countably additive. This is due to the fact
that the space IRT is very large. Let us give an example of a probability cylindrical
measure that is not countably additive on the algebra of cylinders.
5.4.6. Example. (i) Let us take for E the Hilbert space l2 and for G take the
family of coordinate functionals x →xn. A probability G-cylindrical measure λ
on E will be defined as follows: if C = P −1(B), where B ∈B(IRn) and P is

5.4. Cylindrical measures
331
the orthogonal projection onto IRn, then λ(C) := λn(B ∩[0, 1]n), where λn is
the usual Lebesgue measure on IRn. Actually, the G-cylindrical measure λ on l2
is generated by a true probability measure on IR∞that is the countable power of
Lebesgue measure on [0, 1].
The measure λ is not countably additive on the algebra of G-cylinders. Indeed,
otherwise it could be extended to a probability Borel measure on l2, but the outer
measure with respect to λ of every ball BR of radius R centered at the origin in
l2 is zero, since for any fixed R we have
λ2n(BR) = R2nλ2n(B1) = πnR2n/n! →0,
hence the extension would be the identically zero measure. In place of λ one can
take any countable product of probability measures on the real line that vanishes
on l2 (it is countably additive on IR∞).
(ii) Let us take again E = l2 and identify G = E′ with E in the usual
way. A cylindrical measure ν on E will be defined as follows: if C = P −1(B),
where P is the orthogonal projection onto an n-dimensional subspace En ⊂E
and B ∈B(En), then we set ν(C) := γn(B), where γn is the standard Gaussian
measure on En, i.e., the measure with density (2π)−n/2 exp

−(x, x)2/2

with
respect to the standard Lebesgue measure on En corresponding to the given inner
product.
It is straightforward to verify that the cylindrical measure ν is well-
defined (actually this follows from the fact that the projection of γn+1 to IRn
coincides with γn). However, as above, there is no countable additivity: again
the outer measure of every ball in E is zero (Exercise 5.12.80).
The defined
cylindrical measure is called “the canonical cylindrical Gaussian measure on the
Hilbert space”. Below in § 5.7 we consider in more detail Gaussian cylindrical
measures.
5.4.7. Remark. A general G-cylindrical measure ν on E can be also de-
scribed as a system of consistent (in the same sense as in the Kolmogorov theorem)
measures νg1,...,gn on the spaces IRn. Indeed, we simply set
ν(Cg1,...,gn,B) := νg1,...,gn(B).
The specific feature of the situation in the Kolmogorov theorem is that the space
E there turns out to be sufficiently large in order to support the corresponding
countably additive measure, but in the general case this is not always true.
Suppose we are given vector spaces E1 and E2 with certain spaces of linear
functions G1 and G2 defined on them such that there exists a linear mapping
T : E1 →E2 for which g◦T ∈G1 for every g ∈G2. Then, for every A ∈AG2,
we have T −1(A) ∈AG1. Thus, every cylindrical measure ν1 on E1 generates
the cylindrical measure ν2 := ν1◦T −1 on AG1 called the image of the cylindrical
measure ν1 under the mapping T.
Cylindrical measures can fail to be countably additive on cylindrical algebras.
It turns out, however, that every vector space with a cylindrical algebra can be
enlarged in such a way that all cylindrical measures on the extension generated by
bounded cylindrical measures on the original space will be countably additive on
this extension. A precise formulation is this.

332
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
5.4.8. Theorem. Let E be a vector space and let G be some linear space of
linear functions on E separating points. Let j be the natural injective embedding
of E in IRG defined by the formula j(x)(g) = ⟨g, x⟩. Then, for every bounded
cylindrical measure ν on AG, the measure ν ◦j−1 on the cylindrical algebra in
IRG is countably additive.
PROOF. Since the cylindrical measure ν ◦j−1 on IRG is also bounded, it is
countably additive by the Kolmogorov theorem.
□
5.4.9.
Remark. This theorem leads to the following universal procedure
of constructing bounded cylindrical measures.
Suppose we are given two lin-
ear spaces E and G in duality and a measurable space (Ω, B) with a bounded
(countably additive) real measure μ on B.
Suppose that we are also given a
mapping ξ from G to the space L0(μ) = L0(|μ|) of μ-measurable real functions
on Ω such that ξ is linear in the following sense: for every g1, . . . , gn ∈G and
α1, . . . , αn ∈IR1, almost everywhere
ξ(α1g1 + · · · + αngn) = α1ξ(g1) + · · · + αnξ(gn).
Actually this means that we have defined a linear mapping from G to L0(μ), the
space of equivalence classes. Then we can set
νg1,...,gn := μ◦F −1
n ,
Fn(ω) =

ξ(g1)(ω), . . . , ξ(gn)(ω)

.
It is obvious that the measures νg1,...,gn on IRn are consistent, hence generate a
G-cylindrical measure ν on E. If μ is a probability measure, then ξ is called
“a random linear function on E” (in this case it is customary to say that we have
“a weak distribution on E”).
Universality of this construction is seen from the fact that every bounded G-
cylindrical measure ν on E can be obtained in this way from some countable
additive measure. To this end, it suffices to take for μ the countably additive
measure ν◦j−1 on IRG from the previous theorem (extended to a countably additive
measure on the generated σ-algebra) and set ξ(g)(ω) := ω(g).
Let us now give a general result about Radon extensions of cylindrical mea-
sures that follows directly from Corollary 5.2.16.
5.4.10. Theorem. Let E be a topological vector space and G let be a family
of continuous linear functions on E separating points in E. Then, every tight
bounded measure on the algebra of G-cylinders admits a unique extension to a
Radon measure on E.
PROOF. The above corollary applies, since every G-cylindrical measure is
regular due to regularity of all Borel measures on IRn.
□
5.4.11. Example. Let X be a normed space and let μ be a measure on the
σ-algebra E of the space X′ generated by the elements of X. Then μ possesses
a unique extension to a Radon measure on X′ with the weak-∗topology. Indeed,
by the Banach–Alaoglu theorem all closed balls in X′ are compact in the weak-∗
topology. Hence the measure μ is tight.

5.5. The Fourier transform
333
In conclusion let us mention yet another very useful theorem due to Kol-
mogorov that enables one to restrict measures originally defined on the space of
all paths to the space of continuous paths. First we observe that the set of all con-
tinuous functions C[0, 1] does not belong to the σ-algebra σ(IR[0,1]) generated by
cylinders in the space IR[0,1] of all functions on [0, 1], since every set in the latter
σ-algebra is determined by the values of functions on some countable set. More-
over, even if we take some Borel probability measure P on C[0, 1] and construct
the corresponding measure on σ(IR[0,1]) by the formula P(B) = P

B ∩C[0, 1]

,
B ∈σ(IR[0,1]), then C[0, 1] will not belong even to the Lebesgue completion
of σ(IR[0,1]) with respect to P on σ(IR[0,1]). Indeed, the set C[0, 1] contains no
nonempty set from σ(IR[0,1]), hence if it belongs to the Lebesgue completion of
σ(IR[0,1]) with respect to P, it must have the outer P-measure zero, which is
impossible in our situation.
Thus, even extending P to σ(IR[0,1]), one cannot restrict the extension back
to C[0, 1] in the usual way. However, there is a bit more tricky procedure of
restricting a measure to a set of full outer measure, not necessarily measurable.
Namely, if P ∗(Ω∗) = 1 for some set Ω∗in a measurable space (Ω, F) with a
probability measure P, then we can make Ω∗a measurable space with a probability
measure Q, taking the σ-algebra of all sets of the form Ω∗∩F, where F ∈F, and
letting Q(Ω∗∩F) := P(F). This definition is correct, since if Ω∗∩F = Ω∗∩G,
where F, G ∈F, then P(F) = P(G), because F △G ⊂Ω\Ω∗, whence we
obtain P(F △G) = 0 by the equality P ∗(Ω∗) = 1 (this equality means that the
complement of Ω∗contains no sets from F of positive measure).
5.4.12. Theorem. Let T = [a, b] and let P be a probability measure on IRT
such that, for some M > 0, α > 0 and β > 1, for all t, s ∈T we have

|x(t) −x(s)|α P(dx) ⩽M|t −s|β.
Then P ∗
C[a, b]

= 1. If X is a Banach space, then a similar assertion is true
for measures on the space XT if we replace C[a, b] by the space C([a, b], X) of
continuous functions with values in X.
For a proof, see Neveu [371, Section III.5], where the first case is considered,
but the case of C([a, b], X) is completely similar. In place of the interval [a, b] one
can take any set on the real line. There are analogous results for metric spaces.
5.5. The Fourier transform
Here we consider the Fourier transform of measures on infinite-dimensional
spaces introduced by Kolmogorov [280] (he used the term “the Laplace transform”,
following the French mathematical tradition of the epoch).
The Fourier transform (or the characteristic functional) of a bounded Borel
measure μ on IRn is the complex function
μ(y) =

IRn exp

i(x, y)

μ(dx).

334
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
If the measure μ is defined by a density ϱ with respect to Lebesgue measure, then
μ differs from the inverse Fourier transform of the function ϱ just by the missing
factor (2π)−n/2.
Below we consider again pairs of spaces E and G in duality.
5.5.1. Definition. The Fourier transform of a real or complex G-cylindrical
measure ν on E is the complex function ν on G defined by
ν(g) =

E
exp(i⟨g, x⟩) ν(dx).
If E is a Hilbert space, G = E′, and ν is a cylindrical measure on E, then,
identifying E′ with E by means of the Riesz theorem, its Fourier transform ν can
be defined on E itself by the formula
ν(x) =

E
ei(x,z) ν(dz),
where ( · , · ) is the inner product in E. This Fourier transform can be called “the
Hilbert Fourier transform”.
Let μP be the measure on IRn that is the image of μ with respect to the
operator P = (g1, . . . , gn): E →IRn, where gi ∈G. Formula (5.4.2) for the
vector α = (α1, . . . , αn) yields
μ(α1g1 + · · · + αngn) =

E
exp

iα1g1 + · · · + iαngn

dμ
=

IRn exp

iα1y1 + · · · + iαnyn

μP (dy) = #
μP (α).
(5.5.1)
In particular, if νg is the measure on the real line that is the image of the
measure ν with respect to a functional g ∈G, then
ν(g) =

IR1 eit νg(dt).
Below we usually consider the following two situations. In one of them the
role of E is played by some locally convex space and the role of G is played
by its topological dual E′; in the other situation the role of E is played by the
topological dual to some locally convex space G.
5.5.2.
Proposition. If μ and ν are cylindrical measures on (E, AG) and
μ(g) = ν(g) for all g ∈G, then μ = ν, i.e., any cylindrical measure is uniquely
determined by its Fourier transform.
PROOF. Suppose first that E = IRn; here the algebra AE coincides with the
σ-algebra of all Borel sets in IRn and the measures μ and ν are countably additive.
In order to prove that μ = ν, it suffices to show that both measures assign equal
integrals to every continuous function f with compact support.
Let ε > 0. We can assume that f has support in the cube K = [−πk, πk]n,
where k is so large that IRn\K has measure less than ε with respect to the measure
|μ|+|ν|. In addition, we can assume that |f| ⩽1. There is a 2πk-periodic (in every
variable) function ϕ of the form ϕ(x) = c1 exp

i(y1, x)

+· · ·+cm exp

i(ym, x)


5.5. The Fourier transform
335
such that |f(x) −ϕ(x)| ⩽ε for all x ∈K. Then |ϕ(x)| ⩽1 + ε for all x, whence
|f(x) −ϕ(x)| ⩽1 + ε for all x. Therefore, taking into account the equality of the
integrals of ϕ against the measures μ and ν, we obtain


IRn f dμ −

E
f dν
 ⩽

IRn |f −ϕ| d(|μ| + |ν|)
⩽

K
|f −ϕ| d(|μ| + |ν|) + (1 + ε)(|μ| + |ν|)(IRn\K)
⩽ε(∥μ∥+ ∥ν∥) + ε(1 + ε)(∥μ∥+ ∥ν∥).
Letting ε →0, we obtain the desired equality. Another possible justification can
be given with the aid of the Parseval equality (see below).
The general case reduces to the considered one: for any g1, . . . , gn ∈G,
the operator P = (g1, . . . , gn): E →IRn takes the measures μ and ν to their
projections μP and νP on IRn, moreover, #
μP = #
νP , since by formula (5.5.1) we
have the equalities
#
μP (α) = μ(α1g1 + · · · + αngn),
#
νP (α) = ν(α1g1 + · · · + αngn),
where α = (α1, . . . , αn).
Hence μP = νP , whence μ = ν, because P was
arbitrary.
□
5.5.3. Proposition. Let E and G be two vector spaces in duality and let μ
and ν be countably additive measures on the σ-algebras σG in E and σE in G,
respectively, such that the function (g, x) →⟨g, x⟩is measurable with respect to
the product of the σ-algebras σG and σE. Then the following Parseval equality is
valid:

E
ν(x) μ(dx) =

G
μ(g) ν(dg).
(5.5.2)
PROOF. By assumption, there exists the integral

E×G
exp

i⟨g, x⟩

μ⊗ν(dx dg).
Evaluating this integral by Fubini’s theorem in two ways we obtain the desired
equality.
□
The Parseval equality also yields the coincidence of measures with equal
Fourier transforms, since if #
μ1 = #
μ2, then μ1 and μ2 assign equal integrals to
the Fourier transform of every measure ν, which implies the equality of the inte-
grals against these measures for every function f ∈C∞
0 (IRn), since every such
function f is the Fourier transform of the measure g dx, where g differs from the
direct Fourier transform of the function f by a constant factor (this follows from
the known inversion formula for the Fourier transform).
The Parseval equality gives a method to recover a measure by using its Fourier
transform. It is natural to ask about a possibility to decide directly in terms of a
given function χ on IRn whether it is the Fourier transform of a bounded measure.
Unfortunately, there is no constructive answer to this question (as well as there is

336
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
no explicit description of the class of the Fourier transforms of integrable func-
tions), but there are constructive necessary and sufficient conditions in the very
important partial case of nonnegative measures on IRn.
5.5.4. Definition. A complex function ϕ on a linear space E is called positive
definite if, for all vectors x1, . . . , xn ∈E and complex numbers c1, . . . , cn, one
has
n

j,k=1
cjckϕ(xj −xk) ⩾0.
The following classical Bochner–Khintchin theorem is valid (its proof can be
found, for example, in [65, § 7.13]).
5.5.5. Theorem. A complex function on IRn is continuous and positive def-
inite precisely when it coincides with the Fourier transform of a nonnegative
bounded Borel measure on IRn.
Certainly, one can say that the Fourier transforms of bounded measures are
the differences of continuous positive definite functions, but there is no much use
in such “characterizations”. The continuity condition can be formally weakened,
by requiring it only at the origin, but it cannot be completely removed (see below).
5.5.6. Corollary. A complex function ϕ on the space G is the Fourier trans-
form of some E-cylindrical nonnegative measure on G precisely when this function
is positive definite and its restriction to every finite-dimensional subspace in G is
continuous (with the standard topology).
PROOF. The necessity follows from the fact that, for any g1, . . . , gn ∈G, the
function (t1, . . . , tn) →ν(t1g1 + · · · + tngn) on IRn is the Fourier transform of
the image of the measure ν under the map Pg1,...,gn =(g1, . . . , gn): E →IRn. The
sufficiency follows from the previous theorem. Indeed, for any g1, . . . , gn ∈G,
the function indicated above is continuous and positive definite, hence it coincides
with the Fourier transform of some bounded nonnegative Borel measure νg1,...,gn.
The obtained family of measures turns out to be consistent, since the image of the
measure νg1,...,gn with respect to the natural projection from IRn onto IRn−1 has
the Fourier transform evaluated by the formula
(y1, . . . , yn−1) →

IRn exp

i
n−1

j=1
yjxj

νg1,...,gn(dx)
=

νg1,...,gn(y1, . . . , yn−1, 0) = ϕ(y1g1 + · · · + yn−1gn−1),
which coincides with the Fourier transform of the measure νg1,...,gn−1. Hence this
image is νg1,...,gn−1.
□
It is worth noting that there exist discontinuous positive definite functions on
the real line, but the continuity at zero of a positive definite function implies its
continuity everywhere by the following inequality (which can be easily derived
from the definition of nonnegative definite functions):
|ϕ(x) −ϕ(y)| ⩽2ϕ(0)

1 −Re ϕ(x −y)

.
(5.5.3)

5.6. Covariance operators and means of measures
337
5.5.7. Theorem. A sequence of probability measures μj on IRT equipped with
the σ-algebra σ

(IRT )′
converges weakly to a probability measure μ precisely
when μj(l) →μ(l) for all l ∈(IRT )′.
For IRn this is the L´evy theorem (see [65, p. 210]), which yields the case
of IR∞by [65, Example 8.2.16], and Theorem 5.12.71 implies the general case.
In § 5.11, we discuss conditions for the countable additivity of cylindrical measures
in terms of their Fourier transforms. Here we give only one simple general result
ensuring the continuity of Fourier transforms in some topology.
5.5.8. Proposition. Let μ be a Radon measure on a locally convex space E.
Suppose that E′ is equipped with the topology of uniform convergence on a system
S of Borel sets in E such that ∥μ∥= sup{|μ|(S): S ∈S}. Then the function μ
is continuous in this topology.
PROOF. With the aid of the Jordan decomposition the assertion reduces to
nonnegative measures. Hence we can assume that μ is a probability measure. By
inequality (5.5.3) it suffices to verify the continuity of Re μ at the origin. Let us
fix ε ∈(0, 1/2). Let us take a set S ∈S such that μ(E\S) < ε/4. The set
V = {f ∈E′ : supx∈S |f(x)| < ε} is a neighborhood of zero in the considered
topology on E′. For all f ∈V , by the estimate 1 −cos t ⩽t2 we have

E
[1 −cos f(x)] μ(dx) ⩽2μ(E\S) +

S
|f(x)|2 μ(dx) ⩽1
2ε + ε2 ⩽ε,
which gives the desired continuity.
□
5.5.9. Example. If E is quasi-complete, then the function μ is continuous in
the Mackey topology τ(E′, E). Moreover, it is sufficient that every compact set
in E be contained in a convex compact set.
It should be noted that Kwapien and Tarieladze [309] constructed an example
of a Radon probability measure on a metrizable locally convex space X such that
its Fourier transform is not continuous in the Mackey topology τ(X′, X). Thus,
in the previous example, certain additional conditions on the space (or on the
measure) are necessary.
5.6. Covariance operators and means of measures
Throughout this section X is a Hausdorff locally convex space and the con-
sidered measures are nonnegative.
5.6.1. Definition. (i) A measure μ on σ(X′) is called a measure with weak
moment of order r > 0 (or a measure of weak order r) if X′ is contained in Lr(μ).
(ii) A Borel (or Baire) measure μ on X is called a measure with strong moment
of order r > 0 (or of strong order r) if ψ ∈Lr(μ) for every continuous seminorm
ψ on X.
The measure μ on the Hilbert space l2 with values n−2 at the points nen,
where {en} is the standard basis, has weak first moment, since 	∞
n=1 n−1|yn|<∞
whenever (yn) ∈l2, but has no strong first moment, since 	∞
n=1 n−1 = ∞.

338
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
5.6.2. Definition. We say that a measure μ on X of weak order 1 has a mean
(or barycenter) mμ ∈X if for every l ∈X′ we have
l(mμ) =

X
l(x) μ(dx).
Barycenters of signed measures are defined similarly.
In the general case the existence of weak moments does not guarantee the
existence of barycenters.
For example, the atomic measure μ defined on the
Banach space c0 by μ(2nen) = 2−n, where {en} is the standard basis in c0,
has weak first moment, but has no mean, since otherwise all coordinates of its
mean m would be equal to 1 by the equality lk(m) = 	∞
n=1 lk(en) = 1 for every
coordinate functional lk. It is worth noting that such examples are impossible in
spaces not containing c0.
5.6.3. Proposition. If a complete metrizable locally convex space X has no
subspace linearly homeomorphic to c0, then every Radon measure μ on X of weak
order 1 has a mean mμ.
A proof can be found in Vakhania, Tarieladze [537].
5.6.4. Lemma. If a measure μ on σ(X′) has a mean mμ and a continuous
seminorm p is integrable with respect to μ, then
p(mμ) ⩽

X
p dμ.
(5.6.1)
PROOF. By the Hahn–Banach theorem there is a functional f ∈X′ such that
f(mμ) = p(mμ) and f(x) ⩽p(x) for all x ∈X. Then
p(mμ) = f(mμ) =

X
f(x) μ(dx) ⩽

X
p(x) μ(dx),
as required.
□
Let us give a sufficient condition for the existence of a mean ensuring also a
possibility to express it as a vector integral

X
x μ(dx),
(5.6.2)
understood in the following sense: there is a net of Borel mappings Fα : X →X
each of which assumes finitely many values zα,1, . . . , zα,k on sets Aα,1, . . . , Aα,k,
where k = k(α) and lim
α maxi⩽k μ(Aα,i) = 0, such that
lim
α

X
p

x −Fα(x)

μ(dx) = 0
for every continuous seminorm p and, moreover, the integrals of Fα defined as
sums 	k
i=1 μ(Aα,i)zα,i converge in X to mμ.
In case of Banach spaces this gives the Bochner integral.
Note that the mapping x −Fα(x) is Borel measurable, since on every Borel
set Aα,i it differs from the identity by a constant shift. Therefore, the function
p

x −Fα(x)

is also Borel measurable.

5.6. Covariance operators and means of measures
339
If the space X is complete, then the integrals of Fα form a Cauchy net, hence
converge automatically; the same is true if the indicated integrals belong to a
compact set. Indeed, for every continuous seminorm p, the integrals mα of Fα
satisfy the estimate
p(mα −mβ) ⩽

X
p

Fα(x) −Fβ(x)

μ(dx),
moreover, p

Fα(x) −Fβ(x)

⩽p

x −Fα(x)

+ p

x −Fβ(x)

. In the general
case, convergence of the integrals must be required additionally.
Suppose we are given a set S in a locally convex space X and a directed index
set A and that for every index α ∈A we are given a finite partition πα = {Sα,i}
of the set S into disjoint sets Sα,i, where i = 1, . . . , k(α). We shall say that the
net of partitions πα is refining if, for every continuous seminorm p on X, we have
lim
α sup
i
sup
x,y∈Sα,i
p(x −y) = 0.
5.6.5. Lemma. In case of a totally bounded set S, a refining net of finite par-
titions always exists, and in case of a metrizable compact set there is a countable
refining sequence of finite partitions. For Borel sets, the elements of partitions can
be chosen also Borel.
PROOF. For an index set P we take the family of all continuous seminorms
on X equipped with the natural partial ordering defined by the pointwise compar-
ison. This set is directed, since the sum of continuous seminorms is a continuous
seminorm. For any p ∈P, by assumption there exist points s1, . . . , sk ∈S such
that S is covered by the sets si + V , where V = {x: p(x) ⩽1}. Hence we can
partition S into disjoint parts Sp,1, . . . , Sp,k such that p(x −y) ⩽1 if x, y ∈Sp,i.
If S is Borel, then Sp,i can be chosen Borel as well.
We now show that we have obtained a refining net of partitions. Let p ∈P
and ε > 0. Then qε = ε−1p ∈P. In addition, for all q ⩾qε and all x, y ∈Sq,i,
where Sq,i are constructed by q as indicated above, we have
p(x −y) = εqε(x −y) ⩽εq(x −y) ⩽ε,
which proves our claim.
Suppose now that S is compact and metrizable by a metric d. For every n we
partition S into finitely many parts S1, . . . , Sk of diameter less than n−1, where
k = k(n). We show that for every continuous seminorm p and every ε > 0 there
exists n0 such that, for every n ⩾n0 and all i ⩽k(n) we have p(x −y) ⩽ε
whenever x, y ∈Si. To this end, it suffices to prove that there exists δ > 0 such
that p(x −y) ⩽ε whenever d(x, y) ⩽δ. The existence of such δ > 0 follows
from the fact that the function (x, y) →p(x −y) is continuous on the compact
set S×S with the metric d1

(x1, y1), (x2, y2)

= d(x1, x2) + d(y1, y2), hence is
uniformly continuous, but at the diagonal it vanishes.
□
5.6.6. Proposition. Suppose that a Radon probability measure μ on X has
compact support contained in a convex compact set K.
Then μ has a mean
mμ ∈K, moreover, for every refining net of partitions of K into disjoint Borel

340
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
parts Aα,i and every choice of points xα,i ∈Aα,i, the means of the measures
μα := 	
i μ(Aα,i)δxα,i converge to mμ. In addition, the vector integral (5.6.2)
exists.
PROOF. Let us set mα := 	
i μ(Aα,i)xα,i. By the convexity of K we have
mα ∈K. Mappings Fα are defined as follows: Fα(x) = xα,i if x ∈Aα,i. Let
p be a continuous seminorm on X and ε > 0. Choose an index α0 such that
sup
i
sup
x,y∈Aα,i
p(x −y) ⩽ε
whenever α ⩾α0. Then for any x ∈Aα,i we have p(x −xα,i) ⩽ε for all i ⩽k.
Hence the integral of p

x−Fα(x)

over the set Aα,i with respect to the measure μ
does not exceed εμ(Aα,i). Thus, the integral of p

x −Fα(x)

over the whole set
K does not exceed ε. This yields convergence of {mα} in K to some vector m.
It is clear that the integral of f over K equals f(m).
□
5.6.7. Corollary. If a Radon probability measure on a weakly sequentially
complete and quasi-complete locally convex space has weak first moment, then it
has a mean in this space.
PROOF. Let μ be a Radon probability measure on a space X with the stated
properties. Quasi-completeness of the space gives convex compact sets Kn for
which μ(X\Kn) →0. The measures IKn · μ have means mn. If μ has weak
first moment, then, for every f ∈X′, the sequence of numbers f(mn), which are
equal to the integrals of f over Kn, converges to the integral of f. By assumption,
there exists a vector m ∈X for which the limit of this sequence is f(m). Hence
m is the mean of μ.
□
We shall see below that the same is true even without the assumption of the
weak sequential completeness for measures of weak order p > 1.
5.6.8. Corollary. Suppose that a Radon probability measure μ on a sequen-
tially complete space X is concentrated on a countable union of convex compact
sets (which holds if X is quasi-complete) and possesses strong first moment. Then
μ has a mean mμ ∈X.
PROOF. Let μ be concentrated on the union of convex compact sets Kn. We
already know that the measures μn = IKn ·μ have means mn ∈Kn. For every
continuous seminorm p and all n ⩾l we have
p(mn −ml) ⩽

Kn\Kl
p dμ,
whence by the integrability of p we obtain that the sequence {mn} is Cauchy.
Since X is sequentially complete, this sequence converges to some vector m ∈X.
It is obvious that m is the mean of the measure μ.
□
For metrizable compact sets, the condition of completeness of X can be
slightly weakened.
The proof of the next assertion can be extracted from the
above reasoning.

5.6. Covariance operators and means of measures
341
5.6.9. Proposition. If X is sequentially complete and K ⊂X is compact
metrizable, then every Borel measure on K has a mean I(μ) in X. In addition,
I(μ) belongs to the closed convex envelope of K, provided that μ is a probability
measure.
Note that the Jordan decomposition μ = μ+ −μ−of a signed measure μ gives
the mean I(μ) contained in the closed absolutely convex envelope of K, provided
that ∥μ∥⩽1.
5.6.10.
Theorem. The closed absolutely convex envelope of a metrizable
compact set in a locally convex space X is metrizable, and if X is sequentially
complete, then it is compact.
PROOF. The first assertion follows from the second, since X has a completion
(which is, certainly, sequentially complete). Let X be sequentially complete. By
the Riesz theorem C(K)∗is the space of signed Borel measures on the given
compact space K. The closed unit ball U in C(K)∗is compact in the weak-∗
topology. Since the space C(K) is separable (Exercise 1.12.66), the ball U is
metrizable and compact in the weak topology (Theorem 3.1.4). Let us consider
the mapping I : U →X from the previous proposition (taking into account our
remark about signed measures). It is readily seen that this mapping is continuous,
provided that U is equipped with the weak-∗topology and X is equipped with the
weak topology. Hence the absolutely convex set I(U) is weakly compact in X.
By the metrizability of U this set is also metrizable (Exercise 1.12.67). It is clear
that I(U) contains the closed convex envelope A of the set K, since K ⊂I(U) by
the equality k = I(δk), where δk is the Dirac probability measure at the point k.
Hence A is metrizable and compact, being a closed subset of a metrizable compact
space (actually, as is easily verified, I(U) coincides with the set A).
□
It is often useful in applications to have similar facts for weakly compact sets
(but without the assumption of weak completeness of X).
5.6.11. Theorem. Let X be a separable complete locally convex space and
let K be a weakly compact set in X. Then its closed convex envelope is weakly
compact and coincides with the set of barycenters of Radon probability measures
on K (with the weak topology).
PROOF. Let P(K) be the set of Radon probability measures on K (with the
weak topology) also equipped with the weak topology.
For each μ ∈P(K),
consider the functional in (X′)∗taking l ∈X′ to the integral of l with respect
to the measure μ. By Corollary 3.8.6 this functional is given by some vector
b(μ) ∈X, since if a sequence {ln} ⊂X′ converges to zero pointwise, it is
uniformly bounded on K (by weak compactness), hence we have convergence of
the integrals. Since S is convex and closed, one has b(μ) ∈S. The mapping
m →b(μ) is continuous in the weak topology. Thus, the image of the convex
compact set P(K) is a convex weakly compact set, dense in S.
This image
contains the convex envelope of K, since for every k ∈K we have k = b(δk).
Therefore, S coincides with this image.
□

342
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
5.6.12. Corollary. (KREIN’S THEOREM) Let K be a compact set in a Haus-
dorff locally convex space E. Its closed convex envelope S is compact precisely
when it is complete in the Mackey topology. In particular, if the set K is weakly
compact and its closed convex envelope is complete in the Mackey topology, then
it is weakly compact.
PROOF. If S is compact, then it is complete in the Mackey topology. Let S
be complete in the Mackey topology. Since S is precompact, it suffices to show
that it is complete in the original topology, and the weak completeness is sufficient
for this. Hence we can assume from the very beginning that the original topology
is the weak topology. Moreover, we can assume that E is complete, since S is
complete also in the completion of E. In addition, by convexity, S is weakly
closed. Thus, we have to show relative weak compactness of S, which by the
Eberlein theorem reduces to showing that every sequence in S has a weak limit
point in E. Therefore, everything reduces to showing that S is relatively weakly
compact in a separable complete space E, so that it remains to apply the previous
theorem.
□
These questions are related to the important Choquet representations of points
of the closed convex envelopes of compact sets in the form of barycenters of
probability measures on these sets. Let X be a separated locally convex space, let
K be a compact set in X, and let μ be a Radon probability measure on K. The
results obtained above yield that if μ has a mean bμ, then bμ ∈conv K. However,
there might be no mean unless we impose additional conditions on X (such as
quasi-completeness or compactness of the closed convex envelopes of all compact
sets). Nevertheless, the following fact is true.
5.6.13. Theorem. The closed convex envelope of any compact set K coin-
cides with the set of barycenters of Radon probability measures on K (having
barycenters).
PROOF. If X is complete, then every Radon measure μ on K has a barycenter
bμ ∈conv K. Therefore, considering X in its completion and using the compact-
ness of K in the completion, it suffices to prove the theorem for complete X.
A justification is only needed for a representation of every element in conv K in
the form of a barycenter of a Radon probability measure on K. The points of K
itself are the barycenters of the Dirac measures at these points. Hence all points
in conv K admit the required representation. We now observe that the mapping
I : μ →bμ from the set P(K) of Radon probability measures on K to X is con-
tinuous if we equip the space of measures with the weak topology and the space
X with the weak topology σ(X, X′). By compactness of K the set P(K) is also
compact, hence its image is compact as well. Since we already know that the
image of P(K) is dense in conv K, we obtain the equality I

P(K)

= conv K.
Certainly, here one can use a more direct reasoning: for any b ∈conv K, we can
take the net of the barycenters bα ∈conv K of discrete probability measures μα
on K converging to b, by choosing in {μα} a subnet converging in the topology
σ

C(K), C(K)′
with a limit μ (belonging to P(K)), which obviously gives the
equality b = bμ.
□

5.6. Covariance operators and means of measures
343
A measure μ is called a representing measure for b if b = bμ. For a convex
compact set, it is useful to have representing measures concentrated on the set of
its extreme points. The existence of such measures is ensured by the following
Choquet–Bishop–de Leeuw theorem.
Choquet proved this theorem for metriz-
able K. In this case the set extK of extreme points of the compact K is a Gδ-set,
in particular, is a Borel set. In the general case this is not true, which leads to a
modified formulation.
5.6.14. Theorem. If K is a convex compact set in X, then, for any point
k ∈K, there exists a Radon probability measure μ on K representing k and
vanishing on all Baire sets in K\extK. If K is metrizable, then μ(extK) = 1.
On the Choquet representations, see Alfsen [13], Edwards [150], Meyer [340],
Phelps [387], Simon [464] (where one can additional information related to con-
vexity), von Weizs¨acker [561], von Weizs¨acker, Winkler [563], where additional
references can be found.
For a measure μ of weak order p we have the natural embedding operator
Tμ : X′ →Lp(μ).
5.6.15. Lemma. Suppose that a measure μ on a locally convex space X
has weak moment of order p. Then the operator Tμ : X′ →Lp(μ) has closed
graph provided that X′ is equipped with any locally convex topology τ stronger
than σ(X′, X). Hence this operator is continuous if for (X′, τ) the closed graph
theorem holds (for example, if (X′, τ) is a Fr´echet space or is a strict inductive
limit of a sequence of such spaces).
PROOF. If fn, f ∈X′ and fn(x) →f(x) pointwise and fn →g in Lp(μ),
then the sequence {|fn|p} is uniformly integrable, hence fn →f in Lp(μ) and
f = g a.e.
□
For example, if X is a normed space, then X′ is Banach with its natural
norm, so the closed graph theorem holds for X′. It is also sufficient that X′ be
barrelled in the Mackey topology τ(X′, X), but this yields the semireflexivity
of X (see § 3.7).
Let us give a modification of Lemma 5.6.7.
5.6.16. Lemma. If a Radon probability measure μ on a quasi-complete lo-
cally convex space X satisfies the condition X′ ⊂Lp(μ), where p > 1, then the
operator Tμ : X′ →Lp(μ) is continuous when X′ is equipped with the Mackey
topology τ(X′, X) and μ has a mean.
PROOF. Since quasi-completeness implies local completeness (see § 2.10(iii)),
it follows from Example 3.9.13 that it suffices to verify that Tμ is continuous with
respect to the topology τ(X′, X) and the topology of convergence in measure
on Lp(μ). Using quasi-completeness once again, for every ε > 0 we can find
a convex compact set Kε ⊂X such that μ(X\Kε) < ε. If now f ∈X′ and
supx∈K |f(x)| ⩽ε, then obviously μ(x: |f(x)| > ε) < ε. This is the required
continuity.

344
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
Since X coincides with the dual to X′ with the topology τ(X′, X), there is
the adjoint operator T ∗: Lq(μ) →X, where p−1 + q−1 = 1, which gives a mean
by the formula m = T ∗1 ∈X. Indeed,
f(T ∗1) = ⟨1, Tf⟩=

X
f(x) μ(dx),
f ∈X′,
which follows from the definition of T ∗.
□
5.6.17. Definition. Let μ be a measure of weak order 2 on a locally convex
space X. Its covariance is the function Cμ : X′×X′ →IR defined by the formula
Cμ(l1, l2) =

X
l1(x)l2(x) μ(dx) −

X
l1(x) μ(dx)

X
l2(x) μ(dx).
The covariance operator Rμ from X′ to the algebraic dual to X′ is defined by the
equality
Rμ : X′ →(X′)∗,
Rμ(f)(g) = Cμ(f, g).
Let us also consider the operator
Kμ : X′ →(X′)∗,
Kμ(f)(g) = (f, g)L2(μ).
If the measure μ of weak second order has a mean m, then its covariance operator
coincides with the covariance operator of the shifted measure μm(B) = μ(B +m)
having zero mean, i.e., Rμ = Kμm.
It is clear that any covariance operator R has the following properties:
1) linearity,
2) nonnegativity, i.e., ⟨f, R(f)⟩⩾0 for all f ∈X′,
3) symmetry, i.e., ⟨R(f), g⟩= ⟨R(g), f⟩, f, g ∈X′.
Under broad assumptions about the measure or about the space the covariance
operator takes values in more narrow subspaces of the algebraic dual to X′ (for
example, in X′′ or X) and is continuous in reasonable topologies. This question
is studied in detail in Vakhania, Tarieladze [537]. Let us give some typical results.
5.6.18. Theorem. Let μ be a Radon probability measure on a complete (or
quasi-complete) locally convex space X with second weak moment.
Then we
have Rμ(X′)⊂X.
PROOF. By Lemma 5.6.16 the measure μ has a mean, which reduces our
assertion to measures with zero mean. It remains to apply the cited lemma and
observe that Rμf = T ∗
μf, f ∈X′, where T ∗: L2(μ) →X is the dual operator
for Tμ from the lemma.
□
If X is a Hilbert space with the inner product ( · , · ), then it is convenient to
identify X′ with X and consider the covariance operator of the measure μ as the
operator in X defined by the formula
(Rμu, v) =

X
(u, x)(v, x) μ(dx) −

X
(u, x) μ(dx)

X
(v, x) μ(dx).

5.7. Gaussian measures
345
For measures with zero mean we obtain the formula
(Rμu, v) =

X
(u, x)(v, x) μ(dx).
5.6.19. Theorem. The class of covariance operators of measures of second
weak order on a separable Fr´echet space X coincides with the class of all sym-
metric nonnegative operators from X′ to X.
For a proof, see Vakhania, Tarieladze [537]. Usually the class of covariance
operators of measures of strong second order is smaller.
5.6.20.
Proposition. Let H be a separable Hilbert space and let μ be a
measure of weak second order. Then μ has strong second moment if and only if its
covariance operator Rμ is nuclear.
PROOF. Let {en} be an orthonormal basis in H.
If μ has strong second
moment, then, as proved above, it has a mean m and the measure μm also has
strong second moment. Hence we can assume that μ has zero mean. Then

H
(x, x) μ(dx) =
∞

n=1

H
(x, en)2 μ(dx) =
∞

n=1
(Rμen, en).
Thus, Rμ is a nuclear operator. Conversely, suppose that Rμ is a nuclear operator.
If the measure μ has zero mean, then the previous equality gives at once the
integrability of (x, x) by the monotone convergence theorem. In the general case
we observe that μ has mean m (by Corollary 5.6.7). Hence the measure μm has
strong second moment and the same is true for μ.
□
Let us mention one more result from Vakhania, Tarieladze [537].
5.6.21. Theorem. If X is a Banach space, then the following conditions are
equivalent:
(i) X is linearly homeomorphic to a Hilbert space,
(ii) for every two Radon probability measures μ and ν on X with Rμ = Rν,
the existence of strong second moment of the measure μ implies the existence of
strong second moment of the measure ν.
5.7. Gaussian measures
A thorough discussion of Gaussian measures and an extensive bibliography
can be found in the book Bogachev [63].
Here we only mention some basic
concepts and facts necessary for our further exposition.
5.7.1. Definition. A Gaussian measure on IR1 is a probability Borel measure
that is either concentrated at some point a, i.e., is Dirac’s measure δa at a, or
is defined by density (2πσ)−1/2 exp

−(2σ)−1(x −a)2
with respect to Lebesgue
measure, where a ∈IR1 is called the mean and σ > 0 is the called the variance
of this measure.

346
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
The measure for which a = 0 and σ = 1 is called standard Gaussian. A direct
calculation shows that the Fourier transform of the Gaussian measure with mean
a and variance σ has the form
exp

iax −σ
2 x2
.
Suppose now that we are given two linear spaces E and G in duality.
5.7.2. Definition. A probability measure γ on the σ-algebra σ(G) is called
Gaussian if for every g ∈G the induced measure γ◦g−1 is Gaussian on the real
line.
A Radon probability measure γ on a locally convex space X is called Gauss-
ian if so is its restriction to σ(X′).
From the change of variables formula and the formula for the Fourier trans-
form of a one-dimensional Gaussian measure we obtain the following expression
for the Fourier transform of a Gaussian measure on σ(G):
γ(g) = exp

iag −σg
2

,
g ∈G,
ag =

E
g(x) γ(dx),
σg =

E

g(x) −ag
2 γ(dx).
It is clear that the function g →ag is linear on G and the function g →σg is a
nonnegative quadratic form on G. This quadratic form is generated by the bilinear
function
Q(f, g) =

E

f(x) −af

g(x) −ag

γ(dx),
called the covariance of the measure γ.
Conversely, if a measure γ on σ(G) is such that there exist a linear function
a and a quadratic function Q on G for which
γ(g) = exp

ia(g) −1
2Q(g)

,
(5.7.1)
then the measure γ is Gaussian. Indeed, for every g ∈G the function t →γ(tg)
has the form exp

itag −t2Q(g)/2

, i.e., is the Fourier transform of the Gaussian
measure with mean ag and variance σg. But this function is the Fourier transform
of the measure γ◦g−1.
It is important here that we are given in advance that the right-hand side
of (5.7.1) is the Fourier transform of some measure. Not for every nonnegative
quadratic form Q on G the function exp(−Q/2) is the Fourier transform of a
countably additive measure. We return to this question below in § 5.11.
It is known that any Radon Gaussian measure γ has mean m ∈X, i.e., there
is a vector m such that
f(m) =

X
f(x) γ(dx)
∀f ∈X∗.
If m = 0, i.e., the measure γ◦f −1 for each f ∈X∗have mean 0, then γ is called
centered. Any Radon Gaussian measure γ is the shift of the centered Gaussian
measure γm defined by the formula γm(B) := γ(B + m).

5.7. Gaussian measures
347
The most important example of a Gaussian measure is the countable power
of the standard Gaussian measure on the real line. This measure is defined on the
space IR∞. Its Fourier transform has the form
(y1, . . . , yn, 0, 0, . . .) →exp

−1
2(y2
1 + · · · + y2
n)

.
Another key example is the Wiener measure PW on the space IR[0,T ] of all func-
tions on [0, T] or on the space of continuous functions C[0, T]. On the space IR[0,T ]
the Wiener measure is defined by its finite-dimensional projections Pt1,...,tn, which
for 0 < t1 < · · · < tn ⩽T are given by densities pt1,...,tn(x1, . . . , xn) with re-
spect to Lebesgue measure on IRn of the following special form:
1
√2πt1
exp

−x2
1
2t1

×
1

2π(t2 −t1)
exp

−(x2 −x1)2
2(t2 −t1)

× · · · ×
×
1

2π(tn −tn−1)
exp

−(xn −xn−1)2
2(tn −tn−1)

.
In addition, it is required that P0 = δ0. With the aid of Kolmogorov’s theorem on
consistent finite-dimensional distributions one can easily verify the existence of the
Wiener measure on IR[0,T ]. Next, by using another Kolmogorov’s theorem 5.4.12,
one can verify that the set C[0, T] of continuous functions has outer measure 1
and hence the measure PW can be defined on C[0, T], which is called the classical
Wiener measure. To apply the cited theorem we have to observe that

|x(t) −x(s)|4 PW (dx) = 3|t −s|3.
There are ways of defining the Wiener measure directly on C[0, T] (as did Wiener
himself). One can also take an orthonormal basis {ϕn} in L2[0, 1], a sequence
{ξn} of independent standard Gaussian random variables and consider the random
series 	∞
n=1 ξn(ω)en(t), where en is the indefinite integral of ϕn on [0, 1]. It
turns out that such a series converges uniformly on [0, 1] for almost all ω and the
generated measure is the Wiener measure.
The Fourier transform of the classical Wiener measure is defined on the dual
space to C[0, T], i.e., on the space of bounded Borel measures on [0, T], and is
given by the formula
ν →exp

−1
2

[0,T ]

[0,T ]
min(t, s) ν(dt) ν(ds)

.
This equality can be verified as follows. First we check it directly for measures
of the form ν = 	n
i=1 ciδti, where ti ∈[0, T]. To do this, we use the indicated
finite-dimensional distributions to find an explicit expression for the image of the
Wiener measure with respect to the linear functional x →	n
i=1 cix(ti), which
coincides with the image of the measure with density pt1,...,tn on IRn under the
linear function x →	n
i=1 cixi. Next, by a limit procedure, we extend the result
to all measures (any measure ν is approximated by a weakly convergent sequence
of discrete measures).

348
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
For a centered Radon Gaussian measure γ let X∗
γ denote the closure of X′
in L2(γ). Elements of X∗
γ are called γ-measurable linear functionals. There is
an operator Rγ : X∗
γ →X, called the covariance operator of the measure γ, such
that
f(Rγg) =

X
f(x)g(x) γ(dx),
f ∈X′, g ∈X∗
γ.
Set h := g if h = Rγg. Then h is called the γ-measurable linear functional
generated by h. We have also the vector equality (if X is a Banach space, then in
the sense of Bochner’s integral)
Rγg =

X
g(x)x γ(dx),
g ∈X∗
γ.
Thus, this operator extends the covariance operator defined on X′.
For example, if γ is a centered Gaussian measure on a separable Hilbert
space X, then there exists a nonnegative nuclear operator K on X for which
Ky = Rγy for all y ∈X, provided that we identify X′ with X. Then we obtain
(Ky, z) =

X
(y, x)(z, x) γ(dx),
γ(y) = exp

−1
2(Ky, y)

.
Let us take the orthonormal eigenbasis {en} of the operator K with eigenval-
ues {kn}. Then γ is the image of the countable power γ0 of the standard Gaussian
measure on IR1 under the mapping IR∞→X, (xn) →	∞
n=1
√knxnen. This
series converges γ0-a.e. in X by convergence of the series 	∞
n=1 knx2
n, which
follows from convergence of the series of kn and the fact that the integral of x2
n
against the measure γ0 equals 1. In this way X∗
γ is identified with the completion
of X with respect to the norm x →|
√
Kx|X, i.e., the embedding X = X′ →X∗
γ
is a Hilbert–Schmidt operator.
Returning to the general case, note the equality
γ(l) = exp

−1
2|Rγ(l)|2
H

,
l ∈X′,
which can be now extended to l ∈X∗
γ.
The space H(γ) = Rγ(X∗
γ) is called the Cameron–Martin space of the mea-
sure γ. It is Hilbert with respect to the inner product
(h, k)H :=

X
h(x)k(x) γ(dx).
The corresponding norm is given by the formula
|h|H := ∥h∥L2(γ).
Moreover, it is known that H(γ) with the indicated norm is separable. If X is
metrizable, then this is a simple fact following from the separability of L2(μ) for
every Radon measure μ on a metric space; in the general case the proof is highly
nontrivial. Note that the same norm on H(γ) is given by the formula
|h|H = sup

f(h): f ∈X′, ∥f∥L2(γ) ⩽1

.
(5.7.2)
One should have in mind that if dim H(γ) = ∞, then γ

H(γ)

= 0.

5.7. Gaussian measures
349
In the above example of a Gaussian measure γ on a Hilbert space we have
H(γ) =
√
K(X). Indeed, here X∗
γ is the weighted Hilbert space of sequences
(yn) such that 	∞
n=1 kny2
n < ∞, and the operator Rγ takes (yn) to (knyn) and
has the range
√
K(X).
5.7.3.
Theorem. The set H(γ) is the collection of all h ∈X such that
γh ∼γ, where γh(B) := γ(B + h), moreover, the Radon–Nikodym density of the
measure γh with respect to γ is given by the following Cameron–Martin formula:
dγh
dγ = exp

−h −|h|2
H/2

.
For every h ̸∈H(γ) we have γ ⊥γh.
Any centered Radon Gaussian measure is uniquely determined by its Came-
ron–Martin space (with the indicated norm!): if μ and ν are two centered Radon
Gaussian measures such that H(μ) = H(ν) and |h|H(μ) = |h|H(ν) for all vectors
h ∈H(μ) = H(ν), then μ = ν. The Cameron–Martin space is also called the
reproducing Hilbert space.
If γ is a measure on X = IR∞that is the countable product of the standard
Gaussian measures on the real line, then X∗can be identified with the space of all
sequences of the form f = (f1, . . . , fn, 0, 0, . . .). In this case
(f, g)L2(γ) =
∞

i=1
figi.
Hence X∗
γ can be identified with l2; any element l = (cn) ∈l2 defines an element
of L2(γ) by the formula l(x) := 	∞
n=1 cnxn, where the series converges in L2(γ).
Therefore, the Cameron–Martin space H(γ) coincides with the space l2 with its
natural inner product. An element l is a continuous linear functional precisely
when only finitely many numbers cn are nonzero. The restriction of l to l2 is
obviously continuous on l2 with its Hilbert norm, since it has the form of the inner
product with the vector (cn).
For the Wiener measure on C[0, 1], the Cameron–Martin space coincides with
the Sobolev class W 2,1
0
[0, 1] of all absolutely continuous functions h on [0, 1] such
that h(0) = 0 and h′ ∈L2[0, 1]; the inner product is defined by the formula
(h1, h2)H :=
 1
0
h′
1(t)h′
2(t) dt.
The general form of a measurable linear functional for the Wiener measure is given
by the stochastic integral (see [564])
l(x) =
 1
0
h′(t) dx(t).
Such functional is continuous on C[0, 1] precisely when h′ has bounded variation.
The mapping h →h establishes an isomorphism between H(γ) and X∗
γ
preserving the inner product. In addition, Rγh = h. If {en} is an orthonormal
basis in H(γ), then {/
en} is an orthonormal basis in X∗
γ and /
en are independent

350
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
random variables. One can take in X∗
γ an orthonormal basis consisting of elements
ξn ∈X∗. Any element l ∈X∗
γ has the form l = 	∞
n=1 cnξn, where the series
converges in L2(γ). Since ξn are independent Gaussian random variables, the
series converges γ-a.e. The domain of its convergence L is a Borel linear subspace
of full measure (one even has L ∈σ(X)). One can take a version of l linear on all
of X in the usual sense; it is called a proper linear version. For example, let l on
L be the sum of the indicated series; on all of X we define l by linearity (taking a
linear subspace L1 algebraically complementing L and setting l(x + y) = l(x) for
x ∈L, y ∈L1). Such a version is not unique in the infinite-dimensional case, but
any two properly linear versions coincide on the subspace H(γ) (although it has
measure zero!). This is seen from the fact that if l1(x) = l2(x) a.e. and h ∈H(γ),
then l1(x −h) = l2(x −h) a.e. by the equivalence of the measures γ and γh.
Thus, every γ-measurable linear functional f has a version linear on the whole
space. This version is automatically continuous on H(γ) with its norm | · |H.
Conversely, every continuous linear functional l on the Hilbert space H(γ)
admits a unique extension to a γ-measurable properly linear functional l such
that l coincides with l on H(γ). For every h ∈H(γ), such an extension of the
functional x →(x, h)H is precisely h. If h = 	∞
n=1 cnen, then h = 	∞
n=1 cn/
en.
Two γ-measurable linear functionals are equal almost everywhere precisely when
their proper linear versions are equal on H(γ). It is known that every proper linear
γ-measurable function belongs to X∗
γ.
5.7.4. Definition. A Radon Gaussian measure γ on a locally convex space
X is called nondegenerate if, for every nonzero functional f ∈X∗, the measure
γ◦f −1 is not concentrated at a point.
5.7.5. Theorem. Nondegeneracy of a Radon Gaussian measure γ is equiva-
lent to the property that γ(U) > 0 for every nonempty open set U ⊂X. This is
also equivalent to the property that the Cameron–Martin space H(γ) is dense in
the space X.
For any degenerate Radon Gaussian measure γ there exists the smallest
closed linear subspace L ⊂X for which γ(L + m) = 1, where m is the mean
of γ. If m = 0, then on L the measure γ is nondegenerate.
It follows from this theorem that the aforementioned smallest closed affine
(linear for a centered measure) subspace of full measure coincides with the topo-
logical support of the measure γ, i.e., the smallest closed set of full measure. In
addition, we see that in the case of a measure with zero mean every neighborhood
of zero has positive measure.
The role of the countable product of the standard Gaussian measures is clear
from the following important and difficult theorem due to Tsirelson.
5.7.6. Theorem. Let γ be a centered Radon Gaussian measure on a locally
convex space X, let {en} be an orthonormal basis in H(γ), and let {ξn} be
independent standard Gaussian random variables (for example, the sequence of the
coordinate functions on IR∞with the countable product of the standard Gaussian
measures on the real line). Then the series 	∞
n=1 ξn(ω)en converges in X for

5.7. Gaussian measures
351
a.e. ω and the distribution of its sum is γ. In particular, this is true if ξn = /
en. In
addition, there exists a Souslin linear subspace S ⊂X such that γ(S) = 1.
This theorem shows that the countable power of the standard Gaussian mea-
sure on the real line is the main (and essentially unique) example of a centered
Radon Gaussian measure, since every centered Radon Gaussian measure γ is the
image of this countable product under a measurable linear mapping T (however,
T need not be continuous); the mapping T is given by the series indicated in the
formulation and its restriction to l2 is an isometry between l2 and H(γ).
In analogy with functionals, a mapping T from X to a locally convex space
Y is called a γ-measurable linear operator if it is measurable with respect to the
pair of σ-algebras B(X)γ and B(Y ) and has a linear (in the usual sense) version
(called proper linear).
5.7.7. Theorem. Let γ be a centered Radon Gaussian measure on a locally
convex space X with the Cameron–Martin space H.
Then, for every opera-
tor T ∈L(H), there exists a γ-measurable proper linear mapping T : X →X
with the following properties:
(i) on H the mapping T coincides with T,
(ii) the image of the measure γ under the mapping T is a centered Radon
Gaussian measure μ with the Cameron–Martin space H(μ) = T(H).
Any two such mappings are equal γ-a.e. If the measure γ is the distribution
of the series 	∞
n=1 ξn(ω)en from Theorem 5.7.6, then μ is the distribution of the
series 	∞
n=1 ξn(ω)Ten, which converges a.e.
Note that the Fourier transform of the measure μ has the form
μ(l) = exp

−|TRγ(l)|2
H/2

.
Using this theorem, one can obtain a somewhat more general result (passing
to the space X×Y ).
5.7.8.
Corollary. Let γ and μ be centered Radon Gaussian measures on
locally convex spaces X and Y , respectively .
Let A: H(γ) →H(μ) be a
continuous linear operator. Then A extends to a γ-measurable linear mapping
A: X →Y such that the image of γ under this mapping is the centered Radon
Gaussian measure with the Cameron–Martin space A

H(γ)

.
Conversely, if A: X →Y is a γ-measurable linear mapping such that the
measure μ = γ◦A−1 is Radon, then for its proper linear version one has
Ax =
∞

n=1
/
en(x)Aen
γ-a.e.,
where the series converges in Y , moreover, A

H(γ)

= H(μ), A = 
A|H(γ).
In particular, for the identity operator A we obtain
x =
∞

n=1
/
en(x)en
γ-a.e.,
which is also not trivial.

352
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
For two Hilbert spaces H1 and H2, let H(H1, H2) denote the space of Hilbert–
Schmidt operators from H1 to H2 equipped with its natural structure of a Hilbert
space (see [72, Chapter 7]) defined by the inner product
(A, B)H =

α
(Aeα, Beα)H2,
where {eα} is an orthonormal basis in H1.
5.7.9. Corollary. Let X and Y be locally convex spaces and let γ be a cen-
tered Radon Gaussian measure on X. A continuous linear operator A: H(γ)→Y
is the restriction to H(γ) of a measurable linear operator A: X →Y such that
the measure γ◦A−1 is Radon precisely when there exists a Radon Gaussian mea-
sure ν on Y such that A

H(γ)

⊂H(ν).
If Y is a Hilbert space, then this condition is equivalent to the inclusion
A ∈H

H(γ), Y

, hence to the existence of a Hilbert–Schmidt operator T on the
space Y with A

H(γ)

⊂T(Y ).
An important property of Gaussian measures is the so-called 0–1 law, accord-
ing to which certain sets can have measure either 0 or 1. Actually, there are several
results of this type.
5.7.10. Theorem. Let γ be a Radon Gaussian measure on a locally convex
space X. (i) For every γ-measurable affine subspace L ⊂X we have either
γ(L) = 0 or γ(L) = 1.
(ii) Let {en} be an orthonormal basis in H(γ). Let E be a γ-measurable set
such that, for every n and every rational number r, the sets E and E+ren coincide
up to a set of measure zero. Then either γ(E) = 0 or γ(E) = 1. In particular,
this is true if the γ-measurable set E is invariant with respect to translations by
the vectors ren.
Another classical alternative in the theory of Gaussian measures is the Hajek–
Feldman theorem on equivalence and singularity.
5.7.11. Theorem. If μ and ν are Radon Gaussian measures on the same
space, then either μ ∼ν or μ ⊥ν.
One more important fact is the following Fernique theorem.
5.7.12.
Theorem. If γ is a centered Radon Gaussian measure and a γ-
measurable function q is a seminorm on a γ-measurable linear subspace of full
measure, then exp(εq2) ∈L1(γ) for some ε > 0.
In the theory of Gaussian measures an important role is played by Hermite (or
Chebyshev–Hermite) polynomials Hn defined by
H0 = 1,
Hn(t) = (−1)n
√
n!
et2/2 dn
dtn

e−t2/2
,
n > 1.
They have the following properties:
H′
n(t) = √nHn−1(t) = tHn(t) −
√
n + 1Hn+1(t).

5.7. Gaussian measures
353
In addition, the system of functions {Hn} is an orthonormal basis in L2(γ), where
γ is the standard Gaussian measure on the real line.
For the standard Gaussian measure γn on IRn (the product of n standard
Gaussian measures on the real line) an orthonormal basis is L2(γn) is formed by
the polynomials of the form
Hk1,...,kn(x1, . . . , xn) = Hk1(x1) · · · Hkn(xn),
ki ⩾0.
If γ is a centered Radon Gaussian measure on a locally convex space X and {ln}
is an orthonormal basis in X∗
γ, then the polynomials
Hk1,...,kn(x) = Hk1

l1(x)

· · · Hkn

ln(x)

,
ki ⩾0, n ∈IN
form a basis in L2(γ). For example, for the countable power of the standard
Gaussian measure on the real line these polynomials are Hk1,...,kn(x1, . . . , xn).
Let us group the polynomials Hk1,...,kn according to the degrees k1+ · · · +kn.
For k = 0, 1, . . ., let Xk denote the closed linear subspace generated by the func-
tions Hk1,...,kn with k1 + · · · + kn = k. The space X0 is one-dimensional and
consists of constants and X1 = X∗
γ. One can show that every element f ∈X2
is represented in the form f = 	∞
n=1 αn(l2
n −1), where {ln} is an orthonormal
basis in X∗
γ and 	∞
n=1 α2
n < ∞(i.e., the series for f converges in L2(γ)).
We now clarify the role of the space H in the situation where the standard
cylindrical Gaussian measure on H “extends” to a true Gaussian measure on an
enlargement of H. The formulation employs a useful general concept.
5.7.13. Definition. We say that (E′, H, E) is a rigged Hilbert space (Gelfand’s
triple) if E is a Hausdorff locally convex space and H is a separable Hilbert space
continuously embedded into E as a dense linear subspace, which generates also a
dense embedding jH : E′ ⊂H defined by the formula

jH(l), h

H = ⟨l, h⟩, where
l ∈E′ and h ∈H.
5.7.14. Lemma. In the situation of the previous definition we have
H =

x ∈E :
sup{l(x): l ∈E′, |jH(l)|H ⩽1} < ∞

.
(5.7.3)
PROOF. Indeed, it is clear that if h ∈H, then
l(h) =

jH(l), h

H ⩽|jH(l)|H|h|H,
hence h belongs to the right-hand side of the equality to be proved.
Let x ∈E\H. Hence the element x belongs to no set nU, where U is the
closed unit ball in H. The sets nU are closed in E by their weak compactness
in H. Hence for each n there exists a functional fn ∈E′ such that fn(x) > 1 and
fn(u) ⩽1 for all u ∈nU. Hence

jH(fn), u

H ⩽n−1 for u ∈U, whence we
obtain |jH(fn)| ⩽n−1. Thus, for ln = nfn we have ln(x) > n, but |jH(ln)| ⩽1.
This means that x does not belong to the right-hand side of (5.7.3).
□
5.7.15. Proposition. If (E′, H, E) is a rigged Hilbert space such that the
image of the standard cylindrical Gaussian measure νH on H under the embedding
of H into E extends to a Radon measure γ on E, then H coincides with the
Cameron–Martin space of this extension.

354
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
PROOF. For every l ∈E′, by the definition of an extension of a cylindrical
measure we have
γ(l) = #
νH

jH(l)

= exp

−1
2|jH(l)|2
H

,
where for νH we use its Hilbert Fourier transform (defined on H identified
with H′).
This means that |jH(l)|H = |Rγ(l)|H(γ), whence it follows that
H = H(γ), since H(γ) is the set of all vectors with finite norm (5.7.2) and
H is characterized by equality (5.7.3).
□
There is extensive literature on covariance operators of Gaussian measures
(see references in Bogachev [63], Vakhania, Tarieladze [537], and Vakhania, Tarie-
ladze, Chobanyan [538]).
Various aspects of the theory of Gaussian measures are discussed also in
Bogachev [66], [67], Fernique [159], Kuo [305], and Lifshits [316].
5.8. Quasi-measures
The concept of cylindrical measure introduced above does not cover construc-
tions connected with the so-called Feynman measure. In order to cover also this
case in the considered theory, in place of the algebra of all cylindrical sets we shall
consider its subalgebra that we now define.
Let E be a vector space and let G be some vector space of linear functionals
on E. For every n ∈IN and every collection g1, . . . , gn of elements of G, the
symbol Pg1,...,gn will denote the mapping E →IRn defined by the formula
Pg1,...,gn(x) =

g1(x), . . . , gn(x)

.
Let Bb
n be the algebra of subsets of IRn defined as follows: A ∈Bb
n if either A or
IRn\A is a bounded Borel set in IRn.
Let Ab
g1,...,gn denote the algebra of all sets P −1
g1,...,gn(Bb
n) and let
Ab
G =

n,g1,...,gn
Ab
g1,...,gn.
The class Ab
G is an algebra of subsets of E; any element A ∈Ab
G with a nonempty
bounded base B in a representation of the form A = P −1
g1,...,gn(B), will be called
a scalarly bounded G-cylindrical subset of the space E.
5.8.1.
Definition. An additive complex function ν on Ab
G is called a G-
cylindrical quasi-measure on Ab
G if it has the following property: for any n ∈IN,
g1, . . . , gn ∈G and any bounded Borel set B ∈IRn, the restriction of ν to the
σ-algebra of subsets of P −1
g1,...,gn(B) consisting of all sets of the form P −1
g1,...,gn(V ),
where V is a Borel subset of B, is countably additive.
In all examples below we consider quasi-measures whose value on E is 1,
hence it suffices to define their values only on scalarly bounded elements of Ab
G:
for every cylindrical set A ∈Ab
G whose complement E\A is scalarly bounded we
set ν(A) = 1 −ν(IRn\A). We observe that for a signed measure this does not
imply the boundedness of its range.

5.8. Quasi-measures
355
5.8.2. Example. Let E = IRn be canonically identified with the dual space.
A quasi-measure ν on Ab
IRn is called a nondegenerate classical Feynman quasi-
measure if there exist a symmetric positive operator Q in IRn, called the corre-
lation operator, and an element a ∈IRn, called the expectation or mean of the
quasi-measure ν such that for every bounded Borel set A ∈IRn one has
ν(A) = (2π)−n/2(det Q)−1/2

A
exp
(
−i1
2

Q−1(x −a), x −a)
)
dx.
For other scalarly bounded cylindrical sets of the form A = P −1A1, where the
operator P : E →P(E) is an orthogonal projection in E and A1 is a bounded set
in P(E), we set
ν(A) =(2π)−dim P (E)/2(det PQ)−1/2
×

A1
exp
(
−i1
2

(PQ)−1
x −P(a)

, x −P(a)
)
dx.
It is clear that PQ is a nondegenerate positive operator from P(E) to P(E).
5.8.3. Example. Suppose again that E = IRn = G and n = 2k is even. The
simplectic Feynman quasi-measure on IRn is the quasi-measure ν on IRn whose
value on every bounded Borel set A ⊂IRn is defined by
ν(A) =

A
exp

i
k

j=1
xjxk+j

dx ≡

A
exp

i(y, z)IRk

dy dz,
where x = (x1, . . . x2k), y = (x1, . . . xk), z = (xk+1, . . . x2k); for other scalarly
bounded cylindrical sets that are preimages of bounded Borel sets under linear
factorizations the value of this measure is defined as the value of the image of ν
on the image of the original set with respect to this factorization.
5.8.4. Example. Let H be a real infinite-dimensional Hilbert space with the
inner product ( · , · ) identified with its dual. The standard Feynman quasi-measure
on H is the H-cylindrical quasi-measure νΦ on H defined as follows: if P is an
orthogonal projection of H onto a finite-dimensional subspace HP of the space H
and A is a bounded Borel set in HP , then
νΦ(P −1A) = (2π)−dim HP /2

A
exp
(
−i1
2(x, x)
)
dx.
We now describe cylindrical functions that can be integrated over G-cylindri-
cal quasi-measures. A G-cylindrical function f will be called finite if
f(x) = ϕ

g1(x), . . . , gn(x)

,
where g1, . . . , gn ∈G and ϕ is a Borel function on IRn vanishing outside of some
ball.
The integral of a cylindrical finite Borel function f with respect to a cylin-
drical quasi-measure ν is defined as the integral of the function ϕ with respect
to the measure νg1,...,gn (if the latter exists, which holds if, say, the function ϕ is
bounded on all balls).

356
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
Let DG denote the set of all finite G-cylindrical functions f on E of the
analogous form f(x) = ϕ

g1(x), . . . , gn(x)

, where n ∈IN, g1, . . . , gn ∈G
and ϕ ∈D(IRn).
It is straightforward to verify that each cylindrical function of this form is the
Fourier transform of a measure concentrated on the subspace L of the space G
generated by the functionals g1, . . . , gn. In the case where these functionals are
linearly independent, this measure possesses a density with respect to Lebesgue
measure on L (arising if we take the elements g1, . . . , gn as an orthonormal ba-
sis); this density up to a constant factor is the (finite-dimensional) direct Fourier
transform of the function ϕ.
This circumstance enables us to define the Fourier transform for G-cylindrical
quasi-measures on E.
5.8.5. Definition. The Fourier transform of a G-cylindrical quasi-measure
ν is a function ν on G with the following property: for any n ∈IN, linearly
independent elements g1, . . . , gn ∈G, vectors e1, . . . , en ∈E with ⟨gj, ek⟩= δjk,
and any function ϕ ∈D(IRn), one has

IRn ν
 n

k=1
zkgk

ϕ
 n

k=1
zkgk

dz =

E
ϕ

g1(x), . . . , gn(x)

ν(dx),
where for z = (z1, . . . , zn) ∈IRn we set
ϕ
 n

k=1
zkgk

:=

IRn exp

i
n

k=1
zkgk(xkek)

ϕ
 n

k=1
xkek

dx1 · · · dxn.
In other words, the Fourier transform is defined by means of the Parseval
equality.
It should be emphasized that not every quasi-measure possesses the
Fourier transform in this sense.
The Fourier transform of an arbitrary quasi-
measure on IRn can be naturally defined as a functional on the space

D(IRn)
of the Fourier transforms of functions in D(IRn).
The standard Feynman quasi-measure on H has the Fourier transform defined
by
ν(g) = exp

−i
2(g, g)

.
For cylindrical quasi-measures, some constructions defined above for cylin-
drical measures remain meaningful. In particular, their images under linear map-
pings are defined, which is connected with the Fourier transform by the same
formula as in Exercise 5.12.83 for cylindrical measures.
In applications, it is convenient to define the Feynman quasi-measure by
means of its Fourier transform.
In particular, if E is a vector space, G is a
vector subspace in its algebraic dual and b is a bilinear function on G×G, the
G-cylindrical Feynman quasi-measure on E with the correlation function b (and
zero expectation) is by definition the G-cylindrical quasi-measure w the Fourier
transform of which is defined by the equality
w(g) = exp

−ib(g, g)/2

.

5.9. Sufficient topologies
357
Similarly we define Feynman quasi-measures with nonzero expectations. If E is a
Hilbert space and G = E′ = E with the usual Riesz identification, then in place of
the correlation functional it is more convenient to deal with the correlation operator
Q defined by the equality (Qx, x) = b(x, x).
5.9. Sufficient topologies
In this section E is a real vector space and G is some vector space of linear
functionals on E.
A topology τ in a E (not assumed to be compatible with the vector structure) is
called positively sufficient if the continuity in this topology of the Fourier transform
of a nonnegative E-cylindrical measure on G implies that this measure is countably
additive. If the continuity of the Fourier transform is sufficient for the countable
additivity of signed bounded E-cylindrical measures on G, then the topology is
called sufficient.
It is obvious that every sufficient topology is also positively sufficient; in this
section we show that in the class of topologies invariant with respect to translations
the converse is also true. In the next section we describe two sufficient topologies:
the Sazonov topology and the Gross–Sazonov topology.
A topology τ in a vector space E is called necessary if the Fourier transform of
every countably additivity bounded real E-cylindrical measure on G is continuous
in the topology τ.
Similarly one could define the positively necessary topology, however, the
Jordan theorem, according to which every countably additive real measure of
bounded variation defined on an algebra of subsets of an arbitrary space is the
difference of two nonnegative countably additive measures on the same algebra,
yields that every positively necessary topology is necessary; since the inverse im-
plication is also obviously true, the class of positively necessary topologies (would
we introduce it) will coincide with the class of necessary topologies.
The main result of this section is the following theorem due to Tarieladze [516]
(our proof employs the method suggested in Smolyanov, Shavgulidze [496]).
5.9.1. Theorem. Every translation invariant positively sufficient topology in
a vector space E is sufficient.
PROOF. Let τ be a positively sufficient topology in E invariant with respect
to translations and let ν be a bounded cylindrical measure on (G, AE) such that the
function ν is continuous on (E, τ). Let ν = ν+ −ν−be the Jordan decomposition
of the measure ν.
According to Lemma 5.4.2, ν+ and ν−are also bounded
nonnegative cylindrical measures.
For the proof of the countable additivity of ν it suffices to prove the countable
additivity of ν+ and ν−; to this end, in turn, it suffices to prove that the functions
#
ν+ : (E, τ) →C and #
ν−: (E, τ) →C are continuous. The latter will be proved
if we show that #
ν+ and #
ν−can be uniformly approximated by linear combinations
of translations of the Fourier transform of the original measure ν; this will be
done in the next proposition in the general case. The continuity of the functions

358
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
x →ν(x+xr) is seen from the continuity of ν and the invariance of the topology τ
with respect to translations.
□
We now proceed to the aforementioned proposition.
5.9.2. Proposition. Let ν be a bounded cylindrical measure on (G, AE) and
let ν = ν+ −ν−be its Jordan decomposition. Then the functions #
ν+ and #
ν−can
be uniformly approximated by functions of the form
x →
n

j=1
cjν(x + xj),
where cj ∈C and xj ∈E.
PROOF. We give a proof for #
ν+; the assertion for #
ν−is obtained by passing
to the measure −ν. Let ε > 0 and let A ∈AE be such that ν(A) > ν+(G) −ε.
Since ν(A) = ν+(A) −ν−(A), we have
ν+(G\A) < ε + ν(A) −ν+(A) = εν−(A) ⩽ε,
whence by the inequalities ν+ ⩾0, ν−⩾0 we obtain
ν+(G\A) < ε,
ν−(A) < ε.
Our set A has the form A = P −1(B), where B ∈B(IRn),
P = (ψ1, . . . , ψn): G →IRn,
ψi ∈E.
The measure |ν| = ν+ + ν−is also bounded cylindrical. By the countable ad-
ditivity of the measure |ν|◦P −1, there exist numbers c1, . . . , ck ∈C and linear
functions l1, . . . , lk on IRn such that the complex function
Φ(u) =
k

j=1
cj exp

ilj(u)

approximates IB in L1(|ν|◦P −1) up to ε, i.e.,

IRn |IB −Φ| d(|ν|◦P −1) < ε.
Let F(g) := 	k
j=1 cj exp

ilj(Pg)

. By the change of variables formula we obtain

G
|IA(g) −F(g)| |ν|(dg) < ε.
This integral is defined, since the function under the integral sign is bounded and
Borel E-cylindrical.
Let us estimate the function |#
ν+ −
F · ν|, where F · ν is the E-cylindrical
measure on AE defined by the equality
(F · ν)(C) =

C
F(g) ν(dg);
similarly we define the measure IA · ν. Using the equality
ν+ −IA · ν = IG\A · ν+ −IA · ν−,

5.10. The Sazonov and Gross–Sazonov topologies
359
we obtain the chain of inequalities
|#
ν+(x) −
F · ν(x)| ⩽|#
ν+(x) −
IA · ν(x)| + |
IA · ν(x) −
P · ν(x)|
⩽∥ν+ −IA · ν∥+

G
|IA(g) −F(g)| |ν|(dg)
⩽ν+(G\A) + ν−(A) + ε ⩽3ε.
In addition, we have

F · ν(x) =

G
k

j=1
cjeilj(P g)eig(x) ν(dg)
=

G
k

j=1
cjeig(xj)eig(x) ν(dg) =
k

j=1
cjν(x + xj),
where the vectors xj ∈E are constructed as follows: writing the functionals lj
in the form lj(x) = λj,1u1 + · · · + λj,nun, we set xj := λj,1ψ1 + · · · + λj,nψn,
j = 1, . . . , k, where Pg =

ψ1(g), . . . , ψn(g)

, ψ1, . . . , ψn ∈E. With this choice
we have lj(Pg) = g(xj) whenever j = 1, . . . , k.
Thus, the existence of the
required uniform approximations is established.
□
We emphasize that no countable additivity of ν was assumed. However, the
boundedness of variation of the measure ν was essential. Note that the bounded-
ness of variation of ν does not follow from the boundedness of ν even under the
additional condition of continuity of ν (see Exercise 5.12.96).
5.10. The Sazonov and Gross–Sazonov topologies
In this section we introduce the Sazonov and Gross–Sazonov topologies and
prove that they are necessary. We also show that although the Sazonov and Gross–
Sazonov topologies do not coincide, the Fourier transforms of bounded cylindrical
measures that are continuous in one of them are continuous in the other.
Throughout this section the symbol H denotes a separable real Hilbert space
with the inner product (·, ·)H and norm | · |H; for every r > 0, let Sr de-
note the open ball of radius r centered at zero in H and let wr denote the
Gaussian cylindrical measure in H the Fourier transform of which has the form
x →exp

−1
2r(x, x)

; in particular, w1 is the canonical Gaussian measure in H
(see Example 5.4.6(ii)).
For every closed vector subspace F of the space H let PF denote the orthog-
onal projection onto F. The set of all finite-dimensional vector subspaces in H is
denoted by the symbol Fin(H); let J(H) denote the set of all nonnegative self-
adjoint nuclear operators in H. As above, H(H) is the set of all Hilbert–Schmidt
operators in H.
For every operator T ∈J(H) let p(T) denote the seminorm on H defined by
pT (x) =

(Tx, x)H.
5.10.1. Definition. The Sazonov topology in the space H is the locally convex
topology defined by the family of seminorms SH = {pT : T ∈J(H)}.

360
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
The seminorms of the indicated form on H are precisely the seminorms of
the form pS(x) = |Sx|H, where S is a Hilbert–Schmidt operator in H. Indeed,
if T ∈J(H), then we can take S =
√
T; conversely, for every Hilbert–Schmidt
operator S, the operator T = S∗S belongs to the class J(H) and we have the
equality (Tx, x)H = (Sx, Sx)H.
Let now E be an arbitrary real Hausdorff locally convex space.
5.10.2. Definition. The Sazonov topology τ S in E associated with the orig-
inal topology of the locally convex space E is generated by the following family
of seminorms SE on E: p ∈SE precisely when there exist a continuous linear
operator Λ: E →H (where H is equipped with the topology generated by its
norm) and a seminorm q ∈SH for which p(x) = q(Λx).
It is readily seen that if E is a separable Hilbert space, then τ S coincides
with the Sazonov topology defined above for this special case. Indeed, if p ∈SE,
then obviously p ∈SE, since one can take the identity mapping Λ. Conversely,
if p ∈SE, then we can assume that E = H, and then the inclusion p ∈SH
follows from the fact that the composition of a continuous linear operator and a
Hilbert–Schmidt operator is a Hilbert–Schmidt operator.
It turns out that for defining a base of the Sazonov topology there is no need
to take the intersections of balls with respect to different seminorms in SE.
5.10.3. Proposition. The family of subsets of E of the form {x∈E : p(x)<1},
where p ∈SE, is a base of neighborhoods of zero in the Sazonov topology.
PROOF. We have to prove that for every p, q ∈SE there exists a seminorm
p0 ∈E such that
{x ∈E : p0(x) < 1} ⊂{x: p(x) < 1} ∩{x: q(x) < 1}.
By definition, there are operators T1, T2 ∈J(H) and Λ1, Λ2 ∈L(E, H) such
that p(x) = (T1Λ1x, Λ1x)1/2
H , q(x) = (T2Λ2x, Λ2x)1/2
H
for all x ∈E. Let us
set H0 = H ×H and define Λ ∈L(E, H0) and T ∈J(H0) by the equalities
Λ(x) :=

Λ1(x), Λ2(x)

, T(h1, h2) := (T1h1, T2h2). If we now take the semi-
norm p0(x) :=

Tg(x), g(x)
1/2, then we obtain the desired inclusion.
□
Note that it follows from what has been said in § 2.9 (see Theorem 2.9.5) that
a separated locally convex space is nuclear if and only if its topology coincides
with the associated Sazonov topology. We recall that every locally convex space E
is nuclear in its weak topology σ(E, E′) (in particular, every finite-dimensional lo-
cally convex space is nuclear). Thus, such spaces are equipped with their Sazonov
topologies.
Let us proceed to the definition of the Gross–Sazonov topology. This topology
is also first defined for a separable Hilbert space H. Recall that w1 is the standard
cylindrical Gaussian measure on H.
5.10.4. Definition. A seminorm q on H is called measurable if the following
condition is fulfilled:
∀ε > 0 ∃C > 0: w1

x ∈H : q(PF x) > C

< ε
∀F ∈Fin(H).

5.10. The Sazonov and Gross–Sazonov topologies
361
Note that if dim H < ∞, then every seminorm on H is measurable in this
sense. Observe also that the definition of measurability of seminorms does not use
any algebra (or σ-algebra) of subsets.
Let us give an example of a measurable seminorm.
5.10.5. Example. If T is a nonnegative selfadjoint nuclear operator in H,
then the seminorm x →(Tx, x)1/2 on H is measurable.
Indeed, let F ∈Fin(H), let PF be an orthogonal projection from H onto F,
and let wF be the canonical Gaussian measure in F. Then by the Chebyshev
inequality
w1

h∈H : |
√
TPF h|H > C

= wF 
z ∈F : (PF Tz, z)H > C2
⩽C−2

F
(PF Th, h) wF (dh) = C−2 = C−2tr (PF T) ⩽C−2tr T,
where tr denotes the trace, whence our claim follows.
5.10.6. Remark. If {en} is an orthonormal basis in H, Pn is the projection
onto the linear span of e1, . . . , en and q is a continuous seminorm on H, then for
its measurability it suffices to have the required estimate just for the countable set
of projections Pn, i.e., it suffices, for every ε > 0, to have C > 0 such that
w1

x ∈H : q(Pnx) > C

< ε
∀n.
Indeed, in this case, for every finite-dimensional projection P, by using the con-
tinuity of q, one can find a projection PF onto a subspace F contained in Pn(H)
for a sufficiently large n such that
w1

x ∈H : q(Px) > C

< w1

x ∈H : q(PF x) > C

+ ε.
Since w1

x ∈H : q(PF x) > C

⩽w1

x ∈H : q(Pnx) > C

, the left-hand side
is less than 2ε.
5.10.7. Definition. The Gross–Sazonov topology τGS in H is generated by
the family ΓH of all measurable seminorms.
The Gross–Sazonov topology τGS in an arbitrary locally convex space E
associated with the original topology of this space is generated by the family of
seminorms ΓE defined as follows: p ∈ΓE precisely when there exist a continuous
linear mapping Λ: E →H and a seminorm q ∈ΓH such that p(x) = q(Λx).
Let us note two obvious corollaries of the definition: if a seminorm p is
measurable and a seminorm q satisfies the estimate q ⩽kp with some k, then q is
measurable as well; in addition, the sum of finitely many measurable seminorms
is measurable. For example, if two seminorms p1 and p2 are measurable, then for
every C > 0 we have
{x: p1(PF x)+p2(PF x) > C} ⊂{x: p1(PF x) > C/2}∪{x: p2(PF x) > C/2},
hence the measure of the left-hand side does not exceed ε if the measure of every
term in the right-hand side does not exceed ε/2.
As for the Sazonov topology, in the case where E is a separable Hilbert space
the two arising definitions of the Gross–Sazonov topology are equivalent, i.e., we

362
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
have ΓH = ΓH. The inclusion ΓH ⊂ΓH is true for the same reasons as a similar
inclusion for the Sazonov topology. The inverse inclusion follows immediately
from the next lemma (which will be also used later for another purpose).
5.10.8. Lemma. For every measurable seminorm q on H and every continu-
ous linear operator Λ: H →H the seminorm q◦Λ is also measurable.
PROOF. For every F ∈Fin(H) let wF denote the canonical Gaussian mea-
sure on F. Set V := {x ∈H : q(x) ⩽1}. The measurability of q is equivalent to
the following property of the set V :
∀ε > 0 ∃C > 0 ∀F ∈Fin(H):
wF (C·V ∩F) ⩾1 −ε.
(5.10.1)
Let W :=

x ∈H : q(Λx) ⩽1

= Λ−1(V ). In order to prove that the seminorm
q ◦Λ is measurable, it suffices to verify that the set W possesses the property
analogous to property (5.10.1) of the set V . We observe that it suffices to prove
our assertion for invertible operators Λ, since the operator Λλ := Λ −λI is
invertible if |λ| > ∥Λ∥and p(Λx) ⩽p(Λλx)+|λ|p(x), but the sum of measurable
seminorms is measurable. Furthermore, as it follows directly from the definition of
this property, we can assume that ∥Λ∥⩽1. Since V possesses property (5.10.1)
by the measurability of q, for proving that W possesses the same property, it
suffices to verify that for every F ∈Fin(H) there exists Z ∈Fin(H) such that
wF (W ∩F) ⩾wZ(V ∩Z). We show that this is true if Z = Λ(F).
Let A be a linear isometry from Z onto F. It is obvious from the definitions
of the measures wF and wZ that wZ(V ∩Z) = wF 
A(V ∩Z)

, i.e., it suffices to
show that wF 
A(V ∩Z)

⩽wF (W ∩F). Since A(V ∩Z) = AΛ(W ∩F), where
∥AΛ∥⩽1, the required inequality follows from the following general fact, a proof
of which can be found in [63, § 1.8] or obtained as Exercise 5.12.81: if U is an
absolutely convex set in IRn and γ is the standard Gaussian measure on IRn, then
for every linear operator S on IRn with ∥S∥⩽1 one has γ

S(U)

⩽γ(U).
□
The next fact is not obvious from the definition.
5.10.9. Lemma. Every measurable seminorm on H is continuous.
PROOF. Let q be a measurable seminorm that is not continuous at zero. Then
there exist vectors hn ∈H such that |hn|H →0 and q(hn) →+∞. By condition
there exists C > 0 such that w1

x ∈H : q(PF x) > C

< 1/4 for all subspaces
F ∈Fin(H). This means that the standard Gaussian measure of the intersection of
F with the set V := {x: q(x) ⩽C} is not less than 3/4. In particular, this is true
for the one-dimensional subspaces. For them the indicated intersection is either
the whole line or a symmetric compact interval. However, whenever q(hn) > C,
the point hn does not belong to V , hence V ∩IR1hn is an interval of length less
than 2|hn|H. It is clear that the one-dimensional Gaussian measure of such interval
tends to zero as n →∞, which leads to a contradiction.
□
5.10.10. Lemma. Let E be a locally convex space. Then the family

(q◦Λ)−1
[0, 1)

: q ∈ΓH, Λ ∈L(E, H)

is a base of neighborhoods of zero in the topology τ SG.

5.10. The Sazonov and Gross–Sazonov topologies
363
PROOF. Directly from the definition of the topology τ SG we only see that
this family of sets is a prebase. Let Λk ∈L(E, H), qk ∈ΓH, k = 1, 2. Set
H1 = H ×H and consider the operator Λ ∈L(E, H1) defined by the equality
Λx = Λ1x + Λ2x; finally, set q(x) = q1(x) + q2(x). Then the seminorm q on H1
is measurable and qk(Λkx) ⩽q(Λx), k = 1, 2.
□
The role of the introduced concept of measurability of seminorms is related to
the following circumstance.
5.10.11.
Theorem. Suppose that q is a continuous norm on H such that
the image of the canonical cylindrical Gaussian measure on H under the natural
embedding of H into the Banach space X obtained by completing H with respect
to the norm q is a countably additive measure. Then the norm q is measurable.
PROOF. Suppose the contrary. Then there exists ε > 0 such that for every
n ∈IN there is a finite-dimensional subspace Fn in H with the following property:
w1

x ∈H : q(PFnx) ⩽n

⩽1 −ε.
Pick C > 0 such that γ(x ∈X : q(x) ⩽C) > 1−ε, where γ is the Borel extension
of the countably additive image of the measure w1 under the natural embedding
of H into X. According to Proposition 5.7.15, the set H is the Cameron–Martin
space of the measure γ. We further consider only numbers n ⩾C; for them we
have
w1

x ∈H : q(PFnx) ⩽C

⩽1 −ε.
Let us consider the increasing subspaces Hn that are the linear spans of F1, . . . , Fn.
We observe that w1

x ∈H : q(PHnx) ⩽C

⩽1 −ε for all n ⩾C. This follows
from the fact that the standard Gaussian measure of the convex balanced set Q in
IRn does not exceed the measure of Q ∩IRk with respect to the standard Gauss-
ian measure on IRk whenever k ⩽n (Exercise 5.12.81). Moreover, increasing
subspaces Hn, we can assume that their linear span is dense in H. Let Sn de-
note the measurable linear operator on X corresponding to the finite-dimensional
projection PHn (see § 5.7). The Tsirelson theorem yields that Snx →x almost
everywhere with respect to γ. Hence
γ

x: q(Snx) ⩾C

→γ

x: q(x) ⩾C

> 1 −ε.
Since γ

x: q(Snx) ⩾C

= w1

x ∈H : q(PHnx) ⩽C

, this is a contradiction,
which completes the proof.
□
We shall see below that the converse assertion is not true: the measurability
of a norm does not imply the countable additivity of the image of the standard
Gaussian measure under the embedding into the completion with respect to this
norm.
5.10.12. Theorem. The Gross–Sazonov topology on an infinite-dimensional
Hilbert space is strictly stronger than the Sazonov topology. In addition, there
exists a measurable norm on H which cannot be majorized by a norm of the form
h →(Th, h)1/2
H , where T is a nonnegative definite nuclear operator in H.

364
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
PROOF. Let H = W 2,1
0
([0, 1]) and let q be the classical norm
q(h) = ∥h∥C ≡max
t∈[0,1] |h(t)|,
h ∈H.
The norm q is measurable, since the completion of H with respect to the norm q
is the space C0[0, 1] and the image of the canonical cylindrical Gaussian measure
w1 on H with respect to the canonical embedding H →C[0, 1] is the Wiener
measure ν on the algebra of cylindrical sets.
We now prove that there is no nonnegative symmetric nuclear operator T in H
such that for all h ∈H one has ∥h∥C ⩽(Th, h)1/2
H . Indeed, otherwise for every
orthonormal system {en} in H the series 	∞
n=1 ∥en∥2
C must converge. Hence for
the proof of nonexistence of a nuclear operator with the stated property it suffices
to construct an orthonormal system {en} in H such that 	 ∥en∥2
C = ∞.
Let g be the function on [0, ∞) defined as follows: g(t) = t if t ∈[0, 1
2];
g(t) = 1 −t if t ∈[ 1
2, 1]; g(t) = 0 if t > 1. For every natural n and every
m = 1, 2, . . . , 2n−1, we define the function en,m on [0, 1] by
en,m = 2−n−1
2 g

2n−1
t −2−n+1(m −1)

.
It is readily seen that {en,m} is an orthonormal system in H and that we have
∥en,m∥2
C = 2−n−1 for every n ∈IN for all admissible m. Therefore, we obtain
that 	
n,m ∥en,m∥2
C = 	∞
n=1
	2n−1
m=1 2−n−1 = ∞.
□
5.10.13. Remark. In the book Kuo [305], a seminorm q on a Hilbert space
is called measurable (and we shall call it Gross measurable) if the following con-
dition is fulfilled: for every ε > 0 there exists F ∈Fin(H) such that for every
subspace G ∈Fin(H) orthogonal to F one has
w1

z ∈H : q(PGz) > ε

< ε.
5.10.14. Proposition. Every Gross measurable seminorm on a Hilbert space
is measurable.
PROOF. Let ε ∈(0, 1). By definition there exists a subspace F0 ∈Fin(H)
such that for every subspace F1 ∈Fin(H) orthogonal to F0 one has
w1

z ∈H : q(PF1z) > ε/2

< ε/2.
Let us take C > 0 for which w1

z ∈H : q(PF0z) > C

< ε/2; this is possi-
ble, because the restriction of the function w1 to the σ-algebra AF0 is countably
additive. The inequality q(h1 + h2) ⩽q(h1) + q(h2) yields that
{z ∈H : q(z) ⩽C + 1}⊃{h∈F0 : q(h) ⩽C} + {h∈F ⊥
0 : q(h) < ε/2}.
Now, for arbitrary F ∈Fin(H), we take the subspace F2 generated by F and F0
denote by F1 the orthogonal complement to F0 in F2. Then
{z ∈H : q(PF z) > C + 1} ⊂{z ∈H : q(PF2z) > C + 1}
⊂{z ∈H : q(PF0z) > C} ∪{z ∈H : q(PF1z) > ε/2},
so that w1

z ∈H : q(PF z) > C + 1

< ε. Since ε > 0 was arbitrary, this means
that q is measurable.
□

5.10. The Sazonov and Gross–Sazonov topologies
365
We shall now see that the converse is not true: not every measurable seminorm
on H is Gross measurable. In the same book Kuo [305], the “Gross topology” was
introduced in a Hilbert space: this is the topology in H generated by the set of all
Gross measurable seminorms on H. It follows from our previous discussion that
this topology is strictly weaker than the Gross–Sazonov topology in H introduced
above (the Gross topology was not considered in [305] for arbitrary locally convex
spaces).
5.10.15. Example. The norm q(x) = supn |xn|

ln(n + 1)
−1/2 on H = l2
is measurable, but not Gross measurable. Indeed, for the sequence of independent
standard Gaussian random variables ξn almost surely we have
lim sup
n→∞|ξn

ln(n + 1)
−1/2| = 1.
To see this, we verify that P

supn⩾k |ξn| ⩽λ

ln(n + 1)
1/2
= 0 for each k
and each λ < 1 and that for each λ > 1 the probability that for infinitely many
n one has |ξn| ⩾λ

ln(n + 1)
1/2 is zero (here we use that P(|ξ1| > R) is as-
ymptotically CR−1 exp(−R2/2) for large R). Hence Remark 5.10.6 yields the
measurability of q. The aforementioned fact shows also that there is no num-
ber m such that w1

z ∈H : q(PGz) > 1/4

< 1/4 for all projections PG onto
subspaces orthogonal to Pm(H). One can derive from this the absence of any
projections PF required by the Gross definition. An alternative justification is
possible: if the norm q were Gross measurable, then, as shown below, the image
of the standard cylindrical Gaussian measure on H under the embedding to the
completion of H with respect to the norm q would be countably additive. Since
this completion is separable and any centered Gaussian measure on a separable
Banach space is positive on all balls centered at zero (see § 5.7), we would obtain
that P(supn |ξn| < r) > 0 for all r > 0, which is false.
5.10.16. Proposition. If a norm q on H is Gross measurable and B is the
completion of H with respect to q, then the image of the standard Gaussian cylin-
drical measure under the natural embedding of H into B is countably additive.
Conversely, for the Gross measurability the analog of Theorem 5.10.11 holds.
PROOF. It follows from the definition that there exists a sequence of projec-
tions Pn onto increasing finite-dimensional subspaces Hn ⊂H such that the union
of Hn is dense in H and w1(x: q(Px) > 2−n) < 2−n whenever P ⊥Pn. Let
{ei} be an orthonormal basis in H such that e1, . . . , ekn is a basis in Hn. Let
us take a sequence of independent standard Gaussian random variables ξi. The
sequence of random elements ηn = 	kn
i=1 ξiei in B is fundamental in probability,
since
P

q(ηn −ηk)>2−n
= w1

x: q(Pnx −Pkx)>21−n
⩽w1

x: q(Pnx)>2−n
+ w1

x: q(Pkx)>2−n
<21−n
∀k⩾n.
Hence some subsequence {ηnk} converges in B almost everywhere. It is clear
that the distribution of the limit coincides with the image of the standard Gaussian

366
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
cylindrical measure on H. The converse assertion is proved similarly to Theo-
rem 5.10.11.
□
Our discussion of measurable norms is continued in § 5.12(xii).
5.11. Conditions for countable additivity
Here we give sufficient conditions for countable additivity of measures in
terms of their Fourier transforms. In particular, the continuity of the Fourier trans-
form in the Gross–Sazonov topology is sufficient. This condition is not necessary.
5.11.1. Remark. (i) The countable additivity of a nonnegative E-cylindrical
measure is not enough for the continuity of its Fourier transform in the original
topology of the space E. For example, let E be an infinite-dimensional separable
Hilbert space with its weak topology. Let us take a centered Gaussian measure
on E with the Fourier transform exp

−(Qx, x)

, where Q is a nonnegative nuclear
operator in E with an infinite-dimensional range. This function is discontinuous
in the weak topology, because the norm (Qx, x)1/2 cannot be estimated by finitely
many seminorms of the form |(x, v)|.
At the same time the Fourier transform of an arbitrary E-cylindrical countably
additive measure is always sequentially continuous; this follows from the Lebesgue
dominated convergence theorem.
(ii) Since the Gross–Sazonov and Sazonov topologies associated with the weak
topology of an arbitrary locally convex space coincide with this weak topology,
it follows from (i) that the countable additivity of a E-cylindrical measure on E′
does not imply the continuity of its Fourier transform in the Sazonov or Gross–
Sazonov topology (though, as we shall see below, for the Fourier transforms of
cylindrical measures the continuity in one of these topologies is equivalent to the
continuity in the other).
(iii) The following question arises: if the space E is equipped with the Mackey
topology τ(E, E′), will the countable additivity of a E-cylindrical measure on E′
imply the continuity of its Fourier transform in the Sazonov topology associated
with τ(E, E′) (or, which is equivalent, in the Gross–Sazonov topology associated
with τ(E, E′))? The answer remains negative. For the corresponding counter-
example we can take the space C[0, 1] with the classical Wiener measure. Indeed,
let E =

C′, τ(C′, C[0, 1])

, where C′ is the dual to the Banach space C[0, 1].
Then, owing to Theorem 5.10.12, the Fourier transform of the Wiener measure is
not continuous in the Sazonov topology (hence also in the Gross–Sazonov topol-
ogy) associated with the original topology of the space E.
In this example the space C[0, 1] is separable Banach, hence the Fourier
transform of the Wiener measure is continuous in the Mackey topology τ(E, E′)
on E = C′.
However, as already noted, Kwapien and Tarieladze [309] con-
structed a very subtle example of a Radon probability measure on a metrizable
locally convex space X whose Fourier transform is not continuous in the Mackey
topology τ(X′, X).
5.11.2. Remark. Let E be a locally convex space, let ν be a nonnegative E-
cylindrical measure on E′ with the Fourier transform ν, and let τ be an arbitrary

5.11. Conditions for countable additivity
367
topology on E compatible with the vector structure (but not necessarily connected
with the original topology). If the function ν is continuous in the topology τ at
zero, then it is continuous in this topology everywhere. Indeed, by (5.5.3) we have
|ν(x1) −ν(x2)|2 ⩽2ν(0)

1 −Re ν(x1 −x2)

.
Let us proceed to positive results, which give even more than the countable
additivity of single measures and ensure the uniform tightness of families of cylin-
drical measures.
5.11.3. Theorem. Let E be a locally convex space, let P be some set of
probability E-cylindrical measures on E′.
In order that P be uniformly tight
when E′ is equipped with the topology σ(E′, E), it is sufficient that the family of
the Fourier transforms of the measures from P be equicontinuous at zero in the
Gross–Sazonov topology associated with the original topology of E.
This is a corollary of the following main theorem of this section.
A set S in a real vector space X is called an ellipsoid if it has the form
S = {x ∈X : Q(x) ⩽1}, where Q is a nonnegative quadratic form on X, i.e.,
Q(x) = B(x, x), where B is a symmetric bilinear function and Q ⩾0.
5.11.4.
Theorem. Let E be a locally convex space, let O(E) be the set
of all neighborhoods of zero in the Gross–Sazonov topology τ E
GS associated with
the original topology of E, and let K be the set of all compact ellipsoids in
the space

E′, σ(E′, E)

. Then, for every ε > 0 and V ∈O(E), there is an
ellipsoid K ∈K such that whenever a probability E-cylindrical measure ν on E′
satisfies the estimate |ν(x) −1| < ε for all x ∈V , one has ν(A) < 6ε for every
A ∈A(E′, E) with A ∩K = ∅.
PROOF. Suppose first that E is a Hilbert space. Let V ∈O(E), C > 0,
F ∈Fin(E), ν ∈P(E). Let ∥· ∥denote the original norm in E and let UC
denote the closed ball in E of radius C with respect to this norm centered at zero.
Then the following chain of equalities and inequalities holds (below we justify
those which are not completely obvious):
ν

x ∈F : ∥PF x∥> C

= ν◦P −1
F (F\UC)
⩽√e(√e −1)−1

F

1 −e−(x,x)
2C2

ν◦P −1
F (dx)
= √e(√e −1)−1

F

1 −ν(z)

(w1/C2 ◦P −1
F )(dz)
⩽√e(√e −1)−1

V ∩F
|1 −ν(z)| (w1/C2 ◦P −1
F )(dz)
+ √e(√e −1)−1

F \V
|1 −ν(z)| (w1/C2 ◦P −1
F )(dz).
The first inequality in this chain follows from the estimate
1 ⩽
√e
√e −1

1 −e−(x,x)
2C2

if x∈F\UC, i.e., if ∥x∥> C,

368
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
and the subsequent replacement of the domain of integration F\UC by the whole
space F, which is possible since the function under the integral sign is nonnegative.
The equality following this inequality is Parseval’s identity: ν is the Fourier
transform of the measure ν ◦P −1
F , and the measure w1/C2 ◦P −1
F
on F, i.e., the
Gaussian measure on F with the correlation operator C−2I, is the measure whose
Fourier transform is the function x →e−(x,x)
2C2 on F; in addition, we use that the
measures ν and w1/C2 are probability measures.
By condition we have |1 −ν(x)| < ε for x ∈V , so that

V ∩F
|1 −ν(z)| (w1/C2 ◦P −1
F )(dz) < ε.
In addition, for any given ε > 0 there exists C > 0 such that

F \V
|1 −ν(z)| (w1/C2 ◦P −1
F )(dz) < ε.
Indeed, using the change y = Cz, we find that

F \V
|1 −ν(z)|(w1/C2PF
−1)(dz) =

F \CV
|1 −ν(C−1y)| (w1◦P −1
F )(dy).
Since V is a neighborhood of zero in the topology τ E
GS, it contains the unit ball
V0 = {x ∈E : q(x) ⩽1} with respect to some measurable seminorm q. Accord-
ing to the definition of measurable seminorms, for all C ⩾C(ε, V0) we have
(w1◦P −1
F )(F\CV0) < ε/4.
Since V0 ⊂V , we have (w1 ◦P −1
F )(F\CV ) < ε/4, whence on account of the
estimate |1 −ν| ⩽2 for such C we obtain the inequality

F \CV
|1 −ν(C−1y)| (w1◦P −1
F )(dy) < ε/2.
We finally obtain ν(x ∈F : ∥PF x∥> C) < 2ε√e(√e−1)−1. It is easy to verify
that the right-hand side does not exceed 6ε. Thus, for Hilbert spaces the theorem
is proven: our reasoning shows that its conclusion holds if we take K = UC(ε,V0).
Suppose now E is a general locally convex space, ε > 0, a continuous linear
operator Λ: E →H, a neighborhood V ∈O(H) and a probability E-cylindrical
measure ν on E′ are such that |1 −ν(x)| < ε if Λx ∈V . We can assume that
V = {q < 1}, q ∈SH. We show that the set K = Λ∗(UC(ε,V )) is suitable, where
Λ∗is regarded as a mapping from H to E′ (the space H′ is identified with H in
the usual manner). It suffices to show that for every finite-dimensional subspace
F ⊂E the estimate (ν ◦ψ−1)(EF \GF ) < 6ε holds, where ψ is the canonical
mapping from E′ onto quotient EF := E′/F ◦and GF := ψ

Λ∗(UC(ε,V ))

.
Let E1 denote the vector subspace in EF generated by the set GF and let
E2 be its algebraic complement in EF . Let ( · , · )1 be the inner product in E1
with respect to which GC
F ≡

C(ε, V )
−1GF is the unit ball, and let ( · , · )2 be
an arbitrary nondegenerate inner product in E2. For every δ > 0, let qδ denote the
norm in EF defined by the equality
q2
δ(x1 + x2) = (x1, x1)1 + δ(x2, x2)2,
where xj ∈Ej.

5.11. Conditions for countable additivity
369
Further, let Bδ be the unit ball in EF with respect to this norm and let q1
δ be the
norm in F with respect to which the unit ball is the polar B◦
δ in F of the set Bδ.
Since GF = 
δ>0 C(ε, V )Bδ, for the proof of the desired inequality it suf-
fices to show that for all δ > 0 we have
ν◦ψ−1
EF \C(ε, V )Bδ

< 6ε.
Let Λ0 denote the restriction of Λ to the polar E◦
2 of the subspace E2 ⊂EF taken
in F (EF and F are in the natural duality). Then Λ0 is an isometric embedding
to H of the space (E◦
2, q1
δ|E◦
2 ), where q1
δ|E◦
2 is the restriction of q1
δ to E◦
2. Let Λ1
be an extension of Λ0 to an isometric embedding into H of the space F equipped
with the norm q1
δ and let H1 = Λ1(F). We denote by T : EF →H1 the operator
dual to Λ−1
1 : H1 →F. Let ν1 be the H-cylindrical measure in H defined as
follows:
ν1 = ν◦ψ−1◦T −1.
Its Fourier transform satisfies the equality
ν1(y) = ν(Λ−1
1 y),
y ∈H1,
so that |1 −ν1(y)| < ε if y ∈V ∩H1. Therefore,
ν◦ψ−1
EF \C(ε, V )Bδ

= ν1

H1\UC(ε,V )

< 6ε,
as required.
□
A direct corollary of this theorem is the next assertion.
5.11.5. Theorem. Let E be a locally convex space and let ν be a probability
E-cylindrical measure on E′. For countable additivity of ν it is sufficient that its
Fourier transform be continuous at zero in the Gross–Sazonov topology associated
with the original topology of E.
We shall see below that although the Gross–Sazonov topology is strictly stron-
ger than the Sazonov topology, the continuity of the Fourier transform of a E-
cylindrical measure in the Gross–Sazonov topology implies its continuity also in
the Sazonov topology.
The next theorem, concretizing Proposition 5.5.8, is a partial converse to
Theorem 5.11.4.
5.11.6. Theorem. Let E be a locally convex space and let ν be a countably
additive real measure on the σ-algebra of Borel subsets of the space

E′, σ(E′, E)

possessing the following property: for every ε > 0 there exists a compact ellip-
soid K in the space

E′, σ(E′, E)

such that ∥ν∥(E′\K) < ε. Then the Fourier
transform ν of this measure is continuous in the Sazonov topology τS associated
with the Mackey topology.
PROOF. Passing from ν to ∥ν∥we can assume that the original measure ν is
nonnegative; in addition, we can assume that it is probability, so that ν(0) = 1.
By inequality (5.5.3) it suffices to establish the continuity of the function Re ν
on (E, τS) at zero. In turn, to this end it suffices to show that for every ε > 0 there

370
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
are a Hilbert seminorm pε on the space

E, τ(E′, E)

and a nonnegative Hilbert–
Schmidt operator Aε : Epε →Epε, where Epε is the completion of the quotient
Epε of the pre-Hilbert space (E, pε) with respect to its subspace pε−1{0}, having
the following properties. If the symbol pε denotes the extension to Epε of the norm
on Epε generated by the norm pε, then the inequality pε(AεQpεx) < 1, where Qpε
is the canonical operator E →Epε, yields the inequality |Re ν(x) −1| < ε. We
recall that the set

x ∈E : pε(AεQpεx) < 1

is a neighborhood of zero in the
topology τS.
Thus, let ε > 0 be fixed and let K be a compact ellipsoid in

E′, σ(E′, E)

for which ν(E′\K) < ε/4. As we have verified in the proof of Proposition 5.5.8,
under these conditions 1 −Re ν(x) ⩽ε for every x such that |x(g)| ⩽ε for
all g ∈K. Set p(x) := sup{|g(x)|: g ∈K}, x ∈E.
Since K is a compact ellipsoid in

E′, σ(E′, E)

, the function p is a Hilbert
seminorm on E; the absolute convexity and compactness of the set K yield that
p is continuous in the Mackey topology τ(E, E′). The Hilbert space (E′)K, i.e.,
the linear subspace in E′ generated by K with norm pK, for which the closed
unit ball is K, can be naturally identified with the Hilbert space dual to Ep. For
this, for every x ∈Ep and every g ∈(E′)K, it suffices to set g(x) = g(Q−1
P x),
where Q is the canonical mapping from E to Ep (this definition is correct, since
for any g ∈(E′)K the function x →g(x) is constant on every set Q−1
p x); next,
for every g ∈(E′)K we can extend the function x →g(x) from the space Ep to
the space Ep as a continuous function with respect to the norm p.
Using the described identification, we define a nonnegative quadratic function
ψ on Ep by the equality
ψ(x) =

K
|g(x)|2 ν(dg).
There is a nonnegative operator A in Ep such that
p(Ax)2 = ψ(x)
for all x ∈Ep. Finally, set
A := ε−1/2 A.
If p( Ax) < 1, then ψ(x) < ε; hence (by the definition of ψ), for any x ∈E
satisfying the inequality p( AQpx) < 1 we have
1 −Re ν(x) ⩽ε.
We now show that A (hence also A) is a Hilbert–Schmidt operator. Let {eα} be
an orthonormal basis in Ep. Then

p2(Aeα) =

ψ(eα) =

K

K
|g(eα)|2 ν(dg)
⩽

K

|g(eα)|2 ν(dg) ⩽

K
pK(g)2 ν(dg) ⩽1,
Since by the definition of the norm pK for any g ∈K we have pK(g) ⩽1 (in the
above chain of relations we pass from equalities to an inequality, because {eα}

5.11. Conditions for countable additivity
371
can be uncountable). Thus, the norm pε = p and the operator Aε = A possess all
required properties.
□
Similarly one proves the following theorem.
5.11.7. Theorem. Let E be a barrelled locally convex space and let M be
a set of real Borel measures on the space

E′, σ(E′, E)

with the following two
properties:
(i) sup{∥ν∥(E′): ν ∈M} < ∞,
(ii) for every ε > 0, there is a compact set K in the space

E′, σ(E′, E)

such that for every measure ν ∈M one has ∥ν∥(E′\K) < ε.
Then the set #
M of the Fourier transforms of measures in M is equicontinuous
in the topology of the space E.
PROOF. Without loss of generality we can assume that all measures in M
are probability measures. Let ε > 0 and let K be the corresponding compact set
from the hypotheses of the theorem. Then, as in the proof of Proposition 5.5.8, for
every measure ν ∈M we have
1 −Re ν(x) ⩽ε
if |x(g)| ⩽ε for all g ∈K. Let K◦be the polar in E of the set K. Since E is
barrelled, the set K◦is a neighborhood of zero in E. Let V = ε1/2K◦. If x ∈V ,
then by the previous inequality we obtain the equicontinuity of functions in #
M at
zero in the space E. The inequality
|ν(x2) −ν(x1)|2 ⩽2

1 −Re ν(x2 −x1)

yields that for every ε > 0 there exists a neighborhood of zero V in E such that
|ν(x2) −ν(x1)| < ε if ν ∈#
M and x1 −x2 ∈V . Thus, the set of the Fourier
transforms of the measures in M is equicontinuous on the space E.
□
From Theorem 5.11.6 we immediately obtain the following fact (note that
compactness of K is required in the weak-∗topology, not the strong one).
5.11.8. Theorem. Let E be a locally convex space, let ν be a real E-cylin-
drical measure on E′ such that for every ε > 0 there exists a compact ellipsoid
K in the space

E′, σ(E′, E)

such that |ν(C)| < ε for every E-cylindrical set C
in E′ disjoint with K. Then the Fourier transform of the measure ν is continuous
in the Sazonov topology.
Taking into account Theorem 5.11.4, we obtain the following assertion.
5.11.9. Corollary. If on the dual E′ to a locally convex space E we are given
a nonnegative E-cylindrical measure ν whose Fourier transform is continuous at
zero in the Gross–Sazonov topology on E, then it is continuous everywhere in the
Sazonov topology.
Note that the converse assertion is, certainly, also true, since the Gross–
Sazonov topology is stronger than the Sazonov topology.

372
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
5.11.10.
Theorem. Let E be a barrelled locally convex space the topol-
ogy of which can be defined by a family of Hilbert seminorms.
A function ϕ
on E is the Fourier transform of some nonnegative Radon measure on the space

E′, σ(E′, E)

precisely when this function is positive definite and continuous
in the Gross–Sazonov topology or in the Sazonov topology associated with the
original topology in E.
PROOF. If ϕ is the Fourier transform of a nonnegative Radon measure ν, then
the function ϕ is positive definite. Let us prove its continuity. For every ε > 0
there exists a compact set K in the space

E′, σ(E′, E)

such that ν(E′\K) < ε.
Let BK be the closed convex circled hull of this set; then ν(E′\BK) < ε. Since
the topology of a barrelled space is its Mackey topology, the polar B◦
K in the
space E of the set BK is a neighborhood of zero in E. Since the topology of this
space by assumption is generated by a family of Hilbert seminorms, there exists a
continuous Hilbert seminorm p on E such that the set S = {x ∈E : p(x) < 1}
is contained in B◦
K; then the polar S◦in E′ of the set S is a compact ellipsoid
in

E′, σ(E′, E)

, moreover, S◦⊃B. Hence ν(E′\S◦) < ε. Thus, ν satisfies
the condition of Theorem 5.11.8, which gives the continuity of ϕ in the Sazonov
topology. The converse follows from the results above.
□
As a corollary we obtain the classical Minlos theorem.
5.11.11. Corollary. If E is a nuclear locally convex space, then every positive
definite continuous function on E is the Fourier transform of a nonnegative Radon
measure on

E′, σ(E′, E)

(which is Radon also in the strong topology β(E′, E)).
If E is barrelled, then the converse is true.
Applying the theorem to Hilbert spaces we obtain another classical result: the
Sazonov theorem.
5.11.12. Corollary. A bounded cylindrical measure on a separable Hilbert
space is countably additive precisely when its Hilbert Fourier transform is contin-
uous in the Sazonov topology (or in the Gross–Sazonov topology).
For example, this assertion implies the already known fact: in order that a
Gaussian cylindrical measure on a separable Hilbert space be countably additive,
it is necessary and sufficient that its correlation operator be nuclear.
5.12. Complements and exercises
(i) Convolution (372). (ii) 0–1 laws (376). (iii) Convex measures (378). (iv) The central limit
theorem (381). (v) Infinitely divisible and stable measures (383). (vi) Banach supports of mea-
sures (391).
(vii) Infinite-dimensional Wiener processes (393).
(viii) Prohorov locally convex
spaces (394).
(ix) Measurable linear and multilinear functions (399).
(x) Relations between
different σ-algebras (409). (xi) Radonifying operators (412). (xii) Measurable norms (412). Exer-
cises (413).
5.12(i). Convolution
Throughout this section we consider Hausdorff spaces. If μ and ν are two
measures defined on the σ-algebra σ(X′) in a locally convex space X, then their

5.12. Complements and exercises
373
product μ⊗ν is a measure on σ

(X×X)′
. In case of Radon measures μ and ν,
the product μ⊗ν is a tight measure, hence admits a unique extension to a Radon
measure on X×X. The same is true if μ and ν are Radon measures on a Hausdorff
topological vector space. By a product of Radon measures we shall always mean
this extension.
5.12.1. Definition. Let μ and ν be Radon measures on a Hausdorff locally
convex (or Hausdorff topological vector) space X. Their convolution μ ∗ν is
defined as the image of the Radon extension of the measure μ⊗ν on X×X under
the mapping X×X →X, (x, y) →x + y. The convolution of measures on σ(X′)
is defined similarly on σ(X′).
Below we consider Hausdorff spaces.
5.12.2.
Theorem. Let μ and ν be Radon measures on a locally convex
space X.
Then, for every Borel set B ⊂X, the function x →μ(B −x) is
Borel measurable and
μ ∗ν(B) =

X
μ(B −x) ν(dx).
In addition, μ ∗ν = ν ∗μ and 
μ ∗ν = μν.
PROOF. The set A = {(x, y) ∈X×X : x + y ∈B} is Borel. According to a
general result (see Bogachev [65, Theorem 7.6.5]), the measure of A with respect
to the Radon extension of the product of μ and ν equals the integral with respect
to ν of the function x2 →μ(Ax2), where
Ax2 = {x1 : (x1, x2) ∈A} = {x: x1 + x2 ∈B} = B −x2,
moreover, the indicated function is Borel. The same is true for these measures in
the opposite order.
□
It is clear that similarly one can defined the convolution of two bounded
cylindrical measures.
5.12.3.
Proposition. Let μ and λ be two Radon probability measures on
a locally convex space X. Suppose that there exists a positive definite function
ϕ: X∗→C such that λ = ϕμ. Then there exists a Radon probability measure ν
on X with ν = ϕ. In addition, λ = ν ∗μ.
PROOF. It follows from our condition that the restrictions of the function
ϕ to finite-dimensional subspaces are continuous at zero, hence at every point.
Therefore, ϕ is a characteristic functional of a nonnegative quasi-measure ν on the
algebra of cylindrical sets. It remains to show that the set function ν is tight, since
in that case the equality λ = νμ will imply the equality λ = ν ∗μ. Let ε > 0 and
let S be a compact set such that μ(X\S) + λ(X\S) < ε/2. We can assume that
0 ∈S. The set K := S −S is compact and S ⊂K. Let C be a cylindrical set
with C ∩K = ∅. The set C has the form C = P −1(B), where B ∈B(IRn) and
P : X →IRn is a continuous linear mapping. We observe that B ∩P(K) = ∅,
since if x ∈C, then x + h ∈C for all h ∈Ker P. In particular, B ∩P(S) = ∅,

374
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
i.e., C ∩P −1(P(S)) = ∅. For the cylindrical set C0 := P −1(P(S)) we have
S ⊂C0 and
1 −ε/2 ⩽λ(S) ⩽λ(C0) =

X
ν(C0 −x) μ(dx) ⩽

S
ν(C0 −x) μ(dx) + ε/2,
whence we obtain the existence of x0 ∈S such that ν(C0−x0) ⩾1−ε. Moreover,
(C0 −x0) ∩C = ∅, since P(C0 −x0) ⊂P(S −S), because x0 ∈S. Thus, we
have ν(C) ⩽ε, i.e., the measure ν is tight.
□
The proof of the following proposition can be read in Vakhania, Tarieladze,
Chobanyan [538, § VI.3].
5.12.4. Proposition. Let μ1 and μ2 be two nonnegative cylindrical measures
on the algebra of cylindrical sets in a locally convex space X such that the measure
μ1 is symmetric, i.e., μ1(A) = μ1(−A). If μ = μ1 ∗μ2 admits a Radon extension,
then both measures μ1 and μ2 admit Radon extensions.
The assumption that μ1 is symmetric cannot be omitted.
Indeed, let l be
a discontinuous linear functional on X∗(which exists, for example, if X is an
infinite-dimensional Banach space). Then the functionals exp(il) and exp(−il) are
the Fourier transforms of two cylindrical measures on Cyl(X, X∗) without Radon
extensions, but their convolution is Dirac’s measure δ. This example is typical:
according to Rosi´nski [423], if μ and ν are nonnegative cylindrical measures
on Cyl(X, X∗) such that μ ∗ν is tight, then there exists an element l in the
algebraic dual X∗with the property that the cylindrical measures μ∗δl and ν ∗δ−l
(where δl and δ−l are the cylindrical measures with the Fourier transforms exp(il)
and exp(−il), respectively) are tight on X (and hence have Radon extensions).
These results can be extended to families of measures in the following way (see
Vakhania, Tarieladze, Chobanyan [538, Proposition I.4.8]).
5.12.5. Proposition. Let {μλ} and {νλ} be two families of Radon probability
measures on a topological vector space X. Suppose that the family {μλ ∗νλ}
is uniformly tight, i.e., for every ε > 0 there is a compact set Kε such that
μλ ∗νλ(X\Kε) < ε for all λ. Then there exists a family {xλ} of points in X such
that {μλ ∗δxλ} is a uniformly tight family. If, in addition, the measures μλ are
symmetric, then both families {μλ} and {νλ} are uniformly tight.
For a Radon measure μ let Sμ denote its topological support (the smallest
closed set of full measure, see § 5.2).
5.12.6. Proposition. Let μ and ν be two Radon probability measures on a
locally convex space X. Then Sμ∗ν is the closure of Sμ + Sν.
PROOF. If a ∈Sμ, b ∈Sν, then for every absolutely convex neighborhood
of zero U we have μ(a + U) > 0, ν(b + U) > 0, whence μ ∗ν(a + b + 2U) > 0,
because μ(a + b + 2U −x) > 0 for x ∈b + U by the inclusion U ⊂2U −x
for all x ∈U. Hence Sμ + Sν ⊂Sμ∗ν, which implies the inclusion also for the
closure by the closedness of Sμ∗ν. Let now c ∈Sμ∗ν. If c does not belong to the
closure of Sμ +Sν, then there exists an absolutely convex neighborhood of zero U

5.12. Complements and exercises
375
such that c ̸∈Sμ + Sν + U. Then (c + U −x) ∩Sμ = ∅for all x ∈Sν, whence
μ(c + U −x) = 0. Thus, μ ∗ν(c + U) = 0, which is a contradiction.
□
5.12.7. Definition. A random vector in a locally convex space X is a mea-
surable mapping ξ from (Ω, F, P) to

X, σ(X′)

, where (Ω, F, P) is a probability
space. The distribution of the random vector ξ is the probability measure μ on the
σ-algebra σ(X′) that is the image of P, i.e., μ(B) = P

ξ−1(B)

. If μ has zero
mean, then ξ is called centered.
Two random vectors ξ and η with values in X are called independent if
P(ξ ∈A, η ∈B) = P(ξ ∈A)P(η ∈B)
∀A, B ∈σ(X′).
This is equivalent to the condition that the distribution of the random vector (ξ, η)
in X ×X is the product of the distributions of the vectors ξ and η. Hence, for
independent random vectors ξ and η with distributions Pξ and Pη, the distribution
of the random vector ξ + η is the convolution of the distributions of ξ and η, i.e.,
we have Pξ+η = Pξ ∗Pη.
An important area of measure theory on topological vector spaces is related
to the study of convergence of series of random vectors. Let us mention a typical
result. For a sequence of random vectors ηn in a locally convex space X we can
consider its convergence to a random vector η almost everywhere, in probabil-
ity (i.e., convergence in probability to zero of the sequence q(η −ηn) for every
continuous seminorm q on X) and in distribution, i.e., weak convergence of the
distributions of ηn to the distribution of η.
5.12.8. Theorem. Let {ξn} be a sequence of independent random vectors
in a separable Fr´echet space F. Then, for the series of ξn, convergence almost
everywhere, convergence in probability and convergence in distribution are equiv-
alent.
The proof of this fact, easily reducing to the case of Banach spaces due to the
existence of a common Banach support of the distributions of ξn, can be found
in Buldygin [90, p. 90], Vakhania, Tarieladze, Chobanyan [538, Chapter V, § 2,
Theorem 2.3], Kruglov [301, p. 121]. In the case of symmetric distributions a
somewhat stronger assertion holds.
5.12.9. Theorem. Let {ξn} be a sequence of independent random vectors
with symmetric distributions in a separable Fr´echet space F. Then, convergence
of the series of ξn almost everywhere is equivalent to the uniform tightness of the
distributions of the partial sums of this series.
In addition, it is equivalent to the existence of a random element ζ with values
in F such that, for every functional g from some set G ⊂F ′ separating points
in F, the series of g(ξn) converges almost everywhere to g(ζ).
In this circle of problems the following L´evy inequality is often used (for a
proof, see [538, p. 264]).
5.12.10. Theorem. Suppose that a sequence of random vectors ξn in a locally
convex space X is sign invariant, i.e., for every collection of numbers θn = ±1 the

376
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
sequence {θnξn} has the same distribution in X∞as {ξn}. Let Sn = ξ1+· · ·+ξn.
Then, for every set B ∈σ(X′), the following inequalities hold:
P
 n

k=1

Sk ̸∈(B + B)/2

⩽2P(Sn ̸∈B),
P
 n

k=1

ξk ̸∈(B + B)/2

⩽2P(Sn ̸∈B).
5.12(ii). 0–1 laws
We have already encountered the so-called 0–1 laws for Gaussian measures
(Theorem 5.7.10). The assertion for affine spaces is a particular case of a more
general result for stable measures discussed below, but can be also deduced from
the second assertion about invariant sets, which, in turn, can be obtained from
the following Kolmogorov theorem concerning product-measures, i.e., products of
measures. Suppose we are given probability spaces (Xi, Ai, μi). Their product
X = ∞
i=1 Xi is equipped with the σ-algebra A = .∞
i=1 Ai and the measure
μ = .∞
i=1 μi. Let Xn := .∞
i=n+1 Ai and X := 
∞
n=1 Xn, where sets in Xn are
naturally identified with subsets of X (by writing them as X1× · · · ×Xn×A).
5.12.11. Theorem. For every E ∈X we have either μ(E) = 1, or μ(E) = 0.
In particular, every X-measurable function is equal μ-a.e. to some constant.
In the case of identical measures the following result due to Hewitt and Savage
holds (the proofs of both theorems can be found in Bogachev [65, § 10.10(iv)]).
5.12.12. Theorem. Let (Xn, An, μn) = (X1, A1, μ1) for all n, let Sn be the
σ-algebra generated by all A-measurable functions invariant with respect to all
permutations of the variables x1, . . . , xn, and let S := 
∞
n=1 Sn. Then for all
E ∈S we have either μ(E) = 1, or μ(E) = 0. In particular, every S-measurable
function is equal μ-a.e. to some constant.
5.12.13. Corollary. Suppose that in the previous theorem f is a μ-measurable
function such that for every permutation σ of N changing only finitely many ele-
ments we have f(x) = f

σ(x)

μ-a.e., where σ(x) = (xσ(1), xσ(2), . . .). Then
this function is equal to some constant μ-a.e.
PROOF. The set Σ of all permutations of the indicated form is countable. For
every σ ∈Σ there is a set Ωσ ∈A of full measure on which f(x) = f

σ(x)

and
the restriction of the function f to which is A-measurable. It is readily verified
that the class A is invariant with respect to the transformations of X generated by
permutations in Σ and that the measure μ is also invariant with respect to such
transformations.
Hence the intersection of countably many sets obtained from
all Ωσ by all possible transformations by means of different permutations in Σ
belongs to A, has full measure and is invariant with respect to permutations in Σ.
On this intersection Ω the function f is A-measurable and invariant with respect
to permutations in Σ. Outside of Ω we set f = 0. The obtained function coincides
with a constant μ-a.e., whence our claim follows.
□

5.12. Complements and exercises
377
These assertions will be applied in the situation where there is a vector struc-
ture. The following result was obtained in Smolyanov [481]. Suppose we are given
a family of linear spaces Eα, α ∈A, equipped with σ-algebras Aα and probability
measures μα on Aα. Note that the linear structure in Eα need not be compatible
with the measurable structure. Set E = 
α Eα, μ = .
α μα, A = .
α Aα. We
recall that an affine subspace of a linear space E is a set of the form L + v, where
L is a linear subspace in E, v ∈E.
5.12.14. Theorem. Suppose that every affine subspace in (Aα)μα has mea-
sure either 0 or 1. Then the same is true for affine subspaces in Aμ.
PROOF. Let M ∈Aμ be an affine subspace with μ(M) > 0. We first consider
the case A = IN. We show that for every n there exists an affine subspace Mn in E
such that Mn = ∞
i=1 Li, where Li ∈(Ai)μi and μi(Li) = 1, and the restriction
of the function IM to Mn does not depend on the first n variables. For n = 1
we write E as E1×Y and μ as μ1⊗ν. By Fubini’s theorem, there exists y ∈Y
for which μ1(My) > 0, My = {x ∈E1 : (x, y) ∈M}. Since My is an affine
subspace (a simple proof is delegated to Exercise 4.10.38), by assumption we have
μ1(My) = 1. Set M1 = My ×Y . If (x, z) ∈M1 ∩M and (x′, z) ∈M1, then
(x, y) ∈M, (x′, y) ∈M, hence (x′−x, 0) belongs to a linear space L representing
M in the form M = L + v, v ∈E. Hence (x′, z) = (x′ −x, 0) + (x, z) ∈M.
Thus, the restriction of IM to M1 does not depend on x1. We find such an affine
subspace M(i) for every i ⩽n and set Mn = M(1) ∩· · ·∩M(n), M(1) := M1. We
have obtained an affine subspace of the required form.
Independence of the restriction of IMn to M on x1, . . . , xn is verified as
follows. Suppose that x ∈Mn ∩M, y ∈Mn, xi = yi if i > n. Let us consider the
point x′ = (y1, x2, . . . , xn, . . .). Since x, y ∈M(1), where M(1) is the product of
an affine subspace in E1 with the remaining spaces Ei, we have x′ ∈M(1), whence
x′ ∈M, since x′ = x −#
x1 + y1, #
x1 = (x1, 0, 0, . . .), y1 = (y1, 0, 0, . . .) ∈M(1).
Continuing by induction, we obtain that y ∈M, hence IMn(y) = IMn(x).
The set M∞=
∞
n=1Mn is an affine subspace of full measure. Considering the
measure μ on M∞and applying Kolmogorov’s 0–1 law, we obtain that μ(M) = 1,
since μ(M) > 0.
Let us turn to uncountable A. Then there exist a countable part S ⊂M and a
set B ∈.
β∈S Aβ for which M ⊂B×Y , Y = 
α̸∈S Eα, μ(M) = μ(B×Y ). Set
X = 
β∈S Eβ and denote by P the natural projection of E onto X. Consider the
set M ′ = P −1
P(M)

. It is clear that M ⊂M ′ ⊂B×Y , hence M ′ is measurable
and μ(M ′) = μ(M). In addition, M ′ = P(M)×Y , hence P(M) coincides with B
up to a set of measure zero with respect to the projection of the measure μ on X.
Thus, P(M) has a positive measure with respect to this projection. It is readily
seen that P(M) is an affine subspace in X; according to what has been proved
above it has full measure, hence the same is true for M.
□
The hypothesis of this theorem is satisfied by any Borel probability measures
on finite-dimensional spaces equivalent to Lebesgue measures, by Gaussian mea-
sures, by convex measures considered below, and by symmetric stable measures.
The situation becomes especially simple when all spaces Eα are one-dimensional

378
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
and equipped with Borel probability measures μα. Then a necessary and sufficient
condition for the validity of the 0–1 law for measurable affine subspace in E is that
every measure μα either has no points of positive measures or is Dirac’s measure
at a point.
We also observe that if for a measure μ on a linear space E with a σ-algebra
E the 0–1 law holds for measurable affine subspaces and T is a measurable affine
mapping from E to a linear space F with a σ-algebra F, then this law also holds
for the measure μ◦T −1. In this way one can considerably enlarge the number of
examples, using the aforementioned ones.
Let us give one more result related to linear supports and following from
Proposition 7.14.58 in Bogachev [65].
5.12.15. Proposition. If a probability measure μ on the σ-algebra σ(X′) in a
locally convex space X is not concentrated on a closed hyperplane, then, for every
set M ⊂X′ that is convex and compact in the topology σ(X′, X), this topology
is metrizable on M and coincides with the topology of convergence in measure μ
(e.g., this is true for the polars of neighborhoods of zero in the Mackey topology
on X).
Since in the case of a Radon measure the intersection of all closed linear
subspaces of full measure also has full measure, we can pass to the situation
described in this proposition.
5.12.16. Corollary. If X is a metrizable locally convex space and μ is a
Radon measure with respect to the weak topology on X, then it is tight with
respect to the original metric on X.
PROOF. As noted above, we can pass to the case of a measure not concen-
trated on a hyperplane. Taking a basis of convex neighborhoods of zero Un in X,
we obtain from the previous proposition that their polars U ◦
n are metrizable com-
pact sets in the topology σ(X′, X), which gives separability of X′ in this topology.
Hence there is a countable collection {fn} ⊂X′ separating points in X. Hence
weakly compact sets in X are metrizable. The measure μ is concentrated on some
countable union of such sets Kn. Let us take in each Kn a countable set dense in
the weak topology. The obtained countable set S is dense in X with respect to the
original metric, since otherwise we could find a closed hyperplane containing S,
hence also all Kn, which is impossible due to our assumption about the measure.
Therefore, the Borel σ-algebra of X with respect to the metric coincides with
σ(X′) according to Proposition 5.2.1. The Borel extension of μ to the completion
of X (as a metrizable locally convex space) is a Radon measure by separability
of X, moreover, the sets Kn are closed in the completion by their weak compact-
ness in X. Hence the measure μ is Radon with respect to the metric.
□
5.12(iii). Convex measures
Here we briefly discuss an important class of measures called convex or log-
arithmically concave that includes Gaussian measures. Convexity of a probability
measure on IRn is equivalent to the property that on some affine subspace it is

5.12. Complements and exercises
379
given by a density of the form exp(−V ), where V is a convex function with
values in (−∞, +∞] (see Borell [80]).
5.12.17. Definition. A probability measure μ defined on the σ-algebra σ(X′)
in a locally convex space X is called convex (or logarithmically concave) if for
all nonempty sets A, B ∈σ(X′) and all α ∈[0, 1] one has
μ∗

αA + (1 −α)B

⩾μ(A)αμ(B)1−α.
A Radon probability measure μ is convex if its restriction to σ(X′) is convex.
5.12.18. Lemma. A Radon probability measure μ is convex if (and only if)
all its finite-dimensional projections are convex.
PROOF. Taking for A and B cylindrical sets, we obtain convexity of all finite-
dimensional projections. Conversely, let all such projections be convex and let
A, B ∈B(X). Since μ is Radon, it suffices to consider the case where A and
B are compact.
Then A and B are compact in the weak topology, and since
μ is Radon, for any ε > 0 one can find an open cylindrical set C such that
αA + (1 −α)B ⊂C and μ(C) < μ

αA + (1 −α)B

+ ε. Using compactness of
A and B once again, we can find a convex cylindrical neighborhood of zero V such
that α(A + V ) + (1 −α)(B + V )⊂C. The sets A + V and B + V are cylinders.
By convexity of finite-dimensional projections
μ(C) ⩾μ

α(A + V ) + (1 −α)(B + V )

⩾μ(A + V )αμ(B + V )1−α
⩾μ(A)αμ(B)1−α,
which gives the desired estimate, since ε was arbitrary.
□
5.12.19.
Corollary. (i) If μ is a convex Radon probability measure on a
locally convex space X and T : X →Y is a continuous linear mapping to a
locally convex space Y , then the measure measure μ◦T −1 is convex.
(ii) If μ is a convex Radon probability measure on a locally convex space X
and ν is a convex Radon probability measure on a locally convex space Y , then
μ⊗ν is a convex measure on X×Y . (iii) If X = Y , then μ∗ν is a convex measure.
Let us also mention the following results from Borell [80], [82] (their proofs
can be also found in Bogachev [66, § 4.3]).
5.12.20. Theorem. Let μ be a convex Radon measure on a locally convex
space X and let p be a seminorm on X measurable with respect to μ. Then there
is c > 0 such that exp(cp) ∈L1(μ). In particular, p ∈Lr(μ) for all r ∈(0, ∞).
5.12.21. Theorem. Let μ be a convex Radon measure on a locally convex
space X, let h ∈X be a nonzero vector, and let Y be a closed hyperplane for
which X = Y ⊕IR1h. Then one can choose convex probability measures μy on
the straight lines y + IR1h, y ∈Y , such that
μ(B) =

Y
μy(B) ν(dy), B ∈B(X),
where ν is the image of μ under the natural projection X →Y .

380
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
Borell [80] (see also [83]) established the following 0–1 law for convex mea-
sures.
5.12.22. Theorem. Let μ be a convex Radon measure on a locally convex
space X.
(i) Let G be an additive subgroup in X. Then either μ∗(G) = 0 or μ∗(G) = 1.
If G ∈B(X)μ, then either μ(G) = 0 or μ(G) = 1.
(ii) Suppose that for every f ∈X′ the support of the measure μ◦f −1 is either
a point or the whole real line. Then the topological support of μ is a closed affine
subspace.
PROOF. (i) Let 0 < μ∗(G) < 1. Let us take a compact set K0 ⊂G with
μ(K0) > 0. Set K = K0 ∪(−K0) and H = ∞
n=1 Kn, Kn = Kn−1 + K,
K1 = K, i.e., H is the smallest additive subgroup containing K. Then H ⊂G
and μ(H) ⩽μ∗(G) < 1. Let ε = 2−1 min

μ(K), 1−μ(H)

. Let us take compact
sets Q ⊂X\H and S ⊂X such that
μ(Q) > 1 −μ(H) −ε,
μ(X\S) < 2−1
1 −μ(H) −ε

.
(5.12.1)
It is clear that 0 ̸∈K + Q, since otherwise Q ∩K ̸= ∅. Hence there exists n ∈IN
such that
Hn := (n −1)K + nQ ⊂X\S.
(5.12.2)
Indeed, if there are kn ∈K and qn ∈Q such that (n −1)kn + nqn ∈S, then by
the boundedness of S and K we obtain kn + qn →0, whence 0 ∈K + Q by the
closedness of K + Q. We now use the inclusion
n−1
X\(H ∪Hn)

+ (1 −n−1)K ⊂X\(H ∪Q).
It is verified as follows. If x ∈H ∪Q has the form n−1y + (1 −n−1)k, where
y ∈X\(H ∪Hn), then in case x ∈H we obtain y+(n−1)k ∈H, whence y ∈H,
which is impossible, and in case x ∈Q we have y ∈nQ−(n−1)K = Hn, which
is also impossible. The establish inclusion and convexity of μ yield the estimate
μ

X\(H ∪Q)

⩾min

μ

X\(H ∪Hn)

, μ(K)

.
Since the left side is 1 −μ(H) −μ(Q) < ε < μ(K) by (5.12.1), we obtain the
inequality
ε > μ

X\(H ∪Q)

⩾μ

X\(H ∪Hn)

⩾1 −μ(H) −μ(Hn),
giving the estimate μ(Hn) ⩾1 −μ(H) −ε > 0. However, (5.12.1) and (5.12.2)
imply the inequality μ(Hn) ⩽μ(X\S) < 2−1
1 −μ(H) −ε

. The obtained
contradiction means that μ(H) = 1. Hence μ∗(G) = 1.
(ii) Being a Radon measure, μ has topological support S. Convexity of μ
yields convexity of S: if a, b ∈S, then for every convex neighborhood of zero V
the sets V + a and V + b have positive measures, whence
μ

V + (a + b)/2

⩾μ(V + a)1/2μ(V + b)1/2 > 0,
i.e., (a+b)/2 ∈S. Therefore, the whole interval [a, b] is contained in S. If S ̸= X,
then for every point z ̸∈S there exists a functional f ∈X′ with f|S ⩽1 and
f(z) > 1. Our assumption implies that f coincides almost everywhere with some

5.12. Complements and exercises
381
constant cf. Hence S is contained in the closed affine subspace Hf = f −1(cf).
It follows from this that S coincides with the intersection of all closed affine
subspaces of full measure, since this intersection H has full measure by the Radon
property of μ, and the restriction of μ to H cannot have a smaller support.
□
5.12(iv). The central limit theorem
Several interesting classes of measures on infinite-dimensional spaces are in-
troduced by means of independent random vectors or convolutions. In this and
the next subsections we consider some examples; here we discuss the central limit
theorem (abbreviation: CLT).
Let X be a locally convex space and let {ξn} be a sequence of X-valued
independent centered random vectors with a common Radon distribution μ. Set
Sn = ξ1 + . . . + ξn
√n
.
Note that the distribution of ξn coincides with the measure μ∗n defined by the
equality
μ∗n(A) = (μ ∗. . . ∗μ)(n−1/2A),
where the convolution is n-fold. The first problem the central limit theorem deals
with concerns convergence of the sequence of random vectors Sn (in a suitable
sense).
5.12.23. Definition. (i) A probability measure μ with mean m on σ(X′) is
called pre-Gaussian if it has weak second moment and there is a Gaussian measure
γ with mean m on X such that

X
f g dμ =

X
f g dγ
∀f, g ∈X′.
(ii) A Radon probability measure μ with zero mean on X satisfies the central
limit theorem (CLT) if the sequence {μ∗n} is uniformly tight. A Radon probability
measure μ with mean m is said to satisfy the CLT if the measure μ−m with zero
mean satisfies the CLT.
(iii) A space X is called a space with the CLT property if every Radon proba-
bility measure μ on X with zero mean and strong second moment satisfies the CLT;
X is called a space with the strict CLT property if the CLT holds for every Radon
probability measure μ on X with zero mean and weak second moment.
Locally convex spaces with the strict CLT property were introduced in Bo-
gachev [60]. Note that even for measures on the real line the CLT requires finite
second moments (see Bogachev [69, Chapter 1]), so in relation to the CLT we
consider only measures with weak second moment.
5.12.24.
Lemma. Let μ be a Radon probability measure with zero mean
on X and weak second moment. If the sequence {μ∗n} is uniformly tight, then it
converges weakly to some centered Radon Gaussian measure γ. In addition, μ is
a pre-Gaussian measure.

382
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
PROOF. The uniform tightness of {μ∗n} implies the existence of a Radon
probability measure γ that is a limit point for the set {μ∗n} in the weak topology.
We verify that γ is a Gaussian measure. It suffices to verify that all measures
μ◦f −1, where f ∈X′, are Gaussian on the real line. Thus, the assertion reduces
to the one-dimensional case, in which it is well known (see [69]).
□
On IRn every probability measure with weak second moment satisfies the CLT.
Certainly, such a measure has strong second moment. The situation is completely
different in the infinite-dimensional case. For example, the space C[0, 1] does not
have the CLT property. Moreover, there exists a pre-Gaussian measure with com-
pact support in C[0, 1] not satisfying the CLT. On the other hand, there exists a
measure with compact support in C[0, 1] which is not pre-Gaussian. Finally, there
exists a measure on C[0, 1] with weak second moment which satisfies the CLT,
but has no strong second moment (concerning such examples, see Paulauskas,
Rachkauskas [380]). It is known that Hilbert spaces have the CLT property. Since
in a Hilbert space the covariance operator of a probability measure μ is nuclear
precisely when μ has strong second moment, here the class of pre-Gaussian mea-
sures coincides with the class of measures satisfying the CLT (and also with the
class of probability measures having strong second moment). As the example of
C[0, 1] shows, these three classes of measures can be different in general Banach
spaces. The coincidence of these classes characterizes Hilbert spaces. In other
words, a Banach space is linearly homeomorphic to a Hilbert space if and only if
the existence of strong second moment of a probability measure is equivalent to the
property that it satisfies the CLT. It is known that every probability measure with
strong second moment on a Banach space X satisfies the CLT precisely when X is
a space of type 2 (for the definitions of type and cotype, see Vakhania, Tarieladze,
Chobanyan [538]). Thus, on non-Hilbert spaces of type 2 there are measures hav-
ing weak second moment and satisfying the CLT, but not having strong second
moment. If every measure on X satisfying the CLT and having weak second mo-
ment has strong second moment, then X is a space of cotype 2, moreover, this
property completely characterizes spaces of cotype 2. The existence of cotype 2
is equivalent also to the property that every pre-Gaussian measure on X satisfies
the CLT. The proofs of these assertions and the corresponding references can be
found in [380, Chapter 3] and Ledoux, Talagrand [311, Chapter 10].
Let us mention two results from Bogachev [60]; their proofs can be found in
Bogachev [69, § 4.8(iii)] (see also Exercise 5.12.93).
5.12.25. Theorem. (i) A Banach space has the strict CLT property precisely
when it is finite-dimensional.
(ii) The strict CLT property is inherited by closed subspaces and preserved
under formation of strict inductive limits of increasing sequences of closed sub-
spaces, countable products, arbitrary direct sums, and countable projective limits.
5.12.26. Example. Let X be the dual to a complete nuclear barrelled lo-
cally convex space Y . Then X with the strong topology possesses the strict CLT
property. For example, this is true if X is the dual to a nuclear Fr´echet space.

5.12. Complements and exercises
383
The following spaces have the strict CLT property: C∞
0 [a, b], S(IRk), S′(IRk),
and IR∞.
In the next subsection we consider another normalization of sums of indepen-
dent random vectors.
5.12(v). Infinitely divisible and stable measures
5.12.27. Definition. A random vector ξ in a locally convex space X with
distribution μ is called stable of order α ∈(0, 2] if, for every n, there exists a
vector an ∈X such that, for independent random vectors ξ1, . . . , ξn with the same
distribution μ, the random vector n−1/α(ξ1+· · ·+ξn)−an also has distribution μ.
The distribution μ is called stable of order α. If one can take an = 0, then μ is
called strictly stable.
A probability measure μ on σ(X′) is called infinitely divisible if, for each n,
there exists a probability measure νn on σ(X′) such that μ coincides with the
n-fold convolution of νn.
Every stable of order α measure μ is infinitely divisible, since it equals the
n-fold convolution of the distribution of the random vector n−1/α(ξ −n1/α−1an).
Stable of order 2 random vectors are precisely Gaussian random vectors.
In terms of the Fourier transform of μ the property to be infinitely divisible
means that μ = (#
νn)n for every n, and the property to be stable is equivalent to
the relation μ(l) = e−il(an)μ(n−1/αl)n.
Let us consider a measure of the form
μ = e(ν) := e−ν(X)
∞

n=0
ν∗n
n! ,
where ν is a finite nonnegative Radon measure on X, ν∗n is the n-fold convolution
of ν, ν∗0 := δ0. Clearly, for the Fourier transform of this measure we obtain the
equality μ = e−ν(X)eν. Thus, μ = ν∗k
k
for all k, where νk = e(ν/k), hence μ is
infinitely divisible.
General infinitely divisible measures are described by means of the so-called
Poisson measures of the following type. Let B be an absolutely convex compact
set in X and let G be a nonnegative Borel measure on X with values in [0, +∞]
concentrated on the linear span of B, finite on all sets X\rB, r > 0, and such that
f 2/(1 + f 2) ∈L1(G) for all f ∈X′. Set
K(f, x) = eif(x) −1 −if(Tx), Tx = x if x∈B, Tx = x/pB(x) if x̸∈B.
Suppose that the function
exp

X
K(f, x) G(dx)

is the Fourier transform of a Radon probability measure Π on X. Then the mea-
sure Π is called the Poisson measure with spectral measure G (or with the L´evy
measure G) and is denoted by the symbol Π(G). Under broad conditions on the
space X, infinitely divisible measures on X are precisely measures of the form
μ = γ ∗Π(G), where γ is a Gaussian measure and G is some L´evy measure. For

384
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
example, this is true for Fr´echet spaces (the case of Banach spaces is considered
in Kruglov [301], and the case of Fr´echet spaces reduces to that of Banach spaces
due to the existence of a Banach support, see § 5.12(vi)).
Tortrat [526] obtained the following representation of the Fourier transform of
a stable measure μ.
5.12.28. Theorem. Let μ be a stable of order α Radon measure on a quasi-
complete locally convex space X. Then there exist a vector a ∈X and a nonneg-
ative measure Γ with compact support in X for which
μ(l) = exp

il(a) −

|l(x)|α Γ(dx) + iQ(α, Γ, l)

,
l ∈X′,
(5.12.3)
Q(α, Γ, l) = tan πα
2

l(x)|l(x)|α−1 Γ(dx),
α ̸= 1,
Q(1, Γ, l) = −2
π

l(x) ln |l(x)| Γ(dx).
The measure Γ is called spectral. It is clear that it is not uniquely defined.
For example, for α ̸= 1 it can be replaced by the measure λ−αΓλ, where Γλ is
the image of Γ under the homothety with coefficient λ. Thus, one can take for Γ
a probability measure. In Bogachev [59] a modified representation
μ(l) = exp

il(a) −

|l(x)|α Γ(dx) + iβQ(α, Γ, l)

,
β ∈[0, 1],
(5.12.4)
of the Fourier transform of the measure μ was considered, which better reflects
symmetry properties of the measure. For example, if the measure μ is symmet-
ric, i.e., μ(B) = μ(−B), then Q(α, Γ, l) = 0, hence one can find representa-
tion (5.12.4) with β = 0.
The asymmetry index β(μ) of a stable of order α measure μ is defined as the
infimum of numbers β ∈[0, 1] for which representation (5.12.4) exists with some
a ∈X and some measure Γ with bounded support. The next result is proved
in [59].
5.12.29. Theorem. The asymmetry index of a stable measure μ equals the
supremum of the asymmetry indices of finite-dimensional projections of μ. More-
over, there exist a ∈X and a measure Γ with compact support such that (5.12.4)
holds with β = β(μ).
If β(μ) = 0, then the measure μ is symmetric and coincides with its sym-
metrization μs(B) = μ ∗μ(21/αB), where μ(B) = μ(−B).
It is clear that
#
μs = |μ|.
If β(μ) = 1, then μ is called completely asymmetric.
Finally, if
0 < β(μ) < 1, then there exists a completely asymmetric stable of order α mea-
sure ν such that μ = μ1 ∗ν, where μ1(B) = μs(t−1/αB), t = 1 −β(μ).
For stable measures, the following version of the 0–1 law was obtained in
Dudley, Kanter [141].
5.12.30. Theorem. Let μ be a stable Radon measure on a locally convex
space X. Then, for every μ-measurable affine subspace L ⊂X, either μ(L) = 0
or μ(L) = 1.

5.12. Complements and exercises
385
PROOF. Passing to a shift of the measure, we can assume that L is a linear
subspace. Suppose first that μ is symmetric. Let μ(L) = a > 0. We can assume
that L is Borel, since L contains a compact set of positive measure, hence we
can deal with its linear span. Let μt denote the image of μ under the homothety
x →tx, t > 0. We observe that μt = μtα. Hence for all t ∈(0, 1) we have the
equality μ = μt ∗μs, where sα = 1 −tα. Taking t = n−1, we obtain
μ(L −n−1x) =

X
μ(nL −x −ns−1y) μ(dy)
⩾

L
μ(nL −x −ns−1y) μ(dy) = μ(L −x)μ(L)
for all x. If x ̸∈L, then the sets L −n−1x are disjoint, whence it follows that
μ(L −x) = 0 for x ̸∈L. Then by the equality μ ∗μ = μθ, where θ = 21/α, we
obtain
a = μ(L) = μ(θL) = μ∗μ(L) =

X
μ(L−x) μ(dx) =

L
μ(L−x) μ(dx) = a2,
whence a = 1. Let us now drop the assumption that the measure is symmetric.
Let ν = μ ∗μ, μ(B) = μ(−B). Since ν(L) ⩾μ(L)2, by the proven assertion we
have ν(L) = 1. Hence μ(L + x) = 1 for μ-a.e. x. In particular, such x exists in
the set L of positive measure, which gives μ(L) = 1.
□
A similar assertion is true for stable measures on σ(X′).
5.12.31. Lemma. Let μ be a Radon probability measure on a locally convex
space X, let m be a Radon probability measure on a topological space (T, B), and
suppose that for every t ∈T we are given a cylindrical probability measure νt
on X with the following property: for every l ∈X′ the function t →νt(l) is
measurable with respect to m and
μ(l) =

T
νt(l) m(dt).
Suppose also that for any ε > 0 there is a compact set Sε ⊂T with m(Sε) > 1−ε
such that for every cylinder C with a compact base the function t →νt(C) on Sε
is upper semicontinuous (this holds automatically if there is a countable set in X′
separating points in X). Then, for m-a.e. t, the measure νt has a Radon extension
such that for every B ∈B(X) the function t →νt(B) is measurable with respect
to m and
μ(B) =

T
νt(B) m(dt).
(5.12.5)
PROOF. It follows from our condition that for any function f which is a linear
combination of exp(il), where l ∈X′, the integral of f against the measure νt is
a measurable function of t and

X
f dμ =

T

X
f(x) νt(dx) m(dt).

386
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
It is easy to extend this assertion to bounded functions f of the form g◦P, where
P is a finite-dimensional projection and g is a Borel function on P(X). Hence
equality (5.12.5) is true for cylinders B.
Let n ∈IN. Let us fix a compact set K ⊂X. Let us consider the set H of all
closed subspaces in X of finite codimension. It is directed by the natural partial
order relation: H1 ⩽H2 if H2 ⊂H1. The net of functions fH(t) = νt(K + H)
decreases to f(t) = infH fH(t). On every compact set Sε from the condition of
the theorem the functions fH are upper semicontinuous. Hence so is f. By [65,
Lemma 7.2.6] we have

Sε
f dm = lim
H

Sε
fH dm.
Since ε was arbitrary, we obtain the measurability of f and the equality

T
f dm = lim
H

T
fH dm = lim
H μ(K + H) = μ(K),
where the last relation follows from Proposition 5.2.17. Taking compact sets Kn
with μ(Kn) ⩾1 −n−2, for Tn := {t: infH νt(Kn + H) ⩾1 −n−1} we obtain
the estimate
m(Tn) + (1 −n−1)

1 −m(Tn)

⩾

T
f dm ⩾1 −n−2,
whence we see that m(Tn) ⩾1 −n−1.
The set T0 = ∞
n=1 Tn has full m-
measure and infH νt(Kn + H) ⩾1 −n−1 for t ∈T0.
This means that the
measures νt are tight for t ∈T0: for every Borel cylinder C disjoint with Kn,
we have νt(C) ⩽n−1, since there exists H ∈H with (Kn + H) ∩C = ∅.
The Radon extensions of the measures νt will be denoted by the same symbols.
According to what has been proved above, formula (5.12.5) is true for compact
sets B, since νt(B) = infH νt(B + H) for t ∈T0. Using that μ is Radon, it
is easy to extend this to closed sets B. It is clear that the class B of all sets
B ∈B(X) for which (5.12.5) is true admits countable unions of disjoint sets and
that if B1, B2 ∈B and B1 ⊂B2, then B2\B1 ∈B. Since the class of closed sets
belongs to B and admits finite intersections, by the known theorem on σ-additive
classes (see [65, Theorem 1.9.3]) we have B = B(X).
Finally, if there is a countable collection {ln} ⊂X′ separating points in X,
then the indicated additional condition of upper semicontinuity is automatically
fulfilled. Indeed, for every n choose a countable set Fn of smooth functions on IRn
with compact support by which one can uniformly approximate all continuous
functions with compact support. It will be convenient to assume below that Fn is
closed with respect to the operations min(f, 1), max(f, 0), and min(f1, . . . , fn),
where f, fi ∈Fn. The set F of functions of the form f(li1, . . . , lin), f ∈Fn, is
countable. Hence for every ε > 0 there exists a compact set Sε ⊂T such that for
all f ∈F the functions
t →

f dνt

5.12. Complements and exercises
387
are continuous on Sε.
Let C be a cylinder with a compact base in a finite-
dimensional subspace L and let H ∈H. We verify the upper semicontinuity of
the function g: t →νt(C + H) on Sε. By the continuity on Sε of all functions
in F, it suffices to find a sequence of functions fn ∈F pointwise decreasing
to g. This reduces to the following: given a compact set K ⊂IRk, we have to
find functions fn ∈Fn pointwise decreasing to IK. Let Kn be the open n−1-
neighborhood of K. Let us take a continuous function ψn with 0 ⩽ψn ⩽1, equal
to 1 on K and 0 outside of Kn. Find ϕn ∈Fn with supx |ψn(x)−ϕn(x)| ⩽n−1;
we can assume that 0 ⩽ϕn ⩽1, passing to the functions min(ϕn, 1) and then
to max(ϕn, 0). Finally, take min(ϕ1, . . . , ϕn).
□
The following result from Sztencel [508] shows that the distributions of sym-
metric stable vectors are mixtures of Gaussian measures.
5.12.32. Theorem. Let μ be a Radon probability measure on a locally convex
space X that is symmetric and stable of order α. Then, there exist a Radon prob-
ability measure m on the space T = X∞×IR∞and symmetric Radon Gaussian
measures γt on X, where t ∈R, such that for every B ∈B(X) the function
t →γt(B) is measurable with respect to m and
μ(B) =

T
γt(B) m(dt),
B ∈B(X).
(5.12.6)
PROOF. We shall assume that α < 2, since for α = 2 the measure μ is Gauss-
ian. In addition, we first suppose that X is quasi-complete. By the Tortrat theo-
rem we have (5.12.3) with some probability measure Γ concentrated on a compact
set K and a = 0, Q = 0. Let {ξi} be a sequence of independent centered Gaussian
random variables with IE|ξi|α = 1, {ηi} a sequence of independent random vari-
ables with exponential distribution, Z, Z1, . . . a sequence of independent random
vectors in X with distribution Γ such that all these sequences are jointly indepen-
dent. We can assume that they are defined on the space Ω = IR∞×IR∞×X∞
with the product of the corresponding one-dimensional distributions. Let us set
sk = η1 + · · · + ηk. Then IEsk = k. For a measure m we shall take m1⊗m2,
where m1 is the distribution of {Zi} and m2 is the distribution of {sk}. Thus, our
probability space is T = X∞×IR∞, where we identify IR∞×IR∞and IR∞. Let
Cα =
 ∞
0
s−α sin s ds.
The following fact is known (see LePage, Woodroffe, Zinn [314]): given a se-
quence of equidistributed symmetric random variables ζk jointly independent with
the sequence {ηk} and having finite moment of order α, the series 	∞
k=1 s−1/α
k
ζk
converges almost surely and its sum has a stable of order α distribution with the
Fourier transform given by y →exp

−C−1
α |y|αIE|ζ1|α
.
We now consider a
formal series
C1/α
α
∞

k=1
s−1/α
k
ξkZk.

388
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
This formal series “converges” in the following sense: for every l ∈X′ the series
C1/α
α
∞

k=1
s−1/α
k
ξkl(Zk)
of real random variables converges almost surely and for the Fourier transform of
its sum Λl the aforementioned fact yields the equality
IE exp(iΛl) = exp

−IE|l(Z1)|α
= exp

−

|l(x)|α Γ(dx)

= μ(l). (5.12.7)
By the law of large numbers there is a set S ⊂IR∞of full m2-measure such that
lim
k→∞sk/k →1 for all (sk) ∈S. For every element t ∈X∞×IR∞of the form
t =

(xk), (sk)

, where xk ∈K, we would like to define a centered Gaussian
measure γt as the distribution of the random vector C1/α
α
	∞
k=1 s−1/α
k
ξkxk.
If α < 1, then it is easy to show that this series converges in X almost surely
and its distribution is a centered Radon Gaussian measure. Indeed, we shall assume
that the distribution of {ξk} is the measure on IR∞equal to the countable power
of the one-dimensional distribution of ξ1. We observe that the linear subspace
L ⊂IR∞of all sequences ξ = (ξk) with lim supk→∞|ξk|| ln(1 + k)|−1/2 < ∞
has full measure.
For all elements t ∈K∞× S and (ξk) ∈L, the series
	∞
k=1 s−1/α
k
ξkxk converges in X, since for every continuous seminorm p on X
the series 	∞
k=1 s−1/α
k
|ξk|p(xk) converges, because
s−1/α
k
⩽Ck−1/α,
|ξk| ⩽C| ln(k + 1)|1/2,
sup
k
p(xk) < ∞.
In the general case verification is technically more involved, for this reason we
shall define γt as a cylindrical measure and then verify that it is tight. The former is
very simple, since for every functional l ∈X′ the series C1/α
α
	∞
k=1 s−1/α
k
ξkl(xk)
of independent Gaussian random variables converges almost surely by convergence
of the series of s−2/α
k
|l(xk)|2, which follows from the boundedness of l on K and
the estimate s−2/α
k
⩽Ck−2/α, where 2/α > 1.
We now verify that m-almost all cylindrical measures γt are tight and satisfy
equality (5.12.6).
We first verify (5.12.6) for cylindrical sets.
To this end, it
suffices to show that the integral of γt(l) against the measure m equals μ(l) for
all l ∈X′. A straightforward calculation shows that
γt(l) = exp

−Qt(l)/2

,
Qt(l) = C2/α
α
∞

k=1
s−2/α
k
|l(xk)|2IEξ2
1.
It is obvious that in this formula the function t →Qt(l) is Borel. The integral of
γt(l) against the measure m coincides with the quantity
IE exp

iC1/α
α
∞

k=1
s−1/α
k
ξkl(Zk)

equal to μ(l), which follows from formula (5.12.7) and Fubini’s theorem applied
on account of independence of the considered random variables.

5.12. Complements and exercises
389
Thus, equality (5.12.6) is true for cylindrical sets. To complete the proof by
applying the previous lemma we have to verify the required additional condition of
semicontinuity (fulfilled automatically if there is a countable collection in X′ sep-
arating points). For this we observe that the set S ⊂IR∞of full m2-measure intro-
duced above contains the subsets SM = {(sk): sk ⩾M −1k} and m2(SM) →1
as M →∞. This gives the estimate s−2/α
k
⩽M 2/αk−2/α on SM, which yields
the continuity of the restrictions of the functions t →Qt(l) to SM ×K∞for all
l ∈X′. It is easy to see that this gives the continuity of the restrictions to SM×K∞
of the integrals against the measures νt for all cylindrical functions of the form
f(l1, . . . , ln), f ∈Cb(IRn), li ∈X′. As one can see from the proof of the last
assertion of the lemma, we obtain the required upper semicontinuity.
□
Let us give a condition for nondegeneracy of the Gaussian measures γt.
5.12.33. Corollary. Suppose that X′ contains a countable collection of func-
tionals separating points in X (for example, X is a separable Fr´echet space).
If the measure μ from the theorem is not concentrated on a proper closed linear
subspace, then this is also true for m-almost all measures γt.
PROOF. The Radon measure μ is concentrated on the linear subspace X0 that
is the union of an increasing sequence of compact sets Kn, which are metrizable
due to the existence of a sequence {lj} ⊂X′ separating points, moreover, for the
corresponding metric we can take d(x, y) = 	∞
j=1 2−j min

|lj(x −y)|, 1

. Then
almost all measures γt are concentrated on X0 as well, hence we can deal with the
space X = X0.
We show that for m-a.e. t the measures γt◦l, l ∈X′, l ̸= 0, have positive
variances. It is seen from the proof of the theorem that we have to show that for
m1-a.e. (xk) ∈K∞we have supk |l(xk)| > 0 for all nonzero l ∈X′. To each
element z = (zk) ∈K∞we associate the closed linear span E(z) of the sequence
of vectors zk. It suffices to establish that E(z) = X for m1-a.e. z.
In each Kn we choose a countable set {xn,i} everywhere dense with respect
to the metric d. For every fixed pair of numbers n, i consider the function
ψn,i(z) = inf

d(xn,i, x): x ∈E(z) ∩Kn

, z ∈K∞.
This function is Borel, since it is the limit of functions
ψn,i,k(z) = inf

d(xn,i, x): x ∈⟨z1, . . . , zk⟩

∩Kn,
where ⟨z1, . . . , zk⟩is the linear span of z1, . . . , zk, and the functions ψn,i,k are
continuous. Since E(z) does not change under permutations of components of z,
the function ψn,i,k also has this property, hence by Theorem 5.12.12 the function
ψn,i,k is equal to a constant m1-a.e. Hence there is a set Ω0 of full m1-measure
on which all functions ψn,i are constant. This means that on Ω0 the space E(z) is
constant. Indeed, if E(z) ̸= E(z′), then Kn ∩E(z) ̸= Kn ∩E(z′) for some n.
We can assume that there is a point x in

Kn ∩E(z)

\E(z′). Hence there exists
a ball of radius ε > 0 centered at x in which there are no points of Kn ∩E(z′).
Next, there exists a point xn,i such that d(x, xn,i) < ε/4. Then ψn,i(z′) > ε/2,
although ψn,i(z) < ε/4 due to the inclusion x ∈Kn ∩E(z).

390
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
Finally, E(z) = X for all z ∈Ω0. Indeed, otherwise there exists a nonzero
functional l ∈X′ the kernel of which contains all E(z) for z ∈Ω0, i.e., l(zk) = 0
for all k if z = (zk) ∈Ω0. Therefore, we obtain the equality Γ

l−1(0)

= 0,
since m1 = Γ∞. It is clear that this yields the equality μ

l−1(0)

= 0, which
contradicts the condition.
□
In place of a countable separating collection of functionals one could require
a more general condition: the metrizability of compact sets in X; however, this
reduces to the considered case by the same reasoning as in the proof of the previous
corollary.
In Acosta [1], Louie, Rajput, Tortrat [323], Rajput [410], [411], [412], Rajput,
Rama-Murthy, ˙Zak [413], and Tortrat [524], [525], [527], where some additional
references can be found, topological supports of infinitely divisible and stable
measures are studied; in particular, it is shown that the topological support Sμ of
a symmetric stable measure μ is a linear subspace and the support of an infinitely
divisible measure is a convex cone (see [412]).
5.12.34. Theorem. Let μ be a symmetric stable of order α Radon measure.
Then its topological support is a linear space. If α ⩾1, then the topological
support of a Radon α-stable measure is an affine subspace. If α < 1, then the
topological support is a convex cone.
PROOF. We verify only the first assertion (for the proof of the second, see
the paper [412]), following from the previous corollary. Suppose that the space X
is separable metrizable.
Passing to the smallest closed linear subspace of full
measure, we obtain that almost all Gaussian measures γt, the mixture of which
is μ, are positive on nonempty open sets. Hence the same is true for μ.
Let us consider the general case. Suppose that there is a point a not belonging
to Sμ. Then there exists a closed absolutely convex neighborhood of zero V with
μ(a+V ) = 0. Consider the normed space E(V ) obtained by the factorization of X
with respect to the kernel of the Minkowski functional of the set V . Let ν denote
the image of the measure μ under the natural projection π: X →E(V ), under
which V is mapped onto the closed unit ball in E(V ). The Radon measure ν is
symmetric, stable and is not concentrated on a proper closed subspace (otherwise
μ would be concentrated on the preimage of this subspace), hence on account of
the proven case we obtain that its support is the whole space E(V ). However, the
ball of radius 1 centered at π(a) must have zero ν-measure, since its preimage
under the projection π is a + V , because the preimage of the unit ball is V . The
obtained contradiction shows that Sμ = X.
□
It is not known whether a Radon stable measure on a general locally convex
space has always a metrizable compact set of positive measure (as is the case
for Gaussian measures). Additional information about infinite-dimensional stable
and infinitely divisible measures can be found in the books Hazod, Siebert [218],
Kruglov [301], and Linde [317] and the papers Acosta [1], Acosta, Samur [2],
Chung, Rajput, Tortrat [102], Dettweiler [117], Dudley, Kanter [141], Ferni-
que [158], and Kanter [258].

5.12. Complements and exercises
391
5.12(vi). Banach supports of measures
In many applications it is useful to have results asserting that certain measures
on infinite-dimensional spaces are actually concentrated on some more special or
simpler spaces. For example, having a measure on a general locally convex space,
it can be useful to know that it is actually concentrated on a smaller Banach space,
and once this is achieved, one might think of a Hilbert support. Certainly, this is
not always possible, but some positive results are available.
The following result was obtained by Buldygin [91] for Banach spaces and
later extended in Bogachev [60] to Fr´echet spaces (earlier some less general results
were obtained in Kuelbs [302], Sato [428], and Ostrovskii [376]).
5.12.35. Theorem. Let μ be a Radon measure on a Fr´echet space X. Then
there exists a reflexive separable Banach space E ⊂X such that |μ|(X\E) = 0
and the closed unit ball in E is compact in X.
PROOF. It suffices to consider probability measures. The topology of X is
generated by a metric ϱ. For each n take a compact set Kn with μ(X\Kn)<1/n.
Then μ
∞
n=1 Kn

= 1. Pick numbers cn > 0 such that cnKn belongs to the
ball of radius 1/n centered at zero. It is readily seen that the closure S of the
set ∞
n=1 cnKn is compact (every sequence in S has a limit point). The closed
absolutely convex hull K0 of the set S is compact, but this set is not always
suitable, since EK0 need not be even separable. However, by Theorem 2.5.11
one can take a larger absolutely convex compact set W such that EW will be a
separable reflexive space and K0 will be compact as a subset of EW . The measure
μ can be restricted to E = EW , since all Borel sets in E0 are Borel in X due to
the injectivity of the embedding (see Bogachev [65, Theorem 6.8.6]).
□
In the general case, one cannot find E with a Schauder basis (see Fonf, John-
son, Pisier, Preiss [173]; for a sufficient condition, see Theorem 5.12.63).
In
particular, it cannot be always made Hilbert, however, for measures on IR∞this
can be easily done (Exercise 5.12.82). The following interesting fact is known
(see Mushtari [359], Sato [429]).
5.12.36. Theorem. If every Radon measure on a Banach space X is concen-
trated on a continuously embedded separable Hilbert space, then X is isomorphic
to a Hilbert space.
It is clear that it is sufficient that the condition be fulfilled for measures with
bounded support.
As the space IR∞shows, this theorem does not extend to
arbitrary Fr´echet spaces.
Recall that a measure μ on a Banach space has strong moment of order r if
we have ∥· ∥r ∈L1(μ). More generally, a measure μ on a locally convex space
has strong moment of order r if every continuous seminorm belongs to Lr(μ).
For such measures Theorem 5.12.35 can be sharpened (Bogachev [64]).
5.12.37.
Theorem. Let μ be a probability Borel measure on a separable
Banach space X with strong moment of some order r > 0. Then there exists a
linear subspace E ⊂X with the following properties:

392
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
(i) E with some norm ∥· ∥E is a separable reflexive Banach space the closed
balls of which are compact in X;
(ii) μ(E) = 1 and

E
∥z∥r
E μ(dz) < ∞.
If μ on X has all strong moments, then E can be chosen with this property.
Finally, these assertions are true for separable Fr´echet spaces.
PROOF. We modify the reasoning from Theorem 5.12.35. Let ϕ ⩾0 be a
decreasing function on [0, ∞) and 	∞
n=1 ϕ(n) < ∞. There are numbers αn ↓0
for which αnn →∞and 	∞
n=1 ϕ(αnn) < ∞. Let ϕ(R) = μ(x: ∥x∥> R1/r).
Then 	∞
n=1 ϕ(n) < ∞. Let us take αn as above.
For every n, there is a compact set Kn in the ball Un of radius n1/r centered
at zero such that
μ(α1/r
n Kn) ⩾μ(α1/r
n Un) −2−n.
The set K = ∞
n=1 cnKn, where cn := α1/r
n n−1/r, has compact closure. The
closed convex hull V of the set K is also compact.
Let pV and EV be the
Minkowski functional of V and the associated Banach space. Since {pV ⩽c} =
cV for all c ⩾0, the function pV is measurable. Furthermore,
α1/r
n Kn ⊂n1/rK ⊂{pV ⩽n1/r} = n1/rV.
Due to our choice of the sets Kn we obtain pr
V ∈L1(μ), since
μ

x: pr
V (x) > n

= 1 −μ

x: pV (x) ⩽n1/r
⩽1 −μ(α1/r
n Kn)
⩽1 + 2−n −μ(α1/r
n Un) = 2−n + μ

x: ∥x∥> α1/r
n n1/r
= 2−n + ϕ(αnn).
It is clear that μ(EV ) = 1 and μ(α1/r
n Kn) →1, since the balls α1/r
n Un have
radii (αnn)1/r →∞by the condition that αnn →∞. Next we argue as in
Theorem 5.12.35.
The case of a Fr´echet space reduces to the one considered
above by passing to the subspace X0 := {q < ∞}, where qr := 	∞
n=1 cnqr
n and
qn are seminorms defining the topology, cn = 2−n(∥qr
n∥L1(μ) + 1)−1.
□
Note that this theorem does not extend to weak moments (see Exercise 5.12.84
and Exercise 5.12.85).
5.12.38. Corollary. Let μ be a probability measure with strong moment of
order r on a separable Banach space X with the approximation property, i.e.,
for every compact set K in X and every δ > 0 there exists a finite-dimensional
operator S ∈L(X) with supx∈K ∥x −Sx∥⩽δ. Then, for every ε > 0, there
exists a finite-dimensional operator T ∈L(X) such that

X
∥x −Tx∥r μ(dx) < ε.
PROOF. Let E be the space from the previous theorem and let K be its unit
ball. We find ε0 > 0 such that the integral of the function ∥z∥r
E over E is less
than ε/ε0. Let us take a finite-dimensional operator T with sup
K
∥z −Tz∥⩽ε0.

5.12. Complements and exercises
393
Then we have ∥z −Tz∥⩽ε0∥z∥E if z ∈E. Thus, the integral of ∥z −Tz∥r does
not exceed the integral of ∥z∥r
E over E multiplied by ε0, which is less than ε.
□
This corollary does not extend to arbitrary Banach spaces (see Fonf, Johnson,
Pisier, Preiss [173]). However, it would be interesting to study the existence of
such approximations for measures from various special classes.
5.12(vii). Infinite-dimensional Wiener processes
Let X be a Hausdorff locally convex space, let H be a separable Hilbert
space continuously and densely embedded into X, and let jH : X∗→H be
the associated embedding defined in the following way. For every k ∈X∗, the
functional h →⟨k, h⟩is continuous on H. Hence there is a vector jH(k) ∈H
such that for all h ∈H we have

jH(k), h

H = ⟨k, h⟩.
(5.12.8)
Let (Ω, F, P) be a probability space.
For the definition of a real Wiener
process, see Bogachev [63] or Wentzell [564].
5.12.39. Definition. A continuous random process (Wt)t⩾0 on (Ω, F, P) with
values in X is called a Wiener process associated with H if, for every k ∈X∗
with |jH(k)|H = 1, the one-dimensional process ⟨k, Wt⟩is Wiener.
Let Ft ⊂F, t ⩾0, be an increasing family of σ-algebras. A Wiener process
(Wt)t⩾0 is called an Ft-Wiener process if, for all τ ⩾0, t, s ⩾τ, the random
vector Wt −Ws is independent of Fτ and the random vector Wt is Ft-measurable.
Note that the only relation of the process to the topology of X concerns the
continuity of paths (and, of course, the continuity of the embedding H →X). In
particular, if X is a Banach space, then replacing its norm by an equivalent one,
we do not influence Wiener processes associated with H (but changing the norm
of H, we alter the class of the associated processes).
Simple examples of infinite-dimensional Wiener processes are: any sequence
(wt,n)∞
n=1 of independent real Wiener processes, which defines a Wiener process
in IR∞with H = l2, and the sequence (αnwt,n)∞
n=1 with αn > 0 and (αn) ∈l2,
which defines a Wiener process in l2 for which H is the weighted Hilbert space
of sequences h = (hn) with 	∞
n=1 α2
nh2
n < ∞.
A rather obvious necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of a
Wiener process in X is the existence of a separable Hilbert space continuously
and densely embedded into X (see Bogachev [63, § 7.2]). Certainly, not every
locally convex space satisfies this condition. For example, it is not fulfilled for
strict inductive limits of increasing closed subspaces. For separable Fr´echet spaces
it is fulfilled. A much more delicate question is the existence of a Wiener process
with a prescribed space H. Let us give a sufficient condition (see [63, § 7.2]).
5.12.40. Proposition. Let X be a sequentially complete locally convex space
on which there exists a centered Gaussian measure Radon γ with the Cameron–
Martin space H = H(γ) dense in X. Then there exists a Wiener process (Wt)t⩾0
associated with H for which the distribution of W1 coincides with γ.

394
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
A process (Wt)t⩾0 can be constructed in the form
Wt =
∞

n=1
wt,nen,
where (wt,n)∞
n=1 is a sequence of independent real Wiener processes and {en} is
an orthonormal basis in H. The hypotheses of the proposition ensure convergence
of this series in X and the continuity of its sum.
As noted in [63, § 7.2], the condition of sequential completeness can be re-
placed by the existence of a convex compact set of positive γ-measure. However,
it remains unknown whether the only assumption of the existence of the aforemen-
tioned measure γ is sufficient.
5.12(viii). Prohorov locally convex spaces
Here we consider an important class of spaces connected with weak conver-
gence of measures and Theorems 5.3.7 and 5.3.9. The symbol Mr(X) will denote
the set of all Radon measures on a topological space X. Let M+
t (X) denote the
set of all nonnegative tight Baire measures on a topological space X. These spaces
will be equipped with the weak topology.
5.12.41. Definition. (i) A Tychonoff topological space X is called Prohorov
if every set in the space of measures M+
t (X) that is compact in the weak topology
is uniformly tight.
(ii) A Tychonoff topological space X is called sequentially Prohorov if every
sequence of nonnegative tight Baire measures weakly converging to a tight mea-
sure is uniformly tight.
In this definition we could speak of Radon measures, i.e., replace M+
t (X)
by M+
r (X), since every tight Baire measure on X has a unique Radon extension
(see § 5.2).
If in the definition we admit signed measures, then we arrive at the classes of
strongly Prohorov and strongly sequentially Prohorov spaces.
Every complete separable metric space is a Prohorov space; an arbitrary met-
ric space is sequentially Prohorov (see [65, § 8.10(ii)]). Clearly, any Prohorov
space is sequentially Prohorov. However, it is known that the space Q of rational
numbers is sequentially Prohorov, but not Prohorov. We observe that the sequen-
tial Prohorov property is weaker than the requirement that all weakly convergent
sequences of tight measures be uniformly tight (since their limits need not be tight
measures). But for spaces on which all Baire measures are tight, this is the same.
The proof of the following result from Hoffmann-Jørgensen [223] can be
found also in Bogachev [69, Chapter 4].
5.12.42.
Theorem. The class of Prohorov spaces is preserved by taking
(i) countable products, (ii) countable intersections, (iii) closed subspaces and open
subspaces, hence by passing to Gδ-subsets.
In addition, a space is Prohorov provided that every point has a neighborhood
which is a Prohorov space (for example, if it admits a locally finite cover by closed
Prohorov subspaces).

5.12. Complements and exercises
395
We recall that a space X is called hemicompact if it possesses a fundamental
sequence of compact sets Kn (i.e., every compact set in X is contained in some
of Kn).
If the continuity of a function on X follows from its continuity on
all compact sets, then X is called a kR-space.
The latter property holds for
any k-space, i.e., a space in which a set is closed precisely when it has closed
intersections with all compact sets. A nontrivial example: an inductive limit with
compact embeddings (see § 2.7).
5.12.43. Corollary. The class of Prohorov spaces contains all locally compact
spaces and all hemicompact kR-spaces.
The union of two Prohorov subspaces, even if one of them is a point, need
not be Prohorov. In addition, a countable union of closed Prohorov subspaces is
not always Prohorov.
Let us mention some results and examples that enable one to construct broader
classes of Prohorov and sequentially Prohorov spaces by means of the operations
listed in Theorem 5.12.42.
5.12.44. Proposition. Let X be a Tychonoff space possessing a countable
family of closed subspaces Xn with the following property: a function on X is
continuous if and only if its restriction to every Xn is continuous.
(i) If every Xn is Prohorov, then X is Prohorov as well.
(ii) If all Xn are either Polish spaces or compact spaces, then every weakly
fundamental sequence in Mr(X) is uniformly tight. In particular, X is strongly
sequentially Prohorov.
A proof can be found in Bogachev [65, § 8.10(ii)] or [69, Chapter 4].
5.12.45. Example. In the following cases every weakly fundamental sequence
of tight measures on X is uniformly tight:
(i) X is a hemicompact kR-space;
(ii) X is a locally convex space that is the inductive limit of an increasing
sequence of separable Banach spaces En such that the embeddings of En to En+1
are compact operators (by definition X is equipped with the strongest locally
convex topology for which all embeddings En →X are continuous).
PROOF. Case (i) is clear from Proposition 5.12.44. (ii) The results proved in
§ 2.7 yield that X is a k-space with a fundamental sequence of compact sets.
□
5.12.46. Lemma. Let X = ∞
n=1 Xn be a separated locally convex space
that is the strict inductive limit of an increasing sequence of closed subspaces Xn.
If a sequence {μi} of nonnegative Radon measures on X converges weakly to
a Radon measure μ, then, for every ε > 0, there exists n ∈IN such that
μi(X\Xn) < ε for all i ∈IN.
Moreover, for every family {μα} of nonnegative Radon measures on X which
has compact closure in the weak topology in the space Mr(X) and every ε > 0,
there exists n ∈IN such that μα(X\Xn) < ε for all α.
PROOF. Without loss of generality we can assume that μi and μ are probabil-
ity measures (if μi(X) →0, then our assertion is trivial). If the assertion is false,

396
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
then for every n ∈IN there exists i(n) ∈IN with μi(n)(Xn) < 1 −ε. Passing to
a new sequence of measures, we can assume that i(n) = n. Choose m ∈IN such
that μ(Xm) > 1−ε/2. Set k1 := m. Find k2 > m with μm(Xk2) > 1−ε/2. Next
we find a convex symmetric open set U1 in the space Xk2 such that Xm ⊂U1
and μm(U1) < 1 −ε. Such a set U1 exists. Indeed, by the Hahn–Banach theorem
the subspace Xm is the intersection of all closed hyperplanes containing it. By
the Radon property of μm there exists a finite collection of closed hyperplanes
L1, . . . , Lp in Xk2 such that Xm ⊂
p
i=1 Li and μm

p
i=1 Li

< 1 −ε. Then
Li = l−1
i
(0) for some li ∈X∗
k2, and the set 
p
i=1 l−1
i
(−δ, δ) can be taken for U1
for sufficiently small δ > 0. Next we take k3 ⩾k2 with μk2(Xk3) > 1 −ε/2.
There exists a convex symmetric neighborhood of zero W ⊂Xk3 such that
W ∩Xk2 = U1 (see Lemma 1.3.12).
As above, there exists a convex sym-
metric open set V in the space Xk3 such that Xk2 ⊂V and μk2(V ) < 1 −ε.
Set U2 := W ∩V . Continuing the described process by induction, we obtain an
increasing sequence of indices kn ⩾n such that every space Xkn+1 contains a
convex symmetric open set Un for which
1) Un ∩Xkn = Un−1,
2) μkn(Un) < 1 −ε, μkn(Xkn+1) > 1 −ε/2.
By the definition of a strict inductive limit, the set U = ∞
n=1 Un is a neigh-
borhood of zero in X. By construction, for every n we have
μkn(U) < μkn(U ∩Xkn+1) + ε/2 = μkn(Un) + ε/2 < 1 −ε/2,
which contradicts weak convergence (see Theorem 5.3.2), since μ(U) > 1 −ε/2.
In case of a relatively weakly compact family {μα} the reasoning is similar. We
choose a sequence {μα(n)} as above and denote by μ some of its weak limit points.
The previous choice of U leads again to a contradiction with Theorem 5.3.2, since
there exists a subnet {μβ} in {μα(n)} weakly converging to μ.
□
It is not clear whether this lemma is true for signed measures.
5.12.47. Proposition. Suppose that a locally convex space X is the strict
inductive limit of an increasing sequence of its closed subspaces Xn. Then X is
a Prohorov space if all spaces Xn are Prohorov. In particular, if each Xn is a
separable Fr´echet space, then every weakly fundamental sequence of nonnegative
Baire measures on X is uniformly tight.
PROOF. By Lemma 5.12.46 for every ε > 0 the measures from every weakly
compact family M of nonnegative Radon measures on X are ε-concentrated on
some subspace Xn. According to Bogachev [65, Corollary 8.10.2], the restrictions
of the measures from M to Xn form a set with compact closure.
In order to obtain the last assertion, it suffices to recall that the union of a
sequence of separable Fr´echet spaces is Souslin and that Baire measures on it are
Radon (see § 5.2).
□
Obviously, one can multiple the number of such examples by constructing
countable products and passing to closed subsets. We observe that many classical
spaces of functional analysis, such as D(IRd), D′(IRd), S(IRd), and S′(IRd), are
Prohorov spaces, since they can be obtained by means of the indicated operations.

5.12. Complements and exercises
397
5.12.48. Remark. The space D(IR1) is a Prohorov space, but is neither a
kR-space (Exercise 5.12.86), nor a hemicompact space (in addition, it is not σ-
compact).
The absence of a countable family of compact sets which is either
fundamental or exhausting follows from Baire’s theorem applied to the subspaces
Dn(IR1) and the fact that every compact set in D(IR1) is contained in some of the
subspaces Dn(IR1).
Let us discuss a property close to Prohorov’s property. It is related to the
following important result due to A.D. Alexandroff [12, §18], a proof of which
can be found in [65, Proposition 8.1.10]. We recall that a functionally closed set
is the set of zeros of a continuous function.
5.12.49. Proposition. If a sequence of Baire measures μn on a topological
space converges weakly to a measure μ, then this sequence has no eluding load:
lim
n→∞sup
k
|μk|(Zn) = 0
(5.12.9)
for every sequence of pairwise disjoint functionally closed sets Zn with the prop-
erty that the union of every subfamily in {Zn} is functionally closed.
If all measures μn are Radon and the space is completely regular, then the
following fact is true.
5.12.50. Proposition. Suppose that a sequence of Radon measures μn on a
completely regular space X converges weakly to a measure μ. Then
lim
n→∞sup
k
|μk|(Un) = 0
(5.12.10)
for every locally finite sequence of disjoint open sets Un.
PROOF. Here one can apply the same reasoning which proves Alexandroff’s
result (this case is even simpler). Assuming the opposite and passing to a subse-
quence, we obtain compact sets Kn ⊂Un such that |μn|(Kn) ⩾c > 0. There
exist continuous functions ψn : X →[−1, 1] such that ψn = 0 outside of Un
and the integral of ψn against the measure μn is not less than c/2. For every
bounded real sequence {ck} the function ϕ{ck} := 	∞
k=1 ckψk is bounded on X
and continuous due to the local finiteness of {Un}. By condition, the sequence of
the integrals of such function converges. This means that the sequence of vectors
vn = (vn
1 , vn
2 , . . .), where
vn
k =

X
ψk dμn,
is weakly fundamental in the Banach space l1. Indeed, vn ∈l1 by the disjointness
of supports of the functions ψk. Applying to vn the functional on l1 defined by
the bounded sequence {ck} we obtain
∞

k=1
ck

X
ψk dμn =

X
ϕ{ck} dμn.
Since any weakly fundamental sequence in the space l1 must converge in norm
(Exercise 3.12.185), there exists a number N such that |vn
n| < c/4 for all n > N,
which contradicts our assumption.
□

398
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
Note that the limit measure μ is not assumed to be Radon (and can fail indeed
to be Radon).
Using the terminology of A.D. Alexandroff, one can call property (5.12.10)
the absence of eluding load on open sets.
5.12.51. Remark. For every sequence of Radon measures μn on a normal
space property (5.12.10) is equivalent to the property that (5.12.9) holds for every
sequence of pairwise disjoint closed sets Zn with the property that the union of
every subfamily in {Zn} is closed.
Indeed, if {Un} is a locally finite sequence of disjoint open sets, then for
any compact sets Kn ⊂Un we obtain a sequence of sets all unions of which are
closed. Conversely, suppose that for every sequence of locally finite disjoint open
sets Un we have (5.12.10).
It suffices to verify (5.12.9) for compact sets. Suppose we are given a se-
quence of disjoint compact sets Zn all unions of which are closed. Suppose that
μn(Zn) ⩾c > 0. By induction we construct pairwise disjoint open sets Un ⊃Zn.
For example, U1 is constructed as follows: the compact set Z1 and the closed (by
assumption) set ∞
n=2 Zn can be separated by open sets U1 and V1; next, in V1 we
find a neighborhood U2 of the compact set Z2 that is disjoint with some neighbor-
hood of the closed set ∞
n=3 Zn, and so on. Since the space is normal, there is a
continuous function f : X →[0, 1] that equals 1 on the closed union of Zn and
equals 0 outside of the open union of Un. Finally, let ψn = f on Un and ψn = 0
outside of Un. The continuity of the function ψn and the function ϕ{cn} (see the
proof of Proposition 8.1.10 in Bogachev [65]) is verified directly. Thus, for fully
normal spaces (i.e., spaces in which all closed sets are functionally closed) and
Radon measures we have equivalence of property (5.12.9) for general closed sets
and property (5.12.10).
One can consider classes of spaces for which (5.12.9) or (5.12.10) imply
uniform tightness. Let AL be the class of Tychonoff spaces X for which every
sequence of tight Baire measures μn not having eluding load is uniformly tight;
such spaces can be called Alexandroff spaces. Let ALU be the class of Tychonoff
spaces X for which every sequence of Radon measures μn not having eluding
load is uniformly tight; such spaces can be called U-Alexandroff spaces.
By the previous propositions these classes are contained in the class of strongly
sequentially Prohorov spaces. In addition, the spaces of Radon measures on these
spaces are weakly sequentially complete. For fully normal spaces both introduced
properties coincide. It is not difficult to verify that complete metric spaces belong
to AL and ALU: actually, this fact is usually established in the proof of the Pro-
horov theorem for complete metric spaces (see the proof of Theorem 8.6.2 in the
book [65]).
However, an incomplete separable metric space need not be Alexandroff (al-
though it is always sequentially Prohorov). Say, we can take a Lebesgue nonmea-
surable set X in [0, 1] of outer measure 1 and inner measure 0, on which there is a
sequence of measures with finite supports weakly converging to a non-Radon mea-
sure on E induced by Lebesgue measure (see Exercise 5.12.79 or Example 8.4.6

5.12. Complements and exercises
399
in [65]); this sequence is not uniformly tight, but has no eluding load. It is easy to
verify the following properties of the classes AL and ALU (Exercise 5.12.87).
5.12.52. Proposition. (i) Closed subsets of fully normal spaces of class AL
belong to this class.
(ii) The classes AL and ALU admit countable products.
5.12.53. Proposition. Every k-space with a countable fundamental system of
compact sets belongs to AL and ALU.
PROOF. We can assume that the given space X is the union of a strictly in-
creasing sequence of compact sets Kn and that every compact set in X is contained
in some Kn. If X does not belong to ALU, then one can construct a sequence of
Radon measures μk and a sequence of disjoint compact sets Qk with the following
properties: μk(Qk) ⩾c > 0 and each Kn has a nonempty intersection only with
finitely many sets Qk. Hence every union of Qk is closed. Since X is normal
(Exercise 5.12.88), it remains to apply Remark 5.12.51.
□
5.12.54. Corollary. Inductive limits of sequences of locally convex spaces
with compact embeddings belong to AL and ALU.
No explicit descriptions of the class of Prohorov spaces or the class AL are
known.
5.12(ix). Measurable linear and multilinear functions
Let μ be a Radon probability measure on a Hausdorff locally convex space
X with the topological dual X′. A function l: X →IR1 is called proper linear
μ-measurable if it is linear on all of X in the usual sense and is μ-measurable.
The set of all such functions will be denoted by Λ(μ). Let Λ(μ) be the class of all
functions possessing modifications from Λ(μ).
There is also another natural way of defining measurable linear functions. Let
Λ0(μ) denote the closure of X′ in L0(μ), i.e., l ∈Λ0(μ) if there exists a sequence
of functions ln ∈X′ converging to l in measure. Since {ln} contains an almost
everywhere convergent subsequence, we can assume that ln →l a.e.
5.12.55. Lemma. The inclusion Λ0(μ) ⊂Λ(μ) is true.
PROOF. Let ln →l in measure, where ln ∈X′. As already noted, we can
assume that ln →l a.e., then the linear subspace X0 of all x for which there
exists a finite limit l0(x) = lim
n→∞ln(x) has full measure. It is clear that on X0
the function l0 is linear and measurable. It remains to take its arbitrary linear
extension to X.
□
Several examples are known in which Λ(μ) ̸= Λ0(μ) even for a symmet-
ric measure μ, see Kanter [258], [259], Skorohod [469], Smole´nski [473], and
Urbanik [534].
One of such examples is the distribution of any process with
independent increments that is stable of order α < 2.
Similarly one can introduce two classes of measurable linear mappings from
X to a locally convex space Y . The class Λ(μ, Y ) consists of μ-measurable map-
pings to Y , equipped with the σ-algebra σ(Y ′), possessing a linear version. The

400
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
class Λ0(μ, Y ) consists of mappings that are μ-a.e. limits of sequences of contin-
uous linear operators. Certainly, one can even take the smaller class Λ1(μ, Y ) of
mappings which μ-a.e. have the form Ax = lim
n→∞Anx, where An is a continuous
linear operator with a finite-dimensional range.
Let us consider the following property of a mapping A:
(RB) there exists a separable reflexive Banach space (E, ∥· ∥E) of full mea-
sure such that it is compactly embedded into X and A has a version that is a
continuous linear operator from the space (E, ∥· ∥E) to the space Y .
5.12.56. Theorem. (Yurova [576]) Let X and Y be separable Fr´echet spaces,
let μ be a Borel probability measure on X, and let An : X →Y be a sequence
of continuous linear operators such that Anx →Ax almost everywhere. Then
there exist a separable reflexive Banach space (E, ∥· ∥E) of full measure com-
pactly embedded into X and a continuous linear operator A: E →Y that almost
everywhere coincides with A, i.e., the operator A has property (RB).
PROOF. We know (see Theorem 5.12.35) that there exists a separable reflex-
ive Banach space (E0, ∥· ∥E0) of full measure compactly embedded into X. It
is obvious that on (E0, ∥· ∥E0) the operators An are continuous and Anx →Ax
almost everywhere on E0. Hence it suffices to establish the existence of a Ba-
nach space E ⊂E0 with all necessary properties with the exception of reflexivity
(since in that space we can find a smaller reflexive space). Suppose first that Y is
Banach. We show that there exists a subsequence of indices {nk} such that
∞

k=1
2k∥Ank+1x −Ankx∥2
Y < ∞
(5.12.11)
almost everywhere. We observe that for this it is sufficient to have almost every-
where
∞

k=1
2k∥Ank+1x −Ax∥2
Y < ∞.
Let us prove the existence of {nk}.
Pointwise convergence An →A yields
convergence in measure, therefore, for every k there is nk such that μ (Ωk) < 2−k,
where
Ωk = {x: ∥Ankx −Ax∥2
Y > 2−2k}.
Set Λ = 
∞
N=1
∞
k=N Ωk. Since μ
∞
k=N Ωk

⩽21−N, we have μ(Λ) = 0. If
x ∈X\Λ, then
∞

k=1
2k∥Ank+1x −Ankx∥2
Y < ∞,
as required. Let us consider the space E ⊂E0 of all vectors x such that (5.12.11)
holds. This linear subspace has full measure; we define the following norm on it:
∥x∥E = ∥x∥E0 +
 ∞

k=1
2k∥Ank+1x −Ankx∥2
Y
1/2
.

5.12. Complements and exercises
401
The space (E, ∥· ∥E) is complete. Indeed, let {xn} be a Cauchy sequence in E.
Then, as it follows from the expression for the norm on E, it is Cauchy in E0.
Since E0 is complete, this sequence has some limit x in E0. Let us show that
∥xn −x∥E →0. Let ε > 0. Then, for some N, for all m, n > N we have
∞

k=1
2k∥(Ank+1 −Ank)(xn −xm)∥2
Y < ε.
Passing to the limit as m →∞and taking into account the continuity of the
operators Ak, we obtain the estimate
∞

k=1
2k∥(Ank+1 −Ank)(xn −x)∥2
Y ⩽ε.
Hence x ∈E0 and ∥xn −x∥E →0. Thus, (E, ∥· ∥E) is a Banach space contin-
uously embedded into (E0, ∥· ∥E0) and compactly embedded into X. It follows
from (5.12.11) that μ(E) = 1. Let us consider the space Z = E0
  
l2 Yk,
where Yk = (Y, 2k∥· ∥Y ) and the l2-sum of the spaces Yk is the space of se-
quences z = (zk)∞
k=1, where zk ∈Yk, with finite norm
	∞
k=1 ∥zk∥2
Yk
1/2. It is
readily seen that it separable, since E0 and Y are separable. The mapping
T : E →Z,
Tx =

x, (An2 −An1)x, (An3 −An2)x, (An4 −An3)x, . . .

establishes a linear isometry between the space E and a subspace in the separable
space Z, therefore, E is separable as well.
For every x ∈E, the sequence
{Ankx} is obviously Cauchy in Y , hence it converges in Y . We further consider
the version of A equal to the limit of {Ank} on E. For this version we have the
equality ∥Ax∥Y = lim
k→∞∥Ankx∥Y , whence on account of the equality
Ankx = (Ankx −Ank−1x) + · · · + (An2x −An1x) + An1x
we obtain that
∥Ax∥Y ⩽∥An1x∥Y +
∞

k=1
∥Ank+1x −Ankx∥Y
⩽∥An1x∥Y +
 ∞

k=1
2−k1/2 ∞

k=1
2k∥Ank+1x −Ax∥2
Y
1/2
⩽∥An1x∥Y + ∥x∥E.
Therefore, the operator A is continuous from (E, ∥· ∥E) to (Y, ∥· ∥Y ).
We now turn to a general Fr´echet space Y and explain necessary changes in
our reasoning. We can assume that the topology in Y is defined by a sequence of
seminorms pn with pn ⩽pn+1. Now in place of estimate (5.12.11) we can obtain
that almost everywhere
∞

k=1
2kp2
k(Ank+1x −Ankx) < ∞.
(5.12.12)

402
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
A norm on the space E will be defined by the formula
∥x∥E = ∥x∥E0 +
 ∞

k=1
2kp2
k(Ank+1x −Ankx)
1/2
.
As above, E with this norm is complete and separable. The operator A: E →Y
is now defined by the equality Ax = lim
k→∞Ankx. Since for any fixed m and all
k > m we have the estimates
pm(Ank+1x) ⩽pm(Ank+1x−Ankx) + · · · + pm(Anm+1x−Anmx) + pm(Anmx)
⩽pk(Ank+1x−Ankx) + · · · + pm(Anm+1x−Anmx) + pm(Anmx)
⩽∥x∥E + pm(Anmx),
the operator A is continuous.
□
The proven result can be slightly generalized.
5.12.57. Corollary. In place of the separability of the spaces X and Y it is
enough to require that the measure μ be Radon on X.
PROOF. In this case the measure μ is concentrated on some separable closed
subspace X0 and the closure of the linear span of the separable sets An(X0) is a
separable Fr´echet space.
□
The following fact is obvious from the definition of the norm in E.
5.12.58. Corollary. If Y is a Banach space, then the space E mentioned in
the theorem can be taken such that some subsequence {Ank} will converge on E
in the operator norm.
5.12.59. Theorem. (Yurova [576]) Let (E, ∥· ∥) be a separable reflexive
Banach space compactly embedded into a locally convex space X and let A be
a continuous linear operator from (E, ∥· ∥) to a Banach space (Y, ∥· ∥Y ) with
a Schauder basis. Then there exists a sequence of finite-dimensional continuous
linear operators An : X →(Y, ∥· ∥Y ) pointwise converging to A on the space E.
PROOF. Let us first consider the case Y = R.
Let V be the closed unit
ball in (E, ∥· ∥) and let B∗be the closed unit ball in the dual space E∗; then
E = ∞
n=1 nV . Since E is reflexive and compactly embedded into X, the set V
is compact in X. It is obvious that the norm on E coincides with the Minkowski
functional pV of the set V . Applying Proposition 2.5.13, we obtain that the set of
all functionals from B∗that are continuous with respect to the topology induced
from X is dense in B∗with respect to the topology of pointwise convergence on V .
Since E is separable, the topology of pointwise convergence on V is metrizable.
Therefore, any element of the closure is the limit of some sequence. In our case,
if f ∈E∗, then f/∥f∥∈B∗, hence there exists a sequence gn ∈B∗converging
to f/∥f∥pointwise and consisting of functionals continuous on E in the topology
induced from X. It is clear that ∥f∥gn →f. The functionals ∥f∥gn can be
extended to all of X by continuity. The case Y = Rk is easily deduced from the
proven result, which gives the case where Y is finite-dimensional. Let now Y be a

5.12. Complements and exercises
403
space with a Schauder basis {en}. Let Pk be the projection from Y onto the linear
span Yk of the vectors e1, . . . , ek. This is a continuous operator, hence for every
finite-dimensional continuous operator PkA there exists a sequence of continuous
operators Ak,n : X →Y pointwise converging to PkA on E. It remains to a
choose a subsequence {Ak,nk} converging to A pointwise on E. For example, we
can use the metrizability of pointwise convergence on V .
□
Two previous theorems imply the following assertion.
5.12.60. Corollary. If X is a Fr´echet space and Y is a Banach space with a
Schauder basis, then the inclusion to Λ0(μ, Y ) is equivalent to property (RB). In
this case Λ0(μ, Y ) = Λ1(μ, Y ).
5.12.61. Remark. (i) The space E in Theorem 5.12.56 can be taken Hilbert
if X and Y are Hilbert. For this we first take a Hilbert space E0.
(ii) It is readily seen that the last theorem and its corollary remain valid for any
Fr´echet space Y with a basis. It also is clear that in Theorem 5.12.59 it suffices to
have a sequence of continuous finite-dimensional operators on Y pointwise con-
verging to the identity operator. On the other hand, as observed by A.N. Plichko,
taking a separable reflexive Banach space E = Y without the latter property and a
compact injective operator j : E →l2, we see that there are no finite-dimensional
operators An : l2 →Y whose restrictions to E embedded into l2 (more precisely,
to j(E)) converge pointwise to the identity operator A: E →E = Y (more pre-
cisely, j−1 : j(E) →E). Actually, if on E the identity operator is not a pointwise
limit of a sequence of compact operators, then there are no even continuous oper-
ators An pointwise converging to A, since the compositions j(An) are compact.
Herer [219] and Okazaki [373] considered the so-called stochastic bases in a
separable Fr´echet space X with a Borel probability measure μ, i.e., systems of
vectors ϕn ∈X such that there exist fn ∈X′ with fn(ϕk) = δnk such that for
Pnx := 	n
i=1 fi(x)ϕi we have Pnx →x for μ-a.e. x. The next two theorems
were obtained in [373].
5.12.62. Theorem. If a Radon probability measure μ on a separable Fr´echet
space X has a stochastic basis, then there exists a Banach space of full measure
continuously embedded into X and possessing a Schauder basis.
PROOF. By Egorov’s theorem there exist increasing compact sets Kn on
which convergence Pjx →x is uniform. Set P0 = I. The topology of the space
X can be defined by some increasing sequence of seminorms qn. By uniform con-
vergence the quantities Cn = 1+supx∈Kn, j⩾0 qn(Pjx) are finite. Let us consider
the space X0 of all vectors x ∈X with finite norm
∥x∥=
∞

n=1
2−nC−1
n
sup
j⩾0
qn(Pjx).
This is a norm indeed, since the functions qn(Pjx) are seminorms and if ∥x∥= 0,
then qn(x) = 0 for all n, hence x = 0. It is clear that Kn ⊂X0 for all n, hence
μ(X0) = 1. The continuity of qn and Pj implies that the set {x: ∥x∥⩽1} is

404
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
closed in X, hence X0 is Banach. The embedding of X0 into X is continuous,
since for each fixed n we have qn(x) ⩽2nCn∥x∥.
We observe that ∥Pmx∥⩽∥x∥for all m, since PjPmx = Pmx for all j ⩾m,
whence we obtain supj⩾0 qn(PjPmx) ⩽supj⩾0 qn(Pjx). Thus, the operators Pm
are finite-dimensional projections in X0 with unit norm.
The set E = {x ∈X0 :
lim
n→∞∥Pnx −x∥= 0} is a closed linear subspace
in X0 and hence is also a Banach space. Moreover, Km ⊂E for all m. Indeed,
for any given ε > 0 there exists a number n1 > m with 	
n>n1 2−n < ε/4,
next, there is a number j1 such that qn(Pjx −x) < ε/2 for all j ⩾j1 for
every n = 1, . . . , n1. Then for any j ⩾j1 we obtain ∥Pjx −x∥⩽ε, so that
qn(Pjx) ⩽Cn for all j ⩾0 and n ⩾m by inclusion x ∈Km ⊂Kn. Therefore,
E is a Banach space of full measure possessing a Schauder basis.
□
It is not clear whether such a space with a Schauder basis can be found
reflexive and compactly embedded. In addition, it is not clear whether it can be
chosen such that the measure μ on it would have finite strong moment of order r,
provided this is the case on the original space.
5.12.63.
Theorem. Let μ be a Radon probability measure on a Fr´echet
space X such that all continuous seminorms belong to L2(μ), all elements of X′
possess zero means and there is a sequence of functionals fn ∈X′ such that its
elements are independent random variables with respect to μ and their linear span
is dense in X′ with respect to the norm in L2(μ). Then there is a stochastic basis
in X. Therefore, there is a Banach space of full measure having a Schauder basis
and continuously embedded into X .
PROOF. It is clear from what we have proved above that we can pass to
the case of a separable reflexive Banach space X. Let us take a sequence {fn}
in X′ that is an orthonormal basis in X′ with the inner product from L2(μ). Let
Kμ : X′ →X be the covariance operator of μ. We set ϕk = Kμfk and show that
this is a stochastic basis. The σ-algebra generated by the functionals f1, . . . , fn
will be denoted by Fn.
Let us observe that by our assumptions the element Pnx := 	n
i=1 fi(x)ϕi is
the conditional expectation of the identity mapping with respect to Fn. Indeed, for
every function ψ of the form ψ(x) = g

f1(x), . . . , fn(x)

, where the function g
is bounded and continuous on IRn, and every l ∈X′ we have

X
l(x)ψ(x) μ(dx) =

X
l(Pnx)ψ(x) μ(dx),
since by independence of fn this equality is true for l = fj, and for any element
of X′ it remains true by the density of the linear span of {fn} in X′ with respect
to the norm in L2(μ). In addition, the Borel σ-algebra B(X) is generated by
the union of Fn. It is known (see Vakhania, Tarieladze, Chobanyan [538, Theo-
rem 4.2b]) that this yields convergence ∥x −Pnx∥→0 almost everywhere.
□
The result from Fonf, Johnson, Pisier, Preiss [173] mentioned in § 5.12(vi)
implies that stochastic bases do not always exist. Such bases exist for Gaussian
measures in general spaces.

5.12. Complements and exercises
405
5.12.64. Example. Let γ be a centered Radon Gaussian measure on a locally
convex space X and A a measurable linear operator on X with values in a sep-
arable Fr´echet space Y . Then (see § 5.7), there is an orthonormal basis {en} in
the Cameron–Martin space H(γ) of γ and a sequence {ξn} ⊂X∗, orthonormal
in L2(γ), such that the vectors Anx = 	n
k=1 ξk(x)Aek converge to Ax almost
everywhere. It is clear that An are continuous linear operators. If X is also a
Fr´echet space, then by Theorem 5.12.56 there exist a separable reflexive Banach
space (E, ∥·∥E) of full measure compactly embedded into X and a continuous lin-
ear operator A: E →Y almost everywhere equal to A. In particular, this implies
the well-known fact that for any Radon Gaussian measure on a Fr´echet space X
the space of measurable linear functionals Λ0(γ) (which coincides with Λ(γ)) co-
incides also with the space of linear functions possessing continuous restrictions
to compactly embedded reflexive separable Banach spaces of full measure.
We observe that in the space Λ0(μ) one can consider the smaller subspaces
Λp(μ) consisting of the limits of sequences of continuous linear functionals con-
verging in Lp(μ) (certainly, this can be done for measures μ with X′ ⊂Lp(μ)).
In the case of a Gaussian measure, all spaces Λ(μ), Λ0(μ), Λp(μ) coincide. It
would be interesting to enlarge the class of measures for which such coincidence
holds. It is not clear whether the classes Λ(μ) and Λ0(μ) can differ for a convex
Radon measure μ (but for it we always have Λ0(μ) = Λp(μ)).
The situation with measurable polynomials of orders greater than one is more
complicated. Here it is natural to introduce the following spaces of polynomials
(for another approach, see Smolyanov [479] and Exercise 5.12.113):
1) the space Pk(μ) consists of the limits in measure of sequences of real
polynomials of the form f(l1, . . . , ln), where li ∈X′ and f is a polynomial on
IRn of order k;
2) the space Pk,p(μ) consists of the limits in Lp(μ) of sequences of real
polynomials of the form f(l1, . . . , ln), where li ∈X′ and f is a polynomial on
IRn of order k (this is meaningful for measures μ with X′ ⊂Lkp(μ));
3) Pk(μ) consists of μ-measurable functions possessing versions that are poly-
nomials of order k on X in the usual algebraic sense.
In addition, in 1) and 2) in place of finite-dimensional polynomials one could
take any continuous polynomials of order k. In the Gaussian case this does not
enlarge the classes Pk(μ) and Pk,p(μ), but the general case has not been studied
so far. In particular, it would be interesting to study the question about the relation
between the spaces Pk(μ) and Pk(μ) for convex measures. The problem is open
even for k = 1. However, the following important result has been obtained in
Arutyunyan, Yaroslavtsev [26]. It shows that always Pk(μ) ⊂Pk(μ).
5.12.65. Theorem. Let X be a linear space. (i) Let n∈IN and let fk : Xn →IR
be a sequence of multilinear functions converging on some set Ω ⊂Xn to a func-
tion f0. Then there is a multilinear function f : Xn →IR such that f|Ω = f0.
(ii) Let {fk} be a sequence of polynomials of degree d on E converging to a
function f0 on some set Ω ⊂E. Then there is a polynomial g of degree d such
that g|Ω = f0|Ω.

406
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
Therefore, if μ is a Radon probability measure on a locally convex space X
and {fk} is a sequence of μ-measurable polynomials of degree d converging in
measure to a function f, then f has a version that is a polynomial of degree d.
PROOF. (i) Let {eα}α∈A be a Hamel basis in X. Let us consider the space
IR(An) of all real functions on An and its linear subspace Y generated by the
indicator functions Iα1,...,αn of points (α1, . . . , αn) ∈An. The family of these
indicator functions is a Hamel basis in Y . We now define linear functionals Fk
on Y by setting Fk(Iα1,...,αn) = fk(eα1, . . . , eαn). Let us consider the subspace
Y0 ⊂Y of all points at which the sequence {Fk} has a finite limit. It is clear
that Y0 is a linear subspace and the formula F0(y) = lim
k→∞Fk(y) defines a linear
functional F0 on it. Let F be a linear extension of the functional F0 to all of Y .
We define a multilinear function f on the space Xn by means of the equalities
f(eα1, . . . , eαn) = F(Iα1,...,αn). Let us show that this is the desired extension
of f0.
Let x1, . . . , xn ∈Ω.
The elements xi can be represented in the form
xi = 	m
j=1 xi
jej, where {e1, . . . , em} ⊂{eα} is a finite set and we shall assume
that {1, . . . , m} ⊂A. Then, by the linearity of fk in every variable, we obtain
fk(x1, . . . , xn) =

j1,...,jn⩽m
x1
j1 · · · xn
jnfk(ej1, . . . , ejn),
and hence
f0(x1, . . . , xn) = lim
k→∞

j1,...,jn⩽m
x1
j1 · · · xn
jnfk(ej1, . . . , ejn).
On the other hand, by the definition of the functions Fk we have
Fk


j1,...,jn⩽m
x1
j1 · · · xn
jnIj1,...,jn

=

j1,...,jn⩽m
x1
j1 · · · xn
jnfk(ej1, . . . , ejn),
whence it follows that
y :=

j1,...,jn⩽m
x1
j1 · · · xn
jnIj1,...,jn ∈Y0,
in addition, F0(y) = lim
k→∞Fk(y) = f0(x1, . . . , xn). Finally, by the definition of
the function f and the linearity of F we have
f(x1, . . . , xn) =

j1,...,jn⩽m
x1
j1 · · · xn
jnF(Ij1,...,jn) = F(y) = F0(y),
therefore, f(x1, . . . , xn) = f0(x1, . . . , xn).
(ii) There are i-linear forms li
k such that fk(x) = 	d
i=0 li
k(x, . . . , x). For
each i consider the space IR(Ai) and its subspace Y i constructed in the same
manner as Y in the proof of (i). Set Z = IR×Y 1 ×· · ·×Y d. For every k and
i = 1, . . . , d consider the linear functional Li
k : Z →IR such that its restriction to
the space Y i, regarded as a subspace in Z, is defined as follows:
Li
k|Y i(Ieα1,...,eαi) = li
k(eα1, . . . , eαi),

5.12. Complements and exercises
407
where Ieα1,...,eαi : Ai →IR is the indicator function of the point (eα1, . . . , eαi)∈Ai
in the space Y i. This functional is defined by zero on the algebraic complement
to the space Y i and is extended to Z by linearity. Let L0
k : IR →IR, L0
k(x) = l0
kx,
where l0
k is a constant. We assume further that L0
k is a linear function on Z equal
to zero on the algebraic complement of the subspace Y0 := IR. Finally, set
Fk(z) :=
d

i=0
Li
k(z),
which gives a linear functional on Z.
Let us consider the subspace Z0 ⊂Z of all points at which the sequence
{Fk} has a finite limit. It is clear that Z0 is a linear subspace and the formula
F0(z) = lim
k→∞Fk(z) defines a linear functional on Z0. We extend F0 to a linear
functional F on all of Z. The functional F is decomposed into a sum of linear
functionals depending only on the projections onto Y i:
F(z) =
d

i=0
Li(z) =
d

i=0
Li|Y i(zi),
where zi ∈Y i, z = (z0, . . . , zd). For i ⩽d, by means of the equalities
li(α1, . . . , αi) = Li|Yi(Iα1,...,αi),
l0 = L0|Y0(1)
we define the multilinear functions li on Xn. Finally, we define a polynomial on
the space X as follows: f(x) = 	d
i=0 li(x, . . . , x). Let us show that this is the
desired extension of f0. Every element x ∈Ω can be represented in the form
x = 	m
s=1 xses, where es ∈{eα} (as above, we assume that {1, . . . , m} ⊂A).
We show that f(x) = f0(x). By the linearity of li
k in every variable we obtain
li
k(x, . . . , x) =

j1,...,ji⩽m
xj1 · · · xjili
k(ej1, . . . , eji),
whence it follows that
f0(x) = lim
k→∞
d

i=0

j1,...,ji⩽m
xj1 · · · xjili
k(ej1, . . . , eji).
On the other hand, by the definition of the functions Li
k we have
d

i=0
Li
k
 
j1,...,ji
xj1 · · · xjiIαj1,...,αji

=
d

i=0

j1,...,ji⩽m
xj1 · · · xjili
k(ej1, . . . , eji),
whence it follows that for y = (y0, . . . , yd), where
yi :=

j1,...,ji
xj1 · · · xjiIαj1,...,αji ∈Y i,
we have the equality
Fk(y) =
d

i=0

j1,...,ji⩽m
xj1 · · · xjili
k(ej1, . . . , eji) = fk(x).

408
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
Hence f0(x) = lim
k→∞fk(x) = lim
k→∞Fk(y) = F0(y) and y ∈Z0. Finally, by the
definition of the function F we obtain
f(x) =
d

i=0

j1,...,ji⩽m
xj1 · · · xjiLi
k(Ij1,...,ji) = F(z) = F0(z),
therefore, f(x) = f0(x).
□
Note that this result was a long standing problem even for a Gaussian measure
μ on a separable Hilbert space (and even for d = 2). In relation to this result, see
also Arutyunyan, Kosov, Yaroslavtsev [25].
Let us mention the following important result due to Bobkov [56].
5.12.66. Theorem. Set C := 22/ ln 2. Let ν be a convex measure on IRn and
let f be a polynomial on IRn of degree at most k. Then for all p ∈[1, ∞) one has
∥f∥Lp(ν) ⩽pCk∥f∥L1(ν).
In particular, on the space Pk(IRn) of polynomials on IRn of degree at most k
all Lp(ν)-norms are equivalent with constants independent of dimension n, but
dependent only on k and p.
Bobkov’s estimate yields the following result (obtained in Berezhnoy [51]).
5.12.67. Theorem. Let μ be a convex probability measure on a Hausdorff
locally convex space X. Then the following assertions are true.
(i) For every p ∈[1, ∞) we have Pk(μ) = Pk,p(μ) and
∥f∥Lp(ν) ⩽pCk∥f∥L1(ν),
f ∈Pk(μ).
(5.12.13)
(ii) On the space Pk(μ), the norms of all Lp(μ) with p ∈[1, +∞) are equiv-
alent, moreover, it is complete with respect to each of them.
(iii) If a sequence {fj} ⊂Pk(μ) converges in measure, then it converges in
all spaces Lp(μ), p ∈[1, +∞).
PROOF. Let Pfin
k
be the class of finite-dimensional polynomials on X of
the form f = f0(l1, . . . , ln), where li ∈X′ and f0 is a polynomial on IRn
of degree k.
Since every convex measure on IRn has all moments, we have
Pfin
k
⊂Lp(μ) for all p < ∞. Suppose that ϕj ∈Pfin
k
converge in measure to ϕ.
The previous theorem gives (5.12.13) for all ψ∈Pfin
k
. This estimate holds for
p = 2 and ψ = ϕj, which yields the uniform boundedness of ∥ϕj∥L1(μ). Indeed,
otherwise we can assume that ∥ϕj∥L1(μ) →∞. Then the functions ϕj/∥ϕj∥L1(μ)
converge to zero in measure. Their norms in L1(μ) equal 1 and the norms in
L2(μ) are dominated by 2Ck. Hence they converge to zero in L1(μ), which is
impossible. The boundedness in Lp(μ) along with convergence in measure gives
convergence in Lr(μ) for any r < p. Since this is true for all p < ∞, the sequence
{ϕj} converges to ϕ in all Lp(μ). Thus, we have ϕ ∈Lp(μ) and (5.12.13) for
all ψ ∈Pk(μ). Applying this reasoning to the whole class Pk(μ), we obtain
assertions (i)–(iii). The equivalence of all Lp-norms follows from (5.12.13) and
the bound ∥f∥L1(μ) ⩽∥f∥Lp(μ). The completeness of Pk(μ) with respect to all
these norms is clear from the proven facts.
□

5.12. Complements and exercises
409
The following result from Arutyunyan, Kosov [24] has a more involved proof.
5.12.68. Theorem. Let μ be a convex Radon measure on a locally convex
space E and let f be a μ-measurable polynomial of degree d. Then f ∈Lp(μ) for
every p > 0. Moreover, if f does not coincide with a constant a.e., the following
estimate is true:
∥f∥Lp(μ) ⩽k(f)cd
pd

1 + Γ(pd)
1/p,
where k(f) is the number from the previous corollary. If pd ⩾1, the following
estimate is also true:
∥f∥Lp(μ) ⩽k(f)(c1pd)d,
where c1 > 1 is a universal constant independent of d and p.
Yet another result from [24] says that for limits in measure of continuous
polynomials the Lp-norms on the whole space are equivalent to the Lp-norms on
arbitrary subsets of positive measure.
5.12.69. Theorem. Let μ be a convex Radon measure on a locally convex
space E and let U be a measurable set of a positive measure. Let f be a limit in
measure of a sequence of continuous polynomials of degree d. Then
μ(U)d+1

E
|f| dμ ⩽(Cd)2d

U
|f| dμ,
where C is a universal constant. In other words,
∥f∥L1(μ) ⩽(Cd)2d
μ(U)d ∥f∥L1(μU),
where μU(A) = μ(A ∩U)
μ(U)
.
The following 0 −1 law for polynomials is also proved in [24].
5.12.70. Theorem. Let μ be a convex Radon measure on a locally convex
space, and let f and fn, where n ∈IN, be measurable polynomials of degree d.
Then, for every constant C, μ

{x: f(x) = C}

equals either 0 or 1. Moreover,
μ

{x: ∃lim
n→∞fn(x)}

also equals either 0 or 1.
See also the survey Bogachev [68] and Yurova [577].
5.12(x). Relations between different σ-algebras
Let X be a locally convex space.
As we have seen, for the purposes of
measure theory it is useful to consider the σ-algebra σ(X′) generated by cylin-
ders in X, the Borel σ-algebra B(X), and the Baire σ-algebra Ba(X). If we
equip X with other locally convex topologies, the corresponding triples of σ-
algebras arise (certainly, for topologies that agree with duality σ(X′) does not
change). If X is a separable Fr´echet space, then these three σ-algebras coincide,
and in metrizable spaces B(X) and Ba(X) coincide. In the general case these σ-
algebras can differ. Hence it is useful to have nontrivial cases of their coincidence.
We mention some of them. The following important result goes back to Bok-
shtein [58] and Mibu [341] (see also Arkhangel’skii, Ponomarev [22, Chapter II,
§ 5, Exercise 386]) and describes the structure of Baire sets in product spaces (not
necessarily locally convex).

410
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
5.12.71.
Theorem. Let {Xt}t∈T be a collection of separable spaces, let
Y be a separable metric space, and let F : 
t∈T Xt →Y be a continuous map-
ping. Then there exist a finite or countable set S ⊂T and a continuous map
F0 : 
s∈S Xs →Y such that F = F0◦πS, where πS : 
t∈T Xt →
s∈S Xs is
the natural projection. In particular, Ba

t∈T Xt

is generated by the coordinate
mappings to the spaces

Xt, Ba(Xt)

.
This assertion is based on the following interesting fact (it was this fact that
was discovered by M.F. Bokshtein), which we need below (for the proof, see [22,
Chapter II, § 5, Exercise 385]).
5.12.72.
Proposition. The closure of every open set U in the product of
separable spaces Xt, t ∈T, depends only on countably many coordinates, i.e.,
for some at most countable set S ⊂T it has the form Z ×
t̸∈S Xt, where Z is
closed in 
s∈S Xs. An equivalent assertion: for any disjoint open sets U and V
in 
t∈T Xt, there exists an at most countable set S ⊂T such that 
s∈S Xs
contains disjoint open sets U and V with U ⊂π−1
S (U), V ⊂π−1
S (V ).
The next result (following from Theorem 5.12.71) is due to Edgar [148].
5.12.73. Theorem. If X is equipped with the topology σ(X, X′), then the
corresponding Baire σ-algebra coincides with σ(X′).
PROOF. It is clear that σ(X′) is contained in the Baire σ-algebra of the space
X with the weak topology. To verify the inverse inclusion it suffices to show
that, for every function F on X continuous in the topology σ(X, X′), the set
{x ∈X : F(x) > 0} belongs to σ(X′). Let us embed X into IRT as a dense
linear subspace, taking for T a Hamel basis in X′; the density follows from the
fact that for every finite collection t1, . . . , tn ∈T and any numbers c1, . . . , cn there
exists a vector v ∈X such that ti(v) = ci. Moreover, after this embedding, the
weak topology in X coincides with the one induced from IRT . For any rational
number r let Ur = {x ∈X : F(x) > r}, Vr = {x ∈X : F(x) < r}. Let
us take open sets Ur, Vr in IRT with Ur ∩X = Ur, Vr ∩X = Vr. We have
Ur ∩Vr = ∅, since X is dense in IRT . Now we apply Proposition 5.12.72, which
gives a countable set S and open sets U ′
r, V ′
r in IRS such that U ′
r ∩V ′
r = ∅,
Ur ⊂π−1
S (U ′
r), Vr ⊂π−1
S (V ′
r). The open sets U ′
r, V ′
r in the metrizable space IRS
are Baire, hence X ∩π−1
S (U ′
r) and X ∩π−1
S (V ′
r) belong to σ(X′). It remains to
observe that {x ∈X : F(x) > 0} coincides with the union of the sets X∩π−1
S (U ′
r)
over all rational numbers r > 0, which is verified directly.
□
Let us mention the following fact (see Bogachev [65, Chapter 6]).
5.12.74. Theorem. If X is a Souslin locally convex space, then we have the
equalities σ(X′) = B(X) = Ba(X).
5.12.75. Proposition. Suppose that a Banach space X with the closed unit
ball U and unit sphere S is equipped with a locally convex topology τ such that
the ball U is closed in τ. Then the mapping (t, u) →tu is a Borel isomorphism
of the spaces

(0, +∞)×S, B

(0, +∞)×(S, τ)

and

X\{0}, B(X\{0}, τ)

.

5.12. Complements and exercises
411
PROOF. Since the topology τ is locally convex, the indicated mapping is
continuous with respect to this topology on X, hence it is Borel measurable. The
inverse mapping has the form x →(∥x∥, x/∥x∥). It follows from our assumption
that the norm is Borel measurable on (X, τ), whence it follows that the inverse
mapping is Borel measurable.
□
Note that we have the equality
B

(0, +∞)×(S, τ)

= B

(0, +∞)

⊗B(S, τ),
and the same equality is true for any separable metric space in place of (0,+∞),
see, e.g., [65, Lemma 6.4.2].
5.12.76. Corollary. Let τ1 and τ2 be two locally convex topologies on a
Banach space X such that the closed unit ball is closed in both of them and they
coincide on the unit sphere. Then B(X, τ1) = B(X, τ2).
For example, if X is Hilbert, then for τ1 and τ2 one can take the norm topology
and the weak topology (Exercise 3.12.49).
Let us make a remark on measurability of operations in a locally convex
space E equipped with a σ-algebra E. The following subtlety arises here: the
product E ⊗E can be smaller than the corresponding σ-algebra in E ×E. For
example, this can happen for the Borel σ-algebra B(E), see [65, v. 2, p. 15]. As
a result, for a nonseparable Banach space X the addition operation X ×X →X
can fail to be measurable with respect to B(X)⊗B(X) and B(X). Note that
it is shown in Talagrand [513] that X is a measurable vector space, i.e., the
operations (t, x, y) →tx + y, IR1×X ×X →X are measurable with respect to
B(IR1)⊗B(X)⊗B(X) and B(X), precisely when B(X)⊗B(X) = B(X×X). In
the same paper, the existence of a nonseparable Banach space X satisfying this
equality is proved. In addition, it is shown there that the continuum hypothesis
implies the measurability (in the indicated sense) of the space l∞. Certainly, the
operations, being continuous, become measurable if X ×X is considered with its
Borel σ-algebra. It is also worth noting that, according to Talagrand [512], in the
space l∞the Borel σ-algebras corresponding to the weak topology and the norm
topology are different. However, there are no such measurability problems for the
σ-algebra σ(E′) generated by E′: for all locally convex spaces X and Y we have
σ

(X×Y )′
= σ(X′)⊗σ(Y ′),
Since (X×Y )′ = X′×Y ′, the σ-algebra σ

(X×Y )′
is generated by sets of the
form {(x, y): f(x) + g(y) < c}, where f ∈X′, g ∈Y ′, but sets of this form can
be written as a countable unions of sets {x: f(x) ∈Cj}×{y: g(y) ∈Dj}, by
writing the half-plane {(s, t): s + t < c} as the union of a countable collection of
squares Cj×Dj.
According to Fremlin [177], there exists a Banach space X in which the Borel
σ-algebra is not generated by balls. However, as shown in Talagrand [511], there
exists a nonseparable metric space the Borel σ-algebra of which is generated by
balls.

412
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
5.12(xi). Radonifying operators
Let X and Y be locally convex spaces. An operator T ∈L(X, Y ) is called
radonifying if it transforms every probability cylindrical measure on X to a mea-
sure on Y possessing a Radon extension. If this is true for all cylindrical measures
with weak moment of some order p ∈(0, ∞), then T is called p-radonifying;
finally, if this property holds for Gaussian cylindrical measures, then the oper-
ator T is called γ-radonifying.
The classes of radonifying, p-radonifying and
γ-radonifying operators are denoted by the symbols R(X, Y ), Rp(X, Y ), and
Rγ(X, Y ), respectively. The class Rp,q(X, Y ), where 0 ⩽q ⩽p, consists of the
operators T ∈L(X, Y ) transforming every probability cylindrical measure with
weak moment of order p to a measure with a Radon extension and strong moment
of order q.
For Hilbert spaces X and Y , the class of radonifying operators coincides with
the class of γ-radonifying operators and with the class of Hilbert–Schmidt oper-
ators. A nontrivial example of a noncompact radonifying operator is the identity
embedding l1 →l2.
If X and Y are Banach spaces, then Rp,p(X, Y ) = Rp(X, Y ) for p > 0,
in addition, every p-radonifying operator is p-summing and every radonifying op-
erator is p-summing for all p > 0.
In the case 1 < p < ∞the classes of
p-radonifying and p-summing operators coincide. If 0 < p < 1, then one has the
inclusion Rp(X, Y ) ⊂R(X, Y ).
There is a vast literature on these classes in Banach spaces, see, for example,
Diestel, Jarchow, Tonge [121], van Neerven [367], Pietsch [389], Schwartz [442],
Vakhania, Tarieladze, Chobanyan [538], and Vladimirskii [550], [551], [552].
Many results for Banach spaces apply directly to locally convex spaces by means
of factorizations of operators through Banach or Hilbert spaces.
For example,
every continuous linear operator from a Banach space to a nuclear space is radoni-
fying, since it is a composition of a continuous operator and a Hilbert–Schmidt
operator in a Hilbert space.
5.12(xii). Measurable norms
As we have seen in § 5.10, the class of measurable norms introduced there is
broader than the class of Gross measurable norms (Remark 5.10.13). The latter
definition was extended in Dudley, Feldman, Le Cam [140] to general nonnegative
cylindrical measures on locally convex spaces.
Let Y = E′ be the dual to a
locally convex space E and let m be a nonnegative E-cylindrical measure on Y .
A seminorm q on Y will be called (DFL)-measurable with respect to m if the
following condition is fulfilled: for every ε > 0, there exists a finite-dimensional
subspace L ⊂Y such that for every finite-dimensional subspace K contained in
the polar of L taken in E (i.e., in the annihilator of L) we have
m

y ∈Y : inf{q(y −z), z ∈K◦} > ε

⩽ε.
According to [140], for a given seminorm q continuous in the Mackey topol-
ogy τ(Y, E), its (DFL)-measurability with respect to m is equivalent to the fol-
lowing property: the image of m under the natural mapping from Y to the Banach

5.12. Complements and exercises
413
space generated by q has a Radon extension. In addition, if a continuous linear
operator T from Y to a locally convex space Z with a dense range takes m to a
measure with a Radon extension, then, for every continuous seminorm p on Z, the
seminorm p◦T is (DFL)-measurable with respect to m. Finally, if Y = l2 and m is
the standard cylindrical Gaussian measure on Y , then the (DFL)-measurability
coincides with the Gross measurability. However, Maeda [329] and Maeda, Harai,
Hagihara [330] constructed examples of non-Gaussian cylindrical measures m on
a Hilbert space for which there are (DFL)-measurable norms that are not Gross
measurable (such a norm can be even made measurable with respect to the standard
Gaussian cylindrical measure).
Exercises
5.12.77. Let F be some family of real functions on a set X and let σ(F) be the
σ-algebra in X generated by this family. Prove that every function g measurable with
respect to σ(F) has the form g = ψ(f1, f2, . . .), where ψ is a Borel function on IR∞
and {fn} ⊂F.
5.12.78.◦Prove that the linear span of a compact set in a topological vector space is a
Borel set.
5.12.79.◦Let E ⊂[0, 1] be a Lebesgue nonmeasurable set of outer measure 1 and let
μ be the restriction of Lebesgue measure to the Borel σ-algebra of E; then μ is a non-Radon
Borel measure. Show that there exists a sequence of measures with finite supports in E
weakly converging to μ.
5.12.80.◦Let γn be the standard Gaussian measure on the space IRn, i.e., the measure
with density (2π)−n/2 exp

−(x, x)2/2

with respect to Lebesgue measure.
Show that
lim
n→∞γn(BR) = 0 for the ball BR of radius R centered at the origin in IRn.
5.12.81. (i) Let ν be a centered Gaussian measure on IRn and let C be an absolutely
convex set. Prove that ν(C −h) ⩽ν(C) for all vectors h ∈IRn.
(ii) Let ν1 and ν2 be two centered Gaussian measures on IRn with covariance operators
R1 and R2 such that R1 ⩽R2, i.e., (R1v, v) ⩽(R2v, v). Prove that for every absolutely
convex set C in IRn one has γ1(C) ⩾γ2(C).
(iii) Let C be an absolutely convex set in IRn and let γn be the standard Gaussian
measure on IRn. Prove that for every linear operator S on IRn such that ∥S∥⩽1 one
has γn

S(C)

⩽γn(C). In addition, show that γn(C) ⩽γk(C ∩IRk) whenever k < n.
HINT: (i) pass to the standard Gaussian measure and use polar coordinates; (ii) observe
that γ1 = γ2 ∗γ3, where γ3 is a centered Gaussian measure, apply (i); deduce (iii) from (ii).
5.12.82. Prove that every Borel measure on IR∞is concentrated on a compactly
embedded Hilbert space.
HINT: observe that such a measure is concentrated on the linear span of a product of
compact intervals.
5.12.83.◦Let ν be a cylindrical measure on a locally convex space X and let T be
a continuous linear operator from E to a locally convex space Y . Show that the Fourier
transform of the cylindrical measure η = ν◦T −1 is given by η(f) = ν(T ∗f), f ∈Y ′.
5.12.84. Let μ be the probability measure on l2 concentrated on the countable set of
vectors nen such that μ(nen) = cn−2. Show that there is no Banach space E of full
measure compactly embedded into l2 such that E′ ⊂L2(μ), although (l2)′ ⊂L2(μ).

414
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
HINT: verify that otherwise one could find a larger Hilbert space E with the same
property, which would imply compactness of the covariance operator of the measure μ
on l2, but this operator is c · I.
5.12.85. Let μ be a probability measure on c0 with first weak moment and without
mean, for example, μ(2nen) = 2−n, where {en} is the standard basis in c0. Show that there
is no Banach space E of full measure compactly embedded into c0 such that E′ ⊂L1(μ).
HINT: verify that otherwise one could find a larger reflexive Banach space E with the
same property, which would imply the existence of the mean of μ.
5.12.86. Prove that the space D(IR1) with its standard topology is not a kR-space (for
the definition, see § 5.12(viii)).
5.12.87. Prove Proposition 5.12.52.
5.12.88. Prove that every k-space possessing a countable fundamental system of com-
pact sets is normal.
HINT: assuming that X is the union of increasing compact sets Kn with the property
that every compact set in X is contained in some of Kn, for every disjoint closed sets A
and B, one constructs inductively a continuous function f with f|A = 0, f|B = 1; such a
function can be constructed on the compact set K1; if it is already constructed on Kn, it
extends to Kn+1 in such a way that f|A∩Kn+1 = 0, f|B∩Kn+1 = 1; to this end, we set
f = 0 on A∩Kn+1, f = 1 on B ∩Kn+1, then observe that we have obtained a continuous
function on the compact set Kn ∪(A ∩Kn+1) ∪(B ∩Kn+1) and extend it to Kn+1.
5.12.89.◦Suppose that X and Y are locally convex spaces, linear operators An : X →Y
are continuous and on some set S ⊂X these operators uniformly converge to zero. Prove
that one has uniform convergence on the closed absolutely convex envelope of S.
5.12.90. Let K be a compact set in a locally convex space E, let {fn} ⊂E′ be
uniformly bounded on K, and let fn(x) →0 for all x ∈K. Prove that fn(y) →0 for all
vectors y in the closed convex envelope of K.
HINT: apply Theorem 5.6.13 and the Lebesgue dominated convergence theorem.
5.12.91. Let ξ and η be independent random vectors in a locally convex space X
such that the distribution of η is symmetric. Prove that for every absolutely convex set
C ∈σ(X′) one has P(ξ ̸∈C) ⩽2P(ξ + η ̸∈C), and if the distributions of ξ and η are
Radon, then this is true for all Borel absolutely convex sets C.
HINT: let D = X\C and observe that D ⊂(D −x) ∪(D + x) for every x.
5.12.92. Suppose that a Hausdorff locally convex space E is the strict inductive limit
of its increasing closed subspaces En and μ is a Radon probability measure on E such that
E′ belongs to L1(μ). Prove that there exists n such that μ(En) = 1.
HINT: if there are compact sets Kn ⊂E\En with μ(Kn) > 0, then we can assume
that Kn ⊂En+1; there exists a functional f ∈E′ such that the integral of |f(x)| over Kn
is not less than 1; to this end, we construct inductively functionals fn ∈E′ with fn|En = 0
for which the integral of the function |fn(x)| over Kn is greater than the integral of the
function |f1(x) + · · · + fn−1(x)| + 1 over Kn; finally, take f = 	∞
n=1 fn ̸∈L1(μ).
5.12.93. Prove assertion (ii) in Theorem 5.12.25 using the previous exercise.
5.12.94.◦Let K be a convex compact set in a locally convex space. Suppose that
a sequence of Radon probability measures μn on K converges to a measure μ in the
weak-∗topology on C(K)′. Prove that the barycenters of the measures μn converge to the
barycenter of μ.
HINT: on K the weak topology coincides with the original one.

5.12. Complements and exercises
415
5.12.95. (Talagrand [515, p. 184]) Let E be the Banach space of all bounded functions
on [0, 1] that do not vanish in at most countably many points and let E be equipped with
the norm supt |f(t)|. Then, on the weak Borel σ-algebra B

E, σ(E, E′)

there exists a
probability measure that assumes only the values 0 and 1, but is not Radon.
5.12.96. Construct an example of a cylindrical quasi-measure of unbounded variation
on l2 the characteristic functional of which is bounded and continuous in the Sazonov
topology.
HINT: let pn(t) = π−12n(1 + 22nt2)−1; take the product of the measures pn dt and
the function ϕ(y) = −i(y, h)μ(y), see Bogachev [66, Example 3.6.9].
5.12.97. (Kwapie´n [308]) Let ξn be random vraiables on a probability space (Ω, F, P)
such that the series 	∞
n=1 λnξn converges in probability for every sequence of numbers λn
converging to zero. Prove that 	∞
n=1 |ξn|2 < ∞a.e. Deduce from this that the embedding
l1 →l2 is a radonifying operator, i.e., takes every nonnegative cylindrical quasi-measure
on l1 with a continuous characteristic functional to a Radon measure on l2.
5.12.98. (Borell [81]) A linear function on a Fr´echet space measurable with respect to
all Radon Gaussian measures is continuous. Hence the measurability of a linear function on
a Banach space with respect to all Radon measures implies its continuity (Schwartz [441]).
HINT: see Bogachev [63, Proposition 3.9.9]; see also related results in Christen-
sen [101] and Kats [265].
5.12.99. (Talagrand [514]) Under Martin’s axiom, in every infinite-dimensional sep-
arable Banach space X there exists a non-closed hyperplane X0 that is measurable with
respect to every Borel measure on X. Deduce from the previous exercise that X0 cannot
be a kernel of a universally measurable linear function.
5.12.100. Let T be a topological space and let Mσ(T) be the space of all Baire
measures on T with the weak topology σ

Mσ(T), Cb(T)

. Show that the set of finite
linear combinations of Dirac measures is everywhere dense in Mσ(T).
HINT: given a measure μ ∈Mσ(T), functions f1, . . . , fn in the unit ball of the
space Cb(X) and ε > 0, one can partition T into disjoint parts T1, . . . , TN of the form

n
i=1{c ⩽fi ⩽c + ε}; assuming that ∥μ∥⩽1, take arbitrary points ti ∈Ti and consider
the measure 	N
i=1 μ(Ti)δti.
5.12.101. (Ostling, Wilansky [375]) In a sequentially complete locally convex space
the closed convex envelope of a compact set is not always compact. Show that for such
a compact set one can take K = {0, 1}κ, where the cardinality κ is greater than the
continuum, so that K is nonseparable, K is embedded into the space M of Radon measures
on K with separable supports equipped with the weak topology σ

M, C(K)

, and the
embedding takes k ∈K to the Dirac measure δk.
HINT: the image of K in M is compact (the embedding of K is a homeomorphism);
M is sequentially complete, since a weak limit of any sequence of measures with separable
topological supports also has a separable support; in addition, M is dense in the space Mr
of all Radon measures with the weak topology and the closed convex envelope of K in
Mr is the set of all Radon probability measures on K and contains the measure νκ, where
ν(−1) = ν(1) = 1/2; finally, the measure ν does not belong to M, since its support is the
whole set K.
5.12.102. (von Weizs¨acker [562]) (i) Let X be the space of all Borel measures on [0, 1]
equipped with the weak topology and let K be the convex compact set in X consisting of
all probability measures. Let λ be Lebesgue measure and let μ be the image of λ under the

416
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
continuous (in the indicated topology) mapping π : t →δt, [0, 1] →K, where δt is the
Dirac measure at the point t. Set
C :=
∞

n=1

m ∈K : λ + n−1(λ −m) ̸∈K

.
Prove that C is a convex Gδ-set in K and μ(C) = 1, but μ(S) = 0 for every convex
compact set S ⊂C.
(ii) Let K be a convex compact set in a locally convex space X having an infinite-
dimensional linear span. Prove that there exist a convex set C ⊂K and a Radon probability
measure μ on K such that C is a Gδ-set in some metrizable convex compact set K0 ⊂K,
μ(C) = 1, but μ(S) = 0 for every convex compact set S ⊂C.
HINT: (i) It is easy to verify that C is convex and can be represented as the intersection
of a sequence of open sets in K with the weak topology, moreover,
C = K\

ε>0
{m ∈K : λ + ε(λ −m) ∈K}.
Let D be the set of all Dirac measures. Then D is compact in K and μ(D) = 1. If
S ⊂C is a convex compact set with μ(C) > 0, then μ(S ∩D) > 0. Hence the set
A := π−1(S ∩D) is compact and λ(A) > 0. Since δt ∈S for t ∈A, by the convexity and
closedness of S we obtain that every probability measure ν on A belongs to S. In particular,
ν := λ(A)−1λ|A ∈S. The measure λ + λ(A)(λ −ν) is probability, i.e., belongs to K.
According to the indicated equality for C we obtain that ν ̸∈C. This contradicts the fact
that ν ∈S ⊂C. Assertion (ii) can be deduced from (i) with the aid of a suitable mapping
(see details in [562]).
5.12.103. (Fremlin [178, § 461E]). Let X be a complete locally convex space and let
μ be a τ-additive probability measure on X (i.e., if {Uα} is an increasing net of open sets,
then μ

α Uα

= limα μ(Uα)) with bounded support. Then μ has a barycenter.
5.12.104. Let μ and ν be τ-additive measures on a locally convex space X with equal
Fourier transforms. Prove that μ = ν.
HINT: let p be a continuous seminorm on X, let Xp be the normed space obtained
by factorization of X over p−1(0), and let πp : X →Xp be the natural projection. The
sets of the form π−1
p (U), where p is a continuous seminorm and U is open in Xp, form
a topology base in X. Hence it suffices to show the coincidence of μ and ν on these
sets. The measures μ ◦π−1
p
and ν ◦π−1
p
on Xp have equal Fourier transforms and are
τ-additive. Both properties are preserved for the natural extensions of both measures to
the completion of Xp. On a Banach space, any τ-additive measure is Radon, which gives
the equality of the indicated extensions on the completion of Xp, hence also the equality
μ ◦π−1
p
= ν ◦π−1
p . Therefore, μ

π−1
p (U)

= ν

π−1
p (U)

for all open sets U ⊂Xp.
5.12.105. Let X be a Hausdorff topological vector space, let μ and ν be Radon
probability measures such that μ = μ ∗ν. Show that ν is the Dirac measure at the origin.
HINT: see Vakhania, Tarieladze, Chobanyan [538, Proposition I.4.7].
5.12.106. (Grothendieck [207, p. 229]) Suppose that K is a nonempty compact space
and a set M ⊂M = Mr(K) = C(K)′ has compact closure in the Mackey topol-
ogy τ

M, C(K)

. Show that M has compact closure in the topology σ(M, M′).
HINT: according to the Eberlein–ˇSmulian theorem and Theorems 4.7.24 and 8.10.58
in [65], it suffices to show that lim
n→∞μn(Un) = 0 for every sequence of measures μn ∈M
and every sequence of disjoint open sets Un ⊂K. If this is false, then there exist functions

5.12. Complements and exercises
417
fn ∈C(K) such that |fn| ⩽1, fn = 0 outside of Un and the integral of fn against μn is
not less than some ε > 0; {fn} converges to zero pointwise, hence in the weak topology
in the space C(K). It is readily seen that the closed convex envelope of {fn} is weakly
compact. This contradicts compactness of the closure of M in the topology of uniform
convergence on convex weakly compact sets.
5.12.107. Construct an example of a probability measure on a locally convex space
(X, τ) that is defined on σ(X′) and is tight in the weak topology σ(X, X′), but is not tight
in the original topology τ.
HINT: let E = C[0, 1], let X := E′ be equipped with the topology σ(E′, E), and
let μ be the image of Lebesgue measure on [0, 1] under the mapping t →δt. Then μ is a
tight Baire measure in the topology σ(E′, E). For τ take the Mackey topology τ(E′, E).
If μ were tight in this topology, it would be also tight in the topology σ(E′, E′′) according
to Exercise 5.12.106. Then μ would have a Radon extension for the norm topology, hence
would have a norm separable support. This leads to a contradiction, since ∥δt −δs∥= 2
whenever t ̸= s.
5.12.108. (Bogachev [63]) Let P be a probability measure and let γ be a centered
Radon Gaussian measure on L2(P) such that the embedding of its Cameron–Martin space
into L2(P) is not nuclear. Show that γ(E) = 0 for every separable Hilbert space E con-
tinuously embedded into L∞(P). This yields the fact proved in Smolyanov, Uglanov [498]
that the Wiener measure on C[0, 1] has no Hilbert support.
HINT: use the fact that the embedding E →L2(P) is a Hilbert–Schmidt operator (see
Bogachev, Smolyanov [72, Corollary 7.10.28]).
5.12.109. (cf. Wi´sniewski [568]) Let X and Y be separable Fr´echet spaces, where Y
has the approximation property, let μ be a probability Borel measure on X, and let
A: X →Y be a mapping such that there exists a sequence of continuous linear operators
An : X →Y such that for every l ∈Y ′ one has μ-almost everywhere l(Anx) →l(Ax).
Then there exists a sequence of continuous finite-dimensional linear operators Qn : X →Y
that converge to A μ-almost everywhere.
HINT: it is easy to see that A is measurable; let {pk} be an increasing sequence of
seminorms on Y defining the topology; it suffices to show that, for every index k and every
number ε > 0, there exists a continuous finite-dimensional operator Q: X →Y such that
μ

x: pk(Ax −Qx) > ε

< ε;
let ν = μ◦A−1; take a compact set K with ν(Y \K) < ε/2 and find T ∈L(Y ) of the form
Ty = 	m
i=1 fi(y)yi, where fi ∈Y ′, yi ∈Y , pk(yi) ⩽1, such that pk(y −Ty) < ε/2
for all y ∈K; next, find n such that μ

x: |fi(Ax) −fi(Anx)| > ε(2m)−1
, i ⩽m; let
Qx = 	m
i=1 fi(Anx)yi. Then μ

x: pk(Ax −Qx) > ε

does not exceed the sum of the
quantities μ

x: pk(Ax−TAx) > ε/2

and μ

x: pk(TAx−Qx) > ε/2

, where the first
number is ν

y : pk(y −Ty) > ε/2

< ε/2 and the second one is estimated by the series
	m
i=1 μ

x: |fi(Ax) −fi(Anx)| > ε(2m)−1
< ε/2.
5.12.110. Let B be a Borel set in a separable Fr´echet space and let f be a Borel
function on B such that f(z) = αf(x) + βf(y) if x, y, z ∈B, z = αx + βy. Prove that
f extends to a Borel linear function on the linear span L of the set B.
HINT: the sets L×IR1 and S = ∞
n=1(Bn×IRn) are Souslin, the mapping
g : Bn×IRn →L×IR1,
(b1, . . . , bn, t1, . . . , tn) →
 n

i=1
tibi,
n

i=1
tif(bi)


418
Chapter 5. Measures on linear spaces
is continuous; verify that its image is the graph of a linear function on L; use the fact that
a mapping of Souslin spaces with a Souslin graph is Borel (see [65, Lemma 6.7.1]).
5.12.111. Let X = ∞
n=1 Xn, μ = .∞
n=1 μn, μ(n) = .∞
k=n+1 μk for prob-
ability spaces (Xn, An, μn).
Show that, for every function ϕ ∈L1(μ), the function
ϕn(x1, . . . , xn) obtained by integrating ϕ(x1, . . . , xn, yn+1, . . .) in (yn+1, . . .) against the
measure μ(n) is the conditional expectation of f with respect to the σ-algebra generated by
x1, . . . , xn. This yields convergence of ϕn to ϕ almost everywhere (see [65, § 10.2]).
5.12.112. (Smolyanov [481]) Let μ be the countable power of a symmetric probability
Borel atomless measure μ1 on the real line, let λk ∈IR. Show that if the set of convergence
of the series 	∞
k=1 λkx2
k contains a linear subspace of full μ-measure, then 	∞
k=1 |λk| is
finite. If the measure μ1 has finite second moment, then the converse is also true.
5.12.113. (Smolyanov [479]) Let m be a symmetric probability Borel atomless mea-
sure on the real line, let μ be the measure on IR∞equal to the countable power of m, and
let f be a μ-measurable linear function on IR∞. (i) Prove that 	∞
n=1 |f(en)|2 < ∞,
where en is the vector with 1 at the nth place and 0 at other places, and also that
f(x) = 	∞
n=1 f(en)xn a.e., where the series converges almost everywhere.
(ii) A function F that is μ⊗μ-a.e. defined and measurable on IR∞×IR∞will be called
measurable bilinear if, for each y for which the function x →F(x, y) is defined μ-a.e., it
is linear on some measurable linear subspace of μ-measure 1, and similarly for the other
variable. Show that two such functions either differ a.e. or are equal a.e., and the latter
holds precisely when they are equal on all vectors with finitely many nonzero components.
HINT:
the function exp

itf(x)

for every fixed t is a.e.
the limit of the inte-
grals in y of the functions exp

itf(Pnx + Sny)

, where Pnx = x1e1 + · · · + xnen,
Snx = x −Pnx; denoting by ϕn(t) the integral of exp

itf(Sny)

in y, we obtain that
exp

it 	n
j=1 f(ej)xj

ϕn(t) converges to exp

itf(x)

a.e., whence one can readily obtain
convergence of the series of f(ej)xj a.e.; since xj are independent random variables with
respect to μ, by the Kolmogorov three series theorem (see Gihman, Skorohod [194, Chap-
ter II, § 3, Theorem 5]) and the symmetry of m we obtain that for every c > 0 the series of
the integrals of the functions ηi against the measure m converges, where ηj(s) = |f(ej)s|2
if |f(ej)s| ⩽c, ηj(s) = 0 if |f(ej)s| > c; this yields convergence of the series of f(ej)2;
finally, we observe that the series of f(ej)xj converges a.e. to f(x); derive (ii) from (i)
and Fubini’s theorem.
5.12.114. (Wi´sniewski [569]) Let X and Y be separable Fr´echet spaces and let μ be
a symmetric Borel probability measure on X (i.e., μ(B) = μ(−B)), not concentrated on
a proper closed linear subspace. Suppose that X has a stochastic basis {ϕn} with the
corresponding sequence of functionals fn ∈X′ that are independent random variables
on (X, μ). Then, for every μ-measurable linear operator A: X →Y , almost everywhere
Ax = 	∞
n=1 fn(x)Aϕn.
5.12.115. (Kosov [291]) Let μ be a Borel probability measure on a separable Banach
space X and let X′ ⊂L1(μ). Then the following conditions are equivalent: (i) there exists
a compactly embedded separable Banach space Y ⊂X with μ(Y ) = 1 and Y ′ ⊂L1(μ),
(ii) the restriction of μ to every Borel set has a mean.
If X′ ⊂Lp(μ), where p > 1, then the existence of a compactly embedded separable
Banach space Y ⊂X with μ(Y ) = 1 and Y ′ ⊂Lp(μ) is equivalent to the following:
the natural embedding operator X′ →Lp(μ) is compact and for every ψ ∈Lq(μ), where
q = p/(p−1), the measure ψ·μ has a mean. If p = 2, then this is equivalent to compactness
of the covariance operator Kμ : X′ →X.

Comments
The history of development of the theory of topological vector spaces is insepara-
ble from the general history of functional analysis (see Dunford, Schwarz [145], Birk-
hoff, Kreyszig [55], Dieudonn´e [131], L¨utzen [324], Mauldin [334], Monna [351], Nar-
ici [364], Pietsch [390], and Taylor [521]).
Its prehistory was concerned with various
infinite-dimensional spaces of sequences and functions such as IR∞, considered at the
beginning of the XX century by Fr´echet, Hilbert, Volterra, F. Riesz, Weyl, and other re-
searchers, with problems of convex analysis (Minkowski, Hahn, Helly, Banach), with weak
convergence in Hilbert and more general functional spaces (Hilbert, F. Riesz, Weyl, von
Neumann), and also with general topology (especially works of Hausdorff and Tychonoff).
The birth of the proper theory of topological vector spaces and locally convex spaces is
dated by the 30–40s of the XX century, when a number by now classical works of Kol-
mogorov, von Neumann, Tychonoff, ˇSmulyan, Krein, Milman, Dieudonn´e, Eberlein, and
Bourbaki appeared. This direction was deeply influenced (and is still being influenced)
by the theory of Banach spaces, created in the outstanding monograph of its founder (see
Banach [37]). Kolmogorov [279] turned to topological linear spaces in 1934 (apparently,
thinking of measures in such spaces) and obtained his criterion of normability; in 1935 von
Neumann published his paper [370] devoted to such spaces (completely bounded sets were
introduced there); the same year is marked by Tychonoff’s paper [533] on fixed points of
continuous mappings of convex compacta, where the term a “locally convex space” was
first used. In the original paper in German, the term “lokal-konvexer Raum” was used.
The modern definition of a locally convex space by means of seminorms was given by
Dieudonn´e [125].
The first real achievements of the theory of locally convex spaces were connected
exactly with weak and weak-∗topologies of Banach spaces. In 1929, the weak topol-
ogy was explicitly introduced in Hilbert spaces by von Neumann [369], in 1934 in K¨othe,
Toepliz [293] it was defined on some spaces of sequences, Wehausen [560] extended von
Neumann’s definition to normed spaces, finally, in 1939 ˇSmulyan [501] considered the weak
topology generated by a linear space of functionals (i.e., σ(E, G) in modern notation; about
his works, see Raikov [407]), and a year later Dieudonn´e [123] introduced dual pairs (pairs
in duality), making the definition symmetric. In 1938 Goldstine [197] proved that the ele-
ments of the ball of the second dual to a Banach space are “weak” limits of nets of elements
of the ball of the original space (see Exercise 3.12.80), and Alaoglu [7] and Bourbaki [86]
(detailed expositions were given in Alaoglu [8] and Dieudonn´e [125]) established the very
important property of weak-∗compactness of balls in the dual space (somewhat later this
was also proved by ˇSmulyan [501] and Kakutani [253]); certainly, an important role was
played here by compactness of products of compact intervals, discovered shortly before that
by Tychonoff, and also by the case of separable spaces considered earlier by Banach (many
419
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
and Their Applications, Springer Monographs in Mathematics,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-57117-1
V.I. Bogachev and O.G. Smolyanov, Topological Vector Spaces

420
Comments
researchers note with surprise that Banach did not use concepts of general topology already
known by that time and rapidly gaining popularity; his results related to weak convergence
were formulated in terms of transfinite sequences). To this circle of problems belong also
generalizations and geometric versions of the Hahn–Banach theorem on extensions of linear
functionals; Mazur [335] obtained a result on separation of convex sets in normed spaces,
close results were obtained in Eidelheit [152], Kakutani [252], Krein, ˇSmulian [297], and
Dieudonn´e [124]; Suhomlinov [507] considered the complex field case (and also the case
of quaternions).
In relation to the study of weak compactness one should mention the
papers ˇSmulyan [499], [500], [502], [503] (see also Gantmacher, ˇSmulyan [185]) and Eber-
lein [147]. Fichtenholz [168] considered sequential continuity of functionals not connected
with a norm or metric. Note that not every reasonable convergence in a linear space is gen-
erated by a topology. For example, convergence almost everywhere of measurable functions
on [0, 1] (even of polynomials) cannot be generated by a topology, see Exercise 1.12.88.
However, it became possible to consider this theory as an independent area, appar-
ently, only in the 50s of the XX century after works of Laurent Schwartz [440] in the
theory of distributions (strongly influenced by works of S.L. Sobolev on generalized deriv-
atives) and subsequent works of Grothendieck, Dieudonn´e, Mackey, Arens, K¨othe, Klee,
Pt´ak, and other mathematicians from many countries stimulated partly by these investi-
gations and partly by the study of weak topologies in Banach spaces. The main themes
of this period were “duality theory” and weak topologies, special classes of nonnormable
spaces (such as inductive and projective limits), and tensor products. The most important
achievements of these years (until the 60s of the XX century) are well documented in
the books Bourbaki [87], Edwards [150], Floret, Wloka [172], Grothendieck [207], Kan-
torovich, Akilov [261] (in the second edition [262] this material was reduced), Kelley,
Namioka [270], K¨othe [292], Robertson, Robertson [420], Schaefer [436], and Tr`eves [530].
The first detailed expositions of the theory were given already in the 1950s by the au-
thor groups Bourbaki [87] and a bit later Kelley, Namioka [270] (the latter included also
W.F. Donoghue, K.R. Lucas, B.J. Pettis, E.T. Poulsen, G.B. Price, W. Robertson, W.R. Scott,
and K.T. Smith), and also by K¨othe [292]; extensive material was presented in the books
Grothendieck [207] and Gelfand, Shilov [193], but they had a more special character. One
should also mention a number of papers of the same period that played a very important role
in later investigations: Grothendieck [205] (a survey on the status of the problems posed
by Grothendieck is given in Caki´c et al. [93]), Arens [19], Dieudonn´e, Schwartz [132],
Grothendieck [202]–[206], Mackey [327], [328], and Sebasti˜ao e Silva [444]. There were
also surveys Dieudonn´e [126], Hyers [230], and Nakano [361]. Note that Kakutani [251]
proved the existence of a translation invariant metric in a metrizable Abelian group (in
particular, in a metrizable topological vector space, see Theorem 1.6.1), and Klee [273]
solved Banach’s problem about completeness of such an invariant metric in the case of the
existence of some complete metric generating the topology.
Substantial contributions to the study of weak compactness were made by the papers
Grothendieck [202], James [232]–[236].
Note also the series of papers Klee [272], [274],
[275], devoted to convexity. In relation to the condition for the equality of double limits and
its applications to weak compactness mentioned in Exercise 3.12.192, we refer to the papers
Pt´ak [400], [399]. In the latter, connections of this condition with some other problems
are discussed. In particular, it is proved there that for a bounded separately continuous
function f on the product S×T of Tychonoff spaces the equality lim
m→∞lim
n→∞f(sm, tn) =
lim
n→∞lim
m→∞f(sm, tn) is true for all sequences {sm} ⊂S and {tn} ⊂T for which both
limits exist precisely when f extends to a separately continuous function on the product of

Comments
421
the Stone– ˇCech compactifications of S and T, moreover, this is equivalent to the property
that the set of functions s →f(t, s), where t ∈T, is relatively weakly compact in Cb(S).
In the subsequent years the main progress was concerned with solving special impor-
tant problems (for example, connected with the properties of the spaces D and D′ and other
concrete spaces of smooth and generalized functions) and also with applications, among
which one should mention in the first place mathematical problems in quantum physics
(see Bogolubov et al. [73]), the theory of distributions with applications to partial differen-
tial equations, development of Kolmogorov’s ideas on estimating complexity of functional
spaces (see Kolmogorov, Tikhomirov [283]), optimal control and extremal problems, mea-
sure theory on infinite-dimensional spaces, and infinite-dimensional stochastic analysis.
Important sources of development were investigations of operator ideals, nuclear spaces,
bases and approximations. Finally, it is necessary to note the continuing influence of gen-
eral nonlinear infinite-dimensional analysis, constantly generating new interesting objects
of study and important problems. The achievements of the 60–80s of the XX century are
well presented in very informative monographs Jarchow [237], P´erez Carreras, Bonet [385],
Valdivia [543], and Wilansky [567]. There is a more recent book Narici, Beckenstein [365].
There is a huge number of papers on inductive limits of locally convex spaces. In
addition to the works already cited in exercises and comments note the papers Akhme-
dova [4], Bierstedt [53], Makarov [332], Raikov [402], [404], [406], Retakh [417], and
Smolyanov [477].
Efforts of many researchers were directed towards generalizations of the fundamen-
tal theorems connected with the name of Banach and concerned with the conditions for
the continuity of linear operators (the closed graph theorem, the inverse mapping the-
orem, the open mapping theorem, and so on).
One direction of research followed the
line of the properties like completeness and category, see Grothendieck [205], Dieudonn´e,
Schwartz [132], Kalton [256], McIntosh [337], Pt´ak [397], [398]; for this purpose various
classes of complete spaces were invented (Pt´ak spaces and other spaces; hypercompleteness
was introduced by Kelley [269]). These types of completeness were considered in many
papers, references to which can be found in the books cited above; see also Raikov [405],
Smolyanov [480], [482]–[486], [485], and Shavgulidze [446]–[449]. However, it was shown
by Smolyanov [482] that the most important among nonmetrizable spaces the space of
smooth functions D is not fully complete; in this work a stronger assertion was proved:
D possesses an incomplete factor space isomorphic to a dense subspace in the countable
product of the real lines (hence even metrizable). The same method applies for constructing
an incomplete factor space in D′, whence it follows that D′ is not fully complete; the latter
result had been earlier obtained in Slowikowski [470] (see Remark on p. 249 in Raikov’s
supplement to [420]) and Smolyanov [480]. As was later shown by Valdivia [540], [541],
the same result yields that D and D′ are not Br-complete; the latter was independently
proved by Shavgulidze [447], who used not the result, but the method of [480], [482]. These
results, unexpected for experts, lead to decrease of interest in such types of completeness.
In § 2.10(i) we present the results obtained by the method from [482], in particular, we
construct a closed linear subspace in the space D′ and a sequentially continuous discontin-
uous functional on it, whence it follows that the Hahn–Banach theorem does not extend to
sequentially continuous functionals (for D such an example is given in [470]), and also that
the so-called sequential topology on D is not compatible with the vector structure.
Another direction of research was connected with the idea of equipping the space with
some covers and is related to the methods of the descriptive set theory and topology such as
Souslin schemes and analytic spaces, see Schwartz [441], Raikov [408], De Wilde [110]–
[112],
Zabreiko, Smirnov [578], Smirnov [471], Ferrando, K¸akol, L´opez Pellicer [161],

422
Comments
Ferrando, S´anchez Ruiz [166], and Robertson [421]. It appears that for practical applications
the approaches of Schwartz and De Wilde, presented in Chapter 3, have proved the most
useful.
Large sections devoted to various aspects of the theory of locally convex spaces are
included in many books on functional analysis and partial differential equations, see Bo-
gachev, Smolyanov [72], where an extensive bibliography is given, and also Choquet [100],
Edwards [150], Garnir, De Wilde, Schmets [186], Lelong [312], Meise, Vogt [339], and
Reed, Simon [414].
On bornology, see Hogbe-Nlend [226], Palamodov [378], Wael-
broeck [559], and Wilansky [566].
Distributions, partial differential operators and related questions in the theory of locally
convex spaces are discussed in Duistermaat, Kolk [143], Garsoux [187], Horvath [228],
H¨ormander [227], Kanwal [264], Tr`eves [529], and Vladimirov [549]. However, we do not
discuss the theory of distributions in this book, since the topological aspects at the present
stage of the development of this theory play definitely a secondary role, while in the first
place are analytic problems. Nevertheless it is necessary to emphasize that a good number
of important concrete problems of the theory of distributions and differential equations for
distributions was concerned exactly with problems of a topological character. For example,
the study of solvability of differential equations in D′ and related equations in convolutions
lead to problems of the existence of extensions of sequentially continuous functionals on
subspaces to distributions (not always solvable, see Exercise 2.10.63).
Ordered vector spaces are considered in Akilov, Kutateladze [6], Kantorovich, Vulikh,
Pinsker [263], Aliprantis, Burkinshaw [14], Luxemburg, Zaanen [325], Peressini [384], and
Schaefer [436].
On geometry and topology of Banach spaces, see Albiac, Kalton [10], Beauzamy [49],
Benyamini, Lindenstrauss [50], Bourgin [89], Carothers [94], Day [109], Defant, Flo-
ret [113], Deville, Godefroy, Zizler [118], Diestel [120], Diestel, Uhl [122], van Dulst [144],
Fabian et al. [155], [156], Godefroy, Lancien, Zizler [195], Guerre-Delabri`ere [209], Guirao,
Montesinos, Zizler [212], Johnson, Lindenstrauss [238], Kadec, Kadec [244], Li, Quef-
f´elec [315], Lindenstrauss, Tzafriri [318], Megginson [338], Pietsch [390], Pisier [391],
and Wojtaszczyk [571]. On operator ideals, see Defant, Floret [113], Diestel, Jarchow,
Tonge [121], and Junek [239]. There is an extensive literature on the weak topology of
Banach spaces; in addition to the already cited papers, we mention the influential paper
Corson [107] and also Edgar, Wheeler [149],
An interesting model locally convex space, on which many important general concepts
and phenomena are considered, is the space Cp(T) of continuous functions on a topologi-
cal space T equipped with the topology of pointwise convergence; see Arhangel’skii [21],
McCoy, Ntantu [336], and Tkachuk [522], [523]. Topological spaces with certain structures
of infinite-dimensional manifolds are studied in Bessaga, Pelczy´nski [52], Fedorchuk, Chi-
gogidze [157], Chapman [99], and van Mill [345], [346]. The theory of topological groups
is presented in the fundamental monograph Arhangel’skii, Tkachenko [20].
About nonlinear equations and fixed points, see Akhmerov et al. [5], Deimling [115],
Granas, Dugundji [199], Namioka [362], and Nirenberg [372]. Note that only recently
Cauty [98] solved positively the problem (remaining open for 70 years) of the validity of
the Schauder–Tychonoff theorem for every topological vector space (not necessarily locally
convex).
Certainly, it is not possible even to briefly mention here all modern directions of the
development of the theory of topological vector spaces; some additional information can be
found in Akbarov [3], Aytuna et al. [33], Banaszczyk [42], Beattie, Butzmann [47], Beatty,

Comments
423
Schaefer [48], Bierstedt [53], Bierstedt, Bonet [54], Bonet, Cascales [74], Cascales, Orihu-
ela [97], Cooper [106], Ferrando, K¸akol, L´opez Pellicer [160], Ferrando et al. [163]–[165],
Fetisov, Filippenko, Kozobrod [167], Gabriyelyan, K¸akol, Kubzdela, L´opez-Pellicer [182],
Guirao, Montesinos [210], Guirao, Montesinos, Zizler [211], Kadelburg, Radenovi´c [241],
K¸akol, Kubi´s, L´opez-Pellicer [245], K¸akol, L´opez Pellicer [246], K¸akol, L´opez Pellicer,
Okunev [247], K¸akol, L´opez Pellicer, Sliwa [248], K¸akol, Saxon [250], Kalenda, Spur-
n´y [255], Kalton, Peck, Roberts [257], Klee, Maluta, Zanco [276], Kolesnikov [278],
Kondakov [289], Kraaij [295], Kunzinger [304], Peralta et al. [383], Perez-Garcia, Schi-
khof [386], Rolewicz [422], Saxon [431], [432], Saxon, Tweddle [434], Valdivia [547],
Vogt [554], Waelbroeck [558], and Zahariuta [579]. In particular, on Fr´echet spaces, see
[165], [257], [304], [422]. An efficient way of finding information on modern research is
searching in the database MathSciNet by first finding the authors from our bibliography
and then finding the authors citing them. Among actively developing directions of the the-
ory of locally convex spaces one could mention the study of general topological questions
(in particular, connected with compactness), measures on infinite-dimensional spaces, and
various classes of operators and tensor products at the junction with geometry of Banach
spaces and concrete functional spaces (such as spaces of smooth functions).
It is worth noting that not so long ago the answers to the well-known questions posed
by Grothendieck in the 1950s have been found.
Taskinen [517], [518] constructed an
example of a Montel Fr´echet space F with the approximation property for which in the
tensor product F #
⊗πF there is a bounded set not contained in the closed absolutely convex
hull of a set A⊗B with bounded A and B. Hence such a tensor product is not Montel. On
this topic, see also Bonet, D´ıaz, Taskinen [75], Bonet, Galbis [76], Bonet, Taskinen [78],
and Defant, Floret, Taskinen [114].
Investigation of differentiability of mappings on infinite-dimensional spaces of curves
or functions goes back to early classics in variational calculus (Newton, Euler, La-
grange, and others).
Systematic studies began at the end of the XIX century and the
beginning of the XX century by Volterra [557] and his school (see Агzel`a [27]) and
Hadamard (his book [214] has considerable impact) and continued, among many other
researchers, by Gˆateaux [188] and Fr´echet [175], whose names are connected with im-
portant special types of differentiation.
There are many works devoted to differentia-
tion theory and differential calculus in infinite-dimensional spaces and giving also some
historic information; we mention only surveys and books Averbuch, Smolyanov [30],
[31], Balabanov [36], Bastiani [44], Cartan [95], Dieudonn´e [130], Deimling [115],
Eells [151], Fr¨olicher, Bucher [180], Fr¨olicher, Kriegl [181], Gaehler [184], Graves [200],
Hildebrandt, Graves [221], Keller [266], Krasnosel’skii, Zabreiko [296], Kriegl, Mi-
chor [298] (see also Kriegl, Michor, Rainer [299]), Milnor [348], Mujica [356], Neeb [366],
Omori [374], Smolyanov [489], Sova [504], [505], Sukhinin [506], Vainberg [535], and
Yamamuro [573]. Extensive historical comments can be found in [30], Pietsch [390], and
Taylor [520]. On subdifferentials and convex analysis, see Kusraev, Kutateladze [307],
Mordukhovich [352], Singer [465], [466], and Z˘alinescu [580]. The results in § 4.9 were
obtained by Lobanov [321], who found some reinforcements and generalizations of the
results for Banach spaces obtained in Albrecht, Diamond [11] and Hain [215] and also in
Kats, Kurato [240], Smolyanov [488], where compositions with linear functions on locally
convex spaces were considered. Our discussion of polynomials on locally convex spaces
follows Bochnak, Siciak [57].
A topic strongly related to locally convex spaces and differential equations in such
spaces that we do not touch in this book concerns operator semigroups, see the book
Yosida [575], and the following papers where numerous additional references can be found:

424
Comments
Albanese, Jornet [9], Babalola [34], Dembart [116], Frerick, Jord´a, Kalmes, Wengen-
roth [179], Komatsu [285], K¯omura [286], and Kraaij [294].
On general questions of measure theory in infinite-dimensional spaces, see Badrikian,
Chevet [35], Bogachev [63], [65], [66], Buldygin [90], Buldygin, Solntsev [92], Gelfand,
Vilenkin [191], Gihman, Skorohod [194], Hazod, Siebert [218], Heyer [220], Hoffmann-
Jørgensen [224], Kruglov [301], Kuo [305], Ledoux, Talagrand [311], Linde [317], Mush-
tari [359], Schwartz [443], Skorohod [468], Smolyanov, Fomin [495], Smolyanov, Shav-
gulidze [497], Vakhania [536], Vakhania, Tarieladze, Chobanyan [538], Vershik, Suda-
kov [548], and Yamasaki [574]. A very important role in the creation and development of
measure theory on infinite-dimensional linear spaces was played by the works and ideas
of Wiener, Kolmogorov, Fr´echet , Prohorov, Gelfand (in particular, one should mention the
papers [565], [280], [176], [393], [394], [191]). Close to that period were the papers Fortet,
Mourier [174], Gross [201], Mourier [355], and Segal [445]. In the book [65, § 7.14(vii)]
one can find some information on the so-called Radon spaces, in which all Borel measures
are Radon. Though, it is worth noting that a practical value of this concept is not high, since
in applications very seldom there are measures defined on the whole Borel σ-algebra and
not obviously Radon. It is much more often that one has to verify the tightness of a measure
defined on some smaller σ-algebra (for example, generated by cylinders), with the purpose
of extending it to a Radon measure. On vector integration, see Dinculeanu [133], Pan-
chapagesan [379], and Roth [424]. A vector function ψ on a measurable space (X, A, μ)
with values in a locally convex space X is called Pettis integrable if for every l ∈X′ the
function ⟨l, ψ⟩is integrable and its integral l(m), where m ∈X does not depend on l;
then m is called the Pettis integral of ψ. This terminology is often used under the stronger
assumption that in the first sense the restrictions of ψ to all sets A ∈A are integrable.
The mean of a measure introduced in the text is the Pettis integral of ψ(x) = x in the first
weaker sense.
For applications, the most convenient conditions for countable additivity of cylindrical
measures in terms of their Fourier transforms are the theorems due to Sazonov [435] and
Minlos [349], which appeared under the strong influence of the ideas of Prohorov [393] and
Gelfand [190]. An important observation on this question was made by Kolmogorov [281].
The question about extending these results to signed measures was raised by Smolyanov at
the end of the 1960s, but was completely resolved only 20 years later by Tarieladze [516]
(intermediate results were obtained in Shavgulidze [448] and Smolyanov [491]). A study
of topologies on infinite-dimensional spaces in relation to Fourier transforms of measures
was conducted by Mushtari [357]–[360], [354]. As one can see from these and many other
works (see Vladimirskii [553]), sufficient conditions for countable additivity of a cylindrical
measure can be expressed not only in terms of the Fourier transform; for example, various
operators associated with the measure can be also used.
On limit theorems in Banach spaces, see also Kuelbs, Zinn [303], Ledoux, Tala-
grand [311], and Johnson, Lindenstrauss [238, p. 1177–1200]. On 0–1 laws in linear spaces,
see Hoffmann-Jørgensen [225], Takahashi, Okazaki [509], and Zinn [581]. Measurable lin-
ear functions and operators are also studied in Kanter [260], Smole´nski [472], [474], [475],
and Wi´sniewski [570]. Differentiability connected with measures on infinite-dimensional
spaces is studied in Averbuch, Smolyanov, Fomin [32], Bogachev [66], and Bogachev,
Smolyanov [70].

References
[1] Acosta A. de. Stable measures and seminorms. Ann. Probab. 1975. V. 3. P. 865–875. [390]1
[2] Acosta A. de, Samur J. Infinitely divisible probability measures and the converse Kolmogorov
inequality in Banach spaces. Studia Math. 1978. V. 66. P. 143–160. [390]
[3] Akbarov S.S. Pontryagin duality in the theory of topological vector spaces and in topological
algebra. J. Math. Sci. (New York). 2003. V. 113, №2. P. 179–349. [422]
[4] Akhmedova P.D. Sequentially continuous linear functionals in strict inductiv limits of sequences
of Fr´echet spaces. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 1972. V. 27, №2. P. 163–164 (in Russian). [421]
[5] Akhmerov R.R., Kamenskii M.I., Potapov A.S., Rodkina A.E., Sadovskii B.N. Measures of
noncompactness and condensing operators. Birkh¨auser, Basel, 1992; viii+249 pp. [422]
[6] Akilov G.P., Kutateladze S.S. Ordered vector spaces. Nauka, Novosibirsk, 1978; 368 pp. (in
Russian). [422]
[7] Alaoglu L. Weak convergence of linear functionals. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 1938. V. 44. P. 196.
[419]
[8] Alaoglu L. Weak topologies of normed linear spaces. Ann. Math. 1940. V. 41. P. 252–267. [419]
[9] Albanese A.A., Jornet D. Dissipative operators and additive perturbations in locally convex
spaces. Math. Nachr. 2016. V. 289, №8-9. P. 920–949. [424]
[10] Albiac F., Kalton N.J. Topics in Banach space theory. Springer, New York, 2006; xii+373 pp.
[422]
[11] Albrecht F., Diamond H. A converse of Taylor’s theorem. Indiana Univ. Math. J. 1971/1972.
V. 21, №4. P. 347–350. [423]
[12] Alexandroff (Aleksandrov) A.D. Additive set functions in abstract spaces. Mat. Sbornik. 1940.
V. 8(50). P. 307–348; ibid. 1941. V. 9(51). P. 563–628; ibid. 1943. V. 13(55). P. 169–238. [397]
[13] Alfsen E.M. Compact convex sets and boundary integrals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin – New York,
1971; 210 pp. [343]
[14] Aliprantis C.D., Burkinshaw O. Locally solid Riesz spaces with applications to economics. 2nd
ed. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, Rhode Island, 2003; xii+344 pp. [422]
[15] Amemiya I. Some examples of (F) and (DF) spaces. Proc. Japan Acad. 1957. V. 33.
P. 169–171. [238]
[16] Amemiya I., K¯omura Y. ¨Uber nicht-vollst¨andige Montelr¨aume. Math. Ann. 1968. B. 177.
S. 273–277. [186]
[17] Anderson R.D. Hilbert space is homeomorphic to the countable infinite product of lines. Bull.
Amer. Math. Soc. 1966. V. 72. P. 515–519. [217]
[18] Antosik P., Burzyk J. Sequential conditions for barrelledness and bornology. Bull. Pol. Acad.
Sci., Math. 1987. V. 35. P. 457–459. [226]
[19] Arens R. Duality in linear spaces. Duke Math. J. 1947. V. 14. P. 787–794. [420]
[20] Arhangel’skii A., Tkachenko M. Topological groups and related structures. Atlantis Press, Paris;
World Sci. Publ., Hackensack, New Jersey, 2008; xiv+781 pp. [422]
[21] Arkhangel’ski˘ı A.V. Topological function spaces. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1992; x+205 pp. [215,
422]
[22] Arkhangel’ski˘ı A.V., Ponomarev V.I. Fundamentals of general topology. Problems and exercises.
Reidel, Dordrecht, 1984; xvi+415 pp. (Russian ed.: Moscow, 1974). [6, 215, 409]
1In square brackets we indicate all page numbers of citing the publication.
425
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
and Their Applications, Springer Monographs in Mathematics,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-57117-1
V.I. Bogachev and O.G. Smolyanov, Topological Vector Spaces

426
References
[23] Arias de Reyna J. Normed barely Baire spaces. Israel J. Math. 1982. V. 42. P. 33–36; correction:
ibid., 1985. V. 50. P. 264. [209]
[24] Arutyunyan L.M., Kosov E.D. Estimates for integral norms of polynomials on spaces with
convex measures. Matem. Sbornik. 2015. V. 206, №8. P. 3–22 (in Russian); English transl.:
Sbornik Math. 2015. V. , №8. P. 1030–1048. [409]
[25] Arutyunyan L.M., Kosov E.D., Yaroslavtsev I.S. On some properties of polynomials measurable
with respect to a Gaussian measure. Dokl. Ross. Akad. Nauk. 2014. V. 457, №2. P. 131–135 (in
Russian); English transl.: Dokl. Math. 2014. V. 90, №1. P. 419–423. [408]
[26] Arutyunyan L.M., Yaroslavtsev I.S. On measurable polynomials on infinite-dimensional spaces.
Dokl. Ross. Akad. Nauk. 2013. V. 449, №6. P. 627–630 (in Russian); English transl.: Dokl.
Math. 2013. V. 87, №2. P. 214–217. [405]
[27] Агzel`a C. Funzioni di linei. Atti Accad. Lincei Rend. 1889. V. 5, №1. P. 342–348. [423]
[28] Astala K. On Peano’s theorem in locally convex spaces. Studia Math. 1982. V. 73, №3.
P. 213–223. [295]
[29] Atkin C.J. Extension of smooth functions in infinite dimensions. I. Unions of convex sets. Studia
Math. 2001. V. 146, №3. P. 201–226. [305]
[30] Averbuch V.I., Smolyanov O.G. Theory of differentiation in linear topological spaces. Uspekhi
Mat. Nauk. 1967. V. 22, №6. P. 201–260 (in Russian); English transl.: Russian Math. Surveys.
1967. V. 22, №6. P. 201–258. [423]
[31] Averbuch V.I., Smolyanov O.G. The various definitions of the derivative in linear topological
spaces. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 1968. V. 23, №4. P. 67–116 (in Russian); English transl.: Russian
Math. Surveys. 1968. V. 23, №4. P. 67–113; An addendum: ibid., №5. P. 223–224. [423]
[32] Averbuh V.I., Smolyanov O.G., Fomin S.V., Generalized functions and differential equations in
linear spaces. I, Differentiable measures. Trudy Moskovsk. Matem. Ob. 1971. V. 24. P. 133–174
(in Russian); English transl.: Trans. Moscow Math. Soc. 1971. V. 24. P. 140–184. [424]
[33] Aytuna A., Djakov P.B., Goncharov A.P., Terzioglu T., Zahariuta V.P. Some open problems in the
theory of locally convex spaces. Linear Topol. Spaces Complex Anal. 1994. V. 1. P. 147–165.
[422]
[34] Babalola V.A. Semigroups of operators on locally convex spaces. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 1974.
V. 199. P. 163–179. [424]
[35] Badrikian A., Chevet S. Mesures cylindriques, espaces de Wiener et fonctions al´eatoires gaussi-
ennes. Lecture Notes in Math. 1974. V. 379. P. 1–383. [424]
[36] Balabanov M.V. Differentiation of mappings in infinite-dimensional vector spaces. KomKniga,
Moscow, 2006; 176 pp. (in Russian). [423]
[37] Banach S. Th´eorie des op´erations lin´eaires. Warszawa, 1932; vii+254 pp. [419]
[38] Banakh T. Topological classification of strong duals to nuclear (LF)-spaces. Studia Math. 2000.
V. 138, №3. P. 201–208. [242]
[39] Banakh T., Cauty R. Topological classification of closed convex sets in Fr´echet spaces. Studia
Math. 2011. V. 205, №1. P. 1–11. [217]
[40] Banakh T., Repovˇs D. A topological characterization of LF-spaces. Topology Appl. 2012.
V. 159, №5. P. 1475–1488. [242]
[41] Banaszczyk W. The Steinitz theorem on rearrangement of series for nuclear spaces. J. Reine
Angew. Math. 1990. B. 403. S. 187–200. [152]
[42] Banaszczyk W. Additive subgroups of topological vector spaces. Lecture Notes in Math. V. 1466.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991; viii+178 pp. [422]
[43] Banaszczyk W. Rearrangement of series in nonnuclear spaces. Studia Math. 1993. V. 107.
P. 213–222. [152]
[44] Bastiani A. Applications diff´erentiables et vari´et´es diff´erentiables de dimension infinie. J. Anal.
Math. 1964. V. 13. P. 1–114. [423]
[45] Bates S.M. On the image size of singular maps. Duke Math. J. 1992. V. 68, №3. P. 463–476.
[308]
[46] Bates S.M. On smooth rank-1 mappings of Banach spaces onto the plane. J. Differential Geom.
1993. V. 37. P. 729–733. [309]
[47] Beattie R., Butzmann H.-P. Convergence structures and applications to functional analysis.
Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2002; xiv+264 pp. [422]
[48] Beatty T.A., Schaefer H.H. Semi-bornological spaces. Math. Z. 1996. B. 221, №1. S. 337–351.
[423]

References
427
[49] Beauzamy B. Introduction to Banach spaces and their geometry. 2nd ed. North-Holland, Ams-
terdam, 1985; xv+338 pp. [422]
[50] Benyamini Y., Lindenstrauss J. Geometric nonlinear functional analysis. Amer. Math. Soc., Prov-
idence, Rhode Island, 2000; 488 pp. [251, 307, 422]
[51] Berezhnoy V.E. On the equivalence of integral norms on the space of measurable polynomials
with respect to a convex measure. Theory Stoch. Process. 2008. V. 14, №1. P. 7–10. [408]
[52] Bessaga C., Pelczy´nski A. Selected topics in infinite-dimensional topology. Polish Scientific
Publ., Warszawa, 1975; 353 pp. [217, 241, 422]
[53] Bierstedt K.D. An introduction to locally convex inductive limits. In: Functional Analysis and its
Applications (H. Hogbe-Nlend, ed.), World Sci., 1988. P. 35–133. [421, 423]
[54] Bierstedt K.D., Bonet J. Some aspects of the modern theory of Fr´echet spaces. Rev. R. Acad.
Cien. Ser. A Mat. 2003. V. 97. P. 159–188. [423]
[55] Birkhoff G., Kreyszig E. The establishment of functional analysis. Historia Math. 1984. V. 11,
№3. P. 258–321. [419]
[56] Bobkov S.G. Remarks on the growth of Lp-norms of polynomials. Lecture Notes in Math. 2000.
V. 1745. P. 27–35. [408]
[57] Bochnak J., Siciak J. Polynomials and multilinear mappings in topological vector spaces. Studia
Math. 1971. V. 39, №1. P. 59–76. [423]
[58] Bockshtein M. Un th´eor`eme de s´eparabilit´e pour les produits topologiques. Fund. Math. 1948.
V. 35. P. 242–246. [409]
[59] Bogachev V.I. Indices of asymmetry of stable measures. Matem. Zametki. 1986. V. 40, №1.
P. 127–138 (in Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. 1986. V. 40. P. 569–575. [384]
[60] Bogachev V.I. Locally convex spaces with the CLT property and supports of measures. Vestnik
Moskovsk. Univ. 1986. №6. P. 16–20 (in Russian); English transl.: Moscow Univ. Math. Bull.
1986. V. 41, №6. P. 19–23. [381, 382, 391]
[61] Bogachev V.I. Smooth measures, the Malliavin calculus and approximations in infinite dimen-
sional spaces. Acta Math. Univ. Carolinae, Math. et Phys. 1990. V. 31, №2. P. 9–23. [307]
[62] Bogachev V.I. Deterministic and stochastic differential equations in infinite dimensional spaces.
Acta Appl. Math. 1995. V. 40. P. 25–93. [294]
[63] Bogachev V.I. Gaussian measures, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, Rhode Island, 1998; 433 pp.
[321, 345, 354, 362, 393, 394, 415, 417]
[64] Bogachev V.I. Average approximations and moments of measures. J. Complexity. 2000. V. 16.
P. 390–410. [391]
[65] Bogachev V.I. Measure theory. V. 1, 2. Springer, Berlin, 2007; xvii+500 pp., xiii+575 pp. [179,
211, 214, 226, 316, 318 – 320, 322, 325, 337, 376, 378, 386, 391, 395, 398, 410, 418, 424]
[66] Bogachev V.I. Differentiable measures and the Malliavin calculus. Amer. Math. Soc., Rhode
Island, Providence, 2010; xvi+488 pp. [354, 379, 415, 424]
[67] Bogachev V.I. Gaussian measures on infinite-dimensional spaces. In: Real and Stochastic Analy-
sis: Current Trends (M.M. Rao ed.), pp. 1–83. World Sci., Singapore, 2014. [354]
[68] Bogachev V.I. Distributions of polynomials on multidimensional and infinite-dimensional spaces
with measures. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 2016. V. 71, №4. P. 107–154 (in Russian); English transl.:
Russian Math. Surveys. 2016. V. 71, №4. P. 703–749. [409]
[69] Bogachev V.I. Weak convergence of measures. Inst. Computer Sci., Moscow – Izhevsk, 2016;
396 pp. (in Russian); English transl. in preparation. [381, 382, 394]
[70] Bogachev V.I., Smolyanov O.G. Analytic properties of infinite dimensional distributions. Us-
pekhi Mat. Nauk. 1990. V. 45, №3. P. 3–83 (in Russian); English transl.: Russian Math. Surveys.
1990. V. 45, №3. P. 1–104. [424]
[71] Bogachev V.I., Smolyanov O.G. Generalized functions obtained by the regularization of non-
integrable functions. Dokl. Akad. Nauk 2008. V. 419, №6. P. 731–734 (in Russian); English
transl.: Dokl. Math. 2008. V. 77, №2. P. 302–305. [228]
[72] Bogachev V.I., Smolyanov O.G. Real and functional analysis. A university course. 2nd ed.
Regular and Chaotic Dynamics, Moscow – Izhevsk, 2011; 728 pp. (in Russian); English transl.
in preparation. [6, 28, 77, 122, 123, 124, 144, 169, 172, 175, 227, 240, 263, 289, 308, 417, 422]
[73] Bogolubov N.N., Logunov A.A., Oksak A.I., Todorov I.T. General principles of quantum field
theory. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1990; xx+694 pp. [421]
[74] Bonet J., Cascales B. Non-complete Mackey topologies on Banach spaces. Bull. Aust. Math.
Soc. 2010. V. 81, №3. P. 409–413. [423]

428
References
[75] Bonet J., D´ıaz J.C., Taskinen J. Tensor stable Fr´echet and (DF)-spaces. Collect. Math. 1991.
V. 42, №3. P. 199–236. [423]
[76] Bonet J., Galbis A. A note on Taskinen’s counterexamples on the problem of topologies of
Grothendieck. Proc. Edinburgh Math. Soc. (2). 1989. V. 32, №2. P. 281–283. [423]
[77] Bonet J., Lindstr¨om M., Valdivia M. Two theorems of Josefson–Nissenzweig type for Fr´echet
spaces. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1993. V. 117, №2. P. 363–364. [238]
[78] Bonet J., Taskinen J. Quojections and the problem of topologies of Grothendieck. Note Mat.
1991. V. 11. P. 49–59. [423]
[79] Bonic R.A. Four brief examples concerning polynomials on certain Banach spaces. J. Differen-
tial Geom. 1968. V. 2. P. 391–392. [309]
[80] Borell C. Convex measures on locally convex spaces. Ark. Math. 1974. V. 12, №2. P. 239–252.
[379]
[81] Borell C., Gaussian Radon measures on locally convex spaces. Math. Scand. 1976. V. 38, №2.
P. 265–284. [415]
[82] Borell C. A note on conditional probabilities of a convex measure. Lecture Notes in Math. 1978.
V. 644. P. 68–72. [379]
[83] Borell C. Convexity of measures in certain convex cones in vector space σ-algebras. Math.
Scand. 1983. V. 53, №1. P. 125–144. [380]
[84] Borges C.J.R. On stratifiable spaces. Pacif J. Math. 1966. V. 17, №1. P. 1–16. [94]
[85] Borsuk K. Theory of retracts. Panstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, Warsaw, 1967; 251 pp. [94]
[86] Bourbaki N. Sur les espaces de Banach. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris. 1938. T. 206. P. 1701–1704.
[419]
[87] Bourbaki N. Espaces vectoriels topologiques. Hermann & Cie, Paris, 1953; ii+124+iv pp.; 1955;
ii+191 pp. 2nd. ed: Espaces vectoriels topologiques. Chapitres 1 `a 5. Masson, Paris, 1981;
vii+368 pp. (in French); English transl.: Topological vector spaces. Chapters 1–5. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1987; viii+364 pp. [ix, 96, 230, 237, 420]
[88] Bourbaki N. Topologie g´en´erale. Chapitres 1 `a 4. Hermann, Paris, 1971; xv+357 pp. (in French);
English transl.: General topology. Chapters 1–4. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1989; viii+437 pp. [45,
51, 209]
[89] Bourgin R.D. Geometric aspects of convex sets with the Radon–Nikod´ym property. Lecture
Notes in Math. V. 993. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1983; xii+474 pp. [422]
[90] Buldygin V.V. Convergence of random elements in topological spaces. Naukova Dumka, Kiev,
1980; 239 pp. (in Russian). [375, 424]
[91] Buldygin V.V. Supports of probability measures in separable Banach spaces. Teor. Verojatn. i
Primen. 1984. V. 29, №3. P. 528–532 (in Russian); English transl.: Theory Probab. Appl. 1984.
V. 29. P. 546–549. [391]
[92] Buldygin V.V., Solntsev S.A. Asymptotic behaviour of linearly transformed sums of random
variables. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1997; xvi+500 pp. [424]
[93] Caki´c N., Kadelburg Z., Rajovi´c M., Radenovi´c S. On some problems of Grothendieck concern-
ing (F) and (DF) spaces. Numer. Funct. Anal. Optim. 2009. V. 30, №1-2. P. 37–45. [420]
[94] Carothers N.L. A short course on Banach space theory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2005; xii+184 pp. [422]
[95] Cartan H. Calcul diff´erentiel. Formes diff´erentielles. Applications ´el´ementaires au calcul des vari-
ations et `a la th´eorie des courbes et des surfaces. Hermann, Paris, 1967; 178 pp., 186 pp. English
transl.: Differential calculus. Differential forms. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, Massachusetts, 1970;
167 pp., 160 pp. [423]
[96] Cascales B., K¸akol J., Saxon S.A. Metrizability vs. Fr´echet–Urysohn property. Proc. Amer.
Math. Soc. 2003. V. 131, №11. P. 3623–3631 (electronic). [216]
[97] Cascales B., Orihuela J. On compactness in locally convex spaces. Math. Z. 1987. B. 195.
S. 365–381. [423]
[98] Cauty R. R´etractes absolus de voisinage alg´ebriques. Serdica Math. J. 2005. V. 31, №4.
P. 309–354. [422]
[99] Chapman T.A. Lectures on Hilbert cube manifolds. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, Rhode Island,
1976; x+131 pp. [422]
[100] Choquet G. Lectures on analysis. V. I: Integration and topological vector spaces. W.A. Benjamin,
New York, 1969; xx+360+xxi pp. [422]

References
429
[101] Christensen J.P.R. Topology and Borel structure. North-Holland, Amsterdam – London, Amer.
Elsevier, New York, 1974; 133 pp. [415]
[102] Chung D.M.,
Rajput B.S.,
Tortrat A. Semistable laws on topological vector spaces.
Z. Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie verw. Geb. 1982. B. 60. S. 209–218. [390]
[103] Cohen P.E. Products of Baire spaces. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1976. V. 55, №1. P. 119–124. [209]
[104] Collins H.S. Completeness and compactness in linear topological spaces. Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc. 1955. V. 79. P. 256–280. [236]
[105] Colombeau J.F. Infinite dimensional C∞-mappings with a given sequence of derivatives at a
given point. J. Math. Anal. Appl. 1979. V. 71. P. 95–104. [305, 309]
[106] Cooper J.B. Saks spaces and applications to functional analysis. North-Holland, Amsterdam –
New York, 1978; x+325 pp. (2nd ed.: 1987). [423]
[107] Corson H. The weak topology of a Banach space. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 1961. V. 101. P. 1–15.
[422]
[108] Corson H.H. Metrizability of compact convex sets. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 1970. V. 151. P. 589–
596. [242]
[109] Day M.M. Normed linear spaces. 3d ed. Springer-Verlag, New York – Heidelberg, 1973;
viii+211 pp. [227, 422]
[110] De Wilde M. Th´eor`eme du graphe ferm´e et espaces `a r´eseau absorbant. Bull. Math. Soc. Sci.
Math. R. S. Roum. 1967. V. 11. P. 225–238. [196, 421]
[111] De Wilde M. R´eseaux dans les espaces lin´eaires `a semi-normes. M´em. Soc. Roy. Sci. Li`ege.
1969. V. 18, №2. P. 1–144. [196, 421]
[112] De Wilde M. Closed graph theorems and webbed spaces. Pitman, London, 1978; viii+158 pp.
[196, 421]
[113] Defant A., Floret K. Tensor norms and operator ideals. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1993;
xii+566 pp. [422]
[114] Defant A., Floret K., Taskinen J. On the injective tensorproduct of (DF)-spaces. Arch. Math.
1991. B. 57, №2. P. 149–154. [423]
[115] Deimling K. Nonlinear functional analysis. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1985; xiv+450 pp. [422,
423]
[116] Dembart B. On the theory of semigroups of operators on locally convex spaces. J. Funct. Anal.
1974. V. 16. P. 123–160. [424]
[117] Dettweiler E. Grenzwerts¨atze f¨ur Wahrscheinlichkeitsmasse auf Badrikianschen R¨aumen.
Z. Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie verw. Geb. 1976. B. 34. S. 285–311. [390]
[118] Deville R., Godefroy G., Zizler V. Smoothness and renormings in Banach spaces. Longman
Scientific & Technical, Harlow; John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1993; xii+376 pp. [307, 422]
[119] Dierolf S., Lurje P. Deux exemples concernant des espaces (ultra) bornologiques. C. R. Acad.
Sci. Paris. S´er. A-B. 1976. T. 282, №23. P. A1347–A1350. [227]
[120] Diestel J. Geometry of Banach spaces – selected topics. Lecture Notes in Math. V. 485. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin – New York, 1975; xi+282 pp. [123, 422]
[121] Diestel J., Jarchow H., Tonge A. Absolutely summing operators. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1995; xvi+474 pp. [412, 422]
[122] Diestel J., Uhl J.J. Vector measures. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, 1977; xiii+322 pp. [422]
[123] Dieudonn´e J. Topologies faibles dans les espaces vectoriels. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris. 1940. T. 211.
P. 94–97. [419]
[124] Dieudonn´e J. Sur le th´eor`eme de Hahn–Banach. Revue Sci. 1941. V. 70. P. 642–643. [420]
[125] Dieudonn´e J. La dualit´e dans les espaces vectoriels topologiques. Ann. Sci. ´Ecole Norm. Su-
per. (3). 1942. V. 59. P. 107–139. [419]
[126] Dieudonn´e J. Recent developments in the theory of locally convex vector spaces. Bull. Amer.
Math. Soc. 1953. V. 59. P. 495–512. [420]
[127] Dieudonn´e J. On biorthogonal systems. Michigan Math. J. 1954. V. 2. P. 7–20. [220]
[128] Dieudonn´e J. Sur les espaces de Montel m´etrisables. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris. 1954. T. 238.
P. 194–195. [238]
[129] Dieudonn´e J. Bounded sets in (F)-spaces. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1955. V. 6. P. 729–731. [238]
[130] Dieudonn´e J. Foundations of modern analysis. Academic Press, New York – London, 1960;
xiv+361 pp. [51, 423]
[131] Dieudonn´e J. History of functional analysis. North-Holland, Amsterdam – New York, 1981;
vi+312 pp. [419]

430
References
[132] Dieudonn´e J., Schwartz L. La dualit´e dans les espaces (F) et (LF). Ann. Inst. Fourier Greno-
ble. 1949. V. 1. P. 61–101. [420, 421]
[133] Dinculeanu N. Vector integration and stochastic integration in Banach spaces. Wiley–
Interscience, New York, 2000; xvi+424 pp. [424]
[134] Dragilev M.M. Bases in K¨othe spaces. Rostov Gos. Univ., Rostov-on-Don, 2003; 143 pp. (in
Russian). [220]
[135] Dragilev M.M., Chalov P.A. On Fr´echet spaces with an unconditional basis. Mat. Zametki. 2006.
V. 80, №1. P. 29–32 (in Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. 2006. V. 80, №1-2. P. 27–30.
[220]
[136] Drewnowski L. The metrizable linear extensions of metrizable sets in topological linear spaces.
Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1975. V. 51. P. 323–329. [152]
[137] Drewnowski L. Resolutions of topological linear spaces and continuity of linear maps. J. Math.
Anal. Appl. 2007. V. 335, №2. P. 1177–1194. [239]
[138] Dubinsky E. The structure of nuclear Fr´echet spaces. Lecture Notes in Math. V. 720. Springer,
Berlin, 1979; ii+187 pp. [220]
[139] Dubinsky E. Nuclear Fr´echet spaces without the bounded approximation property. Studia Math.
1981/82. V. 71, №1. P. 85–105. [220]
[140] Dudley R.M., Feldman J., Le Cam L. On seminorms and probabilities, and abstract Wiener
spaces. Ann. Math. (2). 1971. V. 93. P. 390–408. Corrections: ibid. 1976. V. 104, №2. P. 391.
[412]
[141] Dudley R.M., Kanter M. Zero–one laws for stable measures. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1974. V. 45,
№2. P. 245–252; Correction: ibid. 1983. V. 88, №4. P. 689–690. [384]
[142] Dugundji J. An extension of Tietze’s theorem. Pacif J. Math. 1951. V. 1. P. 353–367. [94]
[143] Duistermaat J.J., Kolk J.A.C. Distributions: theory and applications. Springer, New York, 2010;
xvi+445 pp. [422]
[144] Dulst D. van. Reflexive and superreflexive Banach spaces. Mathematisch Centrum, Amsterdam,
1978; v+273 pp. [422]
[145] Dunford N., Schwartz J.T. Linear operators, I. General Theory. Interscience, New York, 1958;
xiv+858 pp. [86, 88, 292, 327, 419]
[146] Dynin A., Mitiagin B. Criterion for nuclearity in terms of approximative dimension. Bull. Acad.
Polon. Sci. S´er. Sci. Math. Astronom. Phys. 1960. V. 8. P. 535–540. [220]
[147] Eberlein W.F. Weak compactness in Banach spaces. I. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1947. V. 33.
P. 51–53. [420]
[148] Edgar G.A. Measurability in a Banach space. I. Indiana Math. J. 1977. V. 26, №4. P. 663–677;
II. ibid., 1979. V. 28, №4. P. 559–579. [410]
[149] Edgar G.A., Wheeler R.F. Topological properties of Banach spaces. Pacific J. Math. 1984.
V. 115. P. 317–350. [422]
[150] Edwards R.E. Functional analysis. Theory and applications. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New
York – London, 1965; xiii+781 pp. [ix, 6, 82, 100, 149, 174, 186, 220, 224, 227, 229, 231, 234,
237, 343, 422]
[151] Eells J. A setting for global analysis. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 1966. V. 72, №5. P. 751–807. [423]
[152] Eidelheit M. Zur Theorie der konvexen Mengen in linearen normierten R¨aumen. Studia Math.
1936. V. 6. P. 104–111. [223, 420]
[153] Ekeland I. An inverse function theorem in Fr´echet spaces. Annales Inst. H. Poincar´e (C) Non
Linear Anal. 2011. V. 28, №1. P. 91–105. [291, 310]
[154] Engelking P. General topology. Polish Sci. Publ., Warszawa, 1977; 626 pp. [6, 45, 51, 82, 139,
215, 241, 326]
[155] Fabian M., Habala P., H´ajek P., Montesinos Santaluc´ıa V., Pelant J., Zizler V. Functional analysis
and infinite-dimensional geometry. Springer-Verlag, New York, 2001; x+451 pp. [307, 422]
[156] Fabian M., Habala P., H´ajek P., Montesinos V., Zizler V. Banach space theory. The basis for
linear and nonlinear analysis. Springer, New York, 2011; xiv+820 pp. [307, 422]
[157] Fedorchuk V.V., Chigogidze A.Ch. Absolute retracts and infinite-dimensional manifolds. Nauka,
Moscow, 1992; 232 pp. (in Russian). [422]
[158] Fernique X. Une d´emonstration simple du th´eor`eme de R.M. Dudley et M. Kanter sur les lois
zero–un pour les mesures stables. Lecture Notes in Math. 1974. V. 381. P. 78–79. [390]
[159] Fernique X. Fonctions al´eatoires gaussiennes, vecteurs al´eatoires gaussiens. Universit´e de
Montr´eal, Centre de Recherches Math´ematiques, Montr´eal, 1997; iv+217 pp. [354]

References
431
[160] Ferrando J.C., K¸akol J., L´opez Pellicer M. Necessary and sufficient conditions for precompact
sets to be metrisable. Bull. Austral. Math. Soc. 2006. V. 74, №1. P. 7–13. [423]
[161] Ferrando J.C., K¸akol J., L´opez Pellicer M. A revised closed graph theorem for quasi-Suslin
spaces. Czech. Math. J. 2009. V. 59. P. 1115–1122. [196, 421]
[162] Ferrando J.C., K¸akol J., L´opez Pellicer M., Saxon S.A. Tightness and distinguished Fr´echet
spaces. J. Math. Anal. Appl. 2006. V. 324, №2. P. 862–881. [423]
[163] Ferrando J.C., K¸akol J., L´opez Pellicer M., Saxon S.A. Quasi-Suslin weak duals. J. Math. Anal.
Appl. 2008. V. 339. P. 1253–1263. [423]
[164] Ferrando J.C., K¸akol J., L´opez Pellicer M., ´Sliwa W. Web-compact spaces, Fr´echet–Urysohn
groups and a Suslin closed graph theorem. Math. Nachr. 2010. B. 283, №5. S. 704–711. [196,
423]
[165] Ferrando J.C., L´opez Pellicer M., S´anchez Ruiz L.M. Metrizable barrelled spaces. Pitman Re-
search Notes in Math. Ser. V. 332. Longman, Harlow; Wiley, New York, 1995; 238 pp. [423]
[166] Ferrando J.C., S´anchez Ruiz L.M. On C-Suslin spaces. Math. Nachr. 2015. B. 288, №8-9.
S. 898–904. [422]
[167] Fetisov V.G., Filippenko V.I., Kozobrod V.N. Operators and equations in linear topological
spaces. VNC RAN, Vladikavkaz, 2006; 432 pp. (in Russian). [423]
[168] Fichtenholz G. Sur les fonctionnelles lin´eaires, continues au sens g´en´eralis´e. Matem. Sbornik.
1938. V. 4, №1. P. 193–214. [98, 420]
[169] Filippov V.V. On a question of E.A. Michael. Comm. Math. Univ. Carol. 2004. V. 45, №4.
P. 735–738. [93]
[170] Filippov V.V. On a problem of E. Michael. Mat. Zametki. 2005. V. 78, №4. P. 638–640 (in
Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. 2005. V. 78, №3-4. P. 597–599. [93]
[171] Floret K. Weakly compact sets. Lecture Notes in Math. V. 801. Springer-Verlag, Berlin – New
York, 1980; vii+123 pp. [213, 214, 218, 231, 241]
[172] Floret K., Wloka J. Einf¨uhrung in die Theorie der lokalkonvexen Raume. Lecture Notes in Math.
V. 56. Springer-Verlag, Berlin – New York, 1968; vii+194 S. [420]
[173] Fonf V.P., Johnson W.B., Pisier G., Preiss D. Stochastic approximation properties in Banach
spaces. Studia Math. 2003. V. 159, №1. P. 103–119. [124, 391, 393, 404]
[174] Fortet R., Mourier E. Les fonctions al´eatoires comme ´el´ements al´eatoires dans les espaces de
Banach. Studia Math. 1955. V. 15. P. 62–73. [424]
[175] Fr´echet M. la notion de diff´erentielle dans l’analyse g´en´erale. Ann. Sci. ´Ecole Norm. Sup. 1925.
V. 42. P. 293–323. [423]
[176] Fr´echet M. Les ´el´ements al´eatoires de nature quelconque dans un espace distanci´e. Ann. Inst.
H. Poincar´e. 1948. V. 10. P. 215–310. [424]
[177] Fremlin D.H. Borel sets in non-separable Banach spaces. Hokkaido Math. J. 1980. V. 9.
P. 179–183. [411]
[178] Fremlin D. Measure theory. V. 1–5. University of Essex, Colchester, 2000–2003. [416]
[179] Frerick L., Jord´a E., Kalmes Th., Wengenroth J. Strongly continuous semigroups on some Fr´echet
spaces. J. Math. Anal. Appl. 2014. V. 412, №1. P. 121–124. [424]
[180] Fr¨olicher A., Bucher W. Calculus in vector spaces without norm. Lecture Notes in Math. V. 30.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin – New York, 1966; x+146 pp. [423]
[181] Fr¨olicher A., Kriegl A. Linear spaces and differentiation theory. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,
1988; xvi+246 pp. [423]
[182] Gabriyelyan S.S., K¸akol J., Kubzdela A., L´opez-Pellicer M. On topological properties of Fr´echet
locally convex spaces with the weak topology. Topology Appl. 2015. V. 192. P. 123–137. [242,
423]
[183] Gabriyelyan S., K¸akol J., Plebanek G. The Ascoli property for function spaces and the weak
topology of Banach and Fr´echet spaces. Studia Math. 2016. V. 233, №2. P. 119–139. [242]
[184] Gaehler W. Grundstrukturen der Analysis. B. 1, 2. Birkh¨auser, Basel – Stuttgart, 1977, 1978;
viii+412 S., viii+623 S. [423]
[185] Gantmacher V., ˇSmulian V. ¨Uber schwache Kompaktheit im Banachschen Raum. Rec. Math.
[Mat. Sbornik] N.S. 1940. V. 8 (50), №3. P. 489–492 (in Russian, German summary). [420]
[186] Garnir H.G., De Wilde M., Schmets J. Analyse fonctionnelle. T. I–III. Birkh¨auser, Basel–
Stuttgart, 1968, 1972, 1973; 562 pp., 287 pp., 375 pp. [422]
[187] Garsoux J. Espaces vectoriels topologiques et distributions. Dunod, Paris, 1963; xiii+324 pp.
[422]

432
References
[188] Gˆateaux R. Sur les fonctionnelles continues et les fonctionnelles analytiques. Compt. Rend.
Acad. Sci. (Paris). 1913. T. 157. P. 325–327. [423]
[189] Gelfand I.M. Sur un lemme de la th´eorie des espaces lin´eaires. Commun. Inst. Sci. Math. et
Mecan., Univ. Kharkoff et Soc. Math. Kharkoff, IV. Ser. 13. P. 35–40. [237]
[190] Gel’fand I.M. On some problems of functional analysis. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 1956. V. 11, №6.
P. 3–12 (in Russian). [240, 424]
[191] Gel’fand I.M., Vilenkin N.Ya. Generalized functions. V. 4. Applications of harmonic analysis.
Translated from the Russian. Academic Press, New York – London, 1964; xiv+384 pp. (Russian
ed.: Moscow, 1961). [424]
[192] Gel’fand I.M., Kostyuˇcenko A.G. Expansion in eigenfunctions of differential and other opera-
tors. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR (N.S.). 1955. V. 103, №3. P. 349–352 (in Russian). [240]
[193] Gel’fand I.M., Shilov G.E. Generalized functions. V. 2. Spaces of fundamental and generalized
functions. Academic Press, New York – London, 1968; x+261 pp. (Russian ed.: Moscow, 1958)
[106, 420]
[194] Gihman I.I., Skorohod A.V. The theory of stochastic processes. V. 1. Springer-Verlag, New York
– Heidelberg, 1974; viii+570 pp. (Russian ed.: Moscow, 1971). [329, 418, 424]
[195] Godefroy G., Lancien G., Zizler V. The non-linear geometry of Banach spaces after Nigel
Kalton. Rocky Mountain J. Math. 2014. V. 44, №5. P. 1529–1583. [422]
[196] Godunov A.N. The Peano theorem in Banach spaces. Funkc. Anal. i Pril. 1975. V. 9, №1.
P. 59–60 (in Russian); English transl.: Functional Anal. Appl. 1975. V. 9, №1. P. 53–55. [294]
[197] Goldstine H.H. Weakly complete Banach spaces. Duke Math. J. 1938. V. 4. P. 125–131. [419]
[198] Gorin E.A., Mitjagin B.S. Systems of norms in a countably-normed space. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk.
1958. V. 13, №5. P. 179–184 (in Russian). [151]
[199] Granas A., Dugundji J. Fixed point theory. Springer, New York, 2003; xv+690 pp. [422]
[200] Graves L.M. Topics in the functional calculus. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 1935. V. 41, №10.
P. 641–662. [423]
[201] Gross L. Harmonic analysis on Hilbert space. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 1963. V. 46. P. 1–62.
[424]
[202] Grothendieck A. Crit`eres de compacit´e dans les espaces fonctionnels g´en´eraux. Amer. J. Math.
1952. V. 74. P. 168–186. [420]
[203] Grothendieck A. R´esum´e des r´esultats essentiels dans la th´eorie des produits tensoriels
topologiques et des espaces nucl´eaires. Ann. Inst. Fourier Grenoble. 1952. V. 4. P. 73–112.
[420]
[204] Grothendieck A. R´esum´e de la th´eorie m´etrique des produits tensoriels topologiques. Bol. Soc.
Mat. Sao Paulo. 1953. V. 8. P. 1–79. [420]
[205] Grothendieck A. Sur les espaces (F) et (DF). Summa Brasil. Math. 1954. V. 3. P. 57–123.
[237, 238, 420, 421]
[206] Grothendieck A. Produit tensoriels topologiques et espaces nucl´eaires. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc.
1955. №16. 140 pp.; erratum: Ann. Inst. Fourier, Grenoble. 1955–1956. V. 6. P. 117–120. [195,
420]
[207] Grothendieck A. Espaces vectoriels topologiques. Inst. Mat. Pura Apl., Univ. de S˜ao Paulo, S˜ao
Paulo, 1954; 240 pp.; English transl.: Topological vector spaces. Gordon and Breach, New York
– London – Paris, 1973; x+245 pp. [ix, 195, 234, 416, 420]
[208] Gruenhage G. Metrizable spaces and generalizations. Recent Progress in General Topology-II
(M. Huˇsek, J. van Mill, eds.). P. 201–225. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2002. [216]
[209] Guerre-Delabri`ere S. Classical sequences in Banach spaces. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1992;
xvi+207 pp. [422]
[210] Guirao A.J., Montesinos V. Completeness in the Mackey topology. Funct. Anal. Appl. 2015.
V. 49, №2. P. 97–105. [423]
[211] Guirao A.J., Montesinos V., Zizler V. A note on Mackey topologies on Banach spaces. J. Math.
Anal. Appl. 2017. V. 445, №1. P. 944–952. [423]
[212] Guirao A.J., Montesinos V., Zizler V. Open problems in the geometry and analysis of Banach
spaces. Springer, Cham, 2016; xii+169 pp. [422]
[213] Gutnik L.A. Locally convex spaces that do not contain infinite-dimensional bounded sets. Us-
pekhi Mat. Nauk. 1977. V. 32, №6. P. 251–252 (in Russian). [240]
[214] Hadamard J. Le¸cons sur le calcul des variations. Hermann, Paris, 1910; 534 pp. [423]

References
433
[215] Hain R.M. A characterization of smooth functions defined on a Banach space. Proc. Amer. Math.
Soc. 1979. V. 77, №1. P. 63–67. [423]
[216] Haworth R.C., Mccoy R.A. Baire spaces. Dissert. Math. CXLI. Warszawa, 1977; 73 pp. [209]
[217] Haydon R. An extreme point criterion for separability of a dual Banach space, and a new proof
of a theorem of Corson. Quart. J. Math. Oxford (2). 1976. V. 27, №107. P. 379–385. [242]
[218] Hazod W., Siebert E. Stable probability measures on Euclidean spaces and on locally compact
groups. Structural properties and limit theorems. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2001; xviii+612 p. [390,
424]
[219] Herer W. Stochastic bases in Fr´echet spaces. Demonstr. Math. 1981. V. 14. P. 719–724. [403]
[220] Heyer H. Structural aspects in the theory of probability. 2nd ed. World Sci., Hackensack, New
Jersey, 2010; xii+412 pp. [424]
[221] Hildebrandt T.H., Graves L.M. Implicit functions and their differentials in general analysis.
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 1927. V. 29, №1. P. 127–153. [423]
[222] Hille E., Phillips R.S. Functional analysis and semi-groups. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence,
Rhode Island, 1974; xii+808 pp. [64, 66, 112]
[223] Hoffmann-Jørgensen J. Weak compactness and tightness of subsets of M(X). Math. Scand.
1972. V. 31, №1. P. 127–150. [394]
[224] Hoffmann-Jørgensen J. Probability in Banach spaces. Lecture Notes in Math. 1976. V. 598.
P. 1–186. [424]
[225] Hoffmann-Jørgensen J. Integrability of seminorms, the 0–1 law and the affine kernel for product
measures. Studia Math. 1977. V. 61, №2. P. 137–159. [424]
[226] Hogbe-Nlend H. Th´eorie des bornologies et applications. Lecture Notes in Math. V. 213.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin – Heidelberg – New York, 1971; iv+168 pp. [422]
[227] H¨ormander L. The analysis of linear partial differential operators. I–IV. Springer-Verlag, Berlin
– New York, 1983, 1985; ix+391 pp., viii+391 pp., viii+525 pp., vii+352 pp. [138, 422]
[228] Horvath J. Topological vector spaces and distributions. V. I. Addison-Wesley, Reading – London
– Don Mills, 1966; xii+449 pp. [422]
[229] Hrbacek K., Jech T. Introduction to set theory. 3d ed. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1999;
ix+291 pp. [6]
[230] Hyers D.H. Linear topological spaces. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 1945. V. 51, №1. P. 1–21. [420]
[231] James R.C. A non-reflexive Banach space isometric with its second conjugate space. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1951. V. 37. P. 174–177. [227]
[232] James R.C. Reflexivity and the supremum of linear functionals. Ann. Math. (2). 1957. V. 66.
P. 159–169. [420]
[233] James R.C. Characterizations of reflexivity. Studia Math. 1963/1964. V. 23. P. 205–216. [420]
[234] James R.C. Weakly compact sets. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 1964. V. 113. P. 129–140. [213, 420]
[235] James R.C. Weak compactness and reflexivity. Israel J. Math. 1964. V. 2. P. 101–119. [420]
[236] James R.C. Reflexivity and the sup of linear functionals. Israel J. Math. 1972. V. 13. P. 289–300.
[420]
[237] Jarchow H. Locally convex spaces. B.G. Teubner, Stuttgart, 1981; 548 pp. [ix, 89, 110, 114, 137,
180, 197, 220, 239, 421]
[238] Johnson W.B., Lindenstrauss J. (ed.) Handbook of the geometry of Banach spaces. V. I, II.
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2001, 2003; x+1005 pp., xii+1007–1866 pp. [422, 424]
[239] Junek H. Locally convex spaces and operator ideals. Teubner, Leipzig, 1983; 180 pp. [422]
[240] Kac M.P., Kurato A. A sufficient condition for the differentiability of vector-valued functions.
Vestnik Moskov. Univ. Ser. I Mat. Meh. 1976. №4. P. 44–51 (in Russian); English transl.:
Moscow Univ. Math. Bull. 1976. V. 31, №3-4. P. 83–89. [423]
[241] Kadelburg Z., Radenovi´c S. Subspaces and quotients of topological and ordered vector spaces.
University of Novi Sad, Inst. Math., Novi Sad, 1997; iv+122 pp. [423]
[242] Kadets (Kadec) M.I. Proof of the topological equivalence of all separable infinite-dimensional
Banach spaces. Funkc. Anal. i Pril. 1967. V. 1, №1. P. 61–70 (in Russian); English transl.: Funct.
Anal. Appl. 1967. V. 1, №1. P. 53–62. [217]
[243] Kadets V.M., Kadets M.I. A condition for normability of Frechet spaces. Mat. Zametki. 1985.
V. 38, №1. P. 142–147 (Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. 1985. V. 38, №1. P. 592–595.
[240]
[244] Kadets M.I., Kadets V.M. Series in Banach spaces. Conditional and unconditional convergence.
Birkh¨auser, Basel, 1997; viii+156 pp. [144, 422]

434
References
[245] K¸akol J., Kubi´s W., L´opez-Pellicer M. Descriptive topology in selected topics of functional
analysis. Springer, Berlin, 2011; xii+493 pp. [196, 216, 423]
[246] K¸akol J., L´opez Pellicer M. On realcompact topological vector spaces. Rev. R. Acad. Cienc.
Exactas Fıis. Nat. Ser. A Math. RACSAM. 2011. V. 105, №1. P. 39–70. [423]
[247] K¸akol J., L´opez Pellicer M., Okunev O. Compact covers and function spaces. J. Math. Anal.
Appl. 2014. V. 411, №1. P. 372–380. [423]
[248] K¸akol J., L´opez Pellicer M., Sliwa W. Weakly K-analytic spaces and the three-space property
for analyticity. J. Math. Anal. Appl. 2010. V. 362, №1. P. 90–99. [423]
[249] K¸akol J., L´opez Pellicer M., Todd A.R. A topological vector space is Fr´echet–Urysohn if
and only if it has bounded tightness. Bull. Belg. Math. Soc. Simon Stevin. 2009. V. 16, №2.
P. 313–317. [216]
[250] K¸akol J., Saxon S.A. Montel (DF)-spaces, sequential (LM)-spaces and the strongest locally
convex topology. J. London Math. Soc. (2). 2002. V. 66, №2. P. 388–406. [423]
[251] Kakutani S. ¨Uber die Metrisation der topologischer Gruppen. Proc. Imper. Acad. Tokyo. 1936.
V. 12. P. 82–84. [420]
[252] Kakutani S. Ein Beweis des Satzes von M. Eidelheit ¨uber konvexe Mengen. Proc. Imper. Acad.
Tokyo. 1937. V. 13. P. 93–94. [420]
[253] Kakutani S. Weak topology, bicompact set and the principle of duality. Proc. Imper. Acad. Tokyo.
1940. V. 16. P. 63–67. [419]
[254] Kakutani S., Klee V. The finite topology of a linear space. Arch. Math. (Basel). 1963. V. 14.
P. 55–58. [112]
[255] Kalenda O.F.K., Spurn´y J. Boundaries of compact convex sets and fragmentability. J. Funct.
Anal. 2009. V. 256, №3. P. 865–880. [423]
[256] Kalton N.J. Some forms of the closed graph theorem. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 1971. V. 70.
P. 401–408. [229, 421]
[257] Kalton N.J., Peck N.T., Roberts J.W. An F-space sampler. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1984; xii+240 pp. [423]
[258] Kanter M. Linear sample spaces and stable processes. J. Funct. Anal. 1972. V. 9, №4.
P. 441–459. [390, 399]
[259] Kanter M. Random linear functionals and why we study them. Lecture Notes in Math. 1978.
V. 645. P. 114–123. [399]
[260] Kanter M. Completion measurable linear functionals on a probability space. Colloq. Math. 1978.
V. 38, №2. P. 277–304. [424]
[261] Kantorovich L.V., Akilov G.P. Functional analysis in normed spaces. Macmillan, New York,
1964; xiii+771 pp. [420]
[262] Kantorovich L.V., Akilov G.P. Functional analysis. 2nd edition. Pergamon Press, Oxford– Elms-
ford, New York, 1982; xiv+589 pp. [420]
[263] Kantoroviˇc L.V., Vulih B.Z., Pinsker A.G. Functional analysis in partially ordered spaces.
GITTL, Moscow, 1950; 548 pp. (in Russian). [422]
[264] Kanwal R.P. Generalized functions. Theory and applications. 3d ed. Birkh¨auser Boston, Boston,
2004; xviii+476 pp. [422]
[265] Kats M.P. Continuity of universally measurable linear mappings. Sibirsk. Mat. Zh. 1982. V. 23,
№3. P. 83–90; correction: ibid. 1983. V. 24, №3. P. 217 (in Russian); English transl.: Sib. Math.
J. 1982. V. 23, №3. P. 358–364. [415]
[266] Keller H.H. Differential calculus in locally convex spaces. Lecture Notes in Math. V. 417.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin – Heidelberg – New York, 1974; 143 pp. [423]
[267] Keller O.-H. Die Homoiomorphie der kompakten konvexen Mengen im Hilbertschen Raum.
Math. Ann. 1931. B. 105, №1. S. 748–758. [217]
[268] Kelley J.L. General topology. Van Nostrand, Toronto –New York – London, 1955; xiv+298 pp.
[6, 45, 51, 82]
[269] Kelley J.L. Hypercomplete linear topological spaces. Michigan Math. J. 1958. V. 5. P. 235–246.
[421]
[270] Kelley J.L., Namioka I. Linear topological spaces. 2nd ed. Springer-Verlag, New York – Heidel-
berg, 1976; xv+256 pp. [ix, 81, 235, 420]
[271] Kirillov A.A., Gvishiani A.D. Theorems and problems in functional analysis. Springer-Verlag,
New York – Berlin, 1982; ix+347 pp. [150]
[272] Klee V.L. Convex sets in linear spaces. Duke Math. J. 1951. V. 18. P. 443–466. [420]

References
435
[273] Klee V.L. Invariant metrics in groups (solution of a problem of Banach). Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.
1952. V. 3. P. 484–487. [420]
[274] Klee V.L. Boundedness and continuity of linear functionals. Duke Math. J. 1955. V. 22.
P. 263–269. [420]
[275] Klee V.L. Some topological properties of convex sets. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 1955. V. 78.
P. 30–45. [420]
[276] Klee V., Maluta E., Zanco C. Basic properties of evenly convex sets. J. Convex Anal. 2007.
V. 14, №1. P. 137–148. [423]
[277] Knowles R.J., Cook T.A. Incomplete reflexive spaces without Schauder bases. Proc. Cambridge
Philos. Soc. 1973. V. 74. P. 83–86. [186]
[278] Kolesnikov A.P. Functional splines in topological vector spaces. URSS, Moscow, 2008; 440 pp.
(in Russian). [423]
[279] Kolmogoroff A.N. Zur Normierbarkeit eines allgemeinen topologischen linearen Raumes. Studia
Math. 1934. V. 5. P. 29–33 (English transl in [282]). [40, 419]
[280] Kolmogoroff A. La transformation de Laplace dans les espaces lin´eaires. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris.
1935. T. 200. P. 1717–1718 (English transl. in [282]). [333, 424]
[281] Kolmogorov A.N. A note on the papers of R.A. Minlos and V. Sazonov. Teor. Verojant. i Primen.
1959. V. 4, №2. P. 237–239 (in Russian); English transl.: Theory Probab. Appl. 1959. V. 4.
P. 221–223. [424]
[282] Kolmogorov A.N. Selected works. V. I,II. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1991, 1992. [435]
[283] Kolmogorov A.N., Tihomirov V.M. ε-entropy and ε-capacity of sets in functional spaces. Us-
pekhi Mat. Nauk. 1959. V. 14, №2. P. 3–86 (in Russian); English transl.: Amer. Math. Soc.
Transl. (2). 1961. V. 17. P. 277–364. [421]
[284] Kolmogorov A.N., Fomin S.V. Introductory real analysis. V. 1. Metric and normed spaces. V. 2.
Measure. The Lebesgue integral. Hilbert space. Transl. from the 2nd Russian ed. Corr. repr.
Dover, New York, 1975; xii+403 pp. (Russian ed.: Moscow, 1954, 1960). [x, 5, 150]
[285] Komatsu H. Semi-groups of operators in locally convex spaces. J. Math. Soc. Japan. 1964. V. 16.
P. 230–262. [424]
[286] K¯omura T. Semigroups of operators in locally convex spaces. J. Funct. Anal. 1968. V. 2.
P. 258–296. [424]
[287] K¯omura T., K¯omura Y. ¨Uber die Einbettung der nuklearen R¨aume in (s)A. Math. Ann. 1966.
B. 162. S. 284–288. [138]
[288] K¯omura Y. Some examples on linear topological spaces. Math. Ann. 1964 B. 153. S. 150–162.
[186]
[289] Kondakov V.P. Three main principles of functional analysis, their generalizations and applica-
tions. VNC RAN, Vladikavkaz, 2007; 208 pp. (in Russian). [423]
[290] Korobeinik Ju.F. Representing systems. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 1981. V. 36, №1. P. 73–126
(Russian); English transl.: Russian Math. Surveys. 1981. V. 36, №1. P. 75–137. [220]
[291] Kosov E.D. Supports of measures with weak moments. Dokl. Akad. Nauk. 2012. V. 447, №3.
P. 254–258 (Russian); English transl.: Dokl. Math. 2012. V. 86, №3. P. 776–780. [418]
[292] K¨othe G. Topological vector spaces. V. I, II. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1969, 1979; xv+456 pp.,
xii+331 pp. (German original: Topologische lineare R¨aume. I. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1960;
xii+456 S.) [ix, 238, 238, 420]
[293] K¨othe G., Toepliz O. Lineare R¨aume mit unendlichvielen Koordinaten und Ringe unendlicher
Matrizen. J. Reine Angew. Math. 1934. B. 171. S. 193–226. [419]
[294] Kraaij R. Strongly continuous and locally equi-continuous semigroups on locally convex spaces.
Semigroup Forum. 2016. V. 92, №1. P. 158–185. [424]
[295] Kraaij R.C. A Banach–Dieudonne theorem for the space of bounded continuous functions on a
separable metric space with the strict topology. Topology Appl. 2016. V. 209. P. 181–188. [423]
[296] Krasnosel’skii M.A., Zabreiko P.P. Geometrical methods of nonlinear analysis. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 1984; xix+409 pp. [423]
[297] Krein M., ˇSmulian V. On regulary convex sets in the space conjugate to a Banach space. Ann.
Math. (2). 1940. V. 41. P. 556–583. [420]
[298] Kriegl A., Michor P.W. The convenient setting of global analysis. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence,
Rhode Island, 1997; x+618 pp. [423]
[299] Kriegl A., Michor P.W., Rainer A. The exponential law for spaces of test functions and diffeo-
morphism groups. Indag. Math. (N.S.). 2016. V. 27, №1. P. 225–265. [423]

436
References
[300] Krom M.R. Cartesian products of metric Baire spaces. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1974. V. 42.
P. 588–594. [209]
[301] Kruglov V.M. Supplementary chapters of probability theory. Vysˇs. ˇSkola, Moscow, 1984; 264 pp.
(in Russian). [375, 384, 390, 424]
[302] Kuelbs J. Some results for probability measures on linear topological vector spaces with an
application to Strassen’s LogLog Law. J. Funct. Anal. 1973. V. 14, №1. P. 28–43. [391]
[303] Kuelbs J., Zinn J. Another view of the CLT in Banach spaces. J. Theoret. Probab. 2008. V. 21,
№4. P. 982–1029. [424]
[304] Kunzinger M. Barrelledness, Baire-like- and (LF)-spaces. Pitman Research Notes in Math. Ser.
V. 298 Longman, Harlow; Wiley & Sons, New York, 1993; xiii+160 pp. [423]
[305] Kuo H. Gaussian measures in Banach spaces. Lecture Notes in Math. V. 463. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin – New York, 1975; vi+224 pp. [354, 364]
[306] Kurosh A.G. Lectures in general algebra. Pergamon Press, Oxford– Edinburgh – New York,
1965; x+364 pp. [1, 5]
[307] Kusraev A.G., Kutateladze S.S. Subdifferentials: theory and applications. Kluwer, Dordrecht,
1995; x+398 pp. [423]
[308] Kwapie´n S. Compl´ement au th´eor`eme de Sazonov–Minlos. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris S´er. A-B. 1968.
T. 267. P. A698–A700. [415]
[309] Kwapie´n S., Tarieladze V. Mackey continuity of characteristic functionals. Georg. Math. J. 2002.
V. 9, №1. P. 83–112. [337, 366]
[310] Larman D.G., Rogers C.A. The normability of metrizable sets. Bull. London Math. Soc. 1973.
V. 5. P. 39–48. [152]
[311] Ledoux M., Talagrand M. Probability in Banach spaces. Isoperimetry and processes. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1991; xii+480 pp. [382, 424]
[312] Lelong P. Introduction `a l’analyse fonctionnelle. I: Espaces vectoriels topologiques. Les cours
de Sorbonne. Centre de Documentation Universitaire, Paris, 1971; ii+230 pp. [422]
[313] Leonov A., Shkarin S. On weak and strong Peano theorems. Russ. J. Math. Phys. 2004. V. 11.
P. 77–80. [297]
[314] LePage R., Woodroofe M., Zinn J. Convergence to a stable distribution via order statistics. Ann.
Probab. 1981. V. 9, №4. P. 624–632. [387]
[315] Li D., Queff´elec H. Introduction `a l’´etude des espaces de Banach. Soc. Math. de France, Paris,
2004; xxiv+627 pp. [422]
[316] Lifshits M.A. Gaussian random functions. Translated from the Russian. Kluwer, Dordrecht,
1995; xii+333 pp. [354]
[317] Linde W. Probability in Banach spaces – stable and infinitely divisible distributions. Wiley, New
York, 1986; 195 pp. [390, 424]
[318] Lindenstrauss J., Tzafriri L. Classical Banach spaces. V. I,II. Springer, Berlin – New York, 1996;
424 pp. [219, 232, 422]
[319] Llavona J.G. Approximation of continuously differentiable functions. North-Holland, Amster-
dam, 1986; xiv+241 pp. [307]
[320] Lobanov S.G. Sufficient conditions for differentiability of mappings of locally convex spaces.
Mat. Zametki. 1986. V. 39, №1. P. 70–82 (in Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. 1986.
V. 39, №1-2. P. 39–46. [309]
[321] Lobanov S.G. The chain rule and its converse for mappings of locally convex spaces. Mat.
Zametki. 1989. V. 45, №1. P. 43–56 (in Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. V. 45, №1-2.
P. 30–38. [289, 309]
[322] Lobanov S.G., Smolyanov O.G. Ordinary differential equations in locally convex spaces. Us-
pekhi Mat. Nauk. 1994. V. 49, №3. P. 93–168 (in Russian); English transl.: Russian Math.
Surveys. 1994. V. 49, №3. P. 97–175. [294]
[323] Louie D., Rajput B.S., Tortrat A. A zero-one dichotomy theorem for r-semistable laws on infinite-
dimensional linear spaces. Sankhy¯a, Ser. A. 1980. V. 42. P. 9–18. [390]
[324] L¨utzen J. The prehistory of the theory of distributions. Springer-Verlag, New York – Berlin,
1982; viii+232 pp. [419]
[325] Luxemburg W.A.J., Zaanen A.C. Riesz spaces. V. I, II. North-Holland, Amsterdam – London;
American Elsevier, New York, 1971, 1983; xi+514 pp., xi+720 pp. [422]
[326] Mac Lane S. Categories for the working mathematician. 2nd ed. Springer, New York, 1998;
xii+314 pp. [133]

References
437
[327] Mackey G. On infinite-dimensional linear spaces. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 1945. V. 57.
P. 155–207. [420]
[328] Mackey G. On convex topological linear spaces. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 1946. V. 60.
P. 519–537. [420]
[329] Maeda M. Some examples of measurable norms. J. Math. Anal. Appl. 1984. V. 98, №1.
P. 158–165. [413]
[330] Maeda M., Harai K., Hagihara R. Some examples and the connection between cylindrical mea-
sures and measurable norms. J. Math. Anal. Appl. 2003. V. 288, №2. P. 556–564. [413]
[331] Makarov B.M. Inductive limits of normed spaces. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR. 1958. V. 119.
P. 1092–1094 (in Russian). [147]
[332] Makarov B.M. Some pathological properties of inductive limits of B-spaces. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk.
1963. V. 18, №3. P. 171–178 (in Russian). [147, 421]
[333] Mankiewicz P. On topological, Lipschitz, and uniform classification of LF-spaces. Studia Math.
1974. V. 52. P. 109–142. [242]
[334] Mauldin R.D. (ed.) The Scottish Book. Mathematics from the Scottish Cafe. Birkh¨auser, Boston,
1981; xiii+268 pp. [419]
[335] Mazur S. ¨Uber konvexe Mengen in linearen normierten R¨aumen. Studia Math. 1933. V. 4.
P. 70–85. [420]
[336] McCoy R.A., Ntantu I. Topological properties of spaces of continuous functions. Lecture Notes
in Math. V. 1315. Springer, 1988; iv+124 pp. [422]
[337] McIntosh A. On the closed graph theorem. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1969. V. 20. P. 397–404.
[229, 421]
[338] Megginson R.E. An introduction to Banach space theory. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1998;
xx+596 pp. [228, 422]
[339] Meise R., Vogt D. Introduction to functional analysis. The Clarendon Press, Oxford University
Press, New York, 1997; x+437 pp. [89, 238, 422]
[340] Meyer P.-A. Probability and potentials. Blaisdell, Waltham – Toronto – London, 1966;
xiii+266 pp. [343]
[341] Mibu Y. On Baire functions on infinite product spaces. Proc. Imp. Acad. Tokyo. 1944. V. 20.
P. 661–663. [409]
[342] Michael E. A selection theorem. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1966. V. 17. P. 1404–1406. [93]
[343] Miljutin A.A. Isomorphism of the spaces of continuous functions over compact sets of the cardi-
nality of the continuum. Teor. Funkcii Funkcional. Anal. i Pril. Khar’kov. 1966. V. 2. P. 150–156
(in Russian). [217]
[344] Mill J. van. Domain invariance in infinite-dimensional linear spaces. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.
1987. V. 101, №1. P. 173–180. [217]
[345] Mill J. van. Infinite-dimensional topology. Prerequisites and introduction. North-Holland, Ams-
terdam, 1989; xii+401 pp. [422]
[346] Mill J. van. The infinite-dimensional topology of function spaces. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
2001; xii+630 pp. [422]
[347] Millionˇsˇcikov V.M. On the theory of differential equations in locally convex spaces. Mat. Sb.
(N.S.). 1962. V. 57, №4. P. 385–406 (in Russian). [100, 295]
[348] Milnor J. Remarks on infinite-dimensional Lie groups. In: Relativity, groups and topology, II
(Les Houches, 1983). P. 1007–1057. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1984. [423]
[349] Minlos R.A. Generalized random processes and their extension to a measure. Trudy Moskov.
Mat. Obsc. 1959. V. 8. P. 497–518 (in Russian); English transl.: Math. Stat. Probab. 1959. V. 3.
P. 291–314. [424]
[350] Mitiagin B.S. Approximate dimension and bases in nuclear spaces. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 1961.
V. 16, №4. P. 63–132 (Russian); English transl.: Russian Math. Surveys. 1961. V. 16, №4.
P. 59–127. [137, 220]
[351] Monna A.F. Functional analysis in historical perspective. John Wiley & Sons, New York –
Toronto, 1973; viii+167 pp. [419]
[352] Mordukhovich B.S. Variational analysis and generalized differentiation. I. Basic theory. II. Ap-
plications. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2006; xxii+579 pp., xxii+610 pp. [423]
[353] Moscatelli V.B. Fr´echet spaces without continuous norms and without bases. Bull. London Math.
Soc. 1980. V. 12, №1. P. 63–66. [224]

438
References
[354] Mouchtari D. La topologie du type de Sazonov pour les Banach et les supports hilbertiens. Ann.
Univ. Clermont. 1976. V. 61. P. 77–87. [424]
[355] Mourier E. El´ements al´eatoires dans un espace de Banach. Ann. Inst. H. Poincar´e. 1953. T. 19.
P. 161–244. [424]
[356] Mujica J. Complex analysis in Banach spaces. Holomorphic functions and domains of holomor-
phy in finite and infinite dimensions. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1986; xii+434 pp. [423]
[357] Muˇstari (Mushtari) D.H. Certain general questions of the theory of probability measures in
linear spaces. Teor. Verojatnost. i Primenen. 1973. V. 18, №1. P. 66–77 (in Russian); English
transl.: Theory Probab. Appl. 1973. V. 18, №1. P. 64–75. [424]
[358] Mushtari D.Kh. Topological questions of the theory of probability measures in Fr´echet spaces.
Izv. Vyssh. Uchebn. Zaved. Mat. 1983. №12. P. 43–51 (in Russian); English transl.: Soviet Math.
(Iz. VUZ). 1983. №12. P. 50–60. [424]
[359] Mushtari D.Kh. Probabilities and topologies on linear spaces. Kazan Mathematics Foundation,
Kazan’, 1996; xiv+233 pp. [391, 424]
[360] Mushtari D.Kh., Chuprunov A.N. Sufficient topologies and norms. Teor. Verojatn. i Primen.
1983. V. 28, №4. P. 700–714 (in Russian); English transl.: Theory Probab. Appl. 1984. V. 28,
№4. P. 736–751. [424]
[361] Nakano H. Topology of linear topological spaces. Maruzen, Tokyo, 1951; viii+281 pp. [420]
[362] Namioka I. Kakutani-type fixed point theorems: a survey. J. Fixed Point Theory Appl. 2011.
V. 9, №1. V. 1–23. [422]
[363] Narasimhan R. Analysis on real and complex manifolds. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1985;
xiv+246 pp. [310]
[364] Narici L. On the Hahn–Banach theorem. Advanced courses of mathematical analysis. II, p. 87–
122, World Sci. Publ., Hackensack, New Jersey, 2007 (http://at.yorku.ca/p/a/a/o/58.htm). [419]
[365] Narici L., Beckenstein E. Topological vector spaces. 2nd ed. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida,
2011; xviii+610 pp. [ix, 421]
[366] Neeb K.-H. Towards a Lie theory of locally convex groups. Japan. J. Math. 2006. V. 1, №2.
P. 291–468. [423]
[367] Neerven J. van. γ-radonifying operators: a survey. Proc. Centre Math. Appl. Austral. Nat. Univ.,
44, Canberra, 2010. P. 1–61. [412]
[368] Nemirovski˘ı A.S., Semenov S.M. On polynomial approximation of functions on Hilbert space.
Mat. Sb. (N.S.) 1973. V. 92, №2. P. 257–281 (in Russian); English transl.: Math. USSR-Sbornik.
1973. V. 21, №2. P. 255–277. [307]
[369] Neumann J. von. Zur Theorie der Gesellsschaftsspiele. Math. Ann. 1929. B. 100. S. 295–320.
[419]
[370] Neumann J. von. On complete topological linear spaces. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 1935. V. 37.
P. 1–20. [419]
[371] Neveu J. Bases math´ematiques du calcul des probabilit´es. Masson et Cie, Paris, 1964;
xiii+203 pp. English transl.: Mathematical foundations of the calculus of probability. Holden-
Day, San Francisco, 1965; 231 pp. [329, 333]
[372] Nirenberg L. Topics in nonlinear functional analysis. New York University, Courant Institute
of Mathematical Sciences, New York; Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, Rhode Island, 2001;
xii+145 pp. [291, 422]
[373] Okazaki Y. Stochastic basis in Fr´echet space. Math. Ann. 1986. B. 274. S. 379–383. [403]
[374] Omori H. Infinite-dimensional Lie groups. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, Rhode Island, 1997;
xii+415 pp. [423]
[375] Ostling E.G., Wilansky A. Locally convex topologies and the convex compactness property.
Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 1974. V. 75. P. 45–50. [415]
[376] Ostrovski˘ı E.I. On the supports of probability measures in separable Banach spaces. Dokl. Akad.
Nauk SSSR. 1980. V. 225, №6. P. 1319–1320 (in Russian); English transl.: Soviet Math. Dokl.
1980. V. 22, №3. P. 836–838. [391]
[377] Oxtoby J.C. Cartesian products of Baire spaces. Fund. Math. 1960/1961. V. 49. P. 157–166.
[209]
[378] Palamodov V.P. Homological methods in the theory of locally convex spaces. Uspekhi Mat.
Nauk. 1971. V. 26, №1. P. 3–65 (in Russian); English transl.: Russian Math. Surveys. 1971.
V. 26, №1. P. 1–64. [422]

References
439
[379] Panchapagesan T.V. The Bartle–Dunford–Schwartz integral. Integration with respect to a sigma-
additive vector measure. Birkh¨auser, Basel, 2008; xvi+301 pp. [424]
[380] Paulauskas V., Raˇckauskas A. Approximation theory in the central limit theorem. Exact results
in Banach spaces. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1987; xviii+156 pp. [382]
[381] Peetre J. Rectifications `a l’article “Une caract´erisation abstraite des op´erateurs diff´erentiels”.
Math. Scand. 1960. V. 8. P. 116–120. [310]
[382] Pelczy´nski A. Linear extensions, linear averagings, and their applications to linear topological
classification of spaces of continuous functions. Dissert. Math. (Rozprawy Mat.) 1968. V. 58.
92 pp. [217]
[383] Peralta A.M., Villanueva I., Wright J.D.M., Ylinen K. Weakly compact operators and the
strong∗topology for a Banach space. Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh Sect. A. 2010. V. 140, №6.
P. 1249–1267. [423]
[384] Peressini A.L. Ordered topological vector spaces. Harper & Row, New York – London, 1967;
x+228 pp. [422]
[385] P´erez Carreras P., Bonet J. Barrelled locally convex spaces. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1987;
xvi+512 pp. [ix, 99, 121, 124, 127, 147, 148, 149, 175, 179, 180, 191, 209, 224, 227, 229, 421]
[386] Perez-Garcia C., Schikhof W.H. Locally convex spaces over non-Archimedean valued fields.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2010; xiv+472 pp. [423]
[387] Phelps R.R. Lectures on Choquet’s theorem. Van Nostrand, Princeton, 1966; v+130 pp.; 2nd ed.:
Lecture Notes in Math. V. 1757. Springer-Verlag, Berlin – New York, 2001. [343]
[388] Pietsch A. Nuclear locally convex spaces. Springer-Verlag, New York – Heidelberg, 1972;
ix+193 pp. [89, 144]
[389] Pietsch A. Operator ideals. North-Holland, Amsterdam – New York, 1980; 451 pp. [144, 412]
[390] Pietsch A. History of Banach spaces and linear operators. Birkh¨auser Boston, Boston, 2007;
xxiv+855 pp. [419, 422]
[391] Pisier G. Introduction to operator space theory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003;
vii+478 pp. [422]
[392] Preiss D. Differentiability of Lipshitz functions on Banach spaces. J. Funct. Anal. 1990. V. 91.
P. 312–345. [251]
[393] Prohorov Yu.V. Convergence of random processes and limit theorems in probability theory. Teor.
Verojatn. i Primen. 1956. V. 1, №2. P. 177–238 (in Russian); English transl.: Theory Probab.
Appl. 1956. V. 1. P. 157–214. [424]
[394] Prohorov Yu.V. The method of characteristic functionals. Proc. 4th Berkeley Symp. Math. Statist.
and Probab. V. 2. P. 403–419. University of California Press, Berkeley, 1960. [424]
[395] Prostov Yu.I. For homeomorphisms of nonnormable Fr´echet spaces the theorem on the differ-
entiability of an inverse function is invalid. Mat. Zametki. 1990. V. 47, №2. P. 78–88 (Russian);
English transl.: Math. Notes. 1990. V. 47, №2. P. 170–178. [290]
[396] Pryce J.D. Weak compactness in locally convex spaces. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1966. V. 17.
P. 148–155. [213]
[397] Pt´ak V. On complete topological linear spaces. ˇCehoslovack. Mat. Zh. 1953. V. 3, №4.
P. 301–364 (in Russian). [421]
[398] Pt´ak V. Completeness and the open mapping theorem. Bull. Soc. Math. France. 1958. V. 86.
P. 41–74. [421]
[399] Pt´ak V. An extension theorem for separately continuous functions and its application to functional
analysis. Czech. Math. J. 1964. V. 14, №4. P. 562–581. [420]
[400] Pt´ak V. A combinatorial lemma on the existence of convex means and its application to weak
compactness. Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. VII, pp. 437–450. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence,
Rhode Island, 1963. [420]
[401] Qiu J. Local completeness and dual local quasi-completeness. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 2000.
V. 129, №5. P. 1419–1425. [152]
[402] Ra˘ıkov D.A. On two classes of locally convex spaces which are important in applications.
Voronez. Gos. Univ. Trudy Sem. Funkcional. Anal. 1957. V. 5. P. 22–34 (in Russian). [421]
[403] Ra˘ıkov D.A. On a property of nuclear spaces. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 1957. V. 12, №5. P. 231–236
(in Russian). [240]
[404] Ra˘ıkov D.A. Inductive and projective limits with completely continuous mappings. Dokl. Akad.
Nauk SSSR (N.S.). 1958. V. 113. P. 984–986 (in Russian). [421]

440
References
[405] Ra˘ıkov D.A. A criterion of completeness of locally convex spaces. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 1959.
V. 14, №1. P. 223–229 (in Russian). [421]
[406] Ra˘ıkov D.A. An exponential law for spaces of continuous linear mappings. Mat. Sb. (N.S.) 1965.
V. 67, №2. P. 279–302 (in Russian). [421]
[407] Ra˘ıkov D.A. The work of V.L. Shmul’yan on topological linear spaces. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk.
1965. V. 20, №2. P. 135–147 (in Russian); English transl.: Russian Math. Surveys. 1965. V. 20,
№2. P. 130–141. [419]
[408] Ra˘ıkov D.A. Double closed-graph theorem for topological linear spaces. Sibirsk. Mat. Zh. 1966.
V. 7, №2. P. 353–372 (in Russian); English transl.: Sib. Math. J. 1966. V. 7. P. 287–300. [195,
421]
[409] Ra˘ıkov D.A. Supplements to the Russian translation of [420]. Moscow, Mir, 1967 (in Russian).
[195, 421]
[410] Rajput B.S. On the support of certain symmetric stable probability measures on TVS. Proc.
Amer. Math. Soc. 1977. V. 63. P. 306–312. [390]
[411] Rajput B.S. On the support of symmetric infinitely divisible and stable probability measures on
LCTVS. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1977. V. 66. P. 331–334. [390]
[412] Rajput B.S. Supports of certain infinitely divisible probability measures on locally convex spaces.
Ann. Probab. 1993. V. 21, №2. P. 886–897. [390]
[413] Rajput B.S., Rama-Murthy K., ˙Zak T. Supports of semi-stable probability measures on locally
convex spaces. J. Theor. Probab. 1994. V. 7, №4. P. 931–942. [390]
[414] Reed M., Simon B. Methods of modern mathematical physics. I. Functional analysis. 2nd ed.
Academic Press, New York, 1980; xv+400 pp. [422]
[415] Repovˇs D., Semenov P.V. Continuous selections and multivalued mappings. Kluwer, Dordrech –
Boston – London, 1998; viii+356 pp. [93]
[416] Retah V.S. The adjoint homomorphism of locally convex spaces. Funkcional. Anal. i Pril. 1969.
V. 3, №4. P. 63–68 (in Russian); English transl.: Funct. Anal. Appl. 1969. V. 3. P. 307–311.
[240]
[417] Retah V.S. The subspaces of countable inductive limits. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR. 1970. V. 194.
P. 1277–1279 (in Russian); English transl.: Soviet Math. Dokl. 1970. V. 11. P. 1384–1386. [421]
[418] Reznichenko E.A. Normality and collective normality of function spaces. Vestnik Moskov. Univ.
Ser. I Mat. Mekh. 1990. №6. P. 56–58 (in Russian); English transl.: Moscow Univ. Math. Bull.
1990. V. 45, №6. P. 25–26. [215]
[419] Reznichenko E. Stratifiability of Ck(X) for a class of separable metrizable X. Topology Appl.
2008. V. 155. P. 2060–2062. [216]
[420] Robertson A.P., Robertson W. Topological vector spaces. 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press,
London – New York, 1973; viii+172 pp. [ix, 195, 235, 420]
[421] Robertson W. On the closed graph theorem and spaces with webs. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3).
1972. V. 24. P. 692–738. [422]
[422] Rolewicz S. Metric linear spaces. 2nd ed. Reidel, Dordrecht; PWN – Polish Sci. Publ., Warsaw,
1985; xii+459 pp. [423]
[423] Rosi´nski J. On the convolution of cylindrical measures. Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci. 1982. V. 30,
№7–8. P. 379–383. [374]
[424] Roth W. Operator-valued measures and integrals for cone-valued functions. Lecture Notes in
Math. V. 1964. Springer, Berlin, 2009; x+356 pp. [424]
[425] Rudin W. Functional analysis. 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1991; xv+424 pp. [x, 122]
[426] Ruess W. Locally convex spaces not containing ℓ1. Funct. Approx. Comment. Math. 2014. V. 50.
P. 531–558. [242]
[427] Sakai K. On R∞-manifolds and Q∞-manifolds. Topology Appl. 1984. V. 18, №1. P. 69–79.
[242]
[428] Satˆo H. Banach support of a probability measure in a locally convex space. Lecture Notes in
Math. 1976. V. 526. P. 221–226. [391]
[429] Satˆo H. Hilbertian support of a probability measure on a Banach space. Lecture Notes in Math.
1979. V. 709. P. 195–205. [391]
[430] Saxon S.A. Two characterizations of linear Baire spaces. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1974. V. 45,
№2. P. 204–208. [209]
[431] Saxon S.A. Problems from the Perez Carreras/Bonet book. In: Progress in functional analysis
(Peniscola, 1990), pp. 233–237. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1992. [423]

References
441
[432] Saxon S.A. Non-Baire hyperplanes in nonseparable Baire spaces. J. Math. Anal. Appl. 1992.
V. 168, №2. P. 460–468. [423]
[433] Saxon S.A., S´anchez Ruiz L.M. Dual local completeness. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1997. V. 125.
P. 1063–1070. [152]
[434] Saxon S.A., Tweddle I. The fit and flat components of barrelled spaces. Bull. Austral. Math.
Soc. 1995. V. 51, №3. P. 521–528. [423]
[435] Sazonov V.V. On characteristic functionals. Teor. Veroyatn. i Primen. 1958. V. 3, №2. P. 201–205
(in Russian); English transl.: Theory Probab. Appl. 1958. V. 3. P. 188–192. [424]
[436] Schaefer H.H. Topological vector spaces. Springer-Verlag, Berlin – New York, 1971; xi+294 pp.
[ix, 19, 116, 131, 134, 137, 180, 186, 194, 231, 235–238, 240, 420, 422]
[437] Schl¨uchtermann G., Wheeler R.F. The Mackey dual of a Banach space. Noti de Matem. 1991.
V. 11. P. 273–287. [242]
[438] Schmets J. Espaces de fonctions continues. Lecture Notes in Math. V. 519. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin – New York, 1976; xii+150 pp. [213]
[439] Schreier J. Ein Gegenbeispiel zur Theorie der schwachen Konvergenz. Studia Math. 1930. V. 2.
P. 58–62. [232]
[440] Schwartz L. Th´eorie des distributions. T. I,II. Hermann & Cie, Paris, 1950, 1951; 148 pp.,
169 pp. (2e ed.: Hermann, Paris, 1966; xiii+420 pp.) [420]
[441] Schwartz L. Sur le th´eor`eme du graphe ferm´e. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris. 1966. T. 263. P. 602–605.
[415, 421]
[442] Schwartz L. Probabilit´es cylindriques et applications radonifiantes. J. Fac. Sci. Univ. Tokyo,
Sect. I A. 1971. V. 18. P. 139–286. [412]
[443] Schwartz L. Radon measures on arbitrary topological spaces and cylindrical measures. Oxford
University Press, London, 1973; xii+393 pp. [424]
[444] Sebasti˜ao e Silva J. Su certe classi di spazi localmente convessi importanti per le applicazioni.
Rend. Mat. Appl. (5). 1955. V. 14. P. 388–410. [420]
[445] Segal I. Distributions in Hilbert space and canonical system of operators. Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc. 1958. V. 88, №1. P. 12–41. [424]
[446] Shavgulidze E.T. On the hypercompleteness of locally convex spaces. Mat. Zametki. 1973. V. 13,
№2. P. 297–302 (in Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. 1973. V. 13. P. 180–182. [421]
[447] Shavgulidze E.T. On Br-completeness. Funk. Anal. i Pril. 1975. V. 9, №4. P. 95–96 (in Russian);
English transl.: Funct. Anal. Appl. V. 9, №4. P. 363–364. [421, 421]
[448] Shavgulidze E.T. The Minlos theorem for measures of indefinite sign. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 1976.
V. 31, №3. P. 222 (in Russian). [424]
[449] Shavgulidze E.T. Conditions for certain forms of completeness in the class of projective limits
of sequences of inductive limits of sequences of Fr´echet spaces. Funk. Anal. i Pril. 1977. V. 11,
№1. P. 91–92 (in Russian); English transl.: Funct. Anal. Appl. 1977. V. 11, №1. P. 82–83. [421]
[450] Shavgulidze E.T. A diffeomorphism of a locally convex space. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 1979. V. 34,
№5. P. 231–232 (in Russian). [291]
[451] Shirota T. On locally convex vector spaces of continuous functions. Proc. Japan Acad. 1954.
V. 30. P. 294–299. [178]
[452] Shkarin S.A. Some results on the solvability of ordinary linear differential equations in locally
convex spaces. Mat. Sb. 1990. V. 181, №9. P. 1183–1195 (in Russian); English transl.: Math.
USSR-Sb. 1992. V. 71, №1. P. 29–40. [295]
[453] Shkarin S.A. On the Rolle theorem in infinite-dimensional Banach spaces. Mat. Zametki. 1992.
V. 51, №3. P. 128–136 (in Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. V. 51, №3-4. P. 311–317.
[308]
[454] Shkarin S.A. The moment problem in Fr´echet spaces. Mat. Zametki. 1993. V. 54, №1. P. 110–123
(in Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. 1993. V. 54, №1-2. P. 739–746. [240, 309]
[455] Shkarin S.A. Peano’s theorem in infinite-dimensional Fr´echet spaces is invalid. Funkt. Anal. i
Pril. 1993. V. 27, №2. P. 90–92 (in Russian); English transl.: Funct. Anal. Appl. 1993. V. 27,
№2. P. 149–151. [294]
[456] Shkarin S.A. Peano’s theorem is invalid in infinite-dimensional F ′-spaces. Mat. Zametki. 1997.
V. 62, №1. P. 128–137 (in Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. 1997. V. 62, №1-2. P. 108–115.
[294]
[457] Shkarin S.A. Extending smooth functions from linear subspaces of locally convex spaces.
J. Math. Sci. (New York). 1998. V. 91. P. 3323–3338. [305]

442
References
[458] Shkarin S.A. On stratifiable locally convex spaces. Russ. J. Math. Phys. 1999. V. 6. P. 435–460.
[216]
[459] Shkarin S.A. Whitney’s type theorems for infinite dimensional spaces. Infin. Dimens. Anal. Quan-
tum Probab. Relat. Top. 2000. V. 3. P. 141–160. [305]
[460] Shkarin S.A. Sequentially continuous non-linear fundamental systems of solutions of affine equa-
tions in locally convex spaces. Demonstratio Math. 2003. V. 36. P. 611–626. [297]
[461] Shkarin S.A. Monotonically normal topological vector spaces are stratifiable. Topology Appl.
2004. V. 136, №1. P. 129–134. [216]
[462] Shkarin S.A. On solvability of linear differential equations in RN. Demonstratio Math. 2005.
V. 38. P. 85–99. [297]
[463] Shkarin S.A. Compact perturbations of linear differential equations in locally convex spaces.
Studia Math. 2006. V. 172, №3. P. 203–227. [297]
[464] Simon B. Convexity. An analytic viewpoint. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2011;
x+345 pp. [343]
[465] Singer I. Abstract convex analysis. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1997; xxii+491 pp. [423]
[466] Singer I. Duality for nonconvex approximation and optimization. Springer, New York, 2006;
xx+355 pp. [423]
[467] Sipacheva O.V. On a class of free locally convex spaces. Mat. Sb. 2003. V. 194, №3. P. 25–52
(in Russian); English transl.: Sb. Math. V. 194, №3-4. P. 333–360. [94]
[468] Skorohod A.V. Integration in Hilbert space. Springer-Verlag, Berlin – New York, 1974;
xii+177 pp. [424]
[469] Skorohod A.V. Linear and almost linear functionals on a measurable Hilbert space. Teor. Vero-
jatnost. i Primenen. 1978. V. 23, №2. P. 397–402 (in Russian); English transl.: Theor. Probability
Appl. 1978. V. 23, №2. P. 380–385. [399]
[470] Slowikowski W. Extensions of sequentially continuous linear functionals in inductive sequences
of (F)-spaces. Studia Math. 1966. V. 26. P. 193–221. [152, 421]
[471] Smirnov E. Hausdorff spectra in functional analysis. Springer, London, 2002; viii+209 pp. [196,
421]
[472] Smole´nski W. Pre-supports and kernels of probability measures in Fr´echet spaces. Demonstr.
Math. 1977. V. 10, №3-4. P. 751–762. [424]
[473] Smole´nski W. An abstract form of a counterexample of Marek Kanter. Lecture Notes in Math.
1984. V. 1080. P. 288–291. [399]
[474] Smole´nski W. On the approximation of measurable linear functionals. Statist. Probab. Lett. 1985.
V. 3, №4. P. 205–207. [424]
[475] Smole´nski W. On the kernel of probability measures on a Banach space. Demonstr. Math. 1988.
V. 21. P. 569–572. [424]
[476] Smolyanov (Smoljanov) O.G. On linear topological spaces not satisfying the first axiom of
countability. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 1964. V. 19, №6. P. 199–200 (in Russian). [242]
[477] Smolyanov O.G. On the topology of inductive limits of infinite sequences of linear topological
spaces satisfying the first axiom of countability. Vestnik Moskov. Univ. Ser. I Mat. Meh. 1965.
№1. P. 26–29 (in Russian). [421]
[478] Smolyanov O.G. On locally-convex topologies in the space K and in some other spaces of finite
functions. Vestnik Moskov. Univ. Ser. I Mat. Meh. 1965. №3. P. 5–11 (in Russian). [240]
[479] Smolyanov O.G. Measurable polylinear and power functionals in certain linear spaces with
measure. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR. 1966. V. 170. P. 526–529 (in Russian); English transl.:
Soviet Math. Dokl. 1966. V. 7. P. 1242–1246. [405, 418]
[480] Smolyanov O.G. Almost closed linear subspaces of strict inductive limits of sequences of Fr´echet
spaces. Matem. Sb. (N.S.) 1969. V. 80, №4. P. 513–520 (in Russian); English transl.: Math.
USSR-Sbornik. 1969. V. 9, №4. P. 479–485. [139, 421]
[481] Smolyanov O.G. Measurable linear varieties in products of linear spaces with measure. Matem.
Zametki. 1969. V. 5, №5. P. 623–634 (in Russian). English transl.: Math. Notes. 1969. V. 5.
P. 374–379. [377]
[482] Smolyanov O.G. The space D is not hereditarily complete. Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat.
1971. V. 35, №3. P. 682–696 (Russian); English transl.: Math. USSR-Izvestiya. 1971. V. 5, №3.
P. 696–710. [421]
[483] Smolyanov O.G. Some results on fully complete and hereditary complete spaces. Uspekhi Mat.
Nauk. 1972. V. 27, №2. P. 181–182 (in Russian). [421]

References
443
[484] Smolyanov O.G. Sequentially closed subsets of products of locally convex spaces. Funkcional.
Anal. i Pril. 1973. V. 7, №1. P. 88–89 (in Russian); English transl.: Functional Anal. Appl. 1973.
V. 7. P. 80–81. [139, 421]
[485] Smolyanov O.G. The size of the classes of hypercomplete spaces and spaces that satisfy the
Krein–ˇSmul’jan condition. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 1975. V. 30, №1. P. 259–260 (in Russian). [421]
[486] Smolyanov O.G. Almost closed subsets of countable products of locally convex spaces. Trudy
Moskov. Mat. Obsc. 1975. V. 32. P. 61–76 (in Russian). [139, 421]
[487] Smolyanov O.G. The class of spaces in which the theorem on the bounded differentiability of
the inverse function is valid. Mat. Zametki. 1975. V. 17, №5. P. 703–709 (in Russian); English
transl.: Math. Notes. 1975. V. 17, №5. P. 418–421. [290]
[488] Smolyanov O.G. Higher derivatives of mappings of locally convex spaces. Mat. Zametki. 1977.
V. 22, №5. P. 729–743 (in Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. 1977. V. 22, №5-6. P. 899–906.
[306, 423]
[489] Smolyanov O.G. Analysis on topological linear spaces and its applications. Moskov. Gos. Univ.,
Moscow, 1979; 86 pp. (in Russian). [37, 243, 305, 306, 423]
[490] Smolyanov O.G. A method for proving uniqueness theorems for evolution differential equations.
Mat. Zametki. 1979. V. 25, №2. P. 259–269 (in Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. 1979.
V. 25, №1-2. P. 135–140. [297]
[491] Smolyanov O.G. The Gross–Sazonov theorem for sign-variable cylindrical measures. Vestnik
Moskovsk. Univ. 1983. №4. P. 4–12 (in Russian); English transl.: Moscow Univ. Math. Bull.
1983. V. 38. P. 1–9. [424]
[492] Smolyanov O.G. Topology of the spaces D and D′. (Russian) Vestnik Moskov. Univ. Ser. I Mat.
Mekh. 1984. №1. P. 66–68 (in Russian); English transl.: Moscow Univ. Math. Bull. 1984. V. 39,
№1. P. 57–60. [139]
[493] Smolyanov O.G. Nonclosed sequentially closed subsets of locally convex spaces and applica-
tions. Note di Matematica. 1992. V. 12. P. 237–244. [139]
[494] Smolyanov O.G. Solutions of D.A. Raikov’s problems in the theory of topological vector spaces.
Russian J. Math. Phys. 2008. V. 15, №4. P. 522–529. [139]
[495] Smolyanov O.G., Fomin S.V. Measures on topological linear spaces. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 1976.
V. 31, №4. P. 3–56 (in Russian); English transl.: Russian Math. Surveys. 1976. V. 31, №4.
P. 1–53. [424]
[496] Smolyanov O.G., Shavgulidze E.T. A simple proof of Tarieladze’s theorem on sufficiency of pos-
itively sufficient topologies. Teor. Verojatn. i Primen. 1992. V. 37, №2. P. 421–424 (in Russian);
English transl.: Theory Probab. Appl. 1992. V. 37, №2. P. 402–404. [357]
[497] Smolyanov O.G., Shavgulidze E.T. Continual integrals. 2nd ed. URSS, Moscow, 2015; 336 pp.
(in Russian). [424]
[498] Smolyanov O.G., Uglanov A.V. Every Hilbert subspace of a Wiener space has measure zero.
Matem. Zamet. 1973. V. 14, №3. P. 369–374 (in Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. 1973.
V. 14. P. 772–774. [417]
[499] ˇSmulian V. (ˇSmul’yan V.L.) Sur les ensembles r´eguli`erement ferm´es et faiblement compacts dans
l’espace du type (B). C. R. (Dokl.) Acad. Sci. URSS. 1938. V. 18, №7. P. 405–407. [420]
[500] ˇSmulian V. On the principle of inclusion in the space of the type (B). Rec. Math. Moscou. 1939.
V. 5, №2. P. 317–328 (in Russian). [420]
[501] ˇSmulian V. ¨Uber lineare topologische R¨aume. Rec. Math. Moscou. 1940. V. 7. P. 425–444. [419]
[502] ˇSmul’yan V.L. Sur les espaces lin´eaires topologiques. II. Mat. Sb., N. Ser. 1941. V. 9, №3.
P. 727–730 (in Russian. French summary). [420]
[503] ˇSmulian V. Sur les ensembles compacts et faiblement compacts dans l’espace du type (B). Mat.
Sb., N. Ser. 1943. V. 12, №1. P. 91–98. [420]
[504] Sova M. The general theory of differentiability in linear topological spaces. Czechoslovak Math.
J. 1964. V. 14, №3. P. 485–508 (in Russian). [423]
[505] Sova M. Conditions for differentialbility in linear topological spaces. Czechoslovak Math. J.
1966. V. 16, №3. P. 339–362 (in Russian). [423]
[506] Sukhinin M.F. Selected chapters in nonlinear analysis. Izd-vo RUDN, Moscow, 1992; 302 pp.
(in Russian). [423]
[507] Sukhomlinov G.A. On extension of linear functionals in a complex and quaternion linear space.
Mat. Sbornik. 1938. V. 3, №2. P. 353–357 (in Russian). [420]

444
References
[508] Sztencel R. On the lower tail of stable seminorm. Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci. 1984. V. 32, №11–12.
P. 715–719. [387]
[509] Takahashi Y., Okazaki Y. 0–1 laws of a probability measure on a locally convex space. Publ.
Res. Inst. Math. Sci. 1986. V. 22, №1. P. 97–102. [424]
[510] Talagrand M. Sur une conjecture de H.H. Corson. Bull. Sci. Math. (2). 1975. V. 99, №4.
P. 211–212. [215]
[511] Talagrand M. Les boules peuvent engendrer la tribu bor´elienne d’un espace m´etrizable non
s´eparable? S´eminaire Choquet, 17e an´ee. 1977–1978. F. 5, №2, 2 pp. Paris, 1978. [411]
[512] Talagrand M. Comparaison des boreliens d’un espace de Banach pour les topologies fortes et
faibles. Indiana Univ. Math. J. 1978. V. 27, №6. P. 1001–1004. [411]
[513] Talagrand M. Est-ce que l∞est un espace mesurable? Bull. Sci. Math. 1979. T. 103, №3.
P. 255–258. [411]
[514] Talagrand M. Hyperplans universellement mesurables. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, S´er. A. 1980.
T. 291. P. A501–A502. [415]
[515] Talagrand M. Pettis integral and measure theory. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 1984. V. 51, №307.
P. 1–224. [415]
[516] Tarieladze V.I. On a topological description of characteristic functionals. Dokl. Akad. Nauk
SSSR. 1987. V. 295, №6. P. 1320–1323 (in Russian); English transl.: [357, 424]
[517] Taskinen J. Counterexamples to “probl`eme des topologies” of Grothendieck. Ann. Acad. Sci.
Fenn. Ser. A I Math. Dissertationes. 1986. №63. 25 pp. [423]
[518] Taskinen J. The projective tensor product of Fr´echet–Montel spaces. Studia Math. 1988. V. 91,
№1. P. 17–30. [423]
[519] Taskinen J. A Fr´echet–Schwartz space with basis having a complemented subspace without basis.
Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1991. V. 113, №1. P. 151–155. [220]
[520] Taylor A.E. The differential: Nineteenth and twentieth century developments. Arch. Hist. Exact
Sci. 1974. V. 12. P. 355–383. [423]
[521] Taylor A.E. A study of Maurice Fr´echet. I–III. Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. 1982. V. 27, №3.
P. 233–295; ibid., 1985. V. 34, №4. P. 279–380; ibid., 1987. V. 37, №1. P. 25–76. [419]
[522] Tkachuk V.V. A selection of recent results and problems in Cp-theory. Topology Appl. 2007.
V. 154, №12. P. 2465–2493. [422]
[523] Tkachuk V.V. A Cp-theory problem book. Topological and function spaces. Special features of
function spaces. Compactness in function spaces. Functional equivalencies. Springer, New York,
2011; xvi+485 pp.; Springer, Cham, 2014–2016; xiv+583 pp., xvi+524 pp., xiv+727 pp. [422]
[524] Tortrat A. Structure des lois ind´efiniment divisibles (μ ∈I = I(X)) dans un espace vectoriel
topologique (s´epar´e) X. Lecture Notes in Math. 1967. V. 31. P. 299–327. [390]
[525] Tortrat A. Sur la structure des lois ind´efiniment divisibles (classe T(X)) dans les espaces vec-
toriels X (sur le corps r´eel). Z. Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie verw. Geb. 1969. B. 11. S. 311–326.
[390]
[526] Tortrat A. Lois e(λ) dans les espaces vectoriels et lois stables. Z. Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie
verw. Geb. 1976. B. 37, №2. S. 175–182. [384]
[527] Tortrat A. Sur le support des lois ind´efiniment divisibles dans les espaces vectoriels localment
convexes. Ann. Inst. H. Poincar´e. 1977. V. 13. P. 27–43; Compl´ement: ibid., P. 293–298; Second
compl´ement: ibid., P. 349–354. [390]
[528] Toru´nczyk H. Characterizing Hilbert space topology. Fund. Math. V. 1981. V. 111. P. 247–262.
[217]
[529] Tr`eves J.F. Linear partial differential equations with constant coefficients: existence, approxima-
tion and regularity of solutions. Gordon and Breach, New York, 1966; x+534 pp. [422]
[530] Tr`eves F. Topological vector spaces, distributions and kernels. Academic Press, New York –
London, 1967; xvi+624 pp. [ix, 420]
[531] Tsar’kov I.G. Smoothing of Hilbert-valued uniformly continuous mappings. Izv. Ross. Akad.
Nauk Ser. Mat. 2005. V. 69, №4. P. 149–160 (in Russian); English transl.: Izv. Math. 2005.
V. 69, №4. P. 791–803. [307]
[532] Tsar’kov I.G., Shavgulidze E.T. Smooth isometric embedding into an infinite-dimensional sphere.
Funkt. Anal. i Pril. 1999. V. 33, №3. P. 93–95 (in Russian); English transl.: Funct. Anal. Appl.
1999. V. 33, №3. P. 239–240. [310]
[533] Tychonoff A. Ein Fixpunktsatz. Math. Ann. 1935. B. 111. S. 767–776. [419]

References
445
[534] Urbanik K. Random linear functionals and random integrals. Colloq. Math. 1975. V. 38, №2.
P. 255–263. [399]
[535] Vainberg M.M. Variational method and method of monotone operators in the theory of nonlinear
equations. Halsted Press, New York – Toronto, 1973; xi+356 pp. [423]
[536] Vakhania N.N. Probability distributions on linear spaces. Tbilisi, 1971 (in Russian); English
transl.: North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1981; xv+123 pp. [424]
[537] Vakhania N.N., Tarieladze V.I. Covariance operators of probability measures in locally convex
spaces. Teor. Verojatn. i Primen. 1978. V. 23. P. 3–26 (in Russian); English transl.: Theor.
Probab. Appl. 1978. V. 23. P. 1–21. [338, 344, 345]
[538] Vakhania N.N., Tarieladze V.I., Chobanyan S.A. Probability distributions in Banach spaces.
Translated from the Russian. Kluwer, 1991; xxvi+482 pp. (Russian ed.: Moscow, 1985). [354,
374, 375, 382, 404, 412, 416, 424]
[539] Valdivia M. Mackey convergence and the closed graph theorem. Arch. Math. 1974. B. 25.
S. 649–656. [198]
[540] Valdivia M. The space of distributions D′(U) is not Br-complete. Math. Ann. 1974. B. 211.
S. 145–149. [421]
[541] Valdivia M. The space D(U) is not Br-complete. Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble). 1977. V. 27,
№4. P. 29–43. [421]
[542] Valdivia M. On weakly complete sets in a locally convex space. Arch. Math. (Basel). 1977.
B. 28, №6. S. 638–643. [240]
[543] Valdivia M. Topics in locally convex spaces. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1982; xiii+510 pp.
[209, 236, 421]
[544] Valdivia M. Br-complete spaces which are not B-complete. Math. Z. 1984. B. 185, №2.
S. 253–259. [191]
[545] Valdivia M. A characterization of totally reflexive Fr´echet spaces. Math. Z. 1989. B. 200, №3.
S. 327–346. [240]
[546] Valdivia M. Bases and quasi-reflexivity in Fr´echet spaces. Math. Nachr. 2005. B. 278, №6.
S. 712–729. [220]
[547] Valdivia M. On certain (LB)-spaces. Bull. Belg. Math. Soc. Simon Stevin. 2007. V. 14, №3.
P. 565–575. [423]
[548] Vershik A.M., Sudakov V.N. Probability measures in infinite-dimensional spaces. Zap. Nauchn.
Sem. LOMI. 1969. V. 12. P. 7–67 (in Russian); English transl.: Seminars in Math. V.A. Steklov
Math. Inst., Leningrad. 1971. V. 12. P. 1–28. [424]
[549] Vladimirov V.S. Methods of the theory of generalized functions. Taylor & Francis, London,
2002; xiv+311 pp. [90, 422]
[550] Vladimirski˘ı Yu.N. Cylindrical measures and p-summing operators. Teor. Veroyatnost. i Prime-
nen. 1981. V. 26, №1. P. 59–72 (in Russian); English transl.: Theory Probab. Appl. 1981. V. 26,
№1. P. 56–68. [412]
[551] Vladimirski˘ı Yu.N. On a probabilistic characterization of some classes of locally convex spaces.
Teor. Veroyatnost. i Primenen. 1983. V. 28, №3. P. 521–532 (in Russian); English transl.: Theory
Probab. Appl. 1983. V. 28, №3. P. 549–560. [412]
[552] Vladimirski˘ı Yu.N. Compactness of γ-summing operators. Mat. Zametki. 1985. V. 37, №5.
P. 743–750 (in Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. 1985. V. 37, №5-6, P. 410–414. [412]
[553] Vladimirski˘ı Yu.N. Conditions for the countable additivity of a cylindrical measure in a conju-
gate locally convex space. Mat. Zametki. 1994. V. 56, №3. P. 13–19 (in Russian); English transl.:
Math. Notes. 1994. V. 56, №3-4. P. 884–888. [424]
[554] Vogt D. Regularity properties of (LF)-spaces. Progress in functional analysis. P. 57–84. North-
Holland, Amsterdam, 1992. [423]
[555] Vogt D. A nuclear Fr´echet space of C∞-functions which has no basis. Note Mat. 2005/06. V. 25,
№2. P. 187–190. [220]
[556] Vogt D. A nuclear Fr´echet space consisting of C∞-functions and failing the bounded approxi-
mation property. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 2010. V. 138, №4. P. 1421–1423. [220]
[557] Volterra V. Sopra le funzioni che dipendeno da altre funzioni. Atti Realle Accad. Lincei Rend.
Ser. 4. 1887. V. 3, №2. P. 97–105, 141–146, 153–158. [423]
[558] Waelbroeck L. Topological vector spaces and algebras. Lecture Notes in Math. V. 230. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1971; vii+158 pp. [423]

446
References
[559] Waelbroeck L. Bornological quotients. Acad´emie Royale de Belgique. Classe des Sciences, Brus-
sels, 2005; 251 pp. [422]
[560] Wehausen J. Transformations in linear topological spaces. Duke Math. J. 1938. V. 4. P. 157–169.
[419]
[561] Weizs¨acker H. von. Der Satz von Choquet–Bishop-de Leeuw f¨ur konvexe nicht kompakte Mengen
straffer Maße ¨uber beliebigen Grundr¨aumen. Math. Z. 1975. B. 142. S. 161–165. [343]
[562] Weizs¨acker H. von. A note on infinite dimensional convex sets. Math. Scand. 1976. V. 38, №2.
P. 321–324. [415]
[563] Weizs¨acker H. von, Winkler G. Integral representation in the set of solutions of a generalized
moment problem. Math. Ann. 1979. B. 246. S. 23–32. [343]
[564] Wentzell A.D. A course in the theory of stochastic processes. Translated from the Russian.
McGraw-Hill International Book, New York, 1981; x+304 pp. (Russian ed.: Moscow, 1975).
[329, 393]
[565] Wiener N. Differential space. J. Math. Phys. 1923. V. 2. P. 131–174. [424]
[566] Wilansky A. Functional analysis. Blaisdell – Ginn, New York – Toronto – London, 1964;
xvi+293 pp. [422]
[567] Wilansky A. Modern methods in topological vector spaces. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1978;
xiii+298 pp. [ix, 225, 229, 421]
[568] Wi´sniewski A. Measurable linear operators on Banach spaces. Colloq. Math. 1987. V. 54, №2.
P. 261–265. [417]
[569] Wi´sniewski A. Measurable linear functionals and operators on Fr´echet spaces. Proc. Amer.
Math. Soc. 1992. V. 114, №4. P. 1079–1085. [418]
[570] Wi´sniewski A. Measurable linear operators induced by stochastic processes. Demonstr. Math.
2002. V. 35, №4. P. 873–878. [424]
[571] Wojtaszczyk P. Banach spaces for analysts. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1991;
xiv+382 pp. [422]
[572] Wojty´nski W. On conditional bases in non-nuclear Fr´echet spaces. Studia Math. 1970. V. 35.
P. 77–96. [220]
[573] Yamamuro S. Differential calculus in topological linear spaces. Lecture Notes in Math. V. 374.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin – Heidelberg – New York, 1974; iv+179 pp. [423]
[574] Yamasaki Y. Measures on infinite-dimensional spaces. World Sci., Singapore, 1985; x+256 pp.
[424]
[575] Yosida K. Functional analysis. 6th ed. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1980; xii+501 pp. [423]
[576] Yurova E.V. On continuous restrictions of measurable linear operators. Dokl. Akad. Nauk. 2012.
V. 443, №3. P. 300–303 (in Russian); English transl.: Dokl. Math. 2012. V. 85, №2. P. 229–232.
[400, 402]
[577] Yurova E.V. On continuous restrictions of measurable multilinear mappings. Matem. Zametki.
2015. V. 98, №6. P. 930–936 (in Russian); English transl.: Math. Notes. 2015. V. 98, №6.
P. 977–981. [409]
[578] Zabreiko P.P., Smirnov E.I. On the closed graph theorem. Sibirsk. Mat. Z. 1977. V. 18, №2.
P. 304–313 (Russian); English transl.: Siberian Math. J. 1977. V. 18, №2. P. 218–224. [421]
[579] Zahariuta V. Linear topologic invariants and their applications to isomorphic classification of
generalized power spaces. Turk. J. Math. 1996. V. 20, №2. P. 237–289. [423]
[580] Z˘alinescu C. Convex analysis in general vector spaces. World Scientific, River Edge, New Jersey,
2002; xx+367 pp. [423]
[581] Zinn J. Zero-one laws for non-Gaussian measures. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1974. V. 44, №1.
P. 179–185. [424]
[582] Zobin N.M., Mitjagin B.S. Examples of nuclear metric linear spaces without a basis. Funkcional.
Anal. i Pril. 1974. V. 8, №4. P. 35–47 (in Russian); English transl.: Functional Anal. Appl. 1974.
V. 8, №4. P. 304–313. [220]

Author Index
Acosta A. de, 390
Akbarov S.S., 422
Akhmedova P.D., 421
Akhmerov R.R., 422
Akilov G.P., 420, 422
Alaoglu L., 155, 419
Albanese A.A., 424
Albiac F., 422
Albrecht F., 423
Alexandroff (Aleksandrov) A.D., 325, 397, 398
Alfsen E.M., 343
Aliprantis C.D., 422
Amemiya I., 186, 238
Antosik P., 226
Arens R., ix, 159, 420
Arhangel’skii (Arkhangel’ski˘ı) A.V., 6, 215, 409,
422
Arias de Reyna J., 209
Arutyunyan L.M., 408, 409
Агzel`a C., 423
Astala K., 295
Atkin C.J., 305
Averbuch V.I., 423, 424
Aytuna A., 422
Babalola V.A., 424
Badrikian A., 424
Baire R., 172, 208, 210, 315
Balabanov M.V., 423
Banach S., ix, 18, 63, 70, 71, 120, 122, 155, 171,
172, 192, 193, 219, 419
Banakh T., 217, 242
Banaszczyk W., 152, 422
Bastiani A., 423
Bates S.M., 308
Baturov D.P., 215
Beattie R., 422
Beatty T.A., 423
Beauzamy B., 422
Beckenstein E., ix, 421
Benyamini Y., 251, 307, 422
Berezhnoy V.E., 408
Bessaga C., 217, 241, 422
Bierstedt K.D., 421, 423
Birkhoff G., 419
Bishop E., 343
Bobkov S.G., 408
Bochkarev S.V., 219
Bochnak J., 423
Bochner S., 336, 338
Bockshtein M., 409
Bogachev V.I., 6, 179, 228, 240, 289, 294, 307,
345, 354, 379, 381, 382, 384, 391, 409, 422, 424
Bogolubov N.N., 421
Bonet J., ix, 99, 121, 124, 127, 147–149, 175,
179, 180, 191, 209, 224, 227, 229, 238, 421, 423
Bonic R.A., 309
Borel E., 211, 315
Borell C., 379, 380, 415
Borges C.J.R., 94
Borsuk K., 94
Bourbaki N., ix, 45, 51, 96, 155, 170, 175, 209,
230, 237, 419, 420
Bourgin R.D., 422
Bohl P., 86
Brouwer L.E.J., 86
Bucher W., 423
Buldygin V.V., 375, 391, 424
Burkinshaw O., 422
Burzyk J., 226
Butzmann H.-P., 422
Caki´c N., 420
Cameron R.H., 348
Carleman T., 199
Carothers N.L., 422
Cartan H., 423
Cascales B., 216, 423
Cauchy O., 45, 46
Cauty R., 217, 422
Chalov P.A., 220
Chapman T.A., 422
Chevet S., 424
Chigogidze A.Ch., 422
Chobanyan S.A., 354, 374, 375, 382, 404, 412,
416, 424
Choquet G., 342, 343, 422
Christensen J.P.R., 415
Chung D.M., 390
Chuprunov A.N., 424
Cohen P.E., 209
Collins H.S., 192, 236
Colombeau J.F., 305, 309
Cook T.A., 186
Cooper J.B., 423
Corson H., 242, 422
Davies W.J., 123
Day M.M., 227, 422
De Wilde M., 196, 421, 422
Defant A., 422, 423
Deimling K., 422, 423
Dembart B., 424
Dettweiler E., 390
Deville R., 307, 422
Diamond H., 423
D´ıaz J.C., 423
Dierolf S., 227
Diestel J., 123, 412, 422
Dieudonn´e J., 51, 192, 220, 238, 294, 419, 420,
421, 423
Dinculeanu N., 424
Dirac P., 320
Djakov P.B., 422
Dragilev M.M., 220
Drewnowski L., 152, 239
Dubinsky E., 220
Dudley R.M., 384, 412
Dugundji J., 94, 422
Duistermaat J.J., 422
Dulst D. van, 422
Dunford N., 86, 88, 292, 327, 419
Dvoretzky A., 138
Dynin A., 220
Eberlein W.F., ix, 164, 166, 169, 218, 419, 420
Edgar G.A., 410, 422
Edwards R.E., ix, 6, 82, 100, 149, 174, 186, 220,
224, 227, 229, 231, 234, 237, 343, 422
Eells J., 423
Eidelheit M., 223, 420
Ekeland I., 291, 310
447
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
and Their Applications, Springer Monographs in Mathematics,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-57117-1
V.I. Bogachev and O.G. Smolyanov, Topological Vector Spaces

448
Author Index
Enflo P., 219
Engelking P., 6, 45, 51, 82, 139, 215, 241, 326
Fa`a di Bruno F., 272
Fabian M., 307, 422
Fan K., 88
Fedorchuk V.V., 422
Feldman J., 352, 412
Fernique X., 352, 354, 390
Ferrando J.C., 196, 421, 423
Fetisov V.G., 423
Feynman R., 354, 355, 356
Fichtenholz G., 98, 420
Figiel T., 123
Filippenko V.I., 423
Filippov V.V., 93
Floret K., 213, 214, 218, 231, 241, 420, 422, 423
Fomin S.V., x, 5, 150, 424
Fonf V.P., 124, 391, 393, 404
Fortet R., 424
Fr´echet M., x, 25, 139, 216, 249, 419, 423, 424
Fredholm I., 199, 205
Fremlin D.H., 411, 416
Frerick L., 424
Fr¨olicher A., 423
Galbis A., 423
Gabriyelyan S.S., 242, 423
Gaehler W., 423
Gantmacher V., 420
Garnir H.G., 422
Garsoux J., 422
Gˆateaux R., x, 249, 423
Gelfand I.M., 106, 237, 240, 353, 420, 424
Gihman I.I., 329, 418, 424
Gleason A.M., 39
Godefroy G., 307, 422
Godunov A.N., 294, 296
Goldstine H.H., 227, 419
Goncharov A.P., 422
Gorin E.A., 151
Granas A., 422
Graves L.M., 423
Gross L., 357, 359, 361, 364, 424
Grothendieck A., ix, 119, 131, 145, 195, 218, 229,
234, 237, 238, 241, 416, 420, 421, 423
Gruenhage G., 216
Guerre-Delabri`ere S., 422
Guirao A.J., 422, 423
Gutnik L.A., 240
Gvishiani A.D., 150
Habala P., 307, 422
Hadamard J., x, 249, 423
Hagihara R., 413
Hahn H., ix, 63, 70, 71, 419
Hain R.M., 423
Hajek J., 352
H´ajek P., 307, 422
Hamel G., 2
Harai K., 413
Hausdorff F., 9, 419
Haworth R.C., 209
Haydon R., 242
Hazod W., 390, 424
Helly E., 419
Herer W., 403
Hewitt E., 376
Heyer H., 424
Hilbert D., 18, 144, 199, 419
Hildebrandt T.H., 423
Hille E., 64, 66, 112
Hoffmann-Jørgensen J., 394, 424
Hogbe-Nlend H., 422
H¨ormander L., 422
Horvath J., 422
Hrbacek K., 6
Hyers D.H., 420
James R.C., 213, 227, 420
Jarchow H., ix, 89, 110, 114, 137, 180, 197, 220,
239, 412, 421, 422
Jech T., 6
Johnson W.B., 123, 124, 391, 393, 404, 422, 424
Jord´a E., 424
Jornet D., 424
Junek H., 422
Kac (Kats) M.P., 415, 423
Kadelburg Z., 420, 423
Kadets (Kadec) M.I., 144, 217, 240, 422
Kadets V.M., 144, 240, 422
K¸akol J., 196, 216, 242, 421, 423
Kakutani S., 63, 64, 87, 88, 112, 419, 420
Kalenda O.F.K., 423
Kalmes Th., 424
Kalton N.J., 229, 421, 422, 423
Kamenskii M.I., 422
Kanter M., 384, 390, 399, 424
Kantorovich L.V., 420, 422
Kanwal R.P., 422
Keller H.H., 423
Keller O.-H., 217
Kelley J.L., ix, 6, 45, 51, 81, 82, 235, 420
Khintchin A.Ya., 336
Kirillov A.A., 150
Klee V., 112, 420, 423
Knowles R.J., 186
Kolesnikov A.P., 423
Kolk J.A.C., 422
Kolmogoroff (Kolmogorov) A.N., x, 5, 9, 18, 40,
150, 329, 333, 376, 419, 421, 424, 435
Komatsu H., 424
K¯omura T., 138, 424
K¯omura Y., 138, 186
Kondakov V.P., 423
Korobeinik Ju.F., 220
Kosov E.D., 408, 409, 418
Kostyuˇcenko A.G., 240
K¨othe G., ix, 89, 238, 419, 420
Kozobrod V.N., 423
Kraaij R., 423, 424
Krasnosel’skii M.A., 423
Krein M., ix, 84, 190, 191, 342, 419, 420
Kreyszig E., 419
Kriegl A., 423
Krom M.R., 209
Kruglov V.M., 375, 384, 390, 424
Kubzdela A., 423
Kubi´s W., 196, 216, 423
Kuelbs J., 391, 424
Kunzinger M., 423
Kuo H., 354, 364
Kurato A., 423
Kuratowski K., 5
Kurosh A.G., 1, 5
Kusraev A.G., 423
Kutateladze S.S., 422, 423
Kwapie´n S., 337, 366

Author Index
449
Lagrange J.-L., 275
Lancien G., 422
Larman D.G., 152
Le Cam L., 412
Ledoux M., 382, 424
Leeuw K. de, 343
Lelong P., 422
Leonov A., 297
LePage R., 387
L´evy P., 337, 375, 384
Li D., 422
Lifshits M.A., 354
Linde W., 390, 424
Lindel¨of E.L., 215
Lindenstrauss J., 219, 232, 251, 307, 422, 424
Lindstr¨om M., 238
Lipschitz R., 250
Llavona J.G., 307
Lobanov S.G., 289, 294, 309
Logunov A.A., 421
L´opez Pellicer M., 196, 216, 421, 423
Louie D., 390
Lurje P., 227
Lusin N.N., 317
L¨utzen J., 419
Luxemburg W.A.J., 422
Mackey G., ix, 122, 146, 159, 160, 175, 420
Maeda M., 413
Makarov B.M., 147, 421
Maluta E., 423
Mankiewicz P., 242
Markov A.A., 87
Marczewski E., 329
Martin W.T., 348
Mauldin R.D., 419
Mazur S., 219, 420
Mccoy R.A., 209, 422
McIntosh A., 229, 421
Megginson R.E., 228, 422
Meise R., 89, 238, 422
Meyer P.-A., 343
Mibu Y., 409
Michael E., 93,
Michor P.W., 423
Miljutin A.A., 217
Mill J. van, 217, 422
Millionˇsˇcikov V.M., 100, 295
Milman D.P., 84, 85, 214, 419
Milman V.D., 214
Milnor J., 423
Minkowski H., 31, 419
Minlos R.A., x, 372, 424
Mitiagin (Mitjagin) B., 137, 151, 220
Monna A.F., 419
Montel P., 238
Montesinos Santaluc´ıa V., 307, 422, 423
Mordukhovich B.S., 423
Moscatelli V.B., 224
Mouchtari (Mushtari) D., 391, 424
Mourier E., 424
Mujica J., 423
Mushtari (Mouchtari) D., 391, 424
Nachbin L., 213
Nakano H., 420
Namioka I., ix, 81, 235, 420, 422
Narasimhan R., 310
Narici L., ix, 419, 421
Neeb K.-H., 423
Neerven J. van, 412
Nemirovski˘ı A.S., 307
Neumann J. von, 141, 419
Neveu J., 329, 333
Nirenberg L., 291, 422
Ntantu I., 422
Okazaki Y., 403, 424
Oksak A.I., 421
Okunev O., 423
Omori H., 423
Orihuela J., 423
Ostling E.G., 415
Ostrovski˘ı E.I., 391
Oxtoby J.C., 209
Palamodov V.P., 422
Panchapagesan T.V., 424
Parseval M.A., 335
Paulauskas V., 382
Peano G., 276
Peck N.T., 423
Peetre J., 310
Pelant J., 307, 422
Pelczy´nski A., 123, 217, 241, 422
Peralta A.M., 423
Peressini A.L., 422
P´erez Carreras P., ix, 99, 121, 124, 127, 147, 148,
149, 175, 179, 180, 191, 209, 224, 227, 229, 421
Perez-Garcia C., 423
Phelps R.R., 343
Phillips R.S., 64, 66, 112, 295
Pietsch A., 89, 144, 412, 419, 422
Pinsker A.G., 422
Pisier G., 124, 391, 393, 404, 422
Plebanek G., 242
Poisson S.D., 383
Ponomarev V.I., 6, 215, 409
Potapov A.S., 422
Preiss D., 124, 251, 391, 393, 404
Prohorov Yu.V., 326, 394, 424
Prostov Yu.I., 290
Pryce J.D., 213
Pt´ak V., 229, 420, 421
Qiu J., 152
Queff´elec, 422
Raˇckauskas A., 382
Radenovi´c S., 420, 423
Radon J., 316
Ra˘ıkov D.A., 195, 229, 240, 419, 421
Rainer A., 423
Rajovi´c M., 420
Rajput B.S., 390
Rama-Murthy K., 390
Reed M., 422
Repovˇs D., 93, 242
Retah V.S., 240, 421
Reznichenko E.A., 215, 216
Riesz F., 199, 326, 419
Roberts J.W., 423
Robertson A.P., ix, 195, 235, 420
Robertson W., ix, 195, 235, 420, 422
Rodkina A.E., 422
Rogers C.A., 138, 152
Rolewicz S., 423
Rosi´nski J., 374
Roth W., 424
Rudin W., x, 122

450
Author Index
Ruess W., 242
Sadovskii B.N., 422
Sakai K., 242
Samur J., 390
S´anchez Ruiz L.M., 152, 423
Satˆo H., 391
Savage L.J., 376
Saxon S.A., 152, 209, 216, 423
Sazonov V.V., x, 357, 359, 360, 361, 372, 424
Schaefer H.H., ix, 19, 116, 131, 134, 137, 180,
186, 194, 231, 235–238, 240, 420, 422
Schauder J., 86, 193, 199, 203, 219
Schikhof W.H., 423
Schl¨uchtermann G., 242
Schmets J., 213, 422
Schmidt E., 144
Schreier J., 232
Schwartz J.T., 86, 88, 292, 327, 419
Schwartz L., 25, 238, 412, 415, 420, 421, 424
Sebasti˜ao e Silva J., 420
Segal I., 424
Semenov P.V., 93
Semenov S.M., 307
Shaposhnikov A.V., 95
Shavgulidze E.T., 291, 310, 357, 421, 424
Shilov G.E., 106, 420
Shirota T., 178, 213
Shkarin S., 216, 240, 294, 295, 297, 305, 308,
309
ˇSmulian V., ix, 164, 167, 169, 168, 190, 191, 218,
419, 420
Siciak J., 423
Siebert E., 390, 424
Simon B., 343, 422
Singer I., 423
Sipacheva O.V., 94
Skorohod A.V., 329, 399, 418, 424
´Sliwa W., 196, 423
Slowikowski W., 152, 421
Smirnov E.I., 196, 421
Smole´nski W., 399, 424
Smolyanov O.G., 6, 37, 139, 228, 240, 242, 243,
289, 290, 294, 297, 305, 306, 357, 377, 405, 418,
421–424
Sobolev V.I., x
Sobolev S.L., 420
Solntsev S.A., 424
Souslin M., 195, 318
Sova M., 423
Spurn´y J., 423
Steinhaus H., 171, 172
Sudakov V.N., 424
Sukhinin M.F., 423
Sukhomlinov G.A., 420
Sztencel R., 387
Takahashi Y., 424
Talagrand M., 215, 382, 411, 415, 424
Tarieladze V., 337, 338, 344, 345, 354, 357, 366,
374, 375, 382, 404, 412, 416, 424
Taskinen J., 220, 423
Taylor A.E., 419, 423
Taylor B., 275, 279
Terzioglu T., 422
Tihomirov V.M., 421
Tkachenko M., 422
Tkachuk V.V., 422
Todd A.R., 216
Todorov I.T., 421
Toepliz O., 419
Tonge A., 412, 422
Tortrat A., 390
Toru´nczyk H., 217
Tr`eves J.F., ix, 420, 422
Tsar’kov I.G., 307, 310
Tsirelson B.S., 350
Tweddle I., 423
Tychonoff A., 8, 9, 86, 213, 295, 419
Tzafriri L., 219, 232, 422
Uglanov A.V., 417
Uhl J.J., 422
Ulam S., 317
Urbanik K., 399
Urysohn P.S., 139, 216
Vainberg M.M., 423
Vakhania N.N., 338, 344, 345, 354, 374, 375, 382,
404, 412, 416, 424
Valdivia M., 191, 198, 209, 213, 220, 236, 238,
240, 421, 423
Vershik A.M., 424
Vilenkin N.Ya., 424
Villanueva I., 423
Vladimirov V.S., 90, 422
Vladimirski˘ı, 412, 424
Vogt D., 89, 220, 238, 422, 423
Volterra V., 208, 419, 423
Vulih B.Z., 422
Waelbroeck L., 422, 423
Wehausen J., 419
Weizs¨acker H. von, 343, 415
Wengenroth J., 424
Wentzell A.D., 329, 393
Weyl H., 419
Wheeler R.F., 242, 422
Wiener N., 347, 393, 424
Wilansky A., ix, 225, 229, 415, 421, 422
Winkler G., 343
Wi´sniewski A., 417, 418, 424
Wloka J., 420
Wojtaszczyk P., 422
Wojty´nski W., 220
Woodroofe M., 387
Wright J.D.M., 423
Yamamuro S., 423
Yamasaki Y., 424
Yaroslavtsev I.S., 405, 408
Ylinen K., 423
Yosida K., 423
Yurova E.V., 400, 402, 409
Zaanen A.C., 422
Zabreiko P.P., 421, 423
Zahariuta V.P., 422, 423
˙Zak T., 390
Zanco C., 423
Z˘alinescu C., 423
Zermelo E., 5
Zinn J., 387, 424
Zizler V., 307, 422, 423
Zobin N.M., 220
Zorn M., 5

Subject Index
Notation:
A◦, 153
A, 8
˘
A, 29
Aμ, 313
A⊗B, 315
abs conv A, 3
absconv V , 29
B(X), 315
B(IRn), 311, 315
Ba(X), 315
B(E, G), 60
C[a, b], 86, 91
Cb(X), 90, 315
Cn
A(U, G), 260
conv A, 3
conv V , 29
c0, 55, 90
D(IRn), 25, 117
D′(IRn), 26
Dn, Dm(IRn), 117, 118
E′, E∗, 2, 28
EB, 119
Eβ, 182
Eσ, 182
Eτ, 182
E′
β, 182
E′
σ, 182
E′
τ, 182
E(IRn), 26
E′(IRn), 26
E1⊗E2, 130
E1#
⊗εE2, 134
E1$
⊗πE2, 130
f|A, 62
f(n)(x), 248
I, 199
indnEn, 125
indαEα, 109
Ker A, 2
K(E, G), 199
L0(μ), L0(μ), 23
L1(μ), 90
L2(μ), 90
Lp(μ), 90
L∞(μ), 90
Lp(μ, X), 314
L(E, G), 60
L(E, G), 60
LA(P, Q), 244
l2, 90
lp, 90
l∞, 90
lim
←−Eα, 105
lim
−→Eα, 116
pA, 31
IR∞, 18
IRT , 1
Ran A, 2
S(IRn), 25
S′(IRn), 26
T ∗, 162
x⊗y, 130
β(E′, E), 181
δx0, 320
Λ0(μ), 399
μ+, μ−, 313
μ∗, 313
μ ◦f−1, 322
μ⊗ν, 322
μ ∗ν, 373
ν ≪μ, 314
ν ⊥μ, 314
ν ∼μ, 314
σ(A), 201
σ(F), 315
σ(E, G), 27
σ(E, E′), σ(E′, E), 28
τ(E, G), 159
τ(E, E′), 160
AG, 311
∥μ∥, 313
 
α Eα, 114
 
α τα, 114
∂hf(x0), 251
A-, 
A-differentiability, 247
A-continuity, 260
A-convergence, 260
Alexandroff space, 398
Arens topology, 224
absolute continuity of measures, 314
absolutely summing operator, 144
absorbent (absorbing) set, 3
adjoint operator, 162
affine subspace, 3
algebra of cylinders, 311
algebraic basis, 2
algebraic complement, 23
algebraic dual, 2
algebraic kernel, 67
algebraic sum of sets, 4
algebraic sum of subspaces, 23
algebraically inner point, 67
algebraically open set, 67
axiom of choice, 4
B-complete space, 190
Br-complete space, 190
b-, ¯b-differentiability, 249
Baire σ-algebra, 315
Baire measure, 316
Baire property, 210
Baire set, 315
Baire space, 172, 209
Baire theorem, 172
451
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
and Their Applications, Springer Monographs in Mathematics,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-57117-1
V.I. Bogachev and O.G. Smolyanov, Topological Vector Spaces

452
Subject index
Banach disc, 120
Banach space, 18
Banach theorem
– inverse operator, 193
– closed graph, 193
Banach–Alaoglu–Bourbaki theorem, 155
Banach–Dieudonn´e theorem, 192
Banach–Mackey theorem, 122
Banach–Steinhaus theorem, 171
Bochner integral, 338
Borel σ-algebra, 315
Borel function, 315
Borel mapping, 322
Borel measurability, 315
Borel measure, 316
Borel set, 315
balanced convex hull (envelope), 3
balanced set, 3
ball, 6
barrel, 122
barrelled space, 170
barycenter, 338
basis
– Hamel, 2
– Schauder, 219
– algebraic, 2
– filter, 10
bornological space, 175
bounded differentiability, 249
bounded mapping, 175
bounded operator, 175
bounded set, 31
box topology, 148
c-, ¯c-differentiability, 249
Cameron–Martin space, 348
Cauchy filter, 46
Cauchy net, 45
Cauchy sequence, 45
Choquet representation, 343
centered Gaussian measure, 346
complete metric space, 45
complete space, 46
completely ordered set, 5
completely regular space, 9
completion, 51
concave function, 31
continuous linear operator, 60
continuous mapping, 8
convex envelope, 3
convex function, 31
convex hull, 3
convex measure, 378
convolution of measures, 373
circled envelope, 3
circled set, 3
closed ball, 6
closed convex envelope, 29
closed convex hull, 29
closed graph theorem, 193, 196
closed set, 6
closure, 8
codimension, 3
compact, 9
compact operator, 199
compact space, 9
compactness countable, 58
compactness relative, 9
compactness sequential, 58
convergence Mackey, 146
convergence of measures weak, 325
convergence unconditional, 138, 143
convergence weak, 27
convergent filter, 11
convergent net, 10
countable compactness, 58
– relative, 58
countably normed space, 106
covariance operator, 344
cylinder, 311
cylindrical measure, 327
cylindrical set, 311
Davies–Figiel–Johnson–Pelczy´nski
theorem, 123
Dirac’s measure, 320
Dvoretzky–Rogers theorem, 138
dependence linear, 2
derivative, 244
– Fr´echet, 249
– Gˆateaux, 249
– Hadamard, 249
– Radon–Nikodym, 314
– of order n, 248
differentiability, 244
– A-, 
A-, b-, ¯b, c, ¯c, s-, ¯s-, σ-, ¯σ-, 247,
249
– n-fold, 248
– Fr´echet, 249
– Gˆateaux, 249
– Hadamard, 249
– bounded, 249
direct spectre of spaces, 115
direct sum of spaces, 23, 113
disc, 145
– Banach, 120
discontinuous functional, 63
dual space, 2
– algebraic, 2
– topological, 2, 28
ε-net, 39
Eberlein theorem, 166
Eberlein–ˇSmulian property, 218
Eberlein–ˇSmulian theorem, 169
Euclidean space, 2
eigenvalue, 201
eigenvector, 201
equicontinuous set, 61
equivalence relation, 4
equivalent measures, 314
equivalent norms, 2
everywhere dense set, 8
extreme point, 84
Feynman measure, 355, 356
Fr´echet derivative, 249
Fr´echet space, 25, 46
Fr´echet–Urysohn space, 139, 216
Fredholm alternative, 205
filter, 10
– Cauchy, 46

Subject index
453
– convergent, 11
fully complete space, 190
function
– Borel, 315
– convex, 31
– measurable
– – Borel, 315
– – with respect to a measure, 313
– – with respect to a σ-algebra, 313
– gauge, 31
– generalized, 26
– homogeneously convex, 31
– sublinear, 31
fundamental net, 45
fundamental sequence, 45
Gˆateaux derivative, 249
Gaussian measure, 345
– centered, 346
Gross measurability, 364
Gross–Sazonov topology, 361
gauge function, 31
generalized function, 26
generated σ-algebra, 315
graph of a mapping, 193
Hadamard derivative, 249
Hahn–Banach theorem, 70, 72, 77
Hahn–Jordan decomposition, 313
Hajek–Feldman theorem, 352
Hamel basis, 2
Hausdorff space, 9
Hilbert space, 18
Hilbert–Schmidt operator, 144
halfspace, 67
homeomorphic spaces, 9
homeomorphism, 9
homogeneously convex function, 31
hull
– absolutely convex, 3
– balanced, 3
– closed balanced convex, 29
– closed convex, 29
– closed linear, 3
– convex, 3
– convex balanced, 3
– linear, 3
hypercomplete space, 190
hyperplane, 3
– supporting, 68
– separating, 67
hypersubspace, 3
identity operator, 199
independence
– algebraic, 2
– linear, 2
induced topology, 8
inductive topology, 109
inductive limit, 109
– of increasing spaces, 116
– with compact embeddings, 127
– strict, 125
infinitely divisible measure, 383
image of a measure, 322
inner product, 2
interior of a set, 8
inverse spectre of spaces, 105
isolated point, 8
James theorem, 213
Kakutani theorem, 64
Kakutani–Ky Fan theorem, 88
Kolmogorov theorem, 40, 329, 333, 376
K¨othe space, 89
Krein theorem, 342
Krein–Milman theorem, 84
Krein–ˇSmulian space, 190
Krein–ˇSmulian theorem, 191
kernel of an operator, 2
0–1 law, 352, 376, 380, 384
L´evy measure, 384
Lindel¨of property, 215
Lindel¨of space, 215
Lipschitzian mapping, 250
Lusin theorem, 317
limit inductive, 109
– strict, 125
– with compact embeddings, 127
limit of a net, 10
limit point, 8
linear functional, 2
– discontinuous, 63
– measurable, 348, 399
linear independence, 2
linear operator, 2
– measurable, 351, 399
linear order, 5
linear ordering, 5
linear space, 1
linear span, 3
linear variety, 3
linearly ordered set, 5
locally complete space, 145
locally convex space, 16
logarithmically concave measure, 378
μ-almost everywhere, μ-a.e., 313
μ-measurable function, 313
μ-measurable set, 313
Mackey condition, 175, 257
Mackey convergence, 146
Mackey space, 160
Mackey topology, 159, 160
Mackey–Arens theorem, 159
Markov–Kakutani theorem, 87
Michael’s theorem, 93
Minkowski functional, 31
Minlos theorem, 372
Montel space, 238
majorant, 5
mapping
– k-linear, 59
– Borel, 322
– Lipschitzian, 250
– bounded, 175
– continuous, 8
– differentiable, 249
– – Fr´echet, 249
– – Gˆateaux, 249
– – Hadamard, 249

454
Subject index
– measurable, 322
– – Borel, 322
– multilinear, 59
– sequentially continuous, 59
– uniformly continuous, 50
maximal element, 5
mean of a measure, 338
measurable function
– Borel, 315
– with respect to a measure, 313
– with respect to a σ-algebra, 313
measurable linear operator, 351, 399
measurable linear functional, 348, 399
measurable mapping, 322
– – Borel, 322
– – with respect to μ, 322
measurable seminorm, 360
– Gross, 364
measurable space, 313
measure
– τ-additive, 416
– Baire, 316
– Borel, 316
– Dirac, 320
– Feynman, 355
– Gaussian, 345
– – centered, 346
– L´evy, 384
– Poisson, 383
– Radon, 316
– Wiener, 347
– absolutely continuous, 314
– convex, 378
– cylindrical, 327
– infinitely divisible, 383
– logarithmically concave, 378
– probability, 313
– regular, 316
– stable, 383
– tight, 317
measures equivalent, 314
measures mutually singular, 314
metric, 7
metric space, 7
– complete, 45
metrizable space, 7
minimal space, 221
modification of a function, 314
moment strong, 337
moment weak, 337
multilinear mapping, 59
mutual singularity of measures, 314
net, 9
– Cauchy, 45
– convergent, 10
– fundamental, 45
norm, 2
– trace, 134
normal space, 215
normed space, 7
nowhere dense set, 63
nuclear operator, 134, 134
nuclear space, 135
open ball, 6
open set, 6
operator
– Hilbert–Schmidt, 144
– absolutely summing, 144
– adjoint, 162
– bounded, 175
– compact, 199
– continuous, 60
– covariance, 344
– dual, 162
– identity, 199
– linear, 2
– measurable linear, 351, 399
– nuclear, 134, 134
order
– linear, 5
– partial, 4
ordered set, 4
outer measure, 313
Pettis integral, 424
Poisson measure, 383
Prohorov space, 394
Prohorov theorem, 326
Pt´ak space, 190
partial order, 4
point
– accumulation, 8
– extreme, 84
– isolated, 8
– limit, 8
pointwise convergence topology, 17, 60
polar, 153
polynomial, 291
prebase of neighborhoods, 8
precompact set, 39
probability measure, 313
product of σ-algebras, 315
product of measures, 322
projective topology, 101
pseudometric, 7
pseudonorm, 19
pseudotopology, 306
quasi-barrelled space, 174
quasi-complete space, 46
quasi-measure, 354
quasi-norm, 20
quotient space, 2, 113
quotient topology, 21, 113
Radon measure, 316
Radon–Nikodym density, 314
Radon–Nikodym theorem, 314
Riesz theorem, 326
range of an operator, 2
reflexive space, 180, 182
regular measure, 316
relative compactness, 9
s-, ¯s-differentiability, 249
σ-algebra, 313
– Baire, 315
– Borel, 315
– generated, 315
σ-, ¯σ-differentiability, 247
Sazonov theorem, 372
Sazonov topology, 360

Subject index
455
Schauder basis, 219
Schauder theorem, 203
Schauder–Tychonoff theorem, 86
Schwartz space, 25, 238
ˇSmulian theorem, 167, 168
Souslin set, 318
Souslin space, 318
seminorm, 2
– measurable, 360
– Gross measurable, 364
semireflexive space, 182
separable space, 8
separated space, 9
separating hyperplane, 67
separating linear function, 67
separating set, 29, 153
sequence
– Cauchy, 45
– convergent, 10
– fundamental, 45
sequential compactness, 58
– relative, 58
sequential space, 139
sequentially closed set, 48, 139
sequentially complete space, 45
sequentially continuous mapping, 59
set
– μ-measurable, 313
– Alexandroff, 398
– Borel, 315
– Souslin, 318
– absolutely convex, 3
– absorbent (absorbing), 3
– balanced, 3
– balanced, 3
– bounded, 31
– closed, 6
– compact, 9
– completely ordered, 5
– convex, 3
– cylindrical, 311
– first category, 209
– full measure, 313
– equicontinuous, 61
– everywhere dense, 8
– linearly ordered, 5
– measurable, 313
– nowhere dense, 63
– open, 6
– ordered, 4,
– partially ordered, 4
– precompact, 39
– second category, 209
– sequentially closed, 48, 139
– strongly bounded, 182
– totally bounded, 39
– weakly bounded, 80
space
– B-complete, 190
– Br-complete, 190
– C[a, b], 86, 91
– Cb(X), 90, 315
– D(IRn), 25, 117
– D′(IRn), 26
– E(IRn), 26
– E′(IRn), 26
– Lp, 90
– l2, lp, 90
– IR∞, 18
– S(IRn), 25
– S′(IRn), 26
– Σ, 24
– Baire, 172, 209
– Banach, 18
– Cameron–Martin, 348
– Euclidean, 2
– Fr´echet, 25, 46
– Fr´echet–Urysohn, 139, 216
– Hausdorff, 9
– Hilbert, 18
– K¨othe, 89
– Krein–ˇSmulian, 190
– Lindel¨of, 215
– Mackey, 160
– Montel, 238
– Prohorov, 394
– Pt´ak, 190
– Schwartz, 25, 238
– Souslin, 318
– Tychonoff, 9
– barrelled, 170
– bornological, 175
– complete, 46
– completely regular, 9
– countably normed, 106
– dual, 2, 28
– – algebraically, 2
– fully complete, 190
– hypercomplete, 190
– measurable, 313
– quasi-barrelled, 174
– quasi-complete, 46
– compact, 9
– linear, 1
– locally convex, 16
– locally compact, 9
– locally complete, 145
– metric, 7
– – complete, 45
– metrizable, 7
– minimal, 221
– normal, 215
– normed, 7
– nuclear, 135
– reflexive, 180, 182
– semireflexive, 182
– separable, 8
– separated, 9
– sequential, 139
– sequentially complete, 45
– stratifiable, 215
– topological, 6
– – vector 11
– ultrabarrelled, 174
– ultrabornological, 175
– uniform, 81
– vector, 1
– webbed, 196
spectre, 201
– of spaces inverse, 105
– of spaces direct, 115

456
Subject index
stable measure, 383
stratifiable space, 215
strict inductive limit, 109
strong boundedness, 182
strong dual, 182
strong moment, 337
strong topology, 181
strongest locally convex topology, 24, 118
sublinear function, 31
sufficient topology, 357
sum of sets algebraic, 4
sum of spaces direct, 23, 113
support of a measure, 316
supporting hyperplane, 68
T0-, T1-, T3-space, 9
Taylor’s formula, 275, 276
Tychonoff product topology, 8
Tychonoff space, 9
tensor product, 130
– projective, 131
theorem
– Baire’s category, 172
– Banach inverse operator, 193
– Banach closed graph, 193
– Banach–Alaoglu–Bourbaki, 155
– Banach–Dieudonn´e, 192
– Banach–Mackey, 122
– Banach–Steinhaus, 171
– Hajek–Feldman, 352
– Davies–Figiel–Johnson–Pelczy´nski, 123
– Dvoretzky–Rogers, 138
– Eberlein, 166
– Eberlein–ˇSmulian, 169
– Fernique, 352
– Hahn–Banach, 70, 72, 77
– James, 213
– Kakutani, 64
– Kakutani–Ky Fan, 88
– Kolmogorov, 40, 329, 333, 376
– Krein, 342
– Krein–Milman, 84
– Krein–ˇSmulian, 191
– Lusin, 317
– Mackey–Arens, 159
– Markov–Kakutani, 87
– Michael’s selection, 93
– Minlos, 372
– Prohorov, 326
– Radon–Nikodym, 314
– Riesz, 326
– Sazonov, 372
– Schauder, 203
– Schauder–Tychonoff, 86
– ˇSmulian, 167, 168
– Tsirelson, 350
– Zermelo, 5
– bipolar, 154
– closed graph, 193, 196
– inverse operator, 193
– kernel, 138
– mean value, 274
– open mapping, 193
tight measure, 317
topological complement, 23
topological dual, 28
topological space, 6
topological sum, 113
topological support of a measure, 316
topological vector space, 11
topological vector subspace, 20
topology, 6
– β(E′, E), 181
– σ(E, G), 27
– σ(E, E′), σ(E′, E), 28
– τ(E, G), 159
– τ(E, E′), 160
– Arens, 224
– Gross–Sazonov, 361
– Mackey, 159, 160
– Sazonov, 360
– Tychonoff of the product, 8
– box, 148
– compatible with duality, 158
– inductive, 109
– induced, 8
– locally convex, 16
– pointwise convergence, 17, 60
– product, 8, 104
– projective, 101
– – tensor, 131
– strong, 181
– strongest locally convex, 24, 118
– sufficient, 357
– uniform convergence on a class
of sets, 60
– weak, 27
– weak-∗, 28
totally bounded set, 39
triangle inequality, 7
trace norm, 134
ultrabarrelled space, 174
ultrabornological space, 175
ultrafilter, 11
unconditional convergence, 138, 143
uniform boundedness principle, 171
uniform space, 81
uniformity, 81
uniformly continuous mapping, 50
variation of a measure, 313
vector space, 1
version of a function, 314
Wiener measure, 347
weak boundedness, 80
weak convergence, 27
– of measures, 325
weak topology, 27
weak-∗topology, 28
weak moment, 337
weakly bounded set, 80
Zermelo theorem, 5
Zorn lemma, 5
zero–one law, 352, 376, 380, 384

