TRAMES, 2011, 15(65/60), 4, 329–338 
 
 
 
ON TRANSDISCIPLINARITY 
 
Jürgen Mittelstrass 
 
University of Konstanz 
 
 
Abstract. Within the boundaries of transdisciplinary developments, the individual 
disciplines do not remain what they were, they at least change their methodical and 
theoretical perspectives. Not just the theories in the narrow sense, also the disciplines 
themselves get pulled into the process of research and science – in a systematic manner.  
 
Keywords: disciplinarity, interdisciplinarity, transdisciplinarity, nanotechnology 
 
DOI:  10.3176/tr.2011.4.01 
 
 
1. Preliminary remark 
 
The concept of transdisciplinarity – which in the context of the philosophy of 
science I introduced already 20 years ago, as a further development of the concept 
of interdisciplinarity (Mittelstrass 1987:152–158) – has found a foothold in 
science and may even be becoming fashionable. It is used not just by science, 
when thinking about its own research practice, but also by science policy, when 
trying to give the impression of being knowledgeable in the philosophy of science. 
More and more often it seems as if transdisciplinarity were self-explanatory, as if 
its meaning were evident. But this is not at all the case. Though there are attempts 
to define transdisciplinarity as a method in order to present an elaborated 
methodology to the sciences, this is rather due to a misunderstanding than to an 
insight, namely the misunderstanding that transdisciplinarity is something amen-
able to a formulation in a theoretical form. More on this later. The first question 
concerns the relation of what we label transdisciplinarity to the disciplinary 
structure of science. To put it differently: Does disciplinarity, which has 
accompanied us on our scientific roads, have a future? And is interdisciplinarity, 
often evoked when addressing the good relations between the disciplines among 
themselves, no longer enough? What, in any case, is transdisciplinarity, and what 
would its institutionalisation look like? Let me try to give you a reply under four 

Jürgen Mittelstrass 
 
330
headings, using some earlier considerations and some examples I have previously 
given – I do not come up with new ideas every day either (the latest is Mittelstrass 
2002:43–54; also 2000 and 2003). 
 
 
2. Disciplinarity, interdisciplinarity, and the new complexity of science 
 
Our scientific system has become complex in a worrying manner. This is not 
just valid for the ever-increasing acceleration of the growth of knowledge, but also 
in organisational and institutional respects. A particularisation of subject matters 
and disciplines is increasing; the capacity to think in disciplinarities, that is, in 
larger units of science, is decreasing. The borders of subjects and disciplines, if 
they are still perceived as such at all, threaten to turn into limits not just of 
institutions, but also of discovery. Accordingly, the concept of interdisciplinarity, 
often used to oppose this development, is being viewed as a repair tool, which, as 
time goes by, is supposed to lead to a new scientific order.  
But interdisciplinarity is neither something normal, nor something really new, 
nor the true essence of the scientific order. Where it works, it rectifies mis-
guided developments of science, but also renders apparent that (scientific) thinking 
in larger disciplinary units has manifestly declined. A whole should again arise  
out of particularities, both in a systematic as well as in an institutional sense. In 
what follows, the institutional aspect, aiming at the rebuilding of genuine 
disciplinarities, will not be addressed primarily, but the role of structures and 
strategies that span subjects and disciplines in research and, mediately, also in 
teaching.  
In the first instance it is advisable to remind oneself that subjects and 
disciplines have grown through the history of science, and that their boundaries are 
thus determined neither by their objects themselves, nor by theory, but by 
historical growth. Furthermore, their identity is determined by certain objects of 
research, theories, methods, aims of research, which often do not correspond 
univocally to the definitions of subjects or disciplines, but which instead overlap 
these disciplines. This does not just become apparent in the fact that disciplines are 
being guided by methodical and theoretical ideas which, as with the concepts of a 
law of nature, of causality, and of explanation, are not determined to belong to any 
one discipline. It is also evident in the fact that the problems to find solutions for 
science serves, often do not fit straightforwardly into a disciplinary framework. 
For instance, the disciplines dealing with the theoretical description of heat were 
by no means the same in the history of this problem. Initially, heat was conceived 
of as the inner movement of matter, and thus as an object of physics. In the theory 
of caloric matter, formulated by Hermann Boerhaave at the beginning of the 18th 
century, and later developed by Antoine Lavoisier, heat, conceived as matter, 
becomes an object of chemistry. Finally, with the kinetic theory of heat, heat 
changes disciplines anew and becomes an object of physics again. So not (just) the 
objects define the discipline, but our manner of dealing with them in theory.  

On transdisciplinarity 
 
331
The example may also be generalised so as to say that certain problems cannot 
be captured by a single discipline. This is true, in particular, of those problems, as 
for instance rendered clear in the fields of environment, energy and health, which 
arise from issues not exclusively scientific. There is, and this not just in these 
fields, an asymmetry in the developments of problems and scientific disciplines, 
and this is aggravated as the developments of disciplines and science in general are 
characterised by an increasing specialisation. But this means that the inter-
disciplinarity appealed to in this situation is not a ritual of fashion, but arises from 
constraints deriving from the problems themselves. If the problems, whether 
scientific or not, do not do us the favour of defining themselves in the terms of a 
particular discipline or subfield, then special efforts will have to be undertaken, 
which will normally take us outside our normal subjects or disciplines. In other 
words, irrespective of the sense in which interdisciplinarity is being understood 
here, as interdisciplinarity reconstructing larger disciplinary perspectives, or as a 
real enlargement of the domain of interest of the scientific fields and disciplines, 
or going beyond scientific fields and disciplines, one thing should be clear: 
interdisciplinarity, understood rightly, is not merely an alternation between the 
disciplines, nor is it hovering over them, like Hegel's absolute spirit. Rather, it 
undoes disciplinary rigidities whenever these obstruct the formation of problems 
and corresponding research-based actions; in reality, then, it is transdisciplinarity. 
 
 
3. Transdisciplinarity 
 
Whereas scientific cooperation in general means the readiness to engage in 
cooperation in science, and interdisciplinarity normally means concrete coopera-
tion with a finite duration, transdisciplinarity is intended to imply that cooperation 
will lead to an enduring and systematic scientific order that will change the 
outlook of subject matters and disciplines. Transdisciplinarity is a form of 
scientific work which arises in cases concerning the solution of non-scientific 
problems, for instance the above-mentioned environmental, energy and health care 
policy problems, as well as an intrascientific principle concerning the order of 
scientific knowledge and scientific research itself. In both cases, transdisciplinarity 
is a principle of research and science, one which becomes operative wherever it is 
impossible to define or attempt to solve problems within the boundaries of 
subjects or disciplines, or where one goes beyond such definitions.  
Besides, pure forms of transdisciplinarity occur equally rarely as do pure forms 
of disciplinarity. These, too, mostly conceive and realise themselves in the context 
of neighbouring scientific forms, for instance with sociological elements in the 
work of the historian, chemical elements in the work of the biologist or biological 
elements in the work of the medical researcher. In this respect, disciplinarity and 
transdisciplinarity are research-guiding principles or ideal types of scientific work, 
but mixed forms are the rule. What is important is not that science and research 
should be aware of this, and that productive research is restricted by concerns that 

Jürgen Mittelstrass 
 
332
are obsolete (and mostly simply due to habit), and thereby focused on narrow 
areas. Such restrictions neither serve scientific progress, nor a world which, in 
light of its own problems, wants to use rather than admire science.  
In other words, transdisciplinarity overcomes the narrow areas of subjects and 
disciplines which have been constituted historically, but which have lost their 
historical memory and their problem-solving capacities due to an excessive 
specialisation. But it does not lead to new disciplines. That is why it cannot 
replace fields and disciplines. Transdisciplinarity, secondly, is a scientific 
principle of work and organisation which spans subjects and disciplines, driven by 
specific problems, but it is not trans-scientific. The optics of transdisciplinarity is 
scientific, and it is directed at a world that is more than ever a work of the 
scientific and technical mind, and which has a scientific and technical nature. 
Thirdly, transdisciplinarity is a principle of research, and not, or at most 
mediately, namely when the theories themselves follow transdisciplinary research 
programmes, a theoretical principle. It guides the perception of problems, and their 
solution, but it does not solidify in theoretical forms. That is why trans-
disciplinarity is not a method, or even elaborated in the form of a methodology.  
What might, from what I have said, still appear very abstract has already found 
its concrete form in scientific practice, and it is increasingly being fostered 
institutionally. This applies, for instance, to new scientific centres which have 
been formed in the USA, in Berkeley, Chicago, Harvard, Princeton and Stanford 
(see Garwin 1999:3), for instance in Harvard the “Center for Imaging and 
Mesoscale Structures”. It addresses a range of issues which could not sensibly be 
attributed to any particular discipline. Their objects of research are structures of a 
certain dimension in general, not any particular objects. Other institutional forms 
are conceivable, even without gathering them in one building, such as, for 
instance, in the case of the “Center for Nanoscience (CeNS)” at the University of 
Munich.  
Such Centres are also no longer organised according to the traditional pattern 
of faculties or schools of physics, chemistry, or biology, but rather according to a 
transdisciplinary perspective, which, in this case, follows the actual developments 
of science. That is also true in cases where single problems are being addressed, as 
for instance in the new “Bio-X” Centre in Stanford (see Garwin, ibid.), or the 
“Center for Genomics and Proteomics” in Harvard (see Malakoff 1999:610–611). 
Biologists here use sophisticated methods from physics and chemistry to find out 
about the structure of biologically relevant macromolecules, and physicists like the 
Nobel Prize winner Steven Chu, one of the initiators of the “Bio-X”-programme, 
investigate biological objects which may be manipulated with the most advanced 
methods from physics (see Garwin, ibid.). Competencies acquired in individual 
disciplines remain a fundamental precondition for tasks defined transdisciplinarily, 
but they no longer suffice to successfully tackle research projects which extend 
beyond the established fields. This will, in the future, lead to new organisational 
forms, also besides the establishment of centres such as those mentioned, in which 
the boundaries between the individual fields and disciplines will fade away.  

On transdisciplinarity 
 
333
And this is true of all institutional forms of research and science, not just of 
research undertaken in universities. In Germany, these constitute a highly 
differentiated system, which ranges from university research, defined by the unity 
of research and teaching, and Max-Planck-research, defined by ground-breaking 
projects in the newest areas of science, to large-scale research, defined by big 
machinery and fixed-term projects of research and developments (once upon a 
time openly declared as being of national interest), and Fraunhofer-research, 
defined by applied research and closeness to industry, to research done in industry, 
defined by a close connection between research and development. 
But the logic of this system, which other countries envy not just because it 
demonstrates scientific rationality but also exceptional efficiency, is starting to 
become problematic. That is because it leads to the evolution of independent 
subsystems whereas really – in the spirit of the above mentioned development of 
centres – the formation of connections at a low level should be the name of the 
game, not the expansion of independent systems at a high institutional level. For 
Germany, but certainly also for other countries, this means that institutionalised 
research networks of limited duration should take the place of subsystems of 
science which are isolating themselves more and more from each other. The 
justification for this is simple, especially from the perspective of science: The 
system of science has to move when research is moving. At the moment, things are 
exactly the opposite. It is not the research that finds its order, but an order which is 
given in its subsystems and getting increasingly solidified is looking for suitable 
research. This order of science is becoming contraproductive. But this should not 
be the future of research and of a system of science such as the German. As may 
be seen, the increasing transdisciplinarity of scientific research will, or should, 
have far-reaching institutional consequences. 
 
 
4. The unity of nature 
 
In the course of the development of modern science, ideas of a unity of nature 
are again gaining philosophical and scientific importance, as a view of a unitary 
physical theory – if there is only one nature, then all natural laws must be part of a 
unitary theory of nature (see Weizsäcker 1971) –, but also as research is 
increasingly taking a transdisciplinary perspective. If nature does not distinguish 
between physics, chemistry and biology, then why should the sciences that 
research it do so, let alone by means of a rigid disciplinary framework? Indeed, the 
original idea of a unity of nature is shining through the transdisciplinary 
orientation of modern research programmes. But this idea shall not be the theme 
here. Instead, I want to talk about how transdisciplinarity is, as a matter of fact, not 
just a philosophical dream, but instead a part, even an essential part, of the latest 
scientific research. Let me give you two examples, which I have previously used 
in this context.  
 

Jürgen Mittelstrass 
 
334
4.1. Nanotechnology 
 
The idea to do research on and reconstruct functional structures of the 
dimension of 10–9 and 10–6 metres, that is, individual atoms, molecules and small 
collections of atoms, originates with a visionary talk given in 1959 by the physicist 
and later Nobel Prize winner Richard P. Feynman at a conference of the American 
Physical Society (APS) at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena 
(Feynman 1960:22–36). In this talk, Feynman addressed, among other things, the 
storing and reading of information on very small spaces – and so anticipated a 
number of currently used lithographic methods –, miniature computers and small 
'artificial surgeons' which would move through blood vessels to do their job there, 
or in the heart. Feynman had been inspired, as he says himself, by biology, in 
which such small and highly functional structures may already be found. Why 
shouldn’t it be possible to create them artificially?  
Nanotechnologists examine extremely small functional structures (normally 
biological), for instance membranes, enzymes and other cellular components (‘wet 
nanotechnology’) and try, furthermore, to experimentally create these structures, 
using, for instance, semi-conductors (‘dry nanotechnology’) or to simulate their 
properties on computers (‘computational nanotechnology’). In the creation of 
nanostructures, scientists from physics as well as chemistry work together closely. 
Whereas physicists usually begin with a given structure, for instance a surface, 
which they then process with methods from physics (top-down approach), scientists 
from chemistry start at the level of atoms and molecules to systematically assemble 
them (bottom-up approach). All areas of nanotech research are closely interrelated; 
advances in one area normally entail advances in other areas.  
Among the most significant advances in nanotechnology are the synthesis of 
carbon rings (Fullerenes), the creation of microscopic tubes made out of carbon 
atoms (see Ajayan and Ebbesen 1997:1025–1062) and the man-made concatenation 
of a very small number of carbon atoms (see Broglia 1998:371–376). It is remark-
able that it is the biologically important carbon atom that gets used as ‘raw material’.  
 
4.2. The quantum-mechanic measurement process and the concept of information 
 
There are some questions and areas of research whose results are not clearly 
attributable to physics or philosophy. The quantum-mechanical measurement 
process is one of these. How is it possible that the measurement on a quantum-
mechanical system leads to a definite and unambiguous result even if the state 
measured has been prepared as a superposition of eigenstates of the measured 
observables? Does the wave function collapse instantaneously, at the moment of 
measurement, into one of the eigenstates contained in the superposition (as the 
adherents of the Copenhagen interpretation maintain)? Or do we perceive only a 
part of the true wave function after the measurement (as for instance the many-
worlds and the many-minds interpretations suggest)? Or is the measurement 
process a ‘real’ process, occurring on an extremely small timescale, whose 

On transdisciplinarity 
 
335
genuinely non-linear stochastic dynamics goes far beyond the basic assumptions 
of quantum mechanics and, strictly speaking, even contradicts them (see Ghirardi, 
Rimini and Weber 1986:470–491)? Other questions pertain to the unifiability of 
quantum mechanics with the theory of Special Relativity (see Maudlin 1994) and 
the role of non-local causality in physics. Philosophers, well-acquainted with 
subtle differences and the handling of concepts in need of explanation (in this 
context, for instance, non-locality), prove to be useful partners of physics, not 
always – the will to conceptual clarity often shows itself to be a weak will –, but 
occasionally. (Of course, it is true that philosophy should not want to solve 
problems which science, as here physics, is in a better position to solve.) 
Information technology too proves to be useful here. According to the 
Copenhagen interpretation, a quantum system loses information when a measure-
ment is being executed on it. The reason is that the system is in a state of super-
position just before the measurement is performed, whereas after the measurement 
it takes, qua projection, the eigenstate of that operator that has been assigned to the 
observable to be measured. Any further information of the original state has been 
lost. After introducing the concept of information into quantum mechanics, the 
theory of information may be used to further analyse the measurement process, so 
that a bridge to further applications in technology has been built (for instance, 
‘quantum cryptography’ and ‘quantum computing’ (see Weinfurter and Zeilinger 
1996:219–224)). The research principle of transdisciplinarity does not just concern 
the collaboration of diverse scientific skills, it also extends to technology.  
Thus far my examples. Do they, and what I have said about transdisciplinarity 
before, imply that we are facing a fundamental paradigm change, in which it is not 
the theoretical concepts that change – as in the transfer from Aristotelian to 
Newtonian physics – but in which the order of our scientific knowledge, and thus 
that of our scientific research and education, is changing fundamentally? It won't 
get that far, for reasons already mentioned while explaining the concept of trans-
disciplinarity. The standards of rationality, and with them the methods and forms 
of theory construction, are not changing. It is the forms of organisation of science 
and research which are doing so. Once again, transdisciplinarity is a principle of 
research and science, which applies wherever a definition of problems or solu-
tions just through individual fields or disciplines is not possible, or goes beyond 
them. It is not a theoretical principle that changes our textbooks. Just like 
competence in particular fields or disciplines, transdisciplinarity is a research-
guiding principle and a form of scientific organisation, but with the peculiarity that 
transdisciplinarity removes narrowness due to specialisation which is due not to 
scientific necessities but to institutional habits. 
 
 
5. Methodical transdisciplinarity 
 
If it is true that transdisciplinarity is a principle of research and science, not a 
theoretical principle, nor a method that may be expressed in a methodology, then 
what is the peculiarity of transdisciplinarity from the methodological perspective? 

Jürgen Mittelstrass 
 
336
After all, everything science does by way of research has to show the worth of its 
methods; there is no science without the idea of the methodological, or its 
realisation. In other words, what is the significance of methodological trans-
disciplinarity? May something be called methodological without being expressible 
in a methodology? Let me explain.  
I had previously drawn the distinction between sets of problems that are created 
'in the world', that is, in the course of social, scientific or technologically shaped 
developments (as examples, the environment, energy and health care policy had 
been mentioned), and those which science generates itself, in the course of doing 
research. In both cases I had talked about the necessity of transdisciplinary exten-
sions. I shall call transdisciplinarity that makes reference to problems foreign to 
science, practical transdisciplinarity, and transdisciplinarity that originates from 
more strictly scientific problems, theoretical transdisciplinarity. As an example of 
practical transdisciplinarity the case of ecological problems may serve again. 
Ecological problems require the collaboration of many disciplines, for instance 
physics, chemistry, biology, climate research, but also sociology and psychology; 
these contribute with their specialised knowledge to the solution of these 
problems, and a wise and efficient coordination, but not an extension or trans-
formation of these disciplines, is required. They contribute what they know, but 
they do not change themselves in their forms of knowledge or methodology.  
But precisely this might be required when the issue is to solve problems 
generated by science itself, namely such problems which, in contrast to ecological 
ones, are not 'given', and which do not occur in a world common to us, but which 
have been created by the practice of research or which have been discovered in the 
course of the development of research. An example of transdisciplinarity in this 
sense is research on structures, as I have mentioned. The production, analysis, 
manipulation and practical use of structures of a certain size is not just of interest 
for physics, chemistry and biology, but also for geology, material science, 
medicine and computing. For this, the Harvard Centre supplies expensive 
scientific tools and machines, for instance for the visualisation of nanostructures, 
and so, as well as in other ways, for instance by providing infrastructure, creates a 
cooperative atmosphere.  
Now, I do not want to distinguish between practical and theoretical trans-
disciplinarity in the sense that only the latter has a methodological orientation in 
also a more general sense. A methodological orientation also applies, or better, 
should apply, where the issue is the solution of practical problems, such that 
several disciplines need to cooperate for that aim. There are methodical problems 
here too, and not every collaboration between disciplines is successful. What is it 
about? Also for this there is an example.  
In the year 2000 the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences installed a 
working group that was intended to look at the formation, justification and 
implementation of health standards. The background was the peculiar fact that 
health is still – in ordinary life just as well as in science – a vague concept, mostly 
being defined as the absence of disease ('health: see disease'), and then remains 

On transdisciplinarity 
 
337
peculiarly empty; on the other hand, the desolate condition of the German health 
system apparently cannot be remedied with the usual patchwork of reforms carried 
out in the merry go-round of diverse commissions. More fundamental thoughts 
(for instance, on the concept of health) need to be made and the considerations 
have to occur at a deeper level – even at an anthropological or moral level. The 
working group included physicians, lawyers, economists, biologists and 
philosophers. The results have been published in 2004 under the title “Health 
Made to Measure? A Transdisciplinary Study on the Foundations of a Sustainable 
Health Care System” (Gethmann et al. 2004). 
What were the problems of such a group, and how were they solved in a 
systematic and methodical manner? In practice, the process consisted of different 
disciplinarities, represented through different disciplinary competencies, working 
with and on each other – starting with drafts squarely falling into one discipline, 
going through repeated revisions from different disciplinary perspectives, finally 
leading to a common text. The preconditions for this (again in temporal order) 
were: (1) the unconditional will to learn and the readiness to do without one's own 
disciplinary ideas. (2) The development of interdisciplinary competence, consist-
ing of a productive immersion into the approaches of other disciplines. (3) The 
capacity to reformulate one's own approaches in light of the interdisciplinary 
competence thus gained. (4) The production of a common text, in which the unity 
of the argumentation (‘transdisciplinary unity’) takes the place of an amalgamation 
of disciplinary components. In this case, these preconditions were satisfied, and 
the process succeeded.  
These steps, which one may reconstruct methodically, were, to summarise 
them briefly: first a normal, disciplinary approach, then an encounter of the 
disciplines, formation of interdisciplinary competence, de-disciplinarisation in the 
argumentative, transdisciplinarity as argumentative unity. What is crucial is the 
argumentative perspective, the condition that the entire process took place, in a 
non-trivial sense, in argumentative space; in this example: the unity looked for, the 
determination of health care standards and the determination of measures for a 
good life, had been created going beyond, as well through different disciplines.  
In other words, the methodical in this practical transdisciplinarity consists in its 
argumentative creation and the steps which may be distinguished in the process  
of creation. This again may also apply to the transdisciplinarity previously 
described as theoretical, or inner-scientific. That too bases itself on disciplinary 
competencies, but does not relate them to objects of the disciplines, and thus 
constitutes a new ‘disciplinarity’, which, with respect to the original disciplines, 
becomes transdisciplinarity. A research programme, for instance the structural 
research mentioned before, goes beyond the common disciplinary determinations, 
and develops its own forms of work and thus also changes the disciplines involved 
(also due to the constitution of the problem to be solved). That means: Within the 
boundaries of transdisciplinary developments, the individual disciplines do not 
remain what they were, at least, they change their methodical and theoretical 
perspectives. Not just the theories in the narrow sense, also the disciplines 

Jürgen Mittelstrass 
 
338
themselves get pulled into the process of research and science – in a systematic 
manner. Precisely this is what is meant with methodical transdisciplinarity.  
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This paper was read at the international seminar “Silverwhite Route following 
Pytheas and Lennart Meri” on October 15, 2009, Tallinn, Estonia. 
 
 
Address: 
Jürgen Mittelstrass 
Centre for Philosophy of Science 
University of Konstanz 
78457 Konstanz, Germany 
E-mail: Juergen.Mittelstrass@uni-konstanz.de 
 
 
References 
 
Ajayan, P. M. and T. W. Ebbesen (1997) “Nanometre-size tubes of carbon”. Reports on Progress in 
Physics 60, 1025–1062. 
Broglia, R. A. (1998) “Wires of seven atoms – Feynman’s very, very small world”. Contemporary 
Physics 39, 371–376. 
Feynman, R. (1960) “There’s plenty of room at the bottom”. Engineering and Science 23, 22–36. 
Garwin, L. (1999) “US universities create bridges between physics and biology”. Nature 397, 
January 7, 3. 
Gethmann, C. F. et al. (2004) Gesundheit nach Maß? Eine transdisziplinäre Studie zu den Grund-
lagen eines dauerhaften Gesundheitssystems. (Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der 
Wissenschaften: Forschungsberichte, 13.) Berlin: Akademie Verlag. 
Ghirardi, G. C., A. Rimini, and T. Weber (1986) “Unified dynamics for microscopic and macro-
scopic systems”. Physical Review D 34, 470–491. 
Malakoff, D. (1999) “Genomic, nanotech centers open: $ 200 million push by Harvard”. Science 
283, January 29, 610–611. 
Maudlin, T. (1994) Quantum non-locality and relativity: metaphysical intimations of modern 
physics. (Aristotelian Society Series, 13.) Oxford: Blackwell. 
Mittelstrass, J. (1987) “Die Stunde der Interdisziplinarität?”. In Interdisziplinarität: Praxis – 
Herausforderung – Ideologie, 152–158. J. Kocka, ed. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.  
Mittelstrass, J. (2000) Zwischen Naturwissenschaft und Philosophie: Versuch einer Neuvermessung 
des wissenschaftlichen Geistes. (Konstanzer Universitätsreden, 205.) Konstanz: Universitäts-
verlag Konstanz. 
Mittelstrass, J. (2002) “Transdisciplinarity – new structures in science”. In Innovative Structures in 
Basic Research (Ringberg-Symposium 4–7 October 2000), 43–54. Munich: Max-Planck-
Gesellschaft. 
Mittelstrass, J. (2003) Transdisziplinarität – wissenschaftliche Zukunft und institutionelle Wirklich-
keit. (Konstanzer Universitätsreden, 214.) Konstanz: Universitätsverlag Konstanz. 
Weinfurter, H. and A. Zeilinger (1996) “Informationsübertragung und Informationsverarbeitung in 
der Quantenwelt”. Physikalische Blätter 52, 3, 219–224. 
Weizsäcker, C. F. v.  (1971) Die Einheit der Natur: Studien. Munich: Hanser. 

