Springer Handbook of Auditory Research
Colleen G. Le Prell
Edward Lobarinas
Arthur N. Popper
Richard R. Fay    Editors 
Translational 
Research in 
Audiology, 
Neurotology, 
and the Hearing 
Sciences

Springer Handbook of Auditory Research
Series Editors
Richard R. Fay, Ph.D., MA, USA
Arthur N. Popper, Ph.D., MD, USA
Editorial Board
Karen Avraham, Ph.D., University of Tel Aviv
Andrew Bass, Ph.D., Cornell University
Lisa Cunningham, Ph.D., NIH
Bernd Fritzsch, Ph.D., University of Iowa
Andrew Groves, Ph.D., Baylor University
Ronna Hertzano, M.D., Ph.D., School of Medicine, University of Maryland
Colleen Le Prell, Ph.D., University of Texas, Dallas
Ruth Litovsky, Ph.D., University of Wisconsin
Paul Manis, Ph.D., University of North Carolina
Geoffrey Manley, Ph.D., University of Oldenburg, Germany
Brian Moore, Ph.D., Cambridge University, UK
Andrea Simmons, Ph.D., Brown University
William Yost, Ph.D., Arizona State University
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/2506

The ASA Press
The ASA Press imprint represents a collaboration between the Acoustical Society
of America and Springer dedicated to encouraging the publication of important new
books in acoustics. Published titles are intended to reﬂect the full range of research
in acoustics. ASA Press books can include all types of books published by Springer
and may appear in any appropriate Springer book series.
Editorial Board
Mark F. Hamilton (Chair), University of Texas at Austin
James Cottingham, Coe College
Diana Deutsch, University of California, San Diego
Timothy F. Duda, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Robin Glosemeyer Petrone, Threshold Acoustics
William M. Hartmann, Michigan State University
James F. Lynch, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Philip L. Marston, Washington State University
Arthur N. Popper, University of Maryland
Martin Siderius, Portland State University
Andrea M. Simmons, Brown University
Ning Xiang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
William Yost, Arizona State University

Colleen G. Le Prell
• Edward Lobarinas
Arthur N. Popper
• Richard R. Fay
Editors
Translational Research
in Audiology, Neurotology,
and the Hearing Sciences
With 24 Illustrations
123

Editors
Colleen G. Le Prell
Callier Center for Communication Disorders
University of Texas at Dallas
Dallas, TX
USA
Edward Lobarinas
Callier Center for Communication Disorders
University of Texas at Dallas
Dallas, TX
USA
Arthur N. Popper
Department of Biology
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
USA
Richard R. Fay
Marine Biological Laboratory
Woods Hole, MA
USA
ISSN 0947-2657
ISSN 2197-1897
(electronic)
Springer Handbook of Auditory Research
ISBN 978-3-319-40846-0
ISBN 978-3-319-40848-4
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-40848-4
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016945772
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or
for any errors or omissions that may have been made.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG Switzerland

Acoustical Society of America
The mission of the Acoustical Society of America (www.acousticalsociety.org) is
to increase and diffuse the knowledge of acoustics and promote its practical
applications. The ASA is recognized as the world’s premier international scientiﬁc
society in acoustics, and counts among its more than 7,000 members, professionals
in the ﬁelds of bioacoustics, engineering, architecture, speech, music, oceanogra-
phy, signal processing, sound and vibration, and noise control.
Since its ﬁrst meeting in 1929, The Acoustical Society of America has enjoyed a
healthy growth in membership and in stature. The present membership of
approximately 7,500 includes leaders in acoustics in the United States of America
and other countries. The Society has attracted members from various ﬁelds related
to sound including engineering, physics, oceanography, life sciences, noise and
noise control, architectural acoustics; psychological and physiological acoustics;
applied acoustics; music and musical
instruments; speech communication;
ultrasonics, radiation, and scattering; mechanical vibrations and shock; underwater
sound; aeroacoustics; macrosonics; acoustical signal processing; bioacoustics; and
many more topics.
To assure adequate attention to these separate ﬁelds and to new ones that may
develop, the Society establishes technical committees and technical groups charged
with keeping abreast of developments and needs of the membership in their spe-
cialized ﬁelds. This diversity and the opportunity it provides for interchange of
knowledge and points of view has become one of the strengths of the Society.
The Society’s publishing program has historically included the Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, the magazine Acoustics Today, a newsletter, and
various books authored by its members across the many topical areas of acoustics.
In addition, ASA members are involved in the development of acoustical standards
concerned with terminology, measurement procedures, and criteria for determining
the effects of noise and vibration.

This book is dedicated to the memory of
Bertrand Moore, PhD (1944–2015). Dr.
Moore joined the University of Texas at
Dallas (UTD) in 1980 as a scholar and
clinician. He was appointed dean in 1989. In
this role, his steadfast commitment and
support for faculty, students, and
translational research in the behavioral and
brain sciences was unwavering. Dr. Moore
was a strong advocate for translational
research in hearing science, with the
long-term goal of integrating academics,
research, and patient care to advance the
ﬁelds of audiology and speech-language
pathology. His advocacy allowed the
establishment of the Callier Prize, an award
that recognizes individuals, worldwide, for
their contributions to the diagnosis and
treatment of communication disorders as well
as establishment of multiple endowed chair
positions and breaking ground for a major
expansion of the clinical and research
facilities. Dr. Moore believed in and
supported the translational activities
described in this volume and was an advocate
for faculty in all areas of the scientiﬁc
spectrum. He will be greatly missed.

Series Preface
The following preface is the one that we published in Volume 1 of the Springer
Handbook of Auditory Research back in 1992. As anyone reading the original
preface, or the many users of the series, will note, we have far exceeded our original
expectation of eight volumes. Indeed, with books published to date, and those in the
pipeline, we are now set for more than 50 volumes in SHAR, and we are still open
to new and exciting ideas for additional books.
We are very proud that there seems to be consensus, at least among our friends
and colleagues, that SHAR has become an important and inﬂuential part of the
auditory literature. While we have worked hard to develop and maintain the quality
and value of SHAR, the real value of the books is very much because of the
numerous authors who have given their time to write outstanding chapters and to
our many coeditors who have provided the intellectual leadership to the individual
volumes. We have worked with a remarkable and wonderful group of people, many
of whom have become great personal friends of both of us. We also continue to
work with a spectacular group of editors at Springer. Indeed, several of our past
editors have moved on in the publishing world to become senior executives. To our
delight, this includes the current president of Springer US, Dr. William Curtis.
But the truth is that the series would and could not be possible without the support
of our families, and we want to take this opportunity to dedicate all of the SHAR
books, past and future, to them. Our wives, Catherine Fay and Helen Popper, and our
children, Michelle Popper Levit, Melissa Popper Levinsohn, Christian Fay, and
Amanda Fay Sierra, have been immensely patient as we developed and worked on
this series. We thank them, and state, without doubt, that this series could not have
happened without them. We also dedicate the future of SHAR to our next generation
of
(potential)
auditory
researchers—our
grandchildren—Ethan
and
Sophie
Levinsohn; Emma Levit; and Nathaniel, Evan, and Stella Fay.
ix

Preface 1992
The Springer Handbook of Auditory Research presents a series of comprehensive
and synthetic reviews of the fundamental topics in modern auditory research. The
volumes are aimed at all individuals with interests in hearing research including
advanced graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and clinical investigators.
The volumes are intended to introduce new investigators to important aspects of
hearing science and to help established investigators to better understand the fun-
damental theories and data in ﬁelds of hearing that they may not normally follow
closely.
Each volume presents a particular topic comprehensively, and each serves as a
synthetic overview and guide to the literature. As such, the chapters present neither
exhaustive data reviews nor original research that has not yet appeared in
peer-reviewed journals. The volumes focus on topics that have developed a solid
data and conceptual foundation rather than on those for which a literature is only
beginning to develop. New research areas will be covered on a timely basis in the
series as they begin to mature.
Each volume in the series consists of a few substantial chapters on a particular
topic. In some cases, the topics will be ones of traditional interest for which there is
a substantial body of data and theory, such as auditory neuroanatomy (Vol. 1) and
neurophysiology (Vol. 2). Other volumes in the series deal with topics that have
begun to mature more recently, such as development, plasticity, and computational
models of neural processing. In many cases, the series editors are joined by a
coeditor having special expertise in the topic of the volume.
Richard R. Fay, Woods Hole, MA, USA
Arthur N. Popper, College Park, MD, USA
SHAR logo by Mark B. Weinberg, Bethesda, Maryland, used with permission.
x
Series Preface

Volume Preface
Each volume in the Springer Handbook of Auditory Research (SHAR) series
provides comprehensive and up-to-date conceptual reviews on speciﬁc topics
closely related to the sense of hearing. Whereas previous SHAR volumes have
focused primarily on either basic science or applied science, this volume provides
both an overview and examples of the translational research process, which is
deﬁned as the speciﬁc activities that allow basic scientiﬁc data to be “translated”
ﬁrst into clinical investigation and then into healthcare application. Thus, the
authors of each chapter were charged with describing the challenges and joys of
translational research and the process whereby one moves from basic scientiﬁc
inquiry all the way to clinical delivery. The topics in this book were selected with
the goal of emphasizing the critical importance of these translational activities to
new advances in hearing healthcare based on evidence-based practice (EBP), a
principle deﬁned by clinical practices that reﬂect approaches derived from com-
pelling scientiﬁc evidence of efﬁcacy.
Chapter 1 by Le Prell and Lobarinas provides an overview of the volume and
puts the contents into the broad perspective of translational science. This is fol-
lowed in Chap. 2 by Le Prell, who discusses the entire scientiﬁc continuum from
basic science to clinical trials to the epidemiological assessment of public health
with careful attention to potential obstacles in the translational process that may be
encountered at each of these stages. Next, in Chap. 3, Kraus and Anderson discuss
the challenges of treatment and diagnosis of central auditory processing disorder
(CAPD), a clinical disorder for which there are no widely accepted diagnostic
criteria or treatment options.
Chapter 4 by Montgomery, Bauer, and Lobarinas then describes sudden hearing
loss (SHL), a clinical disorder for which there are well-accepted diagnostic criteria
and treatment options. Within the translational research spectrum, this chapter
highlights the discrepancy among existing practice guidelines, evidence for these
guidelines, and public health needs for SHL, a signiﬁcant clinical problem with
limited treatment options. Speciﬁcally, there are now multiple systematic reviews
and meta-analyses that draw into question the extent and reliability of steroid
xi

treatment, the most widely accepted and used therapeutic intervention. This chapter
provides an overview of the challenges associated with establishing etiology, for-
mal assessment, and treatment of SHL. In Chap. 5, Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell
describe the myriad of issues related to preclinical development of a drug, with the
primary emphasis of the chapter being the issues that emerge with the transition to
clinical testing. Chapter 6 by Campbell and Fox continues the theme of new drug
development, discussing the challenges of translation of otoprotective drugs from
testing in animal models to assessment in humans.
Chapter 7 by Allman, Schormans, Typlt, and Lobarinas transitions from pre-
vention of hearing loss to treatment of tinnitus, a condition often comorbid with
hearing loss. Next, in Chap. 8, Staecker, Klickstein, and Brough describe the
development of molecular therapeutics for treating profound hearing loss via
regeneration of sensory cells in the cochlea. In Chap. 9, Tan, Xia, and Richter
discuss the potential for alternative cochlear implant designs that take advantage of
new stimulation technologies. The authors speciﬁcally review and consider three
novel strategies for neural stimulation, including optogenetics, optoacoustics, and
infrared neural stimulation.
Although this volume focuses on translational auditory neuroscience, much
of the basic and applied science in the previous volumes provides background to
these chapters. As a complement to the previous SHAR volumes on the human
auditory cortex and cochlear implants, the ﬁrst case study in the current volume
delves into central auditory processing (Chap. 3) and builds on the themes raised in
Neural Correlates of Auditory Cognition (Vol. 45, 2012, edited by Cohen, Popper,
and Fay). The second case study in this volume focuses on sudden hearing loss
(Chap. 4) and updates previous discussion of autoimmune inner ear disease as
provided in Auditory Trauma, Protection, and Repair (Vol. 31, 2008, edited by
Schacht, Popper, and Fay).
Similarly, the problem of noise-induced hearing loss was discussed in detail in
Noise-Induced Hearing Loss (Vol. 40, 2012, edited by Le Prell, Henderson, Fay,
and Popper). In the current volume, the process by which a therapeutic intervention
would transition from the laboratory, through the regulatory bodies, to clinical trials
and ultimately into routine clinical care is presented as a third in-depth case study
(Chap. 5). The next case study in this volume (Chap. 6) focuses on ototoxicity, a
topic considered in Auditory Trauma, Protection, and Repair (Vol. 31, 2008, edited
by Schacht, Popper, and Fay). In this new volume, the current state of available
therapies to alleviate tinnitus is discussed in the context of translating these inter-
ventions into clinical practice in the ﬁfth case study (Chap. 7). The earlier edition,
Tinnitus (Vol. 44, 2012, edited by Eggermont, Zeng, Popper, and Fay), provided a
thorough overview of the proposed underlying mechanisms of tinnitus.
In the next case study (Chap. 8), readers are given a glimpse into the future with
speciﬁc examples of promising molecular therapies for hearing loss, an update to
the information reviewed in Development of the Inner Ear (Vol. 26, 2005, edited by
Kelley, Wu, Popper, and Fay) and the more recent Hair Cell Regeneration, Repair,
and Protection (Vol. 33, 2008, edited by Salvi, Popper, and Fay). Finally, novel and
emerging cochlear implant technologies progressing through the translation process
xii
Volume Preface

are discussed (Chap. 9). This ﬁnal case study builds on the discussion of current
technology in Cochlear Implants: Auditory Prostheses and Electric Hearing (Vol.
20, 2004, edited by Zeng, Popper, and Fay) as well as in Auditory Prostheses (Vol.
39, 2011, edited by Zeng, Popper, and Fay).
Fundamental to the issue of translational research is selection of the most
appropriate animal models. Multiple chapters draw on the important preceding
work across mammals as described in Comparative Hearing: Mammals (Vol. 4,
1994, edited by Fay and Popper). Another critical element in translational research
is the selection of the most appropriate human functional metrics. This new volume
builds on the work discussed in both Clinical Aspects of Hearing (Vol. 7, 1996,
edited by Van De Water, Popper, and Fay) and Human Psychophysics (Vol. 3,
1993, edited by Yost, Popper, and Fay).
Collectively, the chapters in this volume build on and frame previous important
topics in hearing science in the context of the scrutiny and high bar of the trans-
lational process and the critical steps involved in moving from the bench to the
bedside.
Colleen G. Le Prell, Dallas, TX, USA
Edward Lobarinas, Dallas, TX, USA
Arthur N. Popper, College Park, MD, USA
Richard R. Fay, Woods Hole, MA, USA
Volume Preface
xiii

Contents
1
Perspectives on Auditory Translational Research . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Colleen G. Le Prell and Edward Lobarinas
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research
in the Hearing Sciences, Audiology, and Otolaryngology . . . . . . . .
19
Colleen G. Le Prell
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis
and Treatment Efﬁcacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Nina Kraus and Samira Anderson
4
Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
Scott C. Montgomery, Carol A. Bauer, and Edward Lobarinas
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss . . . . . . . . .
105
Eric D. Lynch, Jonathan Kil, and Colleen G. Le Prell
6
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
141
Kathleen C.M. Campbell and Daniel J. Fox
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies
for Tinnitus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
165
Brian L. Allman, Ashley L. Schormans, Marei Typlt,
and Edward Lobarinas
8
Developing a Molecular Therapeutic for Hearing Loss . . . . . . . . .
197
Hinrich Staecker, Lloyd Klickstein, and Douglas E. Brough
9
Photons in the Ear. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
219
Xiaodong Tan, Nan Xia, and Claus-Peter Richter
10
Clinical and Translational Research: Challenges to the Field . . . . .
241
Colleen G. Le Prell and Edward Lobarinas
xv

Contributors
Brian L. Allman Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of
Medicine & Dentistry, Western University, London, ON, Canada
Samira Anderson Department of Hearing and Speech Sciences, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
Carol A. Bauer Division of Otolaryngology, Southern Illinois University School
of Medicine, Springﬁeld, IL, USA
Douglas E. Brough GenVec Inc., Gaithersburg, MD, USA
Kathleen C.M. Campbell Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology,
and Cell Biology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Springﬁeld, IL,
USA
Daniel J. Fox Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology, and Cell
Biology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Springﬁeld, IL, USA
Jonathan Kil Sound Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Seattle, WA, USA
Lloyd Klickstein Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA,
USA
Nina
Kraus Departments
of
Communication
Sciences,
Neurobiology
and
Physiology, and Otolaryngology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
Colleen G. Le Prell Callier Center for Communication Disorders, University of
Texas at Dallas, Dallas, TX, USA
Edward Lobarinas Callier Center for Communication Disorders, University of
Texas at Dallas, Dallas, TX, USA
Eric D. Lynch Sound Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Seattle, WA, USA
Scott C. Montgomery Division of Otolaryngology, Southern Illinois University
School of Medicine, Springﬁeld, IL, USA
xvii

Claus-Peter Richter Department of Otolaryngology, Northwestern University,
Chicago,
IL,
USA;
Department
of
Biomedical
Engineering,
Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL, USA; Department of Communication Sciences and
Disorders, The Hugh Knowles Center, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL,
USA
Ashley L. Schormans Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School
of Medicine & Dentistry, Western University, London, ON, Canada
Hinrich Staecker Department of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery,
University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City, KS, USA
Xiaodong Tan Department of Otolaryngology, Northwestern University, Chicago,
IL, USA
Marei Typlt Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of
Medicine & Dentistry, Western University, London, ON, Canada
Nan
Xia Key
Laboratory
of
Biorheological
Science
and
Technology,
Bioengineering College, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China; Department of
Otolaryngology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
xviii
Contributors

Chapter 1
Perspectives on Auditory Translational
Research
Colleen G. Le Prell and Edward Lobarinas
Abstract Translational research encompasses a spectrum beginning with basic
scientiﬁc inquiry, extending into applied assessment in clinical trial evaluations, and
ultimately extending to clinical application and assessment of the impact on public
health. Translational research occurs at the boundaries between each of these steps,
with speciﬁc activities required to move from basic science into clinical testing
(translation 1, T1), from clinical testing into clinical best practice guidelines
(translation 2, T2), from guidelines into healthcare practice (translation 3, T3), and
from clinical practice into public health beneﬁt (translation 4, T4). This volume on
translational research introduces scientists and clinicians to this process via speciﬁc
examples across current “hot topics” in auditory research. Among the topics are
examples from central auditory processing disorder, sudden hearing loss,
noise-induced hearing loss, tinnitus, cisplatin-induced hearing loss, molecular
therapies for hair cell regeneration, and next-generation novel cochlear implant
devices relying on optical stimulation. A brief review of each chapter is included
here. Across the chapters, readers will appreciate the current state of the science, a
review of current clinical practices, and emerging evidence-based interventions
with the overarching goal of providing interested parties with a reference high-
lighting the process, challenges, and rewards of translational research.
Keywords Advances in hearing  Auditory disorders best practices  Clinical
research  Evidence-based practice  Translational research
C.G. Le Prell (&)  E. Lobarinas
Callier Center for Communication Disorders, University of Texas at Dallas,
1966 Inwood Road, Dallas, TX 75235, USA
e-mail: colleen.leprell@utdallas.edu
E. Lobarinas
e-mail: edward.lobarinas@utdallas.edu
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
C.G. Le Prell et al. (eds.), Translational Research in Audiology, Neurotology,
and the Hearing Sciences, Springer Handbook of Auditory Research 58,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-40848-4_1
1

1.1
Introduction to the Volume
Each individual volume within the Springer Handbook of Auditory Research
(SHAR) provides comprehensive and up-to-date conceptual reviews on speciﬁc
topics closely related to the sense of hearing. Previous SHAR volumes have
focused primarily on either basic science or applied science. The present volume
provides both an overview and examples of the translational research process, with
translational research deﬁned as the speciﬁc activities that allow basic scientiﬁc data
to be “translated” ﬁrst into clinical investigations and then into healthcare appli-
cation. In this particular volume, the authors of each chapter were charged with
describing the challenges and joys of translational research, the process whereby
one moves from basic scientiﬁc inquiry all the way to clinical delivery. The
chapters include examples of translational research programs drawn from across a
broad range of relevant topics. The topic of this book was selected with the goal of
emphasizing the critical importance of these translational activities to new advances
in hearing healthcare and the goal of evidence-based practice (EBP), a principle
deﬁned by clinical practices that reﬂect approaches derived from compelling sci-
entiﬁc evidence of efﬁcacy.
In the United States and other countries, EBP has been conceptualized as the
provision of clinical service with speciﬁc care decisions not only driven by the
expert opinion of the clinician but also based on the best scientiﬁc data from current
research literature. More recently, EBP was deﬁned to also include patient pref-
erence; if patients are to make informed decisions about their healthcare prefer-
ences, it is incumbent on the care provider to not only be familiar with the research
literature but also to be able to explain it to patients and make the information
accessible to them so that they can make informed decisions about their care.
Throughout the volume, there is therefore a focus on the essential precursors of
EBP. These include the importance of robust basic science, critical review of
existing ﬁndings, and the multiple steps required to move from basic science,
through clinical trials, and ultimately to patient care. In the absence of valid con-
trolled research reports, clinicians must rely on expert opinion, individual expert
judgment, and patient preference in lieu of evidence-based guidance from the
literature.
This initial chapter provides a brief introduction to translational research with
themes that are expanded on in detail in Chap. 2. This is followed by an intro-
duction to each of the speciﬁc case studies included in Chaps. 3–9. The ﬁnal Chap.
10 reviews common themes that emerged across the case studies in each chapter
and ends with commentary on two speciﬁc topics that were selected to highlight the
translational nature of some of today’s “hot” scientiﬁc topics. There is an urgent
need to close signiﬁcant gaps in our understanding of clinically relevant problems
in hearing, so that clinical care reﬂects methods with the highest level of evidence
of efﬁcacy. These case studies provide a tool for introducing basic scientists to the
concepts and ideas in translational science with the hope that basic scientists will
think about scientiﬁc design with the potential for translation already in mind, to
2
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

protect opportunities for translation, and to ultimately close the gaps between
benchtop and bedside. Closing these gaps will require enhanced collaboration
among basic and applied scientists and clinicians. The overarching goal of this text
is to provide a reference for scientists, clinicians, and other interested parties as to
the important roles each plays in moving discoveries to healthcare delivery.
1.2
Clinical and Translational Research
Translational research is often described as “bench to bedside.” It attempts to move
basic science ﬁndings into clinical trials (translation 1, T1) and then data from
clinical trials must be translated into clinical care guidelines that are based on the
best scientiﬁc evidence (translation 2, T2). There is subsequent translation from
guidelines into daily patient care as part of healthcare practice (translation 3, T3)
and ultimately into population-based health assessment programs (translation 4, T4)
(Meslin et al. 2013). Activities encompassed in each of these speciﬁc stages, and
obstacles to successful translation, are discussed in Chap. 2 by Le Prell, with
particular emphasis on T1 and T2.
The case studies in the chapters in this book largely focus on T1 and T2 research
stages. When compelling basic science results fail to be assessed in clinical trials
(i.e., failure to successfully navigate T1) or succeed in clinical testing but fail to
successfully emerge as an approved drug agent, device, or other therapeutic
intervention (i.e., failure to navigate T2), there can be no third phase of translation
(T3) into patient care or any broader assessment of public health impact (T4). One
of the earliest translational hurdles is the signiﬁcant regulatory process that occurs
as part of the move from basic scientiﬁc and preclinical investigations (using
in vitro or in vivo methods with animal subjects) into human clinical testing, which
involves an entirely different regulatory structure including not only institutional
review boards (IRBs) or other national ethical review boards responsible for the
oversight of the use of human subjects in research but also any agency responsible
for the oversight of new drug development such as the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA). Indeed, the difﬁculty of this translational phase has resulted
in the speciﬁc commentary that “bench to bedside” research may be more accu-
rately deﬁned as “bench to FDA to bedside” research because the regulatory pro-
cess is so cumbersome (Knoepﬂer 2015). The myriad of obstacles that must be
successfully negotiated as part of this process have led to the widespread deﬁnition
of these translational phases as a “valley of death” from which many promising
therapies never emerge (Hudson and Khazragui 2013; Meslin et al. 2013;
Hammonds 2015).
The emphasis on translational research that has emerged in the United States is
not unique; there is a global movement toward translational research and
university-industry collaboration is often emphasized as a key element within the
translational process. There are both commonalities and differences in the
approaches
to university-industry collaborations across
countries, with the
1
Perspectives on Auditory Translational Research
3

approaches in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, and Japan all having
strengths and weaknesses (Miller 1995; Hudson and Khazragui 2013; Kneller et al.
2014). Butler (2008) highlights major investments in translational research in other
countries, noting, for example, “In Britain, which is second only to the United
States in biomedical research output, the government last year announced a dou-
bling of the Medical Research Council’s budget to almost £700 million (US$1.3
billion) by 2010, largely to ﬁnance a new focus on translational research” (p. 842).
Indeed, there are translational centers and translational research funding programs
all around the world (for speciﬁc examples, see Tralau-Stewart et al. 2009). Some
of the efforts in individual countries are focused on speciﬁc directions. In India, for
example, there has been a major push for the country to become a new “hub” for
clinical trials (Bhowmik et al. 2010; Singh and Srivastva 2013), and there has been
a drive to set up large “bio-banking” services, where tissues can be deposited and
later accessed for use in future studies (Shankar 2015). Khanna (2012) highlights
the reduced cost of trials not only in India but in China and Singapore as well.
Singapore has been described as having had success stories speciﬁcally in fostering
strong partnerships between scientists and clinicians to jointly advance translational
medical programs (Wong 2014).
In any effort to promote translational research success, there will be a parallel
effort to educate and encourage intellectual property protection (discussed in more
detail in Chap. 2 by Le Prell). Nelsen (2004) speciﬁcally highlights the growing
emphasis on translational research and, correspondingly, technology transfer at
institutions around the world and points to some of the ﬁnancial “lessons learned”
from the US experience—speciﬁcally, the difﬁculty in licensing and proﬁting from
academic intellectual property. One thing that is increasingly clear is that education
in the translational sciences is urgently needed (Robinson et al. 2013; Manson et al.
2015). As part of this education process, education on team-based science is critical
(Stokols et al. 2008; Roberts et al. 2012; Cooke and Hilton 2015).
The case stories in this book highlight many of the above themes and provide an
introduction to activities encompassed in the phrase “translational research.” This
term is not a catchall nor is it simply a “buzz word” for the moment; translational
research is a process that has speciﬁc steps that are fundamental to success in
developing applications of basic science ﬁndings. The speciﬁc steps in the tech-
nology transfer process, and factors related to the likelihood of success, are dis-
cussed in Chap. 2. Although academics and industry historically have been
considered “separate” entities with different goals (dissemination of knowledge vs.
protected proprietary information), newer translational models encourage signiﬁ-
cant interaction between academics and industry in the United States and abroad
(Pienta 2010; Emmert-Buck 2011; Hudson and Khazragui 2013). The National
Institutes of Health (NIH) has also recognized the gap in translational success as an
issue and has developed funding mechanisms that speciﬁcally support translational
research. However, there is still criticism that the NIH has not done enough to
bridge this gap given its overarching mission of public health improvement, and
much work remains to address existing and emerging healthcare needs that are best
served with robust translational research efforts (for discussion, see Butler 2008).
4
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

1.3
Translational Efforts Reviewed in This Volume
The ﬁnal sections of this initial chapter introduce the topics and themes of each of
the case studies addressed in subsequent chapters. The case studies were speciﬁ-
cally invited, as they provide examples of the successful systematic progression of
basic scientiﬁc inquiry into preclinical and clinical investigations.
1.3.1
The Scientiﬁc Continuum and Challenges
in Translational Research
Chapter 2, by Le Prell, discusses the entire scientiﬁc continuum from basic science
to clinical trials to the epidemiological assessment of public health, including
careful attention to potential obstacles in the translational process that may be
encountered at each of these stages. Chapter 2 includes a discussion of the sources
of funding, including not only the NIH but also foundations and industry, as well as
the need for and the steps involved in disclosure, patents, and licensing. The reg-
ulatory requirements, which are increased relative to those for basic science
research, are discussed, with a speciﬁc case example drawn from a clinical trial
assessing a dietary supplement for potential prevention of temporary threshold shift
(TTS) (NCT00808470). In that case, the use of the supplement progressed through
the same FDA review process used to regulate drugs (i.e., the Investigational New
Drug [IND] application). Readers will ﬁnd the experiences of different investigators
with the FDA summarized in multiple chapters throughout this volume.
1.3.2
Diagnosis and Treatment of Central Auditory
Processing Disorder
Chapter 3, by Kraus and Anderson, features a clinical disorder for which there are
no widely accepted diagnostic criteria or treatment options (for review and dis-
cussion, see Fey et al. 2011; Bellis et al. 2012). Speciﬁcally, Kraus and Anderson
discuss the challenge of diagnosing and treating central auditory processing dis-
order (CAPD), more recently termed auditory processing disorder (APD). APD was
initially deﬁned as a disorder of auditory perception despite normal hearing sen-
sitivity, but the deﬁnition has now been expanded to also include abnormal hearing
sensitivity with disproportionately poorer performance than would be expected
given the hearing loss. One of the major challenges to clinicians has been dis-
agreement of how to deﬁne APD, its causes, and its boundaries, particularly
because APD is often comorbid with learning problems such as dyslexia or
attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). A second major challenge has
been the lack of agreement on the “appropriate” tools for diagnosing APD.
1
Perspectives on Auditory Translational Research
5

A myriad of tests and test batteries exist, but clinicians disagree on the diagnostic
criteria for APD (for discussion, see Wilson and Arnott 2012). In Chap. 3, a
speech-evoked auditory brainstem response (ABR) metric that could be used as a
tool to determine an “objective” criterion in the diagnosis of APD is described,
including the translation of the data collection protocols into existing commercial
equipment that can now be purchased by others interested in this research topic.
Data from patients with APD are compared to data from controls, and from patients
with other disorders, to provide a rationale for the diagnostic utility of this novel
approach. In the latter part of the chapter, the therapeutic effects of music therapy on
speech-evoked ABRs are described. In addition to describing a potential objective
measurement tool for APD diagnosis, a major strength of the approach described in
this chapter is the strong use of community partnerships to forge relationships with
service providers who assist children and adults diagnosed with APD. The music
therapy delivery was speciﬁcally modeled using time allowances for music classes
to facilitate translation into public school curricula and real-world environments.
Finally, the authors discuss new important directions for their research, such as
determining optimal training programs and adaptability of these programs across
diverse populations.
1.3.3
Sudden Hearing Loss
Chapter 4, by Montgomery, Bauer, and Lobarinas, describes a clinical disorder for
which there are well-accepted diagnostic criteria and treatment options. The chapter
provides an overview of the challenges associated with establishing etiology, for-
mal assessment, and treatment of sudden hearing loss (SHL). Various mechanisms
that have been proposed include autoimmune-mediated damage, viruses, vascular
abnormalities, and abnormal cellular stress responses. A number of risk factors also
play a role in development and severity of SHL. These include diseases of the
cardiovascular system and circulatory system and chronic kidney disease. SHL has
also been found to be a predictor of subsequent disease such as myocardial
infarction and erectile dysfunction, suggesting a link with impaired perfusion and
microvascular damage.
Owing to the varied proposed etiology, a number of treatments have been pro-
posed. These include hyperbaric oxygen therapy, steroids, and a variety of alter-
native pharmacotherapy including antivirals, vasoactive drugs, and salvage therapy.
Despite efforts at targeting speciﬁc proposed etiologies, oral steroids continue to be
the standard of care for SHL. More recently, tympanic injections have emerged as an
alternative method of administration for steroid treatment of SHL (for review, see
Rauch 2008). Though assumed to be more effective, there have been few data to
guide physician treatment decisions regarding whether or not to use this more
invasive method of delivery to administer drugs directly to the site of “injury” or the
more traditional oral treatment, leading to a recent large multisite investigation
(NCT00097448). Interpretation of outcomes is complicated by the high rate of
6
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

spontaneous recovery, however. The clinical signiﬁcance of this issue to
evidence-based patient care has driven multiple clinical trials around the world in
recent years. This chapter reviews the current practice, state of the science, and the
challenges of treating SHL as well as the difﬁculties overseeing clinical investiga-
tions and determining efﬁcacy. Control groups need to be carefully considered in any
clinical investigation. As discussed earlier in this section, in the case of SHL, steroids
are the standard of care. Interestingly, multiple systematic reviews suggest there to
be little or no systematic evidence of beneﬁt when steroid-treated patients are
compared to patients who received a placebo (Wei et al. 2013; Crane et al. 2015).
A number of individual studies suggest positive effects at the group level when
treatment delivery is intratympanic (Filipo et al. 2013; Lavigne et al. 2015; Ng et al.
2015), but beneﬁts are not consistent across investigations (NCT00097448). To
deprive a control group of effective treatment represents an unacceptable alternative;
thus, clinical investigations will often compare a new drug to the established treat-
ment, with the study designed to show there is no difference between the agents (i.e.,
the new drug is at least as effective as the existing standard of care). In the case of
SHL, steroid treatment may not have any beneﬁt, but it is the standard of care,
making it extremely difﬁcult to recruit subjects if they may be randomized to placebo
condition (Rauch 2015). As discussed in the chapter, the standard oral steroid
treatment may not conclusively provide beneﬁt, but patients prefer the knowledge
that their symptoms are being treated with the best current strategy rather than taking
the chance they will not receive any therapy.
1.3.4
Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
Chapter 5, by Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell, brieﬂy describes the myriad of issues related
to preclinical development of a drug, with the primary emphasis of the chapter
being the issues that emerge with the transition to clinical testing. Examples and
discussion of the clinical development of an agent being assessed for the potential
prevention of noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) is used as a case study. The
regulatory environment is a key focus, with a detailed discussion of the process of
developing a novel pharmaceutical, as well as an overview of some of the processes
that drive the cost of new drug development, such as the development of speciﬁc
manufacturing protocols including identiﬁcation of contaminants, by-products, and
metabolites that are produced biologically and safety assessments that are likely
required for all of the above. The costs of developing a new drug are signiﬁcant,
commonly described as running more than US$1 billion per drug or pharmaco-
logical agent; this chapter explains where some of those costs come from and how
the high number of “failures” increases the cost associated with each success
(Munos 2009). Chapter 2 discusses conﬂict of interest and the requirement for
transparency, and therefore it is highlighted here that as per the acknowledgments in
Chap. 5, Lynch is the president and director, and Kil is the chief medical ofﬁcer, of
Sound Pharmaceuticals, Inc., a company that owns relevant intellectual property for
1
Perspectives on Auditory Translational Research
7

the protection of auditory function using Ebselen (Kil and Lynch 2004, 2010,
2012). Le Prell was the principal investigator of NCT01444846, which was con-
ducted with funding provided by Sound Pharmaceuticals, Inc., and Lobarinas
served as the lead audiologist on this trial. The ﬁnal sections of this chapter describe
similarities, and differences, in the way the development of other agents has
proceeded.
1.3.5
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss
Chapter 6, by Campbell and Fox, continues the theme of new drug development,
discussing the challenges of translation of otoprotective drugs from testing in
animal models into human trials. A major difﬁculty described in this chapter is the
selection of speciﬁc test protocols to be used for measuring cisplatin-induced
hearing loss, as there are a number of scales that have been used clinically and that
could be considered for clinical trials on otoprotective agents. There are different
deﬁnitions of what constitutes an ototoxic drug-induced hearing loss across scales,
with robust threshold changes required to be observed to meet the criteria put
forward by ASHA (American Speech-Language-Hearing Association 1994) and the
AAA (American Academy of Audiology 2009), speciﬁcally, shifts that are greater
than 20 dB at one frequency or greater than 10 dB at two adjacent frequencies.
This chapter describes, in detail, the potential application of ASHA/AAA
strategies and other criteria-based categorization strategies to monitoring the pre-
vention of cisplatin-induced ototoxicity; other strategies based on the absolute size
of the threshold shift are also possible and have been used in completed studies
(Campbell 2014). Multiple clinical trials on the prevention of cisplatin-induced
hearing loss have been completed, are now in progress, or will begin in the near
future, and these trials may serve as models for future investigations (Anderson and
Campbell 2015). However, in preparing this chapter, Campbell and Fox noted that
the selection of the speciﬁc scale or measure of hearing loss to be used as a primary
end point is something that needs to be negotiated with the FDA as part of the
approval process, and the “best” measure may differ from study to study. Thus,
“cookbook” procedures cannot be offered, as every trial will be individually
negotiated with the FDA. Readers are referred to a recent review from Campbell’s
team for details of ongoing studies (Anderson and Campbell 2015), with the caveat
that different protocols may be best for different trials and all protocols must be
approved as part of the IND process. A brief discussion of several agents is pro-
vided, including discussion related to the development of D-methionine, an agent
for which Campbell is the sole inventor on relevant intellectual property (Campbell
2001, 2008). Campbell is also a founding member of MetArmor, Inc., a newly
formed company that will be further developing a commercial formulation of D-
methionine as a potential product for further testing for safety and efﬁcacy in
humans.
8
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

1.3.6
Drugs for Treatment of Tinnitus
Chapter 7, by Allman, Schormans, Typlt, and Lobarinas, transitions from preven-
tion of hearing loss to treatment of tinnitus. Similar to the APD case study in Chap.
3 by Kraus and Anderson, the precise mechanisms underlying tinnitus are not well
understood and are likely to vary from patient to patient. However, unlike for APD,
there are a number of animal models of tinnitus that provide unique opportunities to
study the potential pathophysiological correlates underlying tinnitus, particularly as
these relate to NIHL.
Chapter 7 reviews a number of treatments that have been evaluated for tinnitus,
the rationale behind their use, the “off-label” approach, proposed efﬁcacy, and the
discrepancies observed between data derived from animal experiments and human
studies (for earlier detailed review, see Dobie 1999). The chapter also provides an
overview of the controversies related to peripheral versus central origins of tinnitus,
statistical versus clinical efﬁcacy, self-selection bias, and the implications of these
distinctions for treatment.
With respect to clinical trials, the chapter reviews the signiﬁcant disagreement
across investigators with respect to whether outcome measures should reﬂect
changes in the auditory perception of tinnitus (i.e., decreases in perceived loudness
in loudness matching studies) or changes in the emotional or psychological reaction
to the sound of tinnitus, that is, tinnitus “disability.” The challenges of interpreting
the data are also compounded by varying study designs, varying subject and
experimenter blinding, conﬂicting tinnitus perception and reaction outcomes, lack
of statistical power, and strong placebo effects.
Despite the aforementioned challenges, there is signiﬁcant interest in ﬁnding
efﬁcacious treatments for tinnitus. Evolving collaborations among interested parties
include teams composed of physicians, audiologists, neuroscientists, and psychol-
ogists, with growing public awareness promoted across these disciplines. As dis-
cussed in the chapter, the future of tinnitus research will be shaped by forging
important collaborative efforts, reﬁning outcome measures, continued basic science,
reﬁned animal models, and robust evidence-based translational efforts leading to
new best practices for patient care. Drugs are the topic of Chap. 7; for discussion of
hearing aids, magnetic and electric stimulation, and counseling and masking ther-
apies, readers are referred to other recent reviews (Nobel 2012; Folmer et al. 2014;
De Ridder et al. 2015).
1.3.7
A Molecular Therapeutic for Restoration of Auditory
Function
Chapter 8, by Staecker, Klickstein, and Brough, describes the development of a
molecular therapeutic for treating profound hearing loss by inducing the regener-
ation of sensory cells in the cochlea. In the 1980s, there was a startling discovery
1
Perspectives on Auditory Translational Research
9

that sensory hair cells were regenerated after noise or drug insult in avian species
such as chicken (Gallus gallus domesticus: Cotanche 1987a, b; Corwin and
Cotanche 1988) and common quail (Coturnix coturnix: Ryals and Rubel 1988).
Accompanying that regeneration, there was a full restoration of function (Saunders
et al. 1991; Niemiec et al. 1994). Laboratories around the world quickly focused
their attention on the developmental pathways involved in hair cell differentiation,
with the hopes of inducing hair cell regeneration in mammals, although success in
this goal was slow to be accomplished (Izumikawa et al. 2005). There is an
abundance of basic science data showing the promise of gene therapy for
restoration of hearing (for recent reviews, see Geleoc and Holt 2014; Chien et al.
2015; Fujioka et al. 2015), with Atoh1 emerging as a compelling candidate
(Richardson and Atkinson 2015).
All of the translational and developmental issues identiﬁed in the earlier case
studies are ampliﬁed when the drug of interest is delivered via gene therapy, with
intent to drive the generation of new cell populations to replace cells that have been
damaged or lost. The chapter describes a host of challenges that must be navigated
to launch any clinical investigation of a regeneration therapy with the drug to be
delivered into the inner ear. The authors have ﬁrsthand insight into all of the
challenges discussed in this chapter. Klickstein is the head of Translational
Medicine, New Indications Discovery Unit at Novartis Institutes for BioMedical
Research, and Brough is the chief scientiﬁc ofﬁcer at GenVec, Inc. GenVec
invented the drug CFG166. This drug is now being tested in partnership with
Novartis and the University of Kansas, where Staecker serves as the principal
investigator of NCT02132130, a study assessing CFG166 (see also https://
pioneersresearch.org/node/182).
Many of the challenges launching NCT02132130 include the obvious difﬁculties
in identifying the molecular pathway to the target, developing a strategy for safely
delivering the therapy, determining a starting dose, and navigating the IND process
through the FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER). Each of
these issues is discussed in detail as well as less obvious challenges such as the
identiﬁcation of an appropriate patient population for an agent that induces hair cell
regeneration. Such a population should include participants in which hair cell loss is
speciﬁcally known. However, clinical testing often falls short of revealing a precise
underlying pathology, making participant selection somewhat difﬁcult. The authors
also make a signiﬁcant argument about the importance of establishing clear beneﬁt,
given that cochlear implants have been well established as a strategy for restoring
not only awareness of sound but, in many cases, speech perception as well. For
gene therapy to ultimately be successful, patients should receive at least as much
beneﬁt as that derived from a cochlear implant.
10
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

1.3.8
Cochlear Implants/Infrared Neural Stimulation
In Chap. 9, by Tan, Xia, and Richter, the potential for alternative cochlear implant
designs that take advantage of new stimulation technologies are considered. The
authors speciﬁcally review and consider three novel strategies for neural stimula-
tion, including optogenetics, optoacoustics, and infrared neural stimulation, an
approach that has emerged as a “hot” topic in hearing science, with growing
attention at professional meetings and in the literature. The ultimate future appli-
cation for this early science lies in the potential redesign of future cochlear implants,
and the authors speciﬁcally discuss the potential advantages of light-based stimu-
lation over conventional electrical stimulation.
The development of these potential next-generation implants is in its infancy, and
the demonstration of both efﬁcacy and safety of these devices for long-term use will
be an important next step. Richter and colleagues describe advances in infrared
neural stimulation in detail and highlight the prospects for translation. Lessons
regarding necessary next steps can be readily drawn from the animal literature on
implant technology. Early studies on infrared neural stimulation in animals will need
to provide parametric data equivalent to that collected in electrical cochlear pros-
thesis studies on current ﬂow, impedance, site of stimulation, and frequency–re-
sponse relationships (Clopton and Spelman 1982; Spelman et al. 1982). Patterns of
damage observed after electrode insertion and stimulation were of particular
importance in these early studies (Miller et al. 1983; Duckert and Miller 1984, 1986).
A wealth of work has focused on biophysics and physiology of electrical stimulation
(for review, see Abbas and Miller 2004) as well as long-term effects of electrical
stimulation (for review, see Leake and Rebscher 2004). It will be essential that any
long-term damage related to infrared stimulation similarly be assessed. The devel-
opment of databases over time has allowed careful mapping of structure–function
relationships in which hair cell, neural, and other structural measures can be assessed
for a relationship with electrically evoked function (Pﬁngst et al. 2011; O’Leary et al.
2013), and such parameters will need to be mapped for infrared stimulation. Given
that speech processing is a major goal, strategies for processing stimulation will need
to be optimized. Examples from the cochlear prosthesis literature include continuous
interleaved speech (CIS), spectral peak (SPEAK), advanced combination encoder
(ACE), and simultaneous analog stimulation (SAS) (for review, see Wilson 2004).
Changes in surgical procedure (i.e., “soft surgery”; see Rogowski et al. 1995;
Giordano et al. 2014) were studied ﬁrst in animal models and likely predict a
similar developmental trajectory for infrared device implantation procedures. Data
from animal models have provided insight into electrically evoked stimulus pro-
cessing by comparing tone-evoked and electrically evoked activity in the inferior
colliculus (Middlebrooks 2004; Snyder et al. 2004; Bierer et al. 2010) and auditory
cortex (Bierer and Middlebrooks 2002; Middlebrooks and Bierer 2002); these tools
have been used to show that transmission of information to the auditory cortex is
impaired by some stimulus conﬁgurations (Middlebrooks 2008). Central response
to electrical stimulation has been a major focus of cochlear prosthesis research (for
review, see Hartmann and Kral 2004), and similar studies using infrared neural
stimulation will be needed to optimize stimulation parameters.
1
Perspectives on Auditory Translational Research
11

There is a fascinating history of human testing and development of cochlear
implants (for reviews, see Zeng 2004; Eshraghi et al. 2012). Some 50 years after
the ﬁrst implant procedures, the development of the electrical cochlear prosthesis is
still active and ongoing, with current investigations into new electrode coatings
(Tykocinski and Cowan 2005; Richardson et al. 2009), new implant materials
(Gwon et al. 2015), and an exciting new prosthesis that is being actively modiﬁed to
allow local drug delivery (Hendricks et al. 2008; Nguyen et al. 2009; Farhadi et al.
2013). No doubt, new information related to the development of infrared stimu-
lation protocols will similarly emerge over an extended period if the device is
ultimately translated to human testing. Taken together, the kinds of studies that set
the stage for new surgical interventions are well established. As noted in several
chapters, the device side of the FDA is well versed indeed in audiometric testing
within clinical trials and there is a relatively clear path forward for the testing of
new implantable devices to restore hearing in the profoundly deaf.
1.4
Summary
There are any number of translational topics that could have been selected for this
volume. The topics included, however, were selected to provide a variety of dif-
ferent examples, some of which require INDs for approval to assess study drugs and
others that discuss the development of devices (with the device used either diag-
nostically as in Chap. 3 or therapeutically as in Chap. 9) under a separate regulatory
Investigational Device structure. In some case studies, the clinical disorder is well
understood (as in cisplatin-induced hearing loss and NIHL), but in other case
studies, the disorder of interest is not well understood (as in tinnitus, APD, and
SHL). In some case studies, there is no accepted therapy, but in other cases, there is
a current standard of care (such as the delivery of steroids in the case of SHL or the
use of a cochlear prosthesis to rehabilitate auditory function). The ethics pertaining
to appropriate control groups must be carefully considered where there is a standard
of care. The collection of case stories provided by the various authors in this
volume are intended to be useful to those seeking an introduction to translational
research methods There are a variety of shortcomings to the evidence base available
to guide hearing loss prevention and treatment decisions. Access to training, and
improvements in existing training in translational research, are needed to allow
researchers to successfully close the gaps in translation.
Compliance with Ethics Requirements
Colleen Le Prell has received contract funding from industry sources including
Sound Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Edison Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Hearing Health
Sciences, Inc., and MaxSound, Inc. She is a co-inventor on patents assigned to the
University of Michigan and the University of Florida.
Edward Lobarinas declares no conﬂict of interest.
12
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

References
Abbas, P. J., & Miller, C. A. (2004). Biophysics and physiology. In F.-G. Zeng, A. N. Popper, &
R. R. Fay (Eds.), Cochlear implants: Auditory prostheses and electric hearing (pp. 149–212).
New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
American Academy of Audiology (AAA). (2009). Position statement and clinical practice
guidelines:
Ototoxicity
monitoring.
http://www.audiology.org/resources/documentlibrary/
Pages/OtotoxicityMonitoring.aspx. Accessed October 30, 2012.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA). (1994). Guidelines for the audiologic
management of individuals receiving cochleotoxic drug therapy. ASHA, 36(Suppl. 12), 11–19.
Anderson, J. M., & Campbell, K. (2015). Assessment of interventions to prevent drug-induced
hearing loss. In J. M. Miller, C. G. Le Prell, & L. P. Rybak (Eds.), Oxidative stress in applied
basic research and clinical practice: Free radicals in ENT pathology (pp. 243–269). New
York: Humana Press.
Bellis, T. J., Chermak, G. D., Weihing, J., & Musiek, F. E. (2012). Efﬁcacy of auditory
interventions for central auditory processing disorder: A response to Fey et al. (2011).
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 43(3), 381–386.
Bhowmik, D., Chandira, M., & Chiranjib, B. (2010). Emerging trends of scope and opportunities
clinical trials in India. International Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2(1),
7–20.
Bierer, J. A., & Middlebrooks, J. C. (2002). Auditory cortical images of cochlear-implant stimuli:
Dependence on electrode conﬁguration. Journal of Neurophysiology, 87(1), 478–492.
Bierer, J. A., Bierer, S. M., & Middlebrooks, J. C. (2010). Partial tripolar cochlear implant
stimulation: Spread of excitation and forward masking in the inferior colliculus. Hearing
Research, 270(1–2), 134–142.
Butler, D. (2008). Translational research: Crossing the valley of death. Nature, 453(7197),
840–842.
Campbell, K. C. M. (2001). Therapeutic use of D-methionine to reduce the toxicity of ototoxic
drugs, noise, and radiation. US Patent No. 6,265,386. United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Campbell, K. C. M. (2008). Therapeutic use of methionine-derivitives to reduce the toxicity of
noise. US Patent No. 7,423,065. United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Campbell, K. C. M. (2014). The role of pharmaceutical agents in hearing loss management and
prevention. Presented at the Academy of Doctors of Audiology (ADA) 2014 Convention,
November
6–9,
2014,
Las
Vegas,
NV.
http://www.audiologist.org/_resources/2014_
convention__presentations/Campbell.pdf. Accessed September 22, 2015.
Chien, W. W., Monzack, E. L., McDougald, D. S., & Cunningham, L. L. (2015). Gene therapy for
sensorineural hearing loss. Ear and Hearing, 36(1), 1–7.
Clopton, B. M., & Spelman, F. A. (1982). Neural mechanisms relevant to the design of an auditory
prosthesis. Location and electrical characteristics. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and
Laryngology (Supplement), 98, 9–14.
Cooke, N. J., and Hilton, M. L. (Eds.); Committee on the Science of Team Science; Board on
Behavioral, Cognitive, and Sensory Sciences; Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and
Education; National Research Council. (2015). Enhancing the effectiveness of team science.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Corwin, J. T., & Cotanche, D. A. (1988). Regeneration of sensory hair cells after acoustic trauma.
Science, 240(4860), 1772–1774.
Cotanche, D. A. (1987a). Regeneration of hair cell stereociliary bundles in the chick cochlea
following severe acoustic trauma. Hearing Research, 30(2–3), 181–195.
Cotanche, D. A. (1987b). Regeneration of the tectorial membrane in the chick cochlea following
severe acoustic trauma. Hearing Research, 30(2–3), 197–206.
Crane, R. A., Camilon, M., Nguyen, S., & Meyer, T. A. (2015). Steroids for treatment of sudden
sensorineural hearing loss: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Laryngoscope,
125(1), 209–217.
1
Perspectives on Auditory Translational Research
13

De Ridder, D., Vanneste, S., Elgoyhen, A. B., Langguth, B., & de Nora, M. (2015). All treatments
in tinnitus are experimental, controversial, and futuristic: A comment on “Experimental,
controversial, and futuristic treatments for chronic tinnitus” by Folmer et al. (2014). Journal of
the American Academy of Audiology, 26(6), 595–597.
Dobie, R. A. (1999). A review of randomized clinical trials in tinnitus. Laryngoscope, 109(8),
1202–1211.
Duckert, L. G., & Miller, J. M. (1984). Morphological changes following cochlear implantation in
the animal model. Acta Oto-Laryngologica Supplementum, 411, 28–37.
Duckert, L. G., & Miller, J. M. (1986). Mechanisms of electrically induced damage after cochlear
implantation. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology, 95(2 Pt 1), 185–189.
Emmert-Buck, M. R. (2011). An NIH intramural percubator as a model of academic-industry
partnerships: From the beginning of life through the valley of death. Journal of Translational
Medicine, 9, 54.
Eshraghi, A. A., Nazarian, R., Telischi, F. F., Rajguru, S. M., Truy, E., & Gupta, C. (2012). The
cochlear implant: Historical aspects and future prospects. Anatomical Record, 295(11),
1967–1980.
Farhadi, M., Jalessi, M., Salehian, P., Ghavi, F. F., Emamjomeh, H., et al. (2013). Dexamethasone
eluting cochlear implant: Histological study in animal model. Cochlear Implants International,
14(1), 45–50.
Fey, M. E., Richard, G. J., Geffner, D., Kamhi, A. G., Medwetsky, L., et al. (2011). Auditory
processing disorder and auditory/language interventions: An evidence-based systematic
review. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 42(3), 246–264.
Filipo, R., Attanasio, G., Russo, F. Y., Viccaro, M., Mancini, P., & Covelli, E. (2013).
Intratympanic steroid therapy in moderate sudden hearing loss: A randomized, triple-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Laryngoscope, 123(3), 774–778.
Folmer, R. L., Theodoroff, S. M., Martin, W. H., & Shi, Y. (2014). Experimental, controversial,
and futuristic treatments for chronic tinnitus. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology,
25(1), 106–125.
Fujioka, M., Okano, H., & Edge, A. S. (2015). Manipulating cell fate in the cochlea: A feasible
therapy for hearing loss. Trends in Neurosciences, 38(3), 139–144.
Geleoc, G. S., & Holt, J. R. (2014). Sound strategies for hearing restoration. Science, 344(6184),
1241062.
Giordano, P., Hatzopoulos, S., Giarbini, N., Prosser, S., Petruccelli, J., et al. (2014). A soft-surgery
approach to minimize hearing damage caused by the insertion of a cochlear implant electrode:
A guinea pig animal model. Otology & Neurotology, 35(8), 1440–1445.
Gwon, T. M., Min, K. S., Kim, J. H., Oh, S. H., Lee, H. S., et al. (2015). Fabrication and
evaluation of an improved polymer-based cochlear electrode array for atraumatic insertion.
Biomedical Microdevices, 17(2), 32.
Hammonds, T. (2015). Academic-Pharma drug discovery alliances: Seeking ways to eliminate the
valley of death. Future Medicinal Chemistry, 7(14), 1891–1899.
Hartmann, R., & Kral, A. (2004). Central responses to electrical stimulation. In F.-G. Zeng,
A. N. Popper, & R. R. Fay (Eds.), Cochlear implants: Auditory prostheses and electric hearing
(pp. 213–285). New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Hendricks, J. L., Chikar, J. A., Crumling, M. A., Raphael, Y., & Martin, D. C. (2008). Localized
cell and drug delivery for auditory prostheses. Hearing Research, 242(1–2), 117–131.
Hudson, J., & Khazragui, H. F. (2013). Into the valley of death: Research to innovation. Drug
Discovery Today, 18(13–14), 610–613.
Izumikawa, M., Minoda, R., Kawamoto, K., Abrashkin, K. A., Swiderski, D. L., et al. (2005).
Auditory hair cell replacement and hearing improvement by Atoh1 gene therapy in deaf
mammals. Nature Medicine, 11(3), 271–276.
Khanna, I. (2012). Drug discovery in pharmaceutical industry: Productivity challenges and trends.
Drug Discovery Today, 17(19–20), 1088–1102.
Kil, J., & Lynch, E. (2004). Methods for treating hearing loss. US Patent No. 6,815,434. United
States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
14
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

Kil, J., & Lynch, E. (2010). Methods for treating hearing loss. US Patent No. 7,820,640. United
States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Kil, J., & Lynch, E. (2012). Methods and compostions for ameliorating the undesirable effects of
chemotherapy. US Patent No. 8,309,560. United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Kneller, R., Mongeon, M., Cope, J., Garner, C., & Ternouth, P. (2014). Industry-university
collaborations in Canada, Japan, the UK and USA—with emphasis on publication freedom and
managing the intellectual property lock-up problem. PLoS ONE, 9(3), e90302.
Knoepﬂer, P. S. (2015). From bench to FDA to bedside: US regulatory trends for new stem cell
therapies. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, 82–83, 192–196.
Lavigne, P., Lavigne, F., & Saliba, I. (2015). Intratympanic corticosteroids injections: A
systematic review of literature. European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, Published
online 23 June 2015; doi: 10.1007/s00405-015-3689-3.
Leake, P. A., & Rebscher, S. J. (2004). Anatomical considerations and long-term effects of
electrical stimulation. In F.-G. Zeng, A. N. Popper, & R. R. Fay (Eds.), Cochlear implants:
Auditory
prostheses
and
electric
hearing
(pp.
101–148).
New
York:
Springer
Science + Business Media.
Manson, S. M., Martinez, D. F., Buchwald, D. S., Rubio, D. M., & Moss, M. (2015). Vision,
identity, and career in the clinical and translational sciences: Building upon the formative years.
Clinical and Translational Science, 8(5), 568–572.
Meslin, E. M., Blasimme, A., & Cambon-Thomsen, A. (2013). Mapping the translational science
policy ‘valley of death’. Clinical and Translational Medicine, 2(1), 14.
Middlebrooks, J. C. (2004). Effects of cochlear-implant pulse rate and inter-channel timing on
channel interactions and thresholds. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 116(1),
452–468.
Middlebrooks, J. C. (2008). Cochlear-implant high pulse rate and narrow electrode conﬁguration
impair
transmission
of
temporal
information
to
the
auditory
cortex.
Journal
of
Neurophysiology, 100(1), 92–107.
Middlebrooks, J. C., & Bierer, J. A. (2002). Auditory cortical images of cochlear-implant stimuli:
Coding of stimulus channel and current level. The Journal of Neurophysiology, 87(1),
493–507.
Miller, J. M., Duckert, L. G., Malone, M. A., & Pﬁngst, B. E. (1983). Cochlear prostheses:
Stimulation-induced damage. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology, 92(6 Pt 1),
599–609.
Miller, R. C. J. (1995). University–industry collaboration. The American Journal of Medicine, 99
(Suppl 6A), 6A-90S–96A-92S.
Munos, B. (2009). Lessons from 60 years of pharmaceutical innovation. Nature Reviews Drug
Discovery, 8(12), 959–968.
NCT00097448. Sudden deafness treatment trial (SSNHL). http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00097448. Accessed October 2, 2015.
NCT00808470. Micronutrients to prevent noise-induced hearing loss. http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/
show/NCT00808470. Accessed May 8, 2012.
NCT01444846. Otoprotection with SPI-1005. http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01444846.
Accessed January 11, 2013.
NCT02132130. Safety,
tolerability and efﬁcacy for CGF166 in patients
with bilateral
severe-to-profound hearing loss. http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02132130. Accessed
August 4, 2015.
Nelsen, L. L. (2004). A US perspective on technology transfer: The changing role of the
university. Nature, 5, 1–5.
Ng, J. H., Ho, R. C., Cheong, C. S., Ng, A., Yuen, H. W., & Ngo, R. Y. (2015). Intratympanic
steroids as a salvage treatment for sudden sensorineural hearing loss? A meta-analysis.
European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, 272(10), 2777–2782.
Nguyen, Y., Couloigner, V., Rudic, M., Nguyen, Y., Couloigner, V., et al. (2009). An animal
model
of
cochlear
implantation
with
an
intracochlear
ﬂuid
delivery
system.
Acta
Oto-Laryngologica, 129(11), 1153–1159.
1
Perspectives on Auditory Translational Research
15

Niemiec, A. J., Raphael, Y., & Moody, D. B. (1994). Return of auditory function following
structural regeneration after acoustic trauma: Behavioral measures from quail. Hearing
Research, 79(1–2), 1–16.
Nobel, W. (2012). Evidence about the effectiveness of treatments related to tinnitus. In L. Wong &
L. Hickson (Eds.), Evidence-based practice in audiology: Evaluating interventions for children
and adults with hearing impairment (pp. 267–282). San Diego: Plural Publishing.
O’Leary, S. J., Monksﬁeld, P., Kel, G., Connolly, T., Souter, M. A., et al. (2013). Relations
between cochlear histopathology and hearing loss in experimental cochlear implantation.
Hearing Research, 298, 27–35.
Pﬁngst, B. E., Colesa, D. J., Hembrador, S., Kang, S. Y., Middlebrooks, J. C., et al. (2011).
Detection of pulse trains in the electrically stimulated cochlea: Effects of cochlear health. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 130(6), 3954–3968.
Pienta, K. J. (2010). Successfully accelerating translational research at an academic medical center:
The University of Michigan–Coulter translational research partnership program. Clinical and
Translational Science, 3(6), 316–318.
Rauch, S. D. (2008). Clinical practice. Idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing loss. New England
Journal of Medicine, 359(8), 833–840.
Rauch, S. D. (2015). Clinical trials in acute hearing loss. Presented at Rational Pharmacotherapy
for Acute Hearing Loss—Recent Advances and Perspectives, a corporate symposium
sponsored by Auris Medical, September 28, 2015, Dallas, TX.
Richardson, R. T., & Atkinson, P. J. (2015). Atoh1 gene therapy in the cochlea for hair cell
regeneration. Expert Opinion on Biological Therapy, 15(3), 417–430.
Richardson, R. T., Wise, A. K., Thompson, B. C., Flynn, B. O., Atkinson, P. J., et al. (2009).
Polypyrrole-coated electrodes for the delivery of charge and neurotrophins to cochlear neurons.
Biomaterials, 30(13), 2614–2624.
Roberts, S. F., Fischhoff, M. A., Sakowski, S. A., & Feldman, E. L. (2012). Perspective:
Transforming science into medicine: How clinician-scientists can build bridges across
research’s “valley of death.” Academic Medicine, 87(3), 266–270.
Robinson, G. F., Erlen, J. A., Rubio, D. M., Kapoor, W. N., & Poloyac, S. M. (2013).
Development, implementation, and evaluation of an interprofessional course in translational
research. Clinical and Translational Science, 6(1), 50–56.
Rogowski, M., Reiss, G., & Lehnhardt, E. (1995). Morphologic study of the guinea pig cochlea
after cochlear implantation using the “soft surgery” technique. Annals of Otology, Rhinology,
and Laryngology Supplement, 166, 434–436.
Ryals, B. M., & Rubel, E. W. (1988). Hair cell regeneration after acoustic trauma in adult Coturnix
quail. Science, 240(4860), 1774–1776.
Saunders, J. C., Cohen, Y. E., & Szymko, Y. M. (1991). The structural and functional
consequences of acoustic injury in the cochlea and peripheral auditory system: A ﬁve year
update. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 90(1), 136–146.
Shankar, S. K. (2015). Let us promote bio-banking in India for translational research. Neurology
India, 63(5), 644–646.
Singh, H., & Srivastva, A. (2013). Recent trends in scope and opportunity of clinical research in
India. Indian Journal of Research in Pharmacy and Biotechnology, 1(3), 299–304.
Snyder, R. L., Bierer, J. A., & Middlebrooks, J. C. (2004). Topographic spread of inferior
colliculus activation in response to acoustic and intracochlear electric stimulation. Journal of
the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 5(3), 305–322.
Spelman, F. A., Clopton, B. M., & Pﬁngst, B. E. (1982). Tissue impedance and current ﬂow in the
implanted ear. Implications for the cochlear prosthesis. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and
Laryngology Supplement, 98, 3–8.
Stokols, D., Hall, K. L., Taylor, B. K., & Moser, R. P. (2008). The science of team science:
Overview of the ﬁeld and introduction to the supplement. American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, 35(2 Suppl), S77–S89.
Tralau-Stewart, C. J., Wyatt, C. A., Kleyn, D. E., & Ayad, A. (2009). Drug discovery: New
models for industry-academic partnerships. Drug Discovery Today, 14(1–2), 95–101.
16
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

Tykocinski, M., & Cowan, R. S. (2005). Poly-vinyl-alcohol (PVA) coating of cochlear implant
electrode arrays: An in-vivo biosafety study. Cochlear Implants International, 6(1), 16–30.
Wei, B. P., Stathopoulos, D., & O’Leary, S. (2013). Steroids for idiopathic sudden sensorineural
hearing loss. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 7, Cd003998.
Wilson, B. S. (2004). Engineering design of cochlear implants. In F.-G. Zeng, A. N. Popper, &
R. R. Fay (Eds.), Cochlear implants: Auditory prostheses and electric hearing (pp. 14–52).
New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Wilson, W. J., & Arnott, W. (2012). Evidence of the effectiveness of interventions for auditory
procesing disorder. In L. Wong & L. Hickson (Eds.), Evidence-based practice in audiology:
Evaluating interventions for children and adults with hearing impairment (pp. 283–307). San
Diego: Plural Publishing.
Wong, T. Y. (2014). How to bridge the “valley of death” between a research discovery and clinical
application? Annals of the Academy of Medicine, Singapore, 43(8), 422–424.
Zeng, F.-G. (2004). Auditory prostheses: Past, present, and future. In F.-G. Zeng, A. N. Popper, &
R. R. Fay (Eds.), Cochlear implants: Auditory prostheses and electric hearing (pp. 1–13). New
York: Springer Science + Business Media.
1
Perspectives on Auditory Translational Research
17

Chapter 2
Current Issues in Clinical
and Translational Research in the Hearing
Sciences, Audiology, and Otolaryngology
Colleen G. Le Prell
Abstract Translational research is often described as “bench to bedside” because it
builds on basic science ﬁndings to “translate” discoveries into potential interven-
tions or therapeutics that can be tested in clinical trials and adopted into healthcare
practice. This introductory chapter offers working deﬁnitions of the various phases
of research spanning from basic research to clinical testing and ultimately to the
implementation of these endeavors into evidence-based patient care. There are
multiple challenges in moving from basic science to clinical trials and from clinical
research into routine application in healthcare delivery. There are also clearly
diverging interests of academics (creation of knowledge, education of the future
workforce) and industry (meeting market needs and protecting exclusivity to
generate revenue and increase shareholder value). However, academia and industry
share the common goal of ﬁnding cures for patients in need. Whether patient care is
advanced through industry-funded research within an academic laboratory or
industry licensing of an academic patent is not important from the patient’s per-
spective. What will beneﬁt patients the most in the long run is the translation of
novel therapies into clinical testing with subsequent translation of the most effective
therapies into patient care, with the long-term goal of improving public health
outcomes.
Keywords Clinical research  Evidence-based practice  Technology transfer 
Translational research
C.G. Le Prell (&)
Callier Center for Communication Disorders, University of Texas at Dallas,
1966 Inwood Road, Dallas, TX 75235, USA
e-mail: colleen.leprell@utdallas.edu
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
C.G. Le Prell et al. (eds.), Translational Research in Audiology, Neurotology,
and the Hearing Sciences, Springer Handbook of Auditory Research 58,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-40848-4_2
19

2.1
Translational Research
This introductory chapter offers working deﬁnitions of the various phases of
research spanning from basic research to clinical testing and ultimately to the
implementation of these endeavors into evidence-based patient care. It also pro-
vides a brief overview of the diversity of individuals that scientists may need to
interact with as part of the translational research process, including technology
transfer ofﬁcers, patent lawyers, and regulatory bodies such as the US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA).
Translational research is often described as “bench to bedside” because it builds
on basic science ﬁndings to “translate” discoveries into potential interventions or
therapeutics that can be tested in clinical trials and adopted into healthcare practice.
A number of translational research models have been proposed (Westfall et al.
2007; Dougherty and Conway 2008; Woolf 2008), and although the speciﬁc def-
initions vary from report to report, it is clear that there are multiple phases within
the broader category of translational research. The ﬁrst of these occurs at the
intersection of basic science and clinical research (T1) and the second at the
transition from clinical research to clinical practice (T2). There are multiple chal-
lenges in moving from basic science to clinical trials and from clinical research into
routine application in healthcare delivery (Fears et al. 2010). Here, the different
“phases” of research are identiﬁed and discussed.
Basic and clinical areas of research are often considered to be two distinct phases
in the process of translation. As per the excellent review and summary of the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) deﬁnition of translation research by Rubio et al.
(2010, p. 471), “According to this deﬁnition, translational research is part of a
unidirectional continuum in which research ﬁndings are moved from the
researcher’s bench to the patient’s bedside and community. In the continuum, the
ﬁrst stage of translational research (T1) transfers knowledge from basic research to
clinical research, while the second stage (T2) transfers ﬁndings from clinical studies
or clinical trials to practice settings and communities, where the ﬁndings improve
health.” Basic science and its translation into clinical research in the T1 and T2
phases are really only the beginning of the journey toward effective healthcare.
Dougherty and Conway (2008) propose third-stage (T3) activities intended to
determine the extent to which these new clinical practices actually serve to improve
the health of individuals and populations. Policy changes necessary to implement
evidence-based treatments are also included in this T3 set of activities (Dougherty
and Conway 2008). These T3 activities are distinct from T2 in that the end point
becomes health improvement at the population-level, in contrast with health
improvement for individual patients; population-level changes are studied using
epidemiological research. Success is measured in this T3 phase as “changes in
health-related behavior or other risk factors (in the shorter term), well-being or
quality of life, or ‘hard’ morbidity or mortality end points (in the longer term)”
(Ogilvie et al. 2009).
20
C.G. Le Prell

The gaps between basic research and adoption into practice (i.e., T1 and T2) are
an ongoing challenge, often because some drug, device, or other therapeutic must
be commercialized to become available for use by clinicians. A major obstacle is
that basic discoveries coming out of academic institutions are often not sufﬁciently
advanced to be attractive to companies as commercial opportunities (Handelsman
2009). The transition of research from a university setting to a corporate entity is
termed “technology transfer” and is discussed in detail in Sect. 2.5. The topic of
translational research has received signiﬁcant attention from the NIH given their
mission statement, which includes the protection and improvement of health as well
as disease prevention (http://goo.gl/ro0nD8). Speciﬁcally, the goals of the NIH are
as follows:
• “to foster fundamental creative discoveries, innovative research strategies, and
their applications as a basis for ultimately protecting and improving health;
• to develop, maintain, and renew scientiﬁc human and physical resources that
will ensure the Nation’s capability to prevent disease;
• to expand the knowledge base in medical and associated sciences in order to
enhance the Nation’s economic well-being and ensure a continued high return
on the public investment in research; and
• to exemplify and promote the highest level of scientiﬁc integrity, public
accountability, and social responsibility in the conduct of science.”
2.2
Translational Research in Hearing and Balance
In 2004, the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders
(NIDCD) organized a workshop in Bethesda, Maryland, focused on the topic of
translational research in hearing and balance (http://goo.gl/wMKltN) to determine
how to support translational work in the hearing and balance sciences. Initial
presentations reviewed the approaches of the National Institute of Mental Health
(NIMH) and National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS). At
the time, both institutes had already released program announcements requesting
translational research applications for funding.
The workshop yielded positive outcomes, and on November 24, 2004, the
NIDCD released PAR-05-023, “NIDCD Translational Research Grants,” a program
announcement that called for basic scientists and clinicians to jointly develop
translational research projects appropriate for R01 or R21 funding mechanisms. The
intent of the PAR was “to encourage basic research ﬁndings to have a practical
impact on the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of communication disorders”
(http://goo.gl/hnlpRS). This program announcement was later divided into two new
program announcements, one speciﬁc to R01 applications and the other calling for
R21 applications. NIDCD currently has a call for R01 applications with the goal of
translating basic hearing and balance research into clinical tools or applications
(http://goo.gl/unLxrD), with application deadlines extending into February, 2017.
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
21

However, the last submission dates for R21s under that translational PAR were in
2013.
The importance of translational research to the NIH was further evidenced by the
creation of the National Center for Advancing Translation Sciences (NCATS),
launched in January 2012 (http://goo.gl/hV6Dj). One of the award programs housed
under NCATS is the Clinical and Translation Science Award (CTSA), a program
that supports “the development and implementation of national standards and best
practices for translation, from basic discovery to clinical and community-engaged
research.” The NIH has been the major source of support for translational research
in the United States and much of this chapter is organized around the NIH’s
mission, approach, and deﬁnitions. Clearly, the NIH is not the only source of
funding for translational research and this approach is not intended to minimize the
important contributions of foundations, other organizations, and industry. Action on
hearing loss, for example, has put into place “The Translational Research Initiative
for Hearing (TRIH).” This mechanism for funding explicitly excludes basic
research as it is intended to move promising basic research into clinical trials (http://
goo.gl/NVhmJf). Importantly, this program actively includes industry partners to
facilitate the technology transfer process. Industry partners are invited to strategi-
cally fund, or cofund, projects in their area of interest.
2.3
The Translational Science Spectrum
The NCATS website provides a useful structure for organizing the continuum from
basic research to population assessment (http://goo.gl/1mE15O). The speciﬁc stages
in the spectrum of translational science include basic, preclinical, and clinical
research; clinical implementation; and public health. In this model, public health
issues should drive basic research, and basic research should yield information that
provides rationale support for new therapeutic targets (see Fig. 2.1).
2.3.1
Basic Science
According to NCATS, “Basic research involves scientiﬁc exploration that can
reveal fundamental mechanisms of biology, disease, or behavior. Every stage of the
translational research spectrum builds upon and informs basic research…insights
gained from the Center’s studies along the translational spectrum can inform basic
research” (http://goo.gl/AvA5tf). These principles broadly hold true regardless of
funding source. Basic science is commonly considered to involve laboratory-based
experiments. Such studies might be intended to increase general knowledge on
fundamental mechanisms (as stated by NCATS), or these basic science studies
might be intended to provide the foundation for clinical research (Rubio et al.
2010).
22
C.G. Le Prell

The importance of basic research within the NIDCD is made clear in a message
from the NIDCD Director, James F. Battey, Jr., titled, “Advancing Research to
Improve the Lives of People with Communication Disorders” (http://goo.gl/drU1c5).
Dr. Battey points to genetic research, identiﬁcation of genetic mutations linked to
inherited hearing loss, and successes in gene mapping as fertile grounds for new
discoveries “when we learn how to harness their potential to pause or reverse some
types of hearing loss.” He also points to research on inner ear sensory cell regener-
ation that “could one day offer a powerful treatment option, if not a cure, for hearing
loss.” The theme of translation of these and other basic ﬁndings into clinical use is
made clear by his statement, “As we head toward new frontiers in scientiﬁc discovery
and precision medicine, NIDCD-funded research is likely to produce more sensitive,
individually tailored, and effective technologies for people with hearing loss.”
Fig. 2.1 Translational science spectrum. “The translational science spectrum represents each
stage of research along the path from the biological basis of health and disease to interventions that
improve the health of individuals and the public. The spectrum is not linear or unidirectional; each
stage builds upon and informs the others. At all stages of the spectrum, NCATS develops new
approaches, demonstrates their usefulness, and disseminates the ﬁndings. Patient involvement is a
critical feature of all stages in translation” (http://www.ncats.nih.gov/translation/spectrum).
Reprinted with permission of the National Institutes of Health/National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
23

The growth of the NIH can be traced at least in part to a landmark report to
President Roosevelt by Vannevar Bush, the director of the Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc
Research and Development at that time (Bush 1945). As reviewed by Crowley and
Gusella (2009), a major outcome of Bush’s ground-breaking suggestion was public
funding of the nation’s scientiﬁc endeavors via the NIH. The Bush report provided
a major impetus to the expansion of basic scientiﬁc inquiry in the United States
(Bertha 1996). Bush (1945, pp. 18–19) wrote,
Basic research is performed without thought of practical ends. It results in general
knowledge and an understanding of nature and its laws. This general knowledge provides
the means of answering a large number of important practical problems, though it may not
give a complete speciﬁc answer to any one of them. The function of applied research is to
provide such complete answers. The scientist doing basic research may not be at all
interested in the practical applications of his work, yet the further progress of industrial
development would eventually stagnate if basic scientiﬁc research were long neglected.…
Basic research leads to new knowledge. It provides scientiﬁc capital. It creates the fund
from which the practical applications of knowledge must be drawn. New products and new
processes do not appear full-grown. They are founded on new principles and new con-
ceptions, which in turn are painstakingly developed by research in the purest realms of
science…..A nation which depends upon others for its new basic scientiﬁc knowledge will
be slow in its industrial progress and weak in its competitive position in world trade,
regardless of its mechanical skill.
This report to the president is interesting in that it stresses that advances in
science lead to more jobs, higher wages, more abundant crops, higher standards of
living, prevention and cure of diseases, conservation of limited national resources,
and a position of world leadership (Bush 1945). Subsequent to this report, there was
a substantial increase in funding for research beginning in the early 1960s (Bertha
1996). The NIH website includes a short history of the Public Health Service
(PHS) and the NIH, highlighting changes in funding after World War II as well as
the incorporation of the National Cancer Institute (NCI) into the NIH through the
1944 Public Health Service Act. With respect to funding, “The entire NIH budget
expanded from $8 million in 1947 to more than $1 billion in 1966. Between 1955
and 1968, NIH Director James A. Shannon presided over the spectacular growth
that is now fondly remembered as ‘the golden years’ of NIH expansion” (http://goo.
gl/FWQEhf). As funding for the NIH grew, it funded more basic research than
clinical research (Moses et al. 2005; Crowley and Gusella 2009). According to the
US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), the NIH currently spends
approximately 53–54 % of its budget on basic biomedical and behavioral research
on the causes of disease onset and progression (http://goo.gl/LgujS4).
2.3.2
Preclinical Research
According to NCATS, “Pre-clinical research connects basic science and human
medicine. During this stage, scientists apply fundamental discoveries made in the
laboratory or the clinic to further understand the basis of a disease or disorder and
24
C.G. Le Prell

ﬁnd ways to treat it. Hypothesis testing is carried out using cell or animal models;
samples of human or animal tissues; or computer-assisted simulations of drug,
device, or diagnostic interactions within living systems” (http://goo.gl/yxVjSD).
Multiple examples of the transition from basic research to preclinical research are
readily available within the ﬁeld of hearing science.
The transition from basic to preclinical research has been rapid in the case of
noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL), for example. After initial suggestions that
intense metabolic activity might contribute to noise-induced pathology in the inner
ear (Lim and Melnick 1971), Yamane et al. (1995) used immunocytochemical
labeling to identify and localize noise-induced free radical formation in the mar-
ginal cells of the stria vascularis. Subsequently, Ohlemiller et al. (1999) reported a
nearly fourfold increase in hydroxyl (OH) radical formation within 1–2 h of noise
exposure. Later, free radical formation was reported as also being signiﬁcant in
outer hair cells, with continued postnoise production of both reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) (Yamashita et al. 2004). These
basic scientiﬁc ﬁndings demonstrating noise-induced free radical formation quickly
led to preclinical studies in which “antioxidant” substances that neutralize free
radicals were assessed for potential prevention of NIHL in rodent models (for
detailed reviews, see Le Prell et al. 2007b; Le Prell and Bao 2012). A number of
these agents have now moved forward into clinical research investigations with
human subjects (for detailed review, see Le Prell and Lobarinas 2015).
Translational activities related to the development of a potential drug agent for the
prevention of NIHL are described by Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell, Chap. 5.
Basic research yielded similar understanding of the mechanisms of aminogly-
coside ototoxicity (for reviews, see Huth et al. 2011; Rybak and Brenner 2015) and
cisplatin ototoxicity (for review, see Laurell and Pierre 2015). There has been
signiﬁcant preclinical investigation of agents that might prevent ototoxicity asso-
ciated with these life-saving therapeutics (for reviews, see Abi-Hachem et al. 2010;
Poirrier et al. 2010; Campbell and Le Prell 2012). Clinical trial data have been
somewhat slow to emerge, however (for recent review, see Anderson and Campbell
2015). One potential challenge for the translation of otoprotective therapies into
human patients being treated with aminoglycoside antibiotics or cisplatin is the
requirement that the otoprotective agent must not interfere with the therapeutic
antimicrobial or antineoplastic beneﬁt of the therapeutic agent (for a brief review
and discussion of cisplatin, see Rybak et al. 2009; for a brief review and discussion
of aminoglycoside antibiotics, see Le Prell et al. 2014). Translational activities
related to the development of a potential drug agent for the prevention of
cisplatin-induced hearing loss are described by Campbell and Fox, Chap. 6.
2.3.3
Clinical Research
As reviewed by Rubio et al. (2010), the NIH has identiﬁed patient-oriented
research, epidemiologic and behavioral studies, outcomes research, and health
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
25

services research as falling under the broad heading of Clinical Research. Clinical
trials and other assessments of therapeutic interventions and new technologies thus
fall under this category of patient-oriented research. According to NCATS,
“Clinical research includes clinical trials with human subjects to test intervention
safety and effectiveness, behavioral and observational studies, outcomes and health
services research, and the testing and reﬁnement of new technologies. The goal of
many clinical trials is to obtain regulatory approval for an intervention” (http://goo.
gl/rJZSXy). The NIH clinical trial registry maintained at the website www.
clinicaltrials.gov is an excellent resource for the identiﬁcation of currently ongoing
clinical trials for a speciﬁc disease condition.
Because data are not published until a study is completed and negative results
can be more difﬁcult to publish for a variety of reasons, the clinical trial registry is a
major advance in transparency as researchers (and patients) can readily search to
see what studies are ongoing. Moreover, the results are required to be posted on this
registry website within 12 months of the completion of the study. A helpful
summary of the current guidelines for studies that must be posted in this registry is
available at https://goo.gl/OP9IYg. HHS has proposed new requirements and pro-
cedures for registering trials and submitting results at the end of the study, so this
should be considered a moving target.
In addition to HHS requirements to post studies, there are also FDA require-
ments for clinical trials conducted under their oversight. The FDA requires such
trials be listed on clinicaltrials.gov. Similarly, the NIH requires that NIH-funded
clinical studies be listed on this clinical trial registry website. Finally, an increasing
number of journals will not accept human clinical research manuscripts describing
outcomes from studies that were not posted on the clinical registry. It is universally
understood that studies assessing potential health beneﬁts of new drug agents fall
under the oversight of the FDA (at least in the United States). Although the FDA is
well known for its role in the regulation and oversight of new drug development
and approval, readers are strongly cautioned that the assessment of other com-
pounds, including dietary supplements, in a clinical trial is regulated under the same
rules and requirements as any other novel drug agent when health outcomes are
assessed. To illustrate the importance of these and other regulatory guidelines in the
conduct of translational science, the following case study is offered.
In 2009, the study NCT00808470 was actively going through the institutional
review process at participating sites including the University of Michigan and the
University of Florida. During the review process at both supervising institutions,
there was active discussion regarding whether an Investigational New Drug
(IND) application was required prior to Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval.
The guidance initially provided by commercial partners responsible for manufac-
turing the dietary supplements to be used in the studies indicated that foods and
dietary supplements that are intended to make structure/function labeling claims do
not meet the deﬁnition of a “drug” and therefore do not require the submission of an
IND. Fortunately for the study team, that guidance was not accepted by the
supervising IRBs and there was an explicit academic institutional requirement to
pursue an IND. An IND application was therefore ﬁled and ultimately approved
26
C.G. Le Prell

(IND application number 116027, allowed to proceed August 31, 2012). Speciﬁc
guidance on the assessment of a dietary supplement in studies on the prevention of
acquired hearing loss was later communicated to participants in the Pharmaceutical
Interventions to Prevent Hearing Loss (PIHL) working group at a meeting orga-
nized by the Department of Defense (DoD) Hearing Center of Excellence (HCE).
One of the presentations at that meeting was contributed by Eric Bastings, Deputy
Director, Division of Neurology Products, FDA (E. Bastings, The FDA/IND
Process and Recommendations, presented August 24, 2012, Baltimore, Maryland).
Dr. Bastings, in his slides and commentary, noted that dietary supplements are not
“lawfully marketed” drug products and as such they always need an IND before use
in a clinical trial because any agent that is used to “diagnose, prevent, treat, or cure
a disease” is considered a drug. The FDA deﬁnes disease as “…damage to an organ,
part, structure, or system of the body such that it does not function properly (e.g.,
cardiovascular disease), or a state of health leading to such dysfunction (e.g.,
hypertension); except that diseases resulting from nutritional deﬁciencies (e.g.,
scurvy, pellagra) are not included in this deﬁnition.” A very helpful summary of the
criteria used to distinguish health claims (related to disease prevention, mitigation,
treatment, etc.) and structure/function claims (allowed for dietary supplements) is
available in Guidance from the FDA (US Food and Drug Administration 2002).
As additional background on dietary supplements, it should be noted that the
sale of dietary supplements is regulated by the FDA under the Dietary Supplement
Health and Education Act of 1994 (DSHEA). DSHEA regulates substances
including vitamins, minerals, herbs and other botanicals, amino acids, concentrates,
metabolites, constituents, and extracts and any dietary substance intended to be
used to supplement the diet and increase total dietary intake. Unlike drug agents,
which must be proven to be both safe and effective for their intended use before
marketing, DSHEA has no similar provisions requiring that the FDA review and
approve dietary supplements for safety or effectiveness before distribution to con-
sumers. To restrict the use of a supplement or force its removal from the market-
place, the FDA itself would have to show that the dietary supplement was “unsafe”
before it could take any action. This aspect of their duties is facilitated only by the
requirement that manufacturers and distributors of dietary supplements who receive
a report that the use of their product was associated with a serious adverse advent
must record, investigate, and forward that report to the FDA (for guidance see US
Food and Drug Administration, Dietary Supplements 2015).
Particularly relevant to the case study introduced earlier in this section, dietary
supplements are reviewed using the same criteria as drugs when a clinical trial
assesses potential health beneﬁts associated with use of a dietary supplement. The
review of the IND application for the agents used in NCT00808470 was surely
simpliﬁed by the categorization of the active agents as generally regarded as safe
(GRAS) (http://goo.gl/NJt0X8), which reduced the requirements for toxicity data
required as part of IND applications for new drug agents. However, despite GRAS
components, the active agents were required to be manufactured to pharmaceutical
standards, including stability testing, with all required manufacturing records pro-
vided in the section of the IND termed “Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Controls
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
27

(CMC)” (http://goo.gl/OGLUuf). The CMC section of the IND is discussed in
detail by Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell, Chap. 5.
The Michigan Institute for Clinical & Health Research (MICHR) at the
University of Michigan (UM), and in particular the MICHR IND/IDE Investigator
Assistance Program (MIAP) (https://goo.gl/aOzKXU), was instrumental in the
successful application for approval to proceed with NCT00808470. They were
wholly responsible for assembling the IND application and ﬁling updates and
annual reports as required by the FDA, with the study team simply providing
information for the applications and reports as needed. MICHR services were
initially supported by the National Center for Research Resources (NCRR)
(UL1RR024986) and are currently supported by NCAT (UL1TR000433). This is a
compelling example of one of the ways in which CTSA funding from the NIH
fosters clinical research at academic institutions.
2.3.4
Clinical Implementation
According to NCATS, “The clinical implementation stage of translation involves
the adoption of interventions into routine clinical care for the general population.
This stage also includes implementation research to evaluate clinical trial results
and to identify new clinical questions and gaps in care” (http://goo.gl/8AT7Wv).
Unfortunately, publishing data in an academic journal does not by itself guarantee
this information is transferred to clinicians or into clinical practice (Meline and
Paradiso 2003). Crowley and Gusella (2009) provide an interesting commentary on
the impact of the Bush (1945) report on both basic research and clinical research in
the United States. They highlight the positive impact in that medical schools and
academic health science centers preferentially recruit basic scientists and support
their research success through space allocations, promotions, and prestigious
treatment. An unintended consequence, however, was that clinical work translating
basic science discoveries into humans (i.e., clinical-translational research) was
deemed the responsibility of academic hospitals and academic physicians (Crowley
and Gusella 2009). Unfortunately, there are many basic researchers with little direct
connection to an academic hospital and thus no immediate or obvious partners to
oversee
such
clinical
research.
There
is
the
partial
exception
in
the
clinician-scientist that has pursued dual training in research and clinical practice and
maintains both an active clinical practice and an active research program, but many
basic research scientists will not be directly involved in the clinical testing or
clinical implementation of their research. Given lack of communication between
basic researchers, clinicians leading clinical trials, and physicians in general prac-
tice, it is sad, but perhaps not surprising, that it can take 10 years or longer for
technologies tested in teaching hospitals to make it into common application (for
detailed discussion of “translational lag,” see Milne and Kaitin 2009). None of the
preceding comments should be taken to suggest that researchers cannot have an
28
C.G. Le Prell

active role in facilitating clinical implementation; these comments simply highlight
ongoing challenges.
Attending and presenting at clinical professional meetings is a critically
important component of facilitating the implementation of new research outcomes
into clinical practice. Attending presentations by clinicians has added value in that
scientists learn the key clinical issues for which new clinical solutions are needed,
and in turn this can inform and guide new basic inquiry and new preclinical
research study design. Clinical practice can, and should, inform research, with
clinical observations guiding new research (for discussion see Apel 2011). The
annual midwinter meeting of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology
(ARO) is an example of a meeting that is attended by both basic scientists and
clinicians.
The
annual
conference
of
the
National
Hearing
Conservation
Association (NHCA) is a second example of a meeting that is widely attended by
audiologists, industrial hygienists, professional service providers, physicians, nur-
ses, and researchers. The Annual Scientiﬁc and Technology Conference of the
American Auditory Society (AAS) is also worth mention here, as they speciﬁcally
call for translational research presentations as part of the conference program. Other
more clinical meetings that basic scientists may not have considered attending
include the annual AudiologyNOW! meeting of the American Academy of
Audiology (AAA), which is the largest gathering of audiologists in the world or the
annual meeting and OTO EXPOSM of the American Academy of Otolaryngology–
Head and Neck Surgery (AAO–HNS).
Outside of professional conferences, building strong relationships with clinical
counterparts within an academic health science center is critically important. The
development of a strong clinical trial design that can hopefully yield evidence that
will be compelling to clinicians is contingent on the identiﬁcation of relevant
clinical metrics. Researchers are often accustomed to interpreting outcomes based
on the statistical signiﬁcance of a difference between two groups. Clinicians will be
concerned not only about the reliability of the difference but also about the clinical
signiﬁcance. Using the example of NIHL, a drug that reliably provided an average
3-dB reduction in the amount of permanent threshold shift may not be useful for
patients based on the minimal functional beneﬁt, the cost of the drug, and the
potential side effects, even if the 3-dB difference was statistically signiﬁcant. In
contrast, a drug that might not have reached statistical signiﬁcance based on average
group response, but was highly efﬁcacious in a speciﬁc subgroup, could have
signiﬁcant clinical relevance because it may provide help for “some patients.” This
is a common conclusion in tinnitus studies in particular, based on the unknown
etiology of the tinnitus in many cases (Dobie 1999; Langguth and Elgoyhen 2012).
Statisticians do warn that subgroup analyses should be undertaken only with great
care, however (Sleight 2000). Clinician partners can provide compelling insight
into what would constitute a compelling clinical outcome so that studies can be
designed and powered appropriately to support later clinical implementation. These
and related issues are the heart of the movement toward “Evidence-Based Practice”
(see Sect. 2.4).
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
29

2.3.5
Public Health
According to NCATS, “In this stage of translation, researchers study health out-
comes at the population-level to determine the effects of diseases and efforts to
prevent, diagnose and treat them. Findings help guide scientists working to improve
interventions or develop new ones” (http://goo.gl/LNexCY). Longitudinal studies
in large populations provide the best evidence for successful intervention outcomes.
Although they do not include intervention components, there are several longitu-
dinal studies on auditory function worth noting. One of the larger scale longitudinal
studies that has provided valuable information on auditory function is the
Epidemiology of Hearing Loss cohort from Beaver Dam, Wisconsin, and, more
recently, the Beaver Dam Offspring Study, which now includes 5275 adults born
between 1902 and 1962 (Cruickshanks et al. 1998; Nash et al. 2011). A second
such study is the Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging, which started in 1958
and includes more than 1400 men and women in their 20s through their 90s (Brant
and Fozard 1990; Moreira and Palladino 2011). Finally, the Blue Mountain Hearing
Study (BMHS) is a population-based survey of age-related hearing loss (Gopinath
et al. 2011). The study is a spin-off of the Blue Mountain Eye Study and includes
prospective 5-year assessments (Mitchell et al. 2011). With longitudinal data col-
lection, it becomes possible to prospectively evaluate hypotheses about factors that
mediate hearing loss, such as dietary nutrient intake (Gopinath et al. 2011).
Longitudinal data are also available from the Health Professional’s Follow-Up
Study, which enrolled 26,273 men 40–74 years old at the time of the 1986 baseline
(Shargorodsky et al. 2010a, c). However, it should be noted that the extent of the
hearing loss assessment is a single survey question, “Have you ever had profes-
sionally diagnosed hearing loss?” Thus, to be identiﬁed as having hearing loss a
participant must not only suspect he or she has hearing loss but also has to have
followed through with a visit to a physician or audiologist to have the hearing loss
professionally diagnosed. Thus, the survey is not sensitive to mild hearing loss, and
researchers using this survey data will not correctly categorize participants who
have hearing loss but have not had their hearing loss professionally diagnosed. It is
difﬁcult to determine what percent of individuals have hearing loss but have not
sought help, given that these individuals, by deﬁnition, have not sought
help. Duijvestijn et al. (2003) had a very clever approach to this problem in that
they performed audiometric testing on 1419 individuals aged 55 or older who
participated in a driving test study. A total of 483 individuals, 34 % of the sample,
had a pure-tone average (PTA) threshold at 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 kHz exceeding 30 dB;
however, fewer than half of the individuals who were identiﬁed as having hearing
loss of 30 dB or more had visited a physician with complaints of hearing impair-
ment. Worth noting, more than half of those individuals who had hearing loss but
had not pursued any hearing healthcare services did in fact report they perceived
their hearing as poor. Taken together, reliance on the self-report of professionally
diagnosed hearing loss provides conﬁdence all subjects with reported hearing loss
30
C.G. Le Prell

do have hearing loss, but there is certain to be signiﬁcant underreporting of hearing
loss by those who have not pursued diagnosis from a physician or audiologist.
Longitudinal data have also been collected in the Nurses’ Health Study II (http://
goo.gl/SKtfeM). Launched in 1976, the Nurses’ Health Study was initially estab-
lished to investigate potential long-term consequences of oral contraceptive use. In
1989, diet and lifestyle questions were added to the survey. In 2010, they added a
question, “Have you ever had professionally diagnosed hearing loss?” The year of
ﬁrst diagnosis was requested if the response was positive. In 2012, this was
modiﬁed to instead ask, “Do you have a hearing problem?” and “If so, at what age
did you ﬁrst notice a change in your hearing?” All of the surveys are available
online (http://goo.gl/9LMShA), and the data can be accessed with permission
subsequent to scientiﬁc review of the proposed analysis (http://goo.gl/qGWxOl).
The 2012 data on “hearing problems” were used to explore the potential relation-
ship between analgesic use and “hearing loss” (Curhan et al. 2012). The diagnosis
of hearing loss based on a positive response to a survey question about hearing
problems is potentially worrisome in light of new data showing some 12 % of a
sample of individuals in the Beaver Dam study, with normal hearing conﬁrmed in
audiometric testing, self-reported hearing difﬁculties (Tremblay et al. 2015).
Difﬁculties with speech-in-noise, for instance, may be caused at least in part by
cognitive and perceptual changes, separate from changes in hearing thresholds
(Füllgrabe et al. 2014). Certainly, some individuals with high-frequency hearing
loss have difﬁculties understanding speech-in-noise because some parts of the
speech signal are inaudible given their elevated thresholds (Quist-Hanssen et al.
1979; Badri et al. 2011). There is also a distortion component in which
hearing-impaired listeners may perform more poorly than normal-hearing listeners
even if all components of the speech signal are presented at audible levels (Plomp
1986). Speech-in-noise tests are essentially a “stress test” for auditory function
(Wilson 2011), and, as per the review by Wilson, it was Carhart (1951) who ﬁrst
recognized that some patients have disproportionate difﬁculty hearing in noise.
Later, Carhart and Tillman (1970) explicitly advocated that audiologic evaluations
should include a measure of the ability of patients to understand speech in com-
peting background noise in addition to the traditional pure-tone audiogram and
speech discrimination in quiet. It is not clear what percent of the participants in the
Nurses’ Health Study II have threshold deﬁcits (hearing loss) versus other auditory
complaints falling under the general heading of hearing problems (such as difﬁculty
discriminating speech in noisy backgrounds).
Population-level health data that are not longitudinal but include careful
audiometric assessment of thresholds can be garnered from the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) database. The NHANES is an ongoing
cross-sectional survey of the civilian noninstitutionalized population of the United
States, with data collected virtually continuously from new participants during each
two-year test cycle. Speciﬁcally, approximately 10,000 individuals are selected at
random every 2 years, with the demographic distribution in each cycle selected to
yield a population that is representative of the US population (for detailed dis-
cussion of the historic and current sampling procedures, see Johnson et al. 2014). In
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
31

recent years, NHANES data have been used to assess relationships between hearing
loss and a variety of factors including cognition (Lin 2011); depression (Li et al.
2014); smoking (Agrawal et al. 2009) and secondhand smoke exposure (Fabry et al.
2011; Lalwani et al. 2011); cardiovascular health (Agrawal et al. 2008; Nash et al.
2011); exposure to metals such as cadmium and lead (Choi et al. 2012); diet
(Spankovich and Le Prell 2013; Choi et al. 2014); noise exposure (Mahboubi et al.
2013; Spankovich and Le Prell 2014); and skin color, race, and ethnicity (Lin et al.
2012). A wealth of data has been generated as these results, in deidentiﬁed form, are
freely available on the Internet for download by interested researchers (http://goo.
gl/FWFiV).
Readers are cautioned that outcomes from and interpretations of NHANES
analyses vary as a function of the speciﬁc data incorporated into any given analysis.
For example, both Shargorodsky et al. (2010b) and Henderson et al. (2011)
assessed potential changes in the prevalence of hearing loss, including NIHL, in
children and adolescents by comparing NHANES III (1988–1994) data to
NHANES 2005–2006 data. Although neither author reported any reliable change in
noise-induced threshold shift (NITS) (deﬁned using the “notched” deﬁnition of
Niskar et al. 1998), Shargorodsky et al. (2010b) reported a statistically signiﬁcant
increase in high-frequency hearing loss (PTA at 3, 4, 6, and 8 kHz greater than
15 dB HL) in NHANES 2005–2006 (16.4 %; 95 % CI: 13.2–19.7) relative to
NHANES III (12.8 %; 95 % CI = 11.1–14.5) (P = 0.02). In contrast, when
Henderson et al. (2011) assessed high-frequency hearing loss using slightly dif-
ferent criteria (PTA at 3, 4, and 6 kHz greater than 15 dB HL), there were no
reliable changes in high-frequency hearing loss. A second major design difference
was the exclusion criteria. Whereas Henderson et al. (2011) excluded participants
who failed to meet normal tympanometric compliance criteria, Shargorodsky et al.
(2010b) did not exclude data obtained from such participants. The different con-
clusions resulting from two different analyses of the same epidemiological data
highlight the challenges of epidemiological research and the importance of coding
all of the relevant variables. Related to this, if a single database is analyzed twice
and the same conclusion is drawn each time, the second analysis cannot be con-
sidered to have independently conﬁrmed the ﬁrst study given that the subjects were
identical. However, if two different (nonoverlapping) cohorts are analyzed, with the
same pattern of results, then the conclusions are much more compelling as there are
different participants in the different sample cycles. Taken together, data from
various NHANES analyses and the handful of longitudinal studies to date provide a
wealth of information on the prevalence of hearing loss and risk factors for hearing
loss. Once a given intervention has been adopted and made its way into widespread
clinical use, the real-world efﬁcacy might perhaps be able to be studied using
population-based approaches.
32
C.G. Le Prell

2.4
Evidence-Based Practice
There is a movement across healthcare asserting that decisions about a patient’s
care should be based on evidence that the recommended treatments or interventions
are likely to beneﬁt the patient. Quality, effectiveness, efﬁciency, and cost are key
drivers of the movement toward evidence-based practice (EBP) (Moodie et al.
2011). EBP has quickly been adopted as the logic is self-evident: how can anyone
argue against the idea that clinicians provide patient care based on the best available
evidence (Valente 2005)? The ability to access, critically analyze, and interpret
scientiﬁc literature is fundamental to the concept of EBP. Academic training will
not provide clinicians with sufﬁcient knowledge of the most efﬁcacious approaches
for the entire spectrum of cases that will be seen over the course of a professional
career (Nail-Chiwetalu and Bernstein Ratner 2006; Bernstein Ratner 2011). The
advice from Bernstein Ratner (2006) regarding the education of tomorrow’s clin-
icians is compelling indeed: “Evidence is only helpful to professionals and their
clients if health service providers seek it out, understand it, and apply it…We need
to inculcate the value of reading the updated professional, peer-reviewed literature
and help equip today’s students with the understanding that this is the ﬁrst step in
EBP: When you do not know the best way to treat your client, look it up, and look
in the right place. If you thought you knew it last year, check and see if it is still
true” (p. 265). Academic researchers can facilitate this process by writing for
clinicians rather than for their scientiﬁc colleagues, which speciﬁcally includes
avoidance of jargon, explanation of clinical relevance, and clearly summarizing
individual outcomes as well as group outcomes (Meline and Paradiso 2003).
Contrary to strict reliance on the literature, however, EBP also requires that
healthcare providers incorporate clinical expertise gained from patient care and
patient preferences in making decisions (Dollaghan 2004; Moodie et al. 2011).
2.4.1
Levels of Evidence
Because EBP is ﬁrmly grounded in empirical evidence, it is critical to understand
how to locate relevant literature and be able to critically evaluate evidence quality
and relevance (Nail-Chiwetalu and Bernstein Ratner 2006; Limb 2011). The “level
of evidence” pyramid provides a useful structure for ranking evidence (Cox 2005;
Moodie et al. 2011). The highest level of evidence is meta-analysis (also termed
systematic reviews) of randomized controlled trials (e.g., Agarwal and Pothier
2009; Phillips and Westerberg 2011). Systematic reviews are different from tradi-
tional reviews in that these are based less on narrative and more on numerical
analysis across studies (McKibbon 1999, pp. 121–151). The original randomized
controlled trial reports are the next level (e.g., Kramer et al. 2006; Suckfuell et al.
2014), followed by nonrandomized intervention studies (such as the study by
Lindblad et al. 2011). In the level of evidence pyramid, these are followed by
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
33

nonintervention designs such as cohort studies, case-control studies, cross-sectional
studies, case reports, and ﬁnally, “expert opinion” (for additional discussion see
McKibbon 1999, pp. 1–31; Moodie et al. 2011). The text by Dawes et al. (2005)
lays out a speciﬁc framework for critically assessing study designs.
Although expert opinions, including consensus statements, should be discounted
if contradicted by compelling data from scientiﬁc studies, there may be cases where
the paucity of data necessitates reliance on the opinions of experts as a primary
source of information (Dollaghan 2004). The absence of data must not be inter-
preted as an absence of effectiveness when there is no research literature. In those
cases, clinical expertise will necessarily be more heavily weighted. It must also be
recognized, however, that not all research data are relevant to decisions in clinical
practice. For example, basic research focused on underlying mechanisms is usually
derived from animal models. These mechanistic data cannot be used as a basis for
therapeutic treatment in humans in the absence of subsequent clinical trial evalu-
ation (Dollaghan 2004). In other words, the basic science and preclinical data guide
potential assessments in humans but do not provide a compelling rationale for
immediate adoption into clinical practice. Additionally, even data from human
studies can be, and should be, “ignored” if the study was not scientiﬁcally sound
(Dollaghan 2004). Critical thinking includes identifying and critically evaluating an
argument based on the speciﬁc supporting evidence; assessing trial design and
potential shortcomings are essential (Finn 2011).
Only the higher levels of evidence are typically considered to warrant serious
consideration of a change in clinical practice (Valente 2005). However, many times
such evidence does not exist and yet treatment decisions must be made (Limb
2011). This situation can and usually does generate controversy among experts, as
has been recently observed for treatment of tinnitus (Folmer et al. 2014; De Ridder
et al. 2015) and the noise exposure exchange rate (ER) as regulated in the occu-
pational noise standard 29 CFR 1910.95 (Occupational Safety and Health
Administration [OSHA] 1983), with strong advocates for both maintaining the
current 5-dB ER (Dobie and Clark 2014, 2015) and adopting a more conservative
3-dB ER (Morata et al. 2015; Suter 2015). While one can (and of course does)
prospectively track subjects longitudinally as part of a hearing conservation pro-
gram, variable use of hearing protection devices (HPDs) in the workplace remains
problematic and actual daily exposures thus remain unknown for most workers. The
evidence used to call for changes in healthcare, regulations, or other policy issues
should be carefully evaluated as part of any call for change. Dobie and Clark (2015,
p. 2) state, “It is unclear to us how a change in the ER would motivate employers to
implement better HCPs and to put more emphasis on noise control, or how
including more workers in those programs would motivate workers to more
faithfully use HPDs.” Based on this guidance, one might consider advocating for
research that identiﬁes and establishes evidence-based best practices for education
and motivation of workers to achieve HPD use that is correct and consistent.
Training on correct insertion signiﬁcantly improves HPD attenuation achieved by
34
C.G. Le Prell

participants, although training strategies vary across studies (Tufts et al. 2013;
Salmani Nodoushan et al. 2014). Fit-testing earplugs to verify achieved attenuation
of a given earplug type provided to a worker also has the potential to improve
hearing conservation outcomes, particularly when ﬁt testing is used as a training
tool to teach correct insertion, but the tools available for ﬁt testing are still under
investigation themselves (Neitzel et al. 2006; Voix and Hager 2009; Schulz 2011).
In an EBP model, being critical about the quality of the evidence is a goal, not a
character ﬂaw (Dollaghan 2004).
2.4.2
Statistical Signiﬁcance Versus Clinical Signiﬁcance
In evaluating study outcomes for their potential relevance to patient care, it is
important to consider not only statistical but also clinical signiﬁcance (Meline and
Paradiso 2003). The example of a small but statistically signiﬁcant improvement in
hearing outcomes was discussed in Sect. 2.3.4. Readers are reminded the P value
generated during signiﬁcance testing reveals nothing about the size or meaning of a
group difference; the P value only serves as a test of how likely it is the null
hypothesis (i.e., that there is no between-group difference) might be true, and a type
I error (concluding there is a group difference when there is not) might be made
(Altman 2000). This has led to a suggestion to assess effect sizes or conﬁdence
intervals to provide information about the size and impact of the group difference
(Altman 2000; Dollaghan 2004). Conﬁdence intervals specify a range of values
within which the true population values are likely to fall (Altman 2000; Dollaghan
2004). A 95 % conﬁdence interval speciﬁes the range of values over which 95 % of
the possible intervals would contain the true value, and a 99 % conﬁdence interval
speciﬁes the range of values over which 99 % of the possible intervals would
contain the true value; thus the 99 % conﬁdence interval will be wider than the
95 % conﬁdence interval. The conﬁdence interval is explicitly intended to illustrate
that if the same study were repeated on different subjects, the results would be
different and thus we should be concerned about the range of values over which the
true population value is likely to be found (Altman 2000) rather than the speciﬁc
mean measured in the sample assumed to represent the population of interest.
Effect size provides a measure of the strength of a phenomenon. Effect size can
be calculated as simple effect size (the difference between two group means), but it
is typically calculated as the difference between the two group means divided by the
standard deviation (SD), which accounts for variation across subjects and permits
comparisons across studies (Meline and Paradiso 2003). There are multiple pro-
cedures for selecting the speciﬁc SD term that goes into the calculations (for review,
see Coe 2002) and there are multiple strategies for interpreting the signiﬁcance of
the effect size (e.g., Cohen 1988; Ferguson 2009). Incorporation of SD into the
calculation has an important inﬂuence on effect size. Readers will recall that SD is
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
35

calculated as the sum of the squared differences of each data point from the mean
divided by the number of data points (for population data) or the number of data
points minus 1 (for sample data). Thus, if the differences from the mean stay the
same (the numerator) but the sample size grows (the denominator), the calculated
SD will be smaller. When the effect size is calculated normalizing for SD, the
calculated effect size will be larger if the SD (now the denominator) is smaller.
Thus, even if they have equivalent outcomes with respect to mean group differ-
ences, larger studies will have larger effect sizes than smaller studies, increasing the
importance of data from large studies and decreasing the importance of smaller ones
when meta-analyses are performed.
2.4.3
The Gap Between Knowledge and Action
One might expect generally widespread agreement that EBP is “a good thing” given
its emphasis on using the current best available information for making decisions
about patient care. Chief concerns expressed by both otorhinolaryngologists and
audiologists include lack of time to access and critically evaluate the literature
(Bhargava et al. 2011; Moodie et al. 2011). This is a common concern across
health-related professionals (Nail-Chiwetalu and Bernstein Ratner 2006; Bernstein
Ratner 2011), as is the cost of acquiring full-text literature for clinicians not afﬁl-
iated with an academic health science center and its libraries (Bernstein Ratner
2011). Nevertheless, relevant clinical professional societies are embracing EBP. For
example, the AAA, in its Standards of Practice for Audiology document, states,
“Audiologists
implement
evidence-based
practices,”
(Standard
IA2),
and
“Audiologists seek, critically evaluate, and apply research ﬁndings to promote
evidence-based practice” (Standard VIA1). The Standards of Practice document and
links to a variety of Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPGs) are available at http://goo.
gl/QNUiye.
The AAO-HNS also offers a variety of CPGs based on systematic review of the
evidence
at
http://goo.gl/IBbVM5.
They
explicitly
support
and
endorse
evidence-based medicine (EBM) when it includes clinical expertise, the best
available external evidence, and also individual patient preference (http://goo.gl/
uHd424). As discussed in Sect. 2.4.1, they offer an interesting caution that high-
lights the importance of all three of these components. Speciﬁcally, “the AAO-HNS
also cautions that evidence based recommendations can change over time as data
accumulates and our knowledge grows. Moreover, a current absence of data does
not equate to an absence of effectiveness. As such, research evidence is often not
the sole determinant of clinical decisions. Evidence must be interpreted in the
context of each individual patient, and clinical decisions are usually made using the
best available evidence in conjunction with clinical expertise and judgment.”
36
C.G. Le Prell

2.5
Technology Transfer and the Valley of Death
Although there is generally good support for EBP, which by deﬁnition is based
strongly on data from research investigations, there is clearly a failure for many
promising drugs and technologies to make it into clinical trials, let alone into
clinical practice. The gap between translational research and commercialization is a
major problem, in part because basic discoveries coming out of academic institu-
tions are often not advanced enough to be attractive to companies (Handelsman
2009). The transition of research from a university into a corporate entity is termed
“technology transfer,” and the all-too-frequent failure of promising basic science
ﬁndings to make their way into use is termed the valley of death (Coller and Califf
2009; Meslin et al. 2013). “The technology transfer gap has always been with us,
but in drug discovery it has widened to form a valley of death between the tradi-
tional ﬁnishing point of research supported by an academic grant, and the sort of
programs industry is interested in licensing or venture capitalists are prepared to
back through a startup” (Moran 2007, p. 266). Some blame the NIH for investing
too many of their resources into basic science research, with not enough funding to
support applied science (for discussion see Butler 2008), although, as noted in
Sect. 2.2, the NIH (including the NIDCD) have put speciﬁc funding mechanisms
into place for translational research and CTSAs provide programmatic support at an
institutional level.
In addition to institutional support through CTSA-funded services, technology
transfer ofﬁces are key players. Strong technology transfer ofﬁces facilitate trans-
lational research, generate income through licensing, and foster academic–industry
collaborations (Martin 2002). There are ﬁve key aspects to the technology transfer
process: disclosure, patent protection, marketing, negotiating, and licensing (Bertha
1996). The review by Patino (2009), providing perspective from a technology
transfer ofﬁce, is an excellent starting point for all of these. Helpful commentary
from an inventor’s perspective is also found in Marks (1991). Additional “required
reading” is the article by Coller and Califf (2009), which provides a framework for
assessing whether a basic science discovery is likely to succeed in the translation
process.
2.5.1
Disclosure
Written disclosure by the inventor to the university is an essential ﬁrst step; the
university technology transfer ofﬁce team then meets with the inventor to discuss
the invention, including novelty, nonobviousness, and prior art, to determine the
likelihood a patent will be allowed by the US Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce
(USPTO). It is critical that the inventor have this initial meeting with the appro-
priate university ofﬁcials prior to disclosing new data at professional meetings, in
professional publications, and in other public releases. Once data are in the public
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
37

domain, patent opportunities decrease. Although US law does allow a patent to be
ﬁled within the ﬁrst year after an invention has been published or otherwise publicly
disclosed, almost all other countries prohibit the ﬁling of a patent once data are in
the public domain (Nelsen 2004). Because receipt of patent protection does not
guarantee a licensing partner will be found (Patino 2009), initial discussions with
the Technology Transfer Ofﬁce will often focus on many of the issues raised by
Coller and Califf (2009) in their framework for assessing likely success. The
technology transfer team will therefore also ask the inventor about potential
licensees to ensure that if they invest in the patent preparation, submission, and
defense, there are potential commercialization partners who may choose to invest in
licensing the rights to the patent for product development purposes. Companies will
typically be well versed in intellectual property management and will require
nondisclosure agreements protecting against any public disclosure or other sharing
of their proprietary information.
2.5.2
Patents
The cost for ﬁling a patent application is fairly minimal, although there are sig-
niﬁcant legal costs incurred with the writing of the patent, which will directly vary
with the complexity of the intellectual property, and there will be fees due at later
times during the prosecution, award, and maintenance of a patent (for detailed
discussion of factors that inﬂuence ﬁling cost, see Patino 2009). One common sense
solution is the ﬁling of a provisional patent, which requires minimal information
and minimal investment but protects the disclosure while the more time-consuming
nonprovisional application is drafted by a patent attorney (Patino 2009). If the
invention is deemed to meet speciﬁc criteria set by the USPTO (e.g., novelty,
nonobviousness, and lack of prior art) when the utility application (i.e., the full
application) is ﬁled, a patent will be issued. Patents provide necessary protection of
a company’s investment in the development of a product. Without a patent and an
exclusive license to protect against competition, it is not ﬁnancially viable for a
company to invest in the development of a new drug and clinical testing of that
agent (Nelsen 2004; Patino 2009). Development of a pharmaceutical can cost
nearly 1 billion US dollars (Peters 2004).
University opportunities to be part of the technology transfer process, through
the ﬁling of patent applications to protect faculty inventions, arose with the passage
of The Patent and Trademark Law Amendments Act (the Bayh–Dole Act) of 1980.
This act gave universities the right to own, manage, and proﬁt from inventions
developed using government funding (i.e., NIH or other governmental grants to
academic institutions). Prior to the Bayh–Dole Act, the government owned all
patents for inventions arising from research conducted using federal grant funds.
There was limited licensing of these government patents by companies as the
government would not allow exclusive licenses. Because corporate competitors
could simultaneously license the rights to use those inventions in their own
38
C.G. Le Prell

competing products, there was little competitive advantage to be gained through
nonexclusive licensing agreements. With the passage of Bayh–Dole, exclusive
licensing of new inventions from universities to businesses became possible, and
exclusive licenses have been more ﬁnancially attractive to industry (University of
California Technology Transfer Ofﬁce 2015).
There continue to be strenuous objections to academic patents, however, based
on arguments that development of proprietary information is fundamentally
incompatible with an educational mission of collecting and evaluating knowledge,
making that information available for students, and broadly enabling product
development for the public good (Korn and Heinig 2005; Lempert 2005). The ﬁscal
importance of the issue of ownership of intellectual property is made clear by
Kesselheim and Avorn (2005). To advocate that universities should pursue intel-
lectual property rights for the basic scientiﬁc results generated by their faculty,
which are often precursors to actual commercial end products, they state, “re-
stricting patenting rights to the end product alone ignores earlier scientiﬁc and
ﬁnancial contributions. Where intellectual property law draws the line has billion
dollar ramiﬁcations for universities and academic medical centers attempting to
support their research budgets, for patients who depend on the creation of inno-
vative medical products, and for society, which ultimately beneﬁts from and pays
for these discoveries” (Kesselheim and Avorn 2005, p. 851).
One common tension during the negotiation of contracts for industry-funded
research at academic institutions is management of potential new intellectual
property (i.e., whether the university or the company owns any resulting patents,
whether license agreements will be exclusive or not, and whether royalties will be
required) (e.g., Kneller et al. 2014). Freedom of publication for the academic
partner is another common tension (Kneller et al. 2014). Faculty are evaluated
based on their publication records, and the mission of an academic research insti-
tution is creation and dissemination of knowledge. However, companies often need
to protect trade secrets. One common solution is the requirement that faculty
provide copies of papers and presentations to the company 30–90 days (depending
on contract terms) before release so that companies can ﬁle patents as needed
(Kneller et al. 2014).
2.5.2.1
Patents for Drugs That Mediate Auditory Trauma
Many of the compounds and molecules that are being investigated as potential
otoprotective agents have been awarded patent protection as novel therapeutics that
protect and/or preserve hearing. Ebselen, the subject of a case study in Chap. 5 by
Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell, is the active agent in a formulation identiﬁed as SPI-1005;
this patent is assigned to Sound Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Kil and Lynch 2010).
SPI-1005 was studied in a Phase I safety study (Lynch and Kil 2009) and was
evaluated in a completed Phase II safety and efﬁcacy study completed at the
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
39

University of Florida (NCT01444846; Kil et al. 2014).1 Oral D-methionine, the
subject of a case study in Chap. 6 by Campbell and Fox, is the active agent
protected by multiple US and international patents (e.g., Campbell 2001, 2008).
A proprietary formulation of b-carotene, vitamins C and E, and magnesium is the
subject of several patents assigned to the University of Michigan (Miller et al. 2011,
2012, 2015)2 and these patents are currently licensed to Hearing Health Science,
Inc. This combination of active agents was assessed in animal models at both the
University of Michigan (Le Prell et al. 2007a, 2011a) and Washington University
(Le Prell et al. 2011b) before being assessed in clinical trials conducted in Sweden
(in partnership with the Karolinska Institutet; see Le Prell et al. 2011c) and at the
University of Florida (NCT00808470; Le Prell et al. 2016).
Other agents that act to reduce NIHL and/or noise-induced tinnitus are also
being evaluated for potential efﬁcacy in human subjects and developed as com-
mercial agents by companies (for discussion of tinnitus therapies, see Allman,
Schormans, Typlt, and Lobarinas, Chap. 7). For example, AM-111 is a patented
JNK inhibitor (Bonny 2009) being developed by Auris Medical for human use in
the inner ear; it has been assessed in recent clinical trials (Suckfuell et al. 2007,
2014). AM-101, patented for the prevention of tinnitus and other auditory com-
plaints (Guitton et al. 2015), was also examined in a recent clinical study (Staecker
et al. 2015). The novel surgical approach described for the delivery of adenoviral
vector with E1/E3/E4 deletions (to allow transgene manipulation) described by
Staecker (2008, assigned to the University of Maryland, Baltimore) is being used in
NCT02132130 described by Staecker, Klickstein, and Brough, Chap. 8. The patents
cited here are by no means an exhaustive list; these are provided simply to highlight
relevant intellectual property associated with authors contributing chapters to this
volume and to make the point that agents under investigation as potential otopro-
tective agents are routinely protected by institutional technology transfer ofﬁces if
developed at academic institutions and by the corporate owners if they are devel-
oped by businesses.
2.5.3
Marketing, Negotiating, and Licensing
It must be kept in mind that a fundamental goal of the Technology Transfer Ofﬁce is
to promote the advancement of university intellectual property outside of the uni-
versity through a licensing agreement and that the Technology Transfer Ofﬁce is
speciﬁcally tasked with protecting the best interests of the university (Patino 2009).
In contrast, the company is tasked with protecting its own best interests, such as
requiring a strong intellectual property position that ensures its ability to develop a
11Colleen Le Prell was the principal investigator on the contract between Sound Pharmaceuticals,
Inc. and the University of Florida.
2Colleen Le Prell is an inventor on these patents; see references for detailed information.
40
C.G. Le Prell

product exclusively. Whereas exclusive licensing opportunities do increase the
chances that a company will agree to a license, there is no guarantee that a license
agreement will be negotiated. Even if a license agreement is successfully negoti-
ated, there is no guarantee that the license agreement will lead to a new consumer
product or process (Patino 2009). Licensing agreements will typically include
milestones for development, and if they are not met, the licensing agreement can be
terminated.
As patents for pharmaceutical agents grow older, they become less useful;
therefore licensing and development must be pushed forward as quickly as possible
by both the technology transfer ofﬁce and the company. The Drug Price
Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984, commonly referred to as the
Hatch–Waxman Act of 1984, speeds the development of generic drug products by
allowing the generic to reference all of the preclinical and clinical data that were
collected by a pharmaceutical company during the development of the original
name brand drug rather than conducting their own testing on the generic itself
(Peters 2004; Knowles 2010). As reviewed by Peters (2004), although new drugs
typically qualify for 20 years of patent protection, which stops competitors from
marketing products with the same active ingredients, this 20-year “clock” begins
with the submission of the IND. Because clinical testing and review and approval
within the FDA can take multiple years, a large portion of a drug’s patent life is lost
during the testing period. The Hatch–Waxman Act does provide a mechanism
through which some of this “lost patent time” can be restored, but “the maximum
restored patent life is ﬁve years, and the maximum total effective patent life—
meaning the time between FDA approval and a drug’s patent expiration after any
restored patent life—cannot exceed 14 years” (Peters 2004, p. 22). Thus, as patents
age, there is less value associated with investing in clinical trials or additional
development of the chemical entity if there will not be any signiﬁcant protected
sales period during which a generic equivalent cannot be made available to con-
sumers. These kinds of challenges have led many universities to not only allow but
also help faculty to spin-off startup companies that will license and develop intel-
lectual property the faculty member developed at the university (Martin 2002;
Nelsen 2004; Hammerstedt and Blach 2008).
2.6
Summary
This chapter provided a detailed overview of the T1, T2, and T3 phases of trans-
lational research, including provision of working deﬁnitions of different phases of
research progressing from basic research through clinical testing and implementa-
tion into evidence-based patient care. There are many other tasks that must be
accomplished to translate an agent from basic research into clinical testing,
including, for example, development of dose–response curves, pharmacokinetic
testing, two-species toxicity testing, and Phase 1 safety tests, all of which are
discussed in more detail by Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell, Chap. 5, and by Staecker,
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
41

Klickstein, and Brough, Chap. 8. These studies are not attractive or appealing to
many of the reviewers at the NIH who are accustomed to R01, R21, or other
funding mechanisms where basic inquiry and generation of new mechanistic insight
is the goal, but they are critically important to human translation.
Some of this work might be done within a university despite funding challenges,
although many of these speciﬁc activities will occur postlicensing with leadership
by a corporate entity. Worth noting, the NIH as part of its overall funding portfolio
also offers Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) awards, which companies
can apply for to obtain grant funding that supports research that will foster new
product development. Companies might also be able to obtain ﬁnancial support
from angel investors (individuals who support business development, typically
investing between $25,000 and $100,000 in exchange for equity ownership) or
venture capital (larger investments, also in exchange for equity ownership, and
typically resulting in signiﬁcant control over company decisions). All of the
activities that must happen if a drug is to successfully move forward into Phase 2
efﬁcacy testing have a price tag, and funds must come from grants, investors, or
revenue streams from other existing products in the case of an established company
with existing product lines. Academic inventors may interact with companies that
license the rights to their inventions by partnering on grants, attending meetings
with potential investors, or partnering on clinical testing of a licensed invention.
Academic inventors who create a new spin-off company that will license and further
develop the technology they invented have an even greater interest in furthering
their own knowledge about all of the regulatory and ﬁnancial challenges they will
encounter.
With respect to translational research, Coller and Califf (2009) state that “the
resources needed are substantial, the costs high, and the failure rates daunting.” To
navigate the many challenges successfully, there is a need for new funding models,
changes to the regulatory environment to decrease bureaucracy and cost, and other
policy changes necessary to accelerate the process (Fears et al. 2010). There are
clearly diverging interests of academics (creation of knowledge, education of the
future workforce) and industry (meeting market needs and protecting exclusivity to
generate revenue and increase shareholder value). However, as argued by
Ehrismann and Patel (2015), there is an important common ground found in the
mutual goal of advancing biomedical research, and ﬁnding cures for patients in
need. Whether patient care is advanced through industry-funded research within an
academic laboratory, or industry licensing of an academic patent, is not important
from the patient’s perspective. What will beneﬁt patients the most in the long run is
the translation of novel therapies into clinical testing (T1) with subsequent trans-
lation of the most effective therapies into patient care (T2), with the long-term goal
of improving public health outcomes (T3).
42
C.G. Le Prell

2.7
Closing Comments
The authors who describe the challenges and the obstacles and the myriad of
“things you never even guessed you would need to someday know” when it comes
to translational research are absolutely right—translation is slow and there is a steep
learning curve. I have been asked if I would pursue a translational research program
again, knowing what I know now about the slow pace of success in these kinds of
activities. To all those reading this chapter to the very end, the answer is
emphatically, enthusiastically, and without reservation yes. It is tremendously
rewarding seeing each incremental step forward in the development of otoprotective
agents. There are no FDA-approved drugs for the prevention of acquired hearing
loss, but such agents are urgently needed. “Competitive agents” or not, there is a
celebration of each accomplishment as data emerge across laboratories, and there
are strong partnerships within and even among industry and academic investigators.
Compliance with Ethics Requirements
Colleen Le Prell has received contract funding from industry sources including
Sound Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Edison Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Hearing Health
Sciences, Inc., and MaxSound, Inc. She is a co-inventor on patents assigned to the
University of Michigan and the University of Florida.
Acknowledgments Translational research must be approached as team science, with scientists,
clinicians, physicians, statisticians, experts in the regulatory rules and IND preparation, and, of
course, a clinical trial manager all contributing important pieces. I am grateful to the many friends
and colleagues who have partnered with me on the studies described in this chapter, including
Patrick Antonelli, Edward Lobarinas, Christopher Spankovich, Scott Grifﬁths, and Leigh Anne
Marshall at the University of Florida; Josef Miller, Glenn Green, Bill Reisdorph, and Kenneth
Guire at the University of Michigan; Kathleen Campbell at Southern Illinois University; Eric
Lynch and Jonathon Kil at Sound Pharmaceuticals, Inc., and Matt Klein and Erin Johnson at
Edison Pharmaceuticals, Inc. I appreciate helpful comments on an earlier version of this manu-
script from Edward Lobarinas, Art Popper, and Jianxin Bao.
References
Abi-Hachem, R. N., Zine, A., & Van De Water, T. R. (2010). The injured cochlea as a target for
inﬂammatory processes, initiation of cell death pathways and application of related
otoprotectives strategies. Recent Patents on CNS Drug Discovery, 5(2), 147–163.
Agarwal, L., & Pothier, D. D. (2009). Vasodilators and vasoactive substances for idiopathic
sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 4, CD003422.
Agrawal, Y., Platz, E. A., & Niparko, J. K. (2008). Prevalence of hearing loss and differences by
demographic characteristics among US adults: Data from the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey, 1999–2004. Archives of Internal Medicine, 168(14), 1522–1530.
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
43

Agrawal, Y., Platz, E. A., & Niparko, J. K. (2009). Risk factors for hearing loss in US adults: Data
from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999 to 2002. Otology &
Neurotology, 30(2), 139–145.
Altman, D. G. (2000). Appendix 1: Conﬁdence intervals. In D. L. Sackett, S. E. Straus, W.
S. Richardson, W. Rosenberg, & R. B. Hauynes (Eds.), Evidence-based medicine: How to
practice and teach EBM (pp. 233–243). Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Anderson, J. M., & Campbell, K. (2015). Assessment of interventions to prevent drug-induced
hearing loss. In J. M. Miller, C. G. Le Prell, & L. P. Rybak (Eds.), Oxidative stress in applied
basic research and clinical practice: Free radicals in ENT pathology (pp. 243–269). New
York: Humana Press.
Apel, K. (2011). Science is an attitude: A response to Kamhi. Language, Speech, and Hearing
Services in Schools, 42(1), 65–68; discussion 88–93.
Badri, R., Siegel, J. H., & Wright, B. A. (2011). Auditory ﬁlter shapes and high-frequency hearing
in adults who have impaired speech in noise performance despite clinically normal audiograms.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 129(2), 852–863.
Bernstein Ratner, N. (2006). Evidence-based practice: An examination of its ramiﬁcations for the
practice of speech-language pathology. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools,
37(4), 257–267.
Bernstein Ratner, N. (2011). Some pragmatic tips for dealing with clinical uncertainty. Language,
Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 42(1), 77–80; discussion 88–93.
Bertha, S. L. (1996). Academic research: Policies and practice. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 51
(1–3), 59–73.
Bhargava, D., Al-Saidi, Y., Bhargava, K., & Al-Abri, R. (2011). Information mastery, effective
health care, evidence-based practice and the otolaryngologist. Sultan Qaboos University
Medical Sciences Journal, 11(4), 492–496.
Bonny, C. (2009). Cell-permeable peptide inhibitors of the JNK signal transduction pathway. US
Patent No. 7,635,681. United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Brant, L. J., & Fozard, J. L. (1990). Age changes in pure-tone hearing thresholds in a longitudinal
study of normal human aging. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 88(2),
813–820.
Bush, V. (1945). Science: The endless frontier. A report to the president by Vannevar Bush,
director of the Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research and Development. http://www.nsf.gov/about/
history/nsf50/vbush1945_content.jsp. Accessed July 9, 2015.
Butler, D. (2008). Translational research: Crossing the valley of death. Nature, 453(7197),
840–842.
Campbell, K. C. M. (2001). Therapeutic use of D-methionine to reduce the toxicity of ototoxic
drugs, noise, and radiation. US Patent No. 6,265,386. United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Campbell, K. C. M. (2008). Therapeutic use of methionine-derivitives to reduce the toxicity of
noise. US Patent No. 7,423,065. United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Campbell, K. C. M., & Le Prell, C. G. (2012). Potential therapeutic agents. Seminars in Hearing,
33(1), 97–113.
Carhart, R. (1951). Basic principles of speech audiometry. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 40(1–2),
62–71.
Carhart, R., & Tillman, T. W. (1970). Interaction of competing speech signals with hearing losses.
Archives of Otolaryngology, 91(3), 273–279.
Choi, Y.-H., Hu, H., Mukherjee, B., Miller, J., & Park, S. K. (2012). Environmental cadmium and
lead exposures and hearing loss in U.S. adults: The National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey, 1999 to 2004. Environmental Health Perspectives, 120(11), 1544–1550.
Choi, Y.-H., Miller, J. M., Tucker, K. L., Hu, H., & Park, S. K. (2014). Antioxidant vitamins and
magnesium and the risk of hearing loss in the US general population. American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 99(1), 148–155.
Coe, R. (2002). It’s the effect size, stupid: What effect size is and why it is important. Paper
presented at the Annual Conference of the British Educational Research Association,
44
C.G. Le Prell

University of Exeter, England, September 12–14, 2002. http://www.leeds.ac.uk/educol/
documents/00002182.htm. Accessed July 15, 2015.
Cohen, D. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences, 2nd ed. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Coller, B. S., & Califf, R. M. (2009). Traversing the valley of death: A guide to assessing prospects
for translational success. Science Translational Medicine, 1(10), 10cm19.
Cox, R. M. (2005). Evidence-based practice in provision of ampliﬁcation. Journal of the American
Academy of Audiology, 16(7), 419–438.
Crowley, W. F., Jr., & Gusella, J. F. (2009). Changing models of biomedical research. Science
Translational Medicine, 1(1), 1cm1.
Cruickshanks, K. J., Wiley, T. L., Tweed, T. S., Klein, B. E., Klein, R., et al. (1998). Prevalence of
hearing loss in older adults in Beaver Dam, Wisconsin. The Epidemiology of Hearing Loss
Study. American Journal of Epidemiology, 148(9), 879–886.
Curhan, S. G., Shargorodsky, J., Eavey, R., & Curhan, G. C. (2012). Analgesic use and the risk of
hearing loss in women. American Journal of Epidemiology, 176(6), 544–554.
Dawes, M., Davies, P., Gray, A., Mant, J., Seers, K., & Snowball, R. (2005). Evidence based
practice. Philadelphia: Elsevier.
De Ridder, D., Vanneste, S., Elgoyhen, A. B., Langguth, B., & de Nora, M. (2015). All treatments
in tinnitus are experimental, controversial, and futuristic: A comment on “Experimental,
controversial, and futuristic treatments for chronic tinnitus” by Folmer et al. (2014). Journal of
the American Academy of Audiology, 26(6), 595–597.
Dobie, R. A. (1999). A review of randomized clinical trials in tinnitus. Laryngoscope, 109(8),
1202–1211.
Dobie, R. A., & Clark, W. W. (2014). Exchange rates for intermittent and ﬂuctuating occupational
noise: A systematic review of studies of human permanent threshold shift. Ear and Hearing,
35(1), 86–96.
Dobie, R. A., & Clark, W. W. (2015). Response to Suter and NIOSH. Ear and Hearing, 36(4),
492–495.
Dollaghan, C. A. (2004). Evidence-based practice in communication disorders: What do we know,
and when do we know it? Journal of Communication Disorders, 37(5), 391–400.
Dougherty, D., & Conway, P. H. (2008). The “3T’s” road map to transform US health care: The
“how” of high-quality care. JAMA, 299(19), 2319–2321.
Duijvestijn, J. A., Anteunis, L. J., Hoek, C. J., Van Den Brink, R. H., Chenault, M. N., & Manni,
J. J. (2003). Help-seeking behaviour of hearing-impaired persons aged > or = 55 years: Effect
of complaints, signiﬁcant others and hearing aid image. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 123(7),
846–850.
Ehrismann, D., & Patel, D. (2015). University-industry collaborations: Models, drivers and
cultures. Swiss Medical Weekly, 145, w14086.
Fabry, D. A., Davila, E. P., Arheart, K. L., Serdar, B., Dietz, N. A., et al. (2011). Secondhand
smoke exposure and the risk of hearing loss. Tobacco Control, 20(1), 82–85.
Fears, R., van der Meer, J. W., & ter Meulen, V. (2010). Translational medicine policy issues in
infectious disease. Science Translational Medicine, 2(14), 14cm2.
Ferguson, C. J. (2009). An effect size primer: A guide for clinicians and researchers. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 40(5), 532–538.
Finn, P. (2011). Critical thinking: knowledge and skills for evidence-based practice. Language,
Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 42(1), 69–72; discussion 88–93.
Folmer, R. L., Theodoroff, S. M., Martin, W. H., & Shi, Y. (2014). Experimental, controversial,
and futuristic treatments for chronic tinnitus. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology,
25(1), 106–125.
Füllgrabe, C., Moore, B. C. J., & Stone, M. A. (2014). Age-group differences in speech
identiﬁcation despite matched audiometrically normal hearing: Contributions from auditory
temporal processing and cognition. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 6, Article 347.
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
45

Gopinath, B., Flood, V. M., McMahon, C. M., Burlutsky, G., Spankovich, C., et al. (2011).
Dietary antioxidant intake is associated with the prevalence but not incidence of age-related
hearing loss. The Journal of Nutrition, Health, & Aging, 15(10), 896–900.
Guitton, M., Puel, J.-L., Pujol, R., Ruel, J., & Wang, J. (2015). Methods for the treatment of
tinnitus induced by cochlear excitotoxicity. US Patent No. 9,072,662. United States Patent
Trademark Ofﬁce.
Hammerstedt, R. H., & Blach, E. L. (2008). Commercialization of basic research from within the
university and return of value to the public. Animal Reproduction Science, 105(1–2), 158–178.
Handelsman, K. (2009). A translational research niche for small business innovation research
grants. Science Translational Medicine, 1(5), 5cm6.
Henderson,
E.,
Testa,
M.
A.,
&
Hartnick,
C.
(2011).
Prevalence
of
noise-induced
hearing-threshold shifts and hearing loss among US youths. Pediatrics, 127(1), e39–e46.
Huth, M. E., Ricci, A. J., & Cheng, A. G. (2011). Mechanisms of aminoglycoside ototoxicity and
targets of hair cell protection. International Journal of Otolaryngology, 2011, Article ID
937861.
Johnson, C. L., Dohrmann, S. M., Burt, V. L., & Mohadjer, L. K. (2014). No. 162. National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey: Sample design, 2011–2014. National Center for Health
Statistics. Vital and Health Statistics Series; Series 2. Data Evaluation and Methods Research.
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/series/series02.htm
Kesselheim, A. S., & Avorn, J. (2005). University-based science and biotechnology products:
Deﬁning the boundaries of intellectual property. JAMA, 293(7), 850–854.
Kil, J., & Lynch, E. (2010). Methods for treating hearing loss. US Patent No. 7,820,640. United
States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Kil, J., Lynch, E. D., Grifﬁths, S., Lobarinas, E., Spankovich, C., et al. (2014). Efﬁcacy of
SPI-1005 for prevention of noise-induced hearing loss: Phase 2 clinical trial results.
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 151(1 Suppl.), 83–84.
Kneller, R., Mongeon, M., Cope, J., Garner, C., & Ternouth, P. (2014). Industry–university
collaborations in Canada, Japan, the UK and USA—With emphasis on publication freedom
and managing the intellectual property lock-up problem. PLoS ONE, 9(3), Article e90302.
Knowles, S. M. (2010). Fixing the legal framework for pharmaceutical research. Science, 327,
1083–1084.
Korn, D., & Heinig, S. J. (2005). Biotechnology products and university-based science. JAMA,
293(23), 2862–2863; author reply 2863.
Kramer, S., Dreisbach, L., Lockwood, J., Baldwin, K., Kopke, R. D., et al. (2006). Efﬁcacy of the
antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC) in protecting ears exposed to loud music. Journal of the
American Academy of Audiology, 17, 265–278.
Lalwani, A. K., Liu, Y. H., & Weitzman, M. (2011). Second hand smoke is associated with
sensorineural hearing loss in adolescents. Archives of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery,
137(7), 655–662.
Langguth, B., & Elgoyhen, A. B. (2012). Current pharmacological treatments for tinnitus. Expert
Opinion on Pharmacotherapy, 13(17), 2495–2509.
Laurell, G., & Pierre, P. V. (2015). Hearing loss after cisplatin: Oxidative stress pathways and
potential for protection. In J. M. Miller, C. G. Le Prell, & L. P. Rybak (Eds.), Oxidative stress
in applied basic research and clinical practice: Free radicals in ENT pathology (pp. 217–241).
New York: Humana Press.
Lempert, P. (2005). Biotechnology products and university-based science. JAMA, 293(23), 2861–
2862; author reply 2863.
Le Prell, C. G., & Bao, J. (2012). Prevention of noise-induced hearing loss: Potential therapeutic
agents. In C. G. Le Prell, D. Henderson, R. R. Fay, & A. N. Popper (Eds.), Noise-induced
hearing loss: Scientiﬁc advances (pp. 285–338). New York: Springer Science+Business
Media.
Le Prell, C. G., & Lobarinas, E. (2015). Strategies for assessing antioxidant efﬁcacy in clinical
trials. In J. M. Miller, C. G. Le Prell, & L. P. Rybak (Eds.), Oxidative stress in applied basic
46
C.G. Le Prell

research and clinical practice: Free radicals in ENT pathology (pp. 163–192). New York:
Humana Press.
Le Prell, C. G., Hughes, L. F., & Miller, J. M. (2007a). Free radical scavengers vitamins A, C, and
E plus magnesium reduce noise trauma. Free Radical Biology and Medicine, 42(9), 1454–
1463.
Le Prell, C. G., Yamashita, D., Minami, S., Yamasoba, T., & Miller, J. M. (2007b). Mechanisms
of noise-induced hearing loss indicate multiple methods of prevention. Hearing Research, 226
(1–2), 22–43.
Le Prell, C. G., Dolan, D. F., Bennett, D. C., & Boxer, P. A. (2011a). Nutrient treatment and
achieved plasma levels: Reduction of noise-induced hearing loss at multiple post-noise test
times. Translational Research, 158(1), 54–70.
Le Prell, C. G., Gagnon, P. M., Bennett, D. C., & Ohlemiller, K. K. (2011b). Nutrient-enhanced
diet reduces noise-induced damage to the inner ear and hearing loss. Translational Research,
158, 38–53.
Le Prell, C. G., Johnson, A.-C., Lindblad, A.-C., Skjönsberg, A., Ulfendahl, M., et al. (2011c).
Increased vitamin plasma levels in Swedish military personnel treated with nutrients prior to
automatic weapon training. Noise & Health, 13, 432–443.
Le Prell, C. G., Ojano-Dirain, C. P., Rudnick, E. W., Nelson, M. A., deRemer, S., et al. (2014).
Assessment of nutrient supplement to reduce gentamicin-induced ototoxicity. Journal of the
Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 15(3), 375–393.
Le Prell, C. G., Fulbright, A., Spankovich, C., Grifﬁths, S., Lobarinas, E., et al. (2016). Dietary
supplement comprised of b-carotene, vitamin C, vitamin E, and magnesium: failure to prevent
music-induced temporary threshold shift. Audiology and Neurotology EXTRA, 6, 20–39.
Li, C. M., Zhang, X., Hoffman, H. J., Cotch, M. F., Themann, C. L., & Wilson, M. R. (2014).
Hearing impairment associated with depression in US adults, National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey 2005–2010. JAMA Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 140(4),
293–302.
Lim, D. J., & Melnick, W. (1971). Acoustic damage of the cochlea. A scanning and transmission
electron microscopic observation. Archives of Otolaryngology, 94(4), 294–305.
Limb, C. J. (2011). The need for evidence in an anecdotal world. Trends in Ampliﬁcation, 15(1),
3–4.
Lin, F. R. (2011). Hearing loss and cognition among older adults in the United States. Journals of
Gerontology A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 66(10), 1131–1136.
Lin, F. R., Maas, P., Chien, W., Carey, J. P., Ferrucci, L., & Thorpe, R. (2012). Association of skin
color, race/ethnicity, and hearing loss among adults in the USA. Journal of the Association for
Research in Otolaryngology, 13(1), 109–117.
Lindblad, A. C., Rosenhall, U., Olofsson, A., & Hagerman, B. (2011). The efﬁcacy of N-
acetylcysteine to protect the human cochlea from subclinical hearing loss caused by impulse
noise: A controlled trial. Noise Health, 13(55), 392–401.
Lynch, E. D., & Kil, J. (2009). Development of ebselen, a glutathione peroxidase mimic, for the
prevention and treatment of noise-induced hearing loss. Seminars in Hearing, 30, 47–55.
Mahboubi, H., Zardouz, S., Oliaei, S., Pan, D., Bazargan, M., & Djalilian, H. R. (2013).
Noise-induced hearing threshold shift among US adults and implications for noise-induced
hearing loss: National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys. European Archives of
Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, 270, 461–467.
Marks, L. A. (1991). Medical technology transfer: the inventor’s perspective. Biomedical
Instrumentation & Technology, 25(1), 35–41.
Martin, J. B. (2002). Academic-industrial collaboration: The good, the bad, and the ugly.
Transactions of the American Clinical and Climatological Association, 113, 227–239;
discussion 239–240.
McKibbon, A. (1999). PDQ: Evidence-based principles and practice. Hamilton, ON, Canada: B.
C. Decker.
Meline, T., & Paradiso, T. (2003). Evidence-based practice in schools: Evaluating research and
reducing barriers. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 34(4), 273–283.
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
47

Meslin, E. M., Blasimme, A., & Cambon-Thomsen, A. (2013). Mapping the translational science
policy ‘valley of death’. Clinical and Translational Medicine, 2(1), 14.
Miller, J. M., Le Prell, C. G., Schacht, J., & Prieskorn, D. (2011). Composition and method of
treating hearing loss. US Patent No. 7,951,845. United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Miller, J. M., Le Prell, C. G., Schacht, J., & Prieskorn, D. (2012). Composition and method of
treating hearing loss. US Patent No. 8,338,398. United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Miller, J. M., Le Prell, C. G., Schacht, J., & Prieskorn, D. (2015). Composition for treating hearing
loss. US Patent No. 8,927,528. United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Milne, C. P., & Kaitin, K. I. (2009). Translational medicine: An engine of change for bringing new
technology to community health. Science Translational Medicine, 1(5), 5cm5.
Mitchell, P., Gopinath, B., Wang, J. J., McMahon, C. M., Schneider, J., et al. (2011). Five-year
incidence and progression of hearing impairment in an older population. Ear and Hearing, 32
(2), 251–257.
Moodie, S. T., Kothari, A., Bagatto, M. P., Seewald, R., Miller, L. T., & Scollie, S. D. (2011).
Knowledge translation in audiology: Promoting the clinical application of best evidence.
Trends in Ampliﬁcation, 15(1), 5–22.
Moran, N. (2007). Public sector seeks to bridge ‘valley of death.’ Nature Biotechnology,
25(3), 266.
Morata, T. C., Themann, C. L., Byrne, D. C., Davis, R. R., Murphy, W. J., & Stephenson, M. R.
(2015). Letter to the Editor: Scientiﬁc rigor required for a re-examination of exchange rate for
occupational noise measurements re: Dobie, R.A., & Clark, W.W. (2014) Exchange rates for
intermittent and ﬂuctuating occupational noise: A systematic review of studies of human
permanent threshold shift, Ear Hear, 35, 86–96. Ear and Hearing, 36(4), 488–491.
Moreira, T., & Palladino, P. (2011). ‘Population laboratories’ or ‘laboratory populations’? Making
sense of the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging, 1965–1987. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 42(3), 317–327.
Moses, H., 3rd, Dorsey, E. R., Matheson, D. H., & Thier, S. O. (2005). Financial anatomy of
biomedical research. JAMA, 294(11), 1333–1342.
Nail-Chiwetalu, B. J., & Bernstein Ratner, N. (2006). Information literacy for speech-language
pathologists: A key to evidence-based practice. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in
Schools, 37(3), 157–167.
Nash, S. D., Cruickshanks, K. J., Klein, R., Klein, B. E., Nieto, F. J., et al. (2011). The prevalence
of hearing impairment and associated risk factors: The Beaver Dam Offspring Study. Archives
of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 137(5), 432–439.
NCT00808470. Micronutrients to prevent noise-induced hearing loss. http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/
show/NCT00808470. Accessed May 8, 2012.
NCT01444846. Otoprotection with SPI-1005. http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01444846.
Accessed January 11, 2013.
NCT02132130. Safety,
tolerability and efﬁcacy for CGF166 in patients
with bilateral
severe-to-profound hearing loss. http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02132130. Accessed
August 4, 2015.
Neitzel, R., Somers, S., & Seixas, N. (2006). Variability of real-world hearing protector attenuation
measurements. Annals of Occupational Hygiene, 50(7), 679–691.
Nelsen, L. L. (2004). A US perspective on technology transfer: The changing role of the
university. Nature, 5, 1–5.
Niskar, A. S., Kieszak, S. M., Holmes, A., Esteban, E., Rubin, C., & Brody, D. J. (1998).
Prevalence of hearing loss among children 6 to 19 years of age: The Third National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey. JAMA, 279(14), 1071–1075.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). (1983). 29 CFR 1910.95. Occupational
Noise Exposure; Hearing Conservation Amendment; Final Rule, effective 8 March 1983. U.S.
Department of Labor, Occupational Safety & Health Administration.
Ogilvie, D., Craig, P., Grifﬁn, S., Macintyre, S., & Wareham, N. J. (2009). A translational
framework for public health research. BMC Public Health, 9, 116.
48
C.G. Le Prell

Ohlemiller, K. K., Wright, J. S., & Dugan, L. L. (1999). Early elevation of cochlear reactive
oxygen species following noise exposure. Audiology and Neuro-Otology, 4(5), 229–236.
Patino, R. (2009). Intellectual property rights and research disclosure in the university
environment: Preserving the commercialization option and optimizing market interest.
Journal of the American Association of Laboratory Animal Science, 48(2), 138–143.
Peters, C. P. (2004). Fundamentals of the prescription drug market. National Health Policy Forum.
http://www.nhpf.org/library/background-papers/BP_RxIndustry_08-24-04.pdf
Phillips, J. S., & Westerberg, B. (2011). Intratympanic steroids for Meniere’s disease or syndrome.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (7), CD008514.
Plomp, R. (1986). A signal-to-noise ratio model for the speech-reception threshold of the hearing
impaired. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 29(2), 146–154.
Poirrier, A. L., Pincemail, J., Van Den Ackerveken, P., Lefebvre, P. P., & Malgrange, B. (2010).
Oxidative stress in the cochlea: An update. Current Medicinal Chemistry, 17(30), 3591–3604.
Quist-Hanssen, S., Thorud, E., & Aasand, G. (1979). Noise-induced hearing loss and the
comprehension of speech in noise. Acta Oto-Laryngologica Supplementum, 360, 90–95.
Rubio, D. M., Schoenbaum, E. E., Lee, L. S., Schteingart, D. E., Marantz, P. R., et al. (2010).
Deﬁning translational research: Implications for training. Academic Medicine, 85(3), 470–475.
Rybak, L. P., & Brenner, M. J. (2015). Aminoglycoside-induced oxidative stress: Pathways and
protection. In J. M. Miller, C. G. Le Prell, & L. P. Rybak (Eds.), Oxidative stress in applied
basic research and clinical practice: Free radicals in ENT pathology (pp. 195–216). New
York: Humana Press.
Rybak, L. P., Mukherjea, D., Jajoo, S., & Ramkumar, V. (2009). Cisplatin ototoxicity and
protection: Clinical and experimental studies. Tohoku Journal of Experimental Medicine, 219
(3), 177–186.
Salmani Nodoushan, M., Mehrparvar, A. H., Torab Jahromi, M., Safaei, S., & Mollasadeghi, A.
(2014). Training in using earplugs or using earplugs with a higher than necessary noise
reduction rating? A randomized clinical trial. International Journal of Occupational and
Environmental Medicine, 5(4), 187–193.
Schulz, T. Y. (2011). Individual ﬁt-testing of earplugs: A review of uses. Noise Health, 13(51),
152–162.
Shargorodsky, J., Curhan, S. G., Eavey, R., & Curhan, G. C. (2010a). A prospective study of
cardiovascular risk factors and incident hearing loss in men. Laryngoscope, 120(9),
1887–1891.
Shargorodsky, J., Curhan, S. G., Curhan, G. C., & Eavey, R. (2010b). Change in prevalence of
hearing loss in US adolescents. JAMA, 304(7), 772–778.
Shargorodsky, J., Curhan, S. G., Eavey, R., & Curhan, G. C. (2010c). A prospective study of
vitamin intake and the risk of hearing loss in men. Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery,
142(2), 231–236.
Sleight, P. (2000). Debate: Subgroup analyses in clinical trials: Fun to look at—but don’t believe
them! Current Controlled Trials in Cardiovascular Medicine, 1(1), 25–27.
Spankovich, C., & Le Prell, C. G. (2013). Healthy diets, healthy hearing: National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999–2002. International Journal of Audiology, 52(6),
369–276.
Spankovich, C., & Le Prell, C. G. (2014). Associations between dietary quality, noise, and
hearing: Data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999–2002.
International Journal of Audiology, 53(11), 796–809.
Staecker, H. (2008). Drug delivery to the inner ear and methods of using same. US Patent
No. 7,387,614. United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Staecker, H., Maxwell, K. S., Morris, J. R., van de Heyning, P., Morawski, K., et al. (2015).
Selecting appropriate dose regimens for AM-101 in the intratympanic treatment of acute inner
ear tinnitus. Audiology and Neuro-Otology, 20(3), 172–182.
Suckfuell, M., Canis, M., Strieth, S., Scherer, H., & Haisch, A. (2007). Intratympanic treatment of
acute acoustic trauma with a cell-permeable JNK ligand: A prospective randomized phase I/II
study. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 127(9), 938–942.
2
Current Issues in Clinical and Translational Research …
49

Suckfuell, M., Lisowska, G., Domka, W., Kabacinska, A., Morawski, K., et al. (2014). Efﬁcacy
and safety of AM-111 in the treatment of acute sensorineural hearing loss: A double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled phase II study. Otology & Neurotology, 35(8), 1317–1326.
Suter, A. H. (2015). Letter to the Editor: An alternative interpretation of issues surrounding the
exchange rates re: Dobie, R.A., & Clark, W.W. (2014) Exchange rates for intermittent and
ﬂuctuating occupational noise: A systematic review of studies of human permanent threshold
shift, Ear Hear, 35, 86–96. Ear and Hearing, 36(4), 485–487.
Tremblay, K. L., Pinto, A., Fischer, M. E., Klein, B. E. K., Klein, R., et al (2015). Self-reported
hearing difﬁculties among adults with normal audiograms: The Beaver Dam offspring study.
Ear and Hearing, doi:10.1097/AUD.0000000000000195.
Tufts, J. B., Jahn, K. N., & Byram, J. P. (2013). Consistency of attenuation across multiple ﬁttings
of custom and non-custom earplugs. Annals of Occupational Hygiene, 57(5), 571–580.
University of California Technology Transfer Ofﬁce. (2015). The Bayh-Dole Act: A guide to the
law and implementing regulations. http://www.ucop.edu/ott/faculty/bayh.html. Accessed July
9, 2015.
US Food and Drug Administration. (April 28, 2015). Dietary supplements. http://www.fda.gov/
Food/DietarySupplements/UsingDietarySupplements/ucm109760.htm. Accessed July 1, 2016.
US
Food
and
Drug
Administration.
(2002,
May
27,
2015).
Guidance
for
industry:
Structure/function
claims,
small
entity
compliance
guide.
http://www.fda.gov/Food/
GuidanceRegulation/GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/DietarySupplements/
ucm103340.htm. Accessed August 6, 2015.
Valente, M. (2005). Using evidence-based principles to make clinical decisions. Journal of the
American Academy of Audiology, 16(10), 768–769.
Voix, J., & Hager, L. D. (2009). Individual ﬁt testing of hearing protection devices. International
Journal of Occupational Safety and Ergonomics, 15(2), 211–219.
Westfall, J. M., Mold, J., & Fagnan, L. (2007). Practice-based research—“Blue Highways” on the
NIH roadmap. JAMA, 297(4), 403–406.
Wilson, R. H. (2011). Clinical experience with the words-in-noise test on 3430 veterans:
Comparisons with pure-tone thresholds and word recognition in quiet. Journal of the American
Academy of Audiology, 22(7), 405–423.
Woolf, S. H. (2008). The meaning of translational research and why it matters. JAMA, 299(2),
211–213.
Yamane, H., Nakai, Y., Takayama, M., Iguchi, H., Nakagawa, T., & Kojima, A. (1995).
Appearance of free radicals in the guinea pig inner ear after noise-induced acoustic trauma.
European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, 252(8), 504–508.
Yamashita, D., Jiang, H., Schacht, J., & Miller, J. M. (2004). Delayed production of free radicals
following noise exposure. Brain Research, 1019, 201–209.
50
C.G. Le Prell

Chapter 3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological
Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
Nina Kraus and Samira Anderson
Abstract Auditory processing disorders contribute to communication difﬁculties
in children with language-based learning impairments and in older adults who have
trouble hearing in background noise. Therefore, deﬁcits in auditory processing are
widespread among these diverse populations. For this reason, it behooves both
scientiﬁc and clinical communities to consider optimum techniques for assessing
and managing these deﬁcits. The auditory brainstem response to complex sounds
(cABR) provides an objective index of the biological health of the central auditory
system. The cABR is also a sensitive indicator of training-induced neuroplastic
changes and can therefore be used to assess treatment efﬁcacy. Once integrated into
clinical practice, use of the cABR may facilitate more widespread evaluation and
treatment of auditory processing disorders.
Keywords Auditory aging  Auditory-based learning impairments auditory
training  cABR  Central auditory function  Frequency following response 
Objective assessment  Real-world environments  Speech in noise  Temporal
processing
N. Kraus (&)
Departments of Communication Sciences, Neurobiology and Physiology,
and Otolaryngology, Northwestern University, 2240 N. Campus Dr., Evanston,
IL 60208, USA
e-mail: nkraus@northwestern.edu
URL: http://www.brainvolts.northwestern.edu
S. Anderson
Department of Hearing and Speech Sciences, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD 20742, USA
e-mail: sander22@umd.edu
URL: http://www.hearinbrainlab.umd.edu
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
C.G. Le Prell et al. (eds.), Translational Research in Audiology, Neurotology,
and the Hearing Sciences, Springer Handbook of Auditory Research 58,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-40848-4_3
51

3.1
Introduction
The concept of an auditory processing disorder (APD) has been around for decades.
Myklebust (1954) ﬁrst deﬁned APD as a disorder of auditory perception despite
normal audiometric thresholds. In the 1970s, behavioral tests of auditory processing
were developed and normative values were established based on performance of
individuals with known cortical lesions. Now these behavioral tests are often used
to assess auditory processing in children and adults who do not have identiﬁed
anatomical abnormalities but have apparent hearing difﬁculties in difﬁcult listening
situations.
The most common manifestation of APD is difﬁculty understanding speech in
noise. Deﬁcits in auditory processing are prevalent in children with learning dis-
abilities (Bradlow et al. 2003; Sharma et al. 2006). Children with dyslexia have
poorer speech-in-noise (SIN) perception than children who are typically developing
(Bradlow et al. 2003). They also have difﬁculty recognizing speech degraded by the
removal of temporal ﬁne structure cues, demonstrating that a speech perception
deﬁcit can occur in the presence of either external or internal noise (Ziegler et al.
2009). In addition to deﬁcits in SIN perception, children with dyslexia have poorer
performance compared to children who are typically developing on commonly used
tests of auditory processing, such as the Pitch Pattern Sequence Test (Musiek 1994),
the Dichotic Digits Test (Musiek 1983), and the Random Gap Detection Test (Dias
et al. 2012). Given the evidence that children with learning disabilities often have
APD, routine screening for APD may be beneﬁcial in such children.
Older adults may also be affected by auditory processing deﬁcits. Older adults
have more trouble understanding speech in noisy environments than younger adults,
even
with
audiometrically
normal
hearing
thresholds
(Gordon-Salant
and
Fitzgibbons 1993; Souza et al. 2007). These deﬁcits may arise from decreased ability
to process the fast temporal changes in speech (Grose et al. 2006; Gordon-Salant
et al. 2007). Older adults have more difﬁculty identifying words that differ in tem-
poral segmental speech cues (i.e., “dish” vs. “ditch” or “beat” vs. “wheat”) than
young adults (Gordon-Salant et al. 2006, 2008), which may account for the older
adult’s difﬁculty when trying to perceive these cues in compromised environments.
Temporal processing deﬁcits have also been revealed by electrophysiological
studies. Older adults have delayed neural timing for the onset, offset, and consonant–
vowel regions of the brainstem response to speech syllables compared to younger
adults (Anderson et al. 2012; Clinard and Tremblay 2013) and they have decreased
gap detection amplitudes in cortical responses (Lister et al. 2011; Harris et al. 2012).
Current evaluation of hearing difﬁculties in older adults is typically limited to
assessment of audiometric thresholds and speech perception in quiet despite the fact
that the number one complaint of older adults is trouble hearing in noise. Therefore,
assessment of auditory processing is warranted when an individual reports greater
hearing difﬁculty than would be predicted from audiometric thresholds.
Referrals for APD evaluations from educators, psychologists, speech-language
pathologists, and other professionals are increasing, and parents are demanding
52
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

these services when they learn of the existence of APD on the Internet and other
media sources. Yet, despite the need for APD assessment and the availability of
behavioral assessments, audiologists have been reluctant to include APD assess-
ment in their clinical practices. A gap exists between the research supporting an
auditory processing basis for learning impairments and speech perception deﬁcits
and the application of this knowledge in a clinical setting.
Several factors contribute to the lack of translation into clinical practice. One
issue is a disagreement about whether APD exists as a separate entity apart from
deﬁcits in cognitive functions such as attention and memory (Cacace and
McFarland 1998; Moore et al. 2010). Furthermore, APD is often comorbid with
other learning problems such as dyslexia or attention deﬁcit disorder (Sharma et al.
2009), with possible effects on the validity of the test results. Clinicians disagree on
the criteria for APD diagnosis. Wilson and Arnott (2012) used nine different
diagnostic criteria to determine the rate of APD diagnosis in 150 school-age chil-
dren who completed an APD test battery and found that the rates of diagnosis
varied from 7.3 to 96.0 %. Finally, clinicians are unsure of the efﬁcacy of the
treatments purported to improve auditory processing. Although beneﬁts of training
and/or FM systems for children with APD have been reported (Sharma et al. 2012),
consensus has been hampered by disagreement about what constitutes an APD
diagnosis and the paucity of outcome studies. Existing studies are difﬁcult to
compare because of methodological differences (Fey et al. 2011; Wilson et al.
2013). Conclusive outcome studies may be an unrealistic expectation given the
different ways that APD is deﬁned and the difﬁculties encountered when conducting
longitudinal studies. In summary, some individuals have inordinate difﬁculty
hearing speech in noise or paying attention to relevant sounds and excluding
irrelevant stimuli, suggesting an auditory processing disorder. Large-scale studies in
clinical settings combining behavioral and biological metrics are likely to be
revealing and to provide guidance to clinicians.
Given that the attention and memory requirements of behavioral assessments of
APD may reduce their validity, an objective assessment is needed for diagnostic
evaluation and to document treatment efﬁcacy. Electroencephalography (EEG) is the
primary tool for evaluating infant peripheral hearing ability, but its use can be
extended to evaluation of central auditory function. In children with learning
problems, the ability to discriminate along a continuum of syllables differing in the
spectral content of the formant transition correlates with the magnitude of mismatch
negativity responses (MMNs) (Kraus et al. 1996). The middle latency response
(MLR) has been used to diagnose APD and assess treatment beneﬁts (Schochat et al.
2010). The use of the MLR is limited by between-subject variability, but this can be
minimized by using between-ear amplitude differences rather than absolute ampli-
tudes to determine the presence of an APD (Weihing et al. 2012). Typically, indi-
viduals with normal auditory processing have equivalent amplitudes when either the
right or left ear is stimulated, but individuals with APD show unilateral deﬁcits.
The auditory brainstem response to complex sounds (cABR; also called the
frequency following response, or FFR) is another EEG evaluation that has recently
been used to evaluate auditory processing disorders in a variety of clinical
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
53

impairments, including dyslexia, SIN perception deﬁcits, APD, hearing loss, and
aging. Because the cABR resembles the evoking stimulus acoustically and visually
(Galbraith et al. 1995), the accuracy of encoding speciﬁc speech features, such as
timing, pitch, and harmonics, is feasible to assess to an extent that is not possible
when using slower, cortical potentials (MLRs) and late latency responses (MMNs).
The following sections will describe the features of the cABR and its clinical
applications for assessment of APD and therapeutic outcomes.
3.2
cABR: Objective Assessment of Central Auditory
Function
The cABR’s origins can be dated back to the frequency following response in the
late 1960s and early 1970s. The term frequency following response (FFR) is used
because the waveforms in the response reproduce the fundamental frequency of the
stimulus (Marsh and Worden 1968). Moushegian et al. (1973) ﬁrst demonstrated
that the FFR can be recorded from the vertex of the human scalp. Initial experi-
ments used simple sounds such as sine waves or tone bursts (Gardi and Merzenich
1979; Hall 1979), but in the 1980s Greenberg published the results of recording
FFRs to vowels (Greenberg 1980) and to complex tones (Greenberg et al. 1987).
It was initially thought that the FFR could be used to assess infant hearing, but
the FFR is more robust for low-frequency tones (Gardi et al. 1979), limiting its
utility for the assessment of high-frequency thresholds. However, the last decade
has seen demonstrations of the utility of the FFR for evaluating clinical disorders,
including learning disabilities (Ghannoum et al. 2014; Malayeri et al. 2014),
reading impairments (Banai et al. 2009; Hornickel and Kraus 2013; White-Schwoch
et al. 2015), speciﬁc language impairment (Basu et al. 2010), autism (Russo et al.
2009), SIN perception deﬁcits in children (Anderson et al. 2010a, b), APD (Billiet
and Bellis 2010; Filippini et al. 2012), attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
(Jafari et al. 2014), and age-related hearing difﬁculties (Anderson et al. 2013a, b;
Clinard and Tremblay 2013).
The term cABR was adopted to differentiate these recordings from those made to
simple and periodic stimuli (Skoe and Kraus 2010). Many of the aforementioned
studies were conducted using the syllable [da], which contains an initial stop
consonant burst, a consonant-vowel transition, and a steady-state vowel. Therefore,
the cABR includes a response to a transient consonant in addition to the periodic,
steady-state response that characterizes the traditional FFR. As mentioned earlier,
the cABR’s ﬁdelity to the evoking stimulus permits evaluation of the encoding
accuracy of speech components important for everyday communication—timing,
pitch, and timbre (Fig. 3.1). The evaluation of these components has been useful in
understanding the biological bases of the aforementioned clinical populations. For
example, children with reading disabilities have delayed timing and reduced rep-
resentation of the ﬁrst formant harmonics in speech compared to children with
54
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

normal reading ability (Banai et al. 2009; Hornickel et al. 2009). Children with
autism have less accurate pitch tracking than children who are typically developing
(Russo et al. 2008). Finally, older adults with good SIN performance have better
subcortical representation of the fundamental frequency (F0) and less neural
degradation in noise than older adults with poor SIN performance (Anderson et al.
2011). Each of these clinical communication disorders affects distinct components
of the cABR, resulting in a unique neural signature for speciﬁc impairments (Kraus
and Nicol 2014; Kraus and White-Schwoch 2015).
Another important feature of the cABR is its high reliability, a necessary con-
dition for use in a clinical setting. Measures of pitch, timing, and timbre are reliable
from session to session in school-age children (Hornickel et al. 2012a) and in young
adults (Song et al. 2011). Further studies need to be conducted to determine cABR
reliability in infants and older adults, two populations in which assessment may be
unreliable due to immature development or variability associated with aging.
Finally, cABR features can be modiﬁed with experience. The cABR arises
largely from the inferior colliculus (IC) in the midbrain (Chandrasekaran and Kraus
2010), a hub of intersecting connections of afferent and efferent ﬁbers (Bajo and
King 2012; Garcia-Lazaro et al. 2013). Animal models have demonstrated that
connections between auditory cortex and IC are essential for auditory learning (Gao
and Suga 2000; Bajo et al. 2010). Human studies have demonstrated that features of
the cABR can be modiﬁed with online learning (Skoe et al. 2013b; Escera and
Malmierca 2014), with as little as 1 week of training (Song et al. 2008), through
classroom FM systems (Hornickel et al. 2012b) or through lifelong language
experience (Krishnan et al. 2010; Krizman et al. 2012) and music training (re-
viewed in Kraus and White-Schwoch 2016). Therefore, given its reliability and its
sensitivity to individual differences in auditory processing, the cABR may be ideal
for evaluating the efﬁcacy of APD training programs.
Fig. 3.1 When the stimulus waveform 170-ms [da] is temporally shifted to account for neural
conduction, the stimulus timing of the onset and offset is apparent in the response waveform
(average responses of 15 young adults with normal hearing). The periodicity of the stimulus
waveform, with repeating peaks every 10 ms corresponding to the F0 of 100 Hz, is also replicated
in the response waveform (a). The harmonics of the response (average responses of 15 young
adults) mirror those of the stimulus (b)
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
55

3.3
Integrating the cABR into Clinical Practice
A new EEG assessment has a high likelihood of being adopted into clinical practice
if it can be incorporated into an existing platform used for other testing, such as
hearing screening or diagnostics. The ﬁrst clinical system, BioMARK, was built on
an existing platform in common use in clinical sites in 2005. It was developed at
Northwestern University by the Kraus Lab and was commercialized by Bio-logic
Systems Corporation (Natus Medical, Mundelein, IL). King et al. (2002) ﬁrst
reported brainstem responses to a speech syllable in children with learning
impairments, and Johnson et al. (2005) reported deﬁcient sound encoding in chil-
dren with learning or auditory processing disorders using the Bio-logic System.
This particular system used a 40-ms [da], which contained an initial stop consonant
burst followed by a consonant–vowel (CV) transition. The short length of the
syllable makes it suitable for clinical assessment, as the total recording can be
accomplished in less than 20 min. The inclusion of the CV transition permits
evaluation of the most perceptually vulnerable region of the speech syllable (Miller
and Nicely 1955). The system includes a template with marked peaks (onset peak:
V, onset trough: A, FFR peaks: D, E, and F, and offset peak: O) to facilitate
clinician peak picking (Fig. 3.2).
Since 2011, the cABR has been available as a research module from Intelligent
Hearing Systems (IHS; Miami, FL). This version permits researchers or clinicians
to use a variety of stimuli of different lengths. Using a full-length speech syllable is
useful for comparing responses to different regions of the stimulus—the onset,
transition, steady state, and offset (Fig. 3.3). Neural timing delays in clinical pop-
ulations are often speciﬁc to the onset, offset, and transition regions of the stimulus
(Anderson et al. 2010a, 2012).
Fig. 3.2 The 40-ms [da] and its average response obtained from 25 infants aged 3–11 months
using the BioMARK clinical EEG system. The onset peak and trough (V and A), FFR peaks (D, E,
and F), and offset peak (O) correspond to the onset, FFR, and offset of the stimulus when it has
been shifted to account for neural conduction time [Adapted from Anderson et al. (2015)]
56
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

Another beneﬁt of the full-length syllable is the ability to compare phase dif-
ferences between responses to two different stimuli. For example, an individual’s
responses to the syllables [ga] and [ba] should be in phase with each other in the
steady-state vowel region, which is acoustically identical between the syllables.
However, the responses to the consonant–vowel transitions should be out of phase,
as differences between the stimuli in the formant transition are reﬂected in the phase
of
the
response
(Skoe
et
al.
2011).
A
cross-phase
analysis
allows
the
clinician/researcher to evaluate the extent of brainstem consonant differentiation in
an individual (Fig. 3.4).
Fig. 3.3 The 170-ms stimulus [da] and the average response waveform of 15 older adults with
normal hearing (aged 60–69 years). The prestimulus, onset (*8 ms), transition (20–60 ms),
steady state (60–120 ms), and offset (*185 ms) are marked on the response waveform [Adapted
from Anderson et al. (2012)]
Fig. 3.4 Cross-phaseogram obtained from an individual 10-month-old infant. In the transition
region (*20–60 ms), the phase of the response to [ga] leads [ba], indicated by the red color, in the
formant transition region (400–720 Hz), as expected given tonotopicity of the auditory system. In the
steady-state region (60–120 ms), the responses of the two syllables are in phase, as indicated in green
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
57

Clinical use of the cABR can expand the diagnostic capabilities of an evoked
potential instrument. The current clinical protocol focuses on the ear; the cABR
would expand testing to include auditory processing to the midbrain, reﬂecting
inﬂuences of the corticofugal pathway, and would provide an objective assessment
of auditory processing and treatment efﬁcacy. Sections 3.4–3.7 describe how the
cABR has been used to increase understanding of auditory processing impairments
in children and in older adults and how it has been used to document treatment
efﬁcacy of training programs in real-world settings.
3.4
Evaluation of APD and Auditory-Based Learning
Impairments
Some children with learning impairments, either dyslexia or speciﬁc language
impairment (SLI), have deﬁcits in auditory skills compared to typically developing
children. For example, children with learning impairments may have difﬁculty
perceiving rapidly presented auditory stimuli (Tallal 1980; Wright et al. 1997).
Children with dyslexia may also have impaired perception of syllable onsets
because of the inability to lock onto amplitude envelope modulations of speech
(Goswami et al. 2002). Furthermore, there are no appreciable differences on
auditory processing tests between groups of children with APD and with SLI
(Miller and Wagstaff 2011). Therefore, objective and more granular evaluations of
auditory processing skills in children with APD or SLI are warranted.
Similarities also exist between children with APD and children with auditory
neuropathy spectrum disorder (ANSD), a disorder characterized by normal outer
hair cell function with disrupted auditory nerve activity (Zeng et al. 2005).
Individuals with ANSD have ﬂuctuating hearing levels and may even have normal
audiometric thresholds (Kraus et al. 1984, 2000). However, they exhibit poor
temporal processing with elevated gap detection and temporal masking thresholds,
and they have difﬁculty detecting signals in noise (Zeng et al. 2005). However,
unlike individuals with ANSD, for whom the click-evoked ABR is absent, children
with APD typically have normal click ABR latencies. The APD deﬁcit is more
subtle than that of ANSD and may be revealed only with the use of a complex
stimulus (Filippini and Schochat 2009; Hornickel and Kraus 2013).
A pattern of cABR ﬁndings has emerged in children with reading impairments:
they have delayed neural responses and reduced representation of higher speech
harmonics (Banai et al. 2009; Malayeri et al. 2014) (Fig. 3.5). These ﬁndings may
arise from a decrease in the synchrony of neural ﬁring, which can lead to delayed
response peaks and greater intertrial variability (Don et al. 1976; Schaette et al.
2005). Increased intertrial variability was found in a rat model of dyslexia (Centanni
et al. 2014) and in poor readers compared to good readers (Hornickel and Kraus
2013). A similar neural difﬁculty is found in the FFRs of children with SLI.
58
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

Compared to children with normal language abilities, children with SLI have
degraded frequency tracking to tonal sweeps, especially at higher presentation rates,
suggesting a disruption in sustained neural phase locking of the FFR generators in
the brainstem (Basu et al. 2010). The inability to accurately represent the acoustic
elements of speech that are critical for phonemic discrimination may impair the
internal mapping of sound necessary to develop language or reading.
Delayed neural timing is also found in normal-hearing children with relatively
poor speech-in-noise performance but only when comparing responses obtained in
a background-noise condition to those obtained in quiet. The effects of noise on
brainstem responses include delayed latencies and reduced amplitudes (Burkard and
Sims 2002). Anderson et al. (2010a) found that 8- to 12-year-old children with poor
SIN perception have greater noise-induced peak latency delays than age- and
hearing-matched children with good SIN perception when comparing responses to a
speech syllable obtained in quiet and in six-talker babble. This noise-induced delay
was also seen in children who were divided into groups of good and poor readers
(Fig. 3.6). Sperling et al. (2005) hypothesized that a noise-exclusion deﬁcit pre-
vents the formation of perceptual categories across sensory domains, contributing to
reading difﬁculties. The ﬁnding of noise-induced delays in children with deﬁcits in
both SIN perception and reading suggests a common neural mechanism underlying
these impairments.
However, children with reading versus SIN perception deﬁcits appear to have
distinct as well as the aforementioned overlapping neural signatures. Distinctions
Fig. 3.5 Comparison of cABRs to a 40-ms [da] in children, ages 7–15, who were divided into
groups of good (N = 35) and poor (N = 28) readers. Top Poor readers (red) have delayed latencies
compared to good readers (black) for all seven peaks in the cABR. Bottom Poor readers have
reduced representation of the ﬁrst formant compared to good readers. Dotted line 1 S.E.
***p < 0.002 [adapted from Banai et al. (2009), Cerebral Cortex, 19(11), 2699–2707]
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
59

are evident in the spectral content of their responses. Unlike children with reading
problems, children with poor SIN perception have reduced amplitude of the F0
rather than the higher harmonics (Anderson et al. 2010b). The F0 and lower har-
monics contribute to pitch perception (Meddis and O’Mard 1997), and pitch, along
with spatial, timing, and harmonic cues, aids in speaker identiﬁcation and auditory
object formation (Oxenham 2008; Shinn-Cunningham and Best 2008). Locking
onto a speaker’s particular voice aids in stream segregation and is necessary to
understand speech in a background of multiple talkers (Bregman 1990). Therefore,
weak representation of the F0 may impair the listener’s ability to focus on a
speaker’s voice.
Few studies have used the cABR to investigate neural speech processing in
children who have been diagnosed speciﬁcally with an APD independent of a
reading or language impairment. Rocha-Muniz et al. (2012) compared cABR
responses to a 40-ms [da] in three groups of children aged 6–12 years who were
typically developing, diagnosed with an auditory processing disorder, or diagnosed
with a SLI. They found that both the APD and SLI groups of children had abnormal
cABR results compared to the normally developing group, but the abnormalities
differed. Both groups with disorders had delayed peak timing compared to the
typically developing group, but the timing delays in the SLI group were more
pervasive than in the APD group. In addition, the SLI group had reduced ampli-
tudes for the high-frequency region of the stimulus (721–1,154 Hz) compared to
either the APD or typically developing group. These results are slightly different
from those of the Banai et al. (2009) study, which found reduced amplitudes for
both the mid (410–755 Hz) and the higher harmonics (755–1,130 Hz) in the group
with reading impairments compared to the group with normal reading ability, but
no information was provided regarding reading ability in the groups in the
Rocha-Muniz et al. (2012) study.
Behavioral testing of APD is typically restricted to children older than the age of
six because the language demands and testing requirements of memory and
Fig. 3.6 Noise-induced latency shifts are greater for children with poor SIN perception (blue)
than for those with good SIN perception (black), left, and are greater for children with poor reading
(red) than for those with good reading (black), right. These latency delays were noted only for the
consonant–vowel transition region of the syllable. Error bars = 1 S.E. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01
[Adapted from Anderson et al. (2010a)]
60
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

attention exceed the abilities of younger children. The cross-phaseogram analysis,
as mentioned in Sect. 3.2, evaluates subcortical differentiation of speech sounds.
Impaired ability to accurately represent speech sounds is an example of an auditory
processing disorder and may result in reading and language impairments. In a study
of 3- to 5-year-old preschoolers, responses were recorded to the syllables [ba] and
[ga] and cross-phaseograms were obtained (White-Schwoch and Kraus 2013).
These children were also administered a phonological processing test (Clinical
Evaluation of Language Fundamentals–Preschool-2, CELF-2P, Pearson, San
Antonio, TX) and were divided into groups of low and high phonological pro-
cessing skills. The children who had higher phonological processing showed
greater phase differences in their responses between the [ba] and [ga] syllables than
the children with lower phonological processing (Fig. 3.7). A follow-up study
demonstrated that subcortical encoding of consonants in noise in preschool children
predicts scores on tests of phonological processing a year later (White-Schwoch
et al. 2015). Because reliable FFRs to a speech syllable have been obtained in
Fig. 3.7 Preschool children with better phonological awareness scores (top) have greater
subcortical differentiation of stop consonants, as measured by larger phase differences, than
age-matched children with poorer phonological awareness scores (bottom). The red region in the
top panel shows the expected phase lead of [ga] before [ba] in the transition region, while there are
no phase differences in the bottom panel illustrating data from children with less developed
phonological (prereading) skills [Adapted from White-Schwoch and Kraus (2013)]
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
61

infants (Jeng et al. 2010; Anderson et al. 2015), perhaps these kinds of measures
can be used to target at-risk infants and children who would beneﬁt from inter-
vention for language-based learning impairments.
3.5
Treatment of APD and Auditory-Based Learning
Impairments
Other barriers to the inclusion of auditory processing evaluations in audiologic
practices are the limited insurance payments for services and the belief by some
clinicians that there are no effective treatment strategies for APD. The evidence of
training
beneﬁts
using
electrophysiologic
assessments
is
limited,
but
the
click-evoked middle-latency response and the tone burst-evoked P300 may detect
positive training outcomes in children with APD (Wilson et al. 2013). Because the
cABR is reliable and meaningful in individuals and reveals myriad aspects of
auditory processing, it can provide an effective assessment of the efﬁcacy and
nature of training beneﬁts for auditory processing.
Two common interventions for APD are improving access to the signal through
the use of an assistive listening device and providing auditory-based training to
strengthen neural sound processing. FM systems are most often used in classrooms
with children with hearing loss, but recommendations for its use with children with
APD are increasing. Classroom noise often exceeds recommended levels (ANSI
2002; Knecht et al. 2002), putting the child with APD at a disadvantage compared
to his or her peers. An FM system improves the child’s access to the teacher’s
voice, effectively increasing the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and can be used to
offset the deleterious effects of a noisy environment. The cABR was used to
evaluate neural auditory processing and phonological skills in children with poor
reading skills following 1 year of FM use (Hornickel et al. 2012b). Three groups of
8- to 12-year-old children were compared: an experimental group of children with
reading impairments who used an FM system in the classroom, a control group of
children with reading impairments who did not use an FM system, and another
control group of children who were typically developing. Each group underwent a
battery of tests before the beginning and after the end of the school year. The
experimental group wore the FM system during school hours throughout the aca-
demic year. Two key ﬁndings emerged. In brainstem responses to a 170-ms [da],
response consistency improved (intertrial variability decreased) in children who
wore the FM systems, but there were no changes in response consistency in the
other groups. Furthermore, the group who used the FM system was the only group
that improved on phonological awareness (CTOPP) and basic reading (Woodcock–
Johnson III Test of Achievement Basic Reading Cluster Score, HMH Riverside
Publishing, Rolling Meadows, IL). Importantly, pretraining response consistency
predicted the extent of improvement on phonological processing, suggesting that
the cABR can be used to predict individual beneﬁt from FM use (Fig. 3.8).
62
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

The cABR has also been used to document beneﬁts from computer-based
auditory training programs. Children with learning disabilities (8–12 years)
underwent 35–40 h of Earobics training (Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt Learning
Technology, Boston, MA) over the course of 8 weeks (Russo et al. 2005). Earobics
provides interactive training to improve phonological awareness, auditory pro-
cessing, and language processing. The children’s responses to a 40-ms [da] were
elicited in quiet and in white Gaussian background noise (+5 SNR) before and after
training. The responses in quiet and noise were cross-correlated to yield a measure
of response degradation in noise—lower correlation values indicate greater noise
degradation. Higher quiet-to-noise correlation values were seen after training,
whereas no changes were seen in a control group. This training was accompanied
by improvements in perception of sentences in noise, suggesting that more precise
neural encoding of speech in noise is a factor in perceptual performance.
Training beneﬁts were also documented with the cABR in children with SLI or
APD. Responses to a 40-ms [da] were recorded in quiet and in white noise (+5
SNR) in four groups of children: typically developing (N = 7; no training), APD
(N = 9, training), SLI (N = 6, training), and SLI (N = 7, no training). These chil-
dren were also tested on a battery of behavioral APD tests, including a
speech-in-noise test (details not provided), the Dichotic Digits (Musiek et al. 1991)
or Staggered Spondaic Words Test (Keith et al. 1987), and the Pitch Pattern
Sequence Test (Musiek et al. 1980). The training groups received 50 min of
auditory training per week for eight weeks. The training consisted of practice on
dichotic listening, pattern sequencing, and listening to speech in competing noise.
Fig. 3.8 cABR averages taken at two different times in the recording session (gray and black,
respectively) in an individual child’s response at pre- and posttraining sessions. The r-value is a
measure of the degree of correlation (response consistency) between the two waveforms at each
session. At the posttraining session, the waveforms are more closely aligned and have a higher r-
value (a). The pretraining measure of neural response consistency predicts the change in
phonological awareness after FM use during one academic year. Lower pretraining response
consistency scores are associated with greater improvement in phonological awareness (b).
[Adapted from Hornickel et al. (2012b)]
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
63

All four groups were tested before the initial visit and then 12 weeks later. Both the
SLI and APD training groups had earlier brainstem latencies for the onset and initial
peaks of the FFR elicited in noise but not in quiet, and no changes were seen in the
control groups. Although the SLI and APD groups had signiﬁcantly delayed
latencies compared to the typically developing group before training, these differ-
ences disappeared after training. In addition, only the training groups had better
behavioral performance on the Dichotic Digits or Staggered Spondaic Words Test
and the Pitch Pattern Sequence Test at the second visit. No changes were seen on
the speech-in-noise test in any of the groups. This study demonstrates the feasibility
of using the cABR for evaluating treatment efﬁcacy. However, the lack of an APD
control group, random assignment, and small sample sizes limit interpretation of the
results. More rigorous studies are needed to demonstrate efﬁcacy of APD treatment.
3.6
Aging Effects on Auditory Processing: Spotlight
on Hearing in Noise
Older adults, even those with audiometrically normal hearing, report trouble
hearing in background noise, echoing one of the primary elements of APDs. This
difﬁculty may arise, in part, from deﬁcits in auditory temporal processing. Older
adults are less able than younger adults to follow the fast-changing temporal cues
that allow a listener to distinguish between words that differ on a single temporal
dimension, such as voice onset time or formant transition duration (Gordon-Salant
et al. 2006, 2008). Furthermore, older adults have more difﬁculty recognizing
time-compressed speech (Gordon-Salant et al. 2007) and discriminating on the
basis of temporal order compared to younger adults (Fogerty et al. 2010). Studies
using speech materials may be affected by language or cognitive factors, but these
deﬁcits have also been found in studies using nonspeech materials. Older adults
have larger gap detection thresholds (Schneider and Hamstra 1999; Phillips et al.
2000), larger duration discrimination thresholds (Fitzgibbons and Gordon‐Salant
1995; Kumar 2011), and reduced temporal order discrimination compared to
younger adults (Fitzgibbons et al. 2006; Shrivastav et al. 2008). Based on a review
of 65 articles on central auditory aging, a task force concluded that the difﬁculties
experienced by older adults may arise from a combination of factors including
neurodegeneration along the auditory pathway and cognitive declines (Humes et al.
2012). The cABR is affected by both neurodegeneration and top-down cognitive
inﬂuences (Kraus and White-Schwoch 2015) and is therefore a sensitive metric of
auditory aging and can reveal a neural basis for central auditory processing deﬁcits
in older adults.
The use of the cABR permits evaluation of central auditory abilities in older
adults without the confounds of linguistic or cognitive factors that may affect
behavioral results. One primary ﬁnding across studies that supports a deﬁcit in
central processing is delayed neural timing (cABR peak latencies) in response to the
64
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

consonant–vowel transition of speech syllables (Vander Werff and Burns 2011;
Anderson et al. 2012). This delay is similar to that seen in children with SLI, poor
reading, and APD. These studies have been conducted in individuals with “clini-
cally normal hearing.” Because the deﬁnition of “normal hearing” may include
thresholds ranging from −10 to 25 dB HL, it would be useful to determine if a
relationship between latency and pure-tone threshold exists within this normal
range, especially in older adults. Other characteristics in common with children
with language-based learning deﬁcits include decreased trial-to-trial response
consistency and diminished representation of the higher harmonics in older adults
compared to younger adults (Anderson et al. 2012). Furthermore, similar factors
characterize children and older adults who are good or poor SIN perceivers. The
neural signature underlying successful ability to hear in noise, robust representation
of the F0 and higher quiet-to-noise correlations, is present in both children and older
adults (Fig. 3.9; Anderson et al. 2011).
To better understand the factors supporting speech understanding in older adults,
structural equation modeling was used to determine the contributions of peripheral
hearing status (audiogram, otoacoustic emissions), life experience (music, socio-
economic status, physical exercise), cognitive function (attention, memory), and
subcortical sound processing (F0 and ﬁrst formant representation and quiet-to-noise
correlations) to SIN perception (based on the QuickSIN and the HINT) in 120
Fig. 3.9 Older adults with good SIN perception have greater strength of the F0 than age- and
hearing-matched older adults with poor SIN perception. All participants had clinically normal
audiometric thresholds (a). Older adults with good SIN perception have higher quiet-to-noise
correlation values than older adults with poor SIN perception (b). Better SIN perception is
associated with higher F0 amplitudes (c) and higher quiet-to-noise correlations. (d) *p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01 (c, d). [Adapted from Anderson et al. (2011)]
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
65

middle- to older-aged adults, 55–79 years, with hearing levels ranging from normal
to moderate sensorineural hearing loss (Anderson et al. 2013c). Both cognitive and
subcortical processing contributed signiﬁcantly to SIN perception, while neither life
experiences nor peripheral hearing loss made signiﬁcant contributions. However, it
is expected that the contribution of peripheral hearing loss would be a signiﬁcant
factor in a data set that included more individuals with hearing loss. Furthermore,
life experiences that are characterized by enrichment or deprivation may also affect
neural speech encoding. For example, music training and language exposure can
strengthen subcortical speech encoding (Wong et al. 2007; Parbery-Clark et al.
2012), whereas an impoverished upbringing may lead to decreased trial-to-trial
response consistency and reduced representation of the ﬁrst formant harmonics
(Skoe et al. 2013a).
Although the cABRs in children with language-based learning impairments and
older adults are inﬂuenced by peripheral and cognitive factors, there are likely
different etiologies. In older adults, the deﬁcits noted in the cABR may arise from
peripheral neurodegeneration, cognitive declines, and changes in the balance of
neurotransmitters. Animal models have demonstrated peripheral neurodegeneration
after noise exposure in the absence of hair cell death. The degeneration can manifest
as a delayed loss of auditory nerve ﬁbers after recovery from noise exposure
(Kujawa and Liberman 2006) or as an acute loss of auditory nerve terminals
(Kujawa and Liberman 2009), although it remains undetermined if these
noise-exposed animals have behavioral deﬁcits processing sounds in challenging
environments. Similarly, aging mice that have not had noise exposure experience
cochlear synaptic loss and a decrease in auditory nerve ﬁbers before there is
detectable change in hearing thresholds or numbers of hair cells (Sergeyenko et al.
2013). This cochlear neuropathy is likely to affect the precision of sound encoding,
particularly in the auditory brainstem where precise synchrony is required to pro-
duce a response (Bharadwaj et al. 2014). Therefore, the temporal processing deﬁcits
noted in the cABR in previous studies may arise, in part, from cochlear neurode-
generation. Additional studies in mice, assessing the cABR following exposures
deﬁned by Kujawa and Liberman (2009) as synaptopathic, would be useful in
establishing the extent to which cABR changes are induced after noise exposure (cf.
Shaheen et al. 2015). The cABR may also be affected by the local changes in the
auditory brainstem and midbrain and top-down changes from auditory cortex. There
is widespread speculation that decreased ABR amplitude after synaptopathic
damage will speciﬁcally result in SIN deﬁcits. Age-related changes in the balance
of
excitatory
and
inhibitory
neurotransmitters
occur
in
cochlear
nucleus
(Schatteman et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2009), inferior colliculus (Walton et al. 2002;
Caspary et al. 2008), and auditory cortex (Hughes et al. 2010; Caspary et al. 2013).
It is most likely, as stated in the Humes et al. (2012) consensus report, that temporal
processing is affected by the interacting effects of an impoverished auditory signal
and declines in day-to-day top-down modulation of responses.
Auditory processing deﬁcits in children are likely to result from a failure to make
effective sound-to-meaning connections that are necessary building blocks for
learning language (Hornickel and Kraus 2013). This failure may result from a
66
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

genetic predisposition or from environmental factors, such as impoverished expe-
riences, noise exposure, or ototoxic drugs, which result in a reduction in the quality
of sound processing in the auditory brainstem and cortex. Decreased sensory input
associated with hearing loss may also lead to degradation of auditory stimulus
representation that interferes with the establishment of sound-to-meaning pathways
(Balen et al. 2009). It should be noted that APD is a heterogeneous impairment that
may arise from one or more sources of impairment or delayed development
including auditory nerve, brainstem, auditory cortex, prefrontal cortex, corpus
callosum, or other areas (Medwetsky 2011). The cABR may be inﬂuenced by
impairments in these areas, but the neural signatures may depend on the speciﬁc
nature of the impairment. For example, difﬁculty hearing in noise is associated with
reduced representation of the F0 whereas a reading impairment is associated with
reduced representation of higher harmonics.
3.7
Treatment of Auditory Processing
and Speech-in-Noise Perception Deﬁcits in Older
Adults
Auditory-based training induces neuroplasticity in adults that is reﬂected in changes
in cABR and cortical evoked responses. Just 8 days of word-identiﬁcation training
on the basis of differing pitch contours leads to improved subcortical pitch tracking
in young-adult nontonal language speakers (Song et al. 2008). This neuroplasticity
is associated with real-world listening beneﬁts. Young adults who used the com-
mercially
available
Listening
and
Communication
Enhancement
program
(LACE™, Neurotone, Inc., Redwood City, CA) had more robust subcortical speech
representation in noise, and they also had improved scores on SIN tests (HINT and
QSIN) (Song et al. 2012). Beneﬁts of training are also seen in auditory cortex using
the mismatch negativity response, with training on one stimulus generalizing to a
novel stimulus (Tremblay et al. 1997).
Although training can modulate neural and behavioral responses in young adults
and children, can similar beneﬁts be achieved in older adults? Evidence from animal
models is promising. Older rats that undergo frequency discrimination training have
improved synchrony in auditory cortex and better perception; in fact, after training,
the dot raster plots of older rats look similar to those of young rats (de Villers-Sidani
et al. 2010). Therefore, one might expect similar results in older humans.
The use of computer-based auditory training, such as LACE, has become pop-
ular for a number of reasons. It permits adaptive ﬁne manipulation of speech
features and cognitive demands, allowing the user to proceed at an individual pace.
The use of engaging software can increase compliance with the training (Bavelier
et al. 2012) and can improve cognitive function in older adults (Anguera et al.
2013). Finally, the training can be performed at home, making it cost effective and
efﬁcient. Despite this potential, few studies have provided high-quality evidence for
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
67

the efﬁcacy of computer-based auditory training, especially in individuals with
hearing loss (Henshaw and Ferguson 2013). Recently, however, a randomized
controlled study was conducted to determine the beneﬁts of an auditory-based
cognitive computer-training program in older adults with hearing levels ranging
from normal to moderate sensorineural hearing loss (Anderson et al. 2013d). Older
adults, aged 55–70 years, were randomly assigned to one of two groups. Those who
were assigned to the experimental group received 40 h of home-based training over
the course of eight weeks. The training consisted of six modules that adaptively
increased levels of perceptual difﬁculty and memory load. Participants identiﬁed
stimuli that differed in direction of pitch change or in the consonant–vowel tran-
sition duration. The stimuli were presented at a faster rate or were adaptively
compressed as performance improved. Those who were assigned to the active
control group also received 40 h of home-based training over the course of
8 weeks. They watched educational programs on their computers on topics ranging
from art to history to science and answered questions about the content of the
program. The participants were blind to the training group. Participants in the
experimental group had faster subcortical peak latencies in response to a speech
stimulus and reduced interpeak variability; these effects were most pronounced in
noise (two-talker babble; +10 SNR) and in the response region corresponding to the
consonant–vowel transition. The peak latencies in the active control group members
did not change (Fig. 3.10). These neural changes were accompanied by improve-
ments in SIN performance, short-term memory, and processing speed. Follow-up
testing was performed 6 months after the completion of training. Faster timing and
reduced interpeak variability were still present at 6 months, but of the behavioral
variables, only processing speed beneﬁts persisted, not the improvements in SIN
performance or short-term memory (Anderson et al. 2014). Work is needed to
determine the schedule of booster sessions necessary for maintaining performance.
In addition, the training must be inherently reinforcing to the user to encourage
continued participation in the program.
Fig. 3.10 After auditory training, older adults had earlier cABR latencies in response to speech
presented in multitalker babble noise, especially in the consonant–vowel formant transition region.
No latency changes were noted in the active control group. Error bars = 1 S.E. *p < 0.05,
***p < 0.001 [Adapted from Anderson et al. (2013d)]
68
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

The training studies carried out in children and older adults demonstrate the
usefulness of the cABR for documenting changes in auditory processing, and that in
children,
aspects
of
the
cABR
can
predict
behavioral
beneﬁt
from
training (Hornickel et al. 2012a; White-Schwoch et al. 2015). More work is
required to determine the predictors of training beneﬁt in older adults. The cABR
may also be useful in predicting success with other forms of intervention, partic-
ularly from the use of hearing aids. Cortical evoked responses are being used to
determine beneﬁt from hearing aids or cochlear implants in children with deafness,
including those with ANSD (Roland et al. 2012; Cardon and Sharma 2013). The
cABR may be similarly useful in predicting beneﬁt in children or adults with
sensorineural hearing loss that is not related to ANSD.
3.8
Challenges: Evaluating Training Efﬁcacy
in Real-World Environments
The aforementioned studies, although conducted in the home with computer-based
programs or in the classroom with personal FM systems, were closely monitored
and supervised by research personnel. To encourage widespread treatment for APD,
it is important to document efﬁcacy in more typical environments where rigorous
control over treatment conditions may not be possible and to assess the impact of
auditory training in community-based programs that have not been created by the
experimenter. This has recently been achieved in two different studies that were
carried out in at-risk children from lower socioeconomic backgrounds. Both of
these studies used music as a medium for inducing neuroplasticity. Long-term
participation in music training improves auditory expertise—SIN performance and
auditory cognitive skills in children (Gerry et al. 2012; Strait et al. 2013) and older
adults (Parbery-Clark et al. 2011). This enhanced behavioral performance is
accompanied by improvements in the neural encoding of speech in noise (reviewed
in Kraus and White-Schwoch 2016). Even a few years of music training in
childhood and adolescence can partially offset age-related delays in neural timing in
older adulthood (White-Schwoch et al. 2013; see also Skoe and Kraus 2012).
Therefore, music may be an effective training strategy for inducing neuroplasticity
and enhanced auditory function.
One study was conducted in the Chicago public schools (Tierney et al. 2013,
2015). High-school students chose between physical training (Junior Reserve
Ofﬁcers’ Training Corps; ROTC) and music classes (choir or band); both options
met three times per week. The students were evaluated with the cABR before their
freshman year before the initiation of training and at the conclusion of each aca-
demic year. After 2 years, improvement was noted in subcortical timing in response
to a speech syllable presented in a multitalker background in the music training but
not in the ROTC group. This improvement was objectively evaluated in two ways:
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
69

(1) identifying the response shift (stimulus-to-response lag) required to maximize
the correlation between the stimulus and response, providing an objective measure
of neural transmission delay at each test session, and (2) computing phase shifts
between responses collected before and after training. Results indicated a decrease
in stimulus-to-response lag and a negative phase shift indicated faster responses
following 2 years of music training that did not occur in the physical training group
(Fig. 3.11). These results demonstrate that even a modest amount of music training
can improve the neural encoding of sound in adolescents (Tierney et al. 2015).
The second study (Kraus et al. 2014) was a randomized control design carried
out in conjunction with Harmony Project (Los Angeles, CA), an award-winning
community program that provides free music education to children in the
gang-reduction zones of Los Angeles (http://www.harmony-project.org/, 2013).
Children from the Harmony Project waiting list (ages 6–9 years) were randomly
assigned to either defer their participation in music lessons for one year (termed
Group 1) or start music lessons immediately (Group 2). The music lessons began
with 2 h of musicianship classes weekly for approximately 6 months and then
moved to group instruction for  4 hours per week on strings, woodwinds, or brass
winds. cABRs were recorded to the syllables [ga] and [ba] before training, after
1 year, and after 2 years (Kraus et al. 2014). Results demonstrated increased
Fig. 3.11 Top The responses of adolescents to the syllable [da] presented in multitalker babble
(+10 SNR) are shifted earlier in time after 2 years of music training, with decreased lag between
stimulus and response. No changes were seen in the ROTC group. Decreased latencies are also
seen in the post-waveform relative to the pre-waveform in the music group (middle) but not in the
ROTC group (bottom). Error bars = 1 S.E [Adapted from Tierney et al. (2013)]
70
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

subcortical differentiation of the two syllables on the phaseogram after 2 years of
music training in Group 2 (Fig. 3.12). The phase differences after 1 year were not
signiﬁcant in either group. It is likely that the number of hours of lessons after
1 year did not reach the threshold for producing a neurophysiological change, as the
frequency of music lessons increased from 2 to 4 h per week after the ﬁrst 6 months
and was then more focused on a single instrument. One important aspect of this
study is that the testing took place outside the lab setting in a classroom environ-
ment. Using the Intelligent Hearing Systems (IHS, Miami, FL) platform, the cABR
was obtained in classrooms that were not electrically shielded, demonstrating the
possibility of obtaining clean data in non-lab settings. One ﬁnal point is that it takes
time for music lessons to induce neuroplasticity, but these investments early in life
are worthwhile because they have the potential for lifelong payoffs, as noted in
White-Schwoch et al. (2013), who found that the beneﬁts of music training in
elementary and high school (earlier neural timing) persisted into older adulthood.
These two neuroeducational lines of work are important for a number of reasons.
Most of the music studies cited in this chapter referred to individuals who had an
extensive history of training leading to a professional music career. But these
children received the amount of training that would be feasible to provide in the
public schools, demonstrating the power of music education and the need to con-
tinue to maintain music in the public school curriculum. Furthermore, both groups
of children came from environments of lower socioeconomic status with fewer
Fig. 3.12 Cross-phaseograms demonstrated an increase in subcortical differentiation between the
syllables [ba] and [ga] after 2 years but not after 1 year of music training in school-age children.
This increase was noted in the region corresponding to the second formant (0.9–1.5 kHz) at 15–
45 ms post-stimulus onset [Adapted from Kraus et al. (2014)]
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
71

opportunities to engage in enriching experiences. Music training, an enriching
activity with many possible social and recreational beneﬁts, can at least partially
ameliorate the deﬁcits imposed by growing up in an impoverished environment.
Finally, the studies demonstrate the feasibility of using the cABR to assess neu-
rophysiological changes in real-world environments and in existing training pro-
grams, not just those that are experimentally created.
3.9
Future Directions
The biological nature of APD is poorly understood, in part due to the heterogeneous
etiologies that may contribute to APD. Ideally, future studies of APD will include
methodologies that clarify the sensory-cognitive interactions that are at play in this
disorder. In addition to behavioral and cABR assessments, cortical evoked
responses, functional magnetic resonance imaging, and magnetoencephalography
will all contribute to a better understanding of the diverse nature of this disorder.
cABR is likely to be especially viable in the clinic because of its documented
reliability in individual subjects and its precision of reﬂective processing in the
central nervous system. A better understanding of other potential causes of neu-
rodegeneration of central auditory structures, such as history of exposure to noise,
ototoxic agents, and traumatic brain injury, may also contribute to a better under-
standing of APD. The Kraus Lab continues to develop technology to bring the
cABR into widespread clinical use as a measure of auditory processing.
The biological evidence for training efﬁcacy is indisputable, but several ques-
tions remain unanswered. Future studies should determine optimal strategies for
producing changes in different populations and how these strategies can be tailored
to individual needs. The community-based studies described in Sect. 3.8 did not
ﬁnd improvements before two years of training. This fact is important for setting
appropriate expectations. For example, a large study failed to ﬁnd generalization
effects after 6 weeks of online training, concluding that “brain training” does not
improve general cognitive function (Owen et al. 2010), but perhaps the effects
would have been realized after a longer training period. Determining factors that
lead to changes in individuals will help to elucidate the biological mechanisms
underlying these improvements. Large population studies are necessary to deter-
mine efﬁcacy and to provide support for third-party payment. The cABR can be
used to answer these questions.
Research on cABR/FFR is developing quickly across multiple domains (Kraus
et al. In press). More work is needed to inform the efﬁcacy of using the cABR in the
assessment and management of APD in clinical settings. The projects in Los
Angeles and in Chicago were successful, in part, as a result of relationships formed
with community leaders who are committed to helping children achieve their
potential despite the disadvantages that accompany an impoverished upbringing.
Similar relationships need to be forged with clinicians and teachers serving children
or adults with APD to bring assessment and treatment into real-world clinics and
72
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

other learning environments. The Kraus Lab neuroeducation work is an example of
using community-based operations as laboratories in which to obtain scientiﬁc
knowledge.
3.10
Summary
Although APD as an independent entity was identiﬁed several decades ago, the
audiological community has not taken full responsibility for the assessment and
management of this disorder. This reluctance is partly due to limitations in the
current test battery, limited reimbursement, and a need for documentation of
treatment efﬁcacy. The cABR has proven to be sensitive to temporal processing
deﬁcits associated with auditory-based language impairments, including dyslexia,
speciﬁc language impairment, and deﬁcits in SIN perception across the life span.
Because the cABR is a direct measure of auditory processing, an atypical cABR
provides biological evidence of an APD. A few studies have speciﬁcally investi-
gated cABR in children with an APD diagnosis, but more work is needed to
develop criteria for classiﬁcation of the cABR as typical or atypical. Furthermore,
the cABR reﬂects neuroplastic changes in the midbrain, a hub of auditory learning,
and can be used to assess efﬁcacy of treatment. Therefore, the cABR has the
potential to become an important component of the APD diagnostic and manage-
ment test battery. Once integrated into clinical practice, use of the cABR may
facilitate more widespread evaluation and treatment of APD.
Compliance with Ethics Requirements
Nina Kraus is chief scientiﬁc ofﬁcer of Synaural, a company working to create a
user-friendly measure of auditory processing.
Samira Anderson declares that she has no conﬂicts of interest.
Acknowledgments This work has been supported by the National Institutes of Health (R01
DC010016; R01 HD069414; T32 DC009399-01A10), the National Science Foundation (NSF
BCS-0921275; 0842376), the National Association of Music Merchants, and the Knowles Hearing
Center.
References
Anderson, S., Skoe, E., Chandrasekaran, B., & Kraus, N. (2010a). Neural timing is linked to
speech perception in noise. The Journal of Neuroscience, 30(14), 4922–4926.
Anderson, S., Skoe, E., Chandrasekaran, B., Zecker, S., & Kraus, N. (2010b). Brainstem correlates
of speech-in-noise perception in children. Hearing Research, 270(1–2), 151–157.
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
73

Anderson, S., Parbery-Clark, A., Yi, H.-G., & Kraus, N. (2011). A neural basis of speech-in-noise
perception in older adults. Ear and Hearing, 32(6), 750–757.
Anderson, S., Parbery-Clark, A., White-Schwoch, T., & Kraus, N. (2012). Aging affects neural
precision of speech encoding. The Journal of Neuroscience, 32(41), 14156–14164.
Anderson, S., Parbery-Clark, A., White-Schwoch, T., Drehobl, S., & Kraus, N. (2013a). Effects of
hearing loss on the subcortical representation of speech cues. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 133(5), 3030.
Anderson, S., Parbery-Clark, A., White-Schwoch, T., & Kraus, N. (2013b). Auditory brainstem
response to complex sounds predicts self-reported speech-in-noise performance. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 56(1), 31–43.
Anderson, S., White-Schwoch, T., Parbery-Clark, A., & Kraus, N. (2013c). A dynamic
auditory-cognitive system supports speech-in-noise perception in older adults. Hearing
Research, 300, 18–32.
Anderson, S., White-Schwoch, T., Parbery-Clark, A., & Kraus, N. (2013d). Reversal of
age-related neural timing delays with training. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA, 110(11), 4357–4362.
Anderson, S., White-Schwoch, T., Choi, H. J., & Kraus, N. (2014). Partial maintenance of
auditory-based cognitive training beneﬁts in older adults. Neuropsychologia, 62, 286–296.
Anderson, S., Parbery-Clark, A., White-Schwoch, T., & Kraus, N. (2015). Development of
subcortical speech representation in human infants. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 137(6), 3346–3355.
Anguera, J., Boccanfuso, J., Rintoul, J., Al-Hashimi, O., Faraji, F., et al. (2013). Video game
training enhances cognitive control in older adults. Nature, 501(7465), 97–101.
ANSI. (2002). Acoustical performance criteria, design requirements and guidelines for schools.
In ANSI S12.60, American National Standards Institute.
Bajo, V. M., & King, A. J. (2012). Cortical modulation of auditory processing in the midbrain.
Frontiers in Neural Circuits, 6(114), 1–12.
Bajo, V. M., Nodal, F. R., Moore, D. R., & King, A. J. (2010). The descending corticocollicular
pathway mediates learning-induced auditory plasticity. Nature Neuroscience, 13(2), 253–260.
Balen, S. A., Bretzke, L., Mottecy, C. M., Liebel, G., Boeno, M. R. M., & Gondim, L. M. A.
(2009). Temporal resolution in children: Comparing normal hearing, conductive hearing loss
and auditory processing disorder. Revista Brasileira de Otorrinolaringologia, 75(1), 123–129.
Banai, K., Hornickel, J., Skoe, E., Nicol, T., Zecker, S., & Kraus, N. (2009). Reading and
subcortical auditory function. Cerebral Cortex, 19(11), 2699–2707.
Basu, M., Krishnan, A., & Weber-Fox, C. (2010). Brainstem correlates of temporal auditory
processing in children with speciﬁc language impairment. Developmental Science, 13(1), 77–91.
Bavelier, D., Green, C. S., Pouget, A., & Schrater, P. (2012). Brain plasticity through the life span:
Learning to learn and action video games. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 35(1), 391–416.
Bharadwaj, H. M., Verhulst, S., Shaheen, L., Liberman, M. C., & Shinn-Cunningham, B. G.
(2014). Cochlear neuropathy and the coding of supra-threshold sound. Frontiers in Systems
Neuroscience, 8(26), 1–18.
Billiet, C. R., & Bellis, T. J. (2010). The relationship between brainstem temporal processing and
performance on tests of central auditory function in children with reading disorders. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 54(1), 228–242.
Bradlow, A. R., Kraus, N., & Hayes, E. (2003). Speaking clearly for children with learning
disabilities: Sentence perception in noise. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 46(1), 80–97.
Bregman, A. S. (1990). Auditory scene analysis Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Burkard, R. F., & Sims, D. (2002). A comparison of the effects of broadband masking noise on the
auditory brainstem response in young and older adults. American Journal of Audiology, 11(1),
13–22.
Cacace, A. T., & McFarland, D. J. (1998). Central auditory processing disorder in school-aged
children: A critical review. Journalof Speech, Language, andHearing Research,41(2), 355–373.
74
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

Cardon, G., & Sharma, A. (2013). Central auditory maturation and behavioral outcome in children
with auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder who use cochlear implants. International Journal
of Audiology, 52(9), 577–586.
Caspary, D. M., Ling, L., Turner, J. G., & Hughes, L. F. (2008). Inhibitory neurotransmission,
plasticity and aging in the mammalian central auditory system. Journal of Experimental
Biology, 211(11), 1781–1791.
Caspary, D. M., Hughes, L. F., & Ling, L. L. (2013). Age-related GABAA receptor changes in rat
auditory cortex. Neurobiology of Aging, 34(5), 1486–1496.
Centanni, T. M., Booker, A. B., Sloan, A. M., Chen, F., Maher, B. J., et al. (2014). Knockdown of
the dyslexia-associated gene kiaa0319 impairs temporal responses to speech stimuli in rat
primary auditory cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 24(7), 1753–1766.
Chandrasekaran, B., & Kraus, N. (2010). The scalp-recorded brainstem response to speech: Neural
origins and plasticity. Psychophysiology, 47(2), 236–246.
Clinard, C., & Tremblay, K. (2013). Aging degrades the neural encoding of simple and complex
sounds. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 24(7), 590–599.
de Villers-Sidani, E., Alzghoul, L., Zhou, X., Simpson, K. L., Lin, R. C. S., & Merzenich, M. M.
(2010). Recovery of functional and structural age-related changes in the rat primary auditory
cortex with operant training. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 107
(31), 13900–13905.
Dias, K. Z., Jutras, B., Acrani, I. O., & Pereira, L. D. (2012). Random Gap Detection Test (RGDT)
performance of individuals with central auditory processing disorders from 5 to 25 years of
age. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 76(2), 174–178.
Don, M., Allen, A., & Starr, A. (1976). Effect of click rate on the latency of auditory brain stem
responses in humans. The Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology, 86(2 Pt 1), 186–195.
Escera, C., & Malmierca, M. S. (2014). The auditory novelty system: An attempt to integrate
human and animal research. Psychophysiology, 51(2), 111–123.
Fey, M. E., Richard, G. J., Geffner, D., Kamhi, A. G., Medwetsky, L., et al. (2011). Auditory
processing disorder and auditory/language interventions: An evidence-based systematic
review. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 42(3), 246–264.
Filippini, R., & Schochat, E. (2009). Brainstem evoked auditory potentials with speech stimulus in
the auditory processing disorder. Brazilian Journal of Otorhinolaryngology, 75(3), 449–455.
Filippini, R., Beﬁ-Lopes, D. M., & Schochat, E. (2012). Efﬁcacy of auditory training using the
auditory brainstem response to complex sounds: Auditory processing disorder and speciﬁc
language impairment. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 64(5), 217–226.
Fitzgibbons, P. J., & Gordon‐Salant, S. (1995). Age effects on duration discrimination with simple
and complex stimuli. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 98(6), 3140–3145.
Fitzgibbons, P. J., Gordon-Salant, S., & Friedman, S. A. (2006). Effects of age and sequence
presentation rate on temporal order recognition. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 120(2), 991–999.
Fogerty, D., Humes, L. E., & Kewley-Port, D. (2010). Auditory temporal-order processing of
vowel sequences by young and elderly listeners. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 127(4), 2509–2520.
Galbraith, G. C., Arbagey, P. W., Branski, R., Comerci, N., & Rector, P. M. (1995). Intelligible
speech encoded in the human brain stem frequency-following response. NeuroReport, 6(17),
2363–2367.
Gao, E., & Suga, N. (2000). Experience-dependent plasticity in the auditory cortex and the inferior
colliculus of bats: Role of the corticofugal system. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA, 97(14), 8081–8086.
Garcia-Lazaro, J. A., Belliveau, L. A., & Lesica, N. A. (2013). Independent population coding of
speech with sub-millisecond precision. The Journal of Neuroscience, 33(49), 19362–19372.
Gardi, J., & Merzenich, M. (1979). The effect of high‐pass noise on the scalp‐recorded frequency
following response (FFR) in humans and cats. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 65(6), 1491–1500.
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
75

Gardi, J., Salamy, A., & Mendelson, T. (1979). Scalp-recorded frequency-following responses in
neonates. International Journal of Audiology, 18(6), 494–506.
Gerry, D., Unrau, A., & Trainor, L. J. (2012). Active music classes in infancy enhance musical,
communicative and social development. Developmental Science, 15(3), 398–407.
Ghannoum, M. T., Shalaby, A. A., Dabbous, A. O., Abd-El-Raouf, E. R., & Abd-El-Hady, H. S.
(2014). Speech evoked auditory brainstem response in learning disabled children. Hearing,
Balance and Communication, 12(3), 126–142.
Gordon-Salant, S., & Fitzgibbons, P. J. (1993). Temporal factors and speech recognition
performance in young and elderly listeners. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 36(6),
1276–1285.
Gordon-Salant, S., Yeni-Komshian, G. H., Fitzgibbons, P. J., & Barrett, J. (2006). Age-related
differences in identiﬁcation and discrimination of temporal cues in speech segments. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 119(4), 2455–2466.
Gordon-Salant, S., Fitzgibbons, P. J., & Friedman, S. A. (2007). Recognition of time-compressed
and natural speech with selective temporal enhancements by young and elderly listeners.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 50(5), 1181–1193.
Gordon-Salant, S., Yeni-Komshian, G., & Fitzgibbons, P. (2008). The role of temporal cues in
word identiﬁcation by younger and older adults: Effects of sentence context. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 124(5), 3249–3260.
Goswami, U., Thomson, J., Richardson, U., Stainthorp, R., Hughes, D., et al. (2002). Amplitude
envelope onsets and developmental dyslexia: A new hypothesis. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the USA, 99(16), 10911–10916.
Greenberg, S. (1980). Neural temporal coding of pitch and vowel quality: Human frequency-
following response studies of complex signals. Los Angeles: Phonetics Laboratory,
Department of Linguistics, UCLA.
Greenberg, S., Marsh, J. T., Brown, W. S., & Smith, J. C. (1987). Neural temporal coding of low
pitch. I. Human frequency-following responses to complex tones. Hearing Research, 25(2–3),
91–114.
Grose, J. H., Hall III, J. W., & Buss, E. (2006). Temporal processing deﬁcits in the pre-senescent
auditory system. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 119(4), 2305.
Hall, J. (1979). Auditory brainstem frequency following responses to waveform envelope
periodicity. Science, 205(4412), 1297–1299.
The Harmony Project. (2013). http://www.harmony-project.org/.
Harris, K. C., Wilson, S., Eckert, M. A., & Dubno, J. R. (2012). Human evoked cortical activity to
silent gaps in noise: Effects of age, attention, and cortical processing speed. Ear and Hearing,
33(3), 330.
Henshaw, H., & Ferguson, M. A. (2013). Efﬁcacy of individual computer-based auditory training
for people with hearing loss: A systematic review of the evidence. PloS ONE, 8(5), e62836.
Hornickel, J., & Kraus, N. (2013). Unstable representation of sound: A biological marker of
dyslexia. The Journal of Neuroscience, 33(8), 3500–3504.
Hornickel, J., Skoe, E., Nicol, T., Zecker, S., & Kraus, N. (2009). Subcortical differentiation of
stop consonants relates to reading and speech-in-noise perception. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the USA, 106(31), 13022–13027.
Hornickel, J., Knowles, E., & Kraus, N. (2012a). Test-retest consistency of speech-evoked
auditory brainstem responses in typically-developing children. Hearing Research, 284(1–2),
52–58.
Hornickel, J., Zecker, S. G., Bradlow, A. R., & Kraus, N. (2012b). Assistive listening devices
drive neuroplasticity in children with dyslexia. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA, 109(41), 16731–16736.
Hughes, L. F., Turner, J. G., Parrish, J. L., & Caspary, D. M. (2010). Processing of broadband
stimuli across A1 layers in young and aged rats. Hearing Research, 264(1–2), 79–85.
Humes, L. E., Dubno, J. R., Gordon-Salant, S., Lister, J. J., Cacace, A. T., et al. (2012). Central
presbycusis: A review and evaluation of the evidence. Journal of the American Academy of
Audiology, 23(8), 635–666.
76
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

Jafari, Z., Malayeri, S., & Rostami, R. (2014). Subcortical encoding of speech cues in children
with attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder. Clinical Neurophysiology, 126(2), 325–332.
Jeng, F. C., Schnabel, E. A., Dickman, B. M., Jiong, H. U., Ximing, L. I., et al. (2010). Early
maturation of frequency-following responses to voice pitch in infants with normal hearing.
Perceptual & Motor Skills, 111(3), 765–784.
Johnson, K. L., Nicol, T. G., & Kraus, N. (2005). Brain stem response to speech: A biological
marker of auditory processing. Ear and Hearing, 26(5), 424–434.
Keith, R. W., Katbamna, B., Tawﬁk, S., & Smolak, L. H. (1987). The effect of linguistic
background on staggered spondaic word and dichotic consonant vowel scores. British Journal
of Audiology, 21(1), 21–26.
King, C., Warrier, C. M., Hayes, E., & Kraus, N. (2002). Deﬁcits in auditory brainstem pathway
encoding of speech sounds in children with learning problems. Neuroscience Letters, 319(2),
111–115.
Knecht, H. A., Nelson, P. B., Whitelaw, G. M., & Feth, L. L. (2002). Background noise levels and
reverberation times in unoccupied classrooms: Predictions and measurements. American
Journal of Audiology, 11(2), 65.
Kraus, N., & Nicol, T. (2014). The cognitive auditory system: The role of learning in shaping the
biology of the auditory system. In A. N. Popper & R. R. Fay (Eds.), Perspectives on auditory
research (pp. 299–319). New York: Springer Science+Business Media.
Kraus, N., & White-Schwoch, T. (2015) Unraveling the biology of auditory learning: A
cognitive-sensorimotor-reward framework. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(11), 642–654.
Kraus, N., & White-Schwoch, T. (2016). Neurobiology of everyday communication: What have
we learned from music? The Neuroscientist, doi:10.1177/1073858416653593.
Kraus, N., Özdamar, Ö., Stein, L., & Reed, N. (1984). Absent auditory brain stem response:
Peripheral hearing loss or brain stem dysfunction? The Laryngoscope, 94(3), 400–406.
Kraus, N., McGee, T. J., Carrell, T. D., Zecker, S. G., Nicol, T. G., & Koch, D. B. (1996).
Auditory neurophysiologic responses and discrimination deﬁcits in children with learning
problems. Science, 273(5277), 971–973.
Kraus, N., Bradlow, M. A., Cunningham, C. J., King, C. D., Koch, D. B., et al. (2000).
Consequences of neural asynchrony: A case of AN. Journal of the Assocation for Research in
Otolaryngology, 1(1), 33–45.
Kraus, N., Slater, J., Thompson, E. C., Hornickel, J., Strait, D. L., et al. (2014). Music enrichment
programs improve the neural encoding of speech in at-risk children. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 34(36), 11913–11918.
Kraus, N., Anderson, S., White-Schwoch, T., Fay, R. R., and Popper, A. N. (in press). The
Frequency-following response: A window into human communication. Springer Nature, New
York.
Krishnan, A., Gandour, J. T., & Bidelman, G. M. (2010). The effects of tone language experience
on pitch processing in the brainstem. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 23(1), 81–95.
Krizman, J., Marian, V., Shook, A., Skoe, E., & Kraus, N. (2012). Subcortical encoding of sound
is enhanced in bilinguals and relates to executive function advantages. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 109(20), 7877–7881.
Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2006). Acceleration of age-related hearing loss by early noise
exposure: Evidence of a misspent youth. The Journal of Neuroscience, 26(7), 2115–2123.
Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2009). Adding insult to injury: Cochlear nerve degeneration
after “temporary” noise-induced hearing loss. The Journal of Neuroscience, 29(45), 14077–
14085.
Kumar, U. (2011). Temporal processing abilities across different age groups. Journal of the
American Academy of Audiology, 22(1), 5–12.
Lister, J. J., Maxﬁeld, N. D., Pitt, G. J., & Gonzalez, V. B. (2011). Auditory evoked response to
gaps in noise: Older adults. International Journal of Audiology, 50(4), 211–225.
Malayeri, S., Lotﬁ, Y., Moossavi, S. A., Rostami, R., & Faghihzadeh, S. (2014). Brainstem
response to speech and non-speech stimuli in children with learning problems. Hearing
Research, 313, 75–82.
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
77

Marsh, J. T., & Worden, F. G. (1968). Sound evoked frequency‐following responses in the central
auditory pathway. The Laryngoscope, 78(7), 1149–1163.
Meddis, R., & O’Mard, L. (1997). A unitary model of pitch perception. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 102(3), 1811–1820.
Medwetsky, L. (2011). Spoken language processing model: Bridging auditory and language
processing to guide assessment and intervention. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in
Schools, 42(3), 286–296.
Miller, C. A., & Wagstaff, D. A. (2011). Behavioral proﬁles associated with auditory processing
disorder and speciﬁc language impairment. Journal of Communication Disorders, 44(6),
745–763.
Miller, G. A., & Nicely, P. E. (1955). An analysis of perceptual confusions among some English
consonants. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 27(2), 338–352.
Moore, D. R., Ferguson, M. A., Edmondson-Jones, A. M., Ratib, S., & Riley, A. (2010). Nature of
auditory processing disorder in children. Pediatrics, 126(2), e382–390.
Moushegian, G., Rupert, A. L., & Stillman, R. D. (1973). Scalp-recorded early responses in man to
frequencies in the speech range. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 35(6),
665–667.
Musiek, F. E. (1983). Assessment of central auditory dysfunction: The dichotic digit test revisited.
Ear and Hearing, 4(2), 79–83.
Musiek, F. E. (1994). Frequency (pitch) and duration pattern tests. Journal of the American
Academy of Audiology, 5(4), 265–268.
Musiek, F. E., Pinheiro, M. L., & Wilson, D. H. (1980). Auditory pattern perception in‘split
brain’patients. Archives of Otolaryngology, 106(10), 610–612.
Musiek, F.E., Gollegly, K., Kibbe, K., & Verkest-Lenz, S. (1991). Proposed screening test for
central auditory disorders: Follow-up on the Dichotic Digits Test. American Journal of
Otology, 12(2), 109–113.
Myklebust, H. (1954). Auditory disorders in children. New York: Grune & Stratton.
Owen, A. M., Hampshire, A., Grahn, J. A., Stenton, R., Dajani, S., et al. (2010). Putting brain
training to the test. Nature, 465(7299), 775–778.
Oxenham, A. J. (2008). Pitch perception and auditory stream segregation: Implications for hearing
loss and cochlear implants. Trends in Ampliﬁcation, 12(4), 316–331.
Parbery-Clark, A., Strait, D. L., Anderson, S., Hittner, E., & Kraus, N. (2011). Musical experience
and the aging auditory system: Implications for cognitive abilities and hearing speech in noise.
PLoS ONE, 6(5), e18082.
Parbery-Clark, A., Anderson, S., Hittner, E., & Kraus, N. (2012). Musical experience offsets
age-related delays in neural timing. Neurobiology of Aging, 33(7), 1483.e1–4.
Phillips, S. L., Gordon-Salant, S., Fitzgibbons, P. J., & Yeni-Komshian, G. (2000). Frequency and
temporal resolution in elderly listeners with good and poor word recognition. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 43(1), 217–228.
Rocha-Muniz, C. N., Beﬁ-Lopes, D. M., & Schochat, E. (2012). Investigation of auditory
processing disorder and language impairment using the speech-evoked auditory brainstem
response. Hearing Research, 294(1), 143–152.
Roland, P., Henion, K., Booth, T., Campbell, J. D., & Sharma, A. (2012). Assessment of cochlear
implant candidacy in patients with cochlear nerve deﬁciency using the P1 CAEP biomarker.
Cochlear Implants International, 13(1), 16–25.
Russo, N., Nicol, T., Zecker, S., Hayes, E., & Kraus, N. (2005). Auditory training improves neural
timing in the human brainstem. Behavioral Brain Research, 156(1), 95–103.
Russo, N., Skoe, E., Trommer, B., Nicol, T., Zecker, S., et al. (2008). Deﬁcient brainstem
encoding of pitch in children with autism spectrum disorders. Clinical Neurophysiology, 119
(8), 1720–1731.
Russo, N., Nicol, T., Trommer, B., Zecker, S., & Kraus, N. (2009). Brainstem transcription of
speech is disrupted in children with autism spectrum disorders. Developmental Science, 12(4),
557–567.
78
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

Schaette, R., Gollisch, T., & Herz, A. V. (2005). Spike-train variability of auditory neurons in vivo:
Dynamic responses follow predictions from constant stimuli. Journal of Neurophysiology,
93(6), 3270–3281.
Schatteman, T. A., Hughes, L. F., & Caspary, D. M. (2008). Aged-related loss of temporal
processing: Altered responses to amplitude modulated tones in rat dorsal cochlear nucleus.
Neuroscience, 154(1), 329–337.
Schneider, B. A., & Hamstra, S. J. (1999). Gap detection thresholds as a function of tonal duration
for older and younger adults. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 106(1),
371–380.
Schochat, E., Musiek, F. E., Alonso, R., & Ogata, J. (2010). Effect of auditory training on the
middle latency response in children with (central) auditory processing disorder. Brazilian
Journal of Medical and Biological Research, 43(8), 777–785.
Sergeyenko, Y., Lall, K., Liberman, M. C., & Kujawa, S. G. (2013). Age-related cochlear
synaptopathy: An early-onset contributor to auditory functional decline. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 33(34), 13686–13694.
Shaheen L. A., Valero, M. D., & Liberman, M. C. (2015). Towards a diagnosis of cochlear
neuropathy with envelope-following responses. Journal of the Association for Research in
Otolaryngology, 16, 727–745.
Sharma, M., Purdy, S., Newall, P., Wheldall, K., Beaman, R., & Dillon, H. (2006).
Electrophysiological and behavioral evidence of auditory processing deﬁcits in children with
reading disorder. Clinical Neurophysiology, 117(5), 1130–1144.
Sharma, M., Purdy, S. C., & Kelly, A. S. (2009). Comorbidity of auditory processing, language,
and reading disorders. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 52(3), 706–722.
Sharma, M., Purdy, S. C., & Kelly, A. S. (2012). A randomized control trial of interventions in
school-aged children with auditory processing disorders. International Journal of Audiology,
51(7), 506–518.
Shinn-Cunningham, B. G., & Best, V. (2008). Selective attention in normal and impaired hearing.
Trends in Ampliﬁcation, 12(4), 283–299.
Shrivastav, M. N., Humes, L. E., & Aylsworth, L. (2008). Temporal order discrimination of tonal
sequences by younger and older adults: The role of duration and rate. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 124(1), 462.
Skoe, E., & Kraus, N. (2010). Auditory brain stem response to complex sounds: A tutorial. Ear
and Hearing, 31(3), 302–324.
Skoe, E., & Kraus, N. (2012). A little goes a long way: How the adult brain is shaped by musical
training in childhood. The Journal of Neuroscience, 32(34), 11507–11510.
Skoe, E., Nicol, T., & Kraus, N. (2011). Cross-phaseogram: Objective neural index of speech
sound differentiation. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 196(2), 308–317.
Skoe, E., Krizman, J., & Kraus, N. (2013a). The impoverished brain: Disparities in maternal
education affect the neural response to sound. The Journal of Neuroscience, 33(44), 17221–
17231.
Skoe, E., Krizman, J., Spitzer, E., & Kraus, N. (2013b). The auditory brainstem is a barometer of
rapid auditory learning. Neuroscience, 243, 104–114.
Song, J. H., Skoe, E., Wong, P. C. M., & Kraus, N. (2008). Plasticity in the adult human auditory
brainstem following short-term linguistic training. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(10),
1892–1902.
Song, J. H., Nicol, T., & Kraus, N. (2011). Test–retest reliability of the speech-evoked auditory
brainstem response. Clinical Neurophysiology, 122(2), 346–355.
Song, J. H., Skoe, E., Banai, K., & Kraus, N. (2012). Training to improve hearing speech in noise:
Biological mechanisms. Cerebral Cortex, 22(5), 1180–1190.
Souza, P., Boike, K., Witherell, K., & Tremblay, K. (2007). Prediction of speech recognition from
audibility in older listeners with hearing loss: Effects of age, ampliﬁcation, and background
noise. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 18(1), 54–65.
Sperling, A. J., Zhong-Lin, L., Manis, F. R., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2005). Deﬁcits in perceptual
noise exclusion in developmental dyslexia. Nature Neuroscience, 8(7), 862–863.
3
Auditory Processing Disorder: Biological Basis and Treatment Efﬁcacy
79

Strait, D. L., O’Connell, S., Parbery-Clark, A., & Kraus, N. (2013). Musicians’ enhanced neural
differentiation of speech sounds arises early in life: Developmental evidence from ages 3 to 30.
Cerebral Cortex, 24(9), 2512–2521.
Tallal, P. (1980). Auditory temporal perception, phonics, and reading disabilities in children. Brain
and Language, 9(2), 182–198.
Tierney, A., Krizman, J., Skoe, E., Johnston, K., & Kraus, N. (2013). High school music classes
enhance the neural processing of speech. Frontiers in Psychology, 4(855), 1–7.
Tierney, A., Krizman, J., & Kraus, N. (2015). Music training changes the course of adolescent
auditory development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 112(32),
10062–10067.
Tremblay, K., Kraus, N., Carrell, T. D., & McGee, T. (1997). Central auditory system plasticity:
Generalization to novel stimuli following listening training. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 102, 3762.
Vander Werff, K. R., & Burns, K. S. (2011). Brain stem responses to speech in younger and older
adults. Ear and Hearing, 32(2), 168–180.
Walton, J. P., Simon, H., & Frisina, R. D. (2002). Age-related alterations in the neural coding of
envelope periodicities. Journal of Neurophysiology, 88(2), 565–578.
Wang, H., Turner, J. G., Ling, L., Parrish, J. L., Hughes, L. F., & Caspary, D. M. (2009).
Age-related changes in glycine receptor subunit composition and binding in dorsal cochlear
nucleus. Neuroscience, 160(1), 227–239.
Weihing, J., Schochat, E., & Musiek, F. (2012). Ear and electrode effects reduce within-group
variability in middle latency response amplitude measures. International Journal of Audiology,
51(5), 405–412.
White-Schwoch, T., & Kraus, N. (2013). Physiologic discrimination of stop consonants relates to
phonological skills in pre-readers: A biomarker for subsequent reading ability? Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 7(899), 1–9.
White-Schwoch, T., Carr, K. W., Anderson, S., Strait, D. L., & Kraus, N. (2013). Older adults
beneﬁt from music training early in life: Biological evidence for long-term training-driven
plasticity. The Journal of Neuroscience, 33(45), 17667–17674.
White-Schwoch, T., Woodruff Carr, K., Thompson, E. C., Anderson, S., Nicol, T., et al. (2015).
Auditory processing in noise: A preschool biomarker for literacy. PLoS Biology, 13(7),
e1002196.
Wilson, W. J., & Arnott, W. (2012). Using different criteria to diagnose (C)APD: How big a
difference does it make? Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 56(1), 63–70.
Wilson, W. J., Arnott, W., & Henning, C. (2013). A systematic review of electrophysiological
outcomes following auditory training in school-age children with auditory processing deﬁcits.
International Journal of Audiology, 52(11), 721–730.
Wong, P. C. M., Skoe, E., Russo, N. M., Dees, T., & Kraus, N. (2007). Musical experience shapes
human brainstem encoding of linguistic pitch patterns. Nature Neuroscience, 10(4), 420–422.
Wright, B. A., Lombardino, L. J., King, W. M., Puranik, C. S., Leonard, C. M., & Merzenich, M.
M. (1997). Deﬁcits in auditory temporal and spectral resolution in language-impaired children.
Nature, 387(6629), 176–178.
Zeng, F.-G., Kong, Y. Y., Michalewski, H. J., & Starr, A. (2005). Perceptual consequences of
disrupted auditory nerve activity. Journal of Neurophysiology, 93(6), 3050–3063.
Ziegler, J. S., Pech-Georgel, C., George, F., & Lorenzi, C. (2009). Speech-perception-in-noise
deﬁcits in dyslexia. Developmental Science, 12(5), 732–745.
80
N. Kraus and S. Anderson

Chapter 4
Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss
Scott C. Montgomery, Carol A. Bauer, and Edward Lobarinas
Abstract Sudden sensorineural hearing loss (SSNHL) can have varying causes
and etiologies and is considered a syndrome rather than a diagnosis. It is estimated
that a cause is identiﬁed in only 10 % of patients diagnosed with the syndrome.
Historically, there have been several proposed mechanisms for idiopathic SSNHL
and today there are still questions and considerable debate regarding its etiology.
Among the varied proposed mechanisms are immune-mediated disease, viral
infection, vascular abnormalities, or a combination of multiple factors. This chapter
reviews the current state of the science regarding idiopathic SSNHL, diagnosis,
comorbidity, current therapeutic interventions, and emerging opportunities for
disease management and treatment that are based on evidence-based practice. These
include steroid treatment, hyperbaric oxygen therapy, drug therapy for viruses,
intervention for vascular or ischemic etiology, salvage therapy, and posttherapy
rehabilitation in cases of permanent hearing loss as well as the inherent challenges
of providing intervention with varied evidence of efﬁcacy.
Keywords Autoimmune inner ear disease Coagulopathy Herpes Hyperbaric
oxygen  Intratympanic steroids  Mumps  Perilymphatic ﬁstula  Serology 
Salvage  Tinnitus  Vertigo
S.C. Montgomery (&)  C.A. Bauer (&)
Division of Otolaryngology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine,
301 North Eighth St., Springﬁeld, IL 62794, USA
e-mail: smontgomery@siumed.edu
C.A. Bauer
e-mail: cbauer@siumed.edu
E. Lobarinas
Callier Center for Communication Disorders, University of Texas at Dallas,
1966 Inwood Road, Dallas, TX 75256, USA
e-mail: edward.lobarinas@utdallas.edu
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
C.G. Le Prell et al. (eds.), Translational Research in Audiology, Neurotology,
and the Hearing Sciences, Springer Handbook of Auditory Research 58,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-40848-4_4
81

4.1
Introduction
Sudden sensorineural hearing loss (SSNHL) has many causes and etiologies and
therefore is considered a syndrome rather than a diagnosis. It is estimated that a cause is
identiﬁed in only 10 % of patients diagnosed with the syndrome (Schreiber et al.
2010). The lack of a common cause is particularly challenging for translational
research efforts, both in narrowing down potential biogenerators for the disease pro-
cess to guide basic research and for deﬁning inclusion criteria for clinical trials. The
most commonly accepted deﬁnition of SSNHL is based on symptoms rather than on a
speciﬁc pathology. Diagnosis is generally based on the presence of sensorineural
hearing loss greater than 30 dB at three consecutive frequencies in one or both ears on
a standard audiogram occurring over 3 days or less (Stachler et al. 2012). In cases of
unilateral loss, audiometric data are often not present before onset and the 30-dB
differences are measured relative to the opposite ear. Idiopathic sudden sensorineural
hearing loss (ISSNHL) is considered the diagnosis once an appropriate investigation
has been completed and a cause has not been identiﬁed (Stachler et al. 2012).
Historically, several mechanisms have been proposed for ISSNHL, and today there are
still questions and debate regarding its etiology and whether it is immune mediated,
viral, vascular, or a combination of multiple factors. Given these challenges, this
chapter highlights the current state of the basic science, current therapeutic interven-
tions and their relative level of evidence, ethical constraints regarding clinical research
opportunities, and potential strategies to enhance translational research efforts.
4.1.1
Basic Science of SSNHL
Most cases of SSNHL are idiopathic and are classiﬁed based on the reported time
course and severity of symptoms. The current treatment options available, as
described in Sect. 4.5, are used primarily to attenuate and limit inner ear damage as
opposed to addressing the unknown cause of SSNHL. Because the underlying
mechanisms of SSNHL are poorly understood, most attempts at developing animal
models are based on mimicking the symptoms of SSNHL via the introduction of
viruses, vascular abnormalities (Schweinfurth and Cacace 2000), metabolic dis-
turbances (Jing et al. 2006), and a host of other conditions that produce SSNHL-like
symptoms. Similar to other hearing disorders, such as tinnitus and auditory neu-
ropathy, the description of SSNHL as a syndrome is appropriate, and it is likely that
several subtypes exist for which no one single treatment is effective. Further
complicating the efforts of developing animal models are the high spontaneous
recovery rates observed across individuals presenting with SSNHL. In addition,
treatment of patients presenting with SSNHL cannot ethically be withheld or
delayed, thereby limiting both the opportunities and design of clinical trials.
The path forward for basic science will require guidance from collaboration with
clinicians and enhanced classiﬁcation of SSNHL based on biological assays from
82
S.C. Montgomery et al.

presenting patients and comorbid conditions identiﬁed in patients with SSNHL. In
this chapter, we describe the magnitude of this important syndrome, the rationale
and scientiﬁc support for current therapies, and proposed underlying mechanisms.
4.1.2
Epidemiology of SSNHL
The incidence of SSNHL varies across nations but is estimated to be in the range of 4–
160 cases per 100,000 annually. In 2013, a population-based cross-sectional analysis
(Alexander and Harris 2013) estimated an incidence of 27 per 100,000 in the United
States. The study also found that incidence increased with age. Incidence among
people age 65 and older was estimated at 70 per 100,000, data that are consistent with
multiple other studies in Europe and Asia (Wu et al. 2006; Nosrati-Zarenoe et al.
2007; Teranishi et al. 2007). Men in the United States were found to be marginally
more likely to be affected, with a male-to-female ratio of 1.07:1 (Alexander and
Harris 2013). A slightly increased male-to-female incidence has been seen in multiple
older studies outside the United States (Byl 1984; Wu et al. 2006), but a German study
(Klemm et al. 2009) found a female preponderance, with a female-to-male ratio of
1.22:1. The reason for differences between the sexes is unknown, along with dif-
ferences between national studies, but some have speculated that it may be due to
culture differences in self-reporting of disease (Alexander and Harris 2013).
There are estimated to be more than 66,000 cases of SSNHL annually in the United
States alone. Medical evaluation can involve extensive testing and multiple physician
visits across multiple specialties including primary care physicians, emergency
physicians, and otolaryngologists, leading to a signiﬁcant burden on the healthcare
system. Testing typically includes repeated audiometric assessment, magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), and hematologic and serologic
testing depending on the presentation. Consulting services such as cardiology or
neurology may also be utilized in the diagnosis or for follow-up. The disease itself
brings an obvious burden to the patients as well. A unilateral loss caused by SSNHL
impairs sound localization and hearing in background noise. SSNHL also has a sig-
niﬁcant negative impact on quality of life as a result of feelings of exclusion, reduced
well-being, and extensive use of speech perception strategies. This is true even in
patients with only a unilateral loss (Wie et al. 2010). SSNHL occurring in the presence
of an existing age-related hearing loss brings an additional impairment and commu-
nication burden, with concomitant psychosocial effects of social exclusion and reduced
sense of well-being. SSNHL is frequently accompanied by tinnitus and dizziness (Byl
1984), each of which has its own impact on patient health, quality of life, and
healthcare costs. Treatment options and associated costs are highly variable, consistent
with the limited understanding of the pathology and the absence of targeted therapy.
For example, hyperbaric oxygen therapy can be costly and time consuming, requiring
daily sessions for several weeks, potentially taking time away from employment. Drug
regimens can also be expensive and may have an array of side effects (Stachler et al.
2012). Aural rehabilitation for permanent hearing loss includes the expense of hearing
4
Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss
83

aids or surgically implanted devices and the lifelong follow-up maintenance of the
devices. The impact of SSNHL on patients and the healthcare system as a whole is
signiﬁcant. Given the disabling nature of SSNHL, its costs, limited efﬁcacy of its
treatment, and apparent varied etiology there is an urgent need to apply a robust
framework using translational research to move from T0 (basic science) through T1
(clinical insight and Phase 1 clinical trials), T2 (implications for practice via Phase 2
and 3 clinical trials), T3 (Phase 4 clinical trials, dissemination, and outcomes research),
and ultimately T4 (population-level studies and public health). As highlighted in
subsequent sections, the path forward in translation will require signiﬁcant input from
clinicians to optimize both basic science research efforts and clinical trials.
4.2
Clinical Presentation
Although, as stated in Sect. 4.1, SSNHL occurs over 3 days or less (Stachler et al.
2012), the loss frequently occurs over an even shorter time course, and most
commonly, patients report SSNHL occurring during sleep (Mattox and Simmons
1977). Frequent associated symptoms are aural fullness, tinnitus, and vertigo or
disequilibrium (Byl 1984). Unilateral loss is far more common than bilateral loss
(Oh et al. 2007). Approximately 10 % of cases have an identiﬁable cause while the
remaining 90 % are idiopathic (Penido et al. 2009). Spontaneous recovery rates are
estimated to be from 32 to 65 % within 2 weeks of onset (Schreiber et al. 2010).
The longer the duration the hearing loss, the more likely it is to become permanent.
Multiple prognostic indicators are explored in Sect. 4.3.
Bilateral SSNHL, accounting for fewer than 5 % of patients with sudden loss,
may be uniquely different than unilateral SSNHL. Bilateral SSNHL is rarely
idiopathic and may have a lower rate of recovery, in one study estimated at 37.5 %
for bilaterally affected patients compared to 56.5 % for those unilaterally affected
(Oh et al. 2007). Compared to patients with unilateral SSNHL, bilateral SSNHL
was more common in older patients, patients with lipid abnormalities, and patients
with diabetes mellitus (Oh et al. 2007).
4.2.1
Autoimmune Inner Ear Disease and SSNHL
The presentation of autoimmune inner ear disease (AIED) has a signiﬁcant overlap
with SSNHL. At present, however, there is general agreement that these are sep-
arate disorders. AIED typically presents as a rapidly progressive, often ﬂuctuating,
bilateral loss that occurs over weeks to months. A retrospective review (Matsuoka
and Harris 2013) of 47 cases at two tertiary medical centers in the United States
identiﬁed ﬂuctuating hearing loss for more than a year (100 %), tinnitus (95.7 %),
ear pressure (93.6 %), and vestibular symptoms (51.5 %) as the most common
symptoms of AIED. There is no gold standard diagnostic test and therefore AIED is
84
S.C. Montgomery et al.

a clinical diagnosis. Many clinicians consider AIED a heterogeneous syndrome
rather than a speciﬁc diagnosis. There is also a lack of agreement on a treatment
regimen. The most commonly accepted treatment is a 4-week course of high-dose
oral prednisone followed by a gradually decreasing dose known as a taper
(Matsuoka and Harris 2013). The response to steroids is considered to be a critical
diagnostic feature of AIED. Diuretics are often used to control vestibular symp-
toms, with the presumption that an increase in the endolymph volume of the inner
ear, also known as hydrops, is a component of the disease. Drugs that alter the
immune system, such as etanercept and methotrexate, have been tested but studies
have shown no beneﬁt over placebos (Harris et al. 2003; Cohen et al. 2005). The
72-h time frame for rapid hearing loss and presentation of associated symptoms is
the only factor distinguishing the diagnoses of AIED and SSNHL. This somewhat
arbitrary time frame may be inappropriate in light of the limited knowledge of the
pathophysiology of these diseases and the possibly immune-related mechanism of
SSNHL. Despite the lack of success of experimental drugs for AIED in clinical
trials, there may be alternative opportunities to screen potential new drug candidates
in animals based on work on the MRL-lpr mouse, a strain known to develop
multisystemic nonspeciﬁc spontaneous autoimmune disease including degeneration
of the inner ear that is similar to that observed in AIED (Ruckenstein et al. 1993).
A speciﬁc treatment could be subsequently evaluated in clinical trials of individuals
with AIED and SSNHL.
4.2.2
Etiology of Idiopathic SSNHL
There is growing evidence that SSNHL is a multifactorial syndrome with multiple
etiologies rather than a disease with a single etiology. Putative causes of SSNHL are
outlined in Table 4.1. There are numerous theories on the mechanisms ISSNHL,
the most commonly accepted of which are detailed Sects. 4.2.3–4.2.7. As of yet,
there is no direct causal link between any speciﬁc etiology and idiopathic SSNHL.
4.2.3
Membranous Breaks
One of the early theoretical mechanisms of ISSNHL was cochlear trauma with
damage to the inner ear membranes. In 1968 Simmons proposed that rupture of
Reissner’s membrane was the cause of ISSNHL in a series of 15 patients with
sudden onset of hearing loss. Most cases were accompanied by a “pop” or
immediate-onset roaring tinnitus that occurred during strenuous activity, cough, or
another event that increased intracranial pressure. This hypothesis was supported by
two cases in which postmortem pathologic analysis showed evidence of Reissner’s
membrane rupture. Sudden hearing loss occurred in one of the cases as a result of
barotrauma while ﬂying (Gussen 1981).
4
Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss
85

Simmons
(1968)
hypothesized
that
spontaneous
mechanical
rupture
of
Reissner’s membrane would result in a syndrome of sudden hearing loss, tinnitus,
and vertigo (Simmons 1968). Fee observed leakage of perilymph into the middle
ear from the oval window in three patients with SSNHL after head trauma (Fee
1968). Goodhill further developed the link between perilymphatic leaks and
SSNHL with a series of patients presenting with hearing loss after exertion, middle
ear pressure changes, or a spontaneous popping sensation in the ear (Goodhill
1971). He hypothesized that increased middle ear pressure while straining could
result in rupture of the round and oval windows and leakage of perilymph or
perilymph ﬁstula. Alternatively, membrane rupture could occur from transmission
of intracranial pressure to the endocochlear ﬂuid space via an enlarged or patent
cochlear aqueduct or patent internal meatus at the cochlear modiolus.
Membrane breaks and spontaneous perilymphatic ﬁstula may be responsible for
a small proportion of patients with SSNHL. Direct clinical observation does not
support these events as identiﬁable causes in the majority of cases. Membranous
breaks are unlikely the predominant etiology in idiopathic SSHNL given that the
majority of cases are not associated with an increase in activity or intracranial
pressure and instead often occur on awakening from sleep (Chau et al. 2010).
Perilymphatic ﬁstula formation is a known cause of SSNHL after head trauma,
barotrauma, and otologic surgery, but it is likely not the cause of the majority of
cases for the same reasons described earlier. Two histological studies of temporal
bones of patients with SSNHL found no evidence of Reissner’s membrane rupture,
membranous trauma, or perilymphatic ﬁstulae (Schuknecht and Donovan 1986;
Merchant et al. 2005), suggesting an alternative etiology in these instances. These
ﬁndings are consistent with changes in hearing in animals with selective Reissner’s
Table 4.1 Causes of sudden hearing loss
Autoimmune
AIED
Neurologic
Multiple sclerosis
Behçet’s disease
Stroke
Cogan’s syndrome
Systemic lupus
erythematosus
Otologic
Enlarged vestibular
aqueduct
Ménière’s disease
Infectious
HIV
Perilymphatic ﬁstula
Meningitis
Lyme disease
Pharmacologic
Aminoglycosides
Mumps
Chemotherapeutics
Syphilis
Nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs
Toxoplasmosis
Salicylates
Neoplastic
Acoustic neuroma
Traumatic
Surgical/iatrogenic
Cerebellopontine angle
neoplasms
Temporal bone fracture
86
S.C. Montgomery et al.

membrane ruptures. Findings from guinea pigs show less than 10 dB changes,
results suggesting that Reissner’s membrane ruptures alone are unlikely a signiﬁ-
cant contributor to the hearing losses associated with SSHNL (Gyo et al. 1994).
4.2.4
Viral Infection
Viral infections causing damage to auditory structures are well documented in adults.
Otopathology has been linked to a number of agents, including varicella-zoster,
Epstein–Barr, measles virus, and mumps virus. Inﬂammation caused by infection
with or reactivation of a virus has been strongly suspected as one of the main
etiologies of SSNHL, though there are very limited data proving a direct causative
link (Kuhn et al. 2011).
A suggested pathway for viral infection affecting the inner ear structures is from
primary viral infection in the cochlea or cochlear nerve after inoculation via the
bloodstream, cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), or middle ear (Wilson 1986). Alternatively,
SSNHL could be the result of reactivation of a latent viral infection (Wilson 1986).
Several viruses are known to lie dormant within neural tissue and become reacti-
vated at some later point, potentially causing inﬂammation leading to SSNHL
(Fukuda et al. 1994). A third possible mechanism is a combination of viral and
autoimmune etiologies. In this mechanism, a viral infection, either systemic or at a
speciﬁc site outside the inner ear, leads to the creation of an antibody that
cross-reacts with a critical inner ear structure or process (Merchant et al. 2008).
There are multiple serologic studies supporting a viral etiology to SSNHL
(Fukuda et al. 2001; Chau et al. 2010). Live mumps virus was isolated from the
inner ear of a woman who suffered SSNHL in conjunction with mumps infection of
the parotid salivary gland (Westmore et al. 1979). Notably, despite increasing
proportions of the population receiving immunization for mumps, measles, and
rubella, we have not seen a resultant decline in the incidence of SSNHL, suggesting
that these viruses are not likely responsible for the majority of cases. Herpesvirus
particles are known to have a dormant phase in humans that can last the entire
lifetime of the individual (Mandell et al. 2010). It is theoretically possible that
reactivation of one of these viruses could cause SSNHL; however, there are no
laboratory tests available to accurately diagnose viral reactivation. Animal studies
of the effects of viral particle inoculation of the inner ear show histopathology
ﬁndings of leukocytes, neural degeneration, and hemorrhage (Stokroos et al. 1998).
Human histopathological studies have mostly shown atrophy of hair cells and
supporting cells within the organ of Corti along with inconsistent damage to other
structures within the cochlea such as the stria vascularis, tectorial membrane,
cochlear neurons, and the vestibular end organ (Schuknecht and Donovan 1986;
Linthicum et al. 2013). These lesions are similar to those found in temporal bones
of individuals with progressive hearing loss attributed to known viral infections
such as mumps, measles, rubella, or herpes (Merchant et al. 2008). Overall, there is
correlational evidence indicating that viral infection or reactivation may play a role
4
Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss
87

in SSNHL, but there is no evidence that directly links viral infection to SSNHL,
such as histopathological proof of viral particles within the inner ear.
4.2.5
Vascular Occlusion
Vascular occlusion of the vessels supplying the cochlea is another suspected eti-
ology of SSNHL. Two branches of the labyrinthine artery, which arise from the
anterior inferior cerebellar artery, supply the labyrinth and form a capillary network
through the stria vascularis within the cochlea. The acute loss of hearing in SSNHL,
along with its typically unilateral presentation, suggests that an ischemic event in
these small blood vessels is a plausible mechanism. Vascular compromise could
result from acute hemorrhage, occlusion from a traveling blood clot, vascular
disease, decreased blood supply from spasm of blood vessels, or a change in blood
viscosity (Kuhn et al. 2011). There are few data supporting vascular compromise as
the sole explanation of SSNHL, but there is some evidence indicating it may at least
play a role in some of the cases (Greco et al. 2011). In some studies, risk factors
associated with vascular disease and ischemic stroke have been associated with
SSNHL, including hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and cigarette smoking, while
other studies have not found these links. Many of these comorbid conditions are
found in older individuals but SSNHL often affects young, healthy people. A recent
study suggested that altered autonomic regulation plays a role in SSNHL, arguing
that dysfunctional blood pressure modulation may result in short-term blood
pressure ﬂuctuations and reduced cochlear blood ﬂow (Schulz et al. 2014).
Gene analysis has provided evidence for bleeding and clotting disorders as
causes of some cases of SSNHL. Polymorphisms of genes encoding thrombin,
prothrombin, and Factor V Leiden have been associated with SSNHL and are
discussed further in Sect. 4.3.1. Increased concentration of ﬁbrinogen, a critical
component of the clotting cascade, has been thought to contribute to SSNHL in
some cases by increasing blood viscosity. In addition, there is a 1.6 times risk of
stroke among patients suffering from SSNHL, indicating an underlying vascular
abnormality (Patzak et al. 2005).
The labyrinthine artery supplies the cochlea and the vestibular organs. Occlusion
of the labyrinthine artery would be expected to invariably result in auditory and
vestibular dysfunction. In addition, one would expect vascular occlusion to result in
a permanent rather than temporary hearing loss. One of the earliest studies exam-
ining vascular occlusion of the labyrinthine artery demonstrated hearing loss after
1 hour of occlusion. Hearing did not recover when blood ﬂow was restored
(Perlman et al. 1959). Furthermore, histopathologic studies provide only limited
support for a vascular etiology for SSNHL. Fibrosis of the cochlea is the hallmark
ﬁnding in vascular occlusion, as shown in animals after obstruction of the labyr-
inthine artery (Perlman and Kimura 1957; Belal 1979). Examination of temporal
bones from patients who suffered from idiopathic SSNHL rarely reveal ﬁbrosis
(Yoon et al. 1990). A recent study compared temporal bones of seven patients who
88
S.C. Montgomery et al.

suffered known vascular occlusion secondary to surgical procedures and the tem-
poral bones of 11 patients with a history SSNHL. Fibrosis was present in six out of
the seven temporal bones of patients with an associated vascular event but not in
any of the temporal bones with SSNHL. Based on these ﬁndings, the authors
concluded that vascular insufﬁciency was less likely a cause of this disorder
(Linthicum et al. 2013).
4.2.6
Autoimmune Mechanisms
The autoimmune or immunologic hypothesis suggests that damage to the auditory
system is mediated by autoantibody, immune complex, or T-cell mechanisms
similar to the theoretical mechanism of AIED. This hypothesis is loosely supported
by the steroid-responsive nature of SSNHL and associated elevation of the ery-
throcyte sedimentation rate, a nonspeciﬁc marker of inﬂammation (Chau et al.
2010). Antibodies that cross-react with inner ear proteins could potentially be
formed directly or result from a reaction triggered by infection with a virus or other
microorganism (Merchant et al. 2008). Autoantibodies to several inner ear–speciﬁc
antigens have been detected in patients with SSNHL. Choline transporter–like
protein 2 (CTL2), a glycoprotein found on supporting cells, has been identiﬁed as
one possible target of an autoimmune reaction. In 9 of 20 patients with SSNHL,
antibodies to CTL2 were detected on serologic testing (Disher et al. 1997). Other
antigens within the inner ear that potentially are targets of autoantibodies include
cochlin (Solares et al. 2004), beta-actin (Boulassel et al. 2000), beta-tectorin
(Solares et al. 2004), and type 2 collagen (Yoo et al. 1983). A murine model of
immune-mediated hearing loss using beta-tectorin and cochlin supports the idea of
leukocyte inﬁltration of the cochlea as the mechanism causing hearing loss (Solares
et al. 2004). Although elevated levels of antibodies to these antigens have been
detected in association with autoimmune hearing loss, there are no large-scale
studies showing their absence in a normal-hearing population or their presence in
SSNHL. Others have called for direct evidence of these autoantibodies acting
within the cochlea. Longitudinal studies examining titers over time as the hearing of
patients with SSNHL ﬂuctuates would add valuable evidence in support of the role
of these antibodies in SSNHL (Merchant et al. 2008).
There is also evidence suggesting a more systemic autoimmune pathology may
be involved in SSNHL. A group of autoantibodies targeting endothelial cell pro-
teins, anti-endothelial cell antibodies (AECAs), may trigger vascular-mediated
damage to the inner ear. A systematic review examined the evidence for the role
AECAs and several other systemic autoantibodies in idiopathic SSNHL (Chau et al.
2010). Three of seven studies reported a statistically signiﬁcant elevation of sys-
temic autoantibodies in patients with SSNHL (Cadoni et al. 2002; Garcia Berrocal
et al. 2002; Suslu et al. 2009). These antibodies included rheumatoid factor,
antinuclear antibodies, anticardiolipin antibodies, and anti HSP-70 antibodies.
Other immune factors, including decreased tumor necrosis factor-a and T-helper
4
Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss
89

cell populations, have been linked to SSNHL (Chau et al. 2010). The main critique
of many of the ﬁndings is the lack of speciﬁcity to the inner ear.
Overall, there is converging evidence that suggests an altered immunity in
SSNHL but as of yet there is no established direct causative link. As with the other
possible etiologies of SSNHL, an autoimmune phenomenon may be responsible for
only a portion of the syndrome or be one piece of a larger pathophysiological
explanation that has yet to be elucidated.
4.2.7
Cellular Stress Response
Merchant et al. (2008) proposed that inappropriate activation of stress response
pathways within the cochlea are responsible for idiopathic SSNHL. Transcription
factors, such as nuclear factor-j B (NFjB), may be pathologically activated by a
variety of triggers such as viral particles, metabolic stress, or systemic inﬂammatory
disorders. For example, a viral infection could lead to the creation of a circulating
ligand that activates the cellular stress response without direct infection of the
cochlea. This could provide an explanation for the lack of evidence of viral
infection in temporal bones of individuals with idiopathic SSNHL. Furthermore, it
is plausible that such a stress response could be localized to only one end organ,
resulting in unilateral effects. The efﬁcacy of steroids in treating SSNHL also
supports this theory, as steroids are known inhibitors of NFjB (Amsterdam et al.
2002). Although this proposed etiology does theoretically explain SSNHL in many
cases, as of yet there is no direct evidence of any speciﬁc transcription factor
involved in the pathophysiology of SSNHL. There is also a lack of pathologic
evidence from human temporal bone studies that speciﬁcally implicates an altered
cellular immune response.
4.3
Prognosis
Spontaneous recovery rates for SSNHL are well documented, and several factors
have been associated with clinical outcomes. These include patient demographics,
audiologic ﬁndings, duration of hearing loss, and associated symptoms of vestibular
dysfunction. Mattox and Simmons (1977) reported a 65 % recovery rate in a
prospective study of patients presenting with SSNHL. Factors that were predictive
of better recovery included the slope of the initial audiogram, hearing at 8 kHz, and
the erythrocyte sedimentation rate inﬂammatory marker. If patients did have
recovery of hearing, most showed hearing improvement within the ﬁrst 14 days. In
one study, a 40 % recovery to within 20 dB of the opposite ear was reported in
patients who declined treatment (Guyot and Thielen 2000). Older age has been
implicated as a negative predictor in many studies. A recent retrospective review
comparing adults and children found that patients younger than the age of 18 were
90
S.C. Montgomery et al.

more likely to partially and completely recover hearing (Chung et al. 2015).
Profound hearing loss on initial audiometry was a negative predictor for recovery in
both children and adults. Patients with higher thresholds at presentation tend to
have worse outcomes in terms of hearing recovery. A 2014 study found that
patients presenting with profound hearing loss, deﬁned as hearing threshold of
90 dB or greater on pure-tone audiometry at four speciﬁc frequencies, had only a
3 % chance of hearing recovery (Wen et al. 2014).
The predictive value of other vestibular and audiologic diagnostic tests such as
electronystagmography (ENG) and otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) is variable. There
is some evidence linking abnormal ENG ﬁndings with poor recovery of hearing
(Wilson et al. 1980; Xenellis et al. 2006), but this is not a universal ﬁnding
(Fetterman et al. 1996). Otoacoustic emission abnormalities have a similarly weak
evidence base, suggesting only a possible association with negative hearing out-
comes. A small but thorough 2015 prospective study of 15 patients with SSNHL
found that patients with detectable transient evoked OAEs and distortion product
OAEs at 1 week follow-up were more likely to have hearing improvement at
3 months postpresentation compared to those with no response at the 1-week
follow-up (Shupak et al. 2014). Although further investigation is needed with larger
studies, OAEs show promise as prognosticators in ISSNHL and may provide useful
information for clinicians and patients.
There have been efforts to develop predictive models of hearing outcomes for
patients with SSNHL. A predictive model or algorithm could be useful in coun-
seling patients and may offer valuable information to clinicians making treatment
decisions. One difﬁculty with this approach is that modeling is typically based on a
unique population of patients with SSNHL with its own mixture of presenting
symptoms and risk factors. Generalization and application of the constructed model
to other populations may have limitations. There is also no general agreement
regarding relevant factors for inclusion. There is variable evidence supporting each
prognostic factor. Based on each patient population, authors developing predictive
models have found different statistically signiﬁcant prognostic indicators (Mattox
and Simmons 1977; Byl 1984; Suzuki et al. 2014). A recent multivariate analysis
was able to predict posttreatment hearing level within a 40 dB range with 70 %
certainty (Suzuki et al. 2014). This wide range and relatively low level of certainty
indicate the unpredictability and limited value of the prognostic indicators that have
been identiﬁed thus far. If creation of such a model or algorithm is possible, it will
take a large multi-institutional study or meta-analysis.
4.3.1
Risk Factors
A
number
of
risk
factors
for
developing
SSNHL
have
been
identiﬁed.
Predominantly, diseases of the cardiovascular and circulatory system have been
associated with slightly increased risks of developing SSNHL. In addition, patients
who have had SSNHL are at increased risk for subsequently developing myocardial
4
Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss
91

infarction, and some speculate a similar disease process between the two diseases
(Keller et al. 2013; Lin et al. 2013b). Development of erectile dysfunction, another
disorder with an etiology based on impaired perfusion and microvascular damage,
is also increased in patients who have suffered from SSNHL (Hsu et al. 2013).
Patients with chronic kidney disease, particularly those with comorbid diabetes,
have also been found to be at increased risk for SSNHL (Lin et al. 2013a). As
discussed in Sect. 4.2.5, the association of circulatory disease combined with the
sudden nature of the disease gives credence to an ischemic etiology for SSNHL.
Some of the more recently examined factors have included Factor V Leiden, pro-
thrombin, thrombin, lipid proﬁles, obesity, and proinﬂammatory polymorphisms
(Hiramatsu et al. 2012). In general, however, the strength of evidence implicating
these risk factors is weak.
Dyslipidemia has been implicated as a possible risk factor in SSNHL and
hypothesized to play a role in an increased inﬂammatory state in the inner ear.
Several studies have shown that lowering of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
(LDL) levels by apheresis can potentially have positive effects on hearing recovery
in certain patients (Bianchin et al. 2010; Canis et al. 2012). In contrast, a 2015
meta-analysis by Chang et al. examined six case control studies but could not
establish serum LDL or total cholesterol abnormalities as prognostic indicators for
SSNHL owing to a relatively small number of studies with wide variability in
results among them (Chang et al. 2015).
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) is a key enzyme involved in
folate metabolism and polymorphisms of this gene cause increased plasma levels of
homocysteine, a known prothrombotic factor. Polymorphisms of this gene have
been proposed as possible risk factors in developing SSNHL, suggesting the altered
enzyme may lead to a hypercoagulative state and thrombosis or ischemia of the
inner ear. Meta-analysis of six studies found signiﬁcantly increased risk of devel-
oping SSNHL among carriers of the C677T MTHFR polymorphism in European
populations. No statistically signiﬁcant risk was identiﬁed among Asian populations
(Shu et al. 2014).
Overall, there is a growing body of evidence suggesting cardiovascular and
prothrombotic risk factors are associated with SSNHL. As of yet, there are not
enough data to recommend routine laboratory screening tests for any particular
polymorphism. This is a developing area of research that may have clinical utility in
the future and could play an important role in developing clinical trials for indi-
viduals identiﬁed as having cardiovascular abnormalities at the time of reporting
SSNHL.
92
S.C. Montgomery et al.

4.4
Diagnostics and Evaluation
4.4.1
History and Physical
All patients with complaints of sudden hearing loss should undergo a thorough
history and physical examination. This is not only clinically prudent but could also
reveal speciﬁc patterns identifying potential subtypes of SSNHL. It is important to
look for clinical features that are associated with an identiﬁable cause of the
patient’s hearing loss. Historical elements such as trauma, ear pain, ear drainage,
fever, and neurologic symptoms can potentially identify speciﬁc pathology.
A physical examination including otoscopy is strongly recommended to search for
signs of a treatable cause of the hearing loss such as conductive hearing loss.
A neurologic exam is also recommended in the initial workup (Stachler et al. 2012)
to help determine if the hearing loss is due to an ischemic event such as a stroke or a
transient ischemic attack.
Pure-tone air and bone conduction audiometry should be performed on every
patient with suspected SSNHL to determine the degree and conﬁguration of the
hearing loss. The 2012 American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery (AAO-HNS) clinical practice guidelines (Stachler et al. 2012) recommend
ear-speciﬁc speech recognition thresholds, word recognition scores, tympanometry,
acoustic reﬂex thresholds, and acoustic reﬂex decay. These measures are crucial to
obtaining the correct diagnosis and guide treatment for each patient who presents
with SSNHL symptoms.
In addition to their use in diagnosis and as prognosis assessment indicators,
audiometric ﬁndings are critical for follow-up of patients with SSNHL. Serial
audiometry is an important part of monitoring the response to treatment and for
recognizing progression of hearing loss in the affected or a new loss in the unaf-
fected ear, and data regarding the time course and pattern of changes can help in the
design of clinical trials. With respect to management, changes in hearing should be
assessed within 6 months of initial diagnosis of SSNHL (Stachler et al. 2012) and
in patients without complete recovery auditory rehabilitation or assistive devices
may be needed.
In addition to inner ear damage, SSNHL could be associated with retrocochlear
disease. In these cases, ABR testing is useful for evaluating pathology affecting the
cochlear nerve and central auditory pathway, such as an acoustic neuroma, par-
ticularly when patients are unable to undergo MRI. One study estimated the sen-
sitivity of ABR at 71 % with a speciﬁcity of 74 % in patients with asymmetric
sensorineural hearing loss and MRI-conﬁrmed retrocochlear tumors (Cueva 2004).
The gold standard for screening of retrocochlear pathology in patients with
asymmetric hearing loss continues to be MRI with gadolinium contrast enhance-
ment. However, ABR can provide a useful alternative in certain scenarios in which
MRI is contraindicated, such as in patients with metal implants and claustrophobia.
Otoacoustic emissions (Shupak et al. 2014) and electronystagmography have
been implicated as prognostic factors in some studies, but there is insufﬁcient
4
Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss
93

evidence to support their routine use in patients with SSNHL. Importantly, neither
normal ENG nor otoacoustic emission ﬁndings can reliably rule out retrocochlear
pathology. Brainstem auditory evoked potentials (BAEPs) and electrocochleogra-
phy (ECOG) recordings have been shown to be abnormal in patients with ISSNHL
(Habib et al. 2011) and could be used as objective measures in clinical trials. It is
worth noting that whereas BAEP and ECOG can aid in the diagnosis of ISSNHL,
there is no evidence that they provide any additional prognostic value over
behavioral audiometry.
4.4.2
Laboratory Testing
There are no universal laboratory tests or imaging techniques that are diagnostic for
idiopathic SSNHL or have speciﬁc utility for directing targeted therapy. This does
not imply that laboratory testing should never be done in SSNHL. If history,
physical exam, or other testing suggests a particular underlying disease process, it
may be wise to perform laboratory tests and these could aid in identifying subtypes
of SSNHL. Diagnostically, it is also important to perform these tests because some
forms of SSNHL can arise from infectious causes. In these cases, there is often
historical or demographic information that would guide the clinician to conduct
further diagnostic testing.
There is active research in the area of identifying new risk factors and prognostic
factors associated with SSNHL. Given the possibility of increased risk of acute
myocardial infarction in patients who have suffered from SSNHL and the associ-
ation of several cardiovascular risk factors with SSNHL (Lin et al. 2012), some
authors suggest further laboratory investigation in patients with a family history of
cardiac disease. However, the widespread use of laboratory-based screening tests
under these conditions would likely yield many false positives and would not be
cost effective. Several hematologic genetic and nongenetic laboratory studies of the
circulatory system have been examined for their association with SSNHL. In the
future, these may act as useful markers for disease, but as of now, the studies
supporting individual laboratory tests have not provided enough evidence to make a
recommendation in support of routine testing.
4.4.3
Imaging
The classic pattern of hearing loss from vestibular schwannoma is a slow pro-
gressive decline, and a sudden loss is uncommon, occurring in only 10 % of cases.
Nevertheless, the possibility of retrocochlear pathology as the cause of SSNHL
must be considered. MRI of the internal auditory canals, brain, and brainstem with
gadolinium has a high sensitivity for detecting vestibular schwannomas and is
considered the most sensitive test for detecting retrocochlear pathology in general
94
S.C. Montgomery et al.

(Fortnum et al. 2009; Stachler et al. 2012). A recent meta-analysis suggests that the
presence of a high 3-D ﬂuid-attenuated inversion-recovery (FLAIR) MRI signal in
the inner ear of patients with ISSNHL indicated a more severe initial hearing loss
and was associated with a higher incidence of vertigo. These results suggest that
MRI ﬁndings may be a strong predictor of poorer prognosis (Gao and Chi 2014).
Given the time course and pattern of hearing loss associated with vestibular
schwannoma and its readily identiﬁable cause, clinical trials for SSNHL should
screen out or subtype individuals with signs of retrocochlear pathology.
4.5
Treatment
Treatment in cases of SSNHL due to a known etiology will vary based on the
speciﬁc etiology. The information in this section reviews current treatment of
ISSNHL and the relative strength of evidence in support of each of the
interventions.
4.5.1
Steroids
Systemic corticosteroids, either alone or in combination with intratympanic ster-
oids, are the most common treatments for ISSNHL. The speciﬁc mechanism of
action of steroids within the cochlea is not known, but they are presumed to
decrease inﬂammation as they do elsewhere in the body (Tabuchi et al. 2011). The
typical dosing regimen is 1 mg/kg/day of oral prednisone up to 60 mg daily for 10–
14 days given in a single dose (Stachler et al. 2012). Extensive research, including
multiple meta-analyses and a Cochrane review, has examined the efﬁcacy of ster-
oids in treatment of SSNHL. Wilson et al. (1980) ﬁrst described the efﬁcacy of
systemic steroids in improving hearing outcomes, and this study is still referenced
frequently today despite multiple larger studies with arguably better methodology
ﬁnding contrasting results (Crane et al. 2015). A 2006 Cochrane review with
updates in 2009 and 2013 had three trials meet the inclusion criteria, all of which
were double blind and placebo controlled. Two trials showed no signiﬁcant
improvement with steroid administration, whereas the other showed signiﬁcant
hearing improvement in 61 % of the steroid-treated group and only 32 % in the
control participants. The recommendation for steroid use was inconclusive because
of the contradictory results from these studies (Wei et al. 2013). A 2014
meta-analysis (Crane et al. 2015) examined the same three articles for systemic
steroid therapy versus placebo and found no statistically signiﬁcant improvement in
hearing outcome. The 2012 AAO-HNS clinical practice guidelines offered no
strong recommendations for or against systemic steroids for treatment of ISSNHL,
stating that clinicians may offer this initial treatment. This conclusion was based on
the relatively low risk of steroid treatment compared to even a small possible beneﬁt
4
Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss
95

of improved hearing, particularly in patients presenting with a profound loss. The
current practice of systemic steroid treatment is not well supported because of a
proven beneﬁt, but because of the relatively low risk of treatment, this approach
continues to be common practice owing to a possible therapeutic beneﬁt. Given the
mixed reports on systemic steroid treatment and the potential heterogeneity of
ISSNHL, additional studies or analyses could be performed with careful selection
of patients. It is possible that a speciﬁc subtype of ISSNHL could beneﬁt signiﬁ-
cantly from treatment, whereas others may be unresponsive.
Intratympanic steroid administration has also been studied extensively. The
potential beneﬁt of this route of administration is the increased concentration near
the suspected site of disease and the lack of systemic symptoms that accompany
oral steroids. Consequently, this approach may offer an alternative to patients
unable to tolerate systemic therapy. The risks of intratympanic steroid injection
include the pain of the injection, transient vertigo, infection, and tympanic mem-
brane perforation. The concentration of steroid and frequency of administration
varies widely among authors. There is evidence based on histology studies in
guinea pigs that intratympanic steroids may result in higher concentrations of
steroid in the cochlea and even improve cochlear blood ﬂow (Shirwany et al. 1998).
A meta-analysis examining intratympanic steroids versus systemic corticosteroids
found no signiﬁcant difference in outcomes (Crane et al. 2015). Of six trials
meeting inclusion criteria, only one showed a beneﬁt of intratympanic steroids over
systemic steroids for initial treatment of SSNHL. These results were similar to a
2012 meta-analysis (Garavello et al. 2012). The 2012 AAO-HNS clinical practice
guidelines offered no strong recommendations for or against intratympanic steroids
for treatment of ISSNHL for the same reasons as mentioned earlier in this section.
4.5.2
Hyperbaric Oxygen
Hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) therapy was ﬁrst identiﬁed as a possible treatment for
SSNHL and tinnitus in the 1960s. The therapeutic concept is rooted in the theoretical
mechanism of inner ear ischemia causing hearing loss (Bennett et al. 2012). Therapy
involves the administration of 100 % oxygen at a pressure greater than 1 atmosphere
in a sealed chamber to deliver high oxygen content to a patient’s tissues. The usual
course is 5–40 sessions of 1- to 2-hours treatments over the course of several weeks.
Risks of undergoing HBO therapy include damage to the lungs, ears, and sinuses
from the pressure change along with temporary vision change, claustrophobia, and
oxygen poisoning. Other negatives of HBO include the disruption to the patient’s
daily life given the length and frequency of the therapy along with a high cost.
A 2012 Cochrane review examined seven randomized controlled trials and found a
22 % increase in the possibility of hearing improvement following HBO therapy
along with a signiﬁcant improvement (15.6 dB) in average pure-tone audiometric
thresholds. Given its low risk and potential for improvement of hearing, the 2012
AAO-HNS clinical practice guidelines stated that clinicians may offer adjunct HBO
96
S.C. Montgomery et al.

therapy up to 3 months after diagnosis but warned that the data supporting this
therapy are limited and have signiﬁcant shortcomings.
4.5.3
Other Pharmacologic Therapy
A plethora of pharmacologic agents have been tried in the treatment of ISSNHL,
and whereas many have showed positive effects in small studies, these same agents
have been subsequently shown to be ineffective in larger studies and meta-analyses.
Viral infection–mediated inﬂammation is one of the more prominent etiologic
theories for ISSNHL, and thus extensive research has been performed on antiviral
therapy. A 2012 Cochrane systematic review included four randomized trials
comparing steroid treatment with steroid plus antiviral treatment (Awad et al.
2012). None of the four studies found statistically signiﬁcant differences in hearing
outcomes between the two groups. This ﬁnding was in agreement with a previous
systematic review and meta-analysis (Conlin and Parnes 2007). Given this evi-
dence, antiviral therapy should not be used routinely in the treatment of ISSNHL.
The vascular or ischemic etiology for ISSNHL has also led to several targeted
pharmaceutical studies. Multiple vasoactive drugs have been used based on the
circulatory and cardiovascular system risk factors associated with ISSNHL.
A Cochrane review concluded a lack of signiﬁcant beneﬁt for these pharmacologic
agents because of too poor methodology in the identiﬁed studies along with
heterogeneity of results, despite all three studies showing evidence of hearing
improvement relative to placebo (Agarwal and Pothier 2009). The 2012 AAO-HNS
clinical practice guidelines agreed with the ﬁndings of the Cochrane reviews and
recommended against routine use of antivirals, thrombolytics, vasodilators,
vasoactive substances, or antioxidants in the treatment of SSNHL.
4.5.4
Salvage Therapy
Salvage therapy is treatment given after a failure to respond to initial treatment. Many
of the same agents used for initial treatment have also been used for salvage therapy,
the most successful of which is intratympanic steroid injection. A recent meta-analysis
of six studies found a signiﬁcant treatment effect of intratympanic steroid injection
with an odd’s ratio of 6.04 (Crane et al. 2015). These ﬁndings are conﬁrmed by an
earlier meta-analysis analyzing many of the same studies. Although this result is
encouraging, there is a cautionary tone from the authors, who express concern that
certain studies with positive ﬁndings could be considered outliers given their ques-
tionable reliability and perhaps should not have been included in the meta-analysis
A
recent
prospective
randomized
trial
compared
salvage
therapy
with
intratympanic steroid injection to HBO therapy (Cvorovic et al. 2013). As expected,
both HBO therapy and intratympanic steroids led to an improvement in hearing
4
Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss
97

recovery. In addition, patients with hearing thresholds less than 81 dB and age
younger than 60 years receiving HBO therapy tended to have better hearing out-
comes than patients with profound hearing loss and those older than 60 years of
age. These ﬁndings suggest that both HBO therapy and intratympanic steroid
injections are viable salvage therapy options for individuals with SSNHL in select
patient populations. Another study compared HBO therapy, intratympanic steroid
injection, and combination therapy in patients with refractory SSNHL (Yang et al.
2013). Their ﬁndings corroborate the early studies showing beneﬁt in all three
experimental groups. They also found that combined therapy resulted in greater
improvement in word recognition scores, hearing gain, and rate of recovery com-
pared to the other groups, suggesting combination therapy may be the most efﬁ-
cacious treatment option for salvage therapy. Further randomized prospective trials
are needed to elicit the true therapeutic value of these treatments.
4.5.5
Counseling and Ampliﬁcation
It is recommended that patients who fail to respond to treatment and suffer permanent
loss from SSNHL should receive counseling from a clinician and be provided with
rehabilitation resources, including information on assistive listening devices and
hearing aids. Even a unilateral hearing loss results in signiﬁcant disability that impacts
social interactions and communication (Wie et al. 2010). At a minimum, clinicians
should provide information counseling their patients regarding appropriate treatment
options and outcomes. It has been shown that professional counseling can also
ameliorate the self-perceived handicap (Hawkins 2005). Many patients with SSNHL
experience tinnitus, which is also perceived as a handicap (Chiossoine-Kerdel et al.
2000), and thus referral to audiologists or other professionals trained in tinnitus
management is recommended. Clinical trials should be used to evaluate which
rehabilitation strategy or protocol is most beneﬁcial to these patients.
4.5.6
Clinical and Experimental Signiﬁcance
The various clinical studies presented throughout this chapter have shown weak or
conﬂicting evidence for existing SSNHL treatment. Whereas no treatment reliably
reaches statistical signiﬁcance, it appears that subsets of patients have been helped
by some of these therapies. In some cases, there has been substantial attenuation of
SSNHL, so it may be premature to abandon these treatments. Conversely, trial and
error of varied treatments with weak evidence, despite good intentions, is not good
long-term clinical practice. As a result, there is an urgent need for additional
research that is fueled by collaborative efforts from clinicians, basic scientists, and
translational scientists. Among the goals will be identifying responder subtypes and
common pathophysiology to better design clinical trials that determine both
98
S.C. Montgomery et al.

statistical and clinically relevant efﬁcacy. This second point is essential, as a sta-
tistically signiﬁcant effect could be marginal or clinically irrelevant if the effect size
is small. Future clinical trials could initially focus on identiﬁed subtypes who are
more likely to respond and progressively expand to larger groups. In cases in which
treatments fail, additional research is also needed to determine the most efﬁcacious
rehabilitative approaches based on relevant research ﬁndings.
4.6
Summary
As a disorder, SSNHL has provoked controversy in its deﬁnition as well as treat-
ment. Much of the controversy arises from the challenges of studying SSNHL. In a
clinical setting, with such a high rate of spontaneous recovery, it is ethically difﬁcult
to offer invasive, costly, or risky treatments. This same dilemma pervades much of
the research in SSNHL. While considering the high rate of spontaneous recovery,
clinicians must also weigh the morbidity of a possible permanent hearing loss. The
clinician and patient must choose between a limited number of treatment options
with strong scientiﬁc evidence and other treatments with low risk and weaker
evidence but which have the potential to beneﬁt the patient.
Despite being ﬁrst described in 1944, the etiology of SSNHL is still a mystery.
Since the 1940s, a tremendous body of research has been developed, yet we have
found very little concrete evidence suggesting one potential cause over another and
also very little information that can improve patient outcomes. Although this is
somewhat
discouraging,
modern
research
techniques,
from
basic
science
advancements to mining large patient databases, provide an opportunity to make
progress where it was previously not possible. With current research exploring
nearly every facet of this disorder, there is hope that we can soon learn to identify
patients at higher risk for SSNHL and effectively treat those who develop hearing
loss with evidence-based therapies.
Although clinical trials have failed to conclusively identify efﬁcacious treatment,
there is some evidence that steroids, HBO, and vasoactive compounds may help a
subgroup of patients. These subgroups present an enormous research opportunity in
potentially identifying underlying mechanisms or for developing inclusion criteria
for targeted therapies, information that is particularly relevant in T0 through T2.
Ultimately, the success of future treatments will largely depend on robust col-
laborations between clinicians, who are in a position to collect valuable data that
can be used to subtype various forms of SSNHL, and their basic science coun-
terparts, who can then take these ﬁndings and feed them forward through the
translational process.
Compliance with Ethics Requirements
Carol Bauer declares she has no conﬂict of interest.
Scott Montgomery declares he has no conﬂict of interest.
Edward Lobarinas declares no conﬂict of interest.
4
Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss
99

References
Agarwal, L., & Pothier, D. D. (2009). Vasodilators and vasoactive substances for idiopathic
sudden sensorineural hearing loss. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 4,
CD003422.
Alexander, T. H., & Harris, J. P. (2013). Incidence of sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Otology
& Neurotology, 34(9), 1586–1589.
Amsterdam, A., Tajima, K., & Sasson, R. (2002). Cell-speciﬁc regulation of apoptosis by
glucocorticoids: Implication to their anti-inﬂammatory action. Biochemical Pharmacology, 64
(5–6), 843–850.
Awad, Z., Huins, C., & Pothier, D. D. (2012). Antivirals for idiopathic sudden sensorineural
hearing loss. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 8, CD006987.
Belal, A., Jr. (1979). The effects of vascular occlusion on the human inner ear. The Journal of
Laryngology and Otology, 93(10), 955–968.
Bennett, M. H., Kertesz, T., Perleth, M., Yeung, P., & Lehm, J. P. (2012). Hyperbaric oxygen for
idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing loss and tinnitus. The Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews, 10, CD004739.
Bianchin, G., Russi, G., Romano, N., & Fioravanti, P. (2010). Treatment with HELP-apheresis in
patients suffering from sudden sensorineural hearing loss: A prospective, randomized,
controlled study. The Laryngoscope, 120(4), 800–807.
Boulassel, M. R., Tomasi, J. P., Deggouj, N., & Gersdorff, M. (2000). Identiﬁcation of beta-actin
as a candidate autoantigen in autoimmune inner ear disease. Clinical Otolaryngology and
Allied Sciences, 25(6), 535–541.
Byl, F. M., Jr. (1984). Sudden hearing loss: Eight years’ experience and suggested prognostic
table. The Laryngoscope, 94(5 Pt 1), 647–661.
Cadoni, G., Fetoni, A. R., Agostino, S., De Santis, A., Manna, R., et al. (2002). Autoimmunity in
sudden sensorineural hearing loss: Possible role of anti-endothelial cell autoantibodies. Acta
Oto-Laryngologica Supplementum, 548, 30–33.
Canis, M., Heigl, F., & Suckfuell, M. (2012). Fibrinogen/LDL apheresis is a promising rescue
therapy for sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Clinical Research in Cardiology Supplements, 7,
36–40.
Chang, I. J., Kang, C. J., Yueh, C. Y., Fang, K. H., Yeh, R. M., & Tsai, Y. T. (2015). The
relationship between serum lipids and sudden sensorineural hearing loss: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. PloS ONE, 10(4), e0121025.
Chau, J. K., Lin, J. R., Atashband, S., Irvine, R. A., & Westerberg, B. D. (2010). Systematic
review of the evidence for the etiology of adult sudden sensorineural hearing loss. The
Laryngoscope, 120(5), 1011–1021.
Chiossoine-Kerdel, J. A., Baguley, D. M., Stoddart, R. L., & Moffat, D. A. (2000). An
investigation of the audiologic handicap associated with unilateral sudden sensorineural
hearing loss. The American Journal of Otology, 21(5), 645–651.
Chung, J. H., Cho, S. H., Jeong, J. H., Park, C. W., & Lee, S. H. (2015). Multivariate analysis of
prognostic factors for idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing loss in children. The
Laryngoscope, 125(9), 2209–2215.
Cohen, S., Shoup, A., Weisman, M. H., & Harris, J. (2005). Etanercept treatment for autoimmune
inner ear disease: Results of a pilot placebo-controlled study. Otology & Neurotology, 26(5),
903–907.
Conlin, A. E., & Parnes, L. S. (2007). Treatment of sudden sensorineural hearing loss: II.
A meta-analysis. Archives of Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery, 133(6), 582–586.
Crane, R. A., Camilon, M., Nguyen, S., & Meyer, T. A. (2015). Steroids for treatment of sudden
sensorineural hearing loss: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. The Laryngoscope,
125(1), 209–217.
Cueva, R. A. (2004). Auditory brainstem response versus magnetic resonance imaging for the
evaluation of asymmetric sensorineural hearing loss. The Laryngoscope, 114(10), 1686–1692.
100
S.C. Montgomery et al.

Cvorovic, L., Jovanovic, M. B., Milutinovic, Z., Arsovic, N., & Djeric, D. (2013). Randomized
prospective trial of hyperbaric oxygen therapy and intratympanic steroid injection as salvage
treatment of sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Otology & Neurotology, 34(6), 1021–1026.
Disher, M. J., Ramakrishnan, A., Nair, T. S., Miller, J. M., Telian, S. A., et al. (1997). Human
autoantibodies and monoclonal antibody KHRI-3 bind to a phylogenetically conserved
inner-ear-supporting cell antigen. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 830, 253–265.
Fee, G. A. (1968). Traumatic perilymphatic ﬁstulas. Archives of Otolaryngology, 88(5), 477–480.
Fetterman, B. L., Saunders, J. E., & Luxford, W. M. (1996). Prognosis and treatment of sudden
sensorineural hearing loss. The American Journal of Otology, 17(4), 529–536.
Fortnum, H., O’Neill, C., Taylor, R., Lenthall, R., Nikolopoulos, T., et al. (2009). The role of
magnetic resonance imaging in the identiﬁcation of suspected acoustic neuroma: A systematic
review of clinical and cost effectiveness and natural history. Health Technology Assessment, 13
(18), iii–iv, ix–xi, 1–154.
Fukuda, S., Furuta, Y., Takasu, T., Suzuki, S., Inuyama, Y., & Nagashima, K. (1994). The
signiﬁcance
of
herpes
viral
latency
in
the
spiral
ganglia.
Acta
Oto-Laryngologica
Supplementum, 514, 108–110.
Fukuda, S., Chida, E., Kuroda, T., Kashiwamura, M., & Inuyama, Y. (2001). An anti-mumps IgM
antibody level in the serum of idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Auris, Nasus,
Larynx, 28(Suppl.), S3–S5.
Gao, Z., & Chi, F. L. (2014). The clinical value of three-dimensional ﬂuid-attenuated inversion
recovery magnetic resonance imaging in patients with idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing
loss: A meta-analysis. Otology & Neurotology, 35(10), 1730–1735.
Garavello, W., Galluzzi, F., Gaini, R. M., & Zanetti, D. (2012). Intratympanic steroid treatment for
sudden deafness: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Otology & Neurotology, 33
(5), 724–729.
Garcia Berrocal, J. R., Ramirez-Camacho, R., Vargas, J. A., & Millan, I. (2002). Does the
serological testing really play a role in the diagnosis immune-mediated inner ear disease? Acta
Oto-Laryngologica, 122(3), 243–248.
Goodhill, V. (1971). Sudden deafness and round window rupture. The Laryngoscope, 81(9),
1462–1474.
Greco, A., Fusconi, M., Gallo, A., Marinelli, C., Macri, G. F., & De Vincentiis, M. (2011). Sudden
sensorineural hearing loss: An autoimmune disease? Autoimmunity Reviews, 10(12), 756–761.
Gussen, R. (1981). Sudden hearing loss associated with cochlear membrane rupture: Two human
temporal bone reports. Archives of Otolaryngology, 107(10), 598–600.
Guyot, J. P., & Thielen, K. (2000). [Evolution of sudden deafness without treatment].
Schweizerische medizinische Wochenschrift. Supplementum, 116, 93S–96S.
Gyo, K., Kobayashi, T., & Yanagihara, N. (1994). Effects of combined rupture of Reissner’s
membrane and the round window on hearing in the guinea pig. Acta Oto-Laryngologica
Supplementum, 514, 55–58.
Habib, S. S., Husain, A., Omar, S. A., & Al Drees, A. M. (2011). Brainstem auditory evoked
potentials and electrocochleographic ﬁndings in patients with idiopathic sudden sensorineural
hearing loss. Journal of the College of Physicians and Surgeons–Pakistan: JCPSP, 21(7),
415–419.
Harris, J. P., Weisman, M. H., Derebery, J. M., Espeland, M. A., Gantz, B. J., et al. (2003).
Treatment of corticosteroid-responsive autoimmune inner ear disease with methotrexate: A
randomized controlled trial. JAMA, 290(14), 1875–1883.
Hawkins, D. B. (2005). Effectiveness of counseling-based adult group aural rehabilitation
programs: A systematic review of the evidence. Journal of the American Academy of
Audiology, 16(7), 485–493.
Hiramatsu, M., Teranishi, M., Uchida, Y., Nishio, N., Suzuki, H., et al. (2012). Polymorphisms in
genes involved in inﬂammatory pathways in patients with sudden sensorineural hearing loss.
Journal of Neurogenetics, 26(3–4), 387–396.
4
Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss
101

Hsu, H. T., Chen, J. Y., Weng, S. F., Huang, K. H., & Lin, Y. S. (2013). Increased risk of erectile
dysfunction in patients with sudden sensorineural hearing loss: A nationwide, population-based
cohort study. Otology & Neurotology, 34(5), 862–867.
Jing, Z., Ya, Z., Ilmari, P., & Hao, W. (2006). An animal model of sudden onset sensorineural
hearing loss with vestibular function disturbances induced by mitochondrial toxin. Journal of
Otology, 1(2), 86–93.
Keller, J. J., Wu, C. S., Kang, J. H., & Lin, H. C. (2013). Association of acute myocardial
infarction with sudden sensorineural hearing loss: A population-based case-control study.
Audiology and Neuro-otology, 18(1), 3–8.
Klemm, E., Deutscher, A., & Mosges, R. (2009). [A present investigation of the epidemiology in
idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing loss]. Laryngo-Rhino-Otologie, 88(8), 524–527.
Kuhn, M., Heman-Ackah, S. E., Shaikh, J. A., & Roehm, P. C. (2011). Sudden sensorineural
hearing loss: A review of diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis. Trends in Ampliﬁcation, 15(3),
91–105.
Lin, C., Hsu, H. T., Lin, Y. S., & Weng, S. F. (2013a). Increased risk of getting sudden
sensorineural hearing loss in patients with chronic kidney disease: A population-based cohort
study. The Laryngoscope, 123(3), 767–773.
Lin, C., Lin, S. W., Lin, Y. S., Weng, S. F., & Lee, T. M. (2013b). Sudden sensorineural hearing
loss is correlated with an increased risk of acute myocardial infarction: A population-based
cohort study. The Laryngoscope, 123(9), 2254–2258.
Lin, R. J., Krall, R., Westerberg, B. D., Chadha, N. K., & Chau, J. K. (2012). Systematic review
and meta-analysis of the risk factors for sudden sensorineural hearing loss in adults. The
Laryngoscope, 122(3), 624–635.
Linthicum, F. H., Jr., Doherty, J., & Berliner, K. I. (2013). Idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing
loss: Vascular or viral? Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 149(6), 914–917.
Mandell, G. L., Bennett, J. E., & Dolin, R. (2010). Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s principles and
practice of infectious diseases, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier.
Matsuoka, A. J., & Harris, J. P. (2013). Autoimmune inner ear disease: A retrospective review of
forty-seven patients. Audiology and Neuro-otology, 18(4), 228–239.
Mattox, D. E., & Simmons, F. B. (1977). Natural history of sudden sensorineural hearing loss. The
Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology, 86(4 Pt 1), 463–480.
Merchant, S. N., Adams, J. C., & Nadol, J. B., Jr. (2005). Pathology and pathophysiology of
idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Otology & Neurotology, 26(2), 151–160.
Merchant, S. N., Durand, M. L., & Adams, J. C. (2008). Sudden deafness: Is it viral? ORL;
Journal for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology and Its Related Specialties, 70(1), 52–60; discussion
60–62.
Nosrati-Zarenoe, R., Arlinger, S., & Hultcrantz, E. (2007). Idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing
loss: Results drawn from the Swedish national database. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 127(11),
1168–1175.
Oh, J. H., Park, K., Lee, S. J., Shin, Y. R., & Choung, Y. H. (2007). Bilateral versus unilateral
sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 136(1), 87–91.
Patzak, M. J., Demuth, K., Kehl, R., & Lindner, A. (2005). [Sudden hearing loss as the leading
symptom of an infarction of the left anterior inferior cerebellar artery]. HNO, 53(9), 797–799.
Penido, N. O., Cruz, O. L., Zanoni, A., & Inoue, D. P. (2009). Classiﬁcation and hearing evolution
of patients with sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Brazilian Journal of Medical and Biological
Research (Revista Brasileira de Pesquisas Medicas e Biologicas/ Sociedade Brasileira de
Bioﬁsica), 42(8), 712–716.
Perlman, H. B., & Kimura, R. (1957). Experimental obstruction of venous drainage and arterial
supply of the inner ear. The Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology, 66(2), 537–546.
Perlman, H. B., Kimura, R., & Fernandez, C. (1959). Experiments on temporary obstruction of the
internal auditory artery. The Laryngoscope, 69(6), 591–613.
102
S.C. Montgomery et al.

Ruckenstein, M. J., Mount, R. J., & Harrison, R. V. (1993). The MRL-lpr/lpr mouse: A potential
model of autoimmune inner ear disease. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 113(2), 160–165.
Schreiber, B. E., Agrup, C., Haskard, D. O., & Luxon, L. M. (2010). Sudden sensorineural hearing
loss. Lancet, 375(9721), 1203–1211.
Schuknecht, H. F., & Donovan, E. D. (1986). The pathology of idiopathic sudden sensorineural
hearing loss. Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, 243(1), 1–15.
Schulz, S., Ritter, J., Oertel, K., Witt, K., Bar, K. J., et al. (2014). Altered autonomic regulation as
a cardiovascular risk marker for patients with sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Otology &
Neurotology, 35(10), 1720–1729.
Schweinfurth, J. M., & Cacace, A. T. (2000). Cochlear ischemia induced by circulating iron
particles under magnetic control: An animal model for sudden hearing loss. The American
Journal of Otology, 21(5), 636–640.
Shirwany, N. A., Seidman, M. D., & Tang, W. (1998). Effect of transtympanic injection of steroids
on cochlear blood ﬂow, auditory sensitivity, and histology in the guinea pig. The American
Journal of Otology, 19(2), 230–235.
Shu, J., Yin, S., Tan, A. Z., & He, M. (2014). Association between the methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase gene C677T polymorphism and sudden sensorineural hearing loss: A meta-analysis.
European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, 272(9), 2267–2274.
Shupak, A., Zeidan, R., & Shemesh, R. (2014). Otoacoustic emissions in the prediction of sudden
sensorineural hearing loss outcome. Otology & Neurotology, 35(10), 1691–1697.
Simmons, F. B. (1968). Theory of membrane breaks in sudden hearing loss. Archives of
Otolaryngology, 88(1), 41–48.
Solares, C. A., Edling, A. E., Johnson, J. M., Baek, M. J., Hirose, K., et al. (2004). Murine
autoimmune hearing loss mediated by CD4 + T cells speciﬁc for inner ear peptides. The
Journal of Clinical Investigation, 113(8), 1210–1217.
Stachler, R. J., Chandrasekhar, S. S., Archer, S. M., Rosenfeld, R. M., Schwartz, S. R., et al.
(2012). Clinical practice guideline: Sudden hearing loss. Otolaryngology–Head and Neck
Surgery, 146(3 Suppl.), S1–35.
Stokroos, R. J., Albers, F. W., & Schirm, J. (1998). The etiology of idiopathic sudden
sensorineural hearing loss: Experimental herpes simplex virus infection of the inner ear. The
American Journal of Otology, 19(4), 447–452.
Suslu, N., Yilmaz, T., & Gursel, B. (2009). Utility of anti-HSP 70, TNF-alpha, ESR, antinuclear
antibody, and antiphospholipid antibodies in the diagnosis and treatment of sudden
sensorineural hearing loss. The Laryngoscope, 119(2), 341–346.
Suzuki, H., Tabata, T., Koizumi, H., Hohchi, N., Takeuchi, S., et al. (2014). Prediction of hearing
outcomes by multiple regression analysis in patients with idiopathic sudden sensorineural
hearing loss. The Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology, 123(12), 821–825.
Tabuchi, K., Nakamagoe, M., Nishimura, B., Hayashi, K., Nakayama, M., & Hara, A. (2011).
Protective effects of corticosteroids and neurosteroids on cochlear injury. Medicinal Chemistry,
7(2), 140–144.
Teranishi, M., Katayama, N., Uchida, Y., Tominaga, M., & Nakashima, T. (2007). Thirty-year
trends in sudden deafness from four nationwide epidemiological surveys in Japan. Acta
Oto-Laryngologica, 127(12), 1259–1265.
Wei, B. P., Stathopoulos, D., & O’Leary, S. (2013). Steroids for idiopathic sudden sensorineural
hearing loss. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 7, CD003998.
Wen, Y. H., Chen, P. R., & Wu, H. P. (2014). Prognostic factors of profound idiopathic sudden
sensorineural hearing loss. European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, 271(6), 1423–1429.
Westmore, G. A., Pickard, B. H., & Stern, H. (1979). Isolation of mumps virus from the inner ear
after sudden deafness. British Medical Journal, 1(6155), 14–15.
Wie, O. B., Pripp, A. H., & Tvete, O. (2010). Unilateral deafness in adults: Effects on
communication and social interaction. The Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology,
119(11), 772–781.
Wilson, W. R. (1986). The relationship of the herpesvirus family to sudden hearing loss: A
prospective clinical study and literature review. The Laryngoscope, 96(8), 870–877.
4
Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss
103

Wilson, W. R., Byl, F. M., & Laird, N. (1980). The efﬁcacy of steroids in the treatment of
idiopathic sudden hearing loss: A double-blind clinical study. Archives of Otolaryngology, 106
(12), 772–776.
Wu, C. S., Lin, H. C., & Chao, P. Z. (2006). Sudden sensorineural hearing loss: Evidence from
Taiwan. Audiology and Neuro-otology, 11(3), 151–156.
Xenellis, J., Karapatsas, I., Papadimitriou, N., Nikolopoulos, T., Maragoudakis, P., et al. (2006).
Idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing loss: Prognostic factors. The Journal of Laryngology
and Otology, 120(9), 718–724.
Yang, C. H., Wu, R. W., & Hwang, C. F. (2013). Comparison of intratympanic steroid injection,
hyperbaric oxygen and combination therapy in refractory sudden sensorineural hearing loss.
Otology & Neurotology, 34(8), 1411–1416.
Yoo, T. J., Tomoda, K., Stuart, J. M., Cremer, M. A., Townes, A. S., & Kang, A. H. (1983).
Type II collagen-induced autoimmune sensorineural hearing loss and vestibular dysfunction in
rats. The Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology, 92(3 Pt 1), 267–271.
Yoon, T. H., Paparella, M. M., Schachern, P. A., & Alleva, M. (1990). Histopathology of sudden
hearing loss. The Laryngoscope, 100(7), 707–715.
104
S.C. Montgomery et al.

Chapter 5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced
Hearing Loss
Eric D. Lynch, Jonathan Kil, and Colleen G. Le Prell
Abstract Current efforts to translate laboratory ﬁndings into clinical drugs for
preventing or treating sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) are reviewed in this
chapter. Since no drugs have been approved for any inner ear indication involving
SNHL, including tinnitus, this is a novel area of both clinical development and
regulatory oversight. An overview of FDA guidance, and sponsor interactions or
meetings with the FDA, involving preclinical data to clinical trial design and
regulatory approval are reviewed. Speciﬁc steps on how to evaluate the safety and
efﬁcacy of an investigational new drug through a series of well-controlled pre-
clinical (nonhuman) and clinical (human) studies are provided. The information
presented is designed to assist researchers and clinicians in mapping out and exe-
cuting an effective drug development program. In this chapter, regulatory consid-
erations for the development of a new or existing drug that reduces, mitigates,
prevents, or treats noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) are reviewed, including both
preclinical and clinical FDA interactions, followed by a detailed discussion of the
investigational drugs that are furthest along in clinical testing.
Keywords Clinical trial  FDA  Investigational new drug  Noise-induced
hearing loss  Otoprotection
E.D. Lynch (&)  J. Kil
Sound Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 4010 Stone Way N, Seattle, WA 98103, USA
e-mail: elynch@soundpharma.com
J. Kil
e-mail: jkil@soundpharma.com
C.G. Le Prell
Callier Center for Communication Disorders, University of Texas at Dallas,
1966 Inwood Road, Dallas, TX 75235, USA
e-mail: colleen.leprell@utdallas.edu
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
C.G. Le Prell et al. (eds.), Translational Research in Audiology, Neurotology,
and the Hearing Sciences, Springer Handbook of Auditory Research 58,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-40848-4_5
105

5.1
Introduction
In developing drugs for preventing or alleviating sensorineural hearing loss
(SNHL), an important question is whether the use of the drug will be ethical.
Although seemingly obvious, this question bears signiﬁcant regulatory meaning. In
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), in Europe’s European Medicines
Agency (EMA), and in Japan’s Pharmaceutical and Food Safety Bureau (PFSB),
the concept of an “ethical drug” is largely agreed to be a drug that has proven to be
both safe and efﬁcacious. This is demonstrated through a series of well-controlled
preclinical (nonhuman), and clinical (human) studies aimed at understanding the
pharmacologic and toxicologic effects of the investigational drug for a speciﬁc
disease, disorder, or condition. Although the regulatory environment varies from
country to country, the international community has adopted guidelines set forth by
the International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) of Technical Requirements
for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use with regard to drug develop-
ment and marketing.
In the United States, FDA guidance is clear. An investigational new drug
(IND) application is required when clinical studies intended to evaluate the safety
and efﬁcacy of an unapproved drug are proposed. In addition, any clinical evalu-
ation that changes the dose, route of administration, formulation, or indication
generally requires an IND or a waiver from the FDA. Research groups seeking to
develop ethical drugs for the prevention and treatment of SNHL are encouraged to
review and understand the regulatory aspects governing their development pro-
gram. One helpful resource to be consulted early in the process is the Center for
Drug
Evaluation
and
Research
(CDER)
at
the
FDA,
which
offers
a
Pre-Investigational New Drug Application (PIND) Consultation Program. For
investigators at academic institutions, assistance with regulatory support or other
relevant resources may be available through a clinical trial management ofﬁce or
clinical translational research center.
Before beginning the costly and lengthy process of performing the requisite
preclinical safety studies in support of an IND, the investigational compound
should be well vetted for safety and efﬁcacy in at least one relevant animal model of
the human condition or disease. Developing a new drug is expensive and it requires
years of sustained effort. Current estimates for the costs of developing a new
chemical entity (NCE), a new drug that has never been approved by the FDA, can
exceed $1 billion. Higher costs are associated with biologics (e.g., recombinant
proteins, gene therapy) and agents that act on the central nervous system
(CNS) (DiMasi et al. 2003; DiMasi and Grabowski 2007), since clinical testing
typically requires 10+ years (see Fig. 5.1; for additional discussion, see Morgan
et al. 2011). Setting a foundation based on solid preclinical evidence is crucial.
Publication of results and methods from animal studies affords a greater potential
for useful discoveries to be validated by independent parties. Before publicly dis-
closing or otherwise sharing new discoveries, however, intellectual property pro-
tection must be considered. The importance of protecting data generated in
106
E.D. Lynch et al.

preclinical testing is not discussed in detail in this chapter but is an essential step in
the translational process, and Chap. 2 by Le Prell should be reviewed for discussion
on this step. In this chapter, speciﬁc regulatory considerations for the development
of a drug that reduces, mitigates, prevents, or treats noise-induced hearing loss
(NIHL) are reviewed, including both preclinical (Sect. 5.2) and clinical (Sects. 5.3
and 5.4) development, followed by discussion of the investigational drugs that are
furthest along in clinical testing (Sect. 5.5). Readers well versed in preclinical test
methodology may choose to go directly to Sect. 5.3. Section 5.2 highlights issues
in developing preclinical datasets prior to human testing.
5.2
Preclinical Efﬁcacy: Designing “Proof-of-Mechanism”
Studies with Translational Value
There are multiple variables in the design of preclinical efﬁcacy assessments for
NIHL prevention and treatment. A key issue in NIHL research is the lack of
standardized animal models or protocols for the evaluation of lead or candidate
compounds, which reduces the ability to make direct efﬁcacy comparisons between
different compounds. Effective preclinical disease models should closely replicate
the human disease in both pathology and physiology and involve routes of drug
Fig. 5.1 The timeline for the FDA review and approval process. Preclinical research generating
data required for the ﬁling of an investigational new drug (IND) application are shown here as
18 months, which is likely an idealized situation. In many cases, preclinical research and the
necessary toxicological, pharmacological, and pharmacodynamic safety research may proceed
over multiple years before ﬁrst-in-man studies. Phase 1 studies are typically limited to safety and
Pk/PD parameters, whereas Phase 2 studies include both safety and efﬁcacy. Phase 3 studies are
the larger safety and efﬁcacy registration studies that are necessary to seek permission for health
claims from the US FDA
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
107

administration or treatments that translate directly to their intended clinical appli-
cation or indication. Animal models for NIHL are numerous. The adoption of
common models with respect to experimental variables including noise exposure
(Sect. 5.2.1), species selection (Sect. 5.2.2), route of administration and dose–re-
sponse testing (Sect. 5.2.3), and auditory assessments (Sect. 5.2.4) are necessary to
compare lead compounds for their relative safety and efﬁcacy.
5.2.1
“Replication” of the Human Disease: Laboratory
Sound Exposures
In daily life, individuals are exposed to different types of noise based on their
occupation, recreational interests, and other everyday activities. Therefore, in
deﬁning noise exposures for use in preclinical studies, investigators need to
determine the target population for which they want to model relevant noise
exposures. NIHL has two phases: a temporary threshold shift (TTS) hearing loss
following a noise exposure and a permanent threshold shift (PTS) hearing loss that
does not resolve to baseline after a noise exposure. Although there is some debate
over when hearing loss should be deﬁned as permanent, there is generally good
agreement that most TTS will resolve within the ﬁrst 14 days, and by 30 days
postnoise, any remaining threshold shift is a PTS. Investigators must select a level
and duration of noise to elicit a desired TTS or PTS based on their population to be
modeled (Hu 2012). In addition to intensity and duration, spectral characteristics of
the exposure, such as whether the exposure is an impulse noise or a continuous
noise, may be important (Henderson and Hamernik 2012). The potential for repeat
insults within the human population of interest should also be considered as part of
the animal model.
Beyond the basic selection of broadband, octave band, narrowband, or impulsive
noise, investigators need to select a method of delivery for the noise insult.
Important considerations include free ﬁeld versus closed ﬁeld, binaural versus
monaural, restrained versus unrestrained, and awake versus anesthetized animals.
Unfortunately, anesthetics have the potential to alter the pharmacology and toxi-
cology of otoprotective compounds or drugs. In addition, the anesthesia used to
immobilize the animal before and during the noise exposure may alter the animal’s
response to the noise trauma (Chung et al. 2007).
Noise exposure paradigms often vary across laboratories, making comparisons
difﬁcult, if not impossible. Common noise exposures for preclinical testing among
different laboratories would facilitate drug comparisons (for detailed discussion, see
Le Prell and Miller 2016). That said, because human noise exposures outside the
laboratory are highly variable from one setting to another, there is a need for
multiple agreed-on protocols, including broadband, octave-band, and impulse noise
exposures at a minimum and narrowband and pure-tone exposure as an option. The
issue of TTS and PTS within these noise protocols needs careful consideration,
108
E.D. Lynch et al.

given that both are clinically relevant and may involve similar or disparate
drug targets.
5.2.2
Species Commonly Used in Otoprotection Research
Rodents are the most commonly used laboratory models in preclinical NIHL
studies. Here, various mouse and rat strains, Cavia porcellus (guinea pig), and
Chinchilla lanigera (chinchilla) are brieﬂy discussed. In any model, it is preferable
to work with speciﬁc pathogen-free (SPF) organisms from qualiﬁed commercial
vendors to reduce the potential for subclinical diseases or conditions that may
confound experimental results.
5.2.2.1
Mouse Models
Mice are relatively easy to breed and easily housed in large numbers, and a wide
variety of genetically modiﬁed strains are commercially available. However, mice
can be difﬁcult to dose orally and often require signiﬁcantly higher drug doses than
other rodents based on their very rapid metabolism. Owing to their small size, small
deviations in dosing volume tend to impact both pharmacokinetic (Pk) and phar-
macodynamic (PD) values. In addition, mice have an “audiogram” or range of
hearing that is shifted to a higher frequency range than humans. Noise exposure
paradigms
in
mouse
studies
typically
include
extended
high
frequencies
(i.e., >8 kHz), largely above the range considered critical for human hearing.
Auditory function has been documented in a large number of inbred mouse strains
(Zheng et al. 1999). Some of the most common mouse strains used in NIHL studies
are the CBA/Ca and CBA/CaJ. Another common strain is the C57BL/6J, although
this strain carries a Cadherin 23 (Cdh23) mutation that dramatically inﬂuences the
age of onset and rate of progression of hearing loss across the life span. Age is an
important factor, as mice exhibit an increased sensitivity to noise in the ﬁrst 4–
8 weeks of life (Kujawa and Liberman 2006), with vulnerability decreasing across
the remaining life span (Henry 1982). Interestingly, these differences vary across
strains (Li et al. 1993) and some strains appear more resistant to NIHL than others.
These differences raise important questions about which is the “best” strain to use to
model human NIHL, in addition to questions about whether mice are the “best”
rodent species as a whole given differences in hearing and metabolism.
5.2.2.2
Rat Models
Relative to mice, the rat’s larger size makes certain aspects of auditory testing and
drug dosing easier to accomplish. Consequently, rats are popular in hearing
research, and auditory thresholds have been reported across a number of strains
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
109

(Borg 1982). Some of the most commonly used strains for NIHL research are
Sprague-Dawley, Long-Evans, and Fischer 344. This again raises questions about
which is the “best” strain and “best” species. Like mice, rats are more sensitive to
higher frequency sounds than humans and exhibit increased sensitivity to noise in
the ﬁrst 6 weeks after hearing onset (Lenoir et al. 1979).
5.2.2.3
Guinea Pig Models
The use of guinea pigs as laboratory animals is highly regulated by the US
Department of Agriculture (USDA). As a “covered species,” there are additional
considerations regarding their acquisition, monitoring, and reporting of their use for
biomedical research (National Research Council 1996). Sourcing of SPF guinea
pigs can be problematic because of endemic cytomegalovirus (a leading cause of
unilateral SNHL) in many commercially available colonies, but generation of SPF
colonies is possible. Guinea pig breeding is also more challenging owing to lower
fecundity and longer gestational periods relative to mice and rats (Ediger 1976).
Despite the aforementioned challenges, there are multiple advantages to using
guinea pigs for studies on NIHL otoprotection. First, guinea pigs have better
low-frequency hearing than most mice and rats (4–8 kHz). Second, guinea pigs
have signiﬁcantly larger mastoid cavities or bullae and cochlear volumes than mice
or rats, making local or inner ear drug delivery possible. Drugs and investigational
compounds can be delivered directly to the cochlea via a cochleostomy (a hole
drilled through the bony wall of the cochlea) or through the round window
membrane (RWM). RWM application techniques include acute topical applications
(Lemke et al. 2009), surgical implantation of an infusion cannula (Brown et al.
1993; Miller et al. 2007), and drug-diffusing gels such as Gelfoam® (Lemke et al.
2009; Eshraghi et al. 2013). Because differences exist in the noise vulnerability of
albino versus pigmented animals (Pye 1987), strains must still be selected carefully
with respect to “best” modeling of the human condition of interest.
5.2.2.4
Chinchilla
The ﬁnal rodent species to be discussed here is chinchilla, a species also covered by
the USDA. Chinchillas have a long history of use in auditory research because their
range of hearing is similar to that of humans, with increased hearing sensitivity and
noise vulnerability at 4 kHz. Like the guinea pig, the cochlea and round window
can be readily visualized for local or inner ear drug administration. However, SPF
sourcing, vivarium housing, and oral dosing considerations place them in line with
guinea pigs as one of the more challenging species to work with from a technical
and regulatory perspective. In addition, the pharmacology (Pk and PD) of many
approved and investigational drugs are not known in chinchilla, as they are not
widely used in studies beyond the peripheral auditory system.
110
E.D. Lynch et al.

5.2.3
Route and Timing of Administration
Injection (subcutaneous, intramuscular, or intraperitoneal) is the common route of
administration for drugs in most animal studies. Although oral dosing as a route of
administration has not been widely adopted in otoprotective studies, translation to
human clinical trials and ultimate approval will likely require oral administration.
Oral gavage is more time consuming and technically challenging than injection and
can result in trauma to the oropharynx and inhalation of the drug into the lungs.
Some studies have instead delivered compounds in the animal’s food (Le Prell et al.
2011a, 2014) or water (Ojano-Dirain et al. 2013); however, this results in uncertain
dosing and Pk/PD parameters because dietary consumption is difﬁcult to measure
accurately, particularly in the case of multiple animals housed in the same cage.
Even with single-animal housing, water bottles may leak or chow might be
removed from the dispenser without being consumed.
In addition to dosing methodology differences across studies, there are signiﬁ-
cant differences with respect to the start of dosing. The start of dosing might be
hours or days before the noise exposure, and once begun, dosing might continue for
hours, days, weeks, or even months after the noise exposure. Although some studies
do include postnoise treatment dosing, dosing in most otoprotective animal studies
begins prenoise to establish steady-state Pk. It is unclear whether this dosing
strategy will be effective in pivotal or Phase 3 clinical trials that are required for
drug product registration or a new drug application (NDA). Perhaps the most
important issue with respect to dosing, however, is the failure of most preclinical
investigations to establish a dose response or lack of dose response, as would be
expected for any drug development effort (Spruill et al. 2014).
The route of administration of a drug can signiﬁcantly impact its safety and
efﬁcacy proﬁle as well as its potential marketability. For the prevention or treatment
of occupational NIHL, oral delivery will likely be required. Oral administration is
one of the least invasive and easiest methods of drug delivery for humans, par-
ticularly for chronic indications or treatment. If a drug is limited by moderate or
potentially severe adverse events (AEs) or side effects, then local delivery by
intratympanic injection (ITI) may be more favorable. However, this route of
administration has its own side effect proﬁle, including pain, perforation, and
infection, and requires a trained physician or otolaryngologist to administer. In a
single-center study involving 11 subjects, the drug AM-111 was administered by
ITI postnoise exposure for the treatment of acute acoustic trauma (Suckfuell et al.
2007). Here, 13 AEs were reported in 5 subjects. Similar side effects have also been
reported in larger studies using ITI drug administration for other indications
including local steroid treatment after idiopathic sudden hearing loss (Rauch et al.
2011) or ITI dexamethasone (OTO-104, a sustained release dexamethasone
hydrogel)
to
treat
Ménière’s
disease
(Lambert
et
al.
2012).
Intravenous
(IV) administration may be an alternative to oral delivery or ITI administration for
drugs with poor oral bioavailability or where ITI is not possible. Although there do
not appear to be any well-controlled IV-based clinical trials involving NIHL, IV
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
111

administration of drugs has been used after sudden sensorineural hearing loss (Mora
et al. 2003; Kang et al. 2013).
5.2.4
Auditory Assessments in Preclinical Models
The auditory brainstem response (ABR) and otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) are the
most commonly collected data in preclinical tests, whereas human studies typically
assess pure-tone threshold sensitivity behaviorally and perhaps include OAEs. Brief
descriptions of these and other metrics are described in Sects. 5.2.4.1–5.2.4.6.
5.2.4.1
Auditory Brainstem Response
Prevention of TTS and PTS in preclinical models is most commonly assessed using
the acoustically evoked ABR threshold. The ABR is a tone or click-evoked syn-
chronized neural response to calibrated sounds such as tone pips or clicks. The
evoked activity along the ascending auditory pathway is recorded in humans using
electrodes placed on the scalp and earlobe or mastoid, and it is recorded in anes-
thetized animals using subcutaneous electrodes. The speciﬁc test frequencies vary
as a function of species (e.g., chinchillas and guinea pigs have lower frequency
audiograms than rats or mice and are therefore tested at lower frequencies).
Although ABR threshold testing is not commonly used for the diagnosis or mon-
itoring of NIHL in humans, it is widely used in both preclinical and clinical settings.
It would therefore be beneﬁcial to develop a common preclinical ABR testing
methodology to allow comparisons among studies and across compounds.
In addition to the common threshold metric, amplitude has been suggested as an
important new clinical test metric (for review, see Kujawa and Liberman 2015), but
speciﬁc clinical deﬁcits due to decreased ABR wave 1 amplitudes have not been
shown. Therefore, several clinical studies are needed before this method becomes
an adopted clinical end point (Le Prell and Lobarinas 2015; Le Prell and Brungart,
in press). Although the ABR could be used to deﬁne speciﬁc thresholds and
threshold shifts clinically, there is a signiﬁcant challenge to using ABR threshold
testing in humans. Speciﬁcally, there is a much greater noise background that arises
in part because humans are tested in an awake state to avoid anesthesia-related
complications and cost as well as the increased noise from the greater distance
between the scalp electrode and the brainstem generator in human heads relative to
laboratory rodents.
5.2.4.2
Otoacoustic Emissions
Outer hair cell (OHC) function is routinely inferred using OAEs. OAEs are sounds
recorded in the ear canal via a microphone that are generated by nonlinearities
112
E.D. Lynch et al.

produced by OHCs that are reliable correlates of inner ear health (Kemp 2008). All
vertebrates studied to date are capable of generating some level of OAE either
spontaneously [spontaneous otoacoustic emission (SOAE)], evoked by a transient
sound [transient evoked otoacoustic emission (TEOAE)], or evoked by two tones
and measured at a different distortion frequency [distortion product otoacoustic
emission (DPOAE)] (mammals, see Lonsbury-Martin and Martin 2008; amphib-
ians, see Manley and Van Dijk 2008). Despite the variety of cochlear shapes and
mechanics present across the broad class of vertebrates studied, the widespread
existence of OAEs suggests a common mechanism among vertebrates likely
associated with the ampliﬁcation and ﬁne tuning of the auditory system for optimal
sensitivity (Bergevin et al. 2015).
Although not a test of hearing, changes in DPOAE amplitudes have been pro-
posed as an early identiﬁer of NIHL, with potential application in occupational
noise-monitoring programs (Konrad-Martin et al. 2012). OAE metrics may reveal
damaged OHCs in the absence of overt hearing loss, but the utility of OAE mea-
surements as a metric for noise-induced OHC damage in clinical trials will require
additional validation studies before this measure can become a routine aspect of
drug development. As such, although helpful in understanding the pathology of
hearing loss, OAEs will probably remain an exploratory or secondary clinical end
point (for discussion, see Le Prell and Lobarinas 2015). In summary, OAE mea-
surements are now quite common and routinely supplement pure-tone audiometry
in published works, but pure-tone audiometry remains the gold standard for clinical
testing and the determination and progression of acute and chronic NIHL.
5.2.4.3
Behavioral Audiometry
Because ABR thresholds closely match behaviorally derived thresholds in mam-
mals (Le Prell et al. 2004), there is often little incentive for investigators to
undertake the time and expense of training animals to perform an operant response
for reporting the detection or discrimination of different features of acoustic signals.
Trained behaviors are usually maintained using positive reinforcement such as food
or water for correct responses or by shock avoidance paradigms where animals are
punished with a transient foot shock for failing to make correct responses. The
training time required, and the increased costs associated with the long-term care
and personnel time, generally reduce enthusiasm for this approach. This comment
should not be taken to suggest there is no utility in operant experiments.
Psychophysical investigations using operant conditioning have been used to mea-
sure frequency selectivity (Seraﬁn et al. 1982; Prosen et al. 1989), sensitivity to
intensity changes (Prosen et al. 1981; Le Prell et al. 2001), amplitude modulation
(Moody 1994), formant frequency (Sommers et al. 1992), phase (Moody et al.
1998), rise time (Prosen and Moody 1995), and masking (Le Prell et al. 2006).
Animals can also be trained to explore other phenomena such as categorical per-
ception (Kuhl 1986; May et al. 1989). Collection of these measures may be
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
113

increasingly important in the future given suggestions that noise insult results in
suprathreshold processing deﬁcits that are “hidden” in an otherwise normal
audiogram (for review, see Kujawa and Liberman 2015).
5.2.4.4
Audiometry Using Suppression of Reﬂexes
An alternative to operant tasks is the use of acoustic signals to mediate reﬂexive
responses. For example, the acoustic startle reﬂex is a whole body motor response
to unexpected high-level sound present in both animals and humans. This response
can be attenuated by presenting a lower level “cue” stimulus before the louder
startle stimulus, a phenomenon termed prepulse inhibition (PPI). PPI has been used
to generate “audiograms” with threshold estimated based on the minimum sound
levels at which prepulse signals effectively inhibit the acoustic startle reﬂex (Ison
et al. 2002; Tziridis et al. 2012). Prepulse signals that are inaudible should not
suppress the acoustic startle response. Detailed discussion of the acoustic startle
reﬂex in auditory tests is provided by Allman, Schormans, Typlt, and Lobarinas in
Chap. 7.
5.2.4.5
Otoscopy and Tympanometry
During otoscopy, the ear canal is inspected and the tympanic membrane is visu-
alized. Tympanometry then provides measurements of the mobility and impedance
of the tympanic membrane and middle ear ossicles. This validated measure is not a
viable end point but is frequently included as part of the screening criteria in NIHL
studies, with individuals who have conductive or mixed hearing loss excluded. For
preclinical studies, otoscopic evaluation of the animal is sometimes completed, but
tympanometry is rarely performed. Protocols are available for guinea pig
(Darrouzet et al. 2007; Dai and Gan 2008), chinchilla (Margolis et al. 2001;
Akinpelu et al. 2015), rat (Popelar et al. 2003; Bielefeld et al. 2008), and even
mouse (Zheng et al. 2007). Because changes in tympanic membrane compli-
ance can account for some individual variability observed between animal subjects,
tympanometric testing may be worth including in preclinical investigations.
5.2.4.6
Tinnitus Tests
A variety of issues have made it difﬁcult to study subjective tinnitus in animals;
correct reinforcement or punishment for sound reporting responses in animals that
might have experimentally induced tinnitus are particularly problematic as the
investigator has no a priori knowledge regarding which animals develop tinnitus or
how severe an individual animal’s tinnitus might be (Moody 2004). A new para-
digm for the identiﬁcation of tinnitus has emerged that involves a modiﬁcation of
the PPI paradigm (Turner et al. 2006). Instead of using an acoustic PPI cue in a
114
E.D. Lynch et al.

silent background, a silent gap in a continuous background noise is used to mod-
ulate the acoustically evoked startle response. Presumably, when the background
noise is similar to the animal’s tinnitus spectrum, the animal cannot reliably detect
the silent gap, and the gap fails to modulate the startle response. This loss of gap
prepulse inhibition as a measure of tinnitus has been demonstrated in both sali-
cylate- (Yang et al. 2007) and noise- (Longenecker and Galazyuk 2011; Nowotny
et al. 2011) induced tinnitus models. Use of gap detection for tinnitus has not been
validated clinically and has not been used in NIHL clinical studies or trials;
therefore it is not discussed further here. Use of this test is discussed in detail by
Allman, Schormans, Typlt, and Lobarinas in Chap. 7.
5.2.5
Histological Assessments to Elucidate Mechanisms
of Protection
Preclinical evaluation of the effects of noise on the mammalian cochlea have
generally focused on OHC damage or loss, swelling of the stria vascularis, afferent
dendrite swelling, and the loss of presynaptic and postsynaptic elements between
the inner hair cell and auditory nerve. These measurements require postmortem
collection of cochlear tissues and signiﬁcant technical expertise in the subsequent
processing and analysis. Histologic evaluation of the human cochlea is not gen-
erally performed except in cases where temporal bones have been donated for
medical research (as in Makary et al. 2011, for example). In preclinical studies,
histologic analysis can reveal the site or mechanism of action of the drug and
further elucidate what audiometric assessment may best reveal a physiologic change
in human studies (DPOAE, electrocochleography, or ABR). The timing and
methods chosen for sample collection, preservation, and processing substantively
affect histological quality, and protocols should be developed in consultation with
the relevant literature.
5.2.6
Summary of Preclinical Testing Issues
in Translational Investigations
It would be beneﬁcial to the ﬁeld if agreement on common animal models were
achieved. The diversity of models emphasized by different laboratories developing
individual agents has made comparisons of relative efﬁcacy difﬁcult. Appropriate
rationales for selecting speciﬁc species for otoprotection research should include
their similarities to humans both in terms of auditory function as well as in phar-
macology and pharmacodynamics of the drug of interest (see Sect. 5.3). From a
drug development perspective, it is problematic that there is no agreement on either
the most appropriate animal species or most effective noise exposure in translational
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
115

auditory research. To speed the development of promising drugs, standardization of
the multiple variables in the design of preclinical NIHL studies is needed. In
Sect. 5.3, translation of an investigational new drug from preclinical assessment
into human testing is discussed. An IND (Sect. 5.3) is required to proceed with
clinical studies, which are identiﬁed as falling into four stages (Sect. 5.4).
5.3
The Investigational New Drug Application
5.3.1
Pharmacokinetic Assessment
Pharmacokinetics (Pk) is the study of the time course of drug absorption, distri-
bution,
metabolism,
and
excretion
(ADME)
whereas
pharmacodynamics
(PD) refers to the effect of the drug on the body and is often determined by a change
in a circulating biomarker (Spruill et al. 2014). Ultimately Pk and PD information is
used to optimize dose, dose schedule, and the relationship to an efﬁcacy end point
in pivotal studies (see Fig. 5.2). Pk and PD information can drive modiﬁcation of
chemical structure to optimize drug activity. NCEs are often developed from parent
or lead molecules that have been chemically altered based on their structure–ac-
tivity relationship (SAR), ADME, Pk, or PD response observed in earlier studies.
Basic scientists rarely have training in SAR, ADME, Pk, or PD tests, but they are an
integral part of progressing a new agent from animal testing to ﬁrst-in-man
(FIM) studies.
In addition to Pk and PD, there needs to be an early assessment of toxicity,
which is generally performed in mice. However, it is also important to select an
animal species that metabolizes the drug similarly to humans. The FDA requires the
selection of a nonrodent species such as a dog, minipig, or monkey that best
represents the ADME, Pk and PD of the drug in humans for all in vivo toxicology
or toxicokinetic studies. Metabolic proﬁling is critical to the IND process because
the drug’s metabolite may exert important biologic activity and affect both the
drug’s safety and efﬁcacy. When a compound successfully “passes” early in vitro
and in vivo assessments, there is still signiﬁcant work that must be done to establish
appropriate manufacturing procedures.
5.3.2
Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Controls
When a candidate compound is selected for further investigation, efforts to establish
the most efﬁcient route of synthesis in terms of cost, yield, and impurities will be
made. This becomes of particular concern if exotic intermediates are required for
the synthesis, as they may be difﬁcult or impossible to obtain at commercial scale.
116
E.D. Lynch et al.

Medicinal chemists provide signiﬁcant developmental input at this stage; their
expertise allows modiﬁcation of the compound to improve stability and solubility as
well as increase scalability for manufacturing. It may be necessary to establish an
early-stage reference supply of the compound for comparison to subsequent batches
generated by the same or alternative synthesis routes. After the major metabolites
are identiﬁed, these need to be synthesized for use as a reference material for
subsequent bioanalysis of the parent and metabolites in IND-enabling toxicology
Fig. 5.2 Drug discovery: the preclinical activities required in the translation of an agent from a library
of compounds into an investigational new drug candidate. After identiﬁcation of an agent of interest, a
series of in vitro and in vivo tests are required to screen both safety and efﬁcacy. From these assays,
candidates emerge and go through further development to understand better the chemistry of the agent
and biochemical effects, and to design chemical formulations that are bioavailable, with each new
chemical iteration undergoing new assays for safety and efﬁcacy. Completion of this process is
achieved when data are adequate to allow approval of an Investigational New Drug (IND) application
to the FDA, for ﬁrst-in-man studies. Results of those studies may drive further iterations of the process
illustrated here (Adapted from https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Drug_discovery_cycle.svg)
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
117

studies and later in clinical studies. Methods for determining the identity and purity
of the parent compound and associated impurities must be developed and validated
for use on subsequent batches analyzed in IND-enabling toxicology studies. The
ultimate goal of these activities is to optimize the manufacturing protocols, deter-
mine all materials (metabolites) that need to be assessed for safety, and deﬁne the
release speciﬁcations for the drug substance and drug product (see Fig. 5.2). All of
these tests are required to be performed using good laboratory practice (GLP),
which is a set of standards that ensure consistency, reliability, and reproducibility of
the data through uniform, validated procedures completed with calibrated
equipment.
5.3.3
IND-Enabling Toxicology
Questions that lead to a thorough understanding of the mechanism of action,
possible side effects, dose-limiting toxicities, route of administration, drug half-life,
drug metabolites, elimination routes, and possible drug–drug interactions must be
asked and adequately answered after preclinical efﬁcacy has been established.
A major goal of the IND-enabling toxicology is to determine a recommended dose
and schedule for a FIM clinical safety study. An essential component of the IND
package will include in vitro and in vivo mutagenicity and carcinogenicity studies.
These are typically in the form of an Ames test in bacteria for mutagenicity, a
chromosomal aberration test in cultured cell lines, and a micronucleus test in vivo.
These requirements may change based on past history of testing of the components
in the NCE, given the known risk factors. As availability of the new candidate drug
may be limited during early development and characterization steps, a number of
contract research organizations (CROs) also offer non-GLP microversions of these
tests using smaller amounts of the NCE. The much more costly GLP studies require
larger volumes of the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API).
When assessing an NCE in toxicology studies, impurities should be present at a
level above what is present in the ﬁnal marketed drug product to ensure adequate
testing of the impurities. In general, during process development, the impurity
levels are reduced with manufacturing reﬁnements. However, when scaling up to
commercial batch sizes, these improvements may be lost and impurity levels can
increase. Depending on the complexity of the synthesis and cost of the starting raw
materials or intermediates, the price for manufacturing of the drug substance under
good manufacturing practice (GMP), and the development and validation of test
methods to characterize the drug substance, run into the hundreds of thousands of
dollars for production of sufﬁcient qualiﬁed material appropriate for the preclinical
toxicology studies. These ﬁgures can be increased dramatically for biologics or
compounds with extraordinary synthesis routes.
Depending on the proposed route of administration and duration of exposure, the
requirements for IND-enabling toxicology may vary signiﬁcantly. For most drugs
given orally, FDA will generally require at least two routes of administration be
118
E.D. Lynch et al.

evaluated for acute administration. Typically, these are oral and intravenous acute
toxicity studies performed in one rodent and one nonrodent species. In these
studies, it is imperative that exposure to impurities and metabolites be sufﬁcient to
identify toxicity signals in the species chosen in order to be considered reasonably
predictive of human toxicity. If multiple doses in human clinical studies are pre-
dicted or proposed, chronic toxicity studies of a duration equal to or preferably
greater than the exposure duration in human trials will be required in generally one
rodent and one nonrodent species. For all of these studies, careful attention to and
documentation of efforts to improve the formulation chosen for delivery to optimize
exposure in the test animals need to be included. Frequently, non-GLP pilot studies
are performed to evaluate potential formulations and perform dose–response
assessments before performing costly and time-intensive GLP toxicology studies.
Pilot studies may ensure that the toxicology studies performed under GLP are able
to identify dose-limiting toxicities and/or establish maximum feasible dose criteria
for the studies before their performance. Consultation with a regulatory toxicology
expert to plan and perform an acceptable IND toxicology program is highly
recommended.
5.3.4
Filing an IND
5.3.4.1
eCTD Format
Current regulatory ﬁling with the FDA is performed using the “electronic Common
Technical Document” (eCTD) format developed by the ICH Multidisciplinary
Group 2 Expert Working Group (ICH M2 EWG). The eCTD is a hierarchical
HTML electronic structure developed to assist in the transfer of regulatory infor-
mation to the FDA. Before submission of an IND in eCTD format, a sponsor is
required to contact the e-submission support team and arrange to submit a sample
eCTD or standardized data set. On review and approval of the validated structure,
you are then invited to submit an eCTD IND. There is extensive documentation on
the FDA website to guide in the development and ﬁling of an eCTD IND. In
general, specialized software packages are very helpful to address the regulatory
requirements of eCTD ﬁling, submission, and maintenance. It is of course possible
that regulatory ﬁling procedures or software requirements will change over time and
therefore it is highly recommended to work with or engage a regulatory expert or
group familiar with the eCTD process to accelerate submissions and ensure
adherence to current FDA and ICH guidance.
5.3.4.2
Indication for Use
Determining the indication for use for a drug to prevent and/or treat NIHL is
challenging in that this remains an area with no currently approved drugs and thus
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
119

no marketed products with approved labels and indications. Typically, indications
for use are constrained by acute, intermittent, or chronic use. For NIHL, acute or
intermittent use may be appropriate if it is related to treatment at or near the time of
the acute noise exposure or injury. However, for workers exposed to hazardous
noise on a daily basis, chronic daily treatment across an occupational career may be
indicated. A decision on the intended use of the drug product should be made early
on. Although a target product proﬁle (TPP) is not required at the ﬁling of an IND, a
draft TPP should be created early in the development process. The TPP is typically
the goal of an end of Phase 2 meeting with the FDA. Major modiﬁcations to an
indication (e.g., change in target population) may require the ﬁling of a new IND
application, especially if the disease is covered by a different division of the FDA.
An example of the components of a TPP for a drug that prevents or treats NIHL is
provided in Table 5.1.
5.3.4.3
FDA Division
Currently, the Division of Neurology Drug Products (DNP) at the FDA has been
involved in the ﬁling, review, allowance, and oversight of most, if not all, clinical
trials for NIHL. Over the last decade, the DNP has gained signiﬁcant experience in
working with companies seeking to develop drugs for the prevention and treatment
of NIHL as well as other acquired forms of SNHL. As of the writing of this chapter,
there are no drugs that have been approved by the FDA for the prevention or
treatment of any SNHL disease or disorder, let alone NIHL. As NIHL is a novel
therapeutic indication with no marketed products, DNP is playing a signiﬁcant role
in reviewing the criteria for early-, middle-, and late-stage clinical studies. DNP has
established a liaison with the DoD Hearing Center of Excellence to learn about
audiology and otology. In general, the medical device industry for hearing loss is
much more advanced because of the decades of work in approving hearing aids and
cochlear implants in adults and children. It is not uncommon for review teams
within the DNP to consult with their colleagues in the Center for Devices and
Radiologic Health (CDRH) that contains a Division of Ear, Nose, and Throat
(ENT) devices.
5.4
Clinical Safety and Efﬁcacy
5.4.1
Phase 1 Studies
Phase 1 studies include FIM safety and pharmacokinetic tests of the investigational
drug. They are intended to determine the tolerability, dosing, and AEs or side
effects associated with dosing of the drug. Phase 1 studies can be randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) that include a placebo comparator and blinding to the
120
E.D. Lynch et al.

subject and clinician or observer. Single ascending doses will typically start in a
healthy adult population. Multiple ascending doses are typically started in healthy
volunteers and then extended to subjects with the disease, especially if the elimi-
nation or clearance of the drug is altered by the disease and/or the intended Phase 2
Table 5.1 Sample target product proﬁle (TPP)
Product
description/mechanism of
action
Small molecule, hormone, peptide, or antibody by oral delivery
or injection. Drug X increases the activity of an inner ear
antioxidant enzyme critical to hearing function
Indication
Prevention and treatment of NIHL
Efﬁcacy end points
Reduction of NIHL using pure-tone audiometry
Primary efﬁcacy end
point
Reduction in the magnitude of the TTS/PTS (dB HL)
Secondary efﬁcacy end
point
Reduction in the loss of word recognition scores (WRS)
Clinical assessment of
success
Clinically relevant improvement in HL by  25 %
Contraindications
List situations in which the drug should not be used because the
known risk outweighs any potential beneﬁt. Known hazards
from clinical studies. If no known contraindications exist, state
“none known”
Warnings
List serious drug-related adverse reactions from clinical studies
and potential safety hazards. Describe the preclinical and
clinical data that indicate the product’s potential carcinogenic,
mutagenic, and/or fertility side effects
Precautions
General
Carcinogenesis
Mutagenesis
Impairment of fertility
Pregnancy
Nursing mothers
Describe any special care to be exercised by the physician or
patient for the safe and effective use of the product, e.g.,
precautions not listed under any other section. Describe the
animal studies performed to evaluate the pharmacology,
toxicology, carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, and reproductive
toxicities. If no nonclinical studies have been done, state this
Identify Pregnancy Category A, B, C, D or X. If no nonclinical
studies have been done, state this
List information about excretion of the drug in human milk and
the effects on the nursing infant. If no nonclinical studies have
been done, state this
Adverse reactions
List drug-related adverse events seen in clinical trials or
anticipated from preclinical pharmacology and toxicology
Dosage and
administration/market size
List recommended route (oral, IV, transtympanic, inhaled),
regimen (e.g., twice daily), dosage (mg), and duration of
treatment (e.g., 10 days). US market size for acute and chronic
NIHL could be 10–30 million adults
How supplied
Describe product and administration conﬁguration
The TPP is a living document that is good to start at the beginning of a drug development program
and to update after each completed phase of development and as more information is accumulated
on the drug’s safety and efﬁcacy as well as any changes to the clinical indication, intended use or
speciﬁc population, packaging, and labeling [Adapted from Scannon (2012); see also http://www.
fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/guidances/ucm080593.pdf]
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
121

population has impaired renal or hepatic function. Multidose testing is also per-
formed to establish steady-state kinetics for multiday dosing protocols and involves
a series of peak and trough plasma measurements to determine the concentration of
the drug and its major and minor metabolites. PD assessments can also be addressed
in Phase 1 studies, especially if a potential AE involves a drug–drug interaction or
the intended Phase 2 clinical end point is a PD assessment. PD assessments are
often measured during and after the treatment period to determine if any beneﬁcial
change in a biomarker can be elicited. While the FDA does not differentiate
between Phase 1a and Phase 1b studies, the pharmaceutical industry typically
designates Phase 1 studies in a diseased population as a Phase 1b study. The
remainder of this section describes a case study in the form of SPI-1005.
5.4.1.1
Safety Assessments for SPI-1005
Lynch and Kil (2009) describe a Phase 1 clinical trial with ebselen (SPI-1005), an
investigational new drug for the prevention and treatment of NIHL, in a randomized
double-blind placebo-controlled single ascending-dose study. Thirty-two normal
healthy subjects were consented, screened, and enrolled at a single clinical site
(MDS Pharma, Lincoln, Nebraska) for a 72-h inpatient stay. History and physical
(H&P) examinations, vital signs including orthostatic measurements, 12-lead
electrocardiograms (ECGs), hematology [complete blood count (CBC) with dif-
ferential], serology (Chemistry-20, also termed Chem-20, a complete chemistry
screen that measures 20 different substances), and urinalysis were repeated over a
2-week period. AE monitoring was conducted repeatedly over the 3-day inpatient
period. This study was completed and published in a peer-reviewed scientiﬁc
journal. There is no requirement for Phase 1 studies to be published or listed on
clinicaltrials.gov but as per the introductory comments, release of data in a
peer-reviewed format may facilitate development and acceptance as well as driving
new preclinical assessment of investigational drugs in other laboratories. The test
battery is listed in detail here to highlight the multiple components monitored
within a Phase 1 study as part of initial safety assessments.
5.4.2
Pharmacokinetics
A key component of Phase 1 testing is Pk assessment. As part of this Phase 1 study,
Lynch and Kil (2009) reported data on peak plasma concentration (Cmax), the time
after ingesting the drug that it takes to reach maximal concentration (Tmax), and
half-life (t1/2), which is the time it takes for 50 % of the drug to be eliminated from
plasma. Finally, the total concentration or exposure (AUC0−t) for ebselen and its
three metabolites were calculated, as well as the plasma selenium concentration.
Data generated in this Phase 1 study were a necessary step in the drug development
process, ultimately setting the stage for a Phase 2 study assessing safety and efﬁcacy
122
E.D. Lynch et al.

of SPI-1005 (NCT01444846; Kil et al. 2014). Details are shared here to illustrate
the kinds of data that are sought in preclinical and early Phase 1 clinical testing for
an NCE.
Critical to the discussions with the FDA is a robust review of any AEs at each
dose level tested. This is essential in guiding the acceptable dose range and
schedule and the potential allowance of additional clinical studies. If multidose
schedules are proposed in future studies, supporting toxicology studies performed
in appropriate species over a duration of time equal to or greater than the clinical
dosing schedule need to be provided and reviewed. The data gathered in Phase 1
studies allow sponsors to make an informed decision on what dose ranges are well
tolerated and guide establishment of a risk-to-beneﬁt ratio in relationship to the
pursued indication. In the case of the SPI-1005 Phase 1 data, with no AEs reported
at all doses tested (single oral dose up to 1,600 mg) but no multidose testing,
approval for multidose Phase 2 studies relied on preclinical toxicology studies run
in multiple species for 28 days.
5.4.3
Phase 2 Studies
Phase 2 studies include larger numbers of subjects than Phase 1 studies and are
intended to provide an initial assessment of efﬁcacy in the affected population. They
also further assess safety in the affected population. This section introduces the
Phase 2 clinical trial of SPI-1005 in the prevention of NIHL (NCT01444846).
5.4.3.1
Trial Design
This single-center study recruited healthy volunteers 18–31 years of age at the
University of Florida; enrollment was completed in November 2013. This was a
dose-escalating design with three treatment arms. Participants in Arm 1 were ran-
domized to take oral SPI-1005 at a dose of 200 mg twice daily or matching pla-
cebo. Participants in Arm 2 were randomized to take oral SPI-1005 at a dose of
400 mg twice daily or matching placebo, and participants in Arm 3 were ran-
domized to take oral SPI-1005 at a dose of 600 mg twice daily or matching pla-
cebo (see Fig. 5.3). Dosing was continued over 4 days, starting 2 days before a
calibrated sound challenge (CSC) and continuing the day of the CSC and 1 day
post-CSC. This was a double-blind design; neither the subjects nor the study team
knew the treatment condition of any subject during the course of the study. During
the CSC, subjects listened to prerecorded rock or pop music on an iPod® using
insert earphones that were set to a speciﬁc SPL (averaging 100 dBA in coupler
measurements) for a ﬁxed exposure duration (4 h). In a pilot study using this CSC
(n = 12), the TTS at 15 min postnoise exposure ranged from 0 to 14 dB, with the
group average of 6.3 ± 3.9 dB at 4 kHz (the most affected frequency) (Le Prell
et al. 2012).
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
123

Pure-tone audiometry was the primary audiometric assessment; TTS was cal-
culated for each tested frequency in each ear over time. The TTS was deﬁned as the
difference between the post-sound exposure threshold and the baseline threshold
measured immediately before the CSC. Hearing tests were conducted at the time of
screening and enrollment (clinic visit 1), immediately before the CSC on the third
day of dosing, as well as 15-min, 1-h 15-min, 2-h 15-min, and 3-h 15-min
post-CSC (clinic visit 2). Audiometric testing was repeated the following day
(clinic visit 3) and 1 week later (clinic visit 4).
5.4.3.2
Medical Monitoring
Subjects had a detailed H&P examination at the time of the screening to determine
if they satisﬁed the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Subjects who passed the H&P
and all other laboratory criteria, including audiometry, hematology (CBC), serology
(Chemistry-20), and radiology (chest X-ray), were enrolled. The H&P, including
Fig. 5.3 The number of subjects in the Phase 2 clinical trial of SPI-1005 (NCT01451853) are
illustrated here. In an intent-to-treat analysis, all subjects are included, regardless of compliance
with protocol
124
E.D. Lynch et al.

Medra queries about AEs, was repeated at clinic visits 2, 3, and 4. Additional blood
samples were drawn and all baseline assays repeated at clinic visits 2 and 4. Chest
X-ray exams were repeated at clinic visit 4. Details are shared here to illustrate
ongoing medical monitoring in Phase 2 studies, akin to that in Phase 1 studies.
5.4.3.3
Pk
Pk assessments are also completed in Phase 2 studies. Here, blood was collected for
analysis of plasma ebselen and its metabolites, as well as total plasma selenium, at
clinic visit 2. The Pk data from the Phase 1 study with SPI-1005 indicated a plasma
t1/2 of approximately 6–8 h, suggesting that twice-daily dosing would be appro-
priate in a multidose protocol. The Pk data also indicated that ebselen reaches Cmax
in approximately 2 h. These data informed decisions for the timing of blood draws
to quantify ebselen and its metabolites after the achievement of steady state in Phase
2. In the Phase 2 study, Pk samples were drawn on the morning of the third day of
dosing, just prior to the morning dose and 2 h after the morning dose.
Subjects were exposed to the CSC after the second (steady-state) blood sample
was drawn. Based on prior preclinical data, efﬁcacy of ebselen is best achieved
when dosed at least 1 h before noise exposure (Lynch et al. 2004; Yamasoba et al.
2005). By analyzing Pk samples, exposures to drugs in test subjects can be con-
ﬁrmed and exposure–response relationships can be determined. For studies with
multiple dose levels, study sponsors and reviewers can assess whether higher doses
of the drug result in higher exposure levels of the drug and metabolites or if there is
a saturation effect. One additional parameter that can be evaluated with Pk sampling
is conﬁrmation of a subject’s compliance with the dosing schedule. One subject
assigned to the 600-mg group, who reported compliance with the dosing protocol,
showed no detectable levels of ebselen or metabolites in the Pk assessment [using
validated
liquid
chromatography–tandem
mass
spectrometry
(LC-MS/MS)
method]. In addition, the subject’s plasma selenium levels were not elevated above
those of placebo subjects and showed no increase from baseline to treatment [using
a validated inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICPMS) method].
These bioanalytic data were not available in real time and were available only
several weeks after the study was completed, as is typical for many studies, and,
moreover, as required for any double-blind study in which treatment codes are not
available until the data are “locked.” The study coordinators made every attempt to
recall this subject for an interview to discuss this noncompliance issue but did not
receive a response. The retained clinical trial material for this subject was sent for
analysis, which conﬁrmed the presence of study drug in the remaining capsules at
the expected levels. Ultimately, this subject was included in the per protocol efﬁ-
cacy analysis despite strong evidence that the subject was noncompliant with the
dosing protocol as there was no conclusive evidence available. Multiple Phase 2
studies are often performed in an effort to adequately deﬁne dose range, end points,
and power estimates before proceeding with Phase 3 pivotal studies.
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
125

5.4.4
Phase 3 Studies: Pivotal Studies
Phase 3 studies often include a large number of subjects. During Phase 3 studies,
effectiveness is (hopefully) conﬁrmed, side effects are monitored, and there may be
comparisons to other common treatments if there is an established standard of care.
The use of a placebo group should be carefully considered in Phase 3 studies, as
there are special ethical issues related to care for sick or diseased patients
(Hernandez et al. 2014; Keranen et al. 2015; Niemansburg et al. 2015). For the
indication of NIHL, a placebo group comparison to active dose group(s) is justi-
ﬁable given that there are no other currently approved treatments. There is a caveat,
however, in that in any study where PTS is expected in the absence of experimental
drug intervention, every effort must be made to ensure that all subjects are
appropriately educated about the effects of noise on hearing and provided with
hearing protective devices as per regulatory agency guidance (OSHA 1983; DoD
Instruction 6055.12 2010).
Typically, a NCE for a nonorphan indication will need to be tested in a large
number of subjects in two separate pivotal Phase 3 trials, which should result in
similar outcomes. Study repetition allows for comparison and evaluation of
repeatability by the FDA when submitting a NDA for approval to market a drug for
a given indication. In general, exposure to the NCE-containing drug product should
include upward of 600 subjects and is commonly composed of 300 drug-exposed
subjects in each of two Phase 3 trials. The precise numbers of drug-exposed sub-
jects will be negotiated with the FDA review team and is based on known or
potential risks identiﬁed in earlier trials as well as power estimates for achieving a
statistically robust result on agreed on primary end points for the trial. If the results
of the two pivotal Phase 3 trials differ signiﬁcantly in their outcomes, the FDA may
recommend additional conﬁrmatory studies be completed prior to submission of an
NDA. A special protocol assessment (SPA) for clinical protocols is a declaration
from the FDA that a Phase 3 trial’s design is adequate or acceptable for FDA
approval. An SPA will seek to reach agreement between the sponsor and the FDA
on the pivotal protocol design, end points, safety assessments, and the statistical
analysis plan prior to enrollment of the Phase 3 clinical trial.
Given the novelty of NIHL as an indication and the efﬁcacy end points being
employed, sponsors may choose to request an SPA by the FDA review team.
Clinical protocols for Phase 3 trials where data outcomes form the primary basis for
an efﬁcacy claim, if the trials had been the subject of discussion at an end-of-Phase
2/pre-Phase 3 meeting with the review division, may be eligible for an SPA
agreement under the Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) goals. A request for
an SPA must occur before initiation of the pivotal Phase 3 trials. If granted, an SPA
agreement can provide an opportunity to get input and buy-in from the FDA on the
scientiﬁc, regulatory, and statistical rigor of the planned clinical trial. SPAs can also
be requested for nonclinical carcinogenicity protocols and CMC stability protocols.
In performing Phase 3 studies, it is imperative that drug developers utilize a drug
product consistent with that which will be ﬁled for registration with the FDA. Any
126
E.D. Lynch et al.

changes in the dose, formulation, form, and manufacturing methods of the drug
substance or drug product between the clinical supplies used in the pivotal trials and
the drug product in the NDA must be disclosed and could put the approval at risk. If
the FDA concludes that the drug product tested in the pivotal trials is not clearly
equivalent to what is being proposed for registration or market approval, further
studies of the proposed drug product may be required to prove bioequivalence.
Typically, a minimum of two registration batches of qualiﬁed drug substance and
drug product must be manufactured and batch records made available to the FDA to
allow adequate review of the processes for use in commercial manufacturing of the
drug product.
5.4.5
NDA and Approval
Legal requirements for safety and effectiveness for a drug to be approved have been
interpreted as requiring scientiﬁc evidence that the beneﬁts of a drug outweigh the
risks and that adequate instructions exist for safe use in the intended indication.
Well-controlled clinical trials, adequately descriptive labeling and instructions,
appropriate and supportive toxicology reports, and well-delineated CMC all are
components of a successful NDA approval. Perhaps most interesting to readers of
this chapter would be a coherent discussion of the relevant end points for efﬁcacy
assessment of an approvable otoprotective drug. The challenge here is that there is
no precedence to cite, as there are no approved drugs for the prevention and
treatment of NIHL. There are, however, guidance statements from multiple orga-
nizations that might prove helpful.
5.4.5.1
Guidance from Professional Societies
Although there is no speciﬁc guidance from the FDA as discussed in Sects. 5.3.4.2
and 5.3.4.3, it seems reasonable to predict that noise otoprotection health claims are
likely to be based on preservation of threshold sensitivity or perhaps preserved
speech test performance given the recommendations of Gurgel et al. (2012).
Thresholds are assessed using conventional pure-tone air-conduction audiometric
testing using narrowband noises or pure tones as signals. Hearing levels are mea-
sured relative to a large reference population; the difference between an individual’s
measured threshold and the reference threshold is expressed using the units dB HL.
Positive numbers reﬂect poorer hearing relative to the reference population, and
negative numbers reﬂect better hearing than the reference population. In the liter-
ature, hearing loss is typically attributed to noise exposure if the audiometric
conﬁguration is “notched,” meaning that thresholds are poorer at 3, 4, or 6 kHz than
at 1 and 2 kHz and 8 kHz. There are a variety of deﬁnitions of what constitutes a
notched audiogram (for review, see Le Prell et al. 2011b). Two of the more
common notch criteria are those of Coles et al. (2000) and Niskar et al. (2001),
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
127

requiring either a 10-dB or a 15-dB notch depth, respectively. Hearing loss due to
noise is typically the most robust at these 3-, 4-, and 6-kHz frequencies because of
the ear canal resonance at approximately 3 kHz and the half-octave shift in which
hearing loss is expected at or above the exposure frequency (Ward et al. 2003). If
drug beneﬁt is assessed based on some reduction in the prevalence of notched
conﬁgurations, then the deﬁnition of a notch will obviously affect the measured
prevalence of audiometric notches in the audiograms from both treated and control
populations.
Explicit criteria deﬁning threshold shifts in noise-exposed workers, have been
provided by a number of government agencies, including the Occupational Safety
and Health Administration (OSHA), the National Institute on Occupational Safety
and Health (NIOSH), and the Department of Defense (DoD). OSHA deﬁnes a
standard threshold shift (STS) as “a change in hearing threshold relative to the
baseline audiogram of an average of 10 dB or more at 2,000, 3,000, and 4,000 Hz
in either ear” [OSHA 1983; Section 1910.95(g)(10)(i)], whereas NIOSH advocates
a criterion for signiﬁcant threshold shift (STS) with the recommended deﬁnition of
change being “an increase of 15 dB in hearing threshold level (HTL) at 500, 1000,
2000, 3000, 4000, or 6000 Hz in either ear, as determined by two consecutive
audiometric tests,” with the second test required to reduce false-positive ﬁndings
(NIOSH 1998; p. iv, see also pp. 43–50). The DoD deﬁnes STS as “a change in
hearing threshold relative to the initial reference audiogram of an average of 10 dB
or more at 2,000, 3,000, and 4,000 Hz, in either ear,” and they also state, “A single
frequency 15 dB shift at 1,000, 2,000, 3,000, or 4,000 Hz is considered an early
warning ﬂag with no requirements for follow-up testing or referrals, but with a
requirement to counsel the patient and check hearing protection” (DoD Instruction
6055.12 2010). One potential strategy for evaluating otoprotective drug beneﬁt is
assessing whether it reduces the percentage of workers, soldiers, or other
noise-exposed participants that meet the OSHA, NIOSH, or DoD criteria for an
STS. In real-world trials, differential use of hearing protection devices (ear plugs or
ear muffs) increases individual variability as it inﬂuences individual risk of STS.
Campbell and Fox, in Chap. 6, similarly address the issue of how to monitor
drug-induced ototoxic hearing loss in clinical trials. They describe ototoxicity
criteria put forward by the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
(ASHA). However, just as the ASHA criteria were not designed with the intent to
identify beneﬁts of otoprotective agents, the OSHA, NIOSH, and DoD criteria may
be relatively insensitive to drug-mediated beneﬁts.
The potential use of criteria that deﬁne “compensable hearing loss” might be
considered as an alternative, but this is even more problematic in that these criteria
are intended to identify individuals who have suffered disabling auditory injury.
Guidance from the Veterans Administration (VA) is provided in 38 CFR 3.385,
which states, “For the purposes of applying the laws administered by VA, impaired
hearing is considered a disability for VA purposes when the auditory threshold in
any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000 Hz is 40 decibels hearing level
(dB HL) or greater, the auditory thresholds for at least three of the frequencies 500,
1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hz are 26 dB HL or greater, or speech recognition
128
E.D. Lynch et al.

scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 %.” The use of speech tests is
particularly interesting here, given guidance from the American Academy of
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery (AAO–HNS), which has recommended
that word recognition scores be included in all clinical trials that assess auditory
function
(Gurgel
et
al.
2012).
Interest
and
enthusiasm
for
speech,
and
speech-in-noise tasks in particular, appear to be increasing given suggestions that a
history of noise exposure may underlie speech-in-noise discrimination difﬁculties
(Kujawa and Liberman 2009; Lin et al. 2011; Makary et al. 2011), but it is not clear
at this point what the most sensitive test might be (for detailed discussion, see Le
Prell and Lobarinas 2015; Le Prell and Brungart, in press).
5.4.5.2
Guidance from the Department of Defense Hearing Center
of Excellence
Recognizing the importance of these kinds of issues, the DoD Hearing Center of
Excellence
(HCE)
has
established
a
Working
Group
on
Pharmaceutical
Interventions for Hearing Loss (PIHL). A number of issues discussed in this chapter
have been discussed previously in their newsletter series (http://hearing.health.mil/
EducationAdvocacy/NewsLetters.aspx), and a series of articles has been prepared
with authors from the DoD HCE partnering with academic and industry colleagues
to provide a series of guidance documents. Several of these documents have been
accepted for publication, with additional articles currently completing the ﬁnal
stages of the review process. These documents are intended to provide best prac-
tices and establish common procedures for preclinical and clinical investigation and
will be a useful addition to the literature.
5.4.6
Phase 4 Studies: Postmarketing Surveillance Studies
Phase 4 studies are postmarketing surveillance studies, with the potential to expand
on the initial label claims approved under the original NDA. These Phase 4
activities are largely outside the scope of this chapter, which is focused on early
translational and clinical activities required to achieve of proof of concept in
humans.
5.5
Human Clinical Studies in NIHL
Here, brief summaries regarding the development of a subset of the compounds
being developed are offered, ending with a few common observations related to the
future of these early and midstage exploratory studies.
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
129

5.5.1
N-acetylcysteine
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) is the most extensively investigated potentially otopro-
tective drug to date; its testing was facilitated by several features. First, NAC was
already approved by the FDA for acetaminophen overdose and for inhalation as a
mucolytic, with an FDA-approved dosing regimen unique to each of these two
indications. Thus, there was substantial existing safety data in humans as well as
efﬁcacy for a different indication, which is different than developing an NCE for
FIM application. Second, NAC received patent protection (Kopke et al. 2003),
further facilitating commercial development. NAC was previously marketed as The
Hearing Pill® by the American BioHealth Group (Somers 2007; Karlman 2012). In
the absence of efﬁcacy data, The Hearing Pill® was promoted as a dietary sup-
plement, or a “nutraceutical,” a category that cannot make claims of medical beneﬁt
because it was not evaluated by the FDA (Schachtman 2003).
NAC was assessed in several human clinical studies, although not in the mar-
keted formulation of The Hearing Pill®. First, Kramer et al. (2006) documented
TTS and temporary changes in OAEs in 31 normal-hearing subjects after a single
music exposure at a recreational setting (nightclub), with NAC (900 mg) ingested
as an effervescent tablet in water 30 min prior to entering a San Diego nightclub.
Although no signiﬁcant otoprotection was observed, the authors suggested that a
signiﬁcant difference in music exposure levels across the eight evenings of data
collection (ranging from 92.5 to 102.8 Lavg) may have masked potential beneﬁts of
NAC. Two additional studies were completed using TTS models. Lin et al. (2010)
assessed prevention of noise-induced TTS in 53 male workers at a steel manu-
facturing facility in Taiwan, reporting an average TTS at 3, 4, and 6 kHz of 2.77 dB
after placebo and 2.45 dB after NAC. Although this small difference in TTS was
reported to be statistically signiﬁcant (p = 0.03), a 0.3-dB difference is not clini-
cally relevant regardless of statistical reliability. Lindblad et al. (2011) tested NAC
in a weapons training setting in which military subjects were exposed to impulse
noise, but no reliable TTS was measured, making claims of potential otoprotective
beneﬁt impossible.
The methodological issues in these early studies (Kramer et al. 2006; Lin et al.
2010; Lindblad et al. 2011) highlight the importance of having a well-deﬁned trial
population and an adequately powered design. A fourth NAC study was more
successful
in
adequately
powering
the
active
group
against
the
placebo
group. Kopke et al. (2015) assessed threshold shift in 566 normal-hearing partici-
pants treated with 900-mg NAC (effervescent tablet in water) or matching placebo
(in water) three times daily, for a total of 2700 mg/day during the ﬁrst 13 days of
weapons training, followed by twice daily dosing for 3 days, for a total of
1800 mg/day. During the 16-day weapons training period, Marine recruits were
exposed to M-16 riﬂe ﬁre (325 rounds) and other non-riﬂe noise, including simu-
lated explosions. Hearing thresholds were determined using 2–16 kHz tonal stim-
uli, measured before training and 10 days after training had stopped. The primary
outcome (which is deﬁned as part of the statistical analysis plan) was deﬁned as the
130
E.D. Lynch et al.

incidence of a signiﬁcant threshold shift (STS) including an increase of 20 dB or
more at one frequency or 10 dB or more at two adjacent frequencies. There were no
signiﬁcant decreases for the left ear (NAC: 21 % vs. placebo: 19 %, p = 0.7816),
although the group difference approached p < 0.05 for the right ear (NAC: 21 % vs.
placebo: 27 %, p = 0.0562). Additional comparisons were conducted as secondary
analyses; when STS was deﬁned as an increase of 15 dB or more at one frequency
or 10 dB or more at two adjacent frequencies, the rate of STS was reliably different
for the ear corresponding to the trigger hand (NAC: 27 % vs. placebo: 35 %,
p = 0.0288) (Kopke et al. 2015). The additional detail provided for this last study is
included to highlight the difﬁculties of clinical trials in which only 19–35 % of the
placebo group develop a hearing loss and, moreover, to illustrate the complexity of
live ﬁre exercises where the exposure may be asymmetric.
5.5.2
D-Methionine
According to the clinicaltrials.gov website, the study NCT01345474 is currently
recruiting subjects from a population of drill sergeant instructor trainees ages
21–40 years at Fort Jackson, South Carolina. Subjects take twice daily oral
D-methionine (D-Met) of up to 100 mg/kg/day for 18 days (starting 3 days before
training, during 11 days of training, and continuing 4 days posttraining). This is a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. During the study, par-
ticipants are exposed to M-16 ﬁre during weapons training, with a 500-round
minimum over an 11-day period. The primary outcome is pure-tone air-conduction
thresholds measured 22 days after cessation of weapons training, including change
from baseline as measured by absolute change and the frequency of STS. In
addition, the study team is assessing tinnitus using questionnaires to assess changes
in tinnitus loudness and annoyance.
D-Met has not been used in humans previously for the prevention of NIHL,
although a variety of animal data support this indication. Translation to humans was
facilitated by a Phase 1 safety study in which the pharmacokinetics of D-Met were
assessed following oral administration of MRX-1024 (a formulation of D-Met) in
normal volunteers (Hamstra et al. 2010). At that time, the patents protecting D-Met
(Campbell 2001, 2008) were licensed by Molecular Therapeutics, Inc., which
developed MRX-1024 for clinical studies. Testing in healthy volunteers was fol-
lowed by Phase 1 testing in 25 patients receiving MRX-1024 concurrent with
radiation therapy (RT) with or without weekly cisplatinum in an open-label study
(Hamstra et al. 2010). Hamstra et al. (2010, p. 2666) report, “When administered
concurrent with RT without chemotherapy, it was associated with a modest increase
in grade 2 (two of six patients) and grade 3 (one of six patients) emesis. In those
treated with MRX-1024 along with RT and weekly cisplatinum, there was no
appreciable increase in emesis.” After describing all study withdrawals due to
nausea and emesis, the authors conclude, “Aside from nausea and emesis, there
were no other signiﬁcant toxicities observed related to MRX-1024.” Development
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
131

later reverted back to Southern Illinois University School of Medicine. A new
company, MetArmor, Inc., has recently been founded by Dr. Campbell to continue
the clinical development of D-methionine as an otoprotective agent.
5.5.3
Beta-Carotene, Vitamins C and E, and Magnesium
Early data on prevention of NIHL using the combination of beta-carotene, vitamins
C and E, and magnesium came from preclinical tests at the University of Michigan
(Le Prell et al. 2007), and like the compounds described in Sects. 5.5.1 and 5.5.2,
patent protection was sought before publication of preclinical data (Miller et al.
2011). This case study represents what can perhaps best be described as a hybrid
development, as clinical trials were developed at academic institutions, funded by
NIH, and completed with the help of industry patent licensees who formulated
GMP supplies. This case study was initially introduced by Le Prell in Chap. 2,
where the institutional review of NCT00808470 was described as encountering an
“obstacle” in that University of Michigan leadership (the home of the parent NIH
award NIH U01 DC008423) would not allow US studies evaluating the “nu-
traceutical” formulation to move forward without an IND. Under the requirements
of an IND, the clinical trial materials were required to meet relevant pharmaceutical
standards, including stability tests for all four active nutrient agents. Those tests are
not currently required for dietary supplements marketed under the Dietary
Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994 (DSHEA).
The initial licensee of these patents, OtoMedicine, Inc., undertook the expensive
process
of formulation,
manufacturing,
and
purity
and
stability
analyses.
OtoMedicine, Inc., was dissolved before the collection of all FDA-required docu-
mentation and the manufactured supplies could not be used in the planned studies.
This was a signiﬁcant setback with respect to time and resources. A new licensee
for the University of Michigan patents, Hearing Health Sciences, Inc., was iden-
tiﬁed, and they developed a chewable tablet formulation. An IND application was
ﬁled with CMC data in hand, and the study was allowed in the fall of 2012 under
IND 116027. Although this was different from the originally proposed 2008 start
date in the 4-year NIH grant that funded the conduct of these studies, the NIH
allowed the period over which funding was awarded to be extended through
multiple no-cost extension periods, so that the trial could begin enrollment once
clinical materials and IND approval were in hand. Since then, speciﬁc guidance on
studies on the prevention of acquired hearing loss has indicated that such studies
always need an IND before use in a clinical trial (E. Bastings, The FDA/IND
Process and Recommendations, presented August 24, 2012, Baltimore, MD); thus,
FDA guidance should be sought regarding “nutraceutical” agents when planning
clinical trials.
132
E.D. Lynch et al.

5.6
Summary
Some 16 % of disabling hearing loss worldwide has been attributed to occupational
noise (Nelson et al. 2005). The burden is reduced in developed countries, with some
9 % of adult-onset hearing loss in the United States attributed to noise exposure
(Nelson et al. 2005). According to NIOSH, “Four million workers go to work each
day in damaging noise. Ten million people in the U.S. have a noise-related hearing
loss. Twenty-two million workers are exposed to potentially damaging noise each
year” (http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/noise/stats.html). Industrial noise is not the
only source of damage; concerts, nightclubs, and sporting events have the potential
to be quite loud. Power tools and other devices can be hazardously loud as well.
A key concern is the worker who receives 100 % of the maximum daily noise
exposure allowed by OSHA, then goes home and engages in loud recreational
activity or uses loud equipment or machinery at home (for discussion, see Le Prell
2016).
Ruben (2000) raises concerns that subtle, “preclinical” deﬁcits have the potential
for increasing impact on the modern workforce, even in the absence of an STS.
Strong communication skills are critical to many in the workforce. Negative con-
sequences of accumulating hearing impairment, such as difﬁculty hearing normal
communication, communicating over the telephone, or understanding speech in a
noisy ofﬁce setting, are already reﬂected in labor statistics in the form of decreased
income (Ruben 2000). Communication difﬁculties result in underemployment, or
even unemployment, and as the American labor force increasingly shifts from
manual labor to service-related occupations that critically depend on communica-
tion abilities, communication disorders will continue to emerge as an increasingly
important public health issue for the 21st century (Ruben 2000).
Hearing conservation is achieved through engineering controls (decreasing noise
at its source), administrative controls (decreasing the amount of time spent in a
noisy environment), and personal hearing protection devices (HPDs: earplugs and
earmuffs). Without doubt, HPDs will continue to be important tools for hearing loss
prevention, and they continue to improve, with electronic technology representing a
major step forward for preserving situational awareness (Casali et al. 2009; Talcott
et al. 2012). Nonetheless, the hearing conservation amendment was promulgated
more than 30 years ago (OSHA 1983), and NIHL remains one of the top disabilities
for the workforce. There is active debate as to whether the regulations are adequate
(Dobie and Clark 2014, 2015; Morata et al. 2015; Suter 2015). Even if the noise
limits are deemed sufﬁciently protective, compliance with HPD requirements is
frequently inadequate based on poor uptake of education, failure to correctly use
earplugs, failure to consistently use HPDs, and so forth. Regardless of one’s
opinion on the “best” workplace noise limits, it is clear that additional strategies for
protecting hearing are urgently needed, including quieter devices, better HPDs, and
improved educational interventions. Ethical drugs that successfully navigate the
review and approval process for the purpose of hearing loss prevention will provide
an additional new tool for those at risk when noise is unexpected or earplugs are
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
133

unavailable or impractical. To reach this point, continued efforts to move scientiﬁc
investigations from the laboratory into the clinical test environment are urgently
needed.
Compliance with Ethics Requirements
Eric Lynch is a Co-Founder of and the Chief Scientiﬁc Ofﬁcer for Sound
Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
Jonathan Kil is a Co-Founder of and the Chief Medical Ofﬁcer for Sound
Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
Colleen Le Prell was Co-Principal Investigator on clinical study SPI-1005-202 with
Sponsor Sound Pharmaceuticals, Inc. under IND 068443. She is a co-inventor on
patents assigned to the University of Michigan and the University of Florida.
Acknowledgments The clinical trial described in Sect. 5.4 (NCT01444846) was funded by a
contract to the University of Florida (Co-PI: Colleen Le Prell, PhD; Co-PI: Patrick Antonelli, MD)
from Sound Pharmaceuticals, Inc., which owns several relevant patents (Kil and Lynch 2004,
2010, 2012).
References
Akinpelu, O. V., Funnell, W. R., & Daniel, S. J. (2015). Detection of otoacoustic emissions in
chinchilla when the middle ear contains amniotic ﬂuid. Laryngoscope, 125(4), E138–E142.
Bergevin, C., Manley, G. A., & Koppl, C. (2015). Salient features of otoacoustic emissions are
common across tetrapod groups and suggest shared properties of generation mechanisms.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 112(11), 3362–3367.
Bielefeld, E. C., Coling, D., Chen, G. D., Li, M., Tanaka, C., et al. (2008). Age-related hearing loss
in the Fischer 344/NHsd rat substrain. Hearing Research, 241(1–2), 26–33.
Borg, E. (1982). Auditory thresholds in rats of different age and strain: A behavioral and
electrophysiological study. Hearing Research, 8(2), 101–115.
Brown, J. N., Miller, J. M., Altschuler, R. A., & Nuttall, A. L. (1993). Osmotic pump implant for
chronic infusion of drugs into the inner ear. Hearing Research, 70(2), 167–172.
Campbell, K. C. M. (2001). Therapeutic use of D-methionine to reduce the toxicity of ototoxic
drugs, noise, and radiation. US Patent No. 6,265,386. United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Campbell, K. C. M. (2008). Therapeutic use of methionine-derivatives to reduce the toxicity of
noise. US Patent No. 7,423,065. United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Casali, J. G., Ahroon, W. A., & Lancaster, J. A. (2009). A ﬁeld investigation of hearing protection
and hearing enhancement in one device: For soldiers whose ears and lives depend upon it.
Noise & Health, 11(42), 69–90.
Chung, J. W., Ahn, J. H., Kim, J. Y., Lee, H. J., Kang, H. H., et al. (2007). The effect of isoﬂurane,
halothane and pentobarbital on noise-induced hearing loss in mice. Anesthesia and Analgesia,
104(6), 1404–1408.
Coles, R. R., Lutman, M. E., & Bufﬁn, J. T. (2000). Guidelines on the diagnosis of noise-induced
hearing loss for medicolegal purposes. Clinical Otolaryngology and Allied Sciences, 25(4),
264–273.
134
E.D. Lynch et al.

Dai, C., & Gan, R. Z. (2008). Change of middle ear transfer function in otitis media with effusion
model of guinea pigs. Hearing Research, 243(1–2), 78–86.
Darrouzet, V., Dulon, D., & Franco-Vidal, V. (2007). Multifrequency immittancemetry in
experimentally
induced stapes, round window and cochlear lesions. Audiology and
Neuro-Otology, 12(2), 85–100.
DiMasi, J. A., & Grabowski, H. G. (2007). The cost of biopharmaceutical R&D: Is biotech
different? Managerial and Decision Economics, 28, 469–479.
DiMasi, J. A., Hansen, R. W., & Grabowski, H. G. (2003). The price of innovation: New estimates
of drug development costs. Journal of Health Economics, 22(2), 151–185.
Dobie, R. A., & Clark, W. W. (2014). Exchange rates for intermittent and ﬂuctuating occupational
noise: A systematic review of studies of human permanent threshold shift. Ear and Hearing,
35(1), 86–96.
Dobie, R. A., & Clark, W. W. (2015). Response to Suter and NIOSH. Ear and Hearing, 36(4),
492–495.
DoD Instruction 6055.12. (2010). Department of Defense Instruction NUMBER 6055.12, Hearing
Conservation Program (HCP), reissued December 3, 2010.
Ediger, R. D. (1976). Care and management. In J. E. Wagner & P. J. Manning (Eds.), The biology
of the guinea pig (pp. 5–12). New York: Academic Press.
Eshraghi, A. A., Gupta, C., Van De Water, T. R., Bohorquez, J. E., Garnham, C., et al. (2013).
Molecular mechanisms involved in cochlear implantation trauma and the protection of hearing
and auditory sensory cells by inhibition of c-Jun-N-terminal kinase signaling. Laryngoscope,
123(Suppl. 1), S1–S14.
Gurgel, R. K., Jackler, R. K., Dobie, R. A., & Popelka, G. R. (2012). A new standardized format
for reporting hearing outcome in clinical trials. Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery,
147(5), 803–807.
Hamstra, D. A., Eisbruch, A., Naidu, M. U., Ramana, G. V., Sunkara, P., et al. (2010).
Pharmacokinetic analysis and phase 1 study of MRX-1024 in patients treated with radiation
therapy with or without cisplatinum for head and neck cancer. Clinical Cancer Research,
16(9), 2666–2676.
Henderson, D., & Hamernik, R. P. (2012). The use of kurtosis measurement in the assessment of
potential noise trauma. In C. G. Le Prell, D. Henderson, R. R. Fay, & A. N. Popper (Eds.),
Noise-induced
hearing
loss:
Scientiﬁc
advances
(pp.
41–55).
New
York:
Springer
Science + Business Media.
Henry, K. R. (1982). Age-related changes in sensitivity of the postpubertal ear to acoustic trauma.
Hearing Research, 8(3), 285–294.
Hernandez, A., Banos, J. E., Llop, C., & Farre, M. (2014). The deﬁnition of placebo in the
informed consent forms of clinical trials. PLoS ONE, 9(11), e113654.
Hu, B. (2012). Noise-induced structural damage in the cochlea. In C. G. Le Prell, D. Henderson,
R. R. Fay, & A. N. Popper (Eds.), Noise-induced hearing loss: Scientiﬁc advances (pp. 57–86).
New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Ison, J. R., Castro, J., Allen, P., Virag, T. M., & Walton, J. P. (2002). The relative detectability for
mice of gaps having different ramp durations at their onset and offset boundaries. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 112(2), 740–747.
Kang, H. S., Park, J. J., Ahn, S. K., Hur, D. G., & Kim, H. Y. (2013). Effect of high dose
intravenous vitamin C on idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing loss: A prospective
single-blind randomized controlled trial. European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, 270
(10), 2631–2636.
Karlman, B. (2012). ABG launches clinical strength hearing pill. http://www.prweb.com/releases/
2012/12/prweb10187490.htm. (Accessed October 5, 2015).
Kemp, D. T. (2008). Otoacoustic emissions: Concepts and origins. In G. A. Manley, R. R. Fay, &
A. N. Popper (Eds.), Active processes and otoacoustic emissions (pp. 1–38). New York:
Springer Science + Business Media.
Keranen, T., Halkoaho, A., Itkonen, E., & Pietila, A. M. (2015). Placebo-controlled clinical trials:
How trial documents justify the use of randomisation and placebo. BMC Medical Ethics, 16, 2.
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
135

Kil, J., & Lynch, E. (2004). Methods for treating hearing loss. US Patent No. 6,815,434. United
States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Kil, J., & Lynch, E. (2010). Methods for treating hearing loss. US Patent No. 7,820,640. United
States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Kil, J., & Lynch, E. (2012). Methods and compostions for ameliorating the undesirable effects of
chemotherapy. US Patent No. 8,309,560. United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Kil, J., Lynch, E. D., Grifﬁths, S., Lobarinas, E., Spankovich, C., et al. (2014). Efﬁcacy of
SPI-1005 for prevention of noise-induced hearing loss: Phase 2 clinical trial results.
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 151(1 Suppl.), 83–84.
Konrad-Martin, D., Reavis, K., McMillan, G., & Dille, M. (2012). Multivariate DPOAE metrics
for identifying changes in hearing: Perspectives from ototoxicity monitoring. International
Journal of Audiology, 1(Suppl. 1), S51–S62.
Kopke, R., Slade, M. D., Jackson, R., Hammill, T., Fausti, S., et al. (2015). Efﬁcacy and safety of
N-acetylcysteine in prevention of noise induced hearing loss: A randomized clinical trial.
Hearing Research, 323, 40–50.
Kopke, R. D., Henderson, D., & Hoffer, M. E. (2003). Prevention or reversal of sensorineural
hearing loss (SNHL) through biologic mechanisms. US Patent No. 6,649,621. United States
Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Kramer, S., Dreisbach, L., Lockwood, J., Baldwin, K., Kopke, R. D., et al. (2006). Efﬁcacy of the
antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC) in protecting ears exposed to loud music. Journal of the
American Academy of Audiology, 17, 265–278.
Kuhl, P. K. (1986). Theoretical contributions of tests on animals to the special-mechanisms debate
in speech. Experimental Biology, 45(3), 233–265.
Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2006). Acceleration of age-related hearing loss by early noise
exposure: Evidence of a misspent youth. Journal of Neuroscience, 26(7), 2115–2123.
Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2009). Adding insult to injury: Cochlear nerve degeneration
after “temporary” noise-induced hearing loss. Journal of Neuroscience, 29(45), 14077–14085.
Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2015). Synaptopathy in the noise-exposed and aging cochlea:
Primary neural degeneration in acquired sensorineural hearing loss. Hearing Research,
330,191–199.
Lambert, P. R., Nguyen, S., Maxwell, K. S., Tucci, D. L., Lustig, L. R., et al. (2012).
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical study to assess safety and clinical
activity of OTO-104 given as a single intratympanic injection in patients with unilateral
Ménière’s disease. Otology & Neurotology, 33(7), 1257–1265.
Lemke, L. E., McGee, D. H., Prieskorn, D. M., Wall, G. M., Dolan, D. F., et al. (2009). Safety of
ciproﬂoxacin and dexamethasone in the guinea pig middle ear. Archives of Otolaryngology–
Head and Neck Surgery, 135(6), 575–580.
Lenoir, M., Bock, G. R., & Pujol, R. (1979). Supra-normal susceptibility to acoustic trauma of the
rat pup cochlea. Journal de Physiologie, 75(5), 521–524.
Le Prell, C. G. (2016). Potential contributions of recreational noise to daily noise dose. CAOHC
Update, 28(1), 1,3.
Le Prell, C. G., & Lobarinas, E. (2015). Strategies for assessing antioxidant efﬁcacy in clinical
trials. In J. M. Miller, C. G. Le Prell & L. P. Rybak (Eds.), Oxidative stress in applied basic
research and clinical practice: Free radicals in ENT pathology (pp. 163–192). New York:
Humana Press.
Le Prell, C. G., & Brungart, D. S. (in press). Potential effects of noise on hearing: Supra-threshold
testing using speech-in-noise and auditory evoked potentials. Otology & Neurotology.
Le Prell, C. G., & Miller, J. M. (2016). Disorders of hearing. In D. Armstrong & R. D. Stratton
(Eds.), Oxidative stress and antioxidant protection: The science of free radical biology &
disease (pp. 115–131). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Le Prell, C. G., Niemiec, A. J., & Moody, D. B. (2001). Macaque thresholds for detecting
increases in intensity: Effects of formant structure. Hearing Research, 162(1–2), 29–42.
Le Prell, C. G., Yagi, M., Kawamoto, K., Beyer, L. A., Atkin, G., et al. (2004). Chronic
excitotoxicity in the guinea pig cochlea induces temporary functional deﬁcits without
136
E.D. Lynch et al.

disrupting otoacoustic emissions. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 116,
1044–1056.
Le Prell, C. G., Kawamoto, K., Raphael, Y., & Dolan, D. F. (2006). Electromotile hearing:
Acoustic tones mask psychophysical response to high-frequency electrical stimulation of intact
guinea pig cochleae. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 120(6), 3889–3900.
Le Prell, C. G., Hughes, L. F., & Miller, J. M. (2007). Free radical scavengers vitamins A, C, and
E plus magnesium reduce noise trauma. Free Radical Biology and Medicine, 42(9),
1454–1463.
Le Prell, C. G., Gagnon, P. M., Bennett, D. C., & Ohlemiller, K. K. (2011a). Nutrient-enhanced
diet reduces noise-induced damage to the inner ear and hearing loss. Translational Research,
158, 38–53.
Le Prell, C. G., Hensley, B. N., Campbell, K. C. M., Hall, J. W. I., & Guire, K. (2011b). Hearing
outcomes in a “normally-hearing” college-student population: Evidence of hearing loss.
International Journal of Audiology, 50, S21–S31.
Le Prell, C. G., Dell, S., Hensley, B. N., Hall, J. W. I., Campbell, K. C. M., et al. (2012). Digital
music exposure reliably induces temporary threshold shift (TTS) in normal hearing human
subjects. Ear and Hearing, 33(6), e44–e58.
Le Prell, C. G., Ojano-Dirain, C. P., Rudnick, E. W., Nelson, M. A., deRemer, S., et al. (2014).
Assessment of nutrient supplement to reduce gentamicin-induced ototoxicity. Journal of the
Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 15(3), 375–393.
Li, H. S., Hultcrantz, M., & Borg, E. (1993). Inﬂuence of age on noise-induced permanent
threshold shifts in CBA/Ca and C57BL/6 J mice. Audiology, 32(3), 195–204.
Lin, C. Y., Wu, J. L., Shih, T. S., Tsai, P. J., Sun, Y. M., et al. (2010). N-Acetyl-cysteine against
noise-induced temporary threshold shift in male workers. Hearing Research, 269(1–2), 42–47.
Lin, H. W., Furman, A. C., Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2011). Primary neural
degeneration in the guinea pig cochlea after reversible noise-induced threshold shift. Journal of
the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 12(5), 605–616.
Lindblad, A. C., Rosenhall, U., Olofsson, A., & Hagerman, B. (2011). The efﬁcacy of N-
acetylcysteine to protect the human cochlea from subclinical hearing loss caused by impulse
noise: A controlled trial. Noise & Health, 13(55), 392–401.
Longenecker, R. J., & Galazyuk, A. V. (2011). Development of tinnitus in CBA/CaJ mice following
sound exposure. Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 12(5), 647–658.
Lonsbury-Martin, B. L., & Martin, G. K. (2008). Otoacoustic emissions: Basic studies in
mammalian models. In G. A. Manley, R. R. Fay, & A. N. Popper (Eds.), Active processes and
otoacoustic emissions (pp. 261–303). New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Lynch, E. D., Gu, R., Pierce, C., & Kil, J. (2004). Ebselen-mediated protection from single and
repeated noise exposure in rat. Laryngoscope, 114(2), 333–337.
Lynch, E. D., & Kil, J. (2009). Development of ebselen, a glutathione peroxidase mimic, for the
prevention and treatment of noise-induced hearing loss. Seminars in Hearing, 30, 47–55.
Makary, C. A., Shin, J., Kujawa, S. G., Liberman, M. C., & Merchant, S. N. (2011). Age-related
primary cochlear neuronal degeneration in human temporal bones. Journal of the Association
for Research in Otolaryngology, 12(6), 711–717.
Manley, G. A., & Van Dijk, P. (2008). Otoacoustic emissions in amphibians, lipidosaurs, and
archosaurs. In G. A. Manley, R. R. Fay, & A. N. Popper (Eds.), Active processes and
otoacoustic emissions (pp. 211–260). New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Margolis, R. H., Paul, S., Saly, G. L., Schachern, P. A., & Keefe, D. H. (2001). Wideband
reﬂectance tympanometry in chinchillas and human. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 110(3 Pt 1), 1453–1464.
May, B., Moody, D. B., & Stebbins, W. C. (1989). Categorical perception of conspeciﬁc
communication sounds by Japanese macaques, Macaca fuscata. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 85(2), 837–847.
Miller, J. M., Le Prell, C. G., Prieskorn, D. M., Wys, N. L., & Altschuler, R. A. (2007). Delayed
neurotrophin treatment following deafness rescues spiral ganglion cells from death and
promotes
regrowth
of
auditory
nerve
peripheral
processes:
Effects
of
brain-derived
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
137

neurotrophic factor and ﬁbroblast growth factor. Journal of Neuroscience Research, 85,
1959–1969.
Miller, J. M., Le Prell, C. G., Schacht, J., & Prieskorn, D. (2011). Composition and method of
treating hearing loss. US Patent No. 7,951,845 United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Moody, D. B. (1994). Detection and discrimination of amplitude-modulated signals by macaque
monkeys. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 95(6), 3499–3510.
Moody, D. B. (2004). Animal models in tinnitus. In J. B. Snow (Ed.), Tinnitus: Theory and
management (pp. 80–95). Hamilton, ON, Canada: BC Decker.
Moody, D. B., Le Prell, C. G., & Niemiec, A. J. (1998). Monaural phase discrimination by
macaque monkeys: Use of multiple cues. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
103(5 Pt 1), 2618–2623.
Mora, R., Barbieri, M., Mora, F., Mora, M., & Yoo, T. J. (2003). Intravenous infusion of
recombinant tissue plasminogen activator for the treatment of patients with sudden and/or
chronic hearing loss. Annals of Otology, Rhinology and Laryngology, 112(8), 665–670.
Morata, T. C., Themann, C. L., Byrne, D. C., Davis, R. R., Murphy, W. J., & Stephenson, M. R.
(2015). Letter to the Editor: Scientiﬁc rigor required for a re-examination of exchange rate for
occupational noise measurements Re: Dobie, R. A., & Clark, W. W. (2014) Exchange rates for
intermittent and ﬂuctuating occupational noise: A systematic review of studies of human
permanent threshold shift, Ear Hear, 35, 86–96. Ear and Hearing, 36(4), 488–491.
Morgan, S., Grootendorst, P., Lexchin, J., Cunningham, C., & Greyson, D. (2011). The cost of
drug development: A systematic review. Health Policy, 100(1), 4–17.
National Institute on Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). (1998). Criteria for a
recommended standard, occupational noise exposure. DHHS (NIOSH) Publication No.98–126.
National Research Council. (1996). Guide for the care and use of laboratory animals.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NCT00808470. Micronutrients to prevent noise-induced hearing loss. http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/
show/NCT00808470. Accessed May 8, 2015.
NCT01345474. Phase 3 clinical trial: D-methionine to reduce noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL).
http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01345474. Accessed February 5, 2015.
NCT01444846. Otoprotection with SPI-1005. http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01444846.
Accessed January 11, 2015.
Nelson, D. I., Nelson, R. Y., Concha-Barrientos, M., & Fingerhut, M. (2005). The global burden
of occupational noise-induced hearing loss. American Journal of Industrial Medicine, 48(6),
446–458.
Niemansburg, S. L., van Delden, J. J., Dhert, W. J., & Bredenoord, A. L. (2015). Reconsidering
the ethics of sham interventions in an era of emerging technologies. Surgery, 157(4), 801–810.
Niskar, A. S., Kieszak, S. M., Holmes, A. E., Esteban, E., Rubin, C., & Brody, D. J. (2001).
Estimated prevalence of noise-induced hearing threshold shifts among children 6 to 19 years of
age: The Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988–1994, United States.
Pediatrics, 108(1), 40–43.
Nowotny, M., Remus, M., Kossl, M., & Gaese, B. H. (2011). Characterization of the perceived
sound of trauma-induced tinnitus in gerbils. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
130(5), 2827–2834.
Occupational Safety & Health Administration (OSHA). (1983). 29 CFR 1910.95. Occupational
Noise Exposure; Hearing Conservation Amendment; Final Rule, effective 8 March 1983. U.S.
Department of Labor, Occupational Safety & Health Administration.
Ojano-Dirain, C. P., Antonelli, P. J., & Le Prell, C. G. (2013). Mitochondria-targeted antioxidant
MitoQ reduces gentamicin-induced ototoxicity. Otology & Neurotology, 35(3), 533–539.
Popelar, J., Groh, D., Mazelova, J., & Syka, J. (2003). Cochlear function in young and adult
Fischer 344 rats. Hearing Research, 186(1–2), 75–84.
Prosen, C. A., & Moody, D. B. (1995). Rise-time difference thresholds in the monkey. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 97(1), 697–700.
Prosen, C. A., Moody, D. B., Stebbins, W. C., & Hawkins, J. E., Jr. (1981). Auditory intensity
discrimination after selective loss of cochlear outer hair cells. Science, 212(4500), 1286–1288.
138
E.D. Lynch et al.

Prosen, C. A., Halpern, D. L., & Dallos, P. (1989). Frequency difference limens in normal and
sensorineural hearing impaired chinchillas. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
85(3), 1302–1313.
Pye, A. (1987). Comparison of various short noise exposures in albino and pigmented guinea pigs.
Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, 243(6), 411–416.
Rauch, S. D., Halpin, C. F., Antonelli, P. J., Babu, S., Carey, J. P., et al. (2011). Oral vs
intratympanic corticosteroid therapy for idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing loss: A
randomized trial. JAMA, 305(20), 2071–2079.
Ruben, R. J. (2000). Redeﬁning the survival of the ﬁttest: communication disorders in the 21st
century. Laryngoscope, 110(2 Pt 1), 241–245.
Scannon, P. J. (2012). The target product proﬁle: Converting discoveries into companies. http://
www.qb3.org/sites/qb3.org/ﬁles/QB3Podcast20120316_2_0.pdf. Accessed August 9, 2016.
Schachtman, N. (2003). Pop a pill, save your hearing? http://archive.wired.com/medtech/health/
news/2003/12/61646?currentPage=all. Accessed October 5, 2015.
Seraﬁn, J. V., Moody, D. B., & Stebbins, W. C. (1982). Frequency selectivity of the monkey’s
auditory system: Psychophysical tuning curves. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 71(6), 1513–1518.
Somers, T. (2007). ‘Hearing pill’ may be boon. http://www.utsandiego.com/uniontrib/20070406/
news_1b6tech.html. Accessed October 5, 2015.
Sommers, M. S., Moody, D. B., Prosen, C. A., & Stebbins, W. C. (1992). Formant frequency
discrimination by Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata). The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 91(6), 3499–3510.
Spruill, W. J., Wade, W.E., DiPiro, J. T., Blouin, R. A., & Pruemer, J. M. (2014). Introduction to
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. In Concepts in Clinical Pharmacokinetics, 6th ed.
(pp. 1–17). Bethesda, MD: American Society of Health-System Pharmacists.
Suckfuell, M., Canis, M., Strieth, S., Scherer, H., & Haisch, A. (2007). Intratympanic treatment of
acute acoustic trauma with a cell-permeable JNK ligand: A prospective randomized phase I/II
study. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 127(9), 938–942.
Suter, A. H. (2015). Letter to the Editor: An alternative interpretation of issues surrounding the
exchange rates Re: Dobie, R.A., & Clark, W.W. (2014) Exchange rates for intermittent and
ﬂuctuating occupational noise: A systematic review of studies of human permanent threshold
shift, Ear Hear, 35, 86–96. Ear and Hearing, 36(4), 485–487.
Talcott, K. A., Casali, J. G., Keady, J. P., & Killion, M. C. (2012). Azimuthal auditory localization
of
gunshots
in
a
realistic
ﬁeld
environment:
Effects
of
open-ear
versus
hearing
protection-enhancement devices (HPEDs), military vehicle noise, and hearing impairment.
International Journal of Audiology, 51(Suppl. 1), S20–S30.
Turner, J. G., Brozoski, T. J., Bauer, C. A., Parrish, J. L., Myers, K., et al. (2006). Gap detection
deﬁcits in rats with tinnitus: A potential novel screening tool. Behavioral Neuroscience,
120(1), 188–195.
Tziridis, K., Ahlf, S., & Schulze, H. (2012). A low cost setup for behavioral audiometry in rodents.
Journal of Visualized Experiments, 68, doi: 10.3791/4433.
US Department of Defense. (2004). DoD Hearing Conservation Program (HCP). DoD Instruction
(DoDI) Number 6055.12; reissued December 3, 2010.
Ward, W. D., Royster, L. H., & Ward, J. D. (2003). Auditory and nonauditory effects of noise.
In E. H. Berger, L. H. Royster, J. D. Royster, D. P. Driscoll & M. Layne (Eds.), The noise
manual, rev. 5th ed. (pp. 123–147). Fairfax, VA: American Industrial Hygiene Association.
Yamasoba, T., Pourbakht, A., Sakamoto, T., & Suzuki, M. (2005). Ebselen prevents noise-induced
excitotoxicity and temporary threshold shift. Neuroscience Letters, 380(3), 234–238.
Yang, G., Lobarinas, E., Zhang, L., Turner, J., Stolzberg, D., et al. (2007). Salicylate induced
tinnitus: Behavioral measures and neural activity in auditory cortex of awake rats. Hearing
Research, 226(1–2), 244–253.
Zheng, Q. Y., Johnson, K. R., & Erway, L. C. (1999). Assessment of hearing in 80 inbred strains
of mice by ABR threshold analyses. Hearing Research, 130(1–2), 94–107.
Zheng, Q. Y., Tong, Y. C., Alagramam, K. N., & Yu, H. (2007). Tympanometry assessment of 61
inbred strains of mice. Hearing Research, 231(1–2), 23–31.
5
Development of Drugs for Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
139

Chapter 6
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss
Kathleen C.M. Campbell and Daniel J. Fox
Abstract For decades, cisplatin chemotherapy has signiﬁcantly increased survival
in numerous cancer patient populations. However, cisplatin treatment results in
severe adverse side effects including nephrotoxicity, neurotoxicity, radiation-
induced oral mucositis, ototoxicity, and permanent hearing loss. Protection from
cisplatin’s adverse side effects has therefore been a translational research focus for
many years. This chapter discusses cisplatin’s historical discovery, its clinical
application, and cisplatin-induced ototoxicity mechanisms. The chapter then reviews
current translational research to protect from cisplatin-induced hearing loss,
including clinical behavioral and objective monitoring techniques; adult and pedi-
atric grading scales implemented to measure and identify cisplatin-induced oto-
toxicity; and potential otoprotective mechanisms that are currently tested to prevent
cisplatin-induced ototoxicity in animals and clinical trials. Finally, the chapter
reviews potential clinical trial funding and the steps required by the FDA, including
the extensive investigational new drug (IND) application, to test otoprotective agents
for protection from cisplatin-induced hearing loss. At the chapter’s end, readers
should acquire general knowledge underlying cisplatin’s intricate history and clin-
ical cisplatin use and understand the steps required to design and perform transla-
tional otoprotection studies to prevent cisplatin-induced ototoxicity and permanent
hearing loss.
Keywords Cisplatin history Clinical monitoring Food and Drug Administration
Funding sources  Grading scales  Investigational new drug  Mechanisms 
Otoprotection trials Ototoxicity Ototoxic mechanisms
K.C.M. Campbell (&)  D.J. Fox
Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology, and Cell Biology,
Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, 801 N. Rutledge, Springﬁeld,
IL 62794-9629, USA
e-mail: kcampbell@siumed.edu
D.J. Fox
e-mail: dfox@siumed.edu
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
C.G. Le Prell et al. (eds.), Translational Research in Audiology, Neurotology,
and the Hearing Sciences, Springer Handbook of Auditory Research 58,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-40848-4_6
141

6.1
Introduction to Cisplatin Ototoxicity
Barnett Rosenberg’s discovery of cisplatin as an antineoplastic agent historically
impacted cancer patient survival. He found that the “inert” platinum-coated elec-
trodes used during his electrophysiology studies actually created a precipitant,
cisplatin, that prevented in vitro cell division (Rosenberg et al. 1965). Many years
of research determined signiﬁcant cisplatin-induced tumor size reductions and
increased survivability in mice (Rosenberg et al. 1969). Essentially, Rosenberg’s
discovery transformed solid tumor cancer patient survival rates into an 80–90 %
“cure” rate (Alderen et al. 2006).
Cisplatin is now one of the most successful clinical anticancer therapeutics used
to treat solid tumors found in ovarian, cervical, testicular, bladder, lung, and head
and neck cancers (Boulikas and Vougiouka 2004). However, cisplatin also results
in severe cochleo-, nephro-, and neurotoxicities that induce permanent bilateral
hearing loss, kidney failure, cognitive deﬁciencies, and radiation-induced oral
mucositis (Lippman et al. 1973; Grunberg et al. 1989; Taguchi et al. 2005).
Preventing cisplatin-induced damage without compromising its powerful inﬂuence
on solid tumors has therefore been a major translational research focus for many
years.
This chapter reviews current translational research to protect the inner ear from
cisplatin-induced hearing loss. It discusses clinical behavioral and objective grading
scales and monitoring techniques to measure and identify cisplatin-induced oto-
toxicity. The chapter also introduces potential otoprotective therapies that are
currently being tested to prevent cisplatin-induced ototoxicity in animals and
clinical trials. At the chapter’s end, readers should have general knowledge
underlying cisplatin’s translational history, clinical cisplatin use, its impact on
hearing, methods and procedures for cisplatin ototoxicity monitoring, grading of
cisplatin ototoxic adverse events for clinical trials, and an introductory knowledge
of otoprotective agents currently under development to prevent cisplatin-induced
hearing loss, including the challenges encountered in the translational process.
6.2
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss Mechanisms
of Action and Incidence
Cisplatin HCl hydrolyzes in endogenous systems and enters cellular nuclei, where it
binds to DNA with a high afﬁnity to guanine (Sherman et al. 1985; Baik et al.
2003). Cisplatin-bound DNA inﬂuences DNA-binding proteins to either induce
programmed cellular death or initiate cellular repair (Bierbach et al. 1999; McHugh
et al. 2001). Cisplatin-induced cellular death generates excessive reactive oxygen
species (ROS) via the NADPH-oxidase (NOX) pathway that overwhelm endoge-
nous antioxidant pathways and damage cells (Itoh et al. 2011; Casares et al. 2012).
Thus, while the DNA-binding molecular mechanisms render cisplatin an excellent
142
K.C.M. Campbell and D.J. Fox

anticancer drug, the same mechanisms also can cause permanent damage to normal
cells, particularly in the cochlea (Lippman et al. 1973). Inner ear pharmacokinetics
and stress-induced pathways activated in the inner ear by cisplatin treatment have
been well described (for recent review, see Laurell and Pierre 2015).
Cisplatin is the most ototoxic platinum-based chemotherapeutic agent (Moroso
and Blair 1983). Hearing loss generally begins at the higher frequency regions as
early as the ﬁrst treatment cycle and gradually progresses into the midfrequencies
with increased cumulative cisplatin dose (Kopelman et al. 1988). Children younger
than 5 years of age are particularly prone to hearing loss onset compared to ado-
lescents between 15 and 20 years of age (Li et al. 2004). Cisplatin-induced hearing
loss is particularly detrimental to pediatric populations whose cognitive and speech
development depends greatly on hearing perception (Knight et al. 2007).
Cisplatin-treated patients on high-dose protocols, such as in ovarian cancer, have
signiﬁcantly increased incidence (90–100 %) of hearing threshold shifts (Benedetti
Panici et al. 1993). High-frequency hearing loss is ﬁrst observed, but the hearing
loss progresses into lower frequencies as a result of cumulative doses over a body
surface area (BSA) of 100 mg/m2 (Kopelman et al. 1988). At less than a BSA of
400 mg/m2 cumulative dose, approximately 20–50 % of patients incur permanent
hearing loss depending on the treated cancer type, which inﬂuences the cisplatin
dosing regimen (Bokemeyer et al. 1998). Thus, hearing loss extent is strongly
correlated to dose amount and duration of the cisplatin treatment.
6.3
Clinical Monitoring for Cisplatin-Induced Hearing
Loss and New Drug Trials
For general clinical ototoxicity monitoring, the consensus guidelines of the
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) (1994) and the 2009
position statement of the American Academy of Audiology (AAA) provide the
most widely accepted guidances. However, those guidances are designed for early
clinical detection of ototoxicity rather than determination or grading of adverse
events in clinical trials. Furthermore, the guidances were not designed to determine
if a pharmaceutical otoprotective agent reduces ototoxicity in clinical trials. To date,
no formal or universally accepted guidelines are in place for reporting ototoxic
adverse events in clinical trials or determining otoprotection. Currently, the US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) does not provide practice guidelines
speciﬁcally for clinical trials in this area. However, a number of scales and
approaches have been proposed and published (for a recent review, see Anderson
and Campbell 2015). This section reviews some of the options available for both
clinical care and clinical trials.
6
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss
143

6.3.1
Audiological Monitoring Procedures
When monitoring cisplatin chemotherapy patients for ototoxicity, the monitoring
objective for a particular patient must be considered. In all cases, a comprehensive
baseline hearing assessment should be conducted to document current hearing
status for a valid comparison to later hearing testing results. Approximately 15 % of
American adults report impaired hearing (Blackwell et al. 2014). Thus, it is critical
to know whether a patient has preexisting hearing loss. Without baseline testing,
frequently the clinician cannot truly determine whether hearing changed during the
course of treatment or the patient’s perception of his or her hearing has changed.
For example, patients who are stressed, distracted, fatigued, experiencing
malaise, in new listening environments, or listening to new speakers may report
communication difﬁculty even if their auditory threshold has not changed. All of
these situations are common in patients facing a potentially life-threatening illness,
undergoing chemotherapy, and possibly experiencing concomitant radiation treat-
ments. Furthermore, if the patients have preexistent hearing loss, a relatively small
shift in hearing thresholds may have a disproportionate effect on their communi-
cation abilities relative to a patient experiencing the same degree of hearing
threshold shift but with completely normal hearing at baseline. Cisplatin-treated
patients with or without concomitant radiation to the head and/or neck may also
experience a cognitive disorder commonly referred to as “chemobrain,” which may
impair their ability to process auditory information (Whitney et al. 2008). Thus, in
clinical care, but particularly in clinical trials, relying on a patient’s self-report of
hearing loss to indicate ototoxicity will probably be both inaccurate and unreliable.
Consequently, baseline testing is essential to establish a clear relationship
between hearing changes and any drug administration (Campbell and Durrant 1993;
Campbell et al. 2000; Campbell 2004). The baseline evaluation also provides the
opportunity for the audiologist to discuss the possibility of ototoxic hearing loss
with the patient and family and assure them that they can be assisted if a hearing
loss develops.
If the patient’s chemotherapy can be modiﬁed, then the primary goal of oto-
toxicity monitoring is to identify ototoxicity in the very early stages, preferably
while hearing loss is limited to the frequency ranges above 8 kHz, which are not
critical for speech understanding in most listening situations. Cisplatin-induced
hearing loss almost invariably starts in the highest frequencies and then later pro-
gresses into the conventional frequency range (0.25–8 kHz) (Fausti et al. 1984).
Thus, early identiﬁcation can potentially protect the patient’s communicative
abilities because hearing in the conventional frequency range is primarily respon-
sible for speech understanding. Consequently, high-frequency audiometry is rec-
ommended in addition to all other measures if the chemotherapy regimen can
potentially be altered. If high-frequency thresholds worsen, then the audiologist can
notify the patient and physician so that other treatment options such as dose
reduction, a different chemotherapeutic agent, or dosing schedule can be
144
K.C.M. Campbell and D.J. Fox

considered. For clinical trials of an otoprotective agent, high-frequency audiometry
is highly recommended to provide the most sensitive measure of otoprotection.
If the chemotherapy protocol cannot be altered even if ototoxicity occurs, then
the priority for clinical care ototoxicity monitoring changes. When treatment cannot
be safely altered, the goal of ototoxicity monitoring is to detect and monitor the
progression of ototoxicity if it develops, help the patient and family understand the
hearing loss, and develop communication strategies to accommodate it. The man-
agement strategies are similar to those for any other patient developing hearing loss.
These strategies include counseling, including an explanation of the hearing loss, its
impact on communication, and strategies to foster communication. Strategies may
include counseling the family to provide better visual cues to the patient, reducing
ambient noise in communication environments, preferential seating, stress reduc-
tion, and possible use of assistive devices or hearing aids.
If a patient is ﬁtted with a hearing aid, special attention needs to be given to
controlling the maximum power output of the hearing aid. The patient should also
be counseled to avoid noise exposure during and in the months after cisplatin
chemotherapy and to use hearing protectors whenever noise exposure is unavoid-
able. Noise exposure exacerbates cisplatin-induced ototoxicity during the course of
chemotherapy and quite possibly for months or years after discontinuation
(Bhattacharyya and Dayal 1984; Gratton et al. 1990). During the course of a clinical
trial, noise exposure can confound results by introducing temporary or permanent
threshold shifts that are unrelated to cisplatin per se or the investigational study
drug. For clinical trials in cisplatin otoprotection, it is particularly important to
question the subject about recent noise exposure just prior to each hearing test
because noise exacerbates the risk of cisplatin-induced hearing loss, sometimes
even years after cisplatin treatment is discontinued (Peleva et al. 2014). Thus, not
only short-term but also long-term follow-up results for the clinical trials outcomes
could be affected by noise exposures.
Whether for clinical care or for clinical trials, a team approach to ototoxicity
monitoring is essential. Communications, procedures, and reporting for interactions
between the physician, scheduling nurse, patient, and audiology clinic should be
clariﬁed in advance. Infection control and potential exposure to other patients in the
audiology waiting area need to be addressed because these patients can be
immunosuppressed. All audiologic testing should be conducted by experienced,
licensed audiologists. The ototoxicity monitoring team must deliver fast, accurate,
and ﬂexible testing to this challenging test population because of their complicated
schedules and chemotherapy-induced health issues. These patients may have dif-
ﬁculty attending testing sessions that test auditory stimuli at threshold level for long
periods of time.
In addition, all audiologic test equipment must be calibrated at least once per year
and must meet all American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) standards for audiologic testing. Similarly,
the test environment must meet ANSI/ISO standards for ambient-noise levels. If
speech testing is included, the speech signals will also need to be calibrated (ASHA
6
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss
145

1987, 1988). For clinical trials, biannual calibrations are desirable to ensure that all
measures can be accurately compared to baseline ﬁndings.
As recommended by the AAA Position Statement (2009), the baseline audio-
logic assessment should be comprehensive so as to identify other factors that could
cause
ﬂuctuant
hearing
independent
of
the
cisplatin
(e.g.,
otitis
media).
A comprehensive baseline evaluation should include air conduction threshold
testing in the conventional frequency range and in the high-frequency range. Bone
conduction testing should be conducted at any frequency between 0.5 and 4 kHz in
which air conduction thresholds are 15 dB HL (decibels hearing level) or greater to
identify any conductive component in the measured hearing loss. Tympanometry is
also needed at baseline to detect any middle ear abnormality. Speech reception
threshold (SRT) testing and word recognition testing are generally not a part of
subsequent monitoring used to determine if ototoxicity has occurred but are rec-
ommended at baseline so that a comparison is available if hearing loss later
develops. Otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) may be included as an adjunct but are not
recommended as a primary measure, as discussed in Sect. 6.3.1.9. Once a com-
prehensive baseline assessment is collected, the chemotherapy treatment protocol
may be altered if early indication of ototoxicity is discovered.
After the baseline evaluation, ototoxicity monitoring generally includes only air
conduction thresholds in each ear at the conventional frequency range and the
high-frequency range if indicated. The thresholds obtained at each follow-up visit
are compared against pretreatment baseline thresholds and not to the most recent
follow-up evaluation. If the change from baseline meets the ASHA (1994) and
AAA (2009) criteria for detection of ototoxicity, the patient then receives a full
comprehensive audiologic assessment for comparison to baseline ﬁndings. These
results are reported to the patient and physician.
The signiﬁcant change criteria as deﬁned by ASHA (1994) and AAA (2009) are
any one of the following:
1.  20 dB change at any frequency,
2.  10 dB change at any two adjacent frequencies, or
3. loss of response at three consecutive frequencies where responses were obtained
at baseline.
To be considered signiﬁcant for ototoxicity, these changes must replicate
24 hours later with no indication of middle ear abnormality. Patients serve as their
own controls for ototoxic change, which is computed relative to baseline measures.
The methods for clinical ototoxicity monitoring and ototoxicity monitoring in
clinical trials can be similar. However, in clinical trials, the protocols are more
formalized, regimented, and tailored to the potentially ototoxic drug or otoprotec-
tive agent under study (Campbell et al. 2003).
For clinical trials, the ASHA criteria are frequently used as an early indication of
possible ototoxicity. In that case, any patient with a threshold shift at the follow-up
test meeting the ASHA change criteria is immediately scheduled for a full diag-
nostic evaluation to determine if the threshold shift is conductive (e.g., otitis media)
146
K.C.M. Campbell and D.J. Fox

or sensorineural (possible ototoxic shift). If the full assessment conﬁrms sen-
sorineural and possibly ototoxic threshold shift, the degree of shift is then cate-
gorized according to an adverse event grading system. For cisplatin otoprotection
clinical trials, the most common grading system used in the Cancer Therapy
Evaluation Program (CTEP) is the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse
Events (CTCAE).
6.3.1.1
Behavioral Measures
The primary measure for ototoxicity monitoring in clinical care and generally in
clinical trials is pure-tone air conduction threshold audiometry. When needed, bone
conduction thresholds are also added to the test battery to clarify if a loss is
sensorineural or conductive. The objective of these tests is to determine a patient’s
auditory sensitivity thresholds for pure-tone stimuli by air and bone conduction. Air
conduction thresholds indicate hearing losses that are either conductive, sen-
sorineural, or mixed (a combination of sensorineural and conductive hearing loss).
An air–bone gap indicates conductive hearing loss components. Bone conduction
threshold deﬁcits reﬂect only the sensorineural component of the hearing loss. Air
conduction and bone conduction thresholds are compared to determine the degree
and type of hearing loss.
6.3.1.2
Bilateral Air Conduction Pure-Tone Threshold Audiometry
During air conduction threshold testing, the signal is generally delivered through
earphones to each ear individually, with the subject responding by pushing a button
or raising their hand when he or she hears the signal. The softest sound at which the
subject responds 50 % of the time is considered threshold. Pure-tone threshold
testing should utilize the modiﬁed Hughson–Westlake procedure (Carhart and
Jerger 1959; ASHA 1987). Bilateral air conduction pure-tone threshold audiology
is
performed
in
the
conventional
(0.25–8 kHz)
range
prior
to
cisplatin
administration.
Pure-tone air conduction testing should be conducted at 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and
8 kHz and also at 3 and 6 kHz if more precision is needed as in clinical trials (e.g.,
for adverse event grading). The 10- to 16-kHz high-frequency range is recom-
mended to test the earliest detection of cisplatin-induced ototoxicity or the efﬁcacy
of otoprotective agents because cisplatin-induced changes and otoprotection are
represented tonotopically from high to low frequencies (Fausti et al. 1984;
Campbell et al. 1996). The exact frequencies used for high-frequency audiometry
can vary by the speciﬁc audiometer employed.
High-frequency audiometry can be problematic in certain patient populations
because not all patients will have measurable hearing in the high-frequency range
(Osterhammel 1980; Kujansuu et al. 1989); this is particularly problematic for the
elderly (Stelmachowicz et al. 1989; Wiley et al. 1998). Despite these challenges,
6
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss
147

extended high frequencies should be included as a primary or secondary outcome in
cisplatin otoprotection clinical trials, with all patients who have measurable hearing
at each frequency contributing shift data. Although otoprotection trials will typi-
cally focus on frequencies directly relevant for speech understanding, preventing
the onset of hearing loss at the higher frequencies is clinically meaningful in that it
provides proof the agent is bioavailable and effective in the ear and that it may
prevent shift into the lower frequency ranges.
At the baseline visit, pure-tone air conduction testing is immediately repeated at
1 kHz and sometimes also at 2 kHz to determine if the subject or patient provides
reliable responses. Responses are considered reliable if retest thresholds at both
frequencies do not exceed ±5 dB of the previously obtained threshold response.
This threshold reliability veriﬁcation method for ototoxicity monitoring in clinical
populations is based on Fausti et al. (1999) and Campbell et al. (2003); although the
speciﬁc frequencies at which reliability was assessed differed across reports, the
studies shared the conservative 5-dB criterion at two frequencies. Participant reli-
ability is an important issue and the production of consistent detection responses is
advisable for randomization.
6.3.1.3
Bone Conduction Threshold Testing
Bone conduction testing is measured by placing a calibrated vibrator that delivers
the signal through the bone to the cochlea, bypassing the outer and middle ears.
Common bone conductor placements are the mastoid and forehead. Bone con-
duction testing is assessed at 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, or 4 kHz if the air conduction
threshold at that frequency is 15 dB HL or greater. Bone conduction threshold
procedures are essentially the same as those used for air conduction threshold
testing.
6.3.1.4
Pediatric Testing
Monitoring ototoxicity in pediatric patients generally requires special testing
techniques if the child is behaviorally below expectations of a child 4–5 years of
age. Children may need to be tested using play audiometry with two examiners or
conditioned orientation response audiometry with a special pediatric audiometric
test environment and toy reinforcements. If the child will not use earphones, sound
ﬁeld stimuli may be necessary.
Children receiving cisplatin can be particularly difﬁcult to test if they have brain
cancers. A speedy and experienced audiologist is necessary to obtain as much
information as possible. Several studies have obtained excellent cisplatin ototoxi-
city monitoring data in children using a combination of techniques including air
conduction thresholds in the conventional and high-frequency ranges and otoa-
coustic emissions as described in Sect. 6.3.1.9. However, the most sensitive
148
K.C.M. Campbell and D.J. Fox

indicator of early ototoxic change in children is high-frequency audiometry (Knight
et al. 2005, 2007).
6.3.1.5
Immittance Audiometry (Tympanometry)
Immittance audiometry, or tympanometry, is the measurement of sound reﬂection
from the tympanic membrane as changes in air pressure occur. This procedure can
be used to assess the outer and middle ear system including the Eustachian tube.
Immittance audiometry does not measure ototoxicity directly but can help deter-
mine if outer or middle ear dysfunction is causing, or contributing to, hearing loss
independent of any cisplatin effects. It is particularly valuable for cisplatin-treated
patients because they are immunosuppressed, may be hospitalized, and are vul-
nerable to infections such as otitis media.
To measure tympanometry, a soft plastic probe is ﬁrst inserted in the ear canal
until an airtight seal is obtained. Then, a probe tone of about 226 Hz is presented
into the ear canal while the air pressure of the external ear canal is altered from
+200 to −400 dekapascals (daPa). The maximum compliance peak occurs when the
ear canal and middle ear air pressures are equal, thus maximizing acoustic trans-
mission through the middle ear.
The compliance peak indicates the pressure of the middle ear and implies the
efﬁcacy of Eustachian tube function. The height of the compliance peak reﬂects the
mobility, or conversely, the stiffness of the tympanic membrane and middle ear. For
clinical trials or to standardize procedures across sites, tympanometry screeners can
provide fast, easy, and standardized measures with a simple “pass” or “fail”
determination.
6.3.1.6
Speech Reception Threshold Testing
Speech reception threshold (SRT) is the softest intensity sound at which a subject
repeats back spondee words (bisyllabic words with equal emphasis on both sylla-
bles) at least 50 % of the time. In some cases (e.g., very poor word recognition or
very ill subject), a limited set of words may be used, typically six. Procedures are
described in more detail in ASHA (1988).
Speech reception threshold testing is used as cross check for the reliability of
pure-tone air conduction audiometry thresholds and includes checking for malin-
gering. In addition, SRTs provide the basis for determining the sensation level for
measuring word recognition, which is typically conducted at 25 or 40 dB above the
SRT. Sensation level (SL) is the difference between the signal delivery level and the
subject’s threshold for that signal, i.e., a 25-dB SL word recognition test includes
words presented at 25 dB above the SRT.
6
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss
149

6.3.1.7
Word Recognition
The primary purpose of the word recognition test is to estimate the ability to
understand and repeat single-syllable words presented at conversational or other
suprathreshold levels. Word recognition word lists are phonetically balanced,
meaning that they contain the phonemes of that language in the same frequency that
those phonemes appear in that language.
Word recognition should be determined using recorded word lists so that speaker
variables do not inﬂuence comparative results on subsequent testing. However,
some children respond better to live voice. Frequently used sensation levels are 40
or 25 dB SL to increase the sensitivity of the test to hearing changes. If the rec-
ommended decibel SL is uncomfortably loud for a given patient (i.e., signiﬁcant
sensorineural hearing loss with recruitment), word recognition is then tested at the
subject’s most comfortable listening level. Sensation level is based on SRT so the
level automatically adjusts if hearing loss develops during the course of the study as
repeat SRTs are determined. Recorded 50-word lists should be employed unless the
patient factors require live voice or half (25) word lists. However, to determine
whether or not a signiﬁcant change in word recognition has occurred, full 50-word
lists are required to be used with standardized interpretation norms (Thornton and
Rafﬁn 1977).
6.3.1.8
Follow-up Procedures
Audiology reassessments are repeated at each follow-up visit. Follow-up visits are
typically scheduled just before each round of chemotherapy and at a postdrug time
point of 1–3 months. However, monitoring, particularly in children, is desirable for
at least 5 years to check for progression. Comparisons of audiology assessments at
these visits are made to the baseline assessment. Bone conduction thresholds,
speech reception thresholds, and word recognition measures are generally repeated
only if there is a signiﬁcant threshold change (i.e., meeting ASHA criterion values)
and the change is replicated within 24 h. If a change is detected, tympanometry
testing to assess middle ear function is also repeated.
Word recognition scores are not generally used to determine if ototoxicity has
occurred or if an otoprotective agent is effective. Rather, word recognition scores
are used to help determine the impact of any hearing loss that does occur on
communicative function and select the strategies to best help the patient.
6.3.1.9
Objective Measures
Otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) are signals generated by the cochlear outer hair cells
and transmitted out through the middle ear system to a sensitive, low-noise
recording microphone in the external auditory meatus. Several types of OAEs are
found in humans, including spontaneous OAEs, sustained frequency OAEs
150
K.C.M. Campbell and D.J. Fox

(SFOAEs), transient OAEs (TEOAEs), and distortion product OAEs (DPOAEs).
However, only TEOAEs and DPOAEs are commonly used in audiologic clinical
evaluations (for review, see Glattke and Robinette 2007).
TEOAEs and DPOAEs are evoked emissions, meaning that they occur in
response to external stimuli, generally presented to the external auditory meatus.
TEOAEs occur in response to transient signals, usually a broad-spectrum click, thus
eliciting a broad-spectrum cochlear outer hair cell response. DPOAEs can be more
frequency speciﬁc because they are elicited by two simultaneous tones of longer
duration than the click used for TEOAEs. The primary tone is referred to as F1,
which is the lower frequency of the pair and the higher frequency is referred to as
F2. The tone pair elicits responses predominantly at the frequency 2(F1 −F2) but
the
responses
are
commonly
listed
according
to
the
geometric
mean
(GM) frequency which is (F1 + F2)/2.
DPOAEs are more commonly used in ototoxicity monitoring than TEOAEs
because they provide greater frequency response speciﬁcity and better sensitivity
for the high-frequency region, which is most sensitive to ototoxic changes (Knight
et al. 2005, 2007). In addition, DPOAE responses can often be recorded even in the
presence of mild to moderate sensorineural hearing loss while TEOAEs are gen-
erally absent at any frequency region where sensorineural hearing loss exceeds
approximately 30 dB HL (Lonsbury-Martin and Martin 1990; Martin et al. 1990;
Probst et al. 1991).
OAE recording does have several advantages over pure-tone threshold testing
because it requires no active responses from the patient and thus can be used even
in very ill or even comatose patients. OAEs are quick and generally inexpensive
and, although they require a quiet environment, they can be tested outside a sound
booth. Both TEOAEs (Plinkert and Krober 1991; Stavroulaki et al. 1999) and
DPOAEs (Mulheran and Degg 1997; Ress et al. 1999) generally change before air
conduction thresholds in the conventional frequency range when ototoxicity occurs.
DPOAEs generally show ototoxic change before TEOAEs (Lonsbury-Martin and
Martin 2001). However, high-frequency audiometry usually provides even an
earlier indication of ototoxic change than DPOAEs (Knight et al. 2005, 2007).
Although OAEs are classiﬁed as an objective measure, they are subject to
several patient factors. Any patient noise or ambient noise may obscure the
recording because OAEs are very low amplitude signals. Furthermore, any middle
ear problem (e.g., otitis media) or ear canal blockage (e.g., cerumen) may obscure
or preclude the recording because the signal must travel from the cochlea to the
external auditory meatus for recording. Consequently, if a patient develops otitis
media during the course of cisplatin administration, OAEs may not be a useful
measure at that time. Although OAEs are not a true measure of hearing, preexistent
hearing loss may preclude their recording, at least at the affected frequencies.
OAEs are an adjunct rather than a primary measure for monitoring ototoxicity.
They may not reﬂect all changes in the auditory system secondary to cisplatin
administration because they only measure cochlear outer hair cell function.
Cisplatin damage to the auditory system includes multiple sites throughout the
auditory system (Rybak et al. 2007), not only outer hair cell damage (Campbell
6
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss
151

et al. 1996) but also damage to the stria vascularis (Meech et al. 1998) and auditory
cortex (Gopal et al. 2012).
6.3.2
Ototoxicity Deﬁnition and Grading Scales
No universally accepted deﬁnition of ototoxicity exists. In addition to the ASHA
(1994) and AAA (2009) criteria for early detection of ototoxicity, 15 grading scales
have been developed, primarily for the purpose of grading adverse events in reports
and clinical trials (for review, see Anderson and Campbell 2015). Readers may
need to become familiar with them in evaluating the likely incidence and degree of
hearing loss reported in previous clinical trials. Furthermore, some use more levels
of ototoxicity grading that can lead to greater speciﬁcity or ability to distinguish
between ﬁndings in various clinical trials groups. Some clinical trials use a
four-level ototoxicity scale such as the Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program (CTEP)
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) versions 1.0, 2.0. 3.0,
4.0–4.03 and the Functional Hearing Loss Scale (Lewis et al. 2009; Nitz et al.
2013). Previous clinical trials have also used ﬁve-level ototoxicity scales such as the
Brock (SIOP) scale (Khan et al. 1982; Brock et al. 1991) Finally, clinical trials have
used seven- (Chang and Chinosornvatana 2010), eight- (Stöhr et al. 2005), and even
nine-level scales such as the Muenster Scale (Schmidt et al. 2007). Some of these
scales require baseline testing and others do not require baseline testing but only
postdrug administration auditory testing, which can be a consideration in clinical
trial design (Table 6.1).
Most, but not all, scales can be used in both pediatric and adult populations.
Scales that do not require baseline hearing testing were commonly designed for
pediatric populations because children are more likely to have normal hearing at
baseline, although this will not always be true. Children may have preexistent
sensorineural hearing loss, although much less commonly than adults, and they are
Table 6.1 Grading scales developed primarily to assess events in reports and clinical trials
Scale
Baseline testing
Khan et al. (1982)
Required
Brock et al. (1991)
Not required
CTEP: CTCAE versions 1 through 4.03
Required
Muenster Scale (Schmidt et al. 2007)
Required
Functional Hearing Loss Scale (Lewis et al. 2009)
Not required
Chang and Chinosornvatana (2010), Chang (2011)
Not required
SIOP Scale (Brock et al. 2012)
Not required
Nitz Scale (Nitz et al. 2013)
Required
WHO (1997)
Required
Stöhr et al. (2005)
Required
152
K.C.M. Campbell and D.J. Fox

also more prone to conductive hearing loss, which can ﬂuctuate during the course of
chemotherapy. Baseline testing can assist in identifying and managing any con-
ductive hearing loss that may inﬂuence the patient’s hearing abilities during
chemotherapy treatment. However, determination of ototoxic hearing loss is based
on sensorineural hearing thresholds that are more easily monitored in the absence of
a conductive hearing loss component.
For adults, scales for grading ototoxicity adverse events should always include a
baseline audiologic assessment or the effect of the cisplatin cannot be easily par-
celed out from any preexistent sensorineural hearing loss. Furthermore, some scales
were developed with a focus on cancer patients (e.g., CTEP: CTCAE scales) or
even speciﬁcally for children receiving cisplatin (e.g., Brock scale, Chang scale,
SIOP scale, Functional Hearing Loss Scale). The scales vary in many respects
regarding the included frequencies, the hearing threshold criterion levels consid-
ered, and the number of grades, generally from four to nine classiﬁcation levels, in
the scale. Naturally, the variety of scales used over the years and even within the
same time period in the literature renders comparisons across studies problematic.
Agreement on a common scale would be a major advantage for comparing the
efﬁcacy of different drugs across otoprotection trials.
Some of the ototoxicity grading scales are widely used for cancer patients
receiving cisplatin chemotherapy. The CTCAE 4.03 scale, issued June 14, 2010
(Table 6.2), has separate criteria for adults who are or are not enrolled in an oto-
toxicity monitoring program. Readers reviewing earlier studies will need to review
Table 6.2 CTCAE 4.03 adult grading scale
Grade
Parameters
Enrolled
Not enrolled
1
Adults enrolled in a Monitoring
Program (on a 1-, 2-, 3-, 4-, 6-, and
8-kHz audiogram): Threshold shift of
15–25 dB averaged at two contiguous
test frequencies in at least one ear
Adults not enrolled in a Monitoring
Program: Subjective change in hearing in
the absence of documented hearing loss
2
Adults enrolled in a Monitoring
Program (on a 1-, 2-, 3-, 4-, 6-, and
8-kHz audiogram): Threshold shift of
>25 dB averaged at two contiguous test
frequencies in at least one ear
Adults not enrolled in a Monitoring
Program: Hearing loss but hearing aid or
intervention not indicated; limiting
instrumental activities of daily living
3
Adults enrolled in a Monitoring
Program (on a 1-, 2-, 3-, 4-, 6-, and
8-kHz audiogram): Threshold shift of
>25 dB averaged at three contiguous
test frequencies in at least one ear.
Therapeutic intervention indicated
Adults not enrolled in a Monitoring
Program: Hearing loss with hearing aid
or intervention not indicated; limiting
self-care activities of daily living
4
Decrease in hearing to profound
bilateral loss (absolute threshold
>80 dB HL at 2 kHz and above);
nonserviceable hearing
Not speciﬁed for unenrolled
6
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss
153

the speciﬁc version of CTCAE used in that study. Clinical researchers may use a
much earlier version of CTCAE in their report compared to the publication because
clinical trials may occur over a period of years and generally retain a consistent
analysis method once initiated. The scales used may also vary by the primary
location of the study, with studies outside the United States more likely to use
WHO (1997), Stöhr et al. (2005), Muenster (Schmidt et al. 2007), or Nitz et al.
(2013) scales.
6.3.2.1
Adult Grading Scales
One approach to ototoxicity monitoring in cisplatin clinical trials is to use the
ASHA (1994) and AAA (2009) guidelines as a ﬂag during the ototoxicity moni-
toring follow-up visits to trigger a full-scale audiologic assessment and follow-up
and then use the CTCAE (Table 6.2) for the actual adverse event gradings.
The CTCAE for the “unenrolled subjects” have disadvantages because they are
based on highly subjective measures and they do not account for preexistent
hearing loss. Not only may the subject’s perception of hearing ability be subjective,
but audiologists also vary in their criteria for when a hearing aid or other
device/intervention is warranted. However, the CTCAE scales, preferably for
subjects enrolled in a full prospective monitoring program, are among the most
widely used for studies in adults.
6.3.2.2
Pediatric Grading Scales
A wide number of pediatric grading scales were originally developed for children
receiving chemotherapy [e.g., Brock scale (Brock et al. 1991), Chang scale (Chang
and Chinosornvatana 2010; Chang 2011), SIOP scale (Brock et al. 2012),
Functional Hearing Loss Scale (Lewis et al. 2009), and CTCAE 4.03: pediatric
scale (CTEP: CTCAE 2010)]. It should be noted that CTCAE 4.03 for pediatrics
does require baseline assessment for the audiologic ototoxicity monitoring.
Audiologists may vary regarding when they determine that a hearing aid,
speech-language–related services, or a cochlear implant are indicated, which
reduces the precision of ototoxicity classiﬁcation for CTCAE grades 3 and 4. The
pediatric CTCAE 4.03 scale is presented in Table 6.3.
A more objective scale is the SIOP Boston Scale (Brock et al. 2012). Although it
does not require a baseline assessment and thus assumes normal hearing at baseline,
this scale does employ conservative hearing loss criteria using 20 dB HL cutoffs. In
the deﬁnition, ototoxicity is speciﬁcally based on sensorineural hearing level
(SNHL) (Table 6.4).
Standardization and consensus on future ototoxicity monitoring procedures
hopefully will be achieved to facilitate clinical studies and comparisons across
studies. Until a universal scoring system is developed, the appropriate evaluation
tool should be selected based on the study parameters.
154
K.C.M. Campbell and D.J. Fox

6.4
Potential Otoprotective Agents
Currently, no drug is FDA approved to prevent or treat any form of hearing loss,
including cisplatin-induced ototoxicity. However, a number of agents are under
investigation
for
potential
clinical
prevention
or
possibly
rescue
from
cisplatin-induced hearing loss. This section reviews only those agents in or
approaching clinical trials. A number of additional agents are currently being
investigated in the preclinical stage (for review, see Campbell and Le Prell 2012).
Agents to reduce cisplatin-induced ototoxicity are being developed for either direct
delivery to the cochlea through the tympanic membrane to the middle ear cavity or
round window or systemic delivery by injection or oral ingestion. These methods of
delivery closely follow those discussed in Chap. 5 by Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell for
use in prevention of noise-induced hearing loss.
Local delivery advantageously avoids the risk of the otoprotective agent inter-
fering with cisplatin’s antitumor activity. Unfortunately, local delivery also requires
either an injection through the tympanic membrane or a patent pressure equalization
tube placed in the tympanic membrane to facilitate drug placement into the middle
ear cavity. Some investigators are developing devices for chronic placement of
round window drug delivery systems (Hoskison et al. 2013) and others are
investigating magnetized nanoparticles for nonsurgical transtympanic delivery (Zou
et al. 2012).
Additional considerations for local delivery of an otoprotective agent include
otitis media, particularly in young children immunosuppressed by chemotherapy,
loss of the protective agent by leakage through the Eustachian tube, and the
Table 6.3 CTCAE 4.03 pediatric grading scale
Grade
Parameters (on a 1-, 2-, 3-, 4-, 6-, and 8-kHz audiogram)
1
Threshold shift of >20 dB at 8 kHz in at least one ear
2
Threshold shift of >20 dB at 4 kHz and above in at least one ear
3
Hearing loss sufﬁcient to indicate therapeutic intervention, including hearing aids;
threshold shift >20 dB at 3 kHz and above in at least one ear; additional
speech-language–related services indicated
4
Audiologic indication for cochlear implant and additional speech-language–related
services indicated
Table 6.4 SIOP Boston ototoxicity scale
Grade
Parameters
0
 20 dB HL at all frequencies
1
>20 dB HL (i.e., 25 dB HL or greater) SNHL above 4000 Hz (i.e., 6 or 8 kHz)
2
>20 dB HL SNHL at 4000 Hz and above
3
>20 dB HL SNHL at 2000 Hz or 3000 Hz and above
4
>40 dB HL (i.e., 45 dB HL or more) SNHL at 2000 Hz and above
6
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss
155

possibility that the drug delivered into the middle ear cavity will not effectively
reach the round window because the presence of ﬂuid may impede delivery. Local
delivery also precludes any possibility that the protective agent could systemically
protect against other types of cisplatin-induced toxicities such as nephrotoxicity,
neurotoxicity, gastrointestinal toxicity, or “chemobrain.” Systemic delivery, at least
for some otoprotective agents, has the potential for protecting other organ systems
in addition to hearing. For example, in preclinical studies, treatment with D-
methionine has resulted in protection from weight loss (Campbell et al. 1996) and
nephrotoxicity (Jones and Basinger 1989; Jones et al. 1991). However, the risk of
antitumor interference must be carefully addressed both in preclinical, preferably
in vivo, studies (e.g., Cloven et al. 2000) and carefully monitored in clinical studies.
Most, but not all, of the agents in or approaching clinical trials are antioxidants,
not only because of efﬁcacy but because of their known safety proﬁles. One of the
agents studied the longest for protection from cisplatin-induced hearing loss is
sodium thiosulfate (STS) (Otto et al. 1988; Neuwelt et al. 1996). STS is a cisplatin
neutralizer (Jones et al. 1991; Church et al. 1995), and it therefore interferes with the
antitumor effects that are necessary for cancer therapy. A current strategy to avoid
STS tumor protection in both animal studies and clinical trials is to delay the STS
administration by several hours after cisplatin dosing (Muldoon et al. 2000; Harned
et al. 2008). Four clinical trials using STS as an otoprotective agent for cisplatin-
induced ototoxicity are currently listed on clinicaltrials.gov. Two of the clinical trials
use systemic STS (NCT00716976; NCT00652132) and two use local STS delivery
(NCT01369641; NCT02281006) via eardrops or gel to the middle ear.
Amifostine has also been investigated in a number of clinical trials as a putative
cisplatin otoprotective agent, but the preponderance of evidence including a
meta-analysis of previous clinical trials (Duval and Daniel 2012) does not support
its use as an otoprotective agent. The American Society of Clinical Oncology 2008
Clinical Practice Guideline Update Regarding Use of Chemotherapy and Radiation
Therapy Protectants does not recommend amifostine as either an otoprotectant or
neuroprotectant (Hensley et al. 2009).
Ebselen will be used in one active, but not yet recruiting, clinical trial to prevent
cisplatin-induced hearing loss (NCT01451853). One Phase 1 safety trial was
completed and published (Lynch and Kil 2005). In preclinical studies, ebselen did
not interfere with cisplatin’s antitumor action (Baldew et al. 1990; Lynch et al.
2005). For detailed discussion of the development of ebselen for prevention of
noise-induced hearing loss, see Chap. 5 by Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell.
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) has been tested in several clinical trials for protection
from permanent noise-induced hearing loss but without signiﬁcant results (Kopke
et al. 2015). Two studies have investigated NAC for cisplatin otoprotection with
local delivery via transtympanic injections, using the opposite ear as a control. One
study reported statistically signiﬁcant otoprotection but only at 8 kHz (Riga et al.
2013), and the other did not ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant otoprotection at any tested
frequencies (Yoo et al. 2014).
D-Methionine (D-Met) is a promising otoprotective agent in Phase 3 clinical trials
for protection from noise-induced hearing loss (NCT01345474). A number of
156
K.C.M. Campbell and D.J. Fox

preclinical studies have demonstrated protection from cisplatin-induced hearing
loss in animals using D-Met (Campbell et al. 1996, 1999; Korver et al. 2002). Data
from tumor model studies do not suggest antitumor interference (Cloven et al.
2000). In a Phase 1 study, D-Met was safely administered to cisplatin-treated
patients and notably reduced radiation-induced oral mucositis incidence (Hamstra
et al. 2010). One Phase 2 clinical trial using oral D-Met did show statistically
signiﬁcant cisplatin otoprotection without antitumor interference (Campbell et al.
2009). Larger scale clinical trials are in the planning stages.
6.5
The Bench to Bedside Process
Translational research, taking a new drug from the laboratory through the clinical
trial process and hopefully FDA approval, is frequently called “valley of death”
research (Butler 2008). Translational research is usually both complicated and
expensive, as it is necessary to ensure that any new clinical therapeutic is both safe
and effective. The laboratory or clinical researcher wishing to become involved in
this process will generally need to partner with a team of individuals skilled and
experienced in the process. Some of the “valley of death” considerations for pre-
dicting success are reviewed in Coller and Califf (2009), including assessing if the
new drug addresses a compelling health need with a strong rationale and a sig-
niﬁcant improvement over current therapies; assessing if the potential market and
intellectual property protection provides a sufﬁcient ﬁnancial basis for the product
to be cost effective; assessing the animal and human data for probable safety and
efﬁcacy; assessing the likelihood of adequate drug delivery at the intended target;
and assessing the need for and likelihood of obtaining a suitable corporate partner
and whether or not an acceptable pivotal clinical trial can be designed and com-
pleted. Many of these issues are reviewed in more detail in Chap. 2 by Le Prell.
For information regarding the types of information that must be prepared and
gathered for the drug approval process, the FDA’s website provides a wealth of
information and contacts to help and inform individuals with a promising new drug
that could have signiﬁcant clinical impact (Food and Drug Administration 2015).
For additional discussion of the FDA’s role and recommended resources, see
Chap. 5 by Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell and Chap. 8 by Staecker, Klickstein, and
Brough.
One approach is for the new investigator to read the requirements for an
investigational new drug (IND) application and then read the various FDA guid-
ances regarding each required section. In addition, the FDA offers and recommends
a pre-IND consultation and provides a list of contacts for the various drug devel-
opment areas to assist the applicant through the Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research (CDER).
Three types of IND applications may be ﬁled, but for a new otoprotective agent
for prevention of cisplatin-induced ototoxicity, the applicant will probably ﬁle an
6
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss
157

investigator-initiated IND application that can be ﬁled to study an unapproved drug
or a drug that has been previously approved for a different indication.
As per the FDA website, the IND application must contain information in three
broad areas:
1. Animal pharmacology and toxicology studies. These studies are generally
performed in laboratories that meet good laboratory practices (GLP) standards.
Usually they include at least two species, which are often rat and dog. The
purpose of the preclinical data is to permit an assessment as to whether the
product is reasonably safe for initial testing in humans. Also included are any
previous experiences with the drug in humans (often foreign use). These data
may also be used in the dose justiﬁcation for the proposed clinical trial, although
dose–response curves may also be needed.
2. Manufacturing information. This information speciﬁes the composition, manu-
facturer, stability, and controls used for manufacturing the drug substance and
the drug product. This information is assessed to ensure that the company can
adequately produce and supply consistent batches of the drug. For clinical trials,
the drugs should be formulated according to good manufacturing practices
(GMP) standards in an approved facility.
3. Clinical protocols and investigator information. The IND application must
provide detailed protocols for all proposed clinical studies to assess whether the
initial-phase trials will expose subjects to unnecessary risks and whether they
are designed to adequately obtain and analyze the information that is needed for
that particular clinical trial. For example, a Phase 1 clinical trial will focus on
human safety while a Phase 2 trial will include efﬁcacy data. However, all
clinical trials must include safety assessments. Also, information on the quali-
ﬁcations of clinical investigators is required to assess whether healthcare pro-
fessionals
are
qualiﬁed
to
fulﬁll
their clinical
trial
duties.
Healthcare
professionals include physicians who oversee the administration of the experi-
mental compound and provide medical monitoring of side effects as well as
audiologists who are responsible for directly measuring cisplatin otoprotection.
Finally, the protocol must clearly specify the commitments to obtain informed
consent from the research subjects, to obtain review of the study by an insti-
tutional review board (IRB), to comply fully with all the investigational new
drug regulations, and to maintain subject conﬁdentiality and complete records.
After submitting the IND application, the sponsor must wait 30 calendar days
before initiating any clinical trials. During these 30 days, the FDA reviews the IND
application for safety to ensure that no research subject will be subjected to
unreasonable risk.
While the above information describes the general areas, a new investigator will
want to read further on considerations and terminology in pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics (see review, by Rey 2007) to understand the various consid-
erations
including
the
relationship
to
toxicity.
Additional
discussion
of
158
K.C.M. Campbell and D.J. Fox

pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and toxicity tests are provided in Chap. 5 by
Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell.
The process is challenging and often expensive and labor intensive; however, it
is designed to ensure that any approved drugs are both safe and effective.
6.6
Summary
In summary, cisplatin-induced ototoxicity remains a problematic clinical issue for
both pediatric and adult patients. The basic mechanisms of cisplatin-induced oto-
toxicity and otoprotective agents remain highly active areas of research.
Standardized guidelines do exist for clinical ototoxicity monitoring for these
patients. Although no consensus guidelines exist for ototoxicity monitoring in
clinical trials, the clinical monitoring guidelines can be adapted for them. For
adverse event grading and reporting, a number of adverse event classiﬁcation
systems have been reported and are available for use. Some are more commonly
used than others, but usage can vary by type and location of the clinical trial.
One of the most promising areas of research for cisplatin-induced hearing loss is
the progression of protective agents through the preclinical and clinical stages. No
otoprotective agent is currently FDA approved to prevent or treat cisplatin-induced
hearing loss. Hopefully, one or more of these agents will be approved and available
for clinical use in the not too distant future to reduce the incidence of ototoxicity in
these patients.
Compliance with Ethics Requirements
Kathleen Campbell is the sole inventor on the patents for D-methionine. Her patents
belong to her employer SIU School of Medicine. She is also the cofounder and Chief
Scientiﬁc Ofﬁcer for MetArmor, Inc. which has licensed her patents from SIU.
Dr. Daniel Fox is currently the Program Manager for MetArmor team, however he
had no ﬁnancial afﬁliations during the creation of this chapter.
References
Alderen, R., Hall, M., & Hambley, T. (2006). The discovery and development of cisplatin. Journal
of Chemical Education, 83(5), 728–734.
American Academy of Audiology (AAA), Durrant, J., Campbell, K., Fausti, S., Guthrie, O., et al.
(2009). American Academy of Audiology Position Statement and Clinical Practice Guidelines:
Ototoxicity monitoring. www.Audiology.org, pp. 1–25.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA). (1987). Calibration of speech signals
delivered via earphones. ASHA, 29(6), 44–48.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA). (1988). Guidelines for determining
threshold level for speech. ASHA, (30)3, 85–89.
6
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss
159

American Speech–Language–Hearing Association (ASHA). (1994). Guidelines for the audiologic
management of individuals receiving cochleotoxic drug therapy. ASHA 36(Suppl. 12), 11–19.
Anderson, J. M., & Campbell, K. (2015). Assessment of interventions to prevent drug-induced
hearing loss. In J. M. Miller, C. G. Le Prell, & L. P. Rybak (Eds.), Oxidative stress in applied
basic research and clinical practice: Free radicals in ENT pathology (pp. 243–269). New
York: Humana Press.
Baik, M., Freisner, R., & Lippard, S. (2003). Theoretical study of cisplatin binding to purine bases:
Why does cisplatin prefer guanine over adenine? Journal of the American Chemistry Society,
125(46), 14082–14092.
Baldew, G. S., McVie, J. G., van der Valk, M. A., Los, G., de Goeij, J. J., & Vermeulen, N.
P. (1990). Selective reduction of cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) nephrotoxicity by ebselen.
Cancer Research, 50(21), 7031–7036.
Benedetti Panici, P., Greggi, S., Scambia, G., Baiocchi, G., Lomonaco, M., et al. (1993). Efﬁcacy
and toxicity of very high-dose cisplatin in advanced ovarian carcinoma: 4-year survival
analysis and neurological follow-up. International Journal of Gynecological Cancer, 3, 44–53.
Bhattacharyya, T. K., & Dayal, V. S. (1984). Ototoxicity and noise-drug interaction. Journal of
Otolaryngology, 13, 361–366.
Bierbach, U., Qu, Y., Hambley, T., Peroutka, J., Nguyen, H., et al. (1999). Synthesis, structure,
biological activity, and DNA binding of platinum(II) complexes of the type trans-[PtCl(2)(NH
(3))L] (L = planar nitrogen base). Effect of L and cis/trans isomerism on sequence speciﬁcity
and unwinding properties observed in globally platinated DNA. Inorganic Chemistry, 38(15),
3535–3542.
Blackwell, D. L., Lucas, J. W., & Clarke, T. C. (2014). Summary health statistics for U.S. adults:
National Health Interview, 2012 Survey. National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health
Statistics, 10(260).
Bokemeyer, C., Berger, C., Hartmann, J., Kollmannsberger, C., Schmoll, H., et al. (1998).
Analysis of risk factors for cisplatin-induced ototoxicity in patients with testicular cancer.
British Journal of Cancer, 77, 1355–1362.
Boulikas, T., & Vougiouka, M. (2004). Recent clinical trials using cisplatin, carboplatin and their
combination chemotherapy drugs (review). Oncology Reports, 11, 559–595.
Brock, P. R., Bellman, S. C., Yeomans, E. C., Pinkerton, C. R., & Pritchard, J. (1991). Cisplatin
ototoxicity in children: A practical grading system. Medical and Pediatric Oncology, 19(4),
295–300.
Brock, P. R., Knight, K. R., Freyer, D. R., Campbell, K. C., Steyger, P. S., et al. (2012).
Platinum-induced ototoxicity in children: A consensus review on mechanisms, predisposition,
and protection, including a new International Society of Pediatric Oncology Boston Ototoxicity
Scale. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 30(19), 2408–2417.
Butler, D. (2008). Translational research: Crossing the valley of death. Nature, 453(7197):
840–842.
Campbell, K. C. M. (2004). Audiologic monitoring for ototoxicity. In P. Roland & J. Rutka (Eds.),
Ototoxicity (pp. 153–160) New York: BC Decker.
Campbell, K. C. M., & Durrant, J. D. (1993). Audiologic monitoring for ototoxicity.
Otolaryngology Clinics of North America, 26, 903–914.
Campbell, K. C. M., & Le Prell, C. G. (2012). Potential therapeutic agents. Seminars in Hearing,
32(3), 281–296.
Campbell, K. C., Rybak, L. P., Meech, R. P., & Hughes, L. (1996). D-Methionine provides
excellent protection from cisplatin ototoxicity in the rat. Hearing Research, 102(1–2), 90–98.
Campbell, K. C., Meech, R. P., Rybak, L. P., & Hughes, L. F. (1999). D-Methionine protects
against cisplatin damage to the stria vascularis. Hearing Research, 138(1–2), 13–28.
Campbell, K. C. M., Kalkanis, J., & Glatz, F. R. (2000). Ototoxicity: Mechanisms, protective
agents, and monitoring. Current Opinions in Otolaryngology, & Head and Neck Surgery. 8,
436–440.
Campbell, K. C. M., Kelly, E., Targovnik, N., Hughes, L. F., Van Saders, C., et al. (2003).
Audiologic monitoring for potential ototoxicity in a Phase I clinical trial of a new glycopeptide
160
K.C.M. Campbell and D.J. Fox

antibiotic. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology: Special Edition on Ototoxicity,
14(3), 157–169.
Campbell, K. C. M., Nayar, R., Borgonha, S., Hughes, L. F., Rehemtulla, A., et al. (2009). Oral
D-methionine (MRX-1024) signiﬁcantly protects against cisplatin-induced hearing loss: A
phase II study in humans. Abstracts of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 32, 7.
Cancer
Therapy
Evaluation
Program
(CTEP).
http://ctep.cancer.gov/protocolDevelopment/
electronic_applications/ctc.htm. Accessed August 6, 2010.
Carhart, R., & Jerger, J. F. (1959). Preferred method for clinical determination of pure-tone
thresholds. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 24, 330–345.
Casares, C., Ramirez-Camacho, R., Trinidad, A., Roldan, A., Jorge, E., & Garcia-Berrocal,
J. (2012). Reactive oxygen species in apoptosis induced by cisplatin: Review of physiopatho-
logical mechanisms in animal models. European Archives of Otorhinolaryngology, 269,
2455–2459.
Chang, K. W. (2011). Clinically accurate assessment and grading of ototoxicity. Laryngoscope,
121(12), 2649–2657.
Chang, K. W., & Chinosornvatana, N. (2010). Practical grading system for evaluating cisplatin
ototoxicity in children. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 28(10), 1788–1795.
Church, M. W., Kaltenbach, J. A., Blakley, B. W., & Burgio, D. L. (1995). The comparative
effects of sodium thiosulfate, diethyldithiocarbamate, fosfomycin and WR-2721 on amelio-
rating cisplatin-induced ototoxicity. Hearing Research, 86(1–2), 195–203.
Cloven, N. G., Re, A., McHale, M. T., Burger, R. A., DiSaia, P. J., et al. (2000). Evaluation of
D-methionine as a cytoprotectant in cisplatin treatment of an animal model for ovarian cancer.
Anticancer Research, 20(6B), 4205–4209.
Coller, B. S., & Califf, R. M. (2009). Traversing the valley of death: A guide to assessing prospects
for translational success. Science Translational Medicine, 1(10):1–11.
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE). Version 4.0 http://evs.nci.nih.gov/
ftp1/CTCAE/CTCAE_4.03_2010-06-14_QuickReference Accessed May 21, 2015.
Duval, M., & Daniel, S. J. (2012). Meta-analysis of the efﬁcacy of amifostine in the prevention of
cisplatin ototoxicity. Journal of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 41(5), 309–315.
Fausti, S., Schechter, M. A., Rappaport, B. Z., Frey, R. H., & Mass, R. E. (1984). Early detection
of cisplatin ototoxicity: Selected case reports. Cancer, 53, 224–231.
Fausti, S. A., Henry, J. A., Helt, W. J., Phillips, D. S., Frey, R. H., et al. (1999). An individualized,
sensitive frequency range for early detection of ototoxicity. Ear and Hearing, 20(6), 497–505.
Food
and
Drug
Administration
Investigational
New
Drug
Application.
fda.gov/Drugs/
DevelopmentApprovalProcess/HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/ApprovalApplications/
InvestigationalNewDrugINDApplication/default.htm.
Glattke, T., & Robinette, M. (2007). Otoacoustic emissions. In Roeser, R., Valente, M., and
Hosford-Dunn, H. (Eds.), Audiology: Diagnosis (pp. 478–496). New York: Thieme.
Gopal, K.V., Wu, C., Shreshta, B., Campbell, K. C. M., Moore, E. J., & Gross, G. W. (2012).
D-Methionine
protects
against
cisplatin-induced
neurotoxicity
in
cortical
networks
Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 34(5), 495–504.
Gratton, M. A., Salvi, R. J., Kamen, B. A., & Saunders, S. S. (1990). Interaction of cisplatin and
noise on the peripheral auditory system. Hearing Research, 50, 211–223.
Grunberg, S., Sonka, S., & Stevenson, L. (1989). Progressive parestesias after cessation of therapy
with very high-dose cisplatin. Cancer Chemotherapy Pharmacology, 2, 62–64.
Hamstra, D., Eisbruch, A., Naidu, M., Ramana, G., Sunkara, P., et al. (2010). Pharmacokinetic
analysis of Phase 1 study of MRX-1024 in patients treated with radiation therapy with or
without cisplatinum for head and neck cancer. Clinical Cancer Research, 16(9), 2666–2676.
Harned, T. M., Kalous, O., Neuwelt, A., Loera, J., Ji, L., et al. (2008). Sodium thiosulfate
administered six hours after cisplatin does not compromise antineuroblastoma activity. Clinical
Cancer Research, 14(2), 533–540.
Hensley, M. L., Hagerty, K. L., Kewalramani, T., Green, D. M., Meropol, N. J., et al. (2009).
American Society of Clinical Oncology 2008 clinical practice guideline update: use of
6
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss
161

chemotherapy and radiation therapy protectants. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 27(1),
127–145.
Hoskison, E., Daniel, M., Al-Zahid, S., Shakesheff, K. M., Bayston, R., & Birchall, J. P. (2013).
Drug delivery to the ear. Therapeutic Delivery, 4(1), 115–124.
Itoh, T., Terazawa, R., Kojima, K., Nakane, K., Deguchi, T., et al. (2011). Cisplatin induces
production of reactive oxygen species via NADPH oxidase activation in human prostate cancer
cells. Free Radical Research, 45(9), 1033–1039.
Jones, M. M., & Basinger, M. A. (1989). Thiol and thioether suppression of cis-platinum-induced
nephrotoxicity in rats bearing the Walker 256 carcinosarcoma. Anticancer Research, 9(6),
1937–1941.
Jones, M. M., Basinger, M. A., & Holscher, M. A. (1991). Relative effectiveness of some
compounds for the control of cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity. Toxicology, 68(3), 227–247.
Khan, A. B., D’Souza, B. J., Wharam, M. D., Champion, L. A., Sinks, L. F., et al. (1982).
Cisplatin therapy in recurrent childhood brain tumors. Cancer Treatment Reports, 66(12),
2013–2020.
Knight, K., Kraemer, D., & Neuwelt, E. (2005). Ototoxicity in children receiving platinum
chemotherapy: Underestimating a commonly occurring toxicity that may inﬂuence academic
and social development. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 23, 8588–8596.
Knight, K. R., Kraemer, D. F., Winter, C., & Neuwelt, E. A. (2007). Early changes in auditory
function as a result of platinum chemotherapy: Use of extended high-frequency audiometry and
evoked distortion product otoacoustic emissions. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 25(10),
1190–1195.
Kopelman, J., Budnick, A., Sessions, R., Kramer, M., & Wong, G. (1988). Ototoxicity of
high-dose cisplatin by bolus administration in patients with advanced cancer and normal
hearing. Laryngoscope, 98, 858–864.
Kopke, R., Slade, M. D., Jackson, R., Hammill, T., Fausti, S., et al. (2015). Efﬁcacy and safety of
N-acetylcysteine in prevention of noise induced hearing loss: A randomized clinical trial.
Hearing Research, 323, 40–50.
Korver, K. D., Rybak, L. P., Whitworth, C. A., & Campbell, K. C. M. (2002). Round window
application of D-methionine provides complete CDDP otoprotection. Otolaryngology–Head
and Neck Surgery, 126(2), 683–689.
Kujansuu, E., Rahko, T., Punnonen, R., & Karma, P. (1989). Evaluation of the hearing loss
associated with cisplatin treatment by high-frequency audiometry. Gynecology Oncology, 33,
321–322.
Laurell, G., & Pierre, P. V. (2015). Hearing loss after cisplatin: Oxidative stress pathways and
potential for protection. In J. M. Miller, C. G. Le Prell, & L. P. Rybak (Eds.), Oxidative stress
in applied basic research and clinical practice: Free radicals in ENT pathology (pp. 217–241).
New York: Humana Press.
Lewis, M. J., DuBois, S. G., Fligor, B., Li, X., Goorin, A., & Grier, H. E. (2009). Ototoxicity in
children treated for osteosarcoma. Pediatric Blood Cancer, 52(3), 387–391.
Li, Y., Womer, R., & Silber, J. (2004). Predicting cisplatin ototoxicity in children: Inﬂuence of age
and the cumulative dose. European Journal of Cancer, 40, 2445–2451.
Lippman,
A.,
Helson,
C.,
Helson,
L.,
&
Krakoff,
I.
(1973).
Clinical
trials
of
cis-diamminedichloroplatinum
(NSC-119875).
Cancer
Chemotherapy
Reports,
1(57),
191–200.
Lonsbury-Martin, B. L., & Martin, G. K. (1990). The clinical utility of distortion-product
otoacoustic emissions. Ear and Hearing, 11, 144–154.
Lonsbury-Martin, B. L., & Martin, G. K. (2001). Evoked otoacoustic emissions as objective
screeners for ototoxicity. Seminars in Hearing, 22(4), 377–391.
Lynch, E. D., & Kil, J. (2005). Compounds for the prevention and treatment of noise-induced
hearing loss. Drug Discovery Today, 10(19), 1291–1298.
Lynch, E. D., Gu, R., Pierce, C., & Kil, J. (2005). Combined oral delivery of ebselen and
allopurinol reduces multiple cisplatin toxicities in rat breast and ovarian cancer models while
enhancing anti-tumor activity. Anticancer Drugs, 16(5), 569–579.
162
K.C.M. Campbell and D.J. Fox

Martin, G. K., Ohlms, L. A., Franklin, D. J., & Lonsbury-Martin, B. L. (1990). Distortion product
emissions in humans. III: Inﬂuence of sensorineural hearing loss. The Annals of Otology,
Rhinology, and Laryngology (Suppl.), 147, 30–42.
McHugh, P., Spanswick, V., & Hartley, J. (2001). Repair of DNA interstrand crosslinks:
Molecular mechanisms and clinical relevance. The Lancet Oncology, 2(8), 483–490.
Meech, R. P., Campbell, K. C. M., Hughes, L. P., & Rybak, L. P. (1998). A semiquantitative
analysis of the effects of cisplatin on the rat stria vascularis. Hearing Research, 124, 44–59.
Moroso, M., & Blair, R. L. (1983). A review of cis-platinum ototoxicity. Journal of
Otolaryngology, 12, 365–369.
Muldoon, L. L., Pagel, M. A., Kroll, R. A., Brummett, R. E., Doolittle, N. D., et al. (2000).
Delayed administration of sodium thiosulfate in animal models reduces platinum ototoxicity
without reduction of antitumor activity. Clinical Cancer Research, 6(1), 309–315.
Mulheran, M., & Degg, C. (1997). Comparison of distortion product OAE generation between a
group requiring frequent gentamicin therapy and control subjects. British Journal of Audiology,
31, 5–9.
NCT00652132. Cisplatin with or without sodium thiosulfate in treating young patients with stage
I, stage II, or stage III childhood liver cancer. https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00652132. Accessed September 18, 2015.
NCT00716976. Sodium thiosulfate in preventing hearing loss in young patients receiving cisplatin
for newly diagnosed germ cell tumor, hepatoblastoma, medulloblastoma, neuroblastoma,
osteosarcoma, or other malignancy. https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00716976.
Accessed September 18, 2015.
NCT01345474. Phase 3 clinical trial: D-methionine to reduce noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL).
https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01345374. Accessed September 18, 2015.
NCT01369641. The effect of sodium thiosulfate eardrops on hearing loss in patients who receive
cisplatin therapy. https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01369641. Accessed September
18, 2015.
NCT01451853. SPI-1005 for prevention and treatment of chemotherapy induced hearing loss.
https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01451853. Accessed September 18, 2015.
NCT02281006. Efﬁcacy of trans-tympanic injections of a sodium thiosulfate gel to prevent
cisplatin-induced
ototoxicity.
https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02281006.
Accessed September 18, 2015.
Neuwelt, E. A., Brummett, R. E., Remsen, L. G., Kroll, R. A., Pagel, M. A., et al. (1996). In vitro
and
animal
studies
of
sodium
thiosulfate
as
a
potential
chemoprotectant
against
carboplatin-induced ototoxicity. Cancer Research, 56(4), 706–709.
Nitz, A., Kontopantelis, E., Bielack, S., Koscielniak, E., Klingebiel, T., et al. (2013). Prospective
evaluation of cisplatin- and carboplatin-mediated ototoxicity in paediatric and adult soft tissue
and osteosarcoma patients. Oncology Letters, 5(1), 311–315.
Osterhammel, D. (1980). High frequency audiometry. Clinical aspects. Scandinavian Audiology,
9, 249–256.
Otto, W. C., Brown, R. D., Gage-White, L., Kupetz, S., Anniko, M., et al. (1988). Effects of
cisplatin and thiosulfate upon auditory brainstem responses of guinea pigs. Hearing Research,
35(1), 79–85.
Peleva, E., Aloy, E., Carret, A. S., and Daniel, S. J. (2014). Hearing loss in a pediatric patient
following cisplatin chemotherapy and subsequent exposure to excessive noise. International
Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 78(12), 2301–2304.
Plinkert, P. K., & Krober, S. (1991). Fruherkennung einer Cisplatin-Ototoxizitat durch evosierte
otoakustische Emissionen. Laryngorhinootologie, 70, 457–462.
Probst, R., Lonsbury-Martin, B. L., & Martin, G. K. (1991). A review of otoacoustic emissions.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 20, 2021–2027.
Ress, B. D., Sridhar, K. S., Balkany, T. J., Waxman, G. M., Stagner, B. B., & Lonsbury-Martin, B.
L. (1999). Effects of cis-platinum chemotherapy on otoacoustic emissions: The development of
an objective screening protocol. Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 121(6), 693–701.
6
Cisplatin-Induced Hearing Loss
163

Rey, J. (2007). Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. In K. C. M. Campbell (Ed.),
Pharmacology and ototoxicity for audiologists (pp. 10–18). Clifton Park, NY: Thompson
Delmar Learning.
Riga, M. G., Chelis, L., Kakolyris, S., Papadopoulos, S., Stathakidou, S., et al. (2013).
Transtympanic injections of N-acetylcysteine for the prevention of cisplatin-induced ototox-
icity: A feasible method with promising efﬁcacy. American Journal of Clinical Oncology,
36(1), 1–6.
Rosenberg, B., Vancamp, L., & Krigas, T. (1965). Inhibition of cell division in Escherichia coli by
electrolysis products from a platinum electrode. Nature, 205, 698–699.
Rosenberg, B., VanCamp, L., Trosko, J., & Mansour, V. (1969). Platinum compounds: A new
class of potent antitumour agents. Nature, 222(5191), 385–386.
Rybak, L. P., Huang, X., & Campbell, K. C. (2007). Cancer and ototoxicity of chemotherapeutics.
In K. C. M. Campbell (Ed.), Pharmacology and ototoxicity for audiologists (pp. 138–162).
Clifton Park, NY: Thomson Delmar Learning.
Schmidt, C. M., Bartholomäus, E., Deuster, D., Heinecke, A., & Dinnesen, A.G. (2007). The
“Muenster classiﬁcation” of high frequency hearing loss following cisplatin chemotherapy.
HNO, 55(4), 299–306.
Sherman, S., Gibson, D., Wang, A., & Lippard, S. (1985). X-ray structure of the major adduct of
the anticancer drug cisplatin with DNA: cis-[Pt(NH3)2(pGpG))]. Science, 230(4724),
412–417.
Stavroulaki, P., Apostolopoulos, N., Dinopoulo, D., Vossinakis, I., Tsakanikos, M., &
Douniadakis, D. (1999). Otoacoustic emissions—an approach for monitoring aminoglycoside
induced ototoxicity in children. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 50,
177–184.
Stelmachowicz, P. G., Beauchaine, K. A., Kalberer, A., & Jesteadt, W. (1989). Normative
thresholds in the 8–20 kHz range as a function of age. The Journal of the Acoustic Society of
America, 86(4), 1384–1391.
Stöhr, W., Langer, T., Kremers, A., Bielack, S., Lamprecht-Dinnesen, A., et al. (2005). German
Late Effects Working Group in the German Society of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology.
Cisplatin-induced ototoxicity in osteosarcoma patients: A report from the late effects
surveillance system. Cancer Investigation, 23, 201–207.
Taguchi, T., Nazneen, A., Abid, M., & Razzaque, M. (2005). Cisplatin associated nephrotoxicity
and pathological events. Contributions to Nephrology, 148, 107–121.
Thornton, A., & Rafﬁn, M. J. M. (1977). Speech discrimination scores modeled as a binomial
variable. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 21, 507–518.
Whitney, K. A., Lysaker, P. H., Steiner, A. R., Hook, J. N., Estes, D. D., & Hanna, N. H. (2008). Is
“chemobrain” a transient state? A prospective pilot study among persons with non-small cell
lung cancer. Journal of Supportive Oncology, 6(7), 313–321.
Wiley, T. L., Cruikshanks, K. J., Nondahl, D. M., Tweed, T. S., Klein, R., et al. (1998). Aging and
high frequency hearing sensitivity. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41,
1061–1072.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1997). Report of the First Informal Consultation on Future
Programme Developments for the Prevention of Deafness and Hearing Impairment.
Yoo, J., Hamilton, S. J., Angel, D., Fung, K., Franklin, J., et al. (2014). Cisplatin otoprotection
using transtympanic L-N-acetylcysteine: A pilot randomized study in head and neck cancer
patients. Laryngoscope, 124(3), E87–E94.
Zou, J., Sood, R., Ranjan, S., Poe, D., Ramadan, U. A, et al. (2012). Size-dependent passage of
liposome nanocarriers with preserved posttransport integrity across the middle-inner ear
barriers in rats. Otology & Neurotology, 33(4), 666–673.
164
K.C.M. Campbell and D.J. Fox

Chapter 7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological
Therapies for Tinnitus
Brian L. Allman, Ashley L. Schormans, Marei Typlt,
and Edward Lobarinas
Abstract Tinnitus, the perception of a sound that has no external acoustic source
in the environment, is a challenging condition to manage clinically because its
etiology, perceptual characteristics (e.g., pitch and loudness), and accompanying
symptoms (e.g., insomnia, anxiety, and/or depression) vary greatly among patients.
Despite the long history of tinnitus, its considerable prevalence, and economic
burden, there currently exists no approved drug or widely accepted treatment. As
such, previous pharmacological attempts to manage tinnitus have used drugs that
are approved for other medical conditions in what is considered an “off-label”
approach. Broadly, these drugs have included anesthetics, antidepressants, anxi-
olytics, anticonvulsants, glutamate-receptor antagonists, and muscle relaxants. This
chapter provides readers who are new to the ﬁeld an introduction to the speciﬁc
off-label drugs that have been administered for tinnitus management as well as the
associated experimental rationale, patient outcomes, and relevant animal research.
Furthermore, the results and recommendations of systematic reviews are summa-
rized. Finally, where possible, discussion on each drug concludes with the treatment
recommendations of the American Academy of Otolaryngology—Head and Neck
Surgery Foundation. Ultimately, the authors hope that readers gain an awareness of
B.L. Allman (&)  A.L. Schormans  M. Typlt
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry,
Western University, London, ON N6A 5C1, Canada
e-mail: brian.allman@schulich.uwo.ca
A.L. Schormans
e-mail: aschorma@uwo.ca
M. Typlt
e-mail: mtyplt@uwo.ca
E. Lobarinas
Callier Center for Communication Disorders, University of Texas at Dallas,
1966 Inwood Road, Dallas, TX 75235, USA
e-mail: edward.lobarinas@utdallas.edu
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
C.G. Le Prell et al. (eds.), Translational Research in Audiology, Neurotology,
and the Hearing Sciences, Springer Handbook of Auditory Research 58,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-40848-4_7
165

the history of drug therapies for tinnitus as well as the reasoning for why a certain
drug may not be currently recommended, whether it be its apparent inefﬁcacy,
potential for harm, or shortcomings in the associated experimental design of the
clinical trials.
Keywords Anticonvulsants  Anxiolytics  Etiology  Glutamate-receptor
antagonists  Laboratory animal models  Muscle relaxants  Off-label drug
therapy  Prevalence  Tinnitus  Tricyclic antidepressants
7.1
Introduction
Tinnitus, derived from the Latin word tinnire (“to ring”), is a condition charac-
terized by the perception of a sound with no corresponding external acoustic source.
Objective tinnitus represents a rare form of the condition in which an individual
(and perhaps an observer using a stethoscope) can hear a real sound that is gen-
erated by his or her own internal structures, such as blood vessels or musculature
near the middle ear. These sounds can be pulsatile and synchronized with respi-
ration or heartbeat or can be continuous such as in cases of venous hum.
Conversely, subjective tinnitus is a much more common condition that describes a
phantom sensation that can be heard only by the afﬂicted individual. Often, sub-
jective tinnitus is perceived as a ringing or buzzing in one or both ears. Objective
and subjective forms of tinnitus are not mutually exclusive, as some individuals
have described experiencing both types of auditory sensations.
As described in the following sections, subjective tinnitus, henceforth referred to
only as “tinnitus,” is a challenging condition to manage clinically because its
etiology, perceptual characteristics (e.g., pitch and loudness), and accompanying
symptoms (e.g., insomnia, anxiety, and/or depression) vary greatly among patients.
Ultimately, translational research on tinnitus is focused on identifying its neural
basis as well as ﬁnding safe and effective treatment strategies, as both of these goals
remain elusive. To this end, researchers have developed laboratory animal models
capable of screening treatment strategies in hopes of translating these ﬁndings into
improved therapies for tinnitus sufferers.
Moving beyond anecdotal reports, several clinical trials have been conducted to
determine the efﬁcacy of various drugs at suppressing tinnitus. However, because
there currently exists no approved drug treatment for tinnitus, these previous
pharmacological attempts to manage tinnitus have used drugs that are approved for
other medical conditions in what is considered an “off-label” approach. It has been
estimated that more than four million off-label prescriptions are written for tinnitus
each year in the United States and Europe (Vio and Holme 2005), and there are
likely even more supplements sold commercially without a prescription. Off-label
drugs requiring a prescription have included anesthetics, antidepressants, anxi-
olytics, anticonvulsants, glutamate-receptor antagonists, and muscle relaxants.
166
B.L. Allman et al.

This chapter provides an introduction to the speciﬁc off-label drugs that have
been investigated for tinnitus management as well as the associated experimental
rationale, patient outcomes, and relevant animal research. In addition to providing
an update to previous comprehensive articles on the pharmacotherapy of tinnitus
(Salvi et al. 2009; Langguth and Elgoyhen 2012), this chapter also summarizes the
results and recommendations of available articles from the Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews, as these review articles are recognized as providing an
in-depth critique of the primary research devoted to evidence-based healthcare
(http://www.cochranelibrary.com/about/about-cochrane-systematic-reviews.html).
Finally, where possible, the discussion on each drug concludes with recommen-
dations from the American Academy of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery
Foundation, which published an exhaustive, evidence-based Clinical Practice
Guideline for the evaluation and treatment of tinnitus (Tunkel et al. 2014).
As outlined in Sect. 7.4, most of the clinical trials examining off-label drugs
have failed to provide compelling evidence that tinnitus can be routinely managed
with pharmacotherapy in the majority of patients. It is important to note, however,
that a considerable degree of the uncertainty regarding the efﬁcacy of these various
drugs likely can be attributed to methodological limitations in the clinical trials
themselves (e.g., randomization or inadequate placebo controls). Thus, this chapter
provides the reasoning for why a certain drug may not be currently recommended,
whether because of its apparent inefﬁcacy, potential for harm, or shortcomings in
the associated experimental design of the clinical trials, as these collective reasons
have contributed to the difﬁculty in translating drug therapies for tinnitus into
evidence-based practice (Weaver 2014).
7.1.1
Tinnitus Prevalence
A large proportion of adults will experience tinnitus at some point in their life,
albeit perhaps only for a short time and likely as a consequence of exposure to loud
noise or transient vascular changes. However, in approximately 10 % of the general
population (Heller 2003), tinnitus is a chronic condition that can lead to difﬁculty
concentrating, insomnia, and, in some cases, severe forms of anxiety and depres-
sion, all of which can negatively affect quality of life (Erlandsson and Hallberg
2000). According to data derived from the 2011–2012 National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), conducted by the US Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, it is estimated that approximately 20 million
Americans experience chronic tinnitus, with 2 million people suffering from
extreme and debilitating cases (https://www.ata.org/understanding-facts). Other
analyses of NHANES data (1994–2004), which is based on a sample of 14,178
completed surveys, estimate that approximately 50 million American adults have
experienced some form of tinnitus, with 16 million experiencing frequent tinnitus
within the past year (Shargorodsky et al. 2010). Similar rates of tinnitus prevalence
and disturbance (*5–16 % of population, with *1–4 % disabled) have been
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
167

reported in European (Axelsson and Ringdahl 1989; McCormack et al. 2014),
African (Khedr et al. 2010), Asian (Xu et al. 2011; Jalessi et al. 2013), and South
American (Oiticica and Bittar 2015) countries, making tinnitus a global concern.
7.1.2
Tinnitus Diagnosis and Measurement
A comprehensive tinnitus diagnosis should involve a multidisciplinary approach
because tinnitus can be a symptom of various underlying pathologies (e.g., hearing
loss, neurovasculature abnormalities, head/neck trauma, retrocochlear pathology,
etc.) and it can be accompanied by several different comorbidities (e.g., anxiety,
depression, and/or insomnia) (Langguth et al. 2013). Although it is beyond the
scope of the present chapter to provide a detailed description of the recommended
diagnostic procedures, it is worth introducing the stepwise decision-tree approach
for clinical management of tinnitus that has been proposed from the Tinnitus
Research Initiative (TRI)—a leading, nonproﬁt foundation dedicated to supporting
collaborative research to improve the understanding of the pathophysiology of
tinnitus as well as the development of effective treatments. Ultimately, the TRI
recommends that the basic diagnostic steps include a case history, clinical ear
examination, audiologic testing, and assessment of tinnitus severity (Langguth et al.
2013).
Regarding the measurement of tinnitus, there are two important components:
perception and reaction (Tunkel et al. 2014). Tinnitus perception refers to the
acoustic aspects of the phenomenon, such as its loudness, pitch, and temporal
features. These can be, and often are, assessed with psychoacoustic measures,
including matches to real acoustic stimuli (Henry et al. 2014). In contrast, the
patient’s reaction to his or her tinnitus encompasses the person’s emotional
well-being and is reﬂected in subjective measures of how bothersome his or her
tinnitus is (i.e., its severity), measures usually derived from in-depth interviews or
questionnaires (Shi et al. 2014). Several questionnaires are available for assessing
the severity and effects of tinnitus. These include the Tinnitus Handicap
Questionnaire (Kuk et al. 1990); the Tinnitus Reaction Questionnaire (Wilson et al.
1991); the Tinnitus Handicap Inventory (Newman et al. 1996), which is the most
commonly used questionnaire in the United Kingdom (Baguley et al. 2013); and
more recently, the Tinnitus Functional Index (Meikle et al. 2012; Henry et al.
2015).
Because the psychoacoustic measurements of tinnitus do not fully explain the
subjective “feelings” or emotional toll of its severity (Meikle et al. 1984; Folmer
et al. 1999), clinicians are encouraged to include measures of both the patient’s
perception and reaction to his or her tinnitus in a comprehensive evaluation
(Langguth et al. 2011). The use of a validated tinnitus questionnaire is important in
providing a baseline for assessing the efﬁcacy of treatment in clinical trials related
to the subjective elements of tinnitus (Tunkel et al. 2014). That said, given the
number of questionnaires available, it can be difﬁcult to compare across studies if
168
B.L. Allman et al.

each clinical trial evaluates the treatment outcome using a different, albeit validated,
questionnaire. Also important to consider when evaluating the potential efﬁcacy of
putative treatments is the potential for placebo effects to confound the interpretation
(Duckert and Rees 1984).
7.1.3
Tinnitus Etiology
Tinnitus is a difﬁcult condition to manage clinically because its perceptual char-
acteristics, accompanying symptoms, and etiology vary considerably among
patients. For example, tinnitus is often comorbid with other conditions such as
noise- or age-related hearing loss, hyperacusis, head/neck injury or age-related
issues, temporomandibular joint disorders, neurovascular complications, or insult to
the auditory nerve (e.g., via microvasculature compression or vestibular schwan-
noma) (Langguth et al. 2013). Further contributing to the heterogeneity of tinnitus
and its associated symptoms is the ﬁnding that approximately 40 % of patients
report that there was “no related onset factor” associated with their tinnitus (for
review, see Elgoyhen and Langguth 2010).
It is commonly acknowledged that hearing impairment and increasing age are
signiﬁcant risk factors for tinnitus (Ahmad and Seidman 2004). Furthermore, a
study among American adults reported that a history of loud leisure-time, ﬁrearm,
or occupational noise exposure is also associated with increased odds of experi-
encing tinnitus (Shargorodsky et al. 2010). As exposure to loud noise is a pervasive
hazard for military personnel (Grantham 2012), it is well established that service-
men and servicewomen ﬁnd themselves at increased risk for tinnitus (Theodoroff
et al. 2015). Among returning veterans from conﬂicts in Iraq and Afghanistan,
49 % of personnel exposed to blast trauma developed tinnitus (Cave et al. 2007).
In further considering the relationship between hearing loss and tinnitus, a ret-
rospective observational study on 286 tinnitus patients found that the tinnitus pitch
was in the same range and correlated signiﬁcantly with the frequency of the
maximum hearing loss (Schecklmann et al. 2012). That said, an abnormal audio-
gram is not always detected in tinnitus patients (Langguth et al. 2013), particularly
if the pure tones used are within the conventional range of audiometric testing
(125–8,000 Hz). Several studies have conﬁrmed, however, that when the hearing
thresholds of these tinnitus patients are assessed above 8,000 Hz, hearing impair-
ments are indeed revealed and the pitch of the tinnitus is near or at the region of
these higher frequencies (for review, see Henry et al. 2014), ﬁndings that further
support the role of hearing loss in tinnitus etiology.
In addition to hearing loss, symptoms of depression are also commonly reported
in patients who seek medical attention for their tinnitus. It remains challenging,
however, to accurately estimate the prevalence of depression in patients with tin-
nitus from the general population because of research selection bias. Patients
recruited for studies are often those who are actively, and sometimes aggressively,
seeking treatment for their tinnitus and its associated symptoms (e.g., depression,
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
169

anxiety, and/or insomnia). This self-selection bias may lead to an overestimation of
prevalence of depression among individuals with tinnitus. Despite variability in the
rates of depression documented in the literature (14–80 %; Langguth et al. 2011),
several studies report a positive correlation between depression and tinnitus-related
severity and annoyance (for review, see Pinto et al. 2014). From these ﬁndings, an
important clinical question emerges: Is there directionality to this comorbidity of
tinnitus and depression? For example, are patients with depression more vulnerable
to developing tinnitus? Or is depression simply a reﬂection of a learned distress
response brought on by tinnitus? In a comprehensive review of the literature,
Langguth and colleagues (2011) proposed that the comorbidity of tinnitus and
depression does not likely occur by chance nor does depression simply manifest as
a reaction to one’s tinnitus. Instead, they contend that tinnitus and depression are
pathophysiologically interrelated because the two disorders share similar alterations
in neurotransmitter systems, and imaging studies have revealed overlap of brain
circuits that are activated in both tinnitus and depression (see Sect. 7.3 for the
putative mechanisms of tinnitus). That said, the extent to which there may be
interrelation will need to be thoroughly evaluated given that the majority of indi-
viduals with depression do not have tinnitus. In addition, there are many individuals
with tinnitus who are not being treated for depression by a healthcare provider.
Thus, it is possible that those subjects who actively seek treatment are suffering
from both tinnitus and depression, but their symptoms, although related, do not
share a common pathway. It is reasonable, however, to consider that tinnitus can
exacerbate and/or lead to depression and that depression can make coping with
tinnitus more difﬁcult or render individuals more susceptible to tinnitus distress.
Anxiety, another psychological condition, has also been identiﬁed as a signiﬁ-
cant risk factor for tinnitus severity (for review, see Langguth et al. 2011). For
example, in a study of patients deemed to be at high risk for severe or disabling
tinnitus (via the Tinnitus Severity Questionnaire), it was estimated that approxi-
mately 50 % had a concurrent anxiety disorder (Zöger et al. 2006). Subjects
included in this study had pure-tone averages better than 50 dB hearing level
(HL) in their worse-hearing ear (Zöger et al. 2006). Additional studies have iden-
tiﬁed a relationship between tinnitus distress and anxiety sensitivity, whereby
anxious patients misattribute the bodily sensations of their tinnitus as a sign of a
potentially harmful underlying condition that serves to heighten their anxiety
(Hesser and Andersson 2009; Gül et al. 2015). Given the comorbidity of anxiety
and tinnitus, it is not surprising that the intensity of a patient’s tinnitus can be
exacerbated by stressful events (Hébert and Lupien 2009). Moreover, a large-scale
epidemiological study reported a linear association between the presence of tinnitus
and the magnitude of long-term stress (Hasson et al. 2011). It is worth noting,
however, that such human correlational studies are unable to distinguish cause and
effect, such as whether tinnitus increases stress levels, if stress causes tinnitus, or if
both are related to some third unmeasured factor (Mazurek et al. 2012; Canlon et al.
2013).
170
B.L. Allman et al.

7.1.4
Economic Burden of Tinnitus
According to a 2013 report, tinnitus and hearing loss have emerged as the top two
service-related disabilities for which American veterans received compensation
from the US Department of Veterans Affairs (2014). Consequently, the ﬁnancial
cost associated with tinnitus compensation for the military has soared, totaling
$300 million for the 2010 ﬁscal year under the major disability only for hearing loss
category and $920 million overall individual claims (Department of Veterans
Affairs Compensation Beneﬁts Report FY 2010). It is important to note, however,
that the economic burden of tinnitus-related disability is likely not restricted to
military agencies, as it has been estimated that approximately 1 % of the general
population suffers from debilitating tinnitus (McCombe et al. 2001) that can impair
their workplace productivity and earning potential (Henry et al. 2005). For example,
based on a large cohort study, patients with tinnitus have a greater than a threefold
increased risk of going on to receive a disability pension compared to individuals
who went on sick leave for a non-otology/audiology diagnosis (Friberg et al. 2012).
7.2
Laboratory Animal Models of Tinnitus
Over the past approximately 25 years, a number of laboratory animal models have
been developed to investigate the pathophysiology of tinnitus, with the vast
majority using rodents (e.g., rats, mice, and hamsters). It is important to note that
before assessing any changes in cochlear function or brain activity that may
underlie tinnitus, it was necessary that researchers ﬁrst overcome the challenge of
developing behavioral tests that were capable of determining whether or not ani-
mals were actually experiencing tinnitus. Jastreboff and colleagues (1988) were the
ﬁrst to establish an animal model of tinnitus in the rat. Subsequently, a variety of
behavioral paradigms have been developed to screen rats and other laboratory
animals for noise- and drug-induced tinnitus (for review, see Heffner and Heffner
2012; Stolzberg et al. 2012; Hayes et al. 2014). In general, the majority of the initial
behavioral paradigms involved training an animal to perform a distinct behavior
when sound was present in its environment and a different behavior during quiet
conditions. Then, following a noise or drug exposure, if the animal mistakenly
behaved during quiet conditions as though it was “hearing” an acoustic stimulus,
the researchers concluded that the animal was experiencing tinnitus. There are a
number of inherent challenges in developing these models in that the conditions
under which animals are trained to respond or withhold responding are absent of
acoustic stimuli. Then, presumably, when the animal no longer perceives quiet
because of tinnitus, it behaves as if there were a real sound in the background.
Ultimately, based on these behavioral paradigms, it is now well established that,
similar to humans, excessive exposure to loud noise or ototoxic drugs (e.g., sodium
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
171

salicylate, the active component of aspirin) can induce tinnitus in laboratory
animals.
To date, one of the most commonly used behavioral tools to screen animals for
noise-induced tinnitus has been the gap prepulse inhibition of the acoustic startle
(GPIAS) paradigm. The technique was developed by Turner and colleagues (2006)
and was based, in part, on earlier work by Ison and colleagues (Ison 1982; Ison
et al. 2002). In contrast to the aforementioned behavioral tests that involved training
animals before inducing tinnitus, the GPIAS paradigm does not require overt
training, as it is based on an animal’s reﬂexive motoric response (a “ﬂinch”) to a
loud sound. The amplitude of this reﬂexive acoustic startle response can be mod-
iﬁed by presenting an audible acoustic cue before the onset of a startling stimulus.
In the GPIAS paradigm, the cue is a silent gap in a continuous background noise.
Alternatively, acoustic cues such as tones and noise bursts in quiet presented prior
to a startling stimulus can also modify the acoustic startle reﬂex amplitude. A key
feature of the GPIAS paradigm is the consistent ﬁnding that if an animal is able to
detect a brief silent gap in a background sound before the loud startle stimulus, its
acoustic startle amplitude will be attenuated or abolished (i.e., it “ﬂinches” less in
response to the loud sound). Supporters of the GPIAS paradigm suggest that if the
animal’s tinnitus pitch is qualitatively similar to the background sound, then it
should be unable to detect the silent gap, and consequently, its acoustic startle
amplitude will not be suppressed or will be suppressed to a lesser degree. This
difference is important because changes in startle amplitudes after “tinnitus”
induction could result from generalized changes across all trials or the results of
trial averages that include trials in which animals detected the cue and trials in
which the animals completely failed to detect the cue.
It should also be noted that the notion of tinnitus “ﬁlling in” the silent gap has
been seriously challenged in human (Fournier and Hébert 2013; Boyen et al. 2015)
and laboratory animal studies (Hickox and Liberman 2014; Radziwon et al. 2015).
Moreover, a study on rats identiﬁed an additional caveat of the GPIAS paradigm: it
is susceptible to “false positives” for tinnitus following hearing loss (Lobarinas
et al. 2013). To illustrate this point, a temporary and reversible unilateral, con-
ductive hearing loss was produced in rats by plugging one ear with a silicone
elastomer. When tested under the GPIAS, paradigm animals showed behaviors
consistent with “tinnitus” as evidenced by a lack of difference between the trials that
contained a gap, relative to trials with no gap (i.e., it appeared that the animals could
not detect the gap). However, on closer inspection, the presence of the earplug had
signiﬁcantly reduced the response to the loud acoustic startle stimulus under both
cued and uncued trials. If the startling stimulus no longer produced a startle
response, there was nothing from which to inhibit and thus a lack of difference. It
did not matter whether the trial was cued or not as the animals no longer exhibited a
robust startle response. When the same earplugged animals were tested under the
same gap or no-gap conditions but with a startle response induced with a tactile
stimulus (i.e., a 10–12 PSI airpuff to the back of the neck), the animals readily
detected the gap cue prior to the air puff and showed robust inhibition. These results
highlight some of the challenges associated with developing animal models and the
172
B.L. Allman et al.

need to both build robust evidence and critically evaluate existing evidence.
Clearly, a failure to accurately screen animals for the presence/absence of tinnitus is
a signiﬁcant and persistent concern for researchers who intend to subsequently
investigate its pathophysiology or possible drug therapies for translational research
aims.
In addition to the challenges of accurately screening laboratory animals for
tinnitus (for review, see Heffner and Heffner 2012; Eggermont 2013), it is important
to note that current models were designed to assess the perception of tinnitus. In
contrast, the emotional and/or cognitive effects of tinnitus have not been explored in
animals. This could be viewed as either an advantage or a disadvantage. If the goal
is to determine whether a particular therapy reduces the actual sound of tinnitus,
then the current animal models may be an attractive tool to determine efﬁcacy.
However, if tinnitus is deﬁned by the negative psychological reaction experienced
by patients who are unable to habituate to the sound of tinnitus, then animal models
would be of limited use. These different viewpoints also signiﬁcantly affect efforts
at studying tinnitus, as efﬁcacy may be deﬁned by a reduction or elimination of the
tinnitus sound or by a reduction in the psychological reaction to tinnitus.
Despite the aforementioned challenges, there are still signiﬁcant and distinct
beneﬁts of using laboratory animal models for translational tinnitus research. For
example, animal models allow researchers to (1) precisely control how tinnitus is
induced; (2) invasively record neural activity from various brain regions using
microelectrodes; and (3) safely evaluate the efﬁcacy of novel treatments for
reducing the tinnitus percept. In Sect. 7.4, we present the outcomes of various
animal studies that have either screened drugs that had already been administered to
humans for tinnitus (e.g., memantine and cyclobenzaprine) or drugs that have yet to
be tested in clinical trials for tinnitus (e.g., retigabine).
7.3
Putative Mechanisms of Tinnitus
At present, the mechanisms underlying tinnitus continue to remain elusive. It is
unlikely that the signal for tinnitus simply originates in the cochlea and travels to
the brain via the auditory nerve because, although some patients’ tinnitus improved
after their auditory nerve had been surgically transected, other patients experienced
persistent (or worsened) tinnitus following surgery (House and Brackman 1981).
These data suggest that some forms of tinnitus are generated centrally or perpet-
uated even in the absence of a connection to the cochlea (Eggermont et al. 2012).
Further support of a central generator for some forms of tinnitus has emerged from
several neuroimaging studies (Melcher 2012). These studies show that brain
activity is enhanced in auditory and nonauditory areas in patients with tinnitus
relative to control subjects without tinnitus (for review, see Adjamian et al. 2009;
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
173

Lanting et al. 2009). Ultimately, it has been suggested that although tinnitus may
indeed be triggered by cochlear damage, tinnitus can be perpetuated by the sub-
sequent plastic changes that occur in the central auditory system independent of the
periphery (Henry et al. 2014).
Based on several decades of research using both invasive neural recordings in
laboratory animals as well as noninvasive recordings and neuroimaging techniques
in humans, a variety of central mechanisms of tinnitus have been proposed (see
Eggermont et al. 2012). In a comprehensive review, Henry et al. (2014) outlined
these putative tinnitus mechanisms within a framework of various neural models,
including (1) dorsal cochlear nucleus hyperactivity, (2) tonotopic reorganization,
(3) central gain, (4) neural synchrony, and (5) network models. The dorsal cochlear
nucleus (DCN) hyperactivity model of tinnitus suggests that hearing impairment
causes a loss of inhibition in this early relay nucleus, leading to an increase in
spontaneous neural activity that ascends along subsequent structures in the central
auditory system and ultimately manifests as tinnitus (Kaltenbach et al. 2005;
Dehmel et al. 2012). Tonotopic map reorganization occurs at each relay nucleus
throughout the central auditory system as a consequence of the sensory deaf-
ferentation caused by the hearing loss. There is speculation that this reorganization,
typically characterized by an expansion of the representation of frequencies spared
after cochlear damage, results in the phantom perception of tinnitus (Rauschecker
1999). The central gain model of tinnitus proposes that following the reduction in
sensory input from the cochlea, structures in the central auditory system become
hyperactive owing to homeostatic mechanisms that are triggered to preserve neural
sensitivity but do so at the expense of also amplifying “neural noise” (i.e., tinnitus)
(Noreña 2011). Based on results from electro- and magnetoencephalography in
humans, neural synchrony models refer to the aberrant cortical oscillatory activity
that is believed to arise from hyperpolarization of the thalamus following sensory
deafferentation (Llinas et al. 1999; De Ridder et al. 2015). These changes in the
thalamus result in a synchronized, bursting pattern of activity of neurons that
project to the cortex, which ultimately causes abnormally synchronized cortical
activity believed to contribute to the tinnitus percept (Llinas et al. 1999; De Ridder
et al. 2015). Finally, network models of tinnitus are founded on neuroimaging data
that reveal that more than one brain region demonstrates aberrant activity or
morphology in patients with tinnitus (Leaver et al. 2011; Elgoyhen et al. 2012). For
example, frontal, temporal, and parietal cortical areas have been implicated in the
perception of tinnitus, whereas tinnitus distress appears to be associated with
synchronized activity in the subcallosal anterior cingulate cortex, the insula,
parahippocampal area, and amygdala (Langguth et al. 2011). Overall, it should be
noted that the proposed neural models of tinnitus may not be mutually exclusive.
For example, a loss of inhibition early in the auditory pathway or “central gain” due
to homeostatic mechanisms may ultimately manifest as changes in large-scale
network activity.
174
B.L. Allman et al.

7.4
Off-Label Approach to Pharmacotherapy for Tinnitus
Despite the long history of tinnitus suffering and its considerable prevalence and
economic burden, there is currently no FDA-approved drug for the treatment of
tinnitus. Previous pharmacological attempts to manage tinnitus have instead used
drugs approved for other medical conditions. Broadly, these off-label drugs have
included
anesthetics,
antidepressants,
anxiolytics,
anticonvulsants,
glutamate-receptor antagonists, and muscle relaxants.
Other attempts have used various dietary supplements for the treatment of tin-
nitus. Many of these “supplements” carry disclaimers such as, “This statement has
not been evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration. This product is not
intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease” (US Food and Drug
Administration 2015). Such statements are included because, under the Dietary
Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994 (DSHEA) and current FDA regu-
lations, these formulations are considered food and thus exempt from the rigorous
labeling and testing standards applied to drugs. Because of the lack of scientiﬁc
support for the use of dietary supplements (Tunkel et al. 2014), this chapter pro-
vides an overview of the off-label prescription drugs that have been examined in
clinical trials as well as the scientiﬁc rationale underlying their use and the asso-
ciated patient outcomes.
7.4.1
Anesthetics
Bárnáy (1935) inadvertently found that tinnitus could be suppressed with intra-
venous administration of the anesthetic procaine, which is commonly known as
Novocain. Similar promising ﬁndings were reported over the next several decades
(for review, see Melding et al. 1978). In the early 1980s, a series of clinical trials
investigated the effect of intravenous administration of the voltage-gated sodium
channel blocker lidocaine on tinnitus. As summarized and critiqued by Bauer and
Perring (2008), these studies monitored the effect of intravenous lidocaine on tin-
nitus
(versus
a
saline
placebo
control)
5–30 min
postinfusion
using
a
within-subjects design and found that lidocaine reduced the loudness, pitch, and
annoyance of tinnitus in the majority of subjects. However, these effects were
transient, and 9–32 % of subjects included in the various studies reported that their
tinnitus worsened after lidocaine. Furthermore, the study design was compromised
because most subjects experienced side effects (e.g., imbalance and speech disor-
ders) to the lidocaine, preventing them from remaining blind to the treatment.
It has long been known that the inclusion of appropriate placebo controls is
important in clinical trials that seek to evaluate drug therapies for tinnitus. Duckert
and Rees (1984) suggested to patients who had previously participated in a lido-
caine study that they were to again receive an injection of lidocaine but instead were
unknowingly administered saline. The placebo effect inﬂuenced 40 % of subjects,
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
175

as they reported a change in their tinnitus following the placebo (saline) injection.
These ﬁndings reach far beyond the evaluation of the proposed efﬁcacy of lidocaine
and serve as a cautionary note that the effectiveness of drug therapies for tinnitus
may be subject to strong bias by the placebo effect.
Studies have also sought to elucidate the mechanism(s) by which intravenous
lidocaine suppresses tinnitus. For example, Kalcioglu et al. (2005) investigated
whether the effect of lidocaine on tinnitus suppression was due to its effect on
altering otoacoustic emissions in the cochlea. Ultimately, having found similar
changes in distortion product otoacoustic emission (DPOAE) measures in subjects
whose tinnitus lessened with lidocaine treatment versus those whose did not, the
authors concluded that lidocaine-induced suppression of tinnitus was not likely due
to altered DPOAEs. Using positron emission tomography, Reyes et al. (2002)
measured regional cerebral blood ﬂow (rCBF) before and after lidocaine infusion
and found that there was reduction in rCBF (and presumably neural activity) in the
auditory cortex of patients who experienced a decrease in tinnitus loudness, ﬁnd-
ings that were consistent with the authors’ hypothesis that tinnitus originates in the
central auditory pathway rather than the periphery. It is important to note, however,
that these conclusions cannot rule out potential peripheral effects of lidocaine on
auditory nerve ﬁbers, synapses, or inner hair cells.
With respect to efﬁcacy, the potential usefulness of intravenous lidocaine as a
treatment for tinnitus is strongly diminished by its unwanted side effects, transient
nature, increase in tinnitus among some participants, and impractical intravenous
route of delivery outside a clinical setting. Despite these limitations, because a
signiﬁcant proportion (40–82 %) of subjects in the studies summarized by Bauer
and Perring (2008) reported a reduction of tinnitus following intravenous lidocaine
administration, these ﬁndings have been put forth in general support of the con-
tention that tinnitus may indeed be treated with pharmacotherapy (Langguth and
Elgoyhen 2012). Perhaps future studies will be able to offset the clear drawbacks of
intravenous lidocaine administration while preserving its promising effects at
silencing tinnitus.
7.4.2
Tricyclic Antidepressants
If, as suggested, tinnitus and depression share similar pathophysiology (Langguth
et al. 2011), it is reasonable to ponder whether the drugs that effectively treat
depressive symptoms may also be effective at managing tinnitus loudness and/or
severity. To date, a variety of tricyclic antidepressants have been evaluated in
clinical
trials
to
treat
tinnitus,
including
trimipramine,
nortriptyline,
and
amitriptyline. In a double-blind crossover trial versus placebo, trimipramine was
found to be ineffective at reducing tinnitus disability owing to a lack of statistically
signiﬁcant results coupled with a large placebo effect (Mihail et al. 1988). Sullivan
et al. (1993) found that nortriptyline showed a nonstatistically signiﬁcant trend to
decrease functional disability and tinnitus loudness in a 12-week, double-blind,
176
B.L. Allman et al.

randomized controlled trial that included subjects with either major depression or
depressive symptoms. The effectiveness of amitriptyline (10 mg; 3 times/day) was
evaluated in a 10-week, randomized, open-label, placebo-controlled trial (Podoshin
et al. 1995) and a 6-week, randomized, parallel, placebo-controlled single-blind
study (50 mg/day for ﬁrst week; 100 mg/day for 5 weeks) (Bayar et al. 2001).
According to Podoshin and colleagues (1995), the majority of patients reported no
improvement in tinnitus with amitriptyline treatment, whereas Bayar et al. (2001)
found that a higher dose of amitriptyline resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction in the
subjective rating of tinnitus and its loudness as well as a reduction in tinnitus by the
end of the study in 95 % of the patients (compared to 12 % of the placebo group).
Baldo et al. (2012) published a Cochrane Review on the effectiveness of
antidepressants for tinnitus treatment and provided a comprehensive critique of the
aforementioned studies and their outcomes. It is worth noting that Baldo and col-
leagues excluded additional studies that administered antidepressants because of
issues such as high participant dropout rate (Zöger et al. 2006; Holgers et al. 2011),
lack of randomization (Sullivan et al. 1989), or failure to include a placebo control
(Roberts et al. 2011). Considering the primary outcome measure to be a change in
tinnitus disability, Baldo et al. (2012) concluded that the four randomized con-
trolled trials investigating tricyclic antidepressants yielded only a slight improve-
ment, and thus there was insufﬁcient evidence in support of antidepressant therapy
for tinnitus.
Ultimately, the clinical practice guideline published by the American Academy
of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery Foundation does not recommend
antidepressants for treating tinnitus (Tunkel et al. 2014). That said, given the
possibility that tinnitus patients who have sought medical attention may also have
depressive symptoms, it has been suggested that a multidisciplinary diagnostic
approach be used. A team approach involving collaboration between audiologists,
otolaryngologists, and mental health professionals is strongly recommended for
patients with severe tinnitus as well as those with histories suggestive of comor-
bidity with anxiety or depression (Pinto et al. 2014).
7.4.3
Benzodiazepines
Based on the proposed relationship between stress and tinnitus, researchers have
sought to determine the efﬁcacy of anxiolytic (antianxiety) drugs on tinnitus and its
associated symptoms. Several clinical trials for tinnitus have been conducted using
benzodiazepines, a class of psychoactive drugs with anxiolytic (as well as anti-
convulsant and sedative) properties. Benzodiazepines act as positive allosteric
modulators of c-aminobutyric acid (GABAA) receptors, thereby enhancing
GABA-mediated inhibition. In addition to their anxiolytic effects, it has been
suggested that benzodiazepines could suppress tinnitus by increasing inhibitory
neurotransmission
in
the
central
auditory
system,
thereby
offsetting
the
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
177

hyperexcitability that has been implicated in tinnitus pathophysiology (Jufas and
Wood 2015). In further support of the possible therapeutic potential of benzodi-
azepines, an imaging study found that patients with tinnitus have a reduction in
benzodiazepine-binding sites in the medial temporal cortex, as assessed with
single-photon emission computed tomography and a benzodiazepine radioligand
(Shulman et al. 2000).
In a systematic review, Jufas and Wood (2015) considered the strength of the
evidence for benzodiazepine use in tinnitus management and weighed that against
the associated risks. The authors summarized and critiqued six studies (outlined
below) investigating various benzodiazepines, including diazepam (Valium),
alprazolam (Xanax), and clonazepam. Collectively, these studies used a variety of
outcome measures, such as audiometry, visual analogue scales, the Tinnitus
Handicap Inventory, and an assessment of tinnitus loudness, to determine the
efﬁcacy of the drug therapy.
Diazepam is mainly used to treat anxiety and insomnia. Studies conducted in the
early 1980s found that diazepam was ineffective at managing tinnitus in a
double-blind crossover trial (Kay 1981), as well as in a single-blind comparison of
participants (Lechtenberg and Shulman 1984).
Alprazolam signiﬁcantly reduced tinnitus loudness in a 12-week, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study where the dosage was adjusted (0.5–1.5 mg/day) for each
participant (Johnson et al. 1993). Although the majority of participants improved,
this study has been challenged because of its individualized dosing regimen and
lack of inclusion of a validated tinnitus questionnaire as an outcome measure (Salvi
et al. 2009). It appears that these concerns are warranted, as Jalali and colleagues
(2009) reported that alprazolam (1.5 mg/day) did not signiﬁcantly improve the
Tinnitus Handicap Inventory score or tinnitus loudness in a randomized,
triple-blind, cross-over, placebo-controlled trial. Ultimately, the conﬂicting results
between these two studies could partly arise from differences in the patient popu-
lations. Because Jalali and colleagues (2009) excluded tinnitus patients with
depressive or anxiety disorders, it is possible that the beneﬁcial effect on tinnitus
loudness observed by Johnson et al. (1993) was due to alprazolam’s general anx-
iolytic properties on patients in their study rather than its direct effect on tinnitus
pathophysiology (Jufas and Wood 2015).
Of the benzodiazepines used in clinical trials, clonazepam, which has a long
plasma half-life of 20–40 h, has shown the most favorable results in reducing
tinnitus. For example, in a randomized, single-blind comparison study using
clonazepam, 18 of the 26 tinnitus patients experienced reduction in tinnitus volume,
with more than half of these patients reporting a better than 50 % improvement in
tinnitus volume using a patient assessment rating scale (1–5) (Lechtenberg and
Shulman 1984). A follow-up study found that clonazepam reduced tinnitus
annoyance and intensity in a randomized, single-blind, placebo-controlled trial
(Bahmad et al. 2006). Similarly, Han et al. (2012) conducted a randomized,
open-label, crossover comparison study and reported that 3 weeks of clonazepam
signiﬁcantly reduced tinnitus annoyance and loudness as well as scores on the
Tinnitus Handicap Inventory.
178
B.L. Allman et al.

When considering benzodiazepines for tinnitus management, it is important to
be mindful of potential confounds in the aforementioned clinical trials as well as the
likelihood of adverse side effects. For example, Jufas and Wood (2015) cautioned
that, despite the evidence supporting the efﬁcacy of clonazepam in three studies,
none of them adequately described sufﬁcient participant blinding to the treatment,
and this may have resulted in an overestimation of the positive effects reported by
the participants. It is difﬁcult to keep participants blinded to the experimental
conditions because benzodiazepines have a considerable side effect proﬁle,
including sedation, memory impairment, and slurring of speech. Benzodiazepines
also carry a risk of drug dependency. Of the benzodiazepines discussed previously,
alprazolam is perhaps of greatest concern because its relatively short plasma
half-life (12–15 h) makes it difﬁcult for patients to withdraw from use (Wolf and
Grifﬁths 1991). Finally, there are reports that tinnitus can emerge after discontin-
uation of long-term use of benzodiazepines (Busto et al. 1986, 1988; Ashton 1991).
Based on the results available and the potential for adverse effects, previous review
articles (e.g., Langguth and Elgoyhen 2012; Jufas and Wood 2015) as well as the
published Clinical Practice Guideline for Tinnitus (Tunkel et al. 2014) have cau-
tioned against the use of anxiolytics, such as benzodiazepines, for the treatment of
tinnitus.
7.4.4
Anticonvulsants
The use of anticonvulsants is not restricted to epileptic conditions, as this class of
drugs has been prescribed for various psychiatric disorders and pain syndromes
(Langguth and Elgoyhen 2012). The two most commonly used anticonvulsants in
clinical trials for tinnitus management have been carbamazepine and gabapentin.
Carbamazepine, which is structurally similar to tricyclic antidepressants, effectively
inhibits high-frequency neuronal ﬁring by binding to voltage-gated sodium chan-
nels and stabilizing the sodium inactivation state so that fewer channels can sub-
sequently open (Ambrósio et al. 2002). At present, the mechanism(s) underlying
gabapentin’s actions as an antiepileptic and antinociceptive drug is not completely
understood. It has been suggested that its actions may be mediated by multiple
cellular effects, which likely involve blockage of voltage-gated calcium channels
(Sills 2006). Ultimately, the use of anticonvulsants in clinical trials for tinnitus
management has been rationalized based on their actions in reducing the neuronal
hyperexcitability proposed to underlie tinnitus.
In the late 1970s, it was reported that the subset of tinnitus patients who ben-
eﬁtted from intravenous lidocaine also responded positively to carbamazepine
(Shea and Harell 1978; Melding and Goodey 1979). As a follow-up to these studies,
Donaldson (1981) conducted a randomized, crossover trial comparing the effect of
carbamazepine versus placebo. Unlike the studies in which 600–1,000 mg/day of
carbamazepine was effective in approximately half of the patients tested (for
review, see Salvi et al. 2009), the lower dose used in the study by Donaldson (1981)
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
179

(200 mg/day) resulted in a nonsigniﬁcant effect on tinnitus. Using a higher dose
(450 mg/day) in a randomized, double-blind trial, Hulshof and Vermeij (1985)
found that carbamazepine actually worsened tinnitus compared to placebo (albeit
nonsigniﬁcantly), and the majority of patients experienced side effects such as
dizziness, nausea, and headache. Finally, 300–600 mg/day of carbamazepine did
not show a signiﬁcant beneﬁt in tinnitus patients as assessed with visual analog
scale and Tinnitus Severity Index in a randomized, double-blind clinical trial of
patients with nonpulsatile tinnitus (Gerami et al. 2012). Despite these equivocal
results, carbamazepine has been reported to be effective at managing pulsatile
tinnitus (Rahko and Hakkinen 1979; Mardini 1987), a rare form of tinnitus related
to auditory nerve vascular compression in which the phantom sensation is described
as sounding like clicking or a typewriter (i.e., “typewriter tinnitus”; Levine 2006).
In a series of randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials, the anticon-
vulsant gabapentin was found to be no more effective than placebo at improving
scores on the Tinnitus Handicap Inventory (Piccirillo et al. 2007; Witsell et al.
2007) or Tinnitus Severity Index (Dehkordi et al. 2011). Similarly, Bakhshaee et al.
(2008) found no signiﬁcant difference in the Tinnitus Severity Index or loudness
perception between gabapentin and placebo in a double-blind crossover trial. In an
attempt to determine the efﬁcacy of gabapentin on different subpopulations of
tinnitus patients as well as ﬁnd an optimum dose for each patient, Bauer et al.
(2015) conducted a double-blind crossover trial. This trial speciﬁcally segregated
patients whose tinnitus was attributed to high-level sound exposure and included
entry and washout placebo phases that bracketed escalating (800, 1,800, and
2,400 mg) and decreasing drug dose (900 mg) series for 3–4 weeks. Consistent
with the earlier studies, Bauer et al. (2015) conﬁrmed the limited efﬁcacy of
gabapentin in decreasing the loudness and impact of tinnitus.
Similar to the aforementioned carbamazepine clinical trials where efﬁcacy was
reported to differ with various daily dosage regimens, Zheng et al. (2008) used an
animal model and found that carbamazepine at 15 mg/kg but not at lower or higher
doses could reduce salicylate-induced tinnitus in rats that were assessed with a
conditioned lick suppression paradigm. In contrast to the aforementioned human
studies, Bauer and Brozoski (2006) found that gabapentin was effective at rever-
sibly attenuating tinnitus in noise-exposed rats using a psychophysical procedure
based on each animal’s auditory discrimination ability. In fact, Bauer and col-
leagues (2015) acknowledged that it was the promising ﬁndings from their earlier
animal work that directly informed their decision to investigate the effect of
gabapentin in humans with noise-induced tinnitus. In the clinical trial, because the
objective, psychometric assessment of tinnitus loudness paralleled the subjective,
questionnaire-based measures of loudness, the authors suggested that gabapentin
primarily impacts the “sensory” features of tinnitus. Perhaps the positive effects of
both carbamazepine and gabapentin observed in animal studies relate to the fact that
the behavioral paradigms assess whether or not an animal perceives a (phantom)
sound, and as such, the “sensory” nature of tinnitus is measured without the sec-
ondary features commonly reported in humans, such as the attentional and emo-
tional reaction to tinnitus. Consequently, even if the intensity of the tinnitus is
180
B.L. Allman et al.

reduced, it may not be sufﬁcient to reduce the reaction to any residual tinnitus.
Alternatively, if the tinnitus signal is abolished, as some animal data suggest, there
should no longer be any reaction as the phantom sound is no longer present. The
discrepancies between the animal and human data highlight signiﬁcant challenges
and the need for the systematic steps of the translational research process.
In addition to carbamazepine and gabapentin, animal studies that focused on
potential peripheral effects have investigated the anticonvulsant retigabine on tin-
nitus and cochlear function. Retigabine is an unconventional anticonvulsant that
exerts its effects through voltage-gated potassium channels. More speciﬁcally,
retigabine acts as an activator of neuronal KCNQ/Kv7 potassium channels, which
on opening cause hyperpolarization, thereby lessening neuronal excitability.
Retigabine was found to prevent the reduction in the compound action potential
(CAP) that occurs following salicylate administration in rats, ﬁndings that the
authors suggested could protect against salicylate-induced or other forms of tinnitus
(Sheppard et al. 2015). Similarly, noise-exposed mice that were injected with
retigabine (starting 30 min after noise exposure and continuing for 5 days) were
less likely to develop tinnitus than saline-injected mice that received the same noise
exposure (Li et al. 2013). It was reasoned that retigabine prevented tinnitus by
offsetting the neuronal hyperexcitability and reduction of KCNQ activity that
occurs in the dorsal cochlear nucleus following noise exposure and CAP sup-
pression (Li et al. 2013). In a follow-up study from the same laboratory (Kalappa
et al. 2015), the novel KCNQ-channel activator SF0034 was found to be a more
potent and less toxic anticonvulsant than retigabine in rodents, which also appeared
to prevent noise-induced tinnitus in mice. It is worth noting that in both studies (Li
et al. 2013; Kalappa et al. 2015), the noise-exposed mice were screened for tinnitus
using the gap prepulse inhibition of the acoustic startle (GPIAS) paradigm. Because
the GPIAS paradigm has been challenged as a screening tool for tinnitus (see
Sect. 7.2 for details), the promising therapeutic effects of KCNQ-channel activators
would be strengthened by additional studies that screened for tinnitus in
drug-treated animals using paradigms that rely on carefully designed, behaviorally
conditioned responses that can control for the confounding effects of hearing loss.
That said, the study by Li et al. (2013) has provided important ﬁrst steps in
understanding potassium-channel pathologies following noise exposure and may
one day lead to novel pharmacotherapy for tinnitus patients (Kaltenbach 2013).
In 2011, Hoekstra et al. published a Cochrane Review evaluating the effec-
tiveness of anticonvulsants in tinnitus patients. After excluding several studies from
consideration due to such factors as lack of randomization or use of only a single
dose of a given drug, seven clinical trials (encompassing 453 patients) were
reviewed. Based on a meta-analysis, it was concluded that anticonvulsants showed
only a small effect of doubtful clinical signiﬁcance in the treatment of tinnitus, and
18 % of patients experienced side effects. Consequently, according to the Clinical
Practice Guideline for Tinnitus (Tunkel et al. 2014), anticonvulsants are not pre-
sently recommended for treating tinnitus, as they failed to show a preponderance of
beneﬁt over harm.
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
181

7.4.5
Glutamate-Receptor Antagonists
As an alternative to administering drugs aimed at enhancing GABAergic inhibition
in tinnitus patients, clinical trials have also attempted to dampen tinnitus-related
hyperexcitability by antagonizing glutamatergic (excitatory) neurotransmission. To
this end, a variety of glutamate-receptor antagonists have been used, including
memantine, neramexane, caroverine, acamprosate, and AM-101. To date, a
Cochrane Review has not summarized and critiqued the previous clinical trials of
glutamate-receptor antagonists, and the Clinical Guideline of Tinnitus (Tunkel et al.
2014) provides only limited commentary on acamprosate as a treatment option for
tinnitus (see below).
Memantine acts as a glutamatergic antagonist by blocking N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) channels once they have already opened rather than competing to bind at
the actual glutamate-receptor site (Johnson and Kotermanski 2006). Memantine has
been proposed as a putative therapeutic agent for tinnitus of cochlear origin because
it is known to suppress the excitotoxicity mediated by NMDA receptors on cochlear
hair cells (Oestreicher et al. 1998). Using a conditioned lick suppression paradigm
in rats, Lobarinas et al. (2006) found that a low dose of memantine (3 mg/kg) failed
to completely suppress tinnitus induced by sodium salicylate. However, when this
same laboratory increased the dose of memantine (up to 5 mg/kg) and tested ani-
mals
using
the
GPIAS
paradigm,
memantine
appeared
to
suppress
salicylate-induced tinnitus (Ralli et al. 2014). Furthermore, Zheng et al. (2012a)
found that memantine treatment at the higher dose (5 mg/kg) reduced the propor-
tion of rats that showed behavioral evidence of noise-induced tinnitus using a
conditioned lick suppression model (Zheng et al. 2012a).
To date, only one clinical trial has investigated the effect of memantine on
tinnitus. In a randomized, double-blind crossover design, 90 days of treatment with
memantine did not improve scores on the Tinnitus Handicap Inventory beyond that
of the placebo condition, and 9 % of patients experienced side effects (Figueiredo
et al. 2008). Suckfüll et al. (2011) performed a double-blind clinical trial to
investigate the effect of neramexane, a compound related to memantine that acts as
a noncompetitive NMDA antagonist as well as a nicotinic acetylcholine-receptor
antagonist, on patients with moderate to severe tinnitus. The various neramexane
treatment groups (25, 50, and 75 mg/day) as well as the placebo group all showed
trends for improvements in the scores reported for the Tinnitus Handicap Inventory
questionnaire (THI-12) at the 16-week study end point, but the results did not reach
statistical signiﬁcance. At 4 weeks after the end of treatment, however, there was a
signiﬁcant improvement in THI-12 scores in the 50 mg/day group compared to the
placebo group (Suckfüll et al. 2011). Additional clinical trials investigating the
efﬁcacy, safety, and tolerability of neramexane were completed (NCT00405886;
NCT00955799) or terminated (NCT00827008) from 2006 to 2012, but it does not
appear that any results have been made available as of this writing (https://
clinicaltrials.gov/).
182
B.L. Allman et al.

Caroverine, in addition to acting as a noncompetitive NMDA antagonist and a
competitive
a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic
acid
(AMPA)-
receptor antagonist, is a calcium channel blocker and antioxidant. Beginning in the
late 1990s, a series of clinical trials investigated the efﬁcacy of caroverine on
tinnitus. These were conducted based on the rationale that tinnitus of cochlear
origin occurs due to excessive glutamate neurotransmission in inner hair cells. In a
placebo-controlled single-blind study, a single intravenous injection of caroverine
immediately reduced both the subjective rating and psychoacoustic measurement of
tinnitus in 63 % of patients in the treatment but not in the placebo control group
(Denk et al. 1997). However, a separate study that used the same patient selection
and treatment conditions as the protocol of Denk et al. (1997) did not ﬁnd a positive
effect of caroverine administration (Domeisen et al. 1998). Finally, in a
proof-of-concept study, when caroverine was applied noninvasively as a 1 %
topical solution to the tympanic membrane of the affected ear, 57 % of patients
reported an improvement in tinnitus severity (Ehrenberger 2005).
Acamprosate, a drug approved to aid in the withdrawal of alcohol dependency,
has been investigated in clinical trials for tinnitus management based on its putative
actions as both a glutamate antagonist and positive allosteric modulator of GABA.
In a double-blind study, 87 % of patients treated with acamprosate for 90 days
reported tinnitus relief compared to 44 % of patients in the placebo group (Azevedo
and Figueiredo 2007). Furthermore, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
crossover trial found that there was a signiﬁcant improvement in both objective
measures (psychoacoustic matching of tinnitus loudness) as well as subjective
measures of tinnitus (visual analog scale of tinnitus loudness and quality of life
questionnaires), with more than 90 % of subjects reporting improvement in their
tinnitus (Sharma et al. 2012). Moreover, these positive effects seemed to persist
when the acamprosate group discontinued their treatment and crossed over to the
placebo phase for an additional 45 days (Sharma et al. 2012). Despite acknowl-
edging these seemingly favorable results, the Clinical Practice Guideline for
Tinnitus (Tunkel et al. 2014) does not recommend acamprosate treatment because
of insufﬁcient evidence of its efﬁcacy.
Systemic administration of NMDA antagonists can cause considerable unde-
sirable side effects, which ultimately restricts the dosing that can be administered to
patients with tinnitus. As reviewed by Meyer (2013), local drug delivery via
intratympanic membrane injections can be used to increase the drug concentration
in the inner ear while limiting the side effects associated with systemic adminis-
tration (see Chap. 5 by Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell for additional discussion). In 2011,
Muehlmeier et al. evaluated the safety and local tolerance of intratympanic delivery
of the noncompetitive NMDA antagonist AM-101 as a therapy for patients who
have had tinnitus for less than 3 months. In a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, Phase 1/2a study, they reported that intratympanic AM-101 was
well tolerated by study participants (n = 16) irrespective of the administered dose,
and there was some preliminary evidence of its efﬁcacy at managing tinnitus. Based
on these results, a follow-up Phase 2 clinical trial was conducted on 248 patients
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
183

(van de Heyning et al. 2014). Intratympanic administration of AM-101 resulted in a
statistically signiﬁcant, dose-dependent improvement in the subjective measures of
tinnitus loudness, annoyance, and sleep difﬁculties in patients with acute acoustic
trauma- or otitis media-triggered tinnitus; however, there was no overall treatment
beneﬁt on the objective measure of minimum masking level of the patients’ tinnitus,
suggesting that whereas patients were less distressed, the tinnitus sound itself
remained unchanged (van de Heyning et al. 2014). In support for AM-101 as a
potential treatment for acute noise exposure, a study on rats found that local
administration of AM-101 in the cochlea reduced the level of noise-induced trauma
to the inner hair cells and lessened the decline of signal transmission in the auditory
nerve (Bing et al. 2015). At the time of publication of this chapter, subjects were
being recruited to participate in Phase 3 clinical trials to investigate the efﬁcacy of
AM-101 to treat acute tinnitus that started as the result of an injury to the inner ear
or otitis media (NCT01803646) as well as to test the safety and local tolerance of
repeated treatment cycles of AM-101 (NCT01934010; NCT02040207). According
to information on the NIH-sponsored website (https://clinicaltrials.gov/), ﬁnal data
collection from these studies is estimated to be completed in 2016.
7.4.6
Muscle Relaxants
The efﬁcacy of muscle relaxants such as baclofen and cyclobenzaprine to treat
tinnitus has been assessed in clinical trials as well as in animal studies. Baclofen is a
derivative of GABA that acts as an agonist of the GABAB receptor. Although
baclofen was found to reverse the noise-induced hyperexcitability of neurons in the
rat inferior colliculus in a dose-dependent manner (Szczepaniak and Møller 1996), a
double-blind placebo-controlled study found that 3 weeks of baclofen administra-
tion (10 mg orally twice daily for 1 week, 20 mg orally twice daily for the second
week, and 30 mg orally twice daily for the third week) was no more effective than a
placebo in ameliorating tinnitus in patients, as it failed to show any clinical or
statistical advantage over the placebo for both subjective and objective measures of
tinnitus (Westerberg et al. 1996). However, this study was challenged based on the
inclusion of subjects with different types of tinnitus, which may have rendered the
study underpowered (Møller 1997) and because a less effective form of baclofen
containing both the L- and D-isomers was administered to patients (Smith et al.
2012). In rats, when the more potent form of baclofen (L-isomer) was administered
in the days immediately following noise exposure, the animals still went on to
develop tinnitus (Zheng et al. 2014). In contrast, in a different group of rats that had
already screened positive for noise-induced tinnitus, the administration of
L-
baclofen was found to reduce their tinnitus (Zheng et al. 2012b). Finally, to further
complicate the actions of baclofen on tinnitus, case reports have been published in
which baclofen was found to induce severe tinnitus in patients who were taking the
medication for alcohol dependence (Auffret et al. 2014). One must be cautious
184
B.L. Allman et al.

when interpreting these case reports, however, because additional medications may
have confounded the relationship between baclofen and tinnitus in these patients.
In a 12-week, open-label pilot study, the centrally acting muscle relaxant
cyclobenzaprine was found to signiﬁcantly reduce tinnitus severity as assessed by
scores on the Tinnitus Handicap Inventory (Coelho et al. 2012). A separate pilot
study found that cyclobenzaprine positively affected both the distress and intensity
of tinnitus in a subset of patients; 25 % of patients responded with a 55 % reduction
in tinnitus distress, whereas 24 % of patients responded with a 53 % reduction in
tinnitus intensity (Vanneste et al. 2012). Consistent with the effects of cycloben-
zaprine on tinnitus intensity, a study using the GPIAS paradigm found that rats with
noise-induced tinnitus showed a reduction in behavior consistent with tinnitus
following cyclobenzaprine treatment (Lobarinas et al. 2015). At present, the
pharmacological actions of cyclobenzaprine are not completely understood. As
suggested previously (Lobarinas et al. 2015), perhaps cyclobenzaprine exerts its
seemingly positive effects on tinnitus by acting as an attenuator of phantom pain or
as a modulator of attentional mechanisms via its effects on the locus coeruleus, a
brainstem region associated with awareness, arousal, and attention. Based on the
promising ﬁndings in the open-label pilot studies, it was suggested that a ran-
domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial was warranted to evaluate
the efﬁcacy of cyclobenzaprine as a treatment for tinnitus (Coelho et al. 2012;
Vanneste et al. 2012). At the time of publication of this chapter, no clinical trial was
yet underway according to an NIH-sponsored website (https://clinicaltrials.gov/).
7.5
Methodological Considerations
Collectively, the preceding sections reveal the considerable challenges associated
with translating drug therapies for tinnitus management. For example, it can be
difﬁcult to even interpret the seemingly equivocal results of many of the afore-
mentioned clinical trials owing to experimental insufﬁciencies and/or inconsisten-
cies across studies. Ultimately, these methodological shortcomings contribute to the
general lack of support for drug therapies in tinnitus management (Weaver 2014).
In the coming years, it is expected that there will continue to be an increase in
the number of investigations devoted to uncovering the neural basis of tinnitus as
well as in studies seeking to determine the efﬁcacy of novel or off-label drugs.
Moving forward, researchers using animal models are encouraged to scrutinize the
validity and reliability of their chosen model for screening animals for tinnitus-like
behavior, as failure to do so could confound the assessment of the efﬁcacy of novel
drugs for tinnitus treatment. When testing novel or off-label drugs in tinnitus
patients, it is clear that future clinical trials should strive to avoid the method-
ological shortcomings of the studies discussed in this chapter, such as inadequate
placebo controls or participant blinding. To that end, Jufas and Wood (2015)
acknowledged that successful participant blinding can be achieved if the placebos
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
185

used in clinical trials share similar side-effect proﬁles to the drug under
investigation.
In a much-needed call to attention, Landgrebe et al. (2012) have proposed an
international standard regarding the methodological aspects of clinical trials for
tinnitus. Importantly, the authors have identiﬁed several critical aspects of trial
design that should be considered in future studies, some of which include (1) lim-
iting the heterogeneity of included participants so as to reduce the variability in the
ﬁndings (e.g., including/excluding tinnitus patients who also suffer from insomnia,
anxiety, and/or depression); (2) using validated subjective and objective outcome
measures to comprehensively assess the auditory features of the tinnitus percept,
emotional features such as distress and attentional features like awareness; and
(3) adjusting the treatment duration and the follow-up period to accurately assess
the putative efﬁcacy of the therapy (Landgrebe et al. 2012).
7.6
Potential Alternatives to Drug Treatment for Tinnitus
In addition to drug treatment, a variety of alternative strategies have been attempted
for the clinical management of tinnitus, including sound therapy, cognitive
behavioral therapy, and repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). A brief
outline of each of these therapies is included in Sects. 7.6.1–7.6.3. For more
information, interested readers are encouraged to consult with comprehensive
reviews that summarize and critique the effectiveness of sound therapy (Hobson
et al. 2012), TRT (Phillips and McFerran 2010), cognitive behavioral therapy
(Martinez-Devesa et al. 2010), and rTMS (Meng et al. 2011) for the clinical
management of tinnitus.
7.6.1
Sound Therapy
Sound therapy for tinnitus generally refers to the use of sound generators, hearing
aids, or combined devices to partially or completely mask tinnitus, with the aim of
reducing the patient’s awareness and/or associated reactions. Licensed audiologists
who have undergone specialized training usually perform these therapies. One such
approach, Tinnitus Retraining Therapy (TRT), developed by Pawel Jastreboff,
combines counseling with maskers, when needed, as part of a comprehensive
treatment strategy (Jastreboff and Hazell 2004). The masking is set to the “mixing”
point so that patients can still hear the tinnitus, but it is mixed with competing
background noise. This strategy facilitates adaptation as opposed to simply cov-
ering up the tinnitus transiently, while the counseling focuses on reducing tinnitus
reaction. Another sound therapy approach was developed by Neuromonics™Inc., a
device that was the ﬁrst of its kind to be approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA). Whereas TRT focuses on counseling with sound generation
186
B.L. Allman et al.

providing a supportive role, Neuromonics™is centered on extensive use of a
customized sound generator under the guidance of a healthcare provider.
7.6.2
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
Beyond TRT and Neuromonics™, more formal psychological treatment for tinnitus
can be provided by a mental health professional. One of the most widely used
strategies is cognitive behavioral therapy. This approach seeks to manage the
suffering associated with tinnitus by training patients to restructure their negative
thoughts, enhance coping strategies, and encourage them to face situations that may
initially exacerbate their negative feelings to promote habituation. This form of
therapy can sometimes reduce the reaction to tinnitus even when the acoustic
percept shows no signiﬁcant change (Martinez-Devesa et al. 2010).
7.6.3
Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
Transcranial magnetic stimulation is an experimental tool for stimulating cortical
neurons via brief magnetic pulses delivered to the scalp, with the goal of interfering
with the tinnitus-related neural activity (Langguth et al. 2012). This form of
treatment requires physician oversight and has been applied to central disorders
such as migraine and stroke. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS)
was approved as a treatment for major depression by the FDA in the United States
in 2008 for patients unresponsive to antidepressant pharmacotherapy. Although
rTMS has been successful in a subset of tinnitus patients, the associated costs and
specialized facilities have limited its widespread use.
7.7
Summary
Given that tinnitus etiology, as well as its perceptual characteristics and associated
symptoms, can vary considerably among patients, perhaps it is not surprising that
no single drug has been widely accepted as being effective at either quieting tinnitus
or eliminating its distress. Although some drugs have shown promising effects in a
subset of patients (e.g., carbamazepine for “typewriter tinnitus” or AM-101 for
acute noise-induced tinnitus), there is limited support from the aforementioned
clinical trials and Cochrane Reviews that any speciﬁc off-label drugs are capable of
fully treating tinnitus. Ultimately, based on the systematic reviews and acknowl-
edgment of the methodological concerns of several of the clinical trials, the Clinical
Practice Guideline for Tinnitus (Tunkel et al. 2014) stated that clinicians should not
routinely
recommend
antidepressants,
anxiolytics,
anticonvulsants,
or
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
187

intratympanic medications for the primary goal of treating persistent, bothersome
tinnitus. That said, it is acknowledged that their recommendation to avoid the
routine use of medications for tinnitus does not apply to those patients with
comorbid disorders, such as depression, anxiety, or seizure disorder, in which such
drugs could be indicated and useful (Tunkel et al. 2014).
In the future, it is expected that validated animal models will continue to serve a
crucial role in uncovering the neural basis of tinnitus as well as providing oppor-
tunities to screen novel therapies for tinnitus suppression. As discussed earlier,
translating these ﬁndings from animal studies to the improved treatment for tinnitus
patients will ultimately require the collaboration of scientists, audiologists, oto-
laryngologists, and mental health professionals to fully address the worldwide
problem of tinnitus.
Compliance with Ethics Requirements
Brian L. Allman declares that he has no conﬂict of interest.
Ashley L. Schormans declares that she has no conﬂict of interest.
Marei Typlt declares that she has no conﬂict of interest.
Edward Lobarinas received 1-year postdoctoral funding for research on AM-101
from Auris Pharmaceuticals.
References
Adjamian, P., Sereda, M., & Hall, D. A. (2009). The mechanisms of tinnitus: Perspectives from
human functional neuroimaging. Hearing Research, 253(1–2), 15–31.
Ahmad, N., & Seidman, M. (2004). Tinnitus in the older adult. Drugs Aging, 21(5), 297–305.
Ambrósio, A. F., Soares-da-Silva, P., Carvalho, C. M., & Carvalho, A. P. (2002). Mechanisms of
action of carbamazepine and its derivatives, oxcarbazepine, BIA 2-093, and BIA 2-024.
Neurochemical Research, 27(1/2), 121–130.
Ashton, H. (1991). Protracted withdrawal syndromes from benzodiazepines. Journal of Substance
Abuse Treatment, 8(1–2), 19–28.
Auffret, M., Rolland, B., Deheul, S., Loche, V., Hennaux, C., et al. (2014). Severe tinnitus induced
by off-label baclofen. Annals of Pharmacotherapy, 48(5), 656–659.
Axelsson, A., & Ringdahl, A. (1989). Tinnitus-a study of its prevalence and characteristics. British
Journal of Audiology, 23(1), 53–62.
Azevedo, A. A., & Figueiredo, R. R. (2007). Treatment of tinnitus with acamprosate. Progress in
Brain Research, 166, 273–277.
Baguley, D., McFerran, D., & Hall, D. (2013). Tinnitus. The Lancet, 382(9904), 1600–1607.
Bahmad, F. M., Jr., Venosa, A. R., & Oliveira, C. A. (2006). Benzodiazepines and GABAergics in
treating severe disabling tinnitus of predominantly cochlear origin. International Tinnitus
Journal, 12(2), 140–144.
Bakhshaee, M., Ghasemi, M., Azarpazhooh, M., Khadivi, E., Rezaei, S., et al. (2008). Gabapentin
effectiveness on the sensation of subjective idiopathic tinnitus: A pilot study. European
Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, 265(5), 525–530.
188
B.L. Allman et al.

Baldo, P., Doree, C., Molin, P., McFerran, D., & Cecco, S. (2012). Antidepressants for patients
with tinnitus. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 9, CD003853.
Bárnáy,
R.
(1935).
Die
Beinﬂussung
des
Ohrensausens
durch
intravenös
injizierte
Lokalanaestetica. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 23, 201–203.
Bauer, C. A., & Brozoski, T. J. (2006). Effect of gabapentin on the sensation and impact of
tinnitus. Laryngoscope, 116, 675–681.
Bauer, C. A., & Perring, A. (2008). Lidocaine vs placebo: Impact on loudness and annoyance of
tinnitus. In J. Shin, C. Hartnick, & G. Randolph (Eds.), Evidence-based otolaryngology
(pp. 365–368). New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Bauer, C. A., Berry, J., & Brozoski, T. J. (2015). Clinical trials supported by the Tinnitus Research
Consortium: Lessons learned, the Southern Illinois University experience. Hearing Research,
334, 65–71.
Bayar, N., Boke, B., Turan, E., & Belgin, E. (2001). Efﬁcacy of amitriptyline in the treatment of
subjective tinnitus. Journal of Otolaryngology, 30, 300–303.
Bing, D., Lee, S. C., Campanelli, D., Xiong, H., Matsumoto, M., et al. (2015). Cochlear NMDA
receptors as a therapeutic target of noise-induced tinnitus. Cellular Physiology and
Biochemistry, 35(5), 1905–1923.
Boyen, K., Başkent, D., & van Dijk, P. (2015). The gap detection test: Can it be used to diagnose
tinnitus? Ear and Hearing, 36(4), 138–145.
Busto, U., Sellers, E. M., Naranjo, C. A., Cappell, H., Sanchez-Craig, M., & Sykora, K. (1986).
Withdrawal reaction after long-term therapeutic use of benzodiazepines. New England Journal
of Medicine, 315, 854–859.
Busto, U., Fornazzari, L., & Naranjo, C.A. (1988). Protracted tinnitus after discontinuation of
long-term therapeutic use of benzodiazepines. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 8,
359–362.
Canlon, B., Theorell, T., & Hasson, D. (2013). Associations between stress and hearing problems
in humans. Hearing Research, 295(1–2), 9–15.
Cave, K. M., Cornish, E. M., & Chandler, D. W. (2007). Blast injury of the ear: Clinical update
from the global war on terror. Military Medicine, 172(7), 726–730.
Coelho, C., Figueiredo, R., Frank, E., Burger, J., Schecklmann, M., et al. (2012). Reduction of
tinnitus severity by the centrally acting muscle relaxant cyclobenzaprine: An open-label pilot
study. Audiology and Neurotology, 17(3), 179–188.
Dehkordi, M. A., Abolbashari, S., Taheri, R., & Einolghozati, S. (2011). Efﬁcacy of gabapentin on
subjective idiopathic tinnitus: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ear, Nose
& Throat Journal, 90, 150–158.
Dehmel,
S.,
Koehler,
S.
D.,
&
Shore,
S.
E.
(2012).
Dorsal
cochlear
nucleus:
Somatosensory-auditory interactions in tinnitus. In J. J. Eggermont, F.-G. Zeng, A. Popper,
& R. R. Fay (Eds.), Tinnitus (pp. 97–119). New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Denk, D. M., Heinzl, H., Franz, P., & Ehrenberger, K. (1997). Caroverine in tinnitus treatment: A
placebo-controlled blind study. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 117(6), 825–830.
Department of Veterans Affairs Compensation Beneﬁts Report FY2010. http://www.beneﬁts.va.
gov/REPORTS/abr/2010_abr.pdf. Accessed September 1, 2015.
De Ridder, D., Vanneste, S., Langguth, B., & Llinas, R. (2015). Thalamocortical dysrhythmia: A
theoretical update in tinnitus. Frontiers in Neurology, 6, 124.
Domeisen, H., Hotz, M. A., & Hausler, R. (1998). Caroverine in tinnitus treatment. Acta
Oto-Laryngologica, 118, 606–608.
Donaldson, I. (1981). Tegretol: A double blind trial in tinnitus. The Journal of Laryngology and
Otology, 95, 947–951.
Duckert, L. G., & Rees, T. S. (1984). Placebo effect in tinnitus management. Otolaryngology–
Head and Neck Surgery, 92, 697–699.
Eggermont, J. J. (2013). Hearing loss, hyperacusis, or tinnitus: What is modeled in animal
research? Hearing Research, 295, 140–149.
Eggermont, J. J., Zeng, F.-G., Popper, A. N., & Fay, R. R. (2012). Tinnitus. New York: Springer
Science + Business Media.
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
189

Ehrenberger, K. (2005). Topical administration of Caroverine in somatic tinnitus treatment:
Proof-of-concept study. International Tinnitus Journal, 11, 34–37.
Elgoyhen, A. B., & Langguth, B. (2010). Pharmacological approaches to the treatment of tinnitus.
Drug Discovery Today, 15(7/8), 300–305.
Elgoyhen, A. B., Langguth, B., Vanneste, S., & De Ridder, D. (2012). Tinnitus: Network
pathophysiology-network pharmacology. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 6, 1.
Erlandsson, S. I., & Hallberg, L. R. M. (2000). Prediction of quality of life in patients with tinnitus.
British Journal of Audiology, 34(1), 11–19.
Figueiredo, R. R., Langguth, B., Mello de Oliveira, P., & Aparecida de Azevedo, A. (2008).
Tinnitus treatment with memantine. Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 138, 492–496.
Folmer, R. L., Griest, S. E., Meikle, M. B., & Martin, W. H. (1999). Tinnitus severity, loudness,
and depression. Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 121(1), 48–51.
Fournier, P., & Hébert, S. (2013). Gap detection deﬁcits in humans with tinnitus as assessed with
the acoustic startle paradigm: Does tinnitus ﬁll in the gap? Hearing Research, 295, 16–23.
Friberg, E., Jansson, C., Mittendorfer-Rutz, E., Rosenhall, U., & Alexanderson, K. (2012).
Sickness absence due to otoaudiological diagnoses and risk of disability pension: A nationwide
Swedish prospective cohort study. PLoS ONE, 7(1), e29966.
Gerami, A.,Saberi, S., Nemati, S., Kazemnejad, E., & Aghajanpour, M. (2012). Effects of
oxcarbazepine
versus
carbamazepine
on
tinnitus:
A
randomized
double-blind
placebo-controlled clinical trial. Iranian Journal of Neurology, 11(3), 106–110.
Grantham, M. A. M. (2012). Noise-induced hearing loss and tinnitus: Challenges for the military.
In C. G. Le Prell, D. Henderson, R. R. Fay, & A. N. Popper (Eds.), Noise-induced hearing
loss: Scientiﬁc advances (pp. 27–38). New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Gül, A. I., Özkırış, M., Aydin, R., Şimşek, G., & Saydam, L. (2015). Coexistence of anxiety
sensitivity and psychiatric comorbidities in patients with chronic tinnitus. Neuropsychiatric
Disease and Treatment, 11, 413–418.
Han, S. S., Nam, E. C., Won, J. Y., Lee, K. U., Chun, W., et al. (2012). Clonazepam quiets
tinnitus: A randomised crossover study with Ginkgo biloba. Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 83, 821–827.
Hasson, D., Theorell, T., Wallén, M. B., Leineweber, C., & Canlon, B. (2011). Stress and
prevalence of hearing problems in the Swedish working population. BMC Public Health, 11,
130–142.
Hayes, S. H., Radziwon, K. E., Stolzberg, D .J., & Salvi, R. J. (2014). Behavioral models of
tinnitus and hyperacusis in animals. Frontiers in Neurology, 5, 179.
Hébert, S., & Lupien, S. J. (2009). Salivary cortisol levels, subjective stress, and tinnitus intensity
in tinnitus sufferers during noise exposure in the laboratory. International Journal of Hygiene
and Environmental Health, 212(1), 37–44.
Heffner, H. E., & Heffner, R. S. (2012). Behavioral tests for tinnitus in animals. In J. J. Eggermont,
F.-G. Zeng, A. N. Popper, & R. R. Fay (Eds.), Tinnitus (pp. 21–58). New York: Springer
Science + Business Media.
Heller, A. J. (2003). Classiﬁcation and epidemiology of tinnitus. Otolaryngologic Clinics of North
America, 36(2), 239–248.
Henry, J. A., Dennis, K. C., & Schechter, M. A. (2005). General review of tinnitus: Prevalence,
mechanisms, effects, and management. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
48, 1204–1235.
Henry, J. A., Roberts, L. E., Caspary, D. M., Theodoroff, S. M., & Salvi, R. J. (2014). Underlying
mechanisms of tinnitus: Review and clinical implications. Journal of the American Academy of
Audiology, 25(1), 5–22.
Henry, J. A., Griest, S., Thielman, E., McMillan, G., & Kaelin, C. (2015). Tinnitus Functional
Index: Development, validation, outcomes research, and clinical application. Hearing
Research, 334, 58–64.
Hesser, H., & Andersson, G. (2009). The role of anxiety sensitivity and behavioral avoidance in
tinnitus disability. International Journal of Audiology, 48(5), 295–299.
190
B.L. Allman et al.

Hickox, A. E., & Liberman, M. C. (2014). Is noise-induced cochlear neuropathy key to the
generation of hyperacusis or tinnitus? Journal of Neurophysiology, 111(3), 552–564.
Hobson, J., Chisholm, E., & El Refaie, A. (2012). Sound therapy (masking) in the management of
tinnitus in adults. Cochrane Database Systematic Reviews, 11, CD006371.
Hoekstra, C. E., Rynja, S. P., van Zanten, G. A., & Rovers, M. M. (2011). Anticonvulsants for
tinnitus. Cochrane Database Systematic Reviews, 7, CD007960.
Holgers, K. M., Zöger, S., & Svedlund, J. (2011). The impact of sertraline on health-related quality
of life in severe refractory tinnitus: A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study.
Audiological Medicine, 9(2), 67–72.
House, J. W., & Brackman, D. E. (1981). Tinnitus: Surgical treatment. Ciba Foundation
Symposium, 85, 204–216.
Hulshof, J. H., & Vermeij, P. (1985). The value of carbamazepine in the treatment of tinnitus. ORL
Journal for Otorhinolaryngology and Its Related Specialties, 47, 262–266.
Ison, J. R. (1982). Temporal acuity in auditory function in the rat: Reﬂex inhibition by brief gaps
in noise. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 96, 945–954.
Ison, J. R., Castro, J., Allen, P., Virag, T. M., & Walton, J. P. (2002). The relative detectability for
mice of gaps having different ramp durations at their onset and offset boundaries. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 112, 740–747.
Jalali, M. M., Kousha, A., Naghavi, S. E., Soleimani, R., & Banan, R. (2009). The effects of
alprazolam on tinnitus: A cross-over randomized clinical trial. Medical Science Monitor,
15(11), PI55–60.
Jalessi, M., Farhadi, M., Asghari, A., & Kamrava, S. K. (2013). Tinnitus: An epidemiologic study
in Iranian population. Acta Medica Iranica, 51(12), 886–891.
Jastreboff, P. J., & Hazell, J. W. P. (2004). Tinnitus retraining therapy: Implementing the
neurophysiological model. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Jastreboff, P. J., Brennan, J. F., Coleman, J. K., & Sasaki, C. T. (1988). Phantom auditory
sensation in rats: An animal model for tinnitus. Behavioral Neuroscience, 102(6), 811–822.
Johnson, J. W., & Kotermanski, S. E. (2006). Mechanism of action of memantine. Current
Opinion in Pharmacology, 6(1), 61–67.
Johnson, R. M., Brummett, R., & Schleuning, A. (1993). Use of alprazolam for relief of tinnitus: A
double-blind study. Archives of Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery, 119, 842–845.
Jufas, N. E., & Wood, R. (2015). Use of benzodiazepines for tinnitus: Systematic review. The
Journal of Laryngology and Otology, 129(S3), S14–S22.
Kalappa, B. I., Soh, H., Duignan, K. M., Furuya, T.., Edwards, S., et al. (2015). Potent
KCNQ2/3-speciﬁc channel activator suppresses in vivo epileptic activity and prevents the
development of tinnitus. Journal of Neuroscience, 35(23), 8829–8842.
Kalcioglu, M. T., Bayindir, T., Erdem, T., & Ozturan, O. (2005). Objective evaluation of effects of
intravenous lidocaine on tinnitus. Hearing Research, 199(1–2), 81–88.
Kaltenbach, J. A. (2013). Editorial: Tinnitus induction: A departure from tradition. The Hearing
Journal, 66(8), 2.
Kaltenbach, J. A., Zhang, J., & Finlayson, P. (2005). Tinnitus as a plastic phenomenon and its
possible neural underpinnings in the dorsal cochlear nucleus. Hearing Research, 206(1–2),
200–226.
Kay, N. J. (1981). Oral chemotherapy in tinnitus. British Journal of Audiology, 15, 123–124.
Khedr, E. M., Ahmed, M. A., Shawky, O. A., Mohamed, E. S., El Attar, G. S., & Mohammad, K.
A. (2010). Epidemiological study of chronic tinnitus in Assiut, Egypt. Neuroepidemiology,
35(1), 45–52.
Kuk, F. K., Tyler, R. S., Russell, D., & Jordan, H. (1990). The psychometric properties of a
Tinnitus Handicap Questionnaire. Ear and Hearing, 11, 434–445.
Landgrebe, M., Azevedo, A., Baguley, D., Bauer, C., Cacace, A., et al. (2012). Methodological
aspects of clinical trials in tinnitus: A proposal for an international standard. Journal of
Psychosomatic Research, 73(2), 112–121.
Langguth, B., & Elgoyhen, A. B. (2012). Current pharmacological treatments for tinnitus. Expert
Opinion on Pharmacotherapy, 13(17), 2495–2509.
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
191

Langguth, B., Landgrebe, M., Kleinjung, T., Sand, G. P., & Hajak, G. (2011). Tinnitus and
depression. World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 12(7), 489–500.
Langguth, B., De Ridder, D., Kleinjung, T., & Elgoyhen, A. B. (2012). Pharmacological, repetitive
transcranial
magnetic
stimulation,
epidural
stimulation,
and
deep
brain
stimulation.
In J. J. Eggermont, F.-G., Zeng, A. N. Popper, & R. R. Fay (Eds.), Tinnitus (pp. 255–289).
New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Langguth, B., Kreuzer, P. M., Kleinjung, T., & De Ridder, D. (2013). Tinnitus: Causes and clinical
management. The Lancet Neurology, 12(9), 920–930.
Lanting, C. P., de Kleine, E., & van Dijk, P. (2009). Neural activity underlying tinnitus generation:
Results from PET and fMRI. Hearing Research, 255(1–2), 1–13.
Leaver, A. M., Renier, L., Chevillet, M. A., Morgan, S., Kim, H. J., & Rauschecker, J. P. (2011).
Dysregulation of limbic and auditory networks in tinnitus. Neuron, 69(1), 33–43.
Lechtenberg, R., & Shulman, A. (1984). Benzodiazepines in the treatment of tinnitus. The Journal
of Laryngology and Otology, 98(S9), 271–276.
Levine, R. A. (2006). Typewriter tinnitus: A carbamazepine-responsive syndrome related to
auditory nerve vascular compression. ORL Journal of Otorhinolaryngol and Its Related
Specialties, 68, 43–46.
Li, S., Choi, V., & Tzounopoulos, T. (2013). Pathogenic plasticity of Kv7. 2/3 channel activity is
essential for the induction of tinnitus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
USA, 110(24), 9980–9985.
Llinas, R. R., Ribary, U., Jeanmonod, D., Kronberg, E., & Mitra, P. P. (1999). Thalamocortical
dysrhythmia: A neurological and neuropsychiatric syndrome characterized by magnetoen-
cephalography. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 96(26), 15222–
15227.
Lobarinas, E., Yang, G., Sun, W., Ding, D., Mirza, N., et al. (2006). Salicylate- and
quinine-induced tinnitus and effects of memantine. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 126(s556), 13–19.
Lobarinas, E., Hayes, S. H., & Allman, B. L. (2013). The gap-startle paradigm for tinnitus
screening in animal models: Limitations and optimization. Hearing Research, 295, 150–160.
Lobarinas, E., Blair, C., Spankovich, C., & Le Prell, C. (2015). Partial to complete suppression of
unilateral noise-induced tinnitus in rats after cyclobenzaprine treatment. Journal of the
Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 16(2), 263–272.
Mardini, M. K. (1987). Ear-clicking “tinnitus” responding to carbamazepine. New England
Journal of Medicine, 317(24), 1542.
Martinez-Devesa, P., Perera, R., Theodoulou, M., & Waddell, A. (2010). Cognitive behavioural
therapy for tinnitus. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 9, CD005233.
Mazurek, B., Haupt, H., Olze, H., & Szczepek, A. J. (2012). Stress and tinnitus-from bedside to
bench and back. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 6, 47.
McCombe, A., Baguley, D., Coles, R., McKenna, L., McKinney, C., & Windle-Taylor, P. (2001).
Guidelines for the grading of tinnitus severity: The results of a working group commissioned
by the British Association of Otolaryngologists, Head and Neck Surgeons, 1999. Clinical
Otolaryngology and Allied Sciences, 26(5), 388–393.
McCormack, A., Edmonson-Jones, M., Fortnum, H., Dawes, P., Middleton, H., et al. (2014). The
prevalence of tinnitus and the relationship with neuroticism in middle-aged UK population.
Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 76(1), 56–60.
Meikle, M. B., Vernon, J., & Johnson, R. M. (1984). The perceived severity of tinnitus: Some
observations concerning a large population of tinnitus clinic patients. Otolaryngology–Head
and Neck Surgery, 92(6), 689–696.
Meikle, M. B., Henry, J. A., Griest, S. E., Stewart, B. J., Abrams, H. B., et al. (2012). The Tinnitus
Functional Index: Development of a new clinical measure for chronic, intrusive tinnitus. Ear
and Hearing, 32, 153–176.
Melcher, J. R. (2012). Human brain imaging in tinnitus. In J. J. Eggermont, F.-G. Zeng, A.
N.
Popper,
&
R.
R.
Fay
(Eds.),
Tinnitus
(pp.
163–185).
New
York:
Springer
Science + Business Media.
192
B.L. Allman et al.

Melding, P. S., & Goodey, R. J. (1979). The treatment of tinnitus with oral anticonvulsants. The
Journal of Laryngology and Otology, 93(2), 111–122.
Melding, P. S., Goodey, R. J., & Thorne, P. R. (1978). The use of intravenous lignocaine in the
diagnosis and treatment of tinnitus. The Journal of Laryngology and Otology, 92(2), 115–121.
Meng, Z., Liu, S., Zheng, Y., & Phillips, J. S. (2011). Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
for tinnitus. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 10, CD007946.
Meyer, T. (2013). Intratympanic treatment for tinnitus: A review. Noise & Health, 15(63), 83–90.
Mihail, R. C., Crowley, J. M., Walden, B. E., Fishburne, J., Reinwall, J. E., & Zajtchuk, J. T.
(1988). The tricyclic trimipramine in the treatment of subjective tinnitus. Annals of Otology,
Rhinology and Laryngology, 97, 120–123.
Møller, A. R. (1997). Letter to Editor, Westerberg et al.: A double-blind placebo controlled trial of
baclofen in the treatment of tinnitus. American Journal of Otology, 18(2), 268.
Muehlmeier, G., Biesinger, E., & Maier, H. (2011). Safety of intratympanic injection of AM-101
in patients with acute inner ear tinnitus. Audiology and Neurotology, 16(6), 388–397.
NCT00405886. Neramexane for tinnitus. First received: November, 2006; Last veriﬁed: March,
2011. https://clinicaltrials.gov/.
NCT00827008. Open-label, long-term treatment study, to assess the long-term safety and
tolerability and efﬁcacy of neramexane in patients with subjective tinnitus. First received:
January, 2009; Last veriﬁed: November, 2012. https://clinicaltrials.gov/.
NCT00955799. Efﬁcacy, safety, tolerability of neramexane in patients with subjective tinnitus.
First received: August, 2009; Last veriﬁed: November, 2012. https://clinicaltrials.gov/.
NCT01803646. AM-101 in the treatment of acute tinnitus 2. First received: March, 2013. Last
veriﬁed: August, 2015. https://clinicaltrials.gov/.
NCT01934010. AM-101 in the treatment of post-acute tinnitus 1. First received: August, 2013;
Last veriﬁed: August, 2015. https://clinicaltrials.gov/.
NCT02040207. AM-101 in the treatment of post-acute tinnitus 2. First received: January, 2014;
Last veriﬁed: August, 2015. https://clinicaltrials.gov/.
Newman, C., Jacobson, G., & Spitzer, B. (1996). Development of the Tinnitus Handicap
Inventory. Archives of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 122(2), 143–148.
Noreña, A. J. (2011). An integrative model of tinnitus based on a central gain controlling neural
sensitivity. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 35(5), 1089–1109.
Oestreicher, E., Arnold, W., Ehrenberger, K., & Felix, D. (1998). Memantine suppresses the
glutamatergic
neurotransmission
of
mammalian
inner
hair
cells.
ORL
Journal
of
Otorhinolaryngology and Related Specialties, 60(1), 18–21.
Oiticica, J., & Bittar, R. S. M. (2015). Tinnitus prevalence in the city of São Paulo. Brazilian
Journal of Otorhinolaryngology, 81(2), 167–176.
Phillips, J. S., & McFerran, D. (2010). Tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT) for tinnitus. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews, 3, CD007330.
Piccirillo, J. F., Finnell, J., Vlahiotis, A., Chole, R. A., & Spitznagel, E., Jr. (2007). Relief of
idiopathic subjective tinnitus: Is gabapentin effective? Archives of Otolaryngology–Head and
Neck Surgery, 133, 390–397.
Pinto, P. C., Marcelos, C. M., Mezzasalma, M. A., Osterne, F. J., de Melo Tavares de Lima, M. A.,
& Nardi, A. E. (2014). Tinnitus and its association with psychiatric disorders: Systematic
review. The Journal of Laryngology and Otology, 128(8), 660–664.
Podoshin, L., Ben-David, Y., Fradis, M., Malatskey, S., & Hafner, H. (1995). Idiopathic subjective
tinnitus treated by amitriptyline hydrochloride/biofeedback. International Tinnitus Journal,
1(1), 54–60.
Radziwon, K. E., Stolzberg, D. J., Urban, M. E., Bowler, R. A., & Salvi, R. J. (2015).
Salicylate-induced hearing loss and gap detection deﬁcits in rats. Frontiers in Neurology, 6, 31.
Rahko, T., & Hakkinen, V. (1979). Carbamazepine in the treatment of objective myoclonus
tinnitus. The Journal of Laryngology and Otology, 93(2), 123–127.
Ralli, M., Troiani, D., Podda, M. V., Paciello, F., Eramo, S. L., et al. (2014). Effect of the NMDA
channel blocker memantine on salicylate-induced tinnitus in rats. Acta Otorhinolaryngologica
Italica, 34(3), 198–204.
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
193

Rauschecker, J. P. (1999). Auditory cortical plasticity: A comparison with other sensory systems.
Trends in Neurosciences, 22(2), 74–80.
Reyes, S. A., Salvi, R. J., Burkard, R. F., Coad, M. L., Wack, D.S., et al. (2002). Brain imaging of
the effects of lidocaine on tinnitus. Hearing Research, 171(1–2), 43–50.
Roberts, C., Inamdar, A., Koch, A., Kitchiner, P., Dewit O., et al. (2011). A randomized,
controlled study comparing the effects of vestipitant or vestipitant & paroxetine combo in
subjects with tinnitus. Otology and Neurotology, 32(5), 721–727.
Salvi, R., Lobarinas, E., & Sun, W. (2009). Pharmacological treatments for tinnitus: New and old.
Drugs Future, 34(5), 381–400.
Schecklmann, M., Vielsmeier, V., Steffens, T., Landgrebe, M., Langguth, B., & Kleinjung, T.
(2012). Relationship between audiometric slope and tinnitus pitch in tinnitus patients: Insights
into the mechanisms of tinnitus generation. PLoS ONE, 7(4), e34878.
Shargorodsky, J., Curhan, G. C., & Farwell, W. R. (2010). Prevalence and characteristics of
tinnitus among US adults. American Journal of Medicine, 123(8), 711–718.
Sharma, D. K., Kaur, S., Singh, J., & Kaur, I. (2012). Role of acamprosate in sensorineural
tinnitus. Indian Journal of Pharmacology, 44(1), 93–96.
Shea, J. J., & Harell, M. (1978). Management of tinnitus aurium with lidocaine and
carbamazepine. Laryngoscope, 88, 1477–1484.
Sheppard, A. M., Chen, G. D., & Salvi, R. (2015). Potassium ion channel openers, Maxipost and
Retigabine, protect against peripheral salicylate ototoxicity in rats. Hearing Research, 327,
1–8.
Shi, Y., Robb, M. J. A., & Michaelides, E. M. (2014). Medical management of tinnitus: Role of
the physician. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 25(1), 23–28.
Shulman, A., Strashun, A. M., Seibyl, J. P., Daftary, A., & Goldstein, B. (2000). Benzodiazepine
receptor deﬁciency and tinnitus. International Tinnitus Journal, 6(2), 98–111.
Sills, G. J. (2006). The mechanisms of action of gabapentin and pregabalin. Current Opinion in
Pharmacology, 6(1), 108–113.
Smith, P. F., Zheng, Y., & Darlington, C. L. (2012). Revisiting baclofen for the treatment of severe
chronic tinnitus. Frontiers in Neurology, 3, 34.
Stolzberg, D., Salvi, R. J., & Allman, B. L. (2012). Salicylate toxicity model of tinnitus. Frontiers
in Systems Neuroscience, 6, 28.
Suckfüll, M., Althaus, M., Ellers-Lenz, B., Gebauer, A., Görtelmeyer, R., et al. (2011).
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial to evaluate the efﬁcacy and safety
of neramexane in patients with moderate to severe subjective tinnitus. BMC Ear, Nose and
Throat Disorders, 11, 1.
Sullivan, M., Katon, W., Russo, J., Dobie, R., & Sakai, C. (1993). A randomized trial of
nortriptyline for severe chronic tinnitus: Effects on depression, disability, and tinnitus
symptoms. Archives of Internal Medicine, 153(19), 2251–2259.
Sullivan, M. D., Dobie, R. A., Sakai, C. S., & Katon, W. J. (1989). Treatment of depressed tinnitus
patients with nortriptyline. Annals of Otology, Rhinology and Laryngology, 98, 867–872.
Szczepaniak, W. S., & Møller, A. R. (1996). Effects of (–)-baclofen, clonazepam, and diazepam on
tone exposure-induced hyperexcitability of the inferior colliculus in the rat: Possible
therapeutic implications for pharmacological management of tinnitus and hyperacusis.
Hearing Research, 97(1–2), 46–53.
Theodoroff, S. M., Lewis, M. S., Folmer, R. L., Henry, J. A., & Carlson, K. F. (2015). Hearing
impairment and tinnitus: Prevalence, risk factors, and outcomes in US service members and
veterans deployed to the Iraq and Afghanistan wars. Epidemiologic Review, 37(1), 71–85.
Tunkel, D. E., Bauer, C. A., Sun, G. H., Rosenfeld, R. M., Chandrasekhar, S. S., et al. (2014).
Clinical practice guideline: Tinnitus executive summary. Otolaryngology–Head and Neck
Surgery, 151(4), 533–541.
Turner, J. G., Brozoski, T. J., Bauer, C. A., Parrish, J. L., Myers, K., et al. (2006). Gap detection
deﬁcits in rats with tinnitus: A potential novel screening tool. Behavioral Neuroscience,
120(1), 188–195.
194
B.L. Allman et al.

US Department of Veterans Affairs. (2014). Compensation: Service-connected disability or death
beneﬁts. Resource document. Veterans Beneﬁts Administration. http://www.beneﬁts.va.gov/
REPORTS/abr/ABR_FY2013_Compensation_07172014.pdf. Accessed September 1, 2015.
US Food and Drug Administration. (2015). https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/
cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=101.93. Accessed September 1, 2015.
van de Heyning, P., Muehlmeier, G., Cox, T., Lisowska, G., Maier, H., et al. (2014). Efﬁcacy and
safety of AM-101 in the treatment of acute inner ear tinnitus: Phase II study. Otology and
Neurotology, 35(4), 589–597.
Vanneste, S., Figueiredo, R., & De Ridder, D. (2012). Treatment of tinnitus with cyclobenzaprine:
An open-label study. International Journal of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 50(5),
338–344.
Vio, M. M., & Holme, R. H. (2005). Hearing loss and tinnitus: 250 million people and a US$10
billion potential market. Drug Discovery Today, 10(19), 1263–1265.
Weaver, J. (2014). First evidence-based tinnitus guideline shines light on treatment. Hearing
Journal, 67(12), 22–24.
Westerberg, B. D., Roberson, J. B., Jr., & Stach, B. A. (1996). A double-blind placebo controlled
trial of baclofen in the treatment of tinnitus. American Journal of Otology, 17, 896–903.
Wilson, P. H., Henry, J., Bowen, M., & Haralambous, G. (1991). Tinnitus Reaction Questionnaire:
Psychometric properties of a measure of distress associated with tinnitus. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 34, 197–201.
Witsell, D. L., Hannley, M. T., Stinnet, S., & Tucci, D. L. (2007). Treatment of tinnitus with
gabapentin: A pilot study. Otology and Neurotology, 28, 11–15.
Wolf, B., & Grifﬁths, R. R. (1991). Physical dependence on benzodiazepines: Differences within
the class. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 29(2), 153–156.
Xu, X., Bu, X., Zhou, L., Xing, G., Liu, C., & Wang, D. (2011). An epidemiologic study of
tinnitus in a population in Jiangsu Province, China. Journal of the American Academy of
Audiology, 22(9), 578–585.
Zheng, Y., Hooton, K., Smith, P. F., & Darlington, C. L. (2008). Carbamazepine reduces the
behavioural
manifestations
of
tinnitus
following
salicylate
treatment
in
rats.
Acta
Oto-Laryngologica, 128(1), 48–52.
Zheng, Y., McNamara, E., Stiles, L., Darlington, C. L., & Smith, P. F. (2012a). Evidence that
memantine reduces chronic tinnitus caused by acoustic trauma in rats. Frontiers in Neurology,
3, 127.
Zheng, Y., Vagal, S., McNamara, E., Darlington, C. L., & Smith, P. F. (2012b). A dose-response
analysis of the effects of L-baclofen on chronic tinnitus caused by acoustic trauma in rats.
Neuropharmacology, 62(2), 940–946.
Zheng, Y., McPherson, K., & Smith, P. F. (2014). Effects of early and late treatment with
L-baclofen on development & maintenance of tinnitus by acoustic trauma in rats.
Neuroscience, 258, 410–421.
Zöger, S., Svedlund, J., & Holgers, K. M. (2006). The effects of sertraline on severe tinnitus
suffering–a
randomized,
double-blind,
placebo-controlled
study.
Journal
of
Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 26(1), 32–39.
7
Past, Present, and Future Pharmacological Therapies for Tinnitus
195

Chapter 8
Developing a Molecular Therapeutic
for Hearing Loss
Hinrich Staecker, Lloyd Klickstein, and Douglas E. Brough
Abstract The last 30 years have seen an explosion in our understanding of the
molecular basis of hearing loss. The pathways underlying the development of the
ear as well as the numerous molecular components that make hearing work have
been extensively explored. So far, this has not translated into the development of
new types of therapeutics for hearing loss, which is actually the most common
neurodegenerative disease in humans. A signiﬁcant portion of our scientiﬁc focus in
hearing research has been on understanding the pathways that control the genesis of
auditory and vestibular hair cells in an effort to apply this in patients. This chapter
reviews some of the key discoveries in patterning of the neurosensory epithelium of
the inner ear and discusses the factors that go into transforming that information
into a potential drug that is testable in human subjects.
Keywords Drug development  Gene therapy  Hair cell regeneration  Hearing
loss
H. Staecker (&)
Department of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, University of Kansas
School of Medicine, Rainbow Blvd., MS 3010, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA
e-mail: hstaecker@kumc.edu
L. Klickstein
Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 220 Massachusetts Ave.,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
e-mail: Lloyd.klickstein@novartis.com
D.E. Brough
GenVec Inc., 910 Clopper Rd., Gaithersburg, MD 20878, USA
e-mail: dbrough@genvec.com
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
C.G. Le Prell et al. (eds.), Translational Research in Audiology, Neurotology,
and the Hearing Sciences, Springer Handbook of Auditory Research 58,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-40848-4_8
197

8.1
Introduction to Hair Cell Regeneration
The discovery that birds had the ability to regenerate sensory hair cells launched the
ﬁeld of hair cell regeneration research (Cotanche 1987; Cruz et al. 1987). Our
understanding of mammalian hair cell biology has always been that these cells were
terminally differentiated and that loss of these cells resulted in a permanent loss of
hearing (Ruben 1967). Hearing loss is the most common neurodegenerative disease
in humans, and loss of balance sensation is more poorly quantiﬁed but probably
equally common. The number of people with hearing loss worldwide has been
steadily increasing over recent years, reaching almost 49 million people in the
United States alone (Cotanche and Kaiser 2010). A recent report from the World
Health Organization predicts that more than a billion individuals are at risk for
noise-induced hearing loss (http://goo.gl/HmCD6Z/). According to the National
Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (NIDCD) 2010 statis-
tics, approximately 17 % of the American adult population experiences hearing loss
and 3 out of every 1,000 children are born deaf. The prevalence of hearing loss
increases with age, as about 47 % of adults older than 75 years old have hearing
impairment (http://goo.gl/W3kvFa).
Although hearing loss may not be life threatening, it can greatly inﬂuence a
person’s quality of life, and it can have a signiﬁcant ﬁnancial impact on the indi-
vidual and society (Jung and Bhattacharyya 2012). Current treatments of hearing
loss, including hearing aids and cochlear implants, are beneﬁcial, but they are far
from perfect. In addition, hearing aids suffer from poor acceptance and have only a
40 % penetrance into populations that may need them. Given the prevalence of
hearing loss and the very poor penetration of hearing aids and other assistive
listening devices, other approaches are urgently needed. Therefore, a primary goal
of the scientiﬁc community over the last 25 years has been to understand the
process of hair cell development in avian and mammalian systems in the hope of
manipulating genes involved in the development process for clinical beneﬁt (i.e.,
restoring auditory function by inducing the development of new hair cells) (see,
e.g., Salvi et al. 2008).
8.2
Early Mammalian Experiments
A key feature of avian hair cell regeneration is that there is both a mitotic event
resulting in replacement of hair cells and supporting cells as well as replacement of
hair cells via nonmitotic transdifferentiation of existing supporting cells into hair
cells (for review, see Oesterle and Stone 2008). Mammalian systems were initially
thought to lack both the mitotic and differentiation components that allow the
replacement of hair cells. Several early tissue culture experiments demonstrated that
the mammalian vestibular and auditory neuroepithelia had at least a limited capacity
to regenerate (Forge et al. 1993; Warchol et al. 1993). This occurs through a process
198
H. Staecker et al.

of transdifferentiation during which supporting cells turn into hair cells. No mitosis
was seen to occur in mammalian tissue, therefore theoretically limiting the amount
of regenerative capacity of a tissue (Zine and de Ribaupierre 1998). As many
common causes of hearing loss, such as sound trauma, aging, and exposure to
ototoxins, involve at least some degree of hair cell loss, regeneration of hair cells
has remained a favorite target for translational research in the inner ear and research
has focused on the molecular basis of hair cell replacement.
8.2.1
Genes/Proteins Involved in Hair Cell Genesis
Signiﬁcant progress has been made in deﬁning the developmental pathways that
lead to the generation of hair cells. The sensory epithelium of the inner ear consists
of a mosaic of hair cells and supporting cells organized so that each sensory cell is
in contact only with supporting cells. Both supporting cells and hair cells derive
from a common progenitor cell (Puligilla and Kelley 2009). Differentiation of these
progenitors into hair cells is controlled by the helix-loop-helix transcription factor
atonal (Atoh1), referred to as Math1 in the mouse and Hath1 in humans. Supporting
cells contacting hair cells are prevented from differentiating into hair cells through
expression of Hes1 or Hes5, which inhibits Atoh1. Hes expression is modulated
through signaling by the notch delta system (Table 8.1) (Kopecky and Fritzsch
2011). Modulation of any of the members of this signaling cascade has the potential
to alter the fate of portions of the neuroepithelium, resulting in the production of
new hair cells.
Expression of Atoh1 during development follows a basal-to-apical gradient, in
parallel to the pattern of cell cycle exit described by Ruben (1967). As initial
experiments indicated that lack of production of new hair cells was a key difference
between mammalian systems and spontaneously regenerating systems, the role of
cell cycle control in hair cell regeneration has also been evaluated. At least two
different cell cycle control molecules have been shown to be able modulate the
production of hair cells (Lowenheim et al. 1999; Rocha-Sanchez et al. 2011). To
use this information in the development of a potential therapeutic for inner ear
disease, several key elements have to be addressed. A clear target disease state in
which hair cell loss is a major factor must be selected, a speciﬁc molecular pathway
that can be safely modiﬁed must be identiﬁed, and a strategy for effective delivery
of the therapeutic product must be developed. Finally, the design of the treatment
has to meet regulatory requirements. Given these criteria, there is a series of genes
that can potentially be targeted either through overexpression or through inhibition
in an attempt to modulate mammalian hair cell regeneration (see Table 8.1).
Probably the most studied approach to regenerating hair cells is induction of
forced differentiation of supporting cells through the delivery of the atonal gene. At
present, a wide variety of different models have been used to demonstrate that
transfection of Atoh1 into damaged inner ear tissue can induce production of hair
cells (Kawamoto et al. 2003; Shou et al. 2003). Later studies demonstrated a
8
Developing a Molecular Therapeutic for Hearing Loss
199

Fig. 8.1 As demonstrated in these cytococleograms from Schuknecht’s Pathology of the Ear,
there is not necessarily a match between hair cell loss and the audiogram (Schuknecht 1993).
These two audiograms have similar patterns but one has predominantly neuronal loss and the other
has predominantly hair cell loss. Only the second patient would be a candidate for a hair cell
regeneration trial. Otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) could potentially be used to identify patients with
hair cell loss, but for initial clinical trials, patients’ hearing loss will probably be too severe to
allow OAE testing. When hearing loss exceeds 40 dB, OAEs are likely to be absent. (Adapted
from Joe Adams and Saumil Merchant, Disorders of intoxication, and Joseph Nadol, Disorders of
aging. In Schuknecht’s Pathology of the Ear, 3rd ed. Used with permission from PMPH-USA,
Ltd., Shelton, CT)
Table 8.1 Potential targets/pathways that can be manipulated to induce hair cell regeneration
Gene
Type
Modulation
needed
Pros/cons
Cyclin D
Cell cycle
regulator
Increase
Proapoptotic
Rb
Pocket protein
Inhibit
Proapoptotic
p27kip
CKI
Inhibit
May be limited to neonatal period
p19ink4D
CKI
Inhibit
May be limited to IHC, utricle
Notch
Modulation of
atoh1
Inhibit
May be target for pharmacologic
agents
Hes/Hey
Notch signaling
Inhibit
Potential for RNAi
Atoh
Transcription
factor
Inhibit
Limited effect
200
H. Staecker et al.

functional recovery of hearing and balance after Atoh1 gene therapy (Izumikawa
et al. 2005; Staecker et al. 2007). Inhibition of notch signaling, which can be
accomplished by pharmacologic agents, has also been shown to have the potential
for functional recovery of hair cells after damage (Batts et al. 2009; Mizutari et al.
2013). A potential signiﬁcant advantage of using notch inhibitors is that there are
multiple known pharmacologic agents that interfere with notch signaling. This
would obviate the need for developing a more complex molecular therapeutic
agent. This is balanced by the potential toxicity of some notch inhibitors.
Downstream signaling from notch through inhibition of Hes1 and Hes5 could
potentially also be used to induce regeneration of hair cells (Zine and de
Ribaupierre 1998). This approach would need a molecular strategy with the
delivery of siRNA to inhibit Hes expression (Jung et al. 2013).
8.3
Why Hair Cell Regeneration as a Target?
Hearing loss or dizziness are symptoms rather than diseases, so step one of
developing a therapeutic is recognizing that no single treatment is going to address
all types of hearing loss or balance disorders. We therefore have to start the process
by picking a disease process for which we have a diagnostic test and for which a
human clinical trial is potentially feasible. A signiﬁcant advantage of picking hair
cell regeneration as a target for drug development is that there is a long history of
developmental biology research as a basis to pick drug targets, and this supports the
construction of models that allow a clear development of the relationship between
dose of drug and outcome, such as relating vector particle number to total number
of recovered hair cells. Incorrect choice of disease process would likely make a
successful clinical trial impossible. For example, for many disease processes, there
is no clear understanding of the mechanism by which hearing losses are caused.
Even though there is well-known hair cell loss in late Ménière’s disease, the exact
mechanism of low-frequency ﬂuctuating hearing loss remains unexplained.
Therefore, approaching this patient base with a regeneration therapy is unlikely to
work.
An important factor that should not be overlooked is the availability of human
temporal bone pathology specimens for studying the explicit underlying pathology
of the potentially targeted diseases. There are several national temporal bone
libraries that are supported by the National Institutes of Health–National Institute on
Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (NIH–NIDCD). Consultation with
this invaluable resource allows at least a histologic evaluation of many disease
processes, although in many cases, the specimens are obtained years after the active
disease process has ended. Therefore, when targeting a disease for which to develop
a treatment, a histologically characterized human disease for which there is an
animal model to carry out the drug development process should be selected.
8
Developing a Molecular Therapeutic for Hearing Loss
201

8.4
Ethical and Practical Considerations in Deﬁning
a Therapeutic Target
When designing a pharmacologic or molecular intervention for hearing loss, it is
important to keep in mind that current cochlear implantation devices provide
tremendous beneﬁt to the patient in terms of hearing rehabilitation. The outcomes
with the planned pharmaceutical or molecular intervention should be expected to be
better than the least signiﬁcant cochlear implant outcomes. Alternatively, new
interventions should target an area such as vestibular hair cell regeneration for
which a cochlear implant equivalent is not yet available. A potential counterpoint is
that trial of a regenerative therapy in a patient with bilateral severe-to-profound
hearing loss does not preclude later cochlear implantation, whereas testing a novel
therapeutic in an already implanted ear is difﬁcult. Patients with bilateral vestibular
hypofunction would also be a potential target, especially those suffering from
aminoglycoside ototoxicity (Staecker et al. 2011). These patients, however, often
have normal hearing and would thus be at risk for potential side effects.
8.4.1
The Challenge of the Inner Ear
The great challenge of inner ear disease is that most clinically available testing
protocols do not allow precise identiﬁcation of the underlying pathology of the
inner ear. As seen in Fig. 8.1, there can be two patients with high-frequency hearing
loss but they can have very different patterns of loss of hair cells, neurons, and cells
in the stria vascularis. This additionally does not even begin to discuss the possi-
bility of synaptic disorders or underlying molecular basis for inner ear dysfunction.
Potential diseases for which a molecular therapeutic might be considered include
loss of hearing and balance clearly related to hair cell damage. Molecular therapies
have already been studied in animal models after aminoglycoside injury and noise
trauma. Other diseases for which molecular therapies might be considered include
adult-onset progressive hearing loss in which replacement of a defective gene or
inhibition of a pathologic dominant gene could be attempted as well as diseases in
which a preventative approach may be considered (sound trauma). A large portion
of congenital genetic hearing loss could not be addressed, as in utero gene delivery
could not be launched from a clinical trial standpoint. Postnatal treatment of con-
genital hearing loss may be difﬁcult because there is often degeneration of the organ
of Corti beyond a molecular pathology alone (Jun et al. 2000). Presbycusis,
probably the largest target of all, is challenging because it consists of a mix of hair
cell, stria vascularis, and spiral ganglion disorders and would require very long term
trials to show efﬁcacy.
202
H. Staecker et al.

8.4.2
What Is Your Model Disease?
Assuming that hair cell loss is selected as the target, several key concerns that have
been seen in animal models of hair cell loss must be addressed. Many of the rodent
models that have been used in ototoxicity models demonstrate a rapid loss of spiral
ganglion neurons after damage to the organ of Corti (Harrison et al. 1991). This
process also occurs in larger animal models such as cats, although at a lower rate
(Leake et al. 2008). Obviously, hair cell regeneration is useless if there is no neural
connection between the cochlea and the brainstem. Cochlear implant studies and
studies of human temporal bones suggest that unlike rodents, humans maintain a
fairly robust spiral ganglion population in most hearing-related pathologies
(Linthicum and Fayad 2009). Hair cell regeneration experiments in animals also
suggest that the presence of new hair cells can induce neuronal migration, lending
at least some conﬁdence that if hair cells are restored, they can attract an existing
spiral ganglion population (Kawamoto et al. 2003).
Interestingly, the effect of spiral ganglion population survival on successful
hearing is not entirely understood. In cochlear implantation studies, there are some
links between spiral ganglion survival and auditory outcomes (Seyyedi et al. 2014).
As different diseases are associated with different spiral ganglion populations, the
development of animal models and eventual choice of human clinical trial popu-
lations can be reﬁned to reﬂect the ideal potential outcomes of the trials. Therefore,
choosing a patient who, based on existing temporal bone pathology data, may have
signiﬁcant neuronal degeneration could negatively impact trial outcomes. In addi-
tion, when planning for a clinical application, the human life span, onset of deaf-
ness, and duration of deafness must be considered. Again, from cochlear
implantation research, there are clear indications that central auditory system
changes occur if the brain does not receive sound information before 3 years of age
or if a patient is profoundly hearing impaired for longer than 20 years (Ching et al.
2013; Mosnier et al. 2014).
In hair cell regeneration in particular, there is a reliance on the conversion of
supporting cells into hair cells through transdifferentiation. In theory, it is possible
to deplete the inner ear of supporting cells, which would result in a nonfunctional
ear. Quantitative analysis of the human vestibular system suggests that supporting
cells are present in a 5:1 ratio to hair cells whereas rodents have a lower ratio
(Severinsen et al. 2010). Within the cochlea, there are several potential cell types
that can potentially transdifferentiate into hair cells, although the supply of cells
would be more limited than in the vestibular system. Experiments tracking the
production of supernumerary hair cells suggest that the source of supernumerary
hair cells is the lesser epithelial ridge (Bodson et al. 2010). An alternate strategy that
is being evaluated is to induce endogenous stem cells to produce new hair cells
(Martinez-Monedero et al. 2007).
Another concerning observation raised in the review of animal models used for
regeneration studies is that after damage, the cochlea loses its three-dimensional
structure to form a “ﬂat” epithelium (Izumikawa et al. 2008). This ﬂat epithelium
8
Developing a Molecular Therapeutic for Hearing Loss
203

has some of the characteristics of supporting cells but does not regenerate when
transfected with atonal (Oesterle and Campbell 2009). When looking at human
temporal bone specimens, in the bulk of specimens examined, it appears that there
is a robust surviving supporting cell population that retains near-normal anatomic
relationships within the damaged organ of Corti (Linthicum and Fayad 2009). This
observation inﬂuences the design of our animal models. What often differentiates
human temporal bone pathology in patients with ototoxicity from observed
pathology in animal models of ototoxicity is that hair cell loss is not as complete in
humans. The most likely explanation for this is that that the goal in human therapy,
when patients require treatment with ototoxic drugs for life-saving purposes, is to
limit the side effects on the ear, whereas animal models are designed to provide
complete and repeatable damage to the inner ear. This is a situation that does not
occur in the clinical setting. It needs to be kept in mind for models used in trans-
lational research. Ideally, for a hair cell regeneration study, a rodent model that has
partial loss of hair cells is needed, but the partial loss must be reproducible across
subjects for the model to be useful and for experiments to be adequately powered.
8.5
Delivery Options to the Inner Ear
Once a potential drug to develop for hair cell regeneration has been identiﬁed and
selected for further investigation, a methodology for effectively delivering the drug
to the inner ear is needed. Systemic therapy for inner ear disease is in general not
desirable. Because a molecular therapeutic agent may not cross the blood–brain
barrier and systemically delivered drugs can potentially affect nontarget organ
systems, a local therapy is preferred for treating diseases of the inner ear. Multiple
strategies have been devised for delivering drugs either transtympanically or
directly into the inner ear ﬂuid (Staecker and Rodgers 2013). Recent studies that
look at modulators of notch inhibition demonstrate some evidence that when these
drugs are delivered using intratympanic delivery and direct delivery to the inner ear,
they may be able to induce hair cell regeneration (Mizutari et al. 2013). Modulation
of transdifferentiation via atonal delivery requires delivery of the gene to the
supporting cells via gene therapy. Past studies have shown poor penetration of
vectors when applied to the round window membrane, suggesting that direct access
to the inner ear would be needed.
A variety of human surgeries exist that could potentially be adapted to inner ear
gene delivery. Surgeons have been routinely opening the inner ear via the stapes
footplate and have a long track record of safely operating on the stapes. To date, no
drugs have been injected through the stapes footplate in humans, but animal
experiments suggest that this would be feasible (Praetorius et al. 2003). An alternate
route for delivery of drugs into the perilymph space is injection through the round
window membrane. Guinea pig experiments have demonstrated that a cannula
204
H. Staecker et al.

hooked up to an osmotic pump can deliver a wide variety of substances into the
perilymph via this approach (Brown et al. 1993). Recent advances in cochlear
implantation have demonstrated that a ﬂexible electrode can be inserted into the
scala tympani without loss of hearing (Kiefer et al. 2004). Based on the calculated
volume of a cochlear implant electrode and ﬂuid displaced by the insertion of the
electrode, it is reasonable to predict that displacement of that volume of ﬂuid within
the perilymph would be tolerated during drug injections as well.
When planning human studies, the volume of drug adequate to achieve a ther-
apeutic effect might be predicted from kinetic data and drug diffusion models
derived from animal models (Plontke and Zenner 2002). The rodent cochlea has a
signiﬁcantly smaller volume than the human cochlea, and it is not clear if direct
scaling for a rodent model to the human can be calculated (http://oto2.wustl.edu/
cochlea/) (Thorne et al. 1999). Other groups that have been working on
transtympanic delivery have approached this by doing pharmacokinetics using a
sheep model (Wang et al. 2011). Sheep have a slightly larger cochlea and use of
sheep as subjects avoids some of the cost and ethical dilemmas in developing
primate experiments.
A potential problem in delivery through the round window membrane is the
proximity of the cochlear aqueduct. The cochlear aqueduct opens in the basal turn
of the scala tympani next to the round window. The patency of the cochlear
aqueduct in humans is variable. At least in younger patients, it is frequently open,
raising the possibility of distribution of the injected drugs into the cerebrospinal
ﬂuid (CSF) space (Marchbanks and Reid 1990; Shuto et al. 2011). Animal
experiments have suggested that regeneration induced by atonal gene therapy may
be more efﬁciently induced when the vector is injected into the scala media
(Husseman and Raphael 2009). A transcochlear approach to the scala media in
humans would be very difﬁcult to develop. The scala media is, however, accessible
via the endolymphatic sac. Raphael and colleagues have demonstrated the ability to
deliver viral vector into guinea pig cochleas through this approach (Yamasoba et al.
1999). In humans, molecules such as gadolinium have been injected into the
endolymphatic sac and have been seen to be distributed throughout the scala media
without loss of hearing (Mandala et al. 2010). Theoretically, the human inner ear
could also be accessed via the semicircular canals, as has been shown in mice and
rats.
When picking a surgical approach for delivering a completely novel therapeutic
that in and of itself carries some theoretical risk, the complexity of the surgery and
risk of the surgery should be minimized. The safest access to the round window
membrane would require a mastoidectomy and facial recess with subsequent
removal of the tectum to see the round window. The round window potentially
could be accessed via the transcanal approach, but one would need development of
the angled needle to puncture the round window membrane in a controlled fashion.
The
stapes
footplate,
on
the
other
hand,
is
easily
accessible
via
the
transtympanic/transcanal approach and can be fenestrated with a laser. Drug can
8
Developing a Molecular Therapeutic for Hearing Loss
205

then be injected into the perilymphatic space (see Fig. 8.2). Besides total volume
injected, more rapid speed of injection may also negatively affect the inner ear.
Some cochlear implant studies suggest that slower insertion speeds result in better
hearing preservation (Rajan et al. 2013). Development of an injection device for
inner ear drug delivery should take that into account by limiting the speed of
injection into the inner ear through the use of a micropump.
Fig. 8.2 Delivery options for
perilymph-based delivery in
humans. Looking down the
ear canal after lifting the ear
drum, both the round window
and stapes footplate (arrow)
can be accessed (a). Potential
advantages of the stapes
approach include the ability to
have a direct view onto the
footplate without bone
removal and an oval window
that allows one to rest a
delivery catheter (b). For
initial trials, the delivery
catheter can be held in place
with a cup forceps to allow
completion of
infusion. Delivery of atonal-
expressing vector in a human
patient via a custom delivery
catheter resting in a 0.25-mm
stapedotomy (c)
206
H. Staecker et al.

8.6
Developing an Animal Model
Hair cell regeneration research has used multiple different model systems. Avian
models have the advantage of spontaneous regeneration, and newer vertebrate
models such as Danio rerio (zebraﬁsh) have been useful for understanding the
underlying biology of the regeneration process. For translation and large-scale drug
testing, rodent models are probably most appropriate because these are more
commonly used in pharmacokinetic and toxicity studies. A model that can be
translated into the preclinical environment for animal safety testing and then used
for FDA submission is helpful. One potential problem with using rodents for hair
regeneration research, however, is their relative lack of response to the aminogly-
cosides that are typically used to ablate the hair cells in the cochlea. The doses used
in rodents are frequently much higher than those used in humans, given the goal of
ablating the auditory epithelium. Several protocols have been developed for abla-
tion of the auditory system in mice; however, development of a mouse model in
which hearing loss is restricted to the higher frequencies to more accurately model
human high-frequency hearing loss is signiﬁcantly more complex given problems
inducing a repeatable high-frequency hearing loss (Jansen et al. 2013). Similarly, in
the balance system, it is fairly straightforward to ablate all vestibular hair cells
completely but more complex to develop a mechanism of injuries that repeatedly
partially injures the neural epithelium (Schlecker et al. 2011).
An adult mouse utricle tissue culture model has been useful for testing vectors
for vestibular hair cell regeneration (see Fig. 8.3). It has the advantage of using
48 hrs
Adult 
Mouse
Macular
Organs
DMEN+N1
+glucose
37oC
Aminoglycoside
14-28 DIV
Analyze 
hair cell 
counts
Fig. 8.3 Model of mouse utricle to evaluate constructs. The vestibular end organs can be
harvested from an adult animal and maintained in vitro for long time periods. Constructs
demonstrating good efﬁcacy in vitro can then be developed in an in vivo setting
8
Developing a Molecular Therapeutic for Hearing Loss
207

adult rather than neonatal tissue, it can be maintained in the trope for a prolonged
time, and it is easy to quantify cell survival. Profound hearing loss can be induced
in mice via a combination of aminoglycoside and diuretic drugs (Taylor et al.
2008). For induction of complete vestibular loss, neomycin can be injected through
the round window of the mouse. This reliably induces greater than 90 % loss of
vestibular hair cells and is a useful model for testing proof of concept of a new
vector construct.
Use of the toxic nitrile, 3,3′-iminodipropionitrile (IDPN) has been demonstrated
to induce vestibular hair cell injury in a number of different models (Crofton et al.
1994). For delivery of the vector, a number of different approaches to the inner ear,
including stapedotomy and round window injection, can be used. The easiest access
point to the inner ear of the mouse is the posterior semicircular canal, which can be
accessed on the side of the skull. Use of this delivery point minimizes anesthesia
time and allows high throughput for large-scale studies in which surgery must be
performed on large numbers of mice. In the rat, the semicircular canals are less
easily accessed and are deeper in the bone; however, using the facial nerve as a
landmark, the canal can be accessed similarly to the mouse (Gassner et al. 2012).
For many large contract research organizations (CROs), the rat is the preferred
animal for toxicology studies (for additional discussion of toxicology studies, see
Chap. 5 by Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell). Therefore, it is useful to be able to deliver
drugs within both mouse and rat models. The additional advantage of rodent models
is having a very well characterized genome, allowing a variety of different exper-
iments. Outcomes can be determined through hearing testing, evaluation of balance,
and histologic measures. Indeed, all of the outcomes that may be of interest in
humans, such as threshold sensitivity, otoacoustic emission integrity, tinnitus, and
so forth, can be assessed. All are needed for preclinical evaluation of drug toxicity
and efﬁcacy.
8.7
Gene Therapy Basics and Modeling a Vector System
Most of the research on gene delivery and the auditory system has focused on either
adenovector-based or adeno-associated vector-based delivery systems. The utility
of different vector systems has been extensively reviewed (Kawamoto et al. 2001).
For the ear in particular, an important consideration is that during the manufacturing
process, the vector must be produced at a sufﬁcient particle concentration that
delivery of an effective dose of vector into the inner ear will not cause any hydraulic
trauma. For inner ear delivery in particular, adenovector delivery systems are ideal
because they have a long track record of human use and have been used in the
neuroepithelium of the eye. Additionally, for applications such as hair cell regen-
eration where transcription factor activity is needed only for a brief period of time,
adenovectors provide an ideal vehicle because they are transcriptionally silenced
within several weeks of delivery, thus limiting expression of the transgene to a short
208
H. Staecker et al.

time period. For treatment of genetic diseases, long-acting vectors such as
adeno-associated vectors would be needed.
Within the design of the vector itself, several design elements are included to
ensure safety. For nononcolytic gene therapy, vectors have to be designed to be
replication deﬁcient. This can be accomplished through deletion of key vector
genome components and generation of vector in a specially modiﬁed cell line.
Essentially, a gene therapy-based drug needs to be treated like any other pharma-
ceutical and deﬁned in terms of dose–response relationships. Because the cochlea is
a low-volume space, we want to optimize vector delivery by delivering vector only
to supporting cells. This can be achieved by either altering the binding properties of
the vector or using a promoter that is supporting cell speciﬁc. Combining these two
traits optimizes the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the molecular drug (see Fig. 8.4).
Early studies evaluated the effect of promoters on expression of transgenes in
inner ear tissue as well as evaluating the effect of promoter strength on hair cell
regeneration (Praetorius et al. 2010). It is clear that very different patterns of
expression can be achieved that may or may not be appropriate for expression of
Atoh1 and hair cell regeneration. For delivery of atonal, efﬁcacy of hair cell pro-
duction was inversely related to promoter strength. Potentially different vector
systems could be developed that may more speciﬁcally target populations of cells
within the inner ear (Staecker et al. 2014). Alternate serotype adenovectors might
have the additional beneﬁt of inducing a less robust immune response in the inner
ear. Finally, there are also techniques for modifying vectors to bind to speciﬁc
What is your target disease? 
•
Hearing loss with known hair cell loss
How do you get your vector to the right place?
•
Local delivery into perilymph
How do you control the amount and location of gene transcription?
•
Tissue-specific Promoters and control of promoter strength
How do you ensure safety?
•
Control vector dose and volume
Can be modified to alter 
binding
Can be modified to 
alter immunogenicity
Genetic backbone/promoter alterations
Fig. 8.4 Several points have to be considered when designing a vector for delivery of a molecular
therapeutic for hearing loss. Careful construction of a tissue-speciﬁc promoter-driven construct that
is synthesized to produce the highest possible titer per volume of active particles allows low
infusion volumes in the inner ear
8
Developing a Molecular Therapeutic for Hearing Loss
209

epitopes within a tissue. As seen in Fig. 8.5, an adenovector-expressing green
ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) has been conjugated to an antibody that binds the vector
and epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor. Delivery to the mouse organ of Corti
cultures results in altered distribution of vector-induced gene expression. Although
Fig. 8.5 Ad5 vectors can be retargeted to alternative binding patterns. Expression of green
ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) in neonatal organ of inner ear cultures is shown for the organ of Corti
(left) and the spiral ganglion (right). Native vector (upper panels) expresses in the spiral ganglion
and underneath the hair cells. Binding ablated vector (center panels) shows little expression of
GFP. Vector targeted to bind endothelial growth factor (EGF) receptor appears mostly in the organ
of Corti with spiral ganglion GFP expression ablated
210
H. Staecker et al.

this technique is promising in terms of targeting, it would result in a drug pro-
duction process that has signiﬁcant regulatory hurdles. In terms of translation of
therapy, we opted to use an adenovirus Ad5 capsid-based vector due to its extensive
track record in human studies (Wei 2005). This was combined with a vector
manufacturing process that allowed production of very high titer wild-type free
vector. For moving studies forward into the preclinical arena, the transgene for
human atonal delivery was Hath1 driven by the human glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein
promoter to produce a vector that expressed Hath1 only in supporting cells.
8.8
Manufacturing Issues That Must Be Considered
Once the lead molecule had been designed and tested for efﬁcacy, preparations need
to be made to move the project into the preclinical phase. This means production of
a batch of vector produced under good manufacturing practice (GMP). GMP
guidelines are overseen by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and are
described in the Food Drug and Cosmetic act (21 S 351). Additional steps that need
to be evaluated in the process are development of an assay for measuring potency of
the drug (i.e., ability to produce Hath1 protein), veriﬁcation of the absence of
wild-type vector, and validation of assays to determine vector particle number per
unit volume. The stability of the gene medicine product also needs to be validated.
All of this information is contained in the initial investigational new drug
(IND) application. The FDA offers an overview on this topic on its website (http://
goo.gl/W1Fcpe).
8.9
Preclinical Studies
At this point in development, the lead molecule has to be tested in an animal model.
Pharmakokinetics/biodistribution and toxicology have to be carried out under good
laboratory practice (GLP). This is a system of conducting preclinical experiments
that will support an IND application, and requirements are outlined by the FDA
under a series of GLP regulations (21 CFR 58). In brief, the regulations provide
guidance on the organization of personnel conducting the experiments, quality
assurance, facility issues, standard operating procedures, and conduction of the
study as well as archiving of the reports and results. Before undertaking preclinical
studies, it is advisable to meet with the FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research (CBER), which oversees gene therapy trials. For development of an inner
ear-based therapy, several hurdles need to be addressed. The correct animal model
has to be chosen, target organs for evaluation of toxicity need to be identiﬁed, and
duration of the experiment and outcomes measures have to be determined. The
study has to evaluate the formulation and delivery method that are proposed for an
eventual clinical study.
8
Developing a Molecular Therapeutic for Hearing Loss
211

For biodistribution studies, tissues are examined by a quantitative polymerase
chain reaction for vector sequences at hours to 6 months after delivery in a rat
model. For the purposes of the IND applications, it is not necessary to perform these
experiments in a disease model and generally 10 animals per group are acceptable.
The rat was chosen for hearing toxicology experiments because prior studies
demonstrated that Ad5 capsid vectors could be delivered in this model (Gassner
et al. 2012). For biodistribution studies, a sensitivity of <100 vector copies/lg DNA
is considered standard for assay development. The tissue panel for an ear study
would include the injected and contralateral ear, draining lymph nodes, brain, heart,
lung, liver, kidney, spleen, blood, and ovaries/testes. If focused on a short-acting
transcription factor delivered by a nonintegrating vector, long-term (>6 month)
studies are not necessarily required by the FDA during the preclinical phase. The
corollaries to these studies are toxicology studies in which dose ranging is used to
determine a locally toxic dose (induction of hearing loss) in a naïve animal and
histopathology is used to examine all of the organs listed previously for local
damage. These types of studies are best performed by a CRO with expertise in GLP
studies. For inner ear studies, there are not many organizations that are set up to do
the hearing testing and inner ear histology; thus, collaborative efforts including a
researcher experienced in the inner ear are typically needed. This information is put
together with a proof of concept model in which the GMP lead molecule is tested
for efﬁcacy in a disease model.
8.10
Design of a Hair Cell Regeneration Clinical Trial
Phase 1 clinical trials focus primarily on safety. At present, multiple studies are
looking at delivery to the middle ear, but delivery of a molecular therapeutic would
require injection into the perilymph or intralabyrinthine (IL) delivery. This kind of
therapy is a completely novel form of delivery that has never been tested in humans
and therefore needs a safety readout that is separate from analysis of the drug
effects. Patients who are recruited for this trial should have enough residual function
to measure any detrimental effects of either the delivery process or the drug itself on
hearing or balance. This introduces the obvious risk that patients may lose their
remaining hearing if the drug delivery process does induce damage; thus, the ideal
subjects for initial studies will have some residual hearing in both ears such that the
study participant has remaining hearing in one ear if adverse events do occur.
During the Institutional Review Board (IRB) process, one of the elements of
interest is complete and transparent disclosure of risks associated with participation
in research, including clinical trials. If a placebo control is part of the experimental
design, the IRB may pay special attention to the ethics of performing an invasive
surgical sham procedure (Niemansburg et al. 2015).
Picking the correct dose of the therapeutic is an important component of trial
design. Animal studies suggest that there is a minimal effective dose for functional
recovery after delivery of atonal even though an increase in hair cell number can be
212
H. Staecker et al.

seen with a lower dose of vector (Staecker et al. 2014). This suggests that there is a
minimal dose of vector required for efﬁcacy. For vector-based therapeutics, there is
a maximum concentration of vector that can be manufactured. Dosage of the ato-
nal-containing vector can therefore be controlled by diluting concentrated stock or
varying the volume of vector infused into the inner ear. For a clinical trial, the dose
of vector is based on the effective dose derived from animal models scaled up to the
volume of the inner ear of a human. A variety of normative data for the relative size
of the inner ear among models is available (for reviews across species, see Thorne
et al. 1999). In a trial, achieving the optimal dosing is best accomplished by starting
with an estimated low but effective dose and performing a dose escalation exper-
iment as lower doses are conﬁrmed safe. Additional factors that need to be
addressed are the development of a delivery device suitable for injecting microliter
volumes into the inner ear over a several-minute time frame. These devices would
additionally need to be evaluated for compatibility with the drug of interest; that is,
binding to the vector is necessary.
The selection of patients for the clinical trial is critical. Having talked to many
patient groups, the authors of this chapter found a lack of appreciation of the
complexity of hearing loss. Just because a sensorineural hearing loss is present, it
does not necessarily mean it is due to loss of sensory hair cells. Moving forward
then requires identiﬁcation of patient populations where there is some degree of
certainty that hair cell loss is the etiology of their hearing loss. This is best
accomplished by identifying patients based on disease process, such as amino-
glycoside exposure or noise trauma. Gene therapy trials in general have required
longer follow-up than standard pharmacologic trials; thus, participants must be
willing to continue their follow-up participation for extended periods. Consultation
with the regulatory authorities is required for optimizing the design of the trial.
8.11
Funding
A variety of funding mechanisms are available for translational research projects.
The NIDCD has offered a series of requests for applications (RFAs) focused on
translational research. Translational research at academic institutions is thus perhaps
most frequently funded through this dedicated R01 mechanism. When academic
research leads to potential new drug technologies, pharmaceutical companies can
license those technologies and seek additional funding for drug development.
Additional mechanisms such as Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and
Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) programs provide grants that fund
proof of concept Phase 1 studies as well as larger rollouts in the Phase 2 part of the
grant. Unlike traditional research grants that most academics are familiar with (i.e.,
R01, R03, R21), a small business entity must provide the primary oversight and the
principal investigator must be an employee of the business. Clinical development
can occur within academic institutions, however, and the U01 clinical trial coop-
erative agreement is used by the NIH to fund clinical investigations. Finally,
8
Developing a Molecular Therapeutic for Hearing Loss
213

academics can remain actively engaged in clinical research when business entities
choose to provide contract funding for clinical or translational activities at an
academic institution. Ownership of intellectual property and publication rights need
to be carefully negotiated in these latter situations. Although the preceding mech-
anisms are available, it should be noted that the preclinical animal experiments
needed for regulatory ﬁling and the clinical trial itself are generally speaking out-
side the funding capacity of granting agencies and typically require a corporate
partner. For discussion of the development of D-methionine within an academic
institution through grant funding mechanisms, see Chap. 6 by Campbell and Fox.
8.12
Conclusion
Hair cell regeneration has been a leading focus of hearing research for the last
30 years. During that time, we have identiﬁed key pathways in multiple genes that
have the potential to generate hair cells. Ultimately, translation of this information
to human studies requires identiﬁcation of a clinical need and design of a stable lead
molecule that is safe and has veriﬁable dose–response characteristics as well as
being able to be manufactured on an industrial scale. The movement of the atonal
gene from discovery to lead molecule development, preclinical testing, and ﬁnally
human clinical trials hopefully represents the ﬁrst of many molecular therapeutics
for hearing loss that move from bench to bedside. The outcomes and safety studies
as well as experience from moving atonal into a human population will facilitate
the development of a wide variety of other therapeutics that are currently being
tested in animal models.
Compliance with Ethics Requirements
Douglas E. Brough is an employee of GenVec Inc.
Lloyd Klickstein is a stockholder of Novartis and an employee of Novartis
Institutes for BioMedical Research.
Hinrich Staecker is on the surgical advisory board of MedEl GmbH and is a
consultant for Auris Medical.
References
Batts, S. A., Shoemaker, C. R., & Raphael, Y. (2009). Notch signaling and Hes labeling in the
normal and drug-damaged organ of Corti. Hearing Research, 249(1–2), 15–22.
Bodson, M., Breuskin, I., Lefebvre, P., & Malgrange, B. (2010). Hair cell progenitors:
Identiﬁcation and regulatory genes. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 130(3), 312–317.
Brown, J. N., Miller, J. M., Altschuler, R. A., & Nuttall, A. L. (1993). Osmotic pump implant for
chronic infusion of drugs into the inner ear. Hearing Research, 70(2), 167–172.
214
H. Staecker et al.

Ching, T. Y., Dillon, H., Marnane, V., Hou, S., Day, J., et al. (2013). Outcomes of early- and
late-identiﬁed children at 3 years of age: Findings from a prospective population-based study.
Ear and Hearing, 34(5), 535–552.
Cotanche, D. A. (1987). Regeneration of hair cell stereociliary bundles in the chick cochlea
following severe acoustic trauma. Hearing Research, 30(2–3), 181–195.
Cotanche, D. A., & Kaiser, C. L. (2010). Hair cell fate decisions in cochlear development and
regeneration. Hearing Research, 266(1–2), 18–25.
Crofton, K. M., Janssen, R., Prazma, J., Pulver, S., & Barone, S., Jr. (1994). The ototoxicity of
3,3′-iminodipropionitrile: Functional and morphological evidence of cochlear damage. Hearing
Research, 80(2), 129–140.
Cruz, R. M., Lambert, P. R., & Rubel, E. W. (1987). Light microscopic evidence of hair cell
regeneration after gentamicin toxicity in chick cochlea. Archives of Otolaryngology–Head and
Neck Surgery, 113(10), 1058–1062.
Forge, A., Li, L., Corwin, J. T., & Nevill, G. (1993). Ultrastructural evidence for hair cell
regeneration in the mammalian inner ear. Science, 259(5101), 1616–1619.
Gassner, D., Durham, D., Pfannenstiel, S. C., Brough, D. E., & Staecker, H. (2012). Canalostomy
as a surgical approach for cochlear gene therapy in the rat. Anatomical Record (Hoboken),
295(11), 1830–1836.
Harrison, R. V., Shirane, M., Fukushima, N., & Mount, R. J. (1991). Morphological changes to the
cochlea in an animal model of profound deafness. Acta Oto-Laryngologica Supplementum,
489, 5–11.
Husseman, J., & Raphael, Y. (2009). Gene therapy in the inner ear using adenovirus vectors.
Advances in Otorhinolaryngology, 66, 37–51.
Izumikawa, M., Minoda, R., Kawamoto, K., Abrashkin, K. A., Swiderski, D. L., et al. (2005).
Auditory hair cell replacement and hearing improvement by Atoh1 gene therapy in deaf
mammals. Nature Medicine, 11(3), 271–276.
Izumikawa, M., Batts, S. A., Miyazawa, T., Swiderski, D. L., & Raphael, Y. (2008). Response of
the ﬂat cochlear epithelium to forced expression of Atoh1. Hearing Research, 240(1–2), 52–56.
Jansen, T. T., Bremer, H. G., Topsakal, V., Hendriksen, F. G., Klis, S. F., & Grolman, W. (2013).
Deafness induction in mice. Otology & Neurotology, 34(8), 1496–1502.
Jun, A. I., McGuirt, W. T., Hinojosa, R., Green, G. E., Fischel-Ghodsian, N., & Smith, R.
J. (2000). Temporal bone histopathology in connexin 26-related hearing loss. Laryngoscope,
110(2 Pt 1), 269–275.
Jung, D., & Bhattacharyya, N. (2012). Association of hearing loss with decreased employment and
income among adults in the United States. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology,
121(12), 771–775.
Jung, J. Y., Avenarius, M. R., Adamsky, S., Alpert, E., Feinstein, E., & Raphael, Y. (2013).
siRNA targeting Hes5 augments hair cell regeneration in aminoglycoside-damaged mouse
utricle. Molecular Therapy, 21(4), 834–841.
Kawamoto, K., Kanzaki, S., Yagi, M., Stover, T., Prieskorn, D. M., et al. (2001). Gene-based
therapy for inner ear disease. Noise and Health, 3(11), 37–47.
Kawamoto, K., Ishimoto, S., Minoda, R., Brough, D. E., & Raphael, Y. (2003). Math1 gene
transfer generates new cochlear hair cells in mature guinea pigs in vivo. Journal of
Neuroscience, 23(11), 4395–4400.
Kiefer, J., Gstoettner, W., Baumgartner, W., Pok, S. M., Tillein, J., et al. (2004). Conservation of
low-frequency hearing in cochlear implantation. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 124(3), 272–280.
Kopecky, B., & Fritzsch, B. (2011). Regeneration of hair cells: Making sense of all the noise.
Pharmaceuticals (Basel), 4(6), 848–879.
Leake, P. A., Stakhovskaya, O., Hradek, G. T., & Hetherington, A. M. (2008). Factors inﬂuencing
neurotrophic effects of electrical stimulation in the deafened developing auditory system.
Hearing Research, 242(1–2), 86–99.
Linthicum, F. H., Jr., & Fayad, J. N. (2009). Spiral ganglion cell loss is unrelated to segmental
cochlear sensory system degeneration in humans. Otology & Neurotology, 30(3), 418–422.
8
Developing a Molecular Therapeutic for Hearing Loss
215

Lowenheim, H., Furness, D. N., Kil, J., Zinn, C., Gultig, K., et al. (1999). Gene disruption of
p27Kip1 allows cell proliferation in the postnatal and adult organ of Corti. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 96(7), 4084–4088.
Mandala, M., Colletti, L., Carner, M., Cerini, R., Barillari, M., et al. (2010). Induced
endolymphatic ﬂow from the endolymphatic sac to the cochlea in Meniere’s disease.
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 143(5), 673–679.
Marchbanks, R. J., & Reid, A. (1990). Cochlear and cerebrospinal ﬂuid pressure: Their
inter-relationship and control mechanisms. British Journal of Audiology, 24(3), 179–187.
Martinez-Monedero, R., Oshima, K., Heller, S., & Edge, A. S. (2007). The potential role of
endogenous stem cells in regeneration of the inner ear. Hearing Research, 227(1–2), 48–52.
Mizutari, K., Fujioka, M., Hosoya, M., Bramhall, N., Okano, H. J., et al. (2013). Notch inhibition
induces cochlear hair cell regeneration and recovery of hearing after acoustic trauma. Neuron,
77(1), 58–69.
Mosnier, I., Bebear, J. P., Marx, M., Fraysse, B., Truy, E., et al. (2014). Predictive factors of
cochlear implant outcomes in the elderly. Audiology and Neurotology, 19(Suppl. 1), 15–20.
Niemansburg, S. L., van Delden, J. J., Dhert, W. J., & Bredenoord, A. L. (2015). Reconsidering
the ethics of sham interventions in an era of emerging technologies. Surgery, 157(4), 801–810.
Oesterle, E., & Stone, J. (2008). Hair cell regeneration: Mechanisms guiding cellular proliferation
and differentiation. In R. Salvi, A. N. Popper, & R. R. Fay (Eds.), Hair cell Regeneration,
repair, and protection (pp. 141–197). New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Oesterle, E. C., & Campbell, S. (2009). Supporting cell characteristics in long-deafened aged
mouse ears. Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 10(4), 525–544.
Plontke, S., & Zenner, H. P. (2002). Pharmacokinetic considerations in intratympanic drug
delivery to the inner ear. Acta Oto-Rhino-Laryngologica Belgica, 56(4), 369–370.
Praetorius, M., Baker, K., Weich, C. M., Plinkert, P. K., & Staecker, H. (2003). Hearing
preservation after inner ear gene therapy: The effect of vector and surgical approach. ORL
Journal for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology and Its Related Specialties, 65(4), 211–214.
Praetorius, M., Hsu, C., Baker, K., Brough, D. E., Plinkert, P., & Staecker, H. (2010).
Adenovector-mediated
hair
cell
regeneration
is
affected
by
promoter
type.
Acta
Oto-Laryngologica, 130(2), 215–222.
Puligilla, C., & Kelley, M. W. (2009). Building the world’s best hearing aid; regulation of cell fate
in the cochlea. Current Opinion in Genetics & Development, 19(4), 368–373.
Rajan, G. P., Kontorinis, G., & Kuthubutheen, J. (2013). The effects of insertion speed on inner ear
function during cochlear implantation: A comparison study. Audiology and Neurotology,
18(1), 17–22.
Rocha-Sanchez, S. M., Scheetz, L. R., Contreras, M., Weston, M. D., Korte, M., et al. (2011).
Mature mice lacking Rbl2/p130 gene have supernumerary inner ear hair cells and supporting
cells. Journal of Neuroscience, 31(24), 8883–8893.
Ruben, R. J. (1967). Development of the inner ear of the mouse: A radioautographic study of
terminal mitoses. Acta Oto-Laryngologica Supplementum, 220, 221–244.
Salvi, R. J., Popper, A. N., and Fay, R. R. (Eds.). (2008). Hair cell regeneration, repair, and
protection. New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Schlecker, C., Praetorius, M., Brough, D. E., Presler, R. G., Jr., Hsu, C., et al. (2011). Selective
atonal gene delivery improves balance function in a mouse model of vestibular disease. Gene
Therapy, 18(9), 884–890.
Schuknecht, H. F. (1993). Pathology of the ear. Malvern, PA: Lea and Febiger.
Severinsen, S. A., Sorensen, M. S., Kirkegaard, M., & Nyengaard, J. R. (2010). Stereological
estimation of total cell numbers in the young human utricular macula. Acta Oto-Laryngologica,
130(7), 773–779.
Seyyedi, M., Viana, L. M., & Nadol, J. B., Jr. (2014). Within-subject comparison of word
recognition and spiral ganglion cell count in bilateral cochlear implant recipients. Otology &
Neurotology, 35(8), 1446–1450.
216
H. Staecker et al.

Shou, J., Zheng, J. L., & Gao, W. Q. (2003). Robust generation of new hair cells in the mature
mammalian
inner
ear
by
adenoviral
expression
of
Hath1.
Molecular
and Cellular
Neuroscience, 23(2), 169–179.
Shuto, T., Matsunaga, S., & Suenaga, J. (2011). Contralateral hearing disturbance following
posterior fossa surgery. Neurologia Medico-Chirurgica, 51(6), 434–437.
Staecker, H., & Rodgers, B. (2013). Developments in delivery of medications for inner ear disease.
Expert Opinion Drug Delivery, 10(5), 639–650.
Staecker, H., Praetorius, M., Baker, K., & Brough, D. E. (2007). Vestibular hair cell regeneration
and restoration of balance function induced by math1 gene transfer. Otology & Neurotology,
28(2), 223–231.
Staecker, H., Praetorius, M., & Brough, D. E. (2011). Development of gene therapy for inner ear
disease: Using bilateral vestibular hypofunction as a vehicle for translational research. Hearing
Research, 276(1–2), 44–51.
Staecker, H., Schlecker, C., Kraft, S., Praetorius, M., Hsu, C., & Brough, D. E. (2014). Optimizing
atoh1-induced vestibular hair cell regeneration. Laryngoscope, 124(Suppl. 5), S1–S12.
Taylor, R. R., Nevill, G., & Forge, A. (2008). Rapid hair cell loss: A mouse model for cochlear
lesions. Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 9(1), 44–64.
Thorne, M., Salt, A. N., DeMott, J. E., Henson, M. M., Henson, O. W., Jr., & Gewalt, S. L. (1999).
Cochlear
ﬂuid
space
dimensions
for
six
species
derived
from
reconstructions
of
three-dimensional magnetic resonance images. Laryngoscope, 109(10), 1661–1668.
Wang, X., Fernandez, R., Dellamary, L., Harrop, A., Ye, Q., et al. (2011). Pharmacokinetics of
dexamethasone solution following intratympanic injection in guinea pig and sheep. Audiology
and Neurotology, 16(4), 233–241.
Warchol, M. E., Lambert, P. R., Goldstein, B. J., Forge, A., & Corwin, J. T. (1993). Regenerative
proliferation in inner ear sensory epithelia from adult guinea pigs and humans. Science, 259
(5101), 1619–1622.
Wei, L. (2005). Adenovector pigment epithelium-derived factor (AdPEDF) delivery for wet
age-related macular degeneration. Retina, 25(8 Suppl.), S48–S49.
Yamasoba, T., Yagi, M., Roessler, B. J., Miller, J. M., & Raphael, Y. (1999). Inner ear transgene
expression after adenoviral vector inoculation in the endolymphatic sac. Human Gene Therapy,
10(5), 769–774.
Zine, A., & de Ribaupierre, F. (1998). Replacement of mammalian auditory hair cells.
NeuroReport, 9(2), 263–268.
8
Developing a Molecular Therapeutic for Hearing Loss
217

Chapter 9
Photons in the Ear
Xiaodong Tan, Nan Xia, and Claus-Peter Richter
Abstract Among neural prostheses, cochlear implants (CIs) are considered the
most successful devices. To date, they have beneﬁted more than 324,000 patients
with severe-to-profound hearing loss. CIs directly stimulate the auditory nerve and
restore some hearing. Despite the great success of the devices, the outcomes in
performance are variable. CI users often have difﬁculties in speech recognition in
challenging listening environments and their perception of music is limited. It has
been argued that performance correlates with the number of independent channels,
which can be used to transmit information to the brain. While physical properties of
the tissue result in a wide spread of the electrical current in contemporary devices
and limit the number of independent channels, other modes of stimulation may
provide an opportunity to increase spatial selectivity of neural stimulation and thus
increase the number of independent channels for information transfer. An
improvement in performance of the implant users is expected. This chapter provides
an overview of the opportunities and the contemporary challenges of neural stim-
ulation with light regarding auditory prostheses.
X. Tan  N. Xia  C.-P. Richter
Department of Otolaryngology, Northwestern University,
303 E. Chicago Ave., Chicago, IL 60611, USA
e-mail: xiaodong.tan@northwestern.edu
N. Xia
Key Laboratory of Biorheological Science and Technology,
Bioengineering College, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China
e-mail: loojourney@yahoo.com
C.-P. Richter (&)
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University,
2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
e-mail: cri529@northwestern.edu
C.-P. Richter
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, The Hugh Knowles Center,
Northwestern University, 2240 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
C.G. Le Prell et al. (eds.), Translational Research in Audiology, Neurotology,
and the Hearing Sciences, Springer Handbook of Auditory Research 58,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-40848-4_9
219

Keywords Cochlear implant  Infrared neural stimulation  Micro-light-emitting
diode  Optoacoustics  Optogenetics  Vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser
9.1
Introduction
Today, cochlear implants (CIs) have restored some hearing in more than 324,000
individuals with severe-to-profound deafness (NIDCD Information Clearinghouse
2015). Among neural prostheses, CIs are considered the most successful devices.
The average cochlear implant user can understand running speech under quiet
listening conditions. The scores in standard speech recognition tests for many of the
patients are higher than 50 % and can reach close to 100 % (Wilson and Dorman
2008; Amoodi et al. 2012; Friedmann et al. 2015). Despite the unparalleled success
of auditory prostheses, CI users are still challenged in noisy listening environments
and they have little music appreciation (Rubinstein 2004; Limb 2006). Improving
cochlear implants means overcoming existing constraints (Limb and Roy 2014).
Although biological constraints are difﬁcult or not possible to overcome, technical
constraints of cochlear implant devices can be addressed. Biological constraints
include all changes of the neural system that resulted in deafness. Technical con-
straints describe the device limitation when compared to the normal auditory
system.
9.1.1
Biological Constraints
Sensorineural hearing loss is associated with degenerative neurobiological and
physiological changes in the auditory periphery and the central pathway (for a
review, see Shepherd and Hardie 2001). These changes cannot be reversed by
technology and thus become the biological constraints for hearing restoration with
CIs. The most common and almost inevitable change is the degeneration and death
of spiral ganglion neurons (SGNs). Without the synaptic innervation with hair cells,
the dendrites tend to demyelinate and shrink, which eventually results in SGN
death. The signiﬁcantly reduced number of SGNs is one limiting factor for direct
electrical stimulation and hearing restoration.
The neuronal loss is typically nonuniform and results in “holes” of neurons
along the cochlea (Shannon et al. 2002). The nonuniform loss of neurons will
distort the frequency representation along the spiral ganglion. Imperfect or distorted
frequency perception is particularly unfavorable for speech recognition in noisy
listening environments and for music appreciation (Zeng et al. 2014). Nevertheless,
the good news is that studies on the maintenance and regeneration of SGN neurites
are underway (Mukherjea et al. 2015). Prospective new drugs, which can stimulate
the growth of the neural ﬁbers of SGNs are expected to help overcome this barrier
in the future (see, for example, Chap. 8 by Staecker, Klickstein, and Brough).
220
X. Tan et al.

Following cochlear damage, connections in the auditory brainstem and midbrain
appear to remain intact. Nevertheless, morphological and physiological changes
along the auditory pathway must occur and likely contribute to the limited ﬁdelity
of CIs (Ryugo et al. 1997; Redd et al. 2000; Tirko and Ryugo 2012). Morphological
changes include a decrease in the size of neurons, number of afferent inputs, and
size and density of synapses (Saada et al. 1996; Redd et al. 2002; Baker et al. 2010).
Physiological changes in response properties such as prolonged delay times, ele-
vated threshold, desynchronization, altered ﬁring patterns, and increased levels of
adaptation were also reported, which could occur either immediately or over the
long term after hair cell loss (Hartmann et al. 1984; van den Honert and
Stypulkowski 1984). These physiological changes are especially adverse to the
temporal resolution of the auditory system, which also inﬂuences the performance
of CI users. Along the auditory pathway, spatial activation increased after hearing
loss, and a loss of inhibitory inﬂuences was described. At the cortex, spatially larger
cortical activation was seen with positron emission tomography (Wong et al. 1999;
Naito et al. 2000; Limb et al. 2010). Although these changes could mean a plastic
reorganization and more intense use of remaining auditory networks (Truy et al.
1995; Naito et al. 2000; Green et al. 2008), they also indicated a reduced spatial
resolution and number of independent channels.
9.1.2
Technical Constraints
The hearing range for a normal-hearing individual is between 0.02 and 20 kHz
(*10 octaves) with a resolution as low as 0.1 octave and a loudness range of 0–
120 dB with a resolution as low as 1–2 dB. This is achieved by 3000–3500 inner
hair cells and about three times more outer hair cells, which provide more than 30
independent perceptual channels (Shannon et al. 2004; Shannon 2005). In contrast
to normal-hearing individuals, CI users’ “hearing range” is between 0.4 and 8 kHz
(*4.5 octaves) with a loudness range of 6–30 dB and about 20 discernible levels.
CI users have a largely reduced number of independent channels. The limitation
lies not only in the number of physical contacts, which at present is up to 22
channels, but also in the number of channels that can be used to simultaneously
process auditory information. Current spread and physical proximity of the chan-
nels often make the signals from adjacent channels indiscernible, so that there are
typically only four to eight independent channels available to CI users (Fishman
et al. 1997; Reiss et al. 2012; Snel-Bongers et al. 2012). Hence, the frequency
ﬁdelity is drastically reduced. Furthermore, during the implantation, the insertion
depth of the electrode arrays varies. This results in an uncertainty of the electrode
placement (Firszt et al. 2007; Snel-Bongers et al. 2012). Short insertion of the
electrode into the cochlea may impede the ability to stimulate the apical section of
the spiral ganglion, which accounts for the largely reduced perception below
0.4 kHz. Although adjustable to a certain degree, imprecise frequency representa-
tion of the electrode results in poorer performance of CI users (Baskent and
9
Photons in the Ear
221

Shannon 2005). Other factors that affect encoding of acoustic information include
the ability of the auditory nerve to generate action potentials in a given phase (phase
locking). Phase lock in the pristine cochlea is up to 5 kHz, while it decreases to less
than 0.3 kHz in CI users. Compared to the biological constraints, technical con-
straints might be easier to solve, and studies on new methods of stimulation and
new CI designs are underway.
9.2
Photons as Alternative Stimulation in CIs
The goal for neuroprostheses is to restore neural function of a healthy system.
Despite novel and better prostheses designs and better clinical implementation of
the neuroprostheses, there are several challenges that neurostimulation faces (for a
review, see Grill et al. 2009). In particular, the spread of current in the tissue makes
spatial selective stimulation difﬁcult or energy inefﬁcient. Novel stimulation
strategies and stimulation modalities are explored to overcome those technical
constraints. As an alternative to electrical stimulation, methods to control neural
activity by light have been explored recently. It has been argued that optical
methods could improve spatial selectivity and increase the ﬁdelity of neural pros-
theses. Stimulation of the neurons is spatially selective and does not require direct
contact between the electrode and the neural structure. Therefore, for cochlear
prostheses, neural stimulation with light may constitute a novel way to increase the
selectivity of the stimulation and the number of independent channels, which can be
used to encode the acoustic information. Optical methods include optogenetics
(Hernandez et al. 2014; Jeschke and Moser 2015), optoacoustics (Wenzel et al.
2009; Zhang et al. 2009; Schultz et al. 2012b), and infrared neural stimulation
(Izzo et al. 2006). Each of the methods has its own merits and challenges.
9.2.1
Optogenetics
It has been demonstrated that neurons can be made sensitive to irradiation with
visible light by expressing an ion channel, channel rhodopsins (ChR), in their cell
membrane (Boyden et al. 2005). To explore optical stimulation with blue light in
the cochlea, transgenic mice were engineered to express ChR2 in the somata,
dendrites, and axons of SGNs but not in cochlear hair cells. Auditory responses
could be evoked in those mice by using a blue light source (Hernandez et al. 2014).
Selectivity of the optical stimulation was demonstrated by masking the response to
the optical stimulus with an acoustic stimulus and by determining spatial tuning
curves obtained from neural activity recorded from the inferior colliculus during
optical stimulation. The stimulation threshold was 2 µJ/mm2, with a dynamic range
for the responses of more than 20 dB (Moser et al. 2013; Hernandez et al. 2014;
Jeschke and Moser 2015). The minimal latency for the response was 3.1 ms. The
222
X. Tan et al.

width of the spatial tuning curves was 475 ± 65.5 µm for optogenetic stimulation,
which was smaller when compared to the width of the spatial tuning curves
obtained during acoustic pure-tone stimulation (666.7 ± 95.7 µm) or monopolar
electrical stimulation (828.6 ± 101.7 µm). In addition to using transgenic animals,
the authors also crossed the Thy1.2-driven ChR2 transgene with OtoPga/Pga mice to
express ChR2 in their SGNs to mimic a model to rescue from early onset of genetic
deafness. The channel was also expressed in SGNs using a viral vector. At present,
efﬁcient and cell-speciﬁc expression of the optogenetic tool has been observed for
adenovirus carrier (AAV2) (for a review, see Richter and Tan 2014; Jeschke and
Moser 2015; Moser 2015). After transfection, neural responses could be evoked by
direct irradiation of the neurons up to 60 Hz, the current limit of their stimulation
setup (Hernandez et al. 2014).
The optogenetic tool was not only tested in the cochlea. ChR2 was also tran-
siently expressed in guinea pig and rat brainstems via a single injection of
adeno-associated virus vector carrying the target gene. After a survival period of 2–
3 weeks, a broad pattern of expression of the channel was observed in the cochlear
nucleus 2–3 weeks after the injection (Acker et al. 2011). Neural responses showed
a broad pattern of excitation in the central nucleus of the inferior colliculus
(ICC) similar to electric stimulation (Darrow et al. 2013b) or to an acoustic click
(Darrow et al. 2013a).
The potential of optogenetics for the auditory system lies in its known mecha-
nism, while the challenges lie in the dynamics of the channels. Typically, ChR2 can
be used to generate action potentials at a rate of about 70 Hz (Hernandez et al.
2014). This is slower than the neural activity in the normal auditory system. Tissue
will signiﬁcantly scatter light in the visible wavelength range and selective stim-
ulation will require the light source in close proximity to the target structure (for a
review, see, e.g., Richter and Tan 2014). Another challenge for optogenetics as a
tool in prostheses used in humans lies in the requirement to introduce exogenous
genes. Although not established as a routine treatment in clinical practice, gene
therapy is currently being explored in humans. Many reviews and opinion papers
have recently been published on this topic (Liu et al. 2003; Pezzoli et al. 2012; Cox
et al. 2015), and it has also been addressed in Chap. 8 by Staecker, Klickstein, and
Brough.
9.2.2
Optoacoustics
Optoacoustics describes a photothermal effect that results from the absorption of
photons by the target structure. After the absorption, the photon energy is converted
into heat, leading to rapid heating of the irradiated volume. The resulting ther-
moelastic expansion will propagate as a wave with a measurable pressure. The
pressure is particularly large if the pulse duration is shorter than the propagation
time for a stress wave from the irradiated volume. In a simpliﬁed view, for pulse
durations shorter than 1 µs, the condition has been described as stress conﬁned
9
Photons in the Ear
223

(Tuchin 2000; Niemz 2004; Welch and van Gemert 2012). Recently, it has been
reported that for pulse durations that are orders of magnitude longer than 1 µs,
audible stress waves can be generated (Teudt et al. 2011; Schultz et al. 2012a, b). It
has been suggested that light-induced pressure waves can be used to mechanically
stimulate the cochlea (Wenzel et al. 2009; Zhang et al. 2009; Schultz et al. 2012b).
Laser-induced pressure waves vibrate the basilar membrane and stimulate inner and
outer hair cells. The inner hair cells are required to transform the acoustic signal
into action potentials on the auditory nerve. Since the acoustic signal is similar to an
acoustic click, it is counterintuitive that the stimulation results in a selective
stimulation of the cochlea. Nevertheless, it has been demonstrated that infrared laser
pulses generate a focused pressure wave in front of the optical ﬁber (Fridberger and
Ren 2006; Teudt et al. 2011).
Wenzel et al. (2009) used a laser that emits green light (the crystal used as a
lasing medium in this laser is a neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet or
short Nd:YAG laser, k = 532 nm, sp = 10 ns, f = 10 Hz, Q = 0–23 J/pulse) to
stimulate the cochlea of guinea pigs. They were able to evoke auditory brainstem
responses in hearing animals. The response could not be evoked in deaf animals.
For radiation wavelengths in the near infrared, the responses correlated with the
water absorption for the photons. Furthermore, a positive correlation for responses
in the cochlea to optical stimulation occurred at k = 600–800 nm, the absorption
coefﬁcient of hemoglobin (Schultz et al. 2012b).
The important message from the experiments is that all stimuli at radiation
wavelengths in the infrared will heat the target volume and will generate stress
relaxation waves. Consequently, when the technique is considered for scientiﬁc
applications or for prosthetics, the issues of thermal damage and stress-related
effects must be addressed. For sensorineural hearing loss, optoacoustic effects will
be inefﬁcient because of the missing hair cells, and therefore this is unlikely to
become a major player in development of improvements in auditory prosthesis.
9.2.3
Infrared Neural Stimulation of the Cochlea
Infrared neural stimulation (INS) of the cochlea has been studied in gerbil, mouse,
guinea pig, and cat. Experiments were conducted in normal-hearing, acutely
deafened, and chronically deaf animals. Typically, animals are rendered acutely
deaf by the direct injection of neomycin into scala tympani (Schultz et al. 2012b;
Thompson et al. 2015; Young et al. 2015). To render animals chronically deaf,
either neomycin is injected into the middle ear (Richter et al. 2008; Young et al.
2015) or an intraperitoneal injection of kanamycin followed by an intravenous
injection of a diuretic drug such as furosemide is used (Thompson et al. 2015). The
rigorousness of the drug use determines the degree of cochlear damage. In animals
with some remaining hearing, cochlear function was lost in the cochlear base, while
cochlear function was compromised only in the cochlear apex. Typically, responses
224
X. Tan et al.

to pure tones were absent at high frequencies (above 16 kHz) and elevated at low
frequencies (below 16 kHz).
In gerbils, an infrared laser (the crystal used as a lasing medium in this laser was
a holmium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet or short Ho:YAG laser, k = 2.12 µm,
sp = 250 µs, f = 2 Hz, Q = 0–127 µJ/pulse) was used to stimulate the auditory
nerve (Izzo et al. 2006). The laser was coupled to a 200-µm-diameter optical ﬁber,
which was placed in front of the cochlear round window. The optical beam was
directed toward the SGNs. Compound action potentials (CAPs) were evoked in
response to the laser pulses. Note, responses could be evoked in hearing and in deaf
animals missing all hair cells (Fig. 3 in Izzo et al. 2006). An increase in radiation
energy induced a monotonic increase in the evoked response. Input–output curves
are variable across animals. Differences are likely caused by the physiological state
of each cochlea and differences in optical ﬁber placement. In acutely deafened and
in chronically deaf gerbils, thresholds for optically evoked CAPs were not signif-
icantly elevated for short pulse durations (Richter et al. 2008). Experiments were
also conducted with different infrared diode lasers from Aculight (the laser medium
is formed by a p–n junction of a semiconductor diode similar to that found in a
light-emitting diode; k = 1844–1940 nm, sp = 5 µs–1 ms; f = 2–1000 Hz) to
characterize the patterns of the CAPs (Izzo et al. 2007b, 2008). Moreover, the
responses of single auditory nerve ﬁbers were recorded during optical stimulation.
The recordings from low-spontaneous-rate neurons showed on average a ﬁring
efﬁciency of approximately 40 % at 200-Hz laser stimulation rate (Littleﬁeld et al.
2008).
Spatial selective stimulation of the auditory nerve with infrared radiation was
demonstrated in three series of experiments in the cochlea: (1) immunohistochem-
ical staining for c-Fos (Izzo et al. 2007a), (2) tone-on-light masking (Matic et al.
2011), and (3) recording of neural responses in the inferior colliculus and con-
structing corresponding spatial tuning curves (Fig. 9.1) (Richter et al. 2011). The
transiently expressed transcription factor c-Fos was used to stain activated nerve
cells and to identify the spatial area of the cochlea that was stimulated with a Ho:
YAG laser (k = 2.12 µm, sp = 350 µs, f = 2 Hz, H = 60 mJ/cm2), which was
coupled to a 100-µm optical ﬁber. Immunohistochemical staining for c-Fos in the
cochlea showed a small area of optical stimulation, which occurred directly
opposite to the optical ﬁber (Izzo et al. 2007b). This pattern of c-Fos staining is in
contrast to that after electrical stimulation. Electrical stimulation leads to a large,
more spatially extended population of labeled, activated neurons.
Spatial selectivity has also been determined with tone-on-light masking (Matic
et al. 2011). Laser pulses with ﬁxed optical parameters were delivered with a 200-
µm optical ﬁber and were presented simultaneously with an acoustic tone. The tone
was variable in frequency and level. Tone-on-light masking in gerbils revealed
tuning curves with best frequencies between 5.3 and 11.2 kHz. The width of the
tone-on-light tuning curves was similar to the width of tone-on-tone tuning curves.
9
Photons in the Ear
225

The results indicate that the spatial area of INS in the gerbil cochlea is similar to the
cochlear area excited by a low-level acoustic tone, showing promising results for
future use of INS in implantable cochlear prostheses (Matic et al. 2011).
The spatial selectivity of INS in the acutely damaged cochlea of guinea pigs was
determined from neural activity recorded in the ICC during INS (Fig. 9.1). Results
obtained with INS were compared to stimulation with acoustic tone pips in
normal-hearing animals. For the measurements, the radiation was delivered via a
200-µm-diameter optical ﬁber, which was inserted through a cochleostomy into
scala tympani of the basal cochlear turn. ICC responses were recorded in response
to cochlear INS using a multichannel penetrating electrode array. Spatial tuning
curves were constructed from the responses. The majority of ICC spatial tuning
curves indicated that the spread of activation evoked by optical stimuli is compa-
rable to that produced by acoustic tone pips.
Fig. 9.1 Examples of activity plots from the central nucleus of the inferior colliculus (ICC) in
response to INS in cochlea. Each contour has been taken from a different animal. Color bars
provide the cumulative d′ values (a). (b, c) Characteristics of optically and acoustically evoked
spatial tuning curves (STCs). STC widths for d′ values between 1.5 and 3 at steps of 0.5. The
width of the STCs increased with d′ values (b). STC widths for optical (diamonds) and acoustical
(circles) stimuli at a d = 2 are presented (c). On average, the widths for optical stimulation were
357 ± 206 lm and 383 ± 131 lm for pure-tone stimulation. Differences were statistically
signiﬁcant (p < 0.05). (Modiﬁed from Richter et al. 2011, Figs. 6 and 7)
226
X. Tan et al.

9.2.4
Stimulation of the Vestibular Nerve
At present, the ﬁrst prostheses to stimulate the vestibular nerve have been tested
(Della Santina et al. 2010; Golub et al. 2014; Phillips et al. 2015). The devices use
electrical current for neural stimulation and aim to reduce imbalance and disori-
entation caused by vestibular dysfunction. Like cochlear implants, vestibular
prostheses suffer from current spread in the tissue. As a result, unintended stimu-
lation of semicircular canal(s) occurs. As for the cochlea, INS had been explored as
a novel method for stimulation of the vestibular system. Harris et al. (2009) irra-
diated the vestibular nerve with infrared light (wavelength k = 1840 nm, pulse
length sp = 10 µs–1 ms, and radiant power of 200 mW). They evoked neural
responses from the eighth nerve at a location where vestibular and auditory ﬁbers
were present. While direct irradiation of the ampullae produced an evoked potential
at the maximum radiation energy obtained from the diode laser, no eye movements
resulted from the stimulation, suggesting that no vestibulo-ocular reﬂex was
activated.
In a subsequent study, Rajguru et al. (2010a, b) showed that INS can activate
vestibular hair cells. Initial experiments were conducted in toadﬁsh, Opsanus tau.
Afferents of the horizontal semicircular canal showed inhibitory and excitatory
responses evoked by irradiating the neuroepithelium, which houses the sensory hair
cells. Some afferents reduced their average activity during irradiation, while others
increased their activity. In addition to the well-deﬁned excitatory or inhibitory
behavior of the recorded neural units, a smaller subset of afferents displayed a
mixed response composed of an onset inhibitory response followed by an excitatory
phase with tonic stimulation. Primary semicircular canal afferents in the toadﬁsh are
known to receive convergent inhibitory [c-aminobutyric acid (GABA)] and exci-
tatory (glutamate) synaptic input from hair cells (Holstein et al. 2004a, b). Data
from those studies indicated that afferents receiving glutamatergic inputs may
increase their discharge rate with INS. This is consistent with depolarization of hair
cells and increased tonic release of glutamate. On the other hand, afferents that
synapse on combinations of glutamatergic and GABAergic hair cells were observed
to reduce their discharge rate with INS.
The results obtained in the ﬁsh have been recently conﬁrmed in the chinchilla
(Boutros et al. 2013). Because these single-unit responses included a mix of large
excitatory, inhibitory, and mixed responses from canal afferents, it is unclear
whether
infrared
stimulation
can
evoke
signiﬁcant
vestibulo-ocular
reﬂex
(VOR) eye movement responses. Initial results of INS in the chinchilla vestibular
system (using the following laser parameters: k = 1870 nm, sp = 200–350 µs,
f = 200–400 Hz) included the demonstration of eye movements during IR stimu-
lation in two out of four chinchillas (Boutros et al. 2013).
For the vestibular system, it remains to be demonstrated that INS is spatially
selective. Furthermore, it has not been demonstrated that stimulation of afferent
nerve ﬁbers from individual canals can be achieved once they have collected in the
nerve trunk.
9
Photons in the Ear
227

9.2.5
Challenges and Progress on Optical Stimulation
in Cochlea
Implementing optical methods has its own challenges. Although the results from
various animal models show that the auditory nerve can be stimulated with light
after the neurons are sensitized with an optogenetic tool or cochleas with residual
hearing are stimulated with infrared radiation, it is not completely clear how a
prosthesis based on light can be realized in the near future and whether it will
improve contemporary technology.
The parameter space for the optical source has to fulﬁll the following require-
ments to be suitable for use in the auditory system. First of all, the light sources
cannot be large devices because they will be inserted into the cochlea. They should
be able to deliver light pulses at least at 200 Hz with precise temporal control of the
pulse delivery and radiant power. Light sources are typically small lasers or
micro-light-emitting diodes (µLEDs). For optogenetic applications, light sources
with sharp spectral tuning at the activation wavelength of the optogenetic tool are
required because microbial opsin-derived tools can be deactivated by light of
wavelengths near the activation wavelength (Berndt et al. 2009). Second, the ratio
of number of photons emitted to the number of electrons passing though the light
source (external quantum efﬁciency) must be high. Electrons not converted to
photons contribute to heating of the cochlea, with the possibility of damages from
the temperature increase.
For a comparison, electrical stimulation requires about 10 times less energy per
pulse to evoke an action potential than optogenetic approaches have reported
(Hernandez et al. 2014) and about 100 times less than INS would require (Richter
and Tan 2014). It has to be shown that the potential increase in the number of
perceptual channels in an optical implant outweighs the additional energy required
for stimulation.
Progress on implantable optical prostheses in cochlea has been made. Today, a
single-channel and a three-channel light delivery and stimulation control system has
been developed by Lockheed Martin Aculight (Bothell, WA) for the cat cochlea. It
is a wireless, battery-powered unit (<200 g) for chronic stimulation studies in
large-animal models (i.e., cat). Three individually controllable lasers are housed in
the smaller package, which can be carried in a backpack. Real-time control of all
laser parameters, including power (0–250 mW), repetition rate (0–300 Hz), pulse
width (50 µs–1 ms), and wavelength (1.85–1.87 µm), has been achieved. All data
(stimulation inputs and recorded outputs) are time stamped, sorted, saved, and
easily accessible from a graphical user interface. In a recent modiﬁcation, a
breakaway interface connector allows for attachment/detachment of various optical
ﬁber-based implantable light delivery systems with up to three channels with <1 %
variability in optical transmission (Xia et al. 2015).
Other options to deliver the light include optical ﬁbers or waveguides. While
optical ﬁbers may be suitable for a low-density prosthesis application, optical ﬁbers
are not suitable for prostheses that encode more dense information, such as cochlear
228
X. Tan et al.

implants and visual prostheses. In cochlear applications, optical ﬁbers face another
challenge. They are stiff and the bending radius is not large enough to safely place
the ﬁbers along the cochlea. The ﬁbers may break during the insertion or they
damage cochlear tissue (Balster et al. 2014). Even though a single optical ﬁber was
chronically implanted into a cat cochlea for chronic stimulation (Matic et al. 2013),
the multichannel optical ﬁber bundles, which are used to irradiate neurons along
one-half of the basal turn, are unlikely a solution for a chronically implanted light
delivery system (Fig. 9.2).
In addition to the type of optical source used, the placement of the source has
implications for the prosthesis design. An external source would allow for a higher
power, larger battery capacity, and easy modiﬁcations to the stimulating source.
However, by transmitting the optical energy transcutaneously, a signiﬁcant portion
of the optical power would be lost. Percutaneous links, although possible, are much
less desirable because of the risk of infection. A fully implantable optical prosthesis
is desirable because it eliminates the transcutaneous link except for battery
charging. However, implanted optical sources need to be more efﬁcient than
externally mounted sources to reduce the heat generated by powering the device. It
remains to be seen if a solid-state device can be constructed with the size and power
requirements to be fully implanted and to stimulate neurons.
Fig. 9.2 Micro
computed
tomography
(microCT)
images
of two
examples
showing
a
three-channel light delivery system inserted into a cat cochlea (a, b). Sketches of the above
microCT images showing the sites of irradiation. SV, scala vestibuli; SG, spiral ganglion; N,
neurons (c, d)
9
Photons in the Ear
229

A novel laser technology is evolving that will help in miniaturizing the stimu-
lation source. Vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs) are available for
discrete wavelengths between 473 and 1064 mm, and are currently being developed
for 1855 nm (Vixar, Plymouth, MN). VCSELs can be a few micrometers in size
and can be placed close to the target structure. The challenge to place the optical
source close to the neural structure is the heat development of the source. Only a
fraction of the energy used by the light source is converted into photons; the rest is
converted to heat. Local heating constitutes a problem. First prototypes for such
optrodes have been presented recently (Xia et al. 2015). The same control unit for
the three-channel system can be used to power multichannel optrodes with infrared
VCSELs.
µLEDs possess a narrow spectral line width and a high temporal ﬁdelity. They
are an attractive light source for benchtop optogenetic applications (Hernandez
et al. 2014). Recently, an individually controllable, high-power blue µLED array
was fabricated and implanted in cats (Fig. 9.3) and will be tested for optogenetic
application. Again, µLEDs generate substantial heat and their in vivo use requires
caution to avoid heat damage of the tissue.
Fig. 9.3 Optrode fabrication. Step 1: µLEDs were placed on top of a 125-lm-diameter silver wire
with all cathodes connected on the wire (also serving as a heat sink) using conductive silver epoxy.
Step 2: The anodes of µLEDs were connected to the Teﬂon-coated silver wires (75 lm, black
arrows) with conductive silver epoxy. The white bar on the lower right equals 1 mm (a). The tip
of an implantable four-channel µLED optrode array with silicon embedded. The scale bars at the
bottom are spaced 1 mm apart (b). The insertion of the optrode array into a cadaveric cat cochlea.
The hollow star shows the round window, the solid star shows the cochleostomy accessing the
scala tympani, and the solid triangle shows the optrode array (c). One µLED of the
inserted optrode array is emitting in cadaveric cat cochlea. The white bar on the lower right
equals 3 mm (d)
230
X. Tan et al.

9.3
Mechanisms for Stimulation with Light
Photon–tissue interactions are complex and determined by the laser parameters and
the tissue properties. Spot size, radiation wavelength, pulse duration, pulse repeti-
tion rate, and radiant energy, for example, characterize the laser properties, while
absorption and scattering are important tissue properties. For both optogenetics and
INS, a chromophore exists that absorbs the photons.
In optogenetics, the molecular chromophores are exogenous molecules, which
are introduced into the tissue. The conversion of the photon energy results in a
molecular conformational change, which opens an ion channel, allowing the control
of neural activity (Zhang et al. 2006; Yizhar et al. 2011; Bernstein et al. 2012). The
selection of the optogenetic tool determines whether excitation or inhibition can be
achieved. As both inhibition and excitation are possible, the technique can be used
to study and change the dynamics of neural networks.
In INS, the photon energy is converted into heat. Heating of the target structure
results in both optoacoustic and other photothermal effects. It is unlikely that
pulsed, mid-infrared lasers, such as the FEL, Ho:YAG, or Aculight diode lasers,
evoke neural responses via a photochemical reaction. The photon energies are
below the energies required to move an electron to an excited state, as is needed for
a photochemical reaction. For example, the energy in individual photons from the
Ho:YAG is approximately 0.58 eV. The value corresponds to approximately
52 kJ/mol bond energy. Typical ion bond energies are larger and are in the range of
100–1000 kJ/mol. Furthermore, data from Wells et al. did not identify a particular
wavelength between 2 and 10 µm at which the laser stimulation was signiﬁcantly
enhanced, which would have suggested a photochemical reaction (Wells et al.
2007).
9.3.1
Photothermal Effects: Temperature-Sensitive Ion
Channels
Photothermal effects include the activation of heat-sensitive ion channels (Rhee
et al. 2008; Albert et al. 2012), changing the dynamics of ion channels (Wells et al.
2007; Feng et al. 2010), the increase of intracellular calcium (Rhee et al. 2008;
Rajguru et al. 2010b; Dittami et al. 2011), and the change in membrane capacitance
(Shapiro et al. 2012; Liu et al. 2014).
It has been proposed that the mechanism for INS is the direct activation of
heat-sensitive ion channels such as transient receptor potential (vanilloid) or TRPV
channels (Caterina et al. 1997; Güler et al. 2002; Albert et al. 2012). TRPV1 is
perhaps best known for being activated by the chemical capsaicin, the main ingre-
dient in hot chili peppers that produces a burning sensation. TRPV1 channels are
also stimulated by other vanilloid compounds, acid (pH < 5.9), and heat (>43 °C),
making it a key channel in peripheral nociception. TRPV channels are found in
9
Photons in the Ear
231

small neurons, including the sciatic nerve, the dorsal root, and trigeminal ganglia of
rats (Caterina et al. 1997), as well as cochlear structures of both the rat and guinea pig
(Balaban et al. 2003; Takumida et al. 2005; Zheng et al. 2003) and have been
identiﬁed in vestibular neurons (Albert et al. 2012).
Rhee et al. (2008) stimulated cultured primary sensory neurons from the inferior
ganglia of rat, which express the vanilloid transient receptor ion channel (TRPV1).
Laser pulses (k = 1,850 nm) from a diode laser were delivered with a 200-µm silica
to stimulate the neuron cultures. During laser stimulation, the authors monitored the
intracellular calcium concentration using the ﬂuorescent calcium indicator fura-2.
Short trains of 2-ms infrared pulses (*5 W instantaneous power) activated the
TRPV1 ion channels rapidly and reversibly. Identical INS did not increase intra-
cellular calcium in the absence of extracellular calcium or after the application of a
TRPV1-channel blocker. In a different set of experiments, Albert et al. (2012)
suggested that TRPV4 channels mediate the infrared laser–evoked response in
sensory neurons. They showed in whole cell patch-clamp recordings that
voltage-gated calcium and sodium channels contribute to a laser-evoked neuronal
voltage variation. The application of micromolar concentration of ruthenium red
and RN 1734 blocked the responses. The results suggested that the TRPV channels
are the primary effectors of the chain reaction triggered by mid-infrared laser
irradiation. Findings that argue against an activation of TRPV channels were
obtained in studies conducted in dorsal root and the inferior ganglion of the vagus
nerve (nodose ganglion) neurons. The results showed that depolarizations evoked
by INS have multiphasic kinetics comprising fast and slow components (Katz et al.
2010). For their experiments, Katz et al. irradiated the neuron cultures with 5- to
10-ms pulses of k = 1889 nm. They found a near-uniform distribution of respon-
sive neurons with increased membrane conductance, and the negative reversal
potential value (−41 ± 2.9 mV) suggests that INS is unrelated to the activation of
heat-sensitive TRPV1 channels. The long duration of the responses to INS favors
an involvement of second messengers.
9.3.2
Photomechanical Effects
For photomechanical effects, both laser-induced stress waves and volumetric
thermal expansion must be considered as a mechanism for stimulation. Wells et al.
(2007) measured cell surface displacements using differential phase optical coher-
ence tomography (DP-OCT), which could result from heat-induced volumetric
expansions. Pressure measurements with a needle hydrophone revealed values
below 1 bar. From their experiments, they argued against a photomechanical
mechanism from stress wave generation.
Laser-induced pressure waves in water are well documented for experiments
with high local absorption. Pulsed 1850-nm laser light generates a measurable
pressure (Teudt et al. 2011; Schultz et al. 2012a, b). Teudt et al. (2011) reported that
for the laser’s maximum energy levels and with a 200-µm-diameter optical ﬁber,
232
X. Tan et al.

the peak-to-peak sound pressure can reach 62 dB SPL in air. Because the cochlea is
ﬁlled by endo- and perilymph, it is of interest to what extent laser-induced sound
waves exist when the absorbing volume is signiﬁcantly decreased by immersion in
water. Measurements in a swimming pool showed that radiant exposures of
0.35 J/cm2 generated a pressure of 31 mPa in water. Note, radiant exposure at
stimulation threshold for INS is about 0.016 J/cm2.
It has been stated that the energy required for a primary photomechanical
mechanism is much higher than those used by Wells et al. (2007) and Izzo et al.
(2006). Valid arguments include that the parameter space of INS is outside stress
conﬁnement. Stress conﬁnement occurs when the optical energy accumulates in the
tissue before a laser-induced stress wave can propagate out of the irradiated area,
leading to large stress waves. For stress conﬁnement to occur when irradiating with
these wavelengths, the pulse duration should be shorter than 500 ns, which is orders
of magnitudes shorter than the pulse durations used for optical stimulation. On the
other hand, results have been indicating that INS in the cochlea is dominated by a
mechanical event and the stimulation of remaining hair cells (Baumhoff et al. 2013;
Thompson et al. 2015). The discrepancies have not been completely resolved at this
point, and direct stimulation of SGNs with INS is shown in other studies (Young
et al. 2015).
9.3.3
Heat-Induced Capacitive Change of the Cell
Membrane
Using oocytes, Human Embryonic Kidney 293 cells (HEK293 cells), and artiﬁcial
lipid membranes, it has been demonstrated that infrared light excites cells through a
general electrostatic mechanism. Infrared pulses are absorbed by water, producing a
rapid local increase in temperature. This heating reversibly alters the electrical
capacitance of the plasma membrane, depolarizing the target cell. This mechanism
is fully reversible and requires only the most basic properties of cell membranes
(Shapiro et al. 2012). The ﬁndings by Shapiro et al. are supported by a recent study
in which initial results show that pulsed infrared radiation rapidly alters the
capacitance of the membrane through charge redistribution and evokes mitochon-
drial Ca2+ currents (Liu et al. 2013). Although causality has not been shown, the
present results are consistent with the hypothesis that these biophysical events
underlie infrared entrainment of miniature postsynaptic currents. Several authors
discussed the crucial role of mitochondria and calcium ions in the mechanism for
INS (Rajguru et al. 2010b; Dittami et al. 2011). In a recent series of experiments, it
has been shown that pulsed infrared radiation consistently evoked calcium-related
responses in neurons (Lumbreras et al. 2013).
9
Photons in the Ear
233

9.4
Conclusions and Future Directions
Recent research efforts have demonstrated that optical radiation can be used to
stimulate neurons. With the development of compact light sources to evoke neural
responses, it has been validated that stimulation with optical radiation is spatially
selective. Stimulation with optical radiation has advantages and limitations when
compared with stimulation with electric current. The differences between stimula-
tion modalities could be selectively exploited for the next generation of neural
interfaces and as a neurophysiology research tool.
With the objective to design and build INS prostheses, it is extremely important
to understand the mechanism. Improved understanding will allow optimization of
the laser parameter space and will aid the long-term safety of INS. Further work to
understand the effect of beam quality (e.g., focused vs. collimated beam) on
stimulation will aid in the design of efﬁcient research and clinical stimulators.
The advancement of optogenetics and thermogenics also requires the develop-
ment of enabling technology. Visible light is largely scattered in tissue and requires
small light sources to be placed close to the target structures. These needs for the
ﬁeld will nurture engineering attempts for building small and powerful light sources
and the development of advanced and more efﬁcient waveguides.
The biggest challenge for optogenetics will be the translation into the clinic. It
has to be demonstrated that expression of the optogenetics tools is safe.
Furthermore, it will be important to show that effective stimulation of selected
structures is possible in large volumes, different from those present in small rodents
such as mice. This work is still in its early phase. However, it holds promise for the
future given the potential opportunity for more precise stimulation of speciﬁc target
neural populations and that with more channels may come improved performance
in noisy listening environments or for the appreciation of music.
An additional challenge for optical stimulation is the relatively slow repetition
rate of pulses that can be achieved. For INS, the heat that is generated from the
infrared light during stimulation must be removed accordingly. Heat removal is
limited in its speed. Therefore, fast pulse repetition rates would result in the heating
and damage of the neural structures of the cochlea. For optogenetics, the speed is
limited by the dynamics of the optogenetic tools, the ion channels. The develop-
ment of novel sensitive channels is required to meet this need. Likewise, novel
coding strategies must be developed that accommodate the limited repetition rates
at each electrode but take advantage of the increased number of channels at which
stimulation can occur simultaneously.
Compliance with Ethics Requirements
Xiaodong Tan declares that he has no conﬂict of interest.
Nan Xia declares that she has no conﬂict of interest. Nan Xia was supported bu the
China scholarship council.Claus-Peter Richter is the founding Chief technology
Ofﬁcer (CTO) of Resonance Medical, LLC, and is inventor on several patents
pertaining to optical stimulation and the design of optical implant electrodes.
234
X. Tan et al.

Acknowledgments This work has been funded by the NIDCD, R01-DC011855.
References
Acker, L., Huang, B., Hancock, K. E., Hauswirth, W., Boyden, E. S., et al. (2011).
Channelrhodopsin-2 gene transfection of central auditory neurons: Toward an optical
prosthesis. Abstracts of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 34, 484.
Albert, E. S., Bec, J. M., Desmadryl, G., Chekroud, K., Travo, C., et al. (2012). TRPV4 channels
mediate the infrared laser-evoked response in sensory neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology,
107, 3227–3234.
Amoodi, H. A., Mick, P. T., Shipp, D. B., Friesen, L. M., Nedzelski, J. M., et al. (2012). Results
with cochlear implantation in adults with speech recognition scores exceeding current criteria.
Otology & Neurotology, 33, 6–12.
Baker, C. A., Montey, K. L., Pongstaporn, T., & Ryugo, D. K. (2010). Postnatal development of
the endbulb of held in congenitally deaf cats. Frontiers in Neuroanatomy, 4, 19.
Balaban, C. D., Zhou, J., & Li, H. (2003). Type 1 vanilloid receptor expression by mammalian
inner ear ganglion cells. Hearing Research, 175, 165–170.
Balster, S., Wenzel, G. I., Warnecke, A., Steffens, M., Rettenmaier, A., et al. (2014). Optical
cochlear implant: Evaluation of insertion forces of optical ﬁbres in a cochlear model and of
traumata in human temporal bones. Biomedizinische Technik/Biomedical Engineering, 59, 19–
28.
Baskent, D., & Shannon, R. V. (2005). Interactions between cochlear implant electrode insertion
depth and frequency-place mapping. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 117,
1405–1416.
Baumhoff, P., Schultz, M., Kallweit, N., Krueger, A., Ripken, T., et al. (2013). Midbrain activity
evoked by pulsed laser light. Poster 135, 2013 Conference on Implantable Auditory Prostheses,
Lake Tahoe.
Berndt, A., Yizhar, O., Gunaydin, L. A., Hegemann, P., & Deisseroth, K. (2009). Bi-stable neural
state switches. Nature Neuroscience, 12, 229–234.
Bernstein, J. G., Garrity, P. A., & Boyden, E. S. (2012). Optogenetics and thermogenetics:
Technologies for controlling the activity of targeted cells within intact neural circuits. Current
Opinion in Neurobiology, 22, 61–71.
Boutros, P. J., Ahn, J., Fridman, G. Y., Dai, C., Lasker, D., & Della Santina, C. C. (2013).
Vestibulo-ocular reﬂex eye movement responses to infra-red laser stimulation of the
mammalian labyrinth. Abstracts of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 36, 255.
Boyden, E. S., Zhang, F., Bamberg, E., Nagel, G., & Deisseroth, K. (2005). Millisecond-timescale,
genetically targeted optical control of neural activity. Nature Neuroscience, 8, 1263–1268.
Caterina, M. J., Schumacher, M. A., Tominaga, M., Rosen, T. A., Levine, J. D., & Julius, D.
(1997). The capsaicin receptor: A heat-activated ion channel in the pain pathway. Nature, 389,
816–824.
Cox, D. B., Platt, R. J., & Zhang, F. (2015). Therapeutic genome editing: Prospects and
challenges. Nature Medicine, 21, 121–131.
Darrow, K., Slama, M., Kempﬂe, J., Boyden, E. S., Polley, D., et al. (2013a). Optogenetic control
of central auditory neurons. Abstracts of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology,
36, 695.
Darrow, K., Slama, M., Kempﬂe, J., Boyden, E. S., Polley, D., et al. (2013b). A comparison of
electrical and optical activation of midbrain and cortical pathways in mice expressing
channelrhodopsin-2 in the cochlear nucleus. Abstracts of the Association for Research in
Otolaryngology, 36, 265.
Della Santina, C. C., Migliaccio, A. A., Hayden, R., Melvin, T. A., Fridman, G. Y., et al. (2010).
Current and future management of bilateral loss of vestibular sensation: An update on the Johns
9
Photons in the Ear
235

Hopkins Multichannel Vestibular Prosthesis Project. Cochlear Implants International, 11
(Suppl. 2), 2–11.
Dittami, G. M., Rajguru, S. M., Lasher, R. A., Hitchcock, R. W., & Rabbitt, R. D. (2011).
Intracellular calcium transients evoked by pulsed infrared radiation in neonatal cardiomy-
ocytes. Journal of Physiology, 589, 1295–1306.
Feng, H. J., Kao, C., Gallagher, M. J., Jansen, E. D., Mahadevan-Jansen, A., et al. (2010).
Alteration of GABAergic neurotransmission by pulsed infrared laser stimulation. Journal of
Neuroscience Methods, 192, 110–114.
Firszt, J. B., Koch, D. B., Downing, M., & Litvak, L. (2007). Current steering creates additional
pitch percepts in adult cochlear implant recipients. Otology & Neurotology, 28, 629–636.
Fishman, K. E., Shannon, R. V., & Slattery, W. H. (1997). Speech recognition as a function of the
number of electrodes used in the SPEAK cochlear implant speech processor. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 40, 1201–1215.
Fridberger, A., & Ren, T. (2006). Local mechanical stimulation of the hearing organ by laser
irradiation. NeuroReport, 17, 33–37.
Friedmann, D. R., Green, J., Fang, Y., Ensor, K., Roland, J. T., & Waltzman, S. B. (2015).
Sequential bilateral cochlear implantation in the adolescent population. The Laryngoscope, 125
(8), 1952–1958.
Golub, J. S., Ling, L., Nie, K., Nowack, A., Shepherd, S. J., et al. (2014). Prosthetic implantation
of the human vestibular system. Otology & Neurotology, 35, 136–147.
Green, K. M., Ramsden, R. T., Julyan, P. J., & Hastings, D. E. (2008). Cortical plasticity in the
ﬁrst year after cochlear implantation. Cochlear Implants International, 9, 103–117.
Grill, W. M., Norman, S. E., & Bellamkonda, R. V. (2009). Implanted neural interfaces:
Biochallenges and engineered solutions. Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering, 11, 1–24.
Güler, A. D., Lee, H., Iida, T., Shimizu, I., Tominaga, M., & Caterina, M. (2002). Heat-evoked
activation of the ion channel, TRPV4. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 6408–6414.
Harris, D. M., Bierer, S. M., Wells, J. D., & Phillips, J. O. (2009). Optical nerve stimulation for a
vestibular prosthesis. In Proceedings of SPIE 7180, Photons and neurons, 71800R.
Hartmann, R., Topp, G., & Klinke, R. (1984). Discharge patterns of cat primary auditory ﬁbers
with electrical stimulation of the cochlea. Hearing Research, 13, 47–62.
Hernandez, V. H., Gehrt, A., Reuter, K., Jing, Z., Jeschke, M., et al. (2014). Optogenetic
stimulation of the auditory pathway. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 124, 1114–1129.
Holstein, G. R., Martinelli, G. P., Boyle, R., Rabbitt, R. D., & Highstein, S. M. (2004a).
Ultrastructural observations of efferent terminals in the crista ampullaris of the toadﬁsh,
Opsanus tau. Experimental Brain Research, 155, 265–273.
Holstein, G. R., Rabbitt, R. D., Martinelli, G. P., Friedrich, V. L., Jr., Boyle, R. D., & Highstein, S.
M. (2004b). Convergence of excitatory and inhibitory hair cell transmitters shapes vestibular
afferent responses. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 101, 15766–
15771.
Izzo, A. D., Richter, C.-P., Jansen, E. D., & Walsh, J. T. (2006). Laser stimulation of the auditory
nerve. Lasers in Surgery and Medicine, 38, 745–753.
Izzo, A. D., Suh, E., Pathria, J., Walsh, J. T., Whitlon, D. S., & Richter, C. P. (2007a). Selectivity
of neural stimulation in the auditory system: A comparison of optic and electric stimuli.
Journal of Biomedical Optics, 12, 021008.
Izzo, A. D., Walsh, J. T., Jansen, E. D., Bendett, M., et al. (2007b). Optical parameter variability in
laser nerve stimulation: A study of pulse duration, repetition rate, and wavelength. IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 54, 1108–1114.
Izzo, A. D., Walsh, J. T., Ralph, H., Webb, J., Bendett, M., et al. (2008). Laser stimulation of
auditory neurons at shorter pulse durations and penetration depths. Biophysical Journal, 94(8),
3159–3166.
Jeschke, M., & Moser, T. (2015). Considering optogenetic stimulation for cochlear implants.
Hearing Research, 322, 224–234.
Katz, E. J., Ilev, I. K., Krauthamer, V., Kim do, H., & Weinreich, D. (2010). Excitation of primary
afferent neurons by near-infrared light in vitro. NeuroReport, 21, 662–666.
236
X. Tan et al.

Limb, C. J. (2006). Cochlear implant-mediated perception of music. Current Opinion in
Otolaryngology & Head and Neck Surgery, 14, 337–340.
Limb, C. J., & Roy, A. T. (2014). Technological, biological, and acoustical constraints to music
perception in cochlear implant users. Hearing Research, 308, 13–26.
Limb, C. J., Molloy, A. T., Jiradejvong, P., & Braun, A. R. (2010). Auditory cortical activity
during cochlear implant-mediated perception of spoken language, melody, and rhythm.
Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 11, 133–143.
Littleﬁeld, P., Izzo, A. D., Mundi, J., Walsh, J. T., Jansen, E.D., et al. (2008). Characterization of
single auditory nerve ﬁbers in response to laser stimulation. In Proceedings of SPIE 6854,
Optical interactions with tissue and cells XIX, 68540F.
Liu, L., Parekh-Olmedo, H., & Kmiec, E. B. (2003). The development and regulation of gene
repair. Nature Reviews Genetics, 4, 679–689.
Liu, Q., Jorgensen, E., Holman, H., Frerck, M., & Rabbitt, R. D. (2013). Miniature post synaptic
currents are entrained by infrared pulses. Abstracts of the Association for Research in
Otolaryngology, 36, 464.
Liu, Q., Frerck, M. J., Holman, H. A., Jorgensen, E. M., & Rabbitt, R. D. (2014). Exciting cell
membranes with a blustering heat shock. Biophysical Journal, 106, 1570–1577.
Lumbreras, V., Finale, M., Bas, E., Gupta, C., & Rajguru, S. (2013). Pulsed infrared-evoked
intracellular calcium transients in cultured neonatal spiral ganglion neurons. Abstracts of the
Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 36, 341.
Matic, A. I., Walsh, J. T., Jr., & Richter, C. P. (2011). Spatial extent of cochlear infrared neural
stimulation determined by tone-on-light masking. Journal of Biomedical Optics, 16, 118002.
Matic, A. I., Robinson, A. M., Young, H. K., Badofsky, B., Rajguru, S. M., et al. (2013).
Behavioral and electrophysiological responses evoked by chronic infrared neural stimulation of
the cochlea. PLoS ONE, 8, e58189.
Moser, T. (2015). Optogenetic stimulation of the auditory pathway for research and future
prosthetics. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 34C, 29–36.
Moser, T., Hernandez, V. H., Hoch, G., Reuter, K., Jing, Z., et al. (2013). Optogenetic stimulation
of the auditory nerve. Abstracts of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 36, 268.
Mukherjea, D., Ghosh, S., Bhatta, P., Sheth, S., Tupal, S., et al. (2015). Early investigational drugs
for hearing loss. Expert Opinion on Investigational Drugs, 24, 201–217.
Naito, Y., Tateya, I., Fujiki, N., Hirano, S., Ishizu, K., et al. (2000). Increased cortical activation
during hearing of speech in cochlear implant users. Hearing Research, 143, 139–146.
NIDCD Information Clearinghouse. (2015). Cochlear implants. NIH Publication 11-4798. https://
www.nidcd.nih.gov/health/cochlear-implants.
Niemz, M. H. (2004). Laser–tissue interactions: Fundamentals and application, 2nd ed. New
York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Pezzoli, D., Chiesa, R., De Nardo, L., & Candiani, G. (2012). We still have a long way to go to
effectively deliver genes! Journal of Applied Biomaterials & Functional Materials, 10, 82–91.
Phillips, J. O., Ling, L., Nie, K., Jameyson, E., Phillips, C. M., et al. (2015). Vestibular
implantation and longitudinal electrical stimulation of the semicircular canal afferents in human
subjects. Journal of Neurophysiology, 113, 3866–3892.
Rajguru, S. M., Rabbitt, R. D., Matic, A. I., Highstein, S. M., & Richter, C. P. (2010a). Selective
activation of vestibular hair cells by infrared light. Biophysical Journal, 98, 507a.
Rajguru, S. M., Rabbitt, R. R., Matic, A. I., Highstein, S. M., & Richter, C. P. (2010b). Inhibitory
and excitatory vestibular afferent responses induced by infrared light stimulation of hair cells.
Abstracts of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 33, 328.
Redd, E. E., Pongstaporn, T., & Ryugo, D. K. (2000). The effects of congenital deafness on
auditory nerve synapses and globular bushy cells in cats. Hearing Research, 147, 160–174.
Redd, E. E., Cahill, H. B., Pongstaporn, T., & Ryugo, D. K. (2002). The effects of congenital
deafness on auditory nerve synapses: Type I and type II multipolar cells in the anteroventral
cochlear nucleus of cats. Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 3,
403–417.
9
Photons in the Ear
237

Reiss, L. A., Turner, C. W., Karsten, S. A., Erenberg, S. R., Taylor, J., & Gantz, B. J. (2012).
Consonant recognition as a function of the number of stimulation channels in the hybrid
short-electrode cochlear implant. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 132,
3406–3417.
Rhee, A. Y., Li, G., Wells, J., & Kao, Y. P. Y. (2008). Photostimulation of sensory neurons of the
rat vagus nerve. In S. L. Jacques, W. P. Roach, & R. J. Thomas (Eds.), Optical interactions
with tissue and cells: Proceedings of SPIE 6854, Optical interactions with tissue and cells XIX,
68540E. San Francisco.
Richter, C. P., & Tan, X. (2014). Photons and neurons. Hearing Research, 311, 72–88.
Richter, C.-P., Bayon, R., Izzo, A. D., Otting, M., Suh, E., et al. (2008). Optical stimulation of
auditory neurons: Effects of acute and chronic deafening. Hearing Research, 242, 42–51.
Richter, C. P., Rajguru, S. M., Matic, A. I., Moreno, E. L., Fishman, A. J., et al. (2011). Spread of
cochlear excitation during stimulation with pulsed infrared radiation: Inferior colliculus
measurements. Journal of Neural Engineering, 8, 056006.
Rubinstein, J. T. (2004). How cochlear implants encode speech. Current Opinion in
Otolaryngology & Head and Neck Surgery, 12, 444–448.
Ryugo, D. K., Pongstaporn, T., Huchton, D. M., & Niparko, J. K. (1997). Ultrastructural analysis
of primary endings in deaf white cats: Morphologic alterations in endbulbs of Held. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 385, 230–244.
Saada, A. A., Niparko, J. K., & Ryugo, D. K. (1996). Morphological changes in the cochlear
nucleus of congenitally deaf white cats. Brain Research, 736, 315–328.
Schultz, M., Baumhoff, P., Teudt, I. U., Maier, H., Kruger, A., et al. (2012a). Pulsed
wavelength-dependent laser stimulation of the inner ear. Biomedizinische Technik/Biomedical
Engineering, 57(Suppl 1), doi:10.1515/bmt-2012-4339.
Schultz, M., Baumhoff, P., Maier, H., Teudt, I. U., Kruger, A., et al. (2012b). Nanosecond laser
pulse stimulation of the inner ear-a wavelength study. Biomedical Optics Express, 3,
3332–3345.
Shannon, R. V. (2005). Speech and music have different requirements for spectral resolution.
International Review of Neurobiology, 70, 121–134.
Shannon, R. V., Galvin, J. J., 3rd, & Baskent, D. (2002). Holes in hearing. Journal of the
Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 3, 185–199.
Shannon, R. V., Fu, Q. J., & Galvin, J., 3rd. (2004). The number of spectral channels required for
speech recognition depends on the difﬁculty of the listening situation. Acta Oto-Laryngologica
Supplementum, 552, 50–54.
Shapiro, M. G., Homma, K., Villarreal, S., Richter, C. P., & Bezanilla, F. (2012). Infrared light
excites cells by changing their electrical capacitance. Nature Communications, 3, 736.
Shepherd, R. K., & Hardie, N. A. (2001). Deafness-induced changes in the auditory pathway:
Implications for cochlear implants. Audiology and Neurotology, 6, 305–318.
Snel-Bongers, J., Briaire, J. J., Vanpoucke, F. J., & Frijns, J. H. (2012). Spread of excitation and
channel interaction in single- and dual-electrode cochlear implant stimulation. Ear and
Hearing, 33, 367–376.
Takumida, M., Kubo, N., Ohtani, M., Suzuka, Y., & Anniko, M. (2005). Transient receptor
potential channels in the inner ear: Presence of transient receptor potential channel subfamily 1
and 4 in the guinea pig inner ear. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 125, 929–934.
Teudt, I. U., Maier, H., Richter, C. P., & Kral, A. (2011). Acoustic events and “optophonic”
cochlear responses induced by pulsed near-infrared laser. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, 58, 1648–1655.
Thompson, A. C., Fallon, J. B., Wise, A. K., Wade, S. A., Shepherd, R. K., & Stoddart, P. R.
(2015). Infrared neural stimulation fails to evoke neural activity in the deaf guinea pig cochlea.
Hearing Research, 324, 46–53.
Tirko, N. N., & Ryugo, D. K. (2012). Synaptic plasticity in the medial superior olive of hearing,
deaf, and cochlear-implanted cats. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 520, 2202–2217.
238
X. Tan et al.

Truy, E., Deiber, M. P., Cinotti, L., Mauguiere, F., Froment, J. C., & Morgon, A. (1995). Auditory
cortex activity changes in long-term sensorineural deprivation during crude cochlear electrical
stimulation: Evaluation by positron emission tomography. Hearing Research, 86, 34–42.
Tuchin, V. (2000). Tissue optics: Light scattering methods and instruments for medical diagnosis.
Bellingham, WA: SPIE Press.
van den Honert, C., & Stypulkowski, P. H. (1984). Physiological properties of the electrically
stimulated auditory nerve. II. Single ﬁber recordings. Hearing Research, 14, 225–243.
Welch, A. J., & van Gemert, M. J. C. (2012). Optical-thermal response of laser-irradiated tissue,
2nd ed. New York: Plenum Press,
Wells, J., Kao, C., Konrad, P., Milner, T., Kim, J., et al. (2007). Biophysical mechanisms of
transient optical stimulation of peripheral nerve. Biophysical Journal, 93, 2567–2580.
Wenzel, G. I., Balster, S., Zhang, K., Lim, H. H., Reich, U., et al. (2009). Green laser light
activates the inner ear. Journal of Biomedical Optics, 14, 044007.
Wilson, B. S., & Dorman, M. F. (2008). Cochlear implants: Current designs and future
possibilities. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development, 45, 695–730.
Wong, D., Miyamoto, R. T., Pisoni, D. B., Sehgal, M., & Hutchins, G. D. (1999). PET imaging of
cochlear-implant and normal-hearing subjects listening to speech and nonspeech. Hearing
Research, 132, 34–42.
Xia, N., Tan, X., Young, H., Dummer, M., Hibbs-Brenner, M., & Richter, C.-P. (2015).
Multichannel optrode for optical stimulation. Abstracts of the Association for Research in
Otolaryngology, 38, 108.
Yizhar, O., Fenno, L. E., Davidson, T. J., Mogri, M., & Deisseroth, K. (2011). Optogenetics in
neural systems. Neuron, 71, 9–34.
Young, H. K., Tan, X., Xia, N., & Richter, C. P. (2015). Target structures for cochlear infrared
neural stimulation. Neurophotonics, 2, 025002.
Zeng, F.-G., Tang, Q., & Lu, T. (2014). Abnormal pitch perception produced by cochlear implant
stimulation. PLoS ONE, 9, e88662.
Zhang, F., Wang, L. P., Boyden, E. S., & Deisseroth, K. (2006). Channelrhodopsin-2 and optical
control of excitable cells. Nature Methods, 3, 785–792.
Zhang, K. Y., Wenzel, G. I., Balster, S., Lim, H. H., Lubatschowski, H., et al. (2009).
Optoacoustic induced vibrations within the inner ear. Optics Express, 17, 23037–23043.
Zheng, J., Dai, C., Steyger, P. S., Kim, Y., Vass, Z., et al. (2003). Vanilloid receptors in hearing:
Altered cochlear sensitivity by vanilloids and expression of TRPV1 in the organ of Corti.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 90, 444–455.
9
Photons in the Ear
239

Chapter 10
Clinical and Translational Research:
Challenges to the Field
Colleen G. Le Prell and Edward Lobarinas
Abstract Clinical
and translational research are essential to patient care.
Throughout the volume, numerous examples and cases were provided; these served
to illustrate the unique challenges that must be overcome and the work that lies
ahead for advancing hearing healthcare. This ﬁnal chapter provides a summary of
common themes across chapters. Across various “disorders” such as auditory
processing disorders, tinnitus, and sudden onset hearing loss, there were challenges
related to differential diagnosis. Other challenges cut across noise-induced hearing
loss, drug-induced hearing loss, and the other disorders listed above; there is a need
for standardized metrics that allow for results to be compared among studies and for
assessing novel treatment by researchers and clinicians. The overall healthcare goal
is to develop an evidenced-based practice approach so that emerging treatments
reﬂect the highest standard of demonstrated efﬁcacy. The chapters contained in this
volume provide an essential introduction to the processes, successes, and challenges
associated with translational research and the goal of better health outcomes.
Keywords Advances in hearing research  Auditory disorders  Best practices 
Clinical research  Evidence-based practice  Translational research
10.1
Introduction
The chapters in this volume illustrate the extent to which translational research is a
process whereby basic research makes its way into healthcare or other consumer
applications. The goal of this process is to provide beneﬁt to patients as part of
evidence-based medicine (by physicians) or evidence-based practice (by other
C.G. Le Prell (&)  E. Lobarinas
Callier Center for Communication Disorders, University of Texas at Dallas,
1966 Inwood Road, Dallas, TX 75235, USA
e-mail: colleen.leprell@utdallas.edu
E. Lobarinas
e-mail: edward.lobarinas@utdallas.edu
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
C.G. Le Prell et al. (eds.), Translational Research in Audiology, Neurotology,
and the Hearing Sciences, Springer Handbook of Auditory Research 58,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-40848-4_10
241

clinicians such as audiologists or speech language pathologists). Throughout this
volume, the authors have noted hurdles associated with moving results from basic
and preclinical scientiﬁc investigation into clinical trials and additional hurdles to
overcome in moving therapies out of clinical trials into widespread application. In
this ﬁnal summary chapter, a synthesis of the recurring themes from the case studies
in previous chapters is presented, with an effort to point to commonalities across
investigator experiences. Despite signiﬁcant differences across the topics covered
by each chapter and the speciﬁc goals and efforts of each investigator, there were
many shared challenges among translational activities. Translational research is
fundamentally important to the common goal shared by scientists, clinicians, and
industry, with the ultimate goal of improved patient care options and better health
care outcomes. The lessons from the case studies are synthesized in this ﬁnal
chapter with the intent of highlighting solutions and strategies for success. Common
themes include Etiology and Diagnosis (Sect. 10.2), Objective Metrics (Sect. 10.3),
Common Equipment Platforms (Sect. 10.4), Regulatory Requirements (Sect. 10.5),
and Placebo Controls (Sect. 10.6).
10.2
Etiology and Diagnosis
One of the challenges discussed in several of the case studies was that of identifying
appropriate treatment when the etiology of a disorder is unknown. The relevance of
this issue should be immediately clear; it is difﬁcult to assess the efﬁcacy of any
therapeutic intervention when the patient population does not have a single iden-
tiﬁable cause and there is no agreed upon diagnostic test or protocol. In Chap. 3,
Kraus and Anderson discussed the typically unknown etiology of auditory pro-
cessing disorder (APD), noting fundamental disagreement about whether APD and
deﬁcits in attention and memory are separate entities or multiple symptoms with a
shared cause. They further pointed to APD as frequently being comorbid with other
learning problems such as dyslexia and attention deﬁcit disorder, further increasing
the difﬁculty of identifying an appropriate study population.
Similarly, in Chap. 4, Montgomery, Bauer, and Lobarinas made it clear that
sudden sensorineural hearing loss (SSHL) has many possible etiologies, which led
them to classify SSHL as a syndrome rather than a diagnosis. As they discuss, the
etiology of SSHL might be related to cochlear trauma, viral infection, vascular
occlusion, an autoimmune response, or other unknown etiology. Consequently,
clinicians must often select therapies based on their own professional clinical
experiences or expert opinion guidance documents rather than a robust body of
evidence of efﬁcacy. As it relates to translational research, SSHL presents a number
of challenges, primarily because of the spontaneous nature of the syndrome.
Whereas objective measures can be used to quantify and describe the degree and
conﬁguration of the hearing loss associated with SSHL, this has been of limited
use toward research efforts aimed at providing novel therapeutic strategies. As
described in Chap. 4, objective testing for viral, autoimmune, and metabolic
242
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

abnormalities has not provided signiﬁcantly better understanding of the disease
process, a necessity for robust clinical trial design. Owing to the paucity of animal
models and given the high rate of spontaneous recovery among humans, it has been
challenging to assess proposed interventions adequately. Furthermore, the ethics of
withholding treatment that “might” provide beneﬁt must be considered carefully
regardless of the degree of evidence supporting efﬁcacy. Multicenter approaches
have been used (Rauch et al. 2011), and it would be worthwhile for new multicenter
studies across medical centers to collect a number of additional biometrics from
each participant to determine if speciﬁc biomarkers among those who develop
SSHL can be identiﬁed. Those data in turn could be used to develop animal models
if those risk factors can be reliably induced in such models, or the data could
provide strategies for identifying those at higher risk for SSHL for whom existing
or promising interventions may be evaluated. Given the identiﬁed and associated
risk factors, this would seem a plausible approach toward ﬁnding efﬁcacious
interventions for this syndrome.
Chapter 7, by Allman, Schormans, Typlt, and Lobarinas, described the multiple
potential causes of tinnitus, the substantial disagreement regarding outcome mea-
sures for efﬁcacy of treatment, the relevance of animal models, and the lack of
clarity regarding the underlying pathophysiology. For example, current “theories”
of tinnitus and therapeutic approaches are based on tinnitus as a centrally driven
phenomenon that can occur independent of hearing loss, work that is supported by
imaging studies (Gu et al. 2010). However, the majority of patients with tinnitus
also have hearing loss (Chung et al. 1984), and one of the most cited references
(House and Brackmann 1981) purported to support a central hypothesis showed
that nearly half of the patients who had surgical excision of the auditory nerve
reported an improvement in tinnitus. Thus it is clear that the symptoms of tinnitus
could arise from either or both peripheral and central mechanisms, complicating the
design and subject selection for clinical trials. The concept of subtyping tinnitus for
evaluating pharmacotherapy has been recognized (Langguth et al. 2009), and like
the aforementioned examples throughout this volume, subtyping is likely to play a
major role in future clinical trial designs.
As discussed in the preceding paragraphs, continued advances in our under-
standing of APD, SSHL, and tinnitus, as well as continual data-driven reﬁnement in
therapies, will likely lead to tailored therapies for different subgroups of patients
with each of these broad disorders.
When the etiology of a disorder is unknown, it is frequently difﬁcult to identify
effective treatments, as there may be only a subset of “responders” based on an
unknown but shared etiology for which that treatment works. The concept of sub-
group analysis was brieﬂy introduced in Chap. 2 by Le Prell and has been discussed
in detail by others for tinnitus as it relates to randomized controlled trials (RCTs). For
example, Searchﬁeld (2011, p. 422) explicitly cautions, “But the results of many
RCTs may be misleading due to the treatment of persons with tinnitus as a homo-
geneous population, washing out real effects in groups of individuals due to com-
parisons based on mean data, lax inclusion/exclusion criteria, and nonspeciﬁc
placebo effects (Dobie 1999). Subtypes of tinnitus appear to exist and likely respond
10
Clinical and Translational Research: Challenges to the Field
243

differently to treatments (Tyler et al. 2008); the use of antidepressants, for example,
might be useful in treating tinnitus patients with comorbid depression but have no
effect on the tinnitus population as a whole (Dobie et al. 1993).” In this same series of
papers, Langguth et al. (2011, p. 432) also highlight shortcomings in applying group
outcomes to individual patients, as not every patient achieves the average beneﬁt.
They eloquently state, “Evidence based on clinical studies and clinical relevance for
the treatment of the individual patient are not identical. If a speciﬁc intervention has
been demonstrated to have a small beneﬁt in several controlled studies involving
large samples, it is considered the highest level of evidence. However, this small
beneﬁt may be completely irrelevant, clinically, for a speciﬁc patient. In contrast, if
an intervention has been shown to stop tinnitus in case series of a speciﬁc rare
subform of tinnitus (e.g., carbamazepine treatment in ‘‘type-writer-tinnitus’’), it is
only considered as a recommendation of relative low evidence, but it has a huge
clinical relevance for the affected patient.” The lack of evidence that is available to
guide treatment decisions for tinnitus patients makes evidence-based care difﬁcult
indeed (for additional discussion, see Hoare and Hall 2011).
In Chap. 8, Staecker, Klickstein, and Brough discussed the issue of unknown
etiology of hearing loss from a different perspective. They are in the process of
investigating a genetic therapy that speciﬁcally drives the regeneration of outer hair
cells in the inner ear. The patients who will presumably derive the most beneﬁt are
those who retain afferent function but have signiﬁcant outer hair cell loss, condi-
tions that would allow for sound stimulation to be carried to the brain after outer
hair cell replacement. If patients in whom the therapy is assessed do not have an
intact ascending pathway, the regrowth of outer hair cells would be ineffective in
driving functional improvement, even if hair cell growth is successfully accom-
plished. Thus, the enrollment criteria are critically important to the potential for
success in the novel ﬁrst-in-man (FIM) assessment of gene therapy for the inner ear
in clinical trials. Similar challenges will be readily apparent for any future FIM
assessment of the novel efforts to control neural activity using light, an emerging
approach described in Chap. 9 by Tan, Xia, and Richter.
Clearly, there are challenges in precisely diagnosing the causes of auditory
dysfunction given the wide variety of clinical symptoms presented by patients. In
some cases, better animal models are urgently needed so that therapies can be
assessed relative to a known deﬁcit or etiology. In other words, researchers must do
a better job producing models for each of the individual and speciﬁcally known
“subtypes” of patients who are observed within a larger clinical population. This is
not a challenge solely to basic scientists, however, as clinician-scientists (including
MD-PhDs and AuD-PhDs) must also seek to identify what distinguishes patients
within clinical subtypes in order to provide guidance on the necessary models for
which therapeutics should be assessed. This is the fundamental process through
which translational research best proceeds; observation of a clinical disorder in the
course of patient care drives basic research to understand the mechanism of the
disorder, thus providing a rationale for therapeutic intervention that can be assessed
in preclinical research, hopefully leading to assessments in humans under clinical
trial testing, and, if successful, adoption into evidence-based care.
244
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

10.2.1
The Case of Auditory Neuropathy/Auditory
Dyssynchrony
Relevant to the current discussion of etiology and diagnosis is the issue of auditory
neuropathy/auditory dyssynchrony (AN/AD). In AN/AD, the speciﬁc challenge for
treatment is that there are multiple etiologies of auditory neuropathy. The classic
proﬁle of AN/AD is intact cochlear bioampliﬁcation as measured by otoacoustic
emissions (OAEs), suggesting present and normal functioning outer hair cells in
combination with an abnormal or absent auditory brainstem response (ABR), an
indication of aberrant neural responses to acoustic stimuli. The precise locus of the
underlying pathology, however, is not well understood and the speciﬁc pathology
likely varies from patient to patient. There are likely multiple varieties of AN/AD.
Patients may have either pre- or postsynaptic damage, and postsynaptic damage
may be at the nerve terminal or involve the proximal auditory nerve (Starr et al.
2000; Santarelli et al. 2008). Because AN/AD could be the result of damage to
inner hair cells, synapses, the auditory nerve, or the central nervous system, there is
a wide range of functional deﬁcits. Functional deﬁcits vary from deafness in the
most extreme cases to lesser deﬁcits such as ﬂuctuating hearing sensitivity, intact
hearing but poor speech comprehension, or intact hearing with difﬁculties in noise
(for discussion, see Sininger 2008). As a result of the varied etiology and variable
severity of symptoms, the diagnosis or misdiagnosis is a signiﬁcant issue in patient
management (Berlin et al. 2003).
The data from patients with AN/AD reported by Starr et al. (1996, 2000)
describe individuals with normal hearing sensitivity to audiometric stimuli but
severe difﬁculties processing speech. Impaired temporal processing (Zeng et al.
1999; Michalewski et al. 2005) and impaired loudness adaptation (Wynne et al.
2013) have also been reported in patients with AN/AD. The poorer temporal
processing is often accompanied by deﬁcits in pitch discrimination at low fre-
quencies, temporal integration, gap detection, temporal modulation detection,
backward and forward masking, signal detection in noise, binaural beats, and sound
localization using interaural time differences (Zeng et al. 2005). This pattern of
perceptual deﬁcits has been speciﬁcally described as the opposite of what is rou-
tinely observed in hearing-impaired individuals who have increased thresholds and
impaired intensity perception but relatively normal temporal processing after
adjusting for hearing sensitivity (Zeng et al. 2005).
In contrast to the descriptions by Starr and others, clinical diagnosis of AN/AD
often extends to include individuals with elevated audiometric thresholds, resulting
in an even greater diversity of clinical symptoms. The more recent AN/AD spec-
trum disorder terminology suggests that the disorder may arise from either a classic
neuropathy, whereby neurons are missing or nonfunctional, or dyssynchrony,
whereby synapses and neurons may be present but exhibit abnormal synchrony.
With a broad inclusion criterion and multiple potential sites of dysfunction,
translational research efforts at evaluating effective treatment approaches face
10
Clinical and Translational Research: Challenges to the Field
245

signiﬁcant challenges. This is particularly problematic when therapeutic recom-
mendations now include the surgical implantation of cochlear implants.
Cochlear prostheses have been implanted in some patients in an effort to restore
discharge synchrony, with variable success across patients (Kontorinis et al. 2014;
Ji et al. 2015). Predictors for successful rehabilitation with a cochlear implant have
been offered (Jeong and Kim 2013) and there is some support for this invasive
surgical intervention based on the possibility of beneﬁt (Fernandes et al. 2015). The
2008 consensus statement (National Health Service [NHS] 2008; Simmons 2009)
supports the use of cochlear implants for AN/AD if ampliﬁcation has not been
otherwise successful in rehabilitation of auditory function. However, there is also
clear guidance that nonsurgical rehabilitation such as hearing aids, FM systems,
clear speech training, and education to learn sign language should be considered
before advocating surgery to implant such devices (Berlin et al. 2003; NHS 2008;
Hood 2011).
In the Guidelines document, Sininger (2008) notes that there are many physi-
cians who advocate expedited implantation if aided speech performance is poor.
Aided speech performance in children with AN/AD is variable, but clearly there is a
population that achieves beneﬁt (Roush 2008). Given these ﬁndings, cochlear
implant decisions should be made cautiously (Shallop 2008). Despite some success
with cochlear implantation, there would be cause for concern in broadly adopting
invasive therapeutic interventions for a disorder that is broadly deﬁned, that is based
on a wide range of symptoms, and where there is limited knowledge of the
underlying pathology. Although cochlear implantation is an effective intervention
for some patients, a review of the literature used to support the development of the
guidelines suggests that the recommendations were not based on well-controlled
clinical trials, a clearly deﬁned disorder, or a robust body of scientiﬁc evidence but
rather from reports with small sample sizes and varied levels of success (Buss et al.
2002; De Leenheer et al. 2008; Walton et al. 2008). The current recommendations
are perhaps the best possible compromise in the absence of RCT data, with hearing
aids advocated before implantation, and careful counseling on the potential that the
implant may not yield beneﬁt.
10.3
Objective Metrics
Throughout this book, most, if not all, of the chapters have discussed the impor-
tance of objective metrics that can be consistently applied across studies. This is
important for determining the proper diagnosis for which a potential treatment plan
can be developed as well as for allowing efﬁcacy to be assessed and therapies to be
compared. Objective, agreed-on measures are critically important. If the goal of
clinical or translational research is to move promising therapies into healthcare
application, there obviously must be clinical outcomes that can be used to assess the
therapeutic value.
246
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

10.3.1
Objective Metrics: APD
Chapter 3, by Kraus and Anderson, described a major challenge for APD studies, as
there are no agreed-on diagnostic criteria. Therefore, this team began by developing
an objective test for APD. The most common manifestation of APD is difﬁculty
understanding speech in noise, although paying attention to relevant sounds and
ignoring sounds that are not relevant can also be problematic. Because the attention
and memory requirements for tasks that directly assess these difﬁculties may reduce
the validity of those tests, Kraus and her colleagues sought an objective measure.
They proposed that the auditory brainstem response to complex sounds (cABR)
might be an appropriate tool based on its high ﬁdelity to the evoking stimulus
(typically a speech sound [da]), its high reliability, and its repeatability from session
to session. Finally, they describe the validation of the cABR showing that distinct
pathological response patterns accompany different diagnoses. For example, read-
ing disabilities were accompanied by delayed timing and reduced representation of
the ﬁrst harmonic, dyslexia was accompanied by increased variability from trial to
trial, autism was accompanied by less accurate pitch tracking, and poor
speech-in-noise performance was accompanied by poorer subcortical representation
of the fundamental frequency and more neural signal degradation when noise was
added.
These data are both encouraging and promising, but important additional work is
needed to better deﬁne the cABR metric itself, to identify whether a given indi-
vidual’s response is normal or disordered, and to better quantify improvement and
treatment efﬁcacy. For instance, what are the parameters that would trigger a
diagnosis of APD, and what would constitute a clinically signiﬁcant improvement
in the cABR? Also important, where does an “atypical” cABR begin? In other
words, how different must an individual response be from the group normative data
to be deﬁned as atypical? If the cABR is indeed diagnosed as atypical, how is
improvement quantiﬁed? That is, should it be quantiﬁed based on a percent
improvement in amplitude, a numerical change in voltage, or perhaps the shifting of
the cABR amplitude and latency such that it falls within population normative data?
Perhaps most importantly, is there a strong, reliable correlation between change in
cABR and the alleviation of the subjective symptoms that brought the patient to the
clinician for care in the ﬁrst place? Answers to these kinds of questions will be
necessary to move toward clinical implementation, as well as third-party reim-
bursement for testing. Additional data on both the cABR and changes in the speciﬁc
deﬁcits or problems that motivated patients to seek care will be helpful in estab-
lishing the importance and validity of the cABR metric for therapeutic assessment.
The data available from the studies reviewed in Chap. 3 are encouraging and
provide promising proof of concept data, and it will be interesting indeed to monitor
advances in this area.
10
Clinical and Translational Research: Challenges to the Field
247

10.3.2
Objective Metrics: Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
Chapter 5, by Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell, pointed to similar challenges in the selection
of objective metrics for studies assessing the prevention of noise-induced hearing
loss (NIHL). Pure-tone air-conduction audiometry is the gold standard for human
hearing assessment and identiﬁcation of hearing loss. In testing a drug developed for
the prevention of NIHL, one could simply assess group differences in the amount of
hearing threshold shift in participants randomized to a placebo condition and those
randomized to an experimental condition (e.g., Quaranta et al. 2004, 2012). It is not
clear that this is the most valid approach, however, as small differences in threshold
shift might be statistically signiﬁcant but have little clinical signiﬁcance (e.g., the 2.
5-dB shift in treated workers versus a 2.8-dB shift in placebo control condition, with
p = 0.03, in Lin et al. 2010). Alternative approaches could include assessment of the
percent of subjects with a given level of change, as was done recently by Kopke et al.
(2015). Using pure-tone audiometry, they assessed whether the rate of subjects
demonstrating signiﬁcant threshold shift (STS), deﬁned as an increase of more than
20 dB at any test frequency or an average increase of more than 10 dB at any two
consecutive test frequencies, was different in the placebo group and the group treated
with an experimental agent; the criteria used for ototoxic change according to the
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA). There are other explicit
change criteria speciﬁcally developed for identiﬁcation of a signiﬁcant occupational
noise-induced threshold shift (Occupational Safety and Health Administration
[OSHA] 1983; National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health [NIOSH]
1998) that could be considered if a proportional analysis will be completed, as
reviewed by Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell in Chap. 5. A concern about any proportional
analysis, however, is that an important drug beneﬁt could be “missed” if the majority
of the control group falls just short of the criterion deﬁcit, providing a very low
baseline against which decreased prevalence can be assessed.
10.3.3
Objective Metrics: Drug-Induced Hearing Loss
Campbell and Fox describe a similar challenge, the selection of criteria for change,
in Chap. 6. They note that the consensus guidelines provided by ASHA (1994) and
speciﬁed in the position statement of the American Academy of Audiology
(AAA) (2009) provide widely accepted guidance on the deﬁnition of ototoxic
change. However, they note that this guidance was designed for detection of oto-
toxicity during clinical monitoring. These statements were not intended to be used
for the determination or grading of hearing loss as an adverse event in a clinical trial
nor were these designed to determine if a novel pharmaceutical agent reduced
ototoxicity. There are no formal, universally accepted guidelines in place for
reporting ototoxic adverse events in clinical trials or for determining the signiﬁ-
cance of obtained otoprotective beneﬁts. Although the US Food and Drug
248
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

Administration (FDA) does not currently provide practice guidelines speciﬁcally
for clinical trials in this area, Campbell and Fox review a number of scales and
approaches that have been proposed or used in other studies. Indeed, there are
multiple clinical trials on the prevention of cisplatin-induced hearing loss that have
been completed, are now in progress, or will begin in the near future, and these
trials may serve as models for future investigations (for review, see Anderson and
Campbell 2015). As discussed in Chap. 1, Campbell and Fox note that the selection
of the speciﬁc scale or measure of loss to be used as a primary end point is
something that needs to be negotiated with the FDA as part of the approval process.
Because the “best” measure may differ from study to study and FDA approval of
the protocol is essential, they note that “cookbook” procedures cannot be offered
within a chapter such as this one at this time.
10.3.4
Objective Metrics: Tinnitus
With respect to measuring changes in hearing induced by noise or ototoxic drug
insult, there is at least consistency in that the measures are typically based on
threshold measures that can be readily obtained using subjective or objective
measures. Tinnitus, in contrast, presents a different scenario. In Chap. 7, Allman,
Schormans, Typlt, and Lobarinas described the challenges of translational research
on the alleviation of tinnitus. Human tinnitus assessment is typically based on
surveys such as the tinnitus reaction questionnaire (Wilson et al. 1991), tinnitus
handicap questionnaire (Henry and Wilson 1998), tinnitus handicap inventory
(Baguley and Norman 2001; Zeman et al. 2011; Bauer et al. 2016), or the tinnitus
functional index (Henry et al. 2016)—measures that reveal the degree of psycho-
logical distress associated with tinnitus. Clearly, the use of different surveys across
studies has made it difﬁcult to compare outcomes across agents that have been
assessed for potential alleviation of tinnitus symptoms. As discussed in Sect. 10.3.1
with respect to changes in the cABR, however, it is not clear what constitutes a
clinically signiﬁcant improvement for an individual patient, or a treated group,
within any given tinnitus survey. In other words, how much must the score on any
given survey tool change for the change to be deemed clinically signiﬁcant? In
addition, given that tinnitus is a perceptual phenomenon, what if the sound of
tinnitus is signiﬁcantly reduced but there is no corresponding reduction in tinnitus
distress? These and other questions regarding outcome measures and the need for
objective measures will continue to be a challenge for tinnitus research and the
translational process for the foreseeable future.
10
Clinical and Translational Research: Challenges to the Field
249

10.3.5
Objective Metrics: “Hidden” Hearing Loss
The current hot topic of “hidden hearing loss” is highly relevant to the issue of
objective assessment. Sound-evoked ABR thresholds are the gold standard metric
for assessing auditory function in animals, and the harmful functional consequences
of noise are typically measured using ABR thresholds. Recent data, however, have
shown that ABR thresholds provide an incomplete picture of recovery after a noise
exposure because there can be evidence of lasting ABR amplitude decreases at
suprathreshold presentation levels despite complete recovery of hearing sensitivity
as indicated by a return to prenoise ABR thresholds in both mice (Kujawa and
Liberman 2006, 2009; Wang and Ren 2012) and guinea pigs (Lin et al. 2011;
Furman et al. 2013). Speciﬁcally, the ABR wave I amplitude, a correlate of cochlear
output, is reduced even though the threshold of wave I and the amplitude of wave
V, a correlate of central auditory system output, remain unchanged. These results
suggest that noise exposures can result in damage to the inner ear that escapes
detection by conventional threshold assessment.
The results from the animal studies have been widely interpreted by members of
the scientiﬁc community as reﬂecting that any temporary threshold shift (TTS) is
almost certainly hazardous across mammalian species, including humans. This
assumption is questionable, however, as newer studies have now provided exper-
imental evidence that smaller TTS deﬁcits were not accompanied by lasting change
in ABR amplitudes (Hickox and Liberman 2014; Fernandez et al. 2015; Jensen
et al. 2015). The work by Maison et al. (2013) raises further questions with respect
to whether there is a causal relationship or a direct correlation between the size of
the TTS and observed synaptopathic change. In general, TTS deﬁcits of 40 dB or
greater, measured 24 h postnoise, have resulted in synaptopathy, whereas TTS
deﬁcits of 30 dB or less have not appeared to result in synaptopathic change (for
discussion, see Spankovich et al. 2014; Le Prell and Brungart, in press).
Determining the critical boundary at which damage begins is essential because
the decreased ABR wave I amplitude data from the animal studies have been used
to suggest that federal guidelines on workplace noise exposure are ﬂawed (Kujawa
and Liberman 2009; Kujawa 2014; Kujawa and Liberman 2015). Speciﬁcally, in
the absence of signiﬁcant threshold shift and hearing loss (STS, as explicitly
deﬁned in 29 CFR 1910.95), there is no reportable injury to the worker. To be
reportable, workers must not only experience an average change of 10 dB at fre-
quencies of 2, 3, and 4 kHz, but the pure-tone average (PTA) threshold at those
three frequencies must also be poorer than 25-dB hearing level (HL), with 0-dB HL
being a normative reference level that is accepted nationally (ANSI S3.6-1989) and
internationally (ISO/R226-1985). In contrast, the rodents in the animal studies do
not have PTS. Instead, they show only decreased ABR amplitudes, which are
attributed to decreased numbers of synaptic connections, a form of neuropathic
damage (for recent review, see Kujawa and Liberman 2015).
There has been signiﬁcant speculation that noise-induced neuropathic damage
may
explain
the
disproportionate
difﬁculties
processing
speech
in
noisy
250
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

environments among some individuals without “hearing loss” (Kujawa and
Liberman 2009; Lin et al. 2011; Makary et al. 2011). Given that a hallmark of the
aforementioned clinical AN/AD disorder includes intact otoacoustic emissions in
combination with absent or grossly abnormal ABR, Kujawa and Liberman (2015)
have pointed to patients with AN/AD as examples of a human condition consistent
with their results in animals. Moreover, they suggest that the frequent issues with
speech processing in this clinical population as well as potentially many others are
consistent with the speech-in-noise deﬁcits they predict would accompany synap-
topathy in mice with reduced ABR wave I amplitudes. Similarly, Moser et al.
(2013) explicitly predicted that clinical features of AN/AD (as deﬁned in mice)
should be similar to those measured in patients with AN/AD. These are interesting
and provocative predictions, but empirical data are necessary before concluding that
there is a direct relationship between hearing-in-noise performance and synap-
topathy. Hope et al. (2013) do report poorer speech-in-noise performance in Royal
Air Force aircrew pilots than administrators in the absence of signiﬁcant PTA
threshold differences (PTA at 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 kHz; n = 10 per group), but use of the
PTA metric may have masked higher frequency hearing differences (given that
noise typically affects 3, 4, and/or 6 kHz thresholds) and ABR data were not
collected. In contrast, Bramhall et al. (2015) were able to correlate poorer
speech-in-noise performance (using the QuickSIN test) with smaller wave I ABR
amplitude in English-speaking adults ages 19-90 with PTA thresholds of 45 dB HL
or better (PTA at 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 kHz), but the relationship between QuickSIN
scores and ABR amplitude was greatest within the subset of the population with
overt threshold shift, which suggests pathology was not selective synaptopathy as
deﬁned in the animal models.
Noise exposure can be reliably manipulated in animal models and Lobarinas
et al. (2015) recently exposed a group of rats to noise that produced 20–30 dB of
TTS 24 h postexposure in some animals and 40–50 dB in other animals. The
animals that developed 20–30 dB of TTS showed no decrease in ABR amplitudes
and did not show any measurable deﬁcits on a signal-in-noise detection task.
Importantly, rats with the larger TTS (40–50 dB or greater) did show decreased
ABR wave I amplitudes alongside small decreases in postnoise performance on a
signal-in-noise detection task (Lobarinas et al. 2015). However, these deﬁcits were
limited to the most difﬁcult listening condition (the condition with the poorest
signal-to-noise ratio) and were limited to a very narrow subset of frequencies at
which there had been both a robust TTS and a lasting decrease in ABR wave I
amplitude. These data suggest that although a noise exposure that produces no
long-term overt threshold shift can result in difﬁculties processing signals in noise,
the functional sequelae are seen only for very difﬁcult listening conditions and only
for a very narrow range of stimuli corresponding to frequencies at which the most
robust TTS deﬁcits were observed (i.e., 40–50 dB TTS measured 24 h postnoise).
Given the call for potential changes in the occupational noise regulations, there
is
a clear
and
compelling rationale
for
psychophysical
studies assessing
suprathreshold auditory function in humans exposed to occupational or recreational
noise. There is a rich history of such studies in aging patients and patients with
10
Clinical and Translational Research: Challenges to the Field
251

hearing loss of mixed (and frequently unknown) etiology, but there has been much
less systematic effort to study suprathreshold processing deﬁcits in noise-exposed
populations (for review, see Shrivastav 2012). Recent studies in humans suggest
that difﬁculties communicating in noise correlate with deﬁcits in selective attention
(Best et al. 2010; Ruggles et al. 2011). Interestingly, selective attention deﬁcits are
associated with differences in the ﬁdelity of the auditory subcortical steady-state
response (SSRS) (Bharadwaj et al. 2014, 2015). The exploratory data from
Bharadwaj et al. (2015), suggesting a marginally signiﬁcant relationship between
noise exposure (dichotomized as “more exposed” and “less exposed”) and sub-
cortical temporal coding, highlight the need for focused attention assessing the issue
of
potential
noise-induced
suprathreshold
functional
deﬁcits
in
humans.
Unfortunately, any new studies are largely required to be cross-sectional, which
provide lower levels of evidence than prospective designs. Although one can, of
course, begin to prospectively track subjects longitudinally as part of a hearing
conservation program, ethical considerations compel counseling of participants on
the effects of noise on their hearing and provision of hearing protection devices
(HPDs), potentially reducing the opportunity to assess the measure of interest,
which is the effect of noise on suprathreshold hearing. Variable use of HPDs in the
workplace will also be problematic, as the actual exposures as modiﬁed by HPD use
will be unknown.
Acute changes in both ABR wave I amplitude and speech-in-noise performance
might be tracked after a single loud event, but if there is an assumption that
individuals are at risk of permanent harm based on expectations of a large
event-related TTS, it will not be ethical to require these individuals to stay in the
hazardous environment for any speciﬁc period of time, leaving investigators with
only the opportunistic ability to measure changes after whatever exposure a given
person chose recreationally, thus yielding little group data for any speciﬁc given
exposure. This model was used previously in early studies on the effects of
music-player use on hearing; those data typically included no more than a few
participants with data at any given listening level and TTS measured in only a
subset of the participants (Lee et al. 1985; Pugsley et al. 1993; Hellstrom et al.
1998). Even if a group of participants with recreational TTS can be identiﬁed, there
is no clear agreement on which speech-in-noise test, among those already used
clinically and for research, will prove the most sensitive to noise-induced changes
in function (for discussion, see Le Prell and Lobarinas 2015; Le Prell and Brungart,
in press).
Relevant to the discussion earlier in this section regarding the potential for
synaptopathy in the human cochlea and assumptions that any TTS will be haz-
ardous to the human inner ear, there have been a small number of efforts to identify
potential effects of noise on evoked potential amplitudes in humans. In an early
study, Klein and Mills (1981) assessed acute noise-induced changes in ABR
amplitude in ﬁve normal-hearing human listeners exposed to narrowband noise
(centered at 2.6 kHz) at 86 dBC for 8 h, resulting in approximately 30-dB TTS.
A decrease in wave I amplitude was noted for only one of the four participants
completing the exposure (see Subject TS in their Fig. 3). TTS measurements
252
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

conducted at the 4-hour midexposure test time revealed the ﬁfth subject had
experienced the targeted 30-dB TTS at that time and the exposure was therefore
terminated after only 4 h. There was no noise-induced decrease in wave I amplitude
even for this individual, who was seemingly more vulnerable to TTS (see
Subject RZ in their Fig. 3) (Klein and Mills 1981). There are other more recent
studies assessing the potential for chronic deﬁcits in ABR amplitude in participants
with known noise exposure. No such deﬁcits were detected in a population of
veterans assessed by Konrad-Martin et al. (2012); however, their study was
designed to assess age-related, not noise-induced, changes and may have therefore
been underpowered. In a smaller study on the effects of noise exposure, there were
no reported differences in ABR amplitudes between 16 pop/rock musicians and 16
nonmusician controls, although again, with the small sample size, the study may
have been underpowered (Samelli et al. 2012). Taken together, these studies have
not provided any evidence for effects of noise on ABR amplitude in humans,
although sample size and study design questions preclude any conclusion that there
are not effects of noise on ABR amplitude in humans.
Stamper and Johnson (2015a), who more recently assessed the potential rela-
tionship between ABR wave I amplitude and noise history, had a similarly small
sample that included 30 normal-hearing participants recruited on a college campus.
In contrast to the other reports described earlier in this section, they showed a
statistically signiﬁcant relationship in which decreased ABR wave I amplitude was
associated with noise exposure within the past 12 months. This relationship was
reported as statistically signiﬁcant only when the signal was a 90-dB nHL click and
mastoid-placed electrodes were used. Similar trends with p < 0.05 were also
observed for click signals at 70 dB nHL or greater, and for 4-kHz tone burst signals
at 70 dB nHL or above (Stamper and Johnson 2015a), but the relationships were
not reported as statistically signiﬁcant because there was no effort to control for
multiple statistical comparisons. The relationship disappeared at lower levels and
was not statistically signiﬁcant if tympanic membrane electrodes were used instead
of mastoid-placed electrodes as there was more variability in the data collected from
tympanic membrane electrodes (Stamper and Johnson 2015a). Should future
investigations focus on mastoid-placed electrodes because that was the test con-
dition in which a relationship was detected, or should tympanic membrane elec-
trodes be used because these represent a more direct measurement of wave I
amplitude as the response is measured more proximal to the auditory nerve dis-
charge? Alternatively, might foil-wrapped TIPTrode electrodes provide a com-
promise in which a larger, cleaner signal is measured but without the increased
variability? Sensitivity of ABR recordings is improved using electrodes that utilize
the ear canal as a recording site, perhaps providing additional opportunities to study
the effects of noise exposure history (Gaddam and Ferraro 2008). It is worth noting
that the amplitude of ABR wave I was signiﬁcantly larger and easier to identify
when the ear canal was used as one of the recording sites relative to more con-
ventional scalp (mastoid) recordings. Given that the work to date in animal models
has revealed ABR wave I amplitude deﬁcits, the ear canal-based recording protocol
seems likely to optimize technical aspects of data collection.
10
Clinical and Translational Research: Challenges to the Field
253

At recent professional meetings, the Stamper and Johnson (2015a) report was
cited in numerous presentations as conﬁrmatory evidence that noise exposure
produces neuropathic damage in the human ear; however, caution is clearly still
warranted. First, correlational studies of this nature cannot conﬁrm causal rela-
tionships. More importantly, however, Stamper and Johnson (2015a) unfortunately
did not assess whether there was an interaction with sex. Males typically have
smaller ABR amplitudes and longer ABR latencies than females (Hall 1992). Males
typically also have more signiﬁcant noise exposure histories than their female peers.
Thus, there is a clear potential for confounded outcomes if the effect of sex is not
controlled for in the analysis. Worth noting, Stamper and Johnson (2015b) recently
reported that on sex-speciﬁc analysis, this purported relationship was statistically
reliable within their female cohort, but for males, the trend was for wave I
amplitude to increase (grow larger) with increasing noise exposure, although this
relationship was not statistically signiﬁcant. It may be the case that routine expo-
sures encountered by this college student cohort did not induce the phenomena of
interest. Noise exposures that resulted in smaller TTS (i.e., on the order of 20 dB
measured 24 h postnoise) did not result in any decrease in ABR amplitudes in mice
(Hickox and Liberman 2014; Jensen et al. 2015) or in rats (Lobarinas et al. 2015).
In humans, when the effects of noise were previously studied in ﬁve male partic-
ipants, there was no reliable noise-induced decrease in wave I amplitude despite
30-dB threshold shifts immediately postnoise (Klein and Mills 1981). New data
continue to emerge, with Plack and colleagues recently presenting data indicating
no reliable relationship between recreational noise exposure, evoked potential
amplitude, and speech-in-noise performance (Prendergast et al. 2016). Our
emerging data similarly show no relationship between recreational noise exposure
and speech-in-noise performance (Le Prell and Lobarinas 2016).
Additional studies that control for multiple potentially important variables will
be needed before meaningful discussions regarding changes in federal regulations
can take place. Scientiﬁcally important issues should be considered separately from
regulatory issues wherever possible. A relationship between noise exposure and
suprathreshold deﬁcits, such as speech-in-noise deﬁcits, is important and indeed
represents a novel target through which worker health protections might be lobbied
to be strengthened. From a regulatory perspective, however, it is perhaps relatively
unimportant whether the speech-in-noise deﬁcit is related to a selective synap-
topathy
or
some
other
pathology.
Attributing
psychophysical
deﬁcits
in
noise-exposed participants to synaptic damage as opposed to the possibility of
subtle hair cell damage, which can modify the effects of selective synaptic or neural
damage (for review and discussion, see Young 2012), is a scientiﬁc issue with
perhaps translational importance for treatment strategies. In other words, if func-
tional deﬁcits in the form of signiﬁcantly poorer speech-in-noise performance were
reliably related to noise insult, this would be an important ﬁnding regardless of
whether the functional deﬁcit was linked to synaptopathic or stereocilia damage.
However, distinguishing subtle outer hair cell from neuropathic damage would be
essential for the purpose of designing pharmaceutical interventions and drug studies
that target speciﬁc cell types. The level of evidence should be carefully considered
254
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

as part of any additional call for regulatory change. In an evidence-based practice
model, being critical about the quality of the evidence is a goal, not a character ﬂaw
(Dollaghan 2004). Only with agreement on metrics such as where electrodes should
be placed, what speech-in-noise tests are the most sensitive to change (given
speculation that this will be the most disrupted functional metric), how to account
for potential inﬂuence of earplugs that may or may not have been used consistently
or correctly, and what additional independent variables to include (such as sex) can
new studies begin to raise questions about the point at which hazard begins.
10.4
Common “Equipment” Platforms
With the potential metric of the cABR in hand, a key challenge facing Krause and
Anderson was the development of a platform that could be readily available to
clinicians. As they discuss in Chap. 3, the cABR test platform developed at
Northwestern University was incorporated into the existing Bio-logic System
(“BioMARK”) in 2005 and in 2011 was incorporated into the Intelligent Hearing
Systems SmartEP evoked potential device as a research module.
Similar “platform” challenges are evident with tinnitus as varying tinnitus sur-
veys have been used across different studies. The lack of common platforms and the
possibility that the method by which data are collected (by handing the subject a
survey to independently complete on paper or asking the questions in an interview
format) could conceivably inﬂuence the participant’s response are signiﬁcant
concerns for translational research efforts. The Hawthorne effect is a phenomenon
whereby participant behaviors (or beliefs, perceptions, etc.) are modiﬁed as a
function of that behavior being under observation, and the effects are strongest
when the participant interacts with a particularly “likable” observer and the par-
ticipant wants to meet the observer’s expectations (Berthelot et al. 2011). The total
amount of time spent in follow-up (abbreviated testing at some visits versus
comprehensive follow-up at all visits) can also inﬂuence study results and is con-
sistent with the Hawthorne effect (McCarney et al. 2007). Consequently,
researchers studying tinnitus and other perceptual disorders for which there are no
clear objective metrics are at a distinct disadvantage that is further exacerbated by
the subjective and varied nature of outcome measures.
The issue of common equipment platforms is clearly relevant to the efforts of
Staecker, Klickstein, and Brough as well. As they discuss in Chap. 8, they are
performing the ﬁrst ever gene therapy intervention in the human cochlea and
implementing a novel surgical approach, an approach that would be potentially
useful to other surgeons in future clinical trials. Finally, readers will quickly see
there has been signiﬁcant variation with respect to different techniques in optoge-
netics, optoacoustics, and infrared neural stimulation, all of which are being
assessed for use in novel cochlear prostheses platforms, as reviewed in Chap. 9 by
Tan, Xia, and Richter. The technology for optical stimulation is still under devel-
opment, and although it is too early to choose precise test parameters, animal
10
Clinical and Translational Research: Challenges to the Field
255

studies will hopefully include evoked potential assessments across a wide range of
frequencies representative of the animals’ full range of hearing sensitivity.
10.5
Regulatory Requirements
Interactions with the FDA process are discussed by Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell,
Chap. 5; Campbell and Fox, Chap. 6; and Staecker, Klickstein, and Brough, Chap.
8. These interactions are also clearly relevant to Chap. 9 by Tan, Xia, and Richter.
If devices that use light to stimulate auditory neurons are to be implanted in
humans, there will obviously be a substantive safety review before the ﬁrst devices
can be surgically implanted.
10.5.1
Regulation of New Devices
Although the development of these potential next-generation implants is in its
infancy, demonstrating efﬁcacy and safety of these devices for long-term use will be
an important next step. Richter and colleagues describe advances in infrared neural
stimulation in detail and highlight the prospects for translation. Lessons regarding
the necessary next steps can be readily drawn from the animal literature on implant
technology. Early studies in animals will need to provide parametric data equivalent
to those collected in studies on current ﬂow, impedance, site of stimulation, and
frequency-response relationships (Clopton and Spelman 1982; Spelman et al.
1982). Patterns of damage observed after electrode insertion and stimulation were
of particular importance in these early studies (Miller et al. 1983; Duckert and
Miller 1984, 1986). There is a fascinating history of human testing and develop-
ment of cochlear implantation ﬁrst performed by Djurno and Eyriés in Paris in 1957
(Eshraghi et al. 2012). Although these early efforts failed, they demonstrated that
electrical stimulation of the inner ear was possible and led to continued efforts by
House in the United States beginning in the 1960s. Some 50 years later, the
development of the implant is still active and ongoing with respect to new electrode
coatings (Tykocinski and Cowan 2005; Richardson et al. 2009), new implant
materials (Gwon et al. 2015), and an exciting new prosthesis that is being actively
modiﬁed to allow local drug delivery (Hendricks et al. 2008; Nguyen et al. 2009;
Farhadi et al. 2013). These advances will allow for agents of interest, including not
only dexamethasone but also particles developed using advances in nanotechnol-
ogy, to be infused to improve outcomes (Meyer et al. 2012). The potential beneﬁts
of combined electroacoustic function are also being assessed in animals (Tanaka
et al. 2014; Reiss et al. 2015) as well as being adopted in humans (Santa Maria et al.
2014; Causon et al. 2015). In addition to modiﬁcations to allow drug delivery and
the three novel strategies for neural stimulation, as described by Tan et al. in
Chap. 9, other strategies continue to emerge. For example, penetrating electrode
256
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

arrays have been developed (Middlebrooks and Snyder 2007, 2008) to move away
from delivering electrical charge within the ﬂuid space to direct electrical stimu-
lation, results that produce a narrower and more focused spread of excitation than
traditional electrode stimulation. Taken together, the kinds of studies that set the
stage for new surgical interventions are well established. As noted in several
chapters (see, e.g., Chap. 5), the device side of the FDA is well versed, particularly
for audiometric testing within clinical trials, and there is a relatively clear path
forward for the implant of devices to restore hearing to the profoundly deaf.
10.5.2
Regulation of Drug Research
Lynch, Kil, and Le Prell (Chap. 5) and Campbell and Fox (Chap. 6) discussed
clinical testing and other developmental steps in the pathway to the development of
a new ethical (prescription) drug. With the move to develop regenerative therapies,
the complexity of the task increases. This was discussed in detail by Staecker,
Klicktein, and Brough in Chap. 8. Gene therapy is also being combined with
cochlear implants. Conversely, cochlear implant interventions have also driven
gene therapy, whereby genes that drive neurotrophin production can be used to
achieve better implant performance (Pinyon et al. 2014). The promise of stem cell
research (Hu and Ulfendahl 2013) has been highlighted in recent descriptions of
FDA-approved studies for treating hearing loss, one of which is being conducted at
Children’s Memorial Hermann Hospital in Houston, Texas. Although in-depth
discussion on the role of stem cell therapy is beyond the scope of this chapter, it is
likely to play a signiﬁcant complementary role in cochlear implants and inner ear
repair/regeneration research in the not so distant future.
10.6
Placebo Controls
Placebo control conditions are used to assess the extent of improvement or percent
of participants who improve in the absence of an active treatment agent, with all
other study conditions held equal. A fascinating development in the understanding
of placebo effects comes from the recent work of Kathryn Hall (Hall et al. 2012,
2015; Hall and Kaptchuk 2013). They ﬁrst reported a link between the gene that
encodes the enzyme catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), which breaks down
catecholamines, and the size of the placebo response in patients with irritable bowel
syndrome (Hall et al. 2012); those with a particular genetic conﬁguration (i.e., the
met-met genotype for the COMT enzyme) had more robust improvements after a
sham acupuncture treatment. Excluding strong placebo responders from a clinical
trial would theoretically reduce the size of the placebo effect and would potentially
allow drug beneﬁts to be measured in smaller, and less expensive, studies. A patent
based on this concept has been ﬁled (Winkler et al. 2015). According to one of the
10
Clinical and Translational Research: Challenges to the Field
257

inventors, “Drug discovery is not about whether a drug works. It’s about whether it
works better than a placebo control” (Ted Kaptchuk, quoted in Servick 2014,
p. 1446). To put this into perspective, Winkler points to placebo response rates
ranging from 5 to 30 % and states, “Where do you start? Assume 5 %, run a small
trial, and fail? Or start with the assumption of 30 %, and have a very big trial which
costs a lot of money and may preclude the drug developer from running other
studies?” (Gunther Winkler, quoted in Servick 2014, p. 1446). As discussed by
Servick (2014), this screening strategy might ultimately be more appropriate for
speeding early-phase small-scale tests, as there are concerns that come with sys-
tematically excluding a participant population that may also be good drug
responders. Regardless of whether there is a relationship between the mechanisms
of placebo response and those of the response to the investigative agent, excluding
people with a particular genetic background modiﬁes the population such that it is
systematically different from the targeted patient population, a strategy that is not
typically preferred for clinical trials.
In Sect. 10.2, the ethics of withholding treatment that “might” provide beneﬁt
was questioned. This is a difﬁcult issue for cases in which it is not clear that there is
an effective standard of care that a new drug should be compared against. When
there is no accepted treatment, a placebo control is generally deemed appropriate
and ethical. However, when there is an accepted therapeutic intervention, a new
drug would be more likely to be assessed in an equivalency analysis to ensure it is
at least “as good” as the current standard of care. In Chap. 1, Le Prell and Lobarinas
noted that multiple systematic reviews suggest there to be little or no systematic
evidence of beneﬁt when steroid-treated patients are compared to patients who
received a placebo (Wei et al. 2013; Crane et al. 2015). In the case of SSHL,
however, steroid treatment is the standard of care regardless of whether there is
robust evidence suggesting it provides beneﬁt. Because there is a conventional care
option, it is extremely difﬁcult to recruit subjects to new clinical studies if they may
be randomized to a placebo condition rather than to the best available treatment
currently identiﬁed (Rauch 2015).
10.7
Summary
There is an increasing emphasis on evidence-based practice (EBP) among health
and health-related professions. This is driven in part by managed care considera-
tions due to third-party payers increasingly demanding evidence that the procedures
and treatments being reimbursed are efﬁcacious. There is a much larger landscape,
however, with a moral and ethical imperative to deliver the best possible care to
patients. There is increasing consensus that the “best” care is evidence-based care,
embedded in EBP. Healthcare within the EBP model requires that healthcare
decisions be based on evidence that the recommended treatments or interventions
258
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

are likely to provide beneﬁt, and this model has been advocated with respect to
hearing healthcare (Dollaghan 2004; Valente 2005; Moodie et al. 2011). The pre-
cursors to EBP are discussed in Chap. 2 by Le Prell, and one of the central themes
of this text is that translational research is urgently needed across the ﬁeld of
hearing and related sciences as these data provide the foundation upon which
clinical care is advanced.
Millions of dollars are devoted to hearing-related research every year. According
to the FY 2016 Congressional Justiﬁcation, the budget for extramural hearing &
balance research was US $203M in FY 2014 and US $204M in FY 2015 and is US
$210M in the president’s FY 2016 budget (http://www.nidcd.nih.gov/about/plans/
congressional/Pages/CJ16.aspx). In their discussion of key advances in the past
year, the NIDCD summary highlights investments in translating discovery into
health through studies linking hearing loss and depression and studies identifying
strategies for improving communication in children with autism. The two high-
lighted priorities for FY 2016 are both translational in nature: “Harnessing Data and
Technology
to
Improved
Health—Hearing
Health
Care”
and
“Translating
Discovery into Health—Global Health and Reducing Health Disparities among
Minority and Underserved Children.” There is a keen interest in application of
knowledge generated in basic research investigations to applied investigations in
order to determine health-related beneﬁt and impact. The number of Americans
with hearing loss is expected to increase given the aging of the American popu-
lation. The major advances in knowledge have the potential to signiﬁcantly improve
hearing and communication outcomes in this aging population as a result of suc-
cessful clinical translation.
The chapters in this volume stress the need for basic mechanistic understanding
of disorders and diseases, objective diagnostic tools and criteria, and agreed-on
metrics for measuring improvements in human populations. Teams are needed to
successfully marry basic and applied investigations and to seamlessly move back
and forth between the benchtop in the laboratory and the bedside in the clinical trial
and patient care areas. Funding can be challenging and regulatory procedures that
protect human participants can be onerous, but the end goal of improved patient
outcomes is something that all parties seek and prioritize.
Compliance with Ethics Requirements
Colleen Le Prell has received contract funding from industry sources including
Sound Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Edison Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Hearing Health
Sciences, Inc., and MaxSound, Inc. She is a co-inventor on patents assigned to the
University of Michigan and the University of Florida.
Edward Lobarinas declares no conﬂict of interest.
10
Clinical and Translational Research: Challenges to the Field
259

References
American Academy of Audiology. (2009). Position statement and clinical practice guidelines:
Ototoxicity monitoring [Online, veriﬁed 7/5/2016]. http://audiology-web.s3.amazonaws.com/
migrated/OtoMonGuidelines.pdf_539974c40999c1.58842217.pdf.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (1994). Guidelines for the audiologic manage-
ment of individuals receiving cochleotoxic drug therapy. ASHA, 36(Suppl. 12), 11–19.
Anderson, J. M., & Campbell, K. (2015). Assessment of interventions to prevent drug-induced
hearing loss. In J. M. Miller, C. G. Le Prell, & L. P. Rybak (Eds.), Oxidative stress in applied
basic research and clinical practice: Free radicals in ENT pathology (pp. 243–269). New
York: Humana Press.
ANSI S3.6-1989, “American National Standard Speciﬁcations for Audiometers.”
Baguley, D., & Norman, M. (2001). Tinnitus handicap inventory. Journal of the American
Academy of Audiology, 12(7), 379–380.
Bauer, C. A., Berry, J., & Brozoski, T. J. (2016). Clinical trials supported by the Tinnitus Research
Consortium:
Lessons
learned,
the
Southern
Illinois
University
experience.
Hearing
Research, 334, 65–71.
Berlin,
C.
I.,
Hood,
L.,
Morlet,
T.,
Rose,
K.,
&
Brashears,
S.
(2003).
Auditory
neuropathy/dys-synchrony:
Diagnosis
and
management.
Mental
Retardation
and
Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 9(4), 225–231.
Berthelot, J. M., Le Goff, B., & Maugars, Y. (2011). The Hawthorne effect: Stronger than the
placebo effect? Joint Bone Spine, 78(4), 335–336.
Best, V., Gallun, F. J., Mason, C. R., Kidd, G., Jr., & Shinn-Cunningham, B. G. (2010). The
impact of noise and hearing loss on the processing of simultaneous sentences. Ear and
Hearing, 31(2), 213–220.
Bharadwaj, H. M., Verhulst, S., Shaheen, L., Liberman, M. C., & Shinn-Cunningham, B. G.
(2014). Cochlear neuropathy and the coding of supra-threshold sound. Frontiers in Systems
Neuroscience, 8, 26.
Bharadwaj, H. M., Masud, S., Mehraei, G., Verhulst, S., & Shinn-Cunningham, B. G. (2015).
Individual differences reveal correlates of hidden hearing deﬁcits. Journal of Neuroscience, 35
(5), 2161–2172.
Bramhall, N., Ong, B., Ko, J., & Parker, M. (2015). Speech perception ability in noise is correlated
with auditory brainstem response wave I amplitude. Journal of the American Academy of
Audiology, 26, 509–517.
Buss, E., Labadie, R. F., Brown, C. J., Gross, A. J., Grose, J. H., & Pillsbury, H. C. (2002).
Outcome of cochlear implantation in pediatric auditory neuropathy. Otology & Neurotology,
23(3), 328–332.
Causon, A., Verschuur, C., & Newman, T. A. (2015). A retrospective analysis of the contribution
of reported factors in cochlear implantation on hearing preservation outcomes. Otology &
Neurotology, 36(7), 1137–1145.
Chung, D. Y., Gannon, R. P., & Mason, K. (1984). Factors affecting the prevalence of tinnitus.
Audiology, 23(5), 441–452.
Clopton, B. M., & Spelman, F. A. (1982). Neural mechanisms relevant to the design of an auditory
prosthesis. Location and electrical characteristics. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and
Laryngology (Supplement), 98, 9–14.
Crane, R. A., Camilon, M., Nguyen, S., & Meyer, T. A. (2015). Steroids for treatment of sudden
sensorineural hearing loss: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Laryngoscope,
125(1), 209–217.
De Leenheer, E. M., Dhooge, I. J., Veuillet, E., Lina-Granade, G., & Truy, E. (2008). Cochlear
implantation in 3 adults with auditory neuropathy/auditory dys-synchrony. B-ENT, 4(3),
183–191.
Dobie, R. A. (1999). A review of randomized clinical trials in tinnitus. Laryngoscope, 109(8),
1202–1211.
260
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

Dobie, R. A., Sakai, C. S., Sullivan, M. D., Katon, W. J., & Russo, J. (1993). Antidepressant
treatment of tinnitus patients: Report of a randomized clinical trial and clinical prediction of
beneﬁt. American Journal of Otology, 14(1), 18–23.
Dollaghan, C. A. (2004). Evidence-based practice in communication disorders: What do we know,
and when do we know it? Journal of Communication Disorders, 37(5), 391–400.
Duckert, L. G., & Miller, J. M. (1984). Morphological changes following cochlear implantation in
the animal model. Acta Oto-Laryngologica Supplementum, 411, 28–37.
Duckert, L. G., & Miller, J. M. (1986). Mechanisms of electrically induced damage after cochlear
implantation. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology, 95(2 Pt 1), 185–189.
Eshraghi, A. A., Nazarian, R., Telischi, F. F., Rajguru, S. M., Truy, E., & Gupta, C. (2012). The
cochlear implant: Historical aspects and future prospects. Anatomical Record, 295(11),
1967–1980.
Farhadi, M., Jalessi, M., Salehian, P., Ghavi, F. F., Emamjomeh, H., et al. (2013). Dexamethasone
eluting cochlear implant: Histological study in animal model. Cochlear Implants International,
14(1), 45–50.
Fernandes, N. F., Morettin, M., Yamaguti, E. H., Costa, O. A., & Bevilacqua, M. C. (2015).
Performance of hearing skills in children with auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder using
cochlear implant: A systematic review. Brazilian Journal of Otorhinolaryngology, 81(1),
85–96.
Fernandez, K.A., Jeffers, P.W., Lall, K., Liberman, M.C., & Kujawa, S.G. (2015). Aging after
noise exposure: Acceleration of cochlear synaptopathy in “recovered” ears. Journal of
Neuroscience, 35, 7509–7520.
Furman, A. C., Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2013). Noise-induced cochlear neuropathy is
selective for ﬁbers with low spontaneous rates. Journal of Neurophysiology, 110(3), 577–586.
Gaddam, A., & Ferraro, J.A. (2008). ABR recordings in newborns using an ear canal electrode.
International Journal of Audiology, 47(8), 499–504.
Gu, J. W., Halpin, C. F., Nam, E. C., Levine, R. A., & Melcher, J. R. (2010). Tinnitus, diminished
sound-level tolerance, and elevated auditory activity in humans with clinically normal hearing
sensitivity. Journal of Neurophysiology, 104(6), 3361–3370.
Gwon, T. M., Min, K. S., Kim, J. H., Oh, S. H., Lee, H. S., et al. (2015). Fabrication and
evaluation of an improved polymer-based cochlear electrode array for atraumatic insertion.
Biomedical Microdevices, 17(2), 32.
Hall, J. W. I. (1992). Handbook of auditory evoked responses. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Hall, K. T., & Kaptchuk, T. J. (2013). Genetic biomarkers of placebo response: What could it
mean for future trial design? Clinical Investigation (London), 3(4), 311–314.
Hall, K. T., Lembo, A. J., Kirsch, I., Ziogas, D. C., Douaiher, J., et al. (2012). Catechol-O-
methyltransferase val158met polymorphism predicts placebo effect in irritable bowel
syndrome. PLoS ONE, 7(10), e48135.
Hall, K. T., Loscalzo, J., & Kaptchuk, T. J. (2015). Genetics and the placebo effect: The
placebome. Trends in Molecular Medicine, 21(5), 285–294.
Hellstrom, P. A., Axelsson, A., & Costa, O. (1998). Temporary threshold shift induced by music.
Scandinavian Audiology Supplementum, 48, 87–94.
Hendricks, J. L., Chikar, J. A., Crumling, M. A., Raphael, Y., & Martin, D. C. (2008). Localized
cell and drug delivery for auditory prostheses. Hearing Research, 242(1–2), 117–131.
Henry, J. A., Griest, S., Thielman, E., McMillan, G., Kaelin, C., & Carlson, K. F. (2016). Tinnitus
Functional Index: Development, validation, outcomes research, and clinical application.
Hearing Research, 334, 58–64.
Henry, J. L., & Wilson, P. H. (1998). The psychometric properties of two measures of tinnitus
complaint and handicap. International Tinnitus Journal, 4(2), 114–121.
Hickox, A. E., & Liberman, M. C. (2014). Is noise-induced cochlear neuropathy key to the
generation of hyperacusis or tinnitus? Journal of Neurophysiology, 111(3), 552–564.
Hoare, D. J., & Hall, D. A. (2011). Clinical guidelines and practice: A commentary on the
complexity of tinnitus management. Evaluation and the Health Professions, 34(4), 413–420.
Hood, L. J. (2011). Variation in auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder: Implications for
evaluation and management. Seminars in Hearing, 32(2), 117–122.
10
Clinical and Translational Research: Challenges to the Field
261

Hope, A. J., Luxon, L. M., & Bamiou, D. E. (2013). Effects of chronic noise exposure on
speech-in-noise perception in the presence of normal audiometry. Journal of Laryngology and
Otology, 127(3), 233–238.
House, J. W., & Brackmann, D. E. (1981). Tinnitus: Surgical treatment. Ciba Foundation
Symposium, 85, 204–216.
Hu, Z., & Ulfendahl, M. (2013). The potential of stem cells for the restoration of auditory function
in humans. Regenerative Medicine, 8(3), 309–318.
ISO/R226-1985, “International Standard Organization Normal Equal-Loudness Contours for Pure
Tones Under Free-Field Listening Conditions.”
Jensen, J. B., Lysaght, A. C., Liberman, M. C., Qvortrup, K., & Stankovic, K. M. (2015).
Immediate and delayed cochlear neuropathy after noise exposure in pubescent mice. PLoS
One, 10(5), e0125160.
Jeong, S. W., & Kim, L. S. (2013). Auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder: Predictive value of
radiologic studies and electrophysiologic tests on cochlear implant outcomes and its radiologic
classiﬁcation. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 133(7), 714–721.
Ji, F., Li, J., Hong, M., Chen, A., Jiao, Q., et al. (2015). Determination of beneﬁts of cochlear
implantation in children with auditory neuropathy. PLoS ONE, 10(5), e0127566.
Klein, A. J., & Mills, J. H. (1981). Physiological and psychophysical measures from humans with
temporary threshold shift. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 70(4), 1045–1053.
Konrad-Martin, D., Dille, M. F., McMillan, G., Griest, S., McDermott, D., et al. (2012).
Age-related changes in the auditory brainstem response. Journal of the American Academy of
Audiology, 23(1), 18–35; quiz 74–75.
Kontorinis, G., Lloyd, S. K., Henderson, L., Jayewardene-Aston, D., Milward, K., et al. (2014).
Cochlear implantation in children with auditory neuropathy spectrum disorders. Cochlear
Implants International, 15(Suppl. 1), S51–S54.
Kopke, R., Slade, M. D., Jackson, R., Hammill, T., Fausti, S., et al. (2015). Efﬁcacy and safety of
N-acetylcysteine in prevention of noise induced hearing loss: A randomized clinical trial.
Hearing Research, 323, 40–50.
Kujawa, S. G. (2014). Putting the ‘neural’ back in sensorineural: Primary cochlear neurodegen-
eration in noise and aging. The Hearing Journal, 67(11), 8.
Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2006). Acceleration of age-related hearing loss by early noise
exposure: Evidence of a misspent youth. Journal of Neuroscience, 26(7), 2115–2123.
Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2009). Adding insult to injury: Cochlear nerve degeneration
after “temporary” noise-induced hearing loss. Journal of Neuroscience, 29(45), 14077–14085.
Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2015). Synaptopathy in the noise-exposed and aging cochlea:
Primary neural degeneration in acquired sensorineural hearing loss. Hearing Research, 330(Pt
B), 191–199.
Langguth, B., Salvi, R., & Elgoyhen, A. B. (2009). Emerging pharmacotherapy of tinnitus. Expert
Opinion on Emerging Drugs, 14(4), 687–702.
Langguth, B., Kleinjung, T., & Landgrebe, M. (2011). Tinnitus: The complexity of standardiza-
tion. Evaluation and the Health Professions, 34(4), 429–433.
Lee, P. C., Senders, C. W., Gantz, B. J., & Otto, S. R. (1985). Transient sensorineural hearing loss
after overuse of portable headphone cassette radios. Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery,
93(5), 622–625.
Le Prell, C. G., & Lobarinas, E. (2015). Strategies for assessing antioxidant efﬁcacy in clinical
trials. In J. M. Miller, C. G. Le Prell & L. P. Rybak (Eds.), Oxidative stress in applied basic
research and clinical practice: Free radicals in ENT pathology (pp. 163–192). New York:
Humana Press.
Le Prell, C. G. & Lobarinas, E. (2016). No relationship between recreational noise history and
performance on the Words-in-Noise (WIN) test in normal hearing young adults. Association
for Research in Otolaryngology, 39th Midwinter Meeting Abstracts, page 68. Mt. Royal, NJ:
Association for Research in Otolaryngology.
Le Prell, C. G., & Brungart, D. S. (in press). Potential effects of noise on hearing: Supra-threshold
testing using speech-in-noise and auditory evoked potentials. Otology & Neurotology.
262
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

Lin, C. Y., Wu, J. L., Shih, T. S., Tsai, P. J., Sun, Y. M., et al. (2010). N-Acetyl-cysteine against
noise-induced temporary threshold shift in male workers. Hearing Research, 269(1–2), 42–47.
Lin, H. W., Furman, A. C., Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2011). Primary neural
degeneration in the guinea pig cochlea after reversible noise-induced threshold shift. Journal of
the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 12(5), 605–616.
Lobarinas, E., Spankovich, C., & Le Prell, C. G. (2015). Normal thresholds but poorer hearing in
noise following a “deafferenting” exposure. Abstracts of the Association for Research in
Otolaryngology, 38, 447.
Maison, S. F., Usubuchi, H., & Liberman, M. C. (2013). Efferent feedback minimizes cochlear
neuropathy from moderate noise exposure. Journal of Neuroscience, 33(13), 5542–5552.
Makary, C. A., Shin, J., Kujawa, S. G., Liberman, M. C., & Merchant, S. N. (2011). Age-related
primary cochlear neuronal degeneration in human temporal bones. Journal of the Association
for Research in Otolaryngology, 12(6), 711–717.
McCarney, R., Warner, J., Iliffe, S., van Haselen, R., Grifﬁn, M., & Fisher, P. (2007). The
Hawthorne Effect: A randomised, controlled trial. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 7, 30.
Meyer, H., Stover, T., Fouchet, F., Bastiat, G., Saulnier, P., et al. (2012). Lipidic nanocapsule drug
delivery: Neuronal protection for cochlear implant optimization. International Journal of
Nanomedicine, 7, 2449–2464.
Michalewski, H. J., Starr, A., Nguyen, T. T., Kong, Y. Y., & Zeng, F.-G. (2005). Auditory
temporal processes in normal-hearing individuals and in patients with auditory neuropathy.
Clinical Neurophysiology, 116(3), 669–680.
Middlebrooks, J. C., & Snyder, R. L. (2007). Auditory prosthesis with a penetrating nerve array.
Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 8(2), 258–279.
Middlebrooks, J. C., & Snyder, R. L. (2008). Intraneural stimulation for auditory prosthesis:
Modiolar trunk and intracranial stimulation sites. Hearing Research, 242(1–2), 52–63.
Miller, J. M., Duckert, L. G., Malone, M. A., & Pﬁngst, B. E. (1983). Cochlear prostheses:
Stimulation-induced damage. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology, 92(6 Pt 1),
599–609.
Moodie, S. T., Kothari, A., Bagatto, M. P., Seewald, R., Miller, L. T., & Scollie, S. D. (2011).
Knowledge translation in audiology: Promoting the clinical application of best evidence.
Trends in Ampliﬁcation, 15(1), 5–22.
Moser, T., Predoehl, F., & Starr, A. (2013). Review of hair cell synapse defects in sensorineural
hearing impairment. Otology & Neurotology, 34(6), 995–1004.
National Health Service (NHS). (2008). Guidelines for identiﬁcation and management of infants
and
young
children
with
auditory
neuropathy
spectrum
disorder.
http://www.
childrenscolorado.org/File%20Library/Conditions-Programs/ASL/ANSD-Monograph-Bill-
Daniels-Center-for-Childrens-Hearing.pdf. Accessed November 19, 2015.
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). (1998). Criteria for a
Recommended Standard, Occupational Noise Exposure, DHHS (NIOSH) Publication
No. 98–126.
Nguyen, Y., Couloigner, V., Rudic, M., Nguyen, Y., Couloigner, V., et al. (2009). An animal
model
of
cochlear
implantation
with
an
intracochlear
ﬂuid
delivery
system.
Acta
Oto-Laryngologica, 129(11), 1153–1159.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). (1983). 29 CFR 1910.95. Occupational
Noise Exposure; Hearing Conservation Amendment; Final Rule, effective 8 March 1983. U.S.
Department of Labor, Occupational Safety & Health Administration.
Pinyon, J. L., Tadros, S. F., Froud, K. E., Y Wong, A. C., Tompson, I. T., et al. (2014). Close-ﬁeld
electroporation gene delivery using the cochlear implant electrode array enhances the bionic
ear. Science Translational Medicine, 6(233), 233–254.
Prendergast, G., Guest, H., Hall, D., Kluk de-Kort, K., Léger, A., et al. (2016). An investigation of
hidden hearing loss in young adults with normal hearing. Association for Research in
Otolaryngology, 39th Midwinter Meeting Abstracts, page 202. Mt. Royal, NJ: Association for
Research in Otolaryngology.
10
Clinical and Translational Research: Challenges to the Field
263

Pugsley, S., Stuart, A., Kalinowski, J., & Armson, J. (1993). Changes in hearing sensitivity
following portable stereo system use. American Journal of Audiology, 2, 64–67.
Quaranta, A., Scaringi, A., Bartoli, R., Margarito, M. A., & Quaranta, N. (2004). The effects of
‘supra-physiological’ vitamin B12 administration on temporary threshold shift. International
Journal of Audiology, 43(3), 162–165.
Quaranta, N., Dicorato, A., Matera, V., D’Elia, A., & Quaranta, A. (2012). The effect of
alpha-lipoic acid on temporary threshold shift in humans: A preliminary study. Acta
Otorhinolaryngologica Italica, 32(6), 380–385.
Rauch, S. D. (2015). Clinical trials in acute hearing loss. Presented at “Rational Pharmacotherapy
for Acute Hearing Loss-Recent Advances and Perspectives,” a corporate symposium
sponsored by Auris Medical, September 28, 2015, Dallas, TX.
Rauch, S. D., Halpin, C. F., Antonelli, P. J., Babu, S., Carey, J. P., et al. (2011). Oral vs
intratympanic corticosteroid therapy for idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing loss: A
randomized trial. JAMA, 305(20), 2071–2079.
Reiss, L. A., Stark, G., Nguyen-Huynh, A. T., Spear, K. A., Zhang, H., et al. (2015).
Morphological correlates of hearing loss after cochlear implantation and electro-acoustic
stimulation in a hearing-impaired guinea pig model. Hearing Research, 327, 163–174.
Richardson, R. T., Wise, A. K., Thompson, B. C., Flynn, B. O., Atkinson, P. J., et al. (2009).
Polypyrrole-coated electrodes for the delivery of charge and neurotrophins to cochlear neurons.
Biomaterials, 30(13), 2614–2624.
Roush, P. (2008). Management of children with auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder: Hearing
aids. Guidelines for identiﬁcatation and management of infants and young children with
auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder, 30–32. http://www.childrenscolorado.org/File%
20Library/Conditions-Programs/ASL/ANSD-Monograph-Bill-Daniels-Center-for-Childrens-
Hearing.pdf. Accessed November 19, 2015.
Ruggles, D., Bharadwaj, H., & Shinn-Cunningham, B. G. (2011). Normal hearing is not enough to
guarantee robust encoding of suprathreshold features important in everyday communication.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 108(37), 15516–15521.
Samelli, A. G., Matas, C. G., Carvallo, R. M., Gomes, R. F., de Beija, C. S., et al. (2012).
Audiological and electrophysiological assessment of professional pop/rock musicians. Noise &
Health, 14(56), 6–12.
Santa Maria, P. L., Gluth, M. B., Yuan, Y., Atlas, M. D., & Blevins, N. H. (2014). Hearing
preservation surgery for cochlear implantation: A meta-analysis. Otology & Neurotology, 35
(10), e256–e269.
Santarelli, R., Starr, A., Michalewski, H. J., & Arslan, E. (2008). Neural and receptor cochlear
potentials obtained by transtympanic electrocochleography in auditory neuropathy. Clinical
Neurophysiology, 119(5), 1028–1041.
Searchﬁeld, G. (2011). A commentary on the complexity of tinnitus management: Clinical
guidelines provide a path through the fog. Evaluation and the Health Professions, 34(4),
421–428.
Servick, K. (2014). Outsmarting the placebo effect. Science, 345(6203), 1446–1447.
Shallop, J. K. (2008). Management of children with auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder:
Cochlear implants. Guidelines for identiﬁcation and management of infants and young
children with auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder, 33–34. http://www.childrenscolorado.
org/File%20Library/Conditions-Programs/ASL/ANSD-Monograph-Bill-Daniels-Center-for-
Childrens-Hearing.pdf. Accessed November 19, 2015.
Shrivastav, M. N. (2012). Suprathreshold auditory processing deﬁcits in noise-induced hearing
loss. In C. G. Le Prell, D. Henderson, R. R. Fay & A. N. Popper (Eds.), Noise-induced hearing
loss: Scientiﬁc advances. (pp. 137–150). New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Simmons, J. L. (2009). Cochlear implants in auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder. This article
ﬁrst appeared in ASHA Access Audiology, 8(3), May/June 2009. Available at http://www.asha.
org/aud/articles/CochlearImplantsANSD/. Accessed November 19, 2015.
Sininger, Y. (2008). Auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder: Challenges and questions. Guidelines
for identiﬁcation and management of infants and young children with auditory neuropathy
264
C.G. Le Prell and E. Lobarinas

spectrum
disorder,
9–14.
http://www.childrenscolorado.org/File%20Library/Conditions-
Programs/ASL/ANSD-Monograph-Bill-Daniels-Center-for-Childrens-Hearing.pdf.
Accessed
November 19, 2015.
Spankovich, C., Grifﬁths, S.K., Lobarinas, E., Morgenstein, K.E., de la Calle, S., et al. (2014).
Temporary threshold shift after impulse-noise during video game play: Laboratory data.
International Journal of Audiology, 53 Supplement 2, S53–S65.
Spelman, F. A., Clopton, B. M., & Pﬁngst, B. E. (1982). Tissue impedance and current ﬂow in the
implanted ear: Implications for the cochlear prosthesis. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and
Laryngology Supplement, 98, 3–8.
Stamper, G. C., & Johnson, T. A. (2015a). Auditory function in normal-hearing, noise-exposed
human ears. Ear and Hearing, 36(2), 172–184.
Stamper, G. C., & Johnson, T. A. (2015b). Letter to the Editor: Examination of potential sex
inﬂuences in auditory function in normal-hearing, noise-exposed human ears. Ear Hear, 36,
172–184. Ear and Hearing, 36(6), 738–740.
Starr, A., Picton, T. W., Sininger, Y., Hood, L. J., & Berlin, C. I. (1996). Auditory neuropathy.
Brain, 119 (Pt 3), 741–753.
Starr, A., Sininger, Y. S., & Pratt, H. (2000). The varieties of auditory neuropathy. Journal of
Basic and Clinical Physiology and Pharmacology, 11(3), 215–230.
Tanaka, C., Nguyen-Huynh, A., Loera, K., Stark, G., & Reiss, L. (2014). Factors associated with
hearing loss in a normal-hearing guinea pig model of hybrid cochlear implants. Hearing
Research, 316, 82–93.
Tykocinski, M., & Cowan, R. S. (2005). Poly-vinyl-alcohol (PVA) coating of cochlear implant
electrode arrays: An in-vivo biosafety study. Cochlear Implants International, 6(1), 16–30.
Tyler, R., Coelho, C., Tao, P., Ji, H., Noble, W., et al. (2008). Identifying tinnitus subgroups with
cluster analysis. American Journal of Audiology, 17(2), S176–S184.
Valente, M. (2005). Using evidence-based principles to make clinical decisions. Journal of the
American Academy of Audiology, 16(10), 768–769.
Walton, J., Gibson, W. P., Sanli, H., & Prelog, K. (2008). Predicting cochlear implant outcomes in
children with auditory neuropathy. Otology & Neurotology, 29(3), 302–309.
Wang, Y., & Ren, C. (2012). Effects of repeated “benign” noise exposures in young CBA mice:
Shedding light on age-related hearing loss. Journal of the Association for Research in
Otolaryngology, 13(4), 505–515.
Wei, B. P., Stathopoulos, D., & O’Leary, S. (2013). Steroids for idiopathic sudden sensorineural
hearing loss. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 7, Cd003998.
Wilson, P. H., Henry, J., Bowen, M., & Haralambous, G. (1991). Tinnitus reaction questionnaire:
Psychometric properties of a measure of distress associated with tinnitus. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Research, 34(1), 197–201.
Winkler, G., Hall, K. T., & Kaptchuk, T. J. (2015). Methods and kits for determining a placebo
proﬁle in subjects for clinical trials and for treatment of patients. US Patent Application
20150110718, published April 23, 2015; amended in US Patent Application 20150315651
published November 5, 2015. United States Patent Trademark Ofﬁce.
Wynne, D. P., Zeng, F.-G., Bhatt, S., Michalewski, H. J., Dimitrijevic, A., & Starr, A. (2013).
Loudness adaptation accompanying ribbon synapse and auditory nerve disorders. Brain, 136
(Pt 5), 1626–1638.
Young, E. D. (2012). Neural coding of sound with cochlear damage. In C. G. Le Prell, D.
Henderson, R. R. Fay, & A. N. Popper (Eds.), Noise-induced hearing loss: Scientiﬁc advances
(pp. 87–135). New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Zeman, F., Koller, M., Figueiredo, R., Aazevedo, A., Rates, M., et al. (2011). Tinnitus handicap
inventory
for
evaluating
treatment
effects:
Which
changes
are
clinically
relevant?
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 145(2), 282–287.
Zeng, F.-G., Oba, S., Garde, S., Sininger, Y., & Starr, A. (1999). Temporal and speech processing
deﬁcits in auditory neuropathy. NeuroReport, 10(16), 3429–3435.
Zeng, F.-G., Kong, Y. Y., Michalewski, H. J., & Starr, A. (2005). Perceptual consequences of
disrupted auditory nerve activity. Journal of Neurophysiology, 93(6), 3050–3063.
10
Clinical and Translational Research: Challenges to the Field
265

