
Translation Theories Explained
Translation Theories Explained is a series designed to respond to the
profound plurality of contemporary translation studies. There are many
problems to be solved, many possible approaches that can be drawn from
neighbouring disciplines, and several strong language-bound traditions
plagued by the paradoxical fact that some of the key theoretical texts have
yet to be translated.
Recognizing this plurality as both a strength and a potential shortcoming,
the series provides a format where different approaches can be compared,
their virtues assessed, and mutual blind spots overcome. There will also be
scope for introductions to specific areas of translation practice. Students
and scholars may thus gain comprehensive awareness of the work being
done beyond local or endemic frames.
Most volumes in the series place a general approach within its historical
context, giving examples to illustrate the main ideas, summarizing the most
significant debates and opening perspectives for future work. The authors
have been selected not only because of their command of a particular
approach but also in view of their openness to alternatives and their
willingness to discuss criticisms. In every respect the emphasis is on
explaining the essential points as clearly and as concisely as possible, using
numerous examples and providing glossaries of the main technical terms.
The series should prove particularly useful to students dealing with translation
theories for the first time, to teachers seeking to stimulate critical reflection,
and to scholars looking for a succinct overview of the field's present and
future.
AnthonyPym
Series Editor


Translation and Language
Linguistic Theories Explained
Peter Fawcett
STjEROME
Pll KL IS H lNG
Manchester, UK & Northampton, MA

First published 1997 by
St. Jerome Publishing
2 Maple Road West, Brooklands, Manchester, M23 9HH, United Kingdom
Fax +44 161905 3498. Email: stjerome@compuserve.com
www.stjerome.co.uk
Reprinted 2003
ISBN 1-900650-07-X
ISSN 1365-0513
Copyright © Peter Fawcett 1997
All Rights reserved, including those of translation into foreign languages. No part
ofthis publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise without either the prior written permission ofthe Publisher or a licence
permitting restricted copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency (CLA), 90
Tottenham Court Road, Lond on, WI P9HE. In North America, registered users may
contact the Copyright Clearance Center (CCC): 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers MA
01923, USA.
Printed and bound in Great Brit ain by
T.J. International Ltd., Cornwall, UK
Cover design by Steve Fieldh ouse, Oldham, UK (+44 161 6202263)
Typeset by Delta Typesetters, Cairo, Egypt
Email:hilalil945@hotmail.com
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record ofthis book is available from the Briti sh Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Fawcett, Peter D.
Translation and language : linguistic theories exp lained / Peter
Fawcett.
p. em,-
(Translation theories explained, ISSN 1365-051 3)
Includes bibli ographical references.
ISBN I-900650-07-X (paperback : alk. paper)
I. Translating and interpreting. I. Title. II. Series.
P306.F36 2003
4 I8'.02-dc2 I
200 3004768

Contents
Foreword
1.
Introduction
A troubled relationship
Langue/parole
....j
Signifier/signified
5
Paradigmatic and syntagmatic: word sets and collocations
6
Sociolinguistics and pragmatics
9
2.
Sub-Word Components
11
Sound
11
Morphemes
14
Componential analysis
17
....
Semantics
19
j.
Semantic fields
19
Word relations
21
Connotation
23
Word meaning and tran slation
25
4.
Translation Techniques
27
Russian approaches (Shveitser and Retsker)
27
Translation as 'analogy'
27
Translation as 'adequacy'
28
Concretization
29
Logical derivation
30
Antonymic translation
31
Compensation
31
The view from Canada (Vinay and Darbe1net)
34
Borrowing
34
Calque
35
Literal translation
36
Transposition
37
Modulation
37

5.
6.
7.
Equivalence
Adaptation
An American model (Malone)
Matching: Substitution and Equation
Zigzagging: Divergence and Convergence
Recrescence: Amplification and Reduction
Repackaging: Diffusion and Condensation
Reordering
Critique
Equivalence
Catford and textual equivalence
Nida and dynamic equivalence
Komissarov's sharp and fuzzy equivalence
Beyond the Word
Generative grammar
Shveitser: translation and rewriting rules
Malone and bridge building
Beyond the Sentence: Contex t and Register
Context
Communicative event and regi ster
Register
Register and language use r
Register and language use
Register in practice
38
39
41
41
43
45
47
49
50
53
54
56
60
64
65
67
69
72
72
74
75
75
77
80
8. Text Structure
Theme/rheme and functional sentence perspective
Cohesion
Cohesion through repetition
Cohesion through ellipsis
Cohesion through reference
Paratax is and hypotaxis
Coherence
Translation as text
85
85
90
91
92
94
96
98
100

9. Text Functions
Language functions
Text functions and types
Reiss and the monofunctional approach
The multifunctional approach
Function-altering transl ation
Overt and covelt translation
10. Sociolinguistics
11. Pragmatics
Presupposition
Speech acts
Implicature
12. Psycholinguistics
Relevance theory
Translation strategies
Conclusion and Perspectives
Glossary
Bibliography
101
101
104
104
108
112
113
116
123
123
126
130
135
135
139
144
146
153


Foreword
This book is about the love-hate relationship between linguistics and
translation theory. Many linguists have no interest in translation theory,
and some translation theorists are increasingly declaring that linguistics
has nothing to offer their discipline.The author ofthis book does not entirely
share this sceptical attitude towards linguistics; he does not see linguistics
as the grand liberator or the great oppressor oftranslation studies; he believes
rather that there are many things in translation which can only be described
and explained by linguistics. Further, a translator who lacks at least a basic
knowledge oflinguistics is somebody who is working with an incomplete
toolkit.
Since what might be called the 'heroic age ' of linguistically-oriented
translation studies extended from the mid-1950s to the mid-1980s, it is only
right that these classic texts receive their due attention in these pages. How-
ever, in spite ofthe scepticism alluded to above, there is continued and even
renewed interest in linguistic approaches to translation studies. We shall
thus also look at these more recent developments, especially in the later
chapters.
In relation to some ofthese developments, the author may seem to take
a sceptical attitude. But that should be taken not as hostility so much as an
indication that these approaches have not yet made their point convincingly,
and that more research needs to be done.
Indeed, a phrase encountered frequently and with variations in these
later chapters is: 'little is known about this as yet'. There are many areas of
translation studies where much more linguistic research is needed. There
has been a tendency for translation theorists to make a proposal and then
pass on, leaving the ground largely unbroken. Other researchers have to get
out their spades and start digging. One hope, therefore, is that this book will
point the way to such areas.
In an introductory book of this length it is not possible to cover all
aspects ofthe relationship between linguistics and translation theory. I have
nevertheless tried to cover in reasonable detail those areas which have been
central to the subject and give at least a mention to others, which the reader
can follow up through the bibliography.
All translations ofquotations are my own.


1. Introduction
A troubled relationship
Modem linguistics began in the early twentieth century with the work ofthe
Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure. He focused on the notion oflanguage
as a system at a given moment in time (a synchronic approach) at a highly
abstract level that uncovered powerful principles about the way in which
language in general is structured. The structuralist model he produced was
to prove immensely influential when, much later, it was taken up by anthro-
pologists, literary critics and philosophers as the one model that would
apparently explain what we had always wanted to know about life, the uni-
verse and everything.
Since linguistics is the study of language and has produced such
powerful and productive theories about how language works, and since
translation is a language activity, it would seem only common sense to
think that the first had something to say about the second. Indeed in 1965
the British scholar John Catford opened his book A Linguistic Theory of
Translation with the words: "Clearly, then, any theory of translation must
draw upon a theory of language - a general linguistic theory". In exactly
the same year, however, the famous American theoretical linguist Noam
Chomsky was rather more sceptical about the implications ofhis own theory
for translation, saying that his theory "does not, for example, imply that
there must be some reasonable procedure for translating between languages"
(1965 :30). Although no expert in translation, Chomsky nonetheless divined
that there was something about the activity that put it beyond reason. Perhaps
he had read what the academic Ivor Richards (1953 :250) said about
translation: "We have here indeed what may very probably be the most
complex type ofevent yet produced in the evolution ofthe cosmos".
This uncertain relationship between linguistics and translation theory
continued to be reflected in the literature. Eight years after Catford's and
Chomsky's pronouncements, the German theorist Jorn Albrecht (1973: I)
expressed regret and astonishment that linguists had not studied translation;
yet the Soviet linguist Aleksandr Shveitser, writing in the same year (al-
though quoted here from the later German translation), made the opposite
claim: many linguists had long since decided translation could indeed be an
object oflinguistic study (1987: 13). He rejected the idea that linguistics can
explain only the lowest levels of translation activity, saying this was based
on too narrow a view of linguistics. He did, however, refer brief1y to the
furore caused by the first major attempt by a Russian scholar to produce a

Translation and Language
linguistic description oftranslation (Fedorov 1953), which provoked lively
polemic and liberal accusations of 'deviation' (see Cary 1957: 187).
The intervening years have not resolved the tension. Almost thirty years
after the Catford-Chomsky declarations, the English academic Roger Bell
( 1989:xv) claimed that translation theorists and linguists were still going
their own separate ways. The French scholar Maurice Pergnier has pointed
out that even though linguistics has developed in ways that make it much
more relevant to the concerns oftranslation, there are still those who would
like to liberate translation completely from its sway (1993 :9). Indeed, his
compatriot Marianne Lederer is just one among many who dismisses lin-
guistics from translation studies: "I hope in this way to bring out the reasons
why translation must be dealt with on a level other than the linguistic"
( 1994:87).
Such a position is provocatively extreme. Linguistics quite clearly does
have something to offer the study oftranslation, and in these pages we shall
be exploring what that is. At the same time, however, we shall be pointing
out the limitations ofthe discipline, especiallyifpeople want to see translation
as an entirely linguistic activity or want to use linguistics as a recipe giving
ready-made solutions to specific translation problems rather than as a
resource for extrapolating general problem-solving techniques from specific
concrete problems.
The relationship of linguistics to translation can be twofold: one can
apply the findings of linguistics to the practice of translation, and one can
have a linguistic theory of translation, as opposed, say, to a literary, eco-
nomic or psychological theory oftranslation.
In the first approach, a subdivision oflinguistics such as sociolinguis-
tics might have something to say about the way in which language varies in
relation to social status, age, gender and so on. It will enable us to recognize
these variations and describe them. And when we have to deal with sociolin-
guistic variation in a text to be translated, linguistics can provide one input
in deciding how to cope with the situation.
In the second approach, rather than applying linguistic theory to
elements within the text to be translated, one can apply it to the entire con-
cept oftranslation itself. Thus the theory ofdynamic equivalence put forward
by the American scholar Eugene Nida, which we consider below, can actu-
ally be seen as nothing less than a sociolinguistics oftranslation, describing
the way translators can adapt texts to the needs of a different audience in
the same way we all adjust our language to suit the people we are talking to.
Both ofthese approaches are found in writings on linguistics and trans-
lation, and we shall try to signal them as we go along. For the remainder of
this chapter we shall follow the first approach, giving an overview of the
2

Introduction
basic concepts and main divisions in structural linguistics to see how impor-
tant they are in translation, then coming back to them in greater detail in
later chapters.
Langue/parole
Saussure made it possible to see language as a set of structured systems
rather than a ragbag of bits and pieces. Some parts of language, such as
grammar, have always been thought ofas systems, ofcourse. But the struc-
turalist linguistics that emerged from Saussure's work attempted to uncover
the systematic and structured nature of other parts of language: the sound
system (phonetics and phonemics), the grammar system (syntax, which is
word order, and morphology, which is word shape) and the meaning system
(semantics).
For linguistics to make progress in describing these systems, Saussure
thought it necessary to distinguish between what he called 'langue' and
'parole' (the terms are often used in their French form in other languages,
because, ironically, it can be difficult to find translation equivalents). This
is the difference between the abstract language system (langue or 'a lan-
guage'), which Saussure saw as the object oflinguistics, and actual uses of
language (parole or 'speaking'), which were thought to be too variable for
systematic, 'scientific' study because the factors involved were too numerous
and too random.
An example might illustrate this: After a certain amount of alcoholic
intake you might say I've got a shore headwhen you mean sore head. Now,
although linguistics can describe the difference between sand sh in phone-
mic theory, in this particular case the difference has no linguistic meaning;
it is a matter of parole; it is a one-off event that has no function in the
language system. By contrast, the difference between sore and shore in the
non-alcoholic I got a bit sore sitting on the shore does have a function in the
language system: the sound opposition in this case serves to mark out a
change in meaning, and it does so on a systematic basis (single/shingle, sin/
shin etc.) These differences are a matter of langue.
This distinction between langue and parole, and the insistence that lin-
guistics should study only langue, led to tremendous progress in the
discipline. Yet the early linguistic approaches to translation that tried to
follow the same line led to considerable dissatisfaction. To many transla-
tors and translation theorists the findings seemed sterile, leaving out many
things of interest to translation. The German scholar Dieter Stein (1980),
for example, went so far as to declare that the linguistics oflangue had little
or nothing to offer translation studies (which is to forget that language
3

Translation and Language
structure can be a serious problem in translation).
The langue-oriented approach can certainly produce useful compara-
tive descriptions of language systems, and, as the Canadian translation
theorist Jean Delisle says, such things must be a part of every translator's
knowledge (1988:78). I can scarcely envisage being a translator if I don't
have that basic command of my languages. But these things by no means
exhaust the problems oftranslation. They belong to what the German theo-
rist Werner Koller (1979: 185) calls 'foreign language competence',
knowledge that is basic to, but not the whole of, 'translator competence',
because simply knowing two languages is not all that is needed to be a
translator, as these pages will make abundantly clear.
Stein advocated what he called the' Sit/Text ' approach, which involved
data of a textual and situational nature. This would require a linguistics of
parole rather than oflangue and would allow us to account for such things
as the drunkard's shore head, which is vital for translation. The Fren ch
theorist Jean-Rene Ladmiral also claimed that "translation is a communi-
cation operation guaranteeing identity of parole through differences of
langues" (1979:223), while Albrecht reminded us that "what is being trans-
lated are not 'codes' or languages but 'messages' or texts" (1973:26), in
other words parole not langue. For Koller (1979: 183), translation theory is
"a science ofparole".
The problem was that parole-oriented linguistics was scarcely
developed. There was thus a fear that abandoning the langue-oriented
approach would mean giving up any attempt to turn translation theory into
a scientific theory that would rescue it from the earlier dilettante approaches.
Even though the linguistics of parole is now better developed, it makes use
ofwhat the Croatian scholar Vladimir lvir (1996: 153) calls 'ad hoc catego-
ries' that do not have "theoretical coherence and scientific rigour" because
they are "not amenable to .. . theoretical treatment". The irony is that by the
1990s the whole idea ofa scientific approach to translation had come under
fire anyway.
The view that translation must be studied as parole (a communicative
event) rather than langue (an abstract system) is now widely acce pted, to
the extent that an author like Pergnier (1993:223) can refer to it as a 'fact',
and an important fact, since, as he says, it is because translation is a
fact of parole that there is no such thing as the one 'right' translation of
a message.
The langue/parole distinction is a very high -level distinction, concern-
ing as it does the entire language. Saussure's other major distinction concerned
one ofthe lowest levels oflanguage, but was, if anything, even more revolu-
tionary in its consequences.
4

Introduction
Signifier/signified
If language is a structure, it must have component parts . The most impor-
tant of these is the sign, a technical concept intended to get away from the
notion of 'word', which is notoriously difficult to define. The sign itselfis a
structure that has two parts : the signifier and the signified, both ofwhich are
mental states. The signifier is a mental image ofthe physical sound that you
make when you say, for example, cat or koshka (or mimi ifyou speak Tahi-
tian), while the signified is a mental concept or representation of physical
cats in the real world.
One of Saussure's key claims is that the link between the signifier and
the signified is not given by some Supreme Being or by Nature, as many
nonlinguists believe, but by society. The relation between the two is an arbi-
trary social construct. A tubular object consisting of meat and other
ingredients wrapped in a casing is assigned the signifier sausage in English
and Wurst in German. Neither ofthese is more 'right' than the other. There
is nothing magic in the object itselfthat makes sausage a 'better' word than
Wurst. It might seem that way, especially to people who speak only one
language, but in reality the link is purely arbitrary and no particular lan-
guage has the 'right way' of saying things.
Perhaps one of the easiest ways to understand this is to consider the
phenomenon ofpolitical correctness. In a short space oftime the supporters
of this ideology managed to create a whole new set of words to talk about
things for which they previously used the same words as everybody else .
They then tried, with varying success, to make their new words the social
norm . Altering an entire vocabulary in this way can only be possible be-
cause ofthe arbitrariness ofthe signifier-signified link.
Paradoxically, the same PC phenomenon demonstrates the deep-rooted
beliefamong many people that there is a special link between signifier and
signified. The attempt by some feminists to write the word man out ofexist-
ence, even as a component ofwords where it has no connection with 'male
adult' (so that emancipate becomes ewomancipate), suggests a very strong
beliefin word magic , in the power ofthe signifier to shape the way we think
about the signified. There is a joke about two farmers watching pigs wal-
lowing in the mud. After a time one says to the other, 'No wonder they be
called pigs '. This view is put with admirable succinctness by the comic
novelist Terry Pratchett (1989: 132): "All things are defined by names. Change
the name, and you change the thing".
This kind of belief is not entirely irrational. If the signifier-signified
link is arbitrary, then translation would be very simple: you would identify
the signified, strip away the source-language signifier, and replace it with
5

Translation and Language
the target-language signifier. According to this primitive theory oftransla-
tion we would read the sign sausage, identify the language-independent
signified denoted by the signifier, find its German signifier, and make a
simple substitution: sausage would become Wurst. Translation would be a
job for computers (a vast topic in itselfwhich would be too technical for the
present book to cover).
However, things are not that simple. Signs do not just signify (point to
things in the real world). They also have value derived from language-
internal structuring which is not the same from one language to the next.
The words cat and koshka don't have the same range ofmeanings, so their
value is different. English has two words wood and/orest for the one Rus-
sian word lies , so again the values are different.
But words also carry a superstructure that is often referred to by the
term'connotation'. We think ofsome words as 'good' tgrandmother; baby,
chocolate) and other words as 'bad' (spider, snot, slug). But these
connotational meanings are highly variable even within a language (some
people don't like babies, others may have a fondness for spiders, while
grandma may be the proverbial 'grandmother from hell ') and they are often
different between cultures. French people sitting down to eat remain calm in
front ofa plate ofsnails. Many English people would react differently, and
so for them the menu may offer escargots, promising the exotic not the
slimy. Connotation has proved difficult for linguistics to formalize, but we
shall look at one useful attempt below.
Paradigmatic and syntagmatic: word sets and colloca tions
In addition to having its own internal structure, the sign can be structured in
two other ways. Signs can be joined up in a string, and they can be grouped
in a bundle. This is often called the 'chain and choice' model, and we shall
see examples of how a translation problem that cannot be solved at one
point in the chain may be solved by an appropriate choice at some other
point. In the first case (making the chain) we produce word sequences: in the
restaurant we can string words together to say 'I'd like sausage and chips,
please'. The order in which we put the words is not normally random. It is
governed by 'syntax', the rules of our language which tell us what kind of
word can come in what place in a sentence. In another language we might
have to say 'Like chipsausage would' . This is syntagmatic structure. Tradi-
tional linguistics handled syntax as a set of slots along the surface of the
page or in the stream ofspoken language; it tried to identify the function of
each slot and what could go in it. Chomsky's revolution was to go below the
surface and ask how the string was generated and from what.
6

Introduction
Tn the second case (making the choice), we can pick words out of a
'bag' in place of other words. We could replace sausage in the above sen-
tence by any number ofwords, such as egg,pie or steak. This is paradigmatic
structure. But again the structure is not random. As we shall see below,
words tend to group together to form semantic fields. Most people would
associate knives withforks rather than with cats and dogs or any other non-
cutlery items.
These groups may seem naturally ordered according to what is out
there in the real world. But very often they, like the sign, are socially deter-
mined. Sticking with our food example, we find that the society we live in
quite arbitrarily restricts what we are allowed to eat and in what combina-
tions . Tripe and chips is not a combination found on English menus. Nor is
boiledpotato and roast dog or broccoli and sauted maggot, although dogs
and maggots are staple diet in other cultures, and this may pose problems
for the translator. If we are translating a text in which the words.fish and
chips are chained together not to designate a particular combination offoods
that somebody just happens to be eating but to convey the sociolinguistic
connotation of 'typical national cheap meal ', we may have to consider the
possibility ofsome kind ofcultural adaptation in our translation. This takes
us outside linguistics, to a point where we can use linguistic concepts to
describe the phenomena we find in language but where the guidelines on
how to handle those phenomena in translation must come from some other
discipline.
As the example of tripe and chips shows, the paradigmatic (picking
items out ofour lexical bag) and the syntagmatic (stringing them together in
a line) come together in the concept of 'collocation', a technical term for
what some people call a 'set phrase' . Except in special circumstances, such
as poetry or madness, we can 't take any old thing out of our language bag
and stick it next to any other old thing. We are subjected to what are called
'selection restrictions '. These may be quite rigid (we say bats in the belfry
not bats in the steeple to say that somebody is mad) or they may be quite
loose: a British prime minister caused surprise with the phrase two bananas
short ofa picnic to mean the same thing, and although most English people
say egg and chips, the heroine in the film Shirley Valentine called them
chips and egg.
Some collocations are quite arbitrary. What possible link can there
be between rain, cats, and dogs? And yet the English say It s raining
cats and dogs. Others can be clearly motivated. The equivalent French
expression II pleut comme vache qui pisse (' It's raining like a cow
urinating') is quite graphic. Good translation is often a case of either
knowing or serendipitously hitting on the appropriate collocation (which
7

Translation and Language
will not always be in the dictionary).
Even people translating into their own language can get the collocation
wrong, as happened with the student translator who produced the sentence
lost in a sea ojexplanations, which is actually a mixing of two separate
collocations (drowning in a sea I lost in a fog). Yet it should be said that
collocations are not necessarily always right or wrong, but often simply
more or less acceptable. You might get some idea ofdegrees ofacceptability
ofcollocation by asking yourselfwhether one can say the cow stro//edover
to the fence.
Because collocations are judged on a sliding scale ofacceptability rather
than just as right or wrong, not all speakers ofa language agree on what is
or is not a collocation. The Canadian theorists Jean-Paul Vinay and Jean
Darbelnet (1958:89) give the translation pair Echappe aI'analyse I bajjles
analysis, which baffles quite a number of English people because they do
not accept that bajjles analysis is an English expression (maybe they've
only ever heard 'defies analysis'). The fact that the dictionary definition of
'baffle' does not preclude it from collocating with 'analysis' does not, of
course, mean that the collocation exists.
As Hans Honig and Paul Kussmaul say (1984:98), diverging from the
accepted collocations ofthe target language is not necessarily a bad thing to
do, since there may be a good reason for it (poetry, for example). Yet where
no good reason exists, such divergence thwarts reader expectation and causes
a momentary disruption in text processing, producing what Ladmiral
(1979:221) calls a braking effect on the ocular sweep of reading, an effect
that will not have existed in the original. Note, though, that proponents of
'foreignizing translations', a concept we shall come back to, are entirely in
favour of this braking process.
These concepts (sign, paradigm, collocation, etc.), together with others
ofa more traditional nature that we shall look at below, produced the struc-
tural linguistics which allowed a rigorous analysis of word and sentence
structure.
Indeed, the chain-and-choice model was tremendously successful
when applied to other areas of human experience that suddenly became
readable as a form of language: selecting items from a semantic field
(such as clothes) and chaining them together in socially constrained
sequences that were really quite arbitrary (fashion) . Such social
construction is also found in two other branches of linguistics that are
closer to a linguistics of parole than oflangue, although they can still be
analyzed in terms of the Saussurean concepts of signifierl signified and
paradigm/syntagm. We shall introduce them briefly here, leaving greater
detaiI to later chapters.
8

Introduction
Sociolinguistics and pragmatics
The reference above to 'tripe and chips' can serve as a pointer to these other
areas of linguistics. If I order 'tripe and chips' in a restaurant, the other
customers may react in two ways: either I will be considered irredeemably
vulgar, or I will cause a stir, or even both.
In the first case, I will have categorized myself as coming from a cer-
tain social class (there is little demand for tripe among the English middle
classes) and possibly also as coming from a certain part of England (Lon-
don or the North, perhaps), which may also be confirmed by my accent.
This is the stuffofsociolinguistics, the study oflanguage in relation to such
things as age, class, regional origin and status. This is at the edge oflinguis-
tics because it shades over from language use into real-world knowledge
and experience. Am I classified as lower class because of the words tripe
and chips or because of the objects? The distinction is not always easy to
make, and the Egyptian-bom theorist Mona Baker (1992 :183) goes so far
as to say that it is "not particularly helpful" in the case of translation to try
to distinguish the linguistic from the extralinguistic. However, since we must
be careful not to overrate the role oflinguistics in translation, we must try to
make that distinction where possible.
Ifmy demanding tripe and chips had been deliberately intended to create
a stir, then we would be in another area of linguistics that goes under the
name of pragmatics. This is defined as what it is we actually do with
language, the things we accomplish by speaking and writing.
If, for example, I wish to show respect for somebody I am writing to,
the way I accomplish that aim differs according to the language I use, and it
would be absurd, except for specific purposes, to translate such formulae
literally. Likewise, if I were translating a novel that contained the phrase
Can you lend me 100 yen, I would not make a precise calculation from the
current exchange rate. I would instead provide what has been called a set-
to-set translation (Malone 1988: 102), because what matters is not the precise
sum but the act of asking for financial assistance.
By contrast, if! were translating an engineering document describing
machine-tool parts and made the foolhardy decision to convert the measure-
ments from metric to imperial, then it would become necessary to use a
calculator because these figures are being put to a different use. (1 have
called this decision 'foolhardy' because one translator did make the conver-
sion with catastrophic results: the manufactured parts were the wrong length
by a margin that was minute but sufficient to render them useless. One
thing linguistics will not tell translators is to make sure they have a good
insurance policy to cover them against that kind of mistake.)
9

Translation and Language
Before we move on to these wider areas oflinguistics we need to come
back to the concept of the sign, both as a structure within itself and as a
structure with other units; we need to analyze its importance to translation.
10

2. Sub-Word Components
Sound
The clever trick about language lies in what has been called 'the double
articulation'. Out of all the possible noises human beings can make (and
which every baby makes in the first weeks of life), each language selects
its own small number to produce a finite set ofsounds speci fie to itself. This
is the first articulation. In the second articulation the language then com-
bines this finite set to form the potentially infinite set of words. That is the
clever trick : a closed system that produces an open-ended system.
The study ofsound belongs to a branch oflinguistics called phonetics,
which analyzes the sounds ofa language using a highly technical terminology,
In translation we mostly do not have to worry much about this level of
language . However, in literary texts a lot of the time and in many other
types of text some of the time, there are special sound effects such as al-
literation (matching consonants, as in make mine a Martini) and assonance
(matching vowels, as in those lazy, hazy days ofsummeri that can combine
to special effect. Such effects can be described using the technical terminol-
ogy of phonetics, but it isn't really necessary. We do not need to know that
make mine a Martini makes use of an anterior voiced non-coronal bilabial
nasal (m) alternating with an anterior voiced coronal unrilled nasal (n). Know-
ing the terminology is no use whatsoever if we read a text so rapidly or so
carelessly that we don 't even notice the sound effect in the first place. It is
far more important for the translator to be sensitive to sound effects (some
of which can be quite subtle), to judge to what extent the sound effect is
intentional or accidental, and finally to assess the likelihood ofits transfer to
another language, although not necessarily using the same sounds.
A German text on illness tells us that half of the diseases that kill us
come from what have angefressen, angesoffen lind angeschmokt ('scof-
fed, guzzled, and smoked'), and the structural repetition would be hard to
convey. In a French text about modem food production the author concludes
that no us I 'avons standardisee, liniformisee, mondialisee. Done,
fragilisee . Having noted the end rhyme (and some readers wouldn't) we
need to ask if it is deliberate or simply pure chance that the words the
author wanted to use just happened to have the same ending. Applying one
ofthe rules ofthumb devised by the American linguist Joseph Malone relating
to the distance between the words involved (1988:205), we would have to
say that the effect is almost certainly intended (we can never be 100% sure
in a text of this kind) since the words come one after the other. But can the
rhyme be translated? The first and third items can (standardized,
11

Translation and Language
globalized) but the second and last are going to be a problem. How hard
are we going to try to solve that problem?
The answer to this involves the 'minimax' concept, first applied to trans-
lation by the Czech translation theorist Jiri Levy (1967) and later pursued
by the German Wolfram Wilss (1994). This principle says that people will
strive to achieve maximum effect for minimum effort, and the amount of
effort to be expended will be calculated according to each situation (of
course, people may make the wrong calculation, spending too long on a
problem they are not going to solve, or giving up too readily). Inthis particu-
lar case, since the main text function is to pass on information, a translator
may think it not worth trying too hard (deadlines and the size ofthe transla-
tion fee will form part ofthe calculation), relying instead on serendipity or
sudden insight to find 'homogenize' for the third element in the chain and
despairing ofsolving the last one . This is another situation in which linguis-
tics can help us define the problem and the terms ofthe solution, but where
the end result will be influenced by factors external to linguistics.
The German author Rudolf Zimmer (1981) has examined a corpus of
largely French-German literary translation ove r the centuries to see how
translators deal with sound when it is used in wordplays. He finds a variety
ofresponses to the problem, ranging from changing the device used (allitera-
tion may become assonance), through various forms of explaining to the
target-language reader that something has been lost in the translation, to
full-blooded transposition in which the translator uses other words from the
same or a similar semantic field that do not mean the same as the original
but which do rhyme.
The most famous example of this approach is Levy's reference to the
German poem Ein Wiesel saft auf einem Kiesel inmitten Bachgeriesel
('a weasel sat on a pebble in the middle ofa babbling brook') in which the
translator kept weasel, altering the rest ofthe poem to make it rhyme. Levy
(1969: 103-4) points out that the same effect could have been achieved by
changing weasel to any other animal and altering all the other rhyming
elements accordingly. In other words, only the most general meanings (an
animal, a place to sit on, a place to sit in) need be translated.
The difficulty ofachieving an adequate transfer ofsound effects with-
out extreme distortion ofmeaning is one reason why much rhymed verse is
translated as blank verse nowadays, although a Spanish poet once deplored
the reverse effect, complaining that "en ruso me riman" ("I get rhymed in
Russian!") (personal communication).
Another area where the sound level may be important in translation is
when a decision is taken to translate a text at the level of its sounds rather
than its meaning. This situation is no doubt rare for most translators, yet it is
12

Sub-Word Components
also quite common in the sense that most languages can show examples. It
involves making a paradigmatic choice oftarget-language words that sound
as much as possible like those in the source language. The Russian word
for 'Russian' (ruskii) might be translated as rust key, for example, or the
German word for 'football' (FujJball) might be rendered as fuzz ball, nei-
ther of which has anything to with the original meaning. Left at this basic
level, the result is likely to be nonsense and will give pleasure only to people
who can appreciate the joke. If the decision is taken to make the words
connect syntagmatically and semantically, it becomes possible to turn the
source text into an entirely different target text that mayor may not be on
the same subject, so that we are playing a game of theme and variations
over time. This is what the Zukofskys (1969) have famously done with the
Latin poet Catullus.
Translating sounds is actually very difficult, but it can be fun to try.
Take some famous phrase or advertising slogan, like Vorsprung durch
Technik, and see what you can turn it into (the best I managed was Boris
pronged Dirk a nick).
Sound translation may become the overriding concern in the dubbing
of films. If the audience has a clear view of the mouth and lip movements
of the characters, and there is a mismatch between what they see and
what they hear, this can pose problems: the aesthetic effect may be de-
stroyed, comprehension may be impaired, or it might quite simply be as
irritating as an unscratchable itch. This is too complicated a topic to go into
here (it will be dealt with in another book in the series), but dubbing can
have unexpected side effects. In order to match the mouth movements for
the English I'm SOrlY, German dubbers translate the phrase not with the
usual equivalent of Entschuldigung but with Es tut mil' Leid (to match the
111 sound), and this would now appear to be moving into the language of at
least some Germans as a way ofapologizing. The translation teacher Nigel
Ross (1995) has described similar American influences on the Italian lan-
guage also as a result of dubbing.
As we shall see in relation to the translation techniques of borrowing
and calque, translation can have this effect of colonizing the target lan-
guage with source-language structures and culture. Indeed, some translation
theorists are now advocating the adoption of techniques to prevent such
imperialism (see Douglas Robinson in this series). On a more mundane
level, you might try to see for yourselfjust how difficult dubbing is by taking
a famous line from a movie ('Frankly, my dear, I couldn't give a damn'
from Gone with the Wind, for example) and trying to produce a dubbed
version that will match the lip movements.
Translating sound may also be involved in the by no means negligible
13

Translation and Language
case when one wishes simply to transfer a foreign word or a proper name
into the target text. Depending on the alphabet of the source-language, the
words in question are translated alphabetically or by sound. An example
will make the difference clear. When the Olympic games were held in
Moscow, one of the BBC's sports reporters decided to give the viewers a
spot oflocal colour by telling them about the language. Standing in front of
a building with a sign, he said: "That may look like it's called a pectopah ,
but in fact it's a restoran or restaurant". In the first case he translated the
letters; in the second he rendered the sound.
If a character in a French novel were called Henri, to change just one
letter and translate him as Henry would be a move fraught with aesthetic,
cultural and political problems. Consequently, the name would normally be
transliterated alphabetically as Henri. But that gives people who don't speak
French no idea of the sound, which is (roughly) Onri. Even if the sound
mattered in some way, because the name is the subject of a pun such as
Henri, on rit ('Henry, we're laughing'), the vast majority of translators
would probably still rely on transliteration, perhaps overestimating the abil-
ity oftheir readers to pronounce a foreign language, and so not realizing the
degree of loss in their translation.
If the source language uses an alphabet other than the Roman alpha-
bet, however, then usually it is the sound which is translated. We translate
the Russian name for John not as Ibah but as Ivan. Although even here,
where you might imagine there was a prime case for international agree-
ment, there is confusion in translation practice. The Russian genitive or
'possessive' case for masculine singu lar adjectives ends in -ogo, pronounced
-avo. Some publishers transliterate it alphabetically (ruskogo ), while oth-
ers transliterate it phonetically (ruskovo).
A famous example ofsound being translated is found in Anthony Bur-
gess's A Clockwork Orange, where Burgess used his own nontechnical
system to create a kind of 'future slang' based on Russian, with words
such as horrorshow for 'excellent' and krovi for 'blood', which will then
have to be reproduced in some way in translation into other languages
(presumably in Russian the effect is totally lost). Catford (1965 :56-65) pro-
vides one ofthe few systematic, albeit very brief, discussions oftranslating
sound and alphabet, a discussion that is perhaps not very useful for most of
the trainee translators who read the book. However, in the field of anthro-
pology, where the sounds and alphabets of unrecorded languages need to
be studied, such matters come into their own.
Morphemes
At the level above individual sounds and letters , which are units without
14

Sub-Word Components
meaning, we find the morpheme, a word known only to academics until
The Mighty Morphin Power Rangers brought it closer to the lives of the
masses by their ability to change shape or 'rnorph' into mighty warriors. A
morpheme (a shape unit) is defined as the lowest verbal unit which has
meaning. If! say cba, I am producing an utterance that has no meaning in
English (it doesn't even appear to be an acronym) and I would simply be
producing a series of sounds for no apparent reason (I am unlikely to be
spelling part ofa word for somebody, since the cb combination is likely to
be very rare, ifit exists at all, in English). However, if! say abc, then I may
well be producing a morpheme, as in He doesn't even know the abc of
the subject. (Whether abc would actually be one morpheme or three is
perhaps best left to people who enjoy such arguments.)
Translation at this level is a medium-to-rare phenomenon, and again
one ofits uses can be for literary entertainment. The famous' Jabberwocky'
poem by Lewis Carroll ('Twas bryllig and the slithy toves did gyre and
gimble in the wabe ... ') is often assumed to be very difficult to translate
because of its invented words made up of sounds and morphemes from
other words (slithy from lithe and slimy). In fact, the individual parts of it
ought to be quite easy to translate for precisely that reason. It is a fairly
simple task to break an invented word like bryllig down into its morphemes
(bryll- will be the root and -ig the adjectival ending), and it is then also a
fairly simple task to find appropriate target-language morphemes (bryllig
becomes brilgeait in French, for example), although getting the rhyme and
the rhythm is a different matter altogether. Note how a morphemic analysis
can demonstrate that grammar has meaning: -ig in bryllig may not have
meaning in the same way that a word like dog has meaning, but it has the
meaning ofits grammatical function.
A more serious and more common form of morpheme transfer occurs
in the translation ofphilosophical and scientific texts, where the trans lation
technique called 'calque' (to be discussed below) enters into its own, albeit
at a level lower than the one anticipated by Vinay and Darbelnet (1958),
who gave us the term in this meaning. The English translators of the Ger-
man philosopher Martin Heidegger frequently translate the morphemes of
his compound words rather than try to invent a new English word, produc-
ing terms like disclosedness (for Er-schlossen-heit) that are not in any
dictionary. New chemical substances or new technologies will often be trans-
lated morphemically into languages that do not readily use Greek and Latin
as English and French do. In fact, even old chemical substances get this
treatment. Oxygen means'sour generating'. In German this has been trans-
lated more loosely as Sauerstoff ('sour stuff'), but in Russian it has been
translated literally at the morphemic level as kislorod. Russian is a good
15

Translation and Language
example ofhow translation policy can constitute a language. A large number
ofeven nonscientific Russian words are simply morphemic translations of
Latin words into Russian roots. The word soznaniye ('conscience ') is a
literal translation into Russian of the Latin con- + -scientia ('with knowl-
edge').
Finally, an interesting form ofmorphemic translation occurs quite fre-
quently in translation practice without much note being taken ofit, although
it can often mean the difference between a good and a bad translation. In
this case , rather than translating morpheme to morpheme, a practice that
tends to be restricted to the areas listed above, we translate morpheme to
word or phrase, a process that Catford called rank-shifted translation be-
cause we are going in this case from a unit at a lower rank, the morpheme,
to a unit at a higher rank, the phrase. Two examples will show what is
meant.
Languages differ in their willingness to pluralize nouns, and in such
cases it can often be helpful to translate the source-language plural mor-
pheme by lexical means, using a process that different translation theorists
have all recognized but to which they have given different names (' dilution'
and 'diffusion', for example). In this way, the plural morpheme ofthe source
language becomes, in the target language, something like the variousfo rms
of, the different categories of and so on. Similarly, languages differ in
their willingness to produce verbal nouns . Modem French seems quite happy
to do this , and French writing on women's studies, for example, produces
terms such as inferiorisation or minorisation, where the morpheme -
isation may have to be translated lexically in some languages by quite
lengthy phrases such as 'the relegation of women to minority status' .
Many people writing in the tradition ofdeconstruction, post-structuralism
and post-modernism have leant heavily for their terminology on the literal
translation of French texts , and they have tended to reject the expansive
translation technique I have just referred to, preferring instead to borrow or
calque the term. This is presumably because producing a one-word
expression (lexicalizing the term ) gives it the dignity ofan actually existing
concept, bringing into being a word that can appear in the dictionaries ofthe
future, whereas a diluted translation has the inferiority of a second-hand
explanation and will never appear in any dictionary. In other words, we can
spell out in linguistic terms what options are available in such translation
situations, but the actual choice made will be guided by non linguistic
considerations, political in this case . It is important for translators to be
aware of these dimensions. (A less generous interpretation of cases like
this, which are not new in translation, is that morphemically translating long
foreign words is a way of disguising nonsense as high intellect.)
16

Sub-Word Components
This concept of lexicalization is, by the way, one of the reasons why
the French authorities have such difficulty in their never-ending attempts to
eradicate English and American terms from their language: the French terms
they propose are either not neatly lexicalized (they sound like explanations)
or are composed ofGreco-Latin roots that make them sound like scientific
concepts rather than everyday items: calling a radio tuner a syntoniser
not only gives a more technical term but also removes the cachet of using
'hip' language which is what young French people want.
Morphemic translation may sometimes be applied inappropriately.The
Russian translation theorist Andrei Fedorov (1958 :159) tells us that the
German word Rosenkranz in a stage direction to the nineteenth-century
German play Maria Stuart was broken down by the Russian translator into
its component parts to give 'wreath of roses ' . As a result, whenever the
play was staged in Russia, Mary Queen of Scots turned up for her execu-
tion by decap itation sporting a jolly bunch ofroses when she should have
been carrying a rosary.
Componential analysis
To talk of morphemic translation is to recognize units ofmeaning smaller
than the word , units that serve as building blocks to make words , just as
sounds and letters are the building blocks for morphemes. The economic
conditions ofthe 1980s produced a flurry ofbuilt-up words in English such
as downsizing, rights izing and delayering, which, in translation into many
languages, may call for a diffusional translation technique when the con-
cepts do not exist and cannot be packaged as individual words. The
component parts are clear in these English words, but other words that
seem not to be built up out ofseparate blocks in this way still tum out to be
packages of meaning rather than one single meaning. Just as these words
can be broken down phonetically into their component sound parts, so also
they can be broken down semantically into their component meaning parts .
This process has been called 'componential analysis' and one of its main
protagonists (until recently) was Nida.
In componential analysis we use the notation [+meaning] and [-mean-
ing] to represent the units of meaning that combine to make a word . The
classic example given in the literature is: 'man' = [+adult] [+male] which at
once shows the potentially ideological nature ofthe concept since women
will ask why not: 'man' = [+adult] [-female]?
This kind of componential analysis is not usually of much use to a
translator. To take another classic example, the fact that the French mouton
can have the component [+animate] in its meaning of'sheep' and [-animate]
17

Translation and Language
in its meaning of 'mutton' is not going to give a seasoned or even semi-
seasoned translator sleepless nights. This information may be fascinating to
those whose speciality is the contrastive analysis oflanguages, but that is a
different activity from translation. We saw the difference in our earlier
example of the French minorisation, where we could list the semantic
components and still be unsure as to whether we should translate it by an
explanatory phrase or take the plunge and create the word 'minorization'.
Componential analysis at this level has been ofuse to translation firstly
in anthropological linguistics, where it has served to compare and contrast
such things as kinship structures and colour schemes in different cultures,
and secondly in the translation ofwhat are now called 'sensitive texts' such
as the Bible. In the case of such texts some means must be found to trans-
fer often difficult concepts into a culture in which they may seem very
strange but where that strangeness must be overcome if the text is to have
its effect. This process may involve the unpacking ofthe components into a
phrase.
In most forms of day-to-day translation the problem of differing
componential structure between languages usually disappears because of
the context: only the novice translator is likely to confuse the German Fleisch
meaning 'meat' [-human] and the same word when it means 'flesh' [rhu-
man], a pretty important distinction in cooking but not a serious translation
problem. However, the English translators of the French television soap
opera Chdteauvallon did not take componential structure into account when
they translated un garcon de trente ans as a thirty year old boy rather
than a thirty year old bachelor. In the context ('a thirty year old garcon
doesn't live with his parents, he has his own place'), garcon was probably
marked [-married] rather than [-adult] , hence bachelor.
Many of the cases covered in studies ofcomponential analysis are far
less interesting from our point of view, although immensely important for
language learners. They concern the kind of vocabulary and meaning dis-
tinctions that form part of foreign-language competence rather than
translator competence, whereas the problem with garcon does concern
translator competence, because it involves a nexus of knowledge about
word meaning, cultural usage, context, and the capacity for textual inter-
pretation. One of the main uses ofcomponential analysis is not with single
words but with series ofwords, which we shall look at under the heading of
semantic sets.
18

3. Semantics
In moving from the level of sound to the level of morphemes and word
components, we have moved into the area of linguistics called semantics,
which is the study of meaning.
The disenchantment oftranslation theorists and practitioners with lin-
guistics is often said to arise from the initial refusal ofstructural linguistics
to address the question ofmeaning on the grounds that it was scarcely struc -
tured and, in any case, located in the 'black box' of the mind where it was
unobservable and so unavailable to scientific study. A classic textbook of
the time, Charles Hockett's A Course in Modern Linguistics (1958), has no
chapter on meaning. However, a linguistics that ignores meaning is not much
use to translation studies, for which the question of meaning is absolutely
central. As Catford says, "It is clearly necessary for translation-theory to
draw upon a theory of meaning" (1965:35).
Linguistics fairly quickly came to the task ofmodelling mean ing both
at word and sentence level. At word level it produced concepts we have
already referred to or will consider below, such as denotation, connotation,
componential analysis and semantic fields. On the level ofsentence mean-
ing, it has developed concepts such as presupposition and entailment, which
will only partly concern the translator.
Semantic fields
The importance ofthese concepts for translation is that their application in
comparative linguistics demonstrates clearly that meanings and meaning
structures do not match between languages. From a linguistic point ofview,
one could say that each language is full ofgaps and shifts when compared
with other languages. Just as butchers in one country take the same animal
and cut it up in different ways from butchers in another country, so lan-
guages take what is apparently the same external reality and slice it differently.
Another view says that languages actually create 'external reality', which
mayor may not be there, but that is a philosophical question beyond the
scope ofthis book.
One of the most spectacular and frequently quoted examples of the
differential slicing ofreality is supposed to be the ability ofthe Inuit to name
many more different types ofsnow than other people (a feature put to some
use in the novel Miss Smilla s Feelingfor Snow) . But there are more homely
examples. Most English speakers will normally use just the one word to
refer to their home lighting (,Put the light on'), whereas some French people
19

Translation and Language
may slice things up differentl y and refer to them by a number of different
terms relating to the shape or position: I knew a French family whi ch used
anneau for a circular neon light in the kitchen and rapplique for a wall-
fitted light in the sitting room. In other words, in the semantic field of 'house
lighting', just as in other semantic fields (gardening terms, literary genres,
furniture ..., the list is endless), different languages will have a different
number ofterms in different relationships to one another.
This affects not just things but actions as well. Carl James (1980:93),
for example, has contrasted the English terms for 'cook' with the much
more restricted number of German terms where the word kochen has to
stand in for cook, boil and simmer, and where, in spite ofall the odds appar-
ently stacked against them , Germans still manage to avoid food poisoning.
This is where componential analysis comes in handy for marking out the
distinctions, although the terms we are about to use will hopefully be more
fruitful for translators.
In the lighting example, the English use what is called a ' hypernym' (a
more general term) while the French use a series of'hyponyms' (more spe-
cific terms); in the cooking example it is English which has the hyponyms
and German the hypernyms . These terms turn out to be important for trans-
lation:just as we saw above that differences in componential structure may
call for special translation techniques of repackaging, so in the realm of
semantic fields the interplay between hypernym and hyponym turns out to
offer a useful technique for solving translation problems. A very simple
example occurs for those tran slating between Engli sh and Russian where
the English hyponyms arm / hand and leg / foot conflate into the Russian
hypernyms ruka and noga respectively. (When Russians go to their doctor
with a pain in their noga, they have to use different words again to make
clear which part is hurt ing.) A comparable phenomenon is found in the
strange case quoted by Igor Mel 'cuk (1978:292) of a language that has no
word for 'foreskin', only two hyponyms, one meaning 'uncircumcized male
member' and the other meaning 'circumcized male member'. In the transla-
tion ofthe Biblical command to 'Bring back the foreskins ofthe Philistine s'
rather more got chopped offthan was intended.
This phenomenon ofslicing the world up differently occurs within lan-
guages as well as between them. The French scholar Georges Mounin, one
ofthe earliest linguistic commentators on translation, gives examples from
the semantic field of French bread (1963:65). Now, I was at pains in the
previous paragraph to say that only some French people use different terms
for their lighting, and the same is true ofMounin's bread: not all ofthem are
used by all French people. In England, too, words such as bap, bun and
teacake will either not be used by all English people or will not refer to the
20

Semantics
same objects in different parts ofthe country. Languages differ in the number
of hyponyms at their disposal and whether or not there are hypernymous
terms in a particular field. These gaps create problems in translation.
It may also be the case that one language just doesn 't make use of the
possibilities available to it in the same way as another language. Vinay and
Darbelnet (1958:60) point to the apparent paucity in French of a semantic
field expressing sound. French, they claim, can only say 'un bruit de soie,
de chaises ' (' the noise of silk or of chairs') whereas English can say 'the
rustle of silk, the scraping of chairs' . Yet as Andre Malblanc (1963 :46)
points out, French does have a quite rich semantic field in this area ofmean-
ing but seems more reluctant to use it (the reason given by Malblanc is that
the words are 'heavy', although the real reason lies in the attempts made in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries to purge the vocabulary for literary
purposes).
Even where words seem to have an unproblematic match between two
languages in a given semantic field, this often turns out not to be so. In
claiming above that sausage and Witrst denote the same object, I deliber-
ately ignored the many differences between them: what they are made of,
what they are eaten with, how they are cooked, and so on. Similarly, Italian
butter and English butter would also seem superficially to occupy the same
place in the field of foodstuffs, but the English academic Susan Bassnett
(1980: 18) has shown they are not really the same thing: the composition and
colour are different, they are used differently in the preparation of meals,
and they have different social status. Nonetheless, one would usually want
to translate the Italian word burro by the English word butter, the German
word Wurstby the English word sausage and accept the loss ofthe noncentral
meanings. This is the sort ofloss that makes some people declare translation
to be an impossible undertaking, a view which ignores the fact that there are
also gains in translation.
Word relations
Words enter into relations other than that ofgeneral-specific, and you will
find these dealt with in detail in the standard works on semantics. The English
linguist Geoffrey Leec h (1981), for example, discusses synonymy (words
with the same meaning), polysemy (words with several meanings), and
homonymy (words which look or sound alike but which have different
meanings), and breaks down antonymy (words with opposite meanings) into
several classes:
binary taxonomic oppositions (alive/dead), where two opposite terms
describe all possibilities for a particular field ofmeaning, although we
21

Translation and Language
can add other terms to produce a gradient ('He was more dead than
alive');
multiple taxonomic oppositions (single/married/divorced), the seman-
tic fields discussed earlier;
polar oppositions (large/small), which work on a scale rather than as
straight opposites (some quite large people feel quite small when they
discover they are sharing their living space with a spider or a mouse);
relative oppositions (up/down), which involve a directional vector, in
other words they point in different directions from one another, as in ' I
own thislThis belongs to me'.
Like so many other linguistic terms, few of these concepts are
unproblematic from the theoretical point ofview. Yet our concern here is not
to get involved in problems of definition but rather to establish whether or
not the concepts are useful for translators. If I am adamant that I do not
need to know that an unvoiced pharyngeal spirant is what gives the allitera-
tion in 'happy hour' (that time in English pubs when the drink is cheap),
could I equally adamantly agree with Albrecht (1973:47) when he says that
the concept ofsynonymy is "only ofmarginal importance" for translation?
The answer is a qualified no. Qualified, because we need, as always, to
distinguish between the usefulness of these terms in acquiring foreign lan-
guage competence and their applicability to the translation process. But the
distinction is not always an easy one to make in this area .
Knowing that the Russian word dubio is a polyseme (meaning either
'cudgel' or 'blockhead') or that the German word Hats is a homophone
(two words with the same sound but different meanings) is knowledge to be
acquired when learning the language, a matter of language competence.
However, when the translator ofa travel brochure writes the phrase ' Ifyou
enjoy idleness', we are dealing with two types of competence: language
(in)competence, since the translator has not learnt the negative meaning of
'idleness' as opposed to the more positive 'lazing about', and translation
competence, since the translator has not learnt to apply such translation
concepts as text type, text function and verbal routines (a native speaker
writing a travel brochure would have produced the more appropriate phrase
'Ifyou just want to relax in the sun '). The same travel brochure also told its
readers 'thus you will remain lying on rocks or on pebbles getting sun-
burnt', which is not calculated to cause a stampede to the airport.
In the case of the ' directional vectors' mentioned abo ve, Malone
(1988:85) is able to show that there can be good translation reasons for
replacing a source-language phrase like 'That pleases me' with a target-
language phrase like ' I like that'. The reasons might be on the level ofstyle
(one is more formal than the other) or information flow (the preceding part
22

Semantics
of the translation may have been written in such a way that we are now
obliged to begin with '1'), or formal parallelism of structures to produce
some textual effect.
Similarly, there may often be good reasons for choosing a synonym
rather than the obvious translation ofan SL item (variety, euphony, formal-
ity level might be some such reasons), and the use of polar opposites in a
restructured sentence is a frequent translation device, as we shall see in the
sect ion on translation techniques.
The problem with our example of idleness versus relaxation is that
even on holiday many people do not like to think of themselves as 'idle'.
Being idle is a bad thing; being relaxed is good. The words have different
connotational meanings.
Connotation
"This is not a very useful term", says Palmer (1981 :92), the author of a
standard English book on semantics. And yet Ladmiral devotes over 100
pages to the topic (1979:115-246). Leech (1981: 12) discusses connotative
meaning as just one aspect of associative meaning, all those elements of
meaning that attach in some way to a word without being a 'real' or central
part of its meaning and which can vary enormously from person to person
or culture to culture. Where one culture sees a fluffy pet, another culture
sees a food item or a pavement soiler; where one culture sees stinking excre-
ment , another culture sees a substance with medicinal properties. One can
begin to understand Palmer's reluctance to entertain the notion.
Take the French word brioche. The dictionary translates this as brioche
(a sort ofbun), meaning that there is no apparent equivalent for this object
in English even at the denotationallevel. That being so, how is one to trans-
late the connotational dimensions ofthe word? A sentence like On va manger
de la brioche will be uttered with relish by many French people because it is
a treat (although unappreciative foreigners like myse lffind it not at all sweet
and rather dry to eat) . It is also served for the Fete des Rois (Twelfth Night)
when it contains plastic figurines representing the king and the queen (it
used to be beans, but that 's progress), and those who find them in their piece
ofbrioche get to wear paper crowns. It was also the word Marie-Antoinette
used in her famous declaration Let them eat cake, when she was told the
populace were revolting because they had no bread to eat. This shows just
how difficult the word is to translate since brioche lies somewhere between
bread and cake and poor old Marie-Antoinette was not being quite as heart-
less as the English translation makes her seem.
Similarly, in my Chamber's English dictionary, I find ' Cantal: a hard,
full-fat French cheese made from cow 's milk, from the Cantal department
23

Translation and Language
of the Auvergne'. As a definition of the denotational meaning, that's fine.
But to French people it's just one ofa wide choice ofcheeses (paradigmatic)
to accompany various other foods and drinks (syntagmatic) and will evoke
memories of texture, taste and smell, possibly repugnance for non-cheese
eaters, and beyond that there lie memories of geography and culture (the
Auvergnats, living in the centre of France, have their own special place in
the folklore of everyday life: they are stubborn, they pronounce -s- as -sh-,
they work hard, many ofthem became cafe owners in Paris .. .).
Faced with this load of connotational meaning, how is a translator to
cope without lapsing into lengthy commentary? Here again we are at the
limits ofhow much linguistics can contribute to translation, since nothing in
linguistics itselfwill actually help us solve this particular problem. But what
linguistics can do for us is give us some help in defining the problem.
Clearly, the range of information I provided for brioche and cantal is
so wide and so disparate that some way must be found to portion it out and
deal with it more systematically rather than lumping it all under one head-
ing. One ofthe few, and often criticized, attempts to deal with connotational
meaning in a systematic way comes from Osgood, Succi and Tannenbaum
(1957). The details of their work and the criticisms of it need not be re-
peated here. Inpractice, translators have to work with connotation whether
or not theoretical linguists are happy with the tenn. As Ladmiral says,
"Translatology cannot be content with applying linguistic theory; it has to
manage a practice, day by day; it is a praxeology" (19 79:162).
The research conducted by Osgood, Succi and Tannenbaum led them
to the conclusion that speakers react to words in three dimensions: words
are good or bad, active or passive , strong or weak. The Edinburgh-based
scholars Basil Hatim and Ian Mason (I 990a: 114) give the example of ls-
latnic fitndamentalists and the different 'connotations' the term would have
in Western and Islamic media. The 'connotational ' meanings they list are in
fact examples ofassociational meaning, which are potentially unlimited: in
the Western media Islamic fundamentalists are associated with fanaticism,
terrorism and so on, while in Islamic media they are associated with martyr-
dom and sacrifice. The connotational meanings in the terminology ofOsgood
and company are much more restricted: in this case the Western connota-
tions would be active, strong but bad, while the Islamic connotations would
be active, strong and good. In our earlier case of brioche the major con-
notational component would be 'good' (but not for me).
The French academics Helene Chuquet and Michel Paillard (19 87:220),
who restrict their briefdiscussion to the positive/negative axis, indicate the
kinds ofpitfalls that arise from connotational meaning. A neophyte transla-
tor from French to English might see no problem in translating the French
24

Semantics
juvenile as English j uvenile without bothering to check the dictionary. Yet
the nontechnical usage ofthe word tends to be positive in French and nega-
tive in English (calling somebodyjuvenile is quite an insult). This emerges
only indirectly from the dictionary, which gives young, youthful as transla-
tions ofthe FrenchjuV(?nile.You have to notice that j uvenile is not there and
ask yourself why not in order to realize there is a problem.
Although this view of connotational meaning is more limited than,
for example, Leech's description of the phenomenon, it is easier to grasp.
It might have helped the student translator who unthinkingly produced
the translation dreadful adventures, which, for no good reason, links a
'bad' word (dreadfu l swith a 'good' word (adventures), a negative with
a po sitive, and so sets up a slight conflict in the reader 's mind. Thi s
phenomenon demonstrates that it is not enough to get connotation right
for the individual word; one must take account of higher units. In a text
on the likelihood of the Holocaust ever being repeated, for example, the
student translator who wrote of a repeat performance might have de-
cided, on consideration of connotational meaning, that the term was
inappropriate to the subject matter.
However we account for it, the fact remains that connotational mean-
ing is difficult to translate. Indeed, such difficulties raise the question ofthe
fundamental impossibility ofgood translation ofanything other than techni-
cal texts. Ladmiral's solution is to propose a series oftranslation techniques,
not all ofwhich he explains very satisfactorily, ranging from nontranslation,
where the tran slator deems the connotational meaning to be unimportant,
via 'periparaphrase' (1979:2 19), which builds some form of explanation
into the text , to 'minimal mistranslation' (ibid:244), where the connotation
of a word is deemed more important than its denotation. As an example of
the latter he refers to Nida and Taber's discussion of the Greek word gunai
in the New Testament, translated denotatively as woman in the King James
Bible but connotatively as mother in the New English Bible to mark the
word positively (showing affection and respect). Yet this kind of approach
may ultimately lead to much-maligned examples like translating the Bibli -
cal Lamb ofGod by Seal ofGod for Inuit readers. Before crossing this line
into the risky territory of cultural adaptation, most translators wiII want to
test other techniques, perhaps of the kind examined below.
Word meaning and translation
The variation between languages in the different components and relations
ofword meaning has two consequences for translation. Firstly the meaning
that is transferred will be decided by situation and context, not by the
25

Translation and Language
dictionary, and secondly, the transfer will nearly always involve some form
ofloss or change. These are both now a commonplace oflinguistic theories
of translation. As Catford (1965 :49) says, "The SL [source-language] and
TL [target-language] items rarel y have the same 'meaning' in the linguistic
sense; but they can function in the same situation", while Albrecht (1973 :23)
tells us that human translation "is always to some extent ' false"'.
The same Albrecht (1973:5) uses the interesting analogy of currency
transfer: although the aspect and numerical value of the coins and notes
change, their 'real' value should not, but in reality it does, since they fit into
a different price structure. He could also have said that they fit into a cul-
tural system with different purchasing priorities. He points to the considerable
differences in 'pure' meaning between the Frenchje suis allee a la gare
pour chercher mon frere et tna sceur and the German ich bin ZlIll1 Bahnhof
gefahren um mein e Geschwister abzuholen (1973: 10). The two most obvi-
ous differences are that the French shows the speaker to be a woman whereas
the German doesn't , and the German tells us the speaker used motorized
transport whereas the French doesn 't. Another difference is that German
can package brother and sister into one item. Yet none of this prevents the
two sentences from being perfectly adequate situational translations ofone
another.
The second consequence ofmeaning differences between languages
is that one task of a linguistic theory of translation becomes that of
defining the catalogue of translation techniques required to overcome
these mismatches. The literature is quite full of such catalogues, or
taxonomies. In the next chapter we shall look at three: the most famous
from Vinay and Darbelnet, and work done by two Russian scholars and
one American expert.
26

4. Translation Techniques
Russian approaches
The Russian translation theorist Yakob Retsker (1974:9) describes three
types of relationship between a source language and a target language:
equivalence;
n
variant and contextual correspondence;
III
all other types of translational transformation.
The changing terminology is intended to alert us to a fundamental differ-
ence between equivalence and the two other categories based on the langue/
parole distinction. For Retsker, equivalence is a fact of langue: a one-to-
one relationship between the source language and target language term
regardless of context. One would thus expect a term like carbon monox-
ide to be translated the same way at all times into whatever the target
language. This would come under the study oftenninology, where the one-
to-one relationship between name and thing would theoretically allow us to
implement a 'primitive' translation theory of word-for-word substitution.
Such a theory is expressed in Jumpelt's declaration (1961 :57) that the trans-
lator's task is "to produce relations between the TL [target-language] unit
and 0 [object] which largely correspond to the relations between the SL
[source-language] unit and 0". In the scientific and technical literature
that Jumpelt is talking about you would expect this strategy to succeed,
although even in that kind of literature there are many factors that make
the task harder than it might seem.
Retsker's two other categories of correspondence and transforma-
tion, which his compatriot Shveitser renames 'analogy' and 'adequacy '
(1987:25), are facts of parole, where the translation will be dependent on
factors such as context and text function.
Transla tion as 'analogy'
Analogy covers the situation of one-to-many correspondences between
languages. This is the usual case as we saw in our introductory discussion
ofmeaning. Opening a Spanish-English dictionary at random I find, on the
same page, the one-to-one equivalence of the technical term nefrltis /
nephritis, and the one-to-several correspondence of necesidad meaning
necessity, need, tight spot, poverty and business (as a euphemism for
excrement). Retsker quotes the Russian dictionary as giving no fewer than
eight translations of the English word sincere (1974: 14). The German
27

Translation and Language
dictionary gives six translations, but the French dictionary on ly three.
In oth er words, how we translate thi s word will vary acc ording to the
microcontext and will be subject to selection restrictions. In some cases
the context will reduce the solutions available to just one-to-one equiva-
lence. If the microcontext is ji-iendthen our choice in Russian reduces
to one word because the collocation is fixed.
Dictionaries have become increasingly helpful in this respect but they
cannot be trusted entirely. My Spanish dictionary gives just one translation
for sincere. Is this because Engli sh sincere and Spanish sincero are pan-
contextual equivalents whereas in German, French and Russ ian we have
only contextual correspondences? Or is it because the makers of the Span-
ish dictionary have decided to save some space on this word? Only translators
who have built up their own internal dictionary (or those with a better dic-
tionary than mine) will know the answer.
Even where a dictionary provides contextual help, it can be misleading.
Students translating a text on the Holocaust which referred to la deportation
des Juifs found under dep ortation in the dictionary '(internement)
imprisonment (in a concentration camp)'. Given such precise information,
they thought they were dealing with an equivalent and wrote either imprison-
ment or internment, but in fact we are dealing here with a contextual
variational correspondence: the context (the subject matter in this case)
requires deportation. The term imprisonment would be neutral, while the
word internment would have associational meanings that would be different
for different groups ofpeople (Japanese-Americans might remember their
internment in World War II, while older British people would associate the
term with Northern Ireland). The possibility of causing offence by mis-
translating such tenns is great, which demonstrates the need for translators
to have encyclopaedic knowledge extending way beyond the purely linguistic.
The dictionary can also be misleading in what would seem to be very
clear-cut cases ofequivalence. I quoted above the randomly selected case
of nefr itis translated only as nephritis in the dictionary. But there are
many situations in which one would want to translate it as inflammation
ofthe kidneys, just as one might wish to translate the French infarctus du
myocarde by heart attack rather than myocardial infarction. It is this
latitude even in the handling of apparently straightforward equivalences
which leads people like Jean Delisle and Marianne Lederer to reject the
narrowly linguistic categorizing of theorists such as Retsker in favour of
what they call the 'interpretative' approach.
Translation as 'adequacy'
Retsker 's final category, which he calls 'all other tran slational tran sfonna-
28

Translation Techniques
tions' and which Shveitser calls 'adequacy', covers cases where there is
no one-to-one equivalence and no readily definable contextual correspond-
ence in the form ofa collocation. Inthese cases the translator departs from
the wording ofthe original, and from the dictionary offerings, to use one of
four translation techniques. Retsker (1974:39) actually lists seven, but we
shall follow Shveitser (1973 :25-28), who does some reorganizing.
J. Concretization
Related to our earlier discussion of hyponymic/hypernymic shifts in
translation are what Retsker calls 'concretization' or 'differentiation', with
its corollary 'generalization'. The German Geschwister, for example, could
be translated as the more concrete and differentiated brothers and sisters
or as the more abstract and undifferentiated siblings , depending on context
and desired effect. An example taken at random from French might be the
abstractfi1111erolie which, according to context, we can translate either by
the technical tennjillllOroJe or by the concrete and differentiated volcanic
smoke and gas, while German offers examples such as Mufiheirat (a
'must-wedding') which could be translated either as an equall y abstract
f orced wedding or as the very concrete shotgun wedding.
Another example from French would be the translation of the already
concrete charentaises by the double concrete pipe and slippers in an
attempt to convey the associational and connotational meaning ofa certain
kind of conservative, conformist, stay-at-home man, even though such a
translation would be culturally problematic, since the Frenchman in ques-
tion would be more likely to smoke a Gauloise cigarette than a pipe.
Inall ofthese cases, linguistics can explain what is going on (abstract-
concrete switching) but cannot necessarily tell us what solution to adopt,
since the criteria for that would depend on a wide variety offactors such as
world knowledge, reader expectation, information loading, text type, de-
sired effect, and even the politics of translation.
Retsker gives the apparently straightforward example Have you had
your meal? where the generic meal must become the more precise break-
fast/dinner/supper in translation into Russian. But even here we need
sociolinguistic and world knowledge, since "for an English person from a
well-to-do bourgeois family, dinner-time almost coincides with supper-time
for a working-class family" (Retsker 1974:42).
A less straightforward example given by Retsker (1974:41) is the word
ruthless in the text ruthless newspaper jingoism, where he claims the
term is being used not in its normal meaning of ' without mercy' but
simply as an intensifier, so that it can be translated into another language
29

Translation and Language
by a generalized term such as 'unrestrained'. The most likely candidate in
a language such as French would be acharne, which is not given in the
dictionary under ruthless, where we find only what Retsker would call true
equivalents meaning 'without mercy'.
Ifthe word we need is not in the dictionary, will reference to Retsker's
taxonomy help us find it? The answer is, of course, no, not directly. Does
this mean the taxonomy is useless? We shall come back to this question in
general terms below, but an immediate answer in reference to this particular
example is that application ofthe taxonomy would have stopped us looking
in the wrong place in the dictionary to begin with . Realizing that the word
ruthless was being used here not in its precise concrete meaning but as a
generalized negative intensifier should have triggered a search for contextual
variants in English, sending us to the monolingual synonym dictio nary as a
first step, and from there to the right place in the bilingual dictionary.
2. Logical derivation
The English expression shorter working hours expresses the result or
effect of an action (hours have become shorter as a result of some action
taken), whereas the German and French equivalents - Senkung del'
Arbeitszeit and reduction de la semaine de travail (reduction in work
time/working week) - express the cause. The relation between the English
on the one hand and the French and German on the other is one of logical
modulation. Retsker's illustration ofthis translation technique (1974:45) is
acid test: the English terrn refers to a process whereas one possibl e Rus-
sian translation ('litmus paper') refers to the object used in the test.
If actions are complexes consisting of 'cause-process-effect', then
the source language may express an action by focusing on one of these
elements, while the target language focuses on another. This is a form of
the literary device known as metonymy: if we say With one thrust ofhis
trusty blade, Dirk was F ee, we are using the part (blade) to express the
whole (knife or sword). An interlingual example would be to go for a sail
(part) / ir depaseo en barco (whole) (Vazquez-Ayora 1977:29 7). Shveitser
says (198 7:30) this kind of metonymic transfer is very frequent in transla-
tion , and indeed it forms the basis ofanother famous translation taxonomy
provided by Vinay and Darbelnet, to which we shall come shortly. Douglas
Robin son (1991), an ardent opponent of a strictly linguistic approach to
translation, even sees it as a translation strategy in itself.
Different languages achieve this kind of correspondence in different
ways. The French for acid test involves no logical derivation but simpl y a
generalization (epreuve decisive), while the German term Feuerprobe
30

Translation Techniques
('test by fire') involves a different semantic domain.
The examples we have given of this particular translation technique
would not seem to be very productive. Translators who don't know how to
translate acid test will turn to a dictionary not to a taxonomy. However, the
word they want may not be there (my Spanish dictionary offers nothing),
while over-reliance on dictionaries can be time-consuming and lead to poor
translations, so a professional translator might achieve better results by
thinking taxonomically and going straight to a generalizing translation. This
would be true of renoncer in the phrase les Europeens doivent renoncer
alafacilite where time spent consulting the dictionary would be time wasted
since none of the translations given are satisfactory (give up is too collo-
quial , renounce too formal and collocationally restricted, relinquish and
abandon are the wrong meaning). It would be far better to look for logical
connections that might suppl y a more appropriate translation. The useful-
ness ofa taxonomy is not in supplying ready-made solutions to a particular
problem so much as suggesting general problem-solving methods.
3. Antonym ic translation
Antonymic translation is translation by the opposite. It is frequently used to
achieve what is felt to be a more natural wording in the target language.
Thus the French est line valeur deja ancienne may be translated literally
(is an already old value) but could also be translated as is by no means a
new value. Retsker (1974:48-9) gives examples such as The woman at
the other end asked him to hang on translated into Russian as not to
hang lip the phone and wrote with perseverance as worked without a
break for reasons of 'naturalness'. There are many translation situations
where this technique can be useful.
4. Compensation
Compensation is a technique used by some translators (others reject it)
when something in the source language is not translatable. The term covers
so many situations that there is a danger, according to Shveitser (1987:32),
echoing Vinay and Darbelnet (1958: 189), of seeing all translation as com-
pensation and ofoverzealous translators turning their task into one ofcomment
or even total adaptation and rewriting.
Vinay and Darbelnet devote some four pages to the concept, which they
see as the making good in one part of the text of something that could not
be translated in another (1958:189). Vazquez-Ayora, whose book is a de-
velopment oftheir work into Spanish, devotes ten whole pages to the subject
31

Translation and Language
(1977:373-384). Jiri Levy (1969:58) views compensation more as an ele-
ment oflangue and takes the sunny view that where a linguistic subsystem
is richl y developed in one language but absent or poorly developed in an-
other, the second language will have other systems to compensate, as with
the Russian aspectual system that compensates for a limited tense system.
One frequently cited situation requiring compensation is the translation
ofdialects. We shall say no more about the issue here , since it will come up
again in our section on sociolinguistics. Instead, let us take as our first ex-
ample a case quoted by Retsker (19 74:53) in which a character in a
Galsworthy novel alters the sum on a cheque from nine to ninety pounds
simply by adding two letters. Since the Russian word for 'nine' (which ends
in -at) cannot easily be altered to the word for 'ninety' (which ends in
-nosto) the Russian tran slator has been forced to compensate by reducing
the sums to 'eight' and 'eighty' . Retsker makes the point that in French the
forger would have to be even more modest (only ' five' and ' fifty' lend
themselves to the manoeuvre), which begs the question whether there might
not be some languages in the world where the sum would be either so small
as to make the game not worth the candle, or so astronomical as to make
the forgery self-denouncing.
However, although Retsker makes the point that changing French cinq
(' five' ) to cinquante (' fifty') requires five extra letters (as does the Rus-
sian 'eight' to 'eighty' conversion), he overlooks the fact that in real life
there is unlikely to be sufficient space on a cheque to insert all those extra
letters. A problem that is linguistically definable (converting a number by
morphemic addition) and linguistically solvable (trawl the number system
for a compensatory substitute) turns out in practice to be fraught with real-
world restrictions.
Although this example has a reality problem, it is nonetheless clearly a
situation where compensation is called for, and one must applaud the trans-
lator for being sufficiently eagle-eyed to notice there was a problem (many
would not). The two areas of compensation discussed by Vinay and
Darbelnet (1958:189-191 ) also seem unproblematic. The first concerns the
fact that in many languages the words for 'you' depend on the degree of
familiarity between the people speaking. The second area of compensa-
tion, which we shall deal with in the discussion ofsentence structure, concerns
the fact that some languages use linguistic devices for emphasis that are
not available in other languages. Clearly, some form of compensation is
required in these cases to avoid translation loss.
The first case (forms of address) is widely discussed in the literature,
so I shall simpl y mention here two rather unusual examples ofit. In the film
Man Bites Dog (the imaginati ve translation of the original Belgian C'est
32

Translation Techniques
arrive pres de chez vouss, a serial killer is having dinner with his friends (it
can happen). In a sudden fit of rage he shoots one of them dead, where-
upon a woman who had been using the familiar tu prudently switches to the
more respectful vous, a switch that the killer comments upon. The subtitler
compensated for the absence of an equivalent by using the word Sir, a
frequent but not always plausible solution.
The second example comes from Miss Smilla s Feeling for Snow
(Hoeg 1993 :239), which handles the situation rather differently, giving the
following rather odd exchange ofdialogue:
"What's your native language?":
"You mean, what 's your native language", he corrects me gently,
substituting the formal form of address.
where the not very visible footnote number (even less visible because un-
expected in a novel) directs the reader to a linguistic explanation at the
bottom of the page.
Vinay and Darbelnet restrict the scope of compensation to adjacent
text areas: the compensatory feature will be found within a few words of
the segment in which there was a problem, as in our two examples. Where
compensation becomes unsavoury to many translators is in the suggestion
that it can be used to maintain a more global textual balance.
One of the greatest difficulties in translation is wordplay. If the
subject of a text forces the translator to remain within the same semantic
domain as the pun, and if the target language quite simply has no two
words in that domain that can form a wordplay, then the pun is untrans-
latable. How, for example, are we to translate the pun in Ie socialisme
francais est lin cadavre exquis where the last two words can be taken
quite literally as 'good-looking corpse' (socialism was dead), but also
as a reference to the Surrealist game of Consequences (French socialism
was a jumble of disparate tendencies). There would seem to be no pos-
sibility of translating this wordplay.
The suggestion made by some is that a translator should compen-
sate for such a loss by producing a pun in some other part of the text
where none exists in the original. One proponent of this kind of strategy
is the German translation theorist Guttinger (1963 :75), quoted approv-
ingly by Zimmer who calls it "a perfectly useful suggestion" (1981 :53).
Many translators find this quite repugnant, however, and one's reaction
to the idea is likely to depend on wider, non-linguistic issues such as
the prevalent ideological atmosphere, publisher practice and copyright
laws.
33

Translation and Language
The view from Canada
Retsker and Shveitser's taxonomies are only two of quite a large number
of attempts to formalize the procedures involved in translation. The most
famous, and one ofthe most criticized, is undoubtedly the one proposed by
Vinay and Darbelnet in 1958.
These two authors base their theory of translation on two elements.
Firstly, they use the apparatus of Saussurean linguistics: langue/parole,
signifier/signified, the structuring oflanguage at the level ofgrammar, lexis
and what they call the 'message', the textual and situational level. Secondly,
they make use of the notion that each language has its own 'spirit' which
systematically compels it to express itsel f in one way rather than another.
This latter element has been disparaged by later commentators. Albrecht
talks ofthe "sinister proximity offolk-ps ychological tracts" (1973: 74) while
Chuquet and Paillard warn against "hasty generalisations offolk psychology"
(1987:32). Presumably, however, a more sophisticated form ofthis concept
informs the 'foreignizing' strand in translation theory that warns against
colonization and enslavement of the Other produced precisely by using
some of the translation techniques advocated by Vinay and Darbelnet.
These translation techniques, which we look at next, are 'borrowing',
'calque', 'literal translation', 'transposition', 'modulation', 'equivalence' and
'adaptation', each of which can be applied at the linguistic levels of lexis,
grammar and text.
Borrowing
The source-language form is taken into the target language, usually be-
cause the latter has a gap in its lexicon, although the technique can be used
for other reasons. When the Russians launched the first space satellite, the
Western press borrowed the term sputnik until we learned to call them
satellites. But the terms glasnost and perestroika describing policies pur-
sued by the former Soviet leader Gorbachov continue to be used as
borrowings for their exotic flavour, "to create a stylistic effect", as Vinay
and Darbelnet would say (1958:47), when they could actually have been
translated quite simply as openness and reconstruction.
Borrowing a tenn when a possible translation exists might be intended,
as Fedorov says (1953: 160-61), to retain the "shade of speci ficity" in the
foreign object or institution, perhaps adding the translation or some form of
explanation to assist the reader. Other reasons may be to convey a sound
effect or to ensure that a cultural Other is not translated entirely out of
existence.
34

Translation Techniques
One often overlooked area of borrowing is in the domain of brand
names, where problems of sound and meaning can arise . A story com-
monly told in translation circles is that the makers ofthe deodorant Bodymist
launched the product onto the German market under the same name be-
cause nobody told them that in German Mist means 'manure'. Deciding
whether to borrow, translate or adapt a product name into a target culture
will be a balancing act between the need to find appropriate sounds and
connotations, the need to mark the nationality of the product, and also the
need to avoid unnecessary costs in packaging and advertising, although
retaining the source language name may be seen as cultural imperialism.
Thus, borrowing may sound superficially unproblematic: if the target
language doesn't have a word for something, just borrow it from a lan-
guage that does. But it is not as simple as that ; it raises important questions
ofnational identity, power and colonization. Since the collapse ofthe Soviet
Union, the Russian language has, to the dismay of some, borrowed Ameri-
can words almost greedily; German has long been replete with English loan
terms even where German terms already exist; and the French authorities
make regular attempts to de-americanize their language.
Calque
A calque is a literal translation at the level ofthe phrase (Vinay and Darbelnet
do not consider its use at the morphemic level in translating terminology).
The most frequently cited examples are the various translations of sky-
scraper. According to Fedorov, calques tend to come into the language
together with the thing they refer to (we will question this in a moment). He
quotes the example ofgromkovoritel, a literal Russian translation of loud-
speaker (1953: 163). When the Russians first had to deal with supermarkets
they did so through the calque svierkhrynok, but this proved to be ambigu-
ous and so was replaced by 'shop without assistants' before becoming
'self-service shop' (Retsker 1974: 12).
Like borrowings, calques often make their first appearance not in trans-
lations but as an element in a newspaper article or in some other form of
original literature, since journalists and creative writers tend more often
than translators to see themselves as word creators. Although no research
has been done to prove this, it seems highly likely that translators will resort
more readily to borrowing than to calque, since the guidelines for using the
latter are far less obvious than for the former.
Despite Fedorov's claim, calques do not always appear at the same
time as the thing. The oil crisis that did so much economic damage in
the 1970s used to be referred to in the English press as just that. In the
35

Translation and Language
1990s the posher press began to talk about the oil shock. For decades the
English language used the phrase both sides of industry, but Eurospeak
has since introduced the social partners, and now economic commenta-
tors use Anglo-Saxon to mean English and American, These are all late
calques from the French, proving that interlingual int1uence is a two-way
street after all.
Literal translation
This is the rare but always welcome case when a text can go from one
language into another with no changes other than those required by the
target-language grammar. Vinay and Darbelnet do not say much about
this, so we have to tum to Vazquez-Ayora for such things as the distinction
between literal translation as a legitimate translation technique and literal
translation as a general strategy, which he castigates as mechanistic and
servile. He describes the technique as follows:
If, given two utterances, one in English and the other in Spanish,
there exists between them a precise correspondence of 'structure'
and of 'signification', and the equivalence is achieved moneme by
moneme, literal translation results and can be applied without risk.
And he adds the dire warning: "The translator should not alter this process
out of an itch to change things or out of simple fear of the crit icism (from
the ignorant) that the translation is literal in the pejorative sense of the
term" (1977:257). He gives a number ofexamples that require only obliga-
tory grammatical adjustments, concluding that they are legitimate cases of
literal translation, which he calls the "degree zero oftranslation" (1977:258).
He compares, for example, John hit Paul / Juan pego a Pablo, which
are literal translations (the a is an obligatory addition in Spanish), wit h 1
have a headache / Me duele la cabeza, where the lexemes 'me', 'hurt',
'head' are translated but in a radically different grammatical structure
(1977:258). This is called 'oblique' translation, and more specifically trans-
position, and is used alongside the remaining translation techniques when a
literal translation:
gives another meaning;
n
has no meaning;
ill
is structurally impossible;
IV
corresponds to nothing in the target-language metalinguistics;
v
does have a target-language correspondence but not at the
same language level. (Vinay and Darbelnet 1958:49)
36

Translation Techniques
Transposition
The technique oftran sposition is how Vinay and Darbelnet deal with gram-
matical changes in translation. Both they and Vazquez-Ayora devote some
considerable space to the not always fascinating task ofdemonstrating how
the parts ofspeech may play musical chairs in translation. Unexciting though
such lists may be, they contain information that can be of use to novice
translators. Some students might, for example, tran slate the French I 'eco-
nomic n 'a cesse de croitre by the very clumsy the economy did not stop
growing when, in fact, it needs a verb/adverb tran sposition (the economy
grew steadllyi or a point-of-view reversal (the economy continued to grow).
Of course such a shift does not constitute a rule - one of the main
criticisms made against Vinay and Darbelnet is that they give preci sely that
false impression. For example, they propose in the early 19th century as
a translation of all debut du 1ge steele, but the context may requ ire one to
translate it more literally. Support for their proposed translation comes twice
in the opening scene of Buiiuel's film Milky Way, where alafin du Nietne
siecle is subtitled as in the late Nth century, but this may simply have been
an economy imposed by the medium.
Some ofthe information contained in the kind oflist provided by Vinay
and Darbelnet or Vazquez-Ayora is purel y grammatical, more a matter of
language knowledge than translation competence. In the same list as the
'n'a cesse de' example, Vinay and Darbelnet also include the French verb
faillir in its meaning ofthe English adverbial 'almost/nearly'; but this is the
only meaning it can have, which makes it a matter of langue, whereas the
decision to translate cesser as a verb or an adverb will depend on a number
of factors, making it an act of parole.
Modulation
This is defined by Vinay and Darbelnet as "a variation in the message,
obtained by changing point ofview, lighting" (1958:51).As Vazquez-Ayora
(1977:293) says, many translators use transposition intuitively but the use of
mod ulation, which requires extensive knowledge ofthe targ et language, is
far less obvi ous and more risky. The idea, as explained by Kelly (1979:133),
is that the signifier changes while the signified remains the same, and this is
achieved by various forms of metaphor, metonymy and synecdoche. Modu-
lation may take place between such things as an abstract and a concrete
term, between a part and a whole, or it may reverse a point of view. Vinay
and Darbelnet (1958:236-8) quote such examples as give a pint 0.( blood /
donnez un peu de votre sang (concrete-to-abstract), you 're quite a stranger
37

Translation and Language
/ on ne se voit plus (effect-to-cause),jinm cover to cover / de la premiere
a la derniere page (part-to-part), you can have it / je vaus Ie laisse
(reversal of terms), to which we can add vous avez bien cinq minutes /
you can spare a moment (rethinking of time intervals), while Vazquez-
Ayora gives us would give him some ideas / Ie ayudarian a pensar
(result-to-means), don't get so excited / tranquilizate (negated opposite,
two other examples of which occur in the subtitles of Bufiuel's Milky Way:
il ne fait pas chaud ce soir / it's a bit chilly tonight and ce n 'est pas trop
tot / about time), which are also antonymic translations, of course.
Equivalence
Vinay and Darbelnet define equivalence essentially as the translation of
idioms when two languages refer to the same situation in totally different
ways. As such, it is not, in their presentation, an especially interesting trans-
lation case since it is based essentially on language knowledge. You either
know or do not know how to translate phrases like as thick as two short
planks or to have jelly belly. If you do not (and if your dictionary doesn't
come to your rescue) then no amount oftheory will help. When a translator
does fail to spot an idiom and translates its elements separately, we have
what Vinay and Darbelnet call 'overtranslation' (1958:31).
The interesting problem with equivalence arises, as Fedorov (1953: 171)
points out, in cases such as literature and advertising when the idiom is
motivated (is based on a structural or situational feature) but has no corre-
spondence in the target language. An example of this occurred in The
Observer newspaper of 15 December 1996 which gave a literal transla-
tion of the French expression 'He who steals an G:?zif[egg] will also steal a
bceuf [ox]' .
In such cases choices have to be made between translating the basic
meaning or attempting to convey some ofthe flavour ofthe original. Fedorov
(1953: 172) quotes the example ofa Romany idiom meaning 'fl ies can't get
into a closed mouth' based on assonance between panda (mouth) and
macho (flies). This would be difficult to achieve in English, but in French a
literal translation actually strengthens the effect by turning assonance to
rhyme (bouche / mouchey. The Russian translation has to alter the mean-
ing slightly to achieve the same effect: 'into a mouth closed tight (glukho)
fly no flies (mukha)' . In another case quoted by Fedorov (1953 :173), the
translator modified the original to achieve a phrase that is not actually a
Russian idiom but a very con vincing imitation of one: the French ' empty
barrels sing best ' becomes 'an empty barrel rings more resoundingly', which,
according to Fedorov, "evokes the impression ofa living phrasal combina-
38

Translation Techniques
tion that could have existed in Russian".
One problem with the concept of equivalence is the term itself, which
now has a much wider meaning in translation. This is why some people
prefer to keep the word in its French form,
Adaptation
Adaptation is the final translation technique on Vinay and Darbelnet's list,
and the one most open to controversy. This is demonstrated quite ironically
by the two authors themselves. Having outlined the techniques, they pro-
vide examples in tabular form of each one applied at each linguistic level
(1958:55):
at the lexical level they propose translating cyclisme by either baseball
or cricket, even though they themselves refer to the confusion caused
when an interpreter translated cricket as Tour de France;
II
at the syntactic level they offer before you could say Jack Robinson for
en un din d 'ceil, presumably called adaptation rather than equivalence
because of the Englishness of 'Jack Robinson', even though it is pre-
cisely this which makes such a translation problematic in some contexts;
11l
at the message level they actually seem to propose translating the French
bon appetit (enjoy your meal) by the American Hi!, which needs no
further comment.
This kind of substitution is supposed to take place when the receiving
culture has little or nothing in its experience that would allow it to under-
stand a close translation. Vazquez-Ayora (1977:324) quotes Nida's example
of the absurdity of translating white as snow for a culture which has no
knowledge of the substance, a problem referred to in the musical The King
and 1. Adapting this to a comparison with white bird plumage may seem
quite a reasonable solution. However, Vazquez-Ayora also shows how prob-
lematic adaptation can be when he refers approvingly to a suggestion by
Vinay and Darbelnet (1958:53) that it is culturally normal for English fa-
thers, but not for French fathers, to kiss their daughters on the mouth (albeit
only when returning home after a long journey!). There is no indication
where this idea comes from but it is highly doubtful if such behaviour was
ever the case , and it would certainly raise eyebrows nowadays. This dem-
onstrates the extreme delicacy of resorting to adaptation and the extensive
knowledge one needs of other cultures before even thinking of using it.
Similar confusion is likely to arise from a case of adaptation in the
translation of the film Une Semaine de vacances, where the subtitler has
replaced a reference to a Belgianjoke by a reference to an Irishjoke, since
39

Translation and Language
it was customary, in pre-political correctness days, to use these nationalities
in France and England respectively as examples of low intelligence. There
are two dangers here which typify all adaptation. Firstly, people with no
knowledge of the source culture get the wrong idea about it and come
away with the belief that French people tell jokes about the Irish, which
may serve to reinforce prejudice. Secondly, they learn nothing about the
cultures of other people. In the extreme case, adaptation leads to what
Levy calls ' localization and topicalization' (1969:86), which can be a high-
risk strategy ifit has not been specifically commissioned.
Vinay and Darbelnet suggest that such items should be adapted to the
receiving culture unless the translator is looking for what they disparagingly
call "cheap local colour" (1958:53) in the style of 'The muzhik finished his
kasha and kefir and jumped into his kibitka'. Their preferred strategy of
adaptation is a dangerous one, but there are times when it may be appropri-
ate. A text on the quality of life published in Le Monde many years ago
symbolized degrees of decorum by referring to different methods of pay-
ment in French restaurants: in cheap eateries the bill is scribbled on the
plain paper tablecloth; in establishments seeking a higher social tone the
tablecloth will be embossed paper; while in the very best restaurants the bill
will be brought on a saucer. In cultures where such a practice does not
exist, it might be thought more important to adapt this text to local habits,
since the purpose ofthe text is to make a moral point rather than communi-
cate knowledge about French lifestyles. In the same text, however, it might
be thought tasteless to try to adapt a reference to the French town ofOrad our,
the site of Nazi atrocities during the Second World War. In such cases
there are techniques other than adaptation available to the translator.
The fact that Vinay and Darbelnet, as well as other linguistically-
ori ented translation theorists, do consider matters of culture shows that
Lefevere is quite wrong when he claims that "linguists have moved from
word to text as a unit, but not beyond" (Bassnett and Lefevere 1990 :4).
They may not have taken the 'cultural turn' in his own meaning of ideo-
logical manipulation in translation, but they do not ignore the world beyond
the word.
Although the work of Vinay and Darbelnet has been criticized from
man y sides, as we shall see below, it is true to say that theirs was a pioneer-
ing work and Delisle is right to say that it had "resounding and well-deserved
success" (1988:75), at least in the French and Canadian tradition. They are
also referred to in the Russian and Spanish literature (the latter largely
because of the work of Vazquez-Ayora). Yet this is not quite so true of the
Anglo-American domain. Two of the most widely read English books on
translation theory are Newmark's Approaches to Translation , where Vinay
40

Translation Techniques
and Darbelnet are mentioned just twice , and Nida and Taber's The Theory
and Practice ofTranslation, where their name appears only in the bibliogra-
phy. It remains to be seen whether that situation will be remedied by the
appearance, almost forty years on, of an English translation of their work.
An American model
In addition to the seven translation techniques listed above, Vinay and
Darbelnet refer to the concepts of 'dilution'/'concentration' and 'amplifi-
cation'/' economy' (1958:183-188). These notions also surface in a translation
taxonomy devised thirty years later by Malone, who describes the further
techniques (or 'trajections' as he calls them) of 'matching', 'zigzagging',
'recrescence', 'repackaging', 'reordering' and 'recoding'. His claim (1988:2)
is that such techniques and procedures will "serve either as tools for the
study ofcompleted translation (the ANALYTIC mode), or as helpmates in
the act of translation (the OPERATIVE mode)."
Most of these translation processes are described by three terms: the
generic term listed above and two specific terms. Thus, the generic proc-
ess Matching (Malone capitalizes the words) covers two specific processes
called Equation and Substitution. However, the two specific processes do
not exhaust all the possibilities ofthe generic process so the latter are also
discussed in their own right.
Matching: Substitution and Equation
Equation is the same as Vinay and Darbelnet's 'literal translation' and so
needs no further discussion here. Where it is not possible, it is replaced by
Substitution which encompasses Vinay and Darbelnet's transposition (for
example, a Greek grammatical structure signalling prayer Substituted by
the archaic pronoun thou), equivalence (the German idiom 'the air was
clear' Substituted by the way was clear), and adaptation (having a charac-
ter in a poem hum rather than whistle because the latter is not seen as
'poetic') (1988 :20-21).
The generic process for Equation and Substitution is Matching (1988:22),
which takes two forms :
alternation between Equation and Substitution for stylistic reasons;
n
replacement by something that is neither Equation nor Substitution.
An example of (i) is where a translator introduces stylistic variation
into what is called a co-reference chain. A child might write a story in the
41

Translation and Language
form John go r lip early. John was going fishing. John liked fishing
where an adult might write John got lip early. He was going fishing. The
lad was a keen fan ofthe sport, varying the modes of reference to John
and fi shing through the chain of sentences to avoid tedium. As Baker
(1992: 183) says, "Each language has what we might call general prefer-
ences for certain patterns of reference as well as specific preferences that
are sensitive to text type". Very little is known about this, so most transla-
tors will act intuitively. If a varied co-reference chain is not or cannot be
maintained in translation, then equivalence at text level is not achieved.
Examples of(ii), where the Matching consists neither of Equation nor
Substitution, begin with our old friends 'borrowing' (which Malone calls
'carry-over matching') and 'calque', plus 'prefabricated matching' and ' faux
amis' (1988:23).
In our earlier discussion we mentioned borrowing only as a one-way
street from source to target language, as when German television dubbers
provide local colour by borrowing Sir and Mister in the translation ofAmeri-
can TV series. But a source-language text can itself contain borrowings.
Again, in original German TV series one can hear things like Das war too
much ('It was too much ') and das ist die ganze Cleverness ('that's the
whole cleverness'). When texts containing such items are translated into
English, the foreignizing effect is simply lost.
Malone's concept of prefabricated matching refers to the use of al-
ready existing, conventionalized target-language counterparts (1988:26), as
when the Latin auri is translated by burnisht gold rather than just gold
because ofthe prevailing poetics. This is the kind ofthing Toury (1995 :267-
68) is referring to with his 'law of growing standardisation' according to
which source language textemes are replaced by target language
repertoremes or linguistic routines. It is this process which gives unity of
expression to the translations of a given era.
Such pre-fabricated conventions may actually be the result of transla-
tion activity, giving what Steiner (1992:333) calls "the 'moon in pond like
blossom weary' school of instant exotica". Alternatively, the conventions
may derive from overt or covert authoritarian imposition, as with the trans-
lation of Freud. Hatim and Mason (1990b:2) tell us that the English
translators tried to make Freud conform to the norms ofscientific discourse,
using Latin to translate his very Germanic lexis for example, while Hjort
writes that "a translator ... who is informed about the history of Freud
translation knows that he or she will be expected to follow certain conven-
tions" (in Bassnett and Lefevere 1990:43). In the mid-1990s the French
written media reported the furore surrounding the latest Freud translation
for the same reasons.
42

Translation Techniques
The category of ' faux amis ' is somewhat out of place in Malone's list
oftrajections (1988:28), since they really constitute translation errors. They
are source-language words that look like target-language words but which
mean different things. They are a fact of the language system not of trans-
lation competence. A translator who is taken in by them simply has more
language learning to do. Honig and Kussmaul (1984: 120) ask "Why are
there so many curates and so few vicars in England? Why do Americans
build houses so huge that visitors go in and find themselves standing in a
lobby?" The answer is that novice German translators are tricked by the
spelling into thinking that hall means Halle (German for 'hotel lobby') and
vicar means Vikar (German for 'curate').
Zigzagging: Divergence and Convergence
This set oftrajections arises from different lexical structuring between lan-
guages that we discussed earlier, leading to the concept of one-to-many
equivalence. The German word See Diverges into English sea or lake,
while the German Wurst Diverges into sausage or turd. This again is a
matter oflanguage knowledge and important only to novice translators who
have to learn to read the linguistic, situational and stylistic clues that will tell
them the correct meaning.
However, such disambiguation into Divergence is not always easy, of-
ten because dictionaries are out-of-date or incomplete (a fact which too
many student translators bizarrely refuse to accept). Many French-English
dictionaries give only one meaning for the word populistne (a literary move-
ment), completely omitting its political meaning, and so inducing error in
students who believe the dictionary never lies.
More interesting from the point of view of translation are those situa-
tions where Divergence is a source-language stylistic choice that cannot
always be replicated in the target language. In certain English newspapers,
quotations are often followed by some colourful phrase expressing the speak-
er's attitude, such as he stormed or he complained, whereas in other
languages the range may be rather more restricted ('he declared', 'he said').
Such cases require the translator to have considerable textual competence
in the target language, including knowledge of the type of publication in-
volved. By comparing the British Financial Times with the French Le
Figaro, Gallagher (1993: 153) concludes that it is the British newspaper
which has a more restricted set of choices in this situation. He might have
found different results with different publications.
Divergence may have unwanted side effects. An author may use a
device such as ambiguity to create suspense which the target language
43

Translation and Language
may not be able to replicate because it must Diverge into unambiguous
term s. Malone (1988:34) quotes a use of the pronoun us which produces
deliberate uncertainty because we do not know who is included in it. This
effect is lost in languages that have no such ambiguous terms for the word.
The French text on the quality of life referred to earlier starts with the
French word for ' it' and then uses a variety of other devices such as 'of
which' and 'of it' to avoid saying what the text is about until the very last
word of a long paragraph. It is open to debate whether such a device can
be sustained in English or must be destroyed by early Divergence. As de
Beaugrande and Dressler say, this linguistic occurrence works best "if the
distance between the pro-form and the co-referring expression is kept within
limits" (1981:61), and the impetuous English might find a whole paragraph
too much to stomach.
A text beginning with 1/s 'agit juste d 'un petit test realise par Fortune
uses the impersonal text opener 'it is a matter of' to delay the topic of a test
carried out by Fortune, creating a small moment of suspense and a note of
irony (the test measures the risk of being made redundant). If the target
language cannot replicate this structure, either by turning the sentence round
(Fortune magazine has devised this little test) or by using a different
presentational device (There :S' this little test ...), the effect may have to be
lost with if and test Diverging into something like 'questionnaire/test' .
Malone (1988:88) also quotes the possibility ofDivergence into one or
another target term (paradigmatic Divergence) being replaced by syntagmatic
Divergence in which the translator strings together all possible translations.
In our discussion ofcompensation we referred to the untranslatable pun in
Ie socialisme francais est un cadavre exquis. Rather than forcing our-
selves to choose just one of its possible meanings, we could put both : The
mish-mash that is French socialism is well and truly dead. This tech-
nique could clearly become all too safe a haven for the indecisive.
The opposite of Divergence is Convergence, where varied source-
language term s collapse into just one in the target language, in many cases
a simple fact oflife calling for no special action from the translator except
if the original diversity served a purpose such as the expression of status:
Wienold (1990:184) quotes the case of the translation of a Japanese dia-
logue between a young woman and an old man Converging to give the
impression of equal status where the original showed deference.
Zigzagging is the generic term for Divergence and Convergence. These
are situations where the source language has what are called doublets, two
words meaning the same thing but often with some kind of connotational
difference. According to Malone (1988:38) Norwegian has two words for
a smoker's pipe , a standard word and a word more expressive of personal
44

Translation Techniques
attachment. Vinay and Darbelnet (1958:72-73) show zigzagging between
the French maternel and the English maternal /motherly, and also claim
that the two languages systematically operate a technical/normal register
switch as in concours hippique / horse show.
Perhaps the best application ofZigzagging would be to describe situa-
tions where the translator has a choice between Divergence and Convergence.
Many languages economically convey information about gender. A sen-
tence such as the French je suis fatiguee tells us the speaker is a woman.
In translation this would usually Converge into the genderless I'm tired.
But if the translator feels the reader should know the speaker's gender
(this was the first sentence in the text), some form ofDivergence/Diffusion
would have to be found: 1'/11 one velY tired lady/woman are possible, but
they alter the meaning in a number of ways.
Recrescence: Amplification and Reduction
This rather surgically named set oftechniques is more or less self-explanatory.
Amplification is what we should use instead of Vinay and Darbelnet's
politically suspicious 'adaptation' technique, providing explanations rather
than making cultural adaptations as a strategy for bridging anticipated gaps
in the target-language audience's knowledge. The extent to which it happens
will depend on the translator's attitude to the readership and to hard work.
Some translators believe in giving readers no assistance whatsoever,
insisting that they should use dictionaries and encyclopaedias, while other
translators are overly lavish with disruptive footnotes. Govaert (197 1:431)
warns that explicitation must be justified by the micro- and macro-context,
"otherwise the translator is embellishing and tampering". We shall see an
example of what he means below.
In relation to the question of hard work, translators will show varying
degrees ofwillingness to undertake research to supplement their own knowl-
edge gaps . Trainee translators in particular seem quite happy to use only the
means immediately to hand, rather than going off to research more widely.
What is one to think ofthe translator who was content to produce the sentence
It reminded many people of the story of the Medusa raft, which would
in fact remind most readers of nothing at all? Similarly, the translator who
produced according to 'Monarchs and Cannibals ' by Marvin Harris
from a French original was foolish to assume that the book title required no
more than literal translation (the non-Gallic name should have rung warning
bells), when in fact the original title was Of Cannibals and Kings.
Malone lists a number of text types that might require the use ofAm-
plification, although ultimately ofcourse all text types may require it. His list
45

Translation and Language
includes philosophical texts, for which Zimmer (1981:118-20) provide s an
example taken from the translation by the German philosopher Schleier-
macher of a Platonic dialogue on a subject we mentioned in Chapter 1
about the link between signifier and signified being arbitrary or motivated.
Is there something about a word that makes it uniquely appropriate for the
object it designates? One of the speakers in the Platonic text says yes,
arguing that the Greek word anthropos ('man') is the perfect term to use
because it is made up of two words meaning 'examine' and ' observe'
(anathrei and opope in Greek), which is what distinguishes humans from
animals, making the word just perfect. Now, Schleiennacher happened to
have his own theory oftranslation in which literal translation is given pride
of place, and he translated the passage according to his principles. How-
ever, the result makes no sense because the German words for 'man',
'look' and 'observe' are no more related than their English equivalents. The
text needed some form ofAmplification.
Providing the target audience with enough information to understand
the translation can be a headache because the translator has to make often
difficult judgements about the readers' level of sophistication and the de-
gree to which they can be expected to show initiative, while trying to balance
out such things as information overload and readability. Again these are
matters that take translational decision-making beyond the linguistic dimen-
sion into such matters as cultural judgements and publishing policy.
Many of the cases where a tran slator may consider using Amplifica-
tion concern world knowledge, and since they compensate for knowledge
gaps Malone calls them 'compensatory Amplifications'.
Amplifications of this type can range from the addition ofjust one or
two words in the body of the text (the French trade union CGT, the
German newspaper Die Zeit), to footnotes and even appendices. How
much information would be required, for example, to Amplify the reference
to the Medusa raft quoted above? Not as much as the two whole volumes
offootnotes supplied by the author Vladimir Nabokov to explain his literal
translation of the nine teenth-century epic poem Eugene Onegin.
There are, however, cases ofAmplification motivated by linguistic rea-
sons. Malone (1988:45) calls these 'classificatory Amplifications' because
they indicate that the word is one of a set. The word old may be added in
front of a nickname as a way of putting the word in its clas s, as also
happened in the student translation it was the modern version ofthe old
shipwreck story where there was no equivalent for old in the source
language. Under this heading one might also reclassify the device referred
to earlier of amplifying an awkward source-language plural noun into a
phrase by adding words like kinds. types. methods etc. In a French text
46

Translation Techniques
about food safety we are told about the hysterical behaviour ofcertaines
volailles, where the best translation strategy would be to write some breeds
of poultry.
Reduction is the omission ofinformation considered to be unnecessary,
oflittle importance, or unlikely to make sense to the target-language reader.
The text les top-models, comme disent les Anglais does not need the last
four words translated into English, just as the text the cadres - the white-
collar; middle-class workers - are dissatisfied can do without the explanation
in a translation into French. Malone (1988:47) quotes the example ofPlakate
an Litfajisdulen ('bills or posters on columns or pillars') translated simply
as bills because columns specifically for displaying advertisements are less
usual in Britain and the United States, whereas the French have a ready-
made equivalent in colonne Morris. Another solution to the problem can
be to use Diffusion into a definition, which can then be reduced back into
shorter form in later recurrences. This is often the preferred solution for
dealing with an institution commonly referred to by an acronym: the steps
are to Diffuse the acronym into its full form, Amplify by explaining the
function ofthe institution, and then Reduce future references back down to
the acronym: The SDKPiL (The Social-Democratic Party ofPoland and
Lithuania) was set up in ... Members of the SDKPiL ... Sometimes step
one is omitted, as in DGSE (the French equivalent of M16) .
Recrescence is the generic term for Amplification and Reduction. Like
Zigzagging, it seems not to refer to a different phenomenon but rather to
cases where Amplification and Reduction alternate under the pressure of
different demands.
Repackaging: Diffusion and Condensation
Whereas Amplification and Reduction add or remove information, Diffu-
sion and Condensation express the same information in longer or shorter
form .
These four terms are mirrored in Vinay and Darbelnet's 'amplification/
economy' and 'dilution/concentration' (1958:183-88). The difference is that
Vinay and Darbelnet see amplification/economy not so much as providing/
omitting useful/pointless information for the target-language reader but as
characteristics ofspecific languages: English is more concise than French,
they say, when it is describing 'reality', while French is more 'rapid' when
writing about the intellect (1958: 188). A second difference is that their ex-
amples do not always allow one to see the distinction. It is not entirely clear,
for example, why bilan represents a 'concentration' in relation to the di-
luted balance sheet, while haut represents an 'economy' in relation to the
47

Translation and Language
amplified this side up (1958: 183, 185).
Diffusion can occur for two reasons, one structural and related to
linguistic competence, the other properly translational. A book like Lan-
guages of Asia and the Pacific is replete with examples of lexical
diffusion: the one wordfail becomes the two-word tidak dapat in Malay;
complain becomes bulpyong ul mal hamnida in Korean; Spanish can
say in one word (matear) what it takes five words to say in English (to
plant at regular intervals).
Such structural Diffusion can arise for grammatical reasons also. One
use of the French conditional and the German subjunctive is to signal that
the writer is reporting someone else's words without supporting or denying
them. In many other languages, this would have to be Diffused into Ac-
cording to ... or It is claimed that ..., a fact not realized by two journalists
from The Guardian newspaper who translated it as a standard conditional
(Hatim and Mason 1990a:83). Clearly, this kind of Diffusion and Concen-
tration will be frequent and banal translation procedures because of the
nature of language.
Diffusion becomes a matter for proper translation decision-making in
cases where a complex concept is lexicalized in one language but not in
another, as with the German Familienanschlufl. The dictionary Diffuses
this into the definition or description where one is treated as one of the
family, but other Diffusions are possible and may be preferable (ofriendly;
caringfirm comes to mind). Such definitional Diffusion is often appropri-
ate in conjunction with borrowing when the context offers no clues to help
the target-language reader divine what the borrowing means.
One kind of Diffusion for which there is no reason or excuse is quoted
by Govaert (1971 :431-32). He compares an extract from a Dutch novel
with its French translation. The original Dutch says:
He was only the guide of this famous traveller, who had published
thick books, and wrote incredibly rapidly in his notebook in a sort of
shorthand that nobody could understand.
And the French translation says:
He was in fact only a guide and nothing more, a guide being paid
by this tourist, who was thought in the valley to be a writer of
renown; some even claimed that he had already published some
very, very fat books. And why not? Could he not be seen at
every moment opening his notebook to scribble notes in it and
cover the paper, with incredible speed, with complicated signs
that were absolute ly incomprehensible.
48

Translation Techniques
Condensation is less frequent than Diffusion according to Malone, which
may seem surprising since it should simply depend on the direction oftrans-
lation. What he seems to mean by this claim is the 'fact' that translations
are nearly always longer than the originals because of the need precisely
for Amplification and Diffusion. I put 'fact' in inverted commas because it
is not clear if this often repeated commonplace about translation has ever
been subjected to proper testing. Vinay and Darbelnet (1958: 185) are just
two of many authors who make the claim, attributing it to prudence and
ignorance, but they offer no proof.
One use of Condensation over the ages concerns the sometimes per-
ceived need to cut out parts ofthe text that might be thought boring, obscene
or politically problematic. Although a study ofCondensation from this point
ofview is extremely interesting, and we shall refer to it again, it is obviously
not a matter for linguistics.
Repackaging, the generic term for Diffusion and Concentration, again
refers to the process of shifting between the two in the course of translat-
ing a text be in response to a variety of pressures such as the need to build
in more detail early in a text and then find shorter ways of referring to the
same thing to avoid prolixity, the need to extricate oneselffrom complicated
sentence structures, the need to accommodate rhetorical structures, the
need to vary co-reference chains, and so on.
Reordering
Malone's final 'traj ection' is Reordering. His rather short discussion simply
enumerates and exemplifies situations where reordering word sequences
becomes necessary for comprehension, as in the breaking up of complex
structures, or because the source and target languages have different nar-
rative and stylistic structures.
The subject is also covered somewhat more extensively by Vinay and
Darbelnet under two headings:
Wordorder, which tends to be fixed by the grammar ofthe language, so
that we cannot nowadays, in English, say Where go you ?, whereas we
could say What say you?, but it would not mean the same thing , being
either ironic anachronism or meaning What do you think?
n
What Vinay and Darbelnet callla demarche, a word that is not easy to
translate except by a diffusional 'order ofdoing things', which presents
more freedom of choice than word order and has to do with the spe-
cific 'spirit' of a language. Since French is what they call a langue de
l'entendement, in other words one that represents the order ofreality in
a logical order in the sentence, it proceeds by announcing the subject
49

Translation and Language
and then saying something about it. They say this tendency is so strong
in French that it has the side effect that adverbial phrases of time,
manner and place gravitate towards the beginning, since they merely
modulate the message without being the main point. English, being
what they call a 'language of the concrete', more 'touchy-feely' as it
were, does not have the same compulsion to announce causes before
effects. Consequently, where the French would (and English could)
say 'Being ready, he set offon his travels', English is more likely to say
'He set off on his travels when he was ready'.
Although this kind of statement needs considerable hedging because
all sorts ofcombinations may be possible in phrasal placing in sentences, it
is given some support by the ludicrously melodramatic translation 'But who,
in Auckland harbour on the evening ofJuly 10, placed two mines on the hull
of the Rainbow Warrior?' (quoted in Hatim and Mason 1990a:87), where
what is a normal order of presentation in French sounds in English like a
botched attempt at creating suspense.
Critique
A number of criticisms have been levelled at such taxonomies, especially
that of Vinay and Darbelnet, which is the oldest. They can be grouped
under five headings:
I.
The nature of the categories: authorities such as Chuquet and Paillard
(1987: I0), Kelly (1979: 133) and Larose (1989: 18) point out that some
of the categories (borrowing, calque) are not really translation tech-
niques at all, while others (adaptation) go way beyond translation, and
the remainder are not clearly distinguishable from one another. How-
ever, if we are to make some sort of systemic sense out of translation
(which is the aim of a linguistic approach), you have to start some-
where, and it is surely significant that different researchers come up
with broadly comparable categories.
2.
The taxonomies have more to do with contrastive linguistics than with
the dynamics of translation, and as such they register facts of more
importance to language learners than to translators. The discussion
above should have shown that this is only partly true.
3.
Even though the taxonomists describe their categories as translation
'techniques' or 'processes', they are actually nothing ofthe sort (Delisle
1988:72-73). They are after-the-event categories for describing the end
result ofthe translation process and not, as Malone claims, operational
procedures guiding the process itself. There are two answers to this .
50

Translation Techniques
Firstly, even if that is all they were, they would still be important.
Describing translations systematically has been invaluable to modern
translation theory (and trainee translators should have to practise it).
Kitty van Leuven-Zwart (1989, 1990) has welded her own version of
Vinay and Darbelnet's taxonomy to the concept of 'shift' developed in
a literary approach to translation with a view to establishing the exist-
ence of translation norms, while the present author (1997) has used it
to trace the workings of a colonialist mindset in translation.
Secondly, whether these taxonomies describe product or process
is a matter of viewpoint. Once you have learnt, for example, that it is
possible to do an antonymic translation and seen how it works, then it
does become a translation process to be used with all the other skills a
translator deploys.
4.
The taxonomies are not predictive. Knowing what the translation tech-
niques are does not tell you when to use them . This criticism would be
important if one wanted to claim that translation is a science, a piece of
hubris that few would now be guilty of.
5.
The taxonomies are just fancy names for what translators already do (or
think they do) intuitively; learning them would therefore be a waste of
time. This is a serious objection. Kelly (1979: 155) concludes from his
analysis of translation over the centuries that translators were indeed
applying these techniques before the linguists named them, while Malone
(1988: ISO) admits the absurdity of supposing that a particular transl a-
tion was arrived at by the conscious use of one of his techniques.
In the meantime, however, a lot of translation still has a bad press, as
exemplified by the currency of the pejorative word translationese and the
frequency with which translations are dissected and found wanting at aca -
demic conferences and in the press. The Observer of 8 January 1995
talked of "drab duds" and "one enormous disaster" in reference to transla-
tion, and just over a year later referred to "a cumbersome translation from
the French", adding " If there is such a thing as kitsch translation, this is it" .
The problem is often seen to be inappropriate literalism. One reason
for this may be that translators who have never have learnt to think ofsuch
things as 'hypernymic' or ' antonymic' translation in any systematic way
have an impoverished vocabulary to talk to themselves about what they are
doing. We shall see in the section on psycholinguistics that translators may
monologue with themselves when they are translating, especially in difficult
spots. Maybe the quality oftheir translations could be improved by enrich-
ing the quality of their monologues, to the extent that they can replace
vague concepts such as 'sounds right' , 'clumsy ' and 'flow' by a more pre-
cise vocabulary.
51

Translation and Language
Komissarov (1977:46) is no doubt right when he says the ability to
translate does not mean the ability to formulate one's thought processes
explicitly in this way. But he also says that a translator's intuitive ideas on
translation may be false . Rejecting translation theory on the grounds that
'it's just putting fancy names to what I do already' is perfectly acceptable if
translators are indeed 'doing these things already' and doing them well. But
ifnot, then knowing the names and practising the techniques oftranslation,
having a 'science' of translation to start with, may correct the deficiencies
and the wrong intuitions, creating a liberating effect without being a con-
straint. The 'art' of translation comes from the accumulated experience of
enriching and applying the 'science' oftranslation.
52

5. Equivalence
The ultimate goal of the various translation techniques and str ategies out-
lined in the previous chapter is to achieve 'equivalence', a concept that has
probabl y cost the lives of more trees than any other in translation studies .
Why this is so becomes ob vious when you consider the five 'frames of
reference' listed by Koller (197 9:188-89) as constituting word and text
meaning and which, in an ideal world, would have to be accounted for in
order to say that particular kinds of equivalence have been achieved:
I.
denotational meaning:the object or concept referred to (hence also called
referential meaning);
2.
connotational meaning, which Koller breaks down into nine sub-
categories:
language leve l (elevated, poetic, formal , normal, familiar,
colloquial, slang, vulgar)
sociolect (the 'jargon' of different social groups such as
soldiers, students, etc.)
dialect (the language ofa particular region)
medi um (written versus spoken language)
style (old-fashioned, trendy, euphemistic , etc.)
frequency (common versus rare words)
domain (normal, scientific, technical)
value (positive versus negative)
emotional tone (neutral, cold, warm, etc.)
3.
textual norms (the kind oflanguage typical ofsuch things as legal texts
or instructions for use, etc.)
4.
pragmatic mean ing (reader expectations)
5.
linguistic form (rhyme, rhythm, metaphor, etc.).
Matching a shopping list of this kind, and perhaps even more impor-
tantly, getting two different translators to match it and to come up with
exactly the same solution (the wrong desideratum but one apparently es-
poused by many critics of the concept of equivalence) is clearly such an
impossible task that the concept seems dubious, especially wh en presen ted
as a quasi -mathematical notion, as it sometimes ha s been. Snell-Hornby
(1988:22) takes the view that "equivalence is unsuitable as a bas ic concept
53

Translation and Language
in translation theory" because it is "imprecise and ill-defined (even after a
heated debate ofover twenty years)".
The stakes in relation to the concept of equivalence are high . When
Kelly (1979:24) asks "What does the linguist have to offer the translator?",
his answer is "The most obvious is analysis ofequivalence, and some objec-
tive justification ofthe translator's intuitions".
There have been many definitions ofequivalence, and it would be tedi-
ous to go through them all here. The most famous are probably those of
Catford and Nida.
Catford and textual equivalence
Catford deserves a mention, even though Snell-Hornby (1988: 14-15) believes
his approach "is now generally considered dated and of mere historical
interest". He describes equivalence as a 'key term ' and tells us that "The
central problem oftranslation practice is that offinding TL [target-Ianguage]
translation equivalents. A central problem of translation theory is that of
defining the nature and conditions oftranslation equivalence" (1965:21).
Catford makes a distinction between formal correspondence and what
he calls 'textual equivalence' (1965:27), but this is not necessarily a distinc-
tion between two approaches to translation. Formal correspondence is a
matter of langue whereas textual equivalence is a matter ofparole. Formal
correspondence exists where a target-language category occupies the same
position in its language system as the same or some other category in the
source language. Thus prepositions seem to operate in the same way in most
European languages (1965:32-33). In so far as we can translate preposition
by preposition in these languages, formal correspondence gives us textual
equivalence. Where that is not the case, we arrive at textual equivalence
through translation 'shifts' (1965:73).
These can be structure shifts (John loves Mary becomes 'Is love at
John on Mary' in Gaelic), class shifts (the adjective in medical student
becomes an adverbial phrase in the French equivalent 'student in medicine'),
unit shifts (the English indefinite article translated by a change in word
order in Russian), and intra-system shifts (a source-language singular
becomes a target-language plural). This is Catford's own taxonomy of
translation techniques, comparable to those seen earlier, but much more
restricted because the terms are based rigorously on a purely linguistic system.
On one point Catford is adamant. In translation, either through formal
correspondence or through textual equivalence achieved by translation shifts,
we do not transfer meaning between languages. What we do is replace a
source-language meaning by a target-language meaning that can function in
54

Equivalence
the same way in the situation being represented linguistically. He demon-
strates that two equivalent utterances in a source language and a target
language do not have the same meaning because languages will verbalize
different situational features: showing the speaker is a woman, signalling
modes oftransport, expressing respect, indicating verbal aspect, and so on.
Catford goes on to state that textual equiva lence is achieved when the source
and target items are "interchangeable in a given situation" (1965 :49,
Catford's italics) and this happens when 'an SL [source-language] and a
TL [target-language] text or item are relatable to (at least some oj) the
same features ofsubstance' (1965:50, Catford's italics).
The reference to substance may seem a little odd, but it stems from the
linguistic theory Catford is working with. Writing, sound and the things out
there in the world are 'substance'. Language is an abstract and formal rep-
resentation ofthat substance.Taking his rather simple example, the Russian
ya prishla (I came/have come) uses a formal means (the final-a on prishla)
to represent the situational substance that the speaker is a woman. There is
nothing about the substance ofa woman that requires her to be represented
by the sound/letter -a. That is a matter ofabstract linguistic form, as is also
the fact that, in a situation where we are describing somebody arriving in a
place, Russian will use formal means to pick out from the situational sub-
stance the notion ofgender and the mode oftransport, French may formally
signal gender (je suis arriveei but not transport mode, German will signal
transport mode (kommen vs.fahren) but not gender, while English will sig-
nal neither, but all three can be textual equivalents in the appropriate situation.
The way different languages choose which elements ofthe situation to
represent and which to ignore is part of the differential slicing up of reality
which we talked about in Chapter 3. Although, according to Catford's theory,
textual equivalence is the solution, picking out those situational elements
which the target language selects and not striving to represent those it does
not, he realizes there are situations where translation becomes partly or
completely impossible, when linguistic structure is an integral part of the
message or when the source culture has artefacts unknown in the target
culture.
Catford is not unaware that his definition oftextual equivalence poses
problems. The concept ofsameness of situation, as he admits (1965 :52), is
a difficult one, especially when very different cultures are involved. His
description of how we discover textual equivalences is also dubious, al-
though he might be less ready to accept this . Even though the process is
based on a linguistic procedure called 'commutation' which works well in
discovering the structural description ofa language, it becomes dubious in
application to translation.
55

Translation and Language
Basically, it works as follows: Suppose we have a source text that says
ABC and a translator tells us the equivalent should be XYZ; suppose we
then commute ABC to ADC and the translation becomes XWZ; in that
case, according to Catford, 0 and Ware cross-language equivalents. This
is a very dodgy notion because, as any translator knows, any number of
other things might also have been said in response to the change in the
source: we could have said XYA or WXY, or made no change at all. The
French IIpleutaverse could become any ofthe English series It :5 pouring/
tippling/siting/bucketing down depending on the translator's whim. Catford's
definition ofequivalence, then , behind a facade ofscientific respectability,
hides a notorious vagueness and a suspect methodology.
Other criticisms made ofCatford have not always been based on accu-
rate or careful readings of his work. Larose (1989: 113) claims that he
decontextualizes the translation process, and yet Catford refers several times
to context and uses the concept of social contextual function to suggest
solutions to dialect translation , for example. Another criticism made by
Larose is that Catford's theory is paralyzed at sentence level. This would
certainly seem to be supported by the examples Catford uses, but the vulgar
fact is that much translation does take place at that level. Larose is nonethe-
less right to call Catford disappointing. Much of his text on restricted
translation (translating only grammar or translating the alphabet, for exam-
pie) seems motivated mainly by a desire for theoretical completeness, covering
all the aspects ofhis model, and is out of touch with what most translators
have to do.
Nida and dynamic equivalence
Four years after Catford's book, Eugene Nida's even more famous attempt
to deal with translation correspondence under the heading of'dynamic equiva-
lence' has subsequently led to denunciation rather than just criticism.
Writing in 1969 (in collaboration with Taber, who rarely gets men-
tioned), Nida tells us that translation theory is lagging behind translation
skills and needs to catch up: "The older focus in translating was the form of
the message... The new focus, however, has shifted from the form of the
message to the response ofthe receptor" (1969: I). This means that different
translations will be 'correct' for different readerships. Nida does not tell us
here where this new 'spirit' comes from (we have to go back to the earlier
Toward a Science a/Translating for that) but proceeds to his famous defi-
nition ('declaration' or 'manifesto' might be better words): "Translating
consists in reproducing in the receptor language the closest natural equiva-
lent ofthe source-language message, first in terms ofmeaning and secondly
56

Equivalence
in terms of style" (1969:12). He then proceeds to analyze this statement in
proselytizing terms, with declarations such as "the translator must strive for
equi valence rather than identity", "the best translation does not sound like a
translation", and "a conscientious translator will want the closest natural
equivalent". As will be seen,judgmental terms abound, and it is this nonna-
tive approach, coup led with the fact that Nida works in the sensitive area of
Bible translation, which has been the source ofcontroversy.
Nida, like Martin Luther long before, wants to translate the Bible in a
way that would have immediate meaning for the target-language reader,
rather than as a text in which every word was God-given and therefore
sacrosanct and available only to the priestly class . Somebody who has not
learnt Hebrew will take the phrase heap coals offire on his head as a form
oftorture (I certainly did), rather than meaning 'to make somebody ashamed
ofhis behaviour ' (1969:2). This concern with reader response, comprehen-
sibility and right understanding leads Nida to make such declarations as "To
communicate effectively one must respect the genius of each language"
(1969:4, Nida's italics), and he calls on structural, psycho- and sociolin-
guistics to show how this can be done.
In a clear, detailed and erudite exposition, Nida and Taber show how
dynamic equivalence impacts on the translation of grammatical meaning
(like Catford, Nida is clear that what should be translated is grammatical
function not form), referential meaning and connotative meaning. They also
analyze the concept in relation to the translation of idiom, discourse struc-
ture, language variety, types ofdiscourse and style, as well as discussing the
translation process itselfand the problems it poses. The result is one of the
most complete and consistent discussions oftranslation ever produced. De-
spite the criticisms made of it, the book should be compulsory reading for
all translators.
In his search for dynamic equivalence Nida is prepared to do things
such as build in redundancy (repeating information) where a formal transla-
tion would produce a dense text, and to alter the sequence of sentences
where the order ofevents in the original does not match real-time chronol-
ogy (1964:139). Many translators ofsecular texts might consider that to be
sound advice, but in the tradition ofBiblical translation, in which St Jerome
declared that "even the order of the words is a mystery", it smacks of
proselytization by one church.
Another charge now made against Nida by the multiculturalists is that
if we follow his injunction to preserve the genius of the target language, it
will mean suppressing the Otherness ofthe source language and so is a form
of colonial ism or 'ethnocentric violence', as Venuti has it (1995:21). Such
people would tum on its head Nida's declaration that the source form must
57

Translation and Language
be changed to preserve the meaning (1969:5) and his assertion that "The
best translation does not sound like a translation" (1969: 12).
The problem with the concept ofdynamic equivalence does indeed ap-
pear most acutely when it produces what seem to be colonizing translations.
The most notorious example is Nida's very briefmention in Towards a Sci-
ence ofTranslation of the rendering of the Biblical greet one another with
a holy kiss as give one another a hearty handshake all around, of which
Nida says the latter "quite naturally translates" the former (1964: 160). This
goaded the French theorist Henri Meschonnic, who takes a mystic view of
translation, into writing with some vehemence that "This automatic
behavourism authorizes any kind of manipulation ... Translation becomes
adaptation, with Nida's dynamic equivalence as its good conscience"
(1986:77).
As with Catford, the attacks have not always been based on a careful
reading ofNida. Those who have accused him ofcultural imperialism have
overlooked his distinction between "a linguistic translation, which is legiti-
mate, and a cultural translation or adaptation, which is not" (1969: 134),
because such a cultural reinterpretation "does not take seriously the cultural
outlook of the people of Biblical times" (1969:13). Nida had, in fact, al-
ready stated in his earlier book that "it is quite impossible to remove such
' foreign' objects as ... Lamb of God" (1964:167).
The problem with this is that the boundaries are not watertight. Nida
does not make clear whether the 'hearty handshake' is a linguistic transla-
tion in which idiom is traded for idiom, or whether it falls under his category
of"areas oftension between formal-equivalence and dynamic-equivalence
translations" (1964: 171). One such area consists ofobjects and events that
exist in both source and target cultures but with a different function. In such
circumstances, Nida says , one possible solution is simply to use the target-
language functional equivalent, replacing, for example, 'heart' by 'li ver ' as
an expression of the centre ofemotions (1964: 172), which would also jus-
tify the substitution ofhandshakes for kisses. A second problem with Nida's
distinction, which is intended to rein in translator licence, is dealt with a few
paragraphs below.
A fundamental charge made against dynamic equivalence is its essen-
tial impossibility. The Chinese scholar Qian Hu is only one in a long line to
write about 'The Implausibility of Equivalent Response'. In one ofa series
of articles on the subject he tells us that Nida's concept is wrong because
"Total compatibility between any two languages is precluded" by the very
nature oflanguage (1994:427 ). He points out that two speakers ofthe same
language may have such different backgrounds that they will often not un-
derstand the same utterance in the same way. This is not something Nida
58

Equivalence
would disagree with, and Qian Hu even quotes Nida to that effect several
times. In the very first pages of The Theory and Practice of Translation
Nida tells us, "Ofcourse no communication, even within a single language,
is ever absolute (for no two people ever understand words in exactly the
same manner), and we certainly cannot expect a perfect match between
languages" (1969:4-5). Few people would disagree with this. It is the cause
of the misunderstandings and disputes of daily life and it follows on from
what we said about languages being full ofgaps in relation to one another as
well as internally between individuals.
The implications for translation are certainly important, of course. If
two native speakers don't even speak quite the same language as one an-
other, how can a translator expect to react to a foreign language text like a
speaker of that language? And how can we possibly begin even to know,
never mind replicate, the response to a text from a culture distant in time
and space? The entire first section of Steiner's After Babel is devoted to
precisely this problem.
The importance of this is twofold. First, according to this theory of
extreme subjectivity, or solipsism, any equivalent effect a translator aims
for can only be an equivalence to the effect on the translator and not on the
original readers. But under this theory (ifyou accept it) there is no way out
ofthe prison house, so we simply plough on regardless because that is how
language works.
Second, even ifyou do not accept this full-blown solipsism, it is obvi-
ous that languages are incommensurate in many ways. From the point of
view of the intended readership, this incommensurability raises the prob-
lem ofwhat means, ifany, can be used to achieve some kind ofequivalent
response, and to what lengths we must go to fulfil that aim. This is a point
that Gutt uses to attack Nida's theory. He explains in some detail the kind
ofknowledge that would be needed by a target-language audience ifit is to
react appropriately to a Biblical passage, then he tells us that "one would
expect the theory ofdynamic equivalence to provide and spell out the meas-
ures needed to achieve this" (1991 :76). However, Nida's distinction between
linguistic translation and cultural adaptation quoted above precludes this,
according to Gutt, since the kind of explanation required is of a cultural
nature, and Nida rejects cultural translation.
Gutt is in fact being disingenuous here, since on the one hand Nida does
'provide and spell out' translation measures (1964:171 et seq.) and on the
other he makes a distinction between cultural translation and cultural expla-
nation, rejecting the former but not the latter provided it is in the right place
(1969 :111).
The provision ofany kind ofexplanation ofthe sort Gutt envisages will
59

Translation and Language
produce not an equivalent response but only intellectual understanding. In
such cases, the theory ofdynamic equivalence cannot possibly apply, unless
we are prepared to turn translation into wholesale adaptation of the 'hearty
handshake' variety. This means, quite simply, that there are texts or parts of
texts where dynamic equivalence is not available as a tool to the translator.
Conversely, there are other texts, or parts of texts, where it is available. In
other words, the appropriate response to the theory ofdynamic equivalence
is neither unthinking acceptance nor outright rejection. It is a translation
strategy to be used where appropriate, something that will be decided, not
without conflict, by the wider translation culture in which each translator
has a part to play, just as the wider culture will help to decide when it is
appropriate to take an opera by Mozart and set it not en una bodega but in
an American diner.
As for the practical problem raised by cultural and linguistic differ-
ence s that the target audience will not understand, we dealt with these in the
chapter on translation techniques and will refer to them again briefly under
the heading ofpresupposition, so there is no need to rehearse the arguments
here, but simply to say that the dividing line between translation and gloss is
fuzzy rather than clear.
Successful communication beyond all manner of boundaries is a vul-
gar fact: linguistic groups do recognize one another beyond their individual
differences; people can differentiate between a tabloid editorial, a lyrical
poem and a scientific treatise, and text producers can make intelligent
decisions about how much information the readership needs and how best
to incorporate it. The fact that these are not rigidly definable concepts
does not, in a world ofchaos theory and fuzzy logic, make them invalid or
inoperable.
Komissarov's sharp and fuzzy equivalence
A rather fuzzier approach to equi valence deserves mention before we wrap
the topic up. It comes from eastern Europe and has the advantage ofgoing
explicitly beyond word level , which is where too much of the discussion
gets stuck. We can take as our starting point a distinction made by Gak
(1992:139) between three typologies ofequivalence, ofwhich only the third,
stratificational equivalence, interests us here. This is equivalence defined by
the linguistic level at which it takes place. There are three such levels: form,
meaning, and situation (or the reality evoked, as Gak calls it), which is
pretty well the same as van den Broek's hierarchical classification ofequiva-
lence into syntactic, semantic and pragmatic (1978:39). Gak says no more
on the subject, but if we go back to an article by Komissarov from 1977 we
60

Equivalence
find a five-term taxonomy based on the level oflanguage at which transla-
tion equivalence is achieved. Each type ofequivalence retains and adds to
the features of the preceding level. They are explained below using literal
translations ofKomissarov's Russian examples, shown by R. (Some of his
examples seem a bit odd but you'll get the idea ofwhat he means.)
1.
Equivalence can be established only at the level ofthe general message,
with no other discemible situational, lexical or grammatical relation be-
tween source and target:
Maybe there is some chemistry between us doesn't mix (meaning 'You
and rare incompatible')
R: Is often that people not go together by characters
All that is translated in this example is the general concept of 'personal
incompatibility'; the concrete metaphor has given way to general state-
ment.
2.
At this level, in addition to the communicative intention, a concrete situa-
tion is identified in both languages even though there are no matches ofa
lexical nature between the source language and the target language
(Komissarov also says there is no syntactic match, but his example dis-
proves that):
He answered the telephone
R: He took the receiver
The communicative intention here is to narrate an act, and the situation
identified in both languages is 'answering the phone', but there are no
verbal correspondences between the two sentences other than a similar
grammatical structure.
3.
In addition to the communicative intention and the identification of a
situation, this type preserves the general situational descriptors:
Scrubbing makes me bad-tempered
R: From the washing offloors ofme the character is spoilt
The communicative intention is expressing an attitude; the situation
identified is a negative activity; and the situation is described in the
same general terms (which Komissarov explains rather cryptically as
'A makes B's C contain D' for the English, and 'C which belongs to B
gets D through A' for the Russian).
61

Translation and Language
4.
This level builds in closer semantic and syntactic relationships. Most of
the source-language words have a corresponding lexical item in the
target-language and the syntax is transformationally related:
1told him what 1 thought ofher
R: 1told him my opinion of her
5.
In this type there is close parallelism between the source and the target at
all levels oflanguage:
1saw him at the theatre
R: I saw him in theatre
The interest of this kind of taxonomy is that it directs the translator
away from the unthinking or over-anxious attempt to match word for word,
which all too often produces nonsense. Sliding along the scale from type 5
to type 3 might have helped the transl ator who produced After receiving
strong blows in the press, which sounds like an industrial accident but re-
ally means 'As a result of intense media criticism' or 'Following hostile
press reports' . Simi larly, Today, we offer you to share this position in an
advert for a French wine purchasing company could have shifted to type 2:
Now yo u too can take advantage of this wonderf ul opportunity. Type I is
often a necessity in subtitling films because ofthe special constraints on the
practice. Inthe film Cible emouvante (Wild Target) , Comment ca: et alors,
et alors ? becomes Is that all you can say?, while an example ofType 2 is
found in the same film when the French for get a nettle rash is translated as
throw a tantrum .
Ofcourse, as with other models ofequivalence, this one cannot predict
the precise conditions in which each type is appropriate. As a result it may
seem only a little more helpful than the old translation adage 'as literal as
possible, as free as necessary' . Nor is it immune to wider considerations
that would override its categories. The author ofstrong blows in the press,
for example, may have been deliberately attempting to produce a foreignizing
translation.
From this point ofview, the various concepts and taxonomies ofequiva-
lence , hailed as our scientific guide to correct translation, tum out to have a
theoretical foundation not very much firmer than the concepts of literal ,
faithful and free translation. But, like those concepts, the notion ofequiva-
lence and the techniques for achieving it continue to be used in the everyday
language of translation because they represent translation reality. The
taxonomies we have looked at are not drawn out ofthin air; they are based
on observations ofwhat actually happens in translation, and different com-
62

Equivalence
mentators at different times are finding pretty much the same things hap-
pening. Similarly, the distinction between formal and dynamic equivalence
is seen in translation practice and provides a formal definition and structure
for that practice. Yet it remains true that none ofthese concepts can operate
in a vacuum. They depend on wider linguistic and cultural considerations.
63

6. Beyond the Word
Shveitser'sjudgement on Retsker was that his taxonomy oftranslation tech-
niques was based too much on the lower linguistic levels ofword and phrase
(1987:33), a criticism echoed by Delis le (1988:44) in relation to all other
such taxonomies: "One of the major weaknesses of [linguistic] theories of
translation is that they have not ventured far enough beyond the word and
sentence".
We shall see that this is not entirely true , but it certainly is true that
adherence to the word level as a translation unit causes uncomfortable
effects at the textual level , as in the sign at Berlin airport which says (un-
less they've changed it) Welcome in Berlin or the caption at the end of
each episode of Seven Cities of Gold which read To Follow (a literal
translation of the French original) instead of To Be Continued. The lin-
guistic level at which the translation unit is set has a long and disputatious
history behind it (Kelly 1979: 121) and is related, as Albrecht (1973 :52)
amongst many others points out, to ' literal' tran slation (low-level transla-
tion unit) and 'free' translation (high-level units). Note, though, that although
Albrecht believes that the results become less acceptable as the translator
shifts the level of text segmentation down toward the word and the mor-
pheme, he also says that such literalist translation "is not just a game for
linguists; in specific circumstances it can be useful" (1973:52).
When we see somebody's translation theory criticized for being too
'word-bound', we would do well to remember that a great deal of transla-
tion takes place at this level with no adverse effects. Although it has been
fashionable to claim for quite some time that 'the text is the real unit of
translation', the idea has not often been properly clarified, and when
Lorscher claims that "It may well be the fact that professional transla-
tors work with texts only" (1991: 13) he offers no evidence to show
how this might operate in reality, so that such statements sound like mere
ideological posturing. The opposite point ofview is put by Kade (1980: 18),
who says that "Texts are usuaIly too long to be treated as a communi-
cative unit in the transcoding process", and by Popovic (19 77 :13), who
says "The main field where the translator's decisions take place is the
level of the textual microstructure".
What professional and even novice translators actually do is relate the
translation of the microlevel of words and phrases to higher textual levels
of sentence and paragraph, and beyond that to such parameters as register,
genre, text conventions, subject matter, and so on, in a constant dialectic.
The rest of this book will look at the implications these levels have for the
translator 's activity.
64

Beyond the Word
Generative grammar
Above the level of word and phrase is the sentence. One attempt to
extend the analysis of translation to this level has been to invoke genera-
tive-transformational grammar.
In the mid-1960s Noam Chomsky set the world of linguistics ablaze
with two new ideas. Noting that existing linguistic theories could not easily
handle certain surface features of language, he proposed a new theory,
called 'generative' or 'transformational grammar', which claimed that speak-
ers generate the more or less complicated surface structures of sentences
through a series of transformations of much more basic structures called
'kernels' or 'deep structures'. Chomsky also suggested that the elements
that make up the kernels are universal, existing in all languages.
The explosion ofresearch that resulted from these ideas led to theories
ofsuch ferocious complexity that only an expert in linguistics would want to
go into them. However, Nida has proposed his own far simpler version of
deep structure analysis for the purposes of translation.
In his model of the translation process, Nida proposes that complex
phrases or sentences in the source language should first be reduced to
'kernels' using just the four categories of Object (0) for things, Event (E)
for actions, Abstraction (A) for qualities, quantities, etc., and Relation (R)
for connecting words. There is nothing intrinsically wrong with these cat-
egories (they are comparable to those proposed in case grammar and
semantics), although much finer classifications could certainly be made. As
Andrews (1985 :71) says: "There are .. . many (probably infinitely many)
more semantic roles that might be significant for the grammar of a lan-
guage". Yet infinite taxonomies are unmanageable, so let's stick with Nida's
much more practical approach.
Having analyzed our sentences into kernels, these kernels are then
'transferred into the target language, and from there the target surface
structures are arrived at by a series of transformational rules. The reason
Nida suggests that translation sho uld proceed like this has to do with
Chomsky's second idea regarding universals, leading Nida to say that
languages agree far more on the level ofthe kernels than on the level
of the more elaborate structures. This means that if one can reduce
grammatical structures to the kernel level, they can be transferred
more readily and with a minimum of distortion . (1969 :39)
In fact, Nida promptly modifies this idea of kernel-level transfer in a foot-
note, opening himself to the accusation that he is not working with proper
transformational grammar (see Gentzler 1993:49). Yet that is not in itselfa
65

Translation and Language
serious accusation, given that transformational-generative grammar has gone
through several stages and linguists themselves have disagreed on the
'proper'model.
More important for our purposes is to see how the process might work.
We shall do this by taking one ofNida's examples. The sentence John ...
[preached] a baptism of repentance for the forgiven ess of sins is
analyzed as
0
E
E
R
E
John
[preached]
a baptism
of
repentance
R
E
R
E
for
the forgiveness
of
Sll1S
Note that many words traditionally called 'nouns', which are usually de-
fined as 'thing-words', actually tum out have the function of ,events', which
have traditionally been associated with verbs, or 'doing-words'.
In order to produce complete kernels from this analysis, we must make
explicit two things that are only implicit in the sentence: (i) it is people who
receive baptism and forgiveness (they are the goal of these actions) and
people who sin and repent (they are the subject of these actions; (ii) it is
God who forgives (He is the subject of the action).
We are now in a position to produce our kernels:
(l) John preached X (where X means 2 to 5 below)
(2) John baptizes the people
(3) The people repent
(4) God forgives X (where X means 5 below)
(5) The people sin
This is simple enough. In fact, one might want to jump in and translate these
'kernels' into the target language and then work them back up to the sur-
face. However, Nida has only said that this is the level at which 'transfer'
takes place, without specifying at any point what that means. He subse-
quently tells us that "the kernel expressions themselves are not to be
translated literally... They are only the basis for transfer" (1969:47). Again
he does not say what this means, and in the later discussion oftransfer and
restructuring, the concept of kernels seems quietly to fade away.
It actually transpires that, after we have reduced our sentences to
kernels, we must then '''back up' to the point where these kernels are
carefully and properly related to each other" (1969:I04) - although we are
66

Beyond the Word
not told how to do that - , and it also transpires that in the process of our
analysis we should not simply have been producing kernels but also antici-
pating things we know will have to happen in the target language when we
restructure the kernels into surface structures. It further transpires that
stylistic requirements that are not actually represented in the kernels will
have to be taken into account in the restructuring process. Finally, the sole
purpose of such an analysis is to identify word functions and relations; it
has nothing to do with meaning, which is the subject of a different part of
the translation process in Nida's scheme.
So what had seemed a simple, clear and easy-to-follow model turns
out to be rather more complicated, even vague, and concerned to capture
only one aspect of translation. Add to this the fact that large swathes of
language can be translated without kernel analysis and we have a model
which is beginning to look decidedly useless for most translation purposes.
Kernel production may well help in dealing with the ambiguities produced
by the highly nominalized and genitivized language ofthe King James bible
and comparable texts, and it may be useful for trainee translators to prac-
tise as one ofthe forms of analysis that might occasionally be needed. But
if I take a sentence at random out of a newspaper (The squeeze on do-
mestic demand would be at least partly offset by growth in exports just
happens to come to hand) with the aim oftranslating it, the effort spent in
reducing it to kernels that I then do not translate seems best devoted to
other matters, such as making sure that I know the technical terms for
squeeze and demand in an economic context.
Shveitser: translation and rewriting rules
These objections to Nida's kernel concept are shared by Shveitser, although
he largely accepts Nida's version oftransfonnationaI grammar. He points
out quite rightly that a phrase like the foundations of the house, which
Nida subjected to deep structure analysis in order to explain the meaning of
of, can be disambiguated by the context without the need for deeper analy-
sis and can be transferred directly to the target-language surface structure
(1987:47). However, Shveitser also claims that such surface transfer is
possible only for related languages, whereas in translating practice it is
surely the case that skilled translators have internalized their command of
their second language to the point where they can go directly between the
surface structures of whatever their language pair happens to be. In other
words, kernel analysis is one possible tool in the translation process, but not
the process itself, and not even necessarily a part of the process.
As far as Shveitser is concerned, generative grammar in its American
67

Translation and Language
form is inadequate for tran slation purposes because, at least in its early
phase, it continued to ignore meaning, and so cannot account for "the mecha-
nisms oflexical and syntacti c paraphrase .. . which, more complicated than
grammatical transformations, are typical oflanguage activity in general and
translation in parti cular" (1987:51). Shveitser finds greater assistance in a
Russian model which, in addition to assigning syntactic functi ons to words,
contains deep lexis rules that assign to words information telling us (i) the
equivalence substitutes for the word (synony ms, converses, derivates) and
(ii) how the word collocates with others (1987: 53).
A function parameter, for example, assigns fall to rain and shine to
sun because that is what rain and sun do, while an inception parameter
assigns sets in to storm and breaks out to conflict because that is how
storms and conflicts begin. A causative parameter collocates reduce and
to tears but incite and to murder, and so on.
Used in combination, such syntactic and lexical parameters allow us to
maintain equivalence within an altered structure by applying rewriting rules.
Thus, a conversive reformulation allows us to rewrite many unionsjoined
the TUC as the TUC counts many unions as members, where the verb
becomes its converse with reassignation ofsubject/object functions, while
prepare f or can become the synonymous make preparations for with
grammatical reassignment from phrasal verb to verb phrase.
Other applications lead to greater syntactic changes, as in the pair He
subjected the patients to an examination / The patients allowed them-
selves to be examined by him, in which the actants or agents reverse
grammatical roles (Shveitser 1987:54).
Translators certainly do use the kind oftransfonnations described here ,
as we saw in our discu ssion of tran slation techniques, and this gives some
plausibility to Shveitser's view of translation as a process of paraphrase.
But the rules themselves are of little use to practising translators, for three
reasons.
First, Shveitser gives us a grand tota l ofno fewer than fifty-five lexical
and twenty-two syntactic rules! Although translators might profit from learn-
ing halfa dozen names for translation tech niques, only the most masochistic
wou ld wish to learn such a hefty apparatus as this.
Second, the rules do not all have equal status for a translator. Various
localized pressures of a syntactic or stylistic nature may cause a translator
to cast around for alternatives in the search for a 'better' translation, so
that the platoon was shot at is rewritten as the squad came under fire
(an awkward passive becomes an active and the clumsy sound combina-
tion in was shot disappears). But not even novice translators are going to
waste time casting around for the rule that will enable them to tum die
68

Beyond the Word
Sonne scheint into the sun shines rather than the sun falls.
This discrepancy arises from the fact that the generative rules Shveitser
is talking about were originally intended to represent the innate language
ability that a native speaker does not need to think about before speaking. A
non-native speaker has acquired that knowledge in very different ways,
however, and translation is not the same as speaking. A translator will focus
very different levels of awareness on different elements of the text in the
process of translation, pondering for hours over a small phrase that may
require some conscious form of transformational manipulation, and then
translating the next dozen sentences on auto-pilot because they involve
only internalized linguistic routines. In other words, iftransformational gram-
mars describe how language works (and not everyone thinks they do) they
do not necessarily describe how translation works.
Third, Shveitser's claim that these procedures produce equivalence of
meaning in an altered structure needs to be examined carefully in each
case. In any language that allows He subjected them to examination to
be rewritten as They allowed themselves to be examined, there is likely to
be rather more at stake than a mere reversal of roles, so Shveitser's model
does not fulfil its declared aim of 'sameness in difference'.
Malone and bridge building
Also derived from generative grammar is Malone's 'bridging' technique.
This takes its name from the type of bridge that can be raised and lowered
between two pylons. The bridge itself will be the sentence to be translated
represented in both SL and TL at some point between the deep structure
and the surface structure, while the pylons symbolize the derivational rules
that allow us to transform the deep structure into the surface. The idea is
that we can raise our representation of the sentence closer to the surface
structure or lower it towards the deep structure depending on how common
the SL and TL derivations are. This overcomes the objection made against
Nida, since it allows that there is little point in analyzing sentences into
kernels if a direct surface translation can take place. If the surface struc -
tures of source and target languages are arrived at in the same way, no
further analysis is necessary. If, however, the derivation is different, then
we lower our bridge to the appropriate level of grammatical abstraction in
the source language and then work our way back up the derivational rules
in the target language in order to arrive at an appropriate surface structure.
Thus, the French sentence Je tdcherais de m 'y conformer is de-
rived from the abstract structure: JE<a> TACH- [+ conditional]
(JE<a>CONFORM-JE<a>y} by applying rules which produce appropriate
69

Translation and Language
pronoun links, build in agreement between appropriate parts of the sen-
tence, and reposition elements within the sentence.
By contrast, the English deep structure for the translation of this sen-
tence, which is: 1 <a> would try{l<a>ACCOMMODATE 1<a>to them},
requires only two rules: one to handle the pronouns and the other to pro-
duce an appropriate verb form to give the surface structure J would try to
accommodate myselfto them (Malone 1988:147) . The fact that only part
of the English sentence is represented in deep structure form with the first
part (I would fly) already in its surface structure is presumably intended to
demonstrate Malone's notion that bridge technique need only be applied
when the differences between source-language and target-language deri-
vations are great enough to justify the work.
The derivation rules needed to go from deep to surface structure are
taken from standard transformational grammar. We mention only two taken
at random to convey the flavour of the process:
Equi deletes links in a coreference chain: the not impossible English
sentence He wants he should do this himselfwould become He wants
to do this himself;
Rais takes an element in the subordinate clause and raises it into the
main clause: compare What J want is that you shut up with J want you
to shut up.
As with Shveitser, the different transformational rules have different
status when it comes to translation (as opposed to generating sentences in
one's native language). Thus, the use of a RelPro rule to insert a relative
pronoun can be a deliberate translator choice for running short sentences
into a longer sentence, possibly for stylistic reasons, but many ofthe rest do
not represent translator choice. For example, the rule which positions ob-
ject pronouns is a grammatical imposition in many languages, what Vinay
and Darbelnet called a 'servitude', and as such a translator has no choice
but to apply them.
Many commentators have pointed out that the processes described by
Nida, Shveitser and Malone, among others, almost certainly have little to do
with what goes on in the heads of actual translators. These models are based
on the assumption that the translation process consists of three phases: analy-
sis into deep grammar and meaning, mental transfer from the source language
to the target language (sometimes via some mysterious interlanguage called
a tertium comparationis), and restructuring to produce an acceptable text
(Nida 1969:33), although none of these theorists are necessarily claiming
that the phases occur separately one after the other.
70

Beyond the Word
These models are heavily marked by information theory and computer
modelling approaches with their concepts of input, treatment, and output.
As Lorscher (1991 :17) points out, such process models of translation are
purely logical constructs with no proven psychological reality. Where trans-
lators do bother to analyze a text (and whole segments of texts can be
translated without such conscious work), their analyses are far more likely
to take the form ofdiscursive explanations to themselves ofwhat they think
the text is about rather than careful reduction to kernels and reassembly as
surface structures. Lorscher 's research suggests that translators actually
use the minimax principle: they keep the mental burden as low as possible
by making use ofdeeper, more abstract, and therefore more difficult process-
ing levels only when higher-level processing has failed (Lorscher 1991 :267).
We shall have more to say about this in the section on psycholinguistics.
On the whole, the grammar of deep structure and transformational
rules, dramatic as its impact may have been on linguistics, would seem to
have little to offer to the study oftranslation. Not only does it not offer any
real insight into translation, it is, as Gentzler (1993 :50) rightly says, actually
divorced from real translation problems: "from contemporary neologisms to
archaisms, from proper nouns to metaphors, from high registers to dialects
and 'mistakes' and all those knotty problems that make translation both
impossible and fascinating".
Another aspect of meaning commonly attributed to whole sentences
rather than words concerns the things that sentences imply or presuppose.
Since these are often linked to language in use, we shall leave consideration
ofthis area of semantics to the chapter on pragmatics. Our next task, how-
ever, will be to look at the linguistics of what happens beyond the level of
the sentence in the realm of context and register.
71

7. Beyond the Sentence: Context and Register
Context
One of the most frequent injunctions in translation is to 'look at the con-
text', and one reason transformational grammar has so little to offer translation
is its refusal to do precisely that (Faiss 1973:78). Most words entered in the
mono- and bilingual dictionary have multiple meanings; the one-to-many
equivalence relation. Only by looking at the company a word keeps can we
find out which meaning is to be activated in a specific instance. She won
the butterfly might mean that some lucky woman drew the winning ticket
for a lepidoptera, but could mean she won a swimming race. We need the
context to tell us. This seems to be such an obvious fact that it may come as
som e surprise to find that the concept of context is not unproblematic in
linguistics (and is even rejected in deconstructionist analyses on the grounds
that every word always contains traces of all its meanings).
According to Leech (1981 :6 1ff) the notion of context emerged as an
attempt to remove language from the purely mental sphere, amenable only
to unreliable introspection, and put it in a perspective that would allow sci-
entific observation. This perspective was the concrete situation in which
the language was being used and the things being done with language in
that situation: buying a train ticket, being arrested by the police ...
This use ofthe word ' context' is no longer quite the same as it was in
the preceding paragraph, where it meant literally 'the text that goes around
the text we are looking at'. To make this clear, some writers refer to the
wider meanin g of context as 'the context of situation' and the narro wer
meaning as 'co-text'. Holz-Manttari's Handlungstheorie reminds us that
the act of translation also has its own institutional context while Vermeer's
concept ofSkopostheorie reminds us that a translation has to function in a
context different from that of the source text (see Chri stiane Nord in this
series ).
The attractiveness ofthe concept ofcontext seem s obvious. If it works,
it allows us to describe the linguistic behaviour of a given situation in a
scientific way, to find out how other languages handle the context in ques-
tion, and to translate accordingly, usingjust the form ofwords we desperately
need to translate our source text. Just as we know without a shadow of
doubt that in a spec ific situation epericoloso sporg ersi equals (ve ry pre-
cisely) do not lean out of the window (and not it is dangerous to lean
out'; and def ense d'entrer equa ls (rather less precisely) no entry (and not
fo rbidden to enter), so we might hope to find the precise contextual pa-
rameters that tell us how to translate, without a shadow ofa doubt. Longtemps
72

Beyond the Sentence
je me suis couche de bonne heure or Four score years ago and ten.
You might, for example, be translating a text in which Mr and Mrs
Smith go to the grocers (anything is possible). All you have to do, in order
to translate this, is to match it with the words that would be used in that very
same grocery-buying situation in the target culture, taking care only to al-
low for the fact that foreigners eat some funny things (the English eat parsnips
when every good French person knows they are meant for pig feed) .
The problem, as Leech says , is that such situations are 'primitive'
(1981 :64). As long as the parties concemed confine themselves as good
capitalists to the business ofbuying and selling groceries using the appropri-
ate set phrases that regulate such a transaction, we have a situation that
just might possibly be described with the scientific accuracy envisaged by
the contextualists. But if Mr Smith grows prize cucumbers and has strict,
not to say manic, ideas on the subject, he might engage the grocer in a
discussion that is purely tangential to or even has nothing to do with the
situation in hand, and which, from the linguistic point ofview, will require
the notion of context to be widened to take in the theory and practice of
horticulture as well as the art ofpolemic in a public place.
This, according to Leech (1981 :64), is precisely what happened with
contextualism. The notion of context was diluted to the point where it be-
came too abstract to permit the scientific descriptions which had been its
main purpose.
Eggins (1994:8) is able to say very precisely that in the context of a
recipe book you would not expect to find such sentences as Perhaps you
should maybe mix the eggs and milk/or about two minutes or so, since
the writing of recipes is a rigidly controlled genre, but she would have far
more difficulty saying precisely what kind oflanguage you might or might
not find in an article on garden gnomes or Kevin Bacon.
Although the concept of context can be used to (i) resolve ambiguity,
(ii) provide referents for words like this and then, and (iii) supply infonna-
tion that makes sense of elliptical utterances, Leech demonstrates quite
easily that there can be no such thing as an exhaustive scientific description
ofa given context, and that the tenn may have some use in pragmatics but
has none in semantics.
Of course, rejecting context on scientific-linguistic grounds does not
render the concept unusable. Just as terms such as 'literal' and 'free' transla-
tion and 'equivalence' continue to be used by translators even though there is
no accepted 'scientific' definition of them, so translators continue to refer
to context. As is so often the case, translation has to rely on fuzzy concepts
that are not amenable to scientific definition but which can be made work-
able for practical purposes. The mystery, perhaps, is why theorists are so
73

Translation and Language
determined to defuzz the discipline.
One simple exercise to demonstrate the practical applicability of con-
text would be to take a sentence such as the French Je vais aI 'ecole and ask
in what contexts the following translations would be appropri ate: Jgo to
school, I'm go ing to school, 1'111 go ing to the school and 1'111 driving to
college, together with any others you can think of (Pergnier 1993 :5 1-52).
Context can , at least for some of its dimensions, be approached
from two directions: first, from the point of view of 'register', the speci-
fication of the elements of the communicative event, its participants
and parameters, and second, from the point of view of 'scenes-and-
frames' , which is a kind of updated version of contextualism.
Communicative event and register
Journalists used to be, probably still are, taught that the first paragraph of
their article should give the answers to 'Who, what, when, where, and why'.
These are the basic elements ofany situation.According to Nord (1991 :36),
who gives a potted history of this question list all the way back, would you
believe, to Hennagoras ofTemnos (2 BCE!) , the complete list should be:
Who transmits
to whom
what for
by which medium
where
when
why
a text
with what fun ction?
On what subject matter
do they say
what
(what not?)
in what order
using which non-verbal elements
in which words
in what kind ofsentences
in which tone
to what effect?
Nord has attempted to put the extratextual factors in the first paragraph
and the intratextual factors in the second. This list is encapsulated quite
neatly in the register model of text.
74

Beyond the Sentence
Register
At the centre of language is variability. We don 't all speak in exactly the
same way all the time . Language varies in different contexts and situations
ofuse. This is accounted for in linguistics by 'register analysis'. As always
in linguistics, there is no one standard presentation ofthe register model, but
the fundamentals are the same . The two main parameters that cause lan-
guage to vary are language user and language use, and both parameters
can be described in terms of a set of sub-parameters. Changes in any of
these will produce changes in the language used.
Register and language user
Language users can be described by the place they occupy in:
time (what age do/did they live in?)
space (what region do/did they come from?)
society (what social class do/did they belong to?)
From a purely linguistic point of view these parameters seem unexcep-
tional. From other points ofview they become problematic, as we shall see.
However, the first sub-parameter (time) would seem to be uncontroversial.
Writers and translators live in a certain era and the language they use will
be date-stamped for that era, with words that subsequently disappear or
change meaning, grammatical structures that later fall out of use, even
different spelling. The real question for translation is quite simply this: Should
the translation ofan earlier text be written in the modem target language or
an earlier version ofit? Should Dostoevsky be translated into the English of
Dickens?
In the vast majority of cases the answer is no and this parameter has
no influence on translation. Unless a translator has taken the immense trou-
ble to learn the earlier form ofthe language, the result will almost certainly
be risible pastiche. The larger the temporal gap to be bridged, the more
alien such a translation becomes to its readers, who might just as well learn
the foreign language and enjoy the original.
One writer who has attracted this sort of attention is the medieval
Italian author Dante, whose Divine Comedy was translated into medieval
French in the nineteenth century and an invented medieval German in the
twentieth century, even though Dante's medieval Italian is far less differ-
ent from modem Italian than medieval French or German is from modem
French or German. The result, as Zimmer (1981 :135) says, is little more
75

Translation and Language
than an intellectual game.
There are cases, usually but not only in literary translation, however,
where a part ofthe original text will make use ofdifferent historical stages
of the language: the discovery of an ancient manuscript or an imagined
future language, for example. In such cases a holistic or illusionistic ap-
proach to translation comes into its own . Zimmer (1981 :133) gives the
example of a novel by Thomas Mann which contains a passage written in
'archaic' German. The French tran slator has not attempted to use authen-
tic archaic French, preferring simply to take whatever opportunities arise to
use older forms of spe lling and the occasional archaic word, giving a form
of French that has never actually existed but which gives the illusion of
being plausibly dated for modem readers.
There are two other main ways in which the temporally marked aspect
of language influences translation. The first is the need to prepare new
translations when existing ones are perceived to be out of touch with the
modem state of the language, alth ough economic reasons may mean that
this process applies only to 'classic' texts. The second is the desire to avoid
new translations because of the perceived classic status of an existing trans-
lation or the beliefthat a translation close in time to the original is likely to be
a better representation of the language of the original.
The other two parameters defining language user, reg ion and social
class, seem superficially uncontroversial but pro ve not to be. Ifall or part of
a source text is written in a regional language, the tran slator may want to
reflect that in the translation. We shall return to this point under the heading
ofsociolinguistics, where we will see that dialect translation is by no means
as simple and straightforward as one might think, especially since it often
relates to questions of status and repression.
The last parameter (social class) may have seemed uncontroversial
when the concept of register was first elaborated, and in many language
communities it still is. The idea that the 'unmarked' reg ister, in other words
the accepted standard, should be the language of the 'educated middle
classes' was accepted without a murmur of protest at a time when the
sociolinguist Bernstein was able to compare what seemed to be the rich -
ness and diversity of the 'extended' language code used by the educated
bourgeoisie with the impoverished nature of the 'restricted' code of the
working classes. Since then, just as the so-called poverty of the restricted
codes has come under attack, so too has the notion of a middle-class white
norm also been subjected to (largely unsuccessful) assa ult.
Ideo logical considerations also influence this parameter in translation.
The ideology ofthe target culture may not permit the use ofanything other
than the standard dialect, in which case suppression will be the tran slation
76

Beyond the Sentence
strategy adopted. Alternatively, a source text written in the standard lan-
guage may be translated into a non-standard language (we shall see some
examples in the chapter on sociolinguistics). In other cases, the translator
will be allowed and will try to represent variations in social class markers in
the text to be translated. Translators should therefore be able to recognize
these markers and be able to reproduce them as appropriate in the target
language.
Neither of these tasks is as easy as it sounds, since the translator may
have had no exposure to different varieties ofthe foreign source language,
while in the native target language translators may be able to recognize
varieties, but may not be able to produce them. We can all recognize the
different regional pronunciations ofour own country but we cannot all imi-
tate them, and the same is true of written registers. The most common type
oftranslator may well by the third type in Levy's tripartite division (1969:63):
those who only ever use their own 'idiolect', their own individual and spe-
cific way of using language. We shall see an example of this at the end of
the section on function in translation.
Register and language lise
The 'language user' was the first parameter of register description. The
second is ' language use'. Just as the language user was defined by three
sub-parameters of place, time and status, so now it is customary to de-
scribe language use in terms also ofthree sub-parameters: tenor, mode and
domain. Of these three sub-parameters, the first two can be defined quite
precisely, while the third seems to be a more slippery concept.
'Tenor' is used to describe the relationship of text producer to text
receiver, as reflected, for example, in the difference between Please place
in the receptacle provided and Bob it in the bin, between BWe gehen
Sie weg and Hall ab, between Ayez I'obligeance de quitter ma presence!
and Foutez-moi Ie camp d 'ici. A text will usually have an abundance of
lexical, grammatical and syntactic markers to show the degree offormality,
distance and politeness between the sender and the receiver, a degree which
may vary from the formal or even frozen language of officialese to the
most intimate ofpersonal talk.
What actually determines this degree of distance and consequent for-
mality may be social status (the first letter I got from my university in England
began 'Dear Fawcett') or the authority that comes with knowledge ("The
existence of mediation does not entail the existence ofeither Kuhnian para-
digms or Foucauldian epistemes" (Benjamin 1989:32) - no, I don't know
what it means either). But distance can also be decided by something as
77

Translation and Language
simple as available space: the standard phrase on branded medicine con-
tainers, If symptoms persist consult your doctor, is often replaced
nowadays where space allows by the friendlier, more informal but slightly
longer If symptoms do not go away, talk to your doctor about it.
The second sub-parameter of language use is 'mode' or 'channel'. At
its simplest, this is the choice between speaking and writing.A couple who
have fallen out and who are not on speaking terms may communicate through
notes stuck to the fridge door, and the tone is apt to be icy (l shall return
home at 5 p.m. rather than Back at 5). Speaking and writing can be done
alone (monologue) or with other people (dialogue). This parameter can
become very complex, however, because within both speaking and writing
there will be many variations on the main theme. We can chat informally to
friends supplementing our words with a whole array of body language, or
be interviewed formally by a customs officer over certain undeclared items.
We can write informally in a diary with a plethora of exclamation marks,
underlinings and coloured inks, or make a formal typed complaint to some-
body in authority. At stake, in addition to the dimension offonnality deriving
from tenor, will be such things as the balance between explicit and implicit
information, the degree ofplanning involved, and the carefulness or other-
wise of the structure of the message.
Some languages have clearly demarcated spoken and written forms ,
whereas other languages have more fluid frontiers which can be a source
of pitfalls. A French academic colleague once refused to translate a news-
paper headline referring to kids by the equivalent gosses because in his
opinion that word belonged only to informal spoken language.
The more fluid the borderline between what counts as purely spoken
and what is allowed in writing, the more difficult decisions become, espe-
cially when we take account oflanguage changing over time. Can teachers
oftranslation into English continue to boldly reject split infinitives or refuse
split phrasal verbs that they will not put up with? The classic example of
this is French, where the complexity of the written language in relation to
the spoken language led the Ministry ofEducation to issue regularly revised
editions of 'dispensations', lists of 'mistakes' that teachers were no longer
to mark wrong.
For most translators other than interpreters the problem of translating
spoken language does not arise. Although the language of theatre, when
intended for performance, has to be translated in a way that makes it speak-
able by the players, the 'speech' we are dealing with has been filtered
through the writing system and tends to be a conventionalized representa-
tion rather than the real thing (verbatim transcriptions ofreal spoken language
make for tedious reading). This is why the English translator John London
78

Beyond the Sentence
(1990: 161) discovered with surprise that the actors often replaced his own
translation by lines that he himselfconsidered to be unidiomatic.
In film dubbing also the constraints of synchronization may override
the need to represent the spokenness of the language, while one area of
translation where the difference between the written and spoken language
may be shown up quite cruelly is in the subtitling offilms, where constraints
of space force the use of often formal structures of a kind not found in the
spoken language in its current form. One ofthe subtitles in the Filipino film
Manila: In the Claws of Darkness is You see nothing but my pate, a
sentence you are unlikely to hear in spoken English.
For most translators the constraints ofmode will require control ofthe
very wide range of written expressions appropriate to the third parameter
oflanguage use, namely 'domain', also called 'field' or 'province'.
The meaning of this parameter is not as clear as the previous two.
Hatim and Mason say "field is not the same as subject matter" (1990a:48),
but Bell says "in a very much broader sense, domain can refer to ... family,
friendship, education and so forth" (1991 :191), which sounds very much
like subject matter. Crystal and Davy (1969:73) say that 'province' should
not be identified with subject matter, even though they define province as
the language ofadvertising, the language ofpublic worship, etc., which also
sounds very much like subject matter.
In the brief examples they give, Hatim and Mason (1990a:52-53) de-
scribe the 'field' of four different extracts as follow s:
arousing interest in the topic
n
American domestic policy and international current affairs
111
news reporting
IV
assessing current affairs (investigative journalism)
These seem to be very different kinds ofthing: (i) is a text function; (ii) is
subject matter; (iii) is either a professional activity or a text type; (iv) is a
combination of text function, subject matter, and professional activity or
text type.
Part of the problem in defining this parameter is that in practice all of
the parameters ofregister are imbricated in one another. The language ofa
text may be formal not just because oftenor (the writer maintains distance
from the reader) but also because of mode (written language tends to be
more formal than spoken) and province (we don't often write in slang about
nuclear physics). The amount of information included may not just be a
function of using the written mode, which has to find ways of providing
information that in conversation would be conveyed by context and body
79

Translation and Language
language, but also because we might choose to treat people we are speak-
ing to as if they were stupid and needed things spelling out (in a loud voice).
For all practical purposes, this parameter seems to be a combination of
subject matter, in so far as it influences choice oflexis, and genre or format
ofdelivery in so far as it influences such parameters as formality, complex-
ity and presentational modes. This would mean the important dimension of
participation could be subs umed just as much under 'province' as under its
normal location with 'tenor' . Participation concerns the extent to which the
text producer attempts to ' involve' the reader in the text in some way.
Authors can try to make the text receiver participate more closely in the
communicative event either because they want to get close to them or
show friendliness (tenor), or because the textual conventions require it (prov-
ince) . The anonymous author of a pantomime wants the audience to shout
'Watch out, he's behind you! ' not as a mark of personal closeness with the
audience but because the genre is dead without it.
Register in practice
One ofthe earliest applications ofthe concept ofregister to translation was
provided by House, who demonstrated its use in assessing the quality of a
translation. Although the model she uses is slightly different from the one
outlined above, it covers all the same parameters and adds to it the concept
of'socialrole relationship' (1977 :45) which, in addition to the equality-power
dimension, also includes the related concept of positional role versus
situational role . Our positional role, what we do in life, will affect the way
we use language. House quotes such 'high-status' examples as teacher or
priest, but people such as plumbers and carpenters will also use language
dictated by their position in life, and that language will include variations
depending on whether the addressee is the customer, the supplier or the
apprentice. The situational role is more transient: the plumber at school on
parents' night, or the teacher having a tooth removed.
In addition to register, House draws on the concept of text function.
We shall look at this notion in more deta il in a later section. All we need to
know here is that House takes the source text and analyzes each of the
register parameters to see how they contribute to conveying information
(province) and to building a relationship between author and reader (tenor).
She then analyzes the target version and provides a text profile ofthe qual-
ity of the translation not just on the basis of the traditional criterion of a
semantico-grammatical mismatch (the meaning is wrong or the target-lan-
guage norms are violated) but by the degree ofregister match or mismatch,
a dimension that was either missing or inadequately developed in earlier
80

Beyond the Sentence
models of translation quality assessment.
This is clearly a good idea, but it isrendered somewhat murky by House's
decision to refer to sernantico-grammatical mistakes as 'overtly erroneous
errors' and register mistakes as 'covertly erroneous errors', which is just
the kind ofjargon translators can do without.
House subjects a number of text types to register analysis . Here we
shall look at just one, because this particular analysis has been the subject
of criticism by Gutt in his attempt to prove that translation theory needs
none of the traditional apparatus offunction, equivalence and so forth (we
shall analyze his position in a later section).
The text is taken from a travel brochure about the town ofNuremberg.
The medium is simple written-to-be-read, with no spoken language mark-
ers (it is important in register analysis to note things that are not there, as
well as those that are) . The text is main ly a monologue (no second person
pronouns) with some attempts at dialogue (one use of we, some structures
and lexis implying an invitation to come and see the town). The relationship
between author and reader is mainly impersonal (the author is anonymous,
the readership is not some specific social group) but the text tries to flatter
the reader by referring to landmarks in the town by name alone, without
further explanation, so supposing the reader is a person ofknowledge. The
tenor ofthe text is partly formal , using some older or archaic structures and
vocabulary. The province is marked by the cliched hyperbole and 'poetic'
language typical ofholiday brochures. House's analysis is much longer than
this, but the above notes should give an idea of the process.
In her evaluation ofthe translation House makes two main points , which
we shall simply summarize here without the detailed supporting proof she
supplies: (i) that the translation fails to flatter the reader at crucial points,
and (ii) that it fails to match the pseudo-poetic exaggeration and pretension
typical oftravel advertising. The first ofthese points is not seen as an error,
since an English-speaking audience cannot be expected to understand the
references to the cultural artefacts and so needs the explanations built in by
the translator, even though this loses the element of flattery. The second
item, loss of pretension, is seen as a 'covertly erroneous error' because the
register dimension could have been respected in translation.
Gutt (1991 :46-49) believes both of these conclusions are faulty. His
criticism is important for translation, even ifyou don 't accept it, because it
concerns a question ofvital importance for translators: How closely will the
reader read the text and can we know what the effect of the text will be on
the reader?
In relation to the social role relationship of flattery, Gutt doubts first
whether the author of the German original deliberately intended to flatter
81

Translation and Language
their audience, and second whether the German audience actually would
have felt flattered anyway. This relates both to the 'intentional fallacy', the
false beliefthat an authorial intention can be recovered from a text , and to
the reception-theory claim that effects on a readership can be gauged. The
debate on whether intention and effect can be known is by no means over.
Literary critics who, in the 1980s, fervently proclaimed the 'death of the
author', who they saw as a linguistico-social construct rather than a person
speaking in his or her own voice, returned in the 1990s to searching through
authors' work for clues to their lives. Interested readers will find a useful
introduction with further reading in the first two chapters of Translating
Poetic Discourse by Myriam Diaz-Diocaretz (1985).
But even if flattery in the Nuremberg travel brochure was intended by
the German author and received by the German audience, then surely, Gutt
argues, the translator could have reacted to loss of flattery in the English
version by the use of compensation: they could have built in forms of flat-
tery to ensure overall functional equivalence of the translation with the
original. This argument allows Gutt to deploy the reductio ad absurdum of
suggesting that the translator should maintain a strict mathematical flattery
count or test the translation for flattery effect on a sample audience. How-
ever, there are two flaws in Gutt's argument. First, the failure ofan individual
translator to behave in a certain way does not invalidate the model that
analyzes that behaviour. Second, compensation is not some sort of neutral
translation technique to be deployed like universal filler whenever a crack
appears in the wall oftranslation. It is a disruptive move that has ideological
overtones and is for that reason not used by all translators and need not
therefore be predicted by any translation model.
On the second ofHouse's points, that ofthe translation failing to match
the pseudo-poetry ofthe original, Gutt 's criticism is again both apposite and
dubious. He points out that the target language may not accept pretension
and exaggeration in a text of this type, and that the translation should not
therefore attempt a match on this dimension. This is certainly true, and
indeed he is obliged to quote House herself to precisely that effect, so his
only real criticism comes down to suggesting that House should have laid
greater emphasis than she does on the culture-bound nature of register.
Nonetheless, Gutt's overall criticism remains correct: Even if we
accept that a translation has to be functionally equivalent to the original
(which is not House's position, since, as we shall see below, she ac-
cepts the existence of function-altering translation), the model is
insufficiently predictive in spelling out what this means in practice, which
is precisely the same criticism we have noted in relation to the applica-
tion of translation techniques.
82

Beyond the Sentence
These rather abstract considerations should not be allowed to hide the
considerable importance ofthe linguistic concepts behind register analysis,
especially for translators who are not content to approach their task hap-
hazardly in the hope that 'it'll be all right on the night', but who prefer to
come to the task in some planned kind of way. From this point of view
register analysis serves several important purposes.
First, all translators should be able to perform a register analysis for
two reasons: (i) in order to have an understanding of the text they are
translating which goes beyond the simple level of denotation and allows
them to choose the appropriate register in the target language, and (ii) so
that when they are required to tackle new subject matters they can pro-
duce their own analysis ofthe registers available for that subject in both the
source and target languages.
This is important because trainee translators have a tendency to shift
registers without reason, like the student who alternated colloquialisms such
as drugged up to the eyeballs with formal syntax like takes not the slight-
est interest, and formal vocabulary such as evince a studied vulgarity
with informal phrases such as comes across as, even though the original
text was written in a uniform register. Another student allowed spoken
language to erupt into formal written language in the sentence the C01]JO-
ration cynically stated that the pesticides, I quote, 'had been used
incorrectly '. Similarly, attention to register might have prompted a search
for a more formal phrase to replace the last three words in comparing
anthropophagy to the cravings of pregnant women makes us laugh.
Second, the assumption is that the registers appropriate in a given situa-
tion will vary between languages, as both Gutt and House point out. As a
corollary, register shifts would have to occur in the process of translation.
Sadly, however, very little comparative work seems to have been done in
this field. This is not really surprising given the theoretical difficulties in-
volved. Ifwe try to draw conclusions from source texts and their translations
we run the risk of methodological unsoundness since the translations may
be faulty. If we work with parallel texts in bilingual publications such as
those put out by the United Nations or by the Aeroport de Paris, we have
no guarantee that the independently working authors were aiming at the
same register. Comparing a UNESCO report on drugs written in French,
German and English, we find differences such as the following:
experience seems to demonstrate that it is unrealistic
l'experience semble montrer que c'est la un objectif chimerique
doch zeigt die Erfahrung, daf dies eine vollig unzulangliche Aufforderung
ist
83

Translation and Language
or again:
much has happened
beaucoup de chemin a ete parcouru
es ist viel Zeit vergangen
Each language uses somewhat different verbal strategies which impact on
textual tone (tenor). But without detailed and voluminous analysis we can-
not say whether these strategies are specific to the translators involved or
part of a consistent register difference in this style of report.
Similarly, in a 1991 edition of the bilingual Austria Today, where the
German says ' borrow' (i.e. steal) a car for a 'merry trip ', the English says
bands of teenagers steal automobiles and race them against each other
on public roads. It is almost a mass 'sport ' in some countries. Even a
quiet personal 'borrowing' of som ebody els e 's vehicle for a quick
'tour '.. .. Is this because the author believes the English register should be
more sensational, or because they have a somewhat hysterical personality?
Whatever the case, there is little solid data for translators to go on, other
than their own experience.
We have suggested above that French is less ready to mix language
levels than Eng lish. Sa'Adeddin (1990:32) points to the insincerity and ef-
fusiveness that would result from the close translation of an Arabic text,
where the original Arabic would appear dull and arrogant without the ma-
terial that causes problems in translation. Neubert (19 77:55) also reports
that Anglo-American newspapers use a wider range ofregisters than their
Russian or German counterparts, which has two consequences: in trans-
lating from English into Russian or German there should be a general raising
and neutralizing ofmarked Anglo-American styles, while those translating
in the opposite direction will have the more difficult task of building in
greater stylistic variation. The example given by Neubert illustrates the
problem. If you were translating from German into English the headline
EWG-Manipulation, Skandal unt heimliche Gelder, how likely are you
to think of EEC Brainwash: Row Over Cash? Working in the opposite
direction should be easier because the translation becomes more of an
explanation, using abstract hypernyms rather than the English concrete
hyponyms.
84

8. Text Structure
In our section 'Beyond the word' we looked at sentence meaning in rela-
tion to generative grammar, which is one approach to meaning created by
the grammatical structure of the sentence and the functions of its compo-
nents. Another type of sentence meaning is created by its conceptual
structure which is dealt with in linguistics under the heading of 'theme-
rheme' organization or 'functional sentence perspective' . Larger textual
structures are dealt with under the headings of 'cohesion' (grammatical
and lexical linkage) and 'coherence' (conceptual linkage). Here we shall
look at all of these concepts.
Theme/rheme and functional sentence perspective
The semantic organization of the sentence or clause into two parts , the
'theme' (what we are talking about) and the 'rheme' (what we say about
the theme), would seem to be a matter ofcommon sense. Nothing could be
further from the truth. Getting into the subject can be like bounding onto a
holiday beach and then wishing you 'd been more attentive to the sign that
said 'Danger: Quicksand' .
The 'standard' approach is to call whatever comes in first position in
the sentence the theme. Whatever follows that is the rheme. Themes are
then classified (Eggins 1994:274ff) according to the nature ofthe linguistic
item in first position. These will be different for different sentence types.
Deviations from the norm are then called 'marked theme'. This in itself
might seem unobjectionable. Matters become complicated when one tries
to explain the function of such positioning, given that word order is highly
regulated in some languages and very loose in others.
East European linguists, who did much ofthe early work on theme and
rheme, wanted to know the difference between sentences such as the Rus-
sian Anna liubit Ivana ('Ann loves John') with the object in its 'normal'
position after the verb and Ivana liubit Anna (' Ann loves John ') with the
object in an 'abnormal' position at the front of the sentence. The answer,
according to Comrie (1979), is found by asking what question each sen-
tence might be a reply to. In the first case, it is 'Who does Ann love?' and
in the second 'Who loves John?'
The first question already gives the name Ann, so when the question is
answered, this ' old' information is got out of the way by putting it first,
leaving the tasty new information tantalizingly to the end: 'Ann loves John' .
In other words, we follow the information pattern old-to-new. When the
question is ' Who loves John?', we can do the same thing in Russian. We
85

Translation and Language
can put the old information (John) first and the new information (Ann)
second, because the word ending tells us that Ivana is the object of love
and Anna its source.
If we wanted to get the same information flow in English, and discus-
sions of the subject in translation theory tend to assert that we do, then we
might have to use a variety of what are actually quite difficult and unusual
structures such as the passive (John is loved by Ann) or so-called clefted
structures involving splitting devices such as It is X who ... or What X did
was to .... Such might have been the intention ofthe student who translated
a German inversion into the clefied structure On October 7 1949, there
was founded the German Democratic Republic, but this is really just a
bad translation using a rather antiquated structure.
However, this notion of'new' versus'old' (or 'given ' as it is also called)
is rather less obvious than it appears.As Diller and Kornelius (1978:50-51)
point out, deciding precisely what is new information in a sentence by look-
ing at a statement (Cain kills Abel) and asking a question (Who does Cain
kill?) falls foul of a simple fact: we could also have asked What does Cain
do to Abel?, What does Cain do?, or Who kills Abel? If a language has
a fixed word order system, the new information called for by these differ-
ent questions cannot necessarily be signalled by simply positioning it toward
the end of the clause. Sentences like John is loved by Ann or It is by Ann
that John is loved as a device for getting new information into rheme
position may be popular in linguistic textbooks but the average English
speaker (or writer) rarely resorts to them (the word processor used to
write this book issues stem warnings whenever it finds them). In such
languages, other means exist to indicate new information, In English, stress
patterns can be used, and not simply in speaking. It is a fairly common
experience for an English person to have to re-read a written sentence
because their first mental representation of the stress pattern was wrong.
The very first words ofa text are in theme position but are totally new
to us in relation to that particular text. Leonora Cherniakhovksaia (1977 :89)
quotes two Russian sentences (given here in literal translation) that are of
apparently similar structure:
In Armenia was born the new production of Britten
On the streets of the capital of Armenia appeared posters
but which were translated differently into English as:
While in Armenia, Britten composed ...
Posters .. . appeared in the streets ofArmenia's capital.
86

Text Structure
The explanation Chemiakhovksaia gives is that in the first sentence In Ar-
menia is not new information (the sentence does not come from the beginning
of the text) but the second half is. Both languages handle this information
structure in the same way, from old to new. In the second sentence, both
parts of the sentence are new information because it's the first sentence in
the text. In this situation, Russian creates a hierarchy of importance for the
new information and sends the most important to rheme position. But in
English the information flow is decided by the fixed grammatical structure
(it would be possible but very clumsy to send 'posters' to end-position).
Chemiakhovskaia (1977:90) uses theme-rheme theory to explain why an
initial adverbial phrase in Russian sentences is usually transformed into
grammatical subject in English: the Russian In the room set in deathly
silence becomes English The room turned deathly silent and To this pe-
riod belong Lissitsky s first works becomes English This period saw
Lissitsky s first works.
Theme-rheme has also been explained as Topic -Comment. Theme is
what we are talking abo ut (topic) and rheme is what we are saying about it
(comment). This is why, in Eggins's account, the theme part ofthe sentence is
not just the first word or phrase but extends to include the first properly
'topical' item. A news bulletin might begin with something like Today. in
New York. three armed men seized hostages .... (German news bulletins
follow a similar structure: Bonn: del' Bundeskanzler ....) Clearly, the initial
adverbial phrases in this example are not the topic of the utterance, which
is 'three armed men', so we need to exp lain why this item is not the very
first in the sentence. The standard account acknowledges the 'real' topic
and includes it in the theme but gives the theme a different name (topical,
interpersonal, textual) depending on what linguistic item comes first. This is
a rather mechanical solution. In our example, the fronting of the adverbial
phrases may not be a thematizing device, but may instead serve one oftwo
quite different pragmatic purposes: getting relevant but non-essential de-
tails out of the way or dramatizing the event by stage-setting.
Hawkins (1986:47) acknowledges that the information structure of
the sentence is "a more subtle phenomenon" than imagined, and he points
out that "there appear to be other pragmatic functions performed by word
order variants which (ifthey have been disc ussed at all) have been lumped
together under a simplifying Theme-Rheme rubric". So rather than seeing
sentence structure simply in terms of theme-rheme, given-new or topic-
comment, translators need to be aware ofa hierarchy ofsemantic weighting
of information in and between sentences and the function it serves. They
need to know what the 'normal' order of words is, in so far as there is one,
and then to assess the meaning of any changes to that, since in language
87

Translation and Language
we convey meaning by doing what is less expected.
What, for example, might be the differences, in terms of stress, focus,
contrast or even text type, between:
The cat sat on the mat
On the mat sat the cat
Sat the cat on the mat
where the first is unmarked and the others marked?
The most likely explanation of the second is that it is part of a
presentational sequence aiming for narrative climax (on the floor was a
mat and on the mat sat the cat), which is why this sequence is typical of
such text types as telling jokes or stories in English. The third example (sat
the cat on the mat) might be interpreted as poetic (also text type) . What-
ever the explanation, only the context will tell us. And what the translator
needs to know is how the target language achieves the effect in question.
We have talked above of standard and marked theme positions. But
what is standard and marked varies between languages. This difference
creates a small problem with the second sentence in the following extract
from an advert translated from French for publication in an English news-
paper: You surely know or can imagine how exciting is the search [for
good wines]. In France, we do this search for our customers. Leaving
aside the incongruity of saying the search is exciting and then offering to
deprive customers ofthat excitement, you might want to ask yourself, as an
exercise in assessing differential weighting within a sentence, why a better
translation would have been something like Our company already carries
out this search on behalf of our customers over in France.
Theme distribution over a longer stretch oftext than the clause or sen-
tence can tum the unmarked into the marked. Inthe German travel brochure
analysed by House, which we discussed under register, every paragraph
except the first starts with the theme Nuremberg. This density ofrepetition
takes an unmarked thematic structure and makes it marked (a feature which
the translator failed to reflect). Something similar happens in the following
French text (presented here in literal translation and in reduced form to
make the point more clearly): Today, mad cow disease ... Yesterday, con-
taminated blood. Before yesterday Minamata disease . Tomorrow other
evils or threats ... And then there will be yet more threats ...
Clearly, the fronting of an adverb of time, fairly normal and therefore
unmarked in French, becomes marked through the process ofparallelism in
which the same grammatical class recurs several times throughout the text
segment in the same place but with a different content. This takes us into
the subject of cohesion, which we discuss below. But before we come to
88

Text Structure
that subject, the French text raises several points of importance for transla-
tion and will round offour discussion oftheme-rheme.
First , the French text can be translated into English without disrupting
the theme order, but there are languages where this may not be the case.
The assumption is that not all languages organize therne-rheme in the same
way, and indeed may not even have a theme-rheme structure. However,
reservations of this kind tend to be couched in tentative language. Thus
there is a 'suggestion' (Baker 1992:133) that Dutch may find fronted ad-
verbs of time quite unusual, making a tra nslation of our French text
problematic. James (1980: 115-6) quotes 'highly tentative' research sug-
gesting that French, but not English, can structure paragraphs in such a
way that the rheme of each sentence remains constant, as in Cats eat
rats. Dogs eat rats. Snakes eat rats. Hawkins quotes research, later
queried, suggesting that the unmarked order of German complements (In-
direct Object+Direct Objec t) can only be inverted, become marked, provided
the pattern of Theme+ Rheme is followed.
Second, although the French text thematizes time, it jumps around in
the temporal sequence. It might be the case that in translation into some
languages (possibly even English) this thematization can be achieved only
by a re-arrangement into the strictly chronological: First X ... Then Y ...
After that ... And next? Certainly, the first translators of Milan Kundera's
novel TheJoke thought this kind ofchronological sequence important enough
to reshape the entire story (Kuhiwczak 1990: 125).
Third, although the thematic dynamics ofthe text are ofinterest and not to
be neglected, many translators may well have other priorities: what is the
Minamata disease? should they provide an explanation for the target reader?
and how will they deal with avant-hier, for which the translation is not so
obvious? Most translation takes place in real time ; priorities have to be set;
and anxious calculations of therne-rheme may not be the most important.
Nonetheless, the breakdown of thematic structure can be important,
as in the following sentence taken from a translation telling people how to
handle ' Dangers Induced by Electric Current' : If nobody can remove the
current, place on an insulated stool. (By contrast, there are no thematic
problems whatsoever in the sentence prior to this: If the tension is over
1000 V, remove the current and expect the fall of the victim if he is
suspended. The only problem here is calculating the speed of one's exit.)
Thematic disruption is not just found in translation. The English newspaper
The Observer in May 1994 quoted: [Her] son was killed by a car going
through a red traffic light. He \Vas let off with a fine.
Because thematic breakdown can lead to incoherence, thematic struc-
ture does require attention (no one would translate literally a very common
89

Translation and Language
Russian structure such as Funny, ofcourse, the supposition ...). And yet
this is probably one area where seasoned translators in particular feel free
to shift things around to their heart's content without regard to any theory.
An analysis of translations of Gabriel Garcia Marquez (Munday: research
in progress) shows that the American translator quite happily moves adver-
bial phrases about without any sense that she might be disrupting a carefully
planned pattern of theme-rheme information flow. This may mean one of
three things: either the translator knows, consciously or unconsciously, that
theme-rheme order is different in Spanish and English; or she doesn't know
and doesn't care (unlikely given the quality ofher work); or in many cases
it doesn't really matter what comes where in the sentence as long as it's
comprehensible. In which case, Nida was right to respond to Munday's
research by invoking simple 'variability': a phrase that 'feels fine ' in one
position one day may simply 'feel better' in another position the next day.
After a rapid survey of work done on the subject, Gallagher (1993: 152)
comes to the conclusion that "it is misleading to suggest .. . that the theme-
rheme organization of the source text must be preserved at all costs".
Indeed, unskilled translators may produce clumsy translations by un-
thinkingly reproducing source-language thematic structures. One offender
here is the French c1efted structure c 'est ... qui/que .... Although French,
like English, has quite strict word order, and is therefore forced, like Eng-
lish , to make use of this and other clefted devices to ' landscape' the
information structure of sentences, the density of usage is not the same ,
and too many 'it is .. . which' structures will be stylistically clumsy.
In summary, then, although the concepts of theme and rheme are use-
ful to translators, more useful still is being able to interpret the reasons why
things are put where they are in the sentence (focus, emphasis, contrast,
presupposed knowledge, narrative presentation, sentence rhythm, etc.) and
the various means for achieving those effects in the target language. Equally
useful is the ability to decide whether or not, in a given translation situation,
such things are worth attention.
For the sentence In France, we do this search for our customers, we
earlier proposed an alternative translation. Both sentences used devices (we,
do, this. oU1~ already) which show that this sentence cannot be the first in
the text. They can only be understood because they refer to information
given earlier in the text. They are signals back to that information and they
bind the present part of the text with its earlier parts. They give cohesion.
Cohesion
Properly maintained theme dynamics isjust one of the ways a text is held
together. Two other binding agents are cohesion, which is normally defined
90

Text Structure
as the use of grammatical or structural devices to guarantee text integrity,
and coherence, which is defined as the conceptual or semantic network
that glues the parts of a text into the whole. You will not, of course, be
surprised to be told that there are other definitions. Eggins (1994:87) de-
fines coherence as the relation of the text to situation and genre, in other
words as something external to the text, while cohesion is defined as a text -
internal dimension.
By Eggins's account, if, in the middle of a sun-baked desert at high
noon , I say Turn on the light please, I will be judged to be situationally
incoherent. If, as the arresting officer at the scene of a crime, I replace the
words 1 shall now apprise yOll ofyour Miranda rights by the words Now,
listen lip you little piece ofshit, I shall be deemed generically incoherent.
If I produce the French sentence 11 veux qu 'elle est heureux, I am being
not incoherent but incohesive at a very basic internal level because the -x
should be -t, the est should be soit and the heureux should be heureuse.
Although a French person would make sense of my sentence, they would
have to work harder to do so because I have demolished the basic gram-
mar links that relate items to one another in a sentence and beyond.
Cohesion is one of the more interesting aspects of textuality, one that
receives a great deal of attention in certain kinds of literary criticism but
which is often all too easily overlooked in the translation situation.
There would seem to be two general ways of achieving cohesion, al-
though it is difficult to define them in a way that avoids overlap. On the one
hand, there is a set of clearly grammatical devices such as the sequence of
tenses or j unctives that organize the text in time , space and logic. On the
other, there is a set of lexico-grammatical devices that are used for main-
taining links ofidentity between items ofsemantic information in the text.
Cohesion through repetition
The most obvious device for holding parts ofa text together is simple rep-
etition, or 'recurrence', to use the technical term , as in The group has
been holding meetings ... The meetings have been kept under wraps.
Too much repetition can be a bad thing, so a variation on recurrence is
'partial recurrence', which is to repeat the item in a different grammatical
form, as in 1 was moved by a feeling of ... Today 1f eel ... (from a Rus-
sian text where the equivalent words were chuvstomlchuvstvuiuy.
In the case of parallelism, a grammatical structure is repeated with
different content, while paraphrase is the opposite: the same content in a
different structure. A partial example ofparallelism is the German Tiefsinn,
Unsinn, Scharfsinn , which also demonstrates the greater effect of paral-
lelism when it is supported by morphological structure rather than simple
91

Translation and Language
word class. The English translation of the German would be profundity,
nonsense. acuity, which can rely only on the traditional rhetorical device
ofa ternary structure without any sound echo to bolster it. The same is true
of the ternary but non-rhyming simple, self-evident, monotonous, trans-
lated from a Russian text in which, unlike the English, each word ends in
the same sound. Clearly, deliberate repetition in a text may be a translation
problem 'if it cannot be repl icated.
Cohesion through ellipsis
Another way to hold text together is, paradoxically, by missing bits out, a
device known as ellipsis. According to de Beaugrande and Dressler (198 1:68)
this phenomenon is not very well understood, since most linguistic research
has concentrated on so-called 'well-formed sentences' . Consequently, al-
though it should be a grammatical matter and of little importance for
translation, coverage in grammar books tends to be very patchy.
Ellipsis can act in apparently bizarre ways. In English, for example,
the subject of a sentence can be ellipted in the main clause but not in the
subordinate clause: we can say He s good at his job. Knows what he 's
doing, but not Hes good at his job because knows what doing.
From the point ofview oftranslation it is important to know what each
language is allowed to miss out and in what circumstances. Vinay and
Darbelnet, followed by Vazquez-Ayora, seem to envisage three types of
ellipsis in the translation situation.
First, there is the ellipsis that can only be resolved by reference to world
knowledge or the situation. Such things as SVPor Haut, which are ellipted
in the extreme, require cultural knowledge ofhow a specific society organ-
izes public messages for economic communication: the first means Keep
offthe Lawn in Canada, while the second means This Side Up (Vinay and
Darbelnet 1958: 173). Knowing how to arrive at Hello, stranger from the
French On ne vous voit plus (Vinay and Darbelnet 1958: 175) requires
knowledge oflinguistic routines that are not always in the dictionary.
Second, there are cases of language-specific economy, which many
source-language speakers will not regard as ellipsis. We 'll price ourselves
out ofthe market (Vinay and Darbelnet 1958: 185) will not be considered
elliptical by English speakers; it only becomes so in comparison with one of
several likely French translations. Similarly, He laughed his approval
(Vazquez-Ayora 1977:358) will be thought elliptical only in relation to the
Spanish equivalent 'He approved it with a smile' . Nonetheless, such exam-
ples illustrate a widespread phenomenon in which the economy ofan English
structure ofverb + adverbial usually needs to be diluted in trans lation, often
92

Text Structure
by an inversion of the semantic content and grammatical structure: the
adverbial phrase often indicates the end result of the action of the verb (he
cried himself to sleep; he drank himself to death), and this has to be-
come a less elliptical, inverted expression such as he killed himselfthrough
excessive drinking.
Three cases of ellipsis quoted by Vazquez-Ayora (1977:357) are mat-
ters of pure grammar, however: the omis sion of the relative pronoun and
copula in John thought MOlY clever, which may have to be restored in
translation; the accusative+infinitive construction in 1 asked them not to
talk, which must become 1 asked them that they not talk in many target
languages; and so-called restrictives or concessives such as Whatever his
faults, he is a good fr iend, where the elided elements often need to be
restored in the target language (Whatever his faults may be ...).
A much more interesting type quoted by Vazquez-Ayora isproblematic in
two ways. It is the ellipsis ofthe kind different levels of, and attitudes to,
the communication process (1977 :356), altho ugh again whether this really
is a case ofellipsis from the point ofview ofthe source language is open to
debate. The first way in which this kind of cohesion is a problem is that in
many languages itwould be considered an anacoluthon (a confusion of gram-
matical structures) to subject the same noun (communication process) to
government by two different prepositions (of, to), and the structure must be
replaced by an often lengthy periphrasis, going from economy to dilution.
The second way in which this is a problem is that in translating in the
opposite direction, the movement from dilution to economy will often be
lost. Faced with the Spanish phrase que se ocupan de los diferentes niveles
del proceso del comunicacion asf como de las actitudes que se han tomado
frente a el, the vast majority oftranslators will probably produce which are
concerned with the diff erent levels of the communication process as
well as the attitudes which people have adopted towards it, perhaps
because they will feel that the asf como singles out the following phrase for
treatment by co-ordination (as well as ...) rather than subordination (levels
of, and attitudes to, ...). This is Levy's 'deceptive and treacherous' Cat-
egory C equivalence, where the pressure ofthe source structure is so strong
that even somebody translating into their native language will forget to use
perfectly acceptable structures simply because they will never be encoun-
tered in the source, where they have no counterpart (Levy 1969:59).
The final category of ellipsis cove red by Vinay and Darbelnet is at the
borderline between ellipsis and our next topic, reference, because what is
omitted in one language is represented (referred to) in another by so-called
'pro-forms'. The phenomenon of whether something is elided or repre -
sented constitutes the difference between languages that feel the need to
93

Translation and Language
provide the verb with all of its complementary bits and bobs , and other
languages that are happy to wield the scissors. Thus, We must tell him is
claimed to be short for We must tell him about it, and in some languages
the about it must be expressed. The same is true of sentences like He
didn't say, or comparatives like He is cleverer than you think.
Cohesion through referen ce
Languages try to avoid repetition by using shorter pro-forms to replace
some longer item previously referred to. What these pro-forms are will
depend on the language in question . In English they can be pro-nouns ('There
was an old woman who lived in a shoe . She had so many children she
didn't know what to do'), pro-verbs (' I know it, and so do you '), pro-
complements ('Is this right? I think so'), and pro-modifiers ('He is a lazy,
vicious, lying swine. Such people are best avoided').
Pro-forms are not the only way ofachieving coreference in the textual
chain. Repetition, partial repetition and synonymy serve the same purpose.
A similar though not identical function is fulfilled by a class of words that
have in the past been called shifters or pointers, but which are now usually
called 'deictics' (from the Greek word meaning 'to point'). These include
obvious pointing words like this and that (the demonstratives) or here and
there (adverbs of place), and not so obvious pointers like today and now
(adverbs of time).
In many cases deictics pose no problems for translators because there
should be no reason to do any other than replace them with target-language
equivalents. Deictics can, however, sometimes become a problem, espe-
cially in text types where the main purpose is not just to convey information.
When Macbeth murmurs 'Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow creeps
on this petty pace ', there should be no strictly referential need to replace
the deictic by anything other than the target-language word for 'tomorrow',
but aesthetic needs might dictate otherwise. (The comic writer Paul Jennings
pointed out that Hamlet's anguished cry ofmother, mother sounds like the
bleating of a demented sheep when translated into Frenc h, while the scary
Hamlet, I am thy father s ghost sounds distinctly unscary in Afrikaans:
Omlet, ek is de papa spook).
Many translators, however, are familiar with the problem of deictics
such as recent and forthcoming (According to a recent report ...; In a
forthcoming publication ...). These will usually be out of date by the time
a translation appears, and ifit is the publisher's policy to avoid outdated
references the translator could be faced with a not inconsiderable amount
of research to replace the word recent with an actual date and to check
94

Text Structure
whether forthcoming has finally come forth (translators should always
insist on a separate research fee whenever appropriate; authors should
stop using recent to give the impression of being bang up to date in their
specialist field;forthcoming is unavoidable).A comparable translation prob-
lem posed by the deictics we and you will be dealt with briefl y in the section
on pragmatics.
Other forms of reference should cause fewer headaches, since the
thing they refer to, the referent, will be reco verable from the context. This
should allow the correct treatment ofminor problems ofappropriate gram-
matical categories of gender, number, etc.
In some cases, what is being referred to can be retrieved only from the
cultural context, which may be universal or more parochial. This is
homophoric reference. If I say Look at the moon, people will know where
to look, even ifthe moon in question is a paper moon in a school theatrical
production (Luke Skywalker, by contrast, would have needed more infor-
mation). When the movie Now, Voyager closes on the immortal words
Don't let s ask for the moon ; we have the stars, we all understand. If it
had ended with Don 't let s go to the boondocks; we have the Quantocks,
that would have been more parochial, since the shared knowledge pointed
to by the use of the is much more culturally specific, accessible only to a
limited number ofpeople
From the point of view of translation, such instances are not actually
interesting as examples of the linguistic category of reference. The ques-
tions they raise are better dealt with under the heading of presupposition,
which we shall deal with in the section on pragmatics.
Even more localized are references to items in the immediate communi-
cative situation: a weary parent says to a fractious child Do put that down,
Nigel. before you break it and we would have to be there to know what the
fragile that and it is. Most written texts, however, will create their own
situational context: TheFactious child seized hold ofthe priceless Ming
vase. His mother sighed: 'Do put that down ... " and items can then be
referred to by anaphora, referring back to something that came earlier in the
text, or cataphora, referring forward to something com ing later. Ifyou have
difficulty distinguishing these words pronounce anaphora as 'enough al-
ready' (we've been here before) and cataphora as 'cut forward ' (to the future).
This kind of reference may be a problem in a lengthy text because
there may be long gaps between the reference and its referent, so a good
memory is required, as happened in a text which made a cataphoric refer-
ence to something called the ADAV which was not resolved until very many
pages later into Allgemeine Deutsche Arbeiter Verein, which could not
have been guessed from the context of its first appearance.
95

Translation and Language
One type of reference that may tum into a niggl e for translators is
reference to the text itself, as in The examples discussed above ... or As
we said earlier ..., since many transl ation commissioners will insist on
these being replaced by prec ise page numbers.
The most interesting problem with reference lies in possible differ-
ences of use between source and target, altho ugh aga in thi s is an
understudied field . Some languages, such as Russian, do not have a word
for the to refer to something we are presumed already to know about, so
translation requires a different linguistic structure such as word order.
Both Spanish and French use the demonstrative deictic differentl y from
Engli sh to constitute reference links (French people with near-native com-
petence in English can often be detected only from slight misu se of the
words this and that). As Vazquez-Ayora says , rather obscurely, "The
anaphoric reference of the Spanish demonstrative is weak and leaves a
gap. The transition must be more gradual ..." (1977:342). He gives the
example of I wonder about that becoming 1 wonder if that is true in
Spanish; while A problem like that becomes A problem ofthat kind, and
This section become s The present section (1977:280). Similarly, Vinay
and Darbelnet (1958: 112) list a whole set ofexamples in which the demon-
strative as sole reference is not strong enough in French and must be
supplemented in various ways.
Parataxis and hyp otaxis
The second major way in whi ch a text is held together is through joining
parts of it together using a variety of conjunctions or devices that imitate
conjunctions. The sentence 1've got a cold. 1'm going to bed uses what
is called 'parataxis', simply putting the two sentences side-by-side with no
obvious cohesive link . The text receiver has to provide the cause-effect
connection through situational coherence. By contrast, 1'171 going back to
bed because 1've got a cold uses hypotaxis, placing one clause in subor-
dination to the other and making the nature of the link clear through a
cohesive device .
Now, some languages are claimed to be more hypotactic than others.
Vazquez-Ayora tells us, "ifcompared with English, French boasts ofbeing
a linked language, Spanish is so to an even greater degree" (1977: Ill ), and
he quotes examples such as Then he came out and Smith gave him ...
translated into Spanish as When he came out, Smith gave him .... If I take
a French text at random, I find the following succession ofhypotactic struc-
tures: Est-il permis ... sans se faire accuser ... Est-if possible de ...
pour tenter de ... avant qu 'elles ..., Ie marche permettant de.... Turning
to a similar type ofarticle in an Engli sh newspaper of comparable quality I
96

Text Structure
find the following succession of paratactic structures: Charges typically
eat up ... They account for more than ... But charges could be cut ...
Labour is promising ... A spokesman said ....
The preference of certain languages for hypotaxis may pose the kind
ofproblem Vinay and Darbelnet evoke regarding the translation ofthe para-
tactic writing of Ernest Hemingway, where, as they say (1958:229), the
'mental habits' of the translator will sooner or later kick in and begin to
modify the style. This has also happened with the French translation of
Kes , where the translator, almost certainly without realizing it, has replaced
simplejuxtaposition by participial subordination.
The actual ways in which languages achieve co-ordination and subor-
dination of textual components are essentially a matter of grammar; they
belong not so much in books on translation as in grammar books or books
on text linguistics, as in de Beaugrande and Dressler's discussion of con-
junction, disjunction, contrajunction and subordination (1981 :7 1-74) .
Nevertheless, as part of their understanding of how a text is constructed
and functions, translators should be able to recognize not just the specific
functions ofcause, reason, time etc., but also the more general functions of
elaboration (restating or clarifying), extension (adding to or modifying) and
enhancement (extending by specification) (Eggins 1994: I05-1 06). They
should also know (i) the extent to which their target language is
hypotactic or paratactic in expressing these links in given text types; and
(ii) whether, in particular, complicated subordination structures work in the
target language.
The answer to (i) is still surprisingly impressionistic. Even though the
concepts of coherence and cohesion, like that of theme and rheme, are
now quite old, they still do not form part of the standard description of a
language.All ofthe many books on the world's languages provide excellent
thumbnail sketches of the phonetics, grammar, syntax and morphology of
each language they cover, but nothing on how they handle texture, although
there are isolated studies on the subject for specific languages.
The answer to (ii) depends of course on a variety of factors, of wh ich
the most important will be a trade-off between text type and information
load. Take a sentence such as the following (translated from French):
The American president threatening to impose a steep tax on im-
ports ofwhite wine and the British press holding Jacques Delors up
to public ridicule, are they using a similar ritual ... ?
This literal translation is, ofcourse, an anacoluthon. The first obvious solu-
tion is to form a correct English interrogative sentence (with careful use of
commas to avoid ambiguity):
97

Translation and Language
Are the American president, threatening to impose a steep tax on
imports ofwhite wine, and the British press, holding Jacques Delors
up to public ridicule , using a similar ritual.. .?
The problem with this is that it requires readers to hold on to a lot ofgram-
matical and semantic information before they finally get to the verb. This
load is not intolerable for certain types ofaudience, so the translator has to
decide whether to (i) impose it; (ii) lighten it by clear hypotactic signalling
(When the American president ..., and the British press ..., are they
resorting to a similar ritual ...?); (iii) resort to parataxis (The American
president ..., and the British press ... Perhaps they are trying to ....
One area of translation in which the maintenance of cohesion suffers
is in the translation of film, where the German researcher Herbst (1994:
178-84) has found faulty use ofthe German equi valents ofpro-fonns, ellip-
sis and repetition. Given the specific constraints ofthis form oftranslation,
it is doubtful whether the situation can be improved. But cohesion can also
be impaired in written translation. Trainee translators in particular can pro-
duce nonsense without realizing it, and cohesive failure is often part ofthe
problem.
Coherence
'Coherence' is the twin of 'cohesion', but it is a rather more difficult con-
cept to define. Itinvol ves not only such matters as the conceptual logic of
how a text is structured, which will often be reflected in cohesive devices,
but also knowledge of such things as subject matter and how the world
works. A good text producer will make sure there is a network of meaning
relations both within the text and between the text and the real world to act
as the Ariadne's thread for the reader.
One approach to coherence is found in scenes-and-frames linguistics,
which, as we said earlier, has something in common with situationalism and
contextual ism as regulated patterns ofbehaviour. Definitions ofscenes and
frames vary from author to author. De Beaugrande and Dressler (1981 :90)
define a 'frame' as an internalized global pattern of knowledge about ac-
tions, objects and so on, so that we could, if asked, list the ingredients of a
wedding ceremony or a graduation day. 'Scenes' (also called 'schemes' )
would be global patterns in which the knowledge is arranged in an appropri-
ately structured form, so that in open heart surgery we know that we must
anaesthetize the patient before we wield the scalpel.
Snell-Hornby (1988:82-6), who uses the definition of'frame' as simply
the linguistic form that triggers scenes, has attempted to show how the
concepts might apply to translation in text analysis and production. Taking a
98

Text Structure
newspaper article about the rescue of children from the ruins of a hospital
in the aftermath of an earthquake, she finds three frames in the headline
('babies saved', 'Mexico', 'hospital ruins'), which are intended to activate
two scenes ('there was an earthquake in Mexico', 'other babies have been
found alive in the hospital ruins"). She then segments the body of the text
into a series of scenes. By this point, however, she no longer seems to be
using the word 'scene' in the sense defined above but quite simply in the
sense of a scene in a play, since she merely gives each text segment a
descriptive label such as 'police car with dogs' , 'airport with rescue team' ,
when you would expect 'airport' to be one scene-activating frame and
'rescue team' another. These scenes are then supposed to be "reconstructed
into frames ofthe English language". In order to do this, she lists the scenes
and indicates in note form what information is to go with each before finally
producing a translation of the text.
This would appear to be a rather odd translation strategy: how many
translators other than interpreters reduce the original to note form before
doing a translation? Snell -Hornby's aim is to demonstrate her overall belief
in a holistic approach to translation as opposed to a word-for-word ap-
proach, but the actual translation she produces differs from the original only
in her decision to add explanatory information not in the German (the date
of the earthquake and the hospital name, for example) and to rep lace the
cultural reference returned to the Bundesrepublik by the hypernym re-
turned home. There is nothing to indicate that a scenes-and-frame analysis
has provided any more help with this translation than a good old-fashioned
look at the context and the target readership. And the same is true ofKuss-
maul 's explanation (1995:94-97) ofwhy it is wrong to translate ' How many
bedrooms?', which is a frame for activating the English scene 'house size',
by the German 'Wieviele Schlafzimmer?', which activates the German scene
' sleeping and/or sex'.
In theory, since the translator produces a text on the basis of an already
existing text, the coherence should be maintained if the translator knows
enough about the subject matter to avoid wrong lexical choices. Even where
cohesion is damaged in translation, as it often is, coherence of a kind may
still be maintained. The translator who wrote If, on the other hand, as big
a partisan as Schmidt came to say last in Strasbourg. the blossoming
of the European idea is only tenable as a US protege has produced a
text that is a mess in terms of cohesion, but still sufficiently coherent. The
same is true of the following extract from an advert for a cutting machine:
It is important for the user to dispose of a machine quere of the pro-
duction capacity lies higher man his real needs. This provides a more
supple action and an ever satisfaction giving production.
99

Translation and Language
Translation as text
So far we have been looking at how linguistic concepts assist in the produc-
tion oftranslation at the textual level. But it is also possible to have a textual
theory oftranslation, ofwhich the last two examples are a good illustration.
Educated native speakers writing directly in their native language are un-
likely to produce the kind of mess we see in these two texts. So why does
it happen in translation? Is it just the result ofignorance and inattention, or
are translated texts systematically different from original texts in linguisti-
cally describable ways?
One of the first to analyze this phenomenon was, yet again, the Czech
scholar Levy back in 1963 (although his work now seems to exist only in its
1969 German translation). His research highlighted two trends in transla-
tion . First, a process of lexical impoverishment takes place (Levy 1969:
110-11) because translators tend to choose more general and therefore
more colourless vocabulary and because they reduce lexical variety by
using fewer synonyms. Second (ibid: 11 7), translators intellectualize the trans-
lated text by making it more logical, by explicitating the implicit, and by
formally representing syntactic relations.
For a long time these phenomena were treated as translation mistakes
under the pejorative heading of 'translationese', also called 'the third lan-
guage' by Alan Duff (1981) who provides a detailed analysis of what
produces translationese. Subsequently, however, research has concentrated
on this phenomenon as a defining feature of translation as text and there
has been an attempt to find universals of translation. The work of Blum-
Kulka (1986) and Baker (1993), among others, has found evidence to support
Levy 's experiments, leading to the so-called 'explicitation hypothesis' which
states that translations will as a general principle be more explicit than the
original text.
Baker (1993 :243-45) also suggests that translated texts will simplify
and disambiguate, naturalize and normalize in relation to originals. Toury
(1995:286-78) has brought the results together in his ' laws' of translation,
one ofwhich relates to the tolerance ofspecific languages for translationese,
or ' interference'. This research, which is much facilitated by the use of
computers, will continue to yield insights into how translations are their own
kind oftext.
100

9. Text Functions
Language functions
The devices used to build sentence perspective, cohesion and coherence are
not selected at random. Out ofthe possibilities offered by language, we will
choose those best suited to our aim in communicating. The text receiver
will also attempt to link what we are saying to some kind of aim. This
notion that all forms ofbehaviour can be described as serving a function is
an old one . Some optimistic eighteenth-century philosophers believed that
the behavioural function of the stripes on a melon was to guide the knives
ofhuman beings. The modern anthropologist will tell you, more plausibly,
that your dog's face -licking behaviour is designed not to show affection but
to make you regurgi tate food. In a more tasteful vein, the Roman philoso-
pher Cicero declared that language was also function-oriented behaviour
and served three major functions: ad docendum, ad delec tandum, ad
movendum (to instruct, delight and move).
However, none of these functions seem to be involved if I murmur
Dreadful weather, isn't it to an acq uaintance in the street (although it is not
inconceivable that I want to make him feel miserable). Consequently, later
scholars have tried to set up more inclusive taxonomies of language func -
tions that would incorporate just such linguistic behaviour as this. One of
the most famous comes from one ofthe greatest ofscholars to have worked
in linguistics, Roman Jakobson, who related the function ofan utterance to
the element of language at the centre of attention. Different authors use
different terms in this domain; the ones below are taken from Holmes
(1992 :286).
Ifan utterance is built on the following parameters:
Sender, Code, Message, Subject Maner, Channel and Receiver
then focusing attention on one ofthese yields the following language func-
tions:
I .
Sender: Expressive: using language to talk about oneself, as in I feel
pretty, oh so pretty;
2.
Code: Metalinguistic: using language to talk about language, as in You
say toniahto I say tomaydo;
3.
Message: Poetic : using the forms oflanguage for aesthetic effect, as in
Bebop a lula a sham bam bam, tutti frutti or the murmur of doves in
immemorial elms and buzzing ofinnumerable bees;
101

Translation and Language
4.
Subject: Referential: using language to pass on information, as in I just
met a girl named Maria or We're al/ going on a slimmer holiday;
5.
Channel: Phatic: checking to see if the channel of communication is
working or not, as in Testing, testing, Mary had a little lamb, I, 2, 3,
testing, or Is there anybody there", said the traveller, as he knocked at
the moonlit door;
6.
Receiver: Directive: using language to get people to do something, as in
When you walk through a storm, hold your head lip high and don t be
afraid ofthe dark.
We can safely assume that all these functions will be represented in all
languages, although not necessarily to the same degree. In some cultures it
is positively impolite to talk about oneself, whi le in others it is the height of
Freudian repression not to. The directive function may be quite baldly ex-
pressed in some cultures, but wrapped around in politeness formulas in
others. Indeed, within a given speech community the appropriate forms for
a directive can vary enormously, from the straightforward imperative via
the roundabout question to the opaque allusion, depending on the dimen-
sions of register discussed earlier. The translator's job is to know not only
the forms available but the correct circumstances in which they will be
used.
The phatic function, in addition to actually testing the physical chan-
nel, also includes the means whereby a speaker simply maintains contact
with someone. This can be either by the exchange of trivia or by the use of
so-called contact parentheses such as so you see or ifyou get my meaning.
It is to maintain phatic communion that a dentist will ask you some trivial
question just after he's filled your mouth with sharp metal objects. Since
this function is largely a spoken one, its importance in written translation
will be in dealing with representations ofspeech. One obvious fonn ofphatic
communion in writing is the rhetorical question, which serves the purpose
among other things ofkeeping the reader alert. However, as we have pointed
out before, the use of the device varies between cultures. It would be quite
unusual in English, but not in Russian, to have a stand-alone paragraph
consisting ofjust one question, as in What was the reasonfor this? Russian
can also, unlike English and other languages, use an exclamation such as
Hurrah! on a line of its own (to express irony, I'm told).
Ofthe other language functions, obvious difficulties are posed for trans-
lation by the aesthetic function, too many to occupy us here. Rather less
obvious may be the difficulties posed by the metalinguistic function, al-
though they are closely related to the aesthetic funct ion since they are often
based on properties specific to the source language. Research in this area
has been done by Zimmer (198 1:127), who explains, for example, why a
102

Text Function s
literal tran slation of the alliterative horrible Harry into French horrible
Henri doe s not work, except on paper, because the h is silent in French, and
so must be replaced by something like affreux Alfred. The only reason why
this substitution is acceptable in its context is because it is taken from a
book on ling uistics, where the sole aim is to present information about the
poetic function ofalliteration. If Harry had been a name in a novel, then no
such substitution would have been possible without running the risk ofcul-
tural adaptation.
Thi s is the reason why some other metalinguistic translations quoted
by Zimmer ( 1981:124-5 ) work only within limits. One of his examples is
an incident taken from the nineteenth-century French novel Le Rouge et Ie
noir in which the young hero betrays his humble origins by making a spell-
ing mistake in the French language. The mistake he makes alters the
pronunciation ofthe word involved, which allows his aristocratic employer
not only to point out the mistake but also to repeat it mockingly in conver-
sation two pages later. How this is handled in translation shows the
decision-making process facing translators, how the y also may not carry
through completely the solution they opt for, and what sort of strain the y
put on the readership.
In the Finnish tran slation of Le Rouge et Ie noir the French word is
retained, so that Finnish readers who can 't pronounce French will not get
the metalinguistic joke. In the German and Hungarian translations the French
spelling mistake is transposed into a spelli ng mistake in the target languages.
The Hungarian translation, however, is not followed through into both the
microcontexts in which it is needed. The German translation is followed
through, because, quite fortuitously, the offending word in French lends
itself to literal translation with a mis spelling that alters the pronunciation.
However, although the limited local function is retained and made accessi-
ble to German readers, the larger aesthetic function is damaged because of
the oddity of having French characters writing German,
An interesting micro-study by Nord ( 1995) shows the importance of
this area of linguistics to tran slation by relating the language functions (to
which she gives slightly different names) to book titles and newspaper head-
ings in several European languages. She has found, for example, that three
functions are essential and three functions are optional: a title must be dis-
tinctive, metatextual and phatic, but only may be referential, expressi ve and
appellative (1995:266). In other words, a title must stand out, behave like a
title , and make contact with the read er. A title may, but does not have to, tell
us what the text is about, give the author's attitude to it, and pro vide an
impulse for the reader to buy it.
In Nord's corpus oftitles , the last three functions occurred in proportions
103

Translation and Language
of 100:30:6 respectively, although children's literature shows a higher
incidence of the expressive function. Nord finds that German titles tend to
be followed by a subtitle. The phatic function is achieved in all languages
by having quite short titles which are easy to remember. And the referential
function can be totally destroyed by a bad translation: Die siindigen Engel
for The Turn of the Screw suggests pornography, while the literal Spanish
translation is nonsensical. This briefaccount will serve to show the usefulness
to the translator ofknowing how language functions operate at a microtextual
level. Yet texts also have functions at the macro level.
Text functions and types
Reiss and the monofunctional approach
The concept oftext function has been the basis ofvarious attempts to make
translation 'scientific', or objectively justifiable. One ofthe pioneers in this
work was the German scholar Katharina Reiss, who was keen to avoid a
situation in which "the door is open to the caprice ofthe translator" (197 1:31).
Her work actually began as an attempt to find a better basis for judging the
quality of a translation. Since not every element of the original can be pre-
serv ed in translation, it makes no sense to judge a translated text in the
traditional manner of picking out a few items to comment on. We should
begin by determining the text type. For Reiss (1971 :53), "If we have done
this , then - since the text type co-determines the appropriate translation
method - we can begin by investigating whether the translator has correctly
followed the hierarchy ofwhat must be preserved".
Since text type will decide our translation strategies, it clearly becomes
important to have a system for deciding what type the text is. The distinc-
tion made by Cicero all those centuries ago was taken up by Reiss, via the
German scholar BUhler, under the headings ' informative', 'expressive' and
'operative' . BUhler contended that all three functions figure simultaneously
in any utterance. Reiss also accepts that there will be many "intersections
and mixed forms" but believes that one function will predominate (1971:32).
Each language function will have a corresponding language dimension:
logi cal for the informative, aesthetic for the expressive, dialogic for the op-
erative type, and to each text function will correspond a global text type: the
informative function will produce content-centred text types, the expressive
function will give form-centred text types focusing on the sender, and the
persuasive function will lead to behaviour-centred types focusing on the
receiver. In the process ofassigning a text to its type, we may have to let go
ofsome traditional notions. Thus, an advert is not primarily informative so
104

Text Functions
much as persuasive while 'trashy literature' ofthe bodice-ripper and airport
variety is not expressive but informative (Reiss 1971:32-3). From this per-
spective, in other words, a text like Probably the best lager in the world is
not a piece of information but an attempt to make you buy the beer, while
The steely blade flashed in the moonlight; a CIY rang out across the lake;
and Vlad the Vicious was no more is not to be treated in the same way as
When to the sessions ofsweet silent thought 1summon lip remembrance of
things past but in the same way as The Japanese economy is due f or a
strong export and investment revival.
The rather neat symmetry of Reiss 's classification is disrupted by the
need to include a further text type that is governed not by function but by
extraneous factors such as medium. This is the audio-medial text type such
as a radio play, a film or an opera, and it may intersect with any ofthe three
others.
Each major text type contains subdivisions into numerous text sorts ,
such as lyric, play or novel for the expressive type, text book, report and
essay for the informative type, and sermon, propaganda and advert for the
operative or persuasive type. In her second book on the subject, Reiss ar-
ranges a selection of these text sorts into concentric circles (1976: 19) to
show how mixed forms emerge such as biography, which she says is a mix-
ture ofcontent-centred and form-centred text type.
It is, however, the overall text type, rather than the subdivisions , that
will decide the type ofequi valence to be sought and the translation strategy
to be followed.
Ifthe text function is to provide information, then content must be pre-
served at all costs, and any ' flourishes of style' can safely be sacrificed to
that purpose, so that the translation method will be 'plain-prose' . A flaw in
the argument here is that this 'ain't necessarily so', as we shall see in the
section on presupposition with an example from a famous economics text
book.
If the text function is to produce an aesthetic effect, then the translation
must also have such an effect. This type ofequivalence is to be achieved not
by reproducing the informational content, nor even by reproducing the means
which produced the effect in the source language, since both of these are
likely (although not necessarily doomed) to fail. We must rather use analo-
gous means, following what Reiss calls an 'author-adapted (identifying)'
translation method, to produce the same , or at least a similar, effect. If I
want to translate Clang, clang, clang went the trolley, there is little point
looking up the word clang in my dictionary, as ifthe informational content
ofthe word mattered, since in both Spanish and French it is translated as 'to
emit a metallic sound', which has no aesthetic effect, while in Russian the
105

Translation and Language
word Iyazg may well, for all I know, have the same effect as clang, but is a
noun rather than an interjection.
This is not a subject to be belaboured here , since the translation of
literature involves far more than linguistics, but Reiss's scheme comes un-
stuck at the edges in this category. Whereas ' subj ect-adapted' and
'plain-prose' make sense as translation methods for the informative text , it
is far less clear what is meant by describing 'autorgerecht' and 'identi-
fizierend ' as translation methods. We shall return to this point below.
Finally, ifthe text function is persuasive, then equi valence is achieved
if the SL and TL texts have the same persuasive effect, and the translation
method will be what Reiss calls 'parodistic/adaptive' . According to this
theory, if I want to sell a product internationally, then I may have to adapt
the name and the jingle to local conditions. Drinka Pinta Milka Day is
unlikely to work in any other language, while marketing the ski resort of
Bastad in English will require a certain sense ofhumour. There is, however,
a fundamental question about whether or not this text type deserves sepa-
rate treatment. This is another point we shall return to below.
In addition to deciding the general translation strategy, the text type
will also and inevitably influence specific translation techniques, and much
ofReiss's first book is devoted to showing how this works for each text type
in relation to linguistic factors (semantics, grammar and style) and the non-
linguistic factors ofthe speech situation (place, time, etc.), while her second
book does the same for just the operative text type. Thus, when it comes to
handling objects, customs and so forth which are specific to the source lan-
guage culture, Reiss enumerates the possible techniques ofborrowing, calque,
footnote and explanation available to reproduce these in the target language,
but relates them to text type. Footnotes, comments and even interpolated
descriptions are quite natural in many of the sub-forms of the informative
text type, but out of place in the persuasive type, where borrowing and
calque are more appropriate, while explanation is best for the form-centred
text type, since it allows the insertion of brief additional material which
provides the information needed to understand the text without overly dis-
rupting the expressive form (19 71:79).
Reiss is also aware that the function ofthe text may be altered in trans-
lation, so that we get adaptation, paraphrase, summary, rough translation,
student cribs, scholarly translations, interlinear versions, and so on. She
similarly recognizes that a specifically targeted readership may also influ-
ence what happens in translation in terms of censorship, adaptation and
rewriting. Although she sees the legitimacy ofsuch approaches, for which
she prefers the word 'transfer' rather than 'translation', they fall outside the
scope of her aim, which is to provide criteria for judging the success of a
106

Text Functions
translation as she understands that tenn.
Reiss 's work has been subjected to criticism on all fronts by Koller
(19 79: 199-205). He doubts the legitimacy of recognizing only three lan-
guage functions, although the 'additional' ones that he offers, such as 'to
convince', 'to entertain', 'to instruct', can all be subsumed under Reiss 's
three; he questions the attribution of text sorts to text types , and it is true
that allocating cliched popular novels to the domain of the content- rather
than form-centred text type betrays a view ofliterary form which looks even
more narrow now than when Koller himself called it narrow; he rightly
criticizes her use ofthe term 'translation method' to mean a general instruc-
tion to the translator rather than a specific indication of how the instruction
is to be put into practice; when Reiss does indicate a specific translation
method (when she says, for example, that in content-centred texts linguistic
form should obey the laws ofthe target language), Koller can see no logical
connection between the general instruction and the method, and can even
think ofcases where the opposite method is needed.
Koller supports this last declaration by quoting (1979:242) a translator
ofcontent-centred texts (the late-capitalist training ofnon-manual workers
in Sweden sounds as content-centred as you can get) who decided to stay as
close as possible to the original in order to convey the flavour of Swedish
officialese. Sadly, however, Koller does not give us an example ofwhat this
meant for the actual language used.
Nonetheless, this is, in fact, the most serious criticism of the Reissian
approach. There is quite simp ly no necessary link between text function and
translation strategy. Just because we have identified a text function, and just
because that function is, in linguistic and possibly also logical terms,
superordinate to the other aspects ofthe text, that does not mean that we are
led inexorably to any logical or 'translation-scientific' imperative to take
this function as the overriding parameter to which we subordinate our trans-
lation decisions. Giving primacy to the function may seem like a sensible
thing to do; and it may seem like a desirable thing to do; it may even, ifthe
author is still covered by copyright, seem like a legal thing to do; but it is
still not a necessary thing to do.
A translator still might choose to behave like the linguistically alert
hooligan on the London Underground who by judicious use of a penknife
transformed the informative text above the door, Obstructing the doors causes
delays and can be dangerous, into the anarcho-revolutionary operative text
Obstruct the doors, cause delays, and be dangerous. If you object to this
manipulation offunction, then you should be reminded that there was a time
when the overriding function ofcertain sacred texts was precisely that no-
body shou ld ever under any circumstance translate them. But some people
107

Translation and Language
did, and they were put to death for it. And now, because of their courage,
other people do, and they are fairly well paid for it.
Another major problem with the Reissian taxonomy, which will carry
us through into the next section, concerns the serious doubts as to whether
the so-called operative text really exists independently of the informative
and expressive text types. It is possible to imagine a text that conveys noth-
ing but information (e=mc 2) and also texts which are purely expressive
(eenie, meenie, minie, mo, or concrete poems that randomly mix 'empty'
words like ping and pong). By contrast, a persuasive text which is some-
thing fundamentally different from a simple combination ofinformation and
form is more difficult to conceive.
In fact, it is already skating on thin ice to say that e- mc' conveys pure
information, since, as Kade points out, even scientific texts aim to have an
effect (1980:81). They might, for example, want to blind you with science,
or kowtow to the prevalent conventions of writing science, or use a facade
of scien ce to promote a racist ideology. The ice is equally thin under the
contention that a concrete poem like ping ping pong ping pong pong is a
purely expressive text, since deconstructionists would probably point to the
ingrained Western habit of seeing things in rigid binary terms while femi-
nists might resent the harsh masculinity ofthe explosive consonants and the
hard vowel o.
This is one ofthe most frequent criticisms offunction-based translation
taxonomies:they assume a monolith where really there is multifunctionality.
Although the overall aim ofa text is important, we still have to concentrate
on the mosaic of subtextual functions. Indeed, under the influence of
deconstruction it is the mosaic, the text as fragments, which becomes the
centre of focus , but that is another story.
The multifunctional approach
One of the main proponents of the text as a multifunctional object was
Halliday, whose work is summarized in Eggins and Bell from a purely lin-
guistic point of view and in Hatim and Mason from a translation point of
view. This approach also tries to make a connection between text function,
the categories ofsystemic linguistics, and those of register analysis, and in
the process produces quite abstract concepts that may seem a long way
from how you and l actually experience a text.
Most texts convey ideas and talk about human experience. This gives
them an ideational (or experiential) function. This would seem to relate to
the register parameter offield or domain. For most translators, equipped as
they are with the 'plan of action' that Kade (1980:40) assumes all text
108

Text Functions
producers to have , dealing with this function would certainly require prior
knowledge of the subject matter and a willingness to fill any knowledge
gaps by appropriate and often demanding research. It might also require
some version of Holz-Manttari's recommended process of using a variety
of highlighting and linking devices (arrows, underlinings, circles, etc.) to
bring out the techtonics or thematic structure of the text (1984: 131-36),
although again the divorce between the examples provided by translation
theorists and the cases dealt with by practitioners is highlighted by the fact
that her method can only work on short texts of the kind used in the trans-
lation class.
The linguists, however, would have us go further than this and analyze
the ideational function into the semantic categories of transitivity that or-
ganize language into propositional meaning. These categories consist of
Actor, Process, Goal, and Circumstance, each of which can be differenti-
ated in various ways. Thus, ifthe Process is material (an action or an event),
then we have an Actor and a Goal, as in The Treaty ofRome gave Europe a
long-term goal, but if the Process is mental, then actor and goal are best
called Senser and Phenomenon, as in The nations ofEurope hoped'for peace.
Similarly, the Circumstances ofpropositional meaning can be subcategorized
as Scope, Time, Manner, Place, and so on (Bell 1991:124-29). So an analy-
sis at this level would involve the translator in identifying in each phase of
the text what processes involve what actors and goals and in what circum-
stances. This may all seem a far cry from translation, but Hatim and Mason
(199 7:10) show how the modulation ofchoic es in this domain can actually
alter the way we perceive a fictional character.
Most texts also relate the text producer to the text receiver in some
way, even ifit is only by refusing a relation as in a coldly impersonal scien-
tific text. This interpersonal function would seem to relate to the register
parameter oftenor and will often be analyzed by the translator charting the
use of such things as personal pronouns, rhetorical questions, connota-
tionally marked words, shared knowledge, and so on. The linguist, however,
would relate this to the grammatical categories of mood, which are every
bit as abstract as those of transitivity. They organize language into sen-
tences in which the functions ofsubject, predicate, comp lement, and adjunct
are filled with noun phrases, verb phrases and adverbial phrases and struc-
tured into different sentence types such as declaratives and interrogatives
which may be modalized for possibility and frequency or for obligation and
inclination.
Although it may not be so easy to see the link between such an abstract
concept as the varying configurations of subject, predicate, etc. and the
interpersonal function of the text, a moment's reflection will reveal that a
109

Translation and Language
high use ofdeclaratives would suggest an expert writing from a position of
knowledge and power, while the use ofquestions (rhetorical in the case of
written texts) indicates somebody seeking the solidarity ofsupport. Similar
support-seeking would be suggested by the use of modulated declaratives
such as The authors of the report wonder whether ..., while the use of
modals such as usually or perhaps might reflect a desire not to be seen as a
dogmatic expert but as somebody prepared to be flexible. It has also been
claimed (Eggins 1994: 193-95) that clear distinctions can be made between
men and women in choice of mood structures which define the interper-
sonal function and the tenor of a text: men, according to Eggins, "give
information but demand goods and services", while "women demand infor-
mation but give goods and services"; "women are conversationally
'supportive', while men just sit back and perform" (1994: 194).
In addition to expressing ideas and relating author to receiver, texts are
also organized as texts. This is the textual function and is described in
terms oftheme dynamics and relates to the register dimension ofmode. We
have already discussed these in detail above and need not come back to
them here.
What we can do is to give a briefindication ofhow these functions can
be distorted in translation. Faced with a French text on economic theory
written in a very authoritative and forbidding style, a student translator
made a deliberate decision to alter the register and the text functions be-
cause he was genuinely convinced that such a style was unacceptable in
English.
The extract he translated was not the beginning ofthe text. He decided
to indicate this by showing that the theme economic models was not new by
adding in such as these (the disadvantages ofmodels such as these). Un-
fortunately, because, in the register terms ofLanguage User: Social Class,
he was not fully in possession ofa mature writing style (the so-called Edu-
cated Middle Class style) , he went on to make the same move twice more in
the second line of his text, and yet again in the sixth line, producing naive
and obtrusive repetition ofthe phrase such as these. A similar lack ofskill
led him to alter the tenor from highly formal to colloquial by writing about
the industrial side of international trade and also to make a mistake in
thematic linkage by using the connecting conjunction due to when he meant
owing to, as well as turning the appositional clause ..., the three powers
being Germany, Japan and the US into a full sentence in brackets with a
full stop but no main verb. In terms of the ideational function, although
superficially the text was an accurate rendering of the subject matter, he
introduced explicit or implied Acto rs where there were none in the original
(a criticism levelled at, may lead one, it is agreed that, one might add
110

Text Functions
that). But the main change was in the mood system, producing a tenor that
was far more consultative than the original and an interpersonal function
that seemed far more anxious to take the audience with it than to provide
instruction. This was done not only by the use of modal adjuncts such as
generally or modal operators such as might, but also by the use of verbs
that incorporate modality into their meaning such as tend (usuality), sug-
gests (possibility).
As we have suggested in our discussion of Reiss, there is no objection
in principle to making these changes. Baker (1992:211) quotes a Greek
translation from English in which the incidence of repeated items is
higher than in the original, and assumes, since Greek speakers have no
objection to this , that the translation conforms to Greek discourse patterns.
Similarly, in the French translation of Frank G. Slaughters's Puritans in
Paradise (which has the much steamier title in French of Love in The
Bahamas), the tenor has been altered in the first few paragraphs by the
introduction of no fewer than three rhetorical questions where none exist
in the original: He felt none ofthe usual urge becomes Where was his
usual impatience ... ?; It was impossible to believe becomes How to
believe
?; and Footloose as he was is translated as Was he notfre e as
the air
?
If changes such as these are deemed appropriate, then the student trans-
lator just quoted was not behaving inappropriately. What one might challenge
is the judgement concerning what is and is not possible in the target lan-
guage. The Greek translation alluded to by Baker may well have been just
as acceptable without the lexical repetition, just as the French translation
would certainly have caused no waves without the questions. What we are
dealing with here are the intuitive judgements of professional translators
whose intuition mayor may not be good and about whose training as text
producers we tend to know nothing.
Hatim and Mason, who discuss text functions and types under the head-
ings ofexpository, argumentative and instructional, rather than in Reissian
terminology, and who try to delineate typical ways in which they might be
structured, come to the by now familiar conclusion that "relatively little is
known about the differences in the ways text structures develop in different
languages" (1990: 173). Baker gives some indications on the subject, and
Reiss and Vermeer refer to research tending to show that descriptive pas-
sages are less common in modem Hebrew and medieval European literature
than they are in modem European literature (1984:28) and that novels begin
differently in different cultures (1984:39). We can add to this that listing is
a much more popular device in French newspaper writing than in English.
We'll see an example later.
111

Translation and Language
Function-altering translation
What we actually do in translation does not follow on automatically from
the knowledge that different languages handle things differently. Just as a
text can have a dominant function, so too can a translation. The function of
the translation does not have to be the same as that of the original. Kade
(1977:33) has said that there are two types oftranslation: equivalent trans-
lation, which retains the communicative function of the SL text, and
heterovalent translation (content-reworking), where the text takes on a dif-
ferent function in the target language.
This idea that a translation may function differently from the original
was already implicit in Nida and Taber, according to whom "Even the old
question: Is this a correct translation? must be answered in terms ofanother
question, namely: For whom?" (1969: I). Honig and Kussmaul also declared
that there were two basic types of translation, function retaining and func-
tion altering, and that both were equally legitimate (1982:40), an idea pursued
in the so-called Skopos theory of Reiss and Vermeer (1984) and the action
theory of Holz-Manttari (1984). Nord (1991 :9) puts it bluntly: "The func-
tion ofthe target text is not arrived at automatically from an analysis of the
source text, but is pragmatically defined by the purpose ofthe intercultural
communication". Indeed, she goes even further: "Functional equivalence
between source and target text is not the 'normal' skopos of a translation,
but an exceptional case in which the factor 'change offunctions ' is assigned
zero value" (1991 :23).
In support of this Nord quotes the example of a newspaper article on
drugs written for young people and containing slang and drugjargon. Ifthis
text is to be translated for a comparable audience, the interpersonal function
implied by the language should be matched, but ifthe translation were aimed
at an adult audience, the language would not be understood and the text
would not be taken seriously (1991 :53). Nord admits, however, that such
texts , although popular with teachers oftranslation, rarely get translated in
'real life' because they are written for the occasion and rapidly become
obsolescent (1991 :64). If they are to be translated at all, they require a
specific translation approach. To get at what this is, we shall take a short
detour into the vexed question ofliteral versus free translation.
The (in)famous division between the literal and the free approach to
translation, which dates back to the Romans, has not been popular among
linguists (although theorists such as Antoine Berman, coming from other
orientations, have been happy to develop it). Albrecht (1973 :24) calls the
terms "problematic but very popular" and tries to provide a linguistic basis
for them by describing literal translation as 'Bedeutungsinvarianz' and free
112

Text Functions
translation as 'Bezeichnungsinvarianz'; which is the difference between
sense and denotation, and so corresponds to sign-centred and content-
centred translation respectively. Catford (1965 :25) adds the third category
of 'word-for-word' translation and suggests that the categories "partly cor-
relate" with the linguistic rank (or level) chosen as the translation unit. This
would mean that free translation has no set unit of translation, shifting up
and down the linguistic scale, but tending to be at the higher levels, "some-
times between larger units than the sentence", while word-for-word
translation, as the name suggests, takes the word or the morpheme as its
translation unit, and literal translation bases itself on the word as unit, but
may be obliged to shift up to group and clause level in order to be gram-
matical. This has an uncomfortable consequence, however: a translation
such as 11pleut averse for It 'sraining cats and dogs (1965:26) is called a
free translation, where most people would want to call it functionally
equivalent.
Overt and covert translation
On the whole, however, largely because of the problems posed by defini-
tions such as Catford's, linguists have attempted to describe tran slation
typologies without using the words ' literal' or 'free' . In 1977, House postu-
lated a distinction between 'overt' and 'covert' translation. An overt
tran slation "is one in which the TT addressees are quite ' overtly' not being
directly addressed" (19 77:189), so that such a translation is quite visibly a
translation. This situation arises when the source text is clearly linked to its
time, culture or language, and specifically targets its source language audi-
ence . With texts ofthis type, the function ofthe original cannot possibly be
matched in translation, so a 'second level function ' has to be matched in-
stead (1977: 191). This proves to be difficult because on the one hand the
status of the source text or author means that the text "has to remain as
intact as possible" but on the other hand such texts often contain material
(like puns , dialects, etc.) which "frequently necessitates major changes"
(1977: 192). The problem, as House admits, is "often insoluble" (1977 :193).
A covert translation is one which is not marked as a translation but
could just as easily have been written originally in the target language. Texts
which can be translated in this way are supracultural, supralinguistic and
supratemporal. "In the case ofcovert TTs, it is thus both possible and desir-
able to keep the function ofthe ST equivalent in TT" (1977:194-95) . Ifthe
overt approach to translation is difficult, then the covert approach is even
more so since the translator has to take account ofdifferent cultural presup-
positions in the TL context (1977: 196).
113

Translation and Language
This distinction is similar to that proposed by Nord between 'instru-
mental' and 'documentary' translation (Nord 1991:72-73), a distinction
which, like House's, is based on whether or not the SL text specifically
addressed itselfto source-culture receivers.lfit did not, then it is legitimate
to produce an instrumental translation, one which can act independently in
the target culture in one ofthree ways: (i) by replicating the function ofthe
original, where that is possible, with all the linguistic and cultural changes
that implies; (ii) finding other functions for the text, as in translating adult
books for children; (iii) replicating the effect ofthe original, as in the trans-
lation of poetry. By contrast, in documentary translation (which covers
word-for-word, literary, philological and exoticizing translations) the tar-
get reader is put into the role of 'observing' a communication between SL
author and SL readers rather than being an integral part ofthe communica-
tion process.
Much the same distinction, but one which became far more famous,
was put forward by Newmark as the distinction between 'communicative'
and 'semantic' translation. The first translation type aims at equivalence of
effect, while the second aims to reproduce the semantics and syntax of the
source text as closely as possible (Newmark 1981:39). In the first type, we
are able to participate fully in the communication event, while in the second
we are called upon simply to observe. Thus, to take Newmark's simple
example (1981 :54), the communicative translation of Frisch angestrichen
would be Wet Paint, whereas the semantic translation would be Freshly
painted. Given the function of the phrase as a warning that needs to be
understood promptly, the communicative translation would be the most ap-
propriate in most cases, and there are certainly translation situations in which
the phrase could well occur (in a novel , for example, or possibly in a set of
instructions or a on a bilingual notice), while the semantic translation might
be used in a linguistics book as examples of how different languages word
public messages. Note that semantic does not mean literal: angestrichen in
German can mean a few things other than painted, but semantic translation
still takes account ofcontext and pragmatics.
One final approach to text function and translation is the four-term
taxonomy proposed by Neubert (1978: 197-200). His criterion is the same
as House's: the relationship of the text to the source language and culture.
From this he deduces four situations, which, he claims, "give rise to highly
definite consequences for translation" (1978:197).
In Type I both SL and TL texts have similar goals based on general
needs: these are scientific and technical texts, and also adverts if the TL
culture has them . Such texts have the highest degree oftranslatability.
Type II texts contain information specific to the needs ofthe SL reader-
114

Text Functions
ship: these are official pronouncements, instructions, local press, literature
concerned with social, economic and political themes, and so on. This kind
oftext is untranslatable. This does not mean that they do not get translated,
but that commonality of interests between SL and TL may be hard to locate,
and that the translator must know why a text is being translated that was not
intended for a TL audience.
Type III texts are literary texts, which, like Type II texts, are directed
at the SL audience but which are also of potential interest to all human
beings. They are translatable within significant limits because oftheir for-
mal features.
Type IV texts are written with the intention ofbeing translated because
their function is to inform the foreign audience about events in the SL coun-
try. Even though these texts, like those in Type II, are closely imbricated
with the sender culture, they will still be highly translatable but will require
a good system of feedback between translator and customer.
It is not clearto what extent any ofthese taxonomies is ultimately very
different from the distinction made by Nida between dynamic equivalence
and formal correspondence. Perhaps the main difference is simply that Nida
was more predisposed to emphasize dynamic equivalence while later au-
thors have attempted to show the conditions in which both forms are
appropriate. However, this apparent even-handedness is not completely sue-
cessful and tends not to avoid a certain degree ofreligious reverence towards
the 'original text'. Indeed, Gentzler (1993:72) finds this reverence behind
much of what he sneeringly calls the 'scientific' approaches to translation
theory. It appears in particular towards 'great literature', which most of
these authors are adamant requires a literalist approach, mainly it would
seem on moral grounds rather than linguistic ones. Nik Zaitun tells us ofa
translation of Macbeth into Malay in which the word God was replaced by
Allah and the word sword was replaced by kris. The tone of her argument
suggests approval until she suddenly announces that the play has been 'mis-
translated' (1994:94).
Talking about originals and translations aimed at specific groups of
people has already taken us into questions ofsociolinguistics, while talking
about the functions of a text, how language does things and how it relates
the participants in the communication act, has taken us into pragmatics.
The next two sections ofthis book will look more closely at various aspects
ofthese disciplines as they relate to translation.
115

10. Sociolinguistics
When we looked at register analysis we already began to consider sociolin-
guistic questions about the relationship of language to the social roles that
people play and the impact ofstatus and power on the language people use.
Social class, ethnic origin , gender, age, regional origin and professional
status all cause variations in the language we use. These are matters of
extreme importance since the social status of languages has frequently led
to civil strife and bloodshed. The importance that we attach to language as
identity poses considerable delicate problems for translators, and transla-
tion can be one element in the struggle to develop and defend languages
threatened with disappearance.
Sociolinguistics can either provide us with a total theory oftranslation
or provide linguistic insights that help us with specific aspects of transla-
tion. There are not now many who would feel obliged to follow Otto Kade,
a linguist in the former East Germany, whose communist-inspired sociolin-
guistic approach led him to write things like: "Adopting the standpoint of
the working classes, standing on the ground ofMarxism-Leninism, is there-
fore also the best guarantee in language mediation for scientificity and fidelity
to the original" and to declare that the socialist language mediator should be
personally convinced of the Marxist-Leninist class viewpoint and have a
Marxist-Leninist education (1980:38-39).
There are, however, quite a few who would still follow Kade in his
declaration (1980:43-44) that Western bourgeois translators and transla-
tion theorists are guilty of occluding social matters: "bourgeois theorists
try to explain the socially motivated processes in language mediation as
purely linguistic phenomena". There is an increasing body ofliterature, of
which the work ofLawrence Venuti is exemplary, devoted to demonstrating
how translations are made in a variety ofways to seem 'transparent' to the
Western English-speaking reader by suppressing or naturalizing the for-
eign. Ofcourse, it is also possible to work in the opposite direction. Indeed,
well before Venuti, the nineteenth-century German philosopher
Schleiennacher proclaimed the value of foreignizing translations: readers
should have "the feeling that they are in the presence of the foreign " (in
Storig 1963:54); a language should have a special linguistic area for trans-
lations, and the latter "must be allowed many things which should not be
seen elsewhere" (ibid: 70).
Already in the fifteenth century the German translator Niclas von Wyle,
explaining why he had produced the difficult literal translation you find
some loving old men but none loved rather than the more comprehensible
youfind some old men who love women but you find no old men who are
116

Sociolinguistics
loved by women, propounded the theory that tran slations written for "high-
bom and well-educated princesses" and "illustrious princes" should be more
difficult than those produced for the "simple common and uneducated man"
(in Keller 1861:8). Louis Kelly (1979:70) explains medieval disputes over
the translation ofthe New Testament as a matter of deciding the appropri-
ate social sty le according to the degree of sophistication of the target
audience. The belles infideles translations ofseventeenth and eighteenth-
century France were also based on a form of sociolinguistics: the people
for whom these translations were made belonged to a social class which (in
theory, at least) ordered its life according to concepts of honnetete (de-
cency) and bienseance (decorum). Translations were supposed to conform
to the same concepts.
We can see some ofthese latter sociolinguistic effects in the eighteenth-
century translations by the French author Prevost of the English author
Richardson. The lower classes are refused a voice by transforming their
direct speech into indirect speech reported by the higher-class hero, or, when
the lower orders do speak, transforming their local accent as represented by
Richardson (she has tacken the logins but fo r a fu e nites) into impeccable
French (Stackelberg 1971:588). Similarly, Othello's straightforward, sol-
dierly Herfather loved me becomes, in the translation of de la Place, the
highly sedate and mannered circumlocution J 'avais eu I'honneur de me
faire estimer de son pere (Stackelberg 1971:590-91).
In this kind oftranslation the entire approach is determined by a social
ethos ofwhat is right and proper. For translators who do not seek the goal of
cultural dominion, there is still a problem ofhow to give voice in translation
to language varieties other than the prevalent 'correct speech'. Two ofthese
voices are constituted by sociolect and dialect. There is some overlapping
between these ' lects', but a dialect is normally defined as a way ofspeaking
typical ofa group ofpeople living in a certain region , and sociolects charac-
terize groupings by social class, status, profession, and so on. You can see
the overlapping when you consider that in many countries dialects tend to
be spoken mainly by the ' lower' classes of the region, while the middle
classes living in the same geographical space adopt the national sociolect.
In many cultures slang is typically a sociolect used by specific groups
of people. It may be job-related, as in the slang of thieves, a lot of which
may never become known to the general public or becomes known only
patchily, as in phrases like to do a creep for a specific kind of house bur-
glary, or words like a twoccer for somebody who drives, usually recklessly,
a car which has been 'taken without [the] owner's consent'. Such words
tend to be known only to the criminals and the police. Some of them (like
twoccery get taken up by the newspapers if there is a spate of such crimes,
117

Translation and Language
and will then appear in the dictionary. Others may never appear in a diction-
ary and will be as big a nightmare for the translator as unfindable acronyms.
Slang may also relate to a pastime such as train spotting or pop music. In
some cases, certain types ofslang may be used largely by younger people as
an expression of group belonging or to express trendiness. In any event, it
can create problems in translation.
There is, ofcourse, the problem ofactually identifying the slang. Eng-
lish people not in the know may once have been puzzled to see a night-club
entrance marked 'UB40' (it was the entrance for people claiming unem-
ployment benefit), and British judges are famous for asking questions that
show their ignorance ofthe common parlance. Those who do not belong to
the right age group are unlikely to understand the sentence Don't be an
anorak. Once they have expunged the embarrassment of ignorance, they
will sooner or later be exposed to the equal embarrassment ofcontinuing to
use them long after they have fallen out of fashion with the groups who
introduced them.
Knowing the slang is only half the battle, however, because you then
have to decide whether the target language has anything comparable. This
might seem simple. We would expect most languages to have slang fonns
and we would expect to be able to substitute them for one another. However,
the type of slang, the density of use and the purpose of use may not be the
same from one culture to the next. In the late 1990s young French people
returned to the use of back-slang, or 'verlan' (the French word for ' back-
wards' written backwards). For example,femme (woman) becomes meuf,
or laisse tomber (let the matter drop, forget it) becomes laisse beton (which
actually has the accidental meaning of ' leave concrete'). A lot of these ex-
pressions are not known to the parents of the children using them, and
sometimes not even to slightly older younger people.
Now, although the type ofslang we are talking about here does exist in
English, its density of use is quite low. My slang dictionary gives the word
deache as back-slang for head and essafJas back-slang for fa ce. Yet in a
lifetime of living in England 1 have never heard either. This type of slang
would, in other words, be largely untranslatable into English by its homo-
logue not because the type of slang does not exist but because it is far less
frequent and less well -developed. For that reason it was not much used in
the subtitles ofthe film La Haine which makes considerable use of verian.
In such situations, other means must be found, as in a case quoted by
Shveitser (1977:63) where the lack, in 1977 at least, ofa Russian slang
term for pot meaning 'marijuana' forced the translator to do two things:
(i) to compensate by trans ferring the linguistic effect further down the chain
of the sentence since no slang item could be found for that spot, and (ii) to
118

Sociolinguistics
replace drug slang by criminal jargon by turning the stylistically neutral
verb 'caught' ('if they're caught using pot') into zastukat meaning 'to de-
nounce somebody to the KGB'. In Russian newspapers, cant, the slang of
thieves, is often used in inverted commas to express sarcasm. This would
not be the effect in other languages.
In addition to types of slang being unavailable, or used to different
extents, the actual purpose or the effect of slang can be different between
languages. In Claude Lelouch's 1976 film Si c 'b ait itrefaire, translated as
Second Chance, the American translators of the dubbed version have a
teenage boy saying things like I 'm top man on a totem pole and King Kong
all in one , The other chick's kinda old but a sweetheart all the same. She
gamme a pair a 'wheels, and Hey, how high can a man get!, which is young
hip, whereas the original French would have been the kind ofslang used by
most generations of French people and therefore marked simply as infor-
mal. The German version of the film (Ein Hauch von Zdrtlichkeiti goes in
the opposite direction, saying only I'm the pasha ofSaint- Valery sur Somme;
she 's really old but nice; she got me a bike; nobody ever died ofenvy .
Slang seems to be quite regularly expunged or weakened in the trans-
lation of films. This was the finding of Hesse-Quack (1969: 114) who
quotes words like mains etnmerdeuses translated as nicht so kaprizios.
My own research has shown things like Oh putain translated as No kidding
in the hit film Les Visiteurs (1993), while in La Fracture du myocarde
(1990) (Cross My Heart), which is full of the kind of foul-mouthed
slang so common among French children, the translators have not opted
to find the functional vulgar equivalents so common among young Eng-
lish children: Ca sert it rien de sefaire chier becomes Why worry?, and
F'es chiante comtne une nana is translated as You 're such a pain. Note
that where slang is toned down, it is not necessarily an act of censor-
ship. As Hesse-Quack (1969:127) says, the target language might quite
simply not have the range and strength of vocabulary to replace it, which
lends support to the hypotheses of Levi" and Toury in relation to the
levelling and generalising tendencies of translation.
The opposite tendency can also be found, however. In the film Stalin-
grad (1993) neutral language is replaced by American slang: Tatsdchlich
is translated as No shit, while Drecksack becomes Asshole.
Other forms of sociolect can also cause problems for much the same
reasons. The comic writer Afferbeck Lauder gave a lot of people some
harmless pleasure during the 1960s with a little book called Fra.f]ly Well
Spoken, which contained short dialogues spelt in such a way as to imitate
the pronunciation ofthe English upper middle classes, the so-called 'public
school ' pronunciation. The sitweshnsfrott with dencher is how they would
119

Translation and Language
pronounce The situation isfraught with danger. Translating such sociolin-
guistic levels into languages that are supposedly classless (as is claimed for
both American and German) is obviously going to be difficult. Inany event,
as was the case with slang, we are unlikely to find one-to-one correspond-
ences. As Shveitser says (1977:61), literature often uses social or regional
variability as a means of characterization, but he believes it is often and
inevitably levelled out.
One form oflevelling found in film dubbing is to make thoroughgoing
use of the American sociolect, for economic reasons. Francois Truffaut's
La Nuit americaine (1973) (Day/or Night) and Claude Lelouch's Si c 'b ait
arefaire are available only in American. This process can lead to quite
bizarre consequences. The German children's film Runaway Express (1992)
has been dubbed into an American which does not always sound quite right.
The end credits reveal that the film had been dubbed by a company located
in Wales, presumably using British actors instructed to use an American
accent!
The problem, as we have seen in the case ofSecond Chance, is that this
linguistic domination can also lead to unwarranted cultural transfer. In the
same film, a French teacher speaking to his students is given the words Hey,
wow, man! You're all meatheads in this class ! which is not how French
teachers speak to their students and does not match the speaker's sardonic
facial expression (the German version has the more restrained: Eine brillante
Klasse habe ich da).
Perverse though this example may be, it does suggest that Shveitser's
rather pessimistic view that sociodialects are inevitably lost in translation is
not always borne out by reality. There are more or less successful ploys for
dealing with the problem.
One not very successful attempt is found in the French-Canadian film
Being at Home with Claude (1992), where the subtitlers attempted to rep-
resent the nonstandard urban variety ofCanadian French, known as 'j oual ',
by what seemed like American gangster-speak: What are you doing? be-
comes Whaddaya doin '? This does not work, however, because it goes
against the industry practice of making subtitles transparent and instantly
comprehensible. The need to reproduce the accent mentally strains the view-
er's language processing capacities in the already difficult subtitling situation.
Shveitser (1977:62) refers to another unsuccessful attempt to translate
sociolect when he quotes a critic as saying that in the Russian translation of
Vanity Fair "the English Joneses and Johnsons spoke the dialect ofMoscow
corn merchants". By contrast, Zimmer (1981 :146) finds the German at-
tempt to translate the Cockney lect of Pygmalion (later to become My Fair
Lady) quite successful. However, the effect is not achieved by matching at
120

Sociolinguistics
the same linguistic level. The Cockney dialect is represented in the English
text mainly by pronunciation and poor grammar, whereas the German trans-
lator uses not only indications of nonstandard pronunciation and grammar
but also 'vulgar' lexis and syntax.
Something similar happens in the French version of the English novel
Kes. The northern English dialect used in the dialogue passages should in
theory be tran slated differently from the non-dialectal language of the nar-
rative, but this becomes a problem for the reasons we saw in the discussion
ofregister. Because there is no French dialect that is comparable to English
Yorkshire, the latter is replaced by a sociolect. For example, the phrase
What 's lip wi 'thee, shit t 'bed? represents dialect by pronunciation and
vocabulary: the dialectal pronoun thee for you, the characteristic omission
ofcertain sounds such as the loss ofthe -th on with and the reduction ofthe
to t, usually pronounced as a glottal stop. The French translation Quoi done
qll 'il t 'arrive? T 'as chic all lit? is not dialect but sociolect, using deviant
grammar typical of the 'incorrect' spoken language of the less well edu-
cated, a translation move which may well be thought politically incorrect
but which sadly matches popular perceptions. In The Observer of 15 De-
cember 1996 a recruitment consultant from the south of England is quoted
as saying: "Let's face it - people with Scouse [Liverpool] accents sound
whiny, and people with Brummie [Birmingham] accents sound stupid", while
another says: "Generally, you are perceived to have a higher intelligence if
you speak 'received English' [BBC English]".
Occasionally the translator may try to find an even more radical solu-
tion to dialect translation. Shveitser (19 77:62) quotes the translation ofthe
Doric Greek dialect in a classical Greek comedy into Nigerian pidgin, giv-
ing language like WlIsa ah go fi nd una chiefs or wetin una de call dem
leaders? Ah bring important news for dem oIt is also possible to find the
Bible translated into rap language and other dialects. This kind of transla-
tion has such repercussions (literary, as well as religious, texts are sacred to
many people) that references to it can be found in the strangest of places:
one episode of the American TV sitcom The Byrds ofParadise discussed
the advisability ofallowing some schoolchildren to perform Shakespeare in
Hawaian Pidgin!
Mishandling sociolects and dialects in translation can lead to laughable
results. The translator Gregory Rabassa (1984:39) thinks that "The most
appalling errors of translation are not the slips brought on by a misread
word, but things like 'gosh darn' in the mouth of a drover". Rabassa, in
fact, believes that "The transfer of local or regional idioms into another
language ... must be listed as another of the impossibilities of translation"
(1984:24) . But the results of inept handling of sociolect and dialect can be
121

Translation and Language
far worse than laughable: they can lead to offensive stereotyping and to
whole groups ofpeople being gratuitously insulted. Hesse-Quack (1969:230),
for example, found that German dubbing made an unpleasantly consistent
use ofthe Berlin urban dialect to characterize socially inferior characters in
foreign films.
There is also the problem of naturalizing dialects and their speakers
out of existence in translation. Annick Chapdelaine (1994: 12-13) has at-
tempted to go against this trend by translating the Southern American dialect
in a Faulkner novel into rural Quebecois. She claims to be "motivated not
by the desire to naturalize Faulkner, but to make him accessible to French-
speaking people via Quebec". But there has to be some doubt as to what is
achieved by this. Writing something like J 'cre ben que je vas commencer
demain ('I think I'll start tomorrow) (Chapdelaine 1994:23) will certainly
give a voice to the linguistic Other, but will not of course evoke the Deep
South so much as the vastly different environment of rural Quebec.
It is not at all obvious either here or in the case ofKes how an audience
can find its way back from the local resonances ofthe translation to those of
the original. Although this form oftranslation, somewhat confusingly called
transparent to differentiate it from the kind oftranslation which renders the
foreign invisible, has the noblest ofaims, we should not delude ourselves as
to what it can achieve. It takes us to the point where translation becomes
impossible.
122

11. Pragmatics
An area of modem linguistics of considerable importance for translation,
and on which great hopes have sometimes been placed, is pragmatics. This
has been defined in a number ofways. If, following Neubert (1978 :185-89),
we define grammatical meaning as the relation between linguistic forms ,
and semantic meaning as the relation between forms and reality, then prag-
matic meaning can be seen as the relation between linguistic forms and the
participants in the communicative act. This definition, however, is broad
enough to include sociolinguistics. So we might more usefully say that prag-
matics studies how grammar and semantics are put together in order to do
something with language. Pragmatics covers quite a number of things, in-
cluding deixi s, which we have already referred to. Here we shall pick out
just three aspects that have attracted attention: presupposition, speech acts,
and Gricean implicatures.
Presupposition
Presupposition can be a highly technical subject involving subtle logical
distinctions. Experts in these matters seem dreadfully keen to know what
kind ofperson would say The King of France is bald when there is no such
person. Furthermore, as Hickey says (1993:89), "virtually everything writ-
ten about presupposition is challenged or contradicted by some authority on
the subject." Clearly these are deep waters, so let's keep our feet on the
ground.
If I ask Have you got any children", I am presupposing there is some-
one there to answer and that they understand English. I am further
presupposing rather less obvious things such as the ability ofthe other per-
son to respond (I'm not likely to ask the question of someone who is lying
face down at the bottom of a swimming pool ), and the willingness of the
person to respond (I' m not likely to ask it of somebody who has just been
fitted with a pair ofconcrete shoes and has other things on their mind). I am
also presupposing their willingness or predisposition to answer questions of
a personal nature.
I can derive the first and second ofthese presuppositions from the lan-
guage used: the wordjon implies the existence ofan addressee (which might
be oneselt) and the sentence is in English. It might also be possible to derive
at least some elements ofthe other presuppositions from the language used
since my utterance takes the form of a question, which presupposes an-
swers. Let's use the completel y untechnical term of'linguistic presupposition'
for these.
123

Translation and Language
However, at least some elements of these presuppositions will be re-
lated not to the linguistic items in my question but to context, and beyond
that to knowledge and culture: I am unlikely to ask the question if I am in
possession ofinforrnation that would make it unwise or unwelcome. I won't,
for example, ask the question of somebody who is putting flowers on a
grave marked In loving memory of X, the only child of..., and 1won 't, in
general, ask questions ofa personal nature ifl know my interlocutor comes
from a culture of personal discretion, as in Japan, where they practise 'enryo',
an attitude of personal reserve in social relationships (Simeoni 1993: 176).
There are, ofcourse, people who will do both ofthese things, either because
they are insensitive, offensive or cruel or because they get paid to do it
(satirists). Let's call these 'nonlinguistic presuppositions'.
Ifl take my question one stage further and ask 'How often do you take
your children to the zoo?', I am making yet more presuppositions, most
notably that the person has children (the word your is the give-away) and
that the person is in the habit oftaking his or her children places (the words
how often let this particular cat out of the bag). Again I am making other
presuppositions of a personal and cultural nature. I am probably assuming
that taking children to public places is a thing that people do, and I am
assuming that zoos are a fit place for impressionable young people.
In fact, when you start taking a sentence apart to find out just what
presuppositions it contains, you will find there are lots of triggers, both
linguistic and nonlinguistic (contextual and cultural), that show that when
we talk or write we make a very large number of presuppositions.
One reason for making the rather crude distinction between linguistic
and nonl inguistic presuppositions is to make the point that the latter are of
most interest to translators. If 1have to translate a sentence Iike The boy ~.
done it again, the presupposition that the boy has done it before should
come out in the translation as clearly as it does in the original. The same
holds true for other linguistic triggers of presupposition. By contrast, I can
make no sense whatsoever of the sentence We need Mohacs, because I do
not share the cultural knowledge presupposed by the author. This is why the
English translator produced the hypemymic translation Weneed defeat in-
stead (Rad6 1979: 191), even though there is considerable loss in the
translation.
Similarly, a literal translation ofAforce de voir des Budapest sur nos
ecrans de television can safely carry the presuppositions about television
ownership and viewing habits, but will overlook the fact that few readers
are likel y to know what Budapest symbolizes in this case . Similarly, the
student who produced the translation He 'dies without a sound'like Alfred
de Vigny :5 wolfwas wrongly presupposing a fair amount ofcultural knowl-
124

Pragmatics
edge on the part of the reader: who was Alfred de Vigny and what exactly
was his relationship with wolves (not to mention the question of why and
how the wolfdied and why part ofthe sentence is in quotation marks)? Such
pragmatic problems assume increased acuity when the text to be translated
includes deictic references to we, us andyou, signalling an involvement that
the target reader will probably not have or feel and leaving the translator to
decide whether to retain the pronouns or replace them by appropriate phrases
which will alter the tenor of the text.
Very few texts will be unaffected by presupposition. The problem is
perhaps best handled by the concept put forward in German translation
theory by Reiss and Vermeer and taken up by Nord ofa text as an 'lnfonna-
tionsangebot', an offer of information, although people like Newmark
(1996:91) dislike the ideology of translation as trade. The point ofpresup-
position is that you save time by not supplying information for which there
is no demand, since you believe it to be shared (unless there is a specific
purpose to supplying it, as in As a priest, you ought to know better than to
use bad language, where the person addressed presumably knows he 's a
priest but needs reminding ofwhat goes with that). Most Hungarians don't
have to be told that Mohacs was the site of a military defeat, just as most
French people don't have to be told what went wrong at Alesia.A writer in
those languages can call up powerful complexes ofknowledge and feeling
very economically. Transfer these to another culture, however, and the pre-
supposed information may not be there.
First, the translator may not share the presupposed knowledge, and if
Durieux (1990:671) is right when she says that "the translator must, in any
event, possess the knowledge that the author presupposes their readers to
have", they must undertake research to acquire it, although in reality a lot of
translation is done without it.
Second, the translator must estimate to what extent the target audience
is likely to share the presuppositions. This is a difficult judgement to make
and involves a delicate balancing act. Either the translator patronizes the
target audience by treating them as if they know nothing and lack the means
to find out, or the translator leaves them in the dark by not supplying what
is needed to make sense ofthe text.
Ifthe target audience is assumed not to know what is being talked about,
the translator must decide what is the best way to pass on the information
with a minimum ofdisruption.
As a trivial example, take the word April as a homophoric reference
that may pose problems if you have to translate the words of the popular
song Though April showers may come your way, They bring the flowers
That bloom in May for a culture where April presupposes anything but
125

Translation and Language
rain. In cases like this, translator decisions will be govemed by the function
of the translation in the target culture.
As a non-trivial example take the case of the translation of an Inuit
legend (Ireland 1989) in which the tran slator dec ided not to pass on cul-
tural information, rendering a word meaning 'skins from seals less than a
year old ' as simply sealskins because the idea that the Inuit might kill and
take the skins of baby seals would put them in a bad light with a Westem
audience enamoured, thanks to Flipper and Free Willy , with wide-eyed
marine life. In other words, the translator needs to know not just what
presuppositional information may be lacking in the target culture but what
presuppositions exist in that culture which may 'proactively' influence the
translation.
Even when translators have identifi ed possible problems ofa pragmatic
nature, they may still get the translation wrong; or they may decide there is
no problem but go ahead and make changes anyway. Thus, the famous
economics textbook by Samuelson uses the image ofa tennis ball and a wad
of gum to make a point about economics: Like a tennis ball (and unlike a
wad of gum). [economic growth} is likely to bounce back fro m the fu ll-
employment ceiling into a recession (1970:246-47). Presumably judging
that wad of gum was less obviously comprehensible (or perhaps cultural
imperialism) to nations less addicted to the substance, both the French and
German translators decided to replace it, but they both got it wrong: neither
the French object (' ball ofwool ') (1972:373) nor the German object ('medi-
cine ball ') (1973:328) display quite the same habit ofsticking to the ceiling
as does a wad ofchewing gum .
In the same section the tran slators had to deal with the cultural refer-
ence to policy makers in Washington. The German version assumed, no
doubt rightly, that die Wirtschaftspolitiker in Washington wou ld pose no
problems ofpresupposed information, although one might wonder about the
effect ofthe ' foreign' allusion on a different audience . The French transla-
tor presumably also realized there would be no real problem with a literal
translation but decided to make a stand against imperialism by rep lacing
Washington with a specifically French allusion to 'the hero in Rene Clair's
film C 'est arrive demain' (1972:374), whic h is abou t a man who can pre-
dict the future, something the policy makers wou ld like to be able to do.
Speech acts
A second area ofpragmatics that is claimed to be important for translation
is 'speech act theory', which, like presupposition, is a matter of some con-
troversy and dispute in linguistics.
126

Pragmatics
The idea behind this theory, which originated with the English philoso-
pher Austin, is that sentences do not just impart information but also perform
an act. More preci sely, they perform three acts: (i) the locutionary act is the
act of making a meaningful sentence, so that the locutionary meaning of a
sentence such as Can you stop singing, Bruce ? consists of a question about
whether or not a man named Bruce has the ability to quit the musical mode;
(ii) the illocutionary act is what the sentence is intended to achieve, the use
to which it is put; we 'll come back to this in a second; (iii) the perlocutionary
act consists of the effect of the utterance on the speaker.
Now let's go back to (ii). Can yo u stop singing, Bruce? might actually
be performing one of at least two speech acts. One can imag ine that our
friend Bruce is stricken with a rare and mysterious disease called meloditis
and has gone to see a doctor, who wants to know whether the patient can
actually exercise any control at all over his vocal chords. Or, far more plau-
sibly, one can imagine a situation in which somebody is highly irritated by
Bruce's singing and just wants him to shut up. In the first instance, the
illocutionary force would be that ofa question, while in the second instance,
in spite of the interrogative grammatical structure, it would actually be a
command. In other words, the act being performed by a particular sentence
is not necessarily given by its form alon e but requires contextual informa-
tion , and a corollary ofthis is that the same speech act can be performed in
many different ways.As Sadock and Zwicky say (1985: 191), "It is possible
to use nearly any sentence type with the effect of nearl y any other".
As for the perlocutionary act, in the first scenario the effect will be to
elicit a response, albeit sung rather than spoken, while in the second case the
perlocutionary force would depend on Bruce's personality and power sta-
tus: he might shut up or he might sing more loudl y.
In theory, a speech act involves all three ofthese elements, but in prac-
tice linguistic discussion has focused largely on the illocutionary act. The
locutionary act is more a matter ofpure semantics, while the perlocutionary
act probably falls largely outside lingui stics.
The concept ofspeech acts arose out ofthe notion that some sentences
actually do perform an act, are indeed the only mean s ofperforming the act.
For this reason they are called performatives. The obvious examples are J
name this ship the Flying Dutchman, J now pronounce yOll man and wife,
J sentence you to be hanged by the neck until dead, YOli 'refired (although
in theory the last example is not a perfonnative because it does not begin
with'!'). All ofthese sentences can also be used in circumstances in which
they are not perfonnatives, typically in reported speech, as in So what did
you say next. Judge Jeffries?- Jtold the little swine 1sentence .... In theory,
therefore, such speech acts require ' felicity conditions' to make them into
127

Translation and Language
performatives and to make them work, in the same way that locutionary
meaning requires truth conditions. I cannot truthfully say the king of France
is bald if he has a full head of hair (or doesn't exist), and I cannot felici-
tously say I nowpronounceyou man and wife unless Iam properly authorized
to do so. Of course, in the real world neither sort of condition has to be
satisfied: the world is full of liars and frauds.
Having delimited the obvious perfonnatives, the question then arose as
to what other speech acts might be fulfilled by utterances, and this is where
the problem begins. Leech (1981 :322) Iists "statements, questions, prom-
ises, warnings, apologies, etc.", where the 'etc.' implies a possibly endless
list, which would become unmanageable and therefore useless. There is also
the question of whether, in cases where there is no explicit performative
verb, we should postulate that one exists in the deep structure, so that a
series ofstatements is a really a succession ofdeclaratives with the words I
declare left out.
We need not pursue these theoretical questions here , but rather turn to
the matter of how useful it is for translators to know about speech acts.
Hatim and Mason, for example, anal yze a passage of English on the as-
sumption that a translation will be influenced by the speech acts underlining
the actual words used: "the translator will seek to relay the illocutionary
force of each speech act in turn" (1990:61). In other words, in order to
translate one of their examples -1 have compiled a bibliography ..., which
1 should be happy to send ... - the translator should know that the speech
act in the first half is a representative (seeking to represent a state of af-
fairs ), while the second half is a commissive (committing the speaker to a
course ofaction). In reality, however, a fairly literal translation will in very
many cases produce the desired effect without the need for the translator to
know anything other than how to say have compiled and would be happy to
in their target language.
Obviously, when a translator has to translate the more obvious ritualis-
tic performatives (ofthe 'I now pronounce you man and wife' variety), then
a literal translation will not do, and the appropriate fonn of words needs to
be used. It is quite surprising, therefore, not to find these formulas in bilin-
gual dictionaries. Other speech acts of the non-ritualistic kind , such as
promising, betting and so on, should also pose no problem, since, as Palmer
says (1981: 166), "speech acts are probably independent of the actual lan-
guage" (although he adds an immediate, second qualifier in the form of"at
least to some degree"). Searle also accepts that "translations of the sen-
tences in question will often, though by no means always, produce sentences
with the same indirect illocutionary act potential ofthe English examples"
(19 75:68), just as Honig and Kussmaul say of a sentence to be translated
128

Pragmatics
into German "However it is translated, the illocutionary force of the sen-
tence would not change" (1982:80).
What may be the case is that different cultures use the same speech acts
to different degrees, although the research done in this area is, like that on
presupposition, disputed by the scholars. This may be especially true ofso-
called indirection, in which we avoid issuing a direct command by using
Can you ... pretty please?, vVoIIId yoII mind dreadfully ...?, Could / possi-
bly ask you to ...? It will also be true of the speech act of cursing, but few
of us have the thrill of translating those. In these cases of indirect speech
act, "the standard forms from one language to the next will not always
maintain their indirect speech act potential when translated from one lan-
guage to another" (Searle 1975:76), so the translator will have what should
be the relatively simple task of learning which forms work and which do
not. As Searle says (1975:76), a literal translation into Czech of Can you
hand me that book? " will sound very odd ifuttered as a request",just as a
literal translation into German of Why don t yoII shut the window? would
not be taken to have the illocutionary force of a request (Honig and Kuss-
maul 1982:77). Snell-Hornby has done a micro-study ofspeech acts in public
notices in German and English and finds that although both languages have
the same speech acts, there are differences in whether or not the addressee is
specified and in the grammatical and lexical means used: English prefers
imperatives and modal verbs while German uses nouns and past participles
(1988:86-93).
Consequently, although it is true that in many cases speech acts
will be preserved in translation without the need to identify them first,
this should not be taken to mean that they pose no problems at all for
the translator. Starting the translation of a philosophical text on canni-
balism with the words Not so very long ago (the SL text began When
recentlyi is to make the wrong speech act, turning an illustrative state-
ment into a fairy tale. Translating a sentence which reads These models
concentrate on ... into These models tend to concentrate on ... is to
turn a statement into a judgement. Leuven-Zwart (1990:83) points to
the effects of a simple switch between the speech act ofquestioning and
the speech act of stating when 'Isn t life ...? " she stammered is translated
as Pero eso no es la vida, which transforms the character from feeling
"perplexity and confusion" to being "cool and distant".
Even here, however, the judgement is not necessarily so simple. We
earlier mentioned a French translation in which statements had been turned
into rhetorical questions because the device is more frequent in French and
is one of the ways in which French narrative achieves immediacy. So, al-
though Leuven-Zwart is right in the case she discusses, such speech-act
129

Translation and Language
changes may be made for reasons of usage and be perfectly justified. What
gives them theirjustification is that the translator is adjusting the text to the
knowledge and expectations of the target audience. The translator is being
polite. It is, ofcourse, possible to be an 'impolite' translator, and that would
have implications for the reader. There would be implicatures.
Implicature
The concept ofimplicature, originated by Grice, is based on the assumption
that conversation is guided by a co-operative principle based on maxims of
the kind children have drummed into them by parents and teachers: be po-
lite, don't waffle, speak when you're spoken to, and so on. These maxims
are, of course, frequently ignored or violated, as in the classic Can )'011 tel!
me the time? - Yes. When that happens we don't necessarily assume a break-
down in conversation, but rather that something is being implied which the
listener has to work out. [fyoung Romeo is on the phone exchanging sweet
talk with Juliet and suddenly raises the tone of his voice and says Yes, OK,
Bob, we 'll work on the car tonight - after we've done our homework, of
course, Juliet at the other end of the line will probably ask Has somebody
just come into the room?, rather than assuming a sudden and swift descent
into lunacy on Romeo's part.
Grice himself postulated (1975) four maxims: quantity, quality, rela -
tion, and manner. The first means that you should give just as much
information as is required (don't waffle, don't be curt, don't be mute). The
second means that you should say only what you believe to be true (don't
tell porkies). The third means that what you say should be relevant (get to
the point, don't go off at a tangent). The fourth means that you should be
clear. Other researchers have added to these a maxim of politeness, which
says simply: be polite.
Although the concept, like many ideas in linguistics, was developed
primarily for the analysis of spoken language, its relevance to the written
language and therefore to translation is also clear. It could work both as a
general theory of the act of translation - Holz-Manttari (1984) describes
translation as 'intercultural cooperation' - and as an instruction to transla-
tors to learn how the maxims are applied in the languages they work between
and to act accordingly.
The politeness principle could be used in invoking the non -translation
ofoffensive material into cultures where it is not customary to cause offence
in writing, although this means violating the qua lity principle, since the
translator will not be giving an accurate and truthful account ofthe original.
The principle ofquantity ofinformation has clear connections with the trans-
130

Pragmatics
lation ofmatter unfamiliar to the TL audience, as we saw under the heading
ofpresupposition, where we discussed a number ofexamples. The medieval
practice of cutting out the boring bits in translation (Amos 1920:5), al-
though again being a violation ofthe quality principle, might be a combination
ofpoliteness and relevance, while the practice ofa translator from an earlier
century known as Bogomolets would seem to be a violation ofquantity and
manner for reasons ofpersonal self-promotion: "Where necessary, I express
myself in more words, and where it is obvious that the author 's language is
more copious than need be, then I express the same essence in shorter form,
in order not only to be compared with the author I have translated but to rise
above him in liveliness ofexposition" (quoted in Balcerzan 1978: 124).
The application of the maxim of relevance in translation is pro-
vided in an example quoted by Ehrman (1993:165) ofa 1960s translation
of the sixteenth-century physician and theologian Paracelsus which
omitted references to his linguistic theories because they did not match
the scientific ideology of contemporary readers and were therefore not
considered relevant. In this case, the maxims of quantity and quality are
violated in the interests of relevance. This, just as in our examples of
the maxim of quantity, is also a matter of presupposition, which shows
the close imbrication ofsome pragmatic concepts and the difficulty some-
times of saying what precisely falls into which category.
In the English subtitles ofthe Mexican film Hasta morir (1994) there is
the following exchange: J want the pachuco with the lady. - A cholo did
thatfor me. This translation technique (borrowing) is a rather unusual strat-
egy to adopt in film translation, where many people in the audience will not
know the source language, since the translator is either not offering all in-
formation needed for comprehension (quantity maxim) or is not being relevant
to the target audience needs (relation maxim) when they are not in a position
(situation) to fill in the gaps in their knowledge (presupposition). The im-
ages on screen (context) give no indication as to what these words mean, so
that the text function (ideational) is not realized and the result is
incomprehension, a complete absence ofclarity (manner maxim) which puts
the audience in a social role ofcomplete inferiority (register).
You might conclude that this translation is a disaster, and some of the
audience would no doubt feel irritated at being left in the dark (perlocutionary
act). It is also possible, however, to see this as a foreignizing translation in-
tended to bring home the otherness of the source culture with powerful
reinforcement ofthe interpersonal funct ion ofthe text through highlighting
the poetic function oflanguage: a certain sensuous satisfaction can be derived
from rolling the sounds around in the mouth and mind even if you don 't
know what the words mean. This last point leads to the final possibility that
131

Translation and Language
this translat ion strategy is an example of kitsch "instant exotica" (Steiner
1992:333) or "cheap local colour" (Vinay and Darbelnet 1958:53) .
Whatever the reason and whatever the effect of such a translation, we
can certainly say that it was not motivated by linguistics (the words are
translatable) or culture (these are not specifically Mexican objects or con-
cepts) or morality (the words are not offensive, and, in any case, the other
subtitles in the film are liberally sprinkled with vulgar swear words). You
might wish therefore to ask yourself whether the explanations advanced in
the previous paragraph give an adequate justification for the strategy of
borrowing, or whether the politeness principle would have been better served
by a literal translation: in the scene in question, two friends, EI Boy and
Mauricio, are in a tattoo parlour. EI Boy wants a tattoo just like Mauricio's:
f want theflash guy with the lady, like him, to which Mauricio says: A half-
breed did that .
The maxim of quality, of telling things as they are, ought to be at the
very heart oftranslation in the concept of fidelity, and one ofthe hop es ofa
linguistic approach to translation was to produce precisely that. From a
linguistic point of view, the only departures from the maxim of quality in
translation should relate to those situations in which there is no linguistic
expression available in the target language. Thi s is where we enter the de-
bate on the role in translation ofgloss and exegesis, which are still linguistic
operations. Even where the TL does have the means to express the source
language there is still lively disagreement over the linguistic level at which
tran slation will take place. However, as we have already indicated on man y
occasion s, the maxim is frequently forced to yield to non-linguistic consid-
erations, some legitimate and others not. We have already quoted Kade's
beliefthat being a good Marxist-Leninist translator "has nothing to do with
an ' ideological revaluation' as is often insinuated from the bourgeois side"
( 1980:46), but modern translation studies are finding examples on all sides
ofsuch interferences with 'quality ' in the Gricean sense.
Equally dubious as a translation principle, at least for man y modern
translators, is one possible interpretation ofthe maxim ofmanner (be clear),
which might imply that the translator as a text producer has the right or the
duty to 'improve on' the original, as Bogomolets claimed to do. Many stu-
dent translators will simply declare as axiomatic that tran slators have no
right to improve on the original, while translators such as Niclas von Wyle
believed, according to Kloepfer (1967:21), that even misprints in the origi-
nal should appear in the translation.
The application of this maxim depends on who you are and what you
are translating. The instruction manual for my video recorder, which is on
the whole well written, nonetheless contains things like There after instead
132

Pragmatics
of Thereafter, you video for your video and the video will build automati-
cally know where to go. It also at one point puts a set of instructions in the
wrong paragraph. To suggest that the translator has no right to improve on
this is tantamount in the first three cases to verbal foppery or casuistry and
in the last case to criminal negligence and may, indeed, lead to legal pro-
ceedings being taken against the translator for damage to person and property.
With literary texts the situation is different, and the 'no improvement'
maxim was probably intended to safeguard the integrity ofsuch texts from
those lesser lights who claim, for example, to have 'improved' Shakespeare.
One rather bizarre form of cimprovement' was found by Hesse-Quack in the
dubbing offilms into German: wherever Germans are refe rred to negatively,
the word 'German' is taken out or replaced by another nationality (1969: 166).
In addition to supplying macro-level translation principles based on
the Gricean maxims, implicatures will also operate at the micro-level, since
it is assumed that different languages will apply the principles in different
ways in different situations, and this knowledge should be part oftranslator
competence.
An English student thought that a letter he had received from a French
company was 'smarmy' when in fact it was simply written in standard po-
liteness formulae (l remain entirely at your disposition, for example) of a
kind which he himself had not yet learnt to use in French and which are no
longer used in English, where government officials do not now beg to re-
main your humble servant. The corollary of this was that his own letters
back to that company would probably have sounded quite rude. Ofcourse,
we could handle this particular concept under the heading ofregister rather
than the politeness maxim.
In many cases translators will have no decision to make in relation to
the Gricean maxims: Isn i Jack a real pig? - The sun s come alit would
presumably require no more than literal translation to preserve its implicature
that Jack has just come into the room. It would, of course, be a problem in
a culture (if such exists) in which bad-mouthing never happens.
At the textual level also , implicature ought not to pose problems. The
most interesting part of implicatures lies in their being flouted. But on the
whole, for a text to be well-written, it would tend to conform to the maxims
rather than flout them . There would seem to be little point (other than inepti-
tude) in producing a text that rambles on in obscure irrelevance, except
perhaps to signal character in a novel or as an experimental novelistic style,
in which case either you would expect the translator to have little option but
to follow suit , or the style in question is deemed unacceptable in the receiv-
ing culture, so translation will not be an option anyway.
This relates to the question ofwhether or not the maxims are universally
133

Translation and Language
applicable in the same way in both space and time . The boring bits which
the medieval translator Aelfric cut out in translation concerned the medieval
literary device of catalogue. In his History of English Literature Fowler
tells us that "Modem readers are often put off by the extent to which older
literature consists of lists; for these now seem dull and empty" (1989:3).
But not just modem readers: Aelfric lived between 955 and 1020, and
boredom was so feared in the seventeenth-century that the French translator
Perrot d'Ablancourt devised a novel means ofdealing with such lists not by
wielding the axe like Aelfric but by moving them out of the main text into
margins and footnotes (Rener 1989:235).
We are dealing here with the maxims of quantity and relation. If the
receiving system does not use lists as a textual device they will seem over-
informational and irrelevant to the TL reader. Should the translator follow
the method outlined in the last paragraph (omission) or in the preceding
paragraph (grin and bear it)? This is not just a question of how to translate
old books; it can arise in translating modem French. The Rainbow Warrior
text (Hatim and Mason 1990a:87) which we have referred to several times
already contains a paragraph which is a long list, a device so unusual in
English that the translators actually fall into an anacoluthon: having trans-
lated the list, which ought to be the subject ofthe verb , they put a dash and
start the sentence off all over again, a linguistic situation they would cer-
tainly have avoided had they written the story themselves from scratch.
Similarly, the device in Russian journalism of using a transitional sen-
tence, usually short and usually on a Iine of its own, such as About what are
we talking here?, is presumably related to the maxim ofmanner. It clarifies
textual structure by sign posting. But should it be translated into a language
which uses no such device?
Similar questions can be asked of the other maxims. Although much
research needs to be done on how the concepts ofpoliteness, informativity,
relevance, clarity and truthfulness affect text production in different lan-
guages and different cultures, any differences that are found will raise the
same question: which system is to be reflected in the translation?
134

12. Psycholinguistics
Psycholinguistics is about language and the mind: what goes on in the mind
when we learn or use a language. Beyond proposing 'models' ofthe trans-
lation process, translation theorists have not been too preoccupied with the
subject. More recently, however, two trends have emerged in the study of
translation as a mental activity. One ofthese, which we shall consider sec-
ond, is quite clearly a branch of psycholinguistics, since it concerns 'what
goes on in the minds oftranslators' . The other trend, whose main proponent
has been Ernst-August Gutt, is less obviously psycholinguistic but we place
it here because it is based on a theory of cognition and claims to offer an
ambitious account oftranslation purely in terms ofthe psychology ofcom-
munication, and, more specifically, in terms ofthe concept of relevance.
Relevance th eory
When people speak we assume they intend to pass on some kind ofinforma-
tion . A listener has the mental capacity to infer that intention by using the
lingu istic properties of what the speaker says to form semantic representa-
tions in the mind. These begin as blueprints based purely on language. They
need further mental processing before they can become proper thoughts that
describe the world.
We get from the semantic representations to the full -fledged thought
by means ofcontext. However, in relevance theory ' context' does not mean
the co-text or the situation. It is rather a set ofassumptions that the listener
has about the world. This set is potentially enormous, including absolutely
everything the hearer can see, feel, remember, etc. To narrow it down so
that we can infer speaker intention, we do two things.
First, we apply the minimax principle by activating the most easily
accessible parts ofcontext in the given situation. Ifwe are in a train station
making reservations, we are more likely to activate, and therefore have easier
access to, information relevant to that situation than to any other.
Second, we will expect to benefit from any utterance in terms of im-
proved understanding of the particular microworld we happen to be in. In
the train station we expect any utterances to lead to the acquisition oftickets
and information.
The principle ofrelevance derives directly from these two elements of
effort and benefit. We choose from the context those assumptions that will
satisfy two requirements:
they will have the largest contextual effects or benefit;
they will require least processing effort.
135

Translation and Language
The hearer will take as the speaker's intention that interpretation of the
speaker's utterance which conforms to this rule.
This does not necessarily make communication straightforward, be-
cause people do not always say what they think. They may exaggerate, use
metaphor, or respond indirectly. This discrepancy between word and thought
is accounted for by distinguishing between descriptive use and interpretive
resemblance. If we say Elizabeth I was queen ofEngland in the sixteenth
century, we are truthfully describing the real world. If we say IfI don't get
this done today, I'm dead we are (hopefully) not truthfully describing the
world. Rather our utterance interpretively resembles our thought, which
will be something like 'If! don 't finish this task today, my life will become
very unpleasant'. The thought and the utterance have an interpretive resem-
blance because they share contextual implications.
Gutt applies this distinction to translation. A translation that is seen as
having to relate in some way to the original would be a case of interpretive
resemblance, whereas a translation intended to survive on its own without
the receiver even knowing there was an orig inal would be a case ofdescrip-
tive use; it would involve whatever changes the commissioner or the translator
thought necessary to maximize its effect, or relevance, for its new audience,
regardless of what was in the original.
Translations ofthis second kind, involving descriptive use, are not re-
ally translations in Gutt's opinion. They have been called so only through
loose usage or because people have found it more economical to translate an
original text and modify it rather than starting a whole new text from scratch .
And since they are not translations, Gutt (1991 :65) believes "there will be
no need for a general theory oftranslation to concern itselfwith such cases".
In other words, a theory oftranslation has no need to bend over backwards
to find concepts to accommodate and describe what are really adaptations.
Another distinction in relevance theory which is important for transla-
tion is that between primary and secondary communication situations. Ifthe
listener is to understand the speaker's informative intention , then three things
must come together: the speaker's utterance, the activation ofthe correct set
of contextual assumptions, and the properly functioning capacity to make
inferences from these two things combined. When that happens, we have a
primary communication situation. In some situations, however, the text re-
ceiver may fail to activate the contextual assumptions intended by the
communicator. Many a spat between human beings is caused by the fact
that the listener doesn't read the signs properly, or deliberately refuses to
switch into the appropriate context. In that case we have a secondary com-
munication situation, and in translation, especially between distant cultures,
this is a very common occurrence.
136

Psycholinguistics
In fact, because meaning is always inferred by reference to relevance
and context, and because relevance and context change in proportion to
cultural distance, Gutt (1991 :99) is forced to challenge the central tenet of
many translation theories: "the aim ofconveying the same message does not
provide a tenable basis for a general theory of translation".
This raises the question of fidelity in translation. Gutt claims that this
can be defined very precisely by relevance theory, and the bulk ofhis book
is aimed at proving this. We are told that "the principle ofrelevance heavily
constrains the translation with regard to both what it is intended to convey
and how it is expressed" (199 I: 10 I). But the only way it achieves this is by
repeating the mantra: "in respects that make it adequately relevant to the
audience - that is, that offer adequate contextual effects" (199 1:I0 I -I 02),
while the manner of expression shou ld be such "that it yields the intended
interpretation without putting the audience to unnecessary processing ef-
fort" (1991: 102).
With some jubilation Gutt announces that "These conditions seem to
provide exactly the guidance that trans lators and translation theorists have
been looking for: they determine in what respects the translation should
resemble the original- only in those respects that can be expected to make
it adeq uately relevant to the receptor language audience" (199 1:I02).
However, words such as 'adequately relevant' and 'unnecessary effort'
are quite vague terms that work on a sliding scale rather than a binary
opposition. This is not in itselfa bad thing, but how do we find the appropri-
ate point on the scale? Presumably by having some idea ofthe target audience
for whom the translation is adequate and sufficiently undemanding.Newmark
(1993 :I06) has responded to Gutt by asking "What ifit [the audience] con-
sists of the great unknown masses?", while other theorists such as Walter
Benjamin believe authors write texts for themselves rather than their read-
ers. Even specialist texts can have an astonishingly wide audience (think of
Stephen Hawkings' A Short History ofTime).
Gutt himself seems to find no problem here, admitting happily that
translators may misjudge the cognitive environment of the target audience
(1991 :I12). But this hardly amounts to providing "exactly the guidance that
translators ... have been looking for" (1991: 102). All Gutt can do is a ret-
rospective analysis to explain how audiences with different degrees of
knowledge will either be able to process a translation and proceed, or not
process it and give up.
Gutt's next claim is that relevance theory can account for the different
approaches to translation through the ages simp ly by saying that they were
intended to maximize relevance for the contemporary audience .This is clearly
right, but in that case what was the point ofexcluding from his theory those
137

Translation and Language
translation practices earlier defined as descriptive use, whose purpose was
to ... maximize relevance? The clear distinction Gutt claims to have estab -
lished is not that clear after all.
Gutt tries to address this problem by considering the distinction be-
tween direct and indirect quotation. In the former, we preserve the meaning
and the form of expression, while in the latter we preserve only what was
meant. What Gutt needs to do then is to find the trans lation equivalent of
direct quotation. There is no straightforward answer to this because the
formal means of expression vary enormously between languages, making
direct formal quotation impossible. Gutt 's answer is to say that it is not the
intrinsic value of stylistic properties that matter but the fact that they give
'communicative clues' that guide the audience to the correct interpretation
ofthe utterance. This seems to be not very different from Nida's view that
what matters in grammar is not form but function .
Similarly, Gutt's statement that the only way ofknowing whether "two
utterances in language A and B share all their comm unicative clues is by
checking whether they give rise to the same interpretation" (1991: 162) is
perilously close to checking for equivalent response, which he has earlier
satirized.
Gutt finds himself in a situation where he has defined two forms of
translation that are quite different from each other: a flexible, context-
sensitive concept oftranslation as interpretive use with shared explicatures
and implicatures and which allows for very different types oftarget text to
be called translation; and a fixed , context-independent form oftranslation
that preserves comm unicative clues. Because he has promised us a unified
theory of translation, he sets out to demonstrate that direct translation is
really just a special case of interpretive use.
Direct translation becomes interpretive-use trans lation by promising to
"interpretively resemble the original completely in the context envisaged for
the original" (1991 :163). In the process, the concept ofcommunicative clue,
which was the subject ofdiscussion for over thirty pages , is quietly demoted
as having no "theoretical status ofits own", and is reduced merely to having
"some value in the practice oftranslation" (1991 :164).
Now, direct trans lation can only become an example ofinterpretive use
by building in the latter part ofthe definition in the preceding paragraph: the
utterances have to combine with the original context for proper inferences
to be made. A primary communication situation must exist, because the
recei ver has to be able to activate the speaker-intended context. This has
two effects: first, "the need for the target audience to familiarize themselves
with the context assumed by the original communicator" (1991: 166); and
second, the suppression of the burden on the translator to compensate for
138

Psycholinguistics
contextual mismatches by spelling out implicatures in the translation, since
"in direct translation it is the audience's responsibility to make up for such
differences" (1991 :166). The concept ofminimum processing effort for the
audience seems to have disappeared from the equation, and it is left to the
translator to "choose between indirect and direct translation" (1991 :181)
depending on what they see as relevant to the audience, and to make the
decision clear to the audience in a foreword (1991: 183). This is suspiciously
like the choices translators had to make under the theories Gutt himselfhas
criticized.
Having promised a unified theory of translation, what Gutt actually
delivers, in an eloquent and enjoyably sharp argument, is a unified general
concept that covers, while leaving intact, two completely different forms of
translation.
Tirkkonen-Condit (1992 :244) also argues against Gutt that translators
make decisions based not on a perceived audience but on their own prefer-
ences, and that the rational minimax approach behind relevance theory may
not be at all the way in which human beings behave: it may not be a true
psycholinguistic concept but simply one more theoretical construct.
In other words, this is another theory about translation and translator
behaviour that has been deductively arrived at from a general principle rather
than inductively from empirical data. In the next section, we shall examine
examples ofthe latter approach.
Translation strategies
Part ofthe problem with many ofthe theories oftranslation we have looked
at so far is that their models ofthe process are purely theoretical constructs.
They take for granted that translation takes place in stages because if you
try to envisage to yourself what a translator might do, that seems a fairly
logical thing to conclude. However, no one really knows what goes on inside
a translator's head. And anyone who wanted to find out would have been
discouraged by the prevalent scientific model which ruled that the 'black
box ' ofthe mind was inaccessible in any valid way.
Since the mid-1980s, however, researchers in Germany and Finland
have increasingly taken up the methods ofpsychological investigation avail-
able in psycholinguistics and the cognitive sciences, applying the concepts
to translation in an attempt to find out how people's minds handle the lin-
guistic process oftranslating.
One ofthe main tools ofinvestigation is the 'think-aloud protocol' (or
TAP), in which people are asked to say whatever comes into their head
while performing a task. This method of investigation is not without
139

Translation and Language
problems, and those researching the area spend quite some time justifying
the procedure itself and the target groups it is used on. However, the
methodological problems are ofless interest to us here than the results.
Krings (1986:260-62) studied the strategies his subjects (advanced lan-
guage learners) used in the comprehension, translation and evaluation
stages of the translation process. He found that in the comprehension (re-
ception) phase of translating they had massive recourse to dictionaries for
solving problems; only in a quarter ofproblem situations did they use their
problem-solving ability by making their own inferences. In 75% of cases
the use of the bilingual dictionary did actually lead to the right answer,
compared with only 40% right answers arrived at by making inferences
from the context.
In the translation phase, Krings again finds considerable reliance on
the bilingual dictionary. If the dictionary offered only one translation, the
subjects used it without any further thought. Where two or more equiva-
lents were offered, the main concern ofthe subjects became that ofchecking
to see which one would fit into the immediate syntactic context, even ifthey
did not understand the equi valent they had chosen. Krings comments, "At
least in some cases the subjects are aware that they are translating without
understanding" (1986:393). In most cases the subjects (presumably because
of the way they had learned the foreign language) were able to associate
only one target equivalent with the source unit, and in most cases they
solved the problem offinding an equivalent at no higher than the word level
(1986:399).
In the evaluation and decision-making stage (1986:464-67) the sub-
jects finalized the choice ofequiva lent by using two main strategies: 'playing-
it-safe ' reduction strategies in which the target message underwent a loss in
relation to the source, and 'risk-taking' achievement strategies in which the
subjects attempted to provide a full translation without knowing ifthe solu-
tions offered were right or not. Where various possible solutions had to be
weighed up, the subjects' choice tended to be guided by 'translation max-
ims '. Krings found seven ofthese (1986:429-34):
(i)
Literalism maxim: avoid translations that move too far away from the
source text;
(ii)
Length-restriction maxim: one subject rejected an ' overlong'
translation citing the 'rule' of an authority on translation that 'a
transl ation should never be more than 10% longer than the original'
(1986:430);
(iii) Translational constancy maxim: the notion that a given source unit
should always be translated by the same target-language word (s);
140

Psycholinguistics
(iv)
Variety maxim: the idea that different source units must be translated
by different target units rather than being allowed to converge into the
same word;
(v)
Foreign-word maxim: when in doubt use a 'proper' target-language
word rather than a similar-sounding loan word (a constant problem in
German where so many English words have been imported and where,
even though these loan words are used with considerable frequency by
native German writers, student translators are told to avoid them) ;
(vi)
Corrective maxim: where translators find, or think they have found, an
error in the source text, some will correct it in translation while others
will insist that you should not 'improve' on the original in any way
whatsoever;
(vii) Translator-tools maxim :this takes us into the realm ofthe light fantas-
tic; Krings found that his translators followed such maxims as:
never translate a source-language word you don't know by a
target-language word that isn't in the dictionary;
trust the dictionary even when you don't understand it;
when in doubt, take the first word offered in the dictionary list
ofequivalents.
Another German scholar who has researched what seems to go on in the
minds of translators is Lorscher, Like Krings, Lorscher worked not with
professional translators but with students. This means his subjects faced
problems ofa kind not faced by professionals (less knowledge ofthe foreign
language and culture, hence the need to make massive use ofthe dictionary)
but they did not face problems of a kind that professional translators do
have to deal with (carrying out research and taking account of customer
requirements, for example). Both authors also studied translation into the
foreign language, which, although it does happen, is not recommended as
best practice in the professional world of translation. Consequently the re-
sults ofthese studies may tell us more about language-learning needs than
abou t translation strategies.
Lorscher (1991 :280) counters this by suggesting that what such studies
reveal are not specifically translation activities but rather general strategies
for processing texts. In any event, Kussmaul and Tirkkonen-Condit
(1995: 181) quote research by Jaaskelainen and Tirkkonen-Condit to the ef-
fect that using professional translators for think-aloud-protocols is
counter-productive, since subjects tend to fall silent when the task in hand is
so routine that it requires little effort, and for professional translators this
will happen a lot.
Lorscher's study aims to find out what range of strategies translators
141

Translation and Language
use, how frequently they occur, what kinds of problems they are able to
solve, and how successful they are.
From the mass of data , Lorscher (1991 :97-117) has uncovered five
basic translation strategies built out of twenty-two elements. These basic
strategies may contain embedded elements within the chain and bound ele-
ments at the end. These are not part ofthe attempt to solve the problem but
probably playa psychological role of mental succour. The basic strategies
can be made into expanded structures by adding in further elements that are
part of the problem-solving process, and they can be built into complex
structures by putting together one or more basic strategies. The elements
that go to produce the basic structures include:
realizing the existence ofa translation problem;
verbalizing the problem;
searching for a solution;
finding a definitive or temporary, whole or part solution;
putting off the search for a solution;
failing to find a solution;
having a problem in understanding the source text.
These elements occur exclusively within what Lorscher calls 'strategic'
phases ofthe translation process, in other words those parts oftranslating in
which a problem is being specifically addressed.
The further set of elements mayor may not occur in such phases. The
list of these elements is too long to quote in full, but they involve such
mental activities as repeating or rephrasing the source and target language
texts , checking a possible solution against the source text or against the
target context, mentally organizing a source-text segment to find a starting
point or to translate it as a whole rather than word by word, commenting on
the text or commenting on what the translator is actually doing.
Out ofthese elements, the basic translation strategies are built up. These
are actually quite simple, ranging from the straightforward:
Realize there is a problem + Solve it or Fail to solve itfor the time
being
to the more complicated:
Realize there is a problem + Searchfo r a solution + Verbalize part
of the problem + Solve that part or put it off+ Search for a solution
to the next part, etc.
In other words, the strategies build up through the addition of extra
stages in verbalizing and searching for solutions to all or part of the prob-
142

Psycholinguistics
lem. Embedded within or appended to the end of the strategies will be the
elements ofmonitoring, rephrasing, checking and so on.
The actual translation results produced by these strategies show that
Lorscher's subjects, like those ofKrings and probably for the same reason,
tend to have just one-to-one associations between the source and the target
translation units. This means they tend to produce sign-oriented rather than
sense-oriented translations; their translation unit is the formal linguistic sign
rather than the sense of the message. Where such an approach produces
nonsense, the subjects are often not even aware of it because they rarely
check their translations to make sure they make sense (1991 :272-73), even
though experiment shows that they have usually correctly understood the
original text (199 1:276) .
As translators become more experienced and acquire greater control
over their mother tongue, so the translation strategy moves more toward the
sense-oriented approach based on larger translation units with checking for
style and text typology (Kussmaul and Tirkkonen-Condit 1995: 187).
Tirkkonen-Condit has found that the more professional translators also make
better use of the minimax strategy, allowing wider goals to influence local
decision-making and prioritizing tasks so that they make better use ofworld
knowledge and inferencing capacities rather than having constant and time-
wasting recourse to dictionaries. As she says, "Since time is a limited
resource, a good translator does not necessarily aim at an optimal perform-
ance but at a performance which is sufficient in a given communicative
situat ion" (Kussmaul and Tirkkonen-Condit 1995: 190).
This probably means professionals make better use of what is called
top-down processing, working from general concepts and objectives down
to precise goals, rather than bottom-up processing, working from data, which,
in translation, means the specific words on the page. This would seem to be
supported by Janet Fraser (1996:88-89), whose research shows the influence
of a specific translation brief on the thought processes and translation
outcomes of professional translators. An entire issue of Meta (vol. 47 ,
no. I) is devoted to this topic of translation processes and would make an
appropriate starting place for those interested in pursuing the matter.
This research would suggest that tra inee translators and experienced
translators behave rather differently. What is not yet known is how they get
from one to the other. One way of finding out might be to pursue Brian
Harris's proposal (1992) to go even further back down the translation chain
to look at what he calls 'natural' translation, which is translation done in
daily life by bilingual children with no training as translators. Such research
is still in its infancy and not accepted by everybody, but it may yet have a
contribution to make to unravelling the mystery oftranslation.
143

Conclusion and Perspectives
Translation can be addressed by a number of discourses. The late Antoine
Berman (1989) has categorized these as:
objective sectorial, in which translation is seen as an object of study
for specific disciplines such as linguistics, poetics or comparative
literature;
objective general, where translation becomes the object of general
discourse studies such as hermeneutics;
experiential, which intertwines translation and philosophy or psycho-
analysis.
Berman (1989:673) has the following to say about the linguistic discourse
on translation studies: linguistics continues to insist that translation is a
proper object oflinguistic study, and provides a conceptual analytical frame-
work for that study, but defines translation in such an abstract way that it
ignores almost entirely the written and textual aspects of the act, not to
mention its cultural and historical dimensions. He attributes this to the fact
that theoretical linguists have no real interest in translation studies.
This is not entirely true, as I hope to have demonstrated. Yet this lack of
interest, where it exists, may be attributed to the highly abstract formalism
of much of modem linguistics which has nothing obvious to do with the
messy reality oflanguage in use. This cou ld be one reason why some trans-
lation theorists view linguistics as a positivist discourse of patriarchal
repression seeking to shackle everything to system and structure.
Some linguists ' lack of interest might also be due to despair. As I have
suggested throughout, although translation phenomena may be amenable to
linguistic description, linguistics is not necessarily the discipline which guides
us to the 'right' answers, which allows us to pick our way through the
imbrication of what Barbara Folkart (1989:149) has called the ratio facilis
of translation, the appropriation of an idiom, and the ratio difficilis, the
invention ofan idiolect, an imbrication and a dialectic not readily amenable
to the cut-and-dried categorizations that linguistics strives for.
Translation is a site oftension and contlict, an activity swept along, in
the dark and without a reliable compass, on the currents ofculture, ideology
and history. The theories we construct, our whistling in the dark, are in-
tended to give some direction to the flow and some comfort to the navigator.
The linguistic discourse is just one ofthose theories and cannot completely
circumscribe translation, and yet, as the continued prol iferation ofresearch
demonstrates, it has a role to play and a voice which will not be silenced.
144

Conclusion and Perspectives
Earlier linguistic theories of translation fell mainly within the domain
of contrastive linguistics, which is not the same as a translation linguistics
but still an important element oftranslation studies. Without systemic com-
parisons you have no basis for discussion. But the comparisons need to be,
and have been, extended beyond the confines ofdifferential semantics and
grammar into the broader areas of text structure and functioning, into the
sociocultural functioning oftranslation and how it is shaped and constrained
by the place and time in which it takes place. Inall of this, linguistics will
have a part to play.
145

Glossary
Adaptation: replacing source-language cultural items by target-language
equivalents. See pp. 39-40.
Amplification: 1. (Vinay and Darbelnet): characteristic of a language that
expresses itselfmore verbosely than another language. 2. (Malone) adding
information to allow the reader of a translation to understand the text. See
pp.45-47.
Anacoluthon: wrongful mixing ofgrammatical structures. See p. 93.
Anaphora:referring back to some earlier item in a text. See p. 95.
Antonymic Translation (Shveitser): translating by an antonym with appro -
priate modifications. See p. 31.
Borrowing: transferring a source language item into the target language to
fill a lexical gap or to give local colour. Called 'Carry-Over Matching' by
Malone. See pp. 34-35 , 42.
Calque (Loan Translation): borrowing a source language item in translated
form. See pp. 35-36.
Cataphora: referring forward to an item that comes at a later point in the
text. See p. 95.
Coherence :conceptual connectedness of a text. See pp. 98-99.
Cohesion : lexico-grammatical connectedness ofa text. See pp. 90-98.
Collocation: set phrase, words that typically go together. See pp. 6-8.
Communicative Translation (Newmark): attempts to maintain the effect of
the original. See p. 114.
Compensation: manipulating one part of a text to make up for a loss in
another. See pp. 31-33 .
Concentration (Vinay and Darbelnet): translating with fewer words with-
out loss ofmeaning. Called 'Condensation' by Malone. See pp. 47-49.
146

Glossary
Concretization (Shveitser): translating an abstract by a concrete term , See
pp.29-30.
Connotation: the 'peripheral', non-denotational meanings of a word. See
pp.23-25.
Convergence (Malone): translating different source words by one target
word. See pp. 43-45.
Con versational Maxims: principles governing conversational cooperation.
Seenpp. 130-134 .
Covert Translation (House): one which is not obviously a translation. See
p. 113.
Cultural Translation (Nida): changing source content to conform to the
target culture. See p. 58.
Deconstruction: reading a text by seizing on apparently peripheral matter in
order to bring out the concealed 'violent hierarchy' ofits dominant ideologi-
cal values; the philosophy that no text has a fixed and stable meaning. See
pp. 16,72, 108.
Deixis:words like this, now, here, etc. which locate things in time and space.
See pp. 94-95.
Denotational Meaning: what the word refers to in the real world, or its
dictionary definition in the case of abstract words. See p. 6, 23-24.
Differentiation (Shveitser): translating a general term by a more specific
term . See pp. 29-30.
Dilution (Vinay and Darbelnet): translating with more words but without
addition ofmeaning. Called ' Diffusion' by Malone. See pp. 47-49.
Directive Fun ction: language used to influence beha viour. See p. 102.
Divergence (Malone): translating one source word by more than one target
word in different contexts. See pp. 43-45 .
Documentary Translation (Nord): translation strategy for texts not intended
for the target-language audience. See p. 114.
147

Translation and Language
Dynamic Equivalence (Nida): eliciting the same reader response as the
original. See pp. 56-60.
Economy (Vinay and Darbelnet): characteristic ofa language that expresses
itselfmore concisely than another language. See p. 47.
Equation (Malone): literal translation involving only necessary grammati-
cal changes. See pp. 41-43.
Equivalence (Vinay and Darbe1net): translating idioms, collocations,
proverbs, etc. by the natural target equivalent. See pp. 38-39.
Equivalence: relation between a source text and its translation usually in-
tended to mean that the target unit is as close as possible in meaning to the
source unit while still being natural usage in the target language. See
Chapter 5.
Equivalent Translation (Kade): perfonns the same function as the original.
See p. 112.
Explicitation Hypothesis: phenomenon whereby a translated text is usually
more explicit, both in the expression ofgrammatical links and ofsemantic
content, than the original. See p. 100.
Expressive Function :1. language used to express the feelings ofthe speak-
ing subject; 2. language in which the formal properties are at least as
important as their meaning. See p. 101.
Faux-amis: source and target language words that look alike but have dif-
ferent meanings. See p. 43.
Foreignizing Translation: makes the target text 'alien' in order to convey
the Otherness of the source culture. See p. 116.
Formal Correspondence (Nida and Catford): translation that adheres closely
to the linguistic form of the source text. See p. 54.
Functional Sentence Perspective: the semantics of sentence structure. See
p.85.
Generalization (Shveitser): translating a more specific source-language item
by a more general target-language item. See pp. 29-30.
148

Glossary
Heterovalent Translation (Kade): performs a different function from the
original. See p. 11 2.
Hyp ernym: a more general word embracing several more specific terms.
See p. 20.
Hyponym: a word whose meaning is included in that of a more general
word. See p. 20.
ideational Function: language used to convey information, ideas or experi-
ence. See pp. 108-109.
instrumental Translation (Nord): trans lation strategy for texts aimed equally
at a source and target language audience. See p. 114.
Interpersonal Function: language used to establish a relationship between
author and reader. See pp. 109-110.
Kernel: the most basic syntactic representation of a sentence in its deep
structure. See pp. 65-67.
Langue: language as an abstract rule system. See pp. 3-4.
Lexicalization: expressing a concept in compact lexical form. See p. 16.
Linguistic Translation (Nida): makes explicit only information that is lin-
guistically implicit in the original. See p. 58.
Literal Translation: 1. tran slation strategy in which the whole text is sub-
jected to translation at a low linguistic level; 2. translation technique in
which parts of a text are tran slated at a low level because the results con-
form to target language norms. See pp. 36, 112-113.
Matching (Malone): generic term for 'Substitution' and ' Equation' (q.v.).
See pp. 41-43.
Metalinguistic Function: the use of language to talk about language. See
p. 101.
Minimax Principle: seeking maximum effect or benefit for minimum effort.
See p. 12.
Mood: grammatical structuring of the clause into sentence types to convey
interpersonal meaning. See p. 109.
149

Translation and Language
Modulation (Vinay and Darbelnet): modifying the semantics ofthe source
term to produce a target equivalent. See pp. 37-38.
Morpheme: smallest linguistic unit ofmeaning. See pp. 14-17.
Natural Translation: spontaneous, untutored translation ofyoung bilingual
speakers. See p. 143.
Overt Translation (House): one which is visibly a translation. See p. 113.
Paradigmatic: the structuring of language on the 'vertical ' dimension
whereby a slot in a linguistic chain can be filled by items taken from the
same grammatical or semantic set. See pp. 6-7.
Parole: language in actual use. See pp. 3-4 .
Phatic Function : language used to maintain contact between speaker and
listener. See p. 102.
Prefabricated Matching (Malone): translating by a conventionalized lin-
guistic routine. See p. 42.
Presupposition: knowledge that a reader is assumed to have already on com-
ing to a text. See pp. 123-126.
Recrescence (Malone): generic term for 'amplification' and 'reduction' (q.v.).
See pp. 45-47.
Reduction (Malone): omitting information that is not needed or will be mis-
understood. See p. 47.
Redundancy : repetition in utterances to counteract interference or avoid a
high load of new information. See p. 57.
Referential:see ' Denotational' and'Ideational' .
Register: variations in language dictated by the interaction oflanguage user
(iocated in time , space and society) and language use (field, mode, tenor).
See pp. 75-84.
Re-ordering (Malone): altering the position of sentence constituents. See
pp.49-50.
150

Glossary
Repackaging (Malone): generic terrn for 'diffusion' and 'condensation' (q.v.).
See pp. 47-49.
Restricted Translation (Catford): translates only one level of the source
text. See p. 56.
Rheme: that part of the clause which provides new information to develop
the theme. See pp. 85-90.
Scenes and Frames: a form of semantics that sees words as frames which
conjure up mental scenes. The French steak-frites and the Englishfish and
chips are frames that activate the same scene of 'basic everyday meal'. See
pp.98-99.
Skopos theory: says that translation strategy is determined by the function
ofthe translated text, which may not be the same as that ofthe original. See
p.72.
Selection Restrictions: elements of a word's meaning that allow it to form
collocations with some words but not others. See p. 7.
Semantic Translation (Newmark): remains as close as possible to the lexico-
grammatical structures ofthe original. See p. 114.
Substitution (Malone): a form of dynamic equivalence used when literal
translation (equation) is not possible and so some form of translation shift
must take place. See p. 41.
Syntagmatic: structuring oflanguage along the horizontal level. See pp.
6-7.
Taxonomy: a classification or conceptual structuring ofa subject. See p. 26.
Textual Equivalence (Catford): target-language text segment that can be
observed to be the equivalent of a source-language text segment. See pp.
54-56.
Theme: that part of a sentence that announces what it is going to be about.
See ppp. 85-90.
Transitivity: conceptual organization ofthe clause to express the ideational
function. See p. 109.
151

Translation and Language
Translation Shift: any departure from formal correspondence in translation.
See p. 51.
Transposition (Vinay and Darbelnet): shifts ofgrammar and syntax in trans-
lation. See p. 37.
Zigzagging (Malone): generic term for divergence and convergence (q.v.).
See pp. 43-45.
152

Bibliography
Albrecht, Jorn (1973) Linguistik und Ubersetzung, Tubingen: Niemeyer.
Amos, Flora Ross (1920) Early Theories ofTranslation, New York: Octagon
Books; reprinted 1973.
Andrews, Avery (1985) 'The Major Functions of the Noun Phrase', in Timo-
thy Shopen (ed) Language Typology and Syntactic Description, Vol. I,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , 62-154.
Baker, Mona (1992) In Other Words: A Coursebook on Translation, London
& New York: Routledge.
Baker, Mona (1993) 'Corpus Linguistics and Translation Studies: Implica-
tions and Applications', in Mona Baker, Gill Francis and Elena Tognini-
Bonelli (eds) Text and Technology: In Honour ojJohn Sinclair, Amster-
dam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 233-50.
Balcerzan, Edward (1978) 'Perevod kak tvorchestvo' (Translation as Crea-
tion) , Babel 21(3): 124-26.
Bassnett-Maguire, Susan (1980) Translation Studies , London: Methuen; re-
vised edition 1993.
Bassnett, Susan and Andre Lefevere (eds) (1990) Translation, History and
Culture, London & New York: Pinter Publishers.
Beaugrande, Robert de and Wolfgang Dressler (1981) Introduction to Text
Linguistics, London & New York: Longman.
Bell, Roger T. (1991) Translation and Translating. Theory and Practice, Lon-
don: Longman.
Benjamin, Andrew (1989) Translation and the Nature ojPhilosophy, London
& New York: Routledge.
Berman, Antoine (1989) 'La traduction et ses discours', Meta 34(4): 672-79.
Blum-Kulka, Shoshana (1986) 'Shifts of Cohesion and Coherence in Trans-
lation', in Juliane House and Shoshana Blum-Kulka (eds) Interlingual and
Intercultural Communication, Tubingen: Gunter Narr, 17-35.
Broek, Raymond van den (1978) 'The Concept ofEquivalence in Translation
Theory: Some Critical Reflections', in James S. Holmes, Jose Lambert
and Raymond van den Broek (eds) Literature and Translation: New Per-
spectives in Literary Studies, Leuven: Acco, 29-43.
Burgess, Anthony (1962) A Clockwork Orange, London: Heinemann.
Cary, Edmond (1957) 'Theories sovietiques de la traduction', Babel 3(4):
179-90.
Catford, John C. (1965) A Linguistic Theory ofTranslation, London: Oxford
University Press.
Chapdelaine, Annick (1994) 'Transparence et retraduction des sociolectes
dans The Hamlet de Faulkner', TTR 7(2): 11-33.
153

Translation and Language
Cherniakhovskaia, Leonora. A . (1977) 'Sinnstruktur und syntaktische
Umformung beim Ubersetzen', in Otto Kade (ed) Vermittelte Kom -
munikation, Sprachmittlung, Translation,Leipzig:VEB Verlag Enzyklopadie,
86-92.
Chomsky, Noam (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, Cambridge, MA :
The MIT Press.
Chuquet, Helene and Michel Paillard (1987) Approche linguistique desproblemes
de la traduction: anglais-francais, Paris: Ophrys.
Comrie, Bernard (1979) 'Russian', in Timothy Shop en (ed) Languages and
their Status, Cambridge, Mass.: Winthrop Publishers.
Crystal, David and Derek Davy (1969) Investigating English Style, London:
Longman.
Delisle, Jean (1988) Translation: an Interpretive Approach, Ottawa: Univer-
sity of Ottawa Press.
Diaz-Diocaretz, Myriam (1985) Translating Poetic Discourse: Questions on
Feminist Strategies in Adrienne Rich, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Duff, Alan (1981) The Third Language: Recurrent Problems of Translation
into English, Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Durieux, Christine (1990) ' La recherche documentaire en traduction tech-
nique: conditions necessaires et suffisantes', Meta 35(4): 669-75.
Eggins, Suzanne (1994) An Introduction to Systemic Functional Linguistics,
London & New York: Pinter Publishers.
Ehrman, James F. (1993) ' Pragmatics and Translation: The Problem of Pre-
supposition', TTR 6(1): 149-70.
Fa iss , Klaus (1973) "Uberse.tzung und Sprachwissenschaft - eine
Orientierung', Babel 19(2): 75-86.
Fedorov, Andrei V. (1953) Vvedenie v teoriu perevoda (Introduction to the
Theory of Translation), Moscow: Literaturi na inostrannix iazikax; 2nd
revised edition 1958; 3rd revised edition 1968 : Osnovy obshchei teorii
perevoda (Foundations of a General Theory of Translation), Moscow:
Visshaia shkola.
Foley, WilliamA. and Robert D. Van Valin, Jr. (1985) ' Information Packaging
in the Clause', in Timothy Shopen (ed) Language Typology and Syntactic
Description, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , 282-364.
Folkart, Barbara (1989) 'La materialite du texte: la traduction comme
recuperation de l'intra-discursif', Meta 34(2): 143-56.
Fowler,Alastair (1989) A History ofEnglish Literature, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Fraser, Janet (1996) 'Mapping the Process of Translation', Meta 47(1): 84-
96.
Gak , Vladimir G. (1992) ' Pour un calcul logique des equ ivalents de traduc-
tion', Meta 37(1): 139-48.
Gallagher, John D. (1993) 'The Quest for Equivalence', Lebende Sprachen
38(4): 150-61.
154

Bibliography
Gentzler, Edwin (1993) Contemporary Translation Theories, London & New
York: Routledge.
Gerrard, Nicci (1996) 'Nam's Inhumanity to Man ', The Observer: Books,
21 January, p. 15.
Govaert, Marcel (1971) 'Criteres de traduction', in Karl-Richard Bau sch and
Hans Martin Gei ger (eds) Interlinguistica. Sprachvergleich und Ober-
setzung. Festschrift zum 60. Geburtstag von Mario Wandruszka, Ttlbingen:
Max Niemeyer, 425-37.
Grice, H. Paul (1975) ' Logic and Conversation', in Peter Cole and Jerry L.
Morgan (eds) Syntax and Semantics, Vol. III: Speech Acts, New York:
Academic Press, 41-5 8.
Gutt, Ernst -August (199 1) Translation and Relevance: Cognition and Con-
text, Oxford: Blackwell.
Guttinger, Fritz (1963) Zielsprache. Theorie und Technik der Ubersetzung,
ZOrich: Manesse.
Hamblin, Charles (1990) Languages of Asia and the Pacific, North Ryde
(Australia): Collins/Angus & Robertson.
Harris, Brian (1992) 'Natural Translation: A Repl y to Han s P. Krings', Target
4(1): 97-103.
Hatim, Basil and Ian Mason (1990a) Discourse and the Translator, London:
Longman.
Hatim, Basil and Ian Mason (1990b) 'Genre, Discourse and Text in the Cri-
tique of Translation', Bradford Occasional Papers, No. 10: 1-13.
Hatim, Basil and Ian Mason (1997) The Translator as Communicator, London
& New York: Routledge.
Hawkins, John A. (1986) A Comparative Typology ofEnglish and German:
Unifying the Contrasts, London & Sydney: Croom Helm.
Heidegger, Martin (1962) Being and Time, translated by John Macquarrie and
Edward Robi nson, London: S.C.M. Press.
Herbst, Thomas (1994) Linguistische Aspekte der Synchronisation von
Fernsehserien: Phonetik, Textlinguistik. Ubersetzungstheorie, Tubingen :
Niemeyer.
Hesse-Quack, Otto (1969) Der Ubertragungsprozefi bei der Synchronisation
von Filmen. Eine interkulturelle Untersuchung, Munich & Basel: Ernst
Reinhard.
Hickey, Leo (1993) 'Presupposition Under Cross-Examination', International
Journal fo r the Semiotics ofLaw 6(16 ): 89-109 .
Hines, Barry (1968) Kes, Harmondsworth: Pen guin Books, translated into
French by Lola Tranec-Dubled, Pari s: Gallimard, 1968.
Hjort, Anne Mette (1990) 'Translation and the Consequences of Scepticism',
in Susa n Bassnett and Andre Lefevere (eds) Translation , History and Cul-
ture, London & New York: Pinter Publishers, 38-45.
Hockett, Charles (1958) A Course in Modern Linguistics,New York: Macmillan.
155

Translation and Language
Hoeg, Peter (1992) Miss Smilla s Feeling j ar Snow, tran slated by F. David,
London : HarperCoUins (Flamingo), 1993.
Holmes, Janet (1992) An Introduction to Soc iolinguistics, Lond on & New
York: Longman.
Holz-M anttari, Justa (1984) Translatorisches Handeln: Theorie lind Methode,
Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia.
Honig, Hans G. and Paul Kussmaul (1984) Strategie del' Ubersetzung: Ein
Lehr- lind Arbe itsbuch, Tubingen : Gunter NaIT.
House, Juliane (1977) A Modelfor Translation Quality Assessment, Tubingen:
Gunter NaIT.
Hu, Qian (1994) 'On the Impl ausibi lity of Equ ivalent Response (Part V)' ,
Meta 39(3 ): 418-32.
Ireland, Jeanette (1989) ' Ideology, Myth and the Maintenanc e of Cultura l
Identity' , ELR Journal 3: 95-136.
Ivir, Vladimir (1996) 'A Case for Linguistics in Translation Theory', Target
8(1): 149-57.
James, Carl (1980) Contr astive Analysis, London: Longman.
Jumpelt, Rudolf Walter (1961 ) Die Ubersetzung naturwissenschaftlicher lind
technischer Literatur. Berlin: Langenscheidt.
Kade, Otto (ed) (19 77) Vermittelte Kommunikation, Sprachmittlung. Transla-
tion, Leipzig:VEB Verlag Enzyklopadie.
Kade, Otto (1980) Die Sprachmittlung als gesellschajtliche Erscheinung lind
Gegenstand wissenschaftlic her Unters uchung. Leipz ig: VEB Verlag
Enzyklopadie.
Keller, Adelbert von (ed) (1861) Translationen von Niclas von H'~l'le, Stuttgart:
Stuttga rt Verein No. 57; reprinted 1967, Hildesheim: G.Olms.
Kemp, Arnold (1996) 'S hadow of Sleaze Dims City of Light', The Observer,
15 December, p. II .
Kelly, Louis (1979) The True Interpreter. A History of Translation Theory and
Practice in the West, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Kloepfer, Rolf (1967) Die Theorie del' literarischen Ubersetzung, Munich:
Wilhelm Fink.
Koller, Werner (1979) Einfiihrung in die Ubersetzungswissenschaft, Heide lberg:
Quelle & Meyer.
Kornissarov, Yilen N. (1977) 'Zur Theorie der linguistischen Ubersetzungs-
analyse', in Otto Kade (ed) Vermittelte Kom munikation, Sprachmittlung,
Translation, Leipzig: YEB, 44-51.
Krings, Hans P. (1986) Was in den Kiipfen von Ubersetzern vorgelzt. Eine
empirische Untersuchung zur Struktur des Uberse tzungsprozesses an
jortgesclzrittenen Franzosischerlernern, Tubingen : Gunter NaIT.
Kuhiwczak, Piotr (1990) 'Translation as Appropriation: The Case of Milan
Kundera's TlzeJoke' , in Susan Bassnett and Andre Lefe vere (eds) Transla-
tion. History and Culture, London & New York: Routledge, 118-30.
156

Bibliography
Kussmaul, Paul (1995) Train ing the Translator, Amsterdam & Philadelphia:
John Benjamins.
Kussmaul, Paul and Sonja Tirkkonen-Condit (1995) 'Think-Aloud Protocol
Analysis in Translation Studies', TTR 8(1): 177-99.
Ladmiral, Jean-Rene (1979) Traduire: theoremes pour la traduction, Paris :
Payot.
Larose, Robert (1989) Theories contemporaines de la traduction, 2nd edition,
Quebec: Presses de l'Universite de Quebec.
Lauder, Afferbeck (1968) Fraflly Well Spoken: How to Speak the Language
ofLondon s West End. London: Wolfe.
Lederer, Marianne (1994) La traduction aujourd'hui, Paris: Hachette.
Leech, Geoffrey (1981) Semantics: The Study ofMeaning, Harmondsworth:
Penguin Books.
Leuven-Zwart, Kitty van (1989) 'Translation and Original: Similarities and
Dissimilarities, 1', Target 1(2): 151-81.
Leuven-Zwart, Kitty van (1990) 'Translation and Original: Similarities and
Dissimilarities, 2', Target 2(1) : 69-95.
Levy, Jifi ( 1967) 'Translation as a Decision Process', To Honor Roman
Jakobson: Essays on the Occasion ofhis 70th Birthday, Vol. 2, The Hague:
Mouton, 11 71-82,
Levy, Jiri (1969) Die literarische Uberse tzung. Theorie einer Kunstgattung,
Frankfurt & Bonn: Athenaum; originally published 1963 as Um'1J1fPiekladu.
London, John (1990) 'Theatrical Poison: Translating for the Stage', Brad-
ford Occasional Papers, No. 10: 141-67.
Lorscher, Wolfgang (1991 ) Translation Performance, Translation Process,
and Translation Strategies. A Psycholinguistic Investigation, Tubingen:
Gunter Narr.
Mac Erlean, Neasa (1996) 'Tipping the Scales is not a Tip for the Top', The
Observer: Business, 15 December, p. 9.
Malblanc, Andre (1963) Stylistique comparee du franca is et de I 'allemand:
Essai de representation linguistique comparee et etude de traduction, Paris :
Didier.
Malone, Joseph L. (1988) The Science of Linguistics in the Art of Transla-
tion:
Some Tools fro m Linguistics for the Analys is and Practice of
Translation, Albany: State University of New York Press .
Mel'Ouk, Igor A. (1978) "Theorie de langage, theorie de traduction', Meta
24(4): 271-302 .
Meschonnic, Henri (1986) 'Alors la traduction chantera', Revue d 'esthetique,
New series, No. 12: 75-90.
Motion, Andrew (1995) 'When Pushkin Comes to Shove or Love', The Ob-
server: Books , 8 January, p. 20.
Mounin, Georges (1963 ) Les problemes theoriques de 10 traduction, Paris :
Gallimard.
157

Translation and Language
Neubert, Albrecht (1978) ' Pragmaticheskie Aspekti Perevoda' (Pragmatic
Aspects of Translation), in Vilen N. Komissarov (ed) Voprosi Teorii
Perevoda v zarubezhnoi lingvistike (Questions of the Theory of Trans-
lation in Foreign Linguistics), Moscow: Mezhdunarodnie otnositelia,
185-202; originally published 1968 in Fremdsprachen: Grundfragen
der Ubersetzungswissenschaft 2: 21-33 .
Neubert, Albrecht (1977) 'Ubersetzungswissenschaft in soziolinguistischer
Sicht', in Otto Kade (ed) Vermittelte Kommunikation, Sprachmittlung,
Translation, Leipzig: VEB , 52-59.
Newmark, Peter (1981) Approaches to Translation, Oxford: Pergamon.
Newmark, Peter (1993) Paragraphs on Translation. Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Newmark, Peter (1996) 'Paragraphs on Translation - 43 ', The Linguist 35(3):
90-93.
Nida, Eugene A. (1964) Toward a Science ofTranslating, Leiden: E. 1. Brill.
Nida, Eugene A. and Charles R. Taber (1969) The Theory and Practice of
Translation, Leiden: E. 1. Brill; reprinted 1974.
Nord, Christiane (1991) Text Analysis in Translation. Theory. Methodology,
and Didactic Applications ofa Modelfor Translation-Oriented TextAnaly-
sis,Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Nord, Christiane (1995) 'Text-Functions in Translation: Titles and Headings
as a Case in Point', Target 7(2): 261-84.
Osgood, Charles E., George 1. Suci and Percy H. Tannenbaum (1957) The
Measurement ofMeaning, Urbana: University ofIllinois Press ; 2nd edition
1967 .
Palmer, Frank R. (1981) Semantics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pergnier, Maurice (1993) Lesfondements sociolinguistiques de la traduction ,
Lille: Presses universitaires de Lille.
Popovic, Anton and Imrich Denes (1977) Translation as Comparison , Nitra:
KLKEM.
Pratchett, Terry (1989) Pyramids, London: Corgi.
Rabassa, Gregory (1984) 'If This be Treason: Translation and its Possibili-
ties', in William Frawley (ed) Translation: Literary, Linguistic and
Philosophical Perspectives, Newmark: University of Delaware Press and
London & Toronto: Associated University Presses.
Rado, Gyorgy (1979) 'Outline of a Systematic Translatology', Babel 25(4):
187-96 .
Reiss, Katharina (1971) Moglichkeiten und Grenzen der Ubersetzungskritik,
Munich: Max Hueber.
Reiss, Katharina (1976) Texttypund Ubersetzungsmethode:Der operative Text,
Kronberg: Scriptor.
Reiss, Katharina and Hans J. Vermeer (1984) Grundlegung einer allgemeinen
Translationstheorie ,Tubingen: Niemeyer.
158

Bibliography
Rener, Frederick M. (1989) Interpretatio: Language and Translation fro m
Cicero to Tytler, Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Retsker, Yakob 1.(1974) Teoria perevoda i perevodcheskaia praktika (Theory
of Translation and Translation Practice), Mo scow: Mezhdunarodnii
otnoshenia.
Richards, Ivor A. (1953) 'Toward a Theory of Translation' , in Arthur F.
Wright (ed) Studies in Chinese Thought, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 147-62 .
Robinson, Douglas (199 1) The Translator 's Turn, Baltimore & London: The
John Hopkins University Press.
Romney, Jonathan (1996) 'The pain in Spain' , The Observer: Books, 21
January, p. 15.
Ross, Nigel J. (1995) 'Dubbing American in Italy ', English Today 41(1): 45-
48.
Sa'Adeddin, MohammedA.A.M. (1990) 'Towards a Viable Applied Linguistic
Theory ofTranslation : An Ethnolinguistic Point ofView '. Bradf ord Occa-
sional Papers, No . 10: 14-45.
Sadock, Jerrold M. and Arnold M. Zwicky (1985) ' Speech Act Distinctions in
Syntax', in Timothy Shopen (ed) Language Typology and Syntactic De-
scription, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 155-96.
Samuelson, Paul A. (1970) Economics, Vol. 1, New York: McGraw Hill, 8th
edition; translated into French by G. Fain as L 'Economique: Introduction
aI 'analyse economique, Paris: Armand Colin, 1972, and into German by
U. Schlieper as Volkswirtschaftslehre: Eine Einfiihrung, Cologne: Bund-
Verlag, 1973.
Saussure, Ferdinand de (1972) Cours de lingu istique generate, Paris: Payot;
originally published 1916.
Schleiermacher, Friedrich (1838) 'Ober die verschiedenen Methoden des
Ubersetzens' , in Hans Joachim Storig (ed) Das Problem des Ubersetzens,
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1963, 38-70.
Searle, John R. (1975) 'Indirect Speech Acts' , in Peter Cole and Jerry L.
Morgan (eds) Syntax and Semantics. Vol. Ill: Speech Acts, New York:
Academic Press, 59-82.
Shveitser, Aleksandr D. (1977) 'Ubersetzung und Soziolinguistik', in O. Kade
(ed) Vermittelte Kommunikation, Sprachmittlung. Translation, Leipzig:VEB,
60-65.
Shveitser, Aleksandr D. (1987) Ubersetzung undLinguistik, Berlin:Akademie;
original title Perevod i Lingvistika, 1973.
Shveitser, Aleksandr D. (1988) Teoria perevoda i ustniy perevod: status,
problemy. aspekty (Theory of Translation and Interpreting: Status, Prob-
lems , Aspects), Moscow: Nauka.
Simeoni, Daniel (1993) 'L'institution dans la langue : lexique et pensee d'Etat ',
TTR 1(1): 171-202.
159

Translation and Language
Slaughter, Frank G. (1960) Puritans in Paradise, London: Hutchinson; trans-
lated by F. de Bardy as Amour aux Bahamas: Les pelerins du paradis,
Paris: Presses de la cite, 1962.
Snell-Hornby, Mary (1988) Translation Studies. An Integrated Approach,
Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Stackelberg, Jurgen von (1971) 'Das Ende der 'belles infideles' - Ein Beitrag
zur franzosischen Ubersetzungsgeschichte', in Karl-Richard Bausch and
Hans Martin Geiger (eds) Interlinguistica. Sprachvergleich und Uberset-
zung. Festschrift zum 60. Geburtstag von Mario Wandruszka, Tubingen:
Max Niemeyer, 585-96.
Stein, Dieter (1980) Theoretische Grundlagen del' Ubersetzungswissenschaft,
Tiibingen: Gunter Narr.
Steiner, George (1975) After Babel: Aspects of language and translation,
Oxford & New York: Oxford Univeristy Press; 2nd edition 1992.
Tirkkonen-Condit, Sonja (1992) 'A Theoretical Account ofTranslation - With-
out Translation Theory?', Target 4(2): 237-45.
Toury, Gideon (1995) Descriptive Translation Studies and Beyond, Amster-
dam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Vazquez-Ayora, Gerardo (1977) Introduccion a la traductologia, Washing-
ton, D.C.: Georgetown University.
Venuti, Lawrence (1995) The Translator's Invisibility: A History of Transla-
tion, London & New York: Routledge.
Vinay, Jean-Paul and Jean Darbelnet (1958) Stylistique comparee du francais
et de I'anglais. Methode de traduction, Paris: Didier.
Vinay, Jean-Paul and Jean Darbelnet (1996) Comparative Stylistics ofFrench
and English. A Methodologyfor Translation, translated and edited by Juan
C. Sager and M.-J. Hamel, Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Wienold, Gotz (1990) 'Typological Aspects of Translating Literary Japanese
into German, II: Syntax and Narrative Technique', Target 2(2): 183-97.
Wilss , Wolfram (1977) Ubersetzungswissenschaft: Probleme und Methoden,
Stuttgart: Klett.
Wilss, Wolfram (1994) 'A Framework for Decision-Making in Translation',
Target 6(2) : 131-50.
Wyle, Niclas von (1478) Reproduced in Adelbert von Keller (ed) (1861)
Translationen von Niclas von Wyle, Stuttgart: Stuttgart Verein No. 57;
reprinted 1967, Hildesheim: G. Olms.
Zimmer, Rudolf(1981) Probleme del' Ubersetzungformbetonter Sprache: ein
Beitrag zur Ubersetzungskritik, Tubingen: Max Niemeyer.
Zaitun, Nik (1994) 'The Translation of Shakespeare in Malaysia', Warwick
Working Papers in Translation. Cross Cultural Transfers, Graduate Stud-
ies Series I: 93-97.
Zukofsky, Celia and Louis Zukofsky (1969) Catullus, London: Cape Goliard
Press.
160


TRANSLATION THEORIES EXPLAINED
Series Editor: Anthony Pym, Spain
ISSN 1365-0513
Titles in the Series
Volume 1: Translating as a Purposeful Activity, Christiane Nord
Volume 2: Translation and Gender, Luise von Flotow
Volume 3: Translation and Language, Peter Fawcett
Volume 4: Translation and Empire, Douglas Robinson
Volume 5: Conference Interpreting, Roderick Jones
Volume 6: Translation and Literary Criticism, Marilyn Gaddis Rose
Volume 7: Translation in Systems, Theo Hermans
Volume 8: Deconstruction and Translation, Kathleen Davis
Volume 9: Can Theory Help Translators?, Andrew Chesterman &
Emma Wagner


