
TRANSLATION—THEORY AND PRACTICE

This page intentionally left blank 

TRANSLATION—
theory and practice:
a historical reader
edited by
DANIEL WEISSBORT
and
ASTRADUR EYSTEINSSON
1

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With oYces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
 Daniel Weissbort and Astradur Eysteinsson 2006
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 2006
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose the same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Data available
Typeset by SPI Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
Printed in Great Britain
on acid-free paper by
Antony Rowe Ltd.,
Chippenham, Wiltshire
ISBN 0–19–871199–9
978–0–19–871199–5
ISBN 0–19–871200–6 (Pbk.)
978–0–19–871200–8 (Pbk.)

PREFACE
The aim of this book is to illuminate the essential activity of translation from a number of
perspectives: historical and contemporary, theoretical and practical. At the same time, the
contents of the present volume speak in many modes and voices to literary and cultural
history, and to cross-cultural relations through the ages. The book draws on several
hundred texts, translations, and texts about translation, ranging from classical antiquity
to the present. Some are reprinted in their entirety, while others are excerpted, and the
editors have supplied notes and introductions. Many of the texts included also themselves
contain examples from translations under discussion, so that on the whole, this volume
pulls together a sizeable world of translation.
For the sake of coherence and due to obvious limits of magnitude, a large part of the
volume focuses on translation into English, although it contains several texts that discuss
translation in general terms, and others that were orginally written in (and concern
translation into) other languages. The volume should be useful for anyone interested in
the history and theory of translation, for what is true of the transfer from one speciWc
language and culture into another may obviously be highly relevant—given important and
interesting diVerences—for other parallel situations.
When we Wrst started working on this project together, we had in mind to put together a
collection of foundational texts in translation studies, from Cicero to around the mid-
twentieth century, including several important prefaces by translators in the English
tradition. As work progressed, the concept started changing. We realized that we did
not want to limit the volume to a canon of a few statements of translation studies as a
theoretical discipline. There were three basic reasons for this.
First, we wanted to bring across to our readers how valuable reXections about transla-
tion took form in contexts of actual translation practice. Some of the most important texts
in the literary history of the English language, for instance the Bible and the Homeric
epics, are translated again and again through the centuries. Hence, it is the need for
translation, and the practice of translation, which opens the gateway between the present
and history. So the sense of translation practice had to be built into the volume, if only by
short examples of the main concern of many of those who have also made important
historical comments on translation.

Second, we wanted to end the historical survey with a collection of recent and
contemporary material in the Weld of translation. Ultimately, this material came to
constitute the largest chapter of the volume, one that was extremely diYcult to select,
since we wanted to provide our readers with an insight into both the vibrant and growing
Weld of translation theory, and at the same time to approach translation studies from a
broad angle, emphasizing, again, the connection between the critical discussion and the
practice of translation (even though we’ve had to restrain the length of examples from
translations).
Third, we felt that limiting our selection to relatively few texts, even though this had the
beneWt of allowing us to reprint most of them as a whole, did not convey the multifari-
ousness, or indeed the complexity, of translation studies as we understand that term. Yet,
the volume must not be allowed to become an oversized collection of short quotations. We
wanted to go for both breadth and depth and this is what we struggled with for a long
time. The Wnal product contains several texts that appear in their entirety, while we have
selected what we felt are the most salient parts of others. Many of the entries focus on a
single translator and/or critic, and some of them are presented in more extensive ‘collages’
(for instance Dryden, Pound, and Nabokov), a mode of selection and introduction we
have also used to cover the translation activity in certain periods.
We put some of these collages in charge of specialists in the respective Welds, and we
should very much like to thank these colleagues for their contributions. They are Jonathan
Wilcox, Jane Stevenson, David Hopkins, Ronnie Apter, Jenefer Coates, and Vinay
Dharwadker. Most of the entries were prepared jointly by the two editors in what was a
long-standing and enjoyable collaboration. In some cases, however, entries were largely
selected and introduced by one of us. Thus, Daniel Weissbort prepared ‘Classical
Latin and Early Christian Latin Translation’, ‘Late Tudor and Early Jacobean Translation’,
‘The Authorized (King James) Version of the Bible’, ‘Anne Dacier’, ‘Alexander Pope’,
‘Samuel Johnson’, ‘Five Nineteenth-Century Translators’, ‘Martin Buber and Franz
Rosenzweig’, ‘Ethnopoetics: Translation of the Oral and of Oral Performance’, ‘Transla-
tion of Verse Form’, and ‘Ted Hughes’; while Astradur Eysteinsson prepared ‘Renaissance
Latin Translation in England’, ‘Johann Wolfgang von Goethe’, ‘Friedrich Schleiermacher’,
‘Victorian Translation and Criticism’, ‘Walter Benjamin’, ‘Jirˇı´ Levy´’, ‘George Steiner’,
‘Mary Snell-Hornby’, ‘Gayatri Spivak’, ‘Talal Asad’, and ‘Eva HoVman’. However, the
shaping and presentation of many other entries, as well as the editing of the volume as
whole, was our joint eVort.
This is not only a book about translators—it is also one in which we had to rely on the
help of a number of translators who provided valuable texts: special thanks go to Louis
Kelly, but also to Stavros Deligiorgis, Jennifer Tanner, Norma Rinsler, and Gottskalk
vi
preface

Jensson. We thank Gardar Baldvinsson for scanning and other assistance in the
preparation of the manuscript, Susan Benner for helping us with the preparation of
some texts, Agnes Vogler for her work on the index, and Theo Hermans for his advice
concerning the inclusion of material regarding Renaissance Latin translation in England.
We are, last but not least, deeply grateful to our wives,Valentina Polukhina and Anna
Johannsdottir, for all their help, advice, and encouragement in the preparation of this
book.
D.W. and A.E.
preface
vii

CONTENTS
General Introduction
1
Babel
8
PART I. FROM ANTIQUITY TO MODERN TIMES
1. From Cicero to Caxton
17
1.1.
Introduction
17
1.2.
Classical Latin and Early Christian Latin Translation
20
1.3.
Old English Translation (Jonathan Wilcox)
34
1.4.
John of Trevisa
47
1.5.
William Caxton
51
2. From the Reformation and the Renaissance
to the Eighteenth Century
55
2.1.
Introduction
55
2.2. Martin Luther
57
2.3.
William Tyndale
68
2.4. Estienne Dolet
73
2.5.
Joachim du Bellay
77
2.6. Late Tudor and Early Jacobean Translation
81
2.7. Renaissance Latin Translation in England
100
2.8. The Catholic Bible in England
110
2.9. The Authorized (King James) Version of the Bible
115
2.10. Sir John Denham
121
2.11. Abraham Cowley
124
2.12. Women Translators from the Sixteenth to the Eighteenth Century
(Jane Stevenson)
128

2.13. John Dryden (David Hopkins)
144
2.14.
Anne Dacier
160
2.15.
Alexander Pope
166
2.16. Samuel Johnson
174
2.17. William Cowper
183
2.18.
Alexander Fraser Tytler
188
3. The Nineteenth Century
195
3.1.
Introduction
195
3.2.
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
198
3.3.
Friedrich Schleiermacher
205
3.4.
Victorian Translation and Criticism
210
3.5.
Six Nineteenth-Century Translators
241
3.6.
James Fitzmaurice-Kelly
258
PART II: THE TWENTIETH CENTURY
4. From Pound to Nabokov
271
4.1.
Introduction
271
4.2. Ezra Pound (Ronnie Apter)
274
4.3.
Constance Garnett
290
4.4. Walter Benjamin
297
4.5.
Martin Buber and Franz Rosenzweig
310
4.6. Jorge Luis Borges
323
4.7. Roman Jakobson
330
4.8.
Jirˇı´ Levy´
337
4.9. Eugene A. Nida
346
4.10. Robert Lowell
352
4.11. Stanley Burnshaw
360
4.12. Laura Bohannan
366
4.13. Vladimir Nabokov (Jenefer Coates)
376
contents
ix

5. Recent and Contemporary Writings
393
5.1.
Introduction
393
5.2. George Steiner
396
5.3.
James S Holmes
406
5.4. Itamar Even-Zohar
429
5.5.
Andre´ Lefevere
435
5.6. Mary Snell-Hornby
443
5.7. Ethnopoetics: Translation of the Oral and of
Oral Performance—Dennis Tedlock and Jerome Rothenberg
452
5.8.
Louis and Celia Zukofsky
458
5.9. Translation of Verse Form
460
5.10.
A. K. Ramanujan (Vinay Dharwadker)
476
5.11. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak
486
5.12. Talal Asad
494
5.13. Eva HoVman
502
5.14. Gregory Rabassa
507
5.15. Suzanne Jill Levine
512
5.16. Ted Hughes
521
5.17. Douglas Robinson
534
5.18. Lawrence Venuti
546
5.19. Susan Bassnett
558
5.20. Everett Fox
562
5.21. John Felstiner
569
5.22. W. S. Merwin
582
5.23. Edwin Morgan
585
5.24. Seamus Heaney
597
Postface Daniel Weissbort
609
Acknowledgements
617
Select Bibliography
625
x
contents

This page intentionally left blank 

NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
Editors:
Daniel Weissbort (b. 1935) is Emeritus Professor of Comparative Literature at the
University of Iowa; Honorary Professor in the Centre for Translation and Compara-
tive Cultural Studies, University of Warwick; Research Fellow, English Department,
King’s College, London University. He has published poetry of his own and transla-
tions of poetry, primarily from Russian. Publications include a number of anthologies,
most recently An Anthology of Contemporary Russian Women’s Poetry (with Valentina
Polukhina; University of Iowa Press and Carcanet, 2006) and a translational memoir
of Joseph Brodsky, From Russian with Love (Anvil, 2004). His Selected Translations of
Ted Hughes (Faber) is to appear in 2006 and a book on Ted Hughes and translation is
forthcoming from OUP. With the late Ted Hughes he founded the magazine, Modern
Poetry in Translation, which he edited from 1965 to 2003.
Astradur Eysteinsson (b. 1957) is Professor of Comparative Literature at the University of
Iceland (Reykjavik). His publications include co-translations of works by Franz Kafka
and Max Frisch into Icelandic, several articles in the general area of literary, cultural,
and translation studies, various editorial projects, and three books: The Concept of
Modernism (Cornell UP 1990), Tvimœli (on translation and translation studies,
University of Iceland Press 1996) and Umbrot (on literature and modernity, University
of Iceland Press 1999).
Scholars who provided the editors with new translations or who edited some of the
individual sections of the volume:
Ronnie Apter is Professor of English at Central Michigan University. Her publications
include 20 performable opera translations and the books Digging for the Treasure:
Translation after Pound (1984; 1987) and a bilingual edition of the Love Songs of
Bernart de Ventadorn in Occitan and English: Sugar and Salt (1999).
Jenefer Coates teaches literary translation and comparative literature at Middlesex Uni-
versity, London. She has edited various journals including In Other Words for the

Translators Association. Besides translating from French and Russian, she also writes
on literary subjects, and is completing a book on intertextuality in Vladimir Nabokov,
focusing on his use of medieval sources.
Stavros Deligiorgis, a University of Iowa professor emeritus, has published articles on the
pre-Socratics, on the Hellenistic and Byzantine romances, and on Chaucer and
Boccaccio. Deligiorgis has Englished contemporary Greek fiction (by Thanassis
Valtinos; with Jane Assimakopoulos), Romanian poetry by Tristan Tzara, Eugene
Ionesco, and Paul Celan, and has regularly participated in performance and inter-
media art projects. Currently, he teaches in the Graduate Translation Studies Program
of the University of Athens, Greece.
Vinay Dharwadker is Professor of Languages and Cultures of Asia at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, where he teaches Indian literatures, literary studies, and modern
theory. A poet, painter, and scholar, he translates poetry from Hindi, Marathi,
Sanskrit, Punjabi, and Urdu into English. His publications include The Oxford
Anthology of Modern Indian Poetry (co-edited, 1994), The Collected Essays of A. K.
Ramanujan (general editor, 1999), and Kabir: The Weaver’s Songs (2003; 2005).
David Hopkins is Professor of English Literature at the University of Bristol. His chief
research interests are in the English poetry of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
and in the reception of Classical literature in England. Among his recent publications
are (ed., with Paul Hammond) The Poems of John Dryden (5 vols., Longman Anno-
tated English Poets) and (ed. with Stuart Gillespie) The Oxford History of Literary
Translation in English, Vol. 3: 1660–1790.
Gottskalk Jensson is a lecturer in Comparative Literature at the University of Iceland.
He is a specialist in Classical Literature (Greek and Roman) and his publications
include The Recollections of Encolpius: The Satyrica of Petronius as Milesian Fiction
(2004).
Louis Kelly is Emeritus Professor of Translation History and Theory at the University of
Ottawa and Senior Member of Darwin College, Cambridge. His publications include
Twenty-five Centuries of Language Teaching (1969) and The True Interpreter (1979).
Norma Rinsler is Emeritus Professor of French at King’s College London, and was
Managing Editor of Modern Poetry in Translation, 1992–2003. She is currently collab-
orating on the 5-volume translation of Paul Vale´ry’s Cahiers/Notebooks (2000 – ).
Jane Stevenson is Professor of Latin at the University of Aberdeen. She has written
extensively about early modern women Latinists. Her publications include Women
notes on contributors
xiii

Latin Poets: Language, Gender, and Authority, from Antiquity to the Eighteenth Century
(2005).
Jennifer Tanner has a B.A. in German Literature from Oberlin College and a M.F.A. in
Literary Translation from the University of Iowa. She is currently working as a
freelance translator of German and Russian.
Jonathan Wilcox is Professor of English at the University of Iowa. He is a specialist in
Anglo-Saxon Language and Literature and his publications include Ælfric’s Prefaces
(1994; 1996) and Wulfstan Texts and Other Homiletic Materials (2000), along with
numerous essays on Anglo-Saxon literature and culture.
But clearly there are many more contributors to this book, from Babel to present-day
Britain.
xiv
notes on contributors

GENERAL INTRODUCTION
Astradur Eysteinsson and Daniel Weissbort
How do works of literature and scholarship acquire international status? How have ideas
and theories, learning and religion, historical and practical knowledge, traversed the globe?
How have various transactions between groups and nations with diVerent customs and
conditions been facilitated? How do we learn of what has transpired in distant places?
To a large extent by building linguistic bridges across the channels that divide language
spheres and cultural regions, whether by the rewriting of messages and works in another
tongue, or through other interventions by individuals who possess knowledge in more
than one language and can therefore act as cultural mediators.
In the empires of Antiquity, interpreters were essential intermediaries in trade and the
various matters of state. With the onset of printing, some of this work was transferred to
translators, who also came to play a key role in disseminating, and passing on to later
generations, the documents that were to form the canons of literature, learning, and
religion, works such as the Homeric epics, the Bible, and Greek drama, philosophy, and
history, to mention obvious examples in the Western tradition.
Translation has been instrumental in the formation of writing and literary culture in
every European language (‘European’ here refers to more than the geographical area of
Europe, as deWned today). Indeed, the history of international contact and cultural
development, within and beyond Europe, can be traced by noting the routes of transla-
tion. Translation is still of the utmost importance in the aVairs of a world that has gone
through the rapid technological development called modernization, which furthermore
has enhanced international relations to the point where people feel they can legitimately
talk of ‘globalization’. While this development is far from having reached all parts of the
world in equal measure, it is true that science, media, entertainment, commerce, and the
many forms of international relations embrace the globe so extensively now, that transla-
tion becomes an almost overwhelming issue, indeed a ‘problem’ (the notion of the
‘problem of translation’ has a long and colourful history). Many see a possible solution
in the adoption of a single global language, and it seems that English is well on its way to

taking on this international role, as Latin did in the very diVerent circumstances of the
Late Middle Ages and Renaissance.
But the notion of a global culture in a single language is not a promising prospect;
indeed, it is, perhaps fortunately, virtually inconceivable. Vital cultural expressions always
involve both the local and the global; the problem of translation is inherent in them, and
therefore also in their dispersion and historical delivery. In the world of literature, and in
many domains of knowledge and culture, the need for translation is as great as ever. It is a
need for trails of understanding between cultures that express themselves in diVerent
tongues. The blazing of such trails also facilitates understanding within cultures which
may be more internally divisive than is apparent. The discovery of the other within
ourselves is another by-product of translation.
The aim of this volume is to illuminate translation from a number of perspectives: historical
and contemporary, theoretical and practical. The texts are drawn from a long stretch of
Western history; from Homeric and biblical texts, via the translation of these and other texts
at various times, via numerous commentaries on translation by Wgures like Cicero, King
Alfred, John Dryden, and George Eliot, to translations as well as critical discussions by
contemporary authors. The main focus of the anthology is on literary translation, and hence
on the art as well as the craft of translation. But this does not imply that we are insisting upon
hard and fast lines between literary and other forms of translation, be they scholarly, technical,
or pragmatic in any other sense. Literary translation—as much as literature itself—draws on
experience from diverse Welds of human experience, and its discursive operations overlap with
those of other kinds of translation. Literature combines cultural and aesthetic values, and
this makes its translation so diYcult and challenging, but also so urgent. It is because of this
concentrated linguistic expression that poetry has so often been seen as the test case of
translation—to the point where it has been deWned as that which is not translatable. Yet, a
great deal of poetry has been and continues to be translated, and it is important to emphasize
that the lessons of literary translation are of course also relevant to other kinds of translation,
although there they may often be downplayed by pressing contextual and practical
concerns—these, of course, may also operate with regard to literary translation. Literary
translation, as much as any other translation activity, takes place in concrete socio-cultural
contexts, where a suYcient need has been felt to transport a linguistic product from one
language to another. As George Steiner has pointed out, arguments against verse translation
are arguments against all translation.1
1 ‘Attacks on the translation of poetry are simply the barbed edge of the general assertion that no language can be
translated without fundamental loss. Formally and substantively the same points can be urged in regard to prose.’
2
general introduction

But literary texts of course also demand particular attention to language itself, its
resonances and references, its historical depth as well as its personal relevance, and this
gives an extra dimension to the ‘problem’ of the translation. This is obviously not only true
of literature in the narrow sense, but also in a broader one, not excluding religious,
mythological, and oratorical discourse, or various texts of philosophy, history, and other
humanistic disciplines. Translation has to attend to the language and cultural heritage of
such works, for it also has the function of extending that heritage, of lending it another
kind of historical depth, of transforming it into a cross-cultural tradition.
‘Translation’ is a concept that is missing in Raymond Williams’s useful book Keywords. It
would, quite appropriately, have come right after ‘Tradition’. However, it is, to an extent,
embodied in Williams’s entry on ‘tradition’, a word that ‘came into English in C14 from fw
tradicion, oF [Old French], traditionem, L[atin], from rw tradere, L—to hand over or
deliver. The Latin noun had the senses of (i) delivery, (ii) handing down knowledge,
(iii) passing on a doctrine, (iv) surrender or betrayal’.2 Translation, too, hands over or
delivers, and it is instrumental in passing on and handing down documents deemed
worthy of such delivery. Interestingly, the notion of betrayal is also very much a part of the
history of the concept of translation, the proverbial truth being that the translator is a traitor
(‘traduttore traditore’), that he or she is constitutionally incapable of delivering the original.
In a recent report, for instance, in the Guardian newspaper (Saturday, 12 June 2004, p. 4),
on the dropping of Latin and Greek by the largest examination board in the UK, a teacher
of Classics, no less, is quoted as saying—quite casually one feels, and not fearing contra-
diction: ‘And it is not enough to trust those who translate, for he who translates, not only
explains but corrupts.’ Williams says of the ‘ceremony, duty and respect’ often associated
with tradition: ‘Considering only how much has been handed down to us, and how various
it actually is, this, in its own way, is both a betrayal and a surrender.’3
Yet, as Williams points out elsewhere, tradition is always ‘selective’,4 this also being true
of translation. Moreover, the selection process, in other words canon-formation, that
forms the basis of literary traditions, is—unless we are working strictly within national
borders—dependent upon translations, which secure the ‘survival’ of the work and attend
to its ‘ripening’ process, as Walter Benjamin puts it in his well-known article ‘Die Aufgabe
George Steiner, After Babel: Aspects of Language and Translation, (3rd edn.: Oxford and New York: Oxford University
Press, 1998), 255.
2 Raymond Williams, Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society (London: Fontana, 1976), 268–9.
3 Ibid. 269.
4 Raymond Williams, Marxism and Literature (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977), 115.
general introduction
3

des U¨ bersetzers’ (‘The Task of the Translator’).5 Ideas such as ‘Western tradition’,
‘European literature’, not to mention ‘World Literature’, are unthinkable in the absence
of translation, and, indeed, of the tradition of translation. More practically: one does well
to remember that most readers of most if not all the best-known works of Western
literature read these works in translation.
The present anthology exempliWes the history and tradition of translation, for instance
by highlighting key texts that have been handed down in Western literature through the
eVorts of translators undeterred by the fact that these texts have been translated many
times before. Indeed, many of them are eager to attempt precisely those texts, to remake
them, as it were, in the shape and texture of their own age.
Such translation—along with the translation of more recent or even contemporary
foreign literature—is obviously a challenge to original writing and is bound to make an
impression on its literary culture. Yet this crucial interaction, and the resulting hybrid
character of literary history, tends to be left out of documented literary histories or dealt
with in a cursory fashion, mostly because they so often work within national borders,
identifying national canons and traditions. Still, the situation is changing as a result of a
less exclusive concern with one’s own culture and of the eVorts of many translation
activists, such as the late James S Holmes, who titled a talk given to the Translation
Programme at the University of Iowa: ‘Studying Translations, an underdeveloped Country
in the World of Literary Scholarship’. Literary history, as we know it, has been very much a
prodigy of Romanticism, cultivating and elevating national legacies.
The historical spectrum of this book, therefore, even though it dwells extensively on a
number of canonical texts, challenges canonical literary history in most of its documented
forms. The historical focus, as we move out of the Classical period, is on the English
language tradition. But when this tradition is viewed from the present perspective, even
Shakespeare is no longer as obviously central as he often seems to be—or at least not in the
same way. Rather he appears as a writer of transcendent genius who rides a wave of
creativity in the English language itself, as it was beginning to beneWt from an age of
proliWc translation. And of course he makes his mark on an English literary culture, which
will avidly continue, however, to seek the best way of bringing Homer, Ovid, Virgil,
Dante, Beowulf, the Bible, into the living language. The more one familiarizes oneself
with this tradition, the clearer it becomes that English possesses a rich history of transla-
tion, or what may be called a strong legacy of translation culture, one that has buttressed
and inspired a great deal of linguistic creativity through the centuries. The poet and
5 Walter Benjamin’s essay is included in Sect. 4.4, below.
4
general introduction

translator Charles Tomlinson, in his introduction to The Oxford Book of Verse in English
Translation, draws attention to ‘a largely forgotten literature’.6 Fourteen years before,
George Steiner, in his innovative Penguin Book of Modern Verse Translation, focuses on
the work of translators, without whom, as he puts it, ‘we would live in arrogant parishes
bordered by silence’.7
It is beyond our capacity to do justice to the multiform nature of English, a world language
or related world languages or group of related languages. It might even be said that English
has become a language pre-eminently of translation, that is, of diVusion and international
communication. (Latin was a means of international communication, but did not have the
strong basis of a Wrst language that English has.) In a number of countries English exists in
a close relationship with another language (Canada, South Africa, India). These are very
important sites of translation touched upon in this book only in the case of India. Edwin
Morgan’s translations into Scots, rather than ‘standard’ English, has to stand for a range of
such possibilities, now that the very notion of a standard English has become problem-
atical, this in its turn allowing for a renewed and non-pedantic, so to speak, interest in
foreignizing rather than the more traditional domesticating translation. The book also
contains a number of important texts from other languages, from Classical times to the
present, which have proved important for the translation debate in English. While a
universal textbook might be desirable, this too is simply beyond our means.
A further word about English as the global lingua franca for many purposes, scholarly,
scientiWc, commercial, political. There are, of course, many Englishes today, which, however,
are similar enough not yet to require by and large the work of translators to ensure their
mutual intelligibility, even if the possibilities of misunderstanding are considerable. It is partly
because of its multiform character that English, with its tendency to regard itself as self-
suYcient, is also suVering from a paucity of translations into it, whereas, as noted, the
language’s richness in, say, the Renaissance was largely due to the voluminous importations
via translation. As Ezra Pound comments, in his essay on ‘Elizabethan Classicists’, (1917):
‘A great age of literature is perhaps always a great age of translation; or follows it.’8 The present
volume argues, by its very existence, for an inclusive approach to the literary legacies of the
world, for greater interaction between them, especially in respect to the dominant language,
English. Cross-cultural communication involves translation; translation implies cross-
6 Charles Tomlinson, ‘Introduction: The Poet as Translator’, The Oxford Book of Verse in English Translation,
chosen and edited by C. Tomlinson (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980), p. xvii.
7 Steiner, ‘Introduction’, in The Penguin Book of Modern Verse Translation, ed. by George Steiner (Harmonds-
worth: Penguin, 1966), p. 25.
8 Cf. the Ezra Pound ‘collage’ in Sect. 4.2, below.
general introduction
5

cultural communication; and translation is the principal arena in which diVerences may be
explored, appreciated, and interpreted or understood. The fact that English seems almost self-
suYcient at this time disguises the fact that it is also permeated with other language traditions.
The present volume, thus, centres on English not in a spirit of chauvinism, but rather the
reverse, seeing it as a language of translation.
The link between theory or reXection on translation and the actual practice of it has been
emphasized throughout. But valuable insights into the nature and act of translation can
also be found in various texts that approach the crossing from one language to another in a
more parabolic or allegorical manner, texts that would not be placed under the rubric of
translation criticism in any conventional sense. The biblical story of the Tower of Babel is
one such text. In attempting to make room for this extra dimension of translation ‘studies’,
we have included a few texts (by Borges, Laura Bohannan, and Eva HoVman) that
illustrate the joys and anxieties of moving across language borders, of striving to represent
something from one culture within another.
The primary writers on translation, historically, have been the translators themselves. As
noted by Peter France, editor of The Oxford Guide to Literature in English Translation:
‘until quite recently, with few exceptions, it [i.e. theory] was the work of practitioners, some
of them eminent ones. Many of the most famous texts are not so much academic treatises
as short personal statements.’9 These statements often take the form of more or less
authoritative prefatorial comments. We have also attempted, with the twentieth century,
to represent work of writers who might be described as primarily theorists or critics. Even
in these cases, though, the theoretical comments were in part drawn from or accompanied
by actual translation. Thus Walter Benjamin’s pivotal essay ‘The Task of the Translator’
featured Wrst as an introduction to his 1923 translations of Baudelaire’s ‘Tableaux parisiens’
into German. More recently, both Lawrence Venuti, whose comments on the post-
colonial developments in translation thought have been inXuential, and Douglas
Robinson, an equally proliWc writer on the subject, are also translators of prose and poetry,
the one from Italian the other primarily from Finnish. James S Holmes, who was among
the pioneers in the emerging discipline of translation studies, was also a major poetry
translator (from Dutch). In view of the intimate relationship between theory and practice
in so many cases, we have sought to provide excerpts from actual translations (e.g.
Benjamin’s translation of a Baudelaire poem into German) as well as more general
statements on the translation process or the aims of translation.
9 Peter France, ‘Theoretical Issues’, in France (ed.), The Oxford Guide to Literature in English Translation
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 4.
6
general introduction

Since canonical works are constantly retranslated, we have selected signiWcant passages
and represented them in several translations: for instance, from Genesis, the story of the
Tower of Babel, the informing myth of translation, and the passage from Homer’s
Odyssey, used by Ezra Pound to introduce his Cantos; also excerpts from Aeschylus’
Agamemnon, from Seneca, Juvenal, Ovid, Beowulf, Racine’s Phe`dre, and so forth. Com-
mon ground is thus established between individual translators, such as Chapman, Pope,
Dryden, Johnson, Browning, Pound, Hughes, and so between diVerent periods of literary
history. A history of translation could indeed be written in terms of translations of Homer
from Chaucer to, Logue, say—as indeed, George Steiner in eVect does in his Penguin
Homer in English (1996). Considerations of space have obliged us to be highly selective and
to abbreviate many documents, but the grouping of related translators in ‘collages’ will we
hope help contextualize their work, drawing attention to the ambience, the cultural-
political conditions under which certain developments took place, certain contradictions
became apparent. The numerous entries—both the ‘collages’ and the sections highlighting
a single translator and/or translation critic—vary a great deal, both in their content,
structure, and introductory material. This variety, so the editors hope, will facilitate the
reader’s appreciation of the rich mosaic of the tradition of translation which is so much a
part of literary and cultural history.
general introduction
7

Babel
The Hebrew Bible and Translation
The Bible is the single most important and most translated text in Western history and
culture. Seen as a unifying work and functioning as the basis of organized religion in the
West, its translation has often manifested cultural and ideological diversity. The very idea
of translating the Bible, ‘the Word of God’, from the source languages into the vernacular
languages has of course led to extensive even deadly controversy. The translation into Latin
by St Jerome, known as the Vulgate, was for centuries the oYcial text of the Catholic
Church and continued often to be the preferred source for Catholic translators, taking
precedence even over the original languages (Hebrew, Aramaic, Greek). The ongoing
translation of the Bible, whether directly from the source languages or from the Vulgate—
later, Luther’s German translation served virtually as an ‘original’ for some Bible
translators—inevitably reXected cultural and linguistic diversity.
The story of this process is, in a sense, contained within the Bible itself, in the Genesis
account of the Tower of Babel (Genesis 11: 1–9). This may be regarded as, perhaps, the key
myth of translation; clearly, if there were only one human language, there would be no
need for translation to facilitate communication between human beings variously located.
Of course, since it is God who divides humanity by creating a multiplicity of languages,
the attempt to overcome the resulting divisions through translation is evidence of an
understandable but sacrilegious desire to return to a condition in which it is practical to
consider building a tower! Hence the sense of taboo-breaking that, according to some
writers on the subject, is attendant on any act of translation, and hence also the sense of
unifying humanity, even in its rich diversity, through the act of translation.
The Babel story is a kind of leitmotif of this volume, and it seems Wtting to present it in
several translations. The source text, in Hebrew, is given below with an interlinear
translation into English (Hebrew, it should be remembered, is read from right to left and
the interlinear version, of course, is also to be so read). This is followed by an ancient Greek
version, which is part of the Wrst and very important translation, into Greek, of the Jewish
Bible, a translation known as the Septuagint. Our readers, thus thrown headlong into the
world of translation, are also given two English renderings of the Septuagint Babel story;
a mid-nineteenth-century one by Sir Lancelot Brenton, and a new, previously unpublished
one by Stavros Deligiorgis, who has also written an introductory note to his translation.
An account of the Septuagint, according to which seventy-two scholars produced iden-
tical versions, certain indication of divine intervention, can be found in the entry on Philo
Iudaeus (p. 23–4). The Vulgate (Latin) version of the Babel story may be found on p. 113–14,
along with the Catholic Douay-Reims translation, which is to a large extent based on the
Latin. Other versions may be found on pp. 43–6, 66–7, 72, 119–20, 321–2, 351, and 568.
8
babel

Genesis 11: 1–9: The Interlinear Literal Translation of the Hebrew Old Testament, trans.
and ed. George Ricker Berry (Genesis and Exodus) (Hinds and Noble Edition, 1897)
babel
9

The Greek text: Genesis 11: 1–9, ed. and trans. Sir Lancelot C. L. Brenton, The
Septuagint with Apocrypha: Greek and English (London: Bagster and Sons, 1851)
And all the earth was one lip, and there was one language to all. 2And it came to pass as
they moved from the east, they found a plain in the land of Senaar, and they dwelt there.
3And a man said to his neighbour, Come, let us make bricks and bake them with Wre.
And the brick was to them for stone, and their mortar was bitumen. 4And they said,
Come, let us build to ourselves a city and tower, whose top shall be to heaven, and let us
make to ourselves a name, before we are scattered abroad upon the face of all the earth.5
And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the sons of men built. 6And
the Lord said, Behold, there is one race, and one lip of all, and they have begun to do this,
and now nothing shall fail from them of all that they may have undertaken to do. 7Come,
and having gone down let us there confound their tongue, that they may not understand
each the voice of his neighbour. 8And the Lord scattered them thence over the face of all
the earth, and they left oV building the city and the tower. 9On this account its name was
called Confusion, because there the Lord confounded the languages of all the earth, and
thence the Lord scattered them upon the face of all the earth.
10
babel

The Septuagint
stavros deligiorgis
The greatest human accomplishment in the Weld of translation may well be the scholarly
eVort of hundreds of bilingual individuals who, between approximately 250 bce and 1200
ce, translated almost two thousand Sanscrit Buddhist treatises into Chinese. Neither the
vast diVerences separating the two languages nor the diVerences between the two cultures
stood in the way of the eVective, purposeful work (in equal doses of translation and
transcendence) that changed the East Asian landscape, on either side of China and India—
including Mongolia and Japan—to the philosophical and religious space we recognize
today.
By sheer coincidence during approximately the same historical times similar world-
changing events were taking place in the Eastern Mediterranean. The languages and the
civilizations in question were Hebrew and Greek. They were bracketed, if not quite
bridged, by the able, authoritative ‘Seventy-two’ translators—according to the early
testimonium, the Epistle of Aristeas (c.150 bce)—who travelled from Jerusalem to Hellen-
istic Alexandria, possibly on a royal commission, during the reign of Ptolemy Philadelphus
(c.285 bc). Contrary to widespread opinion, the Jews of Alexandria would not need a
translation of the Bible after being dominated by the successors of Alexander of Macedon
for only thirty-Wve years. Jews who had been under foreign domination in other parts of
the known world for much longer periods of time were not known to have undertaken
translations of their Scriptures. The Epistle of Aristeas records Demetrius Phalereus—like
any self-respecting chief librarian—expressed an interest in Wlling gaps in his ‘special
collections’ and also in the conservation and linguistic accessibility of his acquisitions. A
direct quotation from the Epistle makes clear that the reasons for the translation of the
Bible were purely intrinsic.
The Books of the Law of the Jews, with some few others, are wanting. For it happens that
these books are written in the Hebrew script and language, but, according to the evidence
of the experts, have been somewhat carelessly committed to writing and are not in their
original form; for they have never had the beneWt of royal attention. It is important that
these books, duly corrected, should Wnd a place in your library, because this legislation, in
as much as it is divine, is of philosophical importance and of innate integrity.
The legendary ‘Seventy’ translators had to face, we must assume, texts thick with
theological, legal, literary, and political concepts for which the Greek they were translating
into had no counterpart. Still, the manner in which the Greek language was mined for
babel
11

words, phrases, and even the retaining of key Hebrew terms in transliteration, is nothing
short of an extended tour de force. The end result managed to communicate, if not the
precise lexical and syntactic elements of the Hebrew, at least the tone of sublimity and of
the sacred associations that the originals as a whole evoked.
The Epistle of Aristeas was the Wrst to mention the enthusiastic approval of the Jewish
community of Alexandria when the task was completed. Later Jewish intellectuals of the
stature of Josephus and Philo Judaeus held the Septuagint in such high regard they did not
hesitate, in their turn, to amplify and elaborate upon Aristeas’ original, ‘miraculous’report.
Early Christian Church Fathers followed suit. They expanded upon Aristeas’s themes just
as Josephus and Philo had done before them even as they were discovering that the
numberless quotations of the Hebrew Bible incorporated in the Gospels and the Epistles
of Paul were free as well as literal adaptations of the Septuagint.
Later Jewish communities were eventually to distance themselves from the Septuagint.
It was compared to a blasphemy as grievous as the worship of the Golden Calf (Sepher
Torah, 1. 8), the divine displeasure indicated by the plunging of the Earth into three days of
unrelieved darkness (Megillath Taanith, Book of Fasts, Wrst century ce).
The progressive grounding of the Christian liturgy upon the text of the Septuagint, on
the other hand, contributed to its being considered a holy text, and one which other
languages would want to approximate through translation. The Arabic, Ethiopic, Arme-
nian, Coptic, and Georgian versions, to mention but a few, were based on the Septuagint.
(Augustine of Hippo was so happy with it that he thought Jerome’s project of going
directly to the Hebrew for his Latin Vulgate to be redundant.)
As a Wnal note we might add that about a thousand years after the Alexandrian drafting
of the Septuagint, Greece, and especially the northern city of Thessaloniki, was to become
the site of a second map-altering event, comparable in importance to the translation of
the Sanskrit scriptures into Chinese. It was the conversion, in the ninth century ce, of the
Southern and Eastern Slavic nations to Christianity; the translation of scriptures (by Cyril
and Methodius), becoming once again the instrument to that end.
Babel: What Greeks Read Between Some Septuagint Lines
At Babel the post-diluvial God who had promised never to destroy humanity again
appears to have noticed a condition that had escaped his earlier wrath: through language
humanity could still become one, a creature bigger than its perishable parts. It could
overcome its post-lapsarian limitations, in other words, and perhaps even its mortality!
The ability of a particular group to communicate with any other group in an unmediated
12
babel

manner is summarily shattered in the same spirit as the removal of the ‘exceeding
wickedness’ of humanity had been dealt with through the Xood. Key to the story of the
confusion of tongues at Babel is God’s perception that human beings would be able to
achieve absolutely anything. In paraphrase the Greek of the Septuagint puts it in terrible,
litotic language: ‘Nothing that they will set out to do will be impossible to them.’
Apart from the occurence of a very familiar universal Xood in the opening sections of
Plato’s Laws, the divine judgement against possible hubris in the human undertaking that
presumes to reach the seat of the heavenly powers would not have escaped Greek
audiences. Plato’s dialogue Protagoras also dealt with a mythic past in which the primordial
human beings began pulling together and joining with one another in order to achieve the
mechanisms of self-preservation that the gods had failed to impart to them as they did to
all the other animals at the time of the creation.
Genesis 11: 1–9: The Septuagint, translated from the Greek by Stavros Deligiorgis
the entire earth used to be one lip
and one voice to all
it happened
as they moved from the east
they found level ground in the land of Sennaar
and they made their home there
every man urged his neighbour ‘come
let us make mud bricks
and let us bake them with Wre’
the mudbricks had bec0me to them like stone
asphalt serving for clay
and they said ‘come let us build ourselves a city
and a tower
the head of which will reach up to heaven
and let us make ourselves a name
before we are dispersed upon the face
of the whole earth’
and the Lord came down to see the city and the tower
that the sons of men had built
and the Lord said
‘here is a single nation and one lip to everybody
babel
13

and they have begun making this
now nothing that they will set out to do will be impossible to them
let us therefore go down
let us confuse their tongue right there
so no one will be able hear his neighbour’s voice’
and the Lord dispersed them from that place
upon the face of the whole earth
and they stopped building the town
and the tower
which is why its name was called Confusion
because that is where the Lord confused the lips
of the whole earth
and it was from there the Lord God dispersed them
upon the face of the whole earth
14
babel

part i
from antiquity to
modern times

This page intentionally left blank 

chapter 1
FROM CICERO TO CAXTON
1.1 Introduction
The English translation tradition, in its earliest manifestations, draws on Classical prece-
dent, mainly on the Classical Latin translation, primarily from the Greek, as well as, of
course, on Early Christian Latin Translation from the Scriptures, the Hebrew, Aramaic of
the Hebrew Bible and from the Greek of the Gospels.
Clear and forceful as were the Roman writers (Cicero, Horace, Quintilian), their legacy
was far from unambiguous and indeed the same oft-quoted remarks or statements of
principle were mobilized in support of apparently contradictory positions. The most
striking example perhaps is Cicero’s famous dictum (in respect to his translation of the
two most prominent Ancient Greek orators) promoting sense-for-sense rather than word-
for-word translation. This ‘free’ approach becomes also a defence of ad verbum Wdelity to
the original, since it is taken to be distinct from literary imitation, a` la Romaine. The
‘Classical Latin and Early Christian Latin Translations’ collage (Sect. 1.2, below) gives a
panoramic view of these developments and controversies.
Nevertheless, while the numerous defensive or aggressive prefaces by translators are
indication of strong opposition to Ciceronian freedom, the sense-for-sense approach
prevailed, at least as far as non-Scriptural texts were concerned. This is particularly true
of a period in which, as in Roman times, a national culture was being constructed,
asserting itself, of course, in many ways, but signiWcantly also in the naturalizing (the
‘Englishing’) of canonical works of Western literature.
With the Scriptures, it was a somewhat diVerent story. The Septuagint or Alexandrian
Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible (c.285 bc), intended perhaps for the use of the
Hellenistic Jews of Alexandria, was by legend held to have been completed in seventy-two
days, the number of translators also being seventy-two, producing identical versions, this
being proof suYcient of ‘divine inspiration’. The intervention of God in the translation of
His own Word was necessarily invoked, since without it the translation would be subject
to endless questioning, in its turn leading inevitably to religious controversy and conXict.

The Septuagint, then, became a canonical text for later translators, being preferred even to
the source, which it would seem to have replaced. Jerome, however, approached this
sacrosanct text with Ciceronian caution and returned for veriWcation to the Hebrew and
Aramaic. His Vulgate translation, which remained the oYcial Bible of the Catholic
Church for centuries, owed its authority not only to the scrupulousness of his scholarship
but also to the excellence of his Latin style. His legacy was a dual one of respect for
tradition and critical acumen. The Vulgate itself, by virtue of its adoption by the one and
only Church, was a text of irreproachable canonicity. It substituted itself for the original
until the need began to be widely felt for extension of the readership via translation into
the European vernaculars.
The documented fourth-century controversy or debate between the two Church
Fathers, Sts Jerome and Augustine, in which no ground was given, expressed irresolvable
diVerences—of temperament, no doubt, as well as of opinion, these diVerences continuing
to operate on into the Renaissance and beyond. One reason for these diVerences, no
doubt, was the fact that Jerome was and Augustine was not a translator. Augustine, intent
on establishing an orthodoxy, conscious of the overriding need to provide sure, unam-
biguous guidance for the faithful, was worried by Jerome’s critical examination of
hitherto supposedly inspired texts. For Augustine there could be only one true translation
of God’s word. Deferring to the Septuagint, whose translators had been led by the Holy
Spirit, he favoured this translation and regarded it as more reliable and authentic even than
the Hebrew and Aramaic originals. He could not approve of Jerome’s new version which
returned to these sources and which, confusingly and dangerously, he felt, drew attention
as well to problematical passages or words therein. Politically more sophisticated than
Jerome, Augustine foresaw, for instance, increased disagreement between the Roman and
Greek churches, resulting from the existence of diVerent versions of the Scriptures,
threatening the unity of the Christian Church. (Of course, he approved of rather than
objected to Jerome’s translations of the Gospels from the Greek source text.) Two diVerent
concepts of scholarship, authenticity, accuracy are at loggerheads here, the prestige of these
two great Wgures ensuring that their diVerence should continue to reverberate.
Translation into the vernacular (Old and Middle English) paralleled or preceded
developments elsewhere in Europe. While early literary activity was mostly in Latin,
King Alfred (871–99) initiated a policy of translation. Jonathan Wilcox’s collage (Sect.
1.3, below) documents this development and activity, including the translation of import-
ant religious works, late Latin works (Boethius), the Bible itself, this being part of a process
of education, for the use of those without or with insuYcient Latin, in a period of decline in
knowledge of the Classical language. Alfred’s approach, as beWts an educator, was prag-
matic, sometimes opting for sense-for-sense, sometimes for the ad verbum. In the following
18
from cicero to caxton

century, the Benedictine monk and homilist Aelfric (c.990–c.1010) translated a part of
Genesis insisting on the need for interpretation rather than unquestioning literalism.
However, conXict between clerical defenders of Latin and inXuential laymen persisted,
viz the ‘Dialogue between a Lord and a Clerk upon Translation’, from the translation by
John of Trevisa (1326–1412) of Ralph Higden’s 1387 world history, Polychronicon. The
argument advanced by the Clerk is, in eVect, an argument against all translation, a defence
of the status quo, translation being seen as representing a danger to the fortress of learning,
i.e to the exclusivism of those with Latin, mainly the clergy. Trevisa’s translation, printed
by Caxton, was among the Wrst books to be made widely available. With printing,
introduced by William Caxton (c.1422–91), texts could of course be far more broadly
disseminated. Caxton, a proliWc translator himself, also printed many works of translation.
The technological revolution initiated by him made possible a great extension of Classical
learning and literature, whether for pedagogical, practical purposes, or for entertainment,
via vernacular translations, the demand for which of course increased just as the conditions
giving rise to that demand also encouraged the expansion of printing. Caxton’s last book,
itself a translation (of Virgil’s Aeneid) was based on an intermediary French version.
Clearly, although there was a discernible impulse, as noted, to return to source texts,
this was not regarded as obligatory. Caxton was undoubtedly the most important early
champion of the English language, and translation had a key role in establishing the native
language as central to the country’s literary life, as a growing percentage of the population
gained access to it.
1.1 introduction
19

1.2 Classical Latin and Early Christian
Latin Translation
Approaches to translation, in the Western tradition, have been seen as oscillating between
an attachment to Classical learning, which stresses intellectual Xexibility, and the Judaeo-
Christian emphasis on the unchanging law of God, embodied in a language which also
cannot be changed. The conXict between commitment to stylistic excellence, clarity of
expression, and ad verbum exactness cannot be resolved, the terms having been established
very early on. The principal arena has undoubtedly been the translation of the sacred texts
of Judaism and Christianity with the geographic spread of these world religions, as well as
the gradual and then incrementally rapid spread of literacy, and self-assertion of the
vernacular languages, especially with the disintegration of such supranational entities as
the Roman and Holy Roman empires and concomitant rise of nation states.
In Roman times, of course, translation relates to the construction of a supranational
culture, based on Rome, and becomes an assertion of Roman cultural independence from
or parity with Attic Greece. To achieve this parity, a non-subservient stance was essential.
Late Roman translation from Biblical Greek—St Jerome’s handling of the Greek
Septuagint, for instance—reXected the high status of the source text. The translations of
the Holy Scriptures were necessarily ‘inspired’ and might enjoy equal and, in the case
of the Septuagint, for instance, even superior status to the source text itself. It was in
this connection that the myth of the origin of the Septuagint developed, obscuring
the reality of the situation (see Philo, below). The Septuagint was held to have been
dictated by God, the seventy-two translators functioning as a kind of collective medium
for him, the identity of the texts, according to the myth, further testifying to divine
intervention.
Jerome, as a ‘Ciceronian’, even though he agonized over it (vide his famous dream) and
even though he admitted that in translation of the Scriptures even the order of the words
was sacrosanct, was not able to suppress his Classicist leanings, being too committed to the
demands of clarity and stylistic excellence, which required a free, or sense-for-sense
approach. The Latin legacy, similarly, embodies both pre-Christian and Christian com-
ponents. It is profoundly ambiguous, and this ambiguity runs through the entire Western
tradition of translation, being evident even today, in scarcely less stark a form than at the
beginning.
Thanks are due to Professor Louis G. Kelly for his advice, and in particular for the translations of Latin texts
which he generously contributed to the present volume.
20
from cicero to caxton

Marcus Tullius Cicero (106–43 bc)
Cicero, Roman statesman, orator, and philosopher, was regarded as one of the Wnest
Classical stylists. He is credited with the formation of a Latin philosophical vocabulary.
In De optimo genere oratorum, his introduction to his translation (not extant) of two
speeches by Demosthenes and his arch-rival Aeschines, Demosthenes being the greatest
orator of fourth-century Greece, Cicero makes a case for ‘free’ translation. The essence of
successful oratory, he insists, is that it should ‘instruct, delight and move the minds of his
audience’, this being achievable in translation only by conserving the ‘force and Xavour of
the passage’, not by translating ‘word for word’. While Cicero has been routinely quoted in
defence of non-literal translation, it should be remembered that he is instancing the
translation of speeches.
The assumption then is that, with suYcient latitude, it is not impossible to convey the
persuasiveness of Greek oratory. Cicero’s approach is essentially pragmatic. Thus, in the De
Wnibus bonorum et malorum, he discusses the translation of Greek philosophical terms into
Latin, insisting that Greek neologisms may be rendered by Latin ones, that there is good
reason for sometimes translating one Greek word by several Latin ones, and that there
should be no injunction against importing Greek words into Latin when there is no
adequate Latin term.
‘De optimo genere oratorum’ (the Best Kind of Orator), iv. 13–v. 14 (46 bc), translated by
L. G. Kelly
And this is our conclusion: that, since the most outstanding Greek orators were those
from Athens, and that their chief was easily Demosthenes, anybody who imitates him
will speak in the Attic style, and excellently to boot. Consequently, since Athenian
orators are proposed for our imitation, to speak in the Attic style is to speak well. But,
because there are many misconceptions over what constitutes this style of composition,
I propose to undertake a task useful for students, but not completely necessary for myself.
For I have translated into Latin two of the most eloquent and most noble speeches in
Athenian literature, those two speeches in which Aeschines and Demonsthenes oppose
each other. And I have not translated like a mere hack, but in the manner of an orator,
translating the same themes and their expression and sentence shapes in words consonant
with our conventions. In so doing I did not think it necessary to translate word for word,
but I have kept the force and Xavour of the passage. For I saw my duty not as counting
out words for the reader, but as weighing them out. And this is the goal of my project: to
give my countrymen an understanding of what they are to seek from those models who
aim to be Attic in style, and of the formulas of speech they are to have recourse to.
1.2 early latin translation
21

Quintus Horatius Flaccus (Horace) (65–8 bc)
Horace was an outstanding lyric poet and satirist, friend of the Emperor Augustus and the
great epic poet Virgil. His four books of Carmina or Odes are perhaps his most admired
and translated works.
The epistle (To the Pisones/ Ad Pisones), known as Ars Poetica [Art of Poetry] concen-
trates on the traditional literary genres of epic and drama, after Aristotle. From the time of
Ben Jonson, Horace has been looked upon as a poetic mentor or companion, his passing
remarks on translation as inXuential therefore as Cicero’s. Horace appears to disparage the
‘faithful’translator, although, somewhat perversely; this criticism has been used to support
Wdelity to the original, on the grounds that he is alluding not so much to translation, as to
literary imitation, in the Roman sense, where Wdelity was regarded as somewhat infra dig.
In calling for a freer treatment of earlier works, Horace echoes Cicero’s admonitions to
translators of orations, where the aim is not so much a literal transcription of the Greek
words as a representation of the persuasiveness of source texts, which are transcriptions of
delivered speeches.
From Ars poetica, ll. 128–44 (19-17 bc?), translated by Ben Jonson (1573–1637), pub. 1640
’Tis hard, to speake things common properly:
And thou maist better bring a Rhapsody
Of Homers, forth in acts, then of thine owne,
First publish things unspoken, and unknowne.
Yet common matter thou thine owne maist make,
For, being a Poe¨t, thou maist feigne, create,
Not care, as thou wouldst faithfully translate,
To render word for word: nor with thy sleight
Of imitation, leape into a streight,
From whence thy Modestie, or Poe¨mes law
Forbids thee forth againe thy foot to draw.
Nor so begin, as did that Circler late,
I sing a noble Warre, and Priam’s Fate.
What doth this Promiser such gaping worth
AVord? The Mountaines travail’d, and brought forth
A scorned Mouse! O, how much better this,
Who nought assaies unaptly, or amisse?
Speake to me, Muse, the Man, who, after Troy was sack’t,
22
from cicero to caxton

Saw many Townes, and Men, and could their manners tract.
Hee thinkes not, how to give you smoake from light,
But light from smoake; that he may draw his bright
Wonders forth after:
From Horace, Satires, Epistles and Ars Poetica, with an English translation by
H. Rushton Fairclough (1926; the Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge, Mass. and
London: Harvard University Press, 1999)
[A prose version which rather tendentiously translates ‘Wdus’ in ‘Wdus interpres’ as ‘slavish’
rather than as ‘faithful’.]
It is hard to treat in your own what is common: and you are doing better in spinning into
acts a song of Troy than if, for the Wrst time, you were giving the world a theme unknown
and unsung. In ground open to all you will win private rights, if you do not linger along
the easy and open pathway, if you do not seek to render word for word as a slavish
translator.
Philo Iudaeus (Philo of Alexandria) (15/10 bc – 45/50 ad) ( X. 20–40 ad)
Philo was a Greek-speaking Jewish theologian and neo-Platonic philosopher. In the
passage below, he describes the origins of the third-century bc translation into Greek
by seventy-two translators of the Hebrew Scriptures, the Septuagint. This translation,
intended primarily for Jews who had migrated to Egypt and other Greek-speaking lands,
became the Old Testament of the Greek-speaking Christians. Philo bases his account on
the anonymous letter of Aristeas, under which name a Jewish writer purportedly writes to
the Athenian statesman Philocrates before the middle of the third century bc. Philo’s
addition to the Aristean story emphasizes the divine origin of the translation, claiming that
the seventy-two worked independently of one another and yet arrived at an identical text,
whereas, according to the earlier account, they collaborated. Divine inspiration alone
could validate translation of the Scriptures, the Word of God.
From The Life of Moses (De vita Mosis, 20 bc) ll. 37–40, by Philo Judaeus, translated by
F. H. Colson (London: Heinemann, 1935)
The translators shut themselves away in seclusion, alone except for the four natural
elements of earth, air, Wre and water (for the Law begins with the creation of the world).
1.2 early latin translation
23

And then they prophesied as if in ecstasy. They used, not diVerent words, but the same
words and sentence structures, as if each was under the guidance of the same invisible
Spirit. But is there anybody unaware that every language, and particularly Greek, is rich
in words, and that the same thought can be rendered in many ways by ringing the
changes on words, using synonyms and, in each case, seeking out the mot juste? Accord-
ing to tradition, this did not happen in the translation of our Law, for each Chaldean
word was exactly translated by a precise Greek equivalent, which was perfectly adapted to
the thing signiWed. As I see it, this is the same as what happens in geometry or dialectic.
There, meanings can not survive ambiguity of expression, as once terminology is
established it remains constant. And similarly, our translators found the expressions
exactly suitable to the things signiWed. And these words were the only possible, or at least
the words most apt, to render the things signiWed with perfect clarity. And here is the
most striking proof of our claim: whenever a Chaldean who reads Greek, or a Greek who
understands Chaldean Wnds himself before both versions at once, he looks on the Greek
and the Chaldean with wonder and respect as two sisters, or rather, as one and the same
work in both matter and style [ . . . ]
Marcus Fabius Quintillianus (Quintilian) (30? – 96? ad)
Quintilian, like Cicero, was trained as an orator and practised at the bar. Tutor to the
family of the Emperor Domitian, he is primarily celebrated as a teacher. Quintilian retired
in order to write, his principal work being the Institutio Oratoria (Education of an Orator),
possibly intended as a primer for the young princes; it is regarded as a basic text in rhetoric,
pedagogy and literary criticism. Book X contains a survey of Greek and Latin writers,
purporting to show how Latin could match Greek. Translation becomes a way of
improving or asserting the value of the vernacular through emulation of Classical models.
Quintilian’s remarks are in the Ciceronian tradition, whereby translation was seen not only
as a tool in the acquisition of a foreign language, but as a means of enriching the target
language. He systematizes much of what earlier writers had to say, making clear, for
instance, the distinction between metaphrasis or word-for-word translation and paraphrasis
or phrase-by-phrase translation. He is concerned not so much with the painstaking
reproduction of earlier texts, as with the preservation of a living tradition. His approach
to education was of course highly inXuential.
In the Wrst passage, below, Quintilian makes it clear that it is permissible and indeed
obligatory not only to emulate the Greek models but even to try to excel them.
24
from cicero to caxton

From Institute of Oratory; or Education of an Orator (Institutio Oratoria, X. xi. 1–11 (96
ce?), translated by J. S. Watson (London: George Bell, 1876)
From these [Greek] authors, and others worthy to be read, a stock of words, a variety of
Wgures, and the art of composition must be acquired; and our minds must be directed to
the imitation of all their excellences; for it cannot be doubted that a great portion of art
consists in imitation, since, though to invent is Wrst in order of time, and holds the Wrst
place in merit, yet it is of advantage to copy what has been invented with success. [ . . . ]
We must, indeed, be either like or unlike those who excel and nature rarely forms one
like, though imitation does so frequently. But the very circumstance that renders the
study of all subjects so much more easy to us, than it was to those who had nothing to
imitate, will prove a disadvantage to us, unless it be turned to account with caution and
judgement.
Undoubtedly, then, imitation is not suYcient of itself, if for no other reason than that
it is the mark of an indolent nature to rest satisWed with what has been invented by
others. For what would have been the case, if, in those times which were without any
models, mankind had thought that they were not to execute or imagine anything but
what they already knew? Assuredly nothing would have been invented. [ . . . ]
It is dishonourable even to rest satisWed with simply equalling what we imitate. For
what would have been the case, again, if no one had accomplished more than he whom
he copied? [ . . . ] But if it is not allowable to add to what has preceded us, how can we
ever hope to see a complete orator, when among those, whom we have hitherto
recognised as the greatest, no one has been found in whom there is not something
defective or censurable? Even those who do not aim at the highest excellence should
rather try to excel, than merely follow, their predecessors; for he who makes it his object
to get before another, will possibly, if he does not go by him, get abreast of him. But
assuredly no one will come up with him in whose steps he thinks that he must tread, for
he who follows another must of necessity always be behind him. [ . . . ]
From Institutio Oratoria, X. v. 1–5, translated by L. G. Kelly
Our ancient orators believed that the most eYcacious means of acquiring a command of
their language was to translate Greek works into Latin. Crassus, quoted in Cicero, De
Oratore l. 155, says he made a practice of it; and Cicero, speaking in his own name,
recommended it very often. And indeed, he published books by Xenophon and Plato he
had translated. [ . . . ] The reason for this exercise is extremely obvious. For Greek authors
abound in richness of expression and bring the greatest Wnesse into their oratory. And
therefore those who would translate these authors must use the best of language while
relying on their native resources. Because our Roman language is immensely diVerent
1.2 early latin translation
25

from Greek, we are bound by a certain need to rethink the many and varied Wgures with
which a work is adorned.
[ . . . ]
For I do not want translation to be a mere paraphrase, but a struggle and rivalry over
the same meanings.
Gaius Plinius Caecilius Secundus (Pliny the Younger) (61? – 112? ad)
A pupil of Quintilian, Pliny was a successful lawyer and orator, serving as praetor and
consul. A member of the wealthy classes, raised by his uncle, the literary equestrian Pliny
the Elder, he is best known for the nine books of letters on a variety of subjects. These
include his oYcial correspondence with the emperor Trajan and amount to a kind of social
history of the time. His circle included many of the major Wgures of the day, such as
Tacitus, Suetonius, and Martial.
Epistle Vll is inXuenced by Quintilian’s notion of emulation, carrying the argument a
stage further into open, almost gloating rivalry.
From Epistle Vll. ix. 1–6, Letter to Fuscus Salinator (85 ad), translated by L. G. Kelly
You ask my opinion on how you should study during your retirement which you have
enjoyed for some time now. As many advise, it is of primary importance to translate from
Greek into Latin or from Latin into Greek. By this type of exercise one becomes sensitive
to the properties and richness of vocabulary, to the wealth of Wgures of speech, to eVective
exposition; and moreover, by the imitation of the best models is learnt the power of
writing on the same subject matter. And at the same time, a translator cannot ignore the
responsibilities of a reader. For from this comes understanding and critical sense.
When you have read closely enough to retain matter and argument, there is nothing to
prevent you from writing like your author’s rival and then comparing your work with
what you have read. Then you should seek out what is better in your version and better in
his. You will have great satisfaction if some of your work is better, and considerable
embarrassment if all of his shows more skill. At times one can choose extremely familiar
passages, and then seek to excel those you have chosen. Being private this struggle is bold
but not out of place: although we do see many who have taken on these contests with
much credit to themselves, and who have shown enough self-conWdence to surpass those
they intended merely to follow.
You can revise what you have written after letting it lie, keep much of it, skim through
much of it, add new material, rewrite a lot of it. This is laborious and tedious; but,
26
from cicero to caxton

because of its very diYculty, it bears fruit in bringing you new Wre, and giving you new
drive when your enthusiasm has Xagged. For you will be weaving new members into the
complete body without disturbing the balance of the original.
Evagrius (X. 360?)
Evagrius of Antioch was St Jerome’s mentor, his host and patron in Syria. Of noble birth
and great wealth, he assisted Damasus in a disputed papal election. He produced a free
translation of the Life of Anthony (the Egyptian hermit who was reckoned to be the founder
of monasticism) by Athanasius of Alexandria (295–373), a Greek Christian writer and
opponent of the Arians who denied the divinity of Christ. Athanasius had created a new
biographical form that served as a model for later Greek and Latin hagiographers.
In his letter to Pammachius, Jerome cites Evagrius’ preface to his translation where, in
Ciceronian fashion, he explains how he has attempted to preserve the sense rather than the
letter of the text.
From the Prologue to the Life of St Anthony (see J. P. Migne, Patrologia Latina, 73. 163,
Paris [1844–55]), translated by L. G. Kelly
Word-for-word translation from one language into another clouds the sense, and like
uncontrolled weeds, smothers the crop. For, while the original case usages and Wgures of
speech dominate the text, what could have been stated in pithy sentences is hardly made
clear by long periphrases. This I have avoided in acceding to your request to translate
the life of St Anthony. Even if some words are missing, nothing is missing from the
senses. Leave it to others to go chasing after words and syllables; you must look for the sense.
From Epilogue to the Life of St Anthony (see Patrologia Latina, 73. 167), translated by
L. G. Kelly
Therefore I would ask those prudent people who have been kind enough to read this book
to excuse me if, in translating from Greek to Latin, I could not bring over the full power of
the Greek. In any case, this was not to my purpose. But we did not take this decision with
malice, but knowing full well how Greek loses when translated into Latin. But I preferred
to see the Greek suVer this loss, rather than have those who manage to read translations
from the Greek suVer loss of divine favour. May almighty God, who inspired St Anthony
in his great exploits, also inspire us to imitate him, so that in all things His name may be
gloriWed through Jesus Christ, our Teacher, Counsellor, Redeemer and Saviour, with the
Holy Spirit, to whom is glory and everlasting power for ever and ever.
1.2 early latin translation
27

Eusebius Hieronymus, St Jerome (348?–420)
Jerome and Augustine (see below) were the most important of the Church Fathers, as far as
translation theory is concerned. Author of the Vulgate Latin translation of the Bible, for
centuries the oYcial Bible of the Catholic Church, Jerome also commented in detail on
the methods and aims of his translation work, viz. the celebrated letter to his friend
Pammachius, which was prompted by the attack on him, in 395, by his former friend and
fellow monk RuWnus, himself the author of numerous translations from the Greek.
Born in Dalmatia into a wealthy family, Jerome came to Rome as a boy where he was
taught by the foremost grammarian of the age, Aelius Donatus. In a famous dream (375),
Jerome was accused by God of being a Ciceronian rather than a Christian, symptom of an
internal conXict between his Classical leanings towards free-ranging translation and
literalist demands, which stressed the accurate transmission of meaning particularly in
the case of Holy Scriptures. After the dream Jerome became a hermit for a while, learning
Hebrew; later he was ordained and continued his theological studies in Antioch where he
translated or adapted, revised and supplemented the Chronicle of the church historian
Eusebius of Caesarea, which he discusses in the letter to Pammachius as well as in his
Preface to the Chronicles (see below). The theoretical basis for Jerome’s translation theory is
elaborated in his preface to the translation of Eusebius and does not signiWcantly change
over the years. On his return to Rome in 382 he became secretary to Pope Damasus and
under orders from him began his translation of the Bible, revising the many versions and
stylistically improving the old Latin text of the Gospels.
Driven from Rome after Damasus’death in 384, Jerome went to Antioch, Jerusalem and
Egypt to study the ascetic life at Wrst hand, and subsequently to Bethlehem, where he
founded a monastery and remained for the rest of his life, while continuing to polemicise
vigorously. His Vulgate translation of the Bible (391–415), dating from this period,
included revisions of earlier New Testament translations and a new translation of the
Old Testament, based on Origen’s Hexapla.
Of all Christian Latin writers Jerome most closely approaches the standards of Classical
Rome, having thoroughly assimilated the works of Cicero, Virgil, Horace, and others. On
the other hand his letters and controversial writings are extraordinarily irascible. The
conXicting demands of Ciceronian aesthetics and Christian asceticism are dramatically
exempliWed in Jerome’s life and work. The apparent contradictions, however, appear less
marked if one bears in mind the distinction Jerome himself makes between translation of
Holy Scriptures and that of non-sacred texts. He weighs in with devastating eVect against
28
from cicero to caxton

the literalists, while at the same time aYrming that in the case of the Scriptures the actual
words and even their order and signiWcance are to be observed.
From the Preface to Chronicles of Eusebius 1–2 (380), translated by L. G. Kelly
There is an old custom among men of letters of translating Greek books into Latin as an
intellectual exercise, and also, what is more diYcult, of translating Wne poetry into Latin
verse. The great Cicero translated whole books by Plato with rigorous closeness and,
having translated the Roman, Aratus, into hexametres, he turned to Xenophon’s Oeco-
nomicus. In this, the golden Xow of eloquence is sometimes muddied by some scabrous
and turbulent shoals so that, those who do not realize that it is a translation, do not credit
Cicero with such work. For it is diYcult, when following the text of another language,
not to overstep the mark in places, and hard to keep in the translation the grace of
something well said in the original. Something is signiWed by the properties of a word: in
my language I do not have anything to match, and when I try to render the full sense, I eat
up the span of a respectably long life in the resulting sentence. [ . . . ] If I translate word
for word, it sounds absurd; if from necessity, I change something in the word-order or in
the language, I am seen to abdicate the responsibility of a translator. [ . . . ] I pray you that
whatever you Wnd disordered in this work, you read with the eye of a friend and not of a
critic. And this is doubly important as you know that I dictated this at considerable speed
to a secretary; and the diYculty of the task is attested to by the fact that the inspired
volumes produced by the Septuagint translators have not kept their Xavour in Greek.
This consideration drove Aquila, Symmachus and Theodotion [Theodosius] to produce
almost a diVerent book from the same work. Aquila tried to translate word for word,
Symmachus preferred to follow the sense, and Theodotion did not want to go too far
from the ancient versions. [ . . . ] Thus it came about that Sacred Scripture seemed so
rough and uncouth that educated people, not knowing that it had been translated from
the Hebrew, looked at the surface instead of the real meat and were put oV by the
unprepossessing clothing of its style rather than Wnding the beautiful body underneath.
Finally, what is more melodious than the Book of Psalms, which can run in iambics like
our Horace or the Greek Pindar, or have the resonance of Alcaeus, or the dignity of
Sappho, or the Xow of lyric metres. What is more beautiful than the canticle of
Deuteronomy and Isaiah, what more digniWed than Solomon, or more perfect than
Job. Now these, as Josephus and Origen point out, all frame their poetry in hexameters
and pentameters. When we read them in Greek, they have a particular sound, and when
in Latin, they do not hang together. If there is anybody who does not believe that the
power of a language is changed in translation, let him translate Homer literally into
Latin—or rather, let him translate Homer into prose. Then he will see a laughable bit of
work, and the greatest of poets scarcely able to speak.
1.2 early latin translation
29

From Letter 57, To Pammachius, ‘On the Best Method of Translating’, translated by
L. G. Kelly
[Jerome had been asked by Eusebius of Cremona, an associate who had no Greek, if he
would translate into Latin a letter sent by Archbishop Epiphanius to John, Bishop of
Jerusalem.]
[ . . . ] Not only do I admit, but I proclaim at the top of my voice, that in translating from
Greek, except from Sacred Scripture, where even the order of the words is of God’s
doing, I have not translated word by word, but sense for sense. [ . . . ]
[Jerome proceeds to cite various Classical authorities, quoting directly from Cicero’s
preface to his own translation of speeches by Aeschines and Demonsthenes as well as
from his own translation of Eusebius’ Chronicles (see above), after which Jerome moves on
to a more contentious area, concerning the translation of Holy Scriptures, even the
Septuagint containing passages problematical from the point of view of strict literality.]
There is nothing extraordinary about this procedure in secular or ecclesiastical writers,
when the translators of the Septuagint, the evangelists and the apostles, did the same
thing in the sacred books. In St Mark, we read that the Lord said: ‘Talitha cumi.’ This is
commented in the text: ‘Which is translated: ‘‘My girl, I say to you, get up’’’ [Mark 5: 41].
Dare you accuse the evangelist of lying because he adds ‘I say to you’, when all we have in
the Hebrew is, ‘My girl, get up?’ But to make it more emphatic and to translate the
nuance of urgent command he added, ‘I say to you.’ [ . . . ]
[Jerome gives a number of such examples, stating that ‘it is clear that, in their use of the
Septuagint translation, the Apostles sought the sense, not words’.]
The opening words of the Hebrew text of Psalm XXI are the very words Christ spoke on
the cross: ‘Eli, Eli, lama sabacthani.’ This means: ‘My God, my God, why have you
abandoned me’ [Ps. 21: 2; cf. Matthew 27: 46]. Let them state the reason why the
Septuagint intercalates ‘look at me’, for it reads: ‘My God, my God, look at me, why
have you abandoned me?’ They will reply that there is no distortion in the sense if two or
three words are added. Let them also realize that the stability of the Church is not
threatened if, in the heat of dictation, I leave out a few words.
It is a long job to detail how much the Septuagint adds, how much it leaves out. [ . . . ]
However, it is not for nothing that the Septuagint has become the oYcial church text: it
was adopted either because it was the Wrst and was produced before the coming of Christ,
or because it was used by the apostles, at least where it did not diVer from the Hebrew.
[Jerome then turns, with savage irony, on his critics who accuse him of taking too many
liberties. Much later, Martin Luther was to do much the same, when confronting his critics.]
30
from cicero to caxton

I have gone beyond the length of a letter, but not beyond the measure of my anger. I have
been called a fraud, and cackling women tear me to pieces between the shuttle and the
loom. But I am content to counter the accusation, rather than to turn it against others.
Thus, I leave everything to your judgement. Read the letter itself, in both Greek and
Latin, and from it you will quickly judge the sort of cant indulged in by my accusers and
the true value of their complaints. For my part, it is enough to have set things right with a
very dear friend, and to await the day of judgement hiding in my cell. If possible, despite
the raging of my enemies, I would rather comment the Scriptures, than write Philippics
in the style of Demosthenes and Cicero.
Aurelius Augustinus, St Augustine (354–430)
Augustine is the most inXuential of the Church Fathers. Born to a pagan father and
Christian mother in Numidia (present-day Algeria), he was sent to Carthage for his
education. Originally intending to enter government service he dedicated himself to
philosophy, after reading Cicero. He was converted to Christianity in 386. Augustine
taught rhetoric in Carthage, Rome and Milan. His masterpiece Confessions (397–8)
outlines his spiritual development and elaborates a radical doctrine of grace. Augustine
was spiritual leader of the Christian Church in Africa, appointed bishop of Hippo in 395.
He continued the monastic community life with his clergy and became a dedicated
preacher and literary protagonist, struggling doggedly against Manichaeism and other
‘heresies’. So forceful was Augustine that he took the Church with him, disposing of rather
than attempting to embrace what he saw as schismatic tendencies.
His major works include exegeses of Scriptural texts and, of course, polemics. On The
City of God (De Civitate Dei, 413–26) laid down the basis for the medieval Church.
Augustine regarded translation as a systematic undoing of the linguistic confusion
following the destruction of the Tower of Babel. For him there could be only one true
translation. In this area (as in others) he strove to establish an orthodoxy, not prevaricating
like Jerome who was tormented by the distinction between translation as such and
translation of the Word of God. Augustine was committed to establishing the authority
of the Church, to this end even condoning persecution. The implications, as far as
translation is concerned, are of the utmost signiWcance. His concern for a single, united
Church led him to favour the Septuagint translation over the Hebrew and Aramaic source
texts, because the Greek translators at Alexandria, it had been held, were guided by the
Holy Spirit. He expressed his concern in a respectful but strongly worded letter to Jerome
on the latter’s plans for a new translation (see below). Of course, Jerome’s version of the
1.2 early latin translation
31

Scriptures, the Vulgate, also came to be regarded as inspired and, as such, took precedence
over the source or original Scriptural texts. Augustine’s literary output, including letters, is
vast and shows him to be, like Jerome, a versatile master of Latin style.
Letter 71. 3–4 and 6 (to Jerome on his plans for the Vulgate), translated by L. G. Kelly
I have further comment in this letter: I have just found out that you have translated the
Book of Job from the Hebrew, even though we already have a Latin translation of yours
from the Greek text. In that translation you marked Hebrew passages missing from the
Greek text with asterisks, and with daggers, Greek passages missing in Hebrew. Your
diligence was such that we can see in certain passages particular words signifying the stars
are in the Hebrew, but not in the Greek. Furthermore, in this last version of yours taken
from the Hebrew, we do not Wnd the same Wdelity to words. And a careful reader will
have some trouble in working out why in your Wrst version asterisks are marked in with
such care that we know where even the most minor particles in Hebrew are missing in the
Greek texts; and in your second from the Hebrew, this editorial work is so careless, that it
seems that the same particles appear in both texts [ . . . ]
Honestly, I would rather you translate the Scriptures for us from the canonical texts
which the seventy translators left us. For it will cause extreme diYculty if your translation
is widely adopted: the Latin churches will then diVer violently from the Greek churches.
Most serious of all, as it is the best known, anybody who disagrees will easily prove you
wrong on the strength of the Greek. For anybody who seizes on something he Wnds
strange in a version taken from the Hebrew and accuses you of error, will hardly, if ever,
pay regard to the Hebrew by which you defend your reading. And even if your version
were to be adopted, who will stand to see the condemnation of so many Greek and Latin
traditions? Because even experts in Hebrew can have other answers, it comes to this, that
you seem to be the only one competent to prove them wrong. But before what judge, if
you can Wnd one perceptive enough?
And so I am immensely grateful to God for your labours in translating the Gospels
from the Greek, because in almost no case is there diYculty when we have recourse to the
Greek text. If then any controversialist argues for a hoary old false reading, we can bring
out the books, compare them, and easily verify or refute. And if certain remarkable cases
rightly call forth our assent, is there anybody stubborn enough not to recognize such a
useful achievement, or give it its due praise? Would you be good enough to tell me why,
in your view, there is so much disagreement between the Hebrew texts and the Greek of
the Septuagint? For the Septuagint has so much authority that it has, with reason, been
widely disseminated. As I remember, this fact is attested to by the custom of the Apostles,
and also by your own testimony. And for this reason, you would have done better if you
had given us an accurate translation of the Greek of the Septuagint. The present Latin
32
from cicero to caxton

versions diVer so much from manuscript to manuscript that the situation is intolerable;
and they are so suspect (it is not unlikely that there is something else in the Greek), that
we can hardly expect to prove anything by quoting them.
Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius (480–524)
Boethius was a late Roman philosopher and statesman, from a family which had held
high political oYce. He was consul in 510 and then political adviser to Theodoric, the
Ostrogoth, rising to the rank of magister oYciorum. He is best known as the author of the
Neoplatonic Consolation of Philosophy (De consolatione philosophiae), a dialogue between
himself and Philosophy, mixing prose and verse, written in prison a year before he was
put to death for treason. As an outstanding Hellenist, his ambition had been to translate all
of Aristotle and Plato. In addition, he wrote textbooks on other subjects, including
theology. The Consolation was second only to Jerome’s Vulgate in popularity during the
Middle Ages, and in general Boethius’s legacy was immense. His work was translated into
Anglo-Saxon by Alfred the Great (see below).
Boethius wrote a Latin commentary on Victorinus’ translation of Porphyrius’ third
century Eisagoge, an introduction to Aristotle’s logic, which became the standard medieval
textbook on the subject; he then retranslated it himself, adding a second volume to his
commentary. In his opening to the second volume, he turns Horace on his head, making
of him the champion of literalism. Boethius’ remarks on translation became common-
places in the continuing struggle between the word-for-word and sense-for-sense appr-
oaches. He extends the theological strictures against free translation to the translation of
philosophy.
Introduction to the second edition of the Commentary on Porphyry’s Isagoge, in Isagoge
Porphyrii Commenta (510 AD?), translated by L. G. Kelly
This reworking of my commentary is designed to shed light on the matter of our
translation. For I am afraid that the translation might earn for me the condemnation
due to the ‘faithful translator’, in that I have manifestly translated each word by one
exactly matching it. My reason for this procedure is that, in those texts in which one seeks
knowledge of things, it is not the grace of a beautiful style we are to seek, but the
uncorrupted truth. Therefore I would seem to have accomplished more if, in philoso-
phical texts written in Latin, the soundness of a close translation should assure that
nothing from the Greek text is missing.
1.2 early latin translation
33

1.3 Old English Translation
jonathan wilcox (university of iowa)
Anglo-Saxon England (c.450–c.1100) was the home to a vibrant literary culture which
developed in the vernacular earlier than in most of medieval Europe. Writing came to
Anglo-Saxon England with the conversion to Christianity, a culture of the book, initiated
by Augustine’s mission of 597. Early literary activity was mostly in Latin until King Alfred
initiated a policy of translation, as he explains in the preface to his translation of Gregory’s
Pastoral Care below. Translation blossomed in late Anglo-Saxon England and reached a
height in the works of Ælfric, two of whose prefaces are presented here. Within such a
culture of translation, there were multiple renditions of the Bible, as seen in the transla-
tions of the Babel story presented below. A distinctive tradition of vernacular verse also
developed in Anglo-Saxon England. While the most famous vernacular poem, Beowulf, is
an original story rather than a translation, a similar style of verse was also used to retell
incidents from the Bible, including the tower of Babel incident in Genesis A presented
below.
I have translated these Old English works into Xuent Modern English while keeping a
foreignizing hint by sometimes staying just slightly closer to the syntax of the original Old
English than is comfortable in Modern English. In the case of the biblical translations,
I have further emphasized the nature of the original by translating with cognates as
indicated in the headnotes. For fuller translations from Old English, see S. A. J. Bradley,
Anglo-Saxon Poetry (London: Dent, 1981), Michael Swanton, Anglo-Saxon Prose (London:
Everyman, 1975), and Kevin Crossley-Holland, The Anglo-Saxon World (Oxford: Oxford
World’s Classics, 1984).
King Alfred
In addition to being the most famous king of Wessex (871–99) and, arguably, the Wrst king
of a united England (that part, at least, which was not under Viking rule), King Alfred was
also a signiWcant translator in his own right and the initiator of a policy of translation. At a
military level, Alfred’s achievement involved Wghting against the Vikings who had overrun
most of the country until he Wnally reigned over a prosperous and expanding nation. At an
educational level, his policy is spelled out in the preface to his translation of Gregory’s
Pastoral Care, translated below. Here the king initiates a programme both of translation
34
from cicero to caxton

and of vernacular education, recognizing that Latin learning has declined, aggravated by
Viking assaults, to such an extent that it is now necessary to provide learning in the native
tongue of his people.
Alfred began his project of translation with Gregory’s Pastoral Care, presumably to
educate and guide his bishops so that they could, in turn, educate the people. Gregory the
Great (c.540–604) had a special resonance for the English as the pope who initiated
Augustine’s original mission to convert the country. Alfred’s further contributions to
those books most needful for all people to know comprise translations of Boethius’
Consolation of Philosophy, Augustine’s Soliloquies, and the Wrst Wfty Psalms, while his
lawcode begins with a translation of Mosaic law. The king undertook such translations
with the aid of a seminar of advisers gathered from outside his kingdom, as he outlines in
the preface to Gregory’s Pastoral Care. These advisers also produced other translations
associated with Alfred’s court, namely of Gregory’s Dialogues, Orosius’ world history, and
probably the Old English translations of Bede’s Ecclesiastical History and of the Martyr-
ology. It is within this milieu, too, that the great work of original historical prose, the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, was produced.
The text of the preface to Gregory’s Pastoral Care below is translated from the edition by
Dorothy Whitelock, Sweet’s Anglo-Saxon Reader (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1967), based
primarily on MS Oxford, Bodleian Library, Hatton 20, the copy sent by the king to the
bishopric at Worcester. Other manuscripts of the work survive addressed to other bishops
or with the recipient’s name left blank. The complete work is edited by Henry Sweet, King
Alfred’s West Saxon Version of Gregory’s Pastoral Care, EETS 45, 50 (London, 1871–2). This
preface, which is written in prose, is followed by a brief verse preface in which the book is
made to describe its origins in the Wrst person. The æstel which accompanied copies of the
book, mentioned at the end of the passage below, is a unique word of unknown meaning:
it is thought to be a book-pointer, which is a likely function for the beautiful (and
valuable) Alfred Jewel in the Ashmolean museum. Two other similar objects of somewhat
lower status have also been found.
The briefer preface to Boethius’ Consolation of Philosophy shows more of the king’s
working method and outlines, in particular, his interesting treatment of the verse elements
of the original prosimetrum. These he translated Wrst into prose and subsequently versiWed
from his own prose translation. The text is taken once again from from the edition by
Dorothy Whitelock in Sweet’s Anglo-Saxon Reader, which is drawn primarily from MS
Oxford, Bodleian Library, Bodley 180. The complete work is edited by W. J. SedgeWeld,
King Alfred’s Old English Version of Boethius De Consolatione Philosophiae (Oxford: Clar-
endon Press, 1899).
1.3 old english translation
35

Alfred’s life was recorded in a probably contemporary Latin biography by Asser,
available in translation by Simon Keynes and Michael Lapidge, Alfred the Great (Har-
mondsworth: Penguin 1983), who also provide a useful introduction and translate many of
the king’s works. On the king as a literary Wgure, see also the useful introduction by Allen
Frantzen, King Alfred (Boston: G. K. Hall, 1986).
King Alfred’s Prose Preface to his Translation of Gregory the Great’s Cura pastoralis,
From Dorothy Whitelock (ed.), Sweet’s Anglo-Saxon Reader
King Alfred commands Bishop Wærferth to be greeted with his words in a loving and
friendly manner; and I command it to be made known to you that it has come very often
into my mind what wise men there were formerly throughout England, both in religious
orders and in secular; and how happy the times then were throughout England; and how
the kings who had power over the people were obedient to God and his messengers; and
how they kept both their peace and their morals and their authority at home, and also
extended their territory abroad; and how they then succeeded both in warfare and in
wisdom; and also how eager the religious orders were both about teaching and learning
and all those services which they should do for God; and how wisdom and learning were
sought from abroad here in this land, and how we now must obtain them from abroad, if
we were to have them. It had declined so thoroughly in England that there were very few
this side of the Humber who could understand their oYces in English or even translate
a single letter from Latin into English; and I think that there were not many beyond the
Humber! There were so few of them that I cannot think of even a single one south of the
Thames when I succeeded to the kingdom. Thanks be to God Almighty that we now
have any supply of teachers. Therefore I command you to do as I believe that you want
to, that you free yourself of these worldly cares as much as you most often can, so that
you may apply that wisdom which God gave you wherever you can apply it. Think what
torments came to us in this world then, when we neither loved it ourselves, nor also
granted it to other people; we had the name alone that we were Christians, and very few
had the practices.
When I recalled all this, then I recalled also how I saw, before it was all plundered and
burnt up, how churches throughout all England stood Wlled with treasures and books,
and also a great multitude of God’s servants; and then they knew very little beneWt of
those books, because they could not understand anything of them, because they were not
written in their own lanugage. As if they were to have said: ‘Our elders, those who kept
these places before, they loved wisdom, and through it they obtained riches and left them
to us. Here their track may yet be seen, but we cannot follow after it.’ And so we have
now abandoned both riches and wisdom, because we would not bend down to that trace
with our mind.
36
from cicero to caxton

When I recalled all this, then I wondered very much at the good counsellors who were
there before throughout England, and who had studied all those books completely, that
they would not turn any portion of them into their own language. But then I immedi-
ately answered myself again, and said: ‘They did not think that men should ever be so
careless and learning so fallen oV: they left it undone on purpose, and intended that there
would be the more wisdom here in the land, the more we would know languages.’
Then I recalled how the law was Wrst found in the Hebrew language, and afterwards,
when the Greeks learned it, then they turned it completely into their own language, and
also all other books. And again the Romans did the same, after they learned them, they
turned them all through wise translators into their own language. And also all other
Christian nations turned some portion of them into their own language. Therefore it
seems better to me, if it seems so to you, that we also translate certain books, those which
are most needful for all people to know, that we turn those into that language which we
can all understand, and bring it about, as we very easily may with God’s help, if we have
the peace, that all the youth of free men who now are in England, those who have the
means that they may apply themselves to it, be set to learning, while they may not be set
to any other use, until the time when they can well read English writings. Those may
afterwards be taught further in Latin who one wishes to teach further and who are to be
placed in higher orders.
When I recalled how the knowledge of Latin had declined before this throughout
England, and yet many could read English writings, then I began among various and
manifold cares of this kingdom to turn into English that book which is called in Latin
Pastoralis, and in English ‘Shepherd-Book’, sometimes word for word, sometimes sense
for sense, just as I learned it from Plegmund my archbishop, and from Asser my bishop,
and from Grimbold my mass-priest, and from John my mass-priest. After I had learned
it, just as I understood it, and as I might most intelligently relate it, I turned it into
English; and I intend to send one to each bishopric in my kingdom; and in each is an
æstel, which is worth Wfty mancuses. And I command in God’s name that no-one take the
æstel from the book, nor the book from the cathedral—it being unknown how long there
may be such learned bishops as there are now, thanks be to God, almost everywhere.
Therefore I intend that it may always be at that place, unless the bishop may have it with
him, or it may be on loan anywhere, or anyone may be making a copy from it.
King Alfred’s Preface to his Translation of Boethius’ De consolatione philosophiae, from
Dorothy Whitelock (ed.), Sweet’s Anglo-Saxon Reader
King Alfred was the translator of this book and turned it from Latin into English, as has
now been done. Sometimes he set it down word for word, sometimes sense for sense, just
as he could relate it most clearly and most meaningfully in light of the various and
1.3 old english translation
37

manifold worldly cares which occupied him both in mind and in body. Those cares are
very diYcult for us to count which occurred in his days in the kingdom which he had
received, and yet, when he had understood this book and turned the substance from
Latin into English, then he worked it over again into verse, as has now been done; and
now he asks and in God’s name beseeches each of those who desires to read this book to
pray for him and not to blame him if they can understand it more rightly than he could,
because every man must say what he says and do what he does in accordance with the
measure of his understanding and in accordance to the time available to him.
Ælfric
In the century following King Alfred, the educational initiative of the king became
combined with a revival of monasticism, generally known as the Benedictine reform, to
lead to a Xowering of intellectual activity in the vernacular. At about the turn of the
millennium, this was apparent in the writing down of all four of the major codices of Old
English poetry and in the original compositions and translations of English churchmen
and intellectuals like Wulfstan, Byrhtferth, and, above all, Ælfric. Ælfric (X. c.990–c.1010)
was a monk of Cerne Abbas, Dorset, and (from 1005) abbot of Eynsham, a newly founded
monastery in Oxfordshire. Ælfric was very concerned with the issue of translation: his
most characteristic writings were homilies, which begin with a translation of a gospel
pericope and continue with his own conspectus of commentary tradition, translated,
combined, and augmented with original moral and topical exhortation. Ælfric shows a
strong sensitivity to language, discussing in his homilies, for example, the special processes
of signiWcation of the real presence in the Eucharist. Such linguistic sensitivity along with
his copious composition in the vernacular make Ælfric particularly qualiWed to pronounce
upon the process of translation.
The preface to his translation of Genesis shows Ælfric’s polemical case against transla-
tion. It introduces his translation of Genesis, a work which he failed to Wnish for reasons
that he explains here. The preface is addressed to Ealdorman Æthelweard, a powerful
nobleman, leader of the western counties, and Ælfric’s frequent patron. Despite his strong
appeal to this patron to be free of translation from henceforth, Ælfric went on writing,
producing many further homilies and numerous occasional works. The explanation for
this apparent paradox may lie in the kind of works he went on to write. As he outlines here,
biblical translation carries special perils both because of the divinely appointed nature of
the text and because of the text’s signiWcance for its Christian audience. In the polemic of
this preface, Ælfric attempts to disallow naively literal readings by providing in miniature
38
from cicero to caxton

homiletic commentary on selected moments in Genesis. The surface narrative may be
simple, he suggests, but it requires interpretation in light of the Old Testament’s antici-
pation of the New. Linguistic sense and ultimate meaning are not the same, here seen as
the contrasting naked narrative and spiritual signiWcance. By continuing his career as a
homilist, Ælfric could satisfy his desire to provide biblical text alongside the interpretation
of that text.
Ælfric’s translation of Genesis was completed by another writer, as he remarks below.
Perhaps the same anonymous translator took over two other substantial translations by
Ælfric—of part of the book of Numbers and most of Joshua—and augmented them to
make a complete translation of the Wrst six books of the Old Testament. This text was then
lavishly illustrated with over 400 coloured drawings (some incomplete) in a high-status
and beautiful manuscript, London, British Library, Cotton Claudius B. iv, probably
written in the second quarter of the eleventh century at St Augustine’s, Canterbury. The
illustrated Hexateuch is reproduced in a facsimile edition by C. R. Dodwell and Peter
Clemoes, The Old English Illustrated Hexateuch, EEMF 18 (Copenhagen: Rosenkilde and
Bagger, 1974) and is discussed in The Old English Hexateuch: Aspects and Approaches, ed.
Rebecca Barnhouse and Benjamin C. Withers (Kalamazoo: Medieval Institute Publica-
tions, 2000). The Wrst folio, containing the opening of this preface, has gone missing and
so has to be supplied from two other surviving copies (MS Oxford, Bodleian Library, Laud
Misc. 509 and Cambridge, University Library, Ii. 1. 33). The text drawn on here is from
Ælfric’s Prefaces, ed. Jonathan Wilcox (Durham Medieval Texts 9, Durham, 1994), where
I provide a fuller introduction to Ælfric and his works. For a more general introduction,
see James R. Hurt, Ælfric (New York: Twayne Publishers, 1972).
While Ælfric’s preface to his translation of Genesis contains his most extensive comment
on translation practice, the preface to his Excerptiones de arte grammatica anglice (conveni-
ently known as Ælfric’s Grammar) also shows his self-consciousness about language. He
undertook this work after his Wrst two series of Catholic Homilies, each of forty homilies, as
he states at the opening of the Old English preface below. The Grammar is a translation in
that it is primarily drawn from a single Latin work, namely the Excerptiones de Prisciano,
itself a simpliWcation of Priscian’s Institutiones grammaticae. Ælfric makes this Latin base
text far more useful for classroom practice by writing in English, by omitting abstruse or
tangential details, and by providing extensive exemplary paradigms, as is described by
Vivien Law, ‘Anglo-Saxon England: Aelfric’s ‘‘Excerptiones de arte grammatica anglice’’’,
Histoire e´piste´mologie langage, 9 (1987), 47–71. In the process, he creates the Wrst Latin
grammar in a medieval vernacular language. This preface is written in two languages,
suggesting the expectation of two distinct audiences: a learned one for the opening Latin
part and a broader one for the subsequent discussion. The Latin preface reveals Ælfric’s
1.3 old english translation
39

expectation of hostility towards the translation process, which he has to justify as only an
exercise to help uneducated children. The English preface reveals through its echoes Ælfric’s
familiarity with King Alfred’s statement on translation, translated above.
Ælfric’s Preface to his translation of Genesis, from Ælfric’s Prefaces, ed. Jonathan Wilcox
(Durham, 1994)
Ælfric the monk humbly greets Ealdorman Æthelweard. You bade me, dear sir, that
I should turn the book of Genesis for you from Latin into English. Then it seemed
diYcult to me to grant you that, and you then said that I need not translate more of the
book except as far as Isaac, the son of Abraham, because some other person had translated
the book for you from Isaac until the end. Now it seems to me, dear sir, that that work is
very perilous for me or any man to undertake, because I fear, if some foolish person reads
this book or hears it read, that he will think that he may live now in the new law just as
the patriarchs lived then in that time before the old law was appointed, or just as men
lived under the law of Moses.
Once I knew a certain masspriest, who was my teacher at the time, owned the book of
Genesis, and he could understand Latin a little; then he said about the patriarch Jacob,
that he had four wives, two sisters and their two handmaidens. What he said was
completely true, but he did not know, as did not I at that time, how great a diVerence
there is between the old law and the new. In the beginning of this world, brother took his
sister for a wife, and sometimes also a father begot by his own daughter, and many men
had multiple wives for the increase of the people, and it was impossible then at the
beginning to marry except among relatives. If anyone will live so now after Christ’s
coming as people lived before the law of Moses or under the law of Moses, such a person
is not a Christian at all, nor is he even worthy that any Christian should eat with him.
Unlearned priests, if they understand some small part from Latin books, then it
immediately seems to them that they may be glorious teachers; but nevertheless they
do not know the spiritual meaning to it and how the old law was symbolic of things to
come, or how the new testament after Christ’s incarnation was the fulWlment of all those
things which the old testament symbolized about the coming of Christ and his chosen
ones. They also often talk about Peter—why they may not have a wife, just as Peter the
apostle had—and they will not hear or understand that the blessed Peter lived according
to the law of Moses until the time of Christ, who Wrst came to humanity at that time and
began to preach his holy gospel and chose Peter Wrst to be his companion. Then Peter
abandoned his wife rightaway, and all the twelve apostles, those who had wives,
abandoned both wives and possessions, and they followed Christ’s teaching to the new
law and to that chastity, which he himself then raised up. Priests are set up as teachers for
lay people. Now it has become Wtting for them that they know to understand the old law
40
from cicero to caxton

spiritually, and what Christ himself taught and his apostles in the new testament, so that
they could guide the people properly to God’s faith and set an example properly in good
deeds.
We also say in advance that the book is very profound to understand spiritually, and
we are not writing anything more than the naked narrative. Then it may seem to the
unlearned that all the sense is enclosed in the simple narrative, but it is very far from that.
[ . . . ] [Ælfric goes on to explain spiritually the opening verse of Genesis and selected
episodes as distinct from their naked narrative.]
Now the aforesaid book is very narrowly set in many places, and yet very profoundly
in the spiritual sense, and it is ordered just as God himself appointed it to the writer
Moses, and we do not dare to write more in English than the Latin has, nor change the
order, except for that alone, that Latin and English do not have a single way in the
ordering of language. Always whoever translates or teaches from Latin into English must
ever order it so that the English has its own way, otherwise it is very misleading for those
to read who do not know the ways of Latin.
It should also be known that there were some heretics who would cast away the old
law, and some would hold the old and cast away the new, just as the Jews do; but Christ
himself and his apostles taught us both to keep the old spiritually and the new literally
with deeds. God created for us two eyes and two ears, two nostrils and two lips, two
hands and two feet, and he also wanted to have two testaments set in this world, the old
and the new, because he does just as is pleasing for himself, and he has no counsellor, nor
does he have need for any man to say to him, ‘Why do you do so?’ We must turn our will
to his decrees, and we may not turn his decrees to our desires.
I now say that I do not dare and I will not turn any book after this from Latin into
English, and I ask you, dear ealdorman, that you no longer ask me for it, lest I be
disobedient to you or lest I be false if I do it. May God be merciful to you forever in
eternity.
I now ask in God’s name, if anyone wants to copy this book, that he correct it properly
against the exemplar, because I do not have control, although someone may bring it to
error through false copyists, and then it will be his peril and not mine. The bad copyist
does much harm, if he will not correct his error.
Ælfric’s Preface to his Grammar, from Ælfric’s Prefaces, ed. Wilcox
[The following is in Latin:]
I, Ælfric, as one knowing little, have applied myself to translating into your language
these excerpts from the lesser and greater Priscian for you tender little boys so that,
having read through Donatus’s eight parts of speech, you may in this book apply to your
tenderness both languages, namely Latin and English, in the time until you reach more
1.3 old english translation
41

perfect studies. Now I know that many will blame me because I have desired to occupy
my mind in such studies, namely turning the art of grammar into the English language,
but I intend this text to be Wtting for ignorant boys, not for their elders.
I know it is possible to translate words in many ways but I follow a simple translation
for the sake of avoiding putting oV the reader. If, nevertheless, our translation displeases
anyone, let him express it however he wants: we are content to express it just as we
mastered it in the school of the venerable prelate, Æthelwold, who inspired many to
good. It must be known, nevertheless, that the Ars Grammatica in many places does not
easily receive translation into the English language as, for example, the parts about feet or
metres, about which we here keep silent; but we have reckoned, nevertheless, this
translation to be useful as a beginning for children, as we have said before. [ . . . ]
[The following is in Old English:]
I, Ælfric, wanted to turn this little book into the English language from that grammar
which is called Grammatica after I had translated those two books comprising eighty
homilies, because grammar is the key which unlocks the meaning of books, and I
thought that this book might help young pupils at the beginning of that craft until
they came to greater understanding. [ . . . ] [Ælfric goes on to stress the responsibility of
the wise to teach and of the young to learn.] Whence shall come wise teachers among
God’s people, unless they learn in youth? And how may the faith be advanced if teaching
falls away and teachers fail? It is now essential, therefore, to warn the servants and monks
of God, so that holy teaching does not cool or fall away in our days, as it did in England a
few years ago from now, such that no English priest knew to write or to explicate a single
letter in Latin, until Archbishop Dunstan and Bishop Æthelwold raised up learning
again in the monastic life. I do not say therefore that this book may help many to
learning, but it is, nonetheless, an introduction to each language, if it pleases anyone.
I now ask in God’s name, if anyone wants to copy this book, that he correct it properly
according to the exemplar, because I do not have control, although someone may bring it
to error through false copyists, and then it will be his peril and not mine. The bad copyist
does much harm, if he will not correct his error.
Old English Versions of the Tower of Babel Story
The Wrst of these comes from the translation of Genesis begun by Ælfric and described in
the headnote to his prefaces above. At this point diVerent manuscripts give radically
diVerent versions, reXecting the work of both Ælfric and the anonymous translator—an
appropriate Babel of texts! The last comes from a translation of Genesis into Old English
verse. Both accounts are illustrated.
42
from cicero to caxton

Old English Hexateuch: Genesis 11: 1–9
[MS Cambridge, University Library, Ii. 1. 33 preserves the translation by Ælfric at this
point, whereas MS British Library, Cotton Claudius B. iv contains that of an anonymous
translator, presumably the one described by Ælfric in his preface to his translation of
Genesis. Ælfric’s translation is signiWcantly closer than the anonymous translator’s to the
Vulgate text. It includes, for example, the biblical cadence of repetition in verse 1, ironed
out in the brevity of the anonymous rendition, a fuller and more balanced statement of
God’s intention in verse 6, and a fuller explanation of the name Babel in verse 9. Ælfric
himself makes one substantial if characteristic adaptation, notwithstanding the implica-
tion of his preface: rather than allow the reader to be distracted by the discussion of
building materials in verse 3, he simply omits this matter.
The text is drawn here from The Old English Version of the Heptateuch, ed. S. J. Crawford,
EETS 160 (London, 1922). To emphasize the minute diVerences between versions, I have
translated particularly closely here, retaining ‘speech’ for OE spæc/spræc, the cognate to
which it is etymologically related, and reserving ‘language’ for gereord, even though the
sense of these two words is overlapping. Similary, I have retained the etymological cognate
for stypel, ‘steeple’, although the word also means tower, while also retaining a distinction
between ceaster, ‘city’, and burh, ‘town’, although the OE distinction is more likely one
of etymology than of reference. The anonymous translator’s word for the original
pre-Babel language in verse 6 suggests that he saw the learned language of the Church as
truly a lingua franca!]
Translation by Ælfric (MS CUL Ii. 1. 33)
1. Wæs þa an gereord on eorþan, 7 heora ealre an spræc.
2. Hi ferdon fram eastdele oð þæt hi comon to anum felde on þam lande Sennar, 7 þer
wunedon.
3. Þa cwæð gehwa to his nyxtan:
4. Cumað 7 utan wircan us ane burh 7 ænne stypel swa heahne ðæt his rof atille þa
heofonan, 7 uton mærsian urne namon, ær þan we beon todælede to eallum landum.
5. God þa nyþer astah, þæt he gesega þa burh 7 þone stypel þe Adames sunus getim-
broden.
6. God cwæð þa: Efne þis his an folc 7 gereord him ealum, 7 hi ongunnon þis to
wircenne; ne hi ne geswicað heora geþohta, ær þan þe hi mid weorce hi gefyllan.
7. Cumað nu eornostlice 7 uton niþer astigan 7 heora gereord þer towendon, þæt heora
nan ne tocnawe his nextan stemne.
8. 7 God þa hi todælde swa of þare stowe to eallum landum, 7 hi geswicon to wrycenne
þa buruh.
1.3 old english translation
43

9. 7 for þi wæs seo burh gehaten Babel, for þan þe ðær wæs todæled þæt gereord ealre
eorþan. God þa hi sende þanon ofer bradnesse ealra eorðan.
Literal Translation of Ælfric by J. Wilcox
1. There was then one language on earth and among them all one speech.
2. They went from the east-part until they came to a plain in the land of Sennar, and
there they dwelt.
3. Then each one said to his neighbour:
4. Come and let us work a town and a steeple so high that its roof may reach heaven, and
let us magnify our name, before we are scattered to all lands.
5. God then came down so that he might see the town and the steeple which Adam’s sons
built.
6. God then said: Lo this is one people and one language among them all, and they have
begun to work this; they will not cease from their intentions before they fulWl them in
deed.
7. Come now, therefore, and let us go down and overthrow their language there, so that
none of them may understand his neighbour’s voice.
8. And so God then scattered them from that place to all lands, and they ceased to build
the town.
9. And for that reason the town was called Babel, because there language was scattered
over all the earth. God then sent them from there over the breadth of all the earth.
Anonymous translation (MS BL Cotton Claudius B. iv)
1. Truly all people then spoke one speech.
2. When they went from the east-part, they found a plain in Sennarland and they dwelt
therein.
3. Then they said among themselves: let us make bricks and bake them in Wre. Truly they
had bricks for stone and tar for wall-lime.
4. And they said: let us build for ourselves a city and a steeple up to high heaven, and
let us honour our name, before we are scattered throughout all the earth.
5. Truly the Lord came down to the point that he might see the town and the steeple
which the children of Adam built.
6. And he said: this is one people, and they all speak one Latin and they have begun to
work this; they will not cease before it may be complete.
7. Truly let us come and scatter their speech there.
8. So the Lord scattered them from that place throughout all the earth.
9. And for that reason the place was named Babel, because all speech was scattered there.
44
from cicero to caxton

Old English Verse Translation: Genesis A
[A poetic paraphrase of Genesis, composed at an unknown time, survives in MS, Oxford,
Bodleian Library, Junius 11, copied at the end of the tenth century. The unknown poet
translated most of the biblical book into characteristic Old English verse, written in
alliterative four-stress lines using the compressed and distinctive language of poetry. Into
this poem, known as Genesis A, was subsequently interpolated a distinct account of the fall
of the angels and the fall of Adam and Eve conceived in heroic terms and written in a
distinctive metre and language adapted from the Old Saxon, known as Genesis B. The
Tower of Babel episode is included in the original part. The text is here drawn from A. N.
Doane (ed.), Genesis A: A New Edition (Madison, 1978), whose solutions to some of the
many linguistic challenges it presents are readily accepted.
Genesis A suggests a diVerent manner of translation from the super-aware style of Ælfric
expounded above. Much of the interest of the poem derives from the poet’s readiness to
embellish and explain his text as he saw Wt, adapting it not just to Wt Old English metrics
but also to Wt the heroic world. This is seen in a willingness to express motivation often left
cryptic in the terse Vulgate original. In this episode the building of the town and the tower
is for wlence, ‘out of pride’, a motivation familiar to any reader of Beowulf as the force that
drove Hygelac on his ill-fated raid against the Frisians. When the poet says of the tribes
inhabiting Sennar ‘the people were of one mind’, his adjective, anmod, puns on ‘proud’
(lit.: ‘excessively-minded’) even as it describes their short-lived unanimity. The very range
of vocabulary for a clan, race, or people suggests something of the poet’s emphasis. The
cost of Babel, the poet stresses, is an acutely perceived social disunity.]
Genesis A, lines 1635b–1701, From A. N. Doane (ed.), Genesis A: A New Edition (Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, 1978)
There was still then one language in common among the inhabitants of the earth. [ . . . ]
Then they departed from the east leading goods, cattle and provisions. The people were
of one mind. The bold warriors sought a roomier land until they arrived in great bands, a
journeying people, where they, children of nobles, Wrmly took a homeland. In their days
the leaders of the people then settled Sennar far and wide with dear men. At that time the
green plains of the beautiful earth were a continuous blessing for them, a growing
prosperity, for each of their desires.
Then many a one there, a single-minded nobleman, asked one another in the company
of his neighbour, about their own honour—before the multitude had to scatter again
among the sons of earth, the people of the nation in a search for land—that they might
build a town and raise up a tower as a beacon to the stars of heaven. Therefore they
1.3 old english translation
45

visited the Weld of Sennar as the most mighty leaders of the people, the eldest, often and
again were accustomed to in pleasure. They sought men with the knowledge for that
work and for that crime, until out of pride and out of recklessness they manifested their
skill. Eager for honour, men built a city and raised a ladder up to the heavens, erected a
stone wall strongly by hand beyond the measure of men.
Then holy God came to gaze upon that work of the race of men, the warriors’ walled city,
together with that beacon, which the descendants of Adam began to raise up to the
heavens, and the strong-minded king made a restraint for that bad counsel. Then, angry
in spirit, he made language dissimilar for the dwellers of earth, so that they did not have
success from speech when they met in great numbers, leaders of that project, successful in
might, in a group at the tower: none of that tribe of men knew what another said. They
could not agree to build that stone wall up from that time onwards, but they wretchedly
misbuilt in heaps, separated by langagues. Each lineage had become strange to the other,
after the creator through his great power disrupted the speech of men.
The sons of princes scattered then in four directions, disunited, in a search for land. On
their track remained a Wrm stone tower and the soaring town on Sennar both together
half-built.
46
from cicero to caxton

1.4 John of Trevisa
John of Trevisa (1326–1412) was scholar and translator of the Polychronicon of Ralph
Higden (1387) and the De Proprietatibus Rerum of Bartholomew (1398). The Polychronicon
is a history of the world, reXecting the historical, geographical, and scientiWc knowledge of
the fourteenth century. Trevisa’s translation of Higden contains prologues on translation
and was printed by Caxton.
Dialogue between a Lord and a Clerk upon Translation, from Trevisa’s Translation of
Higden’s Polychronicon, included in Fifteenth Century Prose and Verse: An English
Garner, introd. Alfred W. Pollard (Westminster: Archibald Constable, 1903), 203–8.
The LORD.—Sith the time that the great and high tower of Babylon was builded, men
have spoken with divers tongues, in such wise that divers men be strange to other and
understand not others’ speech. Speech is not known but if it be learned; common
learning of speech is by hearing, and so alway he that is deaf is alway dumb, for he
may not hear speech for to learn. So men of far countries and lands that have divers
speeches, if neither of them have learned others’ language, neither of them wot what
other meaneth. Though they meet and have great need of information and of lore of
talking and of speech, be the need never so great, neither of them understandeth other’s
speech no more than gagling of geese. For jangle that one never so fast, that other is never
the wiser, though he shrew him instead of ‘good-morrow’! This is a great mischief that
followeth now mankind; but God of His mercy and grace hath ordained double remedy.
One is that some man learneth and knoweth many divers speeches, and so between
strange men, of the which neither understandeth other’s speech, such a man may be
mean and tell either what other will mean. That other remedy is that one language is
learned, used, and known in many nations and lands. And so Latin is learned, known,
and used, specially on this half Greece, in all the nations and lands of Europe. Therefore
clerks, of their goodness and courtesy, make and write their books in Latin, for their
writing and books should be understood in divers nations and lands. And so Ranulphus,
monk of Chester (Ralph Higden), wrote in Latin his books of Chronicles, that describeth
the world about in length and in breadth, and maketh mention and mind of doings and
deeds of marvels and wonders, and reckoneth the years to his last days from the Wrst
making of heaven and of earth. And so therein is great and noble information and lore to
them that can therein read and understand. Therefore I would have these books of
Chronicles translated out of Latin into English, for the more men should them under-
stand and have thereof cunning, information and lore.
1.4 john of trevisa
47

THE CLERK.—These books of Chronicles be written in Latin, and Latin is used and
understood on this half Greece in all the nations and lands of Europe. And commonly
English is not so wide understood, ne known; and the English translation should no man
understand but English men alone; then how should the more men understand the
Chronicles, though they were translated out of Latin, that is so wide used and known,
into English, that is not used and known but of English men alone?
THE LORD.—This question and doubt is easy to assail. For if these Chronicles were
translated out of Latin into English, then by that so many the more men should
understand them as understand English, and no Latin.
THE CLERK.—Ye can speak, read, and understand Latin; then it needeth not to have
such an English translation.
THE LORD.—I deny this argument; for though I can speak, read, and understand
Latin, there is much Latin in these books of Chronicles that I can not understand, neither
thou, without studying, avisement, and looking of other books. Also, though it were not
needful for me, it is needful for other men that understand no Latin.
THE CLERK.—Men that understand no Latin may learn and understand.
THE LORD.—Not all; for some may not for other manner business, some for age,
some for default of wit, some for default of chattel, other of friends to Wnd them to
school, and some for other divers defaults and lets.
THE CLERK.—It needeth not that all such know the Chronicles.
THE LORD.—Speak not too straitly of thing that needeth; for straitly to speak of
thing that needeth, only thing that is, and may not fail, needeth to be. And so it needeth
that God be, for God is, and may not fail. And, so for to speak, no man needeth for to
know the Chronicles, for it might and may be that no man them knoweth. Otherwise to
speak of thing that needeth; somewhat needeth for to sustain or to have other things
thereby, and so meat and drink needeth for keeping and sustenance of life. And, so for to
speak, no man needeth for to know the Chronicles. But in the third manner to speak of
thing that needeth, all that is proWtable needeth, and, so for to speak, all men need to
know the Chronicles.
THE CLERK.—Then they that understand no Latin may ask and be informed and
ytaught of them that understand Latin.
THE LORD.—Thou speakest wonderly, for the lewd man wots not what he should
ask, and namely of lore of deeds that come never in his mind; nor wots of whom
commonly he should ask. Also, not all men that understand Latin have such books to
inform lewd men; also some can not, and some may not, have while, and so it needeth to
have an English translation.
THE CLERK.—The Latin is both good and fair, therefore it needeth not to have an
English translation.
48
from cicero to caxton

THE LORD.—The reason is worthy to be plunged in a pludde and laid in powder of
lewdness and of shame. It might well be that thou makest only in mirth and in game.
THE CLERK.—The reason must stand but it be assoiled.
THE LORD.—A blear-eyed man, but he were all blind of wit, might see the solution
of this reason; and though he were blind he might grope the solution, but if his feeling
him failed. For if this reason were aught worth, by such manner arguing men might
prove that the three score and ten interpreters, and Aquila, Symachus [Symmachus],
Theodocion [Theodosius], and Origines were lewdly occupied when they translated holy
writ out of Hebrew into Greek; and also that Saint Jerome was lewdly occupied when he
translated holy writ out of Hebrew into Latin, for the Hebrew is both good and fair and
y-written by inspiration of the Holy Ghost; and all these for their translations be highly
praised of all Holy Church. Then the foresaid lewd reason is worthy to be powdered, laid
a-water and y-soused. Also holy writ in Latin is both good and fair, and yet for to make a
sermon of holy writ all in Latin to men that can English and no Latin, it were a lewd
deed, for they be never the wiser for the Latin, but it be told them in English what it is to
mean; and it may not be told in English what the Latin is to mean without translation
out of Latin into English. Then it needeth to have an English translation, and for to keep
it in mind that it be not forgeten, it is better that such a translation be made and written
than said and not written. And so this foresaid lewd reason should move no man that
hath any wit to leave the making of English translation.
The CLERK—A great deal of these books standeth much by holy writ, by holy
doctors, and by philosophy; then these books should not be translated into English.
The LORD—It is wonder that thou makest so feeble arguments, and hast gone so
long to school. Aristotle’s books and other books also of logic and of philosophy were
translated out of Greek into Latin. Also at praying of King Charles, John Scott translated
Deny’s books out of Greek into Latin, and then out of Latin into French; then what hath
English trespassed that it might not be translated into English? Also King Alfred, that
founded the University of Oxford, translated the best laws into English tongue, and a
great deal of the Psalter out of Latin into English, and caused Wyrefrith, Bishop of
Worcester, to translate Saint Gregory’s books, the dialogues, out of Latin into Saxon.
Also Caedmon of Whitby was inspired of the Holy Ghost, and made wonder poesies in
English nigh of all the stories of holy writ. Also the holy man Beda translated St. John’s
gospel out of Latin into English. Also thou wotest where the Apocalypse is written in the
walls and roof of a chapel, both in Latin and in French. Also the gospel, and prophecy,
and the right faith of holy church must be taught and preached to English men that can
no Latin. Then the gospel, and prophecy, and the right faith of holy church must be told
them in English, and that is not done but by English translation, for such English
preaching is very translation, and such English preaching is good and needful; then
English translation is good and needful.
1.4 john of trevisa
49

The CLERK—If a translation were made that might be amended in any point, some
men it would blame.
The LORD—If men blame that is not worthy to be blamed, then they be to blame.
Clerks know well enough that no sinful man doth so well that it ne might do better, ne
make so good a translation that he ne might be better. Therefore Origines made two
translations, and Jerome translated thrice the Psalter. I desire not translation of these the
best that might be, for that were an idle desire for any man that is now alive, but I would
have a skilful translation, that might be known and understood.
The CLERK—Whether is you liefer have, a translation of these chronicles in rhyme or
in prose?
The LORD—In prose, for commonly prose is more clear than rhyme, more easy and
more plain to know and understand.
The CLERK—Then God grant us grace grathly to gin, wit and wisdom wisely to
work, might and mind of right meaning to make translation trusty and true, pleasing to
the Trinity, three persons and one God, in majesty, that ever was and ever shall be, and
made heaven and earth, and light for to shine, and departed light and darkness, and
called light, day, and darkness, night; and so was made eventide and morrowtide one day,
that had no morrowtide. The second day He made the Wrmament between waters, and
departed waters that were under the Wrmament fro the waters that were above the
Wrmament, and called the Wrmament heaven. The third day He gathered waters that
be under the Wrmament into one place and made the earth unheled, and named the
gathering of waters, seas, and dry earth, land; and made trees and grass. The fourth day
he made sun and moon and stars, and set them in the Wrmament of heaven there for to
shine, and to be tokens and signs to depart times and years, night and day. The Wfth day
He made fowls and birds in the air, and Wshes in the water. The sixth day He made beasts
of the land, and man of the earth, and put them in Paradise, for he should work and
wone therein. But man brake God’s hest and fell into sin and was put out of Paradise into
woe and sorrow. worthy to be damned to the pain of hell without any end. But the Holy
Trinity had mercy of man, and the father sent the Son, and the Holy Ghost alight on a
maid, and the Son took Xesh and blood of that blissful maid, and died on the Rood to
save mankind, and arose the third day, glorious and blissful, and taught his disciples, and
ascended into heaven when it was time; and shall come at the day of Doom and deem
quick and dead. Then all they that be written in the Book of Life shall wend with Him
into the bliss of heaven, and be there in body and soul, and see and know His Godhead
and Manhood in joy without any end.
Thus endeth the Dialogue.
50
from cicero to caxton

1.5 William Caxton
William Caxton (c.1422–91), before embarking on his career as the Wrst English printer,
was interested in translation. In 1475, he translated Raoul Le Fe`vre’s Recueil des histoires de
Troye: Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye (1475), this translation being the Wrst English printed
book. He printed some eighty works, himself a translator of twenty-one of them, mostly
French romances. Among his most important books was the continuation of John of
Trevisa’s Polychronicon. His last book (1490) was a translation of the Aeneid (Eneydos),
based on an intermediary French version of the Latin. Major translations published
include: The Golden Legend (1483), based on an English translation of 1438, a Latin text
and a French version; and a modiWed version of Malory’s Morte d’Arthur (1485). Caxton’s
major inXuence was as a technologist and champion of English rather than Latin as the
language for the English printed book. He is a key Wgure in the history of communication
in the broadest sense, translation being an essential component of this activity.
From The Recuyell of the Histories of Troy, included in Fifteenth Century Prose and Verse.
An English Garner, introd. Alfred W. Pollard (Westminster: Archibald Constable, 1903),
213–17
From Title and Prologue to Book I
[ . . . ]
When I remember that every man is bounden by the commandment and counsel of
the wise man to eschew sloth and idleness, which is mother and nourisher of vices, and
ought to put myself unto virtuous occupation and business, then I, having no great
charge of occupation, following the said counsel took a French book, and read therein
many strange and marvellous histories, wherein I had great pleasure and delight, as well
for the novelty of the same as for the fair language of French, which was in prose so
well and compendiously set and written, which methought I understood the sentence
and substance of every matter. And for so much as this book was new and late made and
drawn into French, and never had seen it in our English tongue, I thought in myself it
should be a good business to translate it into our English, to the end that it might be had
as well in the royaume of England as in other lands, and also for to pass therewith the
time, and thus concluded in myself to begin this said work. And forthwith took pen and
ink, and began boldly to run forth as blind Bayard in this present work, which is named
‘The Recuyell of the Trojan Histories.’ And afterward when I remembered myself of my
simpleness and unperfectness that I had in both languages, that is to wit in French and in
English, for in France was I never, and was born and learned my English in Kent, in the
1.5 william caxton
51

Weald, where I doubt not is spoken as broad and rude English as in any place of
England; and have continued by the space of 30 years for the most part in the countries of
Brabant, Flanders, Holland, and Zealand. And thus when all these things came before
me, after that I had made and written Wve or six quires I fell in despair of this work, and
purposed no more to have continued therein, and those quires laid apart, and in two
years after laboured no more in this work, and was fully in will to have left it, till on a
time it fortuned that the right high, excellent, and right virtuous princess, my right
redoubted Lady, my Lady Margaret, by the grace of God sister unto the King of England
[ . . . ] sent for me to speak with her good Grace of divers matters, among the which I let
her Highness have knowledge of the foresaid beginning of this work, which anon
commanded me to show the said Wve or six quires to her said Grace; and when she
had seen them anon she found a default in my English, which she commanded me to
amend, and moreover commanded me straitly to continue and make an end of the
residue then not translated; whose dreadful commandment I durst in no wise disobey,
because I am a servant unto her said Grace and receive of her yearly fee and other many
good and great beneWts, (and also hope many more to receive of her Highness),
but forthwith went and laboured in the said translation after my simple and poor
cunning [ . . . ].
Epilogue to Book II
Thus endeth the second book of the Recule of the Histories of Troy. Which books were
late translated into French out of Latin by the labour of the venerable person Raoul le
Fe`vre, priest, as afore is said; and by me indigne and unworthy, translated into this rude
English by the commandment of my said redoubted Lady, Duchess of Burgundy. And
for as much as I suppose the said two books be not had before this time in our English
language, therefore I had the better will to accomplish this said work; which work was
begun in Bruges and continued in Ghent and Wnished in Cologne, in the time of the
troublous world, and of the great divisions being and reigning, as well in the royaumes of
England and France as in all other places universally through the world ; that is to wit the
year of our Lord a thousand four hundred seventy one. And as for the third book, which
treateth of the general and last destruction of Troy, it needeth not to translate it into
English, for as much as that worshipful and religious man, Dan John Lidgate, monk of
Bury, did translate it but late; after whose work I fear to take upon me, that am not
worthy to bear his penner and ink-horn after him, to meddle me in that work. But yet for
as much as I am bound to contemplate my said Lady’s good grace, and also that his work
is in rhyme and as far as I know it is not had in prose in our tongue, and also,
peradventure, he translated after some other author than this is; and yet for as much as
divers men be of divers desires, some to read in rhyme and metre and some in prose; and
also because that I have now good leisure, being in Cologne, and have none other thing
52
from cicero to caxton

to do at this time; in eschewing of idleness, mother of all vices, I have delibered in myself
for the contemplation of my said redoubted lady to take this labour in hand, by the
suVerance and help of Almighty God; whom I meekly supplye to give me grace to
accomplish it to the pleasure of her that is causer thereof, and that she receive it in gree of
me, her faithful, true, and most humble servant, etc.
Epilogue to Book III
Thus end I this book, which I have translated after mine Author as nigh as God hath
given me cunning, to whom be given the laud and praising. And for as much as in the
writing of the same my pen is worn, my hand weary and not steadfast, mine eyne
dimmed with overmuch looking on the white paper, and my courage not so prone and
ready to labour as it hath been, and that age creepeth on me daily and feebleth all the
body, and also because I have promised to divers gentlemen and to my friends to address
to them as hastily as I might this said book, therefore I have practised and learned at my
great charge and dispense to ordain this said book in print, after the manner and form as
ye may here see, and is not written with pen and ink as other books be, to the end that
every man may have them at once. [ . . . ] I beseech Almighty God to reward her [his
patron] everlasting bliss after this life, praying her said Grace and all them that shall read
this book not to disdain the simple and rude work, neither to reply against the saying of
the matters touched in this book, though it accord not unto the translation of others
which have written it. For divers men have made divers books which in all points accord
not, as Dictes, Dares, and Homer. For Dictes and Homer, as Greeks, say and write
favourably for the Greeks, and give to them more worship than to the Trojans; and Dares
writeth otherwise than they do. And also as for the proper names, it is no wonder that
they accord not, for some one name in these days have divers equivocations after the
countries that they dwell in; but all accord in conclusion the general destruction of that
noble city of Troy, and the death of so many noble princes, as kings, dukes, earls, barons,
knights, and common people, and the ruin irreparable of that city that never since was re-
ediWed; which may be example to all men during the world how dreadful and jeopardous
it is to begin a war, and what harms, losses, and death followeth. Therefore the Apostle
saith: ‘All that is written is written to our doctrine,’ which doctrine for the common weal
I beseech God may be taken in such place and time as shall be most needful in increasing
of peace, love, and charity; which grant us He that suVered for the same to be cruciWed on
the rood tree. And say we all Amen for charity!
1.5 william caxton
53

This page intentionally left blank 

chapter 2
FROM THE REFORMATION AND
THE RENAISSANCE TO
THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY
2.1 Introduction
This chapter stretches over a period of two and half centuries, a period of momentous
changes in literature and culture, inaugurated by the Reformation and the Renaissance.
These movements or paradigms are carried forward in no small part by translation: on the
one hand biblical translation, on the other translation of Classical Greek and Roman
canons of literary and historical writings, along with an increasing emphasis on more
recent European literature.
Martin Luther, the most inXuential Wgure of the Reformation and one of its most
radical thinkers, is the author of one of the most important Bible translations in European
history, and his open letter on translation gives valuable insight into the relationship
between the theo-political issues and translation matters. In England, William Tyndale is a
key Reformation advocate, and a crucial translator of the Bible into English—and a martyr
to that joint venture. One need not be a Bible translator, however, to become a martyr to
translation, as witnessed by the case of Estienne Dolet, the French scholar and translator,
who wrote an early systematic account of the measures of translation. Dolet’s is not the
only section in the chapter that testiWes to the importance of French translation and
translation theory during this period (see also Sects. 2.5 on du Bellay and 2.14 on Anne
Dacier), France being of course, ever since the twelfth century, Britain’s strong literary
neighbour. The sixteenth century, a golden age of translation in England, owes a good deal
to France, and some of the translated works came via French into English, notably North’s
famous version of Plutarch. This and other translations were a shaping inXuence on
English as a literary language and even directly on writers of original works, some of
which carry distinct traces of translations, as may be seen in some of Shakespeare’s plays.

The strengthening of vernacular tongues and national cultures tends to obscure the view
to a cross-cultural linguistic activity which also strongly characterized cultural and schol-
arly life in Europe in this era. Latin remained an important medium of scholarly and
cultural preservation and dissemination, a bridge both across time and space—not least
because texts translated into Latin had a potential readership all over Europe. Thus the
most glorious period of translation in England was also the scene of much translation into
Latin, and readers may catch a glimpse of this below.
Along with the advent of Renaissance humanism, women at last came into sight as
makers of written literary culture. Women presumably played a vital role in at least some
of the oral traditions that led up to canonical European literary genres and works, but they
had been largely excluded from early written literary culture, both religious and
secular. For some of them, translation now becomes a means of expression and cultural
contribution—a road into the forefront of the literary system.
As we move into the latter part of the period, it becomes clear how translation
constitutes a shaping force on English literary and cultural activity. Its two primary
Xanks are obviously the English versions of the Bible—especially the Authorized (King
James) Version, one of the most important texts in English literature—and the translation
by Chapman, Dryden, Pope, and many others, of classical works of literature. Methods
may vary a great deal, but the line of translators still forms a tradition within the English
language, an ever-contested and ever-renewed strand of canonical writing whose
signiWcance is thus constantly conWrmed even as its previous ‘performances’ continue to
be challenged. There is no better proof of a living tradition.
During the Reformation and Renaissance, and on into the eighteenth century, state-
ments on translation are most frequently made in the context of actual practice, the most
prominent platform being the translator’s own preface to his or her translation. There are,
however, a number of more general and systematic accounts of translation as an act, and of
its methods. Such accounts (see Dolet in Sect. 2.4, Laurence Humphrey in Sect. 2.7, and
Tytler, who concludes this chapter) need not in themselves provide more of an insight into
the act of translation, but they point the way to a more abstract theory, which in turn may
help us, as students of translation, to understand this rich Weld, where translation can
never be severed from comments on translation, translation being in itself a form of
‘commentary’ on another text.
56
from reformation to eighteenth century

2.2 Martin Luther
Martin Luther (1483–1546), Augustinian monk and theologian, was the German leader of
the Reformation. With his ninety-Wve theses, nailed to the door of Wittenberg University
in 1517, he expressed his dissatisfaction with the penitential system of the Roman Catholic
Church. By 1521, the breach with the Church had become irreparable. An eVective
publicist and great writer of treatises, with a rugged popular style, Luther came to
emphasize original writing in the vernacular, but it was through his translation of the
Bible (the New Testament, published in 1522, and the Old Testament, in 1534) that he was
to establish a norm for written German, and to have a radical and lasting inXuence on
German language and literature. He also wrote hymns, which became very popular and
have survived.
As a translator, Luther was distinctly reader-oriented; his aim was to put together a Bible
text for the general public. His translation, characterized by a combination of popular
speech and poetic dignity, became for many Northern Europeans a new ‘original’, and
served as such as the basis of some Bible translations into the Nordic languages. Luther’s
Open Letter on Translation (1530) is an important text in the history of translation theory,
not only because it is intimately connected to a groundbreaking translation, but further
because it manifests vividly how the choice of words and expressions in a translation is
sometimes intimately linked to a whole ideological and institutional matrix. Luther’s
choice of the word ‘allein’, for instance (see below), is a good deal more laden with
theological politics than he openly admits.
The letter appears here complete (except for its last part which deals with the question
whether deceased saints pray for us), in a new translation, followed by Luther’s translation
of the Babel story (Genesis 11: 1–9) and a literal rendering into English of Luther’s version.
From Open Letter on Translation (Sendbrief vom Dolmetchen), translated by Jennifer
Tanner
From Wenceslaus Link to all Believers in Christ, God’s Grace and Mercy. Solomon the
Wise says in Proverbs 11: 26: ‘He who withholds grain, him the people curse. But blessings
will come upon him who sells it.’ This passage should be understood to apply to anything
that can be of general use or comfort to Christianity. It is for this reason that the master in
the Gospel scolds the faithless servant, the lazy rogue, for burying his money in the earth
and hiding it. To escape the curse of the Lord and of the community at large I have not
suppressed this open letter, which came into my hands from a good friend, but openly
published it. For while much idle talk has come about regarding the translation of the
2.2 martin luther
57

Old and New Testaments, namely, the enemies of the truth purport that the text has in
places been changed or even falsiWed, so that horror and disgust has come over many
simple Christians, as well as over the educated who are not familiar with Hebrew and
Greek. It is to be hoped that this letter will at least in part hinder the godless in their
slander and lift the scruple of the pious; it may even come about that more will be written
on this question or matter. I ask therefore that everyone who loves truth take this work on
my best recommendation and ask God in good faith for correct understanding of the
Holy Writ for the betterment and surfeit of all Christianity. Amen. Nuremberg, 15
September. Anno 1530.
To the Honourable and Circumspect N.,
my favoured lord and friend.
Grace and Peace in Christ. Honourable, circumspect, dear master and friend! I have
received your letter with the two questions of which you desire to hear my account: Wrst,
why I translated the words of St Paul in ‘To the Romans’, chapter 3, verse 28: ‘Arbitra´mur
ho´minem iustiWca´ri ex fı´de absque ope´ribus’ into German as: ‘We hold that man is
justiWed not by the works of law but by faith alone’—and also regarding the note that the
papists have worked themselves into a boundless fury because the word ‘sola’ (alone) is
not found in Paul’s text and that such additions to God’s Word are not to be tolerated
from me, etc.; secondly, if the deceased saints also pray for us, since we read that even the
angels pray for us etc. Regarding the Wrst question, if it please you, you may answer your
papists on my behalf as such:
First of all. If I, Doctor Luther, had been aware that all the papists together were so
skilful that they could translate one chapter of the Holy Writ into German correctly and
well, then, truly, I would have been humble and asked them for help and advice in
translating the New Testament. But since I knew then and still see now that they have no
idea how one should translate or speak German, I spared both them and myself the
trouble. But one can clearly see that they learn to speak and write German from my
translation and my German and steal my language from me, of which they knew so little
before; they do not thank me for it, but rather use it against me. But I will grant them
that gladly, because it does me good to know that I have taught my ingrate disciples, also
my enemies, to speak.
Further, you can say that I have translated the New Testament into German to the best
of my abilities and as conscientiously as possible; I have not forced anyone to read it but
simply left it available and only done so as a service to those who cannot do any better.
No one has been forbidden to make a better one. Whoever does not want to read it can
leave it alone; I am not begging or cajoling anyone to read it. It is my Testament and my
translation and shall remain mine. If I have made any mistakes in doing so (which
I would not consciously do, nor would I wilfully mistranslate a single letter)—on that
58
from reformation to eighteenth century

I will not tolerate the papists as my judge, because their ears are too long for that and
their ‘hee-haw, hee-haw’ is too weak for them to judge my translation. I know well,
and they know less than the miller’s beast, what sort of skill, diligence, judgement, and
intelligence are needed for translation, because they have never tried it.
It is said: ‘He who works on the road has many masters.’ So it has been for me. Those
who have never yet been able to speak, let alone translate, they are all my masters and I have
to be their disciple. And if I were to ask them how the Wrst two words of Matthew 1: 1:
‘Liber Generationis’, should be translated into German, not one of them could have said
as much as ‘cluck’—and now they sit in judgement on the entire work, those Wne fellows.
So it went for St Hieronymus as well, when he translated the Bible: the whole world was
his master and he alone could do nothing right, and the work of this good man was judged
by those who were not good enough to shine his shoes for him. This is why one has to have
great patience in order to openly do something good; because the world wants to remain
Master Cleverly and always has to bridle the horse tail-end Wrst, to be master of everything
and itself unable to do anything. That is its nature, which it cannot give up.
I would look with kindness on any papist who would come out and translate any epistle
of St Paul or one of the prophets into German. As long as he does not use Luther’s German
and translation, then one ought to see a Wne, lovely, praiseworthy German translation! For
we have seen, of course, the Bungler of Dresden, who has shown my New Testament a
master (I do not wish to name him in my books any more; besides, he has his judge1 now
and is well known otherwise); he recognizes that my German is sweet and good, and saw
rightly that he could not make it better and yet wanted to destroy it, went ahead and took
down my New Testament, almost word for word as I did, and removed my preface,
commentary, and name, wrote his name, preface, and commentary in their place, and so
he sells my New Testament under his own name. Oh, dear children, how it hurt me,
when his sovereign, with a dread preface, condemned and forbade that Luther’s New
Testament should be read, and at the same time commanded that the Bungler’s
New Testament should be read (which is the very same one that Luther did).
And just so that no one should think that I am lying, take both Testaments in front of
you, Luther’s and the Bungler’s, hold them opposite each other, and you will see who is
the translator of both. Because although he has patched and changed things in a few
places—although it does not always please me, I can easily bear it and it doesn’t hurt me
much, as far as the text is concerned; that is why I never bothered to write against it, but
had to laugh at the great wisdom, that my New Testament has been so terribly slandered,
condemned, and forbidden when it was published under my name, but it must be read,
when it is published under another name. But what a virtue that is, to slander and sully
another man’s book, then steal the very thing and publish it under one’s own name, and
so by means of someone else’s slandered work to seek praise and fame for oneself—I will
leave that up to his judge. That is enough for me and I am glad that my work (as St Paul
2.2 martin luther
59

also extols) should also be advanced by my enemies and Luther’s book, minus Luther’s
name, under his enemies’ names, should be read. How could I be better avenged?
And to return to the matter at hand: If your papist wants to make a lot of trouble over
the word ‘sola-alone’, then tell him this at once: Doctor Martin Luther wants it that way
and says papist and ass are one and the same. Sic vo´lo, sic iu´beo, sit pro ratio´ne volu´ntas.
For we do not want to be the pupils or disciples of the papist, but their masters and judges.
If they want to strut about and boast with their asses’ heads; and as Paul sang his own
praises against his holy fools, I will sing my own against these asses. Are they Doctors? So
am I! Are they educated? So am I! Are they preachers? So am I! Are they theologians? So am
I! Are they debaters? So am I! Are they philosophers? So am I! Are they dialecticians? So
am I! Are they lecturers? So am I! They write books? So do I!
And I will keep on praising: I can interpret Psalms and Prophets; they cannot. I can
translate; they cannot. I can pray, they cannot. And to speak of lesser things: I understand
their entire Dialectic and Philosphy better than any of them. And I know, furthermore,
that not one of them understands his Aristotle. And if there is even one of them who
correctly understands a preface or chapter of Aristotle, then may I be tossed up in a
blanket!2 I won’t say too much now, because I was raised and trained in their art from
youth onward and I know quite well, how deep and wide it is. And they know just as well
that I know and can do everything they can. But still these ruinous people act against me
as if I were a guest to their art who only arrived this morning and has never seen or heard
the things they learn and can do; and they come on with wondrous displays of their art
and teach me things I stamped to pieces twenty years before; so that I Wnd I have to sing
along with that harlot to all their blaring and hollering: I knew seven years ago that
horseshoe nails are made of iron.
That is in answer to your Wrst question, and I ask that you tell such asses no more in
reply to their useless noise about the word ‘sola’ than this: Luther wants it that way and
says he is a Doctor above all Doctors in the entire papacy; it shall remain as it is. I want,
from now on, only to disdain them and have them disdained as long as they remain such
people, or, should I say, asses. For there are such shameless dunces among them who have
never even learned their own art, that of the Sophists, like Doctor Smith and Doctor
Snotspoon and his sort; and they set themselves against me in this matter which is not
just about sophistry, but also, as St Paul says, about the wisdom and reason of the whole
world. It is true: an ass needn’t sing very long: we know him soon enough by his ears.
For you and our people, however, I will explain why I decided to use the word ‘sola’,
although in Romans 3: 28 it is not ‘sola’ but ‘solum’ or ‘tantum’ that I have used. See how
carefully these asses scrutinize my text! However, I have used ‘sola Wde’ elsewhere and
want both of them, ‘solum’ and ‘sola’. I have taken pains in translating in order to render
a pure and clear German. And it often happened that we sought and questioned a single
word for fourteen days, three, four weeks, and at times still could not Wnd it. In Job we
60
from reformation to eighteenth century

worked this way, Master Philips, Aurogallus, and I, so that in four days sometimes we
could hardly Wnish three lines. Rather—now that it is in German and ready, anyone can
read and criticize it. Now a person can Xy through three, four pages and never stumble
once, but is not aware of the sort of stones and stumps that had been there, where he now
walks along as on a smooth-planed board, where we had to sweat and fret before we were
able to clear such stones and stumps out of the way so that one could walk along so Wnely.
It is a joy to plough a Weld that has already been cleared. But rooting out the brush and
the stumps and preparing the Weld—no one wants that part. It is a thankless task. If God
Himself can get no thanks for the sun, for heaven and earth, or even for His own son’s
death: the world is and remains the world in the devil’s name, because it won’t have it any
other way.
Furthermore, I knew very well here, in Romans 3, that the word ‘sola’ is not found in
the Latin and Greek text, and the papists did not need to tell me that. It is true: these four
letters ‘s-o-l-a’ are not found there and those asses’ heads stare at these letters like cows at
a new gate. They do not see that it nevertheless speaks to the sense of the text, and if one
wants to translate it into German clearly and powerfully it is needed, because my
intention was to speak German, not Latin or Greek, when I undertook to speak German
in the translation. That is how German is. When two things are being spoken of, of
which one is aYrmed and the other negated, then one uses the word ‘solum’/allein along
with the word ‘not’ or ‘no’. As when one says: the farmer brings allein grain and
no money. No, I really have no money, but allein grain. I have allein eaten and not
yet drunk. Did you allein write and not proofread? And countless other such ways
in daily use.
Whether Latin or Greek have this as part of their manner of speech or not, German
does and that is its nature, that the word allein is added to make the word ‘not’ or ‘no’
fuller and clearer. For while I could also say: ‘The farmer brings grain and no money,’the
words ‘no money’ do not sound as full and clear as when I say ‘The farmer brings allein
grain and no money’; and here the word allein helps the word ‘no’ so that we have a full,
clear, German sentence. For one need not ask the letters of the Latin language how one
ought to speak German, the way these asses do, rather one should ask the mother in her
house, the children in the streets, the common man in the marketplace, about it and see
by their mouths how they speak, and translate accordingly: then they understand it well
and recognize that one is speaking German to them.
So it is when Christ says: ‘Ex abunda´ntia cordis os lo´quitur.’ If I were to obey the asses,
they would lay the letters before me and translate it like this: Aus dem U¨berXuß des
Herzens redet der Mund. [Out of the overXow of the heart the mouth speaks.] Tell me: is
that German? What German would understand something like that? What is overXow of
the heart supposed to be? No German could say that, it would be as if he were trying to
say that someone’s heart was much too big or that he had too much heart, while that is
2.2 martin luther
61

still not right either. So overXow of the heart is not German, as little as any of these are:
overXow of the house, overXow of the tile stove, overXow of the bench, no, but this is
how the mother in her house and the common man would say it: Wes das Herz voll is, des
gehet der Mund u¨ber [What the heart is full of will spill over at the mouth]. That is well-
spoken German, which I took pains to come up with and unfortunately could not always
attain or Wnd. For the Latin letters make it enormously diYcult to speak good German.
Likewise, when the traitor Judas says in Matthew 26: 8: ‘Ut quid perdı´tio haec?’ and
Mark 14: 4: ‘Ut quid perdı´tio ista ungue´nti facta est?’ If I were to obey the asses and
literalists, then I would have to translate it as: Warum ist diese Verlierung der Salben
geschehen? [Why has this loss of ointment occurred?] What kind of German is that? What
German would say something like that: Loss of ointment has occurred? And if he actually
understands it then he will think that the ointment has been lost and someone should
look for it, though even that still sounds vague and dubious. If that is good German, why
don’t they come forward and make us a Wne, lovely new German Testament and leave
Luther’s Testament alone? I think they ought to show their skill the light of day. But a
German man would say it (‘Ut quid’ etc.) like this: Was soll doch solcher Unrat? [Why
such a waste?] or: Was soll doch solcher Schade? [Why such a loss?] No, it’s too bad about
the ointment—that is good German, from which one can understand that Magdalene
had handled the spilled ointment inexpediently and was wasteful; that was Judas’
opinion, since he hoped to Wnd a better use for it.
Likewise, when the angel greets Mary and says: Gegru¨ßet seist du, Maria, voll Gnaden,
der Herr mit dir [You are greeted, Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with you]. Now then—
there is how is has been translated into German so far, following the Latin letters. Tell
me, though, if it is good German as well. Where is the man who speaks that way: you are
full of grace? And what German understands what that is supposed to mean: full of
grace? He has to think of a keg full of beer or a bag full of money; that is why I have
translated it like this: Du Holdselige [You blessed woman], by which a German can
much better imagine what the angel means by his greeting. But here the papists go
mad with fury at me for corrupting the angelic greeting, while I still have not found
the best German for it. And if I were to use the best possible German here
and translate the greeting into German like this: Gott gru¨ße dich, du liebe Maria
[Greetings from God, dear Mary] (because this is what the angel is trying to say
and this is how he would have said it, if he had wanted to greet her in German),
I think they would hang themselves in their colossal fervour over the dear Mary, because
I had so destroyed the greeting.
But why should I care if they rage or storm? I do not want to hinder them from
translating what they want; but I do want to translate not as they want, but as I want.
Whoever does not want it can leave it to me and keep his mastery to himself, for I do not
want to see nor hear it; and for my translating they need give neither answer nor account.
62
from reformation to eighteenth century

Hear me well: I want to say: du holdselige Maria, du liebe Maria, and let them say: du voll
Gnaden Maria. He who knows German knows well what a Wne word that is, how it goes
straight to the heart: die liebe Maria, der liebe Gott, der liebe Kaiser, der liebe Fu¨rst, der liebe
Mann, das liebe Kind [the dear Mary, the dear God, the dear emperor, the dear prince, the
dear man, the dear child]. And I do not know if one can express the word liebe as
aVectionately and concisely in Latin or other languages, so that it goes straight to the
heart and resounds through all the senses, as it does in our language.
For I hold that St Luke, being a master of Hebrew and Greek, wanted to capture and
render the sense of the Hebrew word the angel used by using the Greek word ‘kechar-
itome´ni’. And I think the angel Gabriel would have spoken to Mary as he spoke to
Daniel, calling him ‘hamudo´th’ and ‘isch hamudo´th’, ‘vir desiderio´rum’, that is, du lieber
Daniel. For that is Gabriel’s manner of speaking, as we see in the book of Daniel. If I were
to translate the angel’s words by following the letters, as is the asses’ art, I would have to
say: Daniel, du Mann der Begierungen [Daniel, you man of desires], or, Daniel, du Mann
der Lu¨ste [Daniel, you man of of pleasures]. Oh, there’s some good German! A German
can hear perfectly well that Mann, Begierungen, and Lu¨ste are German words, although
Begier and Lust, in the singular, would be much better. But when they are joined together
in such a way: You man of desires; then no German knows what is being said and thinks
perhaps Daniel is full of wicked desires. That would be a Wne translation. Therefore, at
this point I have to let the letters go their way and seek the way a German man would
express what the Hebrew man calls ‘Isch hamudo´th’: and so I Wnd that the German man
speaks as such: Du lieber Daniel, du liebe Maria, or: du holdselige Maid, du niedliche
Jungfrau, du zartes Weib [you blessed maid, you sweet virgin, you gentle woman] and so
on. For he who wants to translate must have a great hoard of words, so that he can Wnd
them right at hand when one refuses to sound right.
And why should I have to talk so much and for so long about translation? If I were to
note the reasons and thoughts behind all of my words, it would take a year of writing.
I have learned well what sort of art and work translation is; therefore I will tolerate no
papal ass or mule who has not attempted anything as my judge or critic in this. Whoever
does not want my translation can leave it be. The devil thank him who doesn’t like it or
alters it without my will or knowledge. If it needs to be altered, then I will do it myself. If
I do not do it myself, then one should leave me my translation in peace and make himself
whatever sort of translation he wants and fare well!
I can testify in good conscience that I have demonstrated my highest faithfulness and
diligence in this, and never had any false thoughts—for I have neither taken nor sought a
farthing for it, nor won any with it. Neither have I sought honour for myself in this, God
knows, my lord; rather I did it as a service to Christianity and in honour of one who sits
on high, who does me so much good in all hours that even if I had translated a thousand
times as much and as diligently, I still would not have earned an hour to live or have
2.2 martin luther
63

a sound eye: all that I am and have comes from His grace and mercy, indeed, it is from
His dear blood and bitter sweat, therefore it should all, God willing, serve to honour
Him, with joy and from the heart. Should the bunglers and papal asses slander me, well
then, the pious Christians praise me, together with their Lord Christ, and I am all too
richly rewarded if just one Christian considers me a faithful worker. I ask the papal asses
for nothing, they are not worthy to inspect my work, and I would be sorry to the bottom
of my heart if they were to ask that I be pardoned. Their slander is my highest renown
and praise. I still want to be a Doctor, an exemplary Doctor, even, and they will not take
that name from me until Judgement Day, that I know in truth.
Yet on the other hand, I did not let the letters go too freely, but together with my
assistants saw to it with great care that where something depended on it, I kept to the
letters and did not deviate from them so freely; as in John 6: 27, where Christ says: Diesen
hat Gott der Vater versiegelt [God the Father has set His seal on this man]. It would be
better German to say: Diesen hat Gott der Vater gezeichnet [God the Father has marked
this man], or, diesen meinet Gott der Vater [God the Father intends this man]. But I would
rather do injury to the German language than deviate from the word. Oh, translation is
not an art just anyone can do, as the mad holy ones believe; it requires a righteous, pious,
faithful, diligent, fearful, Christian, educated, experienced, practised heart. Therefore
I hold that no false Christian or factionist can faithfully translate; as is clearly seen in
Prophets, translated in Worms, where truly great diligence was applied and closely
followed my German. But there were Jews taking part in the work there, who had no
great love of Christ—there would have been skill and diligence enough there per se.
That much I have said of translation and the nature of languages. But I was not only
trusting and following the nature of languages when I added ‘solum’ (allein) in Romans
3: 28. Rather the text and St Paul’s meaning forcefully demand and compel it; for he is
dealing here with the main part of Christian teaching itself, namely, that we are justiWed
by faith in Christ, without any works of law; and he so completely cuts oV all works that
he also says: the works of law (which is of course God’s law and word) do not help to
justify us; and sets Abraham as an example, as this man was justiWed so completely
without works, since even the highest work, which at that time was newly commanded
by God above all other laws and works, namely circumcision, did not help to justify him,
but he was justiWed without circumcision and without any works, through faith, as he
says in Chapter 4: 2: ‘If Abraham was justiWed by works, then he can boast, but not
before God.’ When one so fully excludes all works—and that must indeed be the sense of
this, that faith alone can justify, and anyone who wants to speak clearly and concisely
about such an exclusion of works must say: Faith alone and not works justiWes us. The
matter itself compels this, along with the nature of language.
Yes, I know they say: It sounds vexing and the people will understand it to mean that
they need do no good works. But what else should one say? Is it not much more vexing
64
from reformation to eighteenth century

that St Paul himself does not say: ‘faith alone’, but pours it out much more bluntly, kicks
in the bottom of the barrel and says: ‘without the works of law’, and in Galatians 2: 16:
‘Not by the works of law’ and so on in other places; for the words ‘faith alone’ could still be
glossed, but the words ‘without works of law’ are so blunt, vexing, and scandalous that no
amount of glossing can help. How much more could the people learn from this to do no
good works, where they hear it preached of works in such plain, strong words: ‘no work,
without works, not by works’. Is that not quite vexing, that one preaches ‘without works,
no work, not by works’—so why should it be so vexing if one preaches ‘faith alone’?
And what is even more vexing: St Paul does not reject simple, ordinary works, but
those of the law itself. From that one could grow even more vexed and say, the law be
damned and cursed by God and one should do nothing but evil, as they would do in
Romans 3: 8: ‘Let us do evil, so that good may come’, as a factionist began to say in our
time as well. Should one, merely on account of such vexation, deny St Paul’s words or fail
to speak frankly and freely about faith? Rather, precisely St Paul and we want to have and
teach such vexation for the sake of no other cause so strongly against works and promote
faith alone than that the people should become vexed, kick and fall down, so that they
can learn and know that they will not become pious through their good works, but
through Christ’s death and resurrection alone. If they cannot become pious through
good works of law, how much less will they become pious through evil works and
without law! One cannot conclude that since good works do not help, therefore evil
works help, just as one cannot well conclude that since the sun does not help a blind man
to see, therefore the night and darkness must help him to see.
It amazes me, though, that one can struggle and baulk so much within this open
matter. Tell me, if Christ’s death and resurrection is our work, which we do, or not. It is
in no way our work, nor is it the work of any law. Christ’s death and resurrection alone
make us free from sin and pious, as Paul says in Romans 4: 25: ‘He died for our sins and is
resurrected for our justiWcation.’ Further, tell me: What work is it by which we secure and
hold Christ’s death and resurrection? It could never be an outward work, but can only be
the eternal faith in one’s heart; which alone, completely alone and without any works
grasps such a death and resurrection, where it is preached through the Gospel. What
diVerence does it make if people rant and rage, cry heresy and burn, although the matter
at bottom is clearly printed there and proves that faith alone can secure Christ’s death and
resurrection without any works and that the same death and resurrection are our life and
justiWcation. If it is so obvious that faith alone brings, secures, and gives us this life and
justiWcation, why then should one not speak so? It is not heresy that faith alone secures
Christ and gives life. But it must be heresy, if one says or speaks of such a thing. Are they
not mad, foolish, and senseless? They recognize these matters to be right and yet they
punish any speech of the same matter as wrong; there is nothing that may at once be both
right and wrong.
2.2 martin luther
65

Furthermore I am not the only one, nor even the Wrst to say that faith alone justiWes us.
Ambrose, Augustine, and many others have said it before me. And anyone who intends
to read and understand St Paul must surely say so and cannot do otherwise. His words are
too strong and tolerate no work at all. If it is no work at all, then it must be faith alone.
Oh, what a Wne, useful, unvexing lesson that would be, if people were to learn that they
could become pious through their works along with faith. That would be as much as
saying that Christ’s death does not take away our sins by itself, but that our works also
play a part. What a Wne way to honour Christ’s death, to say that our works help Him
and can also do what He has done, so that we would be just as good and strong as He.
That is the talk of the devil, who cannot resist profaning Chist’s blood.
Because the matter itself, at bottom, demands that one say: ‘Faith allein justiWes us’, as
does the nature of our German language, which also teaches us to express it this way. In
addition I have the example of the holy fathers and the endangerment of the people
forces the matter, in that they keep hanging on works and miss faith and lose Christ,
especially in these times, since they have been used to works for so long that they must be
torn away from them by force. So it is not only right, but of the highest necessity, that
one as clearly and fully as possible state: Faith allein without works makes one pious; and
I regret that I did not also add alle and aller [any], as such: Ohn alle Werk aller Gesetz
[Without any works of any laws], so that it would be fully and roundly said. Therefore it
shall remain so in my New Testament, even if all the papal asses go mad and silly they will
not make me yield. That is enough about that. I will speak further about this, with God’s
grace, in my book De iustiWcatione.
As regards the other question, if the deceased saints pray for us [ . . . ]
translator’s notes
1. i.e., has met his maker.
2. A comical punishment; Wfty lashes with a wet noodle.
Luther’s translation of Genesis 11: 1-9.
Die gantze Heilige SchiVt Deudsch (Wittenberg 1545; last edition published in Luther’s
lifetime), ed. Hanz Volz with Heiz Blanke; text ed. Friedreich Kur (Munich: Rogner &
Bernhand, 1972), 41–2
Es hatte aber alle Welt einerley Zungen und sprache. 2Da sie nu zogen gen Morgen /
funden sie ein eben Land / in lande Sinear / vnd woneten daselbs. 3Vnd sprachen
vntereinander / WolauV / lasst vns Ziegel streichen vnd brennen / Vnd namen ziegel
zu stein / vnd thon zu kalck / 4vnd sprachen / WolauV / Lasst vns eine Stad vnd Thurn
bawen / des spitze bis an den Himel reiche / das wir vns einen namen machen / Denn wir
werden vieleicht zerstrewet in alle Lender.
66
from reformation to eighteenth century

5Da fur der herr ernider / das er sehe die Stad vnd Thurn / die die Menschenkinder
baweten. 6Vnd der herr sprach / Sihe / Es ist einerley Volck vnd einerley Sprach vnter
jnen allen / vnd haben das angefangen zu thun / sie werden nicht ablassen von allem das
sie furgenomen haben zu thun. 7WolauV / lasst vns ernider faren / vnd jre Sprache da
selbs verwirren / das keiner des andern sprache verneme. 8Also zerstrewet sie der herr
von dannen in alle Lender / das sie musten auVho¨ren die Stad zu bawen / 9Da her heisst
jr name Babel / das der herr daselbs verwirret hatte aller Lender sprache / vnd sie
zerstrewet von dannen in alle Lender.
Literal translation by Jennifer Tanner
1. Now all the world had but one tongue and language.
2. As they moved towards morning [the east], they found a Xat land in the land of Sinar,
and they dwelt there.
3. And they spoke among themselves: Well then, let us make1 and burn bricks. And they
took bricks for stone and clay for lime.
4. and said: Well then, let us build a city and a tower whose peak will reach as far as
heaven,2 so that we make a name for ourselves. For we may perhaps be scattered into
all lands.
5. Then the lord came down that he might see the city and the tower that the children
of man were building.
6. And the lord said: See, there is but one people and but one language among all of
them, and they have begun to do this; they will not leave oV from all that they have
undertaken to do.
7. Well then, let us go down and confuse their language there, so that none will discern
the language of the other.
8. So the Lord scattered them from there into all lands, so that they had to stop building
the city.
9. Therefore its name is called Babel, since in that place the lord had confused the
language of all countries and scattered them from there into all lands.
translator’s notes
1.
The verb is streichen, possibly to spread, i.e., spread the mixture of mud and straw into a mould? Bilingual
dictionaries deWne streichen as ‘make’ with regard to bricks. A closer alternative might be ‘cast’. At any rate, it is
only the Wrst step, the second being to Wre the bricks in a kiln.
2.
Himmel equally means ‘heaven’ and ‘sky’ in German; given the context I chose ‘heaven’.
2.2 martin luther
67

2.3 William Tyndale
William Tyndale (c.1494–1536), is by far the most inXuential Bible translator in the English
language. A humanist and theologian, educated at both Oxford and Cambridge, he was
determined, in the spirit of the Reformation, to make the Bible widely available in the
vernacular to both laymen and clergy. While serving as a tutor, in 1522, he also translated
Erasmus’s Enchiridion Militis Christiani (‘The Christian Soldier’s Handbook’, written in
1502). It was his work on this and subsequent problems with the authorities that persuaded
him that ignorance of the Scriptures lay at the root of the theological confusion. In 1524,
Tyndale visited Luther in Wittenberg—Luther had published his German translation of
the New Testament in 1522—and worked on his translation of the New Testament in
Hamburg and Worms, the work being completed in 1525. Much of the commentary is
clearly based on Luther’s German translation, but Tyndale worked scrupulously from the
Greek and Hebrew source texts, using Erasmus’s 1522 Greek New Testament. The Wrst
English New Testament to be printed, Tyndale’s translation was smuggled into England in
1526. Although the bulk of his time went into an extensive revision of his New Testament
(1534), he also began work on the Hebrew Bible, producing versions of the Pentateuch and
of Jonah. Tyndale, who had spent much of his life in exile, under constant threat of arrest,
was eventually captured in Antwerp; he was burned as a heretic at Vilvorde. In 1537, a
composite translation of the Bible, containing the work of Tyndale and Coverdale, was
issued with the Church’s approval.
Tyndale’s Bible translation was the dominant stylistic and scholarly inXuence in the
history of English biblical translation. Its mark on the Geneva Bible, the Douay-Reims
Bible, and the King James Bible is decisive, although, for doctrinal reasons, not acknow-
ledged. The excellence of his translation, as literature, was increasingly recognized, to the
point where its unpedantic directness and idiomatic vigour sometimes served as criteria for
more critical evaluation of the elevated style of the revered 1611 Authorized Version, which
of course is overwhelmingly indebted to Tyndale’s genius.
Tyndale’s preface, below, is presented in somewhat modernized spelling. It vividly
conveys the passion and conviction that informed Tyndale’s activity as a Bible translator,
and the physical precariousness of his position, at the very centre of the religious
controversies, and the intimidation that he was subject to.
68
from reformation to eighteenth century

‘W.T. To the Reader’: Tyndale’s Story of His Translation (the preface to Tyndale’s
translation of Genesis in his Pentateuch, printed in 1530), included in Dewey M.
Beegle, God’s Word into English: The Adventure of Bible Translation (New York:
Harper Brothers, 1960)
When I had translated the new testament, I added an epistle unto the latter end, in which
I desired them that were learned to amend [it] if aught were found amiss. But our
malicious and wily hypocrites which are so stubborn and hard hearted in their wicked
abominations that it is not possible for them to amend any thing at all (as we see by daily
experience when their both livings and doings are rebuked with the truth) say, some of
them that it is impossible to translate the scripture into English, some that it is not lawful
for the lay people to have it in their mother tongue, some that it would make them all
heretics, as it would no doubt from many things which they of long time have falsely
taught, and that it is the whole cause wherefore they forbid it, though they other cloaks
pretend. And some or rather every one say that it would make them rise against the king,
whom they themselves (unto their damnation) never yet obeyed. And lest the temporal
rulers should see their falsehood, if the scripture cam to light, causeth them so to lie.
And as for my translation in which they aYrm unto the lay people (as I have heard say)
to be I wot not how many thousand heresies, so that it cannot be mended or corrected,
they have yet taken so great pain to examyne it, and to compare it unto that they would
fain have it and to their own imaginations and juggling terms, and to have somewhat to
rail at, and under that cloak to blaspheme the truth, that they might with as little labour
(as I suppose) have translated the most part of the bible. For they which in times paste
were wont to look on no more scripture then they found in their duns [the commentaries
of Duns Scotus] or such like devilish doctrine, have yet now so narrowly looked on my
translation, that there is not so much as one I therein if it lack a title over his bed, but they
have noted it, and number it unto the ignorant people for an heresy. Finally in this they
be all agreed to drive you from the knowledge of the scripture, and that ye shall not have
the text thereof in the mother tongue, and to keep the world still in darkness, to the
intent they might sit in the conscience of the people, through vain superstition and false
doctrine, to satisfy their Wlthy lusts their proud ambition, and insatiable covetousness,
and to exalt their own honour above king & emperour, yea and above god himself.
A thousand books had they lever to be put forth against their abominable doings and
doctrine, than that the scripture should come to light. For as long as they may keep that
down, they will so darken the right way with the mist of their sophistry, and so tangle
them that ether rebuke or despise their abominations with arguments philosophy and
with worldly similitude and apparent reasons of natural wisdom. And with wresting the
scripture unto their own purpose clean contrary unto the process, order and meaning of
the text, and so delude them in descanting upon it with allegories, and amaze them
2.3 william tyndale
69

expounding it in many senses before the unlearned lay people (when it hath but one
simple literal sense whose light the owls cannot abide) that though thou feel in thine
heart and art sure how that all is false that they say, yet couldst thou not solve their subtle
riddles.
Which thing only moved me to translate the new testament. Because I had perceived
by experience, how that it was impossible to establish the lay people in any truth, except
the scripture were plainly laid before their eyes in their mother tongue, that they might
see the process, order and meaning of the text: for else whatsoever truth is taught them,
these enemies of all truth quench it again, partly with the smoke of their bottomless pit
whereof thou readest Apocalypse ix. that is, with apparent reasons of sophistry and
traditions of their own making, founded without ground of scripture, and partly in
juggling with the text, expounding it in such a sense as is impossible to gather of the text,
if thou see the process order and meaning thereof.
And even in the bishop of London’s house I intended to have done it. For when I was
so turmoiled in the country where I was that I could no longer there dwell (the process
whereof were to long here to rehearse) I this wise thought in my self, this I suVer because
the priests of the country be unlearned, as god it knoweth there are a full ignorant sort
which have seen no more Latin than that they read in their portesses [breviaries or prayers
for the canonical hours] and missals which yet many of them can scarcely read (except it
be Albertus [i.e. Albertus Magnus] de secretis mulierum in which yet, though they be
never so sorely learned, they pour day and night and make notes therein and all to teach
the midwives as they say, and Linwood [William Lyndewode’s Provinciale, a digest of
English canon law written in 1433] a book of constitutions to gather tithes, mortuaries
[customary gifts claimed from the heirs of dead parishioners], oVerings, customs, and
other pillage, which they call not theirs, but God’s part and the duty of holy church, to
discharge their consciences withall: for they are bound that they shall not diminish, but
increase all thing unto the utmost of their powers) and therefore (because they are thus
unlearned, thought I) when they come together to the alehouse, which is their preaching
place, they aYrm that my sayings are heresy. And besides that they add to of their own
heads which I never spake, as the manner is to prolong the tale to short the time withall,
and accuse me secretly to the chancellor [i.e. the Bishop’s Chancellor of the diocese] and
other bishop’s oYcers. And indeed when I came before the chancellor, he threatened me
grievously, and reviled me and rated me as though I had been a dog, and laid to my
charge whereof there could be none accuser brought forth (as their manner is not to bring
forth the accuser) and yet all the priests of the country were that same day there. As I this
thought the bishop of London came to my remembrance whom Erasmus (whose tongue
maketh of little gnats great elephants and lifteth up above the stars whosoever giveth him
a little exhibition) prayseth exceedingly among other in his annotations on the new
testament for his great learning. Then thought I, if I might come to this man’s service,
70
from reformation to eighteenth century

I were happy. And so I got me to London, and through the acquaintance of my master came
to Sir Harry Gilford the king’s graces controller, and brought him an oration of Isocrates
which I had translated out of Greek into English, and desired him to speak unto my lord of
London for me, which he also did as he showed me, and willed me to write an epistle to my
lord, and to go to him myself which I also did, and delivered my epistle to a servant of his
own, one William Hebilthwayte, a man of mine old acquaintance. But god which knoweth
what is within hypocrites, saw that I was beguiled, and that the council was not the next way
unto my purpose. And therefore he got me no favor in my lord’s sight.
Whereupon my lord answered me, his house was full, he had more then he could well
Wnd, and advised me to seek in London, where he said I could not lack a service. And so
in London I abode almost a year, and marked the course of the world, and heard our
praters, I would say our preachers how they boasted themselves and their high authority
and beheld the pomp of our prelates and how beside they were as they yet are, to set peace
and unite in the world (though it be not possible for them that walk in darkness to
country long in peace, for they can not but ether stumble or dash themselves at one thing
or another that shall clean unquiet altogether) and saw things whereof I defer to speak at
this time, and understood at the last not only that there was no room in my lord of
London’s palace to translate the new testament, but also that there was no place to do it in
all England, as experience doth openly declare.
Under what manner therefore should I now submit this book to be corrected and
amended of them, which can suVer nothing to be well? Or what protestation should
I make in such a matter unto our prelates those stubborn Nimrods which so mightily
Wght against god and resist his holy spirit, enforcing with all craft and subtlety to quench
the light of the everlasting testament, promises, and appointment made between god and
us: and heaping the Werce wrath of god upon all princes and rulers, mocking them with
false fained names of hypocrisy, and serving their lusts at all points, and dispensing with
them even of the very laws of god, of which Christ himself testiWeth, Mathew v. that not
so much as one title thereof may perish or be broken. And of which the prophet sayeth
Psalm cxviii. Thou hast commanded thy laws to be kept meod, that is in Hebrew
exceedingly, with all diligence, might and power, and have made them so mad with
their juggling charms and crafty persuasions that they think it full satisfaction for all their
wicked living, to torment such as tell them truth, and so born the word of their soul’s
health and else whosoever believe thereon.
Notwithstanding yet I submit this book and all other that I have other made or
translated, or shall in time to come (if it be god’s will that I shall further labour in his
harvest) unto all them that submit themselves unto the word of god, to be corrected of
them, yea and moreover to be disallowed & also burnt, if it seem worthy when they have
examined it with the Hebrew, so that they Wrst put forth of their own translating another
that is more correct.
2.3 william tyndale
71

Tyndale’s Old Testament, in a modern-spelling edition and with an introduction by
David Daniell (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), Genesis, 11: 1–9, pp. 25–26
[See other versions of this passage in the introductory Babel section, and in Sects. 1.3, 2.2,
above, and 2.8, 2.9, 4.5, 4.9, 5.20, below.]
And all the world was of one tongue and one language. And as they came from the east,
they found a plain in the land of Sinear, and there they dwelled. And they said one to
another: come on, let us make brick and burn it with Wre. So brick was their stone and
slime was their mortar. And they said: Come on, let us build us a city and a tower, that
the top may reach unto heaven. And let us make us a name, for peradventure we shall be
scattered abroad over all the earth.
And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower which the children of Adam
had builded. And the Lord said: See, the people is one and have one tongue among
them all. And this have they begun to do, and will not leave oV from all that they have
purposed to do. Come on, let us descend and mingle their tongue even there, that one
understands not what another sayeth. Thus the Lord scattered them from thence upon all
the earth. And they left oV to build the city. Wherefore the name of it is called Babel,
because that the Lord there confounded the tongue of all the world. And because that the
Lord from thence, scattered them abroad upon all the earth.
72
from reformation to eighteenth century

2.4 Estienne Dolet
Estienne Dolet (1509–46) was a French humanist printer, translator, and scholar. He
encouraged people to read the Bible in the vernacular and published many Calvinist
works. Dolet’s fame rests on his commentary on the Latin language (1536–8). As a printer
he published his own translations and editions of Classical authors, the New Testament
and Psalms, as well as work by Franc¸ois Rabelais.
From Estienne Dolet, La manie`re de bien traduire d’vne langve en avltre [The Way to
Translate Well from One Language to Another], introd. and trans. by James S. Holmes,
Modern Poetry in Translation, 41–2 (March 1981), 53–6.
[See Sect. 5.3, below for James S. Holmes]
From Holmes’s introduction
For France, as for England, the sixteenth century was a golden age of translation. Unlike
the English, though, the French also carried on a lively theoretical discussion about
translating: What is it? How should it, how can it be done? Is it the best way, or a good
way, to enrich the vernacular literature? The discussion, begun in translators’ prefaces in
the 1520s and ’30s, was contained in the 1540s and ’50s in the major ars poeticas of the
French Renaissance, those of Sebillet (1548), Du Bellay (1549), and Peletier du Mans
(1555). In between, in 1540, a brief essay appeared that was, to my knowledge, the earliest
independent treatise to be published in a modern European language on the principles of
translation (for the epistle on translation written by Luther ten years earlier, however
lively, can hardly be considered that). It also marked the Wrst attempt (later often to be
repeated) to reduce the art of translating well to a series of rules.
This essay was La manie`re de bien traduire d’vne langve en avltre by the ‘native of
Orle´ans’ Estienne Dolet (1509–1546), printed by the author in Lyons in 1540 (and
reprinted two years later) in a small booklet also containing two other brief essays, on
punctuation and accents in French. The three essays were the Wrst in a series planned by
Dolet which, when completed, were to comprise a kind of writer’s handbook to bear the
title L’Orateur franc¸oys. The further studies (on grammar, spelling, pronunciation, the
origins of certain terms, the art of oratory, and the art of poetry) were never published,
perhaps never written: L’Orateur was but one project among many in the life of a busy
writer/translator/printer/publisher, and Dolet may have postponed its completion a little
too long. For in 1546 he was found guilty of heresy—in his way of translating a passage of
good Christian Plato!—and hanged then burnt at the stake, not only translation’s theorist
but its martyr.
2.4 estienne dolet
73

La manie`re, for all its brevity, must have been a gold-mine of advice for the novice
aspiring to the new art of traduction. The new art, for in France, more markedly than in
England, there was a clear break with the medieval traditions of translating, that of
crabbed word-for-wordness in learned glossing and that of uncurbed freedom in literary
adapting alike. The break, indeed, was so sharp that it was felt necessary to create a new
term for the new art: in the 1530s the verb traduir was introduced to contrast with such
older activities as translater and truchmanter, and Dolet went on to form the now-
standard nouns traduction and traducteur.
[ . . . ]
The Way to Translate Well from One Language into Another
To translate well from one language into another requires in the main Wve things.
In the Wrst place, the translator must understand perfectly the sense and matter of the
author he is translating, for having this understanding he will never be obscure in his
translations, and if the author he is translating is diYcult in any way he will be able to
render him easy and entirely understandable. And without further ado I shall give you an
example of this. In the Wrst book of Cicero’s Questiones Tusculanes is the following
passage: ‘Animum autem animam etiam fere` nostri declarant nominari. Nam & agere
animam, & eZare dicimus; & animosos, & bene animates: & ex animi sententia. Ipse
autem animus ab anima dictus est.’
Translating this work of Cicero’s,1 I remarked as follows. ‘One need not dwell at all
on the diVerence,’ I said, ‘between the terms animus and anima. For the Latin expressions
containing the two terms make clear to us that they mean practically the same thing.
It is certain that animus is said for anima, and that the animus expresses itself through
the anima, as if one would say that the vital principle and its manifestations are the
source of the spirit, and that same spirit is an eVect of the said vital principle.’ Tell me,
you who know Latin, whether it would have been possible to translate this passage well
without a deep understanding of Cicero’s sense. Know then that it is important and
necessary for every translator to fathom perfectly the sense of the author he is turning
from one language into another. And without that he cannot translate reliably and
faithfully.
The second thing that is required in translating is that the translator have perfect
knowledge of the language of the author he is translating, and be likewise excellent in the
language into which he is going to translate. In this way he will not violate or diminish
the majesty of the one language or the other. Do you believe that a man can translate any
of Cicero’s orations well into French if he be not perfect in the Latin and French tongues?
Bethink you that every language has its own properties, turns of phrase, expressions,
subtleties, and vehemences that are peculiar to it. If the translator ignores the which, he
does injustice to the author he is translating, and also to the language he is turning him
74
from reformation to eighteenth century

into, for he does not represent or express the dignity and richness of the two tongues
which he has taken in hand.
The third point is that in translating one must not be servile to the point of rendering
word for word. And if someone does that, he is proceeding from poverty and lack of
wisdom. For if he has the qualities aforesaid (which he needs in order to be a good
translator), he will give thought to meanings without regarding the order of words, and
set to work in such a way that the author’s intention will be expressed while preserving
precisely the property of the one and the other language. And it is too great a precision
(or should I say stupidity, or ignorance?) to begin one’s translation at the beginning of the
sentence: if by changing the order of the words you can express the intention of him you
are translating, no one can reprove you for it. Here I do not want to overlook the folly of
some translators who submit to servitude in lieu of liberty. That is to say, they are so
foolish as to make an eVort to render line for line or verse for verse. By which mistake
they often corrupt the sense of the author they are translating and do not express the
grace and perfection of the one and the other language. You should diligently avoid this
vice, which demonstrates nothing but the translator’s ignorance.
The fourth rule, which I shall give at this place, is more to be observed in languages not
reduced to an art than in others. Not yet reduced to a Wxed and accepted art I call such
languages as French, Italian, Spanish, that of Germany, of England, and other vulgar
tongues. Should it therefore happen that you translate a Latin book into one or another
of these (even into French), you should avoid adopting words too close to Latin and little
used in the past, but be content with the common tongue without introducing any new
terms foolishly or out of reprehensible curiousness. If some do so, do not follow them in
this, for their arrogance is of no worth, and is not tolerable among the learned. From this
do not understand me to say that the translator should entirely abstain from words that
are not in common use, for it is well known that the Greek and Latin languages are much
richer in terms than is French. The which often forces us to use rare words. But it should
be done only out of sheer necessity. I am further well aware that some might say that
most terms in the French language have been derived from the Latin, and that if our
predecessors had the authority to introduce them, we moderns and our descendants may
do the same. Let all that be debated by babblers, but the best thing is to follow the
common tongue. I shall treat this point more amply, with further illustration, in my
Orateur franc¸oys.
Let us now move on to the Wfth rule that should be observed by a good translator. The
which is of such great import that lacking it any composition is ponderous and
displeasing. But what does it consist of ? Nothing other than the observation of rhetorical
numbers:2 that is to say, a joining and arranging of terms with such sweetness that not
alone the soul is pleased, but also the ear is delighted and never hurt by such harmony of
language. I speak of these rhetorical numbers more copiously in my Orateur, hence I shall
2.4 estienne dolet
75

not discourse of them further here. But here I do advise the translator to have a care for
them, for without observing numbers one cannot be admirable in any composition
whatsoever, and without them thoughts cannot be serious and have their required and
legitimate weight. For do you think that it is enough to have correct and elegant terms
without a good joining of them? I say to you that it is just as in a confused heap of various
kinds of precious stones, the which cannot display their lustre because they are not
properly arranged. Or just as when various musical instruments are badly played by
performers who are ignorant of the art of music and know little of its tones and measures.
In Wne, there is little splendour in words if their order and pattern be not as it should be.
And for that in times past the Greek orator Isocrates was esteemed above all, and likewise
Demosthenes. Among the Latins Mark Tully Cicero was a great observer of numbers.
But do not think that orators should observe them more than historiographers. And that
being true you will Wnd that Caesar and Sallust kept their numbers no less than Cicero.
The conclusion in this regard is that without closely observing numbers an author is
nothing, and if he does observe them he cannot fail to become renowned for eloquence,
providing he also is precise in his choice of words, serious in his thoughts, and ingenious
in his arguments. These are the points of a perfect orator, one truly arrayed in all glory of
eloquence.
notes
1.
Dolet’s translation of the Tusculan Disputations, which appeared a few years later, in 1543.
2.
Dolet’s term is ‘oratorical numbers’. Today we would probably talk about ‘style’.
76
from reformation to eighteenth century

2.5 Joachim du Bellay
Joachim du Bellay (1522–60) was a French poet who, with Pierre de Ronsard led the
literary group famously known as La Ple´iade. The De´Vense was, in eVect, the group’s
manifesto. Du Bellay met Jacques Peletier who had translated Horace’s Ars poetica into
French. He studied with Ronsard in Paris. His De´Vense, an important document in the
history of translation studies in France and beyond, was published in 1549, in response to
Thomas Sebillet’s Art Poe´tique (1548). Du Bellay underwrote Horace’s pronouncements, as
somewhat simplistically relayed by Sebillet, that one should imitate freely, not translate
slavishly. He also wrote a number of major sonnet sequences, some of which were
translated by Edmund Spenser under the title of Visions of Belay, in 1569.
From La De´Vence et Illustration de la langue franc¸ayse (The Defence and Illustration of
the French Language) (1549), trans. James Harry Smith and Edd WinWeld, in J. H.
Smith and E. WinWeld (eds.), The Great Critics: An Anthology of Literary Criticism
(1932; 3rd edn., New York: W. W. Norton, 1951), 165–77
Book I, Chapter III
Why the French language is not so rich as the Greek and Latin
And if our language is not as copious and rich as the Greek or Latin, that ought not to be
imputed to any fault of the language, as if it of itself could ever be other than poor and
sterile: but the fault ought rather to be laid to the ignorance of our ancestors, who (as
some one has said in speaking of the ancient Romans), holding in higher respect doing
well than talking well, and preferring to leave to their posterity the examples, rather than
the rules, of virtuous action, deprived themselves of the glory of their high deeds, and us
of the fruit of the imitating of them: and in the same way have left us our language so
impoverished and naked that it needs the ornaments and (if I may so speak) the pens of
others. But who would say that Greek and Latin had always been of that excellence which
we see in the times of Homer, of Demosthenes, of Virgil, of Cicero? And if these authors
had considered that, for whatever diligence and cultivation might be expended, their
languages would never bear fruit, would they have striven so hard as they have to bring
them to the point where we now see them? I can say the same thing of our language,
which begins now to Xower without bearing fruit, or rather, like a plant stem, has not yet
Xowered, so far is it from having brought forth all the fruit that it might very well
produce. This is certainly not the fault of its nature, which is as fertile as are others, but
the fault of those who have had it in charge and have not cultivated it suYciently: like
a wild plant, in the very desert where it had come to life, without watering or pruning,
2.5 joachim du bellay
77

(or in any way protecting it from the brambles and thorns which overshadowed it), they
have left it to grow old and almost die. [ . . . ]
Chapter IV
That the French language is not as poor as many think it
I do not, nevertheless, think our vernacular, even as it is now, is so vile and abject as the
ambitious admirers of Greek and Latin hold it, who do not think anything good, and
who reckon even Pitho, goddess of Persuasion, unable to call anything good, except it be
in a foreign tongue and one not understood by the common vulgar. And whoever will
look well at it will Wnd that our French language is not so poor that it cannot render
faithfully what it borrows from others; so unproductive that it cannot, of itself, bear a
fruit of good invention, through the industry and diligence of its cultivators [ . . . ]
Chapter V
That translations are not enough to give perfection to the French language
Nevertheless this laudable toil of translating does not seem to me alone a suYcient means of
raising our vernacular to be the equal and paragon of other more famous languages. I mean
to prove this so clearly that no one, I think, will contradict it, without being manifestly a
calumniator of the truth. [ . . . ] The oYce then of the orator is to speak eloquently and at
length of each thing proposed. But this faculty of speaking thus of all things can only be
acquired by the perfect comprehension of knowledge, which has been the Wrst concern of
their Roman imitators. It is necessary that these two languages be understood by those who
wish to acquire that abundance and that richness of invention, the Wrst and principal piece
of harness for the orator. Once arrived at that point, the faithful translators can grandly serve
and assist those who have not the unique accomplishment of devoting themselves to foreign
languages. [ . . . ] I will never believe that one can learn all that from translations, because it is
impossible to translate it with the same grace that the author has put into it: because each
language has something indeWnably individual only to itself; and if you make an eVort to
render its innate character into another language, observing the law of translation, so that it
is not expanded at all beyond the limits of the author, your diction will be constrained,
turgid, and without charm. [ . . . ]
Chapter VII
How the Romans have enriched their language
If the Romans (some one will say), did not conquer by the labor of translation, by what
means then did they so enrich their language, even almost to equality with the Greek? By
imitating the better Greek authors, transforming themselves through them, devouring
them; and, after having digested them well, converting them into blood and nurture;
each taking to himself according to his nature and the argument which he wishes to
78
from reformation to eighteenth century

choose, the best author, all of whose rarest and most exquisite virtues they observe
diligently, appropriating and embodying these, like engraftments, as I have said before,
to their language. That caused the Romans to build those sublime writings that we delight
in and admire so greatly, counting some equal, others preferable, to the Greek. And what
I say Cicero and Virgil well prove, whom gladly I always name among, the Latins, of
whom the one, as he was entirely given over to the imitation of the Greeks [ . . . ]
Chapter VIII
To enlarge French literature by imitation of the ancient Greek and Latin authors
Write himself, then, must he who wishes to enrich his language, write in imitation of the
best Greek and Latin authors; at all their best qualities, as at a fair target, direct the aim of
his style; for it cannot be doubted that the great part of the art is contained in imitation:
and as it was for the ancients most praiseworthy to invent well, so it is most proWtable well
to imitate them, even for those whose language is not yet plentiful and rich. But he must
understand, who wishes to imitate, that it is no easy thing to follow well the excellent
qualities of a good author, as if to transform oneself with him, for nature has so wrought
even those things which appeal, most similar, that by some mark or feature they can be
distinguished. I say this because there are many in every literature who, without pene-
trating to the secret, innermost part of an author whom they have approached, adapt
themselves solely to Wrst appearances, and spend themselves rather on the beauty of words
than on the might of the real content. And certainly, as it is not vicious, but greatly
laudable, to borrow from another language sentences and words, and to appropriate them
to one’s own: so it is greatly reprehensible, and must seem odious to every reader of a
liberal, cultivated nature, to see, in the same language, such an imitation, such a one as that
of some of the learned, even, who think themselves better in proportion as they resemble
an Heroet or a Marot. I charge you (o you who desire the enlargement of your literature
and its excellence over the others) not to imitate headlong, as recently some one has said,
its most famous authors, as ordinarily do the great part of our French poets, a practice
certainly as faulty as it is of no worth to our vernacular: for that is not another thing but to
give it (o tremendous liberality) what it already has. I would that our language were so rich
in models of its own that we should have no need of recourse to others. But if Virgil and
Cicero had been content to imitate the authors of their literature, what should we have
had of Latin, beyond Ennius or Lucretius, beyond Crassus or Antonius?
Book II, Chapter IV
What types of poems the French poet should choose
Read then, and re-read, o future poet, handle lovingly, night and day, the exemplary
Greek and Latin poets; then leave all those old French poets to the Jenix Floranx of
Toulouse and to the Puy of Rouen; such as rondeaux, ballades, virelays, chants royal,
2.5 joachim du bellay
79

chansons, and other such groceries, which corrupt the taste of our language and only
serve to bear testimony to our ignorance. Devote yourself to pleasant epigrams, not as
made today, by a mob of tellers of new tales, who, in a poem of ten lines, are content to
have said nothing which gives value in the Wrst nine lines, provided in the tenth there
appear a laughable thing: but to the imitation of a Martial, or of some other excellent
poet; if liveliness does not satisfy you, mingle the proWtable with the pleasant. Distill with
a pen Xowing and not scabrous, these plaintive elegies, after the example of an Ovid, a
Tibullus, and a Propertius, mingling into it sometimes some of these ancient fables, no
small ornaments of poetry. Sing to me those odes, yet unknown to the French muse, on
a lute well tuned to the sound of the Greek and Roman lyre, not without a single line in
which appears some trace of rare but authentic lore. Material for that the praises of the
gods and of great men will furnish you, and the deathward tread of earthly things, and
the disquiet of youth: love, the unrestrained rites of wine, and all good cheer. Above all,
take care that the type of poetry be far away from the vulgar, enriched and made
illustrious with proper words and vigorous epithets, adorned with grave sentences, and
varied with all manner of colorful and poetic ornaments [ . . . ]
80
from reformation to eighteenth century

2.6. Late Tudor and Early Jacobean Translation
‘The translators of Elizabeth’s age [ . . . ] sailed the wide ocean of knowledge to plant their
colonies of the intellect where they might, or to bring back to our English shores some
eloquent stranger, whom their industry had taught to speak with our English tongue.’1
This ‘modern’ characterization accords well with Philemon Holland’s remark (see his
preface to the translation of Pliny’s History of the World, in which he declares that he
‘would wish rather and endeavour, by all means to triumph now over the Romans in
subduing their literature under the dent of the English pen, in requitall of the conquest
some time over this Island, atchieved by the edge of their sword.’
Translators function as the literary arm, so to speak, of the Merchant Adventurers, their
primary aim being the endowment of their country with new beneWts or goods. At the
same time, however, the aggressive promotion of the English tongue suggests a sense of
inferiority vis-a`-vis other cultures and languages.
Not surprisingly, then, the emphasis is on ‘englishing’ in a spirit of deWance rather than
humility. English might be prepared to accept any beneWts thrust upon it, especially in
respect to translation from the Classics, advanced cultures of the European mainland, but
this was not to say that it was not also excellently endowed.
Policy and statecraft had much to gain from the imports. The pedagogical purpose of
translators is expressed in the dedications and prefaces, dedicatees being selected for their
inXuence, and texts chosen for their educational value.
Providing plots for dramatists, translators also sought to provide entertainment for the
‘lettered ease’, the focus being on content rather than the elaboration of a theoretical
position. The dedications and prefaces have, in fact, comparatively little of substance to
communicate about methodology beyond stressing the need to write good English, in
general reiterating Cicero’s (‘Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere Wdus / Interpres’) counsel,
not to be bound by the letter of the source text.
The translators set to work ‘in a spirit of sublime unconsciousness. [ . . . ] The prefaces
hardly hint at the complexity of the problem’ (Whibley). There were very few scholars
with the Classical knowledge of, say, a Philemon Holland. Thus North translated Plu-
tarch’s Lives via Bishop Amyot’s French translation. This ‘careless method’seemed to some
as wholly positive, resulting in translations ‘unsoiled by pedantry [ . . . ] They call up a
vision of space and courage and the open air’ (Whibley).
1 Charles Whibley, ‘Translators’, in Sir A.W. Ward and A.R. Waller (eds.), The Cambridge History of English
Literature, vol. iv. (1950 edn.), 1–50. Further references to this work appear in the text.
2.6 tudor and jacobean translation
81

The object was to import valuable works in such a way as to render them widely
accessible to a new and expanded reading public. But of course at a price, and later readers,
while admiring the conviction of earlier performances, might sometimes feel that they
were too distant from their sources, domesticating, to the point of falsiWcation. Translation
was not an exclusive craft at this time, and indeed many of those involved were also men of
the world (Hoby, for instance, was an ambassador; North, too, was active in politics).
In fact, the Elizabethans seemed not to regard plagiarism as intrinsically dishonest.
Indications are that a translator might claim as his own what he had put into English. The
most signiWcant examples of the direct inXuence of translation are of course the use
Shakespeare made, in his Roman plays, of North’s translation of Amyot’s French version
of Plutarch’s Lives. At the time, there was an almost total ignorance of Greek drama, but of
the Classical dramatists, Seneca was the most popular, largely on account of his ‘ingenious
maxims’, the focus on which is another indication, surely, of the extent to which content,
in particular pedagogical elements, dominated. One might, with regard to Shakespeare
and other dramatists of the period, link what was got from Seneca (the Wve-act form of the
drama, the blood-and-guts, the soliloquizing), with what was got from North’s translation.
As well as philosophers and moralists, like Cicero (or Seneca in his capacity as a
moralist), many Greek and Latin historians were translated, but translations from non-
Classical languages were also plentiful.
For a comprehensive listing of the several translations from the Classics, see C. H.
Conley, The First English Translators of the Classics (1927).
Sir Thomas Elyot (1490–1546)
Elyot was an important prose writer, diplomat, and scholar, who learned Latin and Greek,
pupil of Sir Thomas More, a member of the Middle Temple. He published The Boke
Named the Governor (1531), dedicated to Henry Vlll. Often reprinted, it dealt with the
complete training, according to classical precedents, of a gentleman of the governing class
in leadership. He translated works by Isocrates (436–338 bc); advocate of enlightened
monarchy, Plutarch (ad c.46–c.127); and Pico della Mirandola (1463–94) etc. His
Dictionary (1538) was the Wrst book published in English to bear this title, giving an
English vernacular equivalent for each Latin word included. It helped to establish English
as the language of learned and practical discourse.
Elyot translated ‘The Education or Bringinge up of Children’ and ‘Howe one may Take
ProWte of his Enmyes’. The Image of Governance Compiled of the Actes of Alexander Severus.
The preface shows his aim as being a moral one. Elyot was among the Wrst to translate
82
from reformation to eighteenth century

Lucian’s ‘Dialogue of Lucian and Diogenes of the Life Harde and Sharpe, and of the Lyfe
Tendre and Delicate’. His translations from Latin ranged from a sermon of St Cyprian to
the Rules of a Christian Life by the Italian Renaissance writer Giovanni Pico della Mir-
andola. In the preface to his translation of St Cyprian’s fourth-century ce A sweet and
Devout Sermon (1534) (to which is appended a work by Pico della Mirandola), he wrote:
I have translated this little book: not superstitiously following the letter, which is verily
elegant, and therefore the harder to translate into our language, but keeping the sentence
and intent of the Author I have attempted (not with little study) to reduce into English
the right phrase or form of speaking, used in this treatise, which I have dedicated and sent
unto you for a token: that ye shall perceive, that I do not forget you: and that I do
unfaynedly love you, not only for our alliance, but also much more for your perseverance
in virtue & marks of true faith, praying you to communicate it with our two sisters
religious Dorothy & Eleanor, and to join in your prayers to god for me [ . . . ]
From ‘The Letter to Nicocles’, (1531), published in The Doctrinal of Princes (London:
Thomas Bershelet, 1534), translated from Isocrates
This little book (which in mine opinion) is to be compared in counsel and short sentence
with any book, holy scripture excepted, I have translated out of Greek, not presuming to
contend with them, which have done the same in Latin: but to the intent only that
I would assay, if our English tongue might receive the quick and proper sentences
pronounced by the Greeks. And in this experience I have found (if I be not much
deceived) that in the form or speaking, used of the Greeks, called in Greek, and also in
Latin, Phrasis [i.e. style, here applied particularly to conscious art in the construction of
sentences] much near approcheth to that, which at this day we use: than the order of the
Latin tongue I mean in the sentences, and not in the words: which I doubt not shall be
aYrmed by them, who suYciently instructed in all the said three tongues, shall with a
good judgement read this work. Wherefore good sister, for as much as I do consider, with
what fertility almighty god hath endowed you, to my great comfort, if your children do
prosper in virtue and learning, I therefore in times vacant from business & other more
serious study, as it were for my solace & recreation have translated for you this little
treatise entitled the Education of children, and made by Plutarch the excellent philoso-
pher and master to Trajan, most virtuous & noble of all Emperors: whereby ye shall be
marvellously instructed . . . [ . . . ] Also of purpose I have omitted to translate some part
of this matter, contained as well in the Greek as in the Latin, partly for that it is strange
from the experience or usage of this present time, partly that some vices be in those
tongues reproved, which ought rather to be unknown, than in a vulgar tongue to
be expressed.
2.6 tudor and jacobean translation
83

Sir Thomas Hoby (1530–1566)
Famous as a linguist and a traveller in Italy and France, Hoby was knighted in 1566. At the
time of his death in Paris, he was English ambassador. He made available in English the
great Renaissance handbook on the fashioning of a courtier, Il cortegiano, by Baldassare
Castiglione: The Courtier (1561).
From ‘The Epistle of the Translator’, in Baldasar Castiglione, the Book of the Courtier . . .
done into English by Sir Thomas Hoby (1561) (The Tudor Translations; London: David
Nutt, 1900)
And where it shall not perhaps thoroughly please, by reason my Wnal understanding in
the tongue, and less practise in the matters herein contained, is not of force to give it the
brightness and full perfection in this our tongue that it hath in the Italian, it shall suYce
yet that I have shed my self obedient in the respect a man ought to have towards his
betters: and no more can they avoid the blame to charge me withal, than I to undertake
it. Beside that, I have declared my good will and well meaning, no less then if my
cunning were great, and could extend much farther. [ . . . ] But in case, judgements now
feint, or mine interpretation seem not pithy, but rude, not proper, but cold, there is no
more imperfection in this Courtier, then in Cirus himself, in the translation of Xeno-
phon into the Italian or any other tongue, the one as necessary and proper for a
Gentleman of the court, as the other for a king. And I shall desire my labour may so
be taken well in worth, as I have endeavoured my self to follow the very meaning and
words of the Author, without being misled by fantasy, or leaving out any parcel one or
other, whereof I know not how some interpreters of this book into other languages can
excuse themselves, and the more they be conferred, the more it will perchance appear.
Thomas Newton and Alexander Neville
Senecca, His Tenne Tragedies, edited by Thomas Newton, published in 1581, is the most
important Elizabethan translation of Classical drama. Most of the translations date from
the 1560s and were Wrst published then. Alexander Neville (1544–1614) is responsible for
the Oedipus. Other translators are Jasper Heywood, John Studley, Thomas Nuce, and
Newton himself. The translations are written primarily in the ‘fourteener’, take liberties
with content, elaborating and explaining Seneca’s rhetoric, and adding and adapting
episodes and choric interludes.
84
from reformation to eighteenth century

Alexander Neville (1544–1614) was secretary successively to Archbishops Parker, Grin-
dal, and Whitgift. His brother, Thomas, actively defended Puritanism at Cambridge in
1595. Neville himself was a member of Gray’s Inn. The translator, only 16 at the time, states
that he translated Oedipus to be acted at Cambridge. Opposition to liberal inXuences was
aggressive, as many translators testify. Hence the value of the protection of powerful
patrons, in this case Dr Wotton, a member of the Privy Council. Opponents were
characterized as Zoilists (i.e. obscurantists, anti-humanists).
Oedipus, the Fifth Tragedy of Seneca (1560), translation by Alexander Neville
From Neville’s ‘Preface to the Reader’
[This ranges from an apology for liberties taken to an assertion of puritanical moral uplift.]
Behold here before thy Face (good Reader) the most lamentable Tragedy of that most
Unfortunate Prince Oedipus, for thy proWt rudely translated. Wonder not at the
grossness of the Style: neither yet account the Inventors Diligence disgraced by the
Translators Negligence: Who though that he hath sometimes boldly presumed to err
from his Author, roving at random where he list: adding and subtracting at pleasure: yet
let not that engender disdainful suspicion within thy learned breast. [ . . . ] Only wish I all
men by this Tragical history (for to that intent was it written) to beware of sin: the end
whereof is shameful and miserable. [ . . . ] But whereas no man lives so uprightly, whom
slandering tongues leave undiVamed, I refer myself to the Judgement of the wisest, little
esteeming the prejudicial mouths of such carping Merchants, which suVer no men’s
doings almost to escape undeWled. In Wne, I beseech all together (if so it might be) to bear
with my rudeness, and consider the grossness of our own Country language, which can
by no means aspire to the high lofty Latinists style. Mine only intent was to exhort men
to embrace Virtue and shun Vice, according to that of the right famous and excellent
Poet Virgil
Discite justiciam moniti, et non temnere divos
This obtained: I hold myself thoroughly contented: In the mean season I end: wishing
all men to shun Sin, the plain (but most perilous) pathway to perfect infelicity.
From Act 2
[See also Sect. 5.16, below, for Ted Hughes’s version of the same passage, as well as literal
versions by F. J. Miller and that of David Turner. Oedipus, in dialogue with Creon, Queen
Jocasta’s brother, unwittingly calls for expiation for the murder of his predecessor King
Laius (a murder committed, of course, by himself, after which he married Jocasta, his
mother), which may bring about deliverance from the scourge that is aZicting Thebes.]
2.6 tudor and jacobean translation
85

Let us (sith God commaunds) forthwith some good atonement make
If any way, or means there be their wrathful rage to slake.
Thou God that sits on seate on high, and all the world dost guide,
And thou by whose commaundment the Starres in Skies do glide:
Thou, thou that onely ruler art of Seas, of Floods, and all,
On thee and on thy Godhead great, for these requestes I call.
Who so hath slayne king Laius, oh Jove I do thee pray,
Let thousand ills upon him fall, before his dying day.
Let him no health ne comfort have, but al to crusht with cares,
Consume his wretched yeares in griefe, and though that Death him spares
Awhyle. Yet mischiefes all, at length uppon him light.
With all the evile under Sun, that ugly monster smight.
In exile let him live a Slave, the rated course of life.
In shame, in care, in penury, in daunger and in strife.
Let no man on him pity take, let all men him revile.
Let him his Mothers sacred Bed incestuously deWle.
Let him his father kill. And yet let him do mischiefes more.
Arthur Golding (1536–1606)
Educated at Jesus College, Cambridge, Golding entered the service of the Protector
Somerset. His most important work was his translation of Ovid’s Metamorphoses (1565
and 1567). The translation, like Chapman’s version of Homer’s Iliad, is in fourteeners. This
was the Ovid Shakespeare read, although, despite his (relatively) ‘little Latin’, the latter had
access to the source text. Golding also produced the Wrst complete translation of Caesar’s
Commentaries (1565), the rest of his translations being of Calvinistic works of religious
commentary, including Calvin’s own commentaries on the Psalms and Theodore Beza’s
Tragedie of Abraham’s SacriWce (1577). In addition, Golding translated a dialogue of Seneca,
De BeneWciis (1578), and completed Sir Philip Sidney’s translation of Philippe de Mornay’s
A Worke concerning the Trewnesse of the Christian Religion (1604).
The verse introduction to The Metamorphoses describes Ovid’s work as one of ediWca-
tion, teaching the mutability of all things. Ezra Pound, who called Golding’s version the
most beautiful book in the English language, wrote: ‘He is intent on conveying a meaning,
and not on bemusing them with a rumble’ (‘Notes on Elizabethan Classicists’, 1917). In
Pound’s view: ‘The quality of translations declined in measure as the translators ceased to
be absorbed in the subject matter of their original.’
86
from reformation to eighteenth century

Golding’s was the Wrst major English translation of The Metamorphoses. Its importance
can hardly be exaggerated; Shakespeare’s allusions to Classical mythology, particularly, of
course, in his two narrative poems, are drawn largely from Ovid, both source text and
Golding’s translation. The Ovidian echoes are more persistent than any others.
From the ‘Preface to the Reader’, in Ovid’s Metamorphoses:
The Arthur Golding Translation 1567, ed. John Frederick Nimms
(Philadelphia: Paul Dry Books, 2000), 427–8
Through Ovids woorke of turned shapes I have with peinfull pace
Past on untill I have him made so well acquainted with our toong
As that he may in English verse as in his owne bee soong.
Wherein although for pleasant style, I cannot make account,
To match myne author, who in that all other dooth surmount:
Yit (gentle Reader) doo I rrust my travail in this cace
May purchace favour in thy sight my dooings to embrace:
Considring what a sea of goodes and Jewelles thou shalt fynd,
Not more delyghtfull to the eare than frutefull to the mynd.
For this doo lerned persons deeme, of Ovids present woorke:
That in no one of all his bookes the which he wrate, doo lurke
Mo darke and secret misteries, mo counselles wyse and sage,
Mo good ensamples, mo reprooves of vyce in youth and age,
Mo fyne inventions to delight, mo matters clerkly knit,
No, nor more straunge varietie to shew a lerned wit.
The high, the lowe: the riche, the poore: the mayster, and the slave:
The mayd, the wife: the man, the chyld: the simple and the brave:
The yoong, the old: the good, the bad: the warriour strong and stout:
The wyse, the foole: the countrie cloyne: the lerned and the lout:
And every other living wight shall in this mirrour see
His whole estate, thoughtes, woordes and deeedes expresly shewd to bee.
[ . . . ]
Ovid, The Metamorphoses, Book IV, lines 440–55, the tale of Salmacis and
Hermaphrodite
[The Nymph Salmacis has thrown herself upon the double-sexed, reluctant Hermaphro-
ditus (oVspring of Hermes [Mercury] and Aphrodite [Venus]), who is bathing in her pool
and for whom she has developed an overwhelming passion. See Sect. 5. 16, below for
translation of the same passage by Ted Hughes.]
2.6 tudor and jacobean translation
87

Arthur Golding’s translation
The prize is won (cride Salmacis aloud) he is mine owne.
And therewithall in all post hast she having lightly throwne
Hir garments oV, Xew to the Poole and cast hir thereinto
And caught him fast between hir armes, for ought that he could doe:
Yea maugre all his wrestling and his struggling to and fro,
She held him still, and kissed him a hundred times and mo.
and willde he nillde he with hir handes she toucht his naked brest:
And now on this side now on that (for all he did resist
And strive to wrest him from hir gripes) she clung unto him fast:
And wound about him like a Snake which snatched up in hast
And being by the Prince of Birdes borne lightly up aloft,
Doth writhe hir selfe about his necke and griping talants oft:
And cast hir taile about his wings displayed in the winde:
Or like as Ivie runnes on trees about the utter rinde:
Or as the CrabWsh having caught his enmy in the Seas,
Doth claspe him in on every side with all his crooked cleas.
Prose version by Frank Justus Miller (rev. G. P. Goold), Ovid Metamorphoses books
I–VIII (1916; Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1999), 203–4
‘I win, and he is mine!’ cries the naiad, and casting oV all her garments dives also into the
waters: she holds him fast though he strives against her, steals reluctant kisses, fondles
him, touches his unwilling breast, clings to him on this side and on that. At length, as he
tries his best to break away from her, she wraps him round with her embrace, as a serpent,
when the king of birds has caught her and is bearing her on high: which, hanging from
his claws, wraps her folds about his head and feet and entangles his Xapping wings with
her tail: or as the ivy oft-times embraces great trunks of trees, or as the sea-polyp holds its
enemy caught beneath the sea, its tentacles embracing him on every side.
Thomas Wilson (1525?–1581)
Thomas Wilson was a scholar at King’s College, Cambridge. Member of Parliament, he
served as Secretary of State (1577–81). From 1553 Wilson was also a staunch adherent of the
Dudley family (John Dudley, Duke of Nothumberland was a patron of the new learning).
He was a close friend of the noted Greek scholar and leading Cambridge humanist Sir John
Cheeke and was one of the Protestant exiles during the time of Queen Mary, when
88
from reformation to eighteenth century

Protestantism and the new learning were banned. Wilson recalls Cheeke’s concern for
English exiles and his reading to and interpreting for them ‘certaine orations of Demos-
thenes in Greeke . . . ’. He translated Quintilian, Aristotle, and Cicero, Arte of Rhetorique
(1553), and Demosthenes Orations (1570), published just after the Catholic uprising in 1569.
Wilson’s patron was none other than Queen Elizabeth’s ‘principall Secretarie’, Sir
William Cecil. Whether it be true that Wilson had translated Demosthenes’ orations at
the instance of the government to strengthen the country’s morale during a time of
threatened interference from Spain, the political purpose of the translation is clearly
proclaimed on the title page, Philip of Macedon being code for Philip of Spain. The
dedication and other prefatory matter pointedly refer to love of country and the need for
loyalty, especially at so critical a moment in the national history.
While stressing the diYculty of rendering Demosthenes in English (or in Latin) Wilson
insists that English is as good an instrument as any, seeing himself as steering a course
between the apparently too literal translation and the too free. He castigates those who
criticize translations without themselves attempting to translate.
Thomas Wilson from Dedication, Three Orations of Demosthenes (London: imprinted
by Henrie Denhan, 1570)
Yea, the more that I look upon this Orator to bring his sentences and words known to
our common speech and language: the more doe I Wnd him hard and unable to be
translated, according to the excellence of his tongue. And many times I have been
ashamed of my self, when I compared his Greek and my English together. And no
marvel neither. For the Latin translators being otherwise most excellent men, have not
always satisWed themselves, much less answered to their charge and enterprise in the
opinion of others that compared their doings and the Greek together. [ . . . ] For this must
I needs confess, that I am altogether unable to doe so in English, as the excellence of this
orator deserveth in Greek. And yet the cunning is no less, and the praise as great in my
judgement to translate any thing excellently into English, as into any other language.
[ . . . ] And in deed my labour can be no hurt to any body, except it be to my self. For the
Greek is as it was [ . . . ]. And such as have no Greek, may go to the Latin for all my
doings, or any other translation else in any other strange tongue or language. For as I do
hear say, certain pieces of Demosthenes are translated also into divers other tongues. But
such as are grieved with translated books, are like to them that eating Wne Manchet, are
angry with others that feed on Cheate bread. And yet God knoweth men would as gladly
eat Manchet as they, if they had it. But all can not wear Velvet, or feed with the best, and
therefore such are contented for necesity’s sake to wear our Country cloth, and to take
themselves to hard fare, that can have no better. But what reason have they I pray you that
2.6 tudor and jacobean translation
89

will not suVer men to write reason as well as to speak reason? for this I dare say, that even
those men, if they have any reason with them at all, will use in their proofs upon weighty
matters, the arguments of Demosthenes or reasons of like value. And may not I or any
other set down those reasons by pen, in our English language, the which are uttered daily
in our common speech, by men of understanding? [ . . . ] And thus having done my
voluntary task, I desire none other thanks for all my labour and travail herein, but your
favourable defence against certain, that will doe nothing themselves, and yet will Wnd
fault with all things, being in nature Drones, and no Bees: Lubbers and no learners: as
void of sound judgement and understanding, as they are out of reason curious judges,
over the travail and pains taking of others. But who can stop these open mouthed talkers?
empty vessels make the greatest sound, and ring out a hollow noise to small purpose, and
so do these that have the least skill and smallest knowledge, make the mightiest brag, and
are the boldest of all others without cause or reason god he knoweth. Of which croking
paddocks, and manifest overweeners of themselves: I do make very little account, or no
reckoning at all. [ . . . ]
Sir Thomas North (1535–1602/3)
Son of the Wrst Baron North, lawyer and politician, Thomas North was educated at
Peterhouse, Cambridge and Lincoln’s Inn. He was knighted for his part in preparations to
withstand possible invasion at the time of the Armada. It is possible or even likely that
North met Bishop Amyot, the celebrated French translator of Plutarch, who had been
appointed Grand Almoner of France, when he visited the country in the retinue of his
brother, on an embassy to the French court.
In addition to his translation of Plutarch, North also translated The Morall Philosophie of
Doni, and The Diall of Princes, a translation of Antonio de Guevara’s Libro dureo de Marco
aurelio (1528), a spurious autobiography, expanded in the political treatise the Relox de
principes (1529). Plutarch was translated via the French version of the Greek original by
Amyot (1569). It is arguable that, since he was working from an almost contemporary
French intermediary, North might have been somewhat less inclined to adhere closely to the
‘source’ text. His style was intensely dramatic, which above all is what commended it to
Shakespeare, who drew freely on it in his three Roman tragedies (Julius Caesar, Anthony and
Cleopatra, and Coriolanus). The perceived importance of the source is of course implicit in
the dedication of the translation to Queen Elizabeth herself. F. O. Matthiessen (Translation:
An Elizabethan Art, 1931) regarded North’s translation of Plutarch as the earliest great
masterpiece of English prose, after Malory’s Morte D’Arthur and the Book of Common Prayer.
90
from reformation to eighteenth century

From the Dedication ‘To the Most High and Mighty Princess Elizabeth, By the Grace of
God, of England, France and Ireland Queen, Defender of the Faith: etc.’, in Plutarch’s
Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans, Englished by Sir Thomas North (1579; London:
David Nutt, 1896)
How many examples shall your subjects read here, of several persons, and whole
armies, of noble and base, of young and olde, that both by sea and land, at home and
abroad, have strained their wits, not regarded their states, ventured their persons, cast
away their lives, not only for the honour and safety, but also for the pleasure of their
Princes?
Then well may the Readers think, if they have done this for heathen Kings, what
should we do for Christian Princes? If they have done this for glory, what should we do
for religion? if they have done this without hope of heaven, what should we do that look
for immortality? And so adding the encouragement of these examples, to the forwardness
of their Owen dispositions: what service is there in war, what honour in peace, which
they will not be ready to doe, for their worthy Queen?
A comparison between Amyot, North, and a more recent literal translation (Bernadotte
Perrin, The Loeb Classical Library) of Plutarch’s Parallel Lives, ‘Life of Brutus’
Perrin’s translation
And it is said that Caesar, when he Wrst heard Brutus speak in public, said to his friends:
‘I know not what this young man wants, but all that he wants he wants very much.’ For
the weight of his character, and the fact that no one found it easy to make him listen to
appeals for favour, but that he accomplished his ends by reasoning and the adoption of
noble principles, made his eVorts, withersoever directed, powerful and eYcacious.
North’s translation
They say also that Caesar said, when he heard Brutus plead; ‘I know not,’ said he, ‘what
this young man would; but, what he would, he willeth it vehemently.’ For, as Brutus’
gravity and constant mind would not grant all men their requests that sued unto him, but
being moved with reason and discretion did always incline to that which was good and
honest, even so, when it was moved to follow any matter, he used a kind of forcible and
vehement persuasion that calmed not till he had obtained his desire.
[North’s translation is highly colloquial, for example, his use of doublets for single words,
not so much to enhance the meaning as for sound. In general, his changes were in the
interest of precise detailing and dramatic eVect. Where Amyot is digniWed and restrained,
North is often picturesquely vigorous, using the language of direct instead of indirect
speech, drawing on proverbial phrases etc. His dramatization of the text, of course, made it
2.6 tudor and jacobean translation
91

particularly attractive for the playwright. North gave Shakespeare not only material for
plots but living characters and very often the very words they were likely to use:]
Amyot : Mais ilz ne disent pas la verite
Perrin: But it is not so
North: But this holdeth no water
Amyot : luy donna une couple de souZets
Perrin: sprang up and gave him a thrashing
North: rose up on his feet and gave him two good whirts on the ear.
Comparison between North and Shakespeare in Coriolanus
[Shakespeare drew both plot and a good deal of the actual wording from North’s
translation. In Coriolanus, for instance, his indebtedness to North is transparent, although,
as in the passage below, it is also clear that Shakespeare does not simply plagiarize but adds
some signiWcant touches, heightening the text (e.g. ‘Whoop’d out of Rome’) at moments
crucial to the plot. He was able to use North’s text as a basis, at certain points almost as if
they were joint-authors. No doubt the pressure under which he was working rendered him
less likely to have qualms about such borrowings. In Coriolanus, a late play, the principal
character resembles Othello in his nobility and naivety. He is brought low by the baseness
and treachery of others. Shakespeare takes the substance of the plot from North. It is also
noticeable that much of North’s text falls naturally into heroic metre.]
Shakespeare, Coriolanus, Act lV, Scene v
coriolanus (unmuZing). If, Tullus,
Not yet thou know’st me, and seeing me, dost not
Think me for the man I am, necessity
Commands me name myself . . .
My name is Caius Marcius, who hath done
to thee particularly, and to all the Volsces,
Great hurt and mischief; thereto witness may
My surname, Coriolanus: the painful service,
The extreme dangers, and the drops of blood
Shed for my thankless country, are requited
But with that surname; a good memory,
And witness of the malice and displeasure
Which thou shouldst bear me: only that name remains;
The cruelty and envy of the people,
92
from reformation to eighteenth century

Permitted by our dastard nobles, who
Have all forsook me, hath devour’d the rest;
And suVer’d me by the voice of slaves to be
Whoop’d out of Rome. Now this extremity
Hath brought me to thy hearth; not out of hope,
Mistake me not, to save my life; for if
I had fear’d death, of all the men i’ the world
I would have ‘voided thee; but in mere spite
To be full quit of those my banishers,
Stand I before thee here . . .
North
Then Martius unmuZed himself, and after he had paused a while, making no answer, he
said unto him: If thou knowest me not yet, Tullus, and seeing me, dost not perhaps
believe me to be the man I am in deed, I must of necessity bewraye my self to be that I am.
I am Caius Martius, who hath done to thy self particularly, and to all the Volsces
generally, great hurt and mischief, which I cannot deny for my surname of Coriolanus
that I bear. For I never had other beneWt nor recompense, of all the true and painful
service I have done, and the extreme dangers I have been in, but this only surname: a
good memory and witness, of the malice and displeasure thou showldest bear me. In
deed the name only remaineth with me: for the rest, the envy and cruelty of the people of
Rome have taken from me, by the suVerance of the dastardly nobility and magistrates,
who have forsaken me, and let me be banished by the people. This extremity hath now
driven me to come as a poor suitor, to take thy chimney hearth, not out of any hope
I have to save my life thereby. For if I had feared death, I would not have come hither to
put my life in hazard: but prickt forward with spite and desire I have to be revenged of
them that thus have banished me.
John Florio (1553–1625)
Giovanni or John Florio, translator and lexicographer, was the son of an Italian Protestant
refugee. His A World of Words, a vast folio Italian–English dictionary, published in 1598,
was a landmark and standard throughout the seventeenth century. This was followed by
The Essays, or Moral, Politic, and Military Discourse of Lo. Michael de Montaigne (1595;
1603). Under James I, Florio became tutor to Prince Henry. A passionate enthusiast about
words, he wrote in euphuistic style (with a multitude of compound words, doublings, etc).
Shakespeare was greatly inXuenced by the Montaigne translation. Whibley’s comment
2.6 tudor and jacobean translation
93

that it has ‘neither the sentiment of North, nor the scholarship of Holland’, seems too
negative (See also F. O. Matthiessen, Translation, An Elizabethan Art (Harvard, 1931),
‘Florio’s Montaigne’ (1603) for additional comments.)
From Florio’s ‘Dedication to the second book’ Essays of Montaigne (London: V. Sims, 1603)
Montaigne was worth translating, because of his ‘so pleasing passages, so judicious
discourses, so delightsome varieties, so persuasive conclusions, such learning of all sortes,
and above all, so elegant a French style’
From Firste Fruites (London: Thomas Dawson, for Thomas Woodcocke, 1578)
[Florio expresses his dissatisfaction with English.]
It doth not like me at all, because it is a language confused, bepeesed with many tongues:
it taketh many words of the latin, & more from the French, & more from the Italian, and
many more from the Dutch, some also from the Greek & from the Britai, so that if every
language had his own words again, there would but a few remain for Englishmen, and yet
every day they add. Take a book and read, but mark well, and you shall not read four
words together of true English.
[The translation demonstrates his passionate delight in words. Added words are italicized
in the following example:]
M. J’en ay veu engloutir du sable, de la cendre, & se travailler a` point nomme´ de ruiner
leur estomac, pour acquerir les pasles couleurs.’’
F. I have seen some swallow gravell, ashes, coales, dust, tallow, candles, and for the-nonce,
labour and toyle themselves to spoile their stomacke, only to get a pale-bleake colour.
‘‘These boistrous billows’’ for ‘‘ces Xots’’
M. Je ne voy rien autour de moy que couvert & masque´
F. I see nothing about me, but inscrutable hearts, hollow mindes, fained looks, dissembled
speeches, and counterfeit actions.
George Chapman (1559/60–1634)
Chapman wrote much poetry and drama, but is best known for his translations of Homer.
He published the Wrst seven books of the Iliad in 1598, followed by the whole work (1611),
the Odyssey (1614–15) and Homeric ‘Hymns’ (1616), as well as translations from Petrarch
94
from reformation to eighteenth century

(1612), Musaeus (1616), Hesiod (1618), and Juvenal (1629). To some extent superseded by
Pope’s Homer, Chapman’s was the subject of a celebrated poem by John Keats (‘On First
Looking Into Chapman’s Homer’, 1816) and remained in print.
Keats’s resonant sonnet is of interest, taking Chapman at his word, and testifying to the
translation’s enduring freshness and originality:
Oft of one wide expanse had I been told
That deep-brow’d Homer ruled as his demesne;
Yet did I never breathe its pure serene
Till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold:
Then felt I like some watcher of the skies
When a new planet swims into his ken [ . . . ]
Chapman’s observations on translation in the verse preface to the 1611 Iliad, ‘To The
Reader’, hardly describe his method, but embody a passionate defence of Homer and a
deWant attack on the translator’s detractors. Chapman’s insistence on non-literalism makes
it clear that accusations of inaccuracy were a staple of criticism. As regards his tendency to
elaborate, Chapman points to his predecessors. Only poetic licence or inspiration can help
in the translation of poetry. He does not argue but simply aYrms the appropriateness of
the fourteener (fourteen-syllable line). Regarding the use of fourteeners in the Iliad as
against pentametric couplets in the Odyssey, the longer line works well enough if the
enjambments, varying the otherwise jog-trot alternation of 4-stress 3-stress hemistiches,
are carefully observed.
The same indulgence may be granted Chapman which he would claim for Homer, that
he ‘not bee read for a few lynes with leaves turned over capriciously in dismembred
fractions, but throughout, the whole drift, weight and height of his workes set before the
apprensive eye of his judge.’
Chapman translated directly from the original, with errors due to ignorance or haste.
He vindicates his ‘varietie of new wordes’. If ‘my countrey language were an usurer, he
would thank me for enriching him’. He dismisses Scaliger, the greatest Classical scholar of
the time, as ‘soul-blind Scaliger’, and compares Virgil and Homer to the disadvantage of
the former, Homer’s poem being ‘writ from a free fury’, whereas Virgil’s comes out of a
‘courtly, laborious, and altogether imitatory spirit’.
I must confesse I hardly dare referre
To reading judgements, since so generally
Custome hath made even th’ablest Agents erre
In these translations: all so much apply
Their paines and cunning word for word to render
2.6 tudor and jacobean translation
95

Their patient authors, when they may as well
Make Wsh with fowle, Camels with Whales engender,
Or their tongues’ speech in other mouths compell.
For even as diVerent a production
Aske Greeke and English, since, as they in sounds
And letters shunne one forme and unison,
So have their sense and elegancie bounds
In their distinguisht natures, and require
Onely a judgement to make both consent
In sense and elocution, and aspire
As well to reach the spirit that was spent
In his example, as with arte to pierce
His Grammar and etymologie of words.
But as great Clerkes can write no English verse
Because (alas! great Clerks) English aVords,
Say they, no height nor copie—a rude toung
(Since ’tis their Native)—but in Greeke or Latin
Their writs are rare, for thence true Poesie sprong—
Though them (Truth knowes) they have but skil to chat-in
Compar’d with that they might say in their owne,
Since thither th’other’s full soule cannot make
The ample transmigration to be showne
In Nature-loving Poesie, so the brake
That those Translatours sticke in that aVect
Their word-for-word tradujctions (where they lose
The free grace of their naturall Dialect
And shame their authors with a forced Glose)
I laugh to see—and yet as much abhorre
More licence from the words than may expresse
Their full compression and make cleare the Author.
From whose truth if you thinke my feet digresse
[ . . . ]
(In some maine parts) that were his Commentars.
But (as the illustration of the Sunne
Should be attempted by the erring starres)
96
from reformation to eighteenth century

They fail’d to search his deepe and treasurous hart.
The cause was since they wanted the Wt key
Of Nature, in their down-right strength of Art,
With Poesie to open Poesie—
Which in my Poeme of the mysteries
Reveal’d in Homer I will clearely prove,
Till whose neere birth suspend your Calumnies
And farre-wide imputations of selfe love.
From Homer, Odyssey, Book XI
[See other versions of the same passage elsewhere in the volume.]
From The Odysseys of Homer Together With The Shorter Poems Translated According
To The Greek By George Chapman (1614–15)
Arriv’d now at our ship, we launch’d, and set
Our mast up, put forth sail, and in did get
Our late-got cattle. Up our sails, we went
My wayward fellows mourning now th’event.
A good companion yet, a foreright wind,
Circe (the excellent utt’rer of her mind)
Supplied our murmuring consorts with, that was
Both speed and guide to our adventurous pass.
All day our sails stood to the winds, and made
Our voyage prosp’rous. Sun then set, and shade
All ways obscuring, on the bounds we fell
Of deep Oceanus, where people dwell
Whom a perpetual cloud obscures outright,
To whom the cheerful sun lends never light,
Nor when he mounts the star-sustaining heaven,
Nor when he stoops earth, and sets up the even,
But night holds Wx’d wings, feather’d all with banes,
Above those most unblest Cimmerians.
Here drew we up our ship, our sheep withdrew,
And walk’d the shore till we attain’d the view
Of that sad region Circe had foreshow’d [ . . . ]
2.6 tudor and jacobean translation
97

Greek source text and ad verbum translation by Gottskalk Jensson
Philemon Holland (1552–1637)
Even more proliWc than North, Holland went directly to the Classical source, rather than
using intermediaries, but loved ornament. He was no pedant, unashamedly clothing his
Classical authors in Elizabethan garb: ‘if I have called again into use some old words, let it
be attributed to the love of my country language: if the sentence be not so concise, couched
and knit together as the originall, loth I was to be obscure and darke: have I not Englished
every word aptly? Each nation hath several manners, yea, and tearmes appropriate by
themselves.’ Still, Holland, did also go in for much ornament, as for instance with regard
to Pliny’s ‘Historie of the World’ (1634), where famously he expressed the ambition ‘by all
means to triumph now over the Romans in subduing their literature under the dent of the
English pen, in requital of the conquest some time over this Island, achieved by the edge of
their sword.’ There have been understandably few attempts to translate Pliny the Elder’s
enormous Naturalis Historia (Natural History).1 Nearly three centuries were to pass before
there was another version.
Homer, Odyssey, 11. 1–22
English crib
`Paæ K Þ Kd BÆ ŒÆºŁ	 M
b ŁºÆÆ;
BÆ 	b iæ 	æø KæÆ	 N –ºÆ 
EÆ;
K 
 ƒe ØŁ	ŁÆ ŒÆd ƒÆ  	ºÆﬁ;
K 
b a 	BºÆ ºÆ KÆ	; i 
b ŒÆd ÆPd
Æ	 I	Ø; ŁÆºæe ŒÆa 
Œæı :
	E 
 Æs ŒÆØŁ e ŒıÆæﬁæØ
YŒ	 sæ ¥Ø ºØ; KŁºe ÆEæ;
˚æŒ KßºŒÆ	; 
Øc Łe ÆP
Æ:
	E 
 ‹ºÆ ŒÆÆ 	Ø ŒÆa BÆ
l	ŁÆ: c 
 ¼	  Œıæ  YŁı:
B 
b Æ	æ ÆŁ ƒÆ æ.

  MºØ ŒØø  AÆØ IªıØÆ
 
 K æÆŁ ¥ŒÆ ÆŁıææı  ŒÆE:
ŁÆ 
b ˚Ø		æø I
æH 
B	  ºØ ;
MæØ ŒÆd ºﬁ ŒŒÆºı		Ø: P
  ÆPf
 ˙ºØ ÆŁø ŒÆÆ
æŒÆØ IŒØ;
hŁ › i ﬁØ æe PæÆe IæÆ;
hŁ ‹ i ił Kd ªÆEÆ I PæÆŁ ææÆØ;
Iºº Kd f Oºc ÆÆØ 
ØºEØ æEØ:
BÆ 	b Ł KºŁ KŒºÆ	; KŒ 
b a 	BºÆ
ƒº	Ł  ÆPd 
 ÆıÐ  Ææa Þ  ŒÆE
ﬁX	; Zæ K Hæ IØŒ	Ł , n æ ˚æŒ:
‘But when we had come down to the ship and the sea,
we Wrst of all drew the ship into the divine sea, and set
the mast and the sail in the black ship, and took the
sheep and put them aboard, and ourselves embarked
sorrowing, shedding big tears. And for us fair-haired
Kirke, dread goddess of human speech, sent behind the
dark-prowed ship a favourable wind to Wll the sail, a
good companion. Having taken care of every bit of
tackle throughout the ship, we sat down; the wind
and the helmsman steered her. All day long the sail
was stretched as she cruised over the sea. And the sun set
and all roads were darkened; and she came to the edges
of deep-Xowing Okeanos. There is the people and city
of Kimmerian men, wrapped in mist and cloud; and
never does the shining sun look down upon them with
rays, either when climbing the starry heaven or when
going on to earth from heaven, but destructive night is
stretched over poor mortals. Coming to this place we
beached the ship, and took out the sheep; and ourselves
went along the stream of Okeanos, until we came to the
place, which Kirke had pointed out.’
1 See Peter France (ed.), The Oxford Guide to Literature in English Translation (Oxford: OUP, (2000), 539.)
98
from reformation to eighteenth century

Holland, like other translators of the period makes the source text accessible to his
contemporaries. Thus, the opening of his translation of Plutarch’s Moralia, the section on
‘The Education of Children’, in the fairly literal Loeb edition runs: ‘Let us consider what
may be said of the education of freeborn children, and what advantages they should enjoy
to give them a sound character when they grow up. It is perhaps better to begin with their
parentage Wrst’; Holland has: ‘Ereasmuch as we are to consider what may be said as
touching the education of children, free born and descended from gentle blood, how and
by what discipline they may become honest and virtuous, we shall perhaps treat hereof the
better, if we begin at their generation and nativity.’
Livy Ab urbe condita (From the Foundation of the City), 142 books covering seven-and-
a-half centuries of Roman history; Wrst complete translation of the thirty-Wve surviving
books by Philemon Holland
Dedication to Queen Elizabeth
From Preface to the Reader
I framed my pen, not to any aVected phrase, but to a mean and popular style [ . . . ] if the
sentence be not so concise, couched and knit together, as the original, loth I was to be
obscure and dark.
2.6 tudor and jacobean translation
99

2.7. Renaissance Latin Translation in England
Latin was the lingua franca of European intellectual life for centuries. It moved north
across Europe along with institutional Christianity, which reached the shores of Iceland in
the year 1000. From around that time and into the seventeenth century—and to a degree
even into the nineteenth—Latin was a language in which intellectuals pursued a dialogue
across borders, from the Mediterranean to the Arctic Ocean, and across time, for certain
areas of Latin discourse established themselves as traditions which were very much kept
alive from one era to another.
This is a part of European cultural legacy which is often downplayed in national
histories—including literary histories—and sometimes passed over in relative silence,
just like the vital role of Arab scholars in preserving and mediating Classical European
learning after the demise of Ancient Greece and Rome, in many cases passing it back into
Europe through the cross-cultural eVorts of translators in Spain, under Muslim leadership.
Translation was also a central activity in European Latinity. The most powerful text of
this period was a translation: the Vulgate version of the Bible. And while that translation
was often considered a kind of holy ‘original’—the very core of the Catholic Church—and
the translation of holy scripture into other languages could involve severe complications
and penalties, the Church encouraged and relied on the translation of various other texts.
With the onset of the Renaissance, translation also comes to Wgure prominently in other
areas of scholarship, literature, politics, and social life. Translation from and into Latin
becomes a central undertaking. Latin is the source language of countless translations into
the various vernacular tongues that now take on new cultural roles. But since Latin is an
international medium, shared by intellectuals in diVerent countries, it was an obvious
language to translate into, not only the great library of Greek texts from an extensive
period, but also salient documents written in other languages. Of course, many documents
of all kinds were also composed in Latin by individuals in various parts of Europe. One of
the key works of English literature, Thomas More’s Utopia (1516), was written in Latin. In
fact, the same individual might on diVerent occasions write in the respective vernacular, in
Latin, or translate texts from one to the other. This bilingual aspect of the intellectual
pursuit is one of the most striking characteristics of this period in European cultural
history.
Compiled on the basis of J. W. Binns’s Intellectual Culture in Elizabethan and Jacobean England: The Latin
Writings of the Age (ARCA Classical and Medieval Texts, Papers and Monographs, 24; Leeds: Francis Cairns
Publications Ltd., 1990).
100
from reformation to eighteenth century

The following quotations and excerpts are taken from the book Intellectual Culture in
Elizabethan and Jacobean England: The Latin Writings of the Age (ARCA Classical and
Medieval Texts, Papers and Monographs 24; Leeds: Francis Cairns (Publications) Ltd.
1990), by Dr J. W. Binns, formerly of the Centre for Medieval Studies, at the University of
York, England. In this impressive work, Professor Binns gives a detailed account of Latin
writings in Renaissance England. He points out that alongside the literary activity in the
English language at this time, there was a vast but now ‘virtually unremarked’ quantity of
writing in Latin ‘that stands at the centre of the revival of English intellectual life in the years
of Elizabeth and James. About one in ten of the items printed in England between c.1550–
1640 is in Latin. This may not seem a large percentage, but the importance of this forgotten
tenth is greater than the proportion might suggest, because far more vernacular than Latin
items were ephemeral and of slight intellectual interest [ . . . ] whereas Latin writings were
usually serious in purpose and often intended for posterity’ (pp. 1–2).
In our time, when English seems to be headed for a global linguistic dominance in a
number of ways, it puts things into a striking historical perspective to be reminded that
Latin, this ‘dead language’, used to have such a status in Europe, while English, in the age
of Shakespeare, to the ‘scholarly continental public’, was ‘a minor and unknown tongue’
(p. 241). ‘So it made sense for any serious English writer to write in Latin, a language of
unquestioned prestige, which could be read by intellectuals all over Europe, which had
endured pre-eminent for a millennium and a half, and which there was no reason to doubt
would last for ever’ (p. 3). In some cases the act of writing in or translating into Latin, as
Binns points out, was spurred by burning contemporary, ideological and theological
issues, especially when spokesmen of the Church of England sought to justify the
Reformation and defend their church against Catholics on the Continent (p. 242).
Binns gives a scholarly account of poetry and drama, as well as the various non-Wctional
and scholarly works, composed by English writers in Latin. But he also covers the ‘English’
translations into Latin of texts originally written in Greek or in English and other
European vernaculars. Parts of this discussion are included below, along with Binns’s
translation of comments made by these translators on their work.1 Judging by these
comments, no single method appears to reign supreme, but they oVer valuable insights
into textual and contextual matters of translation. The collage concludes with Binns’s
summary of a treatise written in Latin by one of the leading translators, Laurence
Humphrey, a signiWcant work in the history of translation theory, but one that has gone
largely unnoticed. Humphrey’s tripartite notion of translation methods pre-dates by more
than a century Dryden’s similar and much-quoted description of the diVerent kinds of
translation, although what Humphrey understood by ‘imitation’ is somewhat diVerent,
relating to the Classical pedagogical notion, rather than extravagant self-expression.
2.7 renaissance latin translation
101

From J. W. Binns, Intellectual Culture in Elizabethan and Jacobean England: The Latin
Writings of the Age (ARCA Classical and Medieval Texts, Papers and Monographs 24;
Leeds: Francis Cairns (Publications) Ltd., 1990)
John Christopherson and Laurence Humphrey
The most prominent class of Greek writers to engage the attention of English translators
were the Greek Fathers, together with some early Christian and Byzantine religious
writings. Here the motive for translation is clearly theological: to make available to the
wider Latinate audience important religious and theological texts. In this area the work of
John Christopherson is prominent.
The Latin translations by John Christopherson of Eusebius’ Historia ecclesiastica and
De vita Constantini, of Socrates’ Historia ecclesiastica and of the writings on Church
history of Theodoretus, Theodore, Sozomen, and Evagrius Scholasticus were Wrst
printed in Louvain in 1569 under the title Historia ecclesiastica scriptores graeci [ . . . ].
Christopherson, a Catholic, had been made Master of Trinity College, Cambridge, in the
reign of Queen Mary, to whom he had been appointed chaplain and confessor. He died
in 1558 [ . . . ].
In an introductory ‘Prooemium Interpretis’, Christopherson himself writes that he is
translating the works of the Greek Fathers to make more widely known their spiritual
discipline and moral precepts, and so that the excellent examples of their lives might
become better known. [ . . . ]
Christopherson goes on to say that those who publish Wne editions of the Greek and
Latin Fathers have conferred a great blessing on the Church. Therefore he had decided to
embark upon his present work:
I consider that it would be not inconvenient for me to interpret this work, and that it
would be not unpleasant for others to read: so long as I turned it into Latin in such a
way as both to express truly the sense and meaning of the author, and to adumbrate its
form of speech and harmony by imitating them, so that the whole work might be
articulated by features either identical to, or else not greatly dissimilar from, the
original.
Christopherson continues to give further revealing glimpses of his thought in this
‘Prooemium’, which is in eVect a miniature treatise on the Art of Translation. In
translating from Greek into Latin, Christopherson says that four things are desirable:
In translating Greek, it seems to me, contemplating the matter with keen attention,
that four things in particular are required: a true explanation of sense and meaning,
good latinity, harmony, and that perspicuity of speech which I have mentioned. The
Wrst is usually held to be relevant for Wdelity, the second for delight, the third for the
judgement of the ears, the fourth for the understanding. For who will believe if
102
from reformation to eighteenth century

the meaning is suspect? Who will take pleasure in reading, if the speech is rude
and unpolished? Whose ears will not be disgusted, if the speech is disconnected and
confused? Whom will it not deter, if it seems obscure and shrouded by darkness?
And although those ideals are in the highest degree both useful and necessary in
translating the books of philosophers, orators and poets, who have written about
the humane disciplines and polite literature, yet in rendering the writings of saints
and apostles, the things which are handed down by them about our religion ought
rightly to be considered no less necessary and much more useful. For although in
translating the Scriptures the order of the words should be retained, as St Jerome
says, because it is a mystery: yet in the translation of other Greek writings, on the
same authority of Jerome (when he cites and imitates Cicero), we should translate
not word for word, but meaning for meaning.
In other words, says Christopherson, the meaning of the text ought not to be subordin-
ated to a good style, desirable though the latter may be. On the other hand, inXexible
adherence to the letter rather than the spirit is to be avoided. True eloquence, he
continues, is not empty verbalising, but the articulation of wisdom:
For eloquence is not that empty and almost puerile verbal volubility which often
insolently advances itself among the common people, but wisdom which speaking
eloquently and copiously glides into the minds of the prudent with sweetness. For if
you take away wisdom, the death of eloquence will follow.
(pp. 218–21)
Laurence Humphrey, (1527?-1590), President of Magdalen College, Oxford, was one of
the most learned of the Latin writers of Elizabethan England. [ . . . ]
Laurence Humphrey’s translation of St Cyril of Alexandria’s Commentariorum in
Hesaiam prophetam libri quinque was printed at Basle, 1563, and was dedicated to Queen
Elizabeth, whilst his translation of the Disputatio contra Marcionistas, attributed to
Origen, appeared in the complete Latin translation of Origen by a variety of hands
published at Basle in 1571 and reprinted at Paris in 1572–4 and 1604. The title page of the
second volume claims Humphrey’s Latin version as the Wrst available anywhere
(nunc primum latine redditi per Laurentium Humfridum Anglum). Humphrey’s translation
is dedicated on 6 August 1557 to an otherwise obscure Sir Anthony Cave, and Humphrey
writes in the dedication that he had translated the work from a Greek codex belonging
to Froben:
I translated the work from the Greek from a manuscript codex of Froben, rendering
the meaning not the words, having regard not to the number of words but to their
weight, everywhere taking precautions to the best of my ability that the meaning of
the Greek should not be overthrown, as usually happens, and perish in translation.
2.7 renaissance latin translation
103

In this dedication Humphrey proclaims the ethical and educational virtue of the
Greek Fathers, both in inculcating good morality and in their rhetorical style. It was, we
may be sure, the passionate interest of these translators in morals and in schooling that
drew them to such works:
I wish that the Homilies of Chrysostom and the speeches of Gregory and of Basil the
Great could occupy some place (in schools) since not only are they bestrewn and
crammed with metaphors, similes, and proverbs, but they excel in all kinds of
doctrine and learning.
(pp. 224–5)
Patrick Young and Richard Brett
The translation by Patrick Young, the biblical scholar and librarian to James I and
Charles I, of Pope Clement I’s (X. A.D. 96) Clementis ad Corinthios epistola prior,
appeared at Oxford in 1633, and was dedicated to King Charles. [ . . . ]. Young says that
his translation is a plain one, and maintains that it is strictly faithful and literal:
Subtracting nothing, and adding nothing of my own, not a syllable, not a letter, . . .
I have as far as was possible translated most faithfully.
His version was not distinguished for elegance of style:
If you seek for the charm of eloquence, or the splendour of rhetorical speech in my
version you will do so in vain. I aimed in this matter at Wdelity, not ornament, or
verbal elegance.
(p. 226)
In 1597, Richard Brett, Fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford, published a Latin translation
of a work by Simeon Metaphrastes, a Byzantine writer from Constantinople who
Xourished at the beginning of the tenth century, the Vitae sanctorum evangilistarum
Iohannis et Lucae, a Simeone Metaphraste olim concinnatae, iam recens traductae. This
work appeared from the press of Joseph Barnes, the university printer, and it contains an
edition of the Greek text parallel to the Latin. Brett, who was later one of the translators
of King James’ Bible, dedicates the work to the judge, Thomas Owen, and in his
dedication he makes it clear that he has allowed himself a good deal of freedom. The
translation had occupied him for a month:
Where my author is sportive with repetition, there I have wielded my axe, and cut
out his tautologies. Where he progresses with too much compression and obscurely,
there I have introduced some light and charm. Where he progresses in too expansive
a manner, uniting in a single sentence matters ill-digested or very numerous and
conXicting, there indeed I have given the most correct shape to single items as
104
from reformation to eighteenth century

I thought best, and broken it up into sometimes two, sometimes three, periods
without any harm to the meaning . . . For what a task it was for a man in intervals of
leisure from higher cares to have transcribed, translated, copied out again and
submitted to the press this work in the space of one month? I do not say ‘polished
the work’, since I had neither the time nor the inclination to do so.
(pp. 226–7)
Lord Bacon
The most important English author to gain a continental audience in Latin guise at this time
was [ . . . ] undoubtedly Lord [Francis] Bacon. Those of his works that were not written in
Latin from the start were soon made available to a European audience in Latin versions.
William Rawley, chaplain and amanuensis to Lord Bacon and editor of the London, 1623
edition of De augmentis scientiarum, the Wrst book of which incorporates a Latin translation
of Bacon’s The Advancement of Learning, writes in his dedicatory letter to the reader:
Not long ago he formed the intention that it should be translated into Latin, since
he had heard that the work was being sought after by foreigners. Nay, he was wont
frequently to say that books written in modern languages would not very long after
go bankrupt. And so he now publishes his translation of the work, which has been
worked on by certain men who are fairly well known for their eloquence, and then
puriWed by his own revision too.
The words of Bacon himself which Rawley cites provide the clearest proof possible of
the relative status of English and Latin in this period. This Latin version of Bacon was
widely reprinted all over Europe—at Paris in 1624, Strasbourg in 1635 and 1654, Leyden
in 1645 and 1652, Amsterdam in 1662; and indeed it was never really out of circulation,
since it was re-issued in the eighteenth century at Lugano, 1763 and Wu¨rzburg, 1779 and
in the nineteenth century at Nuremburg, 1829.
Some explanation of ‘men . . . well known for their eloquence’ may be worthwhile.
Bacon had written earlier to Dr Playfere, the Lady Margaret Professor of Divinity at
Cambridge, asking him to translate the Advancement of Learning into Latin on the
grounds that English was still very much a ‘private’ language:
And therefore the privateness of the language considered wherein it is written, exclud-
ing so many readers, (as, on the one side, the obscurity of the argument in many parts
of it excludeth many others), I must account it a second birth of that work, if it might
be translated into Latin, without manifest sense of loss of the sense and matter.
It appears, however, that Dr Playfere produced an over-elaborate specimen of a transla-
tion, which did not please Bacon, who may have thought that such a translation would
distract from the meaning. Rawley’s friend Thomas Tenison reports:
2.7 renaissance latin translation
105

he sent a specimen of such superWne Latinity, that the Lord Bacon did not
encourage him to labour further in that work, in the penning of which, he
desired not so much neat and polite, as clear, masculine, and apt expression.
So it appears that Playfere was not one of the translators, who according to Tenison
included the poet George Herbert. Nevertheless it is clear that Bacon himself exercised
Wnal supervision over the version.
(pp. 252–3)
Sir Francis Kynaston
[The following is from Binns’s account of the Latin translation of Chaucer’s Troilus and
Criseyde, Books I and II, by Sir Francis Kynaston, a courtier and poet:]
Amorum Troili et Creseidae [ . . . ] printed in parallel with the English text of Thynne, and
dedicated to Patrick Young, the Royal Librarian, throws important light on the literary and
cultural aspirations of the English at this time. The impulse behind it, as is clear from the
dedication and the many prefatory poems, was to preserve a great literary work from
neglect, and to make it available both to a European audience, and to Kynaston’s own
English contemporaries, for whom the archeisms of Chaucerian English were an obstable to
understanding. Thus it has nationalistic and literary aims in a number of dimensions. [ . . . ]
In a subsequent ‘address to the reader’, Kynaston explains the spirit in which he had
undertaken the work, and the diYculties he had encountered. He again explains that he
had seen Chaucer becoming obsolete and despised for the archaism of his English, so that
to preserve the poem, it seemed advisable to put it into Latin:
It seemed most advisable to me to endow the poem with a new tongue, and to adorn
it with a new kind of rhythm and song; and to support it on the eternal column of
Roman eloquence and to render it stable and unmoving (as much as is in my power)
throughout all time.
He could, he says, have provided an English modernization of the poem, just as the
Roman de la Rose had been seven times modernized in France since it was Wrst written.
But he thought that to change even an iota of Chaucer’s writings would be a sin, for they
were worthy of remaining sacred and untouched for ever.
Kynaston adopts an unusual verse form in attempting to convey the Chaucerian metre
as closely as possible in Latin. He explains that it would have been easier to put the poem
into Latin hexameters and pentameters. But when he remembered that the seven-line
stanza (of pentameters) had been used by both Tasso and Ariosto, and that it was popular
with the English and French, then he thought that he would attempt to write Latin in
the same metre. Kynaston discusses his metrical scheme in some detail, writing that he
will try to preserve the rhythms and rhymes of the original to the best of his ability.
106
from reformation to eighteenth century

He outlines a number of diYculties—discussing the meaning of obsolete words and the
fact that English words are often monosyllabic, while Latin words are polysyllabic,
various problems in rhyme and quantity, the necessity of reproducing Chaucer’s puns
etc. He stresses his faithful rendering. This thoroughly renaissance perception of his
original and of his duties toward it is reinforced by his distinction between the rhymes
used in his own lines and the barbarous stressed metres of (rhyming) monkish verse. At
Wrst sight the result is somewhat disconcerting. The lines appear to have no shape in
quantitative terms, nor do they seem to have any apparent rhythmic structure. The
number of syllables (11, i.e., an attempt to reproduce the Chaucerian pentameter in a
Latin guise) is however fairly constant; and if the lines are read with the strong iambic
rhythm of the original in mind, they work fairly well. A singly stanza of the Latin with
Chaucer’s original at its side will exemplify these features. The opening stanza is:
Dolorem Troili duplicem narrare,
The double sorwe of Troilus to tellen,
Qui Priami Regis Troiae fuit gnatus,
That was the king Priamus sone of Troye,
Ut primum illi contigit amare,
In lovynge, how his aventures fellen
Ut miser, felix, et infortunatus
Fro wo to wele, and after out of joie,
Erat, decessum ante sum conatus.
My purpos is, er that I parte fro ye.
Tisiphone fer opem recensere
Thesiphone, thow help me for t’endite
Hos versus, qui, dum scribo, visi Xere.
Thise woful vers, that wepen as I write.
(pp. 253–6)
Humphrey’s Treatise on Translation
[In his book, Binns discusses Laurence Humphrey’s views on Ciceronianism, as expressed
in his Interpretatio linguarum, seu de ratione convertendi et explicandi autores tam sacros
quam prophanos, libri tres (Basle, 1559), i.e. ‘The translation of languages, or On the logic
of converting/translating and explaining authors, sacred as well as profane, three books’.
He points out, however, that this treatise is ‘worthy of attention on its own account as
a study of the theory of translation’ whereupon he gives the following summary of
Humphrey’s work:]
It is over 600 pages long, and is dedicated to Sir Thomas Wroth. In the dedication
Humphrey states that literature and religion are the two things which bring the most
happiness to men. Literature however depended on languages, and languages could not
be made known without the aid of translation. Humphrey praises the inherent value and
dignity of translation and also women who have translated works into the vernacular—
the daughters of Sir Thomas More, learned in Latin and Greek, Lady Jane Grey, the
2.7 renaissance latin translation
107

daughters of Sir Anthony Cooke, and the newly succeeded Queen Elizabeth herself,
whose accomplishments in Greek, Latin, Italian and French he praises. Humphrey says
that he approves of the translation of the Bible into the vernacular, especially since such
texts as Ovid’s Metamorphoses and Amores were available in vernacular translation. Indeed
he calls for the Bible to be translated into every tongue, so that even Saracens, Sarmatians,
Indians and others could be guided by the knowledge of Christ. Humphrey concludes
the dedication by noting that he is dedicating the work to Wroth at the suggestion of
Edwin Sandys and Sir Francis Walsingham.
Book I of the Interpretatio linguarum starts with arguments in favour of knowing other
languages. Then Humphrey discusses the three types of translation; the purely literal,
word for word kind, which is the lowest type; the excessively free type, which is too self-
indulgent, and third, the middle way between the two extremes, which is both faithful
and elegant. After a section discussing Ciceronianism in Biblical translation, Humphrey
urges his readers to pay equal attention to words and subject matter, and to maintain the
stylistic diVerences (whether high, middle, or low) of the original. Joachim Perionius’
translation of Aristotle is, he says, an admirable example of success in these respects. All
languages are similar to each other, but they diVer too. Greek and Latin diVer very
greatly. There was a danger, so far as the English were concerned, that the English idiom
might creep into Latin. For ‘someone is knocking at the door’, the English were liable to
say Aliquem pulsare ad ostium rather than the Terentian pulsare fores. In this Wrst book,
Humphrey praises Latin in particular as a language generally known, which belongs to
the Christian world, and into which works in other languages are often translated. People
ought not only to be not ignorant of the language but also to know it well. Greek too was
important, and so was Hebrew. Churchmen ought to learn these languages, and univer-
sities too ought to promote them. The Wrst book ends with a schematic guide to the
work, with a list of authors cited, and a short index.
Book II of the Interpretatio linguarum is devoted principally to a discussion of
imitation. Humphrey approves of it, because, as he says, one needs a guide. Whom
one should choose to imitate is important. It is in this context that a further discussion of
Ciceronianism is introduced. Humphrey gives detailed precepts on such topics as the
correct and true formulation of sentences, the removal of ambiguities, whether or not to
change metaphors, and so forth. The importance of constant practice is stressed. Book II
also includes a section on poetical imitation. The third book is concerned to put into
practice the theoretical precepts taught in Book I on the virtues and responsibilities of
translation, and in Book II on imitation. One should Wrst read quickly the work to be
translated, and observe the drift of the argument. Book III is full of direct practical advice
and discusses such subjects as the choice of words. Humphrey maintains that when one is
translating from the Bible, one should translate not word for word, but meaning for
meaning. Humphrey also stresses the importance of correct and versatile style.
108
from reformation to eighteenth century

He discusses rhetorical ornament, the use of synonyms, metaphors, and periphrasis
etc. He praises in particular Sir John Cheke’s Latin translation of the Emperor Leo’s
De bellico apparatu. This section of the work concludes with an encomium of English-
men who had translated various works, and whose memories had been forgotten in
England, so Humphrey says. In particular he praises Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, the
translator of Virgil; and Thomas Wyatt, whose translation of the Psalter he had heard of
by repute. Humphrey also quotes Leland’s praise of Wyatt and Surrey, and mentions
poems and sonnets after the Italian fashion written by Edmund SheYeld, who died in
the Norfolk rebellion. Sir Thomas Chaloner’s translation of Erasmus into English is also
lauded by Humphrey, as is Richard Cavendish’s translation of Euclid, and works
translated by Richard Eden. The translation out of French of Calvin’s An Epistle both
of Godly Consolacion and also of Aduertisement (London, 1550), by Edward Seymour,
Duke of Somerset, is mentioned, along with the work of Sir Thomas Elyot, Katherine
Parr, John Caius, and Nicholas Udall. Humphrey calls for Livy, Cicero, Plato and
Aristotle to be translated into English: and also for translations of the Bible, Church
histories, and works of Christian antiquity. Oxford and Cambridge Universities could
produce many men capable of doing the job, if they would only be diligent. Humphrey
praises the endeavours of Thomas Cooper, later to be the author of the Thesaurus linguae
romanae et britannicae (London, 1565), the standard Elizabethan Latin dictionary. This
section demonstrates very well Humphrey’s awareness of, and interest in, the vernacular
culture of his day.
Then Humphrey recommends the practice of turning prose into verse and of meta-
phrase. In an interesting passage, he remarks that the English language has been
corrupted by the inXux of French and Latin words. The book closes with some practical
illustrations of translation from various languages, and with a Latin translation of a short
treatise by Philo Judaeus, all designed for practice in the art of translation. The Inter-
pretatio linguarum is a formidably erudite work, the product of a well-read, learned
intellectual, and, considering the part that translation from and into English and Latin
played in Elizabethan intellectual life, its signiWcance should be stressed. (pp. 209–12)
editors’ note
1. [Binns places these translations in parentheses following the Latin texts, which for lack of space are not included
here. Binns’s numerous references to exact paginations in his sources are not included in the excerpts from his
book.]
2.7 renaissance latin translation
109

2.8. The Catholic Bible in England
The Douay version or Catholic Bible originated in the need for a translation of the Bible
for use of Roman Catholics during a time of religious controversy (the Reformation), the
many Protestant versions, preceding the Authorized Version of 1611, having been used by
reformers for polemical purposes. The work of preparation was undertaken by the
members of the English College at Douai, in Flanders, founded by William Allen
(afterwards Cardinal Allen) in 1568, the translation being chieXy the work of Gregory
Martin, formerly of St John’s College, Oxford, revised by Thomas Worthington, Richard
Bristowe, John Reynolds, and Allen himself.
In view of the intended purpose of the translation, the scholars worked directly, not
from the original Hebrew or Greek, but from the Latin Vulgate of St Jerome, this being
the oYcial text authorized by the Catholic Church. This text, it should be noted, was in
any case held to be more reliable than others, in view of the authenticity of the source texts
to which Jerome had access at the time. Many ecclesiastical terms, derived from Latin,
were retained; in some cases, the Latin word itself being kept, in an Anglicized form.
The Douay-Reims Bible, not surprisingly in view of its intended polemical use, included
a comprehensive array of annotations interpreting the text in conformity with
Catholic orthodoxy, to combat the equally assertive biblical commentaries of Reformers.
The result, admittedly, was somewhat cumbersome, but the standard of scholarship was
relatively high.
In 1578, the college was temporarily transferred, on account of political troubles, from
Douai to Reims, and the translation of the New Testament was published there in 1582.
The Old Testament was delayed until the whole Bible was published in 1609 and 1610, by
which time the college had returned to Douai. The New Testament, thus, appeared nearly
thirty years before the Authorized Version and, although not acknowledged, inXuenced
the latter to a considerable extent.
Although the Bibles used by the Catholics of England and Ireland subsequently are
popularly styled the Douay Version, from the eighteenth century into the twentieth
century they were, in fact, the result of a series of revisions by Bishop Richard Challoner
(published 1749-52), in most cases his changes bringing the Catholic Bible closer to the
Authorized Version. Challoner’s revision considerably reduced the annotations. A revision
of the Reims-Challoner New Testament was published by the Catholic Bible Society of
America in 1941, sponsored by the Confraternity of Christian Doctrine. The Old Testa-
ment was, in fact, a new translation, based now on the source texts (1948–69). In 1970
a new version of the New Testament, based now on the Greek rather than the Latin
110
from reformation to eighteenth century

Vulgate, was published. Other versions, initiated by or intended for the Roman Catholic
Church, included The Westminster Version of the Sacred Scriptures, and the version by one
man, Mgr. Ronald Knox (1945-9), the limitations of this work clearly indicated, since it is
described as ‘[a] translation of the Latin Vulgate in the light of the Hebrew and Greek
originals’. Movement towards an ecumenical Bible translation takes a step forward with
The Jerusalem Bible, inspired by and largely based on the French Dominican translation La
Bible de Je´rusalem (1956). The English version, inspired by and referring to the French,
returns to the Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek originals. Since use of the original sources, as it
were following the example of St Jerome himself, is now accepted, many of the obstacles in
the way of an ecumenical translation have been removed.
Gregory Martin (1540-82), principle translator of the Douay Version, was assisted by
several of the other scholars then residing in the English College at Douay, but it was
Martin who made the whole translation in the Wrst instance. He was a brilliant scholar and
linguist, ordained priest in 1573, three years later going to Rome to assist Allen in the
foundation of the English College there. He remained in Rome two years, then being
recalled by Allen to Reims.
It was after his return from Rome that he embarked on his Bible translation. In accuracy
and scholarship, as noted, if not in rhythmic harmony, it was superior to any of the English
versions which had preceded it. Beside his Bible translation, Martin published a Treatise of
Schisme (Douai, 1578); Discovery of the Manifold Corruptions of the Holy Scriptures by the
Heretikes of our Daies (Reims, 1582; this attacked various Protestant translations and
occasioned a Werce paragraph by paragraph refutation by William Fulke, in 1583); Treatise
of Christian Peregrination (Reims, 1583); Of the Love of the Soul (St Omer, 1603); and
Gregorius Martinus ad Adolphum Mekerchum pro veteri et vera Græcarum Literarum
Pronunciatione (Oxford, 1712).
From Gregory Martin, ‘The Preface to the Reader’, The New Testament of Jesus Christ
(1582)
2. Which translation we do not for all that publish upon erroneous opinion of necessity
that the Holy Scriptures should always be in our mother tongue, or that they ought, or
were ordained by God, to be read indiVerently of all, or could be easily understood of
everyone that reads or hears them in a known language, or that they were not often
through man’s malice or inWrmity pernicious and much hurtful to many; or that we
generally and absolutely deemed it more convenient in itself, and more agreeable to
God’s word and honour or ediWcation of the faithful, to have them turned into vulgar
tongues, than to be kept and studied only in the ecclesiastical learned languages. Not for
2.8 the catholic bible in england
111

these nor any such like causes do we translate this sacred book, but upon special
consideration of the present time, state, and condition of our country, unto which
diverse things are either necessary or proWtable and medicinable now that otherwise in
the peace of the Church were neither much requisite nor perchance wholly tolerable.
3. In this matter, to mark only the wisdom and moderation of holy Church and the
governors thereof on the one side, and the indiscreet zeal of the popular, and their
factious leaders, on the other, is a high point of prudence. These latter, partly of
simplicity, partly of curiosity, and specially of pride and disobedience, have made
claim in this case for the common people, with plausible pretences many, but good
reasons none at all. The other, to whom Christ has given charge of our souls, the
dispensing of God’s mysteries and treasures (among which Holy Scripture is no small
store) and the feeding of his family in season with food Wt for every sort, have neither of
old nor of late ever wholly condemned all vulgar versions of Scripture, nor have at any
time generally forbidden the faithful to read the same; yet they have not by public
authority prescribed, commanded, or authentically ever recommended any such inter-
pretation to be indiVerently used of all men.
[ . . . ]
4. [ . . . ] In our own country, notwithstanding the Latin tongue was ever (to use
Venerable Bede’s words) common to all the provinces of the same for meditation or study
of Scriptures, and no vulgar translation commonly used or occupied of the multitude, yet
there were extant in English even before the troubles that WycliVe and his followers
raised in our Church, as appears as well by some pieces yet remaining as by a provincial
Constitution of Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, in a Council held at
Oxford, where strait provision was made that no heretical version set forth by WycliVe
or his adherents should be suVered, nor any other in or after his time be published or
permitted to be read, being not approved and allowed by the Diocesan before, alleaging
St. Hierom for the diYculty and danger of interpreting the holy Scripture out of one
tongue into another, though by learned and Catholic men. So also it is there insinuated
that neither the translations set forth before the heretic’s time nor other afterward being
approved by the lawful ordinaries, were ever in our country wholly forbidden, though
they were not (to say the truth) in quiet and better times (much less when the people
were prone to alteration heresy, or novelty), either hastily admitted ordinarily read of
the vulgar, but used only, or specially, of some devout religious and contemplative
persons, in reverence, secrecy, and silence, for their spiritual comfort.
5. Now since Luther’s revolt also, diverse learned Catholics, for the more speedy
abolishing of a number of false and impious translations put forth by sundry sects,
and for the better preservation or reclaim of many good souls endangered thereby, have
published the Bible in the several languages of almost all the principal provinces of the
Latin Church; no other books in the world being so pernicious as heretical translations of
112
from reformation to eighteenth century

the Scriptures, poisoning the people under colour of divine authority, and not many
other remedies being more sovereign against the same (if it be used in order discretion
and humility) than the truth, faithful, and sincere interpretation opposed thereunto.
6. Which causes the holy Church not to forbid utterly any Catholic translation,
though she allow not the publishing or reading of any absolutely and without exception,
or limitation: knowing by her divine and most sincere wisdom, how, where, when, and to
whom these her Master’s and Spouse’s gifts are to be bestowed to the most good of the
faithful; and therefore neither generally permits that which must needs do hurt to the
unworthy nor absolutely condemns that which may do much good to the worthy. [ . . . ]
Genesis 11, ‘The Tower of Babel’
From the Douay-Reims translation of the Bible (1609–10)
1 And the earth was of one tongue, and of the same speech. 2 And when they removed
from the east, they found a plain in the land of Sennaar, and dwelt in it. 3 And each one
said to his neighbour: Come, let us make brick, and bake them with Wre. And they had
brick instead of stones, and slime instead of mortar. 4 And they said: Come, let us make a
city and a tower, the top whereof may reach to heaven: and let us make our name famous
before we be scattered abroad into all lands. 5 And the Lord came down to see the city
and the tower, which the children of Adam were building.
6 And he said: Behold, it is one people, and all have one tongue: and they have begun
to do this, neither will they leave oV from their designs, till they accomplish them in
deed. 7 Come ye, therefore, let us go down, and there confound their tongue, that they
may not understand one another’s speech. 8 And so the Lord scattered them from that
place into all lands, and they ceased to build the city. 9 And therefore the name thereof
was called Babel, because there the language of the whole earth was confounded: and
from thence the Lord scattered them abroad upon the face of all countries.
Latin Vulgate Translation
1. erat autem terra labii unius et sermonum eorundem
2. cumque proWciscerentur de oriente invenerunt campum in terra Sennaar et habita-
verunt in eo
3. dixitque alter ad proximum suum venite faciamus lateres et coquamus eos igni
habueruntque lateres pro saxis et bitumen pro cemento
4. et dixerunt venite faciamus nobis civitatem et turrem cuius culmen pertingat ad
caelum et celebremus nomen nostrum antequam dividamur in universas terras
5. descendit autem Dominus ut videret civitatem et turrem quam aediWcabant Wlii Adam
2.8 the catholic bible in england
113

6. et dixit ecce unus est populus et unum labium omnibus coeperuntque hoc facere nec
desistent a cogitationibus suis donec eas opere conpleant
7. venite igitur descendamus et confundamus ibi linguam eorum ut non audiat unus-
quisque vocem proximi sui
8. atque ita divisit eos Dominus ex illo loco in universas terras et cessaverunt aediWcare
civitatem
9. et idcirco vocatum est nomen eius Babel quia ibi confusum est labium universae
terrae et inde dispersit eos Dominus super faciem cunctarum regionum
114
from reformation to eighteenth century

2.9. The Authorized (King James) Version
of the Bible
Miles Smith (d. 1624), Classical scholar and orientalist, was one of the translators
appointed by James 1 to make a new version of the Bible, and was also assigned the task
of writing the preface. Educated at Oxford, he served in a variety of ecclesiastical positions,
being rewarded for his work on the Bible with the bishopric of Gloucester. His lengthy
preface, excerpts from which are included below, is frequently omitted from editions of the
King James Bible.
It was in the Wrst year of his reign that King James held a conference at Hampton Court
(1604), which authorized Wfty-four scholars to undertake a revision of the existing English
translations of the Bible. A list of Wfteen rules was drawn up, the Wrst being that the
translators should follow the Bishops Bible (1568) as closely as possible, this being largely
based on Tyndale’s translation (1525, 1531; see Sect. 2.3, above). The committee’s work was
undertaken in a non-competitive, scholarly, and, for the time, remarkably unprejudiced
fashion. The King’s objective was similar to that of Pope Damasus when charging Jerome
with the revision of the texts of the Latin Bible, namely, in the interest of unity, to arrive at
a single authoritative text. He was also concerned to heal divisions, working towards a
religious consensus in what was clearly a dangerous situation, with the divisions in
Christianity abroad and at home.
The inXuence of this text on English literature has been enormous, indeed overwhelming
at times, even negatively, as Ezra Pound was to note with regard to translations of Homer,
which he characterized as ‘King James fustian’. So seductive are its cadences that the Auth-
orized Version is seen as one of the most important literary works in the English language,
for which reason we include two other striking excerpts, in addition to the Babel story.
Smith reiterates, with numerous examples, the populist case for making the Scriptures
accessible in the vernacular, ‘for the behoof and edifying of the unlearned which [ . . . ] had
souls to be saved as well . . . ’ He contrasts this inclusiveness with the attitude of the
Catholic Church, which had just produced its own translation into English of the Bible
(Reims/Douay, 1582, 1609, see Sect. 2.8, above). This, he claimed, was reluctantly under-
taken: ‘Yea, so unwilling they are to communicate the Scriptures to the people’s under-
standing in any sort, that they are not ashamed to confess that we forced them to translate
it into English against their wills.’ Later he notes that, for instance, with regard to
ecclesiastical terms, he and his colleagues have avoided the obscure terms employed by
the ‘Papists’, which might seem to defeat the object of the operation.
2.9 the bible: authorized version
115

The introduction includes a short history of Bible translation and reiterates that the
translators are building on the work of their predecessors, notably of St Jerome. The
polemic with the Catholic translators still continued, but in general the tone is conciliatory.
From ‘The Translators to the Reader’, Preface to the King James Version of the Bible, 1611
Happy is the man that delighted in the Scripture, and thrice happy that meditateth in it
day and night.
But how shall men meditate in that, which they cannot understand? How shall they
understand that which is kept close in an unknown tongue? as it is written, ‘Except
I know the power of the voice, I shall be to him that speaketh, a Barbarian, and he that
speaketh, shall be a Barbarian to me.’ [1 Cor. 14]
[ . . . ]
Therefore as one complaineth, that always in the Senate of Rome, there was one or
other that called for an interpreter: [Cicero 5 :: de Wnibus.] so lest the Church be driven to
the like exigent, it is necessary to have translations in a readiness. Translation it is that
openeth the window, to let in the light; that breaketh the shell, that we may eat the
kernel; that putteth aside the curtain, that we may look into the most Holy place; that
removeth the cover of the well, that we may come by the water, even as Jacob rolled away
the stone from the mouth of the well, by which means the Xocks of Laban were watered
[Gen. 29: 10]. Indeed without translation into the vulgar tongue, the unlearned are but
like children at Jacob’s well (which is deep) [John 4: 11] without a bucket or something to
draw with; or as that person mentioned by Isaiah, to whom when a sealed book was
delivered, with this motion, ‘Read this, I pray thee,’ he was fain to make this answer, ‘I
cannot, for it is sealed.’ [Isa. 29: 11]
[ . . . ]
Many men’s mouths have been open a good while (and yet are not stopped) with
speeches about the Translation so long in hand, or rather perusale of Translations made
before: and ask what may be the reason, what the necessity of the employment: Hath the
Church been deceived, say they, all this while? Hath her sweet bread been mingled with
leaven, here silver with dross, her wine with water, her milk with lime? (Lacte gypsum
male miscetur, saith S. Ireney,) [S. Iren. 3. lib. cap. 19.] We hoped that we had been in the
right way, that we had the Oracles of God delivered unto us, and that though all the
world had cause to be oVended and to complain, yet that we had none. Hath the nurse
holden out the breast, and nothing but wind in it? Hath the bread been delivered by the
fathers of the Church, and the same proved to be lapidosus, as Seneca speaketh? What is
it to handle the word of God deceitfully, if this be not? Thus certain brethren. Also the
adversaries of Judah and Jerusalem, like Sanballat in Nehemiah, mock, as we hear, both
the work and the workmen, saying; ‘What do these weak Jews, etc. will they make the
116
from reformation to eighteenth century

stones whole again out of the heaps of dust which are burnt? although they build, yet if
a fox go up, he shall even break down their stony wall.’’ [Neh. 4: 3] Was their Translation
good before? Why do they now mend it? Was it not good? Why then was it obtruded to
the people? Yea, why did the Catholics (meaning Popish Romanlets) always go in
jeopardy, for refusing to go to hear it? Nay, if it must be translated into English, Catholics
are Wttest to do it. They have learning, and they know when a thing is well, they can
manure de tabula. We will answer them both brieXy: and the former, being brethren,
thus, with S. Jerome, ‘Damnamus veteres? Mineme, sed post priorum studia in domo
Domini quod possums laboramus.’ [S. Jerome. Apolog. advers. RuYn.] That is, ‘Do we
condemn the ancient? In no case: but after the endeavors of them that were before us, we
take the best pains we can in the house of God.’ As if he said, Being provoked by the
example of the learned men that lived before my time, I have thought it my duty, to assay
whether my talent in the knowledge of the tongues, may be proWtable in any measure to
God’s Church, lest I should seem to labour in them in vain, and lest I should be thought
to glory in men, (although ancient,) above that which was in them. Thus S. Jerome
may be thought to speak.
AndtothesameeVectsaywe,thatwearesofaroftfromcondemning anyoftheirlabours
that travailed before us in this kind [ . . . ] that we acknowledge them to have been raised
up of God, for the building and furnishing of his Church, and that they deserve to be had
of us and of posterity in everlasting remembrance. [ . . . ] Yet for all that, as nothing is
begun and perfected at the same time, and the later thoughts are thought to be the Wiser:
so, if We building upon their foundation that went before us, and being holpen by their
labours, do endeavor to make that better which they left so good; no man, we are sure,
hath cause to mislike us; they, we persuade ourselves, it they were alive, would thank us.
[ . . . ]
But it is high time to leave them [earlier translators], and to show in brief what we
proposed to ourselves, and what course we held in this our perusal and survey of the Bible.
Truly (good Christian Reader) we never thought from the beginning, that we should need
to make a new Translation, nor yet to make of a bad one a good one, (for then the
imputation of Sixtus had been true in some sort, that our people had been fed with gall of
Dragons instead of wine, with whey instead of milk:) but to make a good one better, or out
of many good ones, one principal good one, not justly to be excepted against; that hath
been our endeavor, that our mark. [ . . . ] S. Jerome maketh no mention of the Greek
tongue, wherein yet he did excel, because he translated not the old Testament out of
Greek, but out of Hebrew. And in what sort did these assemble? In the trust of their own
knowledge, or of their sharpness of wit, or deepness of judgment, as it were in an arm of
Xesh? At no hand. They trusted in him that hath the key of David, opening and no man
shutting; they prayed to the Lord the Father of our Lord, to the eVect that S. Augustine
did; ‘O let thy Scriptures be my pure delight, let me not be deceived in them, neither let
2.9 the bible: authorized version
117

me deceive by them.’ [S. Aug. lib. II. Confess. cap. 2.] In this conWdence, and with this
devotion did they assemble together; not too many, lest one should trouble another; and
yet many, lest many things haply might escape them. If you ask what they had before
them, truly it was the Hebrew text of the Old Testament, the Greek of the New. These are
the two golden pipes, or rather conduits, where-through the olive branches empty
themselves into the gold. Saint Augustine calleth them precedent, or original tongues;
[S. August. 3. de doctr. c. 3. etc.] Saint Jerome, fountains. [S. Jerome. ad Sunjam et Fretel.]
The same Saint Jerome aYrmeth, [S. Jerome. ad Lucinium, Diet. 9 ut veterum.] and
Gratian hath not spared to put it into his Decree, That ‘as the credit of the old Books’ (he
meaneth of the Old Testament) ‘is to be tried by the Hebrew Volumes, so of the New by
the Greek tongue,’ he meaneth by the original Greek. If truth be tried by these tongues,
then whence should a Translation be made, but out of them? These tongues therefore, the
Scriptures we say in those tongues, we set before us to translate, being the tongues wherein
God was pleased to speak to his Church by the Prophets and Apostles. Neither did we run
over the work with that posting haste that the Septuagint did, if that be true which is
reported of them, that they Wnished it in 72 days; [Joseph. Antiq. Wb. 12.] neither were we
barred or hindered from going over it again, having once done it, like S. Jerome, if that be
true which himself reporteth, that he could no sooner write anything, but presently it was
caught from him, and published, and he could not have leave to mend it: [S. Jerome. ad
Pammac. pro libr. advers. Iovinian.] neither, to be short, were we the Wrst that tell in hand
with translating the Scripture into English, and consequently destitute of former helps, as
it is written of Origen, that he was the Wrst in a manner, that put his hand to write
Commentaries upon the Scriptures, [Sophoc. in Elect.] and therefore no marvel, if he
overshot himself many times. None of these things: the work hath not been huddled up in
72 days, but hath cost the workmen, as light as it seemeth, the pains of twice seven times
seventy two days and more: matters of such weight and consequence are to be speeded
with maturity: for in a business of movement a man feareth not the blame of convenient
slackness. [S. Chrysost, in II. Thess. cap. 2.] Neither did we think much to consult the
Translators or Commentators, Chaldee, Hebrew, Syrian, Greek or Latin, no nor the
Spanish, French, Italian, or Dutch; neither did we disdain to revise that which we had
done, and to bring back to the anvil that which we had hammered: but having and using
as great helps as were needful, and fearing no reproach for slowness, nor coveting praise
for expedition, we have at length, through the good hand of the Lord upon us, brought
the work to that pass that you see.
[ . . . ]
Another thing we think good to admonish thee of (gentle Reader) that we have not
tied ourselves to an uniformity of phrasing, or to an identity of words, as some
peradventure would wish that we had done, because they observe, that some learned
men somewhere, have been as exact as they could that way. Truly, that we might not vary
118
from reformation to eighteenth century

from the sense of that which we had translated before, if the word signiWed that same in
both places (for there be some words that be not the same sense everywhere) we were
especially careful, and made a conscience, according to our duty. But, that we should
express the same notion in the same particular word; as for example, if we translate the
Hebrew or Greek word once by purpose, never to call it intent; if one where
journeying, never traveling; if one where think, never suppose; if one where pain,
never ache; if one where joy, never gladness, etc. Thus to mince the matter, we thought
to savour more of curiosity than wisdom, and that rather it would breed scorn in the
Atheist, than bring proWt to the godly Reader. For is the kingdom of God to become
words or syllables? Why should we be in bondage to them if we may be free, use one
precisely when we may use another no less Wt, as commodiously?1
[ . . . ]
Add hereunto, that niceness in words was always counted the next step to triXing, and
so was to be curious about names too: also that we cannot follow a better pattern for
elocution than God himself; therefore he using divers words, in his holy writ, and
indiVerently for one thing in nature: [see Euseb. li. 12. ex Platon.] we, if we will not be
superstitious, may use the same liberty in our English versions out of Hebrew and Greek,
for that copy or store that he hath given us. Lastly, we have on the one side avoided the
scrupulosity of the Puritans, who leave the old Ecclesiastical words, and betake them to
other, as when they put washing for baptism, and congregation instead of church: as
also on the other side we have shunned the obscurity of the Papists, in their azimes,
tunike, rational, holocausts, praepuce, pasche, and a number of such like, whereof
their late Translation is full, and that of purpose to darken the sense, that since they must
needs translate the Bible, yet by the language thereof, it may be kept from being
understood. But we desire that the Scripture may speak like itself, as in the language of
Canaan, that it may be understood even of the very vulgar.
[ . . . ]
editors’ note
1.
[This contrasts with the concern of a modern translator, Everett Fox (see Sect. 5.20, below), and before him,
Buber and Rosenzweig (see Sect. 4.5, below), for verbal patterns (parallelisms, etc.).]
From the Authorized Version
Genesis 11: 1–9
1 And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.
2 And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the
land of Shinar; and they dwelt there.
3 And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them throughly. And
they had brick for stone, and slime had they for mortar.
2.9 the bible: authorized version
119

4 And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto
heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the
whole earth.
5 And the LORD came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men
builded.
6 And the LORD said, Behold, the people is one, and they have all one language; and
this they begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have
imagined to do.
7 Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not
understand one another’s speech.
8 So the LORD scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth: and
they left oV to build the city.
9 Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the LORD did there confound the
language of all the earth: and from thence did the LORD scatter them abroad upon
the face of all the earth.
Psalm 23
A Psalm of David
1 The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not want.
2 He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters.
3 He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for his name’s sake.
4 Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for
thou art with me; thy rod and thy staV they comfort me.
5 Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my
head with oil; my cup runneth over.
6 Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and I will dwell in
the house of the LORD for ever.
St. John 1: 1-5
1 In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
2 The same was in the beginning with God.
3 All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.
4 In him was life; and the life was the light of men.
5 And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not.
120
from reformation to eighteenth century

2.10 Sir John Denham
Sir John Denham (1615–69), courtier, wit, and poet, is best known in literary history for his
national panegyric Cooper’s Hill, which inXuenced georgic and descriptive poetry for over a
hundred years. More than half of his poetical works were translations, some of which were
later praised by Pope and Dryden, and incorporated into their works. At about the same
time that translators in his Royalist circle were eschewing literalism in translation, Den-
ham proposed his ‘new way’, a method both poetic and accurate. Dryden was to commend
Denham and Abraham Cowley for freeing translation from servility, but also to disparage
their excessive liberties.
‘To Sir Richard Fanshaw upon his Translation of Pastor Fido’ (1648)
Such is our Pride, our Folly, or our Fate,
That few but such as cannot write, Translate.
But what in them is want of Art, or voice,
In thee is either Modesty or Choice.
Whiles this great piece, restor’d by thee doth stand
Free from the blemish of an Artless hand.
Secure of Fame, thou justly dost esteem
Less honour to create, than to redeem.
Nor ought a Genius less than his that writ,
Attempt Translation; for transplanted wit,
All the defects of air and soil doth share,
And colder brains like colder Climates are:
In vain they toil, since nothing can beget
A vital spirit, but a vital heat.
That servile path thou nobly dost decline
Of tracing word by word, and line by line.
Those are the labour’d births of slavish brains,
Not the eVects of Poetry, but pains;
Cheap vulgar arts, whose narrowness aVords
No Xight for thoughts, but poorly sticks at words.
A new and nobler way thou dost pursue
To make Translations and Translators too.
They but preserve the Ashes, thou the Flame,
True to his sense, but truer to his fame.
2.10 sir john denham
121

Foording his current, where thou Wnd’st it low
Let’st in thine own to make it rise and Xow;
Wisely restoring whatsoever grace
It lost by change of Times, or Tongues, or Place.
Nor fetter’d to his Numbers, and his Times,
Betray’st his Musick to unhappy Rimes,
Nor are the nerves of his compacted strength
Stretch’d and dissolv’d into unsinnewed length:
Yet after all, (lest we should think it thine)
Thy spirit to his circle dost conWne.
New names, new dressings, and the modern cast,
Some Scenes some persons alter’d, had out-fac’d
The world, it were thy work; for we have known
Some thank’t and prais’d for what was less their own.
That Masters hand which to the life can trace
The airs, the lines, and features of a face,
May with a free and bolder stroke express
A varyed posture, or a Xatt’ring Dress;
He could have made those like, who made the rest,
But that he knew his own design was best.
‘The Preface’ to The Destruction of Troy (1656), from T. R. Steiner (ed.), English
Translation Theory, 1650–1800 (Assen and Amsterdam: Van Gorum, 1975), 63–5
There are so few Translations which deserve praise, that I scarce ever saw any which
deserv’d pardon; those who travel in that kind, being for the most part so unhappy, as to
rob others, without enriching themselves, pulling down the fame of good Authors,
without raising their own: Neither hath any Author been more hardly dealt withal
than this our Master; and the reason is evident, for, what is most excellent, is most
inimitable; and if even the worst Authors are yet made worse by their Translators, how
impossible is it not to do great injury to the best? And therefore I have not the vanity to
think my Copy equal to the Original, nor (consequently) my self altogether guiltless of
what I accuse others; but if I can do Virgil less injury than others have done, it will be, in
some degree to do him right; and indeed, the hope of doing him more right, is the only
scope of this Essay, by opening this new way of translating this Author, to those whom
youth, leisure, and better fortune makes Wtter for such undertakings.
I conceive it a vulgar error in translating Poets, to aVect being Fidus Interpres; let that
care be with them who deal in matters of Fact, or matters, of Faith: but whosoever aims at
it in Poetry, as he attempts what is not required, so he shall never perform what he
attempts; for it is not his busines alone to translate Language into Language, but Poesie
122
from reformation to eighteenth century

into Poesie; & Poesie is of so subtile a spirit, that in pouring out of one Language into
another, it will all evaporate; and if a new spirit be not added in the transfusion, there will
remain nothing but a Caput mortuum, there being certain Graces and Happinesses
peculiar to every Language, which gives life and energy to the words; and whosoever
oVers at Verbal Translation, shall have the misfortune of that young Traveller, who lost
his own language abroad, and brought home no other instead of it: for the grace of the
Latine will be lost by being turned into English words; and the grace of the English, by
being turned into the Latine Phrase. And as speech is the apparel of our thoughts, so are
there certain Garbs and Modes of speaking, which vary with the times; the fashion of our
clothes being not more subject to alteration, than that of our speech: and this I think
Tacitus means, by that which he calls Sermonem temporis istius auribus accommodatum;
the delight of change being as due to the curiosity of the ear, as of the eye; and therefore if
Virgil must needs speak English, it were Wt he should speak not only as a man of this
Nation, but as a man of this age; and if this disguise I have put upon him (I wish I could
give it a better name) Wt not naturally and easily on so grave a person, yet it may become
him better than that Fools-Coat wherein the French and Italian have of late presented
him; at least, I hope, it will not make him appear deformed, by making any part
enormously bigger or less than the life, (I having made it my principal care to follow
him, as he made it his to follow Nature in all his proportions). Neither have I any where
oVered such violence to his sense, as to make it seem mine, and not his. Where my
expressions are not so full as his, either our Language, or my Art were defective (but
I rather suspect my self;) but where mine are fuller than his, they are but the impressions
which the often reading of him, hath left upon my thoughts; so that if they are not his
own Conceptions, they are at least the results of them; and if (being conscious of making
him speak worse than he did almost in every line) I erre in endeavouring sometimes to
make him speak better; I hope it will be judged an error on the right hand, and such an
one as may deserve pardon, if not imitation.
2.10 sir john denham
123

2.11 Abraham Cowley
Abraham Cowley (1618–67) was a committed Royalist, poet (usually thought of as a
Metaphysical poet), and wit, educated at Cambridge. He was regarded as the greatest
poet of his age, ranging very widely, writing English and Latin poetry, plays, essays, and
prose work. Cowley is now perhaps best remembered for his approach to translation of the
Pindaric ode, which established this form in English. In his preface to the Pindariques, he
advanced the notion of ‘Imitation’, an ultra-free type of translation. Dryden, who greatly
admired Cowley and was indebted to him, particularly in respect to his mastery of the
heroic couplet, criticized his notion of imitation insofar as it aspired to normativeness,
although he approved it in the case of Cowley himself and of so problematical a source text
as the Greek poet Pindar’s Odes.
Preface to the Pindariques, included in Abraham Cowley, The Complete Works in Verse
and Prose, ed. Alexander B. Grosart (Facs. edn., New York, 1967)
If a man should undertake to translate Pindar Word for Word, it would be thought that one
Madman had translated another; as may appear, when he that understands not the Original,
reads the verbal Traduction of him into Latin Prose, than which nothing seems more
Raving. And sure, Rhyme without the Addition of Wit, and the Spirit of Poetry (quod
nequeo monstrare & sentio tantum) would but make it ten times more distracted than it is
in Prose. We must consider in Pindar the great DiVerence of Time betwixt his Age and ours,
which changes, as in Pictures, at least the Colours of Poetry; the no less DiVerence betwixt
the Religions and Customs of our Countries, and a thousand Particularities of Places,
Persons, and Manners, which do but confusedly appear to our Eyes at so great a Distance.
And lastly (which were enough alone for my purpose) we must consider that our Ears are
Strangers to the Music of his Numbers, which sometimes (especially in Songs and Odes)
almost without any thing else, makes an excellent Poet. For though the Grammarians and
Critics have laboured to reduce his Verses into regular Feet and Measures (as they have also
those of the Greek and Latin Comedies) yet in eVect they are little better than Prose to our
Ears. And I would gladly know what Applause our best Pieces of English Poesies could
expect from a Frenchman or Italian, if converted faithfully, and Word for Word into French
or Italian Prose. And when we have considered all this, we must needs confess that after all
these Losses sustained by Pindar, all we can add to him by our Wit or Invention (not
deserting still his Subject) is not like to make him a Richer Man than he was in his own
Country. This is in some measure to be applied to all Translations; and the not observing of
it, is the Cause that all which ever I yet saw are so much inferior to their Originals. The like
happens too in Pictures, from the same Root of exact Imitation; which being a vile and
124
from reformation to eighteenth century

unworthy kind of Servitude, is incapable of producing any thing good or noble. I have seen
Originals both in Painting and Poesy, much more beautiful than their natural Objects; but
I never saw a Copy better than the Original, which indeed cannot be otherwise; for Men
resolving in no case to shoot beyond the Mark, it is a thousand to one if they shoot not short
of it. It does not at all trouble me that the Grammarians perhaps will not suVer this libertine
way of rendering foreign Authors, to be called Translation; for I am not so much enamoured
of the Name Translator as not to wish rather to be Something Better, though it want yet a
Name. I speak not so much all this, in Defence of my manner of Translating, or Imitating
(or what other Title they please) the two ensuing Odes of Pindar; for that would not deserve
half these Words, as by this Occasion to rectify the Opinion of divers Men upon this matter.
The Psalms of David, (which I believe to have been in their Original, to the Hebrews of his
Time, though not to our Hebrews of BuxtorWus’s making, the most exalted Pieces of Poesy)
are a great Example of what I have said; all the translators of which (even Mr. Sands himself;
for in despite of popular Error, I will be bold not to except him) for this very Reason, that
they have not sought to supply the lost Excellencies of another Language with new ones in
their own; are so far from doing Honour, or at least Justice to that Divine Poet, that
methinks they revile him worse than Shimel. And Buchanan himself (though much the best
of them all, and indeed a great Person) comes in my Opinion no less short of David, than his
Country does of Judæa. Upon this ground, I have in these two Odes of Pindar, taken, left
out, and added what I please; nor make it so much my Aim to let the Reader know precisely
what he spoke, as what was his Way and Manner of speaking; which has not been yet (that
I know of) introduced into English, though it be the noblest and highest kind of writing in
Verse; and which might, perhaps, be put into the List of Pancirollus, among the lost
Inventions of Antiquity. This Essay is but to try how it will look in an English Habit: For
which Experiment, I have chosen one of his Olympique, and another of his Nemaean Odes;
which are as followeth.
Comparison of translations of one of Pindar’s Odes
[A comparison of the two excerpts below provides ample evidence of what ‘Imitation’
meant in practice, the extent to which Cowley diverges from the source text.]
From ‘The Second Olympique Ode’ of Pindar (written in praise of Theron, Prince of
Agrigentum, Sicily), stanzas 1 and 2, trans. Abraham Cowley, included in Abraham
Cowley, The Complete Works in Verse and Prose, ed. Alexander B. Grosart (Facs. edn.,
New York, 1976).
Queen of all Harmonious things,
Dancing Words, and Speaking Strings,
What God, what hero wilt thou sing?
What happy Man to equal Glories bring?
2.11 abraham cowley
125

Begin, begin thy noble choice,
And let the Hills around reXect the Image of thy Voice.
Pisa does to Jove belong.
Jove and Pisa claim thy Song,
The fair First-Fruits of War, the’ Olympique Games
Alcides oVer’d up to Jove;
Alcides too thy strings may move;
But, oh, what Man to joyn with these can worthy prove,
Joyn Theron boldly to their sacred Names;
Theron the next honour claimes;
Theron to no man gives place,
Is Wrst in Pisa’s, and in Virtue’s Race;
Theron there, and he alone,
Even his own swift Fore-fathers has out-gone.
They through rough ways, o’er many stops they past,
’Till on the fatal bank at last
They Agrigentum built, the beauteous Eye
Of fair-faces Sicilie,
Which does it self i’ th’ River by
With Pride and Joy espy.
Then cheerful Notes their Painted Years did sing,
And Wealth was one, and Honor th’ other Wing.
Their genuine Virtues did more sweet and clear,
In Fortune’s graceful dress appear.
To which great son of Rhea, say
The Firm Word which forbids things to Decay.
If in Olympus Top, where thou
Sit’st to behold thy Sacred Show,
If in Alpheus silver Xight,
If in my Verse thou dost delight,
My Verse, O Rhea’s Son, which is
Lofty as that, and smooth as this. [ . . . ]
Literal translation from Pindar I, ed. and trans. William H. Race (Loeb Classical Library;
Cambridge, Mass. and London: Harvard University Press, 1997), 63–4
Hymns that rule the lye,
What god, what hero, and what man shall we celebrate?
Indeed, Pisa belongs to Zeus, while Herakles
126
from reformation to eighteenth century

established the Olympic festival
as the Wrstfruit of war;
but Theron, because of his victorious four-horse chariot
must be proclaimed—a man just in his regard for guests,
bulwark of Akragas,
and foremost upholder of his city from a line of famous
ancestors,
who suVered much in their hearts
to win a holy dwelling place on the river and they were
the eye of Sicily, while their allotted time drew on, adding
wealth and glory
to their native virtues.
O son of Kronos and Rhea, ruling over your abode on Olympos,
over the pinnacle of contests, and over Alpheos’ course,
cheered by my songs
graciously preserve their ancestral land [ . . . ]
2.11 abraham cowley
127

2.12 Women Translators from the Sixteenth to the
Eighteenth Century
Jane Stevenson
(University of Aberdeen)
Translation was important to early modern women. In these centuries, to be educated
implied familiarity with Latin, and to some extent Greek, but very few women were taught
these languages. However, as J. W. Saunders has pointed out, as early as the mid-sixteenth
century, when few Latin texts were easily available in translation, ‘John Croke’s wife and
Edmund Becke’s cousin who knew no Latin secured the poems they wanted’—that is, they
were able to Wnd some Latinate individual in their circle to translate them. As the sixteenth
century progressed, it was increasingly possible just to go out and buy a copy of a
particular work. Great numbers of translations were published, and widely circulated—
for example Shakespeare, though he had been to a grammar school, was more comfortable
with English translations of Classical texts, and also read Italian literature in translation.
Thus, classical learning could easily be acquired by reading English or French translations,
as we can see from a woman such as the seventeenth-century Dame Sarah Cowper,
daughter of one of the Lord Mayors of London, who left a memorandum of the books
she owned: these include all kinds of texts originally written in Latin, Greek, and French.
Aphra Behn hailed Creech’s translation of the Latin philosopher Lucretius with delight:
Till now, I curst my Birth, my Education
And more the scanted Customes of the Nation.
Permitting not the Female Sex to tread
The Mighty Paths of Learned Heroes dead . . .
So thou by this Translation dost advance
Our Knowledg from the State of Ignorance,
And equals us to Man: Ah how can we
Enough Adore, or SacriWce enough to thee!
The sense that Classical learning was available to them, because ever more works were
translated, is reiterated by women writers in the later seventeenth century. For example,
Elizabeth Rowe’s Poems on Several Occasions includes a preface by her friend Elizabeth
Johnson, signed as from Hardings-rents on 10 May of that year, explaining one of her
references with the words, ‘for you must know we Read Plutarch now ’tis Translated’.
Even in a scholarly family such as that of the Newdigates, the fact that her husband’s
Classical studies were mostly pursued via translations meant that Dame Alice Newdigate
128
from reformation to eighteenth century

was in a position to imbibe a great deal of Classical lore, and did so. One of several women’s
responses to John Sprint’s attempt to circumscribe women’s role entirely to the service of
men, The Ladies Defence, or, The Bride-Woman’s Counsellor Answer’d, a Poem in a Dialogue
between Sir John Brute, Sir William Loveall, Melissa, and a Parson, includes an ‘Epistle
Dedicatory’ by the poet Mary, Lady Chudleigh, advising women to read Classics in
translation (Seneca, Plutarch, Epictetus, then the poets). A French critic, H.-J. Martin,
has described the seventeenth century as ‘the time of translations’, reXecting the astonish-
ing amount of translation from Latin into French in the seventeenth century (some of it by
women, notably Anne Dacier (1651–1720) ) so much so, that by the mid-century, access to
all Classical texts of importance could be achieved without the trouble of learning Latin or
Greek. The cultural dominance of French, not merely in France but in Europe more
generally, is witnessed by a letter sent from John Norris, a philosopher sympathetic to
women’s learning, to the bluestocking poet Elizabeth Thomas (1675–1731) with a sort of
curriculum, in which he says: ‘for some of them [the authors mentioned] there will be a
Necessity of a Language or two, Latin is more diYcult, and French will now answer all,
which therefore I would have you learn out of Hand. It is the most commanding, and
therefore most useful Language at present.’
In the eighteenth century, women continued to be concerned with translation. Mrs
Chapone, a very inXuential voice in the education of girls in the eighteenth century, was
ambivalent about their actually studying the classical languages: ‘I respect the abilities and
application of those ladies who have attained them [ . . . ] yet I would by no means advise
[ . . . ] [any] woman who is not strongly impelled by a particular genius to engage in such
studies,’ but her grounds are that ‘the real knowledge that they supply is not essential, since
the English, French, or Italian tongues aVord tolerable translations of all the most valuable
productions of antiquity’. She assumes as a matter of course that a properly educated woman
will read seriously in Classical literature, and says of Homer and Virgil in translation, ‘every
body reads [them] that reads at all’—she strongly recommended that Virgil be read in
Annibale Caro’s Italian version, because she considered that the closest to the original.
The Sixteenth Century
It is not surprising, given the immense cultural importance of translation in this period, to
Wnd early modern women engaging in translations themselves. It is possible to Wnd
English women translators as early as the Wfteenth century: Henry VII’s mother, Lady
Margaret Beaufort, translated from French, and so did a London woman, Dame Eleanor
Hull. It seems probable that for early modern women, translation oVered a means of
2.12 women translators
129

self-expression which was seen as relatively legitimate because the writer was not herself
claiming the dignity of an author, but merely representing the work of someone else—
though a number of writers indicate some anxiety about whether it is appropriate for a
woman to write. In the sixteenth century, very few Englishwomen published anything at
all. Of the nineteen known to me, just over half were translators. They include Mary
Bassett and Anne Cooke, two of the best-educated women in English, who were both
serious students of Greek and Latin, Queen Elizabeth herself, Mary Sidney the Countess
of Pembroke (the sister of Sir Philip Sidney), and a middle-class woman, Margaret Tyler.
There are also many interesting translations by sixteenth-century women which were not
published. New Year’s gifts are an important part of sixteenth-century English culture, as
Christmas gifts are today, and it was considered appropriate to give something which you
had made. The English princesses, both Mary and Elizabeth, made translations as New
Year’s gifts, which showed oV their accomplishments. Mary Tudor’s translation of the
Prayer of St Thomas Aquinas, made from Latin when she was twelve, still survives, and so do
translations by Elizabeth, including a French translation of a work by Marguerite d’Angou-
leˆme which was made as a present for her father Henry VIII. Other women did the same:
both Lady Jane and Lady Mary Fitzalan (1536–76, 1540–57), the two daughters of the
scholarly Earl of Arundel, made a series of translations from Latin and Greek as presents for
their father which survive in the British Library. Lady Jane has left a translation of Isocrates
from Greek to Latin, and a translation of Euripides’ Iphigeneia into English, which she
loved doing (‘I have taken an incredible pleasure from this reading’, she noted), and her
sister Lady Mary similarly left four small quarto volumes of exercises, presented to her
father as successive New Year’s gifts from her thirteenth to seventeenth year, a book of moral
sayings attributed to Classical authors such as Plato, Aristotle, and Seneca translated from
Latin to English, a volume of translations from Alexander Severus, more moral sayings
translated from Greek to English, and a fourth set translated from Greek to Latin: it is
possible to see that each was more challenging than the last.
Mary Clark, later Mary Bassett, ne´e Roper
Mary Clark, daughter of Margaret Roper, and granddaughter of Sir Thomas More, was
classically educated, as her mother had been, and like her mother, put her languages to use.
She translated her grandfather Sir Thomas More’s History of The Passion from Latin to
English and was considered one of the learned lights of Queen Mary Tudor’s court. John
HarpsWeld asserts that Mary Roper was ‘well experted in the latine and greeke tonges; she
hath very hansomely and learnedly translated out of the greeke into the englishe all the
130
from reformation to eighteenth century

ecclesiasticall storye of Eusebius, with Socrates, Theodoretus, Sozomenus and Euagrius,
albeit of modestie she suppresseth it, and keepeth it from the print’. A manuscript now in
the British Library, Harley 1860, contains the Eusebius translation, a Latin version of the
Wrst book of Eusebius’s Ecclesiastical History with an English version of the Wrst Wve books,
dedicated to the future Queen Mary Tudor, c. 1550. It seems to be the actual manuscript
copy presented to Mary, though it has lost the binding of purple velvet we know it
originally had. Mary Clark’s attitude to her work is apologetic:
When I for myne owne onely exercyse had of late, most noble pryncesse, translated some
part of thecclesyastycall storye [history] of Eusebius out of Greke into englysshe, not
myndyng to have bestowed my fardour labour, as taken more payne therein, veryly
[truly] accomptyng all my whole busyness brought to a fynall ende and conclusyion[ . . . ]
She is apparently dismissing her work as casually produced, nothing more than a private
exercise; which she was somehow persuaded to extend into this huge, formal manuscript.
It is common for early modern women translators to downplay their work in this way,
assuring the reader that they are not trying to show oV in an inappropriate, unfeminine
fashion: we will see that similar points are made by Lucy Hutchinson in the seventeenth
century.
Margaret Tyler
Another Elizabethan woman, Margaret Tyler, who translated a Spanish chivalric romance,
is also conscious that people may Wnd this strange. Interestingly, in excusing herself for
translating a book on a manly subject (warfare), she shifts the ground by pointing out that
according to legend, some women used to be warriors: thus, she implies, there is nothing
very odd in a woman merely writing about war. The following passages give a sense of the
Xavour of her work.
Apology
Such deliverie as I have made I hope thou wilt friendly acept, the rather for that it is a
womans worke, though in a storye prophane, and a matter more manlike than becometh
my sexe. But as for the manlinesse of the matter, thou knowest that it is not necessarie for
every trumpetter or drumstare [drummer] in the warre to be a good Wghter [ . . . ] it is no
sinne to talke of Robinhood, though you never shot in his bowe: or be it that the attempt
were bolde to intermeddle in armes, so as the auncient Amazons did and in this storie
Claridiana doth, and in other stories not a few, yet to report of armes is not so odious but
2.12 women translators
131

that it may be borne withall, not only in you men which your selves are Wghters, but in us
women, to whome the beneWt in equall part apperteineth of your victories.
Diego Ortu´nez de Calaharra: The Mirrour of Princely Deedes and Knyghthood, London,
T. East, 1578, ch. 32.
In the fresh and pleasunt moneth of May, when the greene boughes and sweete smelling
Xowers renewe joye and gladnesse in the heartes of young folke, the great Citte of London
and wide Weldes there-about, seemed not lesse covered with armed knights, then if the
mightie hoasts of Darius and Alexander had thether assembled. For the great Feasts and
Justes [jousts] were so diligently publyshed in everie Region and Countrey, and the prizes
which the king had set, were of such valour, that there came thether from divers farre and
straunge landes, so manye knights and ladies, as that the number of them was inWnit.
Mildred Cecil, Lady Burghley, ne´e Cooke (1526–1589)
One of the few women in the sixteenth century to say anything much about her practice as
a translator is Mildred Cecil, wife of Elizabeth’s chancellor, Lord Burghley. Like her sister
Anne Bacon, who has already been mentioned, she was extremely well educated. At an
early point in her life, before Elizabeth came to the throne, when she and her husband were
very much the clients and prote´ge´s of the Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector of England
during the minority of Edward VI, Mildred Cecil made a translation for Lady Somerset of
a sermon by an early Christian Greek writer, St Basil the Great. This is prefaced by a letter
‘to the veray noble and vertuose Duchesse of Summarsid hir ryght good lady and Mystres’.
She describes her translation as follows, focusing on a perennial diYculty:
I have somwhat superstitiosely observid the nature of the greke phrase not omittyng the
congruety of english speche but rather the use, that the treatye of so goode an Author
shold not in to[o] moch serving the english tongue lese his owne eYcacie and value.
Thynkyng it lesse faute [fault] that thautor [the author] sholde speake grekish English
and save his own sence, than english greke and confound it with a doutful, in this
sheweng the propertie of the tonge, in the other the Veritie [truth] of the matter.
The Seventeenth Century
If we turn now to translation in the seventeenth century, there is a number of important
women translators, most of whom were educated gentlewomen. As Isaac Watts observes,
there were many Stuart gentlewomen ‘rich in Learning, yet averse to Show’. Among
132
from reformation to eighteenth century

numerous other examples, we may consider Martha, Lady GiVard, who read Latin with
ease, made an accomplished English version of Horace’s poem ‘O fons Bandusiae’, and
advised her niece, Lady Berkeley in 1698, ‘I would faine advise about your reading what
I practice myself not to read anything very serious before you goe to bed; that would be a
good time to read Virgil in, and let your Turkish history only goe a dayes.’ Similarly, Anna
Hume, daughter of the Scots historian, poet, and essayist David Hume of Godscroft, is
usually given credit for the English translation of the Latin verses in her father’s History of
the Houses of Douglas and Angus. Elizabeth Cary, Lady Falkland (1585–1639), author of the
closet drama Mariamne, translated all her life. Her daughter testiWes in her biography of
her mother, ‘Afterwards, by herself, without a teacher, and while still a child, she learned
French, Spanish and Italian (which she always understood quite perfectly). She learned
Latin in the same manner (without being taught) and understood it perfectly when she was
young, translating the Epistles of Seneca from Latin to English. After having long
discontinued it, she was much more imperfect in it, so when a little time before her
death she translated some of Blosius out of Latin, she was fain to help herself somewhat
with the Spanish translation.’ These translations seem to have been private, but later in her
life, she attempted to aid the cause of Catholicism in England by translating Cardinal
Perron’s Replique a` la response du serenissime roy de la Grand Bretagne (Perron was an
internationally important Wgure, with a considerable inXuence on the religious life of
England), which was printed with a dedication to her patroness, Queen Henrietta Maria:
most of the copies were seized and burnt.
Katherine Phillips (1631–1664)
Katherine Phillips is the Wrst successful woman playwright, though unlike Aphra Behn,
she did not write for the commercial stage. Nonetheless, her translation of Corneille’s La
Mort de Pompe´e made her famous. She was a Royalist married to a Parliamentarian, and
due to the political diYculties this posed, she and her husband lived quietly in Wales
throughout the Civil War. However, she became known as a poet in her late teens, and at
the Restoration in 1661, she became more publicly visible. In 1662, her close friend Anne
Owen married the distinguished Anglo-Irish Royalist Marcus Trevor, of County Down,
and Katherine was invited to accompany her on the nuptial journey to her husband’s
house at Rostrevor. Katherine’s reputation as a poet preceded her and she was enthusias-
tically received by Dublin society. The Earl of Orrery, having seen her translation of a
single scene, ‘earnestly importuned’ her to execute a complete translation of Corneille’s
play. This was ready by November and produced at the Theatre Royal, Smock Alley,
2.12 women translators
133

Dublin, in February 1663. Phillips’s attitude towards her own work is extremely modest;
but however, her own views of translation come out in a letter she sent to her friend and
adviser, Sir Charles Cottrell, in her criticism of a rival translation of Pompe´e by ‘Certain
Persons of Honour’:
‘Pharsalian Kites’ for ‘les Vautours de Pharsale’, I cannot relish; his englishing ‘le dernier
preuve de leur Amitie’, ‘their new friendship’ & many additions & omissions of the
authors sence. then in the second, & fourth Acts, (which are all I have) unless the parts
acted, were much reform’d from this coppy, there are as many faults as ever I saw in a
good Poem; which were I neare you, I could much better ask your opinion of, onely let
me now inquire what you think of these words
Ne me parlez donc plus de Tage & de Gange
je connoy ma porte´e, & ne prends point de change
which they have english’d thus:
Talk not to me of Tagus, nor of Ganges
I know my right & care not for yr changes.
And calling Juba Scipio the Pompey’s Sons, (for a Rime too), Daring Sprights, making
Cleopatra say she courts Caesar, & add 10: or 12 lines of Romes becoming a Monarchy,
for which as there is no ground in Corneille, so I see not how it would have been proper
for her to say at that time, when Caesar had just refus’d a Crown being pique´ d’honneur,
not to be thought Rome’s Soveraign, though he was her Master. I think a translation
ought not to be used as Musicians doe a Ground, with all the liberty of descant, but as
Painters when they coppy, & the rule that I understood of translations till these
Gentlemen inform’d me better, was to write to Corneille’s sence, as it is to be supposed
Corneille would have done, if he had been an Englishman, not conWnd to his lines, nor
his numbers (unless we can doe it happily) but always to his meaning, or to say all, to
translate as the temple of death is translated, where the Originall appears in its own true
undisWgured proportion, & yet beautify’d with all the riches of another tongue.
(The Temple of Death was a translation by Cottrell himself, of Habert’s Le Temple de Mort,
so the allusion is a compliment to him.) The texture of Phillips’s own translation, notably
smoother than that of the ‘Certain Persons of Honour’, is illustrated below.
Cornelia’s speech to Caesar
cornelia. Caesar, that envious Fate which I can brave,
Makes me thy Prisoner, but not thy Slave:
Expect not then my Heart should e’re aVord
To pay thee Homage, or to call thee Lord:
134
from reformation to eighteenth century

How rude soever Fortune makes her Blow;
I Crassus Widow once, and Pompey’s now;
Great Scipio’s Daughter, (and what’s higher yet)
A Roman, have a Courage still more great;
And of all Stroaks her Cruelty can give,
Nothing can make me blush, but that I live,
And have not follow’d Pompey, when he dy’d;
For though the Means to do it were deny’d,
And Cruel Pity would not let me have
The quick assistance of a Steel or Wave,
Yet I’m asham’d, that after such a Woe,
Grief had not done as much as they could do:
Death had been glorious, and had set me free
As from my Sorrow then, so now from Thee.
Yet I must thank the Gods, though so severe,
That since I must come hither, Thou art here:
That Caesar reigns here, and not Ptolomy;
And yet, O Heaven! what Stars do govern me?
That some faint kind of satisfaction ’tis,
To meet here with my greatest Enemies;
And into their Hands that I rather fall,
Then into His that ow’d my Husband all.
But of thy Conquest, Caesar, make no boast,
Which to my single Destiny thou ow’st;
I both my Husbands Fortunes have defac’d,
And twice have caus’d th’whole World to be disgrac’d;
My Nuptial Knot twice ominously ty’d,
Banish’d the Gods from the Uprighter Side;
Happy in misery I had been, if it,
For Romes advantage, had with Thee been Knit;
And on thy House that I could so dispense
All my own Stars malignant inXuence:
For never think my Hatred can grow less,
Since I the Roman Constancy profess;
And though thy Captive, yet a Heart like mine,
Can never stoop to hope for ought from Thine:
Command, but think not to subject my Will,
Remember this, I am Cornelia still.
2.12 women translators
135

Lucy Hutchinson, ne´e Apsley (1620 – after 1662)
The highly educated Lucy Hutchinson produced two signiWcant translations, neither of
which was published; one of the classical Latin poet Lucretius, the other of a Latin
theological work by John Owen. She was a precocious child: according to her own account
of her life, she could read by the age of four, and by the time she was seven, she had eight
tutors in languages, music, dancing, writing, and needlework. She also learned Latin, at
the express wish of her father. She shows another side of the diYculties women faced as
writers in the following letter which she wrote as an introduction of her translation of
Lucretius, a manuscript presented to the Earl of Anglesey, in which she is anxious to
demonstrate the amateur character of her work:
When I present this unworthy translation to your Lordship, I sacriWce my shame to my
obedience, for (though a masculine witt hath thought it work printing his head in a
laurell crowne for the version of one of these bookes) I am so farre from gloriing
[glorying] in my six, that had they not by misfortune bene gone out of my hands in
one lost copie, even your Lordships command, which hath more authority with me, then
any humane thing I pay reverence to, should not have redeemd it from the Wre [ . . . ] And
therefore, since I did attempt things out of my own Sphaere, I am sorry I had not the
capacity of making a worke, nor the good fortune of chusing a subject, worthy of being
presented to your Lordship [ . . . ] Afterward being convincd of the sin of amusing my
selfe with such vaine Philosophy (which even at the Wrst I did not employ any serious
studie in, for I turnd it into English in a roome where my children practizd the severall
quallities they were taught with their Tutors, and I numbred the sillables of my
translation by the threds of the canvas I wrought in, and sett them downe with a pen
and inke that stood by me; (how superWcially it must needs be done in this manner, the
thing itselfe will shew,) but I say afterwards as my judgement grew riper, and my mind
was Wxt in more proWtable contemplations, I thought this booke not worthy either of
review or correction, the whole worke being one fault.
Lucy Hutchinson is sincere in what she says here: she was deeply devout, and she clearly
had misgivings about spending time on Lucretius, known as ‘the atheist philosopher’. But
there are also issues here about writing as a woman, ‘whose more becoming vertue is
silence’, as she says elsewhere in this introduction. Like the much earlier Mary Clark,
she claims a degree of amateurism which is belied by the translation itself, a very large,
ambitious production translated from a classical language. Both women, however, created
a single, handsomely written presentation manuscript, which was an end in itself rather
than intended as the fair copy for a subsequent edition. Both also claim, implausibly, that
136
from reformation to eighteenth century

the work was achieved casually, almost accidentally, without any desire to proWt from it.
They thus get their apology in Wrst, disarming criticism of both the woman for writing,
and of the work itself, establishing that their work should not be measured against the
serious work of university-educated men. However, the impression is inevitably given by
the translation itself that it is possible for a woman to produce high-quality translation
while supervising a roomful of children and embroidering with the other hand, suggesting
an almost superhuman ease and conWdence. Hutchinson’s translation of the third book of
Lucretius can usefully be contrasted with that of John Dryden, ‘Translation of the Last Part
of the Third Book of Lucretius: Against the Fear of Death’ (1685), which is printed in Sect.
2.13, below.
Now though the nature of the soule, dismist
From humane bodies, could with sence subsist,
Yett that concerns not us, who have alone
Our life and being in their conjuctions.
Neither though time should after death restore
Our matter to the state it had before,
And us in regions of the light revive
Coud we a beniWtt from thence derive,
After the chaine of life were broke, and we
Once interrupted in our memorie.
We now in life are not sollicitous
For what was done before nor anxious
For what our matter shall hereafter doe
When time shall our dissolved frames renew.
For when we look back on vast ages gone,
And on the matters various motion,
Tis easie to believe the seeds have bene
In the same positures oft, that now they’are in.
But tis not to our memories disclosd
Because lifes pawses oft are interpos’d
In which with diverse wandring motions they
Long time devested of all sences stray.
To future woes ordeind, men must survive
In that time when those evills may arrive.
Now, since death doth our former beings cease,
And this which the like troubles may distresse
Prohibitts to have bene before, wee see
Theres nothing to be feard in death, and he
2.12 women translators
137

Who hath no being, feeles no calamitie.
In men, whom never-failing death deprives
Of mortall being, whither unborne their lives
Never begin, or spun out vanish thus
The diVerence is not aniething to us.
Aphra Behn, ne´e Johnson (?1640–1689)
Aphra Behn is very well known as the Wrst successful woman playwright in English. She
made a reasonable living as a dramatist from 1670 until 1682, when London’s two theatre
companies amalgamated into the United Company, halving the demand for new plays.
Thereafter she augmented her income with translations, from French and Latin (the latter
from intermediate English versions), as well as poetry. As a dramatist, she declared her
pride in her work, her desire for fame and literary recognition as well as money. It is
therefore not surprising to Wnd that her translation work was ambitious. One of the most
famous and often-quoted works on translation theory in her time was the Essay on
Translated Verse by Wentworth Dillon, fourth Earl of Roscommon (?1633–85). Aphra
Behn’s translation of Bernard de Fontenelle’s A Discovery of New Worlds is prefaced by an
essay on the translation of prose which explicitly measures itself against Roscommon’s
work, and oVers an analysis of the particular diYculties oVered by various European
languages, based on their linguistic history. She is therefore claiming a space for herself not
as a mere hack, but as a public intellectual, an approach completely diVerent from that of
contemporaries such as Lucy Hutchinson and Katherine Phillips, who present their work
as private and amateur.
The Translator’s PREFACE
The General Applause this little Book of the Plurality of Worlds has met with, both in
France and England in the Original, made me attempt to translate it into English. The
Reputation of the Author, (who is the same, who writ the Dialogues of the Dead ) the
Novelty of the Subject in vulgar Languages, and the Authors introducing a Woman as
one of the speakers in these Wve Discourses, were further Motives for me to undertake
this little work; for I thought an English Woman might adventure to translate any thing,
a French Woman may be supposed to have spoken: But when I had made a Tryal, I found
the Task not so easie as I believed at Wrst. Therefore, before I say any thing, either of the
Design of the Author, or of the Book it self, give me leave to say something of Translation
of Prose in general: As for Translation of Verse, nothing can be added to that Incom-
parable Essay of the late Earl of Roscommon, the nearer the Idioms or turn of the Phrase
138
from reformation to eighteenth century

of two Languages agree, ’tis the easier to translate one into the other. The Italian, Spanish
and French, are all three at best Corruptions of the Latin, with the mixture of Gothic,
Arabick and Gaulish Words. The Italian, as it is nearest the Latin, is also nearest the
English: For its mixture being composed of Latin, and the Language of the Goths,
Vandals, and other Northern Nations, who over-ran the Roman Empire, and conquer’d
its Language with its Provinces, most of these Northern Nations spoke the Teutonick or
Dialects of it, of which the English is one also; and that’s the Reason, that the English and
Italian learn the Language of one another sooner than any other; because not only the
Phrase, but the Accent of both do very much agree, the Spanish is next of kin to the
English, for almost the same Reason: Because the Goths and Vandals having over-run
Africk, and kept Possession of it for some hundred of Years, where mixing with the
Moors, no doubt, gave them a great Tincture of their Tongue. These Moors afterwards
invaded and conquered Spain; besides Spain was before that also invaded and conquered
by the Goths, who possessed it long after the time of the two Sons of Theodosius the
Great, Arcadus and Honorius. The French, as it is most remote from the Latin, so the
Phrase and Accent diVer most from the English: It may be, it is more agreeable with the
Welsh, which is near a-kin to the Basbritton and Biscagne Languages [Breton and
Basque], which is derived from the old Celtick Tongue, the Wrst that was spoken amongst
the Ancient Gauls, who descended from the Celts.
The French therefore is of all the hardest to translate into English. For proof of this,
there are other Reasons also. And Wrst, the nearer the Genious and Humour of two
Nations agree, the Idioms of their Speech are the nearer; and every Body knows there is
more AYnity between the English and Italian People, than the English and the French, as
to their Humours; and for that Reason, and for what I have said before, it is very diYcult
to translate Spanish into French; and I believe hardly possible to translate French into
Dutch. The Second Reason is, the Italian Language is the same now as it was some
hundred of Years ago, so is the Spanish, not only as to the Phrase, but even as to the
Words and Orthography; whereas the French Language has suVered more Changes this
hundred Years past, since Francis the Wrst, than the Fashion of their Cloths, and Ribbons,
in Phrase, Words and Orthography. So that I am conWdent a French Man a hundred
Years hence will no more understand an old Edition of Froisard’s History [Jean Froissard’s
Chronicles, written in the late fourteenth century], than he will understand Arabick.
I confess the French Arms, Money and Intrigues have made their Language very universal
of late, for this they to be commended. It is an Accident, which they owe to the greatness
of their King and their own Industry; and it may fall out hereafter to be otherwise.
A third Reason is as I said before, that the French being a Corruption of the Latin, French
Authors take a liberty to borrow a Word they want from the Latin, without farther
Ceremony, especially when they treat of Sciences. This the English do not do, but at
second hand from the French. It is Modish to Ape the French in every thing: Therefore,
2.12 women translators
139

we not only naturalize their words, but words they steal from other Languages. I wish in
this and several other things, we had a little more of the Italian and Spanish Humour, and
did not chop and change our language, as we do our Cloths, at the Pleasure of every
French Tailor.
In translating French into English, most People are very cautious and unwilling to
print a French Word at Wrst out of a new Book, till Use has rendered it more familiar to
us; and therefore it runs a little rough in English, to express one French Word, by two or
three of ours; and thus much, as to the Ease and DiYculty of translating these Languages
in general: But, as to the French in particular, it has as many Advantages of the English, as
to the Sound, as ours has of the French, as to the SigniWcation: which is another
Argument of the diVerent Genius of the two Nations. Almost all the Relatives, Articles,
and Pronouns in the French Language, end in Vowels, and are written with two or three
Letters. Many of their words begin with Vowels, so that when a word after a Relative,
Pronoun or Article, ends with a Vowel, and begins with another, they admit of their
beloved Figure Apostrophe, and cut oV the Wrst Vowel. This they do to shun an ill sound;
and they are so musical as to that, that they will go against all the Rules of Sense and
Grammar, rather than fail; as for Speaking of a Man’s Wife they say, son Epouse; whereas
in Grammar, it ought to be sa Epouse; but this would throw a French-Man into a Fit of a
Fever, to hear one say, by way of Apostrophe S’Epouse, as this makes their Language to
run smoother, so by this they express several Words very shortly, as qu’entend je, in
English, what do I hear? In this Example, three words have the Sound but of one, for
Sound prevails with them in the beginning, middle and end. Secondly, their words
generally end in Vowels, or if they do not, they do not pronounce the Consonant, for the
most part unless there be two together, or that the next word begins with a Vowel.
Thirdly, by the help of their Relatives, they can shortly, and with ease resume a long
Preceeding Sentence, in two or three short words; these are the Advantages of the French
Tongue, all which they borrow from the Latin. But as the French do not value a plain Suit
without a Garniture, they are not satisWed with the Advantages they have, but confound
their own Language with needless Repetitions and Tautologies; and by a certain Rhet-
orical Figure, peculiar to themselves, imply twenty Lines, to express what an English
Man would say, with more Ease and Sense in Wve; and this is the great Misfortune of
translating French into English: If one endeavours to make it English Standard, it is no
Translation. If one follows their Flourishes and Embroideries, it is worse than French
Tinsel. But these defects are only comparatively, in respect of English: And I do not say
this so much, to condemn the French, as to praise our own Mother-Tongue, for what we
think a Deformity, they may think a Perfection; as the Negroes of Guinney think us as
ugly, as we think them.
[Behn translates Fontenelle’s own preface in the following manner, showing also why she
found this work on popular science interesting: it was an attempt to make contemporary
140
from reformation to eighteenth century

ideas about physics and the nature of the universe accessible to people without a university
education, and was particularly aimed at women.]
The Author’s PREFACE
I Wnd my self reduced almost to the same Condition in which Cicero was, when he
undertook to put Matters of Philosophy in Latin; which, till that time, had never been
treated of, but in Greek. He tells us, it would be said, his Works would be unproWtable,
since those who loved Philosophy, having already taken the pains to Wnd it in the Greek,
would neglect, after that, to read it again in Latin (that not being the Original;) and that
who did not care for Philosophy, would not seek it, either in the Latin, or the Greek. But
to this Cicero himself answer, and says, That those who were not Philosophers would be
tempted to the Reading of it, by the Facility they Would Wnd in its being in the Latin
Tongue; and that those who were Philosophers would be curious enough to see how well
it had been turned from the Greek to the Latin.
Cicero had reason to answer in this manner; the Excellency of his Genius, and the great
Reputation he had already acquired suYciently defend this new Undertaking of his,
which he had dedicated to the beneWt of the Publick. For my part, I am far from oVering
at any Defence for this of mine, though the Enterprize be the same; for I would treat of
Philosophy in a manner altogether unphilosophical, and have endeavoured to bring it to
a Point not too rough and harsh for the Capacity of the Numbers, nor too light and
trivial for the Learned [ . . . ]
In this Discourse I have introduced a fair Lady to be instructed in Philosophy, which,
till now, never heard any speak of it; imagining, by this Fiction, I shall render my Work
more agreeable, and to encourage the fair Sex (who lose so much time at their Toylet in a
less charming Study) by the Example of a Lady who had no supernatural Character, and
who never goes beyond the Bounds of a Person who has no Tincture of Learning, and yet
understands all that is told her.
The Eighteenth Century
The most famous learned woman of eighteenth-century England was Elizabeth Carter,
because she translated from Greek, but while the depth of her knowledge of Greek is
something very out of the ordinary, as a student of Latin, she is a less isolated Wgure than
she appears: to name only other obvious bluestockings (as learned ladies of the eighteenth
century were called), Hannah Thrale read Latin and translated Latin poetry (for example,
she translates a little poem by the Emperor Hadrian in her Retrospection (1801), i. 44).
2.12 women translators
141

Another famous bluestocking, Hannah More, novelist, poet, and moralist, also knew
Latin. Lady Mary Wortley Montagu taught herself Latin, so eVectively that her juvenilia at
sixteen or so includes an imitation of Ovid’s Heroides, the death of Adonis from his
Metamorphoses, and an imitation of Virgil’s tenth eclogue. All this activity suggests, rightly,
that Englishwomen continued to take a lively interest in translation, even from classical
languages.
Elizabeth Carter (1717–1806)
Montagu Pennington, in his Memoirs of Mrs Elizabeth Carter (London, 1807), states, ‘It
was her most eager desire to be a scholar [ . . . ] the slowness with which she conquered the
impediments, that always oppose the beginning of the study of the dead languages, was
such as wearied even the patience of her father [ . . . ] but she was determined to overcome
the diYculty.’ If this is the case, then she triumphed over her slowness, and became the
most famous woman scholar of her generation. She was also known as a poet and writer,
and translated Crousaz’s Examination of Mr Pope’s Essay on Man (1738) from French, and
Algarotti’s Sir Isaac Newton’s Philosophy Explain’d, for the Use of the Ladies (1739) from
Italian, but her chief claim to fame was her translation of Epictetus from ancient Greek.
Curiously, she is the second woman to translate this Stoic philosopher, though she was not
aware of the fact (the learned Dane Birgitte Thott published a Danish translation in
Copenhagen in 1661). She comments brieXy on her method of translation in the preface
below.
From All the Works of Epictetus which are now Extant (1758)
It was judged proper, that a Translation of him should be undertaken; there being none,
I believe, but of the Enchiridion, in any modern Language, excepting a pretty good
French one, published about a hundred and Wfty years ago, and so extremely scarce, that
I was unable to procure it, till Mr Harris obligingly lent it me, after I had published
the Proposals for printing this: which notwithstanding the Assistance given me in the
Prosecution of it, hath still, I am sensible, great Faults. But they, who will see them
the most clearly, will be the readiest to excuse, as they will know best the DiYculty of
avoiding them. There is one Circumstance, which, I am apprehensive, must be particu-
larly striking, and possibly shocking to many, the frequent Use of some Words in an
unpopular Sense: an Inconvenience, which, however, I Xatter myself, the Introduction
and Notes will, in some Degree, remove. In the Translation of technical terms, if the
142
from reformation to eighteenth century

same Greek word had not always been rendered in the same manner, at least when the
Propriety of our Language will at all permit it, every new Expression would have been apt
to raise a new Idea. The Reader, I hope, will pardon, if not approve, the Uncouthness, in
many Places, of a Translation pretty strictly literal: as it seemed necessary, upon the
whole, to preserve the original Spirit, the peculiar Turn, and characteristic Roughness of
the Author.
[This is a sample of the actual translation (bk II, ch. xi, pp. 147–8).]
The Beginning of Philosophy is this: The being sensible of the Disagreement of Men
with each other: an Inquiry into the Cause of this Disagreement; and a Disapprobation,
and Distrust of what merely seems: a certain Examination into what seems, whether it
seem rightly: and an Invention of some Rule, like a Balance, for the Determination of
Weights; like a Square for strait and crooked.
2.12 women translators
143

2.13 John Dryden
David Hopkins
(University of Bristol)
Dryden’s writings on translation are best considered not as a Wxed body of theory or
doctrine, but as the working notes of a practitioner, based on broad principles established
early in his translating career, but continually modiWed, enriched, and transformed by
subsequent discoveries and challenges in the Weld. Dryden’s translations, from the Classical
poets Homer, Horace, Juvenal, Lucretius, Ovid, Persius, Virgil, and Theocritus, and
from the medieval writers Chaucer and Boccaccio, constitute about two-thirds of his
non-dramatic verse. They were the poet’s main source of income in the last decade of his
life, and were widely regarded, for well over a hundred years after his death, as the crown of
his creative achievement. Dryden was, by inclination, an ‘occasional’ translator, who
preferred to select poems and passages which had ‘aVected’ him with a particular vividness
and urgency ‘in the reading’, or to whose authors he felt he had a ‘soul congenial’. (His
version of the works of Virgil—his only attempt at rendering another author’s oeuvre in its
entirety, and the only one of his translations about which he expresses any weariness or
misgivings—is the exception which proves the rule). Dryden’s translations reveal him
constantly (in T. S. Eliot’s words) ‘giving the original through himself and Wnding himself
through the original’. A study of Dryden’s translating practice is thus, necessarily and
simultaneously, a study of the poet’s imaginative communings with a number of his
favourite fellow-writers.
Dryden’s main reXections on translation are to be found in the prefaces and dedicatory
epistles preWxed to the various miscellanies and collections in which his versions appeared
between 1680 and 1700. These discussions focus on a number of recurring questions and
preoccupations: the kinds of knowledge that any successful translator needs to possess; the
kind of Wdelity to his original which he should seek; the ways in which he might best
preserve the distinctive ‘character’ of each of their originals; the degree to which he might
properly add to, subtract from, or ‘update’ material in his original; the larger contribution
which translation might make to the culture and language of the nation. In the Preface to
Ovid’s Epistles (1680), Dryden proposed his celebrated tripartite division of translation
into ‘metaphrase’, ‘paraphrase’, and ‘imitation’. ‘Metaphrase’ is rejected on the grounds
that it produces versions of such crabbed awkwardness that they can give little idea of the
artistic quality of their originals. ‘Imitation’ is criticized because of an excessive freedom
which makes it more properly regarded as original poetry than as translation.
144
from reformation to eighteenth century

‘Paraphrase’—translation in which the contours of the original are attentively observed,
but with a freedom which allows the translator to convey the ‘spirit’ and ‘sense’ rather than
merely the ‘letter’ of the original—is oVered as the ideal via media between the two
extremes.
Dryden broadly adhered to ‘paraphrase’ throughout his translating career, but his later
prefaces and practice reveal him constantly modifying his theory both in details (elements
of ‘metaphrase’ and ‘imitation’ are frequently incorporated piecemeal at the local level)
and in larger responses to speciWc challenges posed by particular writers. In the Preface to
Sylvae (1685), Dryden, buoyed up with conWdence by the ‘hot Wt’ of activity which had
recently produced his masterly renderings of Lucretius, Horace, and Virgil, claims the
right to exercise a greater degree of freedom than he had exercised hitherto, in order to
produce translations which, if his original ‘were living, and Englishman, . . . are such as he
would probably have written’. And when preparing his versions of the highly allusive and
topical Roman satirists Juvenal and Persius (1692; dated 1693), Dryden clearly became
convinced that further liberties were necessary if his versions were to convey to cultivated
English readers a comprehensible and vivid impression of the pointed and acerbic wit
which characterized his originals.
By the Preface to his last volume, Fables Ancient and Modern, Dryden’s discussions of
translation had moved beyond the speciWcs of method and technique, to present the
translator’s art in quasi-mystical terms, as a kind of spiritual ‘transfusion’ or metempsy-
chosis, in which the souls of particular poets, like the constituent elements of individual
human beings described by Ovid’s Pythagoras, are imagined as achieving posthumous life,
in a perpetual cycle of Xux and renewal, through the renderings and reimaginings of their
successors.
Dryden on Translation
From Preface to Ovid’s Epistles (London: J. Tonson, 1680)
Three Types of Translation
All translation, I suppose, may be reduced to these three heads.
First, that of metaphrase, or turning an author word by word and line by line, from
one language into another. Thus, or near this manner, was Horace his Art of Poetry
translated by Ben Jonson. The second way is that of paraphrase, or translation with
latitude, where the author is kept in view by the translator so as never to be lost, but his
words are not so strictly followed as his sense, and that too is admitted to be ampliWed,
but not altered. Such is Mr Waller’s translation of Virgil’s Fourth Aeneid. The third way is
2.13 john dryden
145

that of imitation, where the translator (if now he has not lost that name) assumes the
liberty not only to vary from the words and sense, but to forsake them both as he sees
occasion, and taking only some general hints from the original, to run division on the
groundwork as he pleases. Such is Mr Cowley’s practice in turning two Odes of Pindar,
and one of Horace, into English.
The Hazards of ‘Metaphrase’
’Tis almost impossible to translate verbally and well at the same time; for the Latin (a
most severe and compendious language) often expresses that in one word which either
the barbarity or the narrowness of modern tongues cannot supply in more. [ . . . ] the
verbal copier is encumbered with so many diYculties at once that he can never
disentangle himself from all. He is to consider at the same time the thought of his
author and his words, and to Wnd out the counterpart to each in another language; and
besides this, he is to conWne himself to the compass of numbers, and the slavery of
rhyme. ’Tis much like dancing on ropes with fettered legs: a man may shun a fall by using
caution; but the gracefulness of motion is not to be expected: and when we have said the
best of it, ’tis but a foolish task; for no sober man would put himself into a danger for the
applause of ’scaping without breaking his neck.
The Translator’s Language
No man is capable of translating poetry who, besides a genius to that art, is not a master
both of his author’s language and of his own. Nor must we understand the language only
of the poet, but his particular turn of thoughts and of expression, which are the characters
that distinguish, and, as it were, individuate him from all other writers. When we are
come thus far, ’tis time to look into ourselves, to conform our genius to his, to give his
thought either the same turn, if our tongue will bear it, or, if not, to vary but the dress,
not to alter or destroy the substance. The like care must be taken of the more outward
ornaments, the words. When they appear (which is but seldom) literally graceful, it were
an injury to the author that they should be changed. But since every language is so full of
its own proprieties, that what is beautiful in one is often barbarous, nay sometimes
nonsense, in another, it would be unreasonable to limit a translator to the narrow
compass of his author’s words: ’tis enough if he choose out some expression which
does not vitiate the sense. I suppose he may stretch his chain to such a latitude; but by
innovation of thoughts, methinks he breaks it. By this means the spirit of an author may
be transfused, and yet not lost: and thus ’tis plain that the reason alleged by Sir John
Denham has no farther force than to expression; for thought, if it be translated truly,
cannot be lost in another language; but the words that convey it to our apprehension
(which are the image and ornament of that thought) may be so ill chosen as to make it
appear in an unhandsome dress, and rob it of its native lustre. There is therefore a liberty
146
from reformation to eighteenth century

to be allowed for the expression, neither is it necessary that words and lines should be
conWned to the measure of their original. The sense of an author, generally speaking, is to
be sacred and inviolable.
From Preface to Sylvae (London: printed for Jacob Tonson, 1685)
Freedom and Pedantry in Translation
I have both added and omitted, and even sometimes very boldly made such expositions
of my authors, as no Dutch commentator will forgive me. Perhaps, in such particular
passages, I have thought that I discovered some beauty yet undiscovered by those
pedants, which none but a poet could have found. Where I have taken away some of
their expressions, and cut them shorter, it may possibly be on this consideration, that
what was beautiful in the Greek or Latin would not appear so shining in the English: and
where I have enlarged them, I desire the false critics would not always think that those
thoughts are wholly mine, but that either they are secretly in the poet, or may be fairly
deduced from him: or at least, if both those considerations should fail, that my own is of
a piece with his, and that if he were living, and an Englishman, they are such as he would
probably have written.
For, after all, a translator is to make his author appear as charming as possibly he can,
provided he maintains his character, and makes him not unlike himself. Translation is a
kind of drawing after the life; where every one will acknowledge there is a double sort of
likeness, a good one and a bad. ’Tis one thing to draw the outlines true, the features like,
the proportions exact, the colouring itself perhaps tolerable; and another thing to make
all these graceful by the posture, the shadowings, and chieXy by the spirit which animates
the whole. I cannot without some indignation look on an ill copy of an excellent original;
much less can I behold with patience Virgil, Homer, and some others, whose beauties
I have been endeavouring all my life to imitate, so abused, as I may say to their faces, by
a botching interpreter. What English readers, unacquainted with Greek or Latin, will
believe me, or any other man, when we commend those authors, and confess we derive
all that is pardonable in us from their fountains, if they take those to be the same poets
whom our Ogilbys have translated? But I dare assure them that a good poet is no more
like himself in a dull translation, than his carcass would be to his living body. There are
many who understand Greek and Latin, and yet are ignorant of their mother tongue.
The proprieties and delicacies of the English are known to few; ’tis impossible even for
a good wit to understand and practise them, without the help of a liberal education, long
reading, and digesting of those few good authors we have amongst us, the knowledge of
men and manners, the freedom of habitudes and conversation with the best company of
both sexes; and, in short, without wearing oV the rust which he contracted while he was
laying in a stock of learning.
2.13 john dryden
147

Maintaining the Character of an Original
Thus it appears necessary that a man should be a nice critic in his mother tongue before
he attempts to translate a foreign language. Neither is it suYcient that he be able to judge
of words and style; but he must be a master of them too. He must perfectly understand
his author’s tongue, and absolutely command his own; so that to be a thorough
translator, he must be a thorough poet. Neither is it enough to give his author’s sense
in good English, in poetical expressions, and in musical numbers. For, although all these
are exceeding diYcult to perform, there yet remains an harder task; and ’tis a secret of
which few translators have suYciently thought. I have already hinted a word or two
concerning it; that is, the maintaining the character of an author, which distinguishes
him from all others, and makes him appear that individual poet whom you would
interpret. For example, not only the thoughts, but the style and versiWcation of Virgil and
Ovid are very diVerent. Yet I see, even in our best poets who have translated some parts of
them, that they have confounded their several talents; and by endeavouring only at the
sweetness and harmony of numbers, have made them both so much alike that, if I did
not know the originals, I should never be able to judge by the copies which was Virgil
and which was Ovid. It was objected against a late noble painter, that he drew many
graceful pictures, but few of them were like. And this happened to him because he always
studied himself more than those who sat to him. In such translators I can easily
distinguish the hand which performed the work, but I cannot distinguish their poet
from another.
The Challenge of Translating Lucretius
If I am not mistaken, the distinguishing character of Lucretius (I mean of his soul and
genius) is a certain kind of noble pride, and positive assertion of his opinions. He is
everywhere conWdent of his own reason, and assuming an absolute command, not only
over his vulgar reader, but even his patron Memmius. For he is always bidding him
attend, as if he had the rod over him; and using a magisterial authority while he instructs
him. [ . . . ] He seems to disdain all manner of replies, and is so conWdent of his cause that
he is beforehand with his antagonists, urging for them whatever he imagined they could
say, and leaving them, as he supposes, without an objection for the future. All this, too,
with so much scorn and indignation, as if he were assured of the triumph before he
entered into the lists. From this sublime and daring genius of his, it must of necessity
come to pass that his thoughts must be masculine, full of argumentation, and that
suYciently warm. From the same Wery temper proceeds the loftiness of his expressions,
and the perpetual torrent of his verse, where the barrenness of his subject does not too
much restrain the quickness of his fancy. [ . . . ] These are the considerations which I had
of that author, before I attempted to translate some parts of him. And accordingly I laid
148
from reformation to eighteenth century

by my natural diYdence and scepticism for a while, to take up that dogmatical way of
his, which, as I said, is so much his character as to make him that individual poet.
Capturing the Character of Horace
That which will distinguish his style from all other poets is the elegance of his words, and
the numerousness of this verse; there is nothing so delicately turned in all the Roman
language. There appears in every part of his diction, or (to speak English) in all his
expressions, a kind of noble and bold purity. His words are chosen with as much
exactness as Virgil’s; but there seems to be a greater spirit in them. [ . . . ] But the most
distinguishing part of all his character seems to me to be his briskness, his jollity, and his
good humour; and those I have chieXy endeavoured to copy; his other excellencies,
I confess, are above my imitation. One ode which inWnitely pleased me in the reading,
I have attempted to translate in Pindaric verse; ’tis that which is inscribed to the present
Earl of Rochester, to whom I have particular obligations, which this small testimony of
my gratitude can never pay. ’Tis his darling in the Latin, and I have taken some pains to
make it my masterpiece in English: for which reason I took this kind of verse, which
allows more latitude than any other.
From Dedication to the Aeneis (1697), in The Works of Virgil, translated into English
verse by Mr Dryden (London: printed for Jacob Tonson, 1697)
Imitating Virgil’s Numbers
His words are not only chosen, but the places in which he ranks them for the sound. He
who removes them from the station wherein their master sets them spoils the harmony.
What he says of the Sibyl’s prophecies may be as properly applied to every word of his:
they must be read in order as they lie; the least breath discomposes them; and somewhat
of their divinity is lost. I cannot boast that I have been thus exact in my verses; but I have
endeavoured to follow the example of my master, and am the Wrst Englishman, perhaps,
who made it his design to copy him in his numbers, his choice of words, and his placing
them for the sweetness of the sound. On this last consideration, I have shunned the
caesura [elision] as much as possibly I could; for, wherever that is used it gives a
roughness to the verse, of which we have little need in a language which is overstocked
with consonants. Such is not the Latin, where the vowels and consonants are mixed in
proportion to each other: yet Virgil judged the vowels to have somewhat of an overbal-
ance, and therefore tempers their sweetness with caesuras. Such diVerence there is in
tongues, that the same Wgure which roughens one gives majesty to another; and that was
it which Virgil studied in his verses.
2.13 john dryden
149

Dryden’s Freedoms in Translating Virgil
The way I have taken is not so strait as metaphrase, nor so loose as paraphrase; some
things too I have omitted, and sometimes have added of my own. Yet the omissions,
I hope, are but of circumstances, and such as would have no grace in English; and the
additions, I also hope, are easily deduced from Virgil’s sense. They will seem (at least
I have the vanity to think so) not stuck into him, but growing out of him. He studies
brevity more than any other poet: but he had the advantage of a language wherein much
may be comprehended in a little space. We, and all the modern tongues, have more
articles and pronouns, besides signs of tenses and cases, and other barbarities on which
our speech is built by the faults of our forefathers. [ . . . ] I thought Wt to steer betwixt the
two extremes of paraphrase and literal translation; to keep as near my author as I could,
without losing all his graces, the most eminent of which are in the beauty of his words;
and those words, I must add, are always Wgurative. Such of these as would retain their
elegance in our tongue, I have endeavoured to graV on it; but most of them are of
necessity to be lost, because they will not shine in any but their own. Virgil has
sometimes two of them in a line; but the scantiness of our heroic verse is not capable
of receiving more than one; and that too must expiate for many others, which have none.
Such is the diVerence of the languages, or such my want of skill in choosing words. Yet
I may presume to say [ . . . ] that, taking all the materials of this divine author, I have
endeavoured to make Virgil speak such English as he would himself had spoken, if he
had been born in England, and in this present age.
The Translator’s Burden
But slaves we are, and labour on another man’s plantation; we dress the vineyard, but the
wine is the owner’s; if the soil be sometime barren, then we are sure of being scourged: if it
be fruitful, and our care succeeds, we are not thanked; for the proud reader will only say,
the poor drudge has done his duty. But this is nothing to what follows; for being obliged to
make his sense intelligible, we are forced to untune our own verses, that we may give his
meaning to the reader. He who invents is master of his thoughts and words; he can turn
and vary them as he pleases, till he renders them harmonious; but the wretched translator
has no such privilege; for being tied to the thoughts, he must make what music he can in
the expression; and, for this reason, it cannot always be so sweet as the original.
From Preface to Fables Ancient and Modern (London: Jacob Tonson, 1700)
Dryden’s AYnity with Chaucer
Chaucer, I confess, is a rough diamond, and must Wrst be polished ere he shines. I deny
not likewise that, living in the early days of our poetry, he writes not always of a piece; but
150
from reformation to eighteenth century

sometimes mingles trivial things with those of greater moment. Sometimes also, though
not often, he runs riot, like Ovid, and knows not when he has said enough. [ . . . ] Having
observed this redundancy in Chaucer [ . . . ] I have not tied myself to a literal translation;
but have often omitted what I judged unnecessary, or not of dignity enough to appear in
the company of better thoughts. I have presumed farther in some places, and added
somewhat of my own where I thought my author was deWcient, and had not given his
thoughts their true lustre, for want of words in the beginning of our language. And to this
I was the more emboldened, because (if I may be permitted to say it of myself) I found
I had a soul congenial to his, and that I had been conversant in the same studies. Another
poet, in another age, may take the same liberty with my writings, if at least they live long
enough to deserve correction.
From ‘Of the Pythagorean Philosophy, from Ovid’s Metamorphoses, Book XV’ (1700)
Translation and Immortality
Then to be born is to begin to be
Some other thing we were not formerly,
And what we call to die is not t’ appear
Or be the thing that formerly we were.
Those very elements which we partake
Alive, when dead some other bodies make;
Translated grow, have sense or can discourse;
But death on deathless substance has no force.
Dryden the Translator
From ‘Translation of the Last Part of the Third Book of Lucretius: Against the Fear of
Death’ (1685)
The Wnality of death
Nay, ev’n suppose when we have suVered fate,
The soul could feel in her divided state,
What’s that to us? for we are only we
While souls and bodies in one frame agree.
Nay, though our atoms should revolve by chance,
And matter leap into the former dance;
Though time our life and motion could restore,
And make our bodies what they were before,
What gain to us would all this bustle bring?
2.13 john dryden
151

The new-made man would be another thing;
When once an interrupting pause is made,
That individual being is decayed.
We, who are dead and gone, shall bear no part
In all the pleasures, nor shall feel the smart,
Which to that other mortal shall accrue,
Whom of our matter time shall mould anew.
For backward if you look on that long space
Of ages past, and view the changing face
Of matter, tossed and variously combined
In sundry shapes, ’tis easy for the mind
From thence t’ infer that seeds of things have been
In the same order as they now are seen;
Which yet our dark remembrance cannot trace,
Because a pause of life, a gaping space
Has come betwixt, where memory lies dead,
And all the wandering motions from the sense are Xed.
For whosoe’er shall in misfortunes live,
Must be when those misfortunes shall arrive;
And since the man who is not, feels not woe
(For death exempts him, and wards oV the blow,
Which we the living only feel and bear),
What is there left for us in death to fear?
When once that pause of life has come between,
’Tis just the same as we had never been.
From ‘Horace, Ode 29, Book 3, Paraphrased in Pindaric Verse, and Inscribed to the
Right Honourable Lawrence, Earl of Rochester’ (1685)
Living in the Present
Enjoy the present smiling hour,
And put it out of Fortune’s power;
The tide of business, like the running stream,
Is sometimes high and sometimes low,
A quiet ebb or a tempestuous Xow,
And always in extreme.
Now with a noiseless gentle course
It keeps within the middle bed;
Anon it lifts aloft the head,
And bears down all before it with impetuous force:
152
from reformation to eighteenth century

And trunks of trees come rolling down,
Sheep and their folds together drown;
Both house and homestead into seas are borne,
And rocks are from their old foundations torn,
And woods made thin with winds their scattered honours mourn.
Happy the man, and happy he alone,
He who can call today his own:
He who secure within can say,
‘Tomorrow do thy worst, for I have lived today:
Be fair, or foul, or rain, or shine,
The joys I have possessed, in spite of Fate, are mine;
Not heaven itself upon the past has power,
But what has been has been, and I have had my hour.’
From ‘The Tenth Satire of Juvenal’ (1692; dated 1693)
The Fall of Sejanus
Some ask for envied power, which public hate
Pursues, and hurries headlong to their fate:
Down go the titles, and the statue crowned
Is by base hands in the next river drowned.
The guiltless horses and the chariot wheel
The same eVects of vulgar fury feel:
The smith prepares his hammer for the stroke,
While the lunged bellows hissing Wre provoke.
Sejanus, almost Wrst of Roman names,
The great Sejanus crackles in the Xames:
Formed in the forge, the pliant brass is laid
On anvils; and of head and limbs are made
Pans, cans and piss-pots, a whole kitchen trade.
)
Hannibal
Ask what a face belonged to this high fame;
His picture scarcely would deserve a frame:
A sign-post dauber would disdain to paint
The one-eyed hero on his elephant.
Now what’s his end, O charming Glory, say:
What rare Wfth act to crown this huYng play?
In one deciding battle overcome,
2.13 john dryden
153

He Xies, is banished from his native home;
Begs refuge in a foreign court, and there
Attends, his mean petition to prefer;
Repulsed by surly grooms, who wait before
The sleeping tyrant’s interdicted door.
What wondrous sort of death has heaven designed,
Distinguished from the herd of human kind,
For so untamed, so turbulent a mind?
)
Nor swords at hand, nor hissing darts afar,
Are doomed t’ avenge the tedious, bloody war;
But poison, drawn through a ring’s hollow plate,
Must Wnish him: a sucking infant’s fate.
Go, climb the rugged Alps, ambitious fool,
To please the boys, and be a theme at school!
The miseries of old age
‘Jove, grant me length of life, and years’ good store
Heap on my bending back: I ask no more.’
Both sick and healthful, old and young, conspire
In this one silly, mischievous desire.
Mistaken blessing which old age they call:
’Tis a long, nasty, darksome hospital;
A ropy chain of rheums, a visage rough,
Deformed, unfeatured, and a skin of buV;
A stitch-fall’n cheek that hangs below the jaw;
Such wrinkles as a skilful hand would draw
For an old grandam ape, when, with a grace,
She sits at squat and scrubs her leathern face.
In youth, distinctions inWnite abound;
No shape or feature just alike are found:
The fair, the black, the feeble, and the strong.
But the same foulness does to age belong,
The self-same palsy both in limbs and tongue;
)
The skull and forehead one bald barren plain,
And gums unarmed to mumble meat in vain;
Besides th’ eternal drivel that supplies
The dropping beard from nostrils, mouth, and eyes.
His wife and children loathe him, and, what’s worse,
Himself does his oVensive carrion curse!
154
from reformation to eighteenth century

Flatt’rers forsake him too; for who would kill
Himself to be remembered in a will?
His taste not only palled to wine and meat,
But to the relish of a nobler treat.
The limber nerve, in vain provoked to rise,
Inglorious from the Weld of battle Xies;
Poor feeble dotard, how could he advance
With his blue headpiece and his broken lance?
Add that, endeavouring still without eVect,
A lust more sordid justly we suspect.
From ‘The Second Book of Virgil’s Aeneis’ (1697)
The Death of Priam
‘Perhaps you may of Priam’s fate enquire.
He, when he saw his regal town on Wre,
His ruined palace and his entering foes,
On every side inevitable woes,
In arms disused invests his limbs, decayed
Like them with age, a late and useless aid.
His feeble shoulders scarce the weight sustain:
Loaded, not armed, he creeps along with pain,
Despairing of success, ambitious to be slain.
)
Uncovered but by heaven, there stood in
An altar: near the hearth a laurel grew,
Doddered with age, whose boughs encompass round
The household gods, and shade the holy ground.
Here Hecuba with all her helpless train
Of dames for shelter sought, but sought in vain.
Driv’n like a Xock of doves along the sky,
Their images they hug, and to their altars Xy.
The queen, when she beheld her trembling lord,
And hanging by his side a heavy sword,
‘What rage,’ she cried, ‘has seized my husband’s mind?
What arms are these, and to what use designed?
These times want other aids: were Hector here,
Ev’n Hector now in vain, like Priam, would appear.
With us one common shelter thou shalt Wnd,
Or in one common fate with us be joined.’
She said, and with a last salute embraced
2.13 john dryden
155

The poor old man, and by the laurel placed.
Behold Polites, one of Priam’s sons,
Pursued by Pyrrhus there for safety runs.
Through swords and foes amazed and hurt, he Xies
Through empty courts and open galleries.
Him Pyrrhus, urging with his lance, pursues,
And often reaches, and his thrusts renews.
The youth transWxed, with lamentable cries
Expires before his wretched parent’s eyes:
Whom gasping at his feet when Priam saw,
The fear of death gave place to nature’s law,
And shaking more with anger than with age,
‘The gods,’ said he, ‘requite thy brutal rage—
As sure they will, barbarian, sure they must,
If there be gods in heaven, and gods be just—
Who tak’st in wrongs an insolent delight;
With a son’s death t’ infect a father’s sight.
Not he, whom thou and lying Fame conspire
To call thee his; not he, thy vaunted sire,
Thus used my wretched age: the gods he feared;
The laws of nature and of nations heard.
He cheered my sorrows, and for sums of gold
The bloodless carcass of my Hector sold;
Pitied the woes a parent underwent,
And sent me back in safety from his tent.’
This said, his feeble hand a javelin threw,
Which, Xuttering, seemed to loiter as it Xew:
Just, and but barely, to the mark it held,
And faintly tinkled on the brazen shield.
Then Pyrrhus thus: ‘Go thou from me to Fate,
And to my father my foul deeds relate:
Now die!’ With that, he dragged the trembling sire,
Sliddering through clottered blood and holy mire
(The mingled paste his murdered son had made),
Hauled from beneath the violated shade,
And on the sacred pile the royal victim laid.
)
His right hand held his bloody falchion bare,
His left he twisted in his hoary hair;
156
from reformation to eighteenth century

Then with a speeding thrust his heart he found;
The lukewarm blood came rushing through the wound,
And sanguine streams distained the sacred ground.
9
>
=
>
;
Thus Priam fell, and shared one common fate
With Troy in ashes, and his ruined state:
He who the sceptre of all Asia swayed,
Whom monarchs like domestic slaves obeyed.
On the bleak shore now lies th’ abandoned king,
A headless carcass and a nameless thing.
From ‘Sigismonda and Guiscardo, from Boccace’ [Boccaccio] (1700)
Sigismonda defends her clandestine marriage to her father’s squire, Guiscardo
‘Tancred, I neither am disposed to make
Request for life, nor oVered life to take:
Much less deny the deed; but least of all
Beneath pretended justice weakly fall.
My words to sacred truth shall be conWned;
My deeds shall show the greatness of my mind.
That I have loved, I own; that still I love,
I call to witness all the powers above.
Yet more I own: to Guiscard’s love I give
The small remaining time I have to live;
And if beyond this life desire can be
Not Fate itself shall set my passion free.
This Wrst avowed, nor folly warped my mind,
Nor the frail texture of the female kind
Betrayed my virtue; for too well I knew
What honour was, and honour had his due:
Before the holy priest my vows were tied,
So came I not a strumpet, but a bride.
This for my fame, and for the public voice;
Yet more, his merits justiWed my choice:
Which had they not, the Wrst election thine
That bond dissolved, the next is freely mine:
Or grant I erred—which yet I must deny—
Had parents power ev’n second vows to tie,
Thy little care to mend my widowed nights
Has forced me to recourse of marriage rites,
To Wll an empty side, and follow known delights.
)
What have I done in this deserving blame?
2.13 john dryden
157

State laws may alter: nature’s are the same;
Those are usurped on helpless womankind,
Made without our consent, and wanting power to bind.’
From ‘The First Book of Homer’s Ilias’
Achilles vents his wrath on Agamemnon
‘Dastard and drunkard, mean and insolent,
Tongue-valiant hero, vaunter of thy might,
In threats the foremost, but the lag in Wght;
When didst thou thrust amid the mingled press,
Content to bid the war aloof in peace?
Arms are the trade of each plebeian soul;
’Tis death to Wght, but kingly to control.
Lordlike at ease, with arbitrary power,
To peel the chiefs, the people to devour;
These, traitor, are thy talents; safer far
Than to contend in Welds and toils of war.
Nor couldst thou thus have dared the common hate,
Were not their souls as abject as their state.
But by this sceptre solemnly I swear—
Which never more green leaf or growing branch shall bear,
Torn from the tree and giv’n by Jove to those
Who laws dispense and mighty wrongs oppose—
That when the Grecians want my wonted aid,
No gift shall bribe it, and no prayer persuade.
When Hector comes, the homicide, to wield
His conquering arms, with corpse to strew the Weld;
Then shalt thou mourn thy pride, and late confess
My wrong repented when ’tis past redress.’
He said, and with disdain in open view,
Against the ground his golden sceptre threw.
From ‘The Flower and the Leaf’ (1700)
Spring
Now turning from the wintry signs, the sun
His course exalted through the Ram had run,
And whirling up the skies, his chariot drove
Through Taurus, and the lightsome realms of love,
158
from reformation to eighteenth century

Where Venus from her orb descends in showers
To glad the ground, and paint the Welds with Xowers;
When Wrst the tender blades of grass appear,
And buds that yet the blast of Eurus fear,
Stand at the door of life, and doubt to clothe the year;
)
Till gentle heat, and soft repeated rains
Make the green blood to dance within their veins;
Then, at their call, emboldened out they come,
And swell the gems, and burst the narrow room;
Broader and broader yet, their blooms display,
Salute the welcome sun, and entertain the day.
Then from their breathing souls the sweets repair
To scent the skies, and purge th’ unwholesome air;
Joy spreads the heart, and with a general song,
Spring issues out, and leads the jolly months along.
2.13 john dryden
159

2.14 Anne Dacier
Anne Dacier (1654–1720), daughter of the classical scholar Tanneguy Lefebvre, published
fragments from the Alexandrian poet Callimachus as early as 1674. This was so well
received that she was chosen by Pierre-Daniel Huet, as one of the editors of the collection
of classics Ad usum Delphini, for the use of the Dauphin. She married a student of her
father’s, the philologist Andre´ Dacier. Her many translations include Anacreon and
Sappho (1681); several plays by Plautus and Aristophanes (1683–84); Terence (1688); and
the Iliad (1699) and Odyssey (1708).
Dacier’s translation of the Iliad into prose included a long preface in response to
Homer’s critics. This document Wgures prominently in the ongoing quarrel between the
Ancients (to which group she belonged) and the Moderns, the latter being critical of
Classical literature, including the Homeric poems, and insisting on the right and duty of
contemporary authors to modify them according to their own supposedly superior
aesthetic standards. By the time Boileau, a defender of the Ancients, died in 1711, the
concern for accurate translations of the classics had been swept away by the Moderns’
tireless promotion of contemporary literature. In a letter to Dacier (1720), Voltaire, who
had lauded her as ‘one of the prodigies of the century of Louis XlV’, made his own
position clear: ‘I am convinced that we have two or three poets in France who would be
able to translate Homer very well; but I am equally convinced that nobody will read them
unless they soften and embellish almost everything because, Madame, you have to write
for your own time, not for the past.’1
Scholarly writings by Anne Dacier and others are convincing evidence of the signiWcant
part played by women writers who appreciated the opportunity oVered by translation as a
way of contributing to and shaping the culture of the Enlightenment. Dacier’s renown
spread beyond France, Alexander Pope, for instance, valuing her work, as is clear, if with
some reservations, from his introductory comments to his ‘Observations on the First
Book’ of the Iliad (i.e. his notes). He claims that previous commentators on Homer have
very little on the ‘poetical beauties of the author’, their remarks being ‘rather philosoph-
ical, historical, geographical, allegorical, or in short rather any thing than critical and
poetical’, and he quotes at length from Eustathius, a Constantinople cleric and classical
scholar, whose many works included vast commentaries on the Iliad and the Odyssey. But
he also makes great use of Dacier’s notes, pointing out that she too is indebted to
Eustathius, adding: ‘She has made a farther attempt than her predecessors to discover
1 See A. Lefevere, Translation/History/Culture, (London: Routledge, 1992), 30.
160
from reformation to eighteenth century

the beauties of the Poet; tho’ we have often only her general praises and exclamations
instead of reasons. But her remarks all together are the most judicious collection extant of
the scatter’d observations of the ancients and moderns, as her preface is excellent, and her
translation equally careful and elegant.’2
From The Iliad of Homer, translated from the Greek into blank verse by Mr Ozell,
Mr Broom, and Mr Oldisworth (London: G. James, for Bernard Lintott, 1712),
including an English translation of Dacier’s Preface
[John Ozell in his Preface to the English Translation reiterates much of what Dacier has to
say, but national prejudice also receives an airing. French is ‘the most unWtted language for
such subjects, whereas English is the ‘‘Wttest’’ ’; ‘In Matters of Cookery, indeed, the French
Language abounds beyond any other; for which Reason as a great Critic observes, the
Italians call it the Kitchen-language’; French ‘wants Sinews and Strength to alay the
excessive softness of it’, this putting it at a great disadvantage when trying to convey
‘Manly Passions’, the description of which is of the essence in Homer. And as if that is not
enough, French ‘versiWcation’ is ‘intolerably tedious’, there being no ‘Variety of Numbers
[ . . . ] but the same eternal cadence upon the last syllable of each Word’.
This is good enough reason for translation of the Greek poets into French prose rather than
poetry, although the same argument does notapply to English, where the preferredmediumis
blank verse. Had Homer lived today and written in English, he ‘would most certainly have
chosen the same sort of Verse, which our English Homer, Milton did.’ Ozell is even critical of
the revered Dryden, who, unlike Mme Dacier, was led by rhyme into making errors.]
Ozell’s Notes and Preface
Dacier’s notes, which were of primary importance to her, comment, albeit acutely, on the
message, rather than on the medium, the translation being treated, in eVect, as a source
text. She insists on the need for them, since ‘It is quite impossible to render all those several
Beauties discernible by Translation alone; it is absolutely necessary to accompany this with
Remarks’. The English translators included Dacier’s notes, many of them quite copious,
implicitly of course taking her side in the Querelle. She observes: ‘I have very rarely thought
Wt to descend to criticise upon Words; nothing can be more dry, more barren, or more
disagreeable.’ We might beg to diVer, but she continues: ‘I am of the Opinion, that what is
most advantageous, and of the highest Importance, is to make the Reader thoroughly
apprehend the Delicacy and Energy of Homer’s Turns and Thoughts.’ Thus, the Iliad,
2 See Pope’s Preface to The Iliad of Homer (1715–20; London: Penguin 1996, (1743 edn.) ).
2.14 anne dacier
161

Book 1, line 1, Sing, Goddess the Resentment of Achilles . . . is Xeshed out by this note:
‘The Invention is an essential part of an Epic Poem, and indispensably necessary upon
many Accounts. The Poet, being to relate an inWnite Number of Things, which he is not
willing to be reckon’d the Inventor of, but delivers for true [ . . . ]; and being often oblig’d
to display the most hidden causes, and most Secret springs of Actions; he must necessarily
have recourse to some Deity, to inspire him with them; for he neither ought nor can know
them any other way [ . . . ]’.
Dacier examines ‘the opinion of those, who have believ’d, that Homer’s principle aim,
in his poem, was to please; that Instruction is but incidental; that Morality is there in
subordinate to Pleasure, and only made use of as a surer way to please’. She concludes: ‘To
aYrm that to please is the ultimate End of Epic Poetry is like maintaining that Pleasure is
the only end of Architecture, and that a Palace is built only to entertain the Eye without
any Regard had to the Lodging, and Conveniency of the Owner.’ That is, the moral
reasons for translating Homer are so overwhelming that the task must be undertaken, in
spite of its near impossibility, French verse being so inadequate.
Dacier states unequivocally that ‘Poets translated into verse, cease to be Poets’, maintain-
ing that this can be demonstrated. Accordingly, she recommends prose, in support of which
she alludes to ‘the Hebrews who [ . . . ] have made a sort of Poetry of their Prose’. She insists
that she does not mean by this [i.e. prose translation] servile translation. At the very least,
translation obliges one to read more deeply and to discover new beauties and meanings.
On the one hand, Dacier can say of her notes that these remarks ‘may be serviceable to
the Reader for unravelling of the Poet’s Art [ . . . ]’, by which evidently she had in mind
something other than prosody or aesthetics, while on the other characterizing Homer’s
poetry as being ‘like Musick, which can bring under its Command, and reduce to
Harmony, the most disagreeable and unharmonious Sounds; all things submit to it, and
concur to work the EVects it enjoins’. Since ‘the Beauties are not, however, the most
valuable part’, the attempt to reproduce these, if self-evidently impossible, must and
indeed can be made.
From Anne Dacier’s ‘Preface’, translated by Ozell
But this mixed composition, the source of these beauties, is unknown to our tongue; it
does not, at all, allow of these diVerent turns; it knows not what to do with a mean, hard,
or disagreeable word; it has no treasure in reserve, to conceal what is defective; it neither
has those numerous particles to support its words, nor that diVerent harmony, proceed-
ing from the various ranging of terms; and consequently, it is incapable of expressing
most of the beauties which shines in that poem. This is my condemnation, and a very just
one too, if I am tried with rigor; for, I own, in every verse in Homer I Wnd a beauty, a
force, a harmony, a grace, which it has been impossible for me to preserve.
162
from reformation to eighteenth century

To what purpose was it, then, to attempt a thing I could not succeed in? I will here give
my reasons; perhaps they may make a tolerable excuse.
The wonders of Homer’s style, and the beauties he has drawn from his tongue, are not the
most valuable part of his poetry; there are beauties above those of the language, and such as
cannot fail moving those who are not altogether insensible. The most barbarous nations,
who have no notion of Wne poetry, or the energy and harmony of language, could not
forbear being sensible of the loftiness of his ideas, the majesty of his subject, that beautiful
nature which reigns throughout every part of him, and the surprising variety of his character,
which diVer very much, even in the same kind of virtues. For instance, Ulysses and Nestor,
both of them men of profound prudence, are not the same. Achilles, Diomedes, and Ajax,
all of them brave, are yet so in a diVerent manner. The Indians and the Persians have Homer
translated into their languages; and it is positively said, there is a Chaldaic or Syriac
translation of him. I am of opinion, a French translation may be as good as those, and
better preserve most of the beauties of the style, or give a better sense of them.
Besides, I do not write for the learned, who read Homer in his own tongue; they know
him better than I pretend to; I write for those who do not know him, that is, for the
greater number, in respect of whom this poet is as it were dead; I write also for those who
learn to read him, and are to take pains to understand him before they can be sensible of
his beauties.
As for the Wrst of them, that is, those who are deprived of the pleasure of reading him
in Greek, let them give me leave here to make a comparison which, by letting them see
the judgment I make myself of my work, will put my translation out of the reach of their
censure, and secure the original from their contempt. Can images be more properly
made use of than when we speak of the father of poetry? [ . . . ]
This is the most impartial idea I can give of my translation; I own, it is not Homer alive
and animated, but still it is Homer; there will not be found in him that energy, that grace,
that life, those ravishing charms, and that Wre, which warms all that comes near it; but
every feature, and the admirable symmetry of all his parts will be picked out; nay, I dare
be so bold as to hope, he will still retain lively colours enough to make it doubtful for a
moment whether there are not yet some remains of life in him. In a word, it is Homer,
and Homer much less altered than in the translations that have been hitherto made,
which have so strangely disWgured him, that he is no longer to be known.
Some will say, there is a surer way of approaching to the original, which is to translate
it into verse; for, as they allege, poets are to be translated into verse, to retain their Wre.
This would certainly be best, were it practicable; but to believe it possible is a mistake,
capable, in my opinion, of demonstration. [ . . . ]
A translator, in prose, may say all that Homer has said; this he can never do in verse,
especially in our tongue, where he must of necessity be always altering, retrenching,
2.14 anne dacier
163

adding. Now, what Homer has thought and said, though rendered in a plainer and less
poetical manner than he has done, is certainly much better than what those who translate
him in verse are forced to lend him.
This is my Wrst reason. There is another, which is the same I have already explained.
Our poetry is not capable of expressing all the beauties of Homer, and soaring to his
height; it may follow him in some select places; it may successfully hit oV two, four, or six
of his verses [ . . . ]; but at length, the connection will be so weak that nothing will be
more languid. And what can be imagined meaner than a cold and Xat piece of poetry,
wherein nothing is tolerable that is not excellent? I could make this very obvious by
examples, but that they are common, and every man may convince himself of this truth.
Nay, I am not afraid to say, and could be able to prove it, that poets translated into verse
cease to be poets. [ . . . ]
It is not so in prose, which can follow all the poet’s notions, retain the beauty of his
images, say all he has said; and if at any time it is obliged to lend something to him,
which must be done but very rarely, as being dangerous, it only borrows from him
whatsoever it lends him; and, even under its plainness and mediocrity, fails not to
support itself. I do not say I have performed all this, I only say it may be done in
prose. [ . . . ]
We must then be content with prose for translating of the poets, and endeavour to
imitate the Hebrews, who having no poetry (that is, a sort of speech conWned to a certain
number of feet, and long or short syllables) have made a sort of poetry of their prose, by
means of a more beautiWed, more sprightly, and a more Wgurative language; and it has
succeeded so well, that nothing represents more lively ideas to the mind than the
canticles, the psalms, and some passages in the prophets.
It is certain that prose, supported by and composed with art, will come nearer to
poetry than a translation into verse [ . . . ] But I do not think it enough to say that prose
may come near to poetry; I will go yet farther and aYrm that in case of translation, which
is the matter in hand, there is sometimes such a niceness, a beauty, and an energy in prose
as poetry cannot come near. The books of the prophets and the psalms, even in the
Vulgate, are full of such passages, as the greatest poet in the world could not put into
verse without losing much of their majesty and pathos.
When I speak of a translation of prose, I do not mean a servile translation, I mean a
noble and generous translation which, adhering strictly to the way of thinking in the
original, searches out the beauties of its language and represents the images without
retailing the words. The Wrst sort of translation becomes unfaithful through too scrupu-
lous a faithfulness; for it loses the spirit to preserve the letter, which is the work of a cold
and barren genius; whereas the other, though chieXy aiming to retain the spirit, yet fails
not, in its greatest liberties, to retain the letter; and by means of its bold but true strokes
164
from reformation to eighteenth century

becomes not only a faithful copy of its original, but even a second original; which cannot
be executed but by a solid, noble and fruitful genius.
What I have here said is to undeceive some persons who, being unacquainted with the
nature and beauty of writings, have more particularly a very disadvantageous and false
notion of translations. They fancy it is a servile imitation, wherein the Xower of wit and
fancy have no share; in a word; that there is no creation. This is certainly a gross mistake;
translation is not like the copy of a picture, wherein the copier is tied down to the
features, the colours, the proportions, the contours, and the attitudes of the original he
follows; all this is quite otherwise, a good translator is not so conWned; he is, at most, like
a statuary [sculptor] who works after a picture, or like a painter who copies after a piece
of statuary; he is like Virgil, who describes the Laocoon from the marble original, that
wonderful piece, which he had before him. In this imitation, as in all others, the soul, full
of those beauties it intends to represent, and inebriated with the pleasing vapours arising
from these abundance springs, is to suVer itself to be ravished and transported by that
foreign enthusiasm; and to make it its own, and so to produce very diVerent represen-
tations and expressions, though resembling the others. [ . . . ] This, if I mistake not, is the
diVerence between good and bad translations; the one, by a low and servile imitation,
gives the letter, without the spirit; the other by a free and noble imitation, retains the
spirit, without departing from the letter; and makes quite a new thing of that which was
already known. [ . . . ]
If I understood him [Homer] tolerably, it was only by labouring to make him understood
by others. When we read only for ourselves, we are often satisWed with a slight and
superWcial perusal; but when we read for others, the obligation we lie under of giving
clear and distinct ideas makes us stop to drive deeper into the subject, and necessity then
serving as a spur to the mind, causes it to discover those beauties and meanings which
cursory reading had not permitted it to take notice of. [ . . . ]
2.14 anne dacier
165

2.15 Alexander Pope
Alexander Pope (1688–1744), born in London into a Catholic family, was a major
translator of poetry as well as poet. In 1712, he published his mock-heroic masterpiece
The Rape of the Lock, preceded by his precociously brilliant An Essay on Criticism (1711).
The Iliad was published in six volumes (1715–20), Pope having taken ten years over it. In
1728, The Dunciad inaugurated his later career as the principal satirist of his age.
Associated with this are the Imitations of Horace. The Odyssey, with the assistance of
William Broome and Elijah Fenton, took a further three years (5 vols., 1725–6). The
unprecedented commercial success of Pope’s Homer made its author independently
wealthy. Later he published translations from Chaucer. Also notable among his transla-
tions are Imitations of Horace (1734–7), with the Latin original en face, encouraging
comparison between his transformation of the original and the source text, since an
informed readership could be expected by and large to have access to the Latin. His
prefaces to the Iliad and Odyssey are among his best pieces of sustained critical writing.1
Pope’s interest in Homer, as noted by Steiner,2 dates from childhood, and he drew
‘richly if critically’ on the work of predecessors, like Chapman and Dryden, aiming not at
bland accuracy, of course, but at some sort of poetic equivalency of eVect. He beneWted
also from the scholarship of his French contemporary Anne Dacier (see Sect. 2.14, above).
whose own Homeric translation, however, was into prose. Pope’s translation of the
Homeric epic is perhaps the greatest example of elevated style in English literature; he
took what he saw as essential liberties, varying the repetitive epithets, suppressing what was
considered oVensive to contemporary taste. The so-called Augustan period was arguably
the last period in which a convincing recreation of epic poetry in English could be
attempted, and Pope, with his incomparable mastery of the heroic couplet, the energy
and vigour of his writing, his prosodic inventiveness, allied to a remarkable scholarliness,
was the man for the job. The resulting poem, inevitably, was thoroughly domesticated,
making Homer supremely readable in terms of the neo-classical aesthetic and notions of
propriety. Pope, as Steiner notes, ‘elaborates on the pictorial elements and the morally
sententious’. Even some contemporaries, however, found Pope’s text lacking in precision
and too dependent on the requirements of the time (‘A very pretty poem, Mr Pope, but
you must not call it Homer,’ famously commented Richard Bentley, Master of Trinity).
1 See also H. A. Mason, To Homer through Pope: An Introduction to Homer’s ‘Iliad’ and Pope’s Translation (London:
Chatto and Windus, 1972) for a detailed discussion of the Homeric poems.
2 See Homer in English, ed. George Steiner (London: Penguin, 1996).
166
from reformation to eighteenth century

The reaction was swift and inevitable, as evinced, for example, by William Cowper
(see Sect. 2.17, below), with his blank-verse translation. But one cannot argue with
Steiner’s contention that Pope’s Homers ‘constitute the principal ‘‘epic act’’ after Milton
in the language’. The translation can be characterized as visionary, in that Pope has
dynamically grasped its scope, while remaining brilliantly attentive to detail. The
aphoristic tendency, implicit in the heroic couplet, is expertly controlled, the poem
being organized, as it were, into verse paragraphs and these into chapters, without sacriWce
of the couplet’s incisiveness.
The prefaces, especially that to The Iliad, are striking examples of polemical and at the
same time scholarly critical writing and attest to Pope’s commitment to and appreciation
of Homer’s rapturous, Wery genius, so attractive to Chapman as well, and his conviction
that a balance had to be maintained between Wdelity and freedom: ‘It is certain no literal
translation can be just to an excellent original in a superior language; but it is a great
mistake to imagine [ . . . ] that a rash paraphrase can make amends for its general defect’.
Pope’s footnotes are, indeed, among the Wnest examples of close textual criticism in the
eighteenth century. Steiner concludes, somewhat caustically: ‘Pope’s main detractors have
been those who have not read him.’ And it is indeed a formidable undertaking to read
Pope’s Homer today, since the translation is a masterpiece in its own right, whereas the
modern reader generally seeks out texts which draw somewhat less attention to themselves
(Christopher’s Logue’s ongoing Homer is an exception to this). Ezra Pound remarked,
with somewhat grudging approval, that ‘he [Pope] has at least the merit of translating
Homer into something’.3 But this is in the context of his own agenda and it is possible now
to enjoy and admire Pope, without any sense of having abandoned one’s search for the
‘real’ Homer.
From Alexander Pope’s Preface to The Iliad of Homer (1715–20; London: Penguin, 1996
(using 1743 edn.) ), 3–22, contained also in The Twickenham Edition of the Poems of
Alexander Pope, ed. Maynard Mack (London and New Haven: Methuen and Yale
University Press, 1938–68), vols. vii–x
Homer is universally allowed to have had the greatest invention of any writer whatever.
The praise of judgment Virgil has justly contested with him, and others may have their
pretensions as to particular excellences; but his invention remains yet unrivalled. Nor is it
a wonder if he has ever been acknowledged the greatest of poets, who most excelled in
that which is the very foundation of poetry. [ . . . ]
3 ‘Translators of Greek: Early Translators of Homer’ (1920), repr. in Literary Essays of Ezra Pound (New York:
New Directions, 1968), 250.
2.15 alexander pope
167

Our author’s work is a wild paradise, where, if we cannot see all the beauties so
distinctly as in an ordered garden, it is only because the number of them is inWnitely
greater. It is like a copious nursery, which contains the seeds and Wrst productions of
every kind, out of which those who followed him have but selected some particular
plants, each according to his fancy, to cultivate and beautify. If some things are too
luxuriant it is owing to the richness of the soil; and if others are not arrived to perfection
or maturity, it is only because they are overrun and oppressed by those of a stronger
nature. It is to the strength of this amazing invention we are to attribute that unequalled
Wre and rapture which is so forcible in Homer, that no man of a true poetical spirit is
master of himself while he reads him. [ . . . ]
I shall here endeavour to show how this vast invention exerts itself in a manner superior
to that of any poet through all the main constituents parts of his work; as it is the great and
peculiar characteristic, which distinguishes him from all other authors. [ . . . ]
Fable may be divided into the probable, the allegorical, and the marvellous.
The probable fable is the recital of such actions as, though they did not matter, yet
might in the common course of nature; or of such as, though they did, became fables by
the additional episodes and manner of telling them. [ . . . ] The action is hurried on with
the most vehement spirit, and its whole duration employs not so much as Wfty days.
Virgil, for want of so warm a genius, aided himself by taking in a more extensive
subject, as well as a greater length of time, and contracting the design of both Homer’s
poems into one, which is yet but a fourth part as large as his. The other epic poets have
used the same practice, but generally carried it so far as to superinduce a multiplicity of
fables, destroy the unity of action, and lose their readers in an unreasonable length
of time. [ . . . ]
To proceed to the allegorical fable, if we reXect upon those innumerable knowledges,
those secrets of nature and physical philosophy which Homer is generally supposed to have
wrapped up in his allegories, what a new and ample scene of wonder may this consideration
aVord us! How fertile will that imagination appear, which was able to clothe all the
properties of elements, the qualiWcations of the mind, the virtues and vices, in forms and
persons, and to introduce them into actions agreeable to the nature of the things they
shadowed! This is the Weld in which no succeeding poet could dispute with Homer [ . . . ]
The marvellous fable includes whatever is supernatural and especially the machines of
the gods. If Homer was not the Wrst who introduced the deities (as Herodotus imagines)
into the religion of Greece, he seems the Wrst who brought them into a system of
machinery for poetry, [ . . . ] [N]one has been able to enlarge the sphere of poetry beyond
the limits he has set; every attempt of this nature has proved unsuccessful; and after all the
various changes of times and religions, his gods continue to this day the gods of poetry.
We now come to the character of his persons; and here we shall Wnd no author has ever
drawn so many, with so visible and surprising a variety, or given us such lively and
168
from reformation to eighteenth century

aVecting impressions of them. Every one has something so singularly his own, that no
painter could have distinguished them more by their features, than the poet has by their
manners. Nothing can be more exact than the distinctions he has observed in the
diVerent degrees of virtues and vices. The single quality of courage is wonderfully
diversiWed in the several characters of the Iliad. [ . . . ] The characters of Virgil are far
from striking us in this open manner. [ . . . ]
The speeches are to be considered as they Xow from the characters, being perfect or
defective as they agree or disagree with the manners of those who utter them. As there is
more variety of characters in the Iliad, so there is of speeches, than in any other poem.
[ . . . ] In Virgil, the dramatic part is less in proportion to the narrative, and the speeches
often consist of general reXections or thoughts, which might be equally just in any
person’s mouth upon the same occasion. [ . . . ] We oftener think of the author himself
when we read Virgil than when we are engaged in Homer. [ . . . ] Homer makes us
hearers, and Virgil leaves us readers.
If, in the next place, we take a view of the sentiments, the same presiding faculty is
eminent in the sublimity and spirit of the thoughts. Longinus has given his opinion that
it was in this part Homer principally excelled. What were alone suYcient to prove the
grandeur and excellence of his sentiments in general is that they have so remarkable a
parity with those of the Scripture. [ . . . ] And it is with justice an excellent modern writer
allows, that if Virgil has not so many thoughts that are low and vulgar, he has not so
many that are sublime and noble, and that the Roman author seldom rises into very
astonishing sentiments where he is not Wred by the Iliad.
If we observe his descriptions, images, and similes, we shall Wnd the invention still
predominant. To what else can we ascribe that vast comprehension of images of every
sort, where we see each circumstance of art and individual of nature summoned together
by the extent and fecundity of his imagination [ . . . ] [I]t is evident of Virgil especially,
that he has scarce any comparisons which are not drawn from his master.
If we descend from hence to the expression, we see the bright imagination of Homer
shining out in the most enlivened forms of it. We acknowledge him the father of poetical
diction, the Wrst who taught that ‘language of the gods’to men. [ . . . ] To throw his language
more out of prose, Homer seems to have aVected the compound epithets. This was a sort of
composition peculiarly proper to poetry, not only as it heightened the diction, but as it
assisted and Wlled the numbers with greater sound and pomp, and likewise conduced in
some measure to thicken the images. On this last consideration I cannot but attribute these
also to the fruitfulness of his invention, since (as he has managed them) they are a sort of
supernumerary pictures of the persons or things to which they were joined. [ . . . ] As a
metaphor is a short simile, one of these epithets is a short description.
Lastly, if we consider his versiWcation, we shall be sensible what a share of praise is due
to his invention in that also. He was not satisWed with his language as he found it settled
2.15 alexander pope
169

in any one part of Greece, but searched through its diVerent dialects with this particular
view, to beautify and perfect his numbers. [ . . . ]
It is often hard to distinguish exactly where the virtue ends or the fault begins. As
prudence may sometimes sink to suspicion, so may a great judgment decline to coldness;
and as magnanimity may run to profusion or extravagance, so may a great invention to
redundancy or wildness. [ . . . ] It is owing to the same vast invention, that his similes have
been thought too exuberant and full of circumstances. The force of this faculty is seen in
nothing more than in its inability to conWne itself to that single circumstance upon which
the comparison is grounded. [ . . . ] If there are others which seem rather to charge him with
a defect or narrowness of genius, than an excess of it, those seeming defects will be found
upon examination to proceed wholly from the nature of the times he lived in. Such are his
grosser representation of the gods, and the vicious and imperfect manner of his heroes. [ . . . ]
It must be a strange partiality to antiquity, to think with Madame Dacier, ‘that those times
and manners are so much the more excellent, as they are more contrary to ours.’ [ . . . ]
Having now spoken of the beauties and defects of the original, it remains to treat of the
translation, with the same view to the chief characteristics. As far as that is seen in the main
parts of the poem, such as the fable, manners, and sentiments, no translator can prejudice
it but by wilful omissions or contractions. As it also breaks out in every particular image,
description, and simile, whoever lessens or too much softens those takes oV from this chief
character. It is the Wrst grand duty of an interpreter to give his author entire and
unmaimed; and for the rest, the diction and versiWcation only are his proper province,
since these must be his own, but the others he should take as he Wnds them.
It should then be considered what methods may aVord some equivalent in our language
for the graces of these in the Greek. It is certain no literal translation can be just to an
excellent original in a superior language: but it is a great mistake to imagine (as many have
done) that a rash paraphrase can make amends for this general defect. [ . . . ] It is not to be
doubted that the Wre of the poem is what a translator should principally regard, as it is
most likely to expire in his managing [ . . . ] Where his diction is bold and lofty, let us raise
ours as high as we can, but where his is plain and humble, we ought not to be deterred
from imitating him by the fear of incurring the censure of a mere English critic.
Nothing that belongs to Homer seems to have been more commonly mistaken than
the just pitch of his style [ . . . ] There is a graceful and digniWed simplicity, as well as a
bold and sordid one, which diVer as much from each other as the air of a plain man from
that of a sloven [ . . . ] This pure and noble simplicity is nowhere in such perfection as in
the Scripture and our author. One may aYrm with all respect to the inspired writings,
that the Divine Spirit made use of no other words but what were intelligible and
common to men at that time, and in that part of the world; and, as Homer is the author
nearest to those, his style must of course bear a greater resemblance to the sacred books
than that of any other writer. [ . . . ]
170
from reformation to eighteenth century

Perhaps the mixture of some Graecisms and old words after the manner of Milton, if
done without too much aVectation, might not have an ill eVect in a version of this
particular work, which most of any other seems to require a venerable, antique cast. But
certainly the use of modern terms [ . . . ] cannot be allowable, those only excepted without
which it is impossible to treat the subjects in any living language.
There are two peculiarities in Homer’s diction which are a sort of marks or moles by
which every common eye distinguishes him at Wrst sight [ . . . ] I speak of his compound
epithets, and of his repetitions. Many of the former cannot be done literally into English
without destroying the purity of our language. I believe such should be retained as slide
easily of themselves into an English compound, without violence to the ear or to the
received rules of composition [ . . . ] Some that cannot be so turned, as to preserve their
full image by one or two words, may have justice done them by circumlocution. [ . . . ]
Upon the whole, it will be necessary to avoid that perpetual repetition of the same
epithets which we Wnd in Homer, and which, though it might be accommodated (as has
been already shown) to the ear of those times, is by no means so to ours [ . . . ]
As for Homer’s repetitions, we may divide them into three sorts: of whole narrations
and speeches, of single sentences, and of one verse or hemistitch. I hope it is not
impossible to have such a regard to these, as neither to lose so known a mark of the
author on the one hand, nor to oVend the reader too much on the other. [ . . . ] I believe
the best rule is to be guided by the nearness, or distance at which the repetitions are
placed in the original. When they follow too close, one may vary the expression; but it is
a question, whether a professed translator be authorized to omit any. If they be tedious,
the author is to answer for it.
It only remains to speak of the versiWcation. Homer (as has been said) is perpetually
applying the sound to the sense, and varying it on every new subject. [ . . . ] Few readers have
the ear to be judges of it: but those who have will see I have endeavoured at this beauty.
Upon the whole, I must confess myself utterly incapable of doing justice to Homer.
I attempt him in no other hope but that which one may entertain without much vanity,
of giving a more tolerable copy of him than any entire translation in verse has yet done.
[ . . . ] Chapman has taken the advantage of an immeasurable length of verse, notwith-
standing which, there is scarce any paraphrase more loose and rambling than his. [ . . . ]
He appears to have had a strong aVectation of extracting new meanings out of his author;
insomuch as to promise in his rhyming preface, a poem of the mysteries he had revealed
in Homer [ . . . ] But that which is to be allowed him, and which very much contributed
to cover his defects, is a daring Wery spirit that animates his translation, which is
something like what one might imagine Homer himself would have writ before he
arrived at years of discretion. [ . . . ] It is a great loss to the poetical world that Mr Dryden
did not live to translate the Iliad. He has left us only the Wrst book, and a small part of the
sixth [ . . . ] He seems to have had too much regard to Chapman, whose words he
2.15 alexander pope
171

sometimes copies, and has unhappily followed him in passages where he wanders from
the original. However, had he translated the whole work, I would not more have
attempted Homer after him than Virgil, his version of whom (notwithstanding some
human errors) is the most noble and spirited translation I know in any language. [ . . . ]
That which, in my opinion, ought to be the endeavour of any one who translates
Homer, is above all things to keep alive that spirit and Wre which makes his chief
character. [ . . . ]
From The Iliad of Homer, Book 1, ll. 297–324
[Achilles confronts Agamemnon who has oVended him by seizing Briseı¨s, a beautiful
captive who had been allotted to Achilles. See the same passage in Dryden’s translation,
Sect. 2.13, above.]
O monster, mix’d of insolence and fear,
Thou dog in forehead, but in heart a deer!
When wert thou known in ambush’d Wghts to dare,
Or nobly face the horrid front of war?
’Tis ours, the chance of Wghting Welds to try,
Thine to look on, and bid the Valiant die.
So much ’tis safer thro’ the camp to go,
And rob a subject, than despoil a foe.
Scourge of thy people, violent and base!
Sent in Jove’s anger on a slavish race,
Who lost to sense of gen’rous freedom past,
Are tam’d to wrongs, or this had been thy last.
Now by this sacred sceptre, hear me swear,
Which never more shall leaves or blossoms bear,
Which sever’d from the trunk (as I from thee)
On the bare mountains left its parent tree;
This sceptre, form’d by temper’d steel to prove
An ensign of the delegates of Jove,
From whom the pow’r of laws and justice springs:
(Tremendous oath! Inviolate to Kings)
By this I swear, when bleeding Greece again
Shall call Achilles, she shall call in vain.
When Xush’d with slaughter, Hector comes, to spread
The purpled shore with mountains of the dead,
Then shalt thou mourn th’aVront thy madness gave,
Forc’d to deplore, when impotent to save:
172
from reformation to eighteenth century

Then rage in bitterness of soul, to know
This act has made the bravest Greek thy foe.
From The Odyssey of Homer (London: Lintot, 1725–6), opening lines of Book XI
[See also translations by Chapman, Sect. 2.6; Cowper, Sect. 2.17; Morris, Sect. 3.5; Pound,
Sect. 4.2.]
Now to the shores we bend, a mournful train,
Climb the tall bark, and launch into the main:
At once the mast we rear, at once unbind
The spacious sheet, and stretch it to the wind;
Then pale and pensive stand, with cares opprest,
And solemn horrour saddens every breast.
A freshening breeze the Magic Pow’r supply’d,
While the wing’d vessel Xew along the tyde:
Our oars we shipp’d: all day the swelling sails
Full from the guiding pilot catch’d the gales.
Now sunk the Sun from his aerial height,
And o’er the shaded billows rush’d the night:
When lo! We reach’d old ocean’s utmost bounds,
Where rocks controul his waves with ever-during mounds.
There is a lonely land, and gloomy cells,
The dusky nation of Cimmeria dwells;
The sun ne’er views th’ uncomfortable seats,
When radiant he advances, or retreats:
Unhappy race! whom endless night invades,
Clouds the dull air, and wraps them round in shades.
The ship we moor on these obscure abodes;
Dis-bark the sheep, an oVering to the Gods;
And hellward bending, o’er the beach descry
The dolesome passage to th’ infernal sky.
2.15 alexander pope
173

2.16 Samuel Johnson
Samuel Johnson (1709–84), poet, playwright, educator, journalist, literary critic and
biographer, lexicographer, moralist, as early as 1731 completed a Latin translation of
Pope’s Messiah. Another early translation, from a French version, was of A Voyage to
Abyssinia (1735) by Father Jeronimo Lobo, a Portuguese Jesuit. Johnson moved from
LichWeld to London where, as a journalist, he was always on the verge of abject poverty.
A Poem in Imitation of the Third Satire of Juvenal was published in 1738. And in 1749,
The Vanity of Human Wishes: The Tenth Satire of Juvenal appeared. Johnson was a master
of the noble and sententious style, his couplets not as Xexible as Pope’s, but Wlled with
gravitas. As his biography of his master Dryden indicates, Johnson saw an opportunity for
himself in the translation of Juvenal, even if some passages translated by Dryden could not
be bettered.
He worked on his celebrated Dictionary from 1746 to 1754, The Plan of an English
Dictionary appearing in 1747. The Dictionary was Wrst published in two volumes in 1755,
the Wrst major English dictionary to include historical citations. Some of the deWnitions
oVered were far from neutral but reXected Johnson’s prejudices, such as his anti-Scottish
ones.
In 1750–2 appeared his essays for the Rambler, a semi-weekly publication. Other short
essays, known as the Idler essays, were also published from 1757. Johnson met Boswell in
1763. His Idler essays (especially nos. 68 and 69 [1759], see below), as T. R. Steiner puts it
(English Translation Theory: 1650–1800, 1975), form a ‘capsule history’ of translation. In
general Johnson adheres to the middle way, promoted by Dryden, advocating freedom
rather than slavishness, but not in a spirit of ‘licentiousness’ or at the expense of accuracy.
In 1765, Johnson’s eight-volume edition of The Plays of William Shakespeare was published,
several times reissued with additional notes. These were sensitive reading, stressing the
utilitarian value of literature and treating Shakespeare as a ‘moralist’. As a member of ‘The
Club’ of literary men, Johnson was a master of the conversational art, brilliantly captured
by Boswell in his Life of Johnson.
Johnson also wrote introductions for a collection of English poetry, revised and
corrected as The Lives of the Most Eminent English Poets with Critical Observations on
Their Work, in three volumes (1779–81), including the lives of such as Pope, Dryden, and
Cowley, with commentary on their translations. With regard to Pope’s Homer, Johnson
insisted that it was written to be read and that ‘criticism which would destroy the power of
pleasing must be blown aside’. Pope’s debt to Dryden is noted and carefully delineated; at
the same time the English language’s debt to Pope for his translation is insisted upon. It
174
from reformation to eighteenth century

can hardly be denied that if a translation is not accessible, it cannot do its work, this being
essentially linked to the age in which it is produced, since no one can legislate for
succeeding ages or predict what will be required then. This is an argument used with
some legitimacy by publishers when rejecting certain approaches to translation, such as
that for instance of radical foreignization, although of course the same arguments can be
used in a philistine fashion which does not necessarily reXect the capacity of a readership to
absorb what is challenging.
Johnson once asserted unequivocally to Boswell (Boswell’s Life of Johnson contains many
of his comments on translation) that since ‘poetry cannot be translated’, the criterion must
be the success of the translation as an English poem. This commonsensical point of view,
up till quite recently, might have been taken as standard, although in its time of course it
was radical enough. In his biographical-critical sketches of Cowley, Dryden, Pope, and
others who contributed to the development of translation, Johnson keeps to the middle
path, deWned by Dryden, while being not unsympathetic to the even greater liberties
claimed by later poets-translators, himself included (see below, for his version of Juvenal,
as compared to Dryden’s).
Johnson on Translation
From A Dictionary of the English Language (1755): deWnitions
to translate. To transport; to remove. It is particularly used of the removal of a bishop
from one see to another. To transfer from one to another; to convey; to change; to
interpret to another language; to change into another language retaining the sense.
translation. Removal, act of removing; the removal of a bishop to another see; the act of
turning into another language; interpretation; something made by translation; version.
translator. One that turns anything into another language.
From The Idler, 68/69 (1759): ‘both faithful and pleasing’
He that reviews the progress of English literature, will Wnd that translation was very early
cultivated among us, but that some principles, either wholly erroneous or too far
extended, hindered our success from being always equal to our diligence. [ . . . ]
[ . . . ] It may be supposed that Chaucer would apply more than common attention to
an author of so much celebrity [Boethius], yet he has attempted nothing higher than
2.16 samuel johnson
175

a version strictly literal, and has degraded the poetical parts to prose, that the constraints
of versiWcation might not obstruct his zeal for Wdelity. [ . . . ]
Caxton proceeded as he began, and, except the poems of Gower and Chaucer, printed
nothing but translations from the French, in which the original is so scrupulously
followed, that they aVord us little knowledge or our own language: though the words
are English, the phrase is foreign.
As learning advanced, new works were adopted into our language, but I think with
little improvement of the art of translation, though foreign nations and other languages
oVered us models of a better method; till in the age of Elizabeth we began to Wnd that
greater liberty was necessary to elegance, and that elegance was necessary to general
reception; some essays were then made upon the Italian poets, which deserve the praise
and gratitude of posterity.
But the old practice was not suddenly forsaken: Holland [Philemon Holland, see Sect.
2.6, above] Wlled the nation with literal translation; and, what is yet more strange, the
same exactness was obstinately practised in the versions of the poets. This absurd labour
of construing into rhyme was countenanced by Jonson in his version of Horace [The Art
of Poetry, 1640]; and whether it be that more men have learning than genius, or that the
endeavours of that time were more directed towards knowledge than delight, the
accuracy of Jonson found more imitators than the elegance of Fairfax; and May, Sandys
and Holiday, conWned themselves to the toil of rendering line for line, not indeed with
equal felicity, for May and Sandys were poets, and Holiday only a scholar and a critick.
Feltham appears to consider it as the established law of poetical translation that the
lines should be neither more nor fewer than those of the original; and so long had this
prejudice prevailed, that Denham praises Fanshaw’s version of Guarini [see Sect. 2.10,
above] as the example of a new and noble way, as the Wrst attempt to break the boundaries
of custom and assert the natural freedom of the Muse.
In the general emulation of wit and genius which the festivity of the Restoration
produced, the poets shook oV their constraint, and considered translation as no longer
conWned to servile closeness. [ . . . ] The wits of Charles’s time had seldom more than slight
and superWcial views; and their care was to hide their want of learning behind the colours
of a gay imagination; they, therefore, translated always with freedom, sometimes with
licentiousness, and, perhaps, expected that their readers should accept sprightliness for
knowledge, and considered ignorance and mistake as the impatience and negligence of
a mind too rapid to stop at diYculties, and too elevated to descend to minuteness. [ . . . ]
There is undoubtedly a mean to be observed. Dryden saw very early that closeness best
preserved an author’s sense, and that freedom best exhibited his spirit; he, therefore, will
deserve the highest praise, who can give a representation at once faithful and pleasing,
who can convey the same thoughts with the same graces, and who, when he translates,
changes nothing but the language.
176
from reformation to eighteenth century

From The Lives of the Poets, ‘Cowley’: The Pindarique Odes
[Johnson, the liberal and far from pompous critic, nevertheless draws attention to the
limitations in Cowley’s appreciation of Pindar, which has encouraged him in a mistaken
freedom, failing, if understandably, to perceive the regularities in the Greek poet’s verse.
Nevertheless, later translators are in Cowley’s debt for helping to free translation from
‘servility’.]
His endeavour was, not to shew precisely what Pindar spoke, but his manner of speaking.
He was therefore not at all restrained to his expressions, nor much to his sentiments;
nothing was required for him, but not to write as Pindar would not have written. [ . . . ]
Though the English ode cannot be called a translation, it may be very properly consulted
as a commentary. [ . . . ]
To the disproportion and incongruity of Cowley’s sentiments must be added the
uncertainty and looseness of his measures. He takes the liberty of using in any place a
verse of any length, from two syllables to twelve. The verses of Pindar have, as he
observes, very little harmony to a modern ear; yet by examining the syllables we perceive
them to be regular, and have reason enough for supposing that the ancient audiences
were delighted with the sound. The imitator ought therefore to have adopted what he
found, and to have added what was wanting: to have preserved a constant return of the
same numbers, and to have supplied smoothness of transition and continuity of thought.
Our debt to Cowley
[ . . . ] that he was among those who freed translation from servility, and, instead of
following his author at a distance, walked by his side.
From The Lives of the Poets, ‘Roscommon’
‘It was my Lord Roscommon’s Essay on Translated Verse’, [Wentworth Dillon, Earl of
Roscommon, An Essay on Translated Verse (1684)] says Dryden, ‘which made me uneasy,
till I tried whether or no I was capable of following his rules, and of reducing the
speculation into practice. For many a fair precept in poetry is like a seeming demonstra-
tion in mathematicks, very specious in the diagram, but failing in the mechanick
operation. [ . . . ]’
He that can abstract his mind from the elegance of the poetry, and conWne it to the
sense of the precepts, will Wnd no other direction than that the author should be suitable
to the translator’s genius; that he should be such as may deserve a translation; that he who
intends to translate him should endeavour to understand him; that perspicuity should be
studied, and unusual and uncouth names sparingly inserted; and that the style of the
original should be copied in its elevation and depression. These are the rules that are
2.16 samuel johnson
177

celebrated as so deWnite and important; and for the delivery of which to mankind so
much honour has been paid. Roscommon has indeed deserved his praises, had they been
given with descernment, and bestowed not on the rules themselves, but the art with
which they are introduced, and the decorations with which they are adored.
From The Lives of the Poets, ‘Dryden’
[Against servility, but guided by Dryden, Johnson, as in the Idler essays, again encapsulates
the history of English translation.]
Cowley says that such copyers [Ben Jonson, Feltham, Sandys, etc.] were a servile race; he
asserted his liberty, and spread his wings so boldly that he left his authors. It was reserved
for Dryden to Wx the limits of poetical liberty, and give us just rules and examples of
translation. [ . . . ]
In the proper choice of style consists the resemblance which Dryden principally exacts
from the translator. He is to exhibit his author’s thoughts in such a dress of diction as the
author would have given them, had his language been English [ . . . ] A translator is to be
like his author; it is not his business to excel him.
[The ‘declamatory grandeur’ of Juvenal] The general character of this translation will be
given, when it is said to preserve the wit, but to want the dignity of the original. The
peculiarity of Juvenal is a mixture of gaiety and stateliness, of pointed sentences and
declamatory grandeur. [ . . . ] It is therefore perhaps possible to give a better representa-
tion of that great satirist, even in those parts which Dryden himself has translated, some
passages excepted, which will never be excelled.
[Homer and Virgil] In the comparison of Homer and Virgil, the discriminative excel-
lence of Homer is elevation and comprehension of thought, and that of Virgil is grace
and splendour of diction. The beauties of Homer are therefore diYcult to be lost, and
those of Virgil diYcult to be retained. [ . . . ]
All these obstacles Dryden saw, and all these he determined to encounter. [ . . . ]
From The Lives of the Poets, ‘Pope’: ‘that poetical wonder, the translation of the Iliad ’
The chief help of Pope in this arduous undertaking was drawn from the versions of
Dryden. Virgil had borrowed much of his imagery from Homer, and part of the debt was
now paid by his translator. Pope searched the pages of Dryden for happy combinations
of heroick diction; but it will not be denied that he added much to what he found. He
cultivated our language with so much diligence and art, that he has left in his Homer a
treasure of poetical elegances to posterity. His version may be said to have tuned the
English tongue; for since its appearance no writer, however deWcient in other powers, has
178
from reformation to eighteenth century

wanted melody. Such a series of lines so elaborately corrected, and so sweetly modulated,
took possession of the public ear; the vulgar was enamoured of the poem, and the learned
wondered at the translation.
But in the most general applause discordant voices will always be heard. It has been
objected by some, who wish to be numbered among the sons of learning, that Pope’s
version of Homer is not Homerical; that it exhibits no resemblance of the original
characteristick manner of the Father of Poetry, as it wants his awful simplicity, his artless
grandeur, his unaVected majesty. This cannot be totally denied; but it must be remem-
bered that necessitas quod cogit defendit; that may be lawfully done which cannot be
forborn. Time and place will always enforce regard. In estimating this translation,
consideration must be had of the nature of our language, the form of our metre, and,
above all, of the change which two thousand year have made in the modes of life and
habits of thought. [ . . . ]
Thus it will be found, in the progress of learning, that in all nations the Wrst writers are
simple, and that every age improves in elegance. One reWnement always makes way for
another, and what was expedient to Virgil was necessary to Pope. [ . . . ]
To a thousand cavils one answer is suYcient; the purpose of a writer is to be read, and
the criticism which would destroy the power of pleasing must be blown aside. Pope wrote
for his own age and his own nation: he knew that it was necessary to colour the images
and point the sentiments of his author; he therefore made him graceful, but lost him
some of his sublimity. [ . . . ]
Johnson the Translator
Juvenal, Satire X
[See Sect. 2.13, above, for Dryden’s Version of Satire X and Sect. 4.10, below, for Robert
Lowell’s version.]
From The Vanity of Human Wishes, the Tenth Satire of Juvenal Imitated
by Samuel Johnson (London, 1749), lines 73–90
Unnumber’d suppliants crowd Preferment’s gate,
Athirst for wealth, and burning to be great;
Delusive Fortune hears the’incessant call,
They mount, they shine, evaporate, and fall.
On ev’ry stage the foes of peace attend,
Hate dogs their Xight, and insult mocks their end.
Love ends with hope, the sinking statesman’s door
2.16 samuel johnson
179

Pours in the morning worshipers no more;
For growing names the weekly scribbler lies,
To growing wealth the dedicator Xies,
From every room descends the painted face,
That hung the bright Palladium of the place,
And smoak’d in kitchens, or in auctions sold,
To better features yields the frame of gold;
For now no more we trace in ev’ry line
Heroic worth, benevolence divine:
The form distorted justiWes the fall,
And detestation rids the’indignant wall. [ . . . ]
Niall Rudd, Johnson’s Juvenal, London and The Vanity of Human Wishes (Bristol: Bristol
Classical Press, 1981), literal version of the above passage
So these requests for which it is right to cover the knees of the gods with wax [tablets
containing prayers], are either superXuous or harmful. Some men are sent hurtling down
by the virulent resentment to which their power exposes them; they are destroyed by their
long and impressive list of honours. Down come their statues drawn by the rope; then
axe-blows smash their chariot wheels, and the legs of their innocent horses are broken.
Now the Xames are roaring; now bellows and furnace bring a glow to the head that was
worshipped by the people; the mighty Sejanus is crackling; then from the face which was
number two in the whole world are made pitchers, basins, saucepans, and dishes. [ . . . ]
Johnson, lines 211–22
[The subject here is the heroic warrior, in this case, the historical Charles Xll of Sweden,
instead of Hannibal as in Juvenal]
The vanquish’d hero leaves his broken bands,
and shews his miseries in distant lands;
Condemn’d a needy supplicant to wait,
While ladies interpose, and slaves debate.
But did not Chance at length her error mend?
Did no subverted empire mark his end?
Did rival monarchs give the fatal wound?
Or hostile millions press him to the ground?
His fall was destin’d to a barren strand,
A petty fortress, and a dubious hand;
He left the name, at which the world grew pale,
To point a moral, or adorn a tale.
180
from reformation to eighteenth century

Niall Rudd
Lord, what a sight! What a picture he would have made! A one-eyed general riding on a
huge Gaetulian beast [elephant]. So how did he Wnish up? Alas for his dreams of glory!
The great man, if you please, is beaten; he escapes with frantic haste into exile; and there
he sits in the hall of the king’s palace, an important and impressive client, waiting until it
should please his Bithynian lord [King Prusias] to wake up. That soul which once turned
the world upside down will meet its end, not from a sword or from stones or spears, but
from something which will avenge Cannae and take reprisal for all that blood – a little
ring. [i.e poison] [ . . . ]
Johnson, lines 255–74
[The subject here, of course, is old age.]
Enlarge my life with multitude of days,
In health, in sickness, thus the suppliant prays;
Hides from himself his state, and shuns to know
That life protracted is protracted woe.
Time hovers o’er, impatient to destroy,
And shuts up all the passages of joy:
In vain their gifts the bounteous seasons pour,
The fruit autumnal, and the vernal Xow’r,
With listless eyes the dotard views the store,
He views, and wonders that they please no more;
Now pall the tasteless meats and joyless wines,
And Luxury with sighs her slave resigns.
Approach, ye minstrels, try the soothing strain,
And yield the tuneful lenitives of pain:
No sounds alas would touch the’impervious ear,
Though dancing mountains witness’d Orpheus near;
Nor lute nor lyre his feeble pow’rs attend,
Nor sweeter musick of a virtuous friend,
But everlasting dictates crowd his tongue,
Perversely grave, or positively wrong. [ . . . ]
Niall Rudd
‘Grant me a long life, Jupiter; grant me many years!’ This is the one thing you pray for,
whether your complexion is healthy or pale. But think of the endless and bitter aZictions
that go with longevity. First, look at the face—so misshapen and hideous as to be
2.16 samuel johnson
181

unrecognizable; a misshapen hide instead of human Xesh; baggy cheeks, and wrinkles
such as an old mother ape has long had etched on her muzzle, where Thabraca [on the
North African coast] spreads its leafy glades. Young men have many individual features:
A is more handsome than B and B than C; D is far more powerfully built than E; but old
men all look alike—a trembling body and voice, a now hairless pate, and an infant’s
running nose. The poor old fellow has to chew his bread with gums which have lost their
cutting edge. He is repellent to his wife, his children, and himself; he even provokes the
disgust of Cossus the legacy-hunter. As his palate loses its sensitivity, he no longer takes
the same pleasure in food and wine; he has long since forgotten what sex was like; if you
try to stimulate him, his thin tool with its enlarged vein lies limp and will remain so
although it be caressed all night. What have they to look forward to, these white-haired,
incapacitated lions? Moreover, one rightly regards with suspicion the kind of lust that
hankers after sex without the power to achieve it. Consider now the loss of another
faculty. What pleasure can he get from a musician, even if he be an eminent harpist,
or Seleucus or one of the other pipers who wear those fashionable mantles of gleaming
gold? [ . . . ]
182
from reformation to eighteenth century

2.17 William Cowper
William Cowper (1731–1800), English poet, letter-writer, essayist, was trained as a lawyer.
Cowper wrote many hymns, as well as The Task, a Poem in Six Books (1785): ‘God made the
Country and Man made the Town.’ The success of The Task encouraged Cowper to pro-
duce his blank verse version of Homer (1785–91), a translation which remained popular
well into the nineteenth century. Cowper’s comments on Pope are an indication of Pope’s
prominence as a translator of epic poetry. He objected to Pope’s rhyming-couplet appr-
oach, dismissing the notion that the translator should try to imagine how the original
author would have written in contemporary English. He himself wrote in the Miltonic
tradition, meditatively and didactically, in fact also translating some of Milton’s Latin and
Italian poems (1808) into English. Cowper also translated two poems of Horace early on
and towards the end of his life he produced poems from the French of Mme de la Motte
Guyon (1801). His observations and caveats regarding the translation of such ancient texts
as the Homeric epics remain pertinent.
From Cowper’s ‘Preface’ to The Iliad of Homer, ed. R. Southey (1791; London, 1854)
Whether a translation of Homer may be best executed in blank verse or in rhyme, is
a question in the decision of which no man can Wnd diYculty, who has ever duly
considered what translation ought to be, or who is in any degree practically acquainted
with those very diVerent kinds of versiWcation. I will venture to assert that a just
translation of any ancient poet in rhyme, is impossible. No human ingenuity can be
equal to the task of closing every couplet with sounds homotonous, expressing at the
same time the full sense, and only the full sense of his original. The translator’s ingenuity,
indeed, in this case, becomes itself a snare, and the readier he is at invention and
expedient, the more likely he is to be betrayed into the widest departures from the
guide whom he professes to follow. Hence it has happened, that although the public
have long been in possession of an English Homer by a poet whose writings have
done immortal honour to his country, the demand of a new one, and especially in
blank verse, has been repeatedly and loudly made by some of the best judges and ablest
writers of the present day.
I have no contest with my predecessor. None is supposeable between performers on
diVerent instruments. Mr Pope has surmounted all diYculties in his version of Homer
that it was possible to surmount in rhyme. [ . . . ]
I number myself among the warmest admirers of Mr Pope as an original writer, and
I allow him all the merit he can justly claim as the translator of this chief of poets. He has
2.17 william cowper
183

given us the Tale of Troy divine in smooth verse, generally in correct and elegant language,
and in diction often highly poetical. Bur his deviations are so many, occasioned chieXy by
the cause already mentioned, that, much as he has done, and valuable as his work is on
some accounts, it was yet in the humble province of a translator that I thought it possible
even for me to follow him with some advantage.
That he has sometimes altogether suppressed the sense of his author, and has not
seldom intermingled his own ideas with it, is a remark which, on this occasion, nothing
but necessity should have extorted from me. But we diVer sometimes so widely in our
matter, that unless this remark, invidious as it seems, be premised, I know not how to
obviate a suspicion, on the one hand, of careless oversight, or of factitious embellishment
on the other. On this head, therefore, the English reader is to be admonished, that
the matter found in me, whether he like it or not, is found also in Homer, and that the
matter not found in me, how much soever he may admire it, is found only in Mr Pope.
I have omitted nothing; I have invented nothing.
[ . . . ]
It will however be necessary to speak a little more largely to this subject, on which
discordant opinions prevail even among good judges.
The free and the close translation have, each, their advocates. But inconveniences
belong to both. The former can hardly be true to the original author’s style and manner,
and the latter is apt to be servile. The one loses his peculiarities, and the other his spirit.
Were it possible, therefore, to Wnd an exact medium, a manner so close that it should let
slip nothing of the text, nor mingle any thing extraneous with it, and at the same time so
free as to have an air of originality, this seems precisely the mode in which an author
might be best rendered. I can assure my readers from my own experience, that to discover
this very delicate line is diYcult, and to proceed by it when found, through the whole
length of a poet voluminous as Homer, nearly impossible. I can only pretend to have
endeavoured it.
It is an opinion commonly received, but, like many others indebted for its prevalence
to mere want of examination, that a translator should imagine to himself the style which
his author would probably have used, had the language into which he is rendered been
his own; a direction which wants nothing but practicability to recommend it. For
suppose six persons equally qualiWed for the task, employed to translate the same Ancient
into their own language, with this rule to guide them. In the event it would be found that
each had fallen on a manner diVerent from that of all the rest, and by probable inference
it would follow that none had fallen on the right. [ . . . ]
I have no fear of judges familiar with Homer in the original. They need not be told
that a translation of him is an arduous enterprize, and as such, entitled to some favour.
From these, therefore, I shall expect, and shall not be disappointed, considerable candour
184
from reformation to eighteenth century

and allowance. Especially they will be candid, and I believe that there are many such, who
have occasionally tried their own strength in this bow of Ulysses, They have not found it
supple and pliable, and with me are perhaps ready to acknowledge that they could not
always even approach with it the mark of their ambition. But I would willingly, were it
possible, obviate uncandid criticism, because to answer it is lost labour, and to receive it
in silence has the appearance of stately reserve, and self-importance.
To those, therefore, who shall be inclined to tell me hereafter that my diction is often
plain and unelevated, I reply beforehand that I know it,—that it would be absurd were it
otherwise, and that Homer himself stands in the same predicament. In fact, it is one of
his numberless excellencies, and a point in which his judgement never fails him, that he
is grand and lofty always in the right place, and knows infallibly how to rise and fall with
his subject. Big words on small matters may serve as a pretty exact deWnition of the
burlesque, an instance of which they will Wnd in the Battle of the Frogs and Mice, but
none in the Iliad.
By others I expect to be told that my numbers, though here and there tolerably
smooth, are not always such, but have, now and then, an ugly hitch in their gait,
ungraceful in itself, and inconvenient to the reader. To this charge also I plead guilty,
but beg leave in alleviation of judgement to add, that my limping lines are not numerous,
compared with those that limp not. The truth is, that not one of them all escaped me,
but, such as they are, they were all made such with a wilful intention. In poems of great
length there is no blemish more to be feared than sameness of numbers, and every art is
useful by which it may be avoided. A line, rough in itself, has yet its recommendations; it
saves the ear the pain of an irksome monotony, and seems even to add greater smoothness
to others. Milton, whose ear and taste were exquisite, has exempliWed in his Paradise Lost
the eVect of this practice frequently.
Having mentioned Milton, I cannot but add an observation on the similitude of his
manner to that of Homer. It is such that no person familiar with both, can read either
without being reminded of the other; and it is in those breaks and pauses, to which the
numbers of the English poet are so much indebted both for their dignity and variety, that
he chieXy copies the Grecian. But these are graces to which rhyme is not competent; so
broken, it loses all its music; of which any person may convince himself by reading a page
only of any of our poets anterior to Denham, Waller, and Dryden. A translator of
Homer, therefore, seems directed by Homer himself to the use of blank verse, as to that
alone in which he can be rendered with any tolerable representation of his manner in this
particular. [ . . . ]
A word or two on the subject of the following translation, and I have done.
My chief boast is that I have adhered closely to my original, convinced that every
departure from him would be punished with the forfeiture of some grace or beauty for
which I could substitute no equivalent. The epithets that would consent to an English
2.17 william cowper
185

form I have preserved as epithets; others that would not, I have melted into the context.
There are none, I believe, which I have not translated in one way or other, though the
reader will not Wnd them repeated so often as most of them are in homer, for a reason
that need not be mentioned.
Few persons of any consideration are introduced either in the Iliad or Odyssey by their
own name only, but their patronymic is given also. To this ceremonial I have generally
attended, because it is a circumstance of my author’s manner.
Homer never allots less than a whole line to the introduction of a speaker. No, not
even when the speech itself is no longer than the line that leads it. A practice to which,
since he never departs from it, he must have been determined by some cogent reason. He
probably deemed it a formality necessary to the majesty of his narration. In this article,
therefore, I have scrupulously adhered to my pattern, considering these introductory
lines as heralds in a procession; important persons, because employed to usher in persons
more important than themselves.
It has been my point everywhere to be as little verbose as possible, though at the same
time, my constant determination not to sacriWce my author’s full meaning to an aVected
brevity.
In the aVair of style, I have endeavoured neither to creep nor to bluster, for no author
is so likely to betray his translator into both these faults, as Homer, though himself never
guilty of either. I have cautiously avoided all terms of new invention, with an abundance
of which, persons of more ingenuity than judgement have not enriched our language, but
incumbered it. I have also everywhere used an unabbreviated fullness of phrase as most
suited to the nature of the work, and above all, have studied perspicuity, not only because
verse is good for little that wants it, but because Homer is the most perspicuous of all
poets.
In all diYcult places I have consulted the best commentators, and where they have
diVered, or have given, as is often the case, a variety of solutions, I have ever exercised my
best judgement, and selected that which appears, at least to myself, the most probable
interpretation. On this ground, and on account of the Wdelity which I have already
boasted, I may venture, I believe, to recommend my work as promising some usefulness
to young students of the original.
The passages which will be least noticed, and possibly not at all, except by those who
shall wish to Wnd me at a fault, are those which have cost me abundantly the most labour.
It is diYcult to kill a sheep with dignity in a modern language, to Xay and to prepare it
for the table, detailing every circumstance of the process. DiYcult also, without sinking
below the level of poetry, to harness mules to a waggon, particularizing every article of
their furniture, straps, rings, staples, and even the tying of the knots that kept all together.
Homer, who writes always to the eye, with all his sublimity and grandeur, has the
minuteness of a Flemish painter.
186
from reformation to eighteenth century

But in what degree I have succeeded in my version either of these passages, and such as
these, or of others more buoyant and above-ground, and especially of the most sublime,
is now submitted to the decision of the reader, to whom I am ready enough to confess
that I have not at all consulted their approbation, who account nothing grand that is not
turgid, or elegant that is not bedizened with metaphor.
[ . . . ]
From The Odyssey of Homer, Book XI, trans. William Cowper,
(London: printed for J. Johnson, 1791)
Arriving on the shore, and launching, Wrst,
Our bark into the sacred Deep, we set
Our mast and sails, and stow’d secure on board
The ram and ewe, then, weeping, and with hearts
Sad and disconsolate, embark’d ourselves.
And now, melodious Circe, nymph divine,
Sent after us a canvas-stretching breeze,
Pleasant companion of our course, and we
(The decks and benches clear’d) untoiling sat,
While managed gales sped swift the bark along.
All day, with sails distended, e’er the Deep
She Xew, and when the sun, at length, declined,
And twilight dim had shadow’d all the ways,
Approach’d the bourn of Ocean’s vast profound.
The city, there, of the Cimmerians stands
With clouds and darkness veil’d, on whom the sun
Deigns not to look with his beam-darting eye,
Or when he climbs the starry arch, or when
Earthward he slopes again his west’ring wheels,
But sad night canopies the woeful race.
We haled the bark aground, and, landing there
The ram and sable ewe, journey’d beside
The Deep, till we arrived where Circe bade.
2.17 william cowper
187

2.18 Alexander Fraser Tytler
Alexander Fraser Tytler (1747–1813) was a Scottish lawyer and historian, whose Essay on the
Principles of Translation (1791) is often seen as the Wrst extended thesis on translation
written in English. Tytler’s common-sense approach still appeals, even if it must now be
questioned by translation scholars.
Today’s reader of Tytler, aware of the preoccupations of contemporary translators, will
boggle at the certainties or convictions that evidently informed Tytler’s thinking. To take only
the three principles that he formulates. (1) How can a ‘complete transcription of the ideas of
the original work’ be given, seeing that style or form and content are indissoluble? (2) How
can ‘the style and manner of writing [ . . . ] be of the same character with that of the original’,
when the languages are diVerent? (The problem seems to lie in Tytler’s use of the uncom-
promising term ‘same’rather than, for instance, ‘similar’). (3) As for the requirement that ‘the
Translation should have all the ease of original composition’, translators today often go so far
as deliberately to eschew Xuency. In any case, in itself it is no longer a priority—although the
popular taste, and most publishers, still demand it. This problem is already anticipated, as
Holmes notes in his Introduction (see below), at the time when Tytler was writing his Essay.
In general, the reader today might feel that Tytler’s perception of the translator’s duties is
presumptuous to a degree, transcending the bounds even of his own common-sense thinking,
as for instance when, even with a caution, he allows the translator to ‘add to the idea of the
original what may appear to give greater force or illustration etc’. When it comes to poetry, he
goes even further: ‘I conceive it to be the duty of a poetical translator, never to suVer his
original to fall.’ Such conWdence would give the translator a partnership role with the original
authority, intervening at a later stage in order, as it were, to Wnalize or perfect the text. By this
account, the translation might seem to be superior to the original, since the blemishes will
have been removed.
What picture of the translator, then, emerges from Tytler’s account? He appears as a
latter-day judge, combining the qualities of critic and peerless writer, whose task it is to
present the original author, as he himself would have wished to be presented, free of
blemishes and faults. The translator, in eVect, functions as a kind of censor, who always has
the true interest of author and reader in view. Nevertheless, Tytler’s strictures, even today,
cannot be easily dismissed, however much we may question his concept of good writing.
Many contemporary translation critics will salute his prioritizing of ‘sense’, for instance.
For Tytler, then, the status of a translator could hardly be higher (‘[H]e only is perfectly
accomplished for the duty of a translator who possesses genius akin to that of the original
author’). The translator appears as the partner of the original author, fully equal and in some
ways even superior!
188
from reformation to eighteenth century

From James S Holmes’s introduction to his shortened version of Tytler’s Essay on the
Principles of Translation, Modern Poetry in Translation, 43 (Autumn, 1981), 27–46
Throughout the nineteenth century, and far into the twentieth, the best known and most
read of books in English on the nature of translation was surely Alexander Fraser Tytler’s
Essay on the Principles of Translation. One of the problems facing anyone reading the Essay
is however that one constantly loses the main thread of the argument, led astray by the
abundance of illustrative material jampacked into the book. What I have attempted to do
here is to strip away all this illustrative Xesh to reveal the skeleton of theory giving the
Essay its shape: Tytler’s bare bones. One result is no doubt a decrease in exciting reading,
for many of those lopped-oV examples were brilliant Wnds. [We have, with regrets,
lopped oV even the little that Holmes left, so that what we have here are the bare bones of
the bare bones.]
[ . . . ]
One of the things that becomes clearer as a result of this drastic operation is that Tytler’s
thinking about translating takes on the shape of a system, a normative model that the
translator can actually make use of, to a greater extent than any earlier text that I know on
the subject. Not only does he develop his three translation rules (possibly borrowed—or
plagiarized—from his contemporary and fellow townsman George Campbell); he also
establishes an hierarchical order to guide the choices of the translator attempting to
observe those rules.
Today [Holmes was writing in 1979 or 1980] we would formulate the rules diVerently
and question the universal applicability of the hierarchy. Even so, the structure of this
skeleton remains as an impressive monument epitomizing eighteenth-century common-
sense thinking on translation. Even as Tytler was writing the Essay, of course, the
Xoodtide of Romanticism and Sturm und Drang that would sweep away that ediWce
was swelling in England and Germany. The last edition of the Essay to be prepared by
Tytler himself appeared in the year of his death, 1813; it was that same year that
Schleiermacher delivered to the Prussian Academy his address on the two methods of
translating, but the two men seem to be separated by a revolution in thinking of Andean
proportions. [ . . . ]
From Alexander Fraser Tytler (Lord Woodhouselee), Essay on the Principles of
Translation (1791, 1797, 1813); based on ‘The Essential Tytler’ by James S Holmes,
Modern Poetry in Translation, 43 (Autumn 1981), 27–46
If it were possible accurately to deWne, or, perhaps more properly, to describe what is
meant by a good Translation, it is evident that a considerable progress would be made
towards establishing the Rules of the Art ; for these Rules would Xow naturally from that
2.18 alexander fraser tytler
189

deWnition or description. But there is no subject or criticism where there has been so
much diVerence of opinion. If the genius and character of all languages were the same, it
would be an easy task to translate from one into another; nor would any thing more be
requisite on the part of the translator, than Wdelity and attention. But as the genius and
character of languages is confessedly very diVerent, it has hence become a common
opinion, that it is the duty of a translator to attend only to the sense and spirit of his
original, to make himself perfectly master of his author’s ideas, and to communicate
them in those expressions which he judges to be best suited to convey them. It has, on the
other hand, been maintained, that, in order to constitute a perfect translation, it is not
only requisite that the ideas and sentiments of the original author should be conveyed,
but likewise his style and manner of writing, which, it is supposed, cannot be done
without a strict attention to the arrangement of his sentences, and even to their order and
construction. According to the former idea of translation, it is allowable to improve and
to embellish; according to the latter, it is necessary to preserve even blemishes and defects
and to these must likewise be superadded the harshness that must attend every copy in
which the artist scrupulously studies to imitate the minutest lines or traces of his original.
As these two opinions form opposite extremes, it is not improbable that the point of
perfection should be found between the two. I would therefore describe a good transla-
tion to be, That, in which the merit of the original work is so completely transfused into
another language, as to be as distinctly apprehended, and as strongly felt, by a native of the
country to which that language belongs, as it is by those who speak the language of the original
work. [ . . . ]
It will follow,
I. That the Translation should give a complete transcript of the ideas of the original
work.
II. That the style and manner of writing should be of the same character with that of
the original.
III. That the Translation should have all the ease of original composition.
[ . . . ]
First General Rule [ . . . ]
In order that a translator may be enabled to give a complete transcript of the ideas of the
original work, it is indispensably necessary, that he should have a perfect knowledge of
the language of the original, and a competent acquaintance with the subject of which it
treats. [ . . . ]
The extreme diYculty of translating from the works of the ancients, is most discern-
ible to those who are best acquainted with the ancient languages. It is but a small part of
the genius and powers of a language which is to be learnt from dictionaries and
grammars. There are innumerable niceties, not only of construction and idiom, but
190
from reformation to eighteenth century

even in the signiWcation of words, which are discovered only by much reading, and
critical attention.
A very learned author, and acute critic [George Campbell, ‘Preliminary Dissertations
of a New Translation of the Gospels’, 1789] has, in treating ‘of the causes of the
diVerences in languages’, remarked that a principal diYculty in the art of translating
arises from this circumstance, ‘that there are certain words in every language which but
imperfectly correspond to any of the words of other languages’. Of this kind, he observes,
are most of the terms relating to morals, to the passions, to matters of sentiment, or to the
objects of the reXex and internal senses. [ . . . ]
Where the sense of an author is doubtful, and where more than one meaning can be
given to the same passage or expression, (which, by the way, is always a defect in
composition), the translator is called upon to exercise his judgement, and to select that
meaning which is most consonant to the train of thought in the whole passage, or to the
author’s usual mode of thinking, and of expressing himself. To imitate the obscurity or
ambiguity of the original, is a fault; and it is still a greater, to give more than one meaning.
[ . . . ]
If it is necessary that a translator should give a complete transcript of the ideas of the
original work, it becomes a question, whether it is allowable in any case to add to the
ideas of the original what may appear to give greater force or illustration; or to take from
them what may seem to weaken them from redundancy. To give a general answer to this
question, I would say, that this liberty may be used, but with the greatest caution. [ . . . ]
Under these limitations, a translator may exercise his judgement, and assume to himself,
in so far, the character of an original writer. An improvement is sometimes very happily
made, by substituting Wgure and metaphor to simple sentiment.
[ . . . ]
Analogous to this liberty of adding to or retrenching from the ideas of the original, is the
liberty which a translator may take of correcting what appear to him a careless or inaccurate
expression of the original, where that inaccuracy seems materially to aVect the sense.
[ . . . ]
[ . . . ] I conceive it to be the duty of a poetical translator, never to suVer his original to
fall. He must maintain with him a perpetual contest of genius; he must attend him in his
highest Xights, and soar, if he can, beyond him; and when he perceives, at any time, a
diminution of his powers, when he sees a drooping wing, he must raise him on his own
pinions. Homer has been judged by the best critics to fall at times beneath himself, and to
oVend, by introducing low images and puerile allusions. Yet how admirably is this defect
veiled over, or altogether removed, by his translator Pope. [ . . . ]
It is always a fault when the translator adds to the sentiment of the original author,
what does not strictly accord with his characteristic mode of thinking, or expressing
himself. But if authors, even of taste and genius, are found at times to have made an
2.18 alexander fraser tytler
191

injudicious use of that liberty which is allowed in the translation of poetry, we must
expect to see it miserably abused indeed, where those talents are evidently wanting.
Second General Rule [ . . . ]
[ . . . ] A good translator must be able to discover at once the true character of his author’s
style [ . . . ] [T]hese characteristic qualities he must have the capacity of rendering equally
conspicuous in the translation as in the original. If a translator fails in this discernment,
and wants this capacity, let him be ever so thoroughly master of the sense of his author, he
will present him through a distorting medium, or exhibit him often in a garb that is
unsuitable to his character. [ . . . ]
But a translator may discern the general character of his author’s style, and yet fail
remarkably in the imitation of it. Unless he is possessed of the most correct taste, he will
be in continual danger of presenting an exaggerated picture or a caricatura of his original.
The distinction between good and bad writing is often of so very slender a nature, and
the shadowing of diVerence so extremely delicate, that a very nice perception alone can at
all times deWne the limits. Thus, in the hands of some translators, who have discernment
to perceive the general character of their author’s style, but want this correctness of taste,
the grave style of the original becomes heavy and formal in the translation; the elevated
swells into bombast, the lively froths up into the petulant, and the simple and naif
degenerates into the childish and insipid.
[ . . . ]
The rule which enjoins to a translator the imitation of the style of the original author,
demands several limitations.
1. This imitation must always be regulated by the nature or genius of the language of
the original and of the translation.
The Latin language admits of a brevity, which cannot be successfully imitated in the
English. [ . . . ]
2. The Latin and Greek languages admit of inversions which are inconsistent with the
genius of the English.
3. The English language is not incapable of an elliptical mode of expression; but it
does not admit of it to the same degree as the Latin.
[ . . . ]
Third General Rule [ . . . ]
When we consider those restraints within which a translator Wnds himself necessarily
conWned, with regard to the sentiments and manner of his original, it will soon appear
that this last requisite includes the most diYcult part of his walk. To one who walks in
trammels, it is not easy to exhibit an air of grace and freedom. [ . . . ] The more he studies
192
from reformation to eighteenth century

a scrupulous imitation, the less his copy will reXect the ease and spirit of the original.
How then shall a translator accomplish this diYcult union of ease with Wdelity? To use a
bold expression, he must adopt the very soul of his author, which must speak through his
own organs. [ . . . ]
But while a translator thus endeavours to transfuse into his work all the ease of the
original, the most correct taste is requisite to prevent that ease from degenerating into
licentiousness. [ . . . ]
If the order in which I have classed the three general laws of translation is their just and
natural arrangement, which I think will hardly be denied, it will follow, that in all cases
where a sacriWce is necessary to be made of one of those laws to another, a due regard
ought to be paid to their rank and comparative importance, the diVerent genius of the
languages of the original and translation, will often make it necessary to depart from
the manner of the original, in order to convey a faithful picture of the sense; but it would
be highly preposterous to depart, in any case, from the sense, for the sake of imitating
the manner. Equally improper would it be, to sacriWce either the sense or manner of the
original, if these can be preserved consistently with purity of expression, to a fancied ease
or superior gracefulness of composition. [ . . . ]
[ . . . ]
It may perhaps appear paradoxical to assert, that it is less diYcult to give to a poetical
translation all the ease of original composition, than to give the same degree of ease to a
prose translation. Yet the truth of this assertion will be readily admitted, if assent is given
to that observation [ . . . t]hat a superior degree of liberty is allowed to a poetical
translator in amplifying, retrenching from, and embellishing his original, than to a
prose translator. For without some portion of this liberty, there can be no ease of
composition; and where the greatest liberty is allowable, there that ease will be most
apparent, as it is less diYcult to attain to it. [ . . . ]
[ . . . ]
While a translator endeavours to give to his work all the ease of original composition,
the chief diYculty he has to encounter will be found in the translation of idioms, or those
turns of expression which do not belong to universal grammar, but of which every
language has its own, that are exclusively proper to it. [ . . . ]
The translation is perfect, when the translator Wnds in his own language an idiomatic
phrase corresponding to that of the original.
As there is nothing which so much conduces both to the ease and spirit of compos-
ition, as a happy use of idiomatic phrases, there is nothing which a translator, who has a
moderate command of his own language, is so apt to carry to a licentious extreme.
In the use of idiomatic phrases, a translator frequently forgets both the country of his
original author, and the age in which he wrote; and while he makes a Greek or a Roman
2.18 alexander fraser tytler
193

speak French or English, he unwittingly puts into his mouth allusions to the manners of
modern France or England. [ . . . ]
A translator will often meet with idiomatic phrases in the original author, to which no
corresponding idiom can be found in the language of the translation. As a literal
translation of such phrases cannot be tolerated, the only resource is, to express the
sense in plain and easy language.
But this resource, of translating the idiomatic phrase into easy language must fail,
where the merit of the passage to be translated actually lies in that expression which is
idiomatical. This will often occur in epigrams, many of which are therefore incapable of
translation [ . . . ]
[ . . . ]
In a preceding chapter, while treating of the translation of idiomatic phrases, we
censured the use of such idioms in the translation as do not correspond with the age or
country of the original. There is, however, one species of translation, in which that
violation of the costume is not only blameless, but seems essential to the nature of the
composition: I mean burlesque translation, or Travesty. This species of writing partakes
in a great degree, of original composition and is therefore not to be measured by the laws
of serious translation. [ . . . ]
But this species of composition pleases only in a short specimen. We can not bear a
lengthened work in Travesty. The incongruous association of dignity and meanness
excites risibility chieXy from its being unexpected. [ . . . ]
[ . . . ]
From the consideration of those general rules of translation which in the foregoing
essay I have endeavoured to illustrate, it will appear no unnatural conclusion to assert,
that he only is perfectly accomplished for the duty of a translator who possesses genius
akin to that of the original author. [ . . . ] Thus we shall observe invariably, that the best
translators have been those writers who have composed original works of the same species
with those which they have translated. [ . . . ]
We have observed, in the preceding part of this essay, that poetical translation is less
subjected to restraint than prose translation, and allows more of the freedom of original
composition. It will hence follow, that to exercise this freedom with propriety, a
translator must have the talent of original composition in poetry; and therefore, that
in this species of translation, the possession of a genius akin to that of his author, is more
essentially necessary than in any other. [ . . . ] The best translators of poetry, therefore,
have been those who have approved their talents in original poetical composition. [ . . . ]
194
from reformation to eighteenth century

chapter 3
THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
3.1 Introduction
Several of the key statements of the nineteenth-century philosophy and policy of transla-
tion were made by German scholars and writers who were, in one way or another, active in
the period generally characterized as ‘Romantic’. Herder, Goethe, Humboldt, the Schlegel
brothers, and Schleiermacher all wrote important documents about translation. These
texts were clearly linked to recent and contemporary practice of translation into German
(especially translations of the Homeric epics, the Greek tragedies, and Shakespeare’s
plays), but they also made their mark as theoretical pronouncements both in and beyond
the German sphere, especially some of Goethe’s statements (see Sect. 3.2, below) and
Schleiermacher’s ‘On the DiVerent Methods of Translating’ (excerpts from which are
included in Sect. 3.3, below).
According to Andre´ Lefevere, these writers are part of a ‘German tradition’ that he sees
originating in Martin Luther (see Sect. 2.2, above), moving through Gottsched and
Lessing into the Romantic period, and then on to Nietzsche, Benjamin, and Rosenzweig
(see Sects. 4.4 and 4.5, below).1 Luther is obviously important for most German translation
critics, and Goethe sees Luther’s translation method as a valuable Wrst step or ‘epoch’ in
bringing foreign works into German. It is equally true, however, that Goethe and some of
the other key people mentioned above felt that they had moved beyond this mode of
translation and were eager to witness closer encounters with foreign languages and texts. In
this respect, rather than thinking of themselves as participating in a German tradition,
they often deWned themselves against what they saw as a French tradition of translation,
characterized by appropriation and domestication. It it important to remember that
French had for a long time been the most respected literary vernacular in Europe, one
that often served as an intermediary language for translators. There had in fact been cases
1 Andre´ Lefevere: Translating Literature: The German Tradition from Luther to Rosenzweig (Assen/Amsterdam:
Van Gorcum, 1977).

when a work would be translated into German from a French translation even when the
German translator did in fact know the original language of the work.2
Hence, translation and the translation debate in the early nineteenth century served to
enhance the striving for an independent literary language in Germany. French, as we have
seen, had also often served as the intermediary language for English translators, and while
the cultural and national context in Britain was completely diVerent from that of
Germany, many English translators and scholars welcomed the new German ‘movement’,
while others sought to point out a way in between the German ‘close’ method and the
French ‘loose’ one, often associated with ‘les belles inWde`les’ (the beautiful but unfaithful).3
No single theoretical texts were written in English that can be compared with those of the
leading German thinkers, but a lively translation debate was conducted in books and
journals in Britain, and translation criticism becomes comparatively more prominent than
ever before or indeed after. Reviews, sometimes long and detailed, that centred around
recent translations, would often contain a good deal of general discussion about transla-
tion methods and the cultural cross-over that characterizes the translated text. The best-
known interchange about Victorian translation is the debate between Matthew Arnold
and Francis Newman, but this is in fact very much an integral part of a wider critical
discourse, samples of which can be found in ‘Victorian Translation and Criticism’ (Sect.
3.4, below, see also the introduction to that section).
By the beginning of the period covered in this section, the Western canon was largely in
place, and its key works are at the centre of the translation debate in Britain: Homer
especially, but also the Greek tragedies, Virgil’s Aeneid, and other signiWcant works written
in Classical Greek and Latin, still the two towering original languages against which the
qualities of the English language are measured. But translation from the other European
vernaculars was on the rise; Dante is close to the heart of the canon, and as recent a writer
as Goethe rapidly becomes a writer of paradigmatic signiWcance, one whose works appear
in a succession of (re)translations. But while many scholars and translators largely agreed
about what texts possessed the value which the target language and culture needed most, or
would thrive on, there was Werce disagreement about the method of bringing these texts
across the language barrier.
It is interesting to note that while respect for Homer is generally crystallized in the
discussion about the appropriate metre to use for the Greek epics in English, there are also
those who suggest that prose is the most appropriate form for Homer and for several other
2 Cf. Ju¨rgen Stackelberg: U¨ bersetzungen aus zweiter Hand: Rezeptionsvorga¨nge in der europa¨ischen Literatur vom
14. bis zum 18. Jahrhundert (Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1984) 126.
3 This well-known feminized (sexist?) metaphor for translation was Wrst used by Nicolas Perrot d’Ablancourt
(1606–64), French translator of many Classical authors.
196
the nineteenth century

Classical writings. We are, after all, in the age of the novel by now. But what kind of prose?
Some suggest that the prose style of the Bible is the key to the Classical poetic and dramatic
epics. This is a wonderful manifestation of the interplay, so often ignored or not
recognized, between translation, literary language, and literary history. The Bible in a
‘Classical’ translation—having become a kind of tradition in the language and the literary
culture—is drawn on in translating Classical works into a modern form.
It should come as no surprise, therefore, that nineteenth-century translation into
English evinces a pluralistic spectrum of methods, more in fact than one could conjecture
from the scholarly discussion, which tended to be limited to translation of works from the
Western tradition. Not only is there a good deal of translation of ‘popular’ literature,
notably novels, from other European languages, which do not get much critical attention,
but some of the most popular (and some of the most notorious) literary works in Victorian
Britain were translated texts that originated outside Europe. The British response to the
literature of the ‘Orient’ was sometimes deeply coloured by imperial conWdence, some-
times arrogance, most ignobly expressed, perhaps, in Thomas Babington Macaulay’s
statement in 1835 that a single shelf in ‘a good European library’ was more valuable than
the combined literature of India and the Arab world.4 Some may hear an echo of this
attitude in the words of Edward FitzGerald about the original Ruba´iya´t text that he turned
into tremendously popular English poetry (see Sect. 3.5, below). A very diVerent kind of
response to the ‘exotic’ can be seen in William Morris’s response to classical Icelandic
literature, which he brought into an archaicized English, challenging popular taste for the
exotic by a diVerent sort of ‘nostalgic’ approach.
The reader will Wnd examples from numerous translations in the two large ‘collages’that
make up the bulk of the following chapter, which concludes, however, with James
Fitzmaurice-Kelly’s swift historical overview from 1911 of the whole period covered by
the volume up to that point.
4 Cf. Tejaswini Niranjana: Siting Translation: History, Post-Structuralism, and the Colonial Context (Berkeley and
Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1992), 31.
3.1 introduction
197

3.2 Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832), pre-eminent German poet and writer, was also
a lawyer, politician, civil servant, botanist, zoologist, physicist, painter, theatre manager,
and literary critic. Author of Faust, Die Leiden des jungen Werthers (The SuVerings of Young
Werther), Iphigenie auf Tauris, Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre (Wilhelm Meister’s Apprentice-
ship), and several celebrated poems, Goethe is one of the most important European writers
of his time, both as a master of many genres, and as someone who was instrumental in the
whole crucible of movements and counter-movements: from Sturm und Drang (storm and
stress) and early Romantic revolt against the rationalism of the Enlightenment, toward a re-
evaluation of Classicism and Humanism, along with the development of Romanticism.
Notions of both nationhood and universality, and their linguistic and symbolic modes of
expression, are crucial to Goethe’s world view, suspended as it is between organic growth
and metamorphosis. For Goethe, as for many of his German contemporaries, such as J. G.
Herder, A. W. Schlegel, Wilhelm von Humboldt, and Friedrich Schleiermacher, transla-
tion—both as linguistic fact and as metaphor—was a gateway between on the one hand the
strengthening notions of nationality and the Western tradition, and on the other, in some
cases, the broader world (especially the ‘Orient’).
In the case of Goethe, this gateway is closely linked to ‘world literature’, a concept that
he, more than anyone else, brought into prominence, a concept that clearly is heavily
dependent upon translation. Eckermann’s record of Goethe’s most famous comment on
world literature is included below, and when we look beyond the few lines usually cited, we
see that Goethe’s reXections are started by his observations about a Chinese novel he is
reading (almost certainly in translation, but ironically the text is never fully identiWed). His
conclusion, in this case, may seem to reinstate the Western canon as the cornerstone (‘we
must always return to the ancient Greeks’), but in one of his best-known comments about
translation—his notes to the cycle of poems West-O¨stlicher Divan (1819), which signalled
his discovery of the Orient in the poetry of the Persian poet HaWz—the opposite seems to
be true. There he moves from German translations of Homer, Ariosto, etc., to the
important task of translating Persian and Indian literature into German (see excerpt
below), although the Wnal comment does, signiWcantly, relate this whole translation
endeavour to interlinear versions of the Bible.
It should be stressed that this selection of statements by Goethe does not constitute
a single systematic theory, or even view, of translation (for this see Schleiermacher in
Sect. 3.3, below). Goethe made these statements in diVerent contexts at diVerent times,
but he gradually came to place more and more emphasis on the movement toward the
198
the nineteenth century

foreign, as we see in his notion of the ‘third epoch’ of translation, in which the translation
is not received ‘instead of’ the other text (the original), but rather ‘in the other’s stead’; its
stage is that of the foreign text; the foreign text itself may in fact be that ‘stead [Stelle]’. Or
as Goethe said late in his life: ‘When translating, one should go as far as the untranslatable;
only then does one become aware of the foreign nation and the foreign language.’1 This
view of the foreign (along with the metaphoric reference to the interlinear version) is
clearly a major source of inspiration for Walter Benjamin in his seminal article ‘The Task
of the Translator’ (see Sect. 4.4, below).
On Translation
The following three comments of Goethe on translation, translated by Andre´ Lefevere, are
taken from Lefevere’s Translating Literature: The German Tradition from Luther to Rosen-
zweig (Assen/Amsterdam: Van Gorcum, 1977), 35–9 (printed here in a chronological
sequence).
From Dichtung und Wahrheit (1811–1814)
Wieland’s translation [of Shakespeare] appeared. It was devoured, shared with and
recommended to friends and acquaintances. We Germans had the advantage that
many important works of foreign nations were Wrst translated in a light and bantering
vein. The translations of Shakespeare in prose, Wrst Wieland’s, then [Johann Joachim]
Eschenburg’s, could quickly spread as reading matter. They were generally intelligible
and suited to the common reader. I honour both rhythm and rhyme, through which
poetry become poetry indeed, but what is really deeply and thought operative, what
really shapes and improves, is what is left of a poet when he has been translated into
prose. What remains then is the pure, perfect essence which a blinding exterior often
succeeds in deluding us with when it is not there, and in hiding when it is. That is why
I think translations into prose are more advantageous than translations into verse in the
Wrst stages of education; one can see that boys, who turn everything into a joke, make fun
of the sound of words, the fall of syllables, and destroy the deep essence of the noblest
work out of a certain sense of parodistic devilry. I should therefore like you to consider
whether we are not in need of a prose translation of Homer; it should, of course, be
1 ‘Beim U¨ bersetzen muß man bis ans Unu¨bersetzliche herangehen; alsdann wird man aber erst die fremde
Nation und die fremde Sprache gewahr’, quoted in Hans Joachim Sto¨rig, ‘Einleitung’, in Sto¨rig (ed.), Das Problem
des U¨ bersetzens (Stuttgart: Henry Goverts Verlag 1963), p. viii.
3.2 johann wolfgang von goethe
199

worthy of the level that German literature has reached by now. I leave this and what I said
before to the consideration of our worthy pedagogues who can rely on extensive
experience in this matter. I simply want to remind you of Luther’s Bible translation as
an argument in favour of my proposal. That this excellent man oVered us in our mother
tongue, and as it were in one piece, a work written in the most diVerent styles, as well as
its poetic, historical, imperative, didactic tone, has helped religion more than if he had
aspired to recreate the idiosyncracies of that original down to the smallest detail. Later
translators have tried in vain to make us enjoy the book of Job, the Psalms, and other
canticles in their poetic form. If you want to inXuence the masses, a simple translation is
always best. Critical translations vying with the original are really of use only for
conversations conducted by the learned among themselves.
From ‘Zum bru¨derlichen Andenken Wielands’ (1813)
There are two maxims in translation: one requires that the author of a foreign nation be
brought across to us in such a way that we can look on him as ours; the other requires that
we should go across to what is foreign and adapt ourselves to its conditions, its use of
language, its peculiarities. The advantages of both are suYciently known to educated
people through perfect examples. Our friend [Wieland], who looked for the middle way
in this, too, tried to reconcile both, but as a man of feeling and taste he preferred the Wrst
maxim when in doubt.
From West-O..stlicher Divan (1819)
There are three kinds of translation. The Wrst acquaints us with foreign countries on our
own terms; a simple prosaic translation is best in this respect. For since prose totally
cancels all peculiarities of any kind of poetic art, and since prose itself pulls poetic
enthusiasm down to a common water-level, it does the greatest service in the beginning,
by surprising us with foreign excellence in the midst of our national homeliness, our
everyday existence; it oVers us a higher mood and real ediWcation while we do not realize
what is happening to us. Luther’s Bible translation will produce this kind of eVect at any
time.
If the Nibelungen had been put into decent prose at the outset, and if it had been
stamped a popular romance, much would have been gained and the singular, dark, noble,
awesome sense of chivalry would have addressed itself to us with its full strength.
Whether this is still advisable or feasible now will best be judged by those who have
applied themselves more thoroughly to these matters of great antiquity.
A second epoch follows in which [the translator] really only tries to appropriate
foreign content and to reproduce it in his own sense, even though he tries to transport
200
the nineteenth century

himself into foreign situations. I would like to call this kind of epoch the parodistic one,
in the fullest sense of that word. In most cases men of wit feel called to this kind of trade.
The French use this method in their translations of all poetic works; hundreds of
examples can be found in the translations produced by [Abbe´ Jacques] Delille [a well-
known and proliWc translator of the day]. Just as the French adapt foreign words to their
pronunciations, just so do they treat feelings, thoughts, even objects; for every foreign
fruit they demand a counterfeit grown in their own soil.
Wieland’s translations are of this kind; he too had a singular sense of understanding
and taste which brought him close to antiquity and to foreign countries only to the extent
to which he could still feel comfortable. This excellent man may be considered the
representative of his time; he has had an extraordinary impact, precisely because what he
found pleasing, how he appropriated it, and how he communicated it in his turn seemed
pleasing and enjoyable also to his contemporaries.
Since it is impossible to linger too long either in the perfect or in the imperfect and one
change must of necessity follow another, we experienced the third epoch, which is to be
called the highest and the Wnal one, namely the one in which the aim is to make
the translation identical with the original, so that one would not be valued instead of
the other, but in the other’s stead.1
This kind had to overcome the greatest resistance originally; for the translator who
attaches himself closely to his original more or less abandons the originality of his nation,
and so a third comes into existence, and the taste of the multitude must Wrst be shaped
towards it.
Voss [Johann Heinrich Voss, the translator of Homer into hexameters], who
will never be praised enough, could not satisfy the public initially; yet slowly, bit by
bit, it listened itself into his new manner and made itself comfortable in it. But whoever
can now see what has happened, what versatility has come to the Germans, what
rhetorical, rhythmical, metrical advantages are at the disposal of the talented and
knowledgeable youngster, how Ariosto and Tasso, Shakespeare and Caldero´n are now
presented to us twice and three times over as germanized foreigners, may hope that
literary history will plainly state who was the Wrst to take this road in spite of so many
obstacles.
The works of von Hammer [the Viennese Orientalist Joseph von Hammer-Purgstall]
point for the most part to a similar treatment of Oriental masterpieces, in which
approximation to the external form is to be most recommended. The passage of a
translation by Firdausi which our friend has given us reveal themselves as endlessly
more proWtable when compared to those of an adaptor whom we can read excerpts of in
the Fundgruben [des Orients, a review of Oriental studies edited by von Hammer].
Adapting a poet in this way is, in my opinion, the saddest mistake a diligent translator,
who is moreover well suited to his task, could make. But since these three epochs are
3.2 johann wolfgang von goethe
201

repeated and inverted in every literature; since, indeed, these three methods can
be applied simultaneously, a translation into prose of the Sha`h-na´ma [Book of Kings,
the Persian poet’s Firdausi’s long poem] and the works of Niza¯mı¯ is still in order. It could
be used for rapid reading which would open up the main sense; we would be pleased
with the historical, the legendary, and the generally ethical and we would move closer
and closer to moods and ways of thought, until we could totally fraternize with them
at last.
Remember the most resolute recognition we Germans have given such a translation of
the Sakuntalaˆ [by the Indian dramatist Kaˆlidaˆsa]; we can ascribe its great impact to the
general prose in which the poem has been diluted. But it is about time now for someone
to oVer it to us in a translation of the third type, which would correspond to the diVerent
dialects as well as to the rhythmical, metrical, and prosaic ways of speech in the original,
and which would allow us to enjoy that poem anew in all its idiosyncrasy and to
naturalize it for us. Since a manuscript of this eternal work may be found in Paris, a
German who lives there could gain undying merit among us if he were to undertake such
a work.
The English translator of [Kaˆlidaˆsa’s] Messenger of the Clouds, or Meghaduˆta [Horace
H. Wilson] is also worthy of all praise, because the Wrst acquaintance with such a work is
always momentous in one’s life. But his translation really belongs in the second period, in
that it is supplementary and paraphrastic; it Xatters the Northeasterly ear and sense
through the iambic pentameter. I am indebted to our Kosegarten [Luwig Gotthard
Kosegarten, a scholar-author of the time] for a few lines translated directly from the
original language, and they give a totally diVerent impression indeed. The Englishman
has, moreover, allowed himself transpositions of motifs which the trained esthetic eye
immediately discovers and disapproves of. It remains to explain in a few words why we
called the third epoch the Wnal one. A translation which attempts to identify itself with
the original in the end comes close to an interlinear version and greatly enhances our
understanding of the original; this in turn leads us, compels us as it were, towards the
source text, and so the circle is closed at last. Inside it the coming together of the foreign
and the native, the unknown approximation and the known, keep moving towards each
other.
editors’ note
1. [Here is this important statement in Goethe’s original: ‘wo man die U¨ bersetzung dem Original identisch machen
mo¨chte, so daß eins nicht anstatt des andern, sondern an der Stelle des andern gelten soll’. J. W. von Goethe:
‘Drei Stu¨cke zum Thema U¨ bersetzen’, in Hans Joachim Sto¨rig (ed.): Das Problem des U¨ bersetzens (Stuttgart:
Henry Goverts Verlag, 1963), 36. In his translation Lefevere has made ‘the original identical with the translation’,
almost certainly an accident in typing, which we decided to correct.]
202
the nineteenth century

On World Literature
From J. W. Goethe, Conversations with Eckermann (1823–32), trans. John Oxenford
(San Francisco: North Point Press, 1984), 132–3
Wednesday, January 31 [1827]
Dined with Goethe. ‘Within the last few days, since I saw you,’ said he, ‘I’ll have read
many things; especially a Chinese novel, which occupies me still and seems to me very
remarkable.’
‘Chinese novel!’ said I; ‘that must look strange enough.’
‘Not so much as you might think,’ said Goethe; ‘the Chinese think, act, and feel
almost exactly like us; and we soon Wnd that we are perfectly like them, except that all
they do is more clear, pure, and decorous, than with us.
‘With them all is orderly, citizen-like, without great passion or poetic Xight; and there
is a strong resemblance to my Hermann and Dorothea, as well as to the English novels of
Richardson. They likewise diVer from us in that with them external nature is always
associated with the human Wgures. You always hear the goldWsh splashing in the pond,
the birds are always singing on the bough; the day is always serene and sunny, the night is
always clear. There is much talk about the moon; but it does not alter the landscape, its
light is conceived to be as bright as day itself; and the interior of the houses is as neat and
elegant as their pictures. For instance, ‘‘I heard the lovely girls laughing, and when I got
sight of them they were sitting on cane chairs.’’ There you have, at once, the prettiest
situation; for cane chairs are necessarily associated with the greatest lightness and
elegance. Then there is an inWnite number of legends which are constantly introduced
into the narrative and are applied almost like proverbs: as, for instance, one of a girl who
was so light and graceful in the feet that she could balance herself on a Xower without
breaking it; and then another, of a young man so virtuous and brave that in his thirtieth
year he had the honour to talk with the Emperor; then there is another of two lovers who
showed such great purity during a long acquaintance that, when they were on one
occasion obliged to pass the night in the same chamber, they occupied the time with
conversation and did not approach one another.’
‘There are innumerable other legends, all turning upon what is moral and proper. It is
by this severe moderation in everything that the Chinese Empire has sustained itself for
thousands of years, and will endure hereafter.’
‘I Wnd a highly remarkable contrast to this Chinese novel in the Chansons de Be´ranger,
which have, almost every one, some immoral licentious subject for their foundation, and
which would be extremely odious to me if managed by a genius inferior to Be´ranger; he,
3.2 johann wolfgang von goethe
203

however, has made them not only tolerable, but pleasing. Tell me yourself, is it not
remarkable that the subjects of the Chinese poet should be so thoroughly moral, and
those of the Wrst French poet of the present day be exactly the contrary?’
‘Such a talent as Be´ranger’s,’ said I, ‘would Wnd no Weld in moral subjects.’
‘You are right,’ said Goethe; ‘the very perversions of his time have revealed and
developed his better nature.’
‘But,’ said I, ‘is this Chinese romance one of their best?’
‘By no means,’ said Goethe; ‘the Chinese have thousands of them, and had when our
forefathers were still living in the woods.’
‘I am more and more convinced,’ he continued, ‘that poetry is the universal possession
of mankind, revealing itself everywhere and at all times in hundreds and hundreds of
men. One makes it a little better than another, and swims on the surface a little longer
than another—that is all. Herr von Matthisson must not think he is the man, nor must
I think that I am the man; but each must say to himself that the gift of poetry is by no
means so very rare, and that nobody need think very much of himself because he has
written a good poem.’
‘But, really, we Germans are very likely to fall too easily into this pedantic conceit,
when we do not look beyond the narrow circle that surrounds us. I therefore like to look
about me in foreign nations, and advise everyone to do the same. National literature is
now rather an unmeaning term; the epoch of world literature is at hand, and everyone
must strive to hasten its approach. But, while we thus value what is foreign, we must not
bind ourselves to some particular thing, and regard it as a model. We must not give this
value to the Chinese, or the Serbian, or Caldero´n, or the Nibelungen; but if we really want
a pattern, we must always return to the ancient Greeks, in whose works the beauty of
mankind is constantly represented. All the rest we must look at only historically;
appropriating to ourselves what is good, so far as it goes.’
204
the nineteenth century

3.3 Friedrich Schleiermacher
Friedrich Schleiermacher (1768–1834) was an inXuential German theologian and one of the
key scholarly Wgures of German Romanticism; professor of theology, Wrst at Halle, later in
Berlin; often regarded as the founder of secular hermeneutics, since his theories of
interpretation form a bridge from religion to the humanities in general. His important
lecture ‘On the DiVerent Methods of Translating’, delivered to the Royal Academy of
Sciences in Berlin in 1813, contains a systematic analysis of the Romantic concept of
translation, urging that the reader be brought to the author, that the reader learn to accept
‘alienation’, or what would now be called foreignization of translations.
Schleiermacher opens his lecture (excerpts of which appear below) by discussing
translation as a general feature of understanding and language, then narrows the focus
to two kinds of transference: interpreting (‘Dolmetchen’), whereby he refers not only to
oral interpreting, but to this linguistic act in the general ‘Weld of commerce’, whereas the
‘translator proper operates mainly in the Welds of art and scholarship’, especially as he
tackles creative texts that constitute ‘a new element in the life of a language’ (see below). It
is the latter which is Schleiermacher’s concern, but he goes on to exclude also looser
versions of translation, namely ‘paraphrase’ and ‘imitation’. What we are left with then are
the two basic methods of translation proper: moving the author to the reader or the reader
to the author. Translators pursuing the Wrst method often claim that they want to make
their author speak the way he would have spoken had he written the work in the
translator’s language. This has long been a popular expression (Dryden is often quoted
to this eVect) among translators who wish to argue that the liberties they have taken are
based on some more integral aspects of the work, aspects which are thus being rendered in
spite of the changes made. In his lecture, Schleiermacher goes after this formula with a
vengeance, and argues in detail (which space does not allow us to include) why the method
behind it does not hold water. In fact, he more than once implies that this method often
turns out to be imitation in disguise. Hence, there seems to be only one option left for the
translator who wants to transmit ‘the living power’ which ‘creates new forms by means of
the plastic material of language’; the reader has to be brought to the author, and Schleier-
macher comes up with his own metaphoric formula to describe this translation: it will be
‘perfect in its kind when one can say that if the author had learnt German as well as the
translator has learnt Latin he would not have translated the work he originally wrote in
Latin any diVerently than the translator has done.’ This clever move of casting the author as
a potential translator of his work (rather than a writer of it in another language) dramatizes
the relationship between the author, translator and reader in a thought-provoking way.
3.3 friedrich schleiermacher
205

And while at one point he talks about moving the reader to the author, Schleiermacher also
describes them as meeting ‘at a certain point in the middle’, i.e. they meet through and ‘in’ a
translator who opens up the gateway of the foreign.
However, this foreignizing method clearly challenges the reader and it places a strain on
the language of the translation. Schleiermacher notes that not every language is ready for
this, but he clearly has great faith in the German language and its ability not only to
incorporate the foreign, but to house the extensive number of translated works which he
Wnds necessary for the method to make sense in the long run. Schleiermacher not only sees
translation as a crucial national enterprise, but he also dreams of the German language as a
linguistic empire where the various works of world literary history are all gathered together.
From ‘On the DiVerent Methods of Translating’, trans. Andre´ Lefevere, in Lefevere’s
Translating Literature: The German Tradition from Luther to Rosenzweig (Assen and
Amsterdam: Van Gorcum 1977), 67–89
On the one hand every man is in the power of the language he speaks, and all his thinking
is a product thereof. He cannot think anything with great precision which would lie
outside the limits of language; the shape of his concepts, the nature and the limits of the
way in which they can be connected, is prescribed for him by the language in which he is
born and educated—intellect and imagination are bound by it. Yet on the other hand
every freely thinking, mentally self-employed human being shapes his own language. For
in what other way—except precisely by means of these inXuences—would it have
developed and grown from its Wrst raw state to its more perfect elaboration in scholarship
and art? In this sense, therefore, it is the living power of the individual which creates new
forms by means of the plastic material of language, at Wrst only for the immediate
purpose of communicating a passing consciousness; yet now more, now less of it remains
behind in the language, is taken up by others, and reaches out, a shaping force. It might
even be said that a person deserves to be heard beyond his immediate environment only
to the extent to which he inXuences language. Any verbal text soon dies away of necessity
if it can be reproduced by a thousand organs in a form which is always the same; only that
text can and may endure longer which constitutes a new element in the life of a language
itself. Therefore, each free and higher speech needs to be understood twice, once out of
the spirit of the language of whose elements it is composed, as a living representation
bound and deWned by that spirit and conceived out of it in the speaker, and once out of
the speaker’s emotions, as his action, as produced and explicable only out of his own
being. (p. 71)
If his readers are to understand, they must perceive the spirit of the language which was
the author’s own and be able to see his peculiar way of thinking and feeling, and to realize
206
the nineteenth century

these two aims the translator can oVer them nothing but his own language, which at no
point fully corresponds to the other, and his own person, whose understanding of his
author is now more, now less clear, and whose admiration and approval of him is now
greater, now less. Does not translation, considered in this way, seem a foolish enterprise?
That is why people, in despair at not reaching this goal, or, if you prefer, before they had
reached the stage at which all this could be clearly thought out, discovered two other
methods of becoming acquainted with works in foreign languages, not with a view to
gathering their real artistic or linguistic sense, but rather to Wll a need and to contemplate
spiritual art; in the methods some of these diYculties are forcibly removed, others slyly
circumvented, but the concept of translation adduced here is completely abandoned.
These two methods are paraphrase and imitation. Paraphrase strives to conquer the
irrationality of languages, but only in a mechanical way. It says; even if I do not Wnd a
word in my language which corresponds to a work in the original language, I still want to
try to penetrate its value by adding both restrictive expansive deWnitions. [ . . . ] Imitation,
on the other hand, submits to the irrationality of languages, it grants that one cannot
render a copy—which would correspond precisely to the original in all its parts—of a
verbal artefact in another language, and that, given the diVerence between languages,
with which so many other diVerences are connected, there is no option but to produce an
imitation, a whole which is composed of parts obviously diVerent from the parts of the
original, but which would yet in its eVects come as close to that whole as the diVerence
in material allows. [ . . . ] The imitator, therefore, does not attempt to bring the two
parties—the writer and the reader of the imitation—together, because he does not think
a direct relationship between them is possible; he merely wants to produce on the
reader an impression similar to that received from the original by its contemporaries
who spoke the same language. (pp. 72–3)
But what of the genuine translator, who wants to bring those two completely separated
persons, his author and his reader, truly together, and who would like to bring the latter
to an understanding and enjoyment of the former as correct and complete as possible
without inviting him to leave the sphere of his mother tongue—what roads are open to
him? In my opinion there are only two. Either the translator leaves the author in peace,
as much as possible, and moves the reader towards him; or he leaves the reader in peace, as
much as possible, and moves the author towards him. The two roads are so completely
separate from each other that one or the other must be followed as closely as possible, and
that a highly unreliable result would proceed from any mixture, so that it is to be
feared that author and reader would not meet at all. The diVerence between the two
methods, and the fact that they stand in this relationship, must be immediately obvious.
For in the Wrst case the translator tries, by means of his work, to replace for the reader the
understanding of the original language that the reader does not have. He tries to
communicate to the readers the same image, the same impression he himself has
3.3 friedrich schleiermacher
207

gained—through his knowledge of the original language—of the work as it stands, and
in doing so he tries to move the readers towards his point of view, which is essentially
foreign to them. But if the translation wants to let its Roman author, for instance, speak
the way he would have spoken to Germans, but Latin; rather it drags him directly into
the world of the German readers and transforms him into their equal—and that,
precisely, is the other case. The Wrst translation will be perfect in its kind when one
can say that if the author had learnt German as well as the translator has learnt Latin he
would not have translated the work he originally wrote in Latin any diVerently than the
translator has done. But the second, which does not show the author as he himself would
have translated but as he, as a German, would have originally written German, can have
no other measure of perfection than if it could be certiWed that, could all German readers
be changed into experts and contemporaries of the author, the original would have meant
exactly the same to them as what the translation means to them now—that the author
has changed himself into a German. This method is obviously meant by all those who
use the formula that one should translate an author in such a way as he himself would
have written German. From this opposition it is immediately obvious how diVerent the
procedure must be in every detail, and how, if one tried to switch methods in the course
of one and the same project, everything would become unintelligible as well as unpal-
atable. I merely would like to add that there cannot be a third method, with a precisely
delimited goal over and above these two. The two separated parties must either meet at a
certain point in the middle, and that will always be the translator, or one must completely
join up with the other, and of these two possibilities only the Wrst belongs to the Weld of
translation; the other would be realized if, in our case, the German readers totally
mastered Latin, or rather if that language totally mastered them. (pp. 74–5)
If we except those miraculous masters to whom many languages are as one [ . . . ]—all
others retain a sense of the strange, no matter how Xuently they read a foreign language.
How should the translator transfer this feeling—that they have something foreign before
them—to the readers whom he oVers a translation in their mother tongue? Of course you
will say that the answer to this riddle has been given long ago, and that the problem has
often been solved more than well enough in our case, for the more closely the translation
follows the turns taken by the original, the more foreign it will seem to the reader. That
may well be true, and it is easy enough to ridicule this position in general. But if this joy is
not to be purchased too cheaply, if the most magisterial is not to be thrown out in one
bath with the worst and the most schoolboyish, it will have to be admitted that an
indispensable requirement of this method of translation is a feeling for language which is
not only not colloquial, but also causes us to suspect that it has now grown in
total freedom but rather has been bent towards a foreign likeness; and it must be
admitted that to do this artfully and with measure, without disadvantage to one’s own
language or oneself, is probably the greatest diYculty our translator has to overcome.
208
the nineteenth century

[ . . . ] Who would willingly force himself to appear in movements less light and elegant
than those he is capable of, to seem brutal and stiV, at least at times, and to shock the
reader as much as is necessary to keep him aware of what he is doing? (pp. 78–9)
[Schleiermacher goes on to argue that this kind of translation may not work in languages
that are ‘captives of too strict a bond of classical expression’ (p. 79), but that it should
work in languages ‘which are freer, in which innovations and deviations are tolerated to a
greater extent, in such a way that their accumulation may, under certain circumstances,
generate a certain characteristic mode of expression’ (p. 80). Thus, the characteristics of,
and diVerences between, the diVerent foreign languages and literatures will emerge in a
broad-based literature in translation, in which the reader has a comparative perspective:]
These comparisons are not available if only isolated works of masters of isolated genres
are sporadically translated into a language. In this way even the most educated readers
can achieve only a very deWcient knowledge of what is foreign by means of translation,
and it is inconceivable that they would be able to reach any judgment of either the
translation or the original. This method of translation must therefore be applied
extensively, a transplantation of whole literatures into a language, and it makes sense
and is of value only to a nation that has the deWnite inclination to appropriate what is
foreign. (p. 80)
Just as our soil itself has no doubt become richer and more fertile and our climate milder
and more pleasant only after much transplantation of foreign Xora, just so we sense that
our language, because we exercise it less owing to our Nordic sluggishness, can thrive in
all its freshness and completely develop its own power only through the most many-sided
contacts with what is foreign. And coincidentally our nation may be destined, because of
its respect for what is foreign and its nature which is one of mediation, to carry all the
treasures of foreign art and scholarship, together with its own, in its language, to unite
them into a great historical whole, so to speak, which would be preserved in the centre
and heart of Europe, so that, with the help of our language, whatever beauty the most
diVerent times have brought forth can be enjoyed by all people, as purely and perfectly as
is possible for a foreigner. This appears indeed to be the real historical aim of translation
in general, as we are used to it now. (p. 88)
3.3 friedrich schleiermacher
209

3.4 Victorian Translation and Criticism
Britain was the scene of much translation activity during the nineteenth century and
translation was taken very seriously in the critical forum. Publications such as The
Athenaeum, Classical Museum, and Edinburgh Review regularly featured articles on trans-
lation as well as reviews of newly published translations. Some of these reviews are lengthy
and include a good deal of general discussion about translation methods, most frequently
in relation to the translation of poetry (lyrical, epic, dramatic). Many of these critical
pieces are veritable storehouses of strong opinions, as can be gauged from the excerpts in
the following selection.
The debate is clearly fuelled by a strong conviction that translation is crucial for literary
life in Britain. The Homeric epics seem to become even more important than before; how
Homer is rendered in English is for many one of the key issues of contemporary literary
activity. This is the source of the well-known controversy between Matthew Arnold (1822–
88), poet and professor of poetry at Oxford, and Francis W. Newman (1805–97), professor
of Latin at University College London (brother of the famous cardinal John Henry
Newman). It started with Arnold’s critique (in his lectures ‘On Translating Homer’,
1861) of Newman’s translation of the Iliad. Newman wrote a detailed reply and Arnold
responded in his ‘Last Words on Translating Homer’. It has often been assumed that
Arnold had the last word in more than one sense; most readers have in fact approached the
debate through editions of Arnold’s criticism, where Newman’s reply is printed in between
Arnold’s pieces, and it often feels as if Newman has been simply absorbed in, and
‘contained’ by, the most powerful critical voice of Victorian England.
In the following ‘collage’, we have included parts of Newman’s preface to his translation,
together with an example from the translation, as well as sections of the ensuing debate,
concluding with a passage from the Iliad as translated by Newman and Arnold respectively.
The issues at hand, when observed closely, turn out to be quite complex, and not only as
regards the choice of metre, where they were at loggerheads. Newman’s aim is an ambitious
one, since he wanted to allude to a broad readership while at the same time staying true to the
various ‘peculiarities’ of Homer’s epic, and the broad spectrum of expressions he found in it.
He felt that Arnold was attacking the scholarly mainstay of his translation and answered
accordingly; Arnold then turned the tables on him by claiming that it was not so much in the
realm of scholarship as in poetic delivery that Newman has failed. From a contemporary
point of view, the relationship between theory and practice becomes very complicated here.
Several modern translation scholars seem to work on premises that are quite close to those of
Newman; that does not mean they necessarily approve of his actual translation.
210
the nineteenth century

Translation scholars frequently refer to the Newman–Arnold controversy, but rarely
discuss it in the context of Victorian translation criticism, but this is the context in which it
appears here. Homer was of primary signiWcance throughout the nineteenth century, but
other works from the Western canon also remain important sources of new English texts,
notably works of epic and dramatic poetry: the Greek tragedies, Virgil’s Aeneid, Dante’s
Divina Commedia. As for more recent literature, however, the canonical paradigm begins to
shift as we move into the nineteenth century. France, a powerful literary neighbour for
centuries, is now seriously challenged by Germany. Some of the excerpts below bear witness
to the awareness of and respect not only for recent German literature and philosophy
(Goethe, Schiller, Kant), but also for German achievements in translation, which was seen
as striving for formal and semantic accuracy in the incorporation of Classical literature—
Shakespeare, as well as Homer, Aeschylus, Sophocles—into the world of modern German
writing (see also Sects. 3.2 and 3.3, above, on Goethe and Schleiermacher respectively).
But amidst the widespread interest in translation, there was an anxiety about the
receptiveness of the literary public to older and more recent canonical works in English
translation. This anxiety is echoed in an anonymous review of John Stewart Blackie’s
translation of Aeschylus’ lyrical dramas. ‘There are few literary callings which have been
more aVected by the changes of public taste than that of the translator. From the time of
the Restoration, if not earlier, to the beginning of the present century, the achievement of a
decently successful version of a classic author conferred on a man a species of immortality.
Those who stood highest as original poets felt that their assurance of posthumous fame was
doubly sure when they had associated their names with Homer or Virgil.’ But why has this
changed? The reviewer goes on: ‘After the public had once become accustomed to Byron
and Scott, they began to care little for translations; and the more recent inXuences of
Shelley and Wordsworth have not been more favourable to these unfortunate attempts to
entwine the old with the new’1.
It is probably true that in Britain, in some contrast to what happened in Germany,
contemporary Romantic literature did not develop at close quarters with the translation of
the canonical literature, and that many readers leaned more to the former than the latter.
But the diminished status of the translator—which for instance Richard E. Young Wnds
manifested in his study of Victorian translation criticism2—is also a result of the very
criteria of some of the prominent views of translation. When the novelist George Eliot,
herself a translator and an active spokeswoman of German culture in Britain, notes that
1 Edinburgh Review, 92 (July 1850), 173.
2 Richard Emerson Young: Theories of Translating Poetry in Victorian England, unpublished Ph.D dissertation
(University of Michican, 1964), 137.
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
211

‘a good translator is inWnitely below the man who produces good original works’,3 she is not
holding up any objective measuring stick, but rather following a dominant notion of the
translator’s task.
This notion—marked by what one might call an anxiety of creativity—crops up in
some of the texts below. To some extent it is summed up in a review (see below) of the
translations of James Clarence Mangan, an important literary Wgure in nineteenth-century
Ireland. The reviewer is full of praise: ‘Mr Mangan’s mind is precisely of that plastic
character which is indispensable for spirited and truthful translations. He possesses, in a
high degree, the art of thoroughly divesting himself, in his capacity of translator, of every
individuality, of thought and of manner, and becoming, so to speak, the mere instrument
of the author whom he translates.’ This is of course a well-known trope, the invisible
translator, who does not remind readers that they are reading a translation.4
Many critics (and translators) are sceptical of the overly visible or creative translator, and
of what they perceive of as highly liberal translation methods in the past, even in the
celebrated translations of Dryden and Pope, and they attempt to set up new parameters of
accuracy. This debate, which can get quite heated, also sometimes becomes rather
confusing, especially when it gets entangled with the question whether to translate classical
epic or dramatic poetry into the same or somehow equivalent English metres, or whether
to opt for prose. Some critics see prose translation as a means of guaranteeing a close
rendering of the meaning of the original or even a ‘literal’ transposition; yet at the same
time prose clearly allows the translator more room to move in and such freedom also risks
distancing the text from the original, the verse form of which has already been discarded.
In some essays and reviews of the period, for instance in the review, excerpted below, of
Buckley’s and Blackie’s Aeschylus translations, the values that the critic seems to be after in
translation end up in conXict against one another.
John Stuart Blackie (1809–95)—who has been foregrounded in the collage with excerpts
from four of his critical pieces and one of his translations—was one of the most prominent
Wgures in the Weld of translation during this period. First a professor at the University of
Aberdeen, and later Chair of Greek at the University of Edinburgh, he was not only a
Classics scholar, but also a specialist in German and Scottish literature and culture, and
one of Scotland’s leading cultural Wgures. While many of his colleagues seemed to be
actively redrawing a map of classic polarized dichotomy of translation methods, Blackie
3 See George Eliot’s review, printed in its entirety below, in which she discusses works of translation from the
German, but also critiques the celebrated German translations of Shakespeare, showing that they are not as
infallible as one might have assumed.
4 See Lawrence Venuti: The Translator’s Invisibility: A History of Translation (London and New York: Routledge,
1995), for a historical and general study of this view of the translator and his or her work.
212
the nineteenth century

sought to deWne an equally classic idea of ‘the golden mean’; in this case ‘between the
painful minuteness of the German, and the loose diVusion of the vulgar English school’.
But ideas were in a Xux during this period and the excerpts will show that Blackie
changed his mind about certain key issues, for instance that of metre and rhyme. As noted,
there was an avid debate not only about whether epic and dramatic poetry should be
translated into poetry, but also about what English form was most suited as a substitute for
the original hexameter, especially that of the Homeric epics. What was the status of that
form in its source language and culture? Could one translate the works into English
hexameter, or was blank verse perhaps the ‘national’ British equivalent? Matthew Arnold
famously entered precisely this debate as he criticized Francis W. Newman’s translation
of the Iliad.
The Victorian translation debate as a whole, while parts of it may have contributed to
the diminished status of the translator, actually points in the other direction. For as Blackie
states: ‘Translation is really one of the most diYcult kinds of literary work; and requires,
for a decided success, such a combination of learning, judgment, perseverance, enthusiasm
and taste, as is seldom found in the same person.’
Words and Verse Form
From R. H. Horne’s ‘Remarks on Translation’, Classical Museum, 1/4 (1843), 398–403
Words, and symbols—which latter include sculpture and painting—are the only med-
ium of communication between the generations of mankind. We shall speak chieXy of
the Wrst, and most enduring; referring to the latter occasionally in illustration.
The medium of an author’s thoughts must be his words; words are the sole material by
which he permanently expresses what has passed in his mind; they are the only form and
image his ideas assume in developing a particular train of thought or condition of
emotion. The only merit therefore in a translation is that of giving the words of an
author in another language, as nearly by equivalents as possible. [ . . . ] No professions of
admiration and thorough comprehension on the part of the translator are any excuse for
abandoning the words of his author. The instant a man says, ‘I will give the spirit of the
author in the words that author would have used had he lived now, and written in this
other language,’ it is all over with the original. Translation, in such a case, becomes a
mere cover for individual egotism and vanity,—often for presumption—always for
something other than it pretends to be. Sometimes it will be necessary to render one
idiom by another, as one proverb may often be rendered by another; but the literal words
of the original should be given in a note. [ . . . ] (p. 398)
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
213

The English language is lamentably deWcient in faithful translations of the ancients; indeed,
it may be said, that for the literature of this country the whole business of translating the
ancients has yet to be done. Those which we most read are, unfortunately, the least like the
originals. Of Herodotus, simple, naive, and truthful, I believe the translation that is read
most, is one that was made from a French translation. [ . . . ] How turgid and mawkish are
our versions of Pindar and Theocritus! How, also, has ‘dear Don Quixote’ suVered in his
time! We have no faithful translation of Juvenal; still less of Ovid; and Dryden’s Virgil might
have been written by him without Virgil. [ . . . ] Perhaps it may be said, that with regard to
translating poetry, our tendency to do so in rhyme, is at the root of the evil. There may be
much in that, but the evil itself is the false principle; it is the substitution of the translator’s
mind for the mind of the man translated. Therefore the blank verse (rarely used) is, for the
most part, as unfaithful as the rhyme, whenever any diYcult passage occurs, or one of more
than ordinary energy and ornament. In the latter case, the translator is hampered by his
notion of the laws of metre, and his fears of being thought rugged, or of giving ‘a school-boy
version.’ O, that we could once see a good, innocent, truthful, schoolboy-like translation of
a great author!—for that would be a right beginning, and constitute a new ‘school of
translation’ in this country, where it is so much needed. But nearly all these versiWcations are
rhymed, and polished up on the model of Pope’s dulcet monotony, the metrical system of
ten-syllable Wnger-counting, instead of allowing any guidance of the ear in the ‘beats of
time,’ which lead to the energetic freedom of rhythmic harmonies. To that narrow scholastic
metre-law, and to the rhymes, anything that appeared obscure or obstinate on the part of the
original, has been sacriWced without the slightest hesitation.
Perhaps there is no instance of the licentious spirit of English translations more complete
than in those purporting to be from Homer. The name of George Chapman, I mention
with reverence and admiration; but his truly-grand version of Homer must nevertheless be
declared no translation. Chapman’s version of Homer is a paraphrase by a kindred spirit;
that of Pope is a paraphrase in his own spirit. The works might be appropriately contra-
distinguished as ‘Homer’s Chapman,’ and ‘Pope’s Homer.’ [ . . . ] (pp. 399–400)
Germans in English
From William Empson, ‘Hayward’s Translation of Faust’, Edinburgh Review, 57 (Apr.
1833), 107–43.
[A review of Faust: A Dramatic Poem by Goethe. Translated [by Abraham Hayward] into
English Prose, with remarks on former Translations and Notes (London, 1833).]
The translator of a poem has his choice whether he will employ verse or prose. Adopting
the form of prose, he tells you plainly what you are to expect, nothing more than the
214
the nineteenth century

substance honestly ‘done into English.’ Assuming the outward and visible signs of poetry,
he too frequently hangs out false colours. [ . . . ] A prose translation, designed for a higher
purpose than for the use or abuse of schoolboys, is a novelty in English literature
deserving of attention on its Wrst appearance. (p. 107)
If the diYculty of the particular metre, or of metre generally, can be mastered without
sacriWcing more on their account then they are worth, they ought undoubtedly to be
preserved. What, however, in any given case, is a nation to do, until a genius shall arise
who can reconcile contradictions which are too strong for ordinary hands? In the
meanwhile, is it not the wisest course, to make the most favourable bargain that
the nature of the dilemma oVers. [ . . . ] What is the best? Surely that in which the least
of the original is lost—least lost of those qualities which are the most important. The
native air and real meaning of a work are more essential qualities, than the charm of its
numbers, or the embellishments and the passion of its poetic style. [ . . . ] Goethe has
borne personal testimony to the speciWc and powerful inXuence which translations in
prose may exercise upon the poetical character of a nation.1 (pp. 112–13)
Mr Hayward says that one of the highest triumphs of a translator, in a passage capable of
various meanings, is to shadow out them all. In reply to this, our Wrst remark is that his
own practice, according to his account of it, is inconsistent with his rule. In the course of
his enquiries, he says, that ‘he has not unfrequently had three or four diVerent interpret-
ations suggested to him by as many accomplished German scholars, each ready to do
battle for his own against the world.’ What then? Does he say that he has attempted to
shadow out them all? So far from it, he insists—we dare say with justice—that readers
who may miss their favourite interpretation in his version of any passage, are bound to
give him the credit of having wilfully ‘rejected it.’ [ . . . ] Whenever a word or a sentence is
capable of several meanings, the ambiguity must operate either as a beauty or as a defect.
There can be no diYculty in telling which. Nor does it make any diVerence for this
purpose, whether the ambiguity arises from the general nature of the language, or is
attributable solely to the author. In the few instances where an uncertainty of this kind
is a beauty, it is of course a translator’s business as much to give the double, as in other
instances to give the single meaning. In the great majority of cases where the uncertainty
is a defect, an obligation on the tailor to preserve the patches and the spots of the pattern
coat, (especially spots of this nature,) strikes us as very Chinese proceeding.2 To avoid
these blemishes is not to falsify; it is simple justice toward an original of any merit. (p. 133)
editors’ notes
1. [Cf. the Goethe entry in Sect. 3.2, above.]
2. [Presumably a reference to ‘Chinese copy’, i.e. an exact copy of an original.]
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
215

From an anonymous review in The Athenaeum, 5 July 1834, of three English translations
of Goethe’s Faust
[A review of Hayward’s prose translation (2nd edn.) and verse translations by John S.
Blackie and David Syme.]
If the number of labourers in the rich harvest Weld of German letters aVords any proof of
the increasing thirst after this noble literature amongst our countrymen, it is assuredly a
matter of no mean import to all well-wishers of a nearer and kindlier intercourse between
the master minds of both nations, that the Wrst quarter of this year brought forward three
separate translations of the same matchless original.
[ . . . ]
Mr Hayward’s translation, we admit, is a most useful companion for the learner, as a
sort of grammatical key. But, when for this he has used it—and it will but seldom lead him
astray—poorly indeed must he feel the power of the master poet, if he again opens it.
[ . . . ]
We have said that justice cannot be done Faust in English prose; and the translations of
Mr Blackie and Mr Syme have each failed, in our judgment, in attempting to catch
Goethe’s mantle in poetry. Comparing the original, for one instant and in one point of
view, to a Titian of inestimable price, we are ill content to see this copied by a statue, which
can give us none of the painter’s splendid colouring. But it is true, that we may Wnd there
the grace and soul of beauty of the picture: and this better than a copy in oils, where the
tone and tint or Titian’s glories are lost—the masterly handling of his subject travestied
and degraded. Both of these translators in verse confess, in their prefaces, to minor
changes of words, and omissions, here and there, to give increased poetical power to the
whole! We reprobate all such irreverent tampering. It would never have been dreamed of
by any one who could feel and translate Goethe. It has been remarked before, that much
of the charm of Goethe’s numbers lies in their exquisite unity with the thoughts they
breathe. This beauty our translators could not imitate, and have not preserved.
From an anonymous review of James Clarence Mangan’s Anthologia Germanica—
German Anthology; a Series of Translations from the most Popular of the German Poets,
2 vols., Dublin Review, 19 (Dec. 1845), 312–31
Poetical translations from the foreign languages, especially the German, have multiplied
so rapidly of late years, that the English reader is often bewildered in attempting to make
a selection. [ . . . ]
The volumes now before us will introduce the reader to many poets who are
comparatively unknown, but whose acquaintance notwithstanding, will, we make no
doubt, prove little less agreeable than that of the old and traditionary representatives of
216
the nineteenth century

German literature. [... We] have no hesitation in saying, that the German Anthology is
destined to take its place in the very highest rank of poetical translations. Mr Mangan’s
mind is precisely of that plastic character which is indispensable for spirited and truthful
translations. He possesses, in a high degree, the art of thoroughly divesting himself, in his
capacity of translator, of every individuality, of thought and of manner, and becoming, so
to speak, the mere instrument of the author whom he translates. The moment he takes
up the pen, he forgets himself altogether; or rather he, as it were, converts himself into his
original thinking and writing in a new language; so that not alone the thought, but the
words, the form, the style, the manner, the very metre, arc faithfully rendered back. With
him translation is a mere process of fusion; but the metal is recast in precisely the same
mould, and preserves not alone the substance, but the most minute and delicate
peculiarities of form which characterised its original structure.
And this faculty is still more extraordinary when exercised, as here, upon an almost
endless variety of subjects. [ . . . ] Mr Mangan has tried his hand on more than forty
diVerent models, and appears equally at home with all. With that strange faculty of
which naturalists tell, his pen seems to take its colour from the food it feeds upon—it is
pious and didactic with Ho¨lty or Klopstock—humorous and burlesque with Dunkel—it
plunges into the depths of mysticism with De la Motte Fouque´—and laughs at the world
with Kotzebue or Bu¨rger. The writer is a complete literary Proteus. He appears to be
equally in his element among the fairy tales of Schnezler, and the philosophic reveries of
Schiller or Goethe; and after throwing his whole soul into one of the Wery philippics of
Freiligrath or Kerner, can return to dream over the melancholy sentimentalism of Tieck,
or Simrock, or Ru¨ckert, as though he had lived his whole life long in those dreamy halls,
‘Where melancholy music ceaseless swells.’
George Eliot, ‘Translations and Translators’, The Leader, 20 Oct 1855
[A review of Critique of Pure Reason, translated ‘from the German of Emanuel Kant’ by
J. M. D. Meiklejohn (Bohn’s Philosophical Library); and Specimens of the Chociest Lyrical
Productions of the most Celebrated German Poets, with Biographical and Literary Notes,
translated in English Verse by Mary Anne Burt (2nd edn. London: Hall, Virtue, and Co.)]
A clergyman (of the Charles Honeyman species) once told us that he never set about
preparing his sermons till Saturday evening, for he ‘trusted to Providence’. A similar kind
of trust, we suppose, must be prevalent among translators, for many of them are
evidently relying on some power which
Can teach all people to translate,
Though out of languages in which
They understand no part of speech—
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
217

a Nachklang, or resonance, perhaps, of the famous legend about those early translators,
the Seventy who turned the Old Testament into Greek, which legend tells how Ptolemy
shut them up in separate cells to do their work, and how, when they came to compare
their renderings, there was perfect agreement! We are convinced, however, that the
translators of the Septuagint had some understanding of their business to begin with,
or this supernatural aid would not have been given, for in the matter of translation, at
least, we have observed, that ‘God helps them who help themselves.’ A view of the case,
which we commend to all young ladies and some middle-aged gentlemen, who consider
a very imperfect acquaintance with their own language, and an anticipatory acquaintance
with the foreign language, quite a suYcient equipment for the oYce of translator.
It is perfectly true that, though geniuses have often undertaken translation, translation
does not often demand genius. The power required in the translation varies with the
power exhibited in the original work: very modest qualiWcations will suYce to enable a
person to translate a book of ordinary travels, or a slight novel, while a work of reasoning
or science can be adequately rendered only by means of what is at present exceptional
faculty and exceptional knowledge. Among books of this latter kind, Kant’s Critique of
Pure Reason is perhaps the very hardest nut—the peach-stone—for a translator to crack
so as to lay open the entire uninjured kernel of meaning, and we are glad at last to believe
that a translator of adequate power has been employed upon it. For so far as we have
examined the version placed at the head of our article, it appears to us very diVerent
indeed from the many renderings of German metaphysical works, in which the transla-
tor, having ventured into deep waters without learning to swim, clings to the dictionary,
and commends himself to Providence. Mr Meiklejohn’s translation—so far, we must
again observe, as we have examined it—indicates a real mastery of his author, and, for the
Wrst time, makes Kant’s Critik der reinen Vernunft accessible to English readers.
It may seem odd that we should associate with this mighty book—this terrible ninety-
gun ship—such a little painted pleasure-boat as Miss (or Mrs) Burt’s miscellaneous
collection of translations from German lyric poets. But we are concerning ourselves here
simply with translation—not at all with Kant’s philosophy or with German lyrics
considered in themselves, and these two volumes happen to be the specimens of
translation most recently presented to our notice. With regard to prose, we may very
generally use Goldsmith’s critical recipe, and say that the translation would have been
better if the translator had taken more pains; but of poetical attempts we are often sure
that no amount of pains would produce a satisfactory result. And so it is with Miss Burt’s
Specimens of the German Poets. She appears to have the knowledge and the industry which
many translators want, but she has not the poetic power which makes poetical transla-
tions endurable to those acquainted with the originals. Amongst others, however, who
have no such acquaintance, Miss Burt’s translations seem to have been in some demand,
since they have reached a second edition. She has been bold enough to attempt a version
218
the nineteenth century

of Goethe’s exquisite Zueignung (Dedication), and here is a specimen of her rendering.
Goethe sings with divine feeling and music—
Fu¨r andre wa¨chst in mir das edle Gut,
Ich kann und will das Pfund nicht mehr vergraben,
Warum sucht’ ich den Weg so sehnsuchtsvoll,
Wenn ich ihn nicht den Bru¨dern zeigen soll?
Miss Burt follows him much as a Jew’s harp would follow a piano—
Entombed no longer shall my talent be,
That treasure I amass, shall others share?
To Wnd the road—oh, why such zeal display,
If I guide not my brethren on their way?
A version like this bears about the same relation to the original as the portraits in an
illustrated newspaper bear to the living face of the distinguished gentlemen they mis-
represent; and considering how often we hear opinions delivered on foreign poets by
people who only know those poets at second hand, it becomes the reviewer’s duty to
insist again and again on the inadequacy of poetic translations.
The Germans render our poetry better than we render theirs, for their language, as
slow and unwieldy as their own post-horses in prose, becomes in poetry graceful and
strong and Xexible as an Arabian war-horse. Besides, translation among them is more
often undertaken by men of genius. We remember, for example, some translations of
Burns, by Freiligrath, which would have arrested us by their beauty if we had seen the
poems for the Wrst time, in this language. It is true the Germans think a little too highly
of their translations, and especially are under the illusion, encouraged by some silly
English people, that Shakespeare according to Schlegel is better than Shakespeare
himself—not simply better to a German as being easier for him to understand, but
absolutely better as poetry. A very close and admirable rendering Schlegel’s assuredly is,
and it is a high pleasure to track it in its faithful adherence to the original, just as it is to
examine a Wne engraving of a favourite picture. Sometimes the German is as good as the
English—the same music played on another but as good an instrument. But more
frequently the German is a feeble echo, and here and there it breaks down in a supremely
Wne passage. An instance of this kind occurs in the famous speech of Lorenzo to Jessica.
Shakespeare says—
Soft stillness and the night
Become the touches of sweet harmony.
This Schlegel renders—
Sanfte Still und Nacht
Sie werden Tasten su¨sser Harmonie.
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
219

That is to say, ‘Soft stillness and the night are the Wnger-board of sweet harmony.’ A still
worse blunder is made by Tieck (whose translation is the rival of Schlegel’s) in the
monologue of Macbeth. In the lines—
That but this blow
Might be the be-all and the end-all here—
But here upon this bank and shoal of time,
I’d jump the life to come—
Tieck renders, ‘Upon this bank and shoal of time,’ ‘Auf dieser Schu¨lerbank der Gegen-
wart’, that is, ‘On this school-bench of the present!’ These are cases of gross inaccuracy
arising from an imperfect understanding of the original. Here is an instance of feebleness.
Coriolanus says—
And like an eagle in the dovecote, I
Flutter’d the Volscians in Corioli.
For the admirably descriptive word ‘Xuttered,’ Schlegel gives ‘schlug’ which simply means
‘slew’. Weak renderings of this kind are abundant.
Such examples of translators’ fallibility in men like Schlegel and Tieck might well
make less accomplished persons more backward in undertaking the translation of great
poems, and by showing the diYculty of the translator’s task, might make it an object of
ambition to real ability. Though a good translator is inWnitely below the man who
produces good original works, he is inWnitely above the man who produces feeble original
works. We had meant to say something of the moral qualities especially demanded in the
translator—the patience, the rigid Wdelity, and the sense of responsibility in interpreting
another man’s mind. But we have gossiped on this subject long enough.
John Stuart Blackie
From J. S. Blackie, ‘Recent translations of the Agamemnon’, Classical Museum, 6 (1848),
432–63
[A review of two translations of Aeschylus’ Agamemnon, by W. Sewell (1846) and John
Conington (1848).]
The English and the Germans, so diversely constituted in most particulars, and forming,
in fact, opposite poles of the intellectual and moral world, stand peculiarly contrasted in
that department of literature which seeks to appropriate the products of foreign and far
distant minds by the engine of translation. Scarcely does the theology or the metaphysics
of our trans-Rhenane brethren present a stronger contrast to ours, than Pope’s Homer
220
the nineteenth century

forms to that of Voss. In the transfusion of ancient Greek and Roman poetry into our
tongue, the main object of the English translator has always been to be free and graceful,
spirited and energetic; while, with an instinct no less distinctly national, the German,
religiously laborious, strives after accuracy of erudition, and profundity of philosophical
appreciation. (p. 432)
[ . . . ] though Mr Conington may not have succeeded in dethroning Mr Symmons from
the position which he holds, as the most poetical of all the English translators of the
Agamemnon, he has produced a work of high merit, satisfying at once the demands of
the man of taste and the minute student of Aeschylus, in a fashion of which the English
school of translation has hitherto presented very few examples. Such a beginning
certainly aVords the best reason to hope that this country may yet give birth to a series
of translations, realizing the true golden mean between the painful minuteness of the
German, and the loose diVusion of the vulgar English school. (p. 463)
From Blackie’s preface to his translation of The Lyrical Dramas of Aeschylus (1850;
London J. M. Dent & Sons, 1906)
The proper problem of an English translator is not how to say a thing as the author would
have said it, had he been an Englishman; but how, through the medium of the English
language, to make the English reader feel both what he said and how he said it, being a Greek.
Now, any one who is familiar with the general run of English rhythmical translations, of
which Pope’s Iliad is the pattern, must be aware that they have too often been executed
under the inXuence of the former of these principles rather than the latter. In Pope’s
Homer, and in Sotheby’s also, I must add, we Wnd many, perhaps all the Wnest passages
very Wnely done; but so as Pope or Sotheby might have done themselves in an original
poem written at the present day, while that which is most peculiarly Homeric, a certain
blunt naturalness and a talkative simplicity, we do not Wnd in these translators at all. [ . . . ]
Now, I at once admit that a good prose translation—that is to say, a prose translation
done by a poet or a man of poetical culture—of such an author as Homer, is preferable,
for many purposes, to a poetical translation so elegantly defaced as that of Pope. A prose
translation, also, of any poet, done accurately in a prosaic style by a proser, however
much of a parody or a caricature in point of taste, may not be without its use, if in no
other way, as a ready check on the free licence of omission or inoculation which
rhythmical translators are so fond to usurp. But it is a mistake to suppose, because
Pope, under the inXuence of Louis XIV and Queen Anne, could not write a good poetical
translation of Homer, that therefore such a work is beyond the compass of the English
language.1 I believe that, if Alfred Tennyson were to give the world a translation of the
Iliad in the measure of Locksley Hall, he would cut Pope out of the market of the million,
even at this eleventh hour. We are, in the present epoch of our literary history, arrived at
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
221

a very favourable moment for producing good translations. A band of highly-original and
richly-furnished minds has just left the stage, leaving us the legacy of a poetical language
which, under their hand, received a degree of rhythmical culture, of which it had been
before considered incapable. The example of the Germans, also, now no longer conWned
to the knowledge of a few, stands forth to show us how excellent poetical translations may
be made, free, at least, from those faults from which we have suVered. There is no reason
why we should despair of producing poetical versions of the Classics which shall be at once
graceful as English compositions, and characteristic as productions of the Greek or
Roman mind. I, for one, have already passed this judgment on my own attempt, that if
I have failed in these pages to bring out what is Greek and what is Aeschylean prominently,
in combination with force, grace, and clearness of English expression, it is for lack of skill
in the workman, not for want of edge in the tool. (pp. 3–4)
note
1. Southey requested a Frenchman ambitious of translating his Roderick, to do so in prose, not because he preferred
that method in general, but because he believed that ‘poetry of the higher order is as impossible in French, as it is in
Chinese!’—Life, Vol. IV, p. 100. [italics in original]
From Blackie’s translation of Aeschylus’ Agamemnon, included in The Lyrical Dramas of
Aeschylus, pp. 45–6
[Cf. the passage as translated below by Browning (Sect. 3.5) Lowell (Sect. 4.10) and Hughes
(Sect. 5.16)]
I’ll voice the strain. What though the arm be weak
That once was strong,
The suasive breath of Heaven-sent memories stirs
The old man’s breast with song.
My age hath virtue left
To sing what fateful omens strangely beckoned
The twin kings to the fray,
What time to Troy contentuous marched
The embattled Greek array.
Jove’s swooping bird, king of all birds, led on
The kings of the Xeet with spear and vengeful hand:
By the way-side from shining seats serene,
Close by the palace, on the spear-hand seen,
Two eagles Xapped the air,
One black, the other silver-tipt behind,
And with keen talons seized a timorous hare,
Whose strength could run no more,
222
the nineteenth century

Itself, and the live burden which it bore.
Sing woe and well-a-day! But still
May the good omens shame the ill.
From Blackie’s ‘A Few Remarks on English Hexameters’, Classical Museum, 4/3 (1856),
p. 319–30
The general principle, then, on which a metrical translation must proceed is plain
enough. The reader of a translated work is entitled to demand a fac-simile of the original;
but this only in so far as is consistent with the grammatical and rhythmical genius of the
language in which the translation is made. Now what is included in that wide word the
genius of a language? It includes two things essentially diVerent [ . . . ] in the Wrst place,
and principally, whatever belongs organically to the grammatical and metrical structure of
the language; and in the second place, whatever belongs by use and habit and association
to the characteristic style and peculiar living expression of the language. Thus, the English
language, by its structure, most naturally falls into the iambic movement [ . . . ] but it is
also capable, without any painful eVort, of the trochaic movement; and when stirred with
high lyric emotion, it does not refuse the tribrachic measure [ . . . ]. (p. 321)
The matter then comes to a very short issue. The man who shall sit down to write a
translation of the Iliad in English hexameters, must do so with the full consciousness that
he is making a very deliberate and doubtful experiment against the literary use and wont
of a highly cultivated language [ . . . ]. (p. 327)
If, on account of epic associations, our ten-syllabled verse is to be used in rendering
Homer, there can be no question that, in this particular matter, Cowper was nearer the
mark than Pope, and that, in this case, blank verse is preferable to rhyme. But it admits,
we think, of the clearest proof on the strictest aesthetic principles—principles which it
might go hard even with our hardy German friends to disprove—that the proper English
correlative of the Greek hexameter of Homer, (Virgil may be diVerent,) is Chapman’s old
iambic verse of fourteen syllables; or better still—because, like dactylic verse, it com-
mences with the accent—the trochaic measure of Wfteen syllables, so felicitously used by
Mr Tennyson in his luxuriant poem, ‘Locksley Hall.’ [ . . . ] The only doubt that can be
stated is, whether this measure, iambic or trochaic, should be used with or without
rhyme. The English ear unquestionably would prefer rhyme; but for the sake both of
accuracy in the version, and variety in the pause, we should like to see the experiment
made without rhyme. (pp. 329–30)
From Blackie’s ‘Homer and his Translators’, Macmillan Magazine, 4 (Aug. 1861), 268–80
Why have we so few Wrst-rate poetical translations? For several reasons. First, because
there is no great demand for them. [ . . . ] Second, because the work of translation, like
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
223

that of criticism, is more exposed to be undertaken by unqualiWed persons than almost
any other work. [ . . . ] But a third reason is stronger than these. Translation is really one of
the most diYcult kinds of literary work; and requires, for a decided success, such a
combination of learning, judgment, perseverance, enthusiasm and taste, as is seldom
found in the same person. (268)
Homer is an IØ
 or popular minstrel, who addressed his narrative songs to the ear of
the masses for their amusement—not a Ø, or modern poetic man of genius, who
addresses his epos to the cultivated understanding and the polished taste of the reading
public, or, it may be, only a small fraction of that public. This truth must be admitted,
and its signiWcance known and felt, before a single step can be taken towards a translation
of Homer in the spirit of which Homer was written. (p. 272)
The great excellence of Cowper lies in his avoidance of the two grand faults of his two
great predecessors [Chapman and Pope]: when they are turgid, bombastical, and be-
spangled with artiWcial conceits, he is always chaste, simple, natural, and at the same time
digniWed. But he wants Wre and rapidity—a very great defect in the popular epos, and
very un-Homeric—nor can he pretend to equal Pope in sound, or Chapman in vigour. In
the ‘Odyssey’ this quiet manner is more at home, and his translation of that work is
perhaps the best version of any Homeric poem existing in the English language. (p. 274)
[Blackie goes on to discuss why diVerent varieties of blank verse will not do.]
[ . . . ] Pope will beat them all, you may depend upon it. And why will Pope beat them all?
Perhaps for several reasons; but certainly for this one—because he rhymes. And in favour
of rhyme, that good old English luxury—that happy modern invention—I must here,
before proceeding further, put in a strong plea,—partly because it is the fashion, in
certain quarters, to talk cheaply of it; partly because Professor Arnold most unhand-
somely disowns it; and partly because I am certain that no translation of Homer, however
well executed, will have any chance of popularity without it. (p. 274)
One thing remains. Professor Arnold, in the ingenious, graceful, and thoughtful little
book, which has given occasion to these critical remarks, showed a good example to all
critics by giving a specimen of the sort of hexameters into which he was of opinion that
Homer should be translated. I should consider myself somewhat of a sneak if after having
commented so freely on his opinions, I should not follow his practice. Here, therefore,
I Xing down for his critical dissection and disapproval—for I cannot expect him to
approve of my ballad measure any more than I do of his hexameters—the well known
smart interlude between Ulysses and Thersites, in the second book of the Iliad.
[ . . . ]
Soothly Achilles lacketh gall, and droops his princely wing,
Or this were the last of insults, cast from the lips of this faithless king!
224
the nineteenth century

Such reckless works Thersites dared from venomed heart to Xing
Against the monarch; but Ulysses darkly-scowling came,
And swift pursued the railer rude with words of bitter blame.
Thersites, sense-confounding fool, thy mouth of Xuent prate
Learn now to gag; against the kings this ribald talk abate!
I tell thee true, of all the crew from Greece to Troy that came,
Vilest art thou: there breathes not one, who owns a fouler name!
[ . . . ] (p. 279)
Newman, Arnold, Homer
From F. W. Newman, ‘Preface’to The Iliad of Homer: Faithfully Translated into Unrhymed
English Metre by F. W. Newman (London: Walton and Maberly, 1856), pp. iii–xx
In discerning the mind of Homer—as to its intellectual and moral tone—we get
discernment not into one Greek only, but into all the Greeks, of whom he is emphatically
a noble type. In this respect, the substance of what he tells is often of less importance to
us than the manner in which he tells it, and it becomes a Wrst-rate duty of a translator to
adhere closely to his manner and habit of thought, as also to his moral sentiments. (p. iii)
[Homer] is alternately Poet, Orator, Historian, Theologian, Geographer, Traveller,
jocose as well as serious, dramatic as well as descriptive. [ . . . ] it suYces to warn the
reader not to expect, or to wish, Homer to be always at the same high pitch of poetry. He
rises and sinks with his subject, is prosaic when it is tame, is low when it is mean. To
express this suitably, we need a diction suYciently antiquated to obtain pardon of the
reader for its frequent homeliness.
The style of Homer himself is direct, popular, forcible, quaint, Xowing, garrulous,
abounding with formulas, redundant in particles and aYrmatory interjections, as also
in grammatical connectives of time, place, and argument. In all those respects it is similar
to the old English ballad, and is in sharp contrast to the polished style of Pope, Sotheby,
and Cowper, the best known English translators of Homer. (p. iv)
[ . . . ] the Wrst matter of all is to select the metre, with which the style is intimately
connected. The moral qualities of Homer’s style being like those of the English ballad, we
need a metre of the same genius. It must be fundamentally musical and popular. (p. v)
These considerations convinced me a` priori that the English metre Wtted to translate
Homer’s hexameter must be a long line composed of two short ones, having each either
three beats or four beats. [ . . . ] But beside this I held it as an axiom that rhyme must be
abandoned. [ . . . ] Yet on abandoning rhyme, to which our ears are accustomed in the
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
225

popular ballad, I found an unpleasant void, until I gave a double ending to the verse, i.e.,
one (unaccented) syllable more than our Common Metre allows. (pp. vi–vii)
A few remarks here on the problem presented to a translator seem to me the more
needful, because some reviewers of my translation of Horace’s Odes laid down as axioms
(to which they assumed my agreement), principles which I regard to be utterly false and
ruinous to translation. One of these is, that the reader ought, if possible, to forget that it
is a translation at all, and be lulled into the illusion that he is reading an original work. Of
course, a necessary inference from such a dogma is that whatever has a foreign colour is
undesirable and is even a grave defect. The translator, it seems, must carefully obliterate
all that is characteristic of the original, unless it happen to be identical in spirit to
something already familiar in English. From such a notion I cannot too strongly express
my intense dissent. I aim at precisely the opposite—to retain every peculiarity of the
original, so far as I am able, with the greater care the more foreign it may be—whether it be
a matter of taste, of intellect, or of morals. (pp. xv–xvi)
From Newman’s translation of The Iliad of Homer, Book 1, pp. 7–8 (ll. 225–44)
[Achilles confronts Agamemnon. For the same passage, translated by Dryden and Pope
respectively, see Sects. 2.13 and 2.15, above.]
‘O gorg’d with wine! the eyes of dog, but heart of deer, who bearest,
Never didst thou with all the folk
put corslet on for battle,
Nor hardihood of soul hast thou
among Achaia’s chieftains
On ambuscade to go; but this
to thee destruction seemeth.
Truly more gainful is it, mid
Achaia’s ample army
To plunder of his gifts, whoe’er
a word against thee sayeth;—
A king who doth his folk devour,
for-that they all are worthless;
Else, verily, Atrides! this
were now thy Wnal outrage.
But roundly will I say,—and swear
a mighty oath upon it:
That by the sceptre in my hand,
whence leaf or twig shall never
Sprout forth, sithence the parent trunk it left upon the mountains;
Nor bud will it; for by the brass
both leaf and bark around it
Are peel’d away; but now in turn
Achaia’s children bear it,—
Servants of Justice,—in their palms;
by Jupiter deputed
To enforce observance of the Right:
(a mighty oath I tender):
There shall upon Achaia’s sons
a longing for Achilles
Come, soon or late, on one and all;
but them though pierc’d with anguish,
Unable wilt thou be to help,
when hero-slaying Hector
Shall hew them down in crowds:
but thou thy soul within shalt mangle
Enrag’d, that thou didst vilely treat
the noblest of the Achaians.’
226
the nineteenth century

From Matthew Arnold’s On Translating Homer (1861), repr. in Matthew Arnold’s Essays,
Literary and Critical (London: Dent, 1906), 210–75
[ . . . ] The translator’s ‘Wrst duty’, says Mr Newman, is a historical one: ‘to be faithful’.
Probably both sides would agree that the translator’s ‘Wrst duty is to be faithful’; but the
question at issue between them is, in what faithfulness consists.
My one object is to give practical advice to a translator; and I shall not the least
concern myself with theories of translation as such. But I advise the translator not to try
‘to rear on the basis of the Iliad, a poem that shall aVect our countrymen as the original
may be conceived to have aVected its natural hearers’; and for this simple reason, that we
cannot possibly tell how the Iliad ‘aVected its natural hearers.’ [ . . . ] Evidently the
translator needs some more practical directions than these. No one can tell him how
Homer aVected the Greeks; but there are those who can tell him how Homer aVects
them. These are scholars; who possess, at the same time with knowledge of Greek,
adequate poetical taste and feeling. No translation will seem to them of much worth
compared with the original; but they alone can say whether the translation produces
more or less the same eVect upon them as the original. They are the only competent
tribunal in this matter: the Greeks are dead; the unlearned Englishman has not the data
for judging; and no man can safely conWde in his own single judgment of his own work.
(pp. 211–12)
Mr Newman says that ‘the entire dialect of Homer being essentially archaic, that of a
translator ought to be as much Saxo-Norman as possible, and owe as little as possible to the
elementsthrownintoourlanguagebyclassicallearning.’MrNewmanisunfortunateinthe
observance of his own theory, for I continually Wnd in his translation words of Latin origin,
which seem to me quite alien to the simplicity of Homer—‘responsive’ for instance, which
is a favourite word of Mr Newman, to represent the Homeric I	Ø	:
Great Hector of the motley helm thus spake to her responsive.
But thus responsively to him spake godlike Alexander.
And the word ‘celestial’, again, in the grand address of Zeus to the horses of Achilles,
You, who are born celestial, from Eld and Death exempted!
seems to me in that place exactly to jar upon the feeling as too bookish. But, apart from
the question of Mr Newman’s Wdelity to his own theory, such a theory seems to me both
dangerous for a translator and false in itself. Dangerous for a translator; because,
wherever one Wnds such a theory announced (and one Wnds it pretty often), it is generally
followed by an explosion of pedantry; and pedantry is of all things in the world the most
un-Homeric. False in itself; because, in fact, we owe to the Latin element in our language
most of that very rapidity and clear decisiveness by which it is contradistinguished from
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
227

the German, and in sympathy with the languages of Greece and Rome: so that to limit an
English translator of Homer to words of Saxon origin is to deprive him of one of his
special advantages for translating Homer. In Voss’s well-known translation of Homer, it
is precisely the qualities of his German language itself, something heavy and trailing both
in the structure of its sentence and in the words of which it is composed, which prevent
his translation, in spite of the hexameters, in spite of his Wdelity, from creating in us the
impression created by the Greek. Mr Newman’s prescription, if followed, would just strip
the English translator of the advantage which he has over Voss. (pp. 213–14)
Homer is rapid in his movement, Homer is plain in his words and style, Homer is simple
in his ideas, Homer is noble in his manner. Cowper renders him ill because he is slow in
his movement, and elaborate in his style; Pope renders him ill because he is artiWcial both
in his style and his words; Chapman renders him ill because he is fantastic in his ideas;
Mr Newman renders him ill because he is odd in his words and ignoble in his manner.
[ . . . ] Mr Newman’s movement, grammatical style, and ideas, are a thousand times in
strong contrast with Homer’s; still it is by the oddness of his diction and the ignobleness
of his manner that he contrasts with Homer the most violently. (p. 250)
So the translator really has no good model before him for any part of his work, and has to
invent everything for himself. [ . . . ] Pope certainly had a quick and darting spirit, as he
had, also, real nobleness; yet Pope does not render the movement of Homer. To render
this the translator must have, besides, his natural qualiWcations, an appropriate metre.
I have suYciently shown why I think all forms of our ballad-metre unsuited to Homer.
It seems to me to be beyond question that, for epic poetry, only three metres can seriously
claim to be accounted capable of the grand style. Two of these will at once occur to
everyone,—the ten-syllable, or so-called heroic, couplet, and blank verse. (p. 251)
[Arnold then explains why he Wnds that neither of these two metres, nor in fact the
Spenserian stanza, work for Homer.]
When I say this, I point to the metre which seems to me to give the translator the best
chance of preserving the general eVect of Homer,—that third metre which I have not yet
expressly named, the hexameter. I know all that is said against the use of hexameters in
English poetry; but it comes only to this, that, among us, they have not yet been used
on any considerable scale with success. Solvitur ambulando: this is an objection which can
best be met by producing good English hexameters. And there is no reason in the nature
of the English language why it should not adapt itself to hexameters as well as the
German language does; nay, the English language, from its greater rapidity, is itself better
suited than the German for them. [ . . . ] Applied to Homer, this metre aVords to the
translator the immense support of keeping him more nearly than any other metre to
Homer’s movement [ . . . ] (257)
228
the nineteenth century

[The translator] will Wnd one English book and one book only, where, as in the Iliad
itself, perfect plainness of speech is allied with perfect nobleness; and that book is the
Bible. No one could see this more clearly than Pope saw it: ‘This pure and noble
simplicity,’ he says, ‘is nowhere in such perfection as in the Scripture and Homer’: yet
even with Pope a woman is a ‘fair,’ a father is a ‘sire’ and an old man a ‘reverend sage,’ and
so on through all the phrases of that pseudo-Augustan, and most unbiblical, vocabulary.
The Bible, however, is undoubtedly the grand mine of diction for the translator of
Homer; and, if he knows how to discriminate truly between what will suit him and what
will not, the Bible may aVord him also invaluable lessons of style. (p. 264)
So essentially characteristic of Homer is his plainness and naturalness of thought, that to
the preservation of this in his own version the translator must without scruple sacriWce,
where it is necessary, verbal Wdelity to his original, rather than run any risk of producing,
by literalness, an odd and unnatural eVect. The double epithets so constantly occurring
in Homer must be dealt with according to this rule; these epithets come quite naturally in
Homer’s poetry; in English poetry they, in nine cases out of ten, come, when literally
rendered, quite unnaturally. I will not now discuss why this is so, I assume it as an
indisputable fact that it is so; that Homer’s 	æø IŁæø comes to the reader as
something perfectly natural, while Mr Newman’s ‘voice-dividing mortals’ comes to him
as something perfectly unnatural. (pp. 265–6)
So I proceed at once to give, in conclusion, one or two passages in which I have tried to
follow those principle of Homeric translation which I have laid down. [ . . . ] I take Wrst a
passage of which I have already spoken, the comparison of the Trojan Wres to the stars.
[ . . . ] I want to show you that it is possible, in a plain passage of this sort, to keep
Homer’s simplicity without being heavy and dull; and to keep his dignity without
bringing in pomp and ornament. ‘As numerous as are the stars on a clear night,’ says
Homer,
So shone forth, in front of Troy, by the bed of Xanthus,
Between that and the ships, the Trojan’s numerous Wres.
In the plain there were kindled a thousand Wres: by each one
There sat Wfty men, in the ruddy light of the Wre:
By their chariots stood the steeds, and champed the white barley
While their masters sat by the Wre, and waited for Morning.
Here, in order to keep Homer’s eVect of perfect plainness and directness, I repeat the
word ‘Wres’ as he repeats ıæ, without scruple; although in a more elaborate and literary
style of poetry this recurrence of the same word would be a fault to be avoided. I omit the
epithet of Morning, and whereas Homer says that the steeds ‘waited for Morning,’
I prefer to attribute this expectation of Morning to the master and not the horse. Very
likely in this particular, as in any other single particular, I may be wrong: what I wish you
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
229

to remark is my endeavour after absolute plainness of speech, my care to avoid anything
which may the least check or surprise the reader, whom Homer does not check or
surprise. (pp. 267–8)
From Homeric Translation in Theory and Practice, a Reply to Matthew Arnold, Esq.,
Professor of Poetry, Oxford, by Francis W. Newman, a Translator of the Iliad (London
and Edinburgh: Williams and Norgate, 1861) (also in Matthew Arnold’s Essays,
pp. 276–336)
Scholars are the tribunal of Erudition, but of Taste the educated but unlearned public is
the only rightful judge; and to it I wish to appeal. [ . . . ] Where I diVer in Taste from Mr
Arnold, it is very diYcult to Wnd ‘the scholars’ tribunal,’ [ . . . ] but as regards Erudition,
this diYculty does not occur, and I shall fully reply to the numerous dogmatisms by
which he settles the case against me. (p. 2)
[Regarding hexameters:] The method could not be proWtably used for translating Homer
or Virgil, plainly because it is impossible to say for whose service such a translation would
be executed. Those who can read the original will never care to read through any
translation; and the unlearned look on all, even the best hexameters, whether from
Southey, Lockhart or Longfellow, as odd and disagreeable prose. [ . . . ] ‘Homer is
popular,’ is one of the very few matters of fact in this controversy on which Mr Arnold
and I are agreed. ‘English hexameters are not popular,’ is a truth so obvious, that I do not
yet believe he will deny it. Therefore, ‘Hexameters are not the metre for translating
Homer.’ Q.E.D. (pp. 12–13)
At length I come to the topic of Diction, where Mr Arnold and I are at variance not only
as to taste, but to the main facts of Greek literature. I had called Homer’s style quaint and
garrulous; and said that he rises and falls with his subject, being prosaic when it is tame,
and low when it is mean. I added no proof; for I did not dream that it was needed. Mr
Arnold not only absolutely denies all this, and denies it without proof; but adds, that
these assertions prove my incompetence, and account for my total and conspicuous
failure. (p. 31)
I regard it as quaint in Homer to call Juno white-arm’d goddess and large-ey’d. (I have not
rendered HØ ox-ey’d, because in a case of doubt I shrank to obtrude anything so
grotesque to us.) It is quaint to say ‘the lord of bright-haired Juno lightens’ for ‘it
lightens’; or ‘my heart in my shaggy bosom is divided,’ for ‘I doubt’ [ . . . ]. If the whole
Greek nation by long familiarity had become inobservant of Homer’s ‘oddities’ (con-
ceding this for the moment), that also would be no fault of mine. That Homer is
extremely peculiar, even if the Greeks had become deadened to the sense of it, the
proof on all sides is overpowering.
230
the nineteenth century

It is very quaint to say, ‘the outwork (or rampart) of the teeth’ instead of ‘the lips.’ If
Mr Arnold will call it portentous in my English, let him produce some shadow of reason
for denying it to be portentous in Greek. [ . . . ] (pp. 50–51)
It is not to be expected, that one who is blind to superWcial facts so very prominent as
those which I have recounted, should retain any delicate perception of that highly
coloured, intense, and very eccentric diction of Homer, even if he has ever understood
it, which he forces me to doubt. [ . . . ]
I have not adduced, in proof of Homer’s quaintness, the monstrous simile given to
us in Iliad 13, 754; viz. Hector ‘darted forward screaming like a snowy mountain, and Xew
through the Trojans and allies:’ for I cannot believe that the poet wrote anything
so absurd. Rather than admit this, I have suggested that the text is corrupt, and
that for Zæœ ØØ we should read Oæø ŁØ,—‘darted forth screaming like a
raging bird.’ Yet, as far as I know, I am the Wrst man that has here impugned the text.
[ . . . ] (p. 54)
From ‘Last Words on Translating Homer. A reply to Francis W. Newman by Matthew
Arnold’ (1862), in Matthew Arnold’s Essays, pp. 337–80
I think that in England, partly from the want of an Academy, partly from a national habit
of intellect to which that want of an Academy is itself due, there exists too little of what
I may call a public force of correct literary opinion, possessing within certain limits a
clear sense of what is right and wrong, sound and unsound, and sharply recalling men of
ability and learning from any flagrant misdirection of these their advantages. (p. 340)
Mr Newman errs by not perceiving that the question is not one of scholarship, but of a
poetical translation of Homer. This, I say, should be perfectly simple and intelligible. He
replies by telling me that I
Ø, Nº
 and ØªÆºØ are hard words. Well, but what
does he infer from that? That the poetical translation, in his rendering of them, is to give
us a sense of the diYculties of the scholar, and so is to make his translation obscure? [ . . . ]
It may even be aYrmed that everyone who reads Homer perpetually for the sake of
enjoying his poetry (and no one who does not so read him will ever translate him well),
comes at last to form a perfectly clear sense in his own mind for every important word in
Homer, such as I
Ø, or MºÆ, whatever the scholar’s doubts about the word may
be. And this sense is present to his mind with perfect clearness and fullness, whenever the
word recurs, although as a scholar he may know that he cannot be sure whether this sense
is the right one or not. But poetically he feels clearly about the word, although
philologically he may not. [ . . . ]
Perplexed by his knowledge of the philological aspect of Homer’s language, encum-
bered by his own learning, Mr Newman, I say, misses the poetical aspect, misses that with
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
231

which alone we are here concerned. [ . . . ] He talks of my ‘monomaniac fancy that there is
nothing quaint or antique in Homer.’ Terrible learning, I cannot help in my turn
exclaiming, terrible learning, which discovers so much! (pp. 350–2)
Translations of the Iliad
[It seems appropriate to conclude this interchange between Newman and Arnold with a
few lines from the Iliad as translated by these two eminent men. Arnold criticizes the way
in which both Chapman and Newman translated the dialogue between Achilles and his
horse and proceeds to give his own translation (p. 273). In his reply, Newman complains
that Arnold does not in fact quote relevant lines of his translation, which he in turn
includes (p. 30). Here are the Wrst eleven lines:]
Arnold’s version
‘Xanthus and Balius both, ye far-famed seed of Podarga!
See that ye bring your master home to the host of the Argives
In some other sort than your last, when the battle is ended;
And not leave him behind, a corpse on the plain, like Patrocles.’
Then from beneath the yoke, the Xeet horse Xanthus addressed him;
Sudden he bowed his head, and all his mane, as he bowed it,
Streamed to the ground by the yoke, escaping from under the collar;
And he was given a voice by the white-armed Goddess Hera.
‘Truly, yet this time will we save thee, mighty Achilles!
But thy day of death is at hand; nor shall we be the reason—
No, but the will of heaven, and Fate’s invincible power.’
Newman’s version
‘Chestnut and Spotted ! noble pair!
farfamous brood of Spry-foot !
In other guise now ponder ye
your charioteer to rescue
Back to the troop of Danaı¨,
when we have done with battle:
Nor leave him dead upon the Weld,
as late ye left Patroclus.’
But him the dapplefooted steed
under the yoke accosted;
(And droop’d his auburn head aside
straightway; and thro’ the collar,
His full mane, streaming to the ground,
over the yoke was scatter’d:
Him Juno, whitearm’d goddess, then
with voice of man endowe`d:)
‘Now and again we verily
will save and more than save thee,
Dreadful Achilles! yet for thee
the deadly day approacheth.
Not ours the guilt; but mighty God
and stubborn Fate are guilty.’
232
the nineteenth century

Translating the European Tradition
From an anonymous review of translations of Aeschylus, The North British Review, 16
(Nov. 1851), 259–78
[A review of The Tragedies of Aeschylus, ‘Literally translated by Theodore Alois Buckley’,
(London, 1849), and The Lyrical Dramas of Aeschylus, from the Greek ‘Translated into
English Verse by John Stuart Blackie’, 2 vols. (London 1850).]
That every civilized modern nation ought to possess a complete series of translations of
all the Greek and Latin Classics, is an assertion that will be universally admitted. (p. 259)
[The reviewer claims that a large proportion of the translation of the Classics has been
vitiated by a ‘false method’ of ‘loose and elegant paraphrase’.] The country has a right to
look to Oxford and Cambridge for the Wlling up of that blank in our literature to which
we have alluded—a complete and trustworthy translation, suitable for the popular
English reader, of all the works that the genius and learning of antiquity have bequeathed
to us. [ . . . ]
And with what kind of translations is it that, under such an arrangement, the ordinary
scholarship of Oxford and Cambridge, or the similarly educated talent throughout the
country, might be fairly expected to provide us? With this, surely, at the least—good
literal prose translations of all the Greek and Latin Classics, accompanied with such
illustrative notes as would make the text thoroughly intelligible to the careful English
reader. The prime and essential characteristic of such translations ought to be rigid and
punctilious literality. [ . . . ] All attempts to escape this, all pretensions about giving the
‘spirit’ of the original, but not the exact words, we would treat as dishonest subterfuges.
There is no security that we see for giving the spirit of the original, unless by giving an
exact version of the words. (pp. 260–2)
It remains true, nevertheless, that no mere intellectual rendering of a poetical passage,
however faithful, can equal the force and intention of the original; and hence we are
prepared to say, in the second place, with Professor Blackie, that, in every case where it is
possible consistently with entire faithfulness to the meaning, the translation of a poetical
passage ought to be in verse. Here, however, a rule suggests itself, so obvious that, were it
not more frequently transgressed than kept, it might seem unnecessary to mention it. It
is this, that every poetical translation of a poetical passage should, wherever it is possible,
be in the same metre as the original. [ . . . ] But how are we to act in the more diYcult
business of translating the ancient poets, whose metres are, for the most part, obsolete?
Here, at best, our procedure must be in a spirit of compromise. [ . . . ] A metrical
fac-simile in English, of the Odes of Horace, would be about as pleasant a spectacle as
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
233

a box of corkscrews; and even Homer would be intolerable in English, whatever he is in
German, Hexameters. [ . . . ] In short, if still we resolve that our translations shall be
metrical [ . . . ] we have clearly but one resource—namely, to exercise our own taste and
ear in Wnding metres which shall satisfy, as nearly as possible, all the demands of the
original, at the same time that they fulWl all native conditions. And this is what Professor
Blackie professes to have done with Aeschylus. (pp. 267–9)
In the two works before us—the one a literal prose translation of the plays of Aeschylus
by an Oxford scholar; the other a poetical translation of the same plays by one who is
both a scholar and a man of genius—the question as between prose translations and
poetical translations of poetry of such a kind and so ancient a date, is brought to a
practical issue. (p. 271)
Mr Buckley’s prose translation of Aeschylus [ . . . ] is certainly done on the principle of
literal exactness. We cannot say much, however, in favour of Mr Buckley’s power of
reconciling literal exactness with other qualities. The literality of his translation is
frequently of that helpless kind which ends in unintelligibility; not a few of the passages
in his version looking like the eVorts of a faithful but somewhat dull schoolboy, who,
after annexing to every word in a sentence its dictionary-meaning, remains without the
slightest glimpse of the sense which the words convey as a whole. [ . . . ]
Professor Blackie’s translation of Aeschylus belongs, of course, by its very nature, to a
far higher order of performance than Mr Buckley’s. And, in that order, it is inWnitely
better done. The translation of the great tragic poet has evidently been to Professor
Blackie a labour of love. Every line of the original has been conscientiously gone through
by the translator, and the meaning rendered in a manner thoroughly intelligible to the
English reader. Here, also, we have spirit, strength, large command of language, and
abundant proof of a mind not only of original literary faculty, and native poetical
tendency, but also richly cultured in classic lore. (p. 273)
And yet, if, passing from the consideration of the merit of Professor Blackie’s translation,
as a general literary feat, we view it specially with relation to the question, how far this
large amount of the labour of one of our really able men has contributed to bring
Aeschylus, in all his force and all his peculiarity, more closely and vividly before the
minds of modern British readers than could have been possible without such help, we
shall be forced to confess that, judging according to such a mode, we should have
preferred being left with but a bald literal version, enjoying, at the same time, the
pleasure of seeing so large a surplus of talent judiciously laid out on some independent
performance. [ . . . ]
[The reviewer stresses and gives an example of Blackie’s excellent rendering of
various passages.] But on the whole, such is the value of literal adherence to the very
words of a poet like Aeschylus, and so inevitable are the deviations from this absolute
234
the nineteenth century

literality in even the most painstaking poetical translator, that we are not sure
whether, if we desired to give an intelligent English reader a clear and exact idea of the
old Greek bard, we should not put Mr Buckley’s prose translation, with all its faults, into
his hands, rather than Professor Blackie’s poetical translation, with all its merits—only
advising him to read Professor Blackie’s translation afterwards, or to keep it by him at the
time, in order to read his Wne renderings of some of the grander and more diYcult
passages. (pp. 274–5)
From an anonymous review in Athenaeum, 23 March 1844, pp. 267–9, of two Dante
translations
[A review of The Inferno of Dante Alighieri, trans. in the terza rima of the original by John
Dayman, and The First Ten Cantos of the Inferno of Dante Alighieri, trans. T. W. Parsons.]
These translators are bold men to venture on Dante, after Mr Cary and Mr Wright. Mr
Dayman’s version is veritable terza rima. Mr Parsons substitutes a stanza that looks, by
the printer’s aid, like the same measure, but is after all only the common quatrain
licentiously used. One great diYculty in Dante (perhaps the greatest), is the conciseness
of his style; nothing tries a translator more than this. Only great authors write concisely,
and they can do it with both energy and grace; in inferior hands, the concise style
becomes hard and stiV. The American translator [Parsons] before us quarrels sadly with
his tools. He writes irreverently of Dante’s ‘curt parsimony of phrase,’ and even calls him
an ‘imperfect speaker.’ Implicit faith is needed in the translator, to render the poet con
amore; what is here described as a puzzle, should be felt as a charm. It is suspicious when a
translator impeaches his poet of faults, by way of excuse for the defects of his own
version. We would permit the facts to be stated, but not as blemishes. Is it a fault in the
Ulyssean bow, that inferior strengths fail in bending it? Let us then cease to doubt
whether Dante’s ‘brevity of description’ is ‘uniformly a merit.’
[ . . . ]
Mr Dayman, unlike his American competitor, has declined to burthen himself with the
yoke of making Dante popular. On the contrary, perhaps, he has somewhat too much
restricted himself from some liberties that might have been allowed to him. Not only has
he undertaken in English the diYcult measure of the original, but, maugre the acknow-
ledged paucity of rhymes in our language, has endeavoured to follow the example of
his author, in using as seldom as possible, the same rhyme twice in the same canto. This
shows, at any rate, a determination to conquer rather than to avoid diYculties. We have,
therefore, two modes of performing the same task before us.
[ . . . ]
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
235

One of these versions is evidently constructed on the principle of popularizing the
original, and the other on that of faithfully reXecting it. Without referring now to the
comparative correctness of the two translations, but conWning ourselves to the mere
results—or the actual eVects produced on the mind by their perusal—let us ask which
has best attained the end of impressing the feeling of poetic excellence and power? We
answer that the award must be given in favour of Mr Dayman. The versiWcation of his
rival is smooth and intelligible; but it has not the force and harmony, the variety and
combination of musical elements that distinguish his own. We have a shrewd suspicion,
then, that the best translation, even for popular purposes, would, not only in the long
run, but in the immediate eVect, be that which proceeded on the strictest pinciples of
conformity to the style and measure of the original poem.
From an anonymous review of The Roman Poets of the Republic by W. Y. Sellar, and
The Aeneid of Virgil in English Blank Verse, trans. by John Miller, Athenaeum, 10 Oct
1863, pp. 459–61
Mr Miller’s translation of Virgil’s Aeneid adds one to the many metrical translations of
Virgil, of which there exist nearly 200. In English alone the bibliographical authorities
give upwards of thirty poetical versions of part or the whole of Virgil’s works. Admitting
that Dryden is not faultless, and we are not tam fautores inepte`as to maintain that he is,
the man must, nevertheless, be very bold who enters the lists with a view to supersede
him. Dryden is, upon the whole, undoubtedly too diVuse; but any one who will take the
trouble to look through the Earl of Surry’s version (1557), or Phaer and Twine’s (1607),
will easily understand the reactionary feeling which made him err in this direction. The
present generation is striving to correct the loose disposition to paraphrase which
characterized our greatest translators; but in doing so it runs great risk of falling into
the bald and inartistic prose-poetry of a more primitive age. At the head of the loose
translators of the Aeneid stands Delille, whose only aim seems to be to travel as far from
the original as his utmost ingenuity will enable him to do. Mr Miller—we regret that we
must say, the late Mr Miller—possessed very great poetical powers, as the prophetic lines,
foreshadows of his death, sad preface to his book, suYciently testify. As a translator, he is
less successful, but his work is creditably accomplished. Apart from occasional liberties
with the metre (such as the uncalled-for introduction of anapaests and tribrachs), we
have no special fault to indicate. Dr Kennedy gave to the world a very fair translation of
Virgil some years ago. Mr Miller’s is rather superior, in point of Wre, to that of the learned
head-master of Shrewsbury.
As a matter of curiosity, it may not be uninteresting to see the diVerent phraseology in
which some half-dozen translators have clothed the same passage; we, therefore, append a
few lines from the Second Book of the Aeneid as rendered by the Earl of Surrey, Phaer
and Twine, &c. and Mr Miller, respectively.
236
the nineteenth century

The Earl of Surrey, 1557:
They whisted all with Wxed face attent
When Prince Aeneas from the royal seat
Thus gan to speak. O Quene, it is thy wil
I should renew a woe cannot be told:
How that the Grekes did spoile and overthrow
The Phrygian wealth and wailful realm of Troy,
Those ruthful things that I myself beheld,
And whereof, no small part fel to my share.
Phaer and Twine, 1607:
They whistled (whisted?) all, and Wxt with eyes ententive did behold,
When Lord Aeneas where he sat from hie bench thus he told.
A dolefull worke me to renew O Queen thou dost constraine
To tell how Greek the Troian wealth and lamentable reigne
Did overthrow, which I myself have seene and bene a part
No small thereof.
Dryden:
All were attentive to the godlike man
When from his lofty couch he thus began:
Great Queen, what you command me to relate,
Renews the sad remembrance of our fate;
An empire from its old foundations rent,
And every woe the Trojans underwent;
A peopled city made a desert place,
All that I saw, and part of which I was.
Pitt, 1740:
All gazed in silence with an eager look,
Then from the golden couch the hero spoke:
‘Ah mighty Queen! You urge me to disclose,
And feel, once more, unutterable woes;
How vengeful Greece with victory was crown’d,
And Troy’s fair empire humbled to the ground;
Those direful scenes I saw on Phrygia’s shore,
Those wars in which so large a part I bore,’ &c.
Delille:
On se tait, on attend dans un profond silence,
Alors, environne´ d’une assemble´e immense,
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
237

De la conche e´leve´e ou` sie´ge le he´ros
Il s’adresse a` Didon, et commence dans ces mots:
‘Reine! de ce beau jour faut-il troubler les charmes,
Et rouvrir a` vos yeux la source de nos larmes;
Vous raconter la nuit, l’e´pouvantable nuit
Qui vit Pergame en cendre et son re`gne de´truit;
Ces derniers coups du sort, ce triomphe du crime,
Dont je fus le te´moin, he´las! et la victime?’
Dr Kennedy:
Silent were all, in deep attention Wx’d,
When from high couch the sire Aeneas spake:
At thy command, O Queen, woes I renew
Unspeakable, showing Troy’s power and realm
By Greeks o’erthrown, most mournful scenes, which I
Viewed, and wherein so large a part I bore.
Mr Miller:
Silent were all and turned their eyes intent,
When sire Aeneas from his high couch began:
Oh mighty Queen, thou orderest to renew
Unutterable sorrow; how the Greeks
The Trojan splendours and that hapless realm
O’erthrew; those dark calamities which I
Both saw and largely shared.
Mr Miller’s interpretation will be found to be careful and conscientious; and the
description of the death of Cacus, and other similar passages, though a long way behind
the grand original, are by no means destitute of spirit.
From S. H. Butcher and A. Lang’s ‘Preface’ to their translation of The Odyssey of Homer
(1878; 4th rev. edn. London: Macmillan 1883), pp. v–x
There would have been less controversy about the proper method of Homeric transla-
tion, if critics had recognised that the question is a purely relative one, that of Homer
there can be no Wnal translation. The taste and the literary habits of each age demand
diVerent qualities in poetry, and therefore a diVerent sort of rendering of Homer. To the
men of the time of Elizabeth, Homer would have appeared bald, it seems, and lacking in
ingenuity, if he had been presented in his antique simplicity. For the Elizabethan age,
Chapman supplied what was then necessary, and the mannerisms that were then deemed
of the essence of poetry, namely, daring and luxurious conceits. Thus in Chapman’s verse
238
the nineteenth century

Troy must ‘shed her towers for tears of overthrow,’ and when the winds toss Odysseus
about, their sport must be called ‘the horrid tennis.’
In the age of Anne, ‘dignity’ and ‘correctness’ had to be given to Homer, and Pope gave
them by aid of his dazzling rhetoric, his antithesis, his nettete´, his command of his every
conventional and favourite artiWce. [ . . . ]
The epics are stories about the adventures of men living in most respects like the men of
our own race who dwelt in Iceland, Norway, Denmark, and Sweden. The epics are, in a
way, and as far as manners and institutions are concerned, historical documents.
Whoever regards them in this way, must wish to read them exactly as they have reached
us, without modern ornament, with nothing added or omitted. He must recognise, with
Mr Matthew Arnold, that what he now wants, namely, the simple truth about the matter
of the poem, can only be given in prose, ‘for in a verse translation no original work is any
longer recognisable.’ It is for this reason that we have attempted to tell once more, in
simple prose, the story of Odysseus. We have tried to transfer, not all the truth about the
poem, but the historical truth, into English. In this process Homer must lose at least half
his charm, his bright and equable speed, the musical current of that narrative, which, like
the river of Egypt, Xows from an indiscoverable source, and mirrors the temples and the
palaces of unforgotten gods and kings. Without this music of verse, only a half truth
about Homer can be told, but then it is that half of the truth which, at this moment, it
seems most necessary to tell. This is the half of the truth that the translators who use verse
cannot easily tell. [ . . . ]
We do not know whether it is necessary to defend our choice of a somewhat antiquated
prose. Homer has no ideas which cannot be expressed in words that are ‘old and plain,’
and to words that are old and plain, and, as a rule, to such terms as, being used by the
Translators of the Bible, are still not unfamiliar, we have tried to restrict ourselves. It may
be objected, that the employment of language which does not come spontaneously to the
lips, is an aVectation out of place in a version of the Odyssey. To this we may answer that
the Greek Epic dialect, like the English of our Bible, was a thing of slow growth and
composite nature, that it was never a spoken language, nor, except for certain poetical
purposes, a written language. Thus the Biblical English seems as nearly analogous to the
Epic Greek, as anything that our tongue has to oVer.
The Odyssey, Book XI (opening lines), trans. Butcher and Lang, p. 172
[Cf. the same passage as translated by others, pp. 97–8, 173, 187, 255–6, and 286–7.]
Now when we had gone down to the ship and to the sea, Wrst of all we drew the ship unto
the fair salt water, and placed the mast and sails in the black ship, and took those sheep
and put them therein, and ourselves too climbed on board, sorrowing and shedding big
3.4 victorian translation and criticism
239

tears. And in the wake of our dark-prowed ship she sent a favouring wind that Wlled the
sails, a kindly escort,—even Circe of the braided tresses, a dread goddess of human
speech. And we set in order all the gear throughout the ship and sat us down; and the
wind and the helmsman guided our barque. And all day long her sails were stretched in
her seafaring; and the suns sank and all the ways were darkened.
She came to the limits of the world, to the deep Xowing Oceanus. There is the land
and the city of the Cimmerians, shrouded in mist and cloud, and never does the shining
sun look down on them with his rays, neither when he climbs up the starry heavens, nor
when again he turns earthward from the Wrmament, but deadly night is outspread over
miserable mortals. Thither we came and ran the ship ashore and took out the sheep; but
for our part we held on our way along the stream of Oceanus, till we came to the place
which Circe had declared to us.
240
the nineteenth century

3.5 Six Nineteeth-Century Translators
The nineteenth century, unlike the Tudor and Jacobean period, is not generally thought of
as a great age of translation. It saw a burgeoning of Romantic poetry and the development
of the novel into a major art form. As is apparent from the Newman–Arnold debate and
more speciWcally from the excerpts of Victorian criticism (see Sect. 3.4, above) there was a
lively debate, spurred in part by developments in German letters. The German example of
close (i.e. ‘literal’ and often ‘foreignizing’) renderings helped to expand the understanding
of varieties of translation, associated with Dryden (see Sect. 2.13, above).
In the practice of translation, no approach could be said to dominate. Robert
Browning’s version of the Agamemnon, in its literalism, may be contrasted with Edward
FitzGerald’s radically ‘free’ (‘domesticating’) version of the Ruba´iya´t of Omar Khayyam,
not to mention Longfellow’s epic imitation, in The Song of Hiawatha, of the Finnish
Kalevala, a prime example of the intercultural eVect, at this time, of translation. Of course,
in the case of FitzGerald, the ‘free’ approach may have had more than a little to do with the
fact that he was translating a non-Western text, whereas Browning’s ‘Wdelity’ can be
partly attributed to the fact that he was translating one of the canonical works of
Western literature. At another extreme is William Morris, who combines close translation
with an archaizing tendency, attempting thereby to connect with a pre-Latinate,
pre-Norman stratum of English. FitzGerald’s (on the surface) almost dismissive attitude
may be gauged by his remark, in a letter to his (far more respectful) mentor, E. B. Cowell:
‘It is an amusement to me to take what Liberties I like with these Persians, who (as I think)
are not Poets enough to frighten one from such excursions, and who really do want a little
Art to shape them’.1
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1807–82), author of The Song of Hiawatha (1855), is the
most popular of all American poets. A European trip brought him into contact with
Scandinavian and German Romantic poetry. During his stay in Stockholm in 1852, he read
the Kalevala, a collection of Finnish folk poems, edited into a coherent national epic cycle
(1835) by Elias Lo¨nnrot (1802–84), comparable with the Icelandic Edda. Attempting to
1 Letters of Edward FitzGerald, i (London, Macmillan and Co., 1894), 319.
3.5 six nineteeth-century translators
241

learn Finnish, Longfellow in fact read the poem in translation from that language, this
inspiring him to write Hiawatha, on the Kalevala model, as an American epic poem.
It was, thus, far from a direct translation, but the stanza form was acknowledged as
deriving from the Finnish collection as well as from a translation into English of Chippewa
legends. Shortly after its publication, Longfellow wrote, in somewhat more respectful
terms perhaps than FitzGerald: ‘I have tried to do for our old Indian legends what the
unknown Finnish poets had done for theirs, and in doing this I have employed the same
meter, but of course have not adopted any of their legends’ (‘In ‘‘Hiawatha’’ ’, November
1855). All of this, of course, is to be understood in the context of the national sentiment
inspired by the German Romantics, such as Johann Gottfried Herder, theoretician of the
Sturm und Drang, preoccupied with folk poetry. Longfellow spent the summer of 1835 in
Sweden, this resulting, two years later, in an essay in the North American Review (1837) on
Esaias Tegne´r’s enormously popular and much translated heroic poem Frithiof’s Saga
(1825), a Romantic cycle on an old Norse theme. Longfellow translated selected passages
in the original metres and included these in his essay.
In the early nineteenth century, comprehensive translation of the German Romantics
helped to promote interest in medieval epic as well. Thus, both Longfellow (The Golden
Legend, 1851) and Rossetti (Henry the Leper, 1846) oVered versions of Der arme Heinrich
(Poor Henry), a story by Hartmann von Aue, a dominant Wgure of the high Middle Ages.
A more modern example (see below) is Longfellow’s translation of Goethe’s poem
‘Wanderers Nachtlied II’ (‘U¨ ber allen Gipfeln’). By this time Professor of Modern
Languages at Harvard (1834), Longfellow was also captivated by some Spanish poems,
recreating the Spanish ballad in The Secret of the Sea (1849), this not being his Wrst venture
into medieval Spanish, since, in 1833, he had published a version of Jorge Manrique’s
Coplas por la muerte de su padre (1479): ‘Verses for his father’s Death’, the most famous
elegy in Spanish, Longfellow’s version being a recreation rather than a strict translation. He
also translated Dante’s Divine Comedy into blank terzines (1865–7), a compromise between
terza rima and the blank verse employed, for instance by Henry Francis Cary (1814), the
best-known nineteenth-century Dante translator (see below).
Comparison of translations of Dante Alighieri, Divine Comedy
Opening lines of Inferno, canto 1, in Italian original
Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita
mi ritrovi per una selva oscura
che la diritta via era smarrita.
242
the nineteenth century

Ah quanto a dir qual era e` cosa dura
esta selva selvaggia e aspra e forte
che nel pensier rinova la paura!
Tant’ e` amara che poco e` piu` morte;
ma per trattar del ben ch’io vi trovai,
diro dell’altre cose ch’i’ v’ho scorte.
Longfellow’s translation (London: Routledge, 1867)
Midway upon the journey of our life
I found myself within a forest dark,
For the straightforward pathway had been lost.
Ah me! how hard a thing it is to say
What was this forest savage, rough, and stern,
Which in the very thought renews the fear.
So bitter is it, death is little more;
But of the good to treat, which there I found,
Speak will I of the other things I saw there.
Henry Francis Cary’s version (1818)
In the midway of this our mortal life,
I found me in a gloomy wood, astray
Gone from the path direct: and e’en to tell,
It were no easy task, how savage wild
That forest, how robust and rough its growth,
Which to remember only, my dismay
Renews, in bitterness not far from death.
Yet, to discourse of what there good befell,
All else will I relate discovered there.
Mark Musa’s version (1971)
Midway along the journey of our life
I woke to Wnd myself in some dark woods,
for I had wandered oV from the straight path.
How hard it is to tell what it was like,
this wood of wilderness, savage and stubborn
(the thought of it brings back all my old fears),
3.5 six nineteeth-century translators
243

a bitter place! Death could scarce be bitterer.
But if I would show the good that came of it
I must talk about things other than the good.
Comparison of translations of Goethe’s ‘Wanderers Nachtlied II’
Longfellow’s translation, from The Poetical Works of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
(London: Frederick Warne and Co., 1882), 595
Wanderer’s Night-Song II
O’er all the hill-tops
Is quiet now,
In all the tree-tops
Hearest thou
Hardly a breath;
The birds are asleep in the trees.
Wait; soon like these
Thou too shalt rest.
German source text
U¨ ber allen Gipfeln
Ist Ruh,
In allen Wipfeln
Spu¨rest du
Kaum einen Hauch;
Die Vo¨gelein schweigen im Walde,
Warte nur, balde
Ruhest du auch.
Plain prose translation by David Luke from Goethe Selected Verse
(London: Penguin, 1986), 50
The Wayfarer’s Nightsong ll
Over all the hill-tops
it is still,
In all the tree-tops
you can hardly
Feel a breath stirring.
The little birds are silent in the forest.
Wait! Soon
You too will be still.
244
the nineteenth century

Edward FitzGerald
Edward FitzGerald (1809–83) was a poet, a proliWc letter-writer, and the renowned
translator of the Ruba´iya´t of Omar Khayyam, probably the most popular English poem
of the nineteenth century. He was a typical, amiable, upper-class Victorian man-of-letters,
able to indulge his interests and curiosities, much loved—by Thackeray, Tennyson, and
Carlyle, among others. In 1837 FitzGerald settled down to a peaceful, uneventful life in
SuVolk. However, in 1845, he met E. B. Cowell, an established Oriental scholar and
linguist. Cowell introduced FitzGerald to Persian and to Spanish literature, guaranteeing
to teach him the grammar in one day! In 1856, Cowell went to India, becoming Professor
of English at Calcutta. Just before his departure, he and FitzGerald read ‘Some curious
inWdel and epicurean Tetrastichs by a Persian of the Eleventh Century’ (from a letter to
Tennyson, July 1856) which Cowell had found in a Wfteenth-century Persian manuscript in
the Bodleian Library and had copied for his friend.
In 1857, amid marital troubles, FitzGerald found that Omar Khayyam ‘breathes a sort of
consolation!’ He jokingly signed his name, in letters to Cowell, ‘Edward FitzOmar’. A
stanza crystallized in his mind fairly early, and, in a letter to Cowell in 1857, he wrote: ‘I see
how a very pretty Eclogue might be tessellated [mosaiced] out of his scattered Quatrains.’
He became obsessed with the translation, but was of course aware of its outrageous nature,
publishing the work in 1859, anonymously, in a limited edition. He had turned these
spontaneous occasional short poems into a continuous, dramatically uniWed sequence,
sometimes compressing more than one poem into one of his own quatrains. It was only
after some time, once it had been discovered by Rossetti, Swinburne, and Ruskin, that the
poem became widely known, achieving its heights, in fact, only after the translator’s
death, and it was not until 1869 that the American scholar Charles Eliot Norton reviewed
it in the most Xattering terms: ‘He is to be called ‘‘translator’’ only in default of a
better word, one which should express the poetic transfusion of a poetic spirit from one
language to another, and the representation of the ideas and images of the original in a
form not altogether diverse from their own but perfectly adapted to the new conditions of
time, place, custom, and habit of mind in which they reappear.’ Norton, with whom
FitzGerald corresponded, added, in a manner which the seventeenth-century exponents
of what Dryden called Imitation might have echoed: ‘It is the work of a poet inspired
by the work of a poet; not a copy, but a reproduction, not a translation, but the redelivery
of a poetic inspiration.’ FitzGerald himself, however, writing to Cowell in 1858, expressed
perhaps a certain unease: ‘My Translation will interest you from its Form, and also in
3.5 six nineteeth-century translators
245

many respects in its Detail: very un-literal as it is. Many Quatrains are mashed together
and something lost, I doubt, of Omar’s Simplicity, which is so much a Virtue in him.’
The success of the poem may be explained in terms of Khayyam’s evident rebellion
against bigotry and religious dogmatism. The translation addressed several prevalent
concerns: divine justice versus hedonism; science versus religion; as well as catering to
the taste for eastern art and bric-a-brac. The only consolation, in a puzzling life, was
physical pleasure. The ‘sceptical’ Ruba´iya´t seemed appropriately published in the same
year as Origin of Species, although FitzGerald himself was no atheist or agnostic. He felt a
kinship with Omar, tinged with guilt, whereas Cowell himself openly disapproved of
Omar’s pessimism about life and especially about the certainty of a Hereafter.
Like Ruskin, FitzGerald found himself out of step with the ‘march of progress’,
lamenting the spoliation of nature and, in fact, turning for relief to the less vulnerable
sea. He produced translations of plays by Caldero´n (1853), Aeschylus (The Agamemnon,
1876), and Sophocles. His other translations from Persian included Attar-ut-Tair’s
thirteenth-century text The Bird Parliament (1859), a kind of ornithological Pilgrim’s
Progress, aYrming in this case the benevolence of God, and Jami’s Salaman and Absal
(1856). A critic, while regretting FitzGerald’s somewhat deWcient Persian, seemed to
approve his work in general, writing that ‘As a Wrst attempt, however, to make Jami
accessible to the English reader, this little volume is deserving of commendation.’
FitzGerald’s approach to translation in general was typiWed by the freedom he felt
appropriate in his treatment of Omar. In a letter to Cowell (1859) he famously wrote: ‘I
suppose very few People have ever taken such Pains in Translation as I have: though
certainly not to be literal. But at all costs a thing must live: with a transfusion for one’s own
life if one can’t retain the Original’s better. Better a live Sparrow than a stuVed Eagle.’ In a
letter to James Russell Lowell, the American poet, essayist, and editor, he underlined this
sentiment, writing explicitly of his approach to translation:
I am persuaded that, to keep Life in the Work (as Drama must) the Translator (however
inferior to his Original) must re-cast that original into his own Likeness, more or less: the
less like his original, so much the worse: but still, the live Dog better than the dead Lion; in
Drama, I say. [ . . . ] Another shot have I made at Faust in Bayard Taylor’s Version: but I do
not even get on with him as with Hayward, hampered as he (Taylor) is with his allegiance
to original metres, etc. His Notes I was interested in: but I shall die ungoethed [ . . . ]
Already in his work on the Quaker poet Bernard Barton in 1849, FitzGerald had
commented: ‘Some of the poems I take entire, some half—some only a few stanzas, and
these dovetailed together—with a change of word or even of a line here and there, to give
them logic and Xuency . . . I am sure I have distilled many pretty little poems out of long
246
the nineteenth century

dull ones which the world has discarded.’ If this was how he could describe his editorial
duties with respect to an English-language poet, it is not surprising that he gave himself
maximum latitude in his translations. His candidly unapologetic description of his own
approach aVords insight into the priorities of at least some prominent nineteenth-century
translators and exempliWes the polarization that had taken place in an era of translation
characterized also by scholarly literalism.
From Edward FitzGerald’s Introduction to the Ruba´iya´t of Omar Khayyam (1st edn.
London: B. Quaritch, 1859)
With regard to the present Translation. The original Ruba´iya´t (as, missing an Arabic
Guttural, these Tetrastichs are more musically called), are independent Stanzas, consisting
each of four lines of equal, though varied, Prosody, sometimes all rhyming, but oftener
(as here attempted) the third line suspending the Cadence by which the last atones
with the former Two. Something as in the Greek Alcaic, where the third line seems to lift
and suspend the Wave that falls over in the last. As usual with such kind of Oriental
Verse, the Ruba´iya´t follow one another according to Alphabetic Rhyme—a strange
Farrago of Grave and Gay. Those here selected are strung into something of an Eclogue,
with perhaps a less than equal proportion of the ‘Drink and make-merry’, which
(genuine or not) recurs over-frequently in the Original. For Lucretian as Omar’s Genius
might be, he cross’d that darker Mood with much of Oliver de Basselin Humour.
Any way, the Result is sad enough: saddest perhaps when most ostentatiously merry:
any way, Wtter to move Sorrow than Anger towards the old Tentmaker, who after vainly
endeavouring to unshackle his Steps from Destiny, and to catch some authentic
Glimpse of tomorrow, fell back upon today (which has out-lasted so many Tomor-
rows!) as the only Ground he got to stand upon, however momentarily slipping from
under his Feet.
From The Ruba´iya´t of Omar Khayya´m (Wrst version, 1859), stanzas 1–3
Wake! For Morning in the Bowl of Night
Has Xung the Stone that puts the Stars to Flight:
And Lo! The Hunter of the East has caught
The Sulta´n’s Turret in a Noose of Light.
Dreaming when Dawn’s Left Hand was in the Sky
I heard a Voice within the Tavern cry,
‘Awake, my Little ones, and Wll the Cup
3.5 six nineteeth-century translators
247

‘Before Life’s Liquor in its Cup be dry.’
And, as the Cock crew, those who stood before
The Tavern shouted—‘Open then the Door!
‘You know how little while we have to stay,
‘And, once departed, may return no more.’
Comparison between FitzGerald’s Wfth version (1879) and that of Robert Graves and
Omar Ali-Shah (The Original Rubaı´yyat of Omar Khayaam, in new translation with
critical commentaries, 1968)
[Note, these stanzas by FitzGerald are, in fact, rendered fairly literally (see L. P. Elwell-
Sutton, ‘the Rubaiyat Revisited’, Delos, 3 (1969), 170–91).]
FitzGerald, stanza 44
Why, if the Soul can Xing the Dust aside,
And naked on the Air of Heaven ride,
Were’t not a shame—were’t not a Shame for him
In this clay carcase crippled to abide?
Robert Graves, stanza 47
Dear love, when you are free to slough your skin
And become naked spirit, soaring far
Across God’s Empyrean, you will blush
That you lay cramped so long in body’s gaol.
FitzGerald, stanza 95
And much as Wine has played the InWdel,
And robb’d me of my Robe of Honour—Well,
I wonder often what the Vintners buy
One half so precious as the stuV they sell.
Robert Graves, stanza 102
Though drink has rotted my high reputation,
Reject it I will not, while yet I breathe,
Wondering often what the vintners buy
Equal in value with the wine they sell.
248
the nineteenth century

Robert Browning
Robert Browning (1812–89) was a major English poet of the nineteenth century. His father
taught him Greek and Latin but he had little formal education. He published proliWcally
before his marriage to Elizabeth Barrett, at the time better known than him. The couple
lived in Italy until Elizabeth’s death in 1861. Browning experimented with form and
content, turning away from direct self-expression to dramatic monologues, implanting
his own ideas in a context of historical personalities and period atmosphere; his work has
greatly inXuenced twentieth-century poets who use dramatic monologue, especially Eliot
and Pound. He ignored the extravagant imagery and vagueness of the Romantics, his chief
source of inspiration being the Italian late Renaissance. In later life, he published an ultra-
literal translation of Aeschylus’ Agamemnon (1877), which he defended convincingly in his
preface, proclaiming his belief in the need for translation to be ‘literal at every cost save
that of absolute violence to our language’ (see below). Pound castigated this version as an
example of Victorian fustian, although much of his own translation work, of course, could
also be described as literalistic, if in an updated way. Browning’s translation of Agamemnon
reXected also his continuing interest in dramatic writing. If at one time it seemed
unreadable, it is once again, perhaps, becoming accessible since ‘standard’ English is no
longer as dominant as it was.
From the Preface (1877) to the Agamemnon, included in The Poetical Works of Robert
Browning, vol. xi (London: Smith, Elder, 1903), 511–12
If, because of the immense fame of the following Tragedy, I wished to acquaint myself
with it, and could only do so by the help of a translator, I should require him to be literal
at every cost save that of absolute violence to our language. The use of certain allowable
constructions which, happening to be out of daily favour, are all the more appropriate to
archaic workmanship, is no violence: but I would be tolerant for once,—in the case of so
immensely famous an original,—of even a clumsy attempt to furnish me with the very
turn of each phrase in as Greek a fashion as English will bear: while, with respect to
ampliWcations and embellishments,—anything rather than, with the good farmer, ex-
perience that most signal of mortiWcations, ‘to gape for Aeschylus and get Theognis.’
I should especially decline—what may appear to brighten up a passage—the employ-
ment of a new word for some old one [ . . . ]—if I obtained a mere strict bald version of
thing by thing, or at least word pregnant with thing, I should hardly look for an
impossible transmission of the reputed magniloquence and sonority of the Greek; and
this with the less regret, inasmuch as there is abundant musicality elsewhere, but nowhere
3.5 six nineteeth-century translators
249

else than in his poem the ideas of the poet. [ . . . ] Fortunately, the poorest translation,
provided only it be faithful,—though it reproduce all the artistic confusion of tenses,
moods, and persons, with which the original teems,—will not only suYce to display
what an eloquent friend maintains to be the all-in-all of poetry—‘the action of the
piece’—but may help to illustrate his assurance that ‘the Greeks are the highest models of
expression, the unapproached masters of the grand style: their expression is so excellent
because it is so admirably kept in its right degree of prominence, because it is so simple
and so well subordinated, because it draws its force directly from the pregnancy of the
matter which it conveys . . . not a word wasted, not a sentiment capriciously thrown in,
stroke on stroke!’1
note
1.
Poems, by Matthew Arnold, Preface.
From Browning’s translation of Aeschylus’ Agamemnon
[See J. S. Blackie’s, Robert Lowell’s, and Ted Hughes’s versions of these lines, in Sect. 3.4,
4.10, and 5.16, below. Hughes’s notion of literalism seems more concerned with ‘playabil-
ity’ than Browning’s.]
[This excerpt, spoken by the Chorus, constituting, in fact, the Wrst choral ode or Parodos,
describes the embarkation for Troy of the Argive Xeet under the monarchs Agamemnon
and Menelaus, brothers, after Menelaus’ wife Helen has Xed to Troy with Paris. The
ominous killing of a pregnant hare by two birds of prey, is recounted.]
How the Werce bird against the Teukris land
Despatched, with spear and executing hand,
The Achaian’s two-throned empery—o’er Hellas’ youth
Two rulers with one mind:
The birds’ king to these kings of ships, on high,
—The black sort, and the sort that’s white behind,—
Appearing by the palace, on the spear-throw side,
In right sky-regions, visible far and wide,—
Devouring a hare-creature, great with young,
Baulked of more racings they, as she from whom they sprung!
Literal translation of this passage, from Aeschylus: Oresteia, trans. with notes by Hugh
Lloyd-Jones (London: Duckworth, 1979)
[This is a modern scholarly literal version. Lloyd-Jones’s note on this section begins: ‘The
Chorus now sings the Parodos proper, ‘‘the longest [only the Wrst part is given here] and
250
the nineteenth century

richest chorus extant in Greek tragedy’’ (Franekel). It falls into 3 sections, diVerentiated by
sense as well as metre [ . . . ]’.]
I have power to tell of the auspicious command of the
expedition, the command of men
in authority; for still from the gods am I inspired
with persuasive power, my strength in song, by the life that
has grown up with me:
to tell how the two-throned command of the Achaeans, of the
youth of Hellas
the concordant leadership,
as sped with avenging spear and arm
by the warlike bird of omen to the Teucrian land,
the king of birds appearing to the kings of the ships,
the black eagle and behind it the white one,
appearing near the palace on the hand in which the spear is
brandished,
in seats conspicuous,
feeding upon the hare, her womb teeming with young,
checked from running her Wnal course.
Sing sorrow, sorrow, but may the good prevail.
Richard Burton
Explorer, Orientalist, scholar, linguist, sexologist, mystic, and spy or diplomat, Richard
Burton (1821–90) was raised in France and Italy and studied at Oxford. He saw active service
in the Indian Army and served in the Crimean War. During the course of an adventurous life,
Burton learned over thirty languages. He wrote voluminously, achieving fame or notoriety for
a literary style that combined an Elizabethan richness with a vocabulary replete with local
colour. He was one of the Wrst Englishmen, in disguise, to make the pilgrimage to Mecca
(1853), writing A Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to Mecca and Al-Madina, and he also
travelled widely for the British government, serving as British Consul oV the coast of
Equatorial Guinea, in Brazil, Damascus, and Trieste, where he died. Burton was one of the
Wrst Europeans to explore East Africa. His other expeditions included one across the United
States to Salt Lake City, and a voyage up the Congo river. Knighted in 1885, Burton produced
the Wrst unexpurgated translation of The Arabian Nights’ Entertainments or the Book of a
Thousand Nights and a Night (1885–8). In addition, in 1883, he produced a translation of the
erotic classic The Kama Sutras of Vatsayayana, The Ananda Ranga, and The Scented Garden of
3.5 six nineteeth-century translators
251

Sheikh Nefzawi. His frankness about sexuality was the most likely reason that his widow, in an
eVort to ‘preserve his reputation’, burned his memoirs after his death. He was also the author
of an archaizing translation of the Portuguese epic The Lusiads (1880).
From The Arabian Nights, ‘The Tale Of The Bull And The Ass’
Know, O my daughter, that there was once a merchant who owned much money and
many men, and who was rich in cattle and camels. He had also a wife and family, and he
dwelt in the country, being experienced in husbandry and devoted to agriculture. Now
Allah Most High had endowed him with understanding the tongues of beasts and birds
of every kind, but under pain of death if he divulged the gift to any. So he kept it secret
for very fear. He had in his cow house a bull and an ass, each tethered in his own stall, one
hard by the other. As the merchant was sitting near-hand one day with his servants and
his children were playing about him, he heard the bull say to the ass:
‘Hail and health to thee O Father of Waking! for that thou enjoyest rest and good
ministering. All under thee is clean-swept and fresh-sprinkled. Men wait upon thee and
feed thee, and thy provaunt is sifted barley and thy drink pure spring water, while
I (unhappy creature!) am led forth in the middle of the night, when they set on my neck
the plow and a something called yoke, and I tire at cleaving the earth from dawn of day
till set of sun. I am forced to do more than I can and to bear all manner of ill-treatment
from night to night. After which they take me back with my sides torn, my neck Xayed,
my legs aching, and mine eyelids sored with tears. Then they shut me up in the byre and
throw me beans and crushed straw mixed with dirt and chaV, and I lie in dung and Wlth
and foul stinks through the livelong night. But thou art ever in a place swept and
sprinkled and cleansed, and thou art always lying at ease, save when it happens (and
seldom enough!) that the master hath some business, when he mounts thee and rides thee
to town and returns with thee forthright. So it happens that I am toiling and distrest
while thou takest thine ease and thy rest. Thou sleepest while I am sleepless, I hunger still
while thou eatest thy Wll, and I win contempt while thou winnest goodwill.’
When
the
bull
ceased
speaking,
the
ass
turned
toward
him
and
said:
‘O Broad-o’-Brow, O thou lost one! He lied not who dubbed thee bullhead, for thou,
O father of a bull, hast neither forethought nor contrivance. Thou art the simplest of
simpletons, and thou knowest naught of good advisers. Hast thou not heard the saying of
the wise?
‘For others these hardships and labours I bear,
And theirs is the pleasure and mine is the care,
As the bleacher who blacketh his brow in the sun
To whiten the raiment which other men wear.’
252
the nineteenth century

Dante Gabriel Rossetti
Dante Gabriel Rossetti (1828–82), painter and poet, like his sister Christina, was bilingual in
Italian and English. He took after his father, who became Professor of Italian at King’s College
London, in the dissemination of Italian culture in England. With William Holman Hunt and
John Everett Millais, fellow students at the Antique School of the Royal Academy, Rossetti
helped found the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood in 1848 (the name coming partly from Keats’s
claim that earlier Italian painters were greater than Raphael). Love of Dante and the earlier
Italian poets inXuenced Rossetti’s own work, and through him, the Pre-Raphaelite movement
inXuenced literature as well. Thus, English readers came to the lost art of the Troubadours
(eleventh to thirteenth centuries) through Dante’s commendation of them in the Divine
Comedy, interest in Dante and his circle having been stimulated by the Pre-Raphaelites. The
Romantics and Pre-Raphaelites established a style in translation which prevailed for the next
half-century, as exempliWed in Ezra Pound’s early work, which may be regarded as both the
last Xowering of it and as the beginning of a new way.
In 1861, Rossetti published his inXuential The Early Italian Poets from Ciullo d’Alcamo to
Dante (revised as Dante and His Circle, 1874). Rossetti’s brother William translated Dante’s
Inferno in 1865. Rossetti himself also translated medieval and Romantic German and
French poetry, including Franc¸ois Villon, the interest in medieval culture extending also to
medieval epic and Minnesang. As noted above (see Longfellow), Rosetti’s paraphrase of
Hartmann’s Der arme Heinrich, Henry the Lepper, was imitated by Longfellow in The
Golden Legend (1851). As his Preface indicates, Rossetti, while insisting on the need for
inspiration (‘a good poem shall not be turned into a bad one’), as it were, also fully
acknowledged the constraints that a desire for Wdelity imposes (‘The task of the translator
[ . . . ] is one of some self-denial’). One might speculate that his non-native ancestry made
him somewhat less cavalier in this latter respect than, say, Burton or FitzGerald.
From the Preface to the First Edition (1861) of The Early Italian Poets together with
Dante’s Vita Nuova, included in Collected Works of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, vol. li
(Boston: Roberts Bros. 1887), pp. xii–xvi
Much has been said, and in many respects justly, against the value of metrical translation.
But I think it would be admitted that the tributary art might Wnd a not illegitimate use in
the case of poems which come down to us in such a form as do these early Italian ones.
Struggling originally with corrupt dialect and imperfect expression, and hardly kept alive
through centuries of neglect, they have reached that last and worst state in which the
3.5 six nineteeth-century translators
253

coup-de-graˆce has almost been dealt them by clumsy transcription and pedantic super-
structure. At this stage the task of talking much more about them in any language is
hardly to be entered upon; and a translation (involving as it does the necessity of settling
many points without discussion,) remains perhaps the most direct form of commentary.
The life-blood of rhythmical translation is this commandment,—that a good poem
shall not be turned into a bad one. The only true motive for putting poetry into a fresh
language must be to endow a fresh nation, as far as possible with one more possession of
beauty. Poetry not being an exact science, literality of rendering is altogether secondary to
this chief law. I say literality,—not Wdelity, which is by no means the same thing. When
literality can be combined with what is thus the primary condition of success, the
translator is fortunate, and must strive his utmost to unite them; when such object can
only be attained by paraphrase, that is his only path.
[ . . . ]
[ . . . ] The task of the translator (and with all humility be it spoken) is one of some self-
denial. Often would he avail himself of any special grace of his own idiom and epoch, if
only his will belonged to him; often would some cadence serve him but for his author’s
structure—some structure but for his author’s cadence; often the beautiful turn of a stanza
must be weakened to adopt some rhyme which will tally, and he sees the poet revelling in
abundance of language where himself is scantily supplied. Now he would slight the matter
for the music, and now the music for the matter; but no,—he must deal to each alike.
Sometimes too a Xaw in the work galls him, and he would fain remove it, doing for the
poet that which his age is denied him; but no,—it is not in the bond. His path is like that of
Aladdin through the enchanted vaults: many are the precious fruits and Xowers which he
must pass by unheeded in search for the lamp alone; happy if at last, when brought to light,
it does not prove that his old lamp has been exchanged for a new one,—glittering indeed to
the eye, but scarcely of the same virtue nor with the same genius at its summons.
‘Ballata’, from Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Poems and Translations
(London: J.-M. Dent & Sons), 313
He will gaze upon Beatrice
Because mine eyes can never have their Wll
Of looking at my lady’s lovely face
I will so Wx my gaze
That I may become bless’d, beholding her.
Even as an angel up at his great height
Standing amid the light,
Becometh bless’d by only seeing God:—
So, though I be a simple earthly wight,
Yet none the less I might,
Beholding her who is my heart’s dear load,
Be bless’d, and in the spirit soar abroad.
254
the nineteenth century

Such power abideth in that gracious one;
Albeit felt of none
Save of him who, desiring, honours her.
William Morris
William Morris (1834–96), poet and designer, was also an important political writer.
InXuenced by Burne-Jones and Ruskin, he turned to architecture; Rossetti it was who
encouraged him to take up painting. Later Morris took up design, furniture, and decoration,
attempting to combine the aesthetic and the useful, with an emphasis on craftsmanship. His
brand of utopian socialism was based on hatred of capitalism and the eVects of the industrial
revolution. In 1890, Morris founded the Kelmscott Press, experimenting with printing and
book design, inspired by medieval design and the tradition of illumination. The immensely
long The Earthly Paradise (1868) incorporated Greek and Norse legend. Morris visited Iceland
twice (1871 and 1873). He got to know an Icelandic scholar, Eirı´kur Magnu´sson, with whom
he translated a number of sagas, six volumes of an intended comprehensive collection being
completed. Morris tries to retain the syntax and employed archaisms, often making these texts
a challenge to read, although accuracy, one of his prime concerns, suVered less. His transla-
tions from Icelandic profoundly inXuenced his own poetry.
Morris’s version of Beowulf from Old English, based on a prose rendering by the Anglo-
Saxon scholar A. J. Wyatt, echoed Old English metre, again retaining the syntax and
exploiting archaic diction. Morris’s version was so closely mimetic that it was felt by some to
be more obscure than the original. It was as though there had been no Norman conquest or
traYc with the Latin world. His translation of Homer is also characterized by his desire to
preserve and cultivate the Northern roots of the English language. In his archaizing
rendering of Virgil (1875), Morris turned to the fourteener, as used by Chapman in his
seventeenth-century translation of Homer’s Iliad (see Sect. 2.6, above). Below, his transla-
tion of the Wrst part of Book XI of the Odyssey (see other translations of the same passage in
this volume), is followed by a passage from Beowulf (see also translations by Morgan and
Heaney respectively, in Sects. 5.23 and 5.24, below), and a passage from the Icelandic saga of
Grettir the Strong. It is in fact one of the scenes which has led many to believe that the Saga
of Grettir is either inXuenced by Beowulf or that the two works share literary roots.
From the Odyssey of Homer (1887), Book XI, translated by William Morris
(London: Reeves & Turner, 1887)
So when adown we were gotten to the ship’s side and the shore,
Then into the holy salt-sea we thrust her down once more,
3.5 six nineteeth-century translators
255

And in the black ship hoisted the sail upon the mast.
And the sheep we gat aboard her, and aboard we also passed
Sore sorrowing, pouring the tear-drops swift-following each on each.
But the fair-haired Circe beworshipped, the Goddess of the speech,
For us had thought behind us and our black-prowed ship to send
The following breeze sail-Wlling, a goodly faring-friend.
So we, when all the tackling about the ship we had dight,
Sat still, while wind and rudder bore on the keel aright,
And the sails of our seafarer were Wlled with the wind all day:
But now the sun sank under and dusk on all roads lay,
And at last unto the utmost of deep Ocean-stream we came,
Where is the folk Cimmerian and the city of their name,
By the mist and the cloud-rack covered, and never on a day
On them doth the sun bright-shining look down with his many a ray;
Nay, not when the starry heaven he climbeth aloft, nor when
From the heavens again he turneth to the Earth and the lands of men,
But over those men unhappy hangs night for ever dead.
There then our ship did we beach, and the sheep therefrom we led,
And along the shores of Ocean ourselves the way did we hold,
Till we came to the land and the country whereof had Circe told,
[ . . . ]
From Beowulf, translated by William Morris and A. J. Wyatt (1895),
repr. in The Collected Works of William Morris, x
(London: Longmans Green and Company 1911), 203
[Beowulf Wghts Grendel.]
Naught would the earls’ help for anything thenceforth
That murder-comer yet quick let loose of,
Nor his life-days forsooth to any of folk
Told he for useful. Out then drew full many
Of Beowulf’s earls the heir-loom of old days,
For their lord and their master’s fair life would they ward,
That mighty of Princes, if so might they do it.
For this did they know not when they the strife dreed,
Those hardy-minded men of the battle,
And on every half there thought to be hewing,
And search out his soul, that the ceaseless scather
Not any on earth of the choice of all irons,
Not one of the war-bills, would greet home for ever,
For he had forsworn him from victory-weapons,
256
the nineteenth century

And each one of edges. But his sundering of soul
In the days that we tell of, the day of this life,
Should be weary and woeful, the ghost wending elsewhere
To the wielding of Wends to wend him afar.
Then found he out this, he who mickle erst made
Out of mirth of his mood unto children of men
And had fram’d many crimes, he the foeman of God,
That the body of him would not bide to avail him,
But the hardy of mood, even Hygelac’s kinsman,
Had him fast by the hand: now was each to the other
All loathly while living: his body-sore bided
The monster: was manifest now on his shoulder
The unceasing wound, sprang the sinews asunder,
The bone-lockers bursted. To Beowulf now
Was the battle-fame given [ . . . ]
From Grettis Saga: The Story of Grettir the Strong, translated by Eirı´kur Magnu´sson and
William Morris (1869), repr. in The Collected Works of William Morris, vii (London:
Longmans Green and Company, 1911), 162–3
[Grettir (as ‘Guest’) Wghts a troll-woman]
Now it is to be told of Guest, that when it drew towards midnight, he heard great din
without, and thereafter into the hall came a huge troll-wife, with a trough in one hand
and a chopper wondrous great in the other; she peered about when she came in, and saw
where Guest lay, and ran at him; but he sprang up to meet her, and they fell a-wrestling
terribly, and struggled together for long in the hall. She was the stronger, but he gave back
with craft, and all that was before them was broken, yea, the cross-panelling withal of the
chamber. She dragged him out through the door, and so into the outer doorway, and
then he betook himself to struggling hard against her. She was fain to drag him from the
house, but might not until they had broken away all the Wttings of the outer door, and
borne them out on their shoulders: then she laboured away with him down towards the
river, and right down to the deep gulfs.
By then was Guest exceeding weary, yet must he either gather his might together, or be
cast by her into the gulf. All night did they contend in such wise; never, he deemed, had
he fought with such a horror for her strength’s sake; she held him to her so hard that he
might turn his arms to no account save to keep fast hold on the middle of the witch.
But now when they came on to the gulf of the river, he gives the hag a swing round,
and therewith got his right hand free, and swiftly seized the short-sword that he was girt
withal, and smote the troll therewith on the shoulder, and struck oV her arm; and
therewithal was he free, but she fell into the gulf and was carried down the force.
3.5 six nineteeth-century translators
257

3.6 James Fitzmaurice-Kelly
James Fitzmaurice-Kelly (1857–1923) was Gilmour Professor of Spanish Language and
Literature at the University of Liverpool (1909–16) and later Cervantes Professor of
Spanish Language and Literature, King’s College London (1916–20). He was a major
British authority on Spanish and Spanish literature in his time. Among his publications are
Life of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (1892); History of Spanish Literature (1898: new
editions 1913, 1926); an edition, with John Ormsby, of Don Quixote (1898–9); The Oxford
Book of Spanish Verse (1913); Cervantes and Shakespeare (1916); and Cambridge Readings in
Spanish Literature (1920). All his principal works were translated into Spanish. He
contributed several articles on Spanish literature and authors to the eleventh edition of
Encyclopaedia Britannica in 1911, but also wrote a general entry on translation. This article,
included below, is very much a solid product of nineteenth-century historical scholarship,
and the author’s emphasis on the historical signiWcance of translation—while it runs
counter to most histories of national literature—grows out of a considerable critical
tradition in Victorian Britain (cf. the collage of Victorian translation criticism in Sect.
3.4, above). Fitzmaurice-Kelly has a keen sense of the multicultural twists and turns in the
history of translation, but at the same time he is thoroughly traditional in his unhesitant
fusion of critical and historical judgement on the one hand and personal taste on the other.
Many will disagree with his harsh treatment of Cowper and especially Pope, or with his
lenient appraisal of Morris’s Beowulf. Mabbe’s version of Celestina, notes Fitzmaurice-
Kelly, ‘deserved a success which it failed to obtain.’ But while much recent scholarship in
both literary and translation studies has moved away from this kind of evaluative
discourse, it has in fact remained a strong current in the critical, if not academic, debate
right up to the present.
Translation, Encyclopædia Britannica (11th edn., Cambridge, 1911), vol. xxvii, pp. 183–6
translation (Lat. trans, across, and latus, the participle of ferre, to carry), literally a
carrying over or transference from one to another, and so from one medium to another.
Among the more literal usages is the translation of Enoch in the Bible (Heb. xi. 5), or the
ecclesiastical removal of a bishop to another see. But the commonest sense of the word is
in connexion with the rendering of one language into another.
The characteristics of a good translation in the literary sense, and the history of the
inXuence, through translations, of one literature on another, are worth more detailed
notice. Dryden has prescribed the course to be followed in the execution of the ideal
translation: ‘A translator that would write with any force or spirit of an original must
258
the nineteenth century

never dwell on the words of his author. He ought to possess himself entirely, and
perfectly comprehend the genius and sense of his author, the nature of the subject, and
the terms of the art or subject treated of; and then he will express himself as justly, and
with as much life, as if he wrote an original; whereas, he who copies word for word
loses all the spirit in the tedious transfusion.’ Comparatively few translators have
satisWed this canon. A writer capable of attaining the standard set up by Dryden is
naturally more disposed to use his powers to express his own views than those of his
foreign predecessors. No doubt at all times, and in all countries, translations have
usually been produced for utilitarian purposes, and not from artistic motives. In the
Wrst instance we may assume that translations were undertaken in a spirit of educational
propaganda as a means of communicating new ideas and new facts to a somewhat
uninstructed and uncritical public, indiVerent as to matters of form. But, though the
translator’s primary motive is didactic, he is insensibly led to reproduce the manner as
well as the matter of his original as closely as possible. Montaigne warns aspirants of the
diYculty in dealing with authors remarkable for the Wnish of their execution. ‘Il faict
bon,’ he writes in the Apologie de Raimond Sebonde, ‘traduire les aucteurs comme celuy-
la` ou il n’y a gue`res que la matie`re a` repre´senter: mais ceux qui ont donne´ beaucoup a` la
grace et a` l’e´le´gance de langage ils sont dangereux a` entreprendre nomme´ment pour les
rapporter a` un idiome plus foible.’ As it happens, however, the task of translating
foreign masterpieces has frequently been undertaken by writers of undisputed literary
accomplishment whose renderings have had a permanent eVect on the literature of their
native country.
It was certainly the case when Rome, having conquered Greece, was captured by her
captive. There is much point and little exaggeration in the statement that ‘when the
Greek nation became a province of Rome, the Latin literature became a province of the
Greek’; and this peaceful victory was initiated by a series of translations made by writers
of exceptional ability and, in some cases, of real genius. The Wrst translator whose name is
recorded in the history of European literature is L. Livius Andronicus, a manumitted
Greek slave who about 240 b.c., rendered the Odyssey into Saturnian verse. This
translation, of which some fragments are preserved, was long in use as a school text,
for Horace studied it under the formidable Orbilius; but Andronicus appears to have
recognized his mistake in using the native Latin measure as a vehicle of literary
expression, and is said to have rendered Greek tragedies and comedies into metres
corresponding to those of his Greek originals. The decision was momentous, for it
inXuenced the whole metrical development of Latin poetry. The example set by Andro-
nicus was followed by Naevius and Ennius, both of whom laid the foundations of the
Latin theatre by translating Greek plays—especially those of Euripides—and naturalized
in Rome the hexameter, which, as practised later by Lucretius and Virgil, was destined to
become ‘the stateliest measure ever moulded by the lips of man.’ The tradition of
3.6 james fitzmaurice-kelly
259

translating more or less freely was continued by Pacuvius, the nephew of Ennius, as well
as by Plautus and Terence, whose comedies are skilful renderings or adaptations from the
New Attic Comedy of Philemon, Diphilus and Menander. A persistent translator from
the Greek was Cicero, who interpolates in his prose writings versiWed renderings of
passages from Homer, Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides which prove the injustice
of the popular verdict on his merits as a poet. Cicero not only translated the oration
of Demosthenes On the Crown, but also made Latin versions of Plato’s Timaeus (part of
which survives), of Xenophon’s Oeconomicus, and of the Phaenomena, an astronomical
poem by Aratus of Soli, an Alexandrian imitator of Hesiod. This last performance was a
tribute to the prevailing fashion of the moment, for the Alexandrian poets had sup-
planted the early Greek school in favour among the literary circles of Rome. To the
foregoing list may be added the great name of Catullus, whose Coma Berenices is
translated from Callimachus, and Cornelius Gallus is mentioned as a translator of
Euphorion. Complete translations became less and less necessary as a knowledge
of Greek spread among the educated class. But the practice of translating fragments of
Greek verse continued throughout the classic period of Latin literature, and the trans-
lations of Greek originals incorporated by Virgil were duly pointed out by Octavius
Avitus.
The knowledge of Greek declined with the empire, and translations were accordingly
produced for the beneWt of students who were curious concerning the philosophic
doctrines of the Athenians and the Neoplatonists. Porphyry’s introduction to Aristotle’s
Categories was translated by Victorinus about the reign of Julian the Apostate; at the end
of the 5th century this introduction was once more translated by Boetius, whose
translations of Aristotle’s Categories and other logical treatises began the movement
which ended in establishing the Greek philosopher as the most profound and authori-
tative exponent of intellectual problems during the middle ages. Plato was less fortunate,
for he was known to students chieXy by the Latin version of the Timaeus made by
Chalcidius (it is said) for Hosius, the bishop of Cordova. Cassiodorus, the contemporary
of Boetius, went farther aWeld when he ordered a Latin translation of Josephus to be
prepared; but the interest in Aristotle extended to the East, and in the 6th century he was
translated into Syriac by Sergius of Resaina. The Syrians acted as interpreters of Greek
learning to the Arabs, and during the 8th and 9th centuries—chieXy through the staV of
translators organized at Bagdad by Honein ibn Ishak—the works of Plato and Aristotle,
as well as those of Hippocrates and Galen, were translated into Arabic. These translations
are of capital importance in the history of European thought. Many of them were
introduced into Spain by the Arabs, and were rendered—in some cases through the
intermediary of a Castilian-speaking Jew—into Latin at the college of translators
founded in 1130 (or shortly afterwards) at Toledo by Raymund, archbishop of that city.
Circulating widely throughout western Europe, these Latin translations supplied the
260
the nineteenth century

learned with a third- or fourth-hand knowledge of Greek philosophy. When Albertus
Magnus, St Thomas Aquinas, or any other early light of the schools refers to Aristotle, it
must be borne in mind that he often had no more exact acquaintance with the text which
he expounds or confutes than could be gathered from an indirect Latin version of an
Arabic rendering of a Syriac translation of a Greek original. This accounts for many
misunderstandings and errors which would otherwise be incomprehensible. Among the
earliest European translators who made their way to Toledo were Adelard of Bath, who
rendered an Arabic version of Euclid into Latin; the Englishman known as Robert de
Retines, afterwards archdeacon of Pamplona, the Wrst translator of the Koran, which he
did into Latin in 1141–1143 by order of Peter the Venerable; and Gerard of Cremona, who,
towards the end of the 12th century, was responsible for over seventy translations from
the Arabic, including Ptolemy’s Almagest and many of Aristotle’s treatises, as well as
works by Galen, Hippocrates and Avicenna. Early in the 13th century Michael Scot, who
had begun his Arabic studies at Palermo, visited Toledo and (perhaps with the help of the
Jew Andreas, if we are to believe the statement of Hermann the German, repeated by
Roger Bacon) translated into Latin various works of Aristotle, Avicenna, and—more
especially—Averroes. These Latin translations by Michael Scot introduced Averroes to
the notice of Western scholars, and the fact that they were used at the universities of Paris
and Bologna gave the Wrst impetus to the vogue of Averroistic doctrine which lasted from
the time of St Thomas Aquinas to the rise of Martin Luther. At Toledo, between 1240 and
1256, Hermann the German translated into Latin the commentaries of Averroes on
Aristotle’s Ethics, together with abridgments of the Poetic and the Rhetoric made respect-
ively by Averroes and Alfarabi. But, at the very period of Hermann the German’s
residence at Toledo, a more satisfactory method of translation was begun. Within half
a century of the conquest of Constantinople in 1204 a visit to Spain was no longer
indispensable for a would-be translator of Greek philosophical treatises. The original
texts slowly became more available, and a Latin translation of Aristotle’s Ethics seems to
have been made from the Greek by order of Robert Grosseteste, bishop of Lincoln,
between 1240–1244. Towards the end of the century the indefatigable William of
Moerbeke (near Ghent)—mentioned as ‘William the Fleming’ by Roger Bacon—
produced, amongst numerous other Latin renderings from the Greek, versions of
Aristotle’s Rhetoric and Politics which have commended themselves to more exact scholars
of the modern German type. The Latin renderings from the Arabic were current till a
much later date; but it was henceforth accepted, at least in principle, that translations of
the Greek classics should be made direct from the original text.
Meanwhile the work of translating foreign productions into the local vernacular had
been begun in the north and west of Europe. Towards the end of the 9th century an
illustrious English translator appeared in the person of King Alfred, who rendered
St Gregory the Great’s Cura pastoralis into West Saxon ‘sometimes word for word,
3.6 james fitzmaurice-kelly
261

sometimes sense for sense.’ Alfred is also regarded, though with less certainty, as the
translator of Bede’s Historia ecclesiastica and the Historia adversus paganos of Orosius.
The version of St Gregory’s treatise is the most literal of the three; omissions are frequent
in the renderings of Bede and Orosius, and in all the diction is disWgured by latinisms.
A larger conception of a translator’s function is noticeable in Alfred’s version of Boetius’s
De consolatione philosophiae, a famous Neoplatonic treatise which was the delight of the
middle ages, and was translated later into German by Notker Labeo, into French by Jean
de Meung, and twice again into English by Chaucer and by Queen Elizabeth respectively.
In translating Boetius, Alfred deals more freely with his author, interpolates passages not
to be found in the extant texts of the original, and yet succeeds in giving an adequate
interpretation which is also an excellent specimen of English prose. If the alliterative verses
found in one manuscript of Alfred’s translation are accepted as his work, it is clear that he
had no poetic faculty; but he has the credit of opening up a new path, of bringing England
into contact with European thought, and of stimulating such writers as Werferth, bishop
of Worcester—the translator of St Gregory’s Dialogues—to proceed on the same line.
Some forty years earlier John Scotus (Erigena) had won celebrity as a translator by his
Latin renderings of works ascribed to the mysterious 5th century Neoplatonist who passes
under the name of Dionysius the Areopagite. Towards the close of Alfred’s reign some
countrymen of Erigena bettered his example by producing Irish versions of Hippocrates
and Galen at St Gallen. St Gallen became a centre of translation, and there, at the
beginning of the 11th century, Notker Labeo presided over a committee of interpreters
who issued German renderings of certain treatises by Aristotle, Terence’s Andria and
Virgil’s Eclogues. Far greater literary importance attaches to Syntipas, the title given by
Michael Andreopulos to a collection of ancient Oriental tales which he translated from an
intermediate Syriac version into Greek at the request of the Armenian duke of Melitene
about the end of the 11th century. These stories were retranslated into French verse and (by
Jean de Haute-Seille) into Latin during the course of the 12th century under the respective
titles of the Sept sages de Rome and Dolopathos; they were utilized in the Cento novelle
antiche, in the Libro dei sette savj, and in the Decamerone, and were Wnally absorbed
by every literature in Europe. Immense popularity was won by the Liber gestorum Barlaam
et Josaphat, a Latin translation made in the 11th or 12th century from the Greek, and
recast in many European languages during the 13th century. The book is in fact a
legendary life of Buddha adapted to the purposes of Christianity by a monk; but it
was accepted as an historical record, the undiscerning credulity of the faithful
informally canonized Barlaam and Josaphat, and ultimately compelled the Latin Church
to include these two Wctitious beings as saints in the Martyrologium romanum. This is
perhaps the most curious result attained by any translation. The interest in Eastern
apologues and moralizing stories, which was early shown in Marie de France’s translation
of Aesopic fables, was further demonstrated by the Castilian translations of Kalilah and
262
the nineteenth century

Dimnah and Sindibad made about the middle of the 13th century, by (or at the command
of) Alphonso the Learned and his brother the Infante Fadrique respectively.
The enthusiasm for these Oriental stories was communicated to the rest of Europe by
John of Capua’s Directorium humanae vitae (1270), a Latin translation of Kalilah and
Dimnah; but, in the meanwhile, as the younger European literatures grew in power and
variety, the Weld of translation necessarily widened to such an extent that detailed
description becomes impossible. GeoVrey of Monmouth’s Historia regum Britanniae,
which purports to be a free version of an unnamed Breton book, is the source of the
Arthurian legends which reappeared transformed in elaborate French versions, and were
transmitted to the rest of Europe during the 12th and 13th centuries. During this period
of French literary supremacy instances of bilingual faculty are not wanting in the form of
translations: shortly after the middle of the 13th century Brunetto Latini translated
passages of Cicero into Italian, and selections from Sallust into French. A hundred
years later there are unmistakable indications that the middle ages are departing, that the
French suzerainty over literature is at an end, and that the advent of the New Humanism
is an accomplished fact. The early Renaissance had already dawned in Italy: a renewed
interest in the Latin classics (Greek was not yet generally cultivated by scholars) proved
that there was a revival of learning in France. Livy was done into French by Bersuire,
Seneca by Bauchant, Boccaccio by Laureat de Premier Fait, and a celebrated translator
appeared in the person of Nicolas Oresme, who, however, rendered Aristotle from a
Latin version. In England Chaucer executed translations of Boetius and part of the
Roman de la rose, and succeeded equally in interpreting the philosophic treatise and the
allegorical poem. A still further advance is discernible in the book of travels ascribed to
Sir John Mandeville: this work, which seems to have been originally written in French, is
rendered into English with an exceptional felicity which has won for the translator the
loose-Wtting but not altogether inappropriate title of ‘the father of English prose.’ The
English version of Mandeville is assigned to the beginning of the 15th century. About
1470 Sir Thomas Malory produced from French originals his Morte d’Arthur, a pastiche
of diVerent texts translated with a consummate art which amounts to originality.
Malory’s inspired version, together with the numerous renderings from the French issued
(and often made personally) by Caxton, stimulated the public taste for romantic
narrative, raised the standard of execution, and invested the translator with a new air
of dignity and importance.
Yet the 15th century has a fair claim to be regarded as the golden age of translation.
The Gothic version of the Bible, made by UlWlas during the 4th century almost
simultaneously with St Jerome’s Vulgate, is invaluable as the sole literary monument of
a vanished language; the 14th century English version by WycliVe and the 15th century
English versions which bear the names of Tyndale and Coverdale are interesting in
themselves, and are also interesting as having contributed to the actual Authorized
3.6 james fitzmaurice-kelly
263

Version of 1611. But they are incomparably less important than Luther’s German
translation of the Bible (1522–1534) which, apart from its signiWcance as indicating the
complete victory of the liberal middle class and the irremediable downfall of the feudal
and ecclesiastical autocracy, supplanted minor dialects and Wxed the norm of literary
expression in German-speaking countries. Luther, it has been truly said, endowed
Germany with a uniform literary language, a possession which she had lost for nearly
three hundred years. The eVect of profane literature was speedily visible in Fischart’s
translations of Rabelais’s Pantagrue´line (1572) and the Wrst book of Gargantua (1575). But
before this date France had produced a prince of translators in Jacques Amyot, bishop of
Auxerre. In 1548 Nicolas de Herberay had published a French translation of Amadis de
Gaule which enchanted the polite world at the court of Henry II., had its day, and is
forgotten. But Amyot’s translation of Plutarch (1559) remains an acknowledged master-
piece, surviving all changes of taste and all variations of the canon of translation.
Montaigne writes: ‘Je donne la palme avecque raison, ce me semble, a` Jacques Amyot,
sur tous nos escripvains Franc¸ois.’ If ‘escripvain’ be understood to mean ‘translator,’ this
judgment is beyond appeal.
Lord Berners will not bear comparison with Amyot in achievement or inXuence; but,
though less completely equipped and less uniformly happy in his choice of texts (for
Amyot translated the Aethiopian History and Daphnis and Chloe as well as Plutarch), Lord
Berners holds a distinguished place in the ranks of English translators. His renderings of
Ferna´ndez de San Pedro’s Ca´rcel de amor and of Guevara’s Libro aureo are now read solely
by specialists engaged in tracing English euphuism to its remoter sources, and some of his
other translations—the Boke of Duke Huon of Burdeux and Arthur of Little Britain—are
too poor in substance to be interesting nowadays. But Lord Berners is justly remembered
by his notable translation of Froissart (1523–1525). Froissart oVers fewer opportunities
than Guevara for the display of that ‘fecundious art of rhetoric’ in which the English
translator thought himself deWcient, and, with this temptation removed, Lord Berners is
seen at his best. In his version of Froissart, apart from endless confusion of proper names,
he makes few mistakes of any real importance, and, if he scarcely equals his original in
brio, he is almost invariably adequate in reproducing the French blend of simplicity with
stateliness. Such translations as Phaer’s Virgil (1557) and Golding’s Ovid (1561) have not
the historical importance of William Painter’s Palace of Pleasure, a miscellaneous collec-
tion of stories rendered from the Italian, nor of Jasper Heywood’s version of Seneca (1581)
whose plays had exercised immense inXuence upon the methods of Garnier and
Montchre´tien in France. Though Kyd translated Garnier’s Corne´lie, the Senecan system
was destined to defeat in England, and Heywood’s translation did not even postpone the
catastrophe. On the other hand Marlowe found the subject of his Tamburlaine in
Painter’s collection, and thus began the systematic exploitation of the Palace of Pleasure
which was continued by his successors on the stage. A translator of the rarest excellence
264
the nineteenth century

was forthcoming in Sir Thomas North, who rendered Guevara (1557) from the French
(revising his second edition from the Spanish), and The Morall Philosophie of Doni—
‘a worke Wrst compiled in the Indian tongue’—from the Italian (1570). But, good as they
are, both these versions are overshadowed by the famous translation of Plutarch which
North published in 1579. He may have referred occasionally to the Greek, or perhaps to
some intermediate Latin rendering; but the basis of his work is Amyot, and his English is
not inferior to the French in sonority and cadence of phrase. This retranslation of a
translation is a masterpiece of which fragments are incorporated with scarcely any change
in Coriolanus, Julius Caesar and Antony and Cleopatra; and touches from North have been
noted also in the Midsummer Night’s Dream and in Timon of Athens. Amyot greatly
inXuenced the development of French prose, and his translation was the source of
Racine’s Mithridate; but, if we reXect that Shakespeare not only took some of his subjects
from the English Plutarch and found nothing to amend in the diction of many passages,
North’s triumph may be reckoned as even more signal than Amyot’s. Very little below
North’s translation of Plutarch comes John Florio’s translation of Montaigne (1603), a
fantastically ingenious performance which contributed a celebrated passage to The
Tempest and introduced the practice of the essay into England. It is impossible to cope
with the activity of English translators during the last half of the 16th century and the Wrst
half of the 17th. To this period belongs Chapman’s impressive and resounding translation
(1598–1616) of Homer, which was to enrapture Keats two hundred years later. Adlington’s
version of Apuleius, Underdown’s renderings of Heliodorus and Ovid, the translations of
Livy, Pliny, Suetonius and Xenophon issued in quick succession by Philemon Holland
are vivid and often extravagantly picturesque in their conveyance of classic authors into
Elizabethan prose. With them must be named the translator of Tacitus (1591), Sir Henry
Savile, who served later on the committee which prepared the Authorized Version of the
Bible, and must therefore be counted amongst those who have exercised a permanent
inXuence on English prose style. Thomas Shelton produced the earliest translation (1612)
of Don Quixote, a version which, in spite of its inaccuracies and freakishness, preserves
much of the tone and atmosphere of the original. Mabbe’s translation (1622) of Guzma´n
de Alfarache was lauded by Ben Jonson, and widely read during the 17th century, and his
version of the Celestina deserved a success which it failed to obtain. It compares most
favourably with a version of Tasso (1600) by Edward Fairfax, who has been persistently
overpraised. But the Puritanical instinct of the English people, powerful even when not
in the ascendant, was an insuperable obstacle to the acclimatization of Spanish literature
in England. The Leviathan has obscured Hobbes’s fame as a translator, but he is known
to scholars by his sound but crabbed rendering of Thucydides (1629) and by a wholly
unnecessary version of Homer which he published at the very end of his career (1674). Sir
Roger L’Estrange is responsible for translations of Seneca, Cicero and Josephus, which are
usually lively enough to be readable and unfaithful enough to be misleading; the most
3.6 james fitzmaurice-kelly
265

popular of his renderings is a translation of Quevedo’s Suen˜os (made through the French)
which owes most of its vogue during the Restoration rather to its reckless indecency than
to its intrinsic merit. Dryden’s free translations of Juvenal (1693) and Virgil (1697) treat
the original authors with a cavalier freedom, but at least they preserve the meaning, if not
the conciseness and point, of the Latin.
Among the multitudinous English translations of the 18th century it is only necessary
to mention Pope’s versions of the Iliad (1715–1720) and the Odyssey (1725–1726) and
Cowper’s rendering of Homer, issued in 1791. These neat translations necessarily fail to
convey any impression of Homer’s epical grandeur, and they set a mischievous fashion of
artiWcial ‘elegance’ which has been too often adopted by their successors; but both Pope
and Cowper conform faithfully to the mistaken canon of their age, and both have
fugitive moments of felicity. A posthumous translation of Don Quixote bearing the
name of Charles Jarvis appeared in 1742, has been reprinted times innumerable ever
since, and has helped to make Cervantes’s masterpiece known to generations of English-
speaking people. Defective in point of exact scholarship, it has the merit of agreeable
perspicuity, and there seems no reason to believe the remark, ascribed by Warburton to
Pope, that Jarvis ‘translated Don Quixote without knowing Spanish’: the available
evidence is strongly against this malicious theory. The most remarkable translations of
the 18th century, however, appeared in Germany: these are the versions of the Odyssey
(1781) and Iliad (1793) by Voss, and A. W. von Schlegel’s rendering of Shakespeare (1797–
1810), which gave a powerful impulse to the romantic movement on the Continent.
Byron’s version of a Spanish ballad and Shelley’s renderings of Caldero´n are interesting
exhibitions of original genius voluntarily accepting a subordinate role. More importance
attaches to Carlyle’s translation of Wilhelm Meister (1824), a faithful rendering free from
the intolerable mannerisms and tricks which the translator developed subsequently in his
original writings. William Taylor had long before translated Bu¨rger’s Lenore, Lessing’s
Nathan and Goethe’s Iphigenia; but such interest as the English nation has been induced
to take in German literature dates from the appearance of Carlyle’s translation. If he did
nothing more, he compelled recognition of the fact that Germany had at last produced
an original genius of the highest class. Caldero´n found accomplished translators in Denis
Florence MacCarthy (1848–1873) and in Edward FitzGerald (1853), who also attempted to
render Sophocles into English; but these are on a much lower plane than the translation
of the Rubaiya´t (1859) of Omar Khayyam, in which, by a miracle of intrepid dexterity, a
half-forgotten Persian poet is transWgured into a pessimistic English genius of the 19th
century. Versions of Dante by Longfellow (whose translations of poems by minor
authors are often admirable), of Latin or Greek classics by Conington, Munro, Jowett
and Jebb, maintain the best traditions of the best translators. William Morris was less
happy in his poetical versions of Virgil (1875) and the Odyssey (1887) than in his prose
translations of The Story of Grettir the Strong (1869) and The Volsunga Saga (1870)—both
266
the nineteenth century

made in collaboration with Magnu´sson—and in his rendering of Beowulf (1895). In his
Lays of France (1872) Arthur O’Shaughnessy skirts the borders of translation without
quite entering into the Weld; he elaborates, paraphrases and embroiders rather than
translates the lais of Marie de France.
Most versions of modern foreign writers are mere hackwork carelessly executed by
incompetent hands, and this is even more true of England than of France and Germany.
But, with the development of literature in countries whose languages are unfamiliar, the
function of the translator increases in importance, and in some few cases he has risen to
his opportunity. Through translations the works of the great Russian novelists have
become known to the rest of Europe, and through translations of Ibsen the dramatic
methods of the modern stage have undergone a revolution.
3.6 james fitzmaurice-kelly
267

This page intentionally left blank 

part ii
the twentieth century

This page intentionally left blank 

chapter 4
FROM POUND TO NABOKOV
4.1 Introduction
Ezra Pound is one of the most important Wgures in the history of translation into English
and a key Wgure for the development of translation in the twentieth-century (see Ronnie
Apter’s collage in Sect. 4.2, below). Associated with his friend and fellow-deracinated
American T. S. Eliot as a founding Wgure of Modernism, Pound was obsessed with the
tradition he was trying, in a sense, to liberate himself from or at least make work for him.
His translations (ranging from Chinese to Provenc¸al) constitute a signiWcant body of
work, informing much of his other writing (for instance, his own poems and his inXuential
essays, including his important anthology (with Marcella Spann) Confucius to Cummings,
1958). While the amount of material translated by Pound is not so vast, it has been
extraordinarily inXuential, accompanied by his polemicizing essays and promoted by the
forceful and charismatic poet himself. It has even been suggested that one may speak of
poetry translation in the modern period as either pre- or post-Poundian, although some
chronologically post-Poundians, e.g. Michael Hamburger, have objected to this.
Pound the Modernist was, of course, also a Victorian and many of his translations carry
the imprint of that period with, for instance, their recourse to archaicizing (not unremi-
niscent of Browning or even Morris). At the same time, with his incomparably well-tuned
ear, Pound was able frequently to approximate the very sound structure of his source texts
(see in particular his version from the Anglo-Saxon of ‘The Seafarer’). An apparent
paradox is perhaps explicable in terms of Pound’s (American?) pragmatism. He attempted
to resolve some of the problems (not to say imponderabilities) of poetic translation by, in a
sense, constructing from elements, borrowed or plundered from world literature,
a language which he used in his translation work and also in his original poetry (somewhat
as Brodsky (see Sect. 5.9 below), in a more limited way created his own English to
accommodate the structures and the very sound of Russian verse).
Nevertheless, while Pound had followers, they could hardly be regarded as mainstream;
the English tradition, as deWned by Dryden, was disturbed but not disrupted by this

‘foreignizing’ reinforcement of what had preceded it and had reached England via
German Romanticism, in particular Schleiermacher (see above, Sect. 3.3, and Sect. 3.1:
Introduction). Pound’s was one among a number of competing inXuences, all of
which however examined their provenance critically or perhaps with less conWdence
than earlier translators, like Pope. That was unless the job in hand was so pressing and
so extensive that there was little time for theorizing! Such was the case of Constance
Garnett (see Sect. 4.3, below), her mission being to bring into readable English and in
suYcient bulk the extraordinary achievements of nineteenth- and early twentieth-century
Russian prose.
This period is marked by the work of a number of inXuential writers and thinkers, who
not only translated but wrote about translation in the most challenging manner, their
work forming the basis for much of the discussion that follows. Walter Benjamin (see Sect.
4.4, below for a discussion of his landmark essay ‘The Task of the Translator’) laid the
foundations for subsequent discourse on the place, the actual objectives of translation,
from both personal and socio-historical points of view. Foreignizing has now been
problematized to the point where it can still inform translation; George Steiner, for
instance, builds on Benjamin’s mystical notion of translation as an Ursprache.
One consequence, of course, is the notion of translation as embodying a distinct
language, a composite or synthesis of source and target languages. (That may be somewhat
misleading, since the language of the translation is, for practical purposes, closer to the
target—even if the latter has been rendered more permeable—than to the source.)
Similarly universalizing intellectual currents are discernible not only in the writings of
George Steiner, but also in the writings and practice of Martin Buber and Franz Rosenz-
weig in their German Bible translation and more recently Everett Fox’s in his translation of
the Hebrew Pentateuch into English. The prevalence of these preoccupations is reXected in
this chapter which draws on writings more internationally than earlier ones, especially on
work being done by American-based scholars and writers. Agendas are somewhat more
clearly deWnable, perhaps because we are approaching the present day and so are more
familiar with the context. Thus the pragmatic Eugene Nida, a major force in the
translation of the Christian Scriptures, is clearly guided by proselytizing aims. Clear
objectives, however, need not be religious ones. Robert Lowell is similarly concerned
with the readerly reader, rather than the scholar or even scholarly reader! Vladimir
Nabokov (see Sect. 4.13, below), a major novelist in Russian and English as well as
translator from Russian into English, was in eVect a radical foreignizer, although himself
rooted in a source language, Russian. His notion of the capabilities of translation is
limited—even so, he goes too far evidently for many English readers. His great test case,
of course, is Pushkin’s novel-in-verse, Eugene Onegin.
272
from pound to nabokov

By restricting the scope of direct translation, Nabokov renders it, as he thought, more
possible if, in a sense, less ambitious, although it must be added that his own work (as
suggested by Jenefer Coates in Sect. 4.13) is permeated by his vast readings in other literary
traditions, this too constituting a kind of translation. Nabokov’s translations, his version of
disciplined literalism also create a new language. He combines scholarship and literalism,
his comprehensive, sometimes fulsome, notes being integral to the text, the translation.
Stanley Burnshaw, the American poet and critic, in his important anthology The Poem
Itself, similarly supplies ‘literal’ translations, accompanied by basic syntactical and con-
textual notes, providing the committed reader with materials, as it were, towards the
construction of a simulacrum of the original.
While the end result appears to be the elaboration of a specialized language of
translation, only the more devoted or committed reader can be expected to follow a
Nabokov, for whom however there was no alternative. Ezra Pound, on the other hand,
strives to create a language of poetry that convincingly establishes its own terms, allowing
translations to convey something like the totality of the poetic experience in the source
language. Both a Pound and a Nabokov, however, are crucially aware of the need to go
beyond plain naturalizing (‘domesticating’), if the ‘other’ is to be introduced into the life-
stream of the native literary culture.
introduction
273

4.2 Ezra Pound
Ronnie Apter
(Central Michigan University)
Ezra Pound (1885–1972) declared, ‘A great age of literature is perhaps always a great age of
translations; or follows it’ (‘Notes on Elizabethan Classicists’ p. 232). He was right. And,
aided by his own gifts as a poet, he helped make the latter half of the twentieth century a
period of great translation. When he began translating and writing about translation in the
1910s, the translation of older poetry into English was dominated by the use of Wardour
Street, a pseudo-archaic me´lange of modern English and archaisms from any of Wve
centuries, which Rossetti, Swinburne, and lesser lights had made popular. Words like
‘hath’ and ‘methinks’ were meant to indicate the age of the source text. In the hands of
good poets like Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Charles Algernon Swinburne, the method
produced glamorously romantic translations. Those less adept produced translations
which made the great poets of the past sound all alike and equally irrelevant to the
present. Pound is remembered as the translator and theorist who put paid to that tradition.
His letters and essays usually urged translation into fully modern English and advocated
free verse as an English equivalent to quantitative or syllabic verse (see ‘Cavalcanti’). His
enormously inXuential translations from Chinese in Cathay, such as ‘South Folk in Cold
Country’ (see below) taught translators how to use a neutral modern, semi-formal diction
to convey a simultaneous sense of antiquity and timelessness. His correspondence with
W. H. D. Rouse (see below), a prose translator of the Odyssey, again and again urges Rouse
to Wnd the modern phrase, the living idiom.
Yet, strangely enough, Pound himself rarely translated older poetry without incorpor-
ating some form of archaizing. One of his great translations, ‘The Seafarer’ (see below),
uses Wardour Street with the best of them. At the same time, it uses a highly original
form of free verse to express the movement of the Anglo-Saxon: a roughly four-stress
line, low in unstressed syllables, with much alliteration. The power and Xexibility of this
form has inXuenced most subsequent translation of Old English. In still other translations,
Pound experimented with using a speciWc earlier period of English (see the translations
at the end of ‘Cavalcanti’), or with mixing diVerent periods on purpose, each locution
being intended to call to mind the Weltanschauung of its particular time, in an attempt
to convey ideas not available to modern English (see ‘How to Read,’ section on
Logopoeia).
274
from pound to nabokov

Against the anti-translation attitude still all too prevalent (‘Poetry is what is lost in
translation’), Pound advocated respect for the English tradition of translation, calling
attention particularly to the beauties of Elizabethan translation: Golding’s Metamorphoses,
Gavin Douglas’s Aeneid, and Marlowe’s Eclogues from Ovid (see ‘Translators of Greek’).
He pointed out that Elizabethans saw earlier literature, not as a set of words to be faithfully
reproduced, but as a set of ideas to be absorbed and refashioned. He set about following
their lead himself to outraged howls about his lack of literality. Canto 1, for instance,
translates not the Odyssey, but a 1538 translation of it into Latin by Andreas Divus
Justinopolitanus (see below). Moreover, Pound’s verse form for the translation is the
roughly four-stress, alliterative free verse he had earlier invented for his translation of
‘The Seafarer’. That translation chain shades into his own poem. Few translators or critics
accept Pound’s Elizabethan approach, yet many cannot but admire the verve of his
translations, and accept that somehow, for all his errors and ‘errors,’ he has come closer
to the spirit of the originals than many a careful classicist.
For Pound, translation is a form of criticism (see ‘Date Line’), its purpose for readers to
point out and make accessible works of importance; its purpose for writers to help them,
in their struggle to match the voice of another, to Wnd their own.
From ‘Notes on Elizabethan Classicists’, in Literary Essays, ed. and introd. T. S. Eliot
(New York: New Directions, 1968), 227–48 (First published as ‘Elizabethan Classicists’,
The Egoist, 4. 8–10 (1917) and 5. 1 (1918) )
A great age of literature is perhaps always a great age of translations; or follows it. The
Victorians in lesser degree had FitzGerald, and Swinburne’s Villon, and Rossetti. One is at
Wrst a little surprised at the importance which historians of Spanish poetry give to Boscan,
but our histories give our own translators too little. And worse, we have long since fallen
under the blight of the Miltonic or noise tradition, to a stilted dialect in translating the
classics, a dialect which imitates the idiom of the ancients rather than seeking their
meaning, a state of mind which aims at ‘teaching the boy his Latin’ or Greek or whatever
it may be, but has long since ceased to care for the beauty of the original; or which perhaps
thinks ‘appreciation’ obligatory, and the meaning and content mere accessories. (232)
Or is a Wne poet ever translated until another his equal invents a new style in a later
language? Can we, for our part, know our Ovid until we Wnd him in Golding? Is there
one of us so good at his Latin, and so ready in imagination that Golding will not throw
upon his mind shades and glamours inherent in the original text which had for all that
escaped him? Is any foreign speech ever our own, ever so full of beauty as our lingua
materna (whatever lingua materna that may be)? Or is not a new beauty created, an old
beauty doubled when the overchange is well done? (235)
4.2 ezra pound
275

From ‘Cavalcanti’, in Literary Essays, 149–200 (Wrst published in Make It New
(1934) )
As to the use of canzoni in English, whether for composition or in translation: it is not
that there aren’t rhymes in English; or enough rhymes or even enough two-syllable
rhymes, but that the English two-syllable rhymes are of the wrong timbre and weight.
They have extra consonants at the end, as in Xowing and going ; or they go squashy; or
they XuV up as in snowy and goeth. They are not rime agute ; they do not oVer readily the
qualities and contrasts that Dante has discussed so ably in De Eloquio.
Even so, it is not that one ‘cannot’ use them but that they demand at times, sacriWce of
values that had not come into being and were therefore not missed in Limoges, A.D.
1200. Against which we have our concealed rhymes and our semi-submerged alliteration.
(En passant, the alliteration in Guido’s canzone is almost as marked as the rhyming
though it enters as free component.)
It is not that one language cannot be made to do what another has done, but that it is
not always expeditious to approach the same goal by the same alley. I do not think
rhyme-aesthetic, any rhyme-aesthetic, can ever do as much damage to English verse as
that done by latinization, in Milton’s time and before. The rhyme pattern is, after all, a
matter of chiselling, and a question of the lima amorosa, whereas latinization is a matter
or compost, and in the very substance of the speech. By latinization I mean here the
attempt to use an uninXected language as if it were an inXected one, i.e. as if each word
had a little label or postscript telling the reader at once what part it takes in the sentence,
and specifying its several relations. Not only does such usage—with remnants of Latin
order—ruin the word order in English, but it shows a fundamental mis-comprehension
of the organism of the language, and fundamental stupidity of this kind is bound to
spread its eVects through the whole Wbre of a man’s writing.
Hendecasyllables
Another prevalent error is that of dealing with Italian hendecasyllables as if they were
English ‘iambic pentameter’. One is told in college that Italian verse is not accentual but
syllabic but I can’t remember anyone’s having ever presented the Anglo-American reader
with a lucid discrimination between the two systems of measurement. (168–9)
As to the atrocities of my translation [of Guido’s canzone ‘Donna mi prega’], all that can
be said in excuse is that they are, I hope, for the most part intentional, and committed
with the aim of driving the reader’s perception further into the original than it would
without them have penetrated. The melodic structure is properly indicated—and for the
Wrst time—by my disposition of the Italian text, but even that Wrm indication of the
rhyme and the articulation of the strophe does not stress all the properties of Guido’s
triumph in sheer musicality. [ . . . ]
276
from pound to nabokov

I have not given an English ‘equivalent’ for the Donna mi Prega; at the utmost I have
provided the reader, unfamiliar with old Italian, an instrument that may assist him in
gauging some of the qualities of the original.
All this is not so unconnected with our own time as it might seem. Those writers to
whom vers libre was a mere ‘runnin’ dahn th’ road’, videlicet escape, and who were
impelled thereto by no inner need of, or curiosity concerning, the quantitative element in
metric, having come to the end of that lurch, lurch back not into experiment with the
canzone or any other unexplored form, but into the stock and trade sonnet. (pp. 172–3)
When I ‘translated’ Guido eighteen years ago [1912] I did not see Guido at all [ . . . ].
My perception was not obfuscated by Guido’s Italian, diYcult as it then was for me to
read. I was obfuscated by the Victorian language.
[ . . . ] I began by meaning merely to give prose translation so that the reader ignorant
of Italian could see what the melodic original meant. It is, however, an illusion to suppose
that more than one person in every 300,000 has the patience or the intelligence to read
a foreign tongue for its sound, or even to read what are known to be the masterworks of
foreign melody, in order to learn the qualities of that melody, or to see where one’s own
falls short.
What obfuscated me was not the Italian but the crust of dead English, the sediment
present in my own available vocabulary—which I, let us hope, got rid of a few years later.
You can’t go round this sort of thing. It takes six or eight years to get educated in one’s art,
and another ten to get rid of that education.
Neither can anyone learn English, one can only learn a series of Englishes. Rossetti
made his own language. I hadn’t in 1910 made a language, I don’t mean a language to use,
but even a language to think in. [ . . . ]
Where both Rossetti and I went oV the rails was in taking an English sonnet as the
equivalent for a sonnet in Italian. (pp. 193–4)
[Having noted the cultural inXuence of Italy on Elizabethan England, Pound asks:] What
happens when you idly attempt to translate early Italian into English, unclogged by the
Victorian era, freed from sonnet obsession, but trying merely to sing and to leave out the
dull bits in the Italian, or the bits you don’t understand?
I oVer you a poem that ‘don’t matter’ [‘Madonna la vostra belta enfolio’]. [ . . . ] It is
not very attractive: until one starts playing with the simplest English equivalent.
‘Lady thy beauty doth so mad mine eyes,
Driving my heart to strife wherein he dies.’
[ . . . ]
The next line is rather a cliche´; the line after more or less lacking in interest. We pull up
on:
4.2 ezra pound
277

‘Whereby thou seest how fair thy beauty is
To compass doom’.
That would be very nice, but it is hardly translation. [ . . . ]
My two lines take the opening and two and a half of the Italian, English more concise;
and the octave gets too light for the sestet. Lighten the sestet.
‘So unto Pity must I cry
Not for safety, but to die.
Cruel Death is now mine ease
If that he thine envoy is.’
We are preserving one value of early Italian work, the cantabile; and we are losing
another, that is, the speciWc weight. (pp. 195–6)
But by taking these Italian sonnets, which are not metrically the equivalent of the English
sonnet, by sacriWcing, or losing, or simply not feeling and understanding their cogency,
their sobriety, and by seeking simply that far from quickly or so-easily-as-it-looks
attainable thing, the perfect melody, careless of exactitude of idea, or careless as to
which profound and fundamental idea you, at that moment, utter, perhaps in precise
enough phrases, by cutting away the apparently non-functioning phrases (whose appear-
ance deceives) you Wnd yourself in the English seicento song-books.
Death has become melodious; sorrow is as serious as the nightingale’s, tombstones are
shelves for the reception of rose-leaves. And there is, quite often, a Mozartian perfection of
melody, a wisdom, almost perhaps an ultimate wisdom, deplorably lacking in guts. (p. 197)
As second exercise, we may try the sonnet by Guido Orlando [‘Onde si move e donde
nasce Amore’] which is supposed to have invited Cavalcanti’s Donna mi Prega.
‘Say what is Love, whence doth he start
Through what be his courses bent
Memory, substance, accident
A chance of eye or will of heart
Whence he state or madness leadeth
Burns he with consuming pain
Tell me, friend, on what he feedeth
How, where, and o’er whom doth he reign
Say what is Love, hath he a face
True form or vain similitude
Is the Love life, or is he death
Thou shouldst know for rumour saith:
Servant should know his master’s mood —
Oft art thou ta’en in his dwelling-place.’
278
from pound to nabokov

[ . . . ] there is no deception, I have invented nothing, I have given a verbal weight
about equal to that of the original, and arrived at this equality by dropping a couple of
syllables per line. [ . . . ]
There is no question of giving Guido in an English contemporary to himself, the ultimate
Britons were at that date unbreeched, painted in woad, and grunting in an idiom far more
diYcult for us to master than the Langue d’Oc of the Plantagenets or the Lingua di Si.
If, however, we reach back to pre-Elizabethan English, of a period when the writers
were still intent on clarity and explicitness, still preferring them to magniloquence and
the thundering phrase, our trial [translation of ‘Chi e` questa che vien, ch’ ogni uom la
mira’, by Guido Cavalcanti], or mine at least, results in:
‘Who is she that comes, makyng turn every man’s eye
And makyng the air to tremble with a bright clearenesse
That leadeth with her Love, in such nearness
No man may proVer of speech more than a sigh?
Ah God, what she is like when her owne eye turneth, is
Fit for Amor to speake, for I cannot at all;
Such is her modesty, I would call
Every woman else but an useless uneasiness.
No one could ever tell all of her pleasauntness
In that every high noble vertu leaneth to herward,
So Beauty sheweth her forth as her Godhede;
Never before so high was our mind led,
Nor have we so much of heal as will aVord
That our mind may take her immediate in its embrace.’
The objections to such a method are: the doubt as to whether one has the right to take
a serious poem and turn it into a mere exercise in quaintness; the ‘misrepresentation’ not
of the poem’s antiquity, but of the proportionate feel of that antiquity, by which I mean
that Guido’s thirteenth-century language is to twentieth-century Italian sense much less
archaic than any fourteenth-, Wfteenth-, or early sixteenth-century English is for us. [ . . . ]
And as [the fervour of the original] simply does not occur in English poetry in those
centuries there is no ready-made verbal pigment for its objectiWcation.
In the long run the translator is in all probability impotent to do all of the work for the
linguistically lazy reader. He can show where the treasure lies, he can guide the reader in
choice of what tongue is to be studied. [ . . . ]
This refers to ‘interpretative translation’. The ‘other sort’, I mean in cases where the
‘translator’ is deWnitely making a new poem, falls simply in the domain of original
writing, or if it does not it must be censured according to equal standards, and praised
with some sort of just deduction, assessable only in the particular case. (198–200)
4.2 ezra pound
279

‘South-Folk in Cold Country,’ from Cathay (1915), included in Personae: The Collected
Shorter Poems of Ezra Pound, introd. Hugh Kenner (London and Boston: Faber and
Faber, 1971), 139; also in Translations (1970), 200, and Poems and Translations (2003), 259
The Dai horse neighs against the bleak wind of Etsu,
The birds of Etsu have no love for En, in the north,
Emotion is born out of habit.
Yesterday we went out of the Wild-Goose gate,
To-day from the Dragon-Pen.1
Surprised. Desert turmoil. Sea sun.
Flying snow bewilders the barbarian heaven.
Lice swarm like ants over our accoutrements.
Mind and spirit drive on the feathery banners.
Hard Wght gets no reward.
Loyalty is hard to explain.
Who will be sorry for General Rishogu,
the swift moving,
Whose white head is lost for this province?
(Li T’ai Po)
note
1. i.e., we have been warring from one end of the empire to the other, now east, now west, on each border.
Letters to W. H. D. Rouse, from The Letters of Ezra Pound 1907–1941, pref. Mark Van
Doren, ed. D. D. Paige (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World, 1950)
Letter 290, Rapallo, February 1935
I don’t see that one translates by leaving in unnecessary words; that is, words not
necessary to the meaning of the whole passage, any whole passage. An author uses a
certain number of blank words for the timing, the movement, etc., to make his work
sound like natural speech. I believe one shd. check up all that verbiage as say 4% blanks,
to be used where and when wanted in the translation, but perhaps never, or at any rate
not usually where the original author has used them. [ . . . ]
When I suggest your doing a translation with all the meaning, I didn’t mean merely to
put back words, or translations for words. (269)
Letter 292, Rapallo, 18 March 1935
NO NO! Doc: Here you are backslidin’ on all your highly respectable principles and
slinging in licherary langwidg and puttin’ yer sentences all out of whack.
280
from pound to nabokov

‘Odysseus’ boy jumped out of bed as rednailed etc. appeared thru the dawn mist,’ or
whatever; and if he reached for his six-shooter before puttin’ on his boots, that is a point
to be made, as highly illustrative of the era. A guards oYcer wdn’t. But I reckon in Idaho
in the 80’s Blue Dick or Curly might have. And for his feet, they ought to be well-kept, or
elegant or patrician otherwise they slide into book-talk.
Tain’t what a man sez, but wot he means that the traducer has got to bring over. The
implication of the word.
As fer them feet, the blighter had been usin cold cream, the bloomin’ Bloomsburry
knut!! [ . . . ]
I think the openings of the books need especial care. This Wrst page of book two is bad.
I mean it is just translation of words, without your imagining the scene and event
enough, and without attending to the English idiom. [ . . . ]
People have been trying to translate this [book] for 400 years. Can’t be done easy. Very
deWnite sense: Telemachus growing up and asserting himself. It is the vividness and
rapidity of narration, three little scenes, all alive. That is writing. I just don’t think you’ve
yet got it. At any rate I’d like to see a ‘rewrite’ as if you didn’t know the words of the
original and were telling what happened.
Excuse this Wrmness, but hang it, anything else wd. be waste of both our time.
(pp. 271–2)
Letter 294, Rapallo, 17 April 1935
I don’t know that I have been clear enough re recurrable epithets—either to be simple
and natural so that repeat don’t worry one, or else strange and part of deWnite intended
stylization.
Glaux, owl, totem or symbolic bird (gods connected with the divine animals, as stupid
bitch Hera has her bull eyes), glare-eyed, owl-eyed Athena.
The Apollo at Villa Giulia gives tip to Mediterranean gods; startling, sudden, none of
that washy late stuV done by sculpting slave models, nor afternoon-tea Xtian piety. Gods
tricky as nature.
‘Wine dark’ I shd. accept. It is outside northern belief, but tells something about
Mediterranean water that has to be seen.
Blond Menelaus: small dark Pelasgians or Mediterraneans still believe in cuckolding
large Nordic fatheads. CucuWer un anglais, etc. At any rate, he has blond temperament,
not redhead but note that as language you can repeat carrot-top, sorrel-top, reddy,
whereas hair colours sound literary. As black-headed, etc.
The Nordic Menelaus. As to character of Odysseus. Anything but the bright little
Rollo of Chambers’ Journal brought up on Sam Smiles. Born on po’ misero, don’t want
to go to war, little runt who Wnally has to do all the hard work, gets all Don Juan’s chances
4.2 ezra pound
281

with the ladies and can’t really enjoy ’em. Circe, Calypso, Nausicaa. Always some Xy in
the ointment, last to volunteer on stiV jobs. (p. 273)
Letter 295, Rapallo, April 1935
Dear Dr Rouse: Sorry, but I am afraid I think the start of V. just plain damn bad.
Careless, frivolous. Missed opportunities all over it.
Let’s list the aims:
1. Real speech in the English version.
2. Fidelity to the original
a. meaning
b. atmosphere
No need of keeping verbal literality for phrases which sing and run naturally in the
original. But, the theoio is strong magic.
The Argicide, Hermes, carried past, the movement with the wind takes the god into
nature. It is raw cut of concrete reality combined with the tremendous energy, the contact
with the natural force. The reality that becomes mere pompous rhetoric in Milton. The
miracle of Homer is that great poesy is everywhere latent and that the literary Wnish is up
to Henry James. (273–4)
Letter 296, Rapallo, 23 May 1995
The Wrst essential is the narrative movement, forward, not blocking the road as
Chapman does. Everything that stops the reader must go, be cut out. And then
everything that holds the mind, long after the reading, i.e., as much as is humanly
possible, must be clamped back on the moving prose. It is enough to break six men’s
backs, and if you hadn’t been there in a sailing boat, I shd. lie down and surrender [ . . . ].
(275)
Letter 297, Rapallo, 6 June 1935
Dear Dr Rouse: I thought I had given plenary approval to Nanny and all yr. country
idiom, any real speech [ . . . ]
[Same letter as above] 13 June 1935
The chief impression in reading Homer is freshness. Whether illusion or not, this is the
classic quality. 3000 years old and still fresh. A trans. that misses that is bad. Must get new
combinations of words. I can’t recall ‘patient protagonist’ as occurring in English. I use
this as example. A trans of meaning. I repeat Dazzi’s scandal re using ‘paroles en liberte´’
and also wonder about Aeschylus and syntax, whether editors haven’t tried to put back
too much. (275)
282
from pound to nabokov

Letter 332, Rapallo, 4 November 1937
Benedictions: No, I am not cursing you fer not makin your kings talk like gangsters.
[ . . . ]
Where the translation can be improved is in dimension of inXection of the voice.
Possibly no change of vocabulary required, but the greater variety of intonation and of
sentence movement. The indication of tone of voice and varying speeds of utterance. In
that, Homer is never excelled by Flaubert or James or any of ’em. But it needs the
technique of one or more life times.
I dare say (in private) that the use of slang is merely a sign of imperfect technique. The
slanger wants to get the real sound of speech as spoken, and can only get near it by using
the expression of the moment. Limited, this view, by fact that the god damn iggurunt
often think they are using vulgah and slangy eggspreshuns when they are using words
right out er Bill Shxpr, such as ‘boosing’ or ‘bowsing,’ etc. Look at Pericles :
Faith, she would serve, (pause)
after a long voyage at sea.
The cadence is so well-taken that even the archaism in the Wrst word doesn’t dim the
naturalness of the sentence.
1. words
2. sentences and movements of same—
two parts of writin’.
I come back to Ulysses the toV, liftin his imaginary highhat as he comes out of the
underbrush. (pp. 298–9)
From ‘The Seafarer’ [1912], included in The Translations of Ezra Pound, introd. Hugh
Kenner (London and Boston: Faber & Faber, 1970), 207–9; also in Poems and
Translations, pp. 236–8)
[From the Anglo-Saxon.]
May I for my own self song’s truth reckon,
Journey’s jargon, how I in harsh days
Hardship endured oft.
Bitter breast-cares have I abided,
Known on my keel many a care’s hold,
And dire sea-surge, and there I oft spent
Narrow nightwatch nigh the ship’s head
While she tossed close to cliVs. Coldly aZicted,
My feet were by frost benumbed.
4.2 ezra pound
283

Chill its chains are; chaWng sighs
Hew my heart round and hunger begot
Mere-weary mood. Lest man know not
That he on dry land loveliest liveth,
List how I, care-wretched, on ice-cold sea,
Weathered the winter, wretched outcast
Deprived of my kinsmen;
Hung with hard ice-Xakes, where hail-scur Xew,
There I heard naught save the harsh sea
And ice-cold wave, at whiles the swan cries,
Did for my games the gannet’s clamour,
Sea-fowls’ loudness was for me laughter,
The mews’ singing all my mead-drink.
Storms, on the stone-cliVs beaten, fell on the stern
In icy feathers; full oft the eagle screamed
With spray on his pinion.
Not any protector
May make merry man faring needy.
This he little believes, who aye in winsome life
Abides ’mid burghers some heavy business,
Wealthy and wine-Xushed, how I weary oft
Must bide above brine.
Neareth nightshade, snoweth from north,
Frost froze the land, hail fell on earth then,
Corn of the coldest. Nathless there knocketh now
The heart’s thought that I on high streams
The salt-wavy tumult traverse alone.
Moaneth alway my mind’s lust
That I fare forth, that I afar hence
Seek out a foreign fastness.
For this there’s no mood-lofty man over earth’s midst,
Not though he be given his good, but will have in his youth greed;
Nor his deed to the daring, nor his king to the faithful
But shall have his sorrow for sea-fare
Whatever his lord will.
He hath not heart for harping, nor in ring-having
Nor winsomeness to wife, nor world’s delight
Nor any whit else save the wave’s slash,
Yet longing comes upon him to fare forth on the water.
[ . . . ]
284
from pound to nabokov

From ‘How to Read’ (Wrst appeared in the New York Herald Tribune, ‘Books’, 1929),
included in Literary Essays, 15–40
If we chuck out the classiWcations which apply to the outer shape of the work, or to its
occasion, and if we look at what actually happens, in, let us say, poetry, we will Wnd that
the language is charged or energized in various manners.
That is to say, there are three ‘kinds of poetry’:
melopoeia, wherein the words are charged, over and above their plain meaning, with
some musical property, which directs the bearing or trend of that meaning.
phanopoeia, which is a casting of images upon the visual imagination.
logopoeia, ‘the dance of the intellect among words’, that is to say, it employs words
not only for their direct meaning, but it takes count in a special way of habits of usage, of
the context we expect to Wnd with the word, its usual concomitants, of its known
acceptances, and of ironical play. It holds the aesthetic content which is peculiarly the
domain of verbal manifestation, and cannot possibly be contained in plastic or in music.
It is the latest come, and perhaps most tricky and undependable mode.
The melopoeia can be appreciated by a foreigner with a sensitive ear, even though he be
ignorant of the language in which the poem is written. It is practically impossible to
transfer or translate it from one language to another, save perhaps by divine accident, and
for half a line at a time.
Phanopoeia can, on the other hand, be translated almost, or wholly, intact. When it is
good enough, it is practically impossible for the translator to destroy it save by very crass
bungling, and the neglect of perfectly well-known and formulative rules.
Logopoeia does not translate; though the attitude of mind it expresses may pass
through a paraphrase. Or one might say, you can not translate it ‘locally’, but having
determined the original author’s state of mind, you may or may not be able to Wnd a
derivative or an equivalent. (25)
From ‘Translators of Greek: Early Translators of Homer’ (1920), included in Literary
Essays, 249–79
We have drifted out of touch with the Latin authors [ . . . ] and we have mislaid the Wne
English versions: Golding’s Metamorphoses; Gavin Douglas’s Aeneids; Marlowe’s Eclogues
from Ovid, in each of which books a great poet has compensated, by his own skill, any
loss in transition; a new beauty has in each case been created. (249)
Pope [ . . . ] has at least the merit of translating Homer into something. The nadir of
Homeric translation is reached by the Leaf-Lang prose; Victorian faddism having
persuaded these gentlemen to a belief in King James fustian; their alleged prose has
4.2 ezra pound
285

neither the concision of verse nor the virtues of direct motion. [ . . . ] their version is full
of ‘Now behold I’ and ‘yea even as’ and ‘even as when’ tushery [ . . . ] (250)
Obscurities not inherent in the matter, obscurities due not to the thing but to the
wording, are a botch, and are not worth preserving in a translation. The work lives not
by them but despite them.
Rossetti is in this matter sounder than Browning, when be says that the only thing
worth bringing over is the beauty of the original; and despite Rossetti’s purple plush and
molasses trimmings he meant by ‘beauty’ something fairly near what we mean by the
‘emotional intensity’ of his original. (268)
One might almost say that Aeschylus’ Greek is agglutinative, that his general drive,
especially in choruses, is merely to remind the audience of the events of the Trojan war;
that syntax is subordinate, and duly subordinated, left out, that he is not austere, but
often even verbose after a fashion (not Euripides’ fashion).
A reading version might omit various things which would be of true service only if the
English were actually to be sung on a stage, or chanted to the movements of the choric
dance or procession. (273)
Comparison of translations of Homer, The Odyssey, beginning of canto 1
Beginning of ‘Canto 1’ (1917; Wnal rev. 1925), in The Cantos of Ezra Pound (1993) 3–5.
[The Andreas Divus mentioned is Andreas Divus Justinopolitanus, translator of the
Odyssey into Latin (Parisiis: In oYcina Christiani Wecheli, 1538), a book bought second-
hand by Pound sometime between 1906 and 1910. Pound relates this provenance in
‘Translators of Greek: Early Translators of Homer’, Literary Essays, p. 259. Divus’s version
appears below.]
And then went down to the ship,
Set keel to breakers, forth on the godly sea, and
We set up mast and sail on that swart ship,
Bore sheep aboard her, and our bodies also
Heavy with weeping, and winds from sternward
Bore us out onward with bellying canvas,
Circe’s this craft, the trim-coifed goddess.
Then sat we amidships, wind jamming the tiller,
Thus with stretched sail, we went over sea till day’s end.
Sun to his slumber, shadows o’er all the ocean,
Came we then to the bounds of deepest water,
To the Kimmerian lands, and peopled cities
Covered with close-webbed mist, unpierced ever
286
from pound to nabokov

With glitter of sun-rays
Nor with stars stretched, nor looking back from heaven
Swartest night stretched over wretched men there.
The ocean Xowing backward, came we then to the place
Aforesaid by Circe.
[ . . . ]
Lie quiet Divus. I mean, that is Andreas Divus,
In oYcina Wecheli, 1538, out of Homer.
And he sailed, by Sirens and thence outward and away
And unto Circe.
Venerandam,
[ . . . ]
Andreas Divus’s Latin translation, used by Pound, with ad verbum translation of the Latin by
Gottskalk Jensson.
[Divus’s version stays very close to the Greek source text (see the Greek with literal
translation after Chapman’s version in Sect. 2.6, above).]
Andreas Divus (1538)
English crib
‘At postquam ad navem descendimus, et mare,
Nauem quidem primum deduximus in mare diuum.
Et malum posuimus et vela in navi nigra:
Intro` autem oues accipientes ire fecimus, intro` et ipsi
Iuimus dolentes, huberes lachrymas fundentes:
Nobis autem a tergo navis nigrae prorae
Prosperum ventum imisit pandentem velum bonum amicum
Circe benecomata gravis Dea altiloqua.
Nos autem arma singula expendientes in navi
Sedebamus: hanc autem ventusque gubernatorque dirigebat:
Huius at per totum diem extensa sunt vela pontum transientis:
Occidit tunc Sol, obumbratae sunt omnes viae:
Haec autem in Wnes pervenit profundi Oceani:
Illic autem Cimmeriorum virorum populusque civitasque,
Caligine et nebula cooperti, neque unquam ipsos
Sol lucidus aspicit radiis,
Neque quando tendit ad coelum stellatum,
Neque quando retro in terram a coelo vertitur:
Sed nox pernitiosa extenditur miseris hominibus:
Navem quidem illuc venientes traximus, extra autem oves
Accepimus: ipsi autem rursus apud Xuxum Oceani
Iuimus, ut in locum perveniremus quem dixit Circe:’
‘And when we had descended to the ship, and the sea, we
indeed Wrst drew the ship down into the divine sea. And
we put the mast and sails in the black ship; and taking the
sheep we made them go aboard the ship, ourselves also
going aboard lamenting, shedding abundant tears. But for
us fair-haired Circe, weighty goddess of lofty speech, sent
behind the dark-prowed ship a favourable wind Wlling the
sail, a good friend. And having arranged every bit of tackle
in the ship we remained seated; but her the wind and the
steersman directed; and throughout the entire day her sails
were stretched as she cruised over the sea. The sun then
set, all roads were overshadowed; and she came to the ends
of deep Ocean; and there is the people and city of
Cimmerian men, covered in mist and cloud, and never does
the shining sun look upon them with rays, not when tending
to the starry sky, nor when turning back to earth
from heaven. But pernicious night is extended over
miserable humans. Indeed coming to this place we pulled
the ship, and took the sheep out; and we ourselves went
back beside the stream of Ocean, until we came to the
place which Circe pointed out.’
4.2 ezra pound
287

From ‘Date Line’ (originally in Make It New, 1934), included in Literary Essays,
74–87
Criticism has at least the following categories [ . . . ]
1. Criticism by discussion [ . . . ]
2. Criticism by translation.
3. Criticism by exercise in the style of a given period. [ . . . ]until a man can actually
control a given set of procedures there must be many elements in them of which he has
but an imperfect knowledge.
This introduces almost a personal note, or at least a long-delayed reply to carpers
who objected to my spending three days in translating Fontenelle on the ground
that I should have been ‘doing original work and not wasting my energies in translation’.
[ . . . ]
4. Criticism via music, meaning deWnitely the setting of a poet’s words; e.g. in [my
opera] Le Testament, Villon’s words, and in [my melopoetic translations in] Cavalcanti,
I have set Guido’s and Sordello’s. [ . . . ]
This is the most intense form of criticism save:
5. Criticism in new composition. [ . . . ]
Criticism so far as I have discovered has two functions:
1. Theoretically it tries to forerun composition, to serve as gunsight, though there is,
I believe, no recorded instance of the foresight having ever been of the slightest use save
to actual composers. I mean the man who formulates any forward reach of co-ordinating
principle is the man who produces the demonstration. [ . . . ]
2. Excernment. The general ordering and weeding out of what has actually been
performed. [ . . . ]
The ordering of knowledge so that the next man (or generation) can most readily
Wnd the live part of it, and waste the least possible time among obsolete issues. (74–5)
Further Reading
Works by Pound or translated by Pound
The Cantos of Ezra Pound (New York: New Directions, 1993).
The Letters of Ezra Pound, 1907–1941, preface by Mark Van Doren, ed. D. D. Paige (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and
World, 1950).
Literary Essays of Ezra Pound, introd. and ed. T. S. Eliot (New York: New Directions, 1968).
Poems and Translations, ed. Richard Sieburth (The Library of America, 2003).
Personae: The Collected Shorter Poems of Ezra Pound (New York: New Directions, 1971).
The Translations of Ezra Pound introd. Hugh Kenner (London and Boston: Faber and Faber, 1970).
288
from pound to nabokov

Works on Pound
Apter, Ronnie, Digging for the Treasure: Translation after Pound (New York: Paragon, 1987).
Kenner, Hugh, The Pound Era (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1971).
Sullivan, J. P., Ezra Pound and Sextus Propertius: A Study in Creative Translation (Austin: University of Texas Press,
1964).
Yip, Wai-lim, Ezra Pound’s ‘Cathay’, (Princeton: Princeton UP, 1969).
4.2 ezra pound
289

4.3 Constance Garnett
Constance Garnett (1861–1946) translated a substantial portion of the classical
(nineteenth-century) corpus of Russian literature, with the exception of its poetry, some
sixty volumes, including the major works of Turgenev, Goncharov, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy,
Gogol, Herzen, and Chekhov.
Constance was married to Edward Garnett, son of Richard Garnett, Keeper of Printed
Books at the British Museum (now the British Library). He was a minor writer but an
inXuential publisher’s reader, encouraging many important writers, including Joseph
Conrad and D. H. Lawrence. David Garnett, their novelist son, who has written a
biography of Constance, comments on the liberality of what in many respects was a
respectable Victorian household. Constance worked for an educational and recreational
charitable organization in London and also joined the socialist Fabian Society, for a while
serving on the executive committee, although she later withdrew when it became increas-
ingly dominated by advocates of state socialism.
In 1891 the Garnetts moved out of London to the country. Edward, however, who had
met a number of political exiles, especially populist (narodnik) Russian thinkers and
writers in London, invited one of them, Feliks Volkhovsky, to visit them, and it is from
this visit that Constance’s involvement with Russia and Russian literature dates,
Volkhovsky persuading her to learn Russian, which she did with remarkable speed by
the long-standing method of translating literary texts. She was introduced to other Russian
exiles, most importantly the political activist Sergei Stepniak-Kravchinsky, who encour-
aged Constance to continue as a translator, which he saw as an eVective means of
propagating the ideology of liberation.
Part of Constance Garnett’s success obviously lay in the appeal of a newly discovered
major literature, but the sheer extent of her work also helps explain its impact, and should
be borne in mind when assessing individual works. Her Wrst translation, 1894, was of Ivan
Goncharov’s A Common Story which had been published in Russia in 1847. Goncharov, of
course, is best known as the author of Oblomov (1859, Wrst English translation not until
1915), it being Garnett evidently who introduced his work. The same year she published a
translation of Tolstoy’s The Kingdom of God is Within You, and scarcely a year passed
without her publishing one or more major translation, notably the complete works of Ivan
Turgenev, who died in 1883, in Wfteen volumes (1894–9), hers not being the Wrst translation
of Turgenev, but by far the most substantial. In 1898, on the Wrst of her two trips to Russia,
she visited Tolstoyan schools for peasants and Tolstoy himself. She went on to translate
Anna Karenina, War and Peace, as well as a number of his short stories (1901–4).
290
from pound to nabokov

Garnett’s translation of Dostoevsky’s Brothers Karamazov in 1912 began the vogue for
Russian writing and in particular for that of Fyodor Dostoevsky himself, whose entire
oeuvre she translated, in thirteen volumes (1912–1920), still managing to complete a
translation of all Chekhov’s stories (1916–22). Her translations of Chekhov’s plays have
perhaps occasioned the most criticism (see Crankshaw’s memoir below), but they were also
inXuential in their time; Bernard Shaw’s Heartbreak House owed much to Garnett’s
translation of The Cherry Orchard. Other important translations are My Life and Works,
memoirs of the philosopher and radical political thinker Alexander Herzen (1924–7), and
the works of Nikolay Gogol, in six volumes.
The impact of Russian prose on English literature can hardly be exaggerated, and no
more can Constance Garnett’s role, this being acknowledged, for instance, by Katherine
MansWeld who clearly was greatly in debt to Garnett for her translations of Chekhov’s
short stories.
Garnett had, of course, had the advantage in some cases (Turgenev, Tolstoy, Dostoevsky,
Chekhov) of translating work by writers who were almost contemporaries. The scale of her
work was astonishing even if she was not in every case the Wrst in the Weld, with the notable
exceptions of Anton Chekhov and Fyodor Dostoevsky. As the most proliWc of translators,
she, above all, was responsible for the vogue for Russian writing, this being fuelled to some
extent by the modernist spirit and progressive political views of the Bloomsbury group, at
the centre of which she and Edward found themselves. As George Hyde puts it,1 this
modern spirit ‘called out across the decades to Russia, Wnding in the writing of a
dispossessed and oppressed ‘‘intelligentsia’’ an analogy for their sense of stylistic and
emotional crisis, of a comprehensive loss of identity (Joyce compared his own writing to
Lermontov’s in 1905)’. Constance’s sympathy for the exploited is evident, but she was out
of step with the new generation of socialists, holding that the economic interpretation of
history was too narrow.
Constance Garnett’s translations made Russian literature accessible to an English-
language public, already disposed to appreciate it. Whatever their shortcomings,
they unquestionably inaugurated the Russian fever of the early twentieth century. Her
importance for many major writers is a matter of record: Joseph Conrad, for instance, in a
letter to Edward Garnett (see Crankshaw’s, memoir, below); Constance herself received a
letter from the then unknown Katherine MansWeld, testifying to an attitude almost of
veneration: ‘My generation (I am 32) and the younger generation owe you more than
we ourselves are able to realize. These books have changed our lives, no less. What
could it be like to be without them!’ Edward Crankshaw, while not uncritical, draws
1 In Peter France (ed.), The Oxford Guide to Literative in English Translation (Oxford: OUP, 2000), 586.
4.3 constance garnett
291

attention to her essential merits as an interpreter of Russian literature. In particular, her
versions of Chekhov revolutionized the art of the short story, crucially inXuencing the likes
of the aforementioned MansWeld and of D. H. Lawrence, who was among her most ardent
admirers.
A few weeks before her death, Constance Garnett was invited to broadcast. She
was already 84 years old, crippled and ill, but the invitation led her to talk about the
subject of translation, on which she had not expressed herself in print before. Her remarks
are informal and anecdotal but even so aVord insights into both her methodology and
her general approach. In any case, this is virtually all we have, since her translations
never included prefatory comments by herself, although some (a few Turgenev novels)
were introduced, in fairly general terms, by her husband Edward. Her son, David
Garnett, made rapid notes of the conversation, which was published, as far as possible
in her own words, in The Listener, 30 January 1947. The same issue contained a useful
memoir by the journalist and political commentator Edward Crankshaw, which is
excerpted below.
Constance Garnett, The Art of Translation, conversation recorded in The Listener,
30 January 1947
I should like to be judged by my translation of Tolstoy’s War and Peace. But Tolstoy’s
simple style goes straight into English without any trouble. There’s no diYculty.
Dostoevsky is so obscure and so careless a writer that one can scarcely help clarifying
him—sometimes it needs some penetration to see what he is trying to say. Turgenev
is much the most diYcult of the Russians to translate because his style is the most
beautiful.
Once when I was translating The Sportman’s Sketches [Turgenev], I gave the Wrst draft
of six of the stories to the Russian revolutionary leader, Stepniak, to read over. I had put,
as I always did, alternative words above the line, whenever I was in some doubt of the
right word. Well, when I had Wnished all the stories in the volume, I asked Stepniak for
my manuscript, but he declared he had given it back to me. However, I could not
remember his doing so, and it was nowhere to be found. So I translated the six stories
again. When I had done this Stepniak found my Wrst translation among his papers and
returned it, so I compared the two translations to choose the best passages from each. To
my surprise I found they were identical; I had hesitated in the same places, over the same
words, and had written the same possible alternatives above the line in the same places.
I concluded that though someone else might do a better version, it was clear that I could
not myself. I had done the only version I was capable of. I took far more trouble over my
translations of Turgenev and of Chekhov than over any of my other translations because
292
from pound to nabokov

their Russian is so beautiful. I was very much pleased because the Russian critic,
Zhdanov, said it was impossible to translate Turgenev, and afterwards took the trouble
to go through some of my translations carefully, and said he was amazed that it was
possible for them to have been so well done.
Sometimes a word eludes me. One of the best translations I made was of the title of
Dostoevsky’s story ‘An Unpleasant Predicament’. The word ‘predicament’ eluded me and
I tried ‘experience’ and other words. Suddenly the word ‘predicament’ came and it was
the exact equivalent of the Russian.
There have been such infamously bad translations. For example, someone did a
translation of Chekhov’s story which I called ‘The Nightmare’—the Russian is
Koshmar—from the French word Cauchemar. He called it ‘The Incubus’. The story is
about someone who makes a complaint to the bishop against a poor village priest and
discovers later that he is starving, and the whole village is dying of starvation under
nightmarish conditions. The title ‘The Incubus’, has no meaning in relation to the story,
or quite the wrong associations. Again, I made a mistake in judgment in translating one
of Turgenev’s stories as A House of Gentlefolk. The Russian means ‘A Nest of Gentlefolk’,
but I was afraid the public would think it too queer. Afterwards someone published a
version called A Nest of Hereditary Legislators, and my title has now been changed to
A Nest of Gentlefolk, quite rightly.
The qualiWcations for a translator are to be in sympathy with the author he is
translating, and most important of all to be in love with words and interested in all
their meanings. The language of a country is the soul of its people, and if you debase the
language you debase the people and rob them of their heritage. The BBC has done such
splendid work by awakening the musical taste of the people: I should like to say that it
ought to do the same for the English language, the richest and the most beautiful in the
world, by awakening the people to the beauty of the language and avoiding the debased
jargon that is spreading everywhere.
The desire to modernise an author arises from ignorance of the past and from bad
taste. I have always tried to translate the Russians into the language of the period in which
they wrote, which is of course possible with Russian literature, since it is all relatively
modern. It would show grotesque insensibility to produce a translation of Gogol’s Dead
Souls, written at the same time as Pickwick, in the language of today’s newspapers. I am
particularly proud of having translated Dead Souls into English of the period in which it
was written. I agree there are obvious limits to this: there would be no advantage in trying
to translate ‘The Odyssey’ into the language of Chaucer—on the other hand no one
would want to translate it into modern slang. Thus with Dead Souls, one cannot translate
the language of Russian serfs before their emancipation into that of the proletariat of
today. One’s aim should always be to translate into the language of the corresponding
way of life.
4.3 constance garnett
293

Edward Crankshaw, ‘Work of Constance Garnett’, printed in The Listener, 30 January
1947
[ . . . ] [S]he was the Wrst, and she was an artist in her own right. The English language is
poor in its translations from other tongues: there have been only a handful of really
inspired translators since the authorised version of the Bible set the standard. The
chances of any of these knowing Russian must have been, statistically, very slender. But
Constance Garnett turned out to be one of them. [ . . . ] It is not necessary to know a
language well by examination standards to become a good translator. It is only necessary
to have the translator’s gift, which is a rare thing. If you have that it means that your
feeling for words and shades of expression is so highly developed that you know
instinctively what your author is trying to say, his tone of voice, his mood, his intentions,
and his ambiguities—even if you cannot tell, without looking up a word or two in a
dictionary, the technical equivalent in English of all the words he has used. Constance
Garnett had that gift, though with certain blind spots, which we shall come to later. [ . . . ]
[T]ranslation at this level of experience is something entirely diVerent in kind as well as
in degree from turning passages of Russian prose into respectable English prose: it is the
recreation of original thought and perceptions into a new medium. This Mrs Garnett
did. She re-created the great Russian classics in another medium: the medium of English
experience. It was summed up very nicely by Joseph Conrad in a letter to his friend and
adviser, Edward Garnett: ‘For the rest, Turgenev for me is Constance Garnett and
Constance Garnett is Turgenev. She has done the marvellous thing of placing the
man’s work inside English literature, and it is there that I see it—or rather that I feel
it’. It was particularly necessary for Conrad to be able to feel Turgenev in this way
because, for personal as well as general reasons, he abhorred Russia like the plague. But he
could not do without Turgenev.
It is the same for all of us today—those of us who were not brought up to speak
Russian. And we should add to Turgenev, Chekhov. Chekhov, for us, is Mrs Garnett, and
Mrs Garnett is Chekhov—for better or for worse. These were the two great writers
whom Mrs Garnett made supremely her own. She translated others, too. She threw
herself into Tolstoy and Dostoevsky. But for these she was not necessary, as she was for
Turgenev and Chekhov. The Xat, didactic cadences of Tolstoy relentlessly batter their way
into the paralysed consciousness of the most inept translator and reproduce themselves in
English with suYcient resemblance to their original state to achieve, by their inspired
accumulation, what Henry James would have called, had he been Tolstoy’s admirer, ‘the
sought total eVect’—though in fact, not at all admiring, he called both Tolstoy and
Dostoevsky ‘Xuid puddings’. Dostoevsky, too, with the overpowering vehemence of his
subject-matter and his manner, takes the thing out of the translator’s hands and sweeps
the reader along in an indiscriminate, headlong rush. It is not until you read and re-read
294
from pound to nabokov

one of the familiar poor translations that you realise how much more sharply you are
aware of the depth and detail of that overpowering landscape when Mrs Garnett takes
you over it. It is simply that you can do without her. In Turgenev, however, and in the
tales of Chekhov, you cannot. For here we enter the realm of the signiWcant word. If
Tolstoy thought in terms of chapters and Dostoevsky in terms of paragraphs, Chekhov
thought in terms of sentences, while Turgenev thought in terms of words and syllables—
and silences. A bad translator could have killed them both stone-dead by reducing them
to nonsense. But by an amazing piece of good luck they found Mrs Garnett, and,
through her, entered in their full stature into English literature. And, having entered it,
they changed it. This means, in eVect, that Mrs Garnett gave us a new literature.
I am not trying to suggest that without Constance Garnett the voices of the great
Russians would never have reached this country. What she did was to give them
authenticity and bring them into the common consciousness. Her own original contri-
bution, which we owe to her and to no one else at all, was the work of Chekhov, which
completely revolutionised the English short story, so that English short story writers—
and novelists—writing today, even if they have never read a word of Chekhov for
themselves, are writing as they do largely because of Chekhov—and Mrs Garnett.
[ . . . ] And until a year or two before the late war almost all the best and much of the
worst in English Wction was permeated with Chekhov—not, alas, by the best and truest
in that genius, whose immense and terrible stature is still not realised in this country, but
by certain aspects of his technique and his approach. But that is not the fault of
Constance Garnett. It is the fault of the writers themselves. And the same goes for the
theatre, though here, too, the inXuence of Chekhov’s plays, through Mrs Garnett’s
translations, immense though it is, and often beneWcial, is by no means everything that
it should be. And this time the translator is not entirely blameless. I spoke earlier of
certain blind spots in her so highly developed instinct for words and meaning. And the
greatest of these appears when it comes to dramatic writing involving dialogue. She did,
it seems to me, lack the sense of dialogue. [ . . . ]
You may wonder whether I know what I am saying when I use the word ‘genius’ in
connection with a translation—well, I think I do. If you will listen a moment to a certain
passage from Turgenev as re-created by Mrs Garnett I think you will understand why. It
comes from ‘The Tryst’ in A Sportsman’s Sketches:
I sat looking about and listening. The leaves faintly rustled over my head; from the
sound of them alone one could tell what time of year it was. It was not the gay
laughing tremor of the spring, nor the subdued whispering, the prolonged gossip of
the summer, nor the chill and timid faltering of late autumn, but a scarcely audible,
drowsy chatter. A slight breeze was faintly humming in the tree-tops. Wet with the
rain the copse in its inmost recesses was for ever changing as the sun shone or hid
behind a cloud; at one moment it was all radiance, as though suddenly everything
4.3 constance garnett
295

were smiling in it; the slender stems of the thinly-growing birch trees took all at
once the soft lustre of white silk, the tiny leaves lying on the earth were on a sudden
Xecked and Xaring with purplish gold, and the graceful stalks of the high, curly
bracken, decked already in their autumn colour, the hue of an over-ripe grape,
seemed interlacing in endlessly tangling criss-cross before one’s eyes. . . .
That is the kind of thing before which, whether in the Russian of Turgenev or the
English of Constance Garnett, you have to throw up your hands in acknowledgment of
magic. There is no knowing how it is done, the translation no less than the original. And
if that is not genius, then I don’t know what is.
Fyodor Dostoevsky, Crime and Punishment (Heinemann, 1914) (opening paragraphs),
translated by Constance Garnett
On an exceptionally hot evening early in July a young man came out of the garret
in which he lodged in S. Place and walked slowly, as though in hesitation, towards
K. Bridge.
He had successfully avoided meeting his landlady on the staircase. His garret was
under the roof of a high, Wve-storeyed house, and was more like a cupboard than a room.
The landlady, who provided him with garret, dinners and attendance, lived on the Xoor
below and every time he went out he was obliged to pass her kitchen, the door of which
invariably stood open. And each time he passed, the young man had a sick, frightened
feeling, which made him scowl and feel ashamed. He was hopelessly in debt to his
landlady and was afraid of meeting her.
This was not because he was cowardly and abject, quite the contrary: but for some
time past he had been in an over-strained, irritable condition, verging on hypochondria.
He had become so completely absorbed in himself and isolated from his fellows that he
dreaded meeting not only his landlady but anyone at all. He was crushed by poverty, but
the anxieties of his position had of late ceased to weigh upon him. He had given up
attending to matters of practical importance; he had lost all desire to do so. Nothing that
any landlady could do had a real terror for him. But to be stopped on the stairs to be
forced to listen to her trivial, irrelevant gossip, to pestering demands for payment, threats
and complaints, and to rack his brains for excuses, to prevaricate, to lie—no, rather than
that, he would creep down the stairs like a cat and slip out unseen.
This evening, however, on coming out into the street, he became acutely aware of his
fears.
296
from pound to nabokov

4.4 Walter Benjamin
Walter Benjamin (1892–1940), German-Jewish essayist, outstanding cultural and literary
critic, has been a shaping force in modern literary studies and more broadly in what has
come to be called cultural studies. His independent way of blending Marxist and
materialist approaches with Jewish Messianic and Kabbalistic ideas took form in a variety
of books and essays on literature, theatre, art, and technology, on the modern city, on
history, and on language. Benjamin’s favourite critical genre was the essay, which allowed
him to combine scholarly analysis with free-Xowing reXections, granting him room for
metaphoric speculation, where political and poetical elements sometimes meet in an
unexpected fashion.
When Benjamin brought out his translation of Baudelaire’s Tableaux parisiens (Heidel-
berg, 1923), he wrote an introduction in the form of an essay, which is arguably the single
most important piece of modern translation studies. It is somehow typical of Benjamin
that he never mentions Baudelaire (whom he wrote about elsewhere) by name in the
introduction, nor so much as touches on the fact that the book in hand contains his own
translations of several poems by Baudelaire. It seems that he wants to leave it wholly up to
the reader to make the connection; this may in fact be an illustration, in practice, of what
he says in the opening words of the introduction; in experiencing and getting to know a
work or form of art, it is of little use to take heed of the audience.
The introduction as a whole is in fact expressive of this ‘lack’ of consideration. This is a
complex piece of writing, packed with valuable observations, which the reader may have a
hard time Wtting together into a coherent argument of a conventional kind. The meeting
of languages, which takes place in the act of translation—and the third space that thus
comes into being—is for Benjamin a manifestation of certain basic elements of language as
a human faculty, indeed of a unifying ‘pure’ language, which may remain hidden in any
language, and which translation has a unique capacity to bring out, if not to capture.
Benjamin’s approach is clearly indebted to German Romantic scholars and translators
(Schleiermacher, Goethe, Humboldt, Ho¨lderlin), but he has given this line of thought a
strong modern twist, in some sense his own brand of what has been called the ‘linguistic
turn’, including his understanding of history as containing ‘messianic’ moments, which
can suddenly let in historical experiences from the past and open up the future.
The introduction, entitled ‘Die Aufgabe des U¨ bersetzers’ (‘The Task of the Translator’),
has been reprinted several times, in German and in several other languages, but generally
as a separate essay. In fact it is often discussed and referred to without any mention of the
fact that it originally served as an ‘introduction’ to a collection of translated poems. It was
4.4 walter benjamin
297

brought into English in 1968, in two diVerent translations: by Harry Zohn, as a part of the
well-known collection Illuminations (ed. Hanna Arendt), and by James Hynd and E. M.
Valk, with a facing German text, in the journal Delos (ed. D. S. Carne-Ross), the organ of
the short-lived National Translation Center, Austin, Texas. The Wrst of these has been
reprinted many times, but the present editors decided to reprint, in full, the Hynd and
Valk translation. It is followed by one of Benjamin’s translations of Baudelaire from the
1923 edition. We are indebted to Professor Norma Rinsler for the literal English version of
Benjamin’s German translation and for the accompanying notes, as well as for her help
with and comments on the literal version of Baudelaire’s French original.
The Task of the Translator, translated by James Hynd and E. M. Valk, Delos, 2 (1968),
76–96
To know a work of art or a genre well, it is of little use to take heed of the audience, of the
respondent. One does not merely go wrong when relating a work of art to a speciWc
public or to the representative of such a public; the very notion of an ideal ‘receiver’
vitiates any theory of art. By deWnition such a theory presupposes man’s being and
nature. Art does exactly the same: it merely presupposes a physical and spiritual human
presence. But never a speciWc act of response. For no poem is intended for its reader, no
painting for its viewer, no symphony for its listener.
Is a translation intended for readers who do not understand the language of the
original? That would seem to be an adequate explanation of the diVerent status of
original and translation in the realm of art. Moreover, this appears to be the only reason
for saying ‘the same thing’ twice. What does a work of literature ‘say’? What does it
communicate? Very little to someone who understands it. It does not, by its essential
nature, inform or assert. Nevertheless, the translation that was concerned merely to
communicate could transmit simply that—communication: in other words, the non-
essential. And this is a characteristic of bad translations. But what there is besides
communication in a literary work—and even the bad translator admits that this is the
essential: is it not the illimitable, the inapprehensible, the ‘poetic’? Which the translator
can only render if he too is a poet? To this in fact is due a second characteristic of the bad
translation, which can therefore be deWned as an inaccurate rendering of non-essential
content. Translation can be nothing more than that so long as it persists in serving the
reader. Yet if it were intended for the reader, so would the original be. If the original does
not exist for the reader, how should a translation?
Translation is a form. To understand it as such means going back to the original.
Because the original contains, in its translatability, the law that governs the translation.
This question of a work’s ‘translatability’ is two-fold. It can mean: will the work ever Wnd
298
from pound to nabokov

its proper translator among all its possible readers; or—and more to the point—does it,
by its nature, permit translation and therefore, given the signiWcance of the form,
demand it? Basically, the Wrst question must be decided contingently, the second is a
matter of demonstration. Only a superWcial approach that denied the independent
meaning of the second possibility would take them to be the same. In this connection,
it might be pointed out that certain concepts are best grasped if they are not associated,
a priori, exclusively with man. Thus one might speak of a life or a moment as
‘unforgettable’ even if all men had forgotten it. If its essence required that it not be
forgotten, then that assertion would not be false: it would only point to a requirement
not satisWed by man and, simultaneously, to a realm in which it could be satisWed: the
memory of God. By the same token, the question of the translatability of certain works
would remain open even if they were untranslatable for man. And indeed, given an
exacting concept of translation, should this not be the case to some extent? It is in the
light of such an analysis that one can ask whether a given work of literature requires
translation. The relevant proposition is this: if translation is a form, then the condition of
translatability must be ontologically necessary to certain works.
Translatability is an essential property of certain works—which is not to say that their
translation is essential to them in themselves, but merely that a particular signiWcance
inherent in the original takes expression in its translatability. One gains the insight that a
translation, however good, cannot be of any signiWcance to the original. Nevertheless it
has the closest tie with the original: because the original is translatable. Indeed, this tie is
the more intimate since it no longer signiWes anything to the original. It may be called a
natural or, more precisely, a vital tie. Just as the expressions of life are most intimately tied
to the living thing, but without signiWcance to it, so translation issues from the original.
Though less from its life than from its ‘surviving life.’ Coming after the original,
translation marks for signiWcant works, which never Wnd their proper translator in the
era of their creation, the stage of their continuing life. And the life and continuing life of
works of art must be understood not metaphorically but as simple matters of fact. Even
when thought was at its narrowest, life, it seemed, could not be limited to organic matter
alone. But one cannot bring this expanded dominion under the incompetent sway of
soul, as Fechner attempted; and the occasions of animal experience, those of sensation, of
which life is only intermittently conscious, are even less adequate to deWne it. In fact, the
concept only has its due when life is recognized in whatever is subject to the continuing
perspective of history, but not limited to it. For it is history alone, not nature, and
certainly not the Wtfulness of sensation or soul, that can Wnally determine the scope of
life. And here the philosopher Wnds his task: to understand all natural life from the
encompassing life of history. And surely the continuing life of works is easier to grasp
than that of creatures. Great works of art can trace their descent from their sources, their
production in the time of their creators, and the subsequent periods of a continuing
4.4 walter benjamin
299

life that is fundamentally eternal. This, when it occurs, is called fame. Translations which
do more than transmit communication occur when a work has reached the era of its fame
in its continuing life. Far, then, from promoting that fame, as bad translators are apt to
claim for their work, the translation owes its existence to it. The life of the original
reaches its ever-recurring, latest and most complete unfolding in translation.
This unfolding, as that of a special and higher life, is determined by a special and
higher purpose. Life and rational purpose—the interdependence of the two notions
looks patent; yet it eludes our understanding. Or rather, we can grasp it when we think of
‘purpose’ in a higher, generalized sphere, not in any particular, self-contained ‘goal.’ All
purposeful phenomena of life, like their rational purpose in general, are Wnally purpose-
ful not for life itself but for the expression of its essence, for the representation of its total
signiWcance. Thus translation’s ultimate purpose is to express the innermost relation
between languages. It cannot possibly, in itself, reveal or create this hidden relation; but it
can represent it by realizing it in germ or intention. And in fact this representation of a
total signiWcance through the attempt, the germ, of its creation is a quite special mode of
representation, virtually conWned to the linguistic province of life. Elsewhere, other types
of signiWcation—signs and analogies—are used, not intension, which realizes by antici-
pation and allusion. But the inner relation presumed between languages is that of a
special convergence. It consists in this: that languages are not alien to each other
but, a priori and apart from all historical connection, are related in that which they
wish to say.
This search for clariWcation may seem to have led the inquiry, after futile detours, back
to the traditional theory of translation. How can the kinship of the languages be validated
in translations, if not by conveying as precisely as possible the form and sense of the
original? The traditional theory could of course gain no exact concept of that precision
and thus could not, Wnally, give any account of what is the essence of translation. In
truth, the kinship of languages proves itself, in translation, to be something much more
profound and speciWc than the superWcial and indeWnable similarity of two literary
works. To grasp the true relation between original and translation requires a method
and an aim quite analogous to the procedure by which epistemology must prove the
impossibility of a picture theory of languages. If it is shown there that knowledge could
not be objective, could not even lay claim to objectivity if knowledge consisted of
pictures of reality, then it can be demonstrated here that no translation would be possible
if similarity with the original were the ultimate object of its being. In its continuing life—
how could one speak of ‘continuing life’ if the process did not involve the metamorphosis
and renewal of a life force—the original work changes. Words also, and be they Wrmly
writ, have their slow ripening. What in the author’s time may have been an extension of
his literary language may later be worked through; some new extension immanent in the
created work can become actual. What once was new can later sound trite; what once was
300
from pound to nabokov

viable can sound archaic. To seek the essence of such changes, and of the no less incessant
transformations of sense, in the subjectivity of succeeding generations rather than in the
life of language itself and its works would be to confuse—even allowing for the crudest
kind of psychologism—the basis and the substance of a fact; or, to put it more strongly,
to deny, from intellectual inadequacy, one of the most extraordinary and productive of
historical processes. And even if one were to make the Wnal stroke of the author’s pen the
work’s coup de graˆce, that moribund theory of translation could not be saved. For just as
in the course of the centuries the tone and meaning of the great literary works are
completely transformed, so too is the translator’s native language. Indeed, while the
writer’s words survive in his own language, even the greatest translation is destined to
diminish through the growth of the translator’s language and to be lost in its renewed life.
Translation is far removed from being the deaf, inert equation of two dead tongues.
Translation is, among all communicative modes, the one most concerned to mark the
ripening process in a foreign language and the pulse of changing life in its own.1
If the kinship of the languages is revealed in translation, this is due to something other
than the vague similarity between reproduction and original. Resemblance, obviously,
need not involve kinship. The concept of kinship is consistent, in this context, with its
narrower use; for identity of origin does not provide a suYcient deWnition in either case,
although, of course, the concept of origin will remain necessary for the deWnition of the
narrower sense. How are the two languages related, apart from their historical connec-
tion? Certainly as little by the resemblance of two literary works as by the resemblance of
words. Rather, all kinship of languages that goes beyond historical derivation is based on
this: that in each of them individually one thing, in fact the same thing, is meant—
something, however, that cannot be attained by any one language alone, but only by the
totality of their mutually supplementary intentions: pure, universal language. While, in
fact, all the individual elements—words, sentences, contexts—in foreign languages
exclude each other, in their intentions the languages supplement each other. The desire
to comprehend this principle exactly—one of the fundamental principles of the phil-
osophy of language—is implicit in the intention to distinguish between what is meant
and the manner of meaning. In ‘Brot’ and ‘pain,’ the same object is designated but not
signiWed. Due to the manner of meaning, the two words always signify something
diVerent for the German and the Frenchman, they are not interchangeable and in fact
tend ultimately to be mutually exclusive; but due to what is meant, taken absolutely, they
signify one and the same thing. Although the manner of meaning is thus quite at variance
in the two words, in the languages to which these words belong their manners of meaning
supplement each other. In these languages, in fact, the manner of meaning is integrated
into what is meant. That is, in the individual languages lacking this supplementary
relation, what is meant is never found in relative independence, as in individual words
and sentences; but it is subject to constant transformations until, out of the harmony of
4.4 walter benjamin
301

all these manners of meaning, that which is meant emerges as universal language. Until
then, it remains hidden in the individual languages. But if these continue to grow in this
way till the messianic end of their history, then it is translation which takes Wre in the
eternal continuing life of the works and in their ceaseless renewal, again and again testing
the holy growth of language—how far distant the hidden may be from revelation, how
conscious the awareness of this distance may be.
This is of course to admit that every translation is a somehow provisional manner of
coming to terms with the otherness of languages. A solution to this ‘otherness,’ one that
is not provisional and subject to time but both instant and Wnal, is denied to man or at
least cannot be pursued immediately. But mediately, it is the growth of religion which
ripens in languages the concealed seed of a higher language. Translation, therefore,
although it can raise no claim for the permanence of its creations, and in this is unlike
art, does not disown its movement towards an ultimate, Wnal and decisive stage of all
linguistic ordonnance. In it the original grows upwards as if in a higher and purer climate
of language. Translation, admittedly, cannot live there permanently any more than it can
reach there in every part of its form. Yet with marvellous insistence it at least points to
that as the realm, predestined and denied, where language is reconciled and fulWlled. The
original does not reach there root and branch, but whatever in a translation is more than
communication stands in this realm. This essential element can be more exactly deWned
as whatever in a translation is not retranslatable. That is, one may take from it all the
information one can, and translate it; yet there remains the intangible at which the true
translator aims. Unlike the language of the original author, this intangible cannot be
translated, since the relation of content to language is utterly diVerent in original and
translation. In the original, they form an assured unity, the unity of fruit and rind, while
the language of the translation invests its content in the ample folds of a royal mantle. For
it signiWes a higher language than it is, and thus, in its alien dimensions, must always be
unsuited to its content. This incongruity hampers any further transposition even as it
renders it superXuous. For every translation of a work from one set point in the history of
language represents, with regard to one set aspect of its content, those in all other
languages. At least to that extent, then, translation transplants the original—ironically
enough—to a more Wnal realm of language, because the original cannot be transferred
from this realm by any further rendering. All that can happen is that its other and
diVerent aspects can in their turn be raised to this higher realm. The word ‘ironical’ may
bring to mind the thinking of the Romantics, and with reason. They possessed particu-
larly keen insight into the life of works of art, the life to which translation is one of the
highest testimonies. Of course, they scarcely recognized it as such but rather turned their
whole attention to criticism, which constitutes another, if less important, moment in the
continuing life of a work of art. But even if their theory was scarcely concerned with
translation, their great achievement as translators showed their feeling for the essence and
302
from pound to nabokov

the dignity of the medium. Everything suggests that this feeling need not necessarily be
uppermost in a writer’s mind; indeed it may play a very minor role there. History does
nothing to conWrm the conventional preconception according to which the important
translators should be true writers and the unimportant translators inferior writers.
Take some of the major Wgures like Luther, Voss, Schlegel: they are incomparably
more important as translators than as writers; while others among the greatest, like
Ho¨lderlin and George, given the complete range of their work, cannot be classiWed
simply as poets. Nor, above all, as translators. Just as translation is a unique form, so too
the task of the translator may be taken as unique and clearly diVerentiated from that
of the writer.
The task is this: to Wnd in the translator’s language that latent structure which can
awake an echo of the original. It is this characteristic of translation that distinguishes it in
every way from an original work, since the design of the original is never directed to
language as such, its totality, but only, and immediately, to certain speciWc linguistic
clusters. But translation, unlike an original work, does not see itself as within the forest
depths of language but rather outside it, facing it; without itself entering those depths, it
calls the original inside, at that one point where, at a given moment, the echo in the
translator’s language can resound to the work in the foreign language. Not only does the
design aim at something diVerent for translation and original, since translation proceeds
from a single foreign work to language in its totality; the design itself is diVerent. That of
the writer is naı¨ve, primary, concrete; that of the translator derivative, Wnal, conceptual.
For the great impulse that charges the translator’s work is the integration of the many
languages into one true language. In that integration, admittedly, individual sentences,
creations, value judgments do not concur—which is why it remains dependent on
translation. But the languages themselves, completed and reconciled in the manner of
their meaning, do come to agreement. If there is a language of truth, in which the Wnal
secrets that draw the eVort of all thinking are held in silent repose, then this language of
truth is—true language. And it is precisely this language—to glimpse or describe it is the
only perfection the philosopher can hope for—that is concealed, intensively, in transla-
tions. There is no muse of philosophy, there is no muse of translation either. Yet these are
no philistine pursuits, as sentimental artists like to suppose. For philosophy has a genius
whose typical longing is for that language which is revealed in translation. ‘Les langues
imparfaites en cela que plusieurs, manque la supreˆme: penser e´tant ecrire sans accessoires,
ni chuchotement mais tacite encore l’immortelle parole, la diversite´ sur terre des idiomes
empeˆche personne de profe´rer les mots qui sinon se trouveraient, par une frappe unique,
elle-meˆme mate´riellement la ve´rite´.’ If what Mallarme´ is thinking in these words can be
strictly determined by the philosopher, then translation, bearing the seeds of such a
language, stands midway between creative writing and teaching. Its work does not rank
with theirs in expressiveness, yet it makes as deep a mark on history.
4.4 walter benjamin
303

If the task of the translator becomes clear in such a light, the path to its solution
threatens to become more impassably obscure. The task, in fact—to bring the seeds of
universal language to ripeness in translation—seems to defy solution, to be impervious to
all solution. For isn’t the basis of any such solution removed if the rendering of sense ceases
to matter? And, if you look at it negatively, it is to this point that everything said so far
leads. Fidelity and freedom—freedom to render the sense and, in its service, Wdelity to the
word—are the hoary concepts that occur in every discussion of translation. They seem of
no further service to a theory that seeks in translation something other than rendering of
sense. Even though the traditional use of these concepts always sees them in incessant
conXict. What exactly can Wdelity bring, in a speciWc way, to the rendering of sense?
Fidelity in the rendering of individual words can almost never carry over fully the sense
they have in the original. For this sense is not exhausted, in its creative signiWcance for the
original, in what is meant; rather, it acquires this signiWcance precisely as what is meant is
bound, in the speciWc word, to the manner of meaning. This is commonly expressed in the
formula that the word carries its emotional tone. In particular, literalness in regard to
syntax destroys any rendering of sense whatever and is in danger of becoming unintelli-
gible. To the nineteenth century, Ho¨lderlin’s translations of Sophocles were monstrous
and glaring examples of such literalness. How much harder, Wnally, the rendering of sense
is made by Wdelity in the rendering of form requires no explanation. Hence the demand
for literalness cannot be ascribed to the concern for preserving the signiWcance. The sense
is much better served—though the work and the language, of course, much less—by the
undisciplined freedom of the bad translator. Necessarily, then, the demand for
literalness—the reason for which is obvious, though the underlying motive may be deeply
concealed—must be more convincingly grounded. Just as the broken pieces of a vase, to
be joined again, must Wt at every point, though none may be exactly like the other; so
translation, rather than following the sense of the original, must Wt itself in its own
language, with loving particularity, to the original’s manner of meaning: so that
both languages (like fragments of one vase) may be recognized as fragments of a greater
language. Precisely for this reason, translation must largely disregard the aim of commu-
nication, the aim of rendering the sense; and the original is essential to it only in so far as it
relieves the translator (and his work) from the task of deWning and ordering the commu-
nicable. In this realm of translation it is also true that K Iæ~ŒŒ :Ð  › ºª. In the
beginning was the Word. Yet the language of the translation can—indeed must—let
itself go with respect to the sense of the original, in order that the intentio of that sense may
resonate with its own kind of intentio—not as reproduction, but as harmony and as
completion of the language in which it appears. It is therefore not the highest tribute to a
translation, especially in the period when it is produced, to say that it reads like an
original. The real meaning of Wdelity, which is vouched for by literalness, is rather that the
great longing for completion of the languages speaks from the work. Genuine translation
304
from pound to nabokov

is translucid; it does not veil the original text nor shadow it. Rather, it allows the radiance
of universal language, a radiance intensiWed by the particular idiom, to fall the more
brightly on the original. Such focusing, such richening of light, is achieved mainly by
Wdelity to syntax—a Wdelity which proves that words, not propositions, are the translator’s
true raw material. The proposition, the sentence-unit is a wall around the idiom of the
original; Wdelity to the word, literalness of felt verbal meaning, is the colonnade through
which the original can be seen.
If Wdelity and freedom in translation have in the past been regarded as conXicting
tendencies, then seemingly this deeper interpretation of one of these concepts, far from
reconciling the two, denies the other any legitimacy at all. To what does freedom refer if
not to the rendering of sense, which is no longer to be the ruling principle? Only if the
sense of a linguistic creation can be taken as identical with the sense it communicates, it
retains over and above all communication—so close, yet so utterly remote; hidden under
it, or rendered the more distinct; broken by it, or rendered the more powerful—
something Wnal, decisive. In all languages and their creations there remains, beyond the
communicable, something incommunicable, something symbolizing or symbolized,
according to context. Symbolizing only, in the ultimate creations of the languages;
symbolized, in the evolutions of the languages themselves. And what seeks to come
forward, indeed to come to birth, in the evolution of the languages is the germ of universal
language. But if this germ, though hidden and fragmentary, is nonetheless present in
actual life as that which is symbolized, it exists in works of art only in the form of its
symbolic representation. If that Wnal essence, which is universal language itself, is in
individual languages conWned to the linguistic and its transformations, then in works of
art it suVers from the burden of an alien sense. To free it, to transform the symbolizing into
the symbolized, to restore universal language, fully formed, to linguistic growth and
movement, this is the prodigious, the unique power of translation. Within this universal
language, which no longer signiWes anything and no longer expresses anything, but which
as inexpressive and creative Word is what is signiWed in every language, all communica-
tion, all sense and all design Wnally converge at a level where their extinction is ordained.
And there, precisely, freedom of language is conWrmed in a new and higher right. Not
freedom to transmit communicable sense, since the task of Wdelity is just to emancipate
translation from this necessity. Rather, freedom validates itself in its own language for the
sake of universal language. The task of the translator is this: in his own language to redeem
universal language from exile in the alien, to free it by translation from the work that
enthralls it. For its sake he breaks down the rotting barriers of his own language: Luther,
Voss, Ho¨lderlin, George extended the boundaries of German. What importance the sense
retains afterwards, for the relation of original and translation, can be caught in a simile.
Just as a tangent glancingly, at a single point only, touches the circle, and as the contact and
not the point prescribes the law by which it draws its straight line out to inWnity, in the
4.4 walter benjamin
305

same way, glancingly, and only at the inWnitely small point of the sense does the translation
touch the original, to follow its personal course, set by the law of Wdelity, in the freedom of
linguistic growth and movement. It was Rudolph Pannwitz, in his krisis der europa¨ischen
kultur, who recognized the true signiWcance of this freedom—though he did not call it
that nor expound it. Here is the passage; with Goethe’s notes to his Divan, it is easily the
best thing published in Germany on the theory of translation:
our translations, even the best, proceed from a false premise, they want to german-
ize hindi, greek, english, instead of hindi-izing, grecizing, anglicizing german. they
have a much greater respect for the little ways of their own language than for the
spirit of the foreign work. the fundamental error of the translator is that he
maintains the accidental state of his own language, instead of letting it suVer the
shock of the foreign language. he must, particularly if he translates a language very
remote from his own, penetrate to the ultimate elements of language itself, where
word, image, tone become one; he must widen and deepen his language through the
foreign one. no one realizes just how possible this is, to what degree every language
is capable of transformation, and language diVers from language almost as little as
dialect from dialect; but this is so only when one takes it not as something merely
superWcial, but as a matter of the deepest gravity.
How far a translation can accord with the essence of this form is objectively determined
by the translatability of the original. The less the quality and dignity of its language, the
greater the element of communication, the less it oVers to translation. A text that oVered
nothing but communicable sense, far from providing the occasion for a model translation,
would defeat translation altogether. The higher the nature of the work, the more
translatable it is even at the most glancing contact with the sense. This of course applies
only to original works. Translations are untranslatable not because of the diYculty of the
undertaking but from the all too limited way the sense adheres to them. Here, as in every
other essential respect; the aYrmative case is made by Ho¨lderlin’s translations, especially
those of the two Sophoclean tragedies. In them the harmony of the two languages is so
profound that sense is hardly touched by language, touched like an Aeolian harp by the
wind. Ho¨lderlin’s translations are archetypes of their form; they bear, to even the most
consummate versions of their text, the relation of archetype to prototype—compare
Ho¨lderlin’s and Borchardt’s versions of Pindar’s Third Pythian Ode. For this very reason,
in them more than in any others, resides the uncanny, primordial danger of all translation:
that the gates of language so wrenched from their hinges, so forced and traversed, should
slam and enclose the translator in silence. The Sophocles translations were Ho¨lderlin’s last
work. In them sense plunges from abyss to abyss until it threatens to vanish in unsound-
able depths of language. But there is a stay. Of all texts it is granted only to the Scriptures,
in which sense has stopped to be the watershed for the Xow of language and the Xow of
306
from pound to nabokov

revelation. Where the text belongs immediately, without mediation of sense, in its
literalness, to true universal language, to truth and teaching, it is translatable absolutely.
No longer for its own sake, but exclusively for the sake of the languages. In that encounter,
so limitless a conWdence is demanded of translation that, like language and revelation in
the text, literalness and freedom must without strain unite in the translation in the form of
the interlinear version. For in some degree, all great writings, but the Scriptures in the
highest degree, contain between the lines their virtual translation. The interlinear version
of the Scriptures is the archetype or ideal of all translation.
editors’ note
1. [The last two sentences are a translation of the following German sentence: ‘So weit ist sie entfernt, von zwei
erstorbenen Sprachen die taube Gleichung zu sein, daß gerade unter allen Formen ihr als Eigenstes es zufa¨llt, auf
jene Nachreife des fremden Wortes, auf die Wehen des eigenen zu merken’, i.e. ‘It [translation] is so far removed
from being the deaf equation of two dead languages, that of all forms it is in fact the one that is most inherently
concerned with watching over the ripening process of the foreign word, the labour pains of its own [word]’.
Given Benjamin’s dense expressive mode, it may seem important not to split the sentence in two. ‘Nachreife’ is a
pregnant word here, referring as it does to the process of ripening after harvesting; this may have signiWcant
resonances when used for the ‘farming’ and historical cultivation of language. Similarly, in view of Benjamin’s use
of imagery in the article, it may be questionable not to keep the metaphor of ‘Wehen’, language ‘in labour’. But
translating this particular text is no easy or painless task and it goes to show that translating a critical or theoretical
text can in certain cases be as arduous a struggle with dense and slippery language as is frequently the case with
poetry or other literary texts (see also the introduction to Sect. 5.11, below on Gayatri Spivak).]
Baudelaire and Benjamin
Charles Baudelaire, ‘La lune oVense´e’
French original
O Lune qu’adoraient discre`tement nos pe`res,
Du haut des pay bleus ou`, radieux se´rail,
Les astres vont te suivre en pimpant attirail,
Ma vieille Cynthia, lampe de nos repaires,
Vois-tu les amoureux, sur leurs grabats prospe`res,
De leur bouche en dormant montrer le frais e´mail?
Le poe¨te buter du front sur son travail?
Ou sous les gazons secs s’accoupler les vipe`res?
Sous ton domino jaune, et d’un pied clandestin,
Vas-tu, comme jadis, du soir jusqu’au matin,
Baiser d’Endymion les graˆces suranne´es?
4.4 walter benjamin
307

- ‘Je vois ta me`re, enfant de sie`cle appauvri,
Qui vers son miroir penche un lourd amas d’anne´es,
Et plaˆtre artistement le sein qui t’a nourri!’
Literal version of Baudelaire’s French, trans. Norma Rinsler
[See also Sect. 4.10, below. for Robert Lowell’s version.]
The Insulted/Injured Moon
O Moon that our fathers circumspectly adored
From the height of the blue countries where the stars,
A brilliant seraglio, will follow you in trim gear,1
Old Cynthia mine, lamp of our retreats/hideouts,
Do you see the lovers, on their prosperous beds/pallets,2
As they sleep, displaying their mouths’ fresh/bright enamel.
The poet beating his brow against his work/the page?
Or under the dry sod the viper couple?
Beneath your yellow cape/domino, and with stealthy foot,
Will, as of old, from dusk till dawn,
Kiss Endymion’s antiquated charms?
‘I see your mother, child of this indigent age,
Leaning towards the mirror her burden of years
And artfully powdering the breast that nourished you!’’
translator’s notes
1. ‘pimpant attirail’seems faintly derisive in this context, more colloquially translated, perhaps, as ‘dressed to kill’ or
‘dressed up to the nines’.
2. This phrase suggests a luxury hotel. ‘Lucky/fortunate beds’—for the lovers, that is—is a possibility.
German translation by Walter Benjamin
Die Kra¨nkung der Luna
O Luna deren Dienst nun Tote wahren
Kannst du von droben wo bei steifen Feiern
Die Sterne mit dir ziehn in Strahlenschleiern
Betagte du mit der wir munter waren
Auf ihrer Streu die Liebenden gewahren
Wenn schlummernd sie den reinen Mund entschleiern
Und wie des Dichters Haupt von Mu¨hen bleiern
Und wie im trocknen Gras sich Vipern paaren?
308
from pound to nabokov

Bliebst du in deinem gelben Domino
Endymions verbuhlter Anmut froh
Bei der du dich bis in den Tag verpat?
-‘Ju¨ngst wies also deine Mutter ich bestrahlte
Ihr Spiegel wie sie die bejahrte Last
Des Busens der dich na¨hrte sorgsam malte.’
Literal version of Benjamin’s German translation, trans. Norma Rinsler
O Moon whose worship dead men now preserve
Can you from up above where in formal solemnities
The stars move with you in veils of radiance1
You ancient one with whom we used to be merry
Perceive2 the lovers on their bed of straw
When sleeping they reveal their pure mouths
And how the poet’s head is leaden with his toil
And how in the dry grass the vipers couple?3
Did you remain in your yellow domino
Happy in Endymion’s wanton grace
With which you let yourself go4 until dawn?
—Just now therefore I revealed your mother I lit up5
Her mirror where she the aged burden
Of the breast that nourished you was painting.
translator’s notes
An absence of punctuation does not make German clearer! Line 9, Bliebst, is past tense, and one would have expected
Bleibst, which if not future as in French, is at least present tense. But the Wrst tercet is in the past tense too.
1. ‘Strahlenschleiern’ in German: ‘radiance-veils’, a lovely coinage.
2. The sense is ‘Can you . . . Perceive. . .’ but the distance is more normal in German than in English.
3. Another poem written about the same time (‘La Voix’) has, to describe the poet’s inner darkness, ‘Je traıˆne des
serpent qui mordent mes souliers’. So, maybe the poet Wnds these vipers underfoot too.
4. It is ‘forget yourself’, in the sense not of Wnding Nirvana but of losing one’s dignity. Bei der can only refer to
Anmut, not to Endymion, so it’s not ‘with whom’.
5. I am reading this as wies ich [und] bestrahlte, i.e. two verbs dependent on one subject.
4.4 walter benjamin
309

4.5 Martin Buber and Franz Rosenzweig
Martin Buber (1878–1965) was one of the most inXuential Wgures in the study of philoso-
phy and religion in the twentieth century. Among his books are I and Thou, Good and Evil,
On Judaism, Tales of the Hasidim, and On the Bible. Franz Rosenzweig (1886–1929) was a
theologian and translator (with Buber) of the Hebrew Bible, his principal work being The
Star of Redemption (1921). A collection of their writings on the Bible and its translation
appeared in 1936 under the title Die Schrift und ihre Verdeutschung; an English version,
Scripture and Translation, from which the excerpts below were taken, was published in
1994.
The translation of the Bible into German by Buber and Rosenzweig represents a
landmark in Bible translation, with its close philological reading of the Hebrew and
Aramaic source texts (cf. the example from Genesis 11 below). The translators focused,
notably, on the technical use of the ‘leading-word’ (‘Leitwort’) technique, parallelisms,
treating the text as oral in origin, the Hebrew Bible regarded as a whole, in eVect an
anthology extensively cross-referencing itself. It was therefore essential to render the cross-
referencing accurately and clearly, not to blur it, as in the King James translation, where
the focus had been also on the potential of the English language, with its richness of
synonyms. It is on principles deWned by Buber and Rosenzweig that Everett Fox (see Sect.
5.20, below) based his own translation of The Five Books of Moses (1995). The basic choice
in biblical translation has been between literal and dynamic (as propounded by Eugene
Nida, for instance, see Sect. 4.9, below) approaches, both of which may of course be
guided by religious impulses, although the dynamic approach usually indicates a concern
with proselytism, whereas the literal indicates greater attention to the wording of the
original text and is sometimes directed at scholars rather than the general reader.
Fox’s English translation reproduces features, in Buberian/Rosenzweigian fashion, of
the Hebrew biblical language. It is worth noting that this coincides with a renewed interest
in foreignization. While foreignization is not in the Wrst place tied to literalistic rendering
of the Scriptures, the climate created by its renewed acceptability is more hospitable to the
kind of translation practised by Fox, which thus seems more linked to radical or progres-
sive developments, than to the ad verbum medieval tradition. Ted Hughes is quoted on the
back cover of The Five Books of Moses: ‘Everett Fox’s new translation of the Old Testament
must be one of the most important books. For once since the King James, a translation
that comes right out of the heart of the living culture of the thing. I read with read
excitement, like a wholly new real text.’ The fact that for Hughes it read like a ‘real text’
310
from pound to nabokov

(meaning presumably an original rather than a translation text) is a signiWcant contem-
porary testimony to the success of Fox’s procedure.
Tyndale, it is true, translated the Bible so it should be accessible to every ploughboy,
whereas those who want still to hear his cadences are governed by a spirit of esotericism rather,
its remoteness from contemporary speech giving it the hallmark of the sacred. It was the
melliXuousness of the King James translators’ language that ensured the longevity of the so-
called Authorized Version. It seems unlikely that a version today, designed to be read in
churches, could possess such lasting qualities. But it would be invidious to argue that changes
in the English language itself might account for this. It is clear to many translation commen-
tators today (see various contributions to Peter France’s The Oxford Guide to Literature in
English Translation, 2000) that intelligibility must take precedence over preserving traditional
language, which no longer communicates eVectively. This does not, of course, address the
question of the validity of the Fox translation, to which Hughes responded so positively,
sensing that a primary connection with the ancient source had been restored.
Buber and Rosenzweig were, of course, active at a time of dire crisis for European Jewish
culture. Buber wanted passionately to renew, as he put it, ‘the dialogue between heaven
and earth’. In 1938, in an essay written in Palestine, ‘The How and Why of our Bible
Translation’ (see Scripture and Translation, pp. 205–19), Buber alludes to the German
assault on the Hebrew Bible, seeking to separate Old and New Testaments in a Nazi-
inspired attempt to purge ‘Jewish inXuence’ from German culture. The bulk of Buber’s
and Rosenzweig’s collaborative translation work, of course, was done some years before
(1925–9), but these disturbing political-cultural developments were apparent already. The
aim of the two translator-philosophers was, idealistically, to bring to life a spoken sacred
text, in a time of crisis, to recover the Word embedded in that text and make it resonate in
the living language of their contemporaries, as Luther had done during the Reformation,
but by returning in the Wrst place to the text itself rather than projecting it immediately
onto the German language. Their motivation was essentially religious, but their practice
was text-based.
From Franz Rosenzweig, ‘Scripture and Word: On the New Bible Translation’ (late
1925), in Martin Buber and Franz Rosenzweig, Scripture and Translation, trans. by
Lawrence Rosenwald with Everett Fox (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press,
1994), 40–2
[The radical agenda of restoring orality to what has been written down is here spelled out.
Rosenzweig’s fervour is clearly discernible in his desire that God’s word should sound
again, be conveyed somehow in writing. A reform of the written scriptures amounts to
4.5 martin buber and franz rosenzweig
311

a kind of religious revival. Rosenzweig announces a revitalization of the language of
religion, through translation, as Luther had done almost exactly four centuries before.]
Every word is a spoken word. The book originally served the word, whether declaimed,
sung, or spoken; it sometimes still serves it today, as in theatrically living drama or opera.
Opera people talk of the script as something technical, instrumental, provisional; once,
that was how people characterized the rank and condition of books generally, vis-a`-vis the
spoken word. But technique has a dangerous power over those who wield it; all
unintentionally the means become an end, the provisional becomes the permanent, the
technical becomes a magic spell. The book no longer serves the word. It becomes the
word’s ruler and hindrance; it becomes Holy Scripture. [ . . . ]
But one book—and precisely the book from which in our Judeo-Christian culture this
fateful scripturalization and literarization of the word had its beginning, and in connec-
tion with which the antidotes of oral teaching and of tradition were Wrst tried out—one
book alone among all the books of our cultural horizon cannot content itself with this
antidote of an oral tradition to complement it. This book alone must not, even qua book,
enter entirely into Schrifttum into literature.1 Its unique content forbids it to become
wholly Schrift. It must remain word. It cannot attain the autonomous, aesthetic value of
Schrift because it cannot attain the distance that is the precondition of this value. Its
content, the essential part of its content, refuses displacement into the objectivity, the
separatedness, the madeness that characterize all that becomes literature. Only its acces-
sories are capable of becoming literature, and it is these accessories that a literary
consideration must content itself with. But the essential content is precisely what escapes
the specifying and distancing power of Schrift: the word of God to man, the word of man
to God, the word of men before God. We have only to consider the letter—the most
legitimate form of writing, the form always addressed to an immediate need and
necessity,2 the form from which all other forms borrow whatever legitimacy they
have—to see that this legitimation of writing can never pertain to the word of and to
and before God; God is present, and if he acts through messengers, they are not postmen
bringing yesterday’s news, which perhaps in the meantime has already been overtaken by
the intervening events; rather in this moment of theirs God is what acts immediately in
them and speaks immediately through them.
It is, accordingly, a vital question for Scripture, for this one Schrift, whether the word is
to be merely adjacent to it or within it. The word of God cannot dispense with the word
of man—the true, spoken, sounding word of man. The Bible alone, among all books of
the literary epoch, whether literary or pre-literary, demands a pre-literary mode of
reading—demands, that is, what the Hebrew expression for reading means, which is
familiar in the west from the Koran and which has also yielded what words pertaining to
writing have not yielded, namely the most familiar term denoting the Old Testament: the
312
from pound to nabokov

qeri’ah, the ‘calling out’. It is in response to this command that in all worship Scripture is
customarily read aloud; it is in the service of this command that Luther in his translation
has recourse to the spoken language of the people. The crucial question to ask of any new
translation is whether this command has been fulWlled at a given time and for a given
people.
The fetters that today hold all written German mute are constituted by the semantic
system in which the words are embedded: punctuation. [ . . . ] When, therefore, these
fetters must be loosed at any cost [ . . . ] we need [ . . . ] drastic measures. Martin Buber has
found these measures. The bond of the tongue must be loosed by the eye. We must free
from beneath the logical punctuation that is sometimes its ally and sometimes its foe the
fundamental principle of natural, oral punctuation: the act of breathing.
Breath is the stuV of speech; the drawing of breath is accordingly the natural
segmenting of speech. [ . . . ]
translators’ notes
1. The German Schrifttum is often translated ‘literature’; but it is, as Rosenzweig goes on to suggest, simply an
extension of Schrift ; if Schrift is ‘writing’, Schrifttum is ‘writingness.’ ‘Writingness’, however, transgresses what
Rosenzweig calls the ‘boundaries of linguistic possibility’; so the translation retains the German term.
Readers should be reminded of the multiple meanings of Schrift: ‘Scripture’, ‘writing’, ‘literature’. When those
various terms appear in the translation they most often render the one German term; when the precise term is
crucial to the argument the translation retains the German.
2. There’s a crucial pun here: because, Rosenzweig writes, the letter comes in aid of an immediate need (Not,
‘need’), it is truly necessary (not-wendig, ‘necessary’). Now wendig means ‘averting’ or ‘turning’; so by separating
the two components of the word Rosenzweig suggests that that is necessary which averts our need, or which we
turn to in our need.
From Franz Rosenzweig, ‘Scripture and Luther’ (July 1926), in Buber and Rosenzweig,
Scripture and Translation, 47–8
[See also Sect. 2.2, above on Luther.]
[Much of this essay has to do with the uniqueness of Luther’s translation, with the fact, as
Rosenzweig sees it, that ‘every great work of one language can in a certain sense be
translated into another language only once’. There is one particular moment in which
‘the genii of the two languages are wedded’. At such a moment, the translator ‘will be led
by the honourable belief that the more faithfully the original enters his language, the more
abundantly the needs of this great national hour will be fulWlled’. This is a unique
historical moment that ‘does not return, because it does not need to return’. ‘No new
translation, therefore, can attain a comparable national signiWcance. Luther may have
allowed for and indeed demanded revision, but this is now impossible, because his
translation has become the fundamental book not only of a particular church but of the
4.5 martin buber and franz rosenzweig
313

national language itself.’ Attempts to improve on Luther, from a Bible criticism point of
view (Wissenschaft) have not succeeded.
The translator however can and must leap over the obstacles, ‘if only that we may be free
then to stand still, and not be in danger.’]
Of Luther’s comments on his translation, the most widely known are those articulating
his desire to make his translation German, generally comprehensible German: ‘to
produce clear language, comprehensible to everyone, with an undistorted sense and
meaning.’1 Such comments are in fact predominant in his work; and the great advance he
made over previous Bible translations was most striking for his contemporaries in
precisely this respect.
But he was also altogether conscious of the other side of his work, of the movement of
the German reader in the direction of the alien original, the genius of the alien language.
The separate preface to the German Psalter is the most instructive of all Luther’s writings
on translation. [ . . . ]
The reasons, or reason rather, for which Luther sometimes asks his reader to ‘give the
Hebrew some room’ and to ‘put up with such words’ are stated by him [ . . . ]
But we have also sometimes translated word for word though we could have done it
otherwise and more clearly, and for this reason: the words have something import-
ant in them. Psalm 68:18, for example: ‘Thou art gone up on high, and hast led
captivity captive.’ An idiomatic translation would be: ‘hast freed the prisoners.’ But
that is too weak and does not yield the rich, subtle sense of the Hebrew: ‘thou hast
led captivity captive’—that is, not only has Christ released the prisoners, but he has
in the process taken away the prison, taken it captive, so that it can never again take
us prisoner, and our redemption is eternal. [ . . . ] To honor such teaching, and for
the comfort of our souls, we must retain such words, must put up with them, and so
give the Hebrew some room where it does better than German can.
It is perfectly clear here how the realms of the two principles, that of moving the text and that
of moving the reader, are bounded [Rosenzweig has previously referred to Schleiermacher’s
distinction between translations that leave the writer in peace and move the reader in his
direction, and those that leave the reader in peace and move the writer]. The former
principle is ordinarily the dominant one, for Luther as for every other translator [ . . . ]
and that Luther speaks at such length of this self-evident side of his work becomes
intelligible only when we understand that he may well have felt himself the Wrst competent
practitioner of the translator’s art. The translations of his predecessors swarmed with
Latinisms—not, however, in adherence to the latter principle, but simply from bungling.
[ . . . ] But where, according to Luther, does the necessity arise ‘to give the Hebrew
some room’? Where the statement is very important, directed to us, ‘to our souls’—that
is, where for Luther, for the living Christian, the Scriptures are the immediate compelling
314
from pound to nabokov

word of God, living truth and living consolation [ . . . ] where for him, the Christian, it
was the living word of God—there and only there, but there necessarily, it had to be
taken word for word, and translated in ‘rigid’ literalness. Elsewhere—and for Luther in
the Old Testament ‘elsewhere’ was the chief part of the text—[ . . . ] the translator ‘sends
the Hebrew words packing, and speaks the meaning of them in the best German he can’.
Luther’s belief, then, determines at every level how the work of mediation is to proceed—
that is, where to leave the word in peace and where the hearer. But Luther’s belief implies
Luther’s concept of a delimitable (because limited) religious content. Our time has lost his
notion of revelation [ . . . ] Our time, then, must in translating be permitted to ask the book
the essential religious question all over again, as Wrmly and assuredly as it can [ . . . ]
[ . . . ] Writing does of course everywhere shape turns of oral expression in accord with its
own formality; but outside the sphere of experience where writing reigns, the language
remains free and productively powerful. [ . . . ] So also in the life of a people: a moment
comes when writing ceases to be a handmaiden of language and becomes its mistress. This
moment comes when a matter encompassing the whole life of the people has been cast
into writing, i.e., when there is for the Wrst time a book that everyone simply ‘must have
read.’ [ . . . ]
For the voice of the Bible is not to be enclosed in any space—not in the inner sanctum
of a church, not in the linguistic sanctum of a people, not in the circle of the heavenly
images moving above a nation’s sky. Rather this voice seeks again and again to resound
from outside—from outside this church, this people, this heaven. It does not keep its
sound from echoing in this or that restricted space, but it wants itself to remain free. If
somewhere it has become a familiar, customary possession, it must again and anew, as a
foreign and unfamiliar sound, stir up the complacent satedness of its alleged possessor
from outside. This book and this book alone among all the books of humankind must
not Wnd its end in the treasure-house of human culture—because, precisely, it must not
Wnd an end in the Wrst place. [ . . . ]
The Luther Bible was when Wrst written what the Bible should be, was the thing
through which, as often as the Bible becomes it, it establishes itself as unique among all
human, i.e., merely human books: a sensation. [ . . . ] The Luther Bible was, then, a
trumpet-call in the ear of those who had fallen asleep happy in their possession of the
‘received and certiWed text.’ But it did not remain that; it became itself a possession, a
national possession. [ . . . ] [O]nly once was it a storm churning up the waters of the
national life before these were gathered and channelled into their individual channels;
and having been that once it could not be that again, since it was now a possession and
thus safely chained up again. [ . . . ]
[ . . . ] Scripture must be read diVerently and transmitted diVerently than Luther read
and transmitted it? Luther had his reasons for sometimes giving the Hebrew some room,
4.5 martin buber and franz rosenzweig
315

for expanding German till it accustomed itself to the Hebrew, namely that on occasion
the text spoke of ‘teaching’ and the ‘comfort of our souls.’ We do not know from what
words teaching and comfort may come; we believe that the hidden springs of teaching
and comfort may someday break through to us from every word of this book. Ought not
Luther’s reasons incline us to a new reverence toward the word, to a reverence that
necessarily must renew our reading, our understanding, and our translation.
[Rosenzweig then pronounces on the limitations of Wissenschaft translation (i.e. transla-
tion based on biblical criticism), which has dispersed the aura of sanctity once surrounding
the Bible, humanizing it and ‘oVering readers of every sort the content of the Old
Testament, with the means of current biblical research, in clear contemporary German’
(Foreword to Kautzsch-Bertholet Textbibel ).]
For—it is almost embarrassing to state such truisms, but also necessary—it is impossible
to transmit the content without at the same time transmitting the form. How something is
said is not peripheral to what is said. The melody makes the music. [ . . . ]
Again: this argument is not at all aimed at the disparagement of individual translators,
who surely gave this translation their best eVorts. Rather it is aimed at Wissenschaft itself,
which in translating is simply not wissenschaftlich enough. It has shaken many persons’
trust in the Luther translation; but it has not put in place of that translation the
translation of contemporary belief and its expressive forms—which is, after all, con-
sciously or unconsciously, what all its work is meant to serve. [ . . . ]
Aside, then, from its correction of particular errors, the modern translation oVers even
in a scholarly sense very little that is better, and much that is worse, than Luther.
Luther himself saw the scholarly signiWcance of his work as lying in his return to the
original text. [ . . . ] Luther the revolutionary, however, was still inwardly linked to what
he was overthrowing. The vulgate was indeed [ . . . ] a soothing pillow for the conscience
and a padding for the door of the cultivated man’s study against disruptive noises from
outside. [ . . . ] In other words: when Luther investigated the meaning of the Hebrew text,
he was not thinking hebraically; nor was he, as he later did in rendering the investigated
meaning into German, thinking Germanically; he was thinking Latinately.
note
1. Preface to the Book of Job, editions of 1524 and 1525.
From Martin Buber, ‘Leitwort Style in Pentateuch Narrative’ (from a lecture, January
1927), in Buber and Rosenzweig, Scripture and Translation, 114–28
[In this lecture, Buber identiWes a salient feature of biblical prosody, ignored in Ciceronian
fashion by the King James translators, who on the contrary exploited the multiplicity of
316
from pound to nabokov

English synonyms (see Sect. 2.9, above, on the Authorized (King James) Version). With their
emphasis on structure and on the poetics of the text, Buber and Rosenzweig strove to
represent more fully the parallelism in the Bible. Buber stresses, however, that the recom-
mended procedure should be adhered to only where appropriate; it is emphatically not to be
regarded as a general rule or as an insistence on a metaphrastic approach. The translator’s task,
in Rosenzweig’s words, is ‘to weigh the claims of local context against the claims of global
context’. Buber gives no useful advice on how this is to be accomplished, but the example set
by him and Rosenzweig in identifying ‘thematic resonances’ is illuminating.]
By Leitwort I understand a word or word root that is meaningfully repeated within a text
or sequence of texts or complex of texts; those who attend to these repetitions will Wnd a
meaning of the text revealed or clariWed, or at any rate made more emphatic. [ . . . ] Such
measured repetition, corresponding to the inner rhythm of the text—or rather issuing
from it—is probably the strongest of all techniques for making a meaning available
without articulating it explicitly [ . . . ] [S]uch repetition can achieve not only aesthetic
value, as manifested notably in the verse-forms of the Elder Edda, but also a special and
irreplaceable value of statement. This value consists in the fact that the meaning to be
stated is portrayed without any tacked-on moral, i.e., without any disruption or distor-
tion of the pure form of the narrative. [ . . . ]
But nowhere, probably, does this happen with such singular power as in the narratives of
the Pentateuch. The strictness of the form here arises from the profound intention to report,
and only to report; and precisely for this reason the message may not impose itself on the
form. [ . . . ] [T]hose who listen will hear the higher meaning in the similarity of sound. A
connection is established between one passage and another, and thus between one stage of
the story and another—a connection that articulates the deep motive of the narrated event
more immediately than could a pinned-on moral. Epic diction never overXows, never
becomes rhetoric or lyric; the Leitwort rhythm is a genuinely epic rhythm, the appropriate
artistic signum of a mystery stretching around and into the world of aesthetic form.
[Buber then gives examples, mostly from Genesis and Numbers of ‘verbal atmosphere’
generated by multiple recurrences, which communicates to the reader what is at issue in
any particular instance.]
From Martin Buber, ‘On Word Choice in Translating the Bible: In Memoriam Franz
Rosenzweig’, (Summer 1930), in Buber and Rosenzweig, Scripture and Translation,
73–89
[Intense concentration on the text as such is passionately urged. The verbal texture as a
whole is considered, as a living or organic whole, rather than the focus being exclusively on
the particular Leitwort, with its thematic signiWcance.]
4.5 martin buber and franz rosenzweig
317

The special obligation to create a new version of the Bible, which came alive in our time
and led to our undertaking, resulted from the discovery that the passage of time had
largely turned the Bible into a palimpsest [ . . . ] The Bible asks us for a reverent intimacy
with its meaning and its sensory concreteness; but that has been replaced by a mix of
uncomprehending respect and unthinking familiarity [ . . . ] and its relation to the real
Bible resembles the relation of the murdered God of our time [ . . . ] to the living God of
reality. [ . . . ]
[ . . . ] Even the most signiWcant translations of the Bible that we possess [ . . . ] do not
aim principally at maintaining the original character of the book as manifested in word
choice, in syntax, and in rhythmical articulation. They aim rather at transmitting to the
translators’ actual community. . . a reliable foundational document [ . . . ] [T]hey do not
a priori ignore the peculiarities of its constituent elements, of its structure, of its dynamic;
but they easily enough sacriWce those peculiarities when stubborn ‘form’ seems to hinder
the rendering of ‘content’ [ . . . ] Revelation is accomplished in the human body and the
human voice, i.e. in this body and this voice, in the mystery of their uniqueness. The
prophet’s proclamation consists not only of its symbols and parables, but also of the
fundamental sensory concreteness of even the subtlest Hebrew concepts, of the taut
stretching in the architecture of the ancient Hebrew sentence, of the Hebrew manner of
relating adjacent or even widely separated words through similarity of verbal root or
similarity of sound, of the powerful movement of Hebrew rhythm that goes beyond all
meter [ . . . ] Theoretically speaking, the biblical messages cannot be rendered in their
fusion of meaning and sound; but practically speaking they can. Can, that is, approxi-
mately—as approximately as one is allowed by the boundaries of the language one
translates into. But the translator must press towards these boundaries again and
again—to the real boundaries, that is—and must accept instruction as to what is
permitted him and what is not only from the mouths of the supreme watchmen of
language.
[However, Buber is careful not to overemphasize the potential of this method. As a
translator himself, he is conscious of the practical limitations, but insists on the need to
listen with great concentration to the source text, its resonances, its echoes, to always bear
in mind that its origin is in the spoken not the written word. At the same time, this
practical intelligence leads him to recommend freedom in expanding the word store,
creating neologisms, resuscitating obsolete terms. As Buber says, ‘It has been one of the
strongest conWrmations of our method that we have been able to reproduce such verbal
patterns’ (he has discussed the translation of ohel mo’ed, referring to the movable sanctuary
of the desert). ‘In both their breadth of manifestation and in their unity’, he sees it as
the translator’s function to return to terms, which have become technical, their living
318
from pound to nabokov

associations (e.g. Shabbat must be delivered ‘from the rigidity of ‘‘Sabbath’’’. He discusses
also the awesome task of rendering of the name of God, the tetragrammaton YHWH.]
[ . . . ] The auditory patterns of German can never reproduce the auditory forms of
Hebrew; but they can, in growing from an analogous impulse and in exercising an
analogous eVect, correspond to them Germanically, can Germanize them.
To meet the demands of such a task, the translator must elicit from the letter of the
Hebrew text its actual auditory form; he must understand the writtenness of Scripture as
for the most part the record of its spokenness [ . . . ]
The auditory form of the German translation should then correspond to spokenness
[ . . . ] [I]ts unfamiliarity is itself necessary, is indeed the one necessity, if [ . . . ] a
translation is to produce an encounter between the Bible and the people today [ . . . ],
to create a western equivalent of this, a German equivalent, we have to reach past the
present verbal repertory towards the defamiliarized—indeed toward the obsolete and
forgotten [ . . . ] Sometimes the translator must venture new formations, if he can Wnd in
the established German vocabulary no exact equivalent for a biblical institution or
concept. No doubt the biblical world will seem [ . . . ] in many ways linguistically sharper
and more vivid [ . . . ]; concepts will in the translation be distanced from the familiar, and
will accordingly present their concrete fundamental signiWcance more emphatically than
they do in the original [ . . . ]
From Martin Buber, ‘A Translation of the Bible’ (1927), in Buber and Rosenzweig,
Scripture and Translation, 166–71
[Martin Buber sums up what Rosenzweig’s and his aims were. So radical and audacious
are they even now, pushing language to its limits that some repetition seems in order.
Buber, below, reiterates the same message even more emphatically than before, in terms
that are echoed later by the likes of Rothenberg and Tedlock (see Sect. 5.7, below,
Ethnopoetics)].
The ‘Old Testament’ has never before been translated by writers seeking to return to the
concrete, fundamental meaning of each individual word: previous translators have been
contented to put down something ‘appropriate’, something ‘corresponding’. [ . . . ] [I]n
Leviticus the ‘man who takes the wife of his brother’ is assigned a punishment corre-
sponding to the sin: ‘he has revealed the nakedness of his brother, and they will remain
naked of children.’ That is why Abraham calls himself not ‘childless’ but ‘childbare’,
‘childstripped.’ To undertake a genuine translation of the Bible entails now and then
venturing such words; whether posterity will receive them or reject them is not for the
living to know.
4.5 martin buber and franz rosenzweig
319

We have attempted also [ . . . ] to distinguish synonyms wherever German permits, i.e.,
not to render two distinct Hebrew words by one German one, nor—at least within a
single sequence—to render a single Hebrew word by two German ones. We have further
attempted, in cases where a common root linked various words, to retain that link in
German. [ . . . ]
The individual word, then, in its original concrete meaning is crucial to us. But that is
not to say that the Hebrew verbal sequence is something secondary, something not to be
maintained against the conventions of the language into which we are translating. We
know of no ‘content’separable from this form in which it has been transmitted to us, and
transferable into a form of a diVerent sort. What matters is to naturalize this form in a
quantitatively diVerent language in such a way as the limits of the language allow—the
time, and not merely the conventions. [ . . . ]
We take seriously not only the text’s semantic characteristics but also its acoustic ones. It
became clear to us, accordingly, that the text’s abundant alliterations and assonances
could not be understood in aesthetic terms alone; often if not always it is passages of
religious importance in which assonance and alliteration occur, and both assonance and
alliteration thus help make this importance emerge more vividly. [ . . . ]
We have, as I said, had in mind the Bible ‘aloud’. We proceed from the notion that the
Bible is a product of living recitation, and is intended for living recitation; that speech is
its nature, and the written text only a form for preserving it. Hence our method of
rendering its rhythm. Our translation is the Wrst colometric translation [ . . . ] i.e. the Wrst
that gives the text its natural division into lines of meaning as these are determined by the
laws of human breathing and human speech, with each line constituting a rhythmic unit.
[ . . . ]
[The Wnal passage actually precedes the last of the above passages, but is placed here as an
introduction to the translation of the Buber Rosenzweig German translation of the Babel
story (which it would be appropriate, of course, to compare with the Everett Fox
translation of the same biblical passage, quoted below. See also other versions of this
famous biblical passage).]
[ . . . ] the remarkable account of how the architects of Babel built of lebenah, brick, rather
than eben, stone, and used as mortar not homer, loam or clay, but hemar, pitch or asphalt
[ . . . ] This is no pun; rather the acoustic similarity emphasizes the nature of the situation,
in which the builders must discard natural materials for artiWcial ones, or at any rate for
materials that can be brought out of the earth only with considerable eVort. The Wrst half
of the verse, ‘so for them brick-stone [Backstein] was like building-stone [Baustein]’,
worked well enough; but the second half needs improvement.
320
from pound to nabokov

Genesis 11: 1–9 in Buber and Rosenzweig’s translation.
From Die Schrift (Die fu¨nf Bu¨cher der Weisung), Verdeutscht von Martin Buber gemeinsam
mit Franz Rosenzweig (12., verbesserte AuXage der neubearbeiteten Ausgabe von 1954)
(Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1997), 33–4.
11, 1 U¨ ber die Erde allhin war eine Mundart und einerlei Rede.
2 Da wars wie sie nach Osten wanderten: sie fanded ein Gesenk im Lande Schinar und
setzten sieh dort fest.
3 Sie sprachen ein Mann zum Genossen:
Heran! backen wir Backsteine und brennen wir sie zu Brande!
So war ihnen der Backstein statt Bausteins und das Roherdpech war ihnen statt Roterd-
mo¨rtels.
4 Nun sprachen sie:
Heran! bauen wir uns eine Stadt und einen Turm, sein Haupt bis an den Himmel,
und machen wir uns einen Namen,
sonst werden wir zerstreut u¨bers Antlitz aller Erde!
5 er fuhr nieder,
die Stadt und den Turm to besehen, die die So¨hne des Menschen bauten.
6 er sprach:
Da, einerlei Volk ist es und eine Mundart in allen, und nur der Beginn dies ihres Tuns—
nichts wa¨re nunmehr ihnen zu steil, was alles sie zu tun sich ersa¨nnen.
Heran! fahren wir nieder und vermengen wir dort ihre Mundart,
daß sie nich mehr vernehmen ein Mann den Mund des Genossen.
8 er zerstreute sie von dort u¨bers Antlitz aller Erde,
daß sie es lassen muen, die Stadt zu bauen.
9 Darum ruft man ihren Namen Babel, Gemenge,
den vermengt hat er dort die Mundart aller Erde,
und zerstreut von dort hat er sie u¨bers Antlitz aller Erde.
Literal translation by A. Eysteinsson
11, 1 Over all the Earth there was one way of mouth and one kind of speech.
2 Then it was that they wandered to the East: they found a valley/lower land in the land
of Shinar and they settled there.
3 They spoke, each man to his fellow man:
Go to it! let us bake stones of brick and let us burn them in the Wre! [repetitive and
alliterative: backen/Backsteine; brennen/Brande]
4.5 martin buber and franz rosenzweig
321

So for them the brickstone was instead of building stone, and the raw pitch was for them
instead of red mortar.
4 Now they spoke:
Go to it! Let us build ourselves a city and a tower, its head as far as the sky,
and let us make ourselves a name,
or else we shall be dispersed over the face of the whole Earth!
5 he went down,
to look at the city and the tower, which the sons of man were building.
6 he spoke:
There, this is one kind of people and one way of mouth in all, and now the beginning of
this deed of theirs—
nothing would hereafter be too steep for them, whatever they would think to do.
7 Go to it! let us go down there we shall mix/confuse their way of mouth,
so that each man no longer perceives the mouth of his fellow man.
8 he dispersed them from there over the face of the whole Earth,
so they had to cease building the city.
9 There one calls their name Babel, mixture/confusion,
for there he confused the way of mouth of the whole Earth,
and he dispersed them from there over the face of the whole Earth.
322
from pound to nabokov

4.6 Jorge Luis Borges
Jorge Luis Borges (1899–1986) was the most prominent Argentinian writer of his time. He
was educated in Europe and was himself very inXuenced by English and American
literature. His reputation as a major writer is principally based on two collections of
short Wctions, masquerading as essays, detective stories, literary criticism, or biography,
Ficciones (1944) and El Aleph (1949). Borges was also a distinguished Anglo-Saxon scholar.
He was the Wrst writer to come to world prominence during the course of the so-called
Latin American Boom in the 1960s. The blurring of linguistic and cultural frontiers
implicit in the boom provides some sort of context for Borges’s perennially intriguing
fable ‘Pierre Menard, Author of Don Quixote’, in which French writer Menard learns
Spanish and immerses himself in Cervantes’s work, so as to translate or rewrite Don
Quixote. This playful story is concerned with an obsessive interest in a ‘foreign’ work, and
at a metaliterary level it addresses some crucial aspects of the personal and historical
relationships implicated in the making of a translation.
From Ficciones, ed. and introd. Anthony Kerrigan (New York: Grove Press, Inc, 1962)
‘Pierre Menard, Author of Don Quixote’, trans. Anthony Bonner
To Silvina Ocampo
The visible works left by this novelist are easily and brieXy enumerated. It is therefore
impossible
to
forgive
the
omissions
and
additions
perpetrated
by
Madame
Henri Bachelier in a fallacious catalogue that a certain newspaper, whose Protestant
tendencies are no secret, was inconsiderate enough to inXict on its wretched readers—
even though they are few and Calvinist, if not Masonic and circumcized. Menard’s true
friends regarded this catalogue with alarm, and even with a certain sadness. It is as if
yesterday we were gathered together before the Wnal marble and the fateful cypresses, and
already Error is trying to tarnish his Memory. . . . Decidedly, a brief rectiWcation is
inevitable.
I am certain that it would be very easy to challenge my meager authority. I hope,
nevertheless, that I will not be prevented from mentioning two important testimonials.
The Baroness de Bacourt (at whose unforgettable vendredis I had the honor of becoming
acquainted with the late lamented poet) has seen Wt to approve these lines. The Countess
de Bagnoregio, one of the most reWned minds in the Principality of Monaco (and now of
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, since her recent marriage to the international philanthropist
Simon Kautsch who, alas, has been so slandered by the victims of his disinterested
4.6 jorge luis borges
323

handiwork) has sacriWced to ‘truth and death’ (those are her words) that majestic reserve
which distinguishes her, and in an open letter published in the magazine Luxe also grants
me her consent. These authorizations, I believe, are not insuYcient.
I have said that Menard’s visible lifework is easily enumerated. Having carefully
examined his private archives, I have been able to verify that it consists of the following:
a)
A symbolist sonnet which appeared twice (with variations) in the magazine La
Conque (the March and October issues of 1899).
b) A monograph on the possibility of constructing a poetic vocabulary of concepts
that would not be synonyms or periphrases of those which make up ordinary language,
‘but ideal objects created by means of common agreement and destined essentially to Wll
poetic needs’ (Nıˆmes, 1901).
c)
A monograph on ‘certain connections or aYnities’ among the ideas of Descartes,
Leibnitz and John Wilkins (Nıˆmes, 1903).
d) A monograph on the Characteristica Universalis of Leibnitz (Nıˆmes, 1904).
e)
A technical article on the possibility of enriching the game of chess by means of
eliminating one of the rooks’ pawns. Menard proposes, recommends, disputes, and ends
by rejecting this innovation.
f ) A monograph on the Ars Magna Generalis of Ramo´n Lull (Nıˆmes, 1906).
g)
A translation with prologue and notes of the Libro de la invencio´n y arte del juego
del axedrez by Ruy Lo´pez de Segura (Paris, 1907).
h) The rough draft of a monograph on the symbolic logic of George Boole.
i)
An examination of the metric laws essential to French prose, illustrated with
examples from Saint-Simon (Revue des langues romanes, Montpellier, October, 1909).
j)
An answer to Luc Durtain (who had denied the existence of such laws) illustrated
with examples from Luc Durtain (Revue des langues romanes, Montpellier, December,
1909).
k) A manuscript translation of the Aguja de navegar cultos of Quevedo, entitled La
boussole des pre´cieux.
l)
A preface to the catalogue of the exposition of lithographs by Carolus Hourcade
(Nıˆmes, 1914).
m) His work, Les proble`mes d’un proble`me (Paris, 1917), which takes up in chrono-
logical order the various solutions of the famous problem of Achilles and the tortoise.
Two editions of this book have appeared so far; the second has as an epigraph Leibnitz’
advice ‘Ne craignez point, monsieur, la tortue,’ and contains revisions of the chapters
dedicated to Russell and Descartes.
n) An obstinate analysis of the ‘syntactic habits’ of Toulet (N.R.F., March, 1921). I
remember that Menard used to declare that censuring and praising were sentimental
operations which had nothing to do with criticism.
324
from pound to nabokov

o) A transposition into Alexandrines of Le Cimetie`re marin of Paul Vale´ry (N.R.F.,
January, 1928).
p) An invective against Paul Vale´ry in the Journal for the Suppression of Reality of
Jacques Reboul. (This invective, it should be stated parenthetically, is the exact reverse of
his true opinion of Vale´ry. The latter understood it as such, and the old friendship
between the two was never endangered.)
q) A ‘deWnition’ of the Countess of Bagnoregio in the ‘victorious volume’—the phrase
is that of another collaborator, Gabriele d’Annunzio—which this lady publishes yearly to
rectify the inevitable falsiWcations of journalism and to present ‘to the world and to Italy’
an authentic eYgy of her person, which is so exposed (by reason of her beauty and her
activities) to erroneous or hasty interpretations.
r) A cycle of admirable sonnets for the Baroness de Bacourt (1934).
s) A manuscript list of verses which owe their eVectiveness to punctuation.1
Up to this point (with no other omission than that of some vague, circumstantial
sonnets for the hospitable, or greedy, album of Madame Henri Bachelier) we have the
visible part of Menard’s works in chronological order. Now I will pass over to that other
part, which is subterranean, interminably heroic, and unequalled, and which is also—oh,
the possibilities inherent in the man!—inconclusive. This work, possibly the most
signiWcant of our time, consists of the ninth and thirty-eighth chapters of Part One of
Don Quixote and a fragment of the twenty-second chapter. I realize that such an
aYrmation seems absurd; but the justiWcation of this ‘absurdity’ is the primary object
of this note.2
Two texts of unequal value inspired the undertaking. One was that philological
fragment of Novalis—No. 2005 of the Dresden edition—which outlines the theme of
total identiWcation with a speciWc author. The other was one of those parasitic books
which places Christ on a boulevard, Hamlet on the Cannebie`re and Don Quixote on
Wall Street. Like any man of good taste, Menard detested these useless carnivals, only
suitable—he used to say—for evoking plebeian delight in anachronism, or (what is
worse) charming us with the primary idea that all epochs are the same, or that they are
diVerent. He considered more interesting, even though it had been carried out in a
contradictory and superWcial way, Daudet’s famous plan: to unite in one Wgure, Tartarin,
the Ingenious Gentleman and his squire. . . . Any insinuation that Menard dedicated his
life to the writing of a contemporary Don Quixote is a calumny of his illustrious memory.
1 Madame Henri Bachelier also lists a literal translation of a literal translation done by Quevedo of the
Introduction a` la vie de´vote of Saint Francis of Sales. In Pierre Menard’s library there are no traces of such a work.
She must have misunderstood a remark of his which he had intended as a joke.
2 I also had another, secondary intent—that of sketching a portrait of Pierre Menard. But how would I dare to
compete with the golden pages the Baroness de Bacourt tells me she is preparing, or with the delicate and precise
pencil of Carolus Hourcade?
4.6 jorge luis borges
325

He did not want to compose another Don Quixote which would be easy—but the Don
Quixote. It is unnecessary to add that his aim was never to produce a mechanical
transcription of the original; he did not propose to copy it. His admirable ambition
was to produce pages which would coincide—word for word and line for line—with
those of Miguel de Cervantes.
‘My intent is merely astonishing,’ he wrote me from Bayonne on December 30th,
1934. ‘The ultimate goal of a theological or metaphysical demonstration—the external
world, God, chance, universal forms—are no less anterior or common than this novel
which I am now developing. The only diVerence is that philosophers publish in pleasant
volumes the intermediary stages of their work and that I have decided to lose them.’ And,
in fact, not one page of a rough draft remain to bear witness to this work of years.
The initial method he conceived was relatively simple: to know Spanish well, to re-
embrace the Catholic faith, to Wght against Moors and Turks, to forget European history
between 1602 and 1918, and to be Miguel de Cervantes. Pierre Menard studied this
procedure (I know that he arrived at a rather faithful handling of seventeenth-century
Spanish) but rejected it as too easy. Rather because it was impossible, the reader will say!
I agree, but the undertaking was impossible from the start, and of all the possible means
of carrying it out, this one was the least interesting. To be, in the twentieth century, a
popular novelist of the seventeenth seemed to him a diminution. To be, in some way,
Cervantes and to arrive at Don Quixote seemed to him less arduous—and consequently
less interesting—than to continue being Pierre Menard and to arrive at Don Quixote
through the experiences of Pierre Menard. (This conviction, let it be said in passing,
forced him to exclude the autobiographical prologue of the second part of Don Quixote.
To include this prologue would have meant creating another personage—Cervantes—
but it would also have meant presenting Don Quixote as the work of this personage and
not of Menard. He naturally denied himself such an easy solution.) ‘My undertaking is
not essentially diYcult,’ I read in another part of the same letter. ‘I would only have to be
immortal in order to carry it out.’ Shall I confess that I often imagine that he Wnished it
and that I am reading Don Quixote—the entire work—as if Menard had conceived it?
Several nights ago, while leaWng through Chapter XXVI—which he had never
attempted—I recognized our friend’s style and, as it were, his voice in this exceptional
phrase: the nymphs of the rivers, mournful and humid Echo. This eVective combination of
two adjectives, one moral and the other physical, reminded me of a line from Shake-
speare which we discussed one afternoon:
Where a malignant and turbaned Turk . . .
Why precisely Don Quixote, our reader will ask. Such a preference would not have
been inexplicable in a Spaniard; but it undoubtedly was in a symbolist from Nıˆmes,
essentially devoted to Poe, who engendered Baudelaire, who engendered Mallarme´, who
326
from pound to nabokov

engendered Vale´ry, who engendered Edmond Teste. The letter quoted above clariWes this
point. ‘Don Quixote,’ Menard explains, ‘interests me profoundly, but it does not seem to
me to have been—how shall I say it—inevitable. I cannot imagine the universe without
the interjection of Edgar Allan Poe
Ah, bear in mind this garden was enchanted!
or without the Bateau ivre or the Ancient Mariner, but I know that I am capable of
imagining it without Don Quixote. (I speak, naturally, of my personal capacity, not of the
historical repercussions of these works.) Don Quixote is an accidental book, Don Quixote
is unnecessary. I can premeditate writing, I can write it, without incurring a tautology.
When I was twelve or thirteen years old I read it, perhaps in its entirety. Since then I have
reread several chapters attentively, but not the ones I am going to undertake. I have
likewise studied the entremeses, the comedies, the Galatea, the exemplary novels, and the
undoubtedly laborious eVorts of Pe´rsiles y Sigismunda and the Viaje al Parnaso. . . . My
general memory of Don Quixote, simpliWed by forgetfulness and indiVerence, is much
the same as the imprecise, anterior image of a book not yet written. Once this image
(which no one can deny me in good faith) has been postulated, my problems are
undeniably considerably more diYcult than those which Cervantes faced. My aVable
precursor did not refuse the collaboration of fate; he went along composing his immortal
work a little a` la diable, swept along by inertias of language and invention. I have
contracted the mysterious duty of reconstructing literally his spontaneous work. My
solitary game is governed by two polar laws. The Wrst permits me to attempt variants of a
formal and psychological nature; the second obliges me to sacriWce them to the ‘‘original’’
text and irrefutably to rationalize this annihilation. . . . To these artiWcial obstacles one
must add another congenital one. To compose Don Quixote at the beginning of the
seventeenth century was a reasonable, necessary and perhaps inevitable undertaking; at
the beginning of the twentieth century it is almost impossible. It is not in vain that three
hundred years have passed, charged with the most complex happenings—among them,
to mention only one, that same Don Quixote.’
In spite of these three obstacles, the fragmentary Don Quixote of Menard is
more subtle than that of Cervantes. The latter indulges in a rather coarse opposition
between tales of knighthood and the meager, provincial reality of his country;
Menard chooses as ‘reality’ the land of Carmen during the century of Lepanto and
Lope. What Hispanophile would not have advised Maurice Barre`s or Dr Rodrı´guez
Larreta to make such a choice! Menard, as if it were the most natural thing in the world,
eludes them. In his work there are neither bands of gypsies, conquistadors, mystics,
Philip the Seconds, nor autos-da-fe´. He disregards or proscribes local color. This disdain
indicates a new approach to the historical novel. This disdain condemns Salammboˆ
without appeal.
4.6 jorge luis borges
327

It is no less astonishing to consider isolated chapters. Let us examine, for instance,
Chapter XXXVIII of Part One ‘which treats of the curious discourse that Don Quixote
delivered on the subject of arms and letters.’ As is known, Don Quixote (like Quevedo in
a later, analogous passage of La hora de todos) passes judgment against letters, and in favor
of arms. Cervantes was an old soldier, which explains such a judgment. But that the Don
Quixote of Pierre Menard—a contemporary of La trahison des clercs and Bertrand
Russell—should relapse into these nebulous sophistries! Madame Bachelier has seen in
them an admirable and typical subordination of the author to the psychology of the hero;
others (by no means perspicaciously) a transcription of Don Quixote; the Baroness de
Bacourt, the inXuence of Nietzsche. To this third interpretation (which seems to me
irrefutable) I do not know if I would dare to add a fourth, which coincides very well with
the divine modesty of Pierre Menard: his resigned or ironic habit of propounding ideas
which were the strict reverse of those he preferred. (One will remember his diatribe
against Paul Vale´ry in the ephemeral journal of the superrealist Jacques Reboul.) The text
of Cervantes and that of Menard are verbally identical, but the second is almost inWnitely
richer. (More ambiguous, his detractors will say; but ambiguity is a richness.) It is a
revelation to compare the Don Quixote of Menard with that of Cervantes. The latter, for
instance, wrote (Don Quixote, Part One, Chapter Nine):
. . . la verdad, cuya madre es la historia, e´mula del tiempo, depo´sito de las acciones,
testigo de lo pasado, ejemplo y aviso de lo presente, advertencia de lo por venir.
[ . . . truth, whose mother is history, who is the rival of time, depository of deeds,
witness of the past, example and lesson to the present, and warning to the future.]
Written in the seventeenth century, written by the ‘ingenious layman’ Cervantes, this
enumeration is a mere rhetorical eulogy of history. Menard, on the other hand, writes:
. . . la verdad, cuya madre es la historia, e´mula del tiempo, depo´sito de las acciones,
testigo de lo pasado, ejemplo y aviso de lo presente, advertencia de lo por venir.
[ . . . truth, whose mother is history, who is the rival of time, depository of deeds,
witness of the past, example and lesson to the present, and warning to the future.]
History, mother of truth; the idea is astounding. Menard, a contemporary of William
James, does not deWne history as an investigation of reality, but as its origin. Historical
truth, for him, is not what took place; it is what we think took place. The Wnal clauses—
example and lesson to the present, and warning to the future—are shamelessly pragmatic.
Equally vivid is the contrast in styles. The archaic style of Menard—in the last analysis,
a foreigner—suVers from a certain aVectation. Not so that of his precursor, who handles
easily the ordinary Spanish of his time.
There is no intellectual exercise which is not ultimately useless. A philosophical
doctrine is in the beginning a seemingly true description of the universe; as the years
328
from pound to nabokov

pass it becomes a mere chapter—if not a paragraph or a noun in the history of
philosophy. In literature, this ultimate decay is even more notorious. ‘Don Quixote,’
Menard once told me, ‘was above all an agreeable book; now it is an occasion for patriotic
toasts, grammatical arrogance and obscene deluxe editions. Glory is an incomprehen-
sion, and perhaps the worst.’
These nihilist arguments contain nothing new; what is unusual is the decision Pierre
Menard derived from them. He resolved to outstrip that vanity which awaits all the woes
of mankind; he undertook a task that was complex in the extreme and futile from the
outset. He dedicated his conscience and nightly studies to the repetition of a pre-existing
book in a foreign tongue. The number of rough drafts kept on increasing; he tenaciously
made corrections and tore up thousands of manuscript pages.3 He did not permit them
to be examined, and he took great care that they would not survive him. It is in vain that
I have tried to reconstruct them.
I have thought that it is legitimate to consider the ‘Wnal’ Don Quixote as a kind of
palimpsest, in which should appear traces—tenuous but not undecipherable—of the
‘previous’ handwriting of our friend. Unfortunately, only a second Pierre Menard,
inverting the work of the former, could exhume and rescuscitate these Troys. . . .
‘To think, analyze and invent,’ he also wrote me, ‘are not anomalous acts, but the
normal respiration of the intelligence. To glorify the occasional fulWllment of this
function, to treasure ancient thoughts of others, to remember with incredulous amaze-
ment that the doctor universalis thought, is to confess our languor or barbarism. Every
man should be capable of all ideas, and I believe that in the future he will be.’
Menard (perhaps without wishing to) has enriched, by means of a new technique, the
hesitant and rudimentary art of reading: the technique is one of deliberate anachronism
and erroneous attributions. This technique, with its inWnite applications, urges us to run
through the Odyssey as if it were written after the Aeneid, and to read Le jardin du
Centaure by Madame Henri Bachelier as if it were by Madame Henri BacheIier. This
technique would Wll the dullest books with adventure. Would not the attributing of The
Imitation of Christ to Louis Ferdinand Ce´line or James Joyce be a suYcient renovation of
its tenuous spiritual counsels?
Nıˆmes
1939
3 I remember his square-ruled notebooks, the black streaks where he had crossed out words, his peculiar
typographical symbols and his insect-like handwriting. In the late afternoon he liked to go for walks on the
outskirts of Nıˆmes; he would take a notebook with him and make a gay bonWre.
4.6 jorge luis borges
329

4.7 Roman Jakobson
Roman Jakobson (1896–1982), literary theorist and linguist, was born and educated in
Moscow. He was associated with a number of Futurist painters and poets, and himself
experimented with ‘supraconscious’ poems. Jakobson was particularly friendly with and
inXuenced by the radically experimental poet Khlebnikov, about whose work he wrote
extensively. He was friendly with Mayakovsky from 1916 until the poet’s suicide in 1930,
writing extensively about his work. Jakobson was co-founder of both the Moscow Linguistic
Circle, in 1915, and the Prague Linguistic Circle, in 1926, and was thus a key Wgure both in the
development of Russian Formalism and Czech Structuralism. In 1916, he had collaborated
with Petersburg literary scholars in establishing a formalist group, called the Society for the
Study of Poetic Language (OPOJAZ). Jakobson came to the USA in 1941, teaching at
Harvard and MIT. His essay, ‘On Linguistic Aspects of Translation’ extends the signiWcance
of translation to include intralingual and intersemiotic translation. It Wrst appeared in Reuben
Brower’s landmark volume, On Translation (Cambridge, Mass. Harvard University Press,
1959). Jakobson’s emphasis on the functional role of linguistic elements in the translated text
had a positive eVect on the work of poetry translators. Regarding poetry by deWnition as
untranslatable, Jakobson believed in the inevitability of ‘creative transposition’.
‘On Linguistic Aspects of Translation’, in R. Jakobson, Language in Literature, ed.
Krystyna Pomorska and Stephen Rudy (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1987), 428–35
According to Bertrand Russell, ‘no one can understand the word ‘‘cheese’’ unless he has a
nonlinguistic acquaintance with cheese.’1 If, however, we follow Russell’s fundamental
precept and place our ‘emphasis upon the linguistic aspects of traditional philosophical
problems,’then we are obliged to state that no one can understand the word cheese unless
he has an acquaintance with the meaning assigned to this word in the lexical code of
English. Any representative of a cheese-less culinary culture will understand the English
word cheese if he is aware that in this language it means ‘food made of pressed curds’ and
if he has at least a linguistic acquaintance with curds. We never consumed ambrosia or
nectar and have only a linguistic acquaintance with the words ambrosia, nectar, and
gods—the name of their mythical users; nonetheless, we understand these words and
know in what contexts each of them may be used.
The meaning of the words cheese, apple, nectar, acquaintance, but, mere, and of any word
or phrase whatsoever is deWnitely a linguistic—or to be more precise and less narrow—a
semiotic fact. Against those who assign meaning (signatum) not to the sign, but to the thing
330
from pound to nabokov

itself, the simplest and truest argument would be that nobody has ever smelled or tasted the
meaning of cheese or of apple. There is no signatum without signum. The meaning of the
word ‘cheese’ cannot be inferred from a nonlinguistic acquaintance with cheddar or with
camembert without the assistance of the verbal code. An array of linguistic signs is needed to
introduce an unfamiliar word. Mere pointing will not teach us whether cheese is the name of
the given specimen, or of any box of camembert, or of camembert in general or of any
cheese, any milk product, any food, any refreshment, or perhaps any box irrespective of
contents. Finally, does a word simply name the thing in question, ordoes it imply a meaning
such as oVering, sale, prohibition, or malediction? (Pointing actually may mean maledic-
tion; in some cultures, particularly in Africa, it is an ominous gesture.)
For us, both as linguists and as ordinary word-users, the meaning of any linguistic sign
is its translation into some further, alternative sign, especially a sign ‘in which it is more
fully developed,’ as Peirce, the deepest inquirer into the essence of signs, insistently
stated.2 The term ‘bachelor’ may be converted into a more explicit designation, ‘unmar-
ried man,’ whenever higher explicitness is required. We distinguish three ways of
interpreting a verbal sign: it may be translated into other signs of the same language,
into another language, or into another, nonverbal system of symbols. These three kinds
of translation are to be diVerently labeled:
(1) Intralingual translation or rewording is an interpretation of verbal signs by means of
other signs of the same language.
(2) Interlingual translation or translation proper is an interpretation of verbal signs by
means of some other language.
(3) Intersemiotic translation or transmutation is an interpretation of verbal signs by
means of signs of nonverbal sign systems.
The intralingual translation of a word uses either another, more or less synonymous,
word or resorts to a circumlocution. Yet synonymy, as a rule, is not complete equiva-
lence: for example, ‘every celibate is a bachelor, but not every bachelor is a celibate.’ A
word or an idiomatic phraseword, brieXy a code-unit of the highest level, may be fully
interpreted only by means of an equivalent combination of code-units, i.e., a message
referring to this code-unit: ‘every bachelor is an unmarried man, and every unmarried
man is a bachelor,’ or ‘every celibate is bound not to marry, and everyone who is bound
not to marry is a celibate.’
Likewise, on the level of interlingual translation, there is ordinarily no full equivalence
between code-units, while messages may serve as adequate interpretations of alien code-
units or messages. The English word cheese cannot be completely identiWed with its
standard Russian heteronym syr because cottage cheese is a cheese but not a syr. Russians
say: prinesi syru i tvorogu, (bring cheese and [sic] cottage cheese). In standard Russian, the
food made of pressed curds is called syr only if ferment is used.
4.7 roman jakobson
331

Most frequently, however, translation from one language into another substitutes
messages in one language not for separate code-units but for entire messages in some
other language. Such a translation is a reported speech; the translator recodes and
transmits a message received from another source. Thus translation involves two equiva-
lent messages in two diVerent codes.
Equivalence in diVerence is the cardinal problem of language and the pivotal concern
of linguistics. Like any receiver of verbal messages, the linguist acts as their interpreter.
No linguistic specimen may be interpreted by the science of language without a
translation of its signs into other signs of the same system or into signs of another
system. Any comparison of two languages implies an examination of their mutual
translatability; widespread practice of interlingual communication, particularly translat-
ing activities, must be kept under constant scrutiny by linguistic science. It is diYcult to
overestimate the urgent need for and the theoretical and practical signiWcance of
diVerential bilingual dictionaries with careful comparative deWnition of all the corre-
sponding units in their intension and extension. Likewise diVerential bilingual grammars
should deWne what uniWes and what diVerentiates the two languages in their selection
and delimitation of grammatical concepts.
Both the practice and the theory of translation abound with intricacies, and from time
to time attempts are made to sever the Gordian knot by proclaiming the dogma of
untranslatability. ‘Mr Everyman, the natural logician,’ vividly imagined by Benjamin
Whorf, is supposed to have arrived at the following bit of reasoning: ‘Facts are unlike to
speakers whose language background provides for unlike formulation of them.’3 In the
Wrst years of the Russian revolution there were fanatic visionaries who argued in Soviet
periodicals for a radical revision of traditional language and particularly for the weeding
out of such misleading expressions as ‘sunrise’ or ‘sunset.’ Yet we still use this Ptolemaic
imagery without implying a rejection of Copernican doctrine, and we can easily trans-
form our customary talk about the rising and setting sun into a picture of the earth’s
rotation simply because any sign is translatable into a sign in which it appears to us more
fully developed and precise.
An ability to speak a given language implies a faculty of talking about this language.
Such a metalinguistic operation permits revision and redeWnition of the vocabulary used.
The complementarity of both levels—object-language and metalanguage—was brought
out by Niels Bohr: all well-deWned experimental evidence must be expressed in ordinary
language, ‘in which the practical use of every word stands in complementary relation to
attempts of its strict deWnition.’4
All cognitive experience and its classiWcation is conveyable in any existing language.
Whenever there is deWciency, terminology may be qualiWed and ampliWed by loanwords
or loan-translations, neologisms or semantic shifts, and Wnally, by circumlocutions. Thus
in the newborn literary language of the Northeast Siberian Chukchees, ‘screw’ is rendered
332
from pound to nabokov

as ‘rotating nail,’ ‘steel’ as ‘hard iron,’ ‘tin’ as ‘thin iron,’ ‘chalk’ as ‘writing soap,’ ‘watch’
as ‘hammering heart.’ Even seemingly contradictory circumlocutions, like ‘electrical
horsecar’ (e`lektricˇeskaja konka), the Wrst Russian name of the horseless street car, or
‘Xying steamship’ (jeha paraqot), the Koryak term for the airplane, simply designate the
electrical analogue of the horsecar and the Xying analogue of the steamer and do not
impede communication, just as there is no semantic ‘noise’ and disturbance in the double
oxymoron—‘cold beef-and-pork hot dog.’
No lack of grammatical device in the language translated into makes impossible a
literal translation of the entire conceptual information contained in the original. The
traditional conjunctions ‘and,’ ‘or’ are now supplemented by a new connective—‘and/
or’—which was discussed a few years ago in the witty book Federal Prose – How to Write
in and/or for Washington.5 Of these three conjunctions, only the latter occurs in one of the
Samoyed languages.6 Despite these diVerences in the inventory of conjunctions, all three
varieties of messages observed in ‘federal prose’ may be distinctly translated both into
traditional English and into this Samoyed language. Federal prose: 1 ) John and Peter,
2) John or Peter, 3) John and/or Peter will come. Traditional English: 3) John and Peter or
one of them will come. Samoyed: John and/or Peter both will come, 2) John and/or
Peter, one of them will come.
If some grammatical category is absent in a given language, its meaning may be
translated into this language by lexical means. Dual forms like Old Russian brata are
translated with the help of the numeral: ‘two brothers.’ It is more diYcult to remain
faithful to the original when we translate into a language provided with a certain
grammatical category from a language devoid of such a category. When translating the
English sentence She has brothers into a language which discriminates dual and plural, we
are compelled either to make our own choice between two statements ‘She has two
brothers’—‘She has more than two’ or to leave the decision to the listener and say: ‘She
has either two or more than two brothers.’ Again in translating from a language without
grammatical number into English one is obliged to select one of the two possibilities—
brother or brothers or to confront the receiver of this message with a two-choice situation:
She has either one or more than one brother.
As Franz Boas neatly observed, the grammatical pattern of a language (as opposed to
its lexical stock) determines those aspects of each experience that must be expressed in the
given language: ‘We have to choose between these aspects, and one or the other must be
chosen.’7 In order to translate accurately the English sentence I hired a worker, a Russian
needs supplementary information, whether this action was completed or not and
whether the worker was a man or a woman, because he must make his choice between
a verb of completive or noncompletive aspect—nanjal or nanimal—and between a
masculine and feminine noun—rabotnika or rabotnicu. If I ask the utterer of the English
sentence whether the worker was male or female, my question may be judged irrelevant
4.7 roman jakobson
333

or indiscreet, whereas in the Russian version of this sentence an answer to this question is
obligatory. On the other hand, whatever the choice of Russian grammatical forms to
translate the quoted English message, the translation will give no answer to the question
of whether I hired or have hired the worker, or whether he/she was an indeWnite or
deWnite worker (a or the). Because the information required by the English and Russian
grammatical pattern is unlike, we face quite diVerent sets of two-choice situations;
therefore a chain of translations of one and the same isolated sentence from English
into Russian and vice versa could entirely deprive such a message of its initial content.
The Geneva linguist S. Karcevskij used to compare such a gradual loss with a circular
series of unfavorable currency transactions. But evidently the richer the context of a
message, the smaller the loss of information.
Languages diVer essentially in what they must convey and not in what they can convey.
Each verb of a given language imperatively raises a set of speciWc yes-or-no questions, as
for instance: is the narrated event conceived with or without reference to its completion?
Is the narrated event presented as prior to the speech event or not? Naturally the attention
of native speakers and listeners will be constantly focused on such items as are compul-
sory in their verbal code.
In its cognitive function, language is minimally dependent on the grammatical pattern
because the deWnition of our experience stands in complementary relation to metalin-
guistic operations—the cognitive level of language not only admits but directly requires
recoding interpretation, that is, translation. Any assumption of ineVable or untranslat-
able cognitive data would be a contradiction in terms. But in jest, in dreams, in magic,
brieXy, in what one would call everyday verbal mythology and in poetry above all, the
grammatical categories carry a high semantic import. In these conditions, the question of
translation becomes much more entangled and controversial.
Even such a category as grammatical gender, often cited as merely formal, plays a great
role in the mythological attitudes of a speech community. In Russian the feminine cannot
designate a male person, nor the masculine specify a female. Ways of personifying or
metaphorically interpreting inanimate nouns are prompted by their gender. A test in the
Moscow Psychological Institute (1915) showed that Russians, prone to personify the
weekdays, consistently represented Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday as males and Wed-
nesday, Friday, and Saturday as females, without realizing that this distribution was due to
the masculine gender of the Wrst three names (ponedel’nik, vtornik, cˇetverg) as against the
feminine gender of the others (sreda, pjatnica, subbota). The fact that the word for Friday is
masculine in some Slavic languages and feminine in others is reXected in the folk
traditions of the corresponding peoples, which diVer in their Friday ritual. The wide-
spread Russian superstition that a dropped knife presages a male guest and a dropped fork
a female one is determined by the masculine gender of nozˇ (knife) and the feminine of
vilka (fork) in Russian. In Slavic and other languages where ‘day’ is masculine and ‘night’
334
from pound to nabokov

feminine, day is represented by poets as the lover of night. The Russian painter Repin
was baZed as to why Sin had been depicted as a woman by German artists: he did not
realize that ‘sin’ is feminine in German (die Su¨nde), but masculine in Russian (grex).
Likewise a Russian child, while reading a translation of German tales, was astounded to
Wnd that Death, obviously a woman (Russian smert’, fem.), was pictured as an old man
(German der Tod, masc.). My Sister Life, the title of a book of poems by Boris Pasternak,
is quite natural in Russian, where ‘life’ is feminine (zˇizn’ ), but was enough to reduce to
despair the Czech poet Josef Hora in his attempt to translate these poems, since in Czech
this noun is masculine (zˇivot).
What was the ﬁrst problem which arose in Slavic literature at its very beginning?
Curiously enough, the translator’s diYculty in preserving the symbolism of genders, and
the cognitive irrelevance of this diYculty, appears to be the main topic of the earliest
Slavic original work, the preface to the Wrst translation of the Evangeliarium, made in the
early 860’s by the founder of Slavic letters and liturgy, Constantine the Philosopher, and
recently restored and interpreted by Andre´ Vaillant.8 ‘Greek, when translated into
another language, cannot always be reproduced identically, and that happens to each
language being translated,’the Slavic apostle states. ‘Masculine nouns like potamos (river)
and aster (star) in Greek, are feminine in another language like reˇka and zveˇzda in Slavic.’
According to Vaillant’s commentary, this divergence eVaces the symbolic identiWcation
of the rivers with demons and of the stars with angels in the Slavic translation of two of
Matthew’s verses (7: 25 and 2: 9). But to this poetic obstacle, Saint Constantine resolutely
opposes the precept of Dionysius the Areopagite, who called for chief attention to the
cognitive values (sileˇ razumu) and not to the words themselves.
In poetry, verbal equations become a constructive principle of the text. Syntactic and
morphological categories, roots, and aYxes, phonemes and their components (distinctive
features)—in short, any constituents of the verbal code—are confronted, juxtaposed,
brought into contiguous relation according to the principle of similarity and contrast and
carry their own autonomous signiWcation. Phonemic similarity is sensed as semantic
relationship. The pun, or to use a more erudite, and perhaps more precise term—
paronomasia, reigns over poetic art, and whether its rule is absolute or limited, poetry
by deWnition is untranslatable. Only creative transposition is possible: either intralingual
transposition—from one poetic shape into another, or interlingual transposition—from
one language into another, or Wnally intersemiotic transposition—from one system of
signs into another (from verbal art into music, dance, cinema, or painting).
If we were to translate into English the traditional formula Traduttore, traditore as ‘the
translator is a betrayer,’ we would deprive the Italian rhyming epigram of all its
paronomastic value. Hence a cognitive attitude would compel us to change this aphorism
into a more explicit statement and to answer the questions: translator of what messages?
betrayer of what values?
4.7 roman jakobson
335

notes
1. Bertrand Russell, ‘Logical Positivism,’ Revue Internationale de philosophie, 4 (1950), 18; cf. p. 3.
2. Cf. John Dewey, ‘Peirce’s Theory of Linguistic Signs, Thought, and Meaning,’ Journal of Philosophy, 43 (1946),
91.
3. Benjamin Lee Whorf, Language, Thought, and Reality (Cambridge, Mass., 1956), p. 235.
4. Niels Bohr, ‘On the Notions of Causality and Complementarity,’ Dialectica, 1 (1948), 317 V.
5. James R. Masterson and Wendell Brooks Phillips, Federal Prose (Chapel Hill, 1948), 40–41.
6. Cf. Knut Bergsland, ‘Finsk-ugrisk og almen sprakvitenskap,’ Norsk Tidsskrift for Sprogvidenskap, 15 (1949),
374–375.
7. Franz Boas, ‘Language,’ General Anthropology (Boston, 1938), 132–133.
8. Andre Vaillant, ‘Le Pre´face de l’Evangeliaire vieux-slave,’ Revue des e´tudes slaves, 24 (1948), 5–6.
336
from pound to nabokov

4.8 Jirˇı´ Levy´
Jirˇı´ Levy´ (1926–67) was a Czech theorist and historian of literature, who became at an early
age a leading scholar of translation in what used to be called ‘Eastern Europe’. His work
built and extended upon the research of Russian formalism and the Czech structuralism of
the Prague school, aimed as it was at combining structural analysis of literary works with a
semantic one, emphasizing, for instance, the information value of the formal components
of poetry. In 1957 he brought out an anthology of Czech theories of translation, and
in 1963 the book Umeˇnı´ prˇekladu (‘The Art of Translation’), which he later reworked in
preparation for Russian and German translations. The German translation, by Walter
Schamschula, was published in 1969 under the title Die literarische U¨bersetzung. Theorie
einer Kunstgattung. The German version was later translated into English by Susanne
Flatauer (the manuscript is entitled Literary Translation as an Art Form), but it was not
published at the time, and as far as we can establish, no part of it has appeared until now—
see excerpts below. Hence, many students of translation know Levy´ only through a few
articles, especially the often-quoted 1967 article ‘Translation as a Decision-Making Process’
(To Honor Roman Jakobson, vol. ii, (The Hague) ).
The parts of Levy´’s book included below manifest several of his key conceptions of
translation. He situates literary translation within a general communicative theory of
translation (cf. also Mary Snell-Hornby in Sect. 5.6, below) and he seeks to locate the
aesthetic qualities of literary works through a structural analysis in which he establishes the
interplay and hierarchy of textual aspects. Since the translator cannot bring everything
across, it is important to decide Wrmly what elements of the work must be preserved in
order for it to function as a whole in its new language. Levy´ is fully aware that translation is
a hybrid phenomenon, one that is often riddled with contradiction between the foreign
and the native, but he sees it as the translator’s task to minimize the wrinkles caused by this
state of aVairs, and to put together a textual whole which will function in its new context
without calling too much attention to the fact that it is a translation. His book is a theory
of what he himself calls the ‘illusionist’ method of translation; in his book he also talks
about the ‘principle of realist translation’—this approach runs counter to theories of
foreignization represented by several critcs in this volume (see e.g. Sect. 3.2, 3.3, 4.4, and
5.2 on Goethe, Schleiermacher, Benjamin, Steiner respectively). ‘A good translator must
above all be an eYcient reader’, Levy´ says, a reader who refashions the work for another
reader who is not to be made conscious of the kind of performance the translator is
involved in. In fact, Levy´ repeatedly compares translation to the performing arts, especially
dramatic performance. He sees the Stanislawskian theatre training (i.e. in method acting)
as the closest analogy to the education of a good translator.
4.8 jirˇı´ levy´
337

From Literary Translation as an Art Form, translated by Susanne Flatauer
A good starting-point from which detailed and specialized theories of translation may be
developed is the precedence according to which individual aspects of the translated text
are preserved—and this precedence depends on the structure of the written or spoken
text, and not on the purpose which the translation is to serve. In the process of
translation, the message may be divided into (a) elements which remain, or ought to
remain, constant ¼ i; and (b) variable elements which are being replaced by an
equivalent in the target language ¼ v. This may be illustrated for some of the most
important types of texts and for some basic linguistic factors, as follows:
technical
text
journalistic
and
rhetorical
prose
literary
prose
and
drama
free
verse
rhymed
verse
musical
text
(libretto)
dubbing
denotative meaning
i
i
i
i
i
i–v
i–v
connotative meaning
v
i–v
i
i
i
i
i
stylistic classiWcation
of the word
i–v
i
i
i
i
i
i
syntax
v
i–v
i
i
i
i
i
repetition of qualities
v
v
v
i–v
i
i
i–v
of sound (rhythm, rhyme)
length and pitch of vowels
v
v
v
i–v
i–v
i
i
characteristics of
enunciation
v
v
v
i–v
i–v
i–v
i
The diYculty of translation increases during the course of transition from technical text
to dubbing, for here factors are added which must be constant. The emphasis shifts
toward invariability of the respective lower linguistic elements, and at the same time, the
demand for invariability of the higher components is often relaxed: in poetry it is
sometimes more important to retain the connotative rather than the denotative meaning.
This becomes even more obvious in the translation of opera libretti. Our diagram is,
admittedly, only a very rough sketch. Thus the statement that in dubbing the form of
enunciation should be preserved needs to be deWned exactly to the eVect that what is
important is ‘the visual form of movement of enunciation’. Of course, whether the
338
from pound to nabokov

individual linguistic elements are obligatory or not (i–v), e.g. in poetry, depends, and this
will be readily understood, on genre, etc.
[ . . . ]
Thus it remains for us to deWne the conception of translation on which this book is
based. The ‘conciseness’ of a translation as well as the truthfulness of Wguration, the
probability of motivation, etc., are special instances of one single general category which
we may call neotic compatibility. And attitudes to this category lie essentially between
two extremes: illusionism and anti-illusionism.
Illusionist methods demand that the work should ‘look like the original, like reality’.
This may be seen clearly in the illusionist theatre which dresses up its actors and builds its
scenery with scrupulous historical correctness. The novel is based on the illusion of the
author’s omniscience and presents its narrative as an objective record of reality, in which
the author does not interfere. The illusionist translator hides behind the original which
he presents to the reader, as it were, without a mediator, in order to evoke in him an
illusion by translation: that is to say, the illusion of reading the original text. In every case,
this is an illusion which relies on a tacit agreement with the reader or spectator: the
playgoer knows that what he sees on the stage is not reality, but he demands that it should
look like reality; the novel-reader knows that he is reading an invented story, but he
demands that the novel should keep to the rules of probability. Thus the reader of a
translation, too, knows that he is not reading the original, but he demands that the
translation should retain the quality of the original. Then he will be ready to believe that
he is reading Faust, Buddenbrooks, or Dead Souls.
Anti-illusionist methods triXe boldly with the fact that it is only an imitation of reality
which they are oVering to the public. The Wgure on the stage proclaims himself to be an
actor, and, taking oV his mask, he points at a tree and announces that this tree represents
a forest. The novelist digresses from epic illusion; addressing his reader, he discusses with
him what he ought to do with the Wgure of his hero. The translator, too, may digress
from his illusion by translation. He does this by revealing his standpoint as observer, by
not simulating an original work, but by annotating it, or by ‘nudging’the reader with the
help of personal and topical allusions. Anti-illusionist translation is rare (basically it
includes parody and caricature), for the aim of translation is primarily representative; it is
to ‘grasp’ the text. An abstract athematic translation would really be an anti-translation.
Thus our book makes the attempt of establishing an ‘illusionist’ theory of translation.
In so doing, we do not deny the possibility of experiments, though these will always have
to be understood with the ‘normal’translation forming a background for them. Whether
we shall characterize this standpoint as functional, using the linguistic conception, or as
realistic, using the aesthetic conception, will depend on the content which we attribute to
these conceptions. The important thing is not going to be the preservation of ‘the work
4.8 jirˇı´ levy´
339

as such’, but to maintain its value for the recipient (that is to say, the distinctive or
sociological functions of its elements). We shall not insist upon the experience of the
reader of the original having to be identical with that of the reader of the translation.
Instead we shall insist upon an identity from the point of view of the function in the
overall structure of the socio-historical contexts of both readers. What is important is to
subordinate the details to the whole, be it in regard to their function in the system or in
regard to a schematized validity.
[ . . . ]
To translate is to communicate. Strictly speaking, the translator decodes the information
contained in the original author’s text and reformulates, or encodes, it in his own
language. The reader, in turn, decodes the information contained in the text of the
translation. Thus a chain of communication is formed which can be diagrammatically
illustrated:
reality
Author
selection formulation
text in
foreign
language
reading transfer
text in
translator's
language
reading assimilation
Reader
Translator
This chain is further complicated in the course of the production of a translated play: the
cast decodes the text of the translation and performs the new information which is then
taken in by the audience.
An analysis of the meaning of a work of art may be considered from two possible
angles: (a) the communicative aspect which establishes the processes taking place during
the transfer of the statement from author to recipient; and (b) the representative aspect,
with the essential criterion of what the work embodies, as well as the relationship of its
contents to its creator and to the interplay of the surrounding factors. Our knowledge of
the former aspect has been deWned mainly by the theory of information and its
conception of language as a code (i.e. as as system of units, and of rules for linking
them), in addition to the conception of a work as encoded information. The theory of
information enables us to determine which elements of a translation must remain
unchanged (i.e. information) and which will have to be replaced (i.e. the linguistic code).
Up to now, our knowledge of the latter aspect (discussed by as early a philosopher as
Aristotle in his theory of mimesis) has been extensively deWned by Marxist philosophy of
art and its interpretation of a work of art as a representation of reality, for the analysis of
which it has, above all, applied the dialectics of the object and subject.
[ . . . ]
Having outlined the process of creating a translation, we shall attempt to formulate some
of the demands which are made of the translator’s work. Starting from the thesis that his
340
from pound to nabokov

original represents the material with which he must deal artistically, we can summarize
the demands made upon the translator in three ways. He must
(1) fully comprehend the original,
(2) interpret the original,
(3) translate the original.
Comprehension of the original:
We expect that the artist who has created the original work should have comprehended
the reality he represents, and that the translator, in turn, should comprehend the work he
translates. A good translator must above all be an eYcient reader.
[ . . . ]
Not until the translator has grasped the reality in the form in which it has been executed
in the work, will he be able to create an artistically true translation.
Educational means which might lead to such a comprehension of the reality, will Wrst
have to be established. Certainly, to gain experience in the dramaturgic interpretation of
plays will have to be one of these means, as well as the concentrated thinking through of
literary works. A part of this education would consist of detailed analysis of the heroes’
mental and physical characteristics, in descriptions of the place of action and of
situations; in subtle analysis of interrelationships between the characters, or between
action and scenery, author and work, work and time; in an analysis of the reXection of an
alien milieu in the work; in an analysis of its meaning, etc. It will surely be possible to
Wnd methods similar to those used by Stanislavski for the training of actors, in order to
reveal hidden textual meanings and develop the translator’s imagination.
[ . . . ]
A translated work is a hybrid form. A translation is not a homogenous work, but a
conglomerate, a blending of two structures: on the one hand, there is its content, its
meaning, as well as its formal outline; on the other hand, the whole system of language-
related traits which the translator has added to the work. Between these two layers—or
rather qualities which intermingle throughout the work as a whole—there exists a state of
tension, which may result in conXict.
The content of the work is dependent on an alien milieu; its language is the mother
tongue. The reader is conscious of this dichotomy only when there is a clear conXict
between the milieu of the action and the speciWcally native expression. There are cases
where even the best possible solution is a compromise which cannot quite conceal the
contradictions in the translation.
[ . . . ]
The more perfect the translation, the better able it is to overcome its unavoidable
quality of being contradictory. That is why translating requires—in addition to all that
4.8 jirˇı´ levy´
341

translation and original work presuppose equally—one particular ability: the translator
must know how to compensate for contradictions which will arise of necessity in the
translated work owing to its ambivalent character. For it requires only one small detail to
draw the reader’s attention to the fact that he is reading a book which has been
transplanted into an alien soil, just as the spectator will be reminded by some minor
clumsiness that the Wgures on the stage are only pretending, which will instantly disrupt
his immediate enjoyment of the play. It is this which misleads critics into clinging to
details and to emphasizing, above all, the negative facets of a translation.
In translation more than anywhere else a consistency of conception is needed, i.e. a
deWnite grasp of the work and a consistent basic attitude to it. Then again, we may very
often observe a degree of uncertainty in the use of techniques, and this depends entirely
on the translator’s resourcefulness. Translators using dialects frequently allow one person
to use the same word in diVerent guise. The translation often shows how, step by step, the
translator managed to Wnd better solutions for constantly recurring situations. In the
methods used we can also sometimes trace vacillation between the intention of either
bringing the work to the reader or taking him to it. First and foremost, though, a
translator must have a consistent aim in his own mind, and this must be given precedence
over partial solutions.
[ . . . ]
A literary work is an historically conditioned fact which cannot be repeated. There can be
no identity between original and translation, and that is why the exclusive element
cannot be wholly retained. To demand this would result in literal translation, in a
naturalistic copying of dialects which are conditioned socially as well as by time and
place, in formalist adherence to metre and, theoretically, to the thesis of the untranslat-
ability of any work. Strictly speaking, however, there is, between an original and its
translation, not the same relationship as between an object and its reXection (i.e. reality
and art, or literary model and independent variations on it), and that is why the
important aspects of a translation are neither artistic transformation nor taking to an
intellectual conclusion of the exclusive traits of the original. In practice this would lead to
actualization and adaptation to local realities, and in theory to the thesis that a translation
must be better than its original. The relationship between a translation and its original is
that of a work and its actualization in another material; therefore, on no account should
it be the realization of the form : content unity in the linguistic material which is regarded
as the constant factor, but the realization of that unity in the mind of the receptor, or, in
more simple terms, the impression the work makes on the readier. For the reader, then,
the important feature of translation is not mechanical retention of form, but of its
semantic and aesthetic values; not the retention of all those details which emphasize the
historical milieu of the time of a work’s creation, is the important feature of the
speciWcally national and temporal aspect, but to awaken in the reader the impression,
342
from pound to nabokov

the illusion of a deWnite historical national milieu. Several working principles may be
established from this.
A literary work takes its material from the social consciousness of its surroundings and
realizes it through the communication medium, i.e. language. Thus, only when the social
consciousness and the communication media of both author and reader are the same,
will the realization of a work not be distorted. Due to the continuous development of the
social consciousness of the nation in which the work was created, some elements in its
content will, in the course of this development, cease to be wholly comprehensible even
within the context of its native literature, or perhaps their sense will be distorted; among
these elements are time-related facts, human relationships, etc. In the same way, language
develops in the main stylistically: an expression regarded by the author as a colloquial
phrase and understood as such by the contemporary reader, can lose its popular character
in generations to come and Wnally turn into an archaism. That is why today a foreign
reader will catch the distorted meaning of the work. And that is why the translation
should start out from the undistorted original realization.
Only those speciWc elements should be retained in a translation which the reader will be
able to perceive as characteristic of the foreign milieu, i.e. only those capable of being
vehicles for the meaning of national and temporal characteristics. All the rest which the
reader no longer perceives as a reXection of the milieu, will lose substance and deteriorate
into becoming form without content, since they can no longer be realized.
In consideration of these facts the translator from the Russian will preserve the
patronymic form (Vasilij Ivanovitch) because we already regard it as typically Russian.
Conversely, a translator from the English will not retain the custom for a married woman
to be known not only by her husband’s surname, but also by his Christian name, because
the reader will not recognize the typically English mode of appellation. Amelia Sedley,
Thackeray’s heroine in Vanity Fair, is called Mrs George Osborne after her marriage; as a
rule, this is not translated [into German] as Frau Georg Osborne, but as Frau Osborne or
Frau Amelie Osborne.
[ . . . ]
In contrast to an original work, a translation is not an independent literary entity. It is
meant to be the reproduction of another work, and this very relationship to the original
is its fundamental characteristic. In this genre it is precisely because we evaluate a
translation according to its relation to the original that we Wnd the course between
beginning and end of the creative process of such absorbing interest. For this reason, an
analysis of how a translation is created is extremely important. At the same time, the
process of creation is harder to evaluate in connection with translators than with the
original author, because evidence of this process may be detected only in the linguistic
expression, usually in delicate semantic nuances, and it is this very wording which is so
often interfered with by editors, publishers and other adaptors.
4.8 jirˇı´ levy´
343

If conclusions about the relationship of the translated version and its original are to be
reliable, it will in the Wrst place be necessary to establish reliably which text the translator
used as his original. Work on the history of a translation, particularly an earlier one, is
made more diYcult by the fact that many writers, including eminent authors, translate,
as it were, second-hand, and this takes place not only from oriental but also from most of
the minor European literatures. When translating from oriental works, it is very fre-
quently the English text which serves as a link; and the German when translating from
minor European literatures, but there are others as well. Thus at about 1800 Czech
translators would translate via German and Polish texts. Conversely Czech texts have
been the starting point for Polish translators from the time of Humanism. The scholar
investigating a translator’s conception of his original text might end up by describing in
fact an extraneous translation on which the translator’s version had been based.
Mostly it is misunderstandings and deviations hard to attribute to a direct translation
which draw our attention to a dependence on an extraneous translation.
In 1889, the Bibliothe`que populaire published a French translation of short stories by
Jan Neruda under the title Contes tche`ques. Several misunderstandings clearly point to the
fact that this is not a direct translation from the Czech, but a translation via the German.
Selsky´ trh : Bauernmarkt : Marche´ aux Mac¸ons (instead of Marche´ aux Paysans), Petrˇın :
Laurenziberg : le Mont Saint-Laurent (instead of le Mont Saint-Pierre). It is not diYcult to
Wnd the German link text: Jurenka’s translation of Kleinsaitner Geschichten (Tales from
Kleinseiten) and Smital’s translation of Genrebilder (Genre Pieces) which appeared in
Reclam’s Universal Library during the years 1883–6. [ . . . ].
Admittedly, second-hand translating has not always been as simple as that. We must
take into account that often the translator worked with several texts, and that he either
used an extraneous translation to help him Wnd a solution for semantically or stylistically
diYcult details or that, conversely, he later compared and checked with the original a
translation which had been prepared from an extraneous translation. Moreover, in such
cases it is usually possible to establish the method of working.
[ . . . ]
As soon as the historian has ascertained the points of reference from which the translator
started out, he will be able to tackle his main task, namely the analysis of the principles of
the translator’s conception and working methods. Technically speaking, there exists in
every translation a certain percentage—which varies according to its accuracy—of
diVerent values which the translator has added to the text. It is precisely these deviations
from his original which will reveal most clearly the translator’s methods and his attitude
to the translated work. That is why the analysis of a translation must begin with a careful
comparison of the translated version and the original text and, in addition, with, so-to-
speak, statistical recordings of deviations in details as far they can be ascertained. Here we
344
from pound to nabokov

may say again that while a number of deviations will be accidental, a proportion will be
characteristic for the relationship between the translator’s personal style and the style of
the period in which the original was written, for the relationship between his conception
of the work and its objective idea. Among accidental deviations—which, at the most,
may serve as evidence of the translator’s linguistic knowledge or conscientiousness—are
obvious semantic mistakes. Most reviews of translations concentrate precisely on these
mistakes, and for that reason this material will not provide a very rich source for work on
the history of translation. We shall Wnd other inaccuracies which, at least partly, can be
classiWed in several groups all of which are invariably characterized by some kind of
semantic or aesthetic shifting vis-a`-vis the original. These groups of deviations will
indicate clearly the translator’s main principles of interpretation.
4.8 jirˇı´ levy´
345

4.9 Eugene A. Nida
Eugene A. Nida (b. 1914), American pioneer in development of theory and practice of
Bible translation, took a degree in Greek, encountering the works of such linguists as
Edward Sapir and Leonard BloomWeld. From 1946 until his retirement in the 1980s, he was
executive secretary for Translations of the American Bible Society.
Nida undertook a series of Weld trips in Africa and Latin America, during which he
worked with missionary translators on linguistic problems, and searched for potential
indigenous translators. He emphasized the need to provide translators with better models,
resources, and training, building a translations network and organizational structure that
became the global United Bible Societies Translations Program (UBS). Nida has published
widely, including Toward a Science of Translating (Brill, 1964), and later The Theory and
Practice of Translation (Brill, 1969, with C. R. Taber), expounding a theory of dynamic
(functional) equivalence, an approach designed to enable the translator to capture the
meaning and spirit of the original language text without being bound to its linguistic
structure.
The excerpt below deals with Nida’s key notion of dynamic equivalence. This is
followed by the Good News Bible version of Genesis 11, The Tower of Babel. The Good
News Bible is the best-known example of a biblical translation based on a model of
dynamic equivalence. See also other versions of this passage, e.g. Septuagint, Tyndale
(Sect. 2.3), Authorized Version (Sect. 2.9), and Fox (Sect. 5.20) (this last based on
diametrically diVerent Bible translation principles).
From Toward a Science of Translating: With Special Reference to Principles and
Procedures Involved in Bible Translating (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1964), 156–60
Since no two languages are identical, either in the meanings given to corresponding
symbols or in the ways in which such symbols are arranged in phrases and sentences, it
stands to reason that there can be no absolute correspondence between languages. Hence
there can be no fully exact translations. The total impact of a translation may be
reasonably close to the original, but there can be no identity in detail. Constance
B. West (1932, p. 344) clearly states the problem: ‘Whoever takes upon himself to
translate contracts a debt; to discharge it, he must pay not with the same money, but
the same sum.’ One must not imagine that the process of translation can avoid a certain
degree of interpretation by the translator. In fact, as D. G. Rossetti stated in 1874 (Fang,
1953), ‘A translation remains perhaps the most direct form of commentary.’
346
from pound to nabokov

DiVerent Types of Translations
No statement of the principles of correspondence in translating can be complete without
recognizing the many diVerent types of translations (Herbert P. Phillips, 1959). Trad-
itionally, we have tended to think in terms of free or paraphrastic translations as
contrasted with close or literal ones. Actually, there are many more grades of translating
than these extremes imply. There are, for example, such ultraliteral translations as
interlinears; while others involve highly concordant relationships, e.g. the same source-
language word is always translated by one—and only one—receptor-language word. Still
others may be quite devoid of artiWcial restrictions in form, but nevertheless may be
overtraditional and even archaizing. Some translations aim at very close formal and
semantic correspondence, but are generously supplied with notes and commentary.
Many are not so much concerned with giving information as with creating in the reader
something of the same mood as was conveyed by the original.
DiVerences in translations can generally be accounted for by three basic factors in
translating: (1) the nature of the message, (2) the purpose or purposes of the author and,
by proxy, of the translator, and (3) the type of audience.
Messages diVer primarily in the degree to which content or form is the dominant
consideration. Of course, the content of a message can never be completely abstracted
from the form, and form is nothing apart from content; but in some messages the
content is of primary consideration, and in others the form must be given a higher
priority. For example, in the Sermon on the Mount, despite certain important stylistic
qualities, the importance of the message far exceeds considerations of form. On the other
hand, some of the acrostic poems of the Old Testament are obviously designed to Wt a
very strict formal ‘strait jacket.’ But even the contents of a message may diVer widely in
applicability to the receptor-language audience. For example, the folk tale of the Baure´
Indians of Bolivia, about a giant who led the animals in a symbolic dance, is interesting
to an English-speaking audience, but to them it has not the same relevance as the Sermon
on the Mount. And even the Baure´ Indians themselves recognize the Sermon on the
Mount as more signiWcant than their favorite ‘how-it-happened’ story. At the same time
of course, the Sermon on the Mount has greater relevance to these Indians than have
some passages in Leviticus.
In poetry there is obviously a greater focus of attention upon formal elements than one
normally Wnds in prose. Not that content is necessarily sacriWced in translation of a
poem, but the content is necessarily constricted into certain formal molds. Only rarely
can one reproduce both content and form in a translation, and hence in general the form
is usually sacriWced for the sake of the content. On the other hand, a lyric poem
translated as prose is not an adequate equivalent of the original. Though it may
reproduce the conceptual content, it falls far short of reproducing the emotional intensity
4.9 eugene a. nida
347

and Xavor. However, the translating of some types of poetry by prose may be dictated by
important cultural considerations. For example, Homer’s epic poetry reproduced in
English poetic form usually seems to us antique and queer—with nothing of the liveliness
and spontaneity characteristic of Homer’s style. One reason is that we are not accustomed
to having stories told to us in poetic form. In our Western European tradition such epics
are related in prose. For this reason E. V. Rieu chose prose rather than poetry as the more
appropriate medium by which to render the Iliad and the Odyssey.
The particular purposes of the translator are also important factors in dictating the
type of translation. Of course, it is assumed that the translator has purposes generally
similar to, or at least compatible with, those of the original author, but this is not
necessarily so. For example, a San Bias story-teller is interested only in amusing his
audience but an ethnographer who sets about translating such stories may be much more
concerned in giving his audience an insight into San Bias personality structure. Since,
however, the purposes of the translator are the primary ones to be considered in studying
the types of translation which result, the principal purposes that underlie the choice of
one or another way to render a particular message are important.
The primary purpose of the translator may be information as to both content and
form. One intended type of response to such an informative type of translation is largely
cognitive, e.g. an ethnographer’s translation of texts from informants, or a philosopher’s
translation of Heidegger. A largely informative translation may, on the other hand, be
designed to elicit an emotional response of pleasure from the reader or listener.
A translator’s purposes may involve much more than information. He may, for
example, want to suggest a particular type of behavior by means of a translation.
Under such circumstances he is likely to aim at full intelligibility, and to make certain
minor adjustments in detail so that the reader may understand the full implications of
the message for his own circumstances. In such a situation a translator is not content to
have receptors say, ‘This is intelligible to us.’ Rather, he is looking for some such response
as, ‘This is meaningful for us.’ In terms of Bible translating, the people might understand
a phrase such as ‘to change one’s mind about sin’ as meaning ‘repentance.’ But if the
indigenous way of talking about repentance is ‘spit on the ground in front of,’ as in
Shilluk,1 spoken in the Sudan, the translator will obviously aim at the more meaningful
idiom. On a similar basis, ‘white as snow’ may be rendered as ‘white as egret feathers’, if
the people of the receptor language are not acquainted with snow but speak of anything
very white by this phrase.
A still greater degree of adaptation is likely to occur in a translation which has an
imperative purpose. Here the translator feels constrained not merely to suggest a possible
line of behavior, but to make such an action explicit and compelling. He is not content to
translate in such a way that the people are likely to understand; rather, he insists that the
translation must be so clear that no one can possibly misunderstand.
348
from pound to nabokov

In addition to the diVerent types of messages and the diverse purposes of translators,
one must also consider the extent to which prospective audiences diVer both in decoding
ability and in potential interest.
Decoding ability in any language involves at least four principal levels: (1) the capacity
of children, whose vocabulary and cultural experience are limited; (2) the double-
standard capacity of new literates, who can decode oral messages with facility but
whose ability to decode written messages is limited; (3) the capacity of the average
literate adult, who can handle both oral and written messages with relative ease; and
(4) the unusually high capacity of specialists (doctors, theologians, philosophers, scien-
tists, etc.), when they are decoding messages within their own area of specialization.
Obviously a translation designed for children cannot be the same as one prepared for
specialists, nor can a translation for children be the same as one for a newly literate adult.
Prospective audiences diVer not only in decoding ability, but perhaps even more in
their interests. For example, a translation designed to stimulate reading for pleasure will
be quite diVerent from one intended for a person anxious to learn how to assemble a
complicated machine. Moreover, a translator of African myths for persons who simply
want to satisfy their curiosity about strange peoples and places will produce a diVerent
piece of work from one who renders these same myths in a form acceptable to linguists,
who are more interested in the linguistic structure underlying the translation than in
cultural novelty.
Two Basic Orientations in Translating
Since ‘there are, properly speaking, no such things as identical equivalents’ (Belloc 1931a
and b, p. 37), one must in translating seek to Wnd the closest possible equivalent.
However, there are fundamentally two diVerent types of equivalence: one which may
be called formal and another which is primarily dynamic.
Formal equivalence focuses attention on the message itself, in both form and content.
In such a translation one is concerned with such correspondences as poetry to poetry,
sentence to sentence, and concept to concept. Viewed from this formal orientation, one
is concerned that the message in the receptor language should match as closely as possible
the diVerent elements in the source language. This means, for example, that the message
in the receptor culture is constantly compared with the message in the source culture to
determine standards of accuracy and correctness.
The type of translation which most completely typiWes this structural equivalence
might be called a ‘gloss translation,’ in which the translator attempts to reproduce as
literally and meaningfully as possible the form and content of the original. Such a
translation might be a rendering of some Medieval French text into English, intended
for students of certain aspects of early French literature not requiring a knowledge of the
original language of the text. Their needs call for a relatively close approximation to the
4.9 eugene a. nida
349

structure of the early French text, both as to form (e.g. syntax and idioms) and content
(e.g. themes and concepts). Such a translation would require numerous footnotes in
order to make the text fully comprehensible.
A gloss translation of this type is designed to permit the reader to identify himself as
fully as possible with a person in the source-language context, and to understand as much
as he can of the customs, manner of thought, and means of expression. For example, a
phrase such as ‘holy kiss’ (Romans 16: 16) in a gloss translation would be rendered
literally, and would probably be supplemented with a footnote explaining that this was a
customary method of greeting in New Testament times.
In contrast, a translation which attempts to produce a dynamic rather than a formal
equivalence is based upon ‘the principle of equivalent eVect’ (Rieu and Phillips, 1954). In
such a translation one is not so concerned with matching the receptor-language message
with the source-language message, but with the dynamic relationship [ . . . ], that the
relationship between receptor and message should be substantially the same as that which
existed between the original receptors and the message.
A translation of dynamic equivalence aims at complete naturalness of expression, and
tries to relate the receptor to modes of behavior relevant within the context of his own
culture; it does not insist that he understand the cultural patterns of the source-language
context in order to comprehend the message. Of course, there are varying degrees of such
dynamic-equivalence translations. One of the modern English translations which, per-
haps more than any other, seeks for equivalent eVect is J. B. Phillips’ rendering of the
New Testament. In Romans 16: 16 he quite naturally translates ‘greet one another with
a holy kiss’ as ‘give one another a hearty handshake all around.’
Between the two poles of translating (i.e. between strict formal equivalence and
complete dynamic equivalence) there are a number of intervening grades, representing
various acceptable standards of literary translating. During the past Wfty years, however,
there has been a marked shift of emphasis from the formal to the dynamic dimension.
A recent summary of opinion on translating by literary artists, publishers, educators, and
professional translators indicates clearly that the present direction is toward increasing
emphasis on dynamic equivalences (Cary, 1959b).
note
1. This idiom is based upon the requirement that plaintiVs and defendants spit on the ground in front of each other
when a case has been Wnally tried and punishment meted out. The spitting indicates that all is forgiven and that
the accusations can never be brought into court again.
bibliography
Hilaire Belloc (1931a) On Translation. Oxford University Press.
Hilaire Belloc (1931b) ‘On translation.’ Bookman 74. 32–39, 179–185 (reprinted BT 10. 83–100. 1959).
Edmond Cary, ed. (1959b) ‘Notre enque`te.’ Babel 5. 61–106.
350
from pound to nabokov

Achilles Fang (1953) ‘Some reXections on the diYculty of translation.’ In Arthur F. Wright, ed., Studies in Chinese
Thought. (Am. Anthropol. Assoc., Vol. 55, Memoir 75.) Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press, pp. 263–285. (Reprinted
in Reuben A. Brower, ed. On Translation. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, pp. 111–133.
Herbert P. Phillips (1959) ‘Problems of translation and meaning in Weld work.’ Human Organization 18. 184–192.
E. V. Rieu and J.B. Phillips (1954) ‘Translating the Gospels.’ Concordia Theol. Monthly 25. 754–765.
Constance B. West (1932) ‘La the´orie de la traduction au XVIIIe sie`cle.’ Revue Litte´rature Compare´e 12. 330–355.
The Babel story, Genesis 11: 1–9, included in The Good News Bible: Today’s English
Version (The Bible Societies, Collins/Fontana, 1976), 15
1 At Wrst, the people of the whole world had only one language and used the same words.
2 As they wandered about in the East, they came to a plain in Babylonia and settled there.
3 They said to one another, ‘Come on! Let’s make bricks and bake them hard.’ So they
had bricks to build with and tar to hold them together. 4 They said, ‘Now let’s build a
city with a tower that reaches the sky, so that we can make a name for ourselves and not
be scattered all over the earth.’
5 Then the lord came down to see the city and the tower which those men had built,
6 and he said, ‘Now then, these are all one people and they speak one language; this is
just the beginning of what they are going to do. Soon they will be able to do anything
they want! 7 Let us go down and mix up their language so that they will not understand
one another.’ 8 So the lord scattered them all over the earth, and they stopped building
the city. 9 The city was called Babylon,1 because there the lord mixed up the language of
all the people, and from there he scattered them all over the earth.
note
1. babylon: This name sounds like Hebrew for ‘mixed up.’
4.9 eugene a. nida
351

4.10 Robert Lowell
Robert Lowell (1917–77), American poet, was also a playwright and translator. From a
distinguished New England family, Lowell was the dominant poetic voice of his era.
Trained in the Classics, Lowell turned to translation in a major way with Phaedra (1960), a
version from the French of Racine. Imitations (1961), a collection of free versions of
European poets, from Homer to Pasternak, for which he revived Dryden’s term for the
least source-text based form of poetry translation, marked a signiWcant moment in the
history of post-war poetry translation, with its radically domesticating approach. Lowell’s
career itself seems to reXect a turn from academic verse to the freer approach of Whitman
or the spoken-voice rhythms of W. C. Williams, as well as to more self-exposure. His verse
play treatment of Aeschylus’ Prometheus Bound (1967) creates a new play. Near the Ocean
(1967) includes rather closer versions of Horace, Dante, Quevedo, Go´ngora, and of
Juvenal’s Tenth Satire, titled like Samuel Johnson’s imitation, ‘The Vanity of Human
Wishes’. As Lowell says in a note: ‘The theme that connects my translations is Rome, the
greatness and horror of her Empire.’ The political implications, as regards his own
country, are clear. Lowell’s version of Aeschylus’s Oresteia was published posthumously,
in 1978. Like Ted Hughes’s, it was based on other translations, especially Richmond
Lattimore’s, even though Lowell had had a classical education.
Though his own translations tended to be highly personal, Lowell was also committed
to translation in a general sense, serving on the board of the relatively short-lived National
Translation Centre, Austin, Texas, founded in 1965. In an interview with D. S. Carne-
Ross, and published in the Wrst issue of the NTC’s journal Delos, edited by Carne-Ross,
Lowell said: ‘[T]he whole point of translating [ . . . ] is to bring into English something that
didn’t exist in English before. I don’t think I’ve ever done a translation of a poem I could
have written myself.’ Nevertheless, as Carne-Ross suggests, Lowell’s method is to ‘take
possession of the original and dominate it’.
The introduction to Imitations as a statement became something of a benchmark for later
discussions of poetry translation. Lowell is quite frank about his intentions, taking as a
precedent the tradition of ‘imitation’, as characterized, for instance, by Dryden (see Sect. 2.13,
above). Nevertheless, his work was frequently attacked for not being what it in fact explicitly
rejects. Ted Hughes’s interest in translation (see Sect. 5.16, below) was awakened to some
extent by Lowell, and even if his approach was diVerent, it is relatable to Lowell’s endeavours.
Imitations, being the work of a major poet, helped draw attention to the art of
translation, and to its importance in the context of literature in general. The terms of
352
from pound to nabokov

the debate generated by this work were perhaps somewhat stark, but maybe this helped get
it a hearing. Lowell, of course, must have been well aware of many of the issues raised by
his statement. Imitations itself, although of intrinsic interest as work by a major talent,
cannot be read even as a reduced anthology of European poetry, but is certainly of moment
as an ambitious attempt to re-create in English works of genius in other languages; by
deWnition, as Lowell is obliged by his credo to claim, this requires similar inspiration. One
might suppose that the likelihood of this occurring, also by deWnition, is minimal, and
that it is therefore the near impossible that Lowell is attempting, particularly since, as he
puts it, he was writing these translations ‘from time to time when I was unable to do
anything of my own’. He does not apologize but rather makes a virtue of the highly
personal nature of his motivation, although the combativeness of his tone also suggests
that he is aware of the risks involved.
At the same time, he insists on the value of ‘modest photographic prose translations’, as
against would-be poetic versions by inferior poets or by good poets working below par.
Ted Hughes, coming to translation a little later, bases his own work, to a far greater extent,
on these ‘modest’ versions which he evidently believes capable of conveying the force of
works of genius. However, even if the results are quite diVerent, less divides Lowell and
a Hughes than is immediately apparent, both being fully aware of the problems and of
the risks.
From Imitations (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1961)
‘Introduction’, pp. xi–xiii
This book is partly self-suYcient and separate from its sources, and should be Wrst read as
a sequence, one voice running through many personalities, contrasts and repetitions.
I have hoped somehow for a whole, to make a single volume, a small anthology of
European poetry. The dark and against the grain stand out, but there are other modifying
strands. I have tried to keep something equivalent to the Wre and Wnish of my originals.
This has forced me to do considerable re-writing.
Boris Pasternak has said that the usual reliable translator gets the literal meaning
but misses the tone, and that in poetry tone is of course everything. I have been reckless
with literal meaning, and laboured hard to get the tone. Most often this has been
a tone, for the tone is something that will always more or less escape transference
to another language and cultural moment. I have tried to write alive English and to
do what my authors might have done if they were writing their poems now and
in America.
Most poetic translations come to grief and are less enjoyable than modest photo-
graphic prose translations, such as George Kay has oVered in his Penguin Book of Italian
4.10 robert lowell
353

Verse. Strict metrical translators still exist. They seem to live in a pure world untouched
by contemporary poetry. Their diYculties are bold and honest, but they are taxidermists,
not poets, and their poems are likely to be stuVed birds. A better strategy would seem to
be the now fashionable translations into free or irregular verse. Yet this method com-
monly turns out a sprawl of language, neither faithful nor distinguished, now on stilts,
now low, as Dryden would say. It seems self-evident that no professor or amateur poet, or
even good poet writing hastily, can by miracle transform himself into a Wne metricist.
I believe that poetic translation—I would call it an imitation—must be expert and
inspired, and needs at least as much technique, luck and rightness of hand as an original
poem.
My licenses have been many. My Wrst two Sappho poems are really new poems
based on hers. Villon has been somewhat stripped; Hebel is taken out of dialect;
Hugo’s ‘Gautier’ is cut in half. Mallarme´ has been unclotted, not because I disapprove
of his dense medium but because I saw no way of giving it much power in English.
The same has been done with Ungaretti and some of the more obscure Rimbaud.
About a third of ‘The Drunken Boat’ has been left out. Two stanzas have been added
to Rilke’s ‘Roman Sarcophagus,’ and one to his ‘Pigeons.’ ‘Pigeons’ and Vale´ry’s
‘Helen’ are more idiomatic and informal in my English. Some lines from Villon’s
‘Little Testament’ have been shifted to introduce his ‘Great Testament.’ And so forth!
I have dropped lines, moved lines, moved stanzas, changed images and altered meter
and intent.
Pasternak has given me special problems. From reading his prose and many transla-
tions of his poetry, I have come to feel that he is a very great poet. But I know no Russian.
I have rashly tried to improve on other translations, and have been helped by exact prose
versions given me by Russian readers. This is an old practice; Pasternak himself, I think,
worked this way with his Georgian poets. I hope I have caught something worthy of his
all-important tone.
This book was written from time to time when I was unable to do anything of my
own. It began some ten years ago when I read a parallel French translation of Rilke’s
‘Orpheus,’ and felt that a much better job might be done in English. I had long been
amazed by Montale, but had no idea how he might be worked until I saw that unlike
most good poets—Horace and Petrarch are extremes—he was strong in simple prose and
could be made still stronger in free verse. My Baudelaires were begun as exercises in
couplets and quatrains and to get away from the longer, less concentrated problems of
translating Racine’s Phe`dre.
All my originals are important poems. Nothing like them exists in English, for the
excellence of a poet depends on the unique opportunities of his native language. I have
been almost as free as the authors themselves in Wnding ways to make them ring right
for me.
354
from pound to nabokov

‘La Lune oVense´e’
See Sect. 4.4, above, for Walter Benjamin’s German version, the source text, and a literal
translation.
The Injured Moon
Oh Moon, discreetly worshipped by our sires,
Still riding through your high blue countries, still
Trailed by the shining harem of your stars,
Old Cynthia, the lamp of our retreats . . .
The lovers sleep open-mouthed! When they breathe,
They show the white enamel of their teeth.
The writer breaks his teeth on his work-sheets,
The vipers couple under the hot hill.
Dressed in your yellow hood, do you pursue
Your boy from night to dawn, till the sun climbs
Skyward, where dim Endymion disappears?
‘I see your mother, Child of these poor times,
Crushed to her mirror by the heavy years.
She cunningly powders the breast that nourished you.’
Racine’s Phaedra
Excerpts from Robert Lowell’s Preface, ‘On Translating Phe`dre’, from Phaedra: Racine’s
Phe`dre, trans. Robert Lowell (1961; London: Faber and Faber 1963)
[In their somewhat despairing way, these prefatory remarks again argue for ‘free’ transla-
tions. Phe`dre has proved a challenge to a number of contemporary English language poets
(see Sect. 5.16 and 5.23, below, for the same passage, translated by Ted Hughes into English
and by Edwin Morgan into Scots respectively.]
Racine’s plays are generally and correctly thought to be untranslatable. His syllabic
alexandrines do not and cannot exist in English. We cannot reproduce his language,
which is reWned by the literary artiWce of his contemporaries, and given a subtle realism
and grandeur by the spoke idiom of Louis the Fourteenth’s court. [ . . . ] Matisse says
somewhere that a reproduction requires as much talent for colour as the original
painting. I have been tormented by the fraudulence of my own heavy touch.
My meter, with important diVerences, is based on Dryden and Pope. In his heroic
plays, Dryden uses an end-stopped couplet, loaded with inversions, heavily alliterated,
and varied by short un-rhymed lines. My couplet is run on, avoids inversions and
alliteration, and loosens its rhythm with shifted accents and occasional extra syllables.
4.10 robert lowell
355

I gain in naturalness and lose in compactness and epigrammic resonance. I have tried for
an idiomatic and ageless style, but I inevitably echo the English Restoration, both in ways
that are proper and in my sometimes unRacinian humor and bombast. [ . . . ]
Racine’s verse has a diamond-edge. He is perhaps the greatest poet in the French
language, but he uses a smaller vocabulary than any English poet—beside him Pope and
Bridges have a Shakespearian luxuriance. He has few verbally inspired lines, and in this is
unlike Baudelaire and even La Fontaine. His poetry is great because of the justness of its
rhythm and logic, and the glory of its hard, electric rage. I have translated as a poet, and
tried to give my lines a certain dignity, speed, and Xare.
Act 2, Scene 5, From Lowell, Phaedra: Racine’s Phe`dre, pp. 43–4
[John Cairncross’s allegation (see his blank-verse version in Jean Racine: Iphigenia, Phae-
dra, Athalia, trans. and introd. John Cairncross (London: Penguin Books, 1963) ) that
Lowell ‘over-energizes the less important details and adds a lot more of his own, while
under-energizing the great moments . . . ’ is hard to gainsay, when one is faced by a passage
such as the last lines of Phaedra’s guilty declaration [of her love for her stepson Hippolytus,
son of her husband, King Theseus: see below.]
phaedra
[ . . . ]
I love you! Fool, I love you, I adore you!
Do not imagine that my mind approved
my Wrst defection, Prince, or that I loved
your youth light-heartedly, and fed my treason
with cowardly compliance, till I lost my reason.
I wished to hate you, but the gods corrupt
us; though I never suVered their abrupt
seductions, shattering advances, I
too bear their sensual lightnings in my thigh.
I too am dying. I have felt the heat
that drove my mother through the Welds of Crete [ . . . ]
[ . . . ] Prince, I only spoke
about myself ! Avenge yourself, invoke
your father; a worse monster threatens you
than any Theseus ever fought and slew.
The wife of Theseus loves Hippolytus!
See. Prince! Look, this monster, ravenous
for her execution, will not Xinch.
I want your sword’s spasmodic Wnal inch
356
from pound to nabokov

Source text and literal translation by Daniel Weissbort of last section of above, in Phe`dre
(Paris: Petits Classiques Larousse, 1998), 82
He´las! Je ne t’ai pu parler que de toi-meˆme!
Venge-toi, punis-moi d’un odieux amour:
Digne Wls du he´ros qui t’a donne´ le jour,
De´livre l’univers d’un monster qui t’irrite.
La veuve de The´se´e ose aimer Hippolyte!
Crois-moi, ce monstre aVreux ne doit point t’e´chapper;
Voila` mon coeur: c’est la` que ta main doit frapper.
Impatient de´ja` d’expier son oVense,
Au-devant de ton bras je le sens qui s’avance.
Frappe: ou si tu le crois indigne de tes coups,
Si ta haine m’envie un supplice si doux,
Ou si d’un sang trop vil ta main serait trempe´e,
Au de´faut de ton bras preˆte-moi ton e´pe´e;
Donne.
Alas! I have been able to speak to you only of yourself !
Take your revenge, punish me for this odious love:
Worthy son of the hero who gave you life,
Rid the universe of a monster who oVends you.
Theseus’s widow dares to love Hippolytus!
Believe me, this dreadful monster must not escape you;
Here is my heart, that is where your hand must strike.
Impatient already to expiate its oVence,
I feel it go before to meet your arm.
Strike: or if you think it unworthy of your blows,
If your hatred grudges me so easy a punishment,
Or if my blood is too vile to stain your hand,
Instead of your hand, lend me your sword.
Give [it to me].
Aeschylus, The Oresteia
From Robert Lowell, The Oresteia of Aeschylus (1978; London, Faber and Faber, 1979)
[The translation is accompanied by a note by Lowell himself.]
I do not want to cry down my translation of Aeschylus, but to say what I’ve tried to do
and not tried. I have written from other translations, and not from the Greek. One in
particular, Richmond Lattimore’s, has had my admiration for years, it is so elaborately
4.10 robert lowell
357

exact. I have aimed at something else: to trim, cut, and be direct enough to satisfy my
own mind and at a Wrst hearing the simple ears of a theatre audience.
No version of the Oresteia, even a great one, such as Marlowe or Milton might have
written, can be anything like what was performed Wrst in Athens with music, dance,
masks, and an audience of thirty thousand or more—an event we cannot recover and
something no doubt grander than any play we can see.
From Agamemnon, in Lowell, The Oresteia of Aeschylus, p. 6
See below, Sect. 5.16, for Ted Hughes’s version. Lowell’s is much abbreviated.
I know the omen of the angry birds
Hurled Agamemnon and Menelaus
like a spear at Troy—two thrones, one mind!
Two eagles came to our kings,
one white-tailed, the other black.
They lit on the spear-hand side of the palace.
Everyone saw them. They killed a hare.
Her unborn young were bursting from her side.
From the Agamemnon of Aeschylus, trans. Richmond Lattimore, in Greek Tragedies,
vol. i, ed. Richard Grene and Richmond Lattimore (2nd edn., Chicago,
University of Chicago Press, 1991), 8
I have mastery yet to chant the wonder at the wayside
given to kings. Still by god’s grace there surges within me
singing magic
grown to my life and power,
how the wild bird portent
hurled forth the Achaeans’
twin-stemmed power single hearted,
lords of the youth of Hellas,
with spear and hand of strength
to the land of Teucrus.
Kings of birds to the kings of the ships,
one black, one blazed with silver,
clear seen by the royal house
on the right, the spear hand,
they lighted, watched by all
tore a hare, ripe, bursting with young unborn yet,
stayed from her last Xeet running.
Sing sorry, sorrow: but good wins out in the end.
358
from pound to nabokov

‘The Vanity of Human Wishes’
From Robert Lowell’s version of Juvenal’s Tenth Satire, ‘The Vanity of Human Wishes’, in Near
the Ocean (1967; New York: Farrar Straus and Giroux, First Noonday printing 1971), 54–5
See Sect. 2.16, above for literal version and Samuel Johnson’s translation of this passage.
Why do we hunger so for vicious things?
Our wishes bend the statues of the gods.
How many men are killed by Power, by Power
and Power’s companion, Envy! Your long list
of honor breaks your neck. Statues follow
the rope and crash, the axe cuts down the two-
wheeled chariot’s wheels and snaps the horse’s legs.
Fierce hiss the Wres, the bellows roar, the head
all-popular and adored by all once, burns—
Sejanus crackles, and his crude bronze face,
the second in the world, melts down to jars,
frying pans, basins, platters, chamber pots.
4.10 robert lowell
359

4.11 Stanley Burnshaw
Stanley Burnshaw (1906–2005) was a poet, critic, novelist, playwright, publisher, editor,
and translator. He is probably best known as the author of The Seamless Web (1970), a
study of the ontology of poetry and an analysis of its role in human life. In the Depression
era, his work reXected Marxist ideas, even though it was never particularly doctrinaire. In
1927 Burnshaw began a long association with the French poet Andre´ Spire. Andre´ Spire and
His Poetry appeared in 1933, revealing Burnshaw’s knowledge of European literature and
languages. Burnshaw was co-editor of the New York weekly The New Masses (1934–6). He
is best known, in the Weld of translation, for his innovative 1960 anthology The Poem Itself,
which presented poems in the source language, accompanied by a succinct commentary
and literal prose version. The Modern Hebrew Poem Itself (1965) applies the same principles
to Hebrew poetry. Burnshaw’s internationalist outlook is reXected also in Varieties of
Literary Experience (1962). His collection of poetry, In the TerriWed Radiance (1972),
includes a sequence of poems on the life of Mallarme´. Stanley Burnshaw’s The Collected
Poems and Selected Prose was published in 2002.
From the Introduction to The Poem Itself, ed. Stanley Burnshaw (1960; New York,
Simon & Schuster, 1989), pp. xi–xv
Thirty years ago in This Quarter, I published ‘A Note on Translation’ which suggested that
the only way one could experience the poetry of a language one did not command was by
learning to hear and pronounce (if only approximately) the sounds of the originals and
‘simultaneously’ reading literal renditions. Since the poetry inheres in the tonal language
(the sounds of the poem in its original tongue), how could one possibly experience a Spanish
poem in any language but Spanish, a French poem in any language but French? The ‘Note’
appeared at a time when translators felt free to do anything: they were ‘re-creating originals’!
Bilingual editions had not yet become familiar—nor had Frost’s deWnition of poetry as ‘that
which gets lost from verse and prose in translation.’ Before long a publisher expressed
interest in my notion, and I embarked on a small anthology. But then he insisted that verse
translations also be included,despite the danger of confusing and distracting the reader. And
so for the time being Iabandonedthe project certain as ever that mine was the only means by
which a reader could begin to experience the poetry of other languages.
But my method had not gone far enough, as I discovered many years later when I found
myself working on some poems by Mallarme´. My literal renditions were scrupulous, yet in
certain key places a single French word could not be rendered by a single English word—
pieces of two or even of three might be required. Other words, with double denotations in
360
from pound to nabokov

the French, had to be halved in English or equated by impossible compounds. And certain
phrases that looked easy in the dictionaries carried quite untranslatable connotations
essential as meaning. As for syntax, the reader would have to untangle it for himself. And
the allusions—though at times they might hold the key to the poem, they could not even be
considered, since they stand outside the purview of all translation.
What sort of experience, then, did my conWdent method oVer? Obviously a most
inadequate one: a great deal more would have to be added before an English-speaking
reader could begin to experience Mallarme´. And if this were true of so familiar a poet,
then it must be true of other ‘diYcult’ moderns, such as Rilke, Vallejo, Montale; it must
be true to some degree of every participant in the poetic revolution of the last hundred
years. The method had to be expanded, the line-by-line rendition enriched, at least with
alternate equivalents where necessary and with leads where ellipsis and syntax might
frustrate a reader. Other clues had also to be given: to telescoped images, private
allusions, specialized symbols, systems of belief, and similar problems. And what of the
poem as a work of sonal art? For a reader who wishes to hear and pronounce the original,
however approximately, any number of interesting points might be signalled; not only of
rime, assonance, meter, and strophe, but of graces, stops, turns, and the sonal felicities of
the whole. To be faithful to its intent, the method had to be enlarged into a literal
rendering plus commentary—into a discussion aimed at enabling the reader both to
understand the poem and to begin to experience it as a poem.
The result of these thoughts [ . . . ] fell short of its maker’s ideal, yet it served to show
others how a somewhat ‘diYcult’ poem in a foreign language could be made accessible to
English-speaking readers through a new type of presentation. [ . . . ] One poet-critic
thought that the discussion should be made twice as searching, but he soon saw the
unwisdom of trying to analyze too much. For once the reader begins, he can plunge as
deep as he wishes. The aim is to help him into the poem itself.
There are, of course, various ways of approaching foreign poetry; when a writer uses
one, he does not thereby surrender his right to use others. Those of us who are drawn to
particular poems in other languages will always be free to revivify them with English
verses—and as one of this group, I applaud the practice and hail the occasional
achievements. But these are personal preoccupations, and translation is of public con-
cern. English versions of foreign writings abound, but the reader who wants to experi-
ence the poetry of other literatures must look elsewhere; the vast stock of verse
translations provides no answer.
It provides no answer for several reasons. First, and overwhelming, a verse translation
oVers an experience in English poetry. It takes the reader away from the foreign literature
and into his own, away from the original and into something diVerent. The instant he
departs from the words of the original, he departs from its poetry. For the words are the
poem. Ideas can often be carried across, but poems are not made of ideas (as Degas was
4.11 stanley burnshaw
361

informed): they are made of words. Regardless of its brilliance, an English translation is
always a diVerent thing: it is always an English poem.
In this fact about words lies the source of all the slanderous remarks that have been
made about translators, from Frost’s sentence quoted above to the notorious Italian pun
traduttore-traditore (‘translator-traitor’). Says Poggioli: ‘Both original and translation deal
with a single substance, diVerentiated into two unique, and incommensurable, accidents’;
and Nida: ‘There can never be a word-for-word type of correspondence which is fully
meaningful or accurate.’1 When Coleridge proposed as ‘the infallible test of a blameless
style’ ‘its untranslateableness in words of the same language without injury to the meaning,’
he took care to ‘include in the meaning of a word not only its correspondent object, but
likewise all the associations which it recalls.’ For every ‘meaningful’ word is a unique
totality—unique in sound, denotation, connotation, and doubtless much more.
But the order that words make is no less crucial to the translator than the words
themselves. For when they appear in a sequence (as in a poem) they begin to mean in a
special way—their uniquenesses act, as it were, selectively. The position that each word
holds in relation to the others causes parts of its content to be magniWed and other parts
diminished. Yet even though some meanings recede as others come to the fore, all of
them are to some degree also active—whence the multiform richness of feeling and
thought conveyed (the ‘suggestions, ambiguities, paradoxes, levels of meaning’ of current
terminology). These facts may be read into Coleridge’s deWnition of poetry as ‘the best
words in the best order,’ especially into his famous remark about ‘a more than usual state
of emotion, with more than usual order.’ Today we talk of the ‘aVective’ phrase or
sentence, whose word arrangement diVers from that of prose; we say each poem is an
organization of such phrases. But some critics go further: each aVective phrase is a
rhythmic metaphor—a poem is a series of rhythmic metaphors which evokes a physical
response in the reader’s body, in his internal and external muscles. Not only the mind,
but the total organism moves with and ‘mirrors’the pattern of the words. For a translator
to evoke this response by diVerent words and word order would of course be impossible.
But, all corporeal concurrences aside, could a translator even think of trying to carry
across into a diVerent language the ‘more than usual order’ of the original words?
And yet, with all its limitations, verse translation has given us almost all we know of
the poets of the rest of the world.2 And from what we have been given we have formed
our judgments. Can they be trusted? The only works we could read have been those that
happened to appeal to translators who happened to succeed in turning them into English
poems that happened to get published. This fortuitousness should be enough to make us
suspect that the picture has been skewed; but there is more. We naturally judge the
quality of a foreign poem by the quality of the English poem it inspired, even though we
know such correspondence is rare. As a result, verse translation being the poorest
subdivision of English verse, we must continually assure ourselves that the originals are
362
from pound to nabokov

much better—which is safe enough, but only a wishful assumption. And what of all the
poetry that has never been carried across because it seemed too long or too compact or
too diYcult or too delicate to fashion into an English poem?
The method of The Poem Itself should overcome all three obstacles we have noted in
verse translation. Because each word of a foreign poem is unique in itself and in its order,
we ask the reader to read the original along with our English approximations (usually set
in italics, with alternate meanings in parentheses and explanations in brackets). Our
comments on allusion, symbol, meaning, sound, and the like will enable him to see what
the poem is saying and how, though the poem itself is an unparaphrasable totality. As to
how much the reader will hear of the sound of the poem, this depends on what
knowledge he already has and on what eVort he is willing to invest in learning to hear.
This book, then, oVers poems and the means toward experiencing them.
[ . . . ]
Before inviting the reader to begin, we make Wve qualiWcations. (1) Each poem (and
each unit of a long poem) is presented on a two-page spread, to enable the reader to see
everything without turning pages: a few of our discussions could have used additional
space. (2) Ideally each poem should be available in a recording. (3) The book makes no
claim to being representative of the last hundred years—how could it be, in so few pages
and with so much to choose from? Yet many of the Wnest poets and poems have been
included. (4) The notes on ‘The Prosodies’ and ‘The Pronunciations’ will be most useful
to the reader who recognizes the intentional brevity of the Wrst and the avowed
inadequacy of the second. Every likening of a foreign sound to an English sound is at
best an approximation, often only remote. [ . . . ]
notes
1. On Translation, edited by Reuben A. Brower, Harvard University Press, 1959. Renato Poggioli: ‘The Added
ArtiWcer’, p. 138; [Eugene A.] Nida: ‘Principles of Translation as ExempliWed by Bible Translating’, p. 13.
2. Even when we are not aware—as, for example, when a revision of an original passage appears without
acknowledgment [...].
Rainer Maria Rilke, ‘Archa¨isher Torso Apollos’
From The Poem Itself, p. 146, commentary by Gregor Sebba
Wir kannten nicht sein unerho¨rtes Haupt,
darin die Augena¨pfel reiften. Aber
sein Torso glu¨ht noch wie ein Kandelaber,
in dem sein Schauen, nur zuru¨ckgeschraubt,
4
sich ha¨lt und gla¨nzt. Sonst ko¨nnte nicht der Bug
der Brust dich blenden, und im leisen Drehen
4.11 stanley burnshaw
363

der Lenden ko¨nnte nicht ein La¨cheln gehen
zu jener Mitte, die die Zeugung trug.
8
Sonst stu¨nde dieser Stein entstellt und kurz
unter der Schultern durchsichtigem Sturz
und Ximmerte nicht so wie Raubtierfelle;
und bra¨che nicht aus allen seinen Ra¨ndern
12
aus wie ein Stern: denn da ist keine Stelle,
die dich nicht sieht. Du mut dein Leben a¨ndern.
(Der Neuen Gedichte anderer Teil, 1908)
We did not know his unheard-of (unbelievable) head (2) wherein the eye-apples ripened. But
(3) his torso still glows like a candelabrum (4) in which his gaze, merely turned down low [like
the Xames of a candelabrum, no longer visible but still sending out an afterglow] (5) holds on
and gleams. Else the curve (6) of the chest could not blind you, and in the slight twist (7) of the
loins there could not go a smile [there would not be a smile, going] (8) towards that center that
bore procreation [the genitals]. (9) Else this stone would be standing disWgured and short (10)
under the shoulders’ transparent fall (plunge) (11) and [it] would not glint like the fell (skin) of
beasts of prey; (12) and would not break out from all its [sharp] edges (13) like a star: For here
[on this torso] is no place (14) that does not see you. You must change your life.
The sonnet does not describe the ‘Archaic Torso of Apollo.’ It states its impact upon the
beholder: an immediate confrontation, almost a collision, with a work of art that deWes even
mutilation. The interplay of internal and end rimes (6–7) beautifully reXects the charac-
teristic turn of the body: blenden—Drehen—Lenden—gehen (‘blind—twist—loins—go’) as
the line gracefully breaks between substantive and attribute (Drehen / der Lenden).
Head and limbs have been broken oV, but the stone’s vitality, controlled and Wrmly
contained where the sculptor’s hand shaped it, ‘erupts’ at the rough broken surfaces ‘like a
star.’ The lost eyes’ gaze is all-present in the marble: every spot you look at looks at you.
Confronted with such overwhelming beauty, such power over time and destruction, only
one attitude is possible, and the last line proclaims it: You must become essential like this
stone; nothing less will do.
Version by Stephen Mitchell, from The Selected Poetry of Rainer Maria Rilke, ed. and
trans. Mitchell (New York: Random House, 1984), 61
Archaic Torso of Apollo
We cannot know his legendary head
with eyes like ripening fruit. And yet his torso
is still suVused with brilliance from inside,
like a lamp, in which his gaze, now turned to low,
364
from pound to nabokov

gleams in all its power. Otherwise
the curved breast could not dazzle you so, nor could
a smile run through the placid hips and thighs
to that dark center where procreation Xared.
Otherwise this stone would seem defaced
beneath the translucent cascade of the shoulders
and would not glisten like a wild beast’s fur:
would not, from all the borders of itself,
burst like a star: for here there is no place
that does not see you. You must change your life.
4.11 stanley burnshaw
365

4.12 Laura Bohannan
Laura Bohannan is an American anthropologist, who received a doctorate at Oxford in 1951.
She lectured in anthropology at the University of Chicago and at Northwestern University,
and later became professor at the University of Illinois. She has contributed to anthropo-
logical journals and books on Africa. Her Shakespeare article, included below, was originally
written for the BBC’s Third Programme in 1954 under the title ‘Miching Mallecho, That
Means Witchcraft’. With her husband Paul, she co-authored The Tiv of Central Nigeria (1953)
and in 1954, she published, under the pseudonym Elenore Smith Bowen, an anthropological
novel, Return to Laughter, about her work among an (unnamed) African tribe.
Anthropology, originating in the study of ‘primitive’ cultures, has relied heavily on, and
involved, translation (see also below, Sect. 5.7 on Ethnopoetics and Sect. 5.12 on Talal
Asad). Cultural translation is clearly an ambivalent concept, on the one hand representing
a radically foreign experience in a modern, usually ‘Western’ context, on the other risking
appropriation, a kind of neo-colonialization, since it brings a modern Western rationality
to bear on cultural material that does not possess an equal symbolic and political status.
Bohannan’s article indicates an awareness of this dilemma and of the risks of substituting
the familiar for the unfamiliar, although in this case it is, ironically, a canonical Western
source that is being appropriated by a ‘primitive’ tribe.
Laura Bohannan, ‘Shakespeare in the Bush’ Natural History (the Journal of the American
Museum of Natural History), 75 (Aug.–Sept. 1966), 28–33
Just before I left Oxford for the Tiv in West Africa, conversation turned to the season at
Stratford. ‘You Americans,’said a friend, ‘often have diYculty with Shakespeare. He was,
after all, a very English poet, and one can easily misinterpret the universal by misunder-
standing the particular.’
I protested that human nature is pretty much the same the whole world over; at least
the general plot and motivation of the greater tragedies would always be clear—every-
where—although some details of custom might have to be explained and diYculties of
translation might produce other slight changes. To end an argument we could not
conclude, my friend gave me a copy of Hamlet to study in the African bush: it would,
he hoped, lift my mind above its primitive surroundings, and possibly I might, by
prolonged meditation, achieve the grace of correct interpretation.
It was my second Weld trip to that African tribe, and I thought myself ready to live in
one of its remote sections—an area diYcult to cross even on foot. I eventually settled
366
from pound to nabokov

on the hillock of a very knowledgeable old man, the head of a homestead of some
hundred and forty people, all of whom were either his close relatives or their wives and
children. Like the other elders of the vicinity, the old man spent most of his time
performing ceremonies seldom seen these days in the more accessible parts of the
tribe. I was delighted. Soon there would be three months of enforced isolation and
leisure, between the harvest that takes place just before the rising of the swamps and the
clearing of new farms when the water goes down. Then, I thought, they would have even
more time to perform ceremonies and explain them to me.
I was quite mistaken. Most of the ceremonies demanded the presence of elders from
several homesteads. As the swamps rose, the old men found it too diYcult to walk from
one homestead to the next, and the ceremonies gradually ceased. As the swamps rose even
higher, all activities but one came to an end. The women brewed beer from maize and
millet. Men, women, and children sat on their hillocks and drank it.
People began to drink at dawn. By midmorning the whole homestead was singing,
dancing, and drumming. When it rained, people had to sit inside their huts: there they
drank and sang or they drank and told stories. In any case, by noon or before, I either had
to join the party or retire to my own hut and my books. ‘One does not discuss serious
matters when there is beer. Come, drink with us.’ Since I lacked their capacity for the
thick native beer, I spent more and more time with Hamlet. Before the end of the second
month, grace descended on me. I was quite sure that Hamlet had only one possible
interpretation, and that one universally obvious.
Early every morning, in the hope of having some serious talk before the beer party, I used
to call on the old man at his reception hut—a circle of posts supporting a thatched roof
above a low mud wall to keep out wind and rain. One day I crawled through the low
doorway and found most of the men of the homestead sitting huddled in their ragged
cloths on stools, low plank beds, and reclining chairs, warming themselves against the chill
of the rain around a smoky Wre. In the center were three pots of beer. The party had started.
The old man greeted me cordially. ‘Sit down and drink.’ I accepted a large calabash full
of beer, poured some into a small drinking gourd, and tossed it down. Then I poured
some more into the same gourd for the man second in seniority to my host before
I handed my calabash over to a young man for further distribution. Important people
shouldn’t ladle beer themselves.
‘It is better like this,’ the old man said, looking at me approvingly and plucking at
the thatch that had caught in my hair. ‘You should sit and drink with us more often.
Your servants tell me that when you are not with us, you sit inside your hut looking at
a paper.’
The old man was acquainted with four kinds of ‘papers’: tax receipts, bride price
receipts, court fee receipts, and letters. The messenger who brought him letters from the
chief used them mainly as a badge of oYce, for he always knew what was in them and
4.12 laura bohannan
367

told the old man. Personal letters for the few who had relatives in the government or
mission stations were kept until someone went to a large market where there was a letter
writer and reader. Since my arrival, letters were brought to me to be read. A few men also
brought me bride price receipts, privately, with requests to change the Wgures to a higher
sum. I found moral arguments were of no avail, since in-laws are fair game, and the
technical hazards of forgery diYcult to explain to an illiterate people. I did not wish them
to think me silly enough to look at any such papers for days on end, and I hastily
explained that my ‘paper’ was one of the ‘things of long ago’ of my country.
‘Ah,’ said the old man. ‘Tell us.’
I protested that I was not a storyteller. Story-telling is a skilled art among them; their
standards are high, and the audiences critical—and vocal in their criticism. I protested in
vain. This morning they wanted to hear a story while they drank. They threatened to tell
me no more stories until I told them one of mine. Finally, the old man promised that no
one would criticize my style ‘for we know you are struggling with our language.’ ‘But,’ put
in one of the elders, ‘you must explain what we do not understand, as we do when we tell
you our stories.’ Realizing that here was my chance to prove Hamlet universally intelli-
gible, I agreed.
The old man handed me some more beer to help me on with my storytelling. Men
Wlled their long wooden pipes and knocked coals from the Wre to place in the pipe bowls;
then, puYng contentedly, they sat back to listen. I began in the proper style, ‘Not
yesterday, not yesterday, but long ago, a thing occurred. One night three men were
keeping watch outside the homestead of the great chief, when suddenly they saw the
former chief approach them.’
‘Why was he no longer their chief?’
‘He was dead,’ I explained. ‘That is why they were troubled and afraid when they saw
him.’
‘Impossible,’ began one of the elders, handing his pipe on to his neighbor, who
interrupted, ‘Of course it wasn’t the dead chief. It was an omen sent by a witch. Go on.’
Slightly shaken, I continued. ‘One of these three was a man who knew things’—the
closest translation for scholar, but unfortunately it also meant witch. The second elder
looked triumphantly at the Wrst. ‘So he spoke to the dead chief saying, ‘‘Tell us what we
must do so you may rest in your grave,’’ but the dead chief did not answer. He vanished,
and they could see him no more. Then the man who knew things—his name was
Horatio—said this event was the aVair of the dead chief’s son, Hamlet.’
There was a general shaking of heads round the circle. ‘Had the dead chief no living
brothers? Or was this son the chief?’
‘No,’ I replied. ‘That is, he had one living brother who became the chief when the
elder brother died.’
368
from pound to nabokov

The old men muttered: such omens were matters for chiefs and elders, not for
youngsters; no good could come of going behind a chief’s back; clearly Horatio was
not a man who knew things.
‘Yes, he was,’ I insisted, shooing a chicken away from my beer. ‘In our country the son
is next to the father. The dead chief’s younger brother had become the great chief. He
had also married his elder brother’s widow only about a month after the funeral.’
‘He did well,’ the old man beamed and announced to the others, ‘I told you that if we
knew more about Europeans, we would Wnd they really were very like us. In our country
also,’ he added to me, ‘the younger brother marries the elder brother’s widow and
becomes the father of his children. Now, if your uncle, who married your widowed
mother, is your father’s full brother, then he will be a real father to you. Did Hamlet’s
father and uncle have one mother?’
His question barely penetrated my mind; I was too upset and thrown too far oV balance
by having one of the most important elements of Hamlet knocked straight out of the
picture. Rather uncertainly I said that I thought they had the same mother, but I wasn’t
sure—the story didn’t say. The old man told me severely that these genealogical details
made all the diVerence and that when I got home I must ask the elders about it. He
shouted out the door to one of his younger wives to bring his goatskin bag.
Determined to save what I could of the mother motif, I took a deep breath and began
again. ‘The son Hamlet was very sad because his mother had married again so quickly.
There was no need for her to do so, and it is our custom for a widow not to go to her next
husband until she has mourned for two years.’
‘Two years is too long,’ objected the wife, who had appeared with the old man’s
battered goatskin bag. ‘Who will hoe your farms for you while you have no husband?’
‘Hamlet,’ I retorted without thinking, ‘was old enough to hoe his mother’s farms himself.
There was no need for her to remarry.’ No one looked convinced. I gave up. ‘His mother and
the great chief told Hamlet not to be sad, for the great chief himself would be a father to
Hamlet. Furthermore, Hamlet would be the next chief: therefore he must stay to learn the
things of a chief. Hamlet agreed to remain, and all the rest went oV to drink beer.’
While I paused, perplexed at how to render Hamlet’s disgusted soliloquy to an
audience convinced that Claudius and Gertrude had behaved in the best possible
manner, one of the younger men asked me who had married the other wives of the
dead chief.
‘He had no other wives,’ I told him.
‘But a chief must have many wives! How else can he brew beer and prepare food for all
his guests?’
I said Wrmly that in our country even chiefs had only one wife, that they had servants
to do their work, and that they paid them from tax money.
4.12 laura bohannan
369

It was better, they returned, for a chief to have many wives and sons who would help
him hoe his farms and feed his people; then everyone loved the chief who gave much and
took nothing—taxes were a bad thing.
I agreed with the last comment, but for the rest fell back on their favorite way of
fobbing oV my questions: ‘That is the way it is done, so that is how we do it.’
I decided to skip the soliloquy. Even if Claudius was here thought quite right to marry
his brother’s widow, there remained the poison motif, and I knew they would disapprove
of fratricide. More hopefully I resumed, ‘That night Hamlet kept watch with the three
who had seen his dead father. The dead chief again appeared, and although the others
were afraid, Hamlet followed his dead father oV to one side. When they were alone.
Hamlet’s dead father spoke.’
‘Omens can’t talk!’ The old man was emphatic.
‘Hamlet’s dead father wasn’t an omen. Seeing him might have been an omen, but he
was not.’ My audience looked as confused as I sounded. ‘It was Hamlet’s dead father. It
was a thing we call a ‘‘ghost.’’ ’ I had to use the English word, for unlike many of the
neighboring tribes, these people didn’t believe in the survival after death of any indi-
viduating part of the personality.
‘What is a ‘‘ghost?’’ An omen?’
‘No, a ‘‘ghost’’ is someone who is dead but who walks around and can talk, and people
can hear him and see him but not touch him.’
They objected. ‘One can touch zombis.’
‘No, no! It was not a dead body the witches had animated to sacriWce and eat. No one
else made Hamlet’s dead father walk. He did it himself.’
‘Dead men can’t walk,’ protested my audience as one man.
I was quite willing to compromise. ‘A ‘‘ghost’’ is the dead man’s shadow.’
But again they objected. ‘Dead men cast no shadows.’
‘They do in my country,’ I snapped.
The old man quelled the babble of disbelief that arose immediately and told me with
that insincere, but courteous, agreement one extends to the fancies of the young,
ignorant, and superstitious, ‘No doubt in your country the dead can also walk without
being zombis.’ From the depths of his bag he produced a withered fragment of kola nut,
bit oV one end to show it wasn’t poisoned, and handed me the rest as a peace oVering.
‘Anyhow,’ I resumed, ‘Hamlet’s dead father said that his own brother, the one who
became chief, had poisoned him. He wanted Hamlet to avenge him. Hamlet believed
this in his heart, for he did not like his father’s brother.’ I took another swallow of beer.
‘In the country of the great chief, living in the same homestead, for it was a very large
one, was an important elder who was often with the chief to advise and help him. His
name was Polonius. Hamlet was courting his daughter, but her father and her brother
370
from pound to nabokov

. . . [I cast hastily about for some tribal analogy] warned her not to let Hamlet visit her
when she was alone on her farm, for he would be a great chief and so could not marry
her.’
‘Why not?’ asked the wife, who had settled down on the edge of the old man’s chair.
He frowned at her for asking stupid questions and growled, ‘They lived in the same
homestead.’
‘That was not the reason,’ I informed them. ‘Polonius was a stranger who lived in the
homestead because he helped the chief, not because he was a relative.’
‘Then why couldn’t Hamlet marry her?’
‘He could have,’ I explained, ‘but Polonius didn’t think he would. After all, Hamlet
was a man of great importance who ought to marry a chief’s daughter, for in his country
a man could have only one wife. Polonius was afraid that if Hamlet made love to his
daughter, then no one else would give a high price for her.’
‘That might be true,’ remarked one of the shrewder elders, ‘but a chief’s son would
give his mistress’s father enough presents and patronage to more than make up the
diVerence. Polonius sounds like a fool to me.’
‘Many people think he was,’ I agreed. ‘Meanwhile Polonius sent his son Laertes oV to
Paris to learn the things of that country, for it was the homestead of a very great chief
indeed. Because he was afraid that Laertes might waste a lot of money on beer and
women and gambling, or get into trouble by Wghting, he sent one of his servants to Paris
secretly, to spy out what Laertes was doing. One day Hamlet came upon Polonius’s
daughter Ophelia. He behaved so oddly he frightened her. Indeed’—I was fumbling for
words to express the dubious quality of Hamlet’s madness—‘the chief and many others
had also noticed that when Hamlet talked one could understand the words but not what
they meant. Many people thought that he had become mad.’ My audience suddenly
became much more attentive. ‘The great chief wanted to know what was wrong with
Hamlet, so he sent for two of Hamlet’s age mates [school friends would have taken long
explanation] to talk to Hamlet and Wnd out what troubled his heart. Hamlet, seeing that
they had been bribed by the chief to betray him, told them nothing. Polonius, however,
insisted that Hamlet was mad because he had been forbidden to see Ophelia, whom he
loved.’
‘Why,’ inquired a bewildered voice, ‘should anyone bewitch Hamlet on that account?’
‘Bewitch him?’
‘Yes, only witchcraft can make anyone mad, unless, of course, one sees the beings that
lurk in the forest.’
I stopped being a storyteller, took out my notebook and demanded to be told more about
these two causes of madness. Even while they spoke and I jotted notes, I tried to calculate
the eVect of this new factor on the plot. Hamlet had not been exposed to the beings that
4.12 laura bohannan
371

lurk in the forests. Only his relatives in the male line could bewitch him. Barring relatives
not mentioned by Shakespeare, it had to be Claudius who was attempting to harm him.
And, of course, it was.
For the moment I staved oV questions by saying that the great chief also refused to
believe that Hamlet was mad for the love of Ophelia and nothing else. ‘He was sure that
something much more important was troubling Hamlet’s heart.’
‘Now Hamlet’s age mates,’ I continued, ‘had brought with them a famous storyteller.
Hamlet decided to have this man tell the chief and all his homestead a story about a man
who had poisoned his brother because he desired his brother’s wife and wished to be chief
himself. Hamlet was sure the great chief could not hear the story without making a sign if
he was indeed guilty, and then he would discover whether his dead father had told him
the truth.’
The old man interrupted, with deep cunning, ‘Why should a father lie to his son?’ he
asked.
I hedged: ‘Hamlet wasn’t sure that it really was his dead father.’ It was impossible to say
anything, in that language, about devil-inspired visions.
‘You mean,’ he said, ‘it actually was an omen, and he knew witches sometimes send
false ones. Hamlet was a fool not to go to one skilled in reading omens and divining the
truth in the Wrst place. A man-who-sees-the-truth could have told him how his father
died, if he really had been poisoned, and if there was witchcraft in it; then Hamlet could
have called the elders to settle the matter.’
The shrewd elder ventured to disagree. ‘Because his father’s brother was a great chief,
one-who-sees-the-truth might therefore have been afraid to tell it. I think it was for that
reason that a friend of Hamlet’s father—a witch and an elder—sent an omen so his
friend’s son would know. Was the omen true?’
‘Yes,’ I said, abandoning ghosts and the devil; a witch-sent omen it would have to
be. ‘It was true, for when the storyteller was telling his tale before all the homestead,
the great chief rose in fear. Afraid that Hamlet knew his secret he planned to have
him killed.’
The stage set of the next bit presented some diYculties of translation. I began
cautiously. ‘The great chief told Hamlet’s mother to Wnd out from her son what he
knew. But because a woman’s children are always Wrst in her heart, he had the important
elder Polonius hide behind a cloth that hung against the wall of Hamlet’s mother’s
sleeping hut. Hamlet started to scold his mother for what she had done.’
There was a shocked murmur from everyone. A man should never scold his mother.
‘She called out in fear, and Polonius moved behind the cloth. Shouting, ‘‘A rat!’’
Hamlet took his machete and slashed through the cloth.’ I paused for dramatic eVect.
‘He had killed Polonius!’
372
from pound to nabokov

The old men looked at each other in supreme disgust. ‘That Polonius truly was a fool
and a man who knew nothing! What child would not know enough to shout, ‘‘It’s me!’’ ’
With a pang, I remembered that these people are ardent hunters, always armed with bow,
arrow, and machete; at the Wrst rustle in the grass an arrow is aimed and ready, and the
hunter shouts ‘Game!’ If no human voice answers immediately, the arrow speeds on its
way. Like a good hunter Hamlet had shouted, ‘A rat!’
I rushed in to save Polonius’s reputation. ‘Polonius did speak. Hamlet heard him. But
he thought it was the chief and wished to kill him to avenge his father. He had meant to
kill him earlier that evening. . . . ’ I broke down, unable to describe to these pagans, who
had no belief in individual afterlife, the diVerence between dying at one’s prayers and
dying ‘unhousell’d, disappointed, unaneled.’
This time I had shocked my audience seriously. ‘For a man to raise his hand against his
father’s brother and the one who has become his father—that is a terrible thing. The
elders ought to let such a man be bewitched.’
I nibbled at my kola nut in some perplexity, then pointed out that after all the man
had killed Hamlet’s father.
‘No,’ pronounced the old man, speaking less to me than to the young men sitting
behind the elders. ‘If your father’s brother has killed your father, you must appeal to your
father’s age mates; they may avenge him. No man may use violence against his senior
relatives.’ Another thought struck him. ‘But if his father’s brother had indeed been
wicked enough to bewitch Hamlet and make him mad that would be a good story
indeed, for it would be his fault that Hamlet, being mad, no longer had any sense and
thus was ready to kill his father’s brother.’
There was a murmur of applause. Hamlet was again a good story to them, but it no
longer seemed quite the same story to me. As I thought over the coming complications of
plot and motive, I lost courage and decided to skim over dangerous ground quickly.
‘The great chief,’ I went on, ‘was not sorry that Hamlet had killed Polonius. It gave
him a reason to send Hamlet away, with his two treacherous age mates, with letters to a
chief of a far country, saying that Hamlet should be killed. But Hamlet changed the
writing on their papers, so that the chief killed his age mates instead.’ I encountered a
reproachful glare from one of the men whom I had told undetectable forgery was not
merely immoral but beyond human skill. I looked the other way.
‘Before Hamlet could return, Laertes came back for his father’s funeral. The great chief
told him Hamlet had killed Polonius. Laertes swore to kill Hamlet because of this, and
because his sister Ophelia, hearing her father had been killed by the man she loved, went
mad and drowned in the river.’
‘Have you already forgotten what we told you?’ The old man was reproachful. ‘One
cannot take vengeance on a madman; Hamlet killed Polonius in his madness. As for the
4.12 laura bohannan
373

girl, she not only went mad, she was drowned. Only witches can make people drown.
Water itself can’t hurt anything. It is merely something one drinks and bathes in.’
I began to get cross. ‘If you don’t like the story I’ll stop.’
The old man made soothing noises and himself poured me some more beer. ‘You tell
the story well, and we are listening. But it is clear that the elders of your country have
never told you what the story really means. No, don’t interrupt! We believe you when
you say your marriage customs are diVerent, or your clothes and weapons. But people are
the same everywhere; therefore, there are always witches and it is we, the elders, who
know how witches work. We told you it was the great chief who wished to kill Hamlet,
and now your own words have proved us right. Who were Ophelia’s male relatives?’
‘There were only her father and her brother.’ Hamlet was clearly out of my hands.
‘There must have been many more; this also you must ask of your elders when you get
back to your country. From what you tell us, since Polonius was dead, it must have been
Laertes who killed Ophelia, although I do not see the reason for it.’
We had emptied one pot of beer, and the old men argued the point with slightly tipsy
interest. Finally one of them demanded of me, ‘What did the servant of Polonius say on
his return?’
With diYculty I recollected Reynaldo and his mission. ‘I don’t think he did return
before Polonius was killed.’
‘Listen,’ said the elder, ‘and I will tell you how it was and how your story will go, then
you may tell me if I am right. Polonius knew his son would get into trouble, and so he
did. He had many Wnes to pay for Wghting, and debts from gambling. But he had only
two ways of getting money quickly. One was to marry oV his sister at once, but it is
diYcult to Wnd a man who will marry a woman desired by the son of a chief. For if the
chiefs heir commits adultery with your wife, what can you do? Only a fool calls a case
against a man who will someday be his judge. Therefore Laertes had to take the second
way: he killed his sister by witchcraft, drowning her so he could secretly sell her body to
the witches.’
I raised an objection. ‘They found her body and buried it. Indeed Laertes jumped into
the grave to see his sister once more—so, you see, the body was truly there. Hamlet, who
had just come back, jumped in after him.’
‘What did I tell you?’ The elder appealed to the others. ‘Laertes was up to no good
with his sister’s body. Hamlet prevented him, because the chief’s heir, like a chief, does
not wish any other man to grow rich and powerful. Laertes would be angry, because he
would have killed his sister without beneWt to himself. In our country he would try to kill
Hamlet for that reason. Is this not what happened?’
‘More or less,’ I admitted. ‘When the great chief found Hamlet was still alive, he
encouraged Laertes to try to kill Hamlet and arranged a Wght with machetes between
374
from pound to nabokov

them. In the Wght both the young men were wounded to death. Hamlet’s mother drank
the poisoned beer that the chief meant for Hamlet in case he won the Wght. When he saw
his mother die of poison, Hamlet, dying, managed to kill his father’s brother with his
machete.’
‘You see, I was right!’ exclaimed the elder.
‘That was a very good story,’ added the old man, ‘and you told it with very few
mistakes. There was just one more error, at the very end. The poison Hamlet’s mother
drank was obviously meant for the survivor of the Wght, whichever it was. If Laertes had
won, the great chief would have poisoned him, for no one would know that he arranged
Hamlet’s death. Then, too, he need not fear Laertes’ witchcraft; it takes a strong heart to
kill one’s only sister by witchcraft.
‘Sometime,’ concluded the old man, gathering his ragged toga about him, ‘you must
tell us some more stories of your country. We, who are elders, will instruct you in their
true meaning, so that when you return to your own land your elders will see that you
have not been sitting in the bush, but among those who know things and who have
taught you wisdom.’
4.12 laura bohannan
375

4.13 Vladimir Nabokov
Jenefer Coates
Vladimir Nabokov (1899–1977) is best known as a bilingual novelist of dark themes and
brilliant style, and as a controversial translator, chieXy of Pushkin’s Eugene Onegin.
Nabokov was, in fact, constantly engaged in turning his own and others’ texts between
Russian, English, and French in the course of a long working life. His mixed approach,
however, led to accusations of double standards: translating his own work with great
artistry, he came to adopt a literalist approach for others. Nabokov the translator was
closely related to Nabokov the writer: the two evolved in tandem, with the mid-career
switch from Russian to English sharpening sensitivity to ineluctable cultural and linguistic
diVerence. His thoughts were shaped into poems, stories, and novels as well as polemical
essays, lectures, commentaries, and reviews, in which scorn for commonplace practices
gave way to an impassioned justiWcation of literalism (a term he dismissed, however, as
‘more or less nonsense’). His novels meanwhile increasingly embodied themes of trans-
formation and translation in a broad and narrow sense.
Born in St Petersburg, Nabokov described his upbringing as that of ‘a normal tri-lingual
child in a family with a large library’, declaring in 1964: ‘I am an American writer, born
in Russia and educated in England where I studied French literature, before spending
Wfteen years in Germany’ (Strong Opinions (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1973), 26).
The leading Russian writer in e´migre´ Berlin, Nabokov began to experiment with English
in the 1930s. Fleeing Nazism for America in 1940, he embarked on a new career as university
teacher, lepidopterist, and writer in English. After moderate success, he Wnally attracted
worldwide note and notoriety with Lolita (Paris: Olympia Press 1955; New York: Putnam’s
1958) which enabled him to devote himself entirely to literature for the Wrst time. Moving to
Switzerland, he completed his Pushkin translation (Eugene Onegin: A Novel in Verse, trans.
Vladimir Nabokov (Bollingen Series, 72, New York: Pantheon 1964; rev. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1975)) and composed, inter alia, two major works in English,
Pale Fire (New York: Putnam’s, 1962) and Ada (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1969), whilst
continuing to translate his earlier novels in both directions, to meet the new demand.
Switching Languages
Nabokov published (under the pseudonym ‘Vladimir Sirin’) two Russian translations
before his own Wrst novel: Romain Rolland’s pseudo-medieval Colas Breugnon (1914) from
376
from pound to nabokov

French (Nikolka Persik, Berlin: Slovo 1922) and Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland from
English (Anya v strane chudes, Berlin: Gamayun, 1923). Both playfully hark back, the one
to courtly England, the other to Rabelaisian France. Nabokov cheerfully russianized both,
trawling dictionaries for suitable archaic equivalents. He also made Wne appropriative
translations of French and English poets, amongst them Verlaine, Rimbaud, Supervielle,
Rupert Brooke, and Yeats.
The switch to primary use of English brought changes of approach. His translations
into Russian, for all the interlingual play and neologizing that characterize Nabokov’s
style, remained essentially domesticating: innovation is, after all, relative to normative
form. The ‘russianizing’ of Lolita, for instance, which he took into his own ‘safe hands’
(1967), sparkles with all the energy of the original, featuring hundreds of new usages, and
Russian in place of Anglophone allusions. Creative adjustments were defended on grounds of
authorial licence.
Into English, however, the pattern is more complex: ‘fair imitation’ was abandoned for
more or less word-for-word solutions when translating others, but for his own work,
Nabokov always produced approximate replicas. Working methods varied, however:
whereas Russian was always handled alone, Nabokov came to prefer collaboration into
English, revising and polishing drafts prepared by skilled translators (mostly, and most
happily, with his son Dmitri as ‘docile assistant’). Translation, he complained, drained him
of precious energies needed for new writing and required ‘another section of the brain than
the text of my book, and switching from the one to another by means of spasmodic jumps
causes a kind of mental asthma’ (Letter to James Laughlin, 16 July 1942, in Selected Letters
1940–1977, ed. Dmitri Nabokov and Matthew J. Bruccoli (New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1989), 40).
The temptation to improve on the ‘greener fruits’ of an earlier self was irresistible to
such a proliWc, inventive writer. In two cases, translation turned into serial rewriting:
Otchaianie (1932), Wrst composed in Russian, was self-translated into English as Despair
(1935), but further revised for republication, still as Despair, in 1966 (New York: Putnam’s,
1966). Nabokov’s memoirs began as Conclusive Evidence (1951), were reworked into
Russian as Drugie berega (1954), and then underwent further transformation before Wnal
publication as Speak, Memory: An Autobiography Revisited (New York: Putnam’s, 1966),
a process he described thus: ‘This re-Englishing of a Russian re-version of what had been
an English re-telling of Russian memories in the Wrst place, proved to be a diabolical
task, but some consolation was given me by the thought that such multiple metamor-
phosis, familiar to butterXies, had not been tried by any human before’ (Speak, Memory
(1966), 12–13).
On his painful switch of language, Nabokov would later write:
4.13 vladimir nabokov
377

None of my American friends have read my Russian books and thus every appraisal on
the strength of my English ones is bound to be out of focus. My private tragedy, which
cannot, indeed should not, be anybody’s concern, is that I had to abandon my natural
language, my natural idiom, my rich, inWnitely rich and docile Russian tongue, for a
second-rate brand of English. (‘On a Book Entitled Lolita’, 1956, postscript to Lolita
(1958), 316)
The achievement of Lolita is all the greater for this sense of loss, yet its success is,
paradoxically, partly due to the relative weakness of Nabokov’s early English. Discovering
he was ‘tri-literary’ rather than tri-lingual—never having lived in an English-speaking
household, he lacked what he called ‘domestic diction’—Nabokov turned what he per-
ceived as an impediment to advantage by giving his style a baroque, hyper-literary tone
(‘You talk like a book,’ Lolita complains to Humbert). It would also engender some
memorable, tragicomic outsiders (Pnin, Humbert, and Kinbote). The mature Nabokovian
voice would be self-conscious, richly intertextual, and always a little foreign. It would resist
easy access through involute structures and intricate language, its complexity increasing in
inverse proportion to the rugged plainness of translation, although in fact both called for
close attention (‘the re-reader’ being addressed in Ada).
Teaching Russian and European literature in translation gave further impetus to
literalism. A literal translation did not seek to entertain or delight, but to educate and
inform. Appalled at the shortcomings of versions praised by publishers and critics,
Nabokov complained:
I am teaching a course in European Fiction at Cornell University and have selected as a
permanent item Flaubert’s ‘Madame Bovary’. In September I ordered, for a class of 133
students [ . . . ] your edition of that novel [ . . . ] I devoted seven class meetings to the
discussion of the novel, and at least 10 minutes of every such period had to be spent in
correcting the incredible mistranslations (more exactly, only the worst of them). In point
of fact every page of the book contains at least three or four blunders—either obvious
mistakes, or slovenly translations giving the wrong slant to Flaubert’s intention. His
lovely descriptions of visual things, clothes, landscapes, Emma’s hairdo etc. are com-
pletely botched by the translator. I had to revise all this, going through each word of
the book with a copy of the French Wrst edition before me and have found, in addition
to the various blunders due to the translator’s insuYcient French, a number of misprints
due, in most cases, to faulty proofreading (‘beads’ for ‘meads’, ‘came’ for ‘cane’—that sort
of thing) [...]
My intention was to use the book next year and in later years. As my classroom analysis of
Flaubert’s style is a close one, and as my students are not expected to have enough French
to turn to the French original, the situation is an alarming one [...] My suggestion is that
378
from pound to nabokov

before you make a new printing of your new edition (the one ‘based on the Eleanor Marx
Aveling translation with corrections and modernization by the editor’, 1946), you accept
from me a list of more than 1000 corrections [ . . . ] I have also come to the conclusion
that a number of notes elucidating local, literary and historical allusions, which are
absolutely incomprehensible to the American student, ought to be added to the English
translation of the book [ . . . ] and this I would also be willing to do [ . . . ] (To John Selby,
Editor at Rinehart, 17 January 1951 (Selected Letters (1989), 111–12))
Here are all the signs of Nabokov’s growing functionalism. The good reader, he believed,
should be ready to work at the text, to take a Schleiermachian journey into an estranged
world and meet the author (or translator) at least halfway:
The good reader is one who has imagination, memory, a dictionary and some artistic
sense [ . . . and who will] notice and fondle details . . . Up a trackless slope climbs the
master artist, and at the top, on a windy ridge, whom do you think he meets? The
panting and happy reader, and there they spontaneously embrace and are linked for ever,
if the book lasts forever [ . . . ] (‘Good Readers and Good Writers’, c.1940s, in Vladimir
Nabokov, Lectures on Russian Literature, ed. Fredson Bowers (New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1981 / London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1982), 1–6)
The Art of Translation
Nabokov had begun to air his views soon after arrival in America, publishing the ‘The Art
of Translation’ in 1941. Despite a taxonomist’s tendency to draw up rules and categories, he
eschewed the abstractions of theory proper: sarcastically descriptive and stridently pre-
scriptive, he appealed to an aesthetics that informed his own work. Couched in measured
scholarly discourse, his views might have won more friends, but the colourful disparage-
ments of a little-known foreign writer only raised hackles.
From ‘The Art of Translation’, The New Republic, New York, 4 Aug. 1941; repr. in
Vladimir Nabokov: Lectures on Russian Literature, ed. Fredson Bowers (New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1981 / London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1982), 315
Three grades of evil can be discerned in the queer world of verbal transmigration. The
Wrst, and lesser one, comprises obvious errors due to ignorance or misguided knowledge.
This is mere human frailty and thus excusable. The next step to Hell is taken by the
translator who intentionally skips words or passages that he does not bother to under-
stand or that might seem obscure or obscene to vaguely imagined readers; he accepts the
4.13 vladimir nabokov
379

blank look that his dictionary gives him without any qualms; or subjects scholarship to
primness: he is as ready to know less than the author as he is to think he knows better.
The third, and worst, degree of turpitude is reached when a masterpiece is planished and
patted into such a shape, vilely beautiWed in such a fashion as to conform to the notions
and prejudices of a given public.
[ . . . ]
Barring downright deceivers, mild imbeciles and impotent poets, there exist, roughly
speaking, three types of translators—and this has nothing to do with my three categories
of evil; or, rather, any of the three types may err in a similar way. These three are: the
scholar who is eager to make the world appreciate the works of an obscure genius as
much as he does himself; the well meaning hack; and the professional writer relaxing
in the company of a foreign confre`re. The scholar will be, I hope, exact and pedantic:
footnotes—on the same page as the text and not tucked away at the end of the volume—
can never be too copious and detailed. The laborious lady translating at the eleventh
hour the eleventh volume of somebody’s collected works will be, I am afraid, less
exact and less pedantic; but the point is not that the scholar commits fewer blunders
than a drudge; the point is that as a rule both he and she are hopelessly devoid of any
semblance of creative genius. Neither learning nor diligence can replace imagination
and style.
Now comes the authentic poet who has the two last assets and who Wnds relaxation in
translating a bit of Lermontov or Verlaine between writing poems of his own. Either he
does not know the original language and calmly relies upon the so-called ‘literal’
translation made for him by a far less brilliant but a little more learned person, or else,
knowing the language, he lacks the scholar’s precision and the professional translator’s
experience. The main drawback, however, in this case is the fact that the greater his
individual talent, the more apt he will be to drown the foreign masterpiece under the
sparkling ripples of his own personal style. Instead of dressing up like the real author, he
dresses up the author as himself.
We can deduce now the requirements that a translator must possess in order to be
able to give an ideal version of a foreign masterpiece. First of all he must have as much
talent, or at least the same kind of talent, as the author he chooses [ . . . ] Second, he
must know thoroughly the two nations and the two languages involved and be perfectly
acquainted with all details relating to his author’s manner and methods; also, with the
social background of words, their fashions, history and period associations. This leads
to the third point: while having genius and knowledge he must possess the gift of
mimicry and be able to act, as it were, the real author’s part by impersonating his
tricks of demeanor and speech, his ways and his mind, with the utmost degree of
verisimilitude [ . . . ]
380
from pound to nabokov

During the 1950s, Nabokov translated chieXy for academic purposes. His version of the
anonymous Slovo o polku Igoreve, for example, was originally prepared for teaching at
Harvard in 1949, but when published, with commentary and notes, in 1960 under the title
The Song of Igor’s Campaign. An Epic of the Twelfth Century (Vintage 1960; repr. Ann
Arbor: Ardis 1988), Nabokov deliberately rendered it still ‘less readable’, warning: ‘I have
ruthlessly sacriWced manner to matter and have attempted to give a literal rendering of the
text as I understand it.’ Despite the rough-hewn texture, it retains some poetry: the Old
Russian text, originally composed in the twelfth century, or perhaps forged in the
eighteenth, is rendered in broadly modern English, with archaisms employed in token
rather than in toto, matching perceived anachronisms for the sake of ‘historical exacti-
tude’. In this, he diVered signiWcantly from Pound, for example, whose transposition of an
entire text to a past, dead form Nabokov considered fake, no matter how (or, especially,
whether) ‘inspired’. The abstruse lexis that occurs everywhere in Nabokov is used always
for precision of meaning rather than eVect.
The Song of Igor’s Campaign, p. 36, lines 130–50
Igor leads Donwards his warriors.
His misfortunes already
are forefelt by the birds in the oakscrub.
The wolves, in the ravines,
conjure the storm.
The erns with their squalling
summon the beasts to the bones.
The foxes yelp
at the vermilion shields.
O Russian land,
you are already behind the culmen!
Long does the night keep darkling.
Dawn sheds its light.
Mist has covered the Welds.
Stilled is the trilling of nightingales;
the jargon of jackdaws has woken.
With their vermilion shields
the sons of Rus have barred the great prairie,
seeking for themselves honor,
and for their prince glory.
4.13 vladimir nabokov
381

From foreword to the translation, in collaboration with Dmitri Nabokov of Lermontov’s
A Hero of our Time (New York: Doubleday, 1958)
This is the Wrst English translation of Lermontov’s novel. The book has been paraphrased
into English several times, but never translated before. The experienced hack may Wnd it
quite easy to turn Lermontov’s Russian into slick English cliche´s by means of judicious
omission, ampliWcation, and levigation; and he will tone down everything that might
seem unfamiliar to the meek and imbecile reader visualized by his publisher. But the
honest translator is faced with a diVerent task.
In the Wrst place we must dismiss, once and for all the conventional notion that a
translation ‘should read smoothly’ and ‘should not sound like a translation’ (to quote the
would-be compliments, addressed to vague versions, by genteel reviewers who have and
never will read the original texts). In point of fact, any translation that does not sound like
a translation is bound to be inexact upon inspection; while, on the other hand, the only
virtue of a good translation is faithfulness and completeness. Whether it reads smoothly
or not, depends on the model, not on the mimic.
Pushkin
In a lecture given in Paris in 1937 (attended by James Joyce) entitled ‘Pouchkine: ou le vrai
et le vraisemblable’ (‘Pushkin, or the Real and the Plausible’, trans. Dmitri Nabokov, New
York Review of Books, 31 March 1988), Nabokov had declared:
Those of us who really know him revere him with unparalleled fervor and purity, and
experience a radiant feeling when the richness of his life over-Xows into the present to
Xood our spirit [...] To read his works [ . . . ] and to reread them endlessly is one of the
glories of earthly life.
Nabokov’s early eVorts at translating Pushkin were considered ‘the best translations of
poetry of any kind’ by the American critic Edmund Wilson (The Nabokov-Wilson Letters :
Correspondence between Vladimir Nabokov and Edmund Wilson, 1941–1971, ed. Simon
Karlinsky (New York: Harper and Row, 1979), 42), who encouraged the publication of a
small collection (Three Russian Poets: Pushkin, Lermontov and Tyutchev, Vladimir Nabokov,
Norfolk: New Directions, 1945). Nabokov later dismissed these translations as ‘graceful
imitations’, however, and in 1955 expressed his deep misgivings about ‘traducing’ Pushkin
in a poem published in The New Yorker. Ostensibly a model of the fourteen-line Onegin
stanza, Nabokov’s poetic apology was reprinted in his translator’s introduction to Eugene
Onegin (1964 and 1975, vol. i. 9). It begins:
382
from pound to nabokov

What is translation? On a platter
A poet’s pale and glaring head,
A parrot’s screech, a monkey’s chatter,
And profanation of the dead.
[ . . . ].
Nabokov felt ambivalent about translating Pushkin. He longed to reveal to the Anglo-
phone world a poet that meant more to himself (and all Russian speakers) than any other,
yet found the impersonation involved in conventional translation increasingly abhorrent,
especially while he still feared sounding second-rate in his own creative voice. He knew
that Pushkin’s special magic, like that of all great poets, lay in the speciWc ‘combinational
delights’ of sound and sense that would always elude recapture in another language. In the
Nabokovian universe, the speciWc is constantly opposed to the general, while mimicry,
masquerade, and imitation are always equated with falsity, fakery, and phoneyness. After
years of experimentation, Nabokov Wnally hit on the ‘right approach’ but only disclosed it
a decade later. He meanwhile outlined the diYculties in ‘Problems of Translation:
‘‘Onegin’’ in English’.
From ‘Problems of Translation: ‘‘Onegin’’ in English’, Partisan Review, 22 (1955), Repr.
in R. Schulte and J. Biguenet (eds.), Theories of Translation (Chicago: Chicago
University Press 1992); and in L. Venuti (ed.), The Translation Studies Reader (New
York & London: Routledge 2000)
I
I constantly Wnd in reviews of verse translations the following kind of thing that sends
me into spasms of helpless fury: ‘Mr (or Miss) So-and-so’s translation reads smoothly.’
In other words, the reviewer of the ‘translation,’ who neither has, nor would be able to
have, without special study, any knowledge whatsoever of the original, praises as
‘readable’ an imitation only because the drudge or the rhymster has substituted easy
platitudes for the breathtaking intricacies of the text. ‘Readable,’ indeed! A schoolboy’s
boner is less of a mockery in regard to the ancient masterpiece than its commercial
interpretation or poetization. ‘Rhyme’ rhymes with ‘crime,’ when Homer or Hamlet
are rhymed. The term ‘free translation’ smacks of knavery and tyranny. It is when
the translator sets out to render the ‘spirit’—not the textual sense—that he begins
to traduce his author. The clumsiest literal translation is a thousand times more useful
than the prettiest paraphrase.
[ . . . ]
4.13 vladimir nabokov
383

IV
The person who desires to turn a literary masterpiece into another language, has only one
duty to perform, and this is to reproduce with absolute exactitude the whole text, and
nothing but the text. The term ‘literal translation’ is tautological since anything but that
is not truly a translation but an imitation, an adaptation or a parody.
The problem, then, is a choice between rhyme and reason: can a translation while
rendering with absolute Wdelity the whole text, and nothing but the text, keep the form of
the original, its rhythm and its rhyme? To the artist whom practice within the limits of
one language, his own, has convinced that matter and manner are one, it comes as a
shock to discover that a work of art can present itself to the would-be translator as split
into form and content, and that the question of rendering one but not the other may
arise at all. Actually what happens is still a monist’s delight: shorn of its primary verbal
existence, the original text will not be able to soar and to sing; but it can be very nicely
dissected and mounted, and scientiWcally studied in all its organic details [ . . . ]
VII
[ . . . ] Here are three conclusions I have arrived at: 1. It is impossible to translate Onegin
in rhyme. 2. It is possible to describe in a series of footnotes the modulations and rhymes
of the text as well as all its associations and other special features. 3. It is possible to
translate Onegin with reasonable accuracy by substituting for the fourteen rhymed
tetrameter lines of each stanza fourteen unrhymed lines of varying length, from iambic
diameter to iambic pentameter.
These conclusions can be generalized. I want translations with copious footnotes,
footnotes reaching up like skyscrapers to the top of this or that page so as to leave only the
gleam of one textual line between commentary and eternity. I want such footnotes and
the absolutely literal sense, with no emasculation and no padding—I want such sense and
such notes for all the poetry in other tongues that still languishes in ‘poetical’ versions,
begrimed and beslimed by rhyme. And when my Onegin is ready, it will either conform
exactly to my vision or not appear at all.
[Nabokov’s Onegin Wnally reached publication in 1964. The method was didactic and
scholarly. Rather than recreating Pushkin’s ‘limpid harmonies [ . . . ] multiple melodies
[ . . . ] and precise and luminous images’ in the usual Byronic pastiche, Nabokov attempted
to match not only meaning word-for-word but the syllabic rhythm of the Russian as well.
The stanzaic form was retained but all other rhetorical features suppressed, although lyric
moments still glint like shards among rubble. The English translation was interlinear,
designed to keep pace exactly with Pushkin’s cyrillic on a second line and its roman
transliteration on a third. Notes would ideally be accommodated close to the relevant text,
even though some of them ran to many sides. In the event, the published edition
384
from pound to nabokov

comprised four separate volumes, one each for the English and Russian texts, and two for
the 1200 pages of compendious notes and commentaries. These analyse details of style,
variants, and sources and place both poem and poet in full historical, intellectual, and
artistic contexts. Nabokov’s provocative Foreword sets the tone.]
From Eugene Onegin: A Novel in Verse by Aleksandr Pushkin, trans. from the Russian,
with commentary, by Vladimir Nabokov, (Bollingen Series 72, 1964); Princeton:
Princeton University Press, rev. 1975), vol. i, Foreword, pp. vii–x
[ . . . ] Can Pushkin’s poem, or any other poem with a deWnite rhyme scheme, be really
translated? To answer this we should Wrst deWne the term ‘translation.’ Attempts to render
a poem in another language fall into three categories:
(1) Paraphrastic: oVering a free version of the original, with omissions and additions
prompted by the exigencies of form, the conventions attributed to the consumer, and the
translator’s ignorance. Some paraphrases may possess the charm of stylish diction and
idiomatic conciseness, but no scholar should succumb to stylishness and no reader be
fooled by it.
(2) Lexical (or constructional): rendering the basic meaning of words (and their order).
This a machine can do under the direction of an intelligent bilinguist.
(3) Literal: rendering, as closely as the associative and syntactical capacities of another
language allow, the exact contextual meaning of the original. Only this is true translation.
Let me give an example of each method. The opening quatrain of Eugene Onegin,
transliterated and prosodically accented, reads:
Moy dya´dya sa´mih che´stnı¨h pra´vil,
Kogda´ ne v shu´tku zanemo´g,
On uvazha´t sebya´ zasta´vil,
I lu´chshe vıdumat’ ne mo´g . . .
This can be paraphrased in an inWnite number of ways. For example:
My uncle, in the best tradition,
By falling dangerously sick
Won universal recognition
And could devise no better trick . . .
The lexical or constructional translation is:
My uncle [is] of most honest rules [:]
when not in jest [he] has been taken ill,
he to respect him has forced [one],
and better invent could not . . .
4.13 vladimir nabokov
385

Now comes the literalist. He may toy with ‘honorable’ instead of ‘honest’ and waver
between ‘seriously’ and ‘not in jest’; he will replace ‘rules’ by the more evocative
‘principles’ and rearrange the order of words to achieve some semblance of English
construction and retain some vestige of Russian rhythm, arriving at:
My uncle has most honest principles:
when he was taken ill in earnest,
he has made one respect him
and nothing better could invent . . .
And if he is still not satisWed with his version, the translator can at least hope to amplify it
in a detailed note.
[ . . . ]
We are now in a position to word our question more accurately: can a rhymed poem like
Eugene Onegin be truly translated with the retention of its rhymes? The answer, of course,
is no. To reproduce the rhymes or yet translate the entire poem literally is mathematically
impossible. But in losing its rhyme the poem loses its bloom, which neither marginal
description nor the alchemy of a scholium can replace. Should one then content oneself
with an exact rendering of the subject matter and forget all about form? Or should one
still excuse an imitation of the poem’s structure to which only twisted bits of sense stick
here and there, by convincing oneself and one’s public that in mutilating its meaning for
the sake of a pleasure-measure rhyme one has the opportunity of prettifying or skipping
the dry and diYcult passages?
[ . . . ]
In transposing Eugene Onegin from Pushkin’s Russian into my English I have sacriWced to
completeness of meaning every formal element including the iambic rhythm, whenever
its retention hindered Wdelity. To my ideal of literalism I sacriWced everything (elegance,
euphony, clarity, good taste, modern usage, and even grammar) that the dainty mimic
prizes higher than truth. Pushkin has likened translation to horses changed at the
posthouses of civilization. The greatest reward I can think of is that students may use
my work as a pony. [ . . . ]
The Shift to Literalism
Nabokov attempted to translate Pushkin at three diVerent stages of his career: as an
emerging English writer in 1945; as an acclaimed author in 1964, and as a bilingual
master in 1976. The shift towards ‘bony literalism’ can be traced in his handling of a
single stanza.
386
from pound to nabokov

Three translations by Nabokov of Eugene Onegin by Alexander Pushkin, chapter 1,
stanza, XXXII,
Russian Review, 4/2 (1945), 38–9
Diana’s bosom, Flora’s dimple
are very charming, I agree—
but there’s a greater charm, less simple,
—the instep of Terpsichore.
By prophesying to the eye
a prize with which no prize can vie
’tis a fair token and a snare
for swarms of daydreams. Everywhere
its grace, sweet reader, I admire:
at long-hemmed tables, half-concealed,
in spring, upon a velvet Weld,
in winter, at a grated Wre,
in ballrooms, on a glossy Xoor,
on the bleak boulders of a shore.
Eugene Onegin: A Novel in Verse (Bollingen Series 72, New York:
Pantheon Press 1964; London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1964), i. 111
Diana’s bosom, Flora’s cheeks, are charming,
dear friend! Nevertheless, for me
something about it makes more charming
the small foot of Terpsichore.
By prophesying to the gaze
an unpriced recompense,
with token beauty it attracts the willful
swarm of desires.
I like it, dear Elvina,
beneath the long napery of tables,
in springtime on the turf of meads,
in winter on the hearth’s cast iron,
on mirrory parquet of halls,
by the sea on granite of rocks.
Eugene Onegin (Bollingen Series, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
(1964; rev. 1975), i. 109
Diana’s bosom, Flora’s cheeks,
are charming, dear friends!
4.13 vladimir nabokov
387

However, the little foot of Terpsichore
is for me in some way more charming.
By prophesying to the gaze
an unpriced recompense,
with token beauty it attracts
the willful swarm of longings.
I’m fond of it, my friend Elvina,
beneath the long napery of tables,
in springtime on the turf of meads,
in winter on the hearth’s cast iron,
on mirrory parquet of halls,
by the sea on granite of rocks.
notes to chapter one: xxxii. commentary, vol . 2 : 118–120 (excerpts). [1964 and 1975]
3–4/Cf. Le joli-pied of Nicolas Edme Restif de la Bretonne, a mediocre but entertaining writer of the eighteenth
century (1974–1806) [ . . . ]
7/with token beauty /uslo´vnoyu kraso´y . Although uslovn€ııy means ‘conditional’ or ‘conventional,’ the only possible
sense here must turn on the idea of un signe convenu, with the emphasis on the sign, the emblem, the cipher, the
code of beauty, the secret language of those narrow little feet [ . . . ]
Cf. Shakespeare, Troilus and Cressida, IV, v. 55:
There’s language in her eye, her cheek, her lip
Nay, her foot speaks . . .
8/ willful swarm /svoevo´l’n€ıy ro´y : a common Gallicism, essaim, with svoevo´l’n€ıy, ‘self-willed’ echoing alliteratively
such cliche´ epithets as volage, frivole, folaˆtre [ . . . ]
9/Elvina: I suspect this is a natural child of Macpherson’s Malvina. It occurs in French imitations of the Ossian
poems [ . . . ]
Reception of Onegin
By the time Eugene Onegin Wnally appeared in 1964, Nabokov was internationally
acclaimed as a virtuoso stylist. His translation was thus perceived not as the product of a
thorough but idiosyncratic scholar, but of a writer who talked of aesthetic bliss while giving
short shrift to the creator of the ‘greatest poem in the Russian language’; and a writer,
moreover, who had Xouted his own strictures when translating his own work. Despite the
frankness of Nabokov’s aims, hostility has persisted. Yet no student or translator can ignore
his study: Nabokov gained Pushkin due recognition as a universal poet, and enhanced
scholarship in the Weld. His detailed historical analysis establishes crucial intertextual links
between the Russian masterpiece and European writing, and shows how Pushkin often
relied on sources read in translation. This point is commonly seen as spiteful condescension
on the part of the superior multilingualist, but like Pushkin, Nabokov saw translation as
388
from pound to nabokov

cultural synthesis, a vital stage or staging post in literary evolution; unlike him, however, he
saw ‘misrepresentations’ as obstructions to that process.
Nabokov’s Onegin ignited one of the most celebrated literary rows of the twentieth
century. The loudest detractor was his erstwhile friend and supporter Edmund Wilson,
who chose to ignore its advertised purpose, and derided the lack of poetic form, the stilted,
archaic diction, awkward syntax, and elephantine prose that so betrayed the glories of the
Russian. Nabokov rose in defence and a bitter debate over prosody and style dragged on
for many months. Nabokov wearily stated his cause for the last time in ‘Reply To My
Critics’:
From: ‘Reply To My Critics’, Encounter (Feb. 1966), repr. in Strong Opinions (New
York: McGraw Hill, 1973), 241–67
[ . . . If] adverse criticism happens to be directed not at those acts of fancy [my novels],
but at such a matter-of-fact work of reference as my annotated translation of Eugene
Onegin, other considerations take over. Unlike my novels, EO possesses an ethical side,
moral and human elements. It reXects the compiler’s honesty or dishonesty, skill or
sloppiness. If told I am a bad poet, I smile; but if told I am a poor scholar, I reach for my
heaviest dictionary.
[ . . . O]ne might conclude that literal translation represents an approach entirely devised
by me; that it had never been heard of before; and that there was something oVensive
and even sinister about such a method and undertaking. Promoters and producers of
what Anthony Burgess calls ‘arty translations’—carefully rhymed, pleasantly modulated
versions containing, say, eighteen percent of sense plus thirty-two of nonsense and Wfty
of neutral padding—are I think more prudent than they realize. While ostensibly
tempted by impossible dreams, they are subliminally impelled by a kind of self-
preservation. The ‘arty translation’ protects them by concealing and camouXaging
ignorance or incomplete information or the fuzzy edge of limited knowledge. Stark
literalism, on the other hand, would expose their fragile frame to unknown and
incalculable perils.
[ . . . ]
As a result the canned music of rhymed versions is enthusiastically advertised, and
accepted, and the sacriWce of textual precision applauded as something rather heroic,
whereas only suspicion and blood-hounds await the gaunt, graceless literalist groping
around in despair for the obscure word that would satisfy impassioned Wdelity and
accumulating in the process a wealth of information which only makes the advocates of
pretty camouXage tremble or sneer.
[ . . . ]
4.13 vladimir nabokov
389

My EO falls short of the ideal crib. It is still not close enough and not ugly enough. In
future editions I plan to defowlerize it still more drastically. I think I shall turn it entirely
into utilitarian prose, with a still bumpier brand of English, rebarbative barricades of
square brackets and tattered banners of reprobate words, in order to eliminate the last
vestiges of bourgeois poesy and concession to rhyme. [ . . . ]
[As threatened, the 1975 edition was revised to be even more ‘bumpy’.]
Nabokov’s Oeuvre
The order of publication suggests that Nabokov wrote Lolita before translating Pushkin.
In fact the translation was completed well before Lolita catapulted him to prominence, but
a further decade was devoted to the commentary. Yet work on the two did overlap by
several years and noticeable similarities have given rise to critical speculation. Lolita has
been posited as a ‘free’ translation of Onegin that complements the ‘faithful’ literal.
Intertextual sleuths have suspected a plundering or, more puzzlingly, a parody of Pushkin.
Both novels are luminous examples of the romantic genre, and both are what Nabokov
called a ‘‘phenomenon of style’’ (Eugene Onegin, Translator’s Introduction, i. 7) for both
recall their own precursors through homage, parody and multiple allusions: Onegin looks
back from the 1820s while Lolita looks back from the 1950s—by which time, Onegin was
just one more romance resonating among the many.
Both employ the usual romantic devices, including the epistolary declaration descended
from the French: thus Charlotte’s letter to Humbert resembles Tatiana’s confession to
Onegin in its sentimental phrasing and gallic Xavour. Pushkin conveys this in a Russian
that touchingly calques the French. This is lost in the deliberate cliche´s of Nabokov’s
translation (excerpted below), but is richly ampliWed in his notes. However, his grotesque
reincarnation of the moment in Lolita, with Charlotte’s transatlantic gush punctuated by
genteel franglais, speaks to us far more directly.
Tatiana’s Letter to Onegin, chapter three, stanza XXXI,
Nabokov’s 1964 translation
I write to you—what would one more?
What else is there that I could say?
’Tis now, I know, within your will
to punish me with scorn.
[ . . . ]
390
from pound to nabokov

Why did you visit us?
In the backwoods of a forgotten village,
I would have never known you
nor have known this bitter torment.
[ . . . ]
Another! . . . No, to nobody on earth
would I have given my heart away!
That has been destined in a higher council,
that is the will of heaven: I am thine;
my entire life has been the gage
of a sure tryst with you;
I know that you are sent to me by God,
you are my guardian to the tomb . . .
You had appeared to me in dreams,
unseen, you were already dear to me,
your wondrous glance would trouble me,
your voice resounded in my soul
long since . . . No, it was not a dream!
Scarce had you entered, instantly I knew you,
I felt all faint, I felt aXame,
and in my thoughts I uttered: It is he!
Is it not true that it was you I heard:
you in the stillness spoke to me
when I would help the poor
or assuage with a prayer
the anguish of my agitated soul? [ . . . ]
Charlotte’s Letter to Humbert, From Lolita, part I, chapter 16, p. 67
This is a confession: I love you (so the letter began; and for a distorted moment I mistook
its hysterical scrawl for a schoolgirl’s scribble). Last Sunday in church—bad you, who
refused to come to see our beautiful new windows!—only last Sunday, my dear one,
when I asked the Lord what to do about it, I was told to act as I am acting now. You see,
there is no alternative. I have loved you from the minute I saw you. I am a passionate and
lonely woman and you are the love of my life.
Now, my dearest, dearest, mon cher, cher monsieur, you have read this; now you know.
So, will you please, at once, pack and leave. This is a landlady’s order. I am dismissing a
lodger. I am kicking you out. Go! Scram! Departez! I shall be back by dinnertime, if I do
eighty both ways and don’t have an accident (but what would it matter?), and I do not
4.13 vladimir nabokov
391

wish to Wnd you in the house. Please, please, leave at once, now, do not even read this
absurd note to the end. Go. Adieu. [ . . . ]
Themes, images, and calques of translation are woven with increasing complexity into
Nabokov’s mature novels, his late works subtly interrogating the very fundamentals of
word, world and meaning. The entire process of ‘text production’ is represented from
pencils and sharpeners to proofs and misprints, with a cast of writers, translators, editors,
critics, and readers, whose every blunder serves as counterpoint to a coded, overarching
truth. The text-and-commentary structure of Pale Fire (1962), for example, is a model of
critical reading that draws the reader into interpreting the interpretations, whilst passages
in Ada (1969) playfully blur linguistic borders by bending and blending at least three
languages at once.
No writer has engaged with the intricacies of cross-cultural exchange in such vivid detail,
nor made such an eloquent contribution to not one, but two, major literary traditions.
From Ada (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1969), 76
‘Et pourtant,’ said the sound-sensitive governess, wincing, ‘I read to her twice Se´gur’s
adaptation in fable form of Shakespeare’s play about the wicked usurer.’
‘She also knows my revised monologue of his mad king,’ said Ada:
Ce beau jardin Xeurit en mai,
Mais en hiver
Jamais, jamais, jamais, jamais, jamais
N’est vert, n’est vert, n’est vert, n’est vert,
n’est vert.
‘That’s good,’ said Greg with a veritable sob of admiration.
‘Not so energichno, children!’ cried Marina [ . . . ]
Further Reading
The Garland Companion to Vladimir Nabokov ed. V. Alexandrov (New York and London: Garland, 1995), articles
on translation, self-translation, and bilingualism plus treatments of speciWc texts, with useful bibliographies.
Beaujour, Elizabeth Klosty Alien Tongues: Bi-lingual Russian Writers of the ‘First’ Emigration (Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 1989).
Boyd, Brian, Vladimir Nabokov: The Russian Years and Vladimir Nabokov: The American Years (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1990 and 1991), 2-volume biography with textual analysis.
Grayson, Jane, Nabokov Translated (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977), detailed study of Nabokov as self-
translator.
Leighton, Lauren G, Two Worlds, One Art (Dekalb, JU.: Northern Illinois Univerity Press, 1991).
392
from pound to nabokov

chapter 5
RECENT AND CONTEMPORARY
WRITINGS
5.1 Introduction
It has often been said that it is not until the 1960s that translation studies becomes a
discipline in its own right. While it may be hard to draw any Wrm lines in this regard, and
while many of the key statements in the Weld pre-date the 1960s, even by centuries, it is
true that certain book-length studies appeared in the sixties that helped deWne the scope of
a separate Weld of scholarly study—books such as G. Mounin’s Les Proble`mes the´oriques de
la traduction (1963), Jirˇi Levy´’s Umeˇnı prˇekladu (1963; see Sect. 4.8, above), Eugene A.
Nida’s Toward a Science of Translating (1964; see Sect. 4.9, above), and J. C. Catford’s
A Linguistic Theory of Translation: An Essay in Applied Linguistics (1965). In the 1970s this
Weld starts developing apace, and in retrospect—as regards literary translation studies in
English—George Steiner’s After Babel (1975) and a couple of books of critical essays
co-edited by James S Holmes, The Nature of Translation: Essays on the Theory and Practice
of Literary Translation (1970) and Literature and Translation: New Perspectives in Literary
Studies (1978), appear to be the landmark publications from that period. It seems
appropriate, therefore, that these two scholars should open the last and longest chapter
of the volume, devoted to recent and contemporary writings.
Steiner and Holmes are very diVerent in their approaches to translation. After Babel is a
monumental and magisterial book, immensely ambitious in its compehensiveness. The
book has been discussed and criticized, but Wguring out in what ways it has shaped
translation studies is no easy task. In his ‘Preface to the Second Edition’ (1992), Steiner
notes: ‘Since it Wrst appeared, After Babel has been drawn upon and pilfered, often without
acknowledgement. A considerable secondary literature has grown up around many of the
themes Wrst stated in the book.’1 It is, indeed, true that the legacy of After Babel remains an
1 George Steiner, ‘Preface to the Second Edition’, After Babel: Aspects of Language and Translation (2nd edn.,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992), p. xi.

open topic. James Holmes was a much less proliWc scholar, but he wrote some key essays
which helped deWne translation studies as we know it (including the very name of the
Weld). His legacy also rests in his active collaboration with scholars from several countries,
people such as Jose´ Lambert, Anton Popovicˇ, and Itamar Even-Zohar, these collaborative
eVorts clearly inXuencing the careers of several other scholars in the Weld, such as Andre´
Lefevere, Gideon Toury, Susan Bassnett, and Theo Hermans.
Some of these scholars are represented in the following chapter, as well as some other
prominent contemporary translation scholars, such as Mary Snell-Hornby, Douglas
Robinson, and Lawrence Venuti (see introductory comments in each section). However,
we are not able to include as many theorists in what has become a vibrant academic
discipline, as we would have liked, the reason being that this volume is not limited to
translation studies in the strictly theoretical sense of that term. Emphasizing the vital
connection between theory and practice, we have included texts by several writers who
have translated important texts into English, as well as making signiWcant comments on
their work and on the act of translation in general—i.e. the following writers: A. K.
Ramanujan, Gayatri Spivak, Gregory Rabassa, Suzanne Jill Levine, Ted Hughes, Everett
Fox, John Felstiner, W. S. Merwin, Joseph Brodsky, Edwin Morgan, and Seamus Heaney.
Some of these individuals are both translators and academic critics, some are poets and
translators, some work in all these capacities; similarly, several of the theorists mentioned
above are also active translators.
Broad as the concept of ‘translation studies’ is in both this and previous chapters of the
volume, it is nevertheless focused in one way or another on literary translation. Even when
we include an autobiographical account of moving between languages and cultures (see
Sect. 5.13 below, on Eva HoVman), or an excerpt from an anthropological discussion of
cultural translation (cf. Sect. 5.12, below, on Talal Asad), these have been chosen because
they have signiWcant implications for translation as a creative act. Of course, critical
explorations of literary translation can often be brought to bear on other kinds of
translation (and vice versa), but we would have immeasurably expanded an already
compendious volume if we had attempted to account for the various philosophical and
linguistic theories of translation which have Xourished in recent years, or for computerized
translation, or other kinds of ‘practical’ translation, including simultaneous oral transla-
tion (interpreting), not to mention the many kinds of what Roman Jakobson calls
‘intersemiotic translation’ (see Sect. 4.7, above). There are many interesting areas of
investigation here, including Wlm translation (both via dubbing and subtitling), or indeed
Wlm adaptation of literary texts—or various kinds of dramatizations or stage versions of
literary and dramatic texts: we are of course aware that theatre translation is not very
prominently represented in this volume (although see e.g. Sect. 5.16, 5.19, and 5.23, below,
394
recent and contemporary writings

on Ted Hughes, Susan Bassnett, and Edwin Morgan respectively). In its broadest ramiWca-
tions, intersemiotic translation has a long and colourful history of interartistic interpret-
ation (poetry to music, music to dance, painting to prose, novel to Wlm, and so on). Given
the cultural and semiotic complexities of moving from one language to another, the study
of literary translation should always have a good deal to contribute to translation studies in
this broader sense.
Some of the following entries bear witness to the fact that English as a language of
literary translation is increasingly facing non-Western, often post-colonial, challenges. It is
still too early to say, with Goethe, that ‘the epoch of world literature is at hand’, as least as
far as English is concerned, for the increasing global dissemination of the English language
does not go hand in hand with a proportional growth of translation into English. In fact,
in the United States and Britain, the inverse proportion seems closer to the truth. Still,
certain works make their way into English, for instance from Latin America and India. In
India, English is an oYcial language but it must coexist with several indigenous languages
and this results in a ‘translation culture’ which is quite diVerent from that of most other
English-speaking countries.
While these non-Western sources may gradually make an increasing impact on English
as a literary language, it is interesting to note that some of the most imporant English-
language modernist poets of the twentieth century continue to cultivate key texts from the
Western tradition. Pound’s urge to ‘make it new’ appears to have been heard by Robert
Lowell, Ted Hughes, W. S. Merwin, Edwin Morgan, and Seamus Heaney, all of whom
have attended to the European tradition, both the Classical Greek and Roman, but also
the Anglo-Saxon and the Celtic. These translators thus help anchor the continuities that
may be traced through the whole history reXected by this volume, while also reminding us
that ‘the experience of the foreign’, in Antoine Berman’s words,2 is often close to home; it is
often in what seemed most familiar in history.
2 Antoine Berman: The Experience of the Foreign: Culture and Translation in Romantic Germany, trans. S. Heyvaert
(Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1992). So actually the words are those of Berman’s translator.
Originally published as L’E´preuve de l’e´tranger: Culture et traduction dans l’Allemagne romantique (Paris: Gallimard,
1984).
5.1 introduction
395

5.2 George Steiner
George Steiner (b. 1929), scholar, critic, Wction writer, was educated at the universities of
Paris, Chicago, Harvard, Oxford, and Cambridge. He has been Extraordinary Fellow of
Churchill College, Cambridge since 1969 and was Professor of English and Comparative
Literature, University of Geneva (1974–94). Steiner is a Fellow of the British Academy and
has held visiting professorships at Yale, New York University, the University of Geneva,
and Oxford University. His non-Wction includes a number of major studies, including
Tolstoy or Dostoevsky (1958), The Death of Tragedy (1961), In Bluebeard’s Castle: Some Notes
towards the RedeWnition of Culture (1971). After Babel (1975) was preceded by his ground-
breaking anthology of Modern Verse Translation (1966), which focuses on the translators
rather than translated. In addition Steiner has edited Homer in English (1996), an anthol-
ogy of translations/translators of Homer, from Lydgate and Chaucer to the present day. He
is also the author of a number of works of Wction including Portage to San Cristobal of AH
(1981), which was adapted for the stage by Christopher Hampton. A volume of autobiog-
raphy, Errata: An Examined Life, was published in 1997. Steiner regularly contributes
reviews and articles to journals and newspapers, including the New Yorker, the Times
Literary Supplement, and the Guardian.
After Babel: Aspects of Language and Translation was published by Oxford University
Press in 1975. A second, revised, edition was brought out in 1992, and a third edition, from
which the following quotations and excerpts are taken, appeared in 1998.
Steiner’s view and theories of translation in After Babel are embedded in a wide-ranging
exploration of language and hermeneutics. While the book contains valuable analyses of
translations of texts from one language to another, it also dwells extensively on the
translatory nature of understanding, interpretation, communication, and various aspects
of language. Steiner’s philosophical, literary, and linguistic sources are legion, but prom-
inent among them are hermeneutic traditions stemming from both Jewish Gnosticism and
Kabbalism, in part as inXected by Walter Benjamin, and the modern hermeneutic-
existential philosophy of Heidegger and Gadamer.
Having argued how, within the parameters of language, understanding establishes itself
as translation—the opening chapter is entitled ‘Understanding as Translation’—one of
the issues Steiner actually Xeshes out in the book is the resistance of language to
understanding and translation. ‘It may be—I will argue so—that communication outward
is only a secondary, socially stimulated phase in the acquisition of language. Speaking to
oneself would be the primary function [ . . . ]’ (p. 125). This provocative stance does not
imply that ‘internalized’ language (p. 181) is a tidy and smooth aVair, for it seems to be the
396
recent and contemporary writings

very force that most strongly encounters the deadening elements of language in the social
sphere. Indeed, ‘it is its great untidiness that makes human speech innovative and
expressive of personal intent. It is the anomaly, as it feeds back into the general history
of usage, the ambiguity, as it enriches and complicates the general standard of deWnition,
which gives coherence to the system. A coherence, if such a description is allowed, ‘‘in
constant motion’’ ’ (p. 213).
This conception of language also shapes Steiner’s view of translation. Good translators
resist the temptation to smooth out the resistant elements in the original, for the result of
such a procedure can be a ‘deceptive ease of transfer. We do not feel the resistant
particularity of the ‘‘other’’. But great translation must carry with it the most precise
sense possible of the resistant, of the barriers intact at the heart of understanding’ (p. 397).
‘We must not trust the translation whose words are entirely ‘‘unbroken’’. As with a sea-
shell, the translator can listen strenuously but mistake the rumour of his own pulse for the
beat of the alien sea’ (p. 398).
As Steiner’s discussion of a number of actual translations makes clear, these hermeneutic
statements do not constitute a formula for any single method of translating. It seems that
there are diVerent ways—none of which are easy—of capturing or reinventing the beat of
the alien sea.
From After Babel: Aspects of Language and Translation (3rd edn., Oxford and New York:
Oxford University Press, 1998)
‘Interpretation’ as that which gives language life beyond the moment and place of imme-
diate utterance or transcription, is what I am concerned with. The French word interpre`te
concentrates all the relevant values. An actor is interpre`te of Racine; a pianist gives une
interpre´tation of a Beethoven sonata. Through engagement of his own identity, a critic
becomes un interpre`te—a life-giving performer—of Montaigne or Mallarme´. As it does not
include the world of the actor, and includes that of the musician only by analogy, the English
term interpreter is less strong. But it is congruent with French when reaching out in another
crucial direction. Interpre`te/interpreter are commonly used to mean translator.
This, I believe, is the vital starting point. (p. 28)
Polysemy, the capacity of the same word to mean diVerent things, such diVerence ranging
from nuance to antithesis, characterizes the language of ideology. Machiavelli noted that
meaning could be dislocated in common speech so as to produce political confusion.
Competing ideologies rarely create new terminologies. As Kenneth Burke and George
Orwell have shown in regard to the vocabulary of Nazism and Stalinism, they pilfer and
decompose the vulgate. In the idiom of fascism and communism, ‘peace’, ‘freedom’,
‘progress’, ‘popular will’ are as prominent as in the language of representative democracy.
5.2 george steiner
397

But they have their Wercely disparate meanings. The words of the adversary are appro-
priated and hurled against him. When antithetical meanings are forced upon the same
word (Orwell’s Newspeak), when the conceptual reach and valuation of a word can be
altered by political decree, language loses credibility. Translation in the ordinary sense
becomes impossible. To translate a Stalinist text on peace or on freedom under prole-
tarian dictatorship into a non-Stalinist idiom, using the same time-honoured words, is to
produce a polemic gloss, a counter-statement of values. At the moment, the speech of
politics, of social dissent, of journalism is full of loud ghost-words, being shouted back
and forth, signifying contraries or nothing. It is only in the underground of political
humour that these shibboleths regain signiWcance. When the entry of foreign tanks into a
free city is glossed as ‘a spontaneous, ardently welcomed defence of popular freedom’
(Izvestia, 27 August 1968), the word ‘freedom’ will preserve its common meaning only in
the clandestine dictionary of laughter.
That dictionary, one supposes, plays a large role in the language of children. Here
diachronic and synchronic structures overlap. At any given time in a community and
in the history of the language, speech modulates across generations. Or as psycho-
linguists put it, there are ‘phenomena of age grading’ in all known languages. The matter
of child-speech is a deep and fascinating one. Again, there are numerous languages in
which such speech is formally set apart. Japanese children employ a separate vocabulary
for everything they have and use up to a certain age. More common, indeed universal, is
the case in which children carve their own language-world out of the total lexical and
syntactic resources of adult society. So far as children are an exploited and mutinous
class, they will, like the proletariat or ethnic minorities, pilfer and make risible the
rhetoric, the taboo words, the normative idioms of their oppressors. The scatological
doggerels of the nursery and the alley-way may have a sociological rather than a
psychoanalytic motive. The sexual slang of childhood, so often based on mythical
readings of actual sexual reality rather than on any physiological grasp, represents a
night-raid on adult territory. The fracture of words, the maltreatment of grammatical
norms which, as the Opies have shown, constitute a vital part of the lore, mnemonics,
and secret parlance of childhood, have a rebellious aim: by refusing, for a time, to accept
the rules of grown-up speech, the child seeks to keep the world open to his own,
seemingly unprecedented needs. In the event of autism, the speech-battle between
child and master can reach a grim Wnality. Surrounded by incomprehensible or hostile
reality, the autistic child breaks oV verbal contact. He seems to choose silence to shield
his identity but even more, perhaps, to destroy his imagined enemy. Like murderous
Cordelia, children know that silence can destroy another human being. Or like
Kafka they remember that several have survived the song of the Sirens, but none their
silence.
[ . . . ]
398
recent and contemporary writings

The speech of children and adolescents fascinated Dostoevsky. Its ferocious innocence,
the tactical equivocations of the maturing child, are reproduced in The Brothers Karamazov.
St Francis’s ability to parley with birds is closely echoed in Alyosha’s understanding of Kolya
and the boys. But for all their lively truth, children in the novels of James and Dostoevsky
remain, in large measure, miniature adults. They exhibit the uncanny percipience of the
‘aged’ infant Christ in Flemish art. Mark Twain’s transcriptions of the secret and public
idiom of childhood penetrate much further. A genius for receptive insight animates the
rendition of Huck Finn and Tom Sawyer. The artfulness of their language, its ceremonies of
insult and kinship, its tricks of understatement are as complex as any in adult rhetoric. But
they are unfailingly re-creative of a child’s way. The discrimination is made even more exact
by the neighbouring but again very diVerent ‘childishness’ of Negro speech. For the Wrst
time in Western literature the linguistic terrain of childhood was mapped without being laid
waste. After Mark Twain, child psychology and Piaget could proceed.
When speaking to a young boy or girl we use simple words and a simpliWed grammar;
often we reply by using the child’s own vocabulary; we bend forward. For their part,
children will use diVerent phrasings, intonations, and gestures when addressing a grown-
up from those used when speaking to themselves (the iceberg mass of child language) or
to other children. All these are devices for translation. J. D. Salinger catches us in the act:
Sybil released her foot. ‘Did you read ‘‘Little Black Sambo’’?’ she said.
‘It’s very funny you ask me that,’ he said. ‘It so happens I just Wnished reading it last
night.’ He reached down and took back Sybil’s hand. ‘What did you think of it?’ he
asked her.
‘Did the tigers run all around that tree?’
‘I thought they’d never stop. I never saw so many tigers.’
‘There were only six,’ Sybil said.
‘Only six!’ said the young man. ‘Do you call that only?’
‘Do you like wax?’ Sybil asked.
‘Do I like what?’ asked the young man.
‘Wax.’
‘Very much. Don’t you?’
Sybil nodded. ‘Do you like olives?’ she asked.
‘Olives—yes. Olives and wax. I never go anyplace without ’em.’
. . .
Sybil was silent.
‘I like to chew candles,’ she said Wnally.
‘Who doesn’t?’ said the young man, getting his feet wet.
This is the ‘perfect day for bananaWsh’, the swift passage from Pentecost to silence. Being
so near death, Seymour, the hero of the story, translates Xawlessly. Usually, the task is
5.2 george steiner
399

more diYcult. There is so much we do not know. Even more than the illiterate and the
oppressed, children have been kept in the margin of history. Their multitudinous
existence has left comparatively few archives. How, for instance, do class-lines cut across
age gradients? Is it true that the current revolution in the language of sex is entirely a
middle-class phenomenon, that sex-talk of the most anatomical and disenchanted kind
has always been in use among children of the working-class? One thing is clear. The entry
of the child into complete adult notice, a heightened awareness of its uniquely vulnerable
and creative condition, are among the principal gains of the recent past. The stiXed voices
of children that haunt Blake’s poetry are no longer a general fact. No previous society has
taken as much trouble as ours to hear the actual language of the child, to receive and
interpret its signals without distorting them.
In most societies and throughout history, the status of women has been akin to that of
children. Both groups are maintained in a condition of privileged inferiority. Both suVer
obvious modes of exploitation—sexual, legal, economic—while beneWting from a myth-
ology of special regard. Thus Victorian sentimentalization of the moral eminence of
women and young children was concurrent with brutal forms of erotic and economic
subjection. Under sociological and psychological pressure, both minorities have devel-
oped internal codes of communication and defence (women and children constitute a
symbolic, self-deWning minority even when, owing to war or special circumstance, they
outnumber the adult males in the community). There is a language-world of women as
there is of children. (pp. 35–9)
Any model of communication is at the same time a model of translation, of a vertical or
horizontal transfer of signiWcance. No two historical epochs, no two social classes, no two
localities use words and syntax to signify exactly the same things, to send identical signals
of valuation and inference. Neither do two human beings. Each living person draws,
deliberately or in immediate habit, on two sources of linguistic supply: the current vulgate
corresponding to his level of literacy, and a private thesaurus. The latter is inextricably a
part of his subconscious, of his memories so far as they may be verbalized, and of the
singular, irreducibly speciWc ensemble of his somatic and psychological identity. Part of
the answer to the notorious logical conundrum as to whether or not there can be ‘private
language’ is that aspects of every language-act are unique and individual. They form what
linguists call an ‘idiolect’. Each communicatory gesture has a private residue.
[ . . . ]
I have been trying to state a rudimentary but decisive point: interlingual translation is
the main concern of this book, but it is also a way in, an access to an inquiry into
language itself. ‘Translation’, properly understood, is a special case of the arc of com-
munication which every successful speech-act closes within a given language. On the
inter-lingual level, translation will pose concentrated, visibly intractable problems;
but these same problems abound, at a more covert or conventionally neglected level,
400
recent and contemporary writings

intra-lingually. The model ‘sender to receiver’ which represents any semiological and
semantic process is ontologically equivalent to the model ‘source-language to receptor-
language’ used in the theory of translation. In both schemes there is ‘in the middle’ an
operation of interpretative decipherment, an encoding-decoding function or synapse.
Where two or more languages are in articulate interconnection, the barriers in the middle
will obviously be more salient, and the enterprise of intelligibility more conscious. But
the ‘motions of spirit’, to use Dante’s phrase, are rigorously analogous. So, as we shall see,
are the most frequent causes of misunderstanding or, what is the same, of failure to
translate correctly. In short: inside or between languages, human communication equals
translation. A study of translation is a study of language. (pp. 47–9)
My conviction is that we shall not get much further in understanding the evolution of
language and the relations between speech and human performance so long as we see
‘falsity’ as primarily negative, so long as we consider counter-factuality, contradiction,
and the many nuances of conditionality as specialized, often logically bastard modes.
Language is the main instrument of man’s refusal to accept the world as it is. Without that
refusal, without the unceasing generation by the mind of ‘counter-worlds’—a generation
which cannot be divorced from the grammar of counter-factual and optative forms—we
would turn forever on the treadmill of the present. Reality would be (to use Wittgen-
stein’s phrase in an illicit sense) ‘all that is the case’ and nothing more. Ours is the ability,
the need, to gainsay or ‘un-say’ the world, to image and speak it otherwise. In that
capacity in its biological and social evolution, may lie some of the clues to the question of
the origins of human speech and the multiplicity of tongues. It is not, perhaps, ‘a theory
of information’ that will serve us best in trying to clarify the nature of language, but a
‘theory of misinformation’. (p. 228)
We need a word which will designate the power, the compulsion of language to posit
‘otherness’. That power, as Oscar Wilde was one of the few to recognize, is inherent in
every act of form, in art, in music, in the contrarieties which our body sets against gravity
and repose. But it is pre-eminent in language. French allows alte´rite´, a term derived from
the Scholastic discrimination between essence and alien, between the tautological integ-
rity of God and the shivered fragments of perceived reality. Perhaps ‘alternity’ will do: to
deWne the ‘other than the case’, the counter-factual propositions, images, shapes of will
and evasion with which we charge our mental being and by means of which we build the
changing, largely Wctive milieu of our somatic and our social existence. ‘We invent for
ourselves the major part of experience,’ says Nietzsche in Beyond Good and Evil (‘wir
erdichten . . . ’ signifying ‘to create Wctionally’, ‘to render dense and coherent through
poiesis’). Or as he puts it in Morgenro¨te, man’s genius is one of lies. (pp. 232–3)
The hermeneutic motion, the act of elicitation and appropriative transfer of meaning, is
fourfold. There is initiative trust, an investment of belief, underwritten by previous
5.2 george steiner
401

experience but epistemologically exposed and psychologically hazardous, in the mean-
ingfulness, in the ‘seriousness’ of the facing or, strictly speaking, adverse text. We venture
a leap: we grant ab initio that there is ‘something there’to be understood, that the transfer
will not be void. All understanding, and the demonstrative statement of understanding
which is translation, starts with an act of trust. This conWding will, ordinarily, be
instantaneous and unexamined, but it has a complex base. It is an operative convention
which derives from a sequence of phenomenological assumptions about the coherence of
the world, about the presence of meaning in very diVerent, perhaps formally antithetical
semantic systems, about the validity of analogy and parallel. The radical generosity of the
translator (‘I grant beforehand that there must be something there’), his trust in the
‘other’, as yet untried, unmapped alternity of statement, concentrates to a philosophically
dramatic degree the human bias towards seeing the world as symbolic, as constituted of
relations in which ‘this’ can stand for ‘that’, and must in fact be able to do so if there are
to be meanings and structures.
[ . . . ]
As he sets out, the translator must gamble on the coherence, on the symbolic plenitude of
the world. Concomitantly he leaves himself vulnerable, though only in extremity and at
the theoretical edge, to two dialectically related, mutually determined metaphysical risks.
He may Wnd that ‘anything’ or ‘almost anything’ can mean ‘everything’. This is the
vertigo of self-sustaining metaphoric or analogic enchainment experienced by medieval
exegetists. Or he may Wnd that there is ‘nothing there’ which can be divorced from its
formal autonomy, that every meaning worth expressing is monadic and will not enter
into any alternative mould. There is Kabbalistic speculation, to which I will return, about
a day on which words will shake oV ‘the burden of having to mean’ and will be only
themselves, blank and replete as stone.
After trust comes aggression. The second move of the translator is incursive and
extractive. The relevant analysis is that of Heidegger when he focuses our attention on
understanding as an act, on the access, inherently appropriative and therefore violent, of
Erkenntnis to Dasein. Da-sein, the ‘thing there’, ‘the thing that is because it is there’, only
comes into authentic being when it is comprehended, i.e. translated.1 The postulate that
all cognition is aggressive, that every proposition is an inroad on the world, is, of course,
Hegelian. It is Heidegger’s contribution to have shown that understanding, recognition,
interpretation are a compacted, unavoidable mode of attack. We can modulate Heideg-
ger’s insistence that understanding is not a matter of method but of primary being, that
‘being consists in the understanding of other being’ into the more naı¨ve, limited axiom
that each act of comprehension must appropriate another entity (we translate into).
Comprehension, as its etymology shows, ‘comprehends’ not only cognitively but by
encirclement and ingestion. In the event of interlingual translation this manoeuvre of
comprehension is explicitly invasive and exhaustive. Saint Jerome uses his famous image
402
recent and contemporary writings

of meaning brought home captive by the translator. We ‘break’ a code: decipherment is
dissective, leaving the shell smashed and the vital layers stripped. Every schoolchild, but
also the eminent translator, will note the shift in substantive presence which follows on a
protracted or diYcult exercise in translation: the text in the other language has become
almost materially thinner, the light seems to pass unhindered through its loosened Wbres.
For a spell the density of hostile or seductive ‘otherness’ is dissipated. Ortega y Gasset
speaks of the sadness of the translator after failure. There is also a sadness after success,
the Augustinian tristitia which follows on the cognate acts of erotic and of intellectual
possession.
[ . . . ]
The third movement is incorporative, in the strong sense of the word. The import, of
meaning and of form, the embodiment, is not made in or into a vacuum. The native
semantic Weld is already extant and crowded. There are innumerable shadings of
assimilation and placement of the newly-acquired, ranging from a complete domestica-
tion, an at-homeness at the core of the kind which cultural history ascribes to, say,
Luther’s Bible or North’s Plutarch, all the way to the permanent strangeness and
marginality of an artifact such as Nabokov’s ‘English-language’ Onegin. But whatever
the degree of ‘naturalization’, the act of importation can potentially dislocate or relocate
the whole of the native structure. The Heideggerian ‘we are what we understand to be’
entails that our own being is modiWed by each occurrence of comprehensive appropri-
ation. No language, no traditional symbolic set or cultural ensemble imports without risk
of being transformed. Here two families of metaphor, probably related, oVer themselves,
that of sacramental intake or incarnation and that of infection. The incremental values of
communion pivot on the moral, spiritual state of the recipient. Though all decipherment
is aggressive and, at one level, destructive, there are diVerences in the motive of
appropriation and in the context of ‘the bringing back’. Where the native matrix is
disoriented or immature, the importation will not enrich, it will not Wnd a proper locale.
It will generate not an integral response but a wash of mimicry (French neo-classicism in
its north-European, German, and Russian versions).
[ . . . ]
Societies with ancient but eroded epistemologies of ritual and symbol can be knocked oV
balance and made to lose belief in their own identity under the voracious impact of
premature or indigestible assimilation. The cargo-cults of New Guinea, in which the
natives worship what airplanes bring in, provide an uncannily exact, ramiWed image of
the risks of translation.
This is only another way of saying that the hermeneutic motion is dangerously
incomplete, that it is dangerous because it is incomplete, if it lacks its fourth stage, the
piston-stroke, as it were, which completes the cycle. The a-prioristic movement of
trust puts us oV balance. We ‘lean towards’ the confronting text (every translator has
5.2 george steiner
403

experienced this palpable bending towards and launching at his target). We encircle and
invade cognitively. We come home laden, thus again oV-balance, having caused disequi-
librium throughout the system by taking away from ‘the other’ and by adding, though
possibly with ambiguous consequence, to our own. The system is now oV-tilt. The
hermeneutic act must compensate. If it is to be authentic, it must mediate into exchange
and restored parity.
The enactment of reciprocity in order to restore balance is the crux of the me´tier and
morals of translation. But it is very diYcult to put abstractly. The appropriative ‘rapture’
of the translator—the word has in it, of course, the root and meaning of violent
transport—leaves the original with a dialectically enigmatic residue. Unquestionably
there is a dimension of loss, of breakage—hence, as we have seen, the fear of translation,
the taboos on revelatory export which hedge sacred texts, ritual nominations, and
formulas in many cultures. But the residue is also, and decisively, positive. The work
translated is enhanced. This is so at a number of fairly obvious levels. Being methodical,
penetrative, analytic, enumerative, the process of translation, like all modes of focused
understanding, will detail, illumine, and generally body forth its object. The over-
determination of the interpretative act is inherently inXationary: it proclaims that
‘there is more here than meets the eye’, that ‘the accord between content and executive
form is closer, more delicate than had been observed hitherto’. To class a source-text as
worth translating is to dignify it immediately and to involve it in a dynamic of
magniWcation (subject, naturally, to later review and even, perhaps, dismissal). The
motion of transfer and paraphrase enlarges the stature of the original. Historically, in
terms of cultural context, of the public it can reach, the latter is left more prestigious. But
this increase has a more important, existential perspective. The relations of a text to its
translations, imitations, thematic variants, even parodies, are too diverse to allow of any
single theoretic, deWnitional scheme. They categorize the entire question of the meaning
of meaning in time, of the existence and eVects of the linguistic fact outside its speciWc,
initial form. But there can be no doubt that echo enriches, that it is more than shadow
and inert simulacrum. We are back at the problem of the mirror which not only reXects
but also generates light. The original text gains from the orders of diverse relationship
and distance established between itself and the translations. The reciprocity is dialectic:
new ‘formats’ of signiWcance are initiated by distance and by contiguity. Some transla-
tions edge us away from the canvas, others bring us up close. (pp. 312–17)
Thus the translator at close quarters is at every point under contradictory stress. He is
aware that he will always know too little about his source-text because there is a sense in
which he ‘knows what he does not know’. This is to say that his experience of the ‘other’
language and ‘other’ culture is so abundant, so collusive, as to suggest to him a strong
sense of the total context. He recognizes the ‘inWnite regression’, the formally undecid-
able compass of historical information, linguistic sensibility, local ambience which could
404
recent and contemporary writings

bear on the meaning of the work which he is translating. On the other hand, he ‘knows
too much’. He brings to the performance of translation a deceptive bias to transparency.
The apparatus of critical comparison, cultural familiarity, immersive identiWcation with
which he works proliferates and can do so unconsciously. He knows more or better than
his author. Pound can make Cathay spare and translucent because he, and his Western
readers, know next to nothing of the original. The English translator of Flaubert, the
German translator of Shakespeare are drawn into a complex space of recognition. The
organization of his own sensibility is in part a product of that which he is about to
translate. Hence the paradox of restoration and homecoming which Celan elicits from
Sonnet 79. Where translation takes place at close cultural-linguistic proximity, therefore,
we can distinguish two main currents of intention and semantic focus. The delineation of
‘resistant diYculty’, the endeavour to situate precisely and convey intact the ‘otherness’ of
the original, plays against ‘elective aYnity’, against immediate grasp and domestication.
In perfunctory translation these two currents diverge. There is no shaping tension
between them, and paraphrase attempts to mask the gap. Good translation, on the
contrary, can be deWned as that in which the dialectic of impenetrability and ingress, of
intractable alienness and felt ‘at-homeness’remains unresolved, but expressive. Out of the
tension of resistance and aYnity, a tension directly proportional to the proximity of
the two languages and historical communities, grows the elucidative strangeness of the
great translation. The strangeness is elucidative because we come to recognize it, to ‘know
it again’, as our own. (pp. 412–13)
note
1. Cf. Paul Ricoeur, ‘Existence et herme´neutique’ in Le ConXit des interpre´tations (Paris, 1969).
5.2 george steiner
405

5.3 James S Holmes
James S Holmes (1924–86), poet, poetry translator, and translation theorist, was born in
rural Iowa and emigrated to the Netherlands in the 1940s, becoming not only the most
prominent translator of Dutch poetry into English, but also a pioneering translation
theorist and among the leading translation activists of the post-war era. From 1960, Holmes
taught in the Department of General Literary Studies of the University of Amsterdam,
where he pioneered translation studies as a discipline and helped establish a Department of
Translation Studies (1982). As a practising translator himself and commentator on the
pragmatics of translation, Holmes also attempted to deWne the role of translation in literary
culture. He was concerned to minimize the evident and (as the discipline developed)
growing gap between theory and practice, maintaining that practical translation training
could beneWt from theoretical insights, such as those oVered by feminism or by queer
studies. He also facilitated contact and promoted dialogue between the diVerent centres of
translation studies, such as those in the Low Countries (e.g. the universities of Amsterdam,
Antwerp, Leuven/Louvain) and, for instance, the Porter Institute of Semiotics, Tel Aviv
University. Another focus of Holmes’s activities was in persuading literature departments to
recognize the cultural signiWcance of translation. Although he published comparatively
little, Holmes’s role and inXuence was pivotal in this Weld, as emerges clearly from his
posthumously published gathering of essays and papers, Translated! (1988). He engaged in
or initiated a number of essential projects, leading for instance to the compilation of
comprehensive bibliographies and identiWcation of key historical texts for the teaching of
translation. He also edited a number of landmark collections of essays, among them The
Nature of Translation (1970) and Literature and Translation (1978; see also Translation
Studies: The State of the Art, Proceedings of the First James S. Holmes symposium on
Translation Studies (1991), ed. Kitty M. van Leuven-Zwart and Ton Naaijkens). His
groundbreaking work in the Weld of translation studies is symbolically reXected in the
fact that he is the one who gave this name to the Weld—in the 1972 paper ‘The Name and
Nature of Translation Studies’ (reprinted in Translated! ).
Holmes, the Theorist
In his article ‘Poem and Metapoem: Poetry from Dutch to English’, Holmes Wrst discusses
the ‘limits between poetry and prose’, arguing that the translator of prose is usually able to
bypass the ‘root problem of all translation’, namely the ‘the fact that the semantic Weld of
406
recent and contemporary writings

a word, the entire complex network of meaning it signiWes, never matches exactly the
semantic Weld of any one word in any other language’. While it is true that in prose
literature the context often provides space for the translator to manoeuvre the ‘Wt between
the original and the translation’, one can certainly Wnd plenty of examples in both prose
and drama texts, along with poetry, that very much problematize the issue of ‘equivalence’,
if that term is taken to imply any kind of sameness of meaning. In other words, what
Holmes sees as a burning issue in the Weld of poetry translation, is to an extent a concern
of all literary translation. Holmes goes on to discuss how one can identify the relation
between the two ‘structures’ of original and translation, suggesting that translation is a kind
of ‘meta-literature’, i.e. ‘writing which makes use of language to communicate something
about literature itself’. The translated poem, a ‘metapoem’, is ‘from this point of view a
fundamentally diVerent kind of object from the poem from which it derives. This
diVerence is perhaps best deWned in the following proposition: MP : P :: P : R—the
relation
of
the
metapoem
to
the
original
poem
is
as
that
of
the
original
poem to ‘‘reality’’’. Criticism is another kind of meta-literature, in which the critic
interprets by analysis. ‘The metapoem, on the other hand, interprets, as William Frost
has pointed out, not by analysis, but by enactment.’ In what follows, Holmes valuably
points out the speciWcity of the translator’s act, and then discusses the constraints of his or
her enactment when translating between closely related languages, and when translating
from ‘little-translated languages’ into, for instance, English, where the translator may
feel heavily restricted by the ‘wants’ of the literary system at the receiving end.
He then discusses two of his own translations of Dutch poems into English. (Holmes
placed the originals of these poems in footnotes. These have been included here in
the body of the text.)
From ‘Poem and Metapoem: Poetry from Dutch to English’, (1969), repr. in Translated!
Papers on Literary Translation and Translation Studies (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1988), 9–22
It is frequently said that to translate poetry one must be a poet. This is not entirely true,
nor is it the entire truth. In order to create a verbal object of the metapoetic kind, one
must perform some (but not all) of the functions of a critic, some (but not all) of the
functions of a poet, and some functions not normally required of either critic or poet.
Like the critic, the metapoet will strive to comprehend as thoroughly as possible the
many features of the original poem, against the setting of the poet’s other writings, the
literary traditions of the source culture, and the expressive means of the source language.
Like the poet, he will strive to exploit his own creative powers, the literary traditions of
the target culture, and the expressive means of the target language in order to produce a
verbal object that to all appearances is nothing more nor less than a poem. He diVers, in
5.3 james s holmes
407

other words, from the critic in what he does with the results of his critical analysis, and
from the poet in where he derives the materials for his verse.
Linking together these two activities, the critical and the poetic, is an activity which is
uniquely the metapoet’s: the activity of organizing and resolving a confrontation between
the norms and conventions of one linguistic system, literary tradition, and poetic
sensibility, as embodied in the original poem as he has analysed it, and the norms and
conventions of another linguistic system, literary tradition, and poetic sensibility to be
drawn on for the metapoem he hopes to create. This activity of confrontation and
resolution is, as the late Jirˇı´ Levy´ pointed out,1 an elaborate process of decision-making,
in which every decision taken governs to some extent the nature of all decisions still to be
taken, and the appropriateness of each decision must be tested in terms of its apposite-
ness within the emerging structure of the metapoem as a whole.
It is these three factors—acumen as a critic, craftsmanship as a poet, and skill in the
analysing and resolving of a confrontation of norms and conventions across linguistic
and cultural barriers: in the making of appropriate decisions—that determine the degree
to which the metapoet is capable of creating a new verbal object which, for all its
diVerences from the original poem at every speciWc point, is nevertheless basically similar
to it as an overall structure.2
The problems involved in resolving a confrontation of the kind I have just mentioned
may vary greatly in emphasis according to the languages and the cultures concerned. In
what follows I shall attempt to identify some of the impediments to appropriate decision-
making in the process of creating a metapoem in one speciWc language, English, on the
basis of a poem in another speciWc language, Dutch. A Wrst major impediment is one that
is common to all translation between closely related languages. Let me illustrate it by an
example not from Dutch, but from German. In the opening line to a familiar poem,
Goethe asks, ‘Kennst du das Land, wo die Zitronen blu¨hn . . . ?’ Much of the eVect of this
line lies in the characteristically Goethean combination of the exotic image of lemon
trees in blossom with the straightforward syntax of everyday interrogative speech:
‘Kennst du das Stu¨ck, das jetzt im Theater spielt?’ ‘Kennst du das Haus, das gestern
verbrannt ist?’
Semantically the line presents few problems for the English translator, and a dynamic
rendering into prose of an equivalent register might be: ‘Do you know the country where
the lemon trees blossom?’ or ‘Do you know the country of the blossoming lemon trees?’
In poetry, however, ‘the temptation’, as Jackson Mathews has pointed out, ‘is much
greater. . . than in prose to fall under the spell of the model, to try to imitate its obvious
features, even its syntax . . . ’.3 And even, he might have added, when formally similar
syntax has a quite diVerent function, or a dysfunction, in the target language. Those who
have attempted to render Goethe’s ‘Mignon’ into English verse have repeatedly fallen
into the trap which this line opens for them, and ‘Kennst du das Land . . . ’time and again
408
recent and contemporary writings

becomes ‘Knowst thou the land . . . ’4 Syntactically and morphologically the two passages
are close parallels, yet the shift in the total message conveyed is tremendous. The
interrogatory inversion instead of an auxiliary construction with ‘do’, the use of the old
second-person singular forms for the verb and the pronoun, the translation of German
Land as ‘land’ in place of ‘country’: all these elements combine to lend the English
passage the wan, archaic quality of a dead poetic tradition, far removed from the
colloquial vigour of the German.
There is a frequent tendency of this kind when the source and target languages are
closely related. A type of linguistic interference, it may manifest itself in such features as
the matching of form to form regardless of meaning, the intrusion of source-language
vocabulary and syntax in the target language, and the contamination of semantic areas,5
and the result is often a mechanistic translation at the lowest ranks, without the
preliminary operations of poem analysis and interlinguistic confrontation. In memory
of those translators of Goethe, I have sometimes referred to the phenomenon as the ‘citric
syndrome.’ But whatever we may choose to call it, it is a phenomenon that repeatedly
stands in the way of satisfactory translation from Dutch to English.6
A second impediment to appropriate decision-making in Dutch–English verse trans-
lation is one that is particular to translation from little-translated languages. Professor
Rabin has called attention to the fact that the more and the longer translations are made
from language A to language B, the easier it becomes to translate from A to B (though
not, it should be noted, in the reverse direction). This fact Rabin attributes to the
accumulation of what he calls a ‘translation stock,’ a collection of proven solutions to
speciWc problems that frequently arise in A-to-B translation. This translation stock, once
developed, may be passed on for centuries, or it may die out rapidly as A-to-B translation
dwindles.7
Such a translation stock is clearly available for the translator from English to Dutch,
since a long and continuous tradition of translation in this direction, for a wide variety of
purposes, has led to the development of a large number of practical solutions to
translation problems and the creation of a certain degree of consensus regarding ‘right’
and ‘wrong’ renderings. This is much less the case for translation from Dutch to English.
True, there is a fairly long tradition of Dutch-to-English translation within the Low
Countries, and a stock of solutions of a certain kind has accumulated. But these
solutions, the work of generations of philologists and schoolmasters with one speciWc
aim in view, are largely unsuited to the needs of translation in any genuine sense, as
distinguished from translation as a didactic method presumed to impart and test
linguistic skills. On the level of literary translation, the translator from Dutch to English
has almost invariably had to start from scratch, working outside a tradition and Wnding
his own solutions as he went along. This has been particularly true in the case of poetry,
where there has never been anything even approaching a tradition of translation in the
5.3 james s holmes
409

Dutch-English direction, solely the work of scattered individuals, isolated in time, place,
and readership. Only in the past few years has this situation begun to change, as more
Dutch poetry than hitherto has been published more widely than heretofore, in trans-
lations by more English and American metapoets.8
A similar impediment to appropriate decision-making derives from the position of
little-known literatures. Concomitant with an absence of a translation tradition is a lack
of knowledge of the literary background against which a poem translated from the Dutch
should be read when it appears. A rendering into English of a poem by Georg Trakl or
Apollinaire falls into (or perhaps contradicts) a general pattern of German or French
poetry already available to the English poetry reader. A rendering of a poem by, say, Paul
van Ostaijen must stand by itself, isolated both from the remainder of Van Ostaijen’s
work and from the entire body of Dutch poetry. This means that the translator of a poem
by Van Ostaijen has to approach his task in quite a diVerent way from the translator of
Trakl or Apollinaire.
[ . . . ]
A few of the problems that come to the fore during the attempt to transform a Dutch
poem into an English metapoem may be illustrated by two examples. The Wrst is an
English rendering of a poem by the contemporary Flemish poet Paul Snoek.
‘Rustic Landscape’
The ducks are like our cousins:
they waggle and walk
and slavering at the mouth
in the mud grow old.
But all at once a terriWc
bang almost breaks
their pleasant peasant membranes.
That was the farmer himself of course:
he’s trying the shotgun out,
the lout. He cut an apple
in the snout and cried, stark red
with relief: ‘I’m dressing,
yes, a golden pear.’
And did those quacking cousins have a laugh.
(1) They prune their roses
with a crooked knife;
(2) How old are the ducks?9
410
recent and contemporary writings

‘Rustiek landschapje’
De ganzen zijn net onze tantes:
zij waggelen en wandelen
en worden watertandend
in de modder oud.
Maar plots doet een geweldig
knalletje hun landelijke,
liefelijke vliezen bijna scheuren.
Dat was een hereboer natuurlijk:
hij schiet met loden spek,
de gek. Hij sneed een appel
in de bek en riep spierrood
van ontspanning: ‘Ik mest,
jawel, ik mest een gulden peer’.
Of die kwakende tantes moesten lachen.
1. Zij snoeien hun rozen
met een kromgekweekt mes;
2. Hoe oud zijn de ganzen?
This is not the place for a detailed comparison of the English text against the Dutch
original, Snoek’s ‘Rustiek landschapje’,10 but even a cursory reading of the two texts in
conjunction is enough to uncover the major decision-requiring problem. A fundamental
theme of the Dutch poem is the juxtaposition of ganzen (geese) and onze tantes (our
aunts), with such descriptive terms as waggelen, wandelen, worden . . . oud, and kwakende
applying to both. These juxtaposed and coalescing images (suddenly separated again in
the two ‘clues’ which close the poem, turning it into a picture puzzle) are reinforced
acoustically by a complex system of alliteration and internal rhyme.
A low-rank translation of the opening line would yield ‘The geese are like our aunts’ or a
similar rendering. But that lacks the acoustic complexity of the Dutch. Moreover it leads the
translator to the further problem that in English geese do not quack (see line fourteen) but
honk or possibly hiss. Retention of the geese leads to honking relatives, and that to a
suggestion, disturbingly inappropriate in this context, of honking car-horns. Retention of
the quacking, on the other hand, leads from geese to ducks. A choice for ducks and quacking
instead of honking and geese opens up the possibility of turning the aunts into cousins and
so to beginning the metapoem with the initial elements for an acoustic system parallel to
that of the Dutch (‘De ganzen zijn net onze tantes. . .’; ‘The ducks are like our cousins . . .’).
This choice, however, leaves the human image less concrete at the end of the Wrst line than in
the Dutch, since cousins, unlike aunts, are of unspeciWed sex and relative age; the translator
who has given preference to this series of choices must rely on the rest of the Wrst stanza,
5.3 james s holmes
411

reinforced by the last, to make it clear that the cousins, too, are female and growing old. In
other words the major cluster of choices facing the translator of this poem is that of either
reconstructing the acoustic qualities of the Dutch at the cost of shifting the nature of two of
the poem’s major images (though preserving the nature of their juxtaposition) or retaining
the images at the cost of introducing alien implications with the ‘honking’11 and failing to
parallel the acoustic qualities of the poem.
The second translation reXects a similar problem of choice between emphasis on the
aspect of sound and the aspect of image. But in the case of this poem, Hubert van
Herreweghen’s ‘Avond aan zee’,12 the factors governing the choice are quite diVerent.
Where in ‘Rustiek landschapje’the nature of the relationship between the two juxtaposed
images was central, not the precise nature of the images themselves, in ‘Avond aan zee’the
emphasis is squarely on an image as such: that of a sow as metaphor for the evening sky as
the sun sets in the sea. In a poem of this kind any shift even in subordinate imagic details
can be quite precarious. On the formal level, Snoek’s poem is highly individual,
contained in an organic form developed for this poem and it alone; Van Herreweghen’s
poem, on the other hand, is formally quite traditional: Wve four-line stanzas rhyming
abba (stanzas one, two, four, and Wve) or abab (stanza three), each line with six
(masculine-rhyme lines) or seven (feminine-rhyme) syllables and three accents. The
sole unorthodox elements in the form are the rhyming of zinkt with zingt in stanza
three13 and the somewhat uneven rhythm throughout.
Such close adherence to traditional form is more common among contemporary
Dutch poets (at least in Flanders) than among their English and American counterparts,
and there is little reason for the translator to concentrate on reproducing a familiar poetic
form at the cost of introducing major shifts in the imagic material of the poem. On the
other hand, by expanding the incidental use of consonance in the Dutch poem into a
basic formal principle of consonance and assonance in the English metapoem, while at
the same time admitting two-accent lines alongside the three-accent of the original, the
translator can create a form for the English metapoem which has two important
advantages. Situationally, it is actually more closely equivalent to the Dutch than a
correspondent form would be. And it has the Xexibility to provide a close Wt for the
semantic and imagic material of the Dutch poem. The result is an English metapoem
which is formally quite diVerent from the Dutch poem but in every other way follows the
original with a minimum of skewing.
‘Evening by the Sea’
An evening of olives;
a lemon sky
surfaces its belly
on a green sea.
412
recent and contemporary writings

A sow lying on its side
grumbling and dangerous,
a belly of thwacking light,
teeth gleeful with rage.
From here to where the earth
slopes away and sinks,
the gigantic red-haired beast
Xames and Xashes and sings.
Vicious mother with lips
of froth across yellow teeth,
eyes of a lightning white,
asquint with ruttish tricks;
belly, your teats hang there
maternally light and full,
plenty of milk for all.
Evening licks our desire.14
‘Avond aan zee’
Een avond van olijven,
een hemel van citroen,
komt op een zee van groen
met zijn buik boven drijven.
Een zeug die op de zijde
grommend gevaarlijk ligt,
een buik vol kletsend licht,
tanden van woede blijde.
Ver tot de hellende aarde
onder de einder zinkt,
het vlammend rood behaarde
groot beeest dat blinkt en zingt.
Wrede moeder met schuimen
lip over geel gebit,
ogen bliksemend wit,
loens van bronstige luimen,
buik, moederlijk daar hangen,
uw tepels licht en melk,
zatheit van dronk voor elk.
Avond likt ons verlangen.
5.3 james s holmes
413

notes
1. Jirˇı´ Levy´, ‘Translation as a Decision Process’, in To Honor Roman Jakobson. Essays on the Occasion of His Seventieth
Birthday (three vols.; The Hague: Mouton, 1967), II, pp. 1171–1182. Cf. Levy´, Umeˇnı´ prˇekladu (Prague:
Ceskoslovensky´ spisovatel, 1963), p. 148; Anton Popovicˇ, ‘Translation Analysis and Literary History: A Slovak
Approach to the Problem’, Babel (Avignon), 14 (1968), pp. 68–76, esp. p. 73.
2. The views expressed in the Wrst part of this essay were developed further in a paper presented at the conference on
literary translation theory held in Bratislava late in May, 1968 and printed in the proceedings of the conference,
James S Holmes with Frans de Haan and Anton Popovicˇ (eds.), The Nature of Translation: Essays on the Theory
and Practice of Literary Translation (Bratislava: Publishing House of the Slovak Academy of Sciences and The
Hague: Mouton, 1970), under the title ‘Forms of Verse Translation and the Translation of Verse Form’.
3. Jackson Mathews, ‘Third Thoughts on Translating Poetry’, in Reuben A. Brower (ed.), On Translation (Harvard
Studies in Comparative Literature, Vol. 23; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1959), pp. 67–77,
quotation p. 67.
4. See the translations listed in Lucretia Van Tuyl Simmons, Goethe’s Lyric Poems in English Translation prior to 1860
(University of Wisconsin Studies in Language and Literature, vol. 6; Madison: [University of Wisconsin], 1919),
and in Stella M. Hinz, Goethe’s Lyric Poems in English Translation after 1860 (same series. vol. 26; 1928).
5. Cf. Ire`ne C. Spilka, ‘On Translating the Mental Status Schedule’, Meta (Montreal), 13 (1968), pp. 4–20; esp. p. 13.
6. One striking example may emphasize my point. A few years ago the following text was published in the
authoritative American review Poetry:
‘The Old Man’
An old man in the street
his small story to the old woman
it is nothing it sounds like a thin tragedy
his voice is white
like a knife that so long was whetted
till the steel was thin
Like an object outside him hangs the voice
over the long black coat
The old meager man in his black coat
seems a black plant
You see this stasps the fear through your mouth
the Wrst taste of an anaesthetic
(translation Hidde Van Ameyden van Duym; Poetry [Chicago], 104 [1964]. p. 175). There is some remarkable
English here. A reading of the Dutch poem by Paul van Ostaijen on the facing page of Poetry shows why.
‘De oude man’
Een oud man in de straat
zijn klein verhaal aan de oude vrouw
het is niets het klinkt als een ijl treurspel
zijn stem is wit
zij gelijkt een mes dat zo lang werd aangewet
tot het staal dun werd
Gelijk een voorwerp buiten hem hangt deze stem
boven de lange zwarte jas
De oude magere in zijn zwarte jas
gelijkt een zwarte plant
Ziet gij dit snokt de angst door uw mond
het eerste smaken van een narkose
414
recent and contemporary writings

(Paul van Ostaijen, Verzameld werk: Poe¨zie [two vols.; Antwerp: De Sikkel, The Hague: Daamen, and
Amsterdam: Van Oorschot. (1952)], II. p. 244).
One can see the lexis and syntax of the original Dutch constantly breaking through the surface of the English,
across the barrier of language. At the rank of lexis, a klein verhaal is equated to a ‘small story’, an ijl treurspel to a
‘thin tragedy, mager to ‘meager’, and de angst to ‘the fear’. At a higher rank ‘Gelijk een voorwerp buiten hem
hangt deze stem’ is rendered as ‘Like an object outside him hangs the voice’, and ‘zij gelijkt een mes dat zo lang
werd aangewet/tot het staal dun werd’ as the contamination ‘like a knife that so long was whetted / till the steel
was thin’. The last line of the poem but one is particularly unclear in the English, partly perhaps because of what
may be a misprint, but primarily because the translator has depended on lexical translation to solve his dilemma
for him, instead of making a choice between two readings (‘Ziet gij dit/snokt de angst door uw mond’ or ‘If/
When you see this fear quivers through your mouth’, and ‘Ziet gij/dit snokt de angst door uw mond’ or ‘You
see, this sucks the fear through your mouth’). The result is that, by retaining the syntax of the Dutch, he has
created a line which must be read either as approximating the less probable of the two Dutch meanings (‘You
see/this stasps the fear through your mouth’) or as meaningless (‘You see this/stasps the fear through your
mouth’).
A translation of this kind, though presented formally as a poem, becomes rather a comment on the general
nature of Dutch syntax than a comment on a speciWc Dutch poem. Indeed, the deviations from the syntactic
norms of English stand in the way of an appreciation of the English text as poetry. (This is not true of all kinds
of syntactic deviation of course. But there is apparently a fundamental diVerence in eVect between the
deviations from the norm of ‘translationese’ and those of ‘poetic licence’.)
7. C. Rabin, ‘The Linguistics of Translation’, in Aspects of Translation (The Communication Research Centre,
University College, London: Studies in Communication, Vol. 5; London: Seeker and Warburg, 1958), pp. 123–
145. esp. pp. 144–145.
8. More Dutch poetry was published in English translation during the single decade 1955–1965 than in all the
preceding years of this century taken together.
9. My translation. First printed in Delta: A Review of Arts, Life, and Thought in the Netherlands (Amsterdam), 8,
No. 2 (Summer 1965), p. 49.
10. Paul Snoek, De heilige gedichten, 1956–1958 [Antwerp: Ontwikkeling and Rotterdam: Donker, 1959], 39.
11. There is of course also the literalist’s alternative of retaining both the quacking and the geese, at the cost of
confusing the image and tearing the fabric of the poem.
12. Hubert van Herreweghen, Vleugels [Hasselt: Heideland, (1962)], p. 52.
13. Since Van Herreweghen is Belgian, perhaps also the rhyme ligt—licht should be considered consonance rather
than rime riche.
14. My translation. First printed in The Literary Review: An International Journal of Contemporary Writing (Teaneck,
New Jersey), 7, No. 3 (Spring 1964: special Flanders Number), p. 466.
The article ‘Describing Literary Translations: Models and Methods’ is an ambitious
attempt to formulate a model not just of the process of translation itself, but of the way in
which the translation scholar may come to an understanding of, in fact to some extent
retrace, this process. The article, in a word taken from within it, is a kind of ‘map’ of the
sphere and activity of the translation scholar and critic who analyses both the original and
the translation in order to discover how the latter came into being and what ‘rules’
governed this genesis.
In the opening words of his article, Holmes notes the scarcity of studies that attempt to
describe the relations between a literary text and its translation(s), and claims that such
studies also tend to be ‘so haphazard, so piecemeal, so normative. And so naı¨ve in their
methodology’ (p. 81). He then tackles the issue of the translation process.
5.3 james s holmes
415

From ‘Describing Literary Translations: Models and Methods’ (1978), repr. in
Translated!, 81–91
The earliest explicit, more or less formalized models of the translation process were
designed in the late forties and early Wfties as bases for programs of research into the
feasibility of so-called automatic translation. These models started from the notion that
texts were strings of words (or ‘lexical items’) which could, in the main, be translated item
by item, if only a few allowances were made for the unfortunate tendency of languages to
exhibit language-pair diVerences in syntax and to create divergent exocentric (that is,
‘idiomatic’) phrases.1 Later this basically lexical-rank model was replaced by a sentence-
rank model, in which (to cite the terminology used by one of its foremost advocates,
Nida) a source-language passage was converted into a receptor-language passage via a
tripartite process of analysis, kernel-level transfer, and restructuring.2
The shift from lexical rank to sentence rank was a signiWcant step towards sophisti-
cation, but the basic premise remained that a text is a string of units, essentially serial in
nature.
A fundamental fact about texts, however, is that they are both serial and structural—
that after one has read a text in time, one retains an array of data about it in an
instantaneous form. On these grounds, it has more recently been suggested (though
nowhere, as far as I know, clearly set out in model form) that the translation of texts (or at
least of extensive texts, or at least of complex texts) takes place on two planes: a serial
plane, where one translates sentence by sentence, and a structural plane, on which one
abstracts a ‘mental conception’ of the original text, then uses that mental conception as a
kind of general criterion against which to test each sentence during the formulation of
the new, translated text. This model might be sketched as follows:
SOURCE LANGUAGE
TEXT
ANALYSIS
TRANSFER
RESTRUCTURING
RECEPTOR LANGUAGE
TRANSLATION
Figure 1. Nida’s model of the translation process (Nida 1969: 484).
416
recent and contemporary writings

Such a two-plane model would seem to come much closer than the earlier serial models
to describing the translation process as it takes place in the translator’s study. The
introduction of an abstract text-rank3 ‘mental conception’—or, as I propose to call it
henceforward, ‘map’—would seem to be a further step forward.
I would question, however, whether one such map or mental conception is suYcient to
model the actual translation process adequately. Consider for a moment. Mr X, who
sometimes translates poetry into English, has just reread a poem in French, say Baude-
laire’s ‘La ge´ante’. Among the details in the map which he abstracts from the original poem
will be (to restrict myself to a few of the more elementary features) that it is in sonnet form,
rhyming abba abba cde cde, in syllabic verse, twelve (or thirteen) syllables to the line. X, if
he is like most English-language translators, will not automatically decide to ‘retain’ the
rhyme scheme, the syllabic verse, or the twelve- (or thirteen-) syllable lines. Rather, he has
a number of options to select from. On the basis of these selections (and a great many
others) he in fact develops a second map, in various ways like the Wrst, but in others quite
diVerent. It is this second map, not the Wrst, which he uses as his criterion to guide him in
carrying out his translation on the serial plane. If this really approximates the way in which
the translator works, then we arrive at the following two-plane, two-map model.4
In my sketch of this model I have taken the further step of introducing three sets
of rules by which speciWc phases of the translation process would seem to be carried
out. (It goes without saying that in actual practice the diVerent phases are not always
separated from each other in time; like other human beings, the translator can be doing
various things at once.5) Of the three rule sets, the Wrst, that of derivation rules (DR),
determines the way in which the translator abstracts his map of the source text from the
text itself, and the third, that of projection rules (PR), determines the way in which he
makes use of his map of the prospective target text in order to formulate the text,
while the second, that of correspondence rules (CR) or matching rules (MR)—or, if one
prefers, equivalence rules (ER)—determines the way in which he develops his target-text
TEXTUAL
PROCESSING
PLANES
STRUCTURAL
PLANE
SERIAL
PLANE
RECEPTION
OF TSL
MAP
FORMULATION
OF TTL
TSL
TTL
TEXTUAL
PLANE
Figure 2. Two-plane text-rank translation model (TSL ¼ source-language text;
TTL ¼ target-language text).
5.3 james s holmes
417

map from his source-text map. It should be noted that the Wrst of the three phases
described here the translator shares with every reader of literary texts, the third with every
writer; the second, however, that of developing a target-text map from his source-text
map by means of correspondence rules, is uniquely a translational (or at least a speciWc
kind of metatextual) operation, and as such deserves our special attention.
It should be realized in this connectionthat the map of the source text, if the translator-to-
be who abstracts it is a skilled and experienced reader, will be a conglomerate of highly
disparate bits of information. In the Wrst place, as a map of a linguistic artefact, it will
contain information, at a variety of ranks, regarding features of the text in its relation to the
linguistic continuum within which (or violating the rules of which) it is formulated, that is,
contextual information. Secondly, as a map of a literary artefact, it will contain information,
at a variety of ranks, regarding features of the text in its relation to the literary continuum
within which (or rebelling against which) it is formulated, that is, intertextual information.
And third, as a map of a socio-cultural artefact, it will contain information, at a variety of
ranks, regarding features of the text in its relation to the socio-cultural continuum within
which (or transcending which) it is formulated, that is, situational information.6
[Holmes goes on to discuss what Jirˇı´ Levy´ called the translator’s ‘decision process’: how the
translator seeks correspondences between the diVerent features, forms, and functions in the
two diVerent languages (see also Sect. 4.8, above, on Levy´). The translator may be compelled
to abandon certain qualities of the source text, while highlighting others. Thus, ‘the translator,
whether or not he is conscious of it, establishes a hierarchy of correspondences’ (p. 86).]
If this is a fair description of the literary translation process, in other words of the way in
which the literary translator goes about his business, then the task for the scholar who
wishes to describe the relationship between the translated text and its original would
DR
CR
PR
RULES PLANE
TEXTUAL
PROCESSING
PLANES
TEXT PLANE
STRUCTURAL
PLANE
SERIAL
PLANE
MAP TSL
MAP TTL
RECEPTION OF TSL
FORMULATION OF TTL
TTL
TSL
Figure 3. Two-map two-plane text-rank translation model (TSL ¼ source-language
text; TTL ¼ target-language text; DR ¼ derivation rules; CR ¼ correspondence
rules; PR ¼ projection rules).
418
recent and contemporary writings

seem to be obvious. He must attempt to determine the features of the translator’s two
maps and to discover his three systems of rules, those of derivation, projection, and,
above all, correspondence—in other words, the translator’s poetics.
[ . . . ]
In most cases, however, the analyst is left with little or no material beyond the two (or
more) texts, the original and its translation(s), and it is from these alone that he must
attempt to derive his description. How can he set about his task? At the risk of
simplifying the problem, I should like to restrict myself here to considering what I have
suggested is the major aspect of this task, that of attempting to retrace the translator’s two
maps and the correspondence rules determining their relationship.
Clearly, the analyst will have to approach this problem in a diVerent way from that of the
translator. The translator, I have argued, derives a map of the source text from the text itself,
next applies a set of correspondence rules, some of them more or less predetermined and
some more or less ad hoc, to develop a target-text map from the source-text map, and Wnally
uses this second map as a guide while formulating his target text. The analyst, on the other
hand, starting from the two texts, will as a Wrst step apply a set of derivation rules to each text
in turn, in order to obtain maps of the two texts. His next step will be, with the aid of a set of
comparison rules, to compare the two maps in order to determine the network of corres-
pondences between their various features. This will then be followed by a third step in
which, with the aid of a set of abstraction rules, he derives a set of correspondence rules and a
correspondence hierarchy from the network of correspondences.
Only in one phase of one of these steps does the work of the analyst parallel that of the
translator: in the operation of deriving the source-text map from the text. The operation
TSL
TTL
DR
AR
CN
CPR
=~
CRTS
CRTR
≅
MTS
SL
MTR
SL
≅
MTS
TL
MTR
TL
Figure 4. Model of the translation-descriptive process (T ¼ text; SL ¼ source language;
TL ¼ target language; M ¼ map; TR ¼ translator; TS ¼ translation scholar; CN ¼
network of correspondences. CR ¼ correspondence rules; DR ¼ derivation rules; CpR
¼ comparison rules; AR ¼ abstraction rules).
5.3 james s holmes
419

of deriving the target-text map, on the other hand, is for the analyst the reverse of the
operation performed by the translator (though at the same time parallel to the analyst’s
operation of deriving the source-text map, and requiring comparable discovery proced-
ures). Similarly, the abstraction of a network of correspondences from the maps, and of
correspondence rules and a correspondence hierarchy underlying that network, is an
operation of quite a diVerent kind from those performed by the translator.
A further complication is one that applies to all studies of mental processes. Since in
most cases there is little or no tangible evidence of what has taken place in the translator’s
‘mind’ except the text he has produced as compared to the original text, the scholar
attempting to trace the relationship of the two texts likewise in most cases has no material
except those two texts from which to derive his conclusions. And since the descriptive
process he pursues is, though in a diVerent way from the translator’s process, extremely
complex, there is great danger that the results of his analysis will be highly subjective and
so of little value to other scholars. Assuming that objectivity in any true sense is in such a
matter a goal even more unattainable than in research dealing with tangible objects and/
or events observable outside the ‘mind’, one can nevertheless posit that a high degree of
intersubjectivity is an aim worth striving after in a research situation of this kind.
There would seem to be a choice for the analyst between two basic working methods.
In the Wrst, the descriptive scholar, upon studying the two texts, will derive from them a
list of distinctive features which strike him as signiWcant and deserving of comparative
analysis; frequently he will also determine a hierarchical ordering of the features. The
well-trained analyst will, it must be assumed, bring with him a detailed knowledge of
linguistic, literary, and socio-cultural theory such that he can identify contextual, inter-
textual, and situational elements in the texts in a manner acceptable to other scholars,
and this, it must likewise be assumed, will provide at least a modicum of intersubjectivity
to his application of linguistic, literary, and socio-cultural research methods. But the fact
remains that none of the disciplines concerned with the nature of texts has given us a
generally accepted intersubjective method for determining distinctive features in a
concrete text, so that their selection remains to a large extent an ad hoc operation. The
result will consequently be that the maps of the two texts derived by the analyst, like the
translator’s two maps, will be incomplete: the analyst, for instance, may very likely
discover blank spaces (indications of terrae incognitae) in the translator’s maps, but
overlook the blank spaces in his own—and precisely in such terrae incognitae, as in
parts of Africa in the old maps, may be lions.
A second working method, at least in theory, would be to circumvent the problem of
ad hoc selection of distinctive features by determining beforehand a required repertory of
features always to be analysed, regardless of what speciWc text is involved. This method,
too, has at least one major drawback: if its results are to lead to a map that is generally
acceptable as within reach of completeness, the repertory would have to be quite
420
recent and contemporary writings

extensive, and the task of providing full details on the texts would be one that is arduous
and tedious to the researcher and largely uninteresting to the reader.
The repertory method would, however, assure a higher degree of intersubjectivity to
the results of the analysis based on it—provided, of course, that scholars in the Weld could
reach agreement as to what elements should be included in such a repertory. Lambert has
made an explorative attempt at a listing;7 it would seem to me that a further Wlling out
and structuring of this listing should be one of the major foci of research and discussion
in the near future for scholars interested in translation description. It is clear that the
repertory must not only be quite complete, but also complex enough in structure to
accommodate a number of parametric axes. Among these a major one, of course, is the
axis
microstructure-mesostructure-macrostructure
(from
grapheme/morpheme
via
lexeme, sentence, and suprasentential units to text; in verse moreover via line, stanza,
and suprastanzaic units). But other axes intersect this one, notably that of form-meaning-
function (morphologue-semasiologue-analogue) and that of (linguistic) contextuality—
(literary) intertextuality—(socio-cultural) situationality, and these axes too would have to
be incorporated.
The task of working out such a repertory would be enormous. But if scholars were to
arrive at a consensus regarding it, in the way, for instance, that botanists since Linnaeus
have arrived at a consensus regarding systematic methods for the description of plants, it
would then become possible, for the Wrst time, to provide descriptions of original and
translated texts, of their respective maps, and of correspondence networks, rules, and
hierarchies that would be mutually comparable. And only on the basis of mutually
comparable descriptions can we go on to produce well-founded studies of a larger scope:
comparative studies of the translations of one author or one translator, or—a greater
leap—period, genre, one-language (or one-culture), or general translation histories.
Such goals, of course, the scholars of our generation have tended to reject: they seem to
us unattainable, and so outside the range of our less-than-vaulting ambition. It is in any
case certain that they exceed the grasp of the subjective, largely intuitive and impres-
sionist methods still so often being applied today. And only a more explicit, a more
precise, a stricter and more intersubjective approach holds any promise of greater things
to come.
notes
1. See e.g. the discussions in various early computer-oriented studies.
2. In the various models developed at this level, the main diVerence of opinion is in just what is being transferred:
syntactic elements (Nida’s kernel or near-kernel sentences) or semantic kernels. (Eugene A. Nida, ‘Science of
Translation’, Language, 45 [1969], pp. 483–498). The fullest discussion of these and other serial models of the
translation process is to be found in V. N. Komissarov, Slovo o perevode (Moscow: IMO, 1973), a book which I am
unfortunately unable to read, though manuscript translations of several portions of it made by various students
at the University of Amsterdam have given me conWdence that it is a work of high signiWcance which needs to be
translated into a Western language in toto.
5.3 james s holmes
421

3. Obviously, in the case of longer texts there will also be mesostructural ranks, ranging from those of paragraphs
and/or stanzas to those of chapters of novels, cantos of long poems, scenes or acts of plays.
4. Of course the charge can be made that this model, too, is an oversimpliWcation of the translation process,
ignoring as it does the mesostructural ranks. Eventually it may therefore prove necessary to abandon it in favour
of a more complex model introducing a hierarchical series of maps, ranging from sentence-rank maps via a
number of mesostructural maps to the text maps.
5. It also goes withoug saying that there is a great deal of feedback not indicated in the model; details of the target-
text map, and in some cases even of the source-text map, may change drastically in the course of sentence-by-
sentence (or transeme-by-transeme) translation.
6. On this terminology see Andre´ Lefevere, ‘The Translation of Literature: An Approach’, Babel, 16 (1970),
pp. 75–79, and James S Homes, ‘Rebuilding the Bridge at Bommel: Notes on othe Limits of Translatability’,
Translated!, pp. 45–52.
7. Jose´ Lambert, ‘Echanges litte´raires et traduction: Discussion d’un projet’, James S. Holmes, Jose´ Lambert, &
Raymond van den Broeck (eds.). Literature and Translation: New Perspectives in Literary Studies (Leuven, Acco,
1978), pp. 142–160, esp. pp. 154–155.
Holmes, the Translator
James S. Holmes received major awards for his translations of Dutch poetry (including
Dutch Interior, Postwar Poetry of the Netherlands and Flanders, co-edited with William Jay
Smith, 1984). He also published a series of modestly produced chapbooks with translations
of Paul van Ostaijen, Piet Paaltjens, Gerrit Komrij, and others. Some of these translations,
Poems for Men after Martial (1983) being among them, were published under the pseudo-
nym Jacob Lowland. As noted in the Colophon to the Martial chapbook: ‘These versions,
close adaptations of poems from Books Eight to Twelve of Martial’s Epigrams were made
by Jacob Lowland in August & September 1983 [ . . . ] [T]he rendition of lX:59 was
inXuenced by a late seventeenth-century version often tho probably erroneously, attributed
to Henry Killigrew. Martial Music was issued in a limited edition of ninety copies on the
occasion of the colloquium on homo-erotic literature held in Amsterdam in November
1983.’
In ‘Translating Martial and Vergil: Jacob Lowland among the Classics’, from a talk
given by James S. Holmes (Translating Poetry: The Double Labyrinth, ed. Daniel Weiss-
bort, 1989), Holmes remarks about the translation of Catullus, an ongoing project of his,
that ‘one of the major problems [ . . . ] has been not his homosexual feelings, but his
obscenity, the street language. Only since about 1965 has it been possible for people to use
such languaqe in poetry and get it published. It’s not a question of what poets dare to do
often, but of what publishers dare to publish, because of the censorship laws’. As for
Martial, he notes: ‘I hadn’t done anything more with Latin until this past summer. I picked
up a book called From Daphne to Laurel [1982], which is a very interesting anthology of
422
recent and contemporary writings

how English-language translators [ . . . ] have dealt with the classics, from the Middle Ages
up to today [ . . . ] It’s arranged not by poets but by translators [like George Steiner’s
landmark anthology of translators, The Penguin Book of Modern Verse Translation, 1966]
[ . . . ] Well, I came across a poem that I didn’t know, in an anonymous late seventeenth-
century version, by someone who brought out a book of Martial translations. [ . . . ]’ He
continues in this casual manner, while drawing attention to the inhibitions standing in the
way of adequate translations of this important Latin poet. His account of translating
homoerotic Latin poetry challenges a number of theoretical assumptions.
As regards the inevitably limited life of a ‘modernizing’ translation, Holmes comments:
‘That doesn’t worry me at all. I’m quite willing for translation to age very fast. In fact, I’m
quite willing for my own poetry to age very fast. I’m very much concerned with
communication now. [ . . . ] I believe Wrmly in new translations for every generation . . . ’.
The versions of Martial, printed below, though doubtless dated, are probably still access-
ible to the present generation. As regards ‘Window Shopping’, Holmes comments:
‘Mamurra is a name that goes back to the time of Catullus, and I suspect that Martial
knew that. Julius Caesar’s friend, his lover until he died, was named Mamurra, and
Catullus absolutely hated him. [ . . . ] Peter Wigham, in the Penguin translation of
Catullus, translated Mamurra with a pun, as O’Toole [The Poems of Catullus, trans. and
introd. Peter Wigham, 1966] [ . . . ] When I started ‘I decided that I wanted to translate this
so that it communicated in the present day, to gay people in the present day; that was the
Wrst decision I made. [ . . . ]’
Martial IX 57
Latin original
Nil est tritius Hedyli lacernis:
non ansae veterum Corinthiorum,
nec crus compede lubricum decenni,
nec ruptae recutita colla mulae,
nec quae Flaminiam secant salebrae,
nec qui litoribus nitent lapilli,
nec Tusca ligo vinea politus,
nec pallens toga mortui tribulis,
nec pigri rota quassa mulionis,
nec rasum cavea latus visontis,
nec dens iam senior ferocis apri.
res una est tamen (ipse non negabit)
culus tritior Hedyli lacernis.
5.3 james s holmes
423

Literal translation
Nothing is worn smoother than Hedylus’ mantles:
not the handles of antique Corinthian vases,
nor a shank polished by a ten-years-worn fetter,
nor the scarred neck of a broken-winded mule,
nor the ruts that intersect the Flaminian Way,
nor the pebbles that shine on the sea beach,
nor a hoe polished by a Tuscan vineyard,
nor the shiny toga of a defunct pauper,
nor the ramshackle wheel of a lazy carrier,
nor a bison’s Xank scraped by its cage,
nor the tusk, now aged, of a Werce boar.
Yet there is one thing—he himself will not deny it:
Hedylus’ rump is worn smoother than his mantle.
James S. Holmes’s version, Martial Music, p. x
Nothing’s worn smoother than Harry’s coat:
not the handle on a long-used stein,
a slave’s wrist polished by years of rope,
a city-dog’s neck, rubbed by the line,
the ruts that cut country rods in spring,
the gleaming pebbles on ocean beaches,
a hoe for suburban gardening,
the shiny seat of a beggar’s britches,
rickety wheels on a market cart,
the bare-scraped Xanks of a zoo-caged lion,
the horns on a butt-prone billy goat.
Wait! There’s one thing I wouldn’t deny him:
His bum’s worn smoother than Harry’s coat.
Martial IX 59
Latin original
In Saeptis Mamurra diu multumque vagtus,
hic ubi Roma suas aurea vexat opes,
inspexit molles pueros oculisque comedit,
non hos quos primae prostituere casae,
424
recent and contemporary writings

sed quos arcanae servant tabulata catastae
et quos non populus nec mea turba videt.
inde satur mensas et opertos exuit orbes
expositumque alte pingue poposcit ebur,
et testudineum mensus quater hexaelinon
ingemuit citro non satis esse suo.
consuluit nares an olerent aera Corinthon,
culpavit statuas et, Polyclite, tuas,
et, turbata brevi questus crystallina vitro,
murrina signavit seposuitque decem.
expendit veteres calathos et si qua fuerunt
pocula Mentorea nobilitata manu,
et viridis picot gemmas numeravit in auro,
quidquid et a nivea grandius aure sonat.
sardonychas veros mensa quaesivit in omni
et pretium magnis fecit iaspidibus.
undecima lassus cum iam discederet hora,
asse duos calices emit et ipse tulit.
Literal translation
Mamurra, long and often wandering in the Saepta,
here where Golden Rome Xings about her wealth,
inspected and devoured with his eyes dainty boys,
not those the outer stalls made public,
but those who are guarded by the platform of a secret stand,
and whom the people do not see, nor the crowd of such as I. Then, sated with the view,
he had tables and round covered table-tops laid bare,
and must needs have their high-hung glistening ivory supports brought down;
and after four measurements of a tortoise-shell couch for six,
he said with a sigh that it was too small for his citrus wood table.
He took counsel of his nose whether the bronzes smelt of Corinth,
and condemned even your statuary, Polyclitus;
and, complaining that the crystal vases were disWgured by a small piece of glass,
he put his seal on ten murrine articles, and set them aside.
He weighed antique tankards, and any cups
made precious by Mentor’s handiwork,
and counted the emeralds set in chased gold,
and every large pearl that tinkles from a snow-white ear. Genuine sardonyxes he
looked for on every table,
5.3 james s holmes
425

and oVered a price for some big jaspers.
When at the eleventh hour, fagged out, he was at last departing,
for a penny he bought two cups—and bore them oV himself.
‘Window-shopping’, trans. anon
[This is attributed by the British Library catalogue to Henry Killigrew (1613–1700),
although this seems unlikely.]
Mamurra many hours does vagrant tell
I’ th’ shops, where Rome her richest ware does sell.
Beholds fair boys, devours them with his eyes,
Not those of common note, one Wrst espies;
But which in inner rooms they closely mew,
Remov’d from mine, and from the people’s view.
Glutted with these, choice tables he uncases,
Others of ivory, set high, displaces.
Rich tortoise beds he measures four times o’er.
Sighs, they Wt not, and leaves them on that score.
Consults the statues of Corinthian brass
By the scent; and not without blame lets pass
Thy pieces, Polyclet. He next complains
Of crystals mix’d with glass, and then disdains.
Marks porcelain cups, sets ten of them apart:
Weighs antique plate (of Mentor’s noble art
If any be); counts, i’ the’ enamell’d gold,
The gems that stand. Rich pendants does behold:
For the sardonyx makes a search most nice,
And of the biggest jaspers beats the price.
Tir’d now, at last, after eleven hours’ stay,
Two farthing pots he bought, and himself bore away.
James S Holmes’s version, ‘Window Shopping’, Martial Music, p. xl
[See introduction to ‘Holmes, the Translator’, above, for Holmes’s general translation strategy
here. Notes, supplied by Holmes and obviously no longer current, explain the allusions,
e.g. ‘‘‘Rob Himself’’, Rob of Amsterdam, runs an art gallery in Amsterdam [ . . . ]’.]
O’Toole in ennui
(life is such a bore)
goes shopping
in the Gay Department Store.
426
recent and contemporary writings

First to the Slave Department
With his eyes
he eats ’em up:
not those on show for guys
like you & me,
but prime-type types locked tight
in special rooms
tucked out of common sight.
None’s hot enough,
Now Stocks & Pillories.
He checks out this one, that.
None of them please.
He measures all the slings,
twice, three times, four.
None of them Wt.
When will you have some more?
Now on to Art.
There’s this new set of drawings
just in from Finland.
Look! A Xaw!
O Tom, how could you!
Time to contemplate
the silver cockrings.
Silver! Silver plate!
He loves the harnesses,
has three of them
laid by, adores a belt
(each studded gem
selected & set in
by Rob Himself
counts every stone,
then moves on to the shelf
with rings & earrings,
Oooh, the diamond’s nice.
The big one.
Oh? That much? At half the price . . .
5.3 james s holmes
427

Exhausted after four hours’ stay,
he’ll buy
two jars of Lube &
really have to Xy.
428
recent and contemporary writings

5.4 Itamar Even-Zohar
Itamar Even-Zohar (b. 1939), Professor of Culture Research and Porter Chair Professor of
Semiotics and Literary Theory, Tel Aviv University, former editor of Poetics Today (1987–
93), is a leading Israeli translation scholar, probably best known for his Polysystem Theory,
in which is outlined the structure and evolution of literary systems. Even-Zohar and some
of his Israeli colleagues, notably Gideon Toury, worked closely with James S Holmes and
other colleagues in the Netherlands, Belgium, and the UK, this collaboration being
important in the development of Translation Studies in the 1970s and after. In recent
years, he has been researching the development of cultural systems, already an implied
feature of his work in the 1970s, as instanced in his essay ‘The Position of Translated
Literature within the Literary Polysystem’ (1978; rev. 1990), reprinted below.
‘The Position of Translated Literature within the Literary Polysystem’ (1978), repr. in
Polysystem Studies, special issue of Poetics Today, 11/1 (1990), 45–51.
Dedicated to the memory of James S Holmes—a great student of
translation and a dear friend
I
In spite of the broad recognition among historians of culture of the major role translation
has played in the crystallization of national cultures, relatively little research has been
carried out so far in this area. As a rule, histories of literatures mention translations when
there is no way to avoid them, when dealing with the Middle Ages or the Renaissance, for
instance. One might of course Wnd sporadic references to individual literary translations
in various other periods, but they are seldom incorporated into the historical account in
any coherent way. As a consequence, one hardly gets any idea whatsoever of the function
of translated literature for a literature as a whole or of its position within that literature.
Moreover, there is no awareness of the possible existence of translated literature as
a particular literary system. The prevailing concept is rather that of ‘translation’ or just
‘translated works’ treated on an individual basis. Is there any basis for a diVerent
assumption, that is for considering translated literature as a system? Is there the same
sort of cultural and verbal network of relations within what seems to be an arbitrary
group of translated texts as the one we willingly hypothesize for original literature?
What kind of relations might there be among translated works, which are presented
as completed facts, imported from other literatures, detached from their home
contexts and consequently neutralized from the point of view of center-and-periphery
struggles?
5.4 itamar even-zohar
429

My argument is that translated works do correlate in at least twoways: (a) in the way their
source texts are selected by the target literature, the principles of selection never being
uncorrelatable with the home co-systems of the target literature (to put it in the most
cautious way); and (b) in the way they adopt speciWc norms, behaviors, and policies—in
short, in their use of the literary repertoire—which results from their relations with the other
home co-systems. These are not conWned to the linguistic level only, but are manifest on any
selection level as well. Thus, translated literature may possess a repertoire of its own, which
to a certain extent could even be exclusive to it. (See Toury 1985 and 1985a.)
It seems that these points make it not only justiWable to talk about translated literature,
but rather imperative to do so. I cannot see how any scholarly eVort to describe and
explain the behavior of the literary polysystem in synchrony and diachrony can advance
in an adequate way if that is not recognized. In other words, I conceive of translated
literature not only as an integral system within any literary polysystem, but as a most
active system within it. But what is its position within the polysystem, and how is this
position connected with the nature of its overall repertoire? One would be tempted to
deduce from the peripheral position of translated literature in the study of literature that
it also permanently occupies a peripheral position in the literary polysystem, but this is
by no means the case. Whether translated literature becomes central or peripheral, and
whether this position is connected with innovatory (‘primary’) or conservatory (‘second-
ary’) repertoires, depends on the speciWc constellation of the polysystem under study.
II
To say that translated literature maintains a central position in the literary polysystem
means that it participates actively in shaping the center of the polysystem. In such a
situation it is by and large an integral part of innovatory forces, and as such likely to be
identiWed with major events in literary history while these are taking place. This implies
that in this situation no clear-cut distinction is maintained between ‘original’ and
‘translated’ writings, and that often it is the leading writers (or members of the avant-
garde who are about to become leading writers) who produce the most conspicuous or
appreciated translations. Moreover, in such a state when new literary models are emer-
ging, translation is likely to become one of the means of elaborating the new repertoire.
Through the foreign works, features (both principles and elements) are introduced into
the home literature which did not exist there before. These include possibly not only new
models of reality to replace the old and established ones that are no longer eVective, but a
whole range of other features as well, such as a new (poetic) language, or compositional
patterns and techniques. It is clear that the very principles of selecting the works to be
translated are determined by the situation governing the (home) polysystem: the texts are
chosen according to their compatibility with the new approaches and the supposedly
innovatory role they may assume within the target literature.
430
recent and contemporary writings

What then are the conditions which give rise to a situation of this kind? It seems to me
that three major cases can be discerned, which are basically various manifestations of the
same law: (a) when a polysystem has not yet been crystallized, that is to say, when a
literature is ‘young,’ in the process of being established; (b) when a literature is either
‘peripheral’ (within a large group of correlated literatures) or ‘weak,’1 or both; and
(c) when there are turning points, crises, or literary vacuums in a literature.
In the Wrst case translated literature simply fulWlls the need of a younger literature to
put into use its newly founded (or renovated) tongue for as many literary types as
possible in order to make it serviceable as a literary language and useful for its emerging
public. Since a young literature cannot immediately create texts in all types known to its
producers, it beneWts from the experience of other literatures, and translated literature
becomes in this way one of its most important systems. The same holds true for the
second instance, that of relatively established literatures whose resources are limited and
whose position within a larger literary hierarchy is generally peripheral. As a consequence
of this situation, such literatures often do not develop the same full range of literary
activities (organized in a variety of systems) observable in adjacent larger literatures
(which in consequence may create a feeling that they are indispensable). They may
also ‘lack’ a repertoire which is felt to be badly needed vis-a`-vis, and in terms of the
presence of, that adjacent literature. This lack may then be Wlled, wholly or partly, by
translated literature. For instance, all sorts of peripheral literature may in such cases
consist of translated literature. But far more important is the consequence that the ability
of such ‘weak’ literatures to initiate innovations is often less than that of the larger and
central literatures, with the result that a relation of dependency may be established not
only in peripheral systems, but in the very center of these ‘weak’ literatures. (To avoid
misunderstanding, I would like to point out that these literatures may rise to a central
position in a way analogous to the way this is carried out by peripheral systems within
a certain polysystem, but this cannot be discussed here.)
Since peripheral literatures in the Western Hemisphere tend more often than not to be
identical with the literatures of smaller nations, as unpalatable as this idea may seem to
us, we have no choice but to admit that within a group of relatable national literatures,
such as the literatures of Europe, hierarchical relations have been established since the
very beginnings of these literatures. Within this (macro-) polysystem some literatures
have taken peripheral positions, which is only to say that they were often modelled to a
large extent upon an exterior literature. For such literatures, translated literature is not
only a major channel through which fashionable repertoire is brought home, but also a
source of reshuZing and supplying alternatives. Thus, whereas richer or stronger
literatures may have the option to adopt novelties from some periphery within
their indigenous borders, ‘weak’ literatures in such situations often depend on import
alone.
5.4 itamar even-zohar
431

The dynamics within the polysystem creates turning points, that is to say, historical
moments where established models are no longer tenable for a younger generation. At
such moments, even in central literatures, translated literature may assume a central
position. This is all the more true when at a turning point no item in the indigenous
stock is taken to be acceptable, as a result of which a literary ‘vacuum’ occurs. In such a
vacuum, it is easy for foreign models to inWltrate, and translated literature may conse-
quently assume a central position. Of course, in the case of ‘weak’ literatures or literatures
which are in a constant state of impoverishment (lack of literary items existing in a
neighbor or accessible foreign literature), this situation is even more overwhelming.
III
Contending that translated literature may maintain a peripheral position means that it
constitutes a peripheral system within the polysystem, generally employing secondary
models. In such a situation it has no inXuence on major processes and is modelled
according to norms already conventionally established by an already dominant type in
the target literature. Translated literature in this case becomes a major factor of conser-
vatism. While the contemporary original literature might go on developing new norms
and models, translated literature adheres to norms which have been rejected either
recently or long before by the (newly) established center. It no longer maintains positive
correlations with original writing.
A highly interesting paradox manifests itself here: translation, by which new ideas,
items, characteristics can be introduced into a literature, becomes a means to preserve
traditional taste. This discrepancy between the original central literature and the trans-
lated literature may have evolved in a variety of ways, for instance, when translated
literature, after having assumed a central position and inserted new items, soon lost
contact with the original home literature which went on changing, and thereby became a
factor of preservation of unchanged repertoire. Thus, a literature that might have
emerged as a revolutionary type may go on existing as an ossiWed syste`me d’antan, often
fanatically guarded by the agents of secondary models against even minor changes.
The conditions which enable this second state are of course diametrically opposite to
those which give rise to translated literature as a central system: either there are no major
changes in the polysystem or these changes are not eVected through the intervention of
interliterary relations materialized in the form of translations.
IV
The hypothesis that translated literature may be either a central or peripheral system does
not imply that it is always wholly one or the other. As a system, translated literature is
itself stratiWed, and from the point of view of polysystemic analysis it is often from the
vantage point of the central stratum that all relations within the system are observed.
432
recent and contemporary writings

This means that while one section of translated literature may assume a central position,
another may remain quite peripheral. In the foregoing analysis I pointed out the close
relationship between literary contacts and the status of translated literature. This seems to
me the major clue to this issue. When there is intense interference, it is the portion of
translated literature deriving from a major source literature which is likely to assume a
central position. For instance, in the Hebrew literary polysystem between the two world
wars literature translated from the Russian assumed an unmistakably central position,
while works translated from English, German, Polish, and other languages assumed an
obviously peripheral one. Moreover, since the major and most innovatory translational
norms were produced by translations from the Russian, other translated literature
adhered to the models and norms elaborated by those translations.
The historical material analyzed so far in terms of polysystemic operations is too limited
to provide any far-reaching conclusions about the chances of translated literature to assume
a particular position. But work carried out in this Weld by various other scholars, as well as
my own research, indicates that the ‘normal’ position assumed by translated literature tends
to be the peripheral one. This should in principle be compatible with theoretical specula-
tion. It may be assumed that in the long run no system can remain in a constant state of
weakness, ‘turning point,’ or crisis, although the possibility should not be excluded that
some polysystems may maintain such states for quite a long time. Moreover, not all
polysystems are structured in the same way, and cultures do diVer signiWcantly. For instance,
it is clear that the French cultural system, French literature naturally included, is much more
rigid than most other systems. This, combined with the long traditional central position of
French literature within the European context (or within the European macro-polysystem),
has caused French translated literature to assume an extremely peripheral position. The state
of Anglo-American literature is comparable, while Russian, German, or Scandinavian
would seem to show diVerent patterns of behavior in this respect.
V
What consequences may the position taken by translated literature have on translational
norms, behaviors, and policies? As I stated above, the distinction between a translated
work and an original work in terms of literary behavior is a function of the position
assumed by the translated literature at a given time. When it takes a central position, the
borderlines are diVuse, so that the very category of ‘translated works’ must be extended to
semi- and quasi-translations as well. From the point of view of translation theory I think
this is a more adequate way of dealing with such phenomena than to reject them on the
basis of a static and a-historical conception of translation. Since translational activity
participates, when it assumes a central position, in the process of creating new, primary
models, the translator’s main concern here is not just to look for ready-made models in
his home repertoire into which the source texts would be transferable. Instead, he is
5.4 itamar even-zohar
433

prepared in such cases to violate the home conventions. Under such conditions the
chances that the translation will be close to the original in terms of adequacy (in other
words, a reproduction of the dominant textual relations of the original) are greater than
otherwise. Of course, from the point of view of the target literature the adopted
translational norms might for a while be too foreign and revolutionary, and if the new
trend is defeated in the literary struggle, the translation made according to its concep-
tions and tastes will never really gain ground.But if the new trend is victorious, the
repertoire (code) of translated literature may be enriched and become more Xexible.
Periods of great change in the home system are in fact the only ones when a translator is
prepared to go far beyond the options oVered to him by his established home repertoire
and is willing to attempt a diVerent treatment of text making. Let us remember that
under stable conditions items lacking in a target literature may remain untransferable if
the state of the polysystem does not allow innovations. But the process of opening the
system gradually brings certain literatures closer and in the longer run enables a situation
where the postulates of (translational) adequacy and the realities of equivalence may
overlap to a relatively high degree. This is the case of the European literatures, though in
some of them the mechanism of rejection has been so strong that the changes I am
talking about have occurred on a rather limited scale.
Naturally, when translated literature occupies a peripheral position, it behaves totally
diVerently. Here, the translator’s main eVort is to concentrate upon Wnding the best
ready-made secondary models for the foreign text, and the result often turns out to be a
non-adequate translation or (as I would prefer to put it) a greater discrepancy between
the equivalence achieved and the adequacy postulated.
In other words, not only is the socio-literary status of translation dependent upon its
position within the polysystem, but the very practice of translation is also strongly subor-
dinated to that position. And even the question of what is a translated work cannot be
answered a priori in terms of an a-historical out-of-context idealized state: it must be
determined on the grounds of the operations governing the polysystem. Seen from this
point of view, translation is no longer a phenomenon whose nature and borders are given
once and for all, but an activity dependent on the relations within a certain cultural system.
note
1. On the concept of ‘weak’ see ‘Interference in Dependent Literary Polysystems’ [Itamar Even-Zohar, Polysystem
Studies, Poetics Today, 11/1 (1990), 79–84].
bibliography
Toury, G. (1985) ‘Translational Solutions on the Lexical Level and the Dictionary’, in J. Tomaszczyk and
B. Lewandowska-Tomaszczyk (eds), International Conference on Meaning and Lexicography: Abstracts, Lodz,
Poland: University of Lodz.
Toury, G. (1985a) ‘A Rationale for Descriptive Translation Studies’, in T. Hermans (ed.) The Manipulation of
Literature: Studies in Literary Translation, London: Croom Helm, pp. 16–41.
434
recent and contemporary writings

5.5 Andre´ Lefevere
Andre´ Lefevere (1945–96), translation theorist and historian, translator, was born in
Belgium and was educated there (Ghent) and in England (Essex), teaching in Hong
Kong and Antwerp as well as the USA. He came to the University of Texas in Austin in
1984 to take over the Netherlandic Studies Program, and was also very active in the
Comparative Literature Program, where he contributed a vision of how the study of
translations illuminates our understanding of cultures. Lefevere was a leading theoretician
in the Weld of literary translation, associated with the descriptive and target-oriented
approach of such as Gideon Toury. He was also a proliWc author of polemical works
and editor of textbooks, such as Translation/History/Culture: A Sourcebook (1992), with
contributions to books, as well as translations of poetry from French, Dutch, Latin,
German, English, into Dutch and English. He co-authored books with Susan Bassnett,
such as Constructing Cultures: Essays on Literary Translation (1990) and was joint general
editor with Bassnett of the Routledge Translation Studies series. Not unlike James
Holmes, he insisted on the need for theory to be based in experience or practice. Lefevere
developed the notion of refraction or rewriting to characterize the process of successful
translation as a refocusing and redirecting of a source text into a target culture (see also his
Translation, Rewriting, and the Manipulation of Literary Fame, 1992).
From ‘Why Waste Our Time on Rewrites: The Trouble with Interpretation and the
Role of Rewriting in an Alternative Paradigm’, included in Theo Hermans (ed.), The
Manipulation of Literature: Studies in Literary Translation (London: Croom Helm, and
New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1985), 215–43
Criticism, which has often given the impression that it is trying to describe and interpret
works of literature or whole historical epochs from the outside, should be seen for
what it is: an attempt to inXuence the development of a given literature in a certain
direction, the direction which happens to coincide with the poetics and ideology of
the dominant critical school of the moment. To do so, criticism, in its historical avatar,
will not hestitate to rewrite history until it Wts the said ideology and poetics, nor
will it give up trying to inXuence the way in which a reader reads a certain work of
literature.
Deconstructionist criticism is, at last, beginning openly to acknowledge this state of
aVairs. Criticism is put squarely where it belongs: with literature, not with any kind of
analysis of literature as a social phenomenon and not, as has been the case for too long,
somewhere in between, occupying a fundamentally ambiguous position, and forced to
5.5 andre´ lefevere
435

occupy that position by the interplay of systemic constraints (how else could it ever hope
to become and/or remain dominant?), yet obscuring the workings of those constraints by
the very position it occupies. The realization that criticism is part of the rough and
tumble of the development of a literary system, not a description of that system, may
prove productive in opening the way for an analysis of literary systems as such. ‘Since’, in
Paul de Man’s words, ‘they are not scientiWc, critical texts have to be read with the same
awareness of ambivalence that is brought to the study of non-critical literary texts’ (1979:
110). They should no longer be taken for what they are not.
To recognize the fact that criticism, being part of a literary system, can never be
autonomous, will not spell the end of literary studies, as those who produce interpret-
ations and swear by them would have us believe, but it may spell the end of a study of
literature in which interpretation functions as the central concept. It may also spell the
breakthrough of another kind of study of literature which would not only take into
account the literature that is written, but also the ways in which what is written gets
rewritten, in the service of which ideology, which poetics, and with what results.
The study of literature would then no longer consist of the rewriting of literature in
various ways, and the theory of literature would not be ‘the attempt to govern interpret-
ations of particular texts by appealing to an account of interpretation in general’ [Knapp
& Michaels 1982: 723]. Rather, literary theory would try to explain how both the writing
and the rewriting of literature are subject to certain constraints, and how the interaction
of writing and rewriting is ultimately responsible, not just for the canonization of speciWc
authors or speciWc works and the rejection of others, but also for the evolution of a given
literature, since rewritings are often designed precisely to push a given literature in a
certain direction. Think, for example, of the often quoted rewritings of T’ang poetry in
Pound’s Cathay, which have helped to push the evolution of modern English-language
poetry in a certain direction. And if we were able to Wnd out about the evolution of a
given literature, if we could discover certain regular, recurring patterns, we might even try
to formulate a theory of what makes literature tick, a theory that would not focus
primarily on ‘literary practice as an intimate mental process of writing’ (Dubois: 1978:
34), since a few decades of focusing primarily on that aspect seem to have made us sadder
rather than wiser, but on ‘the concept (and the reality) of a socialized apparatus that
takes literature in charge and organizes it’ (ibid.). This does most emphatically not
mean that the writer is now relegated to the periphery, banished from the limelight for
ever, but merely that he or she will have to share the limelight with re-writers, since they
share the responsibility for the evolution of a literature, and to no small extent. (pp.
218–20)
Literature is one of the systems which constitute the (super)system known as society,
which also encompasses other systems, such as physics, law, and many more. A further
word of warning may be in order here: I use the term system with a fair degree of
436
recent and contemporary writings

Xexibility, ranging far and wide in history (the Medieval System in Western Europe, say)
and geography (the Euramerican system, or the Islamic system). I trust that the reader
will read the term with a corresponding Xexibility of mind, the result of a willing
suspension of attitude, so to speak.
Alternatively, a society, a culture is the environment of a literary system. The literary
system and the system of society are open to each other, they inXuence each other. There
is, in fact, a control factor in the literary system which sees to it that that system does not
fall too far out of step with other systems the society consists of. Or rather, it would be
more accurate to say that this control function is shared by two elements, one of which
belongs squarely in the literary system, whereas the other is to be found outside of that
system. The Wrst element tries to control the literary system from the inside, within the
parameters set by the second element. The Wrst element is represented by interpreters,
critics, reviewers, teachers of literature, translators. They will occasionally repress certain
works of literature because these works go all too blatantly against the dominant concept
of what literature should (be allowed to) be—the poetics—and of what society should
(be allowed to) be—the ideology, the world view—of a certain society at a certain
moment. But these rewriters will much more frequently adapt works of literature until
they can be claimed to correspond to the poetics and the ideology of their age. French
neo-classical translations of Homer, for example, in which all that was felt to be
‘uncouth’, such as the entrails of both men and animals, was resolutely left out, are an
obvious example of the process, as long as we realize that these features of the original
were not left out because the translators knew no Greek, or because the Greek-French
dictionaries of the period were strangely deWcient in certain areas, but because the
‘uncouth’ simply ran counter to the dominant poetics/ideology of that period—to such
an extent even that when Leconte de Lisle translated Homer about a hundred and Wfty
years later, and with all entrails in place, he was seriously accused, in certain quarters, of
having mutilated the original, whereas he was, in fact, restoring it.
The second control factor, the one which operates mostly outside the literary system
proper, will be called ‘patronage’ here, and it will be understood to mean something like
‘the powers (persons, institutions) which help or hinder the writing, reading and
rewriting of literature.’ Patronage is usually more interested in the ideology of literature
than in its poetics, or it could be said that the patron ‘delegates’ authority to the
interpreter where poetics is concerned. A paradigmatic example of this, which will
serve to make matters clearer, may be found in the relationship between the critic Sainte-
Beuve and his patron, the later Napoleon III. As Chris Baldick puts it, ‘the political
‘‘strong man’’ for whom Sainte-Beuve was to be the literary equivalent was Louis
Bonaparte and it was in the (far from ‘‘disinterested’’) Bonapartist journal Le Constitu-
tionnel and the oYcial government paper Le Moniteur that he published his Causeries’
(Baldick 1983: 13).
5.5 andre´ lefevere
437

Patronage consists of three elements, which can be seen to interact in various combin-
ations. There is an ideological component, which acts as a constraint on the choice and
development of both form and subject-matter. There is also an economic component: the
patron sees to it that writers and re-writers are able to make a living, by giving them a
pension, appointing them to some oYce (Chaucer, as is not too widely known outside the
circles frequented by medievalists, acted as ‘the King’s envoy, the controller of customs on
wool, hides and sheepskins or the subforester of North Petherton,’ cf. Bennett 1952: 5),
paying royalties on the sale of books, or employing writers and rewriters as teachers and
reviewers. There is, Wnally, also an element of status involved: ‘acceptance of patronage
signaled integration into an elite and acceptance of the style of life associated with that
elite’ (Clark & Clark 1977: 201). Goethe’s Tasso provides us with perhaps the most
succinct description of this element when he exclaims: ‘here is my fatherland, here is
the circle/in which my soul is pleased to dwell/I listen here, I pay attention to every hint/
here speak the voices of experience, science and taste’ (lines 449–452). ‘Here’ is, of course,
the court of Ferrara, and Goethe himself had, as is well known, found a patron in another
court. In more recent times, on the other hand, acceptance of patronage may simply mean
integration into the lifestyle of a support group, or subculture, which certainly need not
always be described in terms of an e´lite. (pp. 226–8)
All writing of literature takes place under the two constraints mentioned above, patron-
age and poetics, to which two more constraints must be added. One is what linguists
often call ‘universe of discourse’ these days, i.e. the knowledge, the learning, but also the
objects and the customs of a certain time, to which writers are free to allude in their work.
The other is the natural language in which the work is composed. For rewriters a Wfth
constraint must be added, namely that of the original work itself. The original is the locus
where ideology, poetics, universe of discourse and language come together, mingle
and clash.
All rewriting of literature, be it interpretation, criticism, historiography, the putting
together of anthologies, or translation, takes place under at least one of the constraints
mentioned, and implies the others. (pp. 232–3)
Translation is probably the most obvious instance of rewriting, since it operates under all
four constraints. Yet all diVerent forms of rewriting tend to work together in a literary
system. No translation, published as a book, is likely to give you just the translation. It is
nearly always accompanied by an introduction, which is a form of criticism cum
interpretation. If the translation is successful, acclaimed, taken up into the mainstream,
it is sure to be anthologized sooner or later, and historians of literature writing on
literatures other than those of which they know the languages, will rely on translations to
get their impressions of what a work is like. No one form of rewriting alone can establish
or disestablish, make or break the reputation of a writer and/or a work inside the
438
recent and contemporary writings

receiving culture, just as functional and inventory innovations in the poetics of the
receiving literature may be initiated by translation, but they are then reinforced by other
forms of rewriting.
Translation operates Wrst of all under the constraint of the original, itself the product
of constraints belonging to a certain time. Second, the language changes, quite dramat-
ically. Third, the universe of discourse very often poses insuperable problems for any
kind of so-called ‘faithful’ translation. Universe of discourse features are those features
particular to a given culture, and they are, almost by deWnition, untranslatable or at least
very hard to translate. They can be things, like ‘bistro’ in French, or concepts, like
‘vo¨lkisch’ in German. They belong to a certain time, like ‘vo¨lkisch’ in German or ‘tunica’
in Latin, and they go under with their time as far as their language of origin is concerned.
In translation, however, they need to be resuscitated, though nobody is quite sure in what
form: loan translation, calque, footnote, a combination of the three?
Voltaire’s translations of Shakespeare provide us with a good example of the poetolo-
gical adaptation works of literature are forced to undergo: the alexandrine takes the place
of the iambic pentameter and the alexandrine does, of course, rhyme. Shakespeare, in
other words, has to sound a lot more like Racine in order to be acceptable as Shakespeare
for the French audience of Voltaire’s time. In Victor Hugo’s time, on the other hand,
Shakespeare does not have to sound like Racine any more—proof of the fact that no
poetics remains dominant in a given system for ever. The same fact also highlights the
relationship between patronage and poetics: the poetics of Victor Hugo’s time is so
diVerent from that of Voltaire’s time because the patronage has shifted dramatically: the
people who extended patronage to Hugo were the people who, among other things,
survived the French Revolution and even proWted from it. Many of the people who were
Voltaire’s patrons, and went to applaud his tragedies which are now almost completely
forgotten, did not.
Writers are rewritten when their work passes from one literature into another, just as
they are rewritten inside a given literature. But why, it may be asked, do writers have to
submit to these indignities? First of all, they don’t really submit. In many cases they have
long been dead, in most they have precious little say in the matter. Writers are powerless
to control the rewriting of their work, which may be a bad thing; but so, in the long run,
is anybody else, which may not be such a bad thing after all. Second, if the writer does
not ‘submit’, he or she will simply not exist in the receiving literature at all. Third, these
indignities usually stop after a while. True, the foreign writer may have to adopt the
native guise, but once he or she is established in the receiving literature, new translations
tend to be made with the aim of revealing him or her on his or her own terms to the
receiving literature, and no longer on terms dictated by the receiving literature itself. The
example of Brecht’s Mother Courage in English/American, which I have analysed in more
detail elsewhere (Lefevere 1982), is instructive in this context.
5.5 andre´ lefevere
439

It is and remains a fact of literary life that patrons and critics are, in the Wnal analysis,
inXuential in deciding what will ‘make it’ in a given literature and what will not. They do
the screening and they pronounce the verdict. The Wght to inXuence that verdict one way
or the other is fought with weapons taken not primarily from the writings of the author
in question, but by means of rewritings of all kinds, which are used against each other
until a certain consensus is reached in systems with diVerentiated patronage. In systems
with undiVerentiated patronage the matter is usually settled with more eYciency and
dispatch: what does not Wt in with the dominant poetics or ideology is simply labelled
‘denatured’, or ‘vile’, or ‘trivial’, or even ‘popular and entertaining’.
Whether or not a literature dictates its terms to potential imports will often depend on
the self-image that literature has developed. If, like French literature in the eighteenth
century, it was convinced that it represented the very epitome of wit and elegance, it
would have every reason to screen out whatever did not fulWl its requirements, or else
change it in such a way as to make it acceptable. It did that to foreign works by means of
translations, it also did that to French works written in a French that was not quite the
French of Paris (and therefore dismissed as ‘popular’, even though, on occasion, ‘charm-
ingly naive’), and it also did that to French works not written to its speciWcations,
ideological or otherwise, such as those of the Marquis de Sade.
If, on the other hand, the potential receiving literature does not have all that much of a
self-image, like German literature in that same eighteenth century, it will not (and did
not) dictate any terms at all. On the contrary, it will accept at least the poetics of the
source literature as a potentially liberating inXuence and one that will, through patient
imitation, allow it Wnally to emerge from the depths of obscurity and to play an
important part on the stage of world literature as a whole.
Translation, then, is the visible sign of the openness of the literary system, of a speciWc
literary system. It opens the way to what can be called both subversion and transform-
ation, depending on where the guardians of the dominant poetics, the dominant
ideology stand. No wonder, therefore, that there have been all kinds of attempts to
regulate translation, to make sure that it does not exert any subversive inXuence on the
native system, to use it to integrate what is foreign by naturalizing it Wrst. Various
historical periods, dominated by completely diVerent poetics, have formulated rules for
the translator to follow, diVerent rules, of course, contradictory rules even, but rules
nonetheless. In fact it could be said that long after the normative (handbooks of) poetics
disappeared from Western literature—and those always contained at least one chapter on
translation—translation remained the only literary activity still supposed to be bound by
rules also, and with a vengeance, in the Romantic period which claimed to have
abolished all rules of any kind in poetic composition.
It should be clear, by now, that translation does not manage to subvert or transform a
literature all on its own. Translation does so in conjunction with other forms of rewriting,
440
recent and contemporary writings

which explains why translation should also be studied in conjunction with other forms of
rewriting, and not on its own. If the study of translation is to be made productive for the
study of literary theory and, especially, literary history, it is quite clear that translation can
no longer be analysed in isolation, but that it should be studied as part of a whole system
of texts and the people who produce, support, propagate, oppose, censor them. Or, to
put it diVerently, translation can be studied in isolation only if it is reduced to one half of
one of the constraints under which it is produced: that of the locutionary level of
language.
The translation of literature, then, must be heavily regulated because it is potentially—
and often actually—subversive, precisely because it oVers a cover for the translator to go
against the dominant constraints of his or her time, not in his or her own name which, in
most cases, would not happen to be all that well known anyway, but rather in the name
of, and relying on the authority of a writer who is considered great enough in another
literature so as not to be ignored in one’s own, at least not if one wants to safeguard that
literature against provincialism and other forms of atrophy. It goes without saying that all
this holds equally true for other forms of rewriting; translation only makes it all so much
more obvious, though still not as obvious as the production of drama. But then
translations are more diYcult to ferret out and destroy than drama. It is not too diYcult
to close down theatres, or to censor plays, or to forbid speciWc performances of speciWc
plays. It is much more diYcult to destroy all potentially subversive translations.
Not all translations produced do, of course, Wt the mould described here. A fair
number of them tend to be produced by ‘technicians’ rather than ‘prophets’. By
technicians I mean scholars of literature who are able to make works of literature
belonging to other systems available in their own systems through translations. This is
a sorely needed contribution to literary studies, since in the present state of literary aVairs
the natural language in which a work of literature is written does not infrequently
militate against that work being given wider exposure. As a result, certain systems of
literature (particularly the Islamic one, in my opinion) are rather less well known than
others, and generalizations in surveys and histories of literature are made on the basis of
what is best known. Most generalizations about literature have, in fact, been made on the
basis of a more or less unashamedly Eurocentric poetics, and, more precisely, of a certain
historical phase in the evolution of that poetics.
It is clear, however, that ‘literature’ cannot be adequately studied if it is, in practice,
restricted to the literature of Europe and the Americas, and that non-Western literary
systems, so often relegated to the mysterious and therefore largely ignorable status of the
‘exotic’, are as vital for any understanding of literature as is the Western system on its
own. Generalizations are, therefore, very often made in good faith, though just as often
on the basis of the kind of ignorance that could be relatively easily remedied by
translation.
5.5 andre´ lefevere
441

It should also be clear that the translations I have in mind at this point should be seen
as a heuristic tool to proWt the study of literature—which does, of course, not mean that
they should be forbidden to delight and please the reader as well—and not as an
‘interpretive’ weapon in the struggle between rival poetics inside the receiving system.
The aim of this kind of translation would be to make literature produced in other
systems available for description and analysis, which is why it should, ideally, be a
‘descriptive’ rather than an interpretive translation. In practice, of course, translations
will tend to be more or less descriptive or more or less interpretive, simply because
nobody is ever able to escape from the ideology and/or the poetics prevalent in the
literary system of his or her own time, to which his or her translation will be seen to
belong. (pp. 234–9)
references
Baldick, Chris. (1983). The Social Mission of English Criticism, 1848–1932, Oxford, Clarendon.
Bennett, H. S. (1952). English Books and Readers, Cambridge, Cambridge UP.
Clark, P. P. Clark, T. N. 1977. ‘Patrons, Publishers and Prizes: The Writer’s Estate in France’, in J. Ben-David &
T. N. Clark (eds.), Culture and its Creators, Chicago, Chicago UP: 197–225.
Dubois, Jean. 1978. L’institution de la litte´rature, Brussels, Editions Labor.
Knapp, S. & Michaels, W. B. 1982. ‘Against Theory’, Critical Inquiry, viii, 4: 723–42.
Lefevere, Andre´. 1982. ‘Mother Courage’s Cucumbers: Text, System and Refraction in a Theory of Literature’,
Modern Language Studies, xii, 4: 3–20.
Man, Paul de. 1979. Allegories of Reading, New Haven, Yale UP.
442
recent and contemporary writings

5.6 Mary Snell-Hornby
Mary Snell-Hornby, translation theorist, is professor of translation studies at the University of
Vienna. She is the author of Translation und Text (1996); she collaborated with Franz
Pochhacker and Klaus Kaindl on Translation Studies: An Interdiscipline (1994), and with a
number of scholars in asssembling Handbuch Translation (1999). Snell-Hornby writes alter-
nately in English and German and her work often mediates valuably between the German
and English-language dimensions of the Weld. Her approach to translation studies is broad-
based and interdisciplinary. Snell-Hornby is among those who wish to develop the discipline
holistically, avoiding the kind of specialization which would compartmentalize diVerent
genres of translation; hence she treats literary translation as inherently and culturally linked
to ‘practical’ translation. This is reXected in the excerpt below, from her book Translation
Studies, which, signiWcantly, is subtitled ‘An integrated approach’.
From Translation Studies: An Integrated Approach (1988; rev. ed., Amsterdam/
Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 1995), 26–35
1.3 Categorization and text-type
The tendency to categorize is innate in man and essential to all scientiWc development,
and to be able to categorize we need concepts. Our discussion so far has centred round
concepts (such as the unstable concept of equivalence) and the categories that ensue from
them. Looking back at the deWnitions and descriptions quoted so far in this study, we see
that these too fall into distinct categories, the most striking being the dichotomy, or rigid
polarization. In 20th century linguistics the dichotomy as a mode of categorization is
associated especially with Saussure, whose distinction between form and substance in
linguistic items is directly reXected in Nida’s dichotomy of formal vs. dynamic equiva-
lence and Catford’s dichotomy of formal correspondence vs. textual equivalence. An-
other kind of categorization is the typology, or system of box-like compartments, as in
Kade’s system of equivalence types, each of these being clear-cut and sharply delimited
from the others.
Both the dichotomy and the typology are fundamental to the classical theory of
categorization that is part of our Western culture. In recent years however, the validity
of this theory has been challenged within a number of cognitive sciences: relevant for our
present purpose is the work done in psychology by Eleanor Rosch and its development
within linguistics by George LakoV.1
5.6 mary snell-hornby
443

1.3.1
Prototype and gestalt
In his study Categories and Cognitive Models (1982), LakoV presents a brief survey of the
classical theory of categorization: this entails clear boundaries between categories without
borderline cases or fuzziness of any kind, shared properties as conditions for category
membership (the so-called ‘checklist theory’), uniformity among all members of the
category, inXexibility of category boundaries, internal deWnition, strictly objective condi-
tions for category membership, and the reductionist principle of ultimate primitives
(LakoV 1982: 15).
[ . . . ]
On the basis of experiments, Eleanor Rosch set out to test the classical theory of
categorization as expounded in objectivist psychology, where experiential aspects (per-
ception, mental imagery, bodily experiences, desires and expectations, social experiences,
understanding one thing in terms of another) were ruled out completely. Rosch’s
experiments disproved the classical theory on all counts and led to her own theory of
natural categorization (1973), according to which human beings categorize in the form of
prototypes—in other words, the natural category has a focus or ‘hard core’ and fades oV at
the edges. [ . . . ]
The notion of the ‘blurred edge’ as applied to concepts is of course by no means new:
this phrase was used by Wittgenstein in his Philosophical Investigations of 1953. Another of
Wittgenstein’s celebrated notions, that of ‘family resemblances,’ is also conWrmed by
Rosch’s experiments, where it is used in the sense of ‘perceived similarities between
representative and nonrepresentative members’ of the category concerned (LakoV 1982:
16). Thus category membership is not dependent on necessary and Wxed conditions, as in
the classical theory, but rather on ‘clusters of attributes that characterize the most
representative members’ (LakoV 1982: 16).
A second important conclusion Rosch made in her experiments is derived from what
she calls basic level results, her basic categories being situated between superordinate and
subordinate. Thus chair represents the basic level between the superordinate furniture
and the subordinate rocking-chair. The use of such taxonomies is of course nothing new
in linguistic theory (and was essential to structural semantics—cf. Snell-Hornby 1983),
but of interest for the present study are Rosch’s conclusions and the research they led to.
Rosch contends that the basic categories (such as chair) do not depend on the objects
themselves, but on the way people interact with them, perceive and use them. Hence
while a chair is imagined as something to sit on, there is no such interactional image
connected with the more abstract superordinate category furniture. Rosch’s notion of the
basic level category stimulated research in ethnobiology by Brent Berlin (Berlin et al.
1974), who concludes that this ‘folk-generic level’ (in his terminology) is in several
respects psychologically basic: at that level languages have simple names, categories
444
recent and contemporary writings

have greater cultural signiWcance and things are more easily remembered, but above all—
and for our purposes this is the essential point:
At that level, things are perceived holistically, as a single gestalt, while for identiWca-
tion at a lower level, speciWc details have to be picked out. (LakoV 1982: 20,
emphasis added)
It is the holistic principle of the gestalt that will be essential in our integrated approach to
translation, which for far too long was thought to be merely a matter of isolatable words.
Like the notion of ‘blurred edges,’the gestalt-concept links up with the European tradition:
the main principle of the school of Gestalt psychology, itself based on experimental studies
carried out by Max Wertheimer, Wolfgang Ko¨hler and Kurt Kofka (Wertheimer 1912), is
that the whole is more than the mere sum of its parts, and an analysis of the parts cannot
provide an understanding of the whole. This principle—a foregone conclusion in literary
studies—was until very recently totally ignored by philologists and linguists: the study of
language, and with it the ‘scientiWc,’ linguistically oriented translation theory, remained
atomistic, fragmented and outof touchwith language in its concrete realization. The change
took place in the 1970s, mainly—as in the case of the prototype and gestalt—via other
disciplines such as sociology (sociolinguistics), moral philosophy (the speech act theory of
Austin and Searle), ethnology and psychology, and with the development of text-linguistics
a more holistic approach to language was made possible.2 In America, Berlin’s ethnobiolo-
gical notion of the gestalt was taken up and developed as a linguistic concept by LakoV in his
study ‘Linguistic Gestalts’ (1977). At the same time the Finnish linguist Raimo Anttila
published an essay drawing on the same principles of Gestalt psychology with the title
‘Dynamic Welds and linguistic structure: A proposal for a Gestalt linguistics’ (1977), and in
Germany a book was published by Stephan LanghoV with the title Gestaltlinguistik (1980).
Even if the term Gestalt linguistics is used in only a few individual studies, the holistic
principle itself has become increasingly dominant in the study of language over the last few
years, and in recent translation theory it is of primary importance.
1.3.2 Text-typologies and the prototypology
The conclusion drawn by LakoV in Categories and Cognitive Models is that the theory of
natural categorization ‘requires not only a very diVerent theory of categories, but a
diVerent world-view to go with it’ (1982: 22). Central to this new theory are experiential
aspects: mental imagery, memory, social functions, human intentions, gestalt percep-
tion—‘all matters that have to do with human interaction with and functioning in the
world, rather than with objective properties of the world’ (LakoV 1982: 22).
Language as part of the world: this notion is central to the integrated approach
adopted in the present study, and at the same time it represents the point of departure
from the ‘world-view’ that dominated the linguistically oriented translation theory.
5.6 mary snell-hornby
445

As we have already seen, the main categorization-types governing translation theory
have been the dichotomy and the typology, the latter being a system of box-like
compartments as in Kade’s equivalence-types. The use of the typology in translation
theory extends beyond the concept of equivalence however: it was of basic importance as
a tool for categorizing texts.
In her pioneering study Mo¨glichkeiten und Grenzen der U¨bersetzungskritik (1971)
Katharina Reiss aims at deriving strictly objective criteria for assessing the quality of
translations. Her approach is based on a translation-related text-typology (1971: 31 V.),
whereby the text-type is presented as a ‘‘literary category of translation critique’’
(1971: 52 f.). Reiss’ typology is founded on Karl Bu¨hler’s organon-model (Bu¨hler
1965: 28), where the three functions of language are shown to be Darstellung (represen-
tation), Ausdruck (expression) and Appell (appeal). From this three-fold division Reiss
derives corresponding ‘dimensions of language’ and corresponding text-types.3 This she
represents in the following diagram:
Language——Representation—— Expression——Appeal
function
Language——logical—————–aesthetic———dialogic
dimension
Text-type——informative———–expressive——–operative
Reiss then oVers criteria for translation according to the respective texttype: a metaphor in
an ‘expressive’ text, for example, must be rendered as a metaphor in the translation, but
this is not necessary for a metaphor in an ‘informative’text (1971: 62). The same principle
applies for idioms: the Spanish idiom ‘miente ma´s que el gobierno,’ for example, would—
according to Reiss—be rendered into German as ‘er lu¨gt allzuviel (he often lies)’ in an
‘informative’text, whereas in an ‘expressive’text a better translation would be the German
idiom ‘er lu¨gt wie gedruckt (he lies like mad)’ (1971: 81 f.). Such prescriptive generaliza-
tions can be extremely misleading, and indeed Reiss has been severely criticized (cf. Koller
1979) for being too rigid. As Reiss herself actually indicates (1971: 32), most texts are in fact
hybrid forms, multi-dimensional structures with a blend of sometimes seemingly con-
Xicting features: Shakespeare’s sonnets contain technical terminology of his day, while
modern economic texts abound in lexicalized metaphor, and advertisements (which
would be categorized by Reiss as strictly ‘operative’ (cf. Reiss 1976)) are characterized by
the varying methods they use to present information. As a starting-point Bu¨hler’s model
undoubtedly has great possibilities for translation theory; as a frame of reference for
objective criteria Reiss’typology, as presented here, though modiWed in Reiss (1976), is too
clear-cut for real-life translation in all its complexity. What is wrong is the use of box-like
categories as a kind of prescriptive grid, creating an illusion of the scientiWc objectivity that
was required of academic thinking at the time.
446
recent and contemporary writings

Reiss’s text-typology demonstrates the shortcomings of the classical theory of categor-
ization. In its concrete realization language cannot be reduced to a system of static and
clear-cut categories. In the present study the rigid typology of the objectivist and
reductionist tradition will therefore be replaced by the prototypology,4 a dynamic,
gestalt-like system of relationships, whereby the various headings represent an idealized,
prototypical focus and the grid-system gives way to blurred edges and overlappings.
Blend-forms are part of the conceptual system and not the exception. Whereas the
typology aims at separation and sharp delimitation, the prototypology aims at focussing
and at subtle diVerentiation.
1.4 An integrated approach
The ideas discussed so far will now be presented in concrete form as a basis for an
integrated concept of translation studies. In the diagram [below] a system of relationships
is established between basic text-types—as prototypes—and the crucial aspects of trans-
lation. On the horizontal plane the diagram represents a spectrum or cline,5 where sharp
divisions have been replaced by the notion of gradual transition, hence no demarcation
lines have been drawn in. At the same time, on the vertical plane, the diagram represents a
stratiWcational model which, in accordance with the gestalt-principle, proceeds from the
most general level (A) at the top, downwards to the most particular level (F) at the
bottom—or, in other words, from the macro- to the micro-level.
Speakability
Historical
Linguistics
Sound/
Rhythm
Dialectology
Phonological
effects
Terminology / Documentation
Standardization
LSP Syntax
Text-linguistics
Contrastive Grammar
Contrastive Semantics
Sociolinguistics
Pragmalinguistics
Psycholinguistics
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Literary Translation
General Language Translation
Special Language Translation
Rible
Stage/
Film
Lyric
Poetry
Modern
Literature
Newspaper/General
Information texts
Advertising L.
Legal L. Economic L. Medicine
Science/
Techn
Cl. Anti-
quity
Literature
before 1900
Children's
literature
Light
fiction
Cultural History/
Literary Studies
Creative extension
of language norm
Recreation of
language dimensions
Shifting of perspective
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
Sociocultural and Area
Studies
Narrowing scope of
interpretation
Grade of differentiation
Communicative function
of the translation
Relevance of
equivalence
criteria
Information function
Invariance
Studies of
Special Subjects
Conceptual
identity
Text-type and relevant criteria for translation
5.6 mary snell-hornby
447

Level A presents the conventional areas of translation which up to now have been kept
all too separate: on the left literary translation, traditionally the province of poets and
scholars and once the only area thought worthy of the theorist, and on the right special
language translation, traditionally inferior and the main concern of the translation
schools. ‘General language translation’ is still a vague concept which up to now has
only been negatively deWned as ‘not literary’ and ‘not technical,’6 but which is nonethe-
less implicitly the concern of the linguistically oriented U¨bersetzungswissenschaft. In this
concept the historical dichotomy has been replaced by a Xuid spectrum, whereby, for
example, prototypically literary devices such as word-play and alliteration can be accom-
modated both in ‘general’ newspaper texts and in the language of advertising, and
conversely prototypically technical terms from the language of science or culture-
bound items from the ‘general’ area of politics or everyday living can be explained and
interpreted as literary devices.
Level B presents a prototypology of the basic text-types, from the Bible to the language of
modern technology, which are the main concern of the translator. While traditional theory
concentrated on the items situated at the extreme left of the spectrum, the Bible, the
monuments of Classical Antiquity and the great works of the European tradition, particu-
larly Shakespeare’s plays, only a few of these areas have been given detailed attention in
modern theory, and even then the focus has been limited to speciWc aspects (for Bible
translation see Nida and Taber 1969, for lyric poetry Levy´ 1969 and Beaugrande 1978). The
special problems of children’s literature and stage-translation until recently only received
scant attention (cf. Verch 1976, Reiss 1982 on children’s literature and Snell-Hornby 1984,
Bassnett-McGuire 1985 and Schultze 1986 on the translation of drama). At the other end of
the scale are the special language text-types, the main fare of the modern professional
translator; in the training institutes the major areas are law, economics, medicine, science
and technology, and these are now being dealt with intensively in academic studies (cf.
Schmitt 1986; Stellbrink 1984a and 1985; Gerzymisch-Arbogast 1986 and 1987). On the
diagram limited space permitted only a narrow selection of basic text-types; there are of
course many others, along with numerous blend forms.
Level C shows the non-linguistic disciplines—or areas of so-called ‘extralinguistic
reality’—which are inseparably bound up with translation. The terms are placed at the
point of the cline where they are thought to apply most, but again, we are concerned here
with the dynamic concept of focus and not with grid-like compartments involving rigid
classiWcation; the arrows indicate the range of application or, where they overlap,
interaction. Essential for special language translation, for example, is specialized factual
knowledge of the subject concerned, while literary translation presupposes a background
in literary studies and cultural history. A necessary precondition for all translation is
knowledge of the sociocultural background, both of the source culture and the target
culture concerned.
448
recent and contemporary writings

Level D names important aspects and criteria governing the translation process itself,
an extremely complex area which at this point is dealt with only brieXy, as most of them
form the main topic of chapters to follow. D(i) focusses on the source text: crucial here is
the understanding of the text, which does not simply involve familiarity with words and
structures, but presupposes the ability to penetrate the sense of the text, both as a complex
multidimensional whole and at the same time in its relationship to the cultural back-
ground. With certain special language texts involving standardized concepts (particularly
in science and technology) the scope of interpretation is narrowed down considerably.
D(ii) names focal criteria for the envisaged translation: the notion of invariance can only
apply in cases of conceptual identity (standardized terminology), while the concept of
equivalence is here still considered to be of some relevance for certain types of special
language translation where the focus is on isolatable lexical items. Basically however, our
conception of translation supports the more dynamic approach pioneered by Ho¨nig and
Kumaul (1982), whose dominant criterion is the communicative function of the target text
(the stage indicated in D(iii)), which governs what they call the ‘notwendigen Grad der
DiVerenzierung’ (the necessary degree of precision) (see Ho¨nig and Kumaul 1982: 58 V.).
With texts involving the creative extension of the language norm—this applies mainly but
not exclusively to literary texts—translation involves recreating language dimensions and
results in a shift of perspective in the target text.
Level E names those areas of linguistics which are relevant for translation. Of basic
importance is text-linguistics in all its aspects, from the analysis of the macrostructure,
thematic progression and sentence perspective (cf. Gerzymisch-Arbogast 1986) to coher-
ence and cohesion. Older literature requires knowledge of Historical Linguistics, while
special language translation presupposes familiarity with work in terminology and access
to data-banks. Contrastive Linguistics, both in syntax and lexicology, has great potential
for translation theory, although up to now its results in this respect have been meagre.
Other disciplines of relevance for translation as an act of communication within a
speciWc situational context would be sociolinguistics (as the study of language varieties),
pragmalinguistics (in particular the speech act theory), and psycholinguistics (as regards
the interdependence of language, experience and thought). And Wnally, the lowest level F
names phonological aspects of speciWc relevance for certain areas of translation, as for
example, speakability in stage translation, alliteration and rhythm in advertising lan-
guage.
With this prototypological framework the foundations have been laid for our con-
ception of translation studies as an integrated and independent discipline that covers all
kind of translation, from literary to technical. In this view, translation draws on many
disciplines, but is not equal to the sum total of their overlapping areas and is not
dependent on any one of them. As a discipline in its own right, translation studies
needs to develop its own methods based, not on outside models and conventions from
5.6 mary snell-hornby
449

other disciplines, but on the complexities of translation. The present study is intended as
a step in that direction.
At this stage I should like to summarize, in four brieXy worded hypotheses, the results
of what has been established so far:
(1) Translation studies should not be considered a mere oVshoot of another discipline
or sub-discipline (whether Applied Linguistics or Comparative Literature): both
the translator and the translation theorist are rather concerned with a world
between disciplines, languages and cultures.
(2) Whereas linguistics has gradually widened its Weld of interest from the micro- to
the macro-level, translation studies, which is concerned essentially with texts
against their situational and cultural background, should adopt the reverse per-
spective: as maintained by the gestalt psychologists, an analysis of parts cannot
provide an understanding of the whole, which must be analyzed from ‘the top
down’.
(3) Translation studies has been hampered by classical modes of categorization, which
operate with rigid dividing-lines, binary opposites, antitheses and dichotomies.
Frequently these are mere academic constructs which paralyze the Wner diVeren-
tiation required in all aspects of translation studies. In our approach the typology
is replaced by the prototypology, admitting blends and blurred edges, and the
dichotomy gives way to the concept of a spectrum or cline against which phe-
nomena are situated and focussed.
(4) While the classic approach to the study of language and translation has been to
isolate phenomena (mainly words) and study them in depth, translation studies is
essentially concerned with a web of relationships, the importance of individual
items being decided by their relevance in the larger context of text, situation and
culture.
notes
1. See especially LakoV 1977 and 1982; also LakoV and Johnson 1980.
2. In practice, only those branches of text-linguistics are relevant for translation which concentrate on concrete texts
as against abstract models (cf. Beaugrande and Dressler 1981 and Stolze 1982: 55 V.). In this study the term text-
linguistics is used in the concrete sense in its relevance for translation.
3. In this study the term dimension is extended beyond the threefold division proposed by Reiss. The English term
text-type as used here includes German Texttyp (as used by Reiss) and Textsorte (as in diagram on p. 447).
4. The term Prototypologie goes back to Neubert (Brussels 1984, personal communication), who applies the concept
of the prototype to lexicography in Neubert 1986a.
5. This conception of the cline as well as that of the stratiWcational model go back to the British linguist M. A. K.
Halliday (see Halliday 1976).
6. The German term Gemeinsprache is matched in English by both general language (as against technical language)
and ordinary language (as against literary language).
450
recent and contemporary writings

references
Anttila, Raimo. 1977. ‘Dynamic Welds and linguistic structure: A proposal for a Gestalt linguistics,’ in: Sprache 23,
1–10.
Bassnett-McGuire, Susan. 1985. ‘Ways Through the Labyrinth: Strategies and Methods for Translating Theatre
Texts,’ in: T. Hermans (ed.), The Manipulation of Literature. London: Crooms Helm, 87–102.
Beaugrande, Robert de. 1978. Factors in a Theory of Poetic Translating, Assen: Van Gorcum.
Berlin, Brent, Dennis E. Breedlove and Peter H. Raaven. 1974. Principles of Tzeltal Plant ClassiWcation, New York:
Academic Press.
Bu¨hler, Karl. 1965. Sprachtheorie, Stuttgart: Fischer.
Gerzymisch-Arbogast, Heidrun. 1986. ‘Zur Relevanz der Thema-Rhema-Gliederung fu¨r den U¨ bersetezungsprozeß,’
in: M. Snell-Hornby (ed.), U¨bersetungswissenschaft—Eine Neuorientierung, Tu¨bingen: Francke, 160–183.
Gerzymisch-Arbogast, Heidrun. 1987. Zur Thema-Rhema-Gliederung in amerikanischen Wirtschaftstexten. Eine
exemplarische Analyse, Tu¨bingen: Narr.
Halliday, M. A. K. 1976. System and Function in Language. Selected Papers, ed. G. R. Kress, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Ho¨nig, Hans G. and Paul Kußmaul. 1982. Strategie der U¨bersetzung. Ein Lehr- und Arbeitsbuch, Tu¨bingen: Narr.
Koller, Werner. 1979. Einfu¨hrung in die U¨bersetzungswissenschaft, Heidelberg: Quelle & Meyer.
LakoV, George. 1977. ‘Linguistic Gestalts,’ in: Proceedings of the Thirteenth Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic
Society, Chicago, 236–287.
LakoV, George. 1982. Categories and Cognitive Models. Trier: LAUT.
LakoV, George and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We Live By, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
LanghoV, Stephan. 1980. Gestaltlinguistik. Eine ganzheitliche Beschreibung syntaktisch-semantischer Sprachfunktionen
am Beispiel modaler InWnitivkonstruktionen des Deutschen und Englischen, Frankfurt: Lang.
Levy´, Jirˇı´. 1969. Die literarische U¨bersetzung. Theorie einer Kunstgattung, transl. Walter Schamschula, Frankfurt:
Athena¨um.
Neubert 1986a. ‘Dichtung und Wahrheit des zweisprachigenWo¨rterbuchs,’ in: Sitzungsberichte der Sa¨chsischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Vol. 126, 4, 1–23.
Nida, Eugene A. and Charles R. Taber. 1969. The Theory and Practice of Translation, Leiden: Brill.
Reiss, Katharina. 1971. Mo¨glichkeiten und Grenzen der U¨bersetzungskritik. Kategorien und Kriterien fu¨r eine sachge-
rechte Beurteilung von U¨bersetzungen, Mu¨nchen: Hueber.
Reiss, Katharina. 1976. Texttyp und U¨bersetzungsmethode. Der operative Text, Kronberg: Scriptor.
Reiss, Katharina. 1982. ‘Zur U¨ bersetzung von Kinder- und Jugendbu¨chern. Theorie und Praxis,’ in: Lebende
Sprachen, 1, 7–13.
Rosch, Eleanor. 1973. ‘Natural categories,’ in: Cognitive Psychology 4, 328–350.
Schmitt, Peter A. 1986. ‘Die ‘Eindeutigkeit’ von Fachtexten: Bemerkungen zu einer Fiktion,’ in: M. Snell-Hornby
(ed.), U¨bersetungswissenschaft—Eine Neuorientierung, Tu¨bingen: Francke, 252–282.
Schultze, Brigitte. 1986. ‘Theorie der Dramenu¨bersetzung—1960 bis heute. Ein Bericht zur Forschungslage,’
unpubl. ms.
Snell-Hornby, Mary. 1983. Verb-descriptivity in German and English. A contrastive study in semantic Welds, Heidelberg:
Winter.
Snell-Hornby, Mary. 1984. ‘Sprechbare Sprache—Spielbarar Text. Zur Problematik der Bu¨hnenu¨bersetzung,’ in:
R. Watts and U. Weidmann (eds.), Modes of Interpretation. Essays Presented to Ernst Leisi, Tu¨bingen: Narr, 101–116.
Stellbrink, Hans-Ju¨rgen. 1984a. ‘Die Aufgaben eines Fremdsprachendienstes beim Abschluß von fremsprachigen
Vertra¨gen,’ Guest Lecture Hildesheim 12.11. 1984, unpubl. ms.
Stellbrink, Hans-Ju¨rgen. 1985. ‘Die Ta¨tigkeit des Dolmetschers und U¨ bersetzers in der Industrie: Meistens nicht wie
im Lehrbuch,’ Guest Lecture Heidelberg 1.2. 1985, unpubl. ms.
Verch, Maria. 1976. ‘Zum Problem englisch-deutscher U¨ bersetzungen von Jugendliteratur,’ in: Revue d’Allemagne
VIII, 3, 466–473.
Wertheimer, Max. 1912/1959. Productive Thinking, Chicago: Chicago University Press.
5.6 mary snell-hornby
451

5.7 Ethnopoetics: Translation of the Oral
and of Oral Performance—Dennis Tedlock
and Jerome Rothenberg
Ethnopoetics, a movement originating in the 1950s and 1960s, which now has a substantial
academic presence in the USA, combines anthropology/ethnography/linguistics and
poetry in an attempt to confront the problem not just of representing or preserving the
vanishing oral literary legacies of the world, but also of connecting them with living
literature. It seems part of a broader impulse, harking back to nineteenth-century Ro-
manticism, with its interest in the folk ethos, as well as to avant-garde experiments and
Modernist, especially Dadaist, interest in ‘primitivism’ and performance. Ethnopoetics,
however, is not to be dismissed as mere exhibitionism. It challenges the traditional
emphasis on semantics, taking its lead from the Weldwork of anthropologists. For the
poets who were directly involved in this movement, and others indirectly aVected,
ethnopoetics represented a way out of, or at least through, the absorption in self, and in
the written as against the oral. Post-colonial aspirations are evident in Jerome Rothenberg’s
remark that ‘a poetics without a concurrent ethnopoetics is stunted, partial, therefore
faulty in a time like ours that can only save itself by learning to confront its multiple
identities and deWnitions—its contradictions, therefore, & its problematics’1. The con-
nections between ethnopoetics and ecology are here clearly relevant.
The origin and theoretical basis of the ethnopoetics movement is addressed below by
the anthropologist Dennis Tedlock and the poet Jerome Rothenberg, who were its
principal originators. This is followed by accounts of ethnopoetics in action.
Dennis Tedlock is Professor of Anthropology at the State University of New York/BuValo;
his Welds of research include oral performances of Mongol shamans, Zu~ni verbal arts,
Yoruba spoken and written verbal arts. Among his books are: The Human Design: 2000
Years of Mayan Literature; Breath on the Mirror: Mythic Voices and Visions of the Living
Maya, (1997); The Dialogic Emergence of Culture (1995); and Teachings from the American
Earth: Indian Religion and Philosophy (1992). Tedlock has also edited a number of
periodicals, including the American Anthropologist and Alcheringa/Ethnopoetics, ‘A First
Magazine of the World’s Tribal Poetries’, co-founded in 1970 and co-edited with Jerome
Rothenberg (1970–6), editor-in-chief (1977–80).
1 In conversation with Gavin Selerie, The Riverside Interviews, iv, ed. G. Selerie (London: Binnacle Press,
1984), 58.
452
recent and contemporary writings

From a State University of New York/BuValo course description by Dennis Tedlock
Ethnopoetics is a decentred poetics, an attempt to hear and read the poetries of distant
others, outside the Western tradition as we know it now. [ . . . ]
Ethnopoetics does not merely contrast the poetics of ‘ethnics’ with just plain poetics,
but implies that any poetics is always an ethnopoetics. [ . . . ]
Practitioners of ethnopoetics treat the relationship between performances and texts as
a Weld for experimentation. [ . . . ] An ethnopoetic score not only takes account of the
words but silences, changes in loudness and tone of voice, the production of sound
eVects, and the use of gestures and props. [ . . . ]
Jerome Rothenberg (b. 1931) is an American poet, editor, and translator. His concern for
the relationship between ‘primitive’ and modern poetry led in 1968 to the publication of
Technicians of the Sacred. He ventured further into this Weld, collaborating with Seneca
songmen in the translation of a series of Navajo horse-blessing songs. Rothenberg called
his approach ‘total translation’, attempting to account for every element in the original
language, including the so-called ‘meaningless’ vocables, word distortions, and redundan-
cies. This project led to another anthology, Shaking the Pumpkin: Traditional Poetry of the
Indian North Americas (1972). With Dennis Tedlock (see above), Rothenberg co-edited
Alcheringa; with Diane Rothenberg he also edited Symposium of the Whole: A Range of
Discourse Toward An Ethnopoetics (1983). Another and related aspect of his work is the
exploration of his own ancestral themes, speciWcally the world of Jewish Poland.
From ‘Ethnopoetics at the Millennium’, a talk for the Modern Language Association of
America (29 December 1994) by Jerome Rothenberg, available at <http://epc.buValo.
edu/authors/rothenberg/ethnopoetics.html> (accessed 7 May 2004)
[ . . . ] For me such an ethnopoetics—which looks away from the modern & experi-
mental, to focus on ancient & autochthonous cultures (often under threat of mass
extinction or long since blown away)—is the product (as study & praxis) of our most
dedicated & outrageous modernism, even surviving (under Wre) into that postmodernism
taken as the older movement’s early & forever problematic oVspring. Early, I say,
remembering that it was Tristan Tzara [ . . . ], who in his Weimar manifesto-lecture of
1922 declared: ‘You are mistaken if you take Dada for a modern school, or as a reaction
against the schools of today. . . . Dada is not at all modern. It is more in the nature of an
almost Buddhist religion of indiVerence.’ [ . . . ]
The decade that followed [after the First World War] also saw a revival of the concern
that we later came to call ecological, with an environment—local & global—under
increasing developmental pressure, & the view—emerging from that concern—that just
5.7 ethnopoetics
453

those cultures that were repositories of the old poetries were the models thereby for a
more sane relation to the natural world & its other-than-human as well as its human
inhabitants. Gradually this would open up to a concern & need for what sacred language
in traditional bioregional cultures [ . . . ]
It was while preparing my second ethnopoetic gathering, Shaking the Pumpkin, that
I received a packet from Dennis Tedlock including his translation—I would later call it his
total translation—of a Zu~ni Indian [oral] narrative called The Boy & the Deer. What it had
to say about the nature of talking & story-telling as those related to poetry (I mean our
poetry as well as theirs) was one of the most electrifying experiences in my life as a poet. It
also led quickly to our founding of Alcheringa as an ongoing venue (we hoped) for a new
ethnopoetics: a convergence of poets & scholars toward a re-imagining of poetry based on
its actual development and presence in the life of many diVerent peoples & cultures.
From ‘On the Translation of Style in Oral Narrative’, by Dennis Tedlock, Journal of
American Folklore, 84 331–4 (1971), 114–33
[ . . . ] A discriminating reader, hoping to Wnd collections of American Indian narratives
which are at one and the same time thoroughly authentic and respectable as literature, is
likely to be disappointed. When he [sic] explores the narratives published before the Weld
methods of Franz Boas1 were widely employed, he may decide that their style seems more
Victorian than Indian. [ . . . ]
Wishing for greater authenticity, our reader may turn at last to the vast scholarly
collections produced by Boasian anthropologists. But he will soon wonder whether the
original style of these narratives was as choppy and clumsy as that of most English
translations. If he takes these translations to represent, as Boas claimed, ‘faithful render-
ing of the native tales’, and if he remains disappointed with popularizations, he may end
by agreeing with La Farge2 who said, ‘the literary value of a great deal of primitive
literature, whether myths or tales, is nil. That of much of the rest is apparent, in the raw
form, only to connoisseurs, while those who undertake to retell some of it often achieve
only emasculation.’
Unless it is true that many of the oral narratives of non-Western peoples have little or
no literary value, and that what value they do have is untranslatable, then something has
gone wrong along the way from the oral performance to the printed page. [ . . . ]
The Zu~ni narratives collected by Frank Hamilton Cushing3 in the 1880s have always
attracted more attention than others. [ . . . ]
The most distressing of all Cushing’s inventions are his moralistic passages. [ . . . ] The
didactic content of Zu~ni tales is usually either implicit or addressed by one tale character
to another, and it is never addressed by the narrator directly to his audience. But Cushing
begins one tale this way: ‘Listen, ye young ones and youths, and from what I say draw
454
recent and contemporary writings

inference. For behold! The youth of our nation in these recent generations have become
less sturdy than of old; else what I relate had not happened.’ [ . . . ]
In some cases the neglect of translation is doubtless related to a belief that style, or at least
the better part of it, is simply untranslatable. [ . . . ] If [this] view is combined with the view
that content survives even bad translation then there is no room at all for an art of
translation. It may be that no one scholar has ever held both these views simultaneously in
their pure form, but many scholars of the past four generations might as well have done so.
[ . . . ]
While it may be that past translations of Zu~ni narratives have suVered somewhat from
neglect of the ‘‘linguistic’’ features of style discussed above, they have suVered much more
from neglect of ‘oral’ or ‘paralinguistic’ features such as voice quality (tone of voice),
loudness, and pausing. Boas wrote long ago that ‘the form of modern prose is largely
determined by the fact that it is read, not spoken, while primitive prose is based on the art
of oral delivery and is therefore, more closely related to modern oratory than to the
printed literary style.’ [ . . . ]
Loudness and voice quality are obviously worth noting, but it seems to me that
pausing is foremost among the paralinguistic devices that give shape to Zu~ni narrative
and distinguish it from written prose, and the same could probably be said of many other
oral narrative traditions. [ . . . ]
The treatment of oral narrative as dramatic poetry has a number of analytical advantages.
Some of the features or oral narrative which have been branded ‘primitive,’ on the basis of
comparisons with written prose Wction, can now be understood as ‘poetic’ instead. It has
been said for example, that while most of our own prose narrative is highly ‘realistic’,
primitive narrative is full of fantasy: a stone moves about like an animal, an animal speaks
like a man, a man jumps through a hoop and becomes a coyote. Yet when we encounter
gross and unexplained distortions of reality in Yeats, for example, we are apt to call them
not ‘primitive’ but ‘dream-like’ or ‘mystical’ and to regard them as highly poetic. [ . . . ]
Another distinguishing feature of ‘primitive’ narrative, according to Boas and many
others, is repetition, ranging from the level of words or phrases to that of whole episodes.
[ . . . ] But the same device is common in epic poetry [ . . . ]. Unless we want to call epic
poetry ‘primitive’, this particular kind of repetition must be properly understood as ‘oral’
and not ‘primitive,’ and the same thing goes for the repeated use of stock formulas in
both epic poetry (epithets, for example) and Zu~ni narrative [ . . . ]
The treatment of oral narrative as dramatic poetry, then, clearly promises many
analytical rewards. It should also be obvious that there are immediate esthetic rewards.
The apparent lack of literary value in many past translations is not a reXection but
a distortion of the originals, caused by the dictation process, an emphasis on content,
5.7 ethnopoetics
455

a pervasive deafness to oral qualities, and a Wxed notion of the boundary between poetry
and prose.
notes
1. Franz Boas (1858–1942), German born and educated anthropologist, later Professor at Columbia University,
established a new concept of culture and race, in which everything was important to the study of culture, so that
collecting all manner of date was essential. He believed in historical particularism, insisting that the diVerences
between peoples were the result of historical, social and geographic conditions and all populations had complete
and equally developed cultures. His views thus ran counter to earlier evolutionist ones.
2. Oliver La Farge (1901–63), American writer and anthropologist, who conducted archaeological expeditions to
Arizona and ethnological ones to Guatemala and Mexico. He also wrote a novel of Navajo life for which he was
awarded the 1930 Pulitzer Prize.
3. Cushing’s translation may be found in Frank Hamilton Cushing, ‘Zu~ni Fetiches,’ Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology, 2 (1883). Frank Hamilton Cushing (1857–1900), pioneer ethnologist whose work at Zun˜i
Pueblo made him one of the most important white observers of Native American culture. In his methods and
thinking, he was a forerunner of anthropologists today. Cushing lived among the Zun˜i, being one of the Wrst
professional anthropologists to live with the people he was studying, not adopting the typical stance of detached
and superior observer. His analysis of Zun˜i life took him several steps along the path of cultural relativism which
was later to become critical to the development of anthropology as a discipline.
From ‘Total Translation: An Experiment in the Translation of American Indian Poetry’,
from Jerome Rothenberg, Pre-Faces & Other Writing (1981); repr. in Writing through
Translations and Variations (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 2004).
A Wnal recorded version appeared nearly ten years after the essay as 6 Horse Songs for 4 Voices
(New Wilderness Audiographics, 1978), available at <http://www.ubu.com/sound/>
along with a number of other performance works.]
The big question, which I was immediately aware of with both poetries [Seneca and
Navago], was if & how to handle those elements in the original works that weren’t
translatable literally. As with most Indian poetry, the voice carried many sounds that
weren’t, strictly speaking, ‘words.’ These tended to disappear or be attenuated in
translation, as if they weren’t really there. [ . . . ]
Here’s an immediate example of what I mean. In the Wrst of Frank Mitchell’s seventeen
[Navago] Horse Songs, the opening line comes out as follows in McAllester’s transcription:
dzo—wowode sileye shi, dza—na desileye shiyi dzanadi sileye shiya’e
but the same segment given ‘as spoken’ reads:
dz____di sila´ shi dz____di sila´ shi dz____di sila´ shi
which translates as ‘over-here it-is-there-(&) mine’ repeated three times. So does the line
as sung if all you’re accounting for is the meaning. In other words, translate only for
meaning & you get the three-fold repetition of an unchanging single statement; but in
456
recent and contemporary writings

the Navajo each time it’s delivered there’s a sharp departure from the spoken form: thus
three distinct sound-events, not one-in-triplicate!
Another thing I try not to overlook is that the singers & I, while separated in Seneca,
are joined in English. That they have to translate for me is a problem at Wrst, but the
problem suggests its own solution. Since they’re bilingual, sometimes beautifully so, why
not work from that instead of trying to get around it? [ . . . ]
(nana na) Sun—(Yeye ye) Standing-within (neye ye) Boy
(Heye ye) truly his horses
(’Eye ye) abalone horses
(’Eye ye) made of sunrays
(Neye ye) their bridles
(Gowo wo) coming on my right side
(Jeye yeye) coming into my hand (yeye neyowo ’ei).
Now this, which even so doesn’t show the additional word distortions that turn up in the
singing, might be brought closer to English word order & translated for meaning alone
as something like
Boy who stands inside the Sun
with your horses that are
abalone horses
bridles
made of sunrays
rising on my right side
coming to my hand
etc.
Translation is carry-over. It is a means of delivery & of bringing to life. It begins with
a forced change of language, but a change too that opens up the possibility of greater
understanding. Everything in these song-poems is Wnally translatable: words, sounds,
voice, melody, gesture, event, etc., in the reconstitution of a unity that would be shattered
by approaching each element in isolation. A full & total experience begins it, which only
a total translation can fully bring across.
5.7 ethnopoetics
457

5.8 Louis and Celia Zukofsky
The son of Russian orthodox Jewish immigrants, his native language Yiddish, Louis
Zukofsky (1904–78) was the founder of the Objectivist movement in poetry in 1931,
along with with George and Mary Oppen of the Objectivist Press. Working as a teacher,
mostly at the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, Zukofsky drew on many sources, includ-
ing the avant-garde modernist work of Ezra Pound, W. C. Williams, and Wallace Stevens;
his own major work, the epic poem ‘A’ is perhaps ‘the most hermetic poem in English’
(Hugh Kenner). With his wife, the composer Celia Thaew, Zukofsky translated the Latin
poetry of Catullus musically, trying, as he put it, ‘to breathe with’ the source text (see
below). The translators retain the rhythm and the actual number of syllables of the
original, a ‘never-never land of phonetic aping’, according to Burton RaVel (Arion,
1969). Even Guy Davenport, an admirer of Zukofsky’s work, including his translations,
regarded the translation, in this case from The Book of Job, as ‘a feat so astounding as to
seem mad’ (Contemporary Authors, 1994).
Andre´ Lefevere (Translating Poetry: Seven Strategies and a Blueprint (Assen: Van Gorcum,
1975) describes the Zukofskys’ approach as ‘phonemic’, quoting Zukofsky’s preface:
‘This translation of Catullus follows the sound, rhythm and syntax of his Latin—tries,
as is said, to breathe the ‘‘literal’’ meaning with him.’ In other words, the translators here
confront directly what may be regarded as the impossibility of achieving identity of sound
and at the same time some degree of semantic Wdelity. They attempt to reproduce the
sound or some semblance of it, to the exclusion of all except a (marginally) defendable
modicum of sense. Lefevere analyses one of the results of this procedure and shows how far
the translator is driven from the source text, even if each transgression or straying can, as
suggested above, be glossed. Nevertheless, as he also points out, ‘the phonemic translator
can, occasionally, achieve satisfactory results without having to exploit the more obvious
outward similarities of words [ . . . ]’. And, even if, in general, the cost may be said to be
catastrophic, this ultra-radical procedure, putting the target language under extreme
pressure, does at the very least oblige the translator to dig deep into the target language,
as well as to listen with the greatest attention to the sound-structure of the original,
abstractly considered. Not surprisingly, the translated text is bound to mix registers,
however ingeniously, and will often resort to archaisms and other anachronistic usages,
although one might do well to remember that, for instance, a poet like Thomas Hardy also
resuscitates archaic or dialect words, and this is quite characteristic of the work of
modernist writers, notably of James Joyce. This exercise or experiment, while conclusively,
most would think, demonstrating the impossibility or even absurdity of the enterprise,
458
recent and contemporary writings

and while being productive only of a sort of hybrid, ‘testifying’, as Lefevere remarks, ‘at
best to the translator’s linguistic virtuosity and inventiveness’, may also sensitize the
translator, if not his/her reader, to the source text’s musical structure, which is so often
neglected or even ignored.
By way of illustration, what follows is a very short poem by Caius Valerius Catullus,
followed by Celia Zukofsky’s literal version, a ‘literate’ version from the Loeb Library
edition, and Wnally Zukofsky’s ‘phonemic’ version.
Catullus 112
Latin original
Multos home es, Naso neque tecum multus homost qui
descendit: Naso, multus es et pathicus
literal translation (by Celia Zukofsky)
Much a man you are, Naso, and that you much a man it is who
comes down: Naso, much you are and pathetic/lascivious.
Loeb Classical Library (used by Zukofsky)
You are many men’s man, Naso, but many men
go down town with you: Naso, you are many
men’s man and minion.
Louis Zukofsky’s version in Catullus (Cape Golliard, 1969)
Mool ‘tis homos’ Naso, ‘n’ queer take ’im mool ’tis ho most he
descended: Naso, mool ’tis is it pathic, cuss.
5.8 louis and celia zukofsky
459

5.9 Translation of Verse Form
Translation of verse form is a much and sometimes hotly disputed topic. Inevitably,
the question is touched upon in a number of entries in this volume. Many translators
believed that, with the advent of so-called free verse, attempts to preserve verse form in
translation were rendered obsolete. It was pointed out, quite correctly, that, for instance,
the Classical hexameter had no proper equivalent in English, being based on a syllable
count, whereas English poetry was accentual, or at least, accentual-syllabic. If syllables
were counted, the iambic measure tended, in any case, to assert itself. Since iambic
pentameters (rhymed couplets or unrhymed blank-verse) were so much more Xexible,
a clear advance on the monotonous fourteener, it was taken as a functional equivalent
of the hexameter (or, for that matter, the alexandrine) permitting greater semantic
accuracy.
Since the earlier part of the twentieth century, the debate has started up again, with a
vengeance. The excerpts below, centre around the late Nobel laureate, poet, and essayist
(in Russian and English) Joseph Brodsky (1940–96). Brodsky is heir to a Russian tradition
of mimetic verse translation, which dismisses any translation not imitative of the original’s
form, even when mimesis is achieved—inevitably one might think—at the cost of
semantic accuracy. As against this, of course, there were those (see Sect. 4.13, above, on
Vladimir Nabokov and Sect. 5.10, below, on A. K. Ramanujan), who insisted on almost
literal transmission of the source text. Introducing his own translation of Pushkin’s
Eugene Onegin (1955), Nabokov is unequivocal: ‘The person who desires to turn a literary
masterpiece into another language has only one duty to perform, and this is to reproduce
with absolute exactitude the whole text, and nothing but the text.’ Form should be
sacriWced without any qualms. Nabokov could not have been more opposed to the notion
advanced by those who believed (like Denham; see Sect. 2.10, above) that only ‘poesie
could open poesie’, or, more recently Robert Lowell (see Sect. 4.10, above) who in his
introduction to Imitations (1962) likens strict metrical translators to ‘taxidermists’.
The late James S Holmes (see Sect. 5.3, above), characteristically tried to take some of
the heat out of the debate by describing the options non-prescriptively. As a verse
translator himself, Holmes particularly in his ‘Jacob Lowland’ alias, is identiWed with
free translation, imitation, even with what might be termed parody. In ‘Forms of Verse
Translation and the Translation of Verse Form’ (in Translated! Papers on literary Translation
and Translation Studies (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1988, 23–33), he begins by deWning the
translation of a poem as belonging to a spectrum or fan of ‘meta-literature’ around the
poem, as do critical commentary, criticism in the source language, critical essays in another
460
recent and contemporary writings

language, and various types of translation which accumulate around primary work.
However, verse translation is also fundamentally diVerent ‘in the very basic fact that it
makes use of verse as its medium, and hence manifestly aspires to be a poem in its own
right, about which a new fan of meta-literature can take shape’. A major problem is that of
‘choosing the most appropriate form of verse in which to cast the metapoem’.
There appear to be four basic approaches, two ‘form-derivative’, two ‘content-
derivative’. (1) ‘The Wrst traditional approach is that usually described as retaining the
form of the original. [ . . . ] The translator making use of [what might be called] mimetic
form looks squarely at the original poem when making his choice of verse form, to the
exclusion of all other considerations.’ (2) ‘A second school of translators has traditionally
looked [ . . . ] to the function of its form within its poetic tradition, then sought a form
that Wlled a parallel function with the poetic tradition of the target language [ . . . ] The
principal underlying this approach is that of ‘‘analogical form’’ [ . . . ]’ (3) ‘[M]any trans-
lators have turned away from form-derivative form [ . . . ], resorting to a verse form which
is basically ‘content-derivative’, and might be called ‘organic form’. The translator [ . . . ]
starts from the semantic material, allowing it to take on its own unique poetic shape as the
translation develops.’ (4) ‘This form does not derive from the original poem at all, and
might therefore be classiWed as ‘‘deviant form’’ or ‘‘extraneous form’’ [ . . . ] in no way
implicit in either the form or the content of the original.’ [ . . . ]
‘The eVect of the analogical form is to bring the original poem within the native
tradition, to ‘‘naturalize’’ it [ . . . ] [I]t follows that the analogical form is the choice to be
expected in a period that is inturned and exclusive, believing that its own norms provide a
valid touchstone by which to test the literature of other places and other times.’ The
mimetic form, on the other hand, ‘tends to have the eVect of re-emphasizing, by its
strangeness, the strangeness which for the target-language reader is inherent in the
semantic message of the original poem. Rather than interpreting the original in terms of
the native tradition; the mimetic metapoem requires the reader to stretch the limits of his
literary sensibility [ . . . ] It follows that the mimetic form tends to come to the fore among
translators in a period when genre concepts are weak, literary norms are being called into
question, and the target culture as a whole stands open to outside impulses.’ The organic
form of the metapoem ‘is a corollary of an organic and monistic approach to poetry as a
whole: since form and content are inseparable [ . . . ], it is impossible to Wnd any prede-
termined extrinsic form into which a poem can be poured in translation, and the only
solution is to allow a new intrinsic form to develop from the inward workings of the text
itself. As fundamentally pessimistic regarding the possibilities of cross-cultural transference
as the mimetic approach is fundamentally optimistic, the organic approach has naturally
come to the fore in the twentieth century.’ ‘There remains the extraneous form, which on
5.9 translation of verse form
461

closer examination is perhaps in some cases not so extraneous after all, but an older
collateral of the organic form [ . . . ].’
Holmes concludes by stressing that these diVerent approaches cannot be regarded ‘solely
as period forms’ and also that they do not necessarily exist only in their pure form.
From ‘Beyond Consolation’ by Joseph Brodsky (trans. Barry Rubin), New York Review
of Books (7 February 1974), 13–16
[This is a review of Hope Abandoned by Nadezhda Mandelstam, trans. Max Hayward; Osip
Mandelstam: Selected Poems, trans. Clarence Brown and W. S. Merwin; Complete Poetry of
Osip Emilevich Mandelstam, trans. Burton RaVel and Alla Burago; Osip Mandel’stam,
Selected Poems, trans. David McDuV.]
Translation is a search for an equivalent, not for a substitute. Mandelstam is a formal poet
in the highest sense of the word. For him, a poem began with a sound, with a ‘sonorous
molded shape of form,’ as he himself called it. Logically, a translator should begin his
work with a search for at least a metrical equivalent to the original form. Some translated
poems indicate that the translators are aware of this. But the tension involved is too high,
it excessively shackles individuality [ . . . ] This happens primarily because these trans-
lators are themselves poets and their own individuality is dearest of all to them. Their
conception of individuality precludes the possibility of sacriWce [ . . . ] This is especially
sad in the case of Merwin, from whom more should have been expected than a
translation of Mandelstam into Merwin.
[Here Brodsky oVers an example, Wrst in Russian transliteration, then in Merwin’s
translation, Wnally in a ‘‘stiV literal version’’, presumably by himself. He continues:]
Mandelstam’s poem is in regular iambic pentameter with regular feminine rhymes [ . . . ]
Meters in verse are kinds of spiritual magnitudes for which nothing can be substituted.
They cannot even be replaced by each other, and especially not by free verse. I don’t mean
that by rejecting meter in translation the translator commits sacrilege, but he is certainly
deceiving the reader. In general, it seems to me that a speciWc system of coordinates must
be created for poems written in free verse. This is a special genre of verbal art, like
graphics in relation to painting. It is a genre with its own aesthetics. To apply to poems
written in free verse the critical terminology that is applied to metrical poetry is to
mislead both oneself and others.
[ . . . ]
A poem is the result of a certain necessity: it is inevitable, and so is its form. ‘Necessity,’
as Nadezhda Mandelstam says in ‘Mozart and Salieri,’ ‘is not a compulsion and is not the
curse of determinism, but is a link between times, if the torch inherited from forebears
462
recent and contemporary writings

has not been trampled.’ Form too is noble for it is hallowed and illumined by time. It is
the vessel in which meaning is cast; they need each other and sanctify each other
reciprocally—it is an association of soul and body. Break the vessel, and the liquid will
leak out. [ . . . ]
Russian poetry has set an example of moral purity and Wrmness, which to no small
degree has been reXected in the preservation of so-called classical form without any
damage to content. Herein lies her distinction from her Western sisters, though in no
way do I presume to judge whom this distinction favors most. However, it is a
distinction, and if only for purely ethnographic considerations that quality ought to be
preserved in translation and not forced into a common mold.
[Brodsky’s remarks on translation, entirely unlike Holmes’s, are unashamedly normative.
He will not accept that a translation is inevitably a substitution, since it cannot be identical
with the source text. When he talks about free verse, ‘a special genre of verbal art’, it is clear
that he is quite out of sympathy with it. When he claims that he does not mean that the
translator who rejects meter in translating is committing sacrilege, it is hard to take him at
his word. Similarly, when he claims that ‘Russian poetry has set an example of moral purity
and Wrmness’, preserving the ‘so-called classical form without any damage to content’, he
does, indeed, ‘presume to judge between it and its Western sisters’.]
From Clarence Brown’s Introduction to Selected Poems of Osip Mandelstam, trans.
Clarence Brown and W. S. Merwin (London: OUP, 1973), pp. v–xviii
[This, of course, preceded Brodsky’s review (see above), which emphatically rejects its
arguments.]
For more years than I Wnd it comfortable to admit I have been preparing a study of
Mandelstam’s life and poetry [ . . . ], and in the course of that I developed a habit
of preparing worksheets on each poem. These included, along with notes on every aspect
of the poem that struck me, notations of variant readings, semantic nuances of the diction,
peculiarities of the prosody, and so on, a plain English translation, often with numerous
alternative translations. [ . . . ] [T]he Wrst stage in our work was my simply turning over to
Merwin my worksheets. From these, with a truly heroic eVort of decipherment, heproduced
Wrst versions. In the intervening couple of years, we have [ . . . ] debated the early results
[ . . . ] Bargains were struck, but no compromises were undertaken, I hope, with the English
poem that was trying to be born out of Mandelstam’s Russian.
The poems that resulted are of course no longer calques of the original [ . . . ], but we
have not consciously invented thoughts or images that the original could in no sense
warrant. It need scarcely be said, I suppose, that we never considered the folly of trying to
convey to the ear of our English readers the sounds of the Russian.
5.9 translation of verse form
463

[Brown then gives as an example poem No. 394, the same poem Brodsky considers in his
review-essay. He proceeds:]
Would Mandelstam approve? I cannot quite bring myself up to the presumption of
answering in his name, so I shall rather let him answer for himself by an account of his
own practice.
Mandelstam also translated. Like most of the Russian poets who brought about the great
reXowering of their art around the turn of the century, he was at home in the languages of
culture, and translation was a part of his response to the world. [ . . . ] He had to translate
[translation being his only means of making a living] under sweatshop conditions, the texts
assigned him being the trash in vogue at the time with the authorities [ . . . ]
But even under these conditions he sometimes managed to translate in response to the
old genuine urgency—out of love. In 1933 he turned four sonnets of Petrarch into
Russian. [ . . . ] I had received the texts alone, with no indication of where the originals
might be among Petrarch’s hundreds of sonnets, so my Wrst concern was naturally to seek
these out. If was an awful headache. No sooner would I have identiWed this or that image
in an opening line or two than some wild divergence would convince me that Mandel-
stam must have been working from another original. The ‘other original’ stubbornly
refusing to turn up, I was driven back to my starting point, and had to conclude what is
the point of this little narrative: that Mandelstam had translated Petrarch not into
Russian, but into Mandelstam.
Lest any reader think that by lending myself to this undertaking I have switched sides
in the Lowell-Nabokov debate let me say, Wrst, that he should inspect my several tributes
to Nabokov, and secondly, that that controversy, now that time had dissipated the fog of
animus, can be seen for what it was, a pseudo-controversy. Lowell does not translate into
English, but into Lowell; Nabokov can be said to translate into literal English only by
those who will accept his deWnition of literal English: in reality, it is Nabokov. Merwin
has translated Mandelstam into Merwin. When one is speaking of writers of the stature
of Lowell, Nabokov, and Merwin this strikes me as being the happiest of situations.
I can imagine, if only just, an English poem that might reproduce what one critic has
called the ‘cello sound’ of this or that poem by Mandelstam [ . . . ] [W]hat is more, I can
imagine the only audience that might, or should, appreciate this English poem: a
roomful of native Russians who, with the original itself unfolding in their mind’s ear,
have just enough English to collate the two, and approve the result. They would approve
it, happily unaware of the exorbitant price that had been paid, and consequently as
happily unable to assess its merit as an English poem of our own time.
We [ . . . ] have accepted the responsibility entailed in the fact that to translate is to
change. Those of my colleagues in the academy who are sent up the wall by ‘mistakes’ in
the translation of poetry, those who are happy to maintain that poetry is untranslatable
464
recent and contemporary writings

here on earth, and the arbiters of their own brand of literalism everywhere, have probably
by now read far enough in this book.
[Brown takes it as axiomatic (a) that no attempt can be made to reproduce the sound of the
Russian and (b) that a translator of poetic distinction will translate not so much into the
target language, as into his ‘own’ language. Brodsky, though he does not refer directly to
Brown’s remarks, clearly disagrees. What else can a poet do, asks Brown, but translate into
his own voice; a poetry translator, insists Brodsky, must resist precisely this temptation.]
From W. S. Merwin’s Foreword to his Selected Translations 1968–1978 (New York:
Atheneum, 1980), pp. vii–xiv
[Among leading contemporary American poets, Merwin is perhaps the most active as a
translator (The Song of Roland, The Cid, The Satires of Persius, and of work by individual
poets, besides Mandelstam, such as Roberto Juarroz, Jean Follain, Pablo Neruda, and
Nicanor Parra).]
When Pope set out to translate Homer almost everything (as it appears to us) was known
beforehand. He knew who most of his immediate readers would be: they had subscribed
for the translations. They, in turn knew—or thought they knew—who Homer was, and
they knew the text, in the original. Both the subscribers and the translator took it for
granted that the proper form for heroic verse, in English, must of course be the heroic
couplet. Pope’s work was expected to display the wit, elegance, and brilliance with which
he could render a generally accepted notion of the Homeric poems into a familiar
English verse form [ . . . ]
[ . . . ] In our time, an individual or social literary culture without it [translation] is
unthinkable. What is it that we think we need? We begin with the idea that it is the
original—which means our relative conception of the original, as scholars, potential
translators, or readers. At the outset, the notion is probably not consciously involved with
any thought of the available means of translation. The ‘original’ may even Wgure as
something that might exist in more forms than one, just as it can be understood by more
than one reader. But if we take a single word of any language and try to Wnd an exact
equivalent in another, even if the second language is closely akin to the Wrst, we have to
admit that it cannot be done. A single primary denotation may be shared; but the
constellation of secondary meanings, the moving rings of associations, the etymological
echoes, the sound and its own levels of association, do not have an equivalent because they
cannot [ . . . ] The surprising thing is that at this point the hope of translation does not fade
altogether, but begins to emerge. Not that these rudiments of form in the original language
can be matched [ . . . ] But the imaginative force which they embody [ . . . ] may suggest
convocations of words in another language that will have a comparable thrust and sense.
5.9 translation of verse form
465

By ‘rudiments of form’ I mean recognizable elements of verbal order, not verse forms.
I began with what I suppose was, and perhaps still is, a usual preconception about the
latter: that Wdelity in translating a poem should include an ambition to reproduce
the original verse form. Besides, I started translating partly as a discipline, hoping
that the process might help me learn to write. [Merwin describes his early visit to Ezra
Pound and the latter urging him to ‘get as close to the original as possible’ and to keep the
rhyme scheme if he could.] When I did come, gradually, to abandon more and more
often the verse forms of poems that I was translating, I did not try to formulate any
precise principle for doing so. Translation is a fairly empirical practice, usually, and
the ‘reason’ for making particular choices, however well grounded in scholarship, is
seldom wholly explicable. I would have recognised, probably, quite early, a simple
reluctance to sacriWce imagined felicities of the potential English version, to keep a
verse pattern that was, in a sense, abstract. [ . . . ] Verse conventions are to a large degree
matters of eVects, that depend partly on a familiarity which cannot, of course, be
translated at all. [ . . . ]
From an interview with W. S. Merwin, conducted by Christopher Merrill, on 12
October 2001, at ‘Lost & Found: The Art of Translation’, the 2nd annual
International Writing Program Festival, University of Iowa, transcription provided by
C. Merrill, Director of the IWP
I’ve come to believe that in general, the musical elements, by which I mean formal
elements, of poetry are embedded in the original language [ . . . ] You can suggest, you
can torment your own language into repeating them, but even if you do, you’re not going
to get the form doing in your language what it did in the original.
The startling thing for me, apart from the excitement of the material itself [here he
alludes to Budge’s edition of ‘The Egyptian Book of the Dead’, with its hieroglyphs, and
the literal rendering under each] was when you turned to the back, where he’s got it in
good English—Xat as can be . . . And I thought of something that I’ve heard two very
diVerent poets say in diVerent ways, and each time it was very revealing [ . . . ] Berryman
and Allen Ginsberg both said to me that in real poems [ . . . ] the focus is twisted
somehow, there’s something a little bit out of perspective. Berryman’s example was
Blake’s never spoken language [ . . . ]. The comparison I would make would be something
like Ce´zanne’s ‘Bathers’, where everything is just a little bit out of proportion. [ . . . ] Look
at the diVerence between ‘Should I say you’re like a day in summer?’ which is the obvious
way to say ‘Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?’ [ . . . ]
I’m in the middle of trying to work on Mandelstam—by the way [ . . . ] [Brodsky] said,
you know, you have to keep the meter and the rhyme of the original. And I said, well, the
466
recent and contemporary writings

meter and the rhyme of the original—Mandelstam generally wrote in rhymed quatrains
[ . . . ] There’s a history of rhymed quatrains in English, and if I were really lucky, it might
sound like not very good Auden, and if I weren’t lucky, it might sound like not very good
Longfellow. [ . . . ] And Wnally he said, well, I would maybe agree with you if it were not
Russian poetry. I said, Well, what is diVerent about Russian poetry? And he said, Russian
poetry is, how shall I say, sacred. And I said, Oh sure, just like all other poetry.
[ . . . ] I have a sense, and through Clarence’s [Brown] conversation I have to feel that
I have a sense of what makes that poem exciting in the original. I don’t want to mislead
about the real meaning of the poem. But I want it to be a poem that has that same kind
of—I don’t know—drama, that same kind of [ . . . ] urgency. It won’t be exactly the
urgency. But if it doesn’t have any urgency, if it’s Xat, it doesn’t matter whether it rhymes
or has meter or anything. You’ve lost the poem.
And of course Mandelstam [ . . . ] said that poets really shouldn’t translate unless they
were getting as close as they could to writing their own poems. [ . . . ]
From ‘On the Translation of Form in Poetry’ by Yves Bonnefoy, World Literature Today,
52–3 (1979), 374–9
[Yves Bonnefoy, major French poet, is also an important translator into French, especially
of Shakespeare and Yeats. He categorically refutes Brodsky’s insistence on formal mimetic
translation and especially his condemnation of the use of free verse.]
[Brodsky] emphasizes the value and meaning of poetic form; he shows its relatedness
with the most inner quality of the poem [ . . . ]—and I cannot but agree with these ideas
[ . . . ] But there is this other point about the inferior [ . . . ] quality of free verse in general,
and even more surprising, this moral judgment which Brodsky makes in unequivocal
terms indeed. [ . . . ] Brodsky makes it very clear that he [ . . . ] rejects every use of it [free
verse], every poem written with its help. Actually, he Wnds in free verse the main
distinction between Russian poetry and what he calls ‘her Western sisters’ and makes
us suspicious that he believes his own poetic tradition the only one inXexible if not heroic
[ . . . ] while the decadent literatures of the West, with their free verse as a proof of their
laziness, would indulge in all the easy delights of their corrupted civilization. [ . . . ]
Yes, it cannot be doubted that poetry is form as well as meaning, so that I surely do not
believe that the Russian poets, for instance, must be deprived, by our way of translating
them, of their rights to be understood as formal artists [ . . . ] and yet, when I began to
translate Shakespeare and later some poems of John Donne [as did Brodsky] and Yeats,
I did not hesitate to adopt free verse, and I still believe I was right. [ . . . ] I also knew that
the laws of reading, understanding, translating a poem are not simple and that perhaps
we must lose in the beginning in order to be able later to recover more fully. [ . . . ]
5.9 translation of verse form
467

[ . . . ] Nothing can be rightly analyzed in itself, independently of the whole to which it
belongs; we must think in terms of structure. In the case of poetry this means that no part
of a poem, not even its form, has a detached or constant meaning [ . . . ] None of us can use
instinctively, unambiguously, the old regular forms, deprived as we are of the old spirit,
which had been for such a long time their principal cause. And even in the case of
translation we cannot but experience this impediment [ . . . ].
Against Brodsky I therefore aYrm that, even when we have to translate some of these
poems of the past, whose regularity was so important an aspect, almost the soul, we can
no longer sincerely and seriously use regular, ‘classical’ meters. Indeed, the more regu-
larity was intense or signiWcant in the original poetry, the more our faked or dispirited
regularity of now must be, at the very Wrst, dismissed.
[But] there is another reason why regular meter must be proscribed from all serious
translation. Whatever the resources of regular verse can be today, we must not forget that
we cannot think only in terms of what is desirable, without checking what can actually be
made. And this examination will rule out, at the level of the translator’s word-by-word
work, any possibility of satisfying regularity. Why? Because exactly as we discovered
a while ago that a poem is a whole whose formal elements have no meaning as such
independently of the others, so now we must understand that writing, the act of writing,
is in itself an unbreakable unity whose formal operations are conceived and executed in
constant interaction with, for example, the invention of the images and the elaboration
of meaning. If the meaning of the future poem were totally given in advance, let us say,
there could conceivably be a way for the author to make it known, and this even clearly;
but that would be a prosaic expression, and every attempt to adorn this precooked
meaning with the feathers of a beautiful prosody would be artiWcial and lifeless. [ . . . ]
But this necessary freedom is not, unfortunately, within reach of the translator. In his
case, meaning, the whole meaning of the poem, is already determined; he cannot invent
anything about it without betraying the intent of the author. Consequently, were he to
decide to adopt the alexandrine or the pentameter, this regular pattern would be for him
nothing but a frame to which the meaning would have to adjust itself, obliging him to
pure virtuosity. [ . . . ] [P]assiveness instead of responsibility and freedom would be his
joyless destiny, with discouragement at the end. [ . . . ]
Far from considering free verse as a minor way of approaching the musicality of language
I will therefore say that it is the full exercise of it [ . . . ] In brief, free verse is only one
aspect among others of modernity as such, and if it is not recognized in this quality in
Russia today, the reason is probably not so much a better understanding of classical forms
by Russian poets as it is a consequence of the distance which keeps all the arts in
Leningrad or Moscow so isolated from the evolution of their counterparts in the
western world.
468
recent and contemporary writings

[Bonnefoy concludes with some reXections and observations on his own free verse
translations of Shakespeare, in which the repetitive pattern of the original poetry ‘is
enough [ . . . ] to pervade what is said in my modern words with some colour of the old
relationship between the poet and the world’.]
Translations of Mandelstam
Comparison of Translations of poem 94, stanza 2 (using numbering in Selected Poems of
Osip Mandelstam, trans. Clarence Brown and W. S. Merwin, p. 99)
[This poem is cited by Brodsky in his review. Brodsky gives a transliteration of the Russian,
the poem as translated by Brown/Merwin, and an ad verbum version, presumably by
himself. The Merwin translation is characterized as a travesty, since it reproduces neither
metre nor rhyme. For purpose of comparison, a number of other translations are given
below. Remarks by other translators are appended to these versions.]
Clarence Brown and W. S. Merwin’s translation
There are women with the dampness of the earth in their veins.
Every step they take there’s a sobbing in a vault.
They were born to escort the dead, and be at the grave
First to greet those who rise again.
It would be terrible to want a caress from them
but to part with them is more than a man could do.
One day angel, next day the worm in the grave,
The day after that, a sketch.
What used to be within reach—out of reach.
Flowers never die. Heaven is whole.
But ahead of us we’ve only somebody’s word.
Joseph Brodsky, ad verbum version
There are women who are akin to the damp earth,
And their every step is reverberating sobbing;
To escort the dead and be Wrst
To greet the resurrected is their calling.
And demanding caresses from them is criminal.
And parting with them is beyond one’s strength.
To-day—an angel, tomorrow—a worm in the grave,
And the day after tomorrow—only an outline.
What was—the walk—becomes unreachable.
5.9 translation of verse form
469

Flowers are immortal. Heaven is whole.
And that which will be is only a promise.
Bernard Meares’s translation, from Osip Mandelstam: 50 Poems,
(New York: Persea, 1977), 98
There are some women who are kin to the raw earth,
Whose every pace is resonant with weeping;
To accompany the dead and be the Wrst
To greet the resurrected is their vocation.
To plead caresses from them would be a crime
And to part with them is more than one can bear.
Today an angel, tomorrow a worm in the tomb,
The next day just an outline, nothing more.
What’s been—a step—will be one step beyond our reach.
Flowers are immortal, heaven a single whole,
And what shall be is nothing but a promise.
[In his ‘Translator’s Introduction’ Meares says nothing about his approach to translation.
Since Brodsky contributes an introduction to the collection, it is to be supposed that he
approves of it. Meares uses rhyme and keeps roughly to a Wve-stress line.]
James Greene’s translation, from Osip Mandelstam Poems,
(London: Paul Elek, 1977), 85
There are women who are natives of the sodden earth:
Their every step a hollow sobbing,
Their calling to accompany the dead,
To be Wrst to meet the risen.
And we would trespass to demand caresses of them,
And to part from them is beyond our strength.
Today—angel, tomorrow—the cryptic worm,
The day after—a stark outline,—
What was a step, now beyond us . . .
But what shall be is, for us,
A promise.
From James Greene, ‘Translator’s Preface’ Osip Mandelstan Poems
[Greene quotes Akhmatova on Mandelstam’s poetry: ‘We know the sources of Pushkin
and Blok, but who will tell us where that new, divine harmony, Mandelstam’s poetry came
470
recent and contemporary writings

from?’ He defends his decision to translate freely, sometimes going so far as to suppress
lines and whole stanzas or even to compress two poems.]
Mandelstam’s poems are rhymed and strictly metrical . . . I have mostly had to eschew
rhyme (but not half-rhyme, internal rhymes or assonance), and have tried to feel my way
towards what might be the right rhythm for English. Some may say that my ‘from’
versions are not translations at all but ‘adaptations’ or ‘imitations’. [ . . . ] However, in
planting Mandelstam’s trees over again in foreign soil, I hope I have not deviated too
much from his sense or spirit.
To the non-Russian-speaking reader who wants to know about the relation between
Mandelstam’s metres (which I have not consciously set out to re-enact), length of line,
etc., and mine, I can only say: ‘decisions’ of this kind are made intuitively, or in heaven;
don’t eat my—or any other translator’s—menus or pontiWcal recipes; total ‘faithfulness’,
were it possible—the ‘same’ metre, rhyme-scheme, pattern of sounds, number of syl-
lables, line-length, etc, etc.—would be an absurdity.
[Greene, like others, emphasizes the subjective nature of the operation; Brodsky Xatly
insists on the sanctity of the original form.]
Richard and Elizabeth McKane’s translation, from The Voronezh Notebooks,
Osip Mandelstam, Poems 1935–1937 (Newcastle upon Tyne: Bloodaxe, 1996), 95
There are women, who are so close to the moist earth;
their every step is loud mourning,
their calling is to accompany the resurrected,
and be Wrst to greet the dead.
It is a crime to demand kisses from them,
and it is impossible to part from them.
Today angels, tomorrow worms in the graveyard,
and the day after, just an outline.
The steps you once took, you won’t be able to take.
Flowers are immortal. Heaven is integral.
What will be is only a promise.
From Richard McKane’s Preface, The Voronezh Notebooks, pp. 11–14
Late Mandelstam is very diYcult even in the original Russian. His technique of
composing by mouthing words with his lips as opposed to sitting at a table with pen
and paper, gives the poems a distinctive sound quality, and a unique voice, ranging from
the colloquial to the elegiac. Not only do Mandelstam’s poems rhyme, but also sounds
and roots evoke other sounds and roots. Form and content unite in an unsplittable whole
in the Russian. So our interpretative capacities were tested to the full in trying to render
meaningful poems in English.
5.9 translation of verse form
471

W. S. Merwin
Interestingly, Merwin, in a recent translation, seems to be approaching a more literal or
foreignizing form of translation. Paradoxically perhaps, in view of his dispute with
Brodsky, he seems less concerned about the strain imposed on English, just as
Brodsky—granted from a non-native perspective—was able to bend English in attempting
to convey the sound-feel of the Russian source texts.
A Sonnet by Dante
[This sonnet from La Vita Nuova (‘Deh peregrini che pensosi andate . . . ’) was composed
by Dante on seeing pilgrims pass before the house of Beatrice after her death. Merwin’s
version was published in a hand-set edition, on the occasion of the translator’s reading in
Iowa City at the translation conference where he was interviewed (see above for excerpts
from this interview; other excerpts, relating to this translation, have been appended here).
By way of stark contrast, we end with Dante Gabriel Rossetti’s version from his translation
of la Vita Nuova (1861) (see also Sect. 3.5, above, on Rossetti).]
W. S. Merwin’s translation (Iowa City, 2001)
Oh pilgrims who walk thinking it may be
of something that is not there now before you
do you come from people as far away
as it seems from the appearance of you
for you do not weep as you travel through
the center of the sorrowing city
as though you might be of those people who
seem not to understand her gravity
If you will pause wishing to hear of that
my heart sighing tells me certainly that
you will be weeping when you go away
She has lost her Beatrice and what
one can say of her in words is able to
make tears fall from all of those who hear it
From the interview with W. S. Merwin, Iowa City, 12 October 2001
I tried to get a sonnet in English out of it. I’ve tried to get it as close [ . . . ] It’s metrically
not the same, but the kind of measure of lines is the same. But the sonnet does not do in
472
recent and contemporary writings

English what the sonnet does in Italian. And the associations of a sonnet in English are
not the associations in Italian. It seemed worth doing because I love the poem. [ . . . ] But
I don’t feel that I’ve contributed an enormous amount to it just by making it a sonnet.
And of course the run-on quality of the line is quite diVerent from Dante.
I wanted something that was closer to the literal meaning of the original than the prose
translation. Because as I looked through the translations, I thought they all take liberties.
[ . . . ] [R]hyme is more important in the Italian than it can ever be in the English. Pace is
immensely important [ . . . ] the pace of the ‘Inferno’ and the ‘Purgatory’ are totally
diVerent. You lose that and you’ve lost something very, very important. But rhyme—you
know, we don’t hear the way the Italians did. [ . . . ] Dante said he wanted it to be in the
plain language of his time. [ . . . ] On the other hand, of course—I wanted the translation
to be a poem. I think that when you’re translating poetry, or when you’re writing poetry,
any conditions that you set yourself becomes a form. If you say literal meaning is one of
the conditions, I don’t want to take liberties, not for the sake of the form or anything else,
I don’t want to mislead anyone—that’s a condition, a form of the writing. just as the
sonnet is a form [ . . . ].
Dante Gabriel Rossetti’s version
Ye pilgrim-folk, advancing pensively
As if in thought of distant things, I pray,
Is your own land indeed so far away
As by your aspect it would seem to be—
That nothing of our grief comes over ye
Though passing through the mournful town midway;
Like unto men that understand to-day
Nothing at all of her great misery?
Yet if ye will but stay, whom I accost,
And listen to my words a little space,
At going ye shall mourn with a loud voice.
It is her Beatrice that she hath lost;
Of whom the least word spoken holds such grace
That men weep hearing it, and have no choice.
Joseph Brodsky
An indication of what Brodsky wanted in translations is suggested by his own versions of
his own poems, of which an example, ‘May 24, 1980’, is given below. This is a mock-heroic
birthday poem to himself. A near literal translation of it by the present writer is also given.
5.9 translation of verse form
473

For a comprehensive discussion of this poem, see V. Polukhina, ‘I, Instead of a Wild Beast’
(in Lev LoseV and Valentina Polukhina, Joseph Brodsky, The Art of a Poem (London:
Macmillan [1999]), 68–91; also Daniel Weissbort, From Russian with Love (London: Anvil,
2004). Brodsky takes considerable liberties, for the sake of what seemed to him a truer
literalism, or truth to the source as a sound/sense artefact.
‘May 24, 1980’
Literal version by Daniel Weissbort
It was I, no wild beast, that entered the cage,
with a nail scorched my prison term and nickname in the barrack hut,
lived by the sea, played roulette,
dined in coat-tails with the devil-knows-who.
From the top of a glacier, I surveyed half the world,
thrice drowned, twice was unpicked/unstitched.
You could people a town with those who have forgotten me.
I mooched about in the steppes, recalling the howl of the Hun,
clothed myself in what again has become fashionable,
sowed rye, tarred barn roofs,
and dry water wasn’t my only beverage.
I admitted into my dreams the sentry’s burnished pupil,
guzzled the bread of exile, not leaving even a crust.
I’ve permitted my vocal cords to utter all manner of
sounds, except for a howl.
I passed over to a whisper. Now I am forty.
What should I say about life? That it turned out to be long.
It is only with sorrow/grief that I can identify.
But until my mouth is crammed with clay,
only gratitude will resound/ring out from it.
Translation of Brodsky by Brodsky
I have braved, for want of wild beasts, steel cages,
carved my term and nickname on bunks and rafters,
lived by the sea, Xashed aces in an oasis,
dined with the-devil-knows-whom, in tails, on truZes.
From the height of a glacier I beheld half a world, the earthy
width. Twice have drowned, thrice, let knives rake my nitty-gritty.
Quit the country that bore and nursed me.
474
recent and contemporary writings

Those who forgot me would make a city.
I have waded the steppes that saw yelling Huns in saddles,
worn the clothes nowadays back in fashion in every quarter,
planted rye, tarred the roofs of pigsties and stables,
guzzled everything save dry water.
I’ve admitted the sentries’ third eye into my wet and foul
dreams. Munched the bread of exile: it’s stale and warty.
Granted my lungs all sounds except the howl;
switched to a whisper. Now I am forty.
What should I say about life? That it’s long and abhors
transparence.
Broken eggs make me grieve; the omelette, though, makes me vomit.
Yet until brown clay has been crammed down my larynx,
only gratitude will be gushing from it.
[If this version by Brodsky does not ‘speak for itself’ with total conviction, it is perhaps
because it marks an interim stage in his mastery of English. It can hardly be denied, even
by those committed to the advancement of the art of translation, that Brodsky had better
things to do than translate his own poetry into English. Nevertheless, it is perhaps not
wholly wishful thinking either to see some sort of a convergence between, for instance,
a Merwin and a Brodsky.]
5.9 translation of verse form
475

5.10 A. K. Ramanujan
Vinay Dharwadker
(University of Wisconsin, Madison)
A. K. Ramanujan (1929–93) was a multilingual poet, Wction writer, translator, and
scholar. As a translator, he brought together an unparalleled variety of languages, texts,
genres, literatures, historical periods, and past and present cultures. He translated
literary works mainly from various forms of Kannada and Tamil into English, and also
from English into Kannada; with the help of collaborators, he rendered texts from
Malayalam, Telugu, Marathi, and Sanskrit into English. He focused his attention on
verse as well as prose, rendering epic and classical poetry from the ancient period (chieXy
works composed between about 500 bc and ad 500), early and late poetic texts from the
middle period (from the eighth to the eighteenth centuries), and poems, short stories,
novelistic Wction, and numerous folktales from the modern period (the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries).
During his lifetime, Ramanujan’s reputation as a translator grew around seven Wnely
crafted books. Among these, The Interior Landscape (1967) and Poems of Love and War
(1985) contained selections of his English versions of Classical Tamil poetry, both including
scholarly commentary on the language and culture of the original texts, but the latter
oVering a larger and more representative body of work and a more comprehensive critical
account of the tradition. Speaking of Shiva (1973) brought together Ramanujan’s transla-
tions of more than two hundred vachanas (‘sayings’) by four major bhaktas (‘devotees,’ in
this case of the god Shiva) in the ‘counter-cultural’ Vira-shaiva religious tradition in
Kannada, from the early centuries of the past millennium. Hymns for the Drowning:
Poems for Vishnu by Nammalvar (1981) consisted of Ramanujan’s renderings of nearly ninety
poems by a tenth-century Tamil saint-poet in the very diVerent Shri Vaishnava bhakti
tradition, complementing in language, religious orientation, and poetic quality his versions
of the Kannada vachanas in Speaking of Shiva. In Samskara: A Rite for a Dead Man (1976,
1978), Ramanujan produced a version of U. R. Anantha Murthy’s existentialist Kannada
novel which had been ‘Popular with critic and common reader alike since its [original]
publication in 1965,’ and ‘was made into an award-winning, controversial Wlm in 1970’
(Samskara, p. viii). Moving away from high culture and touching on a new boundary of
translation in the last years of his life, Ramanujan presented in Folktales from India (1991) his
retellings and edited versions in English prose of nineteenth- and twentieth-century oral
narratives from twenty-two Indian languages.
476
recent and contemporary writings

At the time of his death, Ramanujan left behind several other translated works in various
stages of completion, which have appeared posthumously. When God Is a Customer (1994), a
small book co-translated and co-authored with V. Narayana Rao and David Shulman, oVers a
selection of Telugu bhakti poems by a single poet from the mystic-erotic temple tradition of
the late middle period of southern Indian literary history. The Oxford India Anthology of
Contemporary Poetry, which he co-edited with Vinay Dharwadker between about 1984 and
1992, brings together poems by 125 twentieth-century poets writing in Wfteen Indian lan-
guages and in English, most of them translated by over sixty contemporary translators, and
includes Ramanujan’s versions of more than thirty recent Kannada, Tamil, Telugu, and
Malayalam poems. During the last few years of his life Ramanujan also worked energetically
on one of his longest-term projects, A Flowering Tree and Other Kannada Folktales (1998), a
large collection of orally narrated stories that he had recorded, transcribed, and translated over
three decades of Weldwork in Karnataka, and which Stuart Blackburn edited for posthumous
publication. By the end, Ramanujan had translated, in various senses of this term, ranging
from playful prose retelling to precise poetic metaphrase, produced independently and in
collaboration with others, some three thousand individual texts from the full spectrum of
Dravidian and Indo-Aryan languages into English.
Statements on Translation
From Speaking of Shiva (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1973), 12–13
A translation has to be true to the translator no less than to the originals. He cannot jump
oV his own shadow. Translation is choice, interpretation, an assertion of taste, a betrayal
of what answers to one’s needs, one’s envies. I can only hope that my needs are not
entirely eccentric or irrelevant to the needs of others in the two traditions, the one
I translate from and the one I translate into [ . . . ]
In the act of translating, ‘the Spirit killeth and the Letter giveth Life’. Any direct attack
on the ‘spirit of the work’ is foredoomed to fuzziness. Only the literal text, the word made
Xesh, can take us to the word behind the words. I have tried therefore to attend closely
to the language of the Originals, their design, detail by detail; not to match the Kannada
with the English, but to map the medieval Kannada onto the soundlook of modern
English; in rhythm and punctuation, in phrase-breaks, paragraphs and lineation to
suggest the inner form of the originals as I see them. Medieval Kannada manuscripts use
no punctuation, no paragraph-, word-, or phrase-divisions, though modern editions print
the [vachanas] with all the modern conventions. The few liberties I have taken are towards
a close structural mimicry, a re-enactment in English, the transposition of a structure in
5.10 a. k. ramanujan
477

one texture onto another. Vale´ry said of a translation of St John of the Cross: ‘This is really
to translate, which is to reconstitute as nearly as possible the eVect of a certain cause’.
From ‘On Translating a Tamil Poem’, in The Collected Essays of A. K. Ramanujan (New
Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1999), 229–31
At least four things, maybe even four articles of faith, help the translator.
1. Universals. If there were no universals in which languages participate and of which all
particular languages were selections and combinations, no language learning, translation,
comparative studies or cross-cultural understanding of even the most meager kind would
be possible. If such universals did not exist, as Voltaire said of God, we would have to
invent them. [ . . . ] Universals of structure, in both signiWers (e.g., sound systems,
grammar, semantics, rhetoric, and poetics) and the signiWeds (e.g., what poems are
about [ . . . ] and what they mean within and across cultures), are necessary Wctions, the
indispensable ‘as ifs’ of our fallible enterprise.
2. Interiorised contexts. However culture-speciWc the details of a poem are, poems . . .
interiorise the entire culture. Indeed, we know about the culture of the ancient Tamils
only through a careful study of [their] poems. [ . . . ]
3. Systematicity. The systematicity of such bodies of poetry, the way Wgures, genres, perso-
nae, etc., intermesh in a master-code, is a great help in entering this intricate world of words.
One translates not single poems but bodies of poetry that create and contain their original
world. Even if one chooses not to translate all the poems, one chooses poems that cluster
together, that illuminate one another, so that allusions, contrasts, and collective designs are
suggested. One’s selection then becomes a metonymy of their world, re-presenting it. Here
intertextuality is not the problem, but the solution. [ . . . ]
4. Structural mimicry.[ . . . ] [The] work of translating single poems in their particularity is
the chief work of the translator. In this task, [ . . . ] the structures of individual poems, the
unique Wgures they make out of all the given codes of their language, rhetoric, and poetics,
become the points of entry. The poetry and the signiWcance reside in these Wgures and
structures as much as in the untranslatable verbal textures. So one attempts a structural
mimicry, to translate relations, not items—not single words but phrases, sequences, sen-
tences; not metrical units but rhythms; not morphology but syntactic patterns.
To translate is to ‘metaphor’, to ‘carry across’. Translations are transpositions,
re-enactments, interpretations. Some elements of the original cannot be transposed at
all. One can often convey a sense of the original rhythm, but not the language-bound
metre; one can mimic levels of diction, but not the actual sound of the original words.
Textures are harder (maybe impossible) to translate than structures, linear order more
diYcult than syntax, lines more diYcult than larger patterns. Poetry is made at all these
levels—and so is translation. That is why nothing less than a poem can translate another.
478
recent and contemporary writings

Yet ‘anything goes’ will not do. The translation must not only represent, but re-present,
the original. One walks a tightrope between the To-language and the From-language, in a
double loyalty. A translator is an ‘artist on oath’. Sometimes one may succeed only in
re-presenting a poem, not in closely representing it. At such times one draws consolation
from parables like the following. A Chinese emperor ordered a tunnel to be bored through
a great mountain. The engineers decided that the best and quickest way to do it would be
to begin work on both sides of the mountain, after precise measurements. If the
measurements were precise enough, the two tunnels would meet in the middle, making
a single one. ‘But what happens if they don’t meet?’ asked the emperor. The counselors, in
their wisdom, answered, ‘If they don’t meet, we will have two tunnels instead of one.’ So
too, if the representation in another language is not close enough, but still succeeds in
‘carrying’ the poem in some sense, we will have two poems instead of one.
Selection of Translations
Kapilar (before third century), translated from Classical Tamil
‘What She Said,’ 1, from Poems of Love and War (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1985), 7–8
In his country,
summer west wind blows
Xute music
through bright beetle-holes in the waving bamboos.
The sweet sound of waterfalls is continuous,
dense as drums.
The urgent lowing voices of a herd of stags
are oboes,
the bees on the Xowering slopes
become lutes.
Excited by such teeming voices,
an audience of female monkeys
watches in wonder
the peacock on the bamboo hill
sway and strut
like a dancer
making an entrance
on a festival stage.
5.10 a. k. ramanujan
479

He had a garland on his chest,
a strong bow in his grip,
arrow already chosen,
and he asked which way
the elephant went
with an arrow buried in its side.
He stood at the edge
of a ripe-eared millet Weld.
But, among all the people
who saw him standing there,
why is it
that I alone
lie in bed
in this harsh night,
eyes streaming,
arms growing lean?
‘What She Said,’ 2, from Poems of Love and War, p. 13
You ask me to forget him,
how can I?
His mountain,
wearing its dark raincloud
white-crested
as a bean Xower
the east wind opens,
his mountain,
that blue sapphire,
is never out of sight.
‘What She Said,’ 3, from Poems of Love and War, p. 17
Only the thief was there, no one else.
And if he should lie, what can I do?
There was only
a thin-legged heron standing
on legs yellow as millet stems
480
recent and contemporary writings

and looking
for lampreys
in the running water
when he took me.
‘What She Said’, 4, from Poems of Love and War, p.25
He is from those mountains
where the little back-faced monkey,
playing in the sun,
rolls the wild peacock’s eggs
on the rocks.
Yes, his love is always good
as you say, my friend,
but only for those strong enough
to bear it,
who will not cry their eyes out
or think anything of it
when he leaves.
Ponmutiyar (before third century), translated from Classical Tamil
‘A Young Warrior’, from Poems of Love and War, p. 165
O heart
sorrowing
for this lad
once scared of a stick
lifted in mock anger
when he refused
a drink of milk,
now
not content with killing
war elephants
with spotted trunks,
this son
of the strong man who fell yesterday
5.10 a. k. ramanujan
481

seems unaware of the arrow
in his wound,
his head of hair is plumed
like a horse’s,
he has fallen
on his shield,
his beard still soft.
‘A Mother’s List of Duties’, from Poems of Love and War, p. 185
To bring forth and rear a son is my duty.
To make him noble is the father’s.
To make spears for him is the blacksmith’s.
To show him good ways is the king’s.
And to bear
a bright sword and do battle,
to butcher enemy elephants,
and come back:
that is the young man’s duty.
Erumai Veliyanar (before third century), translated from Classical Tamil
‘The Horse Did Not Come Back’, from Poems of Love and War, p. 179
The horse did not come back,
his horse did not come back.
All the other horses have come back.
The horse
of our good man,
who was father in our house
to a little son
with a tuft of hair
like a plume on a steed,
it did not come back.
Has it fallen now,
his horse
that bore him through battle,
482
recent and contemporary writings

has it fallen
like the great tree
standing at the meeting place
of two rivers?
Devara Dasimayya (tenth–eleventh centuries?), translated from Old Kannada
Poem 133, from Speaking of Shiva, p. 110
If they see
breasts and long hair coming
they call it woman,
if beard and whiskers
they call it man:
but, look, the self that hovers
in between
is neither man
nor woman,
O Ramanatha
Basavanna (c. 1106–67), translated from Old Kannada
Poem 820, from Speaking of Shiva, p. 88
The rich
will make temples for Shiva.
What shall I,
a poor man,
do?
My legs are pillars,
the body the shrine,
the head a cupola
of gold.
Listen, O lord of the meeting rivers,
things standing shall fall,
but the moving ever shall stay.
Mahadevi (mid-twelfth century), translated from Old Kannada
Poem 17, from Speaking of Shiva, p. 116
Like a silkworm weaving
her house with love
5.10 a. k. ramanujan
483

from her marrow,
and dying
in her body’s threads
winding tight, round
and round,
I burn,
desiring what the heart desires.
cut through, O lord,
my heart’s greed,
and show me
your way out,
O lord white as jasmine.
Allama Prabhu (twelfth century), translated from Old Kannada
Poem 972, from Speaking of Shiva, p. 168
Looking for your light
I went out:
it was like the sudden dawn
of a million million suns,
a ganglion of lightnings
for my wonder.
O Lord of Caves,
if you are light,
there can be no metaphor.
N. Revathi Devi (1951–81), translated from Modern Telugu, with V. Narayana Rao
‘This Night’, from The Oxford India Anthology of Contemporary Poetry,
ed. V. Dharwadker and A. K. Ramanujan
(Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1994, 1996)
If this night passes
which does not surrender even to sleeping pills
if this night passes
the night that spreads under my back
like a bed of arrows
for not compromising with man
484
recent and contemporary writings

the night that Xows in my veins
like blood from the thorns of the toddy palm
for not compromising with God
if this night passes
covering the face of honesty
with a blanket of light
another day
another day another night another day
at some time another night another day
if honesty stands naked, smooth
not Wnding light
if that night stands without passing
it will pass, it will move away, honestly
5.10 a. k. ramanujan
485

5.11 Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (b. 1942), literary theorist, feminist critic, translator, studied in
Calcutta and at Cornell University and has taught at a number of universities in the United
States, Europe, and Asia. Spivak’s inXuential translation of and introduction to Jacques
Derrida’s De la grammatologie (1967), Of Grammatology, was published in 1976. She is on
the editorial board of several journals and is active in rural literacy teacher training in India
and Bangladesh. Among her many publications are translations of the Wction of Mahasweta
Devi: Imaginary Maps, Breast Stories, Old Women (1993) and Chotti Munda and His Arrow
(2003), as well as the following books: In Other Worlds: Essays in Cultural Politics (1987);
Outside in the Teaching Machine (1993); A Critique of Postcolonial Reason: Towards a History
of the Vanishing Present (1999); and Death of a Discipline (2003). Spivak is the recipient of
the Sahitya Akademi (National Academy of Literature) 1999 Translation Prize in India. She
is Avalon Professor of the Humanities at Columbia University, New York.
Translation of scholarly and critical material is rarely discussed in the same breath as the
rendering of literary texts from one language to another. The former is supposed to require
conceptual and linguistic accuracy, and while it may certainly call for a considerable
creative grasp of language, it is not expected to involve the more subtle nuances of aesthetic
recreation seen as the crux of literary translation. There are of course borderline genres that
make any such division fuzzy, especially the essay, which has played a vital role in literary
criticism as it has in other areas of writing.
However, in the case of some literary theorists and philosophers, the very act of
linguistic delivery forms such an important part of the ‘content’ expressed in their
scholarly works, that translators have to cope with polysemy, ambiguities, or creative
wordplay in the terms, conceptual formulations, and critical arguments encountered in the
text. The writing of the French philosopher Jacques Derrida, who has greatly inXuenced
literary scholarship in the past few decades, is characterized by a use of words, terms, and
expressions that engage his topics at a linguistic level, while admitting, if not reinforcing,
the openness, the slipperiness, sometimes indeed the uncanniness, of language.
In the introduction to her translation of Derrida’s Of Grammatology, Spivak discusses
the very ‘untranslatability’ of Derrida’s text, but then joins Derrida in regarding this
‘negative’ quality not as a Xaw, but rather as a fate of language, which can can never be
repeated in total sameness, although it is caught in an inWnite web of intertextuality, i.e.
the connections of text with other texts that contribute to its making and understanding.
From this point of view, translation is in some sense ‘primary’, since it draws out the very
diVerence between the signiWer (the sound or the physical signal) and the signiWed (the
486
recent and contemporary writings

concept or abstract ‘meaning’) which together make up the signs used for any kind of
reference to things, relations, emotions, etc. A translator may substitute one signiWer for
another, yet cannot be certain that an analogous change of signiWeds has taken place, nor
that the former signiWed has stayed in ‘place’.
This may give an idea of how translation becomes for Derrida one of the clues to a
philosophy of language, and this holds true for some other thinkers too (see Walter
Benjamin’s ‘The Task of the Translator’, in Sect. 4.4, above; and Sect. 5.2 on George Steiner).1
In Spivak’s article, ‘The Politics of Translation’, based in part on her experience of translating
eighteenth-century poetry and the contemporary Wction of Mahasweta Devi from Bengali
into English, translation is also seen as a crucial gateway to the language of others, as well as a
testing ground for the way in which the individual (the ‘agent’) seeks and forms the faultlines
between logic, rhetoricity, and silence in language. For Spivak, translation is a matter of risk
and intimacy; it challenges the identity of the translator as it brings her face to face with
political, post-colonial, and feminist issues. The ‘exchange of language’ which takes place in
translation must not be made subservient to the safety of the logical aspects of the third-world
source language or the ‘majority’target language (English). ‘Without a sense of the rhetoricity
of language,’ which also works ‘in the silence between and around words’, ‘a species of
neocolonialist construction of the non-Western scene is afoot.’
English texts are being translated into countless languages around the globe, but
Spivak’s discussion takes us to what is probably the most active site of translation into
English today. India and Pakistan have a huge bilingual population, and there is a great deal
of literary traYc into English from the several other languages of the Subcontinent.
As yet, this activity may not have made a large impression upon the English-language
culture of the Western world, less indeed than works originally written in English by
writers from this part of the world, for instance Salman Rushdie, works which often
involve a great deal of cultural translation and border-crossings. But as Spivak points out,
actual works of translation from one language to another may reveal more about the
politics of exchange between languages, cultures, countries, and continents, not to forget
race and gender.2
1 For Derrida’s views of translation, see also his ‘Des Tours de Babel’ (in French and in Joseph F. Graham’s
translation), in Joseph F. Graham (ed.), Difference in Translation (Ithaca, NY and London: Cornell University Press,
1985), and The Ear of the Other: Otobiography, Transference, Translation, trans. Peggy Kamuf and Avital Ronell (New
York: Schocken Books, 1985).
2 See Sect. 5.12, below on Talal Asad, for another interesting discussion about the inequality of languages, and
Sect. 4.12, above, on Bohannan for an insightful reverse situation. See also, for a historical perspective on the Indian-
English translation scene, Tejaswini Niranjana: Siting Translation: History, Post-Structuralism, and the Colonial
Context (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1992).
5.11 gayatri chakravorty spivak
487

From Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak’s ‘Translator’s Preface’ to Jacques Derrida, Of
Grammatology (Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University Press 1976),
pp. ix–lxxxvii
It is customary at this point to say a few words about the problem of translation. Derrida’s
text certainly oVers its share of ‘untranslatable’ words. I have had my battles with ‘exergue’
and ‘propre.’1 My special worry is ‘entamer.’ As we have seen, it is an important word in
Derrida’s vocabulary. It means both to break into and to begin. I have made do with
‘broach’ or ‘breach,’ with the somewhat fanciful conWdence that the shadow-word ‘breach’
or ‘broach’ will declare itself through it. With ‘entamer’ as well as with other words and
expressions, I have included the original in parenthesis whenever the wording and syntax
of the French seemed to carry a special charge. To an extent, this particular problem
informs the entire text. Denying the uniqueness of words, their substantiality, their
transferability, their repeatability, Of Grammatology denies the possibility of translation.
Not so paradoxically perhaps, each twist of phrase becomes at the same time ‘signiWcant’
and playful when language is manipulated for the purpose of putting signiWcation into
question, for deconstructing the binary opposition ‘signiWer-signiWed.’ That playfulness
I fear I have not been able remotely to capture. Even so simple a word as ‘de’ carries a touch
of play—hinting at both ‘of’ and ‘from.’ (I have once resorted to ‘from/of,’ where the
playfulness seemed to ask for special recognition.) But that sort of heavy-handedness
cannot punctuate an entire text where ‘penser’ (to think) carries within itself and points at
‘panser’ (to dress a wound); for does not thinking seek forever to clamp a dressing over the
gaping and violent wound of the impossibility of thought? The translation of the title,
suggesting ‘a piece of’ as well as ‘about,’ I have retained against expert counsel.
I began this preface by informing my readers that Derrida’s theory admitted—as it
denied—a preface by questioning the absolute repeatability of the text. It is now time to
acknowledge that his theory would likewise admit—as it denies—translation, by question-
ing the absolute privilege of the original. Any act of reading is besieged and delivered by the
precariousness of intertextuality. And translation is, after all, one version of intertextuality.2
If there are no unique words, if, as soon as a privileged concept-word emerges, it must be
given over to the chain of substitutions and to the ‘common language,’ why should that act
of substitution that is translation be suspect? If the proper name or sovereign status of the
author is as much a barrier as a right of way, why should the translator’s position be
secondary? It must now be evident that, desiring to conserve the ‘original’ (De la gramma-
tologie) and seduced by the freedom of the absence of a sovereign text (not only is there no Of
Grammatology before mine, but there have been as many translations of the text as readings,
the text is inWnitely translatable), translation itself is in a double bind.
And, from quite another point of view, most practically and rigorously speaking, both
Derrida and I being very roughly bilingual—his English a cut above my French—where
does French end and English begin?
488
recent and contemporary writings

I shall not launch my philosophy of translation here. Instead I give you a glimpse of
Derrida’s:
Within the limits of its possibility, or its apparent possibility, translation practices
the diVerence between signiWed and signiWer. But, if this diVerence is never pure,
translation is even less so, and a notion of transformation must be substituted for
the notion of translation: a regulated transformation of one language by another, of
one text by another. We shall not have and never have had to deal with some
‘transfer’ of pure signiWeds that the signifying instrument—or ‘vehicle’—would
leave virgin and intact, from one language to another, or within one and the same
language. (Pos 31)
‘From one language to another, or within one and the same language.’ Translation is a
version of the intertexuality that comes to bear also within the ‘same’ language. Ergo . . .
Heidegger’s deconstructive (or ‘destructive’) method is often based on consideration of
how the so-called content of philosophy is aVected by the exigencies of translation.
Derrida writes of this in ‘La diVe´rance’ and ‘Ousia et gramme`.’ (MP 3–29, SP 129–60;
MP 31–78) In the latter example there is a double play: Heidegger laments the loss for
philosophy when the lone Latin ‘presence’ was pressed into service to translate the many
nuanced Greek words signifying philosophical shadings of the idea of presence. Derrida
engages in the parallel lament—how translate the many nuanced Heideggerian German
words signifying philosophical shadings of the idea of presence through the lone
Romance ‘pre´sence?’ Derrida goes on to use the business of ‘mistranslations’ as an
eVective deconstructive lever of his own. The most sustained example is ‘La pharmacie
de Platon,’ where he appropriately asks: why have translators obliterated the word
‘pharmakon’ by providing a collection of diVerent words as its translated substitute?
And all said and done, that is the sort of reader I would hope for. A reader who would
fasten upon my mistranslations, and with that leverage deconstruct Derrida’s text beyond
what Derrida as controlling subject has directed in it. (pp. lxxxv–lxxxvii)
notes
1. For a cogent discussion of the problems relating to these two words as used by Derrida, see ‘White Mythology’,
trans. by F. C. T. Moore, New Literary History VI.i. Autumn 1974, p. 5.
2. For a cogent discussion of translation and intertextuality, see JeVrey Mehlman, ‘Portnoy in Paris,’ Diacritics 2, iv
(Winter 1972), p. 21.
bibliography
Pos: Jacques Derrida: Positions, Paris 1972.
MP: Jacques Derrida: Marges de la philosophie, Paris 1972.
SP: Jacques Derrida: Speech and Phenomena, trans. by David B. Allison, Evanston 1973.
5.11 gayatri chakravorty spivak
489

From Spivak’s ‘The Politics of Translation’, in her Outside in the Teaching Machine (New
York and London: Routledge 1993), 179–200
The idea for this title comes from the British sociologist Miche`le Barrett’s feeling that the
politics of translation takes on a massive life of its own if you see language as the process
of meaning-construction.1
In my view, language may be one of many elements that allow us to make sense of
things, of ourselves. I am thinking, of course, of gestures, pauses, but also of chance, of
the subindividual force-Welds of being which click into place in diVerent situations,
swerve from the straight or true line language-in-thought. Making sense of ourselves is
what produces identity. If one feels that the production of identity as self-meaning, not
just meaning, is as pluralized as a drop of water under a microscope, one is not always
satisWed, outside of the ethicopolitical arena as such, with ‘generating’ thoughts on one’s
own. [ . . . ] I have argued in Chapter Six that one of the ways of resisting capitalist
multiculturalism’s invitation to self-identity and compete is to give the name of ‘woman’
to the unimaginable other. The same sort of impulse is at work here in a rather more
tractable form. For one of the ways to get around the conWnes of one’s identity as one
produces expository prose is to work at someone else’s title, as one works with a language
that belongs to many others. This, after all, is one of the seductions of translating. It is a
simple miming of the responsibility to the trace of the other in the self.
[ . . . ]
How does the translator attend to the speciWcity of the language she translates? There is a
way in which the rhetorical nature of every language disrupts its logical systematicity. If
we emphasize the logical at the expense of these rhetorical inferences, we remain safe.
‘Safety’ is the appropriate term here, because we are talking of risks, of violence to the
translating medium.
I felt that I was taking those risks when I recently translated some eighteenth-century
Bengali poetry. I quote a bit from my ‘Translator’s Preface’:
I must overcome what I was taught in school: the highest mark for the most accurate
collection of synonyms, strung together in the most proximate syntax. I must resist
both the solemnity of chaste Victorian poetic prose and the forced simplicity of
‘plain English,’ that have imposed themselves as the norm . . . Translation is the
most intimate act of reading. I surrender to the text when I translate. These songs,
sung day after day in family chorus before clear memory began, have a peculiar
intimacy for me. Reading and surrendering take on new meanings in such a case.
The translator earns permission to transgress from the trace of the other—before
memory—in the closest places of the self.2
490
recent and contemporary writings

Yet language is not everything. It is only a vital clue to where the self loses its
boundaries. The ways in which rhetoric or Wguration disrupts logic themselves point at
the possibility of random contingency, beside language, around language. Such a
dissemination cannot be under our control. Yet in translation, where meaning hops
into the spacy emptiness between the two named historical languages, we get perilously
close to it. By juggling the disruptive rhetoricity that breaks the surface in not necessarily
connected ways, we feel the selvedges of the language-textile give way, fray into frayages or
facilitations.3 Although every act of reading is a bit of this risky fraying which scrambles
together somehow, our stake in agency keeps the fraying down to a minimum except in
the communication and reading of and in love. [ . . . ] The task of the translator is to
facilitate this love between the original and its shadow, a love that permits fraying, holds
the agency of the translator and the demands of her imagined or actual audience at bay.
The politics of translation from a non-European woman’s text too often suppresses this
possibility, because the translator cannot engage with, or cares insuYciently for, the
rhetoricity of the original.
[ . . . ]
Let us now think that, in that other language, rhetoric may be disrupting logic in the
matter of the production of an agent, and indicating the founding violence of the silence
at work within rhetoric. Logic allows us to jump from word to word by means of clearly
indicated connections. Rhetoric must work in the silence between and around words in
order to see what works and how much. The jagged relationship between rhetoric and
logic, condition and eVect of knowing, is a relationship by which a world is made for the
agent, so that the agent can act in an ethical way, a political way, a day-to-day way; so that
the agent can be alive, in a human way, in the world. Unless one can at least construct a
model of this for the other language, there is no real translation.
Unfortunately it is only too easy to produce translations if this task is completely
ignored. [ . . . ]
Without a sense of the rhetoricity of language, a species of neocolonialist construction
of the non-Western is afoot. [ . . . ] Poststructuralism has shown some of us a staging of
the agent with a three-tiered notion of language (as rhetoric, logic, silence). We must
attempt to enter or direct that staging, as one directs a play, as an actor interprets a script.
That takes a diVerent kind of eVort from taking translation to be a matter of synonym,
syntax, and local color.
[Spivak then discusses the need to bring texts into English, ‘the language of the
majority’.] On the other hand, there is nothing essentially noble about the law of
the majority either. It is merely the easiest way of being ‘democratic’ with minorities.
In the act of wholesale translation into English there can be a betrayal of the democratic
ideal into the law of the strongest. This happens when all the literature of the Third
5.11 gayatri chakravorty spivak
491

World gets translated into a sort of with-it translatese, so that the literature by a woman
in Palestine begins to resemble, in the feel of its prose, something by a man from Taiwan.
[ . . . ]
Let us consider an example where attending to the author’s stylistic experiments can
produce a diVerent text. Mahasweta Devi’s ‘Stanada¯yini’ is available in two versions.4
Devi has expressed approval for the attention to her signature style in the version entitled
‘Breast-Giver.’ The alternative translation gives the title as ‘The Wet-Nurse,’ and thus
neutralizes the author’s irony in constructing an uncanny word; enough like ‘wet-nurse’
to make that sense, and enough unlike to shock. It is as if the translator should decide to
translate Dylan Thomas’s famous title and opening line as ‘Do not go gently into that
good night.’ The theme of treating the breast as organ of labor-power-as-commodity and
the breast as metonymic part-object standing in for other-as-object—the way in which
the story plays with Marx and Freud on the occasion of the woman’s body—is lost even
before you enter the story. In the text Mahasweta uses proverbs that are startling even in
the Bengali. The translator of ‘The Wet-Nurse’ leaves them out. She decides not to try to
translate these hard bits of earthy wisdom, contrasting with class-speciWc access to
modernity, also represented in the story. In fact, if the two translations are read side by
side, the loss of the rhetorical silences of the original can be felt from one to the other.
First, then, the translator must surrender to the text. She must solicit the text to show
the limits of its language, because that rhetorical aspect will point at the silence of the
absolute fraying of language that the text wards oV, in its special manner. Some think this
is just an ethereal way of talking about literature or philosophy. But no amount of tough
talk can get around the fact that translation is the most intimate act of reading. Unless the
translator has earned the right to become the intimate reader, she cannot surrender to the
text, cannot respond to the special call of the text.
The presupposition that women have a natural or narrative-historical solidarity, that
there is something in a woman or an undiVerentiated women’s story that speaks to
another woman without beneWt of language-learning, might stand against the translator’s
task of surrender. Paradoxically, it is not possible for us as ethical agents to imagine
otherness or alterity maximally. We have to turn the other into something like the self in
order to be ethical. To surrender in translation is more erotic than ethical. In that
situation the good-willing attitude ‘she is just like me’ is not very helpful. In so far as
Miche`le Barrett is not like Gayatri Spivak, their friendship is more eVective as a
translation. In order to earn that right of friendship or surrender of identity, of knowing
that the rhetoric of the text indicates the limits of language for you as long as you are with
the text, you have to be in a diVerent relationship with the language, not even only
with the speciWc text.
Learning about translation on the job, I came to think that it would be a practical help if
one’s relationship with the language being translated was such that sometimes one preferred
492
recent and contemporary writings

to speak in it about intimate things. This is no more than a practical suggestion, not a
theoretical requirement, useful especially because a woman writer who is wittingly or
unwittingly a ‘feminist’—and of course all woman writers are not ‘feminist’ even in this
broad sense—will relate to the three-part staging of (agency in) language in ways deWned out
as ‘private,’since they might question the more public linguistic maneuvers. (pp. 179–83)
notes
1. The Wrst part of this essay is based on a conversation with Miche`le Barrett in the summer of 1990.
2. Forthcoming from Seagull Press, Calcutta. [Song for Kali: A Cycle of Drawings and Songs (Nirode Mazumdar
Interprets Ramprasad), trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (Seagull Private Books Limited, 2000)]
3. ‘Facilitation’ is the English translation of the Freudian term Bahnung (pathing) which is translated frayage in
French. The dictionary meaning is:
Term used by Freud at a time when he was putting forward a neurological model of the functioning of the
psychical apparatus (1895): the excitation, in passing from one neurone to another, runs into a certain
resistance; where its passage results in a permanent reduction in this resistance, there is said to be facilitation;
excitation will opt for a facilitated pathway in preference to one where no facilitation has occurred. (J. B.
Pontalis, The Language of Psychoanalysis [London: Hogarth Press, 1973], 157.).
4. ‘The Wet-Nurse,’ in Kali for Women, eds., Truth Tales: Stories by Indian Women (London: The Women’s Press,
1987), pp. 1–50 (Wrst published by Kali for Women, Dehli, 1986), and ‘Breast-Giver,’ in Spivak, In Other Worlds,
pp. 222–240.
5.11 gayatri chakravorty spivak
493

5.12 Talal Asad
Talal Asad is Distinguished Professor of Anthropology at the City University of New York
(CUNY) Graduate Center. He has done extensive research on the complex relations
between modernity, secularism, and religion (including modern religious revivals). His
publications include the books Genealogies of Religion: Discipline and Reasons of Power in
Christianity and Islam (1993) and Formations of the Secular: Christianity, Islam, Modernity
(2003).
Asad begins his article ‘The Concept of Cultural Translation in British Social Anthro-
pology’, part of which is reprinted below, by brieXy mentioning anthropological interest in
language and translation, reminding his readers ‘that the phrase ‘‘the translation of
cultures,’’ which increasingly since the 1950s has become an almost banal description of
the distinctive task of social anthropology, was not always so much in evidence’ (p. 141). He
then refers to Godfrey Lienhardt’s 1954 paper ‘Modes of Thought’ as an early example of
the use of this notion of translation (p. 142), quoting Lienhardt’s statement: ‘The problem
of describing to others how members of a remote tribe think then begins to appear largely
as one of translation, of making the coherence primitive thought has in the languages it
really lives in, as clear as possible in our own.’ Asad goes on to cite (p. 142) the noted
British anthropologist Edmund Leach’s comments on how the ‘essential problem’ of
coming to terms with ‘the others’ is ‘one of translation’.
As part of his pursuit of the role of ‘cultural translation’ in British anthropology, Asad
then critically examines the article ‘Concepts and Society’ by another noted scholar in the
Weld, Ernest Gellner. Gellner’s basic argument, says Asad, ‘is that (a) contemporary
anthropologists insist on interpreting exotic concepts and beliefs within a social context,
but that (b) in doing so they ensure that apparently absurd or incoherent assertions are
always given an acceptable meaning, and that (c) while the contextual method of
interpretation is in principle valid, the ‘‘excessive charity’’ that usually goes with it is
not’. Asad cites (p. 146) Gellner’s comments on how the anthropologist has ‘no third
language which could mediate between the native language and his own, in which
equivalences could be stated and which would avoid the pitfalls arising from the fact
that his own language has its own way of handling the world’; and as a result the
anthropologist proceeds to locate equivalent sentences in his own language, but these
tend to be loaded with the value connotations of his own culture. In doing so, the
anthropologist, eager to make sense, is often guilty of excessive charity instead of main-
taining critical distance.
494
recent and contemporary writings

Asad claims that ‘Gellner’s parable of the anthropologist-translator requires the assump-
tion that it is sentences that the latter matches’ (p. 147), whereas he (Asad) sees this
translation as a matter ‘of learning to live another form of life and to speak another kind of
language. Which contexts are relevant in diVerent discursive events is something one learns
in the course of living, and even though it is often very diYcult to verbalize that
knowledge, it is still knowledge about something ‘‘in the nature of society,’’ about some
aspect of living, that indicates (although it does not ‘‘dictate’’) just how much context is
relevant to any given utterance’ (p. 149). Asad concludes his detailed analysis of Gellner’s
article by explaining why he has insisted ‘that anyone concerned with translating from
other cultures must look for coherence in discourses’ and yet he has devoted several pages
‘to showing that Gellner’s text is largely incoherent’. ‘Gellner and I speak the same
language, belong to the same academic profession, live in the same society. In taking up
a critical stance toward his text I am contesting what he says, not translating it, and the
radical diVerence between these two activities is precisely what I insist on. [ . . . ] In order
for criticism to be responsible, it must always be addressed to someone who can contest it’
(pp. 155–6).
All of the above has important implications for the issues of translation covered by other
authors represented in this volume, but this is even more true of Asad’s subsequent
discussion, contained below.
From: ‘The Concept of Cultural Translation in British Social Anthropology’, in James
CliVord and George E. Marcus (eds.), Writing Culture: The Poetics and Politics of
Ethnography (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press 1986), 141–64
The Inequality of Languages
A careful reading of Gellner’s paper shows that although he raises a number of important
questions, he not only fails to answer them but misses some of the most crucial aspects of
the problem with which the ethnographer is engaged. The most interesting of these, it
seems to me, is the problem of what one might call ‘unequal languages’—and it is this
I want now to discuss in some detail.
All good translation seeks to reproduce the structure of an alien discourse within the
translator’s own language. How that structure (or ‘coherence’) is reproduced will, of
course, depend on the genre concerned (‘poetry,’ ‘scientiWc analysis,’ ‘narrative,’ etc.), on
the resources of the translator’s language, as well as on the interests of the translator and/
or his readership. All successful translation is premised on the fact that it is addressed
within a speciWc language, and therefore also to a speciWc set of practices, a speciWc form
of life. The further that form of life is from the original, the less mechanical is the
reproduction. As Walter Benjamin wrote: ‘The language of a translation can—in fact
5.12 talal asad
495

must—let itself go, so that it gives voice to the intentio of the original not as reproduction
but as harmony, as a supplement to the language in which it expresses itself, as its own
kind of intentio’ (1969: 79). It is, incidentally, for the reader to evaluate that intentio, not
for the translator to preempt the evaluation. A good translation should always precede a
critique. And we can turn this around by saying that a good critique is always an
‘internal’ critique—that is, one based on some shared understanding, on a joint life,
which it aims to enlarge and make more coherent. Such a critique—no less than the
object of criticism—is a point of view, a (contra) version, having only provisional and
limited authority.
What happens when the languages concerned are so remote that it is very diYcult to
rewrite a harmonious intentio? Rudolf Pannwitz, quoted in the Benjamin essay on which
I have just drawn, makes the following observation:
Our translations, even the best ones, proceed from a wrong premise. They want to
turn Hindi, Greek, English into German instead of turning German into Hindi,
Greek, English. Our translators have a far greater reverence for the usage of their
own language than for the spirit of the foreign works. . . . The basic error of the
translator is that he preserves the state in which his own language happens to be
instead of allowing his language to be powerfully aVected by the foreign tongue.
Particularly when translating from a language very remote from his own he must go
back to the primal elements of language itself and penetrate to the point where
work, image, and tone converge. He must expand and deepen his language by
means of the foreign language. (1969: 80–1)
This call to transform a language in order to translate the coherence of the original,
poses an interesting challenge to the person satisWed with an absurd-sounding translation
on the assumption that the original must have been equally absurd: the good translator
does not immediately assume that unusual diYculty in conveying the sense of an alien
discourse denotes a fault in the latter, but instead critically examines the normal state of his
or her own language. The relevant question therefore is not how tolerant an attitude the
translator ought to display toward the original author (an abstract ethical dilemma), but
how she can test the tolerance of her own language for assuming unaccustomed forms.
But this pushing beyond the limits of one’s habitual usages, this breaking down and
reshaping of one’s own language through the process of translation, is never an easy
business, in part because (if I may be allowed a hypostatization) it depends on the
willingness of the translator’s language to subject itself to this transforming power.
I attribute, somewhat Wctitiously, volition to the language because I want to emphasize
that the matter is largely something the translator cannot determine by individual
activity (any more than the individual speaker can aVect the evolution of his or
her language)—that it is governed by institutionally deWned power relations between
496
recent and contemporary writings

the languages/modes of life concerned. To put it crudely: because the languages of Third
World societies—including, of course, the societies that social anthropologists have
traditionally studied—are ‘weaker’ in relation to Western languages (and today, espe-
cially to English), they are more likely to submit to forcible transformation in the
translation process than the other way around. The reason for this is, Wrst, that in their
political-economic relations with Third World countries, Western nations have the
greater ability to manipulate the latter. And, second, Western languages produce and
deploy desired knowledge more readily than Third World languages do. (The knowledge
that Third World languages deploy more easily is not sought by Western societies in
quite the same way, or for the same reason.)
Take modern Arabic as an example. Since the early nineteenth century there has been a
growing volume of material translated from European languages—especially French and
English—into Arabic. This includes scientiWc texts as well as ‘social science,’ ‘history,’
‘philosophy,’ and ‘literature.’ And from the nineteenth century, Arabic as a language has
begun as a result to undergo a transformation (lexical, grammatical, semantic) that is far
more radical than anything to be identiWed in European languages—a transformation
that has pushed it to approximate to the latter more closely than in the past. Such
transformations signal inequalities in the power (i.e., in the capacities) of the respective
languages in relation to the dominant forms of discourse that have been and are still being
translated. There are varieties of knowledge to be learnt, but also a host of models to be
imitated and reproduced. In some cases knowledge of these models is a precondition for
the production of more knowledge; in other cases it is an end in itself, a mimetic gesture
of power, an expression of desire for transformation. A recognition of this well-known
fact reminds us that industrial capitalism transforms not only modes of production but
also kinds of knowledge and styles of life in the Third World. And with them, forms of
language. The result of half-transformed styles of life will make for ambiguities, which an
unskillful Western translator may simplify in the direction of his own ‘strong’ language.
What does this argument imply for the anthropological concept of cultural transla-
tion? That perhaps there is a greater stiVness in ethnographic linguistic conventions, a
greater intrinsic resistance than can be overcome by individual experiments in modes of
ethnographic representation.
In his perceptive essay ‘Modes of Thought,’ which Gellner criticizes for making over-
charitable assumptions about the coherence of ‘primitive thought,’ Lienhardt has this to say:
When we live with savages and speak their languages, learning to represent their
experience to ourselves in their way, we come as near to thinking like them as we can
without ceasing to be ourselves. Eventually, we try to represent their conceptions
systematically in the logical constructs we have been brought up to use; and we
hope, at best, thus to reconcile what can be expressed in their languages, with what
can be expressed in ours. We mediate between their habits of thought, which we
5.12 talal asad
497

have acquired with them, and those of our own society; in doing so, it is not Wnally
some mysterious ‘primitive philosophy’ that we are exploring, but the further
potentialities of our thought and language. (1954: 96–97)
In the Weld, as Lienhardt rightly suggests, the process of translation takes place at the very
moment the ethnographer engages with a speciWc mode of life—just as a child does in
learning to grow up within a speciWc culture. He learns to Wnd his way in a new
environment, and a new language. And like a child he needs to verbalize explicitly what
the proper way of doing things is, because that is how learning proceeds. (Cf. A. R. Luria
on ‘synpraxic speech’ in Luria and Yudovich 1971: 50.) When the child/anthropologist
becomes adept at adult ways, what he has learnt becomes implicit—as assumptions
informing a shared mode of life, with all its resonances and areas of unclarity.
But learning to live a new mode of life is not the same as learning about another mode
of life. When anthropologists return to their countries, they must write up ‘their people,’
and they must do so in the conventions of representation already circumscribed (already
‘written around,’ ‘bounded’) by their discipline, institutional life, and wider society.
‘Cultural translation’ must accommodate itself to a diVerent language not only in the
sense of English as opposed to Dinka, or English as opposed to Kabbashi Arabic, but also
in the sense of a British, middle class, academic game as opposed to the modes of life of
the ‘tribal’ Sudan. The stiVness of a powerful established structure of life, with its own
discursive games, its own ‘strong’ languages, is what among other things Wnally deter-
mines the eVectiveness of the translation. The translation is addressed to a very speciWc
audience, which is waiting to read about another mode of life and to manipulate the text
it reads according to established rules, not to learn to live a new mode of life.
If Benjamin was right in proposing that translation may require not a mechanical
reproduction of the original but a harmonization with its intentio, it follows that there is
no reason why this should be done only in the same mode. Indeed, it could be argued
that ‘translating’ an alien form of life, another culture, is not always done best through
the representational discourse of ethnography, that under certain conditions a dramatic
performance, the execution of a dance, or the playing of a piece of music might be more
apt. These would all be productions of the original and not mere interpretations:
transformed instances of the original, not authoritative textual representations of it
(cf. Hollander 1959). But would they be thought of by most social anthropologists as
valid exercises in the ‘translation of culture’? I think not, because they all raise an entirely
diVerent dimension of the relationship between the anthropological ‘work’ and its
audience, the question of diVerent uses (practices), as opposed merely to diVerent writings
and readings (meanings) of that work. And as social anthropologists we are trained to
translate other cultural languages as texts, not to introduce or enlarge cultural capacities,
learnt from other ways of living, into our own. It seems to me very likely that the notion
of culture as text has reinforced this view of our task, because it facilitates the assumption
that translation is essentially a matter of verbal representation.
498
recent and contemporary writings

Reading Other Cultures
This inequality in the power of languages, together with the fact that the anthropologist
typically writes about an illiterate (or at any rate non-English-speaking) population for a
largely academic, English-speaking audience, encourages a tendency I would now like to
discuss: the tendency to read the implicit in alien cultures.
According to many social anthropologists, the object of ethnographic translation is not
the historically situated speech (that is the task of the folklorist or the linguist), but
‘culture,’ and to translate culture the anthropologist must Wrst read and then reinscribe
the implicit meanings that lie beneath/within/beyond situated speech. Mary Douglas
puts this nicely:
The anthropologist who draws out the whole scheme of the cosmos which is
implied in [the observed] practices does the primitive culture great violence if he
seems to present the cosmology as a systematic philosophy subscribed to con-
sciously by individuals. . . . So the primitive world view which I have deWned
above is rarely itself an object of contemplation and speculation in the primitive
culture. It has evolved as the appanage of other social institutions. To this extent it is
produced indirectly, and to this extent the primitive culture must be taken to be
unaware of itself, unconscious of its own conditions. (1966: 91)
One diVerence between the anthropologist and the linguist in the matter of translation
is perhaps this: that whereas the latter is immediately faced with a speciWc piece of
discourse produced within the society studied, a discourse that is then textualized, the
former must construct the discourse as a cultural text in terms of meanings implicit in a
range of practices. The construction of cultural discourse and its translation thus seem to
be facets of a single act. [ . . . ]
The business of identifying unconscious meanings in the task of ‘cultural translation’ is
therefore perhaps better compared to the activity of the psychoanalyst than to that of the
linguist. Indeed British anthropologists have sometimes presented their work in precisely
these terms. Thus David Pocock, a pupil of Evans-Pritchard’s, writes:
In short, the work of the social anthropologist may be regarded as a highly complex
act of translation in which author and translator collaborate. A more precise analogy
is that of the relation between the psychoanalyst and his subject. The analyst enters
the private world of his subject in order to learn the grammar of his private
language. If the analysis goes no further it is no diVerent in kind from the
understanding which may exist between any two people who know each other
well.[!] It becomes scientiWc to the extent that the private language of intimate
understanding is translated into a public language, however specialized from the
layman’s point of view, which in this case is the language of psychologists. But the
5.12 talal asad
499

particular act of translation does not distort the private experience of the subject and
ideally it is, at least potentially, acceptable to him as a scientiWc representation of it.
Similarly, the model of Nuer political life which emerges in Professor Evans-
Pritchard’s work is a scientiWc model meaningful to his fellow-sociologists as
sociologists, and it is eVective because it is potentially acceptable to the Nuer in
some ideal situation in which they could be supposed to be interested in themselves as
men living in society. The collaboration of natural scientists may from this point of
view be seen as developing language enabling certain people to communicate with
increasing subtlety about a distinct area of natural phenomena which is deWned by
the name of the particular science. Their science is, in the literal meaning of the
term, their commonsense, their common meaning. To move from this
common sense to the ‘common sense’ of the wider public involves again an act of
translation. The situation of social anthropology, or sociology in general, is not at
this level so very diVerent. The diVerence lies in the fact that sociological phenom-
ena are objectively studied only to the extent that their subjective meaning is
taken into account and that the people studied are potentially capable of sharing
the sociological consciousness that the sociologist has of them. (1961: 88–89;
emphasis added)
I have quoted this remarkable passage in full because it states very lucidly a position that
is, I think, broadly acceptable to many anthropologists who would otherwise consider
themselves to be engaged in very diVerent kinds of enterprise. I have quoted it also
because the nature of the collaboration between ‘author and translator’ is neatly brought
out in the subsequent reference to the psychoanalyst as scientist: if the anthropological
translator, like the analyst, has Wnal authority in determining the subject’s meanings—it
is then the former who becomes the real author of the latter. In this view, ‘cultural
translation’ is a matter of determining implicit meanings—not the meanings the native
speaker actually acknowledges in his speech, not even the meanings the native listener
necessarily accepts, but those he is ‘potentially capable of sharing’ with scientiWc author-
ity ‘in some ideal situation’: it is when he can say, for example, with Gellner, that vox Dei
is in reality vox populi, that he utters the true meaning of his traditional discourse, an
essential meaning of his culture. The fact that in that ‘ideal situation’ he would no longer
be a Muslim Berber tribesman, but something coming to resemble Professor Gellner,
does not appear to worry such cultural translators.
This power to create meanings for a subject through the notion of the ‘implicit’ or the
‘unconscious,’ to authorize them, has of course been discussed for the analyst-analysand
relationship (e.g., recently in Malcolm 1982). It has not, to my knowledge, been
considered with regard to what the cultural translator does. There are, of course,
important diVerences in the case of the anthropologist. It may be pointed out that the
latter does not impose his translation on the members of the society whose cultural
500
recent and contemporary writings

discourse he unravels, that his ethnography is therefore not authoritative in the way the
analyst’s case study is. The analysand comes to the analyst, or is referred to the latter by
those with authority over him, as a patient in need of help. The anthropologist, by
contrast, comes to the society he wants to read, he sees himself as a learner, not as a guide,
and he withdraws from the society when he has adequate information to inscribe its
culture. He does not consider the society, and neither do its members consider them-
selves to be, sick: the society is never subject to the anthropologist’s authority.
But this argument is not quite as conclusive as it may seem at Wrst sight. It remains the
case that the ethnographer’s translation/representation of a particular culture is inevitably
a textual construct, that as representation it cannot normally be contested by the people
to whom it is attributed, and that as a ‘scientiWc text’ it eventually becomes a privileged
element in the potential store of historical memory for the nonliterate society concerned.
In modern and modernizing societies, inscribed records have a greater power to shape, to
reform, selves and institutions than folk memories do. They even construct folk mem-
ories. The anthropologist’s monograph may return, retranslated, into a ‘weaker’ Third
World language. In the long run, therefore, it is not the personal authority of the
ethnographer, but the social authority of his ethnography that matters. And that
authority is inscribed in the institutionalized forces of industrial capitalist society (see
page 158 [p. 497 in this volume] above), which are constantly tending to push the
meanings of various Third World societies in a single direction. This is not to say that
there are no resistances to this tendency. But ‘resistance’ in itself indicates the presence of
a dominant force. (pp. 156–63)
references
Asad, Talal. 1983a. ‘Anthropological conceptions of Religion: ReXections on Geeretz’, in Man 18, pp. 237–259.
Benjamin, Walter. 1969. ‘The Task of the Translator’, translated by Harry Zohn, in Illuminations: Essays and
ReXections, edited and with an introduction by Hannah Arendt, pp. 69–82.
Douglas, Mary. 1966. Purity and Danger, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Dummett M. 1981. ‘Objections to Chomsky’, in London Review of Books, September 3–16, pp. 5–6.
Gellner, Ernest. 1970. ‘Concepts and Society’, in Rationality, ed. by B.R. Wilson, Oxford, Basil Blackwell, pp. 18–49.
Hollander, J. 1959. ‘Versions, Interpretations, and Performances’, in On Translation, ed. R. A. Brower, Cambridge
Mass., Harvard University Press, pp. 205–231.
Lienhardt, Godfrey. 1954. ‘Modes of Thought’, in The Institutions of Primitive Society by E. E. Evans-Pritchard et al.,
Oxford, Basil Blackwell, pp. 95–107.
Luria, A. R., and F. I. Yudovich. 1971. Speech and the Development of Mental Processes in the Child, London, Penguin
Books.
Malcolm, J. 1982. Psychoanalaysis: The Impossible Profession, London, Pan Books.
Pocock, David. 1961. Social Anthropology, London and New York, Sheed and Ward.
5.12 talal asad
501

5.13 Eva Hoffman
Eva HoVman (b. 1945) was born in Cracow, Poland into a Jewish family, emigrating to
Canada when she was 13. She served as an editor of the New York Times Book Review from
1979 to 1990, but now lives in London. In her Wrst book, Lost in Translation: A Life in a
New Language (1989), she explores the emotional and linguistic dislocation suVered by an
exile. She has also published Exit Into History: A Journey through the New Eastern Europe
(1993); Shtetl: The Life and Death of a Small Town in the World of Polish Jewry (2000); and
After Such Knowledge: Where Memory of the Holocaust Ends and History Begins (2004).
HoVman is the author of numerous essays and articles on cultural and political topics for,
among others, The New York Times, The Atlantic Monthly, and The Yale Review.
Lost in Translation is a autobiographical work describing the journey of a 13-year-old
Jewish girl who leaves her native Poland with her family to settle in North America (Wrst
Canada and later the US). With ties to both the Bildungsroman and postmodern metanarra-
tives, Hofman’s story describes the struggles and challanges facing a person whose border
between childhood and maturity becomes also a divide between countries, cultures, and
languages. Not only her title—the familiar phrase about how meaning risks getting lost when
moving between languages—but a substantial part of HoVman’s work revolves around the
cultural, existential, and metaphorical implications of the term ‘translation’. As a young
immigrant she attempts in various ways to translate her identity, to make the world of her
childhood somehow ‘Wt’ her new linguistic and socio-cultural environment, even as she
realizes that one ‘can’t transport human meanings whole from one culture to another’.1
In this respect, HoVman’s experience is not unlike that of many translators, who when
seeking to transport culturally complex works from one language to another, often get the
strong sense that it cannot be done—yet they, like she, go ahead and do it. The keyword in
the sentence quoted is ‘whole’; one has to let go of a whole, hoping to create another that
represents and extends it honourably. And while one may celebrate both the glories of
translation and the multiculturalism that results from a migrant mobility such as the one
HoVman describes, she also manifests that this is a process fraught with anxiety. This is
also borne out, in the context of postcolonial studies, by Homi Bhabha, who emphasizes
the ‘anxiety of enjoining the global and the local; the dilemma of projecting an inter-
national space on the trace of a decentered, fragmented subject. Cultural globality is
Wgured in the in-between spaces of double-frames: its historical originality marked by
1 Eva HoVman, Lost in Translation: Life in a New Language (London: Minerva 1991), 175.
502
recent and contemporary writings

a cognitive obscurity; its decentred ‘‘subject’’ signiWed in the nervous temporality of the
transitional, or the emergent provisionality of the ‘‘present’’.’2
This is indeed the ‘translational’ experience Ewa, later Eva, HoVman goes through; she
has to negotiate this in-between (non)territory, this ‘interstitial’ space, which unsettles any
rigid mapping of cultural locations, and only allows them to exist in hybrid forms. A part
of every translation is a text in exile; yet that very text cannot be separated from what
Walter Benjamin has termed the labour pains of the language of the translation.3
From Lost in Translation: Life in a New Language (1989; London: Minerva, 1991)
When the brass band on the shore strikes up the jaunty mazurka rhythms of the Polish
anthem, I am pierced by a youthful sorrow so powerful that I suddenly stop crying and
try to hold still against the pain. I desperately want time to stop, to hold the ship still with
the force of my will. I am suVering my Wrst, severe attack of nostalgia, or te˛sknota—a
word that adds to nostalgia the tonalities of sadness and longing. It is a feeling whose
shades and degrees I’m destined to know intimately, but at this hovering moment, it
comes upon me like a visitation from a whole new geography of emotions, an annun-
ciation of how much an absence can hurt. (p. 4)
‘Shut up, shuddup,’the children around us are shouting, and it’s the Wrst word in English
that I understand from its dramatic context. My sister and I stand in the schoolyard
clutching each other, while kids all around us are running about, pummeling each other,
and screaming like whirling dervishes. Both the boys and the girls look sharp and
aggressive to me—the girls all have bright lipstick on, their hair sticks up and out like
witches’ fury, and their skirts are held up and out by stiV, wiry, crinolines. I can’t imagine
wanting to talk their harsh-sounding language. (pp. 104–5)
Every day I learn new words, new expressions. I pick them up from school exercises, from
conversations, from the books I take out of Vancouver’s well-lit, cheerful public library.
There are some turns of phrase to which I develop strange allergies. ‘You’re welcome,’ for
example, strikes me as a gaucherie, and I can hardly bring myself to say it—I suppose
because it implies that there’s something to be thanked for, which in Polish would be
impolite. The very places where language is at its most conventional, where it should be
most taken for granted, are the places where I feel the prick of artiWce.
Then there are words to which I take an equally irrational liking, for their sound, or
just because I’m pleased to have deduced their meaning. Mainly they’re words I learn
2 Homi K. Bhabha, ‘How Newness Enters the World’, The Location of Culture (London and New York:
Routledge 1994), 216.
3 Cf. Walter Benjamin’s article ‘The Task of the Translator’, in Sect. 4.4, above.
5.13 eva hoffman
503

from books, like ‘enigmatic’ or ‘insolent’—words that have only a literary value, that exist
only as signs on the page.
But mostly, the problem is that the signiWer has become severed from the signiWed.
The words I learn now don’t stand for things in the same unquestioned way they did in
my native tongue. ‘River’ in Polish was a vital sound, energized with the essence of
riverhood, of my rivers, of my being immersed in rivers. ‘River’ in English is cold—a
word without an aura. It has no accumulated associations for me, and it does not give oV
the radiating haze of connotation. It does not evoke.
The process, alas, works in reverse as well. When I see a river now, it is not shaped,
assimilated by the word that accommodates it to the psyche—a word that makes a body
of water a river rather than an uncontained element. The river before me remains a thing,
absolutely other, absolutely unbending to the grasp of my mind.
When my friend Penny tells me she is envious, or happy, or disappointed, I try
laboriously to translate not from English to Polish but from the word back to its source,
to the feeling from which it springs. Already, in that moment of strain, spontaneity of
response is lost. And anyway, the translation doesn’t work. I don’t know how Penny feels
when she talks about envy. The word hangs in a Platonic stratosphere, a vague prototype
of all envy, so large, so all-emcompassing that it might crush me—as might disappoint-
ment or happiness. (pp. 106–7)
For my birthday, Penny gives me a diary, complete with a little lock and key to keep what
I write from the eyes of all intruders. It is that little lock—the visible symbol of the
privacy in which the diary is meant to exist—that creates my dilemma. If I am indeed to
write something entirely for myself, in what language do I write? Several times, I open the
diary and close it again. I can’t decide. Writing in Polish at this point would be a little
like resorting to Latin or ancient Greek—an ancient thing to do in a diary, in which
you’re supposed to set down your most immediate experiences and unpremeditated
thoughts in the most unmediated languages. Polish is becoming a dead language, the
language of the untranslatable past. But writing for nobody’s eyes in English? That’s
like doing a school exercise, or performing in front of yourself, a slightly perverse act of
self-voyeurism.
Because I have to choose something, I Wnally choose English. If I’m to write about the
present, I have to write in the language of the present, even if it’s not the language of the
self. As a result, the diary becomes surely one of the more impersonal exercises of that sort
produced by an adolescent girl. These are no sentimental eVusions of rejected love,
eruptions of familial anger, or consoling broodings about death. English is not the
language of such emotions. Instead, I set down my reXections on the ugliness of
wrestling; on the elegance of Mozart, and on how Dostoyevsky puts me in mind of El
Greco. I write down Thoughts. I Write.
504
recent and contemporary writings

There is a certain pathos to this naı¨ve snobbery, for the diary is an earnest attempt to
create a part of my persona that I imagine I would have grown into in Polish. In the
solitude of this most private act, I write, in my public language, in order to update what
might have been my other self. The diary is about me and not about me at all. But on one
level, it allows me to make the Wrst jump. I learn English through writing, and, in turn,
writing gives me a written self. Refracted through the double distance of English and
writing, this self—my English self—becomes oddly objective; more than anything, it
perceives. It exists more easily in the abstract sphere of thoughts and observations than in
the world. For a while, this impersonal self, this cultural negative capability, becomes the
truest thing about me. When I write, I have a real existence that is proper to the activity
of writing—an existence that takes place midway between me and the sphere of artiWce,
art, pure language. This language is beginning to invent another me. However, I discover
something odd. It seems that when I write (or, for that matter, think) in English, I am
unable to use the word ‘I.’ I do not go as far as the schizophrenic ‘she’—but I am driven,
as by a compulsion, to the double, the Siamese-twin ‘you.’ (pp. 120–1)
In the politics of daily perception, I’m at a distinct disadvantage. My American Friends
are so many, and they share so many assumptions that are quite invisible to them,
precisely because they’re shared. These are assumptions about the most fundamental
human transactions, subcutaneous beliefs, which lie just below the stratum of political
opinion or overt ideology: about how much ‘space,’ physical or psychological, we need to
give each other, about how much ‘control’ is desirable, about what is private and what
public, about how much interest in another person’s aVairs is sympathy and how much
interference, about what’s a pretty face or a handsome body, about what we’re allowed to
poke fun at and what we have to revere, about how much we need to hide in order to
reveal ourselves. To remain outside such common agreements is to remain outside reality
itself—and if I’m not to risk a mild cultural schizophrenia, I have to make a shift in the
innermost ways. I have to translate myself. But if I’m to achive this without becoming
assimilated—that is, absorbed—by my new world, the translation has to be careful, the
turns of the psyche unforced. To mouth foreign terms without incorporating their
meanings is to risk becoming bowdlerized. A true translation proceeds by the motions
of understanding and sympathy; it happens by slow increments, sentence by sentence,
phrase by phrase. (pp. 210–11)
I’m a vigilant Culture watcher, like everyone else. And undoubtedly, like everyone else,
I’ve ingested parts of the Culture even while I’ve prudishly pulled my skirts around me.
I see this paradox in my friends clearly enough, culture turning into counterculture and
counterculture into culture despite everyone’s best intentions, the organization man
giving way to the dropout and the dropout to a new technocrat, loneliness to love-ins
and then loneliness again, as if any set of cultural terms necessarily determines the terms
5.13 eva hoffman
505

of the subsequent rebellion, and the rejections carry in them the seeds of what is rejected.
It is always diYcult to know how a culture Xows through our veins, and by now I’ve lost
track of how much America Xows through mine. Fragments of Janis Joplin songs and the
Rolling Stones surface in my mind as I walk down the street; the landscape of Amagan-
sett, where I’ve spent several summers, is just under my retina, to be retrieved whenever
I think vacation, time oV; Wlms about New York are Wlms about my hometown; ‘Gimme
a break,’ I say, when a street vendor gets pushy, and the issues I debate—how to conduct
one’s career without losing one’s sanity, what to eat without becoming contaminated,
how to deal with passive-aggressive lovers—are American conversations, dictated by ‘the
Culture’ as much as this season’s fashions. And I never, never say ‘It’s only psychological’
anymore. Maybe, behind my back and while I wasn’t looking, I’ve acquired a second
unconscious, an American one, made up of diverse cultural matter. Like any uncon-
scious, this one is hard to pin down. I only know that the hybrid creature I’ve become is
made up of two parts Americana, that the pastiche has lots of local color. Despite my
resistance, or perhaps through its very act, I’ve become a partial American, a sort of
resident alien. (p. 221)
For me, therapy is partly translation therapy, the talking cure a second-language cure. My
going to a shrink is, among other things, a rite of initiation: initiation into the language
of the subculture within which I happen to live, into a way of explaining myself to
myself. But gradually, it becomes a project of translating backward. The way to jump
over my Great Divide is to crawl backward over it in English. It’s only when I retell my
whole story, back to the beginning, and from the beginning onward, in one language,
that I can reconcile the voices within me with each other; it is only then that the person
who judges the voices and tells the stories begins to emerge.
The tiny gap that opened when my sister and I were given new names can never be
fully closed up; I can’t have one name again. My sister has returned to her Polish name—
Alina. It takes a while for me to switch back to it; Alina, in English, is a diVerent word
than it is in Polish: it has the stamp of the unusual, its syllables don’t fall as easily on an
English speaker’s tongue. In order to transport a single word without distortion, one
would have to transport the entire language around it. My sister no longer has one,
authentic name, the name that is inseparable from her single essence.
When I talk to myself now, I talk in English. English is the language in which I’ve
become an adult, in which I’ve seen my favorite movies and read my favorite novels, and
sung along with Janis Joplin records. In Polish, whole provinces of adult experience are
missing. I don’t know Polish words for ‘microchips,’ or ‘pathetic fallacy,’ or The Import-
ance of Being Earnest. If I tried talking to myself in my native tongue, it would be a
stumbling conversation indeed, interlaced with English expressions. (pp. 271–72)
506
recent and contemporary writings

5.14 Gregory Rabassa
Gregory Rabassa (b. 1922), American translator, whose father was Cuban, has produced
more than three dozen translations from the Spanish and the Portuguese, the best known
being the novel One Hundred Years of Solitude (1970), a translation of Nobel Prize laureate
Gabriel Garcı´a Ma´rquez’s Cien a~nos de soledad (1967). This translation is widely acclaimed,
and so is that of Ma´rquez’s novel The Autumn of the Patriarch; Ma´rquez himself has called
Rabassa the ‘best Latin American writer in the English language.’ Rabassa’s translations
include works by several other writers, mainly Latin American: Octavio Paz, Miguel Angel
Asturias, Julio Corta´zar, Mario Vargas Llosa, Jorge Amado, Jose´ Lezama Lima, Clarice
Lispector, and Luisa Valenzuela. He has received numerous awards, including the
National Book Award for translation in 1967 for Hopscotch by Corta´zar.
Rabassa received a doctorate from Columbia University. He is still teaching, as a
professor of Romance languages and Comparative Literature at Queens College, City
University of New York. During the Second World War, he served in North Africa and
Italy, his Wrst assignment including breaking secret military codes (‘That’s where my
translating career started . . . ’). After graduate school, he worked as an editor at Odyssey
Review, a literary magazine that published new literature from Europe and Latin America.
Some of his translations were published in the magazine, and this led to an opportunity to
produce Hopscotch, his award-winning translation of Rayuela by Corta´zar. It can truly be
said that Rabassa never looked back from that. Together with Helen R. Lane, Suzanne Jill
Levine (see Sect. 5.15, below), and a number of other translators he has been instrumental
in bringing to the English-language world the ‘boom’ writing of Latin America, including
key works associated with ‘magic realism’.
From Rabassa’s article ‘If This Be Treason: Translation and Its Possibilities’, in William
Frawley (ed.), Translation: Literary, Linguistic, and Philosophical Perspectives (Newark,
Del. University of Delawere Press/London and Toronto: Associated University Presses
1984), 21–9
Traduttore, traditore
—Italian cliche´
In this age of the bad mouth, where a kind word is as rare as a Buick in college town,
translation has had more than its share of opprobrium. This is probably due to its being
a kind of bastard art, an intermediate form, and as such always vulnerable to attack.
5.14 gregory rabassa
507

Translation is almost as old as language, certainly as old as the contact of a language with
alien speakers. In spite of the fact that it is an ancient craft, its ways are still rather
mysterious, and most analyses have fallen short of the mark in deWning what translation
is or, at least, what it should be. The inconsequence of the last fact would seem to make
translation an art, something deWned by its very existence or by its uses, as Ortega might
have put it. (p. 21)
The basic problem of the writer as he moves along is that he must name things: objects,
actions, ideas. He must often choose among possibilities and synonyms for the mot juste;
but since it is his creation, at some point he can sit back and cease pondering. It is his
work, take it or leave it. The translator, however, is at one remove. He must Wnd the mot
juste for a mot juste out of his own bag of possibilities in a diVerent language. The original
agonizing is still there with his own added to it. Borges once advised his translator,
Norman Thomas Di Giovanni, to write what he was trying to say, not what he was
saying. In that case it was easier because the writer was on hand and knew English. The
advice is good, but how can we be sure what Tasso was ‘trying to say’? [ . . . ] (p. 22)
[ . . . ] We come to the part of the tree that grows out of the main trunk, called rama in
Spanish. What shall we call it in English? It is a branch, a bough, a limb, or what? We can
simply call it branch, for rama also possesses the Wgurative meaning branch has in English,
but that might be too easy, something might be lost—we might be missing the poetry.
This is the time to follow the Borgesian dictum. Who is speaking? Would his Anglo-
phonic equivalent be a branch-man, a bough-man, or a limb-man? And we seek help
from our bilingual dictionary. This drab old friend, sneered at by the ‘Xuent,’ is
a great font of synonyms and is quite useful in jogging the memory. The ultimate
solution is, more often than not, instinctive. This means that the translator must be close
in one way or another to the writer. At least, he must have some understanding of him
and his ways.
The translator, therefore, like the critic and scholar, must be a reader. The ideal
translator must be the ideal reader, a rare breed, for a translation ought to be the closest
possible reading of a work. [ . . . ] (p. 23)
If translations have diYculty enduring in time, they have an even harder struggle, in
many cases, making spatial adjustments. Some books are very mulish about being ‘led
across’. Regional and local literature has a Xavour that is immediately sensed in the
original language. Only when that Xavour is limited to the mise-en-sce`ne and does not
aVect the language to any large degree can the translator score a subtle success in
preserving it. Just as words do not have real equivalents in other languages, neither do
dialects or local patterns of speech. Rustics are rustics the world over, but it is absurd and
outlandish to have a Brazilian sertanejo talking like an Appalachian mountain man. Even
black English is poorly served by translation into black Spanish. The African roots are
508
recent and contemporary writings

too remote, and the diverging histories of forced migration under two distinct European
cultures have produced two quite diVerent modes of expression. The transfer of local or
regional idiom into another language, therefore, must be listed as another of the
impossibilities of translation.
A similar problem, but one that can be solved, is the problem that arises when an
environment that is commonplace in one culture becomes exotic in the other. I recall that
the Peruvian novelist Mario Vargas Llosa was concerned that the English translation of
his novel The Green House, which I was working on, would give an exotic tone to what in
Peru was commonplace. He was worried about the names of the Xora and fauna that have
no translation, since they do not exist in English-speaking countries and no Anglo-Saxon
Adam had passed through to give them lexical identity. I did not think it serious enough
to warrant a certain dilution I had come across while working on the Guatemalan
novelist Miguel Angel Asturias. In that case, I had been faced with a tree under which
someone had sat and which bore an ever-so-exotic Mayan name. The French translation
preceded mine, and when I got my hands on it, I Wgured that the solution lay there, and
in a good bilingual dictionary. Alas, I found that the man had sat down under an arbre.
[ . . . ] The Peruvian trees remained with their aboriginal names, for, as I explained to the
author, many commonplace aspects of Peru are, per se, exotic to the outsider. If a novel is
universal, the universality should not be hindered by the strange. [ . . . ] (p. 24–5)
We have seen that the translator is not the free-Xying artist that the writer can be, that it
is, indeed, the writer who causes the translator to hew to a narrow path if he is to do his
job well and correctly. Even when the translator is compared to the performing musician
who interprets an extant composition written by someone else, the comparison is not
exact because the musician is, above all, interpretive and has the freedom to enhance the
piece being played, as Billie Holiday would by her rendition convert the most banal pop
tune into a masterpiece. I have said that the translator qua translator must never engage
in the silk-purse business, regardless of the temptation to do so. To continue the musical
analogy, there is no place for riVs in translation.
Having looked into a few of the many possibilities and impossibilities in the making of
a translation, now we must look to the other side, how a translation should be judged,
what a critic should look for, and who, ideally, he should be. A translator’s ego is most
wounded, of course, when the review fails to mention him, even to the point of omitting
his name from the heading and risking a letter of admonishment from the novelist B. J.
Chute, who, with her watchful eye, has done a splendid job seeing that translators receive
their due. Some reviewers will also go on about the magniWcent language of a novel
without mentioning the fact that is the language of translation, as if the book had been
written in English to begin with. Even when the translator is mentioned and praised, he
should be wary and not let it go to his head. Quite often this sort of encomium really
only covers half of his accomplishment, for it may be that the reviewer, perceptive as he
5.14 gregory rabassa
509

may be, has no knowledge of the work in the original and more than likely is not familiar
with the language it was Wrst written in. In this case, the translator has been told that he
writes well, not that he translated well. Many reviewers of this type, however, will then go
on to discuss and analyze the book with great intelligence and insight, which, by
indirection, tells the translator that he has translated well. Gabriel Garcı´a Ma´rquez has
said that American reviewers, on the whole, have understood One Hundred Years of
Solitude much better than critics in his own language. And, of course, many of these
American reviewers have had to rely completely on the English version. This would
imply that it is almost possible for an astute reader to judge the merits of a translation
without recourse to the original language.
The bane of the translator more often than not is the critic who does know the other
language; he is usually an academician who has done his homework and checked out the
English against the original. If there is a mistake or a slip, he will surely Wnd it, and he is
not above suggesting alternate possibilities, some of which are as cogent as that exasper-
ating last entry on multiple-choice exams, ‘None of these.’ Sara Blackburn has dubbed
this fellow Professor Horrendo, and he is too much with us as he brings the nastiness of
the academic ninguneo (Mexican for put-down) into literary criticism. But it is his mood
that oVends, for in truth he is often right: there have been mistakes, they should be
corrected, which is why it is impossible for a translation ever to be Wnal. The translator is
irked, of course, and is left wondering why the full-dress court-martial when company
punishment would suYce. (pp. 26–7)
It is time for at least one deWnitive statement about translation: it is impossible to make a
handsome living from it. Like so many other artistic endeavors, it is an adjunct or a labor
of love. A person frugal in his wants can possibly live oV it. The successful translator,
catalyst that he is, is not rewarded to the degree that the successful writer is. (p. 28)
Heaven-sent or hell-bent, according to the critic, translation is really something apart
from the other arts. But it is, indisputably, an art. Too often people have deWned it in
terms that only partially apply, for it has never received the massive attention given to
other aspects of literature. It follows, it serves, it is the squire of the arts, but it was Sancho
Panza who made Don Quixote possible. (p. 29)
Gabriel Garcı´a Ma´rquez, One Hundred Years of Solitude (1967), trans. Gregory Rabassa
(1970; New York: Avon Books 1971)
Many years later, as he faced the Wring squad, Colonel Aureliano Buendı´a was to
remember that distant afternoon when his father took him to discover ice. At that
time Macondo was a village of twenty adobe houses, built on the bank of a river of
clear water that ran along a bed of polished stones, which were white and enormous, like
510
recent and contemporary writings

prehistoric eggs. The world was so recent that many things lacked names, and in order to
indicate them it was necessary to point. Every year during the month of March a family
of ragged gypsies would set up their tents near the village, and with a great uproar of
pipes and kettledrums they would display new inventions. First they brought the magnet.
A heavy gypsy with an untamed beard and sparrow hands, who introduced himself as
Melquı´ades, put on a bold public demonstration of what he himself called the eighth
wonder of the learned alchemists of Macedonia. He went from house to house dragging
two metal ingots and everybody was amazed to see pots, pans, tongs, and braziers tumble
down from their places and beams creak from the desperation of nails and screws trying
to emerge, and even objects that had been lost for a long time appeared from where they
had been searched for most and went dragging along in turbulent confusion behind
Melquı´ades’ magical irons. ‘Things have a life of their own,’ the gypsy proclaimed with a
harsh accent. ‘It’s simply a matter of waking up their souls.’ Jose´ Arcadio Buendı´a, whose
unbridled imagination always went beyond the genius of nature and even beyond
miracles and magic, thought that it would be possible to make use of that useless
invention to extract gold from the bowels of the earth. Melquı´ades, who was an honest
man, warned him: ‘It won’t work for that.’ But Jose´ Arcadio Buendı´a at that time did not
believe in the honesty of gypsies, so he traded his mule and a pair of goats for the two
magnetized ingots. U´ rsula Iguara´n, his wife, who relied on those animals to increase their
poor domestic holdings, was unable to dissuade him. ‘Very soon we’ll have gold enough
and more to pave the Xoors of the house,’ her husband replied. For several months he
worked hard to demonstrate the truth of his idea. He explored every inch of the region,
even the riverbed, dragging the two iron ingots along and reciting Melquı´ades’ incanta-
tion aloud. The only thing he succeeded in doing was to unearth a suit of Wfteenth-
century armor which had all of its pieces soldered together with rust and inside of which
there was the hollow resonance of an enormous stone-Wlled gourd. When Jose´ Arcadio
Buendı´a and the four men of his expedition managed to take the armor apart, they found
inside a calciWed skeleton with a copper locket containing a woman’s hair around its
neck. (Opening paragraph, pp. 11–12)
5.14 gregory rabassa
511

5.15 Suzanne Jill Levine
Suzanne Jill Levine, professor of Spanish, University of California, Santa Barbara, is a
leading translator of Latin American Wction, including works by Adolfo Bioy Casares,
Jorge Luis Borges, Carlos Fuentes, Severo Sarduy, and Manuel Puig. She is the author of
numerous studies in Latin American literature, including the book Manuel Puig and the
Spider Woman: His Life and Fictions (2000). She is also the author of a book on the art and
theory of translation, The Subversive Scribe: Translating Latin American Fiction (1991).
A chapter from that book, reprinted below, includes examples from her translation of the
Cuban writer Guillermo Cabrera Infante.
From The Subversive Scribe: Translating Latin American Fiction (St Paul, Minn.:
Graywolf Press, 1991).
From the ‘Preface’
To write about translation is to write about one of writing’s most conscious operations, the one
that lays open the function of writing as a manipulation of words and not of realities.
E. Rodrı´gues Monegal,
Borges: A Literary Biography
Why has the art of translating poetry eclipsed that of prose in the history of translation
studies? The answer seems simple: We have commonly believed that the poetry translator
must be a poet, and therefore that his technique or philosophy deserves our inquiry, but
any somewhat bilingual individual with dictionary in hand can translate a prose text.
Again, the common belief is that novels are easier to translate than poetry. The
traditional virtue of translators, particularly prose translators, has been their invisibility
as humble scribes, scribbling transparent texts in the cellar of the castle of Literature.
The formal and linguistic complexities of twentieth-century Wction obviously belie
these feudal notions. Exposing the poetics of prose translation and the prose translator’s
role as creative writer and literary critic can provide invaluable insights, for translation is
the most concrete form of the interpretive act performed by all readers, scholars, and
teachers of foreign literatures. Translations and the practice of translating, says Gideon
Toury, are observational facts; the description of these facts is not only essential but prior
to any possible theory. Self-referential inquisitions by prose translators should provide
useful models for translation studies as well as models of self-questioning for all
interpreters.
512
recent and contemporary writings

Umberto Eco speaks of telling the process of writing as an activity apart from the
writing itself:
Telling how you wrote something does not mean proving it is ‘well’ written. Poe
said that the eVect of the work is one thing and the knowledge of the process is
another. . . . Sometimes the most illuminating pages on the artistic process have
been written by minor artists, who achieved modest eVects but knew how to ponder
their own processes. (11–12)
With this excusatio propter inWrmitatem in mind, I would like to explain brieXy what
motivated me to write a book about translation.
The project began as a collection of the various notes, articles, and essays I had written
from 1971 to 1984. My Wrst attempt to record the challenging process of my Wrst two
translations, Three Trapped Tigers and Betrayed by Rita Hayworth, was guilelessly called
‘Notes on Translation.’ What struck me almost immediately about these early translation
experiences was how much richer the process was than the Wnal product. Writing about
translation made me even more keenly aware that the reader could gain a more intimate
knowledge of the literary work, and of the languages and cultures involved in the
dialogue between original and translation, if only he or she knew how translation
decisions were made, and how possible choices were Wnally set aside for what were
considered better solutions.
These early translations were also close collaborations, or ‘closelaborations,’ a neolo-
gism coined by Guillermo Cabrera Infante. As I worked with him, and later with Manuel
Puig, I observed that the dilemma of one word versus another was not a problem unique
to translation. The original writer constantly chooses words and phrases, compelled by
intuitions and reasons that often have more to do with language than with his own
intentions; as the composer Maurice Ravel once responded to a eulogizing critic,
creativity is not a matter of inspiration but of choices, of decision-making. The original
is one of many possible versions. When jotting down these Wrst notes, I realized that not
only did the reader ‘lose’ the constant dilemmas and fugitive process of the translation
but also my ongoing dialogue with the authors. Since their letters reveal tantalizing views
of the relationship between original and translation—both as product and process—
I have translated excerpts that will serve as primary material in my presentations of
translation strategies.
Other reasons for writing such a study took shape as I made the transition from
freelance translator to university professor. The academic community is still under the
sway of the positivist prejudice against translation as an unimaginative and unscholarly
activity, and as Carol Maier observes, it still sees translation as ‘a task that does not occur
in the realms of thought but between the pages of a dictionary’ (25). Especially the
translation of contemporary Wction situates me in a sphere that is too ‘literary’ in the eyes
5.15 suzanne jill levine
513

of more traditional colleagues. The translation of poetry, both classical and modern, and
of classical drama, have been marginal scholarly concerns, but does contemporary Wction
merit the same respect? So far only James Joyce, the genius of modernism: Finnegans
Wake, paradigm of the modern, provides in Wction what Pound forged in poetry, a
theoretical though controversial place for translation as interpretation and creation.
But what can we learn from the translation of contemporary Wction—most of it not yet
canonized—and particularly of works from ‘marginal’ countries such as Cuba and Argen-
tina? Much of contemporary Latin Ameriean literature, beginning perhaps with the master
fabulist Jorge Luis Borges, falls under the rubric of ‘postmodernism,’ a tendency that reXects
(for some) exhaustion; John Barth describes Borges’s originality and obsessive, implicit
theme as the ‘diYculty, perhaps unnecessity of writing original works’ (22). Postmodern
writers such as those I’ve translated and am writing about—Cabrera Infante, Puig, Severo
Sarduy—have attempted to revitalize Literature by turningto popular forms. Is such writing
worthy of translation, and do the problems involved in translating it deserve our attention?
I attempt here to address and to redress these questions. In a world preoccupied more
with present than past, English speakers today need to know the concerns expressed in
other languages; North American readers need to hear the voices of that ‘other’ America
alienated from the United States by a torturous political history. But these readers also
need to understand how Latin American writing is transmitted to them, and how
diVerences and similarities between cultures and languages aVect what is Wnally trans-
mitted. Knowing the other and how we receive or hear the other is a fundamental step
toward knowing ourselves. (pp. xii–xv)
‘The Ides of March’: Post-TTT Exercises, The Subversive Scribe, pp. 74–81
Literature is all that is read as such . . .
G. Cabrera Infante,
Exorcismos de esti(l)o
TTT [Cabrera Infante’s Three Trapped Tigers] was written to be read aloud, and the
American English translation followed suit, but doesn’t the written page in translation
inevitably make the textual texture of the spoken more pronounced ? To remake a text that
amuses or moves the reader by the sheer fact of being written in a very local, hence very
‘real’ version of spoken language is surely a task worthy of Pierre Menard. After TTT
I brieXy experienced (to avoid ‘experiment,’ that scientiWc word Cabrera Infante detests)
with Menardian fervor Cabrera Infante’s Exorcismos de esti(l)o (1976), a collection of
comic miscellany in evident homage to Queneau’s Exercices de style. These set pieces really
are exorcisms, excessive games with language and literary forms high and low, Cabrera
514
recent and contemporary writings

Infante blowing oV steam accumulated in TTT, especially in ‘Brainteasers,’ by continu-
ing to abuse texts and to amuse himself. He explains in an interview in the Paris Review:
Exorcismos de esti(l)o . . . means many things: the exorcising of style, exercises in
summertime, even the lure of the pen—all in a send-up of Exercices de style. This is
one of my favorites among my own books, and it closes the cycle begun in my
collected movie reviews, Un oWcio del siglo XX (1962). In Exorcismos, I expanded my
experience (not experiment, a word I loathe when I see it applied to art instead of
science) with Havanese, the idiom of habaneros, who might perhaps be called
hablaneros or total talkers. (166)
I chose to do for Review (Fall 1974) an ‘exorcism’ titled ‘‘‘Los Idus de Marzo’’, segu´n
Plutarco. . . y segu´n Shakespeare, y segu´n Mankiewicz, y segu´n el limpiabotas Chicho Charol’
(16). In this monologue, a shoeshine boy narrates to a silent client his innocent or at least
biased version of the plot of Joseph L. Mankiewicz’s movie version of Shakespeare’s
tragedy Julius Caesar. ‘‘‘The Ides of March,’’ According to Plutarch . . . According to
Shakespeare, According to Mankiewicz, According to the Shoeshine Boy, Ol’ Leatherlip,’
a delirious piece in vulgate, exposes a very literary subject: how culture is handed down
through the metamorphoses of interpretation, that is, translation. Writers (Shakespeare)
interpret history and/or writers (Plutarch); one genre translates another (in this case,
theater reconstructs history and Wlm pirates theater); and readers or spectators of another
age, language, and class interpret history-as-popular-legend converted into high art to
return inevitably to the vox populi.
The translation of this piece conWrms once again that literary parodies of the spoken
become, need to become, more written, more literary when transposed into another
language. Unlike the original parody, the translation mimics a written text.
‘Los Idus . . . ’ already challenges the reader, becomes a veritable obstacle course in
interpreting, indeed in translating spoken Cuban. Chicho’s speech is ‘recorded’ phonet-
ically and forces the reader to translate it into a more communicative code. C becomes
s (socio ¼ sosio), s disappears, making two words into one (quete ¼ que este), and r becomes
l, as in Hollywood’s popular and racist representations of Chinese pronunciation. The
problem of reading Chicho is multiplied by all sorts of wordplays and alliterations. These
can be read as Chicho’s ‘natural’ invention, but we know the author is using Chicho as
a mouthpiece for his own double entendres: The noble Brutus becomes Bruto in Spanish,
which also means stupid.
‘The Ides of March’ is a grotesquerie, low humor straight from the gutter, the satirical
representation of a racial cliche´. This text descends from a popular tradition that harks
back to the Menippea and certainly to the Renaissance farce and Spanish Golden Age
entremeses, in which social satire often plays upon the innocence or ignorance of the
underdog. The black man as the butt of humor is a theme of low farce in both Cuban
5.15 suzanne jill levine
515

and Anglo-American vaudeville, particularly his misperceptions of the rules of the game
in white society and his mispronunciations.1
‘Boy’ in English Wguratively, demeaningly denotes a black man of unspeciWed age who
can be unmistakably identiWed in the Spanish by the Cuban reader. His language, his
unabashed illiteracy, his low station in society, and even his name (Chico suggests ‘burnt,’
thus by metonymy darkened; Charol means ‘patent leather’) belie his racial and, in this
milieu, social identity. Ol’ Leatherlip attempts to duplicate the parodic eVect of the
original name by identifying the character with his trade, but also multiplies or makes
more explicit the parodic thrust of the text by the addition of ‘lip’: The text we read is
indeed a product of Chicho’s ‘lip service.’
Chicho is linguistically, even psychologically plausible in Cabrera Infante’s rendition.
The humor here derives from the contrast between Chicho’s low or comically incorrect
language and the complex literary plot he tries to unravel, as well as the written play with
spoken language that turns the piece into a graphic puzzle that the reader must unravel.
The translation attempts to reproduce both the tension between low language and
high art and written and spoken, but the problem that remains is how to maintain
Chicho’s plausibility. For the sake of humor—the piece’s raison d’eˆtre—verisimilitude is
inevitably undermined when the text loses its raw material and passes into English. The
humor derived from writing words the way they are slurred in Spanish, again, cannot be
repeated to the same eVect in English. ‘This guy’ approximates the tone but is not as
comically confusing as quete (que este). The spoken can only be rendered into yet another
version of the spoken, but also the original already demands, implicitly speaks of
translating into ‘proper’ writing when it is read in Spanish. Here’s the Wrst sentence of
this ludic interlude in spoken ‘Cuban’:
bueno sosio la cosa e quete tipo Sesal no quie sel rey pero si quiere o no quie pero si quiere
la corona que no e pa tanto poque no ejuna corona deoro ni de plata ni con joya ni na ni
na sino quee de yelba asi como de gajo emata y no se polque tanta boba—que sı´se la
pone que si se la quita quetan neneso como un siglo. (p. 35)
For the non-Cuban readers’ sake, here is the above translated to proper phonetics, if not
grammar:
bueno socio la cosa es que este tipo Cesar no quiere ser rey pero si quiere o no quiere pero si
quiere la corona que no es para tanto porque no es una corona de oro ni de plata ni con
joyas ni nada ni nada sino que es de yerba ası´como de gajo de mata yo no se porque tanta
bohada—que si la pone que se la quita que esta´n en eso como un siglo.
Now, in Slanglish:
Well man the thing is that this guy Ceezer dont wanna be king but he really duz or
duznt but he really wants the crown which dont mount to much cos it aint made of
516
recent and contemporary writings

gold or silver or tin or nuttin but sum weeds or branches and I dont know what’s the
big deal about him puttin it on or takin it oV which they fuss about for ages.
Cabrera Infante’s comment on this translation (May 25, 1974):
I really like it, especially since I know how damned diYcult it was, so much so that
I wonder how you could understand the whole thing, since I myself got confused at
certain points of this exercise. I think you’ve transposed it very well into American.
In the original, the authenticity of the transcription of spoken Cuban is what brings
home vividly the distortions but also hidden truths of interpretation, that is, translation.2
I write ‘hidden truths’ because behind Chicho’s innocence and misunderstandings (of,
for example, the symbolic importance of the crown, which he perceives literally as being
a thing made of ‘weeds or branches’) there is implicit criticism. The movie is a
melodrama, and its referent, the high-minded, ‘high art’ drama (and in turn its point
of departure, ancient history) seem on the surface irrelevant to Chicho’s daily existence,
except in and/or through Chicho’s interpretation.
Chicho can certainly identify hypocrisy, deceit, and betrayal in the followers surround-
ing Caesar, except that Chicho uses a word that translates as ‘asslickers’ rather than the
word ‘hypocrites.’ And he Wnds a political issue that strikes home: When the populace
crowds around Caesar begging for favors, Chicho interprets their pleas for ‘amnisty’ for
some relative. Maybe Chicho can understand this detail because, like the Everymen of
Rome, he lives under the double shadow of a dictator’s tyranny: Chicho speaks as a citizen
of Batista’s Cuba, but Cabrera Infante writes the text in the Seventies of Fidel Castro.
Chicho doesn’t consciously admit historical parallels, but they are implied in his
unconsciously devious though direct discourse, as transcribed by his invisible scribe.
The translation can’t possibly reproduce Cuban Black speech but vaguely simulates
spoken Black American, the closest equivalent. What makes this speech humorous to the
reader in Spanish, however, is that it already is written. Chicho’s speech becomes
literature, that is, Cabrera Infante subtly undermines Chicho’s mentality by making
jokes that could sprout from Chicho’s streetwise know-how but which are the author’s.
Something needed to be added in the English, beyond the simulated Black American:
What made Chicho’s speech humorous is the way Cesar becomes Sesal, so I made Caesar
into Ceezer, writing it as it could be heard. Again, I could invent graphic distortions in
English precisely because, unlike Spanish, it often doesn’t (duznt) sound as it is written,
but failure always lurks: An invented distortion is certainly not as funny as a ‘natural’ one.
I had to go further, and, following the author’s lead as in the Brutus/Bruto play, play
with words. When Chicho says Caesar’s smart but perhaps too smart for his own good,
repeating the word vivo (wise guy), which takes on an ironic twist since this vivo (live
wire) ends up muerto (dead), I say ‘and Ceezer who’s no geezer’ with tongue in cheek
5.15 suzanne jill levine
517

since he will never reach old age. And I responded to Brutus and Bruto with ‘his pal
Brutish comes along who aint so brutish.’ ‘The crown which dont mount to much’ plays
with the spoken, which slurringly leaves out syllables, and with a sexual suggestion,
‘mount’: Chicho compares Caesar later on to a cuckolded husband who’s the last to
know—in this case, that he’s in danger of being assassinated—so that a sexual innuendo
Wts well in Chicho’s vulgarized version. These additional jokes compensate somehow for
the loss of the local, and correspond to the text’s underlying ‘thrusts.’
The translation recognizes its status as translation by ‘spickin’ instead of ‘speaking,’
self-consciously saluting the language of the original and participating in the two-
tongued play between English and Spanish already in Cabrera Infante’s original. Trans-
lation means substitution here, as in TTT: In both cascs, the reader is led to respond to
a humor based on language’s distortions and language distorted.
Here is the rest of the translation. Some added or changed puns and alliteration are in
italics:
The thing is that this guy Cashius who’s givin Ceezer the hairy eyeball wants the
little ol’ crown too altho it’s only made of newspaper and he’s eyein it from above on
a balconey with one colum after anotha and he smiles kind of oV the side of his
mouth and that’s when this other guy his pal Brutish comes along who aint so
brutish but who’s damn brutish at the end cos Ceezer is like he was his father in a
manner of spickin and who really loves him and is goin to hand him down the
kingdom someday with the crown and the branch and the whole shebang. But this
here Brutish what he duz is start whispering in corners with Cashius and conspiring
and all that and Ceezer who’s no geezer makes like he dont know what’s happening
but he must know unless kings are like husbands who are always the last to know.
Well, the thing is that Brutish knows it and Ceezer’s friends suspect it and Ceezer’s
wife dreams it and the Sen’dors know it and everybody and his aunt knows it except
Ceezer who keeps making speeches and walkin up and down aroun Rome wrapped
in a white sheet the whole damn day until morning. Then comes this guy with a
beard and a roll of toilet paper in his hand who the friend of some fortuneteller who
already tol Ceezer what was goin to happin to him on the Idas or Ideas of March
which seems to be a bad month, for crazy people and hares and so on, and Ceezer
who jus dont want to unnerstand and when the bad guys come over to im it aint
that way cos before he saw a fat man happily bouncing down the stairs and Ceezer
has this thing with fat guys that he sez you shunt mistrust em but the skinny guys
you should, poor Ceezer who dont know that fat dogs bite harder than skinny dogs
cos theyre fat and grab you wid their strong jores and the party’s over. But this
Ceezer guy goes ahead as if nuttin happened and on and on til he gets to the Senit
which is a cave of Ali babas and the Wfty theeves and is chock full o’ asslickers who
are lying on the Xoor and crawlin over and kneelin before Ceezer askin to get on the
518
recent and contemporary writings

gravy train and to get amnisty for some relative and with all that bunch of beggars
Ceezer dont see the reel bad guys comin and with what intensions besides the knives
which arent sceesors but bonaWdo knives theyre hidin under their sheets. Well the
thing is they cover him with knife wombs cos in dose days they didn’t have guns or
revolvers and they sew his sheet with knives but before this guy Ceezer who’s as
tough as snails and tougher than the marbles, even the loose ones, in that statchue of his
right next to im turns halfway aroun like this and sort of from his proWle he seez his
son who aint his son but is Brutish come over but he sez his son and then Ceezer
spicks to him in sumWn that sounds like Italian and his son who aint his son dont
seem to know Italian cos he dont breathe a word but clams up and keeps a tight
upper and lower lip and makes a tremendous slash in the bread basket and Wnishes
him oV and Ceezer dies like this wrapped up in his sheet which can also be used as a
funeral shroud. And then comes Marlo Brando who dont have to be no Marlowe to
Wnger out who killed Ceezer, and that they’ll kill him too if he dont watch out and
he picks up Ceezer who’s lookin more and more like a salad and carries him out to
the stairs and makes a tremendous fuss saying that he didn’t come to berry Ceezer
but to put him up dere and down below lissening to the speech there’s a load of
people who now that Ceezer died there’s a bigger crowd than before and a
tremendous meeting and sayin that thing about not comin to berry confucion and
a mess cos it seems there’s a war but there isn’t a war and you dont see one Wght and
afterwoods, what happins afterwoods? Well, Brutish does and Brando comes to say
he was brutish but also nobull and Cashius who’s no clay pigeon like Brutish and
even more brutish besides being British cos he kills himself when nobody not even
enemies are around on his birfday cos it seems that’s the way ancient peoples killed
themselves to die on the same day they was born and that’s the story, Joe. Hey, you
want plain or black?
War and confusion are the outcome of Brando’s speech, confusion reigning over the
literal-minded spectator Chicho, who never sees war acted out in this movie pretending
to be a play (or vice versa): hence, berry confucion. Brutish led to British in reaction to
Chicho’s reaction to this travesty of high-style British acting. Alice in Wonderland’s March
hare enters on cue as our Marlowe Chicho gropes to interpret the words of the
Shakespearean soothsayer who whispers or probably shouts into ‘Sesal’s’ ear about
March being a bad month for gente ida (crazy people), ida, the past participle of the
verb ir, literally, ‘gone.’ Associative thinking drives the groping interpreters Chicho and
his translator from the mysterious Ides to the more accessible ida and Ida (the feminine
name) and to Ideas, to berry the reader in confucion.
Yes, I’ll admit I’ve taken liberties for humor’s sake, making Ol’ Leatherlip a mite more
sophisticated and self-conscious than the relatively raw Chicho, but the seed of these
liberties lies in the original itself. Cabrera Infante uses Chicho’s speech as a vehicle of
5.15 suzanne jill levine
519

parody, imposing his subtle and critical diVerences upon ‘another’s’discourse, a discourse
(re)created by him out of the piquant potpourri of spoken Cuban.
notes
1. See chapter Vl, ‘You Always Can Tell,’ of Infante’s Inferno, prefaced by a reference to the Wgures of ‘Blackie and
the Spaniard—traditional comic characters, from as far back as the gay nineties.’ (193)
2. ‘Natural’ inconsistencies in the ‘transcription’ include porque, pronounced once without the r, poque, and the
next time, with the r slurred into l, polque—two possible pronunciations in lower-class Cuban.
bibliography
Barth, John. ‘The Literature of Exhaustion’, Atlantic, August 1967.
Carbrera Infante, G. Infante’s Inferno, trans. S. J. Levine with the author. New York: Harper & Row, 1984.
Carbrera Infante, G. Three Trapped Tigers, trans. Donald Gardner and Suzanne Jill Levine in collaboration with the
author, New York: Harper & Row, 1971.
Carbrera Infante, G. Tres tristes tigres. Barcelona: Seix Barral, 1967.
Eco, Umberto. Postscript to the Name of the Rose, trans. William Wewaver, San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
1984.
Maier, Carol. ‘Some Thoughts on Translations, Imagination and (Un)academic Activity’, Translation Review, 6,
Winter 1986.
Toury, Gideon. In Search of a Theory of Translation, Jerusalem: Porter Institute, 1980.
520
recent and contemporary writings

5.16 Ted Hughes
Ted Hughes (1930–98), British Poet Laureate (1984–98) must also be regarded as among
the major poetry translators in the English tradition. His interest in translation pre-dates
his 1965 co-founding with Daniel Weissbort of the journal Modern Poetry in Translation
(MPT). But MPT helped to bring a number of poets to his attention: notably the Israeli
Yehuda Amichai, the Hungarian Ja´nos Pilinszky, and the Yugoslav Vasko Popa. The Wrst
two of these he translated and the last he did much to promote.
One impulse for the journal had been Hughes’s encounter with poets from Eastern
Europe at various international festivals, and he remained particularly interested in the
post-war East European poets of the generation immediately preceding his own, writers
the circumstances of whose lives ‘had brought their poetry down to such precisions,
discriminations and humilities that it is a new thing’.1 Hence also the allurement for
him of the English versions produced by the Israeli poet Yehuda Amichai of his own
poems, or of the scrupulously literal renderings from the Hungarian of Ja´nos Pilinszky by
another Hungarian poet, Ja´nos Csokits. Hughes was struck by the way these versions
powerfully conveyed material of great urgency, which was apparently dissipated in more
polished or, as we might now say, ‘domesticated’ versions.
Ted Hughes’s severe approach to the translation of poetry suggests a belief in the ability
of poetry to cross language frontiers, provided the translator does not interpose himself
overmuch. That his interest in translation was no passing phase is evidenced by his
continuing work in this area throughout his life. Although he did not take part in the
polemics, he can be said to have represented a foreignizing tendency, relatable to changes
in the literary atmosphere and a new openness of the English language. More immediately,
though, it can be related to his own needs as a writer and it provides important clues to his
development which have been largely ignored. It has been observed that paradoxically
Hughes, while remaining close to the ad verbum text, has created works of translation
which are unmistakably Hughesian. But then, his translations were an integral part of his
oeuvre, just as the promotion of translation was an intrinsic part of his professional activity
as a writer.
Hughes himself wrote only one short (uncollected) essay describing the translation
boom of the previous decade, while at the same time re-formulating his bias towards literal
translation: ‘Modern Poetry in Translation’ (Modern Poetry in Translation: 1983, An Annual
1 Ted Hughes’s ‘Introduction’ to Vasko Popa, Collected Poems, trans. Anne Pennington (Manchester: Carcanet,
1978), 1
5.16 ted hughes
521

Survey (Manchester: Carcanet, 1983)). He refers to a work that for him represented a kind
of model, Specimens of Bushmen Folklore, collected in the 1870s by the German-trained
ethnographer and philologist William Bleek: ‘Ideally we would have liked to see at least
some poems translated [ . . . ] as meticulously as Bleek’s translation of Bushman lore—
though we understood the limited appeal of anything so raw and strange’ (p. 12). (See Sect.
5.7 on Ethnopoetics, for W. S. Merwin’s interest in the near contemporary of Bleek, E. A.
Wallace Budge, who translated The Egyptian Book of the Dead). As in the early MPT
editorials, Hughes inveighed against translations that aimed to produce a ‘parallel equiva-
lent’ of some original’s unique verbal texture. He commented that, in fact, ‘we found the
closest thing to it in translations made by poets whose Wrst language was not English, or by
scholars who did not regard themselves as poets’ (pp. 12–13).
Yehuda Amichai
From Yehuda Amichai, Amen, translated from the Hebrew by the author and Ted
Hughes, with an introduction by Ted Hughes (New York: Harper & Row, 1977)
From ‘Letter of Recommendation’ (p. 66)
[ . . . ]
I remember my father waking me up
for early prayers. He did it caressing
my forehead, not tearing the blanket away.
Since then I love him even more.
And because of this
let him be woken up
gently and with love
on the Day of Resurrection.
[Hughes made minimal changes in the draft given him by the author. In the last stanza,
Amichai oVers an alternative for ‘And because of this’ (In merit of this) which Hughes does
not take up. And in the following line, Amichai has ‘may he be woken up’. Of course, in other
poems, the changes are more considerable. But in general, Hughes’s versions of Amichai do
not shrink from a certain foreignness. Hughes was as good as his word: ‘The translations were
made by the poet himself. All I did was correct the more intrusive oddities and errors of
grammar and usage, and in some places shift about the phrasing and line endings. What
I wanted to preserve above all was the tone and cadence of Amichai’s own voice speaking in
English which seems to me marvellously true to the poetry, in these renderings.’]
522
recent and contemporary writings

Ja´nos Pilinszky
From Ja´nos Pilinszky, Selected Poems, trans. Ted Hughes and Ja´nos Csokits (Manchester:
Carcanet, 1977)
From ‘The French Prisoner’ (the last two stanzas, p. 30)
Why go on. Guards came for him.
He had escaped from the nearby prison camp.
And just as I did then, in that garden,
I am strolling here, among garden shadows, at home.
I look into my notes and quote:
If only I could forget that Frenchman . . .
And from my ears, my eyes, my mouth
The scalding memory shouts at me:
‘I am hungry!’ And suddenly I feel
the eternal hunger
which that poor creature has long ago forgotten
and which no earthly nourishment can lessen.
He lives on me. And more and more hungrily!
And I am less and less suYcient for him.
And now he, who would have eaten anything,
Is clamouring for my heart.
[In addition to the literal translations Ja´nos Csokits provided Hughes with contextual
notes. Here is Csokits’s literal [unpublished]:]
Go on with this—what for? Guards came for him;
he had escaped from the near-by prisoners’ camp.
And I am wandering about, as I did in that garden then,
among the shadows of this garden at home.
I look into my notes and quote:
‘If only I could forget him, that Frenchman . . . ’
And from my ears, my eyes, my mouth
the Werce memory fervently shouts at me:
‘I am hungry!’ And all at once I feel
that immortal hunger which
the poor wretch does not feel since long,
and which no earthly food can still.
He lives on me! And ever more hungrily!
5.16 ted hughes
523

And I am less and less enough for him!
He who would have subsisted on any aliment:
is demanding now my heart.
From Ted Hughes’s ‘Introduction’ to Ja´nos Pilinszky, Selected Poems
Very many lines of his [Csokits’s] rough draft have been impossible to improve, as far as
I could judge, and besides that odd inevitability and ‘style’ which a poet’s translation into
language other than his own often seems to have, he retained naturally an unspoiled sense
of the Xavour and the tone of the originals—that very intriguing quality which is the
translator’s will-o’-the-wisp, the foreignness and strangeness. (pp. 13–14)
Seneca
Ted Hughes’s adaptation of Seneca’s play Oedipus was Wrst performed by the National
Theatre Company in March 1968, produced and designed by Peter Brook, with John
Gielgud in the title role and Irene Worth as Jocasta. Aversion had been commissioned from
David Turner, but, as Hughes put it in his introduction: ‘Peter Brook had clear ideas about
the type of production he wanted, and when he found the translation [by Turner] did not
quite suit them he invited me in to go over it and adapt it [ . . . ] and after some tentative
false starts, we found the only way forward was for me to go back to the original Seneca,
eking out my Latin with a Victorian crib and so make a completely new translation’ (Seneca’s
Oedipus, adapted by Ted Hughes (London: Faber & Faber, 1969), 7). Brook, in fact, got the
actors to study the play in the Miller version, which Hughes described as ‘being extremely
weighty and extremely literal’ (from Ted Hughes’s unpublished account).
As Hughes notes: ‘I was in complete sympathy with Peter Brook’s guiding idea, which was
to make a text that would release whatever inner power this story, in its plainest, bluntest
form, still has, and to unearth, if we could, the ritual possibilities within it’ (pp. 7–8). The
Seneca adaptation inaugurated Ted Hughes’s collaboration with Peter Brook, culminating in
a play, ‘Orghast’, written by Ted Hughes in a language which he invented and called Orghast
(see A. C. H. Smith, Orghast in Persepolis, 1972).
In the excerpt below, King Oedipus, in dialogue with Creon, Jocasta’s brother, calls for
expiation for the murder of his predecessor Laius, so as to bring about deliverance from the
scourge that is aZicting Thebes. He himself, of course, was responsible for this, having
unwittingly killed Laius, his father, and afterwards married his own mother Jocasta, Laius’s
wife. The lineation, supervised by Hughes, has been retained. Note the absence of
punctuation and the spacing of the words. (See also, Sect. 2.6, above, for Alexander
Neville’s translation, 1563, of the same passage).
524
recent and contemporary writings

Seneca, Oedipus, Act II
From Seneca’s Oedipus, adapted by Ted Hughes (London: Faber & Faber, 1969), 24
oedipus:
the movers the guides the lawgivers
are above
they are demanding expiation for this murder
vengeance for Laius
the King of Thebes
where is the man
you great gods
you who choose Kings from among
men and set them up and keep them in power
come down and hear these words
you who made
this whole Universe and the laws we have to live and
die in
hear me
and you
great burning
watcher
who look after the seasons of this earth
who give sap and blood its strength
who pace out
the centuries
and you who govern darkness
and
you
muscle of the earth
who move and speak
in the winds and in water
and you who manage the
dead
be with me now
hear these words I
speak now [ . . . ]
Literal version from Seneca Vlll, Tragedies 1, trans. Frank Justus Miller (1917; Cambridge,
Mass. and London: Loeb Classical Library, 1979), 449.
Now at Heaven’s command let the crime be expiated.
Whoever of the gods dost look with favour upon kingdoms—though, thou, whose are
the laws of the swift-revolving heavens; and thou, greatest glory of the unclouded sky,
who presidest over the twelve signs in thy changing course, who dost unroll the slow
centuries with swift wheel; and thou, his sister, ever faring opposite to thy brother,
Phoebe, night-wanderer; thou whom the winds obey, who over the level deep dost speed
thy azure car; and thou who dost allot homes devoid of light—do ye all attend: [ . . . ]
Version by David Anthony Turner, from Classical Tragedy: Greek and Roman: Eight Plays,
ed. Robert W. Corrigan (New York: Applause Theatre Book Publishers, 1990), 454–5
Well, the Gods demand it. Now someone will pay for that atrocity. All you gods who
look kindly on the work of kings, be near me. May no house be a haven, no home secure,
may no country welcome in his banishment the man whose hand struck down King Laius.
May shame torment his bed, may his seed mock heaven. With that same hand may he kill
even his own father, and may he—can any curse be more deadly?—may he do all the
5.16 ted hughes
525

things I have escaped. There shall be no forgiveness anywhere. Apollo who moves the lips
of the priestess to speak the future, come yourself as witness to my words. By the kingdom
here of which I am guest, and master, by the gods of that home I left behind—I make this
oath. My father, and a quiet old age for him, peaceful possession of a high majesty till
death, for Merope my mother—marriage to Polybus only, never to—someone else . . . On
all this may mercy for the guilty man depend. May I not spare him . . .
But the scene of that foul murder—where did it take place? Tell me again. Was it a fair
Wght or an ambush?
Racine
Ted Hughes’s version of Phe`dre was Wrst performed, in London, by the Almeida Theatre
Company, August 1998, directed by Jonathan Kent, with Diana Rigg as Phe`dre and Toby
Stephens as Hippolytus. That there was an earlier version by Robert Lowell, who also
produced a version of The Oresteia is perhaps not without signiWcance (see Sect. 4.10,
above, on Lowell, for excerpts of the same passages of Phe`dre and Oresteia).
For Ted Hughes, blank verse was not a viable option. Implicitly he recognizes the limits
of translation by aiming to convey an aspect of Racine’s masterpiece rather than the play in
its literary-historical context, or by means of an updated or personalized transcription.
That he felt able to do so is surely because the mythical substratum for him was a
permanent feature of human existence.
From Jean Racine, Phe`dre, new translation version by Ted Hughes (1998; New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1999), 37
[Act 2: Queen Phe`dre confesses her fatal love for her stepson Hippolytus, son of her
husband, King Theseus. See Sect. 4.10, above, for Robert Lowell’s version and his remarks
on the translation of Phe`dre; also Edwin Morgan’s version into Scots, in Sect. 5.23, below.]
[ . . . ]
I am in love.
But do not suppose for a second
I think myself guiltless
For loving you as I love you.
I have not
Indulged myself out of empty boredom.
I have not drunk this strychnine day after day
As an idle refreshment.
526
recent and contemporary writings

Wretched victim of a divine vengeance!
I detest myself
More than you can ever detest me.
You are right, the gods are watching me.
Yes, the same gods
Who have Wlled me with these horrible Xames
That are killing me—as they have killed
All the women in my family.
[ . . . ]
O prince, I cannot speak to you
Of anything but you. Avenge yourself.
I am depraved. Act. Punish me.
Prove yourself the son of your father—
Rid the world of a monster!
The widow of King Theseus has dared
To fall in love with his son, Hippolytus.
This disgusting pest should be killed.
Look—my heart. Here.
Bury your sword here.
This heart is utterly corrupt.
It cannot wait to expiate its evil.
Ovid
Ted Hughes was one of the contributors to After Ovid, New Metamorphoses, ed. Michael
Hofmann and James Lasdun (1994), and continued thereafter to translate the Metamorph-
oses, which was so important to Shakespeare, a primary focus for Hughes (cf. his A Choice
of Shakespeare’s Verse and Shakespeare and the Goddess of Complete Being). Hughes com-
pleted a substantial part of the Metamorphoses, and his Tales from Ovid was among his most
acclaimed works.
Ovid, Metamorphoses, ‘Salmacis and Hermaphroditus’
From Tales from Ovid: Twenty Passages from the Metamorphoses (London: Faber and
Faber, 1997), 226–7
[see Arthur Golding for his translation of the same passage, p. 88. Hughes referred to
Golding’s translation, as well as to the Latin source text. Hughes’s elaborations or additions
(e.g. ‘slippery as the roots of big lilies’; ‘helpless to her burrowing kisses . . . ’; ‘A tangle of
5.16 ted hughes
527

constrictors, nippled with suckers’), seem designed (as in Golding’s version) to make the
scene more graphically vivid.]
‘I’ve won!’ shrieked Salmacis. ‘He’s mine!’
She could not help herself.
‘He’s mine!’ she laughed, and with a couple of bounds
Hit the pool stark naked
In a rocking crash and thump of water
The slips of her raiment settling wherever
They happened to fall. Then out of the upheaval
Her arms reach and wind round him,
And slippery as the roots of big lilies
But far stronger, her legs below wind round him.
He Xounders and goes under. All his strength
Fighting to get back up through a cloud of bubbles
Leaving him helpless to her burrowing kisses.
Burning for air, he can do nothing
As her hands hunt over him, and as her body
Knots itself every way around him
Like a sinewy otter
Hunting some kind of Wsh
That Xees hither and thither inside him,
And as she Xings and locks her coils
Around him like a snake
Around the neck and legs and wings of an eagle
That is trying to Xy oV with it,
And like ivy which Wrst binds the branches
In its meshes, then pulls the whole tree down,
And as the octopus
A tangle of constrictors, nippled with suckers,
That drag towards a maw
Embraces its prey.
Line-by-line modern version by D. E. Hill, Ovid, Metamorphoses i–iv (Warminster: Aris &
Phillips, 1985), 375
‘I have won, and he is mine,’ cried out the Naiad, and she threw
all her clothing well away from her and rushed into the middle of the waters
and held him as he fought against her, violently snatching kisses
and bringing her hands up under him and touching his unwilling breast;
528
recent and contemporary writings

and now she draped herself around the youth this way and that.
At last, though he struggled against her in his desire to get away,
she entwined herself around him like a snake picked up by the king of birds
and snatched aloft (as she hangs from him she binds his head
and feet and entwines her tail around his spreading wings),
or like ivy which likes to weave its way up tall tree trunks,
or like an octopus catching and holding its enemy
beneath the sea by spreading its tentacles in all directions.
Aeschylus
In his translation of Aeschylus’ The Oresteia, (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1999),
as with Seneca and Racine, Hughes does not attempt to reproduce the metre, but sparely
and vividly confronts the myth. In general he exercises much self-restraint, remaining true
to his own ‘literalistic’ aims, and if he takes liberties, these are in deleting rather than
adding. While clearly aiming at immediacy, he is mindful of formal considerations (more
than a shadow of the alexandrine lies over his translation of Phe`dre).
The Oresteia
From Ted Hughe’s translation of Aeschylus’ The Oresteia (New York: Farrar Strauss and
Giroux, 1999), 10–11
[The lines below from Agamemnon (the Wrst play in the Oresteian trilogy) are spoken by
the Chorus and describe the embarcation for Troy of the Argive Xeet under the twin
monarchs, Agamemnon and Menelaus, after Helen, wife to Menelaus, has been abducted
to Troy by Paris. It recounts the ominous killing of a pregnant hare by two birds of prey,
representing the two royal brothers. See Sects. 4.10 and 3.5 above, for versions by Lowell
and Browning respectively of the same passage.]
I am the man to tell this tale.
Old age
Takes away everything
Except a few words the gods have tested,
For the eye
That opens towards the grave
Sees the core of things and is prophetic.
As our two Kings set out,
5.16 ted hughes
529

As their Xoating forest of spears
Lifted anchor,
Two birds,
Hook-beaked, big-winged birds,
Sailed over
On the right—on the right!
Good fortune!
The whole army cheered the good omen—
Victory!
Then those two birds,
The black bird and the white bird,
Flushed and drove and killed
A hare heavy with her twins.
The whole army
Saw them kill the pregnant hare. They saw
The black bird and the white bird
That had brought them promise of victory
Rip the mother’s womb and drag from it
The living unborn tenants—
The whole army watched from start to Wnish
That murder of the unborn.
If evil is in this wind, let it blow over.
Calchas the seer
Recognised the birds,
The white bird and the black,
Menelaus and Agamemnon.
Calchas
Cried to the whole army and the two Kings:
‘What does this kill mean? I will tell you.
It means
Victory with a twist.
Fate will destroy
All Troy’s cattle,
All Troy’s crops,
And at last
Will open to you the city’s holy of holies.
But when you have empted Troy of her blood and her babies,
Then you can expect the anger of heaven.
Artemis, the moon-faced, the goddess,
530
recent and contemporary writings

The mother of the hares,
Beautiful Artemis,
Deity of the womb and its mystery,
Protectress of mothers and their darlings,
She has heard the death-cry of the hare,
She has seen what her father’s birds have done,
She has looked through the bloody spy-hole
Where the hare’s womb was plucked out.
She has seen the bigger murder behind it
Still to be committed
By the hooked heads,
The white bird and the black bird—
What will she do now?
[ . . . ]
Recent scholarly version by Hugh Lloyd-Jones of the Wrst part of this passage
(Aeschylus, Oresteia (1982; London, Duckworth, 2001), 21–2
I have power to tell of the auspicious command of the expedition, the command of men
in authority; for still from the gods am I inspired
With persuasive power, my strengh in song, by the life that has grown up with me:
To tell how the two-throned command of the Achaeans, of the youth of Hellas
the concordant leadership,
was sped with avenging spear and arm
by the warlike bird of omen to the Teucrian land,
the king of birds appearing to the kings of the ships,
the black eagle and behind it the white one,
appearing near the palace on the hand in which the spear is brandished,
in seats conspicuous,
feeding upon the hare, her womb teeming with young,
checked from running her Wnal course.
[ . . . ]
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight
Ted Hughes managed almost to complete a draft of the whole poem, although only a
section was revised for publication in The School Bag, ed. Seamus Heaney and Ted Hughes
5.16 ted hughes
531

(London: Faber and Faber, 1997). Wodwo, the title of Hughes’s 1967 collection, alludes to
a kind of forest troll, a wodwo, which makes an appearance in Sir Gawain.
The passage below describes the encounter between the Green Knight and Sir Gawain,
who has sought him out in the Green Chapel, so as to receive a blow, in return for the
decapitating one dealt the Green Knight when the latter had presented himself at King
Arthur’s court a year before and issued his challenge. Gawain Xinches the Wrst time. Here
he prepares to withstand the second blow. See Sect. 5.22, below, for a literal version of this
passage and a translation by W. S. Merwin, whose career as poet and translator Hughes
followed with much attention.
From The School Bag, ed. Seamus Heaney and Ted Hughes
(London Faber and Faber, 1997), 489–90
‘But hurry up, warrior, for God’s sake come to the point.
Deal me my destiny, and do it quickly.
I shall stand to your stroke with not one stir
Till your axe-head hits me. I give you my word.’
‘Then here it comes,’ cried the other, and heaved it upwards
With a gargoyle grimace as if he were mad.
And with all his strength hauled down, yet never touched him.
He stopped the blade mid-stroke, before it could harm.
Gawain patiently waited, not a nerve twitched.
He stood there still as a rock or some stiV stump
That grips the stony ground with a hundred roots.
Then the Man in Green spoke pleasantly:
‘Now that your heart is whole again, may I ask you,
Let your high rank, that Arthur gave you, preserve you
And recover your neck from my stroke, if it is able.
Then Gawain ground his teeth and shouted in anger:
‘Why, hack away, you savage, you threaten too long.
I think you have frightened yourself with your bragging.’
‘What’s this?’ cried the other. ‘Rough words from Sir Gawain?
I will no longer withhold from such an appeal
Justice.’
And he braced himself for the stroke—
Clenching both lip and brow.
No wonder he did not like it
Who saw no rescue now.
532
recent and contemporary writings

Pushkin
Ted Hughes’s last known poem is, in fact, a translation, a version of Alexander Pushkin’s
‘The Prophet’ (Prorok). This was for a collection of Pushkin translations, by various hands
After Pushkin, (London, The Folio Society, 1999), edited by Elaine Feinstein, on the
occasion of the bicentenary of the poet’s birth.
Hughes was provided by Daniel Weissbort and Valentina Polukhina with a literal
version of the Russian and a guide to the sound and prosody. Evidently he sensed
something ‘primitive’ in Pushkin’s highly sophisticated poem or in the language, insofar
as this could be gleaned from the English versions he had read and the crib he used. What
is thus signalled presumably is that he had found a starting point, as with Pilinszky and
Amichai.
Conclusion of ‘The Prophet’
ad verbum version, with alternative words suggested (published in
Modern Poetry in Translation, 15 (1999), 146)
I lay like a corpse in the desert/wilderness,
And the voice of God called out to me/summoned me:
‘Arise, prophet, and see, and hear,
Carry out my will,
And passing by sea and land,
Burn the hearts of people with the word.
Translation by Ted Hughes in After Pushkin, 26
I lay on stones like a corpse.
There God’s voice came to me:
‘Stand, Prophet, you are my will.
Be my witness. Go
Through all seas and lands. With the Word
Burn the hearts of the people.’
5.16 ted hughes
533

5.17 Douglas Robinson
Douglas Robinson (b. 1954), professor of English at the University of Mississippi, studied
at the universities of Washington and of Jyva¨skyla¨, Finland. He lived and taught in
Finland for fourteen years; co-edited, with Ilkka Rekiaro, a Finnish-English-Finnish
Dictionary (1989); and has translated Finnish poetry into English; he has also translated
from Russian, Spanish, and German. Robinson is a proliWc and versatile translation
scholar. He is the author of Translation and Taboo (1996), Translation and Empire:
Postcolonial Approaches Explained (1997), What Is Translation?: Centrifugal Theories, Crit-
ical Interventions (1997), and Who Translates?: Translator Subjectivities Beyond Reason
(2001). He also edited the textbook Western Translation Theory from Herodotus to Nietzsche
(1997). The title of his book The Translator’s Turn (1991) illustrates his emphasis on how
the act of translation, even when under considerable institutional and normative strain, is
a matter of creative, personal and physical reaction and expression.
From The Translator’s Turn (Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1991)
Conclusion
The argument of this book could be reduced to a few fairly simple and truistic
propositions:
1. Translators choose the TL [target language] words and phrases that feel right.
2. Translators feel their way to the ‘right’ TL words and phrases in a complex two-way
dialogue with the writer of the SL [source language] text and the reader of the TL
text.
3. Translators turn from the SL text toward a TL rephrasing in a wide variety of ways.
4. Translators act upon their TL readers and can direct their inXuence over the TL
reader in a wide variety of ways.
Put like this, these claims seem so commonsensical and obvious, so inevitable, even,
that it would be diYcult to quarrel with them—diYcult, indeed, to imagine what
possible position I could be arguing against. And certainly, if my case were that these
propositions should simply be added to the current prepositional content of mainstream
translation theory—that mainstream theory be supplemented with them, expanded to
contain them—I doubt that many readers would protest.
In fact, of course, my theoretical revisionism is much more radical. The negative
burden of my argument would include at least the following as well:
534
recent and contemporary writings

5. Equivalence between texts is not the Wnal goal of all translation. Equivalence is an
interpretive Wction that helps the translator work toward the true goal of transla-
tion, a working TL text—and is only one of many such Wctions.
6. The striving for sense-for-sense equivalence is based on a reductive and ideologic-
ally contingent interpretation of the SL text and is really only fruitful with certain
relatively uninteresting texts: unprepossessing technical and scholarly texts, for
example. Most SL texts are more demanding and will require more innovative
turnings.
7. Normative rules intended to govern the translator’s choice of TL words and
phrases are not only irrelevant to the practice of translation, they are, insofar
as they alienate translators from their best intuitions about texts, actively
pernicious.
8. Translators are never, and should never be forced to be (or to think of themselves
as), neutral, impersonal transferring devices. Translators’ personal experiences—
emotions, motivations, attitudes, associations—are not only allowable in the
formation of a working TL text, they are indispensable.
This second group of propositions underlines the oppositional thrust of my argument.
I want to incorporate from mainstream theories certain practical approaches to the act of
translation—attempting to render in the TL the sense of individual words, sentences, or
whole texts (metonymy), for example, and attempting to persuade the TL reader to the
SL writer’s position (conversion)—but only as speciWc methods of limited scope in a
broad and complex Weld; and I want to displace the entire rhetoric and ideology of
mainstream translation theory, which, as I claim, is medieval and ecclesiastical in origin,
authoritarian in intent, and denaturing and mystiWcatory in eVect.
The speciWc taxonomic formulations that I oVer are expendable. The six tropes
(metonymy, synecdoche, metaphor, irony, hyperbole, and metalepsis) and the seven
versions (conversion, reversion, subversion, perversion, aversion, diversion, and conver-
sation), my speciWc conceptions of those tropes and versions, and even my conception of
translation in tropological and ethical terms—these are more illustrations of the para-
digm shift that I want to eVect than its substance, which is, I suppose, best summed up in
the eight propositions listed above. I certainly do not expect my tropes and versions to be
adopted wholesale, and I would be horriWed if they were adopted wholesale in an
authoritarian, normative manner, imposed on translators as ‘correct’ or ‘acceptable’
approaches to translation. They are, I repeat, entirely expendable, and it is my sincere
hope that they will be expended in translatological debate: literally used up, subsumed
into future (and Wner) formulations of the translator’s hermeneutical tools and stances.
(pp. 259–60)
5.17 douglas robinson
535

From ‘The Ascetic Foundations of Western Translatology: Jerome and Augustine’ in
Translation and Literature, 1 (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1992), 3–25
[ . . . ] The ascetic imperialism of the medieval Church was Wrst channelled through
superstitious fear of an angry deity monopolized by the clergy; and in some sense, despite
an escalating series of bourgeois demystiWcations throughout the modern era, that
imperialism of the spirit is with us still today. Gradually, however, the monasteries
extended their worldly sway into overtly socio-political spheres, through the amassing
of vast ecclesiastical land holdings, for example—a kind of parallel or mirror-image
feudalism informed not by territorialism but by an ascetic ideology that structured even
decadent opulence in totalitarian ways. Toward the end of the Middle Ages, in the
fourteenth and Wfteenth centuries, the monastic opposition to the territorial ideology of
might makes-right began to assume political form in the rise of the absolute state, which
can be seen as the socio-ideological extension of monastic rule.1 And Wnally—and most
importantly, though also most indirectly—ecclesiastical asceticism ‘seized power’ in
Western society through the rise of a secular but insistently ascetic bourgeoisie, dedicated
to monetary proWt through a new ascetic regimen: temperance, silence, order, resolution,
frugality, industry, sincerity, justice, moderation, cleanliness, tranquillity, chastity, and
humility, in Benjamin Franklin’s late-eighteenth-century list.2 This transformed ascetic
ideology has been so successful in the past few centuries that Franklin’s (or we could say
Augustine’s) ascetic ‘virtues’ have become naturalized in Western society, inscribed in
what we unthinkingly take to be human ‘nature,’ in a discipline that (we believe) it is
only ‘natural’ for all humans to undertake.
[ . . . ]
Certainly the importance of asceticism for the history of Western translatology cannot
be over-emphasized. ‘Normal’ translation as it has been imagined in the West for sixteen
centuries, and continues to be imagined today, is hegemonically ascetic (although
humanistic strains from Cicero and the other classical theorists survive even within
Christian asceticism, encouraging the translator to develop, to grow, through transla-
tion). Indeed it is diYcult to recall (or even to imagine) a Western deWnition of
translation, simple or complex, old or new, that does not immediately betray its ascetic
aims. Consider only the ‘renunciations’ that are now and have long been expected of the
translator: the renunciation of source-language syntax and ‘colour’ or ‘feel’ or ‘mood’, in
the reduction of the source-language text to an abstract ‘sense’; the renunciation of
personal biases, predilections, preferences, and opinions in the education of the transla-
tor into a neutral transfer-machine. Consider the diatribes launched at ‘word-for-word’
and ‘free’translations, and the temptation good translators feel and resist to indulge those
pleasures: to cling ‘too’ closely to the source-language text, to trace its contours lovingly
in the target language, by translating word for word; or to strike oV ‘too’ boldly in a new
536
recent and contemporary writings

direction, to sever ideologically-controlled ties with source language meaning, by trans-
lating freely. Consider the discipline required of the translator to renounce all this, to
resist such temptations, and the institutional support (translator training, translator
organizations and conferences, legal and Wnancial sanctions) provided to back up that
discipline. The history of Western translatology is many things, but above all it is a
history of ascetic discipline. After Jerome and Augustine, even the worldly rebels against
ascetic translatology typically only modify the prescribed ascesis.
Christian asceticism begins in a double tradition, eremitic and cenobitic, and the
history of Western translatology reXects that split from the beginning. The eremite was
the hermit who took drastic and dramatic steps to still the lure of the world in himself:
starvation, motionlessness, sleep deprivation, the refusal to lie or sit down, sitting on
poles. The cenobite was the monk or nun who submitted to monastic discipline,
surrendered all decision-making to the father or mother superior and to the founder of
the order, in the form of a monastic ‘rule’. [ . . . ]
The worldly success of cenobitism has rendered the ascetic tradition in Western
translatology more hegemonically cenobitic than eremitic; the ideal Western translator
has always been more a disciplined monk or nun than a self-dramatizing hermit. As
[GeoVrey Galt] Harpham says, the cenobite, like the ideal translator, is ‘faultless rather
than excellent, a subtracted rather than an achieved self.’3 It is tempting, therefore, to set
the eremitic tradition to one side and focus on the development of translatology out of
cenobitism. The exclusion of the eremite—the maverick, the bull-headed loner, the
individualist, the Ho¨lderlin, the Pound, the Nabokov—is in fact one of the great
temptations of mainstream Western translatology, and one that I am going to have to
resist if I am to explore the complexities of ascetic translation. Although it is true, for
example, that most Western translators have received overwhelming instruction of one
kind or another in cenobitic invisibility (the ‘subtracted self’), and have more or less
successfully resisted the temptation to enter into eremitic self-dramatizations, the two
most famous Western translatologists were eremites: Jerome, the hermit who ended his
life in a monastery in Bethlehem, and Martin Luther, the Augustinian monk who broke
free of the monastery and became one of the Wrst modern eremites, a famous ascetic who
ate and drank and married and clamoured for attention. Jerome’s ‘Letter to Pammachius’
(395) and Luther’s ‘Circular Letter on Translation’ (1530) are powerfully eremitic docu-
ments that have shaped translatology from the ideological periphery: wild, shaggy letters
aXame with the passionate tempers and animal fears of their writers, documents that have
been more quoted than read precisely because they are so embarrassingly unkempt and
uncouth.
Calm, rational, presentable (cenobitic) translatology begins in the West in Book II
of Augustine’s On Christian Doctrine, his discussion of signs. [ . . . ] Where Jerome’s
eremitic translatology is personal, pragmatic, and riddled with internal contradictions,
5.17 douglas robinson
537

Augustine’s cenobitic translatology is impersonal, perfectionist, and systematic; where
Jerome’s is rhetorically hot, Augustine’s is cool.
[ . . . ]
Jerome writes to Pammachius because he has been charged with ‘ignorance and
falsehood . . . by an inexperienced, bumptious tongue’, (probably RuWnus). He goes on:
This tongue, it seems, claims that I have made mistakes through misinterpretation
or carelessness when I translated into Latin a letter written by another in Greek . . .
My enemies tell the uneducated Christian crowd that Jerome falsiWed the original
letter, that Jerome has not translated word for word, that Jerome has written
‘beloved friend’ in place of ‘honorable Sir’, and that—more disgraceful still—
Jerome has maliciously condensed by omitting the epithet ‘most reverend’.4
Jerome is at some pains to defend himself against these charges—to show that they are
based on ignorance and inexperience of translation—and lashes back at his enemies with
his own ‘bumptious tongue’. Compared with his slightly younger and inWnitely more
authoritative contemporary Augustine,5 Jerome is a quirky, crotchety hothead whose
blood boils throughout the letter:
At the very beginning, before I defend my translation, I wish to interrogate those
men who call cunning and malice prudence. Where did you obtain your copy of my
translation? Who gave it to you? How dare you display something obtained by your
fraud? What place will be safe when a man cannot keep his secrets even behind his
own walls and in his private desk? (p. 134)
[ . . . ]
In the defence that follows of his sense-for-sense Latin translation of a Greek letter from
Epiphanius, Bishop of Constantia, to John, Bishop of Jerusalem, Jerome vacillates tellingly
between eremitic self-dramatizations as an experienced translator who knows the right way
to translate and cenobitic submission to the authority of a whole string of classical and
Christian authors (Cicero, Horace, Terence, Plautus, Caecilius, and Bishop Evagrius of
Antioch, who translated Athanasius’s Life of Anthony into Latin). Here, for example, is an
eremitic passage, which Jerome quotes from his own preface to an earlier translation:
‘In the following sentence composed by another man, it is diYcult not to diverge
somewhere; and in translating it is hard to preserve the beauty of idiom which in the
original is most distinguished. Each particular word has a signiWcance of its own.
Possibly I have no equivalent, by which to express some word, and if I then must go
out of my way to reach the goal, miles are spent to cover what in reality is a short
city block. To this diYculty must be added the windings of word transpositions, the
dissimilarities in the use of cases, the varieties in Wgures of speech, and, most
538
recent and contemporary writings

diYcult of all, the peculiar vernacular marrow of the language itself. If one translates
each and every word literally, the passage will sound absurd; and if by necessity
I change anything in the order and wording, it will seem that I have abused the
function of translator.’ Then, after a lengthy discussion, which would be a bit
boring to follow here, I added the following: ‘If anyone does not see how translation
adulterates the charm of the original, let him squeeze Homer word for word into
Latin—I will go even further and ask him to render Homer into Latin prose: the
result will be that the order of the words will seem ridiculous, and that the most
eloquent of poets will be hardly articulate.’ (pp. 138–9)
[ . . . ]
Jerome does not stick to this rhetorical stance throughout, however; he sandwiches
these particular eremitic claims, for example, between quotations from Cicero and
Bishop Evagrius that establish his cenobitic credentials as submissive follower of a
‘Rule’ (‘for this practice I have behind me the authority of Cicero himself’; ‘now if my
own opinion seems to lack authority . . . read and consider this short preface from a
biography of St Anthony of Egypt’, pp. 137, 139). Indeed the remainder of the letter is
devoted to a close reading of the Seventy’s translations from the Hebrew and the
evangelists’ free interpretations or misreadings of the Old Testament, in order to show
that the greatest authorities of all, the Greek translators of the Old Testament (whom
Jerome at this writing, following Philo, still believed to have been divinely inspired) and
the writers of the four gospels, tacitly approved of his translation practice, and thus lent
him their considerable exegetical weight.
Tellingly, however, the cumulative eVect of Jerome’s citations from the Septuagint
and the gospels is subversive of cenobitic discipline—undermines his implicit
self-presentation as the submissive follower of a Rule. The impetus of his citations,
ostensibly submissive and honoriWc, is almost invariably accusatory:
Though the sense is identical with that in the Septuagint, the words are dissimilar,
and are quite diVerently arranged. (p. 141)
Even greater discrepancies may be discovered in another passage from Matthew.
(p. 144)
Similar triXing mistakes occur in the Apostle Paul. (p. 146)
One of the most striking misquotations is made by Stephen, Christ’s Wrst martyr.
(p. 147)
He is supposedly defending the writers and translators in question; but rhetorically his
enumeration of their failings is carefully balanced between praise for sense-for-sense
equivalence and blame for word-for-word deviation:
5.17 douglas robinson
539

Should one accuse the Apostle Matthew of adulterating his translation? It agrees
neither with the Hebrew original, nor with the Greek Septuagint, and, worse than
that, one could claim that Matthew has mistaken even the author’s name, attribut-
ing the passage to Jeremiah instead of Zechariah.
Far be it from Jerome, however, to speak like this about a follower of the Christ.
The truth is that Matthew made it his business to formulate dogmas rather than
scurry after words and syllables. (pp. 141–2)
It is a canny move: at the simplest level, he is providing a model for both praise and
blame, hoping to force his accusers into an extension of their attack on him to the
Seventy and the authors of the New Testament, and thus, since that position is politically
untenable (i.e., heretical), to force them back into praise for his own position.
But there is another, and more devious (more eremitic), side to Jerome’s claims—or
rather, not a ‘side’, but an ascetic tension between opposed resistances. Jerome does
blame the Seventy and the evangelists, it seems to me, for their inaccuracies; and he also
praises them for their creative deviances, their eremitic wanderings beyond the faceless
cenobitic discipline of the scholars. He takes a Werce pleasure in enumerating the ‘defects’
in these texts, the slippages from the Old Testament Hebrew to the Greek of the
Septuagint and the New Testament, and the pleasure seems to me to be steeped in an
eremitic imitation of Christ. This mimetic pleasure in eVect conXates Jerome’s implicit
praise and blame for the Seventy and the evangelists, for it suggests simultaneously that
the writers of the Greek Bible are nothing compared with Christ (and hence are as subject
to blame as anyone else) and that their greatness, like Jerome’s own, lies in their imitation
of Christ (hence they are to be admired and emulated).
This reading of Jerome’s duplicitous letter would corroborate Harpham’s claim that,
‘conceiving of himself as a direct or primary imitation of Christ, the eremite actually
stands in the position of the transcription of the spoken Word. The highly mediated
nature of even this posture undercuts any pretension to true originality on the part of the
eremite, but this is not the real point. The eremite had predecessors but not intermedi-
aries; he placed himself in direct relation, if it can be called that, to the Mediator’ (p. 43).
The eremitic Jerome has predecessors—Cicero, Horace, Bishop Evagrius, the Seventy,
the evangelists—but they are not intermediaries in the sense of mastering or mediating
his understanding of the source-language text (especially in the most radical Christian
sense, of Jesus as the divine source-language Text or Word). They are only humans like
himself, predecessors in the sense of having gone before, having attempted (like himself)
to place themselves in an unmediated relation to truth. Faced as translator and Bible
scholar with the textual traces of their imitations, he sees the inadequacies of those traces
(as he sees the inadequacies of his own), and is not impressed—certainly is not silenced
by them. But because he is attempting to achieve the same unmediated relation through
540
recent and contemporary writings

his translations, he also recognizes the visionary power of their failures, the courage and
determination that led them to deviate from mediated models of understanding and
strike oV on their own, hoping to transcribe the transformative Word on and through
their own bodies by wandering like Jesus in the desert.
[ . . . ]
This crisscrossing of temptations and resistances is in fact inscribed within Jerome’s
own eremitic translatological regimen, in what may be the oddest note in the letter: ‘Now
I not only admit but freely announce that in translating from the Greek—except of
course in the case of Holy Scripture, where even the syntax contains a mystery—I render,
not word for word, but sense for sense’ (pp. 136–7). Given the absence of support for (or
later recurrence to) this ‘exception’, Jerome’s insistence that he renders the Bible word for
word sounds superWcially like kneejerk piety—perhaps an attempt to protect himself
against charges of heresy. Read this way, his word-for-word exceptionalism becomes a
claim to resist the eremitic temptation to ‘deviate’ from the sense of the original.
But it is more complicated than that. Word-for-word translation is ‘normal’ for
ecclesiastical authorities ignorant of translation, who believe that piety toward the
source-language text requires piety toward every word in it. This renders word-for-
word translation an ideological haven for those afraid of heresy charges—like Jerome,
who writes this letter precisely in order to defend himself against such charges. At the
same time, however, it is ‘deviant’ for ecclesiastical authorities with experience of
translation, who believe that the translator should show piety not toward the source-
language text but rather toward its transcendental meaning. This renders word-for-word
translation a temptation to be resisted, a delight in the felicity of the source-language text
that the ascetic translator must renounce. As Jerome’s claim that ‘even the syntax contains
a mystery’ suggests, word-for-word translation is at least implicitly kabbalistic: it reveals
too great an attachment to the ‘world’, to ‘Xeshly’ utterances, to the ‘mystery’ of speciWc
articulations. The ascetic translator is expected to resist this temptation through ideal-
ization, abstraction, the transcendentalization of meaning especially through sense-for-
sense translation, where the ‘sense’ to be translated is regarded as dwelling not in
individual words or even utterances, but beyond all natural language in the mind of
God (as circumscribed by the Church), and perceived by the pious translator only
through the source-language text as through a veil.
Inscribed in the temptations and resistances of Jerome’s letter, therefore, is a whole
mutually deWning system of translatological oppositions that will inform translation
theory until our own [twentieth] century. On the one hand, there is ‘humble’ or ‘self-
eVacing’ or cenobitic translation, predicated on the translator’s pious submission to the
source-language author’s intention as deWned by the ecclesiastical (or other social)
institution; on the other, there is ‘arrogant’ or ‘self-dramatizing’ or eremitic translation,
predicated on the translator’s assumption that he or she knows best and will translate any
5.17 douglas robinson
541

way he or she sees Wt. Each of these positions is then divided into a sense-for-sense/word-
for-word opposition: the ignorant cenobite translates, or requires that others translate,
word for word’ while the learned cenobite translates, or requires that others translate,
sense for sense; and the orthodox eremite translates (etc.) sense for sense, while the
kabbalistic eremite translates (etc.) word for word.
[ . . . ]
Jerome instituted translatology almost by accident, individualistically, eremitically,
in situational self-defence and self-creation; the cenobitic Augustine took a larger, more
dogmatic view. Augustine instituted translatology as a systematic undoing of the scatter-
ing of tongues at the Tower of Babel—speciWcally by identifying the translatum or
transferred message with the unitary Word of God and then policing the transfer. [ . . . ]
In order to envisage perfect translation, then, and thus the Church, Augustine charts
out a dual ascesis, a cenobitic puriWcation at once of the translatum and of the translator.
Everything in language that is not pure, simple, stable, permanent, must be excised;
living language use, especially speech, must be derogated and dismissed as mere dross, a
distortion of stable logoi (which are themselves distortions of the divine Logos) that is in
turn subject to further distortion by listeners. And everything in human response that
proliferates individuated meanings, all interpretive idiosyncrasies, inclinations, impulses,
must be silenced, from within and without: both renounced by the interpreter and
denounced by the monastic institution. Nomadic translation, marketplace translation,
translation as a free-Xowing series of encounters with other speakers in a Xuid social
sphere all this must be thematized as a temptation to be resisted, a sickness to be purged,
an evil to be exorcised. The ideal translator for Augustine was a monk in a cell, puriWed of
personality, perfectly conformed to cenobitic rule, wholly spoken from within by the
voice of God.
[ . . . ]
When selWshness at Babel bred dissension, then, that dissension led to vocal disson-
ance, which led to the need for translation; but in the ‘scattering’ of Bible translations
across the world Augustine sees a potential reversal of the Babelian scattering of tongues:
Thus it happened that even the Sacred Scripture, by which so many maladies of the
human will are cured, was set forth in one language, but so that it could be spread
conveniently through all the world it was scattered far and wide in the various
languages of translators that it might be known for the salvation of people who
desired to Wnd in it nothing more than the thoughts and desires of those who wrote
it and through these the will of God, according to which we believe those writers
spoke.6
The aporias that drive Augustine’s idealization run deep: the scattering of translations
allows all humans to hear ‘nothing more’ than the single and uniWed voice of God. More
542
recent and contemporary writings

is less: more languages, more translations, more voices mean less dissension, less plurality,
less selWsh individuation.
Augustine can only envisage this transformation of more into less through the ascetic
regimen that he outlines in On Christian Doctrine (II. vii), the seven-step path to wisdom
that enables the Bible reader (and thus also the translator) to renounce the ‘selWsh’
impulses that proliferate interpretations and preclude hegemonic understanding. [The
seven steps are fear, piety, knowledge, fortitude, mercy, cleansing, and wisdom.] What makes
this ascetic regimen so successful (witness how well it still works for us today, sixteen
centuries after Augustine invented it) is partly that each step in some sense erases or
subsumes the one previous, so that the pious translator no longer needs to be afraid, the
knowledgeable translator no longer needs to conceive his or her quest for knowledge in
terms of piety, and so on, until the arrival at ‘wisdom’ or perfect submission to cenobitic
discipline erases everything that has gone before, leaving only (at least ideally) the
perfectly neutral translator, the translator as robot, the ‘machine’translator that continues
to practice all seven ascetic disciplines but has forgotten that it does so (has forgotten that
it has been programmed and believes that it is ‘free’). This is the sense in which machine
translation, the great cenobitic project of twentieth-century translatology, would be the
ultimate fulWlment of Augustine’s ascetic program.
But this forgetful internalization is only part of the reason for the program’s success.
Another part is institutional enforcement, the maintenance of communal discipline that
provides for sanctions when ideological programming fails. And it always does: this is the
problem. We are ‘only human’, we say—not (quite) machines. We try to maintain our
fear of the critics and our respect for the source-language author, but they are too
pathetic, too absurd in their ignorance, too backward in their attempts to write com-
prehensible source-language (the author) or target-language (the critics) prose, and we
‘Wx things up’. We try to purge ourselves of distracting personality, but it sneaks back in
when we least expect it. We try to banish despair with determined fortitude, but fail (and
despair at our failure). We try to be merciful to the target-language reader, but the
source-language words delight us too much, we can’t turn away from them, and so we
pepper our translation with source-languagisms, literal renditions.
[ . . . ]
This institutional enforcement of built-to-fail ascetic programs is central to August-
ine’s cenobitic translatology. It is not enough to internalize and then forget fear, piety,
knowledge, fortitude, mercy, puriWcation, and wisdom; one must be repeatedly guided
by institutional authorities to the proper fulWlment of those steps. [ . . . ]
[Robinson further discusses Augustine’s emphasis on Church authority, but points out
how institutional authority is traditionally vested in an ‘alien word’, a ‘foreign word that is
just domesticated enough to be almost understandable but still alien enough to be
5.17 douglas robinson
543

elevated, solemn, sacred, powerful’. Greek was for Augustine the main source of this word,
not least the Greek word for word: logos, and the Greek Septuagint translation was the
prime example of how divine authority is conWrmed in human inspiration; we should,
Augustine says, ‘cede to the divine dispensation’ by which the seventy translators worked.]
This insistence on the centrality of the alien Greek word to Augustine’s cenobitic semiotic
may seem to be undermined by the close attention Augustine pays to Latin translations; but
in fact there is no conXict. The key for Augustine is not the use of an alien language, but the
alienation of whatever language one uses. Nor is this alienation entirely at odds with
familiarity, for in some sense he requires that both the alien and the familiar be resisted:
the utterly alien is not understood and therefore has no impact, while the utterly familiar has
no impact because it is unremarkable. By domesticating the foreign and alienating the
familiar, the user of language creates a kind of ascetic Esperanto, an ‘alien word’ that is at
once familiar and strange, understandable and shot through with awe.
We should recognize this ‘alien word’ as the interlanguage into which translators are
systematically encouraged to render their source-language texts, even by translatologists
like Eugene A. Nida, a vocal advocate of not making the translation sound like a
translation. Nida disapproves of alien Bible translations, like the radically literal rendi-
tions of Buber and Rosenzweig or Chouraqui, or like the outdated English of the King
James Version, and calls for easily understandable colloquial translations; but he also
disapproves of overly assimilated translations, slangy translations, modernized transla-
tions, and so on. The translation should be familiar but not too familiar—and alien, but
not too alien.
In fact, of course, this dialectical resistance to both the alien and the familiar means in
practice that, depending on the readership for whom the translator is translating, the
ascetic alien word may take any number of forms: from the qualiWed colloquialism of a
Nida translation to the literalism of David Rosenberg in The Book of J to the modern-
ization of Clarence Jordan’s Cotton Patch Version; from the radical plainness of a Pound
translation to the radical ugliness of Nabokov’s Eugene Onegin. [ . . . ]
[ . . . ] Translation remains normatively a cenobitic discipline; but in the repressive
dualism of Western thought, norms are predicated upon deviations, and therefore
depend on them for their impact. Cenobitic translation, bound as it is by the subtracted
self’s dialectics of success and failure and of the familiar and the alien, is built upon the
repression of eremitism. Eremitic translation, bound as it is by the isolated self’s
dialectics of brilliance and heresy, mystical oneness with the source-language author
and audience response, is built upon the repression of cenobitism. Ascetic translation
itself, eremitic and cenobitic, is built upon the repression of classical humanism, which
was bound by the created self’s dialectics of passive reception and anxious appropriation,
outer- and inner-direction.
544
recent and contemporary writings

And the key to the complexity of Western translation theory is this: what is repressed
in each successive theory does not thereby vanish, but survives in the resistance that
maintains the repression, survives in a vital enough form to anticipate and in some sense
engineer its own return. Cicero and Luther sound in Jerome. Quintilian and Goethe
sound in Augustine. Repressed echoes striate each theory, every voice. It is only by
listening to those echoes and tracing those striations that we can begin to move beyond
the hegemonic repetition—Cicero and Jerome and Luther and Dryden and everybody
between and since calling for sense-for-sense rather than word-for-word translation—to
which the history of Western translation theory has conventionally been, and continues
today to be, reduced.
notes
1. I’m drawing here on Norbert Elias, Power and Civility, Volume II of The Civilizing Process, translated by
Edmund Jephcott (New York, 1982).
2. For the classic discussion of the bourgeois transformation of ascetic ideology, see Max Weber, The Protestant
Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, translated by Talcott Parsons (New York, 1976). For a discussion of the
transformation of ‘proWt’ from spiritual in the fourth century to monetary in the seventeenth and eighteenth, see
GeoVrey Galt Harpham, The Ascetic Imperative in Culture and Criticism (Chicago, 1987), pp. 62–4.
3. Harpham, The Ascetic Imperative in Culture and Criticism, p. 28.
4. Jerome, ‘Letter to Pammachius (On the Best Kind of Translator)’, in The Satirical Letters of Jerome, translated by
Paul Carroll (Chicago, 1958), pp. 132–4.
5. Jerome was born c. 347, Augustine nine years later in 356, Jerome dies around the age of 73 in c. 420, Augustine at
the age of 74 in 430.
6. Augustine, On Christian Doctrine, translated by D. W. Robertson, Jr (Indianapolis, 1958), II. v. 6; pp. 36–7.
5.17 douglas robinson
545

5.18 Lawrence Venuti
Lawrence Venuti (b. 1953) is a professional translator (mostly from Italian), translation
theorist, and educator, editor of Rethinking Translation: Discourse, Subjectivity, Ideology
(1992) and The Translation Studies Reader (a selection of twentieth-century texts, from
Benjamin to Venuti himself; 2000). He is the author of the The Scandals of Translation:
Towards an Ethics of DiVerence (1998) as well as of the inXuentially polemical The
Translator’s Invisibility: A History of Translation (1995), in which he strenuously argues
against the notion of neutrality in translation, basing his argument on a historical account
of developments from the seventeenth century to the present. He makes the post-colonial,
post-imperial case for translation which attempts to preserve the foreignness of the foreign
text, countering the domesticating, familiarizing, appropriative eVect of what might be
seen as the mainstream approach to translation in the English tradition, drawing on a
hegemonic Classical legacy. Venuti has himself translated much Italian prose and recently
(2002) he published a selection of the work of the Italian author Antonia Pozzi: Breath:
Poems and Letters. The same year, he also published an anthology, Italy: A Traveler’s Literary
Companion. Lawrence Venuti is Professor of English at Temple University, Philadelphia.
In the essay printed below, Venuti again assembles the historical evidence, in support of
a proposition in support of a translator’s activism, which might counter the eVect of
domestication, translatory or whatever, which he characterizes as violence perpetrated on
source cultures.
From ‘Translation as Cultural Politics: Regimes of Domestication in English’, Textual
Practice, 7/2 (Summer 1993), 208–23
A metalanguage is always terrorist.
Roland Barthes (trans. Richard Howard)
All violence is the illustration of a pathetic stereotype.
Barbara Kruger
I propose these two epigraphs as an extravagant but pointed metaphor for translation.
The statement from Roland Barthes concludes his incisive 1961 review of Michel
Foucault’s Histoire de la folie.1 For Barthes, Foucault’s history shows that madness is the
discourse of reason about unreason, and this discourse, apart from the physical exclusions
of exile, imprisonment, and hospitalization which it makes possible, also excludes the
discourse of unreason about unreason, hence reducing the object of which it professes
546
recent and contemporary writings

knowledge. In Barthes’s conclusion, a metalanguage, a second-order discourse that takes
a prior signifying system as its object, is found to be reductive and exclusionary and thus
likened to terrorism, violent action that is both intense and damaging, that intimidates
and coerces, usually in the service of social interests and political agendas, often under the
aegis of reason or truth. The epigram from the artist Barbara Kruger was part of a 1991
installation, in which the accusatory aphoristic statements that distinguish her photo-
montages were painted across the walls and Xoors of the Mary Boone Gallery in New
York.2 Here violence is likened to a metalanguage: it is action with the function of
representation, a second-order discourse illustrating a prior stereotype, which can be seen
as pathetic in its destructiveness, its reductive and exclusionary relation to a person or
social group. Violence is the enactment of a cultural discourse that already constitutes a
conceptual or representational violence. ReXection on translation in the context of
Barthes’s and Kruger’s statements undoubtedly cheapens violent action, trivializing its
serious physical and psychological costs, its brutal materiality. But such reXection will
also illuminate the discursive conditions of violence by attending to the material eVects of
another metalanguage, the power of translation to (re)constitute and cheapen foreign
texts, to trivialize and exclude foreign cultures, and thus potentially to Wgure in racial
discrimination and ethnic violence, international political confrontations, terrorism, war.
The violence of translation resides in its very purpose and activity: the reconstitution
of the foreign text in accordance with values, beliefs and representations that pre-exist it
in the target language, always conWgured in hierarchies of dominance and marginality,
always determining the production, circulation, and reception of texts. Translation is the
forcible replacement of the linguistic and cultural diVerence of the foreign text with a text
that will be intelligible to the target-language reader. This diVerence can never be entirely
removed, of course, but it necessarily suVers a reduction and exclusion of possibilities—
and an exorbitant gain of other possibilities speciWc to the translating language. Whatever
diVerence the translation conveys is now imprinted by the target-language culture,
assimilated to its positions of intelligibility, its canons and taboos, its codes and ideolo-
gies. The aim of translation is to bring back a cultural other as the same, the recognizable,
even the familiar; and this aim always risks a wholesale domestication of the foreign text,
often in highly self-conscious projects, where translation serves an imperialist appropri-
ation of foreign cultures for domestic agendas, cultural, economic, political.
Thus, the violent eVects of translation are felt at home as well as abroad. On the one
hand, translation wields enormous power in the construction of national identities for
foreign cultures and hence can play a role in racial and ethnic conXicts and geopolitical
confrontations. On the other hand, translation enlists the foreign text in the maintenance
or revision of literary canons in the target-language culture, inscribing poetry and Wction,
for example, with the various poetic and narrative discourses that compete for cultural
dominance in the target language. Translation also enlists the foreign text in the
maintenance or revision of dominant conceptual paradigms, research methodologies,
5.18 lawrence venuti
547

and clinical practices in target-language disciplines and professions, whether physics or
architecture, philosophy or psychiatry, sociology or law. It is these social aYliations and
eVects—written into the materiality of the translated text, into its discursive strategy and
its range of allusiveness for the target-language reader, but also into the very choice to
translate it and the ways it is published, reviewed, and taught—all these conditions
permit translation to be called a cultural political practice, constructing or critiquing
ideology-stamped identities for foreign cultures, aYrming or transgressing discursive
values and institutional limits in the target-language culture. The violence wreaked by
translation is partly inevitable, inherent in the translation process, partly potential,
emerging at any point in the production and reception of the translated text, varying
with speciWc cultural and social formations at diVerent historical moments.
The most urgent question facing the translator who possesses this knowledge is: What
to do? Why and how do I translate? Although I have construed translation as the site of
multiple determinations and eVects—linguistic, cultural, ideological, political—I also
want to indicate that the translator always exercises a choice concerning the degree and
direction of the violence at work in his practice. This choice was given its most decisive
formulation at the beginning of the nineteenth century by the theologian and philoso-
pher Friedrich Schleiermacher. In an 1813 lecture on the diVerent methods of translation,
Schleiermacher argued that ‘there are only two. Either the translator leaves the author in
peace, as much as possible, and moves the reader towards him; or he leaves the reader in
peace, as much as possible, and moves the author towards him.’3 Admitting (with
qualiWcations like ‘as much as possible’) that translation can never be completely
adequate to the foreign text, Schleiermacher allowed the translator to choose between
a domesticating method, an ethnocentric reduction of the foreign text to target-language
cultural values, bringing the author back home, and a foreignizing method, an ethno-
deviant pressure on those values to register the linguistic and cultural diVerence of the
foreign text, sending the reader abroad.
Schleiermacher made clear that his choice was foreignizing translation, and this has led
the French translator and translation theorist Antoine Berman to treat Schleiermacher’s
argument as an ethics of translation, concerned with making the translated text a place
where a cultural other is manifested—although, of course, an otherness that can never be
manifested in its own terms, only in those of the target language, and hence always
already encoded.4 The ‘foreign’ in foreignizing translation is not a transparent represen-
tation of an essence that resides in the foreign text and is valuable in itself, but a strategic
construction whose value is contingent on the current target-language situation. Foreign-
izing translation signiWes the diVerence of the foreign text, yet only by disrupting the
cultural codes that prevail in the target language. In its eVorts to do right abroad, this
translation method must do wrong at home, deviating from native norms to stage an
alien reading experience.
548
recent and contemporary writings

I want to suggest that in so far as foreignizing translation seeks to restrain the
ethnocentric violence of translation, it is highly desirable today, a strategic intervention
in the current state of world aVairs, pitched against the hegemonic English-language
nations and the unequal cultural exchanges in which they engage their global others. For
the fact is that only 2–3 per cent of the books published in the US and UK each year are
translations, whereas foreign titles, many from English, count for as much as 25 per cent
(or more) of the books published annually in other countries.5 And yet foreignizing
translation has always been marginalized in Anglo-American culture. This method is
speciWc to certain European countries at particular historical moments: formulated Wrst
in German culture during the classical and romantic periods, it has recently been revived
in a French cultural scene characterized by postmodern developments in philosophy,
literary criticism, psychoanalysis, and social theory that have come to be known as
‘poststructuralism’.6 English-language translation, in contrast, has been dominated by
domesticating theories and practices at least since the seventeenth century.
In 1656, Sir John Denham prefaced The Destruction of Troy, his version of the second
book of the Aeneid, with the remark that ‘if Virgil must needs speak English, it were Wt he
should speak not only as a man of this Nation, but as a man of this age.’7 Denham saw
himself as presenting a naturalized English Virgil. He felt that poetic discourse in
particular called for domesticating translation because ‘Poesie is of so subtle a spirit,
that in pouring out of one Language into another, it will all evaporate; and if a new
spirit be not added in the transfusion, there will remain nothing but a Caput mortuum’
(p. 65). The ‘new spirit’ Denham ‘added’ to Virgil belonged to Denham (‘my Art’,
‘my self’), and he was acutely aware that it was speciWcally English, so that domestication
was a translation method laden with nationalism, even if expressed with courtly self-
eVacement:
if this disguise I have put upon him (I wish I could give it a better name) Wt not
naturally and easily on so grave a person, yet it may become him better than that
Fools-Coat wherein the French and Italian have of late presented him. (p. 65)
Domestication became the preferred method for English-language poetry translation by
the end of the seventeenth century, when it received its authoritative formulation in John
Dryden’s Dedication of the Aeneis (1697). ‘I have endeavoured to make Virgil speak such
English,’ wrote Dryden, ‘as he would himself have spoken, if he had been born in
England, and in this present age.’8 In Dryden’s wake, from Alexander Pope’s multi-
volumed Homer (1715–26) to Alexander Tytler’s systematic Essay on the Principles of
Translation (1791), domestication dominated the theory and practice of English-language
translation in every genre, prose as well as poetry. William Guthrie, for example, in the
preface to his version of The Orations of Marcus Tullius Cicero (1741), argued that ‘it is
living Manners alone that can communicate the Spirit of an Original’ and so urged the
5.18 lawrence venuti
549

translator to make ‘it his Business to be as conversant as he cou’d in that Study and Manner
which comes the nearest to what we may suppose his Author, were he now to live, wou’d
pursue, and in which he wou’d shine.’9 Hence, Guthrie cast his Cicero as a member of
Parliament, ‘where,’ he says, ‘by a constant Attendance, in which I was indulg’d for several
Years, I endeavour’d to possess myself of the Language most proper for this translation.’
It is important not to view such instances of domestication as simply inaccurate
translations. Canons of accuracy and Wdelity are always locally deWned, speciWc to
diVerent cultural formations at diVerent historical moments. Both Denham and Dryden
recognized that a ratio of loss and gain inevitably occurs in the translation process and
situates the translation in an equivocal relationship to the foreign text, never quite
faithful, always somewhat free, never establishing an identity, always a lack and a
supplement. Yet they also viewed their domesticating method as the most eVective way
to control this equivocal relationship and produce versions adequate to the Latin text. As
a result, they castigated methods that either rigorously adhered to source-language
textual features or played fast and loose with them, that either did not suYciently
domesticate the foreign text or did so by omitting parts of it. Following Horace’s dictum
in Ars Poetica, Denham ‘conceive[d] it a vulgar error in translating Poets, to aVect being
Fides Interpres’, because poetic discourse required more latitude to capture its ‘spirit’ in
the target language than a close adherence to each foreign word would allow. But he also
professed to ‘having made it my principal care to follow [Virgil]’, noting that ‘neither
have I any where oVered such violence to his sense, as to make it seem mine, and not his’.
Dryden similarly ‘thought it Wt to steer betwixt the two extremes of paraphrase and literal
translation’, i.e. between the aim of reproducing primarily the meanings of the Latin text,
usually at the cost of its phonological and syntactical features, and the aim of rendering it
word for word, respecting syntax and line break. And he distinguished his method from
Abraham Cowley’s ‘imitations’ of Pindar, partial translations that revised and, in eVect,
abandoned the foreign text. The ethnocentric violence performed by domesticating
translation rested on a double Wdelity, to the source-language text as well as to the
target-language culture, but this was clearly impossible and knowingly duplicitous,
accompanied by the rationale that a gain in domestic intelligibility and cultural force
outweighed the loss suVered by the foreign text and culture.
By the turn of the nineteenth century, a translation method of eliding the linguistic
and cultural diVerence of the foreign text was Wrmly entrenched as a canon in English-
language translation, usually linked to a valorization of transparent discourse. In 1820, a
translator of Aristophanes, John Hookham Frere, unfavourably reviewed Thomas Mitch-
ell’s versions of The Acharnians and The Knights, their principal ‘defect’ being ‘the
adoption of a particular style; the style of our ancient comedy in the beginning of the
16th century’.10 Frere faulted Mitchell’s use of an archaic literary and dramatic discourse,
English Renaissance comedy, because
550
recent and contemporary writings

the language of translation ought, we think, as far as possible, to be a pure,
impalpable and invisible element, the medium of thought and feeling, and nothing
more; it ought never to attract attention to itself; hence all phrases that are
remarkable in themselves, either as old or new; all importations from foreign
languages and quotations, are as far as possible to be avoided . . . such phrases as
[Mitchell] has sometimes admitted, ‘solus cum solo’, for instance, ‘petits pates’, &c.
have the immediate eVect of reminding the reader, that he is reading a translation,
and . . . the illusion of originality, which the spirited or natural turn of a sentence
immediately preceding might have excited, is instantly dissipated by it. (p. 481)
Frere advocated a Xuent strategy, in which the language of the translation is made to read
with a ‘spirited or natural turn’, so that the absence of any syntactical or lexical
peculiarities produces the illusionistic eVect of transparency, the appearance that the
translation reXects the foreign writer’s intention (‘It is the oYce, we presume, of the
Translator to represent the forms of language according to the intention with which they
are employed’) (p. 482) and therefore the appearance that the translation is not in fact a
translation, but the original, still within the foreign writer’s control, not worked over by
the translator. Fluency produces an individualistic illusion, in which the text is assumed
to originate fundamentally with the author, to be authorial self-expression, free of
cultural and social determinations. Since Xuency is here a translation strategy, it can be
considered a discursive sleight of hand by which the translator domesticates the foreign
text, causing its diVerence to vanish by making it intelligible in an English-language
culture that values easy readability, transparent discourse, and the illusion of authorial
presence.
And, once again, the domestication enacted by a Xuent strategy does not necessarily
result in an inaccurate translation. In 1823, the anonymous reviewer of William Stewart
Rose’s Orlando Furioso recommended this strategy in the pronouncement that
the two characteristics of a good translation are, that it should be faithful, and that it
should be unconstrained. Faithful, as well in rendering correctly the meaning of the
original, as in exhibiting the general spirit which pervades it: unconstraincd, so as
not to betray by its phraseology, by the collocation of its words, or construction of
its sentences that it is only a copy.11
Fluency can be associated with Wdelity because it means foregrounding the conceptual
signiWed in the translation, checking the drift of language away from communication,
minimizing any play of the signiWer which calls attention to its materiality, to words as
words, their opacity, their resistance to immediate intelligibility, empathic response,
interpretive mastery. What the Xuent strategy conceals with the eVect of transparency,
what it makes seem faithful, is in fact the translator’s interpretation of the foreign text,
the signiWed he has demarcated in the translation in accordance with target-language
5.18 lawrence venuti
551

cultural values. The Xuent translation is seen as ‘rendering correctly the meaning of the
original’ because it constitutes an interpretation that conforms or can be easily assimi-
lated to those values, not only the valorization of ‘unconstrained’ language, but also the
understanding of the foreign text or literature that concurrently prevails in the target
culture.
In Frere’s case Xuency entailed a linguistic homogenization that avoided ‘associations
exclusively belonging to modern manners’ as well as archaism, that removed as many of
the historically speciWc markers of the foreign text as possible by generalizing or simply
omitting them. The translator will,
if he is capable of executing his task upon a philosophic principle, endeavour to
resolve the personal and local allusions into the genera, of which the local or
personal variety employed by the original author is merely the accidental type;
and to reproduce them in one of those permanent forms which are connected with
the universal and immutable habits of mankind. (p. 482)
Frere rationalized these admitted ‘liberties’ by appealing to a ‘philosophic principle’:
The proper domain of the Translator is, we conceive, to be found in that vast mass
of feeling, passion, interest, action and habit which is common to mankind in all
countries and in all ages; and which, in all languages, is invested with its appropriate
forms of expression, capable of representing it in all its inWnite varieties, in all the
permanent distinctions of age, profession and temperament. (p. 481)
In Frere’s view, a Xuent strategy enables the translation to be a transparent representation
of the eternal human verities expressed by the foreign author.
The principle on which Frere’s translation theory rests is liberal humanism, in which
subjectivity is seen as at once self-determining and determined by human nature,
individualistic yet generic, transcending cultural diVerence, social conXict, and historical
change to represent ‘every shade of the human character’; Frere’s theory may appear to be
democratic in its appeal to what is ‘common to mankind’, to a timeless and universal
human essence, but it actually involved an insidious domestication that allowed him to
imprint the foreign text with his conservative sexual morality and cultural e´litism. He
made plain his squeamishness about the physical coarseness of Aristophanic humour, its
grotesque realism, and felt the need to explain it away as inconsistent with the author’s
intention: the ‘lines of extreme grossness’ were ‘forced compromises’, ‘which have
evidently been inserted, for the purpose of pacifying the vulgar part of the audience,
during passages in which their anger, or impatience, or disappointment, was likely to
break out’ (p. 491). Hence, ‘in discarding such passages,’ Frere asserted, ‘the translator is
merely doing that for his author, which he would willingly have done for himself’—were
he not ‘often under the necessity of addressing himself exclusively to the lower class’
552
recent and contemporary writings

(p. 491). Frere’s advocacy of a Xuent strategy was premissed on a bourgeois snobbery, in
which the moral and political conservatism emerging in early nineteenth-century English
culture resulted in a call for a bowdlerized Aristophanes that represented the ‘permanent’
class divisions of humanity, what Frere described as ‘that true comic humour which he
was directing to the more reWned and intelligent part of his audience’ (p. 491).12 For
Frere, ‘the persons of taste and judgment to whom the author occasionally appeals, form,
in modern times, the tribunal to which his translator must address himself’ (p. 491).
Fluency is thus a discursive strategy ideally suited to domesticating translation, capable
not only of executing the ethnocentric violence of domestication, but also of concealing
this violence by producing the illusionistic eVect of transparency. And it is this strategy
that, with very few exceptions (the Victorian archaism of Francis Newman and William
Morris, for example, or the modernist experiments of Ezra Pound and Louis and Celia
Zukofsky), has continued to dominate the theory and practice of English-language
translation to this day. Perhaps the clearest indication of this dominance is Eugene
Nida’s inXuential concept of ‘dynamic’ or ‘functional equivalence’ in translation, formu-
lated Wrst in 1964, but restated and developed in numerous books and articles over the past
twenty-Wve years. ‘A translation of dynamic equivalence aims at complete naturalness of
expression,’ states Nida, ‘and tries to relate the receptor to modes of behavior relevant
within the context of his own culture.’13 The phrase ‘naturalness of expression’ signals the
importance of a Xuent strategy to this theory of translation, and in Nida’s work it is evident
that Xuency involves domestication. As he has recently put it, ‘the translator must be a
person who can draw aside the curtains of linguistic and cultural diVerences so that people
may see clearly the relevance of the original message.’14 This is of course a relevance to the
target-language culture, something with which foreign writers are usually not concerned
when they write their texts, so that relevance can be established in the translation process
only by replacing source-language features that are not recognizable with target-language
ones that are. Thus, when Nida asserts that ‘an easy and natural style in translating, despite
the extreme diYculty of producing it . . . is nevertheless essential to producing in the
ultimate receptors a response similar to that of the original receptors’ (Science, p. 163), he is
in fact imposing the English-language valorization of transparent discourse on every
foreign culture, masking a basic disjunction between the source- and target-language
texts which puts into question the possibility of eliciting a ‘similar’ response.
Like earlier theorists in the Anglo-American tradition, however, Nida has argued that
dynamic equivalence is consistent with a notion of accuracy. The dynamically equivalent
translation does not indiscriminately use ‘anything which might have special impact and
appeal for receptors’; it rather ‘means thoroughly understanding not only the meaning of
the source text but also the manner in which the intended receptors of a text are likely to
understand it in the receptor language’ (One Language, pp. vii–viii, 9). For Nida,
accuracy in translation depends on generating an equivalent eVect in the target-language
5.18 lawrence venuti
553

culture: ‘the receptors of a translation should comprehend the translated text to such an
extent that they can understand how the original receptors must have understood the
original text’ (ibid., p. 36). The dynamically equivalent translation is ‘interlingual
communication’ which overcomes the linguistic and cultural diVerences that impede it
(ibid., p. 11). Yet the understanding of the foreign text and culture which this kind of
translation makes possible answers fundamentally to target-language cultural values
while veiling this domestication in the transparency evoked by a Xuent strategy. Com-
munication here is initiated and controlled by the target-language culture, and therefore
it seems less an exchange of information than an imperialist appropriation of a foreign
text. Nida’s theory of translation as communication does not adequately take into
account the ethnocentric violence that is inherent in every translation process—but
especially in one governed by dynamic equivalence.
As with John Hookham Frere, Nida’s advocacy of domesticating translation is expli-
citly grounded on a transcendental concept of humanity as an essence that remains
unchanged over time and space. ‘As linguists and anthropologists have discovered,’ Nida
states, ‘that which unites mankind is much greater than that which divides, and hence
there is, even in cases of very disparate languages and cultures, a basis for communication’
(Science, p. 2). Yet the democratic potential of Nida’s humanism, as with Frere’s, is
contradicted by the more exclusionary values that inform his theory of translation,
speciWcally Christian evangelism and cultural elitism. From the very beginning of his
career, Nida’s work has been motivated by the exigencies of Bible translation: not only
have problems in the history of the Bible translation served as examples for his theoretical
statements, but he has written studies in anthropology and linguistics designed primarily
for Bible translators and missionaries. [ . . . ]
To advocate foreignizing translation in opposition to the Anglo-American tradition of
domestication is not to do away with cultural political agendas. Clearly, such an advocacy
is itself an agenda. The point is rather to develop a theory and practice of translation that
resists dominant target-language cultural values so as to signify the linguistic and cultural
diVerence of the foreign text. Philip Lewis’s concept of abusive Wdelity can be taken as a
Wrst step in such a theorization: it acknowledges the equivocal relationship between the
foreign text and the translation and eschews a Xuent strategy in order to reproduce in the
translation whatever features of the foreign text abuse or resist dominant cultural values
in the source language.15 Abusive Wdelity directs the translator’s attention away from the
conceptual signiWed to the play of signiWers on which it depends, to phonological,
syntactical, and discursive structures, resulting in a ‘translation that values experimenta-
tion, tampers with usage, seeks to match the polyvalencies or plurivocities or expressive
stresses of the original by producing its own’ (p. 41). Such a translation strategy can best
be called resistancy, not merely because it avoids Xuency, but because it challenges the
target-language culture even as it enacts its own ethnocentric violence on the foreign text.
554
recent and contemporary writings

The notion of foreignization can alter the ways translations are read as well as
produced because it assumes a concept of human subjectivity that is very diVerent
from the humanist assumptions underlying domestication. Neither the foreign author
nor the translator is conceived as the transcendental origin of the text, freely expressing
an idea about human nature or communicating it in transparent language to a reader
from a diVerent culture. Rather, subjectivity is constituted by cultural and social deter-
minations that are diverse and even conXicting, that mediate any language use, and that
vary with every cultural formation and every historical moment. Human action is
intentional, but determinate, self-reXexively measured against social rules and resources,
the heterogeneity of which allows for the possibility of change with every self-reXexive
action.16 Textual production may be initiated and guided by the producer, but it puts to
work various linguistic and cultural materials which make the text discontinuous, despite
its appearance of unity, and which result in meanings and eVects that may exceed the
producer’s intention, creating an unconscious that is at once personal and social,
psychological and ideological. Thus, the translator consults many diVerent target-lan-
guage cultural materials, ranging from dictionaries and grammars to texts, discursive
strategies, and translations to values, paradigms, and ideologies, both canonical and
marginal. Although intended to reproduce the source-language text, the translator’s
consultation of these materials inevitably reduces and supplements it, even when
source-language cultural materials are also consulted, and their sheer heterogeneity
leads to discontinuities in the translation that are symptomatic of its ethnocentric
violence. Discontinuities at the level of syntax, diction, or discourse allow the translation
to be read as a translation, revealing the strategy at work in it, foreignizing a domesti-
cating translation by showing where it departs from target-language cultural values,
domesticating a foreignizing translation by showing where it depends on them.
[ . . . ]
In many translations [ . . . ] the discontinuities are readily apparent, unintentionally
disturbing the Xuency of the language or deliberately establishing the linguistic hetero-
geneity that distinguishes a resistant strategy. Literary translations, in particular, often
bear prefaces which announce the translator’s strategy and alert the reader to the presence
of noticeable stylistic peculiarities. But perhaps translations in other disciplines should
also contain prefaces that not merely describe the problems posed by the foreign text and
the translator’s solutions, but rationalize the global strategy developed and implemented
by the translator, including the speciWc kind of discourse chosen for the translation and
the speciWc interpretations assigned to key concepts. Such prefaces will ultimately force
translators and their readers to reXect on the ethnocentric violence of translation and
possibly to write and read translated texts in ways that seek to recognize the linguistic and
cultural diVerence of foreign texts. What I am advocating is not an indiscriminate
valorization of every foreign culture or a metaphysical concept of foreignness as an
5.18 lawrence venuti
555

essential value; indeed, the foreign text is privileged in a foreignizing translation only in
so far as it enables a disruption of target-language cultural values, so that its value is
always strategic, depending on the cultural formation into which it is translated. My goal
is not an essentializing of the foreign, but resistance against ethnocentrism and racism,
cultural narcissism and imperialism, in the interests of democratic geopolitical relations.
Hence, my project is the elaboration of the theoretical, critical, and textual means by
which translation can be studied and practised as a focus of diVerence, instead of the
homogeneity that widely characterizes it today. Once the violence of translation is
recognized, the choices facing the writers and readers of translated texts become
clear—however diYcult they are to make.
notes
1. Roland Barthes, ‘Taking sides’, in Critical Essays, trans. Richard Howard (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern
University Press, 1972), pp. 163–70.
2. Barbara Kruger, Mary Boone Gallery, 5–26 January 1991.
3. Friedrich Schleiermacher, ‘On the diVerent methods of translating’, in Translating Literature: The German
Tradition from Luther to Rosenzweig, ed. and trans. Andre´ Lefevere (Assen: Van Gorcum, 1977), pp. 67–89.
4. Antoine Berman, L’e´preuve de l’e´tranger: Culture et traduction dans l’Allemagne romantique (Paris: Gallimard,
1984). See also Berman’s ‘La traduction et la lettre, ou l’auberge du lointain’, in Les Tours de Babel: Essais sur la
traduction (Mauvezin: Trans-Europ-Repress, 1985), pp. 31–150, especially pp. 87–91. Schleiermacher’s theory,
despite its stress on foreignizing translation, is complicated by the nationalist cultural programme he wants
German translation to serve: see my article ‘Genealogies of translation theory: Schleiermacher’, in TTR:
Traduction, Terminologie, Re´daction: Etudes sur le texte et ses transformations, vol. 4, no. 2 (1991), pp. 125–50.
5. See the annual statistics for the American publishing industry presented by Chandler B. Grannis in Publishers
Weekly, 19 September 1989, pp. 24–5, 9 March 1990, pp. 32–5, and 8 March 1991, pp. 36–9. For the British
statistics, see Whittaker’s Almanack for the years 1986 to 1991. The volume of translations published annually in a
European country like Italy can be gauged from Herbert R. Lottman, ‘Milan: A world of change’, Publishers
Weekly, 21 June 1991, pp. s5–s11.
6. I discuss the impact of French poststructuralism on translation theory and practice in the introduction of my
anthology, Rethinking Translation: Discourse, Subjectivity, Ideology (London and New York: Routledge, 1992)
pp. 1–17. The present article develops theoretical issues set forth in that introduction. Although I am theorizing
translation from within Anglo-American culture, the foreign theoretical discourses I put to work considerably
complicate my ‘home’ position, creating possibilities for cultural critique and resistance. In a previous article—
‘The translator’s invisibility’, Criticism, 28, (1986), pp. 179–212—I oVer an assessment of current English-
language translation that is indebted as much to Althusserian Marxism as to poststructuralism.
7. Sir John Denham, ‘Preface’ to The Destruction of Troy, in English Translation Theory, 1650–1800, ed. T. R.
Steiner (Assen: Van Gorcum, 1975), pp. 64–5.
8. John Dryden, ‘Dedication of the Aeneis,’ in English Translation Theory, pp. 72–4.
9. William Guthrie, ‘Preface’ to The Orations of Marcus Tullius Cicero, in English Translation Theory, pp. 96–9.
10. John Hookman Frere, Review of Thomas Mitchell’s translation of The Comedies of Aristophanes, Quarterly
Review, 23 (July 1820), pp. 474–505.
11. Review of William Stewart Rose’s translation of Orlando Furioso, Quarterly Review, 30 (October 1823), pp. 40–61.
12. For the emergence of moral and political conservatism in early nineteenth-century England, see Maurice
J. Quinlan, Victorian Prelude: A History of English Manners, 1780–1830 (New York: Columbia University Press,
1941) and Lawrence Stone, The Family, Sex and Marriage in England, 1500–1800 (New York: Harper & Row,
1977).
556
recent and contemporary writings

13. Eugene A. Nida, Toward a Science of Translating, with Special Reference to Principles and Procedures Involved in
Bible Translating (Leiden: Brill, 1964), p. 159. Further references to this work will be indicated by Science.
14. Jan de Waard and Eugene A. Nida, From One Language to Another: Functional Equivalence in Bible Translating
(Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1986), p. 14. Further references to this work will be indicated by One Language.
15. Philip E. Lewis, ‘The measure of translation eVects’, in DiVerence in Translation, ed. Joseph Graham (Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1985), pp. 31–62.
16. These remarks assume Anthony Giddens’ concept of agency in Central Problems in Social Theory: Action,
Structure, and Contradiction in Social Analysis (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1979),
especially ch. 2.
5.18 lawrence venuti
557

5.19 Susan Bassnett
Susan Bassnett (b. 1945), literary scholar, translation theorist, translator, poet, has served as
Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the University of Warwick, and is Professor in the Centre for
Translation and Comparative Cultural Studies which she founded in the 1980s. She was
educated in several European countries and has lectured widely. Bassnett is author of over
twenty books, and her Translation Studies (1980; 3rd edn. 2002) has remained in print and
has become one of the most important textbooks around the world in the expanding Weld
of Translation Studies. Her Comparative Literature: A Critical Introduction (1993), polem-
ically seeking to situate translation studies in the centre rather than on the fringe of
comparative literature, has itself been translated into several languages. Recent books
include Constructing Cultures (1998) co-authored with Andre´ Lefevere, with whom she
collaborated (see introduction to Sect. 5.5 on Lefevere) on many projects, and Post-
Colonial Translation (1999) co-edited with Harish Trivedi. With Piotr Kuhiwczak, who
also teaches at Warwick, she has translated and edited an anthology: Ariadne’s Thread:
Polish Women Poets (1988). Her own latest collection of poetry is Exchanging Lives (2002).
Susan Bassnett also writes for several national newspapers. One of her specialities is the
semiotics of theatre and theatre translation.
From ‘Theatre and Opera’, in Peter France (ed.), The Oxford Guide to Literature in
English Translation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 96–103
The Problem of the Play-Text
[U]nlike other types of text, the play is written to be spoken and is therefore a kind of
blueprint that actors use as the basis of their performance. It has been argued that the play
text is incomplete without that physical dimension, that in its written version it awaits
realization in performance. Pavis warns that any discussion of the translation of a play
text needs to take the performance dimension into account, since the play is not simply a
literary text, written to be read, but a text that ‘reaches the audience by way of the actors’
bodies’ [P. Pavis, Theatre and the Crossroads of Culture (London and New York: 1992)].
[ . . . ]
Andre´ Helbo makes a distinction between four types of stage direction, suggesting that
some are meant for the actors, some for the staging, some for the implied spectator and
some for the reader [A. Helbo, Theory of the Performing Arts (Amsterdam, 1987)]. What is
clear is that there are very diVerent kinds of stage direction, and very diVerent kinds of
play, and in consequence some plays are more easily accessible to readers even without
the performance dimension.[ . . . ]
558
recent and contemporary writings

Any theory of translation of theatre and opera texts needs to take into account both the
problem of determining exactly what the relationship between written text and perform-
ance is, and the problem of huge variations in reading and writing practices. Is the
dramatic text literature [ . . . ], or is it another kind of text altogether, a hybrid that cannot
be considered as a complete entity? Depending on the response to this question,
translation practice varies considerably.
Theatre and opera are multi-dimensional arts. Tadeusz Kowzan proposes Wve semiotic
systems that underpin all performance, and may be present together or separately,
according to the type of performance being staged. The Wrst of these is the spoken
text, for which there may or may not be a written script, the second is bodily expression,
the third the actor’s physical appearance (height, gestures, features, etc), the fourth the
playing space (size, shape, lighting, props, etc), and the Wfth non-spoken sound, includ-
ing music [T. Kowzan, Litte´rature et spectacle (Paris and The Hague, 1975)]. From these
Wve categories, he determines 13 distinct subsections: words, intonation, mime, gesture,
movement, make-up, hairstyle, costume, props, decor, lighting, music, and sound eVect,
which he classiWes as either auditive or visual signs. This structuralist breakdown of
performance serves as a basic map, and remains a useful tool for understanding the
complex interrelationship between sign systems in theatre. For theatre is above all a
collaborative process, and the Wnal performance is the result of interaction between
diVerent sign systems and diVerent individuals. The spoken text (or written text, if there
is one at all) exists as only one element of that collaboration.
The task of the translator, therefore, is to render the single element of written text into
another language. This might not seem, on the surface, any diVerent from any other kind
of translation practice, but the diYculties arise when we return to the vexed question of
determining exactly what a play-text is. For if there is some kind of coded gestural text
inside the play, which actors, directors, designers and other practitioners can decode and
render actual in corporeal terms, then it follows that the translator needs to take this
factor into account, for practitioners in the target culture will also want to actualize the
play in their own language and physicality.
Speakability
[ . . . ] In his introduction to six plays by Chekhov in English, Robert Corrigan declares:
The Wrst law in translating for the theatre is that everything must be speakable. It is
necessary at all times for the translator to hear the actor speaking in his mind’s ear.
He must be conscious of the gestures of the voice that speak—the rhythm, the
cadence, the interval. He must also be conscious of the look, the feel, and the
movement of the actor while he is speaking. He must, in short, render what might
be called the whole gesture of the scene.
(A. Chekhov, Six Plays, tr. R. Corrigan, New York, 1962) [ . . . ]
5.19 susan bassnett
559

Malcolm GriYths claims that:
Translators for the theatre are enmeshed in a protean activity which requires as
much familiarity with theatre practice, cultural contexts and social history as it does
with spoken and written languages.
(M. GriYths, ‘Presence and Presentation: Dilemmas in Translating for the Theatre’,
in T. Hermans, ed. Second Hand: Papers on the Theory and Historical Study of
Literary Translation, ALW-Cahier. 3, 1985).
This is a large statement, but serves to illustrate the futility of relying upon an ill-deWned
notion of ‘speakability’ as a criterion for translation. What is being suggested here is that
theatre practice in diVerent cultures has its own genealogy and its own traditions;
audiences in diVerent cultures have diVerent horizons of expectation. [ . . . ]
The point is that audience expectations are by no means universal, and performance
styles are geared to accommodate those diVerent expectations. Actors adjust their
rhythms in accordance with the conventions and expectations of their own culture and
tradition. [ . . . ] This means that any modern French performance of a Racine tragedy is a
form of translation, and any version in any other language is doubly a translation, both
interlingual and intersemiotic.
Dialogue and Deixis
[ . . . ] In the 1980s, theatre analysts turned their attention to the fact that at the heart of
dramatic dialogue there lies the notion of the deixis, the ‘I addressing a you here and now’
[K. Elam, The Semiotics of Theatre and Drama (London 1980)]. This means that a
dramatic text can be broken down into a series of deictic units, which give indications
of where speech is to be directed. [ . . . ]
Version, Adaptation, and Translation
The terms ‘version’ or ‘adaptation’ are frequently used with reference to translation of
texts for theatre, and this terminology can have diVerent meanings. One use of the terms
implies a degree of variation from the source text, so that a ‘translation’ might be
perceived as closer to the original than something described as a ‘version’ or as an
‘adaptation’. But ‘adaptation’ can also be used to describe the process for dramatizing a
novel, for example, and in this sense it is often used as a synonym for ‘screenplay’ when
the source text is not set out in the form of a play. [ . . . ]
Some critics argue about the use of this terminology, suggesting that a translation is
somehow more ‘faithful’to the original than a version or an adaptation. This argument is
based on the Xawed premiss that there is such a thing as a ‘faithful’ translation in the Wrst
place, an assumption called into question by Translation Studies. For all translations
reXect the translator’s interpretation of the source text, so that a translation is basically the
560
recent and contemporary writings

product Wrstly of a single individual’s reading and then of his or her second-language
rewriting. Translation inevitably involves rewriting and manipulation of the source, as
translators and theorists, from Dryden to Derrida have pointed out, and the act of
translating always leads to changes.
There is also another, more recent use of the terms ‘version’ and ‘adaptation’. In some
countries, particularly in the English-speaking world, it is common to market transla-
tions as being made by well-known playwrights, even if these have no access to the source
language. [ . . . ] [P]roblems arise when the term ‘translation’, which implies knowledge of
more than one language, is used to describe the work of English writers, and a way round
this ethical and legal diYculty can be found by use of the term ‘translation’to describe the
text produced by interlingual transfer and ‘adaptation’ or ‘version’ to describe the text
rewritten in English. [ . . . ]
Acculturation in Translation
[ . . . ] Translation of a play involves deliberate choices on the part of theatre manage-
ments, funding bodies, actors and directors, and foreign texts are often chosen because of
the speciWc needs of the target system. Many play translations are undertaken in order to
expand a repertoire [ . . . ] A period of intense playwriting activity is generally not one of
great theatre translation, but conversely, a period where there is relatively little native
theatre being produced tends to be a time of increased translation. [ . . . ]
A recent development in the theatre is the transcultural performance, which draws
upon a range of diVerent theatrical systems. It is possible to argue that this kind of
theatre, famously developed by such Wgures as Peter Brook or Pina Bausch, does not have
a source text at all, since the foreign text and culture are not taken as points of departure.
[ . . . ] In this kind of theatre, the communication of the foreign is not posited as a feature
of the performance; rather, the performance seeks to combine diVerent elements in a new
whole. Discussing Eugenio Barba’s intercultural work with Faust, Pavis deWnes it as a
western vision conveyed by eastern traditions that is reworked by a western director,
using performers from both east and west, which results in the ‘neutralization’ of one
theatrical and cultural tradition by another [P. Pavis, Theatre at the Crossroads of Culture,
(London and New York, 1992)].
Although intercultural theatre may be a new development, opera has long had an
intercultural dimension, made possible by a more restricted concept of translation.
When operas are performed in the source language, singers learn their roles in that
language, combining music and sound patterns without necessarily having any conver-
sational or writing ability in the language. It is therefore commonplace to have singers
from China, Bulgaria, the United States or Italy all performing in the same opera,
provided there is a common language in which all will sing. The increased internation-
alization of opera means that this pattern is likely to continue.
5.19 susan bassnett
561

5.20 Everett Fox
Everett Fox, educated at Brandeis University, is the Allen M. Glick Professor of Judaic
and Biblical Studies at Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts. He has investigated
the rhetoric and internal coherence of the Hebrew Bible, with the object of conveying
these qualities, as far as possible, in his translations. These have appeared in The Five
Books of Moses (1995), and in Give Us a King!: Samuel, Saul, and David (1999). Fox has
relied substantially on the theory and practice of Martin Buber and Franz Rosenzweig.
Together with Lawrence Rosenwald, he has also translated Buber and Rosenzweig’s
Scripture and Translation (1994; see Sect. 4.5, above, on Buber and Rosenzweig).
From Everett Fox’s ‘Translator’s Preface’ to The Five Books of Moses: Genesis, Exodus,
Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy (New York: Schocken Books, 1995)
. . . read the Bible as though it were something entirely unfamiliar, as though it
had not been set before you ready-made. . . . Face the book with a new attitude as
something new. . . . Let whatever may happen occur between yourself and it. You
do not know which of its sayings and images will overwhelm and mold you. . . .
But hold yourself open. Do not believe anything a priori; do not disbelieve
anything a priori. Read aloud the words written in the book in front of you; hear
the word you utter and let it reach you.
—adapted from a lecture of Martin Buber, 1926
The purpose of this work is to draw the reader into the world of the Hebrew Bible
through the power of its language. While this sounds simple enough, it is not usually
possible in translation. Indeed, the premise of almost all Bible translations, past and
present, is that the ‘meaning’ of the text should be conveyed in as clear and comfortable a
manner as possible in one’s own language. Yet the truth is that the Bible was not written
in English in the twentieth or even the seventeenth century; it is ancient, sometimes
obscure, and speaks in a way quite diVerent from ours. Accordingly, I have sought here
primarily to echo the style of the original, believing that the Bible is best approached, at
least at the beginning, on its own terms. So I have presented the text in English dress but
with a Hebraic voice.
The result looks and sounds very diVerent from what we are accustomed to encoun-
tering as the Bible, whether in the much-loved grandeur of the King James Version or the
clarity and easy Xuency of the many recent attempts. There are no old friends here; Eve
will not, as in old paintings, give Adam an apple (nor will she be called ‘Eve’), nor will
562
recent and contemporary writings

Moses speak of himself as ‘a stranger in a strange land,’ as beautiful as that sounds.
Instead, the reader will encounter a text which challenges him or her to rethink what
these ancient books are and what they mean, and will hopefully be encouraged to become
an active listener rather than a passive receiver.
This translation is guided by the principle that the Hebrew Bible, like much of the
literature of antiquity, was meant to be read aloud, and that consequently it must be
translated with careful attention to rhythm and sound. The translation therefore tries to
mimic the particular rhetoric of the Hebrew whenever possible, preserving such devices
as repetition, allusion, alliteration, and wordplay. It is intended to echo the Hebrew, and
to lead the reader back to the sound structure and form of the original.
Such an approach was Wrst espoused by Martin Buber and Franz Rosenzweig in their
monumental German translation of the Bible (1925–1962) and in subsequent interpretive
essays. The Five Books of Moses is in many respects an oVshoot of the Buber-Rosenzweig
translation (hereafter abbreviated as B-R). I began with their principles: that translations
of individual words should reXect ‘primal’ root meanings, that translations of phrases,
lines, and whole verses should mimic the syntax of the Hebrew, and that the vast web of
allusions and wordplays present in the text should be somehow perceivable in the target
language (for a full exposition in English, see now Buber and Rosenzweig 1994). In all
these areas I have taken a more moderate view than my German mentors, partly because
I think there are limitations to these principles and partly because recent scholarship
points in broader directions. As a result, my translation is on the whole less radical and
less strange in English than B-R was in German. This, however, does not mean that it is
less diVerent from conventional translations, or that I have abandoned the good Wght for
a fresh look at the Bible’s verbal power.
Buber and Rosenzweig based their approach on the Romantic nineteenth-century
notion that the Bible was essentially oral literature written down. In the present century
there have been Bible scholars who have found this view attractive; on the other hand,
there has been little agreement on how oral roots manifest themselves in the text.
One cannot suggest that the Bible is a classic work of oral literature in the same
sense as the Iliad or Beowulf. It does not employ regular meter or rhyme, even in sections
that are clearly formal poetry. The text of the Bible that we possess is most likely a
mixture of oral and written materials from a variety of periods and sources, and
recovering anything resembling original oral forms would seem to be impossible. This
is particularly true given the considerable chronological and cultural distance at which we
stand from the text, which does not permit us to know how it was performed in ancient
times.
A more fruitful approach, less dependent upon theories whose historical accuracy is
unprovable, might be to focus on the way in which the biblical text, once completed, was
5.20 everett fox
563

copied and read. Recent research reveals that virtually all literature in Greek and Roman
times—the period when the Hebrew Bible was put into more or less the form in which it
has come down to us (but not the period of its composition)—was read aloud. This
holds for the process of copying or writing, and also, surprisingly, for solitary reading. As
late as the last decade of the fourth century, Saint Augustine expressed surprise at Wnding
a sage who read silently. Such practices and attitudes seem strange to us, for whom the
very deWnition of a library, for instance, is a place where people have to keep quiet. But it
was a routine in the world of antiquity, as many sources attest.
So the Bible, if not an oral document, is certainly an aural one; it would have been read
aloud as a matter of course. But the implications of this for understanding the text are
considerable. The rhetoric of the text is such that many passages and sections are under-
standable in depth only when they are analyzed as they are heard. Using echoes, allusions,
andpowerfulinnerstructuresofsound,thetextisoftenabletoconveyideasinamannerthat
vocabulary alone cannot do. A few illustrations may suYce to introduce this phenomenon
to the reader; it will be encountered constantly throughout this volume.
Sound plays a crucial role in one of the climactic sequences in Genesis, Chapters 32–33.
Jacob, the protagonist, has not seen his brother Esau for twenty years. Now a rich and
successful adult, he is on his way back to Canaan after a long exile. He sends messengers
to forestall Esau’s vengeance—for twenty years earlier, Jacob had stolen the birthright and
the blessing which Esau felt were rightly his own. When Jacob Wnds out that his brother
‘is already coming . . . and four hundred men are with him’ (32: 7), he goes even further,
preparing an elaborate gift for Esau in the hopes of appeasing his anger. The text in
vv.21–22 presents Jacob’s thoughts and actions (the translation is taken from the New
English Bible):
for he thought, ‘I will appease him with the present that I have sent on ahead, and
afterwards, when I come into his presence, he will perhaps receive me kindly.’ So
Jacob’s present went on ahead of him. . . .
This is an accurate and highly idiomatic translation of the Hebrew, and the reader will
notice nothing unusual about the passage as it reads in English. The sound of the Hebrew
text, on the other hand, gives one pause. It is built on variations of the word panim,
whose basic meaning is ‘face,’ although the Hebrew uses it idiomatically to encompass
various ideas. (Note: in Hebrew, the sound p is pronounced as ph under certain
circumstances.) If the text is translated with attention to sound, its quite striking oral
character emerges (italics mine):
For he said to himself:
I will wipe (the anger from) his face (phanav)
with the gift that goes ahead of my face; (le-phanai)
564
recent and contemporary writings

afterward, when I see his face, (phanav)
perhaps he will lift up my face! (phanai)
The gift crossed over ahead of his face. . . . (al panav)
Comparison of these two English versions is instructive. In the New English Bible, as in
most other contemporary versions, the translators are apparently concerned with pre-
senting the text in clear, modern, idiomatic English. For example, they render the
Hebrew yissa phanai as ‘receive me kindly.’ The N.E.B. translates the idea of the text;
at the same time it translates out the sound by not picking up on the repetition of panim
words.
What does the reader gain by hearing the literalness of the Hebrew? And what is lost
by the use of its idiomatic meaning? As mirrored in the second translation, it is clear that
our text is signaling something of signiWcance. The motif of ‘face’ (which might be
interpreted as ‘facing’ or ‘confrontation’) occurs at crucial points in the story. The night
before his fateful meeting with Esau, as he is left to ponder the next day’s events, Jacob
wrestles with a mysterious stranger—a divine being. After Jacob’s victory, the text reports
(32: 31):
Yaakov called the name of the place: Peniel/Face of God,
for: I have seen God,
face to face,
and my life has been saved.
The repetition suggests a thematic link with what has gone before. One could interpret
that once the hero has met and actually bested this divine being, his coming human
confrontation is assured of success. Thus upon meeting Esau at last, Jacob says to him
(33: 10):
For I have, after all, seen your face, as one sees the face of God,
and you have been gracious to me.
It could be said that in a psychological sense the meetings with divine and human
adversaries are a unity, the representation of one human process in two narrative
episodes. This is accomplished by the repetition of the word panim in the text.
The above interpretation depends entirely on sound. Once that focus is dropped,
either through the silent reading of the text or a standard translation, the inner connec-
tions are simply lost and the reader is robbed of the opportunity to make these
connections for himself. Clearly there is a diVerence between translating what the text
means and translating what it says.
While the Jacob passages use the sound of a speciWc word to indicate an important
motif in the narrative, there are other cases where sound brings out structure, and the
5.20 everett fox
565

structure itself conveys the principal idea of the passage. A striking example of this is
found at the beginning of Genesis. God’s Wrst acts of creation in 1: 3–5 are portrayed in a
highly ordered fashion, suggesting that creation itself is orderly, and this idea is the
thematic backbone of the whole chapter. We are meant to experience the orderliness of
God’s activity through the sensuality of the language and through the particular way in
which the text speaks. A translation keyed to the sound of the Hebrew reads:
God said: Let there be light! And there was light.
God saw the light: that it was good.
God separated the light from the darkness.
God called the light: Day! and the darkness he called: Night!
The four occurrences of ‘God’ plus verb accomplish the narrator’s goal, and give a tone to
the creation account that makes it akin to poetry. In contrast, virtually all modern
translations treat the passage as prose, rendering it into clear written English but
simultaneously removing its inner structure. What remains is a statement of what is
taking place in the narrative, but without its underlying thrust. Again the New English
Bible:
God said, ‘Let there be light,’ and there was light; and God saw that the light was
good, and he separated light from darkness. He called the light day, and the
darkness night.
This translation is cast in good English style. For just that reason two occurrences of
‘God’ have been omitted, and the passage consequently reads smoothly—so smoothly
that one glides past it as if creation were the same as any other narrated action. But what
has been lost is the characteristic oral ring of the text, and simultaneously its intent to say
something beyond the content of words alone.
Another example of translating with an ear to the sound and structure of the original,
this time from the book of Exodus, comes from the dramatic story of the Sea of Reeds
(14: 11–12). The newly freed Israelites Wnd themselves pursued by their former masters,
the Pharaoh and his army; with their backs to the Sea, they panic, and bitterly harangue
their would-be deliverer, Moses. The present translation, attempting to reXect the
repetition and structure of the original, yields the following:
they said to Moshe:
Is it because there are no graves in Egypt
that you have taken us out to die in the wilderness?
What is this that you have done to us, bringing us out of Egypt?
Is this not the very word that we spoke to you in Egypt,
saying: Let us alone, that we may serve Egypt!
566
recent and contemporary writings

Indeed, better for us serving Egypt
than our dying in the wilderness!
This passage demonstrates several aspects of a rhetorical translation method, if we may so
term it: the laying out of the text in ‘cola’ or lines meant to facilitate reading aloud (more
on this below); the repetition of words—‘Egypt’ Wve times and ‘wilderness’ twice—to
stress the irony of the Israelites’ predicament (as they see it, Egypt means life, and the
wilderness, certain death); and the double use of ‘serve,’ the very word that Moses
constantly drummed into Pharaoh’s ears in the early part of the book to denote the
Israelites’ desire to go and worship their God (‘Send free my people, that they may serve
me’). If we juxtapose the above translation with that found in, say, the New International
Version, the importance of this approach to the text becomes clear:
They said to Moses, ‘Was it because there were no graves in Egypt that you brought
us to the desert to die? What have you done to us by bringing us out of Egypt?
Didn’t we say to you in Egypt, ‘‘Leave us alone; let us serve the Egyptians’’? It would
have been better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the desert!’
Here the rhetorical force of the Hebrew has been ignored. The Hebrew text does not
transpose ‘desert to die’ to ‘die in the desert’ at the end of the passage (the word order
repeats in the original, for emphasis); it does not distinguish in sound between ‘Egypt’
and ‘Egyptians’; and it certainly does not read like standard colloquial prose. Indeed, all
of Chapter 14 of Exodus demonstrates the Bible’s use of an intermediate form between
poetry and prose, a form designed to instruct as well as to inspire.
But it is not only in narrative that the rhetoric of biblical language makes itself felt.
Fully half of the book of Exodus is law or instruction, and one can Wnd there further
examples of the importance of sound structure in the Bible. Take, for instance, the law
concerning the protection of widows and orphans (22: 23–24). This time I shall present
the text Wrst through the eyes of the Jerusalem Bible:
You must not be harsh with the widow, or with the orphan; if you are harsh with
them, they will surely cry out to me, and be sure that I shall hear their cry; my anger
will Xare and I shall kill you with the sword, your own wives will be widows, your
own children orphans.
This is powerful language, especially in a law code. But the Hebrew text goes much
farther, utilizing as it does a double form of the verb rarely found in multiple sequence:
Any widow or orphan you are not to aZict.
Oh, if you aZict, aZict them . . . !
For (then) they will cry, cry out to me,
and I will hearken, hearken to their cry,
5.20 everett fox
567

my anger will Xare up
and I will kill you with the sword,
so that your wives become widows, and your children,
orphans!
Here the text is in eVect slowed down by the division into lines, and the verb forms are
isolated to underscore their unique rhetoric. The eVect of the whole is to focus attention
on this particular law among a host of others. (pp. ix–xv)
Genesis 11: 1–9, as translated in Fox, Five Books of Moses, pp. 48–9.
[Cf. other versions of the same passage, pp. 9–10, 13–14, 43–6, 66–7, 72, 113–14, 119–20,
321–2, 351, and 568.]
1. Now all the earth was of one language and one set-of-words.
2 And it was when they migrated to the east that they found a valley in the land of Shinar
and settled there.
3 They said, each man to his neighbour:
Come-now! Let us bake bricks and let us burn them well-burnt!
So for them brick-stone was like building-stone, and raw-bitumen was for them like
red-mortar.
4 Now they said:
Come-now! Let us build ourselves a city and a tower, its top in the heavens,
and let us make ourselves a name,
lest we be scattered over the face of all the earth!
5 But YHWH came down to look over the city and the tower that the humans were
building.
6 YHWH said:
Here (they are) one people with one language for them all,
and this is merely the Wrst of their doings—
now there will be no barrier for them in all that they scheme to do!
7 Come-now! Let us go down and there let us baZe their language,
so that no man will understand the language of his neighbour.
8 So YHWH scattered them from there over the face of all the earth,
and they had to stop building the city.
9 Therefore its name was called Bavel/Babble,
for there YHWH baZed the language of all the earth-folk,
and from there, YHWH scattered them over the face of all the earth.
568
recent and contemporary writings

5.21 John Felstiner
John Felstiner (b. 1936) graduated from Harvard. Since 1965 he has been teaching literature
at Stanford, where he is Professor of English, with stints at the University of Chile, the
Hebrew University in Jerusalem, and Yale. He has held Rockefeller, Guggenheim, NEH,
and NEA fellowships. He is the author of The Lies of Art: Max Beerbohm’s Parody and
Caricature (1972), Translating Neruda: The Way to Macchu Picchu (1980), and Paul Celan:
Poet, Survivor, Jew (1995). Felstiner has received a number of awards for his work on and
translations of Neruda and Celan. His Selected Poems and Prose of Paul Celan appeared in
2001. Like some other scholars and practitioners of translation, Felstiner has noted how
translation constitutes an exceptionally attentive and energized form of reading. His
article, ‘Kafka and the Golem’, reprinted in its entirety below, exempliWes the many
connections between reading, interpretation and translation.
John Felstiner, ‘Kafka and the Golem: Translating Paul Celan’, in Daniel Weissbort
(ed.), Translating Poetry: The Double Labyrinth (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press,
1985), 35–50
Einem, der vor der Tu¨r stand
To one who stood before the
eines
door, one
Abends:
evening:
ihm
to him
toward
tat ich mein Wort auf –: zum
I opened my word –: to the
Kielkropf sah ich ihn trotten,
clod I saw him trotting, to the
zum
toward
halb-
the half-
schu¨rigen, dem
baked
begot
im kotigen Stiefel des
brother born in the a
Kriegsknechts
dough boy’s hireling’s
geborenen Bruder, dem
dung-caked, boot, him
mit dem blutigen
with his blood
him with his
Gottes-
god-
gema¨cht, dem
on God’s
like loins
schilpenden Menschlein.
handiwork, the
all bloody,
the
chittering manikin.
Rabbi, knirschte ich, Rabbi
Rabbi, I gnashed, Rabbi
Lo¨w:
Loew:
5.21 john felstiner
569

Diesem
For this one –
beschneide das Wort,
circumcise his word,
diesem
for this one –
schreib das lebendige
write the living
Nichts ins Gemu¨t,
Nothingness on his heart,
diesem
for this one
spreize die zwei
spread your two
Kru¨ppelWnger zum heil-
cripple bent Wngers in a
bringenden Spruch.
sav-
safe-
Diesem.
ing saying.
keeping prayer.
For this one
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Wirf auch die Abendtu¨r zu,
And slam
shut the evening
Rabbi.
door, Rabbi.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Reiß die Morgentu¨r auf
Throw the morningdoor open,
Ra- –
Ra- –
Because attentiveness or Aufmerksamkeit—as in a saying that Walter Benjamin took to
identify Kafka’s genius and that Paul Celan then took up in thinking of his own poetic
practice: ‘Attentiveness is the natural prayer of the soul’—because attentiveness mattered
so critically to Celan, I try in translating him to make translating into the fullest possible
and the closest act of reading and of writing.1 A translator, I think, needs to become the
reader par excellence—or perhaps I should say par exigence. Here I would borrow from
Kafka’s Trial, where Joseph K., trying to interpret the parable ‘Before the Law’, is told by
a priest: ‘The Scripture is unalterable and its interpretations often merely betray bewil-
derment at this.’2
At the enigmatic text before me now, ‘Einem, der vor der Tu¨r stand’, ‘To one who stood
before the door’,3 I feel a kindred bewilderment. I can at least perceive in this poem a
dynamic linking divine creative speech to failing mortal clay. And I think I hear Paul
Celan crying out for admission into a spiritual realm that we may (unknowingly)
suppose he entered when in mid-career, a quarter-century after the catastrophe that
took away his parents, culture and homeland, he took his own life by drowning. To begin
tracing him through this poem, I think of what Franz Rosenzweig once said about his
work on Judah Halevi: ‘I myself understand a poem only when I have translated it.’4
Einem, in the dative, an indeWnite pronoun initiating a subordinate clause followed by
a colon; then a second dative, ihm, with a line to itself, leading to a dash and another
colon: punctuation, line breaks, syntax and grammar already seem to compose the law of
this poem, as if language and speech themselves formed a prior, primary reality governing
anything the poem may refer to. Yet a translator’s exactness with these technical elements
does not dispel the reader’s questions. Who is speaking, and to whom? Before what door,
570
recent and contemporary writings

and when—Shabbat, or some other pivot in time? Maybe the fact of a door barring
entrance to something matters more at Wrst than the something behind it.
To one who stood before the door, one
evening:
to him
I opened my word
‘ihm/tat ich mein Wort auf’. Usually with auftun in the German Bible—in Job and
Psalms, for instance—a divine or human speaker opens his mouth or lips, or doors and
gates open up. In Celan’s poem, a word is opened, but what word—or does the very act
of opening, of speaking, matter most here?
Now if line by line I seem to be deferring and frustrating the interpretive impulse,
I think Celan’s poem requires just that of its reader-translator. We have not even come to
the close of a sentence yet; and we have not yet come upon Rabbi Loew.
Having opened his word to someone standing before the door, the speaker saw him
approach someone else. A broken, staggered syntax and an impasto of crude, animal-like
images convey this scene. I sense here a derisiveness pulsing through all Wve adjectives
with the same dropping cadence: schu¨rigen, kotigen, geborenen, blutigen, schilpenden—
a derisiveness I have tried to catch in fairly rough sound and rhythmic patterns:
. . . toward the
clod I saw him trot, toward
the half-
baked
brother begot in a
doughboy’s dung-caked boot,
him with his god-
like loins all
bloody, the
chittering manikin.
What is the ‘clod’, the Kielkropf, that spawns these phrases? A dialect term meaning
changeling, abortion, monster or, colloquially, dolt; my word ‘clod’ indicates an earthy,
soulless creature like the golem, but it loses the idea of something misbegotten and also
weakens the bite of Kielkropf, with those two sharp k’s that cut through again in
Kriegsknecht. To regain a little in translation, instead of ‘born’ I have said ‘begot’ in a
boot, for the verb’s raw rhyme with ‘trot’ and its half-biblical, half-bestial overtones.
If Celan has the golem in mind here, he has certainly laded on more than its usual
legendary traits. The word half-schu¨rig—‘of the second shearing’, i.e. imperfect—does
5.21 john felstiner
571

tally closely with the biblical term golem, ‘unformed’, and also with the colloquial sense of
‘golem’, a dumbhead; both senses are perhaps audible in the English ‘half-baked’. But
Celan’s next phrase gives a strange lineage to this creature the doorkeeper trotted toward,
this ‘brother begot in a/doughboy’s dung-caked boots’.5 Possibly some folk tale lies
behind the image, with muck on a trooper’s boot making do for the clay that formed
humankind. Yet the Kriegsknecht, a ‘mercenary’, still baZes me. In sixteenth-century and
later versions the golem as bodyguard or spy does defend Jews against their enemies, yet
no source I have been able to Wnd says that Joseph Golem actually served as a hired
soldier, much less that he was born in the boot of one.6 Provisionally, ‘doughboy’ will do
for a common trooper, and the word jostles interestingly with ‘dungcaked’. It also
suggests the shaping of Adam, the miracle of creating human life that so powerfully
underlies the golem tradition. In a kind of sacred parody written not long before this
poem, and called ‘Psalm’, Celan begins by countering Creation: ‘No one kneads us again
out of earth and clay,/no one conjures our dust.’7 This ‘psalm’, a quintessential expression
of despair after the Jewish catastrophe, makes a bleak backdrop to the poem ‘Einem, der
vor der Tu¨r stand’, with its wretched creaturely hero.
Now why Bruder? Is this creature a brother to the ‘one who stood before the door’, the
one who trots toward him? Is he something less worthy, an Esau perhaps, deprived of
blessing, or even a Cain, the baneful side of humankind? Celan sees him with a bloody
‘form’, and here the word Gema¨cht, an unusual term, gives me pause. In Psalm 103: 14
Luther uses it to translate the Hebrew yetser, ‘frame’: ‘For He knoweth our frame; He
remembereth that we are dust.’ That Hebrew root occurs in Genesis 2: 7, ‘God formed
man of the dust of the ground’, and in Sefer Yetsirah, the third-century Book of Creation
from which derived the earliest idea of magically fashioning a person such as the golem. So
Gema¨cht signiWes something made, and Gottesgema¨cht, ‘God’s handiwork’. But Celan’s
creature, created in the image of God, has blood on his frame. What is more, Gema¨cht can
also mean something else: the male genitals; indeed for dem blutigen Gottesgema¨cht a
French version of this poem has le membre sanglant de Dieu, ‘God’s bloody member’.8
Although I cannot quite see Celan entertaining such an image, his poem (like the golem
legend) certainly involves the question of (pro)creativeness as well as createdness. I try to
resolve both senses of Gema¨cht, ‘frame’ and ‘generative power’, in the word ‘loins’. I call
them ‘godlike’ to reXect the Genesis story, and I break the word to replicate Celan’s line-
break, which (if only momentarily and prosodically) sunders God from his handiwork.
But why then ‘bloody’? If this brother has something of Cain in him, then his
‘brother’s blood cries out from the ground’ (Gen. 4: 10). Or we remember that the
Golem defended Prague’s Jews against the Passover blood libel. Or perhaps bloody loins
really signal the idea of circumcision that will decisively enter this poem in a moment;
after all, the painful violence of ‘his godlike loins all bloody’ might possibly express Paul
Celan’s sense of having been inscribed in the Mosaic covenant. Fortunately a translation
572
recent and contemporary writings

does not entail specifying one sense or another. I think the clodbrother-manikin in some
way incarnates the animal and unredeemed side of human nature, and thus may reXect
all those possibilities lodged in ‘blood’. As in Psalm 139: 16, the only biblical occurrence
of the word golem, this creature is imperfect, Adam not yet touched by the breath of God.
Then remembering that Rabbi Loew’s homunculus cannot speak helps explain why this
schilpenden Menschlein is called a chirping, or cheeping, or twittering, or chittering
manikin.
Here the speaker stops, and moves from report—‘I opened my word’, ‘I saw him
trot’—into direct speech. This brief transition—
Rabbi, I gnashed, Rabbi
Loew:
—becomes the poem’s fulcrum, identifying as the Maharal of Prague the person who
stood before the door and trotted toward the manikin. And in one unexpected verb,
knirschte, ‘gnash’ or ‘grate’ or ‘grind’, the speaker takes on a desperateness that imbues
everything he says from here on. Simply to utter the word ‘Rabbi’, which appears
nowhere else in Celan’s ten books of poetry, and to utter it twice, bespeaks for him a
rare because openly Jewish urgency. In early 1961, when I believe he wrote this poem,
Celan was acutely aZicted by a public charge of plagiarism against him and by its
connection to recent German anti-semitism.9 He might well have turned then to the
wonder-working Prague Rabbi, the man whose golem fought against libel. And the name
Lo¨w itself, poised alone as an entire verse, may be calling up Celan’s father Leo, in
Russian Lev. Around the time of this poem Celan jokingly signed a letter ‘Pavel
Lvovitsch’, Paul son of Lev.10 As a boy he had not felt close to his father, a man whose
Orthodox, Zionist persuasions represented a Judaism which, but for the Nazi war, he
might have sloughed oV.11 So to single out the name Lo¨w in this poem grounds a
religious and historical urgency in a diYcult private invocation.
After this invocation, again pointed by a colon, we hear twelve lines of direct speech
for the duration of the poem. A much Wrmer syntax and grammar move these lines than
in the poem’s Wrst half. And now a demonstrative pronoun, again a dative, opens the
sentence:
Diesem
beschneide das Wort.
Celan builds so much into the dative with its verb that I have (reluctantly) added
punctuation and emphasis to make this fulcral point decisive in English:
For this one –
circumcise his word.
5.21 john felstiner
573

Here again an enigmatic Wgure generates a cluster of possibilities. Given Celan’s inex-
haustible linguistic curiosity, a pun on brit mila—Covenant of the ‘Word’ as well as of
circumcision—may inhabit the phrase beschneide das Wort (a pun audible only in the
phrase’s Hebrew overtones and thus not for German ears). ‘For this one—circumcise his
word’, the speaker pleads, meaning not only the wordless golem but someone like Moses
of ‘uncircumcised lips’ (Exod. 6: 12), perhaps the poet himself in exile and wanting
prophetic speech. The only English translation I know of renders this phrase as ‘remove
the word’, since beschneiden does literally mean ‘to cut oV’.12 Yes, Rabbi Loew removes
the name of God from the golem’s mouth every Shabbat, and ultimately tears away the
aleph from emeth, ‘truth’, on the creature’s forehead, leaving him meth, ‘dead’. But an
image of cutting oV would deter the prayer rising in this sentence: ‘For this one . . . for
this one . . . for this one.’ If only because Nazism construed circumcision as a fatal sign,
I think Celan would have wanted to ‘circumcise the word’, to bring his own German
language itself, however murderously abused, somehow within the covenant. Jacques
Derrida has called circumcision une blessure lisible.13 Virtually every poem Celan wrote
bears a ‘legible wound’.
And no other Wgure of speech exposes that wound as acutely as paradox:
for this one
write the living
Nothing on his heart
Again I regret having to use three words for Celan’s inXected pronoun, especially now
that the charged word diesem, Xush left and Wlling a line of its own, begins to give a
vertebral structure to this plea or prayer. As for the paradox of ‘living Nothing’, it may
well be emeth written on the golem’s forehead and then removed. But it also belongs to a
larger dimension, as does the paradox of circumcision, the wound that sanctiWes an organ
of regeneration. ‘The Nothing is the Nothing of God . . . from which all true Creation
springs,’ writes Gershom Scholem, whom Celan was reading at the time.14 Yet a poet
who had felt the pain of annihilations as if inscribed on his own back could not wholly
regard das Nichts as sheer creative potential. For a survivor the paradox retains historical,
experiential force, palpable even in the turn of Celan’s verse, the sudden break after
lebendige: ‘write the living/Nothing on his heart’.15
And why ‘write’ it? Celan came to prize the kabbalistic theory of language and
creation: ‘Every word’—he marked this sentence once in Scholem’s little book The Secrets
of Creation—‘Every word is a name of God.’16 Yet long before that Celan had felt his
mother tongue become one and the same with life, with survival. ‘In the midst of the
losses,’ he said after the war, ‘this one thing remained: language.’17 It was literally all he
had left. He wrote—not as if, but because his life depended on it. So a poem that says
574
recent and contemporary writings

‘schreib’ das lebendige Nichts, ‘write’ the paradox of life and death, only makes explicit an
imperative implied in every poem.
Now a third diesem, holding to the spine of the poem, comes to enforce the dative case
with its power of ‘giving’ to or going towards someone:
diesem
spreize die zwei
Kru¨ppelWnger zum heil-
bringenden Spruch.
With no more syllables, an English version can attempt equivalence:
for this one
spread your two
cripple-Wngers in a safe-
keeping prayer.
What English as always cannot do, however, is mimic the intimacy built up in beschneide,
schreib and now spreize, three imperatives spoken in the second person singular. This
form of address to Rabbi Loew seems slightly surprising, just as when Joseph K. uses it to
a priest in The Trial’s cathedral scene.
Why then two Wngers? For a while I tried various explanations: Do those bent Wngers
form the name of the Almighty, Shaddai, as in an ancient benediction?—but that would
take three Wngers!18 Do they symbolize the two-letter combinations recited by medieval
golem-makers?19 Finally on last Rosh Hashanah morning, much later than it should
have, the correct image dawned on me: spread the third and fourth Wngers of each
upraised hand in the Priestly Blessing (Num. 6: 24–7). ‘The Lord bless thee, and keep
thee’: with these words in mind, I changed my ‘sav-ing saying’—so as to cleave to Celan’s
heil-/bringenden Spruch—into ‘safe-keeping saying’, and then, for a better rhythm and
sound, into ‘safe-keeping prayer’. Yet the word ‘prayer’ may lose more than my prosody
gains: namely the fact of ‘saying’, as in Segensspruch, German for ‘benediction’. This
whole poem has proceeded by virtue of language and speech: ‘I opened my word’, ‘the
chittering manikin’, ‘circumcise his word’, ‘write the living Nothing’, and now a bene-
dictive ‘saying’. Well, perhaps in some other world the translation will come right!
We should still ask why these two Wngers are not straight but bent, maimed, stunted,
stumped, crooked. I tried all those adjectives, to stress the paradox in this blessing, and
then realized that the cognate does it best: ‘cripple-Wngers’ for Kru¨ppelWnger. Images of a
bruised, broken or contradicted faith abound in Celan’s poetry, above all in the 1963
volume that includes this poem, Die Niemandsrose (‘The No-One’s-Rose’).20 The year
before he had given an East German magazine ‘Einem, der vor der Tu¨r stand’ plus two
other poems of a similar temper.21 One of them begins:
5.21 john felstiner
575

You prayer-, you blasphemy-, you
prayersharp knives
of my
silence.
You my words with me go-
ing crippled, you
my straight ones.
Such writing resists the need Celan’s readers often feel to rationalize his harshest
paradoxes. Likewise the appeal to Rabbi Loew comes to full stop in an opposition, a
healing yet crippled word, the only kind of truth Celan could credit. Then a Wnal verse,
Diesem, gathers into one word the plea that blessing and safekeeping, light and gracious-
ness, favour and peace be granted ‘For this one’, for a half-baked, misbegotten, bloody,
cheeping handiwork of God.
After this highly liturgical period, Diesem . . . , diesem . . . , diesem . . . Diesem, a pause
ensues, longer than any line- or stanza-break—and alas, the only thing a translation can
perfectly convey. Clearly this silence marks oV a time of waiting, of expectation. Then the
speaker goes on, still in the intimate imperative of prayer:
Wirf auch die Abendtu¨r zu, Rabbi.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Reiß die Morgentu¨r auf, Ra- —
Not much deWes translation here, except perhaps the German verbs’ separable preposi-
tions zu and auf, reserving their impact until the end of the phrase. English can try this
with adjectives:
And slam the eveningdoor shut, Rabbi.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Throw the morningdoor open, Ra- —
Maybe my adjectives even take Celan’s prepositions up a few decibels—not unjustiWably,
I hope.
The poem climaxes here, if beseeching alone can make a climax. And wherever they
may ultimately lead, these doors Wrst lead us back to the beginning—not only to the
poem’s beginning, where ‘To one who stood before the door, one evening . . . I opened
my word’, but to Genesis itself: ‘And there was evening and there was morning: one day.’
This poem of Celan’s has at heart to do with the mystery of creation, or more truly, with
mortal access to the mystery of creation and renewal. Is this evening encounter a Sabbath
encounter? Does evening give way to morning? We can hope so. On another level Celan’s
plea to shut the Abendtu¨r and open the Morgentu¨r carries overtones of Abendland and
Morgenland, Occident and Orient; in his letters of the time he turns away from ‘this so
576
recent and contemporary writings

golden West’ toward Eastern Europe and his homeland.22 But whatever they ask, the
poem’s last two imperatives, like the three before them, do not necessarily guarantee a
response.
An earlier poem also speaks of two doors in a way that can darken our sense of Rabbi
Loew’s Abendtu¨r and Morgentu¨r.23 Celan wrote ‘Epitaph for Franc¸ois’ in 1953, when a son
born to his wife Gise`le died within hours of birth:
The world’s two doors
stand open:
opened by you
at twinight.
We hear them banging, banging . . .
The doors of life and of death stand dreadfully close to each other, as Celan already knew
well enough. So when his later poem asks Rabbi Loew to ‘slam the eveningdoor shut . . .
Throw the morningdoor open’, the hope, the force of this prayer must reside in the
asking.
At this point another kind of source for the evening and morning doors comes to
mind. It occurred to me, again much later than it should have but in fact on Yom
Kippur, that Celan’s Wnal appeal in this poem echoes the Neilah prayer at sunset on the
Day of Atonement: ‘Open the gates to us when the gates are being closed, for the day is
about to set. The day shall set, the sun shall go down and set—let us enter Your gates!’
Whether Celan actually had this paradox of salvation in mind, or had it dimly in mind,
matters only up to a point. If he did, it would Wrmly orient his poem, and would
certainly make me grip my pen more Wrmly as I translate. But even the fact that earlier
on Yom Kippur Psalm 103 is sung, in which God ‘knoweth our frame’, our Gema¨cht
that is formed from dust—even this coincidence does not make Celan’s poem a Yom
Kippur cipher so much as it manifests the deeper coherence of his poetic imagination.
He never made an explicit religious profession or wholehearted commitment, like Franz
Rosenzweig, who converted to Judaism, as it were, after a Yom Kippur service. So
I see the Neilah prayer as conWrmation rather than source for the poem’s closing lines.
Something unexpected and unliturgical happens at the very close of this poem. In the
magazine version Celan had written Reiß die Morgentu¨r auf, Ra . . . , with three dots after
Ra . . . , a sort of trailing oV or giving up. Later he changed that to Ra with a hyphen and
a dash—not merely to prevent the interference of an Egyptian sun god supplanting a
Prague rabbi, but to break oV his own voice more abruptly. The hyphen ruptures a word,
the dash ruptures speech. To translate eVectively, need one only reproduce punctuation
and not decide the vital question: whether this muting signiWes an end or an onset,
darkness or radiance, exile or entrance? I think again of Rosenzweig, his voice paralyzed
for years, dictating as he died what ‘the Lord has truly granted to me’, ‘the point of all
5.21 john felstiner
577

points for which there . . . ’24 I think also of Kafka, speechless at the end from tuberculosis
of the larynx. Of course the golem story itself, in which Rabbi Loew tears the holy name
from his creature’s mouth, furnishes close enough reference for the sudden end to Celan’s
poem. And by now the poet has grown into the golem-Wgure; in pleading ‘For this one
. . . for this one’, he ends up pleading for himself.
Paul Celan’s Wnal silence remains open to the largest possibilities. Nightfall or
morning: he had to tolerate that irreconcilable ambiguity at the heart of his Judaism,
living as he did in exile while holding somehow to a spiritual expectation. So he put the
hyphen after Ra-, breaking oV a Jew’s appeal in mid-voice. Yet the dash can point to
something still to come.
Here the poem stops, and by rights this essay in translation ought to stop at the same
moment. But throughout it all a presence has been hovering that I want to bring,
forward. Franz Kafka’s parable ‘Vor dem Gesetz’, ‘Before’ or ‘In Front of’ the Law, Wrst
came into Celan’s hands when he was sixteen or seventeen.25 Then just after the war, in
Bucharest, he translated it into Rumanian, and in 1959 he underscored some thoughts
about it in Walter Benjamin’s Kafka essay.26 The parable begins quite simply: ‘Before the
Law stands a doorkeeper. To this doorkeeper comes a man from the country and asks for
entrance into the Law. But the doorkeeper says he cannot grant him entrance now. The
man thinks it over and then asks if he’ll be permitted to enter later. ‘‘It’s possible,’’says the
doorkeeper, ‘‘but not now.’’’
Celan’s lifelong, adherent kinship with Kafka starts with childhood, where they both
felt the burden of an unsympathetic father caught between petit bourgeois and normative
Jewish behavior; Celan once told a friend that Kafka’s Letter to His Father had to be
written over and over again in Jewish homes.27 And Celan sometimes associated his
mother, cherished throughout his poetry while the father appears only once, with
Bohemia and Prague: he calls Bohemia his mother’s ‘three-year land’ because she Xed
there during the Wrst world war.28 In Czernowitz, the Austrian Empire’s eastern outpost
ceded to Rumania after 1918, a German-speaking Jew could feel alien both nationally and
linguistically, as likewise in Prague. Early in 1962, at the high pitch of his anxiety about
post-war anti-semitism, Celan adopted a refrain from Kafka’s story ‘A Country
Doctor’—’s ist nur ein Arzt, ‘it’s only a doctor’—and signed a letter with it: ’s ist nur
ein Jud, ‘it’s only a Jew’.29 Both writers tried at times to counter their displacement as
assimilated western Jews by gravitating toward eastern or hasidic Judaism, and Kafka
even sketched in his diary a version of the golem theme.30
First and last, Celan identiWed with the writer in Kafka. Fleeing Bucharest in 1947,
Celan carried a letter of introduction from his mentor, calling his poetry ‘the only lyric
pendant to Kafka’s work’.31 Later he would buy Wrst editions of Kafka and give his
French students Kafka to read and translate. Writing in April 1970 to an Israeli friend,
Celan said his Kafka seminar was going well, and he quoted Kafka’s remark about the
578
recent and contemporary writings

diYculty of getting happiness from writing—‘happiness only if I can raise the world into
the pure, the true, the immutable’.32 Ten days later Celan took his own life.
At bottom, I think Celan saw in Kafka a radical, essentially human estrangement. He
marked vigorously the diary passage where Kafka asks: ‘What have I in common with
Jews? I have hardly anything in common with myself.’33 Yet he also knew that the
seemingly nameless, causeless Angst of Kafka’s protagonists, grounded though it was in
Austrian bureaucratic Prague, had still to Wnd its ultimate name and cause in Nazism.
Celan’s guilt at having survived when his parents did not, his loneliness in France, his
corrosive suspicion that neo-Nazism and anti-semitism were preying upon him—these
anxieties have a more drastic and speciWc basis than Kafka’s.
Despite—or I should say because of—this historical rift between the two writers,
Celan’s poem ‘To one who stood before the door’ compellingly recalls the voice of Kafka’s
parable ‘Vor dem Gesetz’. ‘You’re very friendly to me,’ Joseph K. tells the priest in The
Trial, ‘With you I can speak openly.’ Then K. hears the parable in which a man waits
many years, beseeching a doorkeeper for entrance into the Law. The man grows old and
Wnally almost blind and deaf. ‘But now in the dark he perceives a radiance that streams
inextinguishably from the door of the Law.’ Gathering all his years of trial into one
question, the man asks why, since everyone strives after the Law, no one but himself has
come demanding admission. ‘No one else could obtain admission here,’ the doorkeeper
shouts at the dying man, ‘because this entrance was meant only for you. I will now go and
shut it.’
In rehearsing Celan’s poem with Kafka in the wings, I see the poet stationing himself
within the frame of the parable and hear him opening his word to a guardian of the Law.
Maybe this guardian trots over towards the only sort of person eligible for entrance into
the Law, one of those animal-like creatures ridden with guilt in Kafka’s stories. And now
the crude name ‘Kafka’ itself seems to crop up in Celan’s text. Possibly the double k’s in
this poem’s Kielkropf and Kriegsknecht are hidden signatures—I should have translated:
‘toward the klutz I saw him trot, toward the half-baked brother begot in a kossack’s dung-
caked boot’.34
‘For this one’ Celan’s poem intercedes, commingling the golem legend with Kafka’s
parable: for him some radiance or Glanz, as the parable says, may Wnally break from the
door. Kafka’s word Glanz sends me momentarily back to another poem Celan wrote just
after his Wrst son’s death.35 Entitled ‘Assisi’, it has ‘animals trotting’ toward Saint Francis,
and the poem ends: Glanz, der nicht tro¨sten will, Glanz./Die Toten—sie betteln noch,
Franz. ‘Radiance that will not comfort, radiance./The dead—they still go begging,
Franz.’ Speaking at once to the saint and to his lost son Franc¸ois, Celan also addresses
the Franz whose parable promises radiance at the moment of death. The later poem, ‘To
one who stood before the door’, also begs some of that radiance for a golem, a speechless
creature revertible to clay and dust.
5.21 john felstiner
579

Finally the dative Diesem drops away and the poet speaks for himself. Just as we do not
actually know whether Kafka’s doorkeeper shuts the door or leaves it open, Celan can
only ask for the eveningdoor shut, the morningdoor open. And as in Kafka we are never
to hear the last word. In fact it literally breaks oV.36 ‘Throw the morningdoor open,
Ra- —’, our poem ends, with that much prayer and no more. Let me close now with a
motto from Kafka’s notebook that holds equally for Celan and also, if I may say so, for
his translator: Schreiben als Form des Gebetes, ‘Writing as a form of prayer’.37
notes
This essay originated as a paper for the Association for Jewish Studies, Boston, 16 December 1985. I wish to thank
Gise`le Celan-Lestrange for her generous assistance in my work; Mary Lowenthal Felstiner for her critique of this
essay; and Sigrid Mayer, Jerry Glenn, Al Hoelzel, James K. Lyon for their helpful counsel.
1. Walter Benjamin, ‘Franz Kafka’, in Schriften, ed. Th. W. Adorno and Gretel Adorno (Frankfurt, 1955) 2: 222.
For a translation of this and other essays see Benjamin, Illuminations, ed. Hannah Arendt, trans. Harry Zohn
(New York, 1969) p. 134. Celan cited the sentence in his speech ‘Der Meridian’ (1960): Celan, Gesammelte Werke
(Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1983) 3: 198. (This collected edition, in Wve volumes, is hereafter referred to as GW.)
2. Der Prozeß (1925; Frankfurt, 1979) ch. 9, p. 185. All translations in this essay are mine.
3. GW, 1: 242–3.
4. Letter to Margarete Susman, 22 Aug. 1924, in Franz Rosenzweig, Briefe und Tagebu¨cher, 2 (1918–29) ed. Rachel
Rosenzweig and Edith Rosenzweig Scheinmann (The Hague, 1979) p. 982.
5. Kafka’s ‘man from the country’, who approaches the doorkeeper in ‘Before the Law’, evidently derives from the
Hebrew ‘am ha’ arets, ‘the common people; an ignoramus’, or literally a person of the land, and more literally of
the earth: see Heinz Politzer, Franz Kafka: Parable and Paradox (Ithaca, NY, 1966) p. 174.
6. See Gershom Scholem, ‘The Idea of the Golem’, in On the Kabbalah and Its Symbolism, trans. Ralph Manheim
(New York, 1969) pp. 158–204. Celan owned the German edition, Zur Kabbala und ihrer Symbolik (Zurich,
1960). On the golem legend see also Micha Josef bin Gorion, Der Born Judas (Wiesbaden, 1959); Sigrid Mayer,
Golem: Die literarische Rezeption eines StoVes (Bern, 1975).
7. GW, 1: 225.
8. Celan, La Rose de Personne, trans. Martine Broda (Paris, 1979) p. 71.
9. For biographical material see John Felstiner, ‘Paul Celan: The Strain of Jewishness’, Commentary (April 1985)
44–55.
10. Letter to Reinhard Federmann, 23 Feb. 1962, in ‘In Memoriam Paul Celan’, Die Pestsa¨ule 1 (Sept. 1972) 18.
11. For material on Celan’s early years see Israel Chalfen, Paul Celan: Eine Biographie seiner Jugend (Frankfurt, 1979).
12. ‘To One Who Stood at the Door’, trans. Cid Corman, Origin, 3rd Series 15 (Oct. 1969): 34.
13. Derrida, ‘Shibboleth’, in GeoVrey Hartman and Sanford Budick (eds) Midrash and Literature (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1986). This paper was originally given in French at the International Paul Celan Symposium,
University of Washington, Seattle, 14 Oct. 1984. Derrida also makes a connection between the opening of a door
in this poem and Elijah, since the person holding the infant during circumcision sits on ‘Elijah’s Chair’.
14. Von der mystischen Gestalt der Gottheit (Zurich, 1962) p. 128. In his 1958 poem ‘El Golem’, Jorge Luis Borges
twice makes his subject rhyme with ‘Scholem’: Mayer, p. 77.
15. For the word Gemu¨t, ‘mind’, ‘soul’ or ‘spirit’ would perhaps do better than ‘heart’. Something of a poeticism, the
word occurs only this once in Celan’s poetry. I settle on ‘heart’, maybe by contagion with Judah Lev ben Bezalel,
Lev being Hebrew for ‘heart’, or with the ‘circumcision of the heart’ (Deut. 10: 16, 30: 6).
16. Die Geheimnisse der Scho¨pfung: Ein Kapitel aus dem Sohar (Berlin, 1935) p. 29.
17. ‘Ansprache anla¨ßlich der Entgegennahme des Literaturpreises der freien Hansestadt Bremen’ (1958) in GW, 3:
185.
18. Joshua Trachtenberg, Jewish Magic and Superstition (New York, 1979) p. 80.
19. Scholem, On the Kabbalah, pp. 185–6.
580
recent and contemporary writings

20. Die Niemandsrose (Frankfurt, 1963).
21. Sinn und Form 14, 5–6 (1962) 701–3. The third poem was Es war Erde in ihnen, which begins:
There was earth inside them, and
they dug.
they dug and dug, so their day
went by, their night. And they did not praise God . . .
22. Letter to Alfred Margul-Sperber, 8 Feb. 1962, in ‘Briefe an Alfred Margul-Sperber’, Neue Literatur, 7 (1975): 57.
23. ‘Grabschrift fu¨r Franc¸ois’, GW, 1: 105.
24. Rosenzweig, p. 1237.
25. Chalfen, p. 67. A recent article on the presence of Kafka in Celan’s work does not mention ‘Einem, der vor der
Tu¨r stand’: Dietmar Goltschnigg, ‘Zur lyrischen Kafka-Rezeption nach 1945 am Beispiel Paul Celans’, Literatur
und Kritik, 197–8 (1985) 316–26.
26. Zeitschrift fu¨r Kulturaustausch, 3 (1982) 286.
27. Otto Po¨ggeler, ‘Kontroverses zur A¨sthetik Paul Celans (1920–1970)’, Zeitschrift fu¨r A¨sthetik und allgemeine
Kunstwissenschaft, 25: 2 (1980) 226.
28. Celan, ‘Es is alles anders’, GW, 1: 285.
29. Kafka’s story ‘A Country Doctor’ appeared in the same collection—Ein Landarzt (1919)—as the parable ‘Before
the Law’. The parable later formed part of The Trial, ch. 9. Celan’s letter to Reinhard Federmann, 23 Feb. 1962,
in ‘In Memoriam’, p. 18.
30. Kafka, Tagebu¨cher 1910–1923, ed. Max Brod (Frankfurt, 1973) p. 310 (20 April 1916). Kafka reportedly liked the
atmosphere of Prague’s old Jewish quarter evoked in Gustav Meyrink’s novel Der Golem (1915): Gustav Janouch,
Conversations with Kafka (New York, 1953) p. 47. Johannes Urzidil says that one Friedrich Thieberger was a
Hebrew teacher of Kafka’s: ‘Two Recollections’, The World of Franz Kafka, ed. J. P. Stern (New York, 1980)
p. 60; Thieberger later published The Great Rabbi Loew of Prague (London, 1955). Marthe Robert, As Lonely as
Franz Kafka, trans. Ralph Manheim (New York, 1982), deals beautifully with Kafka’s vexed Jewishness.
31. Letter from Alfred Margul-Sperber to Otto Basil, printed in part in Plan (Vienna) 6 (1948) 423; reprinted in
Milo Dor, ‘Paul Celan’, in U¨ber Paul Celan, ed. Dietlind Meinecke (Frankfurt, 1973) p. 282.
32. Kafka, Tagebu¨cher, p. 333 (25 Sept. 1917).
33. Kafka, Tagebu¨cher, p. 219 (8 Jan. 1914).
34. In a diary entry of 27 May 1914 (Tagebu¨cher, p. 234) Kafka remarks: ‘I Wnd the letter K ugly, it almost sickens me
yet I write it down, it must be characteristic of me.’ Celan’s poem ‘In Prag’ (ca. 1966) bears mention in relation
to ‘Einem, der vor der Tu¨r stand’. Against a somewhat ghastly background, ‘In Prag’ speaks of the Hradcany
Castle Hill, where alchemy was practised, and then of ‘bone-Hebrew/ground to sperm’.
35. ‘Assisi’ (1954), GW, 1:108.
36. In a 1966 poem (‘Frankfurt, September’, GW, 2:114) that quotes Kafka and plays on ‘jackdaw’, his name in
Czech, Celan also recalls Kafka’s tuberculosis of the larynx—the Kehlkopf—and his Wnal story, ‘Josephine the
Singer’. The poem ends:
Der Kehlkopfverschlußlaut
The glottal stop
singt.
sings.
37. Kafka, ‘Fragmente’, in Hochzeitsvorbereitungen auf dem Lande, ed. Max Brod (Frankfurt, 1966) p. 348.
5.21 john felstiner
581

5.22 W. S. Merwin
W. S. Merwin (b. 1927) is a leading American poet, awarded the Pulitzer, Bollingen, Tanning,
and PEN Translation Prizes, as well as the Lila Wallace-Reader’s Digest Writers’ Award and
the Ruth Lilly Poetry Prize. He is a Fellow of the Academy of American Poets. Author of
numerous collections of poetry, of plays, and of prose, he has also been a proliWc translator
from Spanish, French, Italian, Middle English, as well as Russian, Vietnamese and Chinese,
and other languages. His translation of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight was published in
2002. Merwin’s example as a scrupulous translator was one Ted Hughes (to whom and Sylvia
Plath, Merwin dedicated an early volume of translations, Some Spanish Ballads, 1961) had
constantly before him. It was perhaps Merwin’s quite straightforward, semantically faithful
approach, dispensing with or avoiding direct imitation of the source text’s formal qualities
that particularly commended itself to Hughes, that and the discoveries Merwin shared with
his readers. Merwin himself, as noted in an interview excerpted in Sect. 5.9, above, was
encouraged by Ezra Pound, whom he visited in St Elizabeth’s Hospital and who recom-
mended translation, since at age 18, although the young poet might think he did, he in fact
had little to write about! It was Pound, too, who directed his attention to Provence and the
highly sophisticated but little known poetry of the jongleurs and troubadors.
For more on Merwin’s views on verse translation, readers are referred to Sect. 5.9, above.
Merwin has written comparatively little about translation. As he noted in a letter, ‘I
continue in the belief that I don’t know how to translate, and that nobody does. It is an
impossible but necessary process, there is no perfect way to do it, and much of it must be
found for each particular poem, as we go.’1 Nevertheless, his Foreword to Selected
Translations 1968–1978 (1979) is an important statement. He has maintained that he really
has nothing further to say on the subject.
For a translation from the Russian of Osip Mandelstam, which W. S. Merwin made
with Clarence Brown, as also for Merwin’s translation of a Sonnet of Dante, see Sect. 5.9,
above. The selection below is, therefore, limited to a passage from his most recent
translation, Sir Gawain and the Green Knight. The same passage, translated by Ted
Hughes, can be found in Sect. 5.16, above.
Merwin’s translations include, among others: Poem of The Cid (1959); Some Spanish
Ballads (1961); Selected Translations, 1968–1978 (1979), with a foreword; East Window
(1968), translations from Asian languages, including Urdu, Chinese, Sanskrit, Japanese,
1 (See Daniel Weissbort (ed.), Translating Poetry: The Double Labyrinth (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press,
1989), 139.
582
recent and contemporary writings

Persian, and Vietnamese, selected from previously published volumes, with a preface; Sir
Gawain & The Green Knight (2002), with a foreword.
From Sir Gawain and The Green Knight: A New Verse Translation (New York: Alfred
A. Knopf, 2002)
[The New Year’s feast at King’s Arthur’s Court is interrupted by the entry of a huge green
knight, on a green horse. In response to a challenge, Sir Gawain decapitates the knight.
The knight exits carrying his severed head. The condition, however, is that Sir Gawain
must present himself at the Green Chapel, a year later, and receive a blow in return from
the Green Knight. At this point, late in the poem, the Green Knight is set to strike for the
second time, Gawain having Xinched the Wrst time.
In his Iowa interview (see Sect. 5.9, above.), Merwin comments on his translation. His
Foreword reiterates that the translator’s own interest in the troubadour and chivalric
tradition dates from his student years. He continues: ‘As I translated, I wanted to keep
what I could of the movement of the lines, what I felt as their vitality and rush, their pitch
and momentum, and to keep an alliterative recurrence of sounds that would echo in
modern English the stressed alliterative patterns of the original. I did not want, though, to
cram and twist the lines in an eVort to make an exact replica of a verse form in what has
become, in six hundred years, another language. And for every reason I wanted to keep as
close as I could to the meaning of the original words, so as not to mislead my Wrst reader—
myself.’ He felt that he had picked up a familiar accent, the Welsh intonations overheard
in the mining city of Scranton, Pennsylvania, where he was raised. It is interesting to note
that Ted Hughes, also drawn to this poem, remarked that the diction reminded him of
West Yorkshire dialect, which of course is quite likely, since the poem is held to have
originated in that general area of England.]
But have at it, knight, by your faith, and bring me to the point.
Deal me my destiny, and do it out of hand,
For I shall stand for your stroke and not Xinch again
Until your ax strikes me, here is my word upon it.’
‘Have at you, then,’ the other said, and heaves it up high,
His face as Werce as that of a madman.
He aims a heavy blow at him but never touches him,
Withheld his hand suddenly before the harm was done.
Gawain stood waiting for the blow, no part of him moving,
Still as a stone or as the stump of a tree
Which a hundred roots have anchored in rocky ground.
5.22 w. s. merwin
583

Then merrily the man in green says to him,
‘So now that you have your courage up I must make my stroke.
Uphold the high knighthood that Arthur bestowed on you
And see whether your neck can survive this blow.’
Then Gawain was angry and in a rage he said,
‘Well, strike then, you Werce fellow. Your threats take too long.
I begin to believe you are afraid of yourself.’
‘Indeed,’ that other knight said, ‘you speak so boldly,
I will not leave your mission unfulWlled
Any longer.’
Then he plants his feet to strike
With set mouth and frowning brow.
What was there for him to like
With no hope of rescue?
584
recent and contemporary writings

5.23 Edwin Morgan
Edwin Morgan (b. 1920) was born in Glasgow. He studied at Glasgow University in
the late 1930s, during which time he encountered French Symbolism and Russian
Futurism. He returned to the university, as a lecturer, in 1946. That year he also took
part in a discussion regarding the use of Scots in verse, which brought him into disagree-
ment with Hugh MacDiarmid. Morgan retired from Glasgow University as Professor of
English in 1980, by which time he had produced a vast corpus of poetry and critical
writings. In 1999, Edwin Morgan was appointed Glasgow’s Wrst Poet Laureate. He was
awarded the Queen’s Gold Medal for Poetry in 2000 and in 2001 received the Weidenfeld
Prize for Translation. In 2004, Edwin Morgan was nominated as Scots Makar, the Wrst
Poet Laureate or National Poet of Scotland. He has received numerous other honours
and awards.
His voluminous output includes many translations. His 1952 translation of Beowulf was
widely used in the USA and Australia. Other translations include: Selected Poems of Sandor
Weo¨res (from Hungarian, 1970); Wi the haill Voice: 25 Poems by Vladimir Mayakovsky
(from Russian into Scots, 1972); Edmond Rostand’s Cyrano de Bergerac (1992); Jean
Racine’s Phaedra (into Scots, 2000); Attila Jo´zsef Sixty Poems (From Hungarian, 2001).
Morgan, thus, has translated poetry from a number of languages, including Italian,
Russian, German, Spanish, French, Portuguese, Anglo-Saxon, ancient Greek, Dutch,
Khmer, Armenian, and Hungarian. Carcanet, which has published his Collected Poems
(1990), has also published his Collected Translations (1996).
His translations extended an already formidable vocal range. This also formed part of an
attempt to turn Modernism away from the right-wing orientation of Eliot and Pound and
towards the overt political radicalism of such writers as Vladimir Mayakovsky (1894–1930)
and Attila Jo´zsef (1905–37). As regards Mayakovsky, Morgan commented that he was
drawn by the combination of committed political content and adventurous style. During
the 1950s, when use of Scots vernacular in verse was a highly political issue, Morgan
devised a form of proletarian Scots speech, which is exempliWed, for instance, in his 1972
translations of Mayakovsky.
Edwin Morgan, ‘Language at Play, in Conversation with Joseph Farrell’, in Stages of
Translation, ed. David Johnston (Bath: Absolute Classics, 1996), 219–27
JF: You are known principally as a poet, so I presume that your Wrst work of translation
was of poetry. How did you become involved in theatre translation?
5.23 edwin morgan
585

EM: Yes, my Wrst translations were poetry translations. As far as theatre is concerned,
it began in two ways. The most important was my contact with the Medieval Players,
now unfortunately disbanded, but dedicated to the idea that pre-Shakespearean drama
was something a modern audience could enjoy. Although they did quite a number of
plays which had originally been written in medieval English, they also staged various
anonymous plays from other countries. They asked me to take a hand in translating these
and preparing them for performance, which I did. I did two plays with them, and they
seemed to work all right on the stage. That was probably what got me interested in
the stage.
JF: Where did these plays come from?
EM: The titles were The Apple Tree and Master Peter Pathelin. The Wrst of these was
Dutch, and I worked with a Dutch translator. The other was a French farce, written in
medieval French. The Apple Tree is a morality play, with a decidedly grim morality, but
the other was quite a famous work of farce, with lots of scope for linguistic play, which is
why I got so much enjoyment from doing it.
JF: What kindof workdid youactually do with the plays? Istart from the premise that the
distinction between translation and adaptation is fundamental. Were these translations in a
conventional sense, or were you doing an adaptation for the tastes of a modern audience?
EM: No, these were fairly faithful translations. That was how the company wanted to
present these plays, so both translations are close to the original. With Master Peter
Pathelin there are no substantial changes in the text or action, and I kept as closely as
possible to the form. The translation has metre and rhyme, as had the original. It was
much the same with the Dutch play. Both the plays were translated into standard
English, although there were occasional bits of Scots, and other languages too:
PATHELIN
Paid? You don’t pay such grasping men.
The devil gets mafeesh faloos.
He’s coming here to eat a goose
And this is what we have to do.
Long before he starts to chew
He’s going to cry to be paid pronto.
The bed is what I must get onto.
You understand? I’m a sick man.
He knocks, you open, lift your hand
To your lips, say ‘Shush!’ You sigh
You’re sad, you say, ‘Don’t even try
To see him, poor man, ill in bed
For two months, oh, with what a head!’
586
recent and contemporary writings

EM: There is quite a lot of linguistic play in them, but the basic language is English. It
was much the same with The Apple Tree. Being a morality play, I gave them names which
reXected this, names like Frank Goodheart, Faith Trustwell, Willie Wildoats, or Jenny
Joycat.
JF: I’m assuming you don’t speak Dutch, so how did you work when you were
translating that play?
EM: You are correct in your assumption. I had a translation given to me, a direct
word-for-word translation into English.
JF: I would be curious to know how you actually worked in these circumstances. Was
it a joint enterprise, did you work together, did you have him there at your elbow, or did
he simply send you the translation?
EM: He sent me the translation, and I got to work on it, and thereafter we kept in
correspondence. There are problems in interpretation or intelligibility, as there always are
with any translation, but perhaps they were more severe in this case because of the age of
the text. It is obviously frustrating not to have a knowledge of the original language, and
it can never be the best way. I did it in this case because I was invited, it was a pleasing
challenge, and I thought I would enjoy doing it. I seemed to get into the spirit of the
piece, and it worked well on stage. Plainly I much prefer to work as I did with the French
play, seeing it as I would see it and knowing exactly what the words meant. With The
Apple Tree, it was not unduly diYcult, because it was a short play and Wts into a known
genre—you know what medieval morality plays are like. It is similar to various early
English morality plays. You are not entirely at sea. You are not hopelessly distant from
the text.
JF: Your part, when you are basing yourself on a literal translation, is to devise
speakable dialogue.
EM: It is no use—ever—having a translation which might be pedantically accurate or
scholarly if it cannot be spoken on stage. Any translator has to bear that in mind, always.
As it happens, I relish thinking in those terms and working in that kind of way. I Wnd
myself speaking the individual lines to myself. I knew that with the Medieval Players,
actors and actresses would be working on those lines very soon after I had Wnished
putting them on paper:
FROM THE PREFACE TO THE APPLE TREE (1982)
Clearly, it would not do to turn the Dutch text into an imaginary English version
contemporary with it (i.e. about 1500); any such historical pastiche would seem
forced and fraudulent. At the same time, the whole nature of the play resisted
absolute modernisation. The solution adopted was to make the language itself
modern, but set within the structure of a four-stress alliterative line which would
hold associations with the earlier English drama and poetry. The Dutch original is
5.23 edwin morgan
587

written in a rough four-stress line, in rhyming couplets, and the use of alliteration in
English may be taken as some kind of equivalent for the use of rhyme in the Dutch
text. It can give a certain shape, a certain formal interest, to the colloquial language,
without destroying the raciness required. Not all the speeches have this quality of
raciness. Some lines and couplets have more ‘set’, chorus-like, proverbial character,
which has to be indicated. Also there are on three occasions examples of a more
marked formality, a sort of interlacing ‘round’ of repeated phrases suggesting
something ritualistic, perhaps musical, perhaps gestural. . . . It was important
that these features should be reproduced as far as possible, since they are part of
the linguistic variety and verve of the play.
EM: I said at the beginning that there were two factors which had induced me to take
up translation for the stage. The second was that I had been writing opera libretti just
around that time. I worked with Thomas Wilson, and did a script based on the life of St
Columba. It was very lively, because Columba may have been a saint, but he was a very
forceful character who made his presence felt.
JF: Your poetry too has a quality which lends itself to theatre.
EM: I think that lies at the back of it all. The kind of poetry I write is often incipient
theatre. I like dramatic situations, and characters, and the poem is often like a scene from
a play, so I found it natural to take the extra step. I have always liked the presence of the
voice in poetry. Long before there were books, poetry was spoken or chanted.
JF: Do you use a diVerent technique for translating poetry, compared to what you
would use when translating for theatre?
EM: The diVerence lies entirely in the realisation that dialogue has to be spoken. I have
never translated plays for publication, or not primarily for publication; there was always
some company waiting for the script. With a poem, there might be a complex concat-
enation of ideas, or the images might be unusual, so you would have to think of the best
way of rendering them, but without the urgency of producing words to be spoken aloud.
I probably enjoy best poets from other languages like Mayakovsky who, like myself,
believe in the primacy of voice.
JF: Your best known translation, or perhaps it is just the most recent, was the Cyrano
de Bergerac you did for the Communicado Theatre Company. Had you always had a
special fondness for this play, or was it just a telephone call?
EM: I was asked to do it. Communicado wanted a new version for the Edinburgh
Festival in 1992, and they asked me to think about it. I have to confess that I had never
read the play before. I knew the story, but I had never read the play. I read an American
version, and decided it was something I would like to attempt. Gerry Mulgrew, the
director, wanted a Scottish version, although he did not specify it absolutely. There was
no time for theorising about the type of Scots to be employed, because it had to be done
588
recent and contemporary writings

very quickly. Rehearsal schedules meant that I only had three months to do what was a
full Wve act play.
I concluded that it should be in Scots, but not the kind of ‘historical’ Scots used by the
playwrights of the thirties and forties like MacLellan and Kemp, which was a deliberate
attempt to reproduce an older Scots language. These plays have mostly fallen by the
wayside now. I felt that it would have to be a Scots which could be spoken today by
actors, and since it was me who was writing it, it would need to be a Scots with a strong
Glasgow basis—a Glaswegian Scots if you like. It uses words from other parts of the
country, but I was not too worried about purity of the language. I wanted something
which would meet the demands of the play, while always being speakable. The main part
is very long and demanding, so it was vital that the actor playing that part had a language
he was at ease with. Tom Mannion is from Glasgow, and that did work for him. We
experimented with the Wrst act, and it was felt to be successful. I was there during
rehearsals, and if they felt I had used a word which was too obscure, I met their
objections. There is no point in being too precious about this.
I wanted to keep it racy, but formal. I kept the original metre. The original has metre
and rhyme, and it seemed to me that there was no point in abandoning that, because part
of the joy of the play is in the rhyme. The play itself is linguistically sparkling, and I felt
that to do it in some kind of free verse or blank verse would not meet the case. The actors
were initially surprised to be confronted by metre and verse, because so few plays today
are written in that style, but they rose to the challenge:
FROM THE INTRODUCTION TO CYRANO DE BERGERAC (1992)
In the age of Ibsen, the play came as a delightful release. The hero was a poet, and
the brilliant verse of the play, full of pyrotechnics and wit, but racily colloquial also,
and capable of a moving lyricism when the need arose, was a reminder of what
poetry can do in theatre. The play was robust and boisterous, yet sad also, and it at
once inhabited a territory of its own, escaping gritty naturalism and Wn-de-sie`cle
decadence. That robust quality. theatrical yet human, is what keeps the play alive
today.
Various English translations of the play have been made, but it is one of those
plays which need to be translated again and again, in diVerent circumstances and for
diVerent purposes, readerly and actorly. The time seemed ripe for a Scottish version,
but one that would be thoroughly stageworthy and not incomprehensible to an
international audience at the Edinburgh International Festival. I decided that urban
Glaswegian Scots would oVer the best basis, since it is widely spoken, can accom-
modate contemporary reference, is by no means incapable of the lyrical and the
5.23 edwin morgan
589

poetic, and comes unburdened by the baggage of the older Scots which used to be
thought suitable for historical plays. I kept English for the Count de Guiche, and
for some of the minor characters (the fops, the nuns, Roxane’s duenna).
JF: Did you change the play, not in its structure or plot, but in its tone? The
Communicado production was uproariously funny in parts, but I once saw the play
done by the Come´die Franc¸aise. It was an inWnitely more stately production, especially
the famous speech about Cyrano’s nose, which was delivered by an actor in the grandest
of classical styles, and stilled the entire audience. Were you trying to write as you thought
Rostand intended, bringing out a comedy others might have missed, or were you
consciously altering the style?
EM: Well, I have never seen a French production, so I cannot judge that. I thought
I was getting into the spirit of the play, which seemed to me both comic and serious, in
diVerent ways and at diVerent moments. Obviously you can be serious by being funny,
but in that long speech about noses, it seemed to me that the joy with which the character
spoke about all the ways in which someone could have spoken about his nose, if they had
the language to do it, must communicate itself. It is a very funny speech, and this must be
brought out. Cyrano is not only a swordsman, but he is a poet, and the translator must
address himself to the problem of getting the poetic verve across. That was my aim in
that speech—to forge a kind of poetry which would show how his mind worked, how it
leapt from one subject to another very rapidly and very convincingly, while at the same
time bringing out the comedy.
Yer canto’s no bel, young man.
Ye could have said—oh lotsa things, a plan
For each, tae suit yer tone o’voice, like so:
Thuggish: ‘If Ah’d a nose like yours, Ah’d go
Straight to the surgery fur amputation’.
Freen-like: ‘Dinnae dunk it in a cup, fashin
yersel a Munich tankard for tae slurp fae’.
Descriptive: ‘A rock? A peak? A cape? the survey
Shaws the cape’s a haill peninsula!’
Pawky: ‘If it’s in a boax, and no a Wstula,
Whit’s in it, pens or pins or penny needles?’
Gracious: ‘Ye’re a right Saint Francis, ye weedle
The buds o the air tae wrap their gentle tootsies
Roon yer pirch and rest their weary Guccis’.
Truculent: ‘PuV yir pipe until the smoke
Comes whummlin oot yer nose, and the big toke
Has awe yer neebors cryin—Lum’s on Wre!’
590
recent and contemporary writings

Saft-hertit: ‘Whit if it fadit at high noon?
Make a wee parasol tae keep the sun aV !’
Bummin: ‘Nae wind, o hypermacho nose,
Could give ye snuZes but blasts fae Muckle Flugga!’
Dramatic: ‘Bleeds a haill Rid Sea, the bugger!’
EM: In other parts of the play I aimed to bring out the lyrical note, which clashes with
the more boisterous parts of the play, for ultimately we are dealing with a tragic love
story. It would be easy to overlook the moving, touching mood which emerges most
strongly in the latter part of the play. I suppose I was after a Xexible kind of language
which could be funny when needed, yet straight and serious at other times.
JF: Are you tempted to improve on the original, to write in jokes when you think that
Rostand, or any other author, could have, or should have been funnier than he actually
managed to be?
EM: I think to some extent, because theatre is a living process, some changes
are necessary. Some characters have to be dropped or amalgamated, or little bits have
to be added. For Cyrano I was asked to write a nuns’ song at the beginning of the last act,
and this too I did. In addition, when the director, or some actor, found some part
appealing, he asked me to write a few extra lines, which I did. So there were some
changes.
JF: As an instance, the distributrice of Rostand’s original Act 1, sells nothing more
remarkable than ‘oranges, milk, strawberry water, lime juice’, while the ‘usherette’ of your
version oVers:
Ices, ginger, tea,
Raspberry yoghurt, Greek yoghurt, aw the yoghurts,
Lovely Turkish delight, licorice awsorts,
Popcoarn, hote chestnits, marshmallows,
Chewin gum, candy-Xoss . . . . .
EM: However, I decided not to change the main setting of the play. It was tempting to
switch the action to Scotland, and make it a Scottish historical play, but the work needed
its French environment. Cyrano, after all, was a character from history, his life is
documented so it seemed to me important to respect that element. The play remained
set in seventeenth-century France, even if the language used was Scots.
JF: Do you have any feelings about that in general? There are many Scottish versions
of Molie`re or Goldoni which have been transported holus bolus to Glasgow or to
Edinburgh’s New Town. There are two points of view on this—one that it makes the
work more immediate for an audience, or alternatively that it is a refusal of the challenge
of foreign, unfamiliar ideas and an invitation to couthy provincialism.
5.23 edwin morgan
591

EM: I think it varies. At times it can be illuminating to have the play in a very diVerent
setting, but on the whole I prefer to respect the original. In my Cyrano I have some
anachronistic references to Gucci shoes, for instance, or to the Body Shop, but paradox-
ically these references may have a very limited lifespan. But a play is a very Xuid thing.
JF: The voice that people are getting is yours and not that of Rostand, or of the
anonymous authors of medieval morality plays.
EM: Is it?
JF: I put that as a general point. I don’t know if it is any more strongly true in your
case, although I suspect it is.
EM: I don’t know about this. I suppose in general that must be true. I suppose that you
as the writer are responsible for the words and the arrangement of the words, so it is
inevitable that something of yourself must get into it. On the other hand, I don’t try to do
this. Some translators make a deliberate eVort to make the translations an integral part of
their own output. I am thinking of Ezra Pound or Robert Lowell. Their translations are
just Pound poetry or Lowell poetry. But I do try to be fair to the other writer, to
reproduce the eVects of his or her style as far as I can. Where I have published translations
of diVerent authors from diVerent periods, I would hope that this would appear as an
anthology of writings by diVerent people.
JF: So you regard that as a value of your translation, or an aim of translation in
general—the retention of the Xavour, the voice of the original author, as against the
contrary view which would be, more or less, that all that counts is producing something
which reads well or works on stage here and now.
EM: Yes, I think I am with the Wrst view. It is hard to be exactly sure of what was in the
original author’s mind. Rostand belonged to another century, but I think I got into his
way of thinking fairly well. I did a lot of research, I read others of his plays . . . But theatre
is still something else. If you read the play in a book, you still have not seen the play as it
was presented on the French stage in 1897. I would love to have seen that!
JF: Do you Wnd you have greater liberty when you are writing in Scots, as against
writing in English?
EM: I think the answer has to be ‘yes’. It is a strange thing that it should be so, but it is.
It may just be because you are doing something uncommon. Quite a lot of my poetry is
in Scots, or other languages—invented languages—but it is true that you do have more
liberty precisely because of the freshness of the enterprise. Cyrano does not use many
words which would not be known to people in Scotland, but there is another curious
thing: people seem to get a disproportionate delight from hearing Scots words which
they use frequently enough, but which acquire an extra dimension for them when they
hear them in the theatre. Also, there is a stimulus for the writer to be writing in Scots. If
I translate into straight English, as I did with French and Dutch plays, it works all right,
but they lack that spice which you get from something slightly diVerent.
592
recent and contemporary writings

JF: Another topic. Both in poetry and theatre, what are you ultimately translating? Is it
some inner core of meaning you believe you have identiWed, and how do you work out
the balance between the desire to deal with the emotion or thought contained in a poem
or speech and the need to keep some sense of the linguistic richness present in the
original?
EM: That is the hardest thing of all. You are working as you go, and it is very diYcult
to start from a theory. It is very much a question of practice. I like to do it thoroughly.
I like to get to know the original poem or play as deeply as possible, and this means you
have a double task. You have to understand, if you can, the semantic part of the meaning,
but you also have to do a diVerent kind of reading. You have to soak yourself in it, to let it
Xoat into your mind at diVerent times until you get a feeling for what the work is like at
levels other than that of the literal meaning. Not all poems are amenable to this kind of
treatment, but if a poem is at all complex, it will have both an intellectual and an
emotional dimension, and you must aim to transmit both of these aspects, which is not
easy, but I think it can be done. It is a slow process, unless you are lucky.
JF: Since you have translated both from languages you know, and from languages
where you had to rely on the ‘literal’ translation, can you draw up some kind of balance
sheet of the advantages and disadvantages of these processes? What do you lose by not
being able to read the words of the original writer?
EM: Obviously you do lose a lot. The Apple Tree seemed to work, and everyone was
pleased with it, but from my point of view, I really want to be able to read the text—play
or poem—and get to know it as deeply as I can. But there is an important qualiWcation to
be made. As well as the Dutch translation, I have worked on quite a lot of Hungarian
poetry. Modern Hungarian poetry is of a very high class but because their language is so
isolated, the Hungarians Wnd it hard to persuade people of this. They are very keen to
have their literature translated, especially into English. I have visited Hungary, I know a
bit of the language, so I am not totally ignorant of what the language is like, but I need
assistance. Even if I have a literal translation, I go through the text for myself, I know the
sounds and know something of the background. With all these qualiWcations, I still am
reliant on others for access to the text, but I think that in certain circumstances that is
unavoidable, and it is preferable to not having valuable work made available in other
countries.
From the ‘Preface’ to Beowulf (1952; new edn., Manchester: Carcanet, 2002), p. ix
The translation, which was begun shortly after I came out of the army at the end of the
Second World War, was in a sense my unwritten war poem and I would not want to alter
the expression I gave to its themes of conXict and danger, voyaging and displacement,
loyalty and loss.
5.23 edwin morgan
593

From Beowulf (Old English), pp. 21–2
[Beowulf’s Wght with Grendel (lines 791–819). See Sect. 3.5 above, for William Morris’s
version, and, Sect. 5.24, below, for Seamus Heaney’s.]
Nothing would make the protector of warriors
Let slaughter’s emissary escape alive,
Nor would he reckon many days left to him
Of proWt to any man. Then Beowulf’s soldiers
Brandished here and there their ancient swords,
Anxious to defend the body of their lord,
Of the illustrious prince, as they might be able—
Ignorant of this, when they moved to Wght,
Iron-minded men of arms,
Thinking to strike on every side,
To pierce to his spirit; that the lawless ravager
Was not to be reached by any war-blade,
Not by the choicest metal on earth,
For every sword-edge and weapon of victory
He had blunted by wizardry.—Wretched his future
Now at that hour of this earthly life
Cut oV from breath; far had the uncanny
Soul to wander into Wends’ dominions.
For then he discovered, who often before
Had in his transgressions tormented the mind
Of human kind, he God’s antagonist,
That his own body would not obey him,
But the kinsman of Hygelac in undaunted encounter
Had him in his grasp; each was to the other
Abhorrent if alive. The appalling demon
Bore Xesh-agony; on his shoulder became manifest
A monstrous wound, sinews quivering,
Tendons ripped open. To Beowulf was granted
Triumph in the Wght [ . . . ]
The opening of ‘The Seafarer’ (Anglo-Saxon), from Rites of Passage, Selected
Translations (1976); also in Collected Translations (Manchester: Carcanet, 1996), 246–8
[See Sect. 4.2, above for Ezra Pound’s version.]
This verse is my voice, it is no fable,
I tell of my travelling, how in hardship
594
recent and contemporary writings

I have often suVered laborious days,
endured in my breast the bitterest cares,
explored on shipboard sorrow’s abodes,
the welter and terror of the waves. There
the grim night-vigil has often found me
at the prow of the boat when gripped by the cold
it cuts and noses along the cliVs.
There my feet were fettered by frost,
with chains of zero, and the cares were whistling
keen about my heart, and hunger within me
had torn my sea-dazed mind apart.
The theme is strange to the happy man
whose life on earth exults and Xourishes,
how I lived out a winter of wretchedness
wandering exiled on the ice-cold sea,
bereft of my friends, harnessed in frost,
when the hail Xew in showers down.
There I heard only the ocean roar,
the cold foam, or the song of the swan.
The gannet’s call was all my pleasure,
curlew’s music for laughter of men,
cries of a seagull for relish of mead.
There tempests struck the cliVs of rock,
and the frozen-feathered tern called back,
and often the eagle with glistening wings
screamed through the spindrift: [ . . . ]
From Jean Racine, Phaedra, translated into Scots by Edwin Morgan (Manchester:
Carcanet, 2000), 36
[From Act 2, Scene 5, Phe`dre has declared her love for her stepson Hippolytus and now
begs him to avenge his father, her husband Theseus, and kill her for this heinous sin. See
above, Sects. 4.10 and 5.16 for Robert Lowell’s and Ted Hughes’s versions respectively.]
Gode, Ah kid only speak t’ye aboot yirsel!
Avenge it, pey hame this laithlie love:
Gret son o a gret faither, syne oot
The universe, gie yir gyre-carlin hur quietus.
If Theseus’ weeda daurs tae love Hippolytus,
Make shair the coorse gyre-carlin gets hur paiks;
5.23 edwin morgan
595

Here’s ma hert: luft yir haun tae it noo.
Ah feel it, though yir erm is at yir side,
Ma hert gaes oot tae feel it, earn it, thole it.
Hut me: or if ye hink this hert’s no wurth it,
If yir hatred hus te hae a merr fell dunch,
Or if ma bluid’s ower mankit fur ye tae skail,
Gie’s a len a—no yir erm—yir blade—
See’s it!
Russian agitprop poem from 1917, the year of the Bolshevik Revolution
‘To the Bourgeoisie’, from Wi the Haill Voice: 25 Poems
by Vladimir Mayakovsky (1972), included in Edwin Morgan,
Collected Translations (Manchester: Carcanet, 1996), 119
Stick in, douce folk.—Pineaipple, feesant’s breist:
stuV till ye boke, for thon is your last feast.
Literal translation of Russian source text
Eat pineapples, chew grouse,
your last day is coming, bourgeois.
596
recent and contemporary writings

5.24 Seamus Heaney
Seamus Heaney (b. 1939) was born into a farm family in County Derry, Northern Ireland.
He attended St Columb’s College, a Catholic boarding school, where he was taught Latin
and Irish. In Belfast, he studied Anglo-Saxon at Queen’s University, and lectured there
(1966–72). He was involved with the Field Day theatre company, founded in 1980,
contributing a version of Sophocles’ Philoctetes, The Cure at Troy. Having moved to
Dublin, Heaney lectured in English until 1982. He taught at Harvard University, becom-
ing Boylston Professor of Rhetoric and Oratory, a position that he occupied for some
years. In 1989, he was elected for a Wve-year period as Professor of Poetry at Oxford
University. Heaney served for Wve years on The Arts Council in the Irish Republic (1973–8)
and has acted as judge and lecturer. He has received several honorary degrees and other
honours, culminating, in 1995, in the award of the Nobel Prize for Literature.
With Stanislaw Baranczak, he is co-translator of the Renaissance Polish poet Jan Kocha-
nowski’s Laments (1995), and in 1999 published his award-winning version of Beowulf. Other
translations include A Song Cycle by Leosˇ Jana´cˇek, commissioned by the English National
Opera for a series of international performances, opening in Dublin in October 1999 (1999).
In 2004, returning to an earlier engagement with the plays of Sophocles, he completed The
Burial at Thebes, a version of Antigone, to mark the centenary of Dublin’s Abbey.
In 1986, Seamus Heaney delivered a paper, ‘The Impact of Translation’, (The Government
of the Tongue, 1988). It appears that, like Ted Hughes, an equally rooted poet, Heaney was
attuned to the poetry of Eastern Europe and Russia that was being made available through
translation, to such an extent, indeed, that his own engagement, as a translator, comes as no
surprise. Like Hughes he seems, however, to have moved from a focus on the poetry of near
contemporaries to that of the distant past—the Classical past, with which he had some
direct connection through his Catholic heritage and the Celtic and Anglo-Saxon past. Thus
Heaney’s command of contemporary English is deepened and contextualized by an
awareness of other cultural and linguistic legacies and of the extreme conditions shaping
the work of near coevals. In this connection as well, his close friendship with the late Joseph
Brodsky, the exiled Russian poet, also a Nobel laureate, is surely to be noted.
From ‘The Impact of Translation’, included in The Government of the Tongue (London:
Faber, 1988), 36–44
What translation has done over the last couple of decades is not only to introduce us
to new literary traditions but also to link the new literary experience to a modern
5.24 seamus heaney
597

martyrology, a record of courage and sacriWce which elicits our unstinted admiration.
[ . . . ] We have been made conscious, for example, of the passionate spirits of Russian
poetry in the teens, twenties and thirties of this century. [ . . . ] It seems self-evident that
what the reader who does not speak Russian experiences as the poem in translation is
radically and logically diVerent from what the native speaker experiences, phonetics and
feelings being so intimately related in the human makeup. What I am suggesting, rather, is
that our sense of the fate and scope of modern Russian poetry has implicitly established a
bench at which subsequent work will have to justify itself. [ . . . ] For these poets, the mood
of writing is the indicative mood and for that reason they constitute a shadow-challenge to
poets who dwell in the conditional, the indeterminate mood [ . . . ] (pp. 38–9)
I am reminded of Stephen Dedalus’s enigmatic declaration that the shortest way to Tara
was via Holyhead, implying that departure from Ireland and inspection of the country
from the outside was the surest way of getting to the core of Irish experience. Might we
not nowadays aYrm, analogously, that the shortest way to Whitby, the monastery where
Caedmon sang the Wrst Anglo-Saxon verses, is via Warsaw and Prague? To put it more
directly, contemporary English poetry has become aware of the insular and eccentric
nature of English experience in all the literal and extended meanings of those adjectives.
England’s island status, its oV-centre European positioning, its history of non-defeat and
non-invasion since 1066, these enviable and (as far as the English are concerned)
normative conditions have ensured a protracted life within the English psyche for the
assumption that a possible and desirable congruence exists between domestic and
imagined reality. [ . . . ] (pp. 40–41)
I should propose, then, that there was a road not taken in poetry in English in this
century [ . . . ] Further, because we have not lived the tragic scenario which such imagin-
ations presented to us as the life appropriate to our times, our capacity to make a
complete act of faith in our vernacular poetic possessions has been undermined. Con-
sequently, we are all the more susceptible to translations which arrive like messages from
those holding their own much, much further down the road not taken by us—because,
happily, it was a road not open to us [ . . . ] (p. 44)
From an interview with Grigory Kruzhkov, Heaney’s Russian translator, 2003 (Ars
Interpres, 2004) in Seamus Heaney’s cottage, his ‘dacha’, in Co. Wicklow.
[In this revealing conversation with a fellow translator, Heaney shows how his Sweeney
translation is intimately linked to his ongoing work as a poet.]
North [1975] was all written here. And the translation Sweeney Astray [1983], because when
I resigned my job and came here, at Wrst it was all very unusual. Nine years teaching in
the schools and so on. I was not sure how I would Wll my days. So Sweeney Astray
598
recent and contemporary writings

appeared, which I got from the Early Irish Texts Society volume [J. G. O’KeeVe’s
bilingual edition, 1913], Irish on one side and English on the other. I knew it was a
long job, so it kept me busy for a year. I returned to it six years later. [ . . . ]
It’s a translation mediated by the scholars’ translation. [ . . . ] I followed associations of
the Irish, treated it freely. [ . . . ]
It was the added question, the added problem of stanza form and rhyme. The early
Irish text is strict. And somehow there was a softness and a tentativeness about the
movement of this Wrst version. That wasn’t quite right. I wanted to Wnish one version.
But then I knew I had to redo it, but I was too scared to start it. After six years I did begin
it again.
First of all I saw bits of Sweeney Astray in Flann O’Brien’s book At-Swim-Two-Birds
where Sweeney is a comic Wgure in the novel. And Flann O’Brien has translations. Some
of them are overdone and comic, but there is a sense of Irish nature, early Irish nature
poetry in them. The second place where I came across it was an anthology Celtic
Miscellany, edited by Kenneth H. D. Jackson. There I found those little extracts, real
jewels reminding of Chinese or Japanese nature poems. So that wakened me to it. Then
when I looked at it I have to confess that there was a large inXation, a self-inXation
involved, because the story of Sweeney involves a king, springing out of battle and
roaming Ireland. He’s a king from the North, from a place, which is quite close to where
I grew up. And I had an analogy—here I was in Wicklow, displaced from the North,
because of violence in a way. [ . . . ] And the other truth is, if you look out of the window
here, you can see leaves on the trees, you can see ivy [ . . . ] it was like entering the Wrst
world again. And the Sweeney poetry, giving opportunity for this straightforward,
enraptured nature poetry. So it was something about living in these Welds that wakened
in me. [ . . . ] The sense of being withdrawn here was strong, you know. It’s also there in
some poems that I wrote afterwards in Station Island, a sequence called Sweeney Redivivus
[ . . . ]
From ‘Earning a Rhyme: Notes on Translating Buile Suibhne’, included in Rosanna
Warren (ed.), The Art of Translation: Voices from the Field (Boston: Northeastern
University Press, 1989), 13–20
The Irish Literary Revival is by now a historical phenomenon. And the Norman invasion
of England, the Tudor conquest of Ireland, and English colonization of North America,
all these are even more suspended and remote. Yet in Northern Ireland in the late sixties
and early seventies, when the international excitement of the civil rights movement got
grafted on to the political appetites of the Nationalist minority, when questions about
identity and cultural diVerence, which were being newly plied by blacks and Native
Americans in the United States, came up again urgently and violently in Northern
5.24 seamus heaney
599

Ireland; when the poets there—who had ignored their diVerent religio-political origins in
the name of that greater humility and Xexibility which the imaginative endeavor
entails—began to Wnd themselves tugged by undercurrents of historical memory and
pleas for identiWcation with the political aims of their groups; when the whole unWnished
business of the England/Ireland entanglement presented itself at a local level as a conXict
of loyalties and impulses—when all this happened, historical parallels and literary
precedent began to assume fresh relevance, and to oVer distances and analogies which
could ease the strain of the present. The poets were needy for ways in which they could
honestly express the exacerbations of the local quarrel without turning that expression
into just another manifestation of the aggressions and resentments which had been
responsible for the quarrel in the Wrst place.
It was under these circumstances that I began work on Buile Suibhne [ . . . ]
From Sweeney Astray, (1st pub. Derry, Ireland: Field Day Theatre Company, 1983, rev.
text London: Faber & Faber, 2001)
Conclusion of Sweeney’s lament on his fate, p. 40
[Sweeney had been transformed into a wandering bird-creature by St Ronan, whom he
had oVended.]
Mendicant forever,
frayed, scant and raggedy,
high in the mountains
like a crazed, frost-bitten sentry.
I Wnd no bed, no quarter,
no place in the sun—
not even in this reddening
covert of tall fern.
My only rest: eternal
sleep in holy ground
when Moling’s earth lets fall
dark balm on my wound.
But now that sudden bleating
and belling in the glen!
I am a timorous stag
feathered by Ronan Finn.
600
recent and contemporary writings

Sweeney is pursued by headless torsos and disembodied heads, pp. 60–1
They rose in a Xock, coming for him, but he soared away in front, skimming from
thicket to thicket; and no matter how wide the glen that opened before him, he bounded
from edge to edge, from the top of one hill to the top of the next.
The heads were pursuing him,
lolling and baying,
snapping and yelping,
whining and squealing.
They nosed at his calves and his thighs,
they breathed on his shoulder,
they nuzzled the back of his neck,
they went bumping oV tree-trunks and rock-face,
they spouted and plunged like a waterfall,
until he gave them the slip and escaped
in a swirling tongue of low cloud.
From ‘Fretwork: On Translating Beowulf’, a version of the 1999 St Jerome Lecture, TLS, 12
November 1999, 13/14; included in In Other Words, (Autumn/Winter 1999/2000), 23–33
The translation that Norton commissioned was intended to replace a scholarly prose
version by E. Talbot Donaldson, an authority on the poem and one of the editors of the
Norton Anthology, where his translation has heretofore appeared. The publishers therefore
wanted to be sure that my work would not depart too far from the line-by-line meaning
established by generations of editors and commentators, so in order to keep their minds
at rest and me on my toes, they appointed a reader who was a kind of minder. Once
I had completed Wve or six hundred lines, I sent them to the New York oYce and
the oYce sent them on to this man whom I did not then know except as a name at the
bottom of a letter. His brief was to keep me from my own mistakes and to point out what
might be considered my oversteppings, and I was lucky that he combined a deep
knowledge of Beowulf’s language and meanings with a real feel for what might be
permitted if not altogether required in a new translation.
Here’s an example of what went on. In the Anglo-Saxon, there is a famous description
of the mountain tarn where Grendel and his mother dwell. It contains the following lines
about how it is so deep and so forbidding that a hunted deer will allow itself to be torn
apart by the hounds rather than enter it:
Ðæ¯r mæg nihta gehwæm
nı¯ðwundor se¯on,
fy¯r on Xo¯de.
No¯ þæs fro¯d leofað
5.24 seamus heaney
601

gumena bearna
þaet þone grund wite.
Ðe¯ah þe hæ¯ðstapa
hundum geswenced,
heorot hornum trum
holtwudu se¯ce,
feorran geXy¯med,
æ¯r he¯ feorh seleð,
aldor on o¯fre,
a¯er he¯ in wille
hafelan hy¯dan.
(ll. 1365–72)
My Wrst version went as follows:
At night there, something uncanny happens:
the water burns. And the water is bottomless.
Nobody alive has ever fathomed it.
There too the heather-stepper halts:
the hart in Xight from pursuing hounds
will face up to them with Wrm-set horns
and die in the wood rather than dive
beneath its surface.
My reader was prepared to let me oV for letting myself oV the job of alliteration in a line
like ‘Nobody alive has ever fathomed it’, but alliteration could not quite compensate for
what I had written in the previous line: ‘the water burns. And the water is bottomless’.
His note read: ‘‘‘bottomless.’’ Well, the water is so deep that no one has ever fathomed
the bottom: ‘‘it’’ in the next line must refer to some bottom.’ And then came his reminder
about the kenning for the hart:
Heather-stepper. [Is the literal sense not] heath-stepper? Again, a short line—
especially if heather becomes heath. Possibly re-arrange? ‘There the hart halts, the
heath-stepper/hard-pressed in Xight by pursuing hounds . . . ’ I like how the ‘Wrm-
set horns’ become functional in the translation. In the original they are simply an
attribute of the hart.
My letter back on this occasion seems to me to be worth quoting at length since it reveals
all the contradictory commands which the literary translator will feel called upon to obey.
It so happens I had not answered directly until this moment because my instinct was to
defer consideration of the comments until I was so deeply engaged with the work that
I could not be put oV my stride—not that stride was exactly the word for the pace I was
going at. ‘I am writing now,’ I said,
on impulse, having got to that moment in the text where I call the heath-stepper the
heather-stepper and where I want to persist with my perverse rendering . . . In
general, however, I have made the revisions on the lines you suggest . . . glad to be
602
recent and contemporary writings

convinced in so many places that what is called for is a more literal rendering, more
of a word-for-word match with the original. Hence, this morning I’ve tried to
rewrite the bit where Hrothgar describes the prowlers on the moor; and have got to
the ‘bottomless’ water of the mere, which you rightly point out goes beyond what
the original warrants.
At this point, I might have pleaded out that ‘bottomless’ occurs as the last word in an
early poem of my own, but even if I did not adduce the chapter and verse, I went on to
say that for me ‘bottomless’ was a word
with mere-y suggestions, since as a child I was always being warned awav from bog
pools in our district—because they had ‘no bottom to them’. So I was prepared to
transgress, and paused for a while before coming round to a diVerent rendering. In
general, after my pauses, I have come round. I dropped ‘thole’, early on; dropped
‘wallstead’ but then retained it; foresee a reluctance to drop ‘gap of danger’; must
warn you about the appearance of seanachaı (an Irish/Hiberno-English word for a
professional storyteller); and so on . . . And to come to this morning’s heatherings
and thitherings, so to speak—heather is a word deeply within my own Wrst speech
whereas heath is [to my Wrst ear] very much a literary word—Danelaw-y, English
and admittedly very thrilling in its deep [King] Lear-y wildness. I have nothing
against literary words, of course, and in fact I thrill to the depth-charges in ‘heath’,
back through Hopkins’s ‘wiry heath-packs’ and Bronte¨’s HeathcliV, and so on—but
somehow, ‘heather-stepper’ has more spring in its step for me and since the heath is
contained in the heather, I want to hold on to it.
I said earlier that I wanted my anchor to be lodged on the Anglo-Saxon seaXoor, down in
the consonantal rock, but I had a second mooring down in the old soft vowel-bog of the
local speech. I was honour-bound to the feel and sense of the original, but at the same
time could not desert whatever it is in my ear that makes me sound convincing to myself.
At a seminar on translation last year [Nobel Symposium on Translation of Poetry and
Prose, 1998], EWm Etkind quoted Samuel Marshak, a great translator of poetry from
English into Russian. ‘Poetry is impossible to translate,’ Marshak declared. ‘Each time it
is an exception to the rule.’ So I would not claim that there is anything exceptional about
the work I have done, just that it constantly manifests the impossibility factor. Consider,
for example, the problem of translating a line that occurs earlier in the heath-stepper
passage. The original tells us that the country people have seen two ‘micle mearcstapan
mo¯ras healdan/ellorgæ¯stas’ (lines 1348–9)—two big border-steppers keeping to the
moors, spirits from elsewhere. In the Wnal version, I rendered this as ‘two such
creatures/prowling the moors, huge marauders/from some other world’. I liked the
menace and stealth in the word ‘prowling’. It seemed to catch what was shadowy and
ghostly about these ‘ellorgæ¯stas’, as well as what was wild-beastish and brute-dangerous.
5.24 seamus heaney
603

An earlier version, however, had rendered them as two such creatures, ‘ranging the
moors, huge marauders/from some other world’, because ‘ranging’ alliterated with the
stressed syllable in ‘marauding’, and I was wanting to keep as much as possible to the
four-stress pattern and the alliterative requirements of the Anglo-Saxon line. Neverthe-
less, in spite of the falconish sweep of the verb ‘range’ and the glamour it still retains four
and a half centuries after Sir Thomas Wyatt used it in his poem ‘They Xee from me’
(where his former lovers ‘range/Busily seeking with a continual change’) – in spite of all
this, I went for the unalliterating ‘prowl’ because it contained more darkness and danger.
On the other hand, when it came to telling where the monsters dwelt, on ‘windswept
crags/and treacherous keshes, where cold streams/pour down the mountain’, the word
‘kesh’, meaning a causeway or log bridge, presented itself uncontradictably, combining as
it did the local and the alliterative, the drag of the golden chain and the fret-free
exhilaration of having slipped the leash.
[ . . . ]
In the end, the point is this: ‘words of the fragrant portals’ come glimmering up out of
the merest puddles, from the very capillary roots of consciousness in forgotten or half-
remembered sensation. ‘Literary’ does not mean ‘lofty’ The proper translation—‘proper’
in the Latin sense of belonging, belonging recognisably to the original and to the oeuvre
of the translator—exists half-way between a crib and an appropriation. [ . . . ]
Given such an audience[readers of the Norton Anthology], some light editing is
certainly called for. My favourite instance refers to a word used to render the poet’s
laconic description of what was going on in Heorot Hall when Grendel and Beowulf
were in the throes of their combat. ‘Dryht-sele dynede,’ says the Anglo-Saxon; ‘Denum
eallum wearð,/ceaster-bu¯endum, cenra gehwylcum,/eorlum ealuscerwen’ (lines 767–9).
‘The lord’s hall resounded; to all the Danes, the dwellers in the castle, to each brave one,
it was a warriors’ ale-sharing.’ My version went like this:
And now the timbers trembled and sang,
a hall-session that harrowed every Dane
inside the stockade: stumbling in a fury,
the two contenders crashed through the
building. (767–70)
And the footnote in the anthology is to read: ‘In Hiberno-Ellglisli the word ‘session’
(‘seisia´n’ in Irish) can mean a gathering where musicians and singers perform for their
own enjoyment. (Translator’s note).’ Enough. The examples could be multiplied. What
they all go to prove is that one of the most acute dilemmas faced by a contemporary poet
is one that is also shared by the contemporary literary translator. Moreover, since this
dilemma is explicated so vividly in Ted Hughes’s extraordinary essay on ‘Myths, Metres,
Rhythms’, I want to turn to that in order to conclude. The essay is essentially a
604
recent and contemporary writings

meditation on the middle state of the writer, poised between his own idiolect and the vast
sound-wave and sewage-wash of the language’s total availability, but, being the poet he
was, Ted Hughes eschewed the use of a technical term like idiolect. His critical prose, in
spite of recent insinuations to the contrary, was never at odds with the Xourishing of his
creative impulse, so in this instance he typically invented one of his animal parables.
One gazelle Xicks its tail—and the tail Xick goes from gazelle to gazelle right
through the herd, while they keep their heads down, nonchalantly feeding. To the
individual gazelle it must feel like a communal brief prayer, meaning: while we all
exist as one gazelle, I exist as full strength gazelle, immortal gazelle.
In fact, this parable could equally well be a parable for the indissolubility of individual
consciousness, shared language and cosmic at-homeness that we suppose existed in the
world before Babel. Hughes employs it, however, to illustrate the way the non-standard
language of any sub-group functions as a means of communicating and conserving ‘the
voltage of the whole group’s awareness and energy’. This shared inner language is also,
however, a badge of the group’s eccentricity when they come to speak it as part of society’s
lingua franca. ‘From the point of view of the lingua franca,’ Hughes writes, ‘the solidarity
system and mythology of any sub-group tends to appear parochial, old-fashioned, limited
and limiting—to be indulged, if at all, only as local colour.’ On the other hand, from the
point of view of the sub-group, ‘the lingua franca appears shallow, arbitrary, empty,
degraded and degrading, even destructive, if not altogether meaningless’.
As ever with Ted Hughes, there is great cogency in this writing, and it does not lessen
when he goes on to outline its implications for the writer.
Setting aside just how any writer resolves or fails to resolve this dilemma, the fact
remains that each modern literary work has to take its place on a continuum
between some sub-group’s (author’s) system of shared understandings . . . and the
most inclusive, ideally global wave-length of a multi-cultural lingua franca.
Whether the writer intends it or not, is even conscious of it or not, by the very act
of bringing the work to linguistic focus they Wx it at some point on that continuum.
Just where that point is only becomes clear after publication.
So, in a sense, there is nothing more to say. The translator, like the writer in Hughes’s
parable, ‘can only grope along, transmitting what are intended to be meaningful signals,
the most meaningful possible’. If the work is successful, the Xash of the right word-choice
should create a tremor that makes readers feel they exist as ‘full strength’ members of the
language-group. A voltage should travel up the line, from the hoard into the herd, a
sensation of being tied into an extensive and self-fortifying network, a far-reaching
system of pulse and beat and heft and hold. The individual translator of Beowulf
shoulders the burden of the past and tries to launch it into the swim of the present.
5.24 seamus heaney
605

My own metaphor for this process comes from a poem called ‘The Settle Bed’, about a
big unwieldy piece of rural furniture, as solid and clinker-built as a Viking longship. The
settle in question came into my possession after a cousin of my father’s left it to me in her
will, mine to keep, to have and hold and bequeath in turn—so the following lines seemed
an appropriate epigraph for the translation:
and now this is ‘an inheritance’—
Upright, rudimentary, unshiftably planked
In the long ago, yet willable forward
Again and again and again.
To the literary translator, this attempt to will a thing forward is the raison d’eˆtre of the
whole business and belongs, as such, with the larger eVort of poetry itself, especially if
poetry is conceived of as Czeslaw Milosz has conceived of it, ‘a dividend from what you
know and what you are’. Put in a diVerent way, this means that our language pays tribute
to itself when tribute is exacted from it; it suggests that our value to ourselves as
individuals or as a group or even as a species can be re-estimated and increased by
dwelling upon the sum total of the experience stored in our word-hoard. Our fret as
investors in ourselves can, if you like, be allayed when poetry recirculates the language’s
hidden wealth, a recirculation that is not only etymologically renovating, but psycho-
logically and phenomenologically so as well.
From an interview with Grigory Kruzhkov (see above), regarding the success of his
translation of Beowulf
That was an accident, mere accident. Beowulf is based on my reading of Anglo-Saxon
poetry when I was a student. Not that I knew very much about it; I liked the noise of it,
the meter, the alliteration. And it’s like Hopkins. Hopkins is a neo-Anglo-Saxon writer
[ . . . ]. I actually loved doing it, that it was so magniWcently resistant. [ . . . ]
I read it aloud on the BBC [reads a few lines] and so on, and so on . . . just telling,
telling, telling, telling . . . That’s what people like about it, the sense of a straightforward
and clear story being told. But nobody could predict what happened to Beowulf. Let’s
face it, it’s a part of the phenomenon of a consumer society. [ . . . ] It has to do with some
extra glamour, or whatever.
From Beowulf (London: Faber, 1999), 26–7
[Beowulf Wghts Grendel. See Sects. 3.5 and 5.23, above, for William Morris’s and Edwin
Morgan’s versions of this passage.]
606
recent and contemporary writings

But the earl-troop’s leader was not inclined
to allow his caller to depart alive:
he did not consider that life of much account
to anyone anywhere. Time and again,
Beowulf s warriors worked to defend
their lord’s life, laying about them
as best they could with their ancestral blades.
Stalwart in action, they kept striking out
on every side, seeking to cut
straight to the soul. When they joined the struggle
there was something they could not have known at the time,
that no blade on earth, no blacksmith’s art
could ever damage their demon opponent.
He had conjured the harm from the cutting edge
of every weapon. But his going away
out of this world and the days of his life
would be agony to him, and his alien spirit
would travel far into Wends’ keeping.
Then he who had harrowed the hearts of men
with pain and aZiction in former times
and had given oVence also to God
found that his bodily powers failed him.
Hygelac’s kinsman kept him helplessly
locked in a handgrip. As long as either lived,
he was hateful to the other. The monster’s whole
body was in pain, a tremendous wound
appeared on his shoulder. Sinews split
and the bone-lappings burst. Beowulf was granted
the glory of winning [ . . . ]
5.24 seamus heaney
607

This page intentionally left blank 

POSTFACE
Daniel Weissbort
Since this collection provides, as needed, a historical background to translation in the
English tradition, it seems appropriate to provide an account of its own genealogy. We
have drawn on a very large number of related works, as the apparatus indicates. Never-
theless, it was the lack speciWcally of a textbook (a selection of primary texts) which might
function as an introduction to the Weld that prompted us to undertake this task. That the
book has been so long in the making has much to do with the fact that the discipline itself
was evolving, even as we tried to get it into perspective.
For the present writer it all began with the magazine Modern Poetry in Translation
(MPT), co-founded with Ted Hughes in 1965. From the start the journal had the support
of the British Arts Council, and of a number of poets interested in translation (e.g.
Michael Hamburger, Nathaniel Tarn, Anselm Hollo, Peter Redgrove). Like the Penguin
Modern European Poets series (General Editor A. Alvarez), MPTwas initially a response to
a growing awareness of the writings, particularly the poetry, emanating from ‘the other
Europe’, Eastern Europe, in the period after Stalin’s death in 1953. The aim was to publish
work by contemporary poets, in translations that tended towards the literal, as we
understood the term. Early issues of the journal contained a minimum of comment,
although this changed somewhat as we became more aware of current debates on
translation and of the work of such individuals as James S Holmes (see Sect. 5.3, above)
and others. But MPT (‘at least a novelty’, as a Times Literary Supplement editorial called it)
was not alone in the Weld. The idea for such a publication had occurred to Ted Hughes
when he and Sylvia Plath were living in the USA (late 1950s) and there was, even at that
time, at least one other similar project, edited by the American poet, translator, and critic
Willis Barnstone, this eventuating, however, in a landmark anthology, rather than in
several issues of a journal: Modern European Poetry, ed. Willis Barnstone (New York:
Bantam Books, 1966).
In 1972/3 I was invited by Paul Engle, one of the earliest subscribers to MPT, to the
University of Iowa, as a member of the International Writing Program, which, with his
wife Hualing Nieh, he had founded in 1967. Paul Engle is renowned, among other things,
for having developed the Iowa Creative Writing Program, of which he became director in

1942, and for including among its oVerings an ‘invention’ of his, the Translation Work-
shop, this being the Wrst such course in the English-speaking world.
Like most of my English contemporaries, I was uneasy about the notion of Creative
Writing Workshops, and I didn’t really know what to make of a Translation Workshop. It
seems that in 1963, when he was director of the Iowa Writers Workshop, Paul Engle had
invited Edmund (Mike) Keeley, Wction writer and translator of Greek poetry (CavaWs,
Seferis, among others) to try out a Translation Workshop.1 This project was a natural
enough outcome of Engle’s interest in the larger world. He had for some years accepted
foreign student-writers in the Iowa Creative Writing Program. Translation became a
preoccupation, although his personal interest in it pre-dated the Workshop, since he
had translated modern German poetry, including Rilke.
As Keeley explained, there was at that time no public forum for translators, no
publication devoted primarily to translation, no association of translators: ‘Evidence of
an imminent turning point was the second revelation of my year in Iowa, namely that
there were students of writing eager to learn about the craft of translation.’2 Keeley was
given a free hand, the guiding principle being that English was the language into which
translation was to be made.
When I arrived in Iowa (1973/4), Gayatri Spivak, chairperson of Comparative Litera-
ture, was herself working on a translation of Jacques Derrida’s De la grammatologie (1967),
On Grammatology (1976; see Sect. 5.11, above). She was interested in introducing a
translation programme, taking advantage of the favourable situation in Iowa. This
initiative led swiftly enough to the establishment of an MFA Program in Translation, in
Comparative Literature, and it was agreed that this new programme would also have a
theoretical/historical component, which called for a course in the history and theory of
translation. It was Paul Engle, in fact, who had been particularly adamant about the need
for such a course, having in mind a historically focused rather than theory-based one. The
teaching of this course inevitably fell to me, the course concerning itself, above all, with the
history of theory in the English tradition, from its roots in Classical writings (Cicero,
Horace, Quintillian, etc.) up to, say, Ezra Pound. I attempted to carry on beyond EP, but
found contemporary translation theory, especially that which drew on French critical
theory (Derrida, for instance) rather daunting. Our primary interest was in the production
1 For a detailed account of the American translation Workshop and its place in the development of the academic
discipline of Translation Studies, readers should consult Edwin Gentzler’s ‘The North American Translation
Workshop’ in his Contemporary Translation Theories (1993; rev. 2nd edn., Clevedon, Multilingual Matters 2001)
This is based on Wrst-hand experience, since Gentzler, as program assistant to Paul Engle’s International Writing
Program in the early 1970s, participated in the early Translation Workshops.
2 See Keeley’s Closing Address to the 1980 Symposium of the American Literary Translators Association, ‘The
State of Translation’ (MPT, 41–2, Mar. 1981).
610
postface

of translated texts, rather than in the consideration of the theoretical dimension of
translation. Somewhat prior to these developments at Iowa, James S Holmes (1924–86),
like Paul Engle a native Iowan, was at work, at the University of Amsterdam, identifying
texts and assembling bibliographies which might render feasible the teaching of a course
on historical translation theory. It was Holmes, incidentally, who Wrst used the term
‘Translation Studies’3 and certainly it was he who did most to deWne the scope of the
emerging discipline (see Sect. 5.3, above). I met Holmes in Bratislava at an FIT (Inter-
national Federation of Translators, a UNESCO-aYliated body) conference, in 1968, and
he contributed translations of Dutch poetry and articles on historical translation theory to
MPT, also regularly visiting Iowa where he kept an avuncular eye on the Translation
Workshop. Holmes made the bibliographies he was compiling ‘for the use of students
doing graduate work in translation studies at the University of Amsterdam’ available to me
and these lists enabled me to begin assembling a course pack for the course in the history of
translation theory.
The lack of a suitable textbook had been apparent as early as 1973. Indeed, in a report
‘On the Place of Translation in Comparative Literature’, submitted to the American
Comparative Literature Association by Rainer Schulte, himself the originator of the
American Literary Translators Association (ALTA) in the late 1970s, it was stated that:
‘The Course in History of Translation [ . . . ] is one of the most tradition-bound areas of
comparative literature, yet [ . . . ] almost impossible to teach, since suitable materials for
study are shamefully lacking.’ It continues: ‘[T]he class is faced with a paucity of available
materials, from the translations of bygone ages and a plethora of materials from contem-
porary (or at least twentieth-century) translations.’
There was, to be sure, an array of relevant materials, by far the most signiWcant and
inspiring being George Steiner’s compendious work, After Babel: Aspects of Language and
Translation (1975; see Sect. 5.2, above). Some pre-indication of its scope was given by the
same author’s Penguin Book of Modern Verse Translation (1966), which for the Wrst time
allowed translators comparable status with source language poets. Steiner’s introduction to
this anthology is one of the most important contemporary texts on the translation of
poetry and on literary translation in general. Scrupulously, he draws attention to the work
of a number of other scholars and poets, some associated with the short-lived National
Translation Center in Texas (founded in 1968), including, for instance, D. S. Carne-Ross
and William Arrowsmith.
3 See ‘The Name and Nature of Translation Studies’ (1972), included in James S Holmes, Translated!: Papers on
Literary Translation and Translation Studies (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1988).
postface
611

In an essay written for Modern Poetry in Translation: 1983, Ted Hughes speculates on the
reason for the apparent boom in poetry translation in the 1960s and early 1970s. When
MPT began, the people consulted included the poet and translator Nathaniel Tarn who,
between 1967 and 1969, was general editor of Cape Editions, published by Jonathan Cape,
which made available in English translations, especially from the French, a number of
important short texts of literary criticism, linguistics, and anthropology (by Claude Le´vi-
Strauss, Roland Barthes, Michel Leiris among others). A noted translator from Spanish
(Neruda, in particular), Tarn was an advisory editor of MPT and was also involved with
the Wrst Poetry International readings in London, in 1967, directed by Ted Hughes and
Patrick Garland.
Meanwhile, or shortly before these developments in England, Paul and Hualing Engle, at
the University of Iowa, had embarked on a similar if even more ambitious project, namely the
publication, through funds raised by them and made available to the University of Iowa Press,
of a series of international anthologies. In their General Foreword, the Engles wrote that it was
intended to bring together ‘people with creative talent (who, in some instances, may not even
know the language being translated) with a poet native to the language. Together they attempt
a version in English which tries to be partly as imaginative as the original.’4 Paul Engle had
pioneered, through the Translation Workshop, this ‘tandem method’ of translating poetry. It
is worth recording that later, in the spirit of what the IWP had begun, an attempt was made to
formalize the relationship between visiting writers and student-writers in Creative Writing
and Translation by setting up a workshop the participants of which consisted of visiting
foreign writers and student writers in the Creative Writing Program wanting to collaborate
with them on the translation of their work.
The project to assemble a collection of primary texts, with historical notes and commen-
taries moved forward, but was overtaken by some others, including the late Andre´
Lefevere’s Translation/History Culture: A Sourcebook, eventually published in 1992 in the
Routledge Translation Studies series, the general editors of which were Lefevere himself, a
Belgian scholar from the University of Antwerp, and Susan Bassnett of the University
of Warwick. (The Routledge series was actually the second of its kind, the Wrst, less
widely available, being ‘Approaches to Translation Studies’, published by Van Gorcum,
Amsterdam, under the editorship of James S Holmes.) Lefevere’s useful short volume, with
its thematic rather than chronological arrangement and its emphasis on translation as
manipulation, was probably the oVshoot of a larger project, under the aegis of the
4 See e.g. General Editors’ Introduction to Russian Poetry: The Modern Period, ed. John Glad and Daniel
Weissbort (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 1978).
612
postface

ICLA (International Comparative Literature Association), for a world historical reader
in translation studies. I had participated in discussions about this with Holmes and
Lefevere.
The University of Iowa supported our eVorts to bring to fruition work on a Historical
Reader in Translation Studies. My principal collaborator for a while was a doctoral
candidate, Stephen Welchselblatt. In 1997, Astradur Eysteinsson, who had earned his
doctorate in Comparative Literature at Iowa, returned to teach translation courses, and it
was around this time that he and I decided to collaborate on the project. In the course of
our co-editorship, the project was substantially reshaped. Addi Eysteinsson supplied the
enthusiasm and discipline, the practical experience and theoretical knowledge, that made
it possible to complete a far more ambitious project than had originally been envisaged.
However, in the spirit of the earlier work, this volume has tried to keep the scope as open
as may be, emphasizing the link between theory and practice, as this emerges from a
historical survey of historical developments. The primary writers on translation have been
the translators themselves, as noted in the General Introduction to the present volume.
These statements, frequently in the unobtrusive form of prefaces, often reXect diVerences
of opinion regarding for instance the use of blank verse rather than heroic (rhyming)
couplets in the translation of the Homeric epic (William Cowper as against Alexander
Pope). We have represented some of these speciWc controversies, although our focus has
remained the work of individual translators and their contributions to a more general
ongoing debate. We have also attempted, with the twentieth century, to represent work
of writers who might be described primarily as theorists or critics. Even in these cases,
though, the theoretical comments were often drawn from or accompanied by actual
translation.
It is true that some translation theory has detached itself from the practice of translation,
so as to gain a perspective on this rapidly developing discipline. If there is any bias in this
volume, then, it is probably towards theory as it aVects or is reXected in and reXects
practice, this, in its turn, being determined by circumstances. In providing examples where
possible of translations by the likes of Dryden, Pope, Pound, as well as by such as
Benjamin and others who are not primarily creative writers (to use that problematical
but convenient term), we have tried to Xesh out the theory. As a rough guide to the
translations, we have provided literal or ad verbum versions of the source texts. Of course,
the very notion of literalism is problematical; nevertheless, these texts do give some
additional purchase on otherwise inaccessible source material. Naturally, if the literal
version provided was also one used by the translator—assuming he or she needed or
made use of such an intermediate version by someone else—this was an additional bonus.
As we have seen, Ted Hughes—and he was not alone (see, in particular, Sect. 5.22, above,
postface
613

on W. S. Merwin)—wanted versions that aspired to verbal accuracy rather than to any
kind of literariness. His aim when translating was, as far as possible, to preserve the
‘foreignness’, bringing into English that which could not possibly have been there before.
If this seems to accord with post-colonial developments in critical theory, in particular
with the advocacy of ‘foreignizing’ translation by such as Lawrence Venuti, it suggests a
current of thought Xowing both ways between theory and practice.
At the same time, we became increasingly aware that anything to do with human
communication can be related to translation: all transactions between human beings,
whether from diVerent languages and cultures, within the same language, between social
groups, between the sexes, between adults and children and so forth involve translation;
the act of writing may itself be regarded as one of translation. And then, there is the
business of adaptation, for instance the screen treatment of a work of Wction. There is also
the translation of oral poetry into written, when the whole social situation or context is
obviously pertinent, a question with which those involved in ethnopoetics are very much
concerned (see Sect. 5.7, above, on Ethnopoetics and passim). Translation has been
globalized, in so far as its universal implications have been recognized, and the broadening
of the Weld has become conceivable and indeed practical, greatly extending the scope or
relevance of literature.
These developments may have somewhat obscured the distinction between original
writing and translation. Nevertheless, that there is a distinction is not, we believe, an
assumption based wholly on convenience. While, as stated, we have tried to keep the Weld
open, we have also tried not to broaden it to such an extent that it becomes virtually
indeWnable. As regards the place of translation studies in academia, Professor Susan
Bassnett of Warwick University has gone so far as to state that ‘there are now so many
people working in the Weld of Translation Studies that some of the old assumptions about
the marginality of this work have been radically challenged, principal among which is the
notion that the study of translation can be relegated to a sub-category of Comparative
Literature. The current perspective reverses that assessment and proposes instead that
comparative literature be considered a branch of the much wider discipline that is
Translation Studies.’5
As editors of this volume, we have felt it incumbent on us to press for inclusiveness,
keeping Translation Studies as a whole open, rather than exclusive, fortiWed by more or less
impenetrable jargon. The discipline does, after all, propose a new way of looking at least at
5 See Preface to the Revised Edition of Translation Studies by Susan Bassnett-McGuire (1980; London and New
York, Routledge, 1991), p. xi; see also Susan Bassnett’s Comparative Literature: A Critical Introduction (Oxford and
Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell).
614
postface

one area of scholarship: the study of literature. With the emphasis here on the actual
business of writing, of translating, we hope to have been able to preserve the connection at
least with literary life in its historical dimension. One thing translation apparently is not—
even if it may have seemed so and may still seem so to some of its practitioners—is a purely
scribal business, engendering numerous local problems requiring action. At the same time,
of course, that is also precisely what it is! These contradictions and dilemmas account for
the perennial fascination of translation, as an art, as a practical activity or polemic, and so
forth. This fascination, the wide appeal of translation and of any discussion of it, makes it
a most eVective introduction, as well, to the study of literature (arguably, no reading of a
text is closer or more critical than that of its translator). Translation can provide the link,
often missing between theory and practice, between writing about writing and writing
itself.
The normativeness or ideological nature of much writing about translation has, of
course, much to do with the fact that it is, by and large, tied to a consideration of certain
practical problems. We hope that the present volume will help readers put the often
passionate views of writers on translation into historical perspective, at the same time as
relating them to supposedly more enduring aesthetic considerations. In any case, transla-
tion has, for most of its history, been concerned with broadening readerships, making
more widely available what has been accessible only to a privileged few. To that extent,
while recognizing the conservative or even reactionary tendencies of society, as it tries to
preserve or even roll back the status quo, translation activists do well also to acknowledge
the legitimacy of resistance—for instance, among many publishers—to some of the more
radical approaches, such as radical foreignization.
There has been in the post-Second World War period and, particularly from the mid-
1960s, a concerted eVort to interrogate the process of translation, as well as to promote the
actual business of translation. Consciousness-raising in the academy and generally in the
media has inevitably been a slow process. We feel privileged to have been part of this
historical movement and fortunate, too, to be in a position to pay tribute to fellow
prospectors. This volume is also dedicated to the many individuals who directly or
indirectly had a hand in its making, under the peculiarly favourable circumstances that
prevailed in certain places in the last quarter of the twentieth century.
postface
615

This page intentionally left blank 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to all the publishers and translators of texts quoted in this book and in
particular to the following for the translations or articles indicated:
Extracts from The Authorized Version of the Bible (The King James Bible), the rights in which
are vested in the Crown, are reproduced by permission of the Crown’s Patentee, Cambridge
University Press.
Extracts from The Good News Bible (The Bible Societies, Collins/Fontana, 1976), copyright
 The Bible Societies, reprinted by permission of HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
Yehuda Amichai: from ‘Letter of Recommendation’, in Amen, translated from the Hebrew by
the author and Ted Hughes (Harper & Row, 1977), copyright  1977 by Yehuda Amichai,
reprinted by permission of HarperCollins Publishers, USA.
Talal Asad: from ‘The Concept of Cultural Translation in British Social Anthropology’, in
James CliVord and George E. Marcus (eds.), Writing Culture: The Poetic and Politics of
Ethnography (University of California Press, 1986), copyright  The Regents of The University
of California, reprinted by permission of the author and the University of California Press.
Susan Bassnett: from ‘Theatre and Opera’, in Peter France (ed.), The Oxford Guide to Literature
in English Translation (OUP, 2000), reprinted by permission of Oxford University Press.
Walter Benjamin: ‘Die Kra¨nkung der Luna’, German translation of ‘La Lune oVense´e’ by
Charles Baudelaire, in Illuminationen: Ausgewa¨hlte Schriften (Suhrkamp, 1955), reprinted by
permission of Suhrkamp Verlag.
J. W. Binns: from Intellectual Culture in Elizabethan and Jacobean England: The Latin Writings
of the Age (ARCA Classical and Medieval Texts, Papers and Monographs 24, Leeds, 1990),
reprinted by permission of Francis Cairns (Publications) Ltd.
Laura Bohannan: ‘Shakespeare in the Bush’, from Natural History, 75 (August–September
1966); copyright holder not traced.
Yves Bonnefoy: from ‘On the Translation of Form in Poetry’, World Literature Today, 52–3
(1979); copyright holder not traced.
Anthony Bonner: ‘Pierre Menard, author of Don Quixote’, in Jorge Luis Borges, Ficciones, ed.
and introd. Anthony Kerrigan (Weidenfeld and Nicolson/Grove Press, Inc. 1962), reprinted by
permission of Grove/Atlantic, Inc.

Clarence Brown: from Introduction to Osip Mandelstam: Selected Poems, ed. Clarence Brown
and W. S. Merwin (OUP, 1973), reprinted by permission of Oxford University Press.
Joseph Brodsky: ‘May 24, 1980’, from Joseph Brodsky: Collected Poems in English (Carcanet),
Wrst published in To Urania (Farrar, Straus & Giroux), reprinted by permission of Carcanet
Press Ltd and Farrar Straus & Giroux, LLC.
Martin Buber with Franz Rosenzweig: Translation of Genesis 11: 1–9 into German in Die
Schrift (Die fu¨nf Bu¨cher der Weisung) (WBG Darmstadt, 1997), reprinted by permission of the
Estates of Martin Buber and of Franz Rosenzweig.
Stanley Burnshaw: from the introduction to The Poem Itself (Simon & Schuster 1989, Wrst
published in 1960): copyright holder not traced.
F. H. Colson: from Philo Judaeus, The Life of Moses, vol. vi, Loeb Classical Library 289,
(Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1935), reprinted by permission of the Trustees of
the Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press. The Loeb Classical Library 1 is a
registered trademark of the President and Fellows of Harvard College.
Edward Crankshaw: from Memoir of Constance Garnett published in The Listener, 30 January
1947, copyright  Edward Crankshaw 1947, reprinted by permission of PFD on behalf of the
Estate of Edward Crankshaw.
David Daniell: from Tyndale’s Old Testament, Being the Pentateuch of 1530, Joshua to 2 Chronicles
of 1537, and Jonah, in a modern-spelling edition (Yale University Press, 1992), reprinted by
permission of the publisher.
Stavros Deligiorgis: ‘The Septuagint’ including translation of Genesis 11: 1–9 from the Greek,
printed by permission of Stavros Deligiorgis.
Itamar Even-Zohar: ‘The Position of Translated Literature within the Literary Polysystem’
(1978; rev. 1990) as published in Polysystem Studies, a special issue of Poetics Today, 11/1 (1990),
reprinted by permission of the author.
John Felstiner: from ‘Kafka and the Golem: Translating Paul Celan’, in Daniel Weissbort
(ed.), Translating Poetry: The Double Labyrinth (University of lowa Press, 1985), reprinted by
permission of the author.
Susanne Flatauer: from the German by Walter Schamshula of Jirˇı´ Levy´, ‘Translation as an Art
Form’, previously unpublished; copyright holder not traced.
Everett Fox: from the ‘Translator’s Preface’ to The Five Books of Moses: Genesis, Exodus,
Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy (Schocken Books, 1995), copyright  1983, 1986, 1990, 1995
by Schocken Books, reprinted by permission of Schocken Books, a division of Random House,
Inc. [see also at Lawrence Rosenwald with Everett Fox]
618
acknowledgements

Constance Garnett: from ‘The Art of Translation’ (in her own words from notes made by
Richard Garnett published in The Listener, 30 January 1947), and from Fyodor Dostoevsky:
Crime and Punishment (Heinemann, 1914), reprinted by permission of A P Watt Ltd on behalf
of the Executors of the Estate of Constance Garnett.
James Greene: extract from preface and ‘There are women who are natives’ from Osip
Mandelstam Poems (Paul Elek, 1977), copyright  James Greene 1977, reprinted by permission
of HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
Seamus Heaney: extracts from ‘The Impact of Translation’, in The Government of the Tongue,
The 1986 T. S. Eliot Memorial Lectures and Other Critical Writings (Faber, 1988), from Sweeney
Astray (Faber, 1984, 2001), and from Beowulf (Faber, 1999), all reprinted by permission of the
publishers, Faber & Faber Ltd and Farrar Straus & Giroux, LLC; from ‘Earning a Rhyme:
Notes on Translating Buile Suibhne’, in The Art of Translation: Voices from the Field, ed.
Rosanna Warren (Northeastern University Press, 1989), reprinted by permission of Faber &
Faber Ltd; from ‘Fretwork on Translating Beowulf’, Wrst given as a BCLT St Jerome Lecture
and published in In Other Words (Journal of the Translators Association) (Autumn/Winter
1999/2000), No 13/14, reprinted by permission of the British Centre for Literary Translation
and Faber & Faber Ltd.
D. E. Hill: Ovid’s ‘Salamacis and Hermaphroditus’, in Metamorphoses I–IV (Aris & Philips,
1985), reprinted by permission of Oxbow Books Ltd.
Eva HoVman: from Lost in Translation: Life in a New Language (Minerva, 1991), copyright 
Eva HoVman 1991, reprinted by permission of The Random House Group Ltd and Rogers,
Coleridge & White Ltd, 20 Powis Mews, London W11 1JN.
James S Holmes: ‘Poem and Metapoem: Poetry from Dutch to English’, in Translated! Papers
on Literary Translation and Translation Studies (Rodopi, 1988), reprinted by permission of
Editions Rodopi BV; from introduction to and from Estienne Dolet: La manie`re de bien
traduire d’une langue en lautre [The way to translate well from one language to another], in
Modern Poetry in Translation, 41–2 (March 1981), reprinted by permission of the Editors of
Modern Poetry in Translation.
Ted Hughes: from Seneca: Oedipus (Faber, 1969), from Jean Racine: Phe`dre (Faber, 1999), from
Tales from Ovid, Twenty Passages from the Metamorphoses (Faber, 1997), from Aeschylus: The
Oresteia (Faber, 1999), and from ‘Sir Gawain and the Green Knight’ in The School Bag edited
by Seamus Heaney and Ted Hughes (Faber, 1997), all reprinted by permission of the
publishers, Faber & Faber Ltd; from ‘Letter of Recommendation’ by Yehuda Amichai in
Amen translated from the Hebrew by the author and Ted Hughes (Harper & Row, 1977),
copyright  1977 by Yehuda Amichai, reprinted by permission of HarperCollins Publishers,
USA; and from ‘The French Prisoner’translated with Ja´nos Csokits and from the introduction
acknowledgements
619

to Ja´nos Pilinszky, The Desert of Love (Anvil, 1989), reprinted by permission of Anvil Press
Poetry.
Roman Jakobson: ‘On Linguistic Aspects of Translation’, Wrst published in Reuben Brower,
On Translation (Harvard, 1959), reprinted here from Krystyna Pomorska and Stephen Rudy
(eds.), Language in Literature (The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1987), copyright
 1987 by The Jakobson Trust, reprinted by permission of The Roman Jakobson Trust and
Harvard University Press.
Andre´ Lefevere: translations of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Friedrich Schleiermacher
from Translating Literature: The German Tradition from Luther to Rosenzweig (Van Gorcum,
1977), reprinted by permission of Dr Ria Vanderauwera; from ‘Why Waste Our Time in
Rewrites: The Trouble with Interpretation and the Role of Rewriting in an Alternative
Paradigm’, in Theo Hermans (ed.), The Manipulation of Literature: Studies in Literary Trans-
lation (Croom Helm, 1985), reprinted by permission of Palgrave Macmillan.
Suzanne Jill Levine: from The Subversive Scribe: Translating Latin American Fiction (Graywolf,
1991), copyright  1991 by Suzanne Jill Levine, reprinted by permission of Graywolf Press,
Saint Paul, Minnesota.
Hugh Lloyd-Jones: from Aeschylus: The Oresteia (Duckworth, 2001), reprinted by permission
of Gerald Duckworth & Co Ltd.
Robert Lowell: from the Preface and from Phaedra: Racine’s Phe`dre (Faber, 1963, Wrst published
1961), from The Oresteia of Aeschylus (Faber, 1979), from introduction and translation of
Charles Baudelaire’s ‘The Injured Moon’ [‘La lune oVense´e’] in Imitations (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, 1961), copyright  1959 by Robert Lowell, copyright renewed 1987 by Harrier
Sheridan and Caroline Lowell, all reprinted by permission of the publishers, Faber & Faber
Ltd and Farrar, Straus & Giroux, LLC.
Richard and Elizabeth McKane: from Osip Mandelstam: The Moscow & Voronezh Notebooks
(Bloodaxe, 2003), reprinted by permission of Bloodaxe Books Ltd.
Bernard Meares: lines from poem 394, in Osip Mandelstam: 50 Poems (Persea, 1977), translation
copyright  1977 by Bernard Meares, reprinted by permission of Persea Books, Inc. (New
York).
W. S. Merwin: from Sir Gawain and The Green Knight: A New Verse Translation, (Knopf,
2002) copyright  W. S. Merwin 2002, reprinted by permission of The Wylie Agency, Inc.
and Alfred A Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc; from the foreword to Selected
Translations 1968–1978 (Atheneum, 1980), copyright  W. S. Merwin 1980; lines from poem
394 (with Clarence Brown) from Selected Poems of Osip Mandelstam (OUP, 1973), copyright 
W. S. Merwin 1973; ‘La Vita Nuova’ by Dante (International Writing Program Festival,
University of Iowa, 2001), copyright  W. S. Merwin 2001; and from an interview conducted
620
acknowledgements

by Christopher Merrill October 2001 at ‘Lost and Found: The Art of Translation’, Inter-
national Writing Program Festival, University of Iowa, all reprinted by permission of the
Wylie Agency, Inc.
Frank Justus Miller: from Ovid, vol. iv, Loeb Classical Library 43 (1916) in Ovid: Metamorph-
oses Books I–VIII, rev. G. P. Goold (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999) and
from Seneca: Oedipus, vol. viii, Loeb Classical Library 62 (1917) in Seneca Tragedies I (Cam-
bridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1979), reprinted by permission of the Trustees of the
Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press. The Loeb Classical Library 1 is a registered
trademark of the President and Fellows of Harvard College.
Stephen Mitchell: ‘Archaic Torso of Apollo’, copyright  1982 by Stephen Mitchell from The
Selected Poetry of Rainer Maria Rilke, trans. Stephen Mitchell, reprinted by permission of
Random House, Inc.
Edwin Morgan: ‘Language at Play, in Conversation with Joseph Farrell’, in Stages of Transla-
tion, ed. David Johnston (Absolute Classics, 1996), reprinted by permission of Edwin Morgan
and Joseph Farrell; from Beowulf and from his introduction (Carcanet, 2002); from ‘The
Seafarer’ and from ‘To the Bourgeoisie’ by Vladimir Mayakovsky in Collected Translations
(Carcanet, 1996); and from Jean Racine: Phaedra (Carcanet, 2000), all reprinted by permission
of the publishers, Carcanet Press Ltd.
Vladimir Nabokov: from Vladimir Nabokov: Selected Letters 1940–1977, ed. Dmitri Nabokov
and Matthew J Bruccoli (Harcourt, 1989), copyright  1989 by the Article 3b Trust under the
Will of Vladimir Nabokov; from Lolita (Putnam, 1955/Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1959), rep-
rinted by permission of Weidenfeld and Nicolson, an imprint of the Orion Publishing Group;
from ‘The Art of Translation’ in Vladimir Nabokov: Lectures on Russian Literature, ed. Fredson
Bowers (Harcourt, 1981), copyright  1981 by the Estate of Vladimir Nabokov, reprinted by
permission of Harcourt, Inc; from Onegin: A Novel in Verse by Alexandr Pushkin, translated
from the Russian with commentary by Vladimir Nabokov, Bollingen Series 72, vol. 1 (Prince-
ton, 1964), copyright  1964 by Bollingen, 1975 rev. edn., copyright  1975, renewed 1992,
2003 by Princeton University Press. reprinted by permission of Princeton University Press;
from ‘Problems of Translation: ‘‘Onegin’’ in English’, in L. Venuti (ed.), The Translation
Studies Reader (Routledge 2000); from The Song of Igor’s Campaign, An Epic of the Twelfth
Century (Ardis, 1988); from ‘Reply to my Critics’ in Strong Opinions (McGraw Hill, 1973); from
Ada (McGraw Hill, 1969); and from foreword to Lermontov: A Hero of our Time (Doubleday,
1958) translated in collaboration with Dimitri Nabokov, all reprinted by permission of the
Estate of Vladimir Nabokov via Smith Skolnik Literary Management. All rights reserved.
Eugene A. Nida: from Toward a Science of Translating: With Special Reference to Principles and
Procedures Involved in Bible Translating (E. J. Brill, 1964), reprinted by permission of Brill
Academic Publishers.
acknowledgements
621

Ezra Pound: from Selected Letters of Ezra Pound (1950), copyright  1950 by Ezra Pound; from
The Cantos of Ezra Pound (1993), copyright  1934, 1937, 1940, 1948, 1956, 1959, 1962, 1966,
1968 by Ezra Pound; from Personae: The Collected Shorter Poems of Ezra Pound (1971), copyright
 1926 by Ezra Pound; from Literary Essays of Ezra Pound, introd. T. S. Eliot (1968), copyright
 1935 by Ezra Pound; and from The Translations of Ezra Pound (1970), copyright  1953 by
Ezra Pound, all reprinted by permission of the publishers, Faber & Faber Ltd and New
Directions Publishing Corp.
Gregory Rabassa: from ‘If This Be Treason: Translation and Its Possibilities’, in William
Frawley (ed.), Translation: Literary, Linguistic and Philosophical Perspectives (University of
Delaware Press, 1984), reprinted by permission of the Associated University Presses; from
Gabriel Garcı´a Ma´rquez, One Hundred Years of Solitude (Cape, 1970), reprinted by permission
of The Random House Group Ltd.
A. K. Ramanujan: from Speaking of Shiva (Penguin Classics, 1973), copyright  A. K.
Ramanujan 1973, reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd; poems from Poems of Love
and War: From the Eight Anthologies and the Ten Long Poems of Classical Tamil (Columbia
University Press, 1985), copyright  1985 Columbia University Press, reprinted by permission
of the publishers, Columbia University Press and Molly A. Daniels Ramanujan; from ‘On
Translating a Tamil Poem’, in The Collected Essays of A. K. Ramanujan (OUP India, 1999) and
‘This Night’ by N. Revathi Devi, trans. A. K. Ramanujan with V. Narayana Rao in Oxford
India Anthology of Contemporary Poetry edited by Vinay Dharwadker and A. K. Ramanujan
(OUP India, 1996), reprinted by permission of Oxford University Press India, New Delhi.
Rainer Maria Rilke: ‘Archaischer Torso Apollo’ from Neue Gedichte (Insel-Verlag, 2000),
reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Norma Rinsler: literal translations of ‘La Lune oVense´e’ by Charles Baudelaire and of the
German translation by Walter Benjamin, reprinted by permission of Norma Rinsler.
Douglas Robinson: from The Translator’s Turn (The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1991),
copyright  Douglas Robinson 1991, reprinted by permission of the publisher; and from ‘The
Ascetic Foundations of Western Translatology: Jerome and Augustine’, in Translation and
Literature, vol. i (Edinburgh University Press, 1992), reprinted by permission of the publishers,
www.eup.ed.ac.uk
Lawrence Rosenwald with Everett Fox: from Martin Buber: ‘Leitwort Style in Pentateuch
Narrative’, ‘On Word Choice in Translating the Bible: In Memoriam Franz Rozenzweig’, and
‘A Translation of the Bible’; from Franz Rozenzweig: ‘Scripture and Word: On the New Bible
Translation’ and ‘Scripture and Luther’, all in Scripture and Translation [Die Scrift und Ihre
Verdeutschung] (Indiana University Press, 1994), reprinted by permission of the publisher,
Indiana University Press.
622
acknowledgements

Franz Rosenzweig [see Martin Buber]
Barry Rubin: ‘Beyond Consolation’ by Joseph Brodsky, New York Review of Books, 7 February
1974; copyright holder not traced.
Niall Rudd: from Johnson’s Juvenal, London and the Vanity of Human Wishes (Bristol Classical
Press, 1981), reprinted by permission of Gerald Duckworth & Co. Ltd.
James Harry Smith and Edd WinWeld: from Joachin du Bellay, The Defence and Illustration of
the French Language [La Defense et illustration de la langue francayse] in The Great Critics: An
Anthology of Literary Criticism, ed. J. H. Smith and E. WinWeld (3rd edn., Norton, 1951),
copyright 1932, 1939, 1951 by W. W. Norton & Co., Inc., renewed  1967 by James Harry
Smith and Edd WinWeld Parks, reprinted by permission of W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Mary Snell-Hornby: from Translation Studies: An Integrated Approach (John Benjamins Publ.
Co. 1994; rev. edn. 1995), reprinted by permission of John Benjamins Publishing Company,
Amsterdam,/Philadelphia. www.benjamins.com and the Foundation of Language.
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak: from ‘Translator’s Preface’ to Jacques Derrida, Of Grammatology
(The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976), copyright  Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak 1976,
reprinted by permission of the publisher; from ‘The Politics of Translation’, in Outside in the
Teaching Machine (Routledge, 1993), copyright  Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak 1993, reprinted
by permission of Routledge/Taylor & Francis Books, Inc.
George Steiner: from After Babel: Aspects of Language and Translation (3rd edn., OUP, 1998),
reprinted by permission of Oxford University Press.
Dennis Tedlock: from ‘On the Translation of Style in Oral Narrative’, in Journal of American
Folklore, 84; and from a State University of BuValo course description on ‘Ethnopoetics’;
copyright holder not traced.
David Anthony Turner: from Oedipus in Classical Tragedy: Greek and Roman: Eight Plays, ed.
Robert W. Corrigan (Applause, 1990), reprinted by permission of Hal Leonard Corporation
on behalf of Applause Theatre & Cinema Books.
Lawrence Venuti: from ‘Translation as Cultural Politics: Regimes of Domestication in
English’, in Textual Practice 7/2 (1993), reprinted by permission of Taylor & Francis (UK).
Edd WinWeld [see at James Harry Smith]
Celia and Louis Zukofsky: from Catullus (Cape Golliard, 1969); copyright holder not traced.
Despite every eVort to trace and contact copyright holders before publication, this has not
been possible in those cases indicated. If contacted, the publisher will be pleased to rectify any
errors or omissions at the earliest opportunity.
acknowledgements
623

This page intentionally left blank 

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Introductory Note
Selecting material to include in a reader such as this is always a daunting task. When it came to
deciding what to include in a bibliography, which would ‘round oV’ the volume, the editors
felt they were facing one of the most diYcult decisions in this whole process of selection.
The concept of our anthology rests on a wide-ranging and Xexible understanding of the
Weld, drawing not only on a scholarly framework of translation studies in the ‘stricter’ meaning
of the term, but also on various discussions and commentaries on the idea and practice of
translation; on introductions, interviews, notes of practising translators, etc., and not least of
course on the very practice of translation itself (albeit chieXy literary translation).
It is clearly impractical to include an extensive bibliography along those lines, and a short,
selected one would inevitably constitute an awkward case of arbitrariness, more so than our
selection of materials which is contextualized by the volume itself. This is especially true of
translated literary works. The volume contains samples of the work of only some of the
important translators who have enriched the English language through the ages. Trying to
make up for shortcomings by including a list or ‘canon’ of great translators and translations is
not something we were eager to attempt.
It would have been easier to select a number of scholarly books and articles which have
appeared in the past several decades and which have helped to deWne the academic Weld of
translation studies. The volume contains, either in part or in whole, several seminal texts in this
category, i.e. works that could be classiWed as translation theory, a discipline we have partici-
pated in as university teachers and researchers. But we have also consulted other writings
pertaining to translation, be they of a critical, introductory, speculative, experimental, or
experiential bent, and we have both worked as practising translators. Hence, while we are
very much aware of the key role played by translation theory in translation studies as a
discipline, we could not help but wonder whether we wouldn’t be undermining our own
approach—the concept of translation studies constituted in and by the reader—if we chose to
‘close’ it with a bibliography constituted according to a disciplinary framework which the
volume itself displaces, to some extent replacing it with a diVerent model.
Did we want to tell students using this anthology, as they are discovering the whole Weld of
translation and translation studies, that they should now move on to the ‘central’ academic
authorities on translation? Wouldn’t we prefer them to continue ‘thinking the Weld’ in the
broad, open sense, in which we felt we had tried to approach and outline it?

That said, it should of course be acknowledged that the seminal works of translation theory
comprise a critical sprectrum which is applicable in various ways to both the many methods
and examples of translation and the many diVerent accounts of, and comments on, translation.
The useful theoretical works are not pieces of dogma; they contain models and ideas which
students of translation can work with creatively as they discover their own paths in the Weld.
This includes putting together many ‘bibliographies’ that still need to be worked out, for there
are many documents ‘out there’ that touch on translation in a multiplicity of ways—and there
are of course thousands of translations which remain to be discussed and analysed.
Some of the important publications in the history of translation studies have contained
extensive general bibliographies that reXect a discipline which is both versatile and in fact very
much in-progress, as this Weld has been and perhaps still is. This is true for instance of Bayard
Quincy Morgan’s ‘Bibliography, 46bc–1958’, included in Reuben Brower’s On Translation
(1959), the bibliography Eugene A. Nida includes in his Toward a Science of Translating (1964),
and more recently the chronological bibliography in George Steiner’s After Babel (3rd edn.,
1998).
One of the options we considered for the present volume was simply to collect all the
bibliographies and bibliographical references contained within the reader itself and replicate
them as a whole. Ultimately we decided against this. These references are already available in
the book and we felt that a more ‘simple’ list of works would be of greater service, one that
would not attempt to reXect specialized areas of research, but would relate to a more general
framework. As a result, the lists below are restricted to books in English that either collect
material and information in the Weld or present broad accounts of translation and translation
studies. There is also a short list of journals that specialize in translation (not, therefore,
including journals that have intermittently focused on translation or have even, occasionally,
put out special issues on translation).
A. Journals
Babel, international journal of the Federation of Translators, (1955– ).
The Bible Translator (London, 1949– ).
Delos, National Translation Center, University of Texas at Austin (1968–71).
Exchanges, (http://www.uiowa.edu/xchanges/index.htm), University of Iowa (1989– ).
IJT (International Journal of Translation) (New Delhi, 1994– ).
In Other Words, the journal of the Translators Association, produced in collaboration with the
British Centre for Literary Translation at the University of East Anglia, (1993– ).
Meta, University of Montreal (1966– ).
Modern Poetry in Translation (London, 1965– ).
New Voices in Translation Studies (http://www.iatis.org/newvoices/ ) (2005– ).
Target (Amsterdam/Philadelphia, 1989– ).
626
select bibliography

Translation, Columbia University (New York, 1973–94).
Translation and Literature, Edinburgh University Press (1992– ).
Translation Journal (http://accurapid.com/journal/ ) (1997– ).
Translation Review University of Texas (Dallas, 1978– ).
The Translator (Manchester, 1995– ).
TRANSST: International Newsletter for Translation Studies, Tel Aviv University (1987– ).
TTR (Montreal, 1988– ).
Two Lines: A Journal of Translation (San Francisco, 1994– ).
B. Encyclopedias, Anthologies, Essay Collections
Arrowsmith, William and Shattuck Roger, (eds.), The Craft and Context of Translation (Austin:
University of Texas Press, 1961).
Baker, Mona (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation (London: Routledge, 2001).
Bassnett, Susan and Lefevere, Andre´ (eds.), Translation, History and Culture (London and New
York: Pinter Publishers 1990).
—— and Trivedi, Harish (eds.), Post-Colonial Translation: Theory & Practice (London: Rou-
tledge 1998).
Biguenet, John and Schulte, Rainer (eds.), The Craft of Translation (Chicago and London:
University of Chicago Press, 1989).
—— —— Theories of Translation: An Anthology of Essays from Dryden to Derrida (Chicago
and London: University of Chicago Press, 1992).
Bowker, Lynne et al. (eds.), Unity in Diversity: Current Trends in Translations Studies (Man-
chester: St Jerome, 1998).
Brower, Reuben A. (eds.), On Translation (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1959).
Budick, Sanford, and Iser, Wolfgang (eds.), The Translatability of Cultures: Figurations of the
Space Between (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1996).
Chan, Leo Tak-hung (ed.), One into Many: Translation and the Dissemination of Classical
Chinese Literature (Amsterdam and New York: Editions Rodopi, 2003).
Classe, Olive (ed.), Encyclopedia of Literary Translation into English (Chicago and London:
Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers, 2000).
France, Peter (ed.), The Oxford Guide to Literature in English Translation (Oxford: OUP, 2001).
Frank, Armin Paul et al. (eds.), U¨bersetzung—Translation—Traduction: Ein Internationales
Handbuch Zur U¨bersetzungsforschung/An International Encyclopedia of Translation Studies/
Encyclopedie Internationale Des Sciences De Traduction, i (Berlin and New York: Walter de
Gruyter, 2004).
Frawley, William (ed.), Translation: Literary, Linguistic, and Philosophical Perspectives (Newark:
University of Delaware Press and London/Toronto: Associated University Presses, 1984).
select bibliography
627

Graham, Joseph F. (ed.), DiVerence in Translation (Ithaca, NY and London: Cornell University
Press, 1985).
Gra¨hs, L., Korle´n, G., and Malmbert, B. (eds.), Theory and Practice of Translation (Nobel
Symposium 39) (Stockholm, 1978).
Guenthner, F, and Guenthner-Reutter, M. (eds.), Meaning and Translation: Philosophical and
Linguistic Approaches (London: Duckworth, 1978).
Hermans, Theo (ed.), The Manipulation of Literature: Studies in Literary Translation (New
York: St Martin’s Press 1985).
—— Second Hand: Papers on the Theory and Historical Study of Literary Translation (Vlaamse
Vereniging voor Algemene en Vergelijkende Literatuurwetenschap (ALW-CAHIER nr. 3),
1985).
Holmes, James S (ed.), The Nature of Translation: Essays on the Theory and Practice of Literary
Translation (The Hague and Paris: Mouton, 1970).
—— Lambert, J. and van den Broeck, R. (eds.), Literacy and Translation (Leuven: Acco, 1978).
Honig, Edwin, The Poet’s Other Voice: Conversations on Literary Translation (Amherst: Uni-
versity of Massachusetts Press, 1985).
Hung, Eva (ed.), Translation and Cultural Change: Studies in History, Norms and Image-
Projection (Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2005).
Johnston, David (ed.), Stages of Translation: Essays and Interviews on Translating for the Stage
(Bath: Absolute Classics, 1996).
Kittel, Harald, and Frank, Armin Paul (eds.), Interculturality and the Historical Study of Literary
Translation (Berlin: Erich Schmidt Verlag, 1991).
Lefevere, Andre´ (ed.), Translating Literature: The German Tradition (Amsterdam and Assen:
Van Gorcum, 1977).
—— Translation/History/Culture: A Sourcebook (London and New York: Routledge, 1992).
Orero, Pilar, and Sager, Juan C. (eds.), The Translator’s Dialogue (Philadelphia and Amster-
dam: John Benjamins, 1997).
Pa´lsson, Gı´sli (ed.), Beyond Boundaries: Understanding, Translation and Anthropological Dis-
course (Oxford and Providence: Berg, 1993).
Petrilli, Susan (ed.), Translation Translation (Amsterdam and New York: Editions Rodopi,
1993).
Radice, William, and Reynolds, Barbara (eds.), The Translator’s Art: Essays in Honour of Betty
Radice (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1987).
Riccardi, Alessandra (ed.), Translation Studies: Perspectives on an Emerging Discipline (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002).
Robinson, Douglas (ed.), Western Translation Theory: From Herodotus to Nietzsche (Manches-
ter: St Jerome, 1997).
Snell-Hornby, Mary (ed.), Translation and Lexicography (Euralex Colloquium 1987. A Special
Paintbrush Monograph) (Philadelpia and Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1989).
628
select bibliography

——, Jettmarova, Zuzana, and Kaindl, Klaus (eds.), Translation as Intercultural Communica-
tion: Selected Papers from the EST Congress—Prague, September 1995 (Philadelphia and
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1997).
Steiner, T. R. (ed.), English Translation Theory 1650–1800 (Assen and Amsterdam: Van Gorcum,
1975).
Tymoczko, Maria, and Gentzler, Edwin (eds.), Translation and Power (Amherst: University of
Massachusetts Press, 2002).
Van Leuven-Zwart, Kitty M., and Naaijkens, Ton (eds.), Translation Studies: The State of the
Art. Proceedings of the First James S Holmes Symposium on Translation Studies (Amsterdam
and New York: Editions Rodopi, 1991).
Venuti, Lawrence (ed.), Rethinking Translation: Discourse, Subjectivity, Ideology (London and
New York: Routledge, 1992).
—— (ed.), The Translation Studies Reader (London and New York: Routledge, 2000).
Warren, Rosanna (ed.), The Art of Translation: Voices from the Field (Boston: Northeast
University Press, 1989).
Weissbort, Daniel (ed.), Translating Poetry: The Double Labyrinth (Iowa City: University of
Iowa Press, 1989).
C. General or Introductory Books on the Practice of Translation
and/or the Field of Translation Studies
Aaltonen, Sirkku, Time-Sharing on Stage: Drama Translation in Theatre and Society (Clevedon,
UK: Multilingual Matters, 1999).
Amos, Flora Ross, Early Theories of Translation (1920; New York: Octagon Books, 1973).
Apter, Ronnie, Digging for the Treasure: Translation after Pound (New York: Peter Lang
Publishing, 1984).
Austermu¨hl, Frank, Electronic Tools for Translators (Manchester: St Jerome, 2001).
Baker, Mona, In Other Words: A Coursebook on Translation (London and New York: Routle-
dge, 1992).
Barnstone, Willis, The Poetics of Translation: History, Theory, Practice (New Haven and
London: Yale University Press, 1993).
Bassnett, Susan, Translation Studies (1980; 3rd edn. London: Routledge, 2002).
Bell, Roger T., Translation and Translating: Theory and Practice (London and New York:
Longman, 1991).
Benjamin, Andrew, Translation and the Nature of Philosophy: A New Theory of Words (London
and New York: Routledge, 1989).
Berman, Antoine, The Experience of the Foreign, trans. S. Heyvaert (Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1992).
select bibliography
629

Buber, Martin, and Rosenzweig, Franz, Scripture and Translation, trans. Lawrence Rosenwald
and Everett Fox (Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1994).
Catford, J. C., A Linguistic Theory of Translation (London: Oxford University Press, 1965).
Cohen, J. M., English Translators and Translations (London: Longmans, Green, 1962).
Conley, C. H., The First English Translators of the Classics (1927; Port Washington, NY:
Kennikat Press, 1967).
Cronin, Michael. Translating Ireland (Cork: Cork UP, 1996).
Delisle, Jean, and Woodsworth, Judith, Translators through History (Amsterdam: John Benja-
mins, 1995).
Even-Zohar, Itamar, Polysystem Studies, special issue of Poetics Today, 11/1 (Spring 1990).
Friedberg, Maurice, Literary Translation in Russia: A Cultural History (University Park: Penn-
sylvania State University Press, 1997).
Gentzler, Edwin, Contemporary Translation Theories (1993; 2nd rev. edn. Clevedon, UK:
Multilingual Matters, 2001).
Hatim, Basil, and Mason, Ian, Discourse and the Translator (London: Longman, 1990).
Hermans, Theo, Translation in Systems: Descriptive and System-oriented Approaches Explained
(Manchester: St Jerome Publishing, 1999).
Hofstadter, Douglas R., Le Ton beau de marou: In Praise of the Music of Language (New York:
Basic Books, 1997).
Holmes, James S, Translated! Papers on Literary Translation and Translation Studies (Amster-
dam: Rodopi, 1988).
Jacobsen, Eric, Translation: A Traditional Craft (Copenhagen: Nordisk Forlag, 1958).
Kelly, Louis G., The True Interpreter: A History of Translation Theory and Practice in the West
(New York: St Martin’s Press, 1979).
Kussmaul, Paul, Training the Translator (Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1995).
Landers, CliVord E., Literary Translation: A Practical Guide (Clevedon, UK: Multilingual
Matters, 2001).
Lefevere, Andre´, Translating Poetry : Seven Strategies and a Blueprint (Assen : Van Gorcum,
1975).
—— Translating Literature: The German Tradition from Luther to Rosenzweig (Amsterdam and
Assen: Van Gorcum, 1977).
—— Translating Literature: Practice and Theory in a Comparative Literature Context (New
York: The Modern Language Association of America, 1992).
—— Translation, Rewriting, and the Manipulation of Literary Fame (London and New York:
Routledge, 1992).
Matthiessen, F. O., Translation: An Elizabethan Art (1931; New York: Octagon Books, 1965).
Munday, Jeremy, Introducing Translation Studies: Theories and Applications (London: Routle-
dge, 2001).
630
select bibliography

Nida, Eugene A., Toward a Science of Translating: With Special Reference to Principles and
Procedures Involved in Bible Translating (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1964).
—— and Taber, Charles R., The Theory and Practice of Translation (Leiden: Brill Academic
Publishers, 2003).
Niranjana, Tejaswini, Siting Translation: History, Post-Structuralism and the Colonial Context
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1992).
Neubert, Albrecht, and Shreve, Gregory M., Translation as Text (Kent, Ohio, and London:
Kent State University Press, 1992).
Newmark, Peter, Approaches to Translation (Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1981).
Nord, Christiane, Translating as a Purposeful Activity (Manchester: St Jerome, 1997).
Oittinen, Riitta, Translating for Children (New York: Garland Publishing, 2000).
Postgate, J. P., Translation and Translations: Theory and Practice (London: G. Bell and Sons,
1922).
Pym, Anthony, Method in Translation History (Manchester: St Jerome, 1998).
Rener, Frederick M., Interpretatio: Language and Translation from Cicero to Tytler (Amsterdam
and New York: Editions Rodopi, 1989).
Reiss, Katharina, Translation Criticism—The Potentials and Limitations: Categories and Criteria
for Translation Quality Assessment (Manchester: St Jerome and New York: American Bible
Society, 2000).
Robinson, Douglas, The Translator’s Turn (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1991).
—— What Is Translation? Centrifugal Theories, Critical Interventions (Kent, Ohio, and Lon-
don: Kent State University Press, 1997).
Savory, Theodore, The Art of Translation (London: Cape, 1957).
Schwartz, W., Principles and Problems of Biblical Translation: Some Reformation Controversies
and their Background (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1955).
Simon, Sherry, Gender in Translation: Cultural Identity and the Politics of Transmission (Lon-
don: Routledge, 1996).
Snell-Hornby, Mary, Translation Studies: An Integrated Approach (1988; 2nd, rev. edn., Amster-
dam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 1995).
Sofer, Morry, The Translator’s Handbook (1996; 4th, rev. edn. Rockville, Md: Schreiber
Publishing, 2002).
Steiner, George, After Babel: Aspects of Language and Translation (1975; 3rd rev. edn. Oxford:
OUP, 1998).
Tabakowska, Elzbieta, Cognitive Linguistics and Poetics of Translation (Tu¨bingen: Narr, 1993).
Toury, Gideon, Descriptive Translation Studies and Beyond (Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John
Benjamins, 1995).
—— In Search of a Theory of Translation (Tel Aviv: Porter Institute for Poetics and Semiotics,
1980).
Tytler, Alexander Fraser, Essay on the Principles of Translation (1791; 3rd rev. edn. London, 1813).
select bibliography
631

Venuti, Lawrence, The Translator’s Invisibility: A History of Translation (London and New
York: Routledge, 1995).
—— The Scandals of Translation: Towards an Ethics of DiVerence (London: Routledge, 1998).
Wilss, Wolfram, The Science of Translation: Problems and Methods, trans. from German by the
author (Tu¨bingen: Gunter Narr Verlag, 1982).
632
select bibliography

INDEX OF TRANSLATED TEXTS
Works in translation, included in part or whole, in the various entries of the volume (this
index does not include texts on translation of which there are a fair number in the book).
Aeschylus: Agamemnon 222–3, 250–1, 357–8,
529–31
Amichai, Yehuda: Amen 522
Arabian Nights 252
Ballata (anon., from Italian) 254–5
Baudelaire: La lune oVense´e 307–9, 355
Beowulf 256–7, 594, 606–7
Bible:
Babel (Genesis 2:1–9) 9–10, 13–14, 43–6,
66–7, 72, 113–14, 119–20, 321–2, 351, 568
Psalm 23:1–6 120
St. John 1:1–5 120
Boccaccio: Sigismonda and Guiscardo 157–8
Brodsky, Joseph: May 24, 1980 474–5
Calahorra, Diego Ortu´nez de: The Mirrour of
Princely Deedes and Knyghthood 132
Cavacanti, Guido: sonnet 279
Catullus 112 459
Celan, Paul: To One Who Stood Before the
Door 569–70
Chaucer: Troilus and Criseyde 107
Corneille: La Mort de Pompe´e 134–5
Dante: Divine Comedy 242–4
Dante: sonnet 472–3
Dostoevsky: Crime and Punishment 296
Epictetus 143
The Flower and the Leaf 158–9
Goethe: Wanderers Nachtlied II 244
Grettis Saga 257
Herreweghen, Hubert van: Evening by the
Sea 412–13
Homer: Iliad 158, 172–3, 226, 232
Homer: Odyssey, Book XI 97–8, 173, 187,
239–40, 255–6, 286–7
Horace: Ars poetica 22–3
Horace: Ode 29, Book 3 152–3
Indian Subcontinental Poetry:
Kalipar (poems, from Classical
Tamil) 479–81
Ponmutiyar (poems, from Cl. Tamil) 481–2
Erumai Veliyanar (poem, from Cl.
Tamil) 482–3
Devara Dasimayya (poem, from Old
Kannada) 483
Basavanna (poem, from Old Kannada) 483
Mahadevi (poem, from Old
Kannada) 483–4
Allama Prabhu (poem, from Old
Kannada) 484
N. Revathi Devi: This Night (from Modern
Telugu) 484–5
Infante, G. Cabrera: The Ides of March
516–19

Juvenal: The Tenth Satire 153–5, 179–82, 359
Khayyam, Omar: Ruba´iya´t 247–8
Lucretius: Against the Fear of Death 137–8,
151–2
Mandelstam, O.: Poem 94, stanza 2 469–71
Ma´rquez, G. G.: One Hundred Years of
Solitude 510–11
Martial IX 57 and 59 423–8
Mayakovsky, V.: To the Bourgeoisie 596
Orlando, Guido: sonnet 278
Ovid: The Metamorphoses 87–8, 527–9
Pilinszky, Ja´nos: The French Prisoner 523–4
Pindar: The Second Olympique Ode 125–7
Plutarch: Parallel Lives 91–3
Po, Li T’ai: South-Folk in Cold Country 280
Pushkin: Eugene Onegin 385–91
Pushkin: The Prophet 533
Racine: Phaedra 355–7, 526–7, 595–6
Rilke, R. M.: Archa¨ischer Torso Apollos 363–5
Rostand, Edmond: Cyrano de Bergerac 589–91
The Seafarer 283–4, 594–5
Seneca: Oedipus 85–6, 525–6
Shakespeare: Hamlet 366–75
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight 532, 583–4
Snoek, Paul: Rustic Landscape 410–11
The Song of Igor’s Campaign 381
Sweeney Astray 600–1
Virgil: Aeneid 155–7, 237–8
6 Horse Songs for 4 Voices (Native
American) 456–7
634
index of translated texts

INDEX
Ablancourt, Nicolas Perrot de 196 n
Adelard (of Bath) 261
Adlington, W. 265
Aelfric [Ælfric] 19, 34, 38–40, 40–4
(author & translator)
Aeschines 21, 30
Aeschylus 7, 211–12, 220–1, 222–3
(author), 233–4, 246, 249, 250
(author), 260, 282, 286, 352, 357, 358
(author), 529–31 (author)
Aethelweard [Æthelweard] 38, 40
Akhmatova, Anna 470
Albertus Magnus, St 70, 261
Alexander (the Great) 11
Alfarabi 261
Alfred (the Great, King of Wessex) 2, 18,
33–6, 36–8 (author), 40, 261–2
Algarotti, Francesco 142
Ali-Shah, Omar 248 (translator)
Allen, William (Cardinal) 110–11
Alured (King) 49
Amado, Jorge 507
Ambrose, St 66
Amichai, Yehuda 521, 522 (author)
Amyot, Jacques 81, 82, 90–1, 92
(translator) 264–5
Anacreon 160
Andreopulos, Michael 262
Andronicus, Lucius Livius 259
Anthony, St (of Egypt) 27, 538–9
Anttila, Raimo 445
Apollinaire, Guillaume 410
Apter, Ronnie vi, 217, 274–89 (author & editor)
Apuleius, Lucius 265
Aquila 29, 49
Aquinas, Thomas St 130, 261
Arabian Nights 251–2
Aratus (of Soli) 260
Arendt, Hanna 298
Ariosto, Ludovico 106, 198, 201
Aristeas (Epistle or letter of ) 11, 12, 23
Aristophanes 160, 550, 553
Aristotle 22, 33, 60, 89, 108, 109, 130,
260–3, 340
Arnold, Matthew 196, 210, 213, 224, 225,
227–30 (author), 230–1, 231–2 (author
& translator), 239, 250 n
Arundel, Thomas (Archbishop) 112
Asad, Talal 366, 394, 487 n, 494–5, 495–501
(author)
Asser 36, 37
Asturias, Miguel Angel 507, 509
Attar-ut-Tair 246
Athanasius of Alexandria 27, 538
Auden, W. H. 467
Aue, Hartman von 242, 253
Augustus (Emperor) 22
Augustine, St (Aurelius Augustinus) 18, 28, 31,
32–3 (author), 34–5, 66, 117, 118, 536–8,
542–5, 564
Aurogallus (Goldhahn) Matthaeus 61
Aveling, Eleanor Marx 379
Averroes (Ibn Rushd) 261
Avicenna 261
Avitus, Tiberius Octavius 260
Bacon, Lord Francis 105–6
Baldick, Chris 437

Baldvinsson, Gardar vii
Baranczak, Stanislaw 597
Barba, Eugenio 561
Barnhouse, Rebecca 39
Barrett, Miche`le 490, 492, 493 n
Barthes, Roland 546–7
Barth, John 513
Barton, Bernard 246
Basavanna 483 (author)
Basil, St (the Great) 104, 132
Basselin, Oliver De 247
Bassett, Mary 130–1 (author), 136
Bassnett [also Bassnett-McGuire] Susan 394–5,
435, 448, 558–61 (author)
Bauchant, Andre´ 263
Baudelaire, Charles 6, 297–8, 307–9 (author),
326, 354–6, 417
Bausch, Pina 561
Beaufort, Lady Margaret 129
Beaugrande, Robert de 448, 450 n
Beaujour, Elizabeth Klosty 392 n
Bede (the Venerable) 35, 112, 262
Beegle, Dewey M. 69
Behn, Aphra 128, 133, 138–41 (author)
Bellay, Joachim du 55, 73, 77–80 (author)
Belloc, Hilaire 349
Ben-David, J. 442 n
Benjamin, Walter 3, 6, 195, 199, 272, 297–8,
298–307 (author), 308–9 (translator), 337,
355, 495–6, 498, 503, 546, 570
Benner, Susan vii
Bennett, H. S. 438
Bentley, Richard 166
Beowulf 4, 7, 34, 43, 255–8, 267, 563, 585, 593–4,
597, 601, 604–7
Berman, Antoine 395, 548, 556 n
Berners, Lord Gerald Tyrwhitt 264
Bergsland, Knut 336 n
Berlin, Brent 444, 445
Berry, George Ricker 9 (translator)
Berryman, John 466
Bersuire, Pierre 263
Beza, Theodore 86
Bhabha, Homi K. 502
Bible v, 1; Authorized (King James) Version 56,
68, 115–20, 263–4, 310–11, 316–17, 346, 544,
562; Douay-Reims Bible 8, 68, 110–13;
Genesis/Tower of Babel 7, 8–10, 13–14, 19,
34, 38–46, 57, 66–7, 69, 72, 113–14, 119–20,
310, 317, 321–2, 346, 351, 564, 566, 568, 572;
Geneva Bible 68; Good News Bible 351;
Gospels 12, 17–18, 28, 32, 191, 539; Hebrew
Bible 8–10, 68, 310–11, 562–4; Luther’s
Bible 57–67, 200, 264, 315, 403;
Septuagint 8, 11–14, 17–18, 20, 23, 29–32,
118, 218, 346, 539–40, 544; Vulgate 8, 12,
18, 28, 32–3, 43, 45, 100, 110–11, 113, 164,
263; see also Buber & Rosenzweig, Fox,
Tyndale
Biguenet, J. 383
Binns, J. W. 101, 102–9 (author & translator)
Blanke, Heiz 66
Blackburn, Sara 510
Blackburn, Stuart 477
Blackie, John S. 211–13, 216, 220–5 (author &
translator), 233–5
Bleek, William 522
Blok, Aleksandr 470
BloomWeld, Leonard 346
Boas, Franz 333, 454–5, 456 n
Boccaccio, Giovanni 144, 157–8, 263
Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus 18, 33
(author), 35, 37, 175
Bohannan, Laura 6, 366–75 (author), 487 n
Bohannan, Paul 366
Bohr, Niels 332
Bonnefoy, Yves 467–8 (author), 469
Bonner, Anthony 323–30 (translator)
636
index

Borchardt, Rudolph 306
Borges, Jorge Luis 6, 323, 323–9 (author), 508,
512, 514, 580 n
Boswell, James 174–5
Bowers, Fredson 379
Boyd, Brian 392 n
Boyle, Roger (1st Earl of Orrery) 133
Bradley, S. A. J. 34
Brecht, Bertolt 439
Brenton, Sir Lancelot C. L. 8, 10 (translator)
Brett, Richard 104
Bristowe, Richard 110
Brod, Max 581 n
Brodsky, Joseph 271, 394, 460, 462–3 (author),
465–8, 469–70 (translator), 471–3, 474–5
(author & translator), 597
Brooke, Rupert 377
Brook, Peter 524, 561
Broome, William 161, 166
Brower, Reuben A. 330
Brown, Clarence 462, 463–5 (author), 469
(translator), 582
Browning, Robert 7, 222–3 (translator), 241,
249, 249–50 (author & translator), 271,
286, 529
Bruccoli, Matthew J. 377
Buber, Martin 119, 272, 310–11, 313, 316–20
(author), 321 (translator), 544, 562–3
Buckley, Theodore Alois 212, 233–35
Budge, E. A. Wallace 466, 522
Burago, Alla 462 (translator)
Burgess, Anthony 389
Burne-Jones, Edward 255
Burnshaw, Stanley 273, 360–3 (author)
Burt, Mary Anne 217–19
Burke, Kenneth 397
Burton, Richard 251, 252 (translator) 253
Butcher, S. H. 238–40 (author & translator)
Bu¨rger, Gottfried August 217, 266
Bu¨hler, Karl 446
Byrhtferth 38
Byron, Lord George Gordon 211, 266, 384
Caedmon (of Whitby) 49, 598
Caesar, Julius 76, 86
Cairncross, John 356
Caius, John 109
Calahorra, Diego Ortu´nez de 132 (author)
Caldero´n de la Barca, Pedro 201, 204, 246, 266
Callimachus 160, 260
Calvin, John 86, 109
Campbell, George 189–90
Carlyle, Thomas 245, 266
Carne-Ross, D. S. 298, 352
Caro, Annibale 129
Carroll, Lewis 377
Carter, Elizabeth 141, 142–3 (author &
translator)
Cary, Edmund 350
Cary, Elizabeth (Lady Falkland) 133
Cary, Herny Francis 235, 242–3
Casares, Adolfo Bioy 512
Cassiodorus (Flavius Magnus Aurelius
Cassiodorus Senator) 260
Castiglione, Baldassare 84 (author)
Catford, J. C. 393, 443
Catullus, Gaius Valerius 260, 422–3, 458–9,
459 (author)
Cavalcanti, Guido 274, 276–9, 288
Cavendish, Richard 109
Caxton, William 19, 47, 51–3 (author), 176, 263
Cecil, Mildred (Lady Burghley) 132
Cecil, William (Lord Burghley) 89
Celan, Paul 405, 569–70 (author), 570–81
Cervantes, Miguel de 266, 323, 326–8
Chalcidius 260
Chalfen, Israel 580 n, 581 n
Challoner, Richard 110
index
637

Chaloner, Sir Thomas 109
Chapman, George 7, 56, 86, 94–5, 95–7
(author & translator), 166–7, 171, 173, 214,
223–4, 228, 282, 232, 238, 255, 265, 287
Chapone, Hester 129
Charles I (King) 49, 104
Chaucer, GeoVrey 7, 106, 107 (author), 144,
150–1, 166, 175–6, 262–3, 293, 396, 438
Cheke, Sir John 88–9, 109
Chekhov, Anton 290–5, 559
Christopherson, John 102–3
Chouraqui, Andre´ 544
Chudleigh, Lady Mary 129
Chute, B. J. 509
Cicero, Marcus Tullius v, 2, 17–18, 20–2, 21
(author), 24–5, 28–31, 74, 76–7, 79, 81–2,
89, 103, 109, 116, 141, 260, 263, 265, 536,
538–40, 545, 549–50
Clark, Mary, see Bassett, Mary
Clark, P. P. 438
Clark, T. N. 438
Clement I (Pope) 104
Clemoes, Peter 39
CliVord, James 495
Coates, Jenefer vi, 273, 376–92 (author &
editor)
Colson, F. H. 23–4 (translator)
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor 362
Columba, St. 588
Conington, John 220–1, 266
Conley, C. H. 82
Conrad, Joseph 290–1, 294
Constantine, St. 335
Cooke, Anne 130
Cooper, Thomas 109
Corman, Cid 580 n
Corneille, Pierre 133–4, 134–5 (author)
Corrigan, Robert W. 525, 559
Corta´zar, Julio 507
Cottrell, Sir Charles 134
Coverdale, Miles 68, 263
Cowell, E. B. 241, 245–6
Cowley, Abraham 121, 124–6 (author &
translator), 146, 174–5, 177–8, 550
Cowper, Dame Sarah 128
Cowper, William 167, 173, 183–7 (author &
translator), 223–5, 228, 258, 266
Crankshaw, Edward 291–2, 294–6 (author)
Crawford, S. J. 43
Crossley-Holland, Kevin 34
Crousaz, Jean-Pierre 142
Csokits, Ja´nos 521, 523 (translator)
Cushing, Frank Hamilton 454, 456 n
Cyprian, St 83
Cyril, St (of Alexandria) 12, 103
Dacier, Anne 55, 129, 160–2, 162–5 (author),
166, 170
Damasus (Pope) 27, 28, 115
D’Angouleˆme, Marguerite 130
Daniell, David 72
Dante Alighieri 4, 196, 211, 235–6, 242–4
(author), 253, 266, 276, 352, 401, 472–3,
(author), 582
Dares Phrygius 53
Dasimayya, Devara 483 (author)
Davenport, Guy 458
Dayman, John 235–6
Deligiorgis, Stavros vi, 8, 11–14 (author &
translator)
Delille, Jacques 201, 236–7
Denham, Sir John 121–3 (author), 146, 176, 185,
460, 549–50
Demosthenes 21, 30, 31, 76–7, 89–90, 260
Deny 49
Derrida, Jacques 486–9, 561, 574, 580 n
Devi, Mahasweta 486, 487, 492
Devi, N. Revathi 484–5 (author)
638
index

Dewey, John 336 n
Dictes 53
Dharwadker, Vinay vi, 476–85 (author &
editor)
Dillon, Wentworth (4th Earl of
Roscommon) 138, 177–8
Dionysius (the Areopagite) 262, 335
Diphilus 260
Divus, Andreas (see Justinopolitanus)
Doane, A. N. 45
Dodwell, C. R. 39
Dolet, Estienne 55–6, 73–4, 74–6 (author)
Donaldson, E. Talbot 601
Donatus, Aelius 28, 41
Donne, John 476
Doren, Mark Van 280
Dostoevsky, Fyodor 290–5, 296 (author),
396, 399
Douglas, Gavin 275, 385
Douglas, Mary 499
Dryden, John vi, 2, 7, 56, 101, 121, 124, 137,
144–5, 145–59 (author & translator), 205,
212, 214, 226, 236, 237 (translator), 241,
245, 258–9, 266, 271, 352, 354–5, 545,
549–50, 561
Dubois, Jean 436
Dudley, John 88
Dummett, M. 501 n
Duym, Hidde van Ameyden van 414 n
Eckerman, Johann Peter 198, 203
Eco, Umberto 513
Eden, Richard 109
Elias, Norbert 545 n
Eliot, George 2, 211, 212 n, 217–20 (author)
Eliot, T. S. 144, 271, 275
Elyot, Sir Thomas 82–3 (author), 109
Elwell-Sutton, L. P. 248
Empson, William 214–15 (author)
Ennius, Quintus 79, 259, 260
Epictetus 128, 142–3, 143 (author)
Epiphanius (Archbishop) 30, 538
Erasmus, Desiderius 68, 70, 109
Erigena [Eriugena], see Scotus, John
Eschenburg, Johann Joachim 199
Etkind, EWm 603
Euclid 109, 261
Eusebius Pamphili (of Caesarea) 28–9, 30,
102, 131
Eusebius (of Cremona) 30
Eustathius (of Thessalonica) 160
Evagrius Scholasticus (Bishop of Antioch) 27
(author) 102, 538–59
Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 499, 500
Even-Zohar, Itamar 394, 429–34 (author)
Eysteinsson, Astradur vi, 321–2
(translator), 613
Fairclough, H. Rushton 23 (translator)
Fairfax, Edward 176, 265
Fang, Achilles 350
Fanshaw, Richard 121, 176
Farge, Oliver La 454, 456 n
Farrell, Joseph 585–93 (interview with Edwin
Morgan)
Feinstein, Elaine 533
Felstiner, John 394, 569–81 (author &
translator)
Feltham, Owen 176, 178
Fenton, Elijah 166
Firdausi, Tousi 201–2
Fischart, Johann 264
Fitzalan, Lady Jane 130
Fitzalan, Lady Mary 130
FitzGerald, Edward 197, 241–2, 245–7, 247–8
(author & translator), 253, 266, 275
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James 197, 258–67 (author)
Flatauer, Susanne 337, 338–45 (translator)
index
639

Floranx, Jenix 79
Florio, John (or Giovanni) 93–4, 94 (author &
translator) 265
Follain, Jean 465
Fontaine, Jean de la 356
Fontenelle, Bernard De 138, 140, 288
Foucault, Michel 546
Fouque´, Friedrich de la Motte 217
Fox, Everett 119 n, 272, 310–13, 320, 346, 394,
562–8 (author & translator)
France, Peter 6, 98 n, 291 n, 311, 558
Franklin, Benjamin 536
Frantzen, Allen 36
Frawley, William 507
Freiligrath, Ferdinand 217, 219
Frere, John Hookham 550–4
Freud, Sigmund 492, 493 n
Froissart, Jean 264
Frost, William 360, 362, 407
Fuentes, Carlos 512
Fulke, William 111
Gadamer, Hans-Georg 396
Galen (Claudius Galenus of Pergamum) 260–2
Gallus (Gaius Cornelius Gallus) 260
Garnett, Constance 272, 290–2, 292–3
(author), 294–6, 296 (translator)
Garnett, Edward 290, 291, 294
Garnett, David 290, 292
Garnett, Richard 290
Garnier, Robert 264
Gasset, Ortega y 403
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight 531–2, 582–4
Gellner, Ernest 494–5, 497, 500
GeoVrey (of Monmouth) 263
Gerard (of Cremona) 261
Gerzymisch-Arbogas, Heidrun 448, 449
Giddens, Anthony 557 n
GiVard, Lady Martha 133
Ginsberg, Allen 466
Giovanni, Norman Thomas Di 508
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von 195–6, 198–9,
199–204 (author), 211, 214–17, 219, 242,
244 (author), 297, 306, 337, 395, 408–9,
438, 545
Gogol, Nikolay 290–1, 293
Golding, Arthur 86–7, 87–8 (author &
translator), 264
Goncharov, Ivan 290
Gorion, Micha Josef bin 580 n
Gottsched, Johann Christoph 195
Gower, John 176
Go´ngora, Luis de 352
Graham, Joseph E. 487 n
Grannis, Chandler B. 556 n
Graves, Robert 248 (translator)
Grayson, Jane 392 n
Greene, James 470–1 (translator & author)
Gregory, St (the Great) 34, 35, 36, 49, 261–2
Grene, Richard 358
Grettis Saga 255, 257, 266
Grey, Lady Jane 107
GriYths, Malcolm 560
Guevara, Antonio De 90, 264, 265
Guthrie, William 549, 550
Guyon, Jeanne-Marie Bouvier de la Motte 183
Haan, Frans de 414 n
HaWz, Mohammad Shams al-Din 198
Halevi, Judah 570
Halliday, M. A. K. 450 n
Hamburger, Michael 271
Hammer-Purgstall, Joseph von 201
Hampton, Christopher 396
Hardy, Thomas 458
Harpham, GeoVrey Galt 537, 540, 545 n
HarpsWeld, John 130
Hartman, GeoVrey 580 n
640
index

Haute-Seille, Jean de 262
Hayward, Abraham 214 (translator),
215–16, 246
Hayward, Max 462 (translator)
Heaney, Seamus 255, 394–5, 531, 532, 594,
597–607 (author & translator)
Hebel, Johann Peter 354
Heidegger, Martin 348, 396, 402, 489
Helbo, Andre 558
Heliodorus 265
Herberay, Nicolas de 264
Herbert, George 106
Herder, Johann Gottfried 195, 198, 242
Hermann (the German) 261
Hermans, Theo vii, 394, 435, 560
Herodotus 168, 214
Herreweghen, Hubert van 412–13 (author),
415 n
Hesiod 95, 260
Heyvaert, S. 395 n
Heywood, Jasper 84, 264
Herzen, Alexander 290–1
Hieronymus, St 59,
Higden, Ralph 19, 47
Hill, D. E. 528 (translator)
Hippocrates 260–2
Hinz, Stella M. 414 n
Hobbes, Thomas 265
Hoby, Sir Thomas 82, 84 (author)
HoVman, Eva 6, 502–3, 503–6 (author)
Hofmann, Michael 527
Holland, Philemon 81, 94, 98–9, 176, 265
Hollander, J. 498
Holliday, Billy 509
Holmes, James S. 4, 6, 73–4 (author), 74–6
(translator), 188, 189 (author), 393–4,
406–22 (author & translator), 422–3,
424–8 (translator), 429, 435, 460, 462–3
(see also Lowland, Jacob)
Homeric epics v, 4, 7, 29, 53, 77, 86, 94–5,
97–8, 115, 129, 144, 147, 158, 160–74, 178–9,
183–7, 191, 195–6, 198–9, 201, 210–11,
213–14, 220–1, 223–32, 234, 238–40, 255–6,
260, 265–6, 282–3, 285–7, 348, 352, 383,
396, 437, 465, 539, 549
Hopkins, David vi, 144–59 (author & editor)
Hopkins, Gerald Manley 603, 606
Hora, Josef 335
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus) 17, 22–3
(author), 29, 33, 145, 149, 152–3 (author),
176, 183, 226, 233, 259, 352, 354, 538,
540, 550
Horne, R. H. 213–14 (author)
Howard, Henry (Earl of Surrey) 109, 236–7
Howard, Richard 546 (translator)
Huet, Pierre-Daniel 160
Hughes, Ted 7, 85–6, 222, 250, 310–11, 352–3,
355, 358, 394–5, 521–2, 522–33 (translator &
author), 582–3, 595, 597, 604–5
Hugo, Victor 354, 439
Hull, Dame Eleanor 129
Humboldt, Wilhelm von 195, 198, 297
Hume, Anna 133
Humphrey, Laurence 56, 101–4, 107–9
Hunt, William Holman 253
Hurt, James R. 39
Hutchinson, Lucy 131, 136–8 (author &
translator)
Hyde, George 291
Hyde, Lawrence (1st Earl of Rochester) 149, 152
Hynd, James 298 (translator)
Ho¨lderlin, Friedrich 297, 303–6, 357
Ho¨lty, Ludwig Heinrich Christoph 217
Ho¨nig, Hans G. 449
Ibsen, Henrik 267, 589
Infante, Guillermo Cabrera 512–20 (in part as
author)
index
641

Ishak, Honein ibn 260
Isocrates 71, 76, 82, 83, 130
Jackson, Kenneth H. D. 599
Jakobson, Roman 330–6 (author), 394
Jami 246
Janouch, Gustav 581 n
Jarvis, Charles 266
Jebb, Richard Claverhouse 266
Jensson, Gottskalk vi, 98 (translator), 287
(translator)
Jephcott, Edmund 545 n
Jerome, St (Eusebius Hieronymus) 8, 12, 18, 20,
27–8, 29–31 (author), 31–3, 49–50, 103,
110–11, 115–18, 263, 402, 536–45
Jo´hannsdo´ttir, Anna vii
John (Bishop of Jerusalem) 30, 538
John (of Capua) 263
John (of Trevisa) 19, 47–50 (author)
Johnson, Elizabeth 128
Johnson, Samuel 7, 174–5, 175–81 (author &
translator), 352, 359
Johnston, David 585
Jonson, Ben 22 (translator), 145, 176, 178, 265
Jordan, Clarence 544
Josephus, Flavius 12, 29, 260, 265
Jowett, Benjamin 266
Joyce, James 291, 329, 382, 458, 514
Jo´zsef, Attila 585
Juarroz, Roberto 465
Jurenka, H. 344
Justinopolitanus, Andreas Divus 275, 286, 287
(translator)
Juvenal, Decimus Iunius 7, 95, 144–5, 153,
174–5, 178–80, 214, 266, 352, 359
Kade, Max 443, 446
Kafka, Franz 398, 570, 578–81
Kamuf, Peggy 487 n
Kaindl, Klaus 443
Kalidasa 201
Kant, Emanual 211, 217–18
Kapilar 479–81 (author)
Karcevski, S. 334
Karlinsky, Simon 382
Kay, George 353
Keats, John 95, 253, 265
Kelly, Louis G. vi, 20 n, 21 (translator), 25–7
(translator), 29–31 (translator), 32–3
(translator)
Kenner, Hugh 280, 283, 288 n, 289 n, 458
Kennedy, B. H. 236, 238
Kerrigan, Anthony 323
Keynes, Simon 36
Khayyam,Omar 241, 245–7,247–8 (author),266
Khlebnikov, Velimir 330
Killigrew, Henry 422, 426
Klopstock, Friedrich Gottlieb 217
Knapp, S. 436
Knox, Ronald 111
Kochanowski, Jan 597
Kofka, Kurt 445
Koller, Werner 446
Komissarov, V. N. 421 n
Komrij, Gerrit 422
Kosegarten, Luwig Gotthard 201
Kowzan, Tadeusz 559
Kruger, Barbara 546–7, 556 n
Kruzhkov, Grigory 598, 606
Kuhiwczak, Piotr 558
Kur, Friedrich 66
Kußmaul, Paul 449
Kyd, Thomas 264
Kynaston, Sir Francis 106
Ko¨hler, Wolfgang 445
Labeo, Notker 262
LakoV, George 443–5, 450 n
642
index

Lambert, Jose´ 394, 421
Lane, Helen R. 507
Lang, A. 238–40 (author & translator)
LanghoV, Stephan 445
Lapidge, Michael 36
Lasdun, James 527
Latini, Brunetto 263
Lattimore, Richmond 352, 357, 358 (translator)
Lawrence, D. H. 290, 292
Leach, Edmund 494
Lefevere, Andre´ 160 n, 195, 199–202
(translator), 206–9 (translator), 394,
422 n, 435–42 (author), 458–9, 558
Lermontov, Mikhail Y. 291, 380, 382
L’Estrange, Sir Roger 265
Leuven-Zwart, Kitty M. van 406
Lefe`vre, Raoul 51, 52
Leighton, Laura G. 392 n
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim 195, 266
Levine, Suzanne Jill 394, 507, 512–20 (author &
translator)
Levy´, Jirˇı´ 337, 338–45 (author), 393, 408,
418, 448
Lewis, Phillip 554
Lidgate, Dan John 52
Lienhardt, Godfrey 494, 497–8
Lima, Jose´ Lezama 507
Lisle, Leconte de 437
Lispector, Clarice 507
Livy (Titus Livius) 99, 109, 263, 265
Llosa, Mario Vargas 507, 509
Lloyd-Jones, Hugh 250–1 (translator), 531
(translator)
Lobo, Jeronimo 174
Lockhart 230
Logue, Christopher 7, 167
Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth 230, 241–2,
243–4 (translator), 253, 266, 467
LoseV, Lev 474
Lottman, Herbert R. 556 n
Lowell, James Russell 246
Lowell, Robert 179, 222, 246, 250, 272, 308,
352–3, 353–9 (author & translator), 395,
460, 526, 529, 592, 595
Lowland, Jacob (pseudonym of James S.
Holmes) 422, 460
Lucian 83
Lucretius (Titus Lucretius Carus) 79, 128, 136,
137–8 (author), 144–5, 148–52, 259
Luke, David 244 (translator)
Luria, A. R. 498
Luther, Martin 8, 30, 55, 57–67 (author &
translator), 73, 112, 195, 199, 261, 264, 303,
305, 311–16, 537, 545, 572
Lo¨nnrot, Elias 241
Mabbe, James 258, 265
Macaulay, Thomas Babington 197
MacCarthy, Denis Florence 266
MacDiarmid, Hugh 585
Machiavelli, Niccolo 397
Magnu´sson, Eirı´kur 255, 257 (translator), 267
Mahadevi 483 (author)
Maier, Carol 513
Malcolm. J. 500
Mallarme´, Ste´phane 303, 326, 354, 360–1, 597
Malory, Sir Thomas 51, 90, 263
Mandelstam, Osip 462–7, 469–71 (author), 582
Mandeville, Sir John 263
Mangan, James Clarence 212, 216–17
Manheim, Ralph 581 n
Man, Paul de 436
Manrique, Jorge 242
MansWeld, Katherine 291–2
Mayer, Sigrid 580 n
Marcus, George E. 495
Margaret (Duchess of Burgundy) 52
Marlowe, Christopher 264, 275, 285, 358, 519
index
643

Ma´rquez, Gabriel Garcı´a 507, 510, 510–11
(author)
Marquis de Sade (Donatien Alphonse
Franc¸ois) 440
Marshak, Samuel 603
Martial (Marcus Valerius Martialis) 26, 80,
423–8 (author)
Martin, Gregory 110–13 (author)
Martin, H.-J. 129
Mason, H. A. 166 n
Masterson, James R. 336 n
Mathews, Jackson 408
Matthiessen, F. O. 90, 94
Mayakovsky, Vladimir 330, 585, 588, 596 (author)
McAllester, David P. 456
McDuV, David 462 (translator)
McKane, Elizabeth 471 (translator)
McKane, Richard 471 (translator & author)
Meares, Bernard 470 (translator)
Mehlman, JeVrey 489 n
Meiklejohn, J. M. D. 217–18
Melanchthon, Philip 61
Menander 260
Menard, Pierre (character in J. L. Borges’ short
story) 323–9, 513
Merrill, Christopher 466
Merwin, W. S. 394–5, 462–4, 465–7 (author),
469 (translator), 472–3 (author &
translator), 475, 522, 532, 582, 583–4
(translator)
Methodius 12
Meung, Jean de 262
Meyrink, Gustav 581 n
Michaels, W. B. 436
Millais, John Everett 253
Miller, Frank Justus 85, 88 (translator), 524, 525
(translator)
Miller, John 236, 238
Milosz, Czeslaw 606
Milton, John 161, 167, 171, 183, 185,
276, 282, 358
Mitchell, Frank 456
Mitchell, Stephen 364–5 (translator)
Mitchell, Thomas 550–1
Monegal, E. Rodrı´gues 512
Montagu, Lady Mary Wortley 142
Montaigne, Michael de 93–4, 259, 264–5, 397
Montchre´tien, Antoine de 264
Montale, Eugenio 354, 361
More, Hannah 142
More, Sir Thomas 82, 100, 107, 130
Morgan, Edwin 5, 255, 355, 394–5, 526, 585–96
(author & translator), 606
Mornay, Philippe De 86
Moore, F. C. T. 489 n
Mounin, G. 393
Morris, William 173, 197, 241, 255, 255–7
(translator), 258, 266, 271, 553, 594, 606
Mulgrew, Gerry 588
Munro, David B. 266
Murthy, U. R. Anantha 476
Musa, Mark 243–4 (translator)
Musaeus 95
Naaijkens, Ton 406
Nabokov, Dmitri 377, 382
Nabokov, Vladimir vi, 272–3, 376–7, 378–92
(author&translator),403,460,464,537,544
Naevius, Gnaeus 259
Neruda, Jan 344
Neruda, Pablo 465, 569
Neubert, Albrecht 450 n
Neville, Alexander 84, 85–6 (author &
translator) 524
Newdigate, Dame Alice 128
Newman, Francis W. 196, 210–11, 213, 225–6
(author & translator), 227–9, 230–1
(author), 232 (translator), 241, 553
644
index

Newton, Thomas 84
Nida, Eugene A. 272, 310, 346–51 (author), 393,
416, 421 n, 433, 448, 544, 553–4
Nietzsche, Friedrich 195, 328, 401
Nimms, John Frederick 87
Niranjana, Tejaswini 197 n, 487 n
Norris, John 129
North, Sir Thomas 55, 81–2, 90, 91–3 (author
& translator) 94, 98, 265, 403
Norton, Charles Eliot 245
Nuce, Thomas 84
O’Brien, Flann 599
O’KeeVe, J. G. 599
Oldisworth, William 161
Oppen, George and Mary 458
Oresme, Nicolas 263
Origen (Oregenes Adamantius) 28–9, 49–50,
103, 118
Orlando, Guido 278 (author)
Ormsby, John 258
Orosius, Paulus 35, 262
Orwell, George 397–8
O’Shaughnessy, Arthur 267
Ostaijen, Paul van 410, 414 n, 415 n, 422
Ovid (Publius Ovidus Naso) 4, 7, 80, 86–7, 88
(author), 108, 144–5, 148, 151, 214, 264–5,
275, 285, 527, 528–9 (author)
Owen, John 136
Ozell, John 161, 161–2 (author), 162–5
(translator)
Paaltjens, Piet 422
Pacuvius, Marcus 260
Paige, D. D. 280, 288 n
Painter, William 264
Pammachius (letter to) 27–8, 30, 537–8
Pannwitz, Rudolph 306, 496
Parr, Katherine 109
Parra, Niconar 465
Parsons, Talcott W. 235, 545 n
Pasternak, Boris 335, 352, 353–4
Pavis, P. 558, 561
Paz, Octavio 507
Peirce, Charles Sanders 331, 336 n
Peletier du Mans, Jacques 73, 77
Pennington, Mantagu 142
Perionius, Joachim 108
Perrin, Bernadotte 91–2 (translator)
Perron [du Perron], Jacques Davy
(Cardinal) 133
Petrarch, Francis 94, 354, 464
Phalereus, Demetrius 11
Phaer, Thomas 236–7, 264
Philadelphus, Ptolemy 11
Phillips, Herbert P. 347
Phillips, J. B. 350
Phillips, Katherine 133, 134–5 (author &
translator), 138
Philo Judaeus (of Alexandria) 8, 11, 20, 23–4
(author), 109, 539
Philocrates 23
Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 82, 83
Pilinszky, Ja´nos xi, 521, 523–4 (author), 533
Pindar 29, 124–5, 125–7 (author), 146, 177, 214,
306, 550
Pitt, M. Christopher 237
Plato 13, 25, 29, 33, 73, 109, 130, 260
Plautus 160, 260, 358
Playfere, Thomas 105
Pliny the Elder (Gaius Plinius Secundus) 26, 98
Pliny the Younger (Gaius Plinius Caecilius
Secundus) 26–7 (author), 81, 98, 265
Plutarch 55, 81–3, 90, 91–3 (author), 99, 128,
129, 264–5, 403, 515
Po, Li T’ai 280 (author)
Pochhacker, Franz 443
Pocock, David 499
index
645

Poggioli, Renato 362
Po¨ggeler, Otto 581 n
Politzer, Heinz 580 n
Pollard, Alfred W. 47, 51
Polukhina, Valentina vii, 474, 533
Pomorska, Krystyna 330
Ponmutiyar 481–2 (author)
Pontalis, J. B. 492 n
Popa, Vasko 521
Pope, Alexander 7, 56, 95, 121, 160, 161 n,
166–7, 167–74 (author & translator), 179,
183–4, 191, 212, 214, 220–1, 223–6, 228–9,
239, 258, 266, 272, 285, 355–6, 465, 549
Popovic, Anton 394, 414 n
Pound, Ezra vi, 5, 7, 86, 115, 167, 173, 249, 253,
271–3, 274–5, 275–88 (author &
translator), 381, 395, 405, 436, 458, 466, 513,
537, 544, 553, 582, 585, 592, 594
Porphyrius (Porphyry) 33, 260
Pozzi, Antonia 546
Prabhu, Allama 484 (author)
Premier Fait, Laureat de 263
Propertius, Sextus 80
Ptolemy, Claudius 218, 261
Puig, Manuel 512, 513, 514
Pushkin, Alexander 272, 376, 383–4, 385–8
(author), 390–1 (author), 460, 533 (author)
Queen Elizabeth 89–90, 103, 108, 130, 262
Quevedo, Francisco Go´mez de 265, 324, 325 n,
328, 352
Quinlan, Maurice J. 556 n
Quintilian (Marcus Fabius Quintillianus) 17,
24, 25–6 (author), 89, 545
Rabassa, Gregory 394, 507–11 (author &
translator)
Rabelais, Franc¸ois 73, 264, 377
Rabin, C. 409
Race, William H. 126–7 (translator)
Racine, Jean 7, 265, 352, 354–5, 356–7 (author),
397, 439, 526–7 (author), 529, 560, 585,
595–6 (author)
RaVel, Burton 458, 462
Ramanujan, A. K. vi, 394, 460, 476, 477–85
(author & translator)
Rao, V. Narayana 477, 484–5 (translator)
Ravel, Maurice 513
Rawley, William 105
Rekiaro, Ilkka 534
Reiss, Katharina 447, 448, 450 n
Retines, Robert de 261
Reynolds, John 110
Ricoeur, Paul 405 n
Rieu, E. V. 348, 350
Rilke, Rainer Maria 354, 361, 363–5 (author)
Rimbaud, Arthur 354, 377
Rinsler, Norma vi, 298, 308–9 (translator)
Robert, Marthe 581 n
Robertson, D. W. Jr. 545 n
Robinson, Douglas 6, 394, 534–45 (author)
Rolland, Romain 376
Ronell, Avital 487 n
Ronsard, Pierre de 77
Roper, Margaret 130
Rosch, Eleanor 443–4
Rose, William Stuart 551
Rosenberg, David 544
Rosenwald, Lawrence 311 (translator), 562
Rosenzweig, Franz 19 n, 195, 272, 310–11, 311–16
(author), 317, 319–20, 321 (translator), 544,
562–3, 570, 577
Rossetti, Dante Gabriel 242, 245, 253–5 (author
& translator), 274–5, 277, 286, 346, 472,
473 (translator)
Rostand, Edmond 585, 589, 590–1 (author),
592
Rothenberg, Diane 453
646
index

Rothenberg, Jerome 319, 452, 453–4 (author),
456–7 (author & translator)
Rouse, W. H. D. 274, 280, 282
Rowe, Elizabeth 128
Rubin, Barry 462 (translator)
Rudd, Niall 180–2 (translator)
Rudy, Stephen 330
RuWnus 28
Rushdie, Salman 487
Ruskin, John 245–6, 255
Russell, Bertrand 330, 336 n
Sainte-Beuve, Charles-Augustin 437
Salinger, J. D. 399
Sallust (Gaius Sallustius Crispus) 76, 263
Sandys, Edwin 108, 176, 178
San Pedro, Ferna´ndez de 264
Sapir, Edward 346
Sappho 160, 354
Sarduy, Severo 512, 514
Saunders, J. W. 128
Saussure, Ferdinand de 443
Savile, Sir Henry 265
Scaliger, Julius Caesar 95
Scheinmann, Edith Rosenzweig 580 n
Schlegel, August Wilhelm & Friedrich von 195,
198, 219, 220, 266, 303
Schleiermacher, Friedrich 189, 195, 198,
205–6, 206–9 (author), 211, 272, 297, 314,
337, 548, 556 n
Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich von 211,
217
Schulte, Rainer 383
Scot, Michael 261
Scott, John 49, 211
Scotus, John (Erigena) 262
Sebba, Gregor 363, 364 (author)
Sebillet, Thomas 73, 77
SedgeWeld, W. J. 35
Selerie, Gavin 452 n
Sellar, W. Y. 236
Seneca, Lucius Annaeus 7, 82, 84, 85–6
(author), 116, 129, 130, 133, 263–5, 256–7,
524, 525–6 (author), 529
Sergius (of Resaina) 260
Seymour, Edward (Duke of Somerset) 109
Sewell, W. 220
Shakespeare, William 4, 55, 82, 86, 87, 90, 92–3
(author), 101, 128, 174, 195, 199, 201, 211,
212 n, 265, 266, 326, 366–75, 388 n, 392,
405, 439, 446, 448, 467, 469, 515, 519, 527
Schamschula, Walter 337
Schmitt, Peter A. 448
Scholem, Gershom 574
Schultze, Brigitte 448
Shaw, Bernard 291
SheYeld, Edmund 109
Shelley, Percy Byshe 211, 266
Shelton, Thomas 265
Shulman, David 477
Sidney, Mary (Countess of Pembroke) 130
Sidney, Sir Philip 86, 130
Sieburth, Richard 288 n
Simeon Metaphrastes 104
Simmons, Lucretia Van Tuyl 414 n
Smital, J. 344
Smith, A. C. H. 524
Smith, James Harry 77–80 (translator)
Smith, Miles 115
Smith, William Jay 422
Snell-Hornby, Mary 337, 443–51 (author)
Snoek, Paul 410–11 (author), 412
Socrates 102, 131
The Song of Igor’s Campaign 381
Sophocles 211, 246, 260, 266, 304, 306, 597
Sotheby, William 221, 225
Southey, R. 183, 222 n, 230
Sozomen 102, 131
index
647

Spann, Marcella 271
Spenser, Edmund 77
Spilka, Ire`ne C. 414 n
Spire, Andre´ 360
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty 307 n, 394,
486–7, 488–93 (author)
Stackelberg, Ju¨rgen 196 n
Steiner, George 2, 5, 7, 166, 167, 272, 337, 393,
396–7, 397–405 (author), 423, 487
Steiner, T. R. 122, 174
Stellbrink, Hans-Ju¨rgen 448
Stepniak-Kravchinsky, Sergei 290
Stern, J. P. 581 n
Stevenson, Jane vi, 128–43 (author & editor)
Stevens, Wallace 458
Stone, Lawrence 556 n
Studley, John 84
Sto¨rig, Hans Joachim 199 n, 202 n
Suetonius (Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus) 26, 265
Sullivan, J. P. 289 n
Supervielle, Jules 377
Surrey, Earl of (see Howard, Henry)
Syme, David 216
Symmachus 29, 49
Swanton, Michael 34
Sweeney Astray 598–601
Sweet, Henry 35
Swinburne, Charles Algernon 245, 274–5
Taber, Charles R. 346, 448
Tacitus (Publius or Gaius Cornelius
Tacitus) 26, 123, 265
Tanner, Jennifer vi, 57–67 (translator)
Tasso, Torquato 106, 201, 256, 438, 508
Taylor, Bayard 246
Taylor, William 266
Tedlock, Dennis 319, 452, 453–6 (author)
Tegne´r, Esaias 242
Tenison, Thomas 105–6
Tennyson, Alfred 221, 223, 245
Terence(PubliusTerentiusAfer) 160,260,262,538
Thackeray, William Makepeace 245, 343
Theodoretus 102, 131
Theodore 102
Theodosius 29, 49
Thieberger, Friedrich 581 n
Thomas, Elizabeth 129
Thomas, Dylan 492
Thott, Birgitte 142
Thrale, Hannah 141
Thucydides 265
Tibellus 80
Tieck, Johann Ludwig 217, 220
Tolstoy, Leo 290–2, 294–5, 396
Tomlinson, Charles 5
Toury, Gideon 394, 429–30, 435, 512
Trachtenberg, Joshua 580 n
Trakl, Georg 410
Trivedi, Harish 558
Tudor, Mary 130–1
Turgenev, Ivan 290–6
Turner, David 85, 524
Tyler, Margaret 130, 131–2 (author & translator)
Tyndale, William 55, 68, 69–72
(author & translator) 115, 263, 311, 346
Tytler, Alexander Fraser 56, 188–9, 189–94
(author), 549
Twain, Mark 399
Twine, Thomas 236–7
Tzara, Tristan 453
Udall, Nicholas 109
Underdown, Thomas 265
Ungaretti, Giuseppe 354
Urzidil, Johannes 581 n
Vaillant, Andre 335, 336 n
Valenzuela, Luisa 507
648
index

Vale´ry, Paul 325, 327, 328, 354
Valk, E. M. 298 (translator)
Veliyanar, Erumai 482–3 (author)
Venuti, Lawrence 6, 212 n, 394, 546, 546–57
(author)
Verch, Maria 448
Verlaine, Paul 377, 380
Villon, Franc¸ois 253, 275, 288, 354
Virgil 4, 19, 22, 28, 77, 79, 85, 95, 109, 122,
123, 129, 133, 142, 144, 145, 147–50,
155–7 (author), 165, 167–9, 171, 178–9,
196, 211, 214, 223, 230, 236, 237–8
(author), 255, 259–60, 262, 266,
549–50
Volkhovsky, Feliks 290
Voltaire (Franc¸ois-Marie Arouet) 160,
439, 478
Voss, Johann Heinrich 201, 221, 228, 266,
303, 305
Volz, Hanz 66
Waard, Jan de 557 n
Waller, Edmund 145, 185
Walsingham, Sir Francis 108
Warren, Rosanna 599
Watson, J. S. 25 (translator)
Watts, Issac 132
Weber, Max 545 n
Wertheimer, Max 445
Weissbort, Daniel vi, 357 (translator), 422,
474 (translator), 521, 533, 569, 582 n,
609–15 (author)
West, Constance B. 346
Whibley, Charles 81, 93
Whitelock, Dorothy 35, 36, 37
Whitman, Walt 352
Whorf, Benjamin Lee 332, 336 n
Wieland, Christoph Martin 199–201
Wigham, Peter 423
Wilcox, Jonathan vi, 18, 34–54 (author, editor
& translator)
Wilde, Oscar 401
William (of Moerbeke) 261
Williams, Raymond 3
Williams, W. C. 352, 458
Wilson, Edmund 382, 389
Wilson, Horace H. 201
Wilson, Thomas 88–9, 89–90 (author), 588
WinWeld, Edd 77–80 (translator)
Withers, Benjamin C. 39
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 401, 444
Weores, Sandor 585
Wordsworth, William 211
Worthington, Thomas 110
Wroth, Sir Thomas 107–8
Wulfstan 38
Wyatt, A. J. 255, 256 (translator)
Wyatt, Sir Thomas 109, 604
WycliVe, John 112, 263
Wærferth [Werferth, Wyrefrith]
36, 49
Xenophon 25, 29, 84, 260, 265
Yeats, William Butler 377, 455, 467
Yip, Wai-lim 289 n
Young, Patrick 104, 106
Young, Richard E. 211
Yudovich, F. I. 498
Zhdanov, Andrei 293
Zohn, Harry 298, 580 n
Zukofsky, Celia and Louis 458–9, 459
(translators) 553
index
649

