 
 
A Roadmap to Artificial Intelligence: Navigating Core Impacts to 
Successfully Transform Organisations  
Stephen Treacy 
University College Cork, Ireland 
stephen.treacy@ucc.ie 
 
Abstract: Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a highly disruptive technology that will have major effects on the business world over 
the coming years. It has the potential to allow companies to achieve major efficiency gains and a more productive 
workforce through automating existing processes, providing deeper levels of analytics, providing better customer support, 
and increasing security. On the other hand, it may lead to lower staff levels and a drop in existing employee morale. Given 
the complexities of these projects, AI will only benefit organisations if they understand its capabilities in addition to its 
shortcomings. This investigation addresses the predicted impact on skills, roles and employee morale of artificial 
intelligence on the workforce of the future as AI continues to become more prevalent in our society. We investigate these 
impacts of AI specifically across four key industries by engaging in interviews with experts in the field to answer two 
research questions: (i) What are the core impacts of introducing AI systems in the workplace?, and; (ii) How can 
organisations develop AI projects for successful transformation? The inclusion strategy for this research were professionals 
who were highly knowledgeable in the area, and from our findings we were able to identify several impacts that AI made 
to companies developing these projects; namely employment levels, workforce morale, and process efficiency. With these 
insights, we subsequently developed a roadmap which contains the recommended steps and decisions that are necessary 
for successfully introducing AI to an organisation. This roadmap visualises the key decisions and steps that are critical for 
any AI based initiative for organisations, which will provide practitioners with a higher level of understanding of what is 
expected, in addition to enabling more effective collaboration with the system developers. Furthermore, this roadmap 
allows organisations to take a positive and proactive approach to designing these systems with their workforce in mind and 
to prepares them for the implications with the development, deployment, and use of these AI systems. 
 
Keywords: artificial intelligence, transformation, strategy implementation, process efficiency, workforce morale, AI 
transformation, roadmap  
1. Introduction 
Organisations in the digital era must continually adapt their systems to keep up to date with new and evolving 
technologies in order to enhance their efficiency and competitiveness. Despite the many advantages of 
embracing these disruptive technologies, evidence continues to emerge that these systems will replace 
routine labour in particular, in addition to placing an ever-increasing burden on human intelligence 
(Grencikova, Kordos and Berkovi 2020). These disruptions might lead to significant impacts on job creation and 
retention as many roles will have to be re-designed to accommodate the knowledge and skills that embrace 
these new technologies. Implementing AI within organisations can also lead to lower levels of employee 
confidence and engagement, if managed improperly (Brougham and Haar, 2018). 
 
The first section of this paper explores current literature surrounding AI, before presenting the identified 
research gap, and the aim of this investigation. Next, the paper outlines the research design decisions made to 
address the research questions, and subsequently presents the findings of this study. Lastly, the discussion 
outlines the impact this research has for both research and industry, while identifying future areas of interest.   
2. Literature review 
AI has pervaded several industries, ranging from computer science and telecommunications to business and 
finance, arguably making it the single scientific field with the most potential for massive changes to civilization 
(Bostrom, 2019). Organisations must be sufficiently prepared to engage, and work with AI as embracing this 
technology is now more urgent than ever for competitive necessity. For example, American Family Insurance 
Group reported a 32% decrease in false-positive vulnerability alerts, a 45% reduction in security scan time, and 
57% fewer alerts for human developers, accelerating application delivery times by 24% (Schwenger, 2020). 
Today, AI is used as an umbrella term for technologies such as computer vision, machine learning, and 
language processing which can mimic human intelligence and has the potential to transform entire industries 
(Russell and Norvig, 2015).  
 
Presently however, there is only a focus on narrow scale AI implementations where computational thinking 
and programming techniques are used to create machines that perform specific tasks using machine learning 
85

 
Stephen Treacy 
technologies (Wong et al., 2020). These systems are usually fed with large bodies of data set, known as 
training datasets. If these are unrepresentative, or reflect patterns of prejudice, the system is likely to make 
decisions that are discriminatory in nature, with several examples of bias emerging from such cases. These 
failures include Amazon’s recruiting tool, Facebook’s biased ads, and radically biased healthcare risk 
algorithms, highlighting the lack of regulation in AI development, in addition to how organisations are 
struggling to alleviate the dangers associated with this technology (Treacy, 2021).  
 
While AI can provide analytical capabilities lacking in current toolsets, aid (or bypass entirely) developers in the 
highly technical skill sets by acting as intelligent translators from human ideas into working code, it can also 
drastically improve quality assurance and security of software through conducting automatic code analysis. 
With this in mind, research has previously indicated that AI can affect: (i) performance and learning strategies, 
(ii) deep learning that results in innovative ways of thinking, (iii) critical thinking and analytical skills of 
knowledge workers, and (iv) the ability of knowledge workers to share and combine knowledge, to create new 
knowledge (Hetzner et al. 2009). This reveals the significant role the human factor plays, as these systems 
often reflect the developers’ biases-intentional or otherwise.  
2.1 Research gap 
Despite the increased interest in AI by academia, industry, and public institutions, there is yet no standard 
definition of what AI actually involves (Samoili et al. 2020). The increased success of AI, followed by the 
excitement to embrace this technology, has also led to several societal implications, raising further questions 
on its impact within organisations. One potential reason for this absence is the dynamism of changes in the 
technology, as it is constantly evolving. This can be seen through the multi-layered nature of interpreting the 
concept, as it is simultaneously observed as a scientific discipline as part of computer science; a system that 
generates decision-making, learning, reasoning etc.; a technology and knowledge source; as well as being a key 
driver of economic development (Gojakovic et al. 2021). In addition to this is the link between AI and human 
intelligence, which is a subjective category that is difficult to define and measure in both cases. Perhaps the 
most complex reason, is the increasingly pronounced system of cause-and-effect in the socio-political, 
economic, industrial and scientific trends on the development of AI.  
 
Introducing this disruptive medium to organisations must be managed effectively, or risk potential fallout from 
improper deployment. Indeed, research has shown that AI has the potential to improve firm performance, 
“only in the organisation that has an adequate human capital capability in integrating these new technologies 
across its processes” (Harraf and Ghura, 2021, p. 99). For example, managers are expected to respond to 
several unknowns related to the inclusion of AI as a new and unique lifecycle, from conceptualisation of an 
idea, through to the final output. Managers are also expected to enable the creation of certain conditions for 
quality organisational communication, while also encouraging employees in creating value to implementation 
strategies. However, as research within the area of AI in business contexts is growing, aggregated knowledge 
within the subject can be limited, and studies that are rigorous and relevant are needed (Gulati, 2007). 
Managers are left with little support from academia when aiming to implement AI in their firm’s operations 
which leads to an increased risk of project failure and unwanted results (Reim et al., 2020).  
 
Future projections of AI technology point towards fielding solutions more rapidly, but not necessarily with 
more accountability, and our limited understanding of AI applications, and how value is created and captured 
serves to highlight the importance of this research (Åström et al., 2022). Therefore, organisations must 
understand how to align AI systems to the vision of their purpose and to the end goal of value creation 
(Morales, 2020). Given this state of uncertainty, the research questions in this investigation are: 
 
What are the core impacts of introducing AI systems in the workplace? 
 
How can organisations develop AI projects for successful transformation? 
3. Research strategy 
Twelve expert judgement studies were conducted via semi-structured interviews across four key industries 
that have experienced significant adoption of AI technologies in recent years: data analytics, law, consulting 
and accounting, as outlined below in Table 1. These experts had titles that ranged from CEO’s, CIO’s, digital 
specialists and senior managers, and each had extensive experience in AI systems across their areas of 
expertise.  
86

 
Stephen Treacy 
 
Table 1: Expert details for judgement studies  
 
The interviews were semi-structured, with a focus on the interviewee’s background, experience in AI projects 
and AI implementation in their line of business and industry overall. These themes were covered in every 
interview, though the exact questions used in each interview differed depending on the expertise of the 
interviewee. All interviewees gave their permission to record the interview, after which the interviews were 
transcribed. The interviews were subsequently thematically analysed by reducing the data and separating from 
each interview the section in which AI is discussed. Since this research focused on ascertaining the impacts of 
AI, in addition to formulating a roadmap for AI transformation, we reduced the data to focus on these key 
aspects before starting the coding process.  
 
The first phase of coding involved thematically analysing AI sentiment from across the different experts and 
reduced the data by excluding those sections in which AI was not explicitly mentioned by the interviewee. In 
the second phase we coded the sections based on how AI impacts organisations, how AI projects the 
respondents had previously been involved with had developed over time, and the context in which they 
emerged. The third phase was focused on analysing these steps, and how they influenced an AI project over 
the course of conception to implementation. Based on these insights generated, the similarities and 
differences were analysed and mapped out to form different categories. We thus identified three main 
impacts of AI systems on the workforce (employment levels, workforce morale, and process efficiency), before 
identifying a further ten aspects which would ultimately form the basis for our roadmap for AI transformation 
model.  We also rechecked data, regularities, and patterns, drew explanations and reviewed findings among 
third persons as per Yin (1994).  
4. Findings 
Only themes that were encountered multiple times by two or more experts formed the basis for these 
findings.  
4.1 Core impacts of introducing an AI system in the workplace 
Several themes emerged from the findings, revealing the potential of AI to impact across employment levels, 
workforce morale, and process efficiency. The first theme that emerged from the findings, and one of the 
biggest areas of debate in the interviews was the effect that AI would have on employment levels. The experts 
stressed that while AI is currently being widely used across industries for basic tasks, it has not progressed 
enough to perform higher level tasks. These basic tasks that AI can currently perform include voice, image, 
video and text recognition, data analytics, report writing, language translation, gathering and presenting data, 
customer service, stock control, sentiment analysis, validating payments, driving, fraud detection, and virtual 
assistants. Experts accepted that certain sectors face large job losses due to large scale AI implementation, and 
the ability of replicating human capabilities over the coming years to perform more job roles: “AI will displace 
a large proportion of middle-class jobs, leading to a greater divide between low-skilled and high skilled jobs” (E-
3). One expert described how their organisation has already felt its impact, forcing them to cut back on legal 
staff as AI was being deployed for document reviews, analysis, and e-discovery, claiming that “within the next 
three years most law firms will be using AI and if they’re not they’re in trouble” although, this was also being 
“countered by increasing the number of technology and support staff” (E-5). Other experts agreed that many of 
87

 
Stephen Treacy 
today’s job roles would rapidly drop in numbers as a result of AI, a prime example being truck drivers due to 
recent developments in autonomous driving: “the majority of jobs at risk are all the ones that have been 
around since the industrial revolution. If AI gets to the point where it can do all those routine jobs, then a lot of 
people will lose their jobs, for example we are now seeing truck drivers lose their jobs” (E-8).  
 
Although some experts predicted that AI may lead to mass unemployment of basic job roles due to its 
disruptive nature, most experts were optimistic however about future employment opportunities. The 
argument presented was that AI will be used to complement workers, rather than replace them entirely, as the 
strength of AI is different to those of their human counterparts. One expert reiterated how every technological 
advancement encountered thus far has been met with an increase in employment levels “it is a proven stat for 
every job that disappears due to AI, three or four jobs appear to support it, like security and analysts” (E-5). The 
strategy of hiring has also seen a seismic shift in recent years also, with experts revealing that they are pivoting 
away from degree-based appointments, but to be more receptive towards candidates with a proven track 
record of learning experience in the field: “we are hiring skills. We are not hiring people for particular roles” (E-
8). These skills should not only complement working with AI, but also serve them to be less endangered to 
being replaced by automation and unemployment. This was echoed by other experts who argued that 
empathy is a uniquely human trait that is becoming far more important with the use AI, due to the increased 
number of human interactions that are being created: “I’ve never hired a person because they are technically 
good. You hire a person because they can communicate, they’ve got empathy, they can walk in other people’s 
shoes and understand their problems, not just their own problems.” (E-5). This does not mean that everyone 
will have to be technology experts, as mostly this technology will be to help employees adapt and upskill in 
order to create more job value or satisfaction in their current role: “I often hear this in the legal sector, 
whether lawyers need to become coders. I roll my eyes when I hear that… AI can’t do large corporate deals, 
family law can’t be done with that.” (E-4).   
 
Secondly, these findings reveal mixed feelings on how employees would react to greater AI use and the 
consequent workforce morale implications associated with that transition. Many experts expressed how their 
employees were generally excited and interested in using AI: “People are really excited about it and are ready 
to embrace it!” (E-8), while other experts agreed that if these systems were brought in gradually, with effective 
change management and keeping employees informed and trained, morale should not be significantly 
impacted. Once these companies relay the benefits of the AI to the workforce, it should then increase morale: 
“from what I’ve seen in the training courses, people are actually really excited about the capabilities of the 
tools… they are embracing it” (E-12). The experts stressed however that it will be a gradual change, and the 
workforce must be well informed on how the systems will enhance their workday, increase their skills, and 
give them the opportunity to “have a better career as a result” (E-2). Some experts even suggested that the 
introduction of AI will create a greater work-life balance, arguing that “employees could have less demands on 
them with these new systems and new ways of working, and have a more positive life balance” (E-5). Several 
negative sentiments did emerge however, with experts emphasizing that no-one likes change having seen first-
hand how data scientists and analysts have resisted the introduction of AI technologies in fear that these 
systems can perform their job better than they can, and that their job status would diminish as a result: 
“Humans hate change. No human will put their hand up and say change!” (E-5). Experts also outlined that once 
AI takes over some tasks that a human does, and performs them at the same, or even a higher level, then 
workers can lose their motivation, and their sense of purpose may be lost. Firms must therefore ensure that 
while their change management strategies are realistic, they must also be honest with their employees 
regarding any disruption that might occur and should be inclusive to all employees. Experts suggested the 
inclusion of adequate training to use and understand these systems, and validate any concerns, along with 
plans for further upskilling and career training in addition to evaluating the performance of use. These steps 
will ensure the employees still feel needed and validate that their place within the company is still important. 
However, experts highlighted that just because employees are informed of change, it does not mean they feel 
good about it. Employees will need something to work towards, and if they can’t move onto something better 
within their jobs, then their sense of purpose for work may be lost.  
 
Some experts were less optimistic about the short-term potential of AI driven projects, arguing instead that we 
won’t see the full potential of this movement until at least another decade: “it’s much slower burning than 
what you read” (E-1). While these experts were in agreement that AI currently has a lot of hype surrounding it 
given the disruptive potential it carries, the timescale of adoption was adopted at length: “AI will be disruptive, 
yes. But is it happening now? Probably more on a minor scale, it is definitely more talked about than actual 
88

 
Stephen Treacy 
 
disruption. This is hype and reality, which are two different things. It’s getting there.” (E-1). To illustrate this 
point, several AI projects were described that were ultimately abandoned after failing to meet requirements, 
one of which being an Irish company that invested €50,000 to develop AI software to match deliveries and 
invoices. Another failed example described by experts involved Anderson Group Hospitals investing €65 million 
for IBM Watson to deliver cancer research which was similarly abandoned.  
 
Thirdly, experts were unanimous that too much time was being spent on low level data gathering, and 
expressed frustration that not enough time was being spent on analysis and decision making to realise the AI 
strategy. As a result, the findings outlined increased levels of process efficiency as being another impact of AI 
systems in the workplace. The experts argued that with AI based initiative replacing repetitive tasks, it would 
make remaining employees more efficient: “It definitely has a positive impact on efficiency… it 100% makes 
employees a lot more productive” (E-2), freeing them up for better quality, and more meaningful work. Indeed, 
organisations should be cognisant of the available technologies that might be suitable for particular use cases. 
For example, in the accounting sector, some of these repetitive jobs might involve carrying out report writing 
and looking at the integrity and accuracy of accounts that experts “would fully expect AI to be able to do 
sometime in the near future” (E-2). Indeed, some argued that “the implementation of AI will be around the kind 
of grunt work like reviewing documents, looking for issues in contracts etc… which is something AI and machine 
learning can do infinitely better” (E-4). This was echoed by other experts, who stated that “it will make the jobs 
richer, and accountants can spend more time on more interesting parts, and a higher level of analysis rather 
than having to pull all of the data together” (E-12), and that AI should “remove 20% of your role that is boring 
or repetitive” (E-5). While a strength of AI is the speed in which it can process queries, experts also argued that 
you still need a human element for the integrity of the decisions being made: “AI is going to make so many 
decisions in sub-second time. The challenge is going to be how are we making sure that those decisions are 
being made in a responsible framework?” (E-7). The fear is that AI does not contain morals, and cannot be 
programmed to contain empathy, or emotion making effective governance of these technologies crucial. 
Experts also highlighted that AI was better suited to analysing large datasets and documents, whereas people 
are better at socialising and decision-making as a result of these tools: “dashboards and being able to run 
queries through them is definitely a growing and desired skillset, to be technically proficient” (E-7). Experts 
agreed that AI could take over much of the repetitive background work and free up workers time to focus on 
more rewarding work. This would have large efficiency and productivity benefits by allowing organisations to 
use their employees time at work more effectively. For example, one expert outlined how analysts are 
spending too much time gathering data, and not enough time interpreting it to present findings to senior 
management: “Using AI would allow more time to gain insights from the data and use it to make stronger 
business decisions” (E-12).  
4.2 Roadmap 
Using our findings, we developed a roadmap for AI transformation, comprising of ten steps outlined below in 
Figure 1. The first step outlined by the experts, was to create the strategy for the introduction of AI, which 
includes clear and well-defined business cases. Organisations must define clear requirements around how they 
intend to use the AI systems being introduced to suit their needs, and to exploit the capabilities of these 
technologies. Given AI’s growing profile, determining these use cases that offer sufficient value was argued to 
be a pivotal first step in their transformation journey. Once the vision is in place, experts outlined the second 
step involves researching the appropriate technologies to realise the strategy as with the prevalence of AI 
several options may be available for the organisation to choose from. Whether the organisations develop 
these solutions in house, or purchase them from an external vendor, as with any innovation, the organisation 
will have no shortage of options available to them. In some cases, experts recommended undertaking a market 
and in-house talent analysis to get this choice correct, and to establish levels of expectation early in the 
project. If initial expectations are unrealistic, then organisations are likely to be dissatisfied with the final 
product. Building on this, the third step necessary for this transformation is to ensure a transparent level of 
data governance, as any successful AI implementation will be dependent on high-quality data as input. Experts 
stressed that having data governance mechanisms to ensure data gathering, labelling, storage and deletion 
procedures are standardized to train AI systems to make them smarter, and to provide accurate predictions 
and high-quality insights that can be used by the organisation. Several experts outlined how they had 
experience in several failed projects due to poor data quality, unstructured data, and a lack of standardised 
documents being fed into the system.  
89

 
Stephen Treacy 
 
Figure 1: Roadmap for AI transformation  
Once the organisation has a vision for the strategy, selection of technologies, and data governance these 
systems require, experts outlined the next step must focus on evaluating the current workforce and how they 
might receive this new paradigm. This step might include identifying all the skills available in the talent pool, 
and mapping them against the capabilities offered by the new AI technology being introduced. This procedure 
should help management identify any gap in talent and skills required within the organisation and can be used 
to inform future hiring decisions to bring in the requisite levels of talent. Building on this step, once the 
shortages of the existing workforce have been identified, experts suggested that it represents an opportunity 
to hire new talent to fulfil these requirements, and to ensure the correct operation for these systems. 
According to the experts interviewed, hiring new talent at various functional and strategic levels to support 
this system will be a necessity. It is the responsibility of the organisation once they have identified the right 
talent to subsequently prepare the workforce, so they are aware of how the new system is to be applied to 
the correct business problems and processes. They should also be informed as to whether their job is currently 
at risk as a result of this strategy. Experts advised that the key to this lies in communicating and informing the 
employees as to why this technology is being brought in, explaining the business value that is expected from it, 
and what impact it will have on their existing roles. By engaging employees in the process early, experts 
outlined it should result in higher morale towards its adoption. 
 
The seventh step in this roadmap requires the training of the workforce to ensure effective use of the new 
system being implemented. Experts stressed importance towards this step, as with the introduction of new 
technology will ultimately bring with it the need for the existing workforce and/or new hires to be reskilled, or 
upskilled. These training sessions can be delivered through either online training platforms, classroom 
trainings, or bringing in third party consultants to provide this level of instruction. Following from this, 
organisations can begin to execute the AI plan by adopting a staged approach to the AI venture. Experts 
recommended that organisations develop several time scales to judge the success of this rollout, with the 
short-term focus concentrating on taking incremental steps towards building on the initial successes the 
system delivers. In the medium term, develop new use cases and exploring different avenues of deployment. 
The long-term focus for these projects is ultimately return on investment, but given these technologies are not 
fully mature yet, experts advise that organisations should not expect this immediately, but something to be 
developed between the medium and long term of its use. To deliver this, organisations need to be at the 
forefront of innovating with AI implementation while critically analysing their own business models to see 
where else it might be suitable. Throughout these different stages of the project, organisations should develop 
strategies and practices to monitor employee morale as it continues to be rolled out. A change of this nature 
will more than likely lead to a dramatic impact on the workers, and managers and team leaders should 
monitor their workers to ensure they are adjusting positively to change. Experts urged that they be open to 
90

 
Stephen Treacy 
 
discussions with staff and ensure there are avenues for workers to provide feedback. Experts suggested this 
can be done in several ways, for example, deploying AI enabled responsive feedback platforms, or even 
conventional feedback systems to conduct wellness surveys to gauge employee engagement and morale. 
Finally, organisations must also critically evaluate the performance of these systems to move iteratively along 
the maturity curve of adoption. As each application and use case will require different tools, resources, and 
algorithms, evaluating AI systems to get feedback across a benchmark of key performance indicators would 
help organisations to upscale accordingly. Some experts revealed how previous projects had vastly 
underestimated both the amount of time and effort to release an AI system and had not planned accordingly.  
5. Discussion, conclusions, and implications  
Companies must undertake the necessary preparation if they intend to implement AI, or they risk AI projects 
being developed overtime, overbudget, or being abandoned completely. Having a clear strategy for AI 
implementation and data governance mechanisms is vital in this regard. In addition, our findings confirm that 
workers can be affected by AI depending on both the positions they occupy, and the very nature of their tasks, 
with organisations increasingly seeking to replace the monotonous aspects or work through AI transformation 
and automation. On the other hand, employees with high educational attainment, and emotional intelligence 
were identified as being more secure, as these traits are not easily replicated by automation (yet). Given how 
the transformative potential of this technology remains difficult for most organisations, this research has also 
generated a roadmap for AI transformation that these organisations can adopt in introducing these systems. 
This roadmap is a linear process, with several sequential steps needing to be explored before final system 
release. Throughout this journey, this artifact poses significant questions to practitioners including the 
selection of technologies appropriate for their solution, the strategy for why these technologies are required, 
data governance mechanisms, talent identification, and monitoring and evaluating both system performance 
and employee morale. These findings confirm that while AI is set to revolutionise and change the ways of 
working of many traditional operations, academics across the world must prepare to actively research and 
engage in this journey, and they must prepare students to control and drive this transformation through 
innovative research.  
 
This research has several implications for both research and practice. Firstly, in the practitioner realm, AI is 
shown to already be prominent in accurate forecasting, improved insights, superior product quality, increased 
operational efficiency and enhanced customer experience. This research accentuates the literature in the ever-
evolving field of AI by describing the findings outlined above. The identification of three core impacts 
(employment levels, workforce morale, and process efficiency) along with ten criteria (strategy creation, 
technology selection, data governance, workforce evaluation, hiring strategies, communication to workforce, 
training workforce, implementation of system, morale monitoring, and performance evaluation) for a 
successful AI transformation project represent the key findings outlined in this study. Secondly, AI will continue 
to evolve to become smarter and more intelligent to augment human thinking and could eventually dominate 
the human creative thinking ability. These findings highlight both the dynamic nature and the strategic 
decisions involved in any AI transformation project and provides practitioners with a clear understanding of 
what is involved from start to finish. Understanding these areas allows for a more granular project approach, 
and by extension, a more in-depth appreciation of these crucial factors. To foster the potential value within 
organisations, our roadmap reveals decision makers need to do more than just select the technology most 
suitable for their use case. Thirdly, while we endeavoured to achieve the highest levels of objectivity, accuracy 
and validity, the exploratory nature of this study was provided by a relatively small population size of twelve 
qualitative experts focusing on four distinct industries. Future research now encouraged to approach this 
subject matter from different industries, including healthcare, education, marketing, retail and e-commerce 
etc. Future studies are now advised to build on this roadmap through larger scale endeavours, focusing how 
these organisations can manage these distinct steps, and what metrics might be most suitable to ensure 
progress through their journey.  
 
In closing, the future will bring new scenarios and tools, along with an increasing need to adapt to emerging 
markets and threats. To become resilient, organisations require complex solutions to compliment evolving 
strategies, where cooperation with employees could be the most essential component. The frontier of AI in 
this research space is expected to become wider and deeper, thus progressively creating research inputs with 
stronger, actionable insights. 
91

 
Stephen Treacy 
References 
Åström, J., Reim, W. and Parida, V., 2022. Value creation and value capture for AI business model innovation: a three-phase 
process framework. Review of Managerial Science, pp.1-23. 
Bostrom, N., 2019. The vulnerable world hypothesis. Global Policy, 10(4), pp.455-476. 
Brougham, D. and Haar, J., 2018. Smart technology, artificial intelligence, robotics, and algorithms (STARA): Employees’ 
perceptions of our future workplace. Journal of Management & Organization, 24(2), pp.239-257. 
Gojakovic, A.L. and Graca, N., 2021, November. The Impact of Human-Artificial Intelligence Collaboration on Innovation 
Activities in Knowledge-Intensive Companies. In ECIAIR 2021 3rd European Conference on the Impact of Artificial 
Intelligence and Robotics (p. 43). Academic Conferences and publishing limited. 
Grenčíková, A., Kordoš, M. and Berkovič, V., 2020. The impact of industry 4.0 on jobs creation within the small and 
medium-sized enterprises and family businesses in Slovakia. Administrative sciences, 10(3), p.71. 
Gulati, R., 2007. Tent poles, tribalism, and boundary spanning: The rigor-relevance debate in management 
research. Academy of management journal, 50(4), pp.775-782. 
Harraf, A. and Ghura, H., 2021. Potentials of Artificial Intelligence for Business Performance. In The Fourth Industrial 
Revolution: Implementation of Artificial Intelligence for Growing Business Success (pp. 99-109). Springer, Cham. 
Hetzner, S., Gartmeier, M., Heid, H. and Gruber, H., 2009. The interplay between change and learning at the workplace: A 
qualitative study from retail banking. Journal of Workplace Learning. 
Morales, J.A., Scanlon, T.P., Volkmann, A., Yankel, J. and Yasar, H., 2020, August. Security impacts of sub-optimal devsecops 
implementations in a highly regulated environment. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on 
Availability, Reliability and Security (pp. 1-8). 
Reim, W., Åström, J. and Eriksson, O., 2020. Implementation of artificial intelligence (AI): a roadmap for business model 
innovation. AI, 1(2), p.11. 
Russell, S. and Norvig, P., 2005. AI a modern approach. Learning, 2(3), p.4. 
Samoili, S., Cobo, M.L., Gomez, E., De Prato, G., Martinez-Plumed, F. and Delipetrev, B., 2020. AI Watch. Defining Artificial 
Intelligence. Towards an operational definition and taxonomy of artificial intelligence. 
Schwenger, M. N., 2020. DevSecOps - An Ideal Use Case For Applying AI. s.l.:DevOps World - CloudBees 
Treacy, S., 2021, November. Mechanisms and Constraints Underpinning Ethically Aligned Artificial Intelligence Systems: An 
Exploration of key Performance Areas. In ECIAIR 2021 3rd European Conference on the Impact of Artificial 
Intelligence and Robotics (p. 183). Academic Conferences and publishing limited. 
Wong, G.K., Ma, X., Dillenbourg, P. and Huan, J., 2020. Broadening artificial intelligence education in K-12: Where to 
start?. ACM Inroads, 11(1), pp.20-29. 
Yin, R.K., 1994. Discovering the future of the case study. Method in evaluation research. Evaluation practice, 15(3), pp.283-
290. 
92

