XVII
TRIGONOMETRY: HIPPARCHUS, MENELAUS,
PTOLEMY
WE have seen that Sphaeric, the geometry of the sphere,
was very early studied, because it was required so soon as
astronomy became mathematical; with the Pythagoreans the
word Sphaeric, applied to one of the subjects of the quadrivium,
actually meant astronomy. The subject was so far advanced
before Euclid's time that there was in existence a regular
textbook containing the principal propositions about great
and small circles on the sphere, from which both Autolycus
and Euclid quoted the propositions as generally known.
These propositions, with others of purely astronomical in-
terest, were collected afterwards in a work entitled Sphaerica,
in three Books, by THEODOSIUS.
Suidas has a notice, s.v. ©eoSocno?, which evidently con-
fuses the author of the Sphaerica with another Theodosius,
a Sceptic philosopher, since it calls him ' Theodosius, a philoso-
pher \ and attributes to him, besides the mathematical works,
' Sceptic chapters' and a commentary on the chapters of
Theudas. Now the commentator on Theudas must have
belonged, at the earliest, to the second half of the second
century A.D., whereas our Theodosius was earlier than Mene-
laus (fl. about A.D. 100), who quotes him by name. The next
notice by Suidas is of yet another Theodosius, a poet, who
came from Tripolis. Hence it was at one time supposed that
our Theodosius was of Tripolis. But Vitruvius* mentions a
Theodosius who invented a sundial 'for any climate'; and
Strabo, in speaking of certain Bithynians distinguished in
their particular sciences, refers to ' Hipparchus, Theodosius
and his sons, mathematicians'2. 
We conclude that our Theo-
1 De architecture* ix. 9. 
2 Strabo, xii. 4, 9, p. 566.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

246 
TRIGONOMETRY
dosius was of Bithynia and not later in date than Vitruvius
(say 20 B.C.); but the order in which Strabo gives the
names makes it not unlikely that he was contemporary with
Hipparchus, while the character of his Sphaerica suggests a
date even earlier rather than later.
Works by Theodosius.
Two other works of Theodosius besides the Sphaerica,
namely On habitations and On Days and Nights, seem to
have been included in the 'Little Astronomy' (/xi/cpos da-rpo-
vo/j.ovfjiei'os, sc. TOTTOS). These two treatises nee<J not detain us
long. They are extant in Greek (in the great MS. Vaticanus
Graecus 204 and others), but the Greek text has not appar-
ently yet been published. In the first, On habitations, in 12
propositions, Theodosius explains the different phenomena due
to the daily rotation of the earth, and the particular portions
of the whole system which are visible to inhabitants of the
different zones. In the second, On Days and Nights, contain-
ing 13 and 19 propositions in the two Books respectively,
Theodosius considers the arc of the ecliptic described by the
sun each day, with a view to determining the conditions to be
satisfied in order that the> solstice may occur in the meridian
at a given place, and in order that the day and the night may
really be equal at the equinoxes; he shows also that the
variations in the day and night must recur exactly after
a certain time, if the length of the solar year is commen-
surable with that of the day, while on the contrary assump-
tion they will not recur so exactly.
In addition to the works bearing on astronomy, Theodosius
is saidx to have written a commentary, now lost, on the k(j>68iov
or Method of Archimedes (see above, pp. 27-34).
Contents of the Sphaerica.
We come now to the Sphaerica, which deserves a short
description from the point of view of this chapter. A text-
book on the geometry of the sphere was wanted as a supple-
ment to the Elements of Euclid. In the Elements themselves
1 Suidas, loc. cit.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEODOSIUS'S SPHAERICA 
247
(Books XII and XIII) Euclid included no general properties
of the sphere except the theorem proved in XII. 16-18, that
the volumes of two spheres are in the triplicate ratio of their
diameters; apart from this, the sphere is only introduced in
the propositions about the regular solids, where it is proved
that they are severally inscribable in a sphere, and it was doubt-
less with a view to his proofs of this property in each case that
he gave a new definition of a sphere as the figure described by
the revolution of a semicircle about its diameter, instead of
the more usual definition (after the manner of the definition
of a circle) as the locus of all points (in space instead of in
a plane) which are equidistant from a fixed point (the centre).
No doubt the exclusion of the geometry of the sphere from
the Elements was due to the fact that it was regarded as
belonging to astronomy rather than pure geometry.
Theodosius defines the sphere as ' a solid figure contained
by one surface such that all the straight lines falling upon it
from one point among those lying within the figure are equal
to one another', which is exactly Euclid's definition of a circle
with ' solid' inserted before ' figure y and ' surface ' substituted
for ' line'. The early part of the work is then generally
developed on the lines of Euclid's Book III on the circle.
Any plane section of a sphere is a circle (Prop. l). The
straight line from the centre of the sphere to the centre of
a circular section is perpendicular to the plane of that section
(1, Por. 2 ; cf. 7, 23); thus a plane section serves for finding
the centre of the sphere just as a chord does for finding that
of a circle (Prop. 2). The propositions about tangent planes
(3-5) and the relation between the sizes of circular sections
and their distances from the centre (5, 6) correspond to
Euclid III. 16-19 and 15; as the small circle corresponds to
any chord, the great circle (' greatest circle ' in Greek) corre-
sponds to the diameter. The poles of a circular section
correspond to the extremities of the diameter bisecting
a chord of a circle at right angles (Props. 8-10). 
Great
circles bisecting one another (Props. 11-12) correspond to
chords which bisect one another (diameters), and great circles
bisecting small circles at right angles and passing through
their poles (Props. 13-15) correspond to diameters bisecting
chords at right angles. The distance of any point of a great
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

248 
TRIGONOMETRY
circle from its pole is equal to the side of a square inscribed
in the great circle and conversely (Props. 16, 17). Next come
certain problems : To find a straight line equal to the diameter
of any circular section or of the sphere itself (Props. 18, 19);
to draw the great circle through any two given points on
the surface (Prop. 20); to find the pole of any given circu-
lar section (Prop. 21). Prop. 22 applies Eucl. III. 3 to the
sphere.
Book II begins with a definition of circles on a sphere
which touch one another; this happens ' when the common
section of the planes (of the circles) touches both circles'.
Another series of propositions follows, corresponding again
to propositions in Eucl., Book III, for the circle. 
Parallel
circular sections have the same poles, and conversely (Props.
1, 2). Props. 3-5 relate to circles on the sphere touching
one another and therefore having their poles on a great
circle which also passes through the point of contact (cf.
Eucl. III. 11, [12] about circles touching one another). 
If
a great circle touches a small circle, it also touches another
small circle equal and parallel to it (Props. 6, 7), and if a
great circle be obliquely inclined to another circular section,
it touches each of two equal circles parallel to that section
(Prop. 8). If two circles on a sphere cut one another, the
great circle drawn through their poles bisects the intercepted
segments of the circles (Prop. 9). If there are any number of
parallel circles on a sphere, and any number of great circles
drawn through their poles, the arcs of the parallel circles
intercepted between any two of the great circles are similar,
and the arcs of the great circles intercepted between any two
of the parallel circles are equal (Prop. 10).
The last proposition forms a sort of transition to the portion
of the treatise (II. 11-23 and Book III) which contains pro-
positions of purely astronomical interest, though expressed as
propositions in pure geometry without any specific reference
to the various circles in the heavenly sphere. The proposi-
tions are long and complicated, and it would neither be easy
nor worth while to attempt an enumeration. They deal with
circles or parts of circles (arcs intercepted on one circle by
series of other circles and the like). We have no difficulty in
recognizing particular circles which come into many proposi-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEODOSIUS'S SPHAERIGA 
249
tions. A particular small circle is the circle which is the
limit of the stars which do not set, as seen by an observer at
a particular place on the earth's surface; the pole of this
circle is the pole in the heaven. A great circle which touches
this circle and is obliquely inclined to the ' parallel circles' is the
circle of the horizon; the parallel circles of course represent
the apparent motion of the fixed stars in the diurnal rotation,
and have the pole of the heaven as pole. A second great
circle obliquely inclined to the parallel circles is of course the
circle of the zodiac or ecliptic. The greatest of the ' parallel
circles' is naturally the equator. All that need be said of the
various propositions (except two which will be mentioned
separately) is that the sort of result proved is like that of
Props. 12 and 13 of Euclid's Phaenoonena to the effect that in
the half of the zodiac circle beginning with Cancer (or Capri-
cornus) equal arcs set (or rise) in unequal times; those which
are nearer the tropic circle take a longer time, those further
from it a shorter; those which take the shortest time are
those adjacent to the equinoctial points; those which are equi-
distant from the equator rise and set in equal times. In like
manner Theodosius (III. 8) in effect takes equal and con-
tiguous arcs of the ecliptic all on one side of the equator,
draws through their extremities great circles touching the
circumpolar ' parallel' circle, and proves that the correspond-
ing arcs of the equator intercepted between the latter great
circles are unequal and that, of the said arcs, that correspond-
ing to the arc of the ecliptic which is nearer the tropic circle
is the greater. The successive great circles touching the
circumpolar circle are of course successive positions of the
horizon as the earth revolves about its axis, that is to say,
the same length of arc on the ecliptic takes a longer or shorter
time to rise according as it is nearer to or farther from the
tropic, in other words, farther from or nearer to the equinoctial
points.
It is, however, obvious that investigations of this kind,
which only prove that certain arcs are greater than others,
and do not give the actual numerical ratios between them, are
useless for any practical purpose such as that of telling the
hour of the night by the stars, which was one of the funda-
mental problems in Greek astronomy; and in order to find
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

250
TRIGONOMETRY
the required numerical ratios a new method had to be invented
namely trigonometry.
No actual trigonometry in Theodosius.
It is perhaps hardly correct to say that spherical triangles
are nowhere referred to in Theodosius, for in III. 3 the con-
gruence-theorem for spherical triangles corresponding to Eucl.
I. 4 is practically proved; but there is nothing in the book
that can be called trigonometrical. The nearest approach is
in III. 11, 12, where ratios between certain straight lines are
compared with ratios between arcs. AGc '(Prop. 11) is a great
circle through the poles A, A'; GDc, CD are two other great
circles, both of which are at right angles to the plane of AG'c,
but GDc is perpendicular to AA', while G'D is inclined to it at
an acute angle. Let any other great circle AB'BA' through
AA' cut GD in any point B between G and D, and G'D in B'.
Let the ' parallel' circle EB'e be drawn through B', and let
C'c' be the diameter of the ' parallel' circle touching the great
circle G'D. Let L, K be the centres of the ' parallel' circles,
and let R, p be the radii of the ' parallel' circles GDc, Cfc'
respectively. It is required to prove that
2 R: 2 p > (arc GB): (arc C'B').
Let CO, EG meet in N, and join NB'.
Then B'N, being the intersection of two planes perpendicu-
lar to the plane of AG'C A', is perpendicular to that plane and
therefore to both Ee and CO.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEODOSIUS'S SPHAERIGA 
251
Now, the triangle NLO being right-angled at L, NO > NL.
Measure NT along NO equal to NL, and join TB'.
Then in the triangles B'NT, B'NL two sides B'N, NT are
equal to two sides B'N, NL, and the included angles (both
being right) are equal; therefore the triangles are equal in all
respects, and ANLB'= 
ANTB'.
Now 
2R:2p = 0C':C'K
= ON:NL
= ON:NT
[= tan NTS': tan NOB']
> LNTB': /.NOB'
> ANLB'.ANOB'
> LCOB.LNOB'
If a\ b\ c' are the sides of the spherical triangle AB'C\ this
result is equivalent (since the angle COB subtended by the arc
OB is equal to A) to
1: sin b'= tan A : tan a'
where a = BG, the side opposite A in the triangle ABC.
The proof is based on the fact (proved in Euclid's
and assumed as known by Aristarchus of Samos and Archi-
medes) that, if a, /? are angles such that •§ TT > oc > /3,
tan a/tan /? > oc/{J.
While, therefore, Theodosius proves the equivalent of the
formula, applicable in the solution of a spherical triangle
right-angled at C, that tana = sin b tan A, he is unable, for
want of trigonometry, to find the actual value of a/a\ and
can only find a limit for it. He is exactly in the same position
as Aristarchus, who can only approximate to the values of the
trigonometrical ratios which he needs, e.g. sin 1°, cos 1°, sin 3°,
by bringing them within upper and lower limits with the aid
of the inequalities
tan oc oc sin a
tan/3 > J8 > sm^?'
where f n > oc > j8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

252 
TRIGONOMETRY
We may contrast with this proposition of Theodosius the
corresponding proposition in Menelaus's Sphaerica (III. 15)
dealing with the more general case in which C", instead of
being the tropical point on the ecliptic, is, like B', any point
between the tropical point and D. If It, p have the same
meaning as above and r1? r2 are the radii of the parallel circles
through B' and the new G\ Menelaus proves that
sin a __ Rp
sin a' ~~ rYr^
which, of course, with the aid of Tables, gives the means
of finding the actual values of a or a' when the other elements
are given.
The proposition III. 12 of Theodosius proves a result similar
to that of III. 11 for the case where the great circles ABfB,
AC'C, instead of being great circles through the poles, are
great circles touching ' the circle of the always-visible stars',
i. e. different positions of the horizon, and the points C", B' are
any points on the arc of the oblique circle between the tropical*
and the equinoctial points; in this case, with the same notation,
4R:2p> 
(arc BG): (arc B'C).
It is evident that Theodosius was simply a laborious com-
piler, and that there was practically nothing original in his
work. It has been proved, by means of propositions quoted
verbatim or assumed as known by Autolycus in his Moving
Sphere and by Euclid in his Phaenomena, that the following
propositions in Theodosius are pre-Euclidean, I. 1, 6 a, 7, 8, 11,
12, 13, 15? 20 ; II. 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 10 a, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22;
III. lb, 2, 3, 7, 8, those shown in thick type being quoted
word for word.
The beginnings of trigonometry.
But this is not all. In Menelaus's Sphaerica, III. 15, there
is a reference to the proposition (III. 11) of Theodosius proved
above, and in Gherard of Cremona's translation from the
Arabic, as well as in Halley's translation from the Hebrew
of Jacob b. Machir, there is an addition to the effect that this
proposition was used by Apollonius in a book the title of
which is given in the two translations in the alternative
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

BEGINNINGS OF TRIGONOMETRY 
253
forms 'liber aggregativus' and 'liber de principiis universa-
libus\ 
Each of these expressions may well mean the work
of ApoUonius which Marinus refers to as the 'General
Treatise' (17 KCL66\OV irpayjiareia). 
There is no apparent
reason to doubt that the remark in question was really
contained in Menelaus's original work; and, even if it is an
Arabian interpolation, it is not likely to have been made
without some definite authority. 
If then ApoUonius was the
discoverer of the proposition, the fact affords some ground for
thinking that the beginnings of trigonometry go as far back,
at least, as Apollonius. Tannery1 indeed suggested that not
only Apollonius but Archimedes before him may have com-
piled a ' table of chords \ or at least shown the way to such
a compilation, Archimedes in the work of which we possess
only a fragment in the Measurement of a Circle, and Apollonius
in the COKVTOKLOU, where he gave an approximation to the value
of 7r closer than that obtained by Archimedes; Tannery
compares the Indian Table of Sines in the Surya-Siddhdnta,
where the angles go by 24ths of a right angle (l/24th=3° 45',
2/24ths = 7° 30', &c), as possibly showing Greek influence.
This is, however, in the region of conjecture; the first person
to make systematic use of trigonometry is, so far as we know,
Hipparchus.
HIPPARCHUS, the greatest astronomer of antiquity, was
born at Nicaea in Bithynia. 
The period of his activity is
indicated by references in Ptolemy to observations made by
him the limits of which are from 161 B.C. to 126 B.C. Ptolemy
further says that from Hipparchus's time to the beginning of
the reign of Antoninus Pius (A.D. 138) was 265 years.2 The
best and most important observations made by Hipparchus
were made at Rhodes, though an observation of the vernal
equinox at Alexandria on March 24,146 B.C., recorded by him
may have been his own. His main contributions to theoretical
and practical astronomy can here only be indicated in the
briefest manner.
1 Tannery, Recherches sur Vhist. de Vastronomie ancienne, p. 64.
2 Ptolemy, Syntaxis, vii. 2 (vol. ii, p. 15).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

254 
TRIGONOMETRY
The work of Hipparchus.
Discovery of 
'precession.
1. The greatest is perhaps his discovery of the precession
of the equinoxes. 
Hipparchus found that the bright star
Spica was, at the time of his observation of it, 6° distant
from the autumnal equinoctial point, whereas he deduced from
observations recorded by Timocharis that Timocharis had
made the distance 8°. Consequently the motion had amounted
to 2° in the period between Timocharis's observations, made in
283 or 295 B.C., and 129/8 B.C., a period, that is, of 154 or
166 years; this gives about 46-8" or 43-4" a year, as compared
with the true value of 50-3757".
Calculation of mean lunar month.
2. The same discovery is presupposed in his work On the
length of the Year, in which, by comparing an observation
of the summer solstice by Aristarchus in 281/0 B.C. with his
own in 136/5 B.C., he found that after 145 years (the interval
between the two dates) the summer solstice occurred half
a day-and-night earlier than it should on the assumption of
exactly 365^ days to the year; hence he concluded that the
tropical year contained about ^ ^ t h of a day-and-night less
than 365\ days. This agrees very nearly with Censorinus's
statement that Hipparchus's cycle was 304 years, four times
the 76 years of Callippus, but with 111,035 days in it
instead of 111,036 ( = 27,759 x 4). Counting in the 304 years
12x304 + 112 (intercalary) months, or 3,760 months in all,
Hipparchus made the mean lunar month 29 days 12 hrs.
44 min. 2\ sec, which is less than a second out in comparison
with the present accepted figure of 29-53059 days!
3. Hipparchus attempted a new determination of the sun's
motion by means of exact equinoctial and solstitial obser-
vations; he reckoned the eccentricity of the sun's course
and fixed the apogee at the point 5° 30' of Gemini. More
remarkable still was his investigation of the moon's
course. He determined the eccentricity and the inclination
of the orbit to the ecliptic, and by means of records of
observations of eclipses determined the moon's period with
extraordinary accuracy (as remarked above). We now learn
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HIPPAKCHUS 
255
that the lengths of the mean synodic, the sidereal, the
anomalistic and the draconitic month obtained by Hipparchus
agree exactly with Babylonian cuneiform tables of date not
later than Hipparchus, and it is clear that Hipparchus was
in full possession of all the results established by Babylonian
astronomy.
Improved estimates of sizes and distances of sun
and moon.
4. Hipparchus improved on ^Aristarchus's calculations of the
sizes and distances of the sun and moon, determining the
apparent diameters more exactly and noting the changes in
them ; he made the mean distance of the sun 1,2451), the mean
distance of the moon 33f D, the diameters of the sun and
moon 12^ D and J D respectively, where D is the mean
diameter of the earth.
Epicycles and eccentrics.
5. Hipparchus, in investigating the motions of the sun, moon
and planets, proceeded on the alternative hypotheses of epi-
cycles and eccentrics; he did not invent these hypotheses,
which were already fully understood and discussed by
Apollonius. While the motions of the sun and moon could
with difficulty be accounted for by the simple epicycle and
eccentric hypotheses, Hipparchus found that for the planets it
was necessary to combine the two, i.e. to superadd epicycles to'
motion in eccentric circles.
Catalogue of stars.
6. He compiled a catalogue of fixed stars including 850 or
more such stars; apparently he was the first to state their
positions in terms of coordinates in relation to the ecliptic?
(latitude and longitude), and his table distinguished the
apparent sizes of the stars. His work was continued by
Ptolemy, who produced a catalogue of 1,022 stars which,
owing to an error in his solar tables affecting all his longi-
tudes, has by many erroneously been supposed to be a mere
reproduction of Hipparchus's catalogue. That Ptolemy took
many observations himself seems certain.1
1 See two papers by Dr. J. L. E. Dreyer in the Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 1917, pp. 528-39, and 1918. pp. 343-9.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

256 
TRIGONOMETRY
Improved 
Instruments.
7. He made great improvements in the instruments used for
observations. Among those which he used were an improved
dioptra, a c meridian-instrument' designed for observations in
the meridian only, and a universal instrument (darpoXd^oi/
opyavov) for more general use. He also made a globe on
which he showed the positions of the fixed stars as determined
by him; it appears that he showed a larger number of stars
on his globe than in his catalogue.
Geography.
In geography Hipparchus wrote a criticism of Eratosthenes,
in great part unfair. 
He checked Eratosthenes's data by
means of a sort of triangulation; he insisted on the necessity
of applying astronomy to geography, of fixing the position of
places by latitude and longitude, and of determining longitudes
by observations of lunar eclipses.
Outside the domain of astronomy and geography, Hipparchus
wrote a book On things borne down by their weight from
which Simplicius (on Aristotle's Be caelo, p. 264 sq.) quotes
two propositions. It is possible, however, that even in this
work Hipparchus may have applied his doctrine to the case of
the heavenly bodies.
In pure mathematics he is said to have considered a problem
in permutations and combinations, the problem of finding the
number of different possible combinations of 10 axioms or
assumptions, which he made to be 103,049 (v.l. 101,049)
or 310,952 according as the axioms were affirmed or denied1:
it seems impossible to make anything of these figures. When
yie Fihrist attributes to him works ' On the art of algebra,
known by the title of the Rules' and ' On the division of num-
bers ', we have no confirmation: Suter suspects some confusion,
in view of the fact that the article immediately following in
the Fihrist is on Diophantus, who also c wrote on the art of
algebra \
1 Plutarch, Quaest. Conviv. viii. 9. 3, 732 F, Be Stoicorum repugn. 29.
1047 D.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HIPPARCHUS 
257
First systematic use of Trigonometry.
We come now to what is the most important from the
point of view of this work, Hipparchus's share in the develop-
ment of trigonometry. 
Even if he did not invent it,
Hipparchus is the first person of whose systematic use of
trigonometry we have documentary evidence. 
(1) Theon
of Alexandria says on the Syntaxis of Ptolemy, a propos of
Ptolemy's Table of Chords in a circle (equivalent to sines),
that Hipparchus, too, wrote a treatise in twelve books on
straight lines (i.e. chords) in a circle, while another in six
books was written by Menelaus.1 
In the Syntaxis I. 10
Ptolemy gives the necessary explanations as to the notation
used in his Table. The circumference of the circle is divided
into 360 parts or degrees; the diameter is also divided into
120 parts, and one of such parts is the unit of length in terms
of which the length of each chord is expressed; each part,
whether of the circumference or diameter, is divided into 60
parts, each of these again into 60, and so on, according to the
system of sexagesimal fractions. Ptolemy then sets out the
minimum number of propositions in plane geometry upon
which the calculation of the chords in the Table is based {SLOC
rfjs €K 7 w ypajijicov 
fjL€6o8iKrj$ avTcov av<rTd(T€(o$). The pro-
positions are famous, and it cannot be doubted that Hippar-
chus used a set of propositions of the same kind, though his
exposition probably ran to much greater length. As Ptolemy
definitely set himself to give the necessary propositions in the
shortest form possible, it will be better to give them under
Ptolemy rather than here. (2) Pappus, in speaking of Euclid's
propositions about the inequality of the times which equal arcs
of the zodiac take to rise, observes that' Hipparchus in his book
On the rising of the twelve signs of the zodiac shows by means
of numerical calculations (Si dpiOfxcoi') that equal arcs of the
semicircle beginning with Cancer which set in times having
a certain relation to one another do not everywhere show the
same relation between the times in which they rise ',2 and so
on. We have seen that Euclid, Autolycus, and even Theo-
dosius could only prove that the said times are greater or less
1 Theon, Comm. on Syntaxis, p. 110, ed. Halma.
2 Pappus, vi, p. 600. 9-13.
1523.2 
S
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

258 
TRIGONOMETRY
in relation to one another; they could not calculate the actual
times. As Hipparchus proved corresponding propositions by
means of numbers, we can only conclude that he used proposi-
tions in spherical trigonometry, calculating arcs from others
which are given, by means of tables. (3) In the only work
of his which survives, the Commentary on the Phaenomena
of Eudoxus and Aratus (an early work anterior to the
discovery of the precession of. the equinoxes), Hipparchus
states that (presumably in the latitude of Rhodes) a star which
lies 27^° north of the equator describes above the horizon an
arc containing 3 minutes less than 15/24ths of the whole
circle1; then, after some more inferences, he says,' For each
of the aforesaid facts is proved by means of lines (8ia TWV
ypafificQv) in the general treatises on these matters compiled
by me \ In other places2 of the Commentary he alludes to
a work On simultaneous 
risings (ra nepl TG>V o-vvavaroXcov),
and in II. 4. 2 he says he will state summarily, about each of
the fixed stars, along with what sign of the zodiac it rises and
sets and from which degree to which degree of each sign it
rises or sets in the regions about Greece or wherever the
longest day is 14J equinoctial hours, adding that he has given
special proofs in another work designed so that it is possible
in practically every place in the inhabited earth to follow
the differences between the concurrent risings and settings.3
Where Hipparchus speaks of proofs ' by means of lines \ he
does not mean a merely graphical method, by construction
only, but theoretical determination by geometry, followed by
calculation, just as Ptolemy uses the expression e/c 7w ypafi-
ficov of his calculation of chords and the expressions o-cpaipLical
Seigeis and ypa/ifiiKal Seigeis of the fundamental proposition
in spherical trigonometry (Menelaus's theorem applied to the
sphere) and its various applications to particular cases. It
is significant that in the Syntaxis VIII. 5, where Ptolemy
applies the proposition to the very problem of finding the
times of concurrent rising, culmination and setting of the
fixed stars, he says that the times can be obtained ' by lines
o n l y ' (SLCC [IOVO&V TG>V ypa/jL/xcov)* 
Hence we m a y be certain
that, in the other books of his own to which Hipparchus refers
1 Ed. Manitius, pp. 148-50. 
2 Ib., pp. 128. 5,148. 20.
3 Ib., pp. 182. 19-184. 5. 
4 Syntaxis, vol. ii, p. 193,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HIPPARCHUS 
259
in his Commentary, he used the formulae of spherical trigono-
metry to get his results. In the particular case where it is
required to find the time in which a star of 27^° northern
declination describes, in the latitude of Rhodes, the portion of
its arc above the horizon, Hipparchus must have used the
equivalent of the formula in the solution of a right-angled
spherical triangle, tan b = cos A tan c, where G is the right
angle. 
Whether, like Ptolemy, Hipparchus obtained the
formulae, such as this #ne, which he used from different
applications of the one general theorem (Menelaus's theorem)
it is not possible to say. There was of course no difficulty
in calculating the tangent or other trigonometrical function
of an angle if only a table of sines was given; for Hippar-
chus and Ptolemy were both aware of the fact expressed by
sin2 oc + cos2 a — 1 or, as they would have written it,
(crd. 2a)2+ {crd. (180°-2a)}2 = 4r2,
where (crd. 2 a) means the chord subtending an arc 2 a, and r
is the radius, of the circle of reference.
Table of Chords.
We have no details of Hipparchus's Table of Chords suffi-
cient to enable us to compare it with Ptolemy's, which goes
by half-degrees, beginning with angles of -|°, 1°, 1^°, and so
on. But Heron1 in his Metrica says that 'it is proved in the
books about chords in a circle' that, if a9 and an are the sides
of a regular enneagon (9-sided figure) and hendecagon (11-sided
figure) inscribed in a circle of diameter d, then (1) a9 = ^d,
(2) an = %sd very nearly, which means that sin 20° was
taken as equal to 0-3333 ... (Ptolemy's table makes it
— (20 H 
1 1), so that the first approximation is -|), and
60\ 
60 
60 /
sin T
X
T. 180° or sin 16° 21' 49" was made equal to 0-28 (this cor-
responds to the chord subtending an angle of 32° 43' 38",nearly
half-way between 32|° and 33°, and the mean between the two
chords subtending the latter angles gives — ( 
+ — H 
) as
oO \ 
60 
60 /
the required sine, while #o(16A) = Ht> which only differs
1 Heron, Metrica, i. 22, 24, pp. 58. 19 and 62. 17.
s2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

260 
TRIGONOMETRY
by -g^ from -|§| or ^-, Heron's figure). There is little doubt
that it is to Hipparchus's work that Heron refers, though the
author is not mentioned.
While for our knowledge of Hipparchus's trigonometry we
have to rely for the most part upon what we can infer from
Ptolemy, we fortunately possess an original source of infor-
mation about Greek trigonometry in its highest development
in the Spliaerica of Menelaus.
The date of MENELAUS of Alexandria is roughly indi-
cated by the fact that Ptolemy quotes an observation of
his made in the first year of Trajan's reign (A.D. 98). 
He
was therefore a contemporary of Plutarch, who in fact
represents him as being present at the dialogue De facie in
orbe lunae, where (chap. 17) Lucius apologizes to Menelaus 'the
mathematician' for questioning the fundamental proposition
in optics that the angles of incidence and reflection are equal.
He wrote a variety of treatises other than the Sphaerica.
We have seen that Theon mentions his work on Chords in a
Circle in six Books. Pappus says that he wrote a treatise
{irpayfiaTeia) on the setting (or perhaps only rising) of
different arcs of the zodiac.1 Proclus quotes an alternative
proof by him of Eucl. I. 25, which is direct instead of by
reductio ad absurdum? and he would seem to have avoided
the latter kind of proof throughout. Again, Pappus, speaking'
of the many complicated curves ' discovered by Demetrius of
Alexandria (in his "Linear considerations") and by Philon
of Tyana as the result of interweaving plectoids and other
surfaces of all kinds', says that one curve in particular was
investigated by Menelaus and called by him 'paradoxical'
(Trapd8ogos)z\ the nature of this curve can only be conjectured
(see below).
But Arabian tradition refers to other works by Menelaus,
(l) Elements of Geometry, edited by Thabit b. Qurra, in three
Books, (2) a Book on triangles, and (3) a work the title of
which is translated by Wenrich de cognitione quantitatis
discretae corporum permixtorum. 
Light is thrown on this
last title by one al-Chazinl who (about A,D. 1121) wrote a
1 Pappus, vi, pp. 600-2.
2 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 345. 14-346. 11.
3 Pappus, iv, p. 270. 25.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MENELAUS OF ALEXANDRIA 
261
treatise about the hydrostatic balance, i.e. about the deter-
mination of the specific gravity of homogeneous or mixed
bodies, in the course of which he mentions Archimedes and
Menelaus (among others) as authorities on the subject; hence
the treatise (3) must have been a book on hydrostatics dis-
cussing such problems as that of the crown solved by Archi-
medes. The alternative proof of Eucl. I. 25 quoted by
Proclus might have come either from the Elements of Geometry
or the Book on triangles. With regard to the geometry, the
' liber trium fratrum ' (written by three sons of Musa b. Shakir
in the ninth century) says that it contained a solution of the
duplication of the cube, which is none other than that of
Archytas. 
The solution of Archytas having employed the
intersection of a tore and a cylinder (with a cone as well),
there would, on the assumption that Menelaus reproduced the
solution, be a certain appropriateness in the suggestion of
Tannery1 that the curve which Menelaus called the irapd8o£o$
ypajx/jLrj was in reality the curve of double curvature, known
by the name of Viviani, which is the intersection of a sphere
with a cylinder touching it internally and having for its
diameter the radius of the sphere. This curve is a particular
case of Eudoxus's hippopede, and it has the property that the
portion left outside the curve of the surface of the hemisphere
on which it lies is equal to the square on the diameter of the
sphere; the fact of the said area being squareable would
justify the application of the word irapdSogos to the curve,
and the quadrature itself would not probably be beyond the
powers of the Greek mathematicians, as witness Pappus's
determination of the area cut off between a complete turn of
a certain spiral on a sphere and the great circle touching it at
the origin.2
The Sphaerica of Menelaus.
This treatise in three Books is fortunately preserved in
the Arabic, and although the extant versions differ con-
siderably in form, the substance is beyond doubt genuine;
the original translator was apparently Ishaq b. Hunain
(died A. D. 910). There have been two editions, (1) a Latin
1 Tannery, Mimoires scientifiques^ ii, p. 17. 
2 Pappus, iv, pp. 264-8*
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

262 
TRIGONOMETRY
translation by Maurolycus (Messina, 1558) and (2) Halley's
edition (Oxford, 1758). The former is unserviceable because
Maurolycus's manuscript was very imperfect, and, besides
trying to correct and restore the propositions, he added
several of his own. 
Halley seems to have made a free
translation of the Hebrew version of the work by Jacob b.
Machir (about 1273), although he consulted Arabic manuscripts
to some extent, following them, e.g., in dividing the work into
three Books instead of two. But an earlier version direct
from the Arabic is available in manuscripts of the thirteenth
to fifteenth centuries at Paris and elsewhere; this version is
without doubt that made by the famous translator Gherard
of Cremona (1114-87). 
With the help of Halley's edition,
Gherard's translation, and a Leyden manuscript (930) of
the redaction of the work by Abu-Nasr-Mansur made in
A.D. 1007-8, Bjornbo has succeeded in presenting an adequate
reproduction of the contents of the Sphaerica.1
Book I.
In this Book for the first time we have the conception and
definition of a spherical triangle. 
Menelaus does not trouble
to give the usual definitions of points and circles related to
the sphere, e.g. pole, great circle, small circle, but begins with
that of a spherical triangle as ' the area included by arcs of
great circles on the surface of a sphere', subject to the restric-
tion (Def. 2) that each of the sides or legs of the triangle is an
arc less than a semicircle. The angles of the triangle are the
angles contained by the arcs of great circles on the sphere
(Def. 3), and one such angle is equal to or greater than another
according as the planes containing the arcs forming the first
angle are inclined at the same angle as, or a greater angle
than, the planes of the arcs forming the other (Defs. 4, 5).
The angle is a right angle if the planes of the arcs are at right
angles (Def. 6). Pappus tells us that Menelaus in his Sphaerica
calls the figure in question (the spherical triangle) a ' three-
side ' (rptirXevpov)2; the word triangle {rpiyoavov) was of course
1 Bjornbo, Studien itber Menelaos' Sphdrih (Abhandlungen zur Gesch. d.
math. Wissenschaften, Heft xiv. 1902).
2 Pappus, vi, p. 476.16.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MENELAUS'S SPHAERIGA 
263
already appropriated for the plane triangle. We should gather
from this, as well as from the restriction of the definitions to
the spherical triangle and its parts, that the discussion of the
spherical triangle as such was probably new; and if the pre-
face in the Arabic version addressed tQ a prince and beginning
with the words, ' O prince! I have discovered an excellent
method of proof...' is genuine, we have confirmatory evidence
in the writer's own claim.
Menelaus's object, so far as Book I is concerned, seems to
have been to give the main propositions about spherical
triangles corresponding to Euclid's propositions about plane
triangles. At the same time he does not restrict himself to
Euclid's methods of proof even where they could be adapted
to the case of the sphere; he avoids the form of proof by
reductio ad absurdum, but, subject to this, he prefers the
easiest proofs. In some respects his treatment is more com-
plete than Euclid's treatment of the analogous plane cases.
In the congruence-theorems, for example, we have I. 4 a
corresponding to Eucl. I. 4, I. 4 b to Eucl. I. 8, I. 14, 16 to
Eucl. I. 26 a, b; but Menelaus includes (I. 13) what we know
as the ' ambiguous case', which is enunciated on the lines of
Eucl. VI. 7. I. 12 is a particular case of I. 16. Menelaus
includes also the further case which has no analogue in plane
triangles, that in which the three angles of one triangle are
severally equal to the three angles of the other (1.17). He
makes, moreover, no distinction between the congruent and
the symmetrical, regarding both as covered by congruent. 1.1
is a problem, to construct a spherical angle equal to a given
spherical angle, introduced only as a lemma because required
in later propositions. 
I. 2, 3 are the propositions about
isosceles triangles corresponding to Eucl. I. 6, 6; Eucl. 1.18,19
(greater side opposite greater angle and vice versa) have their
analogues in I. 7, 9, and Eucl. I. 24, 25 (two sides respectively
equal and included angle, or third side, in one triangle greater
than included angle, or third side, in the other) in I. 8. I. 5
(two sides of a triangle together greater than the third) corre-
sponds to Eucl. I. 20. There is yet a further group of proposi-
tions comparing parts of spherical triangles, I. 6, 18, 19, where
I. 6 (corresponding to Eucl. I. 21) is deduced from I. 5, just as
the first part of Eucl. I. 21 is deduced.from Eucl. I. 20.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

264 
TRIGONOMETRY
Eucl. I. 16, 32 are not true of spherical triangles, and
Menelaus has therefore the corresponding but different pro-
positions. I. 10 proves that, with the usual notation a, b, c,
A, B, C, .for the sides and opposite angles of a spherical
triangle, the exterior angle at C, or 180° — C, < = or >A
according as c + a > = or < 180°, and vice versa. The proof
of this and the next proposition shall be given as specimens.
In the triangle ABG suppose that c + a > = or < 180°; let
D be the pole opposite to A.
Then, according as c + a > = or < 180°, BG > = or < BD
(since AD-= 180°),
and therefore 
ID > = or < /.BCD (= 180°- C), 
[I. 9]
i.e. 
(since LD = I A) 180°-<7< = or >A.
Menelaus takes the converse for granted.
As a consequence of this, I. 11 proves that A+B + C>lS0°.
Take the same triangle ABG, with the pole D opposite
to A9 and from B draw the great circle BE such that
LD BE = ABDE.
Then GE + EB = CD < 180°, so that, by the preceding
proposition, the exterior angle AGB to the triangle BGE is
greater than AC BE,
i.e. 
G>IGBE.
Add A or D (= lEBD) to the unequals;
therefore 
C+A > LCBD,
whence 
A + B + G > LGBD + B or 180°.
After two lemmas I. 21, 22 we have some propositions intro-
ducing M} N, P the middle points of a, b, c respectively. I. 23
proves, e.g., that the arc MN of a great circle >|c, and I. 20
that AM < = or >\a according as A > = or < (B + C). The
last group of propositions, 26-35, relate to the figure formed
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MENELAUS'S SPHAERIGA 
265
by the triangle ABC with great circles drawn through B to
meet AC (between A and G) in D, E respectively, and the
case where D and E coincide, and they prove different results
arising from different relations between a and c (a>c), com-
bined with the equality of AD and EG (or DC), of the angles
ABD and EBG (or DBG), or of a + c and BD + BE (or 2BD)
respectively, according as a + c < = or >180°.
Book II has practically no interest for us. The object of it
is to establish certain propositions, of astronomical interest
only, which are nothing more than generalizations or exten-
sions of propositions in Theodosius's Sphaerica, Book III.
Thus Theodosius III. 5, 6, 9 are included in Menelaus II. 10,
Theodosius III. 7-8 in Menelaus II. 12, while Menelaus II. 11
is an extension of Theodosius III. 13. The proofs are quite
different from those of Theodosius, which are generally very
long-winded.
Book III. Trigonometry.
It will have been noticed that, while Book I of Menelaus
gives the geometry of the spherical triangle, neither Book I
nor Book II contains any trigonometry. This is reserved for
Book III. As I shall throughout express the various results
obtained in terms of the trigonometrical ratios, sine, cosine,
tangent, it is necessary to explain once for all that the Greeks
did not use this terminology, but, instead of sines, they used
the chords subtended by arcs of a
circle. In the accompanying figure
let the arc i D o f a circle subtend an
angle a at the centre 0. Draw AM
perpendicular to 0Dy and produce it
to meet the circle again in A'. 
Then
sin a = AM/AO, and AM is 
\AA'
or half the chord subtended by an
angle 2 a at the centre, which may
shortly be denoted by J(crd. 2 a).
Since Ptolemy expresses the chords as so many 120th parts of
the diameter of the circle, while AM/AO 
= AA'/2A0, 
it
follows that sin a and -|(crd. 2a) are equivalent. Cos a is
of course sin (90° —a) and is therefore equivalent to \ crd.
(180°-2a).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

266 
TRIGONOMETRY
(a) ' Menelaus's theorem' for the sphere.
The first proposition of Book III is the famous ' Menelaus's
theoremJ with reference to a spherical triangle and any trans-
versal (great circle) cutting the sides of a triangle, produced
if necessary. Menelaus does not, however, use a spherical
triangle in his enunciation, but enunciates the proposition in
terms of intersecting great circles. ' Between two arcs ADB,
AEG of great circles are two other arcs of great circles DFC
and BFE which intersect them and also intersect each other
in F. All the arcs are less than a semicircle. It is required
to prove that
sin CE 
sin Off si
sin EA ~~ sin FD sin BA
It appears that Menelaus gave three or four cases, sufficient
to prove the theorem completely. The proof depends on two
simple propositions which Menelaus assumes without proof;
the proof of them is given by Ptolemy.
(1) In the figure on the last page, if OD be a radius cutting
a chord AB in C, then
AC: GB = sin AD: sin DB.
For draw AM, BN perpendicular to OD. Then
AC:CB = AM:BN
= |(crd. 2 AD) :±(crd. 2DB)
= sin AD: sin DB.
(2) If AB meet the radius OG produced in T, then
AT: BT =SIIL AC: sin BC.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MENELAUS'S SPHAERICA 
267
For, if AM, jBJVare perpendicular to 00, we have, as before,
AT:TB = AM-.BN
= |(crd. 2ilC):i(crd. 2BG)
= sin AC: sin BG.
Now let the arcs of great circles ADB, AEG be cut by the
arcs of great circles DFC, BFE which themselves meet in F.
Let G be the centre of the sphere and join GB, GF, GE, AD.
Then the straight lines AD, GB, being in one plane, are
either parallel or not parallel. If they are not parallel, they
will meet either in the direction of D, B or of A, G.
Let AD, GB meet in T.
Draw the straight lines AKG, DLG meeting GE, GF in K, L
respectively.
Then K, L, T must lie on a straight line, namely the straight
line which is the section of the planes determined by the arc
EFB and by the triangle AGD}
Thus we have two straight lines AC, AT cut by the two
straight lines CD, TK which themselves intersect in L.
Therefore, by Menelaus's proposition in plane geometry,
GK __ GL DT
~ LD'TA
1 So Ptolemy. In other words, since the straight lines GB, GE, GF,
which are in one plane, respectively intersect the straight lines AD, AC,
CD which are also in one plane, the points of intersection T, K, L are in
both planes, and therefore lie on the straight line in which the plane9
intersect.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

268 
TRIGONOMETRY
But, by the propositions proved above,
GK 
sinCff 
GL 
sin OF 
DT 
sinDB
d
therefore, by substitution, we have
sinG# 
sin CF sin DB
sin i?J. "~ sin FD" sin 5JL *
Menelaus apparently also gave the proof for the cases in
which AD, GB meet towards A, G, and in which AD, GB are
parallel respectively, and also proved that in like manner, in
the above figure,
sinCA _ sin CD sinFB
sin AE~~ sin DF' sin BE
(the triangle cut by the transversal being here GFE instead of
ADO). Ptolemy1 gives the proof of the above case only, and
dismisses the last-mentioned result with a ' similarly \
(/3) Deductions from Menelaus's Theorem.
III. 2 proves, by means of I. 14,10 and III. 1, that, if ABC,
A'B'G' be two spherical, triangles in which A = A\ and G, Gf
are either equal or supplementary, sin c/sin a = sin c'/sin o!
and conversely. The particular case in which (7, (7 are right
angles gives what was afterwards known as the ' regula
quattuor quantitatum' and was fundamental in Arabian
trigonometry.2 A similar association attaches to the result of
III. 3, which is the so-called ' tangent' or ' shadow-rule' of the
Arabs. If ABGy A/B/G/ be triangles right-angled at A, A\ and
(7, C' are equal and both either > or < 90°, and if P, Pr be
the poles of AC, A'C', then
sinAB _ sin A'B' sin BP
sin^LO ~~ smTC'" smB7]57'
Apply the triangles so that C' falls on G, C'B' on GB as GE,
and G A' on GA as GD; then the result follows directly from
III. 1. Since sin BP = cos AB, and sin B'P' = cos A'B\ the
result becomes
sin(M
sin CM'
which is the ' tangent-rule' of the Arabs.8
1 Ptolemy, Syntaxis, i. 13, vol. i, p. 76.
2 See Braunmuhl, Gesch. der Trig, i, pp. 17, 47, 58-60, 127-9.
3 Cf. Braunmuhl, op. cit. i, pp. 17-18, 58, 67-9, &c.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MENELAUS'S 
SPHAERICA
269
It follows at once (Prop. 4) that, if AM, A'M' are great
circles drawn perpendicular to the bases BC, B'C of two
spherical triangles ABC, A'B'C in which B = B', C = C",
sin BM 
sin MC / . 
_ . _ 
. , 
tan AM \
= -—"T/fTTT/1 since both are equal to 
.,, r/ )•
smJIf'O'V 
^ 
tan A'M'J
III. 5 proves that, if there are two spherical triangles ABC,
P'
/
D(A')
A'B'C right-angled at A, A' and such that C = C, while b
and V are less than 90°,
sin (a + b) _ sin (a/ + ¥)
sin (a — b) 
sin (a' — &')
from which we may deduce1 the formula
sin (a + b) 
1+ cos C
sin (a — b) ~ 1 — cos C
which is equivalent to tan b = tan a cos C.
(y) Anharmonic property of four great circles through
one point.
But more important than the above result is the fact that
the proof assumes as known the anhar-
monic property of four great circles
drawn from a point on a sphere in rela-
tion to any great circle intersecting them
all, viz. that, if ABCD, A'B'C'D' be two
transversals,
sin AD sin BC 
sin A'D' sin
sin DO ' sin AB " sin D'C' sin A'V'
1 Braunmuhl, op. cit. i, p. 18; Bjornbo, p. 96.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

270 
TKIGONOMETRY
It follows that this proposition was known before Mene-
laus's time. It is most easily proved by means of(Menelaus's
Theorem', III. 1, or alternatively it may be deduced for the
sphere from the corresponding proposition in plane geometry,
just as Menelaus's theorem is transferred by him from the
plane to the sphere in III. 1. We may therefore fairly con-
clude that both the anharmonic property and Menelaus's
theorem with reference to the sphere were already included
in some earlier text-book; and, as Ptolemy, who built so much
upon Hipparchus, deduces many of the trigonometrical
formulae which he uses from the one theorem (III. 1) of
Menelaus, it seems probable enough that both theorems were
known to Hipparchus. 
The corresponding plane theorems
appear in Pappus among his lemmas to Euclid's Porisms,1 and
there is therefore every probability that they were assumed
by Euclid as known.
(8) Propositions analogous to Eucl. VI. 3.
Two theorems following, III. 6, 8, have their analogy in
Eucl. VI. 3. In III. 6 the vertical angle A of a spherical
triangle is bisected by an arc of a great circle meeting BG in
D, and it is proved that sin i?D/sin DC = sin BA/sin 
AC;
in III. 8 we have the vertical angle bisected both internally
and externally by arcs of great circles meeting BC in D and
E, and the proposition proves the harmonic property
sin BE 
si
sin EG " sinDC'
III. 7 is to the effect that, if arcs of great circles be drawn
through B to meet the opposite side AG of a spherical triangle
in D, E so that ZABD = Z EBC, then
sin EA. sin AD _ sin2.A.B
sin DC. sin GE ~ sm^BC '
As this is analogous to plane propositions given by Pappus as
lemmas to different works included in the Treasury of
Analysis, it is clear that these works were familiar to
Menelaus.
1 Pappus, vii, pp. 870-2, 874.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MENELAUS'S SPHAERICA 
271
III. 9 and III. 10 show, for a spherical triangle, that (1) the
great circles bisecting the three angles, (2) the great circles
through the angular points meeting the opposite sides at
right angles meet in a point.
The remaining propositions, III. 11-15, return to the same
sort of astronomical problem as those dealt with in Euclid's
Phaenomena, Theodosius's Sphaerica and Book II of Mene-
laus's own work. 
Props. 11-14 amount to theorems in
spherical trigonometry such as the following.
Given arcs otx, a2, cx3, a4, >S1, /82, )S3, /S4, such that
90°;>a 1>a 2>a 3>a 4,
90°>ft>ft>ft>ft,
and also 
ax > ft, oc2 > ft, a3 > ft, a4 > ft,
(1) If sin «!: sin cx2: sin a3: sin a4 = sin ft: sin ft: sin ft: sinft,
then 
~ 
^ > 
^—^.
sin (ocx — ft) sin (oc2 — ft) sin (a3 — ft)
_ sin (c
~ sih(a4-ft)'
,, 
ax-a2 
ft-ft
then 
-* 
? < ^ — ^ •
If 
sinfo-tt,) < sin (ft-ft)
sin(a3-a4) 
sin (ft-ft)
then 
— 
< -^——^ .
Again, given three series of three arcs such that
OC1>OC2>OC^ ft > ft > ft, 90° > Vl > y2 > y3,
and sin (ax - yx): sin (a a- y2): sin (a3—y3)
= sin (/Sx - yx): sin (ft - y2): sin (ft - y3)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

272 
TRIGONOMETRY
(1) If Of1>j81>2y1, 
a 2>/? 2>2y 2, 
«3>/?3>2y3)
then 
-^—— > o 
7T
then
ft —ft
III. 15, the last proposition, is in four parts. The first part
is the proposition corresponding to Theodosius III. 11 above
alluded to. Let BA, BO he two quadrants of great circles
(in which we easily recognize the equator and the ecliptic),
P the pole of the former, PA19 PA3 quadrants of great circles
meeting the other quadrants in Al9 A3 and Ol9 C3 respectively.
Let R be the radius of the sphere, r, r1? r3 the radii of the
1 parallel circles' (with pole P) through (7, Cl9 C3 respectively.
Then shall
sin A^A3 _ Rr
sin
In the triangles PCC3, BA3C3 the angles at C, A3 are right,
and the angles at C3 equal; therefore (III. 2)
sin PC
sin 
3
sin JBC,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MENELAUS'S SPHAERIGA 
273
But, by III. 1 applied to the triangle BC^ 
cut by the
transversal PGZAZ,
QV»
sin (7^3
sin AXAZ
sin BAS
sin PAX
sin PC^
sin GjGz
sin BCz
sin BA,
sin BCZ~
sin PAX
sin PCX
 J
sinP^!
' sinPOj
Rr
sin PC
sinPC3
J
from above,
Part 2 of the proposition proves that, if PG^A2 be drawn
such that sin2 PC2 = sin PA2. sin PG, or r2
2 = JSr (where r2 is
the radius of the parallel circle through C2), BG2—BA2 is a
maximum, while Parts 3; 4 discuss the limits to the value of
the ratio between the arcs AXA^ and G-fi^.
Nothing is known of the life of CLAUDIUS PTOLEMY except
that he was of Alexandria, made observations between the
years A.D. 125 and 141 or perhaps 151, and therefore presum-
ably wrote his great work about the middle of the reign of
Antoninus Pius (A.D. 138-61). A tradition handed down by
the Byzantine scholar Theodorus Meliteniota (about 1361)
states that he was born, not at Alexandria, but at Ptolemais
fj 'Epfiecov. Arabian traditions, going back probably to
Hunain b. Ishaq, say that he lived to the age of 78, and give
a number of personal details to which too much weight must
not be attached.
The MadrjfiaTLKrj avvTagi? (Arab. Almagest).
Ptolemy's great work, the definitive achievement of Greek
astronomy, bore the title MaOrjfiariKTJs ^wra^em fii(3\ca iy,
the Mathematical Collection in thirteen Books. By the time
of the commentators who distinguished the lesser treatises on
astronomy forming an introduction to Ptolemy's work as
fjLiKpbs dorTpovofjLov/jievos (TO7roy), the 'Little Astronomy', the
book came to be called the * Great Collection', /xeydXt] crvv-
ragis. Later still the Arabs, combining the article Al with
1523.2 
T
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

274 
TRIGONOMETRY
the superlative /liyiarTos, made up a word Al-majisti, which
became Almagest; and it has been known by this name ever
since. The complicated character of the system expounded
by Ptolemy is no doubt responsible for the fact that it
speedily became the subject of elaborate commentaries.
Commentaries on the Syntaxis.
Pappus1 cites a passage from his own commentary on
Book I of the Mathematica, which evidently means Ptolemy's
work. Part of Pappus's commentary on Book V, as well as
his commentary on Book VI, are actually extant in the
original. Theon of Alexandria, who wrote a commentary on
the Syntaxis in eleven Books, incorporated as much as was
available of Pappus's commentary on Book V with full
acknowledgement, though not in Pappus's exact words. In
his commentary on Book VI Theon made much more partial
quotations from Pappus; indeed the greater part of the com-
mentary on this Book is Theon's own or taken from other
sources. Pappus's commentaries are called scholia, Theon's
vnofivrinaTa. Passages in Pappus's commentary on Book V
allude to (the scholia preceding this one' (in the plural), and
in particular to the scholium on Book IV. It is therefore all
but certain that he wrote on all the Books from I to VI at
least. The text of the eleven Books of Theon's commentary
was published at Basel by Joachim Camerarius in 1538, but
it is rare and, owing to the way 'in which it is printed, with
insufficient punctuation marks, gaps in places, and any number
of misprints, almost unusable; accordingly little attention has
so far been paid to it except as regards the first two Books,
which were included, in a more readable form and with a Latin
translation, by Halma in his edition of Ptolemy.
Translations and editions.
The Syntaxis was translated into Arabic, first (we are told)
by translators unnamed at the instance of Yahya b. Khalid b.
Barmak, then by al-Hajjaj, the translator of Euclid (about
786-835), and again by the famous translator Ishaq b. Hunain
(d. 910), whose translation, as improved by Thabit b. Qurra
1 Pappus, viii, p. 1106.13.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PTOLEMY'S SYNTAXIS 
275
(died 901), is extant in part, as well as the version by Nasirad-
din at-Tusi (1201-74).
The first edition to be published was the Latin translation
made by Gherard of Cremona from the Arabic, which was
finished in 1175 but was not published till 1515, when it was
brought out, without the author's name, by Peter Liechten-
stein at Venice. A translation from the Greek had been made
about 1160 by an unknown writer for a certain Henricus
Aristippus, Archdeacon of Catania, who, having been sent by
William I, King of Sicily, on a mission to the Byzantine
Emperor Manuel I. Comnenus in 1158, brought back with
him a Greek manuscript of the Syntaxis as a present; this
translation, however, exists only in manuscripts in the Vatican
and at Florence. The first Latin translation from the Greek
to be published was that made by Georgius ' of Trebizond' for
Pope Nicolas V in 1451; this was revised and published by
Lucas Gauricus at Venice in 1528. The editio princeps of the
Greek text was brought out by Grynaeus at Basel in 1538.
The next complete edition was that of Halma published
1813-16, which is now rare. All the more welcome, there-
fore, is the definitive Greek text of the astronomical works
of Ptolemy edited by Heiberg (1899-1907), to which is now
added, so far as the Syntaxis is concerned, a most valuable
supplement in the German translation (with notes) by Manitius
(Teubner, 1912-13).
Summary of Contents.
The Syntaxis is most valuable for the reason that it con-
tains very full particulars of observations and investigations
by Hipparchus, as well as of the earlier observations recorded
by him, e.g. that of a lunar eclipse in 721 B.C. Ptolemy
based himself very largely upon Hipparchus, e.g. in the
preparation of a Table of Chords (equivalent to sines), the
theory of eccentrics and epicycles, &c.; and it is questionable
whether he himself contributed anything of great value except
a definite theory of the motion of the five planets, for which
Hipparchus had only collected material in the shape of obser-
vations made by his predecessors and himself. A very short
indication of the subjects of the different Books is all that can
T 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

276 
TRIGONOMETRY
be given here. Book I: Indispensable preliminaries to the
study of the Ptolemaic system, general explanations of
the different motions of the heavenly bodies in relation to
the earth as centre, propositions required for the preparation
of Tables of Chords, the Table itself, some propositions in
spherical geometry leading to trigonometrical calculations of
the relations of arcs of the equator, ecliptic, horizon and
meridian, a ' Table of Obliquity ', for calculating declinations
for each degree-point on the ecliptic, and finally a method of
finding the right ascensions for arcs of the ecliptic equal to
one-third of a sign or 10°. Book II: The same subject con-
tinued, i.e. problems on the sphere, with special reference to
the differences between various latitudes, the length of the
longest day at any degree of latitude, and the like. Book III:
On the length of the year and the motion of the sun on the
eccentric and epicycle hypotheses. Book IV: The length of the
months and the theory of the moon. Book V: The construc-
tion of the astrolabe, and the theory of the moon continued,
the diameters of the sun, the moon and the earth's shadow,
the distance of the sun and the dimensions of the sun, moon
and earth. Book VI: Conjunctions and oppositions of sun
and moon, solar and lunar eclipses and their periods. Books
VII and VIII are about the fixed stars and the precession of
the equinoxes, and Books IX-XIII are devoted to the move-
ments of the planets.
Trigonometry in Ptolemy.
What interests the historian of mathematics is the trigono-
metry in Ptolemy. It is evident that no part of the trigono-
metry, or of the matter preliminary to it, in Ptolemy was new.
What he did was to abstract from earlier treatises, and to>
condense into the smallest possible space, the minimum o£
propositions necessary to establish the methods and formulae,
used. Thus at the beginning of the preliminaries to the
Table of Chords in Book I he says:
' We will first show how we can establish a systematic and
speedy method of obtaining the lengths of the chords based on
the uniform use of the smallest possible number of proposi-
tions, so that we may not only have the lengths of the chorda
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PTOLEMY'S SYNTAXIS 
277
set out correctly, but may be in possession of a ready proof of
our method of obtaining them based on geometrical con-
siderations.' *
He explains that he will use the division (1) of the circle into
360 equal parts or degrees and (2) of the diameter into 120
equal parts, and will express fractions of these parts on the
sexagesimal system. Then come the geometrical propositions,
as follows.
(a) Lemma for finding sin 18° and sin 36°.
To find the side of a pentagon and decagon inscribed in
a circle or, in other w^ords, the chords subtending arcs of 72°
and 36° respectively.
Let AB be the diameter of a circle, 0 the centre, OC the
radius perpendicular to AB.
Bisect OB at 2), join DC, and measure
DE along DA equal to DC. Join EC.
Then shall OE be the side of the in-
scribed regular decagon, and EC the side
of the inscribed regular pentagon.
For, since OB is bisected at D,
2 = DE2
Therefore 
BE. E0 = OC2 = 0B\
and BE is divided in extreme and mean ratio.
But (Eucl. XIII. 9) the sides of the regular hexagon and the
regular decagon inscribed in a circle when placed in a straight
line with one another form a straight line divided in extreme
and mean ratio at the point of division.
Therefore, BO being the side of the hexagon, EO is the side
of the decagon.
' Also (by Eucl. XIII. 10)
(side of pentagon)2 = (side of hexagon)2 + (side of decagon)2
= CO2 + OE2 = EC2;
therefore EC is the side of the regular pentagon inscribed
in the circle.
1 Ptolemy, Syntaxis.A. 10, pp. 31 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

278 
TRIGONOMETRY
The construction in fact easily leads to the results
E0 = $0,(^5-1), 
EC=%a«/(10-2</5),
where a is the radius of the circle.
Ptolemy does not however use these radicals, but calculates
the lengths in terms of ' parts' of the diameter thus.
DO = 30, and DO2 = 900; 00 = 60 and OO2 = 3600;
therefore BE2 = DO2 = 4500, and BE = 67* 4' 55" nearly;
therefore side of decagon or (crd. 36°)=DE-DO 
= 37P 4'55".
Again OE2 = (37P±' 55")2 = 1375 . 4' 15", and 0C2 = 3600;
therefore 
OE2 = 4975 . 4' 15", and CE = 70^ 32' 3" nearly,
i.e. 
side of pentagon or (crd. 72°) = 70^ 32' 3".
The method of extracting the square root is explained by
Theon in connexion with the first of these cases, \/4500 (see
above, vol. i, pp. 61-3).
The chords which are the sides of other regular inscribed
figures, the hexagon, the square and the equilateral triangle,
are next given, namely,
crd. 60° = 60^,
crd. 90° = \/(2 . 602) = V(7200) = 84^ 51' 10",
crd. 120° = A/(3 . 602) = 7(10800) = 103P 55' 23".
(/3) Equivalent of sin2 6 + cos2 0 = 1.
It is next observed that, if x be any arc,
(crd. x)2 + {crd. (180°-#)}2 = (diam.)2 = 1202,
a formula which is of course equivalent to sin2 0 +cos2 0 = 1.
We can therefore, from crd. 72°, derive crd. 108°, from
crd. 36°, crd. 144°, and so on.
(y) 'Ptolemy's theorem', giving the equivalent of
sin (0 — (f>) = sin 0 cos <f> — cos 0 sin <f>.
The next step is to find a formula which will give us
crd. (ex — /8) when crd. a and crd. /3 are given. 
(This for
instance enables us to find crd. 12° from crd. 72° and crd. 60°.)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PTOLEMY'S 
SYNTAXI8
279
The proposition giving the required formula depends upon
a lemma, which is the famous ' Ptolemy's theorem \
Given a quadrilateral A BCD inscribed in a circle, the
diagonals being AC, BD, to prove that
AC.BD = AB.DG+AD.BC.
The proof is well known. Draw BE so that the angle ABE
is equal to the angle DBG, and let BE
meet AG in E.
Then the triangles ABE, DBG are
equiangular, and therefore
AB:AE=BD:DG,
or 
AB.DC= 
AE.BD. 
(1)
Again, to each of the equal angles
ABE, DBG add the angle EBD;
then the angle ABD is equal to the angle EBG, and the
triangles ABD, EBG are equiangular;
therefore 
BC:GE=BD: DA,
or 
AD.BG=CE.BD.
By adding (1) and (2), we obtain
AB.DC+AD.BG=AG.BD.
(2)
Now let AB, AG be two arcs terminating at A, the extremity
of the diameter AD of a circle, and let
AG (= a) be greater than AB (= /?).
Suppose that (crd. AG) and (crd. AB)
are given: it is required to find
(crd. BG). '
Join BD, GD.
Then, by the above theorem,
Now AB, AG are given; therefore BD = crd. (180°-AB)
and GD = crd. (180° — AG) are known. And AD is known.
Hence the remaining chord BG (crd. BG) is known.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

280 
TRIGONOMETRY
The equation in fact gives the formula,
{crd. ( a - £ ) } . (crd. 180°) = (crd. a). {crd. (180°-/?)}
-(crd. J3). {crd. (180°-a)},
which is, of course, equivalent to
sin (0 — 0) = sin 6 cos 0 —cos 6 sin 0, where oc = 2 0, /3 = 20.
By means of this formula Ptolemy obtained
crd. 12° = crd. (72°-60°) = 12* 32' 36".
(S) Equivalent of sin2i0 = \ (l-cos0).
But, in order to get the chords of smaller angles still, we
want a formula for finding the chord of half an arc when the
chord of the arc is given. This is the subject of Ptolemy's
next proposition.
Let BG be an arc of a circle with diameter AC, and let the
arc BG be bisected at D. Given (crd. BG), it is required to
find (crd. DC).
Draw DF perpendicular to AC,
and join AB, AD, BD, DC. Measure
AE along AC equal to AB, and join
DE.
Then shall FG be equal to EF, or
FG shall be half the difference be-
tween AG and AB.
For the triangles ABD, AED are
equal in all respects, since two sides
of the one are equal to two sides«of the other and the included
angles BAD, EAD, standing on equal arcs, are equal.
Therefore 
ED = BD = DC,
and the right-angled triangles DEF, DCF are equal in all
respects, whence EF = FG, or CF = %(AC-AB).
Now 
AG.CF=CD\
whence (crd. CD)2 = \AG (AG-AB)
= i(crd. 180°).{(crd. 180°)- (crd. 180°-BG)}.
This is, of course, equivalent to the formula
sin21(9 = |(1-cos 6).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PTOLEMY'S SYFTAXI8 
281
By successively applying this formula, Ptolemy obtained
(crd. 6°), (crd. 3°) and finally (crd. 1J°) = IP 34' 15" and
(crd. |°) = OP 47' 8". But we want a table going by half-
degrees, and hence two more things are necessary; we have to
get a value for (crd. 1°) lying between (crd. 1^°) and (crd. |°),
and we have to obtain an addition formula enabling us when
(crd. a) is given to find {crd. (a + ^°)}, and so on.
(e) Equivalent 
of cos (0 + <p) = cos 6 cos 0 — sin 6 sin </>.
To find the addition formula. Suppose AD is the diameter
of a circle, and AB, BC two arcs. Given (crd. AB) and
(crd. BC), to find (crd. AC). Draw the diameter BOE, and
join CE, CD, DE, BD.
Now, (qrd. AB) being known,
(crd. BD) is known, and therefore
also (crd. DE), which is equal to
(crd. AB); and, (crd. BC) being
known, (crd. CE) is known.
And, by Ptolemy's theorem,
BD.CE^BC.DE+BE.CD.
The diameter BE and all the chords in this equation except
CD being given, we can find CD or crd. (180°—AC). We have
in fact
(.crd. 180°). {crd. (1*0°-AC)}
= {cYd.(lSQo-AB)}.{crd.(lS0o-BC)}-(cYd.AB).(crd.BC);
thus crd. (180° — AC) and therefore (crd. AC) is known.
If AB = 2 0, BC = 2 0, the result is equivalent to
cos (6 + (f>) = cos 6 cos 0 — sin 6 sin <f>.
(£) Method of interpolation based on formula
sin OL /sin £ < a//3 (where \TT > oc > /?).
Lastly we have to find (crd. 1°), having given (crd. 1|°) and
(crd. |°).
Ptolemy uses an ingenious method of interpolation based on
a proposition already assumed as known by Aristarchus.
If AB, BC be unequal chords in a circle, BC being the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

282
TRIGONOMETRY
greater, then shall the ratio of CB to BA be less than the
ratio of the arc CB to the arc BA.
Let BD bisect the angle ABC, meeting AC in E and
the circumference in D. The arcs
AD, DC are then equal, and so are
the chords AD, DC. Also GE>EA
(since CB:BA = CE: EA).
Draw DF perpendicular to AC;
then AD>DE>DF, 
so that the
circle with centre D and radius DE
will meet DA in G and DF produced
intf.
Now 
FE: EA = AFED: AAED
< (sector #ED): (sector GED)
< 
IFDE.IEDA.
Componendo, FA:AE < L FDA: L ADE.
Doubling the antecedents, we have
CA-.AE < LCDA-.LADE,
and, separando, CE :EA < Z CDE: L EDA ;
therefore (since CB:BA = CE:EA)
CB:BA < LCDB.LBDA
< (arc CB): (arc BA),
i. e. 
(crd. CB): (crd. BA) < (arc CB): (arc BA).
[This is of course equivalent to sin a: sin /3 < a: /3, where
3]
2' 50
It follows (1) that (crd. 1°): (crd. |°) < 1: |,
and (2) 
that (crd. 1|°): (crd. 1 °) < 1|: 1.
That is, 
f. (crd. |°) > (crd. 1°) > §. (crd. 1|°).
"But (crd. |°) = 0P 47' 8", so that §(crd. |°) =
nearly (actually IP 2' 5Of");
and (crd. 1-|°) = IP 34' 15", so that |(crd. 1|°) = W 2' 50".
Since, then, (crd. 1°) is both less and greater than a length
which only differs inappreciably from IP 2' 50", we ma^y say
that (crd. 1°) = IP 2' 50" as nearly as possible.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PTOLEMY'S SYNTAX 18 
283
{v) Table of Chords.
From this Ptolemy deduces that (crd. J°) is very nearly
0^ 31' 25", and by the aid of the above propositions he is in
a position to complete his Table of Chords for arcs subtending
angles increasing from ^° to 180° by steps of -|°; in other
words, a Table of Sines for angles from J° to 90° by steps
(6) Further use of proportional increase.
Ptolemy carries further the principle of proportional in-
crease as a method of finding approximately the chords of
arcs containing an odd number of minutes between 0' and 30'.
Opposite each chord in the Table he 'enters in a third column
^ t h of the excess of that chord over the one before, i.e. the
chord of the arc containing 30' less than the chord in question.
For example (crd. 2f°) is stated in the second column of the
Table as 2P 37' 4". The excess of (crd. 2J°) over (crd. 2°) in the
Table is OP 31' 24"; ^Vtn of t n i s is 0^ V 2" 48'", which is
therefore the amount entered in the third column opposite
(crd. 2j°). 
Accordingly, if we want (crd. 2° 25'), we take
(crd. 2°) or 2P 5' 40" and add 25 times 0'P l'2"48'"; or we
take (crd. 2f°) or 2P 37' 4" and subtract 5 times OP l' 2" 48'".
Ptolemy adds that if, by using the approximation for 1° and
f °, we gradually accumulate an error, we can check the calcu-
lation by comparing the chord with that of other related arcs,
e.g. the double, or the supplement (the difference between the
arc and the semicircle).
Some particular results obtained from the Table may be
mentioned. Since (crd. 1°) = 1P 2' 50", the whole circumference
= 360 (IP 2' 50"), nearly, and, the length of the diameter
being 120P, the value of TT is 3 (1 + & + *!§*) = 3 + ^ +^t&>5
which is the value used later by Ptolemy and is equivalent to
3-14166... 
Again, V3 = 2 sin 60° and, 2 (crd. 120°) being
equal to 2 (103? 55' 23"), we have 73 = Tfo (103 + §§ + ^f§Q)
43 55 
23
= 1 + — + —-, + —: = 1-7320509,
60 r60 a 
60d
which is correct to 6 places of decimals. Speaking generally,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

284
TRIGONOMETRY
the sines obtained from Ptolemy's Table are correct to 5
places.
(L) Plane trigonometry in effect used.
There are other cases in Ptolemy in which plane trigono-
metry is in effect used, e.g. in the determination of the
eccentricity of the sun's orbit.1 
Suppose that AGBD is
the eccentric circle with centre 0,
and ABy CD are chords at right
angles through E, the centre of the
earth. To find OE. The arc BG
is known (= a, say) as also the arc
GA (=/3). 
If BF be the chord 
P|.
parallel to CD, and CG the chord
parallel to AB, and if N", P be the
middle points of the arcs BF, GO,
Ptolemy finds (1) the arc 
BF
(= a + /?-180°), then the chord BF,
crd. (a+/8-180°), then the half of it, (2) the arc GC
= arc (a + /3 — 2/3) or arc (a — /3), then the chord GC, and
lastly half of it. 
He then adds the squares on the half-
chords, i.e. he obtains
= i{crd. (a + (3- 180) }2 + £{crd. (a-/3)}2,
that is, 
0E2/r2 = cos2 J (a+j8) + sin2 |(o( -/?).
He proceeds to obtain the angle OEG from its sine OR/OE,
which he expresses as a chord of double the angle in the
circle on OE as diameter in relation to that diameter.
Spherical trigonometry: formulae in solution of
spherical triangles.
In spherical trigonometry, as already stated, Ptolemy
obtains everything that he wants by using the one funda-
mental proposition known as 'Menelaus's theorem7 applied
to the sphere (Menelaus III. i), of which he gives a proof
following that given by Menelaus of the first case taken in
his proposition. Where Ptolemy has occasion for other pro-
positions of MenelausJs Sphaerica, e.g. III. 2 and 3, he does
1 Ptolemy, Syntaxis, iii. 4, vol. i, pp. 234-7.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PTOLEMY'S SYNTAX IS 
285
not quote those propositions, as he might have done, but proves
them afresh by means of Menelaus's theorem.1 The appli-
cation of the theorem in other cases gives in effect the
following different formulae belonging to the solution of
a spherical triangle ABC right-angled at C, viz.
sin a = sine sin A,
tan a = sin b tan A,
cos c = cos a cos 6,
tan b = tan c cos A.
One illustration of Ptolemy's procedure will be sufficient.2
Let HAH' be the horizon, PEZH the meridian circle, EEf
the equator, ZZf the ecliptic, F an
equinoctial point. 
Let EE\ 
ZZ'
cut the horizon in A, B. 
Let P be
the pole, and let the great circle
through P, B cut the equator at C.
Now let it be required to find the
time which the arc FB of the ecliptic
takes to rise; this time will be
measured by the arc FA of the
equator. (Ptolemy has previously found the length of the
arcs BC, the declination, and FC, the right ascension, of B,
I. 14, 16.)
By Menelaus's theorem applied to the arcs AE\ E'P cut by
the arcs AH', PC which also intersect one another in B.
cvd. 2 PH' _ crd. 2PB CV&.2CA .
crd. 2H'E'"" crd. 2 BC' crd. 2 AEn
sin PHr _ sin PB sin CA
1S' 
sin H'E' ~ sin BC ' sin AE''
Now sin PH' = cos H'E\ 
sin PB = cos BC, and 
sinAE'=l;
therefore 
cot H'Ef= cot BC. sin CA,
in other words, in the triangle ABC right-angled at C,
cot A = cot a sin 6,
or 
tan a = sin b tan J..
1 Syntaxis, vol. i, p. 169 and pp. 126-7 respectively,
2 IK vol. i, pp. 121-2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

286 
TRIGONOMETRY
Thus AC is found, and therefore FC-AC or FA.
The lengths of BG, FG are found in I. 14, 16 by the same
method, the four intersecting great circles used in the figure
being in that case the equator EE\ the ecliptic ZZ'', the great
circle PBGPf through the poles, and the great circle PKLP'
passing through the poles of both the ecliptic and the equator.
In this case the two arcs PZ, AE' are cut by the intersecting
great circles PC, FK, and Menelaus's theorem gives (1)
sin PL _ sin GP sin BF
sin KL~~ sin BG ' sin FK'
But sin PL = 1, sin KL = sin BFG, sin GP = 1, sin FK = 1,
and it follows that
sin BG = sin BF sin BFG,
corresponding to the formula for a triangle right-angled at C,
sin a = sin c sin A.
(2) We have
sin PK __ sin PB 
sin GF
sin KL "~ sin.BC * sin FL9
and sin P Z = cos KL = cos J3PC, sin Pi? = cos BG, sin FL=\,
so that 
tan £0 = sin CPtan BFG,
corresponding to the formula
tan a = sin b tan A.
While, therefore, Ptolemy's method implicitly gives the
formulae for the solution of right-angled triangles above
quoted, he does not speak of right-angled triangles at all, but
only of arcs of intersecting great circles. The advantage
from his point of view is that he works in sines and cosines
only, avoiding tangents as such, and therefore he requires
tables of only one trigonometrical ratio, namely the sine (or,
as he has it, the chord of the double arc).
The Analcmma.
Two other works of Ptolemy should be mentioned here.
The first is the Analemma. 
The object of this is to explain
a method of representing on one plane the different points
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ANALEMMA 
OF PTOLEMY 
287
and arcs of the heavenly sphere by means of orthogonal
projection upon three planes mutually at right angles, the
meridian, the horizon, and the ' prime vertical \ 
The definite
problem attacked is that of showing the position of the sun at
any given time of the day, and the use of the method and
of the instruments described in the book by Ptolemy was
connected with the construction of sundials, as we learn from
Vitruvius.1 
There was another di/dXrjfifjLa besides that of
Ptolemy; the author of it was Diodorus of Alexandria, a con-
temporary of Caesar and Cicero (' Diodorus, famed among the
makers of gnomons, tell me the time!' says the Anthology 2),
and Pappus wrote a commentary upon it in which, as ha tells
us,3 he used the conchoid in order to trisect an angle, a problem
evidently required in the Analemma in order to divide any
arc of a circle into six equal parts (hours). 
The word
dvd\7]iifxa evidently means ' taking up' (' Aufnahme') in the
sense of ' making a graphic representation' of something, in
this case the representation on a plane of parts of the heavenly
sphere. Only a few fragments remain of the Greek text of
the Analemma of Ptolemy; these are contained in a palimpsest
(Ambros. Gr. L. 99 sup., now 491) attributed to the seventh
century but probably earlier. Besides this, we have a trans-
lation by William of Moerbeke from an Arabic version.
This Latin translation was edited with a valuable commentary
by the indefatigable Commandinus (Rome, 1562); but it is
now available in William of Moerbeke's own words, Heiberg
having edited it from Cod. Vaticanus Ottobon. lat. 1850 of the
thirteenth century (written in William's own hand), and in-
cluded it with the Greek fragments (so far as they exist) in
parallel columns in vol. ii of Ptolemy's works (Teubner, 1907).
The figure is referred to three fixed planes (1) the meridian,
(2) the horizon, (3) the prime vertical; these planes are the
planes of the three circles APZB, AGB, ZQO respectively
shown in the diagram below. Three other great circles are
used, one of which, the equator with pole P, is fixed; the
other two are movable and were called by special names;
the first is the circle represented by any position of the circle
of the horizon as it revolves round C0Cf as diameter (GSM in
1 Vitruvius, De architect, ix. 4. 
2 Anth. Palat, xiv. 139.
3 Pappus, iv, p. 246. 1.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

288
TRIGONOMETRY
the diagram is one position of it, coinciding with the equator),
and it was called eKTrjfiopos KVKXOS (' the circle in six parts')
because the highest point of it above the horizon corresponds
to the lapse of six hours; the second, called the hour-circle, is
the circle represented by any position, as BSQA, of the circle
of the horizon as it revolves round BA as axis.
The problem is, as above stated, to find the position of the
sun at a given hour of the day. In order to illustrate
the method, it is sufficient, with A. v. Braunmiihl,1 to take the
simplest case where the sun is on the equator, i.e. at one of
the equinoctial points, so that the hectemoron circle coincides
with the equator.
Let 8 be the position of the sun, lying on the equator M8C,
P the pole, MZA the meridian, BGA the horizon, BSQA the
hour-circle, and let the vertical great circle ZSV be drawn
through S, and the vertical great circle ZQG through Z the
zenith and G the east-point.
We are given the arc SG = 90° — ty where t is the hour-
angle, and the arc MB = 90° — 0, where 0 is the elevation of
the pole; and we have to find the arcs SV (the sun's altitude),
VO, the 'ascensional difference', SQ and QG. Ptolemy, in
fact, practically determines the position of S in terms of
certain spherical coordinates.
Draw the perpendiculars, SF to the plane of the meridian,
SH to that of the horizon, and SE to the plane of the prime
1 Braunmuhl, Gesch. der Trigonometries i, pp. 12, 13,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ANALEMMA 
OF PTOLEMY
289
vertical; and draw FG perpendicular to BA, and ET to OZ.
Join HG, and we have FG = 8H, GH = FS = ET.
We now represent SF in a separate figure (for clearness'
sake, as Ptolemy uses only one figure), where B'Z'A' corre-
sponds to BZA, P' to P and O'M' to OM. Set off the arc
P'/S' equal to GS (= 90°-t), and draw 8'F' perpendicular
to O'M'. Then 8'M'= SM, and 5'^'= SF; it is as if in the
original figure we had turned the quadrant M8G round MO
till it coincided with the meridian circle.
In the two figures draw IFK, I'F'K' parallel to BA, B'A\
and LFG, L'F'G' parallel to OZ, O'Z'.
Then (1) arc ZI = arc #5 = arc (90°-57), because if we
turn the quadrant Z8V about ZO till it coincides with the
meridian, 8 falls on J, and V on B. It follows that the
required arc 8V = arc B'V in the second figure.
(2) To find the arc 7(7, set off (7'X (in the second figure)
along G'i" equal to FS or F'S', and draw <7X through to
meet the circle in X\ 
Then arc ^ Z r = a r c 7(7; for it is as if
we had turned the quadrant BVO about BO till it coincided
with the meridian, when (since G'X = FS = GH) H would
coincide with X and 7 with X'. 
Therefore BV is also equal
to B'X\
(3) To find QG or ZQ, set off along T'F' in the second figure
T'T equal to J W , and draw O'Y through to Y' on the circle.
Then arc 2?T'= arc QC; for it is as if we turned the prime
vertical ZQG about ZO till it coincided with the meridian,
when (since T'Y=8'F'= 
TE) E would fall on 7, the radius
OEQ on O'YY' and Q on 7'.
(4) Lastly, arc 55 = arc BL = arc B'L\ because S} L are
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

290 
TRIGONOMETRY
both in the plane LSHG at right angles to the meridian;
therefore arc SQ = arc L'Z'.
Hence all four arcs 8V, VC, QCy Q8 are represented in the
auxiliary figure in one plane.
So far the procedure amounts to a method of graphically
constructing the arcs required as parts of an auxiliary circle
in one plane. But Ptolemy makes it clear that practical
calculation followed on the basis of the figure.1 The lines
used in the construction are 8F= sin t (where the radius =1),
FT=0Fsin(t), 
FG = 0.Fsin(90o -0), and this was fully
realized by Ptolemy. Thus he shows how to calculate the
arc 8Z, the zenith distance (= d, say) or its complement 8V,
the height of the sun (= h, say), in the following way. He
says in effect: Since G is known, and LF'O'G' = 90° —0, the
ratios O'Fr: F'T and O'F': O'T' are known.
[In fact g ^ = c r d > ( 1 8 ^ 2 0 ) , where D is the diameter
of the sphere.]
Next, since the arc MS. or M'S' is known [ = £], and there-
fore the arc P'Sf [= 90°-$], the ratio of O'F' to D is known
[in fact O'F'/D = {crd. 
(lS0-2t)}/2D.
It follows from these two results that
Jt U
Lastly, the arc 8V (= h) being equal to B'I\ the angle h is
equal to the angle O'TT in the triangle I'O'l". 
And in this
triangle O'l', the radius, is known, while OrTf has been found;
and we have therefore
O'T 
crd. (2/*,) 
crd. (180°-2ft crd. (180°-2 0) .
O77, = — ^ — = — ^ 
4 ; 
» , from above.
[In other words, sin/z = cos t cos 0; or, if u = SC = 90°--£,
sin h = sin u cos 0, the formula for finding sin h in the right-
angled spherical triangle SVC]
For the azimuth co (arc BV = arc B'X'), the figure gives
. 
XG' 
S'F' 
S'F' 
O'F' 
. 
1
tan co = -^r, 
= -=?=-, = yy^r, - -r—, = tan t.
sin 0 3
1 See Zeuthen in Bibliotheca mathematica, i3, 1900, pp. 23-7.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ANALEMMA 
OF PTOLEMY 
291
or tan VG = t&nSCcoaSGV in the right-angled spherical
triangle SVG.
Thirdly,
l = CFF = W¥' ' WT' 
^
._ 
. 
tsmQZ 
sinBZ 
, . , 
. 
, , 
, 
o ,
that is. T 
^rj. = ——^^rz,, which is Menelaus, 
jSphaerica,
3 tan SM 
smBM 
r
III. 3, applied to the right-angled spherical triangles ZBQ,
MBS with the angle B common.
Zeuthen points out that later in the same treatise Ptolemy
finds the arc 2 a described above the horizon by a star of
given declination 8', by a procedure equivalent to the formula
cos OL = tan Sr tan 0,
and this is the same formula which, as we have seen,
Hipparchus must in effect have used in his Commentary on
the Phaenomena of Eudoxus and Aratus.
Lastly, with regard to the calculations of the height h and
the azimuth co in the general case where the sun's declination
is 8', Zeuthen has shown that they may be expressed by the
formulae
sin h = (cos 8' cos t — sin Sf tan 0) cos 0,
, 
. 
cos 8/ sin t
and 
tanco =
or
" 
+ (cos 8' cos t — sin 8' tan 6) sin 6
COS0 
X 
r / 
r
cos 8' sin t
sin 8' cos 0 + cos 8* cos t sin 0
The statement therefore of A. v. Braunmiihl1 that the
Indians were the first to utilize the method of projection
contained in the Analemma for actual trigonometrical calcu-
lations with the help of the Table of Chords or Sines requires
modification in so far as the Greeks at all events showed the
way to such use of the figure. Whether the practical applica-
tion of the method of the Analemma for what is equivalent
to the solution of spherical triangles goes back as far as
Hipparchus is not certain; but it is quite likely that it does,
1 Braunmuhl, i, pp. 13, 14, 38-41.
U 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

292 
TRIGONOMETRY
seeing that Diodorus wrote his Analemma in the next cen-
tury. The other alternative source for Hipparchils's spherical
trigonometry is the Menelaus-theorem applied to the sphere,
on which alone Ptolemy, as we have seen, relies in his
Syntaxis. 
In any case the Table of Chords or Sines was in
full use in Hipparchus's works, for it is presupposed by either
method.
The Planisphaerium.
With the Analemma of Ptolemy is associated another
work of somewhat similar content, the 
Planisphaerium.
This again has only survived in a Latin translation from an
Arabic version made by one Maslama.b. Ahmad al-Majriti, of
Cordova,(born probably at Madrid, died 1007/8); the transla-
tion is now found to be, not by Rudolph of Bruges, but by
'Hermannus Secundus', whose pupil Rudolph was; it was
first published at Basel in 1536, and again edited, with com-
mentary, by Commandinus (Venice, 1558). 
It has been
re-edited from the manuscripts by Heiberg in vol. ii. of his
text of Ptolemy. The book is an explanation of the system
of projection known as stereographic, by which points on the
heavenly sphere are represented on the plane of the equator
by projection from one point, a pole; Ptolemy naturally takes
the south pole as centre of projection, as it is the northern
hemisphere which he is concerned to represent on a plane.
Ptolemy is aware that the projections of all circles on the
sphere (great circles—other than those through the poles
which project into straight lines—and small circles either
parallel or not parallel to the equator) are likewise circles.
It is curious, however, that he does not give any general
proof of the fact, but is content to prove it of particular
circles, such as the ecliptic, the horizon, &c. This is remark-
able, because it is easy to show that, if a cone be described
with the pole as vertex and passing through any circle on the
sphere, i.e. a circular cone, in general oblique, with that circle
as base, the section of the cone by the plane of the equator
satisfies the criterion found for the ' subcontrary sections' by
Apollonius at the beginning of his Conies, and is therefore a
circle. The fact that the method of stereographic projection is
so easily connected with the property of subcontrary sections
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE PLAN1SPHAERIUM 
OF PTOLEMY 
293
of oblique circular cones has led to the conjecture that Apollo-
nius was the discoverer of the method. But Ptolemy makes no
mention of Apollonius, and all that we know is that Synesius
of Cyrene (a pupil of Hypatia, and born about A.D. 365-370)
attributes the discovery of the method and its application to
Hipparchus; it is curious that he does not mention* Ptolemy's
treatise on the subject, but speaks of himself alone as having
perfected the theory. While Ptolemy is fully aware that
circles on the sphere become circles in the projection, he says
nothing about the other characteristic of this method of pro-
jection, namely that the angles on the sphere are represented
by equal angles on the projection.
We must content ourselves with the shortest allusion to
other works of Ptolemy. There are, in the first place, other
minor astronomical works as follows:
(1) $d<reis airXavcov da-ripcou of which only Book II sur-
vives, (2) cT7ro0eo-€/y TG>V TrXai/cofxii/coi/ in two Books, the first
of which is extant in Greek, the second in Arabic only, (3) the
inscription in Canobus, (4) IIpo^eLpcov KCLVOVCOV Starcta-is KOU
yfrrjcpocpopLa. 
All these are included in Heiberg's edition,
vol. ii.
The Optics.
Ptolemy wrote an Optics in five Books, which was trans-
lated from an Arabic version into Latin in the twelfth
century by a certain Admiral Eugenius Siculus1; Book I,
however, and the end of Book V are wanting. Books I, II
were physical, and dealt with generalities; in Book III
Ptolemy takes up the theory of mirrors, Book IV deals with
concave and composite mirrors, and Book V with refraction.
The theoretical portion would suggest that the author was
not very proficient in geometry. Many questions are solved
incorrectly owing to the assumption of a principle which is
clearly false, namely that' the image of a point on a mirror is
at the point of concurrence of two lines, one of which is drawn
from the luminous point to the centre of curvature of the
mirror, while the other is the line from the eye to the point
1 See G. Govi, L'ottica di Claudio Tolomeo di JEugenio Ammiraglio d
Sicilia,... Torino, 1884; and particulars in G. Loria. Le scienze emtte
nelV antica Grecia, pp. 570, 571.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

294 
TRIGONOMETRY
on the mirror where the reflection takes place'; Ptolemy uses
the principle to solve various special cases of the following
problem (depending in general on a biquadratic equation and
now known as the problem of Alhazen), * Given a reflecting
surface, the position of a luminous point, and the position
of a point' through which the reflected ray is required to pass,
to find the point on the mirror where the reflection will take
place/ Book V is the most interesting, because it seems to
be the first attempt at a theory of refraction. 
It contains
many details of experiments with different media, air, glass,
and water, and gives tables of angles of refraction (?*) corre-
sponding to different angles of incidence (i); these are calcu-
lated on the supposition that r and i are connected by an
equation of the following form,
r = ai—bi2,
where a} b are constants, which is worth noting as the first
recorded attempt to state a law of refraction.
The discovery of Ptolemy's Optics in the Arabic at once
made it clear that the work Be speculis formerly attributed
to Ptolemy is not his, and it is now practically certain that it
is, at least in substance, by Heron. This is established partly
by internal evidence, e.g. the style and certain expressions
recalling others which are found in the same author's Auto-
mata and Bioptra, and partly by a quotation by Damianus
(On hypotheses in Optics, chap. 14) of a proposition proved by
1 the mechanician Heron in his own Gatoptrica \ which appears
in the work in question, but is not found in Ptolemy's Optics,
or in Euclid's. The proposition in question is to the effect
that of all broken straight lines from the eye to the mirror
and from that again to the object, that particular broken line
is shortest in which the two parts make equal angles with the
surface of the mirror; the inference is that, as nature does
nothing in vain, we must assume that, in reflection from a
mirror, the ray takes the shortest course, i.e. the angles of
incidence and reflection are equal. Except for the notice in
Damianus and a fragment in Olympiodorus1 containing the
proof of the proposition, nothing remains of the Greek text;
1 Olympiodorus on Aristotle, Meteor, iii. 2, ed Ideler, ii, p. 96, ed.
Stiive, pp. 212 5-213. 20.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE OPTICS OF PTOLEMY 
295
but the translation into Latin (now included in the Teubnei:
edition of Heron, ii5 1900, pp. 316-64), which was made by
William of Moerbeke in 1269, was evidently made from the
Greek and not from the Arabic, as is shown by Graecisms in
the translation.
A mechanical work, Tlepl fionai'.
There are allusions in Simplicius1 and elsewhere to a book
by Ptolemy of mechanical content, nepl poir&v, on balancings
or turnings of the scale, in which Ptolemy maintained as
against Aristotle that air or water (e.g.) in their own ' place '
have no weight, and, when they are in their own ' place', either
remain at rest or rotate simply, the tendency to go up or to
fall down being due to the desire of things which are not in
their own places to move to them. Ptolemy went so far as to
maintain that a bottle full of air was not only not heavier
than the same bottle empty (as Aristotle held), but actually
lighter when inflated than when empty. The same work is
apparently meant by the ' book on the elements' mentioned
by Simplicius.2 Suidas attributes to Ptolemy three Books of
Mechanica.
Simplicius 3 also mentions a single book, ire pi SiacrTdo-ecos,
1 On dimension', i.e. dimensions, in which Ptolemy tried to
show that the possible number of dimensions is limited to
three.
Attempt to prove the Parallel-Postulate.
Nor should we omit to notice Ptolemy's attempt to prove
the Parallel-Postulate. 
Ptolemy devoted a tract to this
subject, and Proclus 4 has given us the essentials of the argu-
ment used. Ptolemy gives, first, a proof of Eucl. I. 28, and
then an attempted proof of I. 29, from which he deduces
Postulate 5.
1 Simplicius on Arist. Be caelo, p. 710. 14, Heib. (Ptolemy, ed. Heib.,
vol. ii, p. 263).
2 /&., p. 20. 10 sq.
3 /&., p. 9. 21 sq., (Ptolemy, ed. Heib., vol. ii, p. 265).
4 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 362. 14 sq., 365. 7-367. 27 (Ptolemy, ed. Heib.,
vol. ii, pp. 266-70).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

296 
TRIGONOMETRY
I. To prove I. 28, Ptolemy takes two straight lines AB, CD,
and a transversal EFGH. We have to prove that, if the sum
C 
~/G 
D
H
of the angles BFG, FGD is equal to two right angles, the
straight lines AB, CD are parallel, i.e. non-secant.
Since AFG is the supplement of BFG, and FGC of FGD, it
follows that the sum of the angles AFG, FGG is also equal to
two right angles.
Now suppose, if possible, that FB, GD} making the sum of
the angles BFG, FGD equal to two right angles, meet at K;
then similarly FA, GO making the sum of the angles AFG,
FGC equal to two right angles must also meet, say at L.
[Ptolemy would have done better to point out that not
only are the two sums equal but the angles themselves are
equal in pairs, i.e. AFG to FGD and FGC to BFG, and we can
therefore take the triangle KFG and apply it to FG on the other
side so that the sides FK, GK may lie along GC, FA respec-
tively, in which case GC, FA will meet at the point where
K falls.]
Consequently the straight lines LABK, LCDK enclose a
space: which is impossible.
It follows that AB, CD cannot meet in either direction;
they are therefore parallel.
II. To prove I. 29, Ptolemy takes two parallel lines AB,
CD and the transversal FG, and argues thus. It is required
to prove that 
Z AFG + Z CGF = two right angles.
For, if the sum is not equal to two right angles, it must be
either (1) greater or (2) less.
(1) If it is greater, the sum of the angles on the other side,
BFG, FGD, which are the supplements of the first pair of
angles, must be less than two right angles.
But AF} CG are no more parallel than FB, GD, so that, if
FG makes one pair of angles AFG, FGC together greater than
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PTOLEMY ON THE PARALLEL-POSTULATE 297
two right angles, it must also make the other pair BFG, FGD
together greater than two right angles.
But the latter pair of angles were proved less than two
right angles: which is impossible.
Therefore the sum of the angles AFG, FGC cannot be
greater than two right angles.
(2) Similarly we can show that the sum of the two angles
AFG, FGC cannot be less than two right angles.
Therefore 
Z AFG + Z CGF = two right angles.
[The fallacy here lies in the inference which I have marked
by italics. When Ptolemy says that AF, GG are no more
parallel than FB, GD, he is in effect assuming that through
any one point only one 'parallel can be drawn to a given straight
line, which is an equivalent for the very Postulate he is
endeavouring to prove. The alternative Postulate is known
as 'Playfair's axiom', but it is of ancient origin, since it is
distinctly enunciated in Proclus's note on Eucl. I. 31.]
III. Post. 5 is now deduced, thus.
Suppose that the straight lines making with a transversal
angles the sum of which is less than two right angles do not
meet on the side on which those angles are.
Then, a fortiori^ they will not meet on the other side on
which are the angles the sum of which is greater than two
right angles. [This is enforced by a supplementary proposi-
tion showing that, if the lines met on that side, Eucl. I. 16
would be contradicted.]
Hence the straight lines cannot meet in either direction :
they are therefore parallel.
But in that case the angles made with the transversal are
equal to two right angles: which contradicts the assumption.
Therefore the straight lines will meet.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

