
TURBULENCE, DYNAMOS, ACCRETION DISKS, PULSARS AND 
COLLECTIVE PLASMA PROCESSES 

ASTROPHYSICS AND 
SPACE SCIENCE PROCEEDINGS 
For other titles published in this series, go to 
www.springer.com/series/7395 

TURBULENCE, DYNAMOS, 
ACCRETION DISKS, PULSARS 
AND COLLECTIVE PLASMA 
PROCESSES 
FIRST KODAI-TRIESTE WORKSHOP 
ON PLASMA ASTROPHYSICS HELD 
AT THE KODAIKANAL OBSERVATORY 
KODAIKANAL, INDIA 
AUGUST 27 – SEPTEMBER 7, 2007 
Edited by 
S.S. HASAN 
Indian Institute of Astrophysics, 
Bangalore, India 
R.T. GANGADHARA 
Indian Institute of Astrophysics, 
Bangalore, India 
and 
V. KRISHAN 
Indian Institute of Astrophysics, 
Bangalore, India 

Editors 
S.S. Hasan 
R.T. Gangadhara 
Indian Institute of Astrophysics 
Indian Institute of Astrophysics 
Sarjapur Road 
Sarjapur Road 
Bangalore-560034 
Bangalore-560034 
IInd Block, Koramangala 
IInd Block, Koramangala 
India 
India 
hasan@iiap.res.in 
ganga@iiap.res.in 
V. Krishan 
Indian Institute of Astrophysics 
Sarjapur Road 
Bangalore-560034 
IInd Block, Koramangala 
India 
vinod@iiap.res.in 
ISBN 978-1-4020-8867-4 
e-ISBN 978-1-4020-8868-1 
Library of Congress Control Number: 2008934393 
c⃝ 2009 Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 
No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microﬁlming, recording or otherwise, without the written 
permission from the Publisher, with the exception of any material supplied speciﬁcally for the purpose of 
being entered and executed on a computer system, for the exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. 
Printed on acid-free paper 
springer.com 
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1  

Preface 
The Kodaikanal Observatory of the Indian Institute of Astrophysics traces its 
origins to the end of the nineteenth century when it was decided to relocate the 
Madras Observatory to a high altitude site with a view to initiate observations 
of the Sun. Many valuable observations were made here including the discovery 
of outﬂowing material in sunspots discovered by John Evershed in 1909. The 
Observatory continues to provide useful solar data as well as serve as a centre 
for research and training programmes. Moreover, with its serene and beautiful 
environment, and good infrastructure it is an ideal location for the pursuit of 
intellectual and pedagogical activity. 
In 2006 an initiative was taken to begin a series of schools and workshops 
in diﬀerent areas of astronomy and astrophysics with a view to attract stu-
dents to this ﬁeld as well as to enhance excellence and greater interaction 
among researchers working in these areas. The ﬁrst Kodai-Trieste Workshop 
on Plasma Astrophysics, which was held at the Kodaikanal Observatory, Ko-
daikanal during August 27 - September 7, 2007, was a continuation of this 
eﬀort. Organized jointly by the Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore 
and the Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ASICTP), 
Trieste, its aim was to provide a strong conceptual foundation in plasma astro-
physics. The Workshop was conceived when Prof. K. R. Sreenivasan, Director, 
ICTP, visited the Indian Institute of Astrophysics in October, 2006. 
It is well established that more than 99% of the baryonic matter in the 
universe is in the plasma state. Most astrophysical systems could be approx-
imated as conducting ﬂuids in a gravitational ﬁeld. It is the combined eﬀect 
of these two that gives rise to the rich variety of conﬁgurations in the form of 
ﬁlaments, loops, jets and arches. The plasma structures that cannot last for 
more than a second or less in the laboratory remain intact on astronomical 
time and spatial scales. High energy radiation sources such as active galac-
tic nuclei involve coherent plasma radiation processes for their exceptionally 
large output from regions of relatively small physical sizes. The generation 
of magnetic ﬁeld, anomalous transport of angular momentum with decisive 
bearing on star formation processes, the ubiquitous MHD turbulence under 

VI 
Preface 
conditions not reproducible in terrestrial laboratories are some of the generic 
issues still awaiting a concerted eﬀort to be properly understood. Quantum 
plasmas, pair plasmas and pair-ion plasmas exist under extreme conditions in 
planetary interiors and exotic stars. 
This monograph, consisting of 22 contributions, is organized in six parts 
dealing with astrophysical turbulence, dynamos, pulsar radiation mechanisms, 
quantum plasmas, accretion disks, and solar and space plasmas. The work-
shop brought together several international scientists and young researchers 
working in plasma astrophysics. 
The workshop owes its success to the eﬀorts of a large number of persons, 
including V. Krishan, the course director, K. E. Rangarajan, the convener, 
and R. T. Gangadhara, the coordinator. In addition, I am grateful to all 
the speakers for readily accepting to participate in the workshop and for a 
timely submission of their manuscripts. I am thankful to the scientiﬁc and 
administrative staﬀ of the Indian Institute of Astrophysics at the Bangalore 
and Kodaikanal campuses for providing local support. 
Bangalore 
S. S. Hasan 
April 2008 

Contents 
Part I Astrophysical Turbulence 
Aspects of Hydrodynamic Turbulence in Classical and 
Quantum Systems 
J.J. Niemela . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3 
Observations and Modeling of Turbulence in the Solar Wind 
Melvyn L. Goldstein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21 
Power Spectra of the Fluctuations in the Solar Wind 
V. Krishan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35 
Part II Astrophysical Dynamos 
Alpha Eﬀect in Partially Ionized Plasmas 
V. Krishan and R. T. Gangadhara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  55 
Constraints on Dynamo Action 
A. Mangalam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  69 
Planetary Dynamos 
Vinod K. Gaur . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  85 
Part III Pulsar Radiation Mechanism 
Pulsars as Fantastic Objects and Probes 
Jin Lin Han . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  99 

VIII 
Contents 
Pulsar Radio Emission Geometry 
R. T. Gangadhara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113 
Millisecond Pulsar Emission Altitude from Relativistic Phase 
Shift: PSR J0437-4715 
R. T. Gangadhara and R. M. C. Thomas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137 
Magnetosphere Structure and the Annular Gap Model of Pulsars 
G.J. Qiao, K.J. Lee, H.G. Wang, and R.X. Xu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147 
Wave Modes in the Magnetospheres of Pulsars and Magnetars 
C. Wang, D. Lai . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169 
Polarization of Coherent Curvature Radiation in Pulsars 
R. M. C. Thomas and R.T. Gangadhara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177 
Part IV Quantum Plasmas 
Nonlinear Quantum Plasma Physics 
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, Dastgeer Shaikh. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191 
Dust Plasma Interactions in Space and Laboratory 
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, Dastgeer Shaikh. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 213 
Part V Accretion Disks 
Magnetorotational Instability In Accretion Disks 
V. Krishan and S.M. Mahajan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233 
Hybrid Viscosity and Magnetoviscous Instability in Hot, 
Collisionless Accretion Disks 
Prasad Subramanian, Peter A. Becker, Menas Kafatos. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249 
Transonic Properties of Accretion Disk Around Compact Objects 
Banibrata Mukhopadhyay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 261 
Maximum Brightness Temperature for an Incoherent 
Synchrotron Radio Source 
Ashok K. Singal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 273 
Nonlinear Jeans Instability in an Uniformly Rotating Gas 
Nikhil Chakrabarti, Barnana Pal and Vinod Krishan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 281 

Contents 
IX 
Part VI Solar and Space Plasmas 
An Overview of the Magnetosphere, Substorms and 
Geomagnetic Storms 
G. S. Lakhina, S. Alex, R. Rawat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 293 
Monte Carlo Simulation of Scattering of Solar Radio Emissions 
G. Thejappa, R. J. MacDowall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311 
Evolution of Magnetic Helicity in NOAA 10923 Over Three 
Consecutive Solar Rotations 
Sanjiv Kumar Tiwari, Jayant Joshi, Sanjay Gosain and 
P. Venkatakrishnan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 329 
Stability of Double Layer in Multi-Ion Plasmas 
A.M. Ahadi, S. Sobhanian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 337 

List of Contributors
J.J. Niemela
The Abdus Salam International
Center for Theoretical
Physics, Strada Costiera 11, 34014
Trieste, Italy
niemela@ictp.it
Melvyn L. Goldstein
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center,
USA
melvyn.l.goldstein@nasa.gov
V. Krishan1,2
1Indian Institute of Astrophysics,
Bangalore-560034, India
2Raman Research Institute,
Bangalore-560080, India
vinod@iiap.res.in
R. T. Gangadhara
Indian Institute of Astrophysics,
Bangalore-560034, India
ganga@iiap.res.in
R. M. C. Thomas
Indian Institute of Astrophysics,
Bangalore-560034, India
mathew@iiap.res.in
A. Mangalam
Indian Institute of Astrophysics,
Bangalore-560034, India
mangalam@iiap.res.in
Vinod K. Gaur
Indian Institute of Astrophysics,
Bangalore-560034, India
vgaur@iiap.res.in
Jin Lin Han
National Astronomical Obser-
vatories, Chinese Academy of
Sciences,
Jia-20 DaTun Road, Chaoyang
District, Beijing 100012, China
hjl@bao.ac.cn
G.J. Qiao
Department of Astronomy, Peking
University, Beijing
100871, China
gjn@pku.edu.cn
K.J. Lee
Department of Astronomy, Peking
University, Beijing
100871, China
k.j.lee@water.pku.edu.cn
H.G. Wang
Center for astrophysics, Guangzhou
University, Guangzhou 510006,
China
hgwang@gzhu.edu.cn

XII
List of Contributors
R.X. Xu
Department of Astronomy, Peking
University, Beijing
100871, China
r.x.xu@pku.edu.cn
C. Wang1,2
1National Astronomical Observato-
ries, Chinese Academy of
Sciences. A20 Datun Road, Chaoyang
District, Beijing 100012, China
2Center for Radiophysics and Space
Research, Department of Astronomy,
Cornell University. Ithaca, NY
14853, USA
wangchen@bao.ac.cn
Padma K. Shukla
Theoretische Physik IV, Ruhr-
Universit¨at Bochum, D-44780
Bochum, Germany
ps@tp4.rub.de
Bengt Eliasson
Theoretische Physik IV, Ruhr-
Universit¨at Bochum, D-44780
Bochum,
Germany
bengt@tp4.rub.de
Dastgeer Shaikh
Institute of Geophysics and
Planetary Physics,
University of Californina, Riverside,
CA 92521, USA
shaikh@ucr.edu
Menas Kafatos
College of Science, George Mason
University, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
Prasad Subramanian
Indian Institute of Astrophysics,
Bangalore - 560034, India
psubrama@iiap.res.in
Peter A. Becker
College of Science, George Mason
University, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
Banibrata Mukhopadhyay
Astronomy and Astrophysics
Programme, Department of Physics,
Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore-560012, India
bm@physics.iisc.ernet.in
Ashok K. Singal
Astronomy & Astrophysics Division,
Physical Research
Laboratory, Navrangpura, Ahmed-
abad - 380009, India
asingal@prl.res.in
G. S. Lakhina
Indian Institute of Geomagnetism,
Plot no. 5, Sector-18,
Kalamboli Highway, Panvel (W),
Navi Mumbai-410 218, India
lakhina@iigs.iigm.res.in
S. Alex
Indian Institute of Geomagnetism,
Plot no. 5, Sector-18,
Kalamboli Highway, Panvel (W),
Navi Mumbai-410 218, India
salex@iigs.iigm.res.in
R. Rawat
Indian Institute of Geomagnetism,
Plot no. 5, Sector-18,
Kalamboli Highway, Panvel (W),
Navi Mumbai-410 218, India
rashmir@iigs.iigm.res.in
G. Thejappa
Department of Astronomy, Univer-
sity of Maryland, College
Park, MD 20742
thejappa@astro.umd.edu
R. J. MacDowall
NASA, Goddard Space Flight
Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771
Robert.MacDowall@nasa.gov

List of Contributors
XIII
Sanjiv Kumar Tiwari
Udaipur Solar Observatory,
Physical Research Laboratory,
P. Box - 198, Dewali, Bari Road,
Udaipur - 313 001, Rajasthan, India
stiwari@prl.res.in
Jayant Joshi
Udaipur Solar Observatory,
Physical Research Laboratory,
P. Box - 198, Dewali, Bari Road,
Udaipur - 313 001, Rajasthan, India
Sanjay Gosain
Udaipur Solar Observatory,
Physical Research Laboratory,
P. Box - 198, Dewali, Bari Road,
Udaipur - 313 001, Rajasthan, India
P. Venkatakrishnan
Udaipur Solar Observatory,
Physical Research Laboratory,
P. Box - 198, Dewali, Bari Road,
Udaipur - 313 001, Rajasthan, India
S.M. Mahajan
Institute for Fusion Studies,
The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas 78712, USA
A.M. Ahadi
Physics Department, Shahid
Chamran University, Ahvaz, Iran
E.Mail: ahadi.am@gmail.com
S. Sobhanian
Faculty of Physics, Tabriz University,
Tabriz, Iran
E-Mail:
sobhanian@tabrizu.ac.ir
Nikhil Chakrabarti
Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics,
1/AF Bidhannagar, Kolkata - 700064
E-Mail:
nikhil.chakrabarti@saha.ac.in
Barnana Pal
Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics,
1/AF Bidhannagar, Kolkata - 700064

Part I
Astrophysical Turbulence

Aspects of Hydrodynamic Turbulence in
Classical and Quantum Systems
J.J. Niemela
The Abdus Salam International Center for Theoretical Physics, Strada Costiera
11, 34014 Trieste, Italy niemela@ictp.it
Summary. Turbulence is a complex phenomenon, characterized by many interact-
ing degrees of spatial and temporal freedom. It is widespread, and indeed nearly the
rule, in the ﬂow of classical ﬂuids. The complexity of the underlying equations has
impeded analytical progress and therefore direct numerical simulations of the equa-
tions, as well as experimental work, are key to making further progress. Here, special
attention is given to the role of low temperature helium as a test ﬂuid, including the
superﬂuid phase which also exhibits turbulence.
Key words: Turbulence, helium, superﬂuid, convection, Reynolds number
1 Introduction
Turbulence is important in a wide variety of phenomena found in nature and in
engineering [1]. In the oceans and atmosphere, the large scale circulations are
turbulent and both weather and climate prediction depend on some knowledge
of their dynamics. Turbulence can also be of great importance in the design
of various means of transportation, whether ships, submarines, aircrafts or
cars as well as in heat transfer applications where either natural or forced
convection is operational. And it plays a role in nature not only in the part of
the earth we see but beneath it where turbulent convection in the ﬂuid outer
core gives rise to the magnetic ﬁeld [2]. It also can be found beyond Earth:
in fact, one of the most ubiquitous ﬂuid ﬂows in the universe is the turbulent
convection of heat from the outer radiative zone to surface of stars [3].
On a more fundamental level, ﬂuid turbulence is characterized by having
many degrees of freedom, both spatial and temporal, and is thus an example
of the science of “complexity”. It has potentially useful analogies to many
diverse areas of interest, as disparate as stock market ﬂuctuations [4]. Of
course, the connection is not very direct: we rely on the fact that in the case
of ﬂuid turbulence we happen to know the exact equations of motion and for
that reason it is a good model system. On the other hand, it must also be

4
J.J. Niemela
pointed out that the complexity of these equations has contributed to a very
slow progress in analytical understanding of turbulence. For this reason there
has been a particular emphasis on developing numerical and experimental
approaches. With regard to the former, the computing power needed to solve
large turbulent ﬂows accurately is still years away [5], placing a still larger
burden on experimental input which we will discuss in this article.
There have been several approaches to strengthening the experimental ef-
fort ranging from developing more powerful wind tunnels to developing better
instrumentation. There has been another eﬀort devoted to the identiﬁcation
and utilization of better test ﬂuids, besides the more easily usable air and
water.
While non-conventional test ﬂuids may be desirable, their use may re-
quire considerable further development work in instrumentation, suitable ap-
paratus, techniques, etc, and therefore their choice depends on the precise
questions that one wishes to ask, and clearly on whether the new ﬂuid of-
fers a signiﬁcant or unique solution. One such unconventional test ﬂuid worth
mentioning is helium at cryogenic temperatures, whether in gaseous or liquid
phase. This lecture will brieﬂy survey some of the applications of this test
ﬂuid to the study of turbulence and borrows from a previous review [6].
1.1 Fluid equations
The equations of motion are expressed in a coordinate system that is ﬁxed
in space. For a ﬂuid “element” of density ρ and moving at a velocity u, mass
conservation is given by
∂ρ
∂t + ∇· (ρu) = 0.
(1)
It is usually the case that the density is, or can be considered to be constant
in which case this reduces to
∇· u = 0.
(2)
For an ordinary Newtonian ﬂuid momentum conservation reduces to
Du
Dt = −1
ρ∇p + ν∇2u + Fext,
(3)
for a ﬂuid having pressure p, and kinematic viscosity ν = μ/ρ, where μ is the
shear viscosity. We have used the so-called substantive or convective derivative
D
Dt = ∂
∂t + ∇· u for convenience. The extra term Fext represents a body force
which could, e.g., be due to gravity, rotation, or magnetic ﬁeld. In the case of
thermal convection, which is of particularly common occurrence and interest
(and a focus of this lecture), we have Fext = gαΔT, where g is the acceleration
gravity, α is the isobaric coeﬃcient of thermal expansion and ΔT is the vertical
(in the direction of the gravity) temperature diﬀerence across a layer of ﬂuid in
the direction of the gravity. Assuming further that the density is not aﬀected
strongly by the thermal expansion (i.e., we consider only “thin layers”), these

Aspects of Hydrodynamic Turbulence in Classical and Quantum Systems
5
equations can then considered to be in the Boussinesq approximation [7]. The
ﬁnal equation in this approximation is that for energy conservation:
∂T
∂t = κf∇2T −u · ∇T,
(4)
where κf is the thermal diﬀusivity of the ﬂuid.
These partial diﬀerential equations do not suﬃce by themselves, of course;
the complete description of the ﬂow requires the speciﬁcation of the initial
and the boundary conditions.
The equations presented above can be made more useful by scaling all vari-
ables: using a characteristic velocity U, length L, time by L/U and pressure
ρU 2. Then we have
∂u
∂t + u · ∇u = −∇p + 1
Re∇2u,
(5)
where a Reynolds number Re = UL/ν now appears as a consequence of the
scaling.
In its dimensionless form the momentum equation can account for many
diﬀerent phenomena, from microscopic scales to astrophysical scales. The sole
diﬀerence in the description of diverse ﬂows is the value of the Reynolds
number Re that appears there, and of course the initial and the boundary
conditions which supplement the equation. The Reynolds number in fact is
also referred to as a similarity parameter in the context of aerodynamic model-
testing, in which reliable information can be obtained from smaller scale mod-
els of aircraft, cars, etc. Of course, all this is true for simple pressure-driven
ﬂows that are also not too fast (to avoid approaching the speed of sound and
therefore introducing the Mach number). An example of a simple ﬂow is il-
lustrated in Figure 1, which shows ﬂow going from left to right past a vertical
cylinder protruding above the ﬂuid surface. In the left-most photo the ﬂow
corresponds to a Reynolds number of about 26. There we see a prominent
back-eddy, which is somewhat regular, or “laminar” in appearance. In the
right-hand photo the ﬂow conﬁguration is the same, but with Re = 2000.
Note that in this case the ﬂow behind the cylinder is turbulent with many
length (and time) scales evident as opposed to the ﬂow on the left for which
there is only ﬂow roughly at the scale of the cylinder. This is a signature
of a turbulent ﬂow and distinguished it from one which is laminar, with the
Reynolds number being a quantitative measure of its intensity; i.e. turbulence
exists for Re >> 1.
Other similarity parameters can also be identiﬁed; for instance, in ther-
mally generated ﬂows, the Rayleigh number
Ra = gαΔTL3/νκf,
(6)
results from making the equations with the appropriate body force term non-
dimensional and physically represents the ratio of the rate of potential energy

6
J.J. Niemela
Fig. 1. Flow of a ﬂuid past a circular cylinder. (a) Re = 26. (b) Re = 2000. After
Van Dyke [8].
release due to buoyancy to the rate of its dissipation due to thermal and
viscous diﬀusion [9] where L is the height of a horizontally oriented ﬂuid layer
having a vertical temperature diﬀerence ΔT across it. Another useful number
is the Prandtl number
Pr = ν/κf
(7)
which can be understood as the ratio of time scales due to thermal diﬀusion
(τθ = L2/κf) and momentum diﬀusion (τv = L2/ν).
For a general discussion on turbulence, it is easier to consider only those
ﬂows which are driven by pressure gradients; i.e. when the principal control
parameter is Re. When it is fully developed, the turbulence so generated can
have ﬂuctuations or “eddies” of many diﬀerent scales. Clearly, the largest
such scale is associated with the size of the system, which in the case of an
experiment is the size of the conﬁning box or apparatus.
The smallest scales are identiﬁed as those which are damped out quickly
by viscosity, converting the energy that is transferred form the largest scales
in near-scale interactions. This is the concept of a turbulent cascade of energy.
The smallest scale, for which viscosity dominates, is also referred to as the
dissipation (or Kolmogorov) scale, η.
In between the dissipation scale and the largest scales at which energy is
injected, lies the so-called “inertial” range. It is in this range that the energy
cascades from scale to scale and where viscosity is unimportant. The rate of
energy dissipation per unit mass, ϵ in steady state is clearly the same as that
of energy input; by dimensional analysis we can estimate it as proportional
to u3/ℓ, where u is a characteristic measure of the velocity ﬂuctuation at the
energy injection scale ℓ.
The main thing to note is that either decreasing the viscosity,or increasing
the Reynolds number of the large scale extends the inertial range by mak-
ing the dissipation scale ever smaller (the large scales are typically ﬁxed by
physical constraints). Dimensional analysis gives this smallest scale as
η = (ν3/ϵ)1/4 = ℓRe−3/4
ℓ
.
(8)
Here, Reℓ= uℓ/ν is the Reynolds number of the large scale.

Aspects of Hydrodynamic Turbulence in Classical and Quantum Systems
7
We can also deﬁne the energy cascade in terms of an energy spectrum
E(k), where k is the wavenumber and E(k)dk is the kinetic energy contained
in wavenumbers between k and k + dk. Using the cascade picture described
above [10], we have
E(k) = Ckϵ2/3k−5/3.
(9)
The constant Ck is empirically determined [11, 12] to have a value near unity
(about 1.5).
We expect generally that the turbulence can be nearly homogeneous and
isotropic in the inertial range, following Kolmogorov’s hypothesis of local
isotropy [10]. Since the inertial range grows as a function of Reynolds number,
if there are any universal statistical properties of turbulence we will proba-
bly ﬁnd them in ﬂows for which Re →∞, which must then be an aim for
numerical and laboratory experiments.
Fig. 2. Grid turbulence. After Frisch [13].
One of the most common methods for generating approximately homoge-
neous and isotropic turbulence in experiments is to place a grid of crossed
tines perpendicular to the direction of ﬂow as shown in Figure 2. Here wakes
produced from each tine form small jets at the mesh scale, which then inter-
act through the nonlinear terms in the Navier-Stokes equations to create the
nearly homogeneous and isotropic turbulence further downstream. We shall
consider this example later in the context of an experiment using a quantum
ﬂuid.
2 Low temperature helium as a test ﬂuid
We will consider in some detail here the use of low temperature helium for
the purpose of increasing the control parameters, Re and Ra, for ﬂuid tur-

8
J.J. Niemela
Fig. 3. Pressure-temperature phase diagram for helium.
bulence. In fact, cryogenic helium has the lowest value of kinematic viscosity
of any known ﬂuid. It also has some rather interesting quantum properties
near absolute zero that are both interesting in themselves, and which perhaps
could shed some light on classical ﬂows.
Figure 3 shows the pressure-temperature phase diagram of helium. One
aspect of the phase diagram that stands out is that helium remains a liquid
even at the absolute zero of temperature. This results from a number of con-
siderations. First, helium is a noble gas and hence the interaction between
neighboring atoms is inherently weak. Because the atoms have little mass the
quantum mechanical zero-point energy is suﬃcient to keep the atoms well
separated so that the liquid does not solidify under normal pressure. In fact,
one needs to pressurize helium to roughly 25 atmospheres at absolute zero
in order to form the solid phase as can be seen from ﬁgure 3. Below about
2.177 kelvin at the saturated vapor pressure (SVP) the liquid phase becomes
a superﬂuid, referred to as helium II, whereas above the transition point at
SVP the liquid phase is completely classical and referred to as helium I.
Helium II is characterized by quantum eﬀects: it is related to a form of
Bose-Einstein condensation, in which some fraction of the atoms are con-
densed into the lowest quantum state. Because it is liquid, helium II is far
from being a non-interacting ideal gas and so even at absolute zero tempera-
ture only a small fraction of the atoms are condensed into the ground state.
One can apply a hydrodynamic description of helium II where it is found to
exhibit so-called two-ﬂuid behavior. In this description the ﬂuid is composed
of two interpenetrating ﬂuids: a normal ﬂuid, which may be considered as
composed of thermal excitations with a density ρn, and a superﬂuid with
density ρs, with the total density given by ρ = ρn +ρs. In addition, each ﬂuid
has its own velocity ﬁeld vn and vs. The normal ﬂuid, being in some sense a
gas of thermal excitations, carries the thermal energy in the system and there

Aspects of Hydrodynamic Turbulence in Classical and Quantum Systems
9
is little reason not to consider it as a classical ﬂuid. It has a shear viscosity
given by ηn, while the superﬂuid component has zero viscosity; as we shall see
there can be viscous dissipation at high enough ﬂow rates due to the presence
of vortices.
One of the most important facts is that the superﬂuid component of helium
II is irrotational (curlvs = 0). It can however have circulation,

vs · dr, in
a multiply-connected geometry. We consider, then, the ﬂow around a hollow
vortex core where the superﬂuid velocity is given by
vs = ¯h
m4
∇S.
(10)
Here, the phase, S, of the wave function of the condensed atoms is a function
of the spatial coordinates. Integrating the superﬂuid velocity around a closed
curve (and requiring the condensate wave function to be single-valued) results
in the circulation κ = n2π ¯h/m4 = nh/m4 where n is an integer. It turns out
that the quantum number n = 1 so that the circulation around any quantized
vortex is simply given by κ = h/m4. Further details can be found in a recent
review [14].
We shall consider below quantum turbulence generated in helium II, where
the statistical properties of the turbulence agree with predictions for classical
ﬂuids despite the seemingly severe quantum restriction on the circulation.
2.1 Fluid properties
Returning to the general issue of producing turbulence at high values of
Re = UL/ν, we note that there are three ways in which laboratory ex-
periments can aﬀect this: by maximizing some combination of length scale
L, velocity U or kinematic viscosity ν. First of all it is not always feasible
to increase L arbitrarily due to available space and ﬁnancial considerations
(keeping in mind that Re for turbulent ﬂows is measured by its logarithm).
The velocity U cannot be made arbitrarily large compared to the speed of
sound, c, in the ﬂuid without introducing another similarity parameter, the
Mach number M = U/c. Hence, the best method is to search for ﬂuids with
low kinematic viscosities. As we had mentioned above, helium has the low-
est kinematic viscosity of any known ﬂuid, but how does it compare to the
more common test ﬂuids such as water and air? This comparison is shown in
Table 1.
Clearly helium has a substantial advantage in terms of viscosity over air
and water; on the other hand, these latter ﬂuids are easier to obtain and much
easier to use. we note that helium II has a kinematic viscosity which is similar
to that of helium I, deﬁning it as the ratio of the normal shear viscosity to
the total helium II density (ρs + ρn). This remains true even to the absolute
zero of temperature where an eﬀective kinematic viscosity, proportional to

10
J.J. Niemela
Table 1. Kinematic viscosities for some test ﬂuids. The liquid phases of helium are
evaluated at the saturated vapor pressure (SVP).
Fluid
T(K) P(Bar) ν(cm2/s)
Air
293
1
0.15
Water
293
1
0.01
Helium I
2.2
SVP
1.8 × 10−4
Helium II
1.8
SVP
8.9 × 10−5
Helium gas
5.5
2.8
3.2 × 10−4
the quantum of circulation κ acts in turbulent ﬂows even in the absence of a
normal component [14].
Let us turn our attention brieﬂy to thermal turbulence and examine other
beneﬁcial properties of helium. Recall that the relations 6 and 7 represent
the two principal similarity parameters—the Rayleigh number Ra and the
Prandtl number Pr— for systems in which buoyancy, derived from unstable
heating, drives the ﬂow. Ra is the primary control parameter and fully de-
veloped thermal turbulence occurs at very large values of Ra; again, we wish
to produce ﬂows in which Ra varies over a wide range. It is clear that the
small kinematic viscosity of helium can make Ra also quite large. In addition,
for helium gas, the thermal diﬀusivity κf = k/ρCP , where k is the thermal
conductivity of the ﬂuid, ρ its density, and CP is the constant pressure speciﬁc
heat, is of the same order of ν (except near the critical point, where, in fact, it
becomes vanishingly small because CP diverges there). The Prandtl number
Pr = ν/κf has a nearly constant value near 0.7 suﬃciently away from the
critical point, as for air and other non-interacting gases, and increases rapidly
only near the critical point.
The other ﬂuid parameter which enters the deﬁnition of the Rayleigh num-
ber is the isobaric thermal expansion coeﬃcient α ≡−ρ−1∂ρ/∂T, where the
derivative is evaluated at constant pressure. The sign of α determines the di-
rection of the temperature gradient that is needed to induce buoyancy; since
it is positive in most cases, the heating needs to be from below in order to
destabilize the ﬂow and set up turbulence. A notable exception is water for
which the sign of α reverses below 4 degrees Celsius, as is also the case for
liquid helium just above the lambda point.
For non-interacting gases, α = 1/T, and so, low temperatures themselves
have a particular advantage for buoyancy-driven ﬂows. For helium near its
critical point, α is thermodynamically related to the speciﬁc heat and also di-
verges. In summary, it is the combination α/νκf that determines the Rayleigh
number, and we show it in Table 2 for helium, air and water.
One can use to advantage the enormously large values of the combination
α/νκf near the critical point and generate large values of Ra. For illustration,
if we consider a ﬂuid layer some 10 meters tall (diﬃcult and expensive, but
well within the capacity of presently available cryogenic capability) and a

Aspects of Hydrodynamic Turbulence in Classical and Quantum Systems
11
Table 2. Values of the combination of ﬂuid properties α/νκf for air, water and
helium
Fluid
T(K) P(Bar)
α/νκf
Air
293
1
0.12
Water
293
1
14
Helium I
2.2
SVP
2.3 × 105
Helium II
1.8
SVP
−−−
Helium gas 5.25
2.36
6 × 109
Helium gas
4.4
2 × 10−4 6 × 10−3
reasonable temperature diﬀerence of 0.5K, Rayleigh numbers of the order
1021 are possible. Such large values are characteristic of turbulent convection
in the Sun [15].
2.2 Small “table-top” apparatus
Since the audience is presumably composed mostly of academic persons, we
should re-emphasize that for any given value of Re, the helium experiment
can be made to ﬁt within a standard laboratory, yet yield world-class values
of Re. This we can illustrate by taking the example of pipe ﬂow, considering
both laminar and fully turbulent conditions. The classical experiment is due
to Nikuradse [16] who obtained turbulent ﬂow conditions with Re of up to
3 × 106 in a water ﬁlled apparatus occupying two storeys of a building. Using
liquid helium I this same range of Re has been duplicated in a standard dewar
(13 cm diameter, 1.5 m tall) containing a pipe ﬂow apparatus, where the pipe
was only 5 mm in diameter [17, 18].
3 Alternatives
It is quite reasonable to ask why nature’s “laboratories” such as the oceans
or the atmosphere, which achieve large L without the added cost, cannot
be instrumented and studied instead of investing in laboratory experiments
using an unconventional ﬂuid. The answer is that while this is, in fact, rou-
tinely done, the observed ﬂows are not subject to well-controlled boundary
conditions, and hence there are limitations as to the extent to which a deeper
understanding of turbulence can be obtained; i.e., where small deviations from
expected behavior may contain substantial new insights.
Of course, the reader is also aware that computers these days are quite
powerful and are advancing their capabilities at a rapid rate. So it is also
very reasonable to ask why we cannot simply run direct numerical simula-
tions (DNS) in which the appropriate equations are solved on a computer
without making any approximation. There are in fact many more numerical
experiments than laboratory ones, but still this wonderful tool has a limited

12
J.J. Niemela
applicability for simulating practical ﬂows at high Reynolds and Rayleigh
numbers. Indeed, the DNS eﬀorts are hampered by the large number of de-
grees of freedom in turbulence that grows as Re9/4. This can be easily seen
from 8, where it is clear that the range of scales needed to be well resolved,
ℓ/η, grows like Re3/4. Hence, if the ﬂow is to be followed in a numerical sim-
ulation with a uniform grid, the minimum number of necessary grid points
(in three dimensions) is proportional to Re9/4. The state of the art in full
DNS calculations of turbulent ﬂows [13] is around Re ∼104 whereas most
atmospheric ﬂows and many engineering ﬂow of interest are for Re > 107.
Large eddy simulations (which compute only the large scales but model
the small scales) and turbulence models (which compute only average in-
formation) are quite useful in getting to higher Re, and can produce useful
information, but they are not satisfactory as universal recipes.
4 Examples of laboratory turbulence using helium
We now consider two types of ﬂows where low temperature helium has been
used eﬀectively to push the limits of turbulence research.
4.1 Turbulent thermal convection
Turbulent thermal convection is a problem of much importance for a number
of reasons: it plays a prominent role in the energy transport within stars,
atmospheric and oceanic circulations, the generation of the earth’s magnetic
ﬁeld, and countless engineering processes in which heat transport is important.
Of course actual ﬂows are often very complex and it is not reasonable to
attempt to replicate in a laboratory every aspect related to complex boundary
conditions, rotation, magnetic ﬁelds, ionization, chemical reactions, etc. For
this reason, it is customary to consider a simpler problem that still contains
the essential physics. In the case of buoyancy-driven turbulence, this model
is Rayleigh-B´enard convection (RBC). In RBC, a thin ﬂuid layer of inﬁnite
lateral extent is contained between two isothermal surfaces with the bottom
surface maintained slightly hotter. When the expansion coeﬃcient is positive
(the usual case), an instability develops because the hot ﬂuid from below rises
to the top and the colder ﬂuid from above sinks to the bottom. The applied
driving force is measured in terms of a Rayleigh number, Ra, which is a non-
dimensional measure of the imposed temperature diﬀerence across the ﬂuid
layer, see equation 6. The Prandtl number, Pr, deﬁned in equation 7, is an
additional dynamical parameter because it determines the state and thickness
of the viscous and thermal boundary layers set up on the boundaries. With
increasing Ra the dynamical state of RBC goes from a uniform and parallel
roll pattern at the onset (Ra ∼103) to turbulent state at Ra ∼107–108.
Here, the quantity roughly corresponding to drag in an isothermal ﬂow
is the heat transport, given non-dimensionally in terms of the Nusselt num-
ber Nu

Aspects of Hydrodynamic Turbulence in Classical and Quantum Systems
13
Nu =
q
qcond
= qH
kΔT ,
(11)
where q is the total heat ﬂux, qcond is the heat ﬂux in the absence of convec-
tion, given by Fourier’s law. Nu represents the ratio of the eﬀective turbulent
thermal conductivity of the ﬂuid to its molecular value and can reach val-
ues of over 104 in helium experiments [19] thus demonstrating the enormous
enhancement of transport possible.
The ability to accurately predict Nu for the Ra corresponding to many
natural and engineering ﬂows is out of reach of laboratory experiments using
conventional ﬂuids, since extrapolation in Ra by many orders of magnitude
is required. The use of helium has extended the range of Ra by at least
6 orders of magnitude compared with the best water experiments, reaching
values corresponding to many natural ﬂows, and substantially reducing the
needed extrapolation for others.
We expect Nu = f(Ra, Pr, Γ, ...) to attain some limiting power-law form
in fully developed turbulence as Ra →∞. Thus, we may hope to extrapolate
results from experiments at the highest Ra if we have, indeed, exceeded the
Ra beyond which the functional relation ceases to change.
In a simplistic view, it is possible to see two limiting cases for the scaling
of Nu. In the ﬁrst, we imagine that the global ﬂux of heat is determined
by processes occurring in the two thermal boundary layers at the top and
bottom of the heated ﬂuid layer. These layers, deﬁned as the extent over
which the molecular conduction remains important, are always present at the
solid boundary where a heat ﬂux is imposed, although they become thin in
turbulent convection. Their thickness λ can be estimated as the distance over
which the imposed temperature gradient would produce a state of marginal
stability for convection; that is, when the Rayleigh number based on their
height exceeds something of order 103. Assuming that the temperature outside
the thermal boundary layer is uniform (because of turbulent mixing), one can
easily show that λ = H/2Nu. In helium experiments λ can be of the order
of hundreds of micrometers in a sample cell of height one meter [19]. The
resulting large gradient in temperature acts as a source of stress, resulting in
bursts of hot or cold ﬂuid into the interior, commonly referred to as “plumes”
or “thermals” [20, 21].
Now, in the sense that the bulk ﬂuid outside the boundary layers is fully
turbulent and “randomized”, it acts more or less as a thermal short circuit.
Therefore its precise nature or spatial extent is immaterial to the ﬂux of heat
and from the deﬁnition of Nu given in (14) we can then immediately write
down the asymptotic power law [22] as Nu ∼Ra1/3, where we assume that
the heat ﬂux q appearing in Nu has no implicit height dependence (no internal
energy sources). This simple argument has been made more precise by others
[23] and rigorously shown [24] to hold when Pr and Ra are both very large.
There is another limit, one can think of, in which molecular properties
lose relevance in determining heat transport—for instance, when boundary

14
J.J. Niemela
layers are mixed by a vigorous turbulent ﬂow so that molecular conduction is
supplanted entirely by small scale turbulent motion. Here, an exponent of 1/2
(modulo logarithmic corrections) has been proposed; the phenomenological
theory has been developed by Kraichnan [25].
Fig. 4. Log-log plot of the Nusselt number versus Rayleigh number. The line
through the data is a least-square ﬁt over the entire Ra range, and represents a
dlogNu/dlogRa slope of 0.32.
Figure 4, plotted using the data from Niemela et al. [19], illustrates the
enormous range of Ra and Nu possible in low temperature experiments of
quite modest size. The average slope over 11 decades of Ra is 0.32, rather
close to 1/3. These data have been corrected for some minor eﬀects due to the
ﬁnite conductivity of the horizontal boundaries (although the conductivity of
pure metals at low temperature compared to the ﬂuid is much larger than for
corresponding room temperature experiments) and another eﬀect due to heat
being carried up the sidewalls and then ﬂowing laterally into the ﬂuid, which
can drive the large eddies which then feed back on the sidewall conduction.
The models developed for this are rather rudimentary [26, 27, 28, 29] and a
better knowledge of this eﬀect might slightly alter the exponent. However, it
appears as though an exponent of 1/3 is much more characteristic of high-Ra
turbulence than 1/2, and the use of helium has been crucially important to
making this statement.

Aspects of Hydrodynamic Turbulence in Classical and Quantum Systems
15
4.2 Superﬂuid grid turbulence
As we discussed earlier, the canonical method of creating a nearly isotropic
and homogeneous turbulent ﬂow is to force a ﬂuid through a grid of crossed
bars (see 2). A series of measurements have also been made in which a grid
is towed through a stationary sample of helium II, contained within a square
channel of 1 cm2 cross-section [30, 31, 32, 33]. We should point out that
whether it is the grid or the ﬂuid which moves is, of course, irrelevant.
Fig. 5. Schematic of superﬂuid grid ﬂow apparatus. Attenuation of a standing
second sound wave is used to detect the decay of average quantized vortex line
density.
The apparatus is shown schematically in ﬁgure 5. The mesh Reynolds
number deﬁned as ReM = vgMρ/μ, where μ is the dynamic viscosity of the
normal ﬂuid, ρ the total density of the ﬂuid (helium II), M the mesh size,
and vg the velocity at which the grid was pulled, varied between 5000 and
200, 000. These mesh Reynolds numbers must be considered quite large given

16
J.J. Niemela
the compactness of the apparatus. There is some ambiguity as to which density
must be used in deﬁning the Reynolds number in helium II. The present choice
seems plausible because, when the superﬂuid vortex tangle becomes polarized
and the superﬂuid and normal ﬂuid velocity ﬁelds are correlated, helium II
should behave as a single ﬂuid with the combined density ρ for scales large
compared with the average inter-vortex line spacing [34].
On the opposing walls of the channel shown in ﬁgure 5 two second-sound
transducers were situated, using ﬂush-mounted vibrating superleaks. In this
case the channel acted as a second sound resonator. The length of quantized
vortex line per unit volume, L, can be deduced from second sound measure-
ments through the relation
L = 16Δ0
Bκc
A0
A −1

,
(12)
where A and A0 are, respectively, the amplitudes of the second sound standing
wave resonance with and without the vortices present, Δ0 is the full width at
half maximum of the second sound resonance peak in the absence of vortices,
B is the (frequency-dependent) mutual friction constant [35]. Throughout this
section, we keep the conventional symbol L for the line density, distinguishing
it from the length scale used previously, e.g., in equation 6, by context.
Fig. 6. The log-log plot of the decaying vortex line density versus time in helium
II. The “classical” exponent −3/2 is shown by the displaced dashed line.
An example of decaying line density, after the grid is pulled through a
column of helium II, is shown in ﬁgure 6. The slope of −3/2 is precisely what

Aspects of Hydrodynamic Turbulence in Classical and Quantum Systems
17
one might expect from a classical description of the superﬂuid turbulence,
which we will now attempt to show.
For classical homogeneous turbulence, the turbulent energy dissipation
rate per unit mass, ϵ is exactly equal to kinematic viscosity times the mean
squared vorticity. For decaying grid turbulence in helium II, we may assume
[36, 14] that the total energy dissipation per unit mass in the turbulent ﬂuid
is analogously given by
ϵ = ν′κ2
cL2,
(13)
where ν′ is a proportionality constant with units of kinematic viscosity.
Second, the energy dissipation rate in fully developed turbulence is thought
to be independent of viscosity, so that
ϵ = Cϵu3/ℓ,
(14)
where Cϵ is a constant for suﬃciently large Reynolds number. Here, u can be
taken as the root-mean-square value of the turbulent velocity and Cϵ = 0.5,
dependent on the deﬁnition used for ℓ[37]. In the following we assume that
the same type of relation holds for helium turbulence as well.
At late stages of decay following a grid pull, ℓwill become comparable to
the channel width d and will cease to grow further. Then the above relation
becomes
u2 =
 ϵd
Cϵ
2/3
.
(15)
Noting further that d/dt( 3
2u2) = −ϵ, we have
−ϵ =
 d
Cϵ
2/3
ϵ−1/3 dϵ
dt.
(16)
Integrating we have
κcL =
27
ν′
1/2 d
Cϵ
t−3/2.
(17)
This -3/2 decay is just that observed in the superﬂuid data (see ﬁgure 6)
and shown there by the dashed line, indirectly showing that approximately
homogeneous and isotropic turbulence in the quantum ﬂuid is similar to that
which we would expect for a classical ﬂuid, even though the quantum restric-
tions on the circulation about any vortex line are severe. We can furthermore
solve equation 17 for the eﬀective viscosity of quantum turbulence. This has
been done and shown [14] to be in excellent agreement with theoretical re-
sults assuming an eﬀective kinematic viscosity proportional to the quantum
of circulation κc.
Finally, we point out that the highest values of mesh Re obtained in these
experiments are comparable to those obtained in large wind tunnels, while the
relatively small size of the channel (1 cm by 1 cm) makes it quite accessible
to academic facilities.

18
J.J. Niemela
5 Summary
In summary, we have demonstrated that large values of the turbulence control
parameters, Re and Ra, can be obtained under well-controlled laboratory con-
ditions using low temperature helium as the test ﬂuid. In the case of thermal
turbulence this brings us closer to identifying the asymptotic scaling relation
between Ra and the dimensionless heat transport Nu.
The observation that turbulence below the superﬂuid transition is amenable
to a quasi-classical description is interesting and may lead to a better under-
standing of the nature of turbulence above the superﬂuid transition, which
remains one of the major challenging problems of classical physics.
References
1. D.J. Tritton, Physical Fluid Dynamics. Clarendon Press, Oxford (1988).
2. G.A. Glatzmaier, R.C. Coe, L. Hongre, P.H. Roberts, Nature 401, 885 (1999).
3. E.M. Spiegel, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 9, 323 (1971).
4. B.B. Mandelbrot, Scientiﬁc American 280, 50 (1999).
5. National Research Council Report: Condensed Matter and Materials Physics:
Basic Research for Tomorrow’s Technology, 308 pages, National Academy Press
(1999).
6. J.J. Niemela and K.R. Sreenivasan, J. Low Temp. Phys. 146, 499-510 (2007).
7. A. Oberbeck, Annalen der Physik und Chemie 7, 271 (1879).
8. M. Van Dyke, An Album of Fluid Motion The Parabolic Press 1982.
9. F.H. Busse, Rep. Prog. Phys. 41, 1929 (1978).
10. A.N. Kolmogorov, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 30, 9 (1941).
11. A.S. Monin, A.M. Yaglom, Statistical Fluid Mechanics, vol. 2, MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, USA (1975).
12. K.R. Sreenivasan, Phys. Fluids 7, 2778 (1995).
13. U. Frisch, Turbulence (Cambridge University Press, 1995).
14. W.F. Vinen, J.J. Niemela, J. Low Temp. Phys. 128, 167 (2002).
15. K.R. Sreenivasan, R.J. Donnelly, Adv. Appl. Mech. 37, 239-276 (2001).
16. J. Nikuradse, NASA TT F-10359 (1966). Translated from the German original
Forsch. Arb. Ing.-Wes. No. 356 (1932).
17. C.J. Swanson, B. Julian, G.G. Ihas, R.J. Donnelly, J. Fluid. Mech. 461, 51
(2002).
18. B.J. McKeon, C.J. Swanson, M.V. Zagarola, R.J. Donnelly, A.J. Smits, J. Fluid
Mech. 511, 41 (2004).
19. J.J. Niemela, L. Skrbek, K.R. Sreenivasan, R.J. Donnelly, Nature 404, 837
(2000).
20. E.M. Sparrow, R.B. Husar, R.J. Goldstein, J. Fluid Mech. 41, 793 (1970).
21. S.A. Theerthan, J.H. Arakeri, J. FLuid Mech. 373, 221 (1998).
22. W.V.R. Malkus, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 225, 196 (1954).
23. L.N. Howard, in Proc. 11th Intern. Cong. Appl. Mech. (ed. H. Gortler), Springer,
Berlin, p. 1109 (1966).
24. P. Constantin, C.R. Doering, J. Stat. Phys. 94, 159 (1999).
25. R.H. Kraichnan, Phys. Fluids 5, 1374 (1962).

Aspects of Hydrodynamic Turbulence in Classical and Quantum Systems
19
26. P. Roche, B. Castaing, B. Chabaud, B. Hebral, J. Sommeria, Euro. Phys. J. 24,
405 (2001).
27. G. Ahlers, Phys. Rev. E. 63, art. no. 015303 (2001).
28. J.J. Niemela, K.R. Sreenivasan, J. Fluid. Mech. 481, 355 (2003).
29. R. Verzicco, J. Fluid Mech. 473, 201 (2002).
30. M.R. Smith, Ph.D. thesis, University of Oregon, Eugene (1992).
31. M.R. Smith, R.J. Donnelly, N. Goldenfeld, W.F. Vinen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71,
2583 (1993).
32. S.R. Stalp, Ph.D. thesis, University of Oregon, Eugene (1998).
33. J.J. Niemela, R.J. Donnelly, K.R. Sreenivasan, J. Low Temp. Physics 138 537
(2005).
34. C.F. Barenghi, S. Hulton, D.C. Samuels, Phys Rev. Lett. 89 275301 (2002).
35. C.F. Barenghi, R.J. Donnelly, W.F. Vinen, J. Low Temp. Phys. 52 189 (1983).
36. S.R. Stalp, L. Skrbek, R.J. Donnelly, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 4831 (1999).
37. K.R. Sreenivasan, Phys. Fluids 27, 1048 (1984).

Observations and Modeling of Turbulence in
the Solar Wind
Melvyn L. Goldstein
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, USA
E-mail: melvyn.l.goldstein@nasa.gov
Summary. Alfv´enic ﬂuctuations are a ubiquitous component of the solar wind.
Evidence from many spacecrafts indicate that the ﬂuctuations are convected out of
the solar corona with relatively ﬂat power spectra and constitute a source of free
energy for a turbulent cascade of magnetic and kinetic energy to high wave numbers.
Observations and simulations support the conclusion that the cascade evolves most
rapidly in the vicinity of velocity shears and current sheets. Numerical solutions of
the magnetohydrodynamic equations have elucidated the role of expansion on the
evolution of the turbulence. Such studies are clarifying not only how a turbulent
cascade develops, but also the nature of the symmetries of the turbulence.
Key words: Magnetohydrodynamics-solar wind: Turbulence-simulations
1 Observed Properties of the Solar Wind
The solar wind is the continuous outﬂow of ionized gas from the solar corona
[1]. It is composed primarily of supersonic protons. Alpha particles comprise
a few percent of the total and there are traces of heavier ions. The ion ﬂow is
generally about Mach 10. In contrast, the electrons are subsonic with a Mach
number of ≈0.2. Although the temperature of the corona is typically 1 −2
MK, the temperature of electron and protons near Earth orbit is only about a
tenth of that. The ﬂow becomes supersonic within a few solar radii. Because
the solar wind plasma is highly conductive, the “frozen-in” coronal magnetic
ﬁeld is pulled into the interplanetary medium by the ﬂow and solar rotation
winds it into an “Archimedian” spiral pattern [2]. The wind rapidly attains a
nearly constant terminal speed after which its density decreases as the square
of the radial distance from the sun.
Solar wind ﬂow patterns
Solar wind ﬂow patterns vary with solar cycle. The most well-organized pat-
terns occur during times of minimum solar activity when there are regions of

22
Melvyn L. Goldstein
steady fast wind that originate from regions of open magnetic ﬁeld lines where
the corona is cooler than in surrounding loops. These regions appear darker
in EUV and X-ray wavelengths and are referred to as coronal holes. Fast solar
wind has speeds exceeding 600 km/s and can reach ≈800 km/s. Slow solar
wind, which is rather unsteady, has speeds less than about 500 km/s and orig-
inates near closed loops and coronal streamers. This region is also associated
with coronal mass ejections (CMEs) that generate highly transient ﬂows that
include large-scale magnetic clouds.
1.1 Alfv´en Waves
Soon after the discovery of the solar wind it was realized [4, 5, 6, 11, 43] that
the ﬂuctuations in the magnetic ﬁeld and velocity were often so highly corre-
lated that they appeared as nearly perfect Alfv´en waves [3]. This phenomenon
was most pronounced in fast solar wind, especially in the trailing edges of the
fast streams. However, highly “Alfv´enic” ﬂows have been observed in slow
wind as well.
If one normalizes the ﬂuctuating magnetic ﬁeld, b, by dividing by √μ0ρ
(where ρ is the mass density), Alfv´en waves are deﬁned by v ≡±b, where
v is the ﬂuctuating component of the velocity. The ± sign represents wave
propagation antiparallel (+) and parallel (−) to the ambient magnetic ﬁeld.
It is often convenient to use new variables, referred to as Els¨asser variables
that are deﬁned by z± = v ± b. The predominance of outward propagation
suggests that the Alfv´enic ﬂuctuations are generated below the height where
the ﬂow becomes super-Alfv´enic. Thus, only outward propagating ﬂuctuations
are convected into the heliosphere.
An example of an Alfv´enic interval is shown in Figure 1 from data taken
by Ulysses during a polar pass. The data are displayed as component ﬂuctua-
tions in Sun-Earth-Ecliptic coordinates (radial, normal, tangential, i.e., RTN)
of the magnetic ﬁeld (thin lines) and velocity vector (thick lines). The high
correlations, also referred to as high Alfv´enicity, are obvious, and the posi-
tive sense of correlation for sunward-pointing magnetic ﬁeld implies that the
ﬂuctuations are propagating outward.
The very high Alfv´enicity of solar wind ﬂuctuations might lead one to
wonder whether or not the medium is actively evolving because pure Alfv´en
waves are an exact solution of the incompressible, ideal, equations of magneto-
hydrodynamics. However, the solar wind also exhibits the contrasting quality,
ﬁrst noted by [12], viz., that the power spectra of the magnetic (and velocity)
ﬁelds resemble that of fully developed ﬂuid turbulence [24] in that the spectral
index of the power spectra is ≈−5/3. Analyses of Helios data show, however,
that while the power spectra of ﬂuctuations observed in slow wind and in fast
wind at 1 AU (and beyond) typically have an “inertial range” spectrum with
a slope of −5/3, at 0.3 AU in fast wind, only a very limited inertial range exits
and the spectrum is dominated by an extended energy-containing range with
an spectral index of −1.

Observations and Modeling of Turbulence in the Solar Wind
23
Fig. 1. RTN components and magnitude of the solar wind magnetic ﬁeld (thin line,
left hand scale) and those of the velocity of the solar wind (thick line, right hand
scale) measured by Ulysses in the fast solar wind.
Relationship of Solar Wind Turbulence to Fluid Turbulence
In Figure 2 we show the classic example of fully developed ﬂuid turbulence
[20], and, for comparison, in Figure 3, an example computed from Voyager
magnetometer data obtained near 1 AU [26]. Figure 4 shows the diﬀerence
between fast and slow wind at 0.3 AU from [42]. The Helios data have been
plotted using Els¨asser variables, z±.
As is clear from these spectra, when turbulence has had the opportunity
to develop an inertial range, the slope is essentially −5/3, the Kolmogorov
value for fully developed, incompressible Navier-Stokes ﬂuid turbulence. The
remarkable result is still not fully understood, because the solar wind is neither
a Navier-Stokes ﬂuid nor is it incompressible.

24
Melvyn L. Goldstein
Fig. 2. A plot of the one-dimensional spectrum of tidal channel data collected on
March 10, 1959. The straight line has a slope of −5/3. From [20].
Fig. 3. The magnetic energy spectrum of data collected at 1 AU in units of nT2. The
abscissa is given in both frequency and wave number. Spectra constructed using the
Blackman-Tukey algorithm [8] and the fast Fourier transform technique are shown.
To an excellent approximation, the slope of the power spectrum is −5/3.

Observations and Modeling of Turbulence in the Solar Wind
25
[12] noted the strong association of a well-deﬁned −5/3 inertial range with
(slow) ﬂows that were found in the vicinity of the heliospheric current sheet
where velocity gradients tend to be large and where the magnetic ﬁeld changes
sign as one crosses the current sheet. [12] argued that turbulence in the solar
wind was driven by the energy in velocity shears. [36], in an extensive analysis
of Helios data, conﬁrmed this conjecture.
Properties of Solar Wind Turbulence
The variation in the degree of Alfv´enicity of the magnetic and velocity ﬂuctu-
ation with both distance and with latitude have been an intense area of study.
In a series of papers, [36, 38] examined the evolution of the solar wind with dis-
tance using data from both Helios and Voyager. That analysis showed clearly
that in the outer heliosphere the Alfv´enicity tended to decrease—higher wave
numbers retained their Alfv´enic nature to larger heliospheric distances. (There
are exceptions to this as discussed in [38]).
Fig. 4. Power spectra of the Els¨asser variables for fast wind (left panel) and slow
wind (right panel) from data obtained by Helios at 0.3 AU. Adapted from [42].
Data from Ulysses gives another view of how Alfv´enic ﬂuctuations evolve
in the heliosphere. Evolution should be quite slow at the high heliospheric
latitudes probed by Ulysses because there velocity gradients are small; and
indeed, the ﬂuctuations remain Alfv´enic even near 4 AU at those high lati-
tudes, as is illustrated in Figure 5 [21, 23].

26
Melvyn L. Goldstein
Fig. 5. The spectrum from Ulysses at 4 AU (left) are not very Alfv´enic, while the
spectrum from the high latitude pass (center) shows little evolution with latitude.
The Helios spectrum (right) also suggests that the source spectrum of solar wind
ﬂuctuations is both highly Alfv´enic and has a spectral slope of −1 (cf. Figure 4,
above). Adapted from [17].
1.2 Radial and Temporal Evolution of Solar Wind Turbulence
Another measure of Alfv´enicity is the cross helicity, deﬁned by
Hc = 1
2

dx3v · b.
A useful related quantity is the normalized cross helicity, deﬁned by σc ≡
2Hr
c (k)/Er(k), where Er(k) is the reduced spectral energy (magnetic plus
kinetic). These quantities are reduced in the sense that, due to the super-
Alfv´enic nature of the solar wind ﬂow, the one-dimensional power spectra
are equivalent to three-dimensional spectra that have been integrated over
perpendicular wave numbers [26].
A clear indication that velocity shear is the primary driver of solar wind
turbulence and the cause of the reduction with heliocentric distance of cross
helicity is shown in Figure 6. In the ﬁgure, the normalized cross helicity, σc,
which is generally close to unity in fast wind, ﬂuctuates around zero where
BR changes sign and where the velocity gradients are large. This situation
has been simulated using both two-dimensional incompressible and compress-
ible codes in Cartesian (periodic) geometry as well as in three dimensions in
spherical geometry [18]. The two-dimensional results are shown in Figure 7.
The top panel shows results at T = 4 eddy-turnover times from an incom-
pressible MHD simulation, where ω ≡∇× v is the vorticity. The bottom
panel shows similar results at T = 2 eddy-turn-over times from a solution of
the compressible equations.
1.3 The Symmetry Properties of the Magnetic Fluctuations
The magnetic and velocity ﬁeld ﬂuctuations in the solar wind are intrinsi-
cally three-dimensional. However, as mentioned above, the supersonic/super-
Alfv´enic nature of the ﬂow makes it diﬃcult with only single point measure-
ments to determine more than the reduced, one-dimensional, properties of the

Observations and Modeling of Turbulence in the Solar Wind
27
Fig. 6. A current sheet crossing observed by Helios 2 near 0.3 AU (days 93 −110 of
1976). The data are hour averages. The blue curve of σc is a 25−hour running mean.
The minimum values of σc are found in the low speed region where BR changes sign
and where the velocity gradients are large. Adapted from [34] and [37]
.
Fig. 7. Left: Results at T = 2 eddy-turn-over times from a solution of the compress-
ible equations. The panel includes density ﬂuctuations, ρ, δz−, and the correlation
between density and magnetic ﬁeld magnitude, rB (δρ and δz−are normalized to
twice their maximum values of 0.042 and 0.075, respectively). Right: The solution
at T = 4 eddy-turnover times from an incompressible simulation (ω is the vorticity).
From [35]
.

28
Melvyn L. Goldstein
ﬂuctuations. It is possible, however, even with a single spacecraft (and some
additional assumptions) to explore at least two-dimensional symmetries. [40]
analyzed the relatively few intervals during which the background magnetic
ﬁeld B was either parallel or transverse to the solar wind velocity. Because
of a paucity of examples they could not reach any deﬁnitive conclusions, but
suggested that the magnetic ﬂuctuations could not be isotropic, although for
periods when B was perpendicular to the solar wind velocity, the isotropic
model was a reasonable approximation and parallel propagating Alfv´en waves
oﬀered a poor approximation that was only approximately valid during the ra-
dial B ﬂow intervals. They suggested that a combination of magnetosonic and
Alfv´en waves with approximately one quarter as much power in magnetosonic
waves as in Alfv´en waves ﬁt both data intervals.
Fig. 8. Contour plot of the two-dimensional correlation function of solar wind ﬂuc-
tuations as a function of distance parallel and perpendicular to the mean magnetic
ﬁeld. The four quadrant plot was produced by reﬂecting the data across the axes
from the ﬁrst quadrant (from [29]).
The ﬁrst comprehensive eﬀort to deduce at least the two-dimensional struc-
ture of the magnetic ﬂuctuations was carried out using approximately 16
months of nearly continuous data from ISEE 3 by [29]. The results suggested
that the solar wind ﬂuctuations were made of two components: parallel prop-

Observations and Modeling of Turbulence in the Solar Wind
29
agating planar (slab) Alfv´en waves and ﬂuctuations with wave vectors nearly
transverse to the mean magnetic ﬁeld. The analysis was done on stationary
data intervals [27, 28, 31, 33] and assumed that all the data intervals (463
15−min averages) were members of the same statistical ensemble. The two-
dimensional correlation function from that analysis is shown in Figure 8. More
recently, [13] has carried out a similar analysis, but the intervals were sorted
by whether the ﬂows were fast or slow. They concluded that the fast and slow
wind belonged to separate ensembles and that fast wind was more dominated
by slab-like ﬂuctuations and slow wind contained more quasi-two-dimensional
ﬂuctuations.
[7] suggested that typically 80% of the magnetic ﬂuctuation energy resided
in the quasi-two-dimensional component and only 20% was in the “slab” com-
ponent. Subsequently, [41], using Ulysses data, showed that between 1991 and
1995, a more typical value was 50%. There was no obvious way to tell, how-
ever, whether the “quasi-2D component” reﬂected a nearly-incompressible
population of ﬂuctuations or merely one that contained nearly perpendicular
wavevectors.
[39] used a three-dimensional spherical simulation to demonstrate that
small velocity shears would produce rapid “phase mixing” of planar Alfv´en
waves. [19] later generalized the results of [15, 16] to three dimensions, show-
ing that small velocity shears superposed on an initial wave packet of planar
Alfv´en waves could evolve with distance to produce two-dimensional correla-
tion functions reminiscent of the ISEE-3 analysis.
Consequently, it appears that the 50 −80% of the ﬂuctuation energy that
is quasi-two-dimensional, does not reﬂect a nearly-incompressible component
of the turbulence that arose in the corona, but rather indicates either local
generation or phase mixing. Ascertaining the nature of these ﬂuctuations is
important because the distribution of power between parallel and perpendic-
ular wave numbers determines the spatial diﬀusion of solar and galactic en-
ergetic particles since only power in k∥resonantly scatters energetic charged
particles.
2 Simulating Solar Wind Turbulence
The evolution of turbulence in a spherically expanding magnetoﬂuid such as
the solar wind requires solving the MHD equations using a ﬁnite diﬀerence
algorithm. One approach has been to use fourth-order ﬂux corrected transport
(FCT) [9, 14, 44, 18], although other approaches and algorithms have been
used. In the approach used by [18], the magnetic ﬁeld is determined using
Faraday’s law, which ensures that ∇· B = 0 is preserved to within numerical
round-oﬀerrors. The dependent variables are density, ρ, momentum ρv, total
energy (internal (ρe) + kinetic (ρv2/2) + magnetic (B2/2μ0)), and the mag-
netic ﬁeld B. The equation of state is that of an ideal gas (p = ρRT), where
R is the gas constant and T is temperature.

30
Melvyn L. Goldstein
The turbulence solutions are initiated with supersonic/super-Alfv´enic
time-dependent inﬂow boundary conditions that are imposed at some ra-
dial distance above the critical point, typically taken to be between r =
0.2 −0.5 AU. The solutions include a tilted rotating current sheet, incoming
Alfv´enic or two-dimensional modes with ﬁnite transverse correlation lengths,
microstreams, and pressure-balanced structures.
Fig. 9. Power spectra deduced from the time series of the magnetic ﬁeld components
and |B| (dashed line) along a radius in slow speed ﬂow at θ = 90◦and four radii
ranging from r = 1.02 −3.98 AU. Also shown on each plot is a line with slope of
−5/3. From [18].
2.1 Simulations of a Turbulent Cascade
Using algorithms that are suﬃciently dissipationless, one can study the de-
velopment of a cascade of magnetic energy from the input energy-containing
scales toward the dissipation range. Eventually, the residual numerical dissipa-
tion does steepen the spectrum and damp ﬂuctuations. In Figure 9, a series of

Observations and Modeling of Turbulence in the Solar Wind
31
power spectra are plotted that were computed from a time series of magnetic
ﬁeld values taken at four sites in the simulation domain. Simulation output is
for “slow” ﬂow near θ = 90◦at four radial points ranging from 1.02−3.98 AU.
This region near the current sheet, stirred as it is by strong velocity gradients
and weak magnetic ﬁelds, is where the most rapid evolution takes place. The
turbulent mixing generates about a decade of inertial range. The straight line
on the plots has a slope of −5/3.
3 Summary
This brief review has omitted many topics in solar wind turbulence studies.
Many questions remain unanswered. For example, we do not know if the
corona is turbulent. Indications from Helios observations suggest that it is
not, but rather that ﬂuctuations are continuously pumping the medium via a
log-normal process [30] that results in a k−1 power spectrum at the transition
to the solar wind. A curious aspect of the Alfv´enic turbulence in the solar
wind is that their minimum variance direction tends to lie along the direction
of the local magnetic ﬁeld (see, for example, [22]). This simple observation
has yet to be satisfactorily explained and simulations have been unsuccessful
in replicating the observations. Recently [32], magnetic ﬁeld data obtained
by the four Cluster spacecraft when their separation reached 10,000 km has
been used to compute wavenumber spectra parallel and perpendicular to the
local magnetic ﬁeld. Those preliminary results suggest that, indeed, quasi-
two-dimensional ﬂuctuations predominate over slab Alfv´enic ﬂuctuations. For
a review of the theory of the solar wind, see [25]. An extensive review of solar
wind observations, including topics such as intermittency that have not be
mentioned here, can be found in the Living Reviews article by [10].
References
1. Parker, E.N.: ApJ vol. 128, p 664 (1958)
2. Parker, E.: Interplanetary Dynamical Processes. Wiley, New York (1963)
3. Alfv´en, H.: Cosmical Electrodynamics. Clarendon, Oxford (1950)
4. Barnes, A.: Rev. Geophys. vol. 17, p 596 (1979a)
5. Barnes, A.: Hydromagnetic waves and turbulence in the solar wind. In:
Parker, E.N., Kennel, C.F., Lanzerotti, L.J. (eds.) Solar System Plasma Physics,
vol. 1 p 249 North-Holland, Amsterdam (1979b)
6. Belcher, J.W., Davis, L.: J. Geophys. Res. vol. 76, p 3534 (1971)
7. Bieber, J.W., Wanner, W., Matthaeus, W.H.: J. Geophys. Res. vol. 101(A2),
p 2511 (1996)
8. Blackman, R., Tukey, J.: Measurement of Power Spectra. Dover, New York
(1958)
9. Boris, J.P., Book, D.L.: J. Comput. Phys. vol. 11, p 38 (1973)

32
Melvyn L. Goldstein
10. Bruno, R., Carbone, V.: Living Reviews in Solar Physics 2(4) (2005).
http://www.livingreviews.org/lrsp-2005-4
11. Coleman, P.J.: Phys. Rev. Lett. vol. 17, p 207 (1966)
12. Coleman, P.J.: ApJ vol. 153, p 371 (1968)
13. Dasso, S., Milano, L.J., Matthaeus, W.H., Smith, C.W.: ApJ vol. 635(2), p L181
(2005)
14. DeVore, C.R.: J. Comput. Phys. vol. 92, p 142 (1991)
15. Ghosh, S., Matthaeus, W.H., Roberts, D.A., Goldstein, M.L.: J. Geophys. Res.
vol. 103(A10), p 23691 (1998a)
16. Ghosh, S., Matthaeus, W.H., Roberts, D.A., Goldstein, M.L.: J. Geophys. Res.
vol. 103(A10), p 23705 (1998b)
17. Goldstein, B.E., Smith, E.J., Balogh, A., Horbury, T.S., Goldstein, M.L.,
Roberts, D.A.: Geophys. Res. Lett. vol. 22(23), p 3393 (1995)
18. Goldstein, M.L., Roberts, D.A., Deane, A.E., Ghosh, S., Wong, H.K.: J. Geo-
phys. Res. vol. 104(A7), p 14437 (1999)
19. Goldstein, M.L., Roberts, D., Deane, A.: In: Velli, M., Bruno, R., Malara, F.
(eds.) Solar Wind 10. AIP Conf. Proceedings, vol. 679, 405. Amer. Inst. Phys.
(2003)
20. Grant, H.L., Stewart, R.W., Moilliet, A.: J. Fluid Mech. vol. 12, p 241 (1962)
21. Horbury, T.S., Balogh, A.: J. Geophys. Res. (Space) vol. 106(A8), p 15929
(2001)
22. Horbury, T.S., Balogh, A., Forsyth, R.J., Smith, E.J.: Geophysical Research
Letters vol. 22, p 3405 (1995)
23. Horbury, T.S., Balogh, A., Forsyth, R.J., Smith, E.J.: Astron. Astrophys. vol.
316(2), p 333 (1996)
24. Kolmogorov, A.N.: Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR vol. 30, p 299 (1941)
25. Marsch, E., Axford, W.I., McKenzie, J.M.: In: Dwivedi, B.N. (ed.) Dynamic
Sun, 374. Cambridge Univ. P. (2003)
26. Matthaeus, W.H., Goldstein, M.L.: J. Geophys. Res. vol. 87, p 6011 (1982)
27. Matthaeus, W.H., Goldstein, M.L.: J. Geophys. Res. vol. 87, p 10347 (1982)
28. Matthaeus, W.H., Goldstein, M.L., King, J.H.: J. Geophys. Res. vol. 91, p 59
(1986)
29. Matthaeus, W.H., Goldstein, M.L., Roberts, D.A.: J. Geophys. Res. vol. 95,
p 20673 (1990)
30. Matthaeus, W., Goldstein, M.L.: Phys. Rev. Lett. vol. 57, p 495 (1986)
31. Monin, A.S., Yaglom, A.M.: Statistical Fluid Mechanics: Mechanics of Turbu-
lence. vol. 2. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. (1975)
32. Narita, Y., Glassmeier, K.H., Goldstein, M.L., Treumann, R.A.: In: Shaikh, D.,
Zank, G.P. (eds.) Turbulence and Nonlinear Processes in Astrophysical Plas-
mas; 6th Annual International Astrophysics Conference, APS, p 215. American
Physical Society, Oahu, Hawaii (USA) (2007)
33. Panchev, S.: Random Functions and Turbulence. Pergamon, New York (1971)
34. Roberts, D.A., Ghosh, S., Goldstein, M.L., Matthaeus, W.H.: Phys. Rev. Lett.
vol. 67, p 3741 (1991)
35. Roberts, D.A., Goldstein, M.L.: Turbulence and waves in the solar wind. In:
Shea, M.A. (ed.) U.S. National Report to International Union of Geodesy and
Geophysics, p 932. Amer. Geophys. Union, Washington DC (1991)
36. Roberts, D.A., Goldstein, M.L., Klein, L.W., Matthaeus, W.H.: J. Geophys.
Res. vol. 92, p 12023 (1987a)

Observations and Modeling of Turbulence in the Solar Wind
33
37. Roberts, D.A., Goldstein, M.L., Matthaeus, W.H., Ghosh, S.: J. Geophys. Res.
vol. 97, p 17115 (1992)
38. Roberts, D.A., Klein, L.W., Goldstein, M.L., Matthaeus, W.H.: J. Geophys.
Res. vol. 92, p 11021 (1987b)
39. Ruderman, M.S., Goldstein, M.L., Roberts, D.A., Deane, A., Ofman, L.: J.
Geophys. Res. vol. 104(A8), p 17057 (1999)
40. Sari, J.W., Valley, G.C.: J. Geophys. Res. vol. 81, p 5489 (1976)
41. Smith, C.W.: In: Velli, M., Bruno, R., Malara, F. (eds.) Solar Wind 10. AIP
Conf. Proceedings, vol. 679, 413. Amer. Inst. Phys. (2003)
42. Tu, C.Y., Marsch, E., Thieme, K.M.: J. Geophys. Res. vol. 94(A9), p 11739
(1989)
43. Unti, T.W., Neugebauer, M.: Phys. Fluids vol. 11, p 563 (1968)
44. Zalesak, S.T.: J. Comp. Phys. vol. 31, p 335 (1979)

Power Spectra of the Fluctuations in the Solar
Wind
V. Krishan1,2
1Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore-560034, India
2Raman Research Institute, Bangalore-560080, India
e-mail: vinod@iiap.res.in
Summary. The power spectra of the velocity, the magnetic ﬁeld and the density
ﬂuctuations and their inter-relationships are investigated in the turbulent solar wind
using the dimensional approach of the Kolmogorovic type. While the velocity and
the magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations are dynamically related within the framework of the
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence, the density ﬂuctuations could behave
as a passive scalar and be simply convected by the velocity or the magnetic ﬁeld
ﬂuctuations or they could dynamically participate in the joint production mechanism
of all the ﬂuctuations. The spectrum of the density ﬂuctuations can distinguish
between these two possibilities. Further the inclusion of the Hall eﬀect, arising from
the two ﬂuid treatment, near the ion- inertial scale generates diﬀerent spectra for
the velocity and the magnetic ﬂuctuations adding steeper branches to the ideal
MHD spectra. Which spectrum would the density ﬂuctuations, behaving as a passive
scalar, follow in such a case? The answer leads to the interesting consequence that the
electron density ﬂuctuations and the ion density ﬂuctuations have diﬀerent spectra
at spatial scales equal to and smaller than the ion-inertial scale. This result clearly
demonstrates the two ﬂuid picture brought in by the Hall eﬀect.
Key words: solar wind, turbulent spectra, Hall eﬀect
1 Introduction
The solar wind is a continuous, radial, supersonic outﬂow of plasma from
the solar atmosphere and extends to the farthest reaches of the solar sys-
tem to merge eventually with the interstellar medium. At the earth’s orbit,
the electron- proton plasma, with some trace elements, has a density of 5-10
particles/cc, a temperature of ∼100, 000 K and a velocity V ∼300 Km/s.
Supporting small deviations of ∼10 Km/s, from the radial ﬂow, it is colli-
sionless, inhomogeneous and turbulent on several time and spatial scales. The
source of energy for the hot plasma is the million degree solar corona; solar
gravity being inadequate to hold the corona in static equilibrium. Fluctua-
tions in the density, the velocity and the magnetic ﬁelds exist on three major

36
V. Krishan
scales : (1) 11 year solar cycle related variations and fast stream - slow stream
interactions due to solar rotation; (2) transient disturbances originating on
the sun and propagating out such as those associated with Solar ﬂare caused
blast wave with energy ∼1032 erg and (3) on hours or less scales are the waves
and turbulence in the plasma. For example the Alfven waves ﬂuctuations have
power law spectra K−p, p ∼5/3 along with other values of p. Key Observa-
tions of the Solar Wind Turbulence are: 1. velocity, density, magnetic ﬁeld
and temperatures vary in time; 2. magnetohydrodynamics accounted for ﬂuc-
tuations reasonably well, particularly the shear Alfven waves, indicating that
the magnetosonic waves are damped by kinetic eﬀects; 3. Alfv´en waves are
found always propagating outwards from the Sun; 4. similarity between the
power spectra of the magnetic ﬂuctuations and the velocity ﬂuctuations for
an isotropic magnetoﬂuid as well as ﬂuid turbulence; 5. turbulence is driven
by stream - shear Instabilities.The Alfv´en waves being the exact solutions lack
evolution. However, the solar wind turbulence shows evolution. Perhaps it is
not all Alfv´enic; 6. Voyager and Helios missions provided observations from
0.3 to > 30 AU; 7. Reduced Spectra are obtained by averaging over the two
directions perpendicular to the solar wind velocity (Vs). The study of the solar
wind turbulence is of immence importance on several counts. The solar wind is
a distant plasma system that is accessible to direct observations of nonlinear
processes such as the wave-particle and wave-wave interactions which have
essential bearing on the propagation of the cosmic rays. The coupling of the
solar wind and the magnetosphere deﬁnes the solar-terrestrial relationship.
The turbulence modiﬁes the transport processes with consequences for the
space weather.
The reduced Spectra of the ﬂuctuations are obtained by averaging over
the two directions perpendicular to the solar wind velocity Vs. The spectra
are a function of the wavenumber along Vs. The spectral energy distribu-
tions of the velocity and the magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations in the solar wind are
now known in a wide frequency range, starting from much below the pro-
ton cyclotron frequency (0.1 - 1 Hz) to hundreds of Hz. The inferred power
spectrum [1] of magnetic ﬂuctuations (Fig.1) consists of multiple segments-
a Kolmogorov like branch (∝k−5/3) ﬂanked, on the low frequency end by
a ﬂatter branch(∝k−1) and, on the high frequency end, by a much steeper
branch (∝k−α1, α1 ≃3-4). Attributing the Kolmogorov branch (∝k−5/3) to
the standard inertial range cascade, initial explanations invoked dissipation[2]
processes, in particular, the collisionless damping of Alfv´en and magnetosonic
waves , to explain the steeper branch (∝f −α1, α1 ≃3-4). However, a re-
cent critical study has concluded that damping of the linear Alfv´en waves via
the proton cyclotron resonance and of the magnetosonic waves by the Lan-
dau resonance, being strongly k (wave vector) dependent, is quite incapable
of producing a power-law spectral distribution of magnetic ﬂuctuations, the
damping mechanisms lead, instead, to a sharp cutoﬀin the power spectrum[3].
Cranmer and Ballogoeijen[4] have however, demonstrated a weaker than an
exponential dependence of damping on the wave vector by including kinetic ef-

Power Spectra of the Fluctuations in the Solar Wind
37
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the observed magnetic energy spectrum in the
solar wind.
fects. However it is still steeper than that required for explaining the observed
spectrum.
An alternative possibility, suggested by Ghosh[5]et al., links the spectral
break and subsequent steepening to a change in the controlling invariants of
the system in the appropriate frequency range. Stawicki[6]et al. have invoked
the short wavelength dispersive properties of the magnetosonic/whistler waves
to account for the steepened spectrum and christened it as the spectrum in the
dispersion range. Krishan and Mahajan[7],[8], however, invoke the Hall eﬀect
to model the steepened part of the spectrum, and this should be correct since
the steepening begins at a scale close to the ion-inertial scale, a hallmark of
the Hall eﬀect. The incompressible turbulence has no associated density ﬂuc-
tuations. The density ﬂuctuations, produced by an independent mechanism,
could be convected by the velocity and the magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations as a
passive scalar or they may be concomitantly generated in compressible turbu-
lence along with the other ﬂuctuations. I recapitulate the power spectra of the
ﬂuctuations in Alfv´enic turbulence in the next section. The relation between
the velocity and the magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations, including the Hall eﬀect, is
derived in section 3. The power spectra of ﬂuctuations within the Hall- MHD
invoking the new invariant, the generalized helicity, are derived in section 4.

38
V. Krishan
The dilemma of the density ﬂuctuations, whether being convected by the ve-
locity or the magnetic ﬂuctuations at spatial scales near the ion-inertial scale,
is discussed in section ﬁve and the paper ends with a section on conclusion.
2 Power spectra of ﬂuctuations in Alfv´enic turbulence
The solar wind turbulence is modeled in terms of the magnetohydrodynamic
ﬂuctuations. An assumed input spectrum k−1 of the Alfv´en waves is believed
to decay to generate the Kolmogorov k−5/3 spectrum. since the Alfv´enic ﬂuc-
tuations are characterized by velocity ﬂuctuation V = ±B, the velocity and
the magnetic ﬂuctuations have identical spectra. The question of the ori-
gin of the k−1 spectrum has as yet no satisfactory answer although such a
spectrum is observed under diﬀerent and disparate circumstances related to
self-organized criticality. One alternative is to derive the spectra using the
dimensional arguments of the Kolomogorov hypotheses. The incompressible
magnetohydrodynamic turbulence represented by the Alfv´enic ﬂuctuations
supports two global invariants: the total energy E and the magnetic helicity
HM deﬁned as:
Total Energy
E =
1
2

(V 2 + B2)d3x
= 1
2

k
|Vk|2 + |Bk|2
(1)
Magnetic Helicity HM =

A · Bd3x
=

k
i
k2 (k × Bk) · B−k
(2)
where A is the vector potential. In order to derive the spectral energy dis-
tributions we resort to the Kolmogorov hypotheses according to which the
spectral cascades proceed at a constant rate governed by the eddy turn over
time (kV k)−1. For εE denoting the constant cascading rate of the total energy
E, we get the dimensional equality
(kVk)V 2
k = εE.
(3)
The omnidirectional spectral distribution function WE(k) (kinetic energy per
gram per unit wave vector, V 2
k
2k ), then, takes the form
WE(k) = (εE)
2
3
2
k−5
3 .
(4)
The equipartition between the kinetic and the magnetic energy in Alfv´enic
turbulence yields:
ME(k) = WE(k).
(5)
where ME(k) = (B2
k/2k) is the similarly deﬁned omnidirectional spectral
distribution function of the magnetic energy density.

Power Spectra of the Fluctuations in the Solar Wind
39
The cascading of the magnetic helicity HM (εH being the cascading rate
for the magnetic helicity) produces a diﬀerent dimensional equality
(kVk)
B2
k
k

= εH
(6)
resulting in the following kinetic and magnetic spectral energy distributions:
WH(k) = 2−1 (εH)
2
3 k−1
(7)
MH(k) = WH(k).
(8)
Fig. 2.
Spectral distribution of kinetic energy W(k), the magnetic energy M(k)
and the density N(k) in Alfv´enic turbulence.
The observed solar wind magnetic spectrum, at spatial scales much larger
than the ion-inertial scale can be generated if we could string together the
two branches ME(k) ∝k−5/3, and MH(k) ∝k−1. The rationale as well as

40
V. Krishan
the modality for stringing diﬀerent branches originates in the hypothesis of
selective dissipation. It was, ﬁrst, invoked in the studies of two-dimensional
hydrodynamic turbulence[9]. The idea is that in a given k range, the par-
ticular invariant which suﬀers the strongest dissipation, controls the spectral
behavior ( determined, in turn, by arguments a la Kolmogorov). Thus if the
k ranges associated with diﬀerent invariants are distinct and separate, we
have a straightforward recipe for constructing the entire k-spectrum in the
extended inertial range. In 2-D hydrodynamic turbulence[9], for instance, the
enstrophy invariant, because of its stronger k dependence ( and hence larger
dissipation) compared to the energy invariant, dictates the large k spectral
behavior. Therefore, the entire inertial range spectrum has two segments- the
energy dominated low k, and the enstrophy dominated high k (∝k−3). The
procedure amounts to placing the spectrum with the highest negative expo-
nent at the highest k-end, and the one with the lowest negative exponent of k
at the lowest k-end. This procedure generates the low k-end spectral branches
k−1 and k−5/3 for the kinetic energy and the magnetic energy spectrum. Now,
the density ﬂuctuations if convected as a passive scalar would have the spec-
tral distributions, NE(k) and NH(k), deﬁned as nk2 = kN(k), same as the
kinetic and the magnetic energy as exhibited in Fig.(2). However, if the den-
sity ﬂuctuations are generated by the same mechanism as the velocity and the
magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations as for example in magnetosonic modes, the three
spectra would be determined from their dynamical relationships. In a mag-
netosonic mode propagating perpendicular (kz = 0) to the uniform ambient
magnetic ﬁeld B0, say in the z direction, one has:
V⊥= n (1 + β)1/2 , B = Bz = n
(9)
in dimensionless form. Here n is the density ﬂuctuation and β is the plasma
β. Since the relationships amongst the three ﬂuctuations are independent of
k⊥, the spectral distributions are same as in the case of the incompressible
turbulence. However, the relative magnitudes of the power in the three spectra
are now given by equation (10). One notices that the magnetic ﬂuctuations and
the density ﬂuctuations have identical spectra but the velocity ﬂuctuations can
be much larger than the density or the magnetic ﬂuctuations depending on
the value of the plasma β. For oblique waves, the corresponding spectra would
be anisotropic.
3 Relation between the velocity and the magnetic ﬁeld
ﬂuctuations in Hall-MHD
In the HALL-MHD (HMHD) comprising of the two ﬂuid Model, the electron
ﬂuid equation is given by
mene[∂Ve
∂t + (Ve.∇)Ve] = −∇pe −ene[E + 1
c Ve × B]
(10)

Power Spectra of the Fluctuations in the Solar Wind
41
Assuming inertialess electrons (me ←0), the electric ﬁeld is found to be:
E = −1
c Ve × B −
1
nee∇pe
(11)
The Ion ﬂuid equation is :
mini[∂Vi
∂t + (Vi.∇)Vi] = −∇pi + eni[E + 1
c Vi × B]
(12)
Substitution for E from the inertialess electron Eq. begets:
mini[∂Vi
∂t + (Vi.∇)Vi] = −∇(pi + pe) + 1
c J × B
(13)
The magnetic Induction equation becomes:
∂B
∂t = −c∇× E = ∇× (Ve × B)
(14)
where B is seen to be frozen to electrons. Substituting for Ve = Vi −J/ene,
one gets :
∂B
∂t = ∇×

Vi −J
ene

× B

(15)
We see that B is not frozen to the ions, ne = ni.
The Hall term dominates for (neec)−1J × B ≥Vi × B/c or the length
scale L ≤MAc/ωpi and the time scale T ≥ω−1
ci where M is the Alfvenic Mach
number and ωpi is the ion plasma frequency.
That is the Hall term decouples electron and ion motion on ion inertial
length scales and ion cyclotron times. The Hall eﬀect does not aﬀect mass
and momentum transport but it does aﬀect the energy and magnetic ﬁeld
transport.
The importance of the nonlinear Alfv´enic state for MHD prompts one to
speculate if a similar kind of an exact solution exists for Hall MHD[9],[10], a
system which encompasses MHD. We write the equations in a dimensionless
form. The magnetic and the velocity ﬁelds are respectively normalized by the
uniform ambient ﬁeld B0 and the Alfv´en speed VAi = B0/√4πρi, where ρi is
the uniform ion mass density. The time and the space variables are normalized,
respectively, with the Alfv´en travel time tA = L/VAi, and a scale length L. In
these units the following dimensionless equations
∂B
∂t = ∇× [(Vi −ϵ∇× B) × B]
(16)
∂(∇× Vi)
∂t
= ∇× [Vi × (∇× Vi) −B × (∇× B)]
(17)
constitute the Hall-MHD in the incompressible limit. Here ϵ = λi/L =
c/ωpiL = VAi/Lωci and ωpi = (4πe2ni/mi)1/2 is the ion plasma frequency, λi

42
V. Krishan
is the ion inertial length. Equation (18) has been obtained by taking the curl
of the equation of motion of the ion ﬂuid ( Equation (14)) . We split the ﬁelds
into their ambient and the ﬂuctuating parts:
B = 	ez + b;
Vi = V0 + v
(18)
where V0 = 0 and substitute in Eqs. (17) and (18) to get :
∂b
∂t = ∇× [(v −ϵ∇× b) × 	ez + (v −ϵ∇× b) × b] ,
(19)
∂
∂t(∇× v) = ∇× [v × (∇× v)
+(∇× b) × 	ez + (∇× b) × b] .
(20)
Assuming a plane wave form (Vk, Bk)exp(ikz−iωt) we get the linear relations:
Vk −ϵ∇× Bk = −ω
k Bk
(21)
∇× Bk = −ω
k ∇× Vk
(22)
The solution of equqtions (22, 23) furnishes:
∇× Bk = λBk, λ2 = k2, Bk = α(k)Vk, α = −ω
k
(23)
and the dispersion relation is:
α = −ϵk
2 ±
ϵ2k2
4
+ 1
 1
2
(24)
One notices that the Vk, Bk relation of the waves is now k dependent, the
waves are dispersive and that they are nonlinear since for b given by eqs.(22)
and (23), the nonlinear terms in eqs.(20 and 21) vanish. For k ≪1,
α →±1, ω →∓k
(25)
reproducing the k independent MHD Alfv´enic relationship for both the co- and
the counter propagating waves. For k ≫1, it is easy to recognize, in analogy
with the linear theory, that the α+ wave is the shear-cyclotron branch, while
the α−represents the compressional-whistler mode. The frequency of the α+
wave approaches the ion gyro frequency. The Vk, Bk relation would now give
diﬀerent spectral distributions for the kinetic and the magnetic energy. The
Hall-MHD also supports an additional invariant called the generalized helicity.
The additional invariant and its cascading characteristics along with the new
spectral relations arising from the new Vk, Bk relation are discussed in the
next section.

Power Spectra of the Fluctuations in the Solar Wind
43
4 Generalized helicity and power spectra in Hall-MHD
The additional invariant of the Hall-MHD system, the generalized helicity[12]
is deﬁned as:
HG =

d3x (A + ϵVi) . (B + ϵ∇× Vi)
=
 
ik × Bk
k2
+ ϵVk

. (Bk + iϵk × Vk)
(26)
where A is the vector potential. Notice that HG −HM is a combination of
the kinetic and the cross helicities. The cascading of the generalized helicity
with a constant rate εG , using the relation Bk = α(k)Vk gives
(kVk)

k−1g(k)V 2
k

= εG,
(27)
g(k) = (α + ϵk)2
leading to the spectral energy distributions:
WG(k) = (εG)
2
3 [g(k)]−2
3 k−1,
(28)
and
MG(k) = (α)2WG(k).
The spectral distributions WG(k) and MG(k) are shown in ﬁgures (3,4), re-
spectively, for the two roots α+ and α−for diﬀerent values of the Hall param-
eter ϵ. The generalized helicity reduces to the magnetic helicity for ϵ = 0 and
α± = ±1. The steepening of the spectra towards large values of k is evident
for nonzero values of ϵ.
The spectral distributions obtained from the cascading of the total energy
are accordingly modiﬁed to:
WE(k) = 2−1/3 (εE)
2
3 [1 + (α)2]−2
3 k−5
3 .
(29)
and
ME(k) = (α)2WE(k).
(30)
The spectral distributions WE(k) and ME(k) are shown in ﬁgures (5,6) respec-
tively, for the two roots α+ and α−for diﬀerent values of the Hall parameter ϵ.
The steepening of the spectra towards large values of k is evident for nonzero
values of ϵ.
The spectral distributions obtained from the cascading of the magnetic
helicity are accordingly modiﬁed to:
WH(k) = 2−1 (εH)
2
3 (α)
−4
3 k−1,
(31)
and
MH(k) = (α)2WH(k).
(32)

44
V. Krishan
Fig. 3. Power spectra of the kinetic energy density WG(k) and the magnetic energy
density MG(k) derived from the generalized helicity invariant HG with Hall eﬀect
for α+ root.

Power Spectra of the Fluctuations in the Solar Wind
45
Fig. 4. Power spectra of the kinetic energy density WG(k) and the magnetic energy
density MG(k) derived from the generalized helicity invariant HG with Hall eﬀect
for α−root.

46
V. Krishan
Fig. 5. Power spectra of the kinetic energy density WE(k) and the magnetic energy
density ME(k) derived from the total energy invariant E with Hall eﬀect for the α+
root.

Power Spectra of the Fluctuations in the Solar Wind
47
Fig. 6. Power spectra of the kinetic energy density WE(k) and the magnetic energy
density ME(k) derived from the total energy invariant E with Hall eﬀect for the α−
root.

48
V. Krishan
Fig. 7. Power spectra of the kinetic energy WH(k) and the magnetic energy MH(k)
derived from the mahnetic helicity invariant HM with Hall eﬀect for α+ root.

Power Spectra of the Fluctuations in the Solar Wind
49
Fig. 8. Power spectra of the kinetic energy WH(k) and the magnetic energy MH(k)
derived from the mahnetic helicity invariant HM with Hall eﬀect for α−root.

50
V. Krishan
Fig. 9. Power spectra of the kinetic and the magnetic energy density ﬂuctuations
including Hall eﬀect.
The spectral distributions WH(k) and MH(k) are shown in ﬁgures (7 & 8)
for the two roots α+ and α−for diﬀerent values of the Hall parameter ϵ.
The steepening of the spectra towards large values of k is evident for nonzero
values of ϵ.
It is clear that the spectral distributions (WE, ME, WH, MH) reduce to
the ones obtained in the MHD case for α = 1. For large k, α reduces to the
two values: ϵk and ϵ−1k−1. For α = ϵ−1k−1, corresponding to the shear Alfven
wave, one can determine the kinetic and the magnetic energy spectra using
again the receipe for stringing together the various spectral branches. This
spectra is shown in ﬁg.(9) where the low k end is represented by the MHD
spectra and the high k end by the Hall-MHD spectra.
This is in accordance with the observed magnetic spectra with the steep-
ened part, now, being proposed to be in the inertial range, in contrast to the
other proposals which have unsucessfully put it in the dissipation range. In
the HMHD regime the kinetic and the magnetic enery spectra are diﬀerent as
the two ﬂuids now have their own dynamics.

Power Spectra of the Fluctuations in the Solar Wind
51
5 Power spectra of density ﬂuctuations in Hall-MHD
If the spectra of the kinetic and the magnetic ﬂuctuations are diﬀerent in
HMHD then which would carry the passive density ﬂuctuations? In order to
answer this question let us look at the induction eq.(15) which shows that the
magnetic ﬁeld is frozen to the electrons. Thus one would conclude that the
electron density ﬂuctuations would be frozen to the magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations
and would have the same spectrum as the magnetic ﬁeld. An inspection of the
induction equation in eq.(16) shows that the magnetic ﬁeld is not frozen to
the ions. Thus one would conclude that the ion density ﬂuctuations would be
carried by the velocity ﬁeld ﬂuctuations and would have the same spectrum as
the velocity ﬁeld. So, the electron and the ion density ﬂuctuations have diﬀer-
ent spectral distributions without causing any violation of the quasineutrality.
The entire picture is presented in ﬁg.(10).
Fig. 10. Power spectra of the electron and the ion density ﬂuctuations including
Hall eﬀect.

52
V. Krishan
6 Conclusion
It has been shown that the observed spectral distributions of the velocity, the
magnetic and the density ﬂuctuations in the solar wind can be modeled within
the framework of the Hall magnetohydrodynamics using the dimensional ar-
guments of the Kolmogorov hypotheses. The Hall eﬀect is particularly needed
to account for the high k end of the spectra. The k dependent relation between
the velocity ﬂuctuations and the magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations arising from the
Hall-MHD waves results in diﬀerent spectra for the ﬂuctuations. Addition-
ally, the spectra for the electron and the ion density ﬂuctuations, treated as
passive scalars, also diﬀer at the high k end, again a consequence of the two
ﬂuid treatment which brings in the Hall eﬀect. The spectrum of the electron
density ﬂuctuations steeper than the Kolmogorov spectrum at the ion iner-
tial scale has been inferred from the interplanetary scintillation studies[13].
The spectrum of ion density ﬂuctuations could be inferred from the plasma
wave insitu measurements. Several other consequences of the foray into the
two-ﬂuid treatment such as the inclusion of compressibility and the ensuing
wave modes and anisotrpies need to be investigated.
References
1. M.L. Goldstein, D.A. Roberts and W.H. Matthaeus, Annual Rev. Astron. As-
trophys., 33, 283, (1995).
2. S.P. Gary, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 6759, (1999).
3. H. Li, P. Gary and O. Stawicki, Geophys. Res. Lett, 28, 1347, (2001).
4. S.R. Cranmer, and A.A. von Ballagooijen, Astrophys. J., 594, 573, (2003).
5. S. Ghosh, E. Siregar, D.A. Roberts, and M.L. Goldstein, J. Geophys. Res., 101,
2493, (1996).
6. O. Stawicki, P.S. Gary and H. Li, J. Geophys. Res., 106, 8273, (2001).
7. V. Krishan and S.M. Mahajan, J.G.R., 109, A11105, (2005).
8. V. Krishan and S.M. Mahajan, Solar Physics., 220, 29, (2004).
9. A. Hasegawa, Advances in Phys., 34, 1, (1985).
10. S.M. Mahajan and V. Krishan, MNRAS 359, L27, (2005).
11. V. Krishan and B.A. Varghese, Solar Physics, (2007).
12. Z. Yoshida and S.M. Mahajan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 88, 095001, (2002).
13. P.K. Manoharan, M. Kojima, and H. Misawa, J. Geophys. Res., 99, 23411,
(1994).

Part II
Astrophysical Dynamos

Alpha Eﬀect in Partially Ionized Plasmas
V. Krishan1,2 and R. T. Gangadhara1
1Indian Institute of astrophysics, Bangalore-560034, India
2Raman Research Institute, Bangalore 560080, India
Summary. There are several astrophysical situations where one needs to study
the dynamics of magnetic ﬂux in partially ionized turbulent plasmas. In a partially
ionized plasma the magnetic induction is subjected to the ambipolar diﬀusion and
the Hall eﬀect in addition to the usual resistive dissipation. In this paper we initiate
the study of the kinematic dynamo in a partially ionized turbulent plasma. The Hall
eﬀect arises from the treatment of the electrons and the ions as two separate ﬂuids
and the ambipolar diﬀusion due to the inclusion of neutrals as the third ﬂuid. It is
shown that these nonideal eﬀects modify the so called α eﬀect and the turbulent
diﬀusion coeﬃcient β in a rather substantial way. The Hall eﬀect may enhance or
quench the dynamo action altogether. The ambipolar diﬀusion brings in an α which
depends on the mean magnetic ﬁeld. The new correlations embodying the coupling of
the charged ﬂuids and the neutral ﬂuid appear in a decisive manner. The turbulence
is necessarily magnetohydrodynamic with new spatial and time scales. The nature
of the new correlations is demonstrated by taking the Alfv´enic turbulence as an
example.
Key words: Partially ionized plasma, Dynamo, Hall eﬀect, Ambipolar dif-
fusion.
1 Introduction
The kinematic dynamo has revealed many an essential workings of an astro-
physical dynamo for the generation of magnetic ﬁeld in objects varying from
stars to molecular clouds to accretion disks. The kinematic dynamo ([1] – [4])
is based on the possible generation of an electromotive force parallel to the
mean magnetic ﬁeld in a reﬂexionally asymmetric turbulence, the so called α
eﬀect. Here α is a measure of the net kinetic helicity. The corresponding tur-
bulent diﬀusion coeﬃcient β becomes a function of the mean turbulent kinetic
energy. The scale separation is an integral part of the kinematic dynamo. A
weakly ionized plasma is deﬁned by the condition [5] that the electron-neutral

56
V. Krishan and R. T. Gangadhara
collision frequency νen ∼10−15nn

8KBT/(πmen) is much larger than the
electron-ion collision frequency νei ∼6 × 10−24niΛZ2(KBT)−3/2. This trans-
lates into the ionization fraction ne/nn < 5 × 10−11T 2 [5] where n’s are the
particle densities and T is the temperature in Kelvin. Although the ideal
magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) is often used as a starting point of an astro-
physical investigation, there are many systems with a rather low degree of
ionization dominated by the charged particle-neutral collisions and the neu-
tral particle dynamics. A major part of the solar photosphere ([6], [7]), the
protoplanetary disks [8] and the molecular clouds [9] are some of the examples
of weakly ionized astrophysical plasmas. The dynamo action in such a plasma
would be aﬀected by the multiﬂuid interactions. The issue of possible discon-
nection between the sub-surface and the surface solar magnetic ﬁeld, recently
emphasized by [10], may have some bearing on the neglect of the neutral ﬂuid-
plasma coupling in the ﬂux transport on the solar photosphere. Zweibel ([11])
studied the dynamo process in a partially ionized plasma within a single ﬂuid
description. Including only the ambipolar diﬀusion, she determined the ve-
locity, the density and the magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations self consistently in the
form of magnetohydrodynamic waves and thus went beyond the kinematic
dynamo. Here we recapitulate the essentials of the mean ﬁled dynamo in a
single ﬂuid in section one. We develop a three ﬂuid framework for a kinematic
dynamo including the Hall eﬀect and the ambipolar diﬀusion in section three.
The α eﬀect of the kinematic dynamo is formulated in section four. The new
correlations arising due to the coupling amongst diﬀerent ﬂuids are under-
stood by taking the Alfv´enic turbulence as an example and we end the paper
with a section on discussion and conclusion.
2 Mean Field Dynamo in Single Fluid
Following Krause and R¨adler [12], we begin with the basic equations of non-
relativistic magnetohydrodynamics:
∇× E = −1
c
∂B
∂t ,
∇× B = 4π
c J,
∇· B = 0,
(1)
J = σ(E + u × B
c
),
(2)
where B is the magnetic ﬂux density, E the electric ﬁeld, J the electric current
density, σ the electrical conductivity, and u the ﬂuid velocity.
ρ
∂u
∂t + (u · ∇)u

= J × B
c
−∇p
(3)
Equation (3) describes the momentum conservation of the ﬂuid of mass density
ρ and pressure p. For a given u, these equations determine B, E and J. They
show that

Alpha Eﬀect in Partially Ionized Plasmas
57
∂B
∂t = ∇× (u × B) + η∇2B,
(4)
where η = 1/σ is the electrical resistivity.
2.1 Averaging operations
In a turbulent medium, all the ﬁelds vary irregularly in space and time. Let
F be such a ﬂuctuating ﬁeld, considered as a random function of space and
time. The corresponding mean ﬁeld, F , is then deﬁned to be the expected
value of F in an ensemble of identical systems, and F ′ shall be used to denote
the diﬀerence, (F −F ), between F and F . We can thus write
F = F + F ′,
F ′ = 0.
(5)
The averaging operator commutes with the diﬀerentiation and integration
operators in both space and time.
2.2 The equations for the mean ﬁelds
The problem of the mean-ﬁeld electrodynamics is that of determining B, E
and J when u and some other properties of u′ are known. Writing B = B+B′,
E = E + E′ and u = u + u′, and substituting in Eq. (1), and averaging, we
get
∇× E = −∂B
∂t ,
∇× B = 4π
c J,
∇· B = 0,
(6)
J = σ(E + u × B + u′ × B′).
(7)
These equations would be identical with Eqs. (1) and (2), were it not the
single new term arising from a non-linearity, which gives rise to an additional
electromotive force in Ohm’s law for the mean ﬁelds. The new term called the
“turbulent electromotive force” is denoted as:
E = u′ × B′.
(8)
In order to determine B, E and J, we must know not only u but also this
electromotive force E.
Let us now consider the electromotive force E in more detail. Substituting
B = B + B′ and u = u + u′ in the induction Eq. (4), we obtain
∂B
∂t + ∂B′
∂t
= ∇× (u × B) + ∇× (u × B′) + ∇× (u′ × B) +
∇× (u′ × B′) + η∇2(B + B′).
(9)
These equations determine B′, if B, u and u′ are known. We may therefore
consider E as a functional of B, u and the average statistical properties of u′.
The solution of Eq. (9) depends on the initial and the boundary conditions.

58
V. Krishan and R. T. Gangadhara
For known u and u′, it is possible to determine B, E and J. Consequently,
the determination of that functional dependence is the crucial point in the
development of mean-ﬁeld electrodynamics.
By taking average of Eq. (9), we obtain
∂B
∂t = ∇×

u × B

+ ∇×

u′ × B′
+ η∇2B .
(10)
Next, by substituting back Eq. (10) into Eq. (9), we obtain
∂B′
∂t
= ∇× E + ∇× (u′ × B′) + ∇×

u′ × B

+
∇× (u × B′) + η∇2B′ .
(11)
In the limit of high-conductivity, Eq. (11) can be solved by retaining only the
linear terms in ﬂuctuating quantities and assuming u = 0 :
B′(x, t) = B′(x, t0) +
 t
t0
∇×

u′(x, t′) × B(x, t′)

dt′,
(12)
where t0 is arbitrary, and t −t0 is to be chosen so large that no correlation
between B′(x, t0) and u′(x, t) exists. Thus we assume
t −t0 ≫(λ2
cor/η) ≫τcor,
(13)
where λ2
cor and τcor are the correlation length and time, respectively. The
appropriate solution takes the form
B′(x, t) =
 t
t0
∇×

u′(x, t′) × B(x, t′)

dt′.
(14)
We shall now derive the turbulent electromotive force E by taking the cross
product of Eq. (12) with u′(x, t′) and taking the average. The resulting ex-
pression does not depend on t0 as far as Eq. (13) holds. Hence we can put
t0 = −∞and obtain
E(x, t) =
t

−∞
u(x, t′)′ × ∇×

u′(x, t′) × B(x, t′)

dt′ .
(15)
The integrand is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero only if t −t′ < τcor. If we
replace t′ by t −τ we derive
E(x, t) =
∞

0
u′(x, t) × ∇×

u′(x, t −τ) × B(x, t)

dτ .
(16)
We now write Eq. (16) in terms of its component equations in right-handed
Cartesian coordinate system (x1, x2, x3).

Alpha Eﬀect in Partially Ionized Plasmas
59
E1 = −(w312 −w213)B1 −w22
∂B3
∂x2
+ w33
∂B2
∂x3
,
E2 = −(w123 −w321)B2 −w33
∂B1
∂x3
+ w11
∂B3
∂x1
,
(17)
E3 = −(w231 −w132)B3 −w11
∂B2
∂x1
+ w22
∂B1
∂x2
,
where the notations
wijk =
∞

0
u′
i(x, t)∂u′
k(x, t −τ)
∂xj
dτ,
(18)
wij =
∞

0
u′
i(x, t)u′
j(x, t −τ) dτ,
(19)
have been used. Comparing Eq. (17) with
E = u′ × B′ = αB −β ∇× B
(20)
we immediately ﬁnd that
α = −(w312 −w213) = −(w123 −w321) = −(w231 −w132)
= −1
3(w123 + w231 + w312 −w132 −w321 −w213),
(21)
and
β = w12 = w22 = w33 = 1
3(w11 + w22 + w33).
(22)
Inserting Eqs. (18) and (19) into Eqs. (21) and (22) we ﬁnd ﬁnally
α = −1
3
∞

0
u′(x, t) · ∇× (u′(x, t −τ)) dτ ,
(23)
and
β = 1
3
∞

0
u′(x, t) · u′(x, t −τ) dτ .
(24)
For an estimate of the order of magnitude we evaluate the integrals (23) and
(24) such that
α = −1
3u′ · ∇× u′ τcor ,
(25)
and

60
V. Krishan and R. T. Gangadhara
β = 1
3u′2τcor .
(26)
The dynamo equation, now, becomes
∂B
∂t = ∇×

αB

+ (β + η)∇2B .
(27)
The ﬁrst term on the right hand side determines the growth rate of the large
scale magnetic ﬁeld B.
3 Three-Component Magnetoﬂuid
We begin with the three component partially ionized plasma consisting of
electrons (e), ions (i) of uniform mass density ρi and neutral particles (n)
of uniform mass density ρn. The equation of motion of the electrons can be
written as:
mene
∂Ve
∂t + (Ve · ∇)Ve

= −∇pe −
ene

E + Ve × B
c

−meneνen(Ve −Vn) ,
(28)
where the electron-ion collisions have been neglected since the ionized com-
ponent is of low density. On neglecting the electron inertial force, the electric
ﬁeld E is found to be:
E = −Ve × B
c
−∇pe
ene
−me
e νen(Ve −Vn) .
(29)
This gives us Ohm’s law. For δ = (ρi/ρn) ≪1 the ion dynamics can be
ignored. The ion force balance then becomes:
0 = −∇pi + eni

E + Vi × B
c

−νinρi(Vi −Vn) ,
(30)
where νin is the ion-neutral collision frequency, and the ion–electron collisions
have been neglected for the low density ionized component. Substituting for E
from Eq. (29) we ﬁnd the relative velocity between the ions and the neutrals:
Vn −Vi = ∇(pi + pe)
νinρi
−J × B
cνinρi
,
(31)
where
J = ene(Vi −Ve) .
(32)
The equation of motion of the neutral ﬂuid is:

Alpha Eﬀect in Partially Ionized Plasmas
61
ρn
∂Vn
∂t + (Vn · ∇)Vn

= −∇pn −νniρn(Vn −Vi) −
νneρn(Vn −Ve) ,
(33)
where the viscosity of the neutral ﬂuid has been neglected. Substituting for
Vn −Vi from Eq. (31), and using νinρi = νniρn we ﬁnd:
ρn
∂Vn
∂t + (Vn · ∇)Vn

= −∇p + J × B
c
,
(34)
where p = pn+pi+pe. Observe that the neutral ﬂuid is subjected to the Lorentz
force as a result of the strong ion-neutral coupling due to their collisions.
Consider Faraday’s law of induction:
∂B
∂t = −c∇× E
(35)
By substituting for the electric ﬁeld from Eq. (2), we get
∂B
∂t = ∇× (Ve × B) + η∇2B ,
(36)
where the pressure gradient terms have been dropped for the incompressible
case with constant temperature. Here η = meνenc2/(4πe2ne) is the electrical
resistivity predominantly due to electron-neutral collisions. Using the con-
struction
Ve × B = [Vn −(Vn −Vi) −(Vi −Ve)] × B ,
(37)
and substituting for the relative velocity of the ion and the neutral ﬂuid from
Eq. (31), Eq. (36) becomes:
∂B
∂t = ∇×

Vn −J
ene
+ J × B
cνinρi

× B

+ η∇2B
(38)
One can easily identify the Hall term (J/ene), and the ambipolar diﬀusion
term (J × B) [13]. The Hall term is much larger than the ambipolar term for
large neutral particle densities or for νin ≫ωci where ωci is the ion cyclotron
frequency. In this system the magnetic ﬁeld is not frozen to any of the ﬂuids.
Equations (34) and (38) along with the mass conservation
∇· Vn = 0
(39)
form the basis of our investigation.
4 The Alpha Eﬀect in Three-Component Magnetoﬂuid
The α eﬀect along with its several variants is the key concept in the generation
of large scale magnetic ﬁelds from small scale velocity and magnetic ﬁelds in

62
V. Krishan and R. T. Gangadhara
the kinematic dynamo process [12]. The magnetic induction equation (38) is
written as:
∂B
∂t = ∇× [VE × B] + η∇2B ,
(40)
where
VE = Vn + VH + VAm
(41)
with
VH = −J
ene
(42)
as the Hall velocity and
VAm = J × B
cνinρi
(43)
could be called the ambipolar velocity. Following the standard procedure [12]
the velocity VE and the magnetic ﬁeld B are split into their average large
scale parts and the ﬂuctuating small scale parts as:
VE = VE + V ′
E,
(44)
B = B + B′
(45)
such that
V ′
E = 0,
B′ = 0.
(46)
In the kinematic dynamo the magnetic induction equation is solved for large
and small scale ﬁelds. Substituting Eqs. (44) and (45) into the induction
equation (38), we ﬁnd, in the ﬁrst order smoothing approximation,
V ′
E = V ′
n −J′
ene
+ J′ × B
cνinρi
+ J × B′
cνinρi
(47)
and the mean ﬂow is found to be:
VE = Vn −J
ene
+ J × B
cνinρi
.
(48)
The turbulent electromotive force E is deﬁned as E = V ′
E × B′ and is a
function of the mean magnetic induction B and mean quantities formed from
the ﬂuctuations. The ﬂuctuations in turbulence have, generally, a correlation
in spatial scale Lcor and time scale τcor. In a two-scale turbulence, Lcor ≪L
and τcor ≪τ, where L and τ represent the scales of the large scale quantities.
Thus the ﬂuctuations need to be determined in the immediate vicinity of
the point at which the large scale quantity is to be found. This enables us

Alpha Eﬀect in Partially Ionized Plasmas
63
to employ Taylor’s expansion for B and express the turbulent electromotive
force as (Eq. 5.4 of [12], retaining only the ﬁrst order spatial derivatives and
omitting all time derivatives,
Ei =

V ′
E × B′

i = aijBj + bijk
∂Bj
∂xk
(49)
For a zero mean ﬂow (V E = 0), homogeneous, isotropic, steady and non-mirror
symmetric turbulent velocity ﬁeld V ′
E, the coeﬃcients aij and bijk become
isotropic, and can be expressed as:
aij = αδij;
(50)
bijk = βϵijk
(51)
and the electromotive force can be expressed as:
E = αB −β ∇× B ,
(52)
The coeﬃcients aij or α and bijk or β become functions of B for large B as
we ﬁnd here from the contribution of the ambipolar diﬀusion. The quantity
α, a pseudoscalar, turns out to be the kinetic helicity of the turbulence and
is deﬁned as:
α = −τcor
3 V ′
E · (∇× V ′
E)
= αv + αH + αAm .
(53)
Here, retaining terms quadratic in ﬂuctuations,
αv = −τcor
3 V ′n · Ω′n
(54)
is the measure of the average kinetic helicity of the neutral ﬂuid in the tur-
bulence possessing correlations over time τcor and
αH = 2τcor
3ene
J′ · Ω′n
(55)
represents the contribution of the Hall eﬀect. The coupling of the charged
components with the neutral ﬂuid is clearly manifest through the possible
correlation between the current density ﬂuctuations and the vorticity ﬂuc-
tuations of the neutral ﬂuid Ω′
n = ∇× V ′
n. The ambipolar term gives rise
to
αAm = αA · B ,
(56)
with
αA =
2τcor
3cρiνin
J′ × Ω′n ,
(57)
as the contribution from the ambipolar diﬀusion with its essential nonlinear
character manifest through its dependence on the average magnetic induction.

64
V. Krishan and R. T. Gangadhara
One also observes that the Hall alpha (Eq. 55) requires a component of the
ﬂuctuating current density along the ﬂuctuating vorticity of the neutral ﬂuid
whereas the ambipolar eﬀect (Eq. 56) thrives on the component of the ﬂuctu-
ating current density perpendicular to the ﬂuctuating vorticity. The turbulent
dissipation is given by
β = τcor
3 V ′2
E = βv + βH + βAm
(58)
with
βv = τcor
3 V ′2
n
(59)
as the measure of the average turbulent kinetic energy of the neutral ﬂuid in
the turbulence possessing correlations over time τcor and
βH = 2τcor
3ene
J′ · V ′n
(60)
represents the contribution of the Hall eﬀect. The coupling of the charged
components with the neutral ﬂuid is clearly manifest through the possible
correlation between the current density ﬂuctuations and the velocity ﬂuctua-
tions of the neutral ﬂuid. The ambipolar term furnishes
βAm = βA · B ,
(61)
βA =
2τcor
3cρiνin
J′ × V ′n
(62)
with its essential nonlinear character manifest through its dependence on the
average magnetic induction. One also observes that the Hall βH requires a
component of the current density ﬂuctuations along the velocity ﬂuctuations
of the neutral ﬂuid whereas the ambipolar eﬀect thrives on the component of
the current density ﬂuctuations perpendicular to the velocity ﬂuctuations. We
have used rigid or perfectly conducting boundary conditions (all surface con-
tributions vanish) while determining the averages. Here we consider what is
known as the α2 dynamo and take the mean ﬂow VE = 0. This actually deter-
mines the relative mean ﬂow amongst the three ﬂuids. The dynamo equation
reduces to
∂B
∂t = ∇× [αB −β∇× B] + η∇2B .
(63)
From now onwards we omit the bar on the large scale magnetic ﬁeld. Assum-
ing one dimensional space dependence, we assume the magnetic induction
B = (0, B, ∂A/∂x) in Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z). In the correspond-
ing spherical conﬁguration, one identiﬁes the Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z)
with the polar coordinates (θ, φ, r). Thus B and ∂A/∂x represent the toroidal
and the poloidal parts of the ﬁeld, respectively [4]. The boundary conditions
then turn out to be the vanishing of B and A at the endpoints of a ﬁnite

Alpha Eﬀect in Partially Ionized Plasmas
65
x-interval, say x = 0 and x = πR corresponding to the poles of the sphere.
It is convenient to put the induction equation in a dimensionless form using
a normalizing magnetic ﬁeld B0, a spatial scale R, a time scale R2/η1 and
writing A = A′R. It begets:
∂B
∂t = −Rα
∂2A′
∂x2 + ∂2B
∂x2 −RαA
∂
∂x

B + a∂A′
∂x
 ∂A′
∂x

+
RβA
∂
∂x

B + b∂A′
∂x
 ∂B
∂x

(64)
and
∂A′
∂t = RαB + ∂2A′
∂x2 + RαA

B + a∂A′
∂x

B +
RβA

B + b∂A′
∂x
 ∂2A′
∂x2 ,
(65)
where
Rα = α1R
η1
,
(66)
RαA = αAyRB0
η1
,
(67)
RβA = βAyB0
η1
,
(68)
a = αAz
αAy
,
(69)
b = βAz
βAy
,
(70)
η1 = η + βv + βH,
(71)
α1 = αv + αH .
(72)
Here one observes that since the Hall eﬀect contributes linearly, it can be
combined with the standard αv eﬀect. The ambipolar eﬀect is nonlinear and
appears separately in the induction equation. The Hall eﬀect can completely
quench or enhance the standard αv contribution to the dynamo for V ′
n =
±J′/(ene). In the absence of the ambipolar eﬀect one recovers the standard
α2 eﬀect with an exponential growth rate of the magnetic induction.
It is instructive to examine the new correlations for the case of say Alfv´enic
turbulence. Now in the weakly ionized case the relation between the velocity
and the magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations for the Alfv´en waves is given by V ′
n =
±δB′/√4πρi [7] with δ = ρi/ρn. Substituting these results in the expression
for αH we ﬁnd:
αH = ±2λH
δλn
αv
(73)

66
V. Krishan and R. T. Gangadhara
where λH = c/ωpi is the ion inertial scale and ωpi =

4πnie2/mi is the ion
plasma frequency and
λn = Ω′n · V ′n
Ω′2
n
(74)
is the ratio of the average kinetic helicity and the average enstrophy of the
neutral ﬂuid turbulence. It is interesting to note that the ambipolar α eﬀect
vanishes for the Alfv´enic turbulence. In the next section we discuss the results
of the numerical solutions of Eqs. (64) and (65).
5 Discussion and Conclusion
We solve the ﬁeld Eqs. (64) and (65) demonstrating the linear and the nonlin-
ear α eﬀect for the initial conditions given by [4]: A′(x, 0) = 0, B(x, 0) = sin x.
In the absence of the ambipolar contribution (RαA = 0, RβA = 0). The
Eqs. (64) and (65) become linear with a solution of the form exp[i(kx + γt)],
where γ = −k2 ± kRα and k is the dimensionless wavenumber. Then the ﬁeld
grows for k < Rα i.e., for large values of the eﬀective α at large spatial scale.
With the inclusion of the ambipolar contributions equations become nonlin-
Fig. 1. Fields B and A′ as functions of t and x. Panels (a) and (b) show their time
variations at ﬁxed x values, while the panels (c) and (d) show the spatial variations
at some ﬁxed t values. Chosen Rα = 1.6, RαA = 1.7, RβA = 0.1, a = 1 and b = 0.7.

Alpha Eﬀect in Partially Ionized Plasmas
67
Fig. 2. Fields B and A′ as functions of t and x. Panels (a) and (b) show their time
variations at ﬁxed x values, while the panels (c) and (d) show the spatial variations
at some ﬁxed t values. Chosen Rα = 0.2, RαA = 3.5, RβA = 1.5, a = 1 and b = 1.
ear. In Fig. 1, we present a case with the Hall and the ambipolar contributions.
The comparable values of the coeﬃcients of the linear and the nonlinear α
terms with Rα = 1.6, RαA = 1.7, RβA = 0.1, a = 1 and b = 0.7 lead to a near
constant toroidal ﬁeld near x = 2, fast decaying solution at x = 0.4 and grow-
ing solution at x = 0.75 beyond t ∼0.5. The poloidal ﬁeld, however, grows
at all values of x. The panels c and d demonstrate the expected formation of
spatially sharp magnetic structures due to the nonlinearity of the ambipolar
diﬀusion [9]. The toroidal ﬁeld in addition undergoes a reversal at x ∼0.5.
Figure 2 shows the dominant eﬀect of the ambipolar term with Rα = 0.2,
RαA = 3.5, RβA = 1.5, a = 1 and b = 1. Both the components of the mag-
netic ﬁeld, after an initial near steady state, grow rather fast and again the
formation of small spatial scale structures is evident. Thus the inclusion of
the Hall and the ambipolar eﬀects opens up a range of possible proﬁles of the
magnetic ﬁeld.
In this ﬁrst attempt, a framework and some instructive examples of the
dynamo solutions in a 3-component magnetoﬂuid have been given. In subse-
quent work we plan to investigate the role of the Hall and the ambipolar terms
in some realistic situations such as the Solar surface, molecular clouds and the
accretion disks. In order to deal with these systems, the diﬀerential rotation
in the objects must be included. In the three component system, one would
have to specify the rotation proﬁle of all the components since the system can

68
V. Krishan and R. T. Gangadhara
aﬀord to carry a net current density. The inclusion of the ion-neutral collisions
introduces an additional time scale with which the turbulence correlation time
needs to be contrasted. The inclusion of the Hall eﬀect brings in the physics
at the ion-inertial spatial scale and ion gyration time scale. The possibilities
are many and varied and should be explored in a system speciﬁc manner.
References
1. Parker E.N., 1955, ApJ, 122, 293
2. Steenbeck M., Krause F., R¨adler K.-H., 1966, ZNat, 21a, 369
3. Moﬀatt H.K., 1970, JFM, 41, 435
4. Stix M., 1972, A&A, 20, 9
5. Alfv´en H., F¨althammer C.-G., 1962, Cosmic Electrodynamics, Clarendon Press,
Oxford
6. Leake J.E., Arber T.D., 2006, A&A, 450, 805
7. Krishan, V., Varghese, A.B., 2007, Solar Physics (in Press)
8. Krishan V., Yoshida Z., 2006, Phys. Plasmas, 13, 092303
9. Brandenburg A., Zweibel E.G., 1994, ApJ, 427, L91
10. Sch¨ussler M., 2005, Astronomical Notes, Astronomische Nachrichten, 326, 194
11. Zweibel E.G., 1988, ApJ, 329, 384
12. Krause F., R¨adler K.-H., 1980, Mean Field Magnetohydrodynamics and Dynamo
Theory, Pergman Press
13. Chitre S.M., Krishan V., 2001, MNRAS, 323, L23

Constraints on Dynamo Action
A. Mangalam
Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Koramangala, Bangalore 560034
mangalam@iiap.res.in
Summary. We discuss ﬁrst geometrical constraints on dynamo action. Magnetic
ﬁeld decay is unavoidable under certain conditions of symmetry. These known re-
sults are encompassed by a calculation for ﬂows described in terms of a generalized
poloidal-toroidal representation of the magnetic ﬁeld with respect to an arbitrary
two dimensional surface. We show that when the velocity ﬁeld is two dimensional,
the dynamo growth, if any, that results, is linear in one of the projections of the ﬁeld
while the other projections remain constant. We discuss criteria for the existence of
and classiﬁcation into two and three dimensional velocity results which are satisﬁed
by a restricted set of geometries. Secondly, helicity conservation imposes constraints
on dynamo action. The calculation of helicity is technically complicated because of
open boundaries and the usual form for the MHD invariant is modiﬁed to take this
into account. Here we present a simple application of the quasi linear model to the
galactic dynamo.
1 Geometrical Constraints
The classical problem of the magnetic dynamo concerns the question of the
ampliﬁcation or maintenance of the magnetic ﬁeld in cases where the induc-
tion equation is valid. The equations yield only decaying solutions when the
velocity and magnetic ﬁelds are both axisymmetric [1, 2] or if the geometry
has planar symmetry [3]. In both situations, the velocity and magnetic ﬁeld
can be three dimensional but do not depend on at least one of the coordinates.
In situations where the velocity is two dimensional, but the magnetic ﬁeld is
three dimensional, the impossibility of dynamo action has been proven if the
ﬂow is planar [4, 5, 6] or spherical [7, 8].
In the following, we use a generalized toroidal-poloidal representation of
the magnetic ﬁeld, B, with respect to an arbitrary two dimensional surface and
derive two scalar equations for the poloidal and the toroidal potentials from
the induction equation. We prove a result, which is an extension of the one
in [9], that incompressible two-dimensional velocity ﬂows in situations other
than in the above mentioned antidynamo theorems (where the ﬁeld decays),

70
A. Mangalam
lead to linear growth in one of the ﬁeld components and are otherwise slow.
Here, the ﬂuid velocity is two dimensional in the sense that it lies entirely on
surfaces which can be described by χ(r) = constant. The approach taken here
also lends itself to a uniﬁed and simpler exposition of the previously cited
results [10].
1.1 Normal projection of the induction equation
The starting point of all the above investigations is the well known induction
equation in MHD
∂tB + ∇× (B × v) = −∇× (η∇× B),
(1)
with the constraint
∇· B = 0,
(2)
where η = c2/4πσ is the magnetic viscosity and σ is the conductivity. As in
the above cases, the ﬂuid is assumed to be incompressible (∇· v = 0). We
make the additional simpliﬁcation of taking η to be uniform. Later, we discuss
the eﬀects of relaxing the latter simpliﬁcation.
The RHS of the equation (1) represents resistive dissipation whereas the
LHS contains a term which represents stirring of the B ﬁeld by ﬂuid motions.
In analogy with the heat conduction equation, this shows that in a static ﬂuid
the ﬁelds decay, while stirring may induce ﬁeld generation.
Consider the ﬂuid velocity and the magnetic ﬁeld to be described in terms
of components perpendicular and parallel to the surfaces deﬁned by χ(r) =
constant. The quantities, Bχ ≡B · ∇χ and vχ ≡v · ∇χ, satisfy the reduced
form of the induction equation projected normal to the surface
dtBχ −B · ∇vχ −η(∇2B)χ = 0,
(3)
where dt ≡∂t + v · ∇, and the constraint (2) and incompressibility condition
was taken into account. One can expand the third term of (3) and obtain
dtBχ = η(∇2Bχ −∇· [(∇χ · ∇)B + (B · ∇)∇χ]) + B · ∇vχ,
(4)
where the last term, B · ∇vχ, equals zero when the velocity ﬁelds lie on the
surfaces, χ(r) = const. This can be further reduced to the dissipation theorem
[9],
1
2dt

V
B2
χd3r = −η

V
{(∇Bχ)2 + BχΘ(B, χ)}d3r,
(5)
where a surface integral over ∇· (Bχ∇Bχ) obtained from Gauss’s theorem
vanishes at large distances. Here we have introduced a useful quantity
Θ(Y, χ) ≡∇· [(∇χ · ∇)Y + (Y · ∇)∇χ]
= [2∂k(Yi) + Yk∂i]∂i∂kχ + ∇χ · ∇(∇· Y).
(6)

Constraints on Dynamo Action
71
It can be seen that the last term in equation (6) vanishes if Y is solenoidal
or if ∇· Y is independent of a coordinate directed along ∇χ. The only pos-
itive contribution, leading to growth, can come from the tensor term in Θ
on the RHS of (6). Clearly, if the surface is planar (χ(r) = z) or spherical
(χ(r) = r2/2) the term becomes zero (∂i∂k equals 0 or δik, respectively, and
in the latter case the condition, (2) needs to be further applied), implying
that Bχ decays. This point was made by [9, 11]. Hereafter, we suppress the
notation Θ(Y, χ) to Θ(Y) unless χ is speciﬁed. In the following, where we
keep the treatment general (by keeping the velocity and magnetic ﬁelds three
dimensional), we ﬁnd the same term occuring in the surface projection of the
induction equation. This enables us to expand upon these conditions for ﬁeld
decay and generalize the antidynamo results cited earlier.
1.2 Parallel projection of the induction equation
It is convenient to express the magnetic ﬁeld in terms of the local “poloidal”
and “toroidal” components
B = BP + BT = ∇× ∇× (ψ∇χ) + ∇× (Φ∇χ),
(7)
where ψ and Φ are the generalized poloidal and toroidal ﬂux functions. This
is analogous to the description of magnetic ﬁeld given by [12, 4] for spherical
geometry. We express the ﬁeld in a coordinate system in which a special
coordinate, q, is normal to the surfaces and is given by
χ(r) = f(q).
(8)
The connection to the corresponding formulae in spherical geometry lies in
the fact that any smooth surface has a local radius of curvature. Therefore, we
implicity demand that the surface be smooth (have ﬁrst derivatives deﬁned).
Next, it can be seen that
Bχ = ∇× (∇ψ × ∇χ) · ∇χ
= ∇· [(∇ψ × ∇χ) × ∇χ]
= ∇· [(∇ψ · ∇χ)∇χ −(∇χ)2∇ψ]
= −(∇χ × ∇)2ψ ≡−∇2
∥ψ.
(9)
In order to examine the local components parallel to the surface, we take a
normal projection of the curl of the induction equation (1),
∂t[(∇×B)·∇χ)]+∇χ·[∇×∇×(B×v)] = −∇χ·[∇×∇×(η∇×B)], (10)
After expanding B, the operand of the time derivative in the resulting
equation can be reduced in a fashion similar to Eq. (9)
(∇× B) · ∇χ = −∇2
∥Φ + Θ(∇× [ψ∇χ]).
(11)

72
A. Mangalam
Deﬁning, C ≡∇× B, and the term on the RHS of Eq. (10) yields,
−η(curl3B) · ∇χ = η(∇2C) · ∇χ
= η

∇2Cχ −∇· [(∇χ · ∇)C + (C · ∇)∇χ]

= −η∇2∇2
∥Φ −ηΘ(C) + η∇2Θ(∇× (ψ∇χ)),
(12)
after performing manipulations identical to those required in obtaining Eq.
(6). The second term of equation (10) is
−∇χ · {∇× ∇× [v × (∇× ∇× (ψ∇χ)) + v × (∇Φ × ∇χ)]}.
(13)
The second term may be evaluated in steps as follows
v × (∇Φ × ∇χ) = vχ∇Φ −(v · ∇Φ)∇χ
∇× [v × (∇Φ × ∇χ)] = ∇vχ × ∇Φ −∇(v · ∇Φ) × ∇χ
−∇χ · ∇× {∇× [v × (∇Φ × ∇χ)]} = −∇· [∇Φ(∇χ · ∇vχ) −∇vχ(∇χ · ∇Φ)]
−∇2
∥(v · ∇Φ).
Deﬁning, D ≡v × BP, Dχ reduces to
Dχ = v · (BP × ∇χ).
(14)
The ﬁrst term in Eq. (13) will reduce to
−∇χ · [∇× ∇× D] = −Θ(D) + ∇2Dχ
(15)
where the properties in the calculation (12) are used.
1.3 Results
Now one can write the equation describing the evolution of the parallel com-
ponents of the ﬁeld by including all the terms simpliﬁed to the forms given in
Eqs. (9) –(14), and rearranging terms, as
∇2
∥(dtΦ) −η∇2∇2
∥Φ −ηΘ(C) = ∇· [∇vχ(∇χ · ∇Φ) −∇Φ(∇χ · ∇vχ)]
(16)
+(∂t −η∇2)Θ(∇× [ψ∇χ]) −Θ(D) + ∇2Dχ.
The full form of the corresponding equation for the normal component is
[dt −η∇2]∇2
∥ψ −ηΘ(B) = −(B · ∇)vχ,
(17)
where the second term involves the normal component of velocity.

Constraints on Dynamo Action
73
Non-diﬀusive ﬂows (η = 0)
An exclusion theorem proved by [9] that states that two dimensional non-
diﬀusive ﬂows with a stationary velocity ﬁeld and the property v · a = 0 (the
ﬂux helicity density) under the gauge condition, ∇· a = 0, where a is the
vector potential for the velocity, will lead to a conservation of B · a.
We now generalize this result by not imposing any limitation on the gauge
transformation- as it is impossible to always simultaneously satisfy the condi-
tions v · a = 0 and ∇· a = 0. When the velocity is two dimensional (vχ = 0)
and η →0, it is clear from (17) that Bχ is an integral of motion and cannot
grow with time. Further, if one takes a stationary velocity ﬁeld with v · a = 0
and ∇· a = 0, this implies that the ﬂow lines are along the intersection of
two surfaces; i.e. v = ∇ξ × ∇χ. As a result, Bξ is another constant of motion
(vξ = 0). So the induction, v × B = Bξ∇ξ −Bχ∇χ, is independent of time
and the growth of the remaining component of B, (along v), can utmost be
linear. Hence, we can conclude the intuitive result that ﬂows with zero linkage
(and ∇· a = 0) cannot lead to an exponential growth of the ﬁeld, but utmost
to a linear growth of the ﬁeld in the direction of the ﬂow.
Antidynamo theorems
Based on the equations (17) and (16), we can immediately divide the antidy-
namo results for two and three dimensional velocity ﬁelds. For the 3D results,
we take both the velocity and the magnetic ﬁeld to be three dimensional but
invariant along the special coordinate q (∂q = 0). In the case of 2D results, the
velocity ﬁeld is two dimensional, vχ = 0, and the magnetic ﬁeld is three di-
mensional. Under either of these conditions the ﬁrst term on the RHS of (16)
vanishes. The advection-diﬀusion operator (dt −η∇2) can only manipulate
the ﬁeld and cannot cause growth (cf. (5)).
Here, an antidynamo case is deﬁned as a situation in which the ﬂux func-
tions, ψ and Φ →0 everywhere (as t →∞) with the boundary conditions
that these ﬂux functions vanish at remote surfaces which enclose the volume
of ﬂuid. So the strategy in ﬁnding antidynamo situations is to identify the
conditions when one equation completely decouples from the other and the
decay of the corresponding ﬂux function kills the source terms in the other.
It is natural to consider spherical and planar geometries ﬁrst, since Θ(B) and
Θ(C) would then be zero (cf. (6)). It is to be noted that Θ(∇× [ψ∇χ]) is zero
for spherical, planar and axisymmetry.
The cases of spherical and planar geometries
For spherical geometry (χ = 1
2r2) or planar geometry (χ = z), the equations
(16)–(17) reduce to
[dt −η∇2]Φ = Q(ψ, v)
(18)

74
A. Mangalam
[dt −η∇2]∇2
∥ψ = −B · ∇vχ
(19)
where
Q(ψ, v) ≡[∇2
∥]
−1{∇2Dχ −Θ(D) −∇· [∇Φ(∇χ · ∇vχ)]},
(20)
and ∇2
∥represents L2, the angular momentum operator in the spherical case
or ∂2
x +∂2
y in the planar case. In the two dimensional case (vχ = 0), we have a
source term only in the toroidal equation, (18), while ψ decays. According to
the deﬁnition of D, as ψ →0, D →0 and the RHS of (20) vanishes. Therefore
Q →0 and Φ will decay when t →∞. This follows from the arguments
after (5), and from potential theory which demands that the mean value of
[∇2
∥]
−1(0) is zero in the volume enclosed by a surface on which it vanishes.
Physically, the normal component diﬀuses out and the ﬁeld is conﬁned to two
dimensions; as a result, the ﬁeld is transported like a scalar, and hence decays.
Now, in the three dimensional planar case (χ = z, ∂z = 0) there is a source
term only in the poloidal equation, (19). It can be easily seen from (6) and
(14), that the toroidal source terms involving D and ∇χ · ∇= ∂z are zero.
Subsequently, as Φ →0, B · ∇→Bz∂z(= 0) and ψ decays. It is interesting
that in the three dimensional spherical case none of the source terms in the
above pair of equations are zero to begin with, and hence dynamo action
occurs.
1.4 The case of axisymmetry
In axisymmetry (χ = φ, ∇χ · ∇= ϖ−2∂φ = 0) and D is poloidal. As a
result, Q = 0, as the term involving D is zero [cf. (15)], while Θ(A, φ) =
−(2/ϖ)∂ϖ(Aφ/ϖ), expressed in the cylindrical coordinates, (ϖ, φ, z). Then
the equations, (16)–(17), simplify to
D2[dt −ηD2]Φ = 0,
(21)
[dt −ηϖ−2D2ϖ2](Bφ/ϖ) = −B · ∇(vφ/ϖ),
(22)
where D2 ≡∇2 −2
ϖ∂ϖ, and is known as the Stokes operator, and ∇2
∥repre-
sents [ϖ−1 ˆφ×∇]2 = ϖ−2D2. Since the D2 term can be reduced to a divergence
term and subsequently to a surface integral by Gauss’s theorem which vanishes
due to the dipole behavior of the ﬁeld at large radius, it does not contribute
to growth; see for example, [4](p. 114). Therefore Φ →0, B · ∇→Bφ∂φ(= 0)
and ψ decays according to similar arguments in [4] ( p. 115).
Eﬀects of spatial variation of density and resistivity
It is easy to see from the form of the continuity equation in steady state or
under the anelastic approximation when the density is dependent only on the
special coordinate q,

Constraints on Dynamo Action
75
ρ∇· v + vq∇qρ = 0,
(23)
that ∇· v = 0 is valid when vq = 0. Therefore only the above 2D results
still hold. Non-uniform resistivity introduces a term (∇η × ∇χ) · (∇× B) in
the equation (17) for ψ. This term is zero if η is a function only of q and
hence does not alter the decay of ψ. This was commented upon by [6] for the
cases of spherical and planar geometries. We now show that Φ also decays
in some special cases. The spatial variation of η in q, however introduces
a nonvanishing term (∂zη)(∂zΦ) for planar geometry or (1/r)(∂rη)(∂r[Φr])
for spherical geometry in equation (18). The 3D planar case follows trivially.
Now when vχ = 0, one can invoke a theorem on the resulting elliptic equation
[13, 5], which states that only the constant solution (Φ ≡0) is possible under
the condition of Φ vanishing at large distances. Similarly for axisymmetry, η(φ)
introduces the term (∂φη)Cϖ in (21). When there is no diﬀerential rotation,
Bφ →0 and Cϖ which depends solely on Bφ, vanishes and Φ decays as before.
Therefore, the above 3D planar and 2D planar, spherical, and axisymmetric
results are still valid if η is a function only of q. Also, if there is no diﬀerential
rotation, axisymmetric ﬁelds cannot be maintained if η depends on φ. It shown
that in axisymmetry [14], poloidal ﬁelds cannot be maintained even by a
compressible ﬂuid with η as a function of space and time.
1.5 Concluding remarks on geometrical constraints
In the analysis above, we have cast the induction equation (16)–(17) in a
geometry given by the surfaces χ(r) = constant. This was useful in extend-
ing a previous result for incompressible two dimensional ﬂows while unifying,
classifying, and simplifying the proofs of the known antidyanamo results, and
thereby providing some new insights into the structure of the induction equa-
tion. In order to deduce the general conditions of decay, we can consider the
order of decay of the ﬂux functions, ψ and Φ. If Φ is to decay ﬁrst, then all
the potential source terms which are on the RHS of (16) containing ψ and D
should be zero. This includes the condition that
∇2Dχ −Θ(D) = 0.
(24)
The above equation automatically ensures that Θ(∇× [ψ∇χ]) = ∇χ · [∇×
∇× ∇× (ψ∇χ)] is zero (c.f . (15)). The equation, (24) is true for planar and
axisymmetry. Consequently, the 3D results of planar and axisymmetry follow,
as the ﬁrst term on the RHS of (16) which involves ∇χ·∇is zero. On the other
hand, if ψ is to decay ﬁrst then the RHS of (17) should be zero demanding
the 2D condition, vχ = 0. Further,

V
[Θ(B) −∇2Bχ]d3r ≥0,
(25)
must hold to ensure that ψ decays as per (5) and the boundary conditions
that the ﬂux functions vanish at the remote boundaries. This takes care of the

76
A. Mangalam
decay of Φ since the remaining source terms, which involve ψ, in (16) vanish.
The condition, (25), is true for planar, spherical and axisymmetric geometries.
The unifying aspect of treatment of the boundary conditions used here is that
[∇2
∥]−1(0) is zero with vanishing ﬂux at the boundaries.
We have been able show the impossibility of dynamo action (as deﬁned
in §4) with η = const and ∇· v = 0, exists only for a restricted group of
geometries as allowed by (24) and (25) for the case of 3D and 2D results
respectively. In addition, the above results need further qualiﬁcations that v
is bounded for all time and that “spiky” time dependent behavior is excluded
[15].
As suggested in a classic paper [16], using a diﬀerent approach, that the
impossibility of a steady dynamo for a given geometry depends on the exis-
tence of an arbitrary current, j′, such that

j · j′d3r = 0, and that only a
restricted set satisﬁes this equation. Here we have derived speciﬁc conditions
that determine these geometries. However, a more rigorous analysis of the
above two conditions is needed to ﬁnd the set of all possible χ that satisﬁes
the above criteria.
Including incompressibility in the case of axisymmetry has been done by
([14, 17]). Simulations of [18] reveal hints of a larger theorem involving non
axisymmetric resistivity.
2 Constraints from magnetic helicity on turbulent
dynamos
Two questions about the solar magnetic ﬁeld might be answered together once
their connection is identiﬁed. The ﬁrst is important for large scale dynamo
theory: What prevents the magnetic back-reaction forces from shutting down
the dynamo cycle? The second question is: what determines the handedness
of twist and writhe in magnetized coronal ejecta?
Magnetic helicity conservation is important for answering both questions.
Conservation implies that dynamo generation of large scale writhed struc-
tures is accompanied by the oppositely signed twist along these structures.
The latter is associated with the back-reaction force. It has been suggested
that coronal mass ejections (CMEs) (eg. [19]) simultaneously liberate small
scale twist and large scale writhe of opposite sign, helping to prevent the
cycle from quenching and enabling a net magnetic ﬂux change in each hemi-
sphere. Observations and helicity spectrum measurements from a numerical
simulation of a rising ﬂux ribbon in the presence of rotation support this idea.
Keeping these ideas in mind, we aim to develop a detailed frame work to
calculate the helicity dynamics including relative helicity in a quasi-linear back
reaction model which is more appropriate in situation where there are ﬂows or
magnetic ﬂux crossing the boundaries. The is an extension of a model by [20];
a more careful treatment using the concept of relative helicity is attempted

Constraints on Dynamo Action
77
here. The model is applicable to various astrophysical situations such as solar
or galactic dynamos.
2.1
Magnetic helicity conservation and the dynamo
The magnetic helicity associated with a ﬁeld B = ∇× A is deﬁned as H =

A.B d3x, where A is the vector potential ([4, 21]). Note that this deﬁnition
of helicity is only gauge invariant (and hence meaningful) if the domain of
integration is periodic, inﬁnite or has a boundary where the normal component
of the ﬁeld vanishes. In this case, under a gauge transformation A →A−∇ψ,
the additional term in the helicity,

∇ψ.B =

ψB.dS −

ψ∇.B d3x = 0.
H measures the linkages and twists in the magnetic ﬁeld. From the induction
equation one can easily derive the helicity conservation equation,
dH
dt = −2η

J.B d3x.
(26)
So in ideal MHD with η = 0, magnetic helicity is strictly conserved. Under
many astrophysical conditions where Rm is large (η small), the magnetic he-
licity H, is almost independent of time. In situations where the magnetic ﬂux
penetrates the boundaries the concept of relative helicity is used [21]. We in-
corporate this using gauge conditions where the form remains the same (see
§2.2).
2.2 Calculation of Relative Helcity in C gauge
Here we present a shorter derivation of the relative helicity in “C gauge” of
[22] and associated gauge conditions from ﬁrst principles. The relative helicity
should have the properties of gauge independence and in addition a measure
of the helicity in the volume in question (say Va).If the volume external to
this is Vb, then we can deﬁne relative helicity deﬁned over the entire volume
as
ΔH =

Va+Vb
(A1 · B1 −A2 · B2) d3x,
(27)
where 1 and 2 describe two conﬁgurations where one is the given conﬁguration
and in 2, the external ﬁeld is taken to be a reference ﬁeld (usually a potential
ﬁeld). This can be written as a sum of integrals of (A2 ·B1 −A1 ·B2)+(A1 +
A2) · (A2 −B2). The former is expected to be zero as both quantities in the
term are the same, i.e. physically it is the linkage between ﬁeld conﬁgurations
1 and 2. Now the latter term reduces to
ΔH =

Va
(A1 + A2) · (A2 −B2) d3x.
(28)
To get the gauge of [23], choose the external reference ﬁeld to be a potential
ﬁeld, B2 = P , A2 = AP . To preserve gauge independence, this requires,
P = Bn.

78
A. Mangalam
Further we write the integrand in the Finn-Antonsen gauge as
(A + AP ) · (B −P ) = A · B −AP · P + (AP · B −A · P)
(29)
The last term can be reduced to a surface integral of A × AP . If we take this
as another gauge condition which is equivalent to
A × ˆn]s = AP × ˆn]s
(30)
on the surface, and we obtain the gauge of [24],
ΔHJC =

Va
(A · B −AP · P) d3x
(31)
Now if we take the coulomb gauge for AP and the condition that AP .ˆn|s = 0,
then we obtain the C gauge,
HB =

Va
C · B d3x,
(32)
where C is determined by the conditions, P = B|s and AP · ˆn|s = 0. Further,
we remove all gauge freedom by taking the coulomb gauge for AP and C.
In summary the full set of gauge boundary conditions for the C gauge are
∇× AP = P,
∇× C = B,
Bn = Pn,
∇· AP = 0,
∇· C = 0,
AP .ˆn|s = 0,
A × ˆn]s = AP × ˆn]s
The key point here is that as long the above boundary and gauge conditions
are taken into account, the helicty may calculated using HR = H = C0 · B0,
i.e. that relative helicity is the usual helicity.
2.3 Helicity Dynamics
We write the mean-ﬁeld dynamo equation for B0 (eg. [4]) ,
∂B0
∂t
= ∇× (V0 × B0 + εT −η∇× B0) .
(33)
εT = ⟨vT × b⟩= α0B0 −ηT ∇× B0.
(34)
Here εT is the turbulent emf, α0 = −(τ/3)⟨bT · (∇× bT )⟩, is the dynamo
α-eﬀect, proportional to the kinetic helicity and ηT = (τ/3)⟨b2
T ⟩, is the turbu-
lent magnetic diﬀusivity proportional to the kinetic energy of the turbulence.
This kinematic mean-ﬁeld dynamo equation, has exponentially growing so-
lutions, provided a dimensionless dynamo number has magnitude above a
critical value. While the α-eﬀect is crucial for regeneration of poloidal from
toroidal ﬁelds, the turbulent diﬀusion turns out to be also essential for allowing
changes in the mean ﬁeld ﬂux.

Constraints on Dynamo Action
79
The kinematic mean-ﬁeld equation neglects the the back-reaction on the
velocity due to the Lorentz forces. This rapidly becomes a bad approximation,
due to the more rapid build up of magnetic noise compared to the mean ﬁeld
[25]. Both direct numerical simulations of the non-linear dynamo [26] and
semi-analytic modeling of the non-linear eﬀects point to the crucial role played
by magnetic helicity conservation in limiting mean ﬁeld growth.
The operation of the mean ﬁeld dynamo automatically leads to the growth
of linkages between the toroidal and poloidal mean ﬁelds. Such linkages mea-
sure the helicity associated with the mean ﬁeld. To see how the mean ﬁeld
helicity arises, we need to split the helicity conservation equation into evo-
lution equations of the sub-helicities associated with the mean ﬁeld, say
H0 =

A0.B0 d3x and the ﬂuctuating ﬁeld h =

⟨a.b⟩d3x = ⟨a.b⟩V .
The evolution equations for H0 and h (the details will presented in a paper
in preparation) are
dH0
dt
= 2

εT · B0 d3x −2η

J0 · B0 d3x +

(ηJ0 −εT ) × A · ˆn dA
+

[(A · B)bn −(A · b)Bn] dA
(35)
dh
dt = −2

εT · B0 d3x −2η

⟨j · b⟩d3x
+

(−b × B + ηj −εT ) × a · ˆn dA
(36)
The surface terms include the Poynting ﬂux of the small and large scale helicity
due to expulsion and twisting and writhing at the surface. Here we assume that
the surface terms can either be neglected or are zero for simplicity and defer
the inclusion for a detailed treatment later. We see that the turbulent emf ε
transfers helicity between large and small scales; it puts equal and opposite
amounts of helicity into the mean ﬁeld and the small-scale ﬁeld, conserving
the total helicity H = H0 + h. So if one were to start with zero total helicity
initially, in a system with large Rm, one will always have H0 + h ≈0, or
|H0| ≈|h|.
For a given amount of helicity, the energy associated with the ﬁeld is in-
versely proportional to the scale over which the ﬁeld varies. If for example,
the small-scale ﬁeld were maximally helical, and varied on a single scale, with
associated wave number, kf, we will have kf < a.b >=< b2 >. Similarly in a
periodic box, a maximally helical large scale ﬁeld with wave number km, satis-
ﬁes, km

d3xA0.B0 =

d3xB2
0. We denote the volume average of mean ﬁeld
quantities X0 over the scale of the system,

X0 d3x/V , by X0. So, helicity
conservation, with |H0| ≈|h|, implies B2
0 ≈(km/kf) < b2 >. Now in gen-
eral, < b2 >1/2, will saturate near the equipartition ﬁeld strength, say B2
eq =
4πρv2
T . (Here ρ is the ﬂuid density). So one obtains B2
0 ≈(km/kf)B2
eq ≪B2
eq,
for km/kf ≪1. The mean ﬁeld is expected to attain at most sub-equipartition
values for RM ≫1, if helicity is strictly conserved.

80
A. Mangalam
2.4 Quasi Linear Saturation of the Dynamo
As a crude model of how the dynamo saturates, when the dynamo is not too
supercritical, one may use the quasi-linear theory applicable to weak mean
ﬁelds (cf. [27, 11, 28, 20]).
This gives a re-normalized turbulent emf, with α = α0 + αm, where αm =
(τ/3)⟨b·∇×b⟩/(4πρ), is proportional to the small-scale current helicity. One
can now look for a combined steady state solution to the helicity conservation
equation (36), and the mean-ﬁeld dynamo equation. Assume again that the
small-scale ﬁeld has a scale k−1
f . We then have < b.∇× b >= k2
f < a.b >
(although, for ﬁelds which are not maximally helical, these helicities can not
be related to the energy). Using this, we can write dh/dt in Eq. (36), in terms
of dαM/dt and hence in terms of dα/dt. Further, for Rm large enough that
helicity is conserved, and for a large-scale ﬁeld which varies on scale k−1
m ,
we can approximately write, (∇× B0).B0 ≈k2
mA0.B0 = −k2
m < a.b >=
−(km/kf)2 < b.∇× b >. This relation is of course strictly valid only if H0 is
well deﬁned. This in turn requires that negligible mean magnetic ﬂux escape.
The helicity conservation equation then gives a dynamical equation for
α-quenching
1
ηT k2
f
dα
dt = −2α B2
0
B2eq
−2k2
m
k2
f
(α −α0) −2 η
ηT
(α −α0)
(37)
We see that non-linear eﬀects leads to a decrease in α with time, till the
RHS of Eq. (37) becomes zero. As α decreases, the eﬀective dynamo num-
ber of the dynamo, D, will decrease from an initial value D0 and lead to
a saturation of the mean ﬁeld growth when D = Dc. This happens when
α = αs = α0(Dc/D0). The stationary solution for both the dynamical α
quenching equation and the mean ﬁeld dynamo equations is then obtained by
equating the RHS of Eq. (37) to zero, and substituting a value of α = αsat
given above. For η/ηT ≪(km/kf)2, this gives an estimated mean ﬁeld strength
Bm = |B0|,
Bm ≈[(D0/Dc) −1]1/2 km
kf
Beq.
(38)
The estimate of the mean ﬁeld can be made for a given dynamo model
by supplying D0, Dc, and by taking typical turbulence parameters kf and
Beq. The mean ﬁeld maximal helical scale length is calculated from the mean
magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration and this is shown in §2.5 for a general toroidal-
poloidal split.
2.5 Calculation of the Helical Scale Length of the Mean Field
We deﬁne the mean ﬁeld helical scale length to be
km ≡

B2
0

⟨A0 · B0⟩.
(39)

Constraints on Dynamo Action
81
In a general toroidal-poloidal split, where the vector potential is described
by
A ≡AP + AT = ∇× (ψ∇χ) + Φ∇χ,
(40)
(eg. where χ = φ for cylindrical symmetry and χ = z for planar symmetry),
we ﬁnd that BP = ∇2
∥ψ ≡(∇χ × ∇)2ψ, so that AP · BP = Φ∇2
∥ψ. It can be
shown in general that AT · BT = 0, so that
H = ⟨A0 · B0⟩= ⟨AP · BP ⟩+ ⟨AT · BT ⟩= ⟨Φ∇2
∥ψ⟩,
(41)
and the cross terms are zero. Hence km is calculated to be
km =

(∇2
∥Φ)2 + (∇2
∥ψ)2

Φ∇2
∥ψ

(42)
Application to the galactic dynamo
We consider the analytic model of [9]:
D =

α0Gh3
η2
T
 ,
D0 ∼10 −20,
Dc = 6
We ﬁnd km ∼400 −1000 pc and hence km/kf ∼1/2. As a result the mean
ﬁeld strength Bm ≈0.5Beq.
Application to the solar dynamo
For simplicity, we consider the simplest solar dynamo model ([4, 29]), in which
the convection zone is approximated by a thin slab and the generation process
sources are concentrated at diﬀerent levels
∂zv = −v0δ(z)
α = αsδ(z −1)
Here, the z axis is perpendicular to the slab and B2 ≃B2
y, the velocity shear
(v = vy) describes the diﬀerential rotation of the star. Here the dynamo
number, D = α0v0h2η−2
T
∼103, where h is the slab thickness and the ﬁeld
performs undamped oscillations and the problem admits an analytic solution.
While an application to a more detailed model is pending, we can get
some preliminary estimates. We take km ∼1/h = 0.3R⊙, kf = 1/ℓ, where
the mixing length, ℓ∼0.01R⊙. For a typical D0/Dc ∼10, this indicates sub-
equipartition (about 0.1) volume averaged mean ﬁelds. This estimate has to
be checked by fully non linear models.

82
A. Mangalam
2.6 Conclusions and caveats on constraints from helicity
•
We established a framework for estimating mean ﬁeld strength using rel-
ative helicity in a general context for a given dynamo model.
•
It is shown that the choice of C gauge is useful, in that with appropriate
boundary and gauge conditions, the helicity may calculated using HR =
H =

C0 · B0 d3x.
•
A formula for the helical scale length for a general geometry of the ﬁeld
conﬁguration that was calculated is useful for deriving the scale length
from dynamo models or simulations.
•
The question of how much the surface liberation of small scale twist and
large scale writhe of opposite sign via coronal mass ejections (CMEs) help
in preventing the dynamo can be addressed if the surface terms in eqns
(35, 36) are taken into account.
•
It is expected that qualitative predictions of the sigmoid shapes (pre-
CME) can be made. The predictions can be tested by numerical simu-
lations and observations.
References
1. Cowling, T. G., Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 94, 39 (1934).
2. Backus, G. E. & Chandarsekhar, S., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 42, 105 (1956).
3. Zeldovich, Ya. B., JETP, 31, 154 (1956).
4. Moﬀatt, H. K., Magnetic Field Generation in Electrically Conducting Fluids,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press (1978).
5. Lortz, D., Phys. Fluids, 11, 913 (1968).
6. Zeldovich, Ya. B. & Ruzmaikin, A. A., JETP, 78, 980 (1980).
7. Bullard, E. C. & Gellman, H., Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., A247, 213 (1954).
8. Backus, G. E., Ann. Phys., 4, 372 (1958)
9. Ruzmaikin, A. A. & Sokoloﬀ, D. D., Geophys. and Astrophys. Fluid Dynamics,
16, 73, (1980).
10. Mangalam, A., arXiv:astro-ph/0501041
11. Zeldovich, Ya. B., Ruzmaikin, A. A. & Sokoloﬀ, D. D., Magnetic Fields in As-
trophysics, New York, Gordon & Breach (1983).
12. Chandrasekhar, S., Hydrodynamic and Hydromagnetic Stability, Dover, New
York (1961).
13. Vekua, I. N., Generalized Analytic Functions, Oxford, Pergamon Press (1962).
14. Hide, R. & Palmer, T. N., Geophys. and Astrophys. Fluid Dynamics, 19, 301
(1982).
15. James, R. W., Roberts, P. H. and Winch, D. E., Geophys. and Astrophys. Fluid
Dynamics, 15, 149 (1980).
16. Cowling, T. G., Q. J. Mech. Appl. Math., 10, 129 (1957).
17. Ivers, D. J. & James, R. W., 1995, GAFD, 79, 259
18. Donner, K. J. & Brandenburg, A., 1990, GAFD, 50, 121
19. Blackman, E.G. & Brandenburg, A., 2003, ApJ, 584, L99
20. Subramanian, K., BASI, 2002, 30, 715

Constraints on Dynamo Action
83
21. Berger, M. & Field, G. B., 1984, JFM, 147, 133
22. Berger, M., A & A, 201, 355
23. Finn, J. H. and Antonsen, T. M., 1985, Comments on Plasma Phys and Control
Fusion, 9, 111
24. Jensen, T. & Chu, M. S., 1984, J. Plasma Physics, 25, 489
25. Kulsrud, R. M. & Anderson, S. W., 1992, ApJ., 396, 606
26. Brandenburg, A., 2001, ApJ, 550, 824
27. Pouquet, A., Frish, U. & Leorat, J., 1976, JFM, 77, 321
28. Gruzinov, A. V. & Diamond, P. H., 1994, PRL, 72, 1651
29. Kleeorin, N. and Ruzmaikin, A., 1981, GAFD, 17, 281

Planetary Dynamos
Vinod K. Gaur
Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore 560034, India
Summary. The article begins with a reference to the ﬁrst rational approaches
to explaining the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld notably Elsasser’s application of magneto-
hydrodynamics, followed by brief outlines of the characteristics of planetary mag-
netic ﬁelds and of the potentially insightful homopolar dynamo in illuminating the
basic issues: theoretical requirements of asymmetry and ﬁnite conductivity in sus-
taining the dynamo process. It concludes with sections on Dynamo modeling and,
in particular, the Geo-dynamo, but not before some of the evocative physical pro-
cesses mediated by the Lorentz force and the behaviour of a ﬂux tube embedded in
a perfectly conducting ﬂuid, using Alfv´en theorem, are explained, as well as the tra-
ditional intermediate approaches to investigating dynamo processes using the more
tractable Kinematic models.
Key words: planetary magnetism, self excited dynamo, dynamo modeling
1 Introduction
Magnetic ﬁelds are observed almost everywhere in the universe on a wide va-
riety of scales: planetary, stellar and galactic. Most planets are surrounded by
extensive magnetic structures called magnetospheres which are 10-100 times
larger than their sizes. Magnetospheres of all four giant planets and of Earth
and Mercury have sources in their internal ﬁelds whereas those of Venus and
the comets are induced by interactions between their ionospheres and the so-
lar wind. Although our knowledge about these magnetic structures is largely
furnished by in situ spacecraft measurements, charged particles and atoms
have been observed via the emitted photons at radio and higher frequencies
ranging from a few Hz to several GHz. Thus was detected the magnetic ﬁeld
of Jupiter in the 1950s, producing the ﬁrst evidence that planets other than
earth might have their intrinsic magnetic ﬁelds.
Speculations about the origin of the internal magnetic ﬁelds of planets soon
homed on to two possibilities: fossil ferromagnetism of an earlier inducing ﬁeld

86
Vinod K. Gaur
retained by magnetic rocks such as those bearing magnetite (Fe3O4), or by
an as yet dimly understood dynamo action of conducing ﬂuids circulating in
the planetary interior, as ﬁrst proposed by Larmor [1]. It was soon realized,
however, that remnant magnetism was unlikely to produce the large observed
dipolar ﬁelds, and would require the persistence of long sustained uniform
ﬁelds whilst the bulk of the planetary magnetic material cooled below the curie
point. Yet, Larmor’s suggestion remained unheeded for over two decades until
Walter Elsasser [2] in the 1940s applied magneto-hydrodynamics (MHD) – a
fusion of Maxwell’s electromagnetic equations with those of ﬂuid dynamics – to
the convective motion of the earth’s liquid core stimulated by a small catalytic
magnetic ﬁeld, to derive a self sustained ﬁeld. An important reason for the
continued disregard of Larmor’s proposal of circulating conducting ﬂuids in
the earth’s interior being the likely cause of its magnetism, was the proof by
Thomas Cowling [3] of an anti-dynamo theorem which showed that a perfectly
axi-symmetric ﬂow of a conducting ﬂuid can not generate or sustain an axi-
symmetric magnetic ﬁeld as exhibited by planetary magnetism. The problem
of building in the necessary symmetry breaking mechanisms in the dynamos
of axi-symmetric astrophysical bodies, whether theoretical or experimental,
remains a fundamental issue in all dynamo models.
The MHD equations, however, are far too complex to yield analytic so-
lutions although much insightful understanding of the possible dynamo pro-
cesses have been gleaned by seeking constrained solutions. Meanwhile, con-
siderable intellectual eﬀort has been invested in studying this outstanding
problem using supercomputers even as it poses a formidable challenge be-
cause of the great disparity between the typical scales of magnetic processes,
of a few hundred kilometers in the earth’s core, for example, compared with
hydrodynamic turbulence of the order of ∼10 meters, requiring 1015 grid
points for a realistic simulation.
2 Characteristics of Planetary Magnetic Fields
The structure of extant magnetic ﬁelds of planets or fossil expressions of
their earlier regimes enable one to explore educated speculations about the
state of matter in the planetary interior as well as of its physical properties
and dynamics via the magneto-hydrodynamic theory and solid state physics.
Our knowledge of the magnetic ﬁelds of planets, except for the synchrotron
source Jupiter, is largely derived from ﬂyby and orbiter spacecrafts. They are,
therefore, necessarily restricted in content, although the comparatively better
knowledge of the Earth’s present and historical ﬁeld and fossil expressions of
its past regimes are yet to distill some of the potentially implicit knowledge
of its internal state and dynamics, notably the thermodynamic evolution of
its inner and outer cores and its mantle.

Planetary Dynamos
87
The observed surface ﬁelds of planets are largely dipolar except for Uranus
and Neptune, which have largely quadrupolar ﬁelds. However, their magni-
tudes show a wide variation from 10−4 T for Jupiter to 10−5 T (Tesla) for
Earth, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune, 10−7 for Mercury and less than 10−8
for Venus. The dipole axes of Earth, Jupiter, Saturn are within 10* of their
rotation axes but those of Uranus and Neptune diverge by 40-60*. The latter
planets are also distinguished by their large quadrupole moments indicating
diﬀerent dynamo systems.
Hazarding a possible assumption that planet earth’s magnetic ﬁeld may
be regarded as being proto- typical of planetary magnetism generally, we ex-
plore the Geo-dynamo hypothesis and test its implications against some of the
prominent features of the observed terrestrial magnetic ﬁeld. The latter in-
clude: its predominantly internal (>90%) long lived (>3.5 Ga) dipolar source,
near congruence of its dipolar and rotation axes (∼11*), episodal polarity
reversals, and the westward drift. The last represents a coherent westward
displacement of some speciﬁc features of the surface magnetic ﬁeld, a verita-
ble window into the dynamics of the core.
The inferred persistence of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld from the remnant
magnetization of rocks over 3 billion years old, requires a dynamo process
whereby such long lived magnetic ﬁelds could be sustained by the circulation
of conducting ﬂuids (molten iron in the earth’s outer core, metallic hydrogen
in the cores of Jupiter and Saturn and ionized gases in stars). The dynamo pro-
cess may thus be visualized to consist in sustaining a magnetic ﬁeld through a
positive feedback of currents initially induced in a moving conductor by some
fortuitously present seed magnetic ﬁeld that would eventually be dispensable
for maintaining the dynamo process. A prototypical example of such a self
sustaining dynamo is furnished by the Homo-polar disc dynamo (Figure 1)
which despite its toy like simplicity captures some essential features of plane-
tary and astrophysical dynamos. From the ﬁgure, one can write the equation
of the current circuit as:
LdI
dt + R × I = Magnetic Flux × frequency = M × I × Ω/2π,
(1)
where Ω is the angular frequency of rotation, L the self inductance of the
loop and R its resistance, I the induced current, and M the mutual inductance
between the current loop and the rim of the rotating disc. From Eq. (1) the
expression for I(t) can be written as:
I(t) = Io exp[−(R −α)t/L],
(2)
where α = M × Ω/π.
Thus, as long as [(R–α)/L] is negative, that is, α >R or Ω > 2πR/M,
there would be an exponential growth of I(t) and thereby of the magnetic
ﬁeld. Therefore, for a self sustaining dynamo, R has to be low and the rota-
tion adequate. Two important peculiarities of a self sustaining dynamo are
immediately apparent from an analysis of this simple device:

88
Vinod K. Gaur
Fig. 1. Principle of a self excited dynamo [taken from [7]].
Firstly, the dynamo action can not be maintained if Ω < 2πR/M i.e., the
sense of rotation is reversed. Therefore, axisymmetric ﬂows can not sustain
the dynamo process (Cowling’s anti-dynamo theorem). Secondly, the dynamo
action will cease if R = 0 (perfectly conducting ﬂuid), because magnetic ﬁelds
would be unable to diﬀuse [η in Eq. (5) would be large and so would be the
diﬀusion time constant] in the region where magnetic induction is operating.
Thus whilst the condition of low R is necessary to sustain the dynamo action,
a perfect conductor would stall it.
3 Basic Equations
Interactions between circulating conducting ﬂuids and the evolving magnetic
ﬁeld through a possible dynamo action can be mathematically described by
incorporating the Lorentz magnetic force (J×B) in the classical Navier-Stoke’s
equations. Accordingly,
ρ[(∂V/∂t) + (V.∇)V] + 2ρV × Ω = [−∇p + (J × B) + ρg + ρf]
(3)
subject to the condition of mass conservation
∂ρ/∂t + ∇.(ρV ) = 0.
(4)
Convection driven motions of conducting materials in a planet’s ﬂuid core
are assumed to be responsible for sustaining its dynamo. The convection,
in turn, is generated by buoyancy forces (ρg) caused by thermal as well as
compositional advection – diﬀusion;
The cooling and growth of the solid inner core in the case of the earth,
not only supplies heat (thermal buoyancy) across the inner core-outer core
boundary (ICB), but also expels the low density materials released during

Planetary Dynamos
89
the solidiﬁcation process of the iron alloy (compositional buoyancy). Other
operating forces are the pressure gradient (−∇p = ∇· T) force, the Coriolis
force (2ρV ×Ω), the Lorentz force (J×B) and the Inertial forces (ρDV/Dt).
The (ρf) term accounts for various other forcing terms that may be relevant
to a speciﬁc situation being modeled, such as those due to compressibility.
Although, the above coupled non-linear partial diﬀerential equation is
rather diﬃcult to solve analytically, considerable headway has been made
in simulating realistic low–Reynold number geodynamos. A particularly in-
sightful approach is to study the behaviour of kinematic dynamos, i.e., of the
evolution of the magnetic ﬁeld for given velocity ﬁelds to explore the latter
set that would sustain a self excited dynamo
action, without accounting for the counter inﬂuence on ﬂuid motion
through the Lorentz force. Next, one proceeds to address the question as to
how a eligible velocity ﬁelds may be produced and are subsequently modiﬁed
by the consequent B ﬁeld via the Lorentz force.
Towards the ﬁrst of these steps, we eliminate from Maxwell’s quasi-
stationary equations that ignore the displacement current, the electric ﬁeld
E, and the current density ﬁeld J through the generalized Ohm’s law,
J = σ[E + V × B], for moving conductors under the Galilean transformation,
and thereby obtain the Induction equation for uniform conductivity (∇σ = 0):
∂B
∂t = η∇2B + ∇× (V × B)],
(5)
where μσ = (1/η).
An examination of the Induction Equation shows that the evolution of the
B ﬁeld is determined by the relative strengths of the two opposite terms on
the r.h.s. of Eq. 5. Thus, whilst the ∇×(V×B) term represents the tendency
to advect and distort the magnetic ﬁeld, enhancing its strength in the process,
the η∇2B term describes the diﬀusion of the ﬁeld relative to the ﬂuid, tending
to eliminate high ﬁeld gradients in the advection mediated distortion of the B
ﬁeld. In the absence of sources to sustain the B ﬁeld i.e., V = 0, Eq. 5 reduces
to a vector diﬀusion equation implying that the B ﬁeld would decay in time
of the order of the electromagnetic diﬀusion time constant (τd = L2/η). The
advection diﬀusion time constant, on the other hand, would be of the order
of (τa = L/V ), where L and V represent typical length scale and velocity
magnitudes. The ratio of these two time constants or, equivalently, of the
advective and the diﬀusive tendencies |∇×(V×B)|/|η∇2B| would determine
whether a sustainable magnetic ﬁeld would result. Their non-dimensional ratio
is the magnetic Reynold’s number:
Rm = |∇× (V × B)|/|η∇2B| = (τd/τa) = LV η,
(6)
which, clearly, must exceed 1, usually 10-100, in order to make the dynamo
action possible. Rewriting Eq. 5 in terms of Rm for two limiting cases of
scaling (eq. 5):

90
Vinod K. Gaur
[R* = LR; V* =ν V; t* = t dt] and dropping the asterisks, we obtain the
non-dimensional form of the induction equation :
∂B/∂t = ∇2B + Rm∇× (V × B)
for time scale, t −tdt
(7)
∂B/∂t = R−1
m ∇2B + ∇× (V × B)
for time scale, t −tat
(8)
Magnetic ﬁelds in astrophysical bodies unsupported by a continuously re-
plenishing mechanism would, therefore, disappear in time of the order of the
electromagnetic diﬀusion time constant which is proportional to the electrical
conductivity. In the case of the earth (Lthickness of core ∼3.5 × 106 m, and con-
ductivity ∼4 × 105 S/m), this would be of the order of ∼200, 000 years. On
the other hand, a perfectly conducting ﬂuid (η = 0), would stall diﬀusion of
the magnetic ﬁeld, thereby also stalling the dynamo action. Yet, the behaviour
of the induction ﬁeld in a highly conducting ﬂuid exposes several insightful
ideas. An especially important result that follows is that of the magnetic ﬂux
frozen to the conductor and moving with it so that any agency tending to dis-
tort it has to work against the magnetic stresses thereby creating additional
magnetic energy and intensifying this ﬁeld. However, as the dynamo process
is essentially one of systematically amplifying the magnetic ﬁeld without an
ultimate change in structure, what is equally needed is the associated oper-
ation of a tempering process which would keep eliminating the complexities
(kinks) that also grow with the ﬁeld so that the initial structure is restored.
This recognition underlines the crucial role of diﬀusion (the smoother of ﬁeld
gradients) in sustaining a dynamo operation even as its tendency must be
necessarily much weaker than that of the advective processes needed for gen-
erating the ﬁeld.
4 The Lorentz Force (J × B): A Digression
A moving conductor in the ﬁeld of magnetic induction B experiences a force
F = J × B. In a realistic dynamo, this appears as a back reaction of the
evolving magnetic induction ﬁeld on the velocity ﬁeld. Eliminating J from the
Lorentz force using the Ampere theorem equation of Maxwell i.e, ∇×B = μoJ,
we obtain:
JXB = [(∇× B)/μo] × B = −(1/μo)B × (∇× B)
= (1/μo)[(B · ∇)B −∇(B2/2)].
The second term is like the pressure gradient term signifying an isotropic
pressure p = B2/2μo. The ﬁrst term can be shown to be equal to:
(1/μo)(B · ∇)B = [χ{∂/∂χ(B2/2μo)} + n{[B2/2μoR}],
(9)
where χ and n represent unit vectors respectively, tangential and normal to
the B force line, at the point denoted by the radius vector R, and R measures

Planetary Dynamos
91
the radius of curvature of the ﬁeld line at that point. The terms on the right
hand side of Eq. 10 are in fact the force components of the deviatoric magnetic
tensor and together represent a tensional force of magnitude (B2/μo) acting
on the ﬁeld lines. Therefore, if we visualize a ﬂux tube as a topologically
cylindrical volume with sides parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld lines, the pressure
gradient force would be seen to resist compressions or rarefactions of the
magnetic ﬂux tubes that may be forced by ﬂuid motions, whilst the tensional
force as that of a stretched rubber band, would resist their being bent or
twisted.
5 Alfv´en’s Theorem
Diﬀusion plays a crucial role in smoothening out the growing topological com-
plexity of an evolving dynamo ﬁeld in order to steadily preserve its structure,
and therefore requires the moving conductor to have nonvanishing resistiv-
ity. Yet, it proves instructive to examine the case of a perfectly conducting
dynamo ﬂuid (η=0), which reduces Eq. 5 to:
∂B/∂t = ∇× (V × B).
(10)
This is exempliﬁed by the Alfv´en theorem as follows: Consider the time be-
haviour of the magnetic ﬂux φ =

B(R, t) · dS , across an open surface S
bounded by a closed curve C. As S(t), at time t spanned by C, evolves into
S’(t +δt) spanned by C,’ in response to ﬂuid motions, it generates a volume
v bounded by the closed surface formed by S, S’ and the connecting curved
surface S”. An element of S”, d S” = (V δt × dL) is then the area swept by
the length element dL of the closed curve C. And, the ﬂux crossing this area
is B · (V × dL)δt. Therefore,
∂φ/∂t =

c
(B · V × dL) =

c
(B × V) · dL =

s
[∇× (B × V)] · dS
or, using Eq. 11,
∂φ/∂t = −∂/∂t

s
B · dS = [−∂/∂t

v
(∇· B)dv] = 0
(11)
because according to Faraday’s law [∇× B = −∂B/∂t], and, (∇· B) must
vanish everywhere in space if at some initial time it had been zero. Eq. 12
asserts that the magnetic ﬂux through any closed contour in an inﬁnitely
conducting ﬂuid is conserved, i.e., a ﬂux tube embedded in such a ﬂowing
ﬂuid at any initial time, would maintain its integrity by remaining frozen to
it. Since magnetic ﬁeld lines are the limiting case of an inﬁnitely thin ﬂux tube,
this is also true of the magnetic ﬁeld lines which are accordingly restrained
from breaking and reconnecting - a condition? which? severely inhibits the
dynamo process.

92
Vinod K. Gaur
Indeed, this analogy of a magnetic ﬂux tube behaving like an elastic string
has phenomenological expressions such as the Alfvn waves that propagate
the energy of a disturbance, such as that caused by ﬂuid motion, with a
velocity that actually equals (T/m)1/2 = B(μoρ)−1/2. This can be easily
checked by recalling that a tube of force of cross sectional area A would have
a mass/length = ρA and tensional force = (AB2/μo). Another instructive
deduction from ﬂux conservation evocatively shows how magnetic energy of a
system is intensiﬁed by the motion of a ﬂuid in which a ﬂux tube is embedded.
Thus, if the length L of this ﬂux tube is stretched to L′ by ﬂuid motion, its
cross section A is reduced to A′ = (AL/L′) to conserve mass, thereby den-
sifying the ﬁeld lines within to intensify an original undisturbed B ﬁeld to
B′ = (BA/A′) = (BL/L′) and its energy E to E′ = E(L/L′)2. This exem-
pliﬁes the basic process whereby the advective energy of a highly conducting
ﬂuid is translated into magnetic energy of the system through ∇× (V × B).
However, to sustain the dynamo process the tube must be restored to its orig-
inal form through a process of Ohmic diﬀusion and reconnection of magnetic
ﬁeld lines, in deﬁance of Alfvn’s theorem. In dynamo theory the prime goal is
to explore the nature of ﬁelds that would persist far longer than the diﬀusion
time constant, in turn, requiring ﬁnite even though small resistivity . Despite
this lack of internal consistency, the frozen ﬂux assumption proves evocative
in visualizing the evolution of the ﬁeld, especially when Rm is large.
The toroidal ﬂuid velocity just beneath the core mantle boundary, assum-
ing inﬁnite conductivity of the core and inﬁnite resistivity of the mantle, by
inverting the downward- continued observed B ﬁeld through the insulating
source free mantle to the core- mantle boundary in the induction Eq. 11.
6 Kinematic Dynamos
As stated earlier, the simultaneous solution for both the ﬂuid velocity ﬁeld
and that of the evolving magnetic induction which reacts on the former, is
a most challenging task. A simpler approach is to work with the linear kine-
matic dynamo equations assuming a small magnetic ﬁeld (to justify neglect
of the complex back reaction on to the V ﬁeld), to identify velocity ﬁelds that
would sustain a speciﬁc dynamo situation, and then to test their legitimacy as
solutions of the MHD equations. The kinematic dynamo problem is therefore
posed by the question: whether the ﬂow of an electrically conducting, and
initially unmagnetized ﬂuid would lead to the exponential growth of a small
seed magnetic ﬁeld. If the answer is yes, then the ﬂow can generate a self sus-
taining ﬁeld Since a plausible velocity ﬁeld must replenish magnetic energy
faster than it dissipates (τa < τd, i.e., large Rm), we seek, for a prescribed
steady-state velocity ﬁeld, a self sustained, exponentially growing solution of
the Induction equation 6, or as often called, the Kinematic Dynamo Equation
(Eq. 7):
∂B/∂t = ∇2B + Rm∇× (V × B).
(12)

Planetary Dynamos
93
The conditions of self sustenance demand, i) that all ﬁelds and currents
must solely arise from motions of the MHD ﬂuid, requiring, in turn, that
both V & B vanish at an inﬁnite distance from the circulating ﬂuids, and ii)
that they must persist indeﬁnitely as long as the power sources of the motion
exists.
Accordingly, we seek a solution of the form:
B ∝exp(γt),
(13)
where γ is a positive quantity, in the limit when the conductivity vanishes,
since MHD ﬂuids are generally of very high conductivity. Assuming a non-
linear dependence of conductivity, therefore, γ ∝σ−β in the limit as the
conductivity becomes inﬁnite, where 0≤β≤1. When β is zero, the growth rate
is independent of conductivity and the dynamo is called the fast dynamo.
With the substitution of Eq. 14, Eq. 13 is reduced to solving the eigenvalue
equation:
γB = [∇2B + Rm∇× (V × B)].
(14)
Roberts [4] considers the solution of Eq. 15 for a planetary system con-
sisting of a conducting ﬂuid occupying a bounded volume Va, surrounded by
an exterior volume V* which is an insulator with no sources of B or E. The
spectrum of γ in this case is found to be discreet with limit point at – ∞, and
B = 
k Bk(R) exp(γkt). Once the value of B in Va has been obtained using
the largest real eigenvalues, E in Va can be calculated using Faraday’s equa-
tion and E∗, V ∗
a , with the help of Boundary conditions. Despite its fractured
approach to elucidating self sustained dynamos, kinematic dynamo models
have played an important role in establishing that spherical homogeneous dy-
namos, considered counter- intuitive on the strength of Cowlings anti-dynamo
theorem, were indeed possible.
7 Dynamo Modeling
The decades after the advent of computers in the sixties, witnessed a pro-
gressive sophistication in the simulation of numerical dynamos, showing that
three dimensional self-consistent simulations were possible in principle, but it
was only in 1995 that Glatzmaier and Roberts [7] showed that such models
could reproduce several features of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, including po-
larity reversals. A large number of dynamo models have been explored since
to elucidate signiﬁcant characteristics of this ﬁeld: its secular variation, mor-
phology and even spatial spectra.
Whilst all planetary models are spherical, and incorporate three dimen-
sional ﬂuid ﬂows and magnetic ﬁeld, to meet Cowling’s prohibition of 2-
dimensional solutions, they necessarily include:
i) a plausible energy source for maintaining the ﬂow of an electrically
conducting ﬂuid furnished by thermal or compositional or both, and

94
Vinod K. Gaur
ii) rotation which through the Coriolis force, structures the ﬂuid ﬂow in a
manner conducive to dynamo action.
A simple Geo-dynamo model, now adopted for benchmarking various nu-
merical codes [8], consists of a rotating ﬂuid shell bounded between the core-
mantle boundary at radius r0 and inner core-outer boundary at radius ri.
The solid inner core (r ≤ri) has conductivity as that of ﬂuid outer core,
and the mantle outside the shell (r ≤r0) is insulating mantle. All material
properties in the ﬂuid shell are represented by constants and the Boussi-
nesq approximation is applied accounting all temperature and composition
induced density changes to buoyancy in the Navier-Stokes equations. Phys-
ical dynamo models so constructed are then driven by the standard MHD
equations 3–5, complemented by a thermal/compositional transport equation
and appropriate boundary conditions. The above equations are usually solved
for their non-dimensional forms which being non-unique lead to a variety
of control parameters and solution characteristics. The fundamental length
scale in the benchmark model is represented by the thickness of the ﬂuid shell
[D = (ro−ri)], time by the viscous diﬀusion time (D2/νkinematic viscosity), tem-
perature by ΔT, the diﬀerence between that of the inner and outer boundary
of the shell, and magnetic induction by (Ωρ/σ)1/2. In the case of the geody-
namo, the two most characteristic quantities of the solution are: the Magnetic
Reynold’s number Rm = LVrmsη, and the Elsasser number Λ = (σB2/ρΩ)
which measures the ratio of the Lorentz to Coriolis forces and, in the scal-
ing stated above, equivalent to the square of the expected non-dimensional
magnetic ﬁeld magnitude inside the region of ﬁeld generation.
Besides, exposing possible velocity and magnetic induction ﬁelds that
would sustain a dynamo and reproduce the observed space-time character-
istics, numerical dynamo models, by oﬀering the possibility of designing con-
trolled experiments, have the farther reaching potential of elucidating the
physics of ﬂuid ﬂows interacting with their consequent magnetic induction
ﬁelds, even though their range of validity may be severely restricted by prac-
tical limits to computational schemes. Thus, it has been possible to study
models with moderate values of the magnetic Reynold’s number, Rm up to
∼100 which is not too unrealistic considering that this umber for the geo-
dynamo is ∼1000. On the other hand, all models assume a viscosity that is
far larger than expected to occur in planetary interiors, but are constrained
by the necessity to suppress small scale turbulence which cannot be ade-
quately resolved within the extant computational resources. All these caveats
notwithstanding, numerical dynamos have scored some remarkable successes
in matching the signiﬁcant geomagnetic ﬁeld features not only of the right
form but of the right strength. Especially exciting has been the new knowl-
edge about the role of the earth’s inner core in stabilizing its dipole polarity.
Indeed, the pace of recent advances in numerical dynamo modeling has been
so rapid as to warrant the belief that with more observational geomagnetic
data and features added to the presently available observational data our un-

Planetary Dynamos
95
derstanding of the yet unresolved aspects of dynamo processes is expected to
sharpen progressively.
8 The Geodynamo
The sources of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld lie in the convecting ﬂuids of the
outer core. All solar system planets are known to have a central core of denser
material as inferred from their moments of inertia, but some like Venus and
Mars which are most similar to the earth do not have a dynamo operating
in their cores although remnant magnetization of Martian rocks requires the
existence of an extinguished dynamo that operated in the past. Our ability to
study the earth’s dynamo is considerably more robust because of our greater
knowledge of the space-time characteristics of its ﬁeld, but more speciﬁcally,
because of our substantial understanding of the earth’s surface geological pro-
cesses fashioned by plate tectonics. Plate velocities and therefore their creation
and subduction rates powered by mantle convection, are known to have var-
ied over geological times, thereby varying the rate of heat abstraction from
the core-mantle boundary (CMB) and thereby inﬂuencing the regime of core
convection. Two contrasting situations are distinguished according to whether
the core heat ﬂow crossing this boundary is above or below a threshold value
estimated to be ∼6TW. If this exceeds the heat conducted at the top of the
core along the adiabatic gradient, a thermal boundary layer of colder mate-
rial forms at the top driving a top-down convection. If, on the other hand
the mantle does not conduct away all the heat arriving from below, the ex-
cess heat accumulates or is convected into the interior. Thus, whilst thermal
buoyancy is necessarily produced only on the inner core-outer core boundary,
the style of convection would change as the earth transited from a high heat
ﬂow regime in the past, or even in later epochs owing to ﬂuctuations in the
mantle heat transport mediated by plate tectonic cycles that alter its material
composition.
Palaeomagnetic investigations in the 1950’s revealed that the earth’s dipo-
lar polarity has been reversed several hundred times during the past 160 mil-
lion years [5]. The average duration of the stable geomagnetic polarity during
the past 15 million years is ∼200, 000 years with large variations from some
tens of thousand years to millions of years. This is a puzzling phenomenon
unlike the magnetic polarity of the Sun which reverses at near constant in-
tervals of ∼11 years, about equal to its electromagnetic diﬀusion time τd.
Speculations about the possible origin of the earth’s aperiodic reversals lying
in the coupled plate tectonics-core system through mantle convection, have
been tested using numerical models designed to investigate the eﬀects of a
non-uniform pattern of CMB heat ﬂow [5]. Their model did reproduce re-
versals that have analogues in the palaeomagnetic records and in particular,
showed that the geodynamo is more stable and stronger when the CMB heat

96
Vinod K. Gaur
ﬂow is axi-symmetric and equatorially symmetric, with maxima in the Polar
regions.
Additionally, the electromagnetic coupling between the earth’s core dy-
namo and the lower mantle which has a ﬁnite electrical conductivity typically
of ∼10S/m, generates forces that result in exchange of angular momentum
between the core and the mantle. Detailed estimates of the core top ﬂow and
the resulting electromagnetic torque in the mantle by Stix and Roberts [6]
showed that this is of the right order to explain the small observed ﬂuctua-
tions of the length of the day. Other dynamical variations in the earth’s spin
notably the nutation of its axis have also been inverted to study the physical
state of the earth’s lower mantle
More detailed studies of the earth’s dynamo in recent years, exposing the
role of various interactive processes operating in its various domains: the inner
and outer cores, and the mantle, have thus opened up the possibility of study-
ing not only the diﬀerent dynamo conditions operating in other planets and
the basic physical principles deducible from the consideration of possible sets
of boundary conditions, but also of studying the physical and chemical states
of their internal structure complementarity with other lines of investigation,
notably broad band seismology and high temperature-pressure mineralogy.
Acknowledgments: The matter presented above has drawn heavily from
published work on the subject, particularly the book on Lectures on Solar
and Planetary Dynamos by Proctor and Gilbert et al., and papers by Buﬀet,
Christensen, Glatzmaier and their co-workers. Ajay Manglik painstakingly
reviewed the manuscript and provided many helpful suggestions.
References
1. Larmor, J., Rept. Brit. Assoc. Adv. Sci. P 159, (1919)
2. Elsasser, Walter M., Phys. Rev., Vol. 72, P 821 (1947)
3. Cowling, T. G., MNRAS, 94, 39 (1934)
4. Roberts, P. H., Lectures on Solar and Planetary Dynamos, Ed: M. R. E. Proctor
and A. D. Gilbert (1994)
5. Merrill, R. T. McElhinny, M. W. McFadden, P. L. The Magnetic Field of the Eath:
Paleomagnetism, the Core, and the Deep Mantle, Acdemic Press, San Diego,
California, P 531 (1996)
6. Stix M., Roberts, P. H. Phys. Earth Planet Int., Vol. 36, P 49 (1984)
7. Fitzpatrick, R., Lectures on Magneto-hydrodynamic Theory: http://farside.ph.
utexas.edu
8. Christensen, U. R, Aubert, J., Cardin, P., et al. Phys. Earth Planet. Int., Vol
128, P 25 (2001)

Part III
Pulsar Radiation Mechanism

Pulsars as Fantastic Objects and Probes
Jin Lin Han
National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Jia-20 DaTun Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100012, CHINA
hjl@bao.ac.cn
Summary. Pulsars are fantastic objects, which show the extreme states of matters
and plasma physics not understood yet. Pulsars can be used as probes for the de-
tection of interstellar medium and even the gravitational waves. Here I review the
basic facts of pulsars which should attract students to choose pulsar studies as their
future projects.
Keywords: Pulsars, ISM, Gravitational waves
1 Pulsars: General Introduction
Pulsars are sending us pulses – we can receive these pulses in radio bands. A
small number of pulsars also emit high energy radiation in optical and X-ray
or even γ-ray bands. Here let me discuss the radio pulsars, and leave the high
energy emission and its explanation to Prof. Qiao in this volume.
After the ﬁrst pulsar discovered by Hewish et al. [1] in 1968, it was soon
realized that they are rotating neutron stars [2, 3] with a diameter of only
20 km but extremely high density (1015g cm−3) and extremely strong mag-
netic ﬁelds (108 to 1014 G). Because of revealing of this new state of matter
in the universe, the pulsar discovery was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1974 in
physics.
Pulsars take birth in supernova explosion, which is evident from the young
pulsars and supernova remnants associations [4]. For example, the Vela pulsar
is located in the center of Vela nebula, the Crab pulsar is acting as the heart
of Crab nebula. Pulsars get high velocity (a few 100 km s−1) [5, 6] in the
explosion so that pulsars are running away quickly from their birthplace, even
about half pulsars have escaped from our Galaxy in last 100 Myr [7].
The broadband radio emission of pulsars leaves from the emission region
almost simultaneously. However, after these signals pass through the inter-
stellar medium (ISM), the radio waves at a lower frequency, ν1, in GHz, come
later than these at a higher frequency ν2, with a time delay of

100
Jin Lin Han
dt = 4.15
 1
ν2
1
−1
ν2
2

DM
ms,
(1)
where DM is known as the dispersion eﬀect from the ionized gas in the ISM
along the path from a pulsar to us, given by
DM =
 D
0
nedl
pc cm−3,
(2)
where ne is the electron density in units of cm−3 and D the distance from
observer to pulsar in pc. In Fig. 1 (left panel), we have plotted the signals
received in each frequency channel as function of pulse phase. It is evident that
the signals at low frequency are delayed in arrival time compared to those at
high frequencies. After making the delay corrections and adding the channels
we get the pulse proﬁle (see Fig. 1 right panel).
Fig. 1. The dispersion of pulsed signals – the example is observation of PSR J0437-
4715 (left). The dedispersion and adding signals from all frequency channels gives
a strong and stable proﬁle (right). Data is obtained by the author with Parkes
telescope.
How to ﬁnd pulsars? Because a pulsar have a very accurate period – the
period change due to slow-down is small enough in half an hour, one can make
Fourier transform of the recorded power, and found the period in the power-
spectrum. Nowadays, there are many terrestrial radio frequency interferences
(RFI) which look like pulsar signals. However, these RFI normally show the
maximum power at zero dispersion. Therefore, when radio power from many
frequency channels is recorded, only after the power from all channels are
properly de-dispersed the pulsar signal should show the maximum power.
Therefore, here are several steps to ﬁnd a new pulsar: 1) record signals in
time series at many frequency-channels; 2) de-disperse the channel signals
with many trial DM and add all channels together to get one time series for
each trial DM; 3) search for the periodicity from each dedispersed time series.

Pulsars as Fantastic Objects and Probes
101
Because most pulsars have only narrow pulses, the power-spectrum should
show not only the primary pulsar rotation frequency, but also its harmonics.
Often the harmonics are added together to enhance the searching signal-to-
noise ratio; 4) verify the dedispersed pulse by searching for the best detection
signal-to-noise ratio in the 2-D parameter space around the proposed P and
DM and then folding data in the right period P and DM; 5) ﬁnally re-observe
again in this sky position and search the pulse again around the proposed P
and DM. If the pulse can be found in the same DM but slightly evolved
period, then a pulsar is deﬁnitely found! See [51, 16] for the pulsar searching
strategy.
Up to now, about 1800 pulsars have been discovered [50], including some
discovered using the GMRT [20, 37]. Most of pulsars are in our Milky way
Galaxy, and only about 20 were discovered from extensive searches of nearby
galaxies, the Large and Small Magellanic clouds. Pulsars have a period of
1.3 ms to ∼10 s. Some very fast rotating pulsars, so-called millisecond pulsars,
have a period of only some milliseconds but very stable and very small period
derivatives. From measurements of binary pulsars, it has been established that
neutron stars normally have a mass [55] about 1.4 solar mass (M⊙) though
some are heavier (probably up to 2 M⊙) and some are lighter (1.2 M⊙).
Here are pulsar books I would like to recommend to readers: 1). “Handbook
of Pulsar Astronomy”, by D. Lorimer and M. Kramer [42], published by the
Cambridge University Press (2005), contains many up-to-dated material of
pulsar studies; 2) “Pulsar Astronomy” by A. Lyne & F. Graham-Smith [45],
also published by the Cambridge University Press (2006), is an excellent text
book for graduate students, covering all aspects of pulsar astrophysics.
2 Pulsar emission
Radio emission from pulsars is generated in pulsar magnetosphere. We de-
ﬁne the boundary of this magnetosphere by the light-cylinder, e.g. at the
radius where the rotation speed is equal to the light speed. The particles,
i.e. positrons and electrons, are accelerated along the magnetic ﬁelds above
polar cap or the outer gap. These particles radiate [22] so that we can see the
emission in radio and high energy band. However, it is not clear what physical
processes are involved for the particles to radiate. Pulsar wind or wind nebula
[63] can be formed if particles ﬂow out through the open magnetic ﬁeld lines
passing through the light-cylinder.
It is the rotation that provides the energy source for pulsar emission and
particle outﬂowing. One can calculate the braking torque due to magnetic
dipole radiation, which ﬁnally result in ˙μ = −Kμn, here the μ is the rotation
frequency of the neutron star, and the n is the braking index which theoreti-
cally should be equal to 3. However, the measurements show that it is usually
signiﬁcantly smaller than 3, which implies [81] that other reasons are also
consuming the rotation energy, e.g. pulsar wind. Otherwise, magnetic ﬁelds

102
Jin Lin Han
Fig. 2. The magnetosphere and radiation of neutron stars: (a) the particles are
accelerated in the inner gap, outer gap or the slot gap, and radio emission beams
out near the magnetic poles. The radio beam is not uniformly illuminated but maybe
more bright in (b) conal regions or (c) randomly in patches. The outﬂowing particles
can form the pulsar wind nebula. The polarization of the radio emission depends
on (e) the magnetic ﬁeld planes – when the (g) line of sight impacts the beam,
the observed polarization angles show variations in the (h) “S-shaped” curves. This
demonstration is composed by using the artwork produced by Drs. B. Link, D.
Lorimer, A. Harding, G.J. Qiao, as well as (d) the Chandra and HST images of the
Crab pulsar nebula, and (f) the γ-ray proﬁle of the Vela pulsar.
may evolve. The smaller index means that the magnetic ﬁelds may be growing
[41]. In Fig. 2, I provide an over view on pulsars, and models in understanding
their action.
2.1 Pulse proﬁles and emission beam
Pulsars emit broadband radio waves. We receive these signals when the emis-
sion beam is sweeping towards us. The line of sight impacts the emission
beam so that we see a pulse proﬁle. Now it is clear that 1) the average pulse
proﬁles are very stable, except for a few pulsars with precession [65, 75]; 2)
proﬁles are the ﬁnger-prints of pulsars which diﬀer from each other. Most pul-
sar proﬁles have one or two or three distinctive components or peaks, a small
number of pulsars have 4 or 5, and occasionally more than 10 components [48].
Some components are diﬃcult to be identiﬁed, but can be revealed by multi-
Gaussian ﬁtting [77] or “window-threshold technique” [24]; 3) these proﬁles

Pulsars as Fantastic Objects and Probes
103
Fig. 3. The polarization proﬁle of PSR J2124-3358 at 659 MHz (top panel) shows
more than 12 distinguishable components, each with diﬀerent fraction of linear (dash
line) and circular polarization (lower solid line). Comparison of proﬁles at 659 MHz
and 1327 MHz (lower panel) show that the spectrum varies against rotation phase.
This is an extraordinary proﬁle (data from [48]) and usually pulsars are not so
complicated – see Fig.4.
vary with frequency, and each component has some-how independent spectral
index [48], although in general pulsars have very steep spectrum [52]; 4) some
pulsars have a main pulse and an interpulse, separating about 180◦in the
rotation phase, which look like the emission from the two opposite magnetic
poles; 5) Some pulsars show proﬁles in two or three modes, which is so-called
“mode-changing”. Some pulsars even switch oﬀtheir emission for sometime,
which is called “nulling” [72].
It is naturally understandable that the proﬁle peaks indicate the bright
parts of the emission beam. That is to say, the pulsar emission beam is not
uniformly illuminated, some parts brighter, some fainter. The line of sight
only impacts one slice of beam for a given pulsar, so it is not possible to

104
Jin Lin Han
know the whole beam of any pulsar, except that one can ﬂy in space (!)
and observe a pulsar in diﬀerent lines of sight with respect to its rotational
axis! However, based on proﬁles of many pulsars, the emission beam has been
suggested ideally to consist of one core and nested cones [59, 24]. This image
gained some good support from the observational fact of the widening of the
double proﬁles at lower frequencies [70]. This is so-called “radius-frequency
mapping”, which is explained as the emission comes from a pair cuts of the
“outer cone” formed in the open dipole magnetic ﬁelds. However, if all peak
emission comes from cones, how many cones are needed to explain more than
10 components of some pulsars? Can these emission cones be really formed
above the magnetic polar caps? This problem can be eased in the so-called
“patchy beam” model [44], where the emission comes from many bright parts
of a beam. If the slices of emission beams of all pulsars are put together, one
can not see distinct cones [31].
In fact, the averaged pulse proﬁles can only be used to reveal emission
geometry or brightness distribution of the emission beam. A large amount
of information on the emission process can be obtained from observations of
individual pulses [18, 19]. It has been established that for pulsars with drifting
subpulses, some emission zones is stably circulating around the magnetic axis
of some pulsars with remarkably organized conﬁguration. A detailed modeling
hints that the imagined emission cones are patchy! To my understanding,
“the patchy cones” seems to be the best description of the characteristics of
pulsar emission beam: the cones only roughly deﬁne the emission region in the
magnetosphere and “patches” are related to the non-random but preferred
bunches of ﬁeld lines for generation of emission spots which are probably
physically related to sparking near the polar cap. This idea is similar but
diﬀerent from the idea of “window+sources” proposed by Manchester in 1995
[47].
2.2 Polarization
Pulsars are the strongest polarized radio sources in the universe. Almost 100%
linear polarization is detected (see Fig. 4) for the whole or a part of proﬁles
of some pulsars [78, 49, 74]. In fact, it is the polarization angle sweeping of
the Vela pulsar that leads to the famous “rotating vector model” proposed
by Radhakrishnan and Cooke in 1969 [57], which solidly established that the
radio emission comes from region not far away from the magnetic poles of the
neutron stars, and the observed polarization angle is related (either parallel
or perpendicular) to the plane of magnetic ﬁeld lines, which should have a
“S”-shape (see PSR J2048−1616).
Assuming magnetic ﬁelds of pulsars are dominated by the dipole ﬁelds,
then one can determine the emission geometry from the polarization observa-
tions [59]. The maximum polarization angle swept rate gives the information
on the smallest impact angle of the line-of-sight from the magnetic axis [44].
After classiﬁcation of pulsar proﬁles, Rankin has made extensive eﬀorts to

Pulsars as Fantastic Objects and Probes
105
Fig. 4. The polarization proﬁle of PSR J1932+1059(=B1929+10) main pulse and
J2048−1616 at 1369 MHz, observed by the author using Parkes telescope. The
dashed line is the linear polarization intensity, and the circular polarization is plot-
ted by the lower solid line. The polarization angle curve is plotted on the top of a
proﬁle.
pin down the emission regions, by calculating the geometrical parameters for
various types of pulsars [59, 60, 61, 62]. The geometrical parameters of a large
number of pulsars were also calculated by Gould & Lyne [8]. From the phase
shift between the pulse center and the largest sweep rate of polarization angle
curve, the emission latitude can be estimated [12, 23].
The polarization angle curves often are not smooth but have some jumps
(see PSR J1932+1059 in Fig. 4). When the polarization data samples of indi-
vidual pulses are plotted against the phase bins, the orthogonal polarization
modes can be solidly identiﬁed [46, 17, 66, 67]. Several possible origins of the
orthogonal polarization modes have been suggested. These orthogonally po-
larized modes may reﬂect the eigenmodes of the magneto-active plasma in the
open magnetic ﬁeld lines above the pulsar polar cap, with diﬀerent refraction
indexes [10] to separate these modes in outwards emission, or with diﬀerent
conversion of diﬀerent modes [56]. It is also possible that the pulsar emission
of two modes is generated in one emission region by positrons and electrons
respectively [9, 21], i.e. the intrinsic origin from the emission process rather
than the propagation process. The non-orthogonal emission modes also have
been observed from some pulsars [26], which could be the superposition of
emission of two modes [54] or two regions [79].
Very special to the pulsars is the circular polarized emission, unique in
the universe. Usually it is as strong as 10%, but in some pulsar components
it could reach 70% [48]. The circular polarization measurements have been
comprehensively reviewed in [32, 80]. In summary, we found that circular
polarization is not restricted to core components and, in some cases, reversals
of circular polarization sense are observed across the conal emission. For core
components, there is no signiﬁcant correlation between the sense change of
circular polarization and the sense of linear position-angle variation. These

106
Jin Lin Han
results are contradictory to the conclusions given by Radhakrishnan & Rankin
[58] based on early smaller sample of pulsar data. We found that in conal
double proﬁles, the sense of circular polarization is correlated with the sense
of position-angle variation. Pulsars with a high degree of linear polarization
often have one hand of circular polarization across the whole proﬁle. For
most pulsars, the sign of circular polarization is same at 50 cm and 20 cm
wavelengths, and the degree of polarization is similar, albeit with a wide
scatter. Some pulsars are known to have frequency-dependent sign reversals.
The diverse behavior of circular polarization may be generated in the emission
process [25] or arise as a propagation eﬀect [53].
3 Pulsars as probes for interstellar medium
The dispersion of the radio pulses is a very important tool, which can be used
to not only identify radio emission from distant pulsars but also probe the
ionized gas in the interstellar medium (ISM) which otherwise is diﬃcult to
detect and model. The scattering of radio signals measured from narrow ra-
dio pulses can be used to detect the randomness of electron distribution. The
polarized radio signals of pulsars are Faraday rotated in the magnetized in-
terstellar medium, so that pulsars act as key probes for the Galactic magnetic
ﬁelds.
3.1 Electron density distribution in our Galaxy
The most knowledge of interstellar electron distribution comes from pulsar
measurements. Using the observed dispersion measures of a sample of pul-
sars, DM =
 Dist
0
nedl, one can get the electron density distribution if pulsar
distances can be independently measured; or vice versa. The models for elec-
tron density distribution of our Galaxy have been constructed and constrained
from the DMs and independent distance estimates of a large number of pul-
sars [69, 27, 14, 15], which consists of the thin electron disk, thick disk and
spiral arms as well as bulge component. It is such an electron density model
that can be used to estimate distances of most of pulsars from observed DMs
so that we can know approximately how far a pulsar is located.
In fact, the interstellar medium is not smoothly distributed, but more or
less random or irregularly clumpy, with only some large-scale preferred distri-
bution in spiral arms and concentrated towards the Galactic plane. Note also
that pulsars are point radio sources. They move very fast [5]. The interstellar
medium randomly refracts and diﬀracts the pulsar signal and makes the pul-
sar scintillating and scattering. When pulsars are observed in many frequency
channels for some time, one can see that pulsar signals scintillate both in time
and observation channel frequency dimension – see excellent examples of so-
called dynamic spectrum shown by Gupta et al. [28]. The dynamic spectrum,

Pulsars as Fantastic Objects and Probes
107
which itself is the grey-plot of pulse intensity in the 2-D of observation fre-
quency and time, shows the intensity correlation over both the time scale and
frequency scale. Note that the randomness of the interstellar medium can be
averaged over certain distance, so the distant pulsars do not scintillate much.
The scintillation bandwidth is a function of frequency [71]. High sensitivity
observations can produce parabolic arcs in the secondary spectrum of the dy-
namic spectrum [68], which depends on the velocity of scintillation pattern
and geometry of the diﬀracting screen.
The more distant the pulsar is located, more the pulse signal is diﬀracted
and scattered. This leads to the pulse broadening, especially at low frequen-
cies. The most recent and largest data set for pulsar scattering have been
obtained by Bhat et al [11], who observed 98 pulsars in several frequencies,
from which, together with previous the pulse-broadening, τ, is found to scale
with observation frequency ν and DM, in the form of
log τ(ms) ≃−6.46 + 0.154 log(DM) + 1.07 log(DM)2 −4.4 log(ν/GHz). (3)
We considered the scattering eﬀected on the polarized emission, and found
that scattering can indeed ﬂatten the PA curves [40]. The simulations and the
following observations by Camilo et al. [13] have conﬁrmed such an eﬀect.
3.2 Magnetic ﬁeld structure of our Galaxy
For a pulsar at distance D (in pc), the rotation measure (RM, in radians m−2)
is given by
RM = 0.810
 D
0
neB · dl,
(4)
where ne is the electron density in cm−3, B is the vector interstellar magnetic
ﬁeld in μG and dl is an elemental vector along the line of sight from a pulsar
toward us (positive RMs correspond to ﬁelds directed toward us) in pc. With
the DM we obtain a direct estimate of the ﬁeld strength weighted by the local
free electron density
⟨B||⟩=
 D
0 neB · dl
 D
0 nedl
= 1.232 RM
DM ,
(5)
where RM and DM are in their usual units of rad m−2 and cm−3 pc and B|| is
in μG. Previous analysis of pulsar RM data has often used the model-ﬁtting
method [34, 36], i.e., to model magnetic ﬁeld structures in all of the paths from
pulsars to us (observer), and ﬁt the model to the observed RM data with the
electron density model [14]. Signiﬁcant improvement can be obtained when
both RM and DM data are available for many pulsars in a given region with
similar lines of sight. Measuring the gradient of RM with distance or DM is
the most powerful method of determining both the direction and magnitude
of the large-scale ﬁeld local in that particular region of the Galaxy [33]. One
can get

108
Jin Lin Han
⟨B||⟩d1−d0 = 1.232ΔRM
ΔDM,
(6)
where ⟨B||⟩d1−d0 is the mean line-of-sight ﬁeld component in μG for the region
between distances d0 and d1, ΔRM = RMd1 −RMd0 and ΔDM = DMd1 −
DMd0. From all available data, we found that [33] magnetic ﬁelds in all inner
spiral arms are counterclockwise when viewed from the North Galactic pole.
On the other hand, at least in the local region and in the inner Galaxy in the
fourth quadrant, there is good evidence that the ﬁelds in inter-arm regions are
similarly coherent, but clockwise in orientation. There are at least two or three
reversals in the inner Galaxy, probably occurring near the boundary of the
spiral arms. The magnetic ﬁeld in the Perseus arm cannot be determined well.
The negative RMs for distant pulsars and extragalactic sources in fact suggest
the inter-arm ﬁelds both between the Sagittarius and Perseus arms and beyond
the Perseus arm are predominantly clockwise. See my recent reviews [30, 29]
for more details and references therein.
4 Pulsar timing and gravitational waves
Pulsars emit pulses with accurate period (P). After time-of-arrival (TOA) of
every pulse is measured (timing observations), one has to correct all measure-
ments to the barycenter of the Solar system. It is easy to ﬁnd that pulsars are
slowing down due to radiation. The rate of period change ( ˙P) can be mea-
sured. From P and ˙P, one can estimate the magnetic ﬁeld strength on the
neutron star surface, B = 3.2 × 1019
P ˙P.
The timing data usually have some “noise”, not from measurement un-
certainty but from the stars them-self. More interesting is that from timing
data of young pulsars, there are spectacular changes in the rotation period,
known as “glitch”. About 100 glitches have been observed from some 30 pul-
sars [73, 39, 82]. These glitches provide a penetrating means for investigation
of pulsar interior structure.
Millisecond pulsars are very stable (small ˙P) and have very tiny timing-
noise. By timing millisecond pulsars, especially pulsars in binary system pro-
vide tools to study gravitational theory. The orbital motion of pulsars and
relativistic eﬀects can be easily measured through the pulse time delay. The
ﬁrst extra Solar planet was discovered by using timing the millisecond pulsar
PSR B1257+12 [76]. The gravitational redshift and time dilation as well as
the Shapiro delay have been detected from a number of pulsar binary system
[64], and the masses of pulsars as well as their companions can be measured
very accurately.
The most exciting is the discovery of a relativistic binary pulsar, PSR
B1913+16 [35] which have been used for examination of the general relativ-
ity. The orbital shrink, because of the gravitational wave radiation, has been
detected from this pulsar – which reveals a new radiation form in the nature

Pulsars as Fantastic Objects and Probes
109
and was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1993. The newly discovered binary pulsar
[43] can act as the testbed even better [38].
Acknowledgments
I am very grateful to Dr. R.T. Gangadhara for inviting me to participate the
“First Kodai-Trieste Workshop on Plasma Astrophysics”, and for their great
local hospitality. I wish this lecture-notes can be useful for students to choose
pulsar studies in future. India has many world famous pulsar astronomers and
we wish to make tight connections on pulsar studies in future, given the fact
that the radio telescopes, Indian GMRT and Chinese FAST, both make pulsar
study as primary projects. My research in China at present is supported by
the National Natural Science Foundation (NNSF) of China (10521001 and
10773016) and the National Key Basic Research Science Foundation of China
(2007CB815403).
References
1. A. Hewish, S.J. Bell, J.D. Pilkington et al: Nature 217, 709 (1968)
2. T. Gold: Nature 218, 731 (1968)
3. F. Pacini: Nature 219, 145 (1968)
4. V.M. Kaspi: Advances in Space Sciences 21, 167 (1998)
5. G. Hobbs, D.R. Lorimer, A.G. Lyne, M. Kramer: MNRAS 360, 974 (2005)
6. C. Wang, D. Lai, J.L. Han: ApJ 639, 1007 (2006)
7. X.H. Sun, J.L. Han: MNRAS 350, 232 (2004)
8. D.M. Gould, A.G. Lyne: MNRAS 301, 235 (1998)
9. M.C. Allen, D.B. Melrose: Proc. Astron. Soc. Australia, 4, 365 (1982)
10. J.J. Barnard, J. Arons: ApJ 302, 138
11. N.D.R. Bhat, J.M. Cordes, F. Camilo, et al: ApJ 605, 759
12. M. Blaskiewicz, J.M. Cordes, I. Wasserman: ApJ 370, 643 (1991)
13. F. Camilo, J. Reynolds, S. Johnston et al: ApJ, in press=arXiv:0802.0494 (2008)
14. J.M. Cordes, T.J.W. Lazio: astro-ph/0207156v3 (2002)
15. J.M. Cordes, T.J.W. Lazio: astro-ph/0301598v1 (2003)
16. J.M. Cordes, P.C.C. Freire, D. Lorimer, et al: ApJ 637, 446 (2006)
17. J.M. Cordes, J.M. Rankin, D.C. Backer: ApJ 223, 961 (1978)
18. A.A. Deshpande, J.M. Rankin: ApJ 524, 1008 (1999)
19. A.A. Deshpande, J.M. Rankin: MNRAS 322, 438 (2001)
20. P.C. Freire, Y. Gupta, S.M. Ransom, C.H. Ishwara-Chandra: ApJ 606, 53
(2004)
21. R.T. Gangadhara: A&A 327, 155 (1997)
22. R.T. Gangadhara: ApJ 609, 335 (2004)
23. R.T. Gangadhara: ApJ 628, 923 (2005)
24. R.T. Gangadhara, Y. Gupta: ApJ 555, 31 (2001)
25. M. Gedalin, P.E. Gruman, D.B. Melrose: MNRAS 325, 715 (2001)
26. J.A. Gil, A.G. Lyne, J.M. Rankin et al: A&A 255, 181 (1992)

110
Jin Lin Han
27. G.C. G´omz, R.A. Benjamin, D.P. Cox: ApJ 122, 908 (2001)
28. Y. Gupta, B.J. Rickett, A.G. Lyne: MNRAS 269, 1035 (1994)
29. J.L. Han: IAU Symp. 242, 55 (2007)
30. J.L. Han: Nuclear Physics B Proc. Supp. 175, 62 (2008)
31. J.L. Han, R.N. Manchester: MNRAS 320, L35 (2001)
32. J.L. Han, R.N. Manchester, R.X. Xu, G.J. Qiao: MNRAS 300, 373 (1998)
33. J.L. Han, R.N. Manchester, A.G. Lyne et al: ApJ 642, 868 (2006)
34. J.L. Han, G.J. Qiao: A&A, 288, 759 (1994)
35. R.A. Hulse, J.H. Taylor: ApJ 201, 55 (1975)
36. C. Indrani, A.A. Deshpande: New Astronomy, 4, 33 (1999)
37. B.C. Joshi, M.A. Malaughlin, M. Kramer et al: arXiv 0710.2955 (2007)
38. M. Kramer, I.H. Stairs, R.N. Manchester et al: Science 314, 97 (2006)
39. A. Krawczyk, A.G. Lyne, J.A. Gil et al: MNRAS 340, 1087 (2003)
40. X.H. Li, J.L. Han: A&A 410, 253 (2003)
41. J.R. Lin, S.N. Zhang: ApJ 615, 133 (2004)
42. D. Lorimer, M. Kramer: Handbook of Pulsar Astronomy, Cambridge University
Press (2005)
43. A.G. Lyne, M. Burgay, M. Kramer et al: Sciences 303, 1153 (2004)
44. A.G. Lyne, R.N. Manchester: MNRAS 234, 477 (1988)
45. A.G. Lyne, F. Graham-Smith: Pulsar Astronomy, Cambridge University Press
(2006)
46. R.N. Manchester: PASA 2, 334 (1975)
47. R.N. Manchester: JApA 16, 107 (1995)
48. R.N. Manchester, J.L. Han: ApJ 609, 354 (2004)
49. R.N. Manchester, J.L. Han, G.J. Qiao: MNRAS 295, 280 (1998)
50. R.N. Manchester, G.B. Hobbs, A. Teoh, M. Hobbs: AJ 129, 1993 (2005)
51. R.N. Manchester, A.G. Lyne, F. Camilo, et al: MNRAS 328, 17 (2001)
52. O. Maron, J. Kijak, M. Kramer, R. Wielebinski: A&AS 147, 195 (2000)
53. D. Melrose, Q. Lou: MNRAS 352, 915 (2004)
54. D. Melrose, A. Miller, A. Karastergiou, Q. Lou: MNRAS 365, 638 (2006)
55. D. Page, S. Reddy: ARNPS 56, 327 (2006)
56. S.A. Petrova: A&A 378, 883 (2001)
57. V. Radhakrishnan, D.J. Cooke: ApL 3, 225 (1969)
58. V. Radhakrishnan, J.M. Rankin: ApJ 352, 258 (1990)
59. J.M. Rankin: ApJ 274, 333 (1983)
60. J.M. Rankin: ApJ 352, 247 (1990)
61. J.M. Rankin: ApJS 85, 145 (1993)
62. J.M. Rankin: ApJ 405, 285 (1993)
63. P. Slane, AIP conf.proc. Vol. 968, 143 (2008)
64. I.H. Stairs, Sciences 304, 547 (2004)
65. I.H. Stairs, A.G. Lyne, S.L. Shemar: Nature 406, 484 (2000)
66. D.R. Stinebring, J.M. Cordes, J.M. Rankin et al: ApJS 55, 247 (1984a)
67. D.R. Stinebring, J.M. Cordes, J.M. Weisberg et al: ApJS 55, 279 (1984b)
68. D.R. Stinebring, M.A. McLaughlin, J.M. Cordes, et al: ApJ 549, 97 (2001)
69. J.H. Taylor, J.M. Cordes: ApJ 411, 674 (1993)
70. S.E. Thorsett: ApL 377, 263 (1991)
71. N. Wang, R.N. Manchester, S. Johnston et al: MNRAS 358, 270 (2005)
72. N. Wang, R.N. Manchester, S. Johnston: MNRAS 377, 1383 (2007)
73. N. Wang, R.N. Manchester, R.T. Pace et al: MNRAS 317, 843 (2000)

Pulsars as Fantastic Objects and Probes
111
74. J.M. Weisberg, J.M. Cordes, S.C. Lundgren et al: ApJS 121, 171 (1999)
75. J.M. Weisberg, J.H. Taylor: ApJ 576, 942 (2002)
76. A. Wolszczan, D.A. Frail: Nature 355, 145 (1992)
77. X.J. Wu, X. Gao, J.M. Rankin, W. Xu, V.M. Malofeev: AJ 116, 1984 (1998)
78. X.J. Wu, R.N. Manchester, A.G. Lyne, G.J. Qiao: MNRAS 261, 630 (1993)
79. R.X. Xu, G.J. Qiao, J.L. Han: A&A 323, 395 (1997)
80. X.P. You, J.L. Han: ChJAA 6, 237 (2006)
81. Y.L. Yue, R.X. Xu, W.W. Zhu: Advance in Space Science 40, 1491 (2007)
82. W.Z. Zou, N. Wang, R.N. Manchester, et al: MNRAS 384, 1063 (2008)

Pulsar Radio Emission Geometry
R. T. Gangadhara
Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore 560034, India
E-mail: ganga@iiap.res.in
Summary. Pulsar radio emission is belived to come from relativistic plasma accel-
erated along the dipolar magnetic ﬁeld lines in pulsar magnetosphere. The beamed
emission by relativistic sources occur in the direction of tangents to the ﬁeld lines in
the corotating frame, but in an inertial (lab) frame it is aberrated toward the direc-
tion of rotation. To receive such a beamed emission line-of-sight must align with the
source velocity within the beaming angle 1/γ, where γ is the Lorentz factor of the
source. By solving the viewing geometry, in an inclined and rotating dipole magnetic
ﬁeld, we ﬁnd the coordinates of the emission region in corotating frame. Next, give a
general expression for the phase shift in the intensity proﬁle in lab frame by taking
into account of aberration, retardation and polar cap currents.
By considering uniform and modulated emissions, we have simulated a few typ-
ical pulse proﬁles. The circular polarization of antisymmetric type is an intrinsic
property of curvature radiation, and it survives only when there is modulation or
discrete distribution in the emitting sources. Our model predicts a correlation be-
tween the polarization angle swing and antisymmetric circular polarization.
Key words: pulsars: general – radiation mechanisms: nonthermal — stars:
magnetic ﬁelds – geometry
1 Introduction
The proﬁle morphology and polarization of pulsars has been widely attempted
to interpret in terms of emission in dipolar magnetic ﬁeld lines (e.g., [1], [2],[3],
[3] [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9] [10]). Most of the radio emission models assume (1)
radiation is emitted by the relativistic secondary pair plasma, (2) beamed
radio waves are emitted in the direction of ﬁeld line tangents, and (3) emitted
radiation is polarized in the plane of dipolar ﬁeld lines or in the perpendicular
directions.
We solve the viewing geometry to ﬁnd the coordinates of emission spot
of the radio waves in corotating frame in §2. Next, ﬁnd the coordinates of

114
R. T. Gangadhara
emission spot in an inertial (laboratory) frame by ﬁnding a general expression
for the phase shift in the intensity proﬁle due to aberration, retardation and
polar cap currents in §3, and the expression for emission altitude is give in §4.
The radio emission from coherent sources and polarization is estimated in §6.
2 Coordinates of Emission Spot of Radio Waves in
Corotating Frame
Consider a magnetosphere with dipole magnetic ﬁeld inclined with respect
to rotation axis. We assume that the magnetosphere is stationary or slowly
rotating such that the rotation eﬀects are negligible. Next, consider the rela-
tivistic plasma moving along the curved dipolar magnetic ﬁeld lines. Let S be
the source (bunch) moving along the curved trajectory (C) experiences accel-
eration (a), and emits a relativistically beamed radiation in the direction of
velocity (v), see Figure 1. To receive the beamed emission, observer’s line of
Fig. 1.
Geometry for the calculation of radiation ﬁeld at P. The unit vectors ˆm
and ˆΩ represent the magnetic and the rotation axes, respectively.
sight (ˆn) must align with the source velocity within the beaming angle 1/γ,
where γ is the Lorentz factor of the bunch. In other words a distant observer
at P receives beamed emission only when ˆn · ˆv = cos τ ∼1 for τ ≈1/γ, where
ˆv = v/|v|.
The position vector of a bunch moving along the dipolar magnetic ﬁeld
line is given by (see Eq. 2 in [12]):
r = re sin2 θ{cos θ cos φ′ sin α + sin θ(cos α cos φ cos φ′ −sin φ sin φ′),
cos φ′ sin θ sin φ + sin φ′(cos θ sin α + cos α cos φ sin θ),

Pulsar Radio Emission Geometry
115
cos α cos θ −cos φ sin α sin θ} ,
(1)
where re is the ﬁeld line constant, and the angles θ and φ are the magnetic
colatitude and azimuth Q (see Fig. 2), respectively. Next, φ′ is the rotation
phase and α is the magnetic axis
ˆm = {sin α cos φ′, sin α sin φ′, cos α}
(2)
inclination angle relative to the rotation axis ( ˆΩ). The velocity of bunch is
Fig. 2. Viewing geometry of emission beam. The heavy line ellipse represents the
cone of emission centered on the magnetic axis ˆmt. The arcs ZQX, ZRS, ZY and XSY
represent the great circles centered at O (star center). The magnetic colatitude φ and
the phase angle φ′ of the emission spot are measured from the meridional (Ω, ˆmt)
plane. They have the signs in such a way that φ′ is positive while φ is negative on
the trailing side, and the vice versa on leading side.
given by
v = dr
dt =
∂r
∂θ
 ∂θ
∂t

=
∂θ
∂t

b ,
(3)

116
R. T. Gangadhara
where b = ∂r/∂θ is the magnetic ﬁeld line tangent. Let s be the arc length of
ﬁeld line then ds = |b|dθ, and |b| = (re/
√
2) sin θ

5 + 3 cos(2θ). Therefore,
the magnitude of velocity v = ds/dt = κ c. The parameter κ is assumed to be
constant, which speciﬁes the speed of bunch as a fraction of the speed of light
c. Hence, we have
v = κ cˆb ,
(4)
where
ˆb = b/|b| = {cos τ cos φ′ sin α + sin τ(cos α cos φ cos φ′ −sin φ sin φ′),
cos φ′ sin τ sin φ + sin φ′(cos τ sin α + cos α cos φ sin τ),
cos α cos τ −cos φ sin α sin τ} .
(5)
Here τ is the angle between ˆm and ˆb. In terms of polar angle θ, it is given by
tan τ = sin τ
cos τ =
3 sin(2θ)
1 + 3 cos(2θ) ,
(6)
where
cos τ = ˆb · ˆm =
1 + 3 cos(2θ)

10 + 6 cos(2θ)
,
sin τ = ( ˆm × ˆb) · ˆeφ =
3 sin(2θ)

10 + 6 cos(2θ)
,
and
ˆeφ = {−cos α sin φ cos φ′ −cos φ sin φ′, cos φ cos φ′ −cos α sin φ sin φ′,
sin α sin φ}
(7)
is the binormal to the ﬁeld line. We can solve equation (6) for θ and obtain
cos(2θ) = 1
3(cos τ

8 + cos2 τ −sin2 τ) .
(8)
Next, the acceleration of bunch is given by
a = ∂v
∂t = (κ c)2
|b|
∂ˆb
∂θ = (κ c)2k,
(9)
where k = (1/|b|)∂ˆb/∂θ is the curvature (normal) of the ﬁeld line. Then the
radius of curvature of ﬁeld line is given by
ρ = 1
|k| =

2 −
8
3(3 + cos(2θ))

|b| .
(10)
Therefore, using k = ˆk/ρ, we can write

Pulsar Radio Emission Geometry
117
a = (κ c)2
ρ
ˆk,
(11)
where
ˆk = {(cos α cos φ cos φ′ −sin φ sin φ′) cos τ −cos φ′ sin α sin τ,
(cos φ′ sin φ + cos α cos φ sin φ′) cos τ −sin α sin φ′ sin τ,
−cos φ sin α cos τ −cos α sin τ} .
(12)
Let ˆn = (sin ζ, 0, cos ζ) be the line of sight. where ζ = α +β and β is the sight
line impact angle relative to ˆm. The half–opening angle Γ of the emission
beam is given by
cos Γ = ˆn · ˆm = cos α cos ζ + sin α sin ζ cos φ′ .
(13)
2.1 Magnetic Colatitude of Emission Spot
In the absence of rotation, the radiation is beamed in the direction of ﬁeld
line tangent. So, at any instant, observable radiation comes from a spot in the
magnetosphere where the tangent vector ˆb points in the direction of ˆn. That
is Γ ≈τ at the emission spot. Therefore, using equation (8), we can ﬁnd the
relation for magnetic colatitude θ as a function of Γ :
cos(2 θ) = 1
3(cos Γ

8 + cos2 Γ −sin2 Γ) ,
0 ≤Γ ≤π .
(14)
For Γ ≪1, equation (14) reduces to the well known approximate form θ ≈2
3Γ.
2.2 Magnetic Azimuth of Emission Spot
Next, let μ be the angle between ˆn and ˆb, then we have
cos μ = ˆn · ˆb
= cos2 Γ + (cos α sin ζ cos φ′−sin α cos ζ) sin Γ cos φ −
sin ζ sin φ′ sin Γ sin φ.
(15)
Again to receive the radiation μ ∼0, therefore, we ﬁnd the magnetic azimuth
φ of the emission spot by solving ˆn × ˆb ≈0 :
sin φ = −sin ζ sin φ′ csc Γ,
cos φ = (cos α sin ζ cos φ′ −cos ζ sin α) csc Γ.
Therefore, we have
φ = arctan

sin ζ sin φ′
cos ζ sin α −cos α sin ζ cos φ′

.
(16)
Note that φ is measured with respect to the meridional plane deﬁned by ˆΩ
and ˆm.

118
R. T. Gangadhara
2.3 Altitude of Emission Spot
Pulsar radio emission is generally believed to be coherent curvature radiation
by secondary pair plasma streaming along the dipolar magnetic ﬁeld lines.
By having known the θ, we can ﬁnd the emission altitude r by assuming
the curvature radiation and some typical values for the Lorentz factor γ of
the sources. The characteristic frequency of curvature radiation, at which the
emission peaks, is given by [3]:
ν = 3c
4π
γ3
ρ ,
(17)
Since particles closely follow the curved dipolar ﬁeld lines, the curvature of
particle trajectory can be approximated with the curvature of ﬁeld lines.
Fig. 3. Emission altitude r is plotted as a function of rotation phase φ′ for diﬀerent
ν in left panel and diﬀerent β in right panel.
We can solve equation (10) for the emission altitude
r = 12(3 + cos(2θ)) sin θ

(10 + 6 cos(2θ))3 ρ .
(18)
Next, substituting for ρ from equation (17), we obtain
r = 9cγ3
πν
(3 + cos(2θ)) sin θ

(10 + 6 cos(2θ))3 .
(19)
Emission altitude r is plotted as a function of rotation phase φ′ for diﬀerent ν
in Fig. 3 using α = 30◦and γ = 300. It shows the beviour of emission altitude
for diﬀerent ν and β. It is clear that low frequency emission comes from higher
altitude than the higher. At lower β observer tends to receive radiation from
lower altitude than at larger β.

Pulsar Radio Emission Geometry
119
3 Coordinates of Emission Spot in the Laboratory Frame
In the laboratory frame, the radiation emitted by the relativistic plasma expe-
riences retardation and aberration phase shift due to the altitude diﬀerences
and rotation of pulsar. The rotation velocity of the plasma particle (bunch)
at Q is given by
vrot = Ω × r = Ωr sin θ′ ˆϵ ,
(20)
where Ω is the pulsar angular velocity, and the unit vector ˆϵ represents the
direction of rotation. Consider a Cartesian coordinate system - XYZ (see
Fig. 2), with Z-axis parallel to the rotation axis and X-axis lies in the ﬁducial
plane deﬁned by ˆn and ˆΩ. Let Θ be the angle between the ﬁeld line tangent
ˆb0t and ˆϵ, then we have
ˆϵ = cos Θ ˆϵ∥+ sin Θ ˆϵ⊥,
(21)
where the unit vectors ˆϵ∥and ˆϵ⊥are parallel and perpendicular to ˆb0t. There-
fore, the angle Θ is given by
cos Θ = ˆϵ.ˆb0t =
a1

(1 + 4 a2
2)a3
,
(22)
where
a1 = sin α sin φ,
a2 = cot θ,
a3 = cos2 α cos2 φ + a2
2 sin2 α + a2 cos φ sin(2 α) + sin2 φ
1 + a2
2
.
We ﬁnd Θ = 90◦for the ﬁeld lines which lie in the meridional plane (φ′ = 0)
but for other ﬁeld lines it is < 90◦on leading side and > 90◦in the trailing
side. But for an aligned rotator (α = 0◦), it is 90◦for all the ﬁeld lines.
3.1 Phase shift of radiation emitted by a particle (bunch)
Since the radiation by a relativistic particle is beamed in the direction of
velocity, to receive it sight line must align with the particle velocity within
the angle 1/γ, where γ is the Lorentz factor. The particle velocity is given by
v = κcˆb0t + vrot,
(23)
where c is the speed of light. By substituting for vrot from equation (20) into
equation (23) we obtain
v = (κc + Ωr sin θ′ cos Θ)ˆb0t + Ωr sin θ′ sin Θ ˆϵ⊥.
(24)
By assuming |v| ∼c, from equation (24) we obtain the parameter
κ =

1 −
Ωr
c
2
sin2 θ′ sin2 Θ −Ωr
c sin θ′ cos Θ .
(25)

120
R. T. Gangadhara
We observe that κ ∼1 for r/rLC ≪1, but at large r it decreases from unity
due to increase in rotation velocity, where rLC is the light cylinder radius.
Machabeli & Rogava ([11]), by considering the motion of a bead inside a ro-
tating linear tube, have deduced a similar behavior in the velocity components
of bead.
Using equation (20) we can solve equation (21) for ˆϵ⊥, and obtain
ˆϵ⊥=
ˆΩ × ˆr
sin θ′ sin Θ −cot Θ ˆb0t .
(26)
Let ψ be the angle between the rotation axis and v, then we have
cos ψ = ˆΩ.ˆv = cos ζ
⎛
⎝

1 −
Ωr
c
2
sin2 θ′ sin2 Θ −Ωr
c sin θ′ cos Θ
⎞
⎠
= κ cos ζ ,
(27)
where ˆv = v/|v|. For r/rLC ≪1, it reduces to ψ ∼ζ.
3.2 Aberration Angle
If η is the aberration angle, then we have
cos η = ˆb0t · ˆv = κc + Ωr sin θ′ cos Θ
|v|
,
(28)
sin η = ˆϵ⊥· ˆv = Ω r
|v| sin θ′ sin Θ .
(29)
Therefore, from equations (28) and (29), we obtain
tan η = Ωr
c
sin θ′ sin Θ

1 −(Ωr/c)2 sin2 θ′ sin2 Θ
.
(30)
Hence the radiation beam, which is centered on the direction of v, gets tilted
(aberrated) with respect to ˆb0t due to rotation.
For Ωr/c ≪1, it can be approximated as
tan η ≈Ωr
c sin θ′ sin Θ .
(31)
3.3 Aberration Phase Shift
Consider Figure 4 in which ZAD, ZBX, ZCY and DXY are the great circles
centered on the neutron star. The small circle ABC is parallel to the equa-
torial great circle DXY. The unit vector ˆb0t represents a ﬁeld line tangent,
which makes the angle ζ with respect to the rotation axis ZO. The velocity

Pulsar Radio Emission Geometry
121
unit vector ˆv is inclined by the angles η and ψ with respect to ˆb0t and ZO,
respectively. We resolve the vectors ˆb0t and ˆv into the components parallel
and perpendicular to the rotation axis:
ˆb0t = sin ζ ˆb0t⊥+ cos ζ ˆΩ ,
(32)
Fig. 4. Celestial sphere describing the aberration phase shift of pulsar radio emis-
sion, where η is the aberration angle, and δφ′
abe is the corresponding phase shift.
ˆv = sin ψ ˆv⊥+ cos ψ ˆΩ ,
(33)
where the unit vectors ˆb0t⊥and ˆv⊥lie in the plane of small circle ABC. Next,
by solving for ˆb0t⊥and ˆv⊥, we obtain
ˆb0t⊥=
1
sin ζ (ˆb0t −cos ζ ˆΩ) ,
(34)
ˆv⊥=
1
sin ψ (ˆv −cos ψ ˆΩ ).
(35)
By taking scalar product with ˆb0t⊥on both sides of equation (35), we obtain
cos(δφ′
abe) = ˆv⊥· ˆb0t⊥=
1
sin ψ (ˆv · ˆb0t⊥−cos ψ ˆΩ · ˆb0t⊥).
(36)

122
R. T. Gangadhara
Since ˆΩ and ˆb0t⊥are orthogonal, we have
cos(δφ′
abe) =
1
sin ψ (ˆv · ˆb0t⊥).
(37)
Using ˆb0t⊥from equation (34) we obtain
cos(δφ′
abe) =
1
sin ψ
(ˆv · ˆb0t −cos ζ ˆv · ˆΩ)
sin ζ
.
(38)
By substituting for ˆv · ˆb0t and ˆv · ˆΩ from equations (28) and (27), we obtain
cos(δφ′
abe) =
1
sin ψ
(cos η −cos ζ cos ψ)
sin ζ
.
(39)
Substituting for η again from equation (28), we obtain
cos(δφ′
abe) =
1
sin ζ sin ψ

κ + Ωr
c sin θ′ cos Θ −cos ζ cos ψ

.
(40)
By substituting for κ from equation (27), we obtain
cos(δφ′
abe) =
1
sin ζ sin ψ
cos ψ
cos ζ + Ωr
c sin θ′ cos Θ −cos ζ cos ψ

.
(41)
It can be further reduced to
cos(δφ′
abe) = tan ζ cot ψ + Ωr
c
sin θ′ cos Θ
sin ζ sin ψ .
(42)
The aberration phase shift δφ′
abe is plotted as a function of β in Figure 5
for diﬀerent α in the two cases: (1) φ′ = 0◦and r/rLC = 0.1, and (2) φ′ = 60◦
and r/rLC = 0.1. The Figure 5a shows for α ∼90◦, δφ′
abe ≈r/rLC, which
is nearly independent of β. But, for other values of α, it does depend on
β : larger for β < 0 and smaller for β > 0. Since θ′ decreases with |φ′|,
and Θ < 90◦on leading side and > 90◦on trailing side, δφ′
abe is smaller in
Figure 5b compared to its corresponding values in Figure 5a. Further, we note
that δφ′
abe has negative gradient with respect to |φ′| for both the signs of β. In
Figure 6, δφ′
abe is plotted as a function of φ′ for diﬀerent α and ﬁxed β = 4◦.
It is highest at large α and small |φ′|. For r/rLC ≪1, we can series expand
δφ′
abe and obtain
δφ′
abe = b1 rn + b2 r2
n + O(rn)3 ,
(43)
where rn = r/rLC,
b1 = csc2 ζ sin θ′
−cos(Θ −ζ) cos(Θ + ζ),
b2 = −cot2 ζ cos Θ sin θ′ b1 .

Pulsar Radio Emission Geometry
123
Fig. 5. Aberration phase shift δφ′
abe vs the sight line impact angle β for diﬀerent
α : panel (a) for rn = 0.1 and φ′ = 0◦, and (b) for rn = 0.1 and φ′ = 60◦.
Fig. 6. Aberration phase shift vs the phase φ′. Chosen rn = 0.1, β = 4◦and diﬀerent
α as marked on the ﬁgure.
3.4 Retardation phase shift
Let θe, φe and ˆre be the magnetic colatitude, azimuth and the position vector
of the emission spot at the emission time, respectively. In the expressions for
θ and φ (see eqs. 9 and 11 in G04) we replace φ′ by φ′ + δφ′
abe to obtain θe
and φe. In Figure 7 using rn = 0.1, α = 30◦and β = 4◦we have plotted θe
and φe as functions of φ′. It shows both the minimum of θe and zero crossing
point of φe are at the phase φ′ = −5.5◦. Using the values of θe and φe we ﬁnd
the unit vector ˆre (see eq. 2 in G04). For brevity, we shall drop the suﬃx on ˆr.
Note that φ′ > 0 on the trailing side (Fig. 1). Consider the emission radii r1
and r2 such that r1 < r2. The time taken by the signal emitted at the radius
r1 is given by
t1 = 1
c (d −r1 · ˆn),
(44)
where d is the distance to the pulsar, and ˆn = (sin ζ, 0, cos ζ) is the unit
vector pointing toward the observer. For another radius r2, the propagation

124
R. T. Gangadhara
time is given by
t2 = 1
c (d −r2 · ˆn),
(45)
The radiation emitted at the lower radius r1 takes more time to reach the
Fig. 7. Magnetic colatitude θe and azimuth φ′
e of emission spot vs the phase φ′.
Chosen rn = 0.1, α = 30◦and β = 4◦for both panels.
observer than the one emitted at r2. The time delay between the two signals
is given by
δt = t1 −t2 = 1
c (r2 · ˆn −r1 · ˆn).
(46)
By considering the neutron star center (r1 = 0) as the reference and r2 = r,
we obtain
δt = r
c(ˆr · ˆn).
(47)
Let σ be the angle between ˆr and ˆn, then we have
cos σ = ˆr · ˆn = cos ζ(cos α cos θe −cos φe sin α sin θe) −sin ζ[sin φ′ sin φe sin θe −
cos φ′(cos θe sin α + cos α cos φe sin θe)].
(48)
The time delay δt of components emitted at lower heights, shifts them to
later phases of the proﬁle by (e.g., [13])
δφ′
ret = Ωδt = Ωr
c cos σ .
(49)
In Figure 8, δφ′
ret is plotted as a function of φ′ for diﬀerent α and ﬁxed β = 4◦.
At small α, it is nearly constant and larger. But at larger α it falls with respect
to |φ′|, as ˆr inclines more from ˆn. For rn ≪1, we can ﬁnd the series expansion:
δφ′
ret = c1 rn + c2 r2
n + O(rn)3 ,
(50)
where
c1 = cos(Γ −θ) ,
c2 = sin α sin ζ sin φ′ sin(Γ −θ)(4 cot θ + tan θ)
3
√
8 + cos2 Γ
b1 ,
and Γ is the half-opening angle of the emission beam (see eq. 7 in G04).

Pulsar Radio Emission Geometry
125
Fig. 8. Retardation phase shift vs the phase φ′. Chosen rn = 0.1, β = 4◦and
diﬀerent α.
3.5 Relativistic Phase Shift
Since the retardation and aberration phase shifts are additive, they can collec-
tively introduce an asymmetry into the pulse proﬁle (e.g., GG01). Therefore,
the relativistic phase shift is given by
δφ′
rps = δφ′
ret + δφ′
abe
= rn cos σ + arccos

tan ζ cot ψ + Ωr
c
sin θ′ cos Θ
sin ζ sin ψ

.
(51)
In Figure 9, we have plotted δφ′
rps as a function of φ′ for diﬀerent α in the
two cases of β = ±4◦. It shows δφ′
rps reaches maximum at φ′ ∼0, and falls at
large |φ′|.
Fig. 9. Relativistic phase shift vs the phase φ′ for diﬀerent α at rn = 0.1. Chosen
β = 4◦for panel (a) and −4◦for (b).
In the limit of rn ≪1, we can series expand δφ′
rps and obtain

126
R. T. Gangadhara
δφ′
rps = μ1 rn + μ2 r2
n + O(rn)3 ,
(52)
where μ1 = b1 + c1 and μ2 = b2 + c2.
3.6 Phase Shift Due to Polar Cap Current
Goldreich and Julian [14] have elucidated that the charged particles relativis-
tically stream out along the magnetic ﬁeld lines of neutron star with aligned
magnetic moment and rotation axis. Hibschman and Arons [10] have shown
that the ﬁeld-aligned currents can produce perturbation magnetic ﬁeld B1
over the unperturbed dipole ﬁeld B0, and it can cause a shift in the polariza-
tion angle sweep. Here we intend to estimate the phase shift in the intensity
proﬁle due to the perturbation ﬁeld B1. We assume that the observed radi-
ation is emitted in the direction of tangent to the ﬁeld B = B0 + B1. Using
the equations D5 and D6 given by Hibschman and Arons ([10]), we ﬁnd the
Cartesian components of perturbation ﬁeld:
B1 =

2 μ
rLC
cos α sin θ sin φ
r2
, −2 μ
rLC
cos α sin θ cos φ
r2
, 0

,
(53)
where μ is the magnetic moment. The Cartesian components of unperturbed
dipole is given by
B0 =
3
2
μ
r3 sin(2θ) cos φ, 3
2
μ
r3 sin(2θ) sin φ, μ
r3 (3 cos2 θ −1)

.
(54)
The magnetic ﬁeld, which is tilted and rotated, is given by
Bt = Λ · B,
(55)
where Λ is the transformation matrix given in G04.
The component of Bt perpendicular to the rotation axis is given by
Bt⊥= Bt −(Bt. ˆΩ) ˆΩ.
(56)
Similarly, we ﬁnd the perpendicular components of B0t = Λ · B0 :
B0t⊥= B0t −(B0t. ˆΩ) ˆΩ.
(57)
If δφ′
pc is the phase shift in Bt due to the polar cap current then we have
cos(δφ′
pc) = ˆbt⊥· ˆb0t⊥= Bt⊥,x
|Bt⊥|,
(58)
where ˆbt⊥= Bt⊥/|Bt⊥|, the unit vector ˆb0t⊥= B0t⊥/|B0t⊥| is parallel to the
unit vector ˆx along the X-axis, and Bt⊥,x is the X-component of Bt⊥. If ˆy is
the unit vector along Y-axis, then we have

Pulsar Radio Emission Geometry
127
sin(δφ′
pc) = ˆbt⊥· ˆy = Bt⊥,y
|Bt⊥|.
(59)
Therefore, we have
tan(δφ′
pc) = Bt⊥,y
Bt⊥,x
=
d1 rn
d2 + d3 rn
,
(60)
where
d1 = cos φ′ sin(2α) −2 cos2 α tan ζ ,
d2 = 3 cos θ tan ζ ,
d3 = −sin(2α) sin φ′ .
We have plotted δφ′
pc as a function of φ′ in Figure 10 by choosing α = 10◦, rn =
0.01 and 0.1. It decreases with the increasing |φ′| and it is mostly negative,
except in the case of β < 0, where it is positive over a small range of φ′ near
( ˆΩ, ˆmt) plane. So, δφ′
pc tries to reduce the relativistic phase shift δφ′
rps, except
over a small range of φ′ where it enhances the shift in the case of β < 0. In
Fig. 10. The phase shift δφ′
pc due to polar cap current vs phase φ′. Chosen α = 10◦
and rn = 0.01 for panel (a), and rn = 0.1 for (b).
the limit of rn ≪1, we can series expand equation (60) and obtain
δφ′
pc = d1
d2
rn −d1 d3
d2
2
r2
n + O(rn)3.
(61)
4 Emission Radius from Phase Shift
We can ﬁnd the net phase shift due to aberration, retardation and polar cap
current by adding equations (51) and (60):
δφ′ = δφ′
rps + δφ′
pc
= rn cos σ + arccos

tan ζ cot ψ + Ωr
c
sin θ′ cos Θ
sin ζ sin ψ

+
arctan

d1 rn
d2 + d3 rn

,
(62)

128
R. T. Gangadhara
In Figure 11 we have plotted δφ′ as a function of φ′ in the four cases of rn
(0.01, 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3). It shows δφ′ reaches maximum near the ( ˆΩ, ˆmt) plane
and falls with respect to |φ′|. Note that the magnitude of gradient of δφ′ with
respect to |φ′| is higher than that of δφ′
rps. In the case of β < 0, we ﬁnd δφ′
becomes negative at large |φ′| as the magnitude of δφ′
pc exceeds the magnitude
of δφ′
rps. At higher rn, we note that δφ′ is slightly asymmetric about φ′ = 0.
For rn ≪1, we obtain
Fig. 11. The net phase shift due to aberration, retardation and polar cap current
δφ′ vs phase φ′. Chosen α = 10◦and rn = 0.01, 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 for panels (a), (b),
(c) and (d), respectively.
δφ′ = ν1 rn + ν2 r2
n + O(rn)3,
(63)
where ν1 = μ1 + (d1/d2) and ν2 = μ2 −(d1 d3/d2
2).
For δφ′ ≪1, we can solve equation (63) for the emission radius and obtain
r = rLC
ν1
δφ′ −ν2 rLC
ν3
1
δφ′2 + O(δφ′)3.
(64)
5 Electric ﬁeld of curvature radiation
The relativistic bunch having charge q emits curvature radiation as it acceler-
ates along the curved trajectory C (space curve) see Fig. 1 Then the electric
ﬁeld of the radiation at the observation point P is given by [15]:

Pulsar Radio Emission Geometry
129
E(r, t) = q
c

ˆn × [(ˆn −β) × ˙β]
R ξ3
 
ret
,
(65)
where ξ = 1 −β · ˆn, R is the distance from radiating region to observer, ˆn
the observer’s sight line, β = v/c the velocity and ˙β = a/c the acceleration
of the bunch.
The radiation emitted by a relativistic bunch has a broad spectrum, and
the range of frequency spectrum can be estimated by taking Fourier transfor-
mation of the electric ﬁeld of radiation:
E(ω) =
1
√
2π
+∞

−∞
E(t)ei ωtdt.
(66)
In equation (65), ret means evaluated at the retarded time t′ + R(t′)/c = t.
By changing the variable of integration from t to t′, we obtain
E(ω) =
1
√
2π
q
c
+∞

−∞
ˆn × [(ˆn −β) × ˙β]
R ξ2
eiω{t′+R(t′)/c}dt′,
(67)
where we have used dt = ξ dt′. When the observation point is far away from
the region of space where the acceleration occurs, the propagation vector or
the sight line ˆn can be taken to be constant in time. Furthermore, the distance
R(t′) can be approximated as R(t′) ≈R0 −ˆn · r(t′), where R0 is the distance
between the origin O and the observation point P, and r(t′) is the position of
bunch relative to O.
Since bunches move with velocity κ c along the dipolar ﬁeld lines, over the
incremental time dt, the distance (arclength) covered is ds = κ c dt = |b|dθ.
Therefore, we have
t = 1
κ c

|b|dθ =
re
√
2κ c

sin θ

5 + 3 cos(2θ) dθ .
(68)
By choosing t = 0 at θ = 0, we obtain
t =
re
12κc

12 +
√
3 log

14 + 8
√
3

−3

10 + 6 cos(2θ) cos(θ) −
2
√
3 log
√
6 cos(θ) +

5 + 3 cos(2θ)
 
.
(69)
Then equation (67) becomes
E(ω) ≈
q eiωR0/c
√
2πR0κc2
+∞

−∞
|b| ˆn × [(ˆn −β) × ˙β]
ξ2
eiω{t−ˆn.r/c}dθ,
(70)

130
R. T. Gangadhara
where the primes on the time variable t have been omitted for brevity. The
integration limits have been extended to ±∞for mathematical convenience,
as the integrand vanishes for |θ −θ0| > 1/γ. At any rotation phase φ′, there
exists a magnetic colatitude θ0 and azimuth φ0 at which the ﬁeld line tangent
ˆb exactly align with ˆn, i.e., ˆb0 · ˆn = 1 and τ = Γ, where Γ is the half-opening
angle of the pulsar emission beam centered on ˆm. The expressions for θ0 and
φ0 are given by Gangadhara ([12]; see Eqs. 9 and 11).
The polarization state of the emitted radiation can be determined using
E(ω) with the known r(t), β and ˙β. Since the integral in equation (70) has
to be computed over the path of particle, the line of sight ˆn can be chosen,
without loss of generality, to lie in the xz–plane:
ˆn = (sin ζ, 0, cos ζ) ,
(71)
where ζ = α + σ is the angle between ˆn and ˆΩ, and σ is the closest impact
angle of ˆn with respect to ˆm.
Let
A = {Ax, Ay, Az} = 1
κc|b| ˆn × [(ˆn −β) × ˙β]
ξ2
.
(72)
By substituting for |b|, β and ˙β, and series expanding in power of θ about θ0
we obtain
Ax = Ax0 + Ax1θ + Ax2θ2 + Ax3θ3 + O[(θ −θ0)4] ,
Ay = Ay0 + Ay1θ + Ay2θ2 + Ay3θ3 + O[(θ −θ0)4] ,
Az = Az0 + Az1θ + Az2θ2 + Az3θ3 + O[(θ −θ0)4] .
(73)
where Axi, Ayi and Azi with i = 0, 1, 2, 3 are the series expansion coeﬃcients.
Since their expressions are huge we have not included them to save space,
however, one can reproduce them easily.
The scalar product between ˆn and r is given by
ˆn · r = re sin2 θ
!
cos α (cos θ cos ζ + cos φ cos φ′ sin θ sin ζ) −
cos ζ cos φ sin α sin θ + sin ζ (cos θ cos φ′ sin α −sin θ sin φ sin φ′)
"
. (74)
Next, substituting for t and ˆn · r into the argument of exponential in equa-
tion (70), and series expanding it in powers of θ about θ0 we obtain
ω

t −ˆn · r
c

= c0 + c1θ + c2θ2 + c3θ3 + O[(θ −θ0)4] ,
(75)
where c0, c1, c2, c3 and c4 are the series expansion coeﬃcients. Again to save
space we do not reproduce their expressions here, but one can reproduce them
easily.
Now, by substituting the series expansions from equations (73) and (75)
into equation (70), we obtain the components of E(ω) = {Ex(ω), Ey(ω), Ez(ω)} :

Pulsar Radio Emission Geometry
131
Ex(ω) = E0
+∞

−∞
(Ax0 + Ax1θ + Ax2θ2 + Ax3θ3)ei(c1θ+c2θ2+c3θ3)dθ ,
Ey(ω) = E0
+∞

−∞
(Ay0 + Ay1θ + Ay2θ2 + Ay3θ3)ei(c1θ+c2θ2+c3θ3)dθ ,
Ez(ω) = E0
+∞

−∞
(Az0 + Az1θ + Az2θ2 + Az3θ3)ei(c1θ+c2θ2+c3θ3)dθ ,
(76)
where
E0 =
q
√
2πR0cei[(ωR0/c)+c0].
Now by solving the integrals solutions, we obtain
Ex(ω) = E0(Ax0S0 + Ax1S1 + Ax2S2 + Ax3S3) ,
Ey(ω) = E0(Ay0S0 + Ay1S1 + Ay2S2 + Ay3S3) ,
Ez(ω) = E0(Az0S0 + Az1S1 + Az2S2 + Az3S3) .
(77)
To ﬁnd the polarization angle of radiation ﬁeld E, we need to specify
two reference directions perpendicular to the sight line ˆn. One could be the
projected spin axis on the plane of the sky: ˆϵ∥= (−cos ζ, 0, sin ζ), then the
other direction is speciﬁed by ˆϵ⊥= ˆϵ∥×ˆn = ˆy, where ˆy is a unit vector parallel
to the y-axis. Then the components of E in the directions ˆϵ∥and ˆϵ⊥are given
by
E∥= ˆϵ∥· E = −cos ζ Ex + sin ζ Ez ,
E⊥= ˆϵ⊥· E = Ey .
(78)
At any rotation phase φ′, observer receives the radiation from all those
ﬁeld lines whose tangents lie within the angle 1/γ with respect to the sight
line ˆn. Let η be the angle between the ˆb and ˆn, then cos η = ˆb · ˆn, and the
maximum value of η is 1/γ. Therefore, at φ = φ0 we solve cos(1/γ) = ˆb·ˆn for τ,
and ﬁnd the allowed range (Γ −1/γ) ≤τ ≤(Γ +1/γ) of τ or −1/γ ≤η ≤1/γ
of η, which in turn allows to ﬁnd the range of θ with the help of equation (14).
Next, for any given η within it’s range, we ﬁnd φ by solving cos η = ˆb · ˆn. It
gives (φ0 −δφ) ≤φ ≤(φ0 + δφ), where
cos(δφ) =
sin Γ[cos(1/γ) csc(Γ + η) −cos Γ cot(Γ + η)]
(cos ζ sin α −cos α cos φ′ sin2 ζ)2 + sin2 ζ sin2 φ′ .
Hence by knowing the ranges of θ and φ at any given φ′, we can estimate the
contributions to E from the emissions from all those ﬁeld lines, whose tangents
lie within the angle 1/γ with respect to ˆn. In Figure 12, we have plotted those
regions at three phases; φ′ = −30◦, 0◦and 30◦using α = 10◦, β = 5◦and

132
R. T. Gangadhara
γ = 300. At the center of each region ˆb exactly aligns with the sight line
ˆn = 1. Further, in Figure 13, we have plotted them for −180◦≤φ′ ≤180◦
with step of 5◦between the successive regions. We observe that the range
of θ stays nearly constant (or decreasing negligibly) whereas that of φ gets
narrower with respect to the increasing |φ′|.
Fig. 12. Beaming regions specifying the range of magnetic colatitude θ and azimuth
φ at the three selected phases φ′ = −30◦, 0◦and 30◦. The center of each region gives
the values of φ0 and θ0. Chosen α = 10◦, β = 5◦and γ = 400.
Fig. 13. The beaming regions specifying the range of magnetic colatitude θ and
azimuth φ. They are plotted for the full range of phase: −180◦≤φ′ ≤180◦with
step of 5◦. The center of each region gives the values of φ0 and θ0. Chosen α = 10◦,
β = 5◦and γ = 400.
6 Polarization of radiation ﬁeld
To understand the pulsar emission, we must model for all the Stokes param-
eters (I, Q, U & V —a set of parameters used to specify the phase and
polarization of radiation) of the pulsar emission, and compare with the obser-
vations. They have been found to oﬀer a very convenient method for estab-
lishing the association between the polarization state of observed radiation

Pulsar Radio Emission Geometry
133
and the geometry of emitting region. They are deﬁned as follows:
I = E∥E∗
∥+ E⊥E∗
⊥,
Q = E∥E∗
∥−E⊥E∗
⊥,
U = 2 Re[E∗
∥E⊥] ,
V = 2 Im[E∗
∥E⊥] .
(79)
The parameter I deﬁnes the total intensity, Q and U jointly deﬁne the linear
polarization and it’s position angle, and V describes the circular polarization.
It is well known that the components of a pulsar proﬁle can be decom-
posed into individual Gaussians by ﬁtting one to each of the sub-pulse com-
ponent. For example the components in the pulse proﬁle of PSR 1706-16 and
PSR 2351+61 are ﬁtted with appropriate Gaussians [16]. When the line-of-
sight crosses the emission region, it encounters a pattern in intensity due
to Gaussian modulation in the azimuthal direction. Because of the Gaussian
modulation in the azimuthal direction, the intensity becomes nonuniform in
the polar directions too. These arguments indicate that a Gaussian like in-
tensity modulation exists in the polar directions too. So, we assume that the
emission region of a pulse component has an intensity modulation both in the
azimuthal and polar directions. Hence we deﬁne a modulation function f for
a pulse component as
f(θ, φ) = f0 exp

−
θ −θp
σθ
2
−
φ −φp
σφ
2 
,
(80)
where θp and φp are the peak locations of Gaussian function and f0 is the
amplitude. If wθ and wφ are the full width at half maxima (FWHM) in the θ
and φ directions, then σθ = wθ/(2
√
ln 2) and σφ = wφ/(2
√
ln 2).
Using a Gaussian with peak located at the meridional plane (φ′ = 0◦), we
computed the pulse proﬁles in the two cases of impact parameter (σ = ±5◦),
and plotted in Fig. 14. We observe the proﬁle in the case of negative σ is
broader than the positive case. This diﬀerence is due to the projection of
emission region on to the equatorial plane of the pulsar. In the positive σ
case, the χs swing is ccw and the Vs change is −/+ while in the case of
negative σ the χs swing is cw and Vs change is +/ −. Hence we ﬁnd that
the polarization angle swing is correlated with the circular polarization sign
reversal. This correlation is invariant with respect the stellar spin directions.
7 Discussion
Observed pulsar radio luminosities, together with the small source size, imply
extraordinarily high brightness temperatures, i.e., as high as 1031 K. To avoid
implausibly high particle densities and energies, coherent radiation processes
are invoked. Pacini & Rees [17], and Sturrock ([2]) among others were quick
to point out that the observed coherence may be due to bunching of parti-
cles in the emission region of magnetosphere. The pair-production discharge

134
R. T. Gangadhara
Fig. 14. Simulated pulse proﬁles. Chosen P = 1 s and γ = 400. For panels (a) and
(c) used σθ = σφ = 0.1, θp = 3.33◦, φp = 0◦and f0 = 1 for the modulating Gaussian.
Similarly, for panels (b) and (d) also used the same values, except φp = 180◦.
mechanism originally applied to pulsars by Sturrock automatically produces
dense bunches that can produce coherence at radio frequencies with suﬃcient
intensity to simulate pulsar action.
If the bunches of plasma particles with sizes much smaller than a wave-
length of radiation exist then the net radiation ﬁeld E(ω) ≈NEo(ω), where
N is the number of charges present in the bunch. Hence the total radiation
ﬁeld due to a bunch of particles is equal to the vector sum of the ﬁelds radiated
by each charge.
In an actual case, it is the combination of both incoherent and coher-
ent superpositions determine the polarization state of the observed emission.
Though the emissions from a single bunch is highly polarized, the radiation
received by distant observer will be less polarized, as the radiation from many
bunches is incoherently superposed. The degree of polarization is found de-
pend on the time resolution chosen in the observations [18].
Circular polarization generally strongest in the central regions of a pro-
ﬁle, but is by no means conﬁned to these regions. It has been detected from
conal components of many pulsars, for example, conal-double pulsars, and
found to be highly correlated with the polarization angle swing ([20]). In
most of the cases the sense reversal of circular polarization is nearly inde-
pendent of frequency, suggesting that the circular polarization does not arise
from propagation or plasma eﬀects ([19], [21]). Radhakrishnan and Rankin
[21] have argued that the circular polarization is intrinsically antisymmetric
type and correlated with the polarization angle swing. Since radiation from

Pulsar Radio Emission Geometry
135
many bunches is superposed at given pulse longitude, the circular polariza-
tion of diﬀerent signs and magnitudes is added. The result of such an addition
could be the reason for the diversities in the observed circular polarization.
8 Conclusion
We have derived the polarization state of the coherent curvature radiation due
to relativistic plasma in pulsar magnetosphere. Though the emission from a
single bunch is highly polarized, the net emission from many bunches within
the beaming region is less polarized due to the incoherent superposition of
radiation ﬁelds. If the emission within the beaming region is uniform then the
net circular polarization goes to zero. Based on our model, we predict that
curvature radiation has basically antisymmetric type of circular polarization,
and it is correlated with the polarization angle swing.
References
1. Radhakrishnan, V., Cooke, D. J., 1969, Astrophys. Lett., 3, 225
2. Sturrock, P. A., 1971, ApJ, 164, 229
3. Ruderman, M. A., & Sutherland, P. G., 1975, ApJ, 196, 51
4. Lyne, A. G., Manchester, R. N., 1988, MNRAS, 234, 477
5. Blaskiewicz, M., Cordes, J. M., & Wasserman, I., 1991, ApJ, 370, 643
6. Rankin, J. M., 1983a, ApJ, 274, 333
7. Rankin, J. M., 1983b, ApJ, 274, 359
8. Rankin, J. M., 1990, ApJ, 352, 247
9. Rankin, J. M., 1993, ApJSupp., 85, 145
10. Hibschman, J. A., Arons, J., 2001, ApJ, 546, 382
11. Machabeli, G. Z., Rogava, A. D., 1994, Phy. Rev. A, 50, 98
12. Gangadhara, R. T., 2004, ApJ, 609, 335, (G04)
13. Phillips, J. A., 1992, ApJ, 385, 282
14. Goldreich, P., Julian, W. H., 1969, ApJ, 157, 869
15. Jackson, J. D., 1975, Classical Electrodynamics, (NY: Wiley)
16. Kramer M., Wielebinski, R., Jessner, A., Gil, J. A. & Seiradakis, J. H., 1994,
A&AS, 107, 515
17. Pacini, F., Rees, M. J., 1970, Nat., 226, 622
18. Gangadhara, R. T., Xilouris, K. M., von Hoensbroech, A., et al. 1999, A&A,
342, 474
19. Michel, F. C., 1987, ApJ, 322, 822
20. You, X. P., Han, J. L., 2006, Chin. J. Astron. Astrophys., 6, 237
21. Radhakrishnan, V., Rankin, J. M., 1990, ApJ, 352, 258

Millisecond Pulsar Emission Altitude from
Relativistic Phase Shift: PSR J0437-4715
R. T. Gangadhara and R. M. C. Thomas
Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore 560034, India
E-mail: ganga@iiap.res.in; mathew@iiap.res.in
Summary. We have analyzed the proﬁle of the millisecond pulsar PSR J0437-4715
at 1440 MHz by ﬁtting the Gaussians to pulse components, and identiﬁed its 11
emission components. We propose that they form a emission beam with 5 nested
cones centered on the core. Using the phase location of component peaks, we have
estimated the aberration–retardation (A/R) phase shift. Due to A/R phase shift,
the centroid of intensity proﬁle and the inﬂection point of polarization angle swing
are symmetrically shifted in the opposite directions with respect to the meridional
plane, which is deﬁned by the rotation and magnetic axes. By recognizing this fact,
we have been able to locate the phase location of meridional plane and estimate the
absolute altitude of emission of core and conal components relative to the neutron
star center. Using the expression for phase shift given recently by Gangadhara [1],
we ﬁnd that the radio emission comes from a range of altitude starting from the
core at 7% of light cylinder radius to outer most cone at 30%.
Key words: Pulsars: general —pulsars: individual (PSR J0437-4715)
1 Introduction
The shape and polarization of integrated pulse of a pulsar are quite stable,
and they are expected to the reﬂect the magnetic ﬁeld geometry and the
structure of pulsar emission beam. The common occurrence of odd number
of components and their distribution across the pulse window has led to the
nomenclature of core and cone structure for the pulsar emission beam [2].
However, Lyne & Manchester [3] and Manchester [4] have argued for a diﬀerent
interpretation, in which components on either side of core arise from a random
distribution of emitting regions, which lead to the so-called patchy cone. Mitra
& Deshpande [6] have attempted to test these models, and found the evidences
in favor of conal structure. The frequency evolution of proﬁle structure and
polarization angle swing of pulsars has been interpreted by considering the
radio emission by relativistic plasma moving in dipolar magnetic ﬁeld lines
(e.g.,[7],[8], [9], [2], [10], [11], [3], [14], [12], [13]).

138
R. T. Gangadhara and R. M. C. Thomas
For understanding the pulsar radio emission mechanism, the radio emission
altitude bears an at most importance. There have been two kinds of methods
proposed for estimating the radio emission altitudes: (1) Purely geometric
method, which assumes the pulse edge is emitted from the last open ﬁeld lines
(e.g.,[15], [21], [27]), (2) Relativistic phase shift method, which assumes the
asymmetry in the conal components phase location, relative to core, is due
to the aberration-retardation phase shift, e.g.,[20]. Both the methods have
merits and demerits: former method has an ambiguity in identifying the last
open ﬁeld lines while the latter rely on the clear identiﬁcation of core-cone
structure of the emission beam. Thomas & Gangadhara [33] have showed that
the proﬁles becomes asymmetric due to the inﬂuence of rotation on the radio
emitting sources moving along the dipolar magnetic ﬁeld lines.
By assuming the pulsar radio emission comes from ﬁxed altitude, Blask-
iewicz et al. [14] have showed that polarization angle inﬂection point (PAIP)
lags with respect to the centroid of the intensity proﬁle by ∼4r/rLC, where
r is the emission altitude measured from the center of neutron star and
rLC = Pc/2π is the light cylinder radius. The parameters P and c are the
pulsar spin period and speed of light, respectively. The results of purely geo-
metric method are found to be in rough agreement with those given in [14].
However, the relativistic phase shift method clearly indicates that the emis-
sion altitude across the pulse window is not constant ([20], [23], [26]). Dyks,
Rudak and Harding [16] by revising the relation for aberration phase shift
given in [20], have re-estimated the emission heights. The average emission
heights are found to be comparable with those of geometric method.
By considering the relativistically beamed radio emission in the direction
of magnetic ﬁeld line tangents, Gangadhara [19] has solved the viewing geom-
etry in an inclined and rotating dipole magnetic ﬁeld. He has showed that due
to geometric restrictions in receiving the beamed emission, a distant observer
can not receive the radio waves from a constant altitude. A more exact ex-
pression for relativistic phase shift (A/R) is given by Gangadhara [1], which
includes the phase shift due to polar cap currents also. Under small angle
approximations, the expression of [1] reduces to the one given in [16].
Recently, Johnston & Weisberg [26] have estimated the emission heights
of the young pulsar PSR J1015-5719 using the expression for A/R phase shift
given in [1]. In this paper, we intend to estimate the emission heights of the
nearby, bright millisecond pulsar PSR J0437-4715. It was discovered in the
Parkes southern survey ([25], [29]), has a pulse period of 5.75 ms. Navarro et al.
[30] have presented the mean pulse observations of PSR J0437-4715 at multiple
radio frequencies, and found a frequency dependent lag of the total-intensity
proﬁle with respect to the polarization proﬁle. Jenet et al. [24] have presented
the results based on the high time resolution single pulse observations of this
pulsar. They ﬁnd the single pulse properties of PSR J0437-4715 are similar to
those of the common slow-rotating pulsars.
The outline of this paper is as follows. In §2, we discuss a method for
identifying the phase location of meridional plane. Next, in §3 we consider the

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
139
mean pulse data of millisecond PSR J0437-4715, and ﬁt the Gaussian to pulse
components. By assuming conal emission beam, we have estimated the A/R
phase shifts and the emission heights.
2 Phase of Meridional Plane
In the nested cone structure of pulsar emission beam, the conal components
are expected to be distributed symmetrically on either side of core when ob-
served in the corotating frame. However, for an observer in the laboratory
frame the proﬁle becomes asymmetric due to rotation. A typical asymmetric
proﬁle is given in Figure 1, and such an asymmetry in the real proﬁles has
been reported for many pulsars (e.g., [20], [23], [26]).
Fig. 1. A typical pulse proﬁle. C0 is the core. Cl and Ct are the components on
leading and trailing sides, respectively. The dotted lines represent the phase of cone
center (CC) and polarization angle inﬂection point (PAIP). The thick line mark the
phase of meridional plane (M), and the broken line mark the phase of core peak (C).
Arrows indicate direction of phase shift of CC, C and PAIP with respect to M.

140
R. T. Gangadhara and R. M. C. Thomas
Blaskiewicz et al. [14] have generalized the rotating vector model (RVM)
by considering the ﬁrst order relativistic eﬀects, which arise due to the pulsar
rotation. By assuming that the emission across the entire pulse comes from a
constant height, they have showed that the centroid of the total intensity pulse
advances to earlier phase by ∼r/rLC while the polarization angle inﬂection
point (PAIP) is delayed to later phase by ∼3 r/rLC, where r is the emission
height measured from the center of neutron star. However, there are clear
evidences to show that the emission do not come from a ﬁxed altitude ([20],
[23], [26]). Consider the intensity proﬁle given in Figure 1, in which, Cl and
Ct are the components of an arbitrary cone with center at CC. If the emission
altitude is not constant across the pulse window then the retardation also
contributes to the phase shift, and it is comparable to that of aberration [1]. So,
due to A/R eﬀects, the centroid intensity proﬁle is advanced to earlier phase
by ∼2 r/rLC while the corresponding PAIP is delayed to later phase by ∼
2 r/rLC (e.g., [16], [18]). Hence, the cone center CC and PAIP lie symmetrically
on either side of meridional plane M, which is at the phase φ′ = 0◦. The
meridional plane is deﬁned by the plane containing the rotation axis and the
magnetic axis. Note that the phase location of M is invariant with respect
to r. In other words, both CC and PAIP come closer to M at smaller r, and
move away from it at larger r. In the co-rotating frame, i.e., in the absence
of rotation, the A/R eﬀects vanish, and hence core peak and PAIP appear at
the meridional plane M.
The ﬁeld aligned polar cap current do not introduce any signiﬁcant phase
shift into the phase of PAIP but it does introduce a positive oﬀset into po-
larization angle, however, it roughly cancels due to the negative oﬀset by
aberration [12]. The phase shift of pulse components due to polar cap current
is estimated recently in [1], and found to be quite small compared to A/R
phase shift.
3 Emission height in millisecond pulsar: PSR J0437-4715
Consider the nearest bright millisecond pulsar PSR J0457-4715, which has a
period of 5.75 ms. It was discovered in Parkes southern survey by Johnston
et al. [25], and is in a binary system with white dwarf companion. Manchester
& Johnston [5] have presented the mean pulse polarization properties of PSR
J0437-4715 at 1440 MHz. There is signiﬁcant linear and circular polarization
across the pulse with rapid changes near the pulse center. The position angle
has a complex swing across the pulse, which is not well ﬁtted with the rotating
vector model, probably, due to the presence of orthogonal polarization modes.
The mean intensity pulse has a strong peak near the center, where the circular
polarization shows a clear sense reversal and the polarization angle has a rapid
sweep. These two features strongly indicate that it is a core. The proﬁle shows
more than 8 identiﬁable components.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
141
Table 1. Radio emission height in PSR J0437−4715 at 1440 MHz
Cone No.
φ′
l
φ′
t
δφ′
Γ
r
s/slof
(◦)
(◦)
(◦)
(◦)
(Km)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
0
—
—
−9.50±0.26
4.00±0.00 20.3±0.6 0.17±0.00
1
−29.50±0.24
8.50±0.46 −10.50±0.26
7.06±0.06 23.3±0.5 0.28±0.01
2
−50.00±0.50 21.50±0.54 −14.25±0.37 11.50±0.10 34.3±0.9 0.38±0.01
3
−81.50±0.15 37.94±0.08 −21.78±0.08 18.00±0.02 64.3±0.3 0.43±0.00
4
−102.01±0.36 56.14±0.29 −22.90±0.23 22.93±0.05 84.9±0.9 0.47±0.00
5
−129.50±1.01 89.54±4.15 −19.98±2.10 29.30±0.40 91.8±6.2 0.57±0.02
Consider the average pulse proﬁle given in Figure 2 for PSR J0437-4715 at
1440 MHz. To identify pulse components and to estimate their peak locations
we followed the procedure of Gaussian ﬁtting to pulse components. Two ap-
proaches have been developed and used by diﬀerent authors. Unlike Kramer
et al. [28], who ﬁtted the sum of Gaussians to the total pulse proﬁle, we sepa-
rately ﬁtted a single Gaussian to each of the pulse components. We used the
package Statistics‘NonlinearFit‘ in Mathematica for ﬁtting Gaussians to pulse
components. It can ﬁt the data to the model with the named variables and
parameters, return the model evaluated at the parameter estimates achieving
the leastsquares ﬁt. The steps are as follows: (i) Fitted a Gaussian to the core
component (VI), (ii) Subtracted the core ﬁtted Gaussian from the data (raw),
(iii) The residual data was then ﬁtted for the next strongest peak, i.e., the
component IV, (iv) Added the two Gaussians and subtracted from the raw
data, (v) Next, ﬁtted a Gaussian to the strongest peak (IX) in the residual
data. The procedure was repeated for other peaks till the residual data has no
prominent peak above the oﬀpulse noise level. By this procedure we have been
able to identify 11 of its emission components: I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII,
IX, X and XI, as indicated by the 11 Gaussians in Figure 2. The distribution
of conal components about the core (VI) reﬂect the core-cone structure of the
emission beam. We propose that they can be paired into 5 nested cones with
core at the center.
Manchester & Johnston [5] have ﬁtted the rotating vector model (RVM)
of [7]to polarization angle data of PSR J0437-4715 and estimated the polar-
ization parameters α = 145◦and ζ = 140◦. The parameter α is the magnetic
axis inclination angle relative to the pulsar spin axis, and ζ = α + β, where
β is the sight line impact angle relative to the magnetic axis. However, for
these values of α and ζ the colatitude s/slof (see eq. [15] in [20] ) exceeds 1
for all the cones. The parameter s gives the foot location of ﬁeld lines, which
are associated with the conal emissions, relative to magnetic axis on the polar
cap. It is normalized with the colatitude slof of last open ﬁeld line. However,
Gil and Krawczyk [22] have reported α = 20◦and β = −4◦by ﬁtting the
average intensity pulse proﬁle rather than by formally ﬁtting the RVM. Fur-
ther, they ﬁnd the relativistic RVM by Blaskiewicz et al. [5] calculated with

142
R. T. Gangadhara and R. M. C. Thomas
Fig. 2. Average pulse of PSR J0437-4715 at 1440 MHz and the model Gaussians
(dotted line curves) ﬁtted to emission components. Due to A/R eﬀects, the core (VI)
peak is shifted to the phase ∼−9.5◦from the meridional plane (M) which is at 0◦.
these α and β seems to ﬁt the observed position angle quite well than the
non-relativistic RVM. Further, Gil and Krawczyk [5] have reported that the
centroid of intensity proﬁle and PAIP are separated by ∼40◦. By taking the
cone center (CC) of outermost cone as the centroid of intensity proﬁle, we
can locate the phase of meridional plane M. It is at the mid point, i.e., at
δφ′ ∼20◦between CC and PAIP. Using δφ′ ≈2r/rLC, we get the emission
height r ≈48 km. We have adopted these values of α and β in our model
as they also conﬁrm s/slof ≤1 (see below). The phase φ′ = 0◦, in Figure 2,
corresponds to the phase of meridional plane (M), which is at the mid point
between CC of outermost cone and PAIP of relativistic polarization angle
swing.
In column 1 of Table 1 we have given the cone numbers. The cone number
0 stands for core component. The peak locations of conal components on
leading and trailing sides are given in columns 2 and 3, respectively. The conal
components are believed to arise from the nested hollow cones of emission ([2]-
[31]), which along with the central core emission, make up the pulsar emission
beam. Let φ′
l and φ′
t be the peak locations of conal components on leading
and trailing sides of a pulse proﬁle, respectively. Then, using the following
equations, we estimate the phase shift (δφ′) of cone center with respect to M
and the phase location (φ′) of component peaks in the absence of phase shift,
i.e., in the corotating frame (see eq. [11] in [20]):
δφ′ = 1
2(φ′
t + φ′
l) ,
φ′ = 1
2(φ′
t −φ′
l) .
(1)

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
143
In column 4 of Table 1, we have given the values of δφ′. It increases in mag-
nitude from inner most cone to 4th cone, but for outermost cone i.e., for 5th
cone it decreases slightly. We suspect this decrease in δφ′ for the 5th cone is
due to the fact that emission spot moves closer to the rotation axis, and hence
aberration phase shift becomes smaller ([1]).
The half-opening angle Γ (see eq. [7] in [19]) of the emission beam is given
in column 5, and it is about 30◦for the last cone. In column 6, we have given
the emission heights computed using the expression for A/R phase shift given
in [1] (see eq. [45]). It shows the emission in PSR J0437-4715 occurs over a
range of altitude starting from the core at 20 Km to the outermost cone at 90
Km. In column 7, we have given the colatitude s/slof of foot ﬁeld lines, which
are associated with the component emissions. It shows due to the relativistic
beaming and geometric restrictions, observer tends to receive the emissions
from the open ﬁeld lines which are located in the colatitude range of 0.2 to
0.6 on the polar cap.
4 Discussion
A long standing question in pulsar astronomy has been the location of the ra-
dio emission region in magnetosphere. The emission heights of PSR B0329+54
given in [20] and six other pulsars in [23] are all relative to the emission height
of core. They assumed that the core emission height is negligible compared
to the light cylinder radius of classical pulsars, but it may not be so in the
case of millisecond pulsars. Though Blaskiewicz et al. [14] have assumed a
constant emission height in their model, they have indeed indicated the pos-
sibility of core emission at a lower altitude than conal emissions. We identify,
due to A/R phase shift, that the meridional plane (M) is located at the mid
point between the phase of core peak and polarization angle inﬂection point
(PAIP). By recognizing this fact, we have been able to estimate the absolute
emission heights of the core as well as the conal components. We ﬁnd that the
core emission in PSR J0437−4715 is indeed come from a lower altitude than
the conal emissions.
We selected PSR J0437-4715 because of its strong core and clear conal
emissions. Polarization angle (PA) is complicated near the core component
but we can still locate the meridional plane by avoiding ﬁtting that part of
PA data. The idea is that without the knowledge of polarization angle data
near the core it is possible to locate the meridional plane by just ﬁtting the
relativistic polarization angle formula of BCW91 to segments of PA angle data
corresponding to the conal components. Since the emission altitude for each
cone is diﬀerent, one can not ﬁt the entire PA data with a constant altitude.
If we can best ﬁt a segment of PA data corresponding to a outer cone or any
other inner cone it is possible to locate the phase of the meridional plane.
Since we used the formula of Blaskiewicz et al. [14], in which the aberration
phase shift is independent of phase, our results are approximate.

144
R. T. Gangadhara and R. M. C. Thomas
The polarization angle curve obtained by ﬁtting the segments of PA data
under Cl and Ct gives a virtual inﬂection point (PAIP) corresponding certain
height reported by ﬁtting routine. Since the emission height vary for each
cone, we shall have as many number of virtual inﬂection points as the cones.
The point to be noted is that the cone center and PA virtual inﬂection point
of each cone is approximately symmetrically located on either side of the
meridional plane. Since the cone centers and the virtual PA inﬂection points
are approximately symmetrically located on either side of meridional plane,
it is possible to locate the phase of meridional plane even if we are unable to
detect virtual PA inﬂection point for certain cones or core.
The geometrical method, which by comparing the measured pulse widths
with geometrical predictions from dipolar models, can yield absolute emission
heights. But such absolute values are likely to be underestimated due to an
ambiguity in identifying the last open ﬁeld lines. The proﬁle widths generally
measured at a 10%-level can give the lower limits for emission altitudes [34].
In PSR J0437−4715 the components I and XI are at the intensity level of 1
to 2%, and the ﬁeld lines associated with them are not last open ﬁeld lines,
but they are found to be located at the colatitude s/slof ∼0.6 on polar cap.
It is possible that the A/R phase shift can be reduced by the rotational
distortion of magnetic ﬁeld sweep back of the vacuum dipole magnetic ﬁeld
lines. It was ﬁrst considered in detail by Shitov [32]. Dyks and Harding [16]
have investigated the rotational distortion of pulsar magnetic ﬁeld by making
the approximation of a vacuum magnetosphere. For φ′ = 110◦, β = −4◦and
α = 20◦we computed the phase shift due to magnetic ﬁeld sweep back δφ′
mfsb
(see eq. [49] in [1]). But it is found to be < 0.6◦for r/rLC ≤0.3, which is
much smaller than the aberration, retardation and polar cap current phase
shifts in PSR J0437−4715.
5 Conclusion
We have analyzed the mean proﬁle of the millisecond PSR J0437-4715 at 1440
MHz, and identiﬁed 11 of its emission components. We propose that they
form a emission beam consist of 5 nested cones centered on the core. Using
the phase location of component peaks, we have estimated the aberration–
retardation (A/R) phase shift. Due to A/R phase shift, the center of each
cone and the inﬂection point of corresponding polarization angle swing are
symmetrically shifted in the opposite directions with respect to the meridional
plane. By recognizing this fact, we have been able to locate the phase location
of meridional plane and estimate the absolute altitudes of emission of core and
conal components relative to neutron star center. We used the more exact
expression for phase shift given recently in [1]. The radio emission at 1440
MHz in PSR J0437-4715 is found to come from an altitude range starting
from the core at 7% of light cylinder radius to the outer most cone at 30%.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
145
Acknowledgments
We used the data available on EPN archive maintained by MPIfR, Bonn.
We are thankful to M. N. Manchester and S. Johnston for making their data
available on web.
References
1. Gangadhara, R. T., 2005, ApJ, 628, 930
2. Rankin, J. M., 1983a, ApJ, 274, 333
3. Lyne, A. G., & Manchester, R. N., 1988, MNRAS, 234, 477
4. Manchester, M. N., 1995, A&A, 16, 107
5. Manchester, M. N. & Johnston, S., 1995, ApJ, 441, L6
6. Mitra, D., Deshpande, A. A., 1999 A&A, 346, 906
7. Radhakrishnan, V., & Cooke, D. J., 1969, Astrophys. Lett., 3, 225
8. Sturrock, P. A., 1971, ApJ, 164, 229
9. Ruderman, M. A., & Sutherland, P. G., 1975, ApJ, 196, 51
10. Rankin, J. M., 1983b, ApJ, 274, 359
11. Rankin, J. M., 1990, ApJ, 352, 247
12. Hibschman, J. A., & Arons, J., 2001, ApJ, 546, 382
13. Mitra, D., Li, X. H., 2004, A&A, 421, 215
14. Blaskiewicz, M., Cordes, J. M., & Wasserman, I., 1991, ApJ, 370, 643
15. Cordes, J. M., 1978, ApJ, 222, 1006
16. Dyks, J., Rudak, B., & Harding, A. K., 2004, ApJ, 607, 939
17. Dyks, J., & Harding, A. K., 2004, ApJ, 614, 869
18. Fung, F. K., 2005, Ph.D. thesis, Univ. of Utrecht, 82
19. Gangadhara, R. T. 2004, ApJ, 609, 335
20. Gangadhara, R. T., & Gupta, Y. 2001, ApJ, 555, 31
21. Gil, J. A., & Kijak, J., 1993, A&A, 273, 563
22. Gil, J. A., & Krawczyk, A., 1997, MNRAS, 285, 561
23. Gupta, Y., & Gangadhara, R. T. 2003, ApJ, 584, 418
24. Jenet, F. A., Anderson, S. B., Kaspi, V. M., Prince, T. A., Unwin, S. C., 1998,
ApJ, 498, 365
25. Johnston, S., et al., 1993, Nature, 361, 613
26. Johnston, S., Weisberg, J. M., 2006, MNRAS, In press
27. Kijak, J., & Gil, J., 2003, A&A, 397, 969
28. Kramer M., Wielebinski, R., Jessner, A., Gil, J. A. & Seiradakis, J. H. 1994,
A&As, 107, 515
29. Manchester, M.N., et al., 1996, MNRAS, 279, 1235
30. Navarro, J., Manchester, R. N., Sandhu, J. S., Kulkarni, S. R., Bailes, M., 1997,
ApJ, 486, 1019
31. Rankin, J. M., 1993, ApJS, 85, 145
32. Shitov, Yu. P., 1983, Sov. Astron., 27, 314
33. Thomas, R. M. C., Gangadhara, R. T., 2005, A&A, 437, 537
34. Xilouris, K. M., Kramer, M., Jessner, A., et al., 1996, A&A, 309, 481

Magnetosphere Structure and the Annular
Gap Model of Pulsars
G.J. Qiao1, K.J. Lee1, H.G. Wang2, and R.X. Xu1
1 Department of Astronomy, Peking University, Beijing 100871,
gjn@pku.edu.cn; k.j.lee@water.pku.edu.cn; r.x.xu@pku.edu.cn
2 Center for astrophysics, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China,
hgwang@gzhu.edu.cn
Summary. Pulsar radio and γ-ray emission has been studied for about forty years,
yet no elaborated model is present to account for all the emission of pulsars from
radio to γ-ray bands. A reasonable emission model should present the mechanism
for wide band radiation. The magnetosphere structure and particle acceleration
regions are the basis for solving problem, observations are important inputs to es-
tablish a reasonable model. In our work, both radio and gamma-ray observations
have been considered. We will show how they can limit the radiation locations and
radiation mechanisms. The advantages and disadvantages for diﬀerent radiation lo-
cations (such as the polar gap, the outer gap and the annular gap) are discussed
in comparison with observational facts. The annular gap model, an joint model for
both radio and γ-ray emissions, was proposed recently and reproduce successfully
some important observational phenomenon, e.g., bi-drifting. We will also discuss for
radio and γ-ray observations of PSR B1055-52, and show that radiations come from
the annular region and the core region. Success in reproducing many observational
facts suggest that the annular gap is a promising model for pulsar multi-wavelength
radiation.
Key words: pulsars: general — stars: neutron stars
1 Introduction
Since Hewish et al. [1] discovered the ﬁrst radio pulsar, lots of magnetosphere
theories and acceleration models for pulsars have been proposed, and large
number of observation have been performed during the last 40 years. Gol-
dreich & Julian (GJ) [2] have proposed that there is a magnetosphere out-
side the neutron star surface. The charge density is ρgj = −Ω · B/(2πc) in
the magnetosphere; the electric ﬁeld along the magnetic ﬁeld would be zero
(E · B = 0). This is just a “dead” or “static” magnetosphere. But the ob-
served emission from pulsars hints that there exist some “accelerators” in
pulsar magnetosphere, where electric ﬁeld parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld is not

148
G.J. Qiao, K.J. Lee, H.G. Wang, and R.X. Xu
zero (E · B ̸= 0). These “accelerators” require the deviation of charge density
ρ from the GJ charge density, i.e. ρ −ρgj ̸= 0.
How can the charge density deviate from GJ charge density? There are two
ways: if there is a charge ﬂow, the velocity diﬀerence and the geometrical shape
of the ﬂow will make the local ρ(r) diﬀerent from the local GJ charge density;
anther possibility is that charged particles can not ﬂow easily at certain region
in the magnetosphere, then a “charge starving” or “charge excess” region will
appear.
For radio pulsars, one group of theories belongs to the “polar cap” models,
which consider the formation of the parallel electric ﬁeld in the region near
magnetic poles. There are two kinds of models for the inner accelerators con-
tingent upon whether free ejection of the charged particles is possible from
the star surface. If electrons or ions can be pulled out from the star surface,
the scheme called “space-charge-limited ﬂow” model operates, in which the
parallel electric ﬁeld component is due to either the inertia of particles [3],
the ﬁeld line curvature and geometry [4, 6, 11, 17, 24, 71, 76], or the general
relativistic frame-dragging eﬀect [28, 53]). If the ion binding energy in the neu-
tron star surface is large enough that charged particles can not be pulled out
freely, a vacuum gap in the polar cap region will form, namely, the inner gap
(Ruderman & Sutherland [70], hereafter RS75). The RS model can account
for some features observed in radio bands, such as hollow conical emission,
sub-pulse drifting, microstructure, etc., and is supported by observations for
many years (see [40] for a review, [15, 79]). Furthermore, the “user-friendly”
nature of this model is a virtue not shared by others [73]. Although there are
still debates on the conical emission, it was agreed that there is a “core” emis-
sion beam [18, 19, 23, 41, 44, 52, 65, 66, 67], among others). The RS model,
however, contradicts the observed “core” emission beam.
Even if the binding energy of the neuron star surface is not high enough,
the inner core gap and annular gap can be formed [61] for situations both
of B · Ω < 0 and B · Ω > 0. In some special conditions an inner vacuum
gap (do not include the annular gap) can be formed also when B · Ω < 0
[20, 21]. If pulsars are the bare strange stars, the inner gap can be formed
[59, 60, 83, 84, 85, 87] for situations both of B · Ω < 0 and B · Ω > 0.
Xia et al. [82] found that the Inverse Compton scattering (ICS) in strong
magnetic ﬁelds dominates the production of high energy photons near the
polar cap region. Resonant scattering could also be an important energy loss
mechanism for the primary electrons, comparing with both electrostatic accel-
eration and curvature radiation losses. Inverse Compton scattering was found
to inﬂuence the gap formation, since the pair production avalanche may be
triggered by the up-scattered Compton photons rather than by curvature pho-
tons (e.g. [39, 64, 90, 91, 92]). These results have been conﬁrmed by many
authors (e.g. [14, 28, 29, 42, 75]). In fact, in this case the electrons will stop ac-
celerating before they can emit signiﬁcant curvature radiation. The standard
models of polar cap acceleration thus need substantial revision [28, 91, 92, 93].
When the ICS process in strong magnetosphere is involved, the inner gap

Magnetosphere Structure and the Annular Gap Model of Pulsars
149
structure changes a lot, and the observed mode-changing phenomena can be
understood [91, 92].
The ICS mechanism can also act as an important radiation mechanism
for pulsar’s radio radiation. In the RS model the inner gap breaks down and
sparks periodically. The sparks produce low frequency waves. The low energy
photons are inverse Compton scattered by the secondary particles produced
in the sparking or pair cascades, and the up-scattered radio photons provide
the observed radio emission from the pulsar. This is called the ICS model of
pulsar radio emission. In the model, the “core” and conical emission beams can
be obtained naturally [54, 55, 56, 57]. The observed polarization phenomena
and pulse proﬁles changing with observing frequencies can also be calculated
[58, 86]. The pulse ﬁles changing with observing frequencies can be checked
observationally [94].
Some pulsars emit in both radio and γ-ray bands. Both the polar cap and
the outer gap models of γ-ray pulsars have been suggested to explain the high-
energy emission from pulsars [7, 10, 12, 13, 24, 28, 30, 38, 53, 68, 69, 95]. Qiao
et al. [59, 60, 62, 63] propose a new scenario of the inner annular gap (IAG)
beyond the conventional inner gap. The IAG or annular region is deﬁned by
magnetic ﬁeld lines that intersect the null charge surface (NCS). As we know,
the local magnetic ﬁeld is perpendicular to the rotation axis at the NCS. So
if the radiation is generated near the NCS (either inside or outside), a pulsar
can easily produce a very wide pulse proﬁle,which matches the observed γ-ray
pulse proﬁles. Owing to the emission regions close to the star surface, it can
ﬁt the radio observations also at same time.
Besides these polar gap scenario, there are outer gap models. For a fully
charge separated magnetosphere, i.e. only one sign of charge present at a
given location (see [51]), several groups argue that an outer gap then will
form around the the null charge surface [10, 12, 31, 35] instead of forming a
polar gap. Whether the outer gap can form depends on whether the negative
charged particles can not pass the positive GJ charge density (GJ69) in the
annular region, which needs further consideration when the magnetosphere is
not fully charge separated [61].
Growing evidence shows that the radio emission of pulsars is linked with
the systematic drifting sub-pulses (grazing cuts of the line of sight) or peri-
odic intensity modulations (central cuts of the line of sight) [15, 16, 79]. The
drifting sub-pulse phenomena can only be understood based on the drifting
sparks in the inner polar vacuum gap (RS75; [22, 60, 87]). Two questions
rise: Firstly, in the free ﬂow cases, can the “sparking-like” phenomena take
place? Secondly, if the magnetosphere is not fully charge-separated, what will
happen? Although, as it was mentioned above, the fully charge separated mag-
netosphere is considered conventionally, it may be questionable. Furthermore,
even if the magnetosphere is strictly fully charge separated, the secondary
pair plasma generated from the acceleration region will soon ﬁll some regions
in the magnetosphere, resulting in a quasi-neutral plasma. In this case, the so

150
G.J. Qiao, K.J. Lee, H.G. Wang, and R.X. Xu
called annular region can play a very important role to produce gamma-ray
emission in young pulsars.
This paper is arranged as follows. Magnetosphere structure and accelera-
tion regions of pulsars are discussed in §2. The basic observational facts and
comparison between radio & γ-ray emission properties are summarized in §3.
In §4, radio observational properties and the inverse Compton scattering (ICS)
model are discussed. In §5, several application of annular gap model are given
such as γ-ray emission, bi-drifting sub-pulse of PSR J0815+09 and multi-band
emission from PSR B1055-52. Discussion and conclusion are presented in §6.
2 Magnetospheric structure and acceleration region of
pulsars
As it was pointed out that pulsar radiation needs high energy particles moving
along the ﬁeld lines. So the fundamental process is that the electric ﬁeld
parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld should be non-zero in the acceleration regions,
i.e. E · B ̸= 0. This “acceleration process” requires that local charge density ρ
is not equal to the GJ charge density ρgj in certain region, where ρ −ρgj ̸= 0.
There are two ways, as discussed above, to achieve the deviation. If the
binding energy is low enough, the particles can ﬂow out from the surface of
the neutron star “freely”, the ﬂow process can make the ρ(r) in some places
diﬀerent from the GJ charge density due to velocity contrast, ﬁeld line cur-
vature or general relativistic eﬀect; another way is that there are some places
where some kind of particles can not ﬂow freely, then a “charge starving”
or “charge excess” region will appear. We will discuss these in the following
subsections.
2.1 Low binding energy of the neutron star surface: free ﬂow
situation
The models considering the free ﬂow situation are (i) slot gap model (e.g. [5]),
(ii) the polar cap model (e.g. [53]), and (iii) the annular gap model [61].
The slot gap model
The main assumptions for the electrodynamics in the co-rotating frame are:
(1) The surface between the closed ﬁeld line region and the open ﬁeld lines
region have equal potential Φ = 0. (2) Φ = 0 on the star surface. (3) Only one
sign of charge is present at any point in the magnetosphere, that is magne-
tosphere fully charge separated. (4) ρb(R) = ρgj(R), here ρb(R) is the beam
charge from the neutron star (NS) surface, and R is the radius of the NS.
In the co-rotating frame, Poisson’s equation becomes
∇2Φ = −4π(ρb −ρgj),
(1)

Magnetosphere Structure and the Annular Gap Model of Pulsars
151
Fig. 1. An illustration for the basic picture of the slot gap model. Particles leave
oﬀthe polar cap region with charge density ρb comparing with the locale GJ charge
density ρgj for diﬀerent geometry [4, 5, 6, 71]. With this ﬁgure and Eq.(1) and (2),
Arons and Scharlemann [6] have emphasized that along the polar ﬁeld lines, which
curve toward the rotation axis of the star, are ﬁeld lines with ”favorable” curvature,
Fig.(b), and particle acceleration occurs there. When the magnetic ﬁeld lines curve
away from the rotational axis, Fig.(a), negative particles can not be accelerated
outward, it is so called “un-favorable” region.
The local co-rotating charge density at the point r is [5],
ρgj(r) = −Ω · B(r)
2πc

1 −kg
R
r
3 
,
(2)
where kg = 2GI/R3c2 = 0.17(I45/R3
10). Relativistic space charge limited ﬂow
from the surface has a beam charge density
ρb(r) = −Ω · B(R)
2πc
(1 −kg) |B(r)|
|B(R)|.
(3)
When the frame dragging eﬀect is neglected, we have
ρb(r)/ρgj(r) = cos ζ(R)
cos ζ(r) ,
(4)
where ζ is the angle between the rotational axis Ω and the locale magnetic
ﬁeld lines. The basic results are shown in Fig.1.
The “favorable” region
This is the region where | ρb |<| ρgj | and ρb −ρgj > 0 are satisﬁed, and the
magnetic ﬁeld lines curve towards the rotational axis, as shown by the region

152
G.J. Qiao, K.J. Lee, H.G. Wang, and R.X. Xu
(a) in Fig.2. The electric ﬁeld E∥towards the inner part of the magnetosphere.
So negative particles can be accelerated outward.
“Un-favorable” region
This is the region where | ρb |>| ρgj |, and ρb −ρgj < 0 are satisﬁed, and
the magnetic ﬁeld lines curve away from the rotational axis (region (b) in the
Fig. 2). In this situation negative particles can not be accelerated. The electric
ﬁeld E∥towards to the outer part of the magnetosphere, and hence negative
particles can not be accelerated outward.
2.2 The polar cap model
The main assumptions are the same as that in the slot gap model [53]. But
they included the frame-dragging eﬀect, such that particles can be accelerated
in both the “favorable” and the “un-favorable” regions. However the annular
region is still not taken into account in this model.
2.3 The annular model
The open ﬁeld line region of the pulsar magnetosphere is divided into two parts
by the critical ﬁeld lines (see Fig.2). The part that contains the magnetic axis
is the core region, while the other part is the annular region. The pulsar polar
cap is also correspondingly divided into the core and the annular polar cap
regions (Fig. 2). For an aligned rotator, the radius from the magnetic pole to
the edge of the core cap is rcr = (2/3)3/4R(RΩ/c)1/2, while the radius from
the pole to the outer edge of the annular cap, i.e. the radius of the whole polar
cap, is rp = R(ΩR/c)1/2 (see RS75).
For easy discussion in the following, throughout the text we will focus on
anti-parallel rotators, i.e. Ω · μ < 0. The case of Ω · μ > 0 could be derived by
reversing the signs, and all the conclusions in this paper remain valid. μ is the
magnetic axis.
For Ω · μ < 0, the Goldreich-Julian charge density (ρgj) is positive in the
region enclosed by the null charge surface (NCS). For the core-region ﬁeld
lines, positive charges ﬂow out through the light cylinder. The supply of pos-
itive charges from the surface compensate for the deﬁcit from the light cylin-
der. To maintain the invariance of the total charge of the pulsar, a current is
needed to carry positive charges back to the star or a negative charges away
from the star. For the fully charge separated magnetosphere, only one sign of
charge presents at a given location [51]. In the annular region, the negative
charged particles at lower altitude can not pass the region with positive GJ
charge density at higher altitude. An outer gap then forms beyond the NCS
[31, 35, 74].

Magnetosphere Structure and the Annular Gap Model of Pulsars
153
Fig. 2. A schematic diagram for the annular and the core regions for an inclined
rotator. Ω and μ are the rotational and magnetic axis, respectively. The null charge
surface (NCS) is the surface where the magnetic ﬁeld is perpendicular to the rota-
tion axis (i.e. Ω · B = 0). Line ‘CFL’ and ‘LOF’ are the critical ﬁeld line and the
“last” open ﬁeld line respectively. Charged particles with opposite signs leave oﬀ
the annular and the core cap regions, respectively. The upper boundaries of the pair
formation front are denoted by the dashed lines. The “ﬂash” symbols indicate the
locations with the maximal possibility to initiate the pair-production cascade [61].
2.4 High binding energy of star surface: polar gaps
If the binding energy of the star surface is high enough, then an inner vacuum
gap will form (RS75). It is emphasized that both the core gap and the annular
gap must be taken into account.
For neutron stars, the binding energy of positive particles could be high
enough under some special conditions [20, 21] to form an inner vacuum gap.
Only one of the inner vacuum gaps can form in this case: the conventional
inner core gap (ICG) above the central part of the polar cap for a parallel
rotator (Ω · μ < 0). However, the physical conditions are diﬀerent for bare
strange stars. Beside the ICG above the core part of the polar cap another
gap will form, no matter whether the star is a parallel (Ω · μ > 0) or an
antiparallel rotator (Ω · μ > 0), because the binding energy is roughly inﬁnite
[87, 89]. The width of the IAG is a function of the inclination angle. If the
width of the IAG is large enough, the potential drop in the IAG would be
high enough so that sparking will take place there. The sparking leads to pair
production and generates the secondary pairs, which will accelerate out of the
IAG.
3 Basic observational results in radio and γ-rays bands
Forty years after the discovery of rotation-powered pulsars, many important
discoveries shows that the pulsars are excellent laboratories for studying of
particle acceleration as well as fundamental physics of strong gravity, strong

154
G.J. Qiao, K.J. Lee, H.G. Wang, and R.X. Xu
magnetic ﬁelds and so on. But we still do not understand the fundamentals of
their pulsed emission at any wavelength. Any theoretical model should take
the basic observations into account. Here we list some basic observational facts
in γ-ray and radio bands (see [25, 26, 32, 40, 41, 67, 77, 78]).
(1) The γ-ray light curves of most high-energy pulsars show two major
peaks which are widely separated (∼20%−40% rotational period). The bridge
emissions (the emission between the major peaks) are common.
In contrast to this, for most pulsars, the radio integrated pulse occurs over
a small fraction of the period. The ratio of the pulse duration to pulse period
are usually 2 percent to 6 percent, typical value is 3 percent, corresponding
to between 5◦and 20◦of the pulse phase. The periods of pulsars scale over
3 orders, but the width of “pulse window” is narrow and independent of
period. This very narrow radio emission beam together with the polarization
observations show that the radiation location is near the magnetic pole, so
that the beam is rigidly attached to the surface of the star, and the radio
beam originates up to some tens of stellar radii above the surface.
It is clear that the high energy radiation (except crab pulsar) originates in
a diﬀerent region, where the emission beams are wide. To ﬁt this requirement,
the inclination angle can not be larger than 20◦for polar cap model; or the
emission region could be close to the light cylinder (outer gap model); or high
energy emission region is in the annular region, where even if the radiation
beam is close to the surface of the star, the radiation beam can still be very
wide.
(2) In high energy band, the phase separated spectral hardness shows a
systematic variation through proﬁle, and the maximum is in the bridge. In
radio bands, outside the main pulse proﬁle the ﬂux density usually drops
rapidly to an undetectable level, and “bridge” radiation does not appear.
In γ-ray bands, the light curve together with the bridge emission having
higher hardness are favorable to the polar cap model. The γ-ray light curves
are consistent with single-pole, hollow-cone model (that is the polar cap and
annular gap model) of the emission. Improved measurements and modeling of
the phase-resolved spectra of pulsars are expected to be powerful tools in the
study of the emission processes.
(3) The γ-ray spectra generally show a cutoﬀabove several ten GeV. The
lowest-ﬁeld pulsars have no visible break in the EGRET energy range; the
existence of a spectral change is deduced from the absence of TeV detections
of pulsed emission. The highest-ﬁeld pulsar among these, B1509-58, is seen in
lower energy band [78]. These spectral observations are also consistent with
single-pole, hollow-cone model (that is the polar cap and annular gap model)
of the emission.
(4) Except the Crab pulsar, the other gamma-ray pulsars show signiﬁcant
phase oﬀset between radio and gamma-ray pulses (not including the Geminga
pulsar for its radio emission has not yet conﬁrmed). Only the Crab pulsar has
pulses which are (nearly) aligned across all the electromagnetic bands. This is
a very serious observational fact for all emission theories. In normal case the

Magnetosphere Structure and the Annular Gap Model of Pulsars
155
radio emission region is close the magnetic pole, if the high energy emission
region is close to the light cylinder, how to produce the Crab-like radiation
aligned across wide bands? Owing to many observational facts (such as pulse
during a small fraction of the period,“S” shaped linear polarization and so
no) shows that the radio emission region is close to the magnetic pole and the
surface of the star. So only possible region for high energy will be close to the
radio emission region such as scenario of polar cap and annular gap models.
4 Radio observational properties and the inverse
Compton scattering (ICS) model
The radio beam of pulsars has the following properties: (1) radio beams can
be divided into two kinds of components, i.e. the core and cone [41], or three
kinds, i.e. the core, inner and outer cone [65, 66, 67]. (2) The core and conal
components are emitted at diﬀerent heights [18, 65]. (3) The shapes of pulse
proﬁles change with observing frequencies [57, 58, 94]. (4) The radio emission
is generally highly linearly polarized over all longitudes of proﬁles, but some
pulsars may show depolarization and position angle jumps in the integrated
proﬁles. For some pulsars, the position angle sweep is in an “S” shape. The
sense of the circular polarization may reverse near the central phase of the
integrated pulse [41, 66, 67, 86].
The debate between the “core-cone” beam structure and the “patchy”
beam picture has persisted for a long time [19]. It is possible that the real
pulsar emission beam is the convolution of a “patchy” source function and a
“window” function [44]. The latter may itself be composed of a central core
component plus one or more nested “conal” components.
Inverse Compton Scattering (ICS) model has been developed to reproduce
the main observed properties. By now most theoretical models that explain
pulsar radio emission are based on the picture of inner vacuum gap, e.g. the
inverse Compton scattering model [56, 57, 58, 59], the spark model [21, 22]
and plasma emission model [48]. To explain the γ-ray emission properties, the
polar gap (PC) and the outer gap (OG) models are developed. But there are
few eﬀorts to establish a joint model for radio and γ-ray emission of pulsars.
The IAG model is a model considering both radio and γ-ray at same time.
The radio emission is produced above the polar cap at diﬀerent heights for
diﬀerent components (core or cones), while the γ-ray emission originates at
the places at the annular region near the null charge surface, but the location
is diﬀerent from the conventional outer gap model.
4.1 Radio emission in the ICS model
The basic picture of the ICS model [56, 57, 58, 86] is: low-frequency electro-
magnetic waves (with frequency ∼105−6Hz) are assumed to be excited near
the pulsar polar cap region by the periodic breakdown of the inner gap and

156
G.J. Qiao, K.J. Lee, H.G. Wang, and R.X. Xu
propagate outwards in the open ﬁeld line area. These low energy photons are
inverse Compton scattered by the secondary particles produced in the pair
cascades, and the up-scattered radio photons just provide the observed radio
emission from the pulsar.
If such a RS-type gap does exist, its periodical breakdown due to pair
formation avalanche can naturally provide the low-frequency electromagnetic
waves required in the ICS model. However, the RS model confronts the ba-
sic diﬃculty known as the “binding energy problem”. Recent investigations
suggest that the inner vacuum gap can be formed in either neutron stars (or
crusted strange stars) with extremely strong surface magnetic ﬁeld [20] or
bare strange stars [88]. Bj¨ornsson [9] pointed out that if ions are not bound,
the outﬂow current is still not steady unless averaged over a suﬃciently long
time, since micro-instabilities should exist. Such micro-instabilities make the
inner accelerator to show some features similar to what a RS-type vacuum
gap shows, and the low frequency waves may also excited.
On a conventional view, the propagation of the low frequency waves may
be prohibited by the dense plasma in pulsar magnetosphere. However, we
note that the periodical breakdown of the gap causes the secondary plasma
to eject in clumps so that a large space between adjacent clumps is analogous
to a vacuum to allow low frequency waves to propagate, at least at low alti-
tudes. Furthermore, owing to that the amplitude of the low frequency wave
is very high, nonlinear eﬀects could take a prominent role. In this case, the
plasma frequency could be much lower [33], and the low frequency wave can
propagate near the neutron star surface. We assume that low frequency wave
can propagate to the reasonable heights of interest.
4.2 “Beam-frequency ﬁgure” in the ICS model
The fundamental output of the ICS model is the so-called “beam-frequency
ﬁgure” or “beaming ﬁgure”. Fig. 3 shows typical beam-frequency ﬁgures of
the ICS model. It shows that along a certain ﬁeld line of the dipole ﬁeld,
when the beaming angle (the angle between the radiation direction and the
magnetic axis) increases (the emission altitude gets higher eﬀectively), the
emission frequency will decrease sharply from a high level at ﬁrst, then rise
again after reaching a minimum, and ﬁnally drop again after a maximum. Thus
if an observer is observing at a certain frequency ν, and if the line-of-sight
(hereafter LOS) of the observer is very close to the center of the beam, i.e. the
impact angle is very small, all three emission regions, which correspond to the
core, inner and outer conal emission respectively, can be observed. Hereafter,
the three branches of the beam-frequency ﬁgure are referred to as the “core
branch”, the “inner conal branch” and the “outer conal branch”, respectively.
Even if observing at a same frequency ν, diﬀerent observers with diﬀerent
impact angles will look at distinct emission branches so that various pulse
proﬁles are observed.

Magnetosphere Structure and the Annular Gap Model of Pulsars
157
Fig. 3. Two typical “beam-frequency ﬁgures” in the ICS model. The observing fre-
quency is plotted versus the so called beaming angle, the angle between the radiation
direction and the magnetic axis. (a) For the pulsars with short period, we call it as
Type I of “beam-frequency ﬁgures”, the lines of Ia and Ib correspond to diﬀerent
observational result as diﬀerent impact angle. b.) For the pulsars with longer pe-
riod, we call it as Type II of “beam-frequency ﬁgures”, the lines of IIa , IIb and IIc
correspond to diﬀerent observational result as diﬀerent impact angle, see Qiao et al.
[58] for details.
Physically, the shape of the beam-frequency ﬁgure is just due to the fre-
quency formula of the ICS mechanism under the condition B ≪Bq, which
reads
ν ≃2γ2ν0(1 −β cos θi),
(5)
where Bq = 4.414 × 1013G is the critical magnetic ﬁeld, ν is the scattered fre-
quency, ν0 is the frequency of the incident low frequency wave, β = v/c is the
velocity of the secondary particles in unit of light velocity c, γ = 1/(1−β2)1/2
is the Lorentz factor of the particles, and θi is the incident angle (the angle
between the direction of a particle and an incoming photon). The Lorentz
factor shows a decreasing behavior above the gap due to the energy loss of
the particles. Commonly we assume γ = γ0 exp[−ξ(r −R)], where γ0 is the
initial Lorentz factor of the particles, R is the radius of of the neutron star,
r −R is the emission height from the neutron star surface, and ξ reﬂects the
scale factor of the deceleration.
The typical pulsar classiﬁcation is established by [34, 41, 65, 67]. It is
emphasized that pulse proﬁles of radio pulsars are changed with observed fre-
quencies. So any classiﬁcation should take this eﬀect into account. A new clas-
siﬁcation (take the observing frequency evolution into account) can be see in
[58]. There are very diﬀerent evolution types. For example, the PSR B1933+16
shows the single-to-triple proﬁle evolution with increasing frequency (Fig. 4),

158
G.J. Qiao, K.J. Lee, H.G. Wang, and R.X. Xu
Fig. 4. A simulation for the type pulsar PSR B1933+16. P = 0.3587 s, the incli-
nation angle α = 45◦, the impact angle β = 0◦, γ◦= 3000. The left plot is the
observed pulse proﬁles at diﬀerent frequencies. The observational data of pulsar
PSR B1933+16 from Lyne & Manchester [41] for 1420 MHz, 2700 MHz and 8700
MHz, and from Sieber et al. [72] for 430 MHz and 4900 MHz. The right plot is the
simulation result with ICS model(see Qiao et al. [58]). The horizontal axis is the
longitude (in degrees).
and at higher frequencies the pulse proﬁles are much wider. In the normal
curvature radiation picture: high observed frequencies are radiated from lower
altitudes, so pulse proﬁles are narrow. But for lower observed frequencies, the
radiation location should be higher and pulse proﬁles should be wider, the
pictures are very diﬀerent from observations. In the “beam-frequency ﬁgures”
of ICS model, the simulation ﬁt observations well.
From the “beam-frequency ﬁgures” one can see how many components
in a pulse proﬁle exist and what the positions of these components are. The
detailed classiﬁcation and simulation can be found in Qiao et al.[58].
4.3 The frequency evolution of the integrated pulse proﬁles
If one assumes that the shape of each emission component is Gaussian, as
has been widely adopted in many other studies [34, 36, 81, 94], then we can
get the emission component positions in the integrated pulse proﬁles. Some
simulation examples for several diﬀerent frequency evolution behavior (such as
single pulse proﬁles at low frequencies but triple proﬁles at high frequencies,
such as PSR B1933+16; or at low frequencies the pulsars show core-triple
proﬁles and it evolves to conal-double proﬁles at higher frequencies, such as
PSR B1845-01 and so on) are presented by Qiao et al. [58].
A three-dimensional (3D) method to calculate emission heights is devel-
oped in Zhang et al.[94]. As an example, radiation regions for diﬀerent compo-
nents at diﬀerent frequencies have been calculated for PSR B2111+46. Emis-
sion components at seven frequencies are ﬁtted with Gaussian components,

Magnetosphere Structure and the Annular Gap Model of Pulsars
159
Fig. 5. The data points are obtained from the Gaussian ﬁtting at diﬀerent frequen-
cies. In the ﬁtting, α = 9◦and β = 1.4◦are adopted [67]. Two curves were calculated
for the two sparking points at 74% of polar cap radius in the Ω −μ plane for the
ICS model with a linear decay of the Lorentz factor as γ = γ0(1 −κ r−R
Re ), where
γ0 is the initial Lorentz factor, k is a factor for the energy loss of particles, and Re
is the curvature radius of the magnetic ﬁeld line, r is the height of emission, R the
radius of the star. Chosen γ0 = 10000 and κ = 225.
then the radiation heights for emission components are calculated. It is found
that diﬀerent emission components, even at the same radio frequency, are
radiated from diﬀerent heights. This is probably a common phenomena and
challenges any emission mechanisms. The ICS model for pulsar radio emis-
sion ﬁts the results well. In the Fig. 4 the dots are the positions of emission
components obtained though the Gaussian ﬁtting at diﬀerent frequencies. The
theoretical lines in the ICS model are presented in the Fig.5 also.
4.4 Bunching coherence of the ICS model
Extremely high brightness temperatures observed from radio pulsars require
that any radiation mechanism should be coherent. Pulsar emission could be
coherent through particle bunching (e.g. RS75, for a review[47]), maser be-
havior (e.g. [43]), or intrinsic growing of plasma waves (e.g. [8]). The earliest
suggestion, i.e., coherent curvature radiation by bunches (RS75), was criticized
both by its formation and its maintenance [46]. However, eﬀective bunching
could be possible for the ICS mechanism. If the a large-amplitude low fre-
quency waves excited by gap breakdown exist and propagate at low altitudes,
such waves can act as a fundamental oscillator to excite the particles to ra-
diate in accord with each other. Particles with a same Lorentz factor will see
an incident wave with the same frequency in their rest frames, and therefore
re-emit the secondary waves with the same frequency and the same phase. An

160
G.J. Qiao, K.J. Lee, H.G. Wang, and R.X. Xu
important diﬀerence of such an ICS bunching mechanism is fundamentally
diﬀerent from the curvature radiation (CR) bunching mechanism in that the
requirement for physically localizing the particles in both the same momen-
tum space and a coordinate space is much weaker. The fundamental oscillator
can always “pick up” certain particles in a certain coordinate space region
with an energy around a certain value to radiate coherently [86]. The disperse
of the particles in both the momentum and the coordinate spaces can only
reduce the number of particles to radiate coherently, i.e., reduce the degree of
coherence, but never induce a sudden collapse of a bunch as is the case of CR
bunching mechanism. Thus ICS bunching coherence should be free of the crit-
icisms about the formation and the maintenance of the bunches [46]. Another
advantage of ICS coherence over the CR coherence is that the characteristic
frequency of CR, i.e., ωcr = (3/2)(γ3c/ρ), only depends on the Lorentz factor
γ of the particle at a certain point with the ﬁxed curvature radius of the ﬁeld
line ρ while that of ICS depends both on γ and θi [eq.(1)]. Therefore a modest
disperse of γ can lead to a large dispersion of ν for the CR mechanism so that
coherence could be easily destroyed. For the ICS process, due to the adjust-
ment of θi, emission with the same frequency can be emitted by the particles
of slightly diﬀerent Lorentz factors, and this is helpful to reach coherence.
When bunching coherence is adopted in all the proﬁle simulations, and it can
account for steep radio emission spectra of pulsars.
5 The annular gap model confronted with observations
of γ-ray emission, bi-drifting sub-pulse and the emission
model for PSR B1055-52
As pointed out above, any γ-ray emission theory of pulsars should take the
radio observational properties into consideration. In the polar cap model, it is
easy to understand the hard bridge emission and the cutoﬀat the high energy
region. The disadvantage of this model is that the inclination angle of the
pulsars has to be small (smaller than 20◦) to generate wide radiation beam.
In the outer gap model, it is easy to get the wide emission beams, but it is
diﬃculte to produce the nearly alignment pulse proﬁles at all wavelength for
the Crab-like pulsar. The annular gap model is easy to ﬁt these observational
facts. Because, for this model, the emission region is generated close to the
null charge surface (NCS), where the radiation emission directions are per-
pendicular to the rotational axis, the γ-ray emission beam can be wide even
the emission region are not far from the stellar surface while hardness bridge
emission can also be understood, and the basic idea is shown in Fig.6.

Magnetosphere Structure and the Annular Gap Model of Pulsars
161
5.1 For the case of lower binding energy of the star surface: free
ﬂow situation
Instead of fully charge separated magnetosphere (normally it is adopted in
all models), the annular model assumes that the plasma in magnetosphere is
not fully charge-separated. This is a key point for the annular model, and the
basic idea is showing in Fig. 2.
For the case of not fully charge separated magnetosphere with the low
binding energy of the star surface, the acceleration region should be divided
into two parts [61], as it was suggested for high binding energy case [59]: central
or core acceleration region and annular acceleration region. We emphasized
that: (1) Two kinds of acceleration regions (annular and core) need to be
taken into account. (2) If the potential drop in the annular region of a pulsar
is high enough (normally the cases of young pulsars), charges in both the
annular and core regions could be accelerated and will produce primaries
pairs. Secondary pairs are generated in both regions and stream outwards
to power the broadband radiations. (3) The potential drop in the annular
gap region grows more rapidly than that in the core region. The annular gap
acceleration process is thus a key point to produce wide emission beams as
what we observed. (4) The advantages of both the polar cap and outer gap
models are kept in this model. The geometric properties of the γ-ray emission
can match the observations well. (5) Since diﬀerent kinds of charges leave
oﬀpulsar through the annular and the core region respectively, the current
closure problem can be partially solved.
Fig. 6. A basic picture to show the advantages of the polar cap model, the outer gap
model, and the basic request of the radio and γ-ray observations. The annular gap
model may have the advantages of the both models and avoid the disadvantageous
of them to ﬁt the observation at radio as well as at the γ-ray bands at the same
time.

162
G.J. Qiao, K.J. Lee, H.G. Wang, and R.X. Xu
Fig. 7. The locations of the polar cap, outer gap, slot gap and the annular gap (see
[27]). The annular gap is close to the null charge surface (NCS) where the direction
of the magnetic ﬁeld lines are perpendicular to the the rotational axis, which means
that the emission beams can be very wide even if it is generated close the the star
surface. The radio observations show that the emission region of it could be close to
the magnetic axis and the star surface. One can see that the annular region is closer
to the radio emission regions, so if in the annular region to produce γ-ray emission,
then it well be beneﬁt to ﬁt Crab-like pulsar for nearly alignment emission at wide
wavelength bands.
The locations of polar gap, annular gap, outer gap and slot gap are shown
in Fig. 7.
5.2 For the case with high binding energy of the star surface:
inner core gap and inner annular gap
Qiao et al. [59] proposed a inner gap model for the case with high binding
energy of the star surface. Under this model, the observed of Crab-like, Vela-
like, and Geminga-like light curves at both radio and γ-ray bands, can be
understood theoretically (see Fig.8).
A new drifting pulsar (PSR J0815+09) was discovered in the Arecibo
drift-scan searches [50]. An intriguing feature of this source is that within the
four pulse components in the integrated pulse proﬁle, the sub-pulse drifting
direction in the two leading components is opposite from that in the two
trailing components. In view that the leading theoretical model (RS75) for
pulsar sub-pulse drifting can only interpret one-direction sub-pulse drifting,
the observed “bi-drifting” phenomenon from PSR J0815+09 poses a great
challenge to the pulsar theory. The inner annular gap (IAG), a new type of
inner particle accelerator, was recently proposed to explain both γ-ray and

Magnetosphere Structure and the Annular Gap Model of Pulsars
163
radio emission from pulsars [59]. It was shown that the coexistence of the IAG
and the conventional inner core gap (ICG) oﬀers a natural interpretation to
the bi-drifting phenomenon [60]. In particular, the peculiar drifting behavior
in PSR J0815+09 can be reproduced within the inverse Compton scattering
(ICS) model for pulsar radio emission.
Fig. 8. The observed of Crab-like, Vela-like, and Geminga-like light curves at both
radio and gamma-ray bands, as well as the theoretical ﬁt in inner gap model. The
gamma-ray and radio data are derived from Thompson [80] and the European Pulsar
Network Data Archive, respectively. The parameters in the ﬁtting are determined
in Qiao et al.[59].
5.3 Observations of PSR B1055-52: radiation from the annular
region
From observations of radio and γ-ray emission of PSR B1055-52, Wang at al.
[80] show that the radio main pulse and the γ-ray pulse emissions come from
the annular region while the inter pulse emission comes from the core region.
Fig. 9 shows the result. At radio frequencies, PSR B1055-52 has a strong inter
pulse (IP) follows the main pulse (MP) by a phase oﬀset of 155◦[41, 49]. The
γ-ray light curve of PSR B1055-52 shows double peaks with a separation of
∼80◦. Multi-band observations reveal that the central phase of the radio MP
lags the trailing γ-ray peak by ∼20◦[79]; see Fig. 9).
5.4 The role of annular gap
The annular ﬂow (see §2.3) and annular gap are very important for the γ-
ray emission, as the simulation can match the observations well [59, 61]. If
the binding energy of the surface is high enough, the consequences are: (1)
Vacuum inner core gap (ICG) and inner annular gap (IAG) can form above

164
G.J. Qiao, K.J. Lee, H.G. Wang, and R.X. Xu
Fig. 9. The observed sub-pulse drifting patterns of PSR J0815+09 and pulse proﬁles
and the simulation results given by Qiao et al. [60]. The left two panels are the
patterns of drifting sub-pulses. The right two panels are the integrated pulse proﬁles.
The observational data are derived from McLaughlin et al. [50].
Fig. 10. Radio and gamma-ray pulse proﬁles of PSR B1055-52 [77] and an analysis
result. It is shown that both main pulse (MP) emission and gamma-ray emission
(GP) are come from the annular region, and the inter pulse emission (IP) comes
from the core region (see Wang et al. [80]). In the ﬁgure red (dark grey) and green
color (light grey) to show annular and core region respectively.
the polar cap region at the same time. (2) Sparking in the IAG plays a very
important role for γ-ray emission. There is enough potential drop across the
IAG for forming sparking, which is the prerequisite for radio and γ-ray emis-
sion. (3) The acceleration and radiation regions are mostly located between

Magnetosphere Structure and the Annular Gap Model of Pulsars
165
the NCS and the inner gap. (4) The γ-ray emission can be observed for both
parallel rotator (Ω · μ > 0) and anti-parallel rotator (Ω · μ < 0). (5) Many
observational characteristics observed at both radio and γ-ray bands can be
reproduced in this model. The γ-ray emission beams of Crab-like, Vela-like
and Geminga-like pulsars can be explained.
In the free ﬂow case, similar results can be gotten and it can match obser-
vations. The consequences are: (1) Two kinds of acceleration regions (annular
and core) need to be taken into account [61]. (2) Normally for young pul-
sars the potential drop in the annular region of a pulsar is high enough that
charges in both the annular and the core regions could be accelerated and
produce primary γ-rays. Secondary pairs are generated in both regions and
stream outwards to power the broadband radiations. (3) The potential drop
in the annular region grows more rapidly than that in the core region. The
annular acceleration process will produce wide emission beams as it was ob-
served in γ-ray bands. The geometric properties of the γ-ray emission from the
annular ﬂow is analogous to that presented in a previous work by Qiao et al.
[59, 60, 62, 63], Wang et al.[80], Zhang et al. [94]. (4) The advantages of both
the polar cap and outer gap models are retained in the annular model. (5)
Since charges with diﬀerent signs leave the pulsar through the annular and the
core regions, respectively, the current closure problem can be partially solved.
6 Discussion and conclusion
1. The inverse Compton scattering (ICS) model of radio emission
A straightforward conclusion of the ICS model is that the emission beams
contain three diﬀerent components, namely the core, the inner cone, and
the outer cone. Diﬀerent components are emitted at diﬀerent altitudes.
The core component is emitted in a region close to the neutron star surface,
the location of the inner cone is higher, and that of the outer cone is even
higher. All these are consistent with observed proﬁle components and
frequency evolution of the radio integrated pulse proﬁles [54, 55, 56, 57],
as indicated by Zhang et al.’s results ([94], see Fig. 4 therein).
2. The annular gap model
An annular gap model in the free ﬂow situation is suggested by Qiao et al.
[61], which can match the observations in a way that the vacuum annular
gap model does [59].
3. Parallel (Ω · μ > 0) and anti-parallel (Ω · μ < 0).
In the discussion above, we focus on the parallel rotator, owing to
cos ζanti = −cos ζparll, and ρgj,anti = −ρgj,parall, all results are the same
in anti-parallel case.
4. Does it have sparking in the free ﬂow model?
Observations show that there are sub-pulses, micro-structures and drifting
sub-pulses, which can be understood when the sparking or bursting are
taken into account. In normal free ﬂow model, i.e. both polar cap and slot

166
G.J. Qiao, K.J. Lee, H.G. Wang, and R.X. Xu
gap model, sparking are not taken into account. However, sparking is a
fundamental ingredient for vacuum gap model, e.g. the RS model or the
inner annular gap model [59]. If the binding energy of the neutron star
surface is not high enough, it can become a test for NSs and strange stars.
Levinson et al. [37] pointed out that stability of models involving steady-
state pair creation at a PFF is questionable. In fact early models did
not make the steady-state assumption like what the later models did. In
particular, Sturrock [76] argued that a steady state is not possible and the
pairs escape in a sequence of sheets. RS75 invoked pair creation in bursts,
called sparking. Instead of the steady-state pair creation, Levinson et al.
[37] developed an oscillation or bursting model for the pair creation. Even
if this treatment needs to be checked out, but it presents a very reasonable
assumption and natural result.
Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful to Drs. Jin Lin Han and Bing
Zhang for their long term contributions and thank the members in the pulsar
group of Peking University for helpful discussions. This work is supported
by NSFC (10778611, 10273001), the Special Funds for Major State Basic
Research Projects of China (G2000077602), and the Key Grant Project of
Chinese Ministry of Education (305001).
References
1. Hewish, A., Bell, S. J., Pilkington, J. D., et al., Nature, 217, 709 (1969)
2. Goldreich, P., & Julian, W. H., ApJ, 157, 869 (1969) (GJ)
3. Michel, F. C., ApJ, 192, 713 (1974)
4. Arons, J., ApJ, 266, 215 (1983)
5. Arons, J., ASP Conference Series, Vol. 202, eds. M. Kramer, N. Wex, and R.
Wielebinski, P. 449 (1999)
6. Arons, J., Scharlemenn, E. T., ApJ, 231, 854 (1979)
7. Ayasli, S., ApJ, 249, 698 (1981)
8. Beskin, V. S., Gurevich, A. V., & Istomin, Y. N., Ap&SS, 146, 205 (1998)
9. Bj¨ornsson, C.-I., ApJ, 471, 321 (1996)
10. Cheng, K. S., Ho, C., Ruderman, M., 1986, ApJ, 300, 500
11. Cheng, A. F., & Ruderman, M. A., ApJ, 235, 576 (1980)
12. Cheng, A., Ruderman, M., & Sutherland, P., ApJ, 203, 209 (1976)
13. Cheng, K. S., Ruderman, M., & Zhang, L., ApJ, 537, 946 (2000)
14. Daugherty, J. K., & Harding, A. K., ApJ, 336, 861 (1989)
15. Deshpande, A. A., & Rankin, J. M., ApJ, 524, 1008 (1999)
16. Deshpande, A. A., & Rankin, J. M., MNRAS, 322, 438 (2001)
17. Fawley, W. M., Arons, J., & Scharlemann, E. T., ApJ, 217, 227 (1977)
18. Gangadhara, R. T., & Gupta, Y. 2001, ApJ, 555, 31
19. Gil, J. A., & Krawczyk, A., MNRAS, 280, 143 (1996)
20. Gil, J. A., & Melikidze, G. I., ApJ, 577, 909 (2002)
21. Gil, J., & Mitra, D., A&A, 550, 383 (2001)
22. Gil, J. A., & Sendyk, M. 2000, ApJ, 541, 351

Magnetosphere Structure and the Annular Gap Model of Pulsars
167
23. Han, J. L., & Manchester, R. N., MNRAS, 320, L35 (2001)
24. Harding, A. K., ApJ, 245, 267 (1981)
25. Harding, A. K., ASP Conference Series Vol. 105, P. 315 (1996)
26. Harding, A. K., astro-ph/0503300 (2005)
27. Harding, A. K., astro-ph/0710.3517 (2007)
28. Harding, A. K., & Muslimov, A. G., ApJ, 508, 328 (1998)
29. Hibschman, J. A., & Arons, J., ApJ., 554, 624 (2001)
30. Hirotani, K., MNRAS, 317, 225 (2000)
31. Holloway, N. J., Nature, 246, 6 (1973)
32. Kanbach, G., astro-ph/0209021 (2002)
33. Kotsarenko, N. Ya., Stewart, G. A., & Vysloukh, V., Ap&SS, 243, 427 (1996)
34. Kramer, M., Wielebinski, R., Jessner, A., Gil, J. A., & Seiradakis, J. H., A&AS,
107, 515 (1994)
35. Krause-Polstorﬀ, J., & Michel, F. C., MNRAS, 213, 43 (1985)
36. Kuzmin, A. D., & Izvekova, V. A., Astronmy Letters, 22, 394 (1996)
37. Levinson, A., Melrose, D., Judge, A., & Luo, Q. H., ApJ., 631, 456 (2005)
38. Lu, T., & Shi, T., A&A, 231, L7 (1990)
39. Luo, Q. H., ApJ, 468, 338 (1996)
40. Lyne, A. G., & Graham-Smith, F., Pulsar Astronomy (2nd ed.: Cambridge:
Cambridge Univ. Press) P. 233 (2005)
41. Lyne, A. G., & Manchester, R. N., MNRAS, 234, 477 (LM88) (1988)
42. Lyubarskii, Y. E., & Petrova, S. A., A&A, 355, 406 (2000)
43. Lyutikov, M., Blandford, R. D., & Machabeli, G., MNRAS, 305, 338 (1999)
44. Manchester, R. N., J. Astrophys Astr. 16, 107 (M95) (1995)
45. Manchester, R. N., & Taylor, J. H. 1977, Pulsars (Freeman: San Francisco)
46. Melrose, D. B., ApJ, 225, 557 (1978)
47. Melrose, D. B., eds: T. H. Hankins, J. M. Rankin, & J. A. Gil IAU Colloq. 128,
Pedagogical Univ. Press, P. 306 (1992)
48. Melrose, D. B., & Gedalin, M. E., ApJ, 521, 351 (1999)
49. McCulloch, P. M., Hamilton, P. A., Ables, F. G., & Komesaroﬀ, M. M., MNRAS,
175, 71 (1976)
50. McLaughlin, M. A. et al., in proceedings of IAU Symp. 218, eds. F. Camilo &
B. M. Gaensler (San Francisco: ASP), P. 127 (2004)
51. Michel, F. C., ApJ, 227, 579 (1979)
52. Mitra, D. & Deshpande, A. A. 1999, A&A, 346, 906
53. Muslimov, A. G., & Harding, A. K., ApJ, 588, 430 (2003)
54. Qiao, G. J., in: Vistas in Astronomy, 31, 393 (1988a)
55. Qiao, G. J., in: High Energy Astrophysics, eds. G. Borner, New York, Springer-
Verag, P. 88 (1988b)
56. Qiao, G. J., Proceedings of IAU Colloq. 128, Edited by T. H. Hankins, J. M.
Rankin, and J. A. Gil. Pedagogical Univ. Press, P. 238 (1992)
57. Qiao, G. J., & Lin, W. P., A&A., 333, 172 (1998)
58. Qiao, G. J., Liu, J. F., Zhang, B., & Han, J. L., A&A., 377, 946 (2001)
59. Qiao, G. J., Lee, K. J., Wang, H. G., Xu, R. X., Han, J. L., ApJ, 606, L49
(2004a)
60. Qiao, G. J., Lee, K. J., Zhang, B., Xu, R. X., & Wang, H. G., ApJ, 616, L127
(2004b)
61. Qiao, G. J., Lee, K. J., Zhang, B., Wang, H. G., & Xu, R. X., ChjAA, 7, 496
(2007)

168
G.J. Qiao, K.J. Lee, H.G. Wang, and R.X. Xu
62. Qiao, G. J., Lee, K. J., Wang, H. G.,& Xu, R. X., Proceedings of the 214th Sym-
posium of the International Astronomical Union held at Suzhou, Eds: X. D. Li,
V. Trimble, and Z. R. Wang. Published on behalf of the IAU by the Astronom-
ical Society of the Paciﬁc, P. 167 (astro-ph/0303231) (2003a)
63. Qiao, G. J., Lee, K. J., Wang, H. G., & Xu, R. X., 2003b, ASP Conference
Proceedings, Vol. 302. Held 26-29 August 2002, Eds: Matthew Bailes, David J.
Nice and Stephen E., P. 183 (2003b)
64. Qiao, G. J., & Zhang, B., A&A., 306, L5 (1996)
65. Rankin, J. M., ApJ, 274, 333 (R83) (1983)
66. Rankin, J. M., Proceedings of IAU Colloq. 128, Eds: by T. H. Hankins, J. M.
Rankin, and J. A. Gil. Pedagogical Univ. Press, P. 133 (1992)
67. Rankin, J. M., ApJ, 405, 285 (1993)
68. Ray, A., & Benford, G., Physical Review D., 23, 2142 (1981)
69. Romani, R. W. 1996, ApJ, 470, 469 (1996)
70. Ruderman, M. A., & Sutherland, P. G., ApJ, 196, 51 (RS75) (1975)
71. Scharlemann, E. T., Arons, J., & Fawley, W. M., ApJ, 222, 297 (1978)
72. Sieber, W., Reinecke, R. & Wielebiski, R., A&A, 38, 169 (1975)
73. Shukre, C. S., in Magnetospheric Structure and Emission Mechanics of Ra-
dio Pulsars, Proceedings of IAU Colloq. 128, Lagow, Poland, 17-22 June 1990.
Edited by T. H. Hankins, J. M. Rankin, and J. A. Gil. Pedagogical Univ. Press,
p.412 (1992)
74. Smith, I. A., Michel, F. C., & Thacker, P. D., MNRAS, 322, 209 (2001)
75. Sturner, S. J., ApJ, 446, 292 (1995)
76. Sturrock, P. A., ApJ, 164, 529 (1971)
77. Thompson, D. J. et al., ApJ, 516, 297 (1999)
78. Thompson, D. J., in: Cosmic Gamma Ray Sources, eds K. S. Cheng & G. E.
Romero, Kluwer ASSL Series (astro-ph/0312272) (2003)
79. Vivekanand, M., & Joshi, B. C., ApJ, 515, 398 (1999)
80. Wang, H. G., Qiao, G. J., Xu, R. X., Liu, Y., MNRAS, 366, 945 (2006)
81. Wu, X. J., Gao, X. Y., Rankin, J. M., Xu, W., & Malofeev, V. M., AJ, 116,
1984 (1998)
82. Xia, X. Y., Qiao, G. J., Wu, X. J., & Hong, Y. Q., A&A, 152, 93 (1985)
83. Xu, R. X., ChJAA, 3, 33 (astro-ph/0211214) (2003b)
84. Xu, R. X. 2005, MNRAS, 356, 359
85. Xu, R. X., in: Stellar astrophysics — a tribute to Helmut A. Abt, eds. K. S.
Cheng, K. C. Leung & T. P. Li , Kluwer Academic Publishers, P. 73 (astro-
ph/0211563) (2003a)
86. Xu, R. X., Liu, J. F., Han, J. L., & Qiao, G. J., ApJ, 535, 354 (2000)
87. Xu, R. X., Qiao, G. J., & Zhang, B., ApJ, 522, L109 (1999)
88. Xu, R. X., & Qiao, G. J., ApJ, 561, L85 (2001)
89. Xu, R. X., Zhang, B., & Qiao, G. J., Astro Particle Physics, 15, 101 (2001)
90. Zhang, B., & Qiao, G. J., A&A, 310, 135 (1996)
91. Zhang, B., Qiao, G. J., Lin, W. P., & Han, J. L., ApJ, 478, 313 (Zhang et al.
1997a)
92. Zhang, B., Qiao, G. J., & Han, J. L., ApJ, 491, 891 (Zhang et al. 1997b)
93. Zhang, B., Harding, A. K., Muslimov, A. G., ApJ, 531, L135 (2000)
94. Zhang, H., Qiao, G. J., Han, J. L., Lee, K. J., & Wang, H. G., A&A, 465, 525
(2007)
95. Zhao, Y. H., Lu, T., Huang, K. L., Lu, J. L., & Peng, Q. H., A&A, 223, 147
(1989)

Wave Modes in the Magnetospheres of Pulsars
and Magnetars
C. Wang1,2 and D. Lai2,1
1 National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences. A20 Datun
Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100012, China. wangchen@bao.ac.cn
2 Center for Radiophysics and Space Research, Department of Astronomy, Cornell
University. Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. dong@astro.cornell.edu
Summary. We study the wave propagation modes in the relativistic streaming pair
plasma of the magnetospheres of pulsars and magnetars, focusing on the vacuum
polarization eﬀect. We show that the combined plasma and vacuum polarization ef-
fects give rise to a vacuum resonance, where “avoided mode crossing” occurs between
the extraordinary mode and the (superluminous) ordinary mode. When a photon
propagates from the vacuum-polarization-dominated region at small radii to the
plasma-dominated region at large radii, its polarization state may undergo signiﬁ-
cant change across the vacuum resonance. Some possible applications of our results
are discussed, such as polarization changes at high frequency for radio emission of
pulsars and possibly magnetars.
Key words: plasmas – polarization – waves – star: magnetic ﬁelds – pulsars:
general
1 Introduction
The magnetospheres of pulsars and magnetars consist of relativistic electron-
positron pair plasmas, plus possibly a small amount of ions. These plasmas
can aﬀect the radiation produced in the inner region of the magnetosphere
or the stellar surface. Understanding the property of wave propagation in
pulsar/magnetar magnetospheres is important for the interpretation of various
observations of these objects. Wave modes in pulsar magnetospheres have been
studied in a number of papers under diﬀerent assumptions about the plasma
composition and the velocity distribution of electron-position pairs (e.g., [1],
[2], [3], [4], [5]).
In this paper, we reinvestigate the property of wave propagation in the
magnetospheres of pulsars and magnetars, focusing on the competition be-
tween the plasma eﬀect and the eﬀect of vacuum polarization. It is well
known that in the strong magnetic ﬁeld typically found on a neutron star,

170
C. Wang and D. Lai
the electromagnetic dispersion relation is dominated by vacuum polarization
(a prediction of quantum electrodynamics; e.g., [6], [7]; see [8] for extensive
bibliography) at high photon frequencies (e.g., X-rays) and by the plasma
eﬀect at suﬃciently low frequencies (e.g., radio waves). We show that the
combined plasma and vacuum polarization eﬀects give rise to a vacuum res-
onance: For a given plasma parameters and external magnetic ﬁeld, there
exists a special photon frequency at which the plasma eﬀect and vacuum po-
larization eﬀects “cancel” each other. The goal of our paper is to map out
the parameter regimes under which the vacuum resonance may occur and to
elucidate how wave propagation may be aﬀected by the resonance. A more
detailed work has been published in [9].
2 Dielectric tensor for an streaming electron-positron
plasma
We consider a cold electron-positron plasma streaming along the magnetic
ﬁeld ˆB with the same velocity. In the coordinate system x′y′z′ with ˆB along
ˆz′, k in the x′-z′ plane and ˆk × ˆB = −sin θBˆy′, we ﬁnd the dielectric tensor
caused by plasma eﬀect is
ϵ(p) =
⎡
⎣
1 + f11 if12
ζf11
−if12
1 + f11 −iζf12
ζf11
iζf12
1 + fη + ζ2f11
⎤
⎦,
(1)
with
f11 = −
vγ−1
1 −uγ−2 (1 −nβ cos θB)−2 ,
f12 = (1 −2f)u1/2vγ−2 (1 −nβ cos θB)−1
1 −uγ−2 (1 −nβ cos θB)−2
,
fη = −
v
γ3 (1 −nβ cos θB)2 ,
ζ =
nβ sin θB
1 −nβ cos θB
,
(2)
where β is the streaming velocity, γ the Lorentz factor, f the fraction of
positions in the pair plasma, n = ck/ω the refractive index, and the other
dimensionless quantities are
u = ω2
c
ω2 =
 eB
mcω
2
,
v = ω2
p
ω2 = 4πNe2
mω2 .
(3)
Vacuum polarization contributes a correction to the dielectric tensor:
Δϵ(v) = (a −1) I + q ˆB ˆB,
(4)

Wave Modes in the Magnetospheres of Pulsars and Magnetars
171
where I is the unit tensor and ˆB = B/B is the unit vector along B. The
magnetic permeability tensor μ also deviates from unity because of vacuum
polarization. The inverse permeability given by
μ−1 = aI + m ˆB ˆB.
(5)
In the low frequency limit ¯hω ≪mec2, general expressions for the vacuum
polarization coeﬃcients a, q, and m are given in [7] and [10]. For B ≪BQ =
m2
ec3/(e¯h) = 4.414 × 1013 G, they are given by
a = 1 −2δV,
q = 7δV,
m = −4δV,
(6)
where
δV = αF
45π
 B
BQ
2
= 2.650 × 10−8B2
12
(7)
and αF = e2/¯hc = 1/137 is the ﬁne structure constant. For B ≫BQ, sim-
ple expressions for a, q, m are given in [11] (see also [12] for general ﬁtting
formulae).
When |Δϵ(v)
ij | ≪1 or B/BQ ≪3π/αF (B ≪5 × 1016 G), the plasma
and vacuum contributions to the dielectric tensor can be added linearly, i.e.,
ϵ = ϵ(p) + Δϵ(v). In the frame with ˆB along ˆz′,
[ϵ]ˆz′= ˆB =
⎡
⎣
S′
iD
A
−iD S′ −iC
A
iC
P ′
⎤
⎦,
(8)
with S′ = S + ˆa, P ′ = P + ˆa + q and ˆa = a −1.
3 Wave Modes in a Cold Streaming Plasma
Using the electric displacement D = ϵ · E and equation (5) in the Maxwell
equations, we obtain the equation for plane waves with E ∝ei(k·r−ωt) (hence-
forth we use E to denote δE, and use B to denote B0)
'1
aϵij + n2 !
ˆkiˆkj −δij −m
a (ˆk × ˆB)i(ˆk × ˆB)j
"(
Ej = 0,
(9)
where n = ck/ω is the refractive index and ˆk = k/k. We can solve this
equation in coordinate system-xyz (with k along the z-axis and B in the x-z
plane, such that ˆk × ˆB = −sin θBˆy), and ﬁnd two wave modes labeled as
“+” mode and “−” mode. We write the mode polarization vector as E± =
E±T + E±zˆz, with the transverse part
E±T =
1
(1 + K2
±)1/2 (iK±, 1),
(10)

172
C. Wang and D. Lai
in which iK± = Ex/Ey, and
K± = βp ±

β2p + r ≃βp ±

β2p + 1,
(11)
where βp is the polarization parameter. Under the following two conditions
uγ−2 (1 −β cos θB)−2 ≫1,
(12)
which implies that the Doppler-shifted frequency is lower than ωc, and
vγ−1 ≪1,
(13)
which is the weak dispersion condition, βp is simpliﬁed to be
βp ≃
fη
2f12
sin2 θB
(cos θB −ζ sin θB)

1 + q + m
fη

.
(14)
The last factor 1+(q+m)/fη is the correction due to the vacuum polarization
eﬀect.
For |βp| ≫1, the two modes are (almost) linearly polarized: the mode
with |K| ≃2|βp| ≫1 is polarized in the ˆk- ˆB plane, and is usually called
ordinary mode (O-mode); the mode with |K| ≃1/(2|βp|) ≪1 is polarized
perpendicular to the ˆk- ˆB plane, and is called extraordinary mode (X-mode).
But the linear polarization state is broken out at the point
fη + q + m = 0,
(15)
where the two modes are exactly circular polarized (βp = 0), this deﬁnes
the “vacuum resonance”. For given ν, γ and B, the resonance occurs at the
density
NV = 9.905 × 1011B2
12ν2
1γ3
3 (1 −β cos θB)2 F(b) cm−3,
(16)
where F(b) ≃1 for B ≪BQ. We can rewrite the resonance density in terms
of the Goldreich-Julian density
ηV = NV
NGJ
= 14.15P1B12ν2
1γ3
3 (1 −β cos θB)2 F(b),
(17)
where NGJ = ΩB/(2πec). The physical meaning of the resonance is clear: For
given ν, γ and B, the dielectric property of the medium is dominated by the
plasma eﬀect when N ≫NV , while it is dominated by vacuum polarization
when N ≪NV ; at N = NV , the plasma eﬀect and vacuum polarization
compensate each other, and the wave modes become exactly circular polarized
(see Fig.1).

Wave Modes in the Magnetospheres of Pulsars and Magnetars
173
Fig. 1. The polarization ellipticity K (upper panel) and index of refraction n (lower
panel) of the wave mode as a function of the plasma density parameter η = N/NGJ
near the vacuum resonance for B = 1012 G, ν = 1 GHz, γ = 103, and θB = 45o.
Three values of f are considered: f = 0, 0.2 and 0.49. The solid lines are for the
“+” mode and dashed lines for the “−” mode.
4 Mode Evolution Across the Vacuum Resonance
Consider a photon (or electromagnetic wave) of a given frequency ν and po-
larization state propagating in the NS magnetosphere. The magnetosphere
is inhomogeneous because of variations in B, N and possibly γ. How does
the polarization of the photon evolve, particularly as the photon traverses
the vacuum resonance region (e.g., from the plasma-dominated region to the
vacuum-dominated region)? Clearly, if the variations of the magnetosphere
parameters (B, N, etc.) are suﬃciently gentle, the polarization state of the
photon will evolve adiabatically, i.e. a photon in a deﬁnite wave mode will
stay in that mode. Then Figure 1 shows that across the vacuum resonance,
the photon polarization ellipse will rotate by 90o, with the mode helicity un-
changed.
To quantify the mode evolution, it is convenient to introduce the “mixing”
angle θm via tan θm = 1/K+, so that
tan 2θm = β−1
p ,
(18)
where we have used |r −1| ≪1. The transverse eigenvectors of the modes
are E+T = (i cos θm, sin θm) and E−T = (−i sin θm, cos θm). Clearly, at the
resonance, θm = 45◦, the X-mode and O-mode are maximally “mixed”.
A general polarized electromagnetic wave with frequency ω traveling in
the z-direction can be written as a superposition of the two modes:

174
C. Wang and D. Lai
E(z) = A+(z)E+(z) + A−(z)E−(z).
(19)
Note that both A± and E± depend on z. Substituting equation (19) into the
wave equation
∇×

μ−1 · ∇× E

= ω2
c2 ϵ · E,
(20)
we obtain the amplitude evolution equations (see [13])
i
 A′
+
A′
−

≃
−Δk/2 iθ′
m
−iθ′
m Δk/2
  A+
A−

,
(21)
where ′ stands for d/dz, Δk = k+ −k−. In deriving equation (21), we have
assumed that E±(z) and A±(z)exp

−i
 z k±dz

vary on a length scale much
larger than the photon wavelength, and we have used k+ ≃k−and |k′
±/k±| ≪
|k±|. Clearly, when |θ′
m| ≪|Δk/2|, or
Γ ≡

(n+ −n−)ω
2θ′mc
 ≫1,
(22)
the polarization vector will evolve adiabatically (e.g., a photon in the plus-
mode will remain in the plus-mode).
5 Discussion
We now discuss possible implications of our results for various radiation pro-
cesses in pulsars and magnetars. We assume a dipole magnetic ﬁeld, with
B ≈B∗
R∗
r
3
,
(23)
where B∗is the surface magnetic ﬁeld and R∗the radius of the NS star. Sub-
stituting equation (23) into equation (17), we obtain the location of vacuum
resonance (assuming constant η and γ)
rV
R∗
≃0.5

ν
1 GHz
2/3 
B∗
1012 G
1/3  γ
103
  η
102
−1/3  P
1 s
1/3
F 1/3 ×
(1 −β cos θB)2/3 .
(24)
Since the dispersion due to vacuum polarization is of order q+m ∝F(b)B2 ∝
r−6, while the plasma eﬀect is measured by ∼vγ−3 ∝Nγ−3 ∝ηBγ−3 ∝
ηγ−3r−3, if ηγ−3 does not vary rapidly, we ﬁnd that for a given photon fre-
quency ν, the wave dispersion is dominated by the vacuum eﬀect for r <∼rV
and by the plasma eﬀect for r >∼rV .
First consider the radio emission from the open ﬁeld line region of a pulsar.
The emission angle relative the local magnetic ﬁeld line is θB ∼1/γ, so that

Wave Modes in the Magnetospheres of Pulsars and Magnetars
175
1 −β cos θB ≃γ−2. This would imply rV /R∗≪1, even for B∗∼1015 G and
for high frequencies (e.g., ν = 20 GHz). Along the ray trajectory, the angle
θB increases. In the small angle approximation (θB ≪1), we have
θB ≈3
4
)rem
R∗
θ0

1 −rem
r

,
(25)
where rem is the radius of the emission point, and θ0 is the polar angle at the
stellar surface of the emission ﬁeld line. Thus θB increases from 0 (at r = rem)
to (3/4)(rem/R∗)θ0. As an example, for rem = 2R∗and θ0 ∼

R∗/RLC ≃
0.0145(P/1s)−1/2, equation (25) implies θB <∼0.015(P/1s)−1/2. From equa-
tion (24), we ﬁnd
rV
R∗
<∼0.1

ν
20 GHz
2/3 
B∗
1015 G
1/3  γ
103
−1/3  η
102
−1/3  P
1 s
−1/3
F 1/3.
(26)
This means that for radio emission along open, dipole ﬁeld lines, plasma eﬀects
always dominate the property of wave propagation and vacuum resonance will
not occur.
Radio emission may also come from the large-curvature magnetic ﬁeld
structure (e.g., ﬁeld lines with curvature radius ∼R∗). In this case, even if
θB ≪1 at emission, it will become signiﬁcantly large (∼45◦) after the wave
propagates a short distance of order R∗. Thus, according to equation (24),
vacuum resonance can occur for suﬃciently high frequencies and strong sur-
face magnetic ﬁelds. This could be the case with the high-frequency radio
emission from the transient AXP XTE J1810-197 ([14]).
Finally, optical/IR radiation emitted from the neutron star surface or near
vicinity may experience the vacuum resonance while propagating through the
magnetosphere. According to equation (26), for B∗= 1012 GHz, γ = 103,
η = 102, P=1 s, rV >∼rem, vacuum resonance will occur when the photon
frequency ν >∼105 GHz, which is optical/IR radiation. The polarization of
such radiation may probe the physical conditions of the magnetosphere.
References
1. Melrose, D. B. & Stoneham, R. J. 1977, PASAu, 3, 120
2. Arons, J. & Barnard, J. J. 1986, ApJ, 302, 120
3. Lyutikov, M. 1998, MNRAS, 293, 447
4. Melrose, D. B., Gedalin, M. E., Kennett, M. P., & Fletcher, C. S. 1999, Journal
of Plasma Physics 62, 233
5. Asseo, E. & Riazuelo, A. 2000, MNRAS, 318, 983
6. Heisenberg, W. & Euler, H. 1936, Z. Phys., 98, 714
7. Adler, S.L. 1971, Ann. Phys., 67, 599
8. Schubert, C. 2001, in Cantatore G., ed., Quantum Electrodynamics and Physics
of the Vacuum, QED 2000, Second Workshop. AIP Conference Proceedings, V
564, p. 28

176
C. Wang and D. Lai
9. Wang, C. & Lai, D. 2007, MNRAS, 377, 1095
10. Heyl, J. S. & Hernquist, L. 1997, Phys. Rev. D, 55, 2449
11. Ho, W. C. G. & Lai, D. 2003, MNRAS, 338, 233
12. Potekhin, A. Y., Lai, D., Chabrier, G. & Ho, W. C. G. 2004, ApJ, 612, 1034
13. Lai, D. & Ho, W. C. G. 2002, ApJ, 566, 373
14. Camilo, F., Ransom, S. M., Halpern, J. P., Reynolds, J., Helfand, D. J., Zim-
merman, N., & Sarkissian, J. 2006, Nature, 442, 892

Polarization of Coherent Curvature Radiation
in Pulsars
R. M. C. Thomas and R.T. Gangadhara
Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore – 560034, India
mathew@iiap.res.in
Summary. We consider the coherent curvature radiation by relativistic plasma
in pulsar magnetosphere. The radiation emitted by relativistic particle bunches is
beamed in the direction of ﬁeld line tangents. For the ﬁrst time, we have derived
analytical expressions for the Stokes parameters of the coherent curvature emission,
taking the detailed geometry into account. The emissions from individual bunches
are incoherently superposed to ﬁnd the net emission within the solid angle of radius
1/γ (beaming region) around the line of sight. By taking into account of the viewing
geometry, we have estimated the polarization state of the emitted radiation.
Key words: pulsars: coherent radio emission - polarization
1 Introduction
A proper explanation for the observed features of polarization of pulsar ra-
dio proﬁles remains elusive in spite of decades of eﬀort. Radhakrishnan and
Rankin [1] have identiﬁed two types of circular polarization: ‘antisymmetric’
and ‘symmetric’. In many pulsars the circular polarization is more or less con-
centrated around the center (core) region of the proﬁle. Where it shows a sense
reversal in most of the cases, while in a few cases the same sense is retained.
Very few pulsars exhibit more complicated polarization behavior, which could
be a mixer of the aforementioned features. Recently, You and Han [2] have
found a strong correlation between the sign reversal of circular polarization
and PPA swing in the case of the double conal pulsars. Circular polarization
has been observed in individual pulses with mean value of typically around
30%, however, the average proﬁles show much lesser values. Frequency depen-
dence of circular polarization has also been investigated ([2],[3]), however, the
general uniﬁed trend in the frequency evolution is yet to be brought out.
Within the existing models, it is quite ambiguous to explain the circular
polarization [4]. The circular polarization properties are often attributed to
the pulsar emission mechanism or to the propagation eﬀects in the pulsar

178
R. M. C. Thomas and R.T. Gangadhara
magnetosphere. Cheng and Ruderman [5] have suggested that the expected
asymmetry between the positively and negatively charged components of the
magneto-active plasma in the far magnetosphere will convert the linear po-
larization into circular polarization. Kazbegi et al. ([6], [7]) have argued that
it is the cyclotron instability rather than the propagation eﬀect is responsible
for the circular polarization in pulsars. Melrose and Luo [8] have explored the
possibility of circular polarization because of the intrinsic relativistic eﬀects,
however, they could not provide a completely realistic model that can be di-
rectly related to observations. Gogoberidze and Machabeli [9] have invoked the
propagation eﬀects to explain the main circular polarization features. There
are also strong arguments favoring intrinsic origin of circular polarization ([1],
[10],[11]).
If we look back, we ﬁnd in most of these models the inherent geometry of
the emission region is not properly taken into account. It has become a draw
back for the eﬀorts on interpreting observations. Nevertheless, the geometry
of emission region is expected to play an important role in the polarization of
observed radio emission. Most of the pulsar observations emphatically support
a nested conal structure for the pulsar emission beam. We adopt the model
of a nested conal structure, as proposed by Rankin [12]. Gil and Krawczyk
[13] have considered a nested conal structure for the pulsar emission region
for simulating the pulse proﬁle of PSR J0473-4075.
In this work, we consider the detailed geometry of the emission region
in non-rotating or very slowly rotating dipole magnetic ﬁeld, and study the
polarization features of coherent curvature radiation. We adopt the model of
coherent curvature radiation developed by Buschauer and Benford [14], as
it can be easily generalized to include the detailed geometry of the emission
region.
2 Radiation Electric Fields
The coherent emission from a bunch of particles moving along the curved
trajectory with a local radius of curvature ρ has been discussed in vast detail,
for example in [14]. The expression for the radiation electric ﬁeld that is
generated due to the accelerated motion of the particle bunch is given in
[14]. By considering the electric ﬁelds and viewing geometry, we solve for the
polarization state of the received radiation. Consider a Cartesian coordinate
system−xyz such that it’s origin O is located at the center of the neutron
star and the spin-axis ˆΩ is directed along the z–axis, as shown in Fig. 1. The
xy−plane lies in the equatorial plane of the pulsar and the curve OP mark
the trajectory of particle which is same as the shape of the ﬁeld line. The unit
vector ˆmt indicates the magnetic axis, and the line of sight
ˆn = sin ζ ˆx + 0 ˆy + cos ζˆz
(1)

Polarization of Radiation in Pulsars
179
ζ = α + β
(2)
is chosen to lie in the xz–plane, where ζ is the angle between ˆn and ˆΩ. For the
sake of simplicity we take that the trajectory of the particle bunch is identical
to that of the ﬂux tube along which it moves (or approximately same as that
of the ﬁeld line co-axial to it).
We chose a another Cartesian coordinate system–x′y′z′ such that z′–axis
is parallel to the magnetic axis ˆmt, and x′–axis lies in the meridional plane,
i.e., plane deﬁned by ˆmt and ˆΩ. The velocity ˆv is directed along the ﬁeld line
tangent ˆτt at the center of momentum (CM) of the bunch, and the acceleration
ˆa directed along the curvature vector of the ﬁeld line. Let μ be the angle
between the sight line ˆn and the plane of motion of the particle bunch or
osculating plane at the point CM, then
sin μ = ˆn · (ˆv × ˆa).
(3)
Fig. 1. The geometry relevant to the model. The curve OP represent the ﬁeld line
chosen to be the axis of the plasma column.

180
R. M. C. Thomas and R.T. Gangadhara
2.1 Radiation electric ﬁelds in frame–x′y′z′
We employ the slightly rearranged expression of [14], as given by Peyman and
Gangadhara [15] , for the radiation electric ﬁeld E′ = E′
||ˆϵ′
|| + E′
⊥ˆϵ′
⊥in the
frame x′y′z′, where E′
|| and E′
⊥are the components in the directions of ˆϵ′
||
and ˆϵ′
⊥, respectively. The unit vector ˆϵ′
⊥= ˆa0, therefore, ˆϵ′
|| = ˆn × ˆϵ′
⊥. The
expressions of E′
|| and E′
⊥are given by
E′
⊥= −μ C⊥L1(μ)
E′
|| = C|| L2(μ) ,
(4)
where
C|| = ωei ω R/c
2√π R c2 (J0 s0 ζ0 η0)sin[(k −kp)s0/2]
(k −kp)s0/2
sin(kη0μ/2)
kη0μ/2
 36ρ
ω2 c
1/3
C⊥= C||
)c1
3
c1 = 1
2
6 ω2ρ2
c2
1/3
= 61/3 ρ ω
c
2/3
,
(5)
ω and k are the radiation frequency and wavenumber, kp is the wavenumber
of the plasma perturbation, and s0 is the coherence length. The parameters
η0 and ζ0 specify the major and minor axes of elliptical cross section of the
plasma column, respectively. J0 is the current density. Since we are consid-
ering strong coherence (discussed in [14]), where k s0 ≫10 and the radial
width of the coherently emitting plasma bunch is ≪λ, the wavelength of the
radiation emitted, the radiation will be sharply peaked at k ≃kp. Due to rel-
ativistic beaming, for the range of μ ≪1 an appreciable quantity of radiation
is received from a single beam. By taking taking these factors into consider-
ation, the sine terms in C⊥can be approximated to be unity. Following the
deﬁnitions of [14], we write

L1(μ)
L2(μ)

=
 +∞
−∞
dt

1
t

exp[i{(c0 + c1 μ2)t + t3}],
(6)
where c0 is deﬁned as
|c0| = c1
γ2
0
1 −2 h(β)kp
k

(7)
and
h(β) =
β
1 + vc/c β ≈1
2 .
Here β = v/c and v ≈c is the phase velocity of the plasma wave in the plasma
frame, and vc is the velocity of the center of momentum of the plasma column.

Polarization of Radiation in Pulsars
181
The coeﬃcient of ‘t’ in the exponential on the r.h.s. of Eq. (6) can be written
as
z = c0 + c1 μ2 .
(8)
It is shown in [14] that z can be considered positive for a large range of
practical parameters in a real situation. Hence the expressions of L1(μ) and
L2(μ) can expressed as
L1(z) = 2
3
√zK1/3
 2
33/2 z3/2

(9)
and
L2(z) = i 2
33/2 z K2/3
 2
33/2 z3/2

.
(10)
Let E = E|| ˆϵ|| + E⊥ˆϵ⊥be the corresponding radiation ﬁeld observed in
the laboratory frame–xyz, where E|| and E⊥are the components of radiation
ﬁeld in the directions of ˆϵ|| and ˆϵ⊥, respectively (see Fig. 1). The components
of radiation electric ﬁeld in the frames x′y′z′ aneted using the following matrix
relation:
E = M · E′ ,
(11)
where the matrix
M =
 cos χ sin χ
−sin χ cos χ

(12)
and χ = cos−1 
ˆϵ|| · ˆeφt

. The unit vector ˆeφt = T ·ˆeφ, and the projected spin
axis on the plane of sky:
ˆϵ|| = −cos ζ ˆx + 0 ˆy + sin ζ ˆz.
3 Stokes parameters of radiation ﬁeld
Stokes parameters have been found to oﬀer a very convenient method for es-
tablishing the association between the polarization state of observed radiation
and the geometry of emitting region. Polarization and geometry are expected
to play a vital (key) role in understanding the pulsar emission. For the math-
ematical convenience we represent the Stokes parameters as a column matrix:
ES =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
I
Q
U
V
⎤
⎥⎥⎦.
(13)

182
R. M. C. Thomas and R.T. Gangadhara
The parameter I deﬁnes the total intensity, Q and U jointly deﬁne the linear
polarization and it’s position angle, and V describes the circular polarization.
They can be determined using the following construction [16]:
ES = ST · [(M
,
M) · (E′ ,
E′∗)],
(14)
where the symbol ‘·′ represents the matrix inner product, - the outer prod-
uct, and ∗represents the complex conjugate. The matrix
ST =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
1 0 0 1
1 0 0 −1
0 1 1 0
0 −i i 0
⎤
⎥⎥⎦.
(15)
3.1 Polarization angle
The polarization angle of the radiation ﬁeld E in the laboratory frame–xyz is
given by
tan(2Ψ) = U
Q = tan[2(χ + Ψ ′)] ,
(16)
where Ψ ′ = (1/2) tan−1 (U ′/Q′) is the polarization angle of E′. Peyman and
Gangadhara [15] have shown that the parameter U ′ = 0, for any given ﬁeld
line in the frame x′y′z′, therefore, the polarization angle Ψ ′ is either zero or
π/2. In laboratory frame-xyz, the polarization angle is given by
Ψ = χ = tan−1
 sin χ
cos χ

.
(17)
3.2 The modulating gaussian
It is well known that the components of a pulsar proﬁle can be decom-
posed into individual gaussians by ﬁtting one to each of the sub-pulse com-
ponent. For example the components in the pulse proﬁle of PSR 1706-16 and
PSR 2351+61 are ﬁtted with appropriate by Kramer et al. [17]. When the
line-of-sight crosses the emission region, it encounters a pattern in intensity
due to gaussian modulation in the azimuthal direction. Because of the gaus-
sian modulation in the azimuthal direction, the intensity becomes nonuniform
in the polar directions to. These arguments indicate that a gaussian like in-
tensity modulation exists in the polar directions too. So, we assume that the
emission region of a pulse component has an intensity modulation both in
the azimuthal and polar directions. we deﬁne a modulation function SM for a
pulse component as
SM = exp[−(φ′
b + φ′
c)2/σ2
φ′ −(θ′
b + θ′
c)2/σ2
θ′] ,
(18)

Polarization of Radiation in Pulsars
183
where σφ′ and σθ′ are the gaussian widths in the azimuthal and polar di-
rections, respectively. Here θ′
c = ζ −θ′
0, φ′
c = −φ′
0, and θ′
0 and φ′
0 are the
corresponding angles for the gaussian peak. The σφ′ and σθ′ need not be con-
stant across the pulse proﬁle, though they are assumed to be constant for the
the small pulse widths of the order of a few times 1/γ. The azimuthal width
σφ′ of the modulating gaussian may be directly inferred from the pulse proﬁle
whereas σθ′ cannot be immediately deduced.
4 Resultant Stokes parameters
The resultant expressions are
Ism = C GM
(19)
Lsm =

Q2sm + U 2sm = C
2 GM
(20)
χsm = 1
2 arctan
 Usm
Qsm

(21)
Vsm = 3 Γ
1
3

2−4/3 c−1/2
1
C GM

φ′
c
σ2
φ′|Cφ| +
θ′
c
σ2
θ′|Cθ|
 
,
(22)
where the normalization constant
C = γ
2 |C|||2 π
√c1
21/3
3

Γ
2
3

(23)
and
GM = exp

−
 θ′
c
σθ′
2
−
 φ′
c
σφ′
2 
.
(24)
5 Computation of polarization parameters
Consider a relativistic bunched plasma with Lorentz factor γ = 1000 acceler-
ated along the dipolar magnetic ﬁeld lines of pulsar with period P = 1 sec.
We computed the intensity Ism, linear polarization Lsm, circular polariza-
tion Vsm and polarization angle χsm for the coherent curvature emission at
1.4 GHz. Chosen a modulating function (GM) with width σθ′ = 4 σφ′ = 4◦
and θ′
c ≃(2/3) β, and plotted in Figs. 2 and 3. These pulses resemble the
pulses of conal singles or core component of multicomponent pulses. In all the
cases, the polarization angle χsm swing is found to be matching with the RC
model[18].
The quantities Ism, Lsm and Vsm are diﬀerent from the polarization pa-
rameters I′, L′ and V ′, and they satisfy the relation

184
R. M. C. Thomas and R.T. Gangadhara
I2
sm > L2
sm + V 2
sm.
In Figs. 2 & 3 we observe that the percentage of circular polarization relative
to total intensity varies with respect to the geometric angles α and β. It shows
a slight increase with respect to increasing β (see Fig. 2), and a steady decrease
for increasing α (see Figs. 2 & 3 )
Fig. 2. The polarization parameters Ism (thick line), Lsm (large dashed line) and
Vsm (small dashed line) vs pulse phase φ′
c, are plotted in panels (a) and (c). They are
normalized with the peak value I0 = Ism(φ′
c = 0). The angle χsm vs pulse phase φ′
c,
is plotted on the panels (b) and (d). Chosen γ = 1000, σθ′ = 4 σφ′ = 4◦, θ′
c ≃(2/3) β
and ρi/rL = 20.
6 Results and Discussions
Our model takes into account of (i) the detailed geometry of emission re-
gion, (ii) the incoherent addition within the beaming region having angular
width 2/γ, and (iii) possible modulations (gaussian) in the emission region.
We transferred the coherent radiation ﬁelds from magnetic coordinates to lab-
oratory frame. To relate the geometry of emission region with the polarization
state of the radiation ﬁeld, Stokes parameters have become convenient tools.
If the size of the bunch is smaller than the wavelength of emitted radiation,

Polarization of Radiation in Pulsars
185
Fig. 3. The polarization parameters Ism (thick line), Lsm (large dashed line) and
Vsm (small dashed line) vs pulse phase φ′
c, are plotted in panels (a) and (c). They are
normalized with the peak value I0 = Ism(φ′
c = 0). The angle χsm vs pulse phase φ′
c,
is plotted on the panels (b) and (d). Chosen γ = 1000, σθ′ = 4 σφ′ = 4◦, θ′
c ≃(2/3) β
and ρi/rL = 20.
then the radiation is expected to be coherent [19]. Since the arc-length cor-
responding to 2/γ is much larger than the wavelength, we have incoherently
added the radiation ﬁelds from diﬀerent bunches.
We considered a gaussian type of modulation in the intensity across the
pulse phase. The mean proﬁle of a pulsar can be split into components and
they can be identiﬁed with some appropriate gaussians (e.g., [17], [20]). This
hints that the individual components of a proﬁle might have a basic unit of
gaussian structure. The component shapes suggest that the emissions corre-
sponding to each component is gaussian modulated.
On a closer look at the Eq. (22), we ﬁnd that the expression for Vsm con-
sists of a two dimensional gaussian GM multiplied by the sum of two terms
inside the square bracket: one has azimuthal variation and other the polar.
The quantities σφ′ and σθ′ can vary signiﬁcantly depending on the geome-
try of emission region, and for demonstration, we consider below a few cases.
It can be immediately noted that when the σφ′ →∞and σθ′ →∞the
circular polarization Vsm →0. That means if there is no modulation, i.e.,
when the emission is uniform across the emission region, the resultant circu-
lar polarization goes to zero. The net circular polarization arises because of
the non-uniformity in the emissions across the region above the polar cap.

186
R. M. C. Thomas and R.T. Gangadhara
Depending up on the values of σφ′ and σθ′ the two terms inside the square
bracket (Eq. 22) describe the various behaviors of the circular polarization
with respect to the pulse phase. If σφ′ < σθ′ then the azimuthal term domi-
nates over the polar term, and the circular polarization behaves like a sense
reversing (antisymmetric) type with respect to pulse phase φ′
c. It is natural to
guess that a relatively narrow pulse component should exhibit a sense revers-
ing circular polarization, since σφ′ is small. A typical example is the famous
pulsar PSR B0329+54 which has a narrow core component with clearly sense
reversing circular polarization. A probable region causing the sense-reversal
can be traced from Fig. 4 as the line-of-sight cuts through the emission region
(LC). The second term appearing within the square bracket in the expression
Fig. 4. The schematic diagram showing the possible origin of anti-symmetric cir-
cular polarization proﬁle. The line LC approximately gives the sweep of the line of
sight across the emission region.
of Vsm in Eq. (22) varies with respect to the polar angle θ′
c as well. For a given
β, θ′
c will have a single sign, as the line of sight never cuts across the emission
region in the polar directions. If σθ′ ≪σφ′ then the polar term will dominate
over the azimuthal term, and hence Vsm will remain with a single sign through
out the pulse phase φ′
c.
7 Conclusion
We have explored the basic features of polarization of the coherent curvature
radiation by relativistic bunched plasma accelerated along the dipolar mag-

Polarization of Radiation in Pulsars
187
netic ﬁeld lines. The eﬀects of geometry of emission region on the proﬁle is
taken into account in a detailed manner. We considered the gaussian type
modulation for the emissions due to coherent curvature radiation by plasma
columns. Our model predicts that the non-uniformities in the emissions within
the beaming region is responsible for the sense reversing circular polariza-
tion. Our model predicts sense reversal of circular polarization under each
component of a pulse proﬁle. We ﬁnd the magnitude of circular polarization
dependence on the geometric angles α and β.
References
1. V. Radhakrishnan, J. M. Rankin: Astrophysical Journal, 352, 258 (1990)
2. X. P. You, J. L. Han: Chinese Journal of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 6, 56
(2006)
3. von A. Hoensbroech, H. Lesch: Astronomy and Astrophysics, 342, 57 (1999)
4. J. L. Han, R. N. Manchester, R. X. Xu, G. J. Qiao: Mon. Not. Royal Astro.
Soc., 300, 373 (1998)
5. A. F. Cheng, M. A. Ruderman: Astrophysical Journal, 212, 800, (1977)
6. A. Z. Kazbegi, G. Z. Machabeli, G. I. Melikidze: Mon. Not. of Royal Astro. Soc.,
253, 37 (1991)
7. A. Z. Kazbegi, G. Z. Machabeli, G. I. Melikidze: 1992, In: Proceedings of IAU
Colloq. 128, held in Lagow, Poland, 17-22 June 1990. Edited by T.H. Hankins,
J.M. Rankin, and J.A. Gil (Pedagogical Univ. Press) p.373
8. D. B. Melrose, Q. Luo: Mon. Not. of Royal Astro. Soc., 352, 915 (2004)
9. G. Gogoberidze, G. Z. Machabeli: Mon. Not. of Royal Astro. Soc., 364, 1363
(2005)
10. J. A. Gil, J. K. Snakowski: Astronomy and Astrophysics, 234, 269 (1990)
11. F. C. Michel: Astrophysical Journal, 322, 822 (1987)
12. J. M. Rankin: Astrophysical Journal, 405, 285 (1993)
13. J. A. Gil, A. Krawczyk: Mon. Not. of Royal Astro. Soc., 285, 561 (1997)
14. R. Buschauer, G. Benford: Mon. Not. of Royal Astro. Soc., 177, 109 (1976)
15. A. Peyman, R. T. Gangadhara: Astrophysical Journal, 566, 365 (2002)
16. S. Johnston: Publ. Astron. Soc. Aust. 19, 277 2002
17. M. Kramer, R. Wielebinski, A. Jessner, J. A. Gil, J. H. Seiradakis: Astronomy
and Astrophysics Supplement, 107, 515 (1994)
18. V. Radhakrishnan, D. J. Cooke: Astrophysical Letters, 3, 225 (1969)
19. G. B. Rybicki, A. P. Lightman: Radiative Processes in Astrophysics, (New York:
Wiley, 1976)
20. X. Wu, X. Gao, J. M. Rankin, W. Xu, V. M. Malofeev: Astronomical Journal,
116, 1984 (1998)

Part IV
Quantum Plasmas

Nonlinear Quantum Plasma Physics
Padma K. Shukla1, Bengt Eliasson2, and Dastgeer Shaikh3
1 Theoretische Physik IV, Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum, D-44780 Bochum, Germany
ps@tp4.rub.de
2 Theoretische Physik IV, Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum, D-44780 Bochum, Germany
bengt@tp4.rub.de
3 Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, University of Californina,
Riverside, CA 92521, USA shaikh@ucr.edu
Summary. We present simulation studies of the formation and dynamics of dark
solitons and vortices, and of nonlinear interactions between intense circularly polar-
ized electromagnetic (CPEM) waves and electron plasma oscillations (EPOs) dense
in quantum electron plasmas. The electron dynamics in the latter is governed by
a pair of equations comprising the nonlinear Schr¨odinger and Poisson system of
equations, which conserves electrons and their momentum and energy. Nonlinear
ﬂuid simulations are carried out to investigate the properties of fully developed
two-dimensional (2D) electron ﬂuid turbulence in a dense Fermi (quantum) plasma.
We report several distinguished features that have resulted from our 2D computer
simulations of the nonlinear equations which govern the dynamics of nonlinearly
interacting electron plasma oscillations (EPOs) in the Fermi plasma. We ﬁnd that a
2D quantum electron plasma exhibits dual cascades, in which the electron number
density cascades towards smaller turbulent scales, while the electrostatic potential
forms larger scale eddies. The characteristic turbulent spectrum associated with the
nonlinear electron plasma oscillations determined critically by quantum tunneling
eﬀect. The turbulent transport corresponding to the large-scale potential distribu-
tion is predominant in comparison with the small-scale electron number density
variation, a result that is consistent with the classical diﬀusion theory. The dynam-
ics of the CPEM waves is also governed by a nonlinear schr¨odinger equation, which
is nonlinearly coupled with the nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation of the EPOs via the
relativistic ponderomotive force, the relativistic electron mass increase in the CPEM
ﬁeld, and the electron density ﬂuctuations. The present governing equations in one
spatial dimension admit stationary solutions in the form a dark envelope soliton. The
dynamics of the latter reveals its robustness. Furthermore, we numerically demon-
strate the existence of cylindrically symmetric two-dimensional quantum electron
vortices, which survive during collisions. The nonlinear equations admit the mod-
ulational instability of an intense CPEM pump wave against EPOs, leading to the
formation and trapping of localized CPEM wave pipes in the electron density hole
that is associated with a positive potential distribution in our dense plasma.
Key words: Quantum plasma - Vortices and Soitary waves: Electromagnetic waves

192
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
1 Introduction
About forty ﬁve years ago, Pines [1] had laid down foundations for quantum
plasma physics through his studies of the properties of electron plasma oscil-
lations (EPOs) in a dense Fermi plasma. The high-density, low-temperature
quantum Fermi plasma is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the low-density, high-
temperature “classical plasma” obeying the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution.
In a very dense quantum plasma, there are new equations of state [2, 3, 4] as-
sociated with the Fermi-Dirac plasma particle distribution function and there
are new quantum forces involving the quantum Bohm potential [5] and the
electron-1/2 spin eﬀect [6] due to magnetization. It should be noted that very
dense quantum plasmas exist in intense laser-solid density plasma interaction
experiments [7, 8, 9, 10], in laser-based inertial fusion [11], in astrophysical and
cosmological environments [12, 13, 14, 15], and in quantum diodes [16, 17, 18].
During the last decade, there has been a growing interest in investigating
new aspects of dense quantum plasmas by developing the quantum hydro-
dynamic (QHD) equations [5] by incorporating the quantum force associated
with the Bohm potential [5]. The the Wigner-Poisson (WP) model [19, 20]
has been used to derive a set of quantum hydrodynamic (QHD) equations
[2, 3] for a dense electron plasma. The QHD equations include the continuity,
momentum and Poisson equations. The quantum nature [2] appears in the
electron momentum equation through the pressure term, which requires the
knowledge of the Wigner distribution for a quantum mixture of electron wave
functions, each characterized by an occupation probability. The quantum part
of the electron pressure is represented as a quantum force [5, 2] −∇φB, where
φB = −(¯h2/2me√ne)∇2√ne, ¯h is the Planck constant divided by 2π, me is
the electron mass, and ne is the electron number density. Deﬁning the eﬀec-
tive wave function ψ =

ne(r, t) exp[iS(r, t)/¯h], where ∇S(r, t) = meue(r, t)
and ue(r, t) is the electron velocity, the electron momentum equation can be
represented as an eﬀective nonlinear Schr¨odinger (NLS) equation [2, 3, 4],
in which there appears a coupling between the wave function and the elec-
trostatic potential associated with the EPOs. The electrostatic potential is
determined from the Poisson equation. We thus have the coupled NLS and
Poisson equations, which govern the dynamics of nonlinearly interacting EPOs
is a dense quantum plasmas. This mean-ﬁeld model of Ref. [2, 3] is valid to
the lowest order in the correlation parameter, and it neglects correlations be-
tween electrons. The QHD equations is useful for deriving the Child-Langmuir
law in the quantum regime [17, 18] and for studying numerous collective ef-
fects [2, 3, 4, 21, 22, 23, 24] involving diﬀerent quantum forces (e.g. due to
the Bohm potential [5] and the pressure law [2, 3] for the Fermi plasma, as
well as the potential energy of the electron−1/2 spin magnetic moment in a
magnetic ﬁeld [44]). In dense plasmas, quantum mechanical eﬀects (e.g. tun-
nelling) are important since the de Broglie length of the charge carriers (e.g.
electrons and holes/positrons) is comparable to the dimensions of the system.
Studies of collective interactions in dense quantum plasmas are relevant for

Nonlinear Quantum Plasma Physics
193
the next generation intense laser-solid density plasma experiments [8, 10, 25],
for superdense astrophysical bodies [12, 14, 15, 26] (e.g. the interior of white
dwarfs and neutron stars), as well as for micro and nano-scale objects (e.g.
quantum diodes [17, 18], quantum dots and nanowires [27], nano-photonics
[28, 29], ultra-small electronic devices [30]) and micro-plasmas [31]. Quantum
transport models similar to the QHD plasma model has also been used in su-
perﬂuidity [32] and superconductivity [33], as well as the study of metal clus-
ters and nanoparticles, where they are referred to as nonstationary Thomas-
Fermi models [34]. The density functional theory [35, 36, 37] incorporates
electron-electron correlations, which are neglected in the present paper.
It has been recently recognized [25, 38, 39] that quantum mechanical ef-
fects play an important role in intense laser-solid density plasma interaction
experiments. In the latter, there are nonlinearities [40] associated with the
electron mass increase in the electromagnetic (EM) ﬁelds and the modiﬁca-
tion of the electron number density by the relativistic ponderomotive force.
Relativistic nonlinear eﬀects in a classical plasma is very important, because
they provide the possibility of the compression and localization of intense elec-
tromagnetic waves. In this Letter, we consider nonlinear interactions between
intense CPEM waves and EPOs in dense quantum plasmas, which are relevant
for a variety of applications in laboratories [9, 10].
In this paper, we investigate, by means of computer simulations, the for-
mation and dynamics of dark/gray envelope solitons and vortices in quantum
electron plasmas with ﬁxed ion background. The results are relevant for the
transport of information at quantum scales in micro-plasmas as well as in
micro-mechanical systems and microelectronics. For our purposes, we shall
use an eﬀective Schr¨odinger-Poisson model [2, 21, 22, 23, 24], which was devel-
oped by employing the Wigner-Poisson phase space formalism on the Vlasov
equation coupled with the Poisson equation for the electric potential. Such
a model was originally derived by Hartree in the context of atomic physics
for studying the self-consistent eﬀect of atomic electrons on the Coulomb po-
tential of the nucleus. The properties of 2D electron ﬂuid turbulence and as-
sociated electron transport in quantum plasmas are investigated numerically
by simulations. We ﬁnd that the nonlinear coupling between the EPOs of
diﬀerent scale sizes gives rise to small-scale electron density structures, while
the electrostatic potential cascades towards large-scales. Finally, we present
theoretical and simulation studies of the CPEM wave modulational instability
against EPOs, as well as the trapping of localized CPEM waves into a quan-
tum electron hole in very dense quantum plasmas, which may be relevant for
the next generation intense laser-plasma interaction experiments.
2 Dark solitons and vortices in a dense quantum plasma
In this section, we discuss the nonlinear properties and dynamics of dark soli-
tons and vortices in a quantum plasma [4]. Generalizing the one-dimensional

194
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
Schr¨odinger-Poisson system of equations [2] to multi-space dimensions, we
have
i∂Ψ
∂t + A∇2Ψ + ϕΨ −|Ψ|4Ψ = 0,
(1)
and
∇2ϕ = |Ψ|2 −1,
(2)
where the wave function Ψ is normalized by √n0, the electrostatic potential
ϕ by TF /e, the time t by ¯hTF and the space r by λD. We have introduced the
notations λD = (TF /4πn0e2)1/2 and A = ΓQ/2, where the quantum coupling
parameter ΓQ = 4πe2m/¯hn1/3
0
can be both smaller and larger than unity
for typical metallic electrons [2]. Here n0 is the equilibrium electron particle
density, TF ≃¯hn2/3
0
/me is the Fermi temperature, me is the electron mass, e
is the magnitude of the electron charge, and ¯h is the Planck constant divided
by 2π. Strictly speaking, the nonlinearity |Ψ|4 in the last term in the left-hand
side of Eq. (1) was derived for the one-dimensional model [2] and takes the
form |Ψ|4/D in D dimensions. However, our numerical investigations of the
proﬁles of dark solitons and vortices have shown very small diﬀerences if we
use D = 2 (for two dimensions) instead of D = 1; henceforth, we will keep
Eqs. (1) and (2) in the present form. The system (1) and (2) is supplemented
by the Maxwell equation
∂E/∂t = iA (Ψ∇Ψ ∗−Ψ ∗∇Ψ) ,
(3)
where the electric ﬁeld E = −∇ϕ. The system of equations (1)–(3) con-
serves the number of electrons N
=

|Ψ| d3x, the electron momentum
P = −i

Ψ ∗∇Ψ d3x, the electron angular momentum L = −i

Ψ ∗r×∇Ψ d3x,
and the total energy E =

(−Ψ ∗A∇2Ψ + |∇ϕ|2/2 + |Ψ|6/3) d3x. We note that
one-dimensional version of Eq. (1) without the ϕ-term has also been used to
describe the behaviour of a Bose-Einstein condensate [41].
Let us ﬁrst consider a quasi-stationary, one-dimensional structure moving
with a constant speed v0, and make the ansatz Ψ = W(ξ) exp(iKx −iΩt),
where W is a complex-valued function of the argument ξ = x −v0t, and K
and Ω are a constant wavenumber and frequency shift, respectively. By the
choice K = v0/2A, we can then write the coupled system of equations as
d2W
dξ2 + λW + ϕW
A
−|W|4W
A
= 0,
(4)
and
d2ϕ
dξ2 = |W|2 −1,
(5)
where λ = Ω/A −v2
0/4A2 is an eigenvalue of the system. From the boundary
conditions |W| = 1 and ϕ = 0 at |ξ| = ∞, we determine λ = 1/A and
Ω = 1+v2
0/4A. The system of Eqs. (4) and (5) supports a ﬁrst integral in the
form

Nonlinear Quantum Plasma Physics
195
H = A

dW
dξ

2
−1
2
dϕ
dξ
2
+ |W|2 −|W|6
3
+ ϕ|W|2 −ϕ −2
3 = 0,
(6)
where we have used the boundary conditions |W| = 1 and ϕ = 0 at |ξ| = ∞.
Fig. 1. The electron density |Ψ|2 (the upper panel) and electrostatic potential ϕ (the
lower panel) associated with a dark soliton supported by the system of equations
(4) and (5), for A = 5 (solid lines), A = 1 (dashed lines), and A = 0.2 (dash-dotted
line). After Ref. [4].
Fig. 2. The time-development of the electron density |Ψ|2 (left-hand panel)
and electrostatic potential ϕ (the right-hand panel), obtained from a simulation
of the system of equations (1) and (2). The initial condition is Ψ
= 0.18 +
tanh[20 sin(x/10)] exp(iKx), with K = v0/2A, A = 5 and v0 = 5. After Ref. [4].
We have solved (4) and (5) numerically and have presented the results in
Fig. 1. Here we have plotted the proﬁles of W 2 and ϕ for a few values of A,
where W was set to −1 on the left boundary and to +1 on the right boundary,

196
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
i.e. the phase shift is 180 degrees between the two boundaries. We see that
we have solutions in the form of a dark soliton, with a localized depletion of
the electron density Ne = |W|2, and where W has diﬀerent sign on diﬀerent
sides of the solitary structure. The local depletion of the electron density is
associated with a positive potential. Larger values of the parameter A give rise
to larger-amplitude and wider dark solitons. Unlike a dark soliton associated
with usual cubic Schr¨odinger equation in which the group dispersion and the
nonlinearity coeﬃcient have opposite sign, the modulus of the wave function in
the present work has localized maxima on both sides of the density depletion.
If the boundary conditions are shifted below 180 degrees (i.e. by a complex
number), we have a “grey soliton” which is characterized by a non-zero density
at the center of the soliton. In order to assess the dynamics and stability of the
dark soliton, we have solved the time-dependent system of Eqs. (1) and (2)
numerically, and have displayed the result in Fig. 2. The initial condition is
Ψ = 0.18+tanh[20 sin(x/10)] exp(iKx), where K = v0/2A, A = 5 and v0 = 5.
We clearly see oscillations and wave turbulence in the time-dependent solution
presented in Fig. 2. Two very clear and long-lived dark solitons are visible,
associated with a positive potential of ϕ ≈3, which is consistent with the
quasi-stationary solution of Fig. 1 for A = 5. Hence, the dark solitons seem to
be robust structures that can withstand perturbations and turbulence during
a considerable time.
Fig. 3. The electron density |Ψ|2 (upper panel) and electrostatic potential ϕ (lower
panel) associated with a two-dimensional vortex supported by the system (7) and
(8), for the charge states n = 1 (solid lines), n = 2 (dashed lines) and n = 3
(dash-dotted lines). We used A = 5 in all cases. After Ref. [4].
We next consider two-dimensional vortex structures of the form Ψ =
ψ(r) exp(inθ −iΩt), where r and θ are the polar coordinates deﬁned via

Nonlinear Quantum Plasma Physics
197
Fig. 4. The electron density |Ψ|2 (left panel) and an arrow plot of the electron
current i (Ψ∇Ψ ∗−Ψ ∗∇Ψ) (right panel) associated with singly charged (n = 1) two-
dimensional vortices, obtained from a simulation of the time-dependent system of
equations (1) and (2), at times t = 0, t = 3.3, t = 6.6 and t = 9.9 (upper to lower
panels). We used A = 5. The singly charged vortices form pairs and keep their
identities. After Ref. [4].
x = r cos(θ) and y = r sin(θ), Ω is a constant frequency shift, and n =
0, ±1, ±2, . . . for diﬀerent excited states (charge states). With this, we can
write Eqs. (1) and (2) in the form
Ωψ + A
 d2
dr2 + 1
r
d
dr −n2
r2

ψ + ϕψ −|ψ|4ψ = 0,
(7)
and
 d2
dr2 + 1
r
d
dr

ϕ = |ψ|2 −1,
(8)

198
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
Fig. 5. The electron density |Ψ|2 (left panel) and an arrow plot of the electron
current i (Ψ∇Ψ ∗−Ψ ∗∇Ψ) (right panel) associated with double charged (n = 2) two-
dimensional vortices, obtained from a simulation of the time-dependent system of
Eqs. (1) and (2), at times t = 0, t = 3.3, t = 6.6 and t = 9.9 (upper to lower panels).
We used A = 5. The doubly charged vortices dissolve into nonlinear structures and
wave turbulence. After Ref. [4].
respectively, where the boundary conditions ψ = 1 and ϕ = dψ/dr = 0
at r = ∞determine Ω = 1. Diﬀerent signs of n describe diﬀerent rotation
directions of the vortex. For n ̸= 0, we must have ψ = 0 at r = 0, and
from symmetry considerations we have dϕ/dr = 0 at r = 0. In Fig. 3, we
display numerical solutions of Eqs. (7) and (8) for diﬀerent charge states
n and for A = 5. We see that the vortex is characterized by a complete
depletion of the electron density at the core of the vortex, and is associ-
ated with a positive electrostatic potential. In order to assess the stability
of the vortices, we have numerically solved the time-dependent system of

Nonlinear Quantum Plasma Physics
199
Eqs. (1) and (2) in two-space dimensions for singly charged vortices and pre-
sented our results in Fig. 4. We have placed four vortex-like structures at
some distance from each other, by the initial condition Ψ = f1f2f3f4, where
fj = tanh[

(x −xj)2 + (y −yj)2] exp[+in arg(x−xj, y−yj)]. Here (x1, y1) =
(−4, 10), (x2, y2) = (2, 10), (x3, y3) = (−2, −10), and (x4, y4) = (4, −10). The
function arg(x, y) denotes the angle between the x axis and the point (x, y),
and it takes values between −π and π. The initial conditions are such that the
vortices are organized in two vortex pairs, as seen in the upper panels of Fig.
4. The vortices in the pairs have opposite polarity on the rotation, as seen
in the electron ﬂuid rotation direction in the upper right panel. The time-
development of the system exhibits that the “partners” in the vortex pairs
attract each other and propagate together with a constant velocity. When the
two vortex pairs collide and interact (see the second and third pairs of panels
in Fig. 4), the vortices keep their identities and change partners in a manner
of asymptotic freedom, resulting into two new vortex pairs which propagate
obliquely to the original propagation direction. For vortices that are multiply
charged (|n| > 1), we have a breakup of the vortices and the formation of quasi
one-dimensional dark solitons and pairs of vortices with single charge states.
One such example is shown in Fig. 5, where we have simulated the system of
Eqs. (1) and (2), with the same initial condition as the one in Fig. 4, except
that we here have taken n = 2 to make the vortices doubly charged. The
second row of panels in Fig. 5 reveals that the vortex pairs keep their iden-
tities for some time, while a quasi one-dimensional density cavity is formed
between the two vortex pairs. At a later stage, the four vortices dissolve into
complicated nonlinear structures and wave turbulence. Hence, the nonlinear
dynamics is very diﬀerent between singly and multiply charged solitons, where
only singly charged vortices are long-lived and keep their identities. This is
in line with previous results on the nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation, where it
was noted that vortices with higher charge states are unstable [42]. In the nu-
merical simulations of Eqs. (1) and (2), we used a pseudo-spectral method to
approximate the x and y derivatives and a fourth-order Runge-Kutta scheme
for the time-stepping. The numerical simulations conﬁrmed the conservation
laws of the electron number, momentum and energy up to the accuracy of the
numerical scheme. The numerical solutions of the time-independent systems
(4)–(5) and (7)–(8) were obtained by using the Newton method, where the ξ
derivatives were approximated with a second-order centered diﬀerence scheme
with appropriate boundary conditions on Ψ and ϕ.
3 Turbulence in quantum plasmas
In this Section, we use the coupled NLS and Poisson equations for investi-
gating, by means of computer simulations, the properties of 2D electron ﬂuid
turbulence and associated electron transport in quantum plasmas [43]. We
ﬁnd that the nonlinear coupling between the EPOs of diﬀerent scale sizes

200
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
gives rise to small-scale electron density structures, while the electrostatic
potential cascades towards large-scales. The total energy associated with our
quantum electron plasma turbulence, nonetheless, processes a characteristic
spectrum, which is a non- Kolmogorov-like. The electron diﬀusion caused by
the electron ﬂuid turbulence is consistent with the dynamical evolution of
turbulent mode structures.
For our 2D turbulence studies, we use the nonlinear Schr¨odinger-Poisson
equations [2, 4]
i
√
2H ∂Ψ
∂t + H∇2Ψ + ϕΨ −|Ψ|2Ψ = 0,
(9)
and
∇2ϕ = |Ψ|2 −1,
(10)
which are valid at zero electron temperature for the Fermi-Dirac equilib-
rium distribution, and which govern the dynamics of nonlinearly interact-
ing EPOs of diﬀerent wavelengths. In Eqs. (9) and (10) the wave function
Ψ is normalized by √n0, the electrostatic potential ϕ by TF /e, the time
t by the electron plasma period ω−1
pe , and the space r by the Fermi De-
bye radius λD. We have introduced the notations λD = (TF /4πn0e2)1/2 ≡
VF /ωpe and
√
H = ¯hωpe/
√
2TF , where the Fermi electron temperature
TF = (¯h2/2me)(3π2)1/3n2/3
0
, e is magnitude of the electron charge, and
ωpe = (4πn0e2/me)1/2 is the electron plasma frequency. The origin of the
various terms in Eq. (9) is obvious. The ﬁrst term is due to the electron iner-
tia, the H-term in (9) is associated from the quantum tunneling involving the
Bohm potential, ϕΨ comes from the nonlinear coupling between the scalar
potential (due to the space charge electric ﬁeld) and the electron wave func-
tion, and the cubic nonlinear term is the contribution of the electron pressure
[2] for the Fermi plasma that has a quantum statistical equation of state.
Equations (9) and (10) admit a set of conservation laws [44], includ-
ing the number of electrons N =

Ψ 2dxdy, the electron momentum P =
−i

Ψ ∗∇Ψdxdy, the electron angular momentum L = −i

Ψ ∗r × ∇Ψdxdy,
and the total energy E =

[−Ψ ∗H∇2Ψ + |∇ϕ|2/2 + |Ψ|3/2]dxdy. In obtaining
the total energy E, we have used the relation ∂E/∂t = iH(Ψ∇Ψ ∗−Ψ ∗∇Ψ),
where the electric ﬁeld E = −∇ϕ. The conservations laws are used to main-
tain the accuracy of the numerical integration of Eqs. (9) and (10), which hold
for quantum electron-ion plasmas with ﬁxed ion background. The assumption
of immobile ions is valid, since the EPOs (given by the dispersion relation
[2, 3] ω2 = ω2
pe + k2V 2
F + ¯h2k4/4m2
e) occur on the electron plasma period,
which is much shorter than the ion plasma period ω−1
pi . Here ω and k are the
frequency and the wave-number, respectively. The ion dynamics, which may
become important in the nonlinear phase on a longer timescale (say of the
order of ω−1
pi ), in our investigation can easily be incorporated by replacing 1
in Eq. (10) by ni, where the normalized (by n0) ion density ni is determined
from dtni + ni∇· ui = 0 and dtui = −C2
s∇ϕ, where dt = (∂/∂t) + ui · ∇, ui

Nonlinear Quantum Plasma Physics
201
is the ion velocity, Cs = (TF /mi)1/2 is the ion sound speed, and mi is the ion
mass.
The nonlinear mode coupling interaction studies are performed to inves-
tigate the multi-scale evolution of a decaying 2D electron ﬂuid turbulence,
which is described by Eqs. (9) and (10). All the ﬂuctuations are initialized
isotropically (no mean ﬁelds are assumed) with random phases and ampli-
tudes in Fourier space, and evolved further by the integration of Eqs. (9) and
(10), using a fully de-aliased pseudospectral numerical scheme [45] based on
the Fourier spectral methods. The spatial discretization in our 2D simulations
uses a discrete Fourier representation of turbulent ﬂuctuations. The numeri-
cal algorithm employed here conserves energy in terms of the dynamical ﬂuid
variables and not due to a separate energy equation written in a conservative
form. The evolution variables use periodic boundary conditions. The initial
isotropic turbulent spectrum was chosen close to k−2, with random phases
in all three directions. The choice of such (or even a ﬂatter than −2) spec-
trum treats the turbulent ﬂuctuations on an equal footing and avoids any
inﬂuence on the dynamical evolution that may be due to the initial spec-
tral non-symmetry. The equations are advanced in time using a second-order
predictor-corrector scheme. The code is made stable by a proper de-aliasing
of spurious Fourier modes, and by choosing a relatively small time step in the
simulations. Our code is massively parallelized using Message Passing Inter-
face (MPI) libraries to facilitate higher resolution in a 2D computational box,
with a resolution of 5122 grid points.
We study the properties of 2D ﬂuid turbulence, composed of nonlinearly
interacting EPOs, for two speciﬁc physical systems. These are the dense plas-
mas in the next generation laser-based plasma compression (LBPC) schemes
[10] as well as in superdense astrophysical objects [14, 15, 26] (e.g. white
dwarfs). It is expected that in LBPC schemes, the electron number density
may reach 1027 cm−3 and beyond. Hence, we have ωpe = 1.76 × 1018 s−1,
TF = 1.7 × 10−9 erg, ¯hωpe = 1.7 × 10−9 erg, and H = 1. The Fermi Debye
length λD = 0.1 ˚A. On the other hand, in the interior of white dwarfs, we
typically have [46] n0 ∼1030 cm−3 (such values are also common in dense neu-
tron stars and supernovae), yielding ωpe = 5.64 × 1019 s−1, TF = 1.7 × 10−7
erg, ¯hωpe = 5.64 × 10−8 erg, H ≈0.3, and λD = 0.025 ˚A. The numerical
solutions of Eqs. (9) and (10) for H = 1 and H = 0.025 (corresponding to
n0 = 1027 cm−3 and n0 = 1030 cm−3, respectively) are displayed in Figs. 6
and 7, respectively, which are the electron number density and electrostatic
(ES) potential distributions in the (x, y)-plane.
Figures 6 and 7 reveal that the electron density distribution has a tendency
to generate smaller length-scale structures, while the ES potential cascades
towards larger scales. The co-existence of the small and larger scale structures
in turbulence is a ubiquitous feature of various 2D turbulence systems. For
example, in 2D hydrodynamic turbulence, the incompressible ﬂuid admits two
invariants, namely the energy and the mean squared vorticity. The two invari-
ants, under the action of an external forcing, cascade simultaneously in tur-

202
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
Fig. 6.
Small scale ﬂuctuations in the electron density resulted from a steady
turbulence simulations of our 2D electron plasma. Forward cascades are responsible
for the generation of small-scale ﬂuctuations. Large scale structures are present
in the electrostatic potential, essentially resulting from an inverse cascade. The 2D
electron ﬂuid turbulence interestingly relaxes towards an Iroshnikov-Kraichnan (IK)
type k−3/2 spectrum in a dense plasma for H = 1 as shown in the next ﬁgure. After
Ref. [43].
bulence, thereby leading to a dual cascade phenomena. In these processes, the
energy cascades towards longer length-scales, while the ﬂuid vorticity trans-
fers spectral power towards shorter length-scales. Usually, a dual cascade is
observed in a driven turbulence simulation, in which certain modes are excited
externally through random turbulent forces in spectral space. The randomly
excited Fourier modes transfer the spectral energy by conserving the constants
of motion in k-space. On the other hand, in freely decaying turbulence, the
energy contained in the large-scale eddies is transferred to the smaller scales,
leading to a statistically stationary inertial regime associated with the forward
cascades of one of the invariants. Decaying turbulence often leads to the for-
mation of coherent structures as turbulence relaxes, thus making the nonlinear
interactions rather ineﬃcient when they are saturated. The power spectrum
exhibits an interesting feature in our 2D electron plasma system, unlike the
2D hydrodynamic turbulence [47, 48, 49]. The spectral slope in the 2D quan-
tum electron ﬂuid turbulence is close to the Iroshnikov-Kraichnan power law
[50, 51] k−3/2, rather than the usual Kolomogrov power law [47] k−5/3. We

Nonlinear Quantum Plasma Physics
203
Fig. 7. The 2D electron ﬂuid turbulence interestingly relaxes towards an Iroshnikov-
Kraichnan (IK) type k−3/2 spectrum in a dense plasma for H = 1. H = 0.025 results
in a ﬂat spectrum. After Ref. [43].
further ﬁnd that this scaling is not universal and is determined critically by
the quantum tunneling eﬀect. For instance, for a higher value of H=1.0 the
spectrum becomes more ﬂat (see Fig 7). Physically, the ﬂatness (or deviation
from the k−5/3), results from the short wavelength part of the EPOs spectrum
which is controlled by the quantum tunneling eﬀect associated with the Bohm
potential. The peak in the energy spectrum can be attributed to the higher
turbulent power residing in the EPO potential, which eventually leads to the
generation of larger scale structures, as the total energy encompasses both the
electrostatic potential and electron density components. In our dual cascade
process, there is a delicate competition between the EPO dispersions caused
by the statistical pressure law (giving the k2V 2
F term, which dominates at
longer scales) and the quantum Bohm potential (giving the ¯h2k4/4m2
e term,
which dominates at shorter scales with respect to a source). Furthermore,
it is interesting to note that exponents other than k−5/3 have also been ob-
served in numerical simulations [52, 53] of the Charney and 2D incompressible
Navier-Stokes equations.
We ﬁnally estimate the electron diﬀusion coeﬃcient in the presence of
small and large scale turbulent EPOs in our quantum plasma. An eﬀective
electron diﬀusion coeﬃcient caused by the momentum transfer can be cal-
culated from Deff =
 ∞
0 ⟨P(r, t) · P(r, t + t′)⟩dt′, where P is electron mo-
mentum and the angular bracket denotes spatial averages and the ensemble
averages are normalized to unit mass. Since the 2D structures are conﬁned

204
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
Fig. 8. Time evolution of an eﬀective electron diﬀusion coeﬃcient associated with
the large-scale electrostatic potential and the small-scale electron density. Here a
comparison between H = 1 and H = 0.025 is shown. After Ref. [43].
to a x −y plane, the eﬀective electron diﬀusion coeﬃcient, Deff, essentially
relates the diﬀusion processes associated with random translational motions
of the electrons in nonlinear plasmonic ﬁelds. We compute Deff in our sim-
ulations, to measure the turbulent electron transport that is associated with
the turbulent structures that we have reported herein. It is observed that the
eﬀective electron diﬀusion is lower when the ﬁeld perturbations are Gaussian.
On the other hand, the electron diﬀusion increases rapidly with the eventual
formation of longer length-scale structures, as shown in Fig. 8. The electron
diﬀusion due to large scale potential distributions in quantum plasmas domi-
nates substantially, as depicted by the solid-curve in Fig. 8. Furthermore, in
the steady-state, nonlinearly coupled EPOs form stationary structures, and
Deff saturates eventually. Thus, remarkably an enhanced electron diﬀusion
results primarily due to the emergence of large-scale potential structures in
our 2D quantum plasma.
4 Interaction between intense electromagnetic waves and
quantum plasma oscillations
In this section, we discuss the nonlinear interaction between intense elec-
tromagnetic radiation and quantum plasma oscillations [54]. We consider a
one-dimensional geometry of an unmagnetized dense electron-ion plasma, in
which immobile ions form the neutralizing background. Thus, we are investi-
gating the phenomena on a timescale shorter than the ion plasma period. Our

Nonlinear Quantum Plasma Physics
205
dense quantum plasma contains an intense circularly polarized electromag-
netic (CPEM) plane wave that nonlinearly interacts with EPOs. The non-
linear interaction between intense CPEM waves and EPOs gives rise to an
envelope of the CPEM vector potential A⊥= A⊥(ˆx + iˆy) exp(−iω0t + ik0z),
which obeys the nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation [40]
2iΩ0
 ∂
∂t + Vg
∂
∂z

A⊥+ ∂2A⊥
∂z2
−
|ψ|2
γ
−1

A⊥= 0,
(11)
where the electron wave function ψ and the scalar potential are governed by,
respectively,
iHe
∂ψ
∂t + H2
e
2
∂2ψ
∂z2 + (φ −γ + 1)ψ = 0,
(12)
and
∂2φ
∂z2 = |ψ|2 −1,
(13)
where Ω0 = ω0/ωpe, Vg = vg/c, He = ¯hωpe/mc2, vg = k0c2/ω0 is the group
velocity of the CPEM waves, and γ = (1+|A⊥|2)1/2 is the relativistic gamma
factor due to the electron quiver velocity in the CPEM wave ﬁelds. Further-
more, ω0 = (k2
0c2+ω2
pe)1/2 is the CPEM wave frequency, k0 is the wavenumber,
c is the speed of light in vacuum, ωpe = (4πn0e2/m)1/2 is the electron plasma
frequency, e is the magnitude of the electron charge, n0 is the equilibrium
electron number density, and m is the electron rest mass. In (11)–(13) the
time and space variables are normalized by the inverse electron plasma fre-
quency ω−1
pe and skin depth λe = c/ωpe, respectively, the scalar potential φ
by mc2/e, the vector potential A⊥by mc2/e, and the electron wave function
ψ(z, t) by n1/2
0
. The nonlinear coupling between intense CPEM waves and
EPOs comes about due to the nonlinear current density, which is represented
by the term |ψ|2A⊥/γ in Eq. (11). The electron number density is deﬁned as
ne = ψψ∗= |ψ|2, where the asterisk denotes the complex conjugate. In Eq.
(12), 1−γ is the relativistic ponderomotive potential [40], which arises due to
the cross-coupling between the CPEM wave-induced electron quiver velocity
and the CPEM wave magnetic ﬁeld. The second term in the left-hand side in
(12) is associated with the quantum Bohm potential [5].
It is well known [55] that a relativistically strong electromagnetic wave in
a classical electron plasma is subjected to the Raman scattering and mod-
ulational instabilities. At quantum scales, these instabilities will be modi-
ﬁed by the dispersive eﬀects caused by the tunnelling of the electrons. In
order to investigate the quantum mechanical eﬀects on the relativistic para-
metric instabilities in a dense quantum plasma in the presence of a rela-
tivistically strong CPEM pump wave, we let φ(z, t) = φ1(z, t), A⊥(z, t) =
[A0 + A1(z, t)] exp(−iα0t) and ψ(z, t) = [1 + ψ1(z, t)] exp(−iβ0t), where A0 is
the large-amplitude CPEM pump and A1 is the small-amplitude ﬂuctuations
of the CPEM wave amplitude due to the nonlinear coupling between CPEM
waves and EPOs, i.e. |A1| ≪|A0|, and ψ1 (≪1) is the small-amplitude

206
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
perturbations in the electron wave function. The constant frequency shifts,
determined from Eqs. (11) and (12), are α0 = (1/γ0 −1)/(2Ω0) and β0 = (1−
γ0)/He, where γ0 = (1 + |A0|2)1/2. The ﬁrst-order perturbations in the elec-
tromagnetic vector potential and the electron wave function are expanded into
their respective sidebands as A1(z, t) = A+ exp(iKz −iΩt)+A−exp(−iKz +
iΩt) and ψ1(z, t) = ψ+ exp(iKz−iΩt)+ψ−exp(−iKz+iΩt), while the poten-
tial is expanded as φ(z, t) = 	φ exp(iKz −iΩt)+ 	φ∗exp(−iKz +iΩt), where Ω
and K are the frequency and wave number of the electron plasma oscillations,
respectively. Inserting the above mentioned Fourier ansatz into Eqs. (11)–(13),
linearizing the resultant system of equations, and sorting into equations for
diﬀerent Fourier modes, we obtain the nonlinear dispersion relation
1 −
 1
D+
+
1
D−
 
1 + K2
DL
 |A0|2
2γ3
0
= 0,
(14)
where D± = ∓2Ω0(Ω −VgK) + K2 and DL = 1 + H2
e K4/4 −Ω2. We
note that DL = 0 yields the linear dispersion relation Ω2 = 1 + H2
eK4/4
for the EPOs in a dense quantum plasma [1]. For He →0 we recover
from (14) the nonlinear dispersion relation for relativistically large ampli-
tude electromagnetic waves in a classical electron plasma [55]. The dispersion
relation (14) governs the Raman backward and forward scattering instabil-
ities, as well as the modulational instability. In the long wavelength limit
Vg ≪1, Ω0 ≈1 we introduce the ansatz Ω = iΓ, where the normalized
(by ωpe) growth rate Γ ≪1, and obtain from Eq. (14) the growth rate
Γ = (1/2)|K|{(|A0|2/γ3
0)[1+K2/(1+H2
e K4/4)]−K2}1/2 of the modulational
instability. For |K| < 1 and He < 1, the linear growth rate is only weakly de-
pending on the quantum parameter He. However, possible nonlinear satura-
tion of the modulational instability may lead to localized CPEM wave packets,
which are trapped in a quantum electron hole. Such localized electromagnetic
wavepackets would have length scales much shorter than those involved in the
modulational instability process. Here quantum diﬀraction eﬀects (associated
with the quantum Bohm potential) become very important. In order to inves-
tigate the quantum diﬀraction eﬀect on such localized electromagnetic pulses,
we consider a steady state structure moving with a constant speed Vg. Insert-
ing the ansatz A⊥= W(ξ) exp(−iΩt), ψ = P(ξ) exp(ikx −iωt) and φ = φ(ξ)
into Eqs. (11)–(13), where ξ = z −Vgt, k = Vg/He and ω = V 2
g /2He, and
where W(ξ) and P(ξ) are real, we obtain from (11)-(13) the coupled system
of equations
∂2W
∂ξ2 +

λ −P 2
γ + 1

W = 0,
(15)
H2
e
2
∂2P
∂ξ2 + (φ −γ + 1)P = 0,
(16)
where γ = (1 + W 2)1/2, and
∂2φ
∂ξ2 = P 2 −1,
(17)

Nonlinear Quantum Plasma Physics
207
with the boundary conditions W = Φ = 0 and P 2 = 1 at |ξ| = ∞. In Eq. (15),
λ = 2Ω0Ω represents a nonlinear frequency shift of the CPEM wave. In the
limit He →0, we have from (16) φ = γ −1, where P ̸= 0, and we recover the
classical (non-quantum) case of the relativistic solitary waves in a cold plasma
[56]. We note that the system of equations (15)–(17) admits a Hamiltonian
QH = 1
2
∂W
∂ξ
2
+ H2
e
2
∂P
∂ξ
2
−1
2
∂φ
∂ξ
2
+ 1
2(λ + 1)W 2 + P 2 −γP 2 + φP 2 −φ = 0,
(18)
where we have used the boundary conditions ∂/∂ξ = 0, W = φ = 0 and
|P| = 1 at |ξ| = ∞.
In order to asses the importance of our investigation, we now present
numerical solutions of (8)–(13) and (15)–(17), ensuring that (18) is conserved.
We chose parameters that are representative of the next generation laser-based
plasma compression (LBPC) schemes [10, 11]. The formula [40] eA⊥/mc2 =
6 × 10−10λs
√
I will determine the normalized vector potential, provided that
the CPEM wavelength λs (in microns) and intensity I (in W/cm2) are known.
It is expected that in LBPC schemes, the electron number density n0 may
reach 1027 cm−3 and beyond, and the peak values of eA⊥/mc2 may be in the
range 1-2 (e.g. for focused EM pulses with λs ∼0.15 nm and I ∼5 × 1027
W/cm2). For ωpe = 1.76×1018 s−1, we have ¯hωpe = 1.76×10−9 erg and He =
0.002, since mc2 = 8.1 × 10−7 erg. The electron skin depth λe ∼1.7 ˚A. On
the other hand, a higher value of He = 0.007 is achieved for ωpe = 5.64 ×1018
s−1. Thus, our numerical solutions below, based on these two values of He,
have focused on scenarios that are relevant for the next generation intense
laser-solid density plasma interaction experiments [10].
We ﬁrst numerically solved Eqs. (15)–(17) for several values of He. Here,
we solved the nonlinear boundary value problem with the boundary condi-
tions W = φ = 0 and P = 1 at the boundaries at ξ = ±10. We used
centered second-order approximations for the second derivatives and solved
the obtained nonlinear system of equations numerically by using the Newton
method. The results are displayed in Figs. 9 and 10. We see that the solitary
envelope pulse is composed of a single maximum of the localized vector po-
tential W and a local depletion of the electron density P 2, and a localized
positive potential φ at the center of the solitary pulse. The latter has a con-
tinuous spectrum in λ, where larger values of negative λ are associated with
larger amplitude solitary EM pulses. At the center of the solitary EM pulse,
the electron density is partially depleted, as in panels a) of Fig. 9, and for
larger amplitudes of the EM waves we have stronger depletion of the electron
density, as shown in panels b) and c) of Fig. 9. For cases where the electron
density goes to almost zero in the classical case [56], one important quantum
eﬀect is that the electrons can tunnel into the depleted region. This is seen in
Fig. 10, where the electron density remains nonzero for the larger value of He

208
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
in panels a), while the density shrinks to zero for the smaller value of He in
panel b).
Fig. 9. The proﬁles of the CPEM vector potential A⊥, the electron number density
and the scalar potential (upper to lower rows of panels) for λ = −0.3, λ = −3.4 and
λ = −0.4, with He = 0.002. After Ref. [54].
In order to investigate the quantum diﬀraction eﬀects on the dynamics of
localized CPEM wavepackets, we have solved the system of Eqs. (11)–(13)
numerically. We considered the long-wavelength limit ω0 ≈1 and Vg ≈0.
In the initial conditions, we use an EM pump with a constant amplitude
A⊥= A0 = 1 and a uniform plasma density ψ = 1. A small amplitude
noise (random numbers) of order 10−2 is added to A⊥to give a seed for any
instability. The numerical results are displayed in Figs. 11 and 4 for He = 0.002
and He = 0.007, respectively. In both cases, we see an initial linear growth
phase and a wave collapse at t ≈70, in which almost all the CPEM wave
energy is contracted into a few well separated localized CPEM wave pipes.
These are characterized by a large bell-shaped amplitude of the CPEM wave,
an almost complete depletion of the electron number density at the center of
the CPEM wavepacket, and a large-amplitude positive electrostatic potential.
Comparing Fig. 11 with Fig. 12, we see that there is a more complex dynamics
in the interaction between the CPEM wavepackets for the larger He = 0.007,
shown in Fig. 12, in comparison with He = 0.002, shown in Fig. 11, where
the wavepackets are almost stationary when they are fully developed. We have
here neglected the eﬀects of the ion dynamics. The latter may be important for
the development of expanding plasma bubbles (cavities) on longer timescales
(e.g. the ion plasma period) [57].

Nonlinear Quantum Plasma Physics
209
Fig. 10. The proﬁles of the CPEM vector potential A⊥, the electron number density
and the scalar potential (upper to lower rows of panels) for He = 0.007 and He =
0.002, with λ = −0.34. After Ref. [54].
Fig. 11. The dynamics of the CPEM vector potential A⊥and the electron number
density |ψ|2 (upper panels) and of the electrostatic potential Φ (lower panel) for
He = 0.002. After Ref. [54].
5 Conclusions
In summary, we have demonstrated the existence of localized nonlinear struc-
tures in quantum electron plasmas. The electron dynamics in the latter is

210
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
Fig. 12. The dynamics of the CPEM vector potential A⊥and the electron number
density |ψ|2 (upper panels) and the electrostatic potential φ (lower panel) for He =
0.007. After Ref. [54].
governed by a coupled nonlinear Schr¨odinger and Poisson system of equa-
tions, which admit a set of conserved quantities (the total number of elec-
trons, the electron momentum, the electron angular momentum, and the elec-
tron energy). The latter were checked numerically. Quasi-stationary, localized
structures in the form of one-dimensional dark solitons and two-dimensional
vortices were found by solving the time-independent coupled system of equa-
tions numerically. These structures are associated with a local depletion of the
electron density associated with positive electrostatic potential, and are pa-
rameterised by the quantum coupling parameter only. In the two-dimensional
geometry, we have a class of vortices of diﬀerent excited states (charge states)
associated with a complete depletion of the electron density and an associated
positive potential. The numerical simulation of the time-dependent system of
equations shows the formation of stable dark solitons in one-space dimension
with an amplitude consistent with the one found from the time-independent
solutions. In two-space dimensions, the dark solitons of the ﬁrst excited state
were found to be stable and the preferred nonlinear state was in the form of
vortex pairs of vortices with diﬀerent polarities. One-dimensional dark solitons
and singly charge two-dimensional vortices are thus long-lived nonlinear struc-
tures, which can transport information at quantum scales in micro-mechanical
systems and dense laboratory plasmas. We have presented computer simula-
tion studies of 2D ﬂuid turbulence in a dense quantum plasma. Our simula-
tions, for the parameters that are representative of the next generation intense
laser-solid density plasma experiments as well as of the superdense astrophys-
ical bodies, reveal new features of the dual cascade in a fully developed 2D

Nonlinear Quantum Plasma Physics
211
electron ﬂuid turbulence. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that the power spectrum asso-
ciated with nonlinearly interacting EPOs in quantum plasmas follow a non-
Kolmogorov-like spectrum. The deviation from a Kolmogorov-like spectrum
resulting from the ﬂattening of the spectrum is mediated essentially by the
nonlinear EPOs interactions in the inertial range (basically controlled by the
electron plasma wave dispersion eﬀect represented by ¯h2k4/4m2
e), which im-
pedes the spectral transfer of the turbulent power associated with the short
scale Fourier modes. In the nonlinear regime, the inhibition of the spectral
transfer is caused by short scale EPOs that are nonlinearly excited by the
mode coupling of the EPOs in the forward cascade regime, which then grow,
acquire nonlinear amplitudes, and eventually saturate in the nonlinear phase.
We have also presented theoretical and computer simulation studies of non-
linearly interacting intense CPEM waves and EPOs in very dense quantum
plasmas. The localized dark solitons, vortices, and CPEM wave structures, as
discussed here, may be useful for information transfer as well as for electron
acceleration in dense quantum plasmas.
Acknowledgements This work was partially supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft through the Sonderforschungsbereicht 591, as well as
by the Swedish Research Council (VR).
References
1. D. Pines: J. Nucl. Energy: Part C: Plasma Phys. 2, 5 (1961)
2. G. Manfredi, F. Haas: Phys. Rev. B 64, 075316 (2001)
3. G. Manfredi: Fields Inst. Commun. 46, 263 (2005)
4. P.K. Shukla, B. Eliasson: Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 245001 (2006)
5. C.L. Gardner, C. Ringhofer: Phys. Rev. E 53, 157 (1996)
6. M. Marklund, G. Brodin: Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 025001 (2007)
7. S.X. Hu, C.H. Keitel: Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4709 (1999)
8. Y.A. Salamin et al: Phys. Rep. 427, 41 (2006)
9. S.H. Glenzer et al: Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 065002 (2007)
10. V.M. Malkin et al: Phys. Rev. E 75, 026404 (2007)
11. H. Azechi et al: Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 48, B267 (2006)
12. M. Opher et al: Phys. Plasmas 8, 2454 (2001)
13. O.G. Benvenuto, M.A. De Vito: Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 362, 891 (2005)
14. G. Chabrier et al: J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 14, 9133 (2002)
15. G. Chabrier et al: J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 39, 4411 (2006)
16. Y.Y. Lau et al: Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 1446 (1991)
17. L.K. Ang et al: Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 208303 (2003)
18. L.K. Ang, P. Zhang: Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 164802 (2007)
19. E.P. Wigner: Phys. Rev. 40, 749 (1932)
20. M. Hillery et al: Phys. Rep. 106, 121 (1984)
21. F. Haas, G. Manfredi, M. Feix: Phys. Rev. E 62, 2763 (2000)
22. D. Anderson et al: Phys. Rev. E 65, 046417 (2002)
23. F. Haas, L.G. Garcia, J. Goedert, G. Manfredi: Phys. Plasmas 10, 3858 (2003)
24. F. Haas: Phys. Plasmas 12, 062117 (2005)

212
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
25. G. Mourou et al: Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 309 (2006)
26. A.K. Harding, D. Lai: Rep. Prog. Phys. 69, 2631 (2006)
27. G.V. Shpatakovskaya: JETP 102, 466 (2006)
28. W.L. Barnes et al: Nature (London) 424, 824 (2003)
29. D.E. Chang et al: Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 053002 (2006)
30. P.A. Markowich et al: Semiconductor Equations (Springer, Berlin 1990)
31. K.H. Becker, K.H. Schoenbach, J.G. Eden: J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 39, R55
(2006)
32. M. Loﬀredo, L. Morato: Nuovo Cimento Soc. Ital Fis. B 108B, 205 (1993)
33. R. Feynman: Statistical Mechanics, A Set of of Lectures (Benjamin, Reading,
1972)
34. A. Domps et al: Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 5520 (1998)
35. P. Hohenberg, W. Kohn: Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964)
36. W. Kohn, L.J. Sham: Phys. Rev. 140, A1133 (1965)
37. L. Brey et al: Phys. Rev. B 42, 1240 (1990)
38. A.V. Andreev: JETP Lett. 72, 238 (2000)
39. M. Marklund, P.K. Shukla: Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 591 (2006)
40. P.K. Shukla et al: Phys. Rep. 138, 1 (1986)
41. E.B. Kolomeisky et al: Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1146 (2000)
42. I.A. Ivonin, V.P. Pavlenko, H. Persson: Phys. Rev. E 60, 492 (1999)
43. D. Shaikh, P.K. Shukla: Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 125002 (2007)
44. M. Marklund, G. Brodin: Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 025001 (2007)
45. D. Gottlieb, S.A. Orszag: Numerical Analysis of Spectral Methods (SIAM,
Philadelphia 1977)
46. I. Iben Jr., A.V. Tutukov: Astrophys. J. 282, 615 (1984)
47. A.N. Kolmogorov: C. R. Acad. Sci. USSR 30, 301 (1941)
48. M. Lesieur: Turbulence in Fluids (Kluwer, Dordrecht 1990)
49. U. Frisch: Turbulence (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England 1995)
50. P. Iroshnikov: Sov. Astron. 7, 566 (1963)
51. R.H. Kraichnan: Phys. Fluids 8, 1385 (1965)
52. V.D. Larichev, J.C. McWilliams: Phys. Fluids A 3 938 (1991)
53. R.K. Scott Phys. Rev. E 75, 046301 (2007)
54. P.K. Shukla, B. Eliasson: Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 096401 (2007)
55. C.J. McKinstrie, R. Bingham: Phys. Fluids B 4, 2626 (1992).
56. J.H. Marburger, R.F. Tooper: Phys. Rev. Lett. 35, 1001 (1975).
57. M. Borghesi et al: Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 135002 (2002).

Dust Plasma Interactions in Space and
Laboratory
Padma K. Shukla1, Bengt Eliasson2, and Dastgeer Shaikh3
1 Theoretische Physik IV, Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum, D-44780 Bochum, Germany
ps@tp4.rub.de
2 Theoretische Physik IV, Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum, D-44780 Bochum, Germany
bengt@tp4.rub.de
3 Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, University of Californina,
Riverside, CA 92521, USA shaikh@ucr.edu
Summary. Nonlinear aspects of coherent structures in dusty plasmas are discussed.
These are the formation of envelope Langmuir solitons and shocks in a uniform dusty
plasma as well as the self-organization of incompressible dust ﬂuid in the form of
vortical structures. We present conditions under which these excitations in dusty
plasmas are possible. The relevance of our investigation to laboratory and space
plasmas is discussed.
Key words: Dusty plasma: Vortices Dust – acoustic waves- Dust ion acoustic
waves
1 Introduction
Nonlinear waves and structures in electron-ion plasmas have been thoroughly
investigated [1, 2, 3]. The presence of charged dust grains in plasmas, which
are ubiquitous in laboratory and space environments, brings a new dimension
to collective dust-plasma interactions [4, 5, 6, 7]. Charged dust grains change
the equilibrium quasineutrality conditions as well as introduce new features
to collective phenomena when their dynamics is taken into consideration. The
dust grain dynamics allows the possibility of new wave modes [8, 9, 10, 11],
e.g. the dust acoustic waves, dust surface vortex modes, dust Coulomb waves,
dust lattice waves, which are spectacularly observed in several laboratory ex-
periments. When the waves are of large amplitudes, nonlinearities come into
the picture [10, 11, 12]. Due to nonlinearities, wave fronts steepen and shocks
are formed. If there is a delicate balance between nonlinearities and dissipa-
tion (e.g. due to dust charge ﬂuctuations or dust ﬂuid kinematic viscosity),
one has the possibility of monotonic shock formation in dusty plasmas. In
a collisionless system, a competition between nonlinearities and dispersion

214
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
leads to the formation of bare solitons in plasmas. In a nonuniform plasma,
the dust ﬂuid motion can be incompressible and the two-dimensional dust
ﬂow can appear as eddies (vortices). In a driven dusty plasma system, say
when electron or electromagnetic beams are ﬁred into the plasma, we can
have the trapping of plasmons and photons in dust density holes which are
self-consistently created by the ponderomotive force of the high-frequency lo-
calized wave envelops. Such a structure is referred to as an envelope soliton.
In this paper, we ﬁrst present a fully nonlinear theory for Langmuir envelope
solitons in a uniform plasma, taking into account the fully nonlinear dust
acoustic wave response in the presence of the ponderomotive force of Lang-
muir waves [13]. Second, we consider the formation of structures associated
with incompressible surface dust vortex modes (SDVMs) [14] and dust zonal
ﬂows (DZFs) in a nonuniform dusty plasma. The present results can help us
to understand the salient features of localized excitations of Langmuir wave
envelopes and coherent vortical structures in laboratory and space plasmas
containing micron-sized charged dust particulates.
2 Langmuir envelope solitons
We here present a fully nonlinear theory for envelope solitons in a complex
(dusty) plasma whose constituents are electrons, ions, and negatively charged
massive dust grains [13]. At equilibrium, we have ni0 = ne0 + Zdnd0, where
nj0 is the unperturbed number density of the particle species j (j equals i for
ions, e for electrons, and d for dust grains) and Zd is the number of electrons
residing on the dust grain surface. Dust grains in laboratory plasmas are typi-
cally charged negatively due to collection of electrons from the ambient plasma
[9, 15], but under UV radiation dust can also be charged positively [16]. We
suppose that the presence of electron beams in a dusty plasma generates large
amplitude Langmuir waves whose frequency is ω = (ω2
pe + 3k2V 2
T e)1/2, where
ωpe = (4πnee2/me)1/2 is the electron plasma frequency, ne is number density
of the electrons, e is the magnitude of the electron charge, me is the electron
mass, k is the wavenumber, VT e = (Te/me)1/2 is the electron thermal speed,
and Te is the electron temperature. Large amplitude Langmuir waves inter-
acting nonlinearly with ﬁnite amplitude dust acoustic perturbations generate
Langmuir wave electric ﬁeld envelope whose electric ﬁeld E evolves slowly in
comparison with the electron plasma wave period according to a nonlinear
Schr¨odinger equation
2iωp
 ∂
∂t + vg
∂
∂x

E + 3V 2
T e
∂2E
∂x2 + ω2
p

1 −ne
ne0

E = 0,
(1)
where ωp = (4πne0e2/me)1/2 is the unperturbed electron plasma frequency
and vg = 3kV 2
T e/ωp is the group velocity of the Langmuir waves. We note
that Eq. (1) is derived by combining the electron continuity and momentum

Dust Plasma Interactions in Space and Laboratory
215
equations as well as by using Poisson’s equation with ﬁxed ions and retaining
the arbitrary large electron number density perturbation ne1 associated with
the dust acoustic waves in the presence of the Langmuir wave ponderomotive
force. For our purposes, we have
ne = ne0 exp(ϕ −W 2),
(2)
where ϕ = eφ/Te, W 2 = |E|2/16πne0Te, and φ is the electrostatic potential
of the DAWs whose phase speed is much smaller than the electron and ion
thermal speeds. The ion number density perturbation associated with the
DAWs is
ni = ni0 exp

−τ(ϕ + μiW 2)

,
(3)
where τ = Te/Ti, Ti is the ion temperature, μi = me/mi, and mi is the ion
mass. We note that the W-terms in Eqs. (2) and (3) come from the averaging
of the nonlinear term mjvhj · ∇vhj over the Langmuir wave period 2π/ωpe,
where vhj ≈qjE/mjωpe is the quiver velocity of the particle species j in
the Langmuir wave electric ﬁeld, qe = −e, qi = e, and qd = −Zde. The dust
dynamics is governed by the dust continuity and momentum equations
∂nd
∂t + ∂(ndud)
∂x
= 0,
(4)
and
mdnd
∂ud
∂t + ud
∂ud
∂x

= ZdndTe
∂(ϕ −μdW 2)
∂x
,
(5)
where μd = Zdme/md, nd is the dust number density, and ud is the x compo-
nent of the dust ﬂuid velocity. The phase speed of the DAWs is assumed to
be much larger than the dust thermal speed. The equations are closed with
Poisson’s equation
λ2
De
∂2ϕ
∂x2 =
 ne
ne0
−ni
ne0
+ Zdnd
ne0

,
(6)
where λDe = (Te/4πne0e2)1/2 is the electron Debye radius. Thus, our nonlin-
ear theory of cavitons accounts for arbitrary large amplitude density varia-
tions (and associated space charge potential φ) that are associated with fully
nonlinear dispersive DAWs, contrary to the small amplitude cavitons based
on the cubic nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation [4], which discards nonlinearities
and the departure from the quasi-neutrality in the plasma slow motion.
We are interested in quasi-steady state solutions of Eqs. (1)–(6). Ac-
cordingly, we insert E(x, t) = W(ξ) exp {i[X(x) + T(t)]}, nd(x, t) = nd(ξ, t),
ud(x, t) = ud(ξ, t) and ϕ(x) = ϕ(ξ), where ξ = x −V t, and V is the constant
speed of the soliton and W(x), X(x), T(x) are assumed to be real. into Eqs.
(1)–(6) we ﬁnally obtain the coupled set of nonlinear equations

216
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
3∂2W
∂ξ2 −(λ −1)W −W exp(ϕ −W 2) = 0,
(7)
and
∂2ϕ
∂ξ2 −exp(ϕ−W 2)+α exp

−τ(ϕ + μiW 2)

+(1−α)
M

M 2 + 2(ϕ −μdW 2)
= 0,
(8)
where ξ is normalized by λDe, λ = 2ω−1
p (dT/dt) −3k2λ2
De(1 −V 2/v2
g) repre-
sents a nonlinear frequency shift, α = ni0/ne0, and M = V/CD is the Mach
number involving the dust acoustic speed CD = (ZdTe/md)1/2. Since in com-
plex plasmas, we typically have μi ≪1 and μd ≪1, the contributions of ion
and dust ponderomotive forces in Eq. (8) can be safely dropped. Thus, the
electron ponderomotive force is transmitted to ions and dust via the ambipolar
potential.
The system of Eqs. (7) and (8), without the μiW 2 and μdW 2 terms in Eq.
(8), admits the ﬁrst integral in the form of a Hamiltonian
H(W, ϕ, λ, M) = 3
∂W
∂ξ
2
−1
2
∂ϕ
∂ξ
2
−(λ −1)W 2 + exp(ϕ −W 2) −1
+α
τ [exp(−τϕ) −1] + (α −1)M

M 2 + 2ϕ −M

= 0,
(9)
where in the unperturbed state (|ξ| = ∞) we have used the boundary con-
ditions W = 0, ϕ = 0, ∂W/∂ξ = 0, ∂ϕ/∂ξ = 0. Because we are interested
in symmetric solutions deﬁned by W(ξ) = W(−ξ) and ϕ(ξ) = ϕ(−ξ), the
appropriate boundary conditions at ξ = 0 are W = W0, ϕ = ϕ0, ∂W/∂ξ = 0,
and ∂ϕ/∂ξ = 0. Hence, from Eq. (9) we have exp(ϕ0 −W 2
0 )−1−(λ−1)W 2
0 +
(α/τ) [exp(−τϕ0) −1]+(α−1)M

M 2 + 2ϕ0 −M

= 0, which shows how
the maximum values of W0 and ϕ0 are related with M and λ for given values
of τ and α. It should be stressed that the static dust case has to be treated
separately, where the last term in the left-hand side of Eq. (9) has to be re-
placed by (α −1)ϕ. Accordingly, the last term in the left-hand side of the
simpliﬁed Hamiltonian above will be replaced by (α −1)ϕ0.
In the absence of the Langmuir waves, the nonlinear DAWs are governed
by the energy integral
1
2
∂ϕ
∂ξ
2
+ Ψ(ϕ, M) = 0,
(10)
where the Sagdeev potential is
Ψ(ϕ, M) = 1 −exp(ϕ) + α
τ [1 −exp(−τϕ)] + (1 −α)M

M 2 + 2ϕ −M

.
(11)

Dust Plasma Interactions in Space and Laboratory
217
Equation (10), which is obtained from Eq. (9) in the limit of vanishing Lang-
muir wave electric ﬁelds, determines the proﬁle of non-envelope (bare) dust
acoustic solitary waves. The latter exist provided that Ψ(ϕ) is negative be-
tween zero and ±ϕ0. Multivalued solutions of Ψ(0) are ensured provided that
∂2Ψ/∂2ϕ = 0, while at ϕ = ϕ0(−ϕ0), we must have ∂Ψ/∂ϕ > 0(< 0). The
condition Ψ(ϕ0, M) = 0 gives a relation between ϕ0 and M for given values
of α and τ. It turns out that dust acoustic solitons have sub-dust acoustic
speed, negative potential and dust density hump.
Fig. 1. Small Mach number Langmuir envelope solitons (cavitons) for λ = 0.06,
τ = 2, α = 2, and M = 0.7 (left panel) and M = 10 (right panel). After Ref. [13].
The numerical solutions of Eqs. (7) and (8) are displayed in Figs. 1–2
for dusty plasmas containing micron-sized dust grains with Zd = 103 and
md/mi = 1012. The ion to electron mass ratio is typically 1836 and more
depending upon ionized dusty gases. Figure 1 shows the proﬁles of a caviton
for M = 0.7 and M = 10 with λ = 0.06 and α = 2. We see that the envelope
Langmuir solitons in complex plasmas are composed of a bell shaped Langmuir
electric ﬁeld and a dust density hole in association with a positive localized
space charge electric potential. For higher Mach numbers, the inﬂuence of
the potential on the dust dynamics becomes smaller; as can be seen from the
dust density perturbations in Fig. 1. Thus, large and small amplitude cavitons
move with sub and super dust acoustic speeds, respectively. By performing
several numerical experiments we studied the inﬂuence of the electron to ion
temperature ratio τ on the caviton. We found that the depth of the caviton
decreases as τ increases, if the other parameters are kept constant.
In order to see the diﬀerence between the cavitons and the bare dust
acoustic solitary waves [8], we integrated Eq. (10) numerically. The results

218
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
Fig. 2. Bare dust acoustic soliton (W = 0) for τ = 2, α = 2, and M = 0.7. After
Ref. [13].
are displayed in Fig. 2. The numerical results shows that the dust acoustic
solitary waves have sub–dust acoustic speed and they are associated with
negative space charge potentials and the dust density hump. As can be seen
from Fig. 2, the bare soliton also develops on a much smaller length scale
than the envelope cavitons in Fig. 1. Evidently, the properties of cavitons are
very diﬀerent from the bare dust acoustic solitary waves. We suggest that
new beam-plasma experimental and computer simulation studies should be
conducted for verifying our theoretical predictions of dust cavitons. We also
hope that forthcoming data from the Cassini mission will also reveal signatures
of magnetic ﬁeld aligned large amplitude localized Langmuir electric ﬁelds as
well as an associated positive potential and ﬁnite amplitude dust density hole
in Saturn’s rings where ne0 ∼50 cm−3, ni0 ∼950 cm−3, nd0 ∼1 cm−3,
Zd ∼103, the dust radius rd ∼1–5 μm, and Te ∼Ti ≈100 eV. In such a
Saturn plasma environment, we expect an ambipolar potential of ten volts
and a relative dust density depletion of ten percent if E ∼0.3 millivolts/m
and M = 0.96.
3 Self-steepening and shock formation
The formation of dust acoustic (DA) and dust ion-acoustic (DIA) shocks are
are studied theoretically and numerically by means of simple-wave solutions
and a comparison between ﬂuid and kinetic model for DIA waves. A ﬂuid
model admits sharp discontinuities at the shock front while the kinetic model
involves Landau-damping of the the shock front.

Dust Plasma Interactions in Space and Laboratory
219
3.1 Dust acoustic shocks
We present non-stationary solutions of fully nonlinear non-dispersive DAWs
in an unmagnetized dusty plasma [22]. The inertialess electrons and ions
are assumed to be Boltzmann distributed, Ne(φ) = exp(ϕ) and Ni(φ) =
β exp(−τϕ), where Ne = ne/ne0, Ni = ni/ni0, ϕ = eφ/Te, β = ni0/ne0, and
τ = Ti/Te. At equilibrium, we have ni0 = ne0 −ϵZdnd0, where nd0 is the un-
perturbed dust number density, Zd is the dust charge state, and ϵ equals −1
(+1) for negatively (positively) charged dust grains. From the quasineutrality
condition ne −ni −ϵZdnd = 0, we have Nd = [β exp(−τϕ) −exp(ϕ)]/(β −1)
where Nd = nd/nd0. The continuity and momentum equation for the cold
dust ﬂuid is
 ∂
∂t + u ∂
∂x

[β exp(−τϕ) −exp(ϕ)] + [β exp(−τϕ) −exp(ϕ)]∂u
∂x = 0, (12)
and
∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂x = −ϵ∂ϕ
∂x ,
(13)
where u is the normalized [by Cd = (ZdTe/md)1/2] dust ﬂuid velocity along
the x axis, the time and space are normalized by the dust plasma period ω−1
pd
and the Debye radius Cd/ωpd, respectively, where ωpd = (4πZ2
de2nd0/md)1/2
is the dust plasma frequency. Simple waves solutions of Eqs. (12) and (13)
can be found by rewriting them as
∂
∂t

ϕ
u

+

u −χ(ϕ)
ϵ
u
 ∂
∂x

ϕ
u

= 0,
(14)
where χ(ϕ) = [β exp(−τϕ) −exp(ϕ)]/[βτ exp(−τϕ) + exp(ϕ)]. The square
matrix in the left-hand side of Eq. (14) is diagonalized by a diagonalizing
matrix whose columns are eigenvectors of the matrix in Eq. (14), yielding
∂ψ±
∂t
+ λ±
∂ψ±
∂x = 0
(15)
where the eigenvalues are λ± = u ±

−ϵχ(ϕ), and the new unknowns ψ± =
u ∓F(ϕ) and F(ϕ) =
 ϕ
0 [−ϵ/χ(s)]1/2 ds. A simple-wave solution is found
by setting ψ−to zero so that u = −F(ϕ), ψ+ = 2u and from Eq. (15)
∂u/∂t + λ+(ϕ)∂u/∂x = 0, where λ+(ϕ) = −F(ϕ) +

−ϵχ(ϕ). Since u is a
function of ϕ, we also have
∂ϕ
∂t + λ+(ϕ)∂ϕ
∂x = 0,
(16)
which describes the self-steepening of the potential ϕ. The general solution of
Eq. (16) for continuous ϕ is ϕ = f0[x −λ+(ϕ)t], where f0 is a function of one
variable, obtained from the initial condition for ϕ at t = 0. The eﬀective phase

220
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
speed λ+(ϕ) is a function of the solution ϕ, and the solution may therefore
self-steepen and develop shocks.
In recent experiments [23], it was observed that large-amplitude waves,
Nd = 2.2, were associated with a ratio u/vph ∼0.5 to 0.8 between the maxi-
mum particle particle (ﬂuid) velocities and the phase speed of the waves. Lin-
ear theory gives vph/u = Nd −1 = 1.2, which deviates from the experimental
results [23]. Hence, we compare the experimental values with our theory. Us-
ing the dust density Nd = 2.2, the theoretical ratio between the particle and
phase velocities, before shocks have developed, is u/vph = (Nd−1)/Nd ≈0.55,
and the ratio between the particle velocity and the speed of fully developed
shock fronts is u/vshock = 2(Nd −1)/(Nd,left −Nd,right) ≈0.75, where we
used Nd,left = 2.2 and Nd,right = 1 (Nd,right is the unperturbed dust density
in front of the shock). The theoretical values are thus in excellent agreement
with the experimental ones. In Fig 3, we have solved the simple-wave equation
Fig. 3.
The time evolution of the electrostatic potential, dust velocity and dust
density with β = 1.1 and τ = 100, for a) t = 0 s, b) t = 0.24 s, c) t = 0.48 s, and d)
t = 0.73 s. After Ref. [22].
(16) numerically with parameters from the experiment in Ref. [23]. In order to
convert the dimensionless units to dimensional ones used in the experiment,
x was multiplied by 1.2, t by 1.1 × 10−3, and u by 1200, and ϕ by 2.5. We see
a clear signature of self-steepening of the DAWs and the creation of shocks
[curves marked d) in Fig. 3], which can also be seen in some of the experiments
of Ref [23].

Dust Plasma Interactions in Space and Laboratory
221
3.2 Dust ion-acoustic shocks
The formation of dust ion-acoustic (DIA) shocks have been observed in recent
experiments [24, 25, 26, 27]. We here discuss a theoretical model for DIA
shocks in an unmagnetized dusty plasma [28], where the inertialess electrons
are Boltzmann distributed, Ne = exp(ϕ), and the ions is governed by the
normalized momentum and continuity equations [28]
∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂z +

1
N + α −1 + 3τN
 ∂N
∂z = 0,
(17)
and
∂N
∂t + N ∂u
∂z + u∂N
∂z = 0,
(18)
where α = ne0/ni0 and τ = Ti0/Te. The time is normalized by the ion plasma
frequency and space by the electron Debye radius. Simple wave solutions of
Eqs. (17) and (18) can be found by rewriting them in the matrix form
∂
∂t

u
N

+
 u
1
N+α−1 + 3τN
N
u
 ∂
∂z

u
N

=

0
0

,
(19)
where the nonlinear wave speeds are given by the eigenvalues
λ± = u ± N 1/2

1
N + α −1 + 3τN
1/2
(20)
of the square matrix multiplying the second term in Eq. (19). This matrix can
be diagonalized by a diagonalizing matrix so that Eq. (19) takes the form [28]
∂ψ±
∂t
+ λ±
∂ψ±
∂z
= 0,
(21)
where the new variables are
ψ± = u
2 ± 1
2
 N
1

1
N ′(N ′ + α −1) + 3τ
1/2
dN ′.
(22)
Setting ψ−to zero, we have u(N) =
 N
1 [1/N ′(N ′ +α−1)+3τ]1/2 dN ′, which
inserted into Eq. (20) gives λ+ as a function of N, and we have from Eq. (21)
that
∂N
∂t + λ+(N)∂N
∂z = 0,
(23)
with the general solution (for continuous N) N = f0(ξ), where ξ = x−λ+(N)t
and f0 is the initial condition for N. We have plotted λ+ as a function of N in
the left panel of Fig. 4. We see that λ+ grows with increasing N in the two cases
with α = 0.25. For λ = 0.05, however, the phase speed ﬁrst decreases for N ≈1
while it increases for large N. In order to study the impact of kinetic eﬀects,
we have compared numerical solutions of Eqs. (17) and (18) with numerical

222
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
Fig. 4. The wave speed λ+ as a function of N for diﬀerent values on τ and α (left
panel). The ion density N obtained from numerical solutions of the ﬂuid and the
Vlasov equation are displayed in the two right columns of panels, respectively. In
the upper panels, N is shown at t = 0 (dash-dotted lines), t = 1700 (dashed lines)
and t = 3400 (solid lines), while in the middle and lower panels N is shown at t = 0,
t = 500 and t = 1000. After Ref. [28].
solutions of the Vlasov equation; see the right panels of Fig. 4. For τ = 0.1
and α = 0.25, we see that both the ﬂuid and Vlasov solutions exhibit shocks.
The shock front is distinct in the ﬂuid solution and more diﬀuse in the Vlasov
solution. For τ = 0.1 and α = 0.25, the ﬂuid solution exhibits distinct shocks,
while the Vlasov simulation shows a phase of self-steepening at t = 500,
followed by an expansion of the diﬀuse shock at t = 1000. For α = 0.05 and τ =
1, the ﬂuid solution shows a shock in the front end of the pulse, while the rear
end of the pulse also steepens. The steepening of the pulse perturbations in the
rear of the pulse can be explained by that the wave speed decreases for small-
amplitude density perturbations (1 < N < 1.1), as seen in the left panel of Fig.
4, while it increases again for large-amplitude density perturbations. We ﬁnally
note that the wave speed must be much larger than the sum of the ion thermal
and ﬂuid velocities [28], i.e. λ+ ≫VT +u, for the acceleration of particles and
Landau damping of the shock to be negligible. Inserting the expressions for
u(N) and λ+(N) into this inequality, where the scaled ion thermal speed
VT = (τT)1/2 ≈τ 1/2N, we obtain N 1/2[1/(N +α−1)+3τN]1/2 ≫(τN 2)1/2,
or (1/[(N + α −1)Nτ] + 3)1/2 ≫1. This condition is fulﬁlled if τ ≪1 or/and
if the electrons are evacuated due to the dust so that α ≪1, and at the same
time N = 1 + N1 where |N1| ≪1.
4 Surface dust vortices and zonal ﬂows
Our investigations of surface dust vortices and zonal ﬂows are based on a
model put forward by Hasegawa and Shukla [14], who theoretically pointed
out the existence of incompressible SDVMs in a nonuniform, unmagnetized

Dust Plasma Interactions in Space and Laboratory
223
dusty plasma. We ﬁrst discuss the equilibrium state of our partially ion-
ized laboratory dusty discharges in which collisions between stationary neu-
trals with electrons and ions are more frequent than those between elec-
trons and ions. Here, the equilibrium electron and ion ﬂuid velocities are
ue0 ≈−(eE0/meνen) −∇Pe0/ne0meνen and ui0 ≈eE0/miνin, respectively,
where e is the magnitude of the electron charge, E0 is the DC electric ﬁeld,
me (mi) is the electron (ion) mass, νen (νin) is the electron (ion)-neutral
collision frequency, and Pe0 is the unperturbed electron pressure which is
much larger than the ion pressure. From the conservation of the unper-
turbed current density, when sources and sinks (ionization, recombination,
etc) in steady state balance, we then deduce a vertically upward (along the
z axis) electric ﬁeld E0z = [1/ne0e(1 + α)] ∂Pe0/∂z, which levitates a nega-
tively charged dust grain in the plasma sheath due to a balance between the
electric force (= QdE0z) and the vertically downward gravity force −mdg.
Here, α = ni0meνen/ne0miνin, ni0 = ne0 −Qdnd0/e, nj0 is the unperturbed
density of the particle species j (j equals e for electrons, i for ions, and d for
dust grains), Qd = −Zde is the dust charge, Zd is the number of electrons
residing on the dust, E0z is the z component of E0, md is the dust mass,
and g is the gravity constant. We suppose that the dust charge distribution
and the equilibrium plasma densities are nonuniform along the z axis. When
the equilibrium is perturbed, one has the possibility of nonlinear SDVMs in
the form of a bipolar vortex or a chain of vortex [3, 4], which can be associ-
ated with coherent vortical structures in laboratory experiments [6]. When the
phase speed (wavelength) of the SDVMs and DZFs is much smaller than the
electron and ion thermal speeds (electron and ion collisional mean free paths
VT e,T i/νen,in, where VT e(VT i) is the electron (ion) thermal speed) in dusty
plasmas, the perturbed electrostatic forces (qjne0,i0E1) acting on electrons
and ions balance the corresponding pressure gradient −∇Pj1, where qe = −e,
qi = e, and E1 (Pj1) is the perturbed electric ﬁeld (perturbed pressure). The
dynamics of incompressible (∇· vd = 0) SDVMs and DZFs is then governed
by the dust continuity and dust momentum equations, namely [14]
∂ρd
∂t + ∇· (ρdvd) = 0,
(24)
and
ρd
 ∂
∂t + νd −η∇2 + vd · ∇

vd = −∇P1 + ρdgˆz,
(25)
where ρd = md(nd0 + nd1), nd1(≪nd0) is a small perturbation in the equi-
librium dust number density, vd is the perturbed dust ﬂuid velocity, νd is the
dust-neutral collision frequency, η represents the kinematic dust ﬂuid viscos-
ity (typically ≃10−2 −10−1 cm2/s in laboratory, similar to that of water
∼10−2 cm2/s), and P1 = Pe1 + Pi1 + Pd1 is the perturbation in the equilib-
rium pressure. We stress that Eq. (25), in which the electric force on charged
dust grains is eliminated by using E1 = (e/Qdnd)∇(Pe1 +Pi1), is widely used
in the investigation of collective processes in dusty plasmas [4].

224
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
Two-dimensional incompressible SDVMs and DZFs are characterized by
the velocity vectors vs = ˆx × ∇ψs(y, z) and vz = ˆx × ∇ψz(y, z), respectively.
Here, ˆx is the unit vector along the x axis, which is perpendicular to the
z axis, and ψs and ψz are the stream functions of the SDVMs and DZFs,
respectively. Thus, there exist SDVM and DZF vorticities characterized by
Ωs = ∇×vs ≡ˆx∇2
⊥ψs(y, z) and Ωz = ∇×vz ≡ˆx∇2
⊥ψz. Letting ρd = ρd0+ρds
and vd = vs + vz in Eqs. (24) and (25), we obtain the governing equations
for the SDVMs in the presence of DZFs. We have
 ∂
∂t + ˆx × ∇ψs · ∇

ρds + ρ′
d0
∂ψs
∂y + (ˆx × ∇ψz · ∇) ρds = 0,
(26)
and
 ∂
∂t + νd −η∇2 + ˆx × ∇ψs · ∇

∇2
⊥ψs + g ∂ρds
∂y
+ (ˆx × ∇ψs · ∇) ∇2
⊥ψz + (ˆx × ∇ψz · ∇) ∇2
⊥ψs = 0.
(27)
where ρ′
d0 = ∂ρd0/∂z and ρd0(z) ≪ρds. We note that ρdz ≪ρds due to
insigniﬁcant variation of the dust ZF stream function along the y axis.
The dynamics of DZFs in the presence of the SDVMs is governed by
 ∂
∂t + νd −η∇2 + ˆx × ∇ψz · ∇

∇2
⊥ψz + Ωave = 0,
(28)
where Ωave =
ˆx × ∇ψs · ∇∇2
⊥ψs

and the angular bracket denotes the av-
eraging over the SDVM period. In the absence of the nonlinear interactions,
the SDVMs and DZFs are decoupled. The corresponding dispersion relations,
obtained from (26)–(28), are ω2 + iω

νd + ηk2
⊥

−Ω2
Bk2
y/(k2
y + k2
z) = 0 and
Ω +i

νd + ηk2
⊥

= 0, respectively. Here, ω(Ω) is the frequency of the SDVMs
(DZFs), ky (kz) is the component of the wavevector along the y (z) axis. The
buoyancy frequency squared is denoted by Ω2
B = g∂lnρd0/∂z. If the equilib-
rium dust density is proportional to exp(−z/L), where L = ρd0/ρ′
d0 is the
dust density gradient scalesize, then Ω2
B = −g/L. We note that the latter is
a positive deﬁnite for L < 0. In the absence of dissipation, we observe the fre-
quency condensation of SDVMs for kz ≫ky →0, indicating the possibility of
SDVMs driven DZFs with short scale structures along the z axis, as discussed
below.
We ﬁrst consider the parametric excitation of DZFs by large amplitude
SDVMs. For this purpose, we neglect the self-interaction mode couplings in
(26)–(28) and let ρds = ρ0± exp(±ik0 ·r∓iω0t)+
+,−ρ± exp(ik± ·r−iω±t),
ψs = ψ0± exp(±ik0 · r ∓iω0t) + 
+,−ρ± exp(ik± · r −iω±t), and ψz =
ϕ exp(iq · r −iΩt), where the subscript 0± (±) stands for the SDVM pump
(sidebands), k± = q ± k0, and ω± = Ω ± ω0. Fourier transforming (26)–(28)
and matching the phasers, we obtain
H±ψ± = ±iω0ˆx × q · k0
k2
±

gkoy + 2k2
⊥0 −q2
⊥

ψ0±ϕ,
(29)

Dust Plasma Interactions in Space and Laboratory
225
Fig. 5. Time evolution of the SDVMs yields long scale potential ﬂows (left) and
vorticity (right) for which kz is ﬁnite and ky ≈0. The vorticity component ∇2ψs
consequently possesses elongated small scale structures.
and
(Ω + iν) ϕ = i ˆx × k0 · q
q2
⊥

K2
−ψ0+ψ−−K2
+ψ0−ψ+

,
(30)
where H± = ω2
± + i

νd + ηk2
±

ω± −Ω2
Bk2
0y/k2
±, k2
± = k2
0y + k2
z±, K2
± =
k2
⊥± −k2
0⊥, and ν = νd + ηq2
⊥. Eliminating ψ± from (30) by using (29), we
have the nonlinear dispersion relation
Ω + iν = ω0
|ˆx × k0 · q|2
q2
⊥

gk0y + 2k2
⊥0 −q2
⊥
 
+,−
K2
±|ψ0|2
H±
,
(31)
where |ψ0|2 = ψ0+ψ0−. For q⊥≪|k0| we obtain from (31) Ω (Ω + iν) =

|ˆx × k0 · q| /q2
⊥

(gk0y + 2k2
⊥0)q · k0⊥|ψ0|2, which predicts a purely growing
instability (Ω = iγ) if the growth rate γ > ν and (gk0y + 2k2
⊥0)q · k0⊥< 0.
For some typical values, viz |vs| ∼CD, |k/k0| ∼0.1, we have γ ∼one tenth of
the dust acoustic wave frequency k0CD, where CD is the dust acoustic speed
[4].
Next, in order to study the dynamics of nonlinearly coupled SDVMs and
DZFs, we develop a spectral code to carry out high resolution computer sim-
ulations of (26)–(28) in a periodic box of length π in each directions. The
time integration uses a second order predictor-corrector method. The spatial
resolution is 1024 × 1024 Fourier modes. All ﬂuctuations in the simulations
are initialized with a Gaussian random number generator to ensure that the
Fourier modes are all spatially uncorrelated and randomly phased. This en-
sures a nearly isotropic initial condition in the real space. We further make
sure that no asymmetry is introduced in the dynamical evolution by the initial
spectra and the boundary conditions. The normalization is as follows; ρds by
ρd0, ψs,z by CDλD, t by ω−1
pd , and the space variable by λD = CD/ωpd, where

226
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
Fig. 6. The potential (left) and vorticity (right) of dust zonal ﬂows (DZF), which
tends to cascade towards shorter length scales that eventually align along the ﬂow
direction.
λD = CD/ωpd is the dusty plasma Debye radius [4]. Thus, the free parameters
in our simulations are νd/ωpd ∼10−2 −10−3, η/CDλD ∼10−2, λ/L ∼0.01
and gλ/C2
D ∼λD/Lp ∼0.01, where L−1
p
= −P −1
0
∂P0/∂z. In Figs. 5 and 6
we show the evolutions of the stream functions and vorticities of the SDVMs
and DZFs, respectively. We see that stream functions are coherent, contrary
to the irregular vorticities. This is an indication of the dual cascade, in which
energy from short scale SDVMs is transferred to large scale DZFs. It is perti-
nent to note from Eqs. (26)-(28) that the mode ky ≈0 cannot be excited in a
linear regime in which this mode is entirely absent from the dynamics. Nev-
ertheless, the ky ≈0 mode, essentially leading to an asymmetric large scale
ﬂows in a real space, is generated purely as a result of nonlinear interactions
among SDVMs and DZFs in an inertial range spectral space across a large
equilibrium dust density gradient. More precisely, in the SDVMs, the energy
ﬂows towards smaller k’s, so that we expect large scale structures, similar
to the modiﬁed NS turbulence. On the other hand, DZFs are zero-frequency
limit of the SDVM mode; they have very small ky and very large kz, so that
the frequency condensation occurs for short wavelengths (viz.kz ≫ky struc-
tures. DZFs are excited due to the Reynolds stresses of the SDVMs. While
the Reynolds stresses possess a tendency of typically generating the large-
scale ﬂows, their time average appearing in Eq. (28) causes a net nonlinear
dissipation of zonal ﬂows. This appears to be the primary reason why DZFs
form short scales (see Fig. 6). The vorticity ﬁeld of DZFs in Fig. 6 appears
to be stretched across the equilibrium density gradient wrapping the small
scale dust vortex structures around in the nonlinear saturated state. The
vortices are trapped in the horizontal sheared ﬂow and propagate along the
self-consistent ﬂow across the equilibrium gradient.

Dust Plasma Interactions in Space and Laboratory
227
Fig. 7. The left panel displays Kolmogorov-like turbulent spectra of coupled DZF
and SDVMs system. The spectrum of SDVMs in inertial range turbulence is more
steep than that of DZF due to the presence of large scale ﬂows that have ky ≈0.
The numerical resolution is 1024 × 1024 Fourier modes in a two-dimensional box
of π × π. The right panel shows the eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient associated with
nonlinear turbulent transport in a coupled SDVM-DZF system. In agreement with
the left panel, transport is suppressed due to the presence of large-scale ﬂows in
SDVM, while it has enhanced in short scales DZFs.
The energy spectrum decays due to dust-neutral collisions and dust kine-
matic viscosity at smaller scales. The left panel in Fig. 7 exhibits a high
resolution Kolomogrov-like spectrum of a fully developed coupled SDVM-ZF
turbulent system and the eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the system. The
spectrum of SDVMs is evidently steeper than that of DZFs in the inertial
regime, thereby indicating the presence of large scale structures in its spec-
trum. This is further consistent with Fig. 5, which demonstrates ky ≈0 ﬂows
in the saturated SDVM-ZF turbulent state. It is to be noted that both the
spectra in Fig. 7 are steeper compared to the fully developed 2D turbulent
spectra for enstrophy or energy due to large-scale structures that condensate
the lower Fourier modes because of inverse cascade processes. The dust den-
sity ﬂuctuations also cascade towards long-scale structures due to short scale
vortex merging. There also exist nonthermal transport associated with the
eﬀective turbulent diﬀusion (Deff =
 τ
0 dτ⟨v(y, t = 0)v(y, t + τ)⟩) of a dust
particle in large scale ZF structures due to a random walk of the macroparti-
cles in enhanced zonal ﬂow ﬂuctuations. As expected, emergence of large-scale
coherent ﬂows in SDVMs quench turbulent transport, in contrast to that in-
volving random short scale DZFs, as shown in the right panel of Fig. 7. In
nonuniform, nonlinear media without dust, 2D ﬂows have been explained on
the basis of the Navier-Stokes (NS) and the Charney-Hasegawa-Mima (CHM)
equations [17, 18, 19, 20], which have two constants of motion, namely the
energy and enstrophy (squared vorticity). The energy decays from a source
to long wavelength, while enstrophy ﬂows to shorter scales. Such a dual cas-
cading, in agreement with the statistical quasi-equilibrium theory, ensures
the formation of coherent vortical structures (eddies) [21], which are respon-
sible for producing enhanced transport of ﬂuids and plasma particles. For
unbounded 2D NS turbulence, the conserved quantities are the kinetic energy

228
Padma K. Shukla, Bengt Eliasson, and Dastgeer Shaikh
E =
 ∞
0
E(k)dk and ﬂuid enstrophy Z =
 ∞
0
E(k)dk, where Ek is the kinetic
energy spectrum. For CHM turbulence, the conserved quantities are the total
energy E + λ2I and total enstrophy Z + λ2E, where I =
 ∞
0
k−2E(k)dk and
λ is a positive constant.
5 Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented two new aspects of nonlinearities in dusty
plasmas. First, we have shown that large-amplitude Langmuir waves interact
with fully nonlinear dust acoustic waves via the ponderomotive force. Such
a nonlinear interaction provides the possibility of Langmuir wave envelope
trapping in a dust density cavity and associated positive space charge poten-
tial. There could exist the posibility of energization of charged particles in
the localized potential of Langmuir wave envelope solitons. Second, we have
considered the nonlinear dynamics of incompressible SDVMs and DZFs in a
dusty plasma containing plasma inhomogeneities. We found that the Jacobian
nonlinearity associated with dust ﬂuid advection is responsible for the dual
cascade leading to structuring of dust ﬂuid in the form of vortical structures.
The latter can cause non-thermal dust particle transport across the dust den-
sity gradient. Furthermore, various scale size dust vortices can be associated
with dust hurricanes and dust devils that have been observed in laboratory
experiments as well as in the Martian atmosphere.
Acknowledgements This work was partially supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft through the Sonderforschungsbereicht 591, as well as
by the Swedish Research Council (VR).
References
1. R.Z. Sagdeev: In Reviews of Plasma Physics, vol 4, ed by M. A. Leontovich
(Consultants Bureau, New York 1966) p 23
2. R.Z. Sagdeev: Rev. Mod. Phys. 51, 11 (1979)
3. V.I. Petviashvilli, O.A. Pokhotelov: Solitary Waves in Plasmas and in the At-
mosphere (Gordon Breach, Philadelphia, 1993)
4. P.K. Shukla, A.A. Mamun: Introduction to Dusty Plasma Physics (Institute of
Physics, Bristol, 2002)
5. R. Merlino, J. Goree: Phys. Today 57, 32 (2004)
6. V.E. Fortov et al: Phys. Uspekhi 47, 447 (2004)
7. M. Hor´anyi et al: Rev. Geophys. 42, RG4002 (2004)
8. N.N. Rao, P.K. Shukla, M.Y. Yu: Planet. Space Sci. 38, 543 (1990)
9. A. Barkan, N. D’Angelo, R.L. Merlino: Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 3093 (1994)
10. P.K. Shukla: Phys. Plasmas 8, 1761 (2001)
11. P.K. Shukla: Phys. Plasmas 10, 1619 (2003)
12. P.K. Shukla, A.A. Mamun: New J. Phys. 5, 17 (2003)
13. P.K. Shukla, B. Eliasson, I. Sandberg: Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 075005 (2003)

Dust Plasma Interactions in Space and Laboratory
229
14. A. Hasegawa, P.K. Shukla: Phys. Lett. A 332, 82 (2004)
15. Z. Sternovsky, M. Hor´anyi, S. Robertson: J. Vac. Sci. Technol. 19, 2533 (2001)
16. B. Walch, M. Hor´anyi, S. Robertson: Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 838 (1995)
17. J.G. Charney: Geofys. Publ. 17, 1–17 (1948)
18. A. Hasegawa, K. Mima: Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 205 (1977)
19. A. Hasegawa, K. Mima: Phys. Fluids 21, 87 (1978)
20. A. Hasegawa: Ad. Physics 34, 1 (1985)
21. W. Horton, Y.H. Ichikawa: Chaos and Structures in Nonlinear Plasmas (World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996)
22. B. Eliasson, P.K. Shukla: Phys. Rev. E 69, 067401 (2004)
23. E. Thomas Jr, R. Merlino: IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 29, 152 (2000)
24. Y. Nakamura, H. Bailung, P.K. Shukla: Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1602 (1999)
25. Q.-Z. Luo, R.L. Merlino: Phys. Plasmas 6, 3455 (1999)
26. Q.-Z. Luo, N. D’Angelo, R.L. Merlino: Phys. Plasmas 7, 2370 (2000)
27. Y. Nakamura: Phys. Plasmas 9, 440 (2002)
28. B. Eliasson, P.K. Shukla: Phys. Plasmas 12, 024502 (2005)

Part V
Accretion Disks

Magnetorotational Instability In Accretion
Disks
V. Krishan1 and S.M. Mahajan2
1 Indian Institute of astrophysics, Bangalore-560034, India,
Raman Research Institute, Bangalore-560080, India
2 Institute for Fusion Studies, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin,Texas
78712
Summary. Accretion disks are a basic and an ubiquitous construct of nature. We
describe their formation, brieﬂy and qualitatively, in diverse astrophysical situations.
These systems, though controlled by the gravitational forces, have embedded in them
a host of magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) and plasma-physical mechanisms without
which many an observed phenomena would be hard to account for. The essential role
of the MHD turbulence has been well emphasized. We give, here, a critical review of
the ways and means of generating it through the magnetorotational instability and
in the process correct the erroneous premise on which the local analysis continues to
be carried out. The problem is complex and the present level of its understanding
leaves much that needs novel techniques to fully capture its entire range of processes.
Key words: Accretion disks-magnetorotational instability-Hall eﬀect
1 Introduction
Accretion disks form whenever a compact object such as a star or a black
hole draws matter from its surroundings. More often than not this matter
carries angular momentum and therefore cannot fall directly on to the com-
pact object but instead settles in Keplerian motion around it. The accretion
could take place via stellar winds as for example on to a black hole or through
the Roche-Lobe ﬁlling process as in close binary stars. Accretion disks oﬀer
novel and eﬃcient ways of extracting the gravitational energy from compact
objects. A blob of gas would orbit a compact object with the Keplerian speed.
It can spiral inwards only if its energy and angular momentum are removed by
some kind of a dissipative process. With this mechanism, the binding energy
of its innermost orbit can be extracted. Thus the inﬂow of the matter could
be enhanced by the outﬂow of the angular momentum. It is well known that
the Sun has the most of the mass and the planets the most of the angular
momentum! It was realized quite early that the molecular viscous mechanism

234
V. Krishan and S.M. Mahajan
cannot produce the infall required for explaining the observed emissivities of
these sources. Ever since, the turbulence assisted transport mechanisms have
been at the centre of these investigations. The turbulence, ubiquitous as it is,
needs instabilities for its generation and ﬂuid shear more often than not ﬁts
the bill. The accretion disks in Keplerian motion are well endowed with shear.
However, the shear of the Keplerian ﬂow is stable since the speciﬁc angular
momentum is an increasing function of the radial position and the Rayleigh
criterion for the stability of the rotating ﬂuids is well satisﬁed The frustrating
search for a suitable hydrodynamic instability led eventually to the study of
magnetohydrodynamic and plasma physical processes. The magnetic stresses
produced by the stretching and shearing through dynamo type mechanisms
could destabilize the system resulting in the outward transport of the angular
momentum ([1], [2], [3], [4]). However, Balbus and Hawley [5] brought out the
important and essential role of even a very weak magnetic ﬁeld in exciting an
interchange type linear instability in diﬀerentially rotating Keplerian disks.
Since this work, there has been a ﬂurry of activity to grasp the essence of the
magnetorotational instability and its attendant consequences for the trans-
port of the angular momentum deploying analytical and numerical methods
([6], [7]). The additional eﬀects such as the Hall eﬀect, the ambipolar diﬀusion
and the dissipative processes have been found to be of particular importance
in weakly ionized plasmas such as exist in the protoplanetary disks. The in-
clusion of the Hall eﬀect and the electrical resistivity was initiated by wardle
[8] wherein a formalism based on the conductivity tensor was adopted. Balbus
and Terquem [9] handled the Hall eﬀect in a dynamical way and determined
the region of instability. They also claimed that the maximum growth rate
continues to have the Oort value even with the inclusion of the Hall eﬀect.
We have examined this piece of work and ﬁnd that both the neglect of the
radial structure altogether as well as its inclusion in the so called local ap-
proximation leave much to be desired. For one the divergence free nature of
the magnetic and the velocity perturbations was violated and it should not
be. The so called local approximation under which the Fourier decomposition
is carried out in the radial coordinate for a radially non autonomous system is
another forbidden shortcut. In this paper after describing the basic properties
of accretion disks in section 2, the nature of the magneto-rotational instability
in a diﬀerentially rotating plasma is discussed in section 3. The mystery about
the nonrecoverability of the Rayleigh criterion in the zero magnetic ﬁeld limit
is solved. The global formulation of the magnetorotational instability is pre-
sented in section 4 along with some exactly solvable cases. An approach based
on being able to deﬁne an eﬀective potential is brieﬂy discussed in section 5.
The speciﬁc case of the Keplerian rotation is presented in section 6. We end
the paper with a mention of some new techniques which should be used in
order to fully grasp the subtleties and the nuances of plasmas with ﬂows, a
system of great astrophysical interest.

Magnetorotational Instability In Accretion Disks
235
2 Basic Characteristics of Accretion Disks
Accretion disks have been observed and postulated in three diﬀerent classes
of objects: 1) in star and planet forming regions, 2) in close binaries where
the two stars orbit each other and 3)around black holes in active galactic nu-
clei. Planet formation has been known to be associated with accretion and
evolution of gas and dust in disks around young stars. A molecular cloud
of gas and dust or a nebula begins to collapse when the gravitational forces
overcome the forces associated with gas pressure responsible for its expansion.
The initial collapse might be triggered by a variety of perturbations such as
a supernova blast wave or density waves in spiral galaxies. In the Nebular
Hypothesis, a cloud of gas and dust collapsed by gravity begins to spin faster
because of angular momentum conservation. Under the action of the compet-
ing forces associated with gravity, gas pressure, and rotation, the contracting
nebula begins to ﬂatten into a spinning disk with a bulge at the center. The
instabilities in the collapsing and rotating cloud cause localized gravitational
collapses. The central bulge becomes the star and condensations in the disk,
the planets, as well as their moons and other debris resulting in the forma-
tion of a system such as the Solar System. Still undergoing condensation, the
star without ignition and the planets are called the protostar and the proto-
planets, respectively. Our Sun is a single star. Most stars occur in multiple
or binary systems. In a binary system, the more massive star evolves faster
and becomes a compact object - either a white dwarf star, a neutron star,
or a black hole. The less massive star during its evolution into its expansion
phase, may be so close to the compact star that its outer atmosphere may
actually touch the surface of the compact star. If one star in a binary system
is , say, a white dwarf and the other, a normal star like the sun, the white
dwarf can pull gas oﬀthe normal star and accrete it onto itself. Since the
stars are revolving around each other, the angular momentum conservation
forbids the gas to fall directly onto the white dwarf and the gas settles in a
disk around the compact star. The gas in the disk becomes very hot due to
friction, eventually loses angular momentum and falls onto the white dwarf.
Since this hot gas is being accelerated it radiates energy, usually in X-Rays
which oﬀer a good diagnostic for accretion disks. The evidence for the rota-
tion of a disk is obtained from the observed double peaked line proﬁles. If
the stars in a binary system are far from each other, the rotation period is
long and given by Kepler’s laws. If on the other hand the stars are nearly
touching each other, as in close binaries, the orbital period is small, matter
may stream from one star onto the other star. These are called accreting bina-
ries. Accretion in such a system can be studied by plotting contours of equal
gravitational potential. The contour through the inner Lagrange point where
the net gravitational force vanishes deﬁnes two regions, one around each star,
called the Roche lobes . Mass accretion can occur if one of the stars ﬁlls its
Roche lobe, allowing matter to spill over the inner Lagrange point, in the
form of a thin stream, onto the other star. Accretion in binary systems can

236
V. Krishan and S.M. Mahajan
also take the form of a wind from the surface of one star. Then the second
star accumulates matter from the ﬁrst star as it moves on its orbit through
this wind. In complex situations, both winds and tidal accretion streams may
be important. Accretion does not stop with the formation of the disk. The
physical processes in the disk itself regulate further accretion. Accretion disks
could be weakly ionized, cold and collisional, e.g., Protoplanetary Disks or
they could be highly ionized, hot and collisionless e.g. those around black
holes. All disks are expected to be magnetized and turbulent. The eﬃciency
of conversion of the gravitational energy into electromagnetic energy (Hydro-
electric Power!) is much higher than that for hydrogen or helium burning and
varies from object to object. The emitted luminosity is L = GM ⊙MR−1 and
the eﬃciency is η = GM(Rc2)−1 where M and R are the mass and the radius
of the star and ⊙M is the mass accretion rate. For a white dwarf, M = M⊙,
the mass of the sun, R= 1000 Km, and η = 0.1%; for a neutron star, M = M⊙,
R= 10 Km., and η = 10%; for a black hole, the eﬃciency could be 10%. The
range of particle densities and temperatures both within disks and from disk
to disk is enormous. Disks occupy the broad density scale gap between the
interstellar matter, which is at the most 106 cm−3 in molecular cloud cores,
and the stellar interiors which have typically 1025 cm−3. Disks in binary sys-
tems generally have interior densities above 1015cm−3. The innermost regions
of an accretion disk can be very hot. If 1037 ergs/s is emerging from a gas
disk over a region of radial dimension of a neutron star 106cm and the gas is
emitting as a blackbody, then its temperature should be of order 107 K , a
good source of KeV photons. The surface temperature is expected to fall out-
wards in the disk. The local luminosity of a disk scales as 1/r and the radiated
ﬂux as 1/r3, implying an r−3/4 scaling law for the surface temperature. Thus,
on scales of 1010 cm., the ﬁducial disk cools to 104 K. Disks around white
dwarfs are at 105K or so in their innermost orbits, and they are not expected
to be powerful x-ray sources. This is the bare bones scenario. The accretion
process becomes complex very near the stellar surface where boundary layer
phenomena may dominate which may be the cause of ﬂares and outbursts in
white dwarf accretion. The equilibrium of the accretion disks is described by
assuming a rotating mass of gas in a cylindrically symmetric potential well
of a point mass at the origin, the centre of the disk. The radial component
of the force balance, assuming radial velocity to be small and neglecting the
vertical variation of the gravitational potential furnishes the Keplerian rota-
tion law Ω = (GMr−3)0.5. The hydrostatic balance in the vertical direction
gives the usual exponentially decreasing density proﬁle with a scale height
H =
√
2cs/Ω where cs is the sound speed. The azimuthal component of the
force balance describes the angular momentum conservation in the absence of
the viscous forces. The molecular diﬀusion produces an outward radial ﬂow.
Thus additional torque is required to transfer the angular momentum out-
wards and consequently the mass ﬂow inwards (Vr < 0). Hence the search for
shear stresses, anomalous viscosity coeﬃcient ν, instabilities and turbulence!
There are three basic timescales: 1) the shortest disk time scale TΩ = 1/Ω

Magnetorotational Instability In Accretion Disks
237
is governed by the rotation velocity; 2) time scale over which the hydrostatic
equilibrium is established in the vertical direction Tz = H/cs and 3) time
scale over which surface density changes, the viscous time scale Tν = r2/ν
with Tν ≫TΩ ∼Tz.
3 Linear Study of Diﬀerentially Rotating Plasmas
We write the MHD equations in a dimensionless form: all lengths are nor-
malized to an equilibrium length L, the magnetic and the velocity ﬁelds are
respectively normalized to the uniform ambient ﬁeld B0, and the Alfv´en speed
VA = B0/√4πρ, where ρ is the uniform mass density, and all frequencies are
measured in terms of VA/L. The induction and the force equations then read
[10], [11]:
∂B
∂t = ∇× [V × B]
(1)
∂
∂t∇× V = ∇× [V × (∇× V ) −B × (∇× B)].
(2)
Equation (2) has been obtained by taking the curl of the equation of motion;
the pressure term disappears because of the constant density assumption.
Equations (1)-(2) allow the equilibrium B0 = 	ez, V0 = rΩ
VA 	eθ. We split the
ﬁelds into their ambient and ﬂuctuating parts:
B = 	ez + b
V = V0 + v.
Invoking the form of perturbations relevant to the cylindrical geometry
b = b(r)e−iωt+ikz+imθ
and using (prime denotes the diﬀerentiation with respect to r)
∇× V0 ≡	ezg(r) = 	ez
1
r
d
dr(r2Ω(r)) = 	ez [2Ω + rΩ′(r)]
(3)
the linearized form of equations (1) and (2), in the incompressible limit (∇·v =
0), turn out to be:
ωm b = −kv + irΩ′(r)br	eθ,
(4)
ωm(∇× v) = −k(∇× b) + irΩ′(r)(∇× v)r	eθ −g(r)kv −ig′vr	ez
(5)
where ωm = ω −mΩ(r).
Equations (4) and (5), coupled with the divergence conditions (∇· v =
0, ∇·b = 0), can be combined to obtain a single one dimensional second-order
diﬀerential equation for the radial component of the velocity or the magnetic

238
V. Krishan and S.M. Mahajan
ﬁeld perturbation for any arbitrary value of m. We do plan to analyze this
general case in the near future. In this paper, however, we will consider only
azimuthally symmetric perturbations (m = 0, ωm = ω). By straightforward
algebra, we derive the relatively compact mode equation (ψ = vr or br)
Lψ ≡d
dr
1
r
d
drrψ −k2ψ = −k2
F 2

4Ω2 + 2F
ω rΩΩ′(r)

ψ.
(6)
where F = (ω2 −k2)/ω, and the deﬁnition of g(r) = 2Ω(r) + rΩ′(r) has been
used. Equation (6), in which the mode frequency appears only through ω2, is
an exact linear consequence of Eqs. (1) and (2).
A Special Case
Let us now view the mode equation in a familiar setting by dwelling on
two of its well-known limiting solutions. Let us begin with the simplest case
of rigid rotation, Ω = Ω0, Ω′(r) = 0; the mode equation reduces to
d
dr
1
r
d
drrψ −k2ψ = −4k2
F 2 Ω2
0ψ
(7)
allowing a solution
ψ = J1(μr),
and the dispersion relation

μ2 + k2
= 4k2
F 2 Ω2
0
(8)
describing the Alfv´en waves in a rotating plasma. Here μ is to be interpreted
as an eﬀective radial wavenumber. Notice that in Eq. (8), the left-hand rep-
resents the square of the total wavenumber comprised of the eﬀective radial
wavenumber μ , and the axial wavenumber k.
4 Diﬀerential Rotation — “The local lore”
Even when the rotation frequency varies with r, the conventional treatments
set, in Eq. (6),
d
dr
1
r
d
drrψ = d2ψ
dr2 + 1
r
dψ
dr −ψ
r2 = 0,
to arrive at the following “local” dispersion relation
F 2 −4Ω2 = 2rΩΩ′ F
ω
or
ω4 −ω2 
2k2 + 4Ω2 + 2rΩΩ′
+ k2 
k2 + 2rΩΩ′
= 0.
(9)

Magnetorotational Instability In Accretion Disks
239
It is straightforward to see that out of the two roots of the quartic, one
reduces to the Rayleigh criterion for vanishing magnetic ﬁeld. The second
root represents a purely-growing mode, provided
k2 + 2rΩΩ′ < 0
(10)
which is possible if Ω′ < 0, i.e., the rotation frequency decreases with distance.
This purely-growing low-frequency root is called the Magnetorotational Insta-
bility (MRI). The theoretical and experimental pursuit of MRI is a major area
of current research.
We contend that this “local” treatment is rather inadequate. In spite of
its initial utility, its predictions cannot be relied on. In the nonautonomous
diﬀerential equation, Eq. (6), the radial structure of the mode must be dictated
by the radial variation of Ω(r) and cannot be chosen arbitrarily. In fact,
diﬀerent Ω(r) proﬁles with the same sign of Ω′ could lead to vastly diﬀerent
mode structures with profound consequences for the existence and/or stability
of the mode.
5 Magnetorotational Instability - “The Global Grope”
Global analyses of the magnetorotational instability have been carried out be-
fore. Knobloch [12] derived the governing eigenvalue equation and discussed
the stability conditions for diﬀerent magnetic ﬁeld geometries and boundary
conditions. The limited validity of the local analysis as well as the essential
role of the azimuthal magnetic ﬁeld were emphasized. Dubrulle and Knobloch
[13] veriﬁed the WKB solutions numerically and assessed the relative role of
the vertical and the toroidal magnetic ﬁelds in the excitation of the MRI.
The growth rate was found to be of the order of the Alfven frequency in the
limit of vanishing vertical ﬁeld. In contrast Curry, Pudritz and Sutherland
[14] studied the growth rates and the radial eigenfunctions of the MRI for a
wide variety of physical conditions pertaining to rotation proﬁles and mag-
netic ﬁeld strengths. They claimed to recover the local behaviour with radial
eigenfunctions sinusoidal in the inner regions and exponentially decreasing in
the outer regions. The unstable global mode in a Keplerian disk has been
found to reside on the boundaries ([15]). Sano and Miyama [16] studied the
global MRI including dissipation and the vertical structure by numerically
solving the eigenvalue problem. A fully three dimensional numerical investi-
gation of the linear MRI with boundaries in all directions has been carried
out by Rudiger and Zhang [17].
More recently Coppi and Keyes [18] investigated the ballooning modes
retaining the global character in the vertical direction but assuming sinusoidal
variation in the radial direction. Kersale et al. [19] ﬁnd that the wall modes
have the properties of the local MRI for boundary conditions that constrain
the total pressure at the radial boundaries. Thus the MRI has remained an

240
V. Krishan and S.M. Mahajan
active area of research over the years with its simulations ([20]), laboratory
studies (e.g. Hantao, Goodman and Kageyama, [21]) and analytical studies
under a host of assumptions. In spite of these many and varied approaches,
the global nature of MRI is still far from delineation. The recovery of the
local characteristics of the MRI depends crucially on the choice of boundary
conditions. The typical boundary conditions, equivalent to walls with inﬁnite
potential, will surely deﬁne and conﬁne the modes almost independent of the
details of the rotation proﬁle. We believe that it is of the utmost importance
to learn about the nature of the instability from a boundary independent (
the eigenmodes vanish at the boundaries) analysis; this kind of approach is ,
perhaps, the key to understanding the eﬀects of diﬀerent rotational proﬁles.
Even though the Keplerian accretion disks were the original inspiration
for the work on MRI, we deal here with the stability of a generic magnetoro-
tational system represented by Eq. (6). A general theoretical framework is
needed since the Ω(r) proﬁles in laboratory experiments could be far from
the Keplerian.
Fortunately, relatively straightforward and well known analytic methods
are enough to extract the relevant physics quite rigorously. It is extremely
convenient that the radial dependence of Eq. (6) (apart from the cylindrical
operator) comes from Ω2 and rΩΩ′ = (r/2)(Ω2)′. Thus a model for Ω2 will
specify the entire spatial dependence.
5.1 Exactly Solvable Proﬁles
We begin our search by investigating two nontrivial Ω2 proﬁles for which the
eigenvalue problem, Eq. (6), is exactly solvable in terms of the well-known
special functions. For each of these examples, we will ﬁrst manipulate Eq. (6)
to derive an equivalent Schr¨odinger-like (self-adjoint) equation and then cal-
culate the eigenspectrum; the eﬀective eigenvalue condition will lead us to a
dispersion relation involving ω2.
I. The ﬁrst of these proﬁles may be written as:
Ω2 = Ω2
0
!
1 + α
r
"
r

Ω2′ = −Ω2
0
α
r .
(11)
For this proﬁle Ω′ < 0 if α > 0. We have deliberately chosen this form so
that the result for rigid rotation can be obtained by simply letting α →0.
We would see later that the problem associated with Ω2 = Ω2
0/r is entirely
equivalent, and by a simple transformation the results obtained for the former
can be translated for the latter.
The relevant mode equation

Magnetorotational Instability In Accretion Disks
241
d
dr
1
r
d
drrψ −k2

1 −4Ω2
0
F 2

ψ = −4k2Ω2
0
F 2
α
r

1 −F
4ω

ψ
(12)
is of the form
d
dr
1
r
d
drrψ −p0ψ + q0
r ψ = 0
(13)
where
p0 = k2

1 −4Ω2
0
F 2

,
q0 = 4αk2Ω2
0
F 2

1 −F
4ω

.
(14)
By the substitutions
ψ =
Q
r1/2 ,
z = 2√p0 r
we can derive the equivalent Schr¨odinger equation
d2Q
dz2 +

−1
4 +
q0
2√p0 z +
1
4 −1
z2

Q = 0
(15)
which is the Whittaker equation with μ = ±1, λ = q0/2√p0. Equation (15)
has well-behaved solutions
ψn = Qn
r1/2 = r e−√p0 rΦ
3
2 −
q0
2√p0
, 3, 2√p0 r

(16)
where Φ is the Kummer function. The solution requires √p0 > 0 for its exis-
tence. The eigenvalue condition
3
2 −
q0
2√p0
= −n,
(17)
then yields the dispersion relation,
q0 = (2n + 3)√p0, or
4αk2Ω2
0
F 2

1 −F
4ω

= |k|
)
1 −4Ω2
0
F 2 (2n + 3).
(18)
One immediately notices that the dispersion relation, Eq. (18), looks very
diﬀerent from the “local” dispersion relation, Eq. (9); one also sees that the
radial quantum number n appears in the spectral relation.
We will not attempt a general analysis of Eq. (18) for all the modes it
allows; we will solve it primarily to obtain an approximate dispersion relation
for the MRI-type of mode ω2 < 0, −ω2 ≪k2. For these conditions
1 −F
4ω = 1 −ω2 −k2
4ω2
= 3
4 + k2
4ω2 ≃k2
4ω2
and

242
V. Krishan and S.M. Mahajan
F 2 = (ω2 −k2)2
ω2
≃k4
ω2 .
With these approximations, Eq. (18) leads to
ω2 =

k2 −
α2Ω4
0
(2n + 3)2
 k2
4Ω2
0
.
implying that for an instability we require (α > 0)
αΩ2
0 > |k| (2n + 3)
which, for small |k|, is a much more severe constraint on Ω′ (measured by
α) than the local criterion would imply. The existence condition, √p0 > 0, is
trivially satisﬁed for the unstable root.
As the radial mode number n rises, the instability criterion becomes harder
to satisfy; thus n = 0 is the easiest to excite. In this case, the instability cri-
terion though both qualitatively and quantitatively diﬀerent from the “local”
criterion, can indeed be satisﬁed for Ω′ < 0, and the eigenvalue problem is
well posed; well-deﬁned square integrable eigenfunctions are associated with
the unstable mode. We shall see that it is not the case for the second exactly
solvable case we present here.
II. Another analytically tractable problem emerges for the rotation proﬁle:
Ω2 = Ω2
0

1 + βr2
r(Ω2)′ = βΩ2
02r2.
(19)
where β < 0(> 0). for Ω′ < 0(> 0). For this proﬁle Eq. (6) becomes
d
dr
1
r
d
drrψ −p0 ψ −qr2ψ = 0,
(20)
p0 = k2

1 −4Ω2
0
F 2 ,

q0 = −4βΩ2
0k2
F 2

1 + F
2ω

.
(21)
With the substitutions, P = rψ, and r2 = 2y, we ﬁnd the standard conﬂuent
hypergeometric form
d2P
dy2 +

−q0 −p0
2y

P = 0,
and another change of variable through z2 = 4q0y2 eventually furnishes
d2P
dz2 +

−1
4 −
p0
4√q0
1
z

P = 0.
(22)

Magnetorotational Instability In Accretion Disks
243
Equation (22) has the Whittaker form with μ = ± 1
2, λ = −p0/4√q0 and leads
to well-behaved eigensolutions
ψn = Pn
r = r e−√q0 r2/2 Φ

1 +
p0
4√q0
, 2, √q0 r2

,
(23)
provided Re √q0 > 0. The eigenvalue condition then leads to the dispersion
relation
1 +
p0
4√q0
= −n,
p0
4√q0
= −(n + 1),
or
k2

1 −4Ω2
F 2

= −4(n + 1)

−4βΩ2
0k2
F 2

1 + F
2ω
1/2
.
(24)
For the existence of the mode, the wave function ψn must fall at inﬁnity.
This can happen if Re √q0 > 0. However, for β < 0(Ω′ < 0) and ω2 < 0 both
F 2 and Fω become negative and so does
q0 = −β4Ω2
0k2
 1
F 2 +
1
2Fω

.
Thus we are led to the contradiction that the right-hand side of Eq. (24) is
purely imaginary, while the left-hand side is purely real. Therefore the proﬁle
Ω2
0(1 + βr2) for Ω′ < 0 does not admit the MRI-like mode for any value of
Ω′.
In fact, although, for β > 0 (Ω′ > 0) q0 is positive for ω2 < 0, Eq. (24) still
cannot be satisﬁed, because the left-hand side is positive and the right-hand
side [of Eq. (24)] is negative.
Here then is an example of a rotation proﬁle which does not allow a mode
with ω2 < 0 for either sign of Ω′.
6 Eﬀective Potential Approach- General Proﬁles
The most important lesson one can learn from the two exactly solvable prob-
lems is that the eigenvalue problem associated with the magnetorotational
system is rather subtle. Relatively crude methods based on the“local” or sim-
ilar analyses can be seriously misleading. Operationally, the essence of the last
section lies in the realization that the existence of a mode of the MRI-type,
for instance, depends not just on the sign and magnitude of Ω′, but on the
full radial form of Ω. In addition, a given Ω may yield a perfectly acceptable
solution for ω2 > 0 while no such solution may exist for ω2 < 0.
The dethronement of Ω′ from its exalted position in the conventional treat-
ment of the MRI is rather diﬃcult to accept; the “local” criterion sounded so

244
V. Krishan and S.M. Mahajan
patently reasonable. In order to ensure that the exactly solvable cases have
not lead us to conclusions that are somehow peculiar and belong to a set of
measure zero, let us study the eigenvalue problems associated with classes of
Ω proﬁles of which the Keplerian will be a particular case. We formulate the
equivalent Schr¨odinger-like mode equation for an eﬀective potential due to
diﬀerential rotation.
Let us assume the rotation proﬁle to have a general power law form:
Ω2 = Ω2
0 [1 + α rs] , r

Ω2′ = sαΩ2
0 rs
(25)
where s and α could be positive or negative. Straightforward algebraic ma-
nipulations yield the self- adjoint eigenvalue equation
d2Q
dr2 + [−p0 −V (r)] Q = 0
(26)
where
p0 = k2 
1 −4Ω2
0/F 2
,
(27)
V (r) =
3
4r2 −q0 rs,
(28)
and
q0 = 4k2Ω2
0
! α
F 2 + sα
4ωF
"
;
(29)
the sign of q0 is ﬁxed by the quantity in the square brackets.
The general problem of the magnetorotational modes is interesting in its
own right but our current quest will be limited to a search for the MRI-
type low-frequency instabilities. The eigenvalue problem, Eqs.(25-29), has the
following interesting features:
1) The eigenvalue (−p0) is always negative for modes with ω2 < 0.
2) The potential has two terms: the ﬁrst one represents the normal cylin-
drical centrifugal barrier and is always positive. The second term is due to
diﬀerential rotation, and its sign will crucially determine the nature of V (r).
3)
The potential must have a minimum for ﬁnite and real r in order to
yield a physically acceptable solution. In addition, the Vmin must be negative
and suﬃciently deep so that the eﬀective eigenvalue line (−p0 with magni-
tude greater than k2) intersects the potential; the intersection deﬁnes the
turning points that trap the mode. These are still the necessary conditions.
The condition of suﬃciency will be satisﬁed if the potential is deep enough to
accommodate the zero point energy associated with the lowest radial eigen-
mode. That requires an actual solution of the problem. Our attempt, here, is
to explore if the potential for a given rotation proﬁle can sustain even a single
unstable mode (ω2 < 0).
4) In the range −2 < s, V (r) approaches positive inﬁnity as r →0. For
this genre of potentials, the criteria for MRI can be succinctly summarized
as:

Magnetorotational Instability In Accretion Disks
245
a) If V (r) (positive or negative) has no minimum, no mode is possible b) If
V (r) does have a minimum but Vmin is positive, no mode is possible c) If V (r)
does have a minimum and Vmin is negative, then the necessary condition for
the existence of a mode is satisﬁed.
The second term in the potential can be considerably simpliﬁed for the
low-frequency modes. For ω2 < 0, (ω2 −k2) < 0 and |ω2| ≪k2, we have
F 2 = (ω2 −k2)2
ω2
≃k4
ω2 ,
(30)
Fω = ω2 −k2 ≃−k2
(31)
yielding
q0 ≃4k2 Ω2
0

−αs
4k2

= −αsΩ2
0.
(32)
We observe that for s > 0, V (r) has no minimum for α < 0 (Ω′ < 0). It
does have a minimum for α > 0 (Ω′ > 0), but then Vmin is positive. In either
case, therefore, no MRI-type mode is possible. This is in conformity with the
conclusion of the exactly-solvable case I with rotation model [Eq. (19)] for
s = 2. Thus we conclude that rotation proﬁles for s > 0 clearly contradict the
standard lore that a suﬃciently large Ω′ < 0, such that (−2rΩΩ′ > k2), can
lead to an instability of the MRI type.
The situation for −2 < s < 0 turns out to be more favorable to the MRI.
In this range of s, the potential V (r) has a negative minimum for q0 > 0
which is clearly possibly for αs < 0 (Ω′ < 0) and the necessary conditions for
an MRI-type mode are satisﬁed. This general result reinforces the conclusion
of the exactly solvable case II with rotation proﬁle given by Eq. (11). We also
derived the suﬃcient condition for the instability for this particular case.
We are thus forced to admit that the mathematical physics behind MRI
is a lot richer and subtler than it has been assumed to be so far. Two distinct
Ω proﬁles with similar Ω′ may lead to entirely diﬀerent consequences; one of
these may support an MRI-like unstable mode while the other may not.
We end this section by remarking that results for proﬁles of type Ω2 =
Ω2
0rs are readily obtained from the results for proﬁles Ω2 = Ω2
0(1 + αrs) by
putting p0 = k2 and α = 1; there is no qualitative change.
7 Magnetorotational instability under Keplerian
Rotation
We now take the tools of our analysis to the most important MRI related
object — the Keplerian disk for which the rotation proﬁle belongs to the
class Ω2 = Ar−(2+a), a > 0. For the Keplerian disk proper, a = 1 and A =
GM/L3, where L is the normalizing distance. The potential in the now familiar
eigenmode equation

246
V. Krishan and S.M. Mahajan
d2Q
dr2 +

−k2 −V (r)

Q = 0
(33)
has the form
V (r) =
3
4r2 −4Ak2
r2+a
 1
F 2 −2 + a
4Fω

.
(34)
For an MRI-type mode with ω2 < 0, the signs of the two terms in the square
brackets are opposite. If the ﬁrst term is dominant, then V (r) is positive ev-
erywhere and has no minimum, and therefore cannot support a mode with
an eﬀective eigenvalue (−k2). If the second term is dominant, then the sign
of the second term is negative, and the potential goes to negative inﬁnity as
r →0 (the Keplerian contribution diverges more rapidly than the centrifu-
gal one for small r). The total potential V (r) cannot have a minimum. The
purely Keplerian potential then cannot support a bound state with ω2 < 0.
The magnetorotational instability, considered as an eigenvalue problem on the
inﬁnite domain, cannot exist in a Keplerian accretion disk described within
the magnetohydrodynamic model.
8 Conclusion
After describing some basic essentials of accretion disks the inadequacies of the
local treatment of the magnetorotational instability have been emphasized. By
deriving and analyzing the appropriate eigenvalue problem for a diﬀerentially-
rotating ideal MHD plasma we have shown: 1) For a large class of rotation
frequency proﬁles, including the Keplerian, the conventionally predicted low
frequency, purely growing (ω2 < 0), axisymmetric, MRI-type instability is
not possible even for Ω′(r) < 0; the eﬀective potential stemming from radial
dependence of (Ω(r)) is found to be inadequate for trapping even the lowest
radial eigenmode, 2) For classes of (Ω(r)) that do satisfy necessary conditions
for the existence of MRI modes, the dispersion relation turns out to be qual-
itatively diﬀerent from the one found by a “local” approximation. The local
theory, therefore, can be often misleading, in addition to being inadequate.
Future analyses as well as simulations of rotating magnetoplasmas must con-
tend with this fact — the MRI they have been looking for may not be there.
A nonautonomous system also known as a nonhermitian system such as a
diﬀerentially rotating plasma does not easily submit to the standard method-
ology of investigating the linear stability. The eigenvalue problem of MRI can
be cast into a Hermitian equation only for the modes with m = 0. When
we analyze a general mode with a ﬁnite m, we encounter the diﬃculty of
non-Hermitian operators. It is only for a static (no-ﬂow) equilibrium that the
stability is studied within the framework of the spectral analysis of Hermitian
operators. The waves and instabilities in a ﬂowing plasma, such as required
for the excitation of the MRI (m = 0 modes are exceptional),are governed by

Magnetorotational Instability In Accretion Disks
247
the non-Hermitian operators.. Then, the standard notion of dispersion rela-
tion (i.e., replacement of ∂t by iω assuming a solution of the form of eiωtf(x)),
fails to capture the general nature of the dynamics. A well-known characteris-
tic of a non-Hermitian system is the possibility of a complex valued ω (reality
of the eigenvalues is a consequence of the Hermitian property). However, the
problem is not so simple. For example, the system may be unstable even if all
the eigenvalues (frequencies) are real, i.e., the dispersion relation can give only
a necessary condition for stability. On the other hand, the energy principle
can deduce only a suﬃcient condition for stability.
While the analysis of a general non-Hermitian system is still far beyond
the range of present-day mathematical theories, stability of some class of equi-
libria may be analyzed with the help of the so-called Casimir invariants. For
example the Beltrami equilibria are characterized by variational principles in-
voking some diﬀerent constants of motion ([22]). The target functional of the
variational principle consists of the energy (Hamiltonian) and helicities. The
helicity is a Casimir invariant in an ideal vortex dynamics system. The addi-
tion of a Casimir invariant to the Hamiltonian does not change the dynamics.
While the extremer of the original Hamiltonian is often trivial (for example,
the absolute minimum, i.e., zero energy state), adding Casimirs can enrich
the structure of such equilibria Beltrami equilibria are an example. When an
equilibrium point of a dynamical system is characterized as an extremer of
the Hamiltonian, we can derive a Lyapunov function from the transformed
Hamiltonian, which often yields reﬁned estimates of the suﬃcient condition
of stability. Thus the study of plasmas with ﬂows needs deployment of new
techniques such as the eﬀective potential approach and the determination of
the spectrum of a non-Hermitian system. This paper does not pass a verdict
against an instability in a rotating magnetoplasma; in particular, in a Kep-
lerian disk. We have simply proved that in a minimal model (incompressible
MHD, axisymmetric perturbations, uniform embedding ﬁeld, purely Keplerian
proﬁles extending all the way) one cannot ﬁnd unstable eigenmodes deﬁned
over the inﬁnite domain. We believe that a physics based modiﬁcation of the
rotation proﬁle near the compact object is necessary for dependable stability
prediction. In addition, the search for the origin of turbulence in accretion
disks, must be carried to more comprehensible models which include, among
other things, compressibility, nonideal and Hall Eﬀects, and nonaxisymmetric
ﬂuctuations.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the insightful discussions with Prof.
Zensho Yoshida of the University of Tokyo. The authors also express their
deep gratitude to Dr. Baba Varghese for his help in the preparation of the
manuscript.

248
V. Krishan and S.M. Mahajan
References
1. D. Lynden-Bell, D., Nature, 223, 690 (1969)
2. N. I. Shakura and R. A. Sunyaev, Astron. Astrophys, 24, 337 (1973)
3. R. D. Blandford, 1976, MNRAS, 176, 465 (1976)
4. J. E. Pringle, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 19, 137 (1981)
5. S. A. Balbus and J. F. Hawley, Ap.J., 376, 214 (1991)
6. J. C. B. Papaloizou and D. N. C. Lin, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 33, 505
(1995)
7. S. A. Balbus and J. F. Hawley, Rev. Mod. Phys., 70, 1 (1998)
8. M. Wardle, MNRAS, 279, 767 (1999)
9. S. A. Balbus and C. Terquem, ApJ, 552, 235 (2001)
10. V. Krishan and B.A. Varghese, Solar Phys., (2008)
11. S.M. Mahajan and V. Krishan, ApJ, In press, (2008)
12. E. Knobloch, MNRAS, 255, 25P (1992)
13. B. Dubrulle and E. Knobloch, ASTRON. ASTROPHYS., 274, 667 (1993)
14. C. Curry, R. E. Pudritz and G. Sutherland, Ap.J., 434, 206 (1994)
15. G. I. Ogilvie and J. E. Pringle, MNRAS, 279, 152 (1996)
16. T. Sano and S. M. Miyama, ApJ, 515, 776 (1999)
17. G. Rudiger and Y. Zhang, Astron. Astrophys, 378, 302 (2001)
18. B. Coppi and E. A. Keyes, Ap.J., 595, 1000 (2003)
19. E. Kersale et al., Ap.J., 602, 892 (2004)
20. J. F. Hawley, Ap.J., 528, 462 (2001)
21. J. Hantao, J. Goodman and A. Kageyama, MNRAS, 325, L1 (2001)
22. Z. Yoshida and S.M. Mahajan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 88, 095001 (2002)

Hybrid Viscosity and Magnetoviscous
Instability in Hot, Collisionless Accretion Disks
Prasad Subramanian1, Peter A. Becker2, and Menas Kafatos2
1 Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore - 560034, India
psubrama@iiap.res.in
2 College of Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
Summary. We aim to illustrate the role of hot protons in enhancing the magnetoro-
tational instability (MRI) via the “hybrid” viscosity, which is due to the redirection
of protons interacting with static magnetic ﬁeld perturbations, and to establish that
it is the only relevant mechanism in this situation. It has recently been shown by
Balbus [1] and Islam & Balbus [11] using a ﬂuid approach that viscous momentum
transport is key to the development of the MRI in accretion disks for a wide range of
parameters. However, their results do not apply in hot, advection-dominated disks,
which are collisionless. We develop a ﬂuid picture using the hybrid viscosity mech-
anism, that applies in the collisionless limit. We demonstrate that viscous eﬀects
arising from this mechanism can signiﬁcantly enhance the growth of the MRI as
long as the plasma β >
∼80. Our results facilitate for the ﬁrst time a direct compari-
son between the MHD and quasi-kinetic treatments of the magnetoviscous instability
in hot, collisionless disks.
Key words: MHD: Viscosity - Instability in Hot - Accretion Disks
1 Introduction
The microphysical source of viscosity in accretion disks has been a long-
standing puzzle. Since the early 1990s, there has been a growing consensus
that magnetic ﬁelds generated by the magnetorotational instability (MRI)
are key to providing the required viscosity in cold accretion disks ([2] (and
references therein), [4], [14]). The standard treatment of the MRI is valid
only for collisional plasmas, which can be described in the MHD approxima-
tion. However, the plasmas comprising hot, two-temperature accretion ﬂows,
like those described in [8] and [19] (hereafter SLE) are clearly collisionless.
This is also the case for the radiatively ineﬃcient, advection-dominated ac-
cretion ﬂows (ADAFs) treated in [15] and [16]. Filho ([9]), Kafatos ([12]) and
Paczy´nski ([17]) had initially suggested that viscosity due to collisions between
hot protons might be important in two-temperature accretion ﬂows, although

250
Subramanian, Becker & Kafatos
the eﬀects of an embedded turbulent magnetic ﬁeld were not included in their
treatments. Subramanian, Becker & Kafatos ([23]; hereafter SBK96) proposed
that a hybrid viscosity, due to protons colliding with magnetic scattering cen-
ters, might be the dominant viscosity mechanism in such accretion disks. In
this paper we investigate the implications of the hybrid viscosity for the devel-
opment of the MRI in hot disks. In particular, we show that this mechanism
can be used to establish an interesting connection between the ﬂuid models
and the quasi-kinetic treatments used by previous authors to study the viscous
enhancement of the growth rate during the early stages of the MRI.
2 MVI in hot accretion disks
Balbus ([1]) and Islam & Balbus ([11]) employed an MHD approach to study
the eﬀect of viscosity on the development of the MRI, and discovered a ro-
bust instability which they call the magnetoviscous instability (MVI). In the
MVI, angular momentum is exchanged between ﬂuid elements via viscous
transport, which plays a central role in the development of the instability.
Balbus ([1]) does not address the physical origin of the viscosity that is cen-
tral to the development of the MVI, and therefore his results are stated in
terms of an unspeciﬁed coeﬃcient of dynamic viscosity, η. Islam & Balbus
([11]) assumed the plain Spitzer (collisional) viscosity due to proton-proton
collisions in their treatment of the MVI, but this particular mechanism is not
eﬀective in hot, collisionless disks. There have been some recent attempts at
quasi-kinetic treatments of MRI-like instabilities in collisionless plasmas (e.g.,
[18], [20], [21]). It is interesting to note that the pressure anisotropy concept
discussed in these papers is somewhat similar to the idea embodied in the
hybrid viscosity formalism of SBK96. This suggests that it may be possible
to develop a “ﬂuid” picture based on the hybrid viscosity that would be ap-
plicable in hot disks, hence bridging the gap between the two paradigms. The
hybrid viscosity concept of SBK96 relies only on the momentum deposited by
particles propagating along magnetic ﬁelds lines between adjacent annuli in
the disk.
3 Applicability of the hybrid viscosity
Paczy´nski ([17]) and SBK96 noted that the presence of even a very weak
magnetic ﬁeld can eﬀectively “tie” protons to magnetic ﬁeld lines. Paczy´nski
argued that in this situation the ion-ion collisional mean free path is much
larger than the proton Larmor radius and therefore the eﬀective mean free
path is equal to the proton Larmor radius. This led him to conclude that
the viscosity would eﬀectively be quenched in such a plasma. However, the
protons in hot accretion disks are typically super-Alfv´enic, especially in the
initial stages of a magnetic ﬁeld-amplifying instability such as the MRI, when

Hybrid viscosity and the MVI
251
the plasma β parameter is quite large. This reﬂects the fact that the ratio of
the proton thermal speed to the Alfv´en speed is equal to (3β/2)1/2. Since the
magnetic ﬁeld evolves on Alfv´en timescales, it can be considered to be static
for our purposes. The motion of collisionless, charged particles propagating
through a static, tangled magnetic ﬁeld has been explored extensively in the
context of cosmic ray propagation (e.g., [5], [6], [10]). It has been conclusively
established that the particle transport does not obey Bohm diﬀusion for a
wide range of rigidities and turbulence levels (see, e.g., Fig. 4 of [5] and Fig. 4
of[6]). In particular, the low rigidity, low turbulence level case appropriate for
our situation obeys the predictions of quasi-linear theory quite well, and the
mean free paths are much larger than the Larmor radius as expected.
Under these conditions, SBK96 demonstrated the importance of a new
kind of viscosity called the “hybrid viscosity,” in which angular momentum is
transported via collisions between protons and static irregularities (“kinks”)
in the magnetic ﬁeld. In this picture, a proton spirals tightly along a magnetic
ﬁeld line until its gyro-averaged guiding center motion (and hence its gyro-
averaged momentum) is changed via an encounter with a kink. During the
encounter the proton therefore exchanges angular momentum with the ﬁeld,
which transfers the resulting torque to the plasma. The eﬀective mean free
path used in the computation of the viscosity is set equal to the distance
between the magnetic kinks (i.e., the ﬁeld coherence length). We express the
hybrid viscosity mechanism in terms of a pressure anisotropy in § 6.1.
Here we examine the implications of the hybrid viscosity for the devel-
opment of the MVI in hot, two-temperature accretion disks around underfed
black holes. We assume that the accreting plasma is composed of fully ion-
ized hydrogen. The physical picture involves the perturbation of an initially
straight magnetic ﬁeld line that eventually leads to the instability (see, e.g.,
Fig. 1 of [1]). Since the proton Larmor radius is negligible in comparison to a
macroscopic length scale, we can eﬀectively think of the proton as sliding along
the ﬁeld line like a bead on a wire. The proton is forced to change its direction
upon encountering the kink associated with the initial ﬁeld perturbation. In
such a situation, the eﬀective mean free path, λ, used in the description of
the hybrid viscosity should be set equal to the wavelength of the initial per-
turbation. We demonstrate that the hybrid viscosity is the principle mediator
of the MVI during the early stages of the instability.
4 Hybrid viscosity in hot accretion disks
The structure of hot, two-temperature accretion disks was ﬁrst studied in
detail by SLE, and later by Eilek & Kafatos ([8]) and SBK96. The closely
related advection-dominated accretion ﬂows were analyzed by Narayan & Yi
([15]), Narayan, Mahadevan, & Quataert ([16]), and many subsequent authors.
In this section, we investigate the nature of the viscosity operative in hot, two-

252
Subramanian, Becker & Kafatos
temperature accretion disks based on a simpliﬁed set of model-independent
relations that are applicable to both ADAF and SLE disks.
The gas in the disk can be considered collisionless with respect to the
protons provided
λii > H ,
(1)
where H is the half-thickness of the disk, and the ion-ion Coulomb collisional
mean free path, λii, is given in cgs units by (SBK96)
λii = 1.80 × 105
T 2
i
Ni ln Λ ,
(2)
for a plasma with Coulomb logarithm ln Λ and ion temperature and number
density Ti and Ni, respectively. We can combine equations (1) and (2) to
obtain
λii
H = 1.20 × 10−19
T 2
i
τes ln Λ > 1 ,
(3)
where the electron scattering optical thickness, τes, is given by
τes = Ni σT H ,
(4)
and σT is the Thomson scattering cross section. Equation (3) can be rear-
ranged to obtain a constraint on τes required for the disk to be collisionless,
given by
τes < 1.20 × 105 T 2
12
ln Λ
∼4 × 103 ,
(5)
where T12 ≡T/1012 K and the ﬁnal result holds for ln Λ = 29 and T12 ∼1.
This conﬁrms that tenuous, two-temperature disks with Ti ∼1011–1012 K will
be collisionless for typical values of τes.
The collisionless nature of hot two-temperature accretion ﬂows established
by equation (5) strongly suggests that the plain Spitzer viscosity is not going
to be relevant for such disks, although the answer will depend on the strength
of the magnetic ﬁeld. The hybrid viscosity will dominate over the Spitzer vis-
cosity provided the ion-ion collisional mean free path λii exceeds the Larmor
radius, λL, so that the protons are eﬀectively “tied” to magnetic ﬁeld lines.
We therefore have
λii > λL ,
(6)
where the Larmor radius is given in cgs units by (SBK96)
λL = 0.95 T 1/2
i
B
,
(7)
where B is the magnetic ﬁeld strength. Whether the disk is of the SLE or
ADAF types, it is expected to be in vertical hydrostatic equilibrium, and
therefore

Hybrid viscosity and the MVI
253
HΩK = cs =

kTi
mp
,
(8)
where ΩK = (GM/r3)1/2 is the Keplerian angular velocity at radius r around
a black hole of mass M, cs is the isothermal sound speed, and k and mp denote
Boltzmann’s constant and the proton mass, respectively.
We can utilize equation (6) to derive a corresponding constraint on the
plasma β parameter,
β ≡8πNikTi
B2
,
(9)
such that the hybrid viscosity dominates over the Spitzer viscosity. By com-
bining equations (2), (4), (6), (7), (8), and (9), we ﬁnd that
β < 3.71 × 1032 T 9/2
12 R3/2 M8
τes (ln Λ)2
,
(10)
where M8 ≡M/(108M⊙) and R ≡rc2/(GM). The minimum possible value
of the right-hand side in equation (10) is obtained for the maximum value of
τes, which is given by equation (5). We therefore ﬁnd that
β < 3.09 × 1027 T 5/2
12 R3/2 M8
ln Λ
.
(11)
This relation is certainly satisﬁed in all cases involving the accretion of plasma
onto a black hole, even in the presence of an inﬁnitesimal magnetic ﬁeld. We
therefore conclude that the protons will be eﬀectively tied to the magnetic ﬁeld
lines in two-temperature accretion disks around stellar mass and supermassive
black holes, which implies that the hybrid viscosity dominates over the Spitzer
viscosity in either SLE or ADAF disks.
The results of this section conﬁrm that protons in two-temperature accre-
tion disks rarely collide with each other, and are closely tied to magnetic ﬁeld
lines, even for very weak magnetic ﬁelds. If a ﬁeld line is perturbed, a typical
proton sliding along it will follow the perturbation, and will thus be eﬀectively
redirected. This is the basic premise of the hybrid viscosity concept, which we
will now apply to the development of the MVI.
5 MVI driven by the hybrid viscosity
Figure 1 of [11] shows that magnetoviscous eﬀects signiﬁcantly enhance the
MRI growth rates in the parameter regime
X <
∼x ,
Y >
∼y ,
(12)
where x ∼1, y ∼1, and

254
Subramanian, Becker & Kafatos
X ≡2.0 (kZ H)2
β
,
Y ≡
1.5 η k2
⊥
Ni mp ΩK
,
(13)
with η denoting the coeﬃcient of dynamic viscosity and kZ and k⊥represent-
ing the z and transverse components of the ﬁeld perturbation wavenumber,
respectively. The maximum MVI growth rate is
√
3 ΩK, which is 4/
√
3 ∼2.3
times larger than the maximum MRI growth rate of (3/4) ΩK. The conditions
in equation (12) are derived from the dispersion relation given in equation (33)
of [11], which is general enough to accommodate diﬀerent prescriptions for the
viscosity coeﬃcient η. The condition X <
∼x implies a constraint on β given
by
β >
∼
2 (kZ H)2
x
.
(14)
As mentioned earlier, a proton sliding along a given ﬁeld line is forced
to change its direction when it encounters a kink/perturbation in the ﬁeld
line. The eﬀective viscosity arises due to the momentum deposited in the
ﬂuid by the proton when it encounters the perturbation. In this picture, the
perturbation wavelength plays the role of an eﬀective mean free path. If we
consider perturbations along an initially straight ﬁeld line, as in Figure 1 of
[1], then only the transverse component of the perturbation wavelength is
relevant, and the eﬀective mean free path for the proton is therefore
λ = 2 π
k⊥
≡ξH ,
(15)
where ξ ≤1, since the perturbation wavelength λ cannot exceed the disk
half-thickness H (SBK96).
In general, the Shakura-Sunyaev ([22]) viscosity parameter α is related to
the coeﬃcient of dynamic viscosity η via (SBK96)
αP ≡−η R dΩK
dR = 3
2 η ΩK ,
(16)
where P = Ni k Ti is the pressure in a two-temperature disk with Ti ≫Te.
By combining equations (8), (13), and (16), we ﬁnd that the condition Y >
∼y
can be rewritten as
(k⊥H)2 α >
∼y .
(17)
Following Islam & Balbus ([11]), we expect that k⊥<
∼kZ. By combining equa-
tions (14) and (17), we therefore conclude that β must satisfy the condition
β >
∼
2 y
αx .
(18)
We can also combine equations (14) and (15) to obtain the separate constraint
β >
∼
79
ξ2x .
(19)

Hybrid viscosity and the MVI
255
Equations (18) and (19) must both be satisﬁed if the MVI is to signiﬁcantly
enhance the MRI growth rates. Hence the combined condition for β is given
by
β >
∼Max
 79
xξ2 , 2 y
αx

.
(20)
We can use equation (16) to calculate the Shakura-Sunyaev parameter
αhyb describing the hybrid viscosity. The associated coeﬃcient of dynamic
viscosity is given by
ηhyb = λ
λii
ηS ,
(21)
where λii is computed using equation (2) and ηS is the standard Spitzer col-
lisional viscosity, evaluated in cgs units using
ηS = 2.20 × 10−15 T 5/2
i
ln Λ .
(22)
The quantity ηhyb deﬁned in equation (21) describes the eﬀect of momentum
deposition due to protons spiraling tightly along a magnetic ﬁeld line over a
mean free path λ. It diﬀers from the expression given in equation (2.14) of
SBK96 by a factor of 2/15, because we do not consider tangled magnetic ﬁelds
here. Setting η = ηhyb in equation (16) and utilizing equations (2), (8), (15),
(21), and (22), we ﬁnd after some algebra that the expression for αhyb reduces
to the simple form
αhyb = 1.2 ξ .
(23)
We can now combine equations (20) and (23) to conclude that in the case of
the hybrid viscosity, the MVI is able to eﬀectively enhance the MRI growth
rates if
β >
∼βcrit ≡Max
 79
xξ2 , 1.7y
xξ

.
(24)
In particular, we note that if x ∼1 and y ∼1, then equation (24) reduces
to βcrit = 79 ξ−2, since ξ ≤1. We therefore conclude that magnetoviscous
eﬀects driven by the hybrid viscosity will signiﬁcantly enhance the growth rate
(compared with the standard MRI growth rate) until the plasma β parameter
reaches ∼80, or, equivalently, until the ﬁeld strength B reaches ∼10% of the
equipartition value. This assumes that the dominant perturbations have ξ ∼1,
which is expected to be the case during the early stages of the instability. Once
the ﬁeld exceeds this strength, the growth rate of the instability during the
linear stage will be equal to the MRI rate.
6 Relation to previous work
It is interesting to contrast our result for the β constraint with those developed
by previous authors using diﬀerent theoretical frameworks.

256
Subramanian, Becker & Kafatos
6.1 Hybrid viscosity in terms of pressure anisotropy
Before proceeding on to discussing the result for the β constraint, we ﬁrst cast
the basic hybrid viscosity mechanism in terms of a pressure anisotropy. Several
similar treatments appeal to a large-scale pressure anisotropy, rather than an
explicit viscosity mechanism (e.g., [18], [20], [21]). It is therefore instructive
to show that the hybrid viscosity mechanism we employ can be cast in these
terms.
We follow the approach of SBK96 in considering a perturbation in the
local magnetic ﬁeld of an accretion disk. The pressure anisotropy due to the
momentum ﬂux carried by the particles can be analyzed in the local region
using cartesian coordinates, with the ˆz-axis aligned in the azimuthal (orbital)
direction, the ˆy-axis pointing in the outward radial direction, and the ˆx-axis
oriented in the vertical direction. The unperturbed magnetic ﬁeld is assumed
to lie in the ˆz direction, and the perturbed ﬁeld makes an angle θ with respect
to the ˆz-axis, and an azimuthal angle φ with respect to the ˆx-axis. In keeping
with the hybrid viscosity scenario, we assume that the particles spiral tightly
around the perturbed ﬁeld line. In this situation, the component of the particle
pressure in the direction parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld, P||, is equal to the
ˆz-directed ﬂux of the ˆz-component of momentum, Pzz. Likewise, the total
particle pressure perpendicular to the ﬁeld, P⊥, is equal to the sum of the
ˆx-directed momentum in the ˆx-direction and the ˆy-directed momentum in
the ˆy-direction, denoted by Pxx and Pyy, respectively. Following the same
approach that leads to equation (2.11) of SBK96, we obtain for the parallel
pressure
P|| = Pzz = 2 mp Ni cos2θ ×
 kTi
2mp
−
2kTi
πmp
1/2
u′(0) λ cos θ sin θ sin φ

,
(25)
where u(y) represents the shear velocity proﬁle and the prime denotes diﬀer-
entiation with respect to y. Similarly, the total perpendicular pressure is given
by
P⊥= Pxx + Pyy = 2 mp Ni sin2 θ ×
 kTi
2mp
−
2kTi
πmp
1/2
u′(0) λ cos θ sin θ sin φ

.
(26)
Taken together, equations (25) and (26) imply that
P⊥
P||
= tan2 θ .
(27)
This result characterizes the pressure anisotropy associated with the hybrid
viscosity mechanism. Equation (27) is strictly valid only in the limit of zero

Hybrid viscosity and the MVI
257
proton gyroradius, which is a reasonable approximation in hot advection-
dominated disks. When the ﬁeld line is unperturbed, so that it lies precisely
along the ˆz-direction, then θ = 0, and equation (27) indicates that the per-
pendicular pressure tends to zero; in reality, owing to ﬁnite gyroradius eﬀects,
the perpendicular pressure would actually be a small, but ﬁnite quantity even
in this limit. Early in the instability, when the ﬁeld line is slightly perturbed,
θ has a small but non-zero value, and equation (27) predicts that the perpen-
dicular pressure starts to increase in relation to the parallel pressure. We have
cast the hybrid viscosity mechanism in terms of a pressure anisotropy in this
section in order to make contact with that part of the literature in which vis-
cous momentum transport is treated solely in this manner. The quasi-kinetic
treatments of Quataert and co-workers rely on a Landau ﬂuid closure scheme
for deriving the perturbed pressure. The pressure anisotropy implied by the
hybrid viscosity mechanism (eq. [27]) is much simpler than the corresponding
result obtained using either the ﬂuid closure scheme of Quataert et al., or the
double adiabatic scheme ([7]) adopted by other authors.
6.2 Relation to MVI treatment
In their treatment of the MVI, Islam & Balbus ([11]) parametrized the vis-
cous transport in terms of an unspeciﬁed proton-proton collision frequency,
ν. Their estimates of the growth rates in collisional plasmas agree fairly well
with those derived using quasi-kinetic treatments. Based on their formalism,
they conclude that the β regime within which magnetoviscous eﬀects can sig-
niﬁcantly impact the MRI growth rates in two-temperature accretion ﬂows
extends to βcrit ∼1. However, as they point out, their approach breaks down
in the collisionless limit ν →0, which describes the ADAF disks of interest
here. It is therefore not surprising that their constraint on β is signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the one we have derived in equation (24).
6.3 Relation to quasi-kinetic treatment
Quataert, Dorland & Hammett ([18]) have treated the case of a strictly colli-
sionless plasma using a fairly complex kinetic formalism. Their results suggest
that, for the case with Bφ = Bz and kr = 0 (which is the one considered by Is-
lam & Balbus and ourselves), viscous eﬀects will signiﬁcantly impact the MRI
growth rates for values of β that are several orders of magnitude larger than
those predicted by our formalism. For example, their analysis predicts that a
growth rate of 1.5 ΩK can be achieved if β >
∼βcrit ∼104 (see Fig. 4 of [18])
and Fig. 2 of [20]). On the other hand, Figure 1 of [11] indicates that a growth
rate of 1.5 ΩK can be achieved in the MHD model if X <
∼0.35, Y >
∼12, which
corresponds to x = 0.35, y = 12 in equation (12). Assuming that ξ ∼1 as
before, equation (24) yields in this case the condition β >
∼βcrit ∼225. Hence
our MHD model based on the hybrid viscosity predicts that viscous eﬀects
will enhance the MRI growth rates down to much lower values of β than those

258
Subramanian, Becker & Kafatos
obtained in the quasi-kinetic model. This diﬀerence reﬂects the diﬀering role
of the particle pressure in the two scenarios.
In our formulation, the viscosity is expressed by protons that deposit their
momentum into the ﬂuid upon encountering kinks in the magnetic ﬁeld, which
is anchored in the local gas. The importance of forces due to gas pressure
relative to those due to the tension associated with the magnetic ﬁeld thus
scales as the plasma β. On the other hand, gas pressure forces are only √β
times as important as forces arising out of magnetic tension in the quasi-
kinetic treatment of [18]. It follows that the value of βcrit computed using
our MHD model based on the hybrid viscosity should be comparable to the
square root of the βcrit value obtained using the quasi-kinetic model, and this
is borne out by the numerical results cited above.
7 Conclusions
In this paper we have investigated the role of hot protons in inﬂuencing the
magnetoviscous instability described in [1] and [11]. We have shown that the
only relevant viscosity mechanism in this situation is the “hybrid” viscosity,
which is due to the redirection of protons interacting with magnetic irregular-
ities (“kinks”) set up by the initial ﬁeld perturbations. In particular, we have
demonstrated in equation (24) that viscous eﬀects associated with the hybrid
viscosity will signiﬁcantly augment the MRI growth rates for β >
∼80, which
corresponds to a magnetic ﬁeld strength B below ∼10% of the equipartition
value. For smaller values of β, we expect the instability to grow at the MRI
rate as long as it remains in the linear regime. This conclusion is expected
to be valid in any hot, two-temperature accretion disk, including advection-
dominated ones. We have obtained this result using a relatively simple ﬂuid
treatment, based upon the general dispersion relation obtained in [11]. Our use
of the hybrid viscosity concept alleviates an important drawback in the ﬂuid
application made by Islam & Balbus ([11]), because their treatment of viscous
transport breaks down in the collisionless plasmas of interest here. The new
results we have obtained allow an interesting comparison between the MHD
approach and the quasi-kinetic formalism used by other authors. We show
that the diﬀerences between the predictions made by the two methodologies
stem from the diﬀering treatments of the particle pressure.
PS gratefully acknowledges the hospitality of the Jagannath Institute of
Technology and Management, where part of this work was carried out.
References
1. Balbus, S. A. 2004, Astrophys. J., 616, 857
2. Balbus, S. A. 2003, Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys, 41, 555
3. Balbus, S. A. & Hawley, J. F. 1992, Rev. Mod. Phys., 70, 1

Hybrid viscosity and the MVI
259
4. Brandenburg, A., Nordlund, A., Stein, R. F., & Torkelsson, U. 1995, Astrophys.
J., 446, 741
5. Candia, J. & Roulet, E. 2004, J. Cosmology & Astropart. Phys., 10, 7
6. Casse, F., Lemoine, M., & Pelletier, G. 2001, Phys. Rev. D, 65, 023002
7. Chew, G. F., Goldberger, M. L., & Low, F. E. 1956, Proc. R. Soc. London A,
236, 112
8. Eilek, J. A., & Kafatos, M. 1983, Astrophys. J., 271, 804
9. Filho, C. M. 1995, Astron. Astrophys., 294, 295
10. Giacalone, J. & Jokipii, J. R. 1999, Astrophys. J., 520, 204
11. Islam, T. & Balbus, S. A. 2005, Astrophys. J., 633, 328
12. Kafatos, M. 1988, in Supermassive Black Holes (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.
Press), 307
13. Mahadevan, R. 1997, Astrophys. J., 477, 585
14. Matsumoto, R., & Tajima, T. 1995, Astrophys. J., 445, 767
15. Narayan, R., & Yi, I. 1995, Astrophys. J., 452, 710
16. Narayan, R., Mahadevan, R. & Quataert, E. 1998, in Theory of Black Hole
Accretion Disks, ed. M. Abramoqicz, G. Bjornsson, & J. E. Pringle (Cambridge:
Cambridge Univ. Press), 148. astro-ph/9803141
17. Paczy´nski, B. 1978, Acta Astronomica, 28, 253
18. Quataert, E., Dorland, W., & Hammett, G. W. 2002, Astrophys. J., 577, 524
19. Shapiro, S. L., Lightman, A. L., & Eardley, D. M. 1976, Astrophys. J., 204, 187
(SLE)
20. Sharma, P., Hammett, G. W., & Quataert, E. 2003, Astrophys. J., 596, 1121
21. Sharma, P., Hammett, G. W., Quataert, E., & Stone, J. M. 2006, Astrophys.
J., 637, 952
22. Shakura, N. I., & Sunyaev, R. A. 1973, Astron. Astrophys., 24, 337
23. Subramanian, P., Becker, P. A., & Kafatos, M. 1996, Astrophys. J., 469, 784
(SBK96)

Transonic Properties of Accretion Disk Around
Compact Objects
Banibrata Mukhopadhyay
Astronomy and Astrophysics Programme, Department of Physics, Indian Institute
of Science, Bangalore-560012, India bm@physics.iisc.ernet.in
Summary. An accretion ﬂow is necessarily transonic around a black hole. How-
ever, around a neutron star it may or may not be transonic, depending on the inner
disk boundary conditions inﬂuenced by the neutron star. I will discuss various tran-
sonic behavior of the disk ﬂuid in general relativistic (or pseudo general relativistic)
framework. I will address that there are four types of sonic/critical point possible to
form in an accretion disk. It will be shown that how the ﬂuid properties including
location of sonic points vary with angular momentum of the compact object which
controls the overall disk dynamics and outﬂows.
Key words: MHD: Accretion disk – compact objects
1 Introduction
Accretion disks serve to identify compact objects, mostly black holes and neu-
tron stars, in the universe. The most common way to understand its formation
is in a binary system where matter is pulled oﬀa companion star and settles
on to the compact object in the form of a disk. As practically black holes
and neutron stars cannot be seen, by detecting and analyzing light rays oﬀ
an accretion disk one can understand the properties of the central compact
object. Other examples of the accretion disk are the protoplanetary disks,
disks around active galactic nuclei, in star-forming systems, and in quiescent
cataclysmic variables etc.
The molecular viscosity in an accretion disk is rather low. Shakura & Sun-
yaev [1] proposed that there is a signiﬁcant turbulent viscosity explaining
transport of matter inwards and angular momentum outwards with the Ke-
plerian angular momentum proﬁle [2]. However, until the work by Balbus &
Hawley [3] origin of the instability and plausible turbulence was not under-
stood. Applying the idea of Magneto-Rotational-Instability (MRI) described
by Velikhov [4] and Chandrasekhar [5], they showed that the Keplerian disk
ﬂow may exhibit unstable modes under perturbation in the presence of a weak

262
Banibrata Mukhopadhyay
magnetic ﬁeld. This plausibly generates turbulence which results transport.
However, there are several accretion disk systems where gas is electrically neu-
tral in charge and thus the magnetic ﬁeld does not couple with the system.
Examples of such system are protoplanetary and star-forming disks, disks
around active galactic nuclei and in quiescent cataclysmic variables. Hence
in these systems MRI is expected not to work to generate turbulence. While
the origin of the transport in such systems is still an ill understood problem,
some mechanisms have been proposed by various groups including the present
author [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
However, the problems of the transport and then the viscosity are not se-
vere if the disk angular momentum proﬁle deviates from the Keplerian type to
sub-Keplerian type. In a sub-Keplerian disk, the gravitational force dominates
over the centrifugal force resulting in a strong advective component of the in-
falling matter [13, 14, 15]. Due to the dominance of the gravity, the matter
even with a constant angular momentum may transport inwards easily. An
accretion disk with a strong advective component, namely the advective accre-
tion disk, is hotter than the Keplerian disk which explains successfully several
systems e.g. Sgr A∗, GRS 1515+105 which are expected to be consisting of
hot disks. Therefore, such an accreting system may not be of pure Keplerian
type. At least close to the compact object it is an advective accretion disk. In
a sub-Keplerian disk, at far away oﬀthe black hole, the speed of the infalling
matter is close to zero when it is practically out of the black hole’s inﬂuence.
However, temperature of the system is ﬁnite resulting in ﬁnite sound speed at
that radius. On the other hand, matter speed at the black hole horizon reaches
the speed of light (c), while, by causality condition, sound speed can be at the
most c/
√
3. Therefore, there must be a location where matter speed crosses
local sound speed making the ﬂow transonic. However, the second condition
namely the inner boundary condition not necessarily be satisﬁed in the ﬂow
around a neutron star. Therefore an accretion ﬂow around a neutron star may
or may not be transonic.
In the present article, I mainly concentrate on the sub-Keplerian accre-
tion disk with possible multitransonic ﬂow. If the ﬂow is transonic, then the
disk dynamics and corresponding outﬂow are inﬂuenced by the sonic loca-
tions/points [14, 16, 17, 18, 19]. Depending upon the ﬂow energy (entropy)
and angular momentum, a disk may exhibit one to four sonic points, through
which all however, matter may not pass. Sonic points in accretion disks play
role similar to the critical points in simple harmonic oscillators, particularly
to control the dynamics of the system. Indeed an accretion disk can be looked
upon as a damped harmonic oscillator [20].
I organize the paper as follows. In the next section, I discuss accretion
ﬂow, ﬁrst the spherical one and then the disk ﬂow, and formation of possible
sonic points therein in the absence of any energy dissipation. In §3, I analyze
how the rotation of the compact object aﬀects the sonic points. Subsequently,
for completeness, I present the generalized set of accretion disk equations

Transonic Properties of Accretion Disk Around Compact Objects
263
including possible dissipation eﬀects in §4, without going into their solutions.
Finally, I summarize in §5.
2 Accretion ﬂow and formation of sonic points
First I discuss simple spherical accretion namely Bondi ﬂow. Subsequently, I
include angular momentum into the equations set describing disk accretion. I
show that while the Bondi ﬂow around a nonrotating compact star exhibits
single sonic point the disk ﬂow may exhibit multiple sonic points.
As gravity is expected to be very strong close to the compact object, in
principle I should describe the ﬂow system by the set of general relativistic
equations. For a nonrotating compact object equations should be written in
the Schwarzschild geometry and for a rotating compact object they should be
in the Kerr geometry. However, that might hide transparency of the descrip-
tion, as the full general relativistic set of equations is so cumbersome that it
is diﬃcult to relate the terms with the physics they carry. Indeed under some
occasions a full general relativistic description is not required. Therefore, I de-
scribe the system by pseudo-Newtonian approach. Here one uses Newtonian
set of equations only along with a modiﬁed gravitational force/potential such
that it mimics the general relativistic features approximately to describe the
system.
2.1 Bondi ﬂow
This happens for an isolated star when matter falls onto it from all directions,
resulting in a spherical accretion. Therefore, to describe the system, we con-
sider the spherical polar coordinate system where only nonzero component of
velocity is vr = v. Hence the equations describing the steady-state ﬂow with
negligible viscosity are given as:
v dv
dx + 1
ρ
dP
dx + Fg = 0,
(1)
1
x2
d
dx

ρvx2
= 0, hence ρvx2 = constant = ˙Mac,
(2)
where all the variables are expressed in dimensionless units. v is velocity in
unit of light speed, x = r/rg where r is radial coordinate and rg = GMs/c2,
Ms, c, G are respectively mass of the central star, speed of light, Newton’s
gravitation constant, P, ρ are respectively corresponding dimensionless pres-
sure, density of the ﬂow,
˙Mac is accretion rate and Fg is gravitational force
given by

264
Banibrata Mukhopadhyay
Fg = 1
x2 : Newtonian,
(3)
=
1
(x −2)2 : pseudo −Newtonian, Schwarzschild geometry [21],
(4)
= (x2 −2j√x + j2)2
x3(√x(x −2) + j)2 : pseudo −Newtonian, Kerr geometry [22], (5)
where j is speciﬁc angular momentum of the compact object. Integrating
equation (1) for an adiabatic ﬂow to a nonrotating compact object I obtain
E = 1
2v2 + na2 −
1
x −2,
(6)
where polytropic index n = 1/(γ −1) and γ is deﬁned as γ = a2ρ/P with
P = Kργ, K is gas constant and a is sound speed. If the Mach number of
the ﬂow is deﬁned as M = v/a, then at a constant energy E, it is clearly
understood from (6) that M −x trajectory is always hyperbolic-type [23]
with a sonic point at M = 1 shown in Fig. 1 [20]. The solution marked ‘A’
by an arrow indicates accretion and marked ‘C′’ as wind. None of the other
solutions are physical to describe accretion and wind. However, for the ﬂow
around a rotating compact object, there might be more than one sonic point
but I will not discuss them here, this can be checked with a pseudo-Newtonian
potential proposed for the Kerr geometry [22].
2.2 Disk accretion ﬂow
Now I consider a binary system when the compact object is closely associated
with its binary companion star and pulling matter oﬀit. The gravitational
force acts on the donor star radially. On the other hand, the star is rotating
and hence the matter detached oﬀit due to gravitational pull has angular
momentum. As a result the matter infalls towards the compact object in a
spiral path forming a disk around it called the accretion disk. Therefore, the
radial momentum balance equation describing disk dynamics in steady-state
in the absence of any energy dissipation is [18]
v dv
dx + 1
ρ
dP
dx −λ2
x3 + Fg = 0,
(7)
where λ is speciﬁc angular momentum of the infall which is a conserved quan-
tity in a nondissipative ﬂow. The corresponding vertically averaged mass con-
servation reads as
1
x
d
dx (xΣv) = 0, hence −4πxΣv = constant = ˙Mac,
(8)
where Σ ∼h(x)ρ is the (vertically integrated) column density [24] with ρ
is density at the equatorial plane, h(x) = a

x/Fg is the half-thickness of

Transonic Properties of Accretion Disk Around Compact Objects
265
Fig. 1. Upper panel: Bondi ﬂow: Mach number as a function of logarithmic radial
coordinate for various energy of the ﬂow. The point ‘B’ is sonic point and the solution
marked by the arrow ‘A’ indicates accretion and ‘C′’ indicates wind. Lower panel:
Disk ﬂow: Same as Bondi ﬂow.

266
Banibrata Mukhopadhyay
the disk computed from the assumption of vertical equilibrium. Now integrat-
ing (7) for an adiabatic ﬂow towards a nonrotating compact object I obtain
speciﬁc energy of the ﬂow
E = 1
2v2 + na2 + λ2
2x2 −
1
x −2,
(9)
which is a conserved quantity for the nondissipative system. It is seen from
(9) that at far away from the black hole and close to its event horizon lo-
cated at x = 2, last term (gravitational potential energy) on the right hand
side dominates over the last but one term (centrifugal energy) resulting in a
hyperbolic-type M −x trajectory as shown in Fig. 1 [16, 20]. On the other
hand, at an intermediate location, with an appropriate value of λ, centrifu-
gal energy may dominate over gravitational potential energy resulting in an
ellipse-type M −x trajectory as shown in Fig. 1.
2.3 Formation of sonic points in disk accretion
Combining (7) and (8) I obtain
dv
dx =
λ2
x3 −Fg +
a2
γ+1

3
x −
1
Fg
dFg
dx

v −
2a2
(γ+1)v
= N
D .
(10)
At the sonic point x = xc, D = 0 and thus to have continuous dv/dx at the
same location N must vanish. Hence, applying N = D = 0 at x = xc to (10),
I obtain velocity, sound speed, speciﬁc energy at xc
vc = ac
)
2
γ + 1, hence Mach number Mc =
)
2
γ + 1,
ac =

(γ + 1)
λ2
x2c
−Fgc
  1
Fgc
dFg
dx

c
−3
xc
−1
,
Ec =
2γ
γ −1
⎡
⎣
λ2
x3c −Fgc
1
Fgc

dFg
dx

c −3
xc
⎤
⎦.
(11)
I also compute a quantity that carries information of entropy
˙
M = (γK)n ˙Mac
(12)
which is a useful quantity to study the sonic point behavior. Now to obtain
solutions for the accretion disk one has to integrate (10) with a proper bound-
ary condition. As our interest is in transonic solutions, the matter necessarily
passes through the sonic location and this I consider as our staring point of the
integration. As the system under consideration is in the steady-state, integrat-
ing from the sonic point to outwards (inwards) and vice versa are equivalent.

Transonic Properties of Accretion Disk Around Compact Objects
267
However, dv/dx given in (10) is of 0/0 form. Therefore, applying l’Hospital’s
rule, I obtain dv/dx at x = xc
dv
dx

c
= −B +
√
B2 −4AC
2A
,
(13)
where,
A = 1 +
2a2
c
(γ + 1)v2c
+ 4a2
c(γ −1)
v2c(γ + 1)2 ,
B = 4a2
c(γ −1)
vc(γ + 1)2
 3
xc
−
1
Fgc
dFg
dx

c

,
C =
a2
c
γ + 1
 1
Fgc
dFg
dx

c
2
−
1
Fgc
d2Fg
dx2

c
−3
x2c
 
−3λ2
x4c
−
dF
dx

c
−a2
c(γ −1)
(γ + 1)2
 3
xc
−
1
Fgc
dFg
dx

c
2
.
(14)
Now the value of discriminant D = B2 −4AC determines the type of sonic
point. Clearly D depends on the sonic location which can be computed for a
given Ec from (11). In fact, the expression for Ec can be rewritten as a fourth
order polynomial of xc. Hence, Ec and λ are the input parameters determining
ﬂow behavior for a given system.
There are four diﬀerent types of sonic point shown in Fig. 2 [25, 20] classi-
ﬁed according to the trajectory around it. (1) When D < 0 with B = 0, sonic
point is center-type (elliptical trajectories in Fig. 1). (2) D < 0 with B ̸= 0
gives spiral-type sonic point. For D ≥0 with (3) AC > 0 it is nodal-type, and
(4) AC < 0, saddle-type (hyperbolic trajectories in Figs. 1). When AC = 0 for
D ≥0, sonic points are called straight line.
Fig. 2. Trajectories around various critical points where abscissa and ordinate are
radial coordinate and Mach number respectively.

268
Banibrata Mukhopadhyay
3 Sonic point analysis in disks around rotating compact
objects
The energy and information of entropy at the sonic point Ec and
˙
Mc as
functions of sonic location xc given by (11) and (12) respectively describe the
loci of sonic point energy and entropy of the ﬂow. Figure 3 [18] shows their
behavior for various choice of speciﬁc angular momentum of the compact
object. As I consider a nondissipative disk, the energy and entropy remain
conserved throughout. The intersections of the curves by the constant energy
and entropy line (which are the horizontal lines in the ﬁgure) indicate the sonic
points of the accretion disk for that particular energy and entropy and speciﬁc
angular momentum of the black hole (Kerr parameter). It is clearly seen that,
at a particular energy and entropy, if the Kerr parameter increases, the region
where sonic points form (as well as radii of marginally bound (xb) and stable
(xs) orbits) shift(s) to a more inner region of the disk and possibility to have
all sonic points in the disk outside event horizon increases. As an example,
for a = 0.998, the inner edge of the accretion disk enlarges to such an extent
that the fourth sonic point in the disk appears outside the event horizon. On
the other hand, for retrograde orbits (counter rotating cases), all the sonic
points come close to each other tending to overlap for a particular value of
the Kerr parameter (when xb and xs move to greater radii). Therefore, as the
value of the Kerr parameter decreases, the possibility of forming individual
sonic points decreases and thus shrinking the region containing sonic points.
This is very well-understood physically; as the Kerr parameter decreases, total
angular momentum of the system decreases resulting in the disk tends to a
Bondi-like ﬂow, that has single saddle-type sonic point.
On the other hand, for a particular a, if Ec and
˙
Mc decrease, then the
possibility to have all the sonic points in the disk increases. This is understood
from Fig. 3 that as Ec and
˙
Mc decrease, the curve is more likely to intersect
the horizontal line. If Ec = 0.05, then number of intersection of all the curves,
except the dashed one, by the Ec = 0.05 line is one giving only sonic point.
The dashed curve with a = 0.998 intersects twice. However, for Ec = 0.0065
(as considered in Fig. 3), the dashed curve intersects four times exhibiting
four possible sonic points in the ﬂow and the other curves intersect thrice. For
a detailed description, see earlier works [18, 19].
Note that the sonic points occurring with a negative slope of the curve
indicate the locations of ‘saddle-type’ sonic point and those with a positive
slope indicate the ‘center-type’ sonic point. Thus the rotation of a black hole
plays an important role in the formation of the sonic points which are related
to the structure of accretion disks and presumably formation of outﬂows and
jets.

Transonic Properties of Accretion Disk Around Compact Objects
269
Fig. 3. Variation of energy (upper panel) and information of entropy (lower panel)
as functions of logarithmic sonic radius when j is a parameter. Central solid curve
is for nonrotating compact object (j = 0), while curves in regions of either side of
it indicated by ‘+’ and ‘−’ are for prograde and and retrograde orbits respectively.
Diﬀerent curves from j = 0 line to downwards are for j = 0.1, 0.5, 0.998 and to up-
wards for j = −0.1, −0.5, −0.998. The horizontal line indicates the curve of constant
energy of 0.0065 (upper panel) and of constant entropy of 5 × 10−5 (lower panel).
Other parameters are λ = 3.3, γ = 4/3.

270
Banibrata Mukhopadhyay
4 Generalized set of equations describing a
sub-Keplerian accretion disk
So far, for simplicity, I have described disks without any dissipative energy. In
principle a disk must exhibit viscous dissipation making angular momentum
varying with disk radius. The hot disk ﬂow with ion temperature T ≥109K
is also expected to generate signiﬁcant nuclear energy mostly via proton-
capture reactions [26, 27]. On the other hand, signiﬁcant energy is radiated
out through the inverse-Compton, bremsstrahlung and synchrotron eﬀects,
cooling the disk. In addition, signiﬁcant energy is expected to be absorbed
through endothermic nuclear reactions, mostly via dissociation of elements [26,
27, 28], aﬀecting disk dynamics signiﬁcantly. Although the main purpose of
the paper is to describe the basic mechanism to form sonic points in accretion
disks and for that the inviscid set of equations without dissipation suﬃces, for
completeness here I describe the generalized set of equations including eﬀects
of energy dissipation. However, I will not go for the solutions of such equations
set which is beyond the scope of present paper.
Therefore, in general one should incorporate two more equations namely
angular momentum balance and energy equation apart from (7) and (8) as
given below. I express viscous dissipation q+ in terms of shear stress Wxφ as
q+ = W 2
xφ/η, where η is the coeﬃcient of viscosity. Shakura & Sunyaev [1]
parametrized shear stress in a Keplerian disk by gas pressure with a constant
α, called Shakura-Sunyaev viscosity parameter, such that Wxφ = −αP. How-
ever, in an advective disk, there must be a signiﬁcant contribution due to ram
pressure and thus shear stress may be read as Wxφ = −α(In+1P +Inv2ρ)h(x),
where I consider vertically averaged disk and In+1, In appear due to integra-
tion in the vertical direction [24] when P and ρ are pressure and density
respectively at the equatorial plane. However, if I use this expression of shear
stress in describing q+, it loses information of actual shear, eﬀect due to vari-
ation of angular velocity in the disk. The proper way of writing shear stress
should be Wxφ = ηx dΩ
dx , where Ω is angular frequency of the ﬂow. If I sub-
stitute this into q+, then ﬁnal equation to be solved will contain a nonlinear
derivative term making it tedious to solve. Therefore, following Chakrabarti
[29], I express q+ = −α(In+1P +Inv2ρ)h(x)x dΩ
dx , where one Wxφ in the square
is expressed by pressure and other by actual shear. Thus the angular momen-
tum balance equation is
v dλ
dx =
1
Σx
d
dx

x2q+
.
(15)
Then the energy equation may read as
ΣvT ds
dx = vh(x)
Γ3 −1
dP
dx −Γ1
P
ρ
dρ
dx

= Q+ −Q−,
(16)
where s is entropy density, Q+ = q+ + qnuc and Q−= qic + qbr + qsyn when
qnuc is the nuclear energy released/absorbed in the disk and qic, qbr, qsyn are

Transonic Properties of Accretion Disk Around Compact Objects
271
respectively energy radiated out due to inverse-Compton, bremsstrahlung,
synchrotron eﬀect. Following Cox & Giuli [30], I deﬁne
Γ3 = 1 + Γ1 −β
4 −3β , Γ1 = β +
(4 −3β)2(γ −1)
β + 12(γ −1)(1 −β), β = gas pressure
total pressure.
(17)
To obtain generalized solutions of an accretion disk with a signiﬁcant ad-
vective component, namely a sub-Keplerian accretion disk, one has to solve
equations (7), (8), (15) and (16) simultaneously along with the set of equa-
tions generating nuclear energy through the reactions taking place in a hot ﬂow
among all the isotopes therein as given in earlier works in detail [26, 27, 28].
5 Summary
I have described how the various types of sonic point form in an accretion
disk. While sonic points necessarily form in disks around a black hole, it need
not be around a neutron star. I have discussed that upto four sonic points may
exist outside event horizon of a black hole depending on the ﬂow parameters
and black hole’s angular momentum. However, in a zero angular momentum
Bondi ﬂow around a nonrotating compact object, there is only one sonic point.
When a disk has saddle and/or nodal -type sonic points, matter passes through
them, while it does not for center and spiral -type sonic points. Therefore, the
last two are not physical sonic points for accretion and wind because they
may not be the part of solutions extending from inﬁnity to the black hole
horizon. However, the corresponding branches may be useful to explain certain
scenarios in disks, as argued by some authors, e.g. formation of shock helping
to understand observed truncation of disks [31, 32], launching of outﬂows and
jets [17]. In these cases, as explained by previous authors [17, 18, 19, 20, 29],
the infalling matter ﬁrst becomes supersonic passing through the outer saddle-
type sonic point, then the shock forms and it becomes subsonic around a
center-type sonic point, and ﬁnally passing through the inner saddle-type sonic
point it falls into the black hole. A detailed behavior of such solutions around
a fast rotating compact object should be investigated for understanding jet
physics in future.
References
1. N.I. Shakura, R.A. Sunyaev: A&A 24, 337 (1973)
2. J.E. Pringle: ARA&A 19, 137 (1981)
3. S.A. Balbus, J.F. Hawley: ApJ 376, 214 (1991)
4. E. Velikhov: J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 36, 1398 (1959)
5. S. Chandrasekhar: Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 46, 253 (1960)
6. A. G. Tevzadze, G. D. Chagelishvili, J.-P. Zahn, R. Chanishvili, J. Lominadze:
A&A 407, 779 (2003)

272
Banibrata Mukhopadhyay
7. P. Yecko: A&A 425, 385 (2004)
8. O. Umurhan, O. Regev: A&A 427, 855 (2004)
9. N. Afshordi, B. Mukhopadhyay, R. Narayan: ApJ 629, 373 (2005)
10. B. Mukhopadhyay, N. Afshordi, R. Narayan: ApJ 629, 383 (2005)
11. B. Mukhopadhyay: ApJ 653, 503 (2006)
12. A. G. Tevzadze, G. D. Chagelishvili, J.-P. Zahn: arXiv0710.3648
13. M. Abramowicz, W. Zurek: ApJ 246, 314 (1981)
14. S. K. Chakrabarti: ApJ 347, 365 (1989)
15. R. Narayan, I. Yi: ApJ 428, L13 (1994)
16. S. K. Chakrabarti: Phys. Rep. 266, 229 (1996)
17. S. K. Chakrabarti: A&A 351, 185 (1999)
18. B. Mukhopadhyay: ApJ 586, 1268 (2003)
19. B. Mukhopadhyay, S. Ghosh: MNRAS 342, 274 (2003)
20. S. K. Chakrabarti: Theory of transonic astrophysical ﬂows, (World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore 1990)
21. B. Paczy´nski, P. J. Wiita: A&A 88, 23 (1980)
22. B. Mukhopadhyay: ApJ 581, 427 (2002)
23. H. Bondi: MNRAS 112, 195 (1952)
24. R. Matsumoto, S. Kato, J. Fukue, A. T. Okazaki: PASJ 36, 71 (1984)
25. J. M. T. Thompson, H. B. Stewart: Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos, (John
Willey and Sons Ltd. 1985)
26. S. K. Chakrabarti, B. Mukhopadhyay: A&A 344, 105 (1999)
27. B. Mukhopadhyay, S. K. Chakrabarti: A&A 353, 1029 (2000)
28. B. Mukhopadhyay, S. K. Chakrabarti: ApJ 555, 816 (2001)
29. S. K. Chakrabarti: ApJ 464, 664 (1996)
30. J. Cox, R. Giuli: Principles of Stellar Structure, (Gordon & Breach, New York
1968)
31. S. V. Vadawale, A. R. Rao, A. Nandi, S. K. Chakrabarti: A&A 370, 17 (2001)
32. S. V. Vadawale, A. R. Rao, S. Naik, J. S. Yadav, C. H. Ishwara-Chandra, A.
Pramesh Rao, G. G. Pooley: ApJ 597, 1023 (2003)

Maximum Brightness Temperature for an
Incoherent Synchrotron Radio Source
Ashok K. Singal
Astronomy & Astrophysics Division, Physical Research Laboratory, Navrangpura,
Ahmedabad, India - 380009. asingal@prl.res.in
Summary. We discuss here a limit on the maximum brightness temperature achiev-
able for an incoherent synchrotron radio source. This limit, commonly referred to
in the literature as an inverse Compton limit, prescribes that the brightness tem-
perature for an incoherent synchrotron radio source may not exceed ∼1012 K, a
fact known from observations. However one gets a somewhat tighter limit on the
brightness temperatures, Tb <
∼1011.5 K, independent of the inverse Compton eﬀects,
if one employs the condition of equipartition of energy in magnetic ﬁelds and rela-
tivistic particles in a synchrotron radio source. Pros and cons of the two brightness
temperature limits are discussed.
Key words: Radio emission: non-thermal – inverse Compton scattering
1 Introduction
From the radio spectra combined with the VLBI (Very large Baseline Inter-
ferometry) observations it has been seen that the brightness temperatures
for compact self-absorbed radio sources do not exceed about ∼1011−12 K.
Kellermann and Pauliny-Toth [1] ﬁrst time gave an explanation of this in
terms of what has since then come to be known in the literature as an Inverse
Compton limit. They argued that at brightness temperature Tb >
∼1012 K en-
ergy losses of radiating electrons due to inverse Compton eﬀects become so
large that these result in a rapid cooling of the system, thereby bringing the
synchrotron brightness temperature quickly below this limit. Of course much
larger brightness temperatures have been inferred for the variable sources,
however this excess in brightness temperatures has been explained in terms
of a bulk relativistic motion of the emitting component [2, 3, 4]. The Doppler
factors required to explain the excess in temperatures were initially thought
to be ∼5−10, similar to the ones required for explaining the superluminal ve-
locities seen in some compact radio sources [5, 6, 7]. Singal and Gopal-krishna
[8] pointed out that under the conditions of equipartition of energy between

274
Ashok K. Singal
magnetic ﬁelds and relativistic particles in a synchrotron radio source, much
higher Doppler factors are needed to successfully explain the variability events.
Singal [9], without taking recourse to any inverse Compton eﬀects, derived a
somewhat tighter upper limit Tb <
∼1011.5 K, ﬁrst time using the argument
that due to the diamagnetic eﬀects the energy in the magnetic ﬁelds cannot
be less than a certain fraction of that in the relativistic particles and then an
upper limit on brightness temperature follows naturally. However, it has to
be noted that if one considers the drift currents at the boundaries, which may
be present due to the non-uniformities in the magnetic ﬁelds [10], the above
limit on the magnetic ﬁeld energy gets modiﬁed. Later similar derivations [11]
of the Tb <
∼1011.5 K limit as well as of large Doppler factors, used essentially
the same equipartition arguments as in [8, 9].
Here, we ﬁrst derive the inverse Compton limit on Tb using the approach
followed in [1], and then the equipartition limit as done in [9]. In fact we ar-
gue that even if we relax the condition of the equipartition of energy between
magnetic ﬁelds and relativistic particles and let the energy in relativistic par-
ticles to be many orders of magnitude larger than that in the magnetic ﬁelds
we still end up with a rather tight Tb limit. On the other hand if the energy
in particles is smaller than that in magnetic ﬁelds, then in any case Tb has to
be lower than ∼1011.5 K, as pointed out in [9].
2 Inverse Compton limit
We want to study the maximum brightness temperature limit in the rest frame
of the source, therefore we assume that all quantities have been transformed
to that frame. Hence we will not consider here any eﬀects of the cosmological
redshift or of the relativistic beaming due to a bulk motion of the radio source.
In inverse Compton interaction between relativistic electrons and their
the synchrotron photons, the energy of the radio photons could get boosted
to X-ray frequencies. The average energy of a photon in an inverse Compton
interaction gets boosted by a factor γ2
e where γe is the Lorentz factor of the
interacting relativistic electrons [12]. We conﬁne our discussion to a single
scattering case only.
A relativistic electron of Lorentz factor γe gyrating in a magnetic ﬁeld B
emits most of its radiation in a frequency band near its characteristic syn-
chrotron frequency [13, 14]
νc = 0.29 3
4π
e B
m0 cγ2
e
(1)
which gives us γ2
e = 8.2×102 νc/B for νc in GHz and B in Gauss. From this we
ﬁnd that for B ∼10−3 Gauss as inferred in compact radio sources, νc = 0.1 to
10 GHz yields γ2
e ∼105 to ∼107. Thus during an inverse Compton interaction
while at the lower end the synchrotron photons can get boosted to infrared

Maximum Brightness Temperature
275
frequencies (∼1013) Hz, at the higher end the synchrotron photons of radio
frequencies ∼1010 Hz could get boosted to X-ray frequencies (∼1017) Hz.
The power radiated by the inverse Compton process Pc as compared to
that radiated by synchrotron mechanism, Ps is given as,
Pc
Ps
= Wp
Wb
(2)
where Wp and Wb respectively are the photon energy density and magnetic
ﬁeld energy density within the source. This relation is true in the case where
Thomson scattering cross-section is valid [12], which is true in our case as we
have γehν << m0c2, for ν < 100 GHz.
The photon energy density is related to the radiation intensity as [14]
Wp = 4π
c
 ν2
ν1
Iν dν
(3)
where the speciﬁc intensity Iν is deﬁned as the ﬂux density per unit solid angle,
at frequency ν. In radio sources, the observed ﬂux density in the optically thin
part of the spectrum usually follows a power law, i.e., Iν ∝ν−α, between the
lower and upper cut oﬀfrequencies ν1 and ν2. In synchrotron theory this
spectrum results from a power law energy distribution of radiating electrons
N(E) ∝E−γ within some range E1 and E2, with γ = 2α + 1 and E1, E2
related to ν1, ν2 by Eq. (1). In compact radio sources the source may become
self-absorbed with ﬂux density ∝ν2.5 below a turnover frequency νm. From
Eq.(3) we can get
Wp = 2.27 × 10−7 f(α) Fm να
m
Θx Θy
ν1−α
2
−ν1−α
1
1 −α

erg cm−3
(4)
the expression to be evaluated in the ‘limit’ for α = 1. Here Fm (Jy) is the
ﬂux density at frequency νm (GHz) corresponding to the point of spectral
turnover, while Θx and Θy (mas) represent the angular size along the major
and minor radio axes of the source component, assumed to be an ellipse. For
calculating the photon energy density it may be appropriate to take the lower
limit of the spectrum at νm itself, therefore we can put ν1 = νm in the above
expression. Here it should be noted that Fν is the ﬂux density in the optically
thin part of the synchrotron spectrum, accordingly Fνm obtained from an
extrapolation up to ν = νm using the straight slope α, is not the same as the
actual peak ﬂux density Fm at the turnover bend (see e.g, [15]). In Table 1
values of f(α) = Fνm/Fm are listed, which as we see are of the order of unity.
We can express Wp in terms of the brightness temperature at the peak of
the spectrum
Tm = 1.763 × 1012Fm Θ−1
x Θ−1
y ν−2
m K
(5)
to get

276
Ashok K. Singal
Wp = 1.29 × 10−7 f(α)
1 −α
 ν2
νm
1−α
−1
 
ν3
m
 Tm
1012

erg cm−3.
(6)
On the other hand, from the synchrotron self-absorption we get,
B = 10−5 b(α) F −2
m Θ2
x Θ2
y ν5
m,
(7)
values of b(α)1 are given in Table 1.
Here a plausible assumption has been made that the direction of the mag-
netic ﬁeld vector, with respect to the line of sight, changes randomly over
regions small compared to a unit optical depth. For a uniform magnetic ﬁeld
direction throughout the source region, the co-eﬃcients a(α) (see next section)
and b(α) would be modiﬁed by factors of the order of unity.
Then the magnetic ﬁeld energy density Wb = B2/8π can be written as,
Wb = 3.84 × 10−11 b2(α) ν2
m
 Tm
1012
−4
erg cm−3.
(8)
Equations (2), (6) and (8) lead us to,
Pc
Ps
= νm

Tm
1011.3 p(α)
5
(9)
where the function
p(α) =

f(α)
b2(α)(1 −α)
. ν2
νm
1−α
−1
/ −1/5
(10)
is of the order of unity (Table 1)2.
3 Equipartition temperature limit
Energy density of the relativistic electrons in a synchrotron radio source com-
ponent is given by [13, 16] 3
We =
8.22 × 10−9
a(α) (α −0.5)
Fν να B−1.5
Θx Θy s
y1(α)
ν1
α−0.5
−
y2(α)
ν2
α−0.5 
(11)
this expression to be evaluated in the ‘limit’ for α = 0.5. Here We (erg cm−3)
is the energy density of radiating electrons; Fν (Jy) is the ﬂux density at
frequency ν (GHz), with ν1 < ν < ν2; and s(pc) is the characteristic depth of
the component along the line of sight.
1 Calculated from the tabulated functions in [14].
2 In Table 1 and 2 we have taken ν1 and ν2 to be 0.01 and 100 GHz, and the
turnover frequency νm is taken to be 1 GHz.
3 Values of a(α) in Table 1, calculated by us from the tabulated functions given
in [14], appear slightly diﬀerent from the ones in [13] but are in agreement with
those in [17].

Maximum Brightness Temperature
277
Table 1. Various functions of the spectral index α
α
γ
a(α)
b(α) f(α) p(α) t(α) y1(α) y2(α)
0.25 1.5 0.149
2.07
1.10 0.66 0.68
1.3
0.011
0.5
2.0 0.103
2.91
1.19 0.83 0.85
1.8
0.032
0.75 2.5 0.0831 2.85
1.27 0.94 0.80
2.2
0.10
1.0
3.0 0.0741 2.52
1.35 1.00 0.67
2.7
0.18
1.5
4.0 0.0726 1.79
1.50 1.03 0.43
3.4
0.38
In terms of the brightness temperature we can write,
We = 4.66 × 10−9 f(α)
s a(α) (α −0.5)
 y1(α)
ν1/νm
α−0.5
−
 y2(α)
ν2/νm
α−0.5 
ν2.5
m
B1.5
 Tm
1012

.
(12)
From the overall charge neutrality of the plasma we expect the electrons to
be accompanied by an equal number of positive charges. Any positrons would
have already been accounted for in our equation above, however presence of
heavy particles will contribute additionally to the total particle energy density.
Let the energy in the heavy particles be ξ times that in the lighter particles,
then the total particle energy density is Wk = (1 + ξ) We.
Now if we assume the energy in particles to be related to that in magnetic
ﬁelds by
Wk = η Wb
(13)
then we get
B7/2 = 1.17 × 10−7f(α)
a(α) (α −0.5)
 y1(α)
ν1/νm
α−0.5
−
 y2(α)
ν2/νm
α−0.5 
×
(1 + ξ)
s η
ν2.5
m
 Tm
1012

. (14)
Now substituting for magnetic ﬁeld from Eq.(7) we get,
η
1 + ξ =
1
s νm

Tm
1010.9 t(α)
8
(15)
where the function
t(α) =

f(α)
(α −0.5) a(α) b3.5(α)
. y1(α)
ν1/νm
α−0.5
−
 y2(α)
ν2/νm
α−0.5/ −1/8
(16)
is of the order of unity (Table 1).

278
Ashok K. Singal
4 A Correction to the derived Tm values
Actually Tm values have been calculated (both here as well as in the literature)
for the turnover point in the synchrotron spectrum where the ﬂux density
peaks. However, the deﬁnition of the brightness temperature (Eq. 5) also
involves ν−2. Therefore a maxima of ﬂux density is not necessarily a maxima
for the brightness temperature also. In fact a zero slope for the ﬂux density
with respect to ν would imply for the brightness temperature a slope of −2.
Therefore the peak of the brightness temperature will be at a point where ﬂux
density ∝ν2, so that Tb ∝F ν−2 has a zero slope with respect to ν. The peak
of Fν ν−2, can be determined in the following manner. The speciﬁc intensity
in a synchrotron self-absorbed source is given by [14],
Iν = c5(α)
c6(α)
 ν
2c1
2.5 
1 −exp
.
−
 ν
ν1
−(α+2.5)/ 
B−0.5
⊥
(17)
where c1, c5(α), c6(α) are tabulated in [14]. The optical depth varies with
frequency as τ = (ν/ν1)−(α+2.5), ν1 being the frequency at which τ is unity.
The equivalent brightness temperature (in Rayleigh-Jeans limit) is then given
by
Tν =
c2 c5(α)
8 k c2
1 c6(α)
 ν
2c1
0.5 
1 −exp
.
−
 ν
ν1
−(α+2.5)/ 
B−0.5
⊥
(18)
where k is the Boltzmann constant and c is the speed of light. We can maxi-
mize Tν by diﬀerentiating it with ν and equating the result to zero. This way
we get an equation for the optical depth τo, corresponding to the peak bright-
ness temperature To, which is diﬀerent from the one that is available in the
literature for the optical depth τm at the peak of the spectrum. The equation
that we get for τo is
exp (τo) = 1 + (2α + 5) τo,
(19)
solutions of this transcendental equation for diﬀerent α values are given in
Table 2. It is interesting to note that while the peak of the spectrum for
the typical α values usually lies in the optically thin part of the spectrum
(τm <
∼1; Table 2), peak of the brightness temperature lies deep within the
optically thick region (τo ∼3). Both the frequency and the intensity have
to calculated for τo to get the maximum brightness temperature values. The
correction factors are then given by,
νo
νm
=
τm
τo
1/(α+2.5)
(20)
To
Tm
=
 νo
νm
0.5  1 −exp (−τo)
1 −exp (−τm)

(21)

Maximum Brightness Temperature
279
Table 2. Values for the temperature limits
α
γ
τm
τo
νo/νm To/Tm log (Tic) log (Teq)
0.25 1.5 0.19 2.80 0.37
3.5
11.7
11.3
0.5
2.0 0.35 2.92 0.50
2.2
11.6
11.2
0.75 2.5 0.50 3.03 0.58
1.8
11.5
11.1
1.0
3.0 0.64 3.13 0.64
1.6
11.5
10.9
1.5
4.0 0.88 3.32 0.72
1.4
11.5
10.7
In Table 2 we have listed νo/νm and To/Tm, for diﬀerent α values. Further
we have also tabulated values of maximum brightness temperatures log (Tic)
for Wp = Wb and log (Teq) for η = 1 (with ξ = 0, s = 1pc) calculated from
equations (9) and (15) respectively for diﬀerent α values, incorporating the
above corrections.
5 Discussion and Conclusions
From Table 2 we see that, depending upon the spectral index value α, theoret-
ical maximum brightness temperature values for the inverse Compton limits
are around Tic ∼1011.6+0.1 K while for equipartition conditions the limits are
lower by a factor of ∼3 (Teq ∼1011.0+0.3 K). From the observational data [18]
it seems that the intrinsic Tb is <
∼1011.3 K, which is broadly consistent with
the either interpretation. It should be noted that though inverse Compton
scattering increases the photon energy density, yet it does not increase the ra-
dio brightness as the scattered photons get boosted to much higher frequency
bands. If anything, some photons get removed from the radio window, but the
change in radio brightness due to that may not be very large. What could be
important is the large energy losses by electrons which may cool the system
rapidly. However, these inverse Compton losses become important only when
Tb > 1011.5 K, but the equipartition conditions may keep the temperatures
well below this limit. This is not to say that inverse Compton eﬀects cannot
occur, it is only that conditions in synchrotron radio sources may not arise
for inverse Compton losses to become very eﬀective. Since we are considering
the brightness temperature limit in the radio-band (after all that is where
observationally such limits have been seen), then variations in νm that we
may consider would at most be about an order of magnitude around say, 1
GHz. With the reasonable assumption that a self-absorbed radio source size
may not be much larger than ∼a pc, from Eq. (15) it follows that an order
of magnitude higher Tm values would require η to increase by about a factor
∼108, that is departure from equipartition will go up by about eight orders
of magnitude. Actually for a given νm, the magnetic ﬁeld energy density will
go down by a factor ∼104 (Eq. 8), while that in the relativistic particles will
go up by a similar factor (Eq. 12, note the presence of B1.5 in the denomi-

280
Ashok K. Singal
nator). This also implies that the total energy budget of the source will be
higher by about ∼104 than from the already stretched equipartition energy
values. Further, it is not the photon energy density that really goes up dras-
tically with higher brightness temperatures (as Wp ∝Tm, Eq. 6), rather it
is the drastic fall in the magnetic ﬁeld energy (Wb ∝T −4
m , Eq. 8) that in-
creases the ratio Pc/Ps to go up as T 5
m. Therefore, it is still not clear whether
the inverse Compton eﬀects actually do play a signiﬁcant role in maintaining
the maximum brightness temperature limit in incoherent synchrotron radio
sources.
References
1. K. I. Kellermann, I. I. K. Pauliny-Toth: ApJ 155, L71 (1969)
2. M. J. Rees: Nature 211, 468 (1966)
3. M. J. Rees: MNRAS 135, 345 (1967)
4. L. Woltjer: ApJ 146, 597 (1966)
5. M. H. Cohen, W. Cannon, G. H. Purcell et al: ApJ 170, 207 (1971)
6. A. R. Whitney, I. I. Shapiro, A. E. E. Rogers et al: Science 173, 225 (1971)
7. M. H. Cohen, R. P. Linﬁeld, A. T. Moﬀet et al: Nature 268, 405 (1977)
8. A. K. Singal, Gopal-krishna: MNRAS 215, 383 (1985)
9. A. K. Singal: A&A 155, 242 (1986)
10. G. Bodo, G. Ghisellini, E. Trussoni: MNRAS 255, 694 (1992)
11. A. C. S. Readhead: ApJ 426, 51 (1994)
12. G. B. Rybicki, A. P. Lightman: Radiative Processes in Astrophysics, (Wiley,
New York 1979)
13. V. L. Ginzburg, S. I. Syrovatskii: ARAA 3, 297 (1965)
14. A. G. Pacholczyk: Radio Astrophysics, (Freeman, San Francisco 1970)
15. M. A. Scott, A. C. S. Readhead: MNRAS 180, 539 (1977)
16. V. L. Ginzburg: Theoretical Physics and Astrophysics, (Pergamon, Oxford 1979)
17. R. J. Gould: A&A 76, 306 (1979)
18. D. C. Homan, Y. Y. Kovalev, M. L. Lister et al: ApJ 642, L115 (2006)

Nonlinear Jeans Instability in an Uniformly
Rotating Gas
Nikhil Chakrabarti1, Barnana Pal1 and Vinod Krishan2
1 Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, 1/AF Bidhannagar, Kolkata - 700064
2 Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore – 560034, India
Raman Research Institute, Bangalore - 560080, India
Summary. A nonlinear stability analysis of a uniformly rotating gas in a gravi-
tational ﬁeld has been performed. One dimensional non-linear equations have been
solved by the double-Lagrangian transformation method. An explosive instability is
shown to exist in contrast to the linear Jeans instability wherein a uniform rotation
of the gas quenches the instability.
Key words: Jeans instability, Structure formation, Lagrangian technique,
Explosive instability
1 Introduction
The problem of gravitational instability of large astrophysical system has been
a subject of ongoing investigation in last few decades starting with the very
early work of Jeans [1]. The Jeans instability can aﬀect the gravitational
collapse of the interstellar gas clouds. It is believed that the star formation
mechanisms are due to the very high velocity cloud-cloud interaction in which
a dense gaseous clump is formed. In these processes gaseous clump grows in
mass, undergoes gravitational Jeans instability and fragments. The fragments
in turn collapse further by self gravity and evolve into stars and /or clusters
of stars.
The star formation mechanisms based on the linear description of the Jeans
instability have been extensively discussed by various authors e.g.[2, 3, 5, 6].
Among these we mention the work of Chandrasekhar [2] in particular, where
the system, an inﬁnite homogeneous gas, rotating with a constant angular
velocity, has been considered. It is shown that the rotation gives rise to a sta-
bilizing eﬀect that overcomes the Jeans instability in a direction perpendicular
to the direction of rotation. In this report, we study the nonlinear stability of
uniformly rotating gas in a gravitational ﬁeld and demonstrate that there is
a possibility of an explosive instability even in the presence of rotation.

282
Nikhil Chakrabarti, Barnana Pal and Vinod Krishan
The classical Jeans instability is obtained assuming a uniform density and
pressure distribution throughout the gas. As is well known, in the presence of
gravitational force, inﬁnite homogeneous distribution of matter cannot occur.
However, for the study of linear instability, such distribution, the so called
“Jeans swindle” is assumed to prevail and the eﬀect of the zero order gravita-
tional ﬁeld is neglected. Here we consider a more realistic model of equilibrium
taking into account the eﬀect of zeroth order gravitational ﬁeld. Nonlinear ef-
fects are included using this model equilibrium system. Our purpose is to
investigate the gravitational instability of nonuniform density distribution as
well as nonuniform gravitational ﬁeld. We exploit the extremely beautiful and
powerful Lagrangian technique to solve the nonlinear equations [7, 8, 9, 10].
For simplicity the system with one spatial dimension is considered and this
enables one to extend the investigation to a wider class of systems namely
those with magnetic ﬁelds.
2 Basic equations
The model equations for non viscous ﬂuid in a rotating frame may be written
as, [4]
ρ
∂u
∂t + (u · ∇)u

= −∇p + ρg + 2ρ(u × Ω),
(1)
where g is the eﬀective gravity (after deduction of centrifugal term from the
gravitational potential), ρ is the density, u is the velocity and Ω is the angu-
lar velocity. For nonlinear analysis, we shall concentrate on one dimensional
variation so that all variables are functions of (x, t) only. We take gravita-
tional ﬁeld in the negative x direction and the constant rotation Ω in the z
direction only. Using these conditions and relating pressure and density as
∂p/∂x = c2
s∂ρ/∂x equation (1) can be written in the component form as:
ρ
 ∂
∂t + ux
∂
∂x

ux = −c2
s
∂ρ
∂x −ρg + 2ρuyΩ
(2)
ρ
 ∂
∂t + ux
∂
∂x

uy = −2ρuxΩ,
(3)
where cs is the sound speed The mass density conservation equation can be
written as
∂ρ
∂t + ∂
∂x(ρux) = 0.
(4)
The Poisson equation for the gravitational ﬁeld is
∂g
∂x = 4πGρ,
(5)
Our aim is to solve these equations for the study of equilibrium and stability.

Nonlinear Jeans Instability in an Uniformly Rotating Gas
283
3 Local analysis
For the local analysis we recapitulate the results derived by Chandrasekhar[2]
in inﬁnite homogeneous medium. Writing ux = ux0 + ux1, uy = uy0 + uy1,
g = g0 + g1, ρ = ρ0 + ρ1 and assuming ux0 = uy0 = 0,∂p0/∂x = 0, neglecting
all nonlinear terms with g is in the negative x direction, linearized equations
become,
∂ux1
∂t
= −g1 −c2
s
ρ0
∂ρ1
∂x + 2Ωuy1
(6)
∂uy1
∂t
= −2Ωux1
(7)
∂ρ1
∂t + ρ0
∂ux1
∂x
= 0
(8)
∂g1
∂x = 4πGρ1
(9)
Variables with subscript one are the perturbed quantities and those with
subscript zero are the equilibrium quantities. Taking the time derivative in
Eq. (6) and using eq. (7 - 9) we get
 ∂2
∂t2 + (2Ω)2
 
−∂ˆρ1
∂t

= −∂
∂t

c2
s
∂2ˆρ1
∂x2 + 4πGρ0ˆρ1

.
(10)
Assuming the perturbation ˆρ1 ∼exp(ikx−iωt) we have the dispersion relation
as
ω2 = c2
s

k2 −k2
J + 4Ω2
c2s

,
(11)
where k2
J = 4πGρ0/c2
s. In the absence of rotation (Ω = 0), if k2
J > k2 there is
an instability known as the Jeans instability. Surely in the direction perpen-
dicular to the direction of propagation of the wave a constant rotation acts
as a stabilizing agent. As it is mentioned before that this result is derived in
a homogeneous medium and with a gravitational ﬁeld homogeneous distribu-
tion of mass is unrealistic. Therefore before going to the stability analysis it
is necessary to study the inhomogeneous equilibrium. In the next section we
shall study the inhomogeneous static equilibrium solution.
4 Equilibrium
Here we assume that in the equilibrium both, geq and ρeq depend only on the
variable x and are denoted as geq(x) and ρeq(x) respectively. Therefore the
static equilibrium u0 = 0 equations can be written from equations (2) and (5)
as
−ρeqgeq −c2
s
∂ρeq
∂x = 0,
(12)

284
Nikhil Chakrabarti, Barnana Pal and Vinod Krishan
and
∂geq
∂x = 4πGρeq,
(13)
Combining the above two equations we can write a single variable equation
as
∂2
∂x2 ln ˆρ = −
4πGρ0
c2s

ˆρ,
(14)
where ˆρ = ρeq/ρ0, ρ0 is a constant normalizing density. Equation (14) is an
exactly solvable with a solution ˆρ = ρeq(x)/ρ0 = sech 2(x/λJ). Accordingly we
can ﬁnd the solution for the gravitational ﬁeld as geq(x) = −ˆexg0 tanh(x/λJ)
where λJ = cs/ωJ, ωJ = 2√πGρ0 is known as Jeans frequency and g0 =
√
2csωJ. In stability analysis we will use ρeq(x) ≡ρ(ξ.0). The equilibrium
solutions are shown in ﬁg. (1) below
Fig. 1. Equilibrium density ρeq(x) (solid line) and gravitational ﬁeld geq(x) (dotted
line) as functions of x.
5 Stability Analysis
We formulate the nonlinear problem in the Lagrangian description by the
Eulerian variables (x, t) to Lagrangian variables (ξ, τ) such that
ξ = x −

ux(ξ, τ)dτ,
τ = t,
(15)
and deﬁne an auxiliary function ψ; where
ψ =

ux(ξ, τ)dτ,
ξ = x −ψ.
(16)

Nonlinear Jeans Instability in an Uniformly Rotating Gas
285
The co-ordinate ξ is in a frame moving with the ﬂuid element. We simplify
equations (2) - (5) using the transformation as:
∂
∂τ ≡∂
∂t + ux
∂
∂x,
(17)
which implies that convective derivative reduces to partial time derivative and
∂ψ
∂τ = ux,
∂x
∂ξ = 1 + ∂ψ
∂ξ .
In view of these transformations equations (4) and (5) simplify to
∂
∂τ

ρ

1 + ∂ψ
∂ξ

= 0,
(18)
∂g
∂ξ = −4πGρ(ξ, 0),
(19)
where ρ(ξ, 0) ≡ρeq is the value of ρ at τ = 0. Using boundary conditions that
at τ = 0 both uy and ψ = 0, momentum equation can be written as
∂2ψ
∂τ 2 + 4Ω2ψ = −g −
c2
s
ρ(ξ, 0)
∂
∂ξ
⎡
⎢⎣ρ(ξ, 0)
1 + ∂ψ
∂ξ
⎤
⎥⎦.
(20)
Now using boundary condition at ξ = 0, ψ = 0 and ρ(0, 0) = ρ0 and normal-
izing the above equation we have
∂2 ˆψ
∂ˆτ 2 + ˆψ = 1
4
 ω2
J
Ω2
 λ2
J
λ2
 ∂2 ˆψ
∂ˆξ2
(21)
where ˆξ = ξ/λ,
ˆτ = 2Ωτ,
ˆψ = ψ/λJ. For the large scale instability the
characteristic scale length λ should be greater than Jeans scale length λJ.
Under this condition the coeﬃcient on the right hand side of Eq. (21) is small
and we denote it by ϵ. Removing all hats for simplicity of notation, we get,
∂2ψ
∂τ 2 + ψ = ϵ∂2ψ
∂ξ2
(22)
The above equation can be solved by the Bogoliuboﬀmethod [11]. In this
method the solution is written as ψ(ξ, τ) = A(ξ, τ) sin[τ + χ(ξ, τ)], where A
and χ are determined form the following equations,
∂A
∂τ sin θ + A∂χ
∂τ cos θ = 0
(23)

286
Nikhil Chakrabarti, Barnana Pal and Vinod Krishan
∂A
∂τ cos θ−A∂χ
∂τ sin θ = ϵ

∂2A
∂ξ2 −A
∂χ
∂ξ
2 
sin θ+ϵ

A∂2χ
∂ξ2 + 2A∂A
∂ξ
∂χ
∂ξ

cos θ,
(24)
where θ = τ + χ. Since ∂A/∂τ and ∂χ/∂τ are proportional to the small
parameter ϵ, A and χ are slowly varying functions of time τ. Substituting Eq.
(23) in Eq. (24) and averaging over τ, the fast time scale over which A and χ
do not change appreciably, we ﬁnd,
 ∂
∂τ1
+ φ ∂
∂ξ

ln A = −1
2
∂φ
∂ξ
(25)
 ∂
∂τ1
+ φ ∂
∂ξ

φ = 1
2
∂
∂ξ
 1
A
∂2A
∂ξ2

,
(26)
where τ1 = ϵτ, and φ = −∂χ/∂ξ.
To solve amplitude A and phase χ we now perform a second Lagrangian
transformation from coordinates ξ, τ1 to ζ, ¯τ, where ζ = ξ−
 ¯τ
0 φ(ζ, τ ′)dτ ′,
¯τ =
τ1, to obtain
∂
∂¯τ

A2

1 +
 ¯τ ∂φ
∂ζ dτ ′

= 0.
(27)
Expressing ∂φ/∂ζ in terms of A and substituting in Eq. (26) we obtain single
variable equation for A,
∂2
∂¯τ 2
 1
ˆA
2
= 1
2
∂
∂ζ

ˆA2 ∂
∂ζ
. ˆA2
A
∂
∂ζ

ˆA2 ∂A
∂ζ
/ 
,
(28)
where ˆA = A(ζ, ¯τ)/A(ζ, 0). Equation (28) can be solved analytically by the
method of separation of variables. Proposing A(ζ, ¯τ) = P(¯τ)Q(ζ), Eq.(28) can
be separated into two equations in space and time variables as
1
2
d2
dζ2
 1
Q
d2Q
dζ2

= α2,
(29)
1
ˆP 6
d2
d¯τ 2
 1
ˆP 2

= α2,
(30)
where α is an arbitrary separation constant, ˆP = P(¯τ)/P(0) and we have used
the relation A(ζ, 0) = P(0)Q(ζ). From Eq. (30) together with the boundary
conditions that at ζ = 0, Q(0) = 1/P(0) and (dQ/dζ)ζ=0 = 0 we get the
spatial solution for the amplitude as
Q(ξ) = Q(0)Hn(αζ) exp

−α2ζ2
2

,
(31)
with the solvability condition α = 1/(1 + 2n), n being any positive integer
and Hn(ζ), the Hermite functions. To obtain the evolution of this proﬁle, we

Nonlinear Jeans Instability in an Uniformly Rotating Gas
287
solve Eq. (30) with the initial conditions ˆP(0) = 1 and (d ˆP/dτ)0 = 0. The
solution is given by
P(¯τ) =
P(0)
(1 + α2¯τ 2)1/4 .
(32)
Therefore the complete solution for the amplitude A is found to be
A(ζ, ¯τ) =
1
(1 + α2¯τ 2)1/4 Hn(αζ) exp

−1
2α2ζ2

,
(33)
Once the amplitude is known, the phase variable can be determined as
φ(ζ, ¯τ) = αζ¯τ

1 + α2¯τ 2−1/2 , assuming φ(ζ, 0) = 0. Knowing φ the rela-
tion between ζ and ξ is evident and the ﬁnal solution for the density may be
obtained from Eq. (19) as,
ρ(ξ, τ) =
ρ(ξ, 0)
1 + f(ξ, τ)
(34)
where
f(ξ, τ) =
e−¯αξ2
(1 + α2ϵ2τ 2)3/4
!
1 + α2ϵ2τ 2{¯αH′
n(¯αξ) −¯α2ξHn(¯αξ)} sin θ
−¯αϵτξHn(¯αξ) cos θ] ,
(35)
ρ(ξ, 0) = ρ0sech 2
 x
λJ

,
¯α =
α
1 +
√
1 + α2ϵ2τ 2 ,
θ = τ

1 −
¯αϵξ2
2
√
1 + α2ϵ2τ 2

.
Once the solution for auxiliary function ψ is known we can easily ﬁnd out
the relation between ξ and x. Thus, the transformation from Lagrangian to
Eulerian variables i.e. determination of ξ as a function of x and t results in
the following relation
x = ξ +
1
(1 + α2ϵ2t2)1/4 Hn(¯αξ) e−¯α2ξ2
2
sin θ.
(36)
Equation (34) together with Eq. (36) gives the complete solution. Equation
(34) indicates that when f(ξ, τ) →−1, the system undergoes an explosive
instability. For large τ, f(ξ, τ) asymptotically approaches
f(ξ, τ) ∼e−¯αξ2
√αϵτ
!0
2nHn−1(¯αξ) −¯α2ξHn(¯αξ)
1
sin θ −¯α
αξHn(¯αξ) cos θ
"
which suggests that for large τ, f(ξ.τ) →0 and the system approaches equi-
librium For lower values of n(= 0 −2), the magnitude of f(ξ, τ) is small
compared to 1. As a result ρ(ξ, τ) ﬂuctuates a little and ﬁnally settles to the

288
Nikhil Chakrabarti, Barnana Pal and Vinod Krishan
Fig. 2. Density amplitude ρ(x, t) for n = 3 with time as a parameter.
value of ρ(ξ, 0). A signiﬁcant change in the density amplitude occurs at n = 3
as shown in ﬁgure (2). It indicates that nonlinearity feeds energy to the system
by virtue of which the density amplitude gets enhanced considerably, reaching
a maximum ρ(x, t) ≈7 at x = 0, t = π/2 and subsequently returns back to its
initial value ρ(ξ, 0) at t →∞. For n = 5 onwards f(ξ, τ) →−1 as τ increases
from zero giving rise to explosive instability. This is clearly demonstrated in
ﬁgure (3). Thus we see that although rotation acts as a stabilizing eﬀect for
linear systems, the possibility of explosive instability is not ruled out in the
presence of nonlinear eﬀects.
6 Summary and conclusion
To summarize, we like to emphasize that the present nonlinear analysis leads
to an explosive instability which can not be quenched by rotation. Non-
relativistic gravitohydrodynamic equations are solved and the solutions in-
dicate the existence of density bursts even in the presence of rotation. From
the mathematical point of view it is interesting to note that the Lagrangian
transformation is introduced twice to reduce the convective derivative to a
partial derivative in some space. We have considered here only one dimen-
sional case for simplicity of calculation. The solution obtained here may be
relevant and applicable for other similar physical situations. To the best of
our knowledge such time dependent solutions of gravitating system have not
been studied earlier. We believe that more investigations of this nature would
enrich our understanding of the structure formation in the universe.

Nonlinear Jeans Instability in an Uniformly Rotating Gas
289
Fig. 3. Density amplitude ρ(x, t) for ﬁxed ξ = 0.7 and diﬀerent n.
References
1. Jeans, J. H., 1902, Phillosophical. Trans., 199, 1.
2. Chandrasekhar, S., 1961, Hydrodynamics and Hydromagnetic Stability, (Oxford
Univ. Press) p-588.
3. Kolb, E. W., & Turner, M. S. 1990, The Early Universe, (Addision-Wesley
Publishing Co.).
4. Krishan, V., 1999, Astrophysical Plasmas and ﬂuids(Kluwer Academic Pub-
lisher) p-270
5. Monte-Lima, I. & Ortega, V. G. 2004, New Astronomy, 9, 365.
6. Griv, E., Gedalim, M. & Yuan, C. 2002, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 383, 338.
7. Dawson, J. M. 1959, Physical Review, 113, 383.
8. Davidson, R. C. & Schram, P. P. 1968, Nuclear Fusion, 8, 183.
9. Infeld, E. & Rowlands, G. 1987, Phys. Rev. Letters, 58, 2063.
10. Davidson, R. C. 1972, Methods in Nonlinear Plasma Theory, (Academic, New
York).
11. Pipes, L. A., & Harvill, L. R. 1971, Applied mathematics for Engineers and
Physicists, p-560.

Part VI
Solar and Space Plasmas

An Overview of the Magnetosphere, Substorms
and Geomagnetic Storms
G. S. Lakhina1, S. Alex1 and R. Rawat1
Indian Institute of Geomagnetism, Plot no. 5, Sector-18, Kalamboli Highway,
Panvel (W), Navi Mumbai-410 218
lakhina@iigs.iigm.res.in;salex@iigs.iigm.res.in;
rashmir@iigs.iigm.res.in
Summary. The magnetosphere is the region of space to which the Earth’s mag-
netic ﬁeld is conﬁned by the solar wind plasma which is continuously being blown
outward from the Sun. The magnetosphere of the Earth extends to distances in
excess of 60,000 kilometers on the Sunward side and to about million kilometers
from Earth on the anti-sunward side, respectively. Much has been learned about
this dynamic plasma region over the past 40 years from the direct measurements
by various spacecrafts. This review ﬁrst gives a brief introduction to this dynamic
region of Earth’s near space environment and then discusses important characteris-
tics of magnetospheric substorms and storms, and their role in controlling the space
weather processes.
Key words: Magnetosphere – Substorms: Geomagnetic storms
1 Introduction
Two Essential ingredients for the formation of the magnetosphere are the
Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld and the solar wind. The major part of the geomagnetic
ﬁeld is generated in the earth’s outer liquid core by a complex process called
Geodynamo which is not fully understood till now. This part constitutes the
Main Field which varies over long time scales of several decades to million
of years. Outside the Earth, the main geomagnetic ﬁeld has the same form
as that of a bar magnet, a dipole ﬁeld, aligned approximately at an angle
of 11.5◦with the Earth’s spin axis. The solar wind is an ionized and highly
conducting gas, consisting mainly of electrons and protons with a small frac-
tion of alpha particles and other heavier ions, emitted continuously from the
Sun. The solar wind ﬂow drags the frozen-in solar magnetic ﬁeld along with
it into the interplanetary medium, the so called interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld
(IMF) [1, 2]. The solar wind interaction with the geomagnetic ﬁeld gives rise
to the Earth’s Magnetosphere. The fast varying part of the geomagnetic ﬁeld

294
G. S. Lakhina, S. Alex and R. Rawat
is controlled by the solar activity and it arises due to the interaction of solar
ejecta with Earth’s magnetosphere. Magnetospheric storms and substorms
are indicators of geomagnetic activity. Magnetic Storms are driven directly
by solar drivers like coronal mass ejections (CMEs), solar ﬂares, fast solar
wind streams, etc. The intensity of a geomagnetic storm is characterized by
Dst (disturbance storm time) index. Substorms, in simplest terms, are dis-
turbances occurring within the magnetosphere that are ultimately caused by
the solar wind. They are delineated by geomagnetic AE (auroral electrojet)
index. Magnetic reconnection plays an important role in energy transfer from
solar wind to the magnetosphere [3] . Magnetic reconnection is very eﬀec-
tive when the interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld is directed southwards leading to
strong plasma injection from the tail towards the inner magnetosphere caus-
ing in-tense auroras at high-latitude nightside regions. The solar wind input
power into the magnetosphere is about ∼1011 W during a typical sub-storms,
and about ∼1013 W during a moderate magnetic storm. Here, we give a brief
overview of the magnetosphere, magnetospheric substorms and storms.
2 Magnetosphere
The Magnetosphere is the region of space, in the vicinity of the Earth, where
the geomagnetic ﬁeld is conﬁned by the solar wind plasma emanating from the
Sun. The magnetosphere of the Earth extends to distances in excess of 60,000
kilometers on the Sunward side and to about million kilometers from the
Earth on the anti-sunward side, respectively. Much has been learned about this
dynamic plasma region over the past 40 years from the direct measurements
by various spacecrafts.
A schematic of the three dimensional view of the magnetosphere is shown
in Figure 1. It shows various important plasma regions as well as the current
systems.
2.1 Some Important Magnetospheric Plasma Regions
The magnetopause forms a boundary between the solar wind and the magne-
tosphere. Here the solar wind dynamic pressure is balanced by the geomag-
netic ﬁeld pressure [4]. The Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld is more or less conﬁned
inside the magnetopause boundary. This boundary layer is the site where so-
lar wind energy and momentum are transferred into the magnetosphere [5].
Two main processes by which the solar wind plasma can cross the magne-
topause are (1) direct entry involving magnetic reconnection [3, 6], and (2)
the cross-ﬁeld transport due to the scattering of particles by the waves across
the closed magnetopause ﬁeld lines [7, 8, 9], or the so called viscous interaction
[10, 11, 12].
The plasma sheet is a thick layer of hot plasma centered on the magne-
totail’s equator, with a typical thickness 3-7 RE and density of 0.3-0.5 ions

An Overview of the Magnetosphere, Substorms and Geomagnetic Storms
295
Fig. 1. Schematic 3-dimensional view of the earth’s magnetosphere formed by the
interaction of solar wind with the geomagnetic ﬁeld. Small arrows indicate the direc-
tion of the magnetic ﬁeld lines. Thick arrows show the direction of electric currents.
Various current systems present in the magnetosphere are shown.
cm−3 and typical ion energy of 2-5 keV during geomagnetically quiet peri-
ods. Strong cross-tail currents ﬂow across the width of the plasma sheet, from
edge to edge. Once the current reaches the magnetopause, it divides into 2
parts which close around the lobes, over the top and under the bottom of
the magnetotail. The tail lobes are two regions of relatively strong magnetic
ﬁeld, above the plasma sheet in both the north and the south hemisphere.
Field lines of the lobes are smooth, and maintain roughly the same direction
until they converge above the poles. They point towards the Earth north of
the equator and away from the Earth south of it. The boundary between the
lobes and the plasma sheet is known as plasma sheet boundary layer.
The plasmasphere contains essentially the high density cold plasma of
the ionospheric origin. The outer boundary of the plasmasphere is called the
plasmapause. Outside the plasmapause, the cold plasma density drops to much
lower values than that inside the plasmasphere. Instead this region is charac-
terized by the presence of hot and tenuous plasma that is accelerated in the
tail on closed ﬁeld lines downstream from the tail reconnection site, and is

296
G. S. Lakhina, S. Alex and R. Rawat
then transported inward toward the Earth. The size of the plasmasphere is
not constant, and it changes with the geomagnetic activity and interplanetary
conditions.
The Ring Current is formed due to the motion of trapped energetic parti-
cles (both electrons and protons) injected towards the earth from the plasma
sheet. These particles undergo three types of basic motions in the dipole ge-
ometry of the geomagnetic ﬁeld as shown in Figure 2. The fastest of the three
Fig. 2. schematics of 3 types of motions exhibited by charged particles (electrons
and ions) in the geomagnetic ﬁeld. The fast motion is the gyration around the
magnetic ﬁeld line, the so called cyclotron motion. The second type is sliding along
the ﬁeld line or the bouncing motion . The third type, the slowest type, is the drift
of charged particles across the magnetic ﬁeld due to the magnetic gradients or the
gradient drift motion. The electrons gradient drift towards the east and the protons
towards the west around the Earth, thus, constituting a westward current, called
the Ring Current which encircles the Earth.
is known as the gyration or cyclotron motion where the charge particles go
around a magnetic ﬁeld line, typically thousands of times each second, in a
plane perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld. This is followed by a slower back-
and-forth bounce motion along the ﬁeld line, typically lasting 1/10 second.
The third and the slowest type, is a slow drift around the magnetic axis of
the Earth, from the current ﬁeld line to its neighbor, staying roughly at the
same distance from the axis. Typical time to circle the Earth is a few minutes
or so. Due to drifting of positive ions and negative electrons in opposite direc-
tions (see Figure 2), an electric current is generated which circulates clockwise
around the Earth when viewed from the north. The current is known as the
ring current. The ring current energy is mainly carried by the ions, most of
which are protons. However, during geomagnetically active periods signiﬁcant
energy is carried by He++ ions of solar wind origin and O+ ions of ionospheric

An Overview of the Magnetosphere, Substorms and Geomagnetic Storms
297
origin. In fact during intense geomagnetic storms, the O+ ions of ionospheric
origin are found to be the most prominent ring current energy carriers.
2.2 Current Systems
There are several current systems in the magnetosphere. The strong currents
are usually encountered in the boundary layers. Some important cur-rent sys-
tems are magnetopause current or Chapman-Ferraro currents which ﬂows in
the magnetopause boundary layer, cross-tail or neutral sheet current ﬂow-
ing at the center of the plasma sheet, and ﬁeld-aligned current or Birkeland
current ﬂowing along the magnetic ﬁeld lines which couples the ionosphere
and magnetosphere, and are linked with auroras. There is another important
current system in the ionosphere called the Solar quiet (Sq) current which
produces daily variations in the geomagnetic ﬁeld. The ﬂuctuations in these
current systems produce variations in the geomagnetic ﬁeld at various scales
in time and space, for example, magnetic pulsations, magnetic bays, daily
variations, etc. These current systems help to dissipate the solar wind energy
transferred to the magnetosphere.
3 Magnetospheric Substorms
Magnetospheric substorms last for a period of ∼one to a few hours, and
are characterized by an explosive energy released from the magnetotail in the
form of energetic particles (∼5-50 KeV) and strong plasma ﬂows (∼100-1000
km s−1 or so). The energy is dissipated in the near-Earth nightside region.
Auroras become widespread and intense, also much more agitated, and the
Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld is disturbed mainly at high latitudes. During the sub-
storm activity, the cross-tail current is disrupted and diverted towards the
ionosphere as ﬁeld-aligned current, and there is an enhancement in the ring
current and the westward electrojet current. Magnetospheric convection in-
creases, the plasma sheet tends to move earthward and a part of the plasma
sheet is severed from the earth, forming a ”plasmoid” that ﬂows out tail-
wards. When the substorms occur frequently they may give rise to geomag-
netic storms.
An isolated substorm has typically three phases. The growth phase usu-
ally begins with the start of southward turning of the interplanetary magnetic
ﬁeld (IMF). The size of the polar cap and the cross-section of the magnetotail
increase, the near-earth plasma sheet starts thinning and the dipolar mag-
netic ﬁeld is stretched into a tail-like ﬁeld. The expansion phase starts with
a sudden brightening of the discrete auroral arcs in the midnight sector and
their rapid poleward advancement. The earthward injection of energetic par-
ticles intensiﬁes the ring current, and the plasmoids are formed ﬂowing in the
anti-earthward direction. The recovery phase is manifested when the auroras
start receding equatorward and the plasma sheet thickens [13].

298
G. S. Lakhina, S. Alex and R. Rawat
3.1 Substorm Models
Several models have been proposed for the substorm phenomena based on
the nature of solar wind energy input and that of the stored energy in the
magnetosphere [14, 15]. Several statistical studies have shown that substorms
clearly have both directly driven and loading - unloading components [16,
17]. Studies based on linear prediction ﬁltering technique indicate that the
typical time scales for the driven and loading-unloading processes are about
20 minutes and 1 hour respectively [18]. Two main models for the substorm
are reconnection model, also known as near earth neutral line (NENL) model,
and the current disruption model.
Reconnection Model
The reconnection model or the NENL model [19] treats the sub-storm phe-
nomenon as a loading-unloading process. The growth phase is due to enhanced
dayside magnetic reconnection which leads to a larger tail size and thinning of
the plasma sheet. The magnetic energy stored in the magnetotail is released
explosively through a magnetic reconnection process in the vicinity of a newly
formed neutral line in the near-earth tail region (at about 10 - 20 RE down-
stream). The neutral line formation leads to the disruption (actual mechanism
some what uncertain) of the cross-tail current in the vicinity of the neutral
line, and to the severance of the plasmasheet to produce a plasmoid.
Current Disruption Model
The current disruption model treats the substorm as a process directly driven
by the solar wind [20]. According to this model, the solar wind energy input,
equivalent to the power of solar wind-magnetosphere (SM) dynamo, directly
controls the response of the magnetosphere such as the magnetospheric en-
ergy dissipation rate. When the solar wind energy input exceeds some critical
value ∼1018 ergs s−1, magnetospheric convection alone is unable to dissipate
this much energy. The cross-tail current is disrupted and diverted to the iono-
sphere, along the magnetic ﬁeld lines where it is dissipated eﬃciently. The
resulting current circuit forms the substorm current wedge [21]. This is iden-
tiﬁed as substorm onset. A sudden increase in the anomalous resistivity due
to a cross-ﬁeld current instability is the likely cause for the current disruption
[22, 23]. Particle injection results from the collapse of stretched ﬁeld lines as
a result of current disruption. The deﬂation of the plasma sheet is commu-
nicated downstream by the launching of a rarefaction wave, causing plasma
sheet thinning further downstream of the current disruption region. Figure 3
shows the highlights of the current disruption model and the NENL model
[24].

An Overview of the Magnetosphere, Substorms and Geomagnetic Storms
299
Fig. 3. A schematic diagram describing highlights of two substorm on-set models.
Top panel shows the current disruption model and the bottom panel shows the near
earth neutral line (NENL) model [after Lui [24]].
4 Geomagnetic storms
A geomagnetic storm is characterized by a Main Phase during which the hor-
izontal component of the Earth’s low-latitude magnetic ﬁeld is signiﬁcantly
depressed over a time span of one to a few hours followed by its recovery
which may extend over several days [25]. The main interplanetary causes of
geomagnetic storms are the solar ejecta (due to CMEs and solar ﬂares) having
unusually intense magnetic ﬁelds and high solar wind speeds near the Earth,
the corotating interaction regions (CIRs) and the fast streams from coronal
holes. Geomagnetic storms occur when the solar wind-magnetosphere coupling
becomes intensiﬁed during the arrival of fast moving solar ejecta accompanied
by long intervals of south-ward interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld (IMF), e.g., such
as in a ”magnetic cloud” [26]. Under such conditions, the eﬃciency of the re-
connection process is considerably enhanced during southward IMF intervals

300
G. S. Lakhina, S. Alex and R. Rawat
[27, 9], leading to strong plasma injection from the magnetotail towards the
inner magnetosphere. This leads to intense auroras at high-latitude nightside
regions and at the same time intensiﬁes the ring current which causes a dia-
magnetic decrease in the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld measured at near-equatorial
magnetic stations. The decrease in the equatorial magnetic ﬁeld strength, mea-
sured by the Dst index, is directly related to the total kinetic energy of the
ring current particles; thus the Dst index is a good measure of the energetics
of the magnetic storm.
4.1 Geomagnetic storms types
The Dst index proﬁle of geomagnetic storms is used to characterize the ge-
omagnetic storms into various types and categories. The sudden commence-
ment (SC) storms are characterized by a sudden increase in the horizontal
magnetic ﬁeld intensity shortly before the main phase [see top panel of Figure
4]. This sudden increase in magnetic ﬁeld strength is caused by the interplane-
tary shock compression of the magnetosphere. The period between the sudden
commencement and the main phase is called the initial phase. However, all
magnetic storms do not have the initial phase. A geomagnetic storm not ac-
companied by a SC is called a gradual geomagnetic storm (SG) type [bottom
panel of Figure 4]. Magnetic storms having a single main phase, wherein the
Dst decreases more or less continuously to a minimum value and then starts
to recover, are called Type 1 or one-step storms. In Type 2 or two-step storms
the main phase undergoes a two-step growth in the ring current [28] in a way
that before the ring current had decayed to a signiﬁcant pre-storm level, a new
major particle injection occurs, leading to further build-up of the ring current
and further decrease of Dst. Hence, there is a possibility of multi-step storms
depending on the ring current injection events caused by the interplanetary
conditions.
The intensity of the magnetic storm is measured by the Dst index at peak
of the main phase. The magnetic storms are called weak when Dst > -50 nT,
moderate when -50> Dst > -100 nT, and intense when Dst < -100 nT [28]
and super intense when Dst < -500 nT [29].
4.2 Some important Characteristics of Magnetic Storms
Taylor et al. [30] have shown that the SC type magnetic storms result from
interplanetary shocks associated with coronal mass ejections (CMEs) while the
gradual storms (SG type) are caused by corotating interaction regions (CIRs).
From the superposed epoch analysis of more than 300 storms, Yokoyama and
Kamide citeYK97 concluded that magnetic storm intensity depends on the
duration of main phase; the more intense storms have longer main phase. The
southward component of IMF plays a crucial role in both triggering the main
phase and in determining the magnetic storm intensity. Tsurutani et al. [32]
have shown that the number of major (Dst < -100 nT) storms follow the solar

An Overview of the Magnetosphere, Substorms and Geomagnetic Storms
301
Fig. 4. Schematics of magnetic storms (top) sudden commencement (SC) type
driven by ICMEs and (bottom) gradual (SG) type caused by CIRs. All storms may
not have initial phases (taken from Tsurutani et al. [32] and slightly modiﬁed)
cycle sunspot number. For weak to moderate storms, there is a much smaller
solar cycle dependence (see Figure 5).
They concluded that CIRs and high speed streams are presumably re-
sponsible for most of the weaker storms. They further showed that the CIR-
generated magnetic storms appear to have very long recovery phases as com-
pared to those driven by interplanetary coronal mass ejections (ICMEs). Rel-
ativistic ”killer” electrons appear during ”recovery” phase of the magnetic
storms. These electrons pose great danger for the spacecraft.
From the study of 9 intense magnetic storms (Dst < - 175 nT) that oc-
curred during 1998 to 2001, Vichare et al. [33] concluded that the main phase
duration shows clear dependence on the duration of southward IMF but no

302
G. S. Lakhina, S. Alex and R. Rawat
Fig. 5. Shows occurrence of magnetic storms per year between 1958 and 2004. The
number of magnetic storms/year with Dst < -100 nT are given at the top and those
with -35 > Dst > -75 nT on the bottom. The smoothed sunspot number is shown
as a solid dark line. The number of major (Dst < -100 nT) magnetic storms follow
the solar cycle sunspot number. There are ∼15 to 20 major magnetic storms/year
during solar maximum and only ∼1 to 2 during solar minimum. The ratio is ∼15
to 20. For weak to moderate intensity magnetic storms, there is much smaller solar
cycle dependence. CIRs/high-speed streams are presumably responsible for most of
the weaker storms [taken from Tsurutani et al. [32]].
clear dependence on intensity of the storm. The underlined conclusion appar-
ently disagrees with statistical study of Yokoyama and Kamide [31]. Vichare
et al. [33] also showed that during the main phase of the storm, almost 5 per-
cent of the total solar wind kinetic energy is available for redistribution in the
magnetosphere, whereas during total storm period it reduces to 3.5 percent.
The intensity of the storm is controlled mainly by the magnitude of the
peak of the southward component of the IMF Bz and its duration rather than
the speed of the CME ejecta. For example, large southward IMF associated
with slow CME of 18 November 2003 gave rise to more intense magnetic storm
(Dst= - 491 nT ) on 20 November 2003 than the very fast CMEs on 28 and
29 October 2003 which produced less intense magnetic storms (Dst= - 358
nT and - 406 nT ) on 29 and 30-31 October 2003, respectively [34].
It is found that solar energetic particle (SEP) events with high ﬂux levels
or a ’plateau’ after the shock passage produce much more intense storms than
the events where the SEP ﬂux levels decrease after the shock passage. An
example of the SEP event is shown in Figure 6 [35]. SEP events having longer
pre-shock southward IMF Bz duration produced stronger main phase storms

An Overview of the Magnetosphere, Substorms and Geomagnetic Storms
303
Fig. 6. (Left diagram), upper panel shows X-ray ﬂux at two wavelengths 0.5-4 A◦
and 1-8 A◦. Proton ﬂux characteristics in various energy levels of 47-65 keV, 112-
187 keV, 0.31-0.58 MeV, 0.76-1.22 MeV and 1.06-1.91 MeV for 14-16 July 2000 are
shown in lower panel. (Right diagram) shows from top to bottom: IMF |B|, IMF
By, IMF Bz, hourly averaged Dst index, 1-minute digital magnetic data △HABG
and △HT IR for 15-17 July 2000. The red star indicates the local noon [after Rawat
et al. [35]]
(see Figure 7). This result can be used as precursory signature for intense
magnetic storms for space weather studies [35].
From the study of 8 intense storms (Dst < -200 nT), Rawat et al. [36] have
found that the zonal component, By of IMF plays a substantial role for the
development of intense main phase in the presence of signiﬁcant southward
Bz Component (see Figure 8).
5 Storm-Substorm Relationships
The magnetic storm-substorm relationship is an active topic of debate [37, 38].
In the earlier view proposed by Akasofu and Chapman [39], magnetic
storms were presumably caused by frequent occurrence of intense sub-storms.

304
G. S. Lakhina, S. Alex and R. Rawat
Fig. 7. Illustrates correspondence of △HABG minimum (ﬁlled ’+’ signs) with du-
ration of southward Bz before shock and Dstmin (ﬁlled square sy-bols) for four SEP
events. ’TS’ indicates the shock time. The pre-shock hours with southward IMF Bz
are marked with respect to the shock time. Red colour symbols depict two intense
main phase events of 14-16 July 2000 and 4-6 November 2001. For intensity of these
storms see the degree of depression in Alibag magnetic ﬁeld and high level of auroral
activity. Weak main-phase events of 8-10 November 2000 and 24-26 September 2001
have been shown by blue symbols. These two cases can be identiﬁed by lower values
of △HABG minimum and AE values [after Rawat et al. [35]].
Observations of energetic particles in the outer region of the ring current
region, which were presumably impulsively injected from the plasma sheet,
during substorms lent support to this idea [40]. Sun et al. [41] and Sun and
Akasofu [42] analyzed the magnetic data from the world wide observatory
network and found two prominent current pattern consisting of one-cell and
two-cell systems. The impulsive one-cell system, well-known to be associated
with the substorms, was highly correlated with the Dst and poorly with the
solar wind. On the other hand, the two-cell system, associated with the mag-
netospheric convection, correlated well with solar wind parameters but poorly
with Dst. Such a separation of magnetic observatory network data into con-
vection and substorm components provides a strong support to the idea of
substorms driving the magnetic storms. Further support to this view comes
from the numerical simulations by Fok et al. [43] of the ring current with im-
pulsive electric ﬁelds mimicking the substorm eﬀects. The simulation results

An Overview of the Magnetosphere, Substorms and Geomagnetic Storms
305
Fig. 8. Correspondence between Tlag and minimum Dst attained for 8 intense storm
events. Tlag is the diﬀerence between onset times of signiﬁcant duskward By and
southward turning of Bz [after Rawat et al. [36]].
indicate a stronger ring current generation than the one that can be produced
from only a convection electric ﬁeld.
The modern view is that enhanced magnetospheric convection from sus-
tained southward IMF can drive the magnetic storm. The particles residing
in the plasma sheet can be transported closer to the Earth by a large magne-
tospheric electric ﬁeld arising from the interaction of strong southward IMF
with the geomagnetic ﬁeld [44, 24]. This view is supported by the facts that
the Dst index can be predicted well using interplanetary conditions alone
[45, 46, 28] and the reported decrease in the rate of development of Dst index
with substorm occurrence [47]. The observations by Gonzalez and Tsurutani
[48] of intense magnetic storms during long duration (> 3-5 hrs) of southward
IMF, a condition favoring strong dawn-to-dusk magnetospheric electric ﬁeld,
also support this idea. Additional support comes from the studies that found

306
G. S. Lakhina, S. Alex and R. Rawat
no substorms in a limited subset of magnetic storms caused by interplanetary
magnetic clouds [49] but found intervals where there were very intense sub-
storms without magnetic storms [50]. These latter events are now called as
high intensity long duration continuous AE activity (HILDCAAs). Numerical
simulations showing build-up of ring current during enhanced magnetospheric
convection without including the impulsive injection from substorm [51] lend
further support to this view.
It is now more or less established that interplanetary electric ﬁelds Ey
(dawn-dusk component corresponding to southwards IMF) play important
roles in both magnetic storms and substorms activity. Whereas the ﬂuctuat-
ing Ey gives rise to substorms, the quasi-steady Ey can give rise to magnetic
storms [52]. Further, it is believed that various plasma instabilities play im-
portant roles in substorm onset [53, 54, 55, 22, 57, 56, 58, 59] but essentially
no role in driving the magnetic storms. Plasma instabilities, however, could
be important during the main as well as the recovery phase of magnetic storm
[60, 61, 62, 63, 64].
6 Conclusions
The interaction of solar wind with the geomagnetic ﬁeld results in the forma-
tion of the Earth’s magnetosphere which contains various plasma re-gions and
the current systems. Magnetic reconnection occurring on the dayside magne-
topause is believed to be the main plasma process which is responsible for the
transfer of solar wind energy into the magnetosphere. This process is most eﬃ-
cient during southward IMF intervals corresponding to the condition when the
dayside geomagnetic ﬁeld and the inter-planetary ﬁeld are oppositely directed.
Magnetospheric substorms and storms are manifestation of the geomagnetic
activity which is ultimately controlled by the solar wind conditions although
the observations indicate that some internal plasma instability of the mag-
netotail may be triggering substorms. However, the excitation of the plasma
instability depend on the magnetotail equilibrium which is controlled by the
interplanetary parameters.
Magnetic storms form the main component of space weather studies [24].
Intense and super-intense geomagnetic storms create hostile space weather
conditions that can generate many hazards to the spacecraft as well as tech-
nological systems at ground. Some adverse eﬀects of intense magnetic storms
are life-threatening power outages, failure and malfunctioning of satellite in-
struments due to deep dielectric charging by relativistic or ”killer” electrons,
satellite communication failure, data loss, and navigational errors, loss of low
earth orbiting satellites, threat to astronauts and jetliner passengers due to
high radiation dosage, damage to power transmission lines and corrosion of
the long pipelines and cables due to geomagnetically induced currents (GICs).
Some of these eﬀects were noticed during the October-November 2003 intense
magnetic storms.

An Overview of the Magnetosphere, Substorms and Geomagnetic Storms
307
Acknowledgements
Thanks are due to Council of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research, Government
India, for providing support to GSL under the Emeritus Scientist Scheme. The
authors acknowledge CELIAS/MTOF experiment on SOHO, a joint ESA and
NASA mission. We thank the ACE SWEPAM instrument team and the ACE
Science Center for providing the ACE data. We acknowledge the information
from the Space Environment Center, Boulder, CO, National Oceanic and At-
mospheric Administration (NOAA), US Dept. of Commerce. We also thank
WDC, Kyoto for providing the preliminary Quick look AE, AL and AU, Dst
and SYM-H indices.
References
1. J. K. Hargreaves: The Solar-Terrestrial Environment, (Cambridge University
Press, 1992)
2. M. G. Kivelson, and C. T. Russell (eds.): Introduction to Space Physics (Cam-
bridge University Press, 1995)
3. Dungey, J. W.: Physical Review Letters 6, 47 (1961)
4. D. G. Sibeck, R. E. Lopez, and E. C. Roelof: J. Geophys. Res. 96, 5489 (1991)
5. G. Haerendel and G. Paschmann: Interaction of the solar wind with the dayside
magnetosphere. In:
Magnetospheric Plasma Physics, ed by A. Nishida (Cent.
for Acad. Publ. Japan, Tokyo, 1982)
6. W. D. Gonzalez, J. A. Joselyn, Y. Kamide, H. W. Kroehl, G. Rostoker, B. T.
Tsurutani, V. W. Vasyliunas: Journal of Geophysical Research 99, 5771 (1994)
7. B. T. Tsurutani and R. M. Thorne: Geophys. Res. Lett. 9, 1247 (1982)
8. R. Gendrin: Geophys. Res. Lett. 10, 769 (1983)
9. B. T. Tsurutani, and W. D. Gonzalez: The interplanetary causes of magnetic
storms; a review. In: Magnetic Storms, Ed by B. T. Tsurutani, W. D. Gonza-
lez, Y. Kamide, and J. K. Arballo, Geophysical Monograph Series, 98 (AGU,
Washington D.C., 1997) pp 77-90.
10. W. I. Axford and C. O. Hines: Can. J. Phys., 39, 1433 (1961)
11. A. Eviatar and R. A. Wolf: J. Geophys. Res. 73, 5561 (1968)
12. Tsurutani, B. T., and W. D. Gonzalez: Geophys. Res. Lett. 22, 663 (1995)
13. S. I. Akasofu, C. I. Meng, and D. S. Kimball: J. Atmos. Terr. Phys., 28, 505
(1966)
14. J. R. Kan, T. A. Potembra, S. Kokubun and T. Iijima: Magnetospheric Sub-
storms. In: Geophysical Monograph 64, (American Geophysical Union, Wash-
ington, D. C., 1991).
15. G. S. Lakhina: Some theoretical concepts of magnetospheric substorms. In: Ge-
omagnetic Studies at Low Latitudes, Memoirs of Geological Society of India,
No. 24, ed by G. K. Rangarajan and B. R. Arora (Geological Society of India,
Bangalore, India, 1992) pp 307-355
16. L. F. Bargatze, D. N. Baker, R. L. McPherron, and E. W. Hones, Jr.: J. Geophys.
Res., 90, 6387 (1985).
17. D. N. Baker: Driven and Unloading aspects of magnetospheric substorms. In:
Proceedings of the International Conference on Substorms (ICS-1), Kiruna, Swe-
den, 23-27 March, ESA SP-335 (1992) pp 185-191.

308
G. S. Lakhina, S. Alex and R. Rawat
18. Clauer, C. R.: The technique of linear prediction ﬁlters applied to studies of
solar wind-magnetosphere coupling. In: Solar Wind- Magnetosphere Coupling,
ed by Y. Kamide and J. A. Slavin (Terra Sci. Pub. Co., Tokyo, 1986) p. 39
19. E.W. Hones Jr.: Space Sci. Revs. 23, 393 (1979)
20. S. I. Akasofu: Magnetospheric substorms: a model. In Solar Terrestrial Physics,
Part III, ed by E. R. Dryer (D. Reidel, Norwood, Mass., 1972) p. 131
21. R. L. McPherron, C. T. Russell and M. D. Aubry: J. Geophys. Res. 78, 3131
(1973)
22. A. T. Y. Lui et al.: J. Geophys. Res. 96, 11389 (1991)
23. A. T. Y. Lui, R. E. Lopez, B. J. Anderson, K. Takahashi, L .J. Zanetti, R. W.
McEntire, T. A. Potemra, D. M. Klumpar, E. M. Greene, and R. Strangeway:
J. Geophys. Res. 97, 1461 (1992)
24. A. T. Y. Lui: Terres. Atmos. Oceanic Sci. (TAO) 14, 221 (2003)
25. G. Rostoker Physics of magnetic storms. In: Magnetic Storms, ed by B. T. Tsu-
rutani, W. D. Gonzalez, Y. Kamide, and J. K. Arballo, (Geophysical Monograph
98, AGU, Washington D C, 1997) p. 149
26. L. W. Klein and L. F. Burlaga: J. Geophys. Res. 87, 613 (1982)
27. W. D. Gonzalez, B. T. Tsurutani, A. L. C. Gonzalez, E. J. Smith, F. Tang, and
S.-I. Akasofu: J. Geophys. Res. 94, 8835 (1989)
28. Y. Kamide, N. Yokoyama, W. D. Gonzalez, B. T. Tsurutani, I. A. Daglis, A.
Brakke, S. Masuda: Journal of Geophysical Research 103, 6917 (1998)
29. B. T. Tsurutani, W. D. Gonzalez,, G. S. Lakhina, and S. Alex: J. Geophys. Res.
108, A7, 1268, doi:10.1029/2002JA009504 (2003a)
30. J. R. Taylor, M. Lester and T. K. Yeoman: Ann. Geophys. 12, 612 (1994)
31. N. Yokoyama and Y. Kamide: J. Geophys. Res. 102, A7, 14215 (1997)
32. B. T. Tsurutani, W. D. Gonzalez, A. L. C. Gonzalez, F. L. Guarnieri,
N. Gopalswamy, M. Grande, Y. Kamide, Y. Kasahara, G. Lu, I.M., R.
McPherron, F. Soraas, and V. Vasyliunas: J. Geophys. Res. 111, A07S01,
doi:10.1029/2005JA011273 (2006)
33. G. Vichare, S. Alex and G. S. Lakhina: J. Geophys. Res. 110, A03204,
doi:10.1029/2004JA010418 (2005)
34. S. Alex, S. Mukherjee and G. S. Lakhina: J. Atmos. Solar-Terr. Phys., 68, 769
(2006)
35. R. Rawat, S. Alex, G. S. Lakhina: Ann. Geophys. 24, 3569 (2006)
36. R. Rawat, S. Alex, G.S. Lakhina: Bull. Astron. Soc. India, in press (2007)
37. A.S. Sharma, Y. Kamide and G.S. Lakhina (eds): Disturbances in Geospace:
The Storm-Substorm Relationship, Geophysical Monograph Series, 142, (AGU,
Washington D.C., 2003)
38. G. S. Lakhina, S. Alex, S. Mukherjee, and G. Vichare: On Magnetospheric
Storms and Substorms. In: The Solar Inﬂuence on the Heliosphere and Earth’s
Environment: Recent Progress and Prospects, Ed by N. Gopalswamy and A.
Bhattacharyya (Quest Publications, Mumbai, 2006) pp. 320-327
39. Akasofu, S. I., and S. Chapman: J. Geophys. Res., 66, 1321 (1961)
40. C. E. McIlwain: Substorm injection boundaries. In: Magnetospheric Physics, ed.
by B. M. McCormac (D. Reidel, Hingham, Mass, 1974) p. 143
41. W. Sun, W. Y. Xu, and S. I. Akasofu: J. Geophys. Res., 103, 11695 (1998)
42. W. Sun and S.I. Akasofu: J. Geophys. Res. 105, 5411 (2000)
43. M. C. Fok, T. E. Moore, and D. C. Delcourt: J. Geophys. Res. 104, 14557
(1999)

An Overview of the Magnetosphere, Substorms and Geomagnetic Storms
309
44. Y. Kamide: J. Geomagn. Geoelectr. 44, 109 (1992)
45. R. K. Burton, R. L. McPherron, and C. T. Russell: J. Geophys. Res., 80, 4204
(1975)
46. R. L. McPherron, D. N. Baker, L. F. Bargatze, C. R. Clauer, and R. E. Holzer:
Adv. Space Res. 8, 71 (1988)
47. T. Iyemori and D. R. K. Rao: Ann. Geophysicae 14, 608 (1996)
48. W. D. Gonzalez and B. T. Tsurutani: Planet. Space Sci. 35, 1101 (1987)
49. B. T. Tsurutani, X.-Y. Zhou, and W. D. Gonzalez: A lack of substorm ex-pansion
phases during magnetic storms induced by magnetic cloud. In: Disturbances in
Geospace: The Storm-Substorm Relationship, ed by A.S. Sharma, Y. Kamide and
G.S. Lakhina, Geophys. Monogr. Ser. 142 (AGU, Washington D.C., 2003b)
50. B. T. Tsurutani, W. D. Gonzalez, F. Guarnieri, Y. Kamide, X. Zhoua, J. K.
Arballo: J. Atmos. Sol. Ter. Phys. 66, 167 (2004)
51. M. W. Chen, M. Schulz, and L. R. Lyons: J. Geophys. Res., 99, 5745 (1994)
52. Y. Kamide: J. Atmos. Sol. Ter. Phys. 63, 4113 (2001)
53. K. Schindler: J. Geophys. Res. 70, 2803 (1974)
54. G. S. Lakhina and K. Schindler: J. Geophys. Res. 93, 8591 (1988)
55. A. P. Kakad, G. S. Lakhina, S. V. Singh: Planet. Space Sci. 51, 177 (2003)
56. W. W. Liu: J. Geophys. Res. 102, 4927 (1997)
57. S. Ohtani and T. Tamao: J. Geophys. Res. 98, 19369 (1993)
58. Huba, J. D., N. T. Gladd, and K. Papadopoulos: The lower- hybrid-drift in-
stability as a source of anamolous resistivity for magnetic ﬁeld line re-connection,
Geophys. Res. Lett., 4, 125, 1977.
59. G.S. Lakhina and B.T. Tsurutani: Geophys. Res. Letts. 24, 1463 (1997)
60. R. B. Horne and R. M. Thorne: J. Geophys. Res. 99, 17259 (1994).
61. M.C. Fok, T.E. Moore, and M.E. Greenspan: J. Geophys. Res. 101, 15311, 1996.
62. G.S. Lakhina and S.V. Singh Role of plasma instabilities driven by Oxygen
ions during magnetic storms and substorms. In: Disturbances in Geospace: The
Storm-Substorm Relationship, Geophys. Monogr. Ser. 142, ed by A. S. Sharma,
Y. Kamide and G. S. Lakhina (AGU, Washington, D.C., 2003) pp. 131-141
63. S. V. Singh, A. P. Kakad, R. V. Reddy, and G. S. Lakhina: J. Plasma Physics
70, 613 (2004)
64. S.V. Singh, A. P. Kakad and G. S. Lakhina: Phys. Plasmas 12, 012903 (2005)

Monte Carlo Simulation of Scattering of Solar
Radio Emissions
G. Thejappa1 and R. J. MacDowall2
1 Department of Astronomy, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742
thejappa@astro.umd.edu
2 NASA, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771
Robert.MacDowall@nasa.gov, gopals@gsfc.nasa.gov
Summary. We present Monte Carlo simulation techniques which are used to study
the scattering of the solar and interplanetary radio emissions, both thermal and non-
thermal, by random density ﬂuctuations. We examine to what extent the scattering
is responsible for (1) anomalous time delays, large source sizes, increased source
heights, and widespread visibilities of type III and type II radio bursts, and (2)
low brightness temperatures of the quiet sun radio emission and large apparent
source sizes. Using the empirically derived models for the electron densities, and
density ﬂuctuations, we show that (1) scattering is mostly responsible for the unusual
behavior of the solar and interplanetary thermal and nonthermal emissions, and (2)
Monte Carlo simulation techniques can be used to extract the characteristics of the
electron beams and CME driven shocks from the type III and type II radio burst
observations and the electron temperatures from the quiet sun observations.
Key words: Sun: Monte Carlo Simulations, Scattering, Radio Bursts, and Quiet
Sun
1 Introduction
Propagation eﬀects, especially, the refraction by the spatially varying background the
solar corona and the interplanetary medium, and the scattering by random density
ﬂuctuations distort low frequency solar and interplanetary radio emission character-
istics. For kilometric type III radio bursts, the propagation eﬀects are believed to be
responsible for [1, 2, 3, 4] (1) the higher apparent source heights in comparison with
emission levels derived from averaged in situ density measurements, (2) larger source
sizes at a given frequency with increasing distances of the centroids from the Sun,
(3) anomalous propagation time delays between signal arrival at widely separated
spacecraft, (4) visibility to sensitive, kilometric wave radio instruments irrespective
of the location of the radiating sources, be they in front of or behind the Sun, and
(5) larger angular radius of the bursts that originate behind the Sun than that of
those occurring in front of the Sun. The scattering is also believed to be the cause

312
G. Thejappa and R. J. MacDowall
of low brightness temperatures of the quiet sun radio emission, and large equatorial
diameters [5, 6, 7, 8].
The regular refraction of radio waves in a spherically symmetric solar atmo-
sphere has been thoroughly investigated using ray tracing methods [9, 10, 11]. The
geometric optics method is usually used to study the scattering of the solar and
interplanetary radio emissions, where the plasma can have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on
the propagation [4, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. In these calculations, the ray path is usu-
ally divided into linear steps of ΔS chosen in such a way that the conditions ψ < 0.1
radians, and Δμ/μ < 0.1 are satisﬁed over each step, where ψ is the deﬂection angle
and μ is the refractive index. In other situations, such as interplanetary scintillations,
where the inﬂuence of plasma on wave propagation can be neglected, the scattering
and diﬀraction are studied using the parabolic equation method [17, 18, 19, 20, 21].
Fokker [13] was the ﬁrst to introduce the Monte Carlo technique to solar radio
astronomy, and [14, 16] added the regular refraction to this algorithm. The Monte
Carlo methods were used extensively in solar radio astronomy [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 15, 22, 23].
For example, [5, 6] used these methods to study the unusual behavior of the quiet sun
radio emission at meter and decameter wavelengths. The main criticism of all these
studies is that they assume idealized spherically-symmetric models for the electron
density and a Gaussian spectrum for the electron density ﬂuctuations, instead of
using more realistic non-spherically symmetric models for the electron density, and
power-law type spectral distribution for the density ﬂuctuations.
We have developed an eﬃcient Monte-Carlo simulation program. We have used
this program to study not only the directivity, visibility, time proﬁles, source sizes,
and East-West asymmetries of type II and type III radio bursts at kilometric and
hectometric wavelengths [4], but also the eﬀects of refraction and scattering on the
quiet sun radio emission [8]. In this paper, we describe these methods and show
how the scattering is mostly responsible for the unusual behavior of the solar and
interplanetary thermal and nonthermal emissions, and how Monte Carlo simulation
techniques can be eﬀectively used to extract the characteristics of the electron beams
and CME driven shocks from the type III and type II radio burst observations, as
well as the electron temperatures from the quiet sun observations.
Electron Density
For the solar wind electron density, we use the empirical formula derived by [24]
Ne(r) = 6.14r−2.10cm−3,
(1)
where r is the heliocentric distance in units of AU. For the quiet sun, we use the em-
pirical formula derived by [25], based on Skylab data obtained during the declining
phase of solar cycle 20 (1973-1976)
Ne(r, θmg) = Np(r) + [Ncs(r) −Np(r)]e−θ2
mg/w2(r) cm−3,
(2)
where, the radial distance r is in units of R⊙. The electron densities at the current
sheet Ncs(r) and the poles Np(r) are deﬁned as
Ne(r) = Σ3
i=1cir−di.
(3)
Here c1, c2 and c3 are 1.07, 19.94, and 22.10 for the current sheet, and 0.14, 8.02, and
8.12 for the pole, respectively. These coeﬃcients are in units of 107. The coeﬃcients

Monte Carlo Simulation of Scattering of Solar Radio Emissions
313
d1, d2 and d3 are 2.8, 8.45, and 16.87, respectively. The angular distance of a point
from the current sheet in a heliomagnetic coordinate system (heliomagnetic latitude)
θmg is given by
θmg = sin−1[−cos θ sin α sin(φ −φ0) + sin θ cos α],
(4)
where θ and φ are the heliographic latitude and longitudes, respectively, α ≃15 deg
is the tilt angle between the dipole axis and the rotation axis, and φ0 ≃0 is the
angle between the heliomagnetic and heliographic equators. The functional form of
the half-angular width of the current sheet, w(r) is
w(r) = Σγir−δi,
(5)
where γ1, γ2, and γ3 are 16.3, 10.0, and 43.20 degrees, and, δ1, δ2, and δ3 are
0.5, 7.31, and 7.52, respectively. We neglect the ambient magnetic ﬁeld, since the
electron cyclotron frequency fce is much smaller than the electron plasma frequency
fpe. We assume that the electron temperature Te is 1 × 106 K in the solar corona,
and 1.5 × 105 K in the solar wind. The fpe, μ (refractive index), and the electron
collision frequency ν are deﬁned as
f 2
pe = 80.6 × 106Ne,
(6)
μ2 = 1 −f 2
pe
f 2 ,
(7)
ν = 4.36NeT −3/2
e
[17.72 + ln(T 3/2
e
/f)],
(8)
where f is the frequency in Hz.
Electron Density Fluctuations
The power spectrum of density ﬂuctuations in the solar corona and the solar wind
is [26, 27]
Pn(q) = C2
Nq−α; qo < q < qi,
(9)
where q is the magnitude of the spatial wavenumber, α is the power-law exponent,
and lo = 2πqo and li = 2πqi are the outer and the inner scales, respectively. It
is [26, 27] shown that for scales larger than a few times 100 km, the α is 11/3
(Kolmogorov spectrum), for intermediate scales (a few km ≤l ≤few times 100 km)
α changes from 11/3 to ∼3 (ﬂat spectrum), and for the smallest scales of the order
of 2 km (inner or dissipative scales) the spectrum becomes quite steep with α ≃4.
If this spectrum is normalized to the variance of the density ﬂuctuations < ΔN 2
e >,
the structural constant C2
N is [28]
C2
N = A(α, qo, qi) < ΔN 2
e >,
(10)
where
A(α, qo, qi) =
. (α−3)Γ (α/2)qα−3
o
(2π)−3/2
Γ [(α−1)/2]
for 3 < α < 4,
1
4π ln( 2q0
qi )
for α = 3.
Thus, for Kolmogorov spectrum with α = 11/3, we obtain C2
N =
ϵ2l−2/3
o
N2
e
6.6
, where
ϵ =
ΔNe
Ne . For example, [29] has derived C2
N =
ϵ2l−2/3
o
N2
e
5.53
. For the solar wind, α

314
G. Thejappa and R. J. MacDowall
is ∼11/3 [29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34]. Since, the inner scale li increases linearly with
distance from the Sun as li = ( R
R⊙)±0.1 km at R ≤100R⊙and from 100 to 200 kms,
li ≃90 −100 kms [26, 35], we assume li as ∼100 kms. For the outer scale l0, we
use the empirical formula derived by [34]
l0 = 19r0.82,
(11)
where r is in units of AU. Based on Helios observations, [36] deduced that ϵ is 0.07
during most of the time and 14% of the time it is 0.1 (see, also [29]). Therefore, we
assume that ϵ is 0.07 throughout the solar wind. For quiet sun studies, we assume
that most of the power is concentrated in the ﬂat portion of the spectrum, with
α = 3 and obtain C2
N =
ϵ2N2
e
4π ln( 2li
lo ). By substituting Li = 50 km, and Lo = 75 km
for li and lo, we obtain C2
N = 0.28ϵ2N 2
e . At radial distances, corresponding to meter
and decameter wavelengths, we also assume that the longitudinal spatial scales are
almost 10 times larger than the transverse scales. We assume that ϵ = 0.1 throughout
the corona.
Computational Scheme
We use the Cartesian coordinate system with origin at the center of the Sun, and the
x-axis coinciding with the line of sight. For ray tracing, we use a set of 6 ﬁrst-order
diﬀerential equations [37]
dR
dτ = T
(12)
dT
dτ = D(R) = 1
2
∂μ2
∂R ,
(13)
with
T 2
x + T 2
y + T 2
z = μ.
(14)
Here
R ≡
2 x
y
z
3
and T ≡
2 Tx
Ty
Tz
3
are the position and direction vectors of the ray, respectively. The independent
variable τ is related to actual path length s as dτ = ds
μ . We can write
D(R) ≡1
2
⎛
⎜
⎝
∂μ2
∂x
∂μ2
∂y
∂μ2
∂z
⎞
⎟
⎠= 8.90 × 1012
f 2
1
r4 NeR.
(15)
We use the 3rd order Runge-Kutta algorithm to integrate the ray tracing equations
(12) and (13), which can be written in vectorial form as (see for example [38])
Rn+1 = Rn + Δτ[Tn + 1
6(A + 2B)],
(16)
Tn+1 = Tn + 1
6(A + 4B + C),
(17)
A = ΔτD(Rn),
(18)

Monte Carlo Simulation of Scattering of Solar Radio Emissions
315
B = ΔτD(Rn + Δτ
2 Tn + 1
8ΔτA),
(19)
C = ΔτD(Rn + ΔτTn + 1
2ΔτB).
(20)
We compute the optical depth τ and the transit time Δt(s) at each step ΔS as
τi+1 = τi + K f 2
pe
f 2
νΔS
μi
(21)
Δti+1 = Δti + K ΔS
μi ,
(22)
where K is 500 for the solar wind, and 2.32 for the solar corona.
Scattering
The mean-square angular deviation < Ψ 2 > suﬀered by a ray due to scattering by
Gaussian ﬂuctuations is [12, 39]
< Ψ 2 >= b(f)ΔS.
(23)
Here, the mean square deviation per unit length, b(f) is deﬁned as
b(f) =
√π
μ4
f 4
pe
f 4
ϵ2
h ,
(24)
where h is the scale height of the density ﬂuctuations. For a power-law spectrum
Pn(q) = C2
Nq−α, the < Ψ 2 > is derived as [17, 4]
< Ψ 2 >= r2
eλ4
πμ2 ΔS C2
N
4 −α(q4−α
i
−q4−α
o
).
(25)
For qo << qi, α = 11/3, re =
e2
mc2 (the classical radius of the electron), λ = c
f (the
wavelength), C2
N =
ϵ2l−2/3
o
N2
e
5.53
, and f 2
pe = e2Ne
πme we obtain
b(f) = π f 4
pe
f 4
ϵ2
μ4l1/3
i
l2/3
o
.
(26)
For α = 3, and for Qi = 2π
Li and Qo = 2π
Lo corresponding to qi and qo we obtain
b(f) = π (1 −Li/Lo)
2 ln(2Li/Lo)
f 4
pe
f 4
ϵ2
μ4Li ,
(27)
for C2
N =
ϵ2N2
e
4π ln(2Li/Lo). For Li = 50 km, and Lo = 75 km, we obtain
b(f) ∼0.6π f 4
pe
f 4
ϵ2
μ4Li .
(28)
It is interesting to note that if we substitute an eﬀective scale height h = l1/3
i
l2/3
o
in the expression (26) corresponding to Kolmogorov spectrum, it coincides with
expression (24) corresponding to the Gaussian spectrum. Similarly, the expression

316
G. Thejappa and R. J. MacDowall
(28) derived for α = 3 almost coincides with the expression (24). The components
of the random perturbation vector < p > are chosen from a Gaussian distribution
of random numbers with a zero mean and a standard deviation of
σ = μ
√
bΔS.
(29)
For isotropic ﬂuctuations, three independent Gaussian distributed random devia-
tions of the direction cosines with the same standard deviation (29) are calculated.
However, for anisotropic ﬂuctuations, the standard deviation σ changes accordingly,
with σ∥< σ⊥. This vector < p > is added to T at each step, and normalized to
have a length of μ.
2 Type III Radio Bursts
We assume that both fundamental and harmonic emission sources are isotropic point
sources. The initial direction vectors of the rays emitted by such sources end on a
sphere of radius ∼local μ0. Since, the probability p(θ0, φ0) = p1(θ0)p2(φ0) that a
point belongs to an element of a spherical surface sin θ0dθ0dφ0 is sin θ0dθ0dφ0
4π
, where
0 ≤θ0 ≤π and 0 ≤φ0 ≤2π, we can write p1(θ0) = sin θ0
2
and p2(φ0) =
1
2π . From
 φ0
0
p2(φ0)dφ0 = φ0
2π = ξ1, and  θ0
0
p1(θ0)dθ0 = 1
2
 θ0
0
sin θ0dθ0 = cos θ0
2
+ 1
2 = ξ2, we
obtain the azimuthal and elevation angles of the initial ray as
φ0 = 2πξ1
(30)
cosθ0 = 2ξ2 −1,
(31)
where ξ1 and ξ2 are the random variables uniformly distributed between 0 and 1.
Thus, the optical direction cosines become
Tx0 = μ0 sin θ0 sin φ0
(32)
Ty0 = μ0 sin θ0 cos φ0
(33)
Tz0 = μ0 cos θ0.
(34)
which imply that −μ0 ≤(Tx0, Ty0, Tz0) ≤μ0. We assign a value of 120 kHz for both
fundamental and harmonic emissions, and accordingly assign altitudes of 0.2097 AU
(corresponding to the 115 kHz plasma level; this level is chosen to avoid severe
deﬂection of rays at critical level) and 0.3895 AU (corresponding to the 60 kHz
plasma level). These plasma levels are calculated using equation (1). We consider
two cases for simulations (1) ϵ = 0 and (2) ϵ = 0.07. For each case, we launch 1000
randomly directed rays from the source, and trace them until they cross the sphere
of 1 AU radius. In the case of ϵ = 0, we take a constant step size of 0.002 AU, and in
the case of ϵ = 0.07, we take a variable step size ΔS = 10l, where l = l1/3
i
l2/3
o
. At the
exit point, we record three components of the position vector(R), three components
of the direction vector (T), total optical depth τ and the time delay Δt (calculated
using equations 21 and 22). In Fig. 1, we present the typical trajectories of the traced
rays, embedded in transparent spheres of 1 AU radius. The distributions (ϵ = 0)
clearly show that the regular refraction focuses the fundamental into a narrower cone
and allows the harmonic to escape into a much wider cone, whereas, the scattering
(ϵ = 0.07) severely distorts the ray trajectories all the way from the source to the
exit point and causes the destruction of the refractive focusing.

Monte Carlo Simulation of Scattering of Solar Radio Emissions
317
Fig. 1. Typical distributions of the traced rays of the fundamental and harmonic
emissions.
Directivity
In a spherically symmetric case, the axis through the source and the center of the
Sun is also the axis of the cylindrical symmetry. The angle β, subtended at the center
by the traced portion of the ray from the source to 1 AU determines the distance
of the apparent source from the center of the solar disk. In heliographic degrees, β,
which is the longitude for an equatorial source is deﬁned as
β = cos−1(R.x)
|R|
,
(35)
where, the x-axis is the axis of symmetry, and R is the position vector at the exit
point. The directivity, which is the ratio of the power received (i.e., number of rays)
in a range of angles from β to β + dβ from the source embedded in a scattering
medium, to the power received from the same source at the same position emitting
the same total power isotropically in a vacuum is deﬁned as
D(β) = 4πΣnβe
−τiβ
ΔΩNT
,
(36)

318
G. Thejappa and R. J. MacDowall
where nβ is the number of rays escaping in the angles from β to β+dβ, and NT is the
total number of rays, the τβ is the optical depth (equation 21), and e−τ represents
the losses suﬀered by the ray. The solid angle ΔΩ spanned by grid separation in the
β direction around the annular ring is deﬁned as
ΔΩ = 4π sin[(iβ + 0.5)Δβ] sin(Δβ/2),
(37)
where Δβ and iβ are the angular width and index of the group, respectively.
We have computed the directivities for ϵ = 0 as well as for ϵ = 0.07 by counting
the number of harmonic and fundamental rays in groups of 5 and 1 degree intervals,
respectively, and normalized them by dividing by the largest number of rays in each
case (see, Fig. 2). The refraction focuses the fundamental and harmonic emissions
into narrow and broad cones of ∼18 and ∼80 degree angular widths, respectively
(ﬁrst row of Fig. 2). The intense ”shoulders” at the edges of the limiting cones proba-
bly are due to ingoing rays from the source [14, 15]. For ϵ = 0, the ratio of intensities
at 5 and 15 degrees is 0.5 for the fundamental, and the ratio of intensities at 5 and 80
degree longitudes is 0.75 for the harmonic. For ϵ = 0, the fundamental is very intense
and directive for an observer located within its limiting cone, indicating that during
low level of density ﬂuctuations, the positive identiﬁcation of the mode of emission
as the fundamental, or a mixture of a strong fundamental and a weak harmonic
can serve as a good warning signal for an imminent arrival of the ﬂare accelerated
electrons or the CME driven shock accelerated electrons at the spacecraft. The di-
rectivity diagrams (ϵ = 0.07) of the scattered fundamental and harmonic emissions
(second row of Fig. 2) do not show the ”shoulders” at the edges of the limiting cones,
i.e., the scattering has completely destroyed the shoulders. More importantly, the
scattering has widened the fundamental and harmonic limiting cones from ∼18 to
∼100 degrees, and from ∼80 to ∼150 degrees, respectively, and extended their
visibilities beyond 90 degree longitude which would have been completely occulted
at the same longitude in the absence of scattering. The symmetry of the directivity
diagrams with respect to the radial direction as seen in Fig. 2 is consistent with the
observed directivity of type III radio bursts at 3 MHz as reported by [40] with a
peak at the central meridian followed by an exponential fall at higher longitudes.
The comparison of these directivity diagrams indicates that the fundamental is gen-
erally weaker at high longitudes than the harmonic, implying that the type II and
type III bursts visible at higher longitudes probably correspond to the harmonic
emission. Thus the computed directivities suggest that (1) the second harmonic is
easily visible to the widely separated spacecrafts, (2) the type III and type II bursts
visible at higher longitudes beyond 40 degrees probably correspond to the second
harmonic, and (3) the emissions visible only at low longitudes from 0 to 30 degrees
can be a mixture of the fundamental and second harmonic; fundamental being more
intense than the harmonic.
Time Proﬁles
The time taken by the ray to travel from the source to the point of exist is the
sum of all the time steps Δti as given in equation (22). The histogram of these
arrival times at 1 AU gives the time proﬁle. In Fig. 3, we present the time proﬁles
of the fundamental and harmonic emissions constructed using the arrival times of
the rays in the longitude range from 0 to 30, and 0 to 90 degrees, respectively. The

Monte Carlo Simulation of Scattering of Solar Radio Emissions
319
Fig. 2. The left column shows the directivities of the fundamental and the right
column shows the directivities of the harmonic emission. Here ϵ is equal to the level
of relative density ﬂuctuations ΔNe
Ne
total durations of the unscattered and scattered emissions are 50 (top panel), and
∼3000 seconds, and ∼350 and ∼3000 seconds, for the fundamental and harmonics,
respectively. The time proﬁle of both scattered fundamental as well as harmonic
emissions look like idealized type III burst time proﬁles, with total durations of
∼3000 s comparable to the observed durations of type III bursts which can last for
an hour or longer [1]. This indicates that the propagation eﬀects should be removed
from the observed time proﬁles before using them to extract any parameters, such
as the duration of the source or the decay constant due to collisional damping [16].
The computed time proﬁles also show that the fundamental (F) and harmonic (H)
emissions arrive at the spacecraft at diﬀerent times, by indicating that they may
contain two peaks. However, the excitation of the harmonic emission is delayed with
respect to the fundamental by
Δt ≃r(fpe) −r(fpe/2)
vb
,
(38)
where vb is the beam speed, and r(fpe) = 19.2f −0.952
pe
AU. For example, a beam
with vb = αc takes
89.9
α
seconds to travel from f ∼fpe layer located at 0.2097

320
G. Thejappa and R. J. MacDowall
Fig. 3. The computed time proﬁles of the fundamental (left column) and harmonic
emissions (right column) at 120 kHz for various cases (see text), where ϵ is equal to
the level of relative density ﬂuctuations ΔNe
Ne
AU (corresponding to fpe = 115 kHz) to the harmonic layer located at 0.3895 AU
(corresponding to fpe = 60 kHz). Thus, when α takes values of 0.1 and 0.5, the
time delay is ∼15 and ∼3 minutes, respectively. These values are comparable with
the observed time delays of the fundamental-harmonic pairs at high frequencies
[41], as well as with those of interplanetary type III radio bursts. For typical beam
velocities, the harmonic peak always occurs later than the fundamental. However,
due to superposition only a single peak may appear in the time proﬁle, which may
correspond to the fundamental at the low longitudes, and to the harmonic at high
longitudes. The occurrence of the fundamental emission followed by the harmonic
is consistent with observations [42, 43].
Source Size and Displacement
The sizes and displacements of the apparent sources can be determined using the
distribution of projected points of the exit points (R) of the rays in the angular
range β and β + dβ onto a plane passing through the source S and perpendicular to
the direction, T. The equation of the plane through the source with radius vector
Rs and normal to T can be written as
T1x + T2y + T3z = D,
(39)

Monte Carlo Simulation of Scattering of Solar Radio Emissions
321
where D = T1x1+T2y1+T3z1, Rs = (x1, y1, z1) and T = (T1, T2, T3). The projection
of the point (x2, y2, z2) on this plane can be obtained from
x −x2
T1
= y −y2
T2
= z −z2
T3
= p,
(40)
as (pT1 + x2, pT2 + y2, pT3 + z2), where p is a parameter. By substituting these
coordinates in the equation of the plane (39), we obtain
T.(pT + R) = D = T.Rs,
(41)
yielding
p = T.(Rs −R)
T.T
.
(42)
The distributions of projected points (Fig. 4) scattered into the longitude range of 0
Fig. 4. The projected images of the scattered fundamental and harmonic sources.
to 30 degrees represent the sizes of the apparent sources, with altitudes equal to the
heliocentric distances of the centroids of these distributions. For example, the 120
kHz fundamental source located at 0.2097 AU (corresponding to fpe = 115 kHz) is
displaced inward to the radial distance of 0.2033 AU (the critical layer corresponding
to ∼120 kHz) when ϵ = 0, and displaced radially outward to a distance of 0.5950 AU
(critical layer corresponding to 38.8 kHz) when ϵ = 0.07. Thus, the radial distance of
the apparent source corresponds to ∼f
3 layer, agreeing very well with the observed
heights of f/2 and f/5 layers for type III radio bursts [2]. The computed centroid of
the apparent harmonic source is displaced inwards from 0.3895 AU corresponding
to 60 kHz plasma level to 0.3152- 0.3329 AU, and to 0.3993 AU corresponding to
∼f
2 critical level when ϵ = 0, and ϵ = 0.07, respectively.
When ϵ = 0, the size of the apparent fundamental source, computed as the
half-power widths of these distributions is 0.2429, and 1.1233 degrees parallel and

322
G. Thejappa and R. J. MacDowall
perpendicular to the radial direction. When ϵ = 0.07, this size is increased respec-
tively to 24 and 27 degrees. When ϵ = 0, the size of the apparent harmonic source
is ∼6.5, and ∼2 degrees along and across the radial directions in both longitude
ranges, and increased to 36 and 38 degrees when ϵ = 0.07. These computed sizes
and heights agree very well with the observations of [1].
Comparison with Observations
In Fig. 5, we present an example of a multi spacecraft detection of a type II and
a couple of type III radio bursts by the Uniﬁed Radio and Plasma Wave (URAP)
experiment on Ulysses [44] and the Waves investigation on Wind [45]. Ulysses is in
a highly elliptical orbit out of the ecliptic plane with aphelion (perihelion) at ∼5.4
AU (∼1.3 AU), the trajectory of the Wind takes it from near Earth orbits to the
Lagrange point (L1), about 230 RE upstream of Earth. The Ulysses data presented
in the top panel show an intense type III burst after 12:00 on 1997/11/6 and several
other weaker type III bursts. The data early on 1997/11/6 are corrupted by a poor
telemetry link. The type II emission is the weaker activity (see color bar scale)
starting at 18:00 and continuing to 12:00 on the next day while drifting from 200 to
100 kHz. The ﬂare site related to these events was at S18 and W63. The bottom panel
shows similar data from the Wind spacecraft, where the same type II and type III
bursts are detected slightly earlier because Wind is closer to the Sun (at 1 AU near
the Earth) than Ulysses (at 5.3 AU). The additional emission features in the Wind
data are Auroral kilometric Emission and the electron thermal noise (the horizontal
feature seen in the bottom half of the panel). In the middle panel, single frequency
data from the two spacecraft at ∼120 kHz is plotted. The signal levels are not the
same at the two spacecraft because the radio bursts are directive, and the distances
of the sources are diﬀerent for diﬀerent spacecrafts. However, the time proﬁles are
remarkably similar at both spacecraft. During these events the two spacecraft were
separated by more than 100 degrees in heliographic longitude. Note that the Ulysses
data plotted in the middle panel have been shifted in time by about 35 minutes to
correct for the longer propagation distance to Ulysses. (ULYSSES: Heliographic
latitude = 2.0 degrees, Heliographic longitude = 53.9 degrees, Range to Sun = 5.3
AU; EARTH/WIND: Heliographic latitude = 3.8 degrees, Heliographic longitude =
301.2 degrees, Range to Sun = 1.0 AU). The distributions of rays emitted by the
fundamental and harmonic sources located at (S18, W63) at altitudes of 0.2050 and
0.3895 AU for ϵ = 0 as well as for ϵ = 0.07 are shown in Fig. 6, where the locations of
the Ulysses and Wind spacecraft are also shown. It is clear from these distributions
that (1) when ϵ = 0 the fundamental is highly beamed and visible only to Ulysses
spacecraft, (2) when ϵ = 0.07 the scattering causes the fundamental to be visible to
both spacecraft, and (3) the harmonic emission is visible to both spacecraft for ϵ = 0
as well as for ϵ = 0.07. Thus, except for the refracted fundamental, the rest of the
emissions, namely scattered fundamental, unscattered harmonic as well as scattered
harmonic can be visible to both Ulysses and Wind spacecraft. This indicates that
the visibility depends on the coordinates of their sources.
3 Quiet Sun Component
The brightness temperature of the quiet Sun radio emission is computed as

Monte Carlo Simulation of Scattering of Solar Radio Emissions
323
Fig. 5. Top: In the top panel, Ulysses URAP data show an intense type III burst
after 12:00 on 1997/11/6, as well as several other weaker type IIIs. The type II
emission is the weaker emission band (see color bar scale) from 18:00 to 12:00 on
the next day and drifting from 200 to 100 kHz. The bottom panel shows similar data
from the Wind Waves instrument. In the middle panel, single frequency data from
the two spacecraft at approximately 120 kHz is plotted. Because of diﬀering distances
from the sources to the spacecraft as well as the eﬀects of directivity, the signal levels
seen for a given emission is diﬀerent at the two spacecraft. The two spacecraft are
separated by more than 100 deg in heliographic longitude, providing an ideal angular
separation for studying these events.
Tb = Te(1 −e−τ).
(43)
Here τ =  s2
s1 ξds is the optical depth, where s1 and s2 are the heliocentric distances
of the source and the observer, respectively. The ξ =
f2
peν
f2μc is the absorption coeﬃ-
cient per centimeter of path length. The optical depth τ is calculated by tracing the
rays (initially launched toward that point). The rays are traced from a distance of
2.5R⊙toward the Sun until τ reaches a large value of ∼10, or the ray is traveled
at least 5 R⊙. The rays are launched only in the equatorial plane, where the x-axis

324
G. Thejappa and R. J. MacDowall
Fig. 6. The typical distributions of the refracted and scattered rays from the ac-
tual source location until they reach distances of Ulysses spacecraft. The locations
of Ulysses and Wind are also shown as * and o, respectively, in these distribution
diagrams.
is directed toward the observer. Here, the positive y direction represents the west
longitude. In Fig. 7, we present the typical trajectories of the traced rays, where red
and blue trajectories correspond respectively to the cases, where only the refraction
is considered, and when both refraction as well as scattering are considered. It is
interesting to note that the scattered rays in the top panel turn back before reaching
the critical layer, i.e., much earlier than the refracted rays, by indicating that the
scattering raises the apparent East-West diameter of the Sun at 34.5 MHz. On the
other hand, the turning points of the scattered rays in the bottom panel almost
coincide with the critical layer, similar to the refracted rays, by indicating that the
scattering may not aﬀect the apparent size of the radio sun at 73.8 MHz.
To calculate the brightness temperatures for diﬀerent longitudes, corresponding
to diﬀerent values of y, we trace ﬁfty rays at intervals of 0.25 solar radii for each y,
and calculate the average brightness temperature using the computed total optical
depth of the ray. By the principle of reciprocity, this value represents the brightness
temperature of thermal emission from that point on the disk. The error bars are
estimated by using the variance of the measures contributing to the mean. In Fig.
8, we present the distributions of the brightness temperature at 50 MHz, where the
solid curve corresponds to the case, where only the refraction is considered, and the
points with error bars correspond to the case, where both the refraction and scat-

Monte Carlo Simulation of Scattering of Solar Radio Emissions
325
Fig. 7. Typical ray trajectories traced in the refracting (red) and refracting and scat-
tering (blue) non-spherical symmetric corona. The rays are initially directed toward
points on the solar disk in the intervals of 0.25R⊙.
tering are included in the calculations. These brightness temperature distributions
resemble very much to those computed by previous authors [22, 5, 6]. The half-power
angular diameter (angular width at half-maximum) in units of arc minutes calcu-
lated using a cubic polynomial interpolation technique is ∼48
′ at 50 MHz when only
the refraction is included, and it is increased to ∼56
′ when the scattering is added
in the calculations. This value compares reasonably well with observed value of 50
′
within the limits of error bars. The brightness temperature is reduced from 9 × 105
K (ϵ = 0) to ∼2.3 × 105 K when the scattering was included, i.e., TB is reduced
almost by 50%. The central brightness temperatures (zero longitude, or y = 0) for
four diﬀerent frequencies (30.9, 50, 60, 73.8 MHz) are presented as the computed
spectrum in Fig. 9. The shape of the spectrum of thermal emission is preserved
in the considered frequency range, even in the presence of density ﬂuctuations by
remaining almost steady at these frequencies in the limits of error bars. The central
brightness temperatures are 3.5 × 105 K, 1.4 × 105 K, 1.7 × 105K, and 1.4 × 105K
at 30.9, 50, 60 and 73.8 MHz, respectively.

326
G. Thejappa and R. J. MacDowall
Fig. 8. Brightness temperature (TB) distributions for 50.0 MHz radiation. The er-
ror bars correspond to the r.m.s deviation from the mean of the computed TB for
individual rays.
Fig. 9. The brightness temperature (TB) spectrum of the quiet Sun

Monte Carlo Simulation of Scattering of Solar Radio Emissions
327
4 Conclusions
The Monte Carlo simulations show that: (1) the widespread visibility of radio bursts
is due to scattering of radio waves by density ﬂuctuations, (2) the scattered funda-
mental and harmonic emissions produce time proﬁles which look very much like
the idealized type III radio bursts indicating that the duration of the beam and
collisional decay constants can be extracted from the observations only if they are
corrected for the propagation eﬀects, (3) the identiﬁcation of the emission modes
in the type III burst time proﬁle, namely the fundamental in the rise part followed
by the harmonic in the decay part of the time proﬁle can be accounted for by the
scattering, (4) the sizes and heights of the apparent sources derived using the dis-
tributions of scattered rays from the isotropic point sources agree very well with
observed values, (5) the scattering at meter-decameter wavelengths leads to a con-
siderable reduction in the central brightness temperatures, (6) although scattering
causes the reduction in the central brightness temperatures, the resultant spectrum,
i.e., the peak brightness temperature as a function of the frequency remains very
similar to the thermal spectrum of electromagnetic radiation, and (7) by knowing
the density distribution, and the parameters of density ﬂuctuations during the radio
observations, we can determine the electron temperatures of the solar corona using
the Monte Carlo simulations.
The Monte Carlo simulation method developed in these studies can be used
to study the propagation of waves in any refracting and scattering medium. These
techniques can be very useful to calculate the propagation related corrections in
the direction ﬁnding algorithms, used by the STEREO spacecraft to track the radio
sources, as well as to extract the physical parameters, such as the speed and disper-
sion of the electron beams, electron temperatures, arrival times of the CME driven
shocks and ﬂare electrons etc.
References
1. Steinberg, J.-L., Dulk, G. A., Hoang, S., Lecacheux, A., & Aubier, M. G. 1984,
A&A, 140, 39.
2. Steinberg, J.-L., Hoang, S., & Dulk, G. A. 1985, A&A, 150, 205.
3. Lecacheux, A., Steinberg, J.-L., Hoang, S., & Dulk, G. A. 1989, A&A, 217, 237.
4. Thejappa, G., MacDowall, R. J., & Kaiser, M. L. 2007, ApJ, 671, 894.
5. M. Aubier, Y. Leblanc, & A. Boischot, A. 1971, A&A, 12, 435.
6. Thejappa, G., & Kundu, M. R. 1992, Sol. Phys., 140, 19.
7. Thejappa, G., & Kundu, M. R. 1994, Sol. Phys., 149, 31.
8. Thejappa, G. & MacDowall, R.J., April 2008, ApJ, v.
9. Jaeger, J. C., & Westfold, K. C. 1950, Austr. J. Res., (A), 2, 322.
10. Smerd, S.F. 1950, Australian J. Sc., Res., A3, 34.
11. Bracewell, R.N., & Preston, G.W. 1956, ApJ, 123, 14.
12. Hollweg, J. 1968, AJ., 73, 972.
13. Fokker, A.D. 1965, Bull. Astr. Inst. Netherlands, 18, 111.
14. Steinberg, J.-L., Aubier-Giraud, M., Leblanc, Y., & Boischot, A. 1971, A&A,
10, 362.
15. Steinberg, J. L. 1972, A&A, 18, 382.
16. Riddle, A. C. 1974, Sol. Phys., 35, 153, 1974.

328
G. Thejappa and R. J. MacDowall
17. Cairns, I. H. 1998, ApJ, 506, 456.
18. Lee, L. C., & Jokipi, J. R. 1975, ApJ, 196, 695.
19. Rickett, B. J. 1977, Ann. Rev. Astr. Astrophys., 15, 479.
20. Rytov, S.M., Kravtsov, Yu. A., & Tatarskii, V. I. 1989, Principles of Statisti-
cal Radiophysics. vol. 4. Wave Propagation Through Random Media. Springer-
Verlag, 1989.
21. Bastian, T. S. 1994, ApJ, 426, 774.
22. Riddle, A. C. 1974, Sol. Phys., 36, 375.
23. Hoang, S., & Steinberg, J. L. 1977, A&A, 58, 287.
24. Bougeret, J.-L., King, J. H., & Schwenn, R. 1984, Sol. Phys., 90, 401.
25. Guhathakurta, M., Holzer, T. E., & MacQueen, R. M. 1996, ApJ, 458, 817.
26. Coles, W. A., & Harmon, J. K. 1989, ApJ, 337, 1023.
27. Coles, W. A., Liu, W., Harmon, J. K. & Martin, C. L. 1991, J. Geophys. Res.,
96, 1745.
28. Eﬁmov, A. I., Chashei, I. V., Bird, M. K., Samoznaev, L. N., & Plettemeier, D.
2005, Astro. Rep., 49, 485.
29. Spangler, S. R. 2002, ApJ, 576, 997.
30. Tu, C. Y., & Marsch, E. 1994, JGR, 99, 21, 481.
31. Spangler, S. R., & Sakurai, T. 1995, ApJ, 445, 999.
32. Spangler, S. R., Kavars, D. W., Kortenkamp, P. S., Bondi, M., Mantovani, F.,
& Alef, W., 2002, A&A, 384, 654.
33. Woo, R., Armstrong, J. W., Bird, M. K., & Patzold, M. 1995, Geophys. Res.
Lett., 22, 329.
34. Wohlmuth, R., Plettemeier, D., Edenhofer, P., Bird, M. K., Eﬁmov, A. I., An-
dreev, V. E., Samoznaev, L. N., & Chashei, I. V., 2001, Space Sci. Rev., 97, 9.
35. Manoharan, P. K., Ananthakrishnan, S., & Rao, A. P. 1988, Proc. Sixth Inter-
national Solar Wind Conf. Vol. 1 (Boulder, NCAR), 55.
36. Bavassano, B., & Bruno, R. 1995, JGR, 100, 9475.
37. Haselgrove, J. 1963, J. Atmos. Terr. Phys., 25, 397.
38. Sharma, A., Vizia Kumar, D., Ghatak, A.K. 1982, Appl. Opt., 21.
39. Chandrasekhar, S. 1952, MNRAS, 112, 475.
40. Fainberg, J., & Stone, R. G. 1970, Sol. Phys., 15, 222.
41. Caroubalos, C., & Steinberg, J. L. 1974, A&A, 32, 245.
42. Kellogg, P. J. 1980, ApJ, 236, 696.
43. Dulk, G. A., Steinberg, J. L., & Hoang, S. 1984, A&A, 141, 30.
44. Stone, R. G., et al., 1992, A&AS, 92, 291.
45. Bougeret, J.-L., et al., 1995, Space Sci. Rev., 71, 231.

Evolution of Magnetic Helicity in NOAA 10923
Over Three Consecutive Solar Rotations
Sanjiv Kumar Tiwari, Jayant Joshi, Sanjay Gosain and P. Venkatakrishnan
Udaipur Solar Observatory, Physical Research Laboratory, P. Box - 198, Dewali,
Bari Road, Udaipur-313 001, Rajasthan, India
stiwari@prl.res.in
Summary. We have studied the evolution of magnetic helicity and chirality in
an active region over three consecutive solar rotations. The region where it ﬁrst
appeared was named NOAA10923 and in subsequent rotations it was numbered
NOAA 10930, 10935 and 10941. We compare the chirality of these regions at photo-
spheric, chromospheric and coronal heights. The observations used for photospheric
and chromospheric heights are taken from Solar Vector Magnetograph (SVM) and
H-α imaging telescope of Udaipur Solar Observatory (USO), respectively. We dis-
cuss the chirality of the sunspots and associated H-α ﬁlaments in these regions. We
ﬁnd that the twistedness of superpenumbral ﬁlaments is maintained in the photo-
spheric transverse ﬁeld vectors also. We also compare the chirality at photospheric
and chromospheric heights with the chirality of the associated coronal loops, as
observed from the HINODE X-Ray Telescope.
Key words: Sun : Helicity – chirality – superpenumbral whirls – sigmoids
1 Introduction
Magnetic ﬁelds exhibit chirality and is observed in most of the solar features like
ﬁlament channels, ﬁlaments, sunspots, coronal loops, coronal X-Ray arcades and
interplanetary magnetic clouds (IMCs) ([1], [2], [3] and the references therein). First
of all G.E. Hale in 1925 ([4]) observed vortices in H-α around sunspots and he
called these features as ’sunspot whirls’. He investigated the data extending over
three solar cycles and found no relationship between the direction of these vortices
and the polarity of the sunspots. Also, he found no reversal of the whirl direction
together with the general reversal of the sunspot polarities with cycle. He found
that about 80 % of sunspot whirls have counterclockwise orientation in the northern
hemisphere and clockwise in the southern hemisphere, now known as the helicity
hemispheric rule. Richardson ([5]) conﬁrmed Hale’s results after doing the same
type of investigation with the data for four solar cycles. Seehafer ([1]) also found
that the negative helicity is dominant in the northern hemisphere and positive in
the southern hemisphere. This is known as the hemispheric helicity rule and is

330
S. Tiwari et al.
independent of the solar cycle. Since 90s the subject is highly taken into account by
most of the researchers in the ﬁeld. Pevtsov, Canﬁeld and Metcalf ([2]) demonstrated
the existence of chirality in the active regions, after analyzing vector magnetograms
from Mees Solar Observatory. Although, the entire active region may not show the
same type of chirality everywhere yet a dominant sense of chirality can be found for
most of the active regions.
The chirality of the H-α ﬁlament can be directly recognized by looking at the
ﬁlament barbs. If the orientation of the barbs is counterclockwise the chirality of the
ﬁlament is known to be dextral and if it is clockwise the chirality is sinistral. Martin
([6]) mentioned that the chirality of the solar features can be used for resolving 180
degree azimuthal ambiguity in the solar vector magnetic ﬁeld. It is believed that
there is one-to-one correspondence between the ﬁlament chirality and the magnetic
helicity sign. A right-handed twist and a clockwise rotation of the loops, when viewed
from the above implies positive helicity or chirality and vice-versa. The magnetic
helicity is a quantitative measure of the chiral properties of the solar magnetic
structures ([7], [8]). It is given by a volume integral over the scalar product of the
magnetic ﬁeld B and its vector potential A.
H =

A · BdV.
(1)
It is well known that the vector potential A is not unique. Thus the helicity can’t
immediately be calculated from the above given equation. Seehafer ([1]) pointed out
that the helicity of magnetic ﬁeld can best be characterized by force-free parameter
alpha also known as the helicity parameter. The force free condition is given as
∇× B = αB.
(2)
Taking the z-component of the magnetic ﬁeld
α = (∇× B)z/Bz
(3)
The magnetic helicity density can be given as
Hm = B2/α
(4)
but except for potential ﬁelds.
And the current helicity density will be given in terms of alpha as
Hc = B2α
(5)
In this paper, we identify the chirality of a sunspot in an active region named
NOAA 10923 when it ﬁrst appeared and NOAA 10930, 10935, 10941 in successive
rotations. The associated H-α ﬁlaments in the three consecutive solar rotations were
obtained from the Udaipur Solar Observatory (USO) high resolution H-α data. We
have calculated the helicity parameter of the sunspots NOAA 10935 and NOAA
10941 and we found that the value of helicity parameter has increased after one
solar rotation. These active regions are not following the helicity hemispheric rule.
There are theories ([9], [10],[11]) which discuss about the ’wrong’ sign of helicity in
the beginning of the solar cycle. Sokoloﬀet al ([12]) observes a signiﬁcant excess of
active regions with the ’wrong’ sign of helicity just at the beginning of the cycle.
But there is no discussion found about the ’wrong’ sign of helicity during the end
of the solar cycle. The sign of helicity is supposed to follow the helicity hemispheric
rule which our result doesn’t show. We compare the helicity of the active regions
with the sign of associated sigmoids obtained from the Hinode.

Evolution of Magnetic Helicity in NOAA 10923
331
2 Data and Instruments used
We use high resolution H-α images taken from Udaipur Solar Observatory (USO)
from Spar Telescope and the vector magnetograms from the USO Solar Vector Mag-
netograph (SVM) ([13], [14]). The Spar Telescope uses 1392×1024 ccd with the pixel
resolution of 0.395 arcsec and the SVM has 1024×1024 ccd with pixel resolution
of 0.98 arcsec. Our H-α observations, after the monsoon break, started on 23rd
November 2006. So we don’t have USO H-α image of the NOAA 10923 in its ﬁrst
appearance. After one rotation we observe the same sunspot in the name of NOAA
10930 on Dec 11 2006. And in other two consecutive rotations we have observed the
same sunspot in the name of NOAA 10935 on 09 Jan 2007 and NOAA 10941 on
06 Feb 2007. We use the available vector magnetograms of NOAA 10935 (09 Jan
07) and NOAA 10941 (06 Feb 07) and compare the vectors with the whirls of the
sunspot images taken in H-α wavelength.
The Spar Telescope has f/15 doublet lens with focal length of 2.25 meters and
objective 0.15 meters. It uses a H-α Halle lyot type ﬁlter with FWHM of 500 m˚A
operating at the wavelength of 6563 ˚A. The telescope utilizes a 1392×1024 CCD
with the pixel size of 6.45 μm. The pixel resolution of the CCD is 0.395 arc-sec and
the ﬁeld of view it covers is 9 arc-min × 7 arc-min. The H-alpha images of the active
regions NOAA 10930, NOAA 10935 and NOAA 10941 are shown in the Figure 1.
Fig. 1. USO H-alpha images
The magnetograms are taken from Solar Vector Magnetograph (SVM), which has
recently become operational at USO. SVM is basically an instrument which makes
two-dimensional spatial maps of solar active regions in the Zeeman induced polarized

332
S. Tiwari et al.
Fig. 2. USO solar vector magnetograms (09Jan07 and 06Feb07 respectively)
Fig. 3. XRT (Hinode) data reverse-S sigmoid showing the dextral chirality in com-
parison with that of photospheric and chromospheric data.
light of the solar spectral lines. SVM has the following main components : a Schmidt-
Cassegrain telescope tube, rotating wave-plate polarimeter, tunable narrow-band
Fabry-Perot ﬁlter, calcite analyzer (Savart plate) and a cooled CCD camera. The
primary imaging is done by using a Celestron C-8 (TM) Schmidt-Cassegrain tele-
scope of 8 inch aperture. The focal length of the telescope is 2032 mm and the
resulting output beam is a f/10 beam. The telescope has a pre-ﬁlter in front with
a 15nm pass-band centered at 630nm wavelength. A circular aperture of 2 arc-min
diameter selects the ﬁeld of view (FOV) at the prime focus. This FOV is then mod-
ulated by the rotating waveplates of the polarimeter. The modulated beam is now
collimated by a 180mm focal length lens. This modulated and collimated beam now
enters the Fabry-Perot etalon and order sorting pre-ﬁlter. Now the re-imaging lens

Evolution of Magnetic Helicity in NOAA 10923
333
makes the image on the CCD camera. Just before the CCD camera a combination
of two crossed calcite beam-displacing crystals is placed for the analysis of polar-
ization. So we get two orthogonal polarized images of the selected FOV onto the
CCD camera. The vector magnetograms of the two active regions NOAA 10935 and
NOAA 10941 are shown in the Figure - 2. We have taken the Hinode (XRT) data
for looking at the sigmoidal structure of corresponding active regions.
3 Analysis
We observed the sunspot NOAA 10923 (Nov 06) which sustains in the three con-
secutive solar rotation in the name of NOAA 10930 (Dec 06), NOAA 10935 (Jan
07) and NOAA 10941 (Feb 07). There was no major activity associated with the
active region NOAA 10923. Looking at the NOAA 10930 in H-Alpha (Fig(1)) we
ensure that there is no particular orientation of the whirls and we can’t recognize
the helicity of the sunspot. There was no ﬁlament seen associated with this active
region. There were X3.4 (at 02:00 UT) and X1.5 (at 21:07 UT) class ﬂares as well
as strong CMEs associated with the active region NOAA 10930 on 13 December
2006. After next rotation the same sunspot is found in the name of NOAA 10935
(Jan 07) (Fig(1)). We now observe the whirls with counter-clockwise orientation are
dominating. A ﬁlament associated with the active region is observed. The end of this
active region ﬁlament is curving towards the sunspot with counter - clockwise whirls
and according to Rust and Martin ([15]) it should (not necessarily) be dextral. Still
in the image here the orientation of the ﬁlament barbs are not clearly recognized to
be dextral. There was not any major event associated with this active region.
In the next rotation we are able to recognize clearly the orientation of the ﬁl-
ament barbs. The active region NOAA 10941 (Feb 07) has come in its third con-
secutive rotation of the sun. It has the barbs with counter - clockwise orientation
close to ﬁlament and this type of chirality is dominating in the whole active re-
gion. The associated ﬁlament is dextral is clear now. No event was observed associ-
ated with this active region. We calculated the helicity parameter for the sunspots
NOAA 10935 and NOAA 10941 which comes out to be -1.1±0.12 × 10−9 m−1 and
-3.77±2.14×10−8m−1 respectively. The value of helicity has increased after next ro-
tation which can also veriﬁed by directly looking at the H-alpha images. The helicity
sign doesn’t support the helicity hemispheric rule. Both the active regions are found
in the southern hemisphere and should bear positive chirality. For the calculation
of helicity we have calculated the helicity parameter alpha best which will give one
value of the alpha for the whole sunspot instead of the value at each pixel. It reduces
the noise in the data. We use our SVM data to plot the transverse ﬁeld upon the
associated H-α image. First of all, the H-α data is re-binned according to the size
of SVM data and then the related vector ﬁeld is plotted over the H-α image. The
180 degree azimuthal ambiguity has been resolved by using acute angle method.
We can see in Figure - 2 that the direction of H-α super-penumbral whirls show
the same chirality as the photospheric transverse ﬁeld vectors. So, by combining the
photospheric and chromospheric data one can use the method of chirality to resolve
180 degree azimuthal ambiguity. Also by looking at the HINODE (XRT) data we
ﬁnd the reverse-S structure in the sigmoids associated with the active regions.

334
S. Tiwari et al.
Fig. 4. Plot of vector magnetic ﬁelds of the sunspots upon the respective H-alpha
images. In the lower part of the image blue arrows show the radial direction and the
red arrows show the actual vector ﬁeld direction. We can see the shear of the ﬁeld.
4 Conclusion and Discussion
We ﬁnd that the active region NOAA 10923 in its diﬀerent appearances doesn’t fol-
low the hemispheric helicity rule, neither its associated ﬁlaments. But their associa-
tion in the terms of chirality follow the well known result of Rust and Martin ([15]).
We calculated the helicity parameter which was found to be negative as expected
from the sunspot with dextral whirls. The helicity increases in the last appearance
but there was no major activity observed associated with the active region in its last
appearance. Hinode (XRT) images also show the same type of chirality in the asso-
ciated sigmoids. Thus the sign of helicity derived from photosphere, chromosphere
and corona are strongly correlated. Figure - 3 shows the vector ﬁelds plotted over
the associated active regions in the chromospheric H-α observations. We ﬁnd the
good matching of the vectors with the super-penumbral whirls of the active regions.
By combining the photospheric and chromospheric data the axial ﬁeld direction at
neutral line can be derived and this method can be used to resolve 180 degree az-
imuthal ambiguity. Sara F. Martin et al ([6]) has already mentioned that the 180
degree azimuthal ambiguity can be resolved by using this method of chirality.

Evolution of Magnetic Helicity in NOAA 10923
335
Acknowledgements
Hinode is a Japanese mission developed and launched by ISAS/JAXA, collaborating
with NAOJ as a domestic partner, NASA and STFC (UK) as international partners.
Scientiﬁc operation of the Hinode mission is conducted by the Hinode science team
organized at ISAS/JAXA.
This team mainly consists of scientists from institutes in the partner countries.
Support for the post-launch operation is provided by JAXA and NAOJ (Japan),
STFC (UK), NASA (USA), ESA, and NSC (Norway). One of us (Jayant Joshi)
acknowledge ﬁnancial support under ISRO/CAWSES – India programme.
References
1. Seehafer, N., 1990, Solar Phys., 125, 219.
2. Pevtsov, A., Canﬁeld, R. C. and Metcalf, T. R., 1995, ApJ, 440, L109
3. Martin, S. F., 1998, ASP Conference Series, 150, 419.
4. Hale, G. E., 1925, Publ. Astron. Soc. Paciﬁc, 37, 268.
5. Richardson, R. S., 1941, Astrophys. J., 93, 24
6. Martin, S. F., Lin, Y., Engvold, O., 2006, American Astronomocal Society, SPD
Meeting, 37, 129
7. Berger, M. A. and Field, G. B., 1984, J. Fluid Mech., 147, 133.
8. Berger, M.A. 1999, Magnetic Helicity in Space and Laboratory Plasmas, Geo-
phys. Monograph, Vol. 111, American Geophysical Union, p. 1.
9. Choudhuri, A. R., et al., 2004, Astrophys. J., 615, L57.
10. Zhang, H., et al., 2006 MNRAS, 365, 276 (Paper I)
11. Chaterjee, P. 2006, J. Astron. Astrophys., 27, 89.
12. Sokoloﬀ, D., 2006, Astronomische Nachrichten, 327, Issue 9, 876
13. Gosain, S., Venkatakrishnan, P. and Venugopalan, K. 2005, Exp. Astron.,
18, 31.
14. Gosain, S., Venkatakrishnan, P. and Venugopalan, K. 2006, J. Astrophys. As-
tron., 27, 285.
15. Rust, M.D. and Martin, S.F. 1994, ASP Conference Series, 68, 337.

Stability of Double Layer in Multi-Ion Plasmas
A.M. Ahadi1, S. Sobhanian2
1 Physics Department, Shahid Chamran University, Ahvaz, Iran
E.Mail:ahadi.am@gmail.com
2 Faculty of Physics, Tabriz University, Tabriz, Iran
E-Mail:sobhanian@tabrizu.ac.ir
Summary. Langmuir condition shows the existence of a net current through the
double layer (DL). Using Langmuir criterion, one may determine the double layer’s
position, but it can not represent alone if this position is stable or not. We obtain
the generalized Langmuir condition in multi-ion plasmas by using a simple model.
Then by analyzing the results, the stability of the determined position is discussed
and the DL stability criterion is obtained. This criterion assures that, when some
perturbations are imposed on the DL, it returns to the stable position.
Key words: Double Layer, Stability, Multi-Ion Plasmas
1 Introduction
The study of Double layers (DLs) is similar to that of plasma sheath. Considering
their special properties and their role as an accelerating system, they have found
to be attractive research interests for several years. Even today, their formation
mechanisms and their eﬀects on diﬀerent plasma properties constitute one of the
advanced research branches in plasma physics ([1]-[7]). Double layer (DL) structure
is determined in a self-consistent behavior by the particle dynamics in the electric
ﬁeld set up by the net charge distribution produced by the particles [2]. The power
supplied to accelerated particles is simply the product of the current crossing the
double layer and the potential across it [2].
Langmuir showed in 1929 for the ﬁrst time that for establishing the pressure
equilibrium in electron-ion plasma, the condition ψi/ψe =

mi/me must be satis-
ﬁed [8]. Later, Carlqvist in 1979 and 1984 extended Langmuir results to the case of
relativistic DLs [9, 10].
Computer simulations [12, 13] and experimental investigations [14, 15] show that
when a current inequilibrium exists in DLs, Langmuir condition would not hold there
in the rest frame, so they have to set themselves to motion. To compensate the
inequilibrium and in this way to settle down the stability in current and to restore
the Langmuir condition is satisﬁed. Although DL exhibits ﬂuctuations produced

338
A.M. Ahadi, S. Sobhanian
by oscillations of the ﬂowing current through plasma, but for strong DL, these
ﬂuctuations are relatively small [16].
In this paper attempt has been done to study a strong moving DL in a mul-
tispecies plasma and to obtain the generalized Langmuir condition. This kind of
plasma with strong DLs is observed in the astrophysical plasmas. By analyzing the
obtained results, some criteria are found for the stability of these DLs. We employ
here the method used by Song [16].
2 Model and Basic Equation
We consider a DL with a large transverse potential fall and assume that its thickness
is small compared with other dimensions. We showed this in Fig. 1. In general
Fig. 1. Schematic ﬁgure of strong moving DL and two possible frames. The DL
moves toward high potential side. Its boundaries are at x1 and x2 in moving frame
and initial equilibrium position is zDL0 in lab frame.
condition the DL can move, so to study it we need two systems: the laboratory
system of reference and the moving frame, which is assumed to be attached to the
DL. If the relative velocity in the laboratory system is given by UDL, the following
relation will be held between the position coordinates:

Stability of Double Layer in Multi-Ion Plasmas
339
x = z −

UDLdt
(1)
In order to ﬁnd the Langmuir condition and the location of the DL formation, we
assume that the plasma is under the action of an inhomogeneous magnetic ﬁeld,
that it is conﬁned by a magnetic ﬂux tube with cross section S. We start with the
equation of continuity and momentum equations:
nαmα
∂uα
∂t + uα ∂uα
∂z

+ ραmαuα + ∂(nαTα)
∂z
= nαqαE
(2)
∂(Snαuα)
∂z
= Sρα −S ∂nα
∂t
(3)
where the index α represent the particles type and ρα and uα are the rate of produc-
tion of the particles and particles velocity of type α, respectively. Also mα indicate
mass of particles and and Tα is the particle temperature.
Expressing the particles velocity, density and electric ﬁeld in moving reference
frame as functions of the corresponding quantities in the rest reference frame, we
arrive at the following equation:
Pi = Pi(z −
 t
0
U(t′)dt′) = Pi(z, t)
(4)
where Pi could be velocity, particle density or the electrical ﬁeld.
3 Generalized Langmuir Condition
Using the mentioned transformation in equation (4), equations (2) and (3) are rewrit-
ten in the moving frame as:
mαnαvα
∂vα
∂x

+ ραmαvα + ραmαUDL + ∂(nαTα)
∂x
= nαqαE
(5)
∂(nαvα)
∂x
+ nαuα ∂(ln S)
∂x
= ρα ,
(6)
where we have made use of vα = uα −UDL.
We can combine, in the moving reference frame (DL frame) the equations of
continuity and momentum. Thus, we will have for each species:
mαnαvαuα
∂ln S
∂x

+ ραmαUDL + ∂(mαnαv2
α + nαTα)
∂x
= nαqαE
(7)
On the other hand, Poisson equation makes possible to express the role of particles
in one equation, we have ∂E
∂z = ∂E
∂x , so that:
ϵ(∂E
∂x ) =

α
qαnα
(8)
Multiplying both sides of this equation by E and using equation (7), we can reach
to:

340
A.M. Ahadi, S. Sobhanian
ϵE(∂E
∂x ) =

α
(mαnαvαuα(∂ln S
∂x ) + ραmαUDL + ∂(mαnαv2
α + nαTα)
∂x
)
(9)
We can now integrate equation (9), and write:

α
 x2
x1
((mαnαvαuα(∂ln S
∂x )+ραmαUDL)dx+

α
(mαnαv2
α + nαTα)]x2
x1 = 0 (10)
Since we have supposed that the DL is strong, the acquired energy by particles is
much bigger than their thermal ﬂuctuation. Neglecting small terms of second order
in equation (10), and reminding that electrons are accelerated in opposite directions
relative to positive ions, we have:

i
mini(vif + UDL)2|x2 = mene(vef −UDL)2|x1
(11)
where vif, vef in the last equation represent the ﬁnal velocities of the free ions and
free electrons inside the DL respectively, and ni and ne are their densities. It is also
assumed that the DL moves in the direction of electron motion, toward the higher
potential. Experimental and simulation results conﬁrm the direction of this motion
[2].
On the other hand, electrons and ions must acquire similar kinetic energies, since
they fall in the same potential of DL, Then:
1
2

i
mi(vif + UDL)2|x2 = 1
2me(vef −UDL)2|x1
(12)
From equations (11) and (12), the neutrality condition becomes 
i ni|x2 = ne|x1.
Now by using equation (11) and deﬁning the electron and ions ﬂuxes as ψe =
nev2
ef|x1 and ψi = niv2
if|x2 respectively, We arrive at:

i
mi
ni (ψi + niUDL)2|x2 = me
ne (ψe −neUDL)2|x1
(13)
Since me ≪mi, we can neglect in the last equation, the small terms and obtain the
generalized Langmuir condition as:

i
mi
ni|x2
ψ2
i + 2ψiniUDL|x2 =
me
ne|x1
ψ2
e
(14)
This equation shows explicitly that the net ﬂux inside a strong DL moving through
plasma of electron and multi-ion species depends not only upon the mass ratio but
also to the number density of each ion species.
4 Stability of Double Layer
As mentioned earlier, Langmuir condition indicates simply the location of the DL.
To see if the obtained location is stable, the equation (14) for the initial equilibrium
point (zDL0) must be written as:

Stability of Double Layer in Multi-Ion Plasmas
341
( me
ne|x1
ψ2
e −

i
mi
ni|x2
ψ2
i )|zDL0 = 0
(15)
Now if we impose some ﬂuctuation to the DL, it dislocates from its initial position
and we can write:
d
dz ( me
ne|x1
ψ2
e −

i
mi
ni|x2
ψ2
i )|zDL0∂z =

i
2ni|x2ψi(d∂z
dt )
(16)
where ∂z has been taken as a small deviation from the equilibrium position. Inte-
gration of this gives:
∂z = A exp( d
dz [
(
me
ne|x1 ψ2
e −
i
mi
ni|x2 ψ2
i )

i 2ni|x2ψi
]t)
(17)
In order to have stable DL, the term inside the parentheses must be negative, so:
d
dz ( me
ne|x1
ψ2
e −

i
mi
ni|x2
ψ2
i ) < 0
(18)
This expresses the stability condition of the DL. When this condition holds, the
motion of the DL will be backward, towards the initial equilibrium position.
5 Conclusion
In this work, using the ﬂuid and Poisson equations, Langmuir condition is obtained
for a strong DL moving through a multi-species plasma. The obtained results conﬁrm
and reproduces those obtained in other works. Also, it is shown that the presence of
various types of ions have direct inﬂuence on the pressure equilibrium and on location
of the DL formation. From the stability study of DL formation place, a criterion has
been obtained for the establishment of the stability and for the production of a
restoring force.
References
1. M.A. Raadu, Phys Reports, 178, No.2, 25 (1989).
2. M.A. Raadu, J.J. Rasmussen, Astrophys and Space Sci, 144, 43 (1988)
3. L.P. Block, Astrophys and Space Sci, 55, 59 (1978)
4. W.M. Moslem, S. Ali, P.K. Shukla, R. Schlickeiser, Phys Plasma, 14, 042107/1-8
(2007)
5. F. Verheest, M.A. Hellberg, J. Plasma Phys, 57, Part.2, 465 (1997)
6. B. Sahu, R. Roychoudhury, Phys Plasma, 11, No.5, 1947 (2004)
7. F.F. Chen, Phys Plasma, 33, 34502 (2006)
8. I. Langmuir, Phys Rev, 33, 954 (1929)
9. P. Carlqvist, Solar Phys, 63,353 (1979).
10. P. Carlqvist, Proceedings 2st Syms on Plasma DLs, Innsbruck, (1984), p 340
11. A.C. Williams, IEEE Trans on Plasma Sci, Ps.14, No.14, 800 (1986)
12. T. Yamamoto, J. Plasma Phys, 34, 271 (1985)

342
A.M. Ahadi, S. Sobhanian
13. N. Sing, R. W. Schunk, J. Geophysics Res, 87, 3561 (1982)
14. N. Hershkowitz, Space Sci Rev, 41, 351 (1985)
15. N.Sato, Proc on Conference on Plasma Physics, Lausanne, Switzerland, June
27- July 3, Vol.II, p 555 (1984)
16. B. Song, R.L. Merlino, N. D’Angelo, Phys Scripta, 45, 391 (1992)

