1 23
Review of Philosophy and
Psychology
 
ISSN 1878-5158
 
Rev.Phil.Psych.
DOI 10.1007/s13164-014-0214-3
The Cognitive Design of Tools of Thought
Barbara Tversky

1 23
Your article is protected by copyright and all
rights are held exclusively by Springer Science
+Business Media Dordrecht. This e-offprint
is for personal use only and shall not be self-
archived in electronic repositories. If you wish
to self-archive your article, please use the
accepted manuscript version for posting on
your own website. You may further deposit
the accepted manuscript version in any
repository, provided it is only made publicly
available 12 months after official publication
or later and provided acknowledgement is
given to the original source of publication
and a link is inserted to the published article
on Springer's website. The link must be
accompanied by the following text: "The final
publication is available at link.springer.com”.

The Cognitive Design of Tools of Thought
Barbara Tversky
# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2014
Abstract When thought overwhelms the mind, the mind puts it into the world, notably
in diagrams and gestures.Both use space and arrays of elements, depictive and non-
depictive, to convey ideas, concrete and abstract,clear and sketchy. The arrays and the
non-depictive elements like boxes and arrows serve to showrelationships and organi-
zations, thematic, categorical, and more. on paper, in the air, in the diagrammedworld.
Human actions organize space to convey abstractions: spraction.
1 Putting Ideas into the World
Thought can quickly outgrow the mind. To augment the mind, people use anything at
hand, their hands, their bodies, arrangements of sticks and stones and coffee cups,
sketches in the sand, scribbles on paper napkins, and more. Some ancient outpourings
of thought have survived the ravages of time, evocative paintings of animals on the
walls of caves (Altamira in Spain, Chauvet in France, Apollo 11 in Namibia), maps
incised in stone (Bedolina map in Val Camonica, Italy), histories carved in columns
(Trajan) and arches (Titus), explanations and journeys painted on walls of tombs
(Valley of the Kings, Egypt), myths glazed on vases (Greece), tallies inscribed in bones
(Ishango bone, Republic of Congo).
These external representations of thought are designed to serve thought, for self or
for others, for many ends. Here we explore how they are designed, how they use marks
and arrangements of marks in space to reflect and affect thought. They are variously
referred to as diagrams, sketches, graphics, visualizations, models, material, cognitive
tools, cognitive artifacts, and more, and their roles in the enrichment of collective and
individual minds cannot be underestimated (e. g., Donald 1991; Hutchins 1995; Kirsh
1995; Malafouris 2013; Norman 1993; Stjernfelt 2011; Suchman 1987; Tversky 2001).
With notable exceptions (such as abaci), they arrange marks or things on the space of a
surface we will call a page. Importantly, the arrangements typically differ from the
arrangements in the natural world, that is, they are designed. External representations
are selective; they schematize, including some information, omitting other information,
and often simplifying and exaggerating the information included. Many, like maps,
Rev.Phil.Psych.
DOI 10.1007/s13164-014-0214-3
B. Tversky (*)
Columbia Teachers College and Stanford University, 525 West 120th St, New York, NY 10027, USA
e-mail: btversky@stanford.edu
Author's personal copy

have been refined through use in communities, a kind of informal user-testing. As such,
they provide insight into the structure of the thought that generated them as well as into
the correspondences between thought and the visual-spatial expressions of thought.
The approach taken here is empirical, using two research paradigms, one from
linguistics and one from psychology. Evidence in linguistics often relies on the analysis
of illustrative examples. We analyze examples of cognitive artifacts produced over time
and space that schematize in similar ways and that design marks in space in similar ways,
revealing those similarities (and ignoring the differences). Evidence in psychology often
relies on experimental manipulations. We have developed a program that might be called
empirical semiotics, experiments examining regularities in the ways people create,
interpret, and use various external representations of meaning. In short, we analyze
external expressions of thought, in the wild and in the laboratory, extracting from both
the visual and spatial features that characterize a wide range of diagrams and underlie
their communicative foundation. We draw connections between material representations
of thought and ethereal representations of thought created by gestures. Both are formed
by the actions of hands in space, so parallels abound. We integrate action in space with
the abstractions they create on a page, in the air, and in the world, developing the concept
of spraction. We begin historically, with external representations of things in the wild.
2 Diagramming Things and Events: Analyzing Examples in the Wild
and Domesticated
Maps In examining diagrams of things, we will collect their characteristics, implicitly
or explicitly contrasting the ways representations of things differ from the world they
represent and differ from another prevalent way of representing things, words and
sentences. We begin with maps, representations of places in spaces, pervasive through-
out the world. The Babylonian clay map depicted below can be seen at the British
Museum. The British Museum dates it 700–500 BC; it is regarded as the oldest
preserved map in the world (Brown 1979). This map, however, is not strictly geo-
graphic; rather it mixes space and time, geography with history, including myth, a not
uncommon mixture in ancient maps, for example, in Mexico (Boone 2010) Fig. 1.
Maps map; they represent landmarks and the spatial relations among them in the real
world using marks and spatial relations on a page. Like modern maps, this ancient map
uses blobs or point-like marks to represent places or landmarks and lines to represent
paths between places more or less geographically arrayed. The same information could
be, and often is, represented by words, but maps have rich correspondences (or second-
order isomorphisms, Shepard 1984) with the worlds they represent and words for the
most part do not. Because of these spatial correspondences, literal and metaphoric, visual-
spatial representations are more direct than representations in words and sentences.
That said, words and sentences and their array on a page can and do correspond to
meanings on occasion. The letters of one word are spatially separated from those of
others; new ideas are indicated by paragraph or chapter breaks. Events are often, though
by no means always, expressed in temporal order. Interestingly, in Greek mathematics,
the sentences of logical syllogisms were ordered similarly and line up as if in a table, an
arrangement that may have facilitated the development of logic and logical reasoning
(Netz 1999). Note that these are spatial devices of the sort that characterize diagrams.
B. Tversky
Author's personal copy

Some sound-meaning correspondences have also been found for specific words (e.g.,
Jurafsky 2013).
Maps (and diagrams) have richer correspondences with the worlds they represent.
Yet, as this ancient map and contemporary maps illustrate, maps do not merely shrink
the world, as much is omitted and much of what is there is distorted, coastlines are
smoothed and roads are often enlarged or they wouldn’t be seen. Like the map above,
modern maps are typically annotated. Maps serve multiple purposes. They provide a
larger view of the world than a viewer can see from any particular place (save a
spaceship). Maps can show how the space is used, and how geography interacts with
human activity. They facilitate planning routes, and serve city planning and design.
What ends they serve depend on their design, on what information is preserved or
omitted, and how it is arranged.
Rock Art Graffiti is (are) not a recent urban phenomenon. The oldest surviving graffiti is
rock art of various forms, carvings in stone, paintings in caves, images in tombs, found all
over the world, and dating back at least as early as the Late Stone Age, 40,000 years ago
(e.g., Pike et al. (2012). These images intrigue, fascinate, mystify, and puzzle their viewers,
and lead to endless speculation about their meanings and perhaps spiritual significance.
Easier to discern is their content and how they are arrayed, and both are revealing.
Although appearing at unrelated sites all over the world, many early cave paintings and
petroglyphs are remarkably similar in form and content. The image on the following page
is from the Chauvet Cave in Southern France, thought to date 30–32,000 years ago (Sadier
et al. 2012). Interestingly, the unique depiction of overlapping heads in the middle has been
interpreted as an early attempt at animation (Azema, and Rivere 2012), foreshadowing
Duchamp’s well-known Nude Descending a Staircase as well as many comics.
Fig. 1 Babylonian clay map. British Museum. Courtesy of Wikipedia commons
Characterizing Diagrams
Author's personal copy

What is curious about these evocative visual relics (Figs. 2, 3 and 4) is what they are
not. Most do not seem to depict individuals. Rather than conveying specifics, they seem
to be conveying generalities. Some depict rudimentary scenes, notably stampedes or a
hunter and his prey, but more frequently, they depict conglomerations of single isolated
images, taken out of their natural settings, animals, stick figures, geometric figures or
symbols. The animals and stick figures are readily identified, again because of corre-
spondences, here of parts, configurations of parts, and shapes between the depictions
and the actual animals. Whether crude, as in petroglyphs or more refined, as in cave
paintings, the forms themselves are idealized, prototypic forms, rather than forms with
specific, individualized identities. The views are stereotyped canonical views, front or
side views of stick or blobby humans, sometimes ornamented, and side views of
animals, sometimes in parades of the same type. The sizes of the figures are approx-
imately the same, not proportional to their actual sizes. They are generally upright and
oriented similarly. The images are often grouped by type, animals organized categor-
ically, humans together elsewhere, usually not arranged in familiar scenes or themes.
Except for the hunter-prey pairs and stampedes, the forms are often loosely lined up as
if on a bulletin board, in sloppy rows and sometimes columns, perhaps to be contem-
plated, juxtaposed, and compared. It is important to remember that it is likely that rock
art had many authors over time, so unlike the other external representations discussed,
these works were not likely to be designed as wholes.
Fig. 2 Image from the Chauvet Cave. Courtesy of Wikipedia Commons
B. Tversky
Author's personal copy

Diagrams Despite the multiple authorship of rock art, its spatial and visual character-
istics–arrays of like groups of similarly sized and oriented canonical images spatially
separated loosely into groups, aligned loosely into rows and columns–are characteris-
tics associated with designed diagrams of things, in contrast to depictions of action
scenes. In their essay The Culture of Diagram, Bender and Marrinan (2010) argue that
diagrams have an intermediate status between depictions, which, according to Good-
man (1976) are “dense,” and descriptions, which are “articulated.” Here I borrow from
but extend Bender and Marrinan’s analyses. They offer the illustrations in Diderot and
D’Alembert’s magnum opus, L’Encyclopedie as examples. Figure 5 shows a typical
example, one of the pages showing the Pinmaker’s Factory. The layout and juxtapo-
sition make the contrast between depictions of scenes and diagrams explicit, by
showing both on the same page.
Fig. 3 Prehistoric petroglyph from Val Camonica, Italy. http://www.reidsitaly.com/destinations/lombardy/
lake_iseo/valcamonica.html
Fig. 4 Ancient petroglyph from Newspaper Rock State Historical Monument Utah. From www.davejenkins.
com Creative Commons GFDL
Characterizing Diagrams
Author's personal copy

The implication is that each individual image at the bottom of the page is in itself a
depiction, but the array is not, the array is articulated like a description. Bender and
Marrinan note several diagrammatic features of the bottom half of the page: the sizes of
the images, not proportional; the shadows, meant to accentuate the features rather than
natural light; the annotation, that is, labels and numbers; the white space separating the
images, meant to point to certain correlations among the objects. Correlation is Bender
and Marrinan’s translation of Diderot and D’Alembert’s rapport; perhaps a better term
for this community would be correspondence. The intermixing of dense depictive
images in an articulated, description-like display signals, according to Bender and
Marrinan, the presence of a diagram. Some diagrams, we will argue, but not all. Along
with many others, Bender and Marrinan regard diagrams not as in and of themselves,
but as “objects to be worked with,” presumably to be used for understanding and
inference. Going beyond their analysis and foreshadowing later discussion, the char-
acteristics of the array, which can be varied, enable and promote different understand-
ings and inferences.
Carrying their analysis further, the scene at the top of the page is depicted “realis-
tically,” that is, people at work using implements in their natural setting, a room
designed for that activity with walls, windows, floor, a door, even pictures and a
fireplace to warm the room. The workers are shown engaged with their tools, and both
workers and objects are arrayed in a space that supports their activities. The light source
is natural, and indicated by appropriate shading and shadows. The white space is actual
empty space. The scene at the top is active; the array at the bottom is frozen, static. The
array of the scene at the top is constrained and determined by gravity, by the architec-
ture of the room, by the characteristics and activities of the workers and their imple-
ments. By contrast, the array of tools and parts of tools at the bottom of the page is
constrained and determined by kinds, objects that share appearance and function. The
Fig. 5 Pinmaker’s Factory from Diderot and D’Alembert, L’Encyclopedie. Courtesy of Wikipedia commons
B. Tversky
Author's personal copy

image sizes of the objects are similar, and the objects are angled to show the critical
features of the parts and tools. Shadows and shading are used to accentuate the
structures of the tools. The tools and tool-parts are grouped by category and arrayed
in columns and rows, separated by approximately equal spaces, as in the Gestalt
principle of grouping by proximity. Both parts of the page, the action scene at the
top and the diagram of the tools at the bottom are contained in frames or boxes. The
frames are descriptive, not depictive; they explicitly separate one form of representation
from the other. Thus, depictions of scenes and diagrams have strikingly different spatial
as well as visual characteristics, and presumably of communicative intent. At the top of
the page, the objects are contextualized; at the bottom, they are decontextualized,
extracted from their context of use, and recontextualized into kinds in the array at the
bottom of the page, forming what today might be termed a catalog. At the same time,
the kinds of diagram exemplified in L’Encyclopedie and in the anatomical and me-
chanical diagrams common at the time are not purely descriptive as they maintain
depictive properties. Here, we suggest that this kind of diagram, a diagram of things, is
derived from depictions, by distillation and rearrangement. Intriguingly, the distillations
and rearrangements mirror both the ways people think about the world and the ways
they design and arrange things in the world.
These ways of depicting and grouping, scenes of action and classes of things, map
onto two common useful ways that people simplify and comprehend the world, by
grouping multitudes of things together: partonomic and taxonomic (e. g., Miller and
Johnson-Laird 1976; Tversky 1990). As their names suggest, partonomies are hierar-
chical organizations of parts; examples include the parts of the body, the parts of
objects, the parts of a scene, as well as parts of more abstract entities, the parts of
government. Taxonomies are hierarchical organizations of kinds; examples include
kinds of animals, kinds of plants, kinds of tools, kinds of musical instruments, that
is, sets of things that share appearance and function. People’s partonomies of scenes
include the people, things, and activities that typically appear in them (Tversky and
Hemenway 1983). Within scenes, people, things, and activities often come in organized
triplets or even quadruplets: in the Pinmaker’s Factory above, one worker is spinning
thread on a wheel, in another scene, a baker is stirring batter with a spoon; in yet
another, a tailor is cutting fabric with scissors. In many other cases, pairs and groups of
people work cooperatively to attain a goal. Those organizations of knowledge, group-
ing objects that people commonly use interactively, such as paper and scissor and
hammer and nail and knife and bread, have been called thematic. Adding an actor to a
thematic grouping of objects creates a rudimentary scene. Interestingly, one of the few
repeated thematic organizations that appear with some frequency in ancient petroglyphs
is hunter-prey, with the hunter often holding a hunting tool.
One of the formative developments in the long period between rock art and
L’Encyclopedie is the page, which both frames and bounds one set of images, and
separates that set of images from other sets of images. Each two-page spread, of
L’Encyclopedie was designed as a whole, to integrate information relevant to a single
topic. The integration is accomplished, at least in part, visually and spatially. The two-
page spread is subdivided into pages, and each page is further subdivided, more
implicitly by white space, more explicitly by lines and frames. Going upwards, the
pages are grouped into chapters and volumes, signified by white space. Thus the visual
and spatial design of L’Encyclopedie is hierarchical, and reflects and supports the
Characterizing Diagrams
Author's personal copy

hierarchical organization of the information. These visual and spatial features also serve
written texts; writing is organized by visual and spatial features like spaces between
words and sentences, indentation for paragraphs, and new pages for new chapters.
Written language has diagrammatic features. We will return to these diagrammatic
visual and spatial devices, lines, frames, and spacing.
Bender and Marrinan point to another way that depictions have been used in
diagrammatic arrays, to portray events in time, different from kinds and parts, and
demanding different arrays of different kinds of depictions. Bundling sequences of
interrelated actions into meaningful events is yet another common way to organize
experience (e. g., Casati and Varzi 1996; Zacks and Tversky 2001). Bender and
Marrinan are referring in particular to the sequences of photographs by Muybridge
and Marey, such as that in Fig. 6.
These time-lapse photos show successive stills of human and animal bodies in
motion. They are arrayed horizontally in reading order and they set the stage for motion
pictures. However, successive stills that constitute a larger event also have ancient
roots, below an example from the tomb of the 15th c BC astronomer Nakht in Thebes,
Egypt. In this case, as evident from Fig. 7, the events are horizontally arrayed, but,
unusually, ordered from bottom to top.
Visual stories, histories, and explanations in tombs (above), columns, arches, friezes,
and scrolls, are also ancient, if later than rock art. In contrast to petroglyphs and cave
paintings, these images are integrated series of related actions in time, in linear arrays.
Each image is typically embedded in a comprehensive and coherent spatial scene, so
their scale and scope are far greater than the second by second portrayals of movements
of bodies of Muybridge and Marey, though both freeze moments in time. Like the
diagrams of the Encyclopedie, they are highly selective. They segment, separate, and
Fig. 6 Time-lapse photographs by Muybridge in part to settle a bet on whether all four legs of a galloping
horse were in the air at the same time. Image courtesy of Wikipedia Commons
B. Tversky
Author's personal copy

frame the continuous flow of human activity by natural joints, typically, key events in
history or key steps in explanations (e. g., Zacks and Tversky 2001; Tversky and Zacks
2013). As in many cave paintings and petroglyphs, the images are typically arrayed in
horizontal rows or vertical columns. The arrays are frequently, but not always, in
temporal order, and the images are typically, but not always, the same size. Some
classical art deviates from that; for example, in some Greek, Etruscan, or Roman vases
or frescoes, the array of figures is determined by importance rather than temporal
Fig. 7 Wall painting showing planting and harvesting under an overseer from the tomb of the 15th c BC
astronomer Nakht, Thebes, Egypt. Image courtesy of Wikipedia Commons
Characterizing Diagrams
Author's personal copy

sequence, with the most important image in the middle, and larger, and the less
important smaller, to either side (Small 1999). Sometimes, the segmentation is implicit,
accomplished with gestalt, perceptual features such as grouping by proximity. Other
times, the grouping is accomplished by the spatial array itself, such as groups of people
facing each other or focusing on the same object or action. In other cases, even ancient
ones, segmentation of a larger event into frozen critical moments is explicit, accom-
plished by adding non-depictive glyphs, lines or frames or boxes that both enclose one
event and separate it from the others. Diagrams that show a sequence of events over
time have many historical and contemporary variants. Stained glass windows are one
example. The visual instructions that come with a camera or knock-down furniture, the
visual explanations common in science textbooks, the visual stories in comics are other
examples. As noted, such diagrams typically contain not only depictive elements but
also words and symbols as well as graphic elements that are non-depictive, such as
frames. Graphic novels and comics bring the communication of events in time to an art
form (McCloud 1993).
These kinds of diagrams could be called bottom-up diagrams. They are distillations
and rearrangements of depictions of aspects of the world, scenes and events. They seem
to begin with that complex world, select and refine depictions of parts of it, and then
rearrange those to articulate conceptual correspondences, using visual devices like
points, blobs, lines, and frames and spatial Gestalt devices like grouping, orders, rows
and columns. To expand the repertory, we turn now to diagrams of ideas.
3 Diagramming Things and Ideas: Laboratory Experiments
The diagrams analyzed so far, maps, rock art of animals, tomb paintings of agriculture,
and engravings of manufacturing refine, rearrange, and reorganize things, scenes, and
events in the world on a page to show certain correspondences and relations among
those things and the spaces that encompass them. We turn now to experiments in which
people produce, understand, and use diagrams with varying meanings to see the ways
those meanings are represented and organized. In particular, experiments on production
and comprehension converge to show that simple geometric forms, dots, lines, boxes,
and arrows, carry context-dependent meanings related to their geometric forms.
Dots and Lines: Route Maps and Directions Explaining how to get from here to there
is a common and ancient task. One way is to give a set of directions in language;
another is to draw a sketch map. Might there be parallels between them? To see, we
approached students in a dormitory around dinner time and asked them if they knew
how to get to a local fast food restaurant (Tversky and Lee 1998, 1999). If they did, we
asked them either to sketch a map or to write down the directions. Adapting a system
developed by Denis (1997), we segmented and coded both maps and directions. Both
shared a small number of semantic units. For landmarks, point-like marks on maps or
names in directions. For paths, variations of lines. Both points and lines have founda-
tions in the concrete world. Places from a distance resemble points and paths from a
distance resemble lines. For turns, lines at right angles for maps and “take a,” “make a,”
or “turn” for directions. For straight roads, straight lines in maps and “go down” in
B. Tversky
Author's personal copy

directions. For winding roads, a curved line in maps and “follow around” in directions.
Thus, although maps could be analog, they weren’t. They represented turns and paths
categorically. Similarly neither represented distance; the presumption seemed to be that
you keep going until the next landmark or intersection. Both had iterations of sequences
of four units: start point, reorientation, progression along a path, and end point.
However, the route directions could and did elide some of the units; for example, the
previous end point is the start point for the next segment, but doesn’t have to be
mentioned twice. Path progression could and was omitted in the route directions. Maps
cannot elide that kind of information; they need to preserve continuity. Thus, the
semantic elements for route maps and route directions were the same, but the prag-
matics of using that information differed.
In a subsequent experiment, participants were given the set of semantic elements
either in pictures or in words and asked to use them to produce a large set of directions.
They were told that the elements might not be sufficient, and they were free to add
elements if they needed them. Very few people added elements, and the elements they
added were things like freeway entrances. Neither medium represented exact distance
or direction. Yet these maps that omit and distort are successful for navigation (e. g.,
Denis, Pazzaglia, Cornoldi, and Bertolo 1998): why? Maps and diagrams are meant to
be used in context, by specific users for specific tasks. Maps are designed differently for
hikers than for drivers and science diagrams are designed differently for novices than
for experts. Route maps are meant to be used in navigation where the environment will
disambiguate and clarify the missing or distorted information. If the map indicates a
right angle turn, but the road goes off at a different angle, the traveler goes with the
road, understanding that the right angle shouldn’t be taken literally. If the distance to the
next turn isn’t proportional, it won’t matter as the traveler will turn at the indicated
landmark.
In fact, route maps distort metric information in many of the same ways that memory
does (e.g., Tversky 1981). Maps for subway systems do the same. In discussing their
revolutionary design of the “map” of the NYC subway system, Massimo Vignelli first
refers to it as a map, and then corrects himself, “it is really a diagram,” (Brew and
Guerra 2013). The beauty of the Vignelli “map” is that it makes the subway routes and
interconnections legible. It does so by simplifying and distorting the “true” spatial
distances and directions and in so doing, it rearranges the natural space and the things in
it.
Lines and Boxes: Graphs Lines and dots are the among the principle components of
another frequent non-depictive diagram, that is, graphs. In graphs, dots or points
represent variables. Just as lines in maps represent the paths between places, lines in
graphs represent the relations between points. Graphs also use frames or boxes, notably
bar graphs. In Talmy’s (1983, 2000) parlance, dots represent concepts that are regarded
as zero-dimension, lines represent concepts that are regarded as one-dimensional, and
bars represent concepts that are regarded as two-dimensional.
Many kinds of data can be represented as bars or lines. To many (though not to
statisticians) that choice seems arbitrary, a matter of taste. However, the format for
representing data, bars or lines, affects their meaning, that is, how the data are
interpreted. Because bars both contain and separate, they invite discrete comparisons.
Because lines connect, they invite trend interpretations. Participants in fact interpreted
Characterizing Diagrams
Author's personal copy

line graphs as trends and bar graphs of the same data as discrete comparisons, even
when contradicted by the dimensions underlying the data. Similarly, when people were
given descriptions of trends or discrete comparisons, they produced line and bar graphs
respectively (Zacks and Tversky 1999).
Arrows Another demonstration of the power of simple geometric forms to create
meaning comes from a set of experiments on arrows (Heiser and Tversky 2006). If
lines suggest paths or relations between points, then arrows, asymmetric lines, should
suggest asymmetric relations. Arrows, too, are rooted in the concrete world; wooden
arrows fly in the direction that they point, and water running downwards in sand creates
arrows in the direction of movement. In an experiment on comprehension, students
were asked to interpret a mechanical diagram (car brake, pulley system, or bicycle
pump) with or without arrows. Those who saw diagrams without arrows interpreted
them as conveying structure, the arrangement of parts. Those who saw diagrams with
arrows interpreted them as conveying behavior in time, causal action. In an experiment
on production, people who were given structural descriptions of one of the systems and
asked to produce a diagram drew the system and labeled the parts, but did not use
arrows. In contrast, people’s diagrams for the causal descriptions, did not label parts but
did put arrows to show the causal sequence of actions from start to finish.
Graphic Language? Dots, lines, boxes, and arrows form a small set of graphic but non-
depictive elements or glyphs that serve as skeletal elements, a partial semantics, for
constructing a wide range of diagrams for a broad range of domains. The senses of the
glyphs change though a core sense remains. For example, a line in a map and a line in a
graph represent relationships in both cases, in the former a physical relation and in the
latter, a conceptual relation. Continuing the analogy to language, each domain has its
own syntax and pragmatics. The rules for conjoining lines and dots is different for route
maps, for line graphs, for circuit diagrams. The constraints on arranging boxes are
different for the periodic table than for a demographic table. The pragmatics differ as
well. Analysis of instances as well as experimentation on production and comprehen-
sion illuminate the semantics, syntax, and pragmatics of various kinds of diagrams,
much as analysis of instances and experimentation illuminate understanding of the
semantics, syntax, and pragmatics of language (Tversky 2004).
Space: Distance, Place and Direction Place in space also conveys meanings that find
agreement in production and comprehension. Distance in space is used by people to
represent distance in space in maps and to represent distance in time, preference,
quantity, and more in graphs. Children spontaneously use order and distance in space
to represent order and distance in time, preference, and quantity (e. g., Tversky et al.
1991). In addition to distance and order, children and adults agree on mappings of
abstract concepts to direction in space. They map increased quantity and increased
preference upwards. To go up means overcoming gravity, which entails strength and
power and health and money. Upwards in space is typically associated with everything
good, as supported by production and comprehension in children and adults (e. g.,
Schubert and Maass 2011; Tversky et al. 1991). These correspondences appear in
language as well. We say we’ve grown close to someone, or far apart. We say
someone’s on the top of the heap or has fallen into a depression. Reading order also
B. Tversky
Author's personal copy

confers directionality to space, in particular to the horizontal, with increases in prefer-
ence, quality, quantity, power, strength, and more conforming to reading order (e.g.,
Schubert and Maass 2011; Tversky et al. 1991). Place, proximity, and direction in space
are powerful influences in graphics and in life; taller people, whether men or women,
have higher-paying jobs (e. g., Egoff and Corder 1991)
3.1 Messy Diagrams: Sketches
Up till now, the discussion has focused on what might be called orderly diagrams.
For the most part these diagrams, maps and visual explanations and graphs, are
designed to clearly communicate a situation so that they are helpful to users in a
range of tasks. Maps for understanding a region, for route planning, and city
planning. Visual explanations for enacting the procedures or understanding the
processes. Graphs for understanding the underlying phenomena and for predic-
tions. In these cases, diagrams are especially useful when they emphasize the
information likely to be productive for inference and omit the information that is
irrelevant and distracting.
Yet, clarity can be fixating, freezing thought instead of freeing it (e. g., Smith 1995)
and thought is not always clear enough to diagram neatly. In science, for example, the
underlying phenomena generating the data are not always known. A case in point is the
cholera outbreak in London in 1854, before the germ theory of disease had been
developed. Dr. John Snow famously mapped each case of cholera as a dot on a city
map. Studying the raw data revealed a cluster of deaths near a specific water pump. The
pump was removed and the epidemic subsided (Johnson 2006). Mapping cases is still
used to track and trace outbreaks of disease in order to understand their origins and to
halt epidemics. Premature summaries might obscure the underlying phenomena.
Messy diagrams, then, can be crucial for thinking through problems, arousing
and considering multiple possibilities. A common case is design, where designers
typically begin with sketches that are vague and tentative. It’s often not clear what
the lines mean, what they refer to, even to their creators. Designers report having
conversations with their sketches, getting feedback from them (Schon 1983a,
1983b). They sketch for one reason, but on inspecting their sketches, see new
patterns and relations and make unintended discoveries. Expert designers are
better than novices at making new discoveries in their sketches; they also make
more conceptual discoveries than novices, for example, realizing the effects of the
layout on traffic, who primarily make perceptual inferences, for example, seeing
patterns in layouts (Suwa and Tversky 1996, 2001, 2003; Suwa et al. 2001;
Tversky and Suwa 2009). Artists report the same; some saying their drawing
“talks to me” (Kantrowitz 2014). Designers adept at making new discoveries
report that they get new ideas when they reconfigure the elements and relations
in their sketches. Because ambiguity allows reconfiguration and reinterpretation,
ambiguous sketches promote discoveries and inferences. Expert designers excel
both at reconfiguring ambiguous sketches and at remote associations (Suwa and
Tversky 2003; Tversky and Suwa 2009). This combination of perceptual and
conceptual skills facilitates finding new interpretations. Expert designers use their
perception actively in the service of discovery and innovation, a process we called
Constructive Perception.
Characterizing Diagrams
Author's personal copy

3.2 Diagrams Without Paper: Gesture
Diagrams require a surface that can be arranged, with marks or objects. Typically the
surface is a page, and the marks graphic. Externalizing thought on a page has many
advantages: the page is public; it is permanent so it can be reinspected, rearranged, and
revised; it can be referred to and animated with gesture and speech. It stays there to be
contemplated. In the absence of such tools, and before they were cheap and ubiquitous,
people used the tools that are always with them, their hands, to create diagrams in the
air. When architects are blindfolded as they design, they gesture copiously (Bilda and
Gero 2006). Gestures also have advantages. They don’t need anything extra. They are
actions, and especially effective in conveying action. Like diagrams on paper, gestures
use arrangements of virtual marks in space to represent the elements and relations of
thought. Thus, like diagrams, gestures can and do represent information that is literally
spatial and information that is metaphorically spatial. In many cases, the gesture forms
are analogous to the marks on a page and the use of gestural space analogous to the use
of diagrammatic space. For example, to represent environments, gestures point to
places and make gestural lines for paths, analogous to dots or blobs for places and
lines for paths in maps (Heiser et al. 2004; Jamalian et al. 2013). A string of integrated
gestures, dots, lines, and boxes for the most part, that are organized in space can
represent and convey a rich environment (Emmorey et al. 2000; Jamalian et al. 2013) or
a family tree (Enfield 2003) or a temporal processes (Jamalian and Tversky 2012) or a
sequence of actions (Kang et al. 2012).
Like diagrams and sketches, gestures serve the thought of self and alter the thought
of others. When solving mental rotation problems, people often rotate their hands;
rotating their hands and in the correct direction helps mental rotation (e. g., Chu and
Kita 2008; Wexler et al. 1998; Wohlschläger and Wohlschläger 1998). When people
read descriptions of rich environments in preparation for a later memory test, many
gesture, and when they do so, they perform better. Their gestures represent the
environments, point-like gestures for places and line-like gestures for paths between
places. Participants rarely look at their hands, and the looks are brief glances. Thus, the
representations that support memory and inference appear to be spatial/motor, rather
than visual. A comprehensive theory of how externalizing thought aids thought must
take into account facilitation by spatial/motor representations as well as by spatial/
visual representations.
Gestures are actions, actions that affect objects in the mind rather than actions that
affect objects in the world. As such they seem especially suited to conveying action.
Action, process, behavior, and causality are especially difficult to extract from diagrams
on the page, in contrast to extracting structure. Structure, the spatial or conceptual
relations among the parts, is in the diagram. Action implies change, so it must be
inferred from the diagram. Novices and those low in spatial ability find it hard to make
inferences from diagrams (e. g., Tversky et al. 2013). A recent experiment has shown
that gesture in fact is effective in conveying action. Participants were asked to learn the
workings of an engine from one of two videos. Both videos had the same verbal script,
which was sufficient to answer the questions, and saw the same diagram of the structure
of the parts of the engine. In one video, the explainer’s gestures showed the shapes of
the parts of the engine in the proper configuration. In another video, the explainer’s
gestures enacted the actions of the parts of the engine, in the same place in gesture
B. Tversky
Author's personal copy

space. Following four viewings of the videos, participants answered questions about
the structure and action of the engine, created a visual explanation of the workings of
the engine, and finally made a video explaining the workings of the engine. Viewing
action gestures affected all three measures. Participants answered more action questions
correctly even those the questions could be answered from the verbal script. They
showed more action in their visual explanations. In their video explanations, they used
more action words and more action gestures (Kang et al. 2012). Thus, watching
gestures that conveyed action instilled deep knowledge of the behavior of the engine,
over and beyond what was conveyed by the words.
Like diagrams, gestures reflect and affect thought. They represent thought using
actions that create virtual marks that stand for elements in virtual spaces that stand for
the relations among elements. Gesture and diagram map meanings quite directly, in
ways that words and sentences cannot (e.g., Tversky et al. 2009; Tversky and Kessell
2014). Gestures and diagrams are deeply intertwined; both are created by actions of the
hands. Diagrams can be viewed as crystallized gestures.
4 Diagramming the World
The analyses of diagrams and gestures have led to a collection of features that
characterize them and differentiate them, on the one hand from the things they represent
and on the other hand from words and sentences. Like things are grouped by proximity
and spatially separated from unlike things. Things are lined up meaningfully in rows
and columns, and the rows and columns are sometimes ordered. Together, the rows and
columns create tables or matrices, organized by the features of the things enclosed in
the tables. The groups and orders are sometimes emphasized with lines and frames. In
diagrams, these features create patterns that are regular, good Gestalts, and differ from
the natural patterns in the world; they catch the eye. They invite explanations for the
organization. Why are things grouped and ordered in those ways? This kind of
reasoning is part of the “work” of diagrams, some of the ways that diagrams promote
inference and discovery.
The designed world uses those same features to the same ends, gathering like things,
separating them from unlike things, arranging things in meaningful orders, and more.
Dishes, flatware, pots and pans are grouped into drawers and shelves of like things, that
is, categories. They are further grouped into hierarchies of categories, plates on one
shelf, bowls on another, both grouped by size. Books are grouped and ordered on
shelves, perhaps by topic or size or time. These visual-spatial organizations express
taxonomic categories of kinds and hierarchies of categories. The spaces designed by
people reflect partonomic thematic organizations as well. The kitchen contains the
things used for cooking and eating. The bathroom encloses the things used for personal
care. Table settings express one-to-one correspondences. Assembly lines order in time
the object-action couplings that form events, putting on clothes or preparing a meal or
manufacturing automobiles (see Kirsh 1995). These visual and spatial arrangements
that people impose on the world articulate conceptual correspondences, abstractions.
Like diagrams, they create patterns that invite the mind to discover their meanings.
The spatial structures that cultures impose on their environments, inside and out,
express more: they both affect and reflect the social, political, and economic
Characterizing Diagrams
Author's personal copy

organizations of those societies. The spatial arrangements of the remnants of ancient
cultures are used by archeologists and historians as clues to the social, political, and
economic organization of those societies. Is there division of activities within house-
holds, across households? Is size of space equal across family units or are some families
allocated more space than others? What structures are proximal, which ones distant?
Spatial size, proximity, grouping, framing with furnishings and walls all carry social-
political-economic meaning. People use those visual and spatial arrangements to make
inferences from the spatial to the social-political-economic in their daily lives. Spatial
relations suggest social relations: people who sit or walk close to each other are more
likely to be seen as a social group, and their degree of spatial closeness to reflect their
social closeness.
The patterns in space that articulate abstractions are created by actions in space.
Those actions are incorporated into gestures used to express acts of thought,
putting, taking, lifting, sorting, pushing, separating, piling, and more. Those
patterns are used to create the diagrams on paper that have more deliberate intent
to communicate abstractions. Actions in space express abstractions and create
abstractions, interlinked processes that have been dubbed spraction (e. g., Tversky
2011a, 2011b). Forming categories of kinds, parts, and events in the mind helps to
simplify and organize James’ proverbial “blooming buzzing confusion” of sensory
input. Similarly, designing the world to reflect kinds, parts, events, and other
abstractions simplifies a complex world by integrating and organizing both per-
ception and action. The simple patterns created by design actions form good
gestalts that attract the eye and inform and stimulate the mind. Those patterns
are used to create the diagrams on paper that have more deliberate intent to
communicate. The patterns in space are designed by action and support action,
performing the basic tasks of life, navigation inside and outside, eating, sleeping,
work, and play. Action. Space. Spraction. Inseparable and integrated.
Acknowledgments
I am indebted to my colleagues and collaborators, especially Valeria Giardino, Jocelyn
Penny Small, Azadeh Jamalian, Angela Kessell, Julie Heiser, Paul Lee, and Jeff Zacks. I am grateful the
Varieties of Understanding Project at Fordham University and The John Templeton Foundation and to the
following National Science Foundation grants for facilitating the research and/or preparing the manuscript:
National Science Foundation HHC 0905417, IIS-0725223, IIS-0855995, and REC 0440103. The opinions
expressed in this publication are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funders.
References
Azema, M., and F. Rivere. 2012. Animation in Paleolithic art: A pre-echo of cinema. Antiquity 86:
316–324.
Bender, J., and M. Marrinan. 2010. The culture of diagram. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Bilda, Z and Gero, J.S. (2006) Reasoning with internal and external representations: A case study with expert
architects. In R Sun and N. Miyake (Editors), Proceedings of the Cognitive Science Society, Lawrence
Erlbaum, Pp. 1020–1026.
Boone, E. H. (2010). Stories in Red and Black: Pictorial Histories of the Aztec and Mixtec. University of Texas Press
Brew, K. and Guerra, R. (2013). Design is One: Lella and Massimo Vignelli. Film. US distributor www.
firstrunfeatures.com
Brown, L. 1979. The story of maps. NY: Dover.
Casati, R., and A. Varzi. 1996. Introduction. In Events, ed. R. Casati and A. Varzi. Aldershot: Dartmouth.
B. Tversky
Author's personal copy

Chu, M., and S. Kita. 2008. Spontaneous gestures during mental rotation tasks: Insights into the
microdevelopment of the motor strategy. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 137: 706–723.
Denis, M. 1997. The description of routes: A cognitive approach to the production of spatial discourse.
Cahiers de Psychologie Cognitive 16: 409–458.
Denis, M. Pazzaglia, F., Cornoldi, C., & Bertolo, L. (1998). Spatial discourse and navigation: An analysis of
route directions in the city of Venice. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 12
Donald, M. 1991. Origins of the modern mind. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Egoff, D.B., and L.E. Corder. 1991. Height differences of low and high job status, female and male corporate
employees. Sex Roles 24: 365–573.
Emmorey, K., B. Tversky, and H. Taylor. 2000. Using space to describe space: Perspective in speech, sign, and
gesture. Spatial Cognition and Computation 2: 157–180.
Enfield, N.J. 2003. Producing and editing diagrams using co-speech gesture: Spatializing non-spatial relations
in explanations of kinship in Laos. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 13(1): 7–50.
Goodman, N.A. 1976. Languages of art: An approach to a theory of symbols. Indianopolis: Hackett.
Heiser, J., and B. Tversky. 2006. Arrows in comprehending and producing mechanical diagrams. Cognitive
Science 30: 581–592.
Heiser, J., B. Tversky, and M. Silverman. 2004. Sketches for and from collaboration. In Visual and spatial
reasoning in design III, ed. J.S. Gero, B. Tversky, and T. Knight, 69–78. Sydney: Key Centre for Design
Research.
Hutchins, E. 1995. Cognition in the wild. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Jamalian, A., and B. Tversky. 2012. Gestures alter thinking about time. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, ed. N. Miyake, D. Peebles, and R.P. Cooper, 551–557.
Austin: Cognitive Science Society.
Jamalian, A., V. Giardino, and B. Tversky. 2013. Gestures for thinking. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, ed. M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sabaenz, and I. Wachsmuth.
Austin: Cognitive Science Society.
Johnson, S. 2006. The ghost map. London: Riverhead Books.
Jurafsky, D. (2013). Why ice cream sounds fat and crackers sound skinny. Stanford Magazine, July/August
Kang, S., B. Tversky, and J.B. Black. 2012. From hands to minds: How gestures promote action understand-
ing. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, ed. N. Miyake, D.
Peebles, and R.P. Cooper, 551–557. Austin: Cognitive Science Society.
Kang, S., Tversky, B. & Black, J. B. (2014) Gesture and speech in explanations to experts and novices.
Kantrowitz, A. (2014). A cognitive ethnographic study of improvisational drawing by eight contemporary
artists. Doctoral dissertation, Columbia Teachers College
Kirsh, D. 1995. The intelligent use of space. Artificial Intelligence 73: 31–68.
Malafouris, L. 2013. How things shape the mind: A theory of material engagement. Cambridge: MIT Press.
McCloud, S. 1993. Understanding comics. Northhampton: Kitchen Sink.
Miller, G.A., and P.N. Johnson-Laird. 1976. Language and perception. NY: Belnap Press.
Netz, R. 1999. Linguistic formulae as cognitive tools. Pragmatics and Cognition 7: 147–176.
Norman, D.A. 1993. Things that make us smart. Boston: Addison-Wesley Longman.
Pike, A.W.G., D.L. Hoffmann, M. Garcia-Diez, P.B. Pettitt, J. Alcolea, R. De Balb, C. Gonzalez-Sainz, C. de
las Heras, J.A. Lasheras, R. Motes, and J. Zilhao. 2012. U-Series dating of Paleolithic art in 11 caves in
Spain. Science 336: 1409–1413.
Sadier, B., J.-J. Delannoy, L. Benedetti, D. Bourles, S. Jaillet, J.-M. Geneste, A.-E. Lebatard, and M. Arnold.
2012. Further constraints on the Chauvet cave artwork elaboration. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 109: 8002.
Schon, D.A. 1983. The reflective practitioner. NY: Harper Collins.
Schubert, T., and A. Maass (eds.). 2011. Spatial dimensions of social thought. Amsterdam: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Shepard, R.N. 1984. Ecological constraints on internal representation: Resonant kinematics of perceiving,
imagining, thinking, and dreaming. Psychological Review 91: 417–447.
Small, J.P. 1999. Time in space: Narrative in classical art. Art Bulletin 81: 562–575.
Smith, S.M. 1995. Getting into and out of mental ruts: A theory of fixation, incubation, and insight. In The
nature of insight, ed. R.J. Sternberg and J.E. Davidson, 229–251. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Stjernfelt, F. 2011. Diagrammatology: An investigation on the borderlines of phenomenology, ontology, and
semiotics. Dordrecht: Springer.
Suchman, L. 1987. Plans and situated actions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Suwa, M., and B. Tversky. 1996. What architects see in their sketches: Implications for design tools. Human
factors in computing systems: Conference companion (pp. 191–192). NY: ACM.
Characterizing Diagrams
Author's personal copy

Suwa, M., and B. Tversky. 2001. Constructive perception in design. In Computational and cognitive models of
creative design V, ed. J.S. Gero and M.L. Maher, 227–239. Sydney: University of Sydney.
Suwa, M., and B. Tversky. 2003. Constructive perception: A skill for coordinating perception and conception.
In Proceedings of the Cognitive Science Society Meetings, ed. R. Alterman and D. Kirsh. Mahwah:
Erlbaum.
Suwa, M., B. Tversky, J. Gero, and T. Purcell. 2001. Seeing into sketches: Regrouping parts encourages new
interpretations. In Visual and spatial reasoning in design, ed. J.S. Gero, B. Tversky, and T. Purcell, 207–
219. Sydney: Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition.
Talmy, L. 1983. How language structures space. In Spatial orientation: Theory, research and application, ed.
H.L. Pick Jr. and L.P. Acredolo, 225–282. N. Y.: Plenum.
Talmy, L. 2000. Toward a cognitive semantics. Vols 1 & 2. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Tversky, B. 1981. Distortions in memory for maps. Cognitive Psychology 13: 407–433.
Tversky, B. 1990. Where partonomies and taxonomies meet. In Meanings and prototypes: Studies on
linguistic categorization, ed. S.L. Tsohatzidis, 334–344. London: Routledge.
Tversky, B. 1995. Cognitive origins of graphic conventions. In Understanding images, ed. F.T. Marchese, 29–
53. New York: Springer.
Tversky, B. 2001. Spatial schemas in depictions. In Spatial schemas and abstract thought, ed. M. Gattis, 79–
111. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Tversky, B. 2004. Semantics, syntax, and pragmatics of graphics. In Language and visualisation, ed. K.
Holmqvist and Y. Ericsson, 141–158. Lund: Lund University Press.
Tversky, B. 2005. How to get around by mind and body: Spatial thought, spatial action. In Cognition,
evolution, and rationality: A cognitive science for the XXIst century, ed. A. Zilhao. London: Routledge.
Tversky, B. 2011a. Spatial thought, social thought. In Spatial dimensions of social thought, ed. T. Schubert and
A. Maass. Amsterdam: Mouton de Gruyter.
Tversky, B. 2011b. Visualizations of thought. Topics in Cognitive Science 3: 499–535.
Tversky, B., and K. Hemenway. 1983. Categories of scenes. Cognitive Psychology 15: 121–149.
Tversky, B. and Kessell, A. (2014). Thinking in action. Topics in Cognitive Science.
Tversky, B., and P.U. Lee. 1998. How space structures language. In Spatial Cognition: An interdisciplinary
approach to representation and processing of spatial knowledge, ed. C. Freksa, C. Habel, and K.F.
Wender, 157–175. Berlin: Springer.
Tversky, B., and P.U. Lee. 1999. Pictorial and verbal tools for conveying routes. In Spatial information theory:
cognitive and computational foundations of geographic information science, ed. C. Freksa and D.M.
Mark, 51–64. Berlin: Springer.
Tversky, B., and M. Suwa. 2009. Thinking with sketches. In Tools for innovation, ed. A. Markman. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Tversky, B., and J.M. Zacks. 2013. Event perception. In Oxford handbook of cognitive psychology, ed. D.
Riesberg. Oxford: Oxford.
Tversky, B., S. Kugelmass, and A. Winter. 1991. Cross-cultural and developmental trends in graphic
productions. Cognitive Psychology 23: 515–557.
Tversky, B., J. Zacks, P.U. Lee, and J. Heiser. 2000. Lines, blobs, crosses, and arrows: Diagrammatic
communication with schematic figures. In Theory and application of diagrams, ed. M. Anderson, P.
Cheng, and V. Haarslev, 221–230. Berlin: Springer.
Tversky, B., J. Heiser, P. Lee, and M.-P. Daniel. 2009. Explanations in gesture, diagram, and word. In Spatial
language and dialogue, ed. K.R. Coventry, T. Tenbrink, and J.A. Bateman, 119–131. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Tversky, B., J. Heiser, and J. Morrison. 2013. Space, time, and story. In The psychology of learning and
motivation, ed. B.H. Ross, 47–76. Oxford: Elsevier.
Wexler, M., S.M. Kosslyn, and A. Berthoz. 1998. Motor processes in mental rotation. Cognition 68: 77–94.
Wohlschläger, A., and A. Wohlschläger. 1998. Mental and manual rotatation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 24: 397–412.
Zacks, J., and B. Tversky. 1999. Bars and lines: A study of graphic communication. Memory and Cognition
27: 1073–1079.
Zacks, J., and B. Tversky. 2001. Event structure in perception and conception. Psychological Bulletin 127: 3–21.
B. Tversky
Author's personal copy

