1
A Study on Gossiping in Transportation Networks
Sarit Kraus, Roni Parshani, Yuval Shavitt
Abstract—To alleviate road congestion suggestions have been
made to equip cars with wireless communication to allow drivers
to exchange information. This information is used to bypass
congested areas. We study the dynamics of this solution using a
hybrid micro simulation tool we have developed, and show that
gossipping is an efﬁcient method of information propagation.
An increase in the number of gossiping agents leads to faster
and wider distribution of information. On the other hand,
as in other information models, when the number of agents
obtaining information about road conditions increases, their
routing performance may decrease (unless smarter algorithms
are deployed) since they will all attempt to use the same
uncongested roads. Nevertheless, when the number of gossiping
agents is balanced (20-30% in our simulations) the average
traveling time of gossiping agents is similar to those who obtain
information from a centralized information center.
I. INTRODUCTION
Road congestion is a known and acute urban menace
with no signs of disappearing. There are apparently many
suggested approaches to tackle this problem; one of them is
to supply vehicles and drivers with up-to-date information
about road conditions. There are two kinds of approaches
to supply drivers with information that can aid them avoid
congestion. One approach is based on ﬁxed-structure commu-
nication networks, for example cellular networks or FM/AM
radio [1], [3], [2], the other approach is based on ad-hoc
communication networks; the latter save the need to deploy
expensive infrastructure. Several innovative projects propose
using ad-hoc networks as the communication infrastructure,
for example FleetNet [10], and CarNet [19].
The advance in technology in recent years has helped bring
forth sophisticated onboard navigation systems for vehicles,
at a reasonable price. Such a system contains a computing
device with a detailed road map, GPS for locating the vehicle
on the map, and communication means. One can use ad-
hoc communication networks (such as 802.11p or in the
future DSRC) to exchange information between neighboring
vehicles. When two vehicles are within communication range
they can exchange their information regarding road conditions.
Road condition information is thus propagated in the network
without any need for an external or central infrastructure.
Each time new information is obtained by a vehicle, the
onboard navigation systems recalculate the optimal route from
its current location to the destination. For example, if the
navigation system receives information that one of the streets
in its planned path is blocked it will plan a new path that avoids
the blocked road; the new path will be the shortest path from
the vehicle’s current position to the destination taking into
account the blockage.
Recently, Shavitt and Shay [25] studied the routing in this
setting, which they termed ”gossip networks”, and showed
how to optimally calculate the shortest path in a system where
the edge delay distributions are known. They also assumed that
the probability to gossip about an edge condition in another
edge is known. While they were able to show that the trip
length and information acquisition can be naturally combined
in the shortest route calculation, their model overlooked im-
portant issues, most notably the feedback mechanism in the
gossip network.
The feedback mechanism in gossip networks is an in-
carnation of load sensitive routing in data networks. Load
sensitive routing was used in the ARPANET network
with
limited success and eventually was abandoned to minimum
hop routing due to its instability (see discussion at [4]). Thus,
it is important to understand how transportation networks can
avoid such instabilities.
In this paper we study the gossip network model in a
practical setting. We assume that drivers learn the expected
congestion on the roads, which can be modeled by having
an expect cost of each edge, and some of the drivers have
a gossiping system that help them learn about congestion
on distant roads. Unlike [25] we do not assume that the
exact probability distribution function of an edge delay is
known, nor do we assume the knowledge of the probability
to learn about congestion. Under these assumptions we study
the information propagation speed in an urban network and
quantify its advantage to drivers on the road. We examine
several important parameters, but mainly the car ﬂow density
and the percentage of gossiping cars. We compared our results
to centralized information models.
Because of the complexity of mathematically analyzing
dynamic networks the investigation was conducted via simula-
tions. For this purpose we built a special micro simulation tool
(see [15], [5], [17] for other micro simulators) that supports
the use of gossiping between individual cars (see Sec. IV-A).
The experimental results show that information propagation in
gossip networks is very efﬁcient even when the percentage of
gossiping agents is only 20-30%. Agents are able to obtain
useful information even with 5% gossiping agents. Our most
interesting ﬁnding is that when the percentage of gossiping
agents is about 20-30% the average path lengths of the
gossiping agents are very close to that of the agents that obtain
information from a centralized information provider.
II. RELATED WORK
Xu et al. [27] studied a similar model in which vehicles
exchange knowledge about the environment which is time
varying and has spatial relevance, both features of our model.
While we are looking at road conditions which change the
vehicle routing, they discover resources (like vacant parking
spots) which changes the vehicle’s destination. Their simula-
tion was performed on a square area where the vehicle may go

2
in any direction, while our study took a more realistic approach
and simulated vehicle movements along a city street map,
where road capacities and trafﬁc light operations are taken into
account. Similar to Xu et al., Datta et al. [9] and Papadopouli
and Schulzerinne [22] also studied information dissemination
via gossip.
Gossiping has been studied in general graphs and in commu-
nication networks [14]. It is important to note that the method
of gossiping used in communication networks is signiﬁcantly
different from the gossiping of mobile agents. While gossiping
in communication networks is invoked by the network nodes
(or routers) and thus is done between static entities, in our
case the gossiping is between mobile agents traveling in the
network. Thus, while in the static case the propagation of the
information can be predicted, given the gossiping algorithm,
it is hard to predict how information will be expanded in the
mobile agent situations that we study. Gossip can also be used
to describe the communication in wireless ad-hock networks
[12]. However, in such domains there is no ﬁxed network,
and most information exchanged is on locating agents. There
is a thread of works that utilize gossip to improve multicast
communication in ad hoc networks [8], [18]
Ganesh et al. [11] who also consider a ﬁxed network,
present the Scalable Membership Protocol (SCAMP) in a
gossip algorithm. As opposed to other protocols, which assume
that the subset of nodes with which a node gossips is chosen
uniformly among all participating nodes, they provide each
node with a partial random view of the system without any
node having global knowledge of the membership. The size of
the partial view automatically adapts when the total number of
participating nodes changes. Furthermore, in our case, who the
agents gossip with is determined by who they pass, whereas
in their case the protocol can determine this number. Thus,
they focus on how large the partial view should be in order to
ensure reliable propagation of the message to all the nodes in
the network.
Olorunleke and McCallas [20] investigated models for shar-
ing information about stationary agents via gossip. Similar to
our results they show that gossip between mobile agents is
an efﬁcient way of sharing information. However, they focus
on the problem of the spread of delusion in situations simpler
than ours (e.g., the information does not change over time). We
assume that agents share only true information, but our model
is much more complex and the shared changed information
inﬂuences the agents’ behavior.
The concept of gossip is commonly used by multiagent
researchers for communication about the reputation of others
[21], [6], [24]. They study how gossip inﬂuences group
structure, norms and performance. Our agents exchange in-
formation about road conditions and it is assumed that they
report only true conditions.
III. MODEL
The transportation network is represented by a directed
graph G = (V ; E), where V is the set of vertices representing
junctions, and E is the set of edges representing roads. An
edge e ∈E is associated with a weight, which speciﬁes the
time it takes to traverse the road associated with the edge.
The road’s weight varies in time according to the trafﬁc load.
Each mobile agent, namely a car, is associated with a pair
of origin and destination vertices. A journey is deﬁned as
a path between an origin vertex and a destination vertex. A
path length (or a journey length) is deﬁned as the sum of the
weights of the edges composing the path. Every agent has
to travel once between its origin and destination and aims to
minimize its path length. The network is modeled as a non-
cooperative game [16] and thus agents do not try to optimize
network performance [13], [25], but rather each agent attempts
to minimize its own journey length.
At a given time, an agent may have inaccurate information
about the weights, and no information on how the weights
may change over time. We assume that an agent, which travels
from vertex v1 ∈V to v2 ∈V , will search for the shortest
path between these two vertices, based on its current available
information, and will move accordingly. Once, its information
about the network has been updated, it will stochastically
decide whether to recompute the shortest path or to keep on
moving and follow its current route. If there is more than one
path that is associated with the shortest distance, one of them
will be chosen randomly.
An agent may update its information on the network in one
of the following ways:
1) When traversing an edge - the information about the
edge’s weight is obtained.
2) Non traversable edges - if the weight of an edge is
very large, this information is available to the agent at
the vertex where one can enter the edge, even though
it hasn’t traversed the edge. Intuitively, this refers to
jammed roads where agents can hardly enter.
3) Information received from other sources.
For the third category, we focus on information that is obtained
by gossiping. However, for comparison we also consider
centralized information providers.
A. The Gossip Model
The exchange of information using gossiping is done in
one of two ways: between mobile agents passing one another
or between agents located at the same edge. The amount of
information traveling in the network depends mainly on two
factors: the percentage of agents participating in the gossip
process and the amount and type of information exchanged in
each act of gossiping.
We assume that each agent maintains an internal database
where it stores the most recent information about all the edges
in the network. For every edge, the agent stores the most recent
weight of which it is aware and the time this weight was
generated by the agent that traversed the relevant edge and
observed its associated weight. Every time an agent traverses
an edge it updates its database with the new information about
the edge. When gossiping, both the edge and its associated
gathering time is sent. Not all the mobile agents are expected
to participate in the gossip process since gossiping may require
special capabilities. We refer to the agents that do not gossip as
regular agents and to the gossiping ones as gossiping agents.

3
In many situations the gossiping agents cannot exchange
their entire database when gossiping since they may pass
one another at such speed that leaves a short window for
effective wireless communication. If during this window there
is increased noise, congestion, or any other disturbances only
a few packets may be exchanged between cars, and thus, it is
necessary to determine which part of the database to send.
There are at least three policies:
1) Randomly selecting a ﬁxed set: when entering the net-
work each agent randomly selects a subset of edges on
which it will send information.
2) Dynamically, randomly selecting a set: each time an
agent needs to send information it randomly selects
a subset of the edges. This may increase the overall
exchange of information in the network compared to
policy (1).
3) Ranking - each agent ranks all the edges in its database
and sends information on the highest ranked edges.
One possible ranking algorithm is based on the as-
sumption that the edges with the largest weight change
amplitude are the most important ones because they
would have the largest effect on the routing. So every
time an agent receives new information it calculates the
change, δ, between the edge’s current weight and the
weight known when it entered the network. Then the
edge’s new ranking is calculated as follows: rank(ti) =
max{rank(ti−1), δ}.
IV. SIMULATION STUDY
A. The Simulation Tool
Transportation network simulations are divided into two
groups: macro simulations and micro simulations. Macro
simulations [26], [15] mimic trafﬁc behavior by using mathe-
matical calculations of ﬂows, while micro simulations simulate
the movement of individual cars. Micro simulation models
can be divided into a few groups that differ by the level of
ﬁdelity [7], [5], [17]: CF, CA, CTM and the queue model. CF
(Car Following) is the most accurate model. It uses realistic
driver behavior, detailed vehicle characteristics and includes
a complicated acceleration and deceleration algorithm. The
problem with this model is that even with today’s advanced
computers, the simulation, using many cars, takes more time
than it would in a real world transportation network. The next
model, the CA (Cellular Automata) is much faster, yet it is still
a high resolution model. Each road is divided into small cells
that allow only one car at a time. In CTM (Car Transmission
Model), the cells are much larger and contain many cars. It is
not necessary to know where the cars are located in the cell
because the trafﬁc ﬂow is calculated using more general rules.
Finally, the fastest and simplest model is the queue model. In
this model the roads are represented by ﬁnite queues and are
not divided into cells. The velocity and distance between the
cars are irrelevant in this model.
Our model is a combination of a few different models [23].
On the one hand, a simple queue model is inadequate since the
act of gossiping is done between passing cars, so each vehicle’s
location on the road is important. On the other hand, a full
CF or even a CA model is too heavy if we intend to support
gossiping between every two individuals. Thus, we propose a
combination where each road is divided into small sections and
the cars are moved from section to section. However unlike
a CF or CA model, our model’s velocity (and therefore the
road’s capacity) does not depend on the distance between the
cars. Instead, each road is modeled by a ﬁnite queue, and when
a car has ﬁnished traversing a road, it is put into the queue
until it is allowed to enter the next road.
The input of the simulation is a graph and a conﬁguration
which is speciﬁed via rules. The rules specify constraints on
parameters associated with agents, their origins and destina-
tions and the time they enter the network. There are also
rules that are associated with changes of the edges’ weights
at speciﬁed times. They model incidents that slow down the
trafﬁc at certain points. Given a conﬁguration, many speciﬁc
runs of the simulation that satisfy the rules can be created
randomly.
The network chosen for our experiments is an illustration
of the central part of Jerusalem. It contains about 50 junctions
and 150 roads which are approximately the number of main
streets in the center of Jerusalem. The basic time unit of the
simulation is a step that is equivalent to about 30 seconds.
Each run of the simulation simulates six hours of movements
on these roads. The average number of cars passing through
the network during a simulation run is about 70,000 and the
average number of cars in the network at a speciﬁc time is
about 3,500 cars.
At the beginning of each run the simulation is activated for
42 simulated hours where the incident rules are not activated
in order to reach the steady state of the network. When
entering the network, each agent has information about the
average time it takes to pass each edge of the network in
the steady state. During the run, randomly selected junctions
are partially or fully blocked and as a result trafﬁc jams are
formed. Each result below presents the averages of at least
30 randomly generated settings of the relevant simulation
conﬁguration (i.e., 180 simulated hours, 7,350,000,000 mobile
agents). Seven different percentage levels of gossiping agents
were considered: 60%, 40%, 30%, 20%, 10%, 5%, 2%.
The simulations are all done at the system level, ab-
stracting the effect of layers 1 and 2. In particular, we
did not model the MAC performance and signal propaga-
tion. All these low layer effects were abstracted by the
fact that only a certain percentage of the packets can be
transmitted. The simulator with documentation is available at
www.eng.tau.ac.il/˜shavitt/Transport.html.
B. Routing in Gossip networks
Using extensive simulations, we found that information
propagation in gossip networks1 is effective. In particular, with
only a small percentage (as low as 10%) of cars that participate
in the gossiping, information is disseminated fast and with a
high rate of updates. We report these results in [23]. In this
1Information is propagated through two processes, the movement of vehi-
cles and car-to-car communication. Some papers term this ”message ferrying”
[28].

4
work we concentrate on assessing the effectiveness of the data
dissemination on the agents routing performance. Since the
trafﬁc load changes over time the agents need to change their
routing paths in order to decrease their journey time.
Next we present two scenarios that illustrate the way
gossiping agents are able to overcome road (edge) blockage,
e.g., due to accidents or road maintenance. In both scenarios
(Figures 1,2) two of the edges were partially blocked and
the ﬂow of agents that could pass through was decreased
by 70%. The blocked edges were randomly selected from a
group of edges which ranked between 10 – 50%. Selecting
overly loaded edges did not leave enough room for recovery,
while selecting lightly loaded edges had no signiﬁcant effect.
Gossiping agent percentage was set at 20%. The graphs present
the journey time as a function of the time of departure of both
the gossip agents and the regular agents.
In the ﬁrst scenario (see Figure 1) the ﬁrst partial blockage
began after 200 steps and ended at the 300th step. The
second partial blockage began after 450 steps and ended at
the 500th step. As a result of the partial blockage after 200
steps, several trafﬁc jams occurred and the average journey
length value increased gradually from that point. However,
the average gossiping agents’ journey length began to decrease
after a short time, indicating that the agents realized that there
was a trafﬁc jam and adjusted their routes, accordingly. The
decrease of the curve of the gossiping agent was to the original
level, meaning they had completely learned the new weights
and found alternative paths. At about step 300 the regular
agents’ journey cost also began to gradually decrease since
the blockage was opened. At about 450 steps the same process
started again except that this time the gossiping agents were
not able to completely recover from the jam.
0
200
400
600
0
20
40
60
80
time of departure
journey length
gossip
regular
Fig. 1.
Gossiping and regular agents in scenario 1
In the second scenario the partial blockage started at the
200th step and ended at the 400th step. Again, the percentage
of gossiping agents was 20%. The regular agents’ curve in-
creased gradually until step 400 and then gradually decreased.
An interesting phenomenon, is that the gossiping agents’ curve
eventually started climbing. As in the previous scenario, the
agent learned about the blockage and avoided it (see the low
peak at time 250), but at a later stage (at time 370) the
blockage must have spread to larger areas of the network
and thus the gossip agents could not bypass it resulting in an
increase in their average travel time. When congestion abated,
the gossip agents were much quicker in ﬁnding shorter paths.
0
200
400
600
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
time of departure
journey length
gossip
regular
Fig. 2.
Gossiping and regular agents in scenario 2
We studied how the percentage of gossiping agents inﬂu-
ences the routing efﬁciency of the agents. Since we showed
above that as the percentage of gossiping agents increases, the
propagation of the information is more efﬁcient, we expected
to ﬁnd that the higher the percentage of gossiping agents,
the lower the average length of the journey. However, as the
lower curve of Figure 3 indicates, the minimal journey length
is obtained for 20% of the gossiping agents (see also, the
second upper curve of Figure 4). This could be explained by
observing the two aspects of efﬁcient routing. First, as men-
tioned above, as the percentage of gossiping agents increases,
the propagation of information is more efﬁcient. Second,
when there are many gossiping agents there is a ping-pong
effect [4] where most of the gossip agents rush to the same
paths that currently seem lightly loaded. The combination of
these two conﬂicting aspects causes the optimum results to
be obtained somewhere in the middle, with 20-30% of the
gossiping agents. A large number of gossiping agents made the
second aspect dominant, but too few gossiping agents caused
the information distribution to be too slow. This behavior can
be seen radically by the fact that with 60% of the gossiping
agents, the journey length was as bad as with 3%.
We also considered situations where the amount of infor-
mation passed between the agents was limited which allowed
the agents to report on only 15 edges (which was 10% of
the edges in the simulated network). The decision procedures
to decide which information would be sent are speciﬁed in
Section III-A.
As can be observed in Figure 3 the ranking algorithm leads
to much more efﬁcient routing than the random algorithms.
The ranking algorithm is much better with the low percentage
levels of gossip agents. The ranking algorithm, as expected
(see introduction to the test), behaves well, despite the fact
that it exchanges only 10% of the information. It behaves
very similarly to the full information exchange - the optimum
value is at 20% and then it rises on both sides. The random
algorithms perform better as the percentage of gossiping
agents increases. At 40% there is a sufﬁcient exchange of
information in the network for the dynamic random algorithm

5
0
10
20
30
40
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
gossip percentage
journey length
fixed random
dynamic random
ranking
no gossip
full gossip
Fig. 3.
Journey length as a function of the gossiping agents percentage
for different procedures of information exchange.
to perform in nearly the same way as the ranking algorithm.
The difference between the dynamic random algorithm and the
ﬁxed random algorithm is that the dynamic random algorithm
is much more sensitive to an increase in the percentage of
gossiping agents.
1) Comparisons with other information models: We com-
pared the routing performance of the gossiping agents with
two information acquisition models:
1) Centralized Information Model - Some of the mobile
agents obtain information from a central information
provider when entering the network. The information
provided includes the current weights of all the roads
in the network. For example, a driver may download
updated road conditions before leaving home.
2) Online Centralized Information Model - The same as in
(1), but an agent is provided with updated information
each time it reaches a vertex. For example a driver may
be subscribed to an update service for her car through a
cellular network.
To show the effectiveness of the gossip model, we used
idealized centralized information models where changes in the
network are immediately available to the user. In practical
systems there is a signiﬁcant delay of 15-45 minutes from
the time congestion occurs until information is disseminated
to the users via the system.
As in the gossip model, some of the agents have access
to centralized information, and we refer to them as special
agents. Other agents gather information about edges only when
traversing them and they are called regular agents. Figure 4
presents the average journey length of the special agents in
the different information models as a function of the special
agents’ percentage. The effect of the percentage of special
agents in the two centralized models is different from that of
the gossip model. As the special agents percentage increases,
the journey length also increases. This is because increasing
the number of special agents in the centralized model does
not decrease the information available to the agents (as in the
gossip model). However, when there are only a few special
agents they can select the best edges without anyone disturbing
them. Moreover, when there are many special agents and all
of them want to select the same believed to be free roads, the
selected roads themselves will become crowded and therefore
less attractive. Another interesting observation is that with the
best percentage of gossip agents, the gossip network is nearly
as good as the centralized models.
0
20
40
60
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
special car percentage
avg. journey length (in steps)
regular cars
gossip cars
centralized
online cent.
Fig. 4.
Journey length of all the agents as a function of the percentage
of special agents.
We also considered the road network load in all the above
cases. The road network load is deﬁned as the average number
of agents (including both special and regular agents) per edge.
Surprisingly, for the centralized model the load decreases with
the increase in the percentage of special agents. The reason
for behavior different from the average journey length is that
the road network load takes into account all the agents in the
network, while the journey length considers only the special
agents. Therefore, when the special agents are the majority, the
load on the roads spread more evenly, even though the special
agents receive slightly less favorable paths. It is interesting to
observe that when the percentage of gossip agents is 60% the
load is higher than when there are no special agents at all.
This is because the gossip agents take longer paths, aiming
to save time; however, since there are so many of them they
increase the load.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presents a simulation study that supports the
efﬁciency of the gossip model for information exchange and
the routing of self interested mobile agents in urban networks.
The model is efﬁcient even when only a relatively low per-
centage of the agents is able to gossip and when only partial
information about the environment can be exchanged between
the gossiping agents. An interesting ﬁnding is that increasing
the percentage of gossiping agents in the environment is
not always beneﬁcial for routing. On the one hand, more
gossiping agents increase the efﬁciency of the propagation of
the information. On the other hand, if some edges become
non transferable and the many gossiping agents become aware
of the blockage, they will try to bypass them using the

6
0
20
40
60
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
4
4.1
special car percentage
avg. network load
decentralized network
gossip network
centralized network
online centralized network
Fig. 5.
Road network load as a function of the percentage of special
agents
same believed to be available edges. Consequently the average
journey length will increase. In other words, stability may not
be achieved with the simple algorithms examined in this paper.
Thus, there is room for designing better algorithms, such as
an algorithm that can select a path with some probability
that increases with its attractiveness. The gap between the
probability to chose a better path over another can change
based on the estimated percentage of gossiping vehicles.
However, it will take time until such situations become reality.
In our experiments, a percentage of 20-30% of gossiping
agents has led to the most efﬁcient routing results. The
average journey length in this setting was very close to that of
agents that obtained information from an idealized centralized
information provider. This was the case even when only 10%
of the information available was exchanged by the gossiping
agents.
REFERENCES
[1] Trafﬁc
information
by
monitoring
cellular
networks.
http://www.appliedgenerics.com.
[2] Trafﬁc information to telematic systems. http://www.trafﬁcmaster.net.
[3] Trafﬁc information via FM radio. http://www.tmcforum.com.
[4] D. Bertsekas and R. Gallager. Data networks. Prentice-Hall, second
edition, 1992.
[5] G. H. Bham and R.F. Benekohal. A high ﬁdelity trafﬁc simulation model
based on automata cellular and car following concepts. Transportation
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 12(1):1–32, 2004.
[6] Cristiano Castelfranchi, Rosaria Conte, and Mario Paolucci. Normative
reputation and the costs of compliance. Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies
and Social Simulation, 1(3), 1998.
[7] N. Cetin, K. Nagel, B. Raney, and A. Voellmy.
Large-scale multi-
agent transportation simulations. Computer Physics Communications,
147:559–564, 2002.
[8] R. Chandra, V. Ramasubramanian, and K. Birman. Anonymous gossip:
Improving multicast reliability in mobile ad-hoc networks.
In 21st
International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS),
page 275283, 2001.
[9] Anwitaman Datta, Silvia Quarteroni, and Karl Aberer. Autonomous gos-
siping: A self-organizing epidemic algorithm for selective information
dissemination in wireless mobile ad-hoc networks.
In ICSNW 2004,
pages 126–143, 2004. LNCS 3226.
[10] A. Ebner and H. Rohling. A self-organized radio network for automotive
applications. In Conference Proceedings ITS 2001, 8th World Congress
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Sydney, Australia, October 2001.
[11] A. J. Ganesh, A. Kermarrec, and L. Massoulie. Peer-to-peer member-
ship management for gossip-based protocols.
IEEE Transactions on
Computers, 52(2):139–149, 2003.
[12] Z. J. Haas, J. Y. Halpern, and L. Li. Gossip-based ad hoc routing. In
IEEE INFOCOM 2002, New York, NY, USA, 2002.
[13] S. Halle and B. Chaib-draa. Collaborative driving system using team-
work for platoon formations.
In Workshop on Agents in Trafﬁc and
transportation (AAMAS-04), 2004.
[14] S. M. Hedetniemi, S. T. Hedetniemi, and A. L. Liestman. A survey
of gossiping and broadcasting in communication networks. Networks,
18(4):319–349, 1988.
[15] D. Helbing, A. Hennecke, V. Shvetsov, and M. Treiber.
Micro- and
macro- simulation of freeway trafﬁc.
Mathematical and Computer
Modelling, 35(5–6):517–547, 2002.
[16] Y. A. Korilis, A. A. Lazar, and A. Orda. Achieving network optima using
stackelberg routing strategies. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking,
5(1):161–173, 1997.
[17] Daniel Krajzewicz, Georg Hertkorn, Christian R¨ossel, and Peter Wagner.
SUMO (Simulation of Urban MObility); an open-source trafﬁc simula-
tion. In the 4th Middle East Symposium on Simulation and Modelling
(MESM), Sharjah, UAE, September 2002.
[18] Jun Luo, Patrick Th. Eugster, and Jean-Pierre Hubaux. Route driven
gossip: Probabilistic reliable multicast in ad hoc networks.
In IEEE
Infocom 2003, 2003.
[19] Robert Morris, John Jannotti, Frans Kaashoek, Jinyang Li, and Douglas
S. J. De Couto. CarNet: A scalable ad hoc wireless network system.
In the 9th ACM SIGOPS European workshop, Kolding, Denmark,
September 2000.
[20] O. Olorunleke and G. McCalla. Model sharing in multiagent systems.
In AAMAS04, New York, NY, USA, August 2004.
[21] M. Paolucci, M. Marcero, and R. Conte. What’s the use of gossip? a sen-
sitivity analysis of the spreading of respectful reputation. Paper presented
at the Schloss Dagstuhl Seminar on Social Science Microsimulation.
Tools for Modeling, Parameter Optimization, and Sensitivity Analysis,
May 1–5 1997.
[22] Maria Papadopouli and Henning Schulzrinne. Effects of power conser-
vation, wireless coverage and cooperation on data dissemination among
mobile devices. In ACM MobiHoc 2001, 2001.
[23] Roni Parshani. Routing in gossip networks. Master’s thesis, Bar Ilan
University, Ramat Gan, Israel, 2004.
[24] Michael Prietula. Advice, trust, and gossip among artiﬁcial agents. In
A. Lomi and E. Larsen, editors, Simulating Organizational Societies:
Theories, Models and Ideas. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2000.
[25] Yuval Shavitt and Amir Shay. Optimal routing in gossip networks. IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technologies, 54(4), July 2005.
[26] M. Treiber and D. Helbing. Macroscopic simulation of widely scattered
synchronized trafﬁc states.
Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and
General, 32, 1999.
[27] B. Xu, A. Ouksel, and O. Wolfson. Opportunistic resource exchange
in inter-vehicle ad hoc networks.
In the Fifth IEEE International
Conference on Mobile Data Management, pages 4–12, Berkeley, CA,
USA, January 2004.
[28] Wenrui Zhao, Mostafa Ammar, and Ellen Zegura. A message ferrying
approach for data delivery in sparse mobile ad hoc networks. In ACM
MobiHoc 2004, 2004.

