1. Sceptical Essays, London 1928, 70.
2. See Husserl’s Ideas III, written in 1912 (Husserliana V, 59). Husserl’s works are quoted from
the Husserliana edition by referring to the volume and page number.
3. One might also point to the 1914 Marburg lecture “Concerning Phenomenology” of Adolf
Reinach, one of Husserl’s early associates, in which Paul Natorp’s conception of cognition was
attacked (see the translation by Dallas Willard in The Personalist 1969 (50), 194-221). On the
personal level, Neo-Kantianism may even be said to have yielded to phenomenology as early as
1912, when Rickert’s son Heinrich Rickert Jr. (who was later killed in World War I) went to
Göttingen to study philosophy with Husserl and Reinach. 
4. “Die reine Phänomenologie, ihr Forschungsgebiet und ihre Methode”, Husserliana XXV, 69.
1
Two Idealisms: Lask and Husserl
Karl Schuhmann and Barry Smith
from: Kant-Studien, 83 (1993), 448–466.
1. Neo-Kantianism and Phenomenology: Antagonism and Convergence
The changes which took place in philosophy at the turn of the present century were
of a quite peculiarly dramatic sort. ‘With the year 1900,’ as Bertrand Russell was
to recall later on, ‘there began a revolt against German idealism’1 which marked not
only the philosophy of the Anglo-Saxon world and of the Austria of Brentano and
Meinong, but also German philosophy itself. The idealist philosophy of Neo-
Kantianism, both in its Freiburg and in its Marburg versions, lost ground –
gradually, but irreversibly – especially after the ‘new movement’ of phenomenology2
began to crystallize around Husserl’s Logical Investigations of 1900/01. This
decline of Neo-Kantianism was becoming clear already before Heidegger’s call to
Marburg in 1923, and indeed the fate of Neo-Kantianism even in its very bastions
was sealed when Husserl took over Heinrich Rickert’s Freiburg chair of philosophy
in 1916.3 Husserl publicly adverted to this fact in his Freiburg inaugural lecture of
1917 when he pointed out, with regard to the new, re-tooled Kantianism of his
predecessor, that ‘in contrast to the secondary productivity of such re-birth
philosophies, it is in most recent times the demand for a wholly radical philosophy
that is forcing itself upon us.’4 This sentiment prevailed not only in
phenomenological quarters. In the same year also the Neo-Kantian Arnold Ruge
conceded in an obituary to Wilhelm Windelband who – together with Emil Lask –

5. Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik 162 (1917), 55.
6. Husserliana XXII, 147 (review, first published in 1897). Concerning Lask, Husserl’s complaint
is echoed by Wilhelm Szilasi, who deplores ‘the rigid abstractness, the want of details and
examples’ in Lask’s work (see his “Das logisch Nackte”, in Phantasie und Erkenntnis, Bern and
Munich 1969, 100). 
7. Published in Logos 2 (1911/12), 26-79.
8. Akos von Pauler, Grundlagen der Philosophie, Berlin and Leipzig 1925, 283.
9. “Zusätze” in his Deutsche Philosophie der Gegenwart, in Scheler’s Gesammelte Werke VII,
Bern and Munich 1973, 329 (see also 312).
10. Sein und Zeit, 218n. 
11. “Emil Lask. Ein Nachruf”, Kant-Studien 22 (1918), 350.
2
had been a colleague of Ruge in Heidelberg, that the time of Neo-Kantian idealism
‘had come to an end.’5
Neo-Kantianism is characterized by three major traits. Firstly, and most
obviously, it is a philosophy that is grafted onto the thinking of Kant. Secondly, it
is ego-centred, which is to say that it attempts to reconstruct all types of cognition,
both everyday and scientific, exclusively in terms of something called ‘subjective
spontaneity’. Thirdly, it is desperately abstract, to a degree that in Neo-Kantian
writings (as Husserl once said of one of Rickert’s works) ‘one does not find one
single example – and also does not miss one.’6 A title like Rickert’s Das Eine, die
Einheit und die Eins7 – almost untranslatable for its abstractness – seems to be
characteristic of the neo-Kantian way of thinking. 
Neo-Kantianism, then, is a philosophy ‘from above’, excelling in speculative
constructions – as opposed to the attitude of patient description which is exemplified
by the phenomenological slogan ‘To the things themselves!’ It is, therefore,
somewhat surprising to read that ‘Windelband’s as well as Rickert’s investigations
are fundamentally phenomenological in character, because rooted in the descriptive
determination of the specific peculiarities of things.’8 One could no doubt dismiss
this affirmation by pointing out that its author, the Hungarian Akos von Pauler, was
in no way an authorized spokesman of phenomenology. But even Max Scheler was
able to remark – this time of Lask, pupil of Rickert and friend of Windelband – that
his works on The Logic of Philosophy and the Doctrine of the Categories (1911)
and on The Doctrine of Judgment (1912) are ‘strongly influenced by
phenomenology’,9 a view that is shared also by Heidegger.10 The suggestion that
Lask is to be ranked with the phenomenologists among the progressive minds of his
day is implied also in Georg Lukács’ conviction that it is the ‘drive toward
concreteness’ that is the guiding force behind Lask’s thinking.11

12. See Husserl’s “Kant und die Idee der Transzendentalphilosophie”, Husserliana VII, 230
(public lecture, given in Freiburg in 1924).
13. Präludien, Tübingen 1884, IV.
14. Iso Kern, Husserl und Kant, The Hague 1964, 50.
15. This may be gathered from the fact that Husserl’s library at the Husserl Archives in Louvain
contains both the dissertation printing and the published edition of Lask’s Ph.D. thesis of 1902
on Fichtes Idealismus und die Geschichte.
16. 1905 was the year in which Lask published his habilitaion thesis on “Rechtsphilosophie”. This
work appeared in the Festschrift for Kuno Fischer, Die Philosophie im Beginn des zwanzigsten
Jahrhunderts, the two volumes of which are to be found in Husserl’s library. It is however more
than unlikely that Husserl should have received the work from Lask.
17. Letter to Husserl of 25 December 1910, quoted in Hanspeter Sommerhäuser, Emil Lask in
der Auseinandersetzung mit Heinrich Rickert (Ph.D. thesis, Zurich), Berlin 1965, 340.
18. Lask’s letters to Husserl are kept at the Husserl Archives under the signature R II Lask. The
earliest piece is a – regrettably now empty – envelope bearing the postmark ‘26.2.10.’ Husserl’s
letters to Lask seem to have been lost.
3
The picture becomes blurred also from the opposite direction when we recall
Husserl’s later view that, though the idea of a Kant renaissance was now certainly
obsolete, there existed none the less ‘a manifest essential affinity’ between Husserl’s
own transcendental phenomenology and the transcendentalism of the Neo-
Kantians.12 Thus, while Lask’s refashioned version of the Neo-Kantian creed was
conceived in the spirit of Windelband’s ‘To understand Kant, is to go beyond
him,’13 phenomenology came gradually to the view that it could not understand itself
except by reflecting upon the – German – historical roots from which it sprang. At
least in its Husserlian version, therefore, phenomenology came to the conclusion that
it had in some sense to go back to Kant, and it is very much to the point that
Husserl’s last great work, the Crisis of European Sciences, has been called his
‘Kantian Meditations.’14
2. Lask and Husserl
However close Husserl’s own relation to other Neo-Kantians may have been, there
is no doubt that Emil Lask was the one who felt closest to Husserl. Already in 1902
Lask seems to have sought to establish contact with the author of the then recently
published Logical Investigations,15 even though he was still a devoted student of
Rickert. And from 1905 on,16 as he himself testifies, Lask began to work Husserlian
ideas into his own philosophy.17 When, in 1908, he published the article “Does a
‘Primacy of Practical Reason’ exist in Logic?”, he mailed an offprint thereof to
Husserl. It is not known exactly when Lask wrote his first letter to Husserl, but the
two were in contact at least from early 1910 on.18 Around Christmas of that year,

19. Lask’s (already mentioned) letter which accompanied the volume is dated 25 December 1910.
The work itself, bearing a handwritten dedication by Lask, is still in Husserl’s library.
20. The copy (with Lask’s dedication) is in Husserl’s library.
21. This transpires from a list of recipients of the work which is kept at the Husserl Archives
under the signature K III 9/56b. We want to thank Professor S. IJsseling, Director of the
Archives, for his kind permission to quote from Husserl’s unpublished materials.
22. Letter at the Husserl Archives (signature R I Rickert).
23. “Heinrich Rickert und Emil Lask”, Zeitschrift für philosophische Forschung 23 (1969), 96n.
Iso Kern’s Husserl und Kant, though bearing the subtitle “An Investigation into Husserl’s
Relation to Kant and Neo-Kantianism”, does not even mention Lask’s name. Also the few
remarks in Reinhard Kynast, Intuitive Erkenntnis, Breslau 1919, 171f., are not really helpful. 
24. The only notable exception is Steven Galt Crowell’s perceptive article “Husserl, Lask and the
Idea of Transcendental Logic”, in Robert Sokolowski (ed.), Edmund Husserl and the
Phenomenological Tradition. Essays in Phenomenology, Washington D.C., 1989, 63-85.
4
Lask sent to Husserl a copy of his newly published Logic of Philosophy.19 In early
1911, Husserl in return mailed to Lask an offprint of his Logos-article “Philosophy
as a Strict Science” which had just appeared. Lask responded on 29 March of the
same year, thanking Husserl especially for the invitation to visit him in Göttingen.
Though he could not go, it is nonetheless important that Lask had caught Husserl’s
interest to a degree that Husserl would have liked to discuss philosophy with him.
On 24 December 1911, Lask wrote to Husserl about the influence the latter had
exerted upon him and at the same time (or shortly afterwards) he mailed Husserl his
Doctrine of Judgment.20 
There is not much known about the further developments of the relations
between the two philosophers. Husserl continued to appreciate highly Lask’s work
and talents. When Husserl’s Ideas I appeared in 1913, Lask was among those to
receive a copy of the work as a gift from its author.21 Lask responded by sending
Husserl an offprint of his 1913 review of Sigwart’s Logic. The most moving
testimony of the high esteem in which Lask was held by Husserl is contained,
however, in the latter’s letter to Rickert of 5 November 1915, written shortly after
Lask had been killed in action: ‘The death of this extraordinary man who – as each
of his writings has shown – strived for the highest philosophical goals, has struck
me deeply. With him there has departed one of the brightest hopes of German
philosophy. I regret very much that I never got to know him personally.’22
Rudolf Malter could still in 1969 remark: ‘A special investigation of Lask’s
relation to Husserl’s phenomenology is completely missing.’23 This statement
remains to some extent true even today,24 and the lacuna will be filled only in part
in the remarks that follow. The same applies to the question of a possible Laskian

25. In addition to what has been said about Husserl’s relation to Lask, one may remark that
Husserl’s library also contains an off- print of Dietrich H. Kerler’s article “Kategorienprobleme.
Eine Studie im Anschluss an Emil Lasks ‘Logik der Philosophie’”, Archiv für systematische
Philosophie 17 (1912), 344-57. Kerler clearly did not present this text to Husserl because he
would have been aware of some special interest in Lask on Husserl’s part, but rather because he
himself was a student of Husserl. Yet it is still worth while to note that a student of Husserl was
ready to treat this topic.
26. References give the volume and page number of teh Herrigel edition of Lask’s works.
27. Lask had also studied Husserl’s article “Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft” of 1911. See
his critical remarks on this text at III, 252.
28. See Ideas I, § 62 (Husserliana III/1, 133).
5
influence, however weak, upon Husserl himself.25 We prefer, rather, to assess the
relation between their respective philosophies considered as abstract bodies of
thought, hoping to establish that there is a sense in which each can throw light on
the other and on the project of idealist philosophy in general. To this end we shall
take both Lask’s Neo-Kantianism and Husserl’s phenomenology in their most
mature versions. Thus we take seriously Lask’s claim that both his Logic of
Philosophy and his Doctrine of Judgment are ‘provisional’ (II, 3)26 and
‘preliminary’ (II, 285), so that they are but preludes to a more comprehensive and
systematic treatment of the problem of logic. It is true that Lask did not live to
publish the work he had in mind. The third volume of Eugen Herrigel’s edition of
the Collected Writings, published in 1924, does however contain a draft by Lask of
his system of logic, together with the still more comprehensive draft of a system of
philosophy in general. It is clearly only on the basis of these latter texts that there
becomes possible an adequate appreciation and evaluation of the place of Lask’s
published writings in his overall thought.
From a properly historical perspective we would of course need to concentrate
on Husserl’s Logical Investigations, the only major work by Husserl with which
Lask was really familiar.27 This, however, would eclipse the fact – crucial in our
present context – that from Ideas I onwards Husserl explicitly interpreted his
phenomenology as a sort of Kantian transcendentalism.28 Husserl from that time on
liked to emphasize what he saw as the fundamental significance of the ‘Copernican
deed [kopernische Tat]’ so dear to Lask: the turn torward the subject. Yet there is
no explicit (or, it seems, implicit) discussion of Ideas I in Lask’s posthumous
writings. And even with respect to the Logical Investigations, Lask was convinced
that, as he himself told Husserl on 24 December 1911, ‘the real discussion of the
work cannot begin until later.’
It should be mentioned, finally, that Lask’s name does not figure at all in
Husserl’s published writings, and even in his manuscripts it occurs only
sporadically. In one of them he refers to ‘Lask’s objection, in the Doctrine of

29. MS D I 13 II/225b. Husserl refers here to pp. 44f. of the first edition of Lask’s Logik der
Philosophie, i.e. to the section “Das Sinnliche als das Nichtgeltende oder Geltungsfremde” (II,
45ff.). But Lask mentions the ‘separation of object and “meaning”’ some pages earlier (II, 41).
Husserl’s note should be seen in the context of Lask’s letter to him of 25 December 1910, where
Lask, too, refers to II, 41 when stating: ‘I do not deny a realm of truth consisting of the sense and
meaning of the propositions and which is distinct from the objects. Only, there exists also a truth
which coincides with what is objectual.’ On II, 41 Lask had said that ‘truly the two realms of
objects and truths about them move together to the single realm of the object which is identical
to the totality of truths.’
30. MS F I 15/4b. The work of Jonas Cohn referred to here is his Voraussetzungen und Ziele des
Erkennens of 1908. Husserl’s manuscript stems from 1911 and was apparently written shortly
after he had received Lask’s work, so that he had not yet had the time to read it.
31. MS B I 7/57a (about 1928). This text, too, is crossed out.
32. MS F II 7/162b.
33. This is suggested by Martin Heidegger in his Zur Sache des Denkens, Tübingen 1969, 83.
34. H. Rickert. Der Gegenstand der Erkenntnis, 4th edition, Tübingen 1921, XIII.From 1915 (the
year of Lask’s death) onwards, the successive editions of this work were dedicated ‘To Emil
6
Categories, to the distinction between meaning and object.’29 But it is characteristic
that he later crossed out this note, and seems to have lost interest in it. Husserl
indeed does not seem to have been well-versed in the Laskian philosophy. This is
also suggested by questions in his manuscripts such as: “Doctrine of the categories:
Whether Cohn’s and Lask’s writings could here be of some help?’30 or: ‘Lask’s
“Logic of Philosophy”: What does he mean by that?”31 Moreover, it is pretty certain
that Husserl never took cognizance of the 1923/24 Herrigel edition of Lask’s
Collected Writings which contains, as was said, his draft of the systems of logic and
philosophy. Perhaps Husserl’s note: ‘auch Lask muß endlich gelesen werden’,32
jotted down in 1923, refers to this edition. At all events it indicates the Husserl had
only a superficial knowledge of Lask’s philosophy )  and it is quite certain that this
was to remain so far the rest of his life.
We prefer, therefore, to discuss Lask’s and Husserl’s respective philosophies,
leaving to others the job of tracing influences. Lask’s thought will be seen to
reinforce some of the tendencies motivating Husserlian phenomenology. Above all,
however, it will prove to run counter to certain lines of Husserlian thinking. As a
matter of fact, Lask’s philosophy is more than a mere mixture of Rickertian and
Husserlian fragments combined in such a way as to make it easily resolvable into
ingredients from either source. Lask maintained an independence of mind with
respect to both Rickert and Husserl, and succeeded in developing a type of thought
which is of a piece and genuinely original. It is therefore no surprise to learn that
Rickert himself felt stimulated by Lask33 and publicly recognized the ‘eminent
significance of this thinker.’34 On the other hand, notwithstanding his

Lask, a dear friend, in faithful memory’.
35. R. Malter, “Heinrich Rickert und Emil Lask”, 90.
36. In equating validity (Gelten) with value (Wert), sense (Sinn) and meaning (Bedeutung), Lask
goes even beyond Rickert’s and Windelband’s equation of validity and value, as also beyond
Husserl’s equation of sense and meaning. Lask’s usage does not, it must be said, meet modern
standards of rigour and precision; thus we have to some extent found it necessary to fight our way
through the surface jungle of his murky terminology, in order to unearth the positive content of
the theories underneath. Note that the concept of validity first came to prominence in the logical
works of Hermann Lotze, one of Windelband’s teachers. According to Lotze, validity is a
character of things that obtain [bestehen] but do not exist. True propositions, for example, are
said to obtain or to ‘have validity’. This view clearly anticipates Lask’s own somewhat broad use
of this term. 
7
acknowledgement of Husserl’s influence upon his thought, Lask retained a certain
distance from Husserl. Thus on 14 November 1912 he wrote to Rickert in defence
of his view that Plato’s philosophy was more than merely the expression of a rather
diffuse enthusiasm for the ideality of theoretical formations. Otherwise, Lask writes,
Plato ‘would probably have been not der göttliche Plato, but merely the author of
Husserl’s Logical Investigations’ (III, 52). Thus Lask in this remark effectively
relegates Husserl to the second rank. Lask, the ‘end-point of Neo-Kantianism,’35 and
Husserl, the starting-point of phenomenology, may thus be considered to be two
poles which both attract and repel each other.
3. Cognition and Its Object
Central to Lask’s philosophy is the thesis
1. that there is an opposition between fact and value,
and
2. that it is ‘experience’ that is the locus of all value or validity or sense or
meaning.36 
Re-expressed in Laskian terms: there is ‘an experienceability of validity, a
possibility of encountering validity in acts of experience’. Such sense or validity
cannot be experienced of itself alone, however: ‘all sense that as a matter of fact can
be found in experience, is tied to factual experiencing’ (III, 67 and 80). The realm
of the ‘factual’, here, or of what happens and is the case, is divided up by Lask into
the field of (psychic) experience as such and of that which is ‘given’ to us (or
‘found’ by us) in experience. 
Within the framework of the Husserlian theory of intentionality this distinction
is of course a truism. Acts, on the one hand, make up the realm of experience as
such )  as opposed to the objects given intentionally in those acts. In Lask, however,
this comes near to a reversal of one of the basic tenets of Neo-Kantianism according
to which nothing may be accepted as ‘given’. Neo-Kantianism rather calls for the
(re-)construction of all objects out of ‘transcendental forms’ and categories seen as

37. For a phenomenological analysis of these notions see Herbert Spiegelberg, “Three Types of
the Given: The Encountered, the Search-found and the Striking”, Husserl Studies 1 (1984),
69-78, which shows that the notion of the given as it occurs in Husserl was developed out of a
Kantian use of this term.
38. Lask continues, characteristically: ‘It is because of this that I am accused by my teacher
Rickert of abandoning Kant and going back in a reactionary way to antiquity.’
39. This conception, as well as Lask’s terminology of being and non-being (II, 6f.), may call to
mind Sartre’s Being and Nothingness. Lask’s non-being is however not consciousness or
subjectivity but rather the objective realm of meaning and truth.
8
residing in ‘pure consciousness’ or ‘consciousness-in-general’. Lask was indeed
aware of the fact that, by introducing into Neo-Kantian constructivism the notion of
the given or found,37 he was in some sense stepping outside the Neo-Kantian
project. On 24 December 1911 he wrote to Husserl: ‘When mentioning your
influence upon me as to my view concerning the relation between subject and
object, I may perhaps specify this by hinting at the fact that I make the type of
intentionality you defend take the place of all [Neo-Kantian] notions of
consciousness-in-general.’38 The acceptance of intentionality thus furnishes a first
common ground shared by Lask and Husserl.
Factuality, then, has two sides, a psychical and (what for Lask is) a physical.
Further, no matter whether on the side of psychical experience or on the side of its
physical objects, what is factual is, Lask says, always empirical and spatiotemporal
in nature. He talks of it as of a ‘mass’ of ‘being’, or of a ‘psychophysical mass’ (II,
7), i.e. as something which, in and of itself, lacks form and articulation. 
On the other hand, however, we have the non-factual realm of sense, meaning
and truth, i.e. all types of ‘validity’. Compared with factual being, i.e. with what is
spatio-temporal, this realm of ideal validity must be said to be a kind of non-being.
It is, from Lask’s point of view, something like a halo or subtle ether surrounding
the opaqueness of what is.39 Lask does not, however, defend a two worlds theory
in which the sensible world of being and the suprasensible world of validity would
dispose of equal rights. To him, the two realms are rather two incomplete elements
which stand to each other as the ‘material’ on the one hand - an underlying stuff,
substrate or carrier of properties - to an accidental form or shape or structure on the
other. The two elements together make up just one world, i.e. precisely that world
which is given in experience.
What is given in experience is therefore more than mere factuality. But it is never
less than factuality, for transparence or intelligibility cannot exist except as tied to
some (irrational) matter. There exists no Platonic realm of separable and
self-sufficient ideas. All forms are ‘enclitic’ (II, 93), and validity obtains only as
something valid with regard to a prior material. This does not imply that – as
Renaissance naturalism would have it – matter would become the ‘mother of forms’.
Validity is referred, intrinsically, to underlying material elements; but it comes to the

40. See Franz Brentano, Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkt, Leipzig 1874, 10ff. The
definite traces of Brentanism in Lask’s thinking cannot, unfortunately, be pursued in this context.
41. Cf. Friedrich Kreis, “Zu Lasks Logik der Philosophie”, Logos 10 (1921/22), 234.
42. H. Sommerhäuser, Emil Lask in der Auseinandersetzung mit Heinrich Rickert, 135. Validity
(as irreducible to the subject) must be said to be pre-given, too. Hence one may also speak of ‘the
experience of form as form’ in Lask (cf. Tercio Sampaio Ferraz Jr., Die Zweidimensionalität des
Rechts als Voraussetzung für den Methodendualismus von Emil Lask, Meisenheim am Glan 1968,
112 and 129) – a suggestion which may recall Husserl’s notion of categorial intuition. In order
to avoid misleading Platonizing interpretations, however, it would be more correct to say that
‘validity gains its character of being a norm, a demand or an “ought”, only in confrontation with
the subject’ (Hanspeter Sommerhäuser, “Emil Lask 1875-1915", Zeitschrift für philosophische
Forschung 21 (1967), 142).
43. Geschichte der Philosophie, Tübingen and Leipzig 1900, 463n.
9
fore only where there are subjects who turn towards this underlying stuff (just as a
comet develops its coma only when approaching the sun). The bearer of experience
– which Lask refers to as ‘subjectivity’ – is therefore ‘the scene where the
actualization of objectively valid content takes place’ (III, 96). On the other hand,
however, subjectivity can serve as such only insofar as it is itself real and hence
belongs to the totality of materials to which validity relates. Thus it is only as
founded upon the total mass of being, consisting of both psychical and physical
‘phenomena’ in Brentano’s sense,40 that sense and value can exist.
Lask thereby supplies the matter of factuality with a prominence otherwise
unheard of in Neo-Kantian thought.41 On the other hand, however, he would oppose
all attempts to reduce forms to matter. This applies not merely to the forms of
objects, but to the forms of subjects, also. Thus Lask will not try to convert sense
or meaning into mere reflections or products of our real psychic acts. He
wholeheartedly embraces Husserl’s anti-psychologism, conceiving Husserl’s chief
merit as lying in the fact that he had ‘insisted on the separability of sense from the
real structures’ of the acts which underlie it (II, 425; cf. also II, 292). It is, therefore,
correct to maintain that for Lask ‘the subject receives that which is valid from the
side of the realm of objects. The subject depends upon that which is valid, while
validity remains what it is independently of the subject.’42 Sense or validity are
always detachable from empirical acts. But now if, as according to Windelband’s
famous phrase, idealism is to be defined as ‘the dissolution of being into processes
of consciousness,’43 then at least in so far as the mind-independence of truth,
meaning and validity is concerned, Lask must be called a realist, and this in
contradistinction to Neo-Kantianism in general.
Lask, it is true, sets out from the thesis of the sheer givenness of validity in
experiencing acts. But this is to say only that it is impossible to gain access to sense
and truth apart from the factual experience of given matters or stuffs. Now the

44. Compare III, 253 with Met., 1072 b 21.
45. Hartmut Rosshoff, Emil Lask als Lehrer von Georg Luka’cs, Bonn 1975, 61. 
46. Cf. Nietzsche’s Götzendämmerung, section entitled “How the ‘True World’ Became a Fable”.
10
omnipresence of validity obtains for the very same reason that matter is omnipresent
too. Validity is a necessary element of the objective side of all intentionality, not
something that is created by grace of the subject. For nothing can be given unless
it be subsumed under a concept or category and understood as a this or a that. This
‘transsubjectivity’ of sense is presupposed in all experience (III, 110; the term is
taken over by Lask from Johannes Volkelt). Sense taken in itself is thus incomplete
and involves of necessity some material which underlies it. The latter is nevertheless
only the substrate of validity, not a cause producing it. Sense is dependent upon the
psychophysical mass, but at the same time cannot be reduced to it.
On this general level, Lask and Husserl agree as to the basic function and nature
of intentionality. Consciousness is neither its own object, nor is it confined to its
own immanent contents, ideas or images. On the contrary, it ‘touches’ reality, as
Lask (using an Aristotelian notion) likes to put it.44 But it is not exhausted by the
transcendent object, either. To reach out to the things is also to be at a distance from
them, and to grasp them is also, in a certain sense, to recede from them.
Intentionality holds open the difference between two poles of equal weight, and it
is precisely thanks to this difference that consciousness has the power to transcend
the given individual thing and to embrace also the generalities of sense or meaning.
In this way, and in virtue of the fact that the subject’s recedes from the object, there
is introduced into the world of matter what one might call ‘intelligible order’, order
qua capacity to be taken up into consciousness or qua rationality of structure. The
‘panarchy of logos’ so vigorously defended by Lask (II, 133; III, 251), consists
more precisely in this: that consciousness in fact hits the object, but never coincides
with it. The subject is immersed in the world of validity, and objects become
phenomena through the imposition of form. ‘The last and immediate datum is for us
sense that is valid for or in respect of subjectivity’ (III, 91). It is no doubt correct to
conclude from this that for Lask – as also for Husserlian phenomenology – ‘there
exists nothing but a phenomenal world – no thing in itself.’45 But one could even go
one step further and affirm, in a style not alien to Nietzsche,46 that in abolishing the
seemingly ‘true’ world of the in itself, Lask has abolished also the seemingly merely
phenomenal world of the ‘objects for us’. 
This leads to an important qualification of Husserl’s thesis that all intentional
acts are governed by some sort of correlation between, in Husserl’s terms, the noetic
and noematic structures, the structures of acts and the structures of intended objects.
According to the Husserl of Ideas I, the spatiotemporal world has a ‘merely

47. Husserliana III/1, 106.
48. Cf. III, 186. See Marianne Weber, Max Weber. Ein Lebensbild, Heidelberg 1950, 528-530.
49. Cf. Husserliana III/1, 226f.
11
intentional being’ and thus depends on our consciousness.47 To this there
corresponds at least in part Lask’s doctrine that form (i.e. the ‘sense’ of things)
‘needs to lean upon’ the subject (II, 94 and III, 111; this is precisely the ‘enclitic’
character of form mentioned above). The sphere of validity is not self-contained but
rather ‘points beyond itself’ (II, 44); it is ‘tied to a basis which is the subject’ (II,
426). Lask and Husserl are up to this point in agreement. Both conceive the relation
between the subject and the world in a dualistic way. But subjectivity, for the author
of Ideas I, is the original locus of the constitution not only of any putative external
reality but of sense or meaning, too. Consciousness is hereby conceived after the
manner of a Cartesian substance as a self-sufficient realm in its own right. For Lask,
on the other hand, ‘the only self-sufficient “world” is the domain of being’ (II, 94),
i.e. the psychophysical mass to which all meaning must refer. Lask, therefore,
pursues ‘a strictly objectivistic tendency’ (III, 91). He defends a ‘standpoint of
transcendence’ (II, 414), conceiving the psychical mass as transcending itself both
in the direction of reality and in the direction of meaning or sense. He thereby rejects
not only the role played by subjectivity in Neo-Kantianism but also Husserl’s notion
of a subjectivity as the locus of all constitution of objects. There is a sense, indeed,
in which Lask may be said to pay more attention than either Husserl or the Neo-
Kantians to the fact that there are many egos, that the world is a public world out
there, so that each individual subject would transcend itself also in the direction of
the world as well as of other subjects (a notion which may reflect the close relations
Lask enjoyed with his colleague Max Weber in Heidelberg).48 
As we have seen, both Lask and the Husserl of Ideas I subscribe to the
Copernican turn brought about by Kant. Both see the world qua meaningful as being
in some sense dependent on the subject. But the subject, for Husserl, acquires an
ontological primacy to the extent that its very being is understood as something
absolute. For Lask, in contrast, Copernicanism means only a priority of the subject
from an epistemological point of view. In transcending ourselves toward the world,
real things are (somehow) disclosed, and this givenness of what is real cannot be
dissolved into constellations of meaning or meaning-bestowal, as it can for Husserl.
In this respect Husserl is without doubt a more orthodox Kantian than Lask.
Husserl’s method consists in stripping experience of all higher-level ingredients until
one arrives at the bare Kantian manifold of hyletic data which make sense only
insofar as they are ‘animated’ in meaning-bestowing acts.49 Lask, in contrast, when
turning to the world of things, does so in order to keep hold of these very things
themselves. What he wants to do is ‘to think through the Copernican doctrine to the
end, to immerse validity and value precisely into the objects themselves’ (II, 389).

50. Ibid., 106.
51. Cf. Eugen Herrigel, “Emil Lasks Wertsystem”, Logos 12 (1923/24), 102, and H.
Sommerhäuser, Emil Lask in der Auseinandersetzung mit Heinrich Rickert, 154. This was, as has
been mentioned above (n. 38), also Rickert’s view.
52. Rickert, Der Gegenstand der Erkenntnis, 20. See II, 414n.
12
Husserl starts, it is true, with consciousness in the ‘natural attitude’, with that
consciousness which takes for granted the existence of an independent world. He
goes on, however, to point out that the relation of this natural consciousness to the
world is in fact derivative, resting on a deeper soil of constituting acts. The result
of Husserl’s efforts is, therefore, in conflict with that very natural consciousness
with which he began. This turnabout is achieved by means of the so-called
‘transcendental reduction’, the upshot of which is the thesis that our ‘ordinary talk
of being’ is to be reversed in order to make room for its very opposite.50 In
Husserl’s view, it is not reality but consciousness which ‘is’ in the fullest sense of
the term. 
In this, too, he is following Kant’s original doctrine (at least in some degree).
Kant’s philosophy has been judged by his successors to be incoherent in that it does
not show how empirical and transcendental notions hang together. Hence it does not
show, either, how one is to effect a transition from the ordinary world-view to the
world view of philosophy. Husserl tried to remedy this by opening up various
‘paths’ that would lead from natural consciousness to the realm of the
transcendental. Lask, too, feels the necessity ‘to apply Kantianism once more to
itself’ (II, 90). He does not, however, look around for some means by which to
bridge the supposed gap. Rather, he prefers to show the inadequacy of the very
terms in which the problem is posed. He first of all transfers some of the so-called
subjective forms and categories to the side of the object, so that they become
conditions for our cognitive access to the world. He then shows that on this basis
there is no longer any need to assume either things-in-themselves or a transcendental
subjectivity in order to explain our everyday experience of the world and of
ourselves.
Lask’s interpreters were eager to characterize this procedure as implying a
relapse into pre-Kantian dogmatism.51 One should remark, however, that Lask’s
approach is ‘transcendental’, at least in Rickert’s usage, which is to say that ‘it
searches after the transcendent objects which in the last instance are the standard of
cognition.’52 But still more important is the fact that cognition for Lask – and this is
a shamefacedly Neo-Kantian trait – is no affair of our passively mirroring an
objectively existing world; it is no ‘picturing’, as he himself prefers to put it. Rather,
in dealing with sense and truth, consciousness has a certain creative or productive
role to play. Direct experience in the sense of sensation or perception does indeed
have things given to it. But it does not simply take in things in their full and massive

53. A more detailed account of Lask’s doctrine of judgment would have to take into account the
various levels of opposites he distinguishes (hitting and missing the object, conformity and
contrariety to truth, etc.). However, with the sole exception of Lask’s notion of judgmental sense,
these distinctions play no significant role in a comparison of his thought with that of Husserl.
13
givenness, as if subjectivity were a neutral and indifferent receptacle in which to
store a pristine world. Cognition is not a mere intuitive having of things. Certainly
if it is to be of things, then it must presuppose some intuitive givenness as its
indispensable first substrate. But merely to be struck by things is not yet to
understand them (a golf-ball, too, may be struck by certain things). Cognition has
to go beyond sensation. It is essentially tied to the realm of judgment, of our actively
deciding about, predicating determinations of, the things. And the judgment
correspondingly does not bear upon the thing in its undifferentiated givenness.
Rather, it refers to it qua intended. 
How, then, are we to understand the contribution of subjectivity to the process
which leads from experience to cognition? We can say, roughly, that it consists in
the adopting or selecting of some point of view from which to apprehend the thing
– in such a way that the latter will become decomposed or split apart into a manifold
of distinct aspects, properties, features. The object of cognition is accordingly no
longer the thing as it was originally given to sensation, but the thing as split apart
into a plurality of aspects or properties, all of which can be said to have or carry
meaning. The judgment, correspondingly, is differentiated into its own correlative
elements of subject, predicate, and the like.53 The content of the judging act is ‘an
antagonistically divided sense’ (II, 306) which contains both the categorial forms
introduced by the cognizing subject and the pre-given and experienced materials to
which these forms have been applied. The proper object of cognition is a product
brought forth from the transcendent material that is given in sensation through a
process of structuring or articulation. And this process consists in the imposition of
forms which fit this material precisely and raise it thereby to the level of validity.
Sense or meaning, therefore, is not radically and rigorously transcendent to
subjectivity as is the object of sensation. The world to which judgments refer is no
longer the transcendent realm of things as experienced, but rather a layer of
‘quasi-transcendence’ founded thereon (II, 421). 
Seen from the phenomenologist’s perspective, this will entail two widely
diverging consequences. Husserl and Lask agree, first of all, as to the absolutely
primary character of direct sensory givenness. This original mode of awareness is
presupposed in all intentional acts. All other types of conscious activity must be
derivative, because their constructs must draw from this pre-given fundament.
Consciousness, that is, is structured in such a way that a secondary level is built up
on a more original one. And this implies a similar distinction on the side of the
objects. Here, too, we have a fundamental layer which is, as Lask expresses it, ‘truly
transcendent’ to the subject experiencing it (II, 425). Lask goes on to describe this

54. In one place Lask also speaks of the ‘manifoldness’ of the primary region (II, 401). This is
obviously an allusion to, or better, a tilting at, Kant. In Kant, sensation yields a chaos of qualities
which is a sheer manifold, a buzzing confusion. In Lask, however, sense-experience refers to
unitary objects which are already in themselves complete. Multiplicity arises only in the subject’s
analysis of the given. Where in Kant the way from sensation to reason leads teleogically from a
manifold to the uniform idea, in Lask it goes from oppositionlessness to oppositionality, from
what is unitary to what is split apart into a multiplicity of aspects.
55. As is attested, e.g., by his posthumously edited course of lectures on Plato (III, 1-56) and by
the extensive discussion of Aristotle in his published writtings (e.g., II, 223ff. and 317ff.), Lask
was ‘intimately familiar with the Greeks’ (E. Herrigel, “Vorwort des Herausgebers” in I, XVII).
He was, above all, one of the few thinkers of his time to have made a close study of Plotinus (see
II, 235-240), whose Enneads he had read in the Creuzer and Moser edition of 1835 (see the
reference to this edition in II, 20n.). Lask’s understanding of Plotinus owed much to Eduard von
Hartmann (II, 223n. and 237n.). It should also be noted that the motto to the original edition of
Die Logik der Philosophie (Tübingen 1911) – regrettably omitted in the Gesammelte Schriften
– is drawn from Plotinus. 
14
fundamental layer as the domain of ‘oppositionlessness’ or ‘transoppositionality’54
(terms close to the thought of Plotinus55) – in contradistinction to the level of
judgment, which is characterized by multiformity and difference. The world of
transcendent things is accessible only in acts of ‘plain dedication’ or ‘Hingabe’ (II,
396) in which the subject is ‘given away’ to the world. But where, in Husserl, a
painstaking description of these lower-order acts and their correlates, i.e. a
phenomenology of perception, is an indispensable prerequisite for the understanding
of the emergence of higher-order acts, Lask skips any analysis of this fundamental
sphere. He focuses exclusively on the doctrine of judgment and of categories, caring
not a hoot about the material world of things. Thus Husserl and Lask hold in
principle the same view about the relation between the direct and indirect types of
awareness of the world, but they differ in their emphases as concerns the respective
terms of this relation. Husserlian phenomenology may therefore be understood as
furnishing here a necessary supplement to the Laskian type of thought.
If, however, we look more closely at the nature of the objective correlates of our
cognitive acts, then the two philosophers will be seen to differ greatly, not merely
in their emphases but in their conclusions. For Husserl, the direct object of judgment
is a ‘Sachverhalt’ or state of affairs, something ontologically ‘positive’ in the sense
that it is an entity in its own right and does not point beyond itself in the manner of
a mere sign or proxy for something else. It has an irreducible being of its own.
States of affairs may in some sense involve real things as their members or
fundaments. Moreover, one and the same state of affairs may be grasped by
different people in different acts and is, in this sense, repeatable. States of affairs
thereby resemble real things which can also be grasped in a multitude of acts and
by different perceivers on different occasions. This very association between things
and states of affairs is, however, rejected out of hand by Lask (II, 391f.). The object

56. The literature on Lask deals in the main either with his logical works or with his philosophy
of law. The notion of life, though central in his posthumous writings, has not thus far been treated.
This is all the more regrettable as this idea (with its Diltheyan ring) seems to furnish the
framework for an adequate understanding also of Lask’s early works. It is therefore a real loss
that Lask could not work out his paper on “Contemplation and Life” (mentioned by Herrigel in
his “Vorwort” in I, XX). In what follows, however, only a few details will be selected for the
purposes of a comparison with Husserl.
15
of judgment, as Lask conceives it, is something that must be sharply distinguished
from any thing of perception. For a sense involves of necessity distinction and
multiplicity, where things present themselves in every case in unitary fashion. In
order to raise the thing to the level of the judgment, the subject must rework and
reshape it – which will mean that cognition can relate to the thing as such only in an
indirect way. The thing in its condition of undisturbed oppositionlessness remains,
it is true, the only standard by which to evaluate the judgment with respect to its
adequacy and correctness. But the judgment itself refers directly only to certain
fragments of sense carved out of the full original datum. The world of
judgment-sense and truth, then, is a collection of ‘imitations holding a secondary
position’. It is cut apart from the plain world of real things by what Lask calls a
‘chasm of artificiality and imagery’ (II, 352f.).
This implies that cognition is a kind of violence exerted upon the given. It breaks
up the thing encountered, putting it beyond the reach of immediate ‘dedication’.
From this, however, it follows that the world of meaning results from a mutilation
of the contents of immediate experience. Consciousness in its active phase is
accordingly by no means truly productive or creative, but rather destructive. ‘It is
not the intact objects which become the ‘matter’ for the ‘form’ of judgment; what
enters into the judgment is only their dismembered and isolated elements’ (II, 375).
This is to reverse all Platonizing views of cognition, i.e. of the general scheme of an
ideality preceding and somehow serving as the standard for reality. In a way similar
to British empiricism, the realm of ‘ideas’ for Lask is secondary and derivative; it
rests on something comparable to Humean ‘impressions’. But the copies and
pictures are not exact renderings of the original thing. They result, rather, from its
dispersion into a myriad of fragments of sense or meaning which can never be
combined in a way which would reconstitute the unity of the thing. The spontaneity
of consciousness so important for Kant consists only in making us irretrievably lose
the freshness and vivacity of perception. And the will to cognition is therefore
irrevocably ‘a negative faculty of subjectivity’ (II, 418), a faculty which leads to an
atomization of the original object into isolated bits and pieces.
4. Cognition and Life56
The acts discussed thus far were all of the theoretical sort, and in them there became
constituted theoretical objects – objects of judgment and cognition. The theoretical

16
process, as Lask conceives it, is set in motion by a will to control and dominate the
world; yet its first achievement is a detached looking at things and an inhibition of
the drive to manipulate them. This is not as paradoxical as might at first appear. For
a dispassionate investigation of the objective nature and properties of things will in
the long run facilitate our control and dominion over them. In his later thinking,
however, Lask came to see this theoretical attitude as something set apart from our
ordinary modes of existence. With Husserl, he saw that it could be characterized
most effectively as the way in which an impartial and uninvolved spectator would
behave towards the world. Pure theory is ‘contemplation’ (Lask) or ‘meditation’
(Husserl), and is just one of a host of ways in which a subject may legitimately
function and express himself. It is in this very power to shape itself and to choose
its own actualizations that conscious life consists. Now life in general is the
performance of acts not only with regard to, but also in interaction with, things.
Theoretical behaviour, then, is of a very peculiar type in that it at least temporarily
suspends this interaction. Its function is therefore comparable to that of a pause in
a piece of music. Theory may be said to be action postponed (or for that reason
anticipated); it is life presently repressing itself. It is therefore a way in which the
life itself may be ‘crowded out of life’ [aus dem Leben abgedrängt] (III, 219). 
The objects of the theorizing attitude are as it were stripped of their momentum
and weight; they lose their active powers, their relevance for life. ‘The living
subjectivity establishes itself as a contemplative subjectivity, and thereby creates a
region of shadows, an impersonal region of objects’ (III, 179). Plato’s ‘true world’,
the world of ideas, is thus unveiled once more as a Homeric realm of the dead. It is
an artefact, and its phenomena are but phantoms. The world of objectivity is ‘an
artificially floating region’ (III, 231), filled with ‘artificial formations which
themselves are not alive’ (III, 228). This world is in fact a netherworld, a relic and
faint memory of our original life.
The world in which real life is experienced ‘is never pure nature’ (III, 241), i.e.
nature as objectified in natural science. Nature as experienced is rather a totality of
things in processes of interaction. Accordingly, any subject which would be the
counterpart of a world reduced to pure nature could be nothing better than a reduced
subject, an eye out of any connection with a hand, a ghastly Cartesian thinking being
ungraspable in, and therefore absent from, the world of everday experience. This
subjectivity is ‘constituted’ out of the living subject in an exclusively negative way.
It is brought about not by specific acts or actions, but precisely through an
abstention therefrom. It results from a ‘fall out of the fullness of life’ (III, 232).
Much as this may at first sight sound anti-theoretical and even anti-scientific, it
has nevertheless some interesting parallels in Husserl, who of course unwaveringly
propagated the ideal of strict science (an ideal which, as he thought, was to be
fulfilled only via his ‘phenomenology’). For Husserl, too, the exercise of scientific
reason presupposes a radical inhibition of the natural life-process, an epoché with
regard to all those lazy positings of the world of the natural attitude. The subjectivity

57. Ideas I, § 53 (Husserliana III/1, 68). Husserl’s considerations in Ideas I leading up to this
result, start explicitly from what he calls our ‘natural life’ (ibid., 56).
58. Manfred Sommer, Lebenswelt und Zeitbewußtsein, Frankfurt am Main 1990, 20 correctly
underlines the fact that the later Husserl’s turn to the Lebenswelt in fact takes up one of the
earliest themes of his though, present as early as 1893.
59. The fact that transcendental reflection upon natural life in its totality is just one minor and
peripheral event in the network of activities which together make up this natural life, leads to
intricate speculations in Husserl’s later thought. For a perceptive study of these problems see
Ronald Bruzina, “The Enworlding (Verweltlichung) of Transcendental Phenomenological
Reflection”, Husserl Studies 3 (1986), 3-29.
60. Husserliana VI, 467 (MS of 1936).
61. Ibid., 113.
62. See ibid., 20-60.
63. Lask took over the notion of the ‘disenchanted world’ from the article “Über einige
Kategorien der verstehenden Soziologie”, Logos 4 (1913), 258, of his Heidelberg colleague Max
Weber.
17
which is reached by this device is the ‘residue’ of an elimination of all functions
which refer to this natural world or are performed within it.57 This stage Husserl
reaches already in Ideas I. It is only much later in his career, in fact in the thirties,
that Husserl also pays full attention to the other side of this coin, viz. to the
complementary fact that for the very reasons just mentioned the whole business of
cognition must have a ‘seat in life’ from whence it is undertaken and sustained.58
This holds for theoretical cognition both in its ‘naive’ form, which leads to science
as normally conceived, and also in its radicalized version which leads to
phenomenology.59 Human life as such is practical, Husserl comes to realize,60 and
one of the means by which it puts itself into practice is the theoretical attitude which
yields objective science.
As in Lask, so also in Husserl, theorizing activity is a special way in which
human life shapes itself. It is part of the historical development of man, and both
thinkers consider ‘theoretical practice to be something peculiar and historically
late’.61 Its success is due, in part at least, to its deliberately overlooking and ignoring
certain aspects of the everyday world. Theory, as Lask conceives it, springs from
the will to give up the attitude of ‘dedication’ in favour of that of control over an
‘emptied’ or deplenished universe. According to Husserl, this process was set in
train with Galileo’s conception of an idealized nature in which the qualities of
experience could be mathematicized.62 In a comparable way Lask states that ‘the
natural science of modern times, with its “nature” deprived of all mystique, was
established after the time of the Renaissance’ (III, 242).63 Moreover, both Husserl
and Lask are convinced that the object of natural science is not a world of

64. See Husserliana VI, 4.
65. Already Fichte, the subject of Lask’s first major study, had remarked: ‘To live is, properly
speaking, not to philosophize; to philosophize is, properly speaking, not to live’
(Rückerinnerungen, Antworten, Fragen, No. 8). This Fichtean factor pervades Lask’s philosophy
from its inception to its mature phase. The third chapter of Lask’s Ph.D. thesis on Fichte is
entitled “Philosophy and Life” (I, 160ff.), and the theme of the ‘opposition between life and
cognition’ (II, 87), and therefore of the irrationality of ‘fact’, is present also in Lask’s The Logic
of Philosophy. Fichte’s influence upon Lask has however not thus far been investigated. 
66. See, e.g., Husserliana III/2, 640: ‘Prior to all objectivation there exists already a life, and
objectivation itself is a new form of pure life.’
18
theoretical entities which would form the canvas underlying and supporting the
variegated world of experience. Rather, science bears upon an emptied world, a
world from which life has been withdrawn. A certain will to superficiality and
shallowness – which in Husserl’s view becomes manifest in the exclusion from
theoretical science of all questions about the value and significance of life64 – is part
and parcel of the project of attaining objectively valid knowledge.
Theory comes into being where life has grown numb. A paralyzed gaze brings
forth a ‘castrated and blasé sort of knowing’ (III, 240). It is clear that this Laskian
diagnosis seems to imply an important shortfall in his own philosophy. For how, and
in the name of what, could one devise a coherent theoretical argument to the effect
that cognition would be nothing but the pale copy of life? Would not such an
argument fall prey to its very success? It is tempting to avoid this pitfall along
Heideggerian lines, i.e. by imputing to science the devastating effects of objectivism
(and its various technological progeny), while reserving for philosophy questions
about the sense of Sein and Dasein. But unlike Heidegger (and, indeed, the later
Husserl), Lask doubts whether the redemption of mankind from spectres it has itself
invoked is part of the historical mission of philosophy. If philosophical thought is
to be coherent and meaningful at all, it has no choice but to be scientific, so that in
this respect it in no way rises above the other sciences. Natural science and
systematic philosophy are equally ‘the most remote from life’ (III, 286).65 Already
Plato’s philosophy could become established only through a ‘break with ordinary
consciousness’ (III, 4). And one may safely add that this still holds for Husserl’s
‘transcendental phenomenology’.
Is, then, the philosopher’s reflection upon theoretical activity to be unmasked as
a kind of shadow-boxing? For an answer to this question, Lask turns once more to
the already established fact that all cognition proceeds from life.66 Life is the
pre-given horizon which no cognition can ever transcend. Even a life that is ‘fixed’
(Lask) or ‘parenthesized’ (Husserl) is still, for all that, a life. Theory is, to be sure,
a way of ‘merely picturing the world’. But one must realize that ‘the mirror is indeed
part of that real process’ which it mirrors (III, 187). Objective cognition is itself an
activity, and as such interferes with the world; but in contradistinction to all other

67. S. G. Crowell (“Husserl, Lask and the Idea of Transcendental Logic”, 77) criticizes Lask’s
objectivism for leaving the ‘concept of the (transcendent) object’ unclarified, pointing instead to
Husserl’s attempt to understand the transcendence of the object in terms of the ‘sphere of
transcendental “immanence”’ (ibid., 82). We, however, would prefer to criticize precisely the
unclarified notion of immanence (and in this respect Crowell’s own use of inverted commas are
significant). Crowell claims that such a ‘reduction to the sphere of immanence, to transcendental
subjectivity in Husserl’s sense’ would ‘in no way “bracket” the object itself’. Yet it is highly
revealing that Crowell is left, in the end, not with the object itself but with no more than an ‘object
as meaning’ (ibid., 84) )  where he himself has gone out of his way to show that the sphere of
meaning is by no means identical to the sphere of transcendent objects.
68. This calls to mind once more a basic tenet of Dilthey’s thought.
19
types of practice it ‘leaves the universe as it is’ (III, 185); it is the sustained effort
to inhibit the spontaneous and unreflective course of life. Science, now, is the result
of simply performing actions of this exceptional, contemplative sort; the peculiar
task of philosophy, on the other hand, is to elucidate the roots of the scientist’s
activity in human practice in general. Philosophy thus mediates between life as the
specific activity of the scientist, barring the way to straightforward practice, and life
qua human experience as such.
This side of Lask’s philosophy, too, has some affinity with Husserl’s thought,
since for Husserl it is the job of First Philosophy (as he calls it) to ground all
sciences in that common soil which is subjective life. But when it comes to
determining the nature of this ‘life’, Lask and Husserl differ sharply. In Husserl, it
consists in the ‘self-actualization’ of a transcendental subjectivity: that the latter
becomes worldly is just one aspect of its immanent ‘unfolding’.67 In Lask, on the
contrary, mundane life is the ultimate horizon in which cognitive as well as practical
life is forever enmeshed.68 Cognition may focus either upon part of what presents
itself in the world of life – and then we deal with science – or else upon life and the
life-world in its totality, which is the philosopher’s affair. It is in this idea of the
disclosedness and transparency of life to itself that there consists the idealist strain
in Lask’s philosophy. But there is in practice no way to transcend this life, either
cognitively or otherwise – a thesis which characterizes his realism.
According to Lask, philosophy had from its very beginnings in Plato’s time
advocated a two worlds theory. In his own early writings Lask had to some extent
still accepted this traditional dual scheme, though he toned it down by claiming no
more than a two elements theory concerning being and validity (or matter and form).
Nevertheless, as he later puts it, ‘the former type of my philosophy was divisive,
too’ (III, 283). In his later thought, however, Lask probed into the common
fundament of sensorily given matter and logical or judgmental form, thus arriving
at the processes of interaction and interwovenness of the subject and its world which
in their totality constitute life. Lask’s self-criticism implies in fact a critique of
philosophical reason in general as it had developed out of Plato. And it therefore
applies also to that specific version of the two worlds scheme which is present in

69. Husserliana III/1, 105. 
20
Husserl’s thinking. Transcendental phenomenology indeed asserts the existence of
an ‘abyss of sense’ between consciousness and reality.69 This conception could,
when rigorously pursued, lead in the extreme case to the idea of a reality devoid of
all sense and intelligibility, and correspondingly to that of a sense-bestowing
subjectivity entirely out of contact with the world of reality. A phenomenological
ontology along Sartrean lines could be interpreted as coming close to a view of this
sort, which is not completely alien to Husserl’s own. In Lask, on the other hand,
such stories are given no chance to take a hold. On the one hand ‘a purely
atheoretical behaviour is’, as he affirms, ‘but an abstract notion’ (II, 186), yet the
idea of a purely theoretical subjectivity is for the same reasons an abstraction too.
On the other hand, a life not illuminated by some type of cognition would be as
contradictory as is a cognition setting out from principles which are intrinsically
alien to life. The world of things is neither completely opaque, nor can it borrow its
light from some ‘place beyond heaven’ (as Plato supposed). The multifaceted
process of a psychic subject’s behaviour in its world is not only the starting-point
of cognition and philosophy, it is also the last word.
‘Essential to philosophy is only its cognitive character; all the rest it shares with the
sphere of life’ (II, 199). The elucidation of this life is the goal of philosophy as Lask
conceives it in his later thought. Husserl’s phenomenology of perception and of the
life-world no doubt goes some way towards living up to this goal, but it is
fortunately not the job of this paper to determine precisely how far it goes.

