READING THE CONSTELLATION: EUOORA WELTY'S PATTERNS 
OF 
TIME, CULTURE, AND MEMORY 
by 
BARBARA J. SYLVESTER 
B.A., Florence State College, 1959 
M.A., Kent State University, 1960 
A THESIS SUBMITTED IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF 
THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE OF 
DOCTOR OF PHIILOSOPHY 
in 
THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
(Department of English) 
We accept this thesis as conforming 
to the required standard 
THE UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA 
September 1997 
©Barbara J. Sylvester, 1997 

In presenting this thesis in partial fulfilment of the requirements for an advanced 
degree at the University of British Columbia, I agree that the Library shall make it 
freely available for reference and study. I further agree that permission for extensive 
copying of this thesis for scholarly purposes may be granted by the head of my 
department 
or 
by 
his 
or 
her 
representatives. 
It 
is 
understood 
that 
copying 
or 
publication of this thesis for financial gain shall not be allowed without my written 
permission. 
Department of 
^s^L^A/«9 
h 
The University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, Canada 
Date VbeCje^Ln^ 
/ £ . 
A?<? 7 
DE-6 (2/88) 

ABSTRACT 
Eudora Welty's full stature in world literature is not 
clear because her canon has not yet been seen as unified by an 
advertent thematic structure. This oversight stems in part 
from the fact that critics, seeing her regional detail as an 
end rather than a means, neglected Lewis Simpson's insistence 
that Welty is a modernist writer working, like Faulkner, in 
the tradition of Proust, Joyce, and Eliot. By applying a 
modernist paradigm to several major volumes of her fiction, I 
have traced consistent, discernible patterns that can be 
communicated in classrooms as well as in scholarly 
discussions. Welty focuses primarily on major transitional 
eras in national history that particularly illustrate the 
inevitable disintegration of familiar cultures. Partly by 
employing Bakhtin's concept of chronotopes, I show that each 
era she portrays is systematically intersected by parallel 
cultures of other eras and locales, evoked by allusions to 
masterpieces of past art works, to historical similarities, 
and to myths that gave meaning to human life in times of 
shared belief. The juxtapositions of different cultures 
comment on a crucial, universal challenge for all humans: 
to accept time's mutability without evasion or retreat. The 
fragments of art form a unifying collage, reminding readers of 
art's importance in sustaining human life by providing codes 
for emotional and spiritual survival of change. Welty's final 
work affirms that humanity can put the details of temporal 
ii 

existence into an emotionally liberating perspective by 
recognizing the constant and reassuring cyclic patterns of the 
natural world, for these patterns can be held in memory and 
preserved in art. 
iii 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Abstract 
ii 
Table of Contents 
iv 
Acknowledgements 
vi 
Abbreviations for Welty's Texts 
vii 
INTRODUCTION 
1 
Chapter 1 
Shaping a Career 
2 3 
Photographing Parts of the Whole 
26 
Framing Reality in A Curtain 
of 
Green 
32 
Following After: 
Sojourners and 
Wayfarers 
35 
Gathering Home 
37 
Wandering: 
3 8 
"The Wanderers" 
42 
"The Bride of the Innisfallen" 
50 
Chapter 2 
The Robber 
Bridegroom: 
Miraculous 
Adventure Time 
58 
The Frame Tale Meeting: 
Intersection 
of Different Worlds 
65 
Clement: The Innocent 
69 
Mike Fink: Folk Hero 
73 
Lockhart and Rosamond: 
Chivalric 
Romance 
78 
Mike Fink: Mail-Rider 
85 
Salome and the Sun God: Cultural 
Parallels 
88 
Clement: Reality and Reaction 
94 
Chapter 3 
The Wide 
Net: 
Adventure Time on the Road 
99 
"First Love" 
105 
"A Still Moment" 
116 
"Asphodel" 
125 
"At the Landing" 
13 3 
Chapter 4 
Delta 
Wedding: 
"Deadening" Time 
146 
Shellmound 
151 
Marmion 
155 
Point of View and Observers 
158 
Plot—An Aspect of the Novel 
162 
iv 

The Yellow Dog and the Blues 
166 
Patterns of Music 
171 
The Throb of the Compress 
172 
The Tinkle of the Piano, 
The Scratch of the Victrola 
174 
The Mournful Airs of Scotland 
178 
Observations 
181 
Chapter 5 
Losing 
Battles: 
Ceremonial Center Time 
18 6 
The Yeoman Farmers of the Tennessee 
Hills 
195 
The Family—Jordan/Vaughn/Beecham/ 
Renfro 
197 
The Battles 
2 01 
Battle Already Lost: Agriculture 
to Commerce-Law 
202 
Battle Already Lost: Agriculture 
to Commerce—Education 
206 
Battle Almost Lost: The Old Religion 
to the New World—The Handwriting 
on the Wall 
2 08 
Battles in Progress 
215 
Granny Vaughn and Lady May Renfro: 
Past Versus Future 
216 
Miss Buelah and Lexie Renfro: 
Fire and Ice 
217 
Jack and Vaughn: Action Versus 
Reflection 
219 
One Battle Won—Bridging the Gaps 
228 
Losing and Surviving 
233 
Chapter 6 
The Optimist's 
Daughter: 
Centrifugal 
Time, Solar-Lunar Time 
238 
A Trio of Protectors 
245 
Hand 
253 
Clock-Calendar Time Vs. Solar-Lunar Time 2 60 
Wilder 
275 
Afterword 
281 
Works Cited 
286 
v 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
My initial thanks must go to the late Professor Cleanth 
Brooks and to Professor Lee Greene who reintroduced me to the 
work of Eudora Welty at an NEH Summer Seminar in 1989. Their 
discussion of The Golden 
Apples, 
along with the enthusiastic 
comments of my colleagues in Professor Greene's study group, 
inspired me to attempt this study. 
At the University of British Columbia, I have been 
fortunate to have the guidance of Professor P. Merivale, 
without whose generous instruction and discipline the present 
study might not have been written. I am grateful, as well, to 
Professors Ross Labrie and Michael Zeitlin for their patience 
and acumen in helping me shape this study. Professor B. L 
Grenberg's earlier assistance and wise counsel is also 
appreciated. 
Thanks are due as well to colleagues at Western 
Washington University. Provost Larry De Lorme, Dean Peter 
Elich, and Vice-Provost Ken Symes have provided professional 
assistance. My colleagues, Roberta Buck, Carmen Werder, and 
Lynne Masland, have been constant in their support of my 
efforts. I am indebted also to Professor L. L. Lee for 
generous discussions of related critical issues. 
My greatest appreciation is due my family. Both my 
mother, Mildred Brown, and my son, John Sylvester, have 
fortified me with cheerful and encouraging words. My husband, 
Bickford Sylvester, has been a professional and personal model 
of "grace under pressure," for whose support I am deeply 
grateful. 
vi 

ABBREVIATIONS 
BI 
The Bride 
of 
the 
Innisfallen 
(1955) 
CS 
The Collected 
Stories 
of Eudora 
Welty 
(1980) 
DW 
Delta 
Wedding 
(1946) 
Eye 
The Eye of 
the 
Story: 
Selected 
Essays 
and 
Reviews 
(1978) 
GA 
The Golden 
Apples 
(1949) 
LB 
Losing 
Battles 
(1970) 
PH 
The Ponder 
Heart 
(1954) 
OD 
The Optimist's 
Daughter 
(1972) 
OTOP 
One Time, 
One Place: 
Mississippi 
in 
the 
Depression 
(1973) 
OWB 
One Writer's 
Beginnings 
(1984) 
RB 
The Robber 
Bridegroom 
(1942) 
WN 
The Wide Net 
(1943) 
vii 

INTRODUCTION 
1 
A decade after Eudora Welty published her last fictional 
work in 1972, Albert J. Devlin remarked that critics, bemused by 
Welty's lyrical artistry, had yet to examine her work with the 
"informed historical and cultural scrutiny (in Louis D. Rubin's 
phrase)" necessary to penetrate her mystery and thereby 
"establish a full circulation of meaning among her memorable 
texts" (Chronicle 
"Introduction" xi). A few years later Peggy 
W. Prenshaw repeated Devlin's assessment: "more attention to the 
relation between works and to the career as a whole is needed. . 
. . the fiction of Eudora Welty has not yet received the scale 
and depth of critical analysis that it warrants" ("Eudora Welty" 
Bibliographic 
Essays 2 67). Too many critics have heeded the 
caveat early expressed by Ruth Vande Kieft, author of the 
standard work on Welty's life and canon, that Welty's work did 
not lend itself to exhaustive analysis. Rather, she explained, 
beyond a certain point, the sense of mystery so fundamental to 
Welty's fiction must remain just that—a mystery, one that 
elicits powerful emotional responses from readers, but leaves 
them uncertain of the meaning of the work itself. As late as 
1987, Vande Kieft advised readers to content themselves by 
"running with the mysteries in parallel relationship to the 
stories" ("Teaching" 204). 
Over this last decade, Welty criticism has proliferated. 
Also, Michael Kreyling's 1991 Author 
and Agent, 
an account of 

2 
Welty's correspondence and relationship with her literary agent, 
Diarmuid Russell, has provided more details about Welty's work 
habits and travels. Yet, no single study has offered a 
satisfying account of either the connections among Welty's texts 
or the relationship between her works and her career. Eudora 
Welty herself has insisted repeatedly that readers must look in 
the expanse of her entire work to comprehend this whole, to 
understand her vision: "it's what the work shows, comprises 
altogether" 
(Price "Introduction" xxviii, emphasis mine). As Jon 
Smith asserts, in a provocative 1995 review of eight new books on 
Eudora Welty, "Welty studies continue only to scratch the 
surface" (554) . 
While I do not presume in this study to explain the mystery 
of Eudora Welty's unique genius, I do intend to suggest a key to 
her method of constructing narratives, which is highly conscious 
and purposeful. This key should help dispel the assumption that 
Welty's canon reflects no conscious thematic structure, an 
assumption that has retarded the recognition of Welty's 
significance in modern literature. The central critical problem, 
as Smith claims, is that Welty has not been consistently 
recognized as a "major modernist" writer.1 This oversight has 
Chester Eisinger sees Welty as a transition figure 
between traditionalism and modernism; Michael Kreyling notes 
the modern dimensions of the early stories ("Modernism") and 
pursues the mythological patterns of Welty's later work in his 
Achievement 
of Order. 
Most recently, Rebecca Mark claims that 
Welty revises the modernist tradition from a feminist 
perspective, while Suzan Harrison, tracing the interrelation 
of Welty's novels and Virginia Woolf's, places Welty in the 
tradition of modernism. 

3 
probably occurred because such signs of modernism as 
manipulations of time, obvious experiments with language, and 
pervasive use of intertextual allusions are not as clearly 
signaled in Welty's work as they are, for example, in the work of 
William Faulkner; so readers have not automatically applied a 
modernist paradigm to the quotidian, regional surfaces of her 
narratives. Like Faulkner, Welty uses Mississippi in what 
appears to be the tradition of southern regionalism. Yet she 
also employs modernist devices, again like Faulkner, that subtly 
alter the representative intention of southern regionalism. In 
Faulkner's work, this particular technique has been compared, by 
Norman Cantor, to Joyce's treatment of Dublin and tradition: 
Joyce, says Cantor, "exploited the British tradition of the 
provincial novel" while "pursuing [an] intense examination of 
segments of universal experience" (42). We need to recognize the 
same achievement in Welty's work. 
That Welty's structural method is definitively modernist is 
made clear by Lewis P. Simpson in The Brazen 
Face of 
History.2 
Simpson cites Welty and Faulkner as examples of the "Proustian-
Joycean literary mind" that took over the post-World War I South. 
2In this book Simpson discusses the development of the 
modern sense of history in American fiction. For specific 
references to Welty and to the development of historical irony 
in southern fiction, see Simpson's chapter, "What Survivors 
Do" (233-54). In his Chronicle 
(208-12), Albert Devlin 
discusses the significance of Simpson's chapter, as well as 
other Simpson articles, in establishing Welty's control of 
specifically "southern materials"—the particular concern of 
Devlin's study. 

4 
The emergence of this "literary mind" in the American South, he 
says, demonstrated a new "southern aesthetic of memory . . . 
imbedded in the European matrix of memory" (244). Moreover, 
Simpson selects Welty as one of the "most sensitive and 
accomplished practitioners" of this modern "aesthetic" (240).3 
Accordingly, central aims of my study are to develop Simpson's 
insight by a systematic examination of Welty's work as a whole 
and to arrive at a clearer understanding of her unifying vision. 
In "Some Notes on Time in Fiction," Welty herself echoes 
Henri Bergson's conception of an interior, associative dimension 
in time, the dimension exploited, of course, by Proust, Joyce, 
Woolf, and Eliot, as well as by Faulkner and Welty. Welty 
declares that "Fiction penetrates chronological time to reach our 
deeper version of time that's given to us by the way we think and 
feel" (Eye 168). For Welty, it is the characters' selective 
retention of moments in time, "not chronology" in history, that 
matters; time is recovered in the present through memory, through 
"Remembering . . . so basic and vital a part of staying alive 
3It is understandable that many readers have associated 
Welty with what Hugh Holman calls, in The Immoderate 
Past, 
the 
"memorial" habit of mind prevalent in pre-World War I southern 
fiction, a nostalgic habit of mind with little sense of 
historical irony. Welty's historical verisimilitude, the 
affirmative aspects of her vision, and her sometimes comic 
indulgence in representing the traditional southern culture of 
community and kinship promote this confusion. But as Simpson 
explains, "writers discovered the modern resistance to the 
disappearance of the community of kinship, custom, and 
tradition," and "a flowering of modern literature" occurred in 
the South when Faulkner, Warren, Welty, and others adopted the 
"Proustian-Joycean" approach to history and to literary 
structure (238, 244). 

5 
that it takes on the strength of an instinct of survival, and 
acquires the power of an art" (Eye 169, 171). 
Thus, in most of her texts, Welty focuses on transitional 
stages in life experience or major periods of historical change 
that particularly illustrate inevitable disruption to familiar 
worlds.4 She continually recreates past American eras, each of 
which also resurrects even more remote eras of American history, 
as well as European history, myth or folklore. In fact, whether 
her narratives are set in the eighteenth, nineteenth, or 
twentieth centuries, Welty follows Joyce's pioneering modernist 
method as expounded by T. S. Eliot in his well-known 192 3 Dial 
review, "Ulysses, Order, and Myth": she manipulates "a 
continuous parallel between antiquity and contemporaneity" as a 
way "of giving a shape and a significance" to what Eliot regards 
as "the immense panorama of futility and anarchy which is 
contemporary history" ("Myth" 681). Welty intersects historical 
times with the modern perspective of the individual mind in order 
4Cf. Harrison's study, which appeared after the composition 
of this dissertation and which focuses on issues of discourse 
particularly relevant to feminist theory. For her, progress from 
communal tradition to individual acceptance of change is seen in 
terms of women's struggle toward a non-patriarchal discourse, 
facilitating a feminine identity and voice for the writer, the 
protagonist, and the protagonist as artist. Harrison views 
Welty's work as artist parables within this paradigm. My study, 
however, deals with Welty's wider interest in the dissolution of 
familiar social and cultural structures as a recurrent, 
archetypal challenge—indeed as the central and most difficult 
challenge to the emotional survival of human beings, regardless 
of gender. Thus, my study associates Welty with a central 
philosophical preoccupation of modernists generally. Inevitably, 
both studies often refer to the same features in Welty's work, 
but in different contexts and with different emphases. 

6 
to achieve the synchronicity characteristic of much modernist 
fiction. Employing the same method as did Joyce and Eliot, Welty 
constructs her texts out of allusions to masterpieces of past art 
works and to myths that gave pleasure, comfort, direction, and 
meaning to humanity in various times when coherent beliefs in 
myth, deity, or nation were consubstantial within a culture, as 
they are not in twentieth-century Western culture. 
To that end, Welty underpins the surface times of her 
contemporary worlds with echoes of classical myth, world literary 
masterpieces, and parallel moments in history and culture. She 
includes musical and visual art forms, folk art as well as high 
art, and popular art as well as traditional. In her canon, these 
diverse fragments from the past not only contribute to meaning in 
the individual works, but also form a unifying collage reminding 
readers of the importance of art in sustaining human life by 
providing a code for emotional and spiritual survival—despite 
inevitable change. Thus, like Joyce, Yeats, Eliot (and Forster 
and Wilder, as we shall note), Welty is one of those modernists 
whose work moves toward affirmation rather than alienation.5 
Yet like Hemingway, Fitzgerald, and Frost (conspicuous 
parallels), Welty has so artfully embedded modernist devices in 
5Although definitions of modernism vary, many specialists 
believe that affirmation can be an element in modernist works. 
For discussion of this view, see Singal 4-10, Gay Freud 21-27, 
and Ellman and Feidelson, "Introduction" to The Modern 
Tradition. 
I locate Welty in this broader view of the 
modernist tradition, as illustrated throughout this study. 

7 
her surfaces of everyday life that their systematic development 
has been neglected by several generations of critical readers. 
Once we apply a modernist paradigm to her work, specific 
devices of irony, allusion, misdirection, and intertextuality 
fall into place to enhance the synchronicity of the work. She 
also employs both ancient and modern literary forms to match each 
text precisely, thus reenforcing content. At the same time, in 
an almost archival way, she defines each text according to 
explicit boundaries of historical time and geographical place. 
The blend presents a challenge to readers, especially those of us 
living in an age that has turned away both from history and from 
the modernist tradition. 
Specifically, for the "contemporaneity" in her plots, Welty 
focuses on the distinctive geography and history of her home 
state. Throughout my study, I will demonstrate at length that in 
each work Welty systematically maps out a particular space and a 
specific time to create what Mikhail Bakhtin has termed the 
literary device of the "chronotope," a literal fusion of space 
and time. Bakhtin defines the term as "the intrinsic 
connectedness of temporal and spatial relationships that are 
artistically expressed in literature" ("Forms" 84). Through the 
chronotope, Bakhtin explains, "the novel's abstract elements— 
philosophical and social generalizations, ideas, analyses of 
cause and effect . . . take on flesh and blood, permitting the 
imagining power of art to do its work" ("Forms" 250). The 
chronotope can express what others have called the novel's world 

8 
view or Zeitgeist, 
as well as the variations in each character's 
perspective on the world. It is the chronotope, Bakhtin insists, 
that governs meaning in the novel by making representation 
possible, an idea that, I will argue, Eudora Welty shares. 
Theories on space and time in literature abound, of course, 
but Bakhtin's offers a particularly useful framework for a study 
of Welty's fiction. With his strong historical sense, he 
distinguishes and illustrates generic, recurring types of 
novelistic chronotopes in European fiction, from Greek romance to 
the nineteenth century. Welty's twentieth-century American 
fictions recreate several of these earlier chronotopes, even as 
Welty establishes unimpeachable geographical and historical 
verisimilitude in her surface plots. Her meticulous attention to 
nuances of difference within given eras has sometimes been 
overlooked by readers who view her work through the values of 
their own eras, thereby missing the interplay of disparate eras 
and voices through which meaning evolves in fiction. Studying 
Welty in the light of Bakhtin's typology may help readers 
navigate this obstacle to a fuller understanding of Welty's 
achievement. We can begin to discern a full range of meaning in 
Welty's canon only when we articulate each work's chronotope more 
precisely and more extensively than we have yet done. 
For example, Welty's sense of place, chorus the critics, is 
one of the great strengths in her work. Welty has generally been 
credited with chronicling the state of Mississippi in her work. 

9 
But, frequently, the critics' recognition is incomplete.6 Too 
often, the place acknowledged amounts to a vague and inaccurate 
generalization called "Mississippi," a far cry from the 
specificity of the actual place.7 Such a general rendition of 
place would be a travesty for a craftsman as careful and precise 
as Eudora Welty. Rather, Welty's Mississippi comprises several 
vastly different places. 
In fact, Eudora Welty might well have been speaking of 
herself when, in 1989, she referred to the critic and novelist 
Louis Rubin as "a mapmaker." With "eyes that see" and the "mind 
that holds the world in its focus," she explained, the mapmaker 
"is able to invent, to reinvent, a country" ("Louis Rubin" 258). 
Eudora Welty, I contend, is a consummate mapmaker, whose large 
canvas has been crafted of meticulously distinct parts of the 
whole. 
As I will show, she works spatially and systematically 
through four of the eight discrete geographical sections that 
6Albert Devlin and Jan Gretland are two important 
exceptions who have carefully addressed Welty's specifics of 
place and history. In Chronicle, 
Devlin addresses 
particularly Welty's historical imagination; he suggests in 
his conclusion that Welty's "allusiveness" and her "engagement 
with the most perplexing issues of southern historiography" 
warrant "scrupulous attention" (205). In his book on Welty's 
"aesthetics of place," Gretland argues, mistakenly I believe, 
that Welty is a Southern regionalist whose fiction represents 
"a cultural continuity of basic Agrarian ideas" (1). 
7For vivid and myriad expressions of "a Mississippian's 
sense of place," see essays collected in Peggy Prenshaw's 
Sense of Place: 
Mississippi. 

10 
together make up the state of Mississippi.8 She also recreates 
another distinct Mississippi entity, the ancient Natchez Trace 
that crosses several sections of the state. In her inductive 
approach to her canvas, Welty represents a series of individual 
experiences in small, separate sections of Mississippi that 
collectively lead to general conclusions about the universal 
nature of human experience. 
Just as important as space to Welty's mapmaking is time, a 
dimension in her work that has commanded even less attention than 
the specific spaces that compose her sense of place. In the 
volumes to be examined in this study, Welty recreates distinct 
historic eras in Mississippi, eras that typify not just the 
experience of Mississippi but the experience of the American 
Republic as well. Within several of these works, she either 
compresses or expands time, creating what we might think of as 
harmonic chords—of past ages and anticipated future ones—to 
accompany the melodic thread of the present era depicted in each 
plot. In words markedly similar to Welty's own, Bakhtin 
describes this process: "Time . . . thickens, takes on flesh, 
becomes artistically visible" ("Forms" 84). In her final novel, 
8The eight sections, described in the 19 3 8 WPA travel 
guide, Mississippi: 
A Guide to the Magnolia 
State 
are the 
Delta, the Coast, the Natchez District, the Brown Loam and 
Loess Hills, the Piney Woods, the Tennessee Hills, the Black 
Prairie, and the Central Hills (3-8). According to the 
authors, "these eight family-like sections grouped together 
form the great neighborhood called Mississippi" (7). In 
dividing the state by physiographic regions, the 1974 Atlas 
of 
Mississippi 
follows the same pattern, adding two more small 
distinct sections (Cross and Wales 4-6). 

11 
The Optimist's 
Daughter, 
Welty puts human-made calendar time into 
a different perspective altogether, suggesting that humans can 
enter the natural world of solar-lunar time by recognizing the 
cyclic patterns that govern Time itself, patterns that can be 
held in memory and preserved in art. By adopting this larger, 
longer view of time, individuals enlarge their vision—a 
necessary first step for surviving, spiritually intact, the 
inevitable experience of loss that accompanies changes brought 
about by time. 
The habit of mind that produced Welty's commitment to a 
system of time and place is disclosed indirectly in The 
Optimist's 
Daughter, 
Welty's most autobiographical novel. When 
the protagonist, Laurel, studies her mother's desk with its "24 
pigeon hole slots like a little country post-office," she notes 
that Becky McKelva stored letters not alphabetically or by 
author, but rather according to their "place and time" (OD 160). 
The old-fashioned country post-office, a fixture in Welty's 
fiction, stored the mail in the same way, in each time according 
to each person's fixed place in the county. Early in her career, 
Welty called attention to this simple organizational scheme with 
the title of her 1935 book of photographs, which we will discuss 
later.9 She called the book One Time, 
One Place: 
Mississippi 
in 
the 
Depression 
/ A Snapshot 
Album. 
9In The Welty 
Collection, 
Suzanne Marrs explains that 
Welty had two New York exhibits of her photographs, which led 
her to submit a collection of them for publication. Although 
the projected book "met with praise" from the publisher, it 
was rejected as an "unprofitable undertaking" (78). 

12 
For Welty, the exterior world embodied in the chronotope 
shapes human experience, but the final meaning of that experience 
emerges from the interplay between the exterior and interior 
worlds of individuals. Asked by renowned folklorist Bill Ferris 
whether she had ever thought of her work "as sort of a map of 
Mississippi," Welty replied that she thought of it "more as an 
internal map. . . . a map of minds and imagination"; but, she 
continued, "it has to be laid somewhere" (Conversations 
160). 
She had not thought to create a literal map of Mississippi 
sections in the sense that Faulkner had recreated Mississippi's 
Central Hills section in his fictional Yoknapatawpha County. 
Her interests, she claimed, had always been focused more on 
the "inside of the characters, to show what they're doing" 
(Conversations 
160). Yet Welty echoes Bakhtin in ascribing the 
importance of each character's particular time and place to his 
or her motivation and action in the plot. 
Something shapes people, and it's the world in which they 
act that makes their experiences—what they act for and 
react against. . . . It furnishes the economic background 
that he grows up in, and the folkways and the stories 
that come down to him in his family. It's the 
fountainhead of his knowledge and experience. . . . 
And just the knowledge that another person has all this 
behind him which can help to explain him and give a 
background to his opinions and his feelings—it's such an 
easy way to understand, to begin to understand other 
people. 
(Conversations 
159) 
For Welty, then, details of the individual's exterior 
world explain and chart the traveler's path through life. 
"Maps," she has explained, "are the contemporary stages of 
journeys undertaken, answering to the dreams and demands of 

13 
travelers" ("Louis Rubin" 256). All her protagonists are 
travelers, wayfarers, wanderers, or sojourners in one way or 
another. The works we will examine usually feature some 
distinctive road, often "literal as well as figurative, upon 
which travelers encounter each other. The Welty canon reveals 
not only an overview of two hundred years of the historical 
American experience, but also an imaginative re-creation of 
the perilous roads navigated by American wayfarers as they 
have attempted to balance dreams engendered by the new world 
with the realities encountered in their lives. 
One of the most famous "road" scenes in the Welty canon 
serves especially well as a typical example of Welty's 
artistic method and thematic interest. To help clarify my 
continuing discussion of Welty's use of allusion to and ironic 
juxtaposition of parallel cultures, I will explicate this 
particular scene from The Optimist's 
Daughter in some detail 
now, although I will not examine the novel itself until 
Chapter 6. This scene embraces both the immediate exterior 
and the interior world of its protagonist, Laurel McKelva 
Hand, at an important moment in her life. In the scene, the 
exterior world—the place and time of Cairo, Illinois, in the 
1940s—comments on Laurel's interior romantic illusion, even 
as it also directs the reader to an earlier work of art. 
Details of Cairo's history as well as the memory it stirs of 
Mark Twain's earlier masterpiece, Adventures 
of 
Huckleberry 
Finn, undercut the scene's apparent surface meaning. 

14 
The scene is recalled by Laurel twenty years after its 
occurrence. In it, Laurel and her fiance, Philip Hand, 
journey by a "crack" Illinois Central train from Chicago down 
to Mississippi for their wedding. As the sun rises, the train 
pulls out of Cairo, Illinois, and the two look down on the 
"confluence of the waters, the Ohio and the Mississippi." 
All they could see was sky, water, birds, light, and 
confluence. It was the whole morning world. 
And they themselves were a part of the confluence. 
Their own joint act of faith had brought them here at the 
very moment and matched its occurrence, and proceeded as 
it proceeded. Direction itself was made beautiful, 
momentous. They were riding as one with it, right up 
front. It's our turn! she'd thought exultantly. And 
we're going to live forever. 
(OD 160) 
The details of the exterior world in this scene, which 
Welty could have expected her earlier readers to recognize, 
shape Laurel's feelings. The "crack" train, The City 
of 
New 
Orleans, 
traveled for decades the principal route through the 
deep South, running daily from Chicago to New Orleans and 
back, transporting generations of young southerners, black and 
white, who headed north from the poverty-stricken South, 
dreaming of new opportunities, new jobs, new lives. Even more 
significant is the town of Cairo. There, the Ohio River flows 
into the Mississippi River, thus mingling the waters of so 
many of the nation's rivers that the spot became known in the 
nineteenth century and is still commemorated in the twentieth 

15 
century as the "Confluence of America."10 Thus, Welty reminds 
her readers, and not for the first time, that the implications 
of her work reach beyond the region of Mississippi to embrace 
America as a whole. Also, in this scene, the geographical 
confluence mirrors the other confluences in the natural world, 
whose sight so exhilarates Laurel and Philip. 
But at the same time, the allusion to the once-bustling 
nineteenth-century town of Cairo adds an ironic dimension 
crucial to a full understanding of the scene. In the 
nineteenth century, Cairo had been a booming river town, 
destined—or so it thought—to become a great city. But by 
the 1940s, the time of Laurel's train journey, Cairo had sadly 
declined, dying out as the Mississippi River's importance as a 
transportation route waned. The reality of the poverty-
stricken twentieth-century town, whose early dreams of 
immortality had mirrored Laurel's present ones, underscores 
the illusory quality of Laurel's exuberant optimism. Also in 
the nineteenth century, Cairo had achieved literary prominence 
as a significant place in Twain's classic American novel, 
Adventures of Huckleberry 
Finn, a work from which, Ernest 
Hemingway believed, "all modern American literature" developed 
(Green Hills 
of Africa 
22). By repeating Twain's portrayal of 
Cairo as the central point in the journey of travelers whose 
10Established in 1812, a small park between the waters 
rests on the southernmost point of land in Cairo, marking the 
confluence of the Ohio and the Mississippi Rivers. A battered 
sign over its entrance still reads "Fort Defiance, the 
Confluence of America." 

16 
dreams are deferred or shattered, Welty immortalizes Cairo 
once again in the twentieth century. 
In The Optimist's 
Daughter, 
Laurel's vision of this 
apparent scene of order, unity, and optimism is characterized 
as the "whole morning world" (OD 186)." But Laurel's fantasy 
that "we're going to live forever" lasts less than a year, not 
even so long as had the early dreams of Cairo, Illinois. 
Indeed, no part of her idyllic imagined world exists by the 
time Laurel recalls it in the 1960s. Nor does such a world 
exist anywhere else in Welty's fiction, except in the early 
romantic illusions of her protagonists. 
This ironic dimension of her fiction has been greatly 
misunderstood by those critics who claim that Welty venerates 
the South. Welty neither venerates nor despises the South. 
Rather she recreates in each microcosm the complexities of 
vice and virtue that inform any human community. It is her 
protagonists who at given moments view their world through 
whatever illusion serves them. Laurel's awed exuberance just 
before her wedding epitomizes an illusion common to travelers 
who face a new day in a new world, whether that new world be 
found in the institution of marriage or in the traveler's 
anticipation of geographical movement and discovery. Just so 
uFor a remarkably similar account of order and 
confluence, see the final scene of Ernest Hemingway's "Indian 
Camp," especially its last line: "In the early morning on the 
lake sitting in the stern of the boat with his father rowing, 
he felt quite sure that he would never die" (70). 

17 
would have been the feelings aroused in F. Scott Fitzgerald's 
seventeenth-century Dutch sailors, as they contemplated the 
"fresh, green breast of the new world" (Gatsby 
182). But 
Welty knows full well that Laurel's optimistic sense of 
immortality is an illusion, that "nothing gold can stay," as 
Frost reminds us. And Laurel McKelva Hand learns it quickly. 
In her novels and short story cycles, Welty captures 
through microcosms of Mississippi's sections the bewildering 
changes that all human beings in all times and places must 
navigate in the experience of a lifetime. Using various 
literary genres appropriate to the particular circumstances, 
Welty places each of her protagonists in a wholly separate 
place and time, representing a type of situation universal in 
human experience: the advent of a profound change that will 
effect the death or at least the radical transformation of a 
way of life. In these transitional eras, the ordinary people 
of Welty's fictional worlds invariably find comfort in various 
illusions that obscure the threatening change they fear. 
However, in the end, as I will explicate in some detail in my 
concluding chapters, Welty eschews the "saving illusions" that 
so frequently characterize the work of high modernists. For 
Welty, humans cannot begin to realize their full potential 
until they can put aside illusions altogether to look 
steadfastly on life's most frightening reality: the 
inevitability of change, loss, and death. 

18 
As they adopt, recognize, and then abandon one illusion 
after another, Welty's protagonists, I suggest, constitute a 
developing composite protagonist, who struggles to control the 
forces that threaten his or her world. This developing 
protagonist also, I believe, reflects stages in the artistic 
development of the artist herself. Although we know little of 
Welty's private adult life, the composite protagonist 
addresses difficult human and artistic concerns that Welty 
must have faced, especially during the middle stage of her 
career. Eventually, the composite protagonist, in the 
character of Laurel McKelva Hand, comes to realize and 
illustrate Welty's principal belief: that only in the "sense 
of our own transience" do we experience the absolute necessity 
to love and to act that moves us to live every moment at our 
highest human potential (Eye 168). 
The protagonists who realize even part of the full 
potential of their humanity are rare, as we shall discover. 
For Welty, such individuals must satisfy three requirements 
involving vision, love, and action. To illustrate these 
necessary developments, Welty uses images of the eyes, the 
heart, and the hands to describe her protagonists. The most 
fully realized of them must not only look resolutely on the 
reality of the world—its linked beauty and terror—but they 
must also see clearly the meaning of their experience in the 
world. Though well aware of the heart's vulnerability to 
loss, they must yet hold their hearts open to all life's 

19 
possibilities of connection. Finally, however strange and 
threatening it may be to do so, they must lift their hands 
always "to make or do," to participate actively in the world 
they inhabit or inherit. 
In the early and mid-career works of Welty's canon, 
perhaps the passage most illustrative of the vision necessary 
to the worthy protagonist comes from The Golden Apples's 
final 
story, "The Wanderers," which I will discuss at length in 
Chapter 1. The protagonist, Virgie Rainey, remembers a 
picture from her youth: Perseus holding aloft the head of the 
Medusa, which he had cut off with a stroke of his sword. 
Believing as much in the Medusa as in Perseus, Virgie, much 
older and now alone in the world, envisions the story of 
Perseus and the reality it represents in "three moments": 
"the beauty and the sword's stroke and the terror" (GA 243) . 
Beyond the three, Virgie perceives, "lay their existence in 
time—far out and endless, a constellation which the heart 
could read over many a night" (GA 243). For Virgie, the 
"sword's stroke" forms the "beat of time." Although Virgie 
now sees fully the meaning of her experience in time, we do 
not learn whether she will also use her vision to participate 
in the world she inhabits. We must wait until Welty's final 
novel, The Optimist's 
Daughter, 
to find Laurel, a protagonist 
who undergoes a similar moment of clarity of vision and also 
demonstrates her ability to act on that vision. 

20 
As I articulate the connections among Welty's works and 
their relationship to her career, I will rely to some extent 
on explication of individual works, as did Ruth Vande Kieft. 
She believed, early and late, that Welty's work required the 
"patient and loving scrutiny we apply to poems" ("Preface" 
Eudora Welty). 
The very nature of modernist writing exerts 
pressure on the reader to participate intellectually by 
pursuing allusions embedded in the text, however subtle or 
indirect. In Welty's case, wide knowledge of many worlds is 
helpful: the natural, the historic, the mythic, the literary, 
and the artistic, just for a start. By supplying some parts 
only alluded to in Welty's surfaces, especially those 
references to the historic and literary records, I expect to 
amplify meaning in the individual works. Only when we reveal 
as fully as possible the greater range of meaning in each work 
can we establish the overall pattern governing Welty's canon. 
Before examining individual works, however, I will 
examine in Chapter 1 what Jon Smith has called the "curious 
shape of her [Welty's] career" (555). I will identify and 
discuss sources important to the development of Welty's 
artistic methods and to the eventual pattern of her canon. 
I will also suggest three broad stages of development in her 
composite protagonist, stages that help connect Welty's 
fiction directly to her artistic development. In Chapter 1, 
I will look particularly at the composite protagonist in two 
stories from Welty's mid-career period, 1949-1955: "The 

21 
Wanderers," from The Golden Apples, 
and "The Bride of the 
Innisfalien," from the collection of the same name. The 
concerns of the composite protagonist, I will suggest, reflect 
Welty's artistic concentration during that time on the 
interior world of the artist, confronted with human as well as 
artistic choices. 
Succeeding chapters will feature analyses of individual 
works whose sum total presents an overview of the American 
experience. As I have said earlier, Welty has chosen 
particular Mississippi transitional eras that also represent 
stages of change in the United States as a whole, albeit 
stages that may have occurred earlier or later than 
Mississippi's: pioneer settlement of the wilderness; the 
ascendance of rail and land transportation over river 
transportation; the initial decline of farming as an 
occupation; the shift in power from agricultural interests to 
commercial-industrial interests; the upheaval of traditional 
patterns of civic life occasioned by the non-violent civil 
rights movement; the destruction of the nation's moral fiber 
by the violence and assassinations directed against the civil 
rights movement and its leaders; and finally the violence, 
division, and destruction prompted by the Vietnam War and the 
domestic anti-war movement. 
Working initially in a chronological format (as I will do 
in ordering the subsequent chapters of this study), Welty 
deals quickly with the late eighteenth century in The 
Robber 

22 
Bridegroom 
(Chapter 2); in The Wide Net (Chapter 3) she dwells 
on the entire nineteenth century, with a brief glance into the 
early twentieth century. Delta 
Wedding (Chapter 4), set in 
the twenties, marks the end of the first stage of development 
in the Welty protagonist. When Welty moves into the twentieth 
century, she slows her pace—with one exception, The 
Golden 
Apples—and 
sets her novels in shorter time frames—a month, a 
week, a day in the twentieth century. As I mentioned earlier, 
works from Welty's second stage, The Golden Apples and The 
Bride 
of the Innisfallen, 
will be treated in Chapter 1. The 
third and final stage of development in the Welty protagonist 
is seen in Losing 
Battles 
(Chapter 5), set in the thirties, 
and The Optimist's 
Daughter (Chapter 6), set in the sixties. 
My purpose, then, in1answer to Devlin's call, is to 
illustrate the pattern and connections that will establish a 
comprehensible "circulation of meaning" among Welty's works. 
My study should also eliminate some of the mystery surrounding 
Welty's acknowledged mastery of the craft of fiction-writing. 
Although agreeing to accept her work as something of a mystery 
may be tempting, admirers who do so will miss its full range 
and power. By examining her varied literary modes and 
difficult mix of chronotopic values and modernist 
intertextuality, I hope to offer a paradigm that will allow 
readers to appreciate Eudora Welty's proper place in the 
pantheon of twentieth-century American artists. 

SHAPING A CAREER 
23 
The "curious shape" of Welty's career, cited by Jon Smith 
as hindering her recognition as a major modernist, includes 
circumstances that have been instrumental, I believe, in 
determining her artistic approach to fiction and focusing her 
attention on journeys and travelers. Of course, the curious 
shape Smith refers to is the hiatus in Welty's fiction 
publishing during the late fifties and the sixties. In his 
words, Welty had 
a few brilliant modernist works in the forties and early 
fifties, a fifteen-year lull, two relatively realistic 
novels in the early seventies, then a quarter century of 
low production (except for the wildly successful, but 
thin, One Writer's 
Beginnings). 
(Jon Smith 555) 
But I will suggest that some curiosities in Welty's career 
began even earlier, indeed even before she started her serious 
writing. Her initial interest in visual arts, her English 
major at the University of Wisconsin, her graduate work in 
advertising at Columbia, her early employment by the Works 
Progress Administration (WPA), the collection of photographs 
gleaned from that employment, all shaped the direction of 
Welty's literary development.1 Later circumstances confirmed 
her belief in her choices: the early recognition and 
promotion of her work by Cleanth Brooks and Robert Penn Warren 
in the Southern 
Review, her friendship with Katherine Ann 
*In The Welty 
Collection 
(77-91) , Suzanne Marrs provides 
an excellent introduction to Welty's photographic 
accomplishments, including technical details about her 
equipment. 

24 
Porter, her frequent travels, her recognition by E. M. 
Forster, and her long employment with the New York Times 
Book 
Review. 
Over the course of Welty's long career, personal 
desires, financial need, and family circumstances contributed 
further to the unusual course of her literary publication. 
In addition to the fiction, Welty published reviews and 
essays. She wrote book reviews for the New York Times 
Book 
Review, 
having been asked by its editor as early as 1943 to 
join his staff. Even when family responsibilities curtailed 
her fiction writing, she continued to write periodically for 
the Book Review over a period of forty years.2 During the 
fifties, Welty also wrote pieces on the art of fiction 
writing, most of which reached a wide audience. 
Over her entire career, Welty taught and traveled much 
more widely than is generally known. She made Jackson her 
home base, but as an adult, she indulged the love of traveling 
that had begun when she was still a child. She was surrounded 
by artistic friends, many of them Jackson natives who became 
highly successful in artistic circles beyond Jackson. Her 
orientation, therefore, has always been much more cosmopolitan 
than one would think, knowing her only from her fictional 
work. 
2See A Writer's 
Eye: 
Collected 
Book Reviews, 
published in 
1994, edited by Pearl Amelia McHaney. The collection contains 
"all sixty-seven of Welty's reviews of seventy-four books" 
(xiv). McHaney's introduction gives a detailed overview of 
Welty's career as reviewer. 

25 
To give some sense of the effect on Welty's artistic 
development of the diverse circumstances of her life, I will 
review briefly here those most important. Some will help 
illuminate specific texts; others will suggest parallels 
between stages of development in Welty's composite protagonist 
and stages of artistic development in the author. Since, as I 
have said, we know very little about Welty's adult life, I 
will use the fiction to illustrate some points. I do not 
suggest that Welty's work is any more autobiographical than 
any other artist's. But certainly reflections of her interior 
world appear in her created world, particularly in certain 
female protagonists, featured in one strand of her mid-career 
short stories. Besides, like Faulkner, she has always 
"directed" readers who want to "know" her to read her fiction. 
We might say that Welty's fiction, after the first 
collection of short stories, Curtain 
of Green, can be roughly 
divided into stages of journeying. For our purposes, I will 
identify three broad ones: following after, wandering, and 
gathering home. These stages correspond, as I will show, to 
developments affecting Welty's artistic imagination and are 
represented by the motivation and movement of various 
protagonists. The texts found in the first and third stages 
will be briefly noted here, but treated fully later in 
separate chapters for each text. However, representative 
parts of the texts found in the second stage will be presented 

26 
in this chapter because they reflect more particularly issues 
that bear on Welty's career. 
PHOTOGRAPHING PARTS OF THE WHOLE 
Welty's early non-literary employment, I believe, had 
lasting effects on the direction of her literary career. 
Welty has said that—growing up in Jackson, Mississippi's 
capital, and attending her final college years out of state— 
she knew little about the diversity of her home state. Not 
until she returned to Jackson after her father's death did she 
really come to know her state in the intimate detail revealed 
in her work. During her early job with the WPA, she traveled 
extensively in the state, taking pictures and talking to 
people in almost every county. Welty was employed during this 
period as a junior publicity agent, not as a writer or a 
photographer; the pictures she took of people and places were 
primarily for her own pleasure. In the process, however, she 
determined to become a writer. A writer, she believed, would 
be able to explore the interior worlds that gave rise to the 
fleeting glimpses of human character that she was able to 
capture with her camera in the still moment of a snapshot. 
This early WPA experience is central, I believe, to the 
direction undertaken by Welty as a writer. 
Although various critics have reported on Welty's work 
for the WPA, no one has discussed the significance to Welty of 
the major product of the WPA's Federal Writers' project—a 

27 
magnificent state travel guide called Mississippi: 
A Guide 
to 
the 
Magnolia 
State, 
published in May, 1938.3 Welty was not 
directly involved in this WPA project, but she knew of it and 
contributed three pictures to it. Certain passages in the 
guide, I suggest, may initially have influenced her decision 
to use particular parts of Mississippi as settings for her 
fiction. They at least explain her systematic partition of 
the state into its separate sections, a fact of Mississippi 
geography that she refers to, years later, in One 
Writer's 
Beginnings 
(OWB 77). For example, the guidebook describes 
Mississippi as "eight distinct geographical units, each with 
its own sectional background, and each but a part of the 
whole" (Mississippi 
3). The authors emphasize the necessity 
of understanding Mississippi's parts in order to counteract 
the impression conveyed by the state's two best known writers, 
Stark Young of the Coast and Natchez areas and William 
Faulkner of the Central Hills section. Each of these writers, 
according to the guide, has simply pictured "the section that 
has conditioned him, and nothing more" (Mississippi 
3). But, 
the writers continue, human motivation and behavior vary 
widely in the eight different sections. 
So, as I have said earlier, it can surely be no 
coincidence that five of Welty's texts are set in one of four 
3This guide is extremely well-written and informative. To 
the usual geographical descriptions and topographical maps, 
the guide adds full articles on topics such as archeology, 
history, agriculture, folkways, commerce, and creative 
efforts. 

28 
separate sections of the state: two in the Yazoo-Delta plain, 
and one each in the Natchez, the Piney Woods, and the 
Tennessee Hills sections. (Notice that she excludes Young's 
Coast and Faulkner's Central Hills.) A sixth text is set 
along the Natchez Trace, the famous historical trail that cuts 
diagonally across the state of Mississippi, from the Natchez 
to the Tennessee Hills sections. 
Indeed, three of Welty's sectional texts could serve 
almost as extensions of Mississippi: 
Guide 
to 
the 
Magnolia 
State. 
They particularly extend a description of the 
background and motivation of early Mississippi settlers, found 
in an historical chapter called "Creative Effort" in 
Mississippi. 
There were three migrations of English, Scotch, and 
Irish stock to Mississippi. The first was the migration 
of Tory families to the Natchez country during and 
immediately following the American Revolution. The 
second was the migration from the Piedmont of the 
Carolinas and Virginia into the Mississippi hills and 
Piney Woods regions immediately after the War of 1812. 
The third was the "flush times" migration that brought 
settlers from all classes of the older South, and even 
from the East and North, into Indian lands opened by the 
treaty of 1832. 
These three groups, though all of one racial stock, 
came with different backgrounds and purposes. The Tories 
were comparatively wealthy and by habit were accustomed 
to a certain amount of ease and gracious living. Their 
ideal was the English country squire. 
• • • 
The hill people were in many ways quite different from 
the Tory group. They did not come to Mississippi to 
reestablish an empire. Instead, they came from King's 
Mountain to escape a world that was too much for them. 
Preferring the alternative of independent isolation, they 
purposely forsook hope of wealth and leisure to hide 
themselves in the hilly retreats of northeastern 

29 
Mississippi or in the great stretches of the Piney Woods. 
• • • 
The people who came to Mississippi on the crest of the 
"flush times" had purposes more nearly like what are 
considered "American" today. They moved to Mississippi 
in order "to get ahead." They meant to begin a 
tradition, not to continue one. 
(Mississippi 
13 5-3 6) 
These three waves of migration are represented 
fictionally in three texts that should be easily recognized by 
Welty scholars. The Tory would-be "country sguire"—only 
slightly modified—appears in the character of Clement 
Musgrove, protagonist of The Robber 
Bridegroom. 
The reclusive 
hill people of northeastern Mississippi's Tennessee Hills are 
exquisitely recreated in the Renfros of Losing 
Battles. 
The 
family motivated by the "American Dream" takes shape as the 
Fairchild family of Delta 
Wedding. 
Only The Robber 
Bridegroom, 
Welty's first novel, is set 
in the actual historical time of the original migration, the 
last third of the eighteenth century. The two other novels 
picture descendants of the original settlers, as they carry on 
their ancestral traditions in the first third of the twentieth 
century. In both cases, the protagonists' ancestors are 
recreated in family stories told within the context of the 
novels. The fullness and richness of detail in these two 
later volumes, combined with the sureness of the multi-faceted 
patterns of imagery, not only capture the essence of each of 
the groups of settlers, but also preserve a meticulously 
accurate record of the times for future inquiry. 

30 
A fourth text, The Wide Net, treats the Natchez Trace, 
which winds through or near the other Mississippi sections 
presented. Two other texts, far less obvious about their 
locale, are set, respectively, in the Delta slightly northeast 
of Vicksburg (The Golden Apples) 
and in the Piney Woods area 
near Jackson (The Optimist's 
Daughter). 
These last two 
volumes offer fewer clues to their settings. Morgana, the 
small, ingrown, fictional hometown in The Golden 
Apples, 
suggests any town, but exists in Welty's imagination 
specifically nineteen miles from Vicksburg. Mt. Salus of The 
Optimist's 
Daughter is also a fictional small town probably 
near Jackson, lying by the Illinois Central rail line. 
All of these works focus on the average people in the 
state, a focus also shared by the Mississippi guidebook. In 
its preface, the WPA state director and state editor declare 
their subject. 
Main emphasis has been placed upon the typical and 
average people of the State, rather than the exceptional 
elements. . . . 
It is this great agricultural majority, 
comprising more than four-fifths of the State's 
population, that has had no place in portrayals of 
Mississippi life by William Faulkner at one extreme and 
by Stark Young at the other. 
(Mississippi 
"Preface") 
Welty's depiction of the average people in Mississippi, like 
the guidebook's, includes rural blacks as well as whites. 
Though I will discuss later the issue of race, an area in 
which Welty has been misread and unjustly criticized, I 
mention it here only in connection with Eudora Welty's first 
completed book, a book of photographs entitled One Time, 
One 

31 
Place: 
Mississippi 
in the Depression 
/ A Snapshot 
Album, 
whose subjects are almost equally divided between black and 
white. Although the book was not published until 1971, it was 
created during the 1930s from the snapshots Welty had taken on 
her travels for the WPA.4 
For the purpose of this study, the most significant 
detail about this book is its title: One Time, 
One 
Place: 
Mississippi 
in the Depression 
/ A Snapshot 
Album. 
This title 
declares the design of time and place that, I contend, governs 
her artistic approach throughout her life's work. 
Even 
within the book, we find section titles that continue the 
emphasis of specific time: "Workday," "Saturday," "Sunday," 
and "Portraits." No text accompanies the photographs, merely 
descriptive titles. But next to each title is carefully 
printed the location of each shot, usually the name of a 
specific county, sometimes a town. Place, like time, supplies 
part of the meaning found in these mostly candid snapshots of 
rural or small-town people carrying out the normal activities 
of their lives. Even the "Portraits" section evolves from the 
unposed snapshots. Most of the photographs present human 
4See McKenzie, Meese, Marrs' "Photography," and Westling's 
"Loving Observer" for discussion of Welty's photographic 
activities during the WPA period. McKenzie emphasizes subject 
matter, Meese discusses Welty's collection of 1,200 negatives 
and prints, and Westling situates Welty among other 
Depression-era photographers. In the thirties, publishers 
rejected Welty's proposed book of photographs, believing that 
Julia Peterkin had already cornered that market with 
Roll, 
Jordan, 
Roll. 
Welty later published four books of 
photographs. 

32 
subjects; several others capture places, many of which will 
reappear in her fiction. In her 1971 introduction to the 
published text, Welty repeats her intention: "I feel that 
taken all together, they cannot help but amount to a record of 
a kind—a record of fact, putting together some of the 
elements of one time and one place" (OTOP 4). 
FRAMING REALITY IN A CURTAIN OF GREEN 
The stories in A Curtain 
of Green, 
Welty's first 
collection, demonstrate both the photographer's careful eye 
and the beginning writer's dependence upon that eye. Although 
this collection made Welty's reputation and has remained one 
of her most admired works, it exhibits only flashes of the 
modernist complexity that will inform Welty's later work.5 
The characters in the stories are frequently at some distance 
from the omniscient narrator. Their characterizations stem 
primarily from details of external appearance and behavior, 
and the plot revolves around a specific event. Yet the 
interior world of the characters seems based almost entirely 
on the imagination of the writer. Having little knowledge of 
such interior worlds, the writer sometimes uses dialogue that 
is totally unlikely, given the condition of the characters. 
According to Michael Kreyling, however, the stories in 
this collection address the modern age's "moral and 
philosophical dilemmas as directly as anyone else's [work]" 
("Modernism" 19). See also Peter Schmidt for discussion of 
the engagement of these stories with social and historical 
forces. 

33 
The words spoken in sign language by Albert Morgan, the deaf 
man in "The Key," for example, are completely unrealistic for 
a man deaf all his life and poorly educated—as suggested in 
the story. He would not think of the key he has found as a 
"symbol," nor would he talk about marrying his wife because of 
"being afflicted in the same way, unable to speak, lonely 
because of that" (CS 32). Such vocabulary and ideas belong to 
the writer—or, perhaps, to the writer in the guise of the 
red-haired man in the story who observes the deaf couple. 
Almost all the stories focus on people who are in some 
way physically or mentally impaired: feeble-minded Lily Daw, 
slow—almost illiterate—Ruby Fisher, deaf-mutes Albert and 
Ellie Morgan, the bigamist Mr. Marblehall, the carnival 
freaks—Keela and the Petrified Man, the murderer Howard, the 
eccentric suicide Clytie. The few stories which concern 
ordinary people who are normal, physically and mentally, place 
them in crises in their lives that have temporarily deranged 
them: the recent widow, Mrs. Larkin; the eater-cornered China 
Grove postmistress; the lonely, dying travelling salesman; the 
jazz musician receiving word of his wife's suicide. 
These stories generally follow Aristotle's unifying 
techniques, concentrating on a single scene spanning most 
often a time frame of an hour or an afternoon with all story 
elements building toward one single effect. The omniscient 
narrator occasionally steps into the role of one or more 
characters, but only briefly. The minute, careful, and 

34 
comprehensive description of character and setting conveys 
much of the movement of the stories. They are almost like 
short mood pieces which elicit intense but transitory feelings 
and leave half-conscious unanswered questions in their wake. 
They suggest the sensations we receive in looking at old 
snapshots, especially if we are curious about lives outside 
our own familiar ken. External facts of nature are captured 
completely, but often the interior world of human nature, 
despite its fascinating suggestiveness, remains elusive. 
Further, the characters themselves, especially given 
their essential difference from the mainstream of society, 
could in fact be found almost anywhere in rural America. 
Welty gives them in some instances Mississippi tags either of 
address or destination, but they are merely tags (sometimes 
even hypothetical ones, like the non-existent town of 
Victory). Little in the action or setting of the stories, 
even those bearing Mississippi place names, would mark the 
characters specifically as Mississippians. 
The one Mississippi characteristic we do see in some 
stories is the speech pattern of country people: "Why I Live 
at the P.O" is the best example. In her monologue, the 
protagonist uses typical pet family names (Papa-Daddy), and 
the common first and middle proper names for girls (Stella-
Rondo and Shirley-T.). She uses the slightly ungrammatical 
phrases ("say any such of a thing") and the hyperbole 
("mortally wounded") that are second nature to southern 

35 
country folk. "Why I Live at the P.O." has justly become a 
classic, not only because of its accurate speech but also 
because it brings into play the full power of Welty's comic 
imagination—another of her great strengths as a story-teller. 
She will repeat this combination with equal success in the 
novella The Ponder Heart, published in the mid-fifties and 
later adapted for the Broadway stage. 
Indeed, the title of this first collection points us in 
the direction of the theater, where an opaque curtain 
intervenes between audience and characters. When the heavy 
curtain rises, the characters stand revealed, but only for a 
brief time—longer than for a photograph, of course, but not 
long enough to fully satisfy. The complex portraits of 
everyday people will begin to emerge in Welty's next stage. 
FOLLOWING AFTER: SOJOURNERS AND WAYFARERS 
With The Robber 
Bridegroom, 
The Wide Net, 
and 
Delta 
Wedding, Welty began to move more surely into the first stage 
of development of her fictional pattern of transitional eras 
in history and human survival of them. Also, she began to use 
more consciously artistic methods of manipulating parallel 
times to enhance meaning in the novels. Added to the 
exquisite external detail of the photographic eye, as well, 
are greater penetrations into the interior worlds of the 
characters. Typically, young protagonists in the works awaken 
to the possibilities of love and direction, and in almost all 

36 
cases, follow after their beloveds. Like Laurel Hand in The 
Optimist's 
Daughter, 
Welty the artist was learning "to work 
toward and into her pattern, not to sketch peripheries" (OD 
161) . 
While the fictional Laurel learned from her husband, the 
primarily self-taught Eudora Welty learned much about 
writing, I believe, from E. M. Forster, whose novels she 
greatly admired. I suggest that Welty examined his classic 
book on writing, Aspects 
of 
the 
Novel, 
quite early. In 1927, 
while Welty was still a teenager, Forster had published the 
widely popular and still influential Aspects, 
originally a 
series of lectures he had delivered at Trinity College, 
Cambridge. It seems highly likely that Welty, the budding 
fiction writer, well-trained in British literature, would 
value the observations of this admired, established novelist, 
a novelist whose best-known epigraph, "only connect," became 
crucial to her own thinking. Besides, she had also begun her 
work as a book reviewer during the early forties; she would 
certainly have been aware of classic works on the subject of 
novel writing. In 1947, we know, she quoted from Aspects 
of 
the 
Novel 
in her first major lecture on writing, "Looking at 
Short Stories" (Eye 85) . An expanded version of the lecture, 
published in installments by the Atlantic 
in 1949, also 
alludes to Forster's Aspects, 
as well as to his fiction. 
But we need not speculate. Her fiction itself provides 
evidence of his influence, as we shall see later in chapters 

37 
on The Wide Wet and Delta 
Wedding. 
I am not suggesting that 
Welty adhered slavishly to Forster's Aspects 
as she worked on 
her early fiction. 
Welty's imagination needed no such spur. 
But I do suggest that Forster's ideas on fiction-writing were 
important to her. If we think of Forster's specific 
excursions into the realm of fictional creativity as a gloss 
on Welty's work, as I will do especially in discussing the 
works of this first period, we gain further insight into the 
experimental variation in her technigues. 
GATHERING HOME 
Since I will examine in this chapter the second stage of 
Welty's fictional journeying, including analyses of 
illustrative stories, I will comment only comment here on 
Welty's third and final fictional stage. This stage includes 
the two novels published in the early seventies, after the 
artist's long lull in publication. The novels of this time, 
which will be discussed extensively in Chapters 5 and 6, also 
follow naturally the essential Mississippi pattern begun in 
the first stage. All through the sixties, Welty had been 
working on Losing 
Battles, 
scene by scene, whenever she could 
spare time from her family caregiving responsibilities. After 
the deaths of her mother and her brother in 1966, Welty 
published The Optimist's 
Daughter in 1969, first in The New 
Yorker. 
In 1970, she published the long-awaited novel, 
Losing 
Battles, 
to a mixed reception. In 1972, after heavily 

38 
revising it, she published The Optimist's 
Daughter as a book. 
It received a Pulitzer Prize for fiction. 
The two novels could hardly be more different 
stylistically. One is long, talky, overflowing with voices 
and detail; the other is short, stripped, and bare. Yet both 
converge thematically on a threatened family home and follow 
the actions of survivors. In them, I believe, Welty completes 
what she has to say about surviving. If she has not returned 
to fiction in the quarter century since, it may be because she 
is fully satisfied with the scope and order of the fictional 
world she has created. 
WANDERING: "THE WANDERERS" AND "THE BRIDE OF THE INNISFALLEN" 
But in the forties, in the second phase of Welty's 
creative expression, such satisfaction was nowhere in 
evidence. Welty's forties' protagonists exhibit an 
interesting shift in motivation and behavior as, I contend, 
did Welty herself. Further, I would suggest that E. M. 
Forster again is partially responsible, this time not through 
his ideas but through his direct recognition of Welty's 
genius. The special bond that Forster thus established with 
the young writer in her highly productive years in the 
forties, Welty revealed publicly late in her career. In 1986, 
at a Montreal conference celebrating Forster's centenary, 
Welty read aloud a private letter she had received from 
Forster in 1947. At the conference, Welty had been asked to 

39 
speak, along with a small panel of other distinguished 
writers, about "the ways in which E. M. Forster had been an 
important presence in their lives, an unseen figure 
occasionally guiding their pens" (Herz and Martin 285). Her 
reply—and the letter itself—warrant quoting in some detail. 
I had published a number of short stories but I wasn't 
known anywhere, and I received this letter one day in 
Jackson, Mississippi. It was written in New York City, 
and dated 28 April, 1947. I copied it off to bring: 
Dear Miss Welty: Finding myself in your country I 
feel I should like to give myself the pleasure of 
writing you a line and telling you how much I enjoy 
your work *The Wide Net'. All the wild and lovely 
things it brings up have often been with me and 
delighted me. I am afraid that I am unlikely to 
have the good fortune of meeting you while I am over 
here since my itinerary keeps me to the North and to 
the West. Still 
there 
are meetings 
which are 
not 
precisely 
personal 
and I've 
had the advantage 
of 
one 
of those 
through 
you, 
and I would like 
to thank 
you 
for 
i t . 
With kind regards and all good wishes. 
Yours sincerely, E. M. Forster. 
Well, it was several moments before I was able to read 
the signature, partly it was his handwriting and partly 
it was my disbelief. The letter was kindness, undreamed-
of kindness. It was also something that belongs to 
another realm, another kingdom in the sense of animal, 
vegetable or mineral kingdoms. It was response. It was 
what I knew Mr. Forster meant me to receive from him. It 
had been received and had given pleasure. The letter 
carries some marks of tears and when I copied it off to 
bring to this conference my tears came back. 
(Herz and Martin 298, emphasis mine) 
Certainly, Forster's was not the first positive response 
she had received to her work.6 But he may well have been the 
most famous and honored novelist yet to encourage her, to in 
^elty also received an encouraging letter in 1943 from 
William Faulkner, who liked The Robber Bridegroom. 
For 
details, see Chapter 3. 

40 
effect welcome her to the inside circle of artists of stature. 
Further, his positive comments were on The Wide Net, 
the 
collection of stories that had received the most stinging 
rebukes from several critics in the United States. Diana 
Trilling, writing in The Nation, 
for example, claimed that 
Welty's "technical virtuosity" exceeded the "uses to which it 
is put."7 
But Forster's approval, a vote of confidence in 
fact, must have encouraged Welty to move ahead with her 
experimental emphasis on the protagonists' interior worlds. 
During the period of the wanderers, Welty turned aside 
temporarily from the background of Mississippi history and 
geography to concentrate on the inner life of an independent 
woman, particularly an artistic one. 
These wanderers appear in the works of the late forties 
and early fifties. The first to feature a wanderer was a 
short work, Music 
from 
Spain 
(1948), set in San Francisco, 
later revised and collected in the interconnected suite of 
stories (Welty's early designation), published as The 
Golden 
Apples 
(1949). The novella, The Ponder 
Heart 
(1954), and 
another collection of short stories, The Bride 
of 
the 
Innisfallen 
(1955), followed. With the possible exception of 
The Ponder 
Heart, 
the exterior world of time and place is less 
important to these works than is the interior world of the 
wanderer. In two particular stories from this stage, the 
7In Author 
and Agent Michael Kreyling gives more detail 
about the criticisms by Trilling and others (100-101). 

41 
wanderers are female protagonists, who explore various paths 
of development. Since these stories especially reflect the 
artistic mind of their creator, I will treat them briefly here 
rather than in later, separate chapters. The two, "The 
Wanderers" and "The Bride of the Innisfallen," feature 
characters whom I think of as "eaters of muscadines," women 
who cannot find satisfaction in the conventional roles for 
women in society. 
These protagonists differ sharply from the typical young 
protagonist of Welty's first stage, like Jenny Lockhart in "At 
the Landing," the story ending The Wide Net. 
As we shall 
understand when we discuss that story in Chapter 4, Jenny 
Lockhart strikes off to the river as a "following after" of a 
potent, life-giving male, planning to wait for him at river's 
edge no matter what indignities she might suffer. The second-
stage protagonists, however, have no such visions in mind. 
Virgie Rainey of "The Wanderers" and the American wife of "The 
Bride" expect to travel alone indefinitely, looking for 
something neither one can quite yet define. The only 
certainty that either exhibits in our last glimpse of them is 
that no male will be the purpose of their travel or 
necessarily await them at their destination. It is not that 
these women feel hostility to men or to the institution of 
marriage. It is rather that they long for "something more," 
perhaps for the ephemeral, alluring vision found in Yeats' 

42 
poem "The Wandering Aengus," from which The Golden 
Apples 
takes its name. 
"The Wanderers" 
"The Wanderers" is the last story in The Golden Apples, 
a 
cycle of connected short stories that focus on the community 
of Morgana, an imaginary rural town in the Yazoo Delta. The 
book, considered Welty's best by many, has received endless 
critical attention. Many critics have been especially 
interested in its dimensions of Greek and Norse mythology.8 
In the fictional town of Morgana, Virgie Rainey and her 
mother, Mrs. Fate Rainey (Miss Katie), live on the outskirts 
of the town, beyond the margins of its conventional society. 
Since they are outsiders, their stories open and close the 
seven story volume of The Golden Apples, 
providing a frame 
tale of sorts. Significantly, Mrs. Rainey comes originally 
from the Tennessee Hills in northeastern Mississippi, the same 
section that Troy Flavin, the overseer in Delta 
Wedding, calls 
home, and the setting for the late novel, Losing 
Battles. 
Katie Rainey, like her ancestors, continues the tradition of 
subsistence farming and quilt-making that we shall soon see in 
extended detail in Losing 
Battles. 
By virtue of her origins, 
Katie Rainey, like Troy Flavin, is thought to be a distinctly 
8For seminal discussions, see Thomas McHaney's "Eudora 
Welty and the Multitudinous Golden Apples," Ruth Vande Kieft's 
Eudora Welty, 
and Daniele Pitavy-Souques' "Technique as Myth: 
The Structure of The Golden 
Apples." 

43 
lower-class person by the Delta natives. Widowed early, Miss 
Katie has lived alone with her daughter, in a ramshackle house 
"beyond the pavement," for almost twenty-three years. 
The detail Mrs. Rainey offers about the community in her 
opening monologue is arresting—much of it accurate, too, 
according to subsequent episodes told by an omniscient author. 
The information pertinent to our examination of Virgie Rainey 
concerns the married life of her neighbors, King and Snowdie 
MacLain, both descendants of the founding families in the 
nearby town of MacLain. Although Mrs. Rainey omits pertinent 
information about her own relationship with King MacLain that 
later surfaces at her funeral, her early monologue hints that 
King MacLain fathered her daughter, Virgie, in addition to his 
wife Snowdie's twin boys. Of course, Mrs. Rainey gives her 
listener fair warning that there might be inaccuracies in her 
account when she announces her storytelling philosophy: 
"Everybody to their own visioning" (GA 10). 
That King MacLain represents the life force of Jupiter is 
quickly established. Nor is there any doubt that almost every 
woman in the community of Morgana, regardless of age or 
status, is uncommonly interested in MacLain's affairs and 
welcomes his passing interest. Mrs. Rainey suggests one 
reason, sheer excitement: King, unlike other husbands, is 
endlessly unpredictable. Her own husband, "Fate Rainey," she 
explains, "ain't got a surprise in him, and proud of it" (GA 

44 
6) . But the Morgana folks seldom see King; in his role as 
fertility god, he spends most of his life wandering. 
The early hint that King MacLain may have fathered Virgie 
Rainey gains credence from the facts of Virgie's life. By far 
the most vital and gifted of the children of Morgana, she 
remains always an outsider. With her legal father dead by the 
time she is in her teens, and her older brother killed in 
World War I, Virgie lacks male guidance or authority. Like her 
mother, Virgie is more attuned to the natural world than to 
communal conventions and becomes an unchecked force of nature. 
Even as a child, Virgie bared her wildness to the 
community. On "speaking-nights," when all the town's families 
gathered together to hear speakers and listen to music, 
"Virgie and her older brother Victor ran wild all over 
everywhere, assaulting the crowd." Virgie is so energetic 
that not even her brother can catch her. "She never rested as 
long as the music played . . . " (GA 45). From her earliest 
days then, Virgie, like her strange, German-born music teacher 
Miss Eckhart, has danced to her own tune, oblivious to the 
conventions of the world she inhabits. 
Only the music teacher has touched Virgie, for she 
recognizes the frightening passion that Virgie expresses at 
the piano. For a time, Virgie submitted to Miss Eckhart's 
overwhelming love for her musical gift and thus for her, 
accepting from Miss Eckhart the "gift of the Beethoven, as 

45 
with the dragon's blood" (GA 243), the gift that allowed her 
to experience positively the passion that consumes her. 
But ironically, Virgie's artistic ability increases her 
outsider status. In a fine article on "Art and Artistry in 
Morgana, Mississippi," Louis Rubin explains the paradoxical 
position of Virgie, of Miss Eckhart, of any true artist, in 
relationship to the community. 
Places like Morgana—human communities—exist to ward off 
and mask, through ritual and social complexity, an 
awareness of the finally unanswerable and inexplicable 
nature of existence in time and eternity. They are 
founded on the agreement—it is an unacknowledged compact 
between its members—not to admit to the existence of 
chaos and violence that cannot be controlled, explained, 
scaled down to manageable proportion. . . . And anyone 
who cannot enter into such a compact, cannot play the 
game by the agreed-upon rules, is a threat to the 
security and place of all the others. 
(Gallery 
62) 
Virgie can't play by the rules. Nor can she acknowledge 
the grief she feels. Virgie has hardened her heart past 
feeling either the joy of her gift or the pain of her 
suffering. Only twice, once during a recital, do we see any 
crack in the "callous[ed] over . . . opaque" shield that 
Virgie early formed to protect her heart (GA 233): 
Virgie had a sudden recollection of recital night at Miss 
Eckhart's—the moment when she was to be called out. She 
was thirteen, waiting outside, on guard at a vast 
calming 
spectacle 
of turmoil, 
and saving it. A little 
drop 
spilled, 
she remembered it now: an anxiety which brought 
her to the point of sickness, that back in there [the 
recital parlor] they were laughing at her mother's hat. 
(GA 212, emphasis mine) 
The second incident occurs in "The Wanderers," when old 
Mr. King McLain, home for good at last, gathers with the rest 

46 
of the community at Virgie's house upon the death of her 
mother. Surrounded by people who have not set foot in her 
house for over twenty years, Virgie keeps up her constant 
refrain, "Don't touch me. Don't touch me" 
(GA 212). But as 
the community carries out its solemn duties to the dead in the 
funeral service, King MacLain does touch her: he makes "a 
hideous face at Virgie, like a silent yell. . . . a yell at 
everything—including death, not leaving it out—and he did 
not mind taking his present animosity out on Virgie Rainey; 
indeed, he chose her" (GA 227) . 
But Mr. King MacLain, an old man, had butted like a goat 
against the wall he wouldn't agree to himself or 
recognize. What fortress indeed would ever come down, 
except before hard little horns, a rush and a stampede of 
the pure wish to live? 
(GA 233) 
The "moment of alliance" that Virgie feels in that instant 
frees her heart, refreshes her. If only temporarily, she 
recognizes "kinship"; "it lacked future as well as past; but 
she knew when even a rarefied thing had become a matter of 
loyalty and alliance" (GA 227) . 
Virgie's thought resembles that of Ellen Fairchild's 
understanding in Delta 
Wedding that "one moment told you the 
great things, one moment was enough for you to know the 
greatest thing" (240). Ellen's thought emerges as she rides 
under the stars to an evening picnic, pregnant, with her 
husband at her side, "breathing a little heavily in a rhythm 
that brought them sometimes together." Her children follow in 
separate wagons. Ellen, contemplating the "repeating fields, 

47 
the repeating cycles of season and her own life," finds 
"something in the monotony itself that was beautiful, 
rewarding" (DW 240). 
Virgie is alone, however. No husband, no children, no 
family, no friends—only the "moment of alliance" with Mr. 
King MacLain. The nearest she has ever come to romantic love, 
so far as we know, was in her teen-age affair with a sailor, 
Bucky Moffitt, whose "wild spirit" still—even in her present 
bereavement—brings a smile to her lips. For her, as for 
Jenny Lockhart in "At the Landing," only the dominant, 
forceful male, whose vitality matches her own, commands her 
attention. But Bucky is dead, killed in World War I; her 
other men have been "drunk," "embarrassed," or "loud" and 
"harmless" (GA 242). Further, as a passionate, sensuous 
woman, Virgie is guilty of "always wishing for a little more 
of what had just been" (GA 220) . 
Nor does Virgie have her art for sustenance, having 
abandoned the Beethoven in her teens to play the accompaniment 
to silent movies in the Bijou Theater in MacLain. The 
undisciplined child could not, would not, sustain the 
disciplined habit of commitment essential to the artist. With 
all the talent in the world, a gift that people remember 
twenty-three years later, the young Virgie could not accept 
the responsibility of direction and purpose. She found it 
easier to play in the darkened movie house for other people's 
dreams. After Bucky Moffitt, after her disastrous escapade in 

48 
Memphis, Virgie may have believed she no longer deserved the 
gift, anyway. The crippling mixture of pride, passion, pain, 
and solitude has stilled her playing hands. 
In the final scene, Virgie interrupts her impulsive 
"escape" from Morgana to rest for a time on the stile before 
the MacLain Courthouse, just seven miles down the road from 
home. Rain is falling: "October rain on Mississippi fields. 
The rain of fall, maybe on the whole South, for all she knew 
on the everywhere" (GA 244).9 Memory replays Virgie's life 
for her, lingering on Miss Eckhart's gift to her of 
the 
Beethoven, and the "beat of time" endless in Miss Eckhart's 
picture of Perseus holding the head of the Medusa. Virgie 
sits on the stile, "bereaved, hatless, unhidden now, in the 
rain. . . . all to herself" (GA 242). 
But events do not end there. For an old Negro woman, 
holding a red hen, comes, sits down on the stile, too, and 
says "'Mornin'" to Virgie. 
Then she and the old beggar woman, the old black 
thief, were there alone 
and together 
in the shelter of 
the big public tree, listening to the magical percussion, 
the world beating in their ears. They heard through 
falling rain the running of the horse and bear, the 
stroke of the leopard, the dragon's crusty slither, and 
the glimmer and the trumpet of the swan. 
(GA 244, emphasis mine) 
In this tableau, Virgie experiences another moment of 
alliance. The "old beggar woman," an outsider, too, welcomes 
9In Chronicle, 
Albert Devlin notes that this line echoes 
the language of Gabriel Conroy in the conclusion of James 
Joyce's "The Dead" (204). 

49 
her with a morning greeting.10 Both then linger comfortably 
in the natural world, caressed by the rain of "everywhere," 
hearing in it the beat of time, thinking of the beat reflected 
in the constellations, "far out and endless . . . which the 
heart could read over many a night" (GA 243). 
Last in Virgie's list of constellations is the swan, 
which according to Gail Mortimer, both Yeats and Welty 
considered a symbol for "the solitary human soul" (Swan 13). 
Virgie's knowledge of life's beauty and terror, implicit in 
the story of Perseus and the Medusa as well as Siegfried and 
the Dragon, has rendered her solitary all her life. But she 
is no longer completely alone. King MacLain knows her, and so 
does the old black woman. What comfort there might be in 
alliance is hers. With it comes the courage to be daring at 
last, to indulge her need to see that "everywhere." 
As a Welty protagonist, then, Virgie has at last 
developed the vision that can hold life's realities in view 
without flinching. The brief recognition of kinship with the 
father represented by King MacLain has pierced the shield held 
before her damaged heart, if only for a moment. As she sits 
in the healing rain by the cemetery, she is lifted for the 
present time, at least, out of the wasteland that has been her 
life. Whether she will develop from there, we cannot know. 
10Thomas L. McHaney argues that the old black thief is 
Minerva, who had come to help out at the funeral and had 
stolen some of Miss Katie's things. He associates her with 
Minerva, the goddess of wisdom, who often assumed the guise of 
an old woman (135). 

50 
She has squandered her gift, lost perhaps totally the power of 
her hands to create art. Until she can lift them again to 
participate in the life around her, Virgie will remain only a 
partially realized heroine in the Welty canon. 
"The Bride of the Innisfallen" 
In "The Bride of the Innisfallen," Welty explores the 
various stages of commitment that follow declarations of 
romantic love. An American wife travels by boat-train from 
London to Fishguard and thence by ferry to Cork in Ireland. 
Sharing the wife's compartment is an assortment of people, 
half of them male, half female—mostly Irish—who apparently 
have little in common except their destination, their shared 
food, and the idle conversation that develops as they speed 
through the night. They jostle each other, shift in and out 
of the compartment in peculiarly stylized motions, and comment 
on the world that passes by in the train corridor and outside 
the train's window. 
The experimental structure of this story has led critics 
to focus most of their attention on its journey motif, a 
somber theme that clashes somewhat with the drawing room 
comedy aspect of the story's surface. Form and content mesh 
more easily, I suggest, when we consider them in light of E. 
M. Forster's discussion of an aesthetic aspect. Literature's 
aesthetic component of pattern, he explains, can be so 
definite as to convey a pictorial representation of a work 

51 
(Aspects 
213-14). The pictorial image of the major part of 
"The Bride of the Innisfalien" is a bird-cage, filled with 
lovebirds. Using that image as template illuminates the story 
and Welty's purpose in demonstrating yet another set of 
romantic illusions. 
A conversation in the compartment about "budgies" points 
to the dominant pictorial image of lovebirds in a bird-cage. 
One of the passengers raises "budgies," short for budgerigars-
-popular cage birds even better known as parakeets or love 
birds. The budgie owner describes the interesting features of 
his birds, some of whom sing, some of whom "engage in 
conversation rather than sing." He adds cryptically, "I might 
be listening to the conversation," as he looks around the 
train compartment where the passengers chatter away. He 
lingers over the description of one particular budgie who had 
an exotic and voracious appetite for "inappropriate food," an 
appetite that led eventually to its death—still talking 
(BI 
61) . 
Although we learn through their conversation that the 
passengers represent various stages of engagement and 
marriage, the general impression they give of lovebirds in a 
cage is reinforced by the striking visual images of the 
passengers, occasionally in individual description but more 
especially in the amazing choreography of their movements 
throughout the story. The story opens, for example, with the 
entrance of the dominant middle-aged Irish woman, who is 

52 
leaving her husband temporarily to visit family in Cork. She 
is described in the shape and colors of a particularly 
handsome budgie: her eyes glitter; she cocks her head to one 
side (BJ 50); she has "great white heavy eyelids" (BJ 49); on 
her hat, directly over her eyes, is a "gold pin in the shape 
of a pair of links" (BJ 50); her blue hat is settled on her 
head "like an Indian bonnet"; from out of the hat's confines, 
her hair is pulled into two "auburn-and-gray pomegranates 
along her cheeks" (BJ 47); a "chaos of blue veil" falls down 
behind from the back of the hat (BJ 50); her raincoat—which 
she never removes—flows down her back in its "salmony-pink 
and yellow stripes . . . expanding as it went" (BJ 47). 
The other six passengers—for a time seven—also 
represent some stage of marital commitment. In addition to 
the dominant Irish matron, there are the American wife; a 
pregnant young Irish wife who displays her grandmother's 
needlepoint depiction of a "Wee Cottage," and shepherds an 
unattended little boy, Victor, back from a family wedding in 
London; a "small, passionate-looking" married man from 
Connemara (BJ 48); and two young lovers, recently become 
engaged. When the train reaches Wales, a young Welsh 
schoolgirl joins them briefly, but buries herself in a book. 
When she gets off, a tall Welshman takes her place. Although 
we learn nothing about him, he prompts the conversation that 
reveals information about the other passengers. 

53 
Even more arresting and relevant are the details 
emphasizing the sounds of the passengers and the look of their 
abrupt, jerky, highly stylized movements within the confines 
of the small compartment. The passengers talk and sing; 
Victor whistles incessantly except to sing or run up and down 
the scales of his harmonica; all, but for the American wife, 
constantly jump up and down, shift seats, rush out into the 
corridor and back in again, fidget with the window shades, 
haul down food from the overhead bins, eat, fling orange 
peels. Most telling are the three sudden, repetitious, now-
you-see-him, now-you-don't attempts of the Welshman to get off 
the train. His hair in "two corner bushes" (BI 55), he hops 
off the train from the outside door only to pop back up again 
instantly, having mistaken the station (BI 73-4). Without 
leaving the door, he chatters again of raising birds—"a cock 
and a hen?"—before dropping again at the train's stop into 
the darkness. And up again he pops. And again he turns the 
conversation to the birds, trying to elicit confirmation from 
the bird-owner that the budgie with the inappropriate appetite 
did, in fact, die "of longings for food from far away" 
(BI 
75). Since the next stop is the right one at last for him, he 
drops away into the "Welsh black, this time for keeps" (BI 
76) . 
The rush and jostle of the movements combined with the 
rarely ceasing song and chatter of the people confined in the 
compartment convey an atmosphere of utter chaotic confusion, 

54 
precisely the atmosphere of a crowded bird cage within a 
private home or in the larger aviary of a public zoo. So 
realistic is the impression conveyed that readers must use an 
act of conscious will to separate the players. To direct us 
to the important point, Welty uses common artistic techniques: 
the all-important opening and closing sections of the story; 
the introduction of the inquisitive Welshman, part of and yet 
apart from the central players; the Welshman's thrice-repeated 
actions to emphasize a central point. 
And to what then are we pointed as we comprehend this 
little band of wanderers, speeding physically through the 
night, facing dangerous waters, in order to reach Innisfree, 
the isle of destiny? Paradoxically, all are caged in by 
traditional bonds of engagement, marriage, and family that 
will permit no free individual flight once they reach their 
destination. But among them all, only the American wife longs 
for such flight, as the Welshman's talk has already hinted. 
Before his final exit the Welshman reads her passport out 
loud, as if it were a "poem . . . with the last verse missing" 
(BT 75). Immediately, then, he asks once again about the 
"prize bird" of the man from Connemara, the bird who "died of 
longings for food from far away" (BJ 75). 
When the Innisfalien 
docks on Irish soil the following 
morning, the American wife emerges on deck, counterpoint to a 
traditional bride—all dressed in white—who, having also 
traveled on the ferry, now appears for the first time. As she 

55 
stands by the rail, smiling, "all ready to be met" (BI 79), 
the bride's destiny, like that of the American's fellow 
passengers, is clear. It is only the American, sole among 
them all, who steps onto the isle of destiny with no one to 
meet her, no one or no thing to restrict her exploration and 
wandering, no check to her effort to experience the "all" of 
her dream, first described as an American passion in The 
Robber 
Bridegroom 
and "The Still Moment." 
As she wanders the streets of Cork, "among people busy at 
encounters, meetings, it seemed to her reunions" (80), the 
American wife contemplates this passion for comprehensive 
experience. In a passage that hints again at the artist's 
dilemma, never far away in Welty's work, she reflects that she 
is no longer lonely, that loneliness accompanies a union "with 
the joy being drawn out of it," not the solitary wandering of 
a passionate person. 
If she could never tell her husband her secret, 
perhaps she would never tell it at all. You must never 
betray pure joy—the kind you were born and began with— 
either by hiding it or by parading it in front of 
people's eyes; they didn't want to be shown it. And 
still you must tell it. Is there no way? she thought— 
for here I am, this far. 
(BI 81-82) 
As her day of wandering draws to a close, and dusk begins 
to close out the light, the rain begins to fall, the healing 
rain after the dangerous waters. The rain is falling even as 
the American girl joins her "fellow writers" to send a 
telegram to her husband, a telegram she fails to send, for 
what finally can she say? She feels herself to be a "heresy," 

56 
occupying a false position in professing any commitment other 
than the one to destiny as it might reveal itself through the 
"upper window" at which she gazes, the window "from which the 
mystery will never go" (BI 82). Her compulsion, as was 
Circe's, is to unlock that mortal mystery, whatever the cost. 
If, like the Connemara man's budgie, she must continue to 
sample exotic foods from far away, then she must also accept 
the risk involved. So the American girl wanders in the rainy 
dusk, knowing—like Virgie Rainey after her mother's funeral— 
all she can bear to know at the moment: "light and rain, 
light and rain, dark, light, and rain" (BI 82). 
The missing last verse of the story read in the girl's 
passport begins here in the rainy dusk of Cork as she pauses 
at length outside a pub. She listens to a man inside telling 
his story and shouting in the middle of it, "Ah, it's a 
heresy, I told him" (BI 82). And then the American girl walks 
into the "lovely room full of strangers" (BI 83). For the 
artist, too, passion is expended and intimacy found among 
strangers, first the fictional ones who act out the story, and 
then the literal ones who read the finished tale. For the 
artist revealed in Welty's work—at least the one indicated in 
the American bride of Innisfallen—is one at home with Henry 
Green's definition of prose, one later echoed by Welty: 
"Prose should be a long intimacy between strangers with no 
direct appeal to what both may have known" (Green 88). For 
the American wife, the longing is for the exotic, the unknown, 

57 
the tantalizing expectation that what one has longed for will 
appear just around the corner. Her longing echoes Virgie's, 
the woman on one plane the daughter of Jupiter, but on the 
other the daughter of Fate Rainey. Both women see clearly 
that the conventional paths for women are marriage and 
procreation. 
But the woman artist, moved more by interior longing than 
exterior societal conventions, faces a complicated road to 
fulfillment of desire. The solitary male artist, one such as 
the Spanish musician in Music from Spain, 
inspires awe and 
adulation in his search for experience and truth. But the 
solitary female artist often inspires suspicion or pity. 
Although we are not privy to the circumstances of the private 
individual, Eudora Welty, the intimate disclosure of the two 
protagonists we have discussed suggests the complexities 
facing her during the middle stage of her fictional 
productivity. 
Having considered parts of two major works concerning the 
"wandering" phase of Welty's composite protagonist, The 
Golden 
Apples, 
1949, and The Bride 
of the Innisfallen, 
1955, we turn 
back now to separate analyses of the early "following after" 
period of the composite protagonist, the works in which Welty 
begins to forge a pattern of time and place: The 
Robber 
Bridegroom, 
1942; The Wide Net, 1943; and Delta 
Wedding, 1946. 

58 
THE ROBBER BRIDEGROOM: MIRACULOUS ADVENTURE TIME 
"Demon Writing": 
"As soon as I start 
writing 
on it, 
off 
it 
goes with me hanging 
on." 
Welty, Letter (Kreyling Agent 
45) 
Despite the "once-upon-a-time" mood of Eudora Welty's 
first novel, a work usually considered to be a fairy tale-
fantasy, The Robber 
Bridegroom 
recreates a particular time in 
history to convey not only the spirit but also the reality of 
the Natchez section of modern-day Mississippi as it existed 
under Spanish rule in the late eighteenth century. This work 
is the first in Welty's pattern of American historical 
experience. So well did Eudora Welty succeed in depicting 
"timeless" time, however, that she herself finally had to 
explain years later that The Robber 
Bridegroom 
was her 
"historical" fiction. Her characters, she claimed in a 1975 
talk to the Mississippi Historical Society, were "children of 
their time, and fathered, rather proudly, by its spirit. If I 
carried out well enough my strongest intentions, fantasy does 
not take precedence over that spirit" ("Fairy Tale" 314). In 
recent years, critics have attended more carefully to the 
history in The Robber 
Bridegroom, 
but Welty's remarks suggest 
that the historical era of the novel deserves still more 
exploration than it has yet received.1 
xFor discussions that address-either specific history or 
historical implications in the novel, see Albert Devlin 
(Chronicle), 
Jan Gretland, Pearl McHaney (52), Warren French, 
and Charles E. Davis. 

59 
This short novel also deserves more careful attention, 
however, because not only does it recreate a significant time 
in the shaping of the American continent, but it does so in a 
place whose historical development has been neglected and 
misunderstood in American history. Further, in The 
Robber 
Bridegroom 
Welty clearly announces the themes and techniques 
that will occupy her for a lifetime. As a preview of Welty's 
developing thematic concern, The Robber 
Bridegroom 
is central 
to Welty studies. For that reason, we will examine this text 
at some length. 
In The Robber 
Bridegroom 
Welty explores the myriad 
romantic illusions and distortions of vision that govern human 
choices in times of cultural change and loss. In the novel's 
climactic scene, the only wholly serious one, Clement 
Musgrove, "an innocent of the wilderness, and a planter of 
Rodney's Landing," looks for the first time upon the full 
reality of his changing world (RB 182). With his innocent 
eyes at last open to deceit and betrayal all around him, 
Clement retires to a circle of stones in a pine grove to 
reflect on his condition. "Now," he announces, "there must be 
a choice made" (RB 141). To clarify the issue governing his 
situation, Clement asks himself two questions, the answers to 
which will guide his choice of action. "What exactly is this 
[issue] now?" . . . "What is the place and time?" 
In subsequent novels, Welty will continue to recreate 
specific places and times—specific chronotopes—which must be 

60 
understood by her protagonists before they can understand the 
meaning of what's happened to them and make their choices 
about how now to live. Each of her protagonists will face 
difficult choices in times of specific cultural dislocations 
and transitions that must also be understood by readers who 
hope to understand the full significance of Welty's texts. 
In plot time, The Robber 
Bridegroom 
depicts just over one 
year in the last decade of the eighteenth century; the events 
of the plot take place in the Natchez area of what was at that 
time the Spanish-governed province of Louisiana. The Natchez 
area lay along the eastern banks of the lower Mississippi 
River, extending from present-day Natchez, the southern 
terminus of the ancient animal trail called the Natchez Trace, 
further south to what is now Louisiana. The Natchez Trace was 
the only land link at that time from the United States to the 
Spanish area. The first census of the Natchez District, taken 
in 1785, showed 1619 people, including 498 slaves (Sass 4). 
The colony, during the final years of Spanish rule, has been 
described as a "far periphery of British civilization . . . 
where ruthless exploitation was a way of life . . . where 
disorder, violence, and human degradation were commonplace" 
(quoted in Rothstein 97).2 No moral compass for behavior 
2The quotation comes from the 1986 work, Voyagers 
to 
the 
West: 
A Passage 
in the Peopling 
of America 
on the Eve of 
the 
Revolution, 
by Bernard Bailyn. One of the chapters (488-92) 
describes the life in early Natchez of William Dunbar, "a son 
of the Scottish Enlightment [sic] as well as of a British 
lord." 

61 
existed on this frontier. But the abundant natural resources, 
which inspired larger-than-life fantasies of success and 
wealth, offset for many adventurers the inherent risks and 
dangers of the area. 
The Old World dominion of the Natchez area is well 
established in The Robber Bridegroom. 
Clement's land grant 
has been bestowed by the King of Spain; hoping to obtain a 
Spanish passport, Jamie Lockhart asks Clement, a respected 
land owner, for a recommendation to the Spanish Governor; both 
men conduct their business affairs in the commercial center of 
the "Spanish country"—New Orleans; and the latest rage in 
New Orleans is a Spanish automaton in an iron skirt (RB 25, 
19, 182, 27). Welty is meticulous about these details, thus 
deliberately calling attention to the Spanish dominion as 
central to the story. 
The novel's protagonist, Clement Musgrove, a mild 
Virginia gentleman, represents the first historical wave of 
migration into the Natchez District from the English colonies 
of Virginia and North Carolina, soon to become part of the new 
Republic of the United States of America. These early 
immigrants were English Tories, whose sympathies lay with 
England rather than with her American rebels during the 
Revolutionary War (Kynerd 153-54). Those who left Virginia to 
travel southwestward did so not to seek a fortune but rather 
to try to establish or reestablish a traditional ideal of the 
English country squire's life. Some immigrants to the New 

62 
World were deprived of inherited land by English laws of 
primogeniture, a practice that was continued to some degree in 
America (Wyatt-Brown 5-6). Other immigrants, with no 
possibility of obtaining land in the old country, worked hard 
in the new one to acquire it. Whatever their original 
resources, many early landholders in America wished to 
continue the English tradition. Their customs, values, and 
often their loyalties were those of the Old World, not the New 
one. 
Acting on the belief that past moments in a particular 
place inform present ones, Welty also spirals back to the 
early eighteenth century in the Natchez District. Using 
historical or fictional narratives about those past moments, 
she evokes ghosts of the complicated Old World past in the 
Natchez area: the Natchez Indian civilization, the early 
French trading post and fort, and the later British sojourners 
who took advantage of the temporary absence of the Spanish. 
By extending time to include the demise of these other 
cultures in the area, Welty accentuates the issue of cultural 
change facing Clement. Toward the end of the novel, Welty 
pushes time forward, slightly over the beginning of the 
nineteenth century, to include the future of the Natchez area: 
its establishment as a territory of the new American Republic. 
This compression and extension of time in The 
Robber 
Bridegroom 
help characterize its chronotope as "a miraculous 
world in adventure time" (Bakhtin 154). Artistically, the 

63 
miraculous element stems from merging in the novel features of 
two types of chronotopes: the folkloric chronotope and the 
chivalric romance. 
The folkloric plot cycle features the 
turn-of-the-century folk hero Mike Fink, an actual Mississippi 
River keelboat man whose prowess on the river was legendary. 
The chivalric romance cycle features Jamie Lockhart, the 
robber bridegroom himself, and Rosamond Musgrove, daughter of 
the displaced Virginian Clement Musgrove. In each plot cycle, 
we find imaginative playing with time, as we have already 
seen. We also find manipulations of space to convey symbolic 
meaning. The different spaces occupied by different 
characters reflect their respective stages of civilization. 
The scenes move from settlement to planter's clearing, to rude 
cabin in the woods, to a cave in the wilderness, to an Indian 
camp in the very depths of the wilderness, and then switch 
abruptly to the commercial center of New Orleans. The novel 
also contains such miraculous elements as a talking locket, a 
talking head, and a talking raven. All these elements, 
characteristic of the ancient, oral traditions of fantasy and 
fairy tale, help establish the miraculous chronotope. 
Welty also mixes in another oral tradition: the American 
tall tale, which similarly distorts space, time, and behavior 
to provide humor. It is this tradition that informs the 
novel's folkloric frame tale, in which the central characters 
meet. In the first half of the frame, Clement Musgrove, Mike 
Fink, and Jamie Lockhart meet in the hamlet of Rodney's 

64 
Landing. In the second half of the frame Rosamond Musgrove, 
abandoned by Jamie Lockhart, is rescued by Mike Fink and 
carried out of the wilderness in which she has been lost. 
The tale enclosed by the frame tale combines Old World 
European fairy tale and New World local history to create a 
chivalric romance the like of which had never before been 
seen, to judge from reader reaction after its publication.3 
The elements of the chivalric romance are there, but they are 
totally inverted, turned upside down, and inside out. Told 
with Welty's characteristic off-beat humor, the story treats 
violence and depravity in the same matter-of-fact tone used to 
relate adventure and romance. As with fairy tale and tall 
tales, the overall exaggeration of character and action de-
emphasizes serious comment in the novel, but does not 
eliminate it. 
To juggle the several strands of the plot, Welty arranges 
its episodes in layers that resemble a palimpsest of 
concentric circles, each circle mirroring a different cycle in 
the complicated, century-long history of the disputed Natchez 
land. The structure of the novel, therefore, resembles a 
Faberge egg or a Chinese puzzle box, with each plot-cycle 
opening up to yield yet another one nestled within it, each 
cycle (except the final one, which bounces forward into the 
3Most critics expressed consternation, both negative and 
positive. Lionel Trilling, for example, panned "this 
transmogrification" of "European fairy tales into the lore of 
the American frontier," but George Herbert Clarke declared it 
"a little classic in its own right." 

65 
future) spiraling further back into Natchez history for its 
events. The novel thus reenacts both the infamous Natchez 
Massacre of 1729 and the opening of a U. S. mail route to the 
new United States territory in 1800 (Howell 129-30, Audhuy 34-
3 6). The textual world created by this structure is at once 
simple and complicated, transitory yet timeless. It is the 
one Welty work for which William Faulkner "revealed a strong 
affinity" (Devlin Chronicle 
21). In 1943, Faulkner wrote 
enthusiastically to Welty about the novella: "You're doing 
all right" (Dawidoff Bl). 
Each distinct plot-cycle in The Robber 
Bridegroom 
features a different member of the Musgrove family: innocent 
Clement; his romantic daughter, Rosamond; and his greedy 
second wife, Salome. Most of the cycles include an encounter 
with the legendary Mike Fink, and all include encounters with 
the robber bridegroom, Jamie Lockhart. Each plot-cycle 
reveals in each character one of the different romantic 
illusions that cloud reality from human vision. Each 
character survives or fails to survive the cultural 
transition, according to the reactions dictated by his or her 
illusions. 
THE FRAME TALE MEETING: INTERSECTION OF DIFFERENT WORLDS 
The opening part of the frame tale, in which the three 
principal male characters meet, might be viewed as a 
forerunner of "The Still Moment," a seminal Welty story 

66 
published soon after The Robber 
Bridegroom. 
Although Clement 
Musgrove, Mike Fink, and Jamie Lockhart meet in a hotel room 
in the river town of Rodney's Landing, they are just as much 
in the wilderness as are the three travelers on the Natchez 
Trace in "A Still Moment." In their meeting, these 
forerunners of the characters in "The Still Moment" also have 
trouble understanding each other, for, as in that story, these 
men in The Robber 
Bridegroom 
come from three completely 
different worlds. Each man's life has been shaped by a 
different time and a different place, a fact that critics have 
generally acknowledged about the short story's characters, but 
not about the novel's. In "The Still Moment," the three 
travelers are based on well-known historical characters whose 
diaries and histories, accessible to contemporary readers, 
emphasize the fact that, figuratively speaking, the travelers 
do not share the same language. Neither do the men in The 
Robber 
Bridegroom, 
but the different worlds that have shaped 
them have not been so easy to see. In The Robber 
Bridegroom, 
only Mike Fink is recognizable as a historical figure. Since 
his fame faded rapidly in the latter part of the twentieth 
century, few now know that he was one of the great folk heroes 
of the nineteenth century, considered the equal of Davy 
Crockett and Daniel Boone. 
A close examination of the text and the historical 
context will reveal, however, that the other Robber 
Bridegroom 
principals are drawn either from a historical type or from 

67 
actual historical models that enable us to determine the world 
views that shaped them. Only the planter, Clement Musgrove, 
is entirely fictional, but he represents a distinct type, an 
early English Tory immigrant to Natchez. Jamie Lockhart, the 
robber bridegroom, is a composite of three famous Natchez 
Trace outlaws of the time, the principal one being a Northern 
"city" boy. Mike Fink, as already noted, is based on the 
historic Mike Fink, a legendary folk hero who came originally 
from the northwestern frontier of Pittsburg. 
The three men, each with his own particular illusion, 
represent different phases in the exploration and civilization 
of a wilderness: the frontiersman, the planter, and the 
robber/merchant. It is perhaps no accident that the meeting 
of these three types mirrors the meeting on the road of James 
Fenimore Cooper's three similar types in The Pioneers, 
the 
first fully American novel. In depicting the settlement of 
the northwestern frontier in upper New York state, also in the 
1790s, Cooper gathers together Natty Bumppo, the frontiersman; 
Judge Temple, who planted the settlement and fought in the 
Revolution to keep it; and a mysterious stranger who turns out 
to be the son and grandson of British Tory military men. Like 
Cooper's characters, each of Welty's characters has devised an 
angle of vision that allows him to navigate the wilderness 
chaos—at least temporarily. But when the men collide by 
chance, events are set in motion that first reinforce and then 
destroy their particular illusions. The reactions of the men-

68 
-and of the Musgrove women as well—to change and loss are 
typical, but none of them satisfies the ideal of the fully 
realized human being, an ideal toward which Welty's 
protagonists will move throughout her canon. 
For those ideal individuals, in Welty's world, must be 
able to look steadily and resolutely upon reality and continue 
to participate in life, despite the inevitability of change 
and loss. They must acknowledge the double nature of human 
experience and eschew romantic illusions about people or 
cultures. For illusions that deny the truth of human 
existence constitute for Welty a "narrowed gaze [which] 
contracts the heart" and stunts the soul, a view that is given 
its fullest expression in "A Still Moment." 
The various patterns of illusions are most easily seen 
when we examine the plot-cycles separately: 1) the folkloric 
frame tale which juxtaposes Clement Musgrove (time-present), 
Mike Fink (time-past), and Jamie Lockhart (time-future); 2) 
the chivalric romance cycle in which Rosamond Musgrove and 
Jamie Lockhart ignore time (once-upon-a-time); and 3) the 
central historical/fantasy cycle of Salome, the Indian Chief, 
and the great sun which affirms the impossibility of 
controlling time (natural solar time). I will examine each 
cycle in turn, filling out the historical context both to 
understand better the chronotope of the novel and to 
appreciate more fully Welty's artistic method in blending fact 

69 
and fiction. In the process, I will examine the textual 
patterns and allusions that expand Welty's themes. 
CLEMENT: THE INNOCENT OF RODNEY'S LANDING 
As the text reveals and historical context attests, the 
protagonist Clement Musgrove is by no means a typical American 
pioneer, but is rather an English colonist from the long-
established Virginia colony. This distinction is crucial to 
fully understand Clement's character, which exemplifies many— 
not all—of the traits attributed to the mythical Virginia 
cavalier: Clement is peaceful, honorable, forbearing, 
moderate. His immigration, he claims, was not motivated by 
ambition. Rather, he explains, there was "a great tug at the 
whole world, to go down over the edge, and one and all we were 
changed into pioneers" (RB 20). Albert Devlin has suggested 
that Clement demonstrates the "pull of a vacant continent" 
thesis advanced by Frederick Jackson Turner (Chronicle 
34-35). 
But Clement's pioneering probably represents an earlier 
historic migration, that of British loyalists who became 
outsiders in America after the Revolutionary War. Since the 
British had.governed the Natchez area, then known as West 
Florida, from 1763-1779, British loyalists from the American 
colonies had immigrated there both before and during the 
American struggle for independence (Kynerd 153-54). 
The 
desire for independence in the American colonies was by no 

70 
means unanimous. Historically, more than 100,000 loyalists 
left the original colonies; some of them headed for the safe 
haven of the Natchez area, encouraged by the new Spanish 
rulers who took over in 1779. 
The text certainly affirms Clement's preference for 
peace. In recounting his life story, he warmly recalls his 
life in "the peaceful hills" of Virginia (RB 20). Also, 
Clement is described as a "man of peace," who prudently steps 
to safety when his roommates start a fight in the initial 
meeting of the three travelers (RB 11). 
Clement Musgrove, then, is a man caught between two 
worlds, much like Rene in Chateaubriand's famous 182 7 work on 
the theme of cultural clashes, The Natchez. 
The Natchez, 
like 
The Robber 
Bridegroom, 
is set in the Natchez area, but during 
the early part of the eighteenth century. Its plot leads up 
to the Natchez Massacre at Fort Rosalie, the event that is 
partially reenacted in Welty's book. Although Welty had 
perhaps read the early French explorer Chevroloix for factual 
details of the Natchez Indian tribe (as Chateaubriand had 
done), it is almost certain that she had read Chateaubriand.4 
As we shall see, she uses the modernist technique of allusion 
here to enforce and expand the sense of Clement's dilemma in a 
transitional time. 
4In a letter to her agent sometime in September, 1940, 
Welty said she had not read Chateaubriand but "maybe I will 
try it" (Kreyling Agent 43). 

71 
Not only in the Natchez Indian content, but also 
stylistically and thematically, 
The Robber 
Bridegroom 
echoes 
The Natchez. 
It compresses time in order to squeeze events 
occurring over many years into the last year or so before a 
major change. Its characters are types, each with a 
predominating trait that defines him or her. Together, the 
group of characters form a general impression of the 
characteristics of the time. Idealized, absent characters 
have similar names: Clement's dead first wife was Amalie, 
while Rene's beloved sister from the Old World is Amelia. 
Rene is repeatedly called the brother of Amelia. 
Moreover, a passage describing Rene just before the 
Indian massacre must surely have influenced a passage in The 
Robber 
Bridegroom 
describing Jamie Lockhart just before the 
capture of the settlers by the Indians. In The Natchez, 
Rene-
-who has come from Europe to live with the Indians and who has 
married the Indian woman Celuta—has inspired feelings of 
love, jealousy, hatred, and compassion from the other 
characters. Unfortunately, he cannot share Celuta's passion . 
of love, or any other passion for that matter, because, like 
Jamie Lockhart's, Rene's heart is tightly locked. In the 
fateful period^ during which the Natchez plot the attack on the 
French, Rene is oblivious to the emotional turmoil around him: 
Motionless amid so many moving persons; the centre of a 
thousand passions, which he did not share; the object of 
all thoughts for widely different reasons; the brother of 
Amelia became the invisible cause of every effect: to 
love and to suffer was the double fatality which he 

72 
imposed on all who came near him. 
(Chateaubriand, I, 275-76) 
Compare Jamie's posture in the identical plot moment in The 
Robber 
Bridegroom: 
There he lay on the ground under a plum tree, napping 
away with a smile on his face, while the paths of the 
innocent Clement and the greedy Salome and the mad Little 
Harp and the reproachful Rosamond all turned like the 
spokes of the wheel toward this dreaming hub. If the 
Indians had not stopped them off, he would have been dead 
three or four times and accused and forgiven once before 
he woke up. 
(RB 147) 
Such a similar image may be coincidence, but it is more likely 
the result of Welty's careful attention to and variation on 
the work of another admired writer: treating in part the same 
subject while changing the tone for comic effect.5 
Finally, in both works, the major characters try to 
negotiate two worlds: the wilderness of the New World and the 
civilization of the Old World. 
Clement initially believes that he is quite capable of 
handling himself in the New World wilderness, but this belief 
is an illusion. Although he takes pride in his "sharpness," 
he is in reality "gullible," oblivious to danger, and totally 
inept in the wilderness, that is, in a frontier land which has 
no familiar or traditional codes to govern human behavior (RB 
3, 20). Twice Clement loses a family to the Indians, and it 
is he himself who introduces the dangerous robber bridegroom 
5For an excellent discussion of the relationship between 
the Natchez Indian culture and the great epic, see Letha 
Audhuy's "Natchez in French Louisiana and Chateaubriand's 
Epic, The 
Natchez." 

73 
into his home, despite receiving visual clues and three spoken 
warnings of danger from the talking raven. Clement has 
survived in the wilderness only because of his gallant 
marriage to the Kentucky widow, Salome, to whose character he 
turns a blind eye. Although Salome is everything he's not— 
ambitious, proud, greedy, ruthless, calculating, hard-hearted, 
and ugly—Clement glosses over even her "destroyed heart" to 
think of her as a good mother to his motherless daughter (RB 
24, 35). Blind as well as innocent, Clement shapes his vision 
to exclude ugly realities that might disturb his peace. 
Clement declares that he is "not a seeker after anything," but 
he deceives himself (RB 20). This Clement seeks peace at any 
price. 
MIKE FINK: FOLK HERO OF THE FRONTIER 
In his fictional meeting with Clement Musgrove and Jamie 
Lockhart, Mike Fink seeks recognition, a gift which was richly 
bestowed on him in real life. The out-sized keelboat man 
dominated the Mississippi river during the late eighteenth and 
early nineteenth centuries. Unlike the flatboat men who 
floated their crafts downriver and then dismantled them, the 
keelboat men actually poled their boats back up river, against 
the current (Blair 8-10). Among these extraordinarily 
powerful men, Mike Fink was king. His prowess on the river 
and off outshone even the accomplishments of legendary hunters 
such as Davy Crockett. Mike Fink was also an early hero of 

74 
the new democratic system, representing a generic class not 
ordinarily raised to heroic stature. His fictional 
frontiersman counterpart is Cooper's Natty Bumppo, whose name, 
ironically, is now much more familiar than Mike Fink's, even 
though the actual Mike Fink, as I have noted, was one of the 
most popular folk-heroes in America. The life of Mike Fink so 
captivated the nineteenth-century imagination that he was the 
subject of numerous books and travelling plays right up 
through the latter part of the century (Dorson 80-92). Even 
now, he still pops up occasionally in twentieth-century 
historical fiction. 
Fink enjoyed extraordinary popularity in the American 
imagination because he was an extraordinary frontiersman, 
veteran of three separate Western frontiers. Born around 177 0 
on the northwestern Pennsylvania frontier, he became a scout 
and Indian fighter in the northwestern Indian wars. 
He later moved to the Mississippi River, the westernmost 
boundary of the American territory, to become a boatman 
traveling down the southwestern frontier. This dangerous and 
adventurous life presented one of the few possibilities for 
earning money in that time and place. When the southwestern 
frontier became more settled, Mike Fink set off up the 
Missouri River to investigate his last frontier, the 
unexplored land of the Louisiana Purchase. 
Mike Fink's heroic stature was intimately linked to the 
Mississippi river's role as a major transportation route 

75 
during the eighteenth and early nineteenth century. In the 
historical time of The Robber Bridegroom, 
the inland states of 
the new republic transported all their goods to market down 
the Mississippi to New Orleans. With no control except for 
sail, poles, and oars, the keelboat men had to be strong, 
adventurous, self-sufficient, and capable of handling trouble, 
both human and natural. Among them, Mike Fink was an 
acknowledged leader, known for his brash, brawling manner, his 
superb marksmanship, his unequaled tall tales, his capacity 
for whiskey ("a gallon of whiskey daily without staggering"), 
and for the prodigious virility which allegedly left 
illegitimate children all up and down the Mississippi Valley. 
His legendary actions exceed even the exploits of King 
MacLain, the Jupiter-Zeus figure in The Golden 
Apples. 
Mike's appetite for full experience of the natural world 
also foreshadows a trait shared by the men in "The Still 
Moment." For he was associated with the nickname "Bang-All": 
some historians attribute the nickname to him, some to his 
Kentucky rifle "Betsy," a beautifully engraved rifle adorned 
with many figures of nature, combined with the American eagle 
symbol and Mike's own lucky six-point star. This nickname 
may well have influenced the refrain of the Natchez Trace 
adventurers in "A Still Moment," all of whom long for and 
search for the "all" in whatever path they've chosen. "What 
each of them had wanted was simply all. 
To save all souls, to 
destroy all men, to see and to record all life that filled 

76 
this world—all, all—" (WN 88). This compulsion to search 
for and embrace all of life reappears also in the female 
characters of Virgie, in The Golden Apples, 
and the American 
wife, in "The Bride of the Innisfalien," as we have already 
seen. 
Mike Fink also brings to The Robber Bridegroom 
the tall-
tale tradition that characterized his age and figured 
prominently in the later work of southwestern humorists. 
Welty preserves some of Fink's actual words (his "half-bull, 
half-alligator" characterization of himself) and all of the 
flavor of his spectacular "brags": 
I can pick up a grown man by the neck in each hand and 
hold him out at arm's length, and often do, too . . . . I 
eat a whole cow at one time, and follow her up with a 
live sheep if it's Sunday. Ho! ho! If I get hungry on a 
voyage, I jump off my raft and wade across, and take 
whatever lies in my path on shore. When I come near, the 
good folk take to their heels and run from their houses! 
I only laugh at the Indians, and I can carry a dozen oxen 
on my back at one time, and as for pigs, I tie them in a 
bunch and hang them to my belt! 
(RB 9) 
Mike Fink appears as himself in the initial frame chapter 
of The Robber Bridegroom, 
but Welty fictionalizes his behavior 
for artistic purposes. In the opening scene of The 
Robber 
Bridegroom, 
Mike Fink tries to rob and murder his roommates in 
their sleep. Although the real Mike Fink had a dark side, 
there is no evidence that he murdered people in their sleep. 
Physical confrontation was his strength and his joy, but 
cowardly, treacherous behavior was more characteristic of the 
likes of Jamie Lockhart. But since Jamie must appear to be a 

77 
brave and honest hero to Clement's innocent eyes, the straight 
outlaw behavior is assigned fictionally to Mike Fink. This 
unpalatable behavior of the legendary, super-human, vital 
individual—able to challenge and survive the forces of nature 
in the new world wilderness—prepares the reader to appreciate 
Mike Fink's later fictional downfall. For by the end of the 
novel, Fink has become himself a victim, not of nature but of 
human progress. Historically, the invention of the steamboat 
eliminated the need for brute force on the Mississippi River, 
and the development of the overland Natchez Trace forecast new 
land-based systems of transportation for goods and people. 
The river culture that elevated Mike Fink to heroic stature 
was obliterated in the nineteenth century by the steamboat and 
by the expanding use of the overland Natchez Trace. 
In the closing scenes of the frame tale, we meet Fink 
once again, not on the river, but on the Natchez Trace as a 
mail rider. Fink has fallen into what he considers the 
"disgrace" of government employment as a "mail rider on dry 
land" (RB 179). Fink has already suffered some deflation in 
the hands of Eudora Welty; she terms him a "flatboat man," a 
much less admired type of river man than the "keelboat man" 
that he actually was. In this second fictional 
role devised 
for Fink, Welty gives the fallen hero a chance to redeem 
himself, as we shall soon see. 

78 
LOCKHART AND ROSAMOND: CHIVALRIC ROMANCE IN A WILDERNESS 
Unlike Mike Fink, just on the verge of becoming an 
anachronism, and Clement Musgrove, a certifiable anachronism, 
Jamie Lockhart is "a man of action, a man of the times, a 
pioneer and a free agent"—at least that is the way Clement 
characterizes him (RB 27). Jamie prides himself on his 
ability to see in both directions, behind and ahead, and act 
to his advantage. He alone navigates the changes brought by 
the end of the century, moving easily from his role as 
gentleman-bandit on the Natchez Trace to that of gentleman-
merchant in New Orleans. Actually he sees little difference 
in the two: "the outward transfer from bandit to merchant had 
been almost too easy to count it a change at all" (RB 184). 
The character Jamie Lockhart, I suggest, is drawn 
primarily from the real-life Joseph Thompson Hare, the "model 
of the romantic highway man," who plundered the Natchez Trace 
during the latter part of the eighteenth century (Daniels 
104). Hare's character was shaped first by northern cities 
where he apprenticed for a time in a tailor's shop and 
developed a life-long interest in fashionable clothes. The 
adult Hare was a model of elegance and fashion whose clothes 
and manners charmed people from Nashville to New Orleans. But 
on the Natchez Trace, in between the cities, he disguised his 
face with berry juice and robbed and murdered wealthy 
travelers. One of the travelers he dispatched was a rich 
Virginia gentleman with a beautiful daughter, Mabel Price 

79 
(Daniels 109), perhaps one of the inspirations for the 
otherwise fictional characters of Clement and Rosamond 
Musgrove. Like Jamie Lockhart, who asks for Clement's help in 
getting a Spanish passport, Joseph Hare acquired a Spanish 
passport (Coates 97). Conveniently, Joseph Hare kept a diary. 
Although he did not discuss all his actual murders, he did 
report regularly his thieving activities. In one passage Hare 
describes the "loot" taken in one of the raids: 
We took three hundred doubloons, 74 pieces of different 
sizes and a large quantity of gold in bars, six inches 
in length and eight square—thirty-weight of it. . . . 
With the others, I found 700 doubloons and five silver 
dollars, and four hundred French guineas, and 67 pieces 
the value of which I could not tell until I weighed 
them. I got twelve or thirteen thousand dollars 
altogether from the company, all in gold. 
(Daniels 106) 
Attributing his information to hearsay, the character Jamie 
Lockhart uses Hare's words almost verbatim: 
Only yesterday I heard of a case where travelers 
captured in the wilderness gave up three hundred 
doubloons, seventy-five bars of gold in six-by-eights, 
five hundred French guineas, and any number of odd 
pieces, the value of which you could not tell without 
weighing them—all together about fifteen thousand 
dollars. 
(RB 22) 
In much of his behavior, especially in episodes with 
Rosamond and with other bandits, the Lockhart character copies 
the actions of two other historical outlaws: Samuel Mason, a 
fairly respectable citizen turned bandit after his beloved 
daughter eloped; and Kuykendall, the bandit with whom Mason's 
daughter eloped. Samuel Mason, like Hare before him, had 
acquired a Spanish passport through the recommendations of a 

80 
"too-trusting gentleman, met along the way and beguiled by the 
bandit's manner" (Coates 124). It is Samuel Mason who 
associated with, sometimes even worked with, the notorious 
Little Wiley Harpe—called just Little Harp in Welty's 
novella. Kuykendall contributed a central act to the Lockhart 
portrait; he seduced and ran away with Mason's daughter, an 
act for which he paid dearly in real life after accepting the 
apparent but deceptive "forgiveness" that his new father-in-
law, Samuel Mason, offered him. The Mason family's murder of 
Kuykendall made fugitives of them all, and after that, the 
Mason gang terrorized the Natchez Trace. Unlike Joseph Hare, 
who sometimes agonized over his killings, Samuel Mason had no 
scruples about murder and mutilation and sometimes left a 
carved message with the bodies of his victims, "Done by Mason 
of the Woods." Samuel Mason's historical record adds weight 
to the barbaric side of the robber bridegroom character, a 
side that is glossed over in the fictional character of Jamie 
Lockhart. Mason's biography also confirms the accuracy with 
which Welty has recreated this time in history. 
Even the mutilation and decapitations of The 
Robber 
Bridegroom 
belong not simply to the exaggerated behavior of 
fairy tale but to the historical record of the eighteenth 
century in the Natchez area. Decapitation of victims and 
outlaws occurred frequently. Both Little Harpe's brother, Big 
Harpe, and Samuel Mason went to their graves headless. Big 
Harpe's head was nailed to a tree in Kentucky where it 

81 
remained for many years. Mason's head was sought and 
eventually cut off by Little Harpe for a $2,000 reward 
(Daniels 120, 123). Little Wiley Harpe wrapped Sam Mason's 
head in blue clay—just as Little Harp does in Welty's novel— 
and carried it in to the authorities to collect his money 
(Daniels 119, 123).6 
In creating the composite of Jamie Lockhart, Welty 
emphasizes the Hare model rather than the Mason one. An 
entirely accurate Natchez Trace bandit could hardly be the 
focus of chivalric romance. A Lockhart entirely like his 
historical models would not be a fit object for the 
respectable heroine's affections. Since Lockhart must be 
viewed by readers as in some ways worthy—and capable, 
perhaps, of being "improved" by love—no mention of murder 
adheres to his name, not even the discreet "gentlemanly" 
type of killings practiced by Joseph Hare. The brutal murders 
and mutilations associated with the historic figure of Samuel 
Mason have been shifted to the character of Little Harp, who 
may or may not have severed fingers in real life but who, we 
know from historian Coates, gloried in all sorts of other 
gruesome mutilations of his victims (39, 51-42). 
Not even 
silly Rosamond could have maintained romantic illusions about 
such a figure as Little Harp. 
6The Natchez Indians also beheaded the French killed in 
the 1729 massacre. 

82 
So Jamie Lockhart exhibits only the robber bridegroom 
fairy-tale motifs dealing with robbery and rescue, deception 
and disguise—motifs that do not preclude the romantic love of 
a respectable young woman. The unpleasant fairy tale motifs 
of murder, mutilation, and severed fingers are assigned to 
Lockhart's alter ego, the truly repulsive Little Harp. But 
Harp is presented as an integral part of Lockhart. Jamie 
Lockhart understands Harp, associates with him, jokes with 
him, even accepts responsibility for him, though he recognizes 
it to be a "burdensome" responsibility. Lockhart "finishes 
off" Harp only when it is a question of his own physical 
survival. 
Lockhart's vision, then, initially seems more realistic 
than that of the other characters in the novel. Jamie is "at 
home" everywhere. He considers himself a "hero" and prides 
himself on "having the power to look both ways and to see a 
thing from all sides" (RB 185). But his image of himself 
leads Lockhart to believe that all things are possible, with 
no price to pay. Like his alter ego, Little Harp, Lockhart is 
convinced that "Advancement is only a matter of swapping heads 
about" (RB 145). Acting on that belief, Lockhart departs for 
New Orleans, after killing Little Harp in self-defense, and 
there he becomes a "rich merchant," "a gentleman of the world 
. . . respected by all that knew him" 
(RB 183). The price 
Lockhart has paid for this vision is revealed only in his 
name: his heart is closed, invulnerable to the deepest 

83 
feelings of humanity. He has advanced by his wits, adjusted 
to a respectable form of thievery, exemplified the success 
story that so beguiles Americans. Cultural transitions from 
one time to another can hardly bother him, for he lives 
without allegiance to place or time. 
The robber bridegroom's sweetheart, Rosamond Musgrove, 
doesn't have Lockhart's power of vision. She suffers the 
blinding romantic illusion that love will make everything 
right. A composite anti-heroine, modeled on the heroines of 
the European fairy tales of "The Robber Bridegroom," "Snow 
White," "Cinderella," and "The Goose Girl," Rosamond enacts 
their adventures, but exhibits none of their virtues. For 
example, in the traditional robber bridegroom fable, known 
under various titles all over the world, the young girl is 
lured to the robber bridegroom's lair with promises of 
marriage even though the bridegroom's express intention is to 
murder and mutilate; a severed finger appears in the tale 
always as evidence of the crime, as it does in The 
Robber 
Bridegroom. 
While the young girl in the traditional tale 
spies on the bridegroom, sees a murder, escapes undetected 
with the finger, and returns to the community to expose the 
bridegroom, Rosamond Musgrove observes a murder and forthwith 
climbs into bed beside her lover. In Welty's tale, it is 
Little Harp who commits the murder and mutilation, but it is 
the robber bridegroom, Jamie Lockhart, who shelters Little 
Harp and takes responsibility for him. In the blindness of 

84 
her love (and much like her father), Rosamond ignores the 
warnings of the talking raven and conveniently overlooks the 
proximity of the two bandits. 
Despite her bold stories and daring adventures, this 
silly goose Rosamond has trouble with reality. On those 
occasions when troubling reality forces itself upon her 
consciousness, take-charge Rosamond sleeps or faints. Waking 
from her first sleep after observing another young woman's 
murder in her bandit's cabin, Rosamond, "no matter what he had 
told her," decides she must learn her bandit's identity. 
Using the brew given her by her sly stepmother, Salome, 
Rosamond removes the berry stains to see Jamie Lockhart.7 He 
awakes to see "Clement Musgrove's silly daughter!" He leaves, 
she tries to follow, but "falls in the dust," realizes from 
"the stirring within her" that she is pregnant, and promptly 
takes leave of her senses by swooning: "a cloud went over the 
moon, and all was dark night" (RB 134-35). When Rosamond, on 
the next day, gets a look at Big Harp's head, held "so it 
turned round like a bird cage on a string," she "fainted again 
onto the grass" (RB 140). 
When she recovers and sets off 
into the woods once more, one of the marauding Indians appears 
"suddenly" in her path, wearing "the mask of a spotty 
leopard." Now, a "spotty leopard" has been a stock character 
in Rosamond's extravagant tales of her adventures. But when 
7Many critics see Rosamond's action as an allusion to the 
myth of Psyche and Cupid. 

85 
the real thing appears, Rosamond "for the third time" falls 
down "in a faint" (RB 147) . 
Rosamond eventually opens her eyes and keeps them open 
long enough to find Jamie again and marry him. She, like 
Jamie, is adaptable. In the closing scenes, she makes her 
peace with her father, and Jamie thanks Clement for the gift 
of his daughter. For after all, in a fairy tale, the lovers 
must live happily ever after. So, too, in the tradition of 
chivalric romance, which the story of Rosamond and Jamie 
fulfills in every particular, except for the fact that theirs 
totally inverts the chivalric conceptions of virtue and honor. 
Their marriage offers a slight concession to social 
convention, as does Jamie's shift from bandit to merchant. 
But these minor acts of civility suggest only a transitory 
thought by the lovers for their new beginning in the city. 
For the reader remembers Lockhart's assessment of his new 
occupation as no "change at all" and Rosamond's wistful 
admission that she "did sometimes miss the house in the wood, 
and even the rough-and-tumble of their old life" (RB 
184). 
The lovers' tale is rollicking good fun, of course, for all 
but the most sober-sided readers. Who can resist poking fun 
at our romantic illusions about love? 
MIKE FINK: MAIL-RIDER 
One of Rosamond's functions in the novel is to provide 
comic relief, a function she carries out admirably in her 

86 
encounter with Mike Fink in his role as a government mail-
rider. She meets Fink on the Natchez Trace after she escapes 
from the Indians. Only with Fink's assistance is she able to 
get out of the "wilderness," where she is "lost" and pregnant, 
and search for Jamie Lockhart (RB 168). 
Characteristically, Welty has merged fact and fiction in 
Fink's rescue scene. The action is similar to a real-life 
event in the life of John Swaney, an early Natchez Trace mail-
rider who became famous when he wrote about his adventures. 
He knew well the terrifying Mason gang of robbers and killers, 
and he reported their exploits in some detail. He 
specifically tells of meeting the pregnant Mrs. Tom Mason on 
the Natchez Trace and carrying her to safety. The fictional 
Rosamond Musgrove's ride with Mike Fink may probably have had 
its origin in this incident. 
Mrs. Tom Mason was the common-law wife of Tom Mason, a 
member of the Mason gang headed by his father, Samuel Mason. 
Two generations of Masons roamed the wilderness with from two 
to three wives at a time. When his daughter-in-law neared the 
end of her pregnancy/ Samuel Mason, his son, Tom, and the rest 
of the gang left her behind in the wilderness to fend for 
herself. Mrs. Mason gave birth alone, flagged down the 
Natchez mail rider John Swaney, and hitched a ride out of the 
wilderness, babe in arms (Coates 149). 
Involving a mail-rider in the plot of The 
Robber 
Bridegroom 
appears to be an inaccuracy in the time frame. The 

87 
Natchez Trace mail route did not begin officially until 1800, 
two years after the United States acquired the Natchez 
district from Spain and somewhat beyond the supposed time line 
of the novel's plot (Bridgforth 387). What at first appears 
an inaccuracy, however, is merely another example of time 
extension in the chronotope of "miraculous time." This 
extension furthers the plot in two ways: it documents the 
personal decline of Mike Fink, whose fame rose with keelboats 
and declined with the nineteenth-century advent of steamships 
and with the greater use of the Natchez Trace; the extension 
provides yet another cultural transition for the Natchez area, 
from Old World Spanish dominion to New World American 
Republic. 
In the rescue scene, Mike Fink's conversation with 
Rosamond Musgrove suggests the problem with his vision. 
Although Rosamond is lost, pregnant, and wandering in the 
wilderness after her escape from the Indians, she is still 
looking for Jamie Lockhart. Fink has seen Lockhart, but 
assures Rosamond that he's seen only the ghost of Lockhart. 
Fink, the champion brawler, genuinely believes that he had 
killed Jamie Lockhart in their original meeting. He did not 
believe the evidence of his own eyes then, and he does not 
believe it months later, because his superstition is stronger 
than empirical evidence. He believes his own legend—in his 
own time. So Fink tells Rosamond where to find the ghost, 
protects her from other live bandits, and bears her off 

,88 
personally on his own horse to the place where he last saw 
Jamie's ghost (RB 176-79). 
In another tangle of communication between two people out 
of phase with each other's times, Rosamond explains that she 
must deliver "a message for Jamie Lockhart from another 
world." 
Fink asks if she is trying to deliver "a message from 
out of the past for an old ghost." Rosamond replies that the 
message is "from out of the future," for the "old ghost" will 
become "a father of twins next week" (RB 111-IS). 
And 
hitching rides with successive mail riders all the way to New 
Orleans, Rosamond, a young woman completely at home in the 
present, at length delivers her message in person to the 
wholly alive Jamie Lockhart. The ghost, in this exchange, is 
actually Mike Fink, whose world and time are on the verge of 
extinction. 
As he rides away, we are told that "he did get 
back on the river and his name was restored to its original 
glory" (RB 180). But for the historical Mike Fink, who moved 
on to the Missouri River after the Mississippi River glory 
days came to an end, the respite was short and not all that 
sweet. 
The fictional old ghost, Mike Fink, does not yet 
recognize the beginning of the end of the frontier and will 
never recognize it in his lifetime. 
SALOME AND THE SUN GOD: 
CULTURAL PARALLELS 
Not content to demonstrate just the transition between 
the age of the planter and the age of the merchant, and to 

89 
chronicle the ascendancy of American power over the Spanish in 
the Natchez area, Welty embeds in The Robber 
Bridegroom 
an 
even earlier cultural transition in the history of the region: 
that between the cultures of the Natchez Indian tribe and the 
first European settlers, the French. In The 
Robber 
Bridegroom, 
the capture of the planters and robbers by the 
Indians echoes the Natchez Massacre of the early eighteenth 
century. Welty's imaginative spiral back into the earlier 
history of the area adds yet another dimension of the fullness 
of time to the vertical time axis (harmonic chord) Welty has 
established. Welty does not name the Natchez Indian tribe in 
her novel because, after 1731, the Natchez tribe and nation no 
longer existed in Natchez. But the surprise capture of the 
Musgroves by the Indians reenacts the success of the Natchez 
Massacre at the French Fort Rosalie in 1729. The Natchez 
success was short-lived because the French retaliation that 
followed totally destroyed the Natchez civilization. Yet the 
same French who routed the Natchez civilization shortly 
afterward gave way briefly to the English who then submitted 
to the Spanish. By Clement's time—less than a century later— 
traces of the French culture have disappeared just as 
completely as that of the Natchez. 
In The Robber 
Bridegroom, 
however, Welty evokes the 
Massacre and the Natchez Indian culture in multiple ways: by 
the description of the Indians' attack as being carried out in 
"devious and secret ways"; by the countless references to 

90 
revenge and human heads as booty; by the Indians' worship of 
the sun, practiced among Southeastern Indians only by the 
Natchez tribe; by the Indians' veneration of their Indian 
Chief and by subtle references to him as the "sun"; and by the 
parody of the Natchez sun dance as performed by Salome 
Musgrove (RB 148, 163, 160-61, 163). 
The character of Salome Musgrove also mirrors that of a 
historical member of the Natchez Indian elite: the "Woman 
Chief," mother of the "Great Sun." Since the Chief of the 
Natchez—the "Great Sun"—descended matrilineally, his mother 
was considered the "Woman Chief" and "held the power of life 
and death" (Mississippi 
56). Like the "Woman Chief," Salome 
is strong, proud, arrogant, and fearless. She claims that she 
can make the sun "stand still," an ability that would suggest 
special powers, indeed, to the Indians who hold her captive. 
In emphasizing the similarity between characteristics of the 
Natchez Woman Chief and of Salome, Welty not only strengthens 
the depiction of the early Natchez civilization, but also 
provides a reasonable explanation for the Indians' attitudes 
toward Salome. 
The stealthy capture by the Indians of almost all the 
Musgroves and the robbers echoes the earlier Natchez Massacre. 
In November of 1729, the Natchez Indians had pretended to go 
about their business as usual at the French trading post and 
settlement in Fort Rosalie. Then, at a signal, the Natchez 
had slaughtered the French "every where at once." "Nearly 

91 
three hundred Frenchmen were killed before noon, and the Great 
Sun sat in the storehouse counting their heads as they piled 
up before him" (Audhuy 35). The Natchez also captured some 
four hundred women and children to be used or sold as slaves. 
Three months later, the French, aided by the Choctaw tribe, 
retaliated; and by the end of the next year, January, 1731, 
the few surviving Natchez Indians had surrendered or had 
escaped to live with the Chickasaw tribe. "Thus was destroyed 
this nation, formerly the most brilliant in the colony" 
(Audhuy 35-36). 
The designation "brilliant," suggesting the achievements 
of the Natchez nation, also suggests the special relationship 
of the nation to the sun. Though small, the Natchez tribe was 
distinct among its neighbors because it "alone had a complex 
chiefdom that was ruled over by a Great Sun, an individual who 
had the power of life and death over his subjects" (Brown 8). 
Each morning, upon rising, the Great Sun "faced toward his 
relative, the rising sun" (Brown 19). Although Welty does not 
include the Natchez hierarchy in her tale, this factual 
information adds density to Welty's theme of doubleness and 
her play with complements. Historically, the Great Sun had a 
brother, known as the "Tattooed Serpent." This brother, like 
the "Woman Chief" mother, figured prominently in the tribe's 
culture. The nation's recognition and acceptance of the 
powers both of light and darkness, sun and serpent, may 
explain Welty's significant description of the Indians' eyes 

92 
as "large, worldly eyes" (RB 144). Certainly, this 
description of the Indians makes an unusual contrast with the 
description of Clement as "innocent" or unworldly. 
The tribe's claim of kinship to the very sun itself 
partially explains the chief character trait of the Natchez— 
their extraordinary pride. In the sixteenth century the Great 
Sun reportedly replied to a summons from the Spanish explorer 
De Soto with hauteur: "it is not my custom to visit any one, 
but rather all, of whom I have ever heard, have come to visit 
me, to serve and obey me, and pay me tribute, either 
voluntarily or by force" (Brown 20). 
Pride is also the defining character trait of Salome 
Musgrove. The scene in which Salome finally holds center 
stage expands the fullness of time in the novel, but it also 
demonstrates the extent of Salome's hubris, the same hubris 
displayed by the Great Sun of the Natchez. It was the pride 
and arrogance of this "ugly woman" that had inspired fear in 
the Indians who, years before, had captured the Musgrove and 
Thomas families on their initial voyage downriver to Natchez. 
Salome's lack of fear persuaded the Indians to release her and 
the other survivors, Clement and his remaining child, Rosamond 
(RB 23) . 
Sure of her purpose from the beginning, Salome is 
identified in the novel as "the greedy Salome." As such, she 
complements her planter husband, who has neither greed nor 
ambition. But since he is never able to deny her—and for 

93 
some time even convinces himself that she, too, must be 
"good"—Clement is as implicated as she in the quest for more 
land and wealth. Referred to as having an "eagle eye" and an 
"eagle claw," Salome represents the worst aspect of human 
greed and disregard for the abundant natural resources of the 
North American continent. Salome's passion for the material 
"all" blinds her to reality. "Her eye, from thinking of 
golden glitter, had possibly gotten too bright to see the dark 
that was close around her now" (RB 144-45). 
Nowhere is Salome's hubris better expressed than in her 
exchange with the Indian Chief whose model is the "Great Sun 
of the Natchez." Remembering the special relationship of the 
Natchez to the sun will help illuminate the comic language in 
this major scene. The entire passage is built on double 
entendre, for the sun Salome presumes to command is not only 
the sun in the heavens of the natural world, but also quite 
literally the Indian Chief, the Great Sun himself. 
*No one is to have power over me,' she cries. 
xNo man 
and none of the elements! . . . 
I am by myself in the 
world. . . . The sun cannot punish me. . .. . Why, I 
could punish the sun if I wished! . . . I will tell the 
sun to stand still, and it will stand still! . . . Sun, 
retire! Go back, Sun! Sun, stand still!' 
(RB 160-63) 
The Natchez recognize Salome's hubris but believe it to be 
deluded—in her but not in themselves. Her last encounter 
with the Indians reveals her mortality, as she dies in her 
frenzied effort to stop the sun and to prove herself superior 
even to the God of time. If "pity ran through all the grooves 

94 
of his [the Indian Chief's] brown face," it is not for 
Clement, as we have assumed, but for Salome, the proud and 
fearless—albeit mortal—Salome (RB 164). 
But if Salome is deluded, so too is the Indian Chief and 
so, by implication, was the Great Sun. However "worldly" his 
eyes and close his kinship to the sun, he does not see that 
his tribe and culture cannot endure forever. The difference 
in attitudes between Salome and the Indians lies only in their 
respective views of the natural world and time. Salome 
believes she can command the sun and stop time; the Natchez 
believe the sun is "the source of our tribe and of every 
thing, and therefore he does not and will not stand still, but 
continues forever" (RB 163). 
CLEMENT: REALITY AND REACTION 
The Robber 
Bridegroom 
implies that no humans, whether in 
harmony with nature or not, can forestall the relentless ebb 
and flow of cultural dominance. Systems within human society 
change as regularly as the seasons of nature. Clement alone, 
among the characters of The Robber 
Bridegroom, 
fully perceives 
this truism. But, as we shall see, he reacts by withdrawing 
from the field of battle in his time, rather than by 
participating fully in the present time that is all we have of 
life. 
It is Clement, finally, who is most drastically affected 
by the discovery that Jamie Lockhart is also the bandit of the 

95 
woods. This truth shatters his illusions and drives him, 
distracted, into the circle of stones in which he asks his 
basic questions: what is the time and place? what is the 
issue now? and what choice must I make? In his circle of 
stones, Clement meditates on the "identity of man." He sees 
the "singing bird" on each limb in the forest. But, for the 
first time, he also sees "a beast" creeping across the forest 
floor. Foreshadowing Rosamond's capture by the Indian "in the 
mask of a spotty leopard," Clement sees the beast creeping 
"slowly and softly and forever moving into profile . . . one 
of a procession, weighted low with his burning coat, looking 
from the yellow eye set in his head" (RB 147, 141). These 
whispers of Blake and Yeats open one of the most pessimistic 
monologues in the Welty canon, one remarkably out of place if 
this novel is meant to be merely an "amusing romp," as some 
critics have called it. Clement recognizes both the "lateness 
of the age" of his old world, and the "time of cunning" in 
this new world, and acknowledges that he cannot survive in the 
new one (RB 144, 142). 
Clement's eyes are opened at last, but the sight 
paralyzes him, temporarily at least. As a result, Clement 
rearranges his "squint" to develop a new view of reality. The 
new one reminds us of that of an earlier American good man, 
young Goodman Brown in Hawthorne's story of the same name. 
Like Goodman Brown, Clement had initially seen only the good 
in people. When Goodman Brown first sees evil, he loses his 

96 
faith completely and thereafter can see nothing but evil. 
When circumstances force Clement to see that the wilderness is 
inside as well as outside his clearing, he reacts by squinting 
in the other direction: no longer can he see or look at any 
good at all for fear of the danger that might lurk just 
beneath and beside it. 
Clement's final spring visit to New Orleans, after his 
loss of innocence, demonstrates the latest form of his 
blindness. Clement is no longer the happy planter we met 
initially upon his return from a trip to New Orleans. That 
Clement had returned not only with bags of gold for the sale 
of his crop but also with many rich and beautiful presents for 
his family: for Salome a "packet of pins, length of calico, 
pair of combs, orange, Madeira, and muscadine wine, the salt 
for the table, and all from the apothecary that he could 
provide"; and for his beloved daughter Rosamond, golden 
hairpins, a "petticoat stitched all around with golden 
thread," and a beautiful silk gown, "the green of the sugar 
cane," just "like the dresses the Creole girls wore" (RB 36, 
41). The Clement we now see in New Orleans has become 
permanently blind to the good: 
New Orleans was the most marvelous city in the 
Spanish country or anywhere else on the river. 
Beauty and vice and every delight 
possible 
to the 
soul and body stood hospitably, 
and usually 
together, 
in every doorway and beneath every palmetto by day and 
lighted torch by night. A shutter opened, and a flower 
bloomed. The very atmosphere was nothing but aerial 
spice, the very walls were sugar cane, the very clouds 
hung as golden as bananas in the sky. But 
Clement 
Musgrove was a man who could have walked the streets 
of 

97 
Baghdad without 
sending a second glance overhead at 
the 
Magic Carpet, 
or heard the tambourines 
of the angels 
in 
Paradise 
without 
dancing a step, 
or had his choice 
of 
the fruits 
of the Garden of Eden without 
making up his 
mind. 
For he was an innocent of the wilderness, and a 
planter of Rodney's Landing, and this was his good. 
(RB 182, emphasis mine) 
Even in his reunion with Rosamond, whom he had thought 
dead, Clement first questions her report of her new and 
glorious life: "Is all this true, Rosamond, or is it a lie?" 
(RB 184). And although he consents to see for himself that it 
is true, he cannot agree to come live with his beloved 
daughter and her family because Rodney's Landing is his only 
"good." So, as "the wind filled the sails for the voyage 
home," Clement takes his bag of gold and returns to the safety 
of his known place. 
Little wonder then that Welty slips in a final irony by 
the curiosity of mentioning that Rosamond has twins, "one of 
whom was named Clementine" (RB 183). A daughter named for her 
grandfather is a memorable gesture to the past, but the 
association with the doomed Clementine of American history— 
immortalized in song—is unavoidable: "Oh my darling, oh my 
darling, oh my darling Clementine / You are lost and gone 
forever / Dreadful sorry, Clementine." 
And what about the other twin, whose name and sex are 
never mentioned? I suggest that we'll meet her counterpart in 
the future in the character of Jenny Lockhart, the protagonist 
of the short story, "At the Landing," which ends the stories 
collected in The Wide 
Net. 

98 
It is surely no accident that the final story in The Wide 
Net is also set in Rodney's Landing, known now, however, in 
the early twentieth century, merely as the Landing, for flood 
and progress have made it a ghost town. Jenny Lockhart and 
her grandfather, surely spiritual descendants of the 
Musgroves, have suffered grievous decline as well. Jenny, a 
lonely, dutiful young woman, is well-nigh imprisoned in the 
grand home of her aged grandfather, who so fears everything 
outside his home that he bars the doors to the outside world. 
We can only assume that the time of merchant Jamie Lockhart 
has now passed, just as surely as had that time of Clement 
Musgrove, innocent planter. It is part of Welty's method, as 
it is of all modernists, to make the connections continually 
between time past, time present, and time future, both within 
works and between them. 

99 
THE WIDE NET: 
ADVENTURE TIME ON THE ROAD 
"The thing 
about this 
part of the country 
in the great 
days 
is 
that people 
like 
Aaron Burr, J. J. Audubon, Lorenzo Dow, and 
goodness knows who, were as thick 
as blackbirds 
in the 
pie, 
and once the pie is opened, they are going to begin to 
sing." 
Welty, Letter (Kreyling Agent 
52) 
With only one exception, the stories in The Wide Net take 
place in small hamlets, dotted along the route of the historic 
Natchez Trace. Welty's use of the Natchez Trace as setting is 
significant not only because the major portion of the Trace 
diagonally traverses her native Mississippi, but also because 
the history of the Trace mirrors the themes of dreams, 
realities, change, and continuity that Welty explores in the 
stories. It began as an animal trail in prehistoric times, 
rose to prominence in the eighteenth century, and declined as 
a pathway to new frontiers in the early nineteenth century. 
Ancient and silent now, the Natchez Trace still suggests the 
life cycle of the many groups of people whose long journeys on 
foot made visible and passable what was originally just a 
series of animal trails through the wilderness. 
In her earlier work, The Robber 
Bridegroom, 
Welty gave 
life to representative wayfarers on the Trace from its 
beginnings right up through the end of the eighteenth century: 
the Indians—Natchez, Choctaw, and Chickasaw—the first humans 
known to follow the trail; the Spanish, the first Europeans to 
explore the trail; the French, the first Europeans to settle 
Natchez; the British colonists who enjoyed a brief sojourn in 
the area; the American riverboat men who brought the 

100 
marketable resources of inland America down the Mississippi 
River to New Orleans and then walked back overland to their 
starting points; the hordes of adventurous pioneers who, just 
before and after the American Revolutionary War, began to 
cascade down the trail to the Natchez District, an area that 
was then not even American territory; and finally the U.S mail 
riders and the American settlers who journeyed to that distant 
and remote southwestern corner which, at the beginning of the 
nineteenth century, had just become American territory. 
In The Wide Net, Welty revisits the Natchez Trace in the 
nineteenth century, shaping stories around early nineteenth-
century, semi-respectable travelers on the Trace, several of 
them famous historical figures. As the frontier wilderness 
becomes more settled, the focus moves from Natchez, at the end 
of the Trace, back up the Trace to isolated houses or small 
hamlets beside it and to the ordinary people who live there. 
Several of these stories recreate well-known places, trends, 
or events in Mississippi history. The time shifts, as well, 
to the latter part of the nineteenth-century, with one story 
set apparently in the early part of the twentieth century. 
Appropriately for nineteenth-century Mississippi history, 
the stories deal with private revelation and action set 
against a background of change amid continuity. These themes, 
according to Albert Devlin, are naturally represented in the 
symbols of the Natchez Trace as well as the Mississippi River, 
for they "express both the complex organization of human 

101 
nature . . . and its incarnation as the reality of history" 
(Chronicle 
72).' The Natchez Trace especially, along whose 
path Mississippi's settlement steadily developed and became 
visible, pulls together geographically diverse sections of the 
state even as it presents graphically the layers of history in 
the state. As a chronotopic symbol for The Wide Net, 
it offers 
endless possibilities. The history of nineteenth-century 
Mississippi, especially the first settled Natchez section, is 
tumultuous: territorial status at the turn of the century, 
statehood in 1817, immigrant explosion accompanied by wild 
land speculation in the flush decades up through the forties, 
bust and depression in the fifties, civil war in the sixties, 
reconstruction until the eighties, natural disasters through 
the rest of the century.2 The state experienced social change 
driven by expansion and greed as well as natural land changes 
occasioned by earthquakes, windstorms, atypical winter 
weather, and repeated flooding. No single literary chronotope 
could account for the entire century; but in Bakhtin's 
typology, we find a general one that serves well for this 
extraordinary century: "adventure time on the road in 
'Devlin's chapter on Welty's historicism (41-79) provides 
an excellent background for several of the motifs I explore 
and extend in this chapter. While some parts of my study 
overlap his work, I extend the material toward a different 
objective. Suzanne Marrs and Pearl Amelia McHaney have also 
made important contributions to understanding the historical 
aspect of Welty's fiction. 
2For a detailed history, consult Richard Aubrey McLemore's 
A History 
of Mississippi, 
Vol. 
II. 

102 
everyday life" (113-15).3 Despite the constant ebb and flow 
of fortune in this nineteenth-century period of rapid growth, 
competing interests, and startling decline in the Natchez 
area, ordinary people continued to experience important, 
private, extraordinary moments of transformation in their 
personal lives, moments that would have lasting effects on 
their identities. These individual moments are the focus of 
the stories in The Wide 
Net. 
The title of the collection, The Wide Net, conveys a 
pictorial image that suggests Welty's approach to her 
characters. Unlike the curtain image governing A Curtain 
of 
Green, which gives advance warning of a barrier between the 
characters' exterior and interior worlds, the net image 
suggests barriers of varying strength and effectiveness, not 
wholly impenetrable. Net barriers can sometimes—not always— 
be breached. But nets can also entangle and trap larger 
creatures, thereby becoming a barrier even crueler than a 
curtain. Not only can the trapped creature still glimpse the 
free world beyond, full of sun and shadow, but also the 
observer can still see the trapped and suffering creature. 
The net in this particular collection is, significantly, a 
wide net, one that sweeps through time as well as space. More 
3As Bakhtin explains later in his discussion, this 
chronotope yields the metaphor of "the path of life," a 
standard motif in literature. He distinguishes this 
chronotope from the straight adventure time chronotope by 
emphasizing that the protagonist journeys through familiar 
territory but experiences "events that are exclusively 
extraordinary" (120-21). 

103 
significantly, as the narrative of the title story, "A Wide 
Net," emphasizes, a wide net can be used for the positive 
purpose of rescue and recovery. 
As she deals with themes of mutability and human 
connection, Welty constructs in this collection an other-
worldly atmosphere that suggests E.M. Forster's metaphor for 
the "fantastic-prophetic axis" in fiction: "a bar of light" 
that slants across other elements in the fiction 
(Aspects 
102).4 "First Love," rather than the title story, "The Wide 
Net," opens The Wide Net collection because its first sentence 
predicts not only the extraordinary content of the story, but 
of the collection as well: "Whatever happened, it happened in 
extraordinary times, in a season of dreams, and in Natchez it 
was the bitterest winter of them all" (WN 3) .5 The details of 
unusual light, stemming from the bitter winter ice and snow, 
help to establish a special mood throughout the story. All 
the stories, as we shall see, suggest "extraordinary" times in 
the everyday lives of people along the Natchez Trace, often 
couched in specific and significant seasonal times or in years 
of extraordinary and destructive natural catastrophes. 
4Forster never fully clarifies this metaphor, except to 
say it "implies the supernatural, but need not express it" 
(106). 
5In his seminal article on The Wide Net, 
Robert Penn 
Warren identifies this sentence as our entree into a "special 
world," one in which we cannot expect "quite the ordinary 
direct lighting of the actual event" (43). 

104 
It is well to remember that the time in which Welty worked 
on the collection was also extraordinary, for Europe was 
embroiled in war, and the United States was being drawn 
inexorably, reluctantly, toward involvement in it (Kreyling 
Agent 75-76). The talk of war in the air may have prompted 
some of the choices made as Welty worked with the historical 
material associated with the Natchez Trace, a subject that she 
had been contemplating for some time (Kreyling Agent 66). 
Certainly the fact that she moved back in time to early 
nineteenth-century American history, with its nearness to the 
Revolutionary War, its early stirring of national feeling, and 
its impulses toward Western expansion, was unusual in 
twentieth-century southern literary tradition. More typical 
were novels dealing with historical detail of the Civil War, a 
battle of separation. But the era recreated in "First Love" 
reflected the contemporary ideas of battle, conquest and 
expansion. 
Only two of the stories, "First Love" and "A Still 
Moment," touch specifically on themes of conquest, but they 
are stories central to the collection and to the Welty canon 
in general. "Asphodel" recounts the process of stagnation and 
decay in community, while "The Winds" and "At the Landing" 
detail the destructive threat of the natural forces of storm 
and flood. Other stories, including the title one, feature 
quests both with and without mythological underpinnings. All 
the stories touch in some way on Welty's central concern with 

105 
the illusions that dominate the relationship of people to time 
and to each other. 
Since chronotopes vary from story to story as Welty moves 
through different eras in the nineteenth century, I will 
examine representative stories in some detail, even though 
most have already received considerable attention in Welty 
criticism. I will work through the stories chronologically, 
as they appear in the collection. In addition to tracing 
historical detail, I will discuss Welty's increasing use of 
images of eyes, hands, and heart to symbolize levels of human 
understanding and maturity. 
"First Love," set in 1807 in Natchez, explores the 
transforming power of love. "A Still Moment," set in 1811, is 
a seminal Welty story, an artist's parable that evolves from 
an unusual encounter on the Natchez Trace. "Asphodel," with 
its timeless setting, nonetheless suggests the middle decades 
of the century with its emphasis on Greek Revival architecture 
and an aristocrat who tries to arrest time. "At the Landing," 
set in the latter part of the century or more likely in the 
early twentieth century, returns to Rodney's Landing to treat 
once more the themes of first love, innocence, and experience. 
"FIRST LOVE" 
"Then the gesture 
one of the men made in the air 
transfixed 
him where he waited" 
(WN 11). 
"First Love" depicts a transfiguration in the life of the 
deaf orphan Joel Mayes, a transfiguration that reflects the 

106 
extraordinary transformation of the town of Natchez itself by 
spectacular weather conditions and dramatic current events. 
Having suddenly lost his parents on the Natchez Trace as they 
traveled south down the Trace from Virginia, Joel now earns 
his bed and board as a boot boy in a Natchez inn. 
Since his 
traumatic loss has caused him to lose all memory of his past, 
Joel lives completely alone at the foot of the Natchez Trace, 
frozen into the present life of his silent daily existence. 
Into his life, dramatically, almost "miraculously," appears 
one night one of the most famous travelers ever to come to 
Natchez, the man who will effect Joel's transfiguration—the 
former Vice-President of the United States, Aaron Burr. 
For in the remarkable tale of "First Love," Eudora Welty 
recreates a major historical event in the life of Natchez, 
Mississippi. Here, in January, 1807, Aaron Burr was arrested 
for conspiracy to commit treason. He was tried in the 
territorial capital of Washington, Mississippi, located just 
six miles up the Trace from Natchez. Although Welty covers 
only that part of Burr's bleak experience occurring in the 
Natchez area, history records the Washington, Mississippi, 
trial as the third of four such trials, all of which acquitted 
Burr for lack of evidence.6 The historically accurate bitter 
cold in the winter of 1807, atypical for southern Mississippi, 
6See Pearl McHaney, 52, for information about Welty's 
knowledge of Aaron Burr. For relevant discussion of the 
conspiracy trials of Aaron Burr, see Jonathan Daniel's 
Ordeal 
of Ambition: 
Jefferson, 
Hamilton, 
Burr. 

107 
persisted through Burr's month in Natchez. On the opening day 
of Burr's trial, Judge Thomas Rodney, the presiding judge, 
recorded the temperature as "ten degrees above zero" (Daniels 
159) . 
The extreme weather conditions set the mood for the story 
in its first line: "in Natchez it was the bitterest winter of 
them all" (WN 3). The extreme cold and strange light that 
transfigure Natchez serve not only to establish a dream-like 
setting, but also to reinforce the atmosphere surrounding the 
story's leading characters. The bitterness reflects the 
chilling public opinion endured by Burr as well as the 
emotionally frozen state of the story's protagonist, Joel 
Mayes. 
The opening paragraphs of "First Love" detail the 
elements of the extreme cold: "The north wind struck . . . 
with an insistent penetration . . . screaming down the river 
bends"; "there was the strange drugged fall of snow"; "Venus 
shone in the daytime . . . through the new transparency of the 
sky"; "The Mississippi shuddered and lifted from its bed"; 
"the ice stretched far out"; the "wildcats . . . howled in 
closer rings each night from the frozen cane"; "Men were 
caught by the cold, they dropped in its snare-like silence." 
The strange daily silence and the clear, cold, glittering air 
effect a "transfiguration" in Natchez, one that it seems must 
affect the "whole world" (WN 3-4). 

Welty's choice of Aaron Burr, the villainous "bad boy" of 
American history, as the evocator of the protagonist's "first 
love" raises immediate questions about Welty's authentic 
rendering of historical facts—further inspiring a sense of 
fantasy in the fictional account. But the historical record 
provides evidence that Aaron Burr provoked just such feelings. 
The nineteenth-century historian J. F. H. Claiborne, an 
excellent source of Natchez Trace data, describes a similar 
picture of Burr as the object of young, first love. 
Significantly, the actual young lover in history was a girl, 
Madeline Price, who makes a brief appearance at the end of 
Welty's fictional account. Claiborne describes her 
enchantment with Burr in what a later historian has called 
"song" and "Southern romance" (Daniels Devil's 
Backbone 
161). 
Neither Claiborne nor later historians express any doubt about 
Burr's fascination for women of all ages. 
But Welty, representing Burr as a whole man, not just a 
lover, shifts the enchantment to a young boy, even more 
spectacularly, to a young deaf boy. Joel Mayes' perception of 
Burr evolves entirely from what he can see; it is impossible 
for him to hear any sounds of speech.7 The image of Burr thus 
conveyed differs markedly from the villainous, treasonous 
stereotype that has persisted through the ages. Further, it 
'Profound deafness is defined as an inability to hear the 
sounds of speech. Most deaf people hear "gross" sound, such 
as a sharp, heavy cough or the roar of an engine. Joel hears 
the "explosions" of breaking trees and some notes of Mrs. 
Blennerhassett's fiddle (WN 161, 164). 

109 
allows, indeed even encourages—just as history does—debate 
about "what really happened." Using the point of view of a 
deaf child, who never hears any of Burr's conversation, 
reinforces the central historical quandary about Burr's 
alleged treasonous activity: no factual evidence exists or 
has ever existed to prove conclusively either his guilt or his 
innocence on the charge of conspiracy against the United 
States.8 Through the wide-open eyes of the orphan boy, we see 
a different dimension of Burr, one that suggests a much more 
complicated and appealing man than the black-and-white 
stereotype of history. 
Of course, Welty omits most of the facts, expecting—in 
typical modernist fashion—that readers will fill these in for 
themselves. Albert Devlin believes, as I do, that Welty 
conducted her own research in order to understand both the 
public and the private Burr as well as possible (Chronicle 
61-
62). Yet, by constructing our vision of Burr from the point 
of view of a deaf child, Welty reenacts for contemporary 
viewers the same lack of access to necessary information that 
faced ordinary Americans at the time. From the story, we 
receive no more evidence with which to judge Burr's intentions 
than did his contemporaries. We do, however, through Welty's 
artistry, experience vividly Burr's ability to inspire and 
8Twentieth-century scholarship suggests that Burr may have 
been a scapegoat whose intentions were distorted in reports to 
President Jefferson from General James Wilkinson in New 
Orleans. We now know that Wilkinson was, at the time, a 
secret agent of the Spanish crown. 

110 
move people. According to Charles Nolan, a specialist in Burr 
literary representations, Welty's portrait of Burr makes 
"First Love" a "stunning achievement" (112).9 
Throughout this story—and throughout the collection— 
Welty associates individual characters with specific time 
dimensions. While other men and creatures in the bitter-cold 
winter of Natchez are frozen in space, Joel Mayes is frozen in 
time. He lives entirely in the present, having no memory that 
precedes his last glimpse on the Natchez Trace of his parents' 
faces. 
It [his memory] reached back and hung trembling over the 
very moment of terror in which he had become separated 
from his.parents, and then it turned and started in the 
opposite direction, and it would have discerned some 
shape, but he would not let it, of the future. 
(WN 12-13) 
We would say now that Joel suffers from shock-induced 
amnesia. His deafness might also be induced by trauma; we do 
hear of cases of "hysterical deafness" or muteness. We know 
at the very least that Joel's is a late deafness. Joel has 
not always been deaf and mute: "I could speak if I would, or 
I could hear," he thinks. "Once I did each thing" (WN 27). 
Given his amnesia, "everything in the passing moment and each 
little deed assumed the gravest importance" (WN 13). 
Joel perceives immediately that Aaron Burr, engaged in 
business or in play, has "no awareness whatever of the 
9In Aaron Burr and the Literary 
Imagination, 
Charles Nolan 
examines literary representations of this compelling public 
figure and private man. The Burr portraits have appeared 
steadily over the last 150 years. 

Ill 
present" (WN 16). Although Burr talks endlessly in Joel's 
tiny room, his attentions are directed toward "conquest . . . 
a dream of delights and powers beyond its walls. . . . " 
(WN 
15). Watching Burr dance later in one of the entertainments 
arranged in Natchez, Joel knows that Burr's "eyes saw nothing 
there and went always beyond the room" (WN 19-20). All is 
future and elsewhere for Burr, whose reputation has been 
tainted by his scandalous duel with Alexander Hamilton and 
will eventually be destroyed by President Thomas Jefferson's 
distrust of him. Less than three years after ending his term 
as Thomas Jefferson's Vice-President, Aaron Burr stands 
accused of fomenting a conspiracy to seize Western lands, 
ostensibly belonging to the Spanish, and possibly of plotting 
secession of the new Republic's territories on the 
southwestern frontier. Did he so conspire? We will probably 
never know. History is as silent on the actual facts of this 
matter as are the Burr/Blennerhassett conversations for Joel. 
In forming some ideas, then, about the man who has 
invaded his space in such a magical way, Joel focuses largely 
on two physical characteristics: the unusual glitter of 
Burr's eyes, well-documented in history, and a particular 
gesture of Burr's right arm and hand, Welty's fictional 
addition (WN 16, 11). For Joel, Burr's eyes shone "like 
travelers' fires seen far out on the river" (WN 16). Joel's 
simile clarifies the light as a positive one giving comfort, 
hope, and renewed energy to those travelers in the cold 

112 
darkness, still some distance away from warmth and 
companionship. It is Burr's gesture, however, that captivates 
Joel. When Burr lifts his right arm in a gesture of "sudden 
nobleness," Joel is "transfixed" (WN 14, 11). Burr's noble 
gesture is never described precisely: he "lifted his right 
arm—a tense, yet gentle and easy motion—and made the dark 
wet cloak fall back" (WN 11). The gesture is to Joel "like 
the first movement he had ever seen, as if the world had been 
up to that night inanimate" (WN 11). 
The nature of the gesture that Welty leaves to our 
imagination might be explained by an historical image that 
affected Welty's imagination. A short distance from Bayou 
Pierre, where, in the story, Burr's flotilla awaits the 
disposition of his trial, there still stands an unusual 
church. The church was built for Reverend Zebulon Butler, a 
young Scottish minister of the early nineteenth century whose 
vision became associated with his recurrent gesture. This 
symbolic gesture so captivated the people of Port Gibson that 
they erected a lasting memorial to it. Instead of the steeple 
which would customarily grace the top of a church, the people 
fashioned a carved hand caught momentarily in the minister's 
well-known gesture: "the upraised and clenched hand, with the 
index finger pointing heavenward" (Daniels 251). The gesture 
so embodied the essence of the admired minister that when the 
wooden hand was half-destroyed by nature's wear and tear, it 
was replaced in the twentieth century with a gold-leaf replica 

113 
which continues to direct upwards the gaze of all observers. 
Welty knew the church well,,for a picture of it appears in her 
book of photographs, One Time, One Place (95). 
Burr's gesture would have been secular rather than 
religious, of course; no threat of hell or promise of heaven 
would be at all implied in it. Indeed, Burr's gesture, we 
know, is "toward the West" (WN 32), perhaps toward a promise 
of earthly lands rather than a heavenly home. But the 
intimation of vision and power implicit in Burr's gesture 
would be no less memorable for being secular rather than 
divine.10 We know that Burr's ideas captivated many of the 
southwestern frontier men, one reason that he aroused such 
fear and animosity in the government. It is entirely credible 
that such a man of authority and purpose could awaken the 
imagination of the orphaned and purposeless child, alone and 
adrift on the edge of the wilderness. 
The moment of transfiguration for Joel comes on the last 
night of Burr's month-long sojourn in Natchez, the night 
before his trial. Night after night, "with his eyes wide open 
in the shadows," Joel has watched Burr talk with 
Blennerhassett, his alleged co-conspirator. Always the fire 
in the grate warms the room, but for Joel the flame springs 
primarily from Burr himself (WN 14). On this important night, 
10Welty worried about the reception Burr's gesture might 
receive in her contemporary war climate. "Do you realize that 
it might be interpreted as pro-fascist, poor Aaron Burr's 
unexplained little dream," Welty wrote to her agent, Diarmuid 
Russell. For more details, see Kreyling, Agent, 76. 

114 
Blennerhassett's young wife joins them to play her fiddle. 
The sight of her playing, some of the fiddle's sounds, and the 
odors in the room speak to the boy of "a place. . . . a 
country" (WN 24). Then "quite clearly, and altogether to his 
surprise," Joel breaks through the confines of present time to 
a time past that he had repressed: 
Instead of the fire on the hearth, there was a mimosa 
tree in flower. It was in the little back field at his 
home in Virginia and his mother was leading him by the 
hand. . . . His mother pointed to it. Among the 
trembling leaves the feathery puffs of sweet bloom filled 
the tree like thousands of paradisical [sic] birds all 
alighted at an instant. He had known then the story of 
the Princess Labam for his mother had told it to him, how 
she was so radiant that she sat on the roof-top at night 
and lighted the city. It seemed to be the mimosa tree 
that lighted the garden, for its brightness and fragrance 
overlaid all the rest. 
(WN 24) 
Without at first wholly realizing it, Joel has heard "the 
sounds of her [Mrs. Blennerhassett's] song, the only thing he 
had ever heard" (WN 25). Joel's recovered memory, prompted by 
the sensory stimulation, features his mother in an experience 
of all-encompassing radiance, a radiance that he associates in 
the present with Aaron Burr. In the moment of his revelation, 
the radiance spreads, for Joel, to cover all those in room. 
At that same moment, Joel himself feels love and pity that 
encompasses all the people in the room because he recognizes 
the "one thing" they all share: "how far they were from home, 
how far from everywhere that they knew" (WN 26). 
Joel's love then, while awakened by Burr, is not 
confined to Burr. It is Burr who receives the benefit of 

Joel's new-found agape, however. When, later on the same 
night, Burr tosses in his sleep, Joel grasps the tortured 
man's hand in his own, suffers the "fierce" clasp that "hurt 
his hand," and receives the "furious pressure of this man's 
dream" until at last Burr quiets and sleeps like a child (WN 
28-9). For Joel, the month with Burr has stirred first only 
awareness of possibilities, then love and compassion for his 
fellow sufferer, and finally joy and participation. As far as 
the evidence of the story goes, Burr is the first person the 
child has touched. Even this early in Welty's career, the 
awakened eyes that look clearly on all aspects of reality are 
accompanied by the open heart and the hands that "make or do." 
Joel's understanding of Aaron Burr produces no final 
answer to the question of Burr's innocence or guilt on the 
charge of treason. The answer to that question remains a 
mystery for Joel, as it still does for us, one hundred and 
eighty-eight years later. But Joel's innocent observation of 
Burr yields greater understanding of the mystery of Burr's 
charismatic personality. For Joel observes and feels all 
parts of Burr's nature, his passion, his dream, his suffering. 
Joel's regard for and identification with Burr—imperfect 
though he may be—constitutes the "love" that plays such an 
important role in Welty's fiction. Through that love, the 
reader glimpses an Aaron Burr clear and whole, worthy of 
admiration as well as pity. "If love does a secret thing 
always, it is to reach backward, to a time that could not be 

116 
known—for it makes a history of the sorrow and the dream it 
has contemplated in some instant of recognition" (WN 28) . 
In this story, the instant of recognition occurs only in 
the heart of the boy, Joel. There is no reciprocity, nor can 
there be, for Burr does not acknowledge the present. Rather 
the spark of connection emanating from Burr reveals Joel's 
past to him. It leaps across time rather than space. By 
helping Joel recover his past, Burr releases the boy from his 
imprisonment in the present and enables him also to adopt some 
hope for a future. 
"A STILL MOMENT" 
"The gaze that looks outward must be trained without rest, 
to 
be indomitable" 
(WN 90). 
"in man the enlargement of the eye to see started a motion in 
the hands to make or do, and . . . the narrowing of the eye 
stopped the hand and contracted the heart" 
(WN 85). 
The important Welty story, "The Still Moment," portrays 
the meeting of three widely different men on the Natchez Trace 
and their various reactions to the sight of a white heron that 
lands nearby. Early critical discussion has centered on the 
various perspectives of the three, while recent criticism has 
approached the story as an artist parable.11 In the story the 
artist, John J. Audubon, encounters the evangelist, Lorenzo 
nRobert Penn Warren's oft-cited 1944 article "Love and 
Separateness" has set the direction for criticism not only of 
this story but for the Welty canon, as well. See also Nancy 
Ann Cluck, Paul Binding (155-58) and Daniele Pitavy-Souques 
(Devlin Life 125-26) for discussion of "The Still Moment" as 
an artist parable. 

117 
Dow, whose rigid views of good and evil match those of the 
third character, the notorious outlaw, James Murrell. The 
three dramatically reveal the conflicting views of reality 
that are central to Welty's artistic method. 
Although no specific date is mentioned in "A Still 
Moment," Welty has specified in her autobiography that the 
scene occurred in 1811, another extraordinary year in the 
Mississippi Valley, one which marked the beginning of the end 
for the Natchez Trace. Charles Joseph Latrobe described the 
year in The Rambler 
in North America as the "Annus Mirabilis 
of the West" (102). Not only did the Mississippi overflow its 
banks in the spring, and the "splendid comet of that year 
. . . shed its twilight over the forests," but "tens of 
thousands" of sguirrels abandoned their northern homes to 
press suicidally toward the south, most of them perishing in 
the Ohio River that blocked their march (Latrobe 102). In 
that year, the ruinous New Madrid fault line trembled, 
triggering a massive earthquake that continued to rock the 
fissured earth for two months thereafter. The earthquake 
caused the Mississippi River to swallow up islands, to run 
backwards for an hour, and to create the mysterious Reelfoot 
Lake in northwestern Tennessee (Latrobe 106-11). 
In this year the characters in "A Still Moment," all 
historical figures who roamed the Natchez Trace wilderness 
during the early years of the nineteenth century, accidentally 
meet. Historically, it is unlikely that their paths ever 

118 
crossed (McHaney "Historical Perspectives" 62-63). Their 
meeting is Welty's fiction. Although Welty retains their 
essential personalities and behavior, she infers from their 
reputations certain habits of thought and adapts them 
accordingly for fictional purposes. Albert Devlin points out 
that all three of the travelers have tainted backgrounds. 
Like Aaron Burr, even the minister and the artist are 
fugitives from justice: "Dow, never approved for Methodist 
ordination, disobeyed his superiors . . . to tour the 
Mississippi Territory"; "Audubon's sketching trip was 
occasioned by the disgrace of bankruptcy and imprisonment in 
Kentucky" (Chronicle 
63). Murrell, of course, has lived his 
entire life outside the law. 
Welty characterizes each of the men as bound to a 
specific dimension of time: Lorenzo Dow to the future, James 
Murrell to the past, John Audubon to a present informed by the 
past and visualizing the future. The three converge at one 
moment in time, share at that moment the sight of a snowy 
heron that alights to feed in the swamp, and then they go 
their separate ways. The action is slight, hanging as it does 
almost wholly on the reactions of the three men to the sight 
of the heron. In this character study, Welty uses an 
omniscient point of view to explore the mind of each of the 
characters as he speculates on the meaning of the heron's 
touching down on the Trace. 

119 
Lorenzo Dow, the Puritan evangelist from Massachusetts, 
lives entirely for the future, for the paradise beyond the 
earthly present. Dow hurries up and down the Trace on his 
mission to save all souls from the "wild places" of their 
earth and their hearts. For Dow there is no life on earth 
except "the tongue," to speak the words of the scripture. 
Nature exists only to testify to God's love; true life exists 
in Christian salvation beyond death. The white heron, for 
Dow, can only be the sign of God's love made visible and near 
(WN 86); its destruction must unaccountably be the work of the 
devil, thinks Dow, as indeed only the "Tempter" can account 
for the conflicting emotions occasioned in his heart by the 
heron's death. 
James Murrell, the notorious outlaw, proclaims his 
credo: "Destroy the present!" Murrell believes that "the 
living moment and the man that lives in it must die before you 
can go on" (WN 79). An artist of sorts himself, as is Dow, 
Murrell rides beside his victims and tells them tales of the 
past, tales that he creates and controls. When he consumes 
his victims, they will become a part of his next tale. Life 
exists in the retelling of it. The heron, for Murrell, is 
merely "whiteness ensconced in darkness," a sight that 
momentarily triggers a prophetic glance into the future of the 
Trace, when it will be "lost" with "all these trees cut down" 
(WN 89). 

120 
Only John Audubon, both aware of his past, of the need 
always to "remember," and conscious of the future he will make 
through his art, actually lives fully in the present moment. 
Audubon never speaks, for his mission is to observe all life 
in the world and to recreate it for posterity. Only he 
notices, for example, that when the heron feeds, "it muddies 
the water with its foot" (WN 87). Only he understands that 
the bird is "defenseless in the world except for the intensity 
of its life," a description that will apply to all major Welty 
protagonists, as we shall see (WN 87). Yet Audubon destroys 
the heron, acknowledging that he cannot reconstruct it 
accurately from memory. Reconstruction, as well as 
observation, is part of his mission; he will reconstruct the 
heron for those who will come after him, in a future which may 
no longer harbor either snowy herons or wilderness trails. 
Audubon destroys with the same love and care that he will use 
to create, even as he wonders still "what structure of life 
bridged the reptile's scale and the heron's feather?" (WN 87). 
In his question, Audubon echoes imagery not only of classical 
Greek poetry but also of new world American Indian folk 
ritual, both of which recognize the "ethical polarity" of "the 
bird and serpent as allegoric of the winged flight of the 
spirit and the earth-bound commitment of the passion" 
(Campbell 88). Audubon alone reflects the certain knowledge 
that there is a bridge between bird and serpent, between soul 
and body, good and evil. Dow and Murrell can survive only by 

121 
denying such a bridge, by carefully separating the dual 
aspects of the human—divine spirit and earthly body, by 
associating this duality with the contrary concepts of good 
and evil. 
Although all three men exhibit the characteristic 
American need to conquer "all" in their separate quests, they 
share no other character traits. The power of the snowy 
heron, which lives intensely in the present moment, arrests 
them all for one still quiet moment, and brings Dow and 
Murrell nearer the question of the bridge between good and 
evil. But when the moment is shattered, both Dow and Murrell 
go their separate ways as before, having suppressed the 
intrusion of the present reality as if it had never existed. 
Critics have compared this story to the earlier "A 
Memory" to explore Welty's thoughts on the creative process 
(Warren 46-47; Vande Kieft Eudora 14-15, 22). The child of "A 
Memory" closes her eyes against the ugliness of humanity that 
confronts her on the beach because it violates the purity of 
the dream of love that has arrested her passions. In The 
Robber 
Bridegroom, 
Clement Musgrove also narrows his eyes to 
any full spectrum of reality, seeing first only the innocent 
singing birds in the trees and next only the corrupt creeping 
serpent that forever slithers nearer the birds. Both 
characters prefigure Lorenzo Dow in this regard, and if we 
merely reverse the reality and the dream, we find James 
Murrell. But the historic John Audubon tries to blend in "A 

122 
Still Moment" both dream and reality, beauty and ugliness, 
believing that the artistic view, the "gaze that looks 
outward," must be trained, unceasingly, to embrace whatever 
comes into view. Yet even Audubon closes his eyes at the 
moment he pulls the trigger to kill the heron. Such narrowing 
of the eyes "contract[s] the heart," makes possible an 
"averting plan" (WN 85). When Audubon opens his eyes to meet 
the horror in Lorenzo Dow's, he recognizes it for the "first 
time" (WN 90-1). Thus, the vision of all three men is 
momentarily enlarged. Dow and Murrell instantly revert to 
their respective squints on reality. But Audubon, who 
remembers everything, will take the horror with him into his 
next encounter with beauty. For always, the past informs his 
present and provides courage for the future. 
One can scarcely avoid speculating on the parallels 
between Welty's "Still Moment" and Sarah Orne Jewett's "A 
White Heron." In Jewett's story, an ornithologist, who hopes 
to capture the rare heron, asks Sylvia, the young protagonist, 
for help in finding its nest. He offers a reward of ten 
dollars to "anybody who could show it to me" (Country 
233). 
Hoping to please the ornithologist and driven by "wild 
ambition," Sylvia climbs alone just before dawn to the very 
top of the highest great pine tree in the area, "the last of 
its generation," where she hopes to search out the nest of the 
white heron that feeds in the marsh. When after her struggle 
to the top of the tree, she sees clearly both the ocean and 

123 
the heron rising into the early daybreak, she experiences an 
epiphany which renders her incapable finally of reporting the 
sight to the ornithologist. When she "remembers how the white 
heron came flying through the golden air and how they watched 
the sea and the morning together, . . . Sylvia cannot speak; 
she cannot tell the heron's secret and give its life away" 
(Country 239). 
Welty's story adds a new layer to the question of life or 
death for the heron. Jewett's ornithologist kills and stuffs 
his rare birds. He preserves the lifeless outward material 
cover of the bird, its skin and feathers, but nothing remains 
inside of its life or movement. For Sylvia, then, the choice 
is clearly between life and death for the heron. Life and 
non-life, good and evil are compartmentalized for her, just as 
they are for Lorenzo Dow and James Murrell. Welty's 
ornithologist, John Audubon, takes the process a step further, 
however, for as an artist, he destroys as part of a plan to 
bring the bird to life again in art. To do so, the artist 
must accurately recreate the complexities of the bird's 
structure and feathers. But since memory alone cannot furnish 
such accuracy, the dead earthly bird becomes a model for 
living art. Thus, where Jewett's story offers either life or 
death for the heron, Welty's story promises life beyond death: 
the rebirth of the heron, feathers and spirit, in the artistic 
re-creation by the artist. 

124 
In "The Still Moment" Audubon follows William Faulkner's 
artistic credo: "The aim of every artist is to arrest motion, 
which is life, by artificial means and hold it fixed so that 
100 years later when a stranger looks at it, it moves again 
since it is life" (Lion 253). Yet Audubon, in seeing the 
heron "most purely at its moment of death" and then 
recognizing the horror in Dow's eyes, understands the paradox 
of the artist's goal. 
He knew that the best he could make would be, after it 
was apart from his hand, a dead thing and not a live 
thing, never the essence, only a sum of parts; and that 
it would always meet with a stranger's sight, and never 
be one with the beauty in any other man's head in the 
world. 
(WN 92) 
Even Audubon's "long labor" of disciplined observation, his 
concentrated effort to commit to memory the essence of the 
heron in "all its solitude, its total beauty," his compulsion 
to recreate in art both the spirit and the passion of the 
heron as he experiences it in time, is not enough, can never 
be enough, to communicate fully his vision to the stranger's 
eyes in another time.12 But if it is good enough, then the 
heron will at least live again for the stranger, albeit in a 
slightly different vision. 
It is not enough for Audubon, but 
it is something. 
If there is a bridge, then, between the "reptile's scale" 
and the "bird's feather," the material and the essence, it 
12See Pitavy-Souques' "The Modernity of Eudora Welty," 
124-26, for discussion of the creative process in "A Still 
Moment." 

125 
must emerge from the artist's love for his subject and from 
his passion to make it live again in another time and place. 
This concept has perhaps been most simply expressed in the 
last line of Thornton Wilder's 1922 Pulitzer Prize winning 
novel, The Bridge 
of San Luis 
Rey: 
"There is a land of the 
living and a land of the dead and the bridge is love, the only 
survival, the only meaning" (235). 
"ASPHODEL" 
"Her look 
was the challenging 
one when looks 
met" 
(WN 105). 
"One hand, 
the right 
one, 
curved 
round and clenched 
an 
ebony 
stick, 
mounted 
with 
the gold head of a lion" 
(WN 104-05). 
Here are Greek form and Greek mythology on a curve of the 
Natchez Trace. "Asphodel" is the name given to the Greek 
Revival style plantation home once occupied by Mr. Don 
Mclnnis. When the story opens, "Asphodel" has been reduced to 
a "golden ruin." The wildflower called asphodel grows "on the 
poorest soil in most parts of the Mediterranean countries" 
(Graves 327). An asphodel is a type of lily, associated in 
Greek legend with the valley of ashes and the walking dead—a 
most appropriate association for this unusual Welty story. 
In exploring the theme of death in life in "Asphodel," 
Welty abandons any reference to specific Mississippi 
historical record. She does, however, invoke the general 
infatuation with Greek Revival style architecture current in 
the nineteenth century, particularly in the South. Asphodel, 
before its ruin, would have resembled just such a typical 

126 
plantation home. Many of these Greek Revival style homes, 
featuring classic lines and a variety of Greek columns, were 
built in the Natchez region during the flush early decades of 
Mississippi statehood.13 
Pictures and descriptions of many 
of these homes are included in the 1938 Mississippi guide 
book. One particularly beautiful example of the six Doric-
column home, and one that Welty would have known, is 
D'evereaux, built in 1840 on a hill above the old Natchez 
Trace near Natchez (Mississippi 
337). It is highly likely 
that D'evereaux was a model for Asphodel. Many critics have 
thought of the ruins of Windsor as the model. Certainly, 
anyone thinking of ruins would think of the ruins of this 
extravagant nineteenth-century plantation home, which was 
destroyed by fire in 1890, leaving only 23 Corinthian columns 
(Cole 217). But Windsor was more opulent than D'evereaux, and 
than Asphodel. Besides, its columns were Corinthian, the most 
elaborate of the Greek order of architecture, rather than 
Asphodel's Doric, the oldest and plainest in the order. 
The Greek revival setting accentuates the forms and 
themes of Greek drama employed by Welty for this story. In a 
noticeable departure from earlier presentations, Welty 
presents in dramatic Greek choral form the remembered story 
of the town matriarch, the proud and aristocratic Miss Sabina, 
13Many of these homes have been carefully preserved in 
Natchez, which sponsors an annual tour of homes, replete with 
costumed hosts and hostesses. Thousands of visitors make the 
pilgrimage each year. 

127 
who falls dead of a stroke when she can no longer control the 
forces of change in her community. She has spent her life 
imposing her will on the community and trying to impose it on 
time itself. In her community, Miss Sabina, like Salome in 
The Robber 
Bridegroom 
and Miss Emily in Faulkner's "A Rose for 
Emily," commands time to stand still. She demands that the 
world exist always in the moment of her greatest beauty and 
authority. Only after her death are townspeople free to live 
again in present time. 
The townspeople, in the tradition of Greek drama, are 
represented by Cora, Phoebe, and Irene, three spinsters who 
form a chorus. In postures "that . . . came from a mourning 
procession" (WN 95), the chorus members gather at the 
previously forbidden Asphodel at high noon on the day after 
Miss Sabina's death to tell, with appropriate ritual and 
feasting, the story of the doomed marriage between Miss Sabina 
and Mr. Don Mclnnis. As in the earliest drama, the entire 
story emerges from the choral song; the chorus "comments or 
moralizes or mythologizes upon what happens" (Grant 157). The 
chorus rests near all that remains of Asphodel—the great 
Doric columns. As symbols of the "pure Present" in time, they 
predicate "the negation of time" (Spengler 489). The women of 
the chorus, luxuriating in their sudden freedom to live in the 
moment, eat their picnic lunch, lingering over the fruits— 
"bananas, figs, pomegranates, grapes." After pressing at the 

128 
"pomegranate stains on their mouths," they chant the history 
so fresh in their minds (WN 97). 
Although Vande Kieft has called the narrative method of 
"Asphodel" "puzzling, eclectic, and bizarre" (Eudora Welty 47-
48), the method could hardly be simpler nor serve Welty's 
purposes better. For "Asphodel" fits the structural form of 
the dithyramb, a ritual form of early Greek tragedy, honoring 
Dionysus. As the most primitive form became more literary, 
competitive festivals of "the Great Dionysia" were presented 
annually. Ordinarily, each day of the festival, three 
tragedies and a tragi-comic or semi-burlesque "satyr play" 
would be performed (Grant 156, 153). The plays emphasized 
"lyric poetry, choral singing and dancing, and mythological 
subjects" (Brockett 13). "Asphodel" fits the tragi-comic 
mode. 
Welty alters the classic order of the dithyramb; she 
begins with the parados. an accepted variation in the form. 
But all the structural elements and dramatic conventions of 
the dithyramb are clearly visible in "Asphodel." The 
structural features of the more refined literary dithyrambs 
include the prologue with its exposition of earlier events, 
the parados or entrance of the chorus who establish the proper 
mood, the stasima containing the episodes that develop the 
main action, and finally the exodus with the concluding scene 
and the departure of the chorus (Brockett 15). The play 
ordinarily begins just before the denouement and only the 

129 
final scenes are dramatized; the Greek desire to keep violent 
events off-stage forces a great deal of exposition. 
The dramatic choral structure merges perfectly, too, with 
the oral story-telling tradition of Southern history. Two-
thirds of the story, the entire history of Miss Sabina and Mr. 
Don Mclnnis, is recounted in the rhythmical, lyrical, 
alternating monologues of the chorus, who represent the 
timelessness of the seasons as well as the community 
observers. Despite the account of bitter disappointment and 
terrible vengeance, Cora, Phoebe, and Irene "tell over Miss 
Sabina's story, their voices serene and alike" (WN 98). Since 
readers have responded more consistently to the Southern 
story-telling tradition than to the Greek choral tale, 
"Asphodel" is usually seen as a comic story of Southern 
spinsters rather than a somber Greek tale of vengeance, 
destruction, and renewal. 
The mismatched mates of the drama, each described as the 
last of a kind, are familiar types that will figure again in 
various forms throughout Welty's work. Michael Kreyling sees 
their union as an Apollonian-Dionysian one, two "opposites" 
which in reality should be viewed as equal parts of a whole 
(Order 23). Miss Sabina, proud guardian of the "civilization" 
that her antebellum culture has wrought, hoards Greek 
artifacts in her dark house. Although the house, like Sabina 
herself and her father before her, "stood on the high hill" 
and "commanded the town that came to be at its foot," it is 

130 
set in hard ground where "not one blade of grass grew" (WN 
98). 
On her wedding day, "no longer young," Miss Sabina 
waits "rigid" for the "great, profane man . . . of Asphodel," 
Mr. Don Mclnnis. The Dionysian figure of Mr. Don Mclnnis is a 
more civilized Billy Floyd, a less mysterious King MacLain. 
Mclnnis comes from the opposite side of the great ring of 
hills, connected to Miss Sabina's town by a "curve of the Old 
Natchez Trace." But the road between Asphodel and Miss 
Sabina's house is "long, winding, difficult, untravelled" (WN 
98). Mclnnis is wild and arrogant, but "the hope was in him, 
and he knew it" (WN 99). 
But hope is thwarted in his life with Sabina: all three 
children die, Sabina drives him from her house, Mclnnis 
disappears, and his own house burns—or is burned—to the 
ground, leaving only the six Doric columns. However, on the 
day after his wife's death, Mr. Don Mclnnis reappears—or so 
it seems to the sated, dreamy spinsters who loll in the glade 
beside Asphodel. Out from between the vine-entangled Doric 
columns steps a naked and bearded man, "as rude and golden as 
a lion" (WN 109). Though he does not move, soon a herd of 
goats swarm out of the ruin and chase the fleeing women, who 
look back even as they flee.14 And when the goats follow 
their buggy, the three spinsters toss out the little basket of 
baked hen that they "had saved back," affirming that Miss 
14The final scene, as Louise Westling has noted in 
Eudora 
Welty 
is reminiscent of the Pan episode in E. M. Forster's 
story, "Story of a Panic" (76) . 

131 
Sabina "would have been ashamed of us . . . . She would never 
have given up the little basket we had saved back" (WN 112) . 
The chorus has already made clear Miss Sabina's attitude 
toward hope, new ideas, and new blood in their account of her 
death in the post office. Miss Sabina despises the post 
office, the one spot in town "beyond her domain." The chorus 
explains why. 
For there, we might still be apart in a dream, and she 
did not know what it w a s . . . . We held onto our letters 
as onto all far-away or ephemeral things at that moment, 
to our secret hope or joy and our despair too, which she 
might require of us. 
(WN 106) 
Sabina, of course, has neither sent nor received a letter, 
indeed has never entered the post office until the final 
moments of her earthly existence. Her descent at last into 
the little "four-posted whitewashed building," crowded with 
folks, each person with a letter in hand, is prompted by a 
desperate need for connection: "Give me my letter," she cries 
(WN 107). But, of course, there is none. In a fury 
reminiscent of a Dionysian orgy, Sabina strikes out at the 
physical evidence of life beyond her control. 
She was possessed then, before our eyes, as she could 
never have been possessed. She raged. She rocked from 
side to side, she danced. Miss Sabina's arms moved like 
a harvester's in the field, to destroy all that was in 
the little room. In her frenzy she tore all the letters 
to pieces, and even put bits in her mouth and appeared to 
eat them. 
(WN 108) 
That Miss Sabina can experience neither hope nor joy is 
substantiated by her attitude toward time, one that we've seen 

132 
in these other Natchez Trace stories. For Miss Sabina 
acknowledges no sense of time except the present: "When Miss 
Sabina is at the door, there is no other place in the world 
but where you stand, and no other afternoon but that one, past 
or future" (WN 106). 
In "Asphodel," the three spinsters, who appear repeatedly 
in Welty's canon, suggest the Fates, who control man's 
destiny, or the Hours, those characters of Greek mythology who 
watch over the works of mortal men. They sometimes represent 
the seasons as well—spring, autumn, and summer. Welty 
apparently fuses the representations: the imagery throughout 
suggests the seasons, as does the pointed reference to the 
statues of the Seasons beside which the spinsters stand in 
Miss Sabina's great hall (WN 101). The "golden day" of which 
Phoebe speaks will endure in their consciousness, not as a 
closed chapter, but rather as a past moment that informs the 
present and celebrates the possibilities of the future.15 
In its thematic assertion about time, "Asphodel" extends 
the central idea of "A Still Moment." Although "Asphodel" 
focuses on the inevitable decline of a civilization that 
attempts to arrest time, the character representative of that 
"civilizing" way of life is as oblivious of historical process 
as are James Murrell, the bandit who closes off the present to 
live only in the past, and Lorenzo Dow, who suffers the 
15A contrasting view is illustrated by Garvin Davenport, 
who asserts that Phoebe's golden day, "the chance for renewal, 
seems to be in the past and therefore lost" (Prenshaw 196). 

133 
present only for dreams of the future. The chorus of Asphodel 
affirms the belief of John Audubon, the artist who remembers 
the past but respects the future, and who can fully experience 
and appreciate the present which merges the other two. A 
community that attempts to ignore its past and exclude the 
change that the future must bring will always come to ruin; 
without change, life itself becomes still and dead. 
"AT THE LANDING" 
Although the river country of the Natchez area has many 
"Landings," most of the descriptive details in this story 
identify this particular landing as what remains of Rodney's 
Landing, the eighteenth-century home of Clement Musgrove in 
The Robber 
Bridegroom. 
Historically, however, the fictional 
Rodney's Landing may be a mixture of two river country towns, 
Rodney and Bruinsburg Landing.16 By the 1920s—the apparent 
16See Eudora Welty's "Some Notes on River Country" in The 
Eye of 
the 
Story, 
286-299. Also consult "More Notes on River 
Country" by Brookhart and Marrs, and "Constructing Time and 
Place" by Meese. Meese calls attention to Welty's picture in 
One Time, 
One Place of the ruins of Windsor, entitled "Home 
After High Water." Windsor's location is given on the picture 
as Rodney (43) . 
Yet, according to Mississippi: 
Guide 
to 
the 
Magnolia 
State, 
Windsor is at least ten miles from Rodney, but 
only three miles from Bruinsburg Landing. Also Bruinsburg 
Landing, not Rodney, was in the nineteenth century the third 
busiest cotton port in the area, trailing only Natchez and 
Vicksburg. Bruinsburg Landing, as a ghost town in the 
twentieth century, also had shantyboats moored to its shore 
(329-330). These historical facts suggest that Welty merged 
details of the two towns, probably in The Robber 
Bridegroom 
as 
well as in "At the Landing," to form the fictional Rodney's 
Landing. If so, then Windsor may be the model Welty 
envisioned for the home of Jenny and her grandfather. Adding 
weight to this conclusion is Salome Musgrove's dream in The 

134 
time setting of "At the Landing"—the thriving river port of 
Clement Musgrove's time has lost its river and its livelihood. 
The Mississippi River which gave life to the town has also 
ravished it regularly by severe flooding: the area 
experienced "major floods eleven times between 1858 and 1922" 
(Cobb 129). In 1876, the force of the river at flood time 
actually created a new channel for itself, one that left the 
town of Rodney three miles inland. Despite systematic flood 
control efforts that began slowly in 1879, periodic flooding 
continued; "great" floods occurred in 1912, 1922, and 1927 
(Blake 33 6). The 1927 flood was so catastrophic that the 
federal government took over major responsibility for flood 
control in the following year. 
It is this 1927 catastrophe that drives the plot of "At 
the Landing," if we can trust the only clue to specific time 
given in the story.17 
On the morning after her grandfather's 
death, the protagonist, Jenny, walks into town where she hears 
"Son Alford" playing his mandolin and "singing his fast song": 
"Ain't she cute / Ain't she smart / Don't look twice / It'll 
break my heart / Everybody loves my gal" (WN 193). The verse 
is a slightly modified version of the popular Tin Pan Alley 
Robber 
Bridegroom 
of having "a mansion at least five stories 
high, with an observatory of the river on top of that, with 
twenty-two Corinthian columns to hold up the roof"—an exact 
description of Windsor (100). 
17Hughes and Marrs place the story in the forties. See 
"More Notes on River Country" 92. For additional source 
material and pictures, see Marrs "Eudora Welty's Photography: 
Images into Fiction" 280-96. 

135 
song, "Five Foot Two, Eyes of Blue," written in 1925 (Shaw 
160). An immediate hit, it became standard fare for even 
amateur musicians with a banjo or mandolin. The song helps 
establish the year of the flood occurring in the story as 
1927. 
The song also offers a telling contrast between Jenny, an 
isolated, inexperienced girl, and the flapper, the typical 
girl of the twenties. With lyrics that described "my gal" as 
having "turned-up nose, turned-down hose" and certified her as 
"flapper, yes sir, one of those," "Five Foot Two, Eyes of 
Blue" was the quintessential song of the Jazz Age flapper. 
The flappers lived their lives with careless abandon, 
deliberately mocking the conventions of their elders. One has 
only to think of Zelda Fitzgerald, an Alabama city girl and, 
perhaps, the most famous flapper of the Jazz age, to 
comprehend the portrait in the song. Even young rural 
southern women adopted some flapper traits, as we shall see 
when we move ahead to Delta 
Wedding. 
For the most part, however, "At the Landing" points back 
to The Robber Bridegroom. 
Jenny and her grandfather appear to 
be the spiritual if not the literal descendants of Clement 
Musgrove and his daughter Rosamond Lockhart. In the 1790s 
Clement's house lay on a hill between the Natchez Trace and 
the Mississippi, with the river just one mile away. Jenny and 
her grandfather also live on the hill, where they "had always 
lived," in a many-galleried house, now three miles distant 

136 
from the river; in the house itself hang two paintings that 
had belonged to Jenny's mother: "The Bird Fair" and "The 
Massacre at Fort Rosalie" (WN 180).18 The house next door is 
the Lockhart house, deserted now except for the albino Mag 
Lockhart and the fiery red horse that roams the Lockhart 
pasture (WN 190, 185); and in the cemetery, Jenny can visit 
her mother's grave whose tombstone records her married name: 
Lockhart (WN 191). Although the Lockharts of The 
Robber 
Bridegroom 
were left in New Orleans with twins, it is not 
difficult to imagine a turn in their fortunes requiring mother 
and children at least to return to Rodney's Landing, to a 
house built near Grandfather Musgrove's, a common enough 
practice in a land where family stayed close. We never learn 
the last name of Jenny's grandfather, but his withdrawal from 
the world outside his own house strongly resembles the course 
of action taken by Clement Musgrove in response to his 
discovery of deceit and betrayal. 
Like Joel Mayes, Jenny, is trapped in time when we first 
meet her. But the time that confines her is the past, not the 
present. She, too, is emotionally frozen, except for the 
curiosity aroused in her by occasional glimpses of the 
mysterious Billy Floyd. For here at the Landing, her 
grandfather has loved, protected, and almost imprisoned her in 
his house. Within the house Jenny enjoys light, order, and 
18The "Massacre at Fort Rosalie" refers to the Natchez 
Massacre of the French garrison and settlement recalled in The 
Robber 
Bridegroom. 

137 
peace. But her grandfather looks at her with eyes that recall 
the memory of her mother, who had a "wild desire" to get to 
Natchez where people milled about. When Jenny goes to the 
door, her grandfather "would call her back" (WN 182). He 
keeps the battered family books on a high shelf, "nearly 
unreachable" for Jenny (WN 181). Although he is frail and 
gentle, the weight of his hand upon her shoulder is like the 
"terrifying weight of a claw" (WN 183). Jenny yields to the 
weight without thought as she would obey "a stranger in the 
street"; apparently "nothing began in her own heart" (WN 183). 
Jenny's grandfather, like Clement Musgrove in The 
Robber 
Bridegroom 
and like Sabina in "Asphodel," resists any threat 
to the careful order he has created in his home. He considers 
any force of nature, a young person's curiosity, his 
daughter's fatal fever, even the Mississippi River, "beneath 
notice or mention" (WN 183).19 
But, of course, no one can 
forestall forever the force of nature. On the night he dies, 
Jenny's grandfather dreams of "high water." He sees the river 
"coming" and "all the people in The Landing . . . gliding off 
19Jenny's mother probably should be imagined as dying of 
yellow fever. In "Some Notes on River Country," Welty says, 
"The girls who died young of the fevers were some of them the 
famous ^Rodney heiresses'" (292). Devastating epidemics of 
yellow fever hit Mississippi in 1878 and 1898. Yellow fever 
appeared again in 1900, localized in Brookhaven and Natchez. 
See History 
of Mississippi, 
Vol. II, 516-21. The last date, 
as the most likely one, fits the "Landing" time frame, 
although it suggests that Jenny might be a few years older 
than she seems to be. However, given Welty's attention to 
historical verisimilitude, it's almost certain that she would 
have in mind as cause of death one of the major illnesses of 
the place and time. 

138 
and upward to darkness" (WN 179). He also sees Billy Floyd, 
the local force of nature, a "half-wild" fisherman who fills 
the role of prophet in his dream. To the grandfather's 
Apollonian mind, Billy Floyd represents the most dangerous 
possible Dionysian disruption. 
When the flood comes, sometime after her grandfather's 
death, Billy Floyd, thought by the townfolks to be someone's 
bastard, a "Gipsy," or a part-Natchez Indian fisherman, 
reappears with it (WN 207) .20 When Jenny finally speaks her 
need for sleep, Billy Floyd rescues her from the flood, lets 
her sleep, then violates her and feeds her. Jenny submits to 
Billy Floyd's physical appropriation as humbly and peacefully 
as she submitted to her grandfather's protectiveness before 
his death. She eats his food "greedily," copying and matching 
his appetite. For the shy, passive Jenny, we remember, would 
"obey a stranger in the street." She can speak aloud only 
"words of wishing": "I wish you and I could be far away. I 
wish for a little house" (WN 201). But such wishing is futile 
for a half-wild man of the woods and river, as even Jenny 
realizes when, after the water goes down, Billy Floyd goes 
down the river in his boat. 
20"Gypsy" was the derogatory term applied by the town 
folks to the fishermen who lived in shantyboats down on the 
banks of the river. Their lives were semi-nomadic as they 
moved up and down the river to follow their livelihood. They 
always tied up by fertile ground, so that they could 
supplement their fish with garden vegetables. According to 
Tom Rankin these river folks "made conscious choices to pursue 
lives of freedom and independence" (336) . 

139 
Despite the shock of what Jenny presumes to be love, her 
inclination, like her grandfather's, like Clement Musgrove's, 
is to hide. "If in all The Landing she could have found a 
place to feel alone and out of sight, she would have gone 
there" (WN 204). Since there is no such place, she readies 
herself to follow after Billy Floyd, just as Joel Mayes in 
"First Love" follows Aaron Burr when he makes his escape up 
the "Liberty Road." Jenny, too, feels "a sense of journey, of 
something that might happen. . . . She looked outward with the 
sense of rightful space and time within her, which must be 
traversed before she could be known at all" 
(WN 206). 
Why does Jenny decide to follow Billy Floyd? A 
"following after" is not quite the same as a journey of 
endless possibilities. Can it be that Jenny is pregnant? 
Although the text offers little conclusive evidence on the 
subject, the talk of the town's three old ladies is 
suggestive. They liken her to her mother, speak of ruin, 
suggest that Jenny "run after him" (WN 206). Jenny blushes 
when Mag brings her a bouquet. As Jenny leaves the Landing, 
she identifies her movement as a "following after, now—it was 
too late to find any way alone" (WN 211). It's possible that 
this hint of a second person involved in her journey refers to 
Billy Floyd. Yet she has been fairly clear-eyed about Billy 
Floyd's separateness from the human community. Also, he would 
be unlikely to accompany her in any direction other than 
toward the river. An unborn child, however, is a 

140 
responsibility forever for a mother. We remember, too, the 
pregnant Rosamond Musgrove's "following after" Jamie Lockhart 
in The Robber 
Bridegroom. 
If we are to suppose Jenny alone 
and pregnant, then the somberness of her mood is more 
understandable. When she reaches the river camp where she 
hopes to find Billy Floyd, she views it not with joy, but with 
quiet resignation. 
A great spiraled net lay on its side and its circles 
twinkled faintly on the sky. Veil behind veil of long 
drying nets hung on all sides, dropping softly and blue-
colored in the low wind and the place was folded in by 
them. All things, river, sky, fire, and air, seemed the 
same color, the color that is seen behind the closed 
eyelids, the color 
of day when vision 
and despair 
are 
the 
same 
thing. 
(WN 212, emphasis mine) 
Jenny's vision echoes that of her grandfather as he lay 
dying and prefigures that of Judge McKelva, the optimist of 
The Optimist's 
Daughter, 
as he lies, choosing not to live, in 
his hospital bed. But unlike the two old men, Jenny—if she 
carries new life within her—is propelled by a connection and 
commitment beyond her control, one that she must honor, 
however difficult and painful her journey might become. Jenny 
herself suspects as she starts out that "what she would reveal 
in the end was not herself, but the way of the traveler" (WN 
206) . 
A pregnancy might also help resolve one of the critical 
questions about this story—the meaning of the "original 

141 
smile" mentioned in the story's final rape episode.21 Billy 
Floyd is not in camp, of course; he's out on the dangerous 
river which still runs fast. The other fishermen, more 
cautious, wait in camp for the waters to slow down. As Jenny 
waits, too, the men fill in their time by raping her, one by 
one, in the "grounded houseboat" where they've put her. Her 
cries are covered by laughs; sometimes, outside by the fire, 
the sounds are heard as "rejoicing" by the women and children 
(WN 213, 214). 
By the fire, little boys were slapped crossly by their 
mothers—as if they knew that the original smile now 
crossed Jenny's face, and hung there no matter what was 
done to her, like a bit of color that kindles in the sky 
after the light has gone. 
(WN 214) 
The associations of "original smile" with the Christian 
term "original sin" brings to mind the story of Eve. For her 
role in original sin, Eve was condemned to "bring forth" her 
children "in sorrow" (Genesis 3:16). The juxtaposition of 
little boys and their cross mothers during the scene 
reinforces the speculation that Jenny has been trapped, caught 
in the net of motherhood, just at the moment she might have 
launched herself into life's possibilities. She no longer has 
choices; she can only wait. 
For Jenny, a smile is also "a barrier." She had 
recognized it as such when she first saw Billy Floyd smile: "a 
21The smile has been variously interpreted as her "dream 
of love" (29) by Vande Kieft and a sign of transcendence by 
Davenport (199). 

142 
smile was always a barrier" (WN 188). She had known then 
"that he lived apart in delight" (WN 188). His delight, his 
passion, will always be out on the river; never will he ground 
himself in a houseboat. Even as Jenny waits in the houseboat, 
"humility" moves "now deep in her spirit" (WN 213). If 
Jenny's delight must be Billy Floyd, then she must accept the 
suffering that goes with it. If her delight is the secret 
thought of new life within her, the "original smile" may 
testify to the eternal mix—joy and sorrow—that humans must 
bear. For sorrow as well as for joy, a smile can serve as 
protection of the secret self. 
The Apollonian and Dionysian elements that stand in 
opposition in "Asphodel" merge to form a whole, then, in "At 
the Landing." In fact, in the form of Billy Floyd, the 
Dionysian element appears as a complete, creative, and 
positive life force: natural, solitary, dominant, and 
unpredictable, yes, but also courageous, saving, and life-
sustaining. He exerts a fascination for Jenny that we will 
see again in the reaction of several women in The 
Golden 
Apples to King MacLain. This positive portrayal of a 
traditionally menacing force implies an acceptance of the 
traditional male-female relationship. 
Yet what are we to make of the continuing rapes of Jenny 
in the "grounded houseboat"? If we think of this story in the 
context of the flooding Mississippi River, we might conceive 
an analogy between the men's treatment of Jenny and the 

143 
flooding river's devastation of the land. Over hundreds of 
years, the Mississippi has regularly overflowed its banks, 
flooding and covering everything in its path, destroying the 
carefully designed order set out on the land by the human 
imagination. Yet the destroyer has served also as the life-
sustainer because the silt from the great river has made the 
Mississippi river country earth among the most fertile in the 
world. The land remains fixed and passive, receiving 
regularly the river's rich wildness. For despite the 
devastation, the land endures to produce new life. 
Jenny loves Billy Floyd, yes, but if his role is double— 
at once the potent, risk-taking fisherman of the human story 
and the symbol of the river itself in the analogy with the 
natural world—then we must think of him both as life-giver 
and destroyer. Remembering that Welty serves an earlier, 
fictional purpose by dividing Jamie Lockhart, the love 
interest of The Robber Bridegroom, 
into the lovable Jamie and 
his despicable alter ego, Little Harp, we might speculate that 
she does the same for the fictional counterparts of the river 
in "At the Landing." Billy Floyd serves as the solitary, 
potent life-giver, while the common fishermen on the shore 
fill the role of the repetitive destroyers. In the natural 
world of the river, the two forces cannot be separated. In 
the artistic world of the love story, they can be separated 
physically but not spiritually. So Jenny must be violated by 

144 
all the fishermen in order for the natural world-human world 
analogy to hold. 
Further, I suggest that the rape scene, in keeping with 
Welty's non-sentimental view of love and life, is meant to 
shock the readers' sensibilities. For we remember from our 
earlier discussion of Virgie Rainey's mature vision of life in 
"The Wanderers" that both beauty and terror coexist with the 
"sword's stroke," the beat of time. Only by experiencing 
these extremes do readers, as well as protagonists, achieve 
the liberation from fear of loss necessary to participate 
fully in life. To live fully is to be vulnerable to the 
paradox of mortal experience.22 
The behavior of the mothers by the fire in the 
fishermen's camp can be more easily understood in light of 
such an analogy. Also, the description of the old woman who 
checks on Jenny after the rapes makes sense when we see her as 
an example of one liberated from fear of vulnerability. The 
old woman, after all, is "bright-eyed," she nods to "the 
flowing river" when she hears that Jenny is "waiting for Billy 
22We might remember that one of Welty's most memorable 
protagonists, Phoenix Jackson in "The Worn Path," demonstrates 
such liberation from fear. An unlikely pilgrim in a 
Pilgrim's 
Progress 
on the Natchez Trace, this poor, illiterate, ancient, 
dignified Negro grandmother undertakes a dangerous journey in 
quest of medicine for her grandson. Like Christian in 
Pilgrim's 
Progress, 
she encounters ten distinct trials, 
including a Valley of Humiliation. Yet with eyes "blue with 
age," sometimes covered with "thick tears," sometimes "shut," 
at other times "opened their widest," always quick to see an 
opportunity (CS 142, 143, 144, 143, 145), she achieves her 
mission. 

145 
Floyd," and the firelight "following her face" shows "its 
dignity" (WN 214). All these women know the truth of the 
natural world: the river runs free and wild in its double 
role, but the land endures the river's violations, receives 
its potency, and by its side continues to produce new life. 
The old woman, in particular, suggests the Yeatsian view of 
survival in the changing world that we will examine closely in 
The Optimist's 
Daughter: 
"All things fall and are built again 
/ And those that build them again are gay. . . . Their eyes 
mid many wrinkles, their eyes / Their ancient, glittering 
eyes, are gay" ("Lapis Lazuli" 566, 567) . 

146 
DELTA WEDDING: "DEADENING" TIME 
"the 
observer. 
. . 
observed" 
(Welty Writer's 
Eye 28) 
Delta 
Wedding, 
Welty's first novel-length work, depicts 
family life in the 1920s on a cotton plantation set in what 
James C. Cobb has declared to be the "the most southern place 
on earth," the Yazoo-Mississippi Delta. The historical model 
for Welty's fictional plantation, Shellmound, was a Delta 
plantation owned by the Scottish-American family of John 
Frazier Robinson, a friend to whom Welty dedicated the novel. 
The family's oral history and written diaries had served first 
as material for a short story, "Delta Cousins," but the 
voluminous detail of those sources soon overflowed into the 
novel, Delta 
Wedding 
(Kreyling Author 
112). Since its 
publication in 1946, the novel has received mixed reactions 
from critics and readers, who have cited as problematic its 
"exotic" setting, its slight, non-traditional plot, its 
seeming indifference to moral issues, and its surface emphasis 
merely on values of family unity and continuity.1 
Indeed, at first glance the novel conveys what Bakhtin 
might characterize as the idyllic chronotope, frequently found 
in the family novel. Certainly, Delta 
Wedding 
exhibits 
several of the features Bakhtin customarily ascribes to the 
^or a suggestion of this mixed reception, see John Crowe 
Ransom's 1946 response, "Delta 
Wedding." 
Although one of 
Welty's avowed admirers, Ransom felt "reservations" as he 
categorized the "many animadversions" he expected would greet 
Welty's new novel (73-75). 

147 
family idyll. Its spatial setting is defined by unity of 
place, customarily a "limited" space and "sufficient unto 
itself." The idyll also limits its material to "only a . f ew of 
life's basic realities. Love, birth, death, marriage, labor, 
food and drink, stages of growth." The life of its 
generations "weakens and renders less distinct all the 
temporal boundaries between individual lives." This "blurring 
of temporal boundaries" helps create a cyclic rhythm. Also 
contributing to the cyclic rhythm is the "conjoining of human 
life with the life of nature," particularly significant when 
the union is achieved in the "real life of the agricultural 
laborer" (Bakhtin 225-26). 
As I will show, however, ominous signs of disorder, half-
concealed in the rich detail of the novel, punctuate the 
harmonious flow of life in Delta 
Wedding. 
Even in this early 
work, Welty relies on techniques of concealment, allusion and 
misdirection to convey meaning. As Louis Rubin has remarked, 
Welty's "meanings are always, if not hidden, then so 
thoroughly imaged in the texture of the fiction that they do 
not readily yield themselves up to thematic paraphrase" 
(Gallery 
50). 
Delta 
Wedding is more resistant to paraphrase 
than most because its plot unfolds along two opposing lines, 
one line carrying the idyllic melody of the novel's surface, 
the other forming dissonant chords of allusion and aural 
imagery that jar the pretty music. In his study of the 
novel's evolution, Michael Kreyling explains that the 

148 
Fairchild family's "uneasy detente with disintegration and 
change" is more visible in the novel's forerunner, the short 
story "Delta Cousins" (Achievement 
57). John Hardy affirms 
that themes of "protection and disaster" are intertwined from 
the beginning of the novel, but adds that meaning becomes 
visible only when the novel is "close-read" like a poem (88). 
I hope to demonstrate through close reading and 
historical explication that Welty combines in Delta 
Wedding 
both an idyllic foregrounded world of family life and a 
submerged background that signals serious problems with the 
traditional cotton business of small plantations and foretells 
the sure destruction of the idyll (Bakhtin 233). Such a world 
as that of the fictional Shellmound is "fated to perish," as 
Welty very well knows; her novel recreates the historical 
signs, but most of her characters are blind to evidence of 
coming disaster. 
Her melodic plot line (or idyllic line if 
we wish to call it that) focuses on the tension between clan 
"insiders" and "outsiders" to reach a happy ending of sorts. 
But the dissonant chords in the background, constructed in 
part with fragments of earlier cultures, in part with glimpses 
of modern culture, rumble that lasting happiness of the kind 
revered by the Fairchild clan is impossible. Even as 
foreboding chords signal destruction of a specific clan's way 
of life, they also suggest inevitable changes in national 
cultures as well. This merging of plot lines results in a 
chronotope that I suggest we call "deadening" time. In the 

149 
nineteenth century, this term referred to the Delta practice 
of clearing fields for cotton plantations by "deadening" off 
the original virgin forest.2 At the time, the transition from 
wilderness to agricultural big business seemed desirable and 
manageable, but the practice set in motion forces that defy 
any human community's attempts at control. 
To construct her portrait of the subsequent twentieth-
century culture, itself already deadening despite its 
appearance of health and vitality, Welty first works for her 
usual historical-cultural verisimilitude. Therefore, the 
time, the place, and the characters in Delta 
Wedding all 
contribute to an appropriate sense of excess in the novel; the 
actual Yazoo-Delta alluvial plain of the setting has been 
called a "land of excess," the "most intemperate country in 
the world and the most alluring" (Cobb 311). Also, the 
planters of the Delta, whose motivations we remember from the 
Mississippi guide book, descend from those nineteenth-century 
immigrants hoping to fulfill the American dream of gaining 
fabulous wealth and success. 
Perhaps no better portrayal exists of a pioneer driven by 
such a dream as that of Thomas Sutpen in Faulkner's great 
novel Absalom, 
Absalom! 
Of course, by 1923, plantations of 
2Frank L. Owsley explains the practice of "deadening" in 
Plain 
Folk of the Old South 108-09. With an ax, farmers 
"girdled" each tree (removed bark in a ring around the trunk). 
This practice killed the trees quickly, so that they could be 
burned in the fall. In the meantime farmers planted the crop 
in the deadening itself. 

150 
Sutpen's antebellum type no longer existed in Mississippi. 
The plantation of Delta 
Wedding is a neoplantation, actually 
much like the large wheat and cattle farms of the western 
states. The owner still holds the power, but the slave labor 
of earlier times has yielded to sharecroppers or hired labor, 
still primarily black. While the Delta planters never 
attained, perhaps, the luxurious wealth of the earliest 
Natchez planters, most of them did make their fortunes and 
maintained them well into the first two decades of the 
twentieth century. Despite the encroachment of the boll weevil 
and the northward migration of a significant part of the black 
population, Cotton was still King in the Delta. Few planters 
in the twenties suspected that their way of life would be 
utterly changed within another decade, in part through nature 
and the mortgages of the Depression, but even more so through 
mechanization, migration, and modernization. 
Welty has been criticized for focusing on what appears to 
be the white planter family's easy life while ignoring the 
black laborers' difficult life. Some early readers, 
conditioned by Marxist, class-conscious social novels of the 
thirties, understandably found Delta 
Wedding's 
apparently 
idyllic aspect puzzling. Later readers, accustomed to the 
heightened awareness of racial issues in the second half of 
the century, may blur the distinctions between sharecroppers, 
hired labor, and slaves. Few readers, early or late, are 
prepared for Welty's adamant refusal to "crusade" in any novel 

151 
for anything.3 As an artist, she conveys her vision through 
artistic language rather than discursive discourse. To have 
mounted an attack on racism in Delta 
Wedding would have 
violated the historical realities of the 1920s, the literary 
conventions of the fictional idyll, and ultimately the vision 
of the novel—which, as we shall see, works precisely 
because 
it demonstrates the illusory quality of the idyll itself. 
SHELLMOUND 
In Delta 
Wedding the action unfolds during September, 
1923, when the plantation business of picking, ginning, and 
baling cotton is at its height. The novel's original dust 
jacket, festooned with prime cotton balls (Polk 
Bibliography 
47-49), emphasizes the significance of the cotton business 5to 
the novel. Indeed, the first title conceived for the novel 
was Shellmound, 
clearly focusing attention on the center of 
the cotton business, the whole of the plantation. The first 
editions of the novel include a hand-drawn map of the 
plantation: its three plantation houses—Shellmound, Marmion, 
3See Eudora Welty's famous 1965 essay "Must the Novelist 
Crusade?" in The Eye of the Story. 
Responding to criticism of 
Faulkner as "after all, only a white Mississippian," Welty 
writes that the "novelist and the crusader who writes both 
have their own place—in the novel and the editorial 
respectively" (147). Citing Forster's A Passage 
to India, 
"an 
intensely moral novel" dealing "with race prejudice," Welty 
declares that great fiction writers make their points, "not by 
preaching at us," but by "being passionately concerned"; not 
by showing us "how to conduct our behavior," but by showing us 
"how to feel" (154). Forster's points are still being read 
and still good, she reminds us, "because 
of the splendor 
of 
the novel" 
(154). 

152 
and the Grove; Brunswick-town, home to most of the Negro hired 
help; the cotton gin and press, set beside the railroad track; 
the several fields and a cemetery. 
In keeping Shellmound as the name of the plantation as 
well as of the primary house sheltering the nucleus of the 
clan, Welty provides some understated suggestions about the 
Fairchild clan. The name "Shellmound," alluding to artifacts 
of a vanished Indian culture, introduces a note of decay and 
loss.4 Although mounds were constructed in ancient Indian 
cultures for many reasons, some Indians of the lower 
Mississippi buried their dead in mounds (Mississippi 
58). 
Rural southerners often decorated cemetery grave mounds, too, 
with shells either along the top, or completely blanketing the 
mounds (Jeane 464). In nature, of course, a shell is strong 
and well-suited to protect the life it shields. But when the 
shell's protective covering unnaturally admits neither 
penetration from, nor entrance into the endlessly evolving 
world beyond its perimeters, its protected life stagnates and 
dies. Shellmound in 1923 rings with the sounds of human 
voices and activities, yet its relentless absorption of the 
individual into the clan hints at the stagnation to come. 
Welty explores in this novel the part of the human 
condition that will occupy her throughout her career: the 
4Also see Westling, Eudora 
Welty, 
for discussion of 
shellmounds in Mississippi history, particularly for 
associations with fertility and with Choctaw traditions (94-
95) . 

153 
paradoxical position of the individual in the community. All 
humans require a stable, familiar world in order to grow and 
develop, but eventually the individual human will desires 
freedom to act outside the community. Further, not even the 
most highly regulated community can control fate itself, which 
can upset in a moment the most carefully designed plan. Louis 
Rubin explains the paradox in his exploration of the artist's 
position in Morgana, the fictional setting of Welty's The 
Golden 
Apples: 
"Places like Morgana—human communities—exist 
to ward off and mask, through ritual and social complexity, an 
awareness of the finally unanswerable and inexplicable nature 
of existence in time and eternity" (Gallery 
62). 
In Delta 
Wedding, 
Welty portrays the most primitive form 
of the human community, the clan—a group of people united by 
a common ancestor. The Fairchild clan's revered Scottish 
origins are historically accurate. The security offered by the 
clan and the price demanded for membership are captured 
beautifully in an early scene featuring the familiar 
children's song and game, "Go in and out the window, go in and 
out the window . . . " 
(DW 72).5 As the novel's young 
5M. E. Bradford discusses this ancient game in "Fairchild 
as Composite Protagonist." Players form a circle with the 
person designated "It" inside the circle. As the players 
sing, the person inside weaves in and out of the "windows" 
between the players, eventually being caught either inside or 
outside at the end of the song. Bradford also gives several 
verses of the tune, relating them to actions of different 
family members (204-05). 

154 
protagonist, Laura McRaven, participates in the game with her 
heedless Fairchild cousins, she registers its implications. 
The song and the game were dreamlike to her. . . . 
It 
was funny how sometimes you wanted to be in a circle 
and then you wanted out of it in a rush. Sometimes the 
circle was for you, sometimes against you, if you were 
It. Sometimes in the circle you longed for the lone 
outsider to come in—sometimes you couldn't wait to 
close her out. It was never a good circle unless you 
were in it, catching hands, and knowing the song. A 
circle was ugly without you. 
(DW 73) 
Laura's ambivalence toward membership in the clan remains a 
constant and also suggests the major source of tension that 
will be treated in the plot of the novel. The larger 
implications of the individual-community paradox will be 
expressed in the patterned texture of the novel, as we shall 
demonstrate later in the discussion. 
Within the sprawling grounds of Shellmound, each of the 
three plantation houses—Shellmound, Marmion, and the Grove— 
is associated with a separate Fairchild brother, and each 
illustrates different time values: Battle and Shellmound, the 
present; Denis and Marmion, the past; George and the Grove, 
the future—or more appropriately for this novel, perhaps, the 
new beginning. Only Battle, who runs the plantation, actually 
occupies his house; he lives there with his wife, Ellen, their 
numerous children, and two of his widowed aunts—Great-Aunt 
Shannon and Great-Aunt Mac. Denis, Battle's older brother, 
was killed in the First World War before he could take over 
his house, Marmion. Battle and Denis' parents, who had built 
the grand house of Marmion in 1890, also died before they 

155 
could occupy it. Since Denis' widow is insane and his nine-
year old daughter, Maureen, brain-damaged, Marmion has sat 
empty for thirty-three years. Battle's younger brother, 
George, practices law in Memphis, so he has installed his two 
unmarried sisters in his house, the Grove. Significantly, the 
Grove rests close to the railroad track, which—in the Delta— 
has always been one of the most conspicuous signs of change. 
MARMION 
Like Shellmound, the name and condition of the house, 
Marmion, amplify the theme of deadening in Delta 
Wedding. 
That a Scottish-American clan might have named its great 
mansion after Sir Walter Scott's early nineteenth-century 
historical romance Marmion rings true. Although his works are 
not widely read today, Scott was a major literary figure whose 
romances were critically successful and widely popular, in 
America as well as England. In the 1830s, Scott's novels 
"became as much a southern staple as cotton iself" (Singal 
13). To name a home in his honor would not be peculiar. 
Welty modeled her Marmion on an actual derelict plantation 
home named Waverley, the title of yet another Scott romance. 
Waverley was a home in Alabama, near the Mississippi College 
for Women which Welty attended in her early college years.6 
6See Marrs' "*The Treasure Most Dearly Regarded': Memory 
and Imagination in Delta 
Wedding." 
Marrs identifies Waverley 
in a discussion of elements that "characterize" Welty's 
creative process: "reliance upon distant memories, the 
impetus to metaphoric thought that distance in time can 

156 
The significance to Delta 
Wedding of the Marmion allusion 
is two-fold. Superficially, Delta 
Wedding resembles 
Marmion 
in its attention to accurate historical detail, lyrical 
description, and meditation on mutability—on the inevitable 
waning of established human systems. 
Delta 
Wedding 
also 
echoes several names and significant actions in Marmion. 
One 
example can be found in the broad resemblance of Battle's 
courtship to that of the hero in "Young Lochinvar." This 
popular romantic poem, excerpted from Marmion, 
was memorized 
and recited by schoolchildren in the South up through the mid-
twentieth century. Battle, in name and behavior, typifies a 
long line of pre-World War II Delta (and Southern) warriors 
who, like Lochinvar, valued honor in battle. "0, young 
Lochinvar is come out of the west, / Through all the wide 
Border his steed was the best" (Scott 213). Like Lochinvar, 
Battle journeyed from the west to win his fair Ellen, whose 
name is also the name of young Lochinvar's bride. 
But much more significant to Delta 
Wedding, 
the historic 
cultural and national battle recounted in Marmion, 
the Battle 
of Flodden Field, invites readers of Delta 
Wedding to view the 
present world of Shellmound, in part, as the legacy of an 
ancient pattern of violent deaths of cultures. Scott's rhymed 
romance recreates a decisive battle in Scotland's national 
political history, a battle fought on September 9, 1573. 
provide, the intuitive recognition that a remembered place can 
define and confine a story's central issues, a tension between 
the power of memory and the demands of fiction" (90). 

157 
Welty's fictional story begins 350 years later, on September 
10, 1923 (DW 3). 
In the Battle of Flodden Field, the army of 
King James IV of Scotland was decimated by the English army; 
by the end of the battle, even King James lay dead on the 
field. Scott supplied an explanatory note for the fame of 
this battle: "Scarce a family of eminence but has an ancestor 
killed at Flodden; and there is no province in Scotland, even 
at this day, where the battle is mentioned without a sensation 
of terror and sorrow" (Marmion, 
Notes 331). The devastation 
to a generation of Scotland's young men—of every class— 
resembled that suffered by the Confederate States' rebels 
(largely Scottish and Scotch-Irish) three centuries later as 
well as that experienced by the armies of England and America 
some three and a half centuries later in the horrors of World 
War I. The desolate and abandoned plantation house, Marmion, 
speaks to that loss—its owner, Denis Fairchild, killed in 
World War I; his immediate survivors, wife and child, deranged 
and disturbingly incompetent; his extended family joining the 
rest of 1920s America in the Jazz Age, trying to spend and 
dance away the disillusioning realization that the world was 
no better than before, despite the war "to end all wars." 
Understanding this background helps us to follow Welty's 
characters around the Shellmound plantation, which shelters 
survivors of two national wars. But less than a decade after 
the last armistice, fledgling signs of a looming social and 
cultural battle begin to appear in the Delta. Even as the 

158 
Fairchilds struggle to preserve the unity of their clan and 
the continuation of their way of life, warning signs flicker— 
both inside and outside the plantation. Few of the family 
notice, but the reader alert to Welty's modernist strategies 
sees the beginning of yet another end. 
POINT OF VIEW AND OBSERVERS 
Welty's most visible modernist strategy is found in her 
treatment of point of view. Structurally, the movement in 
Delta 
Wedding unfolds through disparate scenes observed and 
recounted by several different observers. Michael Kreyling 
outlines the world of the novel established in the opening 
scene: 
. . . the novel ushers the reader into a condition in 
which conventional representation of action and phenomena 
is suspended. Not a line, but a field; not a progression 
in which event after event is encountered in logical 
lockstep, then lost in the wake of the single line of 
forward motion, but complementaries in rhythm 
transforming a line of time into a single moment, and the 
beholder into the object of attention. 
(Agent 110)7 
In 1944, as Welty reviewed Virginia Woolf's last book of 
stories, she noted especially Woolf's technique of having "the 
observer observed." 
Kreyling believes that Woolf's example 
may have prompted Welty to greater experimentation with "the 
otherwise strict discipline of representation" (Agent 108-09). 
7In his discussion of Welty's transformation of the short 
story "Delta Cousins" into the novel Delta 
Wedding, Kreyling 
notes the influence of Virginia Woolf (108-09) . 

159 
Welty may also have read Joseph Frank's discussion of 
Joyce and Proust in "Spatial Form in Modern Literature," an 
important article published in three installments in the 
Sewanee Review during the spring, summer, and autumn of 1945. 
Such an article would have interested Welty, especially since 
it appeared in 1945, the same year in which she was composing 
Delta 
Wedding. 
Welty's novel, like those of Joyce and 
Proust, uses the spatial form of representation Frank 
describes, one that asks readers to "apprehend their work 
spatially, in a moment of time, rather than as a sequence" 
(381). In Delta 
Wedding, readers are also required to 
assimilate the visual patterns and aural rhythms that reappear 
throughout the novel in order, finally, to experience the 
ever-shifting perspectives as an organic whole. 
Observing the members of the sprawling Fairchild clan— 
even as they themselves are observed—are three "outsiders," 
all female and all at different stages of a woman's life. 
The most important observer is the protagonist, Laura McRaven, 
who journeys to Shellmound for her cousin's wedding. It is 
through Laura's innocent observations that the reader first 
notes some of the ominous details of Shellmound. Though Laura 
is a Fairchild, too, she is still only a visitor to 
Shellmound. Her soul has not yet been absorbed by the 
Fairchild clan whose individual members see only the single 
entity of the clan, never the individual human beings who 
constitute the clan. Only rarely does the clan register 

160 
details that contradict the appearance of joyous humanity of 
Shellmound. But Laura's eyes see everything, even the darker 
details about the place—the large field known as the 
"Fairchild Deadening," for example, and the whirling buzzards 
that patrol that field and others. The Fairchild Deadening 
marks the original field in Shellmound: "this was where the 
old Fairchilds had started, deadened off the trees to take the 
land a hundred years ago" (DW 144). 
The second observer is Robbie Reid Fairchild, George's 
young wife. Daughter of a former justice of the peace and 
granddaughter of Old Man Swanson, the cotton compress 
attendant and butt of many town jokes, Robbie neither desires 
nor has been granted a genuine place in the Fairchild family. 
Like Dabney's prospective husband, Troy Flavin, who is the 
Fairchild's overseer, Robbie will never be considered quite 
worthy enough to be a real Fairchild.8 Foreshadowing Gloria 
Renfro in Losing 
Battles, 
Robbie Reid believes the clan to be 
her enemy, always inserting itself between her and her 
husband. Her eyes are sharp, but her vision is contaminated 
by her past experience. It is Robbie's reaction to George's 
heroic action that precipitates the movement of the plot. 
8See John Edward Hardy's analysis, "Marrying Down in 
Eudora Welty's Novels," for fuller explanation of these 
delicate social and economic class lines. See also the 
discussion of J. A. Bryant, Jr. who calls attention to Troy 
Flavin's origins in the Tennessee Hills (69), setting for 
Losing 
Battles. 

161 
The third observer is something of a paradox. Middle-
aged Ellen Fairchild is both insider and outsider. She has 
been Battle's wife for over twenty years and, given her worthy 
Virginian blood lines, has become the heart of the clan. So 
completely has she absorbed the Fairchild identity, she no 
longer has a tangible self-identity. Her little red breast 
pin, symbol of her individual inner life, has been long lost. 
Though the pin is found momentarily by Laura, the child 
immediately loses it in the Yazoo River; this time, it is gone 
for good. Yet one characteristic marks Ellen still, faintly, 
as an outsider: she retains the ability—though it is 
failing—to distinguish one Fairchild from another. Also, she 
notices feelings and motives, whether they be light or dark. 
Her vision is one of experience, noticing but no longer 
arrested by the failings of the clan, for she has become one 
with it. 
Most of the week's events preceding the wedding day are 
reported from the point of view of one of these outsiders. 
Their eyes take in the most minute actions and reactions of 
the entire clan. The wedding of Dabney Fairchild and Troy 
Flavin may provide the occasion for the gathering, but it is 
never seen. It is the clan altogether, not just the wedding 
couple, upon whom the eyes of the beholders are focused. 
Minor "insider" observers also abound. The older 
Fairchild daughters, Shelley and Dabney, comment regularly on 
the members of their family, especially their Uncle George. 

162 
Uncle George figures prominently in a story retold, also, by 
each of the younger Fairchild children in turn. The action of 
Uncle George's encounter with the Yellow 
Dog had occurred 
shortly before the novel begins. But Uncle George's action 
had, in fact, precipitated what little plot we find in the 
novel: his niece Dabney becomes engaged and marries; his wife 
Robbie runs away and then returns. The children's endless 
retelling of Uncle George's "heroic action" emphasizes the 
central importance of Uncle George to the clan. The retelling 
also emphasizes the significance of the railroad train, the 
Yellow 
Dog, which—given its importance to the cotton 
business—becomes almost another "character" in the novel, as 
will later become evident. 
PLOT—AN ASPECT OF THE NOVEL 
In the story, Uncle George, Robbie, and a group of the 
Fairchild children had been walking home along the railroad 
tracks, after a day's fishing. When they reached the railroad 
trestle, Robbie and Shelley, the oldest Fairchild girl, 
refused to cross, Robbie because she was in high heels and 
Shelley because she was afraid. The others went on, but 
jumped off fast when they heard the whistle of the approaching 
Yellow 
Dog train—all except Uncle George and his niece, 
Maureen, who had caught her foot in the rail. Uncle George 
worked futilely but steadily to free the child, even when the 
engine was upon them. Just before it hit them, the Yellow 
Dog 

163 
miraculously managed to stop. At that exact moment, Maureen 
had shoved Uncle George so that he, still with a tight grip on 
the child, had fallen backwards off the trestle, dragging 
Maureen out of the rail track and down to the ground with him. 
Robbie, at the edge of the trestle, had been terrified and 
furious. "You didn't do this for me!" she yelled (DW 88), 
appalled that her husband would sacrifice himself to family 
need, regardless of the cost to her. 
The children's approaches to narrative define primary 
characteristics of each young person, even as they help Laura 
—and the reader—identify the source of tension in the 
family. Their variations in narrative style and the responses 
of their audience exemplify "plotting," as taught by E. M. 
Forster in Aspects 
of the Novel. 
Forster makes this 
distinction between a narrative thread and a plot: "With a 
plot, instead of asking What next? we ask Why?" When George's 
story is told initially by two of the Fairchild children, we 
hear only the narrative thread. "For all of them told 
happenings like narrations," interjects the author, 
"chronological and careful, as if the ear of the world 
listened and wished to know surely" (DW 19). Fourteen-year-
old Orrin's account is casual and concise while nine-year-old 
India's is embellished with gestures, sound effects, and 
dramatic details (DW 19, 58-61). The theatrical India claims, 
"I can tell it good—make everybody cry" (DW 58). But the 
narrative in both instances concerns itself entirely with what 

164 
happened. Despite the fact that many adult Fairchilds are 
present at both initial tellings, only the outsider cousin, 
nine-year-old Laura McRaven, asks why it happened. She 
receives no answer, but she has provided the crucial element 
needed to transform a narrative thread into a plot. 
Later, as the grown-up Fairchild women reflect on the 
incident in solitude, each supplies her own explanation for 
George's action. Eventually Ellen Fairchild, a Fairchild by 
marriage, also repeats Laura's question: "Why?" Of all the 
Fairchild children, only the oldest daughter, eighteen-year 
old Shelley, refuses to narrate the event, even though "her 
memory [had] arrested the action and let her see it again and 
again" (DN 87). Shelley continues to suffer uneasiness about 
the episode. Her greatest discomfort comes from her memory of 
Robbie's first furious words after the incident: "You didn't 
do this for mel" 
(DW 88). Shelley ponders the meaning of it 
all, but cannot yet bring herself even to write it in her 
diary. After the wedding, she acts out her comment by 
deliberately running her car across the railroad track, just 
in front of the on-coming Yellow 
Dog (DW 234). 
When Aunt Tempe, George's sister, hears the tale from yet 
another child—Roy, age eight—she instantly supplies 
motivation. George "did it for Denis," she pronounces (115). 
She assumes automatically that the only possible reason for 
George's action would be to preserve his older brother's flesh 
and blood, and thereby preserve Denis. A Fairchild through 

165 
and through, Aunt Tempe never asks "why," never ponders 
anything. She has ready-made answers for whatever turn of 
fate might interrupt the smooth progression of life in the 
clan. 
Robbie, not truly a member of the clan, also fails to 
wonder why George did it; she is merely angry that he did it. 
His action is indecipherable to her. Curiously, in her 
ignorance, she, like Aunt Tempe, distorts reality. Robbie 
assumes that George just loves his clan better than he loves 
her. Both women suffer from half-vision. While Aunt Tempe 
characterizes the clan as all-important and constructive for 
everyone, Robbie sees it as all-important to George and, 
therefore, destructive to her. She begins to have nightmares 
in which George is "lost, without her, a Fairchild man, lost 
at Shellmound" (DW 149). 
The length to which little Robbie Reid Fairchild will go 
to "have George Fairchild to herself" is foreshadowed by the 
action of the wife, Hazel, in the short story, "The Wide Net." 
Robbie surpasses the daring of Hazel, who only writes 
that she 
is running away but really stays home. Robbie not only writes 
a letter of intent and leaves it in a conspicuous spot, but 
also actually does run away from home (DW 55, 75, 76). She 
assumes that George will come looking for her, might, like 
Hazel's husband, William Wallace Jamieson, "drag the river, 
even" (DW 141; WN 35). Robbie also foreshadows Gloria Renfro 
in Losing 
Battles 
in her inability to accept George's 

166 
inseparability from his family: "I didn't marry into them! I 
married George!" (DW 141). 
THE YELLOW DOG AND THE BLUES 
The visual image of the Yellow 
Dog, the familiar name for 
the Yazoo-Delta Railroad, is more central to the plot of 
Delta 
Wedding than readers unfamiliar with the age of trains 
may realize. Certainly in a general way, the Yellow 
Dog 
implies a machine in the garden, but the history of this 
particular Yazoo-Delta line suggests that, for the Delta, it 
might almost have been the original machine, figuratively 
speaking. In describing the Yellow 
Dog, Welty notifies 
readers immediately, in the novel's third line, that the Dog 
is a "mixed train" (DW 3, emphasis mine). Expecting that 
appellation to be sufficient for most, Welty waits until 
almost the end of the novel to elaborate by specifying the 
train's "four cars, freight, white, colored, and caboose" (DW 
235). The adjectives speak to the causes for the tremendous 
changes in the Delta, both past and present. 
For "even after the Civil War, most of the Delta was 
still virgin forest" (Frank Smith 209). The transformation of 
the Delta wilderness into the Delta cotton fields could not 
have occurred without the presence of the Yazoo-Delta railroad 
line. Running from Yazoo City north to Tutwiler and 
eventually connecting to Memphis, Tennessee, the railroad line 
was established by northern lumber tycoons to transport prime 

167 
hardwood north out of the Delta. In the latter third of the 
nineteenth century, these businessmen set up their base in 
Memphis, just over the Mississippi border, and then covered 
the Delta with many dummy railroad lines directly connected to 
logging operations. By 1890 "Memphis was the largest hardwood 
market in the world" (Smith 209). 
The greatest period of activity for the Yellow 
Dog, 
however, came in "the first twenty-five years of the twentieth 
century" (Smith 212). During that time, the Dog began to 
transport additional resources north out of the Delta: first 
the music of the black inhabitants and later the black 
laborers themselves, upon whose work the Delta cotton 
plantations depended. The movement had begun slowly at the 
turn of the century, when a Delta musician, W. C. Handy— 
famous now as the "Father of the Blues"—began to imagine how 
the "folk music of his race," as he heard it in the Yazoo-
Delta, might appeal to a wider audience. It was not until 
1912 that Handy published his first blues song, "Memphis 
Blues" (Smith 206, 207), but the blues form grew rapidly. 
Many other Delta musicians followed Handy north as the blues 
form began to join the mainstream of American popular music. 
Flowering in the Harlem Renaissance of the twenties, the Delta 
blues phenomenon soon found a place in Tin Pan Alley and on 
the musical comedy stage. 
In 1914, the Yellow 
Dog railroad was immortalized in the 
"Yellow Dog Blues," one of Handy's earliest published blues 

168 
songs. The "Yellow Dog Blues" commemorates the train, noting 
in its chorus that the Yellow 
Dog crosses another train line 
in the Delta town of Moorhead. The song made Moorhead the 
"most famous railroad crossing in the world xwhere the 
Southern crosses the Yellow Dog'" (Frank Smith 209, 205). 
The Yellow 
Dog visual image, with its aural connotation 
relevant to the novel's theme, furnishes an excellent example 
of Welty's allusive method. Welty may have noticed William 
Faulkner's similar use of musical allusion in his famous 19 31 
short story "That Evening Sun." The title of the Faulkner 
story pays homage to W. C. Handy by alluding to his greatest 
popular hit, "St. Louis Blues": the title comes from the 
first line of the song, "I hate to see that evening sun go 
down." Most of Faulkner's contemporary readers would have 
recognized the allusion. Although the "Yellow Dog Blues" 
never became as well-known as the "St. Louis Blues," we can 
assume that for many readers in the forties, the Handy blues 
melodies would still have resonated. Now, however, when even 
Handy's most famous blues song has been lost to memory and few 
modern readers recognize Faulkner's allusion, it is inevitable 
that the full implications of Welty's even more understated 
allusion would go unnoticed. 
But when we understand the allusion, we can see the 
Yellow 
Dog not just as a physical threat to Uncle George and 
Maureen but rather as a major and paradoxical factor in the 
life of the cotton plantation. In carrying lumber, the Dog 

169 
sped up the establishment of the cotton plantation. 
Positioned and controlled by northern interests, the Dog 
increased the flow of southern natural resources, both lumber 
and cotton, north for manufacture, while eliminating the 
possibility of growth in southern manufacture. Heralding the 
expanded northern labor market of the early twentieth century, 
the Yellow 
Dog transported burgeoning numbers of laborers, 
black and white, to the north where better job opportunities 
awaited them. 
The paradoxical immortalizing of the Yellow 
Dog as a 
blues song makes an especially ironic comment on the surface 
"gaiety" of life at Shellmound in 1923. For the "vogue of the 
blues," according to music critic, Arnold Shaw, emphasized 
most tangibly the fact that "there was something desperate in 
the prolonged binge of the twenties. . . . It was a response, 
perhaps, to the loss of limits" (79). It is this Yellow 
Dog 
imagery that yields the first hint of the similarity of the 
Fairchilds' situation to that of the rest of the nation. 
America was rapidly giving itself over to the fun and 
frivolity of the Jazz age, seeking through escape of all kinds 
some deadening of the fear and pain occasioned by the major 
cultural shift following the First World War. 
The Yellow 
Dog also has had a revealing encounter with 
Battle Fairchild, an understated incident recalled much later 
by his wife, Ellen. As Battle had reconnoitered the Far Field 
of the plantation, "his horse, unaccountably terrified at the 

170 
old Yellow Dog one day, threw him and left him unable to raise 
himself from the ditch. . . . ^How could I have been brought 
like this?"1 he had cried (DW 23). The question prompts a 
closer look at Battle, who seems to be the unquestionable 
leader of a strong, happy family and a thriving cotton 
plantation. Yet the few things we learn about Battle belie 
this picture. "Life," we learn from his daughter, "surprises 
Papa and it is Papa that surprise hurts" (DW 86). The look of 
the Shellmound interior is "outdated," 
according to Battle's 
sister, and the house "needs paint" (DW 97, 163). To his 
wife, Battle's "glower of fatherhood" covers "its little 
undermask of helplessness." She trembles to remember his 
"determined breaking of her children's left-handedness" (DW 
22-23). Battle is "as helpless as a child with machinery" 
(DW 
107). Not too good with business, either, he had "let pass" 
mistakes in the accounts that had revealed how his former 
overseer, Mr. Bascom, "had cheated them and stolen so much" 
(DW 65). Now, Battle's new overseer, Troy Flavin, has stolen 
his seventeen-year-old daughter, Dabney, who is determined to 
marry the Tennessee Hills man twice her age. 
Even more telling of Battle's diminishing business and 
familial leadership, Dabney, though engaged a scant three 
weeks, insists on having a big wedding and a honeymoon 
immediately, during prime cotton-picking time. And Battle 
permits it. Further, he takes men away from the fields to 
spend three days preparing Marmion for Dabney and Troy's 

171 
occupancy, even after they have all already taken a day to 
help with wedding preparations and attend the wedding. 
Throughout, Battle groans and protests his daughter's 
"unsuitable" marriage while he worries constantly about 
getting the cotton picked in time: "AThe weather's liable to 
change any day now,' he agreed, shutting 
his 
eyes. 
xThen the 
rains'" (DW 227, emphasis mine). 
Battle's inability to confront trouble mirrors, perhaps 
intentionally, the national leadership of the early twenties. 
Battle's good humor and sweetness are reminiscent of Warren 
Harding's "sweetness" of nature, according to some 
contemporaries his "most notable quality" (Edey 24). The new 
President of the new decade suffered one "vital flaw," 
however: "he refused to face responsibility" (Edey 24). On a 
small scale, Battle Fairchild—leader of Shellmound— 
demonstrates the same flaw. By shutting his eyes to troubles 
that threaten the status quo within his own family and 
business, he fails those who depend on him. Not all the love 
in the world can replace the necessity for keen eyes and 
responsible leadership, especially in changing times. 
PATTERNS OF MUSIC 
Even as the multiplicity of points of view in Delta 
Wedding both constitutes and complicates the plot, Welty 
continues to augment her theme by continuing patterns of aural 
allusion and imagery in the texture of the novel. In some 

172 
cases, aural patterns of imagery convey even more meaning than 
visual patterns, especially in the details that suggest the 
"deadening" aspect of the novel's chronotope. Three of these 
patterns are especially enlightening: the throb of the 
plantation machinery, which accentuates the homogeneity of the 
Fairchild clan; the continual tinkle of popular music within 
Shellmound, which emphasizes the clan's ravenous appetite for 
movement and gaiety; and the somber refrains of historical 
Scottish airs, which prophesy the fate awaiting the clan. 
Welty's manipulation of these patterns culminates in a 
revealing instance of musical counterpoint that forcefully 
illuminates the central idea in the novel: the present Delta, 
way of life, represented by the Fairchild clan and its cotton 
business, will soon become just a memory, as remote in time as 
Flodden Field. 
THE THROB OF THE COMPRESS 
Most of the Fairchild clan have little curiosity about 
the greater world beyond the familiar confines of Shellmound 
and the town of Fairchilds. Welty accentuates the Fairchild 
provincialism and homogeneity by surrounding their family 
activities with the continuous sound of the machinery 
necessary to the final production of cotton. The old-
fashioned cotton gin sucks up the cotton from the wagon-loads 
brought in, separates it, and channels it to the compress for 
packaging. The compress presses the separated cotton into 

173 
jute-enclosed, standard-sized bales, all alike. And during 
the months of cotton-picking season, the compress throbs 
steadily, its sound pervading the surrounding territory. In 
Delta 
Wedding, 
the compress throb is as familiar as the sound 
of a foghorn would be to New England coastal residents. The 
compress pulse insinuates itself even into the Fairchild 
dining room. "The throb of the compress had never stopped. 
Laura could feel it now in the handle of her cup, the 
noiseless vibration that trembled in the best china, was 
within it" (DW 17). 
In the evening, the sound occupies the 
bedrooms: "the hiss of the compress came softly and regularly 
as the sighing breath of night" (DW 86). Even very late on a 
weekend night, the machinery works: "Then there was only the 
murmur of the night, the gin" (DW 230) . 
The bales of cotton pressed out by the compress are 
indistinguishable from one another, even as the Fairchild 
children are all alike, indelibly marked by the dominant 
Fairchild genes. They are all gray-eyed, light-haired, with 
high foreheads and "a perfect widow's peak in every child" (DW 
22); all "without a primary beauty, with only a fairness of 
color (a thin-skinnedness, really) and an ease in the body" 
(DW 15); all left-handed but "broken" of it by their father 
(DW 12); the boys "always rushing, chasing, flying, getting 
hurt" (DW 13); the older girls always heading for a dance 
somewhere; all of them "generously and seriously of the 
moment" (DW 15). 

174 
All the Fairchilds, children and adults, live wholly in 
the present, participating joyfully in whatever activities 
present themselves, taking particular delight in happy 
activities such as play and dancing. Rarely do they pause for 
meditation or reflection of any kind. They love Laura, for 
instance, pet her and kiss her, but no one of them actually 
thinks of what her feelings must be on the recent loss of her 
mother; "the Fairchilds simply shied away from trouble as 
children would do" (DW 159). 
In fact, the other outsider— 
Uncle George Fairchild's wife, Robbie—insists to the 
Fairchilds that they really have no interest in understanding 
other people's lives; rather, Robbie claims, the Fairchilds 
continue "just loving yourselves in each other—yourselves 
over and over again!" (DW 165). In some ways, the Fairchilds 
are never still long enough to contemplate complexities; they 
have a "fleetness about them, though they were tall, solid 
people with * Scotch legs'—a neatness that was actually a 
readiness for gaieties and departures" (DW 14). 
THE TINKLE OF THE PIANO, THE SCRATCH OF THE VICTROLA 
The background tinkle of a piano contributes to the 
continual gaiety in the house; a well-used Victrola provides 
practice music for the unending round of dances the girls 
attend. Almost without ceasing, a young family friend plays a 
mix of popular, classical, and romantic tunes in the 
Shellmound music room: "Drink to Me Only with Thine Eyes," 

"the wedding song," "Constantinople," "a Schubert song" (DW 
28, 179, 189, 110). The friend, Mary Lamar McKay, plays the 
piano "all day, the whole of her visit . . . . Nocturnes were 
her joy" (DW 64). When Mary Lamar leaves the stool, young 
cousin Lady Clare Buchanan occupies it, playing "Country 
Gardens," a favorite recital piece for beginning piano 
students all over the South: "The whole house was shaking 
like the joggling board or the compress, with dancing and 
^Country Gardens7" (DW 101). 
When the piano falls silent, other musical vehicles pick 
up the melodies. One Fairchild or another cranks up the old 
Victrola, which fills the house with scratchy versions of 
popular songs: "Wish I Could Shimmy Like my Sister, Kate," 
"Stop Yer Ticklin', Jock" (DW 9), "By the Light of the Stars" 
(DW 89). Sometimes a human voice or the plucked strings of 
the children's dulcimer will pierce the silence: "I'm the 
Sheik of Araby," "Juanita" (DW 89, 98). At the wedding 
reception, a "black river band" plays live dance music: 
"Who," "Whispering," "Linger Awhile" (DW 219), "Sleepy-Time 
Gal," "Should Auld Acquaintance Be Forgot" (DW 222, 223). 
No listener at the gate could fail to appreciate the 
sound of music issuing from Shellmound. But the observer 
within the house might also register some apprehension on 
hearing the comic, mindless ditty that underscores one of the 
important incidents in the plot. The faint cracks so far 
observed in the Fairchild fortress of Shellmound seem 

176 
negligible, but their potential for harm is underscored by the 
powerful beat of "Constantinople." On the night of the 
wedding rehearsal, the family and the wedding party dance to 
Mary Lamar Mackay's rendition of "Constantinople." 
As the 
family watches, George Fairchild makes up with his temporarily 
estranged wife, Robbie Reid, and then they, too, dance— 
holding the center floor while the others dance around them 
(DW 189). Keeping "time to *Constantinople'" by drumming her 
hand on George's back as they dance, Robbie never misses a 
beat, "for whatever threatened to waste his life, to lead him 
away, even if 
he liked 
it, 
she was going to go up against if 
it killed her" (DW 191-92).9 
To call attention to the title of the tune, Welty 
reenforces it visually. Nine-year old India blissfully 
displays the title emblazoned on her stomach: 
"Shelley did this," India remarked contentedly . . . 
and pulled up her skirt and stuck out her stomach, where 
the word Constantinople was stamped in curlicue letters. 
(180) 
Although the lyrics of "Constantinople" add little to the 
scene, the title itself does. While every other tune in Delta 
Wedding appeared before 1923, as dictated by Welty's 
insistence on verisimilitude, "Constantinople" was not written 
9See John Edward Hardy who argues that Robbie is "at least 
the equal of any of the Fairchild women in moral character, 
and possibly their superior in emotional integrity and 
stamina" (96). 

177 
and published until 1928.10 Further, it was known as a 
novelty "spelling song," an unlikely choice as the featured 
dance tune on the celebratory wedding rehearsal night in 
Delta 
Wedding.n 
Welty's deliberate use of this anachronism can 
have only one purpose: to call attention to the city of 
Constantinople, ancient Christian capital of the Byzantine 
empire. Its conquest and capture in 1453 by the Muslim armies 
of Turkey marked one of the greatest military defeats in 
Western history. The defeat occurred because quarrels among 
the Christian forces in Europe prevented their maintaining the 
solidarity that united the followers of Mohammed. Divided 
against itself, Constantinople fell, and the course of Western 
civilization changed. 
It is true that the name and fate of Constantinople would 
have been in the minds of the Shellmound party in 1923 
because, less than a year earlier, in the aftermath of World 
War I, Constantinople had once again received world-wide 
attention. In 1922, the Turkish army had once again moved 
against Greece. Since the World War I Allies were disunited, 
Turkey retained possession of Constantinople. This time, 
Turkey changed the name of the ancient city to Istanbul. 
10Copyright for "Constantinople," words and music by Harry 
Carlton, was obtained in 1928 by the Lawrence Wright Music Co. 
in London, England. Copyright for the U.S. was assigned in 
the same year to De Sylva, Brown and Henderson in New York 
City. 
nIn a conversation with the author, literary scholar 
Horst Kruse remembered "Constantinople" as a "spelling game." 

178 
The lyrics of a much later, highly popular 1958 Tin Pan 
Alley song, named "Istanbul," celebrate the city's name change 
in words that Americans of 1923 might well have composed at 
the time: 
You can't go back to Constantinople, 
No, you can't go back to Constantinople. 
Now it's Istanbul, not Constantinople. 
Where did Constantinople get the works? 
That's nobody's business but the Turks. 
(Jimmy Kennedy and Nat Simon) 
This song, of course, was written long after Delta 
Wedding was 
published, but it underscores the message implied by the 
allusion to Constantinople in a 1923 setting: no national 
city or religious empire, much less a single clan, can be 
protected forever from the intrusion of outside forces and the 
ultimate destruction of long-held belief systems. 
THE MOURNFUL AIRS OF SCOTLAND 
As we have already seen, Welty's reference to the Battle 
of Flodden Field, the subject of Scott's Marmion, serves the 
same purpose in Delta 
Wedding as the reference to 
Constantinople. But Welty also uses a series of musical 
allusions to remind us of the Scottish past so important to a 
full understanding of the Fairchild family in the present. 
The most important occurs shortly before the "Constantinople" 
scene of George and Robbie. Slightly earlier, again as the 
young members of the wedding party dance to Mary Lamar 
Mackay's spirited version of "Constantinople," a different 
song, a different rhythm, rises plaintively in the Shellmound 

179 
night. Off in another room in the house trembles the voice of 
Aunt Shannon, singing "Oft in the Stilly Night," a national 
Scottish air of remembrance, a memorial to people long dead 
(DW 182). The image evokes one from James Joyce's classic 
short story "The Dead": that of Aunt Julia Morkan who—with a 
voice "strong and clear" but with a "haggard look upon her 
face" 
sings for her annual dance party an old song, "Arrayed 
for the Bridal" (193, 222). 
Battle's aged Aunt Shannon, like Gabriel's Aunt Julia, 
now lives almost entirely in the past. She speaks to her 
long-dead husband, who died in the Civil War. She believes 
that Battle is his older brother, Denis Fairchild, who died in 
the First World War. She identifies young Laura McRaven as 
her dead mother, Annie Laurie Fairchild McRaven. Though 
"Constantinople" quickly overwhelms Aunt Shannon's ghostly 
memorial song on the night before the wedding, their ominous 
counterpoint—accentuating mutability, loss, and memory— 
sounds a sense of danger to the future harmony of the 
Fairchild family. In fact, after the wedding couple return 
from their honeymoon and just before George and Robbie leave 
to return to Memphis, the Fairchilds themselves seem to 
comprehend some coming dissolution of the clan. 
On this final night all together, alone again just with 
family, the Fairchilds picnic and sing the songs of their 
ancestors, sweet and mournful. As their procession of old 
plantation wagons, filled with food and family, journeys 

180 
slowly across the fields, across the river, to the grounds of 
Marmion, first one and then another of the wayfarers starts a 
song: "Some Sweet Day," "Banks o' Bonnie Doon," "Pu'd a 
rose," "Loch Lomond" {DN 239, 240, 241). But as the night 
comes to its close, all the Fairchilds draw together and 
spontaneously—of one accord—begin to sing, "softly, 
wanderingly, each his way" Aunt Shannon's haunting Scottish 
air: "Oft in the stilly night / Ere Slumber's chain has bound 
me . . ." (246). 
Although Welty does not supply in the novel any more 
lines of this "Scotch Air," collected by the poet, Thomas 
Moore, we can be sure she knew them. The lines that follow 
immediately after the ones we hear confirm the clan's feeling 
of nostalgia: 
Oft, in the stilly night, 
Ere Slumber's chain has bound me, 
Fond Memory brings the light 
Of other days around me; 
• • • 
(Moore 142) 
By the end of the first verse, the "Fond Memory" has become 
"Sad Memory." In an image reminiscent of Scarlett's return to 
Tara, the second verse likens the poet's condition to "one, / 
Who treads alone / Some banquet-hall deserted," and the verse 
ends with the repeated refrain, "Sad Memory brings the light / 
Of other days around me" (Moore 142).12 The allusion confirms 
12The association of this verse in Moore's "Oft in the 
Stilly Night" with Tara, the ruined home of the protagonist in 
Margaret Mitchell's 1936 Gone with 
the Wind stimulates yet 
another association: a Moore poem, "The Harp That Once 

181 
the function of memory in the traditional nineteenth-century 
Delta planter family as "memorial." 
But the memorial view of memory displayed by her 
characters in this early novel is not Welty's own view of 
memory. Hers departs from the memorial literary tradition of 
the South. For even as the strains of "stilly night" blanket 
the Fairchilds, the newest member of the family, son-in-law 
Troy Flavin, speaks "through 
the song" to approve George's 
idea about changing some things at Shellmound, "Growing greens 
and getting some cows around" (DW 146, emphasis mine). Both 
Troy, the overseer from the Tennessee Hills, and George, the 
veteran of war and product of legal rather than agricultural 
training, are portrayed with as much sympathy as any of the 
other Fairchilds. At this stage in her career, Welty presents 
the Janus face of the clan, as an entity looking backward to 
harmony and stability, but with two or three individual family 
members looking forward, even relishing the prospect of 
beginning to change the tradition. 
OBSERVATIONS 
As Laura McRaven, the innocent observer of the Fairchild 
clan, has provided our first view of the Shellmound world, so 
Through Tara's Hall." Moore's Tara refers to an ancient 
palace and assembly place in Ireland, long abandoned. A 
couplet from the poem, recalling Tara, also speaks to what 
will doubtless be the poignant fate of Battle Fairchild's 
Shellmound: "No more to chiefs and ladies bright / The harp 
of Tara swells; / The chord alone that breaks at night / Its 
tale of ruin tells" (80). 

182 
she provides the last on the picnic night. She has, by 
novel's end, been allowed to come fully inside the sheltering 
circle of the clan. Even as she claims her place, hugs her 
Aunt Ellen until "they swayed together," and basks in the 
clan's contentment, her ambivalence remains. She does not 
speak it, but her vision and action do. First, she is able to 
"let go" of Ellen's neck and "run forward a step." Knowing at 
last that "wonderful, special anticipation that belonged to 
the Fairchilds," she can act on her own. Her vision, as 
always, remains clear. She shouts out loud as she spots "One 
great golden star through the night falling" 
(DW 247, emphasis 
mine). She sees yet another one, sees even "where it fell" 
(DW 247). She turns back, then, to the Fairchild clan of 
Shellmound, which has given her courage, "both arms held out 
to the radiant 
night" 
(DW 247 emphasis mine). Laura must 
become wholly a part of the clan before she can fully begin 
the development of her individual self, the self that will 
eventually leave the clan's sheltering arms. The Fairchilds 
of Shellmound both protect and stifle. The mixed image of 
light and darkness that ends Delta 
Wedding confirms the 
paradox that is Shellmound, most particularly for its youngest 
observer. 
But the final word on Shellmound must come from the more 
experienced observer, the one who most clearly understands the 
meaning of what is happening to the clan. During the wedding 
reception dance, Ellen wanders through the crowd, "with Battle 

183 
somewhere near, looking among the dancers for her daughters" 
(DW 220). When George, out on the dance floor, looks in her 
direction, she unexpectedly sees into his mind and answers, 
for herself, the question that has bedeviled all the family 
members. Why did George act as he did to save Maureen on the 
railroad trestle, even as the Yellow 
Dog bore down upon them? 
George, she understands at that moment, has already determined 
his purpose in life and will always act on it, regardless of 
any threat from the changing world around him. Ellen 
elaborates her understanding of George's behavior: 
any act on his part might be startling, isolated in its 
very subtlety from the action of all those around him, 
springing 
from long, 
dark, previous, 
abstract 
thought and 
direct 
apprehension, 
instead 
of explainable, 
Fairchild 
impulse. 
It was inevitable 
that George, with this mind, 
should stand on the trestle—on the track where people 
could indeed be killed. . . . He was capable—taking no 
more prerogative than a kind of grace, no more than an 
ordinary responsibility—of meeting a fate whose dealing 
out to him he would not contest; even when to people he 
loved his act was "conceited," if not absurd, if not just 
a little story in the family. 
(DW 221, first emphasis mine) 
George Fairchild, brutally exposed to the realities of 
life by World War I, no longer tries to sustain the Fairchild 
family legend of "happiness" 
(DW 222). As a survivor, George 
seems already to have absorbed the principles that Welty 
upholds: perceive reality, choose your direction, participate 
fully—with passion and compassion—in the world you have 
chosen, keep to your path despite the obstacles that delay or 
threaten your progress. Of course, our knowledge of George 
comes only through the perceptions of the clan that idealizes 

184 
him, so we cannot identify him explicitly as a character who 
has fully realized his humanity, according to Welty's vision. 
But certainly he points the way toward Welty's ultimate 
protagonist, Laurel McKelva Hand in The Optimist's 
Daughter. 
George's commitment still is to the family, the great clan of 
blood-kin relatives who lean upon him, even though they don't 
understand him. As the heart of that extended clan, George 
knows the protective shell of Shellmound can not protect 
against the unpredictable forces of the future. Although 
George doesn't know what is coming, he can imagine things 
similar to those that did come in the actual course of 
history: the catastrophic flood of 1927, the even more 
catastrophic stock-market crash of 1929, the devastating 
depression of the thirties, the unimaginable horror of World 
War II in the forties. 
Ellen perceives George as embodying "what was pure at its 
heart," the quality she loves most. Ellen sees in George the 
human capacity, most rare, to live wholly in his time, 
completely independent (she no longer needs to be a "mother" 
to him) and yet fully responsive to those who need him. 
George focuses all his attention in a way that resembles 
detachment, "motionless pity" (DW 186). He looks steadily on 
the world's complexities, thinks abstractly about them, charts 
his course, and acts with all his being when action is called 
for. Such a man differs markedly from the Fairchild clan, in 
general, which operates by age-old instinct and impulse—the 

185 
most powerful impulse being to preserve the well-being and the 
happiness 
of the immediate family against the calamities that 
abound in the world at large. We will meet such a family 
again in the Renfros of Losing 
Battles. 
Finally, Ellen recognizes George Fairchild as one of 
those rare people who can relieve "the heart's overflow" (DW 
222-23). George, like her, retains the ability to distinguish 
the individual amongst the family members. Also, he is 
capable of focusing his entire attention on the moment and the 
individual within it. When he asks Ellen to dance, she rises 
at once, despite her advanced pregnancy and her husband's 
cautioning words. Although Ellen has become completely 
absorbed by the overwhelming Fairchild identity, she feels 
again, for the moment, her individual identity. 
"I haven't danced in a long time, I guess, and when now 
again?" 
They danced, the music progressed, changed, and 
slowed. It was "Should Auld Acquaintance Be Forgot"— 
it was good night. 
(DW 223) 

186 
LOSING BATTLES: 
CEREMONIAL CENTER TIME 
Like Delta 
Wedding, 
Losing 
Battles 
portrays a large 
family gathering, in this case a family reunion honoring the 
family matriarch's ninetieth birthday. However, nearly a 
quarter of a century passed between the publication of 
Delta 
Wedding 
and the publication of Losing 
Battles. 
During that 
time, Welty published The Golden 
Apples, 
The Ponder 
Heart, 
and 
The Bride 
of 
the 
Innisfallen, 
all works that centered more 
crucially on women protagonists who were trying to balance 
personal—often artistic—needs and family commitments. 
Between 1955 and 1970, Welty published no fiction except for a 
children's book, The Shoe Bird, 
1964; two short stories, 1963 
and 1966; and the early version of "The Optimist's Daughter," 
published in the New Yorker, 
1969. 
Losing 
Battles 
marks the 
beginning of the third stage—"gathering home"—of Welty's 
composite protagonist, even as its structure departs radically 
from that of Delta 
Wedding, 
as we shall see. The tone, too, 
is decidedly different, for here Welty gives free rein to her 
comic exuberance, despite, or perhaps because of, the serious 
subject she portrays. 
In the comic central image of the closing section of 
Losing 
Battles, 
a procession of three battered vehicles and a 
team of mules—roped together—limps from Banner Top hill 
down the five-mile drop to the little town of Banner, 
collecting waiting school children along the way. This image 
not only comments vividly on an important but seldom-remarked 

187 
battle in the novel, but also clearly showcases the 
institutions responsible for the tensions that beset the 
community. Further, it suggests the nature of the compromise 
that might eventually save them all. The vehicles in the 
strange four-part procession (processions are always important 
in Welty) carry the novel's central battlers: at the head of 
the line rolls the Banner school bus, driven by Jack Jordan 
Renfro, the prodigal son returned from Parchman penitentiary 
in time for his great-grandmother's ninetieth birthday and 
family reunion; dragged behind the bus is Judge Oscar Moody's 
once-stately "pleasure" car, a driverless Buick, now no longer 
under its own power, considerably diminished by having swerved 
off the road repeatedly; trailing the Buick and carrying Judge 
Moody lumbers a reconstructed Coca-Cola truck, formerly Jack 
Renfro's but now owned and driven by Curly Stovall, the 
Banner storekeeper and town marshall; holding tight at the 
rear plod two mules, the Renfro family's black one and the 
Baptist preacher's white one, both guided by Jack's younger 
brother, Vaughn Renfro, who has been given the important task 
of braking—holding back any precipitous descent by the 
vehicles, all of which have untrustworthy brakes. Brought 
together in the procession are the institutions of education, 
law, commerce, agriculture, and religion, all of them gasping 
for survival in the desperate conditions of the 193 0s Great 
Depression in Mississippi. 

188 
Even though the chronotope of Losing 
Battles 
echoes that 
of Delta 
Wedding, there are significant differences, as we 
shall see. Bakhtin has no term that fits this novel 
precisely; Losing 
Battles 
extends some elements of the idyllic 
into a provincial rather than strictly family novel (229) . 
Since the idyllic may be confined literally to the home-place 
of the family (232), as is certainly true in Losing 
Battles, 
we might call this chronotope the ceremonial center in the 
provincial novel. The family in Losing 
Battles, 
like it or 
not, has become more a part of the world outside its home-
place; its hero, Jack Renfro, like George Fairchild, has spent 
time in an alien world, from which he returns for the family 
celebration. 
In discussing Losing 
Battles, 
critics have focused 
primarily on the major battle between Jack Renfro's extended 
yeoman farmer family (the Vaughn-Beecham-Renfro family) and 
the institution of public education as represented by the 
former local schoolteacher, Miss Julia Mortimer. Typical 
critical responses are those of Noel Polk and Carol Manning, 
who insist that in the novel, Welty parodies Southern 
conventions of family and religious community, exposing their 
failings and hypocrisy. Gretland, on the other hand, believes 
that Welty celebrates the tradition of an older agrarian order 
whose family values are superior to those values found in the 
modern world. Susan Donaldson comes nearer the truth of the 
matter when, like Louis Rubin, she suggests that Welty here 

189 
reveals the instinctive fear aroused in any group whose 
familiar territory is challenged by the unfamiliar, 
whatever 
it might represent.1 In her analysis, the characters who 
value only the written words of education are just as stubborn 
and wrong-headed as the characters who value only the spoken 
words of the family. Each group, by its initial refusal to 
actually listen to the other, defeats any effort toward 
understanding and cooperation. 
If there has been little unanimity among critics' 
responses to this novel, the reason may be supplied by Ruth 
Vande Kieft's early comment: 
Because of the seemingly random quality of folk speech 
and the episodic nature of much of the comic action, 
Losing 
Battles 
does not appear to have the structural 
coherence of Delta 
Wedding, the unifying symbolism and 
dimension of classical and Celtic mythology to be found 
in The Golden 
Apples. 
(EW 161-62) 
It is true that Losing 
Battles 
presents a challenge, in part 
because almost all present action and all past actions emerge 
entirely from vernacular dialogue. Welty occasionally uses 
brief passages of literary exposition to shift scenes. Just 
once does she stay with exposition for more than a paragraph 
or so in order to express interior thought. To comprehend the 
plot, structure and symbolism, readers must listen patiently 
to the voices of a people who speak in a strange dialect and 
'For discussion of these views see Donaldson 
"Contradictors," Polk "Going to Naples" 156, Manning, 
Gretland, and Rubin "Everything Brought Out . . . " 

190 
whose world, as Joyce Carol Oates remarked at the time, is as 
"remote to most of us as an African nation" (120). 
But the novel has suffered neglect for other reasons, 
having less to do with its artistic merit than with its 
subject matter and a shift in public preferences. In this 
novel, for example, Welty abandons her familiar use of 
folklore or fantasy or Greek mythology as underpinnings for 
her various works. Instead, she bases Losing 
Battles 
entirely 
on a dimension of Christian mythology that was no longer in 
favor among many professional wordsmiths when the novel was 
published in the seventies.2 In accord with this Christian 
dimension, Welty replaces the sound of music that admirers 
have grown to expect in her language. Readers do not find 
here the balanced notes of Beethoven, the mournful cries of 
Negro spirituals and early blues, the Tin Pan Alley repertoire 
of the twenties, or the dazzling American jazz improvisations 
that customarily reverberate through her works. Instead, 
Losing 
Battles 
includes full choruses of old-time Baptist 
hymns which both illuminate the action and move it forward. 
But this "remote" world of Losing 
Battles 
actually 
existed in Mississippi in the 1930s, as its spiritual 
counterparts have existed throughout time, and indeed still 
exist in the 1990s. Although the speech patterns and cultural 
2In an article on the language of Losing 
Battles, 
Robert 
Heilman notes many Biblical allusions. The most important are 
"The Prodigal Son" (LB 105, 107) and "Belshazzar's Feast" (LB 
111). 
For others, see "Losing 
Battles 
and Winning the War" 
(292-93). 

191 
tradition of Boone County, Mississippi, seem foreign, the 
habit of mind demonstrated by Boone County residents is all 
too familiar. Ironically, it is the same habit of mind that 
has created in non-Southerners, especially after the 1960s, a 
one-dimensional view of white Mississippi farmers. Even 
Southern readers can sometimes forget how varied the different 
regions of the South are. Hugh Holman, for example, himself 
both a Southern native and a distinguished literary critic, 
faults Losing 
Battles 
for not including blacks among its 
characters. Yet historically there were almost no blacks in 
the Tennessee Hills section of Mississippi, and for sound 
economic reasons.3 
The farmers there were far too poor 
either to own slaves or to hire help of any kind. Few other 
jobs existed until northern lumbering interests came into the 
region. They brought Negro help with them, as we see in 
Losing 
Battles, 
but those jobs were transient, not permanent 
ones. No laborer, black or white, would care to stay on in 
such dismal farming country when more lucrative agricultural 
jobs were always available in the Delta country to the west. 
Some knowledge of context is crucial, then, to a full 
appreciation of the world of this novel and its inhabitants. 
Since Welty is a meticulous historian, much of the context is 
readily available in the novel, but readers must patiently 
3See Owsley 202-05 for details of slave-holding farmers in 
Tishomingo County in 1850. Their numbers were few, as were 
the numbers of their slaves. Population growth occurred in 
the flatter, more western part of the area which, before 193 0, 
became Alcorn and Prentiss counties. 

192 
piece it together as they listen to the many stories of the 
people of Boone County. My discussion, I hope, will quickly 
highlight some of the issues which, in turn, should cast more 
light on some of the battles and battlers in the novel. For 
as Welty herself has explained in speaking of the problem of 
getting to know people in the city, "you meet somebody cold, 
have no idea of his background. Everything has to start from 
scratch and for that reason can remain more superficial unless 
you really work at it" (Conversations 
178). That problem 
exists for readers who come for the first time to meet the 
inhabitants of the isolated Mississippi hamlet of Banner. 
It is important for Welty readers to "work at it," for 
the residents of Banner are neither misfits nor freaks. They 
are representative products of their culture who exhibit 
characteristics typical of family groups the world over. 
Despite idealistic notions of brotherly love promulgated in a 
Western democracy, individual communities—whatever their size 
or beliefs—all too often preserve their territory by 
picturing any change as a direct threat to the order and 
survival of the community. As community insiders, they feel 
justified in building a fortress around themselves to exclude 
strangers and unfamiliar ideas that, according to community 
myth, will bring chaos. We've already seen this principle in 
operation in Clement Musgrove, Miss Sabina, and the Fairchild 
family. All such efforts are doomed, however, for the world 
changes as surely as it turns upon its axis. Human 

193 
communities can do nothing about mutability, nothing at all 
except perish or find a way to live in a different world. 
That is the point that Welty makes throughout her work. 
In Losing 
Battles, 
the independent family does try to 
find a way to live in its changing world, as I will show. To 
do so, I will supply more of the historical and cultural 
context for that changing world, focusing specifically on the 
motivation and situation of the yeoman farmers in Boone 
County, on the changed nature of the country store, and on the 
subtly-suggested societal alliance between education and 
commercialism. Though the battles between the Renfros and the 
storekeeper are well-documented in the novel, their role as 
representative of a greater cultural shift in the South may 
not be so familiar. 
I will also argue for the presence of the "structural 
coherence" and "unifying symbolism" that Vande Kieft believes 
are missing in Losing 
Battles. 
The structural coherence 
evolves from the interdependent battles revealed in the 
narrative. Since the most obvious battle, the one between the 
family and Miss Julia, has been well examined by other 
critics,4 I will note it only briefly for its role in the 
pattern of battles. My discussion of some of the novel's 
other battles will follow two lines: 1) I will provide some 
historical context for the lesser-known external battles 
already lost; and 2) I will demonstrate the internal battles 
4See particularly Messerli, Gross, Gossett. 

194 
still being waged within the family and community. Finally, I 
will discuss the resolutions of certain battles that partially 
support one critic's view of the novel as "a statement of a 
family's vigor and implicitly of a nation's vitality, the 
power to endure and survive" (Gossett 3 50). For the novel's 
meaning rests more firmly on the chosen actions of 
participants in present battles—those battles being waged 
within the time frame of the novel—than it does on the 
outcomes of those battles lost long ago. 
I will also examine the unifying symbolism of the novel's 
Christian dimension, a dimension that is crucial to the time 
and place of this novel. As I will show, the Tennessee Hills 
were initially settled by immigrants bent on preserving the 
way of life promoted by their primitive Baptist church. 
Welty's fictional Boone County follows the development pattern 
typical of the deep South: a church was built just as soon as 
a settlement was founded (Young 119). In Boone County, Granny 
Vaughn's father-in-law, a Baptist, had built the first house 
in Banner and then immediately thereafter constructed Damascus 
Church, whose pews were "solid cedar, and the pulpit . . . all 
one tree" (LB 49). Among other denominations only the 
Methodists made substantial inroads into Banner in succeeding 
years, the Methodists known particularly for their emphasis on 
education. 

195 
THE YEOMAN FARMERS OF THE TENNESSEE HILLS 
As we learn from Welty's careful description in 
Losing 
Battles, 
her fictional Boone County is based on a section of 
the state known as the Tennessee Hills. This northeastern 
corner of Mississippi, mostly in present-day Tishomingo 
County, is bordered by Tennessee to the north and Alabama to 
the east. Although it has been referred to as Appalachian, 
this area is not properly part of the Appalachian Mountain 
range, even though there may be similarities in the 
inhabitants. The Tennessee Hills are not even mountains, but 
rather red clay hills. Among them stands Woodall Mountain, 
the highest point in Mississippi, 816 feet above sea level. 
The predominantly English and Scotch-Irish yeoman farmers who 
settled the area in the early nineteenth century formed the 
second wave of migration into the Mississippi Territory 
(Owsley 90-91). 
Of course the Tennessee Hills section did not offer as 
much material promise to begin with as that elsewhere in the 
state. Its rolling hills of red clay were much less fertile 
than the western alluvial land of the Delta and the black 
prairie soil of central and southern Mississippi. The bare-
bones subsistence of the fictional Vaughn-Beecham-Renfro clan 
in the 193 0s, living wholly in the tradition of its ancestors, 
is quite realistic. 
Unlike the other two historical waves of immigrants into 
Mississippi—the Natchez pioneers as depicted in The 
Robber 

196 
Bridegroom 
and the planter speculators of Delta 
Wedding—the 
yeoman farmers represented in Losing 
Battles 
did not come to 
Mississippi to make their fortunes. Rather they moved to 
Mississippi in the early nineteenth century to escape a world 
that was "too much" for them (Mississippi 
136). Many came 
from the Coastal Piedmont area of the Carolinas after the 
Battle of Kings Mountain. They hoped to make a modest living 
in the isolated, less desirable hills of Mississippi and to 
preserve more easily their family traditions and religious 
values. For them, the Bible and family stories made up 
literature. "Utilitarian handicrafts" such as woodworking and 
quilt-making were the products of their artistic expression 
(Mississippi 
136). We remember from Delta 
Wedding the myriad 
quilts sent as a wedding present to Dabney and Troy from 
Troy's mother in the Tennessee Hills. Troy remembers the 
names of all the patterns, too: "Delectable Mountains," 
"Tizrah's Treasure," "Hearts and Gizzards," "Four Doves at the 
Window," "Trip Around the World," "Bouquet of Beauty" (DW 112, 
95-96). Generously, Troy's mother sends her own quilts, for 
there's not enough time before the wedding to make new ones. 
For these people of the Tennessee Hills, family and church 
constituted the world. Their hope in moving to a new country 
was to preserve the old ways, not to initiate new ones. 
In their attitudes and intentions, these Mississippi 
settlers were akin to the Pilgrims who settled Plymouth in the 
seventeenth century and the Mormons who trekked to the Great 

197 
Salt Lake in the nineteenth century. The opening section of 
Losing 
Battles 
emphasizes the dawning of a new day, the hope 
of a new beginning in a chosen place. Every detail radiates 
energy and freshness and new beginnings: the crowing rooster, 
the leaping dog, the bolting naked baby. Even the chickens 
described on the opening page are "white Plymouth Rocks loose 
on the world" (LB 3). Both the awakening world of Genesis and 
the awakening hope of the New England Pilgrims echo in this 
passage. 
THE FAMILY—JORDAN/VAUGHN/BEECHAM/RENFRO 
Since all the battles in Losing 
Battles 
involve either 
the Jordan/Vaughn/Beecham/Renfro family in tension with some 
element of society, or else some individual members within the 
family pitted against one another, it will be useful to take a 
closer look at the collective family, gathered on the first 
Sunday in August for their annual reunion and celebration of 
the ninetieth birthday of the family matriarch, Granny Vaughn. 
Significantly, the family gathers at the dog-trot house built 
by Granny Vaughn's grandfather, Captain Jacob Jordan, in 1811, 
"the year the stars fell," the annus 
mirabilis 
that we recall 
from The Wide Net. 
This original home-place, the ceremonial 
center of the family, has been occupied by Jordan descendants 
ever since (LB 180). On the day of the reunion, granddaughter 
Beulah Beecham Renfro articulates the family creed: 
this is a strict, law-abiding, God-fearing, close-
knit family, and everybody in it has always 

198 
struggled the best he knew how and we've all just 
tried to last as long as we can by sticking 
together. 
(LB 344) 
Throughout the novel, Welty graphically directs our 
attention to the central characteristics of the collective 
family: its closeness, its struggle, and its endurance, 
despite mortal blows. On the cover of the novel, as well as 
at the beginning of each of the six parts of the novel, Welty 
features a woodcut of the bois d'arc tree, which has grown for 
decades in the front yard of the Renfro farm. As an image of 
"physical and moral order," the sacred tree, the "most 
widespread of all visual symbols" according to authorities on 
myth, is always a "cosmic center" (Lowry 59). Just so is the 
Renfro family's bois d'arc tree which literally overarches the 
reunion, both physically and metaphorically. In the few 
instances of expository description in the novel, we hear 
specific details of the grand bois d'arc tree or "bodock" tree 
as little Elvie Renfro terms it (LB 181). 
It was this big tree that at this hour had taken 
command of the yard. Its look was this: if disaster 
ever wants to strike around here, let it try it on this 
tree. The top had spread almost as wide as the roof, 
which it had shaded blue as a distant mountain. Its 
hard, pronged branches could never be well concealed by 
leaves so constantly stirring, shimmering without a 
breath of air. 
(LB 178) 
Of course disaster has struck the family, and often over 
the years. Captain Jordan had perched his house there on the 
ridge "in the thick of the Indians, overlooking the stage road 
that come threading through the canebrakes up to Tennessee" 

199 
(LB 180). The road, of course, would have been the northern-
most reach of the Natchez Trace in Mississippi, a pretty rough 
stage road at the time. Some of the disasters are noted by 
Brother Bethune as he recites the family history at the 
reunion dinner: the Union Army's cannon assault that dented 
the chimney of the house, the death in battle of both Captain 
Jordan and at least two of his sons—all during the War 
Between the States; the accident that early claimed the lives 
of the Beechams, Granny's only daughter and son-in-law, 
leaving behind six orphaned Beecham children; the burning of 
the old Vaughn family home in Banner; the arrest and 
imprisonment of the only able-bodied adult male in the home, 
Jack Jordan Renfro; the death of Grandpa Vaughn himself in his 
eighty-ninth year while his great-grandson Jack is still 
imprisoned; the erosion and depletion of the land, the logging 
of the woods, the hard weather and hard times that have 
substantially reduced the family's ability to provide for 
itself. Signs of these losses are duly recorded on the big 
bois d'arc: 
The tree looked a veteran of all the old blows, a 
survivor. Old wounds on the main trunk had healed 
leaving scars as big as tubs or wagon wheels, and 
where the big lower branches had thrust out, layer 
under layer of living bark had split on the main 
trunk in a bloom of splinters, of a red nearly 
animal-like. 
(LB 181) 
Even so, the Renfro family of the Tennessee Hills remains 
marginally better off than the tenant farmers in Mississippi. 
Poor though the land is, the Renfros own it. As long as the 

200 
land produces enough to feed and clothe them, the family is 
satisfied. But having less to start with, the family has no 
reserve whatsoever to help deal with destructive weather 
conditions, family calamities, the economic catastrophes of 
the late twenties, or the changing way of life in the 
thirties—nor can it remain isolated from any of these 
troubles. 
In their poverty and vulnerability, the farmers of the 
Tennessee Hills were similar to small farmers—the majority of 
the population—throughout the Southern states. The per 
capita income in the South in the early part of the twentieth 
century was so much lower than that elsewhere that today we 
would think it typical of an "underdeveloped" country in 
comparison to a "developed" one (Reed 25). For up through the 
first part of the twentieth century, there was almost no 
industry in the South. Only one-third of the Southern 
population lived in towns or cities; the majority were 
involved in agriculture, "unprofitably, for the most part" 
(Reed 25). 
Throughout Losing 
Battles, 
we find references to the 
poverty and hard times experienced by the farmers of Boone 
County. The Baptist preacher, Brother Bethune, states the 
conditions most forcefully in his reunion address to the 
family: 
I don't reckon good old Mississippi's ever been any 
poorer than she is right now, 'cept when we lost. And 
in all our glorious state I can't think of any county 

201 
likelier to take the cake for being the poorest and 
generally the hardest-suffering than dear old Boone. 
(LB 191) 
These yeoman farmers in the Tennessee Hills traditionally 
distrust "outside" help; their scorn for public "relief" is 
unrelieved (LB 191-92). They cling instinctively to their 
basic institutions—family and church—as "an ever present 
help in time of trouble." 
THE BATTLES 
All the battles in the novel are associated with that one 
most prevalent in the Southern literary imagination in the 
period between the two world wars: the struggle between the 
old agricultural way of life, whose tradition honors the land, 
and the new commercial/industrial way of life, whose tradition 
honors profit and technological progress. The old ways 
collide with the new thinking in every skirmish in 
Losing 
Battles: 
the tightly knit family whose lives revolve around 
the land versus the landless family whose children must 
scatter to the four winds to make their living; the self-
sufficient agrarian community able to feed itself and free to 
follow its own traditions versus the new country storekeeper 
whose commercial/industrial connections prefigure endless debt 
and material loss for farmers; the culture of long-standing 
religious and family traditions versus the culture of formal 
education drawing on new ideas in science and technology. All 
the forces brought together in these skirmishes are essential 

202 
to the growth of an industrial democracy. All are treated in 
Losing 
Battles 
fairly sympathetically, with the possible 
exception of the lumbering interests. But we will examine 
them from the point of view of the extended farm family, upon 
whom the novel focuses. 
BATTLE ALREADY LOST: AGRICULTURE TO COMMERCE-LAW 
Of the lost battles, signaled in imagery and in the 
reunion stories, the battle between the agricultural family 
and the commercial/industrial interests—as represented in the 
country store—is one of the most elemental. In rural 
communities of the past, the country store played a central 
role, along with the church and the school house. Originally, 
the country store in Banner had belonged to Mr. Renfro and his 
father before him. But during the First World War, Mr. Renfro 
lost the store to Mr. Dearman, representative of the only 
industry in Mississippi: lumbering. During the early decades 
of the twentieth century, lumber interests moved from the 
north to the south, where they cut down all the virgin timber 
in the state, including "every tree within forty miles" of 
Banner (LB 341) .5 
Mr. Dearman, who happened to be from 
"Manifest, Mississippi," where he had "levelled" the Piney 
Woods area, came to the Tennessee hills, set up a sawmill, 
took over the country store after Mr. Renfro had an accident, 
5William Faulkner touches on this aspect of Southern 
history in most of his work, but most especially in "The 
Bear." 

203 
extended credit for exorbitant interest rates, took over the 
Renfro house, and eventually left town, leaving nothing but 
ruin behind (LB 342). 
This scene played out all over Mississippi and the South 
in general during the latter part of the nineteenth century 
and the early part of the twentieth century. Gradually, the 
country store, which had been the communal social center of 
the town, became the economic and commercial center, operating 
under strict-lien laws. Meant originally to protect the 
farmers, these laws were quickly applied by merchants who were 
then able to acquire the personal property as well as the real 
property of the people in the community.6 Often merchant-
bankers, employing a rigid monopoly system, might charge as 
much as forty per cent interest on credit. Such unscrupulous 
business practice in the country stores made fortunes for many 
merchants, but reduced thousands of independent farmers to 
hopelessly indebted tenant farmers. From the end of the Civil 
War right up through the 1930s, no institution influenced the 
farmers' economic life more.7 
Merchandising as well as farming was risky business in 
the rural South. Farmers traditionally borrowed against next 
year's crop in order to buy seed to plant. In years of 
personal or public disaster from accident, drought, or flood, 
many farmers lost everything they owned. 
7For full discussion of the country store's economic 
power, see Edgar T. Thompson's "Country Store"; for detailed 
information about merchandising and community need, see Thomas 
D. Clark. 

204 
Curly Stovall, the fictional store owner in Banner, makes 
the point. Although Jack's only natural enemy seems to be 
Curly Stovall, the spiritual descendant of Mr. Dearman, it is 
actually their occupations that are antithetical. The time of 
the farmer is being supplanted by the time of the 
merchant/banker. Curly has no malice in him; he's merely 
trying to "get ahead" in the best American fashion. To 
collect payment on the family's bill, he ruthlessly 
confiscates from Jack's teen-age sister her grandmother's 
golden wedding ring, the only family memento of their dead 
grandmother; when Jack tries to retrieve the wedding ring, 
Curly charges him with theft and precipitates his arrest, 
conviction, and imprisonment. In payment for family 
necessities while the breadwinner is in prison, Curly takes 
first the family's goat, then a pig, a calf, and finally 
Jack's beloved stud horse, Dan. For a new shirt, Curly takes 
from Jack's wife, Gloria, a whole barrel of black walnuts. In 
exchange for the loan that pays for the Renfro's new tin roof, 
Curly hauls away the Coca-Cola truck that Jack has spent years 
reconstructing. And, in fact, Curly had originally charged 
Jack "out of his corncrib" merely for hauling the parts of the 
abandoned truck off his property after it had been scattered 
there by a collision with the train that runs through Banner 
(LB 24, 77, 89-90, 88). "Finders, keepers" is Curly's motto, 
and "pay through the nose." 

205 
If any thievery has taken place in Banner, it can morally 
be laid at the feet of the storekeeper, but in the changing 
world of the twentieth century, the law is all on his side. 
Historically, the country storekeeper was frequently prominent 
in local government, and Curly Stovall in Losing 
Battles 
is no 
exception. Since he is presently the town marshall and is 
campaigning for the office of justice of the peace, local law 
and commercialism are indistinguishable, usually to the 
detriment of the farmer. This powerful combination 
relentlessly erodes the agrarian tradition of the area. 
An excellent source of information on the topic is Thomas 
Clark's full study of the country store in Pills, 
Petticoats, 
and Plows. 
A painstaking historian, Clark provides the 
sociological statistics that are given abundant life in 
Losing 
Battles. 
The country store, Clark points out, served in many 
instances as a community social center and was always closely 
associated with the institution of education; indeed, it was 
often located right next door to a school. 
In his discussion of the paradox of the country store, 
"far more symbolic of the southern way of rural life than were 
other institutions," Clark pays especial attention to the 
"grim realities of its confiscatory credit system" ("Preface" 
vii, xi). For even though the country store keeper was "all 
things to his community" and had a "direct tie with eastern 
bankers, manufacturers, and distributors," he was also the 
"connecting link between the rascals of the medicine and easy-

206 
money trades and their victims" ("Preface" vii, viii-ix). 
Clark acknowledges the "weaknesses and failures" of the 
"ruinous" farm-credit system, but demonstrates its necessity 
as well, in view of the devastation of the southern 
agricultural economy by the boll weevil infestation of cotton 
crops, the clear-cutting of the forests by rapacious lumber 
interests, and the inflation brought about by World War I in 
the early decades of the twentieth century. 
BATTLE ALREADY LOST: AGRICULTURE TO COMMERCE-EDUCATION 
The country storekeeper even had a close connection with 
the institution of education, again with a hand in the farm 
family's pocket. Implicit in this association, but little 
imagined by modern readers, is the extent of the economic 
hardship worked upon the southern rural family by the early 
public institution of education. For "public" education in 
the 1930s was not "free" as we think of it now. The 
schoolteacher, whose salary was minuscule, had to be boarded 
in the home of an area family (the Vaughns had kept Miss 
Mortimer for a time). Children were obliged to buy all their 
books and supplies from the local storekeeper; it was not 
until 1940 that the state provided textbooks free for 
elementary grades (Griffith 403). Every item had a markup, of 
course, but some books were priced extra high; Vaughn 
Renfro's big "geography" book, for example, "that he'd traded 
out of Curly Stovall" (LB 365) would have cost at least $2.00 

207 
retail although it would be only $1.00 wholesale (Clark 148). 
In an area where the average cash income might be no more than 
$126 per capita (Emmerich 98), or in some years, nothing at 
all, school expenses could be a severe drain on the farm 
family's income. 
But the expense contributes only in part to the general 
ambivalence felt by the farm folk toward education. Like 
commerce, education brings perspectives and values from a 
bigger world into the isolated community. Fear of these 
conduits for new ideas and new ways permeates Losing 
Battles, 
but is revealed most prominently in the continuing struggle 
between the Renfro family and Miss Julia Mortimer, 
schoolteacher and tireless battler for education in the 
community of Banner. Miss Mortimer attempts to open the minds 
of Banner children to the larger world beyond the Tennessee 
hills region of northeastern Mississippi; her guiding belief 
lies in the power of education to make a child free. When her 
efforts meet resistance from the Renfro family (and many other 
members of the community), modern readers, attributing the 
resistance solely to ignorance, discount the value of the 
family accordingly. But in Banner, in the first half of the 
twentieth century, education seems as paradoxical to the 
yeoman farmer's way of life as commercialism. Although 
education promises a "better" life for Banner children in the 
future, it also drains the family resources in the present, 
both in the supply of physical farm labor and in the daily 

208 
expense involved in supporting the school and in supplying the 
tools for learners. More important, education threatens to 
deprive the family of their children altogether. The 
perennial family fear of losing children to a wider world 
persists in any isolated community, with good reason, as we 
can see in Losing 
Battles. 
BATTLE ALMOST LOST: THE OLD RELIGION TO THE NEW WORLD—THE 
"HANDWRITING" ON THE WALL 
The Christian dimension of Losing 
Battles 
is vital to any 
explication of its theme because, as we have seen, the Baptist 
religion defines the family portrayed. Biblical allusions 
also provide references to the ancient cultures that serve as 
parallels for the culture of the Tennessee Hills. On reunion 
day, the present-day Baptist preacher, Brother Bethune, has 
been asked by the family to give the traditional address, 
prayer, and history of the family. As he surveys the Vaughns, 
Beechams, and Renfros gathered before him around the reunion 
supper table, he describes the scene as a Belshazzar's Feast, 
"without no Handwriting on the Wall to mar it" (LB 111) .8 
8Given her interest in art, her quick humor, and the years 
she needed to complete Losing 
Battles, 
Welty may have had a 
personal reason for this allusion, as well. 
Belshazzar's 
Feast 
is also the name of a "monumental painting" by 
nineteenth-century American artist Washington Allston. In 
1817, Allston conceived the idea for this painting, which was 
to be an entirely new direction for him, and which he 
envisioned as crowning his career. It proved to be his 
albatross, however. Though he worked on it intermittently all 
his life, Belshazzar's 
Feast was still unfinished when he died 
in 1843 (Kasson 43-83). 

209 
The allusion, as familiar to the Baptist family as is the 
giant Renfro Bible that graces the table, evokes the ancient 
world of the Middle East with the familiar names of its 
cities, remembered still in modern times: Damascus, Babylon, 
Nineveh. In the Bible is recorded the history of the earliest 
known civilization, the agrarian Sumerian kingdom, and the 
alien cultures which succeeded it over the years: the 
Babylonians, the Assyrians, and the Chaldeans. 
Brother Bethune's description of the reunion feast refers 
to the story of Belshazzar, the last of the Chaldean kings, 
whose fate is told by the Biblical prophet Daniel. Like his 
father before him, Belshazzar worshipped false gods. When he 
gave a great feast in his banquet house, mysterious writing 
appeared on the wall: 
"Mene, 
mene, 
tekel, 
upharsin." 
Daniel 
translated the words for Belshazzar: "numbered, numbered, 
weighed, divisions." Daniel's interpretation of the words 
prophesied disaster for Belshazzar: "God hath numbered thy 
kingdom, and finished it; thou art weighed in the balance, and 
found wanting" (Daniel 5:25-31). That very night Belshazzar 
was killed and his kingdom delivered to Darius, the Mede. 
Despite his announcement that the handwriting on the wall 
is not applicable to Banner Top, Brother Bethune not only 
carefully recounts the actual words written, but also reminds 
the assembled Vaughns and Renfros of Belshazzar's father, 
Nebuchadnezzar, who went mad and "ate grass." Brother Bethune 
piously hopes that Jack Renfro's father will not do the same. 

210 
But ironically, Brother Bethune—in an almost literal as well 
as figurative sense—is the writing on the wall for the 
primitive religion brought to Banner by Granny Vaughn's 
father-in-law, the builder of Banner's Damascus Church. 
Granny's husband, Preacher Vaughn, had been the last 
"living example of a real, real Baptist" (LB 182). 
Significantly, Grandpa Vaughn had died in his eighty-ninth 
year, just exactly one year before, at the end of the annual 
family reunion. Brother Bethune, "a Baptist preacher and a 
moonshiner" (LB 404)9 is such a poor substitute for Grandpa 
Vaughn that even Jack is shocked: "If Grandpa was back on 
earth to hear him, he'd bore a hole right through him now with 
his eyes," claims Jack (LB 433). But Grandpa is gone, and 
when his wife dies, the Vaughn line will end. As they walk in 
the cemetery, Jack points out Granny's grave site to Gloria: 
"Where we're walking now is where Granny'11 go. . . . The last 
Vaughn in the world! And not weighing 
much more for 
all 
her 
years 
than our baby weighs 
now" (LB 426, emphasis mine). 
9Although everyone understands the term "moonshiner," 
remnant of Prohibition days in the twenties, not everyone 
would comprehend its full significance when applied to Brother 
Bethune. Moonshiners have existed in all eras in the South 
because local counties retain the right to make production and 
sale of liquor illegal, even though it might be legal in the 
state and nation. During difficult economic times, especially 
in hill country, more than one otherwise law-abiding man has 
turned to moonshining. However, liquor is anathema to the 
purist Baptist tradition. So Brother Bethune not only breaks 
the law, he defies one of the basic tenets of the Baptist 
faith he professes. 

211 
The implication can hardly be clearer. The original 
kingdom of Baptist farmers established high in the hills above 
Banner will be unlikely ever to celebrate another such family 
reunion. In fact, it is highly likely that Granny Vaughn is 
already dead by the following morning. During the Sunday 
celebration, she has slipped periodically between the present 
and the past. On Sunday night, she imagines that her dead 
husband has come to her in the night, when it is only her 
great-grandson Vaughn, wearing Grandpa Vaughn's hat. On 
Monday morning, she never appears. The family believes she is 
merely sleeping late to recover from the strenuous reunion 
day, and that may be the case. But she may well already be 
gone forever, except as a memory. 
Certainly, the founding traditions of the Vaughn faith 
have vanished. The Vaughn's oldest grandson, Nathan Beecham, 
has murdered Mr. Dearman, allowed a Negro man to hang for his 
crime, cut off his right hand in remorse, and now roams the 
countryside as an eccentric evangelist, erecting signs that 
warn of sin, damnation, redemption, and eternity. He has 
exiled himself from the family, appearing just once a year at 
the reunion. There he stands silent behind his grandmother, 
who rests in her rocker on one of her birthday presents, the 
"Delectable Mountains" quilt, made by the women in the family 
and "ready to cloak her" (LB 222, 347). Just once Nathan 
leaves her side to play his cornet for the family. Ignoring 
requests for "Poor Wayfaring Stranger" and "Sweet and Low," he 

212 
plays the tune which lies close to his heart and his mission: 
"Let the Lower Lights be Burning" (LB 347). 
Brightly beams our Father's mercy 
From His lighthouse evermore, 
But to us He gives the keeping 
Of the lights along the shore. 
Let the lower lights be burning! 
Send a gleam across the wave! 
Some poor fainting, struggling seaman 
You may rescue, you may save. 
Dark the night of sin has settled, 
Loud the angry billows roar; 
Eager eyes are watching, longing, 
For the lights along the shore. 
Let the lower lights be burning! 
Send a gleam across the wave! 
Some poor fainting, struggling seaman 
You may rescue, you may save. 
(Bliss 262) 
Not all the hymns are sorrowful, however. In the scene 
down on the road below, where the assembled battlers are 
trying to save Judge Moody's car, Welty uses hymns as a 
humorous guide to the action. As the mostly Baptist battlers 
contemplate some action to prevent the car from plunging over 
the hill down into the river below, they can hear Methodists 
down below in Banner singing, "Throw out the life line! Throw 
out the life line! . . . . Someone is sinking today." As the 
car teeters on the edge ever more precariously, the strains of 
"Shall We Gather at the River" drift up the mountain. When 
Mr. Renfro trots down to help, bringing with him the dynamite 
that he fancies will alleviate any problem, his young daughter 
sings, "Yield not to temptation / for yielding is sin" (LB 
128, 131, 137). 

213 
But in the scenes of the reunion up at the very tip of 
Banner Top, Welty uses the hymns to further define the meaning 
of the family's Christianity. Welty usually gives only the 
title, sometimes the chorus, of the carefully selected hymns, 
again because she could assume that many contemporary readers 
could easily supply the words or the verse. When further 
verses will help clarify meaning, I will supply them. 
After the reunion dinner, of which Judge and Mrs. Moody 
have also partaken, Miss Beulah leads the family in singing 
with "Gathering Home." "All their voices rose as one" (LB 
223) . 
Gathering home! Gathering home! 
Never to sorrow more, never to roam! 
Gathering home! Gathering home! 
God's children are gathering home. 
(LB 223) 
Up to the bountiful Giver of life, 
Gathering home! gathering home! 
Up to the dwelling 
where cometh no 
strife, 
The dear ones are gathering home. 
(Slade & Mcintosh 128, emphasis mine) 
In Christian terms, the home, the dwelling, refers to God's 
heavenly home, of course, but in the novel it also marks the 
near-sacred view of the eternal, ceremonial home-place on 
Banner Top created by the revered family ancestors. As the 
singing of this hymn comes to an end, however, one of the rare 
authorial intrusions into the dialogue provides another view 
of the place and family as symbolized in the grand old bois 
d'arc tree, a view that also resembles handwriting on the 
wall. 

214 
As they sang, the tree over them, Billy Vaughn's Switch, 
with its ever-spinning leaves all light-points at this 
hour, looked bright as a river, and the tables might have 
been a little train of barges it was carrying with it, 
moving slowly downstream. Brother Bethune's gun, still 
resting against the trunk, was travelling too, and 
nothing at all was unmovable, or empowered to hold the 
scene still fixed or stake the reunion there. 
(LB 223) 
Granny Vaughn's later contribution to the singing also 
sends mixed messages. "She knew every verse and was not 
sparing them one." 
But the family cannot decipher the song. 
"Is it 'Frog Went A-Courting' or 'Wondrous Love'?" asked Aunt 
Birdie. "Sounds like a little of both" (LB 307). After her 
song, Granny is lifted to the table top where "She danced in 
their faces," even though dancing on Sunday is frowned on by 
Baptists (LB 308). 
The final hymn of the evening seems to pull the family 
back on track. Beulah busily directs the formation of the 
healing circle: 
Where's Jack? Sometimes just making your circle will 
bring him in. Stand up, catch Granny, don't let her fall 
down now! Pull up Brother Bethune before he's slipped 
clear down out of reach! . . . Judge Moody, stoop a 
little, catch hold of Elvie's hand. . . . Drag Nathan in 
where he belongs! . . . Now, are we a circle? 
(LB 348) 
Indeed, they are a circle as they join hands and sing "Blest 
Be the Tie." 
Blest be the tie that binds 
Our hearts in Christian love; 
The fellowship of kindred minds 
Is like to that above. 
We share our mutual woes, 
Our mutual burdens bear; 

215 
And often for each other flows 
The sympathizing tear. 
When we asunder part, 
It gives us inward pain; 
But we shall still be joined in heart, 
And hope to meet again. 
(Fawcett & Nageli 2 39) 
Given the clear signs that the family circle will probably not 
be so complete ever again, the Vaughns and the Renfros can 
only hope to meet again. But they rejoice in the present 
circle, knowing full well that however far the children 
scatter, they "shall still be joined in heart." During the 
singing, "there was only one really mournful voice —Judge 
Moody's." For Judge Moody has delayed answering the pleas of 
Miss Julia Mortimer, has come too late to comfort the teacher 
responsible for his success. 
BATTLES IN PROGRESS 
The family's slim hope of all meeting together again is 
dramatized by the ongoing battles that occur within 
the 
family, even on the occasion of the reunion. Welty uses 
patterns of imagery associated with paired opposites within 
the family to further elaborate the ever-widening rifts in 
beliefs. I will concentrate on three of the most significant 
struggles, the ones that most clearly illustrate the 
characteristics of the old and new world orders. The first 
and the most revealing struggle occurs between ninety-year-old 
Granny Vaughn and her fourteen-month-old great-great-
grandchild, Lady May Renfro. 
Less all-embracing but crucial 

216 
is the continuing battle between Jack's mother, Beulah Renfro, 
and her sister-in-law Lexie Renfro. Most subtle is the 
struggle between the two Renfro brothers, nineteen-year-old 
Jack and twelve-year-old Vaughn. But it is the only one that 
points to some kind of resolution. 
GRANNY VAUGHN AND LADY MAY RENFRO: PAST VERSUS FUTURE 
No more graphic representation of the struggle between 
the old order and the new can be found than that one projected 
in the repeated encounters between Granny Vaughn, born before 
the War Between the States, and her great-great-grandchild, 
Lady May Renfro, born in the 1930s. Early in the novel, even 
before the arrival of the child's father, Jack Jordan Renfro, 
the characteristic stance toward each other of matriarch and 
infant is established. When the baby is unceremoniously 
"loaded . . . onto Granny Vaughn's lap," the usually absent 
authorial voice explains. 
Even before her eyes opened, Granny had put both 
arms out. Lady May, the soles of her feet wrinkling 
like the old lady's forehead, went to the weakest and 
most tenacious embrace she knew. They hugged long 
enough to remind each other that perhaps they were 
rivals. 
(LB 65) 
Later in the day after Granny has opened her birthday 
presents, the baby comes close to look at them, and 
Granny leans toward her to ask for one more precious gift: 
"I want a kiss . . . . 
I want lovingkindness." But 
"Lady May bolted" (LB 223). As dusk falls, the baby makes 

217 
herself a nest "in the grass" and falls into an untroubled 
sleep "where any nest is the same" (LB 312). But very late 
that night, when all the family have left or bedded down, Lady 
May rests peacefully in a significant new nest: Granny's 
recently vacated rocker. 
MISS BEULAH AND LEXIE RENFRO: FIRE AND ICE 
Two other foils within the family, Jack's mother, Miss 
Beulah, and Miss Beulah's sister-in-law, Lexie Renfro, 
demonstrate the differences between being connected to family 
and being alienated from family. As the mainstay of the 
Renfro family, Miss Beulah represents the old order, the 
independent agricultural family. Lexie Renfro, whose father 
was the original country storekeeper, we remember, embraces 
neither an agricultural nor a commercial tradition. 
Since 
her brother, Ralph, has lost the store, Lexie cannot follow 
the family trade. But unlike Beulah, Lexie has created no 
family of her own. While Miss Beulah's life work has been 
holding together the family, both past and present, Lexie has 
bitterly steered her course between family and education, 
committing herself to neither one. Miss Beulah is optimistic; 
Lexie is skeptical and apathetic. 
The two contradict each other at every turn. Within the 
space of fifteen minutes on the morning after the birthday 
reunion, Miss Lexie declares that Granny Vaughn is sleeping 
late because she is "Paying for yesterday." On the contrary, 

218 
corrects Miss Beulah: she is "Rewarding herself!" When Miss 
Beulah tells Jack that the Moodys wouldn't wait for him, Miss 
Lexie reminds him that his own daddy wouldn't wait for him. 
Miss Beulah readies herself to go watch Jack deal with the 
Moody's car because "it's a mother's place to be there and see 
it's done right!" Miss Lexie, however, declares that Jack 
"may have to do without me watching him" (LB 371, 372, 375-
76). Shortly afterward, up on Banner Top where Jack grapples 
with the big job of saving Judge Moody's car, Miss Beulah 
flings herself into the human chain hanging for dear life onto 
the rope that barely holds the car. But Miss Lexie merely 
stands on the road waiting for her ride and (she says) saving 
her strength for other battles (LB 386). 
If Miss Beulah, surrounded by family, represents a 
"Mother Earth," a natural maternal instinct in all its 
vitality and eternal vigilance, then Miss Lexie demonstrates 
its opposite: the shriveled and embittered human self, with 
no human commitment in all the world, in whom all capacity for 
feeling has disappeared. Although Lexie mimics a maternal 
role in her job as practical nurse and companion to sick and 
helpless old people, her vitality and vigilance have become 
hopelessly perverted. Her energy is spent in thwarting any 
natural desires of her charges and on inventing new ways to 
bedevil them. For example, in the guise of "caring" for Miss 
Julia Mortimer, whose life has been devoted to human 
communication, Lexie throws away her incoming letters, fails 

219 
to mail her outgoing ones, and takes away her books, her pen, 
and paper. When Miss Julia still finds the strength and 
determination to crawl out of bed to reach writing materials, 
Lexie ties her to the bed. Finally, Lexie just deserts her 
patient in order to attend the family reunion. Even Lexie's 
own family is ambivalent about her arrival at the reunion, for 
no one in the family ever dreams of calling on her for 
"assistance." At the reunion, all of Lexie's contributions to 
the family talk are negative ones. And when she leaves the 
reunion the next morning, she refuses to ride with the 
"mailrider" back to the funeral for Miss Julia, who has died 
in her absence. Instead, she hitches a ride with the 
"iceman," who is headed in the opposite direction from Banner. 
Her association with ice accentuates the coldness of her 
heart, the chill of her touch. Perhaps nothing speaks so 
tellingly of Lexie's complete lack of feeling as the 
description of her laugh, repeated twice in the first section 
of the book: she "dipped her knees and tipped herself back, 
one tip. She didn't make a sound, but this was her laugh" (LB 
17). 
JACK AND VAUGHN: ACTION VERSUS REFLECTION 
The battle most often remarked in the novel, that between 
the institutions of family and education, becomes concrete in 
the subtle and continuing struggle within the family between 
Jack Jordan Renfro and his younger brother, Vaughn Renfro. We 

220 
might characterize their struggle as one between the soldier 
and the preacher/teacher. Both boys uphold the family 
heritage, but in different ways. Jack, the older Renfro boy, 
typifies the confident, self-reliant, headstrong man of 
action, admired throughout the local community for his farming 
prowess (LB 189). He has been named Jack Jordan for his 
great-great-uncle on Granny's side of the family. That Jack 
Jordan was considered the toughest soldier of the proud 
Confederate Jordans because the Union army "had to starve 
[him] to death to kill him" (LB 180). 
But Vaughn, the younger Renfro brother, is much more 
given to reflection than is Jack. Vaughn carries the family 
name of his great-grandfather, Grandpa Vaughn. The Vaughn 
men, Baptist preachers all, are honored for bringing the early 
foundations of civilization—the first house, the first 
church, and the first school—into the frontier settlement of 
Banner. According to the family myth, Grandpa Vaughn was also 
responsible for the bois d'arc which has long recorded on its 
trunk the family history. The tree, it is said, grew from a 
riding switch he dropped on the ground when he first came to 
the Jordan, now Renfro, farmhouse courting the young Miss 
Thurzah Elvira Jordan, now Granny Vaughn. 
So while Jack's name heritage is agrarian, territorial, 
and military, based on staking a claim to land, living in 
harmony with it, and defending it against all threats, 
Vaughn's name heritage stems from the church, the first sign 

221 
of civilization added to the pioneer foundations of Banner. 
Vaughn, unlike Jack, shows every sign of adding to those 
civilizing institutions by embracing the substance of formal 
education, the first male child in the family to do so. Jack 
is all natural instinct and impulsive action; but Vaughn is 
all reflection and planned action—for better or worse, to be 
revealed in the fullness of time. In the eyes of his mother 
Miss Beulah, at least, Vaughn will always play second fiddle 
to Jack who, like George Fairchild in Delta 
Wedding, is 
considered by all as the protector and savior of the family. 
There can be no guestion that in the family's eyes 
generally, the older son, Jack, is the guintessential hero 
while the younger son, Vaughn, is a necessary but poor 
substitute for Jack. Of course, Vaughn has lived only twelve 
years compared to Jack's nineteen. Even so, in the last two 
years Vaughn has carried out all of Jack's family chores; yet 
the family still finds his efforts inadeguate. Indeed they 
will always be inadequate to Miss Beulah... For her, not even 
added years and continuing work experience will permit Vaughn 
to fill Jack's shoes. This typical example of narrowed-vision 
family favoritism is so common that almost any reader with 
siblings should be able to recognize it. 
The family view of Jack emerges in one of the most vivid 
passages in the novel. Throughout the first part of the 
novel, Welty has built suspense around Jack. Reunion 
participants have spent several hours recounting the hero's 

222 
trials and tribulations, and speculating on his chances of 
getting home from prison in time .to join the celebration. 
Amid the family talk, the preparation for Jack's entrance 
begins. In a long descriptive passage, Welty uses 
synaesthesia that evokes from readers feelings of excitement 
similar to those being experienced at the reunion. The 
passage's dazzling display of sights in terms of sounds 
creates a dramatic, extended drum roll that introduces the 
long-anticipated hero. 
There came a sound like a pistol shot from out in 
the yard. All heads turned front. Ella Fay had cracked 
the first starched tablecloth out of its folds—it waved 
like a flag. Then she dropped it on the ground and came 
running toward them, screaming. Dogs little and big set 
up a tenor barking. Dogs ran from all corners of the 
yard and from around the house and through the passage, 
streaking for the front gate. 
Aunt Nanny grabbed the baby from Gloria's knees and 
ran to hide her in the company room, screaming as if she 
herself had nearly been caught in her nightgown. Miss 
Beulah raced to Granny's side. The barking reached 
frantic pitch as a whirlwind of dust filled the space 
between the chinaberry trees. As even those chatterers 
on the back porch and those filling the house started up 
through the passage, the floor drummed and swayed, a pan 
dropped from its nail in the kitchen wall, and overhead 
even the tin of the roof seemed to quiver with a sound 
like all the family spoons set to jingling in their 
glass. 
Riding a wave of dogs, a nineteen-year-old boy 
leaped the steps to a halt on the front gallery. He 
crashed his hands together, then swung his arms wide. 
"Jack Jordan Renfro," announced Miss Lexie to the 
company. "Well: you brought him." 
(LB 71) 
Far from shrinking from the roar of the crowd, Jack Jordan 
accepts it as his natural due, even adds to the frenzied 
symphonic excitement with the crashing together of his hands 

223 
like cymbals, then the swinging of his arms dramatically wide 
in recognition and in acceptance of the thunderous welcome. 
Amid the near-hysterical tumult of the family, only young 
Vaughn maintains some composure. Jack lunges forward looking 
ready to kiss him, but Vaughn steps back, saying only, 
"I've 
got on your pants" 
(LB 72, emphasis mine).10 Thus, the 
struggle begins innocently enough. Indeed, Jack does not even 
notice the slight deflation of his exalted status as he and 
Vaughn then joust about with the "dried cornstalks" that 
Vaughn has brought, "shaking them like giant rattles, banging 
them about like papery clubs" (LB 72). Shortly thereafter, 
however, Jack is looking for transportation. When his little 
sister suggests that Jack drive the school bus, the only 
vehicle around suitable for his purpose, Vaughn immediately 
pipes up: "You can't. 
You ain't 
the driver, 
Jack, 
not any 
longer" 
(LB 88, emphasis mine). 
Before the end of Part 1, other family members 
unintentionally take part in reducing the mythic-sized Jack to 
human proportions. His mother tells Jack that both his truck 
and his stud horse, his most prized possessions, are gone. 
And in the final put-down, his wife, Gloria, takes charge of 
10Since men's pants were store-bought, rather than home-
made, they were expensive and highly valued. Few farm 
families could afford more than one or two pair at a time. 
Obviously, the Renfros have one pair only for Jack. And 
Vaughn has temporarily taken possession of them. See Thomas 
Clark for more information on the value of men's pants in the 
rural South. 

224 
his business, ordering all the other male members of the 
reunion—human and canine—to sit down and stay home. She 
insists that she alone, with only their baby and Jack's dog, 
Sid, will accompany Jack back down to the road to take care of 
his unfinished business with Judge Moody (LB 88-89, 93). 
Among the excited family members whose image of Jack is 
fixed, only Vaughn recognizes the series of deflations that 
Jack suffers during the long day of the family reunion. Even 
though Vaughn holds firmly to his sense of his own manhood and 
his responsibilities, he pitches in at every turn to assist 
Jack as Jack tries—unsuccessfully—to rescue Judge Moody's 
car. But at the end of the day when the aunts, uncles, and 
cousins have all gone home, and the rest of the Renfro family 
has gone to bed, Vaughn sets off alone on Bet, the mule, back 
down to the road to finish up his own particular business with 
the school bus. As he plods along in the moonlight, he 
reflects on his new view of himself and his older brother. 
For a year and a half it had been "Vaughn! Vaughn!" 
every minute, though it would turn before he knew it 
back into "Jack!" again. 
Or would it? Had today been all brave show, 
and had Jack all in secret fallen down . . . ? 
Could Jack take a fall from highest place and nobody 
be man enough to say so? Was falling a secret, 
another part of people's getting tangled up with 
each other, another danger to walk up on without 
warning . . . ? 
(LB 3 63) 
Vaughn's moonlight mission is to rescue the school bus, 
which his little sister, in a spontaneous attempt to help, has 
rolled down the farm track to the main road and into a ditch. 

225 
Vaughn aims to ready the bus for the morning because the new 
school year will begin then, and he is the new bus driver 
(chosen not because he's the most popular, like Jack, but 
because he's the best speller). Effortlessly, he and the mule 
haul the bus out of the ditch. "Without Jack," he remarks to 
himself, "nothing would be no trouble at all" (LB 3 64). Vaughn 
turns the mule loose, fills the radiator of the bus with 
water, climbs into the driver's seat where his new geography 
book raises him up high enough to see, and coasts down the 
hill to fire up the engine. Just a few hours before, Jack had 
been unable to start this engine, "stomp as he would" (LB 
135). But now almost instantly the engine chirps, and then 
"bang, bang, bang—the engine was running for Vaughn just as 
any engine in the world ought to do" (LB 3 64). Satisfied that 
his bus is ready for the morning work, Vaughn returns it up 
the farm track to a new and hidden parking spot, returns the 
mule to its stall, and then climbs himself to the loft in the 
barn—with its "upper regions full of Grandpa Vaughn's 
prayers"—and falls asleep even before he can finish his own 
prayers. 
But in battles the balance of power can shift swiftly, or 
at least appear to. The next morning, Jack is back in his 
"own pants" and Vaughn must content himself with his old "knee 
pants" (LB 371, 373). Despite this symbolic changing of the 
guard, it is still Vaughn who is up first, who has already 
taken the Moodys down to Banner Top, and who is completing all 

226 
the morning farm chores before leaving for school. Jack, in 
the meantime, returns to Banner Top where he plans, with the 
help of Curly Stovall and the old Coca-Cola truck, to complete 
the rescue of Judge Moody's Buick. Although the two men do 
manage finally to get the Buick back on the road, the truck is 
so battered in the process that it now needs a tow, along with 
the not-quite-mortally-damaged Buick. The Buick's engine is 
still sound and running, though all the car's tires are flat, 
its doors are fallen open, its windshield and headlights are 
broken, its nose is "a little bit out of kilter" 
(LB 396). 
As Jack tries to organize the party to get both vehicles 
down to Banner, Vaughn comes flying down the farm track, 
blowing his horn, negotiating the turn onto the road, and 
smoothly navigating around the bedraggled truck and Buick in 
his great rush to collect the children and get to school. 
Vaughn's easy competence is set once more against Jack's 
physical strength and indomitable will, but once again younger 
brother Vaughn complies with Jack's frantic shouts to "Stop! 
Stop!" "It's no blooming fair," Vaughn complains, even as he 
accepts Jack's directions and sets to work to help Jack rig 
make-shift tow-lines for the battered vehicles in his charge. 
Only Vaughn and Judge Moody have with them tow-ropes and a 
length of chain; for the rest Jack uses "Trace chains, well 
rope, Moody towline, fence wire, and Elvie's swing" (LB 399). 
Vaughn even reluctantly gives up the driver's seat in the 
school bus to Jack—for just this one day only. 

227 
As a last touch to the procession of bus, Buick, and 
homemade truck, Jack adds mule power, Brother Bethune's white 
mule and the Renfro family's black Bet with Vaughn on board. 
Vaughn believes he will at least head the procession, but Jack 
sends him to hitch on at the rear where he will act as the 
brakes. For the brakes of the truck and the Buick are both 
suspect. And Jack has no faith in the world in the "emergency 
[brake] of the Banner School bus." Instead, he relies on 
Vaughn. "You've got two good mules. Each with their own good 
record of behavior. I trust one as much as I do the other" 
(LB 400). Further, the young Vaughn, as accomplished with the 
mules as he is with an engine, could hardly be a better choice 
to hold back what Jack's previous record might suggest would 
be a precipitous and headlong plunge down the hill road, 
ending in disaster. And so they proceed, presenting the 
startling visual image so central to the novel, the procession 
of vehicles we described at the beginning of this chapter. 
The three big hulks ploughed their joined-up 
way down Banner Road, moving as they'd never been 
before and never would be again, in one another's 
custody and in mule custody, above the ragged 
gullies and under the shaved clay hills that were 
shining as though great red rivers were pumping 
through their hearts. 
{LB 402) 
In every instance Jack and Vaughn illustrate the 
characteristics and traditions of the ancestors for whom they 
are named. Jack Jordan is hard-working, loyal to family, 
impetuous, and in constant motion. His stance toward the 
world leads him to act first on any threat to his family or 

228 
his land, and to ask questions later. He is the active, 
physical man of the old order in the South. Vaughn, however, 
is a reflective planner, whose mind works like George 
Fairchild's in Delta 
Wedding. 
Equally hard-working and loyal 
to family, Vaughn is yet devoted to education. Although he 
has not left the family yet, he can already see the world 
beyond Boone County in books—and he dreams of seeing that 
world in person someday. 
ONE BATTLE WON—BRIDGING THE GAPS 
In contriving first to save Judge Moody's Buick and then 
to form and move the procession of damaged vehicles down the 
road to Banner, however, Jack has partially broken ranks with 
his inherited system of values. Judge Moody, after all, has 
been his mortal enemy; Curly Stovall has robbed him of his 
belongings and his freedom. 
What, then, has brought Jack to 
aid them? 
The Jack Renfro who manages to get to his grandmother's 
reunion party has benefited from two more years of education, 
grim though they may have been. Parchman Penitentiary, 
located in the Delta, filled with blacks as well as whites, 
has provided Jack a wider perspective on reality than he has 
had before (LB 56-58). The different perspective tempers 
Jack's traditional Renfro family view, which resists, 
ostracizes, and pities "outsiders" whose values do not 
coincide exactly with those of the clan. Jack now insists on 

229 
dealing with the reality of each new situation; hence, after 
an initial impulse toward revenge, he invites the family's 
most recent "enemy," Judge Moody, right into the heart of the 
reunion. Further, he enlists the aid of his natural and 
personal "enemy," Curly Stovall, to save Judge Moody's car. 
Jack now creates alliances outside the family, an act 
crucial to survival in a changing world. In one of his first 
actions, Jack enlists the aid of his most immediate rival, his 
kid brother Vaughn. Despite Jack's distrust of formal 
education, he wins to his side Vaughn, who "so loved Banner 
School that he would have beaten sunup" to get there if the 
doors could be opened for him (LB 364). Vaughn is the first, 
but he will not be the last Renfro to adapt to a changing 
world by embracing the education that promises different ways 
of viewing the world. But Jack ousts Vaughn from the driver's 
seat in the school bus heading the procession, strategically 
situating him at the rear to handle the mules, the stalwart 
"tools" of the agrarian family. Even though Vaughn then winds 
up merely as the emergency brake, he cooperates. His role is 
vital to the procession and reinforces for him the value of 
the family ways, old-fashioned though they may be. Vaughn 
will never abandon his family as he shifts some of his 
allegiance beyond Banner to the world that he has already 
begun to perceive in his geography book. In this respect, he 
differs from Gloria, who readily abandoned education and Miss 

230 
Julia for love of Jack and now campaigns to dissociate 
herself, her husband and baby from the Renfro family as well. 
Vaughn, thanks to Jack's example, can hold both familial 
and educational values in his view, each reinforcing the 
other. For example, in his moonlight reverie at the end of 
the reunion day, Vaughn looks at the Wayfarer's Bell, which 
has been silent all through the glorious Sunday when all the 
scattered family have been gathered together again in the 
shade of the bois d'arc. But even as he looks, his "heart 
quailed." For Vaughn, even at twelve, understands that though 
"no one was lost any more, there could be no bell that does 
not say *I will ring again'" (LB 365). 
In Boone County, the 
Wayfarer's Bell has biblical as well as family significance. 
It also reminds us of the secular wayfarer far away from the 
land in the twentieth century, the wanderer who cannot come 
home again, either because home no longer exists or because he 
can neither accept nor adapt to the family's values. When the 
wayfarer also cannot form his own purpose apart from the old 
community, he becomes as lost in the darkness as Nathan 
Beecham. 
Jack's further educational experience occurs in the 
family reunion story telling. There, for the first time, Jack 
hears Miss Julia Mortimer's side of the feud from Judge Moody. 
When he can see her as another human being rather than just an 
opposing force, he once again reacts outside of the Renfro 
form. He can no longer demean Miss Julia by pitying her. He 

231 
understands her passionate effort to honor her values in a 
losing battle even as Vaughn understands that wayfarers will 
still sometimes get lost. Although Jack will never embrace 
formal education, he can no longer criticize and pity its 
standard bearer, Miss Julia. "I reckon I even love her," Jack 
explains to Gloria. "J heard 
her 
story" 
(LB 3 61, emphasis 
mine). Jack has learned well the lesson of listening; he 
seems, also, to have added the lesson of inclusion: "Don't 
give anybody up. . . . Or leave anybody out" (LB 361-62). 
Most important, he has learned the full meaning of love. He 
explains it to Gloria: "Don't pity anybody you could love" 
(LB 361). 
It is important to define "love" as Jack uses the word 
here, and as it is used in much of Welty's work. Jack would 
define love as that love commanded by God through Moses and 
Jesus: "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself" (Leviticus 
19:18; Matthew 19:19). We think of such love as that of 
charity for the brotherhood of humanity, charity not in the 
sense of pity but rather in the sense of understanding and 
identification. It is a charity that eschews the stereotyping 
born of prejudice, wherever it might be found. 
The shift in Judge Moody's attitude toward Jack makes the 
point. At their first meeting in the courtroom, Judge Moody 
shows no interest in the truth and no mercy. Jack has hit the 
Banner town marshal and has shown no "respect for the law" (LB 
56). Since Jack's crime has made him almost sub-human in the 

232 
Judge's eyes, Judge Moody gives him the longest sentence 
possible. But after spending a day in the "school chair" at 
the family reunion, Judge Moody sees the Renfro family more 
accurately. As he listens to the family's stories, the family 
assumes an all too human, all-too-familiar shape. After 
experiencing the family's history, its burdens, failures, and 
triumphs, he looks with compassion upon Jack's other possible 
crime of unknowingly marrying his cousin. (In the family 
talk, the idea has been briefly entertained that Jack's orphan 
wife, Gloria, might have been fathered by Jack's uncle.) The 
Judge's respect for the law has not lessened; but he realizes 
that human beings are far more complex than one isolated 
characteristic or action might reveal. Also, family 
relationships can be more intricate and tangled than even the 
family can know. Judge Moody is not being hypocritical, then, 
when he joins the Renfro family circle to sing "Blest be the 
tie that binds / Our hearts in Christian love." 
I do not suggest that the love Welty advocates in her 
other works is necessarily Christian love. Often it is 
romantic or familial. Yet always, in her rich and intricate 
concept of love, lies the spark of recognition and connection 
that comes through momentary identification of one mind with 
another. It resembles E. M. Forster's key formulation: "only 
connect." Though Jack's sense of love is Christian, it is 
also mixed with identification that leads to connection. This 

233 
kind of identification occurs in the moment of revelation we 
will see in the final scene in The Optimist's 
Daughter 
when Laurel identifies with her step-mother, Fay.11 
LOSING AND SURVIVING 
In the beginning of the thirties, no one could have 
imagined the cultural transition that would change forever the 
way of life in the Tennessee Hills. The total ruin of the 
one-crop system of agriculture was confirmed, the inability of 
generations of families to continue simply to live off the 
land became apparent, the rapacious growth of commercial 
interests in material goods and in lumber turned upside down 
the possibility of complete self-sufficiency, the necessity of 
federal relief and regulations thwarted the tradition of self-
direction long valued in the country, and progress in 
educational opportunities would by the forties change the face 
of the rural south forever. Within a decade the occupation of 
the majority of the population would no longer be farming. 
The world evoked in Welty's procession of "hulks" had lost 
about as much as a community could and still survive. 
Any person who would survive the continuing losing 
battles that occur regularly in an evolving society must be 
prepared to understand and engage all participants in the 
battle. In Losing 
Battles, 
the means to survival is 
uFor further discussion of Welty's use of the word 
love, 
see Kreyling's "Words into Criticism," 417-19. 

234 
exemplified by the human chain that the Renfros and the Moodys 
form as they cling desperately to the rope that just barely 
holds back the teetering Buick from plunging off the hilltop. 
After "holding on for eleven and a half minutes," Judge Moody 
"suddenly broke out": 
We're all holding on here now by the skin of our teeth! 
Can't conversation ever cease? Can't anybody offer 
just a single idea? What're we going to do about this? 
(LB 390) 
The Judge's first words look ahead to the end of The 
Optimist's 
Daughter, 
where Laurel McKelva Hand speeds from the 
ruin of her home-place to meet her future, leaving still 
spiritually intact by the skin of her teeth. The significant 
reference in moments of human trial—in both of Welty's final 
novels—to Thornton Wilder's play, The Skin 
of Our Teeth, 
has 
implications for survival that we will discuss in some detail 
in Chapter 6. 
The questions in the Judge's outburst are ones essential 
to survival. The survivor must forge a course of action and 
follow it, regardless of whether he will win or lose the 
particular engagement. He must finally learn how to lose—and 
laugh and love and live again. Jack Renfro, as we see in the 
central image of the procession of hulks, manages just this 
path 
with the vision, ingenuity, courage, and perseverance 
that we expect of heroes and survivors. He will doubtless 
live out the rest of his life in Banner, but through choice 
rather than necessity—and with the full knowledge that he 
could survive elsewhere if he chose. 

235 
It is his younger brother, Vaughn, however, who will 
actively embrace both an education and the larger world that 
exists beyond Banner, all the time retaining the heroic 
characteristics of his older brother, characteristics he has 
already exhibited at the age of twelve. For while Jack 
exhibits traces of the ancient yeoman, the fundamental Baptist 
tradition, and the necessity for immediate action in the face 
of change, Vaughn represents the future which is fast bearing 
down on the Tennessee Hills. Where Jack's heroic qualities 
are instinctive and natural, Vaughn's already are reasoned and 
reflective. With an education, he will be able to bring 
perspectives beyond just family tradition to bear on the 
recurring problems of human experience. 
At any rate, in Losing 
Battles 
the Welty protagonist 
develops the open heart necessary for identification with 
those people who are different. He chooses participation in, 
rather than withdrawal from, the complex world of the 
twentieth century, however makeshift, inefficient, unworldly, 
and possibly even doomed that participation might be. If Jack 
has still one failing as a fully-developed Welty protagonist, 
it is his vision. He believes himself invulnerable as long as 
he has his family. As his wife reminds him, "they've taken 
away everything you've got . . . . Everybody's done their 
worst now . . . . They can't do any more now" (LB 434) . 
Jack 
agrees cheerfully because, having still his strength, his 
faith, and his will, he knows he can provide and endure. 

236 
Besides, Jack still thinks immediately of his family as a sure 
and continuing line of defense against whatever comes: "They 
can't take away what no human can take away," he exclaims: 
"My family . . . .My wife and girl baby and all of 'em at 
home" (LB 434). Further, he plans to add more "little chaps" 
to the family quickly, just in case: "You just can't have too 
many, is the way I look at it" (LB 435). 
Thus, as the novel ends, the family vitality seems 
intact, even multiplied. Significantly Jack sees, down in the 
pasture, his horse, Dan, still alive, although neglected by 
his new owner, Curly. Dan comes quickly to Jack's call, not 
all the way to his old master's waiting arms, but close enough 
to make Jack laugh until "tears popped out on both cheeks." 
Jack's joy at the sheer animal life in the stallion 
compensates for the fact that he no longer belongs to Jack. 
As Dan gallops back into the pasture, the family mule, Bet, 
wanders into the road. In another allusion to new beginnings, 
Jack swings Gloria up onto Bet's back, takes the bridle, and 
leads her home, singing so that "All Banner could hear him and 
know who he was." 
Bringing in the sheaves, 
Bringing in the sheaves! 
We shall come rejoicing 
Bringing in the sheaves!' 
Sowing in the sunshine, 
Sowing in the shadows, 
Fearing neither clouds 
Nor winter's chilling breeze; 
By and by the harvest 
And the labor ended, 

237 
We shall come rejoicing, 
Bringing in the sheaves. 
(LB 43 6; Shaw & Minor 3 59) 
Looking back from the end of the century, we can see the 
irony in the ending, even as we appreciate Jack's courage and 
optimism. We know that family members, of course, are even 
more vulnerable than material goods. Jack's siblings, 
equipped with education, can be lured away by the prospect of 
greater horizons beyond Banner. Jack's children will be taken 
away by forces that are turning a rural, agricultural nation 
into an urban, industrialized one. Jack will have to "stand 
it," just as his great-grandmother, his mother, and Miss 
Mortimer have had to do. The whole family will eventually be 
taken by the great death that awaits us all. Jack is too 
inexperienced yet to visualize all the realities of the future 
that his wife rushes to embrace. Whether he will quail before 
that final vision of a changed world, we cannot know. 
But in her next work, The Optimist's 
Daughter, 
Welty 
intends to test the possibility of spiritual survival despite 
the total loss of home-place and family. 

238 
THE OPTIMIST'S DAUGHTER: CENTRIFUGAL TIME, SOLAR-LUNAR TIME 
The elegiac novel The Optimist's 
Daughter completes the 
pattern created over a lifetime by the artistic consciousness 
of Eudora Welty. Since Welty's over-all pattern is cyclical 
and continuous, the ending of this last fictional work 
appropriately refers the reader back to her first published 
story, "Death of a Traveling Salesman." At the same time, 
this device also refers the reader beyond Welty's canon, to 
similar circularity in a work by another twentieth-century 
artist—the playwright Thornton Wilder. Thus Welty does more 
than dramatize, by her structure, Eliot's credo, "In my end is 
my beginning." Her reference helps to identify that theme in 
her own work by pointing the reader to its familiar treatment 
elsewhere—an indirection characteristic of Eliot and other 
leading modernists. Also, of course, while disclosing her 
theme in this way, she simultaneously reinforces it by 
suggesting its wider applicability—again, a device central to 
the method of those modernists I mentioned earlier. 
Actually, Welty's referential process is additionally 
complex in this case. For the Wilder play to which she 
alludes, The Skin 
of Our Teeth, 
calls attention to and turns 
on both of the thematic patterns signalled by her allusion: 
the cyclicity of history and nature, and the supporting 
suggestion that great works of art address fundamental human 
issues that do not change with the other changes of history. 
As we will see at the conclusion of this chapter, the first 

239 
act of Wilder's play (1942) echoes Welty's first published 
story, "Death of a Traveling Salesman" (1936); later portions 
of the play echo Welty's belief—reflected throughout her 
canon—that artistic masterworks are a sustaining resource; 
and the play's conclusion dramatizes circularity. 
We have observed throughout her works that for Welty 
human experience retains the same fundamental patterns, 
despite differences in the specific times and places that 
shape communities and their individual members. What varies in 
the pattern she presents are individual reactions to 
historical time's inevitable changes. Just as the natural 
world is subject to change wrought by catastrophic forces 
beyond human control, human communities reflect continuous 
shifts in world view brought about by historical forces beyond 
individual control. Welty portrays different types of 
communities fostering different illusions to help their 
members survive emotionally during the inevitable decay and 
death to which all human systems, like all human bodies, are 
subject. The accruing suggestion of her works thus far has 
been that most human beings require such illusions. Yet 
several of her protagonists have been brought to the verge 
(Virgie, notably) of both perceiving and acting upon a 
reassuring awareness of fundamental continuities in history 
and nature; such perception and action could free them to cope 
with inevitable changes in their personal lives or their 

240 
communities without the support of restrictive, evasive 
illusions. 
Until The Optimist's 
Daughter, 
however, no Welty 
protagonist has been portrayed as clearly achieving the 
fullness of experience Welty's works have defined (by default) 
as an achievable human goal: the ability at once to see and to 
feel and to act. We have construed the obstacle to that 
achievement from the illustrative failures and near-successes 
of all Welty's protagonists considered together to this point. 
It is that as long as human beings can salvage some aspect of 
their familiar personal or cultural circumstances to be 
dependent upon, they will restrict their vision and their 
experience accordingly, when faced by cultural change. Total 
deprivation of the familiar would seem to be required before a 
Welty protagonist can break free of restrictive illusion. 
And that, indeed, is the condition in which Welty places 
Laurel in The Optimist's 
Daughter; 
that is the extremity that 
drives Welty's ultimate protagonist to the ultimate realizable 
human accomplishment pointed to in earlier works. As Laurel 
is forced to cope with her personal and cultural deprivation, 
the novel traces her progress toward the liberating 
perspective afforded by nature and history. It is because 
that progress and that liberation are so similar to those of 
Wilder's protagonists in the play just mentioned, that the 
allusions to the play are particularly useful to Welty. But 
before I discuss that intertextual commentary more concretely, 

241 
I want to explain in some detail the complex internal 
structure of Welty's novel. 
Since her ultimate protagonist must be without anything 
to "squint" at, the timing of Welty's return to composing 
fiction was highly opportune; for it was during the decade of 
1960s, a decade when all fundamental cultural assumptions were 
undercut more completely, possibly, than at any other time in 
the lives of her readership during her career. Accordingly, 
perhaps, she employed the contemporary period. Although The 
Optimist's 
Daughter identifies the historical time of its 
setting only indirectly, there is enough information to 
confirm the decade. We know that Laurel is in her mid-
forties, and that her husband, Philip Hand, was killed when a 
"kamikaze pilot" struck his ship during a war-time battle. 
Since "kamikaze" attacks occurred during the 1940s of World 
War II and Philip Hand has been dead for some twenty years, we 
can deduce that the action of the novel takes place in the 
sixties, a period when particularly high expectations of 
social order were entertained by many and, for many, seemed 
betrayed. A new president's "new frontier," the "bright, 
shining moment" of "Camelot," was cut short by internal 
disruptions of established order: the non-violent civil 
disobedience of the Civil Rights movement and the often 
violent responses to it; the assassinations of the president 
himself, his brother, and civil-rights leader Martin Luther 

242 
King, Jr.; the divisive and sometimes violent protests against 
the nation's presence in Vietnam; and other disenchantments. 
The circumstances to some degree match those Welty needed 
her protagonist to face, and Welty's indirection in disclosing 
the historical time serves to emphasize the fact that such 
disruptions are cyclic, not confined to any one age. The "new 
frontier" resembled that of the early nineteenth century in 
its division and violence. Yet the spirit of the 1960s was 
even more threatening to expectations of human order than that 
of the early 1800s had been. No longer did citizens think of 
building a unified nation; the populace seemed bent on 
dismantling all traditionally unified structure. We can 
therefore accurately characterize this era, one in which "the 
center did not hold," as a chronotope of the centrifuge. 
In keeping with this chronotope, the novel departs 
stylistically from the opulent detail and experimental layers 
of Welty's earlier novels. The prose is stripped and meager. 
No music sounds except for a lone, mocking trumpet in the 
dying night of Mardi Gras in New Orleans, the incessant song 
of the mockingbird in the Mississippi town of Mt. Salus, and 
everywhere the noise of people "blundering." The form of 
Welty's final fictional letter to the world fits precisely the 
world through which the protagonist, Laurel McKelva Hand, 
travels. For Laurel travels light, having made few 
commitments since the early death of her husband, Philip Hand. 

243 
As the plot unfolds, Laurel loses the one other human 
connection in her life, her father, Judge Clinton McKelva, the 
traditional optimist of the title. We recall that Jack Jordan 
Renfro in Losing 
Battles 
assumed that loss could not hurt him 
as long as he still had his family. Laurel's situation tests 
that belief. What happens when all family is lost, as well 
as everything else? Deprived of intimate human connection and 
even ejected from the family home, Laurel faces the fact that 
she is at last an orphan, completely alone in the world. Even 
as she recognizes her altered condition, she also receives the 
full impact of the change in the traditional belief system 
that governed her upbringing, a change so profound that she 
cannot begin to imagine how to confront it. The Judge's 
surgery in New Orleans for a torn retina in his right eye, his 
inexplicable decline and death in the hospital, his funeral 
back home in Mt. Salus, Mississippi, and its aftermath for 
Laurel prompt Laurel to an elegiac meditation on the nature of 
humanity, memory, and time itself. Her meditation leads her 
through a private journey of rage, despair, revelation, and 
renewal that enlarges her vision, penetrates the shield of her 
locked heart, and enables her to start over again the 
difficult and dangerous job of building a life in an 
unfamiliar world. 
Employing a technique by now familiar to us, Welty 
recreates Laurel's experience through dialectical opposition 
of characters and times and imagery of fire and hands, as well 

244 
as through intertextual allusions. Certain characters embody 
the values of past and present, and suggest the shape of the 
future. Most obvious among the paired foils are Laurel and 
her step-mother, Fay Chisom McKelva, almost the same age but 
products of completely different worlds. Among the minor male 
characters, pairs from different worlds emphasize common 
values important to survival in difficult times. In efforts 
to reconstruct their pasts, all the pairs highlight the 
fallibility of memory. Even more startling and equally 
revealing is the dichotomy created between artificial human 
time and natural solar-lunar time. In the four weeks needed 
for the plot to unfold, the human time of man-made watches, 
clocks, and calendars governs Laurel's movements. But even as 
the minutes tick off in the earth-bound world of Mt. Salus, 
Mississippi, subtle allusions and misdirections in the human 
time of the plot point to a natural world in which the 
patterns of time and experience repeat themselves endlessly. 
The frequent allusions to similar observations by other 
creative artists in other times and places (there are more 
than the Wilder references) strengthen the novel's submerged 
assertion that individuals survive change best by comparing 
their personal and cultural vicissitudes to the larger pattern 
of recurring change in human history and natural processes. 
"All things fall and are built again" (Yeats 566, 1.35). 

245 
A TRIO OF PROTECTORS 
In conveying the lost spirit of the American past, Welty 
uses fire imagery to characterize two minor characters who in 
different ways share Judge Clinton McKelva's strength and 
limitation. Like the Judge, Mr. Dalzell, the hunter, and 
Major Bullock, the soldier, are protectors of a way of life. 
Despite the extreme difference in their social classes, both 
men—Mr. Dalzell, the judge's hospital roommate, and Major 
Bullock, the judge's long-time family friend—explicitly 
acknowledge the ancient, invaluable element of fire. Fire 
represents for them a substitute for the sun, a powerful life 
force in the natural world. We remember in The 
Robber 
Bridegroom 
the deification of the Natchez Great Sun, who 
derives his power from the natural sun. 
Fire has always played an important role in Welty's 
imagery. Starting with her first published story, "Death of a 
Traveling Salesman," Welty associates fire with light, warmth, 
life, and revelation. The ailing salesman, Mr. R. J. Bowman, 
is set to "trembling" at the hearth of a primitive cabin when 
his Promethean host and benefactor, Sonny, enters with his 
"borry[ed]" fire trailing behind him (CS 127). Bowman drinks 
Sonny's home-made moonshine "just as though he were drinking 
the fire off the hearth." "This is good," he announces. 
"This is what I needed" (CS 128). But Bowman's comfort is 
short-lived. As he lies by the fire trying to sleep, he 
thinks of the couple in the home—Sonny and his pregnant wife 

246 
—and slowly realizes the great secret contained in the 
primitive house: "a fruitful marriage," "the ancient 
communication between two people" (CS 129) . In contrast, the 
emptiness of his own life fills him with emotion and makes him 
wish that the coming child were his own (CS 129) . But as dark 
night presses in, the fire grows fainter. For Mr. Bowman, who 
is well and truly "lost," revelation comes too late for 
action; before dawn, his diseased heart explodes and consigns 
him to oblivion. 
In The Optimist's 
Daughter, 
Mr. Dalzell also lies in the 
dark, along with Judge McKelva. He is "blind, and nearly 
deaf" (OD 20) and, like Judge McKelva, he is dying. While 
Judge McKelva no longer bothers even to speak, Mr. Dalzell 
speaks as much as possible during his final days, but he 
speaks only out of his past. His monologues resurrect past 
hunting trips and repeated admonitions to his "long-lost" son, 
Archie Lee. Over and over, Mr. Dalzell prods Archie to keep 
alert: "You gonna load that gun or you rather be caught 
napping?" Even more important is the need to tend the fire: 
"Don't let the fire go out, son!" (OD 28, 29). Unlike Mr. 
Bowman, however, who seemed never to have realized how close 
he was to death, who wanted desperately only to "get back to 
where he had been before" (CS 129) , Mr. Dalzell senses the 
nearness of his final destination. As he is taken from his 
room for the operation which will prove futile, he mutters, 
"Told you rascals not to let the fire go out" (OD 31). 

247 
Mr. Dalzell's remarks give us some insight into the 
feelings of Judge McKelva, who speaks rarely and then not at 
all in the hospital room. The Judge has protected his family 
and community not with guns but with the high ideals of man-
made law. But law has not prepared him to function in a 
changed cultural context any better than his friends can. 
Laurel senses that he is merely concentrating on time passing, 
even counting off the minutes, as his inner fire flickers ever 
more faintly. In his blindness, the old "optimist" at last 
sees through even his final illusion that he can "save" Fay or 
anyone at all. The Judge has entered what E. M. Forster calls 
the "twilight of the double vision," the state in which "the 
horror of the universe and its smallness are both visible at 
the same time" (Passage 
to India 207); and he is arrested 
there. Like Mrs. Moore in Passage 
to India, 
the Judge 
withdraws with his knowledge, losing all desire to communicate 
in any way with anyone (OD 150). Realizing that he can never 
get back to exactly where he has been, he cannot accept a 
basis for going forward at all. 
The Judge's old family friend Major Bullock does, of 
course, continue to nourish the illusion of the protector. 
His methods resemble Mr. Dalzell's in their special attention 
to guns and fires, the mainstays of past times. At Judge 
McKelva's funeral, Major Bullock reenacts a past which 
required guns for defense and fires for important occasions 
(OD 80, 65). But since the illusion he still cherishes is the 

248 
one Judge McKelva finally relinquished before death, Major 
Bullock's optimism is presented as ironically temporary. For 
he believes that he can.in some way "help" Fay, the Judge's 
now apparently defenseless young widow—who is in reality an 
unresponsive creature of values foreign to him. In past 
times, the obligation of the family friend to assist in times 
of trouble had been clear-cut and easily assumed. That such 
assistance might be useless and unwanted is a fact as 
incomprehensible to Major Bullock as it would be to any other 
thoroughly conventional man of his community, even to such an 
isolated and unworldly farmer as Grandpa Chisom. 
Grandpa Chisom, Fay's paternal grandfather, is compared 
to Mr. Dalzell by Fay in her first reference to an individual 
member of her family. Although she has claimed that her 
family were all dead and that her grandpa died in her arms, he 
appears at the Judge's funeral very much alive, as do members 
of Fay's maternal family. Grandpa Chisom, a farmer, resembles 
Mr. Dalzell only in his close relationship to the land. He 
has a clearer sense of his bearings than do the other men, but 
he has kept it by secluding himself in Bigbee, Mississippi, a 
place hard to find on a map and miles away from even the 
crossroads through which a bus to town passes. Grandpa Chisom 
is obviously alone, self-sufficient, and polite, in the old 
courtly, back-country-gentleman style. He leaves his pecan 
trees and anchoring farm when duties owed to the dead create 
the need, but he hardly knows the modern world beyond his 

249 
farm. "Where I got lost," he explains, "is after I got inside 
of Mount Salus" (OD 77). In his willed innocence (and 
consequently diminished understanding), he is unable to 
distinguish Laurel from Fay. Throughout the day he bestows 
his gift and his familial kiss on Laurel, asking no questions 
and expecting no reply. Grandpa Chisom has finished with the 
world outside Bigbee. Like Clement Musgrove in The 
Robber 
Bridegroom, 
who clings to Rodney's Landing after his romantic 
illusions are shattered, Grandpa Chisom knows his safe place 
and stays in it. He elects to "squint," however much that 
reduces the light of reality reaching his eyes. The 
"something bright"—in his restricted life as well as in his 
"old man's hatband"—is "the other half of his roundtrip 
ticket from Bigbee" (OD 96), taking him back to his retreat. 
Although this generation of protectors exemplifies 
different classes, professions, and illusions, their extended 
families are almost identical. Their sons or sons-in-law are 
inept, missing, or dead; their daughters or daughters-in-law 
are crippled in some way; some of their sons and grandsons are 
diminished and suicidal. The broods headed by Mr. Dalzell's 
daughter (inversely called "Mama") and Grandpa Chisom's 
daughter-in-law, Mrs. Chisom, belong to that "great 
interrelated family of those who never know the meaning of 
what has happened to them" (OD 84). Both women cluster their 
families around them and insistently deny the realities of 
modern life. "Mama," for example, resists modern medical 

250 
treatment, preferring her versions of old wives' tales. Her 
personal belief that all dying folks should have water prompts 
her to declare war on the hospital staff, if necessary, to 
moisten the throat of her dying father. With equal dogmatism 
and confidence, Mrs. Chisom expounds similar unexamined 
theories, slightly adapted to conform with the modern consumer 
world and its emphasis on packaging: widows must make a great 
show of grief in order to express it; high-priced coffins 
signify the depth of the family's love; familial devotion can 
be maintained only by physical proximity. No issue is too 
vast or too complex for Mr. Dalzell's daughter, Mama, or for 
Mrs. Chisom; their personal experience covers it all—they 
assume. 
With their fathers and grandfathers dying, absent, or 
destroyed, it is inevitable that the older sons in these two 
families will be well nigh defenseless in the face of their 
families' backwardness and the unremitting demands of the 
modern world. Without any of the fire so carefully guarded by 
their elders, both sons fix upon suicide as an escape. While 
Mr. Dalzell in his hospital room retreats to the past and 
speaks endlessly of passing humanity's torch for safekeeping 
to his young son, Archie Lee, the now middle-aged Archie sits 
in the hospital waiting room and methodically drinks whiskey 
from a pint bottle, sullenly pursuing the slow suicidal path 
he has chosen. Finding talk useless, he refuses to take his 
turn for a last visit with his father and petulantly mutters 

251 
that "Mama" (who is actually his sister though he speaks to 
her as if she were his mother) would do a greater service to 
their father by just shutting up. Archie Lee has long since 
been lost to his father and the rest of the world alike. For 
the practice of a simple country life is not possible in the 
second half of the twentieth century, for someone without 
financial means. To avoid all aspects of modern life, to hunt 
and live off the land, is not an option for Archie. With no 
land, no education, no natural gifts, and no habits of mind 
except denial and escape, Archie has anesthetized himself for 
the duration, sullenly waiting to die and have done with it. 
Mrs. Chisom's oldest boy, Roscoe, had been less patient. 
Fay's brother had already committed suicide by the quick and 
simple method of closing off the kitchen windows and turning 
on the gas. Mrs. Chisom's grief at the time had been somewhat 
mitigated by the fact that "he didn't do nothing any more 
serious to harm his looks. . . . In his coffin he was pretty 
as a girl" (OD 75). The irony of her evasive consolation 
illustrates her comfort with show rather than substance, a 
pattern to be duplicated later in her widowed daughter's show 
of grief. 
Mrs. Chisom's other sons continue to live in trailers 
drawn around their mother's house; their replication of a 
nineteenth-century wagon train drawn in a tight circle for 
protection implies that they are stuck forever in the past. 
DeWitt, the one son who, according to Fay, "talks my 

252 
language," is an appliance repairman who never repairs 
anything (OD 98). Broken-down machines accumulate in his yard 
while he sulks in his trailer, complaining that not enough 
attention is paid to his feelings. Fay's brother Bubba, who 
has at least accompanied his mother to the funeral, runs a 
wrecking business which consumes almost all his time. The 
youngest Chisom male at the funeral, Mrs. Chisom's ten-year-
old grandson Wendell, exudes an air of inquisitive innocence, 
the only Chisom there who elicits some positive feeling from 
Laurel. But even as young as Wendell is, he has already 
absorbed the Chisom motto, proclaimed on a tin "bumper 
sticker" on their pick-up truck: "Do unto others before they 
do unto you" (OD 90). Dressed in his cowboy suit with double 
holster and guns, he quickly offers to shoot any "bad man" who 
makes his Aunt Fay cry. His parting shot to the McKelva home 
is literally that: "Pow, pow, pow," sound his guns as he 
sways in the back of the pick-up truck, heading back to 
Madrid, Texas (OD 100). 
The name "Madrid" is significant here. For, we remember, 
it is associated with the New Madrid earthquakes and the year 
of the annus mirabilis, 
1811-1812, when movement of the earth, 
originating in southeastern Missouri, was so great that it 
caused the Mississippi River to run backward, flooding the 
land and disrupting life even in the states of Mississippi and 
Tennessee. The allusion to New Madrid, coupled with the 
wrecking business run by Bubba Chisom, can scarcely be more 

253 
suggestive in its implication. The destructive power of the 
Chisom family, reaching its zenith in Fay, has the potential 
for just such far-reaching devastation, intruding as it does 
on this Mississippi community. 
HAND 
In contrast to all the other men in the novel stands 
Laurel's idealized mental image of Philip Hand, her long-dead 
husband who remains for her a moral example for the modern 
world. Laurel characterizes him as the one member of her 
family able to "do" things—with his hands, his head, and his 
artistic ability. Throughout the first section of the novel, 
Welty introduces images of human hands carrying out basic 
functions essential to a fully realized, civilized life. 
Welty's frequent use of the trope of hands, explicitly 
associated with Philip Hand, makes it almost too obvious that 
the dead Philip represents a model of a worthy and admirable 
man, who never closes his eyes to the world around him. 
In the opening pages of the novel, for example, repeated 
references to the hands of the male characters demonstrate 
functions of the hand and, in the cases of Judge McKelva and 
Dr. Courtland, round put their characterizations by evoking a 
time and community when trust was taken for granted among men 
who were both responsible and competent ("handy"). For 
example, a hand holds or grasps, as Judge McKelva holds his 
glasses "in his hand," preparatory to his eye examination. 

254 
When Dr. Courtland enters the room, the two men shake "hands" 
(OD 3), a social act symbolizing a promise of friendship or 
agreement. This symbolic act depends not so much on legal 
contracts written out by hand as on a traditional faith in the 
honesty and good will of the two individuals involved. Dr. 
Courtland's "big country hands" (OD 4) characterize him as a 
man with a large and practiced capacity for hard, physical 
accomplishment. In the judge's case, Laurel remembers him as 
demonstrating less strength and practice in physical work, as 
"holding the shears in both hands," he had earlier attempted 
inexpertly to prune a bush in his back yard (OD 6). The 
Judge's strength lies, rather, in another function of the 
hand, that of exercising authority and "handing on" traditions 
or laws: before he retired from the bench, he used "to hand 
down" a sentence (OD 7). In the present, however, Judge 
McKelva submits himself to the doctor; "I . . . put myself in 
your hands" (OD 10). For Dr. Courtland exhibits not only 
physical skill, but the moral ability to care for, and 
supervise the fate of, another human being, to model the "good 
hands" that we trust to "handle" our affairs. "xI'm in good 
hands, Fay,' Judge McKelva told her" (OD 11). 
But for Laurel, Philip Hand had the best hands. Like Dr. 
Courtland's, Philip's were "large, good hands," bespeaking the 
character of the Ohio country boy he had been. Even more 
striking than Dr. Courtland's, however, were Philip's 
"extraordinary thumbs—double-jointed where they left the 

255 
palms, nearly at right angles; their long, blunt tips curved 
strongly back." To Laurel his "right hand" when it went 
"about its work" looked "like the Hand of his name" (OD 161) . 
Laurel's respect for the hand is clear. Though we take 
the human hand for granted, Welty reminds us that it is a 
distinct feature of humanity; the hand's opposable thumb is 
the major source of our ability to become fully human. Out of 
the hand's capacity to make and use tools has grown the 
brain's capacity for continuous development of intelligence. 
In perhaps its most magnificent function, the human hand began 
the process of recording and preserving human history, in 
pictures and in written words. In ancient days, God himself 
was represented as a hand extended from heaven. 
It is Phil, too, whose hands could create; as Laurel 
explains, Phil had "the gift of his hands." 
The work of his 
hands, was "sound and beautiful" (OD 175, 176). By his 
example—"to work toward and into . . . [a] pattern, not to 
sketch peripheries"—Philip had taught Laurel to make the most 
of her gift, too. Even though he had acknowledged readily the 
truth that nothing made by humans can last, he had designed 
"houses to stand, to last, to be lived in" (OD 162). 
Fulfilling his obligation to his country, he had taken his 
gift of hands to war, disdaining the safe but passive role he 
might have occupied as an army engineer, in camouflage, to go 
directly into the territory of the enemy on a "mine sweeper in 
the Pacific." "I like to see a thing finished," he had 

256 
explained. Appropriately, he had become a "communications 
officer" on the ship (OD 161-62, 162). In a final irony for 
the man with the gift of hands, Phil had been killed when an 
enemy plane had come even closer than needed "to shake hands 
with" (OD 162). By thus inverting the usual association of 
the handshake—the mutual respect and trust demonstrated by 
Judge McKelva and Dr. Courtland—Welty adds yet another 
violent reminder of the modern reign of distrust and disorder. 
The breadboard made by Philip, for Laurel a symbol of the 
"whole solid past" with which Laurel confronts Fay, represents 
as well products of the artist's hands. Philip's creations 
were not only practical and useful; they were beautiful as 
well, "made on the true" to remain for decades "as straight as 
his T-square" (OD 175, 176). In its combination of all the 
human gifts of imagination and craftsmanship, the breadboard 
represents for Laurel the values of a lifetime, its creator 
the epitome of all that is best in the human creature. The 
existence of the breadboard gives proof that Laurel's life 
itself has had value. For, thinks Laurel, the past "has been 
everything and done everything to me, everything for me" (OD 
179) . It is little wonder that Laurel, in her confrontation 
with Fay, lifts the breadboard overhead, "out of Fay's reach" 
and, like Ishmael during the destruction of the Pequod, 
clings 
to it as to "a raft in the waters" (OD 111) . 
If the 
breadboard and the values it represents cannot be saved from 
desecration, if time itself destroys the work of human hands— 

257 
work meant to stand forever, if people now deny or denigrate 
the past, then for what purpose has Phil's life been 
sacrificed? What has been the point of her own sacrificial 
existence? Those are the issues at stake for Laurel in this 
crucial scene. 
In her despair, Laurel experiences the final revelation, 
one received, not—like the first—through dreams, but rather 
through the saving grace of memory. Although she "had been 
ready to hurt Fay," to sink to Fay's pitiful fighting level, 
Laurel does not. For "such is the strangeness of the mind, it 
had been the memory of the child Wendell that had prevented 
her" (OD 178). Only four days before, Fay's little nephew 
Wendell had entered Laurel's view; he was open-mouthed, "about 
seven, fair and frail," his face as yet "unguarded" (OD 69, 
70). Wendell's feelings are still fully intact: curiosity 
about Judge McKelva's funeral and about his Uncle Roscoe's 
death, sadness for his grandmother's sad story, and joyful 
exuberance at the sight of his paternal great-grandfather, 
Grandpa Chisom. To Laurel, who wanted to guard the child from 
his destructive family, Wendell was like "a young, undriven, 
unfalsifying, unvindictive Fay" (OD 76). The memory of his 
face and feelings restores Laurel's own feelings, unlocks her 
heart. And with the memory comes her final understanding 
about the past. The past is dead, is "impervious" to either 
praise or blame. But human memory acts as a "somnambulist," 
unconsciously carrying from the past what may be needed in the 

258 
living present. Memory, unlike the past, is not impervious to 
"wounds"; precisely by virtue of its vulnerability "to the 
living moment," memory continues to live (OD 179). Despite 
its injuries, memory can still deliver some moment of the past 
to relieve the suffering of the human heart in the present. 
As important to Laurel as all of Philip Hand's other 
virtues is his capacity for love. Of all the characters in 
the novel, he is the one whose heart remains vulnerable to 
life's possibilities. We learn this from Philip's own voice, 
as recreated in Laurel's memory on the night she begins to 
feel again. In raising up the past, Laurel discovers "Phil 
himself—here waiting, all the time, Lazarus. He looked at 
her out of eyes wild with the craving for his unlived life, 
with mouth open like a funnel's" (OD 154). Laurel had 
survived his death by locking up the memory of him in a stain-
defying shroud of perfection. Her heart had become a closed 
casket for her perfect companion and for all the feelings that 
had accompanied their lives together. To protect that 
perfection, Laurel had effectively buried herself with her 
dead. But on this final night in her family home, confronted 
with the tangible evidence of the life that had existed in it, 
Laurel is overwhelmed by a "flood of feeling" (OD 154). And 
"yielding at last" the iron effort of control required to 
suppress that feeling, Laurel finds that the "deepest spring 
in her heart had uncovered itself, and it began to flow again" 
(OD 154) . 

259 
In the midst of the flow, even as she imagines the things 
that might have spoiled that perfection "If 
Phil 
had 
lived," 
Laurel hears Phil's voice: "Laurel! Laurel! Laurel! . . . I 
wanted it! . . . I wanted it!" (OD 154-55). His voice circles 
"around the house and around the house" and becomes "a roar," 
reminiscent of the famous Marabar Caves scene in Forster's 
Passage 
to India. 
There the indiscriminate magnification of 
sound became an echo that could "undermine" one's "hold on 
life" (Passage 
149). There old Mrs. Moore had sensed the 
ultimate reality: "Pathos, piety, courage—they exist, but 
are identical, and so is filth" (Passage 
149). And there the 
young Adela Quested had suffered something like "an 
hallucination" which enabled her eventually to recognize the 
truth about herself, that she had been "living at half 
pressure," just on the surface of life (Passage 
239), had 
adopted a near-permanent squint, Eudora Welty might say. But 
the experience of the Marabar Caves helped her to correct her 
squint, to live again at full pressure with open eyes and 
vulnerable heart. Laurel's experience is almost identical. 
Laurel, too, has fled from life, is "half-dead" with her 
"frozen memory" (Carson 137, 152). The revelation in her 
mother's old sewing room corrects her "squint," reopens her 
heart, and nudges her back toward life. 

260 
CLOCK-CALENDAR TIME VS. SOLAR-LUNAR TIME 
In order to place Laurel's experience of historic time in 
the larger perspective of cosmic time that Welty envisions for 
her final protagonist, The Optimist's 
Daughter moves beyond 
the mythical associations with time that we have seen in 
Welty's earlier works. By the 1960s many people felt 
themselves already in touch with a future that seemed to 
obliterate the need for mythologies from the past, 
traditionally used by human communities to sustain them in the 
confusing present and to provide hope for the future. Humans 
now were journeying into space to explore scientifically the 
mysterious heavenly bodies whose constellations had for so 
long mesmerized and reassured earth-bound creatures. In such 
an environment, Welty de-emphasizes the old myths as gauges of 
ultimate reality and turns instead to empirical knowledge of 
the natural world for time references in the rhetoric of the 
novel. Using a characteristic technique, she develops in the 
novel a dichotomy between artificial time, ordered by the 
human ingenuity of clock and calendar calculations, and 
natural time, ordered by the constant cyclic patterns of 
earth, sun, moon, and stars. By the novel's end, the clock-
calendar time of her fictional microcosm has, in fact, been 
firmly absorbed by macrocosmic solar-lunar time. Accordingly, 
the novel's final scene, as we have mentioned, affirms a 
larger perspective on human experience in time, placing it in 
the context of reassuringly constant cycles of natural time. 

261 
In The Optimist's 
Daughter, 
Laurel McKelva Hand's 
consciousness of time evolves from an initial anxious concern 
with every moment of clock time to a final liberating sense of 
release from clock time altogether. Welty evokes this 
consciousness for the reader through subtle references to time 
measurement units and casual allusions to holidays and 
festivals, all of which help to measure the duration of events 
in the plot. But as we come to see, these references not only 
raise questions about what appears to be a realistic depiction 
of historic time, but also insistently highlight the 
unreliability of the clock and calendar time created by 
humanity to order its civil business. As Laurel experiences 
the progressive death, loss or destruction of father, home, 
belongings, and cherished memories, the language of the novel 
moves more surely away from clock time and into solar-lunar 
time. In modernist fashion, Welty holds back explicit comment 
on the implications of her language, expecting her readers to 
look closely at the temporal details of her plot for 
provocative and apparently implausible information that will 
illuminate a range of meaning in the persistent allusions to 
time. That information, as usual in Welty's work, is 
topically specific, requiring in this case some recourse to 
technicalities of time measurement. Further, the information 
is presented both indirectly and fragmentally, as revelation 
comes to us in life. Our tenacious participation is 
justified, therefore, as we discover that the shift thus 

262 
revealed from artificial to natural time confirms the positive 
thrust of Welty's closing view on the means to human survival 
in time's destructive stream. The final scene portrays 
Laurel, like Job, stripped of everything in her familiar 
world, but nonetheless emerging triumphantly into a solar-
lunar time of spring renewal and revived hope in life's 
promise. 
To illustrate Welty's method, we must follow her through 
some of the complicated calculations that attend her allusions 
to time. Indeed, we must first distinguish her two meanings 
for the word "time." So far throughout this study, we have 
noted Welty's use of time in its sense as "epoch"—as an era, 
a location in history. But in The Optimist's 
Daughter, 
Welty 
also uses time as "interval"—as measurement of the passage of 
time. In ancient cultures, such measurement followed the 
cycles of the sun, the moon, the stars, the seasons—natural 
time markers important and easily accessible to a 
predominantly agricultural world. These cycles accounted for 
the natural time divisions of the day, the month, and the 
year. Over the course of history, nations and cultures have 
tried, in varying degrees, to devise artificial ways to 
measure nature's cycles of time consistently enough to 
accommodate the regular patterns of their lives. 
Only in the modern period have human societies all over 
the world been persistently forced to regulate and standardize 
measurement of even the tiniest intervals of time, a move that 

263 
has required considerable human and mechanical calculation. 
For despite its regular rhythms, the natural world does not 
move in intervals nearly so precise as those required by 
modern science and industrial nations.1 Thus, humans have 
developed ever more complicated versions of what is here 
referred to as artificial time, that time, for example, by 
which the date of the vernal equinox is determined by a 
mathematical formula rather than by the always changing actual 
times that the sun intersects the celestial equator in any 
given year. Succeeding centuries have always artificially 
"corrected" solar-lunar time in order to create various 
calendars that serve the religious and civil needs of human 
communities. The twentieth century has merely intensified and 
standardized increasingly minute time measurements in order to 
serve systems necessarily adapted to machines and computers.2 
'See Goudsmit and Claiborne, Chapter 3, for a more 
detailed explanation. In brief, natural units of time—the 
day, the month, the year—are based on recurrent astronomical 
cycles; but the astronomical cycles of the natural world "do 
not fit neatly together" (58). The day comes from the earth's 
"24-hour rotation on its axis," but the rotation is sometimes 
slow, sometimes fast (55). The month is measured by phases of 
the moon, but since the full lunar cycle is slightly over 29 
1/2 days, the year's accumulation becomes not 12 months but 12 
1/3 months. The year, produced by earth's revolution around 
the sun, results in 365 and 1/4 days rather than the 365 days 
that grace our calendar (58-59). Only once every 19 years do 
the erratic cycles of sun and moon assume the same "phase 
relationship" to each other (59). These figures have caused 
calendar makers trouble for at least 5,000 years (58). 
2For details of calendar constructions and "corrections," 
see Goudsmit and Claiborne, especially pages 58-75. Just 
recently, scientists have been forced to add "leap seconds" to 
clock time: the last "leap second" was inserted on June 30, 
1997. 

264 
We will first examine the changing nature of calendar 
time in The Optimist's 
Daughter, 
a need indicated by Welty's 
references to the holiday of George Washington's birthday and 
to the festival of Mardi Gras, the only calendar events 
mentioned, other than Straw Hat Day. The holiday reference 
appears early in the novel when Judge McKelva explains that on 
Washington's birthday he had suffered his eye "disturbance"— 
flashes of light that made him think he had "started seeing 
behind" himself (OD 4-5). Contemporary American readers know 
the date of Washington's birthday to be February 22, for that 
is the date marked on their calendars. But Washington was 
actually born on February 11. His birth-date shifted in 1752, 
when England and her colonies finally accepted the Gregorian 
calendar, the "corrections" that Pope Gregory XIII had made in 
1582—170 years earlier—to the Julian calendar (Couderc 190). 
One of his corrections had been to eliminate ten days from the 
current year. By the time England and her colonies finally 
adopted the Gregorian calendar, they had to drop eleven full 
days rather than ten from their current year. At that time, 
then, George Washington's New Style calendar birthday became 
February 22. In other corrections, ones that yield 
information relevant to the end of The Optimist's 
Daughter, 
Pope Gregory had also moved the date of the new year back to 
January 1 and had reestablished March 21 as the date of the 
vernal equinox. Under earlier corrections to the Julian 

265 
calendar, March 2 5 had marked the beginning of the new year as 
well as the date of the vernal equinox. Under this Old Style 
calendar, each new year had begun on March 25 (Goudsmit and 
Claiborne 74). 
By themselves, these oddities of history raised by the 
reference to Washington's birth-date would seem insignificant. 
However, the next reference given to date the plot is Mardi 
Gras, a marker for the beginning of the period of Lent and the 
ensuing celebration of Easter Sunday, the sacred days of the 
most important "Moveable Feast" in the Christian world. 
Western readers are thus likely to assume automatically that 
the novel has a Christian theme of death followed by 
resurrection—especially in view of the emphasis on biblical 
mythology in Welty's previous novel, Losing 
Battles. 
Yet the 
scant details about time in the plot of The 
Optimist's 
Daughter contradict this initial assumption. 
Judge McKelva dies on the last night of Mardi Gras— 
Shrove Tuesday, and his body is carried home to Mt. Salus on 
the next day, the first day of Lent—Ash Wednesday. Although 
Lent always begins on the Wednesday following the last night 
of Mardi Gras, the date varies from year to year, depending on 
the date set for Easter. This date is also an artificial, 
variable, human-made date, one that must fall "within a 35-day 
period between March 22 and April 25," at least in Western 
churches (Ford 560). The necessity for the artificial date 

266 
stems, of course, from the incompatibilities of calendar 
cycles and astronomical cycles.3 
Yet Judge McKelva's death cannot realistically be 
connected to an actual Easter date because he does not die 
early enough to allow for the period of Lent before Easter. 
The Judge sees the doctor in "early March," undergoes surgery 
to repair his retina immediately, but dies in the hospital 
after "three weeks." A three-week hospital stay, beginning in 
early March, carries the characters at least to March 21, the 
calendar date of the vernal equinox. But Lent—the forty-day 
penance period preceding Easter Sunday—must always begin 
before the date of the vernal equinox in order to meet the 
formula requirements that set April 25 as the very latest date 
that Easter Sunday could ever be celebrated.4 
Therefore, an 
Easter motif could work only if Judge McKelva had died just 
two weeks into the hospital stay. 
Since we cannot assume an absent-minded mistake in 
Welty's calculations, the reference to Mardi Gras must be seen 
to serve a purpose different from its usual one; in this case, 
3Since the Council of Nice, 325 A.D., the Easter date has 
been calculated by a mathematical formula involving an 
astronomical date to signify the vernal equinox, a full moon 
to mark the Jewish Passover month, and a following Sunday to 
note the Christian holy day celebrating Christ's resurrection 
(Ford 560; Goudsmit and Claiborne 58-60, 107). By averaging 
over several years the dates on which the astronomical day 
(extending from noon to noon) is perfectly balanced between 
light and dark, scientists have been able to approximate times 
for the equinoxes, spring and autumn. 
4Such a late Easter last occurred in 1943. 

267 
it does not introduce the Christian holy days of penance 
before the Easter revival of life, but rather it calls 
attention to the pagan origins of those holy days. The night 
of Shrove Tuesday especially is the one in which the Dionysian 
origins of Mardi Gras are most imitated, and the inversion 
theme of the festival's revelry reaches its zenith. For a 
night, at least, traditional human order is overturned; human 
behavior becomes Dionysian—uninhibited and out of control. 
It is just such uncontrolled behavior on the part of Fay 
Chisom McKelva, who aches to join the riotous throngs in the 
street, that finally causes Judge McKelva's death. In her 
frustration, she "lays hands" on the Judge, though the doctor 
has ordered that the patient lie perfectly motionless until 
his treatment is complete. In a fitting irony, moreover, we 
discover that this particular Mardi Gras night marks the date 
of Fay's birth. Early in the novel, then, Fay is associated 
with the disruption and inversion of traditional order that 
culminate in the disenfranchisement of her step-daughter, 
Laurel. 
For Welty's purpose in the novel, Mardi Gras and the 
month of March itself not only draw attention to questions of 
artificial time and solar-lunar cycles, but also emphasize the 
image of a world turned war-like and upside-down. The month 
of March, after all, honors Mars, the god of war. The Judge's 
New Orleans death, occurring at the culmination of Mardi Gras 
festivities, sets the stage for Fay's inheritance and her 

268 
apparent victory over Laurel in all matters pertaining to her 
father, her parents' belongings, and her family home. 
Laurel's subsequent loss of control over every part of the 
world that has ordered her life marks an extremity of 
deprivation and defeat. 
But indirectly, Welty develops—through the dichotomy of 
time allusions and their ensuing revelations of clock and 
calendar time's instability—a thematic motif of Old Style 
renewal. Laurel shifts from an almost obsessive concern with 
artificial units of time measurement during the hospital vigil 
in New Orleans to a consideration of natural units of time 
measurement when she is alone at Mt. Salus, fully aware that 
nothing remains for her of the material and cultural world in 
which she was raised. During the hospital stay, when time for 
her is governed by clocks and watches, Laurel refers only to 
artificial divisions: "It's three weeks," 
she says to Dr. 
Courtland of her father's hospital stay (OD 24, 
emphasis 
mine). 
She and Fay divide each day into eight-hour segments 
(OD 17, emphasis mine). As Laurel reads to her father, she 
checks off time, "moment after moment" 
(OD 25, emphasis mine). 
But after Judge McKelva's funeral in Mt. Salus, the 
language of the novel emphasizes natural divisions of time 
measurement. Laurel feels the "spring 
sun" 
(OD 105, emphasis 
mine). She thinks of this "month" 
in her life. She remembers 
the extraordinary experience of the train ride (discussed in 
the "Introduction") in which, passing over the confluence of 

269 
the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers, she and Phil had felt the 
confluence of "the whole morning 
world," and Laurel had felt 
they would live forever (OD 160, emphasis mine). 
We remember, too, that Old Style Julian calendar-
reckoning dated the beginning of a new year not on January 1, 
but on March 25, the date also proclaimed by the Julian 
calendar as the date of the vernal equinox. Also, we will see 
in the final scene that Laurel, having begun her saga on a 
Monday, also leaves her family home on a Monday, the first day 
of the artificial time unit of the week. She leaves on the 
stroke of noon, which in astronomical time is the beginning of 
the natural time unit of the day—"the morning world," 
figuratively speaking. 
The time markers given in the plot are not intended to 
specify that it is March 25 when Laurel steps off the porch of 
her family home for the last time. For the whole point is 
that human knowledge cannot precisely determine celestial 
timing. But we know that the date is between March 24 and 
28—appropriately approximating 
the Old Style New Year—and 
that the date is clearly not associated with Easter, as our 
calendar-time consciousness has prompted us to assume 
initially. What is exposed is our illusion that human 
experience can be predicted and measured by human logic. What 
is implied is that we can find reassurance and continuity in 
our human experience of the world only in the cyclical 
patterns of the observable natural universe, cyclical timing 

270 
that is irregular in the short term, yet consistent in the 
long term. When we contemplate this perspective, we 
understand Laurel's perception that experience does finally 
"get set into its right order, which is not always the order 
of other people's 
time 
[societal 
time]" 
(OD 174, emphasis 
mine). 
The expanded consciousness of time that Laurel attains at 
last might be explained best by a pictorial image that subtly 
dominates the McKelva family's living room. On the mantel 
above the fireplace sits a grandfather mantel clock—sometimes 
working, sometimes not—surrounded by three Chinese paintings. 
The sounds of the clock, a subtle "whirr" (OD 178) punctuated 
by striking hours, invade the consciousness in the house. But 
the three Chinese paintings that surround the unreliable clock 
are in a "changeless grouping," featuring scenes of still and 
"motionless" time (OD 73). In Chinese classical tradition, 
the paintings depict, respectively, "cranes in their circle of 
moon, a beggar with his lantern, the poet by a waterfall" (OD 
171). In traditional Chinese landscape painting, each of 
these scenes has specific symbolic meaning. The cranes in the 
light of the moon speak to long life and immortality; the 
beggar with the lantern points to the search for truth and 
enlightenment; the poet—the most-highly respected artist in 
ancient China—arid the waterfall signify the value of art and 
its ability to preserve experience in time and to place it in 
proper perspective. The juxtaposition of the McKelva family's 

271 
grandfather clock and the Chinese landscape paintings places 
time in The Optimist's 
Daughter 
in its proper perspective. 
The symbol of artificial micro-time, technically called "small 
time"—specific intervals of human activity—is surrounded, 
encompassed by symbols of astronomical macro-time, technically 
labelled "big time"—the continuous cyclic rotation of earth, 
the sun and moon to which it is bound, and the countless other 
celestial bodies that make up the cosmos (Sivin 152; Goudsmit 
and Claiborne 123). 
Welty's pictorial image alludes at the same time to the 
celebrated pictorial lines from William Butler Yeats's poem 
"Lapis Lazuli," a recent (and Western) work of art whose theme 
is also replicated in hers. The poet's final lines describe 
a gift he has received, a scene carved into a piece of lapis 
lazuli: 
Two Chinamen, behind them a third, 
Are carved in lapis lazuli, 
Over them flies a long-legged bird, 
A symbol of longevity; 
The third, doubtless a serving-man, 
Carries a musical instrument. 
Every discoloration of the stone, 
Every accidental crack or dent, 
Seems a water-course or an avalanche, 
Or lofty slope where it still snows 
Though doubtless plum or cherry branch 
Sweetens the little half-way house 
Those Chinamen climb towards, and I 
Delight to imagine them seated there; 
There, on the mountain and the sky, 
On all the tragic scene they stare. 
One asks for mournful melodies; 
Accomplished fingers begin to play. 
Their eyes mid many wrinkles, their eyes, 
Their ancient, glittering eyes, are gay. 
(566-67, 1.37-56) 

272 
Moved by the "ascetic, pupil, hard stone," Yeats had written 
of the carved lapis lazuli a year before he wrote the poem. 
The "supreme aim," he had remarked, is an "act of faith and 
reason to make one rejoice in the midst of tragedy" (Friar 
551). That, certainly, describes Laurel's final, liberating 
accomplishment, as she gains the vision of these ancients. It 
is a vision based on the poem's central recognition, that "All 
things fall and are built again / And those that build them 
again are gay" (566, 1.35-36)—exactly the perception freeing 
Laurel for a more complex optimism than her father's, one open 
to change because it allows for time's eventual readjustments. 
Both Welty's novelistic presentation of time and Yeats's 
poetic one awaken the reader to the existence of overarching 
patterns in the natural world that confirm our experience of 
inevitable individual 
loss but continual human renewal. For 
"change, by which we measure time, encompasses everything" 
(Goudsmit and Claiborne 128). This truism is as ancient as 
the earth. But only in modern times, according to Goudsmit and 
Claiborne, with Darwin's publication of The Origin 
of 
Species, 
did the existence of such "big time" become "a concept that 
could no longer be ignored" (126) . As a writer who has never 
"ceased from exploring" time and change, Welty has fashioned 
in her final novel a reminder of both the order and the 
disorder subsumed by time; harmonious melodies and dissonant 
chords both claim their rightful place in the movement of 
time. 

273 
In Welty's world, the heroic human survivor of time's 
effects must be fully conscious of his or her place in time. 
For, explains Welty, it is only in the "sense of our own 
transience" that we may find the "one irreducible urgency 
telling us to do, 
to understand, 
to love" 
(Eye 168, emphasis 
mine). As Welty's most exemplary protagonist faces once more, 
then, the responsibilities accompanying mortality, she 
understands full well time's ravages as well as its gifts— 
memory, attention, and anticipation. If Laurel does not quite 
rejoice as she hurries from her lost family home, neither does 
she falter. For in the few days at Mt. Salus, Laurel has 
experienced a spiritual journey and revelation, leading from 
feelings of anger and despair to rediscovered feelings of love 
and hope. 
While Fay remains in the kitchen with her "squinted up" 
eye, Laurel realizes that memory lives "in the freed hands, 
pardoned and freed, and in the heart that can empty but fill 
again, in the patterns restored by dreams" (OD 179). The 
"patterns restored" and the revelation experienced in her 
final hours at Mt. Salus open Laurel's eyes to the 
implications of the clock and the Chinese paintings in the 
family home. Her human losses in "small time" take their 
rightful and comforting place in the "big time" patterns of 
the natural world. Her vision is that of T. S. Eliot's late 
work: 
We move above the moving tree 
In light upon the figured leaf 

274 
And hear upon the sodden floor 
Below, the boarhound and the boar 
Pursue their pattern as before 
But reconciled among the stars. 
("Burnt Norton" II, 119) 
Humans long for order, for plausible answers to difficult 
questions, for dates that coincide with meaningful intervals, 
for closing lines that leave us feeling undisturbed about the 
universe. But in The Optimist's 
Daughter we see, finally, 
just what Laurel sees: that we can never control Time; that 
whatever knowledge future epochs might produce, we still will 
not be able to answer all our questions about the mysteries of 
life and the natural world;5 that the best we can ever do to 
survive Time is to understand its patterns and our place in 
them, open our hearts to the possibility of love and 
connection, and use the gift of our hands to participate in 
the interval of life we are given. 
Laurel's departure from Mt. Salus suggests just this 
uncertainty about the future, along with the survivor's 
renewal of hope for a new world. The bridesmaids, arriving to 
5To emphasize this epistemological paradox is the function 
of Welty's careful attention to the incompatibility in the 
human mind of equally valid clock time and cosmic time, 
together with her deliberate presentation of certain aspects 
of the plot (the exact physiological circumstances of Judge 
McKelva's death, for example) as apparently ambiguous to 
human logic. All the details of Laurel's psychological 
liberation suggest her awareness of this paradox. Thus, what 
may seem at first reading to be a flaw in Laurel's vision—a 
self-deceptive glossing over of ambiguity—is rather, I 
suggest, her informed ordering of events, based on her 
acceptance of the inevitable ambiguities that exist within 
human time. 

275 
drive Laurel to the airport, sound a "tattoo"—a call to 
quarters, on the car horn. As they drive Laurel past the 
school house, they see Miss Adele and her first-graders in the 
school yard. Miss Adele waves, and so do the school-children. 
Laurel's last sight is "the twinkling of their hands, the many 
small and unknown hands, wishing her goodbye" (OD 180). 
WILDER 
The final scene of The Optimist's 
Daughter 
confirms and 
reinforces Welty's comment on time, humanity, and the 
universe. As Laurel whisks herself out of her old world, 
never to know it again, her friend Tish exclaims, "You'll make 
it by the skin of your teeth" (208 emphasis mine). The 
expression thus refers to a time interval, the smallest 
possible one, perhaps, since it means "only just" or "just 
barely." But the expression comes originally from the book of 
Job in the King James version of the Bible, where the wording 
and the connotation are slightly different. After having been 
"destroyed . . . on every side," the righteous Job questions 
God and asks pity from his friends, for, he says, "I am 
escaped with the skin of my teeth" (Job: 19.10, 20, emphasis 
mine). Since teeth have no skin, Job's description informs us 
that he retains his life, but has been left with nothing else 
at all, a hyperbolic description which equally well fits 
Laurel McKelva Hand. 

276 
Both interpretations of the metaphor apply to Laurel's 
situation, and both apply to that of the protagonists in 
Wilder's play The Skin 
of Our Teeth, 
verifying the allusion I 
mentioned at the outset of this chapter. Welty's prepositional 
stress on the expression's reference to a time interval is 
useful, I think, because that meaning is more familiar to most 
readers and thus more effective in encouraging them to 
contemplate parallels between novel and play. Yet the 
original, biblical stress—on survival bereft of anything 
else—is the more essential implication of Welty's allusion, 
considered in the context of the play as a whole. 
The Skin 
of 
Our Teeth is an allegory in which members of the Antrobus 
family (representing Adam and Eve, their children, and thereby 
all people of all times) repeatedly face and survive—both 
"by" and "with" the skin of their teeth—multiple, literal 
destructions of their material world. In each of the play's 
first two acts, the members of the Antrobus family face the 
coming destruction as they always have: they get up every 
day, do whatever they can to stem the coming tide, and then go 
about their usual business of discovering ways to improve the 
human condition. 
By the beginning of the third act, their familiar 
surroundings have been destroyed once by ice, once by flood, 
and once by prolonged war. Nonetheless, when the third-act 
curtain rises, all the members of the Antrobus family are once 
again in place, ready to start again. Although Mr. Antrobus 

277 
has just about lost the desire for rebuilding, his spirit 
revives when he remembers the things that have always 
sustained him in the past. Especially important to him in his 
severest trials have been his books. Now, in the midst of the 
battlefield rubble that surrounds his home, Mr. Antrobus 
uncovers a few tattered remains of his beloved library. He 
remembers the lonely hours on the battlefield when his only 
comfort was derived from reciting his favorite passages from 
these books. Actors portraying the final hours of the night 
come on stage, and each "Hour" recites one of the comforting 
passages. The memorized words from the world's Great Books 
fill the stage as the Hours of 9, then 10, then 11 o'clock 
sound. On the stroke of midnight, these lines are quoted to 
complete Act III: 
And the Earth was waste and void; And the darkness 
was upon the face of the deep. And the Lord said 
let there be light and there was light. 
(SOOT 249-250) 
At the last word, the stage is plunged into total darkness. 
And then swiftly, before another sound, the lights flash on 
again, and the play starts over from the beginning: Act I, 
Scene 1. 
Welty must surely have had this scene in mind when, in 
1973, she wrote her essay, "Some Notes on Time in Fiction" 
(Eye 163-173). She ends her "Notes" by affirming that time 
itself may well be a novel's subject as demonstrated with the 
examples of Thomas Mann and Marcel Proust. Proust's 
accomplishment she explains in this way: 

278 
Proust, discovering a way to make time give back all it 
has taken, through turning life by way of the memory into 
art, left 
masterpieces 
that are like 
clocks 
themselves, 
giant 
clocks 
stationed 
for always out in the 
world, 
sounding 
for us the high hours of our 
literature. 
(Eye 172, emphasis mine) 
Welty's ending signals Wilder's. Her approach in the 
novel has been to focus on the destruction of the "world" of 
one person's consciousness, rather than to address the issue 
allegorically, as has Wilder, by portraying a literal end and 
new beginning of the entire human race. But as novel and play 
echo each other, their implications are consistent. Welty's 
protagonist enters her new world at high noon, the beginning 
of an astronomical day, near an Old Style calendar's New 
Year's Day, and early in the New Style calendar's spring 
season. Laurel Mckelva Hand's individual experience in an 
interval of time illustrates the great epochal pattern of 
human history which Wilder attempted to capture. Since all 
human systems "fall, and are built again," survivors endure by 
recognizing their time and place in the age-old patterns of 
human history, and by observing those patterns of artificial 
time in the greater context of the astronomical cycles of 
natural time. 
Welty, we remember, resists any squinting which might 
distort or narrow the human eye's field of vision. Such 
narrowing causes human beings to see only the immediate 
circumstance of their own particular day and valley, time and 
place. As we have repeatedly seen Welty demonstrate, in a 
life's work portraying different times and places, true 

279 
survivors must open their eyes fully to the world, facing both 
its beauty—the joy of beloved family and friends, the 
reassurance of familiar cultures—and its terror—the total 
lack of human control over the certain loss and destruction 
that accompany the relentless flow of time. 
Laurel starts over with not one shred of the past 
stability of home and family to steady her. She retains, 
however, the use of her hands and—through memory—the 
intimate connection to life and love that brings comfort to 
the lonely human heart. As she begins life anew, going forth 
to meet the day in time with nature's order, her ensuing 
commitments to life and her readiness to build again are 
inevitable; there is no need to specify them. The novel's 
goal is realized, and with it that of Welty's canon. 
The allusion to Wilder's play completes Welty's pattern 
of timeless and circular renewal in yet one more subtle way. 
Both artists emphasize the importance of fire, the paradoxical 
source of life as well as destruction. In the opening scene 
of The Skin 
of Our Teeth, 
the Antrobus family must "borrow 
fire"; otherwise, it faces extinction in the final moments of 
the ice age. It is this act that reminds us of the pivotal 
scene in Welty's first published story, "Death of a Traveling 
Salesman." For in that short story, we noticed earlier, Mr. 
Bowman asks for help from the primitive couple who must "borry 
fire" to warm their own hearth and to revive the lost and 
confused salesman who has found himself at their door. 

280 
"In my end is my beginning": Eliot's words indeed 
proclaim the pattern thus completed by Welty, as the artist 
herself looks both ways at once in establishing her place 
among the major writers of the twentieth century. 

281 
AFTERWORD 
In writing this study, I have attempted to combat the 
tendency to underestimate Eudora Welty's importance in modern 
literature, a miscalculation based largely on the assumption, 
as I have said earlier, that her work reflects no conscious 
thematic structure. A recent reviewer, discussing the 
critical study Eudora 
Welty's 
Aesthetics 
of Place, 
illustrates 
this tendency: "Perhaps she [Eudora Welty] does not have an 
aesthetics of place, or even a theory of aesthetics in 
general; she is, in any case, a much better writer than 
thinker."1 To counter this attitude (and the resulting 
tendency toward impressionism in general references to Welty's 
work), I have traced discernible patterns in her canon that 
can be described and communicated in classrooms as well as in 
scholarly discussions. 
Welty's patterns become more visible when we apply to her 
work a paradigm of modernism. In most of her texts, she 
focuses on periods of change that consistently illustrate 
inevitable disruption to familiar worlds. Her characters 
register events through subjective individual consciousness of 
intense moments in time rather than as objective duration of 
standardized calendar time in history. However, believing 
with T. S. Eliot that "Only through time time is conquered" 
("Burnt Norton" 120), Welty creates as settings accurate 
^retland, Herion-Sarafidis, and Skei, American 
Literary 
Scholarship, 
1994 (465). 

282 
microcosms of cultures in specific times and places in 
American history, usually in specific sections of Mississippi. 
Also, by means of allusion, intertextuality, or ironic 
juxtaposition, she invokes ancient myth or past times of 
cultural transition that parallel her surface plots and 
pluralize temporal times of disconnection and loss. 
This controlling vision that unites Welty's various 
microcosms of time and place affirms her modernist belief in 
mutability as the dominant pattern of history; yet her vision 
also provides assurance that each human being can find 
continuity in his or her resources of human connection, 
memory, and art. Welty attempts, like Thornton Wilder, to 
find "a value above all price for the smallest events in our 
daily life" by showing how they are set "against the largest 
dimensions of time and place" (Wilder "Preface" xii). The 
challenge to Welty's composite protagonist is to maintain a 
constructive sense of purpose in life even as he or she copes 
with the inevitable loss of cherished cultural syntheses. The 
composite protagonist who develops gradually in Welty's canon 
into an emotionally and spiritually-intact survivor must learn 
first to face reality and comprehend the meaning of his or her 
own experience of it. Further, the fully realized protagonist 
must also lift his or her hands "to make or do" in the 
community even while keeping the heart open and vulnerable to 
the spontaneous experience of life. 

283 
The insights reguisite to surviving change and living 
fully in each transient moment emerge artistically from the 
whole of Welty's work. In The Optimist's 
Daughter, 
Laurel, 
who reflects at one point that "Surviving is perhaps the 
strangest fantasy of them all" (163), recognizes only in the 
final scene with Fay the necessity for keeping the heart open 
so that surviving remains actual life, not fantasy. To 
reiterate the stages of Welty's indirectly-expressed belief, 
explicated in this study, we might return to the example of 
Thornton Wilder's play, The Skin 
of Our Teeth to which the 
final dialogue in The Optimist's 
Daughter points.2 
Wilder's protagonist, Mr. Antrobus, succinctly explains 
the elements that sustain an individual facing the challenge 
of survival. In the final act of the play, as he remembers 
his narrow margins of victory over despair and the temptation 
to give up the struggle to live again, Mr. Antrobus states his 
understanding to his wife, Maggie: 
Now I remember what three things always went together 
when I was able to see things most clearly: three 
things. Three things: 
(He points 
to where SABINA has gone 
out.) 
The voice of the people in their confusion and their 
need. 
And the thought of you and the children and this house. 
And . . . Maggie! I didn't dare ask you: my books! 
They haven't been lost, have they? 
(SOOT 247) 
In Welty's canon, as in Wilder's play, the "confusion" 
most central to human experience occurs when familiar cultures 
2In his "Preface" Wilder acknowledges that this play is 
"deeply indebted to James Joyce's Finnegans 
Wake" (xiv). 

284 
disintegrate, as—for Welty—all cultures must in all times 
and places. The "need" of the people is to find a way to live 
with that loss. For Welty, as for Wilder, the intimate 
connections of family and home supply a strength that allows 
for separation and death. For Mr. Antrobus, alone on his 
battlefields, the "thought" of his loved ones suffices. For 
the ultimate Welty protagonist, Laurel McKelva Hand, who has 
no such human connections left, "memory" corresponds to Mr. 
Antrobus's "thought." As long as it remains "vulnerable to 
the living moment," memory carries across time the abiding 
sense of human identification and love essential to human 
survival in Welty's fiction. In memory, too, live the 
patterns revealed by art, for Welty as for Wilder. Mr. 
Antrobus, in his war-time struggles, names the "hours of the 
night" after authors whose passages have intimated the 
continuity of these three fundamental stays against confusion 
(SOOT 248). Welty, following the modernist method, as I have 
shown, embeds in her works mythology, books, paintings, music, 
dance, and folk art—all available to memory if not to the 
present moment, and all constituting tangible reminders of 
times of shared belief. 
But the final words must be those of the artist Eudora 
Welty, whose vision affirms not just the falling of all things 
but the building again. "Any life," Laurel comes to 
understand, is "nothing but the continuity of its love"; and 
love, as memory, lives "not in initial possession but in the 

285 
freed hands, pardoned and freed, and in the heart that can 
empty but fill again, in the patterns restored by dreams" (OD 
160, 178). 

286 
WORKS CITED 
Audhuy, Letha Wood. "Natchez in French Louisiana and 
Chateaubriand's Epic, The Natchez." 
Natchez 
before 
1830. 
Ed. Noel Polk. Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 
1989. 29-42. 
Bakhtin, M. M. "Forms of Time and of the Chronotope in the 
Novel." 
The Dialogic 
Imagination. 
Ed. Michael Holquist. 
Trans. Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist. Austin: U of 
Texas P, 1981. 84-258. 
Binding, Paul. 
The Still 
Moment, Eudora Welty: 
Portrait 
of a 
Writer. 
London: Virago P, 1994. 
Blake, Nelson M. "Flood Control and Drainage." 
Encyclopedia 
of Southern 
Culture. 
Ed. Charles Reagan Wilson and 
William Ferris. Chapel Hill: U of North Carolina P, 
1989. 335-37. 
Blair, Walter, and Franklin J. Meine, eds. and intro. 
Half 
Horse Half 
Alligator: 
The Growth of the Mike 
Fink 
Legend. 
Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1956. 
Bliss, P. P. "Let the Lower Lights Be Burning." 
The 
Broadman 
Hymnal. 
Ed. B. B. McKinney. Nashville: Broadman P, 
1940. 262. 
Bradbury, Malcolm, and James McFarlane, eds. Modernism 
1890-
1930. 
London: Penguin, 1976. 
Bradford, M. E. "Fairchild as Composite Protagonist in 
Delta 
Wedding." 
Eudora Welty: 
Critical 
Essays. 
Ed. 
Peggy W. Prenshaw. Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 1979. 
201-07. 
Bridgforth, Lucie R. "Natchez Trace." Wilson and Ferris 387. 
Brockett, Oscar G. 
History 
of the Theatre. 
Second Edition. 
Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1974. 
Brookhart, Mary Hughes, and Suzanne Marrs. "More Notes on 
River Country." Mississippi 
Quarterly 
39 (Fall 1986), 
507-519. Rpt. Devlin Life 
82-95. 
Brooks, Cleanth. "Eudora Welty and the Southern Idiom." 
Eudora Welty: 
A Form of Thanks. 
Ed. Louis Dollarhide 
and Ann J. Abadie. Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 1979. 
3-24. 

287 
Brown, Ian W. "Natchez Indians and the Remains of a Proud 
Past." 
Natchez 
before 
1830. 
Ed. Noel Polk. Jackson: 
UP of Mississippi, 1989. 8-28. 
Bryant, J. A., Jr. "The Recovery of the Confident Narrator: 
A Curtain 
of Green to Losing 
Battles." 
Prenshaw 68-82. 
Campbell, Joseph. Flight 
of the Wild Gander: Explorations 
in 
the 
Mythical 
Dimension. 
New York: Viking P, 1969. 
Cantor, Norman F. 
Twentieth-Century 
Culture, 
Modernism 
to 
Deconstruction. 
New York: Peter Lang, 1988. 
Carlton, Harry. "C-O-N-S-T-A-N-T-I-N-0-P-L-E." New York: 
De Sylva, Brown and Henderson, 1928. 
Carson, Barbara Harrell. Eudora Welty: 
Two Pictures 
at Once 
in Her Frame. 
Troy, New York: Whitston Publishing, 1992. 
Chateaubriand, Francois Rene. The Natchez; 
An Indian 
Tale. 
3 
vols. 1827. New York: Howard Fertig, 1978. 
Clark, Thomas D. 
Pills, 
Petticoats, 
and Plows: 
The 
Southern 
Country 
Store. 
Norman: U of Oklahoma P, 1944. 
Clarke, George Herbert. "Women Interpret Women." 
VQR 19 
(Winter 1943): 140, 142-43. 
Cluck, Nancy Ann. "Audubon: Images of the Artist in Eudora 
Welty and Robert Penn Warren." 
Southern 
Literary 
Journal 
17 (Spring 1985): 41-53. 
Coates, Robert M. 
The Outlaw Years: 
The History 
of the 
Land 
Pirates 
of the Natchez 
Trace. 
1930. Lincoln: U of 
Nebraska P, 1986. 
Cobb, James C. 
The Most Southern 
Place 
on Earth: 
The 
Mississippi 
Delta 
and the Roots 
of Regional 
Identity. 
New York: Oxford UP, 1992. 
Cooper, James Fenimore. 
The Pioneers. 
1823. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1964. 
Couderc, Paul. "Calendar." Enclyclopedia 
Americana, 
Vol. 
5. 
International Ed. Danbury, Conn.: Grolier, 1994. 184-
190. 
Cross, Ralph D., Robert W. Wales, eds., and Charles T. 
Traylor, cartographer. Atlas 
of Mississippi. 
Jackson: 
UP of Mississippi, 1974. 

288 
Daniels, Jonathan. 
The Devil's 
Backbone: 
The Story 
of 
the 
Natchez 
Trace. 
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1962. 
. Ordeal 
of Ambition: 
Jefferson, 
Hamilton, 
Burr. 
New 
York: Doubleday, 1970. 
Davenport, F. Garvin, Jr. "Renewal and Historical 
Consciousness in The Wide Net." 
Prenshaw 189-200. 
Davis, Charles E. 
"The Robber 
Bridegroom 
and Old Southwest 
Humor: A Doubleness of Vision." 
A Still 
Moment: 
Essays 
on the Art of Eudora Welty. 
Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow P, 
1978. 71-81. 
Dawidoff, Nicholas. "Eudora Welty's Typewriter May be Silent, 
,But She's Still Telling Stories." 
New York 
Times 11 Aug. 
1995, nat'l ed.: Bl, 14. 
Desmond, John F., ed. 
A Still 
Moment: Essays 
on the Art 
of 
Eudora 
Welty. 
Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow P, 1978. 
Devlin, Albert J. 
Eudora Welty's 
Chronicle: 
A Story 
of 
Mississippi 
Life. 
Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 1983. 
—:-, ed. 
Welty: 
A Life 
in Literature 
Jackson: UP of 
Mississippi, 1987. 
Dollarhide, Louis, and Ann J. Abadie, eds. Eudora 
Welty: 
A 
Form of Thanks. 
Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 1979. 
Donaldson, Susan. "xContradictors, Interferers, and 
Prevaricators': Opposing Modes of Discourse in Eudora 
Welty's Losing 
Battles." 
Eudora Welty: 
Eye of 
the 
Storyteller. 
Ed. Dawn Trouard. Kent, Ohio: Kent State 
UP, 1989. 32-43. 
Dorson, Richard M. 
America 
In Legend: 
Folklore 
from 
the 
Colonial 
Period 
to the Present. 
New York: Random 
House, 1973. 
Eisinger, Chester E. "Traditionalism and Modernism in Eudora 
Welty." Prenshaw 3-25. 
Eliot, T. S. 
The Complete 
Poems and Plays. 
New York: 
Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1958. 
. "Ulysses, Order, and Myth." 
The Dial LXXV (1923): 480-
83. Rpt. with added note in "Myth and Literary 
Classicism." 
The Modern 
Tradition. 
Ed. Richard Ellman 
and Charles Feidelson, Jr. New York: Oxford UP, 1965. 
679-81. 

289 
Ellman, Richard, and Charles Feidelson, Jr., eds. 
The 
Modern 
Tradition. 
New York: Oxford UP, 1965. 
Emmerich, J. Oliver. "Collapse and Recovery." 
A History 
of 
Mississippi, 
Vol. 
II. 
Ed. Richard Aubrey McLemore. 
Hattiesburg: U & CP of Mississippi, 1973. 97-119. 
Faulkner, William. "That Evening Sun." 
These 
13: 
Stories 
by 
William 
Faulkner. 
New York: Jonathan Cape & Harrison 
Smith, 1931. 232-260. 
. Lion in the Garden: 
Interviews 
with 
William 
Faulkner. 
Eds. James B. Meriwether and Michael Millgate. New York: 
Random, 1968. 
Fawcett, John, and Hans G. Nageli. "Blest Be the Tie." 
McKinney 239. 
Fitzgerald, F. Scott. 
The Great 
Gatsby. 
New York: Charles 
Scribner's Sons, 1925. 
Ford, George H. "Humanities and the Experiences of Time." 
Time, 
Science, 
and Society 
in China and the West: 
The 
Study 
of 
Time V. 
Ed. J. T.Fraser, N. Lawrence, and F.C. 
Haber. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company, 1958. 
141-148. 
Ford, John T. "Easter." Encyclopedia 
Americana, 
Vol. 
9. 
International Ed. Danbury, Conn.: Grolier, 1994. 560-
561. 
Forster, E. M. 
Aspects 
of 
the 
Novel. 
New York: Harcourt, 
Brace and Company, 1927. 
. A Passage 
to India. 
1924. New York: Harcourt, Brace & 
World, 1952. 
Frank, Joseph. "Spatial Form in Modern Literature." 
Sewanee 
Review. 
Spring, Summer, and Autumn, 1945. 
Rpt. in Criticism. 
Ed. Mark Schorer, Josephine Miles, 
and Gordon McKenzie. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and 
Company, 1958. 379-392. 
Fraser, J. T., N. Lawrence, and F. C. Haber, eds. 
Time, 
Science, 
and Society 
in China and the West: 
The Study 
of 
Time V. 
Amherst: U of Massachusetts P, 1986. 
French, Warren. "AA11 Things Are Double': Eudora Welty as 
a Civilized Writer." Prenshaw 179-188. 

290 
Friar, Kimon. "Notes: Yeats, William Butler." 
Modern 
Poetry. 
Ed. Kimon Friar and John Malcolm Brinnin. 
New York: Appleton-Century Crofts, 1951. 546-560. 
Gay, Peter. 
Art 
and Act: 
On Causes 
in 
History—Manet, 
Gropius, 
Mondrian. 
New York: Harper & Row, 1976. 
. Freud, 
Jews, 
and Other 
Germans: 
Masters 
and Victims 
in 
Modernist 
Culture. 
New York: Oxford UP, 1978. 
Gossett, Louise Y. 
"Losing 
Battles: 
Festival and 
Celebration." Prenshaw 341-350. 
Goudsmit, Samuel, and Robert Claiborne. Time. 
New 
York: Time-Life Books, 1969. 
Grant, Michael. 
Myths 
of 
the 
Greeks 
and Romans. 
1962. 
New York: Mentor, 1986. 
Graves, Robert. The Common Asphodel. 
London: H. Hamilton, 
1949. 
Green, Henry. 
Pack my Bag. 
London: Hogarth P, 1952. 
Gretland, Jan Nordby. 
Eudora 
Welty's 
Aesthetics 
of 
Place. 
Newark, DE: U of Delaware P, 1994. 
, Elisabeth Herion-Sarafidis, and Hans H. Skei. 
"Scandinavian Contributions." American 
Literary 
Scholarship: 
An Annual 
1994. 
Durham: Duke UP, 1996. 
456-469. 
Griffith, Reuben W. "The Public School, 1890-1970." 
McLemore Vol. II 392-414. 
Gross, Seymour. "A Long Day's Living: The Angelic Ingenuities 
of Losing 
Battles." 
Prenshaw 32 5-340. 
Handy, W. C. "St. Louis Blues." 1914. 
. "Yellow Dog Blues." 1914. 
Hardy, John Edward. 
"Delta 
Wedding in Region and Symbol." 
Sewanee Review, 
60 (Summer 1952): 397-417. Rpt. in 
Critical 
Essays 
on Eudora 
Nelty. 
Ed. W. Craig Turner 
and Lee Emling Harding. Boston: G.K. Hall, 1989. 
75-89. 
. "Marrying Down in Eudora Welty's Novels." Prenshaw 93-
119. 

291 
Harrison, Suzan. Eudora Welty 
and Virginia 
Woolf: 
Gender, 
Genre, 
and Influence. 
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State UP, 
1997. 
Heilman, Robert. 
"Losing 
Battles 
and Winning the War." 
Prenshaw 269-304. 
Hemingway, Ernest. Green Hills 
of Africa. 
New York: Charles 
Scribner's Sons, 1935. 
. "Indian Camp." The Complete 
Short 
Stories 
of 
Ernest 
Hemingway. 
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons/ 
MacMillan, 1987. 65-70. 
Herz, Judith Scherer, and Robert K. Martin, eds. E. M. 
Forster: 
Centenary 
Revaluations. 
Toronto: U of Toronto 
P, 1982. 
Holder, Alan. 
The Imagined 
Past: 
Portrayals 
of Our History 
in 
Modern 
American 
Literature. 
Lewisburg, PA: Bucknell UP, 
1980. 
Holman, C. Hugh. 
The Immoderate 
Past. 
Athens: U of Georgia 
P, 1977. 
Hudson, Charles. The Southeastern 
Indians. 
Knoxville: 
U of Tennessee P, 1976. 
Jeane, D. Gregory. "Cemeteries." Wilson and Ferris 463-65. 
Jewett, Sarah Orne. The Country 
of the Pointed 
Firs. 
1896. 
New York: Norton, 1981. 
Joyce, James. "The Dead." Dubliners. 
1914. New York: 
Penguin, 1983. 
Kasson, Joy S. Artistic 
Voyagers: 
Europe and the 
American 
Imagination 
in the Works of Irving, 
Allston, 
Cole, 
Cooper, 
and Hawthorne. 
Westport: Greenwood P, 1982. 
Kennedy, Jimmy, and Nat Simon. "ISTANBUL (Not 
Constantinople)." New York: Alamo Music, 1953. 
Kreyling, Michael. Author 
and Agent: 
Eudora Welty 
and 
Diarmuid 
Russell. 
New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 
1991. 
. "Clement and the Indians: Pastoral and History in 
The Robber Bridegroom." 
Dollarhide and Abadie 25-45. 
. Eudora Welty's 
Achievement 
of Order. 
Baton Rouge: 
Louisiana State UP, 1980. 

292 
. "Modernism in Welty's A Curtain 
of Green and 
Other 
Stories." 
The Southern 
Quarterly 
20 (Summer 1982): 
40-53. Rpt. in Turner and Harding 18-30. 
. "Words into Criticism: Eudora Welty's Essays and 
Reviews." Prenshaw 411-22. 
Kruse, Horst. Personal Conversation. July 25, 1997. 
Kynerd, Byrle. "British West Florida." McLemore, Vol.1 
134-57. 
Landess, Thomas H. "More Trouble in Mississippi: Family Vs. 
Antifamily in Miss Welty's Losing 
Battles." 
Sewanee 
Review (October-December 1971): 626-34. 
Latrobe, Charles Joseph. 
The Rambler in North America. 
1836. 
New York: Johnson Reprint Corporation, 1970. 
Lewis, Sam M., and Joe Young. "Five Foot Two, Eyes of Blue." 
1925. 
Lowry, Shirly Park. Familiar 
Mysteries: 
The Truth 
in 
Myth. 
New York: Oxford UP, 1982. 
McKenzie, Barbara. "The Eye of Time: The Photographs of 
Eudora Welty." Prenshaw 386-400. 
Mark, Rebecca. 
The Dragon's 
Blood: 
Feminist 
Inter 
textuality 
in Eudora Welty's 
"The Golden Apples." 
Jackson: UP of 
Mississippi, 1994. 
Manning, Carol. With Ears Opening Like 
Morning 
Glories: 
Eudora Welty 
and the Love of Storytelling. 
Westport, 
CT: Greenwood P, 1985. 
Marrs, Suzanne. "Eudora Welty's Photography: Images into 
Fiction." Turner and Harding 280-96. 
# "*The Treasure Most Dearly Regarded': Memory and 
Imagination in Delta 
Wedding. 
Southern 
Literary 
Journal, 
Vol. XXV, No. 2 (Spring 1993): 79-91. 
. The Welty 
Collection. 
Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 1988. 
McHaney, Pearl Amelia. "Historical Perspectives in a xStill 
Moment.'" Turner and Harding 52-69. 
McHaney, Thomas L. "Eudora Welty and the Multitudinous Golden 
Apples." 
Mississippi 
Quarterly 
26 (Fall 1973): 589-624. 
Rpt. Turner and Harding 113-41. 

293 
. "Falling into Cycles: 
Golden 
Apples." 
Trouard 173-189. 
McKenzie, Barbara. "The Eye of Time: The Photographs of 
Eudora Welty." Prenshaw 386-400. 
McKinney, B. B., Music Editor. 
The Broadman 
Hymnal. 
Nashville: Broadman P, 1940. 
McLemore, Richard Aubrey, ed. 
A History 
of 
Mississippi, 
2 vols. 
Hattiesburg: U & CP of Mississippi, 197 3. 
Meese, Elizabeth. "Constructing Time and Place: Eudora 
Welty in the Thirties." Prenshaw 401-410. 
Messerli, Douglas. "*A Battle with Both Sides Using the 
Same Tactics': The Language of Time in Losing 
Battles." 
Prenshaw 3 51-3 66. 
Mississippi: 
A Guide 
to the 
Magnolia 
State. 
Federal Writers 
Project of the Works Progress Administration. New York: 
Viking P, 1938. 
Moore, Thomas. "Oft in the Stilly Night (Scotch Air)." 
Moore's 
Irish 
Melodies, 
Lalla 
Rookh, 
National 
Airs, 
Legendary 
Ballads, 
Songs, 
Etc. 
1837. London: William 
MacKenzie. 142. 
. "The Harp that Once Through Tara's Halls." 
Moore's 
Irish 
Melodies 
80. 
Mortimer, Gail L. 
Daughter 
of 
the 
Swan: 
Love 
and 
Knowledge 
in Eudora 
Welty's 
Fiction. 
Athens, GA: U of Georgia P, 
1994. 
. "xThe Way to Get There': Journeys and Destinations in 
the Stories of Eudora Welty." 
Southern 
Literary 
Journal, 
Vol. XIX, No. 2 (Spring, 1987): 61-69. 
Nolan, Charles J. 
Aaron 
Burr 
and the 
American 
Literary 
Imagination. 
Westport: Greenwood P, 1980. 
Oates, Joyce Carol. "Eudora's Web." 
Atlantic, 
225 (April 
1970): 118-120, 122. 
Owsley, Frank Lawrence. 
Plain 
Folk 
of 
the 
Old South. 
1949. 
Chicago: Quadrangle, 1965. 
Penick, James, Jr. 
The New Madrid 
Earthquakes 
of 
1811-1812. 
Columbia: U of Missouri P, 1976. 
Percy, Walker. 
Signposts 
in a Strange 
Land. 
New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1991. 

294 
Pitavy-Souques, Daniele. "A Blazing Butterfly: The Modernity 
of Eudora Welty. Devlin Life 113-138. 
. "Technique as Myth: The Structure of The Golden 
Apples." 
Prenshaw 258-68. 
Polk, Noel. 
Eudora 
Welty: 
A Bibliography 
of Her 
Work. 
Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 1994. 
. "Going to Naples." 
Eudora 
Welty: 
Eye of 
the 
Storyteller. 
Ed. Dawn Trouard. Kent, Ohio: Kent 
State UP, 1989. 153-164. 
—--, ed. Natchez 
before 
1830. 
Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 
1989. 
. "Water, Wanderers, and Weddings: Love in Eudora Welty." 
Dollarhide and Abadie 95-122. 
Prenshaw, Peggy W. "Eudora Welty." American 
Women 
Writers: 
Bibliographic 
Essays. 
Ed. Maurice Duke, Jackson Bryer, 
and Thomas Inge. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood P, 1983. 
, ed. 
Eudora 
Welty: 
Critical 
Essays. 
Jackson: UP of 
Mississippi, 1979. 
, and Jesse 0. McKee, eds. 
Sense 
of Place: 
Mississippi. 
Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 1979. 
Price, Reynolds. "Introduction, Eudora Welty and 
Photography: An Interview." Eudora Welty: 
Photographs. 
Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 1989. 
Rankin, Tom. "River Life." Wilson and Ferris 356-357. 
Ransom, John Crowe. 
"Delta 
Wedding." 
Kenyon 
Review 
8 (Summer 
1946): 503-7. Rpt. in Turner and Harding 71-75. 
Reed, John Shelton. "Instant Grits and Plastic-Wrapped 
Crackers: Southern Culture and Regional Development." 
The American 
South. 
Ed. Louis D. Rubin, Jr. 
Baton Rouge: Louisiana UP, 1980. 
21-21. 
Rothstein, Morton. "The Remotest Corner": Natchez on the 
American Frontier." Natchez 
before 
1830. 
Ed. Noel Polk. 
Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 1989. 92-108. 
Rubin, Louis D., Jr., ed. 
The American 
South. 
Baton Rouge: 
Louisiana UP, 1980. 

295 
. "Art and Artistry in Morgana, Mississippi." 
A Gallery 
of 
Southerners. 
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State P, 1982. 49-
66. 
. "Everything Brought Out In the Open: Eudora Welty's 
Losing 
Battles." 
Hollins 
Critic 
7 (June 1970): 1-12. 
. The Faraway 
Country. 
Seattle: U of Washington P, 1963. 
Sass, Julie. "Chronology." 
Natchez 
before 
1830. 
Ed. Noel 
Polk. Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 1989. 3-7. 
Saunders, James Robert. 
IIXA Worn Path': The Eternal Quest of 
Welty's Phoenix Jackson" 
Southern 
Literary 
Journal 
Vol. XXV, No. 1 (Fall, 1992): 62-73. 
Schmidt, Peter. 
The Heart 
of the Story: 
Eudora Welty's 
Short 
, Fiction. 
Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 1991. 
Scott, Sir Walter. 
Marmion. 
1808. Ed. Lindsay Todd Damon. 
Chicago: Scott, Foresman, 1899. 
Shaw, Arnold. 
The Jazz 
Age: Popular 
Music in the 
1920's. 
New York: Oxford UP, 1987. 
Shaw, Knowles, and George A. Minor. "Bringing In the 
Sheaves." McKinney 359. 
Simpson, Lewis P. 
The Brazen 
Face of History: 
Studies 
in 
the 
Literary 
Consciousness 
in America. 
Baton Rouge: 
Louisiana State UP, 1980. 
Singal, Daniel Joseph. 
The War Within: 
From Victorian 
to 
Modernist 
Thought 
in the South, 
1919-1945. 
Chapel Hill: 
U of North Carolina P, 1982. 
Sivin, N. "On the Limits of Empirical Knowledge in the 
Traditional Chinese Sciences." Fraser, Lawrence, and 
Haber 151-169. 
Slade, Marina E., and R. M. Mcintosh. "Gathering Home." 
McKinney 128. 
Smith, Frank E. The Yazoo 
River. 
New York: Rinehart & 
Company, 1954. 
Smith, Jon. "The Welty Boom!" 
Contemporary 
Literature, 
Vol. 36, No. 3 (Fall 1995): 553-569. 
Spengler, Oswald. "The Organic Logic of History." 
Ellman 
and Fidelson 485-496. 

296 
Thompson, Edgar T. "Country Store." Wilson and Ferris 
15-18. 
Trilling, Diana. "Fiction in Review." 
Nation 
(May 11, 1946): 
578. 
Trilling, Lionel. "American Fairy Tale." 
Nation 
(December 
19, 1942): 686-87. Rpt. Turner and Harding 31-22. 
Trouard, Dawn, ed. 
Eudora Welty: 
Eye of the 
Storyteller. 
Kent, Ohio: Kent State UP, 1989. 
Turner, W. Craig, and Lee Emling Harding, eds. 
Critical 
Essays 
on Eudora 
Welty. 
Boston: G. K. Hall, 1989. 
Vande Kieft, Ruth M. 
Eudora 
Welty. 
1962. Revised ed. 
Boston: Twayne, 1987. 
. "xWhere Is the Voice Coming From?': Teaching Eudora 
Welty." Trouard 190-204. 
Warren, Robert Penn. "The Love and Separateness in Miss 
Welty." 
Kenyon 
Review, 
VI (Spring 1944): 246-59. 
Rpt. Turner and Harding 42-51. 
Welty, Eudora. Afterword. 
Morgana. 
Jackson: UP of 
Mississippi, 1988. 
. The Bride 
of the Innisfalien 
and Other 
Stories. 
New 
York: Harcourt, Brace, 1955. 
. The Collected 
Stories 
of Eudora Welty. 
New York: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Harvest, 1980. 
. Conversations 
with 
Eudora 
Welty. 
Ed. Peggy W. Prenshaw. 
Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 1984. 
. A Curtain 
of Green and Other Stories. 
New York: Harcourt 
Brace, 1941. 
. Delta 
Wedding. 
New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1946. 
. Eudora 
Welty: 
Photographs. 
Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 
1989. 
. The Eye of the Story: 
Selected 
Essays 
and Reviews. 
New 
York: Random House, Vintage, 1979. 
. "Fairy Tale of the Natchez Trace." 
The Eye of the 
Story. 
304-14. 
. The Golden 
Apples. 
New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1949. 

297 
. Losing 
Battles. 
New York: Random House, 1970. 
"Louis Rubin and the Making of Maps." Sewanee Review 97 
(Spring 1989), 252-60. 
"Must the Novelist Crusade?" 
The Eye of the 
Story. 
146-158. 
One Time, 
One Place: 
Mississippi 
in the 
Depression. 
New York: Random House, 1971. 
One Writer's 
Beginnings. 
Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1984. 
The Optimist's 
Daughter. 
New York: Random House, 1972. 
The Ponder Heart. 
New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1954. 
The Robber Bridegroom. 
1942. New York: Harcourt, Brace 
& World, 1970. 
"Some Notes on River Country." 
The Eye of the 
Story. 
286-99. 
A Writer's 
Eye: Collected 
Book Reviews. 
Ed. Pearl Amelia 
McHaney. Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 1994. 
"Writers' Panel." Herz and Martin 289-307. 
Westling, Louise. Eudora Welty. 
Totowa, New Jersey: Barnes & 
Noble, 1989. 
. "The Loving Observer of One Time, 
One 
Place." 
Mississippi 
Quarterly 
39 (Fall 1986): 587-604. Rpt. 
Devlin Life 168-187. 
Weston, Ruth D. 
Gothic 
Traditions 
and Narrative 
Techniques 
in the Fiction 
of Eudora Welty. 
Baton Rouge: Louisiana 
UP, 1994. 
Wilder, Thornton. 
The Bridge 
of San Luis 
Rey. 
New York: 
Grosset & Dunlap, 1928. 
. The Skin 
of Our Teeth. 
1942. Three Plays. 
New York: 
Harper and Brothers, 1975. 105-250. 
Wilson, Charles Reagan, and William Ferris, eds. 
Encyclopedia 
of Southern 
Culture. 
Chapel Hill: U of North Carolina P, 
1989. 
Woodward, C. Vann. 
The Burden of Southern 
History. 
Rev. Ed. 
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State UP, 1968. 

298 
Wyatt-Brown, Bertram. 
Honor and Violence 
in 
the 
Old 
South. 
New York: Oxford UP, 1986. 
Yeats, W. B. 
The Variorum 
Edition 
of 
the 
Poems of W. 
B. 
Yeats. 
Eds. Peter Allt and Russell K. Alspach. 
New York: Macmillan, 1957. 
Young, Thomas Daniel. "Religion, the xBible Belt,' and the 
Modern South." 
The American 
South: 
Portrait 
of 
a 
Culture. 
Ed. 
Louis 
D. Rubin, 
Jr. 
Washington, D.C.: 
Voice of America Forum Series, 1979. 

