Unaccompanied Sonata
Orson Scott Card
1979
1
Tuning Up
When Christian Haroldsen was six months old, preliminary tests showed a predisposition
toward rhythm and a keen awareness of pitch. There were other tests, of course, and many
possible routes still open to him. But rhythm and pitch were the governing signs of his
own private zodiac, and already the reinforcement began. Mr. and Mrs. Haroldsen were
provided with tapes of many kinds of sound and instructed to play them constantly, waking
or sleeping.
When Christian Haroldsen was two years old, his seventh battery of tests pinpointed the
future he would inevitably follow. His creativity was exceptional; his curiosity, insatiable;
his understanding of music so intense that on top of all the tests was written “Prodigy.”
Prodigy was the word that took him from his parents’ home to a house in a deep decid-
uous forest where winter was savage and violent and summer a brief desperate eruption of
green. He grew up cared for by unsinging servants, and the only music he was allowed to
hear was birdsong, and windsong, and the crackling of winter wood; thunder, and the faint
cry of golden leaves as they broke free and tumbled to the earth; rain on the roof and the
drip of water from icicles; the chatter of squirrels and the deep silence of snow falling on a
moonless night.
These sounds were Christian’s only conscious music; he grew up with the symphonies
of his early years only distant and impossible-to-retrieve memory. And so he learned to hear
music in unmusical things — for he had to find music, even when there was none to find.
He found that colors made sounds in his mind: sunlight in summer was a blaring chord;
moonlight in winter a thin mournful wail; new green in spring a low murmur in almost
(but not quite) random rhythms; the flash of a red fox in the leaves, a gasp of startlement.
And he learned to play all those sounds on his Instrument. In the world were violins,
trumpets, clarinets and krumhorns, as there had been for centuries. Christian knew nothing
of that. Only his Instrument was available. It was enough.
1

One room in Christian’s house, which he had alone most of the time, he lived in: a bed
(not too soft), a chair and table, a silent machine that cleaned him and his clothing, and an
electric light.
The other room contained only his Instrument. It was a console with many keys and
strips and levers and bars, and when he touched any part of it, a sound came out. Every
key made a different sound; every point on the strips made a different pitch; every lever
modified the tone; every bar altered the structure of the sound.
When he first came to the house, Christian played (as children will) with the Instru-
ment, making strange and funny noises. It was his only playmate; he learned it well, could
produce any sound he wanted to. At first he delighted in loud, blaring tones. Later he began
to play with soft and loud, and to play two sounds at once, and to change those two sounds
together to make a new sound, and to play again a sequence of sounds he had played before.
Gradually, the sounds of the forest outside his house found their way into the music
he played. He learned to make winds sing through his Instrument; he learned to make
summer one of the songs he could play at will; green with its infinite variations was his most
subtle harmony; the birds cried out from his Instrument with all the passion of Christian’s
loneliness.
And the word spread to the licensed Listeners:
“There’s a new sound north of here, east of here; Christian Haroldsen, and he’ll tear
out your heart with his songs.”
The Listeners came, a few to whom variety was everything first, then those to whom
novelty and vogue mattered most, and at last those who valued beauty and passion above
everything else. They came, and stayed out in Christian’s woods, and listened as his music
was played through perfect speakers on the roof of his house. When the music stopped, and
Christian came out of his house, he could see the Listeners moving away; he asked, and was
told why they came; he marveled that the things he did for love on his Instrument could be
of interest to other people.
He felt, strangely, even more lonely to know that he could sing to the Listeners and yet
never be able to hear their songs.
“But they have no songs,” said the woman who came to bring him food every day. “They
are Listeners. You are a Maker. You have songs, and they listen.”
“Why?” asked Christian, innocently.
The woman looked puzzled. “Because that’s what they want most to do. They’ve been
tested, and they are happiest as Listeners. You are happiest as a Maker. Aren’t you happy?”
“Yes,” Christian answered, and he was telling the truth. His life was perfect, and he
wouldn’t change anything, not even the sweet sadness of the backs of the Listeners as they
walked away at the end of his songs.
Christian was seven years old.
2

2
First Movement
For the third time the short man with glasses and a strangely inappropriate mustache dared
to wait in the underbrush for Christian to come out. For the third time he was overcome
by the beauty of the song that had just ended, a mournful symphony that made the short
man with glasses feel the pressure of the leaves above him even though it was summer and
they had months left before they would fall. The fall is still inevitable, said Christian’s song;
through all their life the leaves hold within them the power to die, and that must color their
life. The short man with glasses wept — but when the song ended and the other Listeners
moved away, he hid in the brush and waited.
This time his wait was rewarded. Christian came out of his house, and walked among the
trees, and came toward where the short man with glasses waited. The short man admired
the easy, unpostured way that Christian walked. The composer looked to be about thirty,
yet there was something childish in the way he looked around him, the way his walk was
aimless, and prone to stop so he would just touch (not break) a fallen twig with his bare
toes.
“Christian,” said the short man with glasses.
Christian turned, startled. In all these years, no Listener had ever spoken to him. It
was forbidden. Christian knew the law.
“It’s forbidden,” Christian said.
“Here,” the short man with glasses said, holding out a small black object.
“What is it?”
The short man grimaced. “Just take it. Push the button and it plays.”
“Plays?”
“Music.”
Christian’s eyes opened wide. “But that’s forbidden. I can’t have my creativity polluted
by hearing other musicians’ work. That would make me imitative and derivative instead of
original.”
“Reciting,” the man said. “You’re just reciting that. This is the music of Bach.” There
was reverence in his voice.
“I can’t,” Christian said.
And then the short man shook his head. “You don’t know. You don’t know what you’re
missing. But I heard it in your song when I came here years ago, Christian. You want this.”
“It’s forbidden,” Christian answered, for to him the very fact that a man who knew an
act was forbidden still wanted to perform it was astounding, and he couldn’t get past the
novelty of it to realize that some action was expected of him.
There were footsteps and words being spoken in the distance, and the short man’s face
became frightened. He ran at Christian, forced the recorder into his hands, then took off
3

toward the gate of the preserve.
Christian took the recorder and held it in a spot of sunlight through the leaves. It
gleamed dully. “Bach,” Christian said. Then, “Who is Bach?”
But he didn’t throw the recorder down. Nor did he give the recorder to the woman
who came to ask him what the short man with glasses had stayed for. “He stayed for at least
ten minutes.—”
“I only saw him for thirty seconds,” Christian answered.
“And?”
“He wanted me to hear some other music. He had a recorder.”
“Did he give it to you?”
“No,” Christian said. “Doesn’t he still have it?”
“He must have dropped it in the woods.”
“He said it was Bach.”
“It’s forbidden. That’s all you need to know. If you should find the recorder, Christian,
you know the law.”
“I’ll give it to you.”
She looked at him carefully. “You know what would happen if you listened to such a
thing.”
Christian nodded.
“Very well. We’ll be looking for it, too. I’ll see you tomorrow, Christian. And next
time somebody stays after, don’t talk to him. Just come back in the house and lock the
doors.”
“I’ll do that,” Christian said.
When she left, he played his Instrument for hours. More Listeners came, and those
who had heard Christian before were surprised at the confusion in his song.
There was a summer rainstorm that night, wind and rain and thunder, and Christian
found that he could not sleep. Not because of the music of the weather — he’d slept through
a thousand such storms. It was the recorder that lay behind the Instrument against the wall.
Christian had lived for nearly thirty years surrounded only by this wild, beautiful place and
the music he himself made. But now.
Now he could not stop wondering. Who was Bach? Who is Bach? What is his music?
How is it different from mine? Has he discovered things that I don’t know?
What is his music?
What is his music?
What is his music?
Until at dawn, when the storm was abating and the wind had died, Christian got out
of his bed, where he had not slept but only tossed back and forth all night, and took the
recorder from its hiding place and played it.
4

At first it sounded strange, like noise, odd sounds that had nothing to do with the sounds
of Christian’s life. But the patterns were clear, and by the end of the recording, which was
not even a half-hour long, Christian had mastered the idea of fugue and the sound of the
harpsichord preyed on his mind.
Yet he knew that if he let these things show up in his music, he would be discovered. So
he did not try a fugue. He did not attempt to imitate the harpsichord’s sound.
And every night he listened to the recording, for many nights, learning more and more
until finally the Watcher came.
The Watcher was blind, and a dog led him. He came to the door, and because he was a
Watcher the door opened for him without his even knocking.
“Christian Haroldsen, where is the recorder?” the Watcher asked.
“Recorder?” Christian asked, then knew it was hopeless, and took the machine and gave
it to the Watcher.
“Oh, Christian,” said the Watcher, and his voice was mild and sorrowful. “Why didn’t
you turn it in without listening to it?”
“I meant to,” Christian said. “But how did you know?”
“Because suddenly there are no fugues in your work. Suddenly your songs have lost
the only Bachlike thing about them. And you’ve stopped experimenting with new sounds.
What were you trying to avoid?”
“This,” Christian said, and he sat down and on his first try duplicated the sound of the
harpsichord.
“Yet you’ve never tried to do that until now, have you?”
“I thought you’d notice.”
“Fugues and harpsichord, the two things you noticed first — and the only things you
didn’t absorb into your music. All your other songs for these last weeks have been tinted
and colored and influenced by Bach. Except that there was no fugue, and there was no
harpsichord. You have broken the law. You were put here because you were a genius,
creating new things with only nature for your inspiration. Now, of course, you’re derivative,
and truly new creation is impossible for you. You’ll have to leave.”
“I know,” Christian said, afraid yet not really understanding what life outside his house
would be like.
“We’ll train you for the kinds of jobs you can pursue now. You won’t starve. You won’t
die of boredom. But because you broke the law, one thing is forbidden to you now”
“Music”
“Not all music. There is music of a sort, Christian, that the common people, the ones
who aren’t Listeners, can have. Radio and television and record music. But living music
and new music — those are forbidden to you. You may not sing. You may not play an
instrument. You may not tap out a rhythm.”
5

“Why not?”
The Watcher shook his head. “The world is too perfect, too at peace, too happy, for us
to permit a misfit who broke the law to go about spreading discontent. The common people
make casual music of a sort, knowing nothing better because they haven’t the aptitude to
learn it. But if you — never mind. It’s the law. And if you make more music, Christian,
you will be punished drastically. Drastically.”
Christian nodded, and when the Watcher told him to come, he came, leaving behind
the house and the woods and his Instrument. At first he took it calmly, as the inevitable
punishment for his infraction; but he had little concept of punishment, or of what exile
from his Instrument would mean.
Within five hours he was shouting and striking out at anyone who came near him, be-
cause his fingers craved the touch of the Instrument’s keys and levers and strips and bars,
and he could not have them, and now he knew that he had never been lonely before.
It took six months before he was ready for normal life. And when he left the Retraining
Center (a small building, because it was so rarely used), he looked tired and years older,
and he didn’t smile at anyone. He became a delivery truck driver, because the tests said that
this was a job that would least grieve him, and least remind him of his loss, and most engage
his few remaining aptitudes and interests.
He delivered doughnuts to grocery stores.
And at night he discovered the mysteries of alcohol, and the alcohol and the doughnuts
and the truck and his dreams were enough that he was, in his way, content. He had no anger
in him. He could live the rest of his life, without bitterness.
He delivered fresh doughnuts and took the stale ones away with him.
3
Second Movement
“With a name like Joe,” Joe always said, “I had to open a bar and grill, just so I could put up
a sign saying Joe’s Bar and Grill.” And he laughed and laughed, because, after all, Joe’s Bar
and Grill was a funny name these days.
But Joe was a good bartender, and the Watcher had put him in the right kind of place.
Not in a big city but in a smaller town; a town just off the freeway, where truck drivers
often came; a town not far from a large city, so that interesting things were nearby to be
talked about and worried about and bitched about and loved.
Joe’s Bar and Grill was, therefore, a nice place to come, and many people came there.
Not fashionable people, and not drunks, but lonely people and friendly people in just the
right mixture. “My clients are like a good drink, just enough of this and that to make a new
flavor that tastes better than any of the ingredients.” Oh, Joe was a poet, he was a poet of
6

alcohol and like many another person these days, he often said, “My father was a lawyer,
and in the old days I would have probably ended up a lawyer, too, and I never would have
known what I was missing.”
Joe was right. And he was a damn good bartender, and he didn’t wish he were anything
else, so he was happy.
One night, however, a new man came in, a man with a doughnut delivery truck and a
doughnut brand name on his uniform. Joe noticed him because silence clung to the man
like a smell — wherever he walked, people sensed it, and though they scarcely looked at
him, they lowered their voices or stopped talking at all, and they got reflective and looked
at the walls and the mirror behind the bar. The doughnut deliveryman sat in a corner and
had a watered-down drink that meant he intended to stay a long time and didn’t want his
alcohol intake to be so rapid that he was forced to leave early.
Joe noticed things about people, and he noticed that this man kept looking off in the
dark corner where the piano stood. It was an old, out-of-tune monstrosity from the old days
(for this had been a bar for a long time), and Joe wondered why the man was fascinated by
it. True, a lot of Joe’s customers had been interested, but they had always walked over and
plunked on the keys, trying to find a melody, failing with the out-of-tune keys, and finally
giving up. This man, however, seemed almost afraid of the piano, and didn’t go near it.
At closing time, the man was still there, and, on a whim, instead of making the man
leave, Joe turned off the piped in music, turned off most of the lights, and went over and
lifted the lid and exposed the gray keys.
The deliveryman came over to the piano. Chris, his name tag said. He sat and touched
a single key. The sound was not pretty. But the man touched all the keys one by one, and
then touched them in different orders, and all the time Joe watched, wondering why the
man was so intense about it.
“Chris,” Joe said.
Chris looked up at him.
“Do you know any songs?”
Chris’s face went funny.
“I mean, some of those old-time songs, not those fancy ass-twitchers on the radio, but
songs. ‘In a Little Spanish Town.’ My mother sang that one to me.” And Joe began to sing,
“In a little Spanish town, ’twas on a night like this.”
Chris began to play as Joe’s weak and toneless baritone went on with the song. But his
playing wasn’t an accompaniment, not anything Joe could call an accompaniment. It was,
instead, an opponent to his melody, an enemy to it, and the sounds coming out of the piano
were strange and unharmonious and by God beautiful. Joe stopped singing and listened.
For two hours he listened, and when it was over he soberly poured the man a drink, and
poured one for himself, and clinked glasses with Chris the doughnut deliveryman who could
7

take that rotten old piano and make the damn thing sing.
Three nights later, Chris came back, looking harried and afraid. But this time Joe knew
what would happen (had to happen) and instead of waiting until closing time, Joe turned off
the piped-in music ten minutes early. Chris looked up at him pleadingly. Joe misunderstood
— he went over and lifted the lid to the keyboard and smiled. Chris walked stiffly, perhaps
reluctantly, to the stool and sat.
“Hey, Joe,” one of the last five customers shouted, “closing early?”
Joe didn’t answer. Just watched as Chris began to play. No preliminaries this time; no
scales and wanderings over the keys. Just power, and the piano was played as pianos aren’t
meant to be played; the bad notes, the out-of-tune notes were fit into the music so that they
sounded right, and Chris’s fingers, ignoring the strictures of the twelve-tone scale, played,
it seemed to Joe, in the cracks.
None of the customers left until Chris finished an hour and a half later. They all shared
that final drink, and went home shaken by the experience.
The next night Chris came again, and the next, and the next. Whatever private battle
had kept him away for the first few days after his first night of playing, he had apparently
won it or lost it. None of Joe’s business. What Joe cared about was the fact that when Chris
played the piano, it did things to him that music had never done, and he wanted it.
The customers apparently wanted it, too. Near closing time people began showing up,
apparently just to hear Chris play. Joe began starting the piano music earlier and earlier, and
he had to discontinue the free drinks after the playing, because there were so many people
it would have put him out of business.
It went on for two long, strange months. The delivery van pulled up outside, and people
stood aside for Chris to enter. No one said anything to him; no one said anything at all, but
everyone waited until he began to play the piano. He drank nothing at all. Just played. And
between songs the hundreds of people in Joe’s Bar and Grill ate and drank.
But the merriment was gone. The laughter and the chatter and the camaraderie were
missing, and after a while Joe grew tired of the music and wanted to have his bar back the
way it was. He toyed with the idea of getting rid of the piano, but the customers would
have been angry at him. He thought of asking Chris not to come any more, but he could
not bring himself to speak to the strange, silent man.
And so finally he did what he knew he should have done in the first place. He called the
Watchers.
They came in the middle of a performance, a blind Watcher with a dog on a leash, and
a Watcher with no ears who walked unsteadily, holding to things for balance. They came in
the middle of a song, and did not wait for it to end. They walked to the piano and closed
the lid gently, and Chris withdrew his fingers and looked at the closed lid.
“Oh, Christian,” said the man with the seeing-eye dog.
8

“I’m sorry,” Christian answered. “I tried not to.”
“Oh, Christian, how can I bear doing to you what must be done?”
“Do it,” Christian said.
And so the man with no ears took a laser knife from his coat pocket and cut off Chris-
tian’s fingers and thumbs, right where they rooted into his hands. The laser cauterized and
sterilized the wound even as it cut, but still some blood spattered on Christian’s uniform.
And, his hands now meaningless palms and useless knuckles, Christian stood and walked out
of Joe’s Bar and Grill. The people made way for him again, and they listened intently as the
blind Watcher said, “That was a man who broke the law and was forbidden to be a Maker.
He broke the law a second time, and the law insists that he be stopped from breaking down
the system that makes all of you so happy.”
The people understood. It grieved them; it made them uncomfortable for a few hours,
but once they toad returned home to their exactly-right homes and got back to their exactly-
right jobs, the sheer contentment of their lives overwhelmed their momentary sorrow for
Chris. After all, Chris had broken the law. And it was the law that kept them all safe and
happy.
Even Joe. Even Joe soon forgot Chris and his music. He knew he had done the right
thing. He couldn’t figure out, though, why a man like Chris would have broken the law in
the first place, or what law he would have broken. There wasn’t a law in the world that
wasn’t designed to make people happy — and there wasn’t a law Joe could think of that he
was even mildly interested in breaking.
Yet. Once Joe went to the piano and lifted the lid and played every key on the piano.
And when he had done that he put his head down on the piano and cried, because he knew
that when Chris lost that piano, lost even his fingers so he could never play again — it was
like Joe’s losing his bar. And if Joe ever lost is bar, his life wouldn’t be worth living.
As for Chris, someone else began coming to the bar driving the same doughnut delivery
van, and no one ever saw Chris again in that part of the world.
4
Third Movement
“Oh, what a beautiful mornin’!” sang the road-crew man who had seen Oklahoma! four
times in his home town.
“Rock my soul in the bosom of Abraham!” sang the road-crew man who had learned to
sing when his family got together with guitars.
“Lead, kindly light, amid the encircling gloom!” sang the road-crew man who believed.
But the road-crew man without hands, who held the sings telling the traffic to Stop or
go Slow, listened but never sang.
9

“Whyn’t you never sing?” asked the man who liked Rodgers and Hammerstein; asked
all of them, at one time or another.
And the man they called Sugar just shrugged. “Don’t feel like singin’,” he’d say, when
he said anything at all.
“Why they call him Sugar?” a new guy once asked. “He don’t look sweet to me.”
And the man who believed said, “His initials are C H. Like the sugar, C&H, you know.”
And the new guy laughed. A stupid joke, but the kind of gag that makes life easier on the
road-building crew.
Not that life was that hard. For these men, too, had been tested, and they were in the
job that made them happiest. They took pride in the pain of sunburn and pulled muscles,
and the road growing long and thin behind them was the most beautiful thing in the world.
And so they sang all day at their work, knowing that they could not possibly be happier than
they were this day.
Except Sugar.
Then Guillermo came. A short Mexican who spoke with an accent, Guillermo told
everyone who asked, “I may come from Sonora, but my heart belongs in Milano!” And
when anyone asked why (and often when no one asked anything), he’d explain: “I’m an
Italian tenor in a Mexican body,” and he proved it by singing every note that Puccini and
Verdi ever wrote. “Caruso was nothing,” Guillermo boasted. “Listen to this!”
Guillermo had records, and sang along with them, and at work on the road crew he’d
join in with any man’s song and harmonize with it, or sing an obligato high above the melody,
a soaring tenor that took the roof off his head and filled the clouds. “I can sing,” Guillermo
would say, and soon the other road-crew men answered, “Damn right, Guillermo! Sing it
again!”
But one night Guillermo was honest and told the truth. “Ah, my friends, I’m no singer.”
“What do you mean? Of course you are!” came the unanimous answer.
“Nonsense!” Guillermo cried, his voice theatrical. “If I am this great singer, why do
you never see me going off to record songs? Hey? This is a great singer? Nonsense! Great
singers they raise to be great singers. I’m just a man who loves to sing, but has no talent!
I’m a man who loves to work on the road crew with men like you, and sing his guts out, but
in the opera I could never be! Never!”
He did not say it sadly. He said it fervently, confidently. “Here is where I belong! I can
sing to you who like to hear me sing! I can harmonize with you when I feel a harmony in
my heart. But don’t be thinking that Guillermo is a great singer, because he’s not!”
It was an evening of honesty, and every man there explained why it was he was happy
on the road crew and didn’t wish to be anywhere else. Everyone, that is, except Sugar.
“Come on, Sugar. Aren’t you happy here?”
10

Sugar smiled. “I’m happy. I like it here. This is good work for me. And I love to hear
you sing.”
“Then why don’t you sing with us?”
Sugar shook his head. “I’m not a singer.”
But Guillermo looked at him knowingly. “Not a singer, ha! Not a singer. A man without
hands who refuses to sing is not a man who is not a singer. Hey?”
“What the hell did that mean?” asked the man who sang folksongs.
“It means that this man you call Sugar, he’s a fraud. Not a singer! Look at his hands. All
his fingers gone! Who is it who cuts off men’s fingers?”
The road crew didn’t try to guess. There were many ways a man could lose fingers, and
none of them were anyone’s business.
“He loses his fingers because he breaks the law and the Watchers cut them off! That’s
how a man loses fingers. What was he doing with his fingers that the Watchers wanted him
to stop? He was breaking the law, wasn’t he?”
“Stop,” Sugar said.
“If you want,” Guillermo said, but the others would not respect Sugar’s privacy.
“Tell us,” they said.
Sugar left the room.
“Tell us,” and Guillermo told them. That Sugar must have been a Maker who broke the
law and was forbidden to make music any more. The very thought that a Maker was working
on the road crew with them — even a lawbreaker — filled the men with awe. Makers were
rare, and they were the most esteemed of men and women.
“But why his fingers?”
“Because,” Guillermo said, “he must have tried to make music again afterward. And
when you break the law a second time, the power to break it a third time is taken away
from you.” Guillermo spoke seriously, and so to the road-crew men Sugar’s story sounded
as majestic and terrible as an opera. They crowded into Sugar’s room, and found the man
staring at the wall.
“Sugar, is it true?” asked the man who loved Rodgers and Hammerstein.
“Were you a Maker?” asked the man who believed.
“Yes,” Sugar said.
“But Sugar,” the man who believed said, “God can’t mean for a man to stop making
music, even if he broke the law.”
Sugar smiled. “No one asked God.”
“Sugar,” Guillermo finally said, “There are nine of us on the crew, nine of us, and we’re
miles from any other human beings. You know us, Sugar. We swear on our mother’s graves,
every one of us, that we’ll never tell a soul. Why should we? You’re one of us. But sing,
dammit man, sing!”
11

“I can’t,” Sugar said. ”You don’t understand.”
“It isn’t what God intended,” said the man who believed. “We’re all doing what we love
best, and here you are, loving music and not able to sing a note. Sing for us! Sing with us!
And only you and us and God will know!”
They all promised. They all pleaded.
And the next day as the man who loved Rodgers and Hammerstein sang “Love, Look
Away,” Sugar began to hum. As the man who believed sang “God of Our Fathers,” Sugar sang
softly along. And as the man who loved folk songs sang, “Swing Low, Sweet Chariot,” Sugar
joined in with a strange, piping voice, and all the men laughed and cheered and welcomed
Sugar’s voice to the songs.
Inevitably Sugar began inventing. First harmonies, of course, strange harmonies that
made Guillermo frown and then, after a while, grin as he joined in, sensing as best he could
what Sugar was doing to the music.
And after harmonies, Sugar began singing his own melodies, with his own words. He
made them repetitive, the words simple and the melodies simpler still. And yet he shaped
them into odd shapes, and built them into songs that had never been heard of before, that
sounded wrong and yet were absolutely right. It was not long before the man who loved
Rodgers and Hammerstein and the man who sang folksongs and the man who believed were
learning Sugar’s songs and singing them joyously or mournfully or angrily or gaily as they
worked along the road.
Even Guillermo learned the songs, and his strong tenor was changed by them until his
voice, which had, after all, been ordinary, became something unusual and fine. Guillermo
finally said to Sugar one day, “Hey, Sugar, your music is all wrong, man. But I like the way
it feels in my nose! Hey, you know? I like the way it feels in my mouth!”
Some of the songs were hymns: “Keep me hungry, Lord” Sugar sang, and the road crew
sang it too.
Some of the songs were love songs: “Put your hands in someone else’s pockets,” Sugar
sang angrily; “I hear your voice in the morning,” Sugar sang tenderly; “Is it summer yet?”
Sugar sang sadly; and the road crew sang them, too.
Over the months, the road crew changed, one man leaving on Wednesday and a new
man taking his place on Thursday, as different skills were needed in different places. Sugar
was silent when each newcomer came, until the man had given his word and the secret was
sure to be kept.
What finally destroyed Sugar was the fact that his songs were so unforgettable. The
men who left would sing the songs with their new crews, and those crews would learn
them, and teach them to others. Crewmen taught the songs in bars and on the road; people
learned them quickly, and loved them; and one day a blind Watcher heard the songs and
knew, instantly, who had first sung them. They were Christian Haroldsen’s music, because
12

in those melodies, simple as they were, the wind of the north woods still whistled and the
fall of leaves still hung oppressively over every note and — and the Watcher sighed. He took
a specialized tool from his file of tools and boarded an airplane and flew to the city closest
to where a certain road crew worked. And the blind Watcher took a company car with
a company driver up the road, and at the end of it, where the road was just beginning to
pierce a strip of wilderness, the blind Watcher got out of the car and heard singing. Heard
a piping voice singing a song that made even an eyeless man weep.
“Christian,” the Watcher said, and the song stopped.
“You,” said Christian.
“Christian, even after you lost your fingers?”
The other men didn’t understand — all the other men, that is, except Guillermo.
“Watcher,” said Guillermo. “Watcher, he done no harm.”
The Watcher smiled wryly. “No one said he did. But he broke the law. You, Guillermo,
how would you like to work as a servant in a rich man’s house? How would you like to be
a bank teller?”
“Don’t take me from the road crew, man,” Guillermo said.
“It’s the law that finds where people will be happy. But Christian Haroldsen broke the
law. And he’s gone around ever since, making people hear music they were never meant to
hear.”
Guillermo knew he had lost the battle before it began, but he couldn’t stop himself.
“Don’t hurt him, man. I was meant to hear his music. Swear to God, it’s made me happier.”
The Watcher shook his head sadly. “Be honest, Guillermo. You’re an honest man. His
music’s made you miserable, hasn’t it? You’ve got everything you could want in life, and yet
his music makes you sad. All the time, sad.”
Guillermo tried to argue, but he was honest, and he looked into his own heart, and
he knew that the music was full of grief. Even the happy songs mourned for something;
even the angry songs wept; even the love songs seemed to say that everything dies and
contentment is the most fleeting thing. Guillermo looked in his own heart and all Sugar’s
music stared back up at him and Guillermo wept.
“Just don’t hurt him, please,” Guillermo murmured as he cried.
“I won’t,” the blind Watcher said. Then he walked to Christian, who stood passively
waiting, and he held the special tool up to Christian’s throat. Christian gasped.
“No,” Christian said, but the word only formed with his lips and tongue. No sound
came out. Just a hiss of air. “No.”
The road crew watched silently as the Watcher led Christian away. They did not sing
for days. But then Guillermo forgot his grief one day and sang an aria from La Bohème, and
the songs went on from there. Now and then they sang one of Sugar’s songs, because the
songs could not be forgotten.
13

In the city, the blind Watcher furnished Christian with a pad of paper and a pen. Chris-
tian immediately gripped the pencil in the crease of his palm and wrote: “What do I do
now?”
The driver read the note aloud, and the blind Watcher laughed. “Have we got a job for
you! Oh, Christian, have we got a job for you!” The dog barked loudly, to hear his master
laugh.
5
Applause
In all the world there were only two dozen Watchers. They were secretive men, who su-
pervised a system that needed little supervision because it actually made nearly everybody
happy. It was a good system, but like even the most perfect of machines, here and there it
broke down. Here and there someone acted madly, and damaged himself, and to protect
everyone and the person himself, a Watcher had to notice the madness and go to fix it.
For many years the best of the Watchers was a man with no fingers, a man with no
voice. He would come silently, wearing the uniform that named him with the only name
he needed — Authority. And he would find the kindest, easiest, yet most thorough way
of solving the problem and curing the madness and preserving the system that made the
world, for the first time in history, a very good place to live. For practically everyone.
For there were still a few people — one or two each year — who were caught in a circle
of their own devising, who could neither adjust to the system nor bear to harm it, people
who kept breaking the law despite their knowledge that it would destroy them.
Eventually, when the gentle maimings and deprivations did not cure their madness and
set them back into the system, they were given uniforms, and they, too, went out. Watching.
The keys of power were placed in the hands of those who had most cause to hate the
system they had to preserve. Were they sorrowful?
“I am,” Christian answered in the moments when he dared to ask himself that question.
In sorrow he did his duty. In sorrow he grew old. And finally the other Watchers, who
reverenced the silent man (for they knew he had once sung magnificent songs), told him he
was free. “You’ve served your time,” said the Watcher with no legs, and he smiled.
Christian raised an eyebrow, as if to say, “And?”
“So wander.”
Christian wandered. He took off his uniform, but lacking neither money nor time he
found few doors closed to him. He wandered where in his former lives he had once lived.
A road in the mountains. A city where he had once known the loading entrance of every
restaurant and coffee shop and grocery store. And at last to a place in the woods where a
house was falling apart in the weather because it had not been used in forty years.
14

Christian was old. The thunder roared, and it only made him realize that it was about
to rain. All the old songs. All the old songs, he mourned inside himself, more because he
couldn’t remember them than because he thought his life had been particularly sad.
As he sat in a coffee shop in a nearby town to stay out of the rain, he heard four teenagers
who played the guitar very badly singing a song that he knew. It was a song he had invented
while the asphalt poured on a hot summer day. The teenagers were not musicians and
certainly were not Makers. But they sang the song from their hearts, and even though the
words were happy, the song made everyone who heard it cry.
Christian wrote on the pad he always carried, and showed his question to the boys.
“Where did that song come from?”
“It’s a Sugar song,” the leader of the group answered. “It’s a song by Sugar.”
Christian raised an eyebrow, making a shrugging motion.
“Sugar was a guy who worked on a road crew and made up songs. He’s dead now,
though,” the boy answered.
“Best damn songs in the world,” another boy said, and they all nodded.
Christian smiled. Then he wrote (and the boys waited impatiently for this speechless
old man to go away): “Aren’t you happy? Why sing sad songs?”
The boys were at a loss for an answer. The leader spoke up, though, and said, “Sure, I’m
happy. I’ve got a good job, a girl I like, and man, I couldn’t ask for more. I got my guitar. I
got my songs. And my friends.”
And another boy said, “These songs aren’t sad, Mister. Sure, they make people cry, but
they aren’t sad.”
“Yeah,” said another. “It’s just that they were written by a man who knows.”
Christian scribbled on his paper. “Knows what?”
“He just knows. Just knows, that’s all. Knows it all.”
And then the teenagers turned back to their clumsy guitars and their young, untrained
voices, and Christian walked to the door to leave because the rain had stopped and because
he knew when to leave the stage. He turned and bowed just a little toward the singers. They
didn’t notice him, but their voices were all the applause he needed. He left the ovation and
went outside where the leaves were just turning color and would soon, with a slight inaudible
sound, break free and fall to the earth.
For a moment he thought he heard himself singing. But it was just the last of the wind,
coasting madly through the wires over the street. It was a frenzied song, and Christian
thought he had recognized his voice.
15

