A 
S T A R 
B O O K 
Z%bQ> 
/ 
19^i5 
/ 
U N D E R S T A N D I N G 
H U M A N 
N A T U R E 
Βγ A L F R E D A D L E R 
TRANSLATED BY 
Walter Beran Wolfe 
GARDEN 
C I T Y P U B L I S H I N G 
COMPANY, I N C . 
Q A H D B N 
C I T Y , 
N E W 
Ϊ Ο Β Κ 

COPYRIGHT, 
1927 
GREENBERG, PUBLtöHER, INC. 
PRINTED IM T H E U N I T E D 8TATE3 
O F ЛМЕК1СД 
AT T H E COUNTRY 
L I F E 
PRESS 
GARDEN C I T Y , NEW 
YORK 

AUTHOR'S P R E F A C E 
This book is an attempt to acquaint the general pubHc 
with the fundamentals of Individual Psychology. At the 
same time it is a demonstration of the practical applica­
tion of these principles to the conduct of one's everyday 
relationships, not only to the world, and to one's feüow-
men, but also to the organization of one's personal life. 
The book is based upon a year's lectures to an audience of 
hundreds of men and women of all ages and professions, 
at the People's Institute in Vienna. The purpose of the 
book is to point out how the mistaken behavior of the in­
dividual a*ffects the4harmony of our social and communal 
life; further, to teaeh the individual to Vecognize his own 
mistakes, and finaHy, to show him how he may effect a 
harmonious adjustment to thexcommunal Ufe. Mistakes in 
business or in science are costly and deplorable, but mis­
takes in the conduct of life are usually dangerous to Hfe 
itself. To the task of uluminating man's progress4oward 
a better · understanding of human nature, this book is 
Medicated. 
ALFRED ÄDLEH 


TRANSLATOR'S P R E F A C E 
It has long been one of the contentions of Alfred Adler 
that scientific knowledge must never remain the private 
property to those who, by virtue of their special training, 
have been enabled to win new truths from Nature: the 
value of all knowledge is relative to its usefulness to 
humanity. The origins of Individual Psychology lie in 
chapters on organ and constitutional pathology which are 
among the most abstruse in all medicine. Very few are 
qualified to read and understand Adler's first epoch-
making "STUDIE 
ÜBEß DIE MINDERWERTIGKEIT VON OB-
GANEN." Yet in the fifteen years which have foUowed the 
publication of this work, Alfred Adler and his feUow-
students have experimented ceaselessly along the lines sug­
gested in this book, so that today Individual Psychology 
has become a separate science, a psychotherapeutic method, 
a system of characterology, at one and the same time a 
'' Weltanschauung'' and an approach to the understanding 
of human conduct. Despite the difficulty of the source 
material, the technique of understanding human conduct 
which is the fruit of these fifteen years of constant experi­
ment and study, lies within the scope of any intelHgent 
adult. 
Individual Psychology foUowed its recognition of the 
origins of the neurosis and delinquency in the situations 
of childhood, by establishing free child-guidance clinics in 
the schools and settlements of Vienna. The courageous sac­
rifice of Adler's pupils, who worked without pay, often 
vii 

viii 
TRANSLATOR'S 
P R E F A C E 
under the most unsatisfactory physical conditions, was 
amply repaid Ъу the splendid psychotherapeutic results. 
Realizing further that every adult, armed with the method 
and insight of Individual Psychology, might make his life 
more meaningful, understand the conduct of his fellows 
better, and become a more complete human being, Adler 
responded to numerous requests, and held weekly lectures 
in the large auditorium of the People 's Institute of Vienna, 
on the understanding of human nature and on the tech­
nique of living. These leetures were held before audiences 
of several hundred people of both sexes, and of all ages. 
Following each lecture an open forum was held, and Dr. 
Adler answered the written questions showered upon him 
in his genial, encouraging way. 
UNDERSTANDING HuMAN NATUKE represents a year of 
these lectures at the People's Institute. A manifest defect 
in the book is that it is a spoken book and not a written 
book. Minus the gestures, minus the sparkle of Dr. Adler's 
wit, minus his extempore blackboard diagrams, UNDER­
STANDING 
HuMAN 
NATURE tends to become a literary 
shadow of a very vibrant reality. Yet the material covers 
the broad expanses of human conduct so well, and illum­
inates in the understanding of our fellows so many points 
which have become muddied in the current logomachia of 
the various psychotherapeutic schools, that the translation 
of this work becomes important to all students of human 
conduct. Physicians, psychiatrists, and psychologists will 
realize that UNDERSTANDING HuMAN NATURE is not an 
exhaustive treatise on psycho-pathology, but an attempt to 
treat the many-faceted problems of the neuroses in a man­
ner intelligible to the educated adult. Students of the spe­
cial problems, touched but cursorily in these pages, will 
use it not as a final text, but as a manual of suggestions 
and stimulations. The same may be said of educators and 

TRANSLATOR'S 
P R E F A C E 
ix 
sociologists, for whom the findings of Individual Psy­
chology are of great moment. It is to the average intelli­
gent adult that UNDERSTANDING HuMAN NATURE wül have 
the greatest appeal. The precept of Socrates, "Know thy­
self!" was, unfortunately, not followed by directions for 
acquiring that knowledge. Centuries after the death of the 
Athenian, a profound thinker, a great physician, a greater 
knower of the human soul, has gathered the fruits of his 
experience, and published a manual and a guide for this 
understanding of our fellows and ourselves. 
The otherwise arduous toil of adequately translating 
these lectures from the involved and ponderous thought-
ways of German, has been materially lightened by a fortu­
nate constellation of circumstances. The preparation of the 
manuscript and the correction of the proofs have been 
largely the painstaking and friendly labor of Professor 
Elizabeth-Vera Loeb of Hunter College. Long personal 
study with Dr. Adler, attendance at these very lectures, 
participation in the actual work of the child-guidance 
clinics in Vienna, together with the application of the 
theory and practice of Individual Psychology in the clinics 
of New York, have enabled the translator to translate not 
only the words, but the feeling and spirit of Individual 
Psychology, into the more dynamic idiom of America. A 
splendid fellowship with the author has more than compen­
sated the translator for his pains. 
W. BERAN WOLPE, M.D. 
New York City 
November 1927 


CONTENTS 
PAÜB 
P R E F A C E 
.. . 
. 
ν 
TRANSLATOR'S 
PREFACE 
vii 
INTRODUCTION 
3 
BOOK I : HUMAN BEHAVIOR 
OHAPTBR 
I. 
THE SOUL 
17 
The Concept and Premise of the Psychic Life . 
. 
17 
The Function of the Psychic Organ . 
. 
. 
. 
18 
Teleology in the Psyehic Life 
19 
I I . 
SOCIAL ASPECTS OF THE PSYCHIC L I F E . 
26 
The Absolute Truth 
26 
The Need lor Communal Life 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
27 
Security and Adaptation 
29 
The Social Feeling 
. 
. 
. 
31 
I I I . 
CHILD AND SOCIETY 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
33 
The Situation of the Infant . 
. 
. 
·.: . 
. .· 33 
The Influence of Difficulties 
36 
Man as a Social Being 
42 
IV. 
T H E WORLD WE L I V E IN 
44 
The Structure of Our Cosmos 
44 
Elements in the Development of the Cosmic Picture 47 
Perception 
47 
Memory 
48 
Imagination 
49 
Fantasy 
. 
. 
57 
Dreams: General Considerations 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
59 
Empathy and Identification . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
60 
Hypnosis and Suggestion 
. 
. 
. •. ·. 
. 
. 
62 
xi 

xii 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTEB 
PAGE 
V. 
T H E F E E L I N G OF INFERIORITY AND T H E 
STRIVING FOR RECOGNITION . 
. 
. 
. 
69 
The Situation in Early Childhood 
69 
The Striving for Superiority 
72 
The Graph of Life and the Cosmic Picture 
. 
. 
80 
VI. 
THE PREPARATION FOR L I F E 
91 
Play 
91 
Attention and Distraction 
. 
93 
Criminal Negligence and Forgetfulness 
. 
. 
. 
96 
The Unconscious 
97 
Dreams 
107 
Talent 
117 
VII. 
SEX 
120 
Bisexuality and the Division of Labor . 
. 
. 
. 120 
The Dominance of the Male in the Culture of Today 122 
The Alleged Inferiority of Women 
129 
Desertion from Womanhood 
133 
Tension Between the Sexes 
145 
Attempts at Reform 
147 
VIII. 
T H E FAMILY CONSTELLATION 
149 
BOOK I I : T H E SCIENCE OF CHARACTER 
• I. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
161 
The Nature and Origin of Character . 
. 
. 
. 161 
The Significance of the Social Feeling for the De­
velopment of Character 
166 
The Direction of Character Development . 
. 
. 171 
The Old School of Psychology 
179 
Temperament and Endocrine Secretion . 
. 
. 
. 180 
Recapitulation 
188 
. I I . AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
. 
. 
. 191 
Vanity and Ambition 
191 
Jealousy 
221 
Envy 
223 

CONTENTS 
xiii 
CHAPTER 
PAOE 
Avarice 
227 
Hate 
228 
« I I I . NON-AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS . 
. 233 
Seclusiveness 
233 
Anxiety . 
. 
235 
Faint-Heartedness 
239 
Untamed Instincts as the Expression of Lessened 
Adaptation 
248 
. IV. OTHER EXPRESSIONS OP CHARACTER . 
. 252 
Cheerfulness 
252 
Thought Processes and Ways of Expression . 
. 253 
Schoolboy Immaturity 
254 
Pedants and Men of Principle 
255 
Submissiveness 
256 
Imperiousness 
260 
Mood and Temperament 
261 
Hard Luck 
262 
Religiosity 
263 
. V. 
AFFECTS AND EMOTIONS 
265 
Disjunctive Afiects 
267 
Anger 
. 
· 
. 267 
Sadness 
270 
The Misuse of Emotion 
271 
Disgust 
273 
Fear and Anxiety 
273 
The Conjunctive AJiects 
275 
Joy 
. 275 
Sympathy 
276 
Modesty 
277 
APPENDIX 
. 
. > . 
. 279 
General Remarks on Education 
279 
Conclusion . 
. 
. 
. 
284 

UNDERSTANDING 
HUMAN NATURE 


I N T R O D U C T I O N 
"The 
destiny of man lies in his soul." 
HERODOTUS 
The science qf humannature may not be approached 
with too much presumption and pride. On the contrary, its 
understanding stamps those who practice it with a cer­
tain modesty. The problem of human nature is one wbieh 
presents an enormous task, whose"solution has been the 
goaloföürculture since time immemoriah^^jsas^ience 
that can not be pursued with the sole purpose of developing 
occasional experts. Only the understanding ofhuman na-
,tureT)y every human being can be its proper goal. Thisis 
asore point with acddemie investigators who consider their 
^ ' researches the exclusive property of a scientific group. 
Owing to our isolated life noneof us knows veryjuücX 
abouthumannäture.In former times it was impossible for 
humanbeings~to live such isolated lives as they live to­
day. We have from the earliest days of our childhood 
few connections with hun|anity.^Thefamilyisolates us. 
Our whole way of living"irihibits that necessary intimate 
vcontact with our fellow men, which is essential forthe de­
velopment of the science and art of knowing human na­
ture. Since we do notfind sufficient contact with our fellow 
men, we become their enemies-vOur behavior towards them 
is often mistaken, and our judgments frequently fabe, sim­
ply because we do not adequately understand human na­
ture. It is an oft-repeated truism that human beings walk 
jaastj and talk past, each other, fail to make contacts, be-
3 

4 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
N A T U R E 
cause they approaeh each other as strangers, not only in 
society, but also in the very narrow circle of the family. 
There is no more frequent complaint than the complaint 
of parents that they cannot understand their children, 
and that of children that they are misunderstood by their 
parents. Our whole attitude toward our fellow man is de­
pendent upon our understanding of him; an implicit 
necessity for understanding him therefore is a fundamental 
of the social relationship. Human beings would live to­
gether more easily if their knowledge of human nature 
were more sat^sfactory.,Disturbing social relationships 
could then be 'obviated^ for' we knowthat unfortunate ad­
justments are possible only when we do not understand one 
another and are therefore exposed to the danger of being 
deceived by superficial dissimulations. 
It is now our purpose to explain wby^n attempt is made 
to approach the problem from the standpoint of the med­
ical sciences, with the objective of laying the foundations 
of an exact science in this enormous field; and to determine 
what the premises of this science of human nature must be, 
what problems itmust solve, and what results might be 
expected from it. \ 
In the first place,^sychiatry is already a science which 
demands a tremendous knowledge of human nature. The 
psychiatrist must obtain insight into the soul of the neu­
rotic patient as quickly and as accurately as possible. In 
this particular field of medicine one can judge, treat, and 
prescribe effectively only when one is quite sure of what 
is going on in the soul of the patient. Superficiality has no 
place here. Error is followed quickly by punishment, and 
the correct understanding of the ailment is crowned by suc­
cess in the treatment. In other words, a very effective test 
of our knowledge of human nature occurs. In ordinary life, 
an error in the judgment of another human being need not 

INTRODUCTION 
5 
be followed by dramatic consequences, for these may occur 
so long after the mistake has been made that the connection 
is not obvious. Often we find ourselves astonished to see 
what great misfortunes foUow decades after a misinterpre¬
tation of a fellow man. Such dismal occurrences teach ua 
the necessity and duty of every man to acquire a working 
knowledge of human nature. 
/ Our examinations of nervous diseases prove that the psy-
|'chic anomalies, complexes, mistakes, which are found in 
[nervous diseases are fundamentaUy not different in struc-
$urefrom the activity of normal individuals. The same 
elements, the same premises, the same movements, are un­
der consideration. The sole difference is that in the nervous 
patient they appear more marked, and are more easilyrec-
ognized. The advantage of this discovery is that we can 
learn from the abnormal cases, and sharpen our eye for 
the discovery of related movements and characteristics in 
the normal psychic life. It is solely a question of that 
training, ardor, and patience which are required by any 
profession. 
ГThe"first great discovery was this: the most important 
determinants of the structure of the soul Ше are generated 
in the earliest days of childhood. In itself this was not such 
arf audacious discovery; similar findings had been made 
by the great students of aU times. The novelty lay in the 
fact thatwewere able to join the childhood experiences, 
impressions, and attitudes, so far as we were capable of 
determining them, with the later phenomena of the soul 
life, in one incontrovej^jhh^andcontinuous pattern,In this 
way we wereableto compare the experiences and attitudes 
of the earliest childhood days with the experiences and at­
titudes of the mature individual later on in life; and in 
this connection the important discovery was made that the 
single manifestations of the psychic life must never be 

6 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
regarded as entities sufficient unto themselves. It was 
learned that we could gain an understanding of these sin­
gle manifestations only when we considered them as par­
tial aspects of an indivisible whole, and that these single 
manifestations could be valued only when we^ouTxT3e-
terminetheir place in the general stream of activity, in 
the general behavior pattern—only when we could dis­
cover theindividual's whole style oflife, and make per­
fectly clear that the secret goal of his childhood "attitude 
was identical with his attitude in maturity. In short, it 
was proven with astonishing clarity that, from the stand-
.point"of psychic movements, no change had taken place. 
The outer form, the concretization, the verbalization of 
certain psychic phenomena might change, but the funda­
mentals, the goal, the dynamics, everything which directed 
jthe psychie life towards its final objective, remained con-
'stant. A mature patient who has an anxious character, 
whose mind isiconstantly filled with doubts and mistrust, 
whose everyeffort is directed toward isolating himself from 
society, shows the identical character traits and psychic 
movements in his third and fourth year of life, though 
in their childish simplicity they are more transparently 
interpreted. We made it a rule therefore to direct the 
greater part of our investigation to the childhood of all 
patients; and thus we developed the art of being able, 
often, to reveal characteristics of a mature person whose 
childhood we knew, before we were told of them. What we 
\ 
observe in him as an adult we consider the direct pro-
je_ction~of"that"which'he has experienced in childhood. 
/ When we hear the most vivid recollections of a patient 's 
childhood, and know how to interpret these recollections 
,correctly, we can reconstruct with great accuracy the pat­
tern of his present characterj In doing this we make use of 
the fact that an individual can vdeviate from the behavior 

INTRODUCTION 
7 
ι into which he has grown in childhood only with great 
j difficulty. Very few individuab have ever been able to 
j change the behavior pattern of their childhood, though 
! in a'dult life they have found themselves in entirely dif-
I ferent situations. A change of attitude in adult life need 
' not necessarily signify a ehange of behavior pattern. The 
j psychic life does not change its foundation; the individual 
j retains the same line of acjfiy^tyboth in childhood and in 
j *maturity, leading us to d^duce^fhat" his goal in life is also 
; unaltered. There is another reason for concentrating our 
attention upon childhood experiences if we wish to change 
the behavior pattern. It makes little difference whether 
we alter the countless experiences and impressions of an 
individual in maturity; what is necessary is to discover 
the fundamental behavior pattern of our patient. Once this 
is understood we can learn his essential character and the 
correct interpretation of his illness. 
The examination of the soul life of the child thus be­
came the ^fukrum^of our science, and a great many re­
searches were dedicated to the study of the first years of 
life. There is so much material in this field which has never 
been touched nor probed that everyone is in a position to 
discover new and valuable data which would prove of im­
mense use in the study of human nature. 
A method of preventing bad character traits was simul­
taneously developed, since our studies do not exist for 
their own sake but for the benefit of mankind. Quite with­
out previous thought, our researches led into the field of 
pedagogy, to which we have contributed for years. Peda­
gogy is a veritabk^^treas,irp-ti'm^ for any one who wishes 
to experiment in it, ahd apply to it what he has found val­
uable in the study of human nature, because pedagogy, 
like the science of human nature, is not to be got out of 
books, but must be acquired in the practical school of life. 

8 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
We must identify ourselves with every manifestation of 
the soul life, live ourselves into it, accompany human 
beings through their joys and their sorrows, in much the 
same way that a good painter paints into a portrait those 
characteristics which he has felt in the person of his sub­
ject. The science of human nature is to be thought of as 
an art which has many instruments at its disposal, an art 
^cbsely related to аЦ other arts, and useful to them^ In lit­
erature and poetry, particularly, it is of exceptional import. 
Its first object must be to enlarge our knowledge of human 
beings, that is to say, it must enable us all to acquire the 
possibüity of fashioning for ourselves a better and a riper 
j)sychic devehTpment. 
7 
^W**| 
Ohe of our great difficulties is that we very frequently 
find people extraordinarilybensitive on just the point of 
their understanding of human nature. There are very few 
human beings who do not consider themselves masters in 
this science even though they have had very few studies 
preparatory to their degree; and there are even fewer such 
who would not feel offended if one would demand that they 
put their knowledge of mankind to the test. Those who 
really wish to know human nature are only those who 
have experienced •the worth and value of people through 
their own empathy, that is, through the fact that they 
аЬзо have lived tnrough psychic crises, or have been able 
to fully recognize them in others. 
From this circumstance arises the problem and the ne­
cessity of finding a precise tactic and strategy, and a tech­
nique in the application of our knowledge. For nothing is 
more hateful, and nothing will be met with a more critical 
glance, than that we should brusquely throw into the face 
of an individual the stark facts which we have discovered 
in the exploration of his soul. It might be well to advise 
anyone who does not want to be hated that he be careful in 

INTRODUCTION 
9 
this very connection. An excellent way to acquire a bad rep­
utation is carelessly to make use of facts gained through a 
knowledge of human nature, and misuse them, as for in­
stance in the desire to show how much one knows or has 
guessed concerning the character of one's neighbor at a 
dinner. It is also dangerous to cite merely the basic truths of 
this science as finished products, for the edification of some­
one who does not understand the science as a whole. Even 
those who do understand the science would feel themselves 
insulted through such a procedure. We must repeat what 
we have already said: the science of human nature com­
pels us to modesty. We may not announce the results of our 
experiments unnecessarily and hastily. This would be ger-
'mane only to a little child who was anxious to parade him­
self and show off all the things that he can do. It is hardly 
to be considered as an appropriate action for an adult. 
We should advise the knower of the human soul first to 
test himseH. He should never cast the results of his experi­
ments which he has won in the service of mankind, into the 
face of an unwilling victim. He would only be making fresh 
difficulties for a still-growing science, and actually defeat 
his purpose! We should then have to bear the onus of mis*, 
takes which had arisen from the unthinking entnusiasm of 
young explorers. It is better to remain careful and mindful 
of the fact that we must have a complete whole in view be­
fore we can draw any conclusions about its parts. Such 
conclusions, furthermore, should be published only when 
we are quite certain that they are to someone'sadvantage. 
One can accomplish a great deal of mischief by asserting 
in a bad way, or at an improper moment, a correct con­
clusion concerning character. 
We must now, before going on with our &onsidgra1,t<>ng, 
meet a certain objection which has already suggested it­
self to many readers. The foregoing assertion, that the 

10 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
style of life of the individual remains unchanged, will be 
incomprehensible to many, because an individual has so 
many experiences in life which change his attitudetoward 
it. We must remember that any experience may have many 
interpretations. We wiU find that there are no two people 
who will draw the same conclusion from a similar expe­
rience. This accounts for the fact that our experiences do 
rxOt always make us any cleverer. One learns to avoid some 
difficulties, it is true, and acquires a philosophical attitude 
towards others, but the pattern along which one acts does 
_a2i_change as a result of this. We will see in the course of 
our further considerations that a human being always 
employs his experiences to the same end. Closer examination 
reveals that all his experiences must fit into his style of 
life, into the mosaieof his life's pattern. It is proverbial 
that we fashion our own experiences. Everyone determines 
how and what he will experience. In our daily life we 
observe people drawing whatever conclusions they desire 
from their experiences. There is the man who constantly 
makes a certain mistake. If you succeed in convincing him 
of his mistake, his reactions will be varied. He may con­
clude that, as a matter of fact, it was high time to avoid 
this mistake. Thisis a very rare conclusion. More prob­
ably he will object that he has been making this mistake 
so long that he is now no longer able to rid himself of the 
habit. Or he wiU blame his parents, or his education, for 
his mistake; he may complain that he has never had any-
Ш
Ьо ever cared for him, or that he was very much 
, or that he was brutally treated, and excuse his 
jCiiui with an alibi. Whatever excuse he makes, h^e betrays 
';One thing, and that is that he wishes to be excused of 
vfurther responsibility. In this manner he has an appar-
nent justification and avoids all criticism of himself. He 
-&imself is never to blame. The reason he has never ac· 

INTRODUCTION 
11 
complished what he desired to do is always someone else's 
fault. What such individuals overlook is the fact that they 
themselves have made very few efforts to obviate their mis­
takes. They are far more anxious to remain in error, blam­
ing their bad education with a certain fervor, for their 
faults. This is an effective alibi so long as they wish to 
have it so. The many possible interpretations of an expe­
rience and the possibility of drawing various conclusions 
from any single one, enables us to understand why a per­
son does not ehange his behavior pattern, but turns and 
twists and distorts his experiences until they fit it. The 
hardest_thiag for hmftan beings to dois to know^thejaselvgs 
ai^I^o_flhange themselves. 
f 
Any one who is not a master in the theory and technique 
of the science of human nature would experience great 
difficulty in attempting to educate human beings to be 
better men. He would be operating entirely on the surface, 
and would be drawn into the error of believing that be­
cause the external aspect of things had changed, he had 
accomplished something significant. Practical cases show 
us how little such technique wiU change an individual, and 
how all the seeming changes are only apparent changes, 
valueless so long as the behavior pattern itself has not been 
modified. 
/The business of transforming a human being is not a 
[ simple process. It demands a certain optimism and pa-
ii tience, and above all the exclusion of all personal vanity, 
since the individual to be transformed is not in duty bound 
J to be an object of another's vanity. The process of transfor-
I mation, moreover, must be conducted in such a way that it 
|seems justified-for the one changed. We can easily under-
iistand that some one wiU refuse a dish which would other-
I 
' 
jwise be very tasty to him if it is not prepared and offered 
vto him in an appropriate manner. 

12 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN N A T U R E 
The science of human nature has yet another aspect-
which we may call its social aspect. Huwan beings would 
dqubibss- -gfit_^kmg__w_ith^ each other better, _&nd would 
apcroach_eacJLi^bejLmM 
stand one anothex^tatier. Under such circumstances it 
would be impossible for them to disappoint and deceive 
each other. A^_^crmoj^_^anger_to societyliesin_this 
possibility^fj^ecepJJOn^ This danger musFbe demonstrated 
to our fellow-workers, whom we/are introducing to this 
study. TJ,pay^mj^t_be capable of paaking those uponwhom 
they are_p_racticing their science understandthe vaTue of 
the, unknown^a^d^unco^scious^Oic^s' working within us; 
in order to help them they must be cognSia^f"ofall the 
veiled, distorted, disguised tricks and legerdemain, of 
Ътгтвп behavior. To this end we must learn the science of 
human nature and practice it consciously with its social 
purpose in view. 
Who is best fitted to collect the material of this science, 
and to practice it ? We have already noted that it is impos­
sible to practice this science only theoretically. It is not 
enough simply to know all the rules and data. It is neces­
sary to transmute our studies into practice, and correlate 
them so that our eyes will acquire a sharper and deeper 
view than has been previously possible. This is the real pur­
pose of the theoretical side of the science of human nature. 
But we can make this science living only when we step out 
into life itself and test and utilize the theories which we 
have gained. There is an important reason for our question. 
In the course of our education we acquire too little knowl­
edge of human nature—and much of what we learn is in-
Vcorrect, because contemporary education is still unsuited to 
give us a valid knowledge of the human soul. Every child 
is left entirely to himself to evaluate his experiences prop­
erly, and to develop himself beyond his classroom work. 

INTRODUCTION 
13 
^There is no tradition for the acquisition of a true knowl­
edge of the human soul. The science of human nature finds 
itself today in the condition that chemistry occupied in the 
^ days of'alchemy. 
>^W_eJmve.foundJ,hat t^oje_wJ^L_h^e^o^been_^j^^t 
ftf *ЬфГ sofial relatinnshipft hv t.np> prnnplipatpd TtuLddb 
ofoureducational system are best adapted to pursue_thgsg_ 
researches in human nature. We are dealing with men and 
women who are, in the last analysis, either optimists, or 
fighting pessimists who have not been driven to resigna­
tion by their pessimism. But contact with humanity, alone, 
is not enough. There must be experience as well. A real 
appreciation for human nature, in the face of our inade­
quate education today, wiU be gained only by one class of 
human beings. These are the «mlrit$ sinners, either those 
who have been in the whirlpool of psychic life, entangled 
in aU its mistakes and errors, and saved themselves out of 
it, or those who have been close to it and felt its currents 
touching them. Others naturaUy can learn it, especially 
when they have the gift of identification, the gift of empa­
thy. The best knower of the human soul wiU be the one who 
has lived through passions himself. The contrite sinner 
seems as valuable a type in our day and age as he was in the 
days when the great religions developed. He stands much 
higher than a thousand righteous ones. How does this hap­
pen? An individual who has lifted himself above the dif­
ficulties of life, extricated himself from the swamp of liv­
ing, found power to profit by bad experiences, and elevate 
himself as a result of them, understands the good and the 
bad sides of life. No one can compare with him in this un­
derstanding, certainly not the righteous one. 
When we find an individual whose behavior pattern has 
rendered him incapable of a happy life, there arises out 
of our knowledge of human nature the implicit duty to 

14 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
N A T U R E 
aid him in readjusting the false perspectives with which 
he wanders through his life. We muTsi%ivehun better per­
spectives, perspectives which are adapted to the community, 
which are more appropriate for the achievement of happi­
ness in this existence. We must give him a new system of 
thought, indicate another pattern for him in which the 
social feeling and the communal consciousness play a 
more important r61e. We do not purpose to make an ideal 
structure of his psychic life. A new viewpoint in itself is 
of great value to the perplexed, since from this he learns 
where he has gone ,astray in making his mistakes. Accord­
ing to our view the strict determinists who consider all 
human activity as the sequence of cause and effect are 
not far from wrong. Causality becomes a different causal­
ity, and the results of experience acquire entirely new 
values, when the power of self-knowledge and self-criticism 
is still alive, and remains a living motif. Th^_abuity_ta. 
know one's self becomes greater when one can determine 
the weilspringsof his activity and the dynamics of his soul. 
Once he has understood this, he has become a different 
( man and can no longer escape the inevitable consequences 
; of his knowledge. 

BOOK I 
HUMAN BEHAVIOR 


C H A P T E R 
I 
THE SOUL 
' ; 
-
^
^
M
^ 
-
I. THE CONCEPT AND РВЕШБЕ ΟΡ'^ΤΗΕ PSYCmC LüTB 
.'1 We attribute a soul only to moving, living organisms.,-;* 
The soulstandsininnaterelationship to free motion.' 
Thoseorganisms which are strongly rooted have no neces­
sity for a soul. How supernatural it would be to attribute 
emotions and thoughts to a deeply rooted plant! To hold 
that a plant eould, perhaps, accept pain which it could in 
no way escape, or that it could have a pj^s£niim£ni_Df that 
which it could not later avoid! To attribute reason and free 
wiU to it at the same time that we considered it aforegone 
conclusion that the plant could not make any use of its 
wiU! Under such conditions the wiU and the reason of 
the plant would of necessity remain sterüe. 
^Thereisa^strict corollary between movement and psychic 
life. This constitutes" thedifferencebetween 
plant and 
animal. In the_evoJLution of the psychie life, thereforej_we 
must consider everything which is connected with move­
ment. All the difficulties that are connected with change 
lof place demand of the soul that it foresee, gather ex­
periences, develop a memory, in .order that the organism 
|be_better fitted for the business of life^We can ascertain 
then m the very beginning that the'development of the 
psychic life is connected with movement, and that the 
evolution and progress of aU those things which are ac­
complished by the soul are conditioned by the free movabil-
17 

18 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
ity of the organism. This movability stimulates, promotes, 
and requires an always greater intensification of the 
psychic life. Imagine an individual to whom we have 
predicated everv movement, and we can conceive of his 
psychic life as at a standstill. "Liberty alone breeds giants. 
Compulsion only kills and destroys." 
I I . JTHE FUNCTION OP THE PSYCHIC ORGAN / 
If we regard the function of the psychic organ from this 
standpoint, we will become aware that we are considering 
the evolution of a hereditary capability, an organ for of¬
'' fense and defense with which the living organism responds 
according to the situation in which it find itself. The 
psychiclife is a complex of aggressive and security^ 
finding activities whose finälpurpose is to guarantee the 
continued existenceon this earth of the human organism, 
and to enable him to securely accomplish his development. 
If we ^antffis^remlse,"the^rfurther considerations grow 
out of it, which we deem_ necessary for a true conception 
of the soul. We cannot imagine a psychic Ufe which is 
tsotafeeL_We can onIy~imagine a psychic life bound up 
with its environment, which receives stimuli from the out-
jside and^ somehow answers them,Jwhich disposes of capa­
bilities and powers which are not fitted to secure the organ­
ism against the ravages of the outer world, or somehow 
bind it to these forces, in order to guarantee its life. 
The relationships which suggest themselves, from this are 
many. They have to do with the organism itself, the pecu­
liarities of human beings, their physical nature, their assets 
and their defects. These are entirely relative concepts, since 
it is entirely a relative matter whether a power or an or­
gan shall be interpreted as ^^geLor liability. These values 
сал be given only by the situations :n which the indi-

T H E SOUL 
19 
vldual finds himself. It is very well-known that the foot 
of man is, in a sense, a degenerate hand. In an animal 
which had to climb this would be of decided disadvantage, 
but for a man, who must walk on the flat ground, it is of 
such advantage that no one would prefer a "normal" hand 
to a "degenerate" foot. As a matter of fact, in our per-
sonal'lives,jas in the livesofaUpeoples,inferiorities are 
not io be considered as the source of all evil. Only the 
situation cah .determine whether they are assets or Uabil-
ities. When we recall how variegated the relationships are 
between the cosmos, with ifs day and night, its dominance 
of the sun, its movabiHty of atoms, and the psychic life of 
man, we reaUze how much these influences affect our psychic 
Hfe. 
г α < : ч [>,ла 
ίΐr.- 
• 
I I I . PURPOSrVENESß (TELEOLOGY) IN THE PSYCHIC 
v 
LlFE 
' The first thing we can discover in the psychic trends is 
that the movements are directed toward a goal. We cannot, 
therefore, imagine the human soul as a sort of static whole. 
I We can imagine it only as a complex of moving powers 
which are, however, the result of a unit cause, and which 
strive for the consummation of a single goal. This teleology, 
• this striving for a goal, is innate in the concept of adapta-
! tion. We can only imagine a psychic life with a goal to¬
; wards which the movements which exist in the psychic life, 
vare_dirccted. 
l^The psychic life of rrum is determined Ъу his goal- No 
human being can think, feel, will, dream, without all these 
activities being determined, continued, modified and di­
rected, toward an ever-present objective. This results, of 
itself, from the necessity of the organism to adapt itseK 
and respond to the environment. The bodily and psychic 

20 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
N A T U R E 
phenomena of human life are based upon those funda­
mentals which we have demonstrated. We cannot conceive-;^ 
of a psychic evolution except within tEe'"patternof an 
ever-present objective, which is determined in itself by 
the dynamics of life. The goal itself wemay_conceiyeas 
changingor as static. 
On this basis all phenomena of the soul life may be 
conceived as preparations for some future situation. It 
seems hardly possible to recognize in the psychic organ, 
the soul, anything but a force acting toward a goal, ^nd 
Individual Psychology considers all the manifestations of 
the human soul as though they were directed toward a 
goal. 
Knowing the goal of an individual, and knowing, also, 
something of the world, we must understand what the 
movements and expressions of his life mean, and what 
their value is as a preparation for his goal. We must know 
also what type of movements this individual must make to 
reach his goal, just as we know what path a stone must 
take if we let it drop to earth, although the soul knows no 
natural law, for the everfpresent goal is always in flux. 
If, however, one has an ever-present goal, then every psycfne 
. tendency must follow with a certain compulsion, as though 
there were a natural law which it obeyed. Alaw governing,., 
tbe_psychic life exists, to be sure; but it is a man-made lawi' 
If anyone feels that the evidence is sufficient to warrant, 
speaking of a psychic law he has been deceived ^oy ap¬
pearances, for when he believes that he has demonstrated 
the unchangeable nature and determination of circum-
/6tance, he has stacked the cards. If a painter_desires to 
j paint a picture, one attributes to him"all the attitudes~ 
i which are germane to an individual who has that goal 
\ before his eyes. He will make all the necessary movements 
\with inevitable consequence, just as though there were 

T H E SOUL 
21 
a natural law at work. But is he under any necessity to 
paint the picture? 
'Γ' There is a difference between movements in nature and 
those in the human soul life. АП the questions about free 
wiU jinfrftupnh't.bia important point. Nowadays it is be-
lievM lhdl human wiU is not free. It is true that human 
wiU becomes bound as soon as it entangles itself or binds 
itself to a certain goal. And since circumstances in the cos­
mic, animal, and social relationships of man frequently 
determine this goal, it is not strange that the psychic life 
should often appear to us as though it were under the 
regency^of unchangeable laws. But if a man, for example, 
denies his relationships to society and fights them, or refuses 
to adapt himself to the facts of life, then all these seeming 
daws are abrogated and a new law steps in which is deter-
!mined by the new goal. In the same manner, the law of 
|Communal life does not bind an individual who has be-
|come perplexed at life and attempts to 6xtirpate_ his feel­
ing for his fellowmen. And so we must assert that a move¬
. ment in the psychic life must arise of necessity only when 
!.ад appropriate goal has been posited. 
£ , 
,, 
On the other hand, it is quite possible todeduce what the 
goal of an individua^must be from his present activities. 
This is of the greater importance because so few people 
know exactly whaVtheir goal is. In actual practiceit is the 
procedure which we must foUow in order to gain a knowl­
edge of mankind. Since movements may have many mean­
ings this is not always so simple. TVe"cah*however take 
many"movements of an individual, compare them, and 
graphically represent them; in this way we arrive at an 
understanding of a human being by connecting two points 
wherein a definite attitude of the psychic life was ex­
pressed, in which the difference in time is noted by a curve. 
This mechanism is utilized toobtain a unified impression 

22 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
of a whole life. An example wffl serve to ülustrate how we 
may rediscover a childhood pattern in an adult, in aU its 
astonishing similarity. 
A certain thirty-year-old man of extraordinarily ag­
gressive character, who achieved success and honor despite 
difficulties in his development, comes to the physician in 
circumstances of greatest depression, and complains that 
he has no desire to work or to live. He explains that he 
is about to be engaged, but that he looks at the future with 
great mistrust. He is pjajjuAeUby a strong jealousy, and 
, there is great danger tnathis engagement will be broken. 
; The facts in the case, which he brings up to prove his 
\ point, are not very convincing. Since no one can reproach 
.the young lady, the obvious distrusf;which he shows lays 
him open to suspicion. He is one of those many men who 
approach änother individual, feei themselves attracted, but 
immediately assume an aggressive attitude, which destroys 
%he very contact which they seek to establish, 
j Now let us plot the graph of this man's style of life as 
we have indicated above, by taking out one event in his 
life and seeking to join it up with his present attitude. 
jAccording to our experience, we usually demand the first 
jchildhood remembrance, even though we know that it is 
jnot alwayiTpossibTS"To"test the value of this remembrance 
jobjectively. This was his first childhood remembrance: he 
Jwas at the market place with his mother and his younger 
1 brother. Because of the turmoü and crowding, his mother 
I took him, the elder brother, on her arm. As she noticed 
! her error, she put him down again and took the younger 
; child up, leaving our patient to run around crushed by 
ί the crowd, very much perplexed. At that time he was four 
j years old. In the recital of this remembrance, we hear the 
identical notes that we surmised in a description of his 
present complaint. He is not' certain of being the favored 

T H E SOUL 
23 
j one, and he cannot bear to think that another might be 
; favored. Once the connection is made clear to him, our 
j patient, very much astonished, sees the relationship im¬
.' mediately. 
The goal toward which every human being's actions are 
/ directed, is determined by those influences and those im-
j pressions which the environment gives to the child. The 
ί ideal state, that is, the goal, of each human being, is prob-
\ ably formed in the first months of his life. Even at this time 
\ certain sensations play a role which evoke a response of 
1 joy or discomfort in the child. Here the first traces of a 
j philosophy of life come to the surface, although expressed 
vin__the most primitive fashion. The fundamental factors 
which influence the soul life are fixed at the time when the 
child is still an infant. Upon these foundations a super­
structure is built, which may be modified, influenced, trans­
formed. A multiplicity of influences soon forces the child 
j into a definite attitude towards life, and c^nq^tionsJbis_par-
jticular type of response to the problems which üfegives. 
Investigators who believe the characteristics of an adult 
are noticeable in his infancy are not far wrong; this ac­
counts for the fact that character is often considered he­
reditary. But the concept that character and persoriaUty 
are inherited from one's parents is universaUy harmful 
because it hinders the educator in his task and cramps his 
confidence. The real reason for assuming that charaeter 
is inherited lies elsewhere. This^evajima enables anyone who 
has the task of education to escape his responsibüities by 
the simple gesture of blaming heredity for the pupil's fail­
ures. This, of course, is quite contrary to the purpose of 
education. 
Our civilization makes important contributions to the 
determination of the goal. Itsetsboundaries against, whifth 
|a chUd battershimseKuntU he finds a way to the fnlfill-

24 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
ment of his wishes whieh promises both security and 
; adaptation to life. How much security the child demands in 
relation to the actuanties of our culture may be learned 
; eariyjn his life. By security we do not consider only se­
curity from danger; we refer to that further coefficient of 
safety whieh guarantees the continued existence of the hu¬
i man organism under optimum circumstances, in very much 
the same way that we speak of the "coefficient of safety" 
|in the operation of a well-planned machine. A child ac­
quires this coefficient of safety by demanding a "plus" 
factor of safety greater than is necessary merely for the 
satisfaction of his given instincts, greater than would be 
necessary for a quiet development. Thus arises a new move­
ment in his soul life. This new movement is, very plainly, 
a tendency toward domination and superiority. Like the 
j grownup, a child wants to out-distance all his rivals. He 
< strains for a superiority which will vouchsafe him that se­
curity and adaptation which are synonymous with the goal 
; he has previously set for himself. There thus wells up a 
certain unrest in his psychic life which becomes markedly 
accentuated as time goes on. Suppose now that the world 
requires a more intensive response. If in this time of need 
\ the child does not believe in his own ability to overcome 
his difficulties we will notice his strenuous evasions and 
. complicated alibis, which serve only to make the underly­
ing thirst for glory the more evident. 
I Inthese circumstances the immediate goal frequently 
!becomesthe evasion of all greater difficulties. This type 
recoils from difficulties or wriggles out of them in order 
temporarily to evade the demands of life. We must under­
stand that the reactions of the human soul are not final 
and absolute: every response is but a partial response, 
valid temporarily, but in no way to be considered a final 
solution of a problem. In the development of the child-

T H E SOUL 
25 
:soul especially, are we reminded that we are dealing with 
• temporary crystalHzations of the goal idea. We cannot ap-
\ ply the same criteria to the child soul that we use to meas-
i ure the adult psyche. In the case of the child we must look 
? farther and question the objective to which the energies 
j and activities working themselves out in his life, would 
j eventuaUy lead him. Could we translate ourselves into his 
\ soul, we could understand how each expression of his power 
! was appropriate to the ideal which he had created for him-
1 self as the crystallization of a final adaptation to life. Wo 
imust assume the child's point of view if we want to know 
'why he acts as he does. The feeling-tone connected with 
|his point of view directs the child in various ways. There 
lis the way of optimism, in which the child is confident of 
|easily solving the problems which he meets. Under these 
jcircumstances he will grow up with the characteristics of 
;an individual who considers the tasks of life eminently 
j within his power. In his case we see the development of 
• courage, openness, frankness, responsibility, industry, and 
j the like. The opposite of this is the development of pessi-
i mism. Imagine the goal of the child who is not confident of 
being able to solve his problems! How dismal the world 
must appear to such a child! Here we find timidity, intro-
spectiveness, distrust, and all those other characteristics and 
traits with which the weakling seeks to defend himself. 
His goal will lie beyond the boundaries of the attainable, 
\but far behind the fighting front of life. 

C H A P T E R I I 
SOCLMLi ASPECTS OP ТИЕ PSYCHIOLJPE' . 
In order to know how a man thinks, we have to examine 
his relationship to his fellowmen. The relation of man to 
man is determined on the one hand by the very nature 
,of the cosmos, and is thus subject to ehange. On the other 
hand, it is determined by fixed institutions such as political 
'traditions in the community or nation. We cannot eompre-
|hend the psychic activities without at the same time under­
standing these social relationships. 
I. THE ABSOLUTE Твитн 
I Man's soul cannot act as a free agent because the neces-
pity of solving the problems which constantly arise, de-
jtermines the line of its activity. These problems are indivis-
Jbly bound up with the logic of man's communal life; the 
essential conditions of this group-existence influence the 
fcdividual, yet the facts of the communal life seldom al­
low themselves to be influenced by the individual, and then 
onljp_to a certain degree. The existing conditions of our 
communal life however cannot yet be considered final; 
they are too numerous, and are subject to much change 
and transformation. We are hardly in a position to com­
pletely illuminate the dark recesses of the problem of the 
psychic life, and understand it thoroughly, since we can 
not escape from the meshes of our own relationships. 
.i Our solerecourse in thisquandary is^to assume the logic 
j · - 
^__—— 
2C— 
· 
' 
'i , 
•'), •.. 
• ' '-.-·. 
, 
.:!/· . :• . 

SOCIAL ASPECTS OF T H E PSYCHIC L L F E 
27 
of our group life as it exists on this planet as though it 
were an ultimate absolute truth ^vhich we could approach 
~ste"p by step after the conquesFbf mistakes and errors aris­
ing from our incomplete organization and our limited cap­
abilities as human beings. 
/ An important aspect of our considerations lies in the 
/materialistic stratification of society which Marx and 
Engels have described. A*ceording to their teaching, the 
economic basis, the technical form in which a people lives, 
determines the "ideal, logical superstructure," the think­
ing and behavior of individuals. Our conception of the 
"logic of human communal life," of the "absolute truth," 
is in part an agreement with those concepts. History, and 
our insight into the life of the individual (that is, our In­
dividual Psychology), have taught us however that it is 
occasionally expedient"for the individual to make a mis¬
. taken response to the demands of an economic situation. 
' In attempting to evade the economic situation, he may be¬
! come inextricably entangled in the meshes of his own mis-
'taken reactions. Our way to the absolute truth wiu lead 
over countless errors of this kind. 
I I . T H E NEED POE COMMUNAL L l F E 
\ The rules of communal life are really just as self-explan­
atory as the laws of climate, which compel certain measures 
/for the protection against cold, for the building of houses, 
J and the Hke/ The compulsion toward the community and 
communariife exists in institutions whose forms we need 
"not entirely understand, as in religion, where the sanctifi-
cation of communal formulae serves as a bond between 
members of the community. If the conditions of our life are 
determined in the first place by cosmic influences, they are 
also further conditioned by the social and communal life 

28 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
of human beings, and by the laws and regulations which 
arise spontaneously from the communal life. The communal 
need regulates all relationships between men.Thecom-
muhal Ufe of man antedates the individual life of man. In 
the history"of human civilization no form of life whose 
foundations were not laid communally can be found. No hu­
man being ever appeared except in a community of human 
•beingSL.This is very easily explained. The whole animal 
kingdom demonstrates the fundamental law that species 
whose members are incapable of facing the battle for self-
'preservation, gather new strength through herd life. 
\ The herd instinct has served humanity to this end: the 
most notable instrument which it has developed against the 
Hgors of the environment is the soul, whose very essence 
is p'ermeatedwith the necessity of communal life; Darwin 
long ago drew aHention to the fact that one never found 
weak animals living alone; we are forced to consider man 
among these weak animals, because he likewise is not strong 
enough to live alone. IIe can offer only little resistance to 
nature. He must supplement his feeble body with many ar­
tificial machines in order to continue his existence upon 
this planet. Imagine a man alone, and without an instru­
ment of culture, in a primitive forest! He would be more 
inadequate than any other living organism. He has not the 
speed nor the power of other animals. He has not the teeth 
of the carnivore, nor the sense of hearing, nor the sharp 
eyes, which are necessary in the battle for existence. Man 
needs an extensive apparatus to guarantee his existence. 
His nutrition, his characteristics, and hia style of life, de­
mand an intensive program of protection. 
Now we can understand why a human being can main­
tain his existence only when he has placed himself under 
particularly favorable conditions.,These favorable condi-

SOCIAL ASPECTS OF T H E PSYCHIC LD7E 
29 
tions have been offered him by the soeial life. Soeial life 
became a necessity, because through the community and 
the division of labor in which every individual subordi­
nated himself to the group, the species was enabled to con­
tinue its existence. Division pf labor (which means es-
isentiany, civilization) alone is capable of making avail-
Wble to mankind those instruments of offense and defense 
kvhich are responsible for all its possessions. Only after 
he learned the division of labor did man learn how to as-
I 
jsert himself. Consider the difficulties of childbirth and 
the extraordinary precautions which are necessary for 
keeping a child alive during its first days! This care and 
precaution could be exercised only where there was such 
a division of labor. Think of the number of sicknesses and 
infirmities to which the human flesh is heir, particularly 
in its infancy, and you have some conception of the un­
usual amount of care which human life demands, some 
comprehension of the necessity of a social life! The com­
munity is the best guarantee of the continued existence 
of human beings! 
I I I . SECXJKITY AND ADAPTATION 
From the previous expositions we conclude that man, 
1 seen from the standpoint of nature, is an inferior organ-
1 ism. This feeling of his inferiority and insecurity is con-
^stantly present in his consciousness. It acts as an ever-
|present stimulus to the discovery of a better way and a 
[finer technique in adapting himself to nature. This stimu-
jlus forces him to seek situations in which the disadvan-
itages of the human status in the scheme of life will be 
|obviated and minimized. At this point arises the necessity 
for a psychic organ which can effect the processes of adap-

30 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
tation and security. It would have been much harder to 
have made an organism out of the primitive and original 
man-animal, which would be capable of fighting nature to 
a standstill, by the addition of anatomic defenses such as 
horns, claws, or teeth. The psychic organ alone could ren­
der first-aid quickly, and eompensatefor the organic de­
ficiencies of man. Thevery stimulation growing from an 
uninterrupted feeling of inadequacy, developed foresight 
and precaution in man, and caused his soul to develop to 
its present state, an organ of thinking, feeling, and acting. 
Since society has played an essential role in the process of 
adaptation, the psychic organ must reckon from the very 
beginning with the conditions of communal life. All its 
faculties are developed upon an identic basis: the logic of 
communal life. 
In the origin of logic with its innate necessity for uni­
versal applicability we should doubtless find the next step 
in the development of man's soul. Only that which is uni­
versally useful is logical. Another instrument of the com­
munal life is to be found in^afticulafe"speech,that miracle 
which"distmguishes"manfromall other animals. The phe­
nomenon of speech, whose forms clearly indicate its social 
origins, cannot be divorced from this same concept of uni­
versal usefulness. Speech would be absolutely unnecessary 
to an individual organism"living alone.Speech is justified 
only in a community; it is a product of communal life, a 
bond between the individuals of the community. Proof for 
the correctness of this assumption istobe found in those 
individuals who have grown up under circumstances whieh 
have made contact with other human beings difficult or im­
possible. Some of these individuals have often evaded all 
connections with society for personal reasons, others are 
the victims of circumstance. In each case, they suffer 

SOCLAL ASPECTS OF T H E PSYCHIC L I F E 
31 
/ 
from speech defects or difficulties and never acquire the 
talent for learning foreign languages. It is as though this 
bond can be fashioned and retained only when the contact 
withhumanity is secure. 
/ Speech has an enormously important value in the devel­
opment of the human soul. Logical thinking is possible only 
with the premise of speech, which gives us the possibility 
of building up concepts and of understanding differences 
in values; the fashioning of concepts is not a private mat­
ter, but concerns all society. Our very thoughts and emo-
ttioris""are conceivable only when we premise their universal 
I utility; our joy in the beautiful is based on the fact that 
I the recognition, understanding, and feeling for the beauti-
\ful are universal. It follows that thoughts and concepts, 
*<like reason, understanding, logic, ethics, and aesthetics, have 
j their origin in the social life of man; they are kt the same 
itime bonds between individuals whose purpose is to pre-
|vent the disintegration of civilization. 
\ Desire and will may also be understood as aspects of 
man's situation as an individual. WiU is but a tendency 
'in the service of the feeling of inadequacy, an instrument 
jfor the attainment of the feeling of a satisfactory adapta-
!tion. To "wiU" means to feel this tendency, and to enter 
|into its movement. Every voluntary act begins with a 
•feeling of inadequacy, whose resolution proceeds toward 
|a condition of satisfaction, of repose, and totality. 
v^_ 
IV. THK SOCOAL FEELING 1 
We may now understand that any rules that serve to 
secure the existence of mankind, such as legal codes, totem 
i Translator's Note—The word "Gemeinschaftsgefühl" for which 
no adequate English equivalent exists, has been rendered aa "social 
feeling" throughout the book. "Gemeinschaftsgefühl" however con-

32 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
N A T U R E 
and taboo, superstition, or education, must be governed by 
the concept of the community and be appropriate to it. 
We have already examined this idea in the case of re­
ligion, and we find adaptation to the community is the 
most important function of the psychic organ, in the case 
of the individual, as in the case of society. What we call 
justice and righteousness, and consider most valuable in 
the human character, is essentially nothing more than the 
fulfillment of the conditions which arise in the social needs 
of mankind. These conditions give shape to the soul and 
direct its activity; responsibility, loyalty, frankness, love 
of truth, and the like are virtues which have been set up 
and retained only by the universally valid principle of 
communal Hfe. We can judgea character as bad or good 
only from the standpoint of society. Character, just as 
any achievement in science, politics or art, becomes note­
worthy only when it has proven its universal value. The 
criteria by which we can measure an individual are de­
termined by his value to mankind in general. We compare 
an individual with the ideal picture of a fellowman, a man 
who overcomes the tasks and difficulties which lie before 
him, in a way which is useful to society in general, a man 
who has developed his soeial feeling to a high degree. Ac­
cording to the expression of FurtmiiUer, he is one "who 
plays the game of Hfe according to the laws of society." 
In the course of our demonstrations it will become increas­
ingly evident that no adequate man can grow up without 
cultivating a deep sense of his fellowship in humanity and 
practicing the art of being a human being. 
notes the sense of human solidarity, the connectedness of man to 
man in a cosmic relationship. Wherever the brief phrase "social 
feeling" has been used therefore, the wider connotation of a "sense 
of fellowship in the human community" should be borne in mind. 

C H A P T E R I I I 
CHTLD AND SOCIETY 
,—' 
ι 
j Society ejjaets certain obligations of us whichlnfluence 
the norms anaforms of our life, as weU as the develop­
ment of our mind. Society has an organic basis. The point 
of tangency between the individual and society may be 
•found in the fact of man's bisexuaHty. Not in the isola­
tion of man and woman, butin the community of man 
iand wife, does he satisfy theimpube of Hfe and achieve 
tsecufity and guarantee his happiness. When we observe the 
slow development of a child, we may be certain no evolu­
tion of human Mfe is possible without the presence of a 
protecting community. The various obligations of Hfe carry 
in themselves the necessity for a division of labor which not 
only does not separate human beings, but strengthens their 
bonds. 
^Everyone must help his neighbor. Everyone must feel 
himself bound to hisfellow man. The vital relationships of 
шап. to man have originated thus. We must now discuss 
in more detail some of these relationships which greet a 
child upon his birth. 
I . T H E SlTUATION OP THE lNPANT 
Every child, dependent as he is on the help of the com­
munity, finds himself face to face with a world that gives 
and takes, that expects adaptation and satisfies life. Hiq 
33 

34 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
instincts are baffled in their fulfillment by obstacles whose 
conquest gives him pain. He realizes at an early age that 
there are other human beings who are able to satisfy their 
urges more completely, and are better prepared to live. 
His soul is born, one might say, in those situations of 
childhood which demand an organ of integration, whose 
function is to make a normal life possible. This the soul 
I accomplishes by evaluating each situation and directing 
j the organism to the next one, with the maximum satisfac-
1 tion of instincts and the least possible friction. In this way 
\ he learns to over-value the size and stature which enable 
j one to open a door, or the ability to move heavy objects, or 
ithe right of others to give commands and claim obedience 
;^to them. A desire to grow, to become as strong or even 
,stronger than all others, arises in his soul. To dominate 
those who are gathered about him becomes his chief pur­
pose in life, since his elders, though they act as if he were 
inferior, are obligated to him because of his very weak­
ness. Two possibilities of action lie open to him. On the 
lone hand, to continue activities and methods which he 
|realizes the adults use, and on the other hand to demon-
sstrate his weakness, which is felt by these same/ädults as 
jan inexorable demand for their help. We shall continually 
find this branching of psychic tendencies in children. 
The formation of types begins at this early period. 
Whereas some children develop in the direction of the ac­
quisition of power and the selection of a courageous tech­
nique which results in their recognition, others seem to 
speculate on their own weaknesses, and attempt Wdemon-
|strate i t in the most varied forms. One need but recall the 
'attitude, the expression, and the bearing of individual chil-
"dren, to find individuals who fit into one group or the 
'*pther. E v e r y type has a meaning only as we understand 

CHILD AND SOCIETY 
35 
its relationship to the environment. Reflections of envi­
ronment are usuaUy to be found in the behavior of any 
fibüd« 
i 
I The basis of ,educability lies in the striving of the child 
to compensate for his weaknesses. A thousand talents and 
capabilities arise from the stimulus of inadequacy. Now 
the situations of individual children are extraordinarily 
different. In the one case we are dealing with an environ­
ment which is hostile to the child and which gives him the 
|impression that the whole world is an enemy country. The 
incomplete perspectives of child thought-processesjyqrfaiif 
this impression. If his education does not forestaTfthis fal­
lacy, the soul of such a child may develop sothat in later 
years he will aet always as if the world really were an 
enemy country. His impression of hostility wfll become 
accentuated as soon as he meets with greater difficulties in 
life. This occurs frequently in the ease of children with 
inferior organ-systems. Such children greet their environ­
ment with an attitude entirely different from those who 
come into the world with relatively normal organs. Organic 
inferiority can express itself in difficulties of motion, in 
inadequacies of single organs, or in weakened resistance 
of the entire organism, which results in frequent sickness. 
Difficulties in facing the world are not necessarily eaused 
only by deficiencies of the childish organism. The unrea­
sonable demands made on a child by a foolish environment 
(or the unfortunate manner in which these demands are 
presented to him) are comparable to actual difficulties in 
the environment. A child who desires to adapt himself to 
his environment suddenly finds difficulties lying in his 
way, especially where he grows up in an environment 
which has itself lost its courage and is imbued with a 
pessimism only too quickly transferred to the child. 

36 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
II. T H E INFLUENCE OP DlPPICULTIES 
f In view of the obstacles which approach every child 
,from countless angles, it is not to be wondered at that 
/his response is not always adequate. His psychic habits 
• have but a short time to develop, and the child finds 
ί himself under the necessity of orientating himself to the 
: unchangeable conditions of actuality, while his technique of 
adjustment is still immature. Whenever we consider any 
\ number of mistaken responses to the environment we find 
i ourselves dealing with constant developmental attempts on 
; the part of the soul to make a correct response and to pro¬
* gress throughout life as in a continual experiment. The 
thing which we particularly see in the expression of the 
child's behavior pattern is the type of response which an 
adolescent gives in a definite situation, in the course of his 
maturation. His response attitude gives us an insight into 
his soul. We must at the same time take cognizance of the 
fact that the responses of any individual, just as those of 
^society, are not to be judged according to a pattern. 
The obstacles a child meets wj^inthe deyelppmentoJ 
his soul usuaUy result in the jurilihg*br distQriion'"Ornis^ 
social feeling. They may be divided into those which arise 
out of defects in his physical environment; such as origi-
; nate in abnormal relationships in his economic, social, ra­
cial, or family circumstances; and further, into those which 
:arise out of defect in his bodily organs. Our civilization is 
s'a culture which is based upon the health and adeauacy of 
1 fuUy-developed organs. Therefore, a child whose important 
organs suffer defects is at a disadvantage in solving the 
problems of life. Children who learn to walk late, or whL 
; have difficulties of any kind in hDc^mwuiau, or those who 
learn to speak late, who are clumsy for a long time be-
;cause the development of their cerebral activity takes 

CHILD AND SOCIETY 
37 
longer than in the case of the usual child, belong in this 
class. We all know how such children are constantly bump­
ing themselves, are clumsy and slow, and carry with them 
a_iuxden of bodily and psychic sorrows. They are obviously 
not tenderly touched by a world which was not appro­
priately fashioned for them. Difficulties which arise out 
of some such inadequate development are many. Of course 
there is always the possibility that in the course of time 
a compensation is established automatically without a 
sear remaining, if the bitterness of the psychic need has 
not, in the meantime, developed in the child an attitude 
of despair which is felt in his later life; such a state of 
affairs may be complicated, in addition, by economic help­
lessness. It is easy to understand that the fixed laws of 
JbLuman society are but poorly comprehended by defectively 
equipped children. They look with suspicionand mistrust 
at the opportunities which they see developing around 
them, and have the tendency to isolate themselves and 
evade their tasks. They have a peculiarly sharp sense of 
Hfe's hostility, and they unconsciously exaggerate it. Their 
interest in the bitterness of life is much greater than in 
its brighter side. For the most part, they overrate both, 
so that theirs is a lifelong attitude of belligerency. They 
demand that an extraordinary amount of attention be paid 
to them, and of course they think far more of themselves 
ithan of others. They conceive of the necessary obligations 
|of life more as difficulties than as stimuli. Soon a gulf, 
|whieh is continually widened because of their hostility to 
their fellows, builds itself between them and their environ­
ment. Now they approach every experience with an ex-
saggerated cautiousness, removing themselves farther and 
farther from the truth and actuality with every contact, 
and succeed only in continually making fresh difficulties 
for themselves. 

38 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
^^similar difficulties may arise when the normal tender-
/ ness of parents toward their children is not manifested to 
.\ a proper degree. Whenever this occurs serious consequences 
\for the development of the child ensue. The child's atti-
kude becomes so fixed that he cannot recognize love nor 
knake the proper use of it, because his instincts for tender-
aiess have never been developed. It will be difficult to mobi­
lize a child who has grown up in a family where there has 
^never been a proper development of the feeling of tender­
ness, to the expression of any kind of tenderness. IIis whole 
attitude in life will be a gesture of escape, an evasion of aU 
Jove and all tenderness. The identical effect may be pro­
duced- by unthinking parents, educators, or other adults, 
who teach children that love and tenderness are improper, 
ridiculous, or unmanly, by impressing some permcious. 
motto upon them. It i« ^nt..gn gfMnm that we find that a 
,ehild is taught that tenderness is ridicul^usr"TEls""ls es­
pecially the case amonglhose'*c^^ 
have often 
been ridiculed. Such children are veritably afraid of show-
TrTg"emotions or feelings because they feel their tendency 
jto show love toward others is ridiculous and unmanly. They 
figEt against normal tenderness as though it were an in­
strument to enslave or degrade them. Thus boundaries to 
the_love life may be set in early childhood.lAfter a brjaJaj^ 
i education in which all tenderness is dammed up and re-
».pressed, a child withdraws from the circle of his environ-
iment, and loses, little by little, contacts which are of utmost 
amportance to his soul. Sometimes a s^n^le.nerson in the 
[environment offers an opportunity of te^ncorcff"when this 
|happens the child joins himself to his frhmcl m avery deep 
|relation. This accounts for the individuals who grow up 
|with social relationships directed to but a single person, 
j whose social tendencies can never be stretched to include 
^more than one other human being. The example of the 

CHILD AND SOCIETY 
39 
!
boy who felt himself neglected when he noticed that his 
mother was tender only to his younger brother, and there« 
j fore wandered up and down through life trying to find the 
I warmth and affection which he had missed from earliest 
I childhood, is a case in point, which demonstrates the diffi-
I culties such a person may find in life. It goes without say-
ling that the education of such individuals proceeds only 
tunder pressure. 
I 
Education accompanied by too much tenderness is as 
I pernicious as education which proceeds without it. Арапь 
j pered child, as much as a hated one, labors under great 
|dimculties. Where it is instituted, a desire for tenderness 
I arises which grows beyond all boundaries; the result is 
|that a petted child binds himseU to one or more persons 
Wnd refuses to allow himself to be detached.» The value of 
|enderness becomes so accentuated by various mistaken ex­
periences that the child concludes that his own love en­
forces certain implicit responsibilities on his grown-ups. 
This is easily accomplished: the child says to his parents, 
^'Because I love you, you must do this or that." It is this 
type of social dogma which frequently grows up within 
|he circle of the family. No sooner does the child recognize 
;a tendency like this on the part of others than he in­
creases his own tenderness in order to make them more 
(;dependent upon him. The flaming up of such tenderness 
|to one particular person in"the family must always be 
|kept in mind. There is no doubt that the future of a child 
!-is influenced injuriously by such training. His Ufe be-
fcomes involved in the struggle to hold the tenderness of 
jothers by fair means or foul. To accomplish this he dares 
jto use every means which lies at hand; he may attempt 
ithe subjugationof his rival, a brother or sister, or occupy 
jhimself withtale-bearing against them. Such a child will 
^ctually incite his brothers to misdeeds in order that he 

40 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
j may be able to sun himself in the love of his parents in 
lrelative glory and righteousness.He applies a definite so-
jcial pressure to his parents in order to fix their atten-
I tion on himself. To do this he will leave no stone unturned 
'until he occupies the limelight and has achieved more im-
{portance than any one else. He is lazy, or bad, for the sole 
(purpose of giving his parents the task of busying them-
;selves more with him; he becomes a model child, because 
'he considers the attention of others a sort of reward. 
; 
After the discussion of these mechanisms we may con-
I clude that anything may become a means to an end, once 
jthe pattern of psychic activity is fixed. The child may de-
ivelop himseK in an evil direction, in order to arrive at 
;his goal, or he may become a model child, with the same 
igoal in view. One can often observe how one of several 
;children seeks the limelight through particular unruliness, 
jwhile another, being shrewder, attains the same goal 
through particular virtue. 
^"With the petted children we may also group those who 
have had every difficulty removed from their path, whose 
capabilities have been belittled in a friendly way. They 
have never had an opportunity to meet responsibilities. 
Such children have all been denied every opportunity to 
make those preparations which are so necessary for future 
life. They are not prepared to make contacts with anyone 
who is willing to join with them, and are certainly not ca­
pable of making contacts with others, who, as a result of 
difficulties and errors in their own childhood, throw ob­
stacles in the way of human contacts. Such children are ut­
terly unprepared for life, because they'n'aW^eveTYa3"aii 
öppörtünifyfo'p^ 
as they" step"oUt"of"tKe "hothöuse atmosphere-of~the tiny 
kingdom of their home,they suffer defeatsalmost-ofneees-

CHHJ> AND SOCIETY 
41 
sity, for the reason that they cannot find any human being 
willing to assume the duties and responsibilities which they 
expect at the hands of their petting educators, nor in the 
degree to which they are accustomed. 
All the phenomena of this type have one thing in com­
mon: they tend to the greater or lesser isolation of the 
childi Children whose gastro-intestinal tracts are defec­
tive assume a special attitude towards nutrition, and as a 
result go through an entirely different developmental 
process from children who are normal in this respect. 
C_hudren with defective organs have a peculiar style of 
life which may eventually drive them into isolation. There 
are other children who do not clearly understand their 
connection with the environment, and actually try to avoid 
it. They cannot flnd a comrade, hold themselves distinct 
from the games of their companions, and, either envi­
ous of their fellows, or, despising the play of children of 
the same age, busy themselves in a shut-in preoccupa­
tion with their own private games. Isolation also threatens 
children who grow up under the pressure of an education 
marked by great strictness. Life will not appear in a favor­
able light to them, because they are expecting bad im­
pressions on every hand. Either they have the impression 
that they must be tolerant of all difficulties and take up 
their sorrows in a humble way, or they feel like champions, 
ready to take up the battle with the environment they 
have always found hostile. Such children feel that life 
and its tasks are inordinately difficult; it is not hard to 
understand how such a child will be busied for the most 
jaart with the defense of his personal boundary lines, lest 
^ie suffer some defeat of his personality. We may expect 
foim constantly to retain before his eyes an unfriendly 
bicture of the outer world. Burdened by an exaggerated 

42 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
^ 
\cautiousness, he develops a tendency to evade all greater 
difficulties, rather than to lay himself open to the dangers 
of-a-possible defeat. 
ι A further common characteristic of these pampered chil­
dren, which is a sign of their inadequately developed social 
feeling, is the fact that they think more of themselves than 
|'of others. In this trait one sees clearly their whole de­
velopment toward a pessimistic philosophy of the world. 
It is impossible for them to be happy unless they find a 
; solution for their false behavior patterrk 
I I I . MAN AS A SOCIAL BEING 
We have been at some length to show how we can under­
stand the personality of the individual only when we see 
him iu bis context, tuul judgo him in his puvtieulur situa­
tion in the wovld. \\y situation we mean his placo in the 
cosmos, and his attitude toward his environment and the 
problems of life, such as the challenges of occupation, con­
tact, and union with his fellow men, which are inherent 
in his being. In this way we have been able to determine 
that the impressions which storm in upon every individual 
from the earliest days of his infancy influence his attitude 
throughout his whole life. One can determine how a child 
stands in relation to life a few months after his birth. It 
is impossible to confuse the behavior of two infants after 
these months because they have already demonstrated a 
well-defined pattern which becomes the clearer as they de­
velop. Variations from the pattern do not occur. The child's 
psychic activity becomes increasingly permeated by his 
social relationships. The first evidence of the inborn social 
feeling unfolds in his early search for tenderness, which 
leads him to seek the proximity of adults. The child's love 
life is always direetedtowardsothevs, not, aTFreffd"wouftr" 

CHILD AND SOCIETY 
13 
say, upon his own body. According to the person, these 
ercrtic"Strivings vary in their intensity and manifestation. 
In children who are more than two years old these differ­
ences may be demonstrated in their speech. Only under the 
stress of the most severe psychopathological degeneration 
does the social feeling which has become firmly based in 
the soul of every child at this time, forsake him. This so­
cial feeling remains throughout life, changed, colored, cir­
cumscribed in some cases, enlarged and broadened in others 
until it touches not only the members of his own family, 
but also his clan, his nation, and finally, the whole of 
humanity. It is possible that it may extend beyond these 
boundaries and express itself towards animals, plants, life­
less objects, or finally towards the whole cosmos. An under­
standing of the necessity for dealing with man as a social 
being is the essential eouelusion οϊ our studies. Onee we 
have grasped this, we have gained an important adjunct 
to the understanding of man's behavior. 

C H A P T E R 
I V 
THE WORLD WE LD7E IN 
I. T H E STRUCTURE OF OUR CoSMOS 
Owing to the fact that every human being must make an 
adjustment to his environment, his psychic mechanism has 
the faculty of taking up impressions from the outer world. 
In addition, the psychic mechanism pursues a definite aim 
according to a definite interpretation of the world, and 
along the lines of an ideal behavior pattern which dates 
from early childhood. Although we cannot express this cos­
mic interpretation and this goal in a definite and exact 
term, we can nevertheless describe it as an ever present 
aura, and as always in contradistinction_to the feeling of 
inadequacy. Psychic movements can occur only when they 
have an innate goal. The construction of a goal, as we 
know, premises the capacity for change, and a certain free­
dom of movement. The spiritual enrichment which results 
from freedom of movement is not to be undervalued. A 
child who raises himself from the ground for the first time 
comes into an entirely new world, and in that second he 
somehow senses a hostile atmosphere. In his first attempt 
at movement, and particularly in rising to his feet and 
learning to walk, he experiences various degrees of diffi­
culty, which may either strengthen or destroy his hope for 
the future. Impressions which grown-ups might consider 
unimportant or commonplace, may have an enormous in-
44 

T H E WORLD W E L I V E LN 
45 
fluence on the child's soul and entirely shape his impres­
sion of the world in which he lives. In this way children 
who have had difficulties in locomotion construct an ideal 
for themselves which is permeated with violent and hasty 
movements; we can discover this ideal by asking them what 
their favorite games are, or what they would like to do 
when they are grown. Usually such children answer that 
they desire to be automobile drivers, locomotive engineers, 
or the like—thus signifying clearly their desire to over­
come every difficulty which hinders their freedom of move­
ment. The goal of their life is to attain a point at which 
their feeling of inferiority and their sense of handicap is 
entirely removed by perfect freedom of motion. It is read­
ily understood that such a sense of handicap can originate 
easily in the soul of a child who has developed slowly, or 
has encountered much sickness in his life. Simüarly, chil­
dren who have come into the world with defects in their eyes 
attempt to translate the entire world into more intensive 
visual concepts. Children who have auditory defects show 
an intense interest for certain tones which seem to sound 
more pleasantto them; in short, they become "musical." 
Of all the organs with which a child attempts the con­
quest of the world the sense organs are the most important 
in the determination of the essential relationships to the 
world in which he lives. It is through the sense organs 
that one constructs one's cosmic picture. Above all, it is 
the eye which approaches the environment, it is the visual 
world predominantly which forces itself upon the attention 
of every human being and gives him the main data in his 
experiences. The visual picture of the world in which we 
live has an incomparable significance in that it deals with 
unchanging, lasting bases, in contrast to the other sense 
organs, the ear, the nose, the tongue, and the skin, which 
are sensitive solely to temporary stimuli. There are, how-

46 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
ever, individuals in whom the ear is the predominant 
organ. Here a psyehic fund of information based more par­
ticularly upon acoustic values is created. In this case the 
soul might be said to have a predominantly auditory con-
steUation. Less frequently we find individuals in whom 
motor activity is predominant. A predominance of interest 
for olfactory or gustatory stimuli determines another type, 
and of these, the first type, which is more sensitive to smeU, 
is under a relative disadvantage in our civilization. Then 
there are a number of children in whom the musculature 
plays the leading role. This group comes into the world 
characterized with a greater restlessness, which forces them 
to constant movement in childhood, and to greater activity 
in maturity. Such individuals are interested only in such 
activities in which the functioning muscles play the chief 
role. They exhibit their activity even during sleep, as any­
one can prove for himself by observing them restlesslvJ:oss,-
ing about in their beds. We must class those '4MgstY_^ chil­
dren whose restlessness is often considered a vice, in this 
category. In general we can say that a child who does not 
approach the world with heightened interest in some one 
organ or organ group, whether these be his sense organs or 
his locomotive apparatus, hardly exists. From the impres­
sions which his more sensitive organ gathers from the 
world each child constructs a picture of the world in which 
he lives. We can therefore understand a human being only 
when we know with what sense organs or organ-systems he 
approaches the world, because aU his relationships are 
colored by this fact; his actions and reactions gain their 
value from our knowledge of the influence which his or­
ganic defects have had upon the consteUation of his cosmic 
picture in his childhood, and thus upon his later develop­
ment. 

T H E WORLD W E L I V E IN 
47 
I I . ELEMENTS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE COSMIC 
PlCTURE 
The ever present goal which determines all our activity 
influences also the choice, intensity, and activity of those 
particular psychic faculties which serve to give shape and 
meaning to the cosmic picture. This explains the fact that 
each of us experiences a very specific segment of life, or 
of a particular event, or, indeed of the entire world in 
which we live. Each of us values only that which is appro­
priate to his goal. A real understanding of the behavior of 
any human being is impossible without a clear comprehen­
sion of the secret goal which he is pursuing; nor can we 
evaluate every aspect of his behavior until we know that 
his whole activity has been influenced by this goal. 
A. PERCEPTION 
The impressions and stimuli which arise in the outer 
world are transmitted by means of the sense organs to 
the brain, where certain traces of them may be retained. 
On these vestiges^are built the world of imagination and the 
world of memory. But a perception is never to be com­
pared with a photographic image because something of the 
peculiar and individual quality of the person who per­
ceives is inextricably bound up with it. One does not 
perceive everything that one sees. No two human beings 
react in quite the same way to the identical picture; if 
we ask them what they have perceived they will give very 
diverse answers. A child perceives only that in his en­
vironment which fits into a behavior pattern previously de­
termined by a variety of causes. The perceptions of chil­
dren whose visual desire is especially well developed have 
a predominantly visual character. The majority of man-

48 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
kind ia probably visual-minded. Others fill in the mosaic 
picture of the world which they have created for them­
selves with predominantly auditory perceptions. These per­
ceptions need not be strictly identical with actuaHty. 
Everyone is capable of reconfiguring and rearranging his 
contacts with the outer world to fit his life pattern. The 
individuality and uniqueness of a human being consists 
in what he perceives and how he perceives. Perception iaj 
more than a simple physical phenomenon; it is a psychic 
function from which we may draw the most far going con­
clusions concerning the inner life. 
B. MEMOEY 
The development of the soul is intimately related to the 
necessity for activity, upon the basis of the facts of per^. 
ception. The soul is innately related to the motility of the 
human organism, and its activities are determined by the 
goal and purpose of this motility. It is necessary for man 
to collect and arrange his stimuli and relationships to the 
world in which he lives, and his soul, as an organ of adapta­
tion, must develop all those,iaculties which play a role 
in his defense and are otherwise active in maintaining his 
existence. 
It is clear now that the individual response of the souI 
to the problems of life leaves traces in the structure of the 
soul. The functions of memory and evaluation are domi­
nated by the necessity for adaptation. Without memories it 
would be impossible to exercise any precaution for the 
future. We may deduce that all recollections have an 
unconscious purpose within themselves. They are not for­
tuitous phenomena, but speak clearly the language of en­
couragement or of warning. There are no indifferent or 
nonsensical reconections. One can evaluate a recollection 
only when one is certain about the goal and purpose which 

T H E WORLD W E L I V E I N 
49 
it subserves. It is not important to know why one remem­
bers certain things and forgets others. We remember those 
events whose recollection is important for a specific psychic 
tendency, because these recollections further an important 
underlying movement. We forget likewise all those events 
which detract from the fulfillment of a plan. We find thus 
that memory, too, is subordinated to the business of pur­
posive adaptation, and that every memory is dominated by 
the goal idea which directs the personality-as-a-whole. A 
lasting recollection, even though it is a false one, as is often 
the case in childhood, where memories are frequently sur­
charged with a one-sided prejudice, may be transposed 
out of the realm of the conscious, and appear as an at­
titude, or as an emotional tone, or even as a philosophic 
point of view, if this be necessary for the attainment of the 
desired goal. 
C. IMAGINATION 
Nbwhere does the uniqueness of an individual show more 
clearly than in the products of his fantasy and of his im­
agination. By imagination we mean the reproduction of a 
perception without the presence of the object itself which 
gave rise to it. In other words imagination is reproduced 
perception:—another evidence of the creative faculty of 
the soul. The product of imagination is not only the repeti­
tion of a perception (which in itself is a product of the 
creative power of the soul), but is an entirely new and 
unique product built upon the basis of the perception, just 
as the perception was created on the basis of physical 
sensations. 
Now there are fantasies which far exceed the customary 
imagination in sharpness of focus. Such visions are so 
sharply outlined that they have a value not of imaginary 

50 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
products, but influence the behavior of the individual as 
though the absent stimulating object were actually present. 
We speak of hallucinations, when fantasies appear as 
though they were; the result of an actually present stimulus. 
The conditions for the appearance of hallucinations are in 
no wise different from those which determine fantastic 
day dreams. Every hallucination is an artistic creation of 
the soul, shaped and constellated according to the goals and 
purposes of the particular individual in which it appears. 
Let us make this clear with an example. 
An intelligent young woman married against the advice 
of her parents. Her parents were so angry at her mismar-
riage that they broke off all relations with her. In the course 
of time the young woman became convinced that her par­
ents had not treated her well, but many attempts at recon­
ciliation failed because of the pride and obstinacy of both 
parties. As a result of her marriage this young woman, who 
belonged to an honored and wealthy family, had fallen 
into rather impoverished circumstances. Tet externally no 
one could observe any signs of unhappiness in her con­
nubial relations. One could have been quite reconciled, to 
?п*е~Гай that she had made a good adjustment were it not 
for the appearance of a very pecuHar phenomenon in her 
life. 
This girl had grown up as the favorite child of her 
father. So intimate had been their relationship that their 
present breach was the more remarkable. The occasion of 
her marriage, however, caused her father to treat her very 
badly, and their rupture was very deep. Even when her 
child was born, her parents could not be moved to visit 
their daughter or to see the child; the young woman took 
the harsh treatment of her parents the more to heart, be­
cause, actuated by a great ambition, she was touched to the 
quick by their attitude toward her in a situation in which 

T H E WORLD W E LP7E l N 
51 
she might well have been treated with consideration. 
We must remember that the mood of this young woman 
was completely dominated by her ambition. It is this char­
acter trait which gives us an insight into the reasons why 
the breach with her parents affected her so deeply. Her 
mother was a stern, righteous person who had many good 
qualities, although she had treated her daughter with a 
heavy hand. She knew how to submit to her husband, at 
least so far as outer appearances were concerned, without 
really relinquishing her own rank. Indeed she drew atten­
tion to her submission with a certain pride, and consid­
ered it an honor. Now in this family there was also a son 
who was considered a chip of the old block and the future 
heir of the family name. The fact that he was considered 
somewhat more valuable than our young woman served 
only to spur her ambition. The difficulties and poverty 
which this young woman, educated in a comparatively 
sheltered atmosphere all her life, was experiencing in her 
marriage, now caused her to think constantly and with 
ever increasing displeasure about the mistreatment she had 
received at the hands of her parents. 
One night before she had fallen asleep it happened 
that a door opened and the Virgin Mary stepped to her 
bed and said: "Because I love you so weU, I must tell you 
that you will die in the middle of December. I do not want 
you to be unprepared." 
The young woman was not frightened by this appari­
tion, but she wakened her husband and told him every­
thing. On the next day she went to the physician and told 
him about it. It was a hallucination. The young woman 
maintained that she had seen and heard everything quite 
clearly. At first glance this seems impossible, yet when 
we apply the key of our knowledge we can understand 
it quite well. Here is the situation: a young woman who 

52 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
is very ambitious, and, as tbe examination shows, has the 
tendency to dominate everyone else, breaks with her par­
ents and finds herself in poverty. It is quite understand­
able that a human being, in an effort to conquer everything 
in the physical sphere in which he lives, should approach 
God and converse with Him. If the Virgin Mary had re­
mained only an imaginary figure (as is the case in prayer) 
no one would have found anything particularly note­
worthy in this occurrence, but this young woman needed 
stronger arguments. 
The phenomenon loses all its mystery when we under­
stand what tricks the soul is capable of producing. Is not 
every human being who dreams in a similar position? The 
difference really is only this: that this young woman can 
dream while she is awake. We must add, too, that her feel­
ing of depression has placed her ambition under greater 
tension. Now we become aware of the fact that actually 
another mother is coming to her, indeed, that Mother who 
in popular conception is the greatest Mother of all. These 
two mothers must stand in certain contrast to one another. 
The Mother of God appeared because her own mother did 
not come. The apparition is an accusation against her own 
mother and her insufficient love for her child. 
The young woman is now trying to find some way of 
proving that her parents are wrong. The middle of Decem­
ber is not an insignificant time. It is that time of the year 
in which people are more apt to consider their deeper re­
lationships, when most human beings approach each other 
with a greater warmth, give presents, and the like. It is 
at this time too that the possibility of reconciliation comes 
closer, so that we can understand that this particular time 
stands in a close relationship to the .quandary in which 
the young woman finds herself. 
4 
The only strange thing in this hallucination seems to be 

T H E WORLD W E L I V E I N 
53 
that the friendly approach of this Mother of God is ac­
companied by the sad news of the young woman's ap­
proaching death. The fact that she told her husband of 
this vision with an almost happy tone of voice is also not 
without significance. This prophecy quickly spread beyond 
the narrow circle of her family and the physician had 
learned of it on the following day: and it was thus very 
\ simple to bring it about that her mother actually visited 
ι her. 
i 
A few days later the Virgin Mary appeared for the 
second time and spoke the same words. When the young 
woman was asked how her meeting with her own mother 
had turned out, she answered that her mother could not 
admit that she had done wrong. We see therefore the old 
theme cropping up again. Her desire to dominate her 
mother had not yet been fulfilled. 
At this time it was attempted to make the parents un­
derstand what was actually going on in the life of their 
daughter, and as a result, a very satisfactory meeting be­
tween the young woman and her father obtained. A touch­
ing scene occurred, but the young woman was not yet sat­
isfied, because she said there was something theatrical in 
her father's behavior. She complained that he had let her 
wait too long! Even in triumph she could not rid herself 
of the tendency to prove everyone else wrong and hersetf 
to appear in the light of a triumphant victor. 
We may conclude from our previous discussion that hal­
lucinations appear in that moment when the psychic ten­
sion is at its greatest and in circumstances in which one 
fears that the attainment of one's goal is impossible. There 
is no question that hallucinations won a considerable in­
fluence in districts where the population has been some­
what backward in its development, in days gone by. 
Descriptions of hallucinations in the writings of trav-

54 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
elers are well known. The mirages which are seen by wan­
derers in the desert, who have lost their way and are suf­
fering from hunger, thirst, and fatigue, are excellent ex­
amples. We can understand that the tension which arises 
when life is in danger, compels the imagination of the 
sufferer to create a clear and refreshing situation for 
himself, in order that he may escape from the unpleasant 
oppression of his environment. The mirage represents a 
new situation which can encourage the fatigued, refresh 
the failing powers of the irresolute, make the traveler 
stronger, or more sensitive: or on the other hand, it may 
act as a baisam, or narcotic, which can rob his misery of 
its horrors. 
Hallucination is nothing new for us sinee we have al­
ready seen similar phenomena in perception, in the mech­
anism of memory, and in imagination. We shau find these 
same processes again when we consider dreams. By ac­
centuating the imagination, and excluding the critique of 
the higher centers, it is easy to produce the phenomena of 
hallucination. Under circumstances of necessity or danger, 
and under the pressure of a situation in which one's power 
is threatened, one strives to obviate the feeling of weak­
ness and overcome it, by this mechanism. The greater the 
tension, the less the consideration which will be paid to the 
critical faculties. Under such circumstances, with the motto 
"Help yourself as you can!" anyone with the aid of every 
ounce of his psychic energy, can force his imagination to 
project itself into the hallucination. 
Illusion is closely related to hallucination, the only dif­
ference being that some point of external contact remains, 
but is misinterpreted, as is the case in the story of Goethe's 
Erlkönig. 
The underlying situation, the feeling of psychic 
peril, is the same. 
Another example will show how the creative power of the 

T H E WORLD W E L I V E I N 
55 
soul can produce either an illusion or a hallucination, as 
the need arises. A man of excellent family who had never 
amounted to anything because of a bad education, held an 
unimportant clerkship. He had given up all hope of ever 
amounting to anything. His hopelessness weighed heavily 
upon him, and in addition his psychic tension was in­
creased by the reproaches of his friends. In these circum­
stances he took tb drink, which gave him at once a sweet 
forgetfulness, and an excuse for his failure. After some 
time he was brought to the hospital in delirium tremens. 
Delirium is closely related to hallucination, and in the de­
lirium of alcoholic intoxication, small animals, such as mice, 
or insects, or snakes, frequently appear. Other hallucina­
tions which are related to the patient's occupation may also 
occur. 
Our patient came into the hands of physicians who were 
strongly opposed to the use of alcohol. They put him 
through a strict course of treatment and he was completely 
freed of his alcoholism, left the hospital cured,.and did not 
touch alcohol for three years. At this time he returned to 
the hospital with a new complaint. He stated that he con­
stantly saw a leering, grinning man who watched him at 
his work. He was now a day-laborer. Once when he was 
particularly angry because this man was laughing at him 
he took his pick and threw it at him to see whether he was 
a real man or only an apparition. The apparition dfld^ed 
the missile, but thereupon attacked him and beat him badly. 
In this case we can no longer speak of a ghost because 
the hallucination had very real fists. The explanation is 
not hard to find. It was his custom to hallucinate, but he 
made his test upon a real man. This shows us elearly that 
although he had been freed of his desire to drink, he had in 
reality sunk further since his discharge from the hospital. 
Ho had lost his job, had been put out of his house, and 

56 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
now had to earn his living as a day-laborer, whieh he as 
well as his friends considered the lowest form of work. 
The psychic tension in which he had lived had not become 
less. Although he had been freed from alcohol he had ac­
tually become poorer by a consolation, despite the great 
advantage of this cure. He could do his first job with the 
help of drink, for when he was reproached too loudly at 
home for not accomplishing anything, the excuse that he 
was a drunkard seemed less shameful to him than his in­
capability of holding a job. After his cure he was again 
face to face with reality and in a situation which was in no 
wise less oppressive than his former one. Should he now 
fail he had nothing to console himself with and nothing to 
blame, not even alcohol. 
In this situation of psychic peril the hallucinations re­
appear. He identifies himself with the previous situation 
and looks at the world as if he were still a drunkard, and 
says very clearly with this gesture, that he has ruined 
his whole life with his drinking and nothing can be done 
about it now. By being siek he hoped to be freed from his 
little honored, and therefore, for him, very unpleasant oc­
cupation as a ditch digger, without having to make a de­
cision about it himself. The above-mentioned hallucination 
lasted for a long time until he finally was forced to the 
hospital again. Now he could console himself with the 
thought that he could have accomplished a great deal more 
had not the misfortune of drink ruined his life. This mech­
anism enabled him to maintain his personal evaluation at 
a high level. It was more important for him not to allow 
his personal evaluation to sink than it was for him to 
work. All his efforts were directed at maintaining the con­
viction that he might have accomplished great things had 
he not been visited by misfortune. This was the proof 
which maintained him in his power relationship and en-

T H E WORLD W E L I V E I N 
57 
abled him to feel that other men were not better than he 
but that an impassable obstacle lay in his way. The mood 
in which he attempted to find a consoling alibi produced 
the apparition of the leering man; the ghost was the sav­
ior of his self-esteem. 
I I I . 
FANTASY 
Fantasy is but another creative faculty of the soul. 
Traces of this activity may be found in the various phe­
nomena which we have already described. Just as the pro­
jection of certain memories imo the sharp focus cf con­
sciousness, or the erection of the bizarre superstructures of 
the imagination, fantasy and day-dreaming are to be con­
sidered part of the creative activity of the soid. The 
prevision and prejudgment which are an essential faculty 
in any mobile organism constitute an important factor in 
fantasy. Fantasy is bound up with the mobility of the hu­
man organism and is indeed nothing more than a method 
of prevision and prescience. The fantasies of children and 
grown-ups, sometimes called day-dreams, are always coB-
9^H^_witi^ue..iuturj, Jhe,' castles in .the air 'J_are_thg 
goal of thjeir_^cJtiyity,, built up in fictional form as models 
for real activity. j^aminatinng nf phufibj^dJftntfl^pg sbpw 
clearly .thal_the. staivingi^..pnwer..pla^^ 
r51e^, Children deal with the goal of their ambition in their 
day-dreams. Most of their fantasies begin with the words 
"when I am grown up," and the like. There are many 
adults who live as though they still had to grow up. The 
clear emphasis on the striving for power indicates to us 
again that the__spul life can^dß.yelopon^^wJ^rLÄJiertain 
goal has been set. In our civilization this goal is the gogl 
4^fjjocial reco^j^ion_an-^significancft1 An individual never 
remains long at any neutral goal, for the communal life 

58 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
of mankind is accompanied by constant self-measurement 
which gives rise to the desire for superiority, and the hope 
of success in competition. The forms of prevision whieh 
are so evident in the fantasies of children are almost en­
tirely situations in whieh the child's power is expressed. 
We must not generalize herebeeause it is impossible to 
lay down rules for the degree of fantasy or the extent of 
imagination. What we have said before is valid for a num­
ber of cases, but may not be applicable to some. Those 
children who approach life with belligerent eyes will de­
velop their fantastic powers to greater lengths because 
their precaution is stimulated to a greater tension as a 
result of their attitude. Weak chi1()rep fpr_whom 1ifp_ 13 
not always pleasant develop, gr.eater puw.ors nf fAn^^^nd 
hjwe_th^tejKteufiy to .pccupy themselves particnJarly with 
th|s1^p.e,pfactiyity. At a certain stage in their develop­
ment their ability to imagine may become a mechanism 
whereby the realities of life are evaded. Fantasy may be 
misusedasacondemnation of reality. In such cases it be­
comes a kind ofppwer-intoxication in. an individual who 
raises himself above the meanness ofliying,by the fictional 
lever of his imagination^ 
The social feeling, together with the striving for power, 
also plays a great role in the fantasy life. In childhood fan­
tasies, it is only seldom that power strivings appear with­
out some application of this power to social ends. This 
trait we see clearly in those fantasies in which the content 
concerns itself with being a savior or a good knight, a vic­
tor over evil forces, devils, and the like. The fantasy that 
the child does not belong to his own family frequently 
occurs. Many children believe that they actually origi­
nated from a different family, and that some day their 
real father, some important personage, will come and fetch 
them. This happens most frequently where children with 

T H E WORLD W E L I V E IN 
59 
a deep feeling of inferiority, hounded by the deprivations 
they have suffered, are forced hito Tn"e4>ackground, or be­
come dissatisfied with the love and tenderness they receive 
in their family circle. Ideas 0f4jr^adeur_betray themselves 
in the external attitude of the child who aets as though he 
were already grown up. Sometimes one finds almost pathol­
ogical expressions of this fantasy, as for instance, in chil­
dren who will wear only stiff hats, or go about picking up 
cigar butts in order to appear men; or in the ease of young 
girls who decide to become men, and bear themselves and 
dress themselves in a manner more appropriate to boys. 
There are children who are said to have no imagination. 
This is surely an error. Either such children do not ex­
press themselves, or there are other reasons which compel 
them to take up battle against the appearance of fantasies. 
A child may contrive to feel a certain sense of power by 
suppressing his imagination. In a cramped striving to ad­
just to reality, these children believe that fantasy is un­
manly or childlike, and refuse to partake in it; and there 
are cases in which this disinclination goes so far that their 
imagination seems totally lacking. 
IV. D K E A M S : GENERAL 
CONSU3ERATIONS 
In addition to the previously described day-dreams we 
must deal with that important and significant activity 
which occurs during our sleep, the night dream. In general 
it may be said that the night dreaming is a repetition of 
the same process which goes on in day-dreams. OJd_experi-
en^ed^psycholpgist^havQ pointed to the fact that the char­
acter of a human being may easily be read from his dreams. 
Actually dreams have occupied the thinking of mankind to 
an enormous degree since the dawn of history. In the sleep 
dream, as in the day-dream, we are concerned with the 

60 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
activity of an organism which is attempting to map, plan, 
and direct its future life toward a goal of security. The 
most apparent difference is that day-dreams are compara­
tively easily understood, whereas sleep dreams are but 
seldom comprehended. That dreams are not understand­
able is not surprising and we might easily be tempted to 
find this an indication that they are superfluous and in­
significant. For the time being let it be said that the striv­
ing for power of an individual who is seeking to overcome 
difficulties and maintain his position in the future, is re­
echoed in his dreams. Dreams offer us important grips on 
the problems of the psychic life. 
The soul has the faculty not only of perceiving what 
actually exists in reality, but also of feeling, of guessing, 
what will occur in the future. This is an important con­
tribution to the function of pre-vision necessary to any 
easily mobile organism since such an organism is constantly 
faced with the problem of making adjustments. We call 
this faculty identification, or empathy. It is extraordinarily 
well developed in human beings. Its extent is so great that 
one finds it in every corner of the psychic life. The neces­
sity for pre-vision is the prime condition of its existence. 
If we are forced to pre-view, to pre-judge, to presume how 
we should act if a certain situation were to occur, we must 
learn how to gain a sound judgment of a situation which 
has not yet occurred, through correlation of our thinking, 
feeling, and perception. It is essential to win a point of 
view so that we may either approach the new situation 
with more strenuous efforts, or avoid it with greater caution. 
Empathy occurs in the moment one human being speak» 
with another. It is impossible to understand another indi-
V. 
E M P A T H Y AND IDENTIFICATION 

T H E WORLD W E L I V E I N 
61 
vidual if it is impossible at the same time to identify one­
self with him. Drama is the artistic expression of empathy. 
Other examples of empathy are those cases in which some­
one has a strange feeling of uneasiness when he notices an­
other in danger. This empathy may be so strong that one 
makes involuntary defense movements, even though there 
is no danger to oneself.iWe all know the wen known ges­
ture which is made when someone has dropped his glass! At 
a bowling alley one may see certain players following the 
course of tne DaTi with movements of their body as though 
they wanted to influence its course by this movement! Sim­
ilarly during football games whole sections of people in the 
grand stand will push in the direction of their favorite 
team, or make resistive pressure when the opponent team 
has the ball. A common expression is the involuntary ap­
plication of imaginary brakes by the occupants of a motor 
car whenever they feel that they are in danger. Few people 
can pass a taU building in which someone is washing a win­
dow without experiencing certain contractions and defense 
movements. When a speaker loses his presence of mind and 
cannot proceed, people in the audience are oppressed and 
uneasy. In the theatre particularly we can hardly avoid 
identifying ourselves with the players, or prevent ourselves 
from acting the most varied roles within ourselves. Our 
entire life is very much dependent upon the faculty of 
identification. If we_.seck lor the. prigin_of.this_ ability to 
act..and. feel asif we weresomeone else, we can find itin 
the^existeace of an inborn social feeling. This is, as a mat­
ter of fact, a cosmie.feelingand a reflection of.the connect­
edness of_the whplecosmoswhichiiYes in_us,; itis an ines­
capable characteristic of being a human being. It gives us 
the faculty of identifying ourselves with things which are 
quite outside our own body. 
Just as there are various degrees of the social feeling so 

62 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
there are various degrees of empathy. These may be ob­
served even in childhood. There are children who occupy 
themselves with dolls just as though they were human 
beings, whereas others are more interested in seeing what 
is inside of them. By projecting the communal relation­
ships from human beings to less valuable or lifeless objects, 
the development of an individual may be entirely stopped. 
Cases of cruelty to animals which we see in childhood were 
impossible without an almost total absence of the social 
feeling, and the ability to identify with other living beings. 
The consequences of this defect lead children to develop 
interest in things which are of very little value or signif­
icance for their development into fellow human beings. 
They think only of themselves, and lose all interest for 
the joys or woes of others. These are manifestations which 
are intimately related to a deficient degree of empathy. 
The inabiUty to identify oneseLf with another may lead so 
far that an individual refuses entirely to cooperate with 
his fellow men. 
VI. 
HYPNOSIS AND SUGGESTION 
Individual Psychology answers the question "How is 
it possible for one individual to influence the behavior of 
another?" by saying that this phenomenon is one of the 
accompanying manifestations of our psychic life. <Our 
whole^ommunallife_were impossible_unlessone individ­
ual could influence another. This mutual influence becomes 
markedly accentuated in some cases, as for instance, in the 
relationship between teacher and pupil, between parents 
and children, between husband and wife. Under the in­
fluence of the social feeling there exists a certain degree 
of wiUingness to be influenced by one's environment. The 
degree of this readiness to be influenced is dependent upon 

T H E WORLD W E L I V E I N 
63 
the degree to which the rights of the one on whom the in­
fluence is exerted are considered by that one who exercises^ 
the influence. R^is_nnpossible^t#J^ 
Щioni.дaiдdi^idαalлvhom oneisharming; One can influence 
another individual best when he is in the mood in which 
he feels his own rights guaranteed. This is a very impor­
tant point in pedagogy. Perhaps it is possible to conceive, 
or even to carry out some other form of education, but a 
system of education which takes this point into consider­
ation will be adequate for the reason that it is connected 
with the most primitive instinct in man, the feeling of his 
relatedness to man and the cosmos. 
It will fail only when it is dealing with a human being 
who has purposely withdrawn himself from the influence 
of society. Such a withdrawal does not occur by accident. A 
lasting war must have occurred, during the course of which 
his connections with the world about him have been dis­
solved, little by little, so that now he stands in open op­
position to the social feeling. Every type of influence upon 
his behavior is now made more difficult or impossible. One 
views the dramatic spectacle of a human being who re­
sponds to every attempt to influence him with a counter 
attack of opposition. 
We may expect that children who feel themselves op­
pressed by their environment will show a deficient amenity 
to the influence of their educators. Cases occur, however, 
in which the external pressure is so strong that it removes 
all obstacles with the result that the authoritative influ­
ence is retained and obeyed. It is easy to prove that this 
obedience is sterile of all social good. It sometimes mani­
fests itself in such a grotesque fashion that it renders the 
obedient individual unfit for life. By dint of their servile 
obedience such individuate are incapable of any action or 
thought without an appropriate command from someone 

64 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
else. The great danger whieh this far reaching submission 
carries in itself is to be measured by the fact that there 
are children who, when they develop into adults, obey 
anyone's commands, even to the commission of crimes. 
Interesting examples are to be found in gangs. Those who 
carry out the gang's commands belong to this class, where­
as the leader of the gang usually holds himself far from 
the scene of action. In almost every important criminal 
case dealing with a gang crime, some such servile man has 
been the cat's paw. This far-reaching blind obedience at­
tains such unbelievable depths that we can occasionally 
find people who are actually proud of their servility, and 
find it a way to the satisfaction of their ambition. 
If we limit ourselves to normal cases of mutual influ­
ence, we find that tbj^e__p_ej^l^_a^ 
influenced, who are most amenable to reasonand logic, 
those whose social feeling has been least distorted. On the 
contrary, those who thirst for superiority and desire dom­
ination are very difficult to influence. Observation teaches 
us this fact every day. 
When parents complain about a child it is only very 
rarely that they do so because of his blind obedience. The 
most common complaint arises because of his disobedi­
ence. Examination shows that such children are caught 
in a current which would make them superior to their en­
vironment ; they are striving to batter down the cramping 
walls of their little life. They have been made unapproach­
able for educational influence by virtue of a mistaken treat­
ment at home. 
TJ^inle^siyestriving for power is bj^aeJj^proportional 
to_U^^egreeia.y^.i.ch..Qne.j:.aja..be educated. Despite this 
fact, our family edueation is concerned, for the most part, 
in spurring on the ambition of the child, and awakening 
ideas of grandeur in his mind. This does not occur because 

T H E WORLD W E L I V E IN 
65 
of thoughtlessness, but because our whole culture is per­
meated with similar grandiose delusions. TjMJift farrn1y^a.s 
in_.pur, civilization, the greatest emphasis is placed ирод 
thj^ndiyidualwhoisgreater, and better, and more glori-
ous,.thanall the others in his environment. In the chapter 
on vanity we shall have occasion to show how maladapted 
this method of education towards ambition is to the "com­
munal life, and how the development of the mind can be 
stunted by the difficulties which ambition places rn its way. 
Every medium is in a position similar to individuals 
who are influenced by every turn of their environment as 
a consequence of their unconditional obedience. Imagine 
obeying every whim that anyone voices, for a short time! 
Hypnosis is based upon a similar preparation. Anyone may 
say, or believe, that he has the will to be hypnotized, but the 
psychic readiness to submit may be wanting. A second in­
dividual may consciously resist, and still be innately de­
sirous to submit. In hypnosis the psychic attitude of the 
medium alone determines his behavior. What he says, or 
what he believes, is of no consequence. Confusion over this 
fact has allowed much misinformation to grow up concern­
ing hypnOSlS. In hy,pnnsiq orp> is usmi11y nccnpii'd with 
1 Л -
djyjduals who..s6fem-to..he..au:mng. against.the hypnosis, 
b^Lar.fi.essentially, desirous of submitting tp the demandsof 
ifee.iypuOtker. This readiness may have various boundaries 
so that the results of hypnosis differ in every individual. 
Hino case does the_deg.ree.of.readiness toba.hypnotized de­
pend upon the wiU of the hypnotizer. It is conditioned en-
tirj^by.the.psychicattitude of the medium. 
In its essence, hypnosis somewhat resembles sleep. It js 
mysterious only because this sleep may be produced at 
the command of another. The command is effective solely 
when it is given to someone who is willing to submit to 
it. The determining factors are, as usual, the nature and 

66 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
character jif._the medium or subject. Only that man who 
i&.willmg to accede to the demands of another without the 
exercise of his critical faculties, is capable of producing a, 
hypnotic sleep; the hypnosis is more than an ordinary 
sleep in that it excludes the faculty of movement to such 
a degree that even the motor centers are mobilized at the 
command of the hypnotizer. A certain twilight slumber 
is all that is left of normal sleep in this state, in which the 
subject can remember only those things which thehypno-
tizer allows him to remember. The most important fact in 
hypnosis is that our critica^faculties, thosefinest products 
of the soul, are completelyjparalyzed during the hypnotic 
trance. TJie hypnotizeri subjectbecomeSjSO to speak, the 
elongated hand of the hypnotizer, an organ functioning 
at his command. 
Mgst pepple whg^have the power, of influencjngJhe.be. 
havior of others ascribe this faculty to some mysterious 
power which is peculiar to them. This leads to an enormous 
amount of mischiefj^esp.ecially in the pernicious activities 
of the telepaths and hypnotizers. These gentlemen commit 
such arrant crimes against mankind that they are quite 
capable of utilizing any instrument appropriate to their ne­
farious purposes. This does not say that all the manifesta­
tions which they produce are based upon a swindle. TJje 
human animal, unfortunately, is capable of such submission 
thaJuit. &dls victim to anyone who poses as the possessor of 
specia^ powers Only too many human beings have ac­
quired the habit of recognizing an authority without test­
ing it. The public wants to be fooled. It wants to swaUow 
every bluff without subjecting it to rational examination. 
Such activity will never bring any order into the communal 
life of mankind but will lead only, again and again, to 
the revolt of those who have been imposed upon. No tele-
path nor hypnotizer has had luck with his experiments 

T H E WORLD W E L I V E I N 
67 
for any great length of ti*ie. Very frequently they have 
eome in contact with someone, some so-caUed medium, who 
has fooled them for all he was worth. This has sometimes 
been the experience of important scientists who have at­
tempted to show their powers on mediums. 
There are other cases in which there is a curious admix­
ture of truth and falsehood: the medium is, so to speak, a 
deceived deceiver, one who fools the hypnotizer in part, but 
also subordinates himself to his will. The power which ap­
parently is at work here is never the power of the hypno­
tizer, but always the readiness of the medium to subordi­
nate himself and submit. There is no magic power which 
influences the medium unless it be the ability of the hyp­
notizer to bluff. Any man who is accustomed to living ra­
tionally, who makes his own decisions, who does not swal­
low anyone 's word uncritically, is naturally not to be hyp­
notized, and will, therefore, never be able to show any 
telepathic powers. Hypnosis and telepathy are only the 
manifestations of servile obedience. 
At this point we must also consider suggestion. Sugges­
tion can be best understood when one includes it in the 
category of impressions and stimuli. It is self-understood 
that no human being is stimulated only occasionally. All 
of us are constantly under the inflnence of innumerable im­
pressions arising in the outer world. The mere perception 
of a stimulus never occurs. Qj^e.an impression is felt, it 
continues toexercise its effec^. When these impressions take 
the form of the demands and the entreaties of another hu­
man being, his attempts at conviction or his arguments, we 
speak of suggestion. It is a case either of the transforma­
tion, or of the reinfnrwrneTit, of a point of view which is al­
ready presenfT m tHeperson to whom the suggestions are 
made. The more difficult problem really begins with the 
fact that every human being reacts variously to stimuli 

68 
UNDER STANDING HUMAN NATURE 
coming from the external world. The degree to which he 
can be influenced is intimately connected with his inde­
pendence. There are tw.o types of human beings, which we 
must bear in mind. Onetype always overvaluesfhe other 
fellow's opinion and therefore values its own opinions only 
lightly, whether they are right or wrong. They are given to 
over-rating the importance of others, and to adapting them­
selves gladly to their opinions. T_heseindividuals are.ex_-
eeptionally susceptihkLJto^s^gesJioji^ 
Asecond 
type considers every stimulus or suggestion as an insult-
Here are the individuals who considerthatonlytheir own 
opinion is right, and are really not concerned as to its ac­
tual correctness, or incorrectness. They disregardanything 
originating in another human being. Both typescarry with 
them a sense of wealmess..The second type expresses this 
weakness by not being able tO.receive anythiug-fromanr 
o.ther human being. Members of this category are usually 
very belligerent persons, although they may pride them­
selves upon being open to suggestions. They talk about this 
)penness and reasonableness, however, only in order to re^ 
inforce their isolated position. Actually they cannot be ap­
proached, and it is very difficult to do anything with them. 

C H A P T E R 
V 
ТНБ 
FEELING OF INFERIORITY AND T H E STRTVONG FOR 
RECOGNITION 
I. T H E SlTUATION 
I N E A R L Y 
CHTLDHOOD 
We are now certainly prepared to recognize the fact that 
children who have been treated as step-children by Nature 
have an entirely different attitude toward life and toward 
their fellow human beings than those to whom the joys of 
existence were vouchsafed at an early age. One can state 
as a fundamental law that children who come into the 
world with organ inferiorities become involved at an early 
age in a bitter struggle for existence which results only 
too often in the strangulation of their social feelings. 
Instead of interesting themselves in an adjustment to 
their fellows, they are continuaUy preoccupied with them­
selves, and with the impression which they make on others. 
What holds good for an organic inferiority is as vand 
for any social or economic burden which might manifest 
itself as an additional load, capable of producing a hostile 
attitude toward the world. The deciding trend becomes 
determined at an early age. Such children frequently hava 
a sentiment as early as their second year of life, that they 
are somehow not as adequately equipped for the struggle 
as their playmates; they sense that they dare not trust 
themselves to the common games and pastimes. As a re­
sult of past privations they have acquired a feeling of be­
ing neglected, which is expressed in their attitude of 
anxious expectation. One must remember that every child 
69 

70 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
occupies an inferior position in life; were it not for a cer­
tain quantum of social feeling on the part of his family 
he would be incapable of independent existence. One rea­
lizes that the beginning of every life is fraught with a 
more or less deep feeling of inferiority when one sees 
the weakness and helplessness of every child. Sooner or 
later every child becomes conscious of his inability to cope 
single-handed with the challenges of existence.»This feel­
ing of inferiority is the driving force, the starting point 
from which every childish striving originates. It deter­
mines how this individual child acquires peace and secur­
ity in life, it determines the very goal of his existence, and 
prepares the path along which this goal may be reached. 
The basis of a child's edueability lies in this peculiar 
situation which is so closely bound up with his organic 
potentialities. Educability may be shattered by two fac­
tors. One of these factors is an exaggerated, intensified, 
unresolved feeling of inferiority, and the other is a goal 
which demands not only security and peace and social equi­
librium, but a striving to express power over the environ­
ment, a goal of dominance over one's fellows. Children 
who have such a goal are always easily recognized. They 
become "problem" children because they interpret every 
experience as a defeat, and because they consider them­
selves always neglected and discriminated against both 
by nature and by man. One need but consider all these fac­
tors to see with what compulsive necessity a crooked, in­
adequate, error-ridden development may occur in the 
life of a child. Every child runs the danger of a mistaken 
development. Every child finds itself in a situation which 
is precarious, at some time or another. 
Since every child must grow up in an environment of 
adults he is predisposed to consider himself weak, small, 
incapable of living alone; he does not trust himself to do 

T H E F E E L I N G OF I N F E R I O R I T Y 
71 
those simple tasks that one thinks him capable of doing, 
without mistakes, errors, or clumsinesses. Most of our er­
rors in education begin at this point. In demanding more 
than the child can do, the idea of his own helplessness is 
thrown into his face. Some chüdren are even consciously 
made to feel their smallness and helplessness. Other chil­
dren are regarded as toys, as animated dolls; others, again, 
are treated as valuable property that must be carefully 
watched, while others still are made to feel they are so 
much useless human freight. A combination of these at­
titudes on the part of the parents and adults often leads 
a child to believe that there are but two things in his 
power, the pleasure or displeasure of his elders. The type 
of inferiority feeling produced by the parents may be 
further intensified by certain peculiar characteristics of 
our civilization. The habit of not taking children seriously 
belongs inthis category. A child gets the impression that 
he is a nobody, without rights; that he is to be seen, not 
heard, that he must be courteous, quiet, and the like. 
Numerous children grow up in the constant dread of 
being laughed at. Ridicule of children is weU-nigh crimi­
nal. It retains its effect upon the soul of the child, and is 
transferred into the habits and actions of his adulthood. 
An adult who was continuauy laughed at as a child may 
be easily recognized; he cannot rid himself of the fear of 
being made ridiculous again. Another aspect of this matter 
of not taking children seriously is the custom of telling chil­
dren palpable lies, with the result that the child begins to 
doubt not only his immediate environment but also to ques­
tion the seriousness and reality of life. 
Cases have been recorded of children who laughed con­
tinually at school, seemingly without reason, who when 
questioned, admitted that they thought school was one 
of their parents' jokes and not worth taking seriously! 

72 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
I I . COMPENSATING FOR T H E F E E L I N G OF lNFERIORrTY; 
T H E STRrVING FOR RECOGNITION AND SUPERIORITY 
It is the feeling of inferiority, inadequacy, insecurity, 
which determines the goal of an individual's existence. 
The tendency to push into the limelight, to compel the 
attention of parents, makes itself felt in the first days of 
life. Here are found the first indications of the awaken­
ing desire for recognition developing itself under the 
concomitant influence of the sense of inferiority, with its 
purpose the attainment of a goal in which the individual 
is seemingly superior to his environment. 
The degree and quality of the social feeling helps to 
determine the goal of dominance. We cannot judge any 
individual, whether it is a child or adult, without draw­
ing a comparison between his goal of personal dominance 
and the quantum of his social feeling. His goal is so con­
structed that its achievement promises the possibility either 
of a sentiment of superiority, or an elevation of the person­
ality to such a degree that Hfe seems worth living. It is this 
goal which gives value to our sensations, which links and 
co-ordinates our sentiments, which shapes our imagination 
and directs our creative powers, determines what we shaU 
remember and what we must forget. We can realize how 
relative are the values of sensations, sentiments, affects, 
and imagination, when not even these are absolute quanti­
ties; these elements of our psychic activity are influenced 
by the striving for a definite goal, our very- perceptions are 
prejudiced by it, and are chosen, so to speak, with a secret 
hint at the final goal toward which the personality is striv­
ing. 
We orient ourselves according to a fixed point which 
we have artificially created, whieh does not in reaHty 
exist, a fiction. This assumption is necessary because of 

T H E F E E L I N G OF I N F E R I O R I T Y 
73 
the inadequacy of our psychic life. It is very similar to 
other fictions which are used in other sciences, such as the 
division of the earth by non-existent, but highly useful 
meridians. In the case of all psychic fictions we have to 
do with the following: we assume a fixed point even 
though closer observation forces us to admit that it does 
not exist. The purpose of this assumption is simply to 
orient ourselves in the chaos of existence, so that we can 
arrive at some apperception of relative values. The ad­
vantage is that we can categorize every sensation and 
every sentiment according to this fixed point, once we 
have assumed it. 
Individual Psychology, therefore, creates for itself a 
heuristic system and method: to regard human behavior 
and understand it as though a final constellation of rela­
tionships were produced under the influence of the striv­
ing for a definite goal upon the basic inherited potential­
ities of the organism. Our experience, however, has shown 
ns that the assumption of a striving for a goal is more 
*han simply a convenient fiction. It has shown itself to be 
iargely coincident with the actual facts in its fundamen­
tals, whether these facts are to be found in the conscious 
or unconscious life. The striving for a goal, the purposive-
ness of the psychic life is not only a philosophic assump­
tion, but actually a fundamental fact. 
When we question how we can most advantageously op­
pose the development of the striving for power, this most 
prominent evil pf our civiHzation, we are faced with a dif­
ficulty, for this striving begins when the child cannot be 
easily approached. One can begin to make attempts at im­
provement and clarification only much later in life. But 
living with the child at this time does offer an opportunity 
to so develop his social feeling that the striving for per­
sonal power becomes a negligible factor. 

74 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
A further difficulty lies in the fact that children do 
not express their striving for power openly, but hide it 
under the guise of charity and tenderness, and carry out 
their work behind a veil. Modestly, they expect to escape 
disclosure in this way. An uninhibited striving for power 
is eapable of producing degenerations in the psychic de­
velopment of the child, an exaggerated drive for security 
and might, may ehange courage to impudence, obedience 
into cowardice, tenderness into a subtle treachery for dom­
inating the world. Every natural feeling or expression fi­
nally carries with it a hypocritical afterthought whose final 
purpose is the subjugation of the environment. 
Education affects the child by virtue of its conscious 
or unconscious desire to compensate him for his insecur­
ity, by schooling him in the technique of life, by giving 
him an educated understanding, and by furnishing him 
with a social feeling for his fellows. All these measures, 
whatever their source, are means to help the growing child 
rid himself of his insecurity and his feeling of inferiority. 
What happens in the soul of the child during this process 
we must judge by the character traits he develops since 
these are the mirror of the activity in his soul. The actual 
inferiority of a child, important as it is for his psychic 
economy, is no criterion of the weight of his feeling of in­
security and inferiority, since these depend largely upon 
his interpretation of them. 
One cannot expect a child to have a correct estimation 
of himself in any particular situation; one does not expect 
it of adults! It is precisely here that difficulties grow 
apace. One child will grow up in a situation so complicated 
that errors concerning the degree of his inferiority are 
absolutely unavoidable. Another child will be able better 
to interpret his situation. But taken by and large the in­
terpretation which the child has of his feeling of infe-

T H E F E E L I N G OF I N F E R I O R I T Y 
75 
, riority varies from day to day until it becomes consoli-
: dated, finally, and is expressed as a definite self-estimation; 
this becomes a "constant" of self-evaluation which the 
child retains, in all his conduct. According to this crystal­
lized norm or "constant of self-estimation" the compensa­
tion trends which the child creates to guide him out of 
his inferiority will be directed toward this, or the other, 
goal. 
The mechanism of the striving for compensation with 
which the soul attempts to neutralize the tortured feeling 
of inferiority has its analogy in the organic world. It is 
a well known fact that those organs of our body which 
are essential for life, produce an overgrowth, and over-
function when their productivity is lessened through dam­
age to their normal state. Thus in difficulties of circula­
tion, the heart, seeming to draw its new strength from the 
whole body, may enlarge until it is more powerful than a 
normal heart. Similarly, the soul, under pressure of the 
feeling of inferiority, or the torturing thought that the 
individual is small and helpless, attempts with all its 
might to become master over this "inferiority complex." 
When the feeling of inferiority is intensified to the 
degree that the child fears he will never be able to com­
pensate for his weakness, the danger arises that in his 
striving for compensation he will be satisfied not with a 
simple restoration of the balance of power; he will demand 
an over-compensation, will seek an overbalance of the 
scales! 
The striving for power and dominance may become so 
exaggerated and intensified that it must be called patho­
logical. When this occurs the ordinary relationships of 
Hfe will never be satisfactory. The movements in these 
cases are apt to have a certain grandiose gesture about 
them. They are well adapted to their goal. Where we are 

76 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
dealing with a pathological power-drive we find individuals 
who seek to secure their position in life with extraordinary 
efforts, with greater haste and impatience, with more vio­
lent impulses, and without consideration of any one else. 
These are the children whose actions become more notice­
able because of their exaggerated movements towards their 
exaggerated goal of dominance; their attacks on the lives 
of others necessitate that they defend their own lives. 
They are against the world, and the world is against 
them. 
This need not necessarily occur in the worst sense of the 
word. There are children who express the striving of 
power in a manner not calculated to bring them into im­
mediate conflict with society, and their ambition may be 
considered as no abnormal characteristic. Yet when we 
carefully investigate their activity and achievements we 
find that society at large does not benefit from their 
triumphs, because their ambition is an asocial one. Their 
ambition will always put them in the path of other human 
beings as disturbing elements. Little by little, too, other 
characteristics will appear which, if we consider total 
human relationships, will assume an increasingly anti­
social color. 
In the forefront of these manifestations are pride, vanity, 
and the desire to conquer everyone at any price. The 
latter may be subtly accomplished by the relative eleva­
tion of the individual, by his deprecation of all those with 
whom he comes in contact. In the latter case the important 
thing is the "distance" which separates him from his fel­
lows. His attitude is not only uncomfortable for the en­
vironment, but for the individual who practises it, because 
it continually brings him into contact with the dark side of 
life and prevents him from experiencing any joy in living. 
The exaggerated drive for power with which some chil-

T H E F E E L I N G OF I N F E R I O R I T Y 
77 
dren wish to assure their prestige over their environment, 
soon forees them into an attitude of resistance against the 
ordinary tasks and duties of everyday life. Compare such 
a power-hungry individual with the ideal social being, 
and one can, after some little experience, specify, so to 
speak, his social index, that is, the degree to which he has 
removed himself from his fellow-man. A keen judge of 
human nature, keeping his eyes open to the value of physi­
cal defects and inferiorities, knows nevertheless that such 
character traits were impossible without antecedent dif­
ficulties in the evolution of his soul. 
When we have gained a true knowledge of human nature, 
built upon a recognition of the value of the difficulties 
which may occur in the proper development of the soul, it 
can never be an instrument of harm so long as we have our­
selves thoroughly developed our social feeling. We can but 
help our fellow-men with it. We must not blame the bearer 
of a physical defect, nor a disagreeable character trait, for 
his indignation. He is not responsible for it. We must in­
deed admit his right to be indignant to the last limits, and 
we must be conscious that we bear a part of the common 
blame for his situation. The blame belongs to us because we 
too have taken part in the inadequate precautions against 
the social misery which has produced it. If we stick to this 
standpoint we can eventually ameliorate the situation. 
We approach such an individual not as a degraded, 
worthless outcast, but as a fellow human being; we give 
him an atmosphere in which he will find that there are pos­
sibilities for feeling himself the equal of every other hu­
man being in his environment. Think how unpleasant the 
sight of an individual's appearance, whose organ or bodily 
inferiorities are externally visible, may be to you! It is a 
good index of the amount of education you yourself need 
in order to come to an absolutely just sense of social values, 

78 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
and put yourself into complete barmony with the truth of 
the soeial feeling. And we can judge then, too, how much 
our civilization owes to such an individual. 
It is self-understood that those who come into the world 
with organ inferiorities feel an added burden of existence 
from their earliest days, and, as a result, find themselves 
pessimistic as regards the whole matter of existence. Chil­
dren in whom the feeling of inferiority has become in­
tensified through some cause or other, although their 
organ inferiorities are not nearly so noticeable, find 
themselves in a similar situation. The feeling of inferiority 
may be so intensified artificially that the result is ex­
actly the same as though the child came into the world 
greatly crippled. A very severe education during the 
critical period, for instance, may effect such an unfor­
tunate result. The thorn which has been stuck into their 
side in the early days of their existence is never removed, 
and the coldness which they have experienced prevents 
them from approaching other human beings in their en­
vironment. They believe themselves thus in a world devoid 
of love and affection, with which they have no common 
point of contact. 
An example: A patient, noticeable because he is contin­
ually telling us about his great sense of duty, and the im­
portance of all his actions, lives with his wife in the worst 
possible relationship. Here are two individuals who meas­
ure the value of any event as a means toward the subju­
gation of their mate, to the thickness of a hair. Wrangling, 
reproaches, insults, in the course of which the two be­
come entirely estranged from one another, are the in­
evitable result. What little social feeling for his fellow 
men the husband retains, at least so far as his wife and 
friends are concerned, is choked by his thirst for superi' 
ority. 

T H E F E E L I N G OF I N F E R I O R I T Y 
79 
We learn the following facts from the story of his life:— 
he was practically undeveloped physically until his seven­
teenth year. His voice was the voice of a young boy, he 
had no body or face hair, and he was among the smallest 
boys in his school. Today he is thirty-six. Nothing which 
is not entirely masculine is noticeable about his outer ap­
pearance, and Nature seemingly has caught up with her­
self and completed everything which she had hardly begun 
to fashion when he was seventeen. But for eight years he 
suffered from this failure of development, and at that time 
he had no guarantee that Nature would ever compensate 
for his anomalies. During this entire period he was tor­
tured with the thought that he must always remain a 
"child." 
At that early age the beginnings of his present character 
traits could be noted. He acted as though he were very 
important, and as if his every action had the utmost 
weight. Every movement served the purpose of bringing 
him into the center of attention. In the course of time he 
acquired those characteristics which we see in him today. 
After he married he was continually occupied with im­
pressing his wife with the fact that he was really bigger 
and more important than she thought, while she was con­
tinually busied with showing him that his assertions con­
cerning his value were nntrue! Under these circumstances 
their marriage, which showed signs of disruption even dur­
ing their engagement, could hardly develop favorably, 
and ended finally in a social cataclysm. The patient eame 
to the physician at this time—since the break-up of his 
marriage served only to accentuate the dilapidation of 
his already battered self-esteem. To be cured, he had to 
learn first from the physician how to know human nature, 
he had to learn how to appreciate the error he had made 
in life. And this error, this wrong evaluation of his infe-

80 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
riority, had colored his entire Hfe up to the time of his 
treatment. 
III. 
T H E GRAPH OP L r P E AND T H E CoSMIC P l C T U B E 
When we demonstrate cases like these it is frequently 
convenient to show relationships between the childhood 
impressions and the actual complaint, as presented by the 
patient; this is best done by a graph, similar to a mathe­
matical formula. A line connecting two points represents 
such an equation. We will succeed in many cases in being 
able to plot this graph of life, the spiritual curve along 
which the entire movement of an individual has taken 
place. T h e equation of the curve is the behavior pattern 
which this individual has followed since earliest childhood. 
Perhaps there will be some readers who have the impres­
sion that we are attempting to belittle human fate by 
over-simplifying it, or that we have a tendency to deny 
that every human being is the master of his life, and that 
we are denying free wiU and judgment. So far as free wiU 
is concerned this accusation is true. Actually we see this 
behavior pattern, whose final configuration is subject to 
some few changes, but whose essential content, whose en­
ergy and meaning, remain unchanged from earliest chüd-
hood, is the determining factor, even though the relations 
to the adult environment which follow the childhood situ­
ation may tend to modify it in some instances. In our ex­
amination we must ferret out the history of the earliest 
childhood days, because the impressions of early infancy 
indicate the direction in which a child has developed, as 
well as the direction in which he wiU respond in the future 
to the challenge of existence. In his response to the chal­
lenge of existence a child wiU utilize all the developed 
mental possibilities he has brought with him into Hfe; the 

T H E F E E L I N G OF I N F E R I O R I T Y 
81 
particular pressure he has felt in the days of earliest in­
fancy will color his attitude toward life and determine in 
a primitive fashion his world-view, his cosmic philosophy. 
It should not surprise us to learn that people do not 
change their attitude toward life after their infancy, 
though its expressions in later life are quite different from 
those of their earliest days. It is important therefore to 
put an infant into relationships in which it will be dif­
ficult for him to assume a false concept of life. The strength 
and resistance of his body is an important factor in this 
. process. His social position, and the characteristics of those 
who educate him, are almost equally important. Even 
though the response to life is automatic and reflex in the 
beginning, type reactions become modified according to a 
certain purposiveness, in later life. In the beginning the 
factors of personal necessity condition his pain and his 
happiness, but later he acquires the ability to evade and 
circumvent the pressure of these primitive needs. This 
phenomenon occurs in the time of self discovery, approxi­
mately during the time that a child begins to speak of 
himself as " I . " It is during this time also that the child 
is already conscious that he stands in a fixed Telationship 
to his environment. This relationship is by no means neu­
tral, since it forces the child to assume a different attitude 
and to adjust his relationships according to the demands 
which his world-view, and his conception of happiness and 
completeness, give him. 
If we reaffirm what has been said concerning the tele­
ology of the psychic Hfe of mankind it wiU become in­
creasingly clear to us that an indestructible unity must 
be a special token of this behavior pattern. The necessity 
for treating with a human being only as unit personality 
becomes increasingly clear in those cases where seemingly 
contrasting expressions of psychic trends are to be found. 

82 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
There are children whose behavior at school and at home 
are diametrically opposite to one another, just as there 
are adults whose character traits appear so contradictory 
that we are deceived concerning their true character. In 
the same way the movements and expressions of two human 
beings may be outwardly identical, yet when examined 
for their underlying behavior patterns, prove themselves 
to be entirely different. When two individuals seem to be 
doing the same thing, each one is really doing something 
distinct and different, yet when two individuals are do­
ing seemingly different things they may actually be do­
ing the same thing t 
Because of this possibility of many meanings we can 
never judge the expressions of the psychic life as single 
isolated phenomena; on the contrary, we must evaluate 
them according to the unit goal toward which they are 
directed. The essential meaning can be learned only when 
we know what value a phenomenon has in the entire con­
text of a person's life. We can have an understanding of 
his psychic life only when we have reaffirmed the law that 
every expression of a man's life is an aspect of his unit 
behavior pattern. 
When we have finally comprehended that aU human 
behavior is based upon the striving for a goal, that it is 
conditioned by its end as well as by its beginning, then we 
can comprehend also wherein lies the possibility of the 
greatest mistakes. The source of these errors lies in the 
fact that every one of us utilizes his triumphs and psychic 
assets according to his particular pattern, and in the 
sense of a reinforcement of his individual life pattern. 
This is possible only because we do not test anything, but 
receive, transform, and assimilate all perceptions in the 
shadow of our own conscious, or the depths of our uncon­
scious. Science alone can illuminate the process and make 

T H E F E E L I N G OF I N F E R I O R I T Y 
83 
it comprehensible; science alone is finany able to modify 
it. We shall conclude our exposition at this point with an 
example in which we wiU analyze and explain every phe­
nomenon by those Individual Psychological concepts which 
we have already learned. 
A young woman comes as a patient and complains of 
her unconquerable dissatisfaction with life, whieh arises, 
as she believes, in the fact that her whole day is taken up 
with a great number of duties of aU kinds. Externally we 
can see in her a hasty being, with restless eyes, who com­
plains of the great unrest which seizes her whenever she 
must do some simple duty. From her family and friends 
we learn that she takes everything seriously and seems to 
be breaking under the burden of her work. The generaI 
impression that we get is that of a person who takes every­
thing very seriously, a characteristic which is common 
to many people. One member of her famüy gives us the 
clue in saying, "She is always making a big fuss over 
everything!'' 
Let us test this tendency to consider every simple task 
a particularly hard and important one, by attempting to 
imagine what kind of an impression this behavior would 
make upon a group of people, or in the marriage relation­
ship. We cannot help feeling that such a tendency simulates 
an appeal to the environment not to force any further 
work upon her since she can no longer do the most ele­
mentary tasks. 
Our knowledge of this woman's personality is not yet 
adequate. We must stimulate her to further expressions of 
herself. One must proceed by innuendo and with the proper 
deUeaey in such examinations. There must be no attempt 
to dominate the patient as this would only serve to make 
her belligerent. Onee her confidence is won and the pos-
sibUity of conversation is given, we come to the conclusion 

84 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
that her whole being is concerned with but a single goal. 
Her behavior shows that she is attempting to demonstrate 
to someone, probably her husband, that she cannot bear any 
further obligations or responsibilities, that she must be 
treated carefully and with tenderness. We can further sus­
pect and imagine that all this must have begun definitely 
at some time in the past, and that such demands must have 
been made of her. We succeed in stimulating her to the 
affirmation that many years ago she had to live through a 
period in which nothing was more wanting than tenderness. 
Now we can understand her behavior better; it is a rein­
forcement of her desire for consideration, and an attempt 
to prevent the recurrence of a situation in which her hun­
ger for warmth and affection might somehow remain un­
satisfied. 
Our findings are clinched by a further explanation on 
her part. She tells of a friend who is in many ways her 
opposite, who is living in an unhappy marriage from which 
she desires to escape. Once she met her friend at a mo­
ment when she was standing, book in hand, telling her 
husband in a bored voice that she really did not know 
whether she would be able to prepare dinner that day. 
This irritated her husband so that he criticized her whole 
personality in harsh terms. To this occurrence our patient 
added: "When I think of this occurrence I think that 
my method is much better. No one can reproach me in 
this way because I am overburdened with work from 
morning until night. If a luncheon is not prepared on time 
at my house no one can say anything to me because my 
time is full of haste and constant excitement. Should I 
give up this method now?" 
One can understand what is going on in this soul. In 
a relatively innocuous way she attempts to attain a certain 
superiority, but remain at the same time beyond every re-

T H E F E E L I N G OF I N F E R I O R I T Y 
85 
proach by pleading constantly for tender treatment. Since 
this mechanism is successful it seems hardly reasonable 
to ask her to forego it, but there is more to her behavior 
than just this. Her appeal for tenderness (which at the 
same time is an attempt to dominate others) can never be 
made drastic enough. Contradictions of all kinds occur 
in this connection. Should anything be lost in the house 
there is a consequent "much ado about nothing"; subse­
quently she has so much business that she is constantly 
suffering from headaches, and she can never sleep quietly 
because she is under the necessity of putting her activities 
jn the right light. An invitation which she may get is in it­
self an important occasion. Enormous preparations are 
necessary for its acceptance. Since the least activity ap­
pears to her inordinately large, paying a caU is a difficult 
labor which demands hours and days to complete. We can 
predict with some certainty that she will either send her 
regrets or, at the very least, come late. The social feeling 
in the life of such a person can never go beyond certain 
limits. 
In married life there are a number of relationships 
which assume a peculiar significance through this appeal 
for tenderness. It is conceivable for instance that a hus­
band must be absent because of his business, or that he 
must make visits by himself, or that he must appear at 
meetings of societies to which he belongs. If he left his wife 
at home at these times would this not be a breach of tender­
ness and consideration? At first we might say, and very 
often this is the case, marriage justifies keeping a husband 
at home as much as possible. Pleasant as this obligation 
might seem in part, in actuality it signifies insupportable 
difficulties for any man who has a professjon. Dis-harmony 
would appear unavoidable in sueh cases and it occurred 
quickly in this one. The husband attempted occasionally 

86 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
to come to his bed late at night without disturbing his 
wife only to be surprised to find her still awake, greeting 
him with reproachful glances. 
We need not picture here all the weU known situations 
of this kind. Nor should we overlook the fact that it is not 
alone the petty vices of women which we are discussing, 
for there are as many men whose attitude is similar. We 
are simply concerned with showing that the demand for 
especial consideration may occasionally take a different 
course. In our case the following procedure would occur: 
If on some occasion the husband has to spend an even­
ing out, his wife tells him that since he goes into society 
so seldom, he should not come home too early. Although 
she says this in a jocular tone her words have very serious 
meaning. It seems to negate the previous impression but 
when we observe more closely we can see the connection. 
The wife is clever enough not to act too strictly. Outwardly 
she is utterly charming. There is no blemish upon her char­
acter, and she interests us only in a psychological way. The 
real significance of her words to her husband lies in the 
fact that it is the wife who has given an ultimatum. Now 
since she has permitted it, he may stay out late whereas she 
would be dreadfully hurt and slighted if he had remained 
away for reasons of his own. Her words drape a veil over 
the whole situation. She has become the directing partner; 
and her husband, even though he is only fulfilling his social 
obligations, is made dependent upon the wish and will of 
his wife. 
Now let us connect this hunger for particular tender­
ness with our newly won concept that this woman can 
bear a situation only when she herself commands. We sud­
denly become aware that throughout her whole life she has 
been actuated by an impulse never to play the second fid-

T H E F E E L I N G OF I N F E R I O R I T Y 
87 
dle, always to maintain her dominaney, never to be thrust 
from her seeure position by any reproach, and always to 
remain inthe center of her Httle environment. ¥ e wiU 
find this movement in every situation in which we find 
her; for instance, when she has to get a new maid, she be­
comes highly excited. Clearly she is concerned to know 
whether she wiU be able to maintain the same dominance 
over the new servant that she was able to hold over the 
old. In like manner, when she is about to leave the house 
for a walk, she leaves a sphere where her dominance is un­
conditionally seeure, and goes out into the world, on the 
street where suddenly nothing is under the shadow of her 
dominance, where she has to dodge every automobUe, in­
deed where she plays a very subordinate role. The cause 
and meaning of her tension becomes perfectly clear when 
one can understand what tyranny she exercises at home. 
These characteristics may often appear in such a pleas­
ant pattern that at the first glance one would never think 
that the person was suffering. On the other hand this suffer­
ing can reach a very high degree. Just imagine this ten­
sion exaggerated and enlarged. There are human beings 
who are afraid of using a street car because in a street car 
they are not the masters of their own wiU and this may go 
so far that they finally do not leave their homes at aU. 
A further development in- pur case is an instructive 
example of the influence which childhood impressions ex­
ercise in the life of an individual. We cannot deny the 
fact that this woman, from her standpoint, is perfectly 
right; if one's attitude, and one's whole life are directed 
with unheard of intensity toward the acquisition of 
warmth, respect, honor, and tenderness, then to act as 
though one were constantly overloaded and constantly ex­
hausted is not a bad means to this end. No other way wiU 

88 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
always serve to keep off criticism, and simultaneously force 
the environment to be gentle, and avoid everything likely 
to disturb a wavering psychic equilibrium. 
If we go back a considerable period in the life of our 
patient we learn that even in school, whenever she could 
not do her homework, she became extraordinarily excited 
and forced her teacher in this way to be very gentle with 
her. To this she adds, she was the oldest of three children 
and was followed by a boy and then by a sister. She was 
constantly at war with her brother. He always appeared 
as the preferred one. She angered herself especially be­
cause people paid more attention to his school work, 
whereas her work, (and she had originally been a good 
pupil,) was met with a certain indifference as to her ac­
complishments. Finally she could hardly bear it any longer 
and was forever nagging to know why her accomplish­
ments were not judged of equal value. 
Thus we can understand that this young girl was striving 
for equality, and that from earliest childhood she had 
had a feeling of inferiority which she was attempting to 
overcome. Her compensation in school was made in such a 
manner that she became a bad pupil. She attempted to 
outdo her brother by means of bad school reports! These 
are no high ethics, but in her childish interpretation she 
acted rationally, for the attention of her parents would be 
more often directed to her in this way. Some of her tricks 
must have been conscious because she declared quite clearly 
that she wanted to be a bad pupil! 
Her parents, however, did not trouble themselves in the 
least about her failures in school. And now something in­
teresting happened. She suddenly showed marked success in 
her studies, for now her younger sister entered upon the 
scene in a new role! This younger sister also had failed in 
school but her mother troubled herself almost as much about 

T H E F E E L I N G OF I N F E R I O R I T Y 
89 
her failure as she had about the brother, and for the pecu­
liar reason that whereas our patient had had bad reports 
only in her studies her sister got bad reports in conduct and 
behavior. She was thus able to gain her mother's attention 
more easily since bad reports in conduct have an entirely 
different social effect than merely bad reports in studies. 
They were bound up with peculiar emergencies that forced 
the parents to occupy themselves more with their child. 
The battle for equality was temporarüy lost. Now the 
loss of a battle for equality never leads to a permanent 
peace. No human being can bear such a situation. Hence 
we shall constantly find new tendencies and activities con­
tributing toward the formation of her character. We can 
now understand the meaning of her great to-do, her con­
stant haste, her desire to show herself under pressure, some­
what better. It was meant originally for her mother and was 
intended to compel her parents' attention to her as weU 
as to her brother and sister; at the same time it was a 
reproach to her parents that they treated her worse than 
the others. The fundamental attitude created at that time 
has remained until today. 
We can go back even farther in her life. She remembers 
as a particularly vivid occurrence of her childhood, that 
she wanted to hit her brother who had just been born, with 
a piece of wood, and that only the care of her mother had 
prevented her from doing great damage. At this time she 
was three years old. This little girl had discovered (even at 
that time) the cause for her neglect and lesser evaluation 
was that she was only a girl. She remembers quite vividly 
that the wish to be a boy was expressed countless times. 
The arrival of her brother not only forced her out of the 
warmth of her nest but she was particularly insulted be­
cause as a boy he was treated much better than she had 
ever been. In her striving to compensate for this defect she 

90 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
happened upon the method of appearing always overloaded 
with work. 
Let us interpret a dream now to show how deeply this 
behavior pattem is anchored in the soul. This woman 
dreamt that she was at home conversing with her hus­
band, but her husband did not look like a man but ap­
peared as a woman. This detail is symbolic of the pattern 
with which she approaches all her experiences and aU her 
relationships. The dream means that she has found equality 
with her husband. He is no longer the dominant male as 
her brother once was, he is already like a woman. There is 
no difference in elevation between them. In her dream she 
has achieved that which she has always wished since her 
childhood. 
bi this way we have succeeded in joining two points in 
the soul life of a human being. We have discovered her style 
of life, her life curve, her behavior pattern, and from 
this we can acquire a unified picture which we might sum 
up as follows: we are dealing here with a human being 
who strives to play the dominant role by amiable means. 

C H A P T E R 
V I 
T H E PREPARATION FOR LTFE 
One of the fundamental tenets of Individual Psychology 
is that aU the psychic phenomena can be considered as 
preparations for a definite goal. In the configuration of the 
soul life which we have previously described we can see 
a constant preparation for the future in which the wishes 
of the individual appear fulfilled. This is a general human 
experience and aU of us must go through this process. AU 
the myths, legends and sagas which speak of an ideal future 
state concern themselves with it. The convictions of aU peo­
ples that there was once a paradise, and the further echo 
of this process in the desire of humanity for a future in 
which aU difflculties have been overcome, may be found in 
aU religions. The dogma of the immortaUty of the soul, or 
its re-incarnation, is a definite evidence of the beUef that 
the soul can arrive at a new configuration. Every fairy tale 
is a witness of- the fact that the hope of a happy future 
has never failed in mankind. 
I. PLAT 
There is in the chUd life an important phenomenon 
which shows very clearly the process of preparation for 
the future. It is play. Games are not to be considered 
as haphazard ideas of parents or educators, but they are 
to be considered as educational aids and as stimuli for 
the spirit, for the fantasy, and for the Ufe-technique of 
91 

92 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
the child. The preparation for the future can be seen in 
every game. The manner in which a child approaches a 
game, his choice, and the importance which he places upon 
it, indicate his attitude and relationship to his environment 
and how he is related to his feUow men. Whether he is 
hostile or whether he is friendly, and particularly whether 
he has the tendency to be a ruler, is evident in his play; 
and in observing a child in his play we can see his whole 
attitude toward life. Play is of utmost importance to every 
child. The discovery of these facts which teach us that the 
play of children is to be considered as a preparation for 
the future is due to Gross, a professor of pedagogy, who 
discovered the same tendencies in the play of animals. 
But we have not exhausted all the view points as to the 
nature of play, with the concept of preparation. Above all 
else games are communal exercises, they enable the child to 
safisfy and fulfill his social feeling. Children who evade 
games and play are always open to the suspicion that they 
have made a bad adjustment to life. These children gladly 
withdraw themselves from all games, or when they are put 
on the playground with other children usually spoil the 
pleasure of the others. Pride, deficient self-esteem and 
the consequent fear of playing one's role badly are the 
chief reasons for this behavior. In general by watching a 
child at play we shall be able to determine with great 
certainty the quantum of his social feeling. 
The goal of superiority, another factor obvious in play, 
betrays itself in the child's tendency to be the commander 
and the ruler. We can discover this tendency by watching 
how the child pushes himself forward and to what degree 
he prefers those games which give him an opportunity to 
satisfy his desire to play the leading role. There are very 
few games whieh do not have at least one of these factors. 

T H E PREPARATION FOR L L F E 
93 
preparation for life, social feeling, or the striving for domi­
nation, incorporated in them. 
There is, however, one other factor which is present 
in play. It is the possibility that the child can express 
himself in a game. The child is more or less placed upon his 
own in play, and his performance is stimulated by his con­
nection with the other children. There are a number of 
games which especially emphasize this creative bent. In the 
preparation for a future profession those plays which 
carry in themselves the possibility for the exercise of the 
creative spirit of the child are especially important. In 
the life histories of many people, it has happened that 
they have made dresses for dolls in their childhood, and 
later made dresses for adults. 
Play is indivisibly connected with the soul. It is, so to 
speak, a kind of profession, and must be considered as such. 
Therefore, it is not an insignificant matter to disturb a 
child in his play. Play should never be considered as a 
method of killing time. In regard to the goal of preparing 
for the future, every child has in him something of the 
adult he will be at sometime. Thns in the appraisal of an 
individual we can draw our conclusions more easily when 
we have a knowledge of his childhood. 
II. ATTENTION AND DlSTEACTION 
Attention is one of the characteristics of the soul which 
is in the very forefront of human accomplishments. When 
we bring our sense organs to the consideration of some par­
ticular event outside or inside our person, we have a feeling 
of particular tension, which does not spread over our entire 
body, but is limited to a single sense organ, as for instance, 
the eye. We have the feeling that something is being pre-

94 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
pared. In the case of the eye the direction of the ocular 
axis gives us this particular feeling of tension. 
If attention calls forth a particular tension in, any part 
of the soul or in our motor organism, then other tensions 
are at the same time excluded. Thus as soon as we wish to 
be attentive to any one thing we desire to exclude all other 
disturbances. Attention, so far as the soul is concerned, 
means an attitude of willingness to make a special bridge 
between ourselves and a definite fact, a preparation for 
offense, which grows out of our necessity, or out of an un­
usual situation which demands that our whole power be 
directed toward a particular purpose. 
Every human being, if we exclude sickness and feeble­
mindedness, possesses the ability to pay attention, but in­
attentive persons are frequently found. There are a num­
ber of reasons for this. In the first place, fatigue or sick­
ness are factors which influence the ability to pay atten­
tion. Further, there are other individuals whose deficient 
attention is due to the fact that they do not want to pay 
attention, because the object to which they should be at­
tentive does not fit into their behavior pattern; on the 
other hand their attention immediately awakens when they 
are considering some matter which is germane to their 
style of life. A further reason for deficient attention is to 
be found in the tendency toward opposition, Children are 
very easily given to opposition, and it often happens that 
such children answer "No" to every stimulus which is of­
fered them. It is necessary for their opposition to become 
open. It is the duty of the educator and of educational tact 
to reconcile such a child by relating the study which he 
must learn to his behavior pattern, and making it germane 
to his style of life. 
Some see and hear and perceive every change. Some 
approach life entirely with their eyes; others entirely with 

T H E PREPARATION FOR L I F E 
95 
their auditory apparatus. Some see nothing, take notice 
of nothing, and are not to be interested in visual things. 
We may find an individual inattentive when his situation 
would warrant his utmost interest because his more sensi­
tive receptors are not stimulated. 
The most important factor in the awakening of attention 
is a really deep rooted interest in the world. Interest lies in 
a much deeper psychic stratum than attention. If we have 
interest, then it is self-understood that we should also 
pay attention; and where interest exists, an educator need 
not concern himself with attention. It becomes a simple 
instrument with which one conquers a field of knowledge 
for a definite purpose. No one has ever developed without 
making mistakes in the process. It follows that the atten­
tion is likewise involved when some such mistaken attitude 
has become fixed in an individual, and it thus happens that 
attention is directed toward things which are not important 
in the preparation for life. When the interest is directed 
towards one's own body, or towards one's own power, one 
is attentive wherever these interests become involved, where-
ever there is something to be won, or wherever one's power 
is threatened. Attention can never be linked with something 
extraneous so long as some new interest is not substituted 
in place of the power interest. One can observe how chil­
dren become immediately attentive when their recognition 
and significance are in question. Their attention on the 
other hand is easily extinguished when they have the feel­
ing there is "nothing in it" for them. 
A defective attention actually means nothing more than 
that a person prefers to withdraw from a situation, to which 
he is supposed to pay attention. It is incorrect, therefore, 
to say that someone cannot concentrate himself. It can eas­
ily be proved that he concentrates very well, but always 
on somethmg else. Lack of will power and lack of energy 

96 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
are similar to the inability to concentrate. We usually find 
an obdurate will and an indomitable energy expressed 
in a different direction in these cases. Treatment is not 
simple. It can be attempted solely by changing the entire 
style of life of the individual. In every case we can be 
sure that we are dealing with a defect only because another 
goal is being pursued. 
Not infrequently inattention becomes a permanent char­
acteristic. We often meet individuals who have been given 
a definite task which they have decHned to do, which they 
have only partially accomplished, or have fully evaded, 
with the result that they are always a burden to someone 
else. Their constant inattention is a fixed character trait, 
which appears as soon as they are under the necessity of do­
ing something which is demanded of them. 
I I I . 
CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE AND FORGETFULNESS 
We usually speak of criminal negligence when the safety 
or health of an individual is threatened by neglect in the 
application of necessary precaution. Criminal neglect is a 
phenomenon which demonstrates the utmost degree of in­
attention. Such defective attention is based on a defective 
interest for one's fellow men. One can determine whether 
children think only of themselves, or whether they take 
into consideration rights of others, by watching for traits 
of negligence in their games. Such phenomena are definite 
standards of the communal consciousness and the social 
feeling of a human being. When the social feeling has been 
insufficiently developed, one acquires sufficient interest for 
his fellows only with the greatest difficulty, even under 
threat of punishment; whereas in the presence of a well-
developed community consciousness, this interest is self-
evident. 

T H E PREPARATION FOR L I F E 
97 
Criminal neglect, therefore, amounts to a defective social 
feeling, yet we must not be too intolerant lest we forget 
to investigate why an individual does not possesses the in­
terest in his fellow-men which we might expect of him. 
We can produce forgetfulness by setting limits to our 
attention, just as we can arrange the loss of valuables. 
Despite the presence of the possibility for greater tension— 
that is, interest—this interest may be so dampened by dis­
pleasure, that a loss or memory lapse is initiated, or at 
least facilitated thereby. Such is the case, for instance, 
when chüdren lose their school books. It is always easy to 
prove that they have not yet become accustomed to theh-
school surroundings. Housewives who are constantly losing 
or*misplacing their keys are usually women who have never 
become friendly with their profession as housewife. For­
getful people usually prefer not to revolt openly, yet a cer­
tain lack of interest in their tasks is betrayed by their for­
getfulness. 
IV. T H B ÜNCONSClOUS 
Our descriptions have often shown individuals who are 
not conscious of the meaning of the phenomena of their 
psychic life. Seldom will an attentive man be able to tell 
you why he sees everything at once. Certain psychic facul­
ties are not to be sought in the reahn of consciousness; al­
though we can consciously force our attention to a certain 
degree, the stimulus to that attention lies not in conscious­
ness, but in our interests, and these, again, lie for the most 
part in the sphere of the unconscious. Taken in its largest 
scope, this is at once an aspect and an important factor in 
the soul life. We may seek and find the behavior pattern of 
a man in the unconscious. In his conscious life we have 
but a reflection, a negative, to deal with. A vain woman 

98 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
nsuaUy has no knowledge of her vanity in most of the 
instances in which she exhibits it; quite to the contrary, 
she will behave so that only her modesty wiU be apparent 
to everyone. It is not necessary to know that one is vain 
to be vain. Indeed for the purposes of this woman, it would 
be quite futile for her to know that she is vain, since if she 
knew she were vain, she could not continue to be vain. We 
can acquire a certain dramatic security in not seeing any­
thing of our own vanity solely by directing our attention 
to something extraneous or irrelevant. The whole process 
takes place in the dark. Attempt to talk to a vain man about 
his vanity and you wiU find it very difficult to achieve a 
conversation on the subject. He may show a tendency to 
evade the matter, to circumlocute, lest he be distuAed; this 
can but make us more certain of our opinion. He wants to 
play his little game, and immediately assumes a defensive 
attitude when some one inadvertently attempts to lift the 
veil from his little trick. 
Human beings may be differentiated into two types; 
those who know more concerning their unconscious life 
than the average, and those who know less; that is, accord­
ing to the extent of their sphere of consciousness. In a great 
many cases, we wiU find coincidently that an individual 
of the second type concentrates upon a small sphere of 
activity, whereas the individuals of the first type are con­
nected with a many-sided sphere, and have large interests 
in men, things, events, and ideas. Those individuals who 
feel themselves pushed to the wall wiU naturally satisfy 
themselves with a small section of life, since they are for­
eign to life, and cannot see its problems with as much 
clarity as those who are playing the game according to 
the rules. They make bad team-mates. They will not be so 
capable of understanding the finer things of life. Because 

T H E PREPARATION FOR L I F E 
99 
of their very limited interest in living, they perceive but an 
insignificant segment of its problems for the reason that 
they fear a broader view would be synonymous with a loss 
of personal power. As to individual occurrences in life, we 
can often discover that an individual knows nothing of his 
capabilities of living, because he undervalues himself. We 
will find also that he is not sufficiently oriented concerning 
his short-comings; he wiU consider himself a good man, 
whereas in reality, he does everything out of egoism; or 
vice-versa, he wiU consider himself an egoist in in­
stances in which a closer analysis shows him to be a very 
good person indeed. It really does not matter what you 
think of yourself, or what other people think of you. The 
important thing is the general attitude toward human 
society, since this determines every wish and every interest 
and every activity of each individual. 
We are dealing again with two types of human beings. 
In the first class are those who Uve a more conscious life, 
who approach the problems of life without Minders on 
their eyes, in an objective manner. The second class ap­
proaches life with a prejudiced attitude, and sees only a 
small part of it. The behavior and speech of individuahi 
of this type are always directed in an unconscious manner. 
Two human beings living with one another may find diffi­
culties in life because one of them is constantly in opposi­
tion. This is not an uncommon occurrence. It is perhaps 
even less uncommon that both parties are in opposition. 
Each party knows nothing about his opposition, believes 
himself right, and give arguments to show that he is the 
champion of peace and harmony. The facts nevertheless 
beUe his words. In actuality it is impossible for him to say 
a single word without attacking his partner on the flank 
with an opposing remark, albeit his attack is externally 

100 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
urmoticeable. On closer inspection we find that he has 
given himself up to a hostile and belligerent attitude 
throughout his life. 
Human beings develop powers in themselves which are 
constantly at work, though they know nothing of them. 
These faculties lie hidden in the unconscious, influence 
their lives and occasionally lead to bitter consequences when 
they are not discovered. Dostoyevsky described such a case 
so beautifully in his novel "The Idiot" that it has been the 
marvel of psychologists ever since: during a social gather­
ing a lady cautions the duke who is the hero of the novel, 
not to upset an expensive Chinese vase which stands near 
him, in a taunting tone. The duke assures her that he wiU 
take care, but a few minutes later the vase lies on the 
ground, shattered into pieces. No one in the group saw a 
mere accident in this occurrence; everyone felt it was a 
very consequent action, quite in keeping with the whole 
character of this man who felt himself insulted by the 
lady's words. 
In judging a human being we must not be guided 
solely by his conscious actions and expressions. Often little 
details in his thinking and behavior of which he is not 
conscious wiU give us a better clue to his real nature. 
People for instance who practice such unpleasant activi­
ties as nail-biting or nose-boring do not know that they 
betray the fact that they are stubborn human beings in 
doing so, since they do not understand the relationships 
which have led them to these traits. Yet it is perfectly clear 
to us that a child must have been scolded repeatedly because 
of these habits; if, then, he does not give them up, despite 
the scoldings, he must be a stubborn human being! Were 
we more expert in our observation, we would have to draw 
yery far reaching conclusions concerning any human being, 

T H E PREPARATION FOR L I F E 
101 
Ъу watching for such insignificant details, in which his 
whole being is mirrored. 
These two following cases will show how important it is 
to the psychic economy that events which are unconscious, 
remain in the unconscious. The human soul has the capabil­
ity of directing the consciousness, that is, of making con­
scious that which is necessary from the standpoint of some 
psychic movement, and viee-versa, to allow something to 
remain in the unconscious or make it unconscious, whenever 
this would seem advisable for the maintenance of the in­
dividual's behavior pattern. 
The first case is that of a young man, a firstborn son, 
who grew up with a younger sister; his mother died when 
he was ten years old, and from that time his father, who 
was a very intelligent, well-meaning, ethical man, had to 
be the educator. The father spent most of his efforts de­
veloping his son's ambition and spurring him on to greater 
activity. The boy tried to be the leader in his classes, 
developed himself extraordinarily well, and so far as his 
ethical and scientific qualities were concerned, always took 
first place, much to the joy of his father, who expected him 
to play an important role in life, from the very first. 
In the course of time this young man developed certain 
traits which caused his father sorrow, and these he tried 
to ehange. The boy's sister grew up to be his obdurate 
rival. She also developed very weU, although she was satis-
fled with utilizing the weapons of weakness for her 
4riumphs, while she enlarged her significance at the cost 
of her brother. She had acquired a considerable facility 
in household tasks, which made competition difficult for 
her brother. As a boy, he found it very difficult to achieve, 
in domesticity, that recognition and significance which he 
had so easily won in other fields of endeavor. The father 

102 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
soon noticed that his son was acquiring a peculiar social 
life, which became the more evident as his puberty ap­
proached. As a matter of fact he had no social life. He 
was hostile to аП new acquaintanceships and where these 
acquaintanceships concerned girls, he simply ran away. 
At first his father saw nothing extraordinary in this, but 
as time went on the boy's social reactions acquired such 
dimensions that he hardly went out of the house, and even 
Httle walks, except in the late twilight, were unpleasant 
to him. He became so shut in that he refused, finally, to 
greet even his old acquaintances, although his attitude in 
school and towards his father remained beyond criticism. 
When it had gone so far that no one could bring him 
anywhere, the father brought this boy to the physician. 
A few consultations sufficed to discover the cause of the 
difficulty. This boy believed that his ears were smaU and 
that therefore everyone considered him very ugly. As a 
matter of fact this was not the case. When his objection 
was overruled and he was told that his ears were in no* 
wise different from those of other boys, and it was shown 
him that he was using this as an excuse to withdraw from 
the company of human beings, he added further that his 
teeth and his hair also were ugly. This aLso was not the case. 
On the other hand it was easily discovered that he was 
inordinately ambitious. He was well aware of his ambition 
and believed that his father, who had constantly stimulated 
him to greater and greater activity so that he might achieve 
a high position in life, had produced this trait in him. His 
plans for the future came to their climax in his desire to 
play the role of a hero of science. This would not be so 
remarkable were it not that with it was combined a ten­
dency to avoid all the obligations of humanity and fellow­
ship. Why did this boy make use of such very childish 
arguments? Had these arguments been right they might 

T H E PREPARATION FOR L I F E 
103 
have justified him in approaching life with a certain cau­
tion and anxiety, because it is undoubtedly true that an 
ugly man encounters many difficulties in our civilization. 
Further examination showed that this boy followed a 
particular goal with his great ambition. Formerly he had 
always been the first one in his class and he wanted to re­
main the first one. To achieve such a goal one has certain 
instruments such as concentration, industry and the like, 
at hand. These were not enough for him. He attempted to 
exclude everything whieh seemed unnecessary, out of his 
life. He might have expressed himself somewhat like this: 
"Since I am going to become famous and since I am going 
to dedicate myself entirely to my scientific labors, I must 
exclude all social relationships as unnecessary." 
But he neither said nor thought this. On the contrary he 
took the unessential element of his alleged ugliness and 
utilized it for the attainment of his purpose. The elevation 
of this insignificant fact acquired value in his scheme of 
things in that it justified him in doing what in reality he 
wanted to do. AU he needed to do now was to have courage 
to argue falsely, to exaggerate his ugUness, in order to pur­
sue his secret purpose. Had he said that he wished to live 
Rke an ascetic hermit in order to attain his goal of being 
the first, his argument would have been transparent to 
everyone. Although unconsciously he was dedicated to the 
idea of playing the heroic r61e, he was consciously unaware 
of his purpose. 
That he wished to hazard everything else in Hfe and 
gain this one point had never entered his head. If he had 
taken this into his consciousness and decided openly to 
stake everything in life in order to become a scientific 
hero, he could not have been as sure of himself as if he 
were to accompUsh his purpose by saying that he was an 
ugly man and dared not go into society; in addition anyone 

104 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
who would say openly that he wanted forever to be first 
and the greatest, and was willing to sacrifice all human 
relationships for the sake of his goal, would make himself 
ridiculous in the eyes of his fellows. It would be too fear­
ful a thought, a thought which one dared not think. There 
are certain ideas whieh one cannot hold too openly, both 
for the sake of others and for the sake of oneself. For this 
reason the guiding idea of this boy's life had to remain 
in his unconscious. 
If now we make obvious to such an individual the main­
springs of his life, and demonstrate to him tendencies 
whieh he dared not look at in himself lest he lose his be-. 
havior pattern, we naturally disturb his entire psychic 
mechanism. What this individual has been trying at aU 
costs to prevent, now happens! His unconscious thought 
processes become clear and transparent! Thoughts which 
were not to be thought, ideas which one dared not retain, 
tendencies which, if conscious, would disturb our entire 
behavior, are laid bare. It is a universal and human phe­
nomenon that everyone seizes upon those thoughts which 
justify him in his attitude and rejects every idea which 
might prevent him from going on. Human beings dare only 
those things which in their interpretation of the world are 
valuable to them. That which is helpful we are conscious 
of; whatever can disturb our arguments we push into the 
unconscious. 
The second case is the history of a very capable young 
boy whose father, a teacher, constantly spurred his son on 
to be the first in his class. In this case, too, the early days 
of this child were a series of victories. Wherever he ap­
peared he was always the conqueror. He was one of the 
most charming members of his society and he had several 
close friends. 
A great change occurred in his eighteenth year. He lost 

T H E PREPARATION FOR L I F E 
105 
aU his pleasure in life, was depressed, distracted, and went 
to great lengths to withdraw from the world. No sooner 
would he make a friendship than he broke it. Everyone 
found a stumbling block in his behavior. His father how­
ever hoped that his shut-in life would enable him to dedi­
cate himself more intensely to his studies. 
During the treatment of this boy he complained con­
stantly that his father had robbed him of aU joy in life, 
that he could find no self-confidence nor courage to go on 
with lite, and that there was nothing left for him to do 
but to sorrow through the rest of his days in solitude. 
His progress in his studies had already become slower and 
he was failing in College. He explained that the ehange in 
his life had begun on the occasion during a social gather­
ing in which his ignorance of modern literature had made 
him the object of ridicule among his friends. The repetition 
of similar experiences caused him to begin his isolation 
and gave him occasion to assume a position outside society. 
He was ruled by the idea that his father was to blame for 
his misfortune, and their relationship became worse day 
by day. 
These two cases are similar to each other in many re­
spects. In the first case our patient was shipwrecked on 
the resistance of his sister, whereas in the second it was 
the belligerent attitude toward a father who was at fault. 
Both patients were led on by an idea which we have been 
accustomed to call the heroic ideal. Both of them had be­
come so intoxicated with their heroic ideal that they had 
lost aU contact with life, had become discouraged and would 
have liked nothing better than to withdraw entirely from 
the struggle. But we cannot believe that our second boy 
would ever have said to himself: '' Since I cannot continue 
this heroic existence I shall withdraw from life and embitter 
the rest of my days!'' 

106 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
To be sure, his father was wrong and his education was 
bad. It was quite evident that he had eyes for nothing but 
his bad education, of which he constantly complained, since 
he wanted to justify himself in his withdrawal, by assum­
ing that his education had been so bad that withdrawal 
from society alone remained a solution of his problem. In 
this way he achieved a situation in which he suffered no 
more defeats, and he was able to credit his father with the 
total blame for his misfortune. Only in this way was he 
able to save a fraction of his self-esteem for himself and 
satisfy his striving for significance. He had a glorious past 
and his future triumphs had been stopped only by the 
fatal fact that his father, because of his bad pedagogy, 
had hindered him from developing to even more brilliant 
accomplishments. 
In a way we might say that something like this train 
of thought remained unconsciously in his mind: "Since 
I now stand closer to the firing front of life, and since I 
realize that it will no longer be so easy always to be the 
first, I shall make every effort to withdraw entirely from 
life." Yet such an idea is clearly unthinkable. No one 
could say such a thing, but an individual can act as> if he 
had taken this thought to heart. This is accomplished by 
making use of still further arguments; by busying himself 
entirely with the educational mistakes of his father he suc­
ceeds in evading society, and avoids all necessary decisions 
in life. Had this train of thought become conscious to him 
his secret behavior would, of necessity, have been disturbed. 
Therefore it remained unconscious. How could anyone say 
that he was an untalented human being when he had such 
a glorious past ? To be sure none could blame him now if he 
succeeded to no new triumphs! The pernicious influence of 
his father 's educational efforts was not to be laid aside. The 
son was judge, claimant, and defendant all in his own per-

T H E PREPARATION FOR L I F E 
107, 
son. Should he now give up such a favorable position? He 
knew too well that his father was to blame only so long 
as he, the son, wanted it, so long as he plied the lever 
which he held between his hands. 
V. 
DREAMS 
It has long been maintained that one could draw con­
clusions concerning the personality-as-a-whole from the 
dreams of an individual. Lichtenberg, a contemporary of 
Goethe, once said that one could guess the character and 
essence of a human being better from his dreams than from 
his actions and words. This is saying a little too much. We 
have the standpoint that one must utilize single phenomena 
of the psychic life with the greatest care and only in con­
nection with other phenomena. We therefore will draw 
conclusions concerning his character from the dreams of an 
individual only when we can find additional supporting 
evidence in other characteristics, to substantiate our in­
terpretation of the dream. 
The interpretation of dreams dates from prehistoric 
times. The research of various epochs in the developmental 
history of culture, especiaUy as evidenced in myths and 
sagas, leads us to the conclusion that in times by-gone 
people were far more concerned with the interpretation 
of dreams than we are today. We also find a much better 
understanding of dreams on the part of the average man 
of those days than is the case today. One need but recall 
the enormous role of dreams in the life of the ancient 
Greeks, or the fact that Cicero wrote a book about them, 
or remind oneself of the many dreams told in the Bible, 
to prove this point. And more. The Bible dreams are either 
cleverly interpreted, or they are related as though it were 
setf-understood that everyone would then interpret them 

108 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
correctly and understand them. This is the case in the in­
stance of Joseph's dream of the sheaves which he told his 
brothers. In the Nibelungen sagas, which originated in an 
entirely different culture, furthermore, we can conclude 
that dreams were used as evidence. 
If we busy ourselves with dreams as a means of approach­
ing and learning something of the human soul, we shall 
hardly view the problem from the standpoint of those in­
vestigators who seek in the dream and in dream interpreta­
tion fantastic and supernatural influences. We shall de­
pend upon the evidence of dreams only when we can be 
justified and strengthened in our assertions by other far 
reaching observations. 
The tendency to believe that dreams have a particular 
meaning for the future, persists even today. There are ideal­
ists who go so far as to allow themselves to be influenced 
by their dreams. In this way one of our patients tricked 
himself into avoiding every honorable occupation and de­
voted himself to gambling on the Exchange. He always 
gambled according to dreams which he had. He had col­
lected historical evidence to prove he had always had.mis-
fortune whenever he did not follow one of his dreams. To 
be sure, he would dream of nothing except that which was 
the object of his constant waking attention. In this way 
he patted himself on the back, so to speak, in his dream, 
and was enabled for a considerable period of time to say 
that he had won very much under the influence of his 
dream. Some time later he explained that he placed no 
value whatever upon his dreams. It seems that he had lost 
all his money. Since this happens frequently to stock market 
operators even without dreams we see no miracle at work 
here. An individual who is intensely interested in some 
particular task is pursued by the necessity of solving this 
problem even at night. Some people do not sleep at all and 

T H E PREPARATION FOR L L F E 
109 
constantly follow their problem while awake, others sleep 
but busy themselves with their plans in their dreams. 
This peculiar phenomenon which occupies our thoughts 
during our sleep, is nothing more than the bridge from 
yesterday to tomorrow. If we know what attitude an in­
dividual takes towards life in general, how he bridges from 
the "now" into the "then," as a rule we will be able to 
understand also the peculiarities of his bridge structure 
in his dreams and be able to make valid conclusions from 
it. In other words it is the general attitude toward life 
which is at the basis of all dreams. 
A young woman has the following dream: she dreams 
that her husband has forgotten her wedding anniversary 
and she reproaches him for it. This dream may mean sev­
eral things. If such a problem can occur at aU it immed­
iately shows us that this marriage is marked by certain 
difficulties; the wife feels herself neglected. She explains 
however that she also forgot about the wedding anniversary 
but it was she who finally remembered it whereas her hus­
band had to be reminded of it by her. She is the "better 
half." To a further question she said that actually nothing 
like this has ever happened and that her husband has 
always remembered the wedding anniversary. Therefore 
in the dream we see her tendency to be anxious for the 
future: something like this might happen. We can further 
conclude that she is given to making reproaches, to using 
arguments which are intangible, and to nagging her hus­
band for things which might occur. 
Still we could not be sure of our interpretation if we 
did not have other evidence at hand which would reinforce 
our conclusions. Asked about her earUest childhood re­
membrance, this woman narrated an event which had al­
ways remained in her memory. When she was a three year 
old chüd her aunt presented her with a carved wooden 

110 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
spoon of which she was very proud; but once as she was 
playing with it, it fell in a brook and floated away. She 
sorrowed about this event for many days in such a way 
that everyone in her environment was concerned with it. 
The dream might lead us to assume that she was now 
again thinking of the possibility that her marriage also 
might float away from her. What if her husband should 
forget about her wedding anniversary ? 
Another time she dreamt that her husband led her up into 
a high building; the stairs grow more and more steep. Think­
ing that she has perhaps climbed too high she becomes ter­
ribly dizzy, has an attack of anxiety, and faints. One may 
experience a similar sensation during the waking life, es­
pecially if one suffers from dizziness in high places in 
which the fear is less that of the height than of the depth. 
By connecting the second dream with the first one and 
melting them together the thought, feeling, and content 
of these dreams g,ive a clear impression that this is a 
woman who is anxious about falling, who is afraid of mis­
chief or calamity. We can imagine that the waning affec­
tion of her husband, or something similar, would be such a 
calamity. What would happen if her husband in some way 
were not compatible? What if their marr,ied life were dis­
turbed ? Scenes might occur, fights take place, which might 
end with the wife's fainting as though lifeless. This ac­
tually occurred once during a family argument! 
Now we come nearer to the meaning of the dream. It is 
quite a matter of indifference in which material the thought 
and emotional content of the dreams expresses itself, or 
what instruments are used for this expression, so long as 
the material is in any way useful and some expression 
is assured. In the dream the life problem of an individual 
is expressed in a simile. It is as though she said, "Do not 
climb too high so that you will not fall too far!" It may 

T H E PREPARATION FOR L I F E 
111 
Dc i7cU to recall the reproduction of a dream in the "Mar­
riage Song * of Goethe. A knisbt c05iea Home from the 
country and finds his castle deserted. Tired out he faUs 
into his bed and in his dream he sees little figures coming 
out from under his bed and notices a marriage ceremony 
among these dwarfs. He is agreeably pleased by his dream. 
It is as though he wanted to corroborate in his thoughts 
the need for finding a woman. What he saw here in minia­
ture occurred later in reality as he celebrated his own 
marriage. 
We find many well known elements in this dream. In the 
first place the preoccupation of the poet with his own 
marriage is hidden behind it. We can see further how 
the dreamer, in his utter need strikes an attitude toward 
his contemporary situation in life. This situation demands 
marriage. He occupies himself in his dream with the prob­
lem of marriage and on the following day decides that i\ 
would be better if he too, were to get married. 
Now let us consider a dream of a twenty-eight-year-old 
man. The movement of the dream, changing from ascent 
to descent like the temperature curve of a fever, indicates 
very clearly the psychic movements with which the life 
of this man is filled. The feeling of inferiority from whieh 
arise the tendencies and strivings for power and for domi­
nance are easily recognized. He relates: " I am making an 
excursion with a large group of people. We must get out 
at a way-station because the ship on which we are to make 
this excursion is too small, and we must stay in this town 
over night. During the night the report comes that the ship 
is sinking, and all participants in the excursion are called 
to man the pumps in order to prevent it. I remember that 
I have some valuables in my baggage and rush to the ship 
where everyone else is already working at the pumps. I 
seek to escape this work and look for the baggage room. I 

112 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN N A T U R E 
succeed, in fishing my knapsack through the window and 
at the same time Ϊ зее a penknife whicb I like very much 
next to my knapsaek. I put it in the knapsack. With an ac­
quaintance I jump off as the ship sinks deeper and deeper. 
We jump off into the sea and land on the ground. Since the 
pier is too high we wander further along and come to a 
precipitous cliff down which I must go. I slide down. I have 
not seen my companion since leaving the ship. I go faster 
and faster and fear that I will be killed. Finally I land at 
the bottom and fall just in front of an acquaintance. It is 
an otherwise unknown young man who had been in a 
strike and had worked very quietly among the strikers, 
who was agreeable to me. He greets me with reproachful 
words, just as though he knew that I had left the others 
on the ship in the lurch. 'What are you doing here?' he 
asks. I seek to escape from this abyss which is surrounded 
on all sides by precipitous cliffs from which ropes hang 
down. I do not dare use them because they are too thin. 
With every attempt to сИтЬ out of the abyss I always slide 
back again. Finally I am on top, but I don't know how 
I got there. It seems to me that I purposely did not want 
to dream this part of the dream, as if I wanted to skip over 
it impatiently. On the edge of the abyss, on top, there was 
a road which was protected on the side of the abyss by a 
fence. People were going by here, and greeted me in a 
friendly fashion." 
If we go back into the life of this dreamer the first thing 
that we hear is that he constantly suffered from severe ill­
ness up to the fifth year of his life, and that after this 
time he was often ill. As a result of his weak health he 
was carefully and anxiously guarded by his parents. His 
contact with other children was very slight. When he 
wanted to make contact with grown-ups he was always 
told by his parents that children should be seen and not 

T H E PREPARATION FOR L L F E 
113 
heard, and that children do not belong with adults. He thus 
failed at a very early age to find those points of contact 
which are necessary for social life, and remained in con­
nection solely with his parents. The further outcome of 
this was that he remained considerably behind his compan­
ions of the same age, with whom he could not keep up. We 
are not to be astonished to hear that he was also considered 
stupid among them, and soon became the butt of all their 
jokes. This circumstance, again, prevented him from finding 
friends. 
An extraordinary feeling of inferiority was accentuated 
to the highest degree by these circumstances. His education 
was directed entirely by his well-wishing, but very irasci­
ble, military father, and by his weak, uncomprehending, 
very domineering mother. Although his parents were con­
stantly reiterating their good will, his education must have 
been a very strict one. His discouragement played a con­
siderable r61e in this process. A very significant event re­
tained in his earliest childhood remembrances was that 
when he was but three years old his mother made him kneel 
on peas for half an hour. The reason for this was a dis­
obedience whose cause his mother knew very well, as the 
child had told her. He had become frightened of a horse­
man and had therefore refused to run an errand for his 
mother. As a matter of fact he was spanked very seldom, 
but when this did occur, he was always beaten with a many-
tailed dog whip, and never without being under the neces­
sity of afterwards begging for forgiveness and relating the 
causes for which he had been beaten. "The child should 
know," said the father, "how he has misbehaved." Once 
he was beaten unjustly and as he could not say afterwards 
why he was beaten, was beaten again, indeed was beaten 
until he confessed to some misdeed or other. 
A belligerent feeling towards his parents was present 

114 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
from his earliest days. His feeling of inferiority had ac­
quired such dimensions that he could not even conceive of 
being superior. His life at school as well as at home was an 
almost unbroken chain of greater or lesser defeats. The 
smallest victory, in his opinion, was denied him. At school, 
up to the time that he was eighteen years old, he was al­
ways the one who was laughed at. Onee he was laughed at 
even by his teacher, who read a bad theme aloud to the 
class and accompanied the reading with derisive remarks. 
Everyone of these occurrences forced him further and 
further into isolation, and sooner or later he began to with­
draw from the world, of his own accord. In his battle with 
his parents he happened upon a very effective although 
costly method of attack. He refused to speak, and with 
this gesture, he relinquished the most important grappling 
hook with which one fastens himself to the outer world. 
Since he was unable to speak with anyone, he became en­
tirely solitary. Misunderstood by all, he spoke to none, 
particularly not with his parents; and finally no one 
addressed him. Every attempt to bring him into society 
came to grief, as every attempt to establish love relation­
ships later in his life also failed, much to his sorrow. This 
is the course of his life until his twenty-eighth year. The 
deep inferiority complex which had permeated his whole 
spirit had as a consequence given rise to an ambition be­
yond aR reason, an unreined striving for significance and 
superiority which ceaselessly distorted his feeling of human 
fellowship. The less he spoke, the more was his psychic life 
fiUed, by day and by night, with dreams of triumphs and 
victories of every sort. 
And thus he dreamt one night the dream which we 
have related above, in which we see clearly the movement 
and the pattern according to which his psychic life de­
veloped. In conclusion let us recall a dream which Cicero 

T H E PREPARATION FOR L I F E 
115 
has rebated, one of the most famous prophetic dreams in 
literature. 
The poet Simonides, who at one time had found the 
corpse of an unidentified man lying on the street and had 
cared for his decent interment, was warned by the ghost 
of this dead man, as he was about to attempt a sea journey, 
that if he should take the journey he would be shipwrecked. 
Simonides did not go and aU those who did, died.1 
According to the report this event in connection with 
the dream is supposed to have had an unusually deep im­
pression on aU people for hundreds of years. 
If we want to interpret this occurrence we must main­
tain that in that time ships were wrecked very frequently, 
and also that because of this reason many people who 
were on the eve of a sea journey, dreamt of shipwrecks, 
and that among these many dreams this particular dream 
demonstrated a particular coincidence between dream and 
reality which was so remarkable that it remained for pos­
terity. It is quite conceivable that those who have a ten­
dency to ferret out mysterious relationships have an es­
pecial weakness for just such stories, whereas we very 
caUnly and soberly interpret the dream as foUows: our 
poet probably never showed any great desire to take this 
trip because of his considerable care for his bodily weU-
being; as the hour of decision neared he was hard put 
to it to find a justification for his hesitating attitude. For 
this reason he allowed the corpse who was under the neces­
sity of proving himself grateful for hje decent burial, to 
appear in a prophetic role. That he now did not take 
the trip is self-understood. If the ship had not gone under 
the world would never have learned anything about the 
i Cf. Enne Nielson, "The Unexplained, In Its Course Through The 
Centuries." Published by the Langewiea| che-Brandt. Ebenhausen near 
Munich. 

116 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
dream nor the story, in all probability. For we experience 
bnly those things whiehset our brain into unrest, which 
demonstrate to us that there is more wisdom hidden between 
heaven and earth than we allow ourselves to dream of. We 
can understand the prophetic nature of dreams in so far 
as we know that both dream and reaHty contain the same 
attitude toward life which an individual shows. 
Another thing which we must consider is the fact that 
all dreams are not so easily understood; as a matter of faet 
only a very few are. We forget the dream immediately after 
it has left its peculiar impression and do not understand 
what is behind it unless we have been versed in the inter­
pretation of dreams. Yet these dreams, too, are but a sym­
bolic and metaphorjc reflection of the activity and behavior 
pattern of an individual. The main meaning of a simfle or 
comparison is that it affords us access to a situation in 
which we are anxious to find ourselves. If we are occupied 
with the solution of a problem and if our personality points 
a specific direction of approach, then we need but seek for 
an animating push to propel us into it. The dream is extra­
ordinarily weU suited to intensify an emotion, or produce 
the verve which is necessary to the solution of a particular 
situation. Nothing is altered by the fact that the dreamer 
does not understand the connection. It suffices that he 
finds the material and the boost in some fashion; the dream 
itself will give evidence of the manner in which the thought 
processes of the dreamer express themselves, as it will in­
dicate the behavior pattern of the dreamer. The dream is 
like a column of smoke which shows that a fire is burning 
somewhere. The experienced woodsman can observe the 
smoke and tell what kind of wood is burning, just as the 
psychiatrist can draw conclusions concerning the nature of 
an individual by interpreting his dream. 

T H E PREPARATION FOR L I F E 
117 
Summing up, we can say that a dream shows not only 
that the dreamer is occupied in the solution of one of his 
life 's problems, but also how he approaches these problems. 
In particular, those two factors which influence the dreamer 
in his relationship with the world and reality, the social 
feeHng and the striving for power, will make themselves 
evident in his dream. 
VI. 
T A L E N T 
Among those psychic phenomena which enable us to 
judge an individual we have left out of consideration one 
which is concerned with his intellectual powers. We have 
placed little value upon what an individual says or thinks 
of himself. We are convinced that each of us can somehow 
go astray and that each of us feels himself under the 
necessity of retouching his psychic image for his fellow 
man, through various of the complicated egoistic, moral, 
or other tricks. One thing we are, however, permitted to 
do, and that is to draw certain conclusions from specific 
thought processes and their expression in speech, even 
though this is possible only to a limited degree. We cannot 
exclude thought and speech from our examination if we 
wish to judge the individual correctly. 
What we are pleased to call talent, that is the special 
ability to make judgments, has been the subject of numer­
ous observations, analyses, and tests, among which the tests 
of inteuigence, in children and adults, are well known. 
These are the so-cafled tests for talent. Up to the present 
time these tests have been unsuccessful. Whenever a num­
ber of pupils are tested the results usually show what the 
teacher could easily have determined without tests. Ln the 
beginning the experimental psychologists were very proud 

118 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
of this although it must have heen evident at the same 
time that the tests were, to a certain degree, superfluous. 
Another objection to intelligence tests is the fact that the 
thought and judgment processes and abilities of children 
do not develop regularly, so that many children who show 
poor results on the tests, suddenly show an extraordinarily 
good development and talent after a few years. Another 
element which must be considered is that children in large 
cities, and those from certain social circles, are better pre­
pared for the tests by virtue of their broader life. Their 
seemingly greater intelligence is deceptive and places other 
children who have not such a fund of preparation, rela­
tively in the shadow. It is well known that eight to ten-year-
old children of well-to-do families, are much more quick 
witted than poor children of the same age. This does not 
mean that the children of the wealthy are more talented 
but that the cause for this difference lies entirely in the 
circumstances of their previous life. 
Up to the present time we have not gone very far with 
tests of talent, as is very evident when we view the sorry 
results which have been shown in Berlin and Hamburg 
where those children who evinced the greatest talent in the 
tests failed in conspicuous percentages later on in their 
education. This phenomenon would seem to prove that we 
have no certain guarantee for the future healthy develop­
ment of the child in the results of his mental test. The 
experiments of Individual Psychology, quite on the con­
trary, have stood the test far better, because they have not 
been directed toward the determination of a particular de­
gree of development, but rather have been designed to 
further the understanding of the positive factors underly­
ing this development. These same observations have, when 
necessary, pressed the proper instruments of correction into 

T H E PREPARATION FOR L I F E 
119 
the hands of the child. It has been the principle of In­
dividual Psychology never to dissolve the thought and 
judgment powers of a child out of the structure of his 
soul life, but to view them solely in connection with his 
other psychic processes. 

C H A P T E R V I I 
SEX 
I. BlSEXUALXTY AND T H E D l V K I O N OF LABOR 
From our previous considerations we have learned that 
two great tendencies dominate all psychic phenomena. 
These two tendencies, the soeial feeling, and the individ­
ual striving for power and domination, influence every hu­
man activity and color the attitude of every individual 
in his striving for security, in his fulfillment of the three 
great challenges of life: love, work, and society. We shall 
have to accustom ourselves, in judging psychic phenomena, 
to investigate the quantitative and the qualitative relation­
ships of these two factors if we want to understand the 
human soul. The relationship of these factors to one another 
conditions the degree to which anyöne is capable of com­
prehending the logic of communal life, and therefore, the 
degree to which he is capable of subordinating himself to 
the division of labor which grows out of the necessity of 
that communal life. 
Division of labor is a factor in the maintenance of human 
society which must not be overlooked. Everyone at some 
time, or at some place, must contribute his quota. That man 
who does not deliver his quota, who denies the value of 
communal life, becomes an anti-social being, and resigns 
his fellowship in humanity. In simple cases of this sort 
we speak of egotism, of mischievousness, of self-centered-
ness, of nuisance. In the more complicated cases, we see the 
120 

S E X 
121 
eccentrics, the hoboes, and the criminals. Public condemna­
tion of these traits and characteristics grows out of an ap­
preciation of their origins, an intuition of their incompati­
bility with the demands of social life. Any man's value, 
therefore, is determined by his attitude toward his fellow 
men, and by the degree in which he partakes of the di­
vision of labor which communal life demands. His affirma­
tion of this communal life makes him important to other 
human beings, makes him a link in the great chain which 
binds society, the chain which we cannot in any way dis­
turb without also disturbing human society. A man's ca­
pabilities determine his place in the total production of 
human society. Much confusion has clouded this simple 
truth, because the striving for power and the lust for dom­
inance have introduced false values into the normal divi­
sion of labor. This striving for dominance has disturbed 
and thwarted the total production, and has given us a false 
basis for the judgment of human values. 
Individuals have disturbed this division of labor by re­
fusing to adapt themselves to the place that they must fill. 
Further, difficulties have arisen out of the false ambition 
and power wishes of individuals who have blocked com­
munal life and the communal work for their own egoistic 
interests. Similarly, entanglements have been caused by 
class differences in our society. Personal power or economic 
interest have influenced the division of the field of labor 
by reserving all the better positions for individuals of 
certain classes, that is, those affording the greater power, 
while other individuals, of other classes, have been excluded 
from them. The recognition of these numerous factors in 
the structure of society enables us to understand why the 
division of labor has never proceeded smoothly. Forces con­
tinually disturbing this division of labor have created priv­
ilege for one, and slavery for another. 

122 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
The bisexuality of the human race conditions another 
division of labor. Woman, by virtue of her physical con­
stitution, is excluded from some certain activities, while 
on the other hand, there are certain labors whicb are not 
given to man, because man could better be employed at 
other tasks. This division of labor should have been in­
stituted according to an entirely unprejudiced standard, 
and all the movements for the emancipation of women in 
so far as they have not overstepped logical points in the 
heat of conflict, have taken up the logic of this point of 
view. A division of labor is far from robbing woman of her 
femininity, or disturbing the natural relationships between 
man and woman. Each acquires those opportunities of la­
bor which are best fitted for him. In the course of human 
development this division of labor has so configured itself 
that woman has taken over a certain part of the world's 
work (which might otherwise occupy a man too), in return 
for which man is in the position to use his powers to 
greater effect. We cannot caU this division of labor sense­
less so long as the powers for work are not misused, and so 
long as physical and mental powers are not deflected to a 
bad end. 
I I . 
THE DOMINANCE OF THE MALE ΓΝ T H E CuLTUKE 
OF 
TODAY 
As a consequence of the development of culture in the 
direction of personal power, especiaUy through the efforts 
of certain individuals and certain classes of society, who 
wish to secure privileges for themselves, this division 
of labor has fallen into characteristic channels which have 
colored our entire civilization. The importance of the 
male in the culture of today is greatly emphasized as a 
result. The division of labor is such that the privileged 

S E X 
123 
group, men, are guaranteed certain advantages, and 
this as a result o£ their domination over women in the 
division of labor. Thus the dominant male assumes ad­
vantages and directs the activity of women to the end 
that the more agreeable forms of life shall appertain al­
ways to the males, whereas those activities are allowed 
women which men can advantageously avoid. 
As things stand now there is a constant striving on the 
part of men to dominate women, and an appropriate dis­
satisfaction with masculine domination on the part of 
women. Since the two sexes are so narrowly connected it 
is easily conceivable that this constant tension leads to psy­
chic dissonances and to far reaching physical disturbances 
which must of necessity be extraordinarily painful to both 
sexes. 
All our institutions, our traditional attitudes, our laws, 
our morals, our customs, give evidence of the fact that they 
are determined and maintained by privileged males for 
the glory of male domination. These institutions reach out 
into the very nurseries and have a great influence upon 
the child's soul. A child's understanding of these rela­
tionships need not be very great, but we must admit that 
his emotional life is immensely affected by them. These 
attitudes may well be investigated when for instance we 
see a young boy responding to the request to put on girls' 
elothes, with a terrific temper tantrum. Once let a boy's 
craving for power reach a certain degree, and you will 
surely find him showing a preference for the privileges of 
being a man which, he recognizes, guarantee his superiority 
everywhere. We have already mentioned the fact that the 
education in our families nowadays is only too well de­
signed to overvalue the striving for power. The consequent 
tendency to maintain and exaggerate the masculine privi­
lege follows naturally, for it is usually the father who 

124 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
stands as the family symbol of power. His mysterious сопь 
ings and goings arouse the interest of the child much more 
than the constant presence of a mother. The child quickly 
recognizes the prominent role his father plays, and notes 
how he sets the pace, makes all arrangements, and appears 
everywhere as the leader. He sees how all obey his com­
mands and how his mother asks him for his advice. From 
every angle, his father seems to be the one who is strong 
and powerful. There are children for whom the father is 
so much a standard that they believe that everything he 
says must be holy; they attest to the rightness of their 
views simply by saying that their father once said so. Even 
in those cases in which the fatherly influence does not seem 
to be so well marked, children will get the idea of the domi­
nation of the father because the whole load of the family 
seems to rest upon him, whereas, as a matter of fact, it is 
only the division of labor which enables the father in the 
family to use his powers to better advantage. 
So far as the history of the origin of masculine domi­
nance is concerned, we must call attention to the fact that 
this is a phenomenon which does not occur as a natural 
thing. This is indicated by the numerous laws which are 
necessary legally to guarantee this domination to men. It 
is also an indication that previous to the legal enforcement 
of masculine domination there must have been other epochs 
in whieh the masculine privilege was not nearly so certain. 
History proves that such epochs actually existed in the 
days of the matriarchate, the age in which it was the 
mother, the woman, who played the important role in life, 
particularly so far as the child was concerned. At that 
time each man in the clan was in duty bound to respect 
the honored position of the mother. Certain customs and 
usages are still colored by this ancient institution, as for 
instance, the introduction of all strange men to a child 

S E X 
125 
with the title of "uncle" or "cousin." A ter"ific battle 
must have preceded the transition from matriarchate to 
masculine domination. Men who like to believe that their 
privileges and prerogatives are determined by nature will 
be surprised to learn that men did not possess these pre­
rogatives from the beginning, but had to fight for them.1 
The triumph of man was simultaneous with the subjuga­
tion of women, and it is especially the evidence in the devel­
opment of the law whieh bears witness to this long process 
of subjugation. 
Masculine dominance is not a natural thing. There is 
evidence to prove that it occurred chiefly as a result of con­
stant battles between primitive peoples, during the course 
of which man assumed the more prominent role as war­
rior, and finally used his newly won superiority in order 
to retain the leadership for himseK and for his own ends. 
Hand in hand with this development was a development 
of property rights and inheritance rights which became a 
basis of masculine domination, in so far as man usually was 
the acquirer and owner of property. 
A growing child need not however read books on this 
theme. Despite the fact that he knows nothing of these 
archaeological data he senses the fact that the male is the 
privileged member of the family. This occurs even when 
fathers and mothers with considerable insight are disposed 
to overlook those privileges whieh we have inherited from 
ancient days, in favor of a greater equality. It is very 
difficult to make it clear to a child that a mother who is 
engaged in household duties is as valuable as a father. 
Think what it means to a young boy who sees the prevail­
ing privilege of manhood before his eyes from his earliest 
i A very good description of this development can be found in 
August Bebel's "Woman and Socialism" and in Mathias and Ma­
thilde Vaerting'a "The Dominant Sex." 

126 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
days. From the day of his hirth he is received with greater 
acclamation than a girl child. It is a well known and aU too 
frequent occurrence that parents prefer to have boys as 
chüdren. A boy senses at every step that, as a chip of 
the old block, he has certain privileges and a greater social 
value. Casual words directed toward him or taken up by 
him occasionally are constantly calling to his attention the 
fact of the greater importance of the masculine role. 
The domination of the male also appears to him in the 
institution of female servants about the house who are used 
for menial tasks, and finally he is reinforced in his senti­
ments by the fact that the women in his environment are 
not at all convinced of their equality with men. That most 
important question which aU women should ask their pros­
pective husbands before marriage: "What is your attitude 
toward masculine domination, particularly in family life ?'' 
is usually never answered. In one case we find an expres­
sion of the striving for equality and in another case any of 
the various degrees of resignation. In contrast we see the 
father convinced from boyhood that as a man he has a more 
important role to play. He interprets this conviction as an 
implicit duty, and concerns himself solely with responding 
to the challenges of life and society in favor of mascuUne 
privilege. 
Every situation which arises out of this relationship is 
experienced by the child. What he gets out of it is a num­
ber of pictures concerning the nature of woman, in which 
for the most part the woman plays a sorry figure. In this 
way the development of the boy has a distinct masculine 
color. What he believes to be the worth-while goals in his 
striving for power are exclusively masculine qualities and 
masculine attitudes. A typical masculine virtue grows out 
of these power relationships, which patently indicates its 
origins to us. Certain character traits count as masculine, 

S E X 
127 
others as feminine, albeit there is no basis to justify these 
valuations. If we compare the psychic state of boys and 
girls and seemingly find evidence in support of this classi­
fication, we do not deal with natural phenomena, but are 
describing the expressions of individuals who have been 
directed into a very specific channel, whose style of life and 
behavior pattern have been narrowed down by specific con­
ceptions of power. These conceptions of power have in­
dicated to them with compelling force the place where they 
must seek to develop. There is no justification for the dif­
ferentiation of "manly" and "womanly" character traits. 
We shaU see how both these traits are capable of being 
used to fulfill the striving for power. In other words, that 
one can express power with the so-called "feminine" traits, 
such as obedience and submission. The advantages which 
an obedient child enjoys can sometimes bring it much more 
into the Ите-Hght than a disobedient child, though the 
striving for power is present in both cases. Our insight 
into psychic life is often made more difficult by the fact 
that striving for power expresses itself in the most complex 
fashion. 
As a boy grows older his masculinity becomes a signif­
icant duty, his ambition, his desire for power and superi­
ority is indisputably connected and identified with the duty 
to be masculine. For many children who desire power it 
is not sufficient to be simply aware of their maseuUnity; 
they must show a proof that they are men, and there­
fore they must have privileges. They aecompnsh this, on 
the one hand, by efforts to excel, thereby measuring their 
masculine traits; on the other hand they may succeed by 
tyrannizing their feminine environment in every possible 
way. According to the degree of resistance which they 
meet, these boys utilize either stubbornness and wild in­
surgency, or craft and cunning, to gain their ends. 

128 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
Since every human being is measured according to the 
standard of the privileged male, it is no wonder that one 
always holds this standard before a boy. Finally he meas­
ures himself according to it, observing and asking whether 
his activities are sufficiently "masculine," whether he is 
"fully a man." What we consider "masculine" nowadays 
is common knowledge. Above all it is something purely 
egoistic, something which satisfies self-love, gives a feeling 
of superiority and domination over others, aU with the 
aid of seemingly "active" characteristics such as courage, 
strength, duty, the winning of aU manner of victories, es­
pecially those over women, the acquisition of positions, 
honors, titles, and the desire to harden himself against so-
called '' feminine'' tendencies, and the like. There is a con­
stant battle for personal superiority because it counts as a 
"masculine" virtue to be dominant. 
In this manner every boy assumes characteristics which 
he sees in adult men, especially his father. We can trace 
the ramifications of this artificially nourished delusion of 
grandeur in the most diverse manifestations of our society. 
At an early age a boy is urged to secure for himself a re­
serve of power and privileges. This is what is called "man­
liness." In bad cases it degenerates into the well-known 
expressions of rudeness and brutality. 
The advantages of being a man are, under such condi­
tions, very alluring. We must not be astonished therefore 
when we see many girls who maintain a masculine ideal 
either as an unfulfilable desire, or as a standard for the 
judgment of their behavior; this ideal may evince itself as 
a pattern for action and appearance. It would seem that in 
our culture every woman wanted to be a man! In this class 
we find those girls particularly who have an uncontrollable 
desire to distinguish themselves in games and activities 
which are more appropriate to boys by virtue of their dif-

S E X 
129 
ferent physique. They cKmb up every tree, play rather 
with boys than with girls, and avoid every "womanly" 
activity as a shameful thing. Their sa+isfaction lies only in 
mascuHne activities. The preference for manliness makes 
all these phenomena understandable when we understand 
how the striving for superiority is more concerned with 
the symbols of things than with the activities of life. 
I I I . 
THE A L L E G E D INEERIOEITT OP W O M E N 
Man has been wont to justify his domination not only 
by maintaining that his position is natural, but also that 
his dominance results from the inferiority of women. This 
conception of the inferioiity of woman is so widespread 
that it appears as the common property of all races. Linked 
with this prejudice is a certain unrest on the part of men 
which may wen have originated in the time of the war 
against the matriarchate, when woman was a source of ac­
tual anxiety. We come upon indications of this constantly 
in literature and history. A Latin author writes "MuHer 
est hominis confusiOj" "Woman is the confusion of man." 
In the theological consilia the question was often argued 
whether a woman had a soul, and learned theses were writ­
ten concerning the question whether woman was actually 
a human being. The century-long period of wjtch-persecu-
tion and witch-burning is a sorry witness of the errors, 
the tremendous uncertainty and confusion of that happily 
forgotten age, concerning this question. 
Woman was often held up as the source of aU evil, as in 
the Biblical conception of the original sin, or as in the Iliad 
of Homer. The story of Helen demonstrated how one 
woman was capable of throwing whole peoples into mis­
fortune. Legends and fairy tales of aU times contain in­
dices of the moral inferiority of woman, of her wickedness, 

130 
UNDER STANDING HUMAN NATURE 
of her falsity, of her treachery and of her fickleness. "Wom­
anly folly" has even been used as an argument in legal 
cases. Coincident with these prejudices is the degradation 
of woman's capability, industry, and ability. Figures of 
speech, anecdotes, mottoes, and jokes, in all literatures and 
among all peoples, are full of degrading critiques of 
woman. Woman is reproached with her spitefulness, her 
pettiness, her stupidity, and the like. 
An extraordinary acuity is sometimes developed in or­
der to bear witness to the inferiority of woman. The num­
ber of men like Strindberg, Moebius, Schopenhauer, and 
Weininger, who have upheld this thesis, has been enlarged 
by a not inconsiderable number of women whose resigna­
tion has caused them to subscribe to a beHef in the inferior­
ity of woman. They are the champions of woman's role of 
submission. The degradation of woman and womanly labor 
is further indicated by the fact that women are paid less 
than men, regardless of whether their work is of equal 
value. 
In the comparison of the results of inteUigence and tal­
ent tests it was actually found that for particular subjeets, 
as for instance, mathematics, boys showed more talent, 
whereas girls showed more talent for other subjects, such 
as languages. Boys actually do show greater talent than 
girls for studies which are capable of preparing them for 
their masculine occupation but this is only a seemingly 
greater talent. If we investigate the situation of the girls 
more closely we learn that the story of the lesser capability 
of woman is a palpable fable. 
A girl is daily subjected to the argument that girls are 
less capable than boys and are suitable only for unessential 
activities. It is not surprising then that a girl is firmly con­
vinced of the unchangeable and bitter fate of a woman and 
sooner or later because of her lack of training in childhood, 

S E X 
131 
actuaUy believes in her own incapability. Discouraged in 
this manner, a girl approaches "masculine" occupations if 
the opportunity to approach them ever presents, with a 
foregone conclusion that she will not have the necessary in­
terest for them. Should she possess such interest, she soon 
loses it, and thus she is denied both an outer and an inner 
/ preparation. 
/ 
Under such circumstances proof of the incapability of 
woman seems valid. There are two causes for this. In the 
first place the error is accentuated by the fact that the 
value of a human being is frequently judged from purely 
business standpoints, or on one-sided and purely egoistic 
grounds. With such prejudices we can hardly be expected 
to understand how far performance and capability are 
coincident with psychic development. And this leads us 
to the second main factor to which the fallacy of the lesser 
eapabüity of woman may thank its existence. It is a fre­
quently overlooked fact that a girl comes into the world 
with a prejudice sounding in her ears which is designed 
only to rob her of her belief in her own value, to shatter 
her self-confidence and destroy her hope of ever doing any­
thing worth while. If this prejudice is constantly being 
strengthened, if a girl sees again and again how women are 
given servile roles to play, it is not hard to understand how 
she loses courage, fails to face her obligations, and sinks 
back from the solution of her life's problems. Then in­
deed she is useless and incapable! Yet if we approach a 
human being, undermine his self-respect so far as his re­
lationship to society is concerned, cause him to abandon aU 
hope of ever accomplishing anything, ruin his courage, and 
then find that he actuaUy never amounts to anything, then 
we dare not maintain that we were right, for we must ad­
mit that it is we who have caused aU his sorrow! 
It is easy enough for a girl to lose her courage and her 

132 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
self-confidence in our civilization, yet, as a matter of fact, 
certain intelligence tests proved the interesting faet that 
in a certain group of girls, aged from 14 to 18, greater tal­
ent and capability were evinced than was shown by all 
other groups, boys included. Further researches show that 
these were all girls from families in which the mother was 
either the sole bread winner, or at least contributed largely 
to the family support. What this means is that these girls 
were in a situation at home in which the prejudice of the 
lesser capability of woman was either not present or existed 
only to a slight extent. They could see with their own еуев 
how their mothers' industry had its rewards, and as a re­
sult they developed themselves much more freely and much 
more independently, entirely uninfluenced by those in­
hibitions which are inevitably associated with the belief in 
the lesser powers of a woman. 
A further argument against this prejudice is the not 
inconsiderable number of women who have accomplished 
results inthe most varied fields, particularly in nterature, 
art, crafts, and medicine, of such remarkable value that 
they are quite capable of standing any comparison with 
the results of men in these fields. There are so many men 
furthermore who not only do not show any achievements 
but are possessed of such a high grade of incapability that 
we could easily find an equal number of proofs (of course 
falsely) that men were the inferior sex. 
One of the bitter consequences of the prejudice concern­
ing the inferiority of women is the sharp division and 
pigeon-honng of concepts according to a scheme: thus 
"mascuHne" signifies worth-while, powerful, victorious, 
capable, whereas "feminine" becomes identical with obe­
dient, servile, subordinate. This type of thinking has be­
come so deeply anchored in human thought processes that 
in our civilization everything laudable has a "masculine" 

S E X 
133 
color whereas everything less valuable or actually deroga­
tory is designated "feminine." We aU know men who could 
not be more insulted than if we told them that they were 
feminine, whereas if we say to a girl that she is masculine 
it need signify no insult. The accent always falls so that 
everything which is reminiscent of woman appears inferior. 
Character traits which would seem to prove this falla­
cious contention of the inferiority of woman prove them­
selves on closer observation nothing more than the mani­
festation of an inhibited psychic development. We do not 
maintain that we can make what is caUed a "talented" 
individual out of every chUd, but we can always make an 
"untalented" adult out of him. We have never done this 
fortunately. Others, however, we know have succeeded 
only too well. That such a fate overtakes girls more fre­
quently than boys, in our day and age, is easily understood. 
We have often had the opportunity of seeing these "un-
talented" chUdren suddenly become so talented that one 
might have spoken of a miracle! 
IV. 
DESERTION PROM WOMANHOOD 
The obvious advantages of being a man have caused se­
vere disturbances in the psychic development of women as 
a consequence of which there is an almost universal dis­
satisfaction with the feminine role. The psychic life of 
woman moves in much the same channels, and under much 
the same rules, as that of any human beings who find them­
selves the possessors of a strong feeling of inferiority be­
cause of their situation in the scheme of things. The preju­
dice of her alleged inferiority as a woman signifies an ad­
ditional aggravating complication. If a considerable num­
ber of girls find some sort of compensation, they owe it 
to their character development, to their intelligence, and 

134 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
sometimes to certain acquired privileges. This shows simply 
how one mistake may give rise to others. Such privileges 
are the special dispensations, exemptions from obHgations, 
and the luxuries, which give a semblance of advantage in 
that they simulate what purports to be a high degree of 
respect for woman. There may be a certain degree of ideal­
ism in this, but finally this idealism is always an ideal 
which has been fashioned by men to the advantage of men. 
George Sand once described it very tellingly when she said: 
"The virtue of woman is a fine invention of man." 
In general we ean distinguish two types of women in 
the battle against the feminine role. One type has already 
been indicated: the girl who develops in an active, '' mascu­
line," direction. She becomes extraordinarily energetic 
and ambitious, and is constantly fighting for the prizes of 
life. She attempts to exceed her brothers and male com­
rades, chooses activities which are usuaUy considered the 
privilege of men by preference, is interested in sports and 
the like. Very often she evades all the relationships of love 
and marriage. If she enters into such a relationship she 
may disturb its harmony by striving to be superior to her 
husband! She may have tremendous disinclination to any 
of the domestic activities. She may voice her disinclination 
directly, or indirectly by disavowing all talent for domes­
tic duties, and constantly give evidence attempting to 
prove that she has never developed a talent for domesticity. 
This is the type that seeks to compensate for the evil 
of the masculine attitude with a "masculine" response. 
The defense attitude toward womanhood is the foundation 
of her whole being. She has been designated "the boy-
girl," "la garQonne," the "mannish" woman, and the like. 
This designation, however, is based upon a false conception. 
There are many people who believe that there is a congen­
ital factor present in such girls, a certain '' masculine'' sub-

S E X 
135 
stance or secretion which causes their "mascuUne" at­
titude. The whole history ofcivilization, however, shows us 
that the pressure exerted upon woman, and the inhibitions 
to which she must submit today, are not to be borne by 
any human being; they always give rise to revolt. If this 
revolt now exhibits itself in the direction which we call 
"masculine," the reason for it is simply that there are only 
two sex roles possible. One must orient oneself according 
to one of two models, either that of an ideal woman, or 
according to that of an ideal man. Desertion from the role 
of woman can therefore appear only as "masculine," and 
vice versa. This does not occur as the result of some mys­
terious secretion, but because in the given time and place, 
there is no other possibility. We must never lose sight of the 
difficulties under which the psychic development of a girl 
takes place. So long as we cannot guarantee every woman 
an absolute equality with man we cannot demand her com­
plete reconciliation with life, with the facts of our civiUza-
tion, and the forms of our social life. 
The woman who goes through life with an attitude of 
resignation, who exhibits an almost unbeuevable degree of 
adjustment, obedience, and humbleness, belongs to the sec­
ond type. Seemingly she adjusts herself everywhere, takes 
root wherever placed, but demonstrates such a high degree 
of clumsiness and helplessness that she accomplishes noth­
ing at all! She may produce nervous symptoms, which 
serve her in her weakness, to demonstrate her need for 
consideration to others; and she shows clearly thereby how 
the training she has undergone, how her misuse of life, 
is regularly accompanied by nervous diseases, and makes 
her totaUy unfit for social life. She belongs to the best 
people in the world, but unfortunately she is sick and can­
not meet the challenge of existence to any satisfying de­
gree. She cannot win the satisfaction of her environment 

136 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
for any time. Her submission, her humility, her self-repres¬
sion, is founded on the same revolt as that of her sister of 
the fLrst type, a revolt which says clearly enough:'' This is 
no happy life!'' 
The woman who does not defend herself against the 
womanly role but carries in herself the torturing con­
sciousness that she is condemned to be an inferior being 
and ordained to play a subordinate role in life, makes up 
the third type. She is fully convinced of the inferiority of 
women, just as she is convinced that man alone is called 
upon to do the worth-while things in life. As a consequence, 
she approves his privileged position. Thus she swells the 
chorus of voices which sound the praises of man as the 
doer and the achiever, and demands a special position 
for him. She shows her feeling of weakness as clearly as if 
she wanted recognition for it, and demanded additional 
support because of it; but this attitude is the beginning of 
a long prepared revolt. By way of revenge she will shift 
her marital responsibilities upon her husband with a light-
hearted catchword to the effect that "Only a man could 
do these things!'' 
Although woman is considered an inferior being, the 
business of education is largely delegated to her. Let us 
now picture these three types of woman for ourselves with 
reference to this most important and difficult task. At this 
juncture we can differentiate the types even more clearly. 
Women of the first type, the "masculine" attitude, will 
tyrannize, will occupy themselves with punishment, and 
thus exercise a tremendous pressure upon children, which 
these children will, of course, attempt to avoid. When this 
type of education is effective, its best possible result is a 
sort of military training which is quite valueless. Children 
usuaUy think that mothers of this kind are very bad edu­
cators. The noise, the great to-do, always has a bad effect, 

S E X 
137 
and there arises the danger that girLä wiU he instigated to 
imitate them, whereas boys are frightened for the rest of 
their lives. Among men who have stood under the domi­
nance of such mothers we shall find a number who avoid 
women as much as possible as though they had been inocu­
lated with bitterness, and were incapable of bringing any 
sense of trust to a woman. What results is a definite divi­
sion and separation between the sexes, whose pathology 
we can readily understand despite the fact that some in­
vestigators still exist who speak of a "faulty apportion­
ment of the masculine and feminine elements." 
Individuak of the other types are equaUy futile as edu­
cators. They may be so skeptical that the children soon 
discover their lack of self-confidence, and grow beyond 
them. In this case the mother renews her efforts, nags and 
scolds, and threatens to tell the father. The fact that she 
caUs upon a masculine educator betrays her again, and 
shows her disbelief in the success of her educational ac­
tivity. She deserts from the front in the matter of educa­
tion just as though it were her duty to justify her stand­
point that man alone is capable, and therefore, indispensa­
ble for education! Such women may simply avoid aU edu­
cational efforts, and shift the responsibility therefor upon 
their husbands and governesses without compunction, since 
they feel they are incapable of any success. 
Dissatisfaction with the womanly role is even more evi­
dent among girls who escape from life because of some so-
caUed "higher" reasons. Nuns, or others who assume some 
occupation for which ceUbacy is an essential, are a case in 
point. Their lack of reconciliation with their role as women 
is clearly demonstrated in this gesture. Similarly, many 
girks go into business at an early age because the inde­
pendence connected with employment seems a protection 
to them against the threatened necessity of marriage. Here 

138 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN 
NATURE 
again the driving power is the disinclination to assume the 
womanly role. 
What of those cases in which marriage occurs, in which 
one could believe that the r61e of woman had been volun­
tarily assumed? We learn that marriage need not neces­
sarily be an indication that a girl has reconciled herself 
with her womanly role. The example of a thirty-six-year-old 
woman is typical of this. She comes to the physician com­
plaining of various nervous ills. She was the oldest child 
of a marriage between an aging man and a very domineer­
ing woman. The fact that her mother, a very beautiful 
young girl, had married an old man leads us to suspect 
that in the marriage of the parents the disinclination for 
the feminine role played some part. The marriage of the 
parents did not turn out happily. The mother ruled the 
house with clamor, and insisted upon having her will car­
ried out at all costs, and regardless of anyone else's pleas­
ure. The old man was forced into his corner at every op­
portunity. The daughter narrated how her mother would 
not even allow her father to lie down upon the sofa to 
rest. Her mother's whole activity consisted in maintaining 
certain "principles of domestic economy" which she felt 
were desirable to enforce. These were an absolute law to 
the family. 
Our patient grew up a very capable child who was much 
pampered by the father. On the other hand, her mother 
was never satisfied with her and was always her enemy. 
Later, when a boy, toward whom the mother was far more 
favorable, was born, the relationship became unbearable. 
The little girl was conscious that she had a support in her 
father, who, no matter how modest and retiring he was in 
other things, could take up the cudgel when his daughter 's 
interests were at stake. Thus she began to hate her mothex 
cordiaUy. 

S E X 
139 
In this stubborn conflict the cleanliness of the mother 
became the daughter's favorite point of attack. The mother 
was so pedantic in her cleanliness that she did not even 
allow the servant girl to touch a door knob without wiping 
it off later. The child made it a point of special pleasure 
to go about as dirty and ill clad as possible, and to soil 
the house whenever the occasion offered. 
She developed all those characteristics which were the 
exact opposite of that which her mother expected of her. 
This fact speaks very clearly against any inherited charac­
teristics. If a child develops only those characteristics 
which must anger her mother almost to death, there is 
either a conscious or unconscious plan underlying them. 
The hate between mother and child has lasted until the 
present day, and a more bitter belligerency could not be 
imagined. 
When this little girl was eight years old the following 
situation existed. The father was permanently on his daugh­
ter 's side; her mother went about with a bitter face, making 
pointed remarks, enforcing her "rules," and reproaching 
the girl. The girl, embittered and belligerent, availed her­
self of an extraordinary sarcasm which crippled the activ­
ity of her mother. An additional complicating factor was 
the valvular heart disease of the younger brother who was 
his mother's favorite and a very much pampered child, 
who used his sickness to hold the attentions of his mother 
to an even more intensive degree. One could observe the con­
stantly thwarted activities of the parents toward their 
children. Under such circumstances did this little girl grow 
up. 
It then occurred that she fell sick of a nervous ailment 
which no one could explain. Her sickness consisted in the 
fact that she was tortured by evil thoughts which were 
directed against her mother, the consequence of which was 

140 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
that she felt herself hindered in all her activities. FinaUy 
she occupied herself very deeply, and suddenly, and with-
out success, in religion. After some time these evil thoughts 
disappeared. Some medicine or other was given the credit 
for the disappearance, although it is more probable that 
her mother was forced into the defensive. A residue which 
expressed itself in a remarkable fear of thunder and 
lightning remained. 
The little girl believed that the thunder and lightning 
came only as a result of her bad conscience, and would some 
day cause her death because she had such evil thoughts. 
One can see how the child was attempting to free herself 
of its hate for its mother at this time. The development of 
the child went further, and it seemed that a bright future 
was beckoning her. The statement of a teacher who said: 
"This little girl could do anything that she wanted to!" 
had a great effect on her. These words are unimportant in 
themselves but for this girl they meant, " I can accomplish 
something if I wish." This realization was foUowed by an 
even greater intensity in the combat against her mother. 
Adolescence came, and she grew up into a beautiful 
young woman, became marriageable, and had many suit-
ors; yet all opportunities of a relationship were broken 
off because of the peculiar sharpness of her tongue. She 
felt herself drawn only to one man, an elderly man who 
lived in her neighborhood, and everyone feared that some 
day she might marry him. But this man moved after some 
time and the girl remained, until she was twenty six years 
old, without a suitor. In the circles in which she moved this 
was very remarkable, and no one could explain it because 
no one understood her history, b i the bitter battle whieh 
she had been carrying on against her mother ever since her 
childhood, she had become unbearably quarrelsome. War 
was her victory. The behavior of her mother had con-

\ 
SEX 
141 
stantly irritated this ehild and caused her to seek for fresh 
triumphs. A bitter word-battle was her greatest happiness; 
in this she showed her vanity. Her "masculine" attitude 
expressed itself also in that she desired such word battles 
only where she could conquer her opponent. 
When she was twenty-six years old she made the acquain-
tance of a very honorable man who did not aUow himself to 
be repulsed by her belligerent character and paid court to 
her very earnestly. He was very humble and submissive in 
his approach. Pressure from her relatives to marry this 
man led her to explain repeatedly that he was so very un-
pleasant to her that she could not think of marriage with 
him. This is not hard to understand when we know her 
character, yet after two years of resistance she finally ac-
cepted him in the deep conviction that she had made a 
slave of him, and that she could do with this man whatever 
she wished. She had hoped secretly that she would find in 
him a second edition of her father, who would give in to her 
whenever she wanted. 
She soon learned that she had made a mistake. A few 
days after her marriage her husband was sitting in the 
room smoking his pipe and comfortably reading his paper. 
I n the morning he left for his office, eame home punctuaUy 
for his meals, and grumbled a little i f his meate were not 
ready. He demanded cleanliness, tenderness, punctuality, 
and all manner of unjustified requests which she was not 
prepared to fulfil. The relationship was not even remotely 
similar to that which she had experienced between herself 
and her father. She tumbled out of all her dreams. The 
more she demanded, the less her husband acceded to her 
wishes, and the more he indicated her domestic role to her, 
the less he saw of her domestic activity. She did not lose 
the opportunity to remind him daily that he really had no 
right to make these requests, as she had expressly told him 

142 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
that she did not like him. This made absolutely no impres-
sion upon him. He continued his demands with an in-
exorableness which caused her to have very unhappy pros-
pects for the future. I n an intoxication of self-effacement 
this righteous, dutiful man had wooed her, but no sooner 
did he have her in his possession, than his intoxication had 
disappeared. 
No change in the lack of harmony which existed between 
them appeared when she became a mother. She was forced 
to assume new duties. In the meantime her relationship to 
her own mother, who was energetically taking up the cudg-
els for her son-in-law, became worse and worse. The con-
stant warfare in her house was carried on with such heavy 
artillery that it is not to be wondered that her husband 
occasionally acted badly, and without consideration, and 
that occasionally the woman was right in her complaints. 
The behavior of her husband was the direct consequence of 
the fact that she was unapproachable, which, again, was a 
result of her lack of reconciliation with her womanliness. 
She had believed originally that she could play her role 
of empress forever, that she could wander through life sur-
rounded by a slave who would carry out all her wishes. 
Life would have been possible for her only under these 
circumstances. 
What could she do now ? Should she divorce her husband 
and return to her mother and declare herself beaten? She 
was incapable of leading an independent life for she had 
never been prepared for it. A divorce would have been an 
insult to her pride and vanity. Life was misery for her; 
on the one hand her husband criticised her, and on the 
other side stood her mother with her heavy guns, preach-
ing cleanliness and order. 
Suddenly she, too, became cleanly and orderly! She did 
washing and polishing and cleaning the whole day. I t 

SEX 
143 
seemed as though she had finaUy seen the light, and had 
acquired the teachings which her mother had drummed into 
her ears for so many years. I n the beginning her mother 
must have smüed, and her husband must have been pleased 
at this sudden change of affairs, at the sight of this young 
woman emptying and cleaning bureaus, cabinets, .and clos-
ets. But one can carry a thing like this too far. She washed 
and scoured so long, until there was not an unscrubbed 
shred in the house, and her zeal was so apparent that she 
was disturbed by everyone in her efforts; and in turn 
disturbed everyone else in her zeal. I f she washed some-
thing and another touched it, then she would have to wash 
it again, and only she could do it. 
The disease which manifests itself in continual washing 
and cleaning is an extraordinarily frequent occurrence in 
women who are belligerent against their womanliness and 
attempt in this fashion to elevate themselves by their com-
plete virtue in cleanliness, over those who do not wash 
themselves so frequently. Unconsciously aU these efforts 
are aimed solely at exploding the entire household. Few 
households were ever more disorderly than the household 
of this woman. Not cleanliness, but the discomfiture of her 
entire household, was her goal. 
We could tell of very many cases in which a reconciliation 
.with the r61e of being a woman was only apparently true. 
That our patient had no friends among women, could get 
along with no one, and knew no consideration for another 
human being, fits very wen
1 into the pattern which we 
might have expected in her Ше. 
It wiU be necessary for us to evolve better methods of 
educating girls in the future, so that they shall be better 
prepared to reconcile themselves with life. Under the most 
favorable circumstances it is occasionally impossible to 
effect this reconciliation with life, as in this case. The al-

144 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
leged inferiority of woman is maintained in our age by law 
and tradition, though it is denied by anyone with a real 
psychological insight. We must therefore be on the watch 
to recognize and counter the whole technique of society's 
mistaken behavior in this connection. We must take up the 
battle not because we have some pathologically exaggerated 
respect for woman, but because the present fallacious at-
titude negates the logic of our whole social life. 
Let us take this occasion to discuss another relationship 
which is often used in order to degrade woman: the so-
caUed "dangerous age," that period which occurs about 
the fiftieth year, accompanied by the accentuation of cer-
tain character traits. Physical changes serve to indicate to 
woman in the menopause that the bitter time in which she 
must lose forever that little semblance of significance which 
she has so laboriously built up during the course of her life, 
has come. Under these circumstances she searches with re-
doubled efforts for any instrument which win be useful in 
maintaining her position, now grown more precarious than 
ever before. Our civUization is dominated by a principle 
in which present performance alone is a source of value; 
every aging individual, but especially a woman who is 
growing old, experiences difficulties at this time. The dam-
age which is done to an aging woman by entirely under-
mining her value affects every human being, in so far as wa 
cannot count our worth solely from day to day in the prime 
of life. What one has accomplished at the height of his ac-
tivities must be credited to him during the years in which 
his powers and activity are of necessity lessened. I t is not 
right to exclude someone entirely from the spiritual and 
material relationships of society simply because he is grow-
ing old. In the ease of a woman this amounts to a virtual 
degradation and enslavement. Imagine the anxiety of an 
adolescent girl who thinks of this epoch in her life which 

SEX 
145 
lies in her future. Womanliness is not extinguished with 
the fiftieth year. The honor and worth of a human being 
lasts unaltered beyond this age. And it must be guaran-
teed. 
V. 
TENSION BETWEEN T H E S E X E S 
The foundations of all these unhappy manifestations are 
built upon the mistakes of our civilization. If our civiliza-
tion is marked by a prejudice^ then this prejudice reaches 
out and touches every aspect of that civilization, and is to 
be found in its every manifestation. The fallacy of the in-
/feriority of woman, and its coroUary, the superiority of 
man, constantly disturbs the harmony of the sexes. As a re-
sult, an unusual tension is introduced into all erotic rela-
tionships, thereby threatening, and often entirely annihilat-
ing, every chance for happiness between the sexes. Our 
whole love life is poisoned, distorted, and corroded by this 
tension. This explains why one so seldom finds a harmoni-
ous marriage, this is the reason so many children grow up 
an the feeling that marriage is something extremely difficult 
and dangerous. 
Prejudices such as we have described above prevent 
children, to a large measure, from understanding life ade-
quately. Think of the numerous young girls who consider 
marriage only as a sort of emergency exit out of life, and 
think of those men and women who see in marriage only a 
necessary evil! The difficulties which originally grew out 
of this tension between the sexes have assumed gigantic 
proportions today. They become greater and greater the 
more clearly a girl acquires the tendency to avoid the sexual 
role which society compels her to assume and the more, in 
the case of a man, there is a desire to play the privileged 
role despite aU the false logic in such behavior. 

146 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
Comradeship is the characteristic index of a true recon-
ciliation with the sexual role, of a veritable equilibrium be-
tween the sexes. A subordination of one individual to an-
other in sexual relationships is just as unbearable as in the 
life of nations. Everyone should consider this problem very 
attentively since the difficulties which may arise for each 
partner from a mistaken attitude are considerable. This 
is an aspect of our life which is so widespread and impor-
tant that every one of us is involved in it. It becomes the 
more complicated since in our day a child is forced into 
a behavior pattern which is a depreciation and negation of 
the other sex. 
A calm education certainly could overcome these dif-
ficulties, but the hurry of our days, the lack of really 
proved and tested educational methods, and particularly 
the competitive nature of our whole life which reaches even 
into the nursery, determine only too harshly the tendencies 
of later life. The fear which causes so many human beings 
to shrink from assuming any love relationships is caused 
largely by the useless pressure which forces every man to 
prove his masculinity under all circumstances, even though 
he must do it by treachery and malice or force. 
That this serves to destroy all candor and trust in the 
love relationships is self-understood. The Don Juan is a 
man who doubts his own manliness, and is seeking constant 
additional evidence for it, in his conquests. The distrust 
which is so universal between the sexes prevents all frank-
ness, and humanity as a whole suffers as a consequence. 
The exaggerated masculine ideal signifies a constant chal-
lenge, a constant spur, a restlessness whose results naturally 
are only vanity and self enrichment, maintenance of the 
"privileged" attitude; and all these of course, are con-
trary to a healthy communal life. We have no reason to 
combat the former purposes of the emancipation-for-

SEX 
147 
women movements. I t is our duty to support them in their 
efforts to gain freedom and equality, because finally the 
happiness of the whole of humanity depends upon effect-
ing such conditions that a woman will be enabled to be 
reconciled with her womanly role, just as the possibility 
of a man's adequate solution of his relationship to woman, 
likewise depends upon it. 
V I . ATTEMPTS AT EEPOKM 
Of all the institutions which have been developed to 
better the relationship between the sexes, co-education is the 
most important. This institution is not universaUy accepted; 
it has its opponents, and its friends. Its friends maintain 
as their most powerful argument that, through co-educa-
tion, the two sexes have an opportunity to become ac-
quainted with one another at an early date and that 
through this acquaintanceship the faUacious prejudices, 
and their disastrous consequences, can be prevented in a 
measure. The opponents usuaüy counter that boys and girb 
are already so different at the time that they enter school 
that their co-education results only in accentuating these 
differences, because the boys feel themselves under pres-
sure. This occurs because the spiritual development of girls 
advances more quickly than that of boys during the school 
years. These boys, under the necessity of carrying their 
privilege and giving evidence of the fact that they are 
more capable, must suddenly recognize that their privilege 
is only a soap bubble which in reality bursts very easily. 
Other investigators have maintained that in co-education 
boys become anxious in front of girls, and lose their self-
esteem. 
There is no doubt that some measure of truth lies in these 
arguments, but they hold water only when we consider 

148 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
co-education in the sense of competition between the sexes, 
for the prize of greater talent and capability. I f that is 
what co-education means to teachers and pupils, it is a dam-
aging doctrine. I f we cannot find any teachers who have a 
better notion of co-education, that is, that it represents a 
training and preparation for future cooperation between 
the sexes in communal tasks, then every attempt at co-
education must fail. Its opponents will see but an affirma-
tion of their attitude in its failure. 
It would require the creative power of a poet to give 
an adequate picture of this whole situation. We must be 
content to indicate only the main points. An adolescent girl 
acts very much as though she were inferior, and what we 
have said concerning the compensation of organic inferiori-
ties holds equally well for her. The difference is this: the 
belief in her inferiority is forced upon a girl by her en-
vironment. She is so irrevocably guided into this channel 
of behavior that even investigators with a great deal of 
insight have from time to time fallen into the fallacy of 
believing in her inferiority. The universal result of this 
fallacy is that both sexes have finally fallen into the hasty 
pudding of prestige politics, and each tries to play a role 
for which he is not suited. What happens ? Both their lives 
become complicated, their relationships are robbed of all 
candor, they become surfeited with fallacies and prejudices, 
in the face of which all hope of happiness vanishes. 

C H A P T E R 
V I I I 
T H E FAMILY CONSTELLATION 
We have often drawn attention to the faet that before 
we can judge a human being we must know the situation 
in which he grew up. An important moment is the position 
which a child occupied in his family constellation. Fre-
quently we can catalogue human beings according to this 
view point after we have gained sufficient expertness, and 
can recognize whether an individual is a first-born, an only 
child, the youngest child, or the like. 
People seem to have known for a long time that the 
youngest child is usually a peculiar type. This is evidenced 
by the countless fairy tales, legends, Biblical stories, in 
which the youngest always appears in the same light. As 
a matter of fact he does grow up in a situation quite dif-
ferent from that of all other people, for to parents he 
represents a particular child, and as the youngest he ex-
periences an especially solicitous treatment. Not only is he 
the youngest, but also usually the smallest, and by con-
sequence, the most in need of help. His other brothers and 
sisters have already acquired some degree of independence 
and growth during the time of his weakness, and for this 
reason he usually grows up in an atmosphere warmer than 
that which the others have experienced. 
Hence there arise a number of characteristics which in-
fluence his attitude toward Hfe in a remarkable way, and 
cause him to be a remarkable personality. One circumstance 
which seemingly is a contradiction for our theory must be 
140 

150 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
noted. No child likes to be the smallest, the one whom 
one does not trust, the one in whom one has no confidence, 
all the time. Such knowledge stimulates a child to prove 
that he can do everything. His striving for power becomes 
markedly accentuated and we find the youngest very 
usually a man who has developed a desire to overcome all 
others, satisfied only with the very best. 
This type is not uncommon. One group of these youngest 
children excels every other member of the family, and be-
comes the family's most capable member. But there is an-
other more unfortunate group of these same youngest 
children; they also have a desire to excel, but lack the 
necessary activity and self-confidence, as a result of their 
relationships to their older brothers and sisters. I f the 
older children are not to be excelled, the youngest fre-
quently shies from his tasks, becomes cowardly, a chronic 
plaintiff forever seeking an excuse to evade his duties. He 
does not become less ambitious, but he assumes that type 
of ambition which forces him to wriggle out of situations, 
and satisfy his ambition in activity outside of the neces-
sary problems of life, to the end that he may avoid the 
danger of an actual test of ability, so far as possible. 
It will undoubtedly have occurred to many readers that 
the youngest child acts as though he were neglected and 
carried a feeling of inferiority within him. I n our investiga-
tions we have always been able to find this feeling of in-
feriority and have been able aLäo to deduce the quality and 
fashion of his psychic development from the presence of 
this torturing sentiment. In this sense a youngest child is 
like a child who has eome into the world with weak organs. 
What the child feels need not actually be the case. It does 
not matter what really has happened, whether an individ-
ual is really inferior or not. What is important is his 
interpretation of his situation. We know very well that mis-

T H E F A M I L Y CONSTELLATION 
151 
takes are easily made in childhood. At that time a child is 
faced with a great number of questions, of possibilities, and 
consequences. 
What shall an educator do? Shall he impose additional 
stimuli by spurring on the vanity of this child? Should he 
constantly push him into the limelight so that he is always 
the first? This would be a feeble response to the challenge 
of life. Experience teaches us that it makes very little dif-
ference whether one is first or not. It would be better to 
exaggerate in the other direction, and maintain that being 
first, or the best, is unimportant. We are really tired of 
having nothing but the first and best people. History as well 
as experience demonstrates that happiness does not consist 
in being the first or best. To teach a child such a principle 
makes him one-sided; above all it robs him of his chance of 
being a good fellow-man. 
The first consequence of such doctrines is that a child 
thinks only of himself and occupies himself in wondering 
' whether someone will overtake him. Envy and hate of his 
fellows and anxiety for his own position, develop in his 
soul. His very place in life makes a speeder trying to beat 
out all others, of the youngest. The racer, the marathon 
runner in his soul, is betrayed by his whole behavior, es-
pecially in little gestures which are not obvious to those who 
have not learned to judge his psychic life in all his rela-
tionships. These are the children, for instance, who always 
march at the head of the procession and cannot bear to 
have anyone in front of them. Some such race-course atti-
tude is characteristic of a large number of children. 
This type of the youngest child is occasionally to be 
found as a clear cut type example although variations are 
common. Among the youngest we find active and capable 
individuals who have gone so far that they have become the 
saviors of their whole family. Consider the Biblical story 

152 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
of Joseph! Here is a wonderful exposition of the situation 
of the youngest son. I t is as though the past had told us 
about it with a purpose and a clarity arising in the full 
possession of the evidence which we acquire so laboriously 
today. In the course of the centuries much valuable mate-
rial has been lost which we must attempt to find again. 
Another type, which grows secondarily from the first, is 
often found. Consider our marathon runner who suddenly 
comes to an obstacle which he does not trust himself to 
hurdle. He attempts to avoid the difficulty by going around 
it. When a youngest child of this type loses his courage he 
becomes the most arrant coward that we can well imagine. 
We find him far from the front, every labor seems too much 
for him, and he becomes a veritable "alibi artist" who 
attempts nothing useful, but spends his whole energy 
wasting time. In any actual conflict he always fails. Usually 
he is to be found carefully seeking a field of activity in 
which every chance of competition has been excluded. He 
will always find excuses for his failures. He may contend 
that he was too weak or petted, or that his brothers and 
sisters did not allow him to develop. His fate becomes more 
bitter if he actually has a physical defect, in which case 
he is certain to make capital out of his weakness to justify 
him in his desertion. 
Both these types are hardly ever good fellow human 
beings. The first type fares better in a world where com-
petition is valued for itself. A man of this type will main-
tain his spiritual equilibrium only at the cost of others, 
whereas individuals of the second remain under the op-
pressive feeling of their inferiority and suffer from their 
lack of reconciliation with life as long as they live. 
The oldest child also has well defined characteristics. 
For one thing he has the advantage of an exeeUent position 
for the development of his psychic life. History recognizes 

T H E 
FAMILY CONSTELLATION 
153 
that the oldest son has had a particularly favorable posi-
tion. Among many peoples, in many classes, this advan-
tageous status has become traditional. There is no question 
for instance that among the European farmers the first born 
knows his position from his early childhood and realizes 
/ 
that some day he will take over the farm, and therefore 
he finds himself in a much better position than the other 
children who know that they must leave their father's 
farm at some time; in other strata of society it is frequently 
held that the oldest son will some day be the head of the 
house. Even where this tradition has not actually become 
|crystallized,as in simple bourgeois or proletarian families, 
the oldest child is usually the one whom one accredits with 
enough power and common sense to be the helper or fore-
man of his parents. One can imagine how valuable it is 
to a child to be constantly entrusted with responsibilities 
by his environment. We can imagine that his thought pro-
cesses are somewhat like this: "You are the larger, the 
stronger, the older, and therefore you must also be cleverer 
than the others." 
If his development in this direction goes on without dis-
turbance then we shall find him with the traits of a guard-
ian of law and order. Such persons have an especially high 
evaluation of power. This extends not only to their own 
personal power, but affects their evaluation of the coneepts 
of power in general. Power is something which is quite 
self-understood for the oldest child, something which has 
weight and must be honored. I t is not surprising that such 
individuals are markedly conservative. 
The striving for power in the case of a second born 
child also has its especial nuance. Second born children are 
constantly under steam, striving for superiority under pres-
sure : the race course attitude which determines their ac-
tivity in life is very evident in their actions. The fact that 

154 
UNDER STANDING H U M A N NATURE 
there is someone ahead of him who has already gained 
power is a strong stimulus for the seeond horn. I f he is 
enabled to develop his powers and takes up the battle with 
the first born he will usually move forward with a great 
deal of elan, the while the first born, possessing power, feels 
himself relatively secure until the second threatens to sur-
pass him. 
This situation has also been described in a very lively 
fashion in the Biblical legend of Esau and Jacob. In this 
story the battle goes on relentlessly, not so much for actual 
power, but for the semblance of power; in cases like this 
it continues with a certain compulsion until the goal is 
reached and the first born is overcome, or the battle is lost, 
and the retreat, which often evinces itself in nervous 
diseases, begins. The attitude of the second born is similar 
to the envy of the poor classes. There is a dominant note 
of being slighted, neglected, in it. The seeond born may 
place his goal so high that he suffers from it his whole life, 
annihilates his inner harmony in following, not the veri-
table facts of life, but an evanescent fiction and the value-
less semblance of things. 
The only child of course finds himself in a very particular 
situation. He is at the utter merey of the educational 
methods of his environment. His parents, so to speak, have 
no choice in the matter. They place their whole educational 
zeal upon their only child. He becomes dependent to a high 
degree, waits constantly for someone to show him the way, 
and searches for support at all times. Pampered through-
out his life, he is accustomed to no difficulties, because one 
has always removed difficulties from his way. Being con-
stantly the center of attention he very easily acquires the 
feeling that he really counts for something of great value. 
His position is so difficult that mistaken attitudes are almost 
inevitable in his ease. I f the parents understand the dangers 

T H E F A M I L Y CONSTELLATION 
155 
of his situation, to be sure, there is a possibility of prevent­
ing many of them, but at best it remains a difficult problem. 
Parents of "only" children are frequently exceptionaUy 
cautious, people who have themselves experienced life as a 
great danger, and therefore approach their child with ад 
, 
inordinate solicitude. The child in turn interprets their 
attentions and admonitipns as a source of additional pres­
sure. Constant attention to health and weU being finaUy 
stimulate him to conceive of the world as a very hostile 
place. An eternal fear of difficulties arises in him and he 
approaches them in an unpractised and clumsy manner be­
cause he has tested only the pleasant things in tife. Such 
children have difficulties with every independent activity 
and sooner or later they become useless for Hfe. Ship­
wrecks in their life's activity are to be expected. Their 
life approaches that of a parasite who does nothing, but 
enjoys life while the rest of the world cares for his wants. 
Various combinations are possible in which several 
brothers and sisters of the same or opposite sexes compete 
with each other. The evaluation of any one case therefore 
becomes exceedingly difficult. The situation of an only boy 
among several girls is a case in point. A feminine influence 
dominates such a household and the boy is pushed into the 
background, particularly if he is the youngest, and sees 
himself opposed by a closed phalanx of women. His striv­
ing for recognition encounters great difficulties. Threatened 
on all sides, he never senses with certainty the privilege 
which in our retarded masculine civilization is given to 
every male. A lasting insecurity, an inability to evaluate 
himself as a human being, is his most characteristic trait. 
He may become so intimidated by his womenfolk that he 
feeLs that to be a man is equivalent to occupying a posi­
tion of lesser honor. On the one hand his courage and self-
confidence may easily be eclipsed, or on the other the 

156 
UNDER STANDING HUMAN NATURE 
stimulus may be so drastie that the young boy forees him-
self to great achievements. Both cases arise from the same 
situation. What becomes of such boys in the end is deter-
mined by other concomitant and closely related phenomena. 
We see therefore that the very position of the child in 
the family may lend shape and color to all the instincts, 
tropisms, faculties and the like, which he brings with him 
into the world. This affirmation robs of all value the the-
ories of the inheritance of especial traits or talents, which 
are so harmful to all educational effort. There are doubtless 
occasions and cases in which the effect of hereditary in-
fluences can be shown, as for instance, in a child who grows 
up removed entirely from his parents, yet develops certain 
similar "familial" traits. This becomes much more com-
prehensible if one remembers how closely certain types of 
mistaken development in a child are related to inherited 
defects of the body. Take a given child who comes into the 
world with a weak body which results, in turn, in his 
greater tension toward the demands of life and his en-
vironment. I f his father came into the world with similarly 
defective organs and approached the world with a similar 
tension, it is not to be wondered at that similar mistakes 
and character traits should result. Viewed from this stand-
point it would seem to us that the theory of inheritance of 
acquired characteristics is based upon very weak evidence. 
Prom our previous descriptions we may assume that 
whatever the errors to which a child is exposed in his de-
velopment, the most serious consequences arise from his 
desire to elevate himself over all his fellows, to seek more 
personal power which will give him advantages over his 
fellow man. I n our culture he is practically compelled to 
develop according to a fixed pattern. I f we wish to prevent 
such a pernicious development we must know the difficulties 
he has to meet and understand them. There is one single 

T H E 
F A M I L Y CONSTELLATION 
157 
and essential point of view which helps 
to overcome all 
these difficulties; it is the view-point of the development 
of the social feeling. If this development succeeds, obsta-
cles are insignificant, but since the opportunities for this 
development are relatively rare in our culture, the diffi-
culties which a child encounters play an important role. 
Once this is recognized we shall not be surprised to find 
mäny people who spend their whole life fighting for their 
lives and others to whom life is a vale of sorrows. We must 
understand that they are the victims of a mistaken develop-
ment whose unfortunate consequence is that their attitude 
toward life also is mistaken. 
Let us be very modest then, in our judgment of our 
fellows, and above all, let us never aUow ourselves to make 
any moral judgments, judgments concerning the moral 
worth of a human being! On the contrary we must make 
our knowledge of these facts socially valuable. We must 
approachsuch a mistaken and misled human being sym-
pathetically, because we are in a position to have a much 
better idea of what is going on within him than he is him-
self. This gives rise to important new points of view in the 
matter of education. The very recognition of the source of 
error puts a great many influential instruments for better-
ment into our hands. By analysing the psychic structure and 
development of any human being we understand not only 
his past, but may deduce further what his future prob-
ably will be. Thus our science gives us some conception of 
wh*at a human being really is. He becomes a living being 
for us, not merely a flat silhouette. And as a consequence 
we can have a richer and more meaningful sense of his 
value as a fellow human than is usual in our day. 

* 
BOOK I I 
THE SCIENCE OP CHARACTEBi 

4 

C H A P T E R 
I 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
I . T H E NATURE AND ORIGIN OP CHARACTER 
What we caU a character trait is the appearance of 
some specific mode of expression on the part of an individ-
ual who is attempting to adjust himself to the world in 
which he lives. Character is a social concept. We can speak 
of a character trait only when we consider the relationship 
of an individual to his environment. It would make very 
little difference what kind of character Robinson Crusoe 
had. Character is a psychic attitude, it is the quality and 
nature of an individual's approach to the environment in 
which he moves. It is the behavior pattern according to 
which his striving for significance is elaborated in the 
terms of his social feeling. 
We have already seen how the goal of superiority, of 
power, of the conquest of others, is the goal which directs 
the activity of most human beings. This goal modifies the 
world philosophy and the behavior pattern and directs the 
various psychic expressions of an individual into specific 
channels. Traits of character are only the external mani-
festations of the style of life, of the behavior pattern, of 
any individual. As such they enable us to understand his 
attitude towards his environment, towards his fellow men, 
towards the society in which he lives, and towards the 
challenge of existence in general. Character traits are 
instruments, the tricks which are used by the total per-
161 

162 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
sonality in the acquisition of recognition and significance; 
their configuration in the personality amounts to a "tech-
nique" in living. 
Traits of character are not.inherited, as many would 
have it, noj^,re_they..eongeDitallypreseRt, They are to be 
considered as similar to a pattern for existence which en-
ables every human being to live his life and express his 
personality in any situation without the necessity of con-
sciously thinking about it. Character traits are not the 
expressions of inherited powers nor predispositions but 
they are flCCfflirfidLior the purpose of maIntaininjg_a_ partic-
ular habitus in life. A child, for instance, is not born lazy 
but is lazy because laziness seems to him the best adapted 
means of making life easier, while it enables him at the 
same time to maintain his feeling of significance. The 
power attitude can be expressed in a certain degree, in the 
pattern of laziness. An individual may draw attention to 
a congenital defect and thus save his face before a defeat. 
The end result of such introspection is always something 
like this: '' If I did not have this defect my talents would 
develop brilliantly. But unfortunately I have the defect!" 
A second individual who is involved in a long-standing war 
with his environment because of his undisciplined striving 
for power, wUl develop whatever power expressions are 
adequate to his battle, such as ambition, envy, mistrust, and 
the like. We believe that such traits of character are in-
distinguishable from the personality, but are not inherited 
nor unchangeable. Closer observation shows us that they 
have been found necessary and adequate for the behavior 
pattern and have been acquired to this end, sometimes very 
early in life. They are not primary factors, but secondary 
ones, which have been forced into being by the secret goal 
of the personality. They must be judged from the stand-
point of teleology. 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
163 
Let us recaU our previous explanations in which we have 
shown how the style of an individual's Hfe, his actions, his 
behavior, his standpoint in the world, are all closely con-
nected with his goal. We cannot think anything, nor set 
anything into motion, without having some distinct pur-
pose in mind. In the dark background of the child's soul 
this goal is already present, directing his psychic develop-
ment from his earliest days. It gives form and character to 
his life and is responsible for the fact that every individual 
is a particular and discreet unity, different from an other 
personalities, because all his movements and all the expres-
sions of his life are directed toward a common, unique, goal. 
To realize this is to know that we can always recognize a 
human being, wherever we find him in the course of his 
behavior, once we know his pattern. 
So far as psychic phenomena and character traits are 
concerned, heredity plays a relatively unimportant role. 
There are no points of contact with reality which might 
support a theory of inherited acquired traits. Investigate 
any particular phenomenon in one's psychie life, and you 
arrive at his first day, and it would seem, indeed, as though 
everything were inherited. The reason that there are char-
acter traits which are common for a whole family, or a 
nation, or a race, lies simply in the fact that one individual 
acquires them from another by imitation or by the process 
of identifying himself with the other's activity. There are 
certain realities, certain peculiarities, expressions and 
forms in the physical and psychic life, which have an es-
pecial significance in our civilization for all adolescents. 
Their common characteristic is that they stimulate imita-
tion. Thus the thirst for knowledge which is expressed some-
times as a desire to see, can lead to curiosity as a charac-
ter trait in such children as have difficulties with their 
optic apparatus, but there is no necessity for the develop-

164 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
ment of this character trait. I f the behavior pattern of 
this child should demand it, this same thirst for knowledge-
might develop into quite another character trait. The same 
child might satisfy himself by investigating all things, and 
taking them apart, or breaking them into pieces. Or such a 
child might, under other circumstances, become a book-
worm. 
We may evaluate the mistrust of those who have diffi-
culties in hearing in much the same way. In our civilization 
they are exposed to a greater danger and they sense that 
danger with a particularly sharpened attention. They are 
also exposed to ridicule, degradation, and are frequently 
considered as cripples. These are factors of the utmost im-
portance in the development of a mistrustful character. 
Since the deaf are excluded from many pleasures, it is not 
surprising that they should be hostile to them. But the as-
sumption that they were born with a mistrustful character 
would be unwarranted. The theory that criminal character 
traits are congenital, is equally fallacious. The argument 
that many criminals are to be found in one family may be 
effectively countered by drawing attention to the fact that 
a tradition and attitude toward the world, and a bad ex-
ample, go hand in hand in these cases. Children in these 
families are taught from early childhood the fact that 
thievery is a possibility for gaining a livelihood. 
The striving for recognition may be considered in much 
the same way. Every child is faced with so many obstacles 
in life that no child ever grows up without striving for 
some form of significance. The form which this striving will 
take is interchangeable, and every human being approaches 
the problem of his personal significance in an individual 
way. The assertion that children are similar to their par-
ents in their character traits, is easily explained by the fact 
that the child, in his striving for significance, seizes upon 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
165 
the example of those individuals in his environment who 
are already significant and demand respect, as an ideal 
model. Every generation learns from its ancestors in this 
way, and it maintains what it has learned in the greatest 
difficulties and complexities to which this striving for 
power may lead it. 
The goal of superiority is a secret goal. The existence 
of a social feeling prevents its frank development. I t must 
grow in secret and hide itself behind a friendly mask! We 
must reaffirm however that it would not grow with such 
tropic luxuriance if we humans understood one another 
better. I f we could go so far that each of us developed 
better eyes and could more transparently view the charac-
ter of his neighbor, then we should not only be able to 
protect ourselves better, but simultaneously make it so 
difficult for another to express his striving for power, 
that it would not pay him to do so. Under such circum-
stances the veiled striving for power would disappear. I t 
pays us therefore to look into these relationships more 
closely and make use of the experimental evidence which 
we have won. 
We live under such complicated cultural circumstances 
that proper schooling for life is made very difficult. The 
most important means for the development of psychological 
acuity have been denied the people, and up to the present 
the only value of schools has been that they have spread 
the raw stuff of knowledge before children and allowed 
them to eat of it what they could or would, without espe-
cially stimulating their interest in it. And even a sufficient 
number of these schools was but a pious wish! The most 
important premise for the acquisition of an understand-
ing of human nature has been hitherto much neglected. We 
too have learned our standards for measuring human be-
ings in the old schools. Here we have learned to divide 

166 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
good from bad, and to distinguish them. What we have not 
learned is how to revise our concepts, and consequently we 
have carried this defect into life and are laboring under 
it to this day. 
As grown-ups we are still making use of the prejudices 
and fallacies of our childhood as though they were sacred 
laws. We are not yet aware that we have been drawn into 
the confusion of our complicated culture, that we have 
assumed standpoints which a true recognition of things as 
they are, would make impossible. In the last analysis, we 
go about interpreting everything from the standpoint of 
the heightening of our personal self-esteem, to the end that 
we become personally more powerful. 
I I . T H E SlGNIPICANCE OP T H E SOCIAL P E E L I N G 
FOB T H E DEVELOPMENT OP СнАВДСТЕК 
The social feeling, next to the striving for power, plays 
the most important r61e in the development of character. 
It is expressed, just as is the striving for significance, in the 
first psychic tendencies of the child, especiauy in his desire 
for contact and tenderness. We have already learned about 
the conditions for the development of the social feeling in 
a previous paragraph, and we wish merely to recall them 
briefly. The social feeling is influenced both by the feeling 
of inferiority and its compensatory striving for power. 
Human _beings. areyery sensitive media _for. the,,,.deyelop-
ment of inferiority complexes of all kinds. The process of 
psychic life, the disquiet that seeks for compensations, that 
demands security and totality, begins as soon as the feeling 
of inferiority appears, for the purpose of securing peace 
and happiness in life. The rules of conduct which we must
 
M 
maintain toward a child grow out of our recognition of his 
feeling of inferiority. These rules may be summed up with 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
167 
the admonition that we must not make life too bitter for a 
child, and that we must prevent him from learning the 
dark side of existence too quickly; and that we must also 
give him the possibility of experiencing the joy of living. 
A second group of conditions, which are of an economic 
nature, comes into play here. Unfortunately, children often 
grow up in circumstances which are unnecessarily bitter; 
misunderstanding, poverty, and want, are phenomena 
which may be prevented. Bodily defects play an important 
role because they can cause a normal style of life to be 
impossible and teach a child that he needs special privileges 
and particular laws in order to maintain his existence. 
Even if we had all these things in our power, we could not 
prevent the fact that such children would experience life 
as an unpleasant difficulty and this in turn gives rise to the 
great danger that their social feeling will become distorted. 
We cannot judge a human being except by using the 
concept of the social feeling as a standard, and measuring 
his thought and action according to it. We must maintain 
this standpoint, because every individual within the body 
of human society must affirm the connectedness of that 
society. The necessity causes us to recognize more or less 
clearly, what we owe our fellow-men. We are in the very 
midst of life and are dominated by the logic of communal 
existence. This determines the fact that we need certain 
known criteria for the evaluation of our fellows. The 
degree to which the social feeling has developed in any 
individual is the sole criterion of human values, univer-
sally valid. We cannot deny our psychic dependency upon 
the social feeling. There is no human being who is capable 
of actually breaking off his social feeling in its entirety. 
There are no words with which we could entirely escape 
our duties to our fellow-man. The social feeling constantly 
reminds us with its warning voice. This does not mean that 

168 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
we constantly have the social feeling in our conscious 
thought, but we do maintain that a certain mobilization of 
power is required to distort it, to set it aside; and further, 
its universal necessity permits no one to begin an action 
without first being justified by this social feeling. The need 
for justifying each act and thought originates in the un-
conscious sense of social unity. At the very least it deter-
mines the fact that we frequently must seek extenuating 
circumstances for our actions. Herein originates the special 
technique of life, of thinking and acting, which causes us 
to wish to remain constantly in rapport with the social 
feeling, or at the very least, to delude ourselves with the 
semblance of social connectedness. In short, these explana-
tions show that there is something like a mirage of the social 
feeling, which acts as a veil cloaking certain tendencies. 
The discovery of these tendencies alone would give us a 
correct evaluation of an action or an individual. That such 
deception may occur, increases the difficulty in evaluating 
the social feeling; it is this very difficulty which raises 
the understanding of human nature to the plane of a 
science. We shall now show several examples which dem-
onstrate how the social feeling may be misused. 
A young man onee narrated that he swam out to an 
island in the sea with some of his comrades and spent some 
time there. I t happened that one of his comrades, leaning 
over the edge of a cliff, lost his balance and fell into the 
sea. Our young man leaned over, and with great curiosity 
watched his comrade go under. As he later thought about 
this event it occurred to him that he had not considered 
his act as being curious. It happened that the young man 
who fell into the sea was saved, but as far as the narrator 
of the story is concerned, we can affirm that his social feel-
ing must have been very small. We shall not be deceived 
into believing that his social feeling is not deficient i f 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
169 
we were to hear that he has never harmed anyone, in aU 
his life, and has occasionally been on friendly terms with 
a comrade. 
This daring assumption must be reinforced by further 
facts. The content of a frequently recurring day-dream of 
this young man was that he found himself shut off from 
all human beings in a pretty little house in the midst of a 
forest. This picture was also his favorite motif for his 
drawings. Whoever understands fantasies and also knows 
his previous history, will easily recognize his deficient social 
feeling reaffirmed in his dream. We shall not be doing him 
an injustice if, without any moral judgment, we point 
out that he has been the victim of a mistaken development 
which had obstructed the evolution of his social feeling. 
There is an anecdote which may well serve to show the 
difference between true and false social feeling. An old 
lady while attempting to board a street car, slipped and 
fell into the snow. She could not arise, and a number of 
people hurried past her without noticing her plight, until 
a man stepped to her side, and helped her up. At this 
moment another man, who had been hidden somewhere, 
jumped to her side and greeted her chivalrous savior with 
these words: "Thank God! I have finally found a decent 
man. I have been standing here for five minutes, waiting to 
see whether someone would help tke old lady up. You are 
the first one to do i t ! " This incident shows how the sem-
blance of a social feeling may be misused. By this palpable 
'trick one man has set himself up as a judge of others, dis-
tributes praise and blame, but has not lifted a finger him-
self to help a situation of which he was a witness. 
There are other more complicated cases in which it is not 
easy to decide how great or how little the social feel-
ing is. Nothing remains but to investigate them radically. 
Once this is done we do not long remain in the dark. There 

170 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
is the case, for instance, of a General who, although he knew 
a battle already half lost, forced thousands of soldiers to 
die unnecessarily. This General certainly said he was 
acting in the interests of the nation, and many people 
agreed with him. Yet it would be difficult to consider him 
a real fellow man, whatever reasons he may have brought 
to justify himself. 
In these uncertain cases we need a standpoint which is 
universally applicable in order to judge correctly. For 
us such a standpoint can be found in the concept of social 
usefulness and the general well-being of humanity, the 
"common weal." I f we assume this standpoint we shall 
only very rarely have difficulty in deciding a particular case. 
The degree of the social fgeling.„shqws itself ,m .aa,in-
dividual's every activity. It may be very obvious in his 
external expressions, as, for instance, the way he looks at 
another person, his manner of shaking hands, or of speak-
ing. His whole personality may give an indelible impres-
sion, one way or another, which we sense almost intui-
tively. Occasionally we draw such far-reaching conclu-
sions unconsciously from the behavior of a man, that our 
own attitude is quite dependent upon them. In these dis-
cussions we are doing little else than bringing this intui-
tive knowledge into the sphere of consciousness, and thus 
enabling ourselves to test and evaluate it, to the end 
that we may avoid making great mistakes. The value of 
this transference into consciousness lies in that we lay 
ourselves less open to false prejudices (which are active 
when we allow our judgments to be formed in the uncon-
scious where we cannot control our activities and have no 
opportunity to make revisions). 
Let us reaffirm that an evaluation of a man's character 
must be made solely when his context, his environment, is 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
171 
known. I f we wrench single phenomena from his life and 
judge them singly, as one might if one considered his physi-
cal status alone, or solely his environment, or education, 
we are inevitably forced into erroneous conclusions. This 
thesis is valuable because it immediately removes a great 
load from the shoulders of mankind. A better knowledge 
of ourselves must, with our technique of living, result in 
a behavior pattern more appropriate to our needs. It be-
comes possible by applying our method, to influence others, 
especially children, for the better, and prevent the inexor-
able consequences of the blind fate which might other-
wise overtake them. Thus it will no longer be necessary for 
an individual to be condemned to an unhappy fate simply 
because he originated in an unfortunate family, or hered-
itary, situation. Let us accomplish this alone, and our 
' civilization will have taken a decided step in advance! A 
new generation will grow up courageously conscious that 
it is master of its own fate! 
I I I . 
T H E DmECTION OF CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 
Any character traits which are conspicuous in a per-
sonality must be appropriate to the direction which his 
psychic development has taken from childhood. This direc-
tion may be a straight line or it may be marked by shunts 
and detours. In the first instance, a child strives for the 
realization of his goal along a direct line, and develops an 
aggressive, courageous character. The beginnings of charac-
ter development usually are marked by such active, ag-
gressive, traits. But this line is easily diverted or modified. 
Difficulties may be inherent in the greater resistive pow-
ers of the child's opponents, who prevent the child from 
gaining his goal of superiority by straight-forward at-
tack. The child will attempt in some way to circumvent 

172 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
these difficulties. His detour, again, will determine specific 
character traits. Other difficulties in development of the 
character, such as the deficient development of organs, re-
pulses and defeats at the hands of his environment, have a 
similar effect upon him. Further, the influence of that 
greater environment, the world, the teacher who cannot be 
avoided, is of great importance. The business of living in 
our civilization, as expressed in the demands, doubts, and 
emotions of a child's teachers, ultimately affects his charac-
ter. All education takes on the color and the attitude best 
calculated to develop a pupil in the direction of the social 
life and the prevailing culture of his times. 
QbjstacIes_ of every sort are dangerous for a straight-line 
dfrvp.lopmpTit, of nharact.ftr. Where they are present, the 
paths by which a child will seek to accomplish his goal of 
power will deviate to a greater or lesser degree from the 
straight line. Jn the first casethe..attitudQ of the...child wUl 
biL_jffidisturbed,andhewilL approach his difficulties..di-
rectly, whereas in the second case we have the_ pjcturejjf 
an entirely different child, a child who has learned thM 
fire burns, that there are opponents in whose presence one 
must be careful. He will attempt to attain his goal of rec-
ognition and power along psychic detours, not directly, but 
by craft. His development is relative to the degree of such 
deviations. Whether or not he is over-cautious, whether or 
not he finds himself in tune with the necessities of life, or 
whether or not he has avoided these necessities, will depend 
upon the afore-mentioned factors. ££_hewill not approach 
his tasks and problems, directly, if he becomes cowardJy 
and timid, refuses tö. look,.another straightin thg eye, prJo 
speak the truth, it is solely another type of child: his goal 
is identical with that of the courageous child. I f two peo-
ple aet differently, their goal may nevertheless be the same! 
Both types of character development may exist to a cer-

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
173 
tain degree in the same individual. This occurs especiaUy 
when the child has not crystallized his trends too sharply, 
when his principles are still elastic, when he does not al-
ways assume the same path, but retains sufficient initiative 
to look for another approach if the first attempt proves 
inadequate. 
An undisturbed communal social life is the first premise 
for an adaptation to the demands of the community. One 
can easily teach a child this adaptation so long as he is 
not in a belligerent attitude toward his environment. War 
within the family may be eliminated only when the educa-
tors are capable of minimizing their own striving for 
power to such a degree that it does not act as a burden 
upon a child. I f in addition, the parents understand the 
principles of a child's development, they can avoid the de-
velopment of straight line character traits into their ex-
aggerated forms, as the degeneration of courage into im-
pudence, of independence into raw egoism. Similarly they 
win be able to avoid any external, forcibly produced 
authority, from producing signs of servile obedience. Perni-
cious training of this sort may otherwise cause the child 
to be shut in, afraid of the truth, and the consequences of 
frankness. Pressure, when used in education, is a double-
edged sword. It produces the semblance of adaptation. 
Compulsive obedience is only apparent obedience. The re-
flection of the general relationships of the child to his en-
vironment is to be found in his soul. Whether all the con-
ceivable obstacles which may be present act directly or in-
directly upon him will also be reflected in his personality. 
A child is usually incapable of exercising any critique of 
outside influences; and his adult environment either knows 
nothing of them or cannot understand them. The constel-
lation of his difficulties, plus his reaction to his obstacles, 
constitutes his personality. 

174 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
There is another scheme according to which we can 
catalogue human beings. The criterion is the manner in 
which they approach difficulties. In the first place there are 
the optimists, who are individuals whose character develop­
ment, by and large, has been in a direct line. They approach 
all difficulties courageously and do not take them too seri­
ously. They maintain their belief in themselves and assume 
a happy attitude toward life with comparative ease. They 
do not demand too much of life because they have a good 
evaluation of themselves, and do not consider themselves 
neglected or insignificant. Thus they are able to bear the 
difficulties of life more easily than others who find in dif­
ficulties only further justification for believing themselves 
weak and inadequate. In the more difficult situations the 
optimists remain quiet in the conviction that mistakes can 
always be rectified. 
Qptimistg,,may ivm&UfatelzJa8. recQgnized.by. their, п щ ь 
ner.They are not afraid,they„spea^_Qp№^^nd^reely, 
and are neither too modesi_nor too inhibited. W_erewe to 
describe them in plastic terms we.would show them with 
open arms, ready to receive their fellow-men. They make 
contacts with others easily and have no difficulty in mak­
ing friends, because they are not mistrustful. Their speech 
isjiot hindered; their attitude, their carriage, their gait, 
is natural and easy^ Pure examples of this type are sel­
dom found except in the first years of childhood; there are 
however, many degrees of optimism and of ability to make 
social contacts with which we can well be satisfied. 
Quite a different type are the pessimists. It is with them 
that we have the greatest problems of education. These are 
the individuals who have acquired an "inferiority com­
plex '' as a result of the experiences and impressions of their 
childhood, for whom all manner of difficulties have vouch­
safed the feeling that life is not easy. They always look for 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
175 
the dark side of life as a result of their pessimistic per-
sonal philosophy, which has been nourished by false treat-
ment in their childhood. They are much more conscious of 
the difficulties of life than are the optimists, and it is easy 
for them to lose their courage. Tortured by a feeling of 
insecurity, they are constantly seeking for support. Their 
cry for help is echoed in their external behavior, because 
they cannot stand alone; if they are children, they per-
sistently call to their mothers, or cry for them as soon as 
separated. This cry for their mothers can sometimes be 
heard even in their old age. 
The abnormal cautiousness of this type can be seen in 
their timid, and fearful, external attitude. The pessimists 
are forever reckoning with the possible dangers which they 
imagine immediately in the offing. Obviously individuals 
of this type sleep badly. Sleep, as a matter of fact, is an 
excellent standard for measuring the development of a 
human being, for sleep disturbances are an index of greater 
cautiousness in the face of a feeling of insecurity. It is as 
though these human beings were ever on guard in order 
to better defend themselves against the menace of life. How 
little joy in life, and what poor understanding of it, is to 
be found in this type! An individual who cannot sleep 
well has developed but a poor technique of living. Were he 
really correct in his conclusions, he would not dare to sleep 
at all. I f life were as bitter as he believes it, then sleep ac-
tuaUy were a very poor arrangement. In the tendency 
to approach these natural phenomena of life in a hostile 
manner the pessimist betrays his unpreparedness for liv-
ing. Sleep itself need not be disturbed. We may suspect 
this same pessimistic tendency when we find an individual 
constantly occupied with investigating whether the doors 
of his room have been carefully locked, or filling his sleep 
with dreams of burglars and robbers. Indeed, the type may 

176 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
be recognized by the posture which it assumes in sleeping. 
Very often individuals who belong to this group curl up into 
the smallest possible space or sleep with the covers drawn 
up over their heads. 
Human beings may also be divided into assailants and 
defendants. The assailant attitude is characterized by vio-
lent movements. People of the aggressive type, when they 
are courageous, elevate courage into foolhardiness, in order 
to vehemently attest their capabilities to the world, thus 
betraying the deep feeling of insecurity which rules them. 
If they are anxious they attempt to harden themselves 
against fear. They play the "manly" r61e to a ludicrous 
degree. Others go to great pains to suppress all feelings of 
tenderness and softness because such feelings appear as 
signs of weakness to them. The aggressives show traits of 
brutality and cruelty, and, should they tend to pessimism, 
all the relationships to environment are changed, for they 
have neither the ability to sympathize nor to cooperate, be-
ing hostile to the whole world. Their conscious sense of their 
own value may at the same time have reached a very high 
degree. They may be puffed up with pride and arrogance 
and a feeling of their own worth. They exhibit their vani-
ties as though they were actually conquerors, yet the ob-
viousness with which they do all this, and the superfluity 
of their movements, not only causes a disharmony in their 
relation to the world, but also betrays their whole character, 
an artificial superstructure based upon an insecure shift-
ing foundation. Their aggressive attitude, which may last 
for a long time, originates in this manner. 
Their subsequent development is not easy. Human soci-
ety does not look with favor upon such beings. The very 
fact that they are so much in evidence makes them dis-
liked. I n their persistent efforts to win the upper hand, they 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
177 
soon find themselves in conflict, especially with others of 
•their own type, whose competition they awaken. Life be-
comes a chain of battles for them; and when they suffer 
the defeats which are unavoidable, their whole line of tri-
umph and victory comes to an abrupt end. They are easily 
frightened, cannot sustain their powers for long conflicts, 
and are unable to recoup their defeats. 
Their failure to aceompnsh their tasks has a retroactive 
influence upon them and their development stops approx-
imately at that place where another type, that type which 
feels itself assailed, begins. Individuals of the second type 
are the assailed, constantly on the defense. They compen-
sate for their feeling of insecurity, not along the line of 
aggression, but by means of anxiety, precaution, and cow-
ardice. We may be certain that this second attitude never 
occurs without the previous, and unsuccessful, maintenance 
of the aggressive attitude which we have just described. 
The defendant type is quickly appaUed by unfortunate ex-
periences. From these they deduce such annihilating con-
sequences that they are easily thrown into flight. Occasion-
ally they succeed in disguising their defection by acting as 
though a useful piece of work lay along the line of retreat. 
Thus when they occupy themselves with remembrances, 
and develop their fantasy, they aetuauy seek only to avoid 
the realitytwhich threatens them. Some of them when they 
have not entirely lost their initiative may actually accom-
plish something which may not be without general useful-
ness for society. Many artists belong to this type. They 
have withdrawn themselves from reality and built them-
selves a seeond world in the realm of fantasy and ideals, 
in which there are no barriers. These artists are the excep-
tions to the rule. Individuals of this type usually capitulate 
to difficulties and suffer defeat after defeat. They fear 

17? 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
everything and everybody, become increasingly distrustful, 
and await nothing but hostility on the part of the world. 
In our civilization unfortunately their attitude is аП 
too frequently reinforced by the bad experiences at the 
hands of others; soon they lose all belief in the good quali­
ties of human beings and in the brighter side of life. One 
of the most common and characteristic traits of such in­
dividuals is their external critical attitude. So accentuated 
does this become at times, that they are quick to recognize 
the most insignificant defect in others. They set themselves 
up as judges of humanity without ever doing anything 
useful themselves for those with whom they live. They busy 
themselves in criticising and spoiUng the other feUow's 
game. Their mistrust forces them into an anxious, hesitat­
ing attitude, yet no sooner are they faced with a task than 
they begin to doubt and to hesitate, as though they wished 
to avoid every decision. I f we want to portray this type 
symbolically, we can do so by imagining a man with one 
hand raised to defend himself and the other covering his 
eyes, so that he may not see the danger. 
Such individuals have other unpleasant character traits. 
It is well known that those who do not trust themselves 
never trust others. Envy and avarice are inevitably devel­
oped by such an attitude. The isolation in which such 
doubters live usually signifies their disinclination to pre­
pare pleasures for others, or to join in the happiness of 
their fellows. Moreover, the happiness of strangers is well-
nigh painful to them. Certain members of this group may 
succeed in maintaining a feeling of their own superiority 
over the rest of mankind by a trick which is so effective thaf 
it is difficult to destroy. In their desire to maintain their su­
periority at all costs they may develop a behavior pattern 
so complieated that, at first glance, one would never suspect 
them of an essential hostility to mankind. 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
179 
I V . T H E OLD SCHOOL OF PSYCHOLOGY 
It is true that one can attempt to understand human 
nature without being consciously aware of the direction 
which this research takes. The usual method is to take a 
single point out of the context of pyschic development, and 
set up "types" according to which one can orient himseH. 
One could, for instance, divide human beings into those 
who are more given to meditation and reflection, who live 
in the life of fantasy, who are foreign to the actualities of 
life. Individuals of this type are more difficult to jolt into 
action than those of another type who reflect less, meditate 
hardly at all, and busy themselves with an active, matter-
of-fact, work-a-day, approach to the problems of life. Such 
types certainly do exist. Yet i f we subscribed to this school 
of psychology, we would soon be at the end of our investi-
gations, and should be forced, like other psychologists, to 
be content to affirm that in one type the powers of fantasy, 
and in the other, the ability to work, was better developed. 
This would hardly be sufficient for a real science. We need 
to discover better conceptions of how these things happen, 
and whether they had to happen, and whether they can be 
avoided or mitigated. For this reason such artificial and 
superficial cataloguings are not valid for a rational study 
of human nature, even though the various types, as stated 
above, actually do occur. 
Individual Psychology has seized upon the development 
of the soul where the forms of psychic expression origi-
nate : in the earliest days of childhood. It has established 
that these expressions, taken wholly or singly, are either 
those which are colored by the preponderance of the social 
feeling, or are those in which the striving for power is more 
in evidence. With this contention Individual Psychology 
has found itself in possession of the key with which it is 

180 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
possible to understand a human being according to a sim-
ple and universally applicable concept. Any human being 
may be classified according to this key concept, which has 
an enormous field of application. That the caution and skill 
in observation which is appropriate to a psychologist, must 
be employed in every case, goes without saying. With this 
self-understood premise we acquire a standard, and are 
able to adduce whether a psychic phenomenon has for its 
content a greater degree of social feeling compounded with 
only a slight striving for personal power and prestige, or 
whether it is predominantly egoistic, ambitious, and use-
ful only in arrogating to its bearer a sense of superiority 
over his environment. On this basis it is not difficult to un-
derstand more clearly certain character traits which have 
previously been misunderstood; and to weigh them ac-
cording to their place in the personality-as-a-whole. At the 
same time that we understand a trait or behavior pattern in 
anyone, we acquire a lever with which we can modify that 
individual's behavior. 
V. 
TEMPERAMENT AND ENDOCRINE SECRETION 
The category of "temperaments" is an old classification 
of psychic phenomena and traits. I t is difficult to know 
just what is meant by "temperament." Is it the quickness 
with which one thinks, speaks, or acts? The power or the 
rhythm with which one approaches a task? On investiga-
tion the explanations of psychologists concerning the es-
sence of temperament seem singularly inadequate. We 
must admit that science has been unable to get away from 
the concept that there are four temperaments, a concept 
which dates back to the gray antiquity in which men first 
began to study the psychic life. The division of tempera-
.ments into sanguine, choleric, melancholic, and phlegmatic, 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
181 
dates from ancient Greece, where it was assumed by Hippo­
crates, whence it was taken up later by the Romans, and 
remains today an honorable and sacred relic in our pres­
ent psychology. 
To the sanguine type belong those individuals who evince 
a certain joy in life, who do not take things too seriously, 
who do not let gray hairs grow too easily on their heads, 
who attempt to see the pleasantest and most beautiful side 
of every event, who are sad when sadness is proper, with­
out breaking down, who experience pleasure in happy 
things, without losing their sense of perspective. A careful 
description of these individuals shows nothing more than 
that they are approximately healthy people, in whom 
high-grade defects are not present. We cannot make this 
assertion of the other three types. 
The choleric individual is described in an old poetical 
work as a man who fiercely kicks aside a stone which lies in 
his way, while the sanguine individual comfortably walks 
around it. Translated into the language of Individual Psy­
chology, the choleric individual is one whose striving for 
power is so tense that he makes more emphatic and violent 
movements, feeling that he is forced at all times to produce 
evidence of his power. He is interested only in overcoming 
аП obstacles in a straight-line aggressive approach. In re­
ality, the more intense movements of these individuals be­
gin early in their childhood, where they lack a feeling of 
their power, and must demonstrate it constantly to be con­
vinced of its existence. 
The melancholic type makes quite a different impres­
sion. To maintain the simile which we have mentioned, the 
melancholic individual, on seeing the stone, would remem­
ber all his sins, begin brooding sadly about his past life, 
and turn back. Individual Psychology sees in him the out­
spokenly hesitating neurotic who has no confidence in ever 

182 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
overcoming his difficulties or of getting ahead, who prefers 
not to risk a new adventure, who would rather remain 
standing stiH than to proceed to a goal; if such an individ-
ual does go on, he begins every movement with the greatest 
caution. I n his life, doubt plays a predominant role. This 
type of man thinks much more of himself than of the oth-
ers, which eventually excludes him from the greater pos-
sibility of finding adequate contacts with life. He is so 
oppressed with his own cares that he can stare only into the 
past, or spend his time in fruitless introspection. 
The phlegmatic individual in general is a stranger to 
life. He gathers impressions without deducing the appro-
priate conclusions from them. Nothing makes a great im-
pression upon him, he is hardly interested in anything, he 
makes no friends, in short he has almost no connections 
with life: of all types he perhaps stands at the greatest 
distance from the business of living. 
We may therefore conclude that the sanguine individual 
alone can be a good human being. Clearly defined tempera-
ments however are seldom found. For the most part one 
deals with admixtures of one or more, and this very circum-
stance robs the lore of temperament of all value. Nor are 
these "types" and "temperaments" fixed. We find, fre-
quently, that one temperament dissolves into another, as 
when a child who begins as a choleric individual, later be-
comes melancholic, and ends his life the picture of the 
phlegmatic habitus. The sanguine individual seems to be 
that one who has been least exposed to the feeling of in-
feriority in his childhood, who has shown fewest important 
bodily infirmities, and has been subjected to no strong ir-
ritations, with the result that he developed quietly, with 
a certain love for life, which enables him to approach it on 
a sure footing. 
At this point science enters the lists and declares: "Tem-

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
183 
peraments are dependent upon the glands of internal se-
cretion."
 1 One of the latest developments in medical science 
has been the recognition of the importance of endocrine 
secretions. The glands of internal secretion are the thyroid, 
the pituitary, the adrenals, the parathyroids, and the is-
lands of Langerhans in the pancreas, the interstitial glands 
of the testes and ovaries, together with certain other his-
tological structures, the functions of which are but vaguely 
understood. These glands have no ducts but pour their 
secretions directly into the blood. 
The general impression is that all organs and tissues 
are influenced in their growth and activity by these en-
docrine secretions which are carried by the blood to every 
single cell in the body. These secretions act as activators 
or detoxicants and are essential to life, but the full signifi-
cance of these endocrine glands is still veiled in darkness. 
The whole science of endocrine secretion is only in its begin-
nings and positive facts concerning the function of the 
endocrine juices are few and far between. But since this 
young science has demanded recognition, and has attempted 
to direct the line of psychological thought as regards char-
acter and temperament, in affirming that these secretions 
determine character and temperament, we must say some-
thing more about them. 
To begin with, let us deal with one important objection. 
I f we see an actual disease process, such as cretinism, in 
which the thyroid gland is deficiently active, it is quite true 
that we also find psychic manifestations, comparable to the 
last degree of the phlegmatic temperament. Without going 
into the fact that these individuals appear puffy and 
bloated, that the growth of their hair is pathological, and 
that they develop a particularly thick skin, they show extra-
iCf. Kretachmer's Character and Temperament—Berlin 1921. 

184 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
ordinary slowness and lassitude in their movements. Their 
psychic sensitivity is markedly lessened and their initiative 
is almost absent. 
Should we now compare this case with another case which 
we could designate as phlegmatic, although no demonstra-
ble pathological changes in the thyroid gland were present, 
we should find two entirely different pictures, with entirely 
dissimilar character traits. One might therefore say that 
seemingly there is something in the secretion of the thyroid 
gland which helps to maintain an adequate psychic func-
tion ; we cannot, however, go so far as to say that the phleg-
matic temperament arises out of the loss of this secretion 
of the thyroid gland. 
The pathologically phlegmatic type is something entirely 
different from that which we are used to calling phlegmatic; 
the psychologicaUy phlegmatic character and temperament 
is distinguished from the pathologically phlegmatic, en-
tirely by the previous psychological history of the indivi-
dual. The phlegmatic types with which we as psychologists 
are interested are by no means static individuals. We shall 
often be surprised to find what astonishingly deep and 
violent reactions sometimes occur in them. There is no 
phlegmatic individual who has been phlegmatic all his life. 
We will learn that his temperament is but an artificial 
shell, a defense mechanism (for which he may have had, 
conceivably, a constitutionally determined tendency in his 
life) which an oversensitive being has created for himself, 
a fortification which he has thrown up between himself and 
the outer world. The phlegmatic temperament is a defense 
mechanism, a meaningful response to the challenge of ex-
istence, and in this sense entirely dissimilar to the sense-
less slowness, indolence, and inadequacy of a cretin whose 
thyroid gland is completely inadequate. 
Even in those cases in which it would seem that only 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
185 
those patients who previously had an incompetent thyroid 
secretion acquired a phlegmatic temperament, this impor-
tant and significant objection is not over-ruled. This is not 
the crux of the whole question. What actually is at stake 
is a whole complex bundle of causes and purposes, a whole 
system of organ activity plus external influences, which 
produce a feeling of inferiority. From this feeling of in-
feriority originates the attempt of the individual who can 
develop a phlegmatic temperament, to shield himself from 
unpleasant insults and injuries to his personal self esteem, 
in this way. But this means only that we are here dealing 
specifically with a type of whom we have already spoken in 
general. Here the deficiency of the thryoid gland is a spe-
cific organ inferiority, and its consequences assume a domi-
nant role. And this organ inferiority gives rise to a more 
strained attitude toward life for which the individual at-
tempts compensation through psychic tricks, of which the 
phlegmatic habitus is a well known example. 
We shall be confirmed in our conception when we take 
into consideration other anomalies of internal secretion and 
examine the temperaments which belong to them. Thus 
there are individuals who have an exaggerated thyroid se-
cretion, as in Basedow's disease, or goiter. The physical 
signs of this disease are over-activity of the heart, high 
pulse-frequency, exophthalmos or bulging eyes, swelling 
of the thyroid gland, and the greater or lesser tendency of 
the extremities, particularly the hands, to tremble. Such 
patients perspire easily, and their gastro-intestinal appara-
tus frequently labors under greater difficulties as a result 
of the secondary influence of the thyroid secretion upon 
that of the pancreas. Such patients are highly sensitive and 
easily irritated, and they are marked by a hasty, irritated, 
trembling activity, often associated with well marked anx-
iety states. The picture of a typical exophthalmic goiter 

186 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
patient is unmistakably that of an over-anxious human 
being. 
To say, however, that this is identical with the picture 
of psychological anxiety, is to commit a grave error. The 
psychological phenomena which one sees in exophthalmic 
goiter, the anxiety states, the inability to do certain bodily 
or mental work, the easy fatigue and great weakness, are 
conditioned not only by psychic causes, but also by organic 
ones. A comparison with a human being who suffers from a 
hurry and anxiety neurosis shows an immense contrast. In 
marked contrast to those individuals whose psychic over­
activity is a result of hyperthyroidism, whose character is 
secondary to a chronic intoxication, who are so to speak 
drunk on thyroid secretion are those other excitable, hasty, 
anxious individuals who belong in an entirely different 
category, for their position is determined almost entirely 
by their previous psychic experiences. The hyperthyroid 
individual certainly shows similarities in behavior, but his 
activity lacks that planfulness and purposefulness which is 
the essential index of character and temperament. 
Other glands with internal secretion must акзо be dis­
cussed here. The connection between the development of the 
various glands of internal secretion and the development 
of the testes and ovaries is especially important.
1 Our con­
tention which has become one of the fundamental tenets 
of biological research, is that one never finds anomalies of 
the glands of internal secretion without also finding anoma­
lies of the gonads, or sexual glands. The especial depen­
dency, and the reason for the simultaneous appearance of 
these inferiorities, has never been fully determined. In the 
case of organic defects in these glands too, the same conclu-
i Cf. Alfred Adler, Organ Inferiority and Its Psychio Compensa­
tion—Adler, Studie uber die Minderwertigkeit von Organen. 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
187 
sions which we might have been led to deduce in other or-
ganic inferiorities, are to be drawn. Where the gonads are 
insufficient we find an individual with organic difficulties 
who finds it more difficult to adjust himself to life, and in 
consequence must produce a greater number of psychie 
tricks and defense mechanisms to aid him in making the 
adjustment. 
Enthusiastic investigators of the endocrine glands have 
led us to expect that character and temperament were 
whoUy dependent upon the endocrine secretions of the 
sexual glands. I t appears however, that extensive anomalies 
in the glandular substance of the testes and ovaries are 
infrequently found. In those cases where pathological de-
generations are present, we are dealing with the exceptional 
cases. There is no particular psychic habitus which is di-
rectly connected with the defective function of the sexual 
glands, which would not originate much more frequently 
in the specific diseases of the sexual glands; we find no solid 
medical foundation for an endocrine basis of character 
such as the endocrinologists claim. That certain stimiüi, 
necessary for the vitality of the organism, arise from the 
sexual glands, and that these stimuH may determine the 
position of the child in his environment, is undeniable. Yet 
these stimuli may be produced by other organs as well, and 
they are not necessarily the basis of a specific psychic struc-
ture. 
Since putting a value on a human being is a difficult and 
delicate task, in which an error may decide between life 
and death, we must issue a warning here. The temptation 
on the part of children who come into the world with con-
genitally weak organs to acquire particular psychic tricks 
and artifices as a compensation is very great. But this 
temptation to develop a peculiar psychic structure can Ъе 
overcome. There is no organ, no matter in what condition 

188 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
it is, which would necessarily and irrevocably force an 
individual to some particular attitude in life. I t may dis-
hearten him, but that is another matter. View points simi-
lar to that we have just mentioned can exist solely because 
no one has ever attempted to obviate the difficulties in the 
psychic development of children with organic inferiorities. 
One has allowed them to lapse into errors as a result of 
their inferiorities; one has examined and observed them, 
but not attempted to help, or to stimulate them! The new 
positional or contexual psychology which has been founded 
upon the experiences of Individual Psychology will prove 
its rightness in consequence of its teachings on this score, 
and will force the present dispositional or constitutional 
psychology to strike its colors. 
V I . 
RECAPITULATION 
Before we go to the consideration of single character 
traits let us review in brief the points which we have al-
ready discussed. We have made the important contention 
that the understanding of human nature can never be 
learned by the examination of isolated phenomena which 
have been withdrawn from their entire psychic context and 
relationships. I t is essential for this understanding that 
we compare at least two phenomena which are separated by 
as great a time as possible, and connect them within a uni-
fied behavior pattern. This particular device has proven 
itself very useful; it enables us to gather a whole mass of 
impressions and condense them, by systematic arrange-
ments, into a sound evaluation of character. I f we were to 
base our judgment upon isolated phenomena we should find 
ourselves in the same difficulties which beset other psychol-
ogists and pedagogues and thus be under the necessity of 
utilizing those traditional criteria which we have always 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
189 
found useless and sterile. I f we can succeed, however, in 
gaining a number of points where we can apply the lever-
age of our system, and join these into a single pattern, we 
have a system before us whose lines of force are evident, 
whose clear unit evaluation of the human being will be 
worth while. Under these circumstances alone shall we be 
standing upon solid scientific ground. Closer acquaintance-
ship with an individual may of necessity cause us to change 
or modify our judgment to a degree. Before we make any 
attempt at educational modification we must fashion for 
ourselves some clear picture of the individual to be edu-
cated according to this system. 
Various ways and means have been discussed whereby 
such a system can be fashioned, and we have used as illus-
trations, phenomena which we have either experienced in 
ourselves or we might demand of any normal being. Fur-
ther than this, we have insisted that this system which we 
have created must never lack for one factor, and that is 
the social factor. It is not enough to observe the individual 
phenomena of psychic life. We must always respect them 
in their relationship to the social life. The most important 
and valuable fundamental thesis for our communal life 
is this: The character of a human being is never the basis 
of a moral judgment, but is an index of the attitude of this 
human being toward his environment, and of his relation­
ship to the society in which he lives. 
In the elaboration of these ideas we discovered two uni-
versal human phenomena: the first one is the universal 
existence of a social feeling which binds man to man; this 
social feeling is at the basis of all great accomplish-
ments of our civilization. The social feeling is the sole 
criterion with which we may effectively measure the phe-
nomena of psychic life which has enabled us to predicate 
the available quantum of social feeling in any individual. 

190 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
We acquire a plastic impression of the human soul when 
we know how an individual stands toward society, how he 
expresses his fellowship in mankind, how he makes his 
existence fruitful and vital. Then we discovered a second 
criterion for the evaluation of character: those powers 
which are most hostile to the social feeling are the ten-
dencies and strivings toward personal power and superi-
ority. With these two points of view we can understand 
how the relation between human beings is conditioned by 
the relative degree of their social feelings, as contrasted 
to their strivings for personal aggrandisement, two tenden-
cies which are always in opposition to each other. I t is a dy-
namic game, a parallelogram of forces whose external mani-
festations are what we call character. 

C H A P T E R I I 
AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
I . V A N I T Y AND AMBITION 
As soon as the striving for recognition assumes the up-
per hand, it evokes a condition of greater tension in the 
psychic life. As a consequence, the goal of power and su-
periority becomes increasingly obvious to the individual, 
who pursues it with movements of great intensity and vio-
lence, and his life becomes the expectation of a great tri-
umph. Such an individual loses his sense of reaHty because 
he loses his connection with life, being always occupied 
with the question of what other people think about him, 
and being concerned chiefly with the impression that he 
makes. The freedom of his action is inhibited to an extraor-
dinary degree through this style of life, and his most 
obvious character trait becomes vanity. 
It is probable that every human being is vain to some 
degree; yet making an exhibit of one 's vanity is not eon-' 
sidered good form. Vanity, therefore, is frequently so dis-
guised and cloaked that it appears in the most varied 
transformations. There is a type of modesty, by way of ex-
ample, which is essentially vain. One man may be so vain 
»s never to consider the judgment of others; another seeks 
greedily after public approbation and uses it to hia own 
advantage. 
Exaggerated beyond a certain degree vanity becomes 
exceedingly dangerous. Quite beside the fact that vanity 
101 

192 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
leads an individual to aLl kinds of useless work and effort 
which is more concerned with the semblance of things than 
with their essence, and beside the fact that it causes him to 
think constantly of himself, or at the most only of other 
people 's opinion of him, its greatest danger is that it leads 
him sooner or later to lose contact with reality. He loses 
his understanding for human connections, his relations to 
life become warped. He forgets the obligations of living, 
and he loses sight especially of the contributions which 
nature demands of every man. No other vice is so well 
designed to stunt the free development of a human being 
as that personal vanity which forces an individual to ap-
proach every event and every fellow with the query: 
"What do I get out of this?" 
People are wont to help themselves out of the difficulty 
by substituting the better-sounding word "ambition" for 
vanity, or haughtiness. How many people there are who 
are exceedingly proud to tell us how ambitious they areI 
The concept "energetic" or "active" is also frequently 
used. So long as this energy proves itseK of use for society 
we can admit its value, but it is usually the rule that aU 
these terms "industry," "activity," "energy," and "go-
getting" are expressions to cloak an unusual degree of 
vanity. 
Vanity very soon prevents an individual from playing 
the game according to the rules. Much more frequently 
it causes him to be a disturber of others so that those in-
dividuals who are excluded from the satisfaction of their 
own vanity are often to be found striving to prevent oth-
ers from the full expression of their lives. Children whose 
vanity is in process of growth exhibit their valor in dan-
gerous situations and like to show weaker children how 
powerful they are. A case in point is cruelty to animals. 
Other children who are already discouraged to a certain 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
193 
degree wül attempt to satisfy their vanity with all manner 
of incomprehensible pettinesses. They will avoid the main 
arena of work and attempt to satisfy their striving for 
significance by playing an heroic role in some side show of 
life which their mood may have dictated. The people who 
are always complaining how bitter life is, and how badly 
fate has treated them, belong in this category. They are 
the ones who would let us know that if they had not been 
so badly educated, or if some other misfortune had not 
occurred to them, that they would be the leaders of today. 
They are constantly making alibis for not approaching the 
real firing front of life; the sole satisfaction for their van-
ity may be found in the dreams which they create for them-
selves. 
The average human being finds himself in difficulties 
with such individuals because he will not know how to 
criticize or evaluate them. The vain one always knows 
how to shift the responsibility for any mistakes to the 
shoulders of another. He is always right, the others are 
always wrong. In life, however, it makes little difference 
who is right and who is wrong, since the only thing which 
counts is the accomplishment of one's purpose, and the 
contribution to the lives of others. Instead of making this 
contribution, the vain individual is occupied with com-
plaints, excuses, and alibis. We are dealing here with the 
various tricks of the human soul, with attempts of in-
dividuals to maintain, at all costs, their feeling of superi-
ority, and to shield their vanity from any insult. 
The objection has frequently been made that without 
great ambition the great accomplishments of mankind 
would never have taken place. This is a false view in a 
false perspective. Since no one is entirely free of vanity, 
everyone has a certain amount of it. But it is not this van-
ity, surely, which is responsible for determining the direc-

194 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
tion his activity has taken toward universal usefukiess, 
nor has it given him the power to carry out his great ac¬
complishments! Such accomplishments can occur only un­
der the stimulus of a social feeling. A work of genius be-
comes valuable only through its social connotation. What-
ever vanity is present in its creation can only detract from 
its value, and disturb its creation; in a real work of genius 
the influence of vanity is not great. 
In the social atmosphere of our times however it is im-
possible to divorce ourselves entirely from a certain de-
gree of vanity. The recognition of this fact is in itself a 
great asset. With this recognition we touch a sore point 
of our civilization, a factor which is responsible for the 
permanent unhappiness of many human beings who are 
to be found only where there is mischief and calamity. 
These are the poor fellows who cannot get along with any-
one, who are unable to adjust themselves to life because 
their whole purpose is to appear to be more than they are. 
It is not to be wondered that they fall easily into conflicts, 
since they are concerned solely with their reputation among 
others. In the most complex entanglements which human 
beings experience we shall find the esential difficulty has 
been someone's unsuccessful attempt to satisfy his vanity. 
It is an important bit of technique on our part to be able 
to determine the degree of vanity, the direction of its 
activity, and the instruments with which it effects its ends, 
when we are attempting to understand a complicated per-
sonality. Such an understanding will always disclose how 
unhealthy vanity can be for the social feeling. Vanity, and 
the feeling for one's fellow men, are not conceivable to-
gether. These two character traits can never be joined be-
cause vanity will not allow itself to be subordinated to the 
principles of society. 
Vanity finds its fate within itself. The development of 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
195 
vanity is constantly threatened by those logical objections 
which develop out of the communäl life. Social and com-
munal life are absolute principles which are undefeatable. 
Vanity therefore, is forced to hide itself at a very early 
period of its development, disguise itself, and make de-
tours to accomplish its ead. The vain individual will al-
ways be a prey to grave doubts as to his ability to achieve 
the victories which it would seem his vanity demands; 
while he dreams and ponders, time flies. And when the 
time has gone, our vain one has the alibi that he never had 
an opportunity to show what he could do. 
In the usual case the sequence of events is something 
like this: the particular individual seeks some privileged 
position, holds himself apart from the stream of life, and, 
standing apart, observes the activity of the rest of man-
kind, with a certain mistrust because of which every fellow-
creature appears as an enemy. Vain people must assume 
positions of offense and defense. Often we will find them 
deep in doubt, entangled in important considerations that 
seem to be logical, which give them the semblance of being 
in the right; but in the course of their considerations they 
waste the main opportunities, and lose their connection 
with life and society, and forego the tasks which everyone 
must accomplish. 
Observe them more closely and we see a background of 
vanity, a desire to conquer everything and everyone, which 
reflects itself in a thousand varied forms. This vanity is 
evident in every attitude, in their dress, in their way of 
speaking, and in their contacts with human beings. I n 
short, wherever we look, we see the pictures of vain, am-
bitious individuals who make no choice in the instruments 
which will lead them to superiority. Since external mani-
festations of this sort are not very pleasant, vain people 
if they are clever, and reaUze the distance which Ues be-

196 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
tween them and the society which they deny, make every 
attempt to camouflage the outer signs of vanity. Thus we 
may find individuals who are externally modest, who vir-
tually neglect their outer appearances in order to indicate 
that they are not vain! The story is told that Socrates 
addressed a speaker who had mounted the tribune in old 
and bedraggled clothes: "Young man of Athens, your 
vanity peeps out through every hole in your robe!" 
There are people who are deeply convinced that they 
are not vain. They look only at the outside, knowing that 
vanity lies much deeper. Vanity may be expressed, for in-
stance, in that a person always demands the full stage in 
his social circle, must always have the floor, or judges a 
social gathering as good or bad according to his ability to 
maintain the center of the stage. Other individuals of this 
same sort never go into society, and seek to avoid it as 
much as possible. This avoidance of society may express 
itself in various ways. Non-acceptance of invitations, or 
coming late, or forcing one 's host to coax and flatter before 
one comes, are some of these vain tricks. Other individuals 
go into society only under very definite conditions and 
show their vanity by being very "exclusive." They proudly 
consider this as a laudable trait. Others, again show their 
vanity by wishing to be present at all social gatherings. 
One must not feel that these are unimportant and in-
significant details; they are very deeply rooted in the 
soul. I n reality a person who can be guilty of them has not 
much place in his personality for the social feeling; he is 
more apt to be a destroyer of society, than its friend. The 
poetical powers of a great writer were necessary in order 
to portray these types with all their variations. We attempt 
solely to indicate them in their bare outlines. 
The one motive which we can discover in all vanity in-
dicates that the vain individual has created a goal which 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
197 
is impossible of attainment in this life. I t is his purpose 
to be more than all others in the world, and this goal is the 
result of his feeling of inadequacy. We may suspect that 
anyone whose vanity is well marked, has little sense of his 
own worth. There may be individuals who are conscious 
that their vanity begins where their feeling of inadequacy 
becomes evident, but unless they make a fruitful use of 
their knowledge their mere consciousness is sterile. 
Vanity develops at a veiy early period. There is usually 
something very puerile about all vanity, and as a result, 
vain individuals always impress us as being somewhat 
childish. The situations which may determine the develop-
ment of vanity are varied. In one case a child feels him-
self neglected because, as a result of inadequate education, 
he senses his littleness as unbearably oppressive. Other 
children acquire a certain haughtiness as a result of their 
family tradition. W'e can be certain their parents, too, 
assumed such an "aristocratic" bearing, which distin-
guished them from others, and made them very proud. 
But beneath this attitude there lies nothing but the at-
tempt to consider oneself a particularly exclusive human 
being, different from all other human beings, born in a 
family which is "better" than all other families, which 
has "better" and "higher" sensibilities, which feels itseH 
predestined, by virtue of its genealogy, to maintain a cer-
tain privilege in life. The demand for such privilege also 
gives a direction to life, and determines a type of behavior 
and its forms of expression. Since life is little adapted to 
the favorable development of such types, since such indi-
viduals with their demand for special privileges are either 
antagonized or ridiculed, many of them withdraw timidly 
and lead a hermit, or an eccentric, existence. As long as 
they remain at home where they are not responsible to any-
one they can maintain their intoxication, and feel them-

198 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
selves reinforced in their attitude by believing that they 
might have aceompUshed their purpose if things had been 
otherwise. 
Occasionally, capable, important individuals who have 
developed themselves to the highest degree are to be found 
in this type. I f they were to throw their talents into the 
scales, they might be of some value, but they misuse their 
abilities in order to intoxicate themselves further. The con-
ditions which they set for an active cooperation with soci-
ety are not easily satisfied. They may, for instance, place 
unfulfillable conditions on time, pointing to the fact that 
they used to do things, or had learned things, or had 
known other things; again, they make alibis, saying that 
others had done or had not done things, according to their 
system. Their conditions may be impossible of satisfac-
tion because of still more evanescent reasons. They wiU 
assert, for instance, that all would have gone well if men 
were really men, or if women had not been what they were. 
But these conditions could not be fulfilled even with the 
best intentions! We must conclude, therefore, that they 
are really only lazy alibis as valuable as hypnotic or in-
toxicant drugs which rob one of the necessity of having 
to think about the time one has wasted. 
There is a great deal of hostility in these people, and 
they are inclined to take the pain and sorrow of others 
lightly. This is the mechanism whereby they achieve a 
feeling of greatness. La Rochefoucault, a great knower of 
human nature, said of most people "They can bear the 
pains of others easily." Social hostility often expresses it-
self in the assumption of a sharp, critical manner. These 
enemies of society are forever blaming, criticizing, ridicul-
ing, judging, and condemning the world. They are dis-
satisfied with everything. But it is not enough only to rec-

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
199 
ognize the bad, and condemn i t ! One must ask oneself: 
"What have I done to make these things better?" 
The vain character is satisfied with elevating himself 
over the rest of humanity by a trick, and etching the char-
acter of others with the sharp acid of his criticism. It is not 
strange that such individuals occasionally develop a fine 
technique, since they have extraordinary practice and train-
ing in it. Individuals who are the greatest wits, whose 
quickness and readiness of repartee are remarkable, are to 
be found among them. One can do mischief with wit and 
quickness of perception as with everything else, and, as is 
the case with the satirists, make sport and mischief with it. 
The derogatory, deprecating fashion of such individuals, 
who cannot criticize too much, is their expression of a char-
acter trait which is common enough. We have caUed this 
the deprecation complex. I t indicates actuaUy what the 
point of attack of the vain person is: it is the worth and 
value of his fellow man. The deprecation tendency is an 
attempt to create the feeling of superiority by the degra-
dation of one's fellows. The recognition of another's worthy 
is equivalent to an insult to the vain one's personality.V 
From this fact alone we can draw far reaching conclusions, 
and learn how deeply rooted in the personality of a vain in-
dividual his feeling of weakness and inadequacy is. 
Since no one of us is quite free of this taint we can use 
this discussion very well to apply a standard to ourselves, 
even though we are not capable of uprooting, in a short 
time, what thousands of years of tradition has aUowed to 
grow up in us. I t will nevertheless be a step in advance if 
we will not allow ourselves to be hoodwinked and entangled 
in prejudices which eventually will be proven disadvan-
tageous and dangerous. I t is not our desire to be different 
human beings, nor to seek different human beings. Yet we 

200 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
feel that a natural law demands that we stretch out our 
hands to join, and cooperate with, our fellow-men. I n an 
age like ours which demands so much cooperation, there 
is no longer place for the strivings of personal vanity. I t is 
in just such an epoch as ours that the contradictions of a 
vain attitude toward life appear especially obvious and 
crass, since we see daily how vanity leads to failure, and 
eventually brings its bearers under the severe fire of so-
ciety, or places them in need of that society's sympathy. 
At no time was vanity more objectionable than today. 
The least we can do is search for better forms and mani-
festations of vanity, so that if we must be vain, we will at 
least exercise our vanity in the direction of the common 
weal! 
The following case is an excellent demonstration of the 
dynamics of vanity. A young woman, the youngest of sev-
eral sisters, was very much pampered from the earliest 
days of her life. Her mother was at her service day and 
night, and satisfied her every wish. As a result of this solic-
itude the demands of this youngest child, who was very 
weak physically, as well, mounted into the realm of the 
immeasurable. One fine day she made the discovery that 
her mother lorded it over her environment whenever she 
was siek; and it did not take the young lady long to leara 
that sickness might be a very valuable asset. 
She soon swallowed the disinclination which normal 
healthy people feel toward sickness, and it was not at aU 
unpleasant for her to feel badly, from time to time. Soon 
she acquired so much training in being sick that she could 
easily be i l l whenever she desired it, and especially when 
her heart was set upon attaining some special object. Un-
fortunately she was constantly desirous of obtaining some 
special object, with the result that, so far as her environ-
ment was concerned, she became chronically iU. The mani-

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
201 
festations of this "sickness complex" in children and 
grown-ups who feel their power growing, and are enabled 
to occupy the center of their families, and exercise an un-
bounded domination over them by virtue of their illness, 
are many. When we have to deal with tender, weak in-
dividuals the possibilities of this way to power are enor-
mous, and naturally it is just such individuals who find 
this way to power, since they have already tasted the con-
cern which their relatives show for their health. 
In such a situation an individual can play certain ac-
cessory tricks to gain his ends. By way of beginning, for 
instance, one does not eat enough; the result is one looks 
badly, and the family must go to great lengths to cook 
delicacies for its sick member, and presto!, in the process, 
the desire to have someone constantly dancing attendance 
upon one develops. These are the people who cannot bear to 
be alone. Simply by feeling ill, or being in danger, one 
acquires the beloved attention. This is easily arranged by 
identifying onself with a dangerous situation, or with some 
sickness. 
The ability to identify oneself with a thing or situation 
we call empathy. I t is well demonstrated in our dreams in 
which we feel as though some specific situation actually was 
taking place. Once the victims of the "sickness complex" 
assume that mode of acquiring power, they succeed very 
easily in producing and conjuring up a feeling of malaise 
so cleverly that there can be no talk of a lie, or distortion, 
or imagination. We know very well that the identification 
with a situation can produce the same effect as if that 
situation were actually present. We know that such indi-
viduals can actually vomit, or produce a real feeling of 
anxiety, just as though they actually were nauseated or 
in danger. Usually they betray themselves in the manner in 
which they produce these symptoms; this young woman of 

202 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
whom we were speaking, for instance, declared that she 
sometimes had a fear "as if I would have an apoplectic 
stroke any moment." There are people who can imagine a 
thing so clearly that they actually lose their equilibrium, 
and one cannot talk of imagination or simulation. All that 
is necessary is that one of these sickness champions suc-
ceeds once in impressing his environment with the signs of 
a disease, or at least with so-called "nervous" symptoms. 
Thereafter everyone who has once been impressed must 
remain at the side of the "patient," take care of him, and 
attend to his well being. The sickness of a fellow man chal-
lenges the social feeling of every normal human being. 
This fact is misused and constituted into a basis of a feel-
ing of power by individuals of the type which we have 
just described. 
The opposition to the laws of society and communal 
life which demand such far reaching considerations .of 
one's fellow men, becomes very evident under such circum-
stances. We shall find as a rule that these individuals 
whom we have been describing are unable to understand 
the pain or happiness of their fellow-men. I t will be diffi-
cult for them not to injure the rights of their neighbors; 
to be helpful to their fellows is entirely beyond their in-
terests. Occasionally they may succeed in life, as a result 
of terrific efforts, and by virtue of the mobilization of their 
entire armament of education and culture; more often 
their efforts will be directed towards attaining only the 
outward show of interest in the welfare of their fellows. 
Essentially, nothing but self k>ve and vanity is the basis 
of their conduct. 
Certainly this is true of the young woman we have just 
described. Her solicitude for her relatives seemingly ex-
ceeded all bounds. I f her mother were to bring her break-
fast to her bed, half an hour late, it would cause her to 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
203 
beworried and concerned; under such circumstances she 
was not satisfied until she had awakened her husband, 
and forced him to investigate whether something had not 
happened to her mother. In the course of time her mother 
accustomed herself to appear very punctually with the 
young woman's breakfast. Much the same thing happened 
to her husband. Being a business man, he had to consider 
his customers and business associates to some extent, yet 
every time he appeared at home a few minutes late he 
found his wife almost on the verge of a nervous break-
down, shivering with anxiety, bathed in perspiration, bit-
terly complaining how she had been the prey of the most 
horrible apprehensions and presentiments. Her poor hus-
band could but follow the example of her mother and 
force himself to be punctual. 
Many people will object that this woman really got no 
benefit from her actions and that these in reality were no 
great triumphs. One must keep in mind that we have de-
scribed but a small part of the whole; her sickness is a 
danger sign which says, '' Take care!'' It is an index of aU 
the other relationships in her life. With this simple device 
she put everyone in her environment into training. The 
satisfaction of her vanity played an essential role in the 
satisfaction of her boundless desire to dominate her envi-
ronment. Imagine the length to which such an individual 
must go to accomplish his purpose! We must deduce that 
her attitude and behavior had become an utter necessity 
for her when we realLze what a high price she was paying 
for them! She could not live quietly unless her words were 
obeyed unconditionally and punctually. But marriage con-
sists in more than having one 's husband punctual. A thou-
sand other relationships are fixed by the imperative con-
duct of this woman, who has learned how to reinforce her 
commands with anxiety states. She is seemingly intensely 

204 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
concerned with the welfare of others, yet everyone must 
unconditionally obey her will. We can make only one con-
clusion, her solicitude is an instrument for the satisfaction 
of her vanity. 
It is not unusual to find a psychic attitude of this nature 
assuming such proportions that the accomplishment of a 
person's will becomes more important than the thing which 
he desires. This is exemplified by the case of a six-year-
old girl whose egotism was so boundless that she was con-
cerned solely with the accomplishment of any random 
whim that happened to be in her thought at any particular 
moment. Her behavior was permeated by the desire to 
show her powers in the conquest of her associates. This 
conquest usually was the result of her activity. Her mother, 
who was very anxious to remain on good terms with her 
daughter, once attempted to surprise the child with her 
favorite dessert, bringing it to her with the words, " I 
have brought you this dessert because I know that you 
like it so much." The little girl crashed the plate to the 
ground, trampled on the cake and cried out, "But Idon't 
want it because you are giving it to me, I want it only when 
I want i t . " Another time this same mother asked whether 
this little girl would like to have coffee or miUi for lunch. 
The Httle girl stood in the doorway and murmured very 
clearly, " I f she says coffee I will drink milk, and if she 
says mihc I will drink coffee!'' 
This was a child who spoke her mind plainly, but there 
are many children who are in the same class who do not 
express their thoughts so distinctly. Perhaps every child 
has this trait to a degree and is at great odds to accom-
plish its will, even though it has nothing to gain, and 
may even suffer pain and unhappiness as a result of having 
its own way. For the most part these wih" be the ehildren 
in whom the privilege of having their own way has been 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
205 
aUowedto develop. Opportunities for this are not hard to 
find nowadays. Consequently among adults we will find 
people who are anxious to have their own way much more 
frequently than those who desire to help their fellows. 
Some go so far in their vanity that they are incapable of 
doing anything which another has suggested to them, even 
though this is the most self-understood procedure in the 
world, and really signifies their own happiness. These are 
the people who cannot wait until another has finished 
speaking in order to raise their objections and their oppo-
sition. And there are some people whose will is spurred 
on by their vanity to such an extent that they actually 
say "no!" when they want to say "yes!" 
To have one 's own way all the time is possible only within 
the circle of one's family, and not always there. Individ-
uals whose contacts with strangers are amiable and com-
plaisant are often to be found. This contact does not 
last long, however, is quickly broken off, and surely sought 
for but seldom. Since Hfe is as it is, and human beings are 
constantly being brought together, it is not unusual to find 
some such individual who wins the hearts of all, but once 
having won them, leaves them in the lurch. Many strive 
constantly to circumscribe their activities within the circle 
of their family life. This process occurred in the case of 
our patient. As a consequence of her charming character 
she was known outside of her home as a delightful person, 
was universally beloved, but whenever she left her home, 
she returned very soon. The desire to return to her family 
was indicated by a variety of tricks. I f she went to a party 
she got a headache (because at any social gathering she 
could not maintain the feeling of her absolute power to 
the degree which she was capable of maintaining at 
home), and had to return. Since this woman could not 
solve the main problem of her life, the problem of the satis-

206 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
faction of her vanity, except in the center of her family 
life, she was forced to arrange something to drive her 
back to this family whenever necessary. She carried on to 
the extent that she was seized by anxiety and excitement 
every time that she went among strangers. Soon she could 
not go to the theater, and, finally, she could not appear 
upon the street because in these situations she lost the 
feeling that the whole world was subject to her will. The 
situation which she sought was not to be found outside of 
her family and particularly not upon the street; as a result 
she declared her disinclination to appear outside of her 
home except when accompanied by the persons of her 
"court." This was the ideal situation which she loved: to 
be surrounded constantly by solicitous people who were 
occupied with her welfare. As the examination showed she 
had carried this pattern with her from early childhood. 
She was the youngest, the weakest, the sickest, and was 
under the necessity of being more pampered and eared 
for than the others. She seized upon the situation of the 
pampered child, and would have maintained it at all costs 
throughout her life had she not disturbed the inexorable 
conditions of Hfe which are sharply opposed to this type 
of behavior. Her unrest and her anxiety states, which were 
so outspoken that no one could deny them, betrayed the 
fact that she had become side-tracked in the solution of 
her vanity problem. The solution was inadequate because 
she did not have the will to subordinate herself to the 
conditions of social life and thus, finally, the manifestations 
of her inability to solve this problem became so painful 
that she sought the help of a physician. 
Now it was necessary to unveil the whole super-structure 
of her life which she had so carefully constructed during 
the course of many years. Great resistances had to be 
overcome because essentially she was not prepared to 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
207 
change, though outwardly she appealed to the physician 
for help. What she really desired was to keep on ruling 
her family as before, without having to pay the price of 
the torturing anxiety states which pursued her upon the 
streets. But one was not to be had without the other! She 
was shown how she was a prisoner within the cage of her 
own unconscious behavior whose advantages she wished to 
enjoy, but whose disadvantages she wished to avoid. 
This example shows all too clearly how every consider-
able degree of vanity acts as a continuous load through-
out life, inhibits the full development of a human being, 
and finally leads to his breakdown. The patient cannot 
understand these things clearly so long as his attention is 
directed only to its advantages. Por this reason so many 
people are convinced that their ambition, which might 
more appropriately be called vanity, is a valuable char-
acteristic because they do not understand that this char-
acter trait constantly dissatisfies a human being, and robs 
him of his rest and sleep. 
Let us add still another example to prove our thesis. A 
young man of twenty-five must take his final examinations. 
He did not present himself for the examinations however, 
because he suddenly lost his entire interest in the subject. 
Hounded by the most unpleasant mood, he deprecated his 
own value, and was so saturated with the thought, that he 
had finally become incapable of taking his examinations. 
Remembrances dating back from his childhood were per-
meated with violent reproaches against his parents whose 
lack of understanding for his development had distinctly 
hindered him. While he was in this mood he also thought 
all human beings were valueless and without interest to 
him; in this way he succeeded in effecting his isola-
tion. 
Vanity proved itself to be the driving force which con-

208 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
stantly furnished him with the alibis and excuses for 
avoiding all tests of his power. Now, just before his final 
examinations, he was overcome with these compulsive 
thoughts, tortured by his lack of desire, and his stage 
fright, which made him perfectly incapable of taking them. 
All this was of extreme importance to him because if he 
did not now achieve anything remarkable his "personality 
feeling," his sense of his own value, was still saved. He 
carried his life preserver with him at all times! With it he 
was safe, consoling himself with the thought that sickness 
and blind fate had determined his inaptitude. We see but 
another form of vanity in this attitude which prevents 
an individual from putting himself to the test. It enables 
him to make his detour at just that moment in which a 
decision concerning his ability is imminent. He thinks of 
the glory which he would lose in defeat, begins to doubt 
his own ability; he has learned the secret of all those who 
can never trust themselves to make a decision! 
Our patient belongs to this group of human beings. His 
own report of himself shows that he was, as a matter of 
fact, always one of them. Every time that the necessity 
for a decision approached, he vacillated and weakened. 
Being interested only in the study of movements and pat-
terns of action, this gesture signifies to us that he desires 
to stop, to brake his progress. 
He was the oldest child and the only boy among four 
sisters; he was besides, the only one who was designated 
for college career. He was, so to speak, the high-light of 
the family, for whom great expectations were held. His 
father had never lost an opportunity to spur on his am-
bition, and was never tired of telling him of the great 
things that he would accomplish. This boy had the desire to 
be more than everyone eke in the world, as an ever present 
goal before his eyes. And now, seized with uncertainty and 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
209 
anxiety, he wonders whether he will ever aetuaUy accom­
plish what is awaited of him. Vanity comes to his rescue, 
and points the way to retreat. 
This shows us how, in the development of an ambitious 
vanity, the dice which make progress impossible are cast. 
Vanity comes to grips with the social feeUng and out of 
their tangled combat no escape is possible. Despite this 
fact we may observe how vain natures constantly break 
through their social feeling from their eariiest childhood, 
and attempt to go their own isolated way. They remind us 
of people who imagine the plan of a strange city accord­
ing to their own fantasy, and theh go waUdng about that 
city, with their imaginary plan, looking for imaginary 
buildings where they have themselves fantastically located 
them. Naturally they never find what they are looking 
for! And poor reality gets the blame. This is the approxi­
mate fate of the egoistic, vain human being. He attempts 
to attain his principle, either by power, or by craft and 
treachery, in all his relationships with his feUow-men. 
He watches for the opportunity to show that others are 
wrong and are making mistakes. He is happy when he 
succeeds in demonstrating, at least to himself, that he is 
cleverer or better than his feUows. But his fellows pay no 
attention to him, they take his gage of battle. The fight 
goes from defeat to victory, but when it ends, our vain 
friend is convinced of his rightness and his superiority. 
These are cheap tricks by which anyone can imagine 
whatever he wishes to believe. I t may thus happen, as in 
our case, that an individual who ought to be studying, 
who should be subordinating himself to the wisdom of a 
book, or submitting himself to an examination where his 
true value would appear, becomes aware of his own de­
ficiencies in the false perspective with which he views аД 
things. He overrates the situation, consequently, and be-

210 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
Heves that his whole happiness in life, his whole success, 
is at stake. Of necessity he falls into a state of tension 
which no human being can bear. 
Every other contact acquires the value of an enormous 
event for him, every address, every word, is valued from 
the standpoint of his own victory or defeat. It is a con-
tinuous battle which eventually drives an individual who 
has made vanity, ambition, false hopes, his behavior pat-
tern in life, into new difficulties and robs him of all true 
happiness in Hfe. Happiness is to be had only when the 
conditions of üfe are affirmed, but when these veritable 
not-to-be-avoided conditions are pushed aside, he blocks 
all paths to happiness and joy to himself, and fails in aU 
those things which mean satisfaction and happiness to 
others. The best that he can do is to dream of his super-
iority and domination over others, despite the fact that he 
finds them in no wise reaLized. 
If he ever possessed such superiority, he would have no 
difficulty in finding enough people whose pleasure it would 
be to contest it with him. There is no antidote for this. No 
one can be forced to admit someone ekse 's superiority. What 
remains is the poor man's own mysterious, uncertain judg-
ment about himself. I t is hard to make any contacts with 
one's feLIows or to reach any real success, when one is in-
volved in such a pattern of life. No one wins in this game! 
The players are forever exposed to assault and deetruction. 
Theirs is the bitter duty to appear great and superior at 
aU times! 
It is quite a different thing when the reputation of a 
man is justified by his services to others. His honor then 
comes to him of itself, and if it is opposed by others, their 
opposition has little weight. He can remain quietly in the 
possession of his honor because he has not staked every-
thing upon vanity. The deciding point is the egoistic at-

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
211 
titude, the constant search for the elevation of one's own 
personality. The vain r61e is always that of expectation 
and acquisition. Contrast your vain person with that other 
individual who shows a well developed social feeling, who 
goes through life with the question, "What can I give?", 
and you will see the enormous differences in character and 
in value immediately. 
And so we arrive at a point of view which people have 
understood for thousands of years. I t is expressed in a 
famous Biblical line: '' It is more blessed to give than to re-
ceive." I f we reflect over the meaning of these words, the 
expression of great experience in human nature, we ree-
ognize that it is the attitude and mood of giving which is 
meant here. I t is the mood of giving, or serving, of help-
ing, which brings with itself a certain compensation and 
psychic harmony, like the gift of the gods which takes 
root in him who gives it away! 
On the other hand the acquisitive people are usually dis-
contented, being occupied solely with the thought of what 
they must still achieve and still possess, in order to be 
happy. The acquisitive man, whose look is never directed 
toward the necessities and needs of others, and to whom 
the misfortune of others is a joy, has no place in his sys-
tem for reconciliation and peace with life. He demands the 
unbending submission of others to laws which his egoism has 
dictated. He demands a different heaven from the one 
which exists, a different way of thinking and feeling; in 
short, his dissatisfaction and immodesty are as execrable as 
everything else which is characteristic of him. 
There are the other and more primitive forms of vanity 
which we find in those people who dress conspicuously, or 
with a certain sense of their own importance, who deck 
themselves out like monkeys in order to make a brave ap-
pearance, in much the same way that primitive man at-

212 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
tempts to shine by wearing an especially long feather in 
his hair when he has reached a certain degree of pride 
and honor. There are a number of human beings who find 
the greatest satisfaction in always being dressed beauti-
 1 
fully, and according to the latest fashion. The various orna-
ments which such individuals carry indicate their vanity 
just as much as so many standards, belligerent emblems, 
or weapons, whose purpose, when rightly understood, is to 
scare off the enemy. Somtimes this vanity is expressed by 
erotic emblems, or by tatooing which seems frivolous to us. 
In these cases we have a feeling that the individual is 
striving to make an impression, though he can do so only 
at the cost of shamelessness. Shameless behavior lends the 
feeling of greatness and superiority to some; others again 
have this same feeling when they appear hard, brutal, stub-
born, or isolated. In reality these may be individuals who 
are closer to tenderness than to bad manners, whose quon-
dam brutality is but a pose. I n boys especially we find 
a seeming lack of feeling which is, in effect, a hostile at-
titude toward the social feeling. Individuals who are im-
pelled by this type of vanity, who desire to play a role 
through which others suffer, would be insulted by any 
appeal to their finer feelings. Such an appeal would simply 
cause them to stiffen their attitude. We have seen cases 
in which the parents approach a child, pleading their 
pain, while the child whom they approach actually ac-
quires a feeling of his own superiority from the demon-
strations of their sorrows. 
We have already noted that vanity Hkes to mask itself. 
Vain people who would like to rule others must first catch 
them in order to bind them to themselves. We must not, 
therefore, allow ourselves to be entirely duped by the ami-
ability, or friendliness, and willingness to make contacts, 
which a person may show; nor must we be deceived into 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
213 
believing that he may not nevertheless be a belligerent ag-
gressor who is looking for conquests, and to the mainte-
nance of his personal superiority. The first phase of this 
battle must be to assure one's opponent and eajole him so 
far that he loses his caution. In the first phase, that of 
friendly approach, one is easily tempted to believe that 
the aggressor is an individual with a great deal of social 
feeling; the second serves to remove the veils and show us 
our error. These are the people who disappoint us. We be-
lieve that they possess two souls, but it is but the one 
soul, which makes an amiable approach but effects a bit-
ter ending. 
The technique of approach may go so far as to assume 
the proportions of a sport: soul catching. The traits of the 
uttermost devotion may be evident, constituting in them-
selves, a certain kind of triumph. These people speak glibly 
of humanity, and seemingly show love of their fellows in 
their actions. Tet this usually occurs in so demonstrative 
a fashion, that the real lmower of the human soul becomes 
wary. An Italian criminal psychologist has said, "when 
the ideal attitude of a human being goes beyond a certain 
degree, when his philanthropy and humanity assume con-
spicuous proportions, we may well be distrustful." Natu-
rally we must take this phrase with reservations, but we 
may be quite sure that the point of view is valid. In general 
we can easily recognise the type. Bootlicking is not pleasant 
to any one. I t soon becomes uncomfortable, and one is on 
one's guard against people who make use of this form of 
flattery. We should rather be inclined to contra-indieate 
this method to ambitious people. It is better to choose a 
different approach and a smoother technique! 
We have already become acquainted in the first part 
of our book with those situations which most frequently 
cause deviations from the normal psychic development. 

214> UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
Prom an educational standpoint the difficulties lie in the. 
fact that we are dealing, in such cases, with children who 
have assumed a belligerent attitude toward their environ-
ment. Even though the teacher knows his duties, which 
are deeply based in the logic of life, he cannot make this 
logic obligatory to the child. The only possible way of 
doing this would seem to lie in avoiding any belligerent 
situation, so far as possible, and treating the child not as 
the object of education, but as the subject; as though he 
were a fully adult individual who stood on the same foot-
ing as the teacher. In this way it would not be so easy 
for a child to fall into the error of believing that he was 
under pressure, or was being neglected, and thus under 
the necessity of taking up the gage of battle with his 
teachers. Prom this battle position the false ambition of 
our culture which characterizes our thinking, our actions, 
and our character traits to such a large degree, develops 
automatically and gives occasion, first for increasingly en-
tangled relationships, to defeats of the personality, and 
finally to the complete disruption and breakdown of the 
individual. 
It is very characteristic that fairy tales, that source from 
which all of us have learned much of our understanding of 
human nature, give us a number of examples which show 
us the danger of vanity. We must here review one fairy 
tale which shows in a particularly drastic way how the un-
bridled development of vanity leads to an automatic de-
struction of the personality. It is Hans Christian Ander-
son's story of The Vinegar Jar. The story goes that 
a fisherman grants a fish he has caught, its freedom, and 
the fish, out of gratitude, permits him the fulfillment of 
a single wish. His wish is fulfilled. The dissatisfied, am-
bitious wife of the fisherman, however, demands that the 
fisherman change his bumble request and make her first 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
215 
a duchess, then a queen, and finally, God! She sends her 
fisherman husband back to the fish again and again, until 
the fish, finally infuriated at the last request, deserts the 
fisherman forever. 
There are no limits to the development of vanity and 
ambition. It is very interesting to see how in fairy tales, 
as well as in the overheated psychic striving of vain indi-
viduals, the striving for power assumes the expression of 
a desire for the ideal of God-likeness. One does not have 
to search far to find that a vain person acts exactly as 
though he were God (which happens in the most serious 
eases), or he behaves himself as though he were God's 
lieutenant, or again, he expresses wishes and desires 
which only God could fulfill. This manifestation, the striv-
ing for God-likeness, is the extreme point of a tendency 
which is present in all his activities, and amounts to a de-
sire to project himself beyond the boundaries of his per-
sonality. 
The evidences of this tendency are many in our age. That 
large group of people that interests itself in spiritualism, 
psychic research, telepathy and similar movements, is com-
posed of just such people who are anxious to grow beyond 
the boundaries of mere humanity, who are desirous of pos-
sessing powers which human beings do not possess, who 
wish to remove themselves beyond time and space, as in 
the intercourse with ghosts and the spirits of the dead. 
I f we investigate still further we shall find that a large 
portion of humanity has the tendency to secure for itself 
a little place in the vicinity of God. There are still a num-
ber of schools whose educational ideal is God-likeness. In 
former times this was, indeed, the conscious ideal of all 
reHgious education. We can only attest to the results of this 
education with horror. We must certainly look about now-
adays for a more reasonable ideal. But that this tendency 

216 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
is so deeply rooted in buman kind is quite conceivable. 
Apart from the psychological reasons the fact is that 
a large portion of humanity gets its first conception of the 
nature of man from the catch-word phrases of the Bible 
which declares that man was created in the image of God. 
We can imagine what important and what perilous conse-
quences such a conception may leave behind it in the soul 
of a child. The Bible, to be sure, is a wonderful work which 
one can constantly read and reread with astonishment at 
its perspicacity, after one's judgment has matured. But 
let us not teach 'it to children, at least not without a com-
mentary, to the end that a child may learn to be content in 
this life, without assuming all manner of magical powers, 
and demanding that everyone be his slave, ostensibly be-
cause he was created in the image of God! 
Closely related to this thirst for God-likeness is the 
ideal of the fairy-tale Utopia where every dream comes 
true. Children seldom count upon the reality of such 
fairy pictures. Yet if we take cognizance of the exceed-
ingly great interest of children in magic, then we can 
never doubt how easily they are aUured thereby, and how 
easy it is for them to sink themselves in such fantasies. 
The idea of enchantment, of a magie influence upon others, 
is found to a strong degree in some people, and may not 
be lost until they are very old. 
On one point perhaps no man is entirely free in his 
thoughts: in the matter of the superstitious feeling that 
women have a magical influence over men. One ean find 
many men who act as though they thought they were ex-
posed to the magical influence of their sexual partners. This 
superstition leads us back to a time in which this belief 
was held much more firmly than today. These were the 
days in which a woman, on the merest pretext, ran the 
danger of being called a witch or a magician, a prejudice 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
217 
which burdened the whole of Europe like a nightmare, and 
determined its history in part, for many decades. I f one re-
calls that a million women were the victims of this delusion, 
one cannot speak any longer simply of harmless mistakes, 
but must compare the influence of this superstition to the 
horrors of the Inquisition, or of the World War. 
The satisfaction of one's vanity through the misuse of 
one's desire for religious satisfaction, is also found on the 
trail of the striving for God-likeness. We have only to 
remark how important it may be to an individual who 
has suffered psychic shipwreck, to remove himseU! from 
other human beings, and engage in personal conversation 
with God! Such an individual considers himself quite in 
the proximity of God, Who is duty-bound, by virtue of the 
worshipper's pious prayers and orthodox ritual, to per-
sonally concern Himself with the worshipper's well-being. 
Such religious hocus-pocus is usually so far from true 
religion that it impresses us as being purely psychopatho-
logical. We have heard a man say that he could not fall 
asleep unless he had said some definite prayer, because 
if he had not sent this prayer to heaven, some human being 
somewhere would have a misfortune. To understand this 
whole flimsy soap-bubble-blowing it is but necessary to 
produce the negative corollary of some such statement, 
and interpret it. " I f I say my prayer no harm can come 
to him," would be the proposition in this instance. These 
are the ways in which one can easily achieve a magical 
greatness. Through this paltry trick a human being really 
succeeds in diverting a misfortune in the life of another 
human being at a definite time. In the day-dreams of 
such religious individuals we can find similar movements 
which reach out beyond, the measure of humanity. In these 
day-dreams are disclosed empty gestures, brave deeds, 
which are quite incapable of actuaUy changing the nature 

218 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
of things, hut succeed very well in the imagination of 
the day-dreamer in preventing him from coming into con-
tact with reality. 
In our civilization there is one thing which seems to have 
a magic power, and that is money. Many people beheve 
that you can do anything with money that you may wish. 
It is not strange therefore that their ambition and vanity 
occupies itself with the question of money and property 
alone. Their ceaseless striving for the acquisition of 
worldly goods now becomes comprehensible. To us it seems 
almost pathological. Again, nothing but a form of vanity 
which attempts, by the heaping up of possessions, to pro-
duce a certain semblance of the enchanter's power. One of 
those very wealthy men who, although he should have had 
quite enough, continued to chase after money, admitted 
after the beginning of a delusional insanity: '' Yes, do you 
know that (money) is the power which constantly allures 
me again and again!" This man understood it, but many 
dare not understand it. The possession of power is so. closely 
aUied with the possession of money and property today, 
and the striving for money and property seems so natural 
in our civilization, that no one pays any attention to the 
fact that many of the individuals who do nothing but chase 
after gold are spurred on by their vanity. 
In conclusion we will report another case which will 
show all the single aspects we have previously discussed, 
and at the same time give us an understanding of another 
phenomenon in which vanity pIays a great role, and that is 
the condition of delinquency. The case concerns a brother 
and sister. The brother, who was the younger, was consid-
ered untalented, whereas the older sister had a reputation 
for exceptional ability. When the brother could not main-
tain the competition any longer he gave up the race. He was 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
219 
pushed into the background although everyone attempted 
to remove difficulties from his path. At the same time he 
carried a heavy burden with him which amounted to the 
seeming acknowledgment that he was untalented. One had 
taught him from his earliest childhood days that his sister 
would always conquer the difficulties of life easily, whereas 
he was fit only for insignificant things. In this way, be-
cause of the better position of his sister, people cred-
ited him with an inadequacy which actually did not 
exist. 
Burdened with this great load he came to school. His 
was the career of a pessimistically inclined child who 
sought to avoid the discovery and recognition of his in-
ability at all costs. As he grew older there arose also the 
desire not to be forced to play the role of the stupid boy, 
but to be treated like an adult. At the age of fourteen he 
had often taken part in the society of grown-ups, but his 
deep feeling of inferiority was a thorn in his side which 
forced him to consider how he could play the role of gen-
tleman who had already grown up. 
His path thus led one day into the domain of prostitu-
tion, and there he has remained to this time. As the ex-
penditure of money was closely related to his interest in 
prostitutes, while at the same time his desire to play the 
grown-up prevented him from begging money of his fa-
ther, he began to rob his father of any funds he considered 
necessary. He was not at all pained by these thefts, and he 
considered himself somewhat in the manner of a grown-up 
who was the treasurer of his father's money. This con-
tinued until one day he was threatened with a severe fail-
ure in school. To be demoted would have been an evidence 
of his inability which he dared not publish. 
The following events now occurred: He was suddenly 

220 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
struck with pangs of remorse and conscience, which inter-
fered sadly with his studies. His situation was bettered 
by this triek because now, should he fail, he would have 
an excuse for the world. He was so martyred by his re-
morse that everyone else in a similar position would also 
have failed in their studies. At the same time a high degree 
of distraction hindered him in his studies because it forced 
him to think of other things. A day was passed in this way, 
night came and he went to sleep conscious of the fact that 
he had tried to study, although in reality he was one of 
those who did not pay the least attention to his work. 
What happened after this also helped him to carry out his 
role. 
He was forced to rise at an early hour. As a result he 
was sleepy and tired the whole day long and could not 
pay any attention whatsoever to his work. One certainly 
could not demand that he compete with his sister! Now it 
was not his lack of talent which was at fault, but the fatal 
concondtant phenomena, his remorse, the pangs of- con-
Bcienee, which left him no peace. At last he was armed on 
all sides and nothing could happen to him. I f he failed, 
there were extenuating circumstances, and no one could say 
that he was untalented. Should he succeed i t was the proof 
of his ability which no one would admit. 
When we see such tricks as these we may be sure that 
vanity i s the cause of them. In this case we can see how 
far one can expose himself even to the danger of de-
linquency in order to avoid the discovery of an alleged, 
but not actually existing, lack of talent. Ambition and 
vanity produce such complications and side tracks in 
life. They rob one of all candor and of all true pleasures, 
of all true joy and happiness in life. Examine more 
sharply and we find for cause nothing but a stupid mis-
take ! 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
221 
I I . 
JEALOUSY 
Jealousy is a character trait which is interesting be-
cause of its extraordinary frequency. By jealousy is meant 
not only the jealousy of love relationships, but also the 
jealousy which is to be found in aU other human relation-
ships. Thus, in childhood, we find children who develop 
jealousy in an attempt to be superior to one another; these 
same children may also develop ambition, and indicate 
their belligerent attitude to the world with both these 
traits. Jealousy, sister of ambition, a character trait which 
may last a life time, arises from the feeling of being neg-
lected and the sense of being discriminated against. 
Jealousy occurs almost universaUy among children with 
the advent of a younger brother or sister who demands 
more attention from his parents, and gives an older child 
occasion to feel like a dethroned king. Those children 
become especially jealous who basked in the warm sun-
shine of their parents' love previous to the advent of the 
younger child. The case of a little girl who had committed 
three murders by the time she was eight years of age, shows 
to what lengths this feeling may go. 
This little girl was a somewhat backward child who was 
prevented from doing any work because she was delicate. 
She found herself, consequently, in a relatively pleasant 
situation. This pleasant situation changed suddenly when 
she was six years old, and a sister arrived in the house-
hold. A total transformation took place in her soul, and 
she persecuted her younger sister with a ruthless hate. 
The parents, who could not understand her behavior, be-
came strict, and attempted to show this child her respon-
sibility for every misdeed. It happened that one day a little 
girl was found dead in the brook which passed by the vil-
lage in which this family lived. Some time later another 

222 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
girl was found drowned, and finally our patient was caught 
just in the moment that she had thrown a third young child 
into the water. She admitted her murders, was put into an 
insane asylum for observation, and was finally placed in a 
sanatorium for further education. 
In this case, the little girl's jealousy of her own sister 
was transferred to other young children. I t was noticed 
that she had no hostile sentiments toward boys, and it 
seemed as though she saw the picture of her younger sister 
in these murdered children, and had attempted to satisfy 
her feeling of vengeance, for her neglect, in her murderous 
deeds. 
Manifestations of jealousy can be produced even more 
easily when there are brothers and sisters. It is well known 
that in our civilization the fate of a girl child is not al-
luring; she can be easily discouraged when she sees her 
brother greeted more vociferously on his advent into the 
world, treated with greater eare and respect, and allowed 
all manner of advantages from which a girl is excluded. 
A relationship like this naturally gives rise to hostility. 
It may happen that an older sister will express her love, 
treat a younger brother like a mother, yet psychologically, 
this need not be different from the first case. I f an older 
girl assumes the mother attitude to younger children, then 
she has regained a position of power where she can act and 
behave as she will; the trick enables her to create a valu-
able asset out of a dangerous position. 
Exaggerated competition between brothers and sisters 
is one of the most frequent causes of family jealousy. A 
girl feels neglected, and drives unremittingly to overcome 
her brothers. Not infrequently, as a result of her industry 
and energy, she succeeds in outdistancing a brother, na-
ture coming to her aid in the matter. A girl develops more 
quickly, both spiritually and physically, in her adolescence, 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
223 
than a boy, although this difference is slowly equaHzed 
in the course of the following years. 
Jealousy has a thousand shapes. It may be recognized 
in mistrust and the preparation of ambushes for others, 
in the critical measurement of one's feUows, and in the 
constant fear of being neglected. Just which of these 
manifestations comes to the fore is dependent entirely 
upon the previous preparation for social life. One form 
of jealousy expresses itself in seU>destruction, another 
expresses itself in energetic obstinacy. Spoiling the sport 
of others, senseless opposition, the restriction of another's 
freedom, and his consequent subjugation, are some of the 
protean shapes of this character trait. 
Giving the other feUow a set of rules for his conduct js 
one favorite trick of jealousy. I t is this characteristic psy-
chic pattern along which an individual moves, when he at-
tempts to foist certain laws of love upon his mate, when he 
builds a waU around his loved one, or prescribes where he 
should look, what he should do, and how he should think. 
Jealousy can also be put to the purpose of degrading and 
reproaching another; these are but means to an end: to 
rob another of his freedom of will, to set him in a rut, or 
to chain him down. A magnificent description of this type 
of behavior is to be found in Dostoyevsky's novel Netots-
chka Njesivanowa, in which a man succeeds in op-
pressing his wife for her whole life, and thus expressing 
his dominance over her, by utilizing the trick we have 
just discussed. We see, therefore, that jealousy is an es-
pecially weH-marked form of the striving for power. 
I I I . 
ENVY 
Where there is a striving for power and domination, 
one can with certainty find the trait of envy in ad-

224 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
dItion. The gulf between an individual and his supernat-
urally high goal expresses itself in the form of anjnJ_erior-
j t y complex. I t oppresses him, and acquires such an influ-
ence upon his general behavior and his attitude toward life 
that one has the impression that he is a long way from his 
goal. His own low evaluation of himself, and his constant 
dissatisfaction with life are unfailing indicators thereof. 
He begins to spend his time in measuring the success_of_ 
others, in occupying himself with what others think of him, 
or of what others have accomplished. He is always the vic-
tim of a sense of neglect, and he ieeh that discrimination 
h^as been exercised against him. Such an individual may 
actually havemore than others. The various manifestations 
of this feeling of being neglected are indices of an un-
satisfied vanity, of adesire to have more than one's neigh-
b_Q.r, or indeed, to have everything. Envious people of this 
type do not say that they wish to have everything because 
the actual existence of a social feeling prevents them from 
thinking these thoughts. But they act as if they wanted to 
have everything. 
The feeljng_of enyy which grows up in the process of 
this constant measuring of others' success dQes not lead 
tg.greater possibiHtieso.f achieving happiness. The uni-
versality of the social feeling causes the universal dislike 
of envy; yet there are but few who are not capable of 
some envy. None of us is entirely free of it. In the even 
tenor of life it may often not be evident, yet when a man 
suffers, or feels himself oppressed, or lacks for money, 
food, dress, or warmth, when his hope for the future is 
darkened, and he sees no way out of his unfortunate situa-
tion, then envy appears. 
We human beings stand today in the beginning of our 
civilization. Although our ethics and our reHgion forbid 
feelings of envy, we have not yet psychologically matured 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
225 
enough to do without them. One can well understand the 
envy of the impecunious. Such envy would be incompre-
hensible only i f someone could prove that, placed in the 
same position, he would not be envious. All that we wish 
to say concerning this is that we must reckon with this 
factor in the contemporary situation in the human soul. 
The fact is that enyy arises in the individual,_ojr.in the 
group, as soon as one limits^_their activity too much_. But 
when envy appears in those most disagreeable forms which 
we cannot ever approve, we do not actuaUy know any 
means of obviating such envy and the frequently associated 
hate. One thing is clear to everyone who Hves in our so-
ciety, and that is that one should not put such tendencies 
to the test, nor provoke them; and that one should have 
sufficient tact not to accentuate any envious expressions 
which might be expected. Nothing is bettered by this 
course, it is true. Yet the_yery least w.e, .can demand o£ 
an individual is_this: tfrat he should nq\ parade any tem-
porary superiorityover his fellows. He may too easily 
injure someone by the useless exhibition of his power_. 
The inseparable connection between the individual and 
society is indicated in the origin of this character trait. Jia 
one, can lift himself aboye society, demonstrate his power 
oYejc.^hisfellows, without simultaneously arousing the op-
position of others who want to prevent his success. Envy 
forces us to institute all those measures and rules whose 
purpose is the establishment of equality in all human 
beings. Finally we come rationaUy to a thesis which we 
have felt mtuiti\e\y.Jhelaw 
of the equality of all human 
beings. This law may not be broken without immediately 
producing opposition and discord. It isone of the funda-
mental laws of human society. 
The manifestations of envy are easily recognized, some-
times, indeed, in the very look of an individual. Envious 

226 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
traits which people have long used in their figures of 
speech have a physiological concomitant. One speaks_of 
"green" or "pale" envy, pointing to the fact that envy 
influences the circulation of the blood. The organic expres-
sion of envy is found in the peripheral contraction of the 
capillary arteries. 
So far as the pedagogic significance of envy is concerned, 
we have but one course. j3ince w
e cannot entirely destroy 
it, we must make it useful. This can be done by giving it 
a channel in which it can be made fruitful, without caus-
i n g too great a shock to the psychic life. This holds good 
for the individual, as well as for a crowd. In the case of 
the individual we can prescribe an occupation which will 
elevate his self-esteem; in the life of nations, we can do 
nothing else than to show new ways to the development of 
innate, undeveloped powers to those nations which feel 
themselves neglected and watch their happier neighbors, 
fruitlessly envious of their better Eituation i n the family 
of nations. 
Anyone who has been envious all his life is useless for 
communal life. He wiU be interested solely in taking some-
thing away from another, in depriving him in some fashion, 
a n d in disturbing him. Simultaneously he will have the 
tendency to fix alibis for the goals which he has not at-
tained, and blame others for his failures. He will be a 
fighter, a marplot, one who has no great love for good re-
lationships, who has no part in the business of making him-
self useful to others. Since he hardly gives himself the 
trouble to sympathize with the situation of others, he has 
little understanding for human nature. He will not be 
moved by the fact that someone else suffers because of his 
actions. Envv mav go so faras to lead aman to feel pleas_-
u r e i n the pain of his neighbor. 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
227 
IV. 
A V A E I C E 
Avarice is closely related, and nsually found, in the bad 
company of envy. By avarice we mean not only that form 
of greed which expresses itself in the hoarding of money, 
but also that more general form which expresses itself 
chiefly in that one is unable to give pleasure to another, 
that one is avaricious in his attitude toward society, and 
every other individual. The avaricious individual builds a 
wall about himself to be secure in the possession of his 
wretched treasures. On one hand, we recognize the con-
nection with ambition and vanity, and on the other hand, 
the relationship to envy may be found. It is not an over-
statement to say that aU these character traits are usually 
present at the same time, and therefore, it is no astonish-
ing trick of mind-reading, when one has discovered one of 
these traits, to declare that the others also are present. 
Almost everyone in the civilization of today shows 
traces, at least, of avarice. The best the average man does 
is to veil it or hide it behind an exaggerated generosity, 
which is the equivalent of nothing more than the giving 
of alms, an attempt, through gestures of generosity, to 
elevate the personality-sense at the expense of others. 
Under circumstances it would appear that avarice is 
actually a valuable quality, as when it is directed toward 
certain forms of life. One may be avaricious of one's time, 
or labor, and in the course of this actually do a great piece 
of work. There is a scientific and moral tendency in our 
present day which pushes this "time-greed" into the fore-
ground, even demanding that everyone be economical of 
his time and labor. This sounds very well in theory, but 
wherever we see this thesis applied practically, we can al-
ways find that some individual goal of superiority and 

228 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
power is being served. This theoreticaUy acquired thesis 
is frequently misused, the greed for time and labor is di-
rected toward shifting the real burdens of work upon the 
shoulders of others. We can judge such activity, as all ac-
tivity, only by the standard of its universal usefulness. 
It is a characteristic of the development of our technical 
age that human beings are treated as though they were 
machines, and that laws for life are given much as laws 
are given for technical activity. I n the latter case such 
rules are often justified; but in the case of human beings 
they lead eventually to isolation, loneliness, and the de-
struction of human relationships. I t will therefore be bet-
ter to adjust our lives so that we would rather give, than 
eave. This is a law which must not be taken from its con-
text, with which one must not be anowed to practice mis-
chief; with which one cannot, indeed, do mischief if one 
keeps the common weal in mind. 
V. 
H A T E 
It is not seldom that we find hate as a characteristic of 
belligerent people. Tendencies to hate (which frequentty 
appear early in childhood) may achieve a very high in-
tensity, as in temper tantrums, while at the same time they 
appear in a milder form as nagging and maliciousness. 
TJie__degree to which anyone iscapable of hating,andnag-
gjn,g is a good index ofhis personality. We know much 
about his soul when we have learned this fact, for hate 
and malice lend the personality a characteristic color. 
Haie directs itself in various ways. It may bejpointßd 
towards various task& which one must perform, against 
sjngle individuaks, against a nation^ or a class, against a 
race, or against th.e_Qther sex, Hate does not appear openly, 
but like vanity, knows how to mask itself and appear, for 

AGGRESSP7E CHARACTER TRAITS 
229 
instance, in the guise of a general critical attitude. Hate 
may expand itself in breaking all contact possibilities 
which an individual may have. Sometimes the degree to 
which an individual may hate is suddenly disclosed, as by 
a stroke of lightning. This occurred in the case of a 
patient who, himself exempted from war service, related 
how much he enjoyed reading the reports of the gruesome 
slaughter and destruction of others. 
In crime we see much of this. In milder forms, hate ten-
dencies may play a great role in our social life, appearing 
in forms which need not be at aU insulting or horrify-
ing. Misanthropy, that form of hate which betrays a very 
high degree of hostility to mankind, is one of these veiled 
forms. There are whole philosophical schools which are 
so permeated with hostility and misanthropy that they 
may be considered equivalent to coarser, undisguised 
hostile acts of cruelty and brutality. The veU is sometimes 
drawn aside in the biographies of famous men. I t is less 
important to meditate on the inevitable truth of this state-
ment than it is to remember that hate and cruelty may 
sometimes exist in an artist who ought to stand close to 
humanity if he wishes to create valid art. 
The many ramifications of hate are to be found every-
where. I f we do not examine them aU here it is because 
it would take us too far afield to demonstrate aU the re-
lationships of single character traits to a general misan-
thropy. Certain occupations and professions, for instance, 
cannot be chosen without a certain misanthropic cast of 
mind. GriUparzer once said, "that a man's cruel instincts 
get a satisfying expression in his poetry." This by no means 
goes to say that these professions cannot be carried out 
without hate. Quite the contrary. In the very moment that 
an individual who is hostile to mankind decides to acquire 
an occupation, such as a military career, all his hostile 

230 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
tendencies are so directed that they fit, at least outwardly, 
into the social scheme. This happens as a result of the 
adjustment he must make to his organization, and because 
of the necessity of being connected with others who also 
have assumed this profession. 
One form in which the hostile feelings are particularly 
well disguised are those actions which come under the 
head of "criminal negligence." "Criminal negligence" 
toward man or property is characterized by the fact that 
the negligent individual loses sight of all those considera-
tions which the social feeling demands. The legal aspects 
of this question have caused unending discussion, but 
have never been entirely satisfactorily cleared up. I t is 
self-understood that an action which might be termed 
"criminally negligent" is not identical with a crime. I f 
we place a flower pot so close to the edge of a window 
that the slightest tremor might cause it to fall upon the 
head of some passerby, it is not the same as if we took 
this flower pot and actually threw it at someone. But the 
"criminally negligent" behavior of some individuals is 
nnmistakably related to crime and is one other key to the 
understanding of human beings. In law, the fact that the 
"criminally negligent" act is not consciously intended is 
considered an extenuating circumstance, yet there is no 
doubt that an unconsciously hostile act is based upon the 
same degree of hostility as a consciously malicious deed. 
I n observing the play of children one can always notice 
that certain children pay less attention to the welfare of 
others. We may be certain that they are not friendly 
toward their feUows. One should wait until one has further 
evidence to prove this fact, but if one finds that whenever 
these children are playing, some misfortune is sure to oc-
cur, we must admit that this child is unaccustomed to keep 
the welfare of his playfellows in mind. 

AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
231 
At this point let us pay particular attention to our 
business life. Business is not especially adapted to con-
vince us of the similarity between negligence and hostility. 
Business men have little concern for the welfare of com-
petitors, or much interest in that social feeling which we 
consider so essential. A number of business procedures 
and enterprises are built clearly on the theory that the 
advantage of one business man can result only from the 
disadvantage of another. As a rule there is no punishment 
for such procedure even though there is a conscious ma-
licious intention. These everyday business procedures in 
which there is a deficient social feeling, just as there is 
in "criminal negligence," poison our whole social life. 
Even those who have the best of intentions, must, under 
the pressure of business, protect themselves as far as pos-
sible. We overlook the fact that this personal protection 
is usually accompanied by damage to someone else. We 
call attention to these matters because they explain, fche 
difficulty of exercising the social feeling under the pres-
sure of business competition. Some solution must be found, 
so that cooperation of every individual toward the com-
mon weal will be made easier instead of more difficult, as is 
usuaUy the case today. As a matter of fact the soul of 
mankind has been automatically at work attempting to 
«ffect a better order, in order to protect itself as best it 
may. Psychology must cooperate and set about under-
standing these changes to the end that it may not only 
understand business relationships, but also for the sake 
of understanding the psychic apparatus which plays its 
role at the same time. Only in this way can we know what 
may be expected of the individual and society. 
Negligence is widespread in family, school, and life. 
We can find it in most of our institutions. Every now and 
again someone who does not consider his fellows in any 

232 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
way, finds his way into the head-lines. Naturally he does 
not go unpunished. The behavior of an inconsiderate hu-
man being usually ends unpleasantly for him. Sometimes 
this punishment foUows only after many years. '' The mills 
of the Gods grind slowly." I t may be so long afterwards 
that the connection is not understood by one who has never 
tried to test his behavior with controls, who does not under-
stand the relationship of cause and effect. Hence the com-
plaints about an undeserved misfortune! The evil fate 
itself may be ascribed to the fact that others, who will 
no longer bear the inconsideration of their feUow, give 
up their personally weU-intended efforts after a time, 
and withdraw themselves from his company. 
Despite any apparent justification for criminaUy negli-
gent deeds, it will be found on closer inspection, that they 
are the expressions of an essential misanthropy. Por in-
stance, a chauffeur who is driving over the speed limit, and 
has run over someone, wiU excuse himself by pleading an 
important appointment. We recognize in him a man whose 
petty personal affairs are placed above the welfare of his 
fellows, so that the dangers to which he exposes them are 
overlooked. The disparity between a man's personal af-
fairs and the welfare of society gives us an index of his 
hostiUty to humanity. 

I 
C H A P T E K I I I 
NON-AGGRESSrVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
Those charaeter traits which are not openly hostile 
toward humanity, but give one the impression of a hos-
tile isolation, may be grouped among the non-aggressive 
traits. I t would seem as if the stream of hostility had been 
side-tracked. We have the impression of a psychic detour. 
Here we have the individual who never harms anyone, but 
withdraws from life and mankind, avoids all contact, and 
fails, because of his isolation, to cooperate with his fellows. 
The tasks of Hfe, however, can be solved for the most part 
only in communal work. An individual who isolates him-
self may be suspected of the same hostility as one who 
wages open and direct warfare upon society. An enormous 
field of research discloses itself for our inspection and we 
shaU demonstrate several of the outstanding manifesta-
tions more closely. The first trait which we must consider 
is timidity and seclusiveness. 
I . 
SECLUSTCENESS 
Seclusiveness and isolation appear in a variety of forms. 
People who detach themselves from society speak little, 
or not at all, do not look their fellows in the eye, do not 
listen, or are inattentive when one speaks to them. I n all 
social relations, even the simplest ones, they exhibit a 
certain frigidity which serves to separate them from their 
fellows. One feels this coldness in their manners and their 
233 

234 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
deeds, in the way in which they shake hands, in the tone 
in which they speak, in the fashion with which they greet 
or refuse to greet others. They seem to be creating a dis-
tance between themselves and their fellows with every 
gesture. 
In all these mechanisms of isolation we find an under-
current of ambition and vanity. These people attempt to 
raise themselves above others by accentuating their dif-
ferences from society. The most that they can win is an 
imaginary glory. A belligerent hostility is evident in the 
seemingly innocuous attitude of these exiles. Isolation may 
be a trait of larger groups. Everyone knows whole families 
whose life is hermeticaUy sealed against approach from 
the outside. Their hostility, their conceit, and their belief 
that they are better and nobler than everyone else, is un-
mistakable. Isolation may be a trait of classes, religions, 
races, or nations, and it is sometimes an extraordinarily 
illuminating experience to walk through a strange town 
and see how, in the very structure of homes and dwellings, 
distinct social strata isolate themselves from others. 
A deep-rooted trend of our culture allows human beings 
to isolate themselves into nations, creeds, and classes. Con-
flict, expressed in senile impotent traditions, is the sole 
result. It further enables some individuals to make use of 
latent contradictions, to set one group to fighting another, 
in order to satisfv their personal vanity. Such a cJass, or 
such an individual, considers itself especially excellent, val-
ues its spirit most highly, and occupies itself chiefly in 
demonstrating the evil of other people. The champions who 
work so hard to accentuate the difficulties between classes 
or nations, do so chiefly to heighten their personal vanity. 
I f unfortunate events, such as the World War and its con-
sequences, occur, they will be the last persons to take the 
blame for having started them. Hounded by their own in-

NON-AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
235 
security, these troublemakers attempt to realize a sense of 
superiority and independence at the cost of others. Isola-
tion is their sorry fate and their tiny cosmos. That they are 
not capable of progress and culture in our civilization, is 
self-understood. 
I I . 
A N X I E T Y 
The character of the misanthrope is frequently colored 
with anxiety. Anxiety is an extraordinarily wide-spread 
trait. I t accompanies an individual from earliest child-
hood to old age, it embitters his life to a marked degree, 
keeps him from all human contacts, -and destroys his hope 
of building up a peaceful life, or of making fruitful con-
tributions to the world. Fear can touch every human 
activity. One can be afraid of the outer world, or afraid 
of the world within himself. 
One man avoids society because he is afraid of it. 
Another may be afraid to be alone. Among the anxious 
ones we will always find that well-known individual who 
must think more of himself than of his fellows. Once let 
anyone assume the standpoint that he must avoid aU the 
difficulties of life, the appearance of anxiety will serve to 
reinforce him whenever necessary. There are people whose 
first reaction is always anxiety when they are about to be-
gin something, whether this be merely leaving their house, 
or parting from a companion, or getting a job, or falling 
in love. They are so little connected with life and with their 
fellow man that every change of situation is accompanied 
by fear. 
The development of their personality and their ability 
to contribute to the world's welfare is markedly inhibited 
by this trait. I t is not absolutely necessary to tremble and 
run away! One's steps need but grow slower, one need 

236 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
but seek for all manner of aUbis and excuses. For the 
most part the fearful individual is not aware that his 
anxious attitude comes to the surface whenever a new sit-
uation appears. 
It is very interesting (in affirmation of our concept) 
to find people who are constantly thinking of the past or of 
death. To think of the past is an unobtrusive, and there-
fore well beloved, means of oppressing oneself. Fear of 
death, or of sickness, is a characteristic of people who are 
seeking for an excuse to avoid aU duties and obligations. 
They lay stress loudly on the fact that everything is van-
ity, that life is so short, or that no one can know what will 
happen. The consolation of heaven and the hereafter has 
much the same effect. For individuals whose real goal lies 
in the hereafter, the business of life on this world be-
comes a highly superfluous striving, a worthless phase of 
development. Individuals of the first type avoid aU tests 
because their ambition prevents them from submitting to 
an examination which would disclose their real worth. In 
the second type we find, for our illumination, that it is the 
same God, the same goal of superiority over others, for 
which they strive, the same vaulting ambition which makes 
them unfitted for life. 
We find anxiety in its first and more primitive form 
in children who tremble when they are left alone. The 
desire of such children is never satisfied when someone 
comes to them; they use this accompaniment for other 
purposes. I f a mother leaves such a child alone, it calls 
her back with evident anxiety. This gesture proves that 
nothing has been changed. I t does not matter whether 
the mother is there or not. The child is far more concerned 
with impressing her into his service, and ruling her. 
This is a sign that one has not allowed the child to develop 
any independence of spirit, but has given him the op-

NON-AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
23? 
portunity, through mistaken treatment, to levy contribu-
tions of service upon his feUows. 
The expressions of childish anxiety are universaUy 
known. They become especially evident when darkness or 
night makes connection with the environment or the be-
loved person more difficult. The scream of anxiety com-
pletes the bridge which has been broken, so to speak, by 
night. Should someone hurry to the child the performance 
which we have described above usually occurs. The child 
demands that someone should turn on the lights, sit with 
him, play with him, and the nke. So long as one obeys, 
his anxiety is dispelled, but the moment his sense of su-
periority is threatened, he becomes anxious again, and 
through his anxiety fortifies his commanding position. 
There are similar phenomena in the life of grown-ups. 
There are individuak who do not like to go out alone. 
One can recognize them on the street because of their anx-
ious gestures, and because of the anxious looks they cast 
about them. Some people will not move from one place to 
another, others seem to be running along the streets as if 
they were being pursued by an enemy. One is sometimes 
approached by a woman of this type who requests that one 
help her across the street. These are not weak, sick, inva-
lids ! They can walk quite easily, and are usually quite 
healthy, but in the face of an insignificant difficulty they 
are struck with anxiety and fear. Occasionally their anx-
iety and insecurity begin the very moment that they leave 
the house. Agoraphobia, or the fear of open places, is in-
teresting for this reason. In the soul of sufferers from this 
symptom the feeling of being the victim of some hostile 
persecution is never dispelled. They believe that something 
differentiates them entirely from other people. Fear that 
they might fall (which means nothing more to us than 
that they feel themselves very greatly elevated) is an ex-

238 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
pression of their attitude. In the pathological forms of fear, 
the same goal of power and superiority may be seen. Por 
many people anxiety is an obvious device to compel some-
one to be close to them, and occupy themselves with the 
person of the sufferer. Under such circumstances we see 
that no one can leave the room lest the sufferer become 
anxious again! Everyone must subjugate himself to the 
patient's anxiety. The anxiety of one person thus imposes a 
law upon the whole environment. Everyone must come to 
the patient, while the patient need go to no one. He be-
comes the king who rules everyone else. 
Fear of human beingscan be dissolved.sQLete-_by_Jhat 
bond which binds the individual to humanity. Qnly that 
individual, can go through life without anxiety_wfeuJs. 
conscious of belonging to the fellowship of mam 
Let us add an interesting example taken from the days 
of the Revolution of 1918 (Austria). During these d&ys a 
number of patients suddenly declared that they wfcre un-
able to come for their consultations. Asked fur their 
reasons they answered with words which signined for thf* 
most part: these are such uncertain times that one can 
never tell what kind of people one will meet upon the 
street. I f one is dressed better than the others one can 
never tell what will happen. 
The discouragement of those days was of course very 
great yet it is remarkable that only certain individuals 
drew these conclusions. Why did merely these people think 
about it ? It is not simply by chance that they did so. Their 
fear was the result of the fact that they had never had 
any contact with human beings. They did not therefore, 
feel themselves sufficiently secure, under the unusual cir-
cumstances of revolution, whereas others, who felt that 
they belonged to society, felt no anxiety, and followed 
their occupations as usual. 

NON-AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
239 
Timidity is a milder if not less noteworthy form of 
anxiety. What we have said of anxiety holds equaUy for 
timidity. Let the relationships in whieh children are pla,ced 
be as simple as you will, timidity will always allow them 
to avoid contacts, or break them when they are made. The 
feeling of inferiority, and the sense of being different 
from others, inhibits these children from finding any joy 
in making new contacts. 
I I I . 
FAmT-HEAKTEDNESS 
Faint-heartedness is a characteristic of those who feel 
that every task which faces them is especially difficult; of 
people who have no confidence in their powers to aecom-
pHsh anything. As a rule this trait is evinced in the form 
of slowed movements. Thus the distance between the in-
dividual and his approaching test or task, not only does 
not quickly become smaller, but may even remain un-
changed. People who are always to be found elsewhere 
when they should be applying themselves to some particu-
lar problem of Life, belong to this group. Such individuals 
suddenly discover that they are not at aLl fit for the pro-
fession which they have chosen, or they find aU manner 
of objections which serve so to annihilate their sense of 
logic, that the assumption of this profession actually be-
comes impossible. Besides slowed movements, the expies-
sion of faint-heartedness is to be found in a certain 
preoccupation 
with over-safety 
and over-preparation, 
activities which have for their sole purpose the evasion of 
aU responsibüity. 
Individual Psychology has called the complex of ques-
tions applicable to this extraordinarily wide-spread phe-
nomenon, "the__problem of distance." It has created n 
standpoint from which we can inexorably judge a human 

240 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
being and measure his distance from the solution of the 
three great problems of life. These problems are: the solu-
tion of the question of his social responsibilities, the re-
lationship between the " I " and the "you," the question 
whether he has fostered his contact between himself and 
his feUows in an approximately correct manner, or has 
hindered this contact. The other questions and problems 
are the problem of profession and occupation, and the 
problem of love and marriage. Prom the degree of failure, 
from the distance of an individual from the solution of 
these problems, we may draw far-reaching conclusions as to 
his personality. At the same time we can use the data which 
we have gathered in this manner, to aid us in our under-
standing of human nature. 
In cases of faint-heartedness, such as those we have 
indicated, the basis may be found in the desire of an 
individual to separate himself from his tasks by a greater 
or lesser distance. There is, however, a bright side next to 
the dark pessimism which we have described. We may 
assume that our patient has chosen his position entirely 
because of this brighter side. I f he approaches a task en-
tirely unprepared for it, then there are extenuating cir-
cumstances if he should fail, and his personality-sense 
and vanity remain untouched. The situation becomesmuch 
more secure, and he acts like a tight-rope walker who 
knows there is a net beneath him. I f he falls, he falls 
softly, and if he approaches a job unprepared for it and 
fails, his sense of personal value is not in danger because 
he can say that a variety of causes have prevented a full 
performance. Had he not started too late, or had he been 
better prepared, success would have been certain. In this 
way it is not a defect of the personality which is at fault, 
but some petty circumstance for which he cannot be ex-
pected to assume responsibility. I f he should succeed, his 

NON-AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
241 
success is the more briUiant. For if someone performs his 
duties industriously, no one is surprised if he accomplishes 
his end, as his success seems self-understood. If, on the 
other hand, he begins too late, works but a little, or is 
quite unprepared, and still solves his problem, he then 
appears in quite another light. He becomes, so to speak, 
a double hero who has done with one hand what others 
can do only with two hands! 
These are the advantages of psychic detours. Yet the 
detour attitude betrays not only ambition, but also vanity, 
and points to the fact that an individual likes to play a 
heroic role, at least for himself. AU his activity is directed 
toward personal inflation, so that he may have the sem-
blance of particular powers. 
Now let us consider other individuals who wish to avoid 
the problems we have described above, and therefore create 
difficulties for themselves to the end that they do not ap-
proach these problems at aU, or at the most, only in a very 
hesitant manner. On their detour we shaU find them in-
volved in aU those eccentricities of Ufe such as laziness, in-
dolence, frequent change of occupation, delinquency, and 
the like. Some people express this attitude toward life in 
their external carriage, their gait being so pliant that they 
seem to resemble snakes. This is surely not accidental. 
With some reservations, one can evaluate them as indi-
viduals who want to avoid problems by making detours 
about them. 
A case taken from real life will show this clearly. It is 
the case of a man who showed his disappointment with 
life plainly, since he was bored with living, and thought 
of nothing but suicide. Nothing gave him any pleas-
ure, and his whole attitude declared the fact that he 
was through with living. The consultation showed that he 
was the oldest of three brothers, and the child of an ex-

242 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
ceptionaUy ambitious father who had gone through life 
with unbroken verve, and had accomplished rather a great 
deal. The patient was the favorite child, who was expected 
some day to walk in his father 's footsteps. The boy 's mother 
died when he was very young, but possibly beeause he en-
joyed the protection of his father to a high degree, he got 
on very well with his step-mother. 
As a first born son he was the uncritical worshipper of 
power and force. His every action and trait bore an im-
perialistic color. He succeeded in being the head of his 
class in school, and after his graduation he took over his 
father's business and behaved himself much as though 
he were giving alms to those with whom he had contact. 
He always spoke with friendly words, treated his work-
men wen, paid them the highest wages and was alwaya 
amenable to reasonable requests. 
Now a change came over his being after the Revolution 
of 1918. He began complaining that he was embittered 
by the unruly behavior of his employees. What they had re­
quested and received in other days, they now demanded. 
He was so embittered that he became obsessed with the 
idea of giving up his business. 
Thus we see him making a wide de4our on this front. 
Usually he was a well-wishing executive, but in the moment 
in which his power relationships were touched, he could 
not play the game. His philosophy was not only disturb-
ing to the conduct of his factory, but also to the conduct 
of his life. I f he had not been so ambitious to prove that 
he was master in his own house, he might have been ap-
proachable from this side, but for him the only thing that 
counted was the domination by personal power. The logi-
cal development of social and business relationships made 
sueh personal domination practically impossible. As a 
result his whole occupation gave him no joy. His tendency 

NON-AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
243 
to withdraw was at the same time an assault and a com-
plaint against his refractory employees. 
Now his vanity could take him only to a certain point. 
The contradiction of the whole situation which suddenly 
had occurred immediately involved him. Because of his 
one-sided development he had lost the ability to change 
his mind, and to develop a new principle of action. He 
had become incapable of further development because his 
only goal had been power and superiority. To this end 
he had allowed his vanity to become the predominant 
trait in his character. 
If we inspect his relationships in life we find that his 
social connections were highly inadequate. He would gather 
about him only those who recognized his superiority and 
obeyed his wiLl, as we might have expected. At the same 
time he was sharply critical, and since he was quite inteUi-
gent, he occasionally succeeded in making very telling, de-
rogatory remarks. His sarcasm soon dispersed his friends, 
and really he was without a single friend all the time. What 
he lacked in contact in human beings, he compensated by 
pleasures of every kind. 
But a veritable shipwreck of his personality occurred 
only when he approached the problem of love and mar-
riage. Here the fate which one might have easily predicted 
for him overtook him. Since love demands the deepest and 
most comradely bond, it does not countenance imperious 
desires in an individual. Now since he had always to be 
the ruler, his choice of a partner in marriage had to be 
appropriate to his desire. The imperious, superiority-
crazed individual will never choose a weak individual as 
his love partner, but will seek one who must be conquered 
and reconquered, so that each conquest appears as a new 
victory. I n this way two similarly-minded individuals, 
whose marriage is an unbroken chain of battles, are drawn 

2U 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
to one another. This man chose for his wife a woman who, 
in many ways, was even more imperious than he. True 
to their principles, both of them had to seize every con-
ceivable weapon in order to maintain their domination. 
Thus they grew farther and farther apart without daring 
to divorce each other since each hoped for an ultimate vic-
tory, and were not to be lured from their connubial battle-
field. 
A dream which our patient dreamt at this time is in-
dicative of his mood. He dreamt that he spoke with a 
young woman who looked like a servant girl, and reminded 
him of his bookkeeper. In his dream he addressed her and 
said "But you see, I am of noble blood." 
It is not difficult to understand what thought processes 
were taking place in this dream. Por one thing, there is the 
manner with which he looks down upon other human be-
ings. Everyone appears to him as a servant, uncultured 
and inferior, the more so if it happens to be a woman. We 
must remember in this connection that he is at war with 
his wife, so that we can assume that his wife is symbolized 
by the figure in the dream. 
No one understands our patient, and he himself under-
stands himself least of all, because he is constantly going 
about, his nose in the air, seeking for his vain goal. His 
separation from the world is paralleled by the arrogance 
with which he demands recognition of his nobility, al-
though this is quite unjustified. At the same time he robs 
all others of their worth. This is a philosophy'of life in 
which neither love nor friendship can find a place. 
The arguments that are used to justify such psychic de-
tours are usually characteristic. Por the most part they 
are reasons which in themselves are quite rational and un-
derstandable, except that they are applicable to other 
situations, and do not fit the present one. Our patient finds. 

NON-AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
245 
for instance, that he must cultivate society, and makes the 
attempt. He joins a fraternity in which he wastes his time 
in drinking and card playing, and similar useless occupa-
tions. He believes this is the only way in which he can 
gather friends about him. FinaUy he eomes home late at 
night, is sleepy and tired the next morning, and points 
out the fact that if one must cultivate society at least one 
cannot always go to the Club, and the like. This rational-
ization might pass muster if he simultaneously applied 
himself more to his work. Instead of this he was to be 
found far from the fighting front as a result of his culti-
vation of society, as we might have expected. Obviously he 
is in the wrong, even though he uses the correct argu-
ments ! 
This case proves clearly that it is not our objective ex-
periences which bring us from the straight path of develop-
ment, but our personal attitude and evaluation of events, 
and the manner in which we evaluate and weigh occur-
rences. Here we have to do with the whole sphere of human 
error. This case, and similar cases, show a chain of errors, 
and the possibility of f*ther errors. We must attempt to 
examine arguments in conjunction with the whole behavior 
pattern of an individual, to understand his errors, and to 
overcome them by appropriate instructions. This process is 
very similar to education. Education is nothing more than 
the removal of errors. To do this it is necessary to under-
stand how a faulty development in a false direction, based 
on an error of interpretation, leads to a tragedy. We must 
admire the wisdom of the ancient peoples who either rec-
ognized, or had a presentiment of this fact, when they 
spoke of Nemesis, the avenging goddess. The misfortunes 
which an individual suffers as a result of a mistaken de-
velopment, show clearly enough the direct consequences of 
his personal worship of power instead of his interest in the 

246 
UNDER STANDING HUMAN NATURE 
common weal. Such a cult of personal power forces him to 
approach his goal by detours, without consideration for 
the interests of his fellows, and at the expense of an unre-
mitting fear at the thought of defeat. At this point in his 
development we usually find the nervous ailments and 
manifestations whose especial purpose and meaning is that 
they prevent an individual from accomplishing some task. 
These symptoms serve to indicate to him that, according to 
his experience, every step forward is bound up with extra-
ordinary dangers. 
Society has no place for deserters. A certain adaptability 
and subordination are necessary to play the game, to be 
helpful, not to assume leadership simply for the purpose 
of ruling. The truth of this law, many of us have observed 
in ourselves, or in others in our environment. We know 
individuals who may pay visits, behave themselves well, 
who do not disturb others, but are not able to be warm 
friends because their striving for power prevents them. I t 
is not strange that others cannot become warm toward 
them. An individual of this class will sit quietly at a table, 
and not show the outer aspects of a happily constituted 
human being. He will prefer a dialogue to an open dis-
cussion, and will show his true character in insignificant 
things. He will for instance go to great lengths to prove 
himself right, even when his rightness is of little concern 
to others. It will soon be seen that the argument itself is 
of little value to him so long as he is proven in the right, 
and others in the wrong. Again, at the point of detour,' he 
shows puzzling manifestations, becomes tired without know-
ing why, gets into a hurry which never brings him for-
ward, qannot sleep, loses his powers, has all kinds of com-
plaints. In short we hear nothing from him but complaints 
for which he can give no adequate reasons. He seems to be 
a sick man, he is "nervous." 

NON-AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
247 
In actuality all these are crafty devices for diverting his 
attention from the indicators that point out the true state 
of affairs which he fears. I t is no accident that he has 
chosen these weapons. Think of the stubborn rebeLliousness 
of a man who is afraid of that universal phenomenon, 
night! We can rest assured, when we see such a one, that he 
has never been reconciled with the business of Hving on 
this earth. Nothing else would satisfy his ego but to do 
away with night! He demands this as a set condition of his 
adjustment to a normal life. But by setting this impossible 
condition he betrays his bad intentions! He is a no-sayer to 
life! 
All nervous manifestations of this sort originate at that 
point where the nervous individual becomes frightened of 
the problems he must solve, and what are they but these 
necessary duties and obligations of every-day life? When 
these appear on the horizon he looks for an excuse, either 
to approach them more slowly, or under extenuating cir-
cumstances, or he seeks an alibi for avoiding them entirely. 
In this way he simultaneously avoids those obligations 
which are necessary for the maintenance of human society, 
and injures not only his immediate environment, but, in 
larger relationships, everyone else. I f we understood human 
nature better, and were in a position to keep in mind that 
terrible causality which effects these tragic results at some 
distant time, we might long ago have made such symptoms 
impossible. It does not pay to attack the logical and im-
manent laws of human society. Because of the long time 
element, and the innumerable complications which may 
occur, we are seldom enabled to fix these connections be-
tween crime and retribution exactly, and draw illuminating 
conclusions from them. Only when we aUow a whole life's 
behavior pattern to unfold before us, and intensively 
study the history of a human being, are we able, with much 

248 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
care, to gain insight into these connections, and to demon-
strate where the original mistake was made. 
rV. 
ÜNTAMED lNSTINCTS AS T H E EXPRESSION OP 
LESSENED ADAPTATION 
There are people who show a character trait which we 
might call uncouthness or lack of civilization to a remark-
able degree. Those who bite their nails, or constantly pick 
their noses, and others who throw themselves upo.n food so 
that their behavior gives the impression of an untamed pas-
sion for eating, belong in this class. That these manifesta-
tions are significant is clear the minute that we watch 
such an individual who approaches his meals like a hungry 
wolf, and knows no inhibition nor shame in expressing his 
greed. What noisy eating! The biggest bites disappear into 
the abyss of his maw! What remarkable speed in eating! 
How much he eats! And how often! Has not everyone 
seen individuals who are not happy if they are not always 
eating something? 
Another manifestation of uncouthness is dirtiness and 
disorderliness. The lack of formality of people who have 
much work to do, or the natural disorder which one can oc-
casionally find when a man is hard at work, is not meant 
here. The type referred to usually does not work, usually 
remains far from aU useful work, yet will never be free of 
external Äisorder and filth. These are individuals who seem 
to seek dilapidation and offensiveness, and we could not 
imagine them without their characteristic trait. 
These are but some of the external characteristics of an 
uncouth human being. They clearly show us that he is not 
playing the game, and wants really, to remove himself from 
other human beings. People who commit these and other un-
couth acts lead us to believe that they have little use for 

NON-AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
249 
their fellows. Most uncouthnesses begin in childhood, for 
hardly any children develop in a straight-away line, but 
there are grown-ups who have never overcome these child-
ish traits. 
At the basis of these manifestations is a more or less 
well-marked disinclination of these uncouth people to 
meet with their fellow-men. Every uncouth individual 
wishes to hold himself distant from life, and is disinclined 
to cooperate. That they are not amenable to moralizing 
preachments to give up their uncouthness is easily com-
prehensible, for when one is disinclined to play the game 
of life according to the rules, he is, as a matter of fact, 
quite right in biting his nails or in exhibiting some similar 
trait. There is really hardly a better way of avoiding hu-
man beings, no more effective means to this end, than to 
appear always in a dirty collar, or in a spotted suit. What 
could prevent him more absolutely from holding a position 
in which he is subject to criticism and competition and 
the attention of others, or what would be more favorable in 
his retreat from love or marriage, than if he would appear 
always in this fashion? He loses out in the competition as 
a matter of course, and at the same time he has an actual 
excuse in that he always blames it on his uncouthness, 
"What couldn't I do if I didn't have this bad habit!" he 
exclaims, but in an aside he whispers his alibi, "Unfor-
tunately, I have it, however!'' 
Let us show one case in which a barbarism became an 
instrument of self defense and was used in order to tyran-
nize the environment. I t is the case of a twenty-two-year-
old girl who was a bed-wetter. She was the next to the last 
child in her family, and because of the fact that she was a 
weak and sickly child enjoyed the particular solicitude of 
her mother, on whom she was exceptionally dependent. She 
managed to chain her mother to her by day and by night, 

250 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
by means of anxiety states during the day, and night ter-
rors and bed-wetting, at night. In its beginning this must 
have been a triumph for her, a balsam for her vanity. She 
succeeded in retaining her mother for herself, by means of 
her misbehavior, at the expense of her brothers and sisters. 
This girl was exceptional also in that she could not be 
moved to make friends, go into society, nor attend school. 
She was particularly anxious when she had to leave the 
house, and even when she grew older, and had to run er-
rands in the evening, walking alone at night was agony 
for her. She came home thoroughly fatigued and anxious, 
and told all manner of terrible stories of the dangers which 
she had run. We can see how all these traits signified only 
that this young woman wanted to remain constantly at her 
mother's side, but since financial circumstances would not 
allow this, an occupation had to be found for her. She was 
finally almost driven to take a position, but after two brief 
days, her old disease, bed-wetting, returned, forced her to 
give up her position because her employers were incensed 
at her. Her mother who did not understand the true mean-
ing of her illness, reproached her bitterly. The young 
woman then attempted suicide, and was taken to a hospi-
tal ; and now her mother swore to her that she would never 
leave her again. 
All these things, the bed-wetting, fear of the night, her 
fear of being alone, and her attempted suicide, were di-
rected toward the same goal. For us they mean: " I must 
remain close to my mother, or, mother must pay constant 
attention to me!" In this way an uncouthness, the habit 
of bed-wetting, acquires a valid meaning. Now we can rec-
ognize that a human being may be judged according to 
such bad habits. At the same time we know that these mis-
takes can be removed only when we understand the pa-
tient entirely, and according to his context. 

NON-AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER TRAITS 
251 
By and large, we shall usuaUy find childish barbarisms 
and bad habits are directed toward acquiring the attention 
of the adult environment. Children who want to play a 
grand role, or show their grown-ups how weak and inca-
pable they are, will make use of them. The common trait 
of behaving very badly while visiting strangers are pres-
ent, has a similar meaning. The best-behaved children 
sometimes seem to be possessed of the devil as soon as a 
guest enters the house. The child wants to play a role and 
does not stop his attempts to do so until his purpose has 
been gained in some manner which seems satisfactory to 
him. When such children grow up they wiH attempt to 
evade the demands of society by some such barbarisms, 
or they will attempt to frustrate the common weal by 
making it difficult for others to get along. An imperious, 
ambitious vanity is hidden beneath all such manifestations. 
Only the fact that these manifestations are varied and weil 
disguised prevents us from recognizing clearly what their 
cause is, and to what end they are directed. 

C H A P T E R 
I V 
OTHER EXPRESSIONS Ob
1 CHARACTER 
I . 
C H E E R F U L N E S S 
We have already drawn attention to the fact that we 
can easily measure anyone's social" feeling by learning 
to what degree he is prepared to serve, to help, and to give 
pleasure to others. The.,talent for brin^ng_j^LeasMeto 
oJhexs.jnakes a man more interesting_. Happy people ap-
proach us more easilyand weju^_ethjm^emotionally as be-
ingjaore sympathetic. It seems that we sense these traits as 
indicators of a highly developed social feeling, quite instinc-
tively. There are people who appear cheerful, who do not 
go about forever oppressed and solicitous, who do not un-
load their worries upon every stranger. They are quite 
capable, when in the company of others, to radiate this 
cheerfuhiess and make life more beautiful and meaningful. 
One can sense that they are good human beings, not only 
in their actions, but in the manner in which they approach, 
in which they speak, in which they pay attention to our 
interests, as well as in their entire external aspect, their 
clothes, their gestures, their happy emotional state, and in 
their laughter. That far-seeing psychologist, Dostoyevsky, 
has said, that "Qne .can recognize a_p_erson_'s_character 
>l much better by his_laughter than by a boring psychologi-
cal examinatioR."!Laughter can make connections as well 
as break them. We have all heard the aggressive notes of 
those who laugh at others' misfortune. There are some 
252 

OTHER EXPRESSIONS OF CHARACTER 
253 
people who are absolutely unable to laugh because they 
stand so far from the innate bond which connects human 
beings, that their ability to give pleasure or to appear 
happy, is absent. That there is another little group of peo-
ple who are utterly incapable of giving anyone else joy 
since they are concerned only in embittering life in every 
situation which they may enter. They walk around as 
though they wished to extinguish every light. They do not 
laugh at all, or only when forced to do so, or when they 
wish to give the semblance of being a joy-giver. The mys-
tery of the emotions of sympathy and antipathy are thus 
made understandable. 
The opj>osite of the sympathetic_type occurs in those 
who are chronic kill-joys and marplots. They advertise 
ihe_ world as a vale of sorrow and pain._Some individuaLs 
go through life as though they were bent by the weight 
of a great load. Every little difficulty is exploited, the 
future appears black and depressing, and they do not miss 
an occasion in which others are happy, to utter doleful 
Cassandra-like prophecies. They are pessimistic in every 
fibre, not only for themselves but for everyone else. Ί1 
someone is happy in their neighborhood they become rest-
less and attempt to find some gloomy aspect to the event. 
This they do, not only with their words, but with their 
disturbing actions, in this way preventing others from 
living happily and enjoying their fellowship in humanity. 
I I . THOUGHT PROCESSES AND W A Y S OF EXPRESSION 
The thought processes and manner of expression of some 
individuals sometimes makes so plastic an impression that 
we cannot help being aware of it. Some people think and 
speak as thougli their mental horizon was circumscribed 
by mottoes and proverbs. One can tell in advance what they 

254 
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN NATURE 
will say. They sound like cheap novels, and they speak in 
catch-word phrases taken from the worst newspapers. 
Their speech is full of slang or technical expressions. This 
type of expression may well give us a further understand-
ing of a human being. There are thoughts and words which 
one does not, or may not, use. Their vulgar and coarse style 
reechoes in every sentence and sometimes frightens even 
the speaker himself. I t bears witness to the speaker's lack 
of empathy in judgment and critique of others, when he 
answers every question with a catch-word phrase, or a slang 
expression, and thinks and acts according to the cliches 
of the tabloids and the movies. Needless to say there are 
many people who cannot think in any other way, and in 
this way, give evidence of their psychic retardation. 
I I I . SCHOOL-BOY IMMATURITY 
Frequently we meet people who give the impression 
that they have stopped their development somewhere i n
r 
their school career and have never been able to grow be-
yond the "prep-school" stage. At home, at work, and in 
society, they act like school-boys, eagerly listening and 
waiting for a chance to say something. They are always 
anxious to answer any question which is asked at a gather-
ing, as though they wanted to be quite sure that everyone 
knew that they also knew something about the subject, 
and were waiting for a good school report to prove it. 
The key to these people is the fact that they feel safety 
only in definite fixed forms of life. They are anxious and 
insecure whenever they find themselves in a situation in 
which a school-boy behavior would be inadequate. This 
trait appears at various intellectual levels. In less sympa-
thetic cases the individual appears dry, sober, and unap-
proachable, or attempts to play the role of the man who 

OTHER EXPRESSIONS OF CHARACTER 
255 
• knows every subject from its basic principles, who either 
knows everything immediately, or seeks to catalogue it 
according to predetermined rules and formuhe. 
IV. 
PEDANTS AND M E N OF PßlNCIPLE 
An interesting example of this scholastic type is to be 
found in the people who attempt to pigeon-hole every 
activity and every event according to some principle 
which they have assumed valid for every situation. They 
believe in this principle and they are not to be brought 
to relinquish it, nor would they be comfortable if every-
thing could not be interpreted according to it. They are 
the dry-as-dust pedants. We have the impression that they 
feel themselves so insecure that they must squeeze aLl of 
life and living into a few rules and formulas, lest they be-
come too frightened of it. Faced with a situation for which 
they have no rule or formulae, they can only run away. 
They are insulted and displeased if anyone plays a game in 
which they are not versed. I t goes without saying that one 
can exercise a great deal of power by the use of this method. 
Think for instance of the innumerable cases of unsocial 
"conscientious objectors." We know that these overcon-
scientious individuals are moved by an unchecked vanity 
and a boundless desire to rule. 
Even if they are good workers, their dry-as-dust pe-
dantic attitude is obvious. They show no initiative, become 
narrowly circumscribed in their interests, and are fuLl of 
their fads and whimsicalities. They may develop the habit 
of always walking on the outside of a stair, for example, 
or waUt only on the cracks in the pavement. Others can-
not be brought to forsake an accustomed path at any cost. 
All these types have not much sympathy for the real things 
of life. In working out their principles they waste an enor-
mous amount of time, and sooner or later, get perfectly 

256 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
out of tune both with themselves and with their environ-
ment. I n the moment in which a new situation to which 
they are not accustomed occurs, they fail entirely because 
they are not prepared to solve it, because they believe that 
without rules and magie formulae nothing can be done. 
They wiU religiously avoid all change. I t will be difficult 
for them, for instance, to accustom themselves to spring-
time because they have so long adjusted themselves to 
winter. The road into the open which appears with the 
warmer season arouses the fear in them that they will have 
to make more contacts with other humans, and they feel 
badly as a resnlt. These are the individuals who complain 
that they feel worse in the Spring. Since they can adjust 
themselves to new situations only with the greatest diffi-
culty, we wiLL find them in positions which demand little 
initiative. No employer would place them in any other 
position as long as they have not changed themselves. 
These are no hereditary traits, no unchangeable manifesta-
tions, but a mistaken attitude toward life, which has taken 
possession of their souls with such power that it entirely 
dominates their personality. In the end the individual can-
not free himself from his ingrown prejudices. 
V. 
SUBMISSIVENESS 
People who are permeated by a spirit of servility are 
Hkewise not well adapted to positions which demand in-
itiative. They are comfortable when they are obeying 
someone else's commands. The servile individual lives by 
the rules and laws of others, and this type seeks out a 
servile position almost compulsively. This servile attitude 
is found in the most varied of life's relationships. One 
can surmise its existence in the outer carriage, which 
usually is a somewhat bent and cringing attitude. We see 

OTHER EXPRESSIONS OF CHARACTER 
257 
them bending themselves in the presence of others, listen-
ing carefuUy to everyone's words, not so much to weigh 
and consider them, but rather to carry out their com-
mands, and to echo and reaffirm their sentiments. They 
consider it an honor to appear submissive, sometimes to 
a perfectly unbelievable degree. There are people who 
find a real pleasure in subjugating themselves. Far be 
it from us to say that those who wish to dominate at all 
times are an ideal type, yet we wish to show the darker 
side of the life of those who find a true solution oftheir 
nfe's problems in submission. 
It may be said that there are many for whom submission 
is a law of life. We do not refer to the servant classes. We 
are speaking of the female sex. That woman must be 
submissive, is an unwritten but deeply rooted law to which 
a number of people subscribe as to a fixed dogma. They be-
lieve that women are here only for the purpose of being 
submissive. These are ideas which have poisoned and de-
stroyed all human relationships, yet this superstition can-
not be weeded out. There are, even among women, many be-
lievers, who feel that it is an eternal law which they must 
obey. But no one has ever seen a case where anyone has 
gained anything by such a viewpoint. Sooner or later some-
one complains that if a woman had not been so submissive 
everything would have turned out better. 
Quite apart from the fact that the human soul will not 
bear submission without revolt, a submissive woman 
sooner or later becomes dependent, and socially sterile, 
as the following case will show. This was a woman who 
married a famous man for love. Both she and her husband 
subscribed to the above-mentioned dogma. I n time she 
had become simply a machine for which there was nothing 
but duty, service, and more service. Every independent 
gesture vanished from her life. Her environment had be-

258 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
come accustomed to her submission, and did not object 
especially, but no one profited by this silence. 
This case did not degenerate into greater difficulties be-
cause it occurred among relatively cultured people. But let 
us consider that in a large portion of mankind the submis-
sion of woman is her self-understood destiny, so that we 
may realize how much cause for conflict lies in this view. 
When a husband considers this submission as a matter 
of course, he may take offense at any moment, because 
actually such submission is impossible. 
Women are to be found who are so permeated with the 
spirit of submission that they seek out the very men who 
appear imperious or brutal. Sooner or later this unnatural 
relationship degenerates into open war. One semetimes 
has the impression that these women want to make the 
submission of women appear ridiculous, and prove that 
it is folly! 
We have already learned a way out of these difficulties. 
When a man and woman Hve together, they must Uve under 
the conditions of a comradely division of labor in which 
neither one nor the other is subjugated. If, for the time 
being, this is but an ideal, at least it gives us a standard 
to measure the cultural advance of an individual. The 
question of submission not only plays a role in the relation-
ship of the sexes and burdens the masculine sex with 
a thousand difficulties which it is incapable of ever solv-
ing, but it also plays an important role in the life of 
nations. 
The ancient civüization built up their whole economic 
situation on the institution of slavery. Perhaps the great-
est number of people who are alive today originated in 
slave families, and hundreds of years have passed during 
which two classes of people lived in absolute strangeness 

OTHER EXPRESSIONS OF CHARACTER 
259 
and opposition to each other. Today, indeed, among cer-
tain people the caste system is still retained, and the 
principle of submission and the slavery of one to another 
exists, and may at any time give rise to a definite type of 
man. In the ancient days it was customary to believe that 
work was the relatively degrading occupation of slaves 
and that the master did not dirty himself with common 
labors, that he was not only the commander, but that all 
worthwhile traits were united in his character. The rul-
ing class consisted of the "best" and the Greek word 
"Aristos" signifies this. Aristocracy was domination by 
the "best," but this "best" was determined entirely by 
power, not by the examination of virtues and qualities. 
Examination and classification occurred only among the 
slaves. The aristocrat was he who held the power. 
I n modern times our point of view has been influenced 
by the previous existence of slavery and aristocracy. 
The necessity of bringing human beings closer has robbed 
these institutions of aU meaning and significance. The 
great thinker, Nietzsche, advocated rule by the best, and 
subjugation of everyone eLse. I t is difficult today to ex-
clude from our thought processes the division of human 
beings into master and servant, and to consider every-
one as quite equal. Yet the mere possession of the new 
point of view of the absolute equality of every human 
being, is a step in advance, adapted to help us, and pre-
vent us from falling into considerable errors in our con-
duet. There are human beings who have become so servile 
that they are happy only when they can be thankful to 
someone else. They are forever excusing themselves, 
seemingly for their very existence in the world. We must 
not be deceived into believing that they do this gladly. 
For the most part they feel themselves very unhappy. 

260 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
V I . 
lMPERIOUSNESS 
Contrasted to the servile individual we have just de-
scribed, is the imperious individual who must have a 
dominant role, and is anxious to play the chief part. He 
is concerned with but one question in all life, "How can 
I be superior to everyone?" This role carries aU manner 
of disappointments with it. To a certain degree the 
imperious role may be useful, if it is not accompanied 
by too much hostile aggression and activity. Wherever a 
director is necessary you will find one of these imperiously-
minded individuals. They seek out positions where com-
mands and organization are of advantage. In times of un-
rest, when a nation is in revolution, such natures come to 
the surface, and it is quite understandable that jüst such 
individuals should appear, for they have the proper ges-
tures, the proper attitudes and desires, and usually also 
the necessary preparation to assume the leader's role. 
They have been accustomed to commanding in their own 
homes. No game satisfies them unless they can play the 
king, the ruler, or the general. Among them are individu-
als who are incapable of the least performance, if some-
one else is dictating; they become excited and anxious 
as soon as they must obey another's command. I n quiet 
times, one finds such individuals heading small groups, 
whether in business or in society. They are always in the 
foreground because they push themselves, and have much 
to say. So long as they do not disturb the rules of the 
game of life, we can have no objection to them, despite 
the fact that we cannot subscribe to the over-evaluation 
of such individuals which society holds today. They too 
are but human beings who stand before an abyss, for they 
cannot play well in the rank and file, they do not make 
the best of team-mates. AU their life they strain themselves 

OTHER EXPRESSIONS OF CHARACTER 
261 
to the uttermost, never acquiring any ease until they have 
proven their superiority in some way. 
V I I . MOOD AND TEMPERAMENT 
Psychology is mistaken if it believes that those human 
beings whose attitude to life and its tasks are very de-
pendent upon their mood or temperament, 
owe this 
quality to their heredity. Mood and tcmp,crflment ,are 
BOi inherited- They occur in overly ambitious, and there-
fore hypersensitive, natures whose dissatisfaction with life 
expresses itself in various evasions. Their hypersensitivity 
is like an outstretched feeler with which they test every new 
situation before they make a final approach to it. 
It would seem, however, that there are some people who 
are always in a cheerful mood. They go to great lengths 
to create a happy atmosphere as a necessary basis of their 
life, laying stress upon its brighter side. We can find aU 
variations of level among them. There are some among 
them who are chUdishly jolly, and have something very 
touching in their childishness. They approach their tasks 
not by evasion, but in a certain playful, chüdish way and 
solve them as though they were games or puzzles. There 
is perhaps no type which is more sympathetic and beauti-
ful in its attitude. 
But among them there are some who carry their cheer-
fulness too far, who approach situations which are rela-
tively serious, in the same childish manner. Sometimes 
this is so inappropriate to the earnestness of life, that we 
get bad impressions. One feels uncertain, seeing them at 
work, getting an impression that they are really irre-
sponsible, because they wish to overcome difficulties too 
easily. As a result, they are kept from the really difficult 
tasks, which they usually avoid of their own accord. Yet 

262 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
we cannot take leave of this type without paying a certain 
tribute to it. This type is always pleasant to work with. 
It forms a pleasant contrast to those other types which 
go about with gloomy faces. Cheerful people cajx.be .won 
Q_ver much more easilythan pessimists, who proceed in a 
sad and discontented_way,fLnding only the jiark sidejof 
every situation which they meet, 
V I I I . HARD 
L U C K 
I t is a psychological truism that whoever gets into diffi-
culties with the absolute truth and logic of communal 
life, will sooner or later feel the repercussion somewhere 
in the course of his existence. As a rule the individuals 
who make these profound mistakes do not learn from ex-
perience, but consider their misfortune as an unjustified 
personal mishap which has fallen upon them. I t takes 
them their whole life to demonstrate what hard luck they 
have had, and prove that they have never succeeded in 
anything, because everything that they have laid their 
hands upon has ended in failure. One even finds the tend-
ency on the part of these unfortunates to be proud of 
their ill-luck, as though some supernatural power had 
caused it. Examine this point of view more closely and 
you will find that vanity is again playing its evil game 
here. They are the individuals who act as though some 
sinister deity spent its time persecuting them. I n a thunder 
storm they believe that the lightning will single them out. 
They are afraid that burglars will enter their particular 
house. I f any misfortune is to occur they are certain that 
they are the ones it will touch. 
Only a man who considers himself the center of aU 
events can exaggerate like this. I t seems very modest 
to be constantly pursued by misfortune, but actually a 

OTHER EXPRESSIONS OF CHARACTER 
263 
stubborn vanity is at work when such individuate feel 
that all hostile powers are concerned with reeking ven-
geance upon them. They are the individuate who embit-
tered their childhood by believing themselves the prey of 
robbers, murderers, and other unpleasant gentry, such as 
ghosts and spirits, as though aLl these individuals and 
apparitions had nothing more to do than persecute them. 
It is to be expected that their attitude will be expressed 
in their external carriage. Thjy_wanc._as.i^QUgJ^,uausr 
p_ressure, bent over so that no one can mistake the heavy 
load under which they move. They remind us oJLthjjge, 
3^0Sti4a--Vbp_supported the Greek .temples, and spent 
their whole lives holding up porticos. They. take every-
thing more .tban seriously,_andjudge everything pessi-
mistically. It is not hard to understand why things 
always go wrong for them. They are persecuted by i l l 
luck because they not only embitter their own lives but 
also those of others. Va_nity is at the root of their mis-
fortune. Being unlucky is one way of being important! 
I X . 
R E U G I O S I T T 
Some of these chronically misunderstood people beat a 
retreat into religion, where they proceed to do just what 
they have done before. They complain and commiserate with 
themselves, and shift their pains upon the shoulders o f a 
complacent God. Their whole activity concerns itself 
solely with their own person. In this process they believe 
that God, this extraordinarily honored and worshipped 
Being, is concerned entirely with serving them, and is 
responsible for their every action. I n their opinion He 
may be brought into even closer connection by artificial 
means, as by some particularly zealous prayer, or other 
reLigious rites. In short, the dear God knows nothing else 

264 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
and has nothing else to do, but to occupy Himself with 
their troubles, and pay a great deal of attention to them. 
There is so much heresy in this type of religious worship 
that if the old days of Inquisition were to return, these 
very religious fanatics would probably be the first to be 
burned. They approach their God just as they approach 
their feUowmen, complainingly, whining, yet never lifting 
a hand to help themselves or better their circumstances. 
Cooperation, they feel, is an obligation only for others. 
The history of an eighteen-year-old girl demonstrates 
the extent to which this vain egoism may go. She was a 
very good and industrious, though very ambitious child. 
Her ambition expressed itself in her religion, in which 
she performed every rite with the utmost piety. One day 
she began to reproach herself for having been too unortho-
dox in her belief, and having broken the commandments, 
and for having held sinful thoughts from time to time. 
The result was that she spent the whole day violently 
accusing herself, with such vehemence that everyone felt 
that she had become insane. She spent the day kneeling 
in a corner, bitterly reproaching herself; yet no one else 
could reproach her for a single thing. One day a priest 
tried to remove the burden of her sin by explaining to 
her that she had really never sinned, and that her salvation 
was certain. The next day this young girl planted her-
self before him on the street, and screamed at him that 
he was unworthy of entering a church because he had 
taken such a burden of sin upon his shoulders. We need 
not discuss this case further, but it illustrates how am-
bition breaks into religious problems, and how vanity 
makes its bearer a judge over virtue, vice, purity, cor-
ruption, good, and evil. 

C H A P T E R V 
AFFECTS AND EMOTIONS 
Affects and emotions are accentuations of what we have 
previously designated as character traits. Emotions ex-
press themselves as a sudden discharge (under the pres-
sure of some conscious or unconscious necessity) and like 
character traits, they have a definite goal and direction. 
We might call them psychic movements which possess a 
definite time boundary. The affects are not mysterious 
phenomena which defy interpretation; they occur wherever 
they are appropriate to the given style of life and the 
predetermined behavior pattern of the individual. Their 
purpose is to modify the situation of the individual in 
whom they occur, to his benefit. They are the accentuated, 
more vehement, movements which occur in an individual 
who has foregone other mechanisms for achieving his pur-
pose, or has lost faith in any other possibilities of attain-
ing his goal. 
We are dealing again with the individual who, bur-
dened by a feeling of inferiority and inadequacy which 
forces him to gather all his powers together and exert 
greater 
efforts, makes more drastic movements than 
would otherwise be necessary. By dint of these more 
strenuous efforts he believes it possible to bring his person 
into the limelight, and prove himself victorious. Just as 
we cannot have anger without an enemy, we cannot con-
ceive of the emotion of anger without considering also 
that its purpose is a victory over this enemy. In our cul-
2C5 

266 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
ture it is stin possible to achieve one's ends by means of 
these accentuated movements. We should have fewer 
outbursts of temper if there were no possibility of attain-
ing recognition by this method. 
Individuals who do not have sufficient confidence in 
their ability to achieve their goal, do not give up their 
purpose because of their feeling of insecurity, but attempt 
to approach it by dint of greater efforts, and with the 
aid of accessory affects and emotions. I t is a method 
by which an individual, stung by a sense of his inferiority, 
gathers his powers together and attempts to win a desired 
objective in the manner of some brutal uncivilized savage. 
Since the affects and emotions are closely bound up 
with the very essence of personality, they are not solitary 
characteristics of solitary individuals, but are to be found 
more or less regularly among aU people. Every individual 
is capable of showing some particular emotion if he is 
brought into the proper situation. We might call this the 
faculty for emotion.
1 The emotions are so essentially .a 
part of human life that we are aU capable of experiencing 
them. So soon as we have gained a fairly deep knowledge 
of a human being we may well be able to imagine his usual 
affects and emotions, without ever having actually come 
into contact with them. I t is quite natural that so deeply 
rooted a phenomenon as an affect or an emotion, shows 
its effect upon the body, since body and soul are so inti-
mately alloyed. The physical phenomena which accompany 
the presence of affects and emotions are indicated by 
various changes in the blood vessels and in the respiratory 
iTranslator's note: In the original, tlie word Affektbereitschaft 
is used. There is no adequate English translation for this word, 
which denotes a lability of the soul; that is to say, that the soul 
possesses the possibility of effecting new emotional constellations 
appropriate to any given new situation. 

AFFECTS A N D EMOTIONS 
267 
apparatus, as in the appearance of blushing, pauor, rapid 
pulse, and variations of the respiratory rate. 
I . D l S J U N C T I V E A F F E C T S 
A. ANQER 
Anger is an affect which is the veritable epitome of 
the striving for power and domination. This emotion be-
trays very clearly that its purpose is the rapid and force-
ful destruction of every obstacle in the way of its angry 
bearer. Previous researches have taught us that an angry 
individual is one who is striving for superiority by the 
strenuous application of all his powers. The striving for 
recognition occasionally degenerates into a veritable power-
intoxieation. Where this occurs we are prepared to find 
individuals who respond to the least stimulus which might 
detract from their sense of power, with paroxysms of 
anger. They believe (perhaps as a result of previous ex-
periences) that they can most easily have their own way, 
and conquer their opponents, by this mechanism. This 
method does not stand upon a very high inteLlectual level, 
yet it works in a majority of cases. I t is not difficult for 
most people to remember how they have rewon their 
prestige through an occasional outburst of fury. 
There are occasions when anger is largely justified, but 
we are not considering these eases here. When we speak 
of anger we speak of individuals in whom this affect is 
ever present, and is a habitual, well-marked response. 
Some people actuaUy make a system out of their anger 
and are notable because they have no other way to ap-
proach a problem. They are usually haughty, highly sensi-
tive people who cannot brook a superior or an equal, who 
must themselves be superior to be happy. Consequently 
their eyes are sharpened, and they are continually on 

268 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
guard lest someone should approach them too closely, or 
does not value them highly enough. Distrust is a character 
trait which is most frequently allied with their sensi-
tivity. They find it impossible to trust a fellow human 
being. 
Other character traits which are closely related will 
be found concomitant with their anger, their sensitivity, 
and their mistrust. I n the difficult cases it is quite pos-
sible to conceive such an exceptionally ambitious individual 
frightened from every serious task, and thus incapable of 
ever adjusting himself to society. Should he be denied any-
thing, he knows but one method of response. He announces 
his protest in a manner which is usually very painful to his 
environment. He may for instance shatter a mirror, or 
destroy a costly vase. One cannot well believe him if he 
attempts, afterwards, to excuse himself by saying that he 
did not know what he was doing. The desire to injure his 
environment is too plainly evident, for he wiU always de-
stroy something valuable, and never confine his rage to 
worthless objects. A plan must have been present in his 
action. 
Albeit in smaller circles this method achieves a certain 
success, so soon as the circle becomes larger it loses its 
effectiveness. These habitually angry people therefore are 
soon to be found in conflict with the world all along the 
line. 
The external attitude which accompanies the affect of 
anger is so common that we have but to mention fury 
to imagine the picture of an irascible man. The hostile 
attitude towards the world is clearly evident. The affect 
of anger signifies an almost complete negation of the 
social feeling. The striving for power is so bitterly ex-
pressed that the death of an opponent becomes easily 
conceivable. We can practice our knowledge of human na-

AFFECTS A N D EMOTIONS 
269 
ture by solving the various emotions and affects which we 
observe, since affects and emotions are the clearest indica-
tions of character. We must designate all irascible, angry, 
acrimonious individuals as enemies of society, and enemies 
of life. We must again call attention to the fact that their 
striving for power is built upon the foundations of their 
feeling of inferiority. No human being who realizes his 
own power is under the necessity of showing these aggres-
sive, violent movements and gestures. This fact must never 
be overlooked. In paroxysms of rage, the whole gamut of 
inferiority and superiority appears with utter clarity. I t 
is a cheap trick whereby the personal evaluation is raised 
at the cost of another's misfortune. 
Alcohol is one of the most important factors which facili-
tate the appearance of rage and anger. Very small quanti-
ties of alcohol are often sufficient to produce this effect. 
I t is well known that the action of alcohol deadens or 
removes the civilized inhibitions. An intoxicated person acts 
as if he had never been civilized. In this way he loses con-
trol of himself, and consideration for others. When he is 
not intoxicated he may be able to hide his hostiHty to man-
kind and inhibit his inimical tendencies at the cost of great 
efforts. Once he is intoxicated his true character is ex-
pressed. It is by no means a fortuitous circumstance that 
those individuals who are out of harmony with life are 
the first to take to alcohol. They find in the drug a certain 
consolation and forgetfulness, as well as an excuse for 
the fact that they have not attained what they desire. 
Temper tantrums are much more frequent among chil-
dren than among adults. Sometimes an insignificant event 
is sufficient to throw a child into temper tantrums. This 
arises from the fact that children, as a result of their 
greater feeling of inferiority, show their striving for 
power in a more transparent manner. An angry child 

270 
UNDER STANDING H U M A N NATURE 
is striving for recognition. Every obstacle he meets appears 
exceptionally difficult, if not insurmountable. 
The results of anger, when they go beyond the usual 
context of swearing and rage, may actually injure the 
person who is angry. We may well write a note in this 
connection, on the nature of suicide. I n suicide we see the 
attempt to injure relatives or friends, and revenge oneself 
for some defeat which has been suffered. 
B. SAT>NESS 
The affect of sadness occurs when one cannot console 
himseU! for a loss or deprivation. Sadness, along with the 
other affects, is a compensation for a feeling of displeas-
ure or weakness, and amounts to an attempt to secure a 
better situation. In this respect its value is identical with 
that of a temper paroxysm. The difference is that it occurs 
as a result of other stimuli, is marked by a different atti-
tude, and utilizes a different method. The striving for su-
periority is present, just as in all other affects, whereas an 
irate individual seeks to elevate his self-evaluation and de-
grade his opponent, and his anger is directed against an op-
ponent. Sadness amounts to an actual shrinkage of the 
psychic front, which is a prerequisite to the subsequent ex-
pansion in which the sad individual achieves his personal 
elevation and satisfaction. But this satisfaction exists as a 
kind of discharge, a movement which is directed against 
the environment, although in a different manner than in 
the case of anger. The sad person complains and with his 
complaint sets himself into opposition to his fellows. Nat-
ural as sorrow is in the nature of man, its exaggeration is 
a hostile gesture against society. 
The elevation of the sorrower is attained consequent to 
the attitude of his environment. We aU know how sorrow-

AFFECTS AND EMOTIONS 
271 
ing individuals find their position made easier by tbe 
fact that others place themselves in their service, sympa-
thize with them, support them, encourage them, or contrib-
ute tangibly to their welfare. I f the psychic discharge 
succeeds as a result of tears and loud sorrow, it is evident 
that the sorrower achieves his elevation over his environ-
ment by making himself a judge and critic, or a plaintiff, 
against the existing order of things. The more the plaintiff 
demands of his environment because of his sorrow, the 
more transparent his claims become. Sadness becomes an 
irrefutable argument which places a binding duty upon the 
sorrower's neighbors. 
This affect clearly indicates the striving from weakness 
to superiority, and the attempt to retain one's position 
and evade a feeling of powerlessness and inferiority. 
C. T H E MISUSE OF EMOTION 
No one understood the meaning and value of the affects 
and emotions until it was discovered that they were val-
uable instruments to overcome the feeling of inferiority, 
and to elevate the personality and obtain its recognition. 
The faculty of showing emotion has a wide application 
in tne psychic life. Once a child has learned that he can 
tyrannize his environment by fury, or sadness, or weeping, 
arising out of a feeling of neglect, he will test this method 
of obtaining domination over his environment again and 
again. In this way he falls easily into a behavior pattern 
which allows him to react to insignificant stimuli with 
his typical emotional response. He uses his emotions when-
ever they suit his needs. Preoccupation with emotion is a 
bad habit which occasionally becomes pathological. When 
this has occurred in childhood we find an adult who is 
constantly misusing his emotions. We have the picture 

272 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
of an individual who uses anger, sorrow, and aU other 
affects in a playful way, as though they were puppets. This 
valueless and often unpleasant characteristic serves to 
rob emotions of their true value. Play-acting with emotions 
becomes a habitual response whenever such an individual 
is denied anything or whenever the dominance of his per-
sonality is threatened. Sorrow may be expressed with such 
violent cries that it becomes unpleasant because it too 
closely resembles a raucous personal advertisement. We 
have seen people who give the impression that they are 
competing with themselves in the degree of sorrow they 
could show. 
The same misuse can be made of the physical accompani-
ments of emotion. I t is well known that there are people 
who allow their anger to react so strongly upon their 
digestive systems that they vomit when they are infuri-
ated. This mechanism expresses their hostility aU the more 
transparently. The emotion of sadness is similarily associ-
ated with refusal to eat so that the sorrowful individual 
actually loses weight and veritably illustrates "the picture 
of sadness.'' 
These types of misuse cannot be a matter of indifference 
with us, because they touch the other fellow's social feeling. 
The moment a neighbor expresses his friendly feeling for 
the sufferer the violent affects we have described cease. 
There are, however individuals who crave the expression of 
another's friendliness to such an extent that they wish 
never to cease with their sorrow because only in this state 
do they feel some tangible elevation of their personality 
sense as a result of the many indications of the friendship 
and sympathy of their neighbors. 
Even though our sympathies are associated with them in 
various degrees, anger and sorrow are disjunctive emotions. 
They do not serve to really bring men closer. Actually 

AFFECTS A N D EMOTIONS 
273 
they separate by injuring the social feeling. Sorrow, it is 
true, eventually effects a union, but this union does not 
occur normally, because both parties do not contribute. I t 
effects a distortion of the social feeling in which, sooner 
or later, the other fenow has to contribute the greater 
share! 
D. DISGUST 
The affect of disgust is marked by a disjunctive ele-
ment, even though this is not so well marked as in the 
other affects. Physically, disgust occurs when the stomach 
walls are stimulated in a certain fashion. There are, how-
ever, also tendencies and attempts to "vomit" matter out 
of the psychic life. I t is here that the disjunctive factor 
of the affect becomes visible. The subsequent events rein-
force us in our opinion. Disgust is a gesture of aversion. 
The grimaces accompanying it signify a contempt for the 
environment, and the solution of a problem, with a gesture 
of discard. This affect can easily be misused by being made 
an excuse for removing oneself from an unpleasant situa-
tion. I t is easy to simulate nausea, and once it is present 
one must, of necessity, escape from the particular social 
gathering in which one finds oneself. No other affect can 
be produced artificially so easily as disgust. By means of 
a special training, anyone can develop the ability of easüy 
producing nausea; in this way a harmless affect becomes 
a powerful weapon against society, or an unfailing excuse 
for withdrawing from it. 
E . FEAR AND ANXIETY 
Anxiety is one of the most significant phenomena in the 
life of man. This affect becomes complicated by the fact 

274 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
that it is not only a disjunctive emotion, but like sorrow, it 
is capable of effecting a one-sided bond for one's fellows. A 
child escapes one situation by his fear, but he runs to the 
protection of someone else. The mechanism of anxiety does 
not directly demonstrate any superiority—indeed it seems 
to illustrate a defeat. I n anxiety one seeks to make oneself 
as smaU as possible, but it is at this point that the con-
junctive side of this affect, which carries with it at the 
same time a thirst for superiority, becomes evident. The 
anxious individuals fiee into the protection of another sit-
uation, and attempt to fortify themselves in this way until 
they feel themselves capable of meeting and triumphing 
over the danger to which they feel exposed. 
In this affect we are dealing with a phenomenon which 
is organically very deeply rooted. I t is a reflection of the 
primitive fear which seizes all living things. Mankind 
is especially subject to this fear because of his weakness 
and insecurity in nature. So inadequate is our knowledge 
of the difficulties of life that a child can never of himself 
reconcile himself with it. Others must contribute whatever 
he lacks. The child senses these difficulties at the moment 
in which he enters life, and the conditions of living begin 
to influence him. There is always a danger that he will 
fail, in striving to compensate for his insecurity, and 
develop a pessimistic philosophy as a result. His dominant 
( 
character trait becomes, therefore, a certain thirst for the 
help and consideration of his environment. The farther 
he stands from the solution of his life 's problems, the more 
developed is his cautiousness. Should such children ever be 
forced to make an advance, they carry the gestures and 
plans of their retreat with them. They are always prepared 
for retreat, and naturally their most common and obvious 
character trait is the affect of anxiety. 
We see the beginnings of opposition in the manner in 

AFFECTS A N D EMOTIONS 
275 
which, this affect is expressed, as in mimicry, but this op-
position does not proceed aggressively nor in a straight 
line. A particularly clear insight into the workings of the 
souI is sometimes vouchsafed us when pathological degen-
erations of this affect occur. In these cases we clearly sense 
how the anxious individual reaches out for a helping hand, 
and seeks to draw another toward him, and chain him to 
his side. 
Further study of this phenomenon leads us to considera-
tions which we have already discussed under the character 
trait of anxiety. In this case we are dealing with individ-
uals who demand support from someone, who need someone 
paying attention to them at aU times. A s a matter of fact 
it amounts to nothing more than the institution of a master-
slave relationship, as if someone else had to be present to 
aid and support the anxious one. Investigate this further 
and one finds many people who go through life demanding 
particular recognitions. They have so far lost their inde-
pendence (as a result of their insufficient and incorrect 
contact with life) that they demand exceptional privileges, 
with extraordinary violence. No matter how much they 
seek out the company of others, they have little social feel-
ing. But lct them show anxiety and fright, and they can 
create their privileged position again. Anxiety helps them 
evade the demands of life, and enslave aU those about 
them. Finally it worms itself into every relationship in 
their daily lives, and becomes their most important instru-
ment to effect their domination. 
I I 
T H E CONJUNCTIVE ApPECTS 
A. J O Y 
Joy is an affect which most clearly bridges the distance 
from man to man. Joy does not brook isolation. Expressions 

276 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
of happiness as evinced in the search for a companion, in 
the embrace, and the like, arise in human beings who want 
to play together, to join together, or enjoy something to-
gether. The attitude is a conjunctive one. I t is, so to speak, 
the reaching out of a hand to a fellow-man. I t is similar to 
the radiation of warmth from one person to another. A l l 
the elements of conjunction are present in this affect. To 
be sure, we are again dealing with human beings who are 
attempting to overcome a feeling of dissatisfaction, or of 
loneliness, so that they may attain a measure of superiority, 
along our frequently demonstrated line from below to above. 
Happiness, as a matter of fact, is probably the best ex-
pression for the conquest of difficulties. Laughter, with its 
liberating energy, its freedom-giving powers, goes hand in 
hand with happiness, and represents, so to speak, the key-
stone of this affect. I t reaches out beyond the personality 
and entwines itself in the sympathies of others. 
Even this laughter and this happiness may be misused for 
personal ends. Thus a patient who was afraid to allow the 
feeling of insignificance to arise in him, showed signs of 
joy at the report of a deadly earthquake. When he was sad 
he felt powerless. He therefore fled from sadness and at-
tempted to approach the opposite affect, joy. Another mis-
use of happiness is the expression of joy at the pain of 
others. A joy which arises at the wrong time or in the 
wrong place, which denies the social feeling and destroys it, 
is nothing but a disjunctive affect, an instrument of con-
quest. 
B. SYMPATHY 
Sympathy is the purest expression of the social feeling. 
Whenever we find sympathy in a human being we can in 
general be sure that his social feeling is mature, because 

AFFECTS AND EMOTIONS 
277 
this affect allows us to judge how far a human being is able 
to identify himself with his fellow men. 
Perhaps more wide-spread than this affect itself, is its 
conventional misuse. This consists in posing as an indi-
vidual who has a great deal of social feeling; the misuse 
inheres in its exaggeration. Thus there are individuate who 
crowd to the scene of a disaster in order to be mentioned 
in the newspapers, and achieve a cheap fame without actu-
ally doing anything to help the sufferers. Others seem to 
have a lust for tracking down another's misfortune. Profes-
sional sympathizers and alms-givers are not to be di-
vorced from their activity for they are actually creating 
a feeling of their own superiority over the miserable and 
poverty-stricken victims whom they are alleged to be help-
ing. That great knower of human beings, La Rochefou-
cauld, has said: "We are always prepared to find a 
measure of satisfaction in the misfortune of our friends." 
A mistaken attempt has been made to connect our en-
joyment of trag7 2 dramas, to this phenomena. I t has been 
said that the onlooker feete holier than the characters 
upon the stage. This does not fit the majority of people, 
for our interest in a tragedy arises for the most part in 
the desire for self-knowledge and self-instruction. We do 
not lose sight of the fact that it is only a play, and we 
make use of the action to give us an added impetus in our 
preparations for life. 
C. MODESTY 
Modesty is an affect which is conjunctive and dis-
junctive at one and the same time. This affect, too, is part 
of the structure of our social feeling, and as such is not 
to be separated from our psychic life. Human society 
were impossible without this affect. I t occurs wherever 

278 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
it would seem that the value of one 's personality was about 
to sink, or where one's conscious self-evaluation might be 
lost. This affect is strongly transferred to the body, the 
transference consisting in the expansion of the peripheral 
capiUaries. A congestion in the skin capillaries, recognized 
as a blush, occurs. This occurs usually in the face, but 
there are some people who blush aU over their body. 
The external attitude is one of withdrawal. I t is a 
gesture of isolation bound up with a slight depression 
which amounts to a readiness to desert from a threaten-
ing situation. Downcast eyes and coyness are movements 
of flight, showing definitely that modesty is a disjunctive 
affect. 
Like other affects modesty may be misused. Some people 
blush so easily that aU their relationships to their fellows 
are poisoned by this disjunctive trait. Its value as a mecha-
nism of isolation becomes obvious when it is thus misused. 

A P P E N D I X 
GENERAL REMARKS ON EDUCATION 
At this point let us add a few remarks on a theme which 
we have occasionauy indicated in our previous consider-
ations. I t is the question of the influence of education in 
the home, in the school, and in life, on the growth of the 
soul. 
There is no doubt that contemporary education in the 
/amily aids and abets the striving for power and the 
development of vanity, to an extraordinary degree. Every-
one can learn a lesson from his own experiences in this 
connection. To be sure, the family has great advantages 
and it is hard to imagine an institution better adapted to 
the care of children than a family in which they are 
properly educated. Especially in the matter of sickness 
does the family prove itseLf the best adapted institution for 
the maintenance of humanity. I f parents were also good 
educators, with the necessary insight and the ability to 
recognize mistaken development in their children when it 
began, and if, further, they were capable of combating 
these errors by proper education—we should be happy to 
admit that no institution were better adapted for the pro-
tection of valid human beings. 
Unfortunately, however, parents are neither good psy-
chologists nor good teachers. Various degrees of a patho-
logical family egoism seem to play the chief role in the 
home education of today. This egoism demands that the 
children of one's own family should be especiaUy culti-
279 

280 
UNDER STANDING H U M A N NATURE 
vated, and should he looked up to as being extraordinarily 
worthwhile, even at the cost of other children. Education 
in the home therefore commits the gravest of psychological 
errors in inoculating children with the false idea that they 
must be superior to everyone else and consider themselves 
better than all other human beings. Any organization of 
the family which is based upon the idea of the leadership 
of the father, cannot be separated from this thought. 
And now the evil begins. This fatherly authority is based 
only to a very slight degree upon the feeling of human 
community and society. It seduces an individual into an 
open, or secret, resistance to the social feeling, only too 
soon. Revolt is never attempted openly. The greatest dis-
advantage of authoritative education lies in the fact that 
it gives the child an ideal of power, and shows him the 
pleasures which are connected with the possession of power. 
Every child grows greedy for domination, becomes ambi-
tious for power, and inordinately vain. Now every child 
desires to reach the pinnacles, every child wants to be re-
spected, and sooner or later demands the same obedience 
and submission of others he has seen placed at the feet of 
the most powerful individual in his environment. A bel-
ligerent attitude to his parents and the rest of the world 
is the inevitable result of his false assumptions. 
Under the prevailing educational influences in the home, 
it is practically impossible for a child to lose sight of the 
goal of superiority. One sees it in small children who like 
to play "the big man," as we may see it in the later Ufe 
of individuaks whose thoughts or unconscious remembrances 
of their childhood life show clearly that they treat the 
whole world as though it were stiU their family. Should 
their attitude be thwarted, their tendency is to withdraw 
from a world which has become hateful to them. 
It is true the family is adapted also to develop the social 

APPENDIX 
281 
feeling. But i f we remember the influence of the striving 
for power, and the presence of authority in the family, 
we find that this social feeling can be developed only to 
a certain degree. The first tendencies toward love and 
tenderness are concerned with the relationship to the 
mother. Perhaps this is the most important experience 
which a child can have, for in this experience he re-
alizes the existence of another entirely trustworthy per-
son. He learns the difference between " I " and "You." 
Nietzsche has said that "everyone fashions the picture of 
his beloved one out of his relationships with his mother." 
Pestalozzi also has shown how a mother is the ideal which 
determines a child's future relationships to the world. The 
relationship to the mother, indeed, determines all subse-
quent activities. 
It is the function of the mother to develop the social 
feeling in the child. Eccentric personalities which we no-
tice among children arise out of their relationship to their 
mothers, and the direction which this development takes is 
an index of the mother-child relationship. Wherever the 
mother-child relationship is warped we usuaUy find certain 
social defects in the children. Two types of error are most 
common. The first error arises out of the fact that a mother 
does not fulfil her function toward her child, and he de-
velops no social feeling. This defect is very significant and 
a score of unpleasant consequences result from it. The 
child grows up like a stranger in an enemy country. I f 
one desires to help such a child, there is no other way to 
do it than to re- 2nact the role of his mother, which the 
child has somehow missed in the course of his development. 
This is the only way, so to speak, to make a fellow-man out 
of him. The second error is probably made more fre-
quently, and consists in this: the mother assumes her 
function, but exercises it in such an exaggerated, emphatic 

282 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
manner that the transference and projection of the social 
feeling beyond the mother is impossible. This mother allows 
the feeling which has developed in the child to discharge 
itself entirely upon her person; that is to say, such a child 
is interested only in his mother, and excludes the rest of 
the world. I t goes without saying that such a child lacks 
the basis for becoming an adequate social being. 
There are many other weighty moments beside the re-
lation towards the mother which play an important role in 
education. A happy nursery enables a child to find his 
way into the world with a certain facility. I f one bears in 
mind what difficulties most children have to fight against, 
how few of them can reconcile themselves with the world 
in the first years of their life, or find it a pleasant sojourn, 
one can understand how extraordinarily significant the 
first childhood impressions are to a child. These are the 
sign posts which point out the direction in which he must 
proceed in the world. I f we add to this the fact that a 
number of children eome into the world as sickly beings and 
experience only pain and sorrow, that most children do 
not have a nursery which is calculated to make them happy, 
we can understand clearly why most children do not grow 
up as friends of life and society, and are not actuated by 
that social feeling which might bloom and develop in a true 
human community. In addition we must throw the excep-
tionally important influence of errors in education, into 
the scales. A stern authoritative education is quite capable 
of annihilating any joy in life that a child may have, just 
as an education which removes every obstacle from a child's 
way, and surrounds him with a hot-house atmosphere, 
"fixes" him, so to speak, when he is adult, so that he is in-
capable of living in any climate more blustering than the 
tropical warmth of his family. 
We see therefore that education in the family, in our soci-

APPENDIX 
283 
ety and civilization, is not weU adapted to develop those val-
uable comradely fellows of human society which we might 
desire. I t is too much given to fostering vain ambitions, and 
the desire for personal aggrandisement, in individuals. 
What possibility still exists which could compensate for 
the errors in the development of a child, and effect an 
amelioration of his condition ? The answer is the school. But 
an exact examination shows that the school, in its con-
temporary form, is also not adapted to this task. There is 
hardly a teacher today who is willing to admit that he 
can recognize the human errors in a child and obviate them 
under the present school conditions. He is quite unprepared 
for this task. I t is his business to retail a certain curric-
ulum to his children without daring to concern himself 
with the human material with which he works. The fact 
that there are far too many children in each class further 
militates against the accomplishment of his task. 
Is there no other institution capable of obviating the de-
fects of family education ? Someone might suggest that life 
is this institution. But life, too, has its specific limitations. 
Life itseU
5 is not adapted to changing a human being, al-
though it sometimes seems to do so. The vanity and am-
bition of human beings will not allow it. No matter how 
many mistakes a man has made, he wül either blame the 
rest of mankind, or feel that his situation is irrevocable. 
We very seldom find anyone who has bumped his head 
against life, who has committed errors, stopping to recon-
sider them. Our analyses of the misuse of experience, in a 
previous chapter, proves the point. 
Life itself cannot produce any essential change. This is 
psychologically comprehensible because life is dealing with 
the finished products of mankind, human beings, who al-
ready have their sharply-focussed viewpoints, all striving 
for power. Quite to the contrary, life is the worst teacher of 

284 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
aU. I t has no consideration, it does not warn us, it does not 
teach us; it simply rejects us, and lets us perish. 
We can draw but one conclusion: the only institution 
capable of effecting a change is the school! The school 
might be capable of this function, if it were not misused. 
Up to the present time it has always been the case that the 
individual who got a school into his hands fashioned it 
into an instrument for his own vain and ambitious plans. 
We hear clamorings today that the old authority should 
be re-established in the schools. Did the old authority ever 
achieve any good results ? How can an authority which has 
always been found harmful suddenly become valuable? 
Why should authority in school be good when we have 
seen that authority in the home, where the situation is 
reaUy better, effects only one thing, universal rebellion 
against it ? Any authority whose recognition does not occur 
in and of itself, but must be forced upon us, is no real 
authority. Too many children come to school with the feel-
ing that the teacher is simply an employee of the state. To 
force an authority upon a child without incurring unfor-
tunate consequences for his psychic development, is impos-
sible. Authority must not rest upon force,—it must be 
based solely on the social feeling. The school is a situation 
which every child experiences in the course of his psychic 
development. I t must, therefore, be adequate to the de-
mands of a healthy psychic growth. We can speak of a good 
school only when that school is in harmony with the neces-
sities for a healthy psychic development. Only such a school 
shall we ever be able to consider a school for social Ufe. 
CONCLUSION 
We have attempted to show in this book that the soul 
arises from a hereditary substance which functions both 

APPENDIX 
285 
pbysically and psychically. Its development is entirely con-
ditioned by social influences. On the one hand the demands 
of the organism must find fulfillment, and on the other the 
demands of human society must be satisfied. In this context 
does the soul develop, and by these conditions is its growth 
indicated. 
We have investigated this development further, have 
diseussed the capabilities and faculties of perception, recol-
lection, emotion, and thinking, and finally, we have con-
sidered traits of character and affects. We have shown that 
all these phenomena are connected by indivisible bonds; 
that on the one hand they are subject to the rule of com-
munal life, and on the other they are influenced by indi-
vidual striving for power and superiority, so that they 
express themselves in a specific, individual, and unique pat-
tern. We have shown how the goal of superiority of the 
individual, modified by his social feeling, according to the 
degree of its development in any concrete case, gives 
rise to specific character traits. Such traits are in no way 
hereditary, but are developed in such a way that they fit 
into the mosaic pattern which arises from the origin and 
source of the psychic development, and lead in a unit 
direction to the goal which is constantly present, more or 
less consciously, for everyone. 
A number of these character traits and affects which 
are valuable indicators for the understanding of a human 
being, have been discussed at some length, whereas others 
have been neglected. We have shown that a definite degree 
of ambition and vanity appears in every human being 
according to the individual striving for power. In this ex-
pression we can clearly discover his striving for power and 
its manner of activity. We have also shown how the ex-
aggerated development of ambition and vanity prevent the 
orderly development of the individual. The development of 

286 
UNDERSTANDING H U M A N NATURE 
the social feeHng is thus either stunted or made quite im-
possible. Because of the disturbing influence of these two 
traits, the evolution of the social feeling is not only in-
hibited but the power-hungry individual is led to his own 
destruction. 
This law of psychic development seems to us to be ir-
refutable. I t is the most important indicator to any human 
being who wishes to build up his destiny consciously and 
openly, rather than to allow himself to be the victim of 
dark and mysterious tendencies. These researches are ex-
periments in the science of human nature, a science which 
cannot otherwise be taught or cultivated. The understand-
ing of human nature seems to us indispensable to every 
man, and the study of its science, the most important ac-
tivity of the human mind. 

MAY W E H E L P ? 
Т н Е 
PUBLISHERS of Star boohs have tried to main­
tain a high standard in the setection of titles for their 
list, and to offer a consistent quality of workmanship 
and material. They trust that the book you have just 
read has, in part at least, earned your esteem for other 
titles in their list. 
They are trying to make the Star Library 
compre­
hend the best in the literary fields of biography, science^ 
history, true adventure, travel, art, philosophyt 
psy­
chology, etc. 
Believing that you will be interested in other books 
of a nature similar to that which you have just finished 
reading, the publisliers have reproduced on the foUow-
ing pages a few extracts from other Star books. These 
are pages picked at random. Although there is no con­
tinuity, we hope that they wiU give you some idea of 
the style in which the books are written and perhaps 
the character of the subject from which you may form 
an opinion as to its place on your personal book shelf. 


V I I I 
R E A D I N G A N D J U D G I N G 
C H A R A C T E R 
Telling Character by Appearance 
O N E of the questions which every psychologist is asked 
again and again is the meaning of a word that has an in-
teresting explanation. I t is the word "correlation." I t 
refers to what things go together. We are aU tremendously 
interested in a great many kinds of correlation. We would 
Hke to be able to detect signs of mental ability or of any 
other accompHshment or power that we value. If, for 
example, taU people were more intelligent than short peo-
ple, there would be a correlation between height and in-
teUigence; and if this relation were a very close one, we 
could measure a person's inteUigence by measuring his 
height. 
But everyone knows that this is not true. There could 
be no worse method of selecting people for inteUigence 
than doing so according to size. And that gives a hint as 
to why it is so difficult to find out what things in nature, 
and in human nature particularly, go together. The hope 
of doing so has led to aU sorts of fanciful schemes for 
reading character. 
There is the common notion that blondes have one set 
of quahties and brunettes another. There is a notion that 
people with a certain shape of chin are firm and decided, 
and people with a different shape of chin are weak in 
231 
Reprintedfrom Joseph ]astrows 
K E E P i N G MENTALLY F i T 
by permission. 

232 
KEEPING M E N T A L L Y F I T 
character. These are aU attempts at correlation. But in-
itead of finding proofs of these relations, the authors of 
these schemes rush to conclusions, in which perhaps there 
is a very shght and confused bit of relation, but not 
enough to support any such system. 
There are many elements in the human make-up that 
are naturally closely correlated. There is an obvious re-
lation between height and weight; so that the average 
weight of a hundred tall people would certainly be greater 
than of a hundred short ones. But you couldn't predict 
absolutely John Smith's weight from his height alone, 
nor his height from the weight alone. 
There is a common method ofdetermining whatsize 
stockings you wear by taking the sole of thestockingand 
folding it around the closed fist until heel and toe just 
meet, That is your size of stockings—so definite is^the re-
lation between the size ofyour foot and the size of your 
hand. 
But when it comes to many of the quahties in which we 
are most interested, such as how intelligent people are, 
whether they have musical abihty, whether they would 
toake good salesmen, or good mechanics or good social 
workers, there is no ready way of deciding by any signs, 
because there are no signs that are closely enough corre-
lated with these abilities. I t is because human beings are 
so complex and vary so much in so many respects that 
count, that we have to rely on a great variety of judg-
ments. I t would be a much simpler world to live in if things 
were more closely correlated, and if it were easier to find 
out which were related to which. 
So correlation is a matter of slight or close relation. 
When there is no correlation at aU, things or events are 
related accidentally only. For example, suicides and rain-
faU. There are neither more nor fewer suicides when the 

READING AND JUDGING CHARACTER 23S 
rainfall is high than when it is low. But suicides vary with 
the season of the year, so there is some relation or corre-
lation. And, of course, some things are in part oppositely 
related, such as speed and strength in horses. 
Fortunately good mental ability is an all-round matter 
in the sense that anyone good in one thing is apt to be i 
good inmany another, but not in all others. We have 
special as weU as general abilities. That is why it is so 
hard to find out what things go together. 
All this has given rise to the scientific study of correla-
tion. By making many measurements on many people of 
what they can do, we have accumulated a large amount 
of information as to what things, both in mind and body, 
go together. When you are dealing with large numbers 
certain general tendencies appear. We have differences 
of race, differences of men and women, differences in our 
family heredity, aU of which enable us to do a certain 
amount of predicting as to a man's future from his an-
cestry and his past performances. 
This has an important practical side because we are 
interested in the problem of what we are good for, and by 
accumulating a lot of records showing how achievement in 
later Ufe is related to early performance, we are beginning 
to direct people into those employments in which they 
best fit. We can suggest a caUing in which success corre-
lates weU with the abüities that we can test. 
Are You A Poor Judge of Yourself? 
The general impression is that you have a better opin-
ion of yourself than the world in general shares. Or to put 
it the other way about, that you are more critical and 
more accurate in judging others than in judging your 
own quahties. 

234 
KEEPING M E N T A L L Y F I T 
Whether that is true or not, can be tested. Prof. Hol¬
lingworth, of Barnard College, made such a test. He asked 
each of twenty-five women students who knew one another 
very well, to arrange their friends in order in regard to 
certain quahties, beginning, let us say, with neatness. Each 
girl went over the list and selected for No. 1 the girl in 
the group whom she thought neatest, then put the next 
as No. 2, and so on, to No. 25 for the least neat, or the 
most untidy, each girl also placing herself where she be-
longed. The same was done for intelligence, for sense of 
humor, for conceit, beauty, vulgarity, snobbishness, re-
finement, and sociability. 
In this case common impression is confirmed by test. 
You do judge others better than yourself. Mary's opinion 
of Anna's, Bertha's, Cora's and Dora's places in the scale 
of intelligence or beauty, conceit or sociability, hits nearer 
the average and therefore the actual place than does 
Mary's view of her own beauty or intelligence, conceit or 
sociability. Judgment of yourself is considerably less re-
liable than your judgment of a friend, when we take the 
average verdict of a friendly jury as the standard. 
Next, a close-up of Mary as she registers an opinion 
of her own looks, or intelligence, or conceit, or snobbish-
ness. Whether it is complimentary to Mary or not, it ap-
pears that she does flatter herself a little. I n all desirable 
qualities she rates herself too high. Particularly, Mary 
thinks she is much more refined, and has a better sense of 
humor than her friends are able to discover. Mary thinks 
herself just a httle brighter and a little more sociable than 
she is voted to be by her college chums. And it is saying 
the same thing to say that Mary thinks herself less vulgar 
and less snobbish than others rate her. 
In which of Mary's qualities does Mary judge herself 
most fairly and see herself nearly as others see her? WeU! 

READING AND JUDGING CHARACTER 235 
it's the view she gets in the mirror. Mary has no iUusions 
about her own beauty; she places herself just right, which 
means that there are as many Mary's who overestimate 
their attractions as there are those who underestimate 
them. But there are four times as many who overrate 
as underrate their refinement. Why? Because, though pref-
erences differ, the face is there, it is objective; while re-
finement and vulgarity have to be inferred from com-
pHcated signs of it in manner and behavior. You will tend 
to exaggerate the good points and underestimate the bad 
points of people you like and do just the reverse for 
people you don't Uke. Next to beauty comes neatness, 
which again can be seen, and conceit which cannot be seen, 
but can easily be inferred from talk and manner. 
There is a further interesting question. I f you stand 
high in a quality, are you a better judge of it in others 
than if you lack it? You are. Refined girls can judge re-
finement in others better than can the average girl. In-
telligent girls can judge intelligence better. This kind of 
test affords a psychological mirror in which you can 
see yourself as others see you. A little flattery as you take 
your own picture seems natural and does little harm; it 
may afford something to hve up to. To be too distrustful 
or too hard on yourself might incline you to think your-
self inferior, and that gets in the way of your proper setf-
assertion. Think well of yourself, but not too weU,—and 
then live up to your estimate! 
How Friends and Strangers Judge 
You 
When you apply for a job, you may be excited be-
cause you feel that so much depends upon first impressions. 
I f that employer weren't a total stranger to you, you 
might not be so much in the dark as to how to impress 

236 
KEEPING M E N T A L L Y E I T 
your good points and gloss over your weak ones. You may 
get some consolation from the fact that he feels the same 
way about you. Interviews are usually appointments with 
strangers; you don't need to interview your close friends. 
I f you get the job, do you change your opinion, or he 
his, on further acquaintance, and for the better or the 
worse? Whatever may be the case with love at first sight, 
employment at first sight is very common and often neces-
sary ; and while there is an engagement period in both 
cases, it should hardly be entered upon without serious 
intentions. 
So it is interesting to learn how much better you can 
judge persons whom you know; how much better your 
friends judge you than do strangers; and what you go 
by on first and on better acquaintance. 
Prof. Cleeton had twenty men students and twenty 
women students rated by their close friends on such mat-
ters as how each stood in intelligence, in good judgment, 
in frankness, in determination, in leadership, in original-
ity, in impulsiveness, in making friends. Then he had these 
same persons interviewed and rated by principals, em-
ployers, aU strangers, but used to dealing with people and 
engaging them. 
Speaking generally, the ratings of the stranger judges 
agreed fairly well among themselves; and the ratings by 
friends agreed fairly weU among themselves. But the two 
ratings did not agree with one another, with the advan-
tage in favor of the judgment by friends. So the judg-
ment based on close acquaintance is superior to that of 
the first impression. The hardest thing to judge is frank-
ness ; on that the rating is most variable, and next to it is 
the ability to make friends. 
Naturally, strangers and friends go by different signs. 
The looks and manner which count largely with the 

READING AND JUDGING CHARACTER 237 
stranger are taken for granted by the friends, and one is 
more at home and natural among friends. The judgment 
of strangers tends to shift rapidly; so that two or three 
interviews are better than one, especially to see whether 
the impression grows more favorable or less so. 
The several judges vary very much in their power to 
hit it right. Some judge weU in three out of four cases, 
and others judge badly three out of four times. So that 
this test also tests how good a first-impression judge you 
are. 
Women form judgments more rapidly than men, but the 
men, though more deliberate, are just as accurate. 
Then there is a third way of judging people that the 
fake readers of character employ, going by the shape of 
the head, by the slim and stout, the blond and brunette. So 
far as these could be applied, they proved to be just hit 
or miss. They enter into the total impression, but by 
themselves they fail. Judging by behavior, expression, 
gesture, manner, posture, speech, voice and the entire con-
versation, which often tells more than the words say, has a 
far greater value than judging by looks. 
The actual basis of an impression is so complex that 
few of the judges, even the good ones, can teU how they 
decide. When you are judging for one special quality, the 
matter may be just as difficult. How does a credit man 
in a large department store know when to give credit or 
when to cash a check? As the world is run, we shall often 
rely on first impressions. I t is worth finding out how ac-
curate they are and how to make them more so. 
What You Can't Tell From 
Handwriting 
I t is hard to say which of the many attempted short 
cuts to the reading of character is the most worthless. 

238 
KEEPING M E N T A L L Y F I T 
I t may be palmistry, which goes by the lines that nature 
put in your hand, or graphology, which goes by the lines 
the school teacher taught your hand to write. They are 
foolish and vain for so many reasons that one doesn't know 
which to put first. I f these systems stopped with rough-
and-ready guesses or estimates or classification of types, 
they might not be so misleading. 
I t is their insistence upon details which gives the foUy 
of the system away. 
The "handwriting" books, Hke the dream books or 
palmistry books or fortune-telling books that keep them 
company, teU you such nonsense as this: " I f you write 
with an upward slope, it shows that you have ambition 
or pride, want to get up in the world; if you write with 
fine strokes, it shows that you are of a fine, sensitive 
nature, timid, shy; or, if your m's and n's are narrow, 
you, too, are sort of narrow in character, shrinking and 
drawn into yourself; if you write with heavy bold strokes 
and cross your t's with a heavy bar, you are forceful; and 
if that bar is long, you keep at things long or are per-
severing ; if you leave your a's and o's open, you are open-
hearted or generous, and if you close them you are close." 
That sort of reasoning will do weU enough for a joke, 
but as science it is ridiculous. 
Yet so many people believe this, or something hke it 
and just as baseless, that it seemed worth while for some-
body to get out his microscope and measuring scales and 
go to considerable trouble to test the belief. For it is just 
the man from Missouri, or any other State, who says 
"Show me" in most things, who falls for this sort of sham 
science. 
Prof. Hull and Mr. Montgomery, of the University of 
Wisconsin, got each of seventeen students of medicine who 
knew each other weU to rate his sixteen companions 

I 
T H E DAILY 
MIRACLE 
!S, he 's one of those men that don'C 
know how to manage. 
Good situa­
tion. Regular income. Quite enough 
for luxuries as well as needs. 
Not really ex­
travagant. And yet the fellow 's always in dif­
ficulties. 
Somehow he gets nothing out of his 
money. 
Excellent flat — half empty! 
Always 
looks as if he 'd had the brokers in. 
New 
suit — old hat! 
Magnificent 
necktie — baggy 
trousers! Asks you to dinner: cut glass — bad 
mutton, or Turkish coffee — cracked cup! 
He 
can't understand it. Explanation simply is that 
he fritters his income away. 
Wish I had the 
halfofit! 
I ' d s h o w h i m - " 
So we have most of us criticised, at one time 
or another, in our superior way. 
We are nearly aU chancellors of the exchequer: 
it is the pride of the moment. 
Newspapers are 
full of articles explaining how to live on such-
and-such a sum, and these articles provoke a 
From Arnold Bennett's How т о L i v E 

i6 
H O W T O L I V E ON 
correspondence whose violence proves the in-
terest they excite. 
Recently, in a daily organ, 
a battle raged round the question whether a 
woman can exist nicely in the country on £85 
a year. I have seen an essay, " How to live on 
eight shillings a week." But I have never seen 
an essay, " How to live on twenty-four hours 
a day." Yet it has been said that time is money. 
That proverb understates the case. 
Time is a 
great deal more than money. If you have time 
you can obtain money — usually. 
But though 
you have the wealth of a cloak-room attendant 
at the Carlton Hotel, you cannot buy yourself 
a minute more time than I have, or the cat by 
the fire has. 
Philosophers have explained space. They have 
not explained time. It is the inexplicable raw 
material of everything. With it, all is possible; 
without it, nothing. 
The supply of time is 
truly a daily miracle, an affair genuinely aston-
ishing when one examines it. You wake up in 
the morning, and lo! your purse is magically 
fiUed with twenty-four hours of the unmanufac-
tured tissue of the universe of your life! It is 
yours. 
It is the most precious of possessions. 
A highly singular commodity, showered upon 

T W E N T Y - F O U R HOURS A DAY 
17 
you in a manner as singular as the commodity 
itsetf! 
For remark! 
No one can take it from you. 
It is unstealable. 
And no one receives either 
more or less than you receive. 
Talk about an ideal democracy! 
In the reahn 
of time there is no aristocracy of wealth, and 
no aristocracy of intellect. 
Genius is never re-
warded by even an extra hour a day. 
And 
there is no punishment. Waste your infinitely 
precious commodity as much as you will, and 
the supply will never be withheld from you. 
No mysterious power will say:—"This man is 
a fool, if not a knave. He does not deserve 
time; he shall be cut off at the meter." 
It is 
more certain than consols, and payment of in-
come is not affected by Sundays. Moreover, 
you cannot draw on the future. 
Impossible to 
get into debt! You can only waste the passing 
moment. 
You cannot waste to-morrow; it is 
kept for you. 
You cannot waste the next hour; 
it is kept ior you. 
I said the affair was a miracle. Is it not? 
You have to live on this twenty-four hours of 
daily time. 
Out of it you have to spin health, 
pleasure, money, content, respect, and the evc< 

18 
HOW TO L I V E ON 
lution of your immortal soul. Its right use, its 
most effective use, is a matter of the highest 
urgency and of the most thrilling actuality. AU 
depends on that. 
Your happiness—the elusive 
prize that you are all clutching for, my friends! 
•—depends on that. 
Strange that the news-
papers, so enterprising and up-to-date as they 
are, are not full of "How to live on a given 
income of time," instead of "How to live on a 
given income of money"! 
Money is far com-
moner than time. When one reflects, one per-
ceives that money is just about the commonest 
thing there is. It encumbers the earth in gross 
heaps. 
If one can't contrive to live on a certain in-
come of money, one earns a little more — or 
steals it, or advertises for it. One doesn't neces-
sarily muddle one's life because one can't quite 
manage on a thousand pounds a year; one braces 
the muscles and makes it guineas, and balances 
the budget. 
But if one cannot arrange that an 
income of twenty-four hours a day shall exactly 
cover all proper items of expenditure, one does 
muddle one's life definitely. The supply of time, 
though gloriously regular, is cruelly restricted. 
Which of us lives on twenty-four hours a 

T W E N T Y - F O U R HOURS A DAY 19 
day? And when I say "lives," I do not mean 
exists, nor " muddles through." Which of us is 
free from that uneasy feeling that the " great 
spending departments " of his daily life are not 
managed as they ought to be? Which of us is 
quite sure that his fine suit is not surmounted 
by a shameful hat, or that in attending to the 
crockery he has forgotten the quality of the 
food? Which of us is not saying to himself — 
which of us has not been saying to himseH all 
his life: " I shall alter that when I have a little 
more time " ? 
We never shall have any more time. 
We 
have, and we have always had, all the time 
there is. It is the realisation of this profound 
and neglected truth (which, by the way, I have 
not discovered) that has led me to the minute 
practical examination of daily time-expenditure. 

20 
HOW TO L I V E ON 
II 
T H E D E S I R E T O E X C E E D ONE*S 
with his twenty-four hours a day? 
I have no 
difficulty in living on twenty-four hours a day. 
I do aU that I want to do, and still find timey 
to go in for newspaper competitions. Surely 
it is a simple affair, knowing that one has only 
twenty-four hours a day, to content one's self 
with twenty-four hours a day! " 
To you, my dear sir, I present my excuses 
and apologies. You are precisely the man that 
I have been wishing to meet for about forty 
years. Will you kindly send me your name and 
address, and state your charge for teUing me 
how you do it? Instead of me talking to you, 
you ought to be talking to me. Please come 
forward. 
That you exist, I am convinced, and 
that I have not yet encountered you is my loss. 
Reprintedfrom Arnold Bennett's HOW т о LIVE 
by permission. 
P R O G R A M M E 
f< B 
UT," someone may remark, with fine 
English disregard of everything ex­
cept the point, " what is he driving at 


