
 Understanding Other Minds  

This page intentionally left blank 

1
 Understanding 
Other Minds 
 Perspectives from 
Developmental Social 
Neuroscience 
 Edited   by 
 Simon Baron-Cohen  
 Helen Tager-Flusberg    
 Michael V.  Lombardo  

 3 
 Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP, 
United Kingdom 
 Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of 
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries 
 © Oxford University Press 2013 
 Author’s contribution to the Work was done as part of the Author’s ofﬁ cial duties 
as a NIH employee and is a Work of the United States Government. Therefore, 
copyright may not be established in the United States (Chapter 20). 
 The moral rights of the authors have been asserted 
 First Edition published in 1993 
 Second Edition published in 2000 
 Third Edition published in 2013 
 Impression: 1 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the 
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted 
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics 
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the 
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the 
address above 
 You must not circulate this work in any other form 
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer 
 Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press 
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America 
 British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
 Data available 
 Library of Congress Control Number: 2013936562 
 ISBN 978–0–19–969297–2 
 Printed and bound by 
 Ashford Colour Press Ltd, Gosport, Hampshire 
 Oxford University Press makes no representation, express or implied, that the 
drug dosages in this book are correct. Readers must therefore always check 
the product information and clinical procedures with the most up-to-date 
published product information and data sheets provided by the manufacturers 
and the most recent codes of conduct and safety regulations. The authors and 
the publishers do not accept responsibility or legal liability for any errors in the 
text or for the misuse or misapplication of material in this work. Except where 
otherwise stated, drug dosages and recommendations are for the non-pregnant 
adult who is not breastfeeding.
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and 
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials 
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.   

 Preface 
Understanding Other Minds: 
What’s new?
Simon Baron-Cohen, Helen Tager-Flusberg, and 
Michael V. Lombardo
As editors of Understanding Other Minds (3rd edn, henceforth UOM-3), we are proud to have com-
piled such an exciting set of new chapters, by such an internationally impressive set of scholars, 
addressing what some regard to be the central psychological process separating humans from all 
other animals: namely, the ability to imagine the thoughts and feelings of others, and to reﬂ ect on 
the contents of our own minds. This drive and capacity to attribute mental states to others has for 
30 years gone under the rubric of possessing a “theory of mind” (ToM). 
In UOM-1 (1993) and UOM-2 (2000), we brought together the state of the art in research into 
ToM during each decade, bringing together scientists and philosophers from ﬁ elds as diverse 
as developmental psychology, psychiatry, and clinical psychology, neuroscience, primatology, 
and philosophy. The aim was to understand the nature of ToM by studying its development, 
its impairment, its brain basis, its evolution, and its theoretical baggage. For those volumes, we 
were joined by a third editor, Donald Cohen, who tragically passed away far too young, after a 
difﬁ cult battle with cancer, and who brought a psychiatrist’s perspective to bear to this funda-
mental ﬁ eld. 
The need for a new edition of this book comes about because the ﬁ eld has not stood still over 
the past decade—on the contrary, the ﬁ eld has continued to attract some of the best minds in 
the effort to understand our mind. So what’s new in UOM-3? First, we have a new co-editor, 
Mike Lombardo, who is an example of how the ﬁ eld has blossomed via a new generation of tal-
ented young developmental social neuroscientists interested in ToM both from the standpoint 
of typical development and its atypical expression in conditions such as autism. Secondly, as our 
understanding of the biology underlying ToM has deepened, so has our understanding of its 
development, cross-cultural expression, and its atypical role in a variety of neurodevelopmental 
conditions. In this Preface we provide a brief summary of what a reader of UOM-3 can expect, 
reﬂ ecting these new developments in the ﬁ eld.
Development
Victoria Southgate (Chapter 1), who opens this volume at the earliest stages of development, 
reveals how infancy research demonstrates that ToM is present much earlier than previously 
believed. She reviews exciting work from her own and other laboratories, suggesting that 

vi
PREFACE
infants expect others’ behavior to be congruent with their own beliefs, even in the first two 
years of life. She argues that infants’ performance on the tasks used to tap these abilities do 
not just reflect behavior-reading, but actually reflect mindreading, even at this young age. 
Andrew Meltzoff and Alison Gopnik (Chapter 2) review training studies suggesting that a 
ToM “module” does not just “turn on” in the child, but that development is influenced by 
experience, evidence, and learning. Furthermore, they argue that the child’s initial state con-
tains Bayesian “priors” that constrain learning, one example being the principle that other 
minds are “like-me”. They describe elegant new experiments with young children to support 
their ideas, for example, from understanding other people’s visual perspectives, and conclude 
that children’s ToM is plastic enough to accommodate to the specific culture in which they 
find themselves. 
Johannes Roessler and Josef Perner (Chapter 3) address a classic question from ToM research 
(why 3-year-olds typically fail false belief (FB) tasks), by arguing that 3-year-olds are “teleologists”. 
By dissecting what young children think other’s “ought” to do in a situation, Roessler and Perner 
offer an explanation for why young children’s explicit ToM (where they make errors) is at odds 
with their own implicit ToM (which, as Southgate shows, they already possess).
Ian Apperly (Chapter 5) reminds us that ToM development doesn’t stop in childhood, and that 
by studying ToM in adults we see that some forms of ToM require effort, whilst others are effort-
less and even automatic. He makes a claim for the existence of two systems, and links this to the 
infancy work and to the neural basis of ToM. Later in this volume, Alvin Goldman and Lucy Jordan 
(Chapter 25), from their perspective as philosophers, update the cognitive debate between “simu-
lation theory” and “theory theory” as mechanisms underlying the development of a ToM.
Cross-cultural perspectives
Henry Wellman and Candida Peterson (Chapter 4) provide a striking graph showing that across 
eight different cultures, the same transition is seen between approximately 3- and 4-year-olds 
(with some cultural variation in ages, but not in trajectory) in passing FB tests. They also report 
their efforts to create a ToM scale that can be used not only across cultures, but also across medical 
conditions, and describe their investigations into how ToM develops differently and later in those 
deprived of hearing spoken language (deaf children). Their results sit comfortably with Meltzoff 
and Gopnik’s conclusions that the nature of the input a child receives affects the way in which ToM 
develops. Liane Young and Adam Waytz (Chapter 6) go one step further, to explore the interest-
ing claim that we use our ToM most when we make moral judgments. David Kenny (Chapter 7) 
guides us through the array of standardized measures that exist to study “judgment accuracy”, a 
factor within “emotional intelligence”, which overlaps with ToM, reminding us of the importance 
of psychometric issues in how we measure ToM. 
Electrophysiology and functional neuroimaging
Mark Sabbagh (Chapter 8) picks up the theme of the neural basis of ToM by discussing enceph-
alographic recordings (EEG)/event-related potential (ERP), making a claim for the N270 play-
ing a key role, and discussing mu-suppression during both intentional action and perception 
of intentional action. Jorie Koster-Hale and Rebecca Saxe (Chapter 9) give us a tour of the 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) literature on ToM, reminding us that, whereas 
in UOM-2 only four studies were reviewed, today there are over 400! Right temporo-parietal 
junction (RTPJ) and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vMPFC) are, they argue, well-replicated 

vii
PREFACE
ToM regions and “one of the most remarkable scientiﬁ c contributions of human neuroimag-
ing, and the one least foreshadowed by a century of animal neuroscience”. These regions, they 
argue, do not work in isolation, but are part of a network. Despite the widely differing experi-
mental paradigms different investigators have employed, consistently similar brain regions are 
activated. 
Neurological lesion studies
Dana Samson and Caroline Michel (Chapter 10) update our knowledge about ToM from studies 
of brain damage. They describe patient WBA who, following a stroke and acquired damage to his 
right lateral prefrontal cortex, suffers from an inability to set aside his own perspective. A second 
patient, PH, following a left-hemisphere stroke, suffered from an inability to process grammar, but 
his ability to pass false belief tasks remained unaffected. They argue that this suggests that once 
ToM is established, syntactic ability plays a minor—if any—role. A third patient, CM, with seman-
tic dementia and atrophy of the left temporal pole, struggled to understand mental state words, but 
had no difﬁ culty understanding others’ intentions on non-verbal tasks. These valuable “natural 
experiments” enable “ﬁ ne cuts” in the neuropsychology of ToM. 
The neural basis of empathy
Anat Perry and Simone Shamay-Tsoory (Chapter 11) extend this approach to the study of empa-
thy, fractionating it into “emotional” and “cognitive” empathy, making a case from both lesion 
and fMRI studies for inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) being central to emotional empathy, anterior 
cingulate cortex (ACC) and insula being central to pain perception, with each of these linking to 
the amygdala. In contrast, they present the evidence for cognitive empathy being a circuit com-
prising TPJ, superior temporal sulcus (STS), vmPFC/orbito-frontal cortex (OFC), dorsolateral 
(dlPFC) and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC). They also look at evidence from fMRI stud-
ies to show how these regions overlap and differ in neuropsychiatric conditions, such as autism, 
schizophrenia, and psychopathy, and how the two components of empathy are both independent 
and yet interact. 
Cade McCall and Tania Singer (Chapter 12) also consider the brain bases of empathy, delineat-
ing the “pain matrix” through experiments. An example is where the observer sees a Q-tip stroking 
a hand or a needle puncturing a hand, which gave rise to the discovery that parts of this “matrix” 
are active when we experience pain and when we observe another person in pain, validating a “mir-
ror system”. Jamil Zaki and Kevin Ochsner (Chapter 13) pick out an Experience Sharing System 
(ESS), distinct from a Mental State Attribution System (MSAS), as what they call a “tale of two 
systems”. This converges on the emotional vs. cognitive empathy systems delineated by Perry and 
Shamay-Tsoory. 
The mirror neuron system
Christian Keysers, Marc Thioux, and Valeria Gazzola (Chapter 14) provide a review of the mirror 
neuron system (MNS) in social cognition, in both monkeys and its putative equivalent in humans. 
They argue for this being a building block of major human abilities, from imitation to language. 
Giacomo Rizzolatti and Maddalena Fabri-Destro (Chapter 15) provide their own ﬁ rst-hand per-
spective on the discovery of the MNS in the monkey brain, and their view of how the human MNS 
is dysfunctional in autism.

viii
PREFACE
Oxytocin
Markus Heinrichs, Frances Chen, and Gregor Domes (Chapter 16) report on the latest research 
into the role of the peptide hormone oxytocin (OXT) in our capacity for empathy and social cogni-
tion. They argue that OXT increases social approach by reducing social stress reactivity (evidence 
of lower cortisol during OXT administration), and boosting social motivation. They argue that 
the amygdala is the target for OXT. Amygdala volume and activation during emotion processing 
are also correlated with polymorphisms in the oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) and OXT dampens 
amygdala stress responses. OXT also increases interpersonal trust as well as attachment, and OXTR 
variations are associated with maternal sensitivity to their child’s needs. OXT also boosts perform-
ance on ToM/emotional accuracy tests, and increase amount of gaze to the eye region of the face. 
This paints an important picture of how OXT sets the stage for focusing on another’s mental states, 
and for learning to use a ToM. The authors explore the potential of OXT for therapy for conditions 
involving social anxiety and deﬁ cits in social cognition.
Prenatal testosterone
Bonnie Auyeung and Simon Baron-Cohen (Chapter 17) review work indicating that fetal testo-
sterone (FT) is inversely associated with a range of indicators of social development, such as eye 
contact, language development, mentalizing, and empathy. They also report on a recent study by 
Mike Lombardo and colleagues showing that FT is associated with increased gray matter volume 
of the RTPJ, a key mentalizing brain region. They argue these effects are speciﬁ c to the prena-
tal effects of testosterone, and report positive associations between FT levels and the number of 
autistic traits found later in development. However, they also review evidence that administration 
of testosterone in adulthood changes activation levels of a number of brain regions relevant to 
ToM and emotion processing, such as orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and amygdala, as well as reward 
circuitry, such as the ventral striatum. They argue that testosterone may have “opposite” effects to 
oxytocin.
Genetics
Bhismadev Chakrabarti and Simon Baron-Cohen (Chapter 18) discuss the heritability of empathy 
using evidence from twin studies. They also discuss different approaches to identifying the genetic 
basis of autism, in which ToM is impaired. These approaches include genome-wide association 
studies, copy number variations, and candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). They 
adopt the latter approach by studying SNPs in genes involved in neural growth and connectiv-
ity, or in social and emotional responsivity, and in sex steroid hormones. Genes associated with 
empathy included NTRK1 and NTRK3, ESR2, GABRB3, and OXTR among others. They make a 
case for taking a systems-based approach to understanding the function of genes that might relate 
to empathy and ToM.
Deaf children
Jennie Pyers and Peter de Villiers (Chapter 19) summarize the development of ToM in deaf 
children raised by signing parents (so-called deaf children born to deaf parents (DoD)) vs. 
deaf children born to hearing parents (DoH) and who are orally taught, to tease out the role 
of language in the development of ToM. They report how deafness per se does not impact 
ToM development since deaf children brought up as native signers perform as well as typically 

ix
PREFACE
hearing children. However, deaf children brought up by hearing parents show language delay 
and subsequent delay in the development of ToM. This clearly illustrates the role that language 
plays in ToM development. Other studies reveal the complex interplay between language and 
ToM in the deaf, and connect with Wellman and Peterson’s earlier chapter dealing with this 
question. They explore the important question about the role of establishing joint attention in 
children who are deaf, and whether this is a critical mediating factor in whether ToM proceeds 
typically or not.
Psychopaths
James Blair and Stuart White (Chapter 20) remind us that, of all clinical groups, those with anti-
social personality disorder, a subset of whom would meet criteria for psychopathy, are the clearest 
case of a group who lack emotional empathy, despite having excellent cognitive empathy and ToM. 
They can manipulate and even torture a victim by knowing very well what their victims thoughts 
and feelings are, but don’t have the typical emotional responses to another person’s suffering. 
They describe their “integrated emotions systems” model of how a typical child learns morality, 
the key role of the amygdala, insula, and inferior frontal cortex (IFC) in this process, because these 
brain regions are critical for forming associations with negative emotions, such as fear, disgust, and 
anger; and the role of the vMPFC in moral decision-making. The pattern of empathy deﬁ cits in 
psychopaths makes them a kind of mirror-image of those with autism, who struggle with cognitive 
empathy but may have intact emotional empathy. 
Autism
Antonia Hamilton and Lauren Marsh (Chapter 21) devote their chapter to ToM in autism, 
hinted at frequently in other chapters in this volume, but central to this one. They focus on the 
mirror system in typical ToM, particularly the IFG and the anterior intraparietal sulcus (aIPS) 
in decoding others’ actions. They contrast this with the brain’s mentalizing system, particularly 
TPJ and mPFC. They explore the evidence for each of these two theories: the “broken mirror” 
theory vs. the impaired mentalizing theory of autism. Although early work found evidence 
supportive of the “broken mirror” theory, subsequent studies have found no differences dur-
ing observation and imitation of other’s actions. Studies from Hamilton’s laboratory contrast 
atypical mentalizing system activity in autism, particularly in the mPFC, to intact mirror sys-
tem engagement. 
Peter and Jessica Hobson (Chapter 22) tackle the slippery concept of “self” in autism, reviewing 
studies of self-awareness, self-conscious emotions (particularly guilt and embarrassment), and 
reﬂ ection on one’s own mental states, use of the ﬁ rst-person pronoun, and the self-reference effect 
in memory, all of which point to difﬁ culties in the development of a concept of self and the self-
monitoring function in autism. They review evidence from fMRI studies consistent with the view 
that in autism the self is atypical. Peter Carruthers (Chapter 26) provides a philosopher’s perspec-
tive on self- vs. other-directed use of ToM. Julie Hadwin and Hanna Kovshoff (Chapter 23) use-
fully review teaching methods and interventions targeting ToM deﬁ cits in autism. These methods 
range from didactic approaches to breaking down ToM into principles, through to facilitating joint 
attention as a precursor to ToM, through to autism-friendly methods of teaching emotion recog-
nition. These chapters are important in linking the nature of autism to clinical and educational 
practice.

x
PREFACE
Non-human primates
Andrew Whiten (Chapter 24) reminds us that whilst humans are “inveterate mentalists”, our 
“baroque human mental interpenetration is unparalleled in its complexity and depth”. His chap-
ter demonstrates that non-human primates have some elementary aspects of ToM, and argues 
that to understand this remarkable human achievement, we need an evolutionary framework. He 
reminds us that agriculture is only 10 000 years old, and that the evolutionary landscape to which 
we adapted was a hunter-gatherer lifestyle with a home base. Whiten reminds us that this niche 
was uniquely human—no other ape developed it. He retells the standard story of how, following 
the loss of forest cover in Africa, humans had to adapt by becoming bipedal and venturing out into 
the open savannah, having to outwit dangerous predators and become big-game hunters. Apes, in 
contrast, stayed in the forest. Humans alone had to develop the intelligence of using weapons and 
traps (requiring deception and ToM) instead of teeth and claws. 
Whiten disputes the standard story as overlooking key factors in human evolution from studies 
of modern-day hunter-gatherers. This hints that our human ancestors probably lived in communi-
ties that were egalitarian and cooperative; how the base-camp likely involved information-sharing 
and a division of labour between the sexes; how hunting is akin to being a group-predator, rather 
than an individual predator; how hunter-gatherers developed culture and language; and how ToM 
ﬁ ts into this “socio-cognitive niche”. He also reviews the primate ToM literature over 30 years since 
Premack and Woodruff asked if the chimpanzee has a ToM, concluding (with Tomasello and Call) 
that chimpanzees may understand goals, intentions, perceptions, and even the knowledge states of 
others, but that they do not understand other’s beliefs. This was the Rubicon that humans alone 
crossed.
These 26 chapters represent, for us as editors, a wonderful overview of a ﬁ eld that is as exciting 
today as it was when we published UOM-1 in 1993. We thank our contributors and look forward 
to meeting them as authors and you as readers again, in UOM-4!

 Acknowledgements 
 We are grateful to our contributors for their hard work in producing these outstanding chapters, 
and for working patiently with us as editors and with the staff at Oxford University Press over a 
2-year period, through a big production process that has resulted in such a high quality volume. 
We dedicate this volume to Professor Donald Cohen MD (September 5, 1940–October 2, 2001) 
who was an enthusiastic co-editor of the ﬁ rst two editions of this book and director of the Yale 
Child Study Center and the Sterling Professor of Child Psychiatry, Pediatrics, and Psychology at the 
Yale School of Medicine. He made fundamental contributions to the understanding of autism and 
Tourette’s syndrome, and was a passionate advocate for social policy. His multi-disciplinary inter-
ests crossed psychology and biology, and included the clinical importance of “theory of mind”. 

This page intentionally left blank 

 Contents 
 Contributors 
xv
 Section 1   Development and cognition 
 1   Early manifestations of mindreading  3 
 Victoria Southgate 
 2   Learning about the mind from evidence: Children’s development of intuitive 
theories of perception and personality  19 
 Andrew N. Meltzoff and Alison Gopnik 
 3    Teleology: Belief as perspective  35 
  Johannes Roessler and Josef Perner 
 4   Theory of mind, development, and deafness  51 
 Henry M. Wellman and Candida C. Peterson 
 5   Can theory of mind grow up? Mindreading in adults, and its implications for 
the development and neuroscience of mindreading  72 
 Ian Apperly 
 6   Mind attribution is for morality  93 
 Liane Young and Adam Waytz 
 7   Issues in the measurement of judgmental accuracy      104 
 David A. Kenny  
 Section 2   Neural systems and mechanisms  
 8   Brain electrophysiological studies of theory of mind      119 
 Mark A. Sabbagh 
 9   Functional neuroimaging of theory of mind   132 
 Jorie Koster-Hale and Rebecca Saxe 
 10   Theory of mind: Insights from patients with acquired brain damage  164 
 Dana Samson and Caroline Michel 
 11   Understanding emotional and cognitive empathy: A neuropsychological 
perspective  178 
 Anat Perry and Simone Shamay-Tsoory 
 12   Empathy and the brain  195 
 Cade McCall and Tania Singer 
 13   Neural sources of empathy: An evolving story  214 
 Jamil Zaki and Kevin Ochsner 

xiv
CONTENTS
 14   Mirror neuron system and social cognition  233 
 Christian Keysers, Marc Thioux, and Valeria Gazzola 
 15   The mirror mechanism: Understanding others from the inside      264 
 Giacomo Rizzolatti and Maddalena Fabbri-Destro 
 16   Social neuropeptides in the human brain: Oxytocin and social behavior  291 
 Markus Heinrichs, Frances S. Chen, and Gregor Domes 
 17   Prenatal and postnatal testosterone effects on human social and 
emotional behavior  308 
 Bonnie Auyeung and Simon Baron-Cohen 
 18    Understanding the genetics of empathy and the autistic spectrum      326 
 Bhismadev Chakrabarti and Simon Baron-Cohen  
 Section 3    Psychiatric, neurodevelopmental, and 
neurological disorders  
 19   Theory of mind in deaf children: Illuminating the relative roles of language 
and executive functioning in the development of social cognition  345 
 Jennie Pyers and Peter A. de Villiers 
 20   Social cognition in individuals with psychopathic tendencies  364 
 James Blair and Stuart F. White 
 21   Two systems for action comprehension in autism: 
Mirroring and mentalizing  380 
 Antonia Hamilton and Lauren Marsh 
 22   Autism: Self and others  397 
 Peter R. Hobson and Jessica A. Hobson 
 23   A review of theory of mind interventions for children and 
adolescents with autism spectrum conditions   413 
 Julie A. Hadwin and Hanna Kovshoff  
 Section 4   Comparative and philosophical perspectives  
 24   Culture and the evolution of interconnected minds  431 
 Andrew Whiten 
 25    Mindreading by simulation: The roles of imagination and mirroring      448 
 Alvin I. Goldman and Lucy C. Jordan 
 26   Mindreading the self  467 
 Peter Carruthers 
 Index  487  

 Contributors 
 Professor Ian Apperly 
School of Psychology, University of 
Birmingham, UK 
 Dr Bonnie Auyeung 
Autism Research Centre, Department of 
Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, UK 
 Professor Simon Baron-Cohen 
Autism Research Centre, Department of 
Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, UK 
 Dr James Blair 
Unit on Affective Cognitive Neuroscience 
at NIMH, USA  
 Professor Peter Carruthers 
Department of Philosophy, University of 
Maryland, USA 
 Dr Bhismadev Chakrabarti
 School of Psychology and Clinical Language 
Sciences, University of Reading, UK  
 Dr Frances S. Chen 
Department of Psychology, University of 
Freiburg, Germany 
 Professor Peter de Villiers 
Department of Psychology, 
Smith College, USA 
 Dr Gregor Domes 
Department of Psychology, University of 
Freiburg, Germany 
 Dr Maddalena Fabbri-Destro 
Brain Center for Motor and Social Cognition, 
Italian Institute of Technology, 
Department of Neuroscience, Italy  
 Dr Valeria Gazzola 
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Royal 
Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands  
 Professor Alvin I. Goldman 
Department of Philosophy, Center for 
Cognitive Science, Rutgers, 
State University of New Jersey, USA  
 Professor Alison Gopnik 
Department of Psychology, University of 
California at Berkeley, USA  
 Dr Julie A. Hadwin 
School of Psychology, University of 
Southampton, UK 
 Dr Antonia Hamilton 
School of Psychology, University of 
Nottingham, UK  
 Professor Markus Heinrichs 
Department of Psychology, 
University of Freiburg, Germany 
 Dr Jessica A. Hobson 
University College London, Institute of 
Child Health (ICH), UK 
 Professor Peter R. Hobson 
University College London, Institute of 
Child Health (ICH), UK 
 Lucy C. Jordan 
Department of Philosophy; Rutgers, State 
University of New  Jersey; 
New Brunswick, USA 
 Professor David A. Kenny 
Department of Psychology, University of 
Connecticut, USA 
 Professor Dr Christian Keysers 
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Royal 
Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands 

xvi
CONTRIBUTORS
 Jorie Koster-Hale 
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA  
 Dr  Hanna Kovshoff 
School of Psychology, University of 
Southampton, UK 
 Lauren Marsh 
School of Psychology, University of 
Nottingham, UK 
 Dr  Cade McCall 
Department of Social Neuroscience, 
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive 
and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany  
 Professor Andrew N. Meltzoff 
Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, 
University of Washington, USA  
 Dr Caroline Michel 
Psychological Sciences Research Institute 
Universit é catholique de Louvain, Belgium 
 Professor Kevin Ochsner 
Department of Psychology, Columbia 
University, USA  
 Dr Josef Perner 
Department of Psychology and 
Centre for Neurocognitive Research, 
University of Saltzberg, Austria 
 Dr.  Anat Perry 
Department of Psychology, University of 
Haifa, Israel 
 Professor Candida C. Peterson 
School of Psychology, University of 
Queensland, Australia  
 Dr Jenny Pyers 
Department of Psychology, 
Wellesley College, USA  
 Professor Giacomo Rizzolatti 
Department of Neuroscience, 
University of Parma, Italy Parma, Italy 
 Dr Johannes Roessler 
Department of Philosophy, 
University of Warwick, UK 
 Professor Mark A. Sabbagh 
Psychology Department, Queen’s University 
at Kingston, Canada 
 Professor Dana Samson 
Psychological Sciences Research Institute 
Université catholique de Louvain, Belgium 
 Dr Rebecca Saxe 
McGovern Institute for Brain Research and 
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 
 Dr Simone Shamay-Tsoory 
Department of Psychology, University of 
Haifa, Israel 
 Professor Tania Singer 
Department of Social Neuroscience, 
Max-Planck-Institute, Institute for 
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 
Leipzig, Germany 
 Dr Victoria Southgate 
Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, 
School of Psychology, Birkbeck, 
University of London, UK 
 Dr Marc Thioux 
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, 
Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and 
Sciences, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
 Dr Adam Waytz 
Management and Organisations Department, 
Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern 
University, USA  
 Professor Henry M. Wellman 
Department of Psychology, University of 
Michigan, USA 
 Dr Stuart F. White 
Unit of Affective Cognitive Neuroscience 
National Institute of Mental Health/NIH, USA 

xvii
CONTRIBUTORS
 Professor Andrew Whiten 
School of Psychology and Neuroscience, 
University of St Andrews, UK  
 Dr Liane Young 
Department of Psychology, 
Boston College, USA 
 Dr  Jamil Zaki 
Department of Psychology, Stanford 
University, USA     
 

This page intentionally left blank 

 Section 1 
 Development and cognition 

This page intentionally left blank 

 Chapter 1 
 Early manifestations of mindreading  
 Victoria   Southgate 
 A decade ago, there was no chapter within a book on understanding other minds devoted to the 
infancy period, because it was generally agreed that no such understanding existed at this stage of 
development. Traditional tests of mindreading, like the Sally-Anne or Smarties task (Gopnik & 
Astingon, 1988; Baron-Cohen, Leslie & Frith, 1985; Perner, Leekam & Wimmer, 1987; Wimmer 
& Perner, 1983), were robustly failed by children under the age of 4, and it was concluded that, 
until this point, children essentially lacked an appreciation that other’s behavior can be driven by 
unobservable mental states (Wellman, Cross & Watson, 2001). While some authors maintained 
that younger children’s failure on these classic tasks likely reﬂ ected performance issues, rather than 
any conceptual deﬁ cit (Leslie, 1994, Leslie & Polizzi, 1998), modiﬁ cations aimed at enabling young 
children to overcome performance limitations did not lower the age at which children passed these 
tasks to any great degree (e.g. German & Leslie, 2000). Nevertheless, it was puzzling that, despite 
failing these tasks, young children’s behavior suggested a greater understanding of other minds 
than their explicit task performance would give them credit for. For example, one inﬂ uential theory 
of communication holds that it involves the ability to represent others’ mental states (Grice, 1989). 
This is clear when we consider the case of pronouns: using terms like “it”, or “he” suggests that the 
person using those terms considers that the other person shares their understanding of what “it” is, 
or who “he” is, and these pronouns are abundant in the speech of toddlers (Bloom, 2000). 
 It has long been known that the method used to test for the presence of an understanding has 
an inﬂ uence on whether or not such understanding is revealed. For example, relying on infants 
explicit search behavior would lead us to believe that they have no appreciation of object perma-
nence before 7 months, when they begin to uncover hidden objects themselves (Piaget, 1954). 
However, researchers using looking-time (the length of time that infants look toward outcomes that 
are expected or unexpected if one possesses a particular concept), and anticipatory looking have 
demonstrated that, in fact, infants as young as 3 months grasp object permanence (Baillargeon, 
Spelke & Wasserman, 1985; Ruffman, Slade & Redman, 2005). In a move paralleling that previ-
ously seen in the domain of physical cognition, the last decade has seen researchers turn to infants 
looking behavior, as a measure of their social cognitive abilities. In ﬁ ndings paralleling those in 
the domain of physical cognition, infants looking behavior reveals a far greater appreciation that 
other’s behavior is generated by their own representations of the world, than classic tests of mind- 
reading would have us believe.  
 Evidence for mindreading in infancy  
 The ﬁ rst forays in to using infants looking behavior as an indication of what they understand 
about other minds investigated whether infants understand that others’ movements are directed 
toward their goals (e.g. Gergely, Nadasdy, Csibra, & Biro, 1995; Woodward, 1998). In one of the 
most well replicated results in the domain of infant social cognition, Woodward (1998, 1999) 

EARLY MANIFESTATIONS OF MINDREADING
4
demonstrated that 6- and 9-month-old infants encoded a relationship between an agent and 
the target of its actions, and reacted with longer looking when the agent subsequently acted on 
a new target object. While these ﬁ ndings demonstrate that infants encode actions in terms of 
what they are directed toward (their intentionality; Gomez, 2008), and expect that having acted 
on a target multiple times, people will most likely continue to act on the same object again, they 
do not tell us whether infants are appealing to unobservable mental states to generate these 
expectations. There is no need to attribute to infants an understanding that others’ actions are 
generated by unobservable mental states like “goal”, as alternative non-mentalistic interpreta-
tions are equally plausible (Gergely & Csibra, 2003; Ruffman, Taumoepeau & Perkins, 2011). 
Thus, evidence that young children are using others’ mental states in order to generate expec-
tations about their behavior needs to come from situations in which the child and the other 
hold a different representation of the world (Dennett, 1978), such as is the case in the classic 
false-belief task.  
 False belief understanding in infants  
 In the ﬁ rst study to suggest that infants are capable of representing other’s unobservable 
mental states, Onishi & Baillargeon (2005) cleverly transformed the classic Sally-Anne task 
(Baron-Cohen et al., 1985; Wimmer & Perner, 1983) in to a looking-time paradigm. Infants 
observed as an actor placed an object in to one of two boxes and then reached in to retrieve her 
object. After that, infants saw the agent disappear, during which time the object moved, by itself, 
to the opposite box. Infants then observed one of two outcomes. In the congruent test trial, the 
actor then reached in to the box where she had left her object (congruent because she could not 
have known that the object had moved in her absence and so she should reach in to the box 
where she left it), but in the incongruent test trial, she reached in to the box where the object 
actually is (incongruent because, unaware that the object had moved, she should not reach to 
its real location). Onishi & Baillargeon (2005) found that infants look signiﬁ cantly longer when 
they watch the incongruent outcome than the congruent outcome, suggesting that they ﬁ nd 
someone searching in the location where the object really is (when they could not know where 
it really is) unexpected—and the fact that they respond with longer looking times toward an 
outcome in which the person searches where the object actually is, suggests that infants have 
some understanding that people’s actions should depend on what they have experienced, rather 
than on what is actually the case. 
 One of the objections to the conclusions drawn by Onishi & Baillargeon (2005), that their ﬁ nd-
ing demonstrates that infants understand that others act on the basis of their representations, 
was that any understanding of mental states should manifest in a variety of contexts, and that we 
are only permitted to conclude that 4-year-olds operate with a mentalistic understanding of oth-
ers because such understanding has been demonstrated in many different contexts and scenarios 
(Perner & Ruffman, 2005). In answer to this challenge, many studies have now appeared which 
do extend this original ﬁ nding to different contexts. For example, Song and Baillargeon (2008) 
showed that infants understand that others can have representations concerning not only the loca-
tion of an object, but also its contents. In a non-verbal task reminiscent of the classic “Smarties” 
task (Perner et al., 1987), they showed infants that an actor preferred to reach for a doll with blue 
hair than a skunk. Then, when the actor was absent, someone put the doll in a plain box and 
the skunk in a box that had blue hair sticking out of it. Like children who pass the Smarties test, 
14.5-month-old infants seemed to expect the actor to be misled by the visible tuft of hair and 
looked longer when she searched in the plain box, even though that was actually where her desired 

WHAT KIND OF BEHAVIOR DO THESE REPRESENTATIONS SUPPORT?
5
doll was located. There are now numerous other examples of different contexts in which infants 
appear able to think about what other people have experienced (e.g. Luo, 2011; Song, Onishi, 
Baillargeon & Fisher, 2008; Scott, Baillargeon, Song & Leslie, 2010; Surian, Caldi, & Sperber, 2007; 
Yott & Poulin-Dubois, 2012). 
 What kind of behavior do these representations support?  
 Looking-time studies have demonstrated that infants are sensitive to the fact that others’ actions 
are motivated by their own view of the world, even when this is different from what the infant 
should know to be the real state of the world. In other words, preverbal infants appear to represent 
another person’s representation of the world. What kind of behavior might this ability to represent 
other’s perspectives on the world support? It is often held that one of the primary reasons why 
we may need to engage in mindreading is to enable us to generate predictions concerning what 
other people may do (Premack & Woodruff, 1978; Dennett, 1978), and the ability to accurately 
predict others’ actions is crucial for any social species (Verfaille & Daems, 2002). However, because 
measures like looking-time rely on infant’s responses to the outcomes of events, they cannot tell 
us whether infants are able to use this sensitivity to others’ mental states, to generate accurate pre-
dictions about their behavior. While looking time is assumed to rest on violated expectations (or 
predictions) that are formed in advance of the infant seeing an outcome, it may equally reﬂ ect the 
infant’s recognition that an outcome is incongruent with a preceding event only when the outcome 
is seen (Southgate & Csibra, 2009). Thus, while looking time certainly tells us that infants can rec-
ognize behavior that is inconsistent with a perspective that an agent should hold, it does not tell 
us whether infants can use their sensitivity to others’ perspectives usefully, to generate predictions 
about what they may consequently do. 
 In a ﬁ rst step toward addressing this question, we used eye-tracking to ask whether 25-month-old 
infants could predict where an agent will search for a desired object when she has a false belief 
about that object’s location (Southgate, Senju & Csibra, 2007). In this task, infants ﬁ rst saw two 
familiarization trials in which an agent, sitting behind a panel with two windows and two boxes 
(Figure 1.1), observed as a puppet placed an object in to one of the two boxes. The puppet then 
disappeared, and both windows lit up at the same time as a chime was heard—at which point the 
agent reached through the window located behind the box containing the toy, and opened the box. 
These two familiarization trials served to show the infant that this cue (both windows lighting up 
and chime) signaled the imminent reach of the agent through one of the windows. In the test trial, 
infants then saw a false-belief scenario in which, once the puppet had placed the toy in one of the 
boxes, the agent turned around, and did not witness the puppet subsequently remove the toy from 
the box and take it away. The question was, when the agent turned back toward the boxes, could 
infants use their apparent sensitivity to others’ perspectives on events to predict that the agent 
will reach through the window above the box where she saw the toy being placed, even though 
the infant has seen that the toy is no longer there? Results showed that, indeed, they could. When 
the agent turned around after the toy was placed in the left-hand box, infants predicted she would 
open the left-hand window upon her return, and when she turned around after it was placed in the 
right-hand box, they expected her to open the right-hand window. 
 More recently, Knudsen & Liszkowski (2012a) have also demonstrated that even younger infants, 
at 18 months, generate predictions in accord with others’ epistemic states. In their study, they use 
what they call an “anticipatory intervening” paradigm, originally suggested by Dennett (1978), 
in which infants observed as an actor re-entered a room with either a true- or false-belief about 
the location of her toy. When the actor had a false-belief that her toy was in the box where she 

Familiarization 1
Familiarization 2
Test Trial 
1
2
3
4
5
6
 Figure 1.1  Upper panel: The two familiarization trials in which the puppet places a ball in either the right or left box. After the puppet leaves 
the scene, the two windows are illuminated and shortly after the actor reaches through the window above the box in which the puppet has 
left the ball. Lower panel: Test trial. The puppet places the ball in the left-hand box (1) and then removes it and places it in the right-hand box 
(2). The actor then turns around (3) and the puppet returns to remove the ball from the right-hand box (4 and 5). The actor then reorients 
to the scene and the windows are illuminated. Infants looking behaviour is measured from the onset of the illumination. A second group of 
infants received an alternative test trial in which the correct location for the actor to search was the left-hand box.  

MINDREADING OR BEHAVIOR READING?
7
left it, 18-month-olds intervened to warn the actor of the real location of the toy, before she had 
approached the location where she thought the toy was, but they did not do this when she had a 
true belief. Together, these studies suggest that, by 18 months, infants can use their understanding 
that others’ actions are modulated by their epistemic states, to generate predictions about what 
actions will follow, and even prepare an appropriate response (e.g. pointing to inform the other) 
for that prediction. 
 Mindreading or behavior reading? 
 The data reviewed so far have been interpreted as reﬂ ecting infant’s appreciation that unobserv-
able mental states modulate others’ actions (e.g. Baillargeon, Scott, & He, 2010). However, a con-
stant challenge for those advocating that infants are encoding others” mental states, is that simpler, 
non-mentalistic interpretations in terms of behavior-reading are always possible (Low & Wang, 
2011; Ruffman et al., 2011). The problem is that one cannot know for sure whether infants are 
genuinely using mental state concepts such as “knows” or “believes” when generating predictions 
about what the other will do, or whether they have simply learnt associations between events and 
typical behaviors that follow from those events (Ruffman et al., 2011). Since mental states drive 
behavior, every mental state will have a behavioral correlate. One commonly suggested probability 
that children might exploit is that people who are ignorant of something will usually get the wrong 
answer (e.g. Perner & Ruffman, 2005). If children evoke such an “ignorance rule” in the false-belief 
task (e.g. the Sally-Anne task), they would reason that, because Sally did not see Anne move the toy 
from location A to location B, Sally will probably get the wrong answer (i.e. she will choose loca-
tion A because the infant knows that the object is actually in location B). However, crucially, this 
does not entail that the child attributes to Sally a mental representation that the toy is at location 
A—she will simply search there because this is not where the object is. While the evidence that 
children evoke such a rule is somewhat contradictory (e.g. Friedman & Petrashek, 2009; Hedger & 
Fabricius, 2011; Ruffman, 1996), it does not seem that infants are using this rule in solving these 
tasks. In our previously described study (Southgate et al. 2007), infants saw a scenario in which 
the object was actually removed from the scene altogether by the puppet (rather than being trans-
ferred from A to B), rendering both boxes the wrong place to search if you actually want to ﬁ nd the 
ball. Infants do not expect the agent to search indiscriminately, however; they speciﬁ cally expect 
her to search in the location where she last saw the object, suggesting that they attribute to her an 
epistemic state in which the object is in location A. Similarly, in a follow-up to their original study 
(Knudsen & Liszkowski, 2012a), Knudsen & Liszkowski (2012b) again used their “anticipatory 
intervening” paradigm to tease apart responses based on an ignorance rule and those based on an 
attributed epistemic state. As in Southgate et al., (2007), the agent’s toy was removed entirely dur-
ing the period when the agent was absent and, instead, aversive objects that the infant knew the 
agent did not like, were placed in each container. When the agent returned, infants pointed more 
to the location where the agent had left her toy, suggesting that they expected her to speciﬁ cally 
choose one location. If infants were operating with an ignorance rule, since both locations were 
wrong (as the object had been removed, rather than transferred), they should have pointed to both 
locations. In a ﬁ nal condition, the agent was, in fact, ignorant of the location of her toy and, in 
this case, infants pointed equally to both locations, suggesting that they understood that her igno-
rance should lead her to search indiscriminately. Recently, looking-time studies have also begun to 
include conditions that control for the use of such an ignorance rule, and conﬁ rm that infants have 
different expectations depending on whether the agent should have a speciﬁ c (false) belief about 
the location of the object, or is simply ignorant of its location (e.g. Scott & Baillargeon, 2009). 

EARLY MANIFESTATIONS OF MINDREADING
8
 While infants do not seem to be relying on an ignorance rule, nevertheless, there are other 
behavioral rules or probabilities that infants might have acquired. For example, in making their 
case against mindreading in non-human primates, Povinelli & Vonk (2003) argue that, while these 
animals might seem like they are sensitive to others’ mental states, they may simply have learned 
that people tend to search for things in locations toward which they were last oriented (see Perner 
& Ruffman, 2005 for the suggestion that infants may exploit the same rule). For Povinelli & Vonk 
(2003), learning that orientation is correlated with subsequent search is sufﬁ cient to form the 
expectation that people will search for things where they last saw them. So, if an actor is oriented 
toward the left-hand box when the object was placed in it, and this was the last point at which her 
eyes were oriented toward the object, this is where she will probably search for it. Since we usually 
do look for things where we last put them, or saw them, it is plausible that infants might acquire 
such a rule through observing the behavior of others. 
 Of course, this kind of rule- or probability-based explanation applies equally to the standard 
false-belief task which is taken as evidence that older children operate with a representational 
theory of mind, and are not just good behavior readers. However, as older children can, in addi-
tion to generating correct predictions, also explain why Sally will search in the false-belief location, 
and give verbal explanations consisting of mental state terms like “thinks” and “knows,” we can be 
more conﬁ dent that they are not solving the tasks merely by employing these kind of behavioral 
rules. How could we know whether infants are really considering the unobservable mental states 
of others in generating predictions about their behavior, or whether these predictions are based on 
associations between events and behavior? 
 One strategy has been to argue that, because infants succeed on a whole host of different tasks, 
and each would require a different learned association to be solved by applying different behav-
ioral rules, it is simply more parsimonious to assume that they are solving these tasks by appeal-
ing to common mental states (Baillargeon et al., 2010).  1 Another strategy has been to directly 
test whether young children inﬂ exibly use such rules. For example, Trauble, Marinovic, & Pauen 
(2010) directly tested the hypothesis that infants solve non-verbal false-belief tasks by using the 
“people search in the last place that they saw something” rule. To address this, Trauble and col-
leagues (2010) ran a study that was largely similar to Onishi and Baillargeon (2005), with the 
exception that, in one condition (the manual control condition) the agent gained their knowl-
edge through touch, rather than vision. While the agent was turned around, she manipulated a 
balance beam behind her back, which caused the object to roll in to the opposite box. Thus, even 
though she did not actually see the object move (and so the last place she saw the object was not 
the location where it now is), her own manipulation caused the object to move, and so she should 
know its actual location. As Trauble and colleagues (2010) argue, if infants rely blindly on a rule 
like “people search for things where they last saw them,” the agent should still be expected to look 
for her object in the location where she last saw it, even though she should know that it is in the 
opposite box since it was her who caused its movement. Infants are not fooled by this: they do 
not expect her to search for the ball in the location where she last saw it, instead they look longer 
when she searches in this location than in the location where the object actually is (just as infants 
in a true-belief condition did), presumably because they understand that the agent should know 
where the ball actually is. 
 Nevertheless, Povinelli & Vonk (2003) are right when they argue that “no experiment in which 
theory of mind coding derives from a behavioral abstraction will ever sufﬁ ce” to deﬁ nitely answer 
  1   See Perner (2010) for arguments against this position.  

MINDREADING OR BEHAVIOR READING?
9
the question of whether non-verbal subjects are utilizing behavioral rules, or appealing to other’s 
mental states. Even if infants in Trauble and his colleagues’ (2010) study were not relying on 
a “seeing” rule, they may have been relying on some other rule involving “touching” (Low & 
Wang, 2011). Povinelli and Vonk’s point is that, because every mental state will have a behavio-
ral correlate, any study in which mindreading skills are assessed by comparing performance on 
conditions which vary in a behavior (e.g. true belief vs. false belief), can always be explained in 
terms of rules. Since we simply do not know how much experience infants need in order to form 
behavioral correlations, appealing to parsimony to solve this dilemma is unsatisfying. However, 
Povinelli & Vonk (2003) do advocate a possible solution following an earlier suggestion by Heyes 
(1998). Speciﬁ cally, in order to tease apart genuine appreciation of unobservable mental states 
from reliance on behavioral associations, one needs to create a situation in which expectations are 
based on an experience for which it would not have been possible for the subject to have acquired 
any behavioral correlate. This could be achieved by providing the subject with direct ﬁ rst-person 
experience of one of its own mental states—seeing—and asking whether they can extrapolate 
this subjective experience to another individual, even though they would have no opportunity 
to acquire any behavioral correlate of this mental state. A version of this paradigm was recently 
implemented by Meltzoff and Brookes (2008) in which they provided 12- and 18-month-old 
infants with differential experience with a blindfold. For one group of infants, the blindfold was 
opaque and prevented seeing; for the other group, a trick blindfold which, although perceptu-
ally identical to the opaque blindfold, did allow the infant to see. They tested infants abilities to 
extrapolate their ﬁ rst-person experience with the blindfold to others, by asking whether, when 
infants saw another person wearing the blindfold (all infants actually saw the experimenter wear 
the opaque blindfold), they would selectively follow the “gaze” direction of that person, depend-
ing on which blindfold they had experienced. Their results showed that infants who had experi-
enced the trick blindfold subsequently followed the gaze of the experimenter who was wearing 
the blindfold signiﬁ cantly more than infants who had experienced the opaque blindfold, sug-
gesting that, indeed, infants had extrapolated their own ﬁ rst-person experience of seeing, or not 
seeing, to another person. 
 In a recent study, we extended this methodology to a false-belief scenario with 18-month-olds, 
and asked whether differential blindfold experience not only modulated what infants understood 
about what the other could see, but also their predictions about what the other would do (Senju, 
Southgate, Snape, Leonard & Csibra, 2011). As in Meltzoff and Brooks (2008), we provided two 
groups of infants with either an opaque blindfold experience, or a trick (transparent) blindfold 
experience. Following the blindfold experience, all infants took part in an anticipatory looking 
paradigm similar to that used by Southgate et al. (2007). The main difference between this study 
and the previous study is that, while in Southgate et al. (2007) infants saw the agent turn around 
while the puppet removed the object from the box, in this version the agent donned the blind-
fold. 2 We hypothesized that if infants understood from their own experience that the blindfold 
was opaque or transparent, then this should modulate whether they infer that the agent has seen 
the puppet remove the object or not and, consequently, whether the agent will search in the 
location where the object was before she put on the blindfold. Speciﬁ cally, we hypothesized that 
infants who had the opaque blindfold experience would understand that the agent could not see 
the puppet removing the object, and so should expect her to search in the location where she last 
 2    Both the transparent and opaque blindfold looked identical when worn by someone else, but regardless of 
condition, all infants saw a movie in which the agent wore the opaque blindfold. 

EARLY MANIFESTATIONS OF MINDREADING
10
saw the object (the false-belief location), whereas we hypothesized that infants who had the trick 
blindfold experience would understand that the agent could see the puppet removing the ball and 
so would have no particular expectation about where she would search. This is exactly what we 
found. Fourteen out of 18 infants who had undergone the opaque blindfold experience expected 
the agent to search in the false-belief location (a result signiﬁ cantly above chance), whereas only 
six out of 18 infants who had the trick blindfold experience looked in anticipation toward the 
false-belief location. These results show that, not only did infants use self-experience to assess 
what the other person could see, they understood the causal role that seeing has in generating 
action. Crucially, these results cannot be explained in terms of a reliance on behavioral rules 
because, since infants never saw the adult wearing the blindfold, they had no opportunity to 
acquire any behavioral correlate of blindfold wearing. 3    
 Beyond behavioral rules  
 The evidence reviewed above suggests that infants are not solving these false-belief scenarios by 
a reliance on learned behavioral rules and that they are, indeed, representing the world from the 
perspective of the other. However, to what extent does infants’ success on these tasks reﬂ ect an 
appreciation of mental state concepts as they are represented by adults, and what might infants 
representations look like? One of the biggest challenges is to account for why, if infants do possess 
a genuine representational theory of mind, do children younger than 4 years not pass the standard 
false-belief tasks? 
 Several theorists have attempted to explain this paradox. One theory is that young infants have 
a representational theory of mind, with concepts like seeing, knowing and believing, but are 
unable to demonstrate this knowledge on the standard false-belief tasks (German & Leslie, 2000; 
Baillargeon et al., 2010). For example, Baillargeon and colleagues argue that in order to respond 
correctly on the verbal false-belief task, infants would need not only to represent the other’s false 
belief, but additionally they would need to access this representation in order to select the correct 
response, and simultaneously inhibit a prepotent tendency to answer the question based on what 
they know to be true (Baillargeon et al., 2010; Scott & Baillargeon, 2009). This position advo-
cates that infant’s representations of other minds are not different from adults, but due to limited 
resources, or immature neural connections, they cannot do all three things (represent beliefs, select 
the right answer and inhibit the wrong answer) at once. 
 There are several problems with this account. Fundamentally, this account is open to similar criti-
cisms as previous accounts that involved explaining infants’ failures by appealing to limited execu-
tive resources. By designing tasks that alleviate some of the executive demands, several researchers 
have succeeded in lowering the age of passing false-belief tasks by a few months, but there is no 
dramatic change (e.g. Carlson, Moses & Hix, 1998; Surian & Leslie, 1999). A bigger problem is that it 
is not clear why performance on the so-called “spontaneous-response tasks” should not also require 
these additional elements that Baillargeon and colleagues (2010) reserve for the elicited response 
tasks. For Baillargeon and colleagues (2010), infant’s performance on their non-verbal false-belief 
tasks suggest that infants “realize that others act on the basis of their beliefs and that these beliefs are 
representations that may or may not mirror reality” (Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005). If it is, indeed, the 
case that infants performance on non-verbal false-belief tasks reﬂ ects this kind of understanding 
 3    See Penn & Povinelli (2007) for further arguments as to why expectations modulated by self-experience 
necessarily entails mental state attributions.  

BEYOND BEHAVIORAL RULES
11
(including an appreciation that the agent’s belief is a representation that is false), then presumably 
some response inhibition would need to be deployed in order for the infant not to respond based 
on what the infant knows to be the true location of the object? In Baillargeon and colleagues’ (2010) 
response account, it is not clear why a saccadic response (e.g. Senju et al., 2011; Southgate et al., 
2007) should be immune to an egocentric bias, but a verbal response should not be. 
 A second problem for this account is that more recent paradigms, in which infants also appear 
to consider others false beliefs, would appear to involve the elements of response selection and 
response inhibition that Baillargeon and colleagues (2010) argue are too challenging for infants 
limited resources. In one task, Southgate, Chevallier and Csibra (2010) presented 17-month-old 
infants with a paradigm in which, in order to select the object about which the experimenter was 
referring, infants needed to consider where the experimenter believed the object to be. Infants saw 
the experimenter placing a different novel object, one in each of two similar boxes, and closed the 
lids. The experimenter then left the room, after which a new experimenter suddenly appeared from 
behind the curtains at the back of the room, crept over to the boxes and switched their contents 
(i.e. the object in the left-hand box was transferred to the right-hand box, and vice versa). The 
new experimenter then closed the lids again and crept back behind the curtains. At this point, the 
original experimenter returned to the room, knelt down behind the two boxes and pointed toward 
one of the closed boxes and said to the infant “Do you remember what I put in here? Can you get 
it for me?”.  4   Since the experimenter was not in the room when the objects were switched, infants 
should reason that she is  not now referring to the object that is actually in the box toward which she 
is pointing, but the object that was in the box and is now in the other box. So, the correct response 
is to give the experimenter the object in the non-referred-to box. The results showed that this is 
what infants did: nine out of 12 infants selected the object in the non-referred box in response to 
the experimenter’s request. On the other hand, in a true-belief control condition in which the ﬁ rst 
experimenter stayed in the room and witnessed the second experimenter switching the contents of 
the boxes, nine out of 12 infants chose the box that the experimenter was actually pointing to. In 
this case, because she saw the switch and knew the contents of the boxes, infants took her pointing 
as referring to the object that was now in the box. 
 According to Baillargeon and colleagues, this kind of “indirect elicited-response” task would 
not demand the same kind of response selection and inhibition processes required by the 
standard false-belief task because there is no question that directly taps their representation of 
the agent’s belief (Baillargeon et al., 2010). It is not clear on what grounds Baillargeon and col-
leagues (2010) draw the conclusion that a direct (e.g. standard Sally-Anne task) and an indirect 
(e.g. Southgate et al., 2010) elicited-response task would require differences in response-selection 
and response-inhibition. Both tasks require an explicit  5 response from the infant, and in order 
to generate their response, infants need to consider what the agent thinks about the location of 
the objects. Moreover, it could be argued that the Southgate et al. (2010) task is also demanding 
of inhibitory processes. In this task, infants need to ignore the location toward which the agent is 
pointing, and thus made most salient, and select the other box that the experimenter is ignoring. 
 4   It is possible that, if understood, the initial phrase “do you remember what I put in here?” could have cued 
infants to think about which object the experimenter put in there, rather than about what the experimenter 
thinks is in there. Thus, in an additional experiment, we used a different phrase (“do you know what is in 
here”) with identical results. 
 5   As opposed to a gaze-based (looking-time or anticipatory-looking) response, which many have termed an 
“implicit” response. However, it should be recognized that his is simply a description of the two kinds of 
responses and does not tell us anything about the computations involved.  

EARLY MANIFESTATIONS OF MINDREADING
12
Thus, presumably, some degree of response-inhibition is required for this task, and there seems no 
a priori reason to assume that, if response inhibition is required to pass the standard Sally-Anne 
task, it is greater than would be required to pass this kind of “indirect” elicited-response task (see 
also Buttelmann Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2009). 6 
 Thinking about what is involved in passing false-belief tasks 
 Evidence reviewed in previous sections should give us reason to doubt that the gap between infants 
passing non-verbal theory of mind tasks, and the age at which children pass standard theory of 
mind tasks can be explained either by appealing to behavioral rules (Perner & Ruffman, 2005), or 
the elimination of response selection and inhibition (Baillargeon et al., 2010). In the absence of a 
convincing explanation for why infants pass non-verbal false-belief tasks, but older children still 
fail verbal false-belief tasks, we should think carefully about just what is involved in success on 
these different tasks. 
 According to Scott, Baillargeon and colleagues’ response account, infants possess a decoupling 
mechanism that enables them “to hold in mind two distinct versions of a scene: one that corresponds 
to reality, and one that incorporates the agent’s false belief” (Scott et al., 2009). Furthermore, they 
argue that infants realize that other’s beliefs may not mirror reality (Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005). 
While they argue that response inhibition is not required for non-verbal false-belief task success, 
others disagree and argue that the lack of a bias toward responding based on the reality-based 
representation is puzzling given that (a) infants have notoriously poor inhibitory capacities and 
(b) even adults default to a reality-based interpretation of others’ behavior under certain circum-
stances (Ruffman & Perner, 2005; Samson & Apperly, 2010). 
 While it is often assumed that success on false-belief tasks (verbal or non-verbal) requires that 
children realize that others’ beliefs are distinct from their own (e.g. Carpendale & Lewis, 2006; 
Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005), this is not necessarily so. In early discussions of what constitutes an 
understanding of other minds, the emphasis was on representing other’s representations (Dennett, 
1978) without emphasis of the need to appreciate the fact that other’s representations might con-
ﬂ ict with reality. The development of the false-belief task evolved not out of a need to demonstrate 
any appreciation that beliefs can be false, but rather because predictions based on beliefs that are 
true, while they might reﬂ ect mental state reasoning, might just as easily reﬂ ect infant’s expecta-
tion that others will behave in accord with reality. To borrow Dennett’s Punch and Judy example, 
the fact that 4-year-olds squeal in anticipatory delight when they see Punch about to push the box 
(that he thinks contains Judy, even though the children have seen her escape) off the cliff suggests 
they were able to reason that he is acting on a mistaken belief that Judy is still in the box. They laugh 
because they know that Judy is not in the box, but that Punch thinks she is. It is only funny because 
children know both of these things: they know that Punch has a belief, and  that  his belief is false. 
 Do infants need to appreciate both of these things in order to generate a prediction concerning 
where an agent will search when she hasn’t seen the displacement of her desired toy? The answer is 
no, not necessarily. In order to generate a correct prediction about where someone will search for an 
object, infants need only to consider the agent’s representation of the object’s location. They do not 
need to understand or appreciate that her representation is false, or think about how it compares 
with reality. To illustrate, in Southgate et al. (2007), infants observe an agent turn around after a pup-
pet has put a toy in the left-hand container. During the time she is oriented away from the scene, the 
 6   However, as we will discuss in the following section, inhibition may be required to a greater extent on tasks 
in which the infants own perspective is explicitly highlighted.  

THINKING ABOUT WHAT IS INVOLVED IN PASSING FALSE-BELIEF TASKS
13
puppet returns to take the toy away. To correctly anticipate that the agent will search in the left-hand 
box upon her return, infants might reason that she will search in the left-hand box because she last 
saw it there even though it is actually now in the right-hand box. Alternatively, they might reason that 
she will search in the left-hand box because she last saw it there. The exact same prediction would be 
made irrespective of whether or not infants encode her representation as false or not. 
 Is it plausible to think that infants might represent the agent’s representation, without consid-
ering how that representation compares with reality? One argument might be that, due to their 
limited ability to act on the world themselves, the most important events to encode and retain are 
those that are relevant for others’ actions. The location of the ball as represented by the agent will 
be predictive of her actions, but the location of the ball as represented by the infant will not be. One 
possibility then is that infants maintain in working memory only the most relevant representation 
for their purposes. In non-verbal false-belief tasks, during habituation or familiarization trials, 
infants are essentially told that, what is relevant is what the agent will do. For example, in Southgate 
et al. (2007), infants observe two familiarization trials during which they are trained that when the 
windows light up and they hear this simultaneous chime sound, the agent will reach through one 
of the windows. Eliciting anticipatory saccades to the windows works only because the infant is 
motivated to care about this aspect of the event (either because they care anyway, or because we 
train them that this is what is relevant). Plenty of evidence shows that we do not always encode or 
retain information that we do not deem to be relevant, and that we pay attention to some things at 
the expense of others (e.g. Duncan, 2006). Although phenomena such as change or inattentional 
blindness have been most extensively studied in adults, there is also evidence showing that infants 
encode or retain different aspects of events depending on what they perceive as being most relevant 
(e.g. Mareshal & Johnson, 2000; Yoon et al., 2008). Thus, it is not implausible to take seriously the 
possibility that infants might not encode, or might not retain, the true location of an object that is 
the target of someone else’s actions. 
 Moreover, recent research suggests that sometimes, we may not store our own and others’ per-
spectives as distinct versions of reality that we can keep separate and compare, and that our encod-
ing of others’ experiences can even interfere with our encoding of our own experience of an event. 
For example, in a task in which adults had to make rapid judgments about how many objects were 
present in a scene, Samson and colleagues found that reaction times were slower when the number 
of objects that were visible to the subject and an avatar were different, suggesting that the agent was 
also computing the scene from the others’ perspective and had to overcome this representation in 
order to make a correct judgment (Samson, Apperly, Braithwaite & Andrews, 2010). An interesting 
aspect of these results was that adults were actually slightly faster to judge someone else’s perspec-
tive than they were to judge their own perspective, raising the possibility that sometimes, someone 
else’s perspective might be given greater importance than one’s own. In a similar study, Kovacs and 
colleagues gave subjects an object-detection task (Kovacs, Teglas & Endress, 2010). Participants 
watched as a Smurf character rolled a ball behind an occluder. Sometimes the participant’s and the 
agent’s beliefs differed (i.e. the participant had seen the ball roll away while the agent was away, so 
the participant knew the object was absent, but the agent should think it is present) and sometimes 
they were the same (i.e. both saw the ball leave, or both saw the ball roll back behind the occluder). 
Kovacs et al. (2010) measured participant’s reaction times to detecting the presence of the ball once 
the occluder was lowered and found that even when participants had seen the ball roll away, if the 
agent should think the ball is present (because he was not there when the ball rolled away), par-
ticipants were just as fast at detecting the object as when they themselves should think it is behind 
the occluder (because they had not seen it roll away). Both these results suggest that sometimes we 
may encode the others’ perspective even at the expense of our own. Kovacs and colleagues (2010) 

EARLY MANIFESTATIONS OF MINDREADING
14
also extended their paradigm to 7-month-old infants and found a similar phenomenon: infants 
who had observed a ball roll away (so should represent no ball behind the occluder), but who knew 
that the Smurf was absent when the ball rolled away (so the Smurf should represent the ball as still 
being behind the occluder), looked longer when the ball was revealed to be absent than when the 
infant and the Smurf had both seen the ball roll away. These results raise the possibility that infants 
may not be representing the other’s perspective of an event as a separate version of reality that 
they could compare with their own, and that their own representation of the event does not take 
precedence. However, although these results tell us that infants encode the others’ perspective, and 
that it interferes with their own representation of an event, they do not tell us whether sometimes 
infants might  preferentially encode or retain the perspective of the other. 
 Nevertheless, this hypothesis would provide an alternative explanation for why infant’s performance 
on false-belief tasks is not subject to an egocentric bias. If infants encode the other’s perspective, but 
either fail to encode, or fail to maintain in memory, events that occurred during her absence (which 
would not alter, or be relevant to, her subsequent actions), then there would be no alternative reality 
to inhibit. Infants would preferentially retain the aspects of the event that are directly relevant for the 
other’s expected action, and while this would constitute a metarepresentation, it would not amount 
to an understanding of belief as a concept which can be true or false, and the truth value of the others 
representation may not be considered.  7   This kind of representation would sufﬁ ce for infants to gener-
ate accurate predictions about what others will do, but it would also have limitations. Returning to 
Dennett’s Punch and Judy example, infants might be able to understand that Punch wants to get rid 
of Judy and that Punch represents Judy as being the in the box and so will push the box over the cliff. 
However, they would not ﬁ nd it funny in the way that 4-year-olds do because the humor of this event 
comes from the fact that children know that she’s not really in the box, and they can compare their 
knowledge with Punch’s belief, and it is this difference in representations that makes the event funny. 
Furthermore, while representing the others’ perspective without considering it’s truth value would be 
sufﬁ cient for action predictions, it is likely to be insufﬁ cient for explaining why others are acting as they 
are. This kind of perspective-taking might enable you to predict where Sally will search, but you will not 
be able to explain why Sally comes up empty-handed (see Andrews, 2003 for a similar distinction). 
 Finally, if infants could pass false-belief tasks without understanding that the belief is false, it may 
provide an explanation for why children do not pass the standard false-belief task until around 4 
years of age. In most non-verbal tasks, there is nothing that forces infants to consider the real state 
of affairs, or to consider the others’ perspective as distinct from their own. Infants are free to attend 
to whatever they deem most relevant. On the other hand, in verbal false-belief tasks, instructions 
often make it explicit that the other person has a perspective that differs from the child’s own 
perspective and experimenters typically highlight the reality by asking children memory questions 
like “where is the ball really?” or “what is in the box?”. This kind of questioning may lead children 
to consider the real location of the object and, until they have the ability to deal appropriately with 
two conﬂ icting representations, they may default to answering in terms of their own perspective.  
 Conclusions 
 Our view of infant’s social cognitive abilities has undergone a radical transformation in the last 
 decade with the publication of results suggesting that even very young infants are considering 
others’ perspectives on the world, and are not, as was once thought, trapped in an egocentric 
viewpoint. The results of the non-verbal, and indirect elicited response, false-belief tasks suggest 
 7    Samson & Apperly advocate a similar position. 

15
REFERENCES
that, long before children turn four, they understand that others’ own experiences modulate their 
actions. The discovery that this understanding exists early in childhood not only gives support 
to previous interpretations of children’s behavior in naturalistic settings (Dunn, 1991), but also 
provides a solution to the tension that has existed between the views that young children are com-
petent communicators but incompetent mindreaders (Breheny, 2006). 
 However, while infants can track events from others’ perspectives, this need not imply that the 
representations that underlie their mindreading abilities are the same as the representations that 
support belief reasoning in older children and adults. For example, theory of mind comprises 
not only the formation of a representation of someone’s thought or perspective, but the proc-
ess of using that representation to generate predictions about how those thoughts will inﬂ uence 
behavior (Dennett, 1978). However, while looking-time data tell us that 7- and 10-month-olds are 
representing events from others’ perspectives (Kovacs et al., 2010; Luo, 2011), they do not tell us 
whether these younger infants can use these inferences to generate predictions about how others 
will behave. Furthermore, we do not know whether infants, like adults, understand that a belief 
can be false, or when attributing a belief to someone, whether young infants are considering the 
truth value of that belief. Finally, while we readily talk about infants’ understanding of mental 
state concepts like “knowledge” and “beliefs,” we do not really know what infants mental state 
concepts might look like. Do infants possess distinct mental state concepts like knowledge and 
belief? It is possible that initially, infants may have available only a core epistemic-state concept (P. 
Carruthers, personal communication), which only gradually becomes differentiated with develop-
ment. The kind of nuanced mental state concepts that adults possess are likely to be culture- and 
language-dependent and, while there may exist core psychological concepts that are universal and 
available pre-linguistically, further mental state concepts may be dependent on linguistic input 
(Scholl & Leslie, 1999; Wellman, 1998). Thus, while the evidence suggests that infants are tracking 
others’ epistemic states from an early age, it is important to recognize that there are various ways 
in which this understanding might differ from an adult-like understanding, while ensuring that 
infants are very good at ﬁ guring out what others will do. 
 Acknowledgements 
 I would like to thank Teodora Gliga for valuable discussion and comments on an earlier version 
of this chapter. VS is supported by a Wellcome Trust Research Career Development Fellowship 
(088427/Z/09/Z). 
 References 
 Andrews, K. (2003).  Knowing mental states: Th e asymmetry of psychological prediction and explanation . 
In Q. Smith and A. Jokic (Eds),  Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives (pp. 201–219) .  Oxford : 
 Oxford University Press . 
 Baillargeon, R., Scott, R., & He, Z. (2010).  False-belief understanding in infants .  Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences ,  14 ,  110–18 . 
 Baillargeon, R., Spelke, E. S., & Wasserman, S. (1985).  Object permanence in fi ve-month-old infants . 
 Cognition ,  20 ,  191–208 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985).  Does the autistic child have a theory of mind? 
 Cognition ,  21 ,  37–46 . 
 Bloom, P. (2000).  How Children Learn the Meanings of Words . Cambridge, MA:  MIT Press . 
 Breheny, R. (2006).  Communication and folk psychology .  Mind and Language ,  21 (1),  74–107 . 

EARLY MANIFESTATIONS OF MINDREADING
16
 Buttelmann, D., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2009).  Eighteen-month-olds show false belief under-
standing in an active helping paradigm .  Cognition ,  112 ,  337–42 . 
 Carlson, S. M., Moses, L. J., & Hix, H. R. (1998).  Th e role of inhibitory control in young children’s diffi  cul-
ties with deception and false belief .  Child Development ,  69 ,  672–91 . 
 Carpendale, J., & Lewis, C. (2006).  How Children Develop Social Understanding .  Oxford :  Blackwell. 
 Dennett, D. C. (1978).  Beliefs about beliefs .  Brain and Behavioral Sciences ,  1 ,  568–70 . 
 Duncan, J. (2006).  Brain mechanisms of attention .  Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology ,  59 ,  2–27. 
 Dunn, J. (1991).  Understanding others: Evidence from naturalistic studies of children . In A. Whiten (Ed.), 
 Natural Th eories of Mind: Evolution, Development and Simulation of Everyday Mindreading (pp.  51–61 ). 
 Oxford :  Blackwell . 
 Friedman, O., & Petrashek, A. R. (2009).  Children do not follow the rule “ignorance means getting it 
wrong” .  Journal of Experimental Child Psychology ,  102 ,  114–21 . 
 Gergely, G., & Csibra, G. (2003).  Teleological reasoning in infancy: the na ï ve theory of rational action . 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences ,  7 (7),  287–92 . 
 Gergely, G., Nadasdy, Z., Csibra, G., & Biro, S. (1995).  Taking the intentional stance at 12 months of age . 
 Cognition ,  56 ,  165–93 . 
 German, T. P., & Leslie, A. M. (2000).  Attending to and learning about mental states . In P. Mitchell & K. 
Riggs (Eds),  Children’s Reasoning and the Mind (pp. 229–252) .  Hove :  Psychology Press . 
 Gomez, J. C. (2008).  Th e evolution of pretence: From intentional availability to intentional non-existence . 
 Mind & Language ,  23 (5),  586–606 . 
 Gopnik, A., & Astington, J. W. (1988).  Children’s understanding of representational change and its relation 
to understanding of false belief and the appearance-reality distinction .  Child Development ,  59 (1),  26–37 . 
 Grice, H. P. (1989).  Studies in the Way of Words .  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press . 
 Hedger, J. A., & Fabricius, W. V. (2011).  True belief belies false belief: Recent fi ndings of competence in 
infants and limitations in 5-year-olds, and implications for theory of mind development .  Review of 
Philosophy and Psychology, 2 (3), 429–447. 
 Heyes, C. M. (1998).  Th eory of mind in nonhuman primates .  Behavioral and Brain Sciences ,  21 ,  101–14 . 
 Knudsen, B., & Liszkowski, U. (2012a).  Eighteen- and 24-month-old infants correct others in anticipation 
of action mistakes .  Developmental Science, 15(1), 113–122 . 
 Knudsen, B., & Liszkowski, U. (2012b).  18-month-olds predict specifi c action mistakes through attribution 
of false belief, not ignorance, and intervene accordingly .  Infancy, 17(6), 672–691 . 
 Kovacs, A. M., Teglas, E., & Endress, A. D. (2010).  Th e social sense: Susceptibility to others’ beliefs in 
human infants and adults .  Science ,  330 (6012),  1830–4 . 
 Leslie, A. M. (1994).  ToMM, ToBy and Agency: Core architecture and domain specifi city . In L. Hirschfeld 
and S. Gelman (Eds),  Mapping the Mind: Domain Specifi city in Cognition and Culture (pp. 119–148) . 
 New York :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Leslie, A. M., & Polizzi, P. (1998).  Inhibitory processing in the false belief task: Two conjectures . 
 Developmental Science ,  1 ,  247–53 . 
 Low, J., & Wang, B. (2011).  On the long road to mentalism in children’s spontaneous false-belief under-
standing: are we there yet?  Review of Philosophy and Psychology ,  2 (3),  411–28 . 
 Luo, Y. (2011).  Do 10-month-old infants understand others’ false beliefs?  Cognition ,  121 (3),  289–98 . 
 Mareschal, D. & Johnson, M. H. (2003).  Th e “what” and “where” of object representations in infancy . 
 Cognition ,  88 ,  259–76 . 
 Meltzoff , A. M., & Brookes, R. (2008).  Self-experience as a mechanism for learning about others: A training 
study in social cognition .  Developmental Psychology ,  44 (5),  1257–65 . 
 Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005).  Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs?   Science ,  308 , 
 255–8 . 

17
REFERENCES
 Penn, D. C., & Povinelli, D. J. (2007).  On the lack of evidence that non-human animals possess anything 
remotely resembling a “theory of mind” .  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, B ,  362 ,  731–44 . 
 Perner, J., Leekam, S. R., & Wimmer, H. (1987).  Th ree-year-olds’ diffi  culty with false belief: Th e case for a 
conceptual defi cit .  British Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  5 (2),  125–37 . 
 Perner, J., & Ruff man, T. (2005).  Infants’ insight into the mind: How deep?  Science ,  308 ,  214–16 . 
 Piaget, J. (1954).  Th e Construction of Reality in the Child .  New York :  Basic . 
 Povinelli, D. J., & Vonk, J. (2003).  Chimpanzee minds: suspiciously human?  Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 
 7 (4),  157–60 . 
 Premack, D. & Woodruff , G. (1978).  Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind?  Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences ,  4 ,  515–26 . 
 Ruff man, T. (1996).  Do children understand the mind by means of simulation or a theory? Evidence from 
their understanding of inference .  Mind & Language ,  11 ,  388–414 . 
 Ruff man, T., & Perner, J. (2005).  Do infants really understand false belief? Response to Leslie .  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences ,  9 ,  462–3 . 
 Ruff man, T., Slade, L., Redman, J. (2005).  Young infants’ expectations about hidden objects .  Cognition ,  97 , 
 B35–43 . 
 Ruff man, T., Taumoepeau, M., & Perkins, C. (2011).  Statistical learning as a basis for social understanding 
in children .  British Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  30 (1), 87–104. 
 Samson, D., & Apperly, I. A. (2010).  Th ere is more to mind reading than having theory of mind concepts: 
New directions in theory of mind research .  Infant and Child Development ,  19 ,  443–54 . 
 Samson, D., Apperly, I. A., Braithwaite, J., & Andrews, B. (2010).  Seeing it their way: Evidence for rapid 
and involuntary computation of what other people see .  Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human 
Perception and Performance ,  36 (5),  1255–66 . 
 Scholl, B. J., & Leslie, A. M. (1999).  Modularity, development and “theory of mind” .  Mind & Language ,  14 , 
 131–53 . 
 Scott, R. M., & Baillargeon, R. (2009).  Which penguin is this? Attributing false beliefs about object identity 
at 18 months .  Child Development ,  80 ,  1172–96 . 
 Scott, R. M., Baillargeon, R., Song, H., & Leslie, A. M. (2010).  Attributing false beliefs about non-obvious 
properties at 18 months .  Cognitive Psychology ,  61 (4),  366–95 . 
 Senju, A., Southgate, V., Snape, C., Leonard, M., & Csibra, G. (2011).  Do 18-month-olds really attribute 
mental states to others? A critical test .  Psychological Science ,  22 ,  878–80 . 
 Song, H., & Baillargeon, R. (2008).  Infants’ reasoning about others’ false perceptions .  Developmental 
Psychology ,  44 (6),  1789–95 . 
 Song, H., Onishi, K. H., Baillargeon, R., & Fisher, C. (2008).  Can an agent’s false belief be corrected by an 
appropriate communication? Psychological reasoning in 18-month-old infants .  Cognition ,  109 ,  295–315 . 
 Southgate, V., Chevallier, C., & Csibra, G. (2010).  Seventeen-month-olds appeal to false beliefs to interpret 
others’ referential communication .  Developmental Science ,  16 ,  907–912 . 
 Southgate, V., & Csibra, G. (2009).  Inferring the outcome of an ongoing novel action at 13 months . 
 Developmental Psychology ,  45 ,  1794–8 . 
 Southgate, V., Senju, A., & Csibra, G. (2007).  Action anticipation through attribution of false belief by 
2-year-olds .  Psychological Science ,  18 ,  587–92 . 
 Surian, L., Caldi, S., & Sperber, D. (2007).  Attribution of beliefs by 13-month-old infants .  Psychological 
Science ,  18 (7),  580–6 . 
 Surian, L., & Leslie, A. M. (1999).  Competence and performance in false belief understanding: A compari-
son of autistic and normal 3-year-old children .  British Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  17 ,  141–55 . 
 Trauble, B., Marinovic, V., & Pauen, S. (2010).  Early theory of mind competencies: Do infants understand 
others’ belief?  Infancy ,  15 ,  434–44 . 

EARLY MANIFESTATIONS OF MINDREADING
18
 Verfaille, K., & Daems, A. (2002)  Representing and anticipating human actions in vision .  Visual Cognition , 
 9 ,  217–32 . 
 Wellman, H. M. (1998).  Culture, variation and levels of analysis in folk psychologies .  Psychological Bulletin , 
 21 ,  33–6 . 
 Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001).  Meta-analysis of theory of mind development: Th e truth 
about false belief .  Child Development ,  72 ,  655–84 . 
 Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983).  Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining function of wrong 
beliefs in children’s understanding of deception .  Cognition ,  13 ,  103–28 . 
 Woodward, A. L. (1998).  Infants selectively encode the goal object of an actor’s reach .  Cognition ,  69 ,  1–34 . 
 Woodward, A. L. (1999).  Infants’ ability to distinguish between purposeful and non-purposeful behaviors . 
 Infant Behavior and Development ,  22 (2),  145–60 . 
 Yoon, J. M. D., Johnson, M. H., & Csibra, G. (2008).  Communication-induced memory biases in preverbal 
infants .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America ,  105 ,  13690–5 . 
 Yott, J., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2012).  Breaking the rules: Do infants have a true understanding of false 
belief?  British Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  30 (1),  156–71 . 

 Chapter 2 
 Learning about the mind from evidence:  
Children’s development of intuitive 
theories of perception and personality  
 Andrew N.   Meltzoff  and   Alison  Gopnik 
 Where does our understanding of the mind come from? Different theoretical perspectives have 
different views on this question. Strong modularity and core knowledge theories (e.g. Leslie, 2005) 
propose that the essentials of our adult understanding of others are in place initially, and develop-
ment involves relatively small changes in that knowledge around the edges. Strong “embodiment” 
and “resonance” theories (e.g. simulation and mirror-neuron based accounts of mindreading, 
such as Gordon, 1996 or Gallese & Goldman, 1998) also do not focus on developmental change 
and argue that our understanding of the mind is fundamentally not inductive. Rather than learn-
ing about the mind from evidence, both these views see our understanding as due to relatively 
automatic and specialized triggering or resonance processes. We “take on” the mental states of oth-
ers or project our own experiences on to them—rather than inferring those states from evidence. 
 In contrast, “theory-theory” accounts (Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997; Gopnik & Wellman, 1994) 
propose that our understanding of the mind, at least in large part, involves learning abstract 
causal structures from evidence—hence, the analogy to theory change in science—involving inital 
hypotheses, tests, and conceptual revision. In the past, these claims were largely made on the basis 
of the naturally occurring changes in children’s understanding of the mind over time. Moreover, it 
was unclear just what kinds of learning mechanism would allow children to learn about a complex 
and invisible system like the mind so swiftly and effectively. 
 In the past 10 years, however, this has begun to change. First, there are results from training 
studies with young children, which show that providing evidence can lead to changes in chil-
dren’s understanding of the mind. For example, Amsterlaw and Wellman (2006) and Slaughter 
and Gopnik (1996) both showed that three-and-a-half-year-olds who received evidence about 
beliefs shifted to a new understanding of belief more quickly than those who did not. Importantly, 
this extended not only to their performance on the classic false-belief task, but to their under-
standing of related concepts like the appearance/reality distinction and the sources of beliefs. 
Interestingly, children showed this effect most clearly when they were asked to explain, rather 
than just describe the evidence. Moreover, naturally occurring variations in the availability of 
evidence children receive can change the timing of their belief understanding. For example, deaf 
children of hearing parents have markedly delayed false-belief understanding (see Gopnik & 
Wellman, 2012, for a review). 
 Even with these training effects, however, we might argue that the incoming evidence simply 
accelerates or delays a naturally occurring change. A more powerful demonstration of the role of 
evidence comes when we design experiments in which we systematically give infants or children 
different kinds of new evidence about a system and see what kinds of inferences they draw. This 

LEARNING ABOUT THE MIND FROM EVIDENCE
20
has been the approach taken in both the statistical learning literature and the causal learning lit-
erature. When children are provided new patterns of evidence under experimental control, and 
the different patterns of evidence lead them to different conclusions, it seems more obvious that 
the evidence itself is doing the causal work. For the most part, however, this work has focused on 
children’s learning of language (e.g. Kuhl, 2004; Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996), physical prop-
erties of objects (Wu, Gopnik, Richardson, & Kirkham, 2011), or physical causal relations (e.g. 
Bonawitz, Lim, & Schulz, 2007; Gopnik, Glymour, Sobel, Schulz, Kushnir, & Danks, 2004; Meltzoff, 
Waismeyer, & Gopnik, 2012; Sobel & Kirham, 2006), rather than on their psychological learning. 
The experiments we discuss in this chapter move beyond this to examine infants’ and young chil-
dren’s developing understanding of other people’s minds. 
 Probabilistic models and Bayesian learning  
 In parallel with the ﬁ eld accumulating new data, theoretical work over the last 10 years (e.g. 
Gopnik, 2012; Gopnik et al., 2004; Meltzoff, Kuhl, Movellan, & Sejnowski, 2009; Tenenbaum, 
Kemp, Grifﬁ ths, & Goodman, 2011) has shown increasingly that it is possible to specify more 
precisely and formally how children learn from evidence. In particular, within the framework of 
probabilistic models and Bayesian inference we can think of children’s learning as a process of 
hypothesis testing and revision (Gopnik, 2012; Tenenbaum et al., 2011). Children use probabilistic 
models to generate structured hypotheses, then test and revise those theories in a systematic way 
based on evidence. Moreover, rather than simply generating a yes or no decision about whether a 
particular hypothesis is true, Bayesian inference considers multiple hypotheses and assigns prob-
abilities to those hypotheses. Bayesian methods let you determine the probability of possibilities. 
The integration of prior knowledge and new evidence in Bayesian reasoning also gives Bayesian 
inference a characteristic combination of stability and ﬂ exibility—a learner will be reluctant to 
give up a strongly-conﬁ rmed hypothesis, but even the most entrenched idea can be rejected if 
enough counter-evidence accumulates. 
 Moreover, according to the theory-theory view, children often are not just learning particu-
lar causal relations but are also learning abstract generalizations about causal structure. In fact, 
empirical research has shown that children develop more abstract, framework knowledge over and 
above their speciﬁ c causal knowledge. For example, children may know in general that actions are 
caused by beliefs and desires without being able to say exactly which beliefs and desires are involved 
in any particular case. 
 These broader generalizations are important in both scientiﬁ c and intuitive theories. Philosophers 
of science refer to “over-hypotheses” (Goodman 1955), or “research programs” (Laudan 1977), or 
“paradigms” (Kuhn 1962) to capture these higher-order generalizations. Cognitive developmen-
talists have used the term “framework theories” (Carey 2009; Wellman 1990; Wellman & Gelman 
1992). For example, in their framework theories, children assume there are different kinds of vari-
ables and causal structure in psychology vs. biology vs. physics. In fact, they often understand 
these abstract regularities before they understand speciﬁ c causal relationships (e.g. Simons & Keil, 
1995). 
 Some nativists argue that this must mean that the more abstract causal knowledge is innate. 
In contrast, constructivists, including Piaget and theory theorists, hold that this abstract causal 
knowledge could be learned. How could this be? 
 Grifﬁ ths and Tenenbaum (2007, 2009; Tenenbaum, et al., 2011), inspired by both philosophy 
of science and cognitive development, have formulated computational ways of representing and 
learning higher-order generalizations about causal structure. Following Gelman, Carlin, Stern, 

PROBABILISTIC MODELS IN DEVELOPMENT
21
& Rubin (2003), they call their approach hierarchical Bayesian modeling (HBM) or, sometimes, 
theory-based Bayesian modeling. The idea is to have meta-representations, that is, representations 
of the structure of particular causal hypotheses, and of the nature of the variables and relationships 
involved in those causal networks. These higher-level beliefs can constrain the more particular 
causal hypotheses. Moreover, these higher-level generalizations can themselves be learned. HBMs 
stack up hypotheses at different levels. The higher levels contain general principles that specify 
which hypotheses to entertain at the lower level. 
 Computational work on HBMs has shown that, at least normatively, hierarchical Bayesian learn-
ing can actually work. Higher-level framework theories can, indeed, be updated in a Bayesian way via 
evidence that contacts only lower level hypotheses. Grifﬁ ths and Tenenbaum (2007) provide several 
simple demonstrations; Kemp, Perfors, & Tenenbaum (2007) and Goodman, Ullman, & Tenenbaum 
(2011) provide more comprehensive and complex ones. These demonstrations show that it is possi-
ble, in principle, to learn to proceed at several levels at once—not just at the level of speciﬁ c hypothe-
ses, but also at the level of speciﬁ c theories and, even more abstractly, at the framework theory level.  
 Probabilistic models in development  
 Probabilistic models were originally designed to be ideal rational accounts of how a scientist or a 
computer could best solve a learning problem. They also have attractions as theories of the learn-
ing mechanisms of cognitive development. One attraction is that, at least in principle, this kind of 
learning would allow children to gradually move from one structured hypothesis to another very 
different hypothesis based on patterns of evidence—children would not be restricted to making 
small tweaks to innate modules or to simply accumulating new data. The probabilistic nature of 
Bayesian inference also captures the often gradual and piecemeal way that development proceeds. 
At the same time, the generative power of structured models and hypotheses might help explain 
the abstract and general character of children’s inferences. 
 In addition, the probabilistic models view gives us a new way to think about the innate bases 
of cognition. Rather than thinking about innate perceptual-cognitive structures as ﬁ rm “con-
straints” on the kinds of knowledge that a human can develop, an innate “prior” might weigh 
certain hypotheses as more likely than others, but even these hypotheses could be overturned with 
sufﬁ cient counter-evidence. The work on hierarchical Bayesian learning (Grifﬁ ths & Tenenbaum, 
2007) suggests that “priors” may not only take the form of speciﬁ c hypotheses about particular 
causal relationships, but may involve broader “framework principles” about general theoretical 
categories and causal relations. These framework principles shape many more speciﬁ c hypotheses, 
but they may themselves be overturned with sufﬁ cient counter-evidence. 
 Developmental changes in understanding the mind 
 We suggest that in terms of our understanding of the mind, a strong prior and innate “framework 
principle” is that our own mental states and those of others are likely to be similar. We can think of 
this as a Bayesian version of the “like-me” hypothesis that we have argued for in the past (Meltzoff, 
2007, 2013; Meltzoff & Gopnik, 1993). This assumption shapes the human infants’ early learning 
about the mind, allowing a framework for preferring some hypotheses to others. It is, however, 
only the beginning of our learning about the mind. Within the framework principle, we can use 
evidence to elaborate on our initial understanding in complex and abstract ways. Eventually, with 
accumulating evidence concerning differences between our own perceptions, desires, and beliefs, 
and those of others, we can revise or overturn that framework principle, as shown by developmen-
tal research (e.g. Gopnik & Wellman, 2012; Moll & Meltzoff, 2011; Repacholi & Gopnik, 1997). 

LEARNING ABOUT THE MIND FROM EVIDENCE
22
 In this chapter, we take the problem of  developmental change in children’s understanding of the 
mind to be central, and illustrate the foregoing ideas with two examples. The ﬁ eld’s (over) concern 
with the shift in children’s verbal reasoning about false belief at 3–4 years of age has obscured the 
important fact that the human intuition of how the mind works is an extended process, including 
signiﬁ cant changes both much earlier and later than the classic preschool shift. We consider both 
an earlier and a later set of developments. In both cases, we show that providing children with 
particular patterns of evidence, whether evidence from their own experience or about the behavior 
of others, can lead to novel and systematic new causal models of how the mind works. Moreover, 
in both cases we invoke the idea of a Bayesian framework principle. The ﬁ rst example concerns 
infants’ early understanding of other people’s visual perception. We suggest that the initial frame-
work principle adopted preverbally, and perhaps present at birth, constrains inferences, but is itself 
inﬂ uenced by evidence. In the second example, the development of an understanding of personal-
ity traits, we suggest that this higher-order principle is actually initially inferred from data, but then 
acts as a constraint on further inferences.   
 Understanding perception  
 Recent studies show that infants use ﬁ rst-person visual experiences as evidence for a new understand-
ing of the perceptions of others. The research is built from the ﬁ nding that young infants make a puz-
zling error. In gaze-following studies, 12-month-olds follow a person’s line of regard to an external 
object even when a blindfold occludes that person’s viewpoint. They do not make this error, however, 
when the person closes his eyes (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2002, 2005). Why do young infants seem to have 
a privileged understanding of eye closing over and above other blindfolds? 
 One idea is that infants have extensive evidence about the causal relation between eye closure and 
visual experience, but initially have much less evidence about other kinds of occlusion. Eye closure 
is a biological motion with which infants have extensive ﬁ rst-person, agentive experience. Even very 
young infants have strong evidence about the causal relation between whether their eyes are open 
or closed, and their visual experience. They can easily perform informal “tests” to assess this causal 
link—they can control their own vision by closing and opening their eyes. When they close their 
eyes, the visual world goes black, and when they open them the world pops back into view. Perhaps 
infants use this evidence, along with their initial “like-me” causal framework principle, to make the 
attribution about others’ visual experiences. What applies to me, also applies to you. 
 This predicts that if infants are given systematic evidence that blindfolds block their own view, 
they should suddenly make different attributions to others. Meltzoff and Brooks (2008) tested this 
idea with 12-month-olds. Infants were randomly assigned to three experimental groups that dif-
fered only in the nature of the evidence provided to the infants. Infants in the key treatment group 
were given massive experience with blindfolds (see Figure 2.1). When the infant looked at a toy, the 
adult blocked the view with a blindfold. She then lowered it in a playful manner, only to repeat the 
cycle for the next toy the child ﬁ xed. Infants experienced that their own view was blocked, but they 
were given no training about the adult’s viewpoint. A control group involved a cloth made from 
the same material as the blindfold, but with a small window cut out of the center. Infants in this 
control received the same protocol (controlling for cloth raising/lowering); however, they could 
peer through the windowed cloth. In a second control group, infants were familiarized with the 
opaque cloth while it was laying ﬂ at on the table. 
 At the end of training, all three groups were given a standard gaze-following test. Infants were 
confronted with a blindfolded adult who turned toward the distal objects. Infants who had received 
ﬁ rst-person training on the opaque blindfold responded in a completely different manner to the 

UNDERSTANDING PERCEPTION
23
controls. Infants in this treatment group did not turn when the adult wore the blindfold, but 
infants in the controls still mistakenly followed the blindfolded adult’s line of regard to the distal 
object, just like untreated infants in previous studies (e.g. Brooks & Meltzoff, 2002). It is as if 
infants in the treatment group had learned that the blindfold could not be seen through by  them , 
and assumed that the same would be true for another person. They assumed the adult could not 
see. Therefore, there was no reason to follow his “gaze” when he turned to face the object; whatever 
the head turn was about, it was not a turn in order to see. 
 Making attributions about novel relations 
 One might argue that these experiments simply hastened a natural development—an understand-
ing that you cannot see through opaque occluders. Could we use evidence similarly to teach infants 
a perceptual principle that they would not encounter naturally? Could that evidence even over-
ride a principle that they had learned earlier? In the natural course of development, by 18 months 
of age, infants no longer make the error of thinking that adults can see through opaque barri-
ers (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2002; Butler, Caron, & Brooks, 2000; Dunphy-Lelii & Wellman, 2004). 
Meltzoff and Brooks (2008) capitalized on this to provide 18-month-olds with a completely novel 
self-experience—one they would not have encountered outside the laboratory. A trick blind-
fold was constructed that looked opaque from the outside, but was made of special material that 
could be seen through when held close to the eyes. Infants were randomly assigned to one of three 
groups: (a) experience with the trick blindfold, (b) experience with the opaque blindfold, and (c) 
baseline experience in which they played with the trick blindfold while it lay ﬂ at on a black table. 
After receiving the differential evidence, infants in all three groups saw the adult wear the blindfold 
in the standard gaze-following test. 
 As expected, infants in the baseline group and the opaque-blindfold groups refrained from fol-
lowing the adult’s head turns when the adult wore the blindfold. The new ﬁ nding is that infants who 
obtained evidence about the trick see-through blindfold now followed the adult’s line of regard 
to the distal object—they treated the adult as if she could see despite wearing the opaque-looking 
occluder that covered her eyes. 
(a)
(b)
 Figure 2.1  A 12-month-old boy in Meltzoff and Brooks’ (2008) training procedure. Infants randomly 
assigned to a treatment group were given self-experience that a blindfold occluded their own percep-
tion. Infants looked at an interesting object (a). The blindfold then blocked their view of the toy (b). 
This was repeated over an 8-min training session. This ﬁ rst-person experience changed infants’ inter-
pretation of how opaque visual occluders inﬂ uence other people’s vision. See text for details. 
 Reproduced from Meltzoff, A.N.& Brooks, R. Self-experience as a mechanism for learning about  others: A training 
study in social cognition.  Developmental Psychology, 44 , 1257–65. ©2008, American Psychological Association.  

LEARNING ABOUT THE MIND FROM EVIDENCE
24
 This underscores the power of infant self-experience in making social attributions to others. 
Infants had learned that they could make perceptual contact with the external world through the 
blindfold. By employing the “like-me” framework principle, they immediately transferred this 
experience to others, despite the fact that the adult’s eyes were covered and it looked, from the 
outside, like she could not see. Moreover, this new experience now allowed them to override their 
earlier belief that blindfolds do obscure vision. 
 These results allow two inferences about development. The ﬁ rst is that infants are projecting 
their own inner experience to others, suggesting that by 12 months of age infants can attribute 
mental states (perceptual experience) to others. Crucially, the mentalism demonstrated is of an 
“on-off” variety, seeing vs. not seeing—a kind of perception-ignorance distinction. The current 
results do not show perspective-taking about  how something appears to the other—only  that it 
can be seen (or not) in the ﬁ rst place. It is widely argued that infants’ understanding of the basic 
on-off experience of vision is a building block for more complex mental states such as false belief. 
Of course, there are other ﬁ ndings suggesting that young children attribute visual experiences 
to others (e.g. Lempers, Flavell, & Flavell, 1977; Moll & Meltzoff, 2011; O’Neill, 1996; Onishi & 
Baillargeon, 2005; Repacholi, Meltzoff, & Olsen, 2008; Tomasello & Haberl, 2003). The speciﬁ c 
advances of the current work are that it uses young infants (12-month-olds) and a controlled 
intervention paradigm with random assignment to show that infants use ﬁ rst-person evidence to 
 change their understanding of the visual experiences of others. 
 A second inference concerns the level of abstraction at play. We believe that infants are learning 
about the spatial-causal relations among three entities: viewer, barrier, and object. These form a 
“visual perception triangle,” with the spatial relations determining whether the object can be seen 
by the viewer. Infants abstract a general lesson from the evidence of their own experience: “If the 
blindfold is interposed between viewer and object, the viewer cannot see the object.” This abstract 
description applies equally well to self and other. If infants can recognize that the spatial relation is 
similar—“blindfold over eyes”—they could generalize that the causal effect is similar. 
 The “like-me” causal framework principle allows infants to treat self and other as similar agents. 
What I learn about myself is immediately put to work in interpreting your behavior; reciprocally, 
the outcome of your actions on the world provides me with information about my own powers 
and the possibilities of my own future actions. This “like-me” framework principle is a human 
birthright (Meltzoff, 2007), underpinning unique features of human social learning and inﬂ uenc-
ing the course of children’s development (Meltzoff, 2013; Meltzoff & Gopnik, 1993). 
 The “like-me” assumption supports learning about the world  from watching other people. This 
occurs in cases of object-directed imitation and learning about cause and effect from observing 
social models (Meltzoff et al., 2012) as well as in learning abstract categorization rules from observ-
ing others’ sorting behavior (e.g. Williamson, Jaswal, & Meltzoff, 2010). The “like-me” assumption 
also supports learning  about  other people’s minds. Infants make attributions about the mental 
states of other “like-me” agents using their  own ﬁ rst-person experience and mental states as a 
framework, which is a launching pad for developing an understanding of other minds. 
 Of course, philosophers have discussed whether an analogy between self and other plays a role in 
adult human affairs (e.g. Hume, 1739/1969; Husserl, 1950/1960; Smith, 1759/1966). The problem 
has traditionally been that the framework of equivalence was thought to be a late achievement and 
perhaps dependent on language, and therefore thought not to play a formative role during infancy. 
A quarter century of research on infancy has changed this view. In particular, the work on infant 
imitation indicates that young infants can represent the acts of others and their own acts in com-
mensurate terms (Meltzoff & Moore, 1977, 1997). The generality of human imitation (face, hands, 
voice, object manipulation, styles of acting) establishes that human infants process a “like-me-ness” 

UNDERSTANDING PERCEPTION
25
at the level of behavior. They also recognize when their own acts are being reﬂ ected back or imitated 
by others, which prompts emotional and prosocial behavioral reactions by infants (e.g. Meltzoff, 
2007) and special neural responses (Saby, Marshall, & Meltzoff, 2012). 
 What the blindfold training studies contribute is that the equivalence also is registered at the 
level of mental states. The infants in the blindfold gaze-following studies are not just registering 
equivalence in terms of behavior or visible conﬁ gurations (e.g. “blindfold over eyes”), but inferring 
mental states. They are assuming that if a blindfold over their own eyes affects their vision, then it 
inﬂ uences the  vision of the blindfolded adult in the same way. 
 It is particularly striking how 18-month-olds react to experience with the trick see-through 
blindfold. Untreated children realize that opaque-looking occluders cannot be seen through, and 
do not follow the line of regard of a blindfolded adult. The novel intervention experience runs 
counter to everyday real-world experience. We arranged it so infants  can see through this blind-
fold. Now when the adult dons the blindfold, infants interpret the behavior of the blindfolded 
adult in a new light. Now infants follow the blindfolded person’s “gaze” to distal objects. Infants 
attribute a psychological state (vision) to the blindfolded adult and interpret the adult’s behavior 
as a “turning to look.” In the absence of the novel self-experience, they do not do so. 
 In the cases we have described so far, evidence came from the child’s self-experience. Is 
self-experience the sole pathway to understanding others’ minds—a Royal Road? If we think of 
“like-me” as a framework principle then inferences should go in both directions—either from 
the self to the other or from the other to the self. We demonstrated just this in both 3-year-olds 
(Williamson & Meltzoff, 2011) and 18-month-olds (Meltzoff & Brooks, 2012). 
 In the latter study we arranged a situation in which 18-month-olds watched a blindfolded adult 
act in distinctive ways. The adult reached out and grabbed the toys, one by one, that were in front 
of her. To an adult it appeared that she was producing “visually-guided behavior.” It is as if the 
adult in this treatment group was demonstrating Superman’s X-ray vision. Control groups either 
performed the same behavior without a blindfold (controlling for “success” in grabbing the toys), 
or wore the blindfold and fumbled and missed the toys (controlling for “blindfold wearing”). After 
the exposure to the adult’s particular pattern of behavior (evidence accumulation), all infants were 
presented with the standard gaze-following test. Results showed that only the infants in the treat-
ment group followed the gaze of the blindfolded adult. This suggests that self-experience is not 
the sole road for learning about other people’s minds. Infants can abstract information about 
whether the adult is (or is not) in visual contact with the world based on the cues, contingencies, 
and structural patterns that the other person exhibits while wearing the blindfold—that is, based 
on the patterning of  others’  behavior and not solely ﬁ rst-person experience. 
 To summarize, these experiments show that infants can combine an initial prior “like-me” 
framework principle with new evidence to infer new causal relations between objects, occluders, 
and experience both for themselves and others. These inferences go both ways—infants can make 
inferences about the behavior of others from their own experiences, but they can also make infer-
ences about their own experiences from the behavior of others (e.g. that they will see something 
interesting if they follow the gaze of the “X-ray vision” adult). 
 We once suggested that the key thought experiment that would differentiate strong “modular-
ity” theories from the “theory-theory” would be to place children in an alternative parallel universe 
with evidence that differs radically from our own (Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997). If children developed 
a veridical understanding of that universe that would support the theory-theory; if they stuck to 
their innate understanding of this universe, that would favor the modularity predictions. However, 
we doubted if the granting agencies would have the funds to support the experiment. In these 
blindfold experiments, however, we have shown that we can do the same thing, although in a more 

LEARNING ABOUT THE MIND FROM EVIDENCE
26
low-cost way. In effect, we presented children with alternative universes in which opaque-looking 
blindfolds are transparent, or in which some adults have the equivalent of Superman’s X-ray 
vision. Even 18-month-olds made the correct inferences about what human behavior and experi-
ence would be like in this world.   
 Social attribution and the understanding of personality traits  
 If children are making new inferences about the mind from evidence well before they are three, 
they are also making new inferences well after they are ﬁ ve. These inferences are particularly inter-
esting because they often straddle the unclear line between “theory of mind” and social psychology. 
One area of particular interest is the inferences we make about personality traits. A long tradi-
tion in social psychology (e.g. Kelley, 1967) shows that adults, at least in Western cultures, tend 
to explain people’s actions in terms of their individual “personality traits.” Our adult language is 
permeated with trait judgments, from brave to shy to intelligent to arrogant to introverted. Indeed, 
if I asked you what someone was like and you answered by giving me a description in terms of a 
5-year-olds theory of mind (“well … she believes that what she sees directly is true, and she usually 
tries to get what she wants …”) I would hardly be satisﬁ ed. Instead, I would expect some discussion 
of those personality traits that are consistent in her behavior and make her different from everyone 
else (“she is intelligent and charming but manipulative; he is difﬁ cult and bad-tempered but full 
of integrity”). This would allow me to predict her next move and explain to myself why the person 
acted toward me like she did. 
 Adults in Western societies tend to attribute behavior to such personality traits even when the 
evidence suggests that those actions are really the result of the situations people ﬁ nd themselves in. 
These attributions can, literally, be a matter of life and death. In the Abu Ghraib trials, for example, 
many observers initially attributed the atrocities to the sadistic individual personalities of those 
particular guards, despite the unsettling social psychology evidence suggesting that a wide range of 
people might behave equally badly in such circumstances. 
 Where do these attributions come from? It is unclear when and why children begin to explain 
action in terms of internal, individual, and enduring traits. Of course, even very young children 
tend to explain action in terms of internal mental states (Flavell, Green, & Flavell, 1990; Lillard & 
Flavell, 1990). However, trait explanations include two additional factors beyond mental states 
themselves. Traits are speciﬁ c to particular, individual people, and they are constant over time and 
across situations. 
 Researchers have demonstrated that children do not spontaneously explain actions in terms 
of traits or endorse trait explanations for a single instance of behavior until middle child-
hood (Alvarez, Ruble, & Bolger, 2001; Peevers & Secord, 1973; Rholes & Ruble, 1984; Shimizu, 
2000). However, other studies show that when preschoolers are given trait labels or behav-
ioral frequency information, they can use that information to make inferences about future 
behavior, and that they can infer a trait label from frequent behaviors (Boseovski & Lee, 2006; 
Ferguson, Olthof, Luiten, & Rule, 1984; Gelman, 2003; Heyman & Gelman, 1999; Liu, Gelman, 
& Wellman, 2007; Matsunaga, 2002). On the other hand, these preschoolers still did not spon-
taneously construct trait explanations; rather they simply matched the frequency of behaviors 
to trait labels that were provided for them. This suggests that the failure to attribute traits 
is not simply a problem with word comprehension or conceptual resources, but may reﬂ ect 
something speciﬁ c to the child’s social cognition. Moreover, when children saw one behavior 
that could suggest a trait, e.g. one brave action, they did not predict that other behaviors would 
follow suit, as adults do. 

SOCIAL ATTRIBUTION AND THE UNDERSTANDING OF PERSONALITY TRAITS
27
 We do not know the learning mechanisms that underlie the course of trait attributions in child-
hood. Kelley provided an early theory suggesting that person and situation covariation evidence 
might play an important role in attributions in adults (Kelley, 1967), and there is signiﬁ cant work in 
this area by social psychologists (e.g. Mischel & Shoda, 1995; Mischel, Shoda, & Mendoza-Denton, 
2002; Plaks, Grant, & Dweck, 2005; Ross, 1977). Empirical studies conﬁ rm that adults use statisti-
cal information tracking multiple people in multiple situations to make trait attributions (e.g. 
Cheng & Novick, 1990; Hewstone & Jaspars, 1987; Morris & Larrick, 1995; Orvis, Cunningham, 
& Kelley, 1975; Sutton & McClure, 2001). However, adults already have intuitive theories of traits. 
They use covariation data to decide when and how to apply those theories to interpret and predict 
behavior, but could covariation play a role in the  development of trait attribution itself? 
 Bayesian causal learning theories suggest that children systematically combine prior knowledge 
and current covariation evidence to arrive at the right causal hypothesis. This suggests a potential 
mechanism for the development of trait attribution. Children may begin by observing person and 
situation covariation evidence that conﬁ rms a particular type of hypothesis, particularly in con-
junction with adults’ linguistic accounting that internal traits cause actions. Once that theory has 
been strongly conﬁ rmed, it will be more difﬁ cult to overturn in the future, although it might still 
be overturned with sufﬁ cient evidence. Eventually, in adults raised in Western societies (Nisbett, 
2003), this may result in a consistent “trait bias” that requires a very large amount of contrary 
evidence or concentrated effort to overcome (e.g. Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007; Dweck, 
2006). 
 In a series of studies, Seiver, Gopnik, and Goodman (2013) examined the developmental 
origins of trait attribution in children raised in the USA. First, they conducted a study where 
4-and 6-year-old children observed a scenario of two dolls playing on two activities (e.g. a bicycle 
and a trampoline). Children were either in the person condition (where the two doll characters 
acted consistently on the two activities, and differently from each other) or the situation condition 
(where both dolls played on one toy activity and did not play on the other). In some of the condi-
tions this evidence was probabilistic—the doll would play on the toy either three out of four times 
or one out of four times. The children in each condition received different covariation informa-
tion about the person and situation. In the person condition, covariation pattern of data indicated 
that some trait of the individual doll was responsible for the action; in the situation condition, 
the covariation pattern indicated that the situation was responsible. However, in both conditions, 
overall, there were the same number of examples of playing and not playing. At the end, we asked 
the children to explain the doll’s actions (e.g. “Why did Josie play on the bicycle?”) and to predict 
their behavior in a future situation (e.g. “What will Josie do when she sees this new diving board? 
Will she play on it or not?”). We also asked them to predict a new doll’s response to the same situ-
ations (e.g. “What if Mary sees the trampoline, will she play on it or not?”) 
 In the person condition, one doll always plays and the other doll never plays. This pattern of evi-
dence suggests that something internal about the individual, rather than the situation is responsi-
ble for her behavior. In the situation condition, both characters never play with one toy and always 
play with the other, suggesting instead, that the situation or the toy itself is responsible for their 
actions. So how would children explain the dolls’ behavior in these two different conditions? 
 Four-year-olds offered explanations that matched the pattern of evidence. In the person condi-
tion, when the evidence indicated that something about the person was responsible for the dolls’ 
behavior, both 4- and 6-year-olds gave internal explanations for that behavior. Interestingly, and 
in keeping with earlier ﬁ ndings, these were rarely classic trait explanations, especially for the 
4-year-olds. Instead, children offered explanations that highlighted “trait-like” characteristics of 
the person, which included both physical characteristics like age or height (“she’s the big sister,” 

LEARNING ABOUT THE MIND FROM EVIDENCE
28
“she’s only little”) and mental states, such as long-standing desires and beliefs (“she likes playing 
on bicycles,” “she thinks the water is dangerous”). 
 In the other condition, when the evidence suggested that the situations were driving the dolls’ 
actions (i.e. they both played on one activity and did not play on the other), 4-year-olds also appro-
priately gave more external explanations—explanations involving the speciﬁ c toy activity (e.g. 
that the bicycle was tippy or the trampoline was safe). In contrast, 6-year-olds persisted in giving 
internal explanations. Like the Western adults interpreting the events of Abu Ghraib, they attrib-
uted the dolls actions to their internal states, even when the pattern of evidence went against those 
attributions. 
 In fact, this difference in attribution style between the two age groups in the situation condi-
tion suggests that the 4-year-olds were actually more sensitive to the covariation data than the 
6-year-olds—they were actually better or, at least, more open-minded learners given the pattern of 
evidence. Seiver et al. (2013) also included a control condition where children were asked to explain 
why a single doll did or did not play on a single activity. In this case, the pattern of evidence pro-
vided to the children was ambiguous about the possible cause of the behavior. Six-year-olds gave 
internal explanations signiﬁ cantly more often than expected by chance; 4-year-olds were at chance. 
The prediction question provided additional evidence for the same developmental change. 
 This pattern of results suggests that American 6-year-olds have developed a speciﬁ c attribu-
tional theory or person “schema”—that is a broad framework principle—that the internal quali-
ties of a person, rather than the situation, drives behavior. This existing framework principle acted 
as a ﬁ lter on their interpretation of the data favoring trait explanations. It did this in much the same 
way that infants’ “like-me” framework drove them to immediately generalize their own experience 
to those of others. While we argue that the “like-me” principle has an innate foundation, the trait 
framework seems to be something that children learn in Western society (best estimate is about 
6 years of age). Six-year-olds use both the evidence at hand and their prior beliefs to arrive at a 
conclusion about a person-situation scenario. The 4-year-olds in contrast, seem to use a more 
general “bottom-up” data based strategy, and only use the most immediately available data to draw 
conclusions about other people’s personality.  
 Domains and development  
 An interesting characteristic of hierarchical Bayesian learning is that broad framework principles 
can actually constitute domains. That is, when children learn a new overarching principle that 
applies to a particular set of data, that principle can act as a constraint on their further infer-
ences. Some principles, like the “like-me” principle could already divide up the world into domains 
very early. Indeed, there is reason to believe that young infants divide the world into “like-me” 
and “not-like-me” domains—at a ﬁ rst approximation, animate experiencing agents and inani-
mate unconscious objects—and treat those domains as if they follow separate rules. However, 
other principles like the “trait bias” could be learned from cultural-linguistic input and yet have 
the similar far-reaching effects overall. We can also ask how domain-speciﬁ c or how general this 
higher-order bias actually is. Does it only apply to the case of psychological causation, or would 
children reason similarly about internal versus external causes of physical outcomes?  
 From people to magnets  
 To explore potential attributional bias in understanding physical causation (Seiver et al., 2013) 
changed the outcome of interest to a physical, rather than psychological one—“stickiness” instead 
of willingness to play. Without changing the task in any other way, they altered the cover story 

FROM PEOPLE TO MAGNETS
29
to implicate physical instead of psychological causation. Rather than saying that the doll char-
acter was playing on the scooter, we would say that the doll was sticking to the scooter. The rel-
evant explanatory question became, “Why did the Josie doll stick to the scooter?” For “internal” 
responses children talked about the properties of the doll; for “external” responses they talked 
about properties of the toy. 
 Four-year-olds in this condition behaved as they did in the psychological case. They contin-
ued to give more internal explanations in the doll condition, and external explanations in the toy 
condition. So 4-year–olds seemed to rely on the data, rather than on prior framework principles. 
However, 6-year-olds behaved differently: They lost their overall preference for internal explana-
tions. Moreover, 6-year-olds now reliably extended the data pattern in both conditions to make 
future predictions. (Six-year-olds were still less likely to normatively explain the data than the 
4-year-olds, however.) 
 Closer examination of the results suggests interesting details about the 6-year-olds’ shift from 
largely relying on the pattern of data provided to relying on a prior framework principle. In the 
physical case, the 6-year-olds gave explanations in terms of a different everyday causal theory—
namely, magnetism. They appealed to the properties of magnetism, such as the relationship 
between magnets and metal, in their explanations and were more likely to give interactive causal 
explanations that implicated both the doll and the toy as causes for the outcome (e.g. “she has metal 
shoes and the skateboard is a magnet”). Children never produced these interactive explanations in 
the social case, and 4-year-olds rarely produced them in the physical case. These explanations sug-
gest that the 6-year-old children relied on a more culturally-conferred, scientiﬁ cally-based causal 
framework about stickiness and magnetism in particular, rather than relying on the pattern of 
observed data per se. 
 What kinds of evidence could lead to this developmental change? One interesting hypothesis is 
that the developments at about 6-years of age are related to the increase in peer group  interaction. 
In many peer interactions in the USA, individual traits, rather than social roles or situations, will 
account for much of the variance in behavior. In a classroom of 28 otherwise similar children 
placed in a similar situation on the playground, some will consistently take risks and others will 
not. Children will see more trait-based covariation as they pay increasing attention to their peers, 
and acquire rich data sets across individuals and situations to draw upon. 
 Similarly, cross-cultural differences in covariation evidence may inﬂ uence the development of 
attribution (Nisbett, 2003). Miller (1984) suggested that children across cultures began with simi-
lar attribution patterns and then diverged toward the more extreme adult patterns as they grew 
older, a claim which has been supported by further studies with children (Gonzalez, Zosuls, & 
Ruble, 2010; Kalish, 2002; Lockhart, Nakashima, Inagaki, & Keil, 2009). 
 These results suggest a mechanism by which cultural differences may inﬂ uence the course of 
social attribution. This may either be because members of different cultures actually do behave dif-
ferently, or because culture and experience inﬂ uence the information children receive from adults 
about traits, such as adult trait language. This evidence is especially relevant to the development of 
person schemata. If the adults within a culture tend to linguistically describe and label behavior in 
terms of traits, this will lead to covariation between certain behaviors and trait labels, which might 
itself provide evidence for a trait-schema (see Kemp, Goodman, & Tenenbaum, 2008). If children 
are using covariation information about people’s behavior  and adult trait language to make infer-
ences about people in situations, such differences in the data could affect the development of their 
mature adult social cognition. An interesting test would be to explore children in a less trait-based 
culture, e.g. mainland China. One might predict that 4-year-olds would show a similar pattern to 
what we observed, but 6-year-olds would not manifest the same trait bias. 

LEARNING ABOUT THE MIND FROM EVIDENCE
30
 Conclusion 
 We have provided two examples about infants’ and children’s developing understanding of other 
minds, one substantially before the well-researched 3–4-year-old age period, and one after it. The 
ﬁ rst example concerned infants’ early attribution of mental states (visual perception) to others, and 
the second example concerned children’s changing interpretation of others’ personalities. In both 
cases, we claim that infants and children are using evidence to develop new inferences and models 
of other people’s minds. These inferences can be speciﬁ c causal hypotheses about what will happen 
in a particular situation—the adult will see the distal objects through the opaque-looking occluder 
or not; the doll will play on one toy, rather than another. They may also, however, involve inferences 
from and about general framework principles. Another person will experience the world in the 
same way that I do. People act based on their individual traits, rather than the situations they ﬁ nd 
themselves in. When we systematically manipulate the evidence that children receive, they draw 
different conclusions about the nature of the minds of those around them. 
 In the real world, children within a particular cultural milieu (shared language, customs, and 
physical world) may receive reasonably consistent, statistically discernable patterns of evidence 
about some aspects of the mind, such as visual perception, and so converge on the same general 
theories as other members in their culture. However, the example of traits and others provided in 
this chapter also emphasize that many aspects of mental life are likely to vary in different places and 
different times, and in the myriad of social, physical, and virtual environments that human beings 
create. Powerful theory-like inferential abilities may be particularly valuable in that sort of world. 
 One of the most endearing and powerful aspects about the child’s social mind is that they change 
it based on evidence. Adult theorists are challenged to create theories explaining children’s concep-
tual plasticity and developmental trajectory.  
 Acknowledgement 
 Work on writing this chapter was supported by NSF grants SMA-0835854 (ANM) and BCS-1023875 
(AG). NSF is not responsible for the content. We thank participants in the McDonnell Causal 
Learning Collaborative for discussions on these topics. The authors contributed equally to this 
chapter. 
 References 
 Alvarez, J.M., Ruble, D.N., & Bolger, N. (2001).  Trait understanding or evaluative reasoning? An analysis of 
children’s behavioral predictions .  Child Development ,  72 ,  1409–25 . 
 Amsterlaw, J., & Wellman, H.M. (2006).  Th eories of mind in transition: A microgenetic study of the devel-
opment of false belief understanding .  Journal of Cognition and Development ,  7 ,  139–72 . 
 Blackwell, L.S., Trzesniewski, K.H., & Dweck, C.S. (2007).  Implicit theories of intelligence predict achieve-
ment across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention .  Child Development ,  78 , 
 246–63 . 
 Bonawitz, E.B., Lim, S., & Schulz, L.E. (2007).  Weighing the evidence: Children’s na ï ve theories of balance 
aff ect their exploratory play . In  Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society 
(pp.  113–18 ).  New York, NY: Erlbaum . 
 Boseovski, J.J., & Lee, K. (2006).  Children’s use of frequency information for trait categorization and behav-
ioral prediction .  Developmental Psychology ,  42 ,  500–13 . 
 Brooks, R., & Meltzoff , A.N. (2002).  Th e importance of eyes: How infants interpret adult looking behavior . 
 Developmental Psychology ,  38 ,  958–66 . 

31
REFERENCES
 Brooks, R., & Meltzoff , A.N. (2005).  Th e development of gaze following and its relation to language . 
 Developmental Science ,  8 ,  535–43 . 
 Butler, S.C., Caron, A.J., & Brooks, R. (2000).  Infant understanding of the referential nature of looking . 
 Journal of Cognition and Development ,  1 ,  359–77 . 
 Carey, S. (2009).  Th e Origin of Concepts .  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Cheng, P.W., & Novick, L.R. (1990).  A probabilistic contrast model of causal induction .  Journal of 
Personality & Social Psychology ,  58 ,  545–67 . 
 Dunphy-Lelii, S., & Wellman, H.M. (2004).  Infants’ understanding of occlusion of others’ line-of-sight: 
Implications for an emerging theory of mind .  European Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  1 ,  49–66 . 
 Dweck, C. (2006).  Mindset: Th e New Psychology of Success .  New York :  Random House . 
 Ferguson, T.J., Olthof, T., Luiten, A., & Rule, B.G. (1984).  Children’s use of observed behavioral frequency 
versus behavioral covariation in ascribing dispositions to others .  Child Development ,  55 ,  2094–105 . 
 Flavell, J.H., Green, F.L., & Flavell, E.R. (1990).  Developmental changes in young children’s knowledge 
about the mind .  Cognitive Development ,  5 ,  1–27 . 
 Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998).  Mirror neurons and the simulation theory of mind-reading .  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 2 ,  493–501 . 
 Gelman, A., Carlin, J.B., Stern, H.S., & Rubin, D.B. (2003).  Bayesian Data Analysis (2nd ed.).  New York : 
 Chapman & Hall . 
 Gelman, S. A. (2003).  Th e Essential Child: Origins of Essentialism in Everyday Th ought.  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press . 
 Gonzalez, C.M., Zosuls, K.M., & Ruble, D.N. (2010).  Traits as dimensions or categories? Developmental 
change in the understanding of trait terms .  Developmental Psychology ,  46 ,  1078–88 . 
 Goodman, N. (1955).  Fact, Fiction, and Forecast .  Cambridge :  Harvard University Press . 
 Goodman, N.D., Ullman, T.D., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2011).  Learning a theory of causalitiy .  Psychological 
Review ,  118 ,  110–19 . 
 Gopnik, A. (2012).  Scientifi c thinking in young children: Th eoretical advances, empirical research, and 
policy implications .  Science, 337, 1623–7. 
 Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D.M., Schulz, L.E., Kushnir, T., & Danks, D. (2004).  A theory of causal 
learning in children: Causal maps and Bayes nets .  Psychological Review ,  111 ,  3–32 . 
 Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff , A. (1997).  Words, Th oughts, and Th eories .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. (1994).  Th e theory theory . In L. A. Hirschfeld & S. A. Gelman (Eds),  Mapping 
the Mind: Domain Specifi city in Cognition and Culture (pp.  257–93 ).  New York :  Cambridge University 
Press . 
 Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H.M. (2012).  Reconstructing constructivism: Causal models, Bayesian learning 
mechanisms, and the theory theory .  Psychological Bulletin,  138 , 1085–108. 
 Gordon, R.M. (1996).  “Radical” simulation . In P. Carruthers & P. K. Smith (Eds),  Th eories of Th eories of 
Mind (pp.  11–21 ).  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Griffi  ths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2007).  Two proposals for causal grammars . In A. Gopnik & L. Schulz 
(Eds),  Causal Learning: Psychology, Philosophy, and Computation (pp.  323–345 ).  New York :  Oxford 
University Press . 
 Griffi  ths, T.L., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2009).  Th eory-based causal induction .  Psychological Review ,  116 , 
 661–716 . 
 Hewstone, M., & Jaspars, J. (1987).  Covariation and causal attribution: A logical model of the intuitive 
analysis of variance .  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  53 ,  663–72 . 
 Heyman, G.D., & Gelman, S.A. (1999).  Th e use of trait labels in making psychological inferences .  Child 
Development ,  70 ,  604–19 . 
 Hume, D. (1969).  A Treatise of Human Nature .  London :  Penguin Books (original work published 1739). 

LEARNING ABOUT THE MIND FROM EVIDENCE
32
 Husserl, E. (1960).  Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology (D. Cairns, trans.).  Th e Hague : 
 Nijhoff  (original work published 1950). 
 Kalish, C.W. (2002).  Children’s predictions of consistency in people’s actions .  Cognition ,  84 ,  237–65 . 
 Kelley, H.H. (1967).  Attribution theory in social psychology . In D. Levine (Ed.),  Nebraska Symposium on 
Motivation, Vol. 15 (pp.  192–238 ).  Lincoln :  University of Nebraska Press . 
 Kemp, C., Goodman, N.D. & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2008).  Th eory acquisition and the language of thought . 
 Paper presented at the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Washington, D.C. . 
 Kemp, C., Perfors, A., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2007).  Learning overhypotheses with hierarchical Bayesian 
models .  Developmental Science,  10 ,  307–21 . 
 Kuhl, P. (2004).  Early language acquisition: Cracking the speech code .  Nature Reviews Neuroscience ,  5 , 
 831–43 . 
 Kuhn, T. S. (1962).  Th e Structure of Scientifi c Revolutions .  Chicago :  University of Chicago Press . 
 Laudan, L. (1977).  Progress and its Problems: Toward a Th eory of Scientifi c Growth .  Berkeley :  University of 
California Press . 
 Lempers, J.D., Flavell, E.R., & Flavell, J.H. (1977).  Th e development in very young children of tacit knowl-
edge concerning visual perception .  Genetic Psychology Monographs ,  95 ,  3–53 . 
 Leslie, A.M. (2005).  Developmental parallels in understanding minds and bodies .  Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 9 ,  459–62 . 
 Lillard, A.S., & Flavell, J.H. (1990).  Young children’s preference for mental state versus behavioral descrip-
tions of human action .  Child Development ,  61 ,  731–41 . 
 Liu, D., Gelman, S.A., & Wellman, H.M. (2007).  Components of young children’s trait understanding: 
Behavior-to-trait inferences and trait-to-behavior predictions .  Child Development ,  78 ,  1543–58 . 
 Lockhart, K.L., Nakashima, N., Inagaki, K., & Keil, F.C. (2009).  From ugly duckling to swan? Japanese and 
American beliefs about the stability and origins of traits .  Cognitive Development ,  23 ,  155–79 . 
 Matsunaga, A. (2002).  Preschool children’s inferences about personality traits .  Japanese Journal of 
Developmental Psychology ,  13 ,  168–77 . 
 Meltzoff , A.N. (2007).  ‘Like me’: A foundation for social social cognition .  Developmental Science ,  10 , 
 126–34 . 
 Meltzoff , A.N. (2013). Origins of social cognition: Bidirectional self-other  mapping and the “Like-Me” 
hypothesis. In M. Banaji & S. Gelman (Eds),  Navigating the Social World: What Infants, Children, and 
Other Species Can Teach Us (pp. 139–44). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Meltzoff , A.N., & Brooks, R. (2008).  Self-experience as a mechanism for learning about others: A training 
study in social cognition .  Developmental Psychology ,  44 ,  1257–65 . 
 Meltzoff , A.N. & Brooks, R. (2012).  Infants inferring mental states from observing others’ behavior. 
Unpublished manuscript.  Seattle:  Institute for Learning & Brain Sciences .  University of Washington . 
 Meltzoff , A.N., & Gopnik, A. (1993).  Th e role of imitation in understanding persons and developing a the-
ory of mind . In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, & D. J. Cohen (Eds.),  Understanding Other Minds: 
Perspectives from Autism (pp.  335–66 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Meltzoff , A.N., Kuhl, P.K., Movellan, J., & Sejnowski, T.J. (2009).  Foundations for a new science of learn-
ing .  Science ,  325 ,  284–8 . 
 Meltzoff , A.N., & Moore, M.K. (1977).  Imitation of facial and manual gestures by human neonates .  Science , 
 198 ,  75–8 . 
 Meltzoff , A.N., & Moore, M.K. (1997).  Explaining facial imitation: A theoretical model .  Early Development 
and Parenting ,  6 ,  179–92 . 
 Meltzoff , A.N., Waismeyer, A., & Gopnik, A. (2012).  Learning about causes from people: Observational 
causal learning in 24-month-old infants .  Developmental Psychology,  48 , 1215–28. 
 Miller, J.G. (1984).  Culture and the development of everyday social explanation .  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 46 ,  961–78 . 

33
 Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1995).  A cognitive-aff ective system theory of personality: Reconceptualizing 
situations, dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in personality structure .  Psychological Review ,  102 , 
 246–68 . 
 Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Mendoza-Denton, R. (2002).  Situation-behavior profi les as a locus of consistency 
in personality .  Current Directions in Psychological Science ,  11 ,  50–4 . 
 Moll, H., & Meltzoff , A.N. (2011).  How does it look? Level 2 perspective-taking at 36 months of age .  Child 
Development ,  82 ,  661–73 . 
 Morris, M. W. & Larrick, R. (1995).  When one cause casts doubt on another: A normative analysis of dis-
counting in causal attribution .  Psychological Review ,  102 ,  331–55 . 
 Nisbett, R.E. (2003).  Th e geography of thought: How Asians and Westerners think diff erently … and why .  New 
York :  Free Press . 
 O’Neill, D. K. (1996).  Two-year-old children’s sensitivity to a parent’s knowledge state when making 
requests .  Child Development ,  67 ,  659–77 . 
 Onishi, K.H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005).  Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs?   Science ,  308 , 
 255–8 . 
 Orvis, B.R., Cunningham, J.D., & Kelley, H.H. (1975).  A closer examination of causal inference: Th e roles 
of consensus, distinctiveness, and consistency information .  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 
 32 ,  605–16 . 
 Peevers, B.H., & Secord, P.F. (1973).  Developmental changes in attribution of descriptive concepts to per-
sons .  Journa1 of Personality and Social Psychology ,  27 ,  120–8 . 
 Plaks, J.E., Grant, H., & Dweck, C. (2005).  Violations of implicit theories and the sense of prediction and 
control: Implications for motivated person perception .  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  88 , 
 245–62 . 
 Repacholi, B.M., & Gopnik, A. (1997).  Early reasoning about desires: Evidence from 14- and 18-month 
olds .  Developmental Psychology, 33 ,  12–21 . 
 Repacholi, B.M., Meltzoff , A.N., & Olsen, B. (2008).  Infants’ understanding of the link between visual per-
ception and emotion: “If she can’t see me doing it, she won’t get angry.”  Developmental Psychology ,  44 , 
 561–74 . 
 Rholes, W.S., & Ruble, D.N. (1984).  Children’s understanding of dispositional characteristics of others . 
 Child Development ,  55 ,  550–60 . 
 Ross, L. (1977).  Th e intuitive psychologist and his shortcomings: Distortions in the attribution process . In 
L. Berkowitz (Ed.),  Advances in social psychology, Vol. 10 (pp.  173–220 ).  New York :  Academic Press . 
 Saby, J.N., Marshall, P.J., & Meltzoff , A.N. (2012).  Neural correlates of being imitated: An EEG study in 
preverbal infants .  Social Neuroscience, 7, 650–61. 
 Saff ran, J.R., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1996).  Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants .  Science ,  274 , 
 1926–8 . 
 Seiver, E., Gopnik, A., & Goodman, N.D. (2013).  Did she jump because she was the big sister or because 
the trampoline was safe? Causal inference and the development of social attribution .  Child Development, 
84, 443–54 . 
 Shimizu, Y. (2000).  Development of trait inference: Do young children understand the causal relation of 
trait, motive, and behavior?  Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology ,  48 ,  255–66 . 
 Simons, D.J., & Keil, F.C. (1995).  An abstract to concrete shift  in the development of biological thought: 
Th e insides story .  Cognition ,  56 ,  129–63 . 
 Slaughter, V., & Gopnik, A. (1996).  Conceptual coherence in the child’s theory of mind: Training children 
to understand belief .  Child Development ,  67 ,  2967–88 . 
 Smith, A. (1966).  Th e theory of moral sentiments .  New York :  Augustus M. Kelley . (Original work published 1759). 
 Sobel, D.M., & Kirkham, N.Z. (2006).  Blickets and babies: Th e development of causal reasoning in toddlers 
and infants .  Developmental Psychology, 42 ,  1103–15 . 
REFERENCES

LEARNING ABOUT THE MIND FROM EVIDENCE
34
 Sutton, R.M., & McClure, J. (2001).  Covariational infl uences on goal-based explanation: An integrative 
model .  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  80 ,  222–36 . 
 Tenenbaum, J.B., Kemp, C., Griffi  ths, T.L., & Goodman, N.D. (2011).  How to grow a mind: Statistics, 
structure, and abstraction .  Science ,  331 ,  1279–85 . 
 Tomasello, M., & Haberl, K. (2003).  Understanding attention: 12- and 18-month-olds know what is new for 
other persons .  Developmental Psychology ,  39 ,  906–12 . 
 Wellman, H.M. (1990).  Th e Child’s Th eory of Mind .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Wellman, H., & Gelman, S. (1992).  Cognitive development: Foundational theories of core domains .  Annual 
Review of Psychology ,  43 ,  337–75 . 
 Williamson, B.A., Jaswal, V.K., & Meltzoff , A.N. (2010).  Learning the rules: Observation and imitation of a 
sorting strategy by 36-month-old children .  Developmental Psychology ,  46 ,  57–65 . 
 Williamson, R.A., Meltzoff , A.N. (2011).  Own and others’ prior experiences infl uence children’s imitation 
of causal acts .  Cognitive Development ,  26 ,  260–8 . 
 Wu, R., Gopnik, A., Richardson, D.C., & Kirkham, N.Z. (2011).  Infants learn about objects from statistics 
and people .  Developmental Psychology, 47 ,  1220–9 . 

 Chapter 3 
 Teleology: Belief as perspective  
 Johannes   Roessler and   Josef  Perner  
 A fundamental question in recent “theory of mind” research is how to interpret a seemingly robust 
dissociation between young children’s performance on different kinds of tests for false belief under-
standing. 3-year-olds’ poor performance on classical, “direct” false belief tasks is well-documented. 
Yet a range of “indirect” tests reveal sensitivity to agents’ false beliefs in much younger children. It 
is natural to think that the two kinds of tests bring to light two kinds of understanding: “explicit” 
vs. “implicit” understanding. But how should we understand this distinction? And why should 
“implicit” understanding of false beliefs only be available in connection with “indirect” tests? 
 Our project in this chapter is to address these questions by further developing a hypothesis 
advanced elsewhere (Perner and Roessler, 2010). This is the hypothesis that young children are 
 teleologists : they make sense of intentional actions in terms of justifying reasons provided by 
“worldly” facts (not by mental states). We begin by spelling out this account in more detail. We 
then argue that mastery of the concept of belief (or possession of an “explicit understanding” 
of belief) involves giving a twist to the teleological scheme of explanation. What is critical is 
the ability to engage in hypothetical or suppositional reasoning about justifying reasons. This 
account, we contend, is in competition with both a “theory theory” and a “simulation theory” 
of belief understanding (though it has some afﬁ nities with certain versions of the latter). In the 
ﬁ nal, fourth part of the chapter we bring the account to bear on the dissociation problem. The 
difference between “direct” and “indirect” tests, we argue, turns on whether successful perform-
ance requires understanding the normative underpinnings of the causal role of belief (as in direct 
tests) or merely requires a set of generalizations regarding the causes of behavior (as in indirect 
tests ).  
 Teleological explanation  
 Why does the baker get up at 3 a.m.? Well, the bread needs to be ready by 6 to go to the super-
markets, and it takes that long to bake. This is a humble example of a teleological explanation: 
it makes the baker’s unusual behavior intelligible not by appeal to his mental states, such as his 
desire to make bread etc, but in terms of the objective reason-giving facts of his situation. Our sug-
gestion is that young children are teleologists. They predict, and perhaps explain, what someone 
will do on the basis of what it makes objective sense for her to do. This, we suggest, explains the 
following striking ﬁ nding concerning young children’s performance on false belief tests: far from 
answering the test question randomly, they systematically and adamantly give the wrong answer. 
The explanation is that they predict that the protagonist will do what he  ought to do in order to 
attain his objective. For example, they will predict that in order to retrieve his chocolate Mistaken 
Max (Wimmer & Perner, 1983) will go to the cupboard (where he ought to go, as this is where the 
chocolate is to be found) rather than to the kitchen drawer (where he believes it is). 

TELEOLOGY: BELIEF AS PERSPECTIVE
36
 This needs some elaboration and qualiﬁ cation. You might say that there is a sense in which Max 
ought to go  to the drawer . Given his false belief, surely it would be quite irrational for him to go 
the cupboard, where he has absolutely no reason to expect the chocolate. We agree. But the point 
is consistent with there  also being a sense in which he ought to go to the cupboard: we have to rec-
ognize two kinds of practical “ought.” Sometimes we are interested in whether someone ought to 
perform a certain action in the sense that there is  reason for her to perform it. (An obvious context 
in which this question is to the fore is when you deliberate about what to do—i.e. reﬂ ect on what 
you have reason to do.) Sometimes we are interested in whether an agent  rationally ought to per-
form a certain action, given her existing beliefs, aims and dispositions. Following Kolodny (2005) 
we will call these the “ought” of reasons vs. the “ought” of rationality. (Alternatively, one might put 
the contrast in terms of objective vs. subjective reasons.) 
 To make the distinction vivid, suppose we are advising Mistaken Max on what to do. From our 
vantage point as spectators of the story, the obvious recommendation is: “You ought to go to the 
cupboard—you have reason to: that’s where the chocolate is.” On the other hand, if Max remains 
ﬁ rmly convinced that the chocolate is in the drawer, despite our best efforts to convince him oth-
erwise, we might switch to a different kind of advice: “Given your belief, the rational thing for 
you to do is clearly to go to the drawer—that’s what you ought to do.’ 1 The ﬁ rst type of judgment 
is more prevalent in the context of advice and joint deliberation; the second type of judgment is 
more prevalent in the context of evaluating the rationality of an action. But they are both central 
and familiar elements of commonsense psychology. 
 Another way to bring out the distinction is to consider what happens when Mistaken Max (with-
out the beneﬁ t of advice from us) goes to the kitchen table and opens the drawer. No doubt he’ll 
be surprised. That’s because he realizes that he was  wrong : he thought there was a good reason for 
him to go to the drawer, but it now turns out that there wasn’t. No chocolate—no reason. This is 
of course consistent with saying, as Max may ﬁ nd it comforting to say, that it was perfectly  rational 
for him to go to the drawer. 
 The “ought” of rationality is often invoked in the context of action  explanation . Those who 
emphasize the “rationalizing” nature of such explanations tend to have in mind that we explain 
intentional actions in terms of attitudes—centrally, beliefs and desires—that make it rational for 
the agent to perform the action. Our proposal is that young children think of intentional actions in 
a more simple-minded way: they predict and explain actions in terms of  reason -giving facts, rather 
than  rationalizing mental states. 
 But can such facts coherently be conceived as  causes ? As Davidson taught us, to explain why 
someone got up at 3 a.m., it is not enough to assemble considerations—“justifying reasons”—
that show this to have been the right thing for him to do. What is required is a causal explanation 
(Davidson 1963). We grant the point. But we suggest that there is nothing incoherent in the idea 
that reason-giving “worldly” facts causally explain someone’s actions. Note, ﬁ rst, that such facts 
yield reasons that can be “agent-speciﬁ c.” That the bread needs to be ready by 6, happily, has no 
implications as to when  you ought to get up, but it gives the baker and his staff a reason to rise early. 
This is not because the reason in question is provided by the beliefs and desires of the relevant 
agents. Rather, agent-speciﬁ city is secured in this schema either by dint of the social roles of the 
agents (it is the baker’s job to deliver the bread on time) or as a result of their practical abilities and 
opportunities for action (that Max needs his chocolate could give anyone a reason to help him get 
it if they are in a position to do so). You might say that without appeal to the agent’s beliefs and 
 1   These pieces of advice are modeled on Kolodny’s examples of what he calls “objective” and “subjective” 
advice. 

THE CONCEPT OF BELIEF: REASONS VS. LAWS
37
desires it’s totally mysterious by what sorts of causal mechanisms the reason-giving facts impact on 
the agent’s movements. But this does not impugn the  coherence of the teleological schema, at least 
on what is sometimes called a “difference-making” approach to causal explanation (Woodward, 
2011). To say that one fact causally explains another is to say that certain counterfactual condition-
als hold: roughly, had there been some variation in respect of the ﬁ rst fact, there would have been 
a corresponding difference in the second fact. If the bread had not been needed until 7, the baker 
would have slept longer. You might still insist that, without some idea of the causal mechanisms 
involved, it would be quite irrational to make a causal judgment. Be that as it may (and the point 
is far from obvious), our claim is not that young children’s simple-minded teleology is correct (or 
a model of rationality)—merely that it is a coherent explanatory (and indeed causal-explanatory) 
schema. 
 We have mentioned one piece of evidence in favor of the teleological analysis. If young children 
predict what people will do on the basis of teleological reasoning, it becomes comprehensible why 
they are so wedded to their predictions. It is not that they are unable to inhibit a prepotent response 
(in which case one would expect that once the mistake is pointed out, they realize what the correct 
answer is). Rather, their predictions are based on sound reasoning! People normally do what it 
makes sense for them to do. From a teleological point of view, what it makes sense for people to do 
depends on their objective circumstances—the relevant evaluative and instrumental facts. In other 
words, young children subscribe to a rather austere version of the “principle of charity,” enjoining 
them to assume that people do what they have reason to do. 2 
 Admittedly, the point hardly amounts to an open-and-shut case for teleology. Our aim here, 
though, is not to undertake a comprehensive review of the evidence. (See Perner and Roessler, 
2010, for more detailed discussion.) Rather we want to argue that the teleological account provides 
an illuminating perspective on two vexed (and we suggest connected) issues in current “theory of 
mind” research:
1. What is involved in grasping the concept of belief, or (to put the same point differently) in 
having an “explicit understanding” of belief? 
 2. What explains the striking dissociations that have been found between children’s performance 
on direct and indirect tests for false belief understanding? 
 In the following two sections we sketch an answer  to (1). Drawing on this account, in the ﬁ nal 
section, we will tackle (2). 
 The concept of belief: reasons vs. laws  
 We can distinguish two aspects of the causal role of beliefs. One has to do with the input side, the 
circumstances in which beliefs are acquired and sustained. The other concerns the ways beliefs 
affect what people do. Someone who has acquired a rudimentary “theory of mind” including 
the concept of belief—who knows what it is to believe something and who is thus able to have 
thoughts, beliefs, desires, etc.,  about beliefs—must presumably be familiar, to some extent, with 
both aspects of the causal role of beliefs. We can put the point by formulating “Introduction” and 
“Elimination” rules for the concept of belief, comparable (in some ways) to the Introduction and 
 2   The adult version of the principle of charity is usually taken to demand that we interpret others in such a 
way as to make them come out as rational as possible (consistent with the available evidence, of course). See 
Schueler (2003), Chapter 4, for illuminating discussion.  

TELEOLOGY: BELIEF AS PERSPECTIVE
38
Elimination rules for the logical constants. 3   The claim would be that mastery of the concept of 
belief requires being able to reason in accordance with these rules. It would be a difﬁ cult task to 
produce a complete list of the relevant rules, but here an example will sufﬁ ce: 
  Introduction rule for Belief 
 A subject S intentionally puts an object O in location L, is not present when O is subsequently moved 
elsewhere, and has no reason to think O has been moved. 
 Therefore, S probably believes that O is still at L. 
 Elimination rule for Belief 
 S believes O is at L, and decides to retrieve O. 
 Therefore S will probably make his/her way to L.   
 What does it come to, being disposed to follow rules such as these? One inﬂ uential sugges-
tion is that the thinker must have assimilated a psychological theory, consisting of (more or less 
platitudinous-sounding) law-like generalizations. On this view, there is a sense in which our dis-
position to reason in accordance with the Introduction and Eliminations Rules for Belief is under-
pinned by our possession of a simple theory of belief. For example, our use of the Introduction rule 
reﬂ ects our knowledge that if someone puts an object in a certain place, and does not witness its 
removal from that place, they tend to believe that the object remains in that place. 
 We can bring out a basic problem with this account by comparing and contrasting the concept 
of belief with other psychological concepts. Consider the concept of being drunk. Someone who 
has acquired the concept of drunkenness is someone who is disposed to draw inferences such as 
the following: 
 Elimination rule for Drunkenness 
 Subject S is drunk. 
 Therefore, S is probably unsteady on his/her feet.   
 A salient difference between the two cases is this. Why does drunkenness give rise to its familiar 
symptoms? Why, for example, does it  impair rather than  boost  our motor skills? To most of us, the 
matter is deeply opaque. We have no idea  why the Elimination rule for Drunkenness holds. No 
doubt there is a story to be told, tracing the effects of alcohol on the motor system. But you don’t 
need to know that story to know what it is to be drunk: the concept of drunkenness is, in that sense, 
a relatively shallow concept. The concept of belief differs in this respect. It’s not only the experts 
who understand why the Introduction and Elimination rules for Belief hold. Why should S’s belief 
that O is at L induce him go to L, rather than to dance a jig? The matter is transparent to any reﬂ ec-
tive thinker who can be said to have a belief-desire psychology (theory of mind): given S’s belief 
and his other circumstances, it  makes sense for him to go to L—that’s where he ought to go (in the 
“ought of rationality” sense). We have a deeper understanding, in the belief case, of what might 
be called the rationale of the Introduction and Elimination rules, i.e. the reason why they hold. 
 3   To illustrate, the Introduction rule for conjunction is 
  p 
  q 
  _____ 
  p & q 
  For discussion of the relation between understanding and the disposition to reason in accordance with 
Introduction and Elimination rules (in a range of cases), see Campbell (2002). 

BELIEF AS PERSPECTIVE: SUPPOSITION VS. SIMULATION
39
Our understanding consists in (a) our ability to reason that S’s circumstances (as speciﬁ ed in the 
Introduction rule) render his belief rational, and that his belief in turn helps to render his action 
(as speciﬁ ed in the Elimination rule) rational, and (b) our conception of people as rational think-
ers and agents. (b) is of course a less austere view than young children’s conception of people as 
responsive to  reasons (i.e. reason-giving facts). The adult view allows that people may act rationally 
on the basis of false beliefs and ﬂ awed values. And of course we recognize that sometimes people 
act irrationally. 
 Belief as perspective: supposition vs. simulation  
 What’s the nature of the reasoning involved in (a)? It is natural, at this point, to turn to the simu-
lation theory. Normally developing humans have a capacity for “imaginative identiﬁ cation” with 
others. It is in virtue of that capacity, it might be said, that we understand the rationale of the 
Introduction and Elimination rules. For example, we put ourselves in Mistaken Max’s situation, 
imagine  deciding to recover the chocolate and  believing the chocolate to be in the drawer, and then, 
still within the context of the imaginative exercise, reason to the conclusion “I should go to the 
drawer.” This would be congenial to Jane Heal’s and Robert Gordon’s views of the role of simula-
tion, which are motivated in part by a concern with the role of rationality in psychological explana-
tion (Gordon, 1995; Heal, 1995). But do we really need to  imagine having S’s mental states to work 
out that S should go to L? There is a familiar distinction, in the literature on imagination, between 
supposing and imagining (see, for example, Gendler, 2000; Moran, 1994; Soteriou, 2010). We want 
to suggest that it is supposition, rather than simulation that holds the key to understanding the 
rational-explanatory role of beliefs. It’s not just that supposition is a more economical procedure 
than simulation. The important point is that it takes  real  (hypothetical or counterfactual) reason-
ing, not just imagined or simulated reasoning, to understand what it is rational to do, given the 
agent’s beliefs. 
 To see the rationale of our Elimination rule for belief it’s essential to appreciate that  if the choco-
late were still in the drawer, then this would give Mistaken Max a reason to go to the drawer (i.e. 
then Max ought—in the “ought of reason” sense—to go to the drawer). To believe that p, after all, 
is to take it to be a fact that p. And what believing that p makes it rational for one to do depends on 
what the fact that p would give one a reason to do. Understanding what S’s belief makes it rational 
for him to do thus requires understanding S’s  perspective  on what he has reason to do. On the face of 
it, though, this kind of “perspective taking” is a fairly basic phenomenon—it’s not clear that mental 
simulation necessarily comes into it. The natural way to reach our critical conditional is to reason 
as follows. “Suppose that the chocolate is still in the drawer. Then what should Max, who urgently 
needs his chocolate, do? Why, the best course of action, surely, would be for him to go to the drawer.” 
Of course, in one sense, to suppose that p just is to imagine that p. But this is to be distinguished 
from the richer sense, or senses, of imagination commonly associated with “simulation,” such as 
imagining “from the inside” Max’s experiences (e.g. imagining craving chocolate) or the kind of 
internal play-acting that may be involved in imagining Max’s thoughts or propositional attitudes. 
 Suppositional reasoning involves using as premises propositions one does not believe to be true. 
But there is nevertheless a sense in which suppositional reasoning is essentially  truth-directed rea-
soning. For one thing, we reason from a supposition using the same rules of inference that govern 
our reasoning from premises we accept. For another, suppositions can be discharged. If you sup-
pose that p, and derive the conclusion that q, you won’t of course accept outright that q; but you 
will, or should, accept outright that  if p then q. As Dummett puts it: “the point of the procedure 
[is] that from the fact that certain consequences follow from some hypothesis, we can draw a 

TELEOLOGY: BELIEF AS PERSPECTIVE
40
conclusion that no longer depends on that hypothesis” (Dummett, 1981, 309). In our example, 
the  consequence that follows from the supposition that the chocolate is still in the drawer is that 
Mistaken Max has a reason to go to the drawer/ought to go to the drawer (in the “ought of reason” 
sense). The  conclusion one draws from this is that  if the chocolate were still in the drawer, Max 
would have a reason to go to the drawer. This conclusion, in turn, can be used to establish what it 
is rational for Mistaken Max to do: given that he  believes the content of our supposition, he ought 
to go to the drawer (in the “ought of rationality” sense). 
 One way in which suppositional reasoning differs from simulation is that it is  third-personal. To 
determine what someone else would have reason to do under certain suppositions it is not necessary 
to “recreate” or “replicate” the agent’s ﬁ rst personal deliberation. One may think of the agent from a 
third- (or second-) person perspective: what would he (or you) have reason to do under those sup-
positions? In contrast, simulating practical reasoning, as standardly conceived, is a matter of imag-
ined, or “make believe,” reﬂ ection on the question “what should  I  do?” (see Gordon, 1996, 62). 
 There are a number of considerations to suggest that rational explanation requires suppositional 
reasoning, rather than imaginative identiﬁ cation. First of all, the idea that it takes an imagina-
tive re-enactment of Max’s thought processes to pass a humble false belief task seems suspect 
on phenomenological grounds. It’s not clear, furthermore, why imagination, in the rich sense, 
should be needed to work out where it makes sense for Max to go, given his belief: straightforward 
suppositional reasoning seems perfectly adequate to that task. 4 Most importantly, such reason-
ing would seem to be essential even if, in addition, one performs a practical simulation of Max’s 
deliberation. For imagining someone’s reasoning to the conclusion that he should do x does not 
commit one to the view that it makes sense for him to do x: one can imaginatively re-enact reason-
ing one takes to be not just based on false premises, but to be confused or deranged. Insofar as a 
practical simulation is to enable one to appreciate the rationality of Max’s action, it has to reﬂ ect 
one’s independent judgment that, given Max’s belief, it’s rational for him to go to the drawer. That 
judgment cannot itself be based on simulation. It requires reasoning to the conclusion that, if the 
chocolate were in the drawer, there would be a justifying reason in favor of Max’s going there; and 
that therefore, given his belief that the chocolate  is  in the drawer, he ought to go there (in the “ought 
of rationality” sense). There are two features of such reasoning that bear emphasis. One is that it 
embeds the simple kind of teleological reasoning at which (we argued) even young children are 
quite proﬁ cient. The other feature is that it requires the reasoner to reason (to  genuinely reason—
not just to  pretend  reasoning) from premises she regards as false, in order to derive true conclusions 
concerning what’s rational for others to do. We call such reasoning “teleology-in-perspective,” to 
highlight both its continuity with young children’s simple teleology and the fact that it presents its 
practitioners with a  perspective problem . They need to be able to move back and forth between two 
conﬂ icting points of view on what someone has reason to do. 
 To sum up our discussion so far: young children’s performance on classical false belief tests 
reﬂ ects both a vital insight—people generally do what it makes sense for them to do—and a cru-
cial limitation—their inability to understand that it can be rational for someone to do something 
even if there is no objective reason for them to do it. This limitation disables young children from 
fully grasping the concept of belief: they are unable to understand why believing something has 
the causal role it does, i.e. to recognize what we called the “rationale” for the Introduction and 
Elimination rules. The next question is this: how might this account help to shed light on the dis-
sociation between children’s performance on direct and indirect tests?  
 4   See Millar (2004) for illuminating discussion of this point. 

UNDERSTANDING THE DISSOCIATION: THEORY VS. TELEOLOGY
41
 Understanding the dissociation: theory vs. teleology  
 Children’s understanding of the role of belief in intentional action has been intensively investi-
gated with the “Mistaken Max” false belief task (Wimmer & Perner, 1983). When Max returns 
looking for his chocolate, 3-year-old children answer with the actual location (cupboard), while 
5-year-olds answer with the location Max believes the chocolate to be in (drawer). Many studies 
tried to ﬁ nd ways of demonstrating earlier understanding, but a large meta-analysis (Wellman, 
Cross, & Watson, 2001) of these studies showed that the understanding that action depends on 
belief develops around 4 years of age. 
 A dissociation 
 Clements & Perner (1994) found a dissociation between different measures of understanding. The 
paradigm was slightly changed. Sam the Mouse used different exits from his abode when looking 
in one or the other of two boxes outside. He had put a piece of cheese in one box (box 1), then 
went inside to sleep. While asleep someone transferred his cheese to the other box (box 2). This set 
up allowed the ﬁ lming of the children’s eye gaze when Sam woke up with a craving for his cheese. 
Most 3-year-olds looked for Sam in expectation of his reappearance at the exit to box 1 (where he 
thought his cheese was). This occurred only in the false belief condition, but not in a true-belief 
control condition, where Sam had seen the transfer to box 2. Most interestingly, all the young 
3-year-olds who showed this looking behavior still maintained, when asked, that Sam would come 
out from the exit to box 2 (where the cheese actually was). 
 This dissociation has been replicated (Garnham & Perner, 2001) by different investigators (Low 
2010; Ruffman, Garnham, Import, & Connolly, 2001; Wang, Low, Jing, & Qinghua, 2012). Perner 
& Clements 2000 made a case that children’s anticipatory looking shows the characteristics of 
indirect measures indicative of implicit knowledge (Reingold & Merikle 1988), e.g. guessing by 
blindsight patients of the location of a stimulus in their blind ﬁ eld (Weiskrantz, 1986), by sighted 
persons in the Roelof’s induced motion illusion (BridgemanKirch, & Sperling, 1981; Bridgeman, 
Peery, & Anand, 1997), thumb-ﬁ nger span size indicating an object’s true size when explicit 
size judgments are distorted by illusion effects (Agliotti, DeSouza, & Goodale, 1995; St ö ttinger, 
Aigner, Hanstein, & Perner, 2009; St ö ttinger, Soder, Pfusterschmied, Wagner, & Perner, 2010). 5 
Furthermore, Ruffman et al. (2001) showed that children seem absolutely unaware—don’t even 
 5   The distinction between direct and indirect tests is not as obvious as it may seem. Naively one would think 
that a direct false belief test is one in which the child is asked directly about an agent’s belief. In that case, the 
good old standard false belief test would be indirect, because children are not asked about Mistaken Max’s 
belief, but about his future action. Hence, the test should strictly speaking not be called a direct false belief 
test, but a direct test of mistaken intentional action. 
  In general other problematic aspects are that the question may be directly about the matter of interest but 
still count as indirect. For instance, when a blindsight person is asked to guess where a stimulus is, implicit 
knowledge can be used, but not when asked to point to where the stimulus actually is. The same can be 
shown with normally sighted persons when they have to indicate a near threshold change of brightness 
(Marcel, 1993). So the critical feature is not the form of the question but how the question is to be taken. If 
the respondent is to take it as a request to say where something really is, then it is a direct test. If the question 
is to be taken as where something could be (a blind guess), then it is an indirect test, because the pointing 
gesture to where it could be (guess) is inﬂ uenced by where it actually is. Moreover, when blindsight patients 
are asked to insert their hand into a slot of different orientation they can do so above chance even when they 
can’t consciously see the slot, but they cannot indicate with their hand the direction of the slot (Perenin & 
Rosetti, 1996). Similar abilities have been reported with healthy persons’ susceptibility to illusions.  

TELEOLOGY: BELIEF AS PERSPECTIVE
42
consider it a vague possibility—that the agent could reappear where they look in anticipation to 
see him reappear. 
 Early sensitivity—the facts 
 The use of indirect tests has led to the discovery of very early sensitivity to agent’s false beliefs. We 
can distinguish four different paradigms. 
 Looking in expectation 
 Children look in expectation where they expect a hand to appear on the basis of where the agent 
thinks an object is. This can be shown by 2 years (Southgate, Senju, & Csibra, 2007) and perhaps 
earlier (Neumann, 2009; Southgate, 2008). 
 Looking time 
 Infants of about 14 months look longer at the test scene when a mistaken agent searches in the cor-
rect location than when she searches in the wrong location where she thinks the object is (Onishi 
& Baillargeon, 2005). The longer looking is interpreted as infants expecting a different action 
(search in the empty container where the agent believes the object to be) than what is shown 
(agent searches in correct container). Hence this method has been dubbed “violation of expecta-
tion paradigm.” This ﬁ nding has led to an explosion of demonstrations that infants in their second 
year expect agents to act according to their beliefs and not the real state of affairs. 
 A somewhat different use of looking time differences was made by Kovacs, Teglas, & Endress 
(2010). As early as 7 months, infants’ looking time was recorded when discovering a surprising 
outcome—a ball behind a screen had disappeared. Their looking time was longer when a bystander 
shared their belief that the ball was still behind the screen than when the bystander thought the ball 
had disappeared. A similar technique using reaction times has been pioneered by Apperly, Riggs, 
Simpson, Chiavarino, & Samson (2006) assessing automaticity of belief attribution in adults with 
the conclusion that it is not automatic.  
 Interpretation of referential expressions 
 This paradigm was pioneered by Carpenter, Call & Tomasello (2002) and Happ é  & Loth (2002) 
with children around the age of 3 years. Southgate, Chevallier, & Csibra (2010) tested 17-month-
old infants who watched an agent place two novel, unnamed objects in two separate boxes. 
Unbeknownst to the agent, the contents were then switched. When the agent returned, she pointed 
to a box (the incorrect box in the false-belief condition) and said: “Do you remember what I put 
in here? There’s a  sefo in here. There’s a  sefo in this box. Shall we play with the  sefo ?” In the false-
belief conditions, children correctly chose the item in the other box, not the one the experimenter 
pointed to. The authors’ interpretation is that children understood that the experimenter wanted 
from the indicated box the object she thought was in there and not the one that was actually in 
there. 
 Helping behavior 
 In the false-belief condition by Buttelmann, Carpenter, and Tomasello (2009), an agent failed to 
witness her favourite toy being moved and returned to the ﬁ rst box to retrieve the toy, but couldn’t 
get to open the box. Children were then asked to “help” the agent. Over 70% of 18-month-olds 
approached the second box. In contrast, less than 20% did so in a knowledge condition where the 
unsuccessful agent had witnessed the transfer to the new box but tried to open the empty box. 
Buttelmann et al. (2009) suggested that toddlers approached the second box in the false-belief 
condition because they recognized that the agent falsely believed that her toy was still inside the 
ﬁ rst box and concluded from the agent’s unsuccessful attempt to open that box that she wanted to 

UNDERSTANDING THE DISSOCIATION: THEORY VS. TELEOLOGY
43
retrieve the toy she thought was in that box but which was now in the new box. So the child had to 
orient to the new box to retrieve the desired toy.   
 Early sensitivity—interpretation 
 One question about these ﬁ ndings concerns the best way to characterize the two groups of tasks—
those that reveal early sensitivity and those traditional tasks that point to later understanding. 
Clements and Perner (1994; Perner & Clements, 2000) characterized the tasks as indirect and 
direct, inspired by the use of this terminology in the consciousness literature (Reingold & Merikle, 
1988). More recently, Scott and Baillargeon (2009) characterized the difference as one of “spon-
taneous” and “elicited” responses, which has much to recommend itself, but also does not quite 
capture the relevant difference, as the authors themselves imply (p. 391): “Finally, infants and tod-
dlers should succeed at indirect-elicited-response tasks that require them to respond to questions 
or prompts that only indirectly tap their representation of an agent’s false belief.” And the authors 
refer to the studies by Buttelmann et al (2009) and Southgate et al (2010) as good examples. So 
“indirectness” seems the critical factor. 
 Several distinctions have been proposed to characterize the difference between the kinds of 
knowledge underlying the early sensitivity and later understanding:
 1.  Implicit—explicit (Clements & Perner, 1994; Perner & Clements, 2000) 
 (a)  unconscious—conscious (Garnham & Perner, 2001; Ruffman et al., 2001) 
 (b)  procedural—declarative 
 (c)  non-conceptual—conceptual (Rakoczy, 2012) 
 (d)  automatic (spontaneous)—controlled (Apperly et al., 2006) 
 2.  Modular—central process (Leslie, 1994) 
 3.  Causal understanding: shallow—deep (behavior rules—mental state rules; Perner, 2010) 
 But from these characterizations no general principles follow for a detailed account, which would 
answer the following two questions:
   1.     Why does early sensitivity emerge only in indirect tasks and not the traditional direct ones?  
 2.  Why do the younger children give systematically wrong answers on the direct tests until they 
are about 4 years old?    
 One detailed account was provided by Scott and Baillargeon (2009). They propose two subsystems 
to the theory of mind system SS1 and SS2 (pp. 1174–5):
  SS1 allows them to attribute two kinds of internal states to the agent: motivational and reality-congruent 
informational states … Motivational states specify the agent’s motivation in the scene and include goals 
and dispositions. Reality-congruent informational states specify what knowledge or accurate informa-
tion as construed by the infant the agent possesses about the scene… SS2 extends SS1 in that it allows 
infants to attribute reality-incongruent informational states to agents. When an agent holds a false or a 
pretend belief about a scene … 
 Scott and Baillargeon’s answer to our two questions rests on the assumption that indirect tests require 
only representation of belief, while direct tests require the interplay of three processes (p. 1176):
 We assume that success in the Sally–Ann task depends on the interaction of three separate processes. 
First, children must represent Sally’s false belief about the marble’s location; … Second, when asked the 

TELEOLOGY: BELIEF AS PERSPECTIVE
44
test question, children must attend to the question, decide to answer it, and tap their representation of 
Sally’s false belief (response-selection process). Finally, children must inhibit any prepotent tendency to 
answer the question based on their own knowledge of the marble’s current location  response-inhibition 
process). ... Children then fail because (a) the joint activation of the false-belief-representation process 
and the response-selection process overwhelms their limited information-processing resources, and/or 
(b) the neural connections between the brain regions that serve these two processes are still immature 
and inefﬁ cient in early childhood. 
 This answers question 1: children show sensitivity to false belief in indirect tests earlier than in 
direct tests because indirect tests tax their limited processing system less than direct tests. An 
answer to question 2 is not obvious. If the overload leaves the toddler without any means to answer 
then the child can but guess, but not be systematically wrong. If the overload disables SS2, but 
leaves SS1 as default, the consequence would be that SS1 would represent the agent’s ignorance of 
the new location and the child, again, can but guess what the agent will do. 
 We can see two interesting weaknesses in this approach. The one, already discussed, is the need 
to explain the systematic errors on the direct tests. The other weakness is that it does not explain 
why only direct tests require response selection and inhibition but not also indirect tests. Scott, 
Baillargeon, Song, & Leslie (2010, p. 391) have this to say:
 In marked contrast, success in spontaneous-response tasks such as VOE [violation of expectation] and 
AL [anticipatory looking] tasks depends on only one process, the false-belief-representation process; 
the response-selection and response-inhibition processes are not activated because children produce 
their responses spontaneously rather than in answer to direct questions. 
 So the response is given spontaneously without external prompt by a question,  6 but that still leaves 
the child to select one of many responses (e.g. should I look to location 1 or to location 2 if I want 
to see him come out of the exit). Selection of the correct looking response would also be interfered 
with by the tendency to look to the exit near the desired object’s real location, which needs to be 
inhibited. In fact, if selection of the spontaneous looking response tends to be automatic and 
implicit in contrast to an explicit response to a question, then it should, if anything, be more dif-
ﬁ cult to inhibit the automatic response than the more explicit response—exactly the opposite of 
what is being observed. 
 From causes of behavior to reasons for acting as causes 
 Our proposal also assumes two different approaches (or systems). One consists of a purely nomic 
causal understanding of  behavior  as caused by motivational and informational states in the tradition 
of theory theory (Gopnik and Meltzoff, 1997; Leslie, 1994). It underlies the data based on indirect tests. 
The other consists of understanding  reasons for  action  in the tradition of those who emphasize the role 
of rationality (and the principle of charity) in interpretation (Davidson, 1963; McDowell, 1985). It is 
triggered by direct tests and is based on expecting people to act in a way they have reasons to act. 
 Approach 1: caused behavior 
 For present purposes we’d like to remain completely agnostic about the causal depth of this under-
standing, e.g. whether infants make causally shallow connections from observable indicators of 
 6   In fact the prompt need not be a question. Garnham and Perner (2001) had children place a mat to catch 
the returning agent. Children who placed the mat spontaneously without hesitation tended to place the mat 
to the exit where the agent thought his object was, while children who needed prompting in the form of a 
reminder to move the mat tended to place it at the exit where the object really was. 

UNDERSTANDING THE DISSOCIATION: THEORY VS. TELEOLOGY
45
motivational and informational states to future behavior (behavior rules, Povinelli & Vonk, 2004) 
or whether they infer inner states from these indicators, and predict and interpret behavior on the 
basis of these inner states (e.g. Tomasello, Call, & Hare, 2003). 7 We also stay neutral about origin. 
Infants’ knowledge might be innate (and modular) and emerge at particular times by maturation 
(Leslie, 1994), or be rapidly built up by statistical learning (Ruffman, Taumoepeau, & Perkins, 
2012) or be acquired through a theorizing process (Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997). 
 We have commitment—though not irrevocable—on some of the other features of its knowl-
edge base. Evidence suggests that it is based on implicit knowledge. The dissociation observed by 
Clements and Perner (1994) and children’s reluctance to acknowledge the agent to reappear where 
they looked in anticipation (Ruffman et al., 2001) suggests that it is not consciously accessible. 
Consequently, it is likely to be automatic and not under voluntary control (Apperly & Butterﬁ ll, 
2009). Moreover, indirect measures tend to consist of online “reactions to the unfolding events” 
(Scott and Baillargeon, 2009, p. 1176) or live interactions in the helping paradigms. This also sug-
gests that the knowledge is procedural and may not be available for conditional reﬂ ection, which 
requires declarative knowledge. 
 The general characterization of this approach is that it treats behavior of organisms or moving 
dots on a par with the movement and changes of inanimate physical objects. Theory of mind is just 
one theory among many others.  
 Approach 2: reasons for action as causes 
 To appreciate behavior (goal-directed movement) as intentional action, one has to understand it 
as behavior for which the agent has reasons. If one were in Mistaken Max’s situation, having put 
one’s chocolate earlier into the drawer and now looking for it, one does not ask oneself what one 
 will do next, but what one  should  do next—go to the drawer or the cupboard? Since from one’s 
own point of view, the chocolate is still in the drawer, one seems to have good (objective) reasons 
to go to the drawer. And because one is motivated by this fact, one knows that one is likely to go 
there because one should go there. One does not simply conclude this on the basis of a law-like 
regularity: “Whenever I want something and think (know) that it is in location x then I will go to 
location x.” 
 To understand others as intentional agents is to understand what they are doing or will do in 
terms of what they should do given their goals and circumstances. 8 Rakoczy, Warnecken, and 
Tomasello (2008) showed that children as young as 2 years expect other people to act as they 
should. If the pronounced goal is to play a certain game then one should behave according to the 
game’s constituent rules. Or else 2- and particularly 3-year-olds get very upset. Children’s norma-
tive attitude is based on understanding objective reasons, i.e. teleology (Perner & Roessler, 2010). 
Teleology captures intentional actions very well, as long as they are based on objective goals and 
objectively appropriate instrumental actions.  9 
 7    Despite the recent evidence of early understanding of the mind the critical evidence whether this under-
standing is based on behavior rules or mental state computation is still outstanding (Perner, 2010). 
 8    We want to emphasize (see above Belief as perspective: supposition vs. simulation) that this should not be 
understood in the sense of simulation theory as imaginatively putting oneself into the other person’s situ-
ation. It only requires seeing from one’s own position what is needed (goal) and what needs to be done to 
achieve it (instrumental action) by whoever is in a position to carry out that action. 
 9   This bears resemblance to Scott and Baillargeon’s (2009) subsystem SS1 as it involves goals and—to use 
their term—reality-congruent instrumental actions. 

TELEOLOGY: BELIEF AS PERSPECTIVE
46
 Teleology breaks down as a means of understanding intentional actions when subjective 
perspectives on goals and means are involved. Mistaken Max’s move to the empty drawer 
remains an irrational behavior for the young teleologist. The teleologist can, however, recap-
ture Mistaken Max’s rationality by realizing that he is mistaken, i.e. has a deviant perspective 
on the world, and employ teleology within his perspective (Perner, 2004). Earlier we labelled 
this kind of reasoning “teleology in perspective” (see Belief as perspective: supposition vs. 
simulation; see also Perner & Roessler, 2010). Importantly, teleology-in-perspective preserves 
the rationality of Mistaken Max’s action: he can be seen to act on the basis of what from his 
perspective appears to be an objective reason. This ability becomes operative around 4 years 
when children develop some notion that different perspectives exist and, thus, need not any-
more rely on being switched to another person’s perspective but can voluntarily do so (Perner, 
Stummer, Sprung, & Doherty, 2002). 
 There is now a large amount of evidence that children at this age become able to succeed on a 
large variety of otherwise unrelated tasks that share the need for perspective understanding. For 
instance, level 2 perspective taking (Masangkay, McCluskey, McIntyre, Sims-Knight, Vaughn, & 
Flavell, 1974), interpreting ambiguous drawings (Doherty & Wimmer, 2005), understanding false 
direction signs (Leekam, Perner, Healey, & Sewell, 2008) alternative naming (Doherty & Perner, 
1998; Parkin, 1994; Perner et al., 2002), episodic memory (Perner & Ruffman, 1995; Perner, Kloo, 
& St ö ttinger, 2007; Sabbagh, Moses, & Shiverick, 2006), and understanding identity information 
(Perner et al., 2010) not only emerge at this age, but also correlate speciﬁ cally with the traditional 
false belief task. 
 A main purpose of understanding reasons for action is to explain, rather than predict behav-
ior (Andrews, 2012) and be able to reason and argue about the correctness or appropriateness 
of one’s own and others’ conduct. It is an essential glue of human society and tied to linguistic 
interaction. Its knowledge base must be explicit: declarative (non-procedural) to be used in con-
ditional arguments, access conscious, conceptual (for linguistic exchanges), and under voluntary 
control (at least for voluntary retrieval). It cannot be modular, since it needs to be accessible for 
argumentation.  
 Explaining the evidence: answering our two questions 
 Having described the two approaches taken by children (also by adults) we need to check how well 
this proposal can answer our two questions (from the section Early sensitivity—interpretation):
   1.     Children show sensitivity to false beliefs very early on indirect measures in online and interac-
tive tasks because they have implicit nomic knowledge about motivational and informational 
states causing behavior (we are non-committal as to the causal depth of this knowledge). In 
contrast, on direct tests the knowledge in question is part of the test speciﬁ cation (“Where will 
Max go?”) which requires a declarative commitment, which—as the consciousness literature 
suggests—requires  explicit knowledge . For this the young children employ pure teleology; they 
make predictions of what someone will do in terms of what the person should do, i.e. has 
objective reasons to do.  
  2.     Children’s predictions on direct false belief tests show the reality error because they are tel-
eologists. Around 4 years they become aware of the existence of perspective differences, which 
enables them to see a person’s reasons relative to a different perspective (teleology in perspec-
tive). The age point conforms to the age at which many other tasks that require awareness of 
perspectives are mastered. 

47
REFERENCES
 Conclusion 
 We drew attention to a feature of how we understand intentional action that tends to get lost in the 
theory theory of mind. Our na ï ve belief-desire psychology is not primarily a body of law-like gen-
eralizations of how agents tend to behave, but involves an understanding that they act for reasons. 
They do what they should do—for the most part. We ventured the contention that infants’ and 
toddlers’ early expectations of how people will act, especially when a false belief is involved, may 
be based on law-like generalizations, which remain implicit and dissociate from an understanding 
of people acting for reasons until they become able to understand reasons relative to an agent’s 
perspective around 4 years. Because of the dissociation, we think that the earlier understanding 
is implicit and the later understanding explicit. Our mentalist understanding (theory of mind) 
of intentional actions has to become explicit at some point anyway, since one of its prime func-
tions is to argue about and justify conduct. Although we emphasized the difference in knowledge 
base of earlier and later understanding, we also like to think that there is developmental continu-
ity between the approaches (this is one reason we do not want to talk of systems that are often 
associated as independent); there is evidence that performance in direct tasks is related to earlier 
performance on indirect tasks (Low, 2010; Thoermer, Sodian, Vuori, Perst, & Kristen, 2011). In 
particular, the discrepancy between how mistaken people act and the young teleologist’s wayward 
predictions must be an important motor for moving to a more sophisticated understanding. As 
Karmiloff-Smith and Inhelder (1974) observed in the context of children’s understanding of how 
to balance objects on a fulcrum: “If you want to get ahead, get a theory.” So, in our case, infants have 
an implicit sense of how people under certain informational conditions are likely to act, then they 
get a rough theory (teleology) that people act as they should act, which they then need to reﬁ ne 
into teleology in perspective.  
 References 
 Agliotti, S., DeSouza, J. F., & Goodale, M. A. (1995).  Size-contrast illusions deceive the eye but not the 
hand .  Current Biology ,  5 (6),  679–85 . 
 Andrews, K. (2012).  Do Apes Read Minds: Toward a New Folk Psychology. Cambridge: MIT. 
 Apperly, I. A., & Butterfi ll, S. A. (2009).  Do humans have two systems to track beliefs and belief-like states? 
 Psychological Review ,  116 ,  953–70 . 
 Apperly, I. A., Riggs, K. J., Simpson, A., Chiavarino, C., & Samson, D. (2006).  Is belief reasoning auto-
matic?  Psychological Science ,  17 ,  841–4 . 
 Bridgeman, B., Kirch, M., & Sperling, A. (1981).  Segregation of cognitive and motor aspects of visual func-
tion using induced motion .  Perception and Psychophysics ,  29 ,  336–42 . 
 Bridgeman, B., Peery, S., & Anand, S. (1997).  Interaction of cognitive and sensorimotor maps of visual 
space .  Perception and Psychophysics ,  59 (3),  456–69 . 
 Buttelmann, D., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2009).  Eighteen-month-old infants show false belief 
understanding in an active helping paradigm .  Cognition ,  112 (2),  337–42 . 
 Campbell, J. (2002).  References and Consciousness .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Carpenter, M., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2002).  A new false belief test for 36-month-olds .  British Journal of 
Developmental Psychology ,  20 ,  393–420 . 
 Clements, W. A., & Perner, J. (1994).  Implicit understanding of belief .  Cognitive Development ,  9 ,  377–97 . 
 Davidson, D. (1963).  Actions, reasons, and causes .  Journal of Philosophy ,  60 ,  685–700 . 
 Doherty, M. J., & Perner, J. (1998).  Metalinguistic awareness and theory of mind: Just two words for the 
same thing?  Cognitive Development ,  13 ,  279–305 . 

TELEOLOGY: BELIEF AS PERSPECTIVE
48
 Doherty, M. J., & Wimmer, M. (2005).  Children’s understanding of ambiguous fi gures: Which cognitive 
developments are necessary to experience reversal?  Cognitive Development ,  20 ,  407–21 . 
 Dummett, M. (1981).  Frege. Philosophy of Language, 2nd edn .  London :  Duckworth . 
 Garnham, W. A., & Perner, J. (2001).  When actions really do speak louder than words—but only implicitly: 
Young children’s understanding of false belief in action .  British Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  19 , 
 413–32 . 
 Gendler, T. S. (2000).  Th e puzzle of imaginative resistance .  Journal of Philosophy ,  97 ,  55–80 . 
 Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1997).  Word, Thoughts, and Theories .  Cambridge :  Bradford Books, 
MIT Press . 
 Gordon, R. (1995).  Folk psychology as simulation . In M. Davies, & T. Stone (Eds),  Folk Psychology .  Oxford : 
 Blackwell . 
 Gordon, R. M. (1996).  “Radical” simulationism . In P. Carruthers, & P. K. Smith (Eds),  Th eories of Th eories 
of Mind, pp.  11–21 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Happ é , F., & Loth, E. (2002).  “Th eory of mind” and tracking speakers’ intentions .  Mind and Language ,  17 , 
 24–36 . 
 Heal, J. (1995).  “Replication and Functionalism’ . In M. Davies & T. Stone (Eds),  Folk Psychology .  Oxford : 
 Blackwell . 
 Karmiloff -Smith, A., & Inhelder, B. (1974).  If you want to get ahead, get a theory .  Cognition ,  3 ,  195–212 . 
 Kolodny, N. (2005).  Why be rational?  Mind ,  114 , 509–63. 
 Kovacs, A. M., Teglas, E., & Endress, A. D. (2010).  Th e social sense: susceptibility to others’ beliefs in 
human infants and adults .  Science New York ,  NY ,  330 (6012),  1830–4 . 
 Leekam, S., Perner, J., Healey, L., & Sewell, C. (2008).  False signs and the non-specifi city of theory of mind: 
Evidence that preschoolers have general diffi  culties in understanding representations .  British Journal of 
Developmental Psychology ,  26 (4),  485–97 . 
 Leslie, A. M. (1994).  Pretending and believing: issues in the theory of ToMM .  Cognition ,  50 ,  211–38 . 
 Low, J. (2010).  Preschoolers’ implicit and explicit false-belief understanding: relations with complex 
 syntactical mastery .  Child Development ,  81 (2),  597–615 . 
 Marcel, A. J. (1993).  Slippage in the unity of consciousness . In G. R. Bock, & J. Marsh (Eds),  Experimental 
and Th eoretical Studies of Consciousness (pp.  168–86) .  Chichester :  Wiley . 
 Masangkay, Z. S., McCluskey, K. A., McIntyre, C. W., Sims-Knight, J., Vaughn, B. E., & Flavell, J. H. 
(1974).  Th e early development of inferences about the visual percepts of others .  Child Development ,  45 , 
 357–66 . 
 McDowell, J. (1985).  Functionalism and anomalous monism . In E. LePore, & B. McLaughlin (Eds),  Actions 
and Events .  Oxford :  Blackwell . 
 Millar, A. (2004).  Understanding People .  Oxford :  Clarendon Press . 
 Moran, R. (1994).  Th e expression of feeling in imagination .  Philosophical Review ,  103 ,  75–106 . 
 Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005).  Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs?  Science ,  308 , 
 255–8 . 
 Neumann, A. (2009).  Infants’ implicit and explicit knowledge of mental states .  Evidence from Eye-tracking 
Studies , Chapter 7.  Ketsch Verlag :  Microfi che . 
 Parkin, L. J. (1994) . Children’s understanding of misrepresentation. Unpublished Th esis for doctorate, 
University of Sussex. 
 Perenin, M. T., & Rossetti, Y. (1996).  Grasping without form discrimination in an hemianopic fi eld . 
 Neuroreport ,  7 ,  793–7 . 
 Perner, J. (2004).  Wann verstehen Kinder Handlungen als rational? In H. Schmidinger & C. Sedmak (Eds), 
 Der Mensch—ein“animal rationale”? Vernunft —Kognition—Intelligenz (pp.  198–215) .  Darmstadt : 
 Wissenschaft liche Buchgesellschaft . 

49
 Perner, J. (2010).  Who took the cog out of cognitive science? Mentalism in an era of anti-cognitivism . 
In P. A. Frensch, & R. Schwarzer (Eds),  Cognition and Neuropsychology: International Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, Volume 1 (pp.  241–61) .  London :  Psychology Press . 
 Perner, J., & Clements, W. A. (2000).  From an implicit to an explicit theory of mind . In Y. Rossetti, & A. 
Revonsuo (Eds),  Beyond Dissociations: Interaction Between Dissociated Implicit and Explicit Processing 
(pp.  273–93) .  Amsterdam :  John Benjamins . 
 Perner, J., Kloo, D., & St ö ttinger, E. (2007).  Introspection and remembering .  Synthese ,  159 ,  253–70 . 
 Perner, J., Mauer, M. C., & Hildenbrand, M. (2011). Identity: Key to children’s understanding of belief. 
 Science ,  333 , 474–7. 
 Perner, J., & Roessler, J. (2010).  Teleology and causal reasoning in children’s theory of mind . In J. Aguilar, 
& A. Buckareff  (Eds),  Causing Human Action: New perspectives on the causal theory of action (pp.  199–
228) .  Cambridge :  Bradford Books, MIT Press . 
 Perner, J., & Ruff man, T. (1995).  Episodic memory an autonoetic consciousness: Developmental evi-
dence and a theory of childhood amnesia. Special Issue: Early memory .  Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology ,  59 (3),  516–48 . 
 Perner, J., Stummer, S., Sprung, M., & Doherty, M. (2002).  Th eory of mind fi nds its Piagetian perspective: 
Why alternative naming comes with understanding belief. Cognitive Development, Special Issue on 
“Constructivism Today” as part of the inauguration of Cognitive Development as the offi  cial journal of the 
Jean Piaget Society for the Study of Knowledge and Development.    Cognitive Development ,  17 ,  1451–72 . 
 Povinelli, D. J., & Vonk, J. (2004).  We don’t need a microscope to explore the chimpanzee’s mind .  Mind & 
Language ,  19 ,  1–28 . 
 Rakoczy, H. (2012).  Do infants have a theory of mind?  British Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  30 ,  59–74 . 
 Rakoczy, H., Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2008).  Th e sources of normativity: young children’s awareness 
of the normative structure of games .  Developmental Psychology ,  44 ,  875–81 . 
 Reingold, E. M., & Merikle, P. M. (1988).  Using direct and indirect measures to study perception without 
awareness .  Perception and Psychophysics ,  44 (6),  563–75 . 
 Ruff man, T., Garnham, W., Import, A., & Connolly, D. (2001).  Does eye gaze indicate implicit knowledge 
of false belief? Charting transitions in knowledge .  Journal of Experimental Child Psychology ,  80 ,  201–24 . 
 Ruff man, T., Taumoepeau, M., & Perkins, C. (2012).  Statistical learning as a basis for social understanding 
in children .  British Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  30 ,  87–104 . 
 Sabbagh, M. A., Moses, L. J., & Shiverick, S. (2006).  Executive functioning and preschoolers’ understand-
ing of false beliefs, false photographs and false signs .  Child Development ,  77 ,  1034–49 . 
 Schueler, F. (2003).  Reasons and Purposes .  Oxford :  Clarendon . 
 Scott, R. M., & Baillargeon, R. (2009).  Which penguin is this? Attributing false beliefs about object identity 
at 18 months .  Child Development ,  80 (4),  1172–96 . 
 Scott, R. M., Baillargeon, R., Song, H. J., & Leslie, A. M. (2010).  Attributing false beliefs about non-obvious 
properties at 18 months .  Cognitive Psychology ,  61 (4),  366–95 . 
 Soteriou, M. (2010).  Cartesian refl ections on the autonomy of the mental . In J. Aguilar, A. Buckareff  & K. 
Frankish (Eds),  New waves in philosophy of action (pp. 122–40) .  Palgrave :  Macmillan . 
 Southgate, V. (2008). “ Attributions of false belief in infancy.” Invited presentation at the EPS Research 
Workshop on Th eory of Mind: A workshop in celebration of the 30th anniversary of Premack & 
Woodruff ’s seminal paper, “Does the chimpanzee have a Th eory of Mind? (BBS 1978), University of 
Nottingham, 11–12 September 
 Southgate, V., Chevallier, C., & Csibra, G. (2010).  Seventeen-month-olds appeal to false beliefs to interpret 
others’ referential communication .  Developmental Science ,  13 (6),  907–12 . 
 Southgate, V., Senju, A., & Csibra, G. (2007).  Action anticipation through attribution of false belief by 
2-year-olds .  Psychological Science ,  18,  586–92 . 
REFERENCES

TELEOLOGY: BELIEF AS PERSPECTIVE
50
 St ö ttinger, E., Aigner, S., Hanstein, K., & Perner, J. (2009).  Grasping the diagonal: controlling attention to 
illusory stimuli for action and perception .  Consciousness and Cognition ,  18 (1),  223–8 . 
 St ö ttinger, E., Soder, K., Pfusterschmied, J., Wagner, H., & Perner, J. (2010).  Division of labour within 
the visual system—fact or fi ction?—Which kind of evidence is appropriate to clarify this debate? 
 Experimental Brain Research ,  202 ,  79–88 . 
 Th oermer, C., Sodian, B., Vuori, M., Perst, H., & Kristen, S. (2011). Continuity from an implicit to an 
explicit understanding of false belief from infancy to preschool age.  British Journal of Developmental 
Psychology ,  30 , 172–87. 
 Tomasello, M., Call, J., & Hare, B. (2003).  Chimpanzees versus humans: It’s not that simple .  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences ,  7 ,  239–40 . 
 Wang, B., Low, J., Jing, Z., & Qinghua, Q. (2012).  Chinese preschoolers’ implicit and explicit false-belief 
understanding .  British Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  30 ,  123–140 . 
 Weiskrantz, L. (1986).  Blindsight: A Case Study and Implications. Paperback edn 1998 .  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press . 
 Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001).  Meta-analysis of theory of mind development: Th e truth 
about false belief .  Child Development ,  72 ,  655–84 . 
 Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983).  Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining function of wrong 
beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception .  Cognition ,  13 ,  103–28 . 
 Woodward, J. (2011).  Causal perception and causal cognition . In J. Roessler, H. Lerman & N. Eilan (Eds), 
 Perception, Causation, and Objectivity (pp. 229–63) .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 

 Chapter 4 
 Theory of mind, development, 
and deafness 
 Henry M.   Wellman and   Candida C.   Peterson  
 Philosophers and psychologists often characterize our everyday system of reasoning about mind, 
world, and behavior as a belief-desire psychology (D’Andrade, 1987; Fodor, 1987; Wellman, 1990). 
Such an everyday psychology, often termed a theory of mind, provides explanations and predic-
tions of intentional action by appeal to what the person thinks, knows, and expects coupled with 
what he or she wants, intends and hopes for. Why did Jill go to the drawer: She  wanted  her choco-
late and  thought  it was in the drawer. Everyday psychology also includes reasoning about the ori-
gins of mental states (Jill wants candy because she is  hungry ; Jill thinks it is in the drawer where 
she last  saw it). That is, everyday or na ï ve psychology incorporates a variety of related constructs, 
such as drives and preferences that ground one’s desires, and perceptual-historical experiences that 
ground one’s beliefs. It includes emotional reactions that result from these desires, beliefs, inten-
tions, actions, and perceptions—happiness at fulﬁ lled desires, frustration at unfulﬁ lled desires, 
surprise when events contradict one’s ﬁ rmly held beliefs. We consider how children develop such 
a theory of mind. 
 For background, and because it is important in its own right, we begin with a brief overview of 
theory of mind development in typically developing children. As follows from the above outline of 
everyday psychological reasoning, children’s developing understanding of beliefs, desires, percep-
tions, intentions, and emotions, are all of interest and importance (see Harris, 2006). Our overview 
sets the stage for two foci we consider in more depth. The ﬁ rst concerns the use of new, insight-
ful methods to more deeply examine how theory of mind unfolds over development. Because 
theory of mind is a developmental achievement, we argue that research must more richly and 
deeply reveal how it actually develops. The second focus concerns the insights to be achieved about 
theory of mind from atypical development. Here, we argue that, although atypical developments 
in children with autism have been most extensively studied (as reviewed elsewhere in this volume), 
developments in children with deafness are both complementary and especially revealing. 
 The course of theory of mind development  
 Development of an understanding of people is a lifelong task, beginning at birth. Infants who are 
only a few days old prefer to look at people and faces, imitate people, but not inanimate devices, 
listen to human voices, and so on. More pertinently, by the end of the ﬁ rst year children begin to 
treat themselves and others as intentional agents and experiencers. 
 Box 4.1 provides an example paradigm used to demonstrate intention understanding in infants 
(from Brandone & Wellman, 2009; Phillips & Wellman, 2005). In early demonstrations using 
something like this paradigm, infants saw an animated circle “jumping” over a barrier to reach 
its goal-object. Just as they do for intentional human acts, 9- and 12-month-olds look longer at 

THEORY OF MIND, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEAFNESS 
52
the indirect test event, showing an abstract, generalized understanding of goal-directed agency 
(Csibra, Gergely, Biro, & Brockbank, 1999). 
 Relatedly, intentional action is not only directed toward speciﬁ c goals, it is non-accidental (e.g. 
Carpenter, Aktar & Tomasello, 1998a; Olineck & Poulin-Dubois, 2005). To illustrate, in Carpenter 
et al. (1998a), 14- and 18-month-old infants watched an adult model do several two-action 
sequences on complex objects (e.g. pushing a button and then moving a lever). One action was 
marked vocally by the adult as intentional (“There!”), and one as accidental (“Whoops!”). Infants 
imitated almost twice as many intentional as accidental actions and only very rarely imitated the 
entire two-action sequences. 
 When viewing actions, such as those in Box 4.1, or such as pushing buttons and moving levers, 
infants might conceivably identify only the spatial-directedness and objective efﬁ ciency of the 
overt behavior toward its overt target—a teleological or behavioral, rather than intentional under-
standing (Gergley & Csibra, 2003). However, inferring a goal when it is unfulﬁ lled (and thus 
non-overt in the actor’s movements or outcomes) demonstrates an understanding that intentions 
exist beyond the surface actions performed. So, in a seminal study (Meltzoff, 1995), 18-month-olds 
witnessed an adult try, but fail to fulﬁ ll several novel, object-directed goals (e.g. trying to hang a 
ring on a hook). Although infants never saw the actions successfully modeled, when given a chance 
to act on the objects themselves they “imitated” the successful action much more than the failed 
 Box 4.1 
 
Habituation event
Direct reach test event
Indirect reach test event    
 Habituation-test (or familiarization-test) paradigms are designed so that participants will look 
longer at novel, unexpected test events more than at familiar, expected test events. In the reach-
ing paradigm (depicted above), during habituation, participants view multiple trials of the 
agent reaching over the barrier for the goal object. Then, the barrier is  removed and the test 
events contrast two different construals of the person’s actions, one in terms of intentions and 
one in terms of physical motions of the body. If during habituation participants construe the 
action in terms of its physical movement (the arcing arm motion), then the indirect reach test 
event should be expected (as it repeats the same movement) whereas the direct reach will stand 
out as novel and so especially attention-worthy. In contrast, if participants initially construe 
the action as goal directed (the actor going as directly as possible to get her goal), then when 
the barrier is removed the direct reach would be the expected action because the actor contin-
ues to directly seek the goal, and the indirect reach would be more attention-worthy because 
(although the actor’s arm movement remains the same as during habituation) the action is no 
longer straightforwardly directed to the goal. In this paradigm, 8-, 9-, 10-, and 12-month-olds, 
and chimpanzees and macaques consistently look longer at the  indirect test event. 

THE COURSE OF THEORY OF MIND DEVELOPMENT
53
(actually witnessed) actions. Fifteen-, but not 12-month-olds also display this pattern (Carpenter, 
Nagell & Tomasello, 1998b). 
 Motoric imitation is arguably a demanding response system, more so than attentive looking. So, 
consider a version of the displays in Box 4.1 where the actor reaches for, but falls short of success-
fully grasping the target object. If habituated to such unsuccessful actions 10- and 12-month-olds 
(and perhaps 8-month-olds), interpret the actions in terms of the (never actually seen) intentional 
goal of grasping the object (Brandone & Wellman, 2009; Hamlin, Hallinan, & Woodward, 2008). 
 Not only do persons engage in intentional action, they experience the world. Infants can appre-
ciate not only intentional action, but also intentional attention and experiences. Potentially, 
gaze-following, where infants follow an agent’s line of sight toward an object, would be produced 
by an understanding that the agent sees something—the person has a visual experience. Infant 
gaze following, however, could be “behavioral”, tracking others’ head-eye orientations might sim-
ply yield for the infant interesting sights without a recognition of the agent’s visual experience 
(Baldwin & Moses, 1996). Yet, by 12–14 months infants also follow an adult’s gaze around a barrier, 
and do so even when this requires leaning or moving behind the barrier (Butler, Caron & Brooks, 
2000; Dunphy-Lelii & Wellman, 2004; Moll & Tomasello, 2004). 
 However, even in appropriately gazing around barriers, infants could be responding to the 
agent’s eye-ball (or head-nose) orientation without a deeper sense of her intentional experience 
(Moore & Corkum, 1994). For example, at 12 months, infants often “gaze follow” the head turns 
of adults who wear blindfolds. However, recent data conﬁ rm a deeper understanding of visual 
experience. In Meltzoff and Brooks (2008), 12-month-olds were given advance experience with 
blindfolds occluding their own vision. After such experiences they were signiﬁ cantly less likely 
to “gaze follow” a blindfolded adult, suggesting that their sense of what the adult can see—visu-
ally experience—guided infants’ actions. Eighteen-month-olds do not often gaze-follow a blind-
folded adult—probably because they have come to understand that blindfolds occlude visual 
experience—but in this same study 18-month-olds were given experience with a special blindfold 
that looked opaque yet was easily seen through when worn. After experience with that blindfold, 
18-month-olds did gaze-follow the head turn of a blindfolded adult. Thus, by 12–18 months, it is 
infants’ sense of the person’s visual experience (not just overt eye- or head-directedness) that often 
controls their gaze following. 
 Persons not only can have intentional experiences about some here and now event, their experi-
ences can accumulate and update (or fail to update) over time. As one example, Tomasello and 
Haberl (2003) examined this with 12- and 18-month-old infants who interacted with three objects. 
Critically, a target adult joined in these interactions for two of the objects, but was absent for the 
third. After these interactions, the target adult saw all three objects displayed on a tray, and said to 
the infant, “Wow! That’s cool! Can you give it to me?” while gesturing ambiguously in the direction 
of the objects. Three objects were now familiar for the infant, but one was new (and so “cool”) to 
the target adult. Infants gave the target adult the object that was new for her. Thus, they tracked the 
adult’s experiences sufﬁ ciently to know that (a) her experience was not updated when theirs was 
(a recognition of the subjectivity of experience) and (b) she was previously unaware of (ignorant 
of) the third object. 
 Initial infant insights about intention culminate in their understanding that intentional 
agents behave according to their desires and emotions, constrained by their perceptual experi-
ences. Tomasello, Carpenter, Call, Behne, & Moll (2005) call this “understanding intentions and 
attention, ” Wellman (2011) calls this a “desire-emotion-perception understanding of persons.” 
Regardless, this infant understanding of persons encompasses a rudimentary, but impressive sense 
of agents’ awareness or unawareness (knowledge or ignorance) of events, a recognition that if 

THEORY OF MIND, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEAFNESS 
54
persons’ experiences of situations are not updated as events change, then they can be unaware of 
key circumstances (and thus act in ignorance). 
 To be unaware of (ignorant about) something is  not the same as to have a false belief about it. 
As depicted in Box 4.2, an agent might also have a false belief about (for example) where an object 
is beyond just being ignorant of its location. False beliefs, when contents of the world (object-
in-cupboard) are seen to contradict contents of thought (“object-in-drawer”), provide a power-
ful, yet everyday, illustration of a “representational” theory of mind. Accordingly, there has been 
much research on children’s understanding of false belief (hundreds of studies in meta-analyses 
by Milligan, Astington, & Dack, 2007; Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001, Liu, Wellman, Tardif, & 
Sabbagh, 2008). Another reason for this voluminous research is that when researchers were ﬁ rst 
becoming interested in theory of mind, several easy-to-use “standard” false belief tasks were devel-
oped (Box 4.2) and these have proved nicely revealing. Indeed, as shown in Box 4.2, they consist-
ently show an important developmental transition where typically developing children come to 
an explicit understanding of false belief during the preschool years. This development is repre-
sentative of broader changes in children’s theory of mind. Moreover, because they have been used 
worldwide, false belief tasks begin to reveal a universal childhood theory-of-mind achievement, 
again as shown in Box 4.2. 
 This picture of false belief development as concentrated in the preschool years represented the 
consensus view, until about 5 years ago. Since then, however, there have been emerging ﬁ ndings 
claiming that even 12-, 15-, and 18-month-olds understand false belief. The ﬁ ndings have come 
from looking-time research methods (Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005; Scott & Baillargeon, 2009; 
Surian, Caldi, & Sperber, 2007), from examinations of anticipatory looking in eye-tracking para-
digms (Southgate, Senju & Csibra, 2007), and from 18-month-olds’ responses in active-interactive 
paradigms (Buttelman, Rickards, & Bortoli, 2009; Southgate, Chevallier & Csibra, 2010). In this 
chapter, we will not tackle this accumulating body of infant “false belief” research, but concentrate 
instead on preschool developments. We adopt this focus for (at least) three reasons. First the full, 
correct interpretation of the infant “false belief” data is not yet clear (e.g. Sodian, 2011). Some 
impressive cognition is going on, and the “classic” consensus that all the progress in understand-
ing false belief emerges in the preschool years and not earlier clearly must be revised. Secondly, 
relatedly, it is not clear how the data from infancy and those in preschool ﬁ t together. The pre-
school data tap conceptions that are considerably more explicit and aware than the infant data, 
but contrasting explicit and implicit knowledge may not be the best way to talk about or reconcile 
the two sets of ﬁ ndings (e.g. Apperly & Butterﬁ ll, 2009). One thing that is clear is that the infant 
and preschool ﬁ ndings do ﬁ t together in some manner. Research now shows that infant compe-
tence in social cognition on looking-time tasks predicts later preschool competence in standard 
tasks (Kristen, Thoermer, Hofer, Aschersleben, & Sodian, 2006; Wellman, Phillips, Dunphy-Lelii, 
& LaLonde, 2004, Wellman, Lopez-Duran, LaBounty, & Hamilton, 2008; Yamaguchi, Kuhlmeier, 
Wynn, & VanMarle, 2009). 
 A ﬁ nal, probably most important reason to continue to concern ourselves with the preschool 
data is that the preschool conceptual developments are importantly related to children’s everyday 
life, actions, and interactions. How so? Consider the data in Box 4.2 again. Amid strong common 
trends there is some obvious variation in preschool false-belief achievement across countries and, 
not explicitly evident in Box 4.2, also across individuals. Although almost all typically develop-
ing children master false belief before middle childhood, some children in some places come to 
this understanding earlier and some later. This variation helps researchers conﬁ rm the impact of 
achieving preschool theory-of-mind understandings. Children’s performance on false-belief tasks 
is just one marker of these understandings, but differences in false belief understanding alone 

THE COURSE OF THEORY OF MIND DEVELOPMENT
55
 Box 4.2 
 
 
 Explicit false belief tasks have children reason about an agent whose actions should be con-
trolled by a false belief. A common task employs a change in locations, as depicted above. The 
child (not shown above) sees the character, Jill, put her chocolate in one location. The character 
leaves and while she cannot see, the chocolate gets moved. When the character returns the child 
is asked “Where will she look for her chocolate?” or “Where does she think her chocolate is?” 
Older children (5 years and over in many studies) answer correctly, like adults. Younger chil-
dren answer incorrectly. They are not just random; they consistently say the agent will search 
in the new location (where it really is). Note that the task taps more than just attribution of 
ignorance (Jill doesn’t know where her chocolate is); rather it assesses attribution of false belief 
(Jill thinks—falsely—that her chocolate is in the drawer). 
 
–5
30
40
50
60
70
Age (Months)
80
90
100 110
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
Proportion Correct
1
2
3
4
5
Australia
Canada
U.S.
Austria
Japan
Korea
Hong Kong
England
  
  As shown in the graph above, children in different cultural-linguistic communities achieve 
false belief understanding more quickly or more slowly, yet in all locales they evidence the same 
trajectory—from below chance to above-chance performance (0 = chance in this graph) typi-
cally in the preschool years (Combined data from Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001 and Lin, 
Wellman, Tardif, & Sabbagh, 2008). 

THEORY OF MIND, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEAFNESS 
56
predict how, and how much, preschool children talk about people in everyday conversation (e.g. 
Dunn, 1996; Dunn & Brophy, 2005), their engagement in social pretend play (e.g. Astington & 
Jenkins, 1999), their social interactional skills (Lalonde & Chandler, 1995; Peterson, Slaughter & 
Paynter, 2007), including their attempts at persuasion and their participation in games like hide and 
seek (Bartsch, London & Campbell, 2007; Peskin & Ardino, 2003), and their interactions with and 
popularity with peers (e.g. Diesendruck & Ben-Eliyahu 2006; Siegal & Peterson, 2002; Slaughter, 
Dennis, & Pritchard, 2002; Watson, Nixon, Wilson, & Capage, 1999). These ﬁ ndings importantly 
conﬁ rm theory of mind’s real-life relevance; moreover, they demonstrate that something deﬁ nite 
and important is happening in children’s theory of mind understandings in the preschool years. 
 In light of the emerging infant data, one theory that has been advanced about these preschool 
developments is that infant theory of mind deﬁ nes the competence, and it is just the  expression 
of that competence that is revealed in the preschool years. Early competence is masked in young 
preschool children in much research because of the executive function demands of standard pre-
school theory of mind tasks (e.g. Luo & Baillargeon 2010; Scholl & Leslie, 2001). On the strongest 
claim, that would make the preschool developments, more or less, nothing but executive-function 
development. 
 However, thinking of preschool false-belief tasks as just proxies for executive-function devel-
opment cannot be the proper account, not the full nor most important story. First, false belief 
still signiﬁ cantly predicts aspects of children’s conversations, their social interactional skills, their 
engagement in pretense, their interactions with and popularity with peers, their participation in 
games like hide and seek, in studies where executive functioning is controlled and factored out 
(e.g. Peskin & Ardino, 2003; Razza & Blair, 2008). Cross-cultural data are telling as well. Suppose 
for a moment that false belief performance does represent just executive-function achievement. 
Those children who early achieve adequate executive functioning should equally attain early 
good false belief performance. Intriguingly, there is evidence that in East Asia (e.g. Oh & Lewis, 
2008), and speciﬁ cally in China (Sabbagh, Xu, Carlson, Moses, & Lee, 2006), children have ear-
lier developing executive-function skills relative to their Western peers (probably because parents 
and teachers place particular emphasis on the socialization of self-control). This earlier compe-
tence at executive-function, however, does  not translate into better or earlier false belief under-
standing. In precise comparisons between preschoolers in Beijing (Sabbagh et al., 2006) and the 
USA (Carlson & Moses, 2001), Chinese children were consistently and signiﬁ cantly advanced in 
executive-functions (on eight different executive-function tasks), and yet at the same time for the 
same children there were no theory of mind differences between the Chinese and US children at 
3½, 4, or 4½ years on four different “standard” preschool false belief tasks. (See Liu et al., 2008, for 
related US–Chinese comparisons.) 
 So our point for this chapter is that whatever is happening in infancy, genuine and important 
theory of mind progressions are occurring in the preschool years; conceptual progressions that are 
not just proxies for executive functions or general cognitive complexity and that impact children’s 
social actions and lives. Moreover, returning to our insistence that understanding of theory of 
mind will be best advanced by more richly developmental data, preschool data now provide the 
best look at how theory of mind progresses developmentally. 
 Scaling theory of mind progressions  
 On this point, the preschool false-belief data alone (as in Box 4.2) provide an intriguing initial 
look at childhood development of theory of mind, as well as an intriguing initial demonstration 
of universality in childhood development of social cognition. However, although data like these 

SCALING THEORY OF MIND PROGRESSIONS
57
are standard for research in cognitive development, they are not very developmental. They show 
developmental progress with age, but it is really only passing or failing one task averaged across age. 
While the data show some universality (and some variability), it is not clear from false-belief data 
alone how to best understand these cross-national comparisons. Newer data unpack universality 
and variability more clearly and do so by clarifying more extended developmental progressions. 
 Consider these related things a child could know (or not know) about persons and minds: (a) 
people can have different desires for the same thing (diverse desires, or DD), (b) people can have 
different beliefs about the same situation (diverse beliefs, DB), (c) something can be true, but 
someone might not know that (knowledge access, KA), (d) something can be true, but someone 
might falsely believe something different (false belief, FB), (e) someone can feel one way but dis-
play a different emotion (hidden emotion, HE). These notions capture aspects of mental subjectiv-
ity, albeit different aspects (including mind–mind, mind–world, and mind–action distinctions). 
Listing them in this manner suggests that one could devise a set of tasks all with similar formats 
and procedures, pretty much like standard false belief tasks, for example, and see how children do. 
Several studies have now done just that. 
 Studies using such a battery of tasks, encompassing more than 500 preschoolers in the USA, 
Canada, Australia, and Germany, evidence a clear and consistent order of difﬁ culty. It is the order 
listed above, with diverse desires easiest and hidden emotions hardest. For shorthand, let us call 
this sequence, DD>DB>KA>FB>HE. This sequence is highly replicable and signiﬁ cant—80% 
of these children show this pattern (Peterson, Wellman, & Liu, 2005; Peterson & Wellman, 2009; 
Wellman & Liu, 2004). Furthermore, longitudinal data for US preschoolers over the age range 
from 3 to 6 years conﬁ rm that individual children develop according to the same sequence, and at 
the same pace, as shown in the cross-sectional data (Wellman et al., 2011). 
 Culture and variation 
 So, these tasks—constituting a Theory of Mind Scale—reveal a robust sequence of understand-
ings. What accounts for the consistency of sequence demonstrated so far? Clearly, a consistent 
sequence could result from innately programmed maturations. (Or similarly, it could result from 
maturationally unfolding gains in basic cognitive processes, say increases in executive function or 
in cognitive capacity.)Alternatively, a consistent sequence might result from processes of concep-
tual learning in which initial conceptions lead to later conceptions, shaped by relevant information 
and experiences. Crucially, if they are more shaped by relevant information and experiences then, 
in principle, sequences could be very different across children and groups. 
 Additional cross-cultural research, for example in China, addresses these possibilities. Assume 
that theory-of-mind understandings  are  the products of social and conversational experiences that 
vary from one community to another. Western and Chinese childhood experiences could be cru-
cially different. Various authors have described an Asian focus on persons as sharing group commo-
nalities and interdependence and a contrasting Western focus on persons as distinctively individual 
and independent (e.g. Markus & Kitiyama, 1991; Nisbett, 2003). These differences include differing 
emphases on common knowledge and perspectives vs. diversity of individual beliefs and perspec-
tives. Moreover, Western and Chinese adults seem to manifest very different everyday epistemolo-
gies. Everyday Western epistemology is focused on truth, subjectivity, and belief; Confucian-Chinese 
epistemology focuses more on pragmatic knowledge acquisition and the consensual knowledge 
that all right-minded persons should learn (Nisbett, 2003; Li, 2001). Indeed, in conversations with 
young children, Chinese parents comment predominantly on “knowing”, whereas US parents com-
ment more on “thinking” (Bartsch & Wellman, 1995; Tardif & Wellman, 2000). 

THEORY OF MIND, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEAFNESS 
58
 In accord with such conversational-cultural preferences for emphasizing knowledge acquisi-
tion vs. belief differences, Chinese preschoolers evidence a consistent but different theory of mind 
sequence where KA and DB are reversed: DD>KA>DB>FB>HE (Wellman, Fang, Liu, Zhu, & Liu, 
2006; Wellman et al., 2011). Both Western and Chinese children ﬁ rst understand basic aspects of 
desire (DD). However, the cultures diverge at the next step. Most Western children ﬁ rst appreciate 
belief differences (DB) and then acquisition of knowledge (KA). For Chinese children in Beijing, 
the ordering of these two steps is reversed. Most of them pass KA before DB. 
 This is not some singular peculiarity of Chinese mind and development; the same alternative 
sequence appears in Iranian preschool children (Shahaeian, Peterson, Slaughter, & Wellman, 2011). 
Despite profound differences in Iran’s Muslim traditions and beliefs in contrast to Chinese Confucian/
Buddhist/Communist ones, both China and Iran share collectivist family values emphasizing con-
sensual learning, knowledge acquisition, respect for the wisdom of elders, and low tolerance for chil-
dren’s assertions of disagreement or independent belief. As a consequence, parents in both Iran and 
China often resemble each other and differ from Western parents in their socialization practices, and 
parental goals and values. Prototypically, Iranian and Chinese parents place stronger emphasis on 
children’s conformity to tradition and emulating knowledgeable adults to overcome their ignorance. 
Western parents are correspondingly apt to more strongly encourage their children’s thinking inde-
pendently, listening to the views of peers, and freely and assertively expressing their own opinions. 
Intriguingly, data on children’s progressive development through the Theory of Mind (ToM) scale are 
in line with these cultural variations in parental beliefs and practices. Most children in the USA and 
Australia form initial conceptualizations of mind in terms of differences of opinion, thus explaining 
their early mastery of the DB task. Children in Iran (Shahaeian et al., 2011), like their peers in China 
(Wellman et al., 2006), most often construct their initial awareness of thinking around the idea of 
acquiring knowledge, thus explaining their relatively earlier mastery of the KA task. Perhaps because 
their socialization confers less exposure to opinion diversity, they are likewise correspondingly slower 
than their Australian or US peers to master DB, even though overall rates of developmental progress 
through the full ﬁ ve steps of the ToM Scale are equivalent in all four countries. 
 We believe that sequence similarities from one culture to the next, coupled with cross-cultural 
differences like these, are especially important and revealing. For example, a developmental scale, 
encompassing a sequences of acquisitions achieved over a range of ages, can provide more inform-
ative comparisons of different children’s understandings for use in individual differences com-
parisons. Similarly, a scale can help overcome a problem endemic to cross-cultural comparisons, 
namely how to validly compare children across different countries and communities. Often this is 
done by comparing two samples of convenience (e.g. one in the USA and one in China) on a single 
task (e.g. false belief performance). Yet two such samples, even if carefully matched for compara-
ble ages, differ so widely (e.g. in languages they acquire, family experiences, nature and onset of 
school or preschool experiences) that evidence that one group is better or worse on a single task is 
almost impossible to interpret. When extended progressions are the same or different (e.g. reveal-
ing sequence differences) comparisons are considerably more informative and interpretable. 
 Of course, sequences are not the only issue—developmental timetables also matter. How long 
can and do these “preschool” developments take? How can differences in developmental timing 
be explained? 
 Atypical development: deafness 
 The false belief data in Box 4.2 already show that timetables can vary; some preschool children are 
quicker, some slower to achieve false belief understanding. However, in the bigger picture this may 

ATYPICAL DEVELOPMENT: DEAFNESS
59
not represent all that much variation. Pretty much everywhere, children achieve a similar under-
standing of false belief before the end of their preschool years. A similar suspicion might arise 
for the sequence data as well: sequence differences are intriguing, but actually, children proceed 
through more or less the same steps, and at more or less the same time—all within the bounds 
of the preschool period. Tightly restricted—not identical, but restricted—timetables might well 
reﬂ ect development of theory-of-mind understandings as largely under maturational control. If 
early progressive theory-of-mind understandings are built one upon the next; however, shaped by 
relevant information and experience, such a developmental process should be able to produce very 
different timetables. 
 It has been known for a long time that false belief understanding  is seriously (not modestly) 
delayed in children with autism. This classic example has been well reported in prior editions of 
this volume. Most adolescents and adults with autism perform poorly on false belief tasks even 
after making allowances for possible deﬁ cits in verbal or non-verbal IQ (Happ é , 1995; Yirmiya, 
Erel, Shaked, & Solomonica-Levi, 1998). However, an autism diagnosis is replete with other known 
developmental atypicalities including neurological impairments, genetic abnormalities, and fre-
quent general, across-the-board, cognitive impairment and delays. Autism could certainly have 
its own delayed maturational timetable. As we noted earlier, we argue for a special focus on deaf 
children. 
 Even when carefully selected so as to be free of all disabilities apart from hearing loss (includ-
ing free from the social deﬁ cits, neurological impairments, and intellectual delays that are often 
associated with autism), deaf children of hearing parents (but  not deaf children of deaf parents) 
are substantially delayed in understanding false belief (see Peterson, 2009; Peterson & Siegal, 2000; 
Siegal & Peterson, 2008, for reviews). Indeed they typically score no higher than children with 
autism of similar age and intellectual ability (e.g. Peterson, 2002; Peterson, Wellman & Liu, 2005). 
Studies of more than 700 severely or profoundly deaf offspring of hearing parents from several 
different countries (and hence different signed and spoken languages, and approaches to deaf 
education) consistently reveal predominant failure on false belief tasks throughout primary school 
(ages 6–12). This is in clear contrast to hearing preschoolers’ predominant success by age 4 or 5. 
Even in high school, two cross-sectional studies of deaf teens from hearing families revealed pass 
rates of only 53 and 60%, respectively, at ages 13–17 (Edmondson, 2006; Russell et al., 1998). These 
serious delays apply just as much to deaf children who sign vs. communicate orally and, within 
the latter group, to those who use cochlear implants vs. external hearing aids (see Peterson, 2004, 
for a review). 
 An intriguing 5–10% percent minority of deaf children are native signers with signing deaf 
parents. Their theory of mind performance is in sharp contrast to that of matched deaf groups 
from hearing families. Thus, native signers in primary school consistently outperform their deaf 
classmates and equal their hearing ones (e.g. Courtin & Melot, 2000; Peterson & Siegal, 1999; 
Meristo, Falkman, Hjelmquist, Tedoldi, Surian, & Siegal, 2007; Schick, De Villiers, De Villiers, & 
Hoffmeister, 2007). When a parent is a deaf signer, the natively signing deaf child has ordinary 
conversational experiences from birth—albeit in sign language—unlike the case if there are hear-
ing parents of deaf children who, despite extensive and conscientious efforts, almost never become 
fully proﬁ cient in sign language. Very few can communicate effectively with their deaf offspring 
in sign about unobservables like thoughts, feelings and other mental states (e.g. Moeller & Schick, 
2006; Vaccari & Marschark, 1997). Furthermore, carefully controlled studies show that this differ-
ence in the early family conversational environment is directly linked with the native signer’s supe-
riority on theory-of-mind tests. Native signers outperform their deaf peers from hearing families 
even after statistically controlling for other potentially contributing factors like executive function 

THEORY OF MIND, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEAFNESS 
60
or current levels of lexical or syntactic language skill (e.g. Schick et al., 2007; Woolfe, Want & Siegal, 
2002). In these ways, delayed theory of mind (speciﬁ cally, for now, delayed false-belief understand-
ing) is demonstrably not a direct consequence of deafness per se. Rather, it requires deafness in 
conjunction with upbringing in conversational situations that are reduced and problematic, as in 
purely hearing families and/or purely oral schools. Native signers’ early opportunities to share, 
via sign, in conversations about thoughts and feelings at home and at school may well be crucial 
to their timely acquisition of false belief understanding. “No other social activity requires more 
negotiation with other minds than conversation” (Malle & Hodges, 2005; p. 5). 
 Again, however, a focus on false belief alone is limiting. More informatively, when deaf children 
of hearing parents receive the Theory of Mind Scale they too evidence a consistent sequence 
of progression, but one that is delayed at every step of the way (e.g. Peterson & Wellman, 2009; 
Peterson et al., 2005). It often takes deaf children 10–12 years, or more, to progressively achieve 
what hearing children (and deaf children of deaf parents) progressively achieve in 4–6 years 
(Peterson, 2009; Wellman et al., 2011). In ToM Scale data summed across various studies and 
across 66 deaf children of hearing parents, the average age of acquisition for DB was 8 years, for 
KA it was 10 years, for FB it was 11 ½ years, and for HE (Hidden Emotion), 12 ½ years (Wellman 
et al., 2011). 
 Furthermore, longitudinal data (Wellman et al., 2011) conﬁ rm that the same ToM Scale sequence 
(DD>DB>KA>FB>HE) that characterizes the development of deaf children cross-sectionally also 
accurately describes the development longitudinally for individual deaf children as they progress 
through primary school and into high school. Figure 4.1 captures that data. Like the cross-sectional 
data, these longitudinal data conﬁ rm how seriously delayed deaf children of hearing parents are 
in developing theory of mind understandings. On average, deaf children (beginning at age 8) take 
41 months to progress longitudinally through the scale as far as a hearing 3-year-old progresses in 
just 12 months. 
 The performance of these deaf children (as in Figure 4.1) also speaks strongly against any matu-
rational, critical-period analysis of theory of mind. According to a critical period account, dep-
rivation of some crucial input or experience at some speciﬁ ed early age (e.g. the preschool years: 
Siegal & Varley 2002; or the period before age 12: Morgan & Kegal, 2006) will result in a permanent 
difﬁ culty or deﬁ cit in theory-of-mind development, no matter how richly stimulating the environ-
ment may become subsequent to that critical time. It is difﬁ cult to rule out such a hypothesis with 
cross-sectional evidence. Yet these newer longitudinal data, by revealing steady progress by deaf 
children both in false belief understanding (e.g. Peterson, 2009) and on the theory of mind scale 
(as shown in Figure 4.1) through primary school and into high school are inconsistent with this 
critical period view. 
 Furthermore, a provocative longitudinal study of a unique group of Nicaraguan deaf adults 
(Pyers & Senghas, 2009) longitudinally followed two cohorts. The ﬁ rst, throughout their growing 
up, had been limited to using a pidgin form of signing that had no terms for thinking or other 
cognitive states. Not surprisingly, they continued to fail FB tests even in adulthood, but then, while 
in their late twenties, they began to interact at a local deaf club with adults from the second cohort. 
The latter had, through interacting together in primary and high school, created a sign language 
equipped with cognitive terms and the ﬁ rst-cohort adults eventually learned it from them. A longi-
tudinal test after 2 years of this informal conversational contact revealed dramatic theory of mind 
gains for the older, language-deprived cohort who now equaled the second cohort (most of whom 
had mastered false belief by their early to mid teens). Together with longitudinal evidence from 
late-signing deaf children, these results demonstrate that ﬁ rst-time mastery of “preschool” theory 
of mind understanding is possible well beyond the bounds of any postulated critical periods and, 
indeed, well into adulthood. 

ATYPICAL DEVELOPMENT: DEAFNESS
61
 At the same time, all the evidence clearly shows that most deaf children of hearing parents 
are seriously delayed in theory of mind understandings, demonstrating the extent to which 
socio-cultural-conversational interchanges affect children’s theory of mind growth. These data as 
to dramatic timetable differences mean that it is worth readdressing the issue of theory of mind 
sequences for deaf children of hearing parents. If the differences apparent in Chinese or Iranian vs. 
US and Australian input and experiences can lead to differences in sequences in the hearing pre-
school child’s case, then the far more striking differences in conversational input and socialization 
experiences that exist between hearing and deaf children should affect theory of mind sequences, 
as well as timetables. Deaf children provide an example of children growing up in quite differ-
ent socio-linguistic, socio-interactive environments in comparison to their hearing peers, cultural 
differences that are arguably at least as wide as those between US and Chinese children. Accounts 
based on construing theory of mind development as based on conceptual learning from socially 
0
3
3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8
4
4.2 4.4 4.6
Age (years)
United States
4.8
5
5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8
6
6.2
1
2
3
Scale scores (0–5)
4
5
6
0
4.2
4.7
5.2
5.7
6.2
6.7
7.2
7.7
8.2
8.7
9.2
9.7
10.2
Age (years)
Deaf
10.7
11.2
11.7
12.2
12.7
13.7
13.2
14.2
14.7
15.2
15.7
16.2
1
2
3
4
5
6
Scale scores (0–5)
 Figure 4.1  Panels showing longitudinal changes on the ToM Scale. Each gray-tone line shows the 
 longitudinal trajectory for a single child. Figures reproduced from Child Development 82 (3), Henry 
M. Wellman, Fuxi Fang, and Candida C. Peterson, Sequential Progressions in a Theory-of-Mind Scale: 
Longitudinal Perspectives, pp, 780–92 © 2011 The Society for Research in Child Development, Inc. 
See also Plate 1.  

THEORY OF MIND, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEAFNESS 
62
variable experiences and inputs should predict that sequences will vary between these groups (at 
least in some relevant ways). 
 In a further study we probed the prior ﬁ nding of identical sequences more deeply by adding a 
focus on children’s understanding of social pretense (Petersen & Wellman, 2009). Why this focus? 
Brieﬂ y, comparisons and sequences between understanding pretense and belief are theoretically 
intriguing (much like the comparisons between knowledge and belief). Moreover, deaf and hear-
ing children’s experiences of pretend play are likely to be quite different, providing an important 
test case for examining similar or different sequences of understanding. 
 Understanding pretense reﬂ ects an understanding of others’ mental states, at least for adults and 
older children (Harris, 2005; Harris & Kavanaugh, 1993; Lillard, 1993; Richert & Lillard, 2002). 
Yet conceptually, pretense and belief clearly differ. Beliefs are “supposed” to be accurate. In other 
words, they are accepted not just as representations, but as representations of factual reality. While 
beliefs can be false, in general they are meant to be true. In contrast, in pretense truth is less an 
issue. Indeed, the whole point of pretense is to create an imaginary representational situation that 
departs from the truth of present reality. In line with this analysis, understanding pretense (and 
imagination) has been shown to be easier than understanding false belief in several studies with 
hearing children (Custer, 1996; Gopnik & Slaughter, 1991; Hickling, Wellman, & Gottfried, 1997—
but see Lillard 1993 and Richert & Lillard 2002 for arguments and data that at least some forms of 
pretense understanding are harder and later-developing than understanding of false beliefs). 
 Pretense additionally stands out as important because childhood engagement in pretend 
play relates to and may inﬂ uence typically developing children’s theory of mind understand-
ings. Thus, preschoolers’ false belief scores are often found to correlate with their frequency of 
engaging in pretend play (Taylor & Carlson, 1997; Youngblade & Dunn, 1995), at least when it is 
socially shared (e.g. Astington & Jenkins, 1999), and the well-established sibling theory of mind 
advantage (whereby preschoolers with child-aged siblings master false belief at younger ages than 
only-children) is often ascribed to added opportunities for make believe play in a sibling family 
(e.g. Perner, Ruffman & Leekam, 1994). Much less is known about these relations and inﬂ uences 
for deaf children, but if social experiences crucially inﬂ uence pretense understanding and theory 
of mind development, there are reasons to expect that the experience of pretense, and thus the 
representational understanding of it as a mental state, might be quite different for deaf children. 
One can easily imagine two distinct scenarios. 
 On the one hand, it is clear that deaf children (in hearing families) are generally delayed in their 
pretense actions and interactions (e.g. Brown et al., 2001), just as they are generally delayed in their 
understanding of mental states such as beliefs and false beliefs. Such data suggest that (especially 
if early shared pretend interactions are key) deaf children may be particularly delayed in under-
standing (as well as participating in) pretense. Preschoolers who are severely or profoundly deaf 
may miss out on pretense discourse and other experiences with social pretending owing to lack of 
a common language (speech or sign) that they can ﬂ uently share with hearing family members or 
their deaf peers. 
 On the other hand, granting overall delays in theory of mind understanding, pretense under-
standing and experiences may be less delayed or less impaired in deaf children than understand-
ings of belief. For example, for deaf children, sharing pretense stipulations with others may proceed 
in largely nonverbal ways via gesture, pantomime, or toy manipulation. Indeed, simple pretense 
stipulations might arguably occur just as easily via gestures as via words (e.g. by holding a banana 
to one’s ear or pressing imaginary keys to simulate a mobile phone). This could make non-verbal 
gestures (a strength of deaf children) a facilitative medium for the social sharing of mental states 
with parents and playmates, within pretense. 

CONTINUING THE SEQUENCE INTO LATE CHILDHOOD AND BEYOND
63
 We addressed these possibilities in research including a focus on pretense understanding along 
with other aspects of a developing theory of mind (Peterson & Wellman, 2009). Speciﬁ cally, we 
added a test of pretense understanding (PU) to the battery of theory of mind tasks in the ToM 
Scale described above, namely; DD, DB, KA, FB, HE. For hearing preschoolers, we found that our 
pretense understanding task (PU) scaled consistently as an intermediate point between the ToM 
Scale concepts of knowledge access and false belief (i.e., DD>DB>KA> PU >FB>HE). For deaf 
children of hearing parents, however, the pattern was different. Although their pretense under-
standing, just like hearing children’s, scaled predictably as a statistically reliable component of the 
full ToM Scale, and although it emerged at a later age than hearing children’s, it consistently occu-
pied an earlier scale step. For deaf children pretense preceded both KA and FB (i.e. their sequence 
was: DD>DB> PU > KA>FB>HE). This, variation in sequence (similar to the Western vs. Chinese/
Iranian sequence contrast for DB and KA as described above) suggests a further role for varied 
social and conversational experience in the sequences through which understandings of mind 
emerge. 
 Continuing the sequence into late childhood and beyond  
 As the ﬁ ndings reviewed thus far from deaf children and adolescents clearly illustrate, continu-
ing ToM development is possible well beyond childhood. Indeed, the same is true for typically 
developing children, adolescents and adults. Dramatic as the preschool gains are (outlined in our 
earlier overview of typical preschoolers’ theory of mind development), still older children develop 
additional understandings, including increasingly reﬂ ective ideas about minds, brains, and mental 
life (e.g. Wellman & Johnston, 2008). To illustrate, children’s understanding of thinking shows 
considerable development. While 3- and 4-year-olds know that thinking is an internal mental 
event (different from looking, talking, or touching) and that the contents of one’s thoughts (e.g. a 
thought about a dog) are not public or tangible (e.g. Wellman & Estes, 1986; Wellman, Hollander & 
Schult, 1996; Richert & Harris, 2006), they fail to recognize the constant ﬂ ow of ideas and thoughts 
experienced in everyday life and involved in actively, consciously thinking. Thus, 7-year-olds and 
adults assert that a person sitting quietly with blank expression is still experiencing “some thoughts 
and ideas” and that it is nearly impossible to have a mind completely “empty of thoughts and 
ideas”; but children 5 and younger do not share these intuitions (Flavell, Green, & Flavell, 1993, 
1995). Coming to recognize that thinking streams along constantly is a development that follows 
on the heels of initial preschool understandings of mental contents. 
 Another set of achievements that nicely illustrates older children’s increasingly reﬂ ective social 
cognition concerns their understanding of nonliteral communication, such as metaphor (Wellman 
& Hickling, 1994), sarcasm (Happ é , 1993; Filippova & Astington, 2010), and many forms of joking 
(Winner, 1993; Winner & Gardener, 1993; Winner & Leekam, 1991) and teasing (Dunn, 1996; Dunn 
& Brophy, 2005; Dunn & Hughes, 1998). Such conversational situations use language to express 
meanings that are literally false, and require that the listener appreciate the differences between 
beliefs, communicative intentions, and messages. When a speaker comments “It’s great weather 
today!” in the midst of cold and pouring rain, most children aged 5–7 fail to perceive that any sar-
casm is intended (e.g. Filippova & Astington, 2008). Some understanding of simple false-naming 
jokes (“look a shoe”, said of a hat) is evident for typical 2-year-olds (Baron-Cohen, 1997), however, 
with increasing age and exposure to varied conversational and social experiences with parents, 
siblings and peers (e.g. Recchia, Howe, Ross & Alexander, 2010), typically-developing children 
gradually come to further understand the interplay between mind, meaning, and occurrences, 
including the awareness of how speakers use irony and sarcasm to convey meanings opposite to 

THEORY OF MIND, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEAFNESS 
64
the literal meaning of their words. Numerous studies, therefore, show a steady improvement in 
the awareness of nonliteral meanings of ironic and sarcastic utterances like this, through age 10 to 
12 (e.g. Demorest et al., 1991; Filippova & Astington, 2008, 2010; Pexman & Glenwright, 2007). 
Indeed, “progress in understanding the social-cognitive functions of irony … continues well into 
adulthood” (Filippova & Astington, 2010, p. 218). 
 Early difﬁ culty with sarcasm and irony is evident not only in typical development, but also in 
adult and child populations with autism (e.g. Happ é , 1993), schizophrenia (Langdon & Coltheart, 
2004) or acquired brain damage (e.g. Gallagher, Happ é , Brunswick, Fletcher, Frith & Frith, 2000). 
More relevant to our focus is that deaf educators and parents of deaf individuals report continuing 
difﬁ culties with non-literal language as deaf children develop into adolescents and adults. Gregory, 
Bishop and Sheldon’s (1995) interviews with the hearing parents of deaf young adults revealed 
persistent difﬁ culties with non-literal language and sarcastic humour even among those who were 
functioning quite successfully both as mature communicators (in speech or sign) and in everyday 
life within their communities. For example, one hearing mother reported that her 19-year-old 
daughter, a British Sign Language (BSL) user, “doesn’t know the meaning of a joke; if you say 
something, it’s serious. She can’t see a double meaning … as far as language goes, you can’t play 
around with it” (p. 33). In general, verbal humour and sarcasm posed problems for nearly 60% of 
this sample of severely or profoundly deaf young adults, with no distinction between signers (of 
BSL or signed English) and oral-language users. 
 Sarcasm understanding is thus a sophisticated developmental achievement (e.g. Baron-Cohen, 
2000; Rajendran, Mitchell, & Rickards, 2005; White, Hill, Happ é , & Frith, 2009) and one with 
well-established empirical links to theory of mind concepts like false belief (e.g. Filippova & 
Astington, 2008). Therefore, in recent research (Peterson, Wellman & Slaughter, 2012) we began 
with the well-validated ToM Scale (DD>DB>KA>FB>HE) and created a sarcasm detection task 
identical in style and question format to other scale tasks. Even after controlling statistically for 
variations in linguistic ability, results showed that sarcasm understanding was more difﬁ cult than 
the ﬁ nal step on the original scale (HE) for typically developing children and for those with deaf-
ness (and autism). Guttman scaling analyses conﬁ rmed that the understanding of the discrepancy 
between spoken communicative intent and literal word meaning, as assessed by our sarcasm task, 
is a reliably more advanced theory of mind achievement and one that, even in typical development 
begins, but is not yet completed during middle childhood. Note that sarcasm detection scaled as a 
sixth step in the developmental progression of theory of mind, and did so similarly for hearing and 
deaf children, but at substantially different times. Sarcasm detection was especially difﬁ cult for deaf 
children even in comparison to age-matched peers with autism. We take such data to provide fur-
ther support for social conversational accounts of theory of mind development by highlighting the 
value of children’s varied participation in everyday social exchanges—ranging from pretend play, 
teasing, and joking, to emotional concealment, sarcasm, and other affectively-laden non-literal 
uses of language—for fostering the timely achievement of mature social understanding. Such 
experiences and achievements are part and parcel of mature social interaction for typically devel-
oping children and they apparently pose extended social difﬁ culties for theory-of-mind-delayed 
deaf children of hearing parents (as well as for language-delayed children with autism). 
 Conclusions 
 The development of a theory of mind, or an everyday understanding of people’s behavior in terms 
of what they know, think, intend and hope, begins at birth and follows a trajectory of striking 
and progressive developmental gains throughout childhood and into adolescence. Recent research 

CONCLUSIONS
65
clearly shows that infants as young as 12–18 months are already capable of some remarkable 
insights into the subjectivity of human mental experience. They ascribe intentionality to infer 
goals and desires even from failed or incomplete actions. In perceptual situations, they can often 
distinguish their own awareness from someone else’s lack of it. 
 Yet it is equally apparent that the developmental story does not end in infancy. The vast majority 
of 3-year-olds routinely fail simple challenges to their ToM understanding both in the laboratory 
(as on false belief tests) and in everyday life (as when playing hide-and-seek, keeping secrets, dis-
cerning lies, negotiating pretense, or interacting skillfully with peers). Yet, by age 5 or 6, success on 
these everyday and laboratory applications of theory of mind is consistent and widespread across 
cultures and methodologies (see Box 4.2). 
 Nor does theory of mind development stop at the end of preschool. As older children and 
adolescents gain increasing social and conversational experiences in the classroom and on the 
playground, their understanding of mental life becomes ever more nuanced, reﬂ ective, versatile 
and complex. They gain new insights into cognition and the stream of consciousness, includ-
ing a deeper appreciation of the subjectivity, interpretivity and diversity of thought, memory and 
belief. Their understanding of emotion grows as does their appreciation and use of language and 
its pragmatics, including nonliteral communications like sarcasm. These more advanced insights 
are not simply a haphazard or piecemeal collection of new ideas. Just like the scalable progressions 
arising from late infancy to the end of preschool, these further, more advanced manifestations 
of understanding other minds include reliably sequential developments that follow, elaborate, 
and build upon the traditional theory-of-mind hallmark, namely success on explicit, inferential 
false belief tests. Thus, recent cross-sectional and longitudinal scaling studies across several differ-
ent cultures have extended the understanding of theory of mind development by documenting a 
reliable progression of conceptual achievements over ﬁ ve or six sequential steps, beginning with 
diverse desires (toddlers’ understanding that different people want different things) and continu-
ing through preschoolers’ awareness of diverse beliefs, knowledge access and false belief to older 
children’s awareness of the subtle socio-cognitive underpinnings of hidden emotion and sarcastic 
communication. 
 Despite broad consistency in these extended developmental sequences, there are also variations 
in developmental patterns for individual children and cultural groups that testify clearly to the 
inﬂ uences of particular inputs and interactive social experiences on the progression of theory of 
mind development. Comparison between children in Western cultures (e.g. Australia, Germany, 
and the USA), in contrast to those in China and Iran nicely illustrate these differences, differences 
that are predictable based on contrasts between Western and Eastern/Middle-Eastern parenting 
beliefs, values and socialization practices. 
 Of course, not all children develop theory of mind on the same early timetable. Our focal exam-
ple of theory-of-mind delays has been deaf children of hearing parents. These examples from 
deafness highlight several important conclusions about theory of mind development for children 
generally. For example, one idea that cannot readily be tested with typically developing children 
(owing to their universally rapid theory of mind mastery) is whether there is a critical period for 
theory of mind achievements. Recent longitudinal research with deaf children and adolescents 
(see Figure 4.1) and adults (Pyers & Senghas, 2009), effectively dispels the critical period idea for 
“preschool” theory of mind insights. 
 Data on deaf children’s developmental theory-of-mind sequences and timetables have additional 
theoretical implications. To illustrate, extended theory-of-mind scaling research has revealed that 
dealing with nonliteral language, as reﬂ ected in appreciation of sarcasm, is a consistently late or 
advanced theory of mind understanding for all groups of children tested so far. Yet it is unusually 

THEORY OF MIND, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEAFNESS 
66
delayed for deaf children. This makes sense in terms of conversational input and social interaction 
experience: Sarcasm is poorly understood, and hence rarely used, even by deaf adults (e.g. Gregory, 
Sheldon, & Bishop, 1995). 
 To conclude, exciting new horizons for theory of mind research go beyond developments in 
infancy to encompass preschoolers, older children, and adults. Deeper attention to development, 
coupled with new developmental methods, have established new insights as well as revealing 
promising directions for future research. Research with deaf children, in particular, combines with 
that from hearing populations and from children with autism to provide new insights that promise 
additional theoretical and applied advances for comprehending children’s understanding of other 
minds. 
 References 
 Apperly, I. A., & Butterfi ll, S. A. (2009).  Do humans have two systems to track beliefs and belief-like states? 
 Psychological Review ,  116( 4),  953–70 . 
 Astington, J. W., & Jenkins, J. M. (1999).  A longitudinal study of the relation between language and 
theory-of-mind development.  Developmental Psychology ,  35( 5),  1311–20 . 
 Baldwin, D. A., & Moses, L. J. (1996). Th e ontogeny of social information gathering.  Child Development , 
 67( 5), 1915–39. 
 Baron-Cohen, S. (1997).  Hey! It was just a joke! Understanding propositions and propositional attitudes by 
normally developing children and children with autism.  Israel Journal of Psychiatry and Related Science , 
 34( 3),  174–8 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S. (2000).  Th eory of mind and autism. In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg & D. Cohen 
(Eds),  Understanding Other Minds ( pp.  3–17 ).  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Bartsch, K., London, K., & Campbell, M. D. (2007).  Children’s attention to beliefs in interactive persuasion 
tasks.  Developmental Psychology ,  43( 1),  111–20 . 
 Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. M. (1995).  Children Talk About the Mind .  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Brandone, A. C., & Wellman, H. M. (2009).  You can’t always get what you want: infants understand failed 
goal-directed actions.  Psychological Science ,  20( 1),  85–91 . 
 Brown, P., Rickards, F. & Bortoli, A. (2001).  Structures underpinning pretend play and word production in 
young children and children with hearing loss.  Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education ,  6,  15–31 . 
 Butler, S., Caron, A., & Brooks, R. (2000).  Infant understanding of the referential nature of looking.  Journal 
of Cognition and Development ,  1 ,  359–77 . 
 Buttelmann, D., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2009).  Eighteen-month-old infants show false belief 
understanding in an active helping paradigm.  Cognition ,  112( 2),  337–42 . 
 Carlson, S. M., & Moses, L. J. (2001).  Individual diff erences in inhibitory control and children’s theory of 
mind.  Child Development ,  72( 4),  1032–53 . 
 Carpenter, M., Aktar, N., & Tomasello, M. (1998a).  14- to 18-month old infants diff erentially imitate inten-
tional and accidental actions.  Infant Behavior and Development ,  21 ,  315–30 . 
 Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998b).  Social cognition, joint attention, and communicative 
competence from 9 to 15 months of age.  Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , 
 63( 4),  i–vi ,  1–143 . 
 Csibra, G., Gergely, G., Biro, S., & Brockbank, M. (1999).  Goal attribution without agency cues: Th e per-
ception of “pure reason” in infancy.  Cognition ,  72 ,  237–67 . 
 Courtin, C., & Melot, A. M. (1998).  Development of theories of mind in deaf children. In M. Marschark 
& D. M. Clark (Eds.),  Psychological Perspectives on Deafness  (pp.  79–102 ).  Mahwah :  Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Inc . 
 Custer, W. L. (1996).  A comparison of young children’s understanding of contradictory representations in 
pretense, memory, and belief.  Child Development ,  67( 2),  678–88 . 

67
 D’Andrade, R. (1987).  A folk model of the mind. In D. Holland & N. Quinn (Eds),  Cultural Models in 
Language and Th ought  (pp.  112–148 ).  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Demorest, A., Silberstein, L., Gardner, H. & Winner, E. (1983).  Telling it like it isn’t.  British Journal of 
Developmental Psychology ,  1 ,  121–34 . 
 Diesendruck, G., & Ben-Eliyahu, A. (2006).  Th e relationships among social cognition, peer acceptance, 
and social behavior in Israeli kindergarteners.  International Journal of Behavioral Development ,  30( 2), 
 137–47 . 
 Dunphy-Lelii, S., & Wellman, H. M. (2004).  Infants’ understanding of occlusion of others’ line-of-sight: 
Implications for an emerging theory of mind.  European Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  1 ,  49–66 . 
 Dunn, J. (1995).  Children as psychologists: Th e later correlates of individual diff erences in understanding of 
emotions and other minds.  Cognition & Emotion ,  9 ,  187–201 . 
 Dunn, J. (1996).  Th e Emanuel Miller Memorial Lecture 1995 Children’s Relationships: Bridging the divide 
between cognitive and social development.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry ,  37 ,  507–18. 
 Dunn, J. & Brophy, M. (2005).  Communication, relationships, and individual diff erences in children’s 
understanding of mind. In Astington, J. W. and Baird, J. A. (Eds),  Why Language Matters for Th eory of 
Mind (pp. 50–69).  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Dunn, J. & Hughes, C. (1998).  Young children’s understanding of emotions within close relationships. 
 Cognition & Emotion ,  12 ,  171–90 . 
 Edmondson, P. (2006).  Deaf children’s understanding of other people’s thought processes.  Educational 
Psychology in Practice ,  22( 2),  159–69 . 
 Filippova, E., & Astington, J. W. (2008).  Further development in social reasoning revealed in discourse 
irony understanding.  Child Development ,  79( 1),  126–38 . 
 Filippova, E., & Astington, J. W. (2010).  Children’s understanding of social-cognitive and 
social-communicative aspects of discourse irony.  Child Development ,  81( 3),  913–28 . 
 Flavell, J. H., Green, F. L., & Flavell, E. R. (1993).  Children’s understanding of the stream of consciousness. 
 Child Development ,  64 ,  387–98 . 
 Flavell, J. H., Green, F. L., & Flavell, E. R. (1995).  Young children’s knowledge of thinking.  Monographs of 
the Society for Research in Child Development ,  243  (entire serial),  60 ( 1), 1–114. 
 Fodor, J. A. (1987).  Psychosemantics: Th e problem of meaning in the philosophy of mind .  Cambridge, MA : 
 Bradford Books/MIT Press . 
 Gallagher, H., Happ é , F., Brunswick, N., Fletcher, P., FrithU., & Frith, C. (2000).  Reading the mind in car-
toons and stories: An fMRI study of `theory of mind’ in verbal and nonverbal tasks.  Neuropsychologia , 
 38 ,  11–21 . 
 Gergely, G., & Csibra, G. (2003).  Teleological reasoning in infancy: Th e naive theory of rational action. 
 Trends in Cognitive Science ,  7 ,  287–92 . 
 Gopnik, A., & Slaughter, V. (1991).  Young children’s understanding of changes in their mental states.  Child 
Development ,  62( 1),  98–110 . 
 Gregory, S., Sheldon, L., & Bishop, J. (1995).  Deaf young people and their families: Developing understand-
ing .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Hamlin, J. K., Hallinan, E. V., & Woodward, A. L. (2008).  Do as I do: 7-month-old infants selectively 
reproduce others’ goals.  Developmental Science ,  11 ,  487–94 . 
 Happ é , F. (1993).  Communicative competence and theory of mind in autism.  Cognition ,  48 ,  101–19 . 
 Happ é , F. G. E. (1995).  Th e role of age and verbal ability in the theory of mind task performance of subjects 
with autism.  Child Development ,  66( 3),  843–55 . 
 Harris, P. L. (2005).  Conversation, pretense and theory of mind. In J. W. Astington & J. A. Baird (Eds.),  Why 
Language Matters for Th eory of Mind  (pp.  70–83 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Harris, P. L. (2006).  Social cognition. In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Eds),  Handbook of Child Psychology. 
Volume 2. Cognition, Perception, and Language, Vol. 2 (pp. 811–58).  Hoboken :  John Wiley & Sons . 
REFERENCES

THEORY OF MIND, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEAFNESS 
68
 Harris, P. L., & Kavanaugh, R. D. (1993).  Young Children’s understanding of pretense.  Monographs of the 
Society for Research in Child Development ,  58 ( 1),  i–107 . 
 Hickling, A. K., Wellman, H. M., & Gottfried, G. (1997). Preschoolers’ understanding of others’ mental 
attitudes toward pretend happenings.  British Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  15, 339–54. 
 Hughes, C., Jaff ee, S. R., Happ é , F., Taylor, A., Caspi, A., & Moffi  tt, T. E. (2005).  Origins of individual dif-
ferences in theory of mind: From nature to nurture?  Child Development ,  76( 2),  356–70 . 
 Kristen, S., Th oermer, C., Hofer, T., Aschersleben, G., & Sodian, B. (2006).  Skalierung von “theory 
of mind” aufgaben (Scaling of theory of mind tasks).  Zeitschrift  fur Entwicklungspsychologic und 
Padagogische Psychologie ,  38 ,  186–95 . 
 Lalonde, C. E., & Chandler, M. J. (1995).  False belief understanding goes to school: On the 
social-emotional consequences of coming early or late to a fi rst theory of mind.  Cognition and Emotion , 
 9( 2–3),  167–85 . 
 Langdon, R., & Coltheart, M. (2004).  Recognition of metaphor and irony in young adults.  Psychiatry 
Research ,  125 ,  9–30 . 
 Li, J. (2001).  Chinese conceptualization of learning.  Ethos ,  29( 2),  111–37 . 
 Lillard, A. S. (1993).  Young children’s conceptualization of pretense: Action or mental representational 
state?  Child Development ,  64( 2),  372–86 . 
 Liu, D., Wellman, H. M., Tardif, T., & Sabbagh, M. A. (2008).  Th eory of mind development in Chinese 
children: A meta-analysis of false-belief understanding across cultures and languages.  Developmental 
Psychology ,  44( 2),  523–31 . 
 Luo, Y., & Baillargeon, R. (2010).  Toward a mentalistic account of early psychological reasoning.  Current 
Directions in Psychological Science ,  19( 5),  301–7 . 
 Malle, B. & Hodges, S. (2005).  Other Minds: How Humans Bridge the Divide Between Self and Others.  New 
York :  Guilford Press . 
 Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991).  Culture and the self:Implications for cognition, emotion, and moti-
vation.  Psychological Review ,  98 ,  224–53 . 
 Meltzoff , A. N. (1995).  Understanding the intentions of others: Re-enactment of intended acts by 
18-month-old children.  Developmental Psychology ,  31 ,  838–50 . 
 Meltzoff , A. N., & Brooks, R. (2008).  Self-experience as a mechanism for learning about others: A training 
study in social cognition.  Developmental Psychology ,  44( 5),  1257–65 . 
 Meristo, M., Falkman, K., Hjelmquist, E., Tedoldi, M., Surian, L., & Siegal, M. (2007).  Language access 
and theory of mind reasoning: Evidence from deaf children in bilingual and oral environments. 
 Developmental Psychology ,  43 ,  1156–69 . 
 Milligan, K., Astington, J. W., & Dack, L. A. (2007).  Language and theory of mind: Meta-analysis of the 
relation between language ability and false-belief understanding.  Child Development ,  78( 2),  622–46 . 
 Moeller, M. P., & Schick, B. (2006).  Relations between maternal input and theory of mind understanding in 
deaf children.  Child Development ,  77 ,  751–66 . 
 Moll, H., & Tomasello, M. (2004).  12- and 18-month-old infants follow gaze to spaces behind barriers. 
 Developmental Science ,  7 ,  F1–9 . 
 Morgan, G., & Kegal, J. (2006).  Nicaraguan sign language and theory of mind: Th e issue of critical periods 
and abilities.  Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry ,  47 ,  811–19 . 
 Moore, C., & Corkum, V. (1994).  Social understanding at the end of the fi rst year of life.  Developmental 
Review ,  14 ,  349–72 . 
 Nisbett, R. E. (2003).  Th e Geography of Th ought: How Asians and Westerners Th ink Diff erently—and Why . 
 New York :  Free Press . 
 Oh, S., & Lewis, C. (2008).  Korean preschoolers’ advanced inhibitory control and its relation to other exec-
utive skills and mental state understanding.  Child Development ,  79( 1),  80–99 . 

69
 Olineck, K.  M. , & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2005).  Infants’ ability to distinguish between intentional and acci-
dental actions and its relation to internal state language.  Infancy ,  8 ,  91–100 . 
 Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005).  Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs?  Science ,  308 , 
 255–8 . 
 Perner, J., Ruff man, T., & Leekam, S. R. (1994).  Th eory of mind is contagious: You catch it from your sibs. 
 Child Development ,  65( 4),  1228–38 . 
 Peskin, J., & Ardino, V. (2003).  Representing the mental world in children’s social behavior: Playing 
hide-and-seek and keeping a secret.  Social Development ,  12( 4),  496–512 . 
 Peterson, C. C. (2002).  Drawing insights from pictures: Th e development of concepts of false drawing and 
false belief in children with deafness, normal hearing and autism.  Child Development ,  73 ,  1442–59 . 
 Peterson, C. C. (2004).  Th eory-of-mind development in oral deaf children with cochlear implants or con-
ventional hearing aids.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry ,  45 ,  1–11 . 
 Peterson, C. C. (2009).  Development of social-cognitive and communication skills in children born deaf. 
 Scandinavian Journal of Psychology ,  50( 5),  475–83 . 
 Peterson, C. C., & Siegal, M. (1999).  Representing inner worlds: Th eory of mind in autistic, deaf and nor-
mal hearing children.  Psychological Science ,  10 ,  126–9 . 
 Peterson, C. C., & Siegal, M. (2000).  Insights into a theory of mind from deafness and autism.  Mind & 
Language ,  15 ,  123–45 . 
 Peterson, C. C., Slaughter, V. & Paynter, J. (2007).  Social maturity and theory-of-mind development 
in typically-developing children and those on the autism spectrum.  Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry ,  48 ,  1243–50 . 
 Peterson, C. C. & Wellman, H. M. (2009).  From fancy to reason: Scaling deaf and hearing children’s under-
standing of mind.  British Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  27 ,  297–310 . 
 Peterson, C. C., Wellman, H. M., & Liu, D. (2005).  Steps in theory-of-mind development for children with 
deafness or autism.  Child Development ,  76( 2),  502–17 . 
 Peterson, C. C., Wellman, H. M., & Slaughter, V. (2012).  Th e mind behind the message: Advancing 
theory of mind scales for typically developing children, and those with deafness, autism, or Asperger 
Syndrome.  Child Development ,  83( 2),  469–85 . 
 Pexman, P. & Glenwright, M. (2007).  How do typically developing children grasp the meaning of verbal 
irony?  Journal of Neurolinguistics ,  20 ,  178–96 . 
 Phillips, A. T., & Wellman, H. M. (2005).  Infants’ understanding of object-directed action.   Cognition ,  98( 2), 
 137–55 . 
 Pyers, J. E., & Senghas, A. (2009).  Language promotes false-belief understanding: Evidence from learners of 
a new sign language.  Psychological Science ,  20( 7),  805–12 . 
 Rajendran, G., Mitchell, P., & Rickards, H. (2005).  How do individuals with Asperger Syndrome respond 
to nonliteral language and inappropriate requests in computer-mediated communication?  Journal of 
Autism and Developmental Disorders ,  35 ,  429–43 . 
 Razza, R. & Blair, C. (2008).  Associations among false-belief understanding, executive function and social 
competence.  Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology ,  30 ,  332–43 . 
 Recchia, H., Howe, N., Ross, H. & Alexander, S. (2010).  Children’s understanding and production of verbal 
irony in family conversations.  British Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  28 ,  255–74 . 
 Richert, R. A., & Lillard, A. S. (2002).  Children’s understanding of the knowledge prerequisites of drawing 
and pretending.  Developmental Psychology ,  38( 6),  1004–15 . 
 Richert, R. A., & Harris, P. L. (2006).  Th e ghost in my body: Children’s developing concept of the soul. 
 Journal of Cognition and Culture ,  6( 3–4),  409–27 . 
 Russell, P. A., Hosie, J. A., Gray, C. D., Scott, C., Hunter, N., Banks, J. S., et al. (1998).  Th e development of 
theory of mind in deaf children.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry ,  39( 6),  903–10 . 
REFERENCES

THEORY OF MIND, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEAFNESS 
70
 Sabbagh, M. A., Xu, F., Carlson, S. M., Moses, L. J., & Lee, K. (2006).  Th e development of executive func-
tioning and theory of mind: A comparison of Chinese and U. S .  preschoolers .  Psychological Science ,  17 , 
 74–81 . 
 Schick, B., De Villiers, P., De Villiers, J., & Hoff meister, R. (2007).  Language and theory of mind: A study 
of deaf children.  Child Development ,  78 ,  376–96 . 
 Scholl, B. & Leslie, A. (2001).  Minds, modules and meta-analysis.  Child Development ,  72 ,  696–701 . 
 Scott, R. M., & Baillargeon, R. (2009).  Which penguin is this? Attributing false beliefs about object identity 
at 18months.  Child Development ,  80( 4),  1172–96 . 
 Shahaeian, A., Peterson, C. C., Slaughter, V., & Wellman, H. M. (2001).  Culture and the sequence of steps 
in theory of mind development.  Developmental Psychology ,  47( 5),  1239–47 . 
 Siegal, M. & Peterson, C. C. (2008).  Language and theory of mind in atypically developing children: 
Evidence from studies of deafness, blindness, and autism. In C. Sharp, P. Fonagy & I. M. Goodyer 
(Eds),  Social Cognition and Developmental Psychopathology ( pp.  81–112 ).  Oxford; New York :  Oxford 
University Press . 
 Siegal, M., & Varley, R. (2002).  Neural systems involved in ‘theory of mind’.  Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 
 3( 6),  463–71 . 
 Slaughter, V., Dennis, M. J., & Pritchard, M. (2002). Th eory of mind and peer acceptance in preschool chil-
dren.  British Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  20 ( 4), 545–64. 
 Sodian, B. (2011).  Th eory of mind in infancy.  Child Development Perspectives ,  5 ,  39–43 . 
 Southgate, V., Chevallier, C., & Csibra, G. (2010).  Seventeen-month-olds appeal to false beliefs to interpret 
others’ referential communication.  Developmental Science ,  13( 6),  907–12 . 
 Southgate, V., Senju, A., & Csibra, G. (2007).  Action anticipation through attribution of false belief by 
2-year-olds.  Psychological Science ,  18( 7),  587–92 . 
 Surian, L., Caldi, S., & Sperber, D. (2007).  Attribution of beliefs by 13-month-old infants.  Psychological 
Science ,  18( 7),  580–6 . 
 Tardif, T., & Wellman, H. M. (2000).  Acquisition of mental state language in Mandarin- and 
Cantonese-speaking children.  Developmental Psychology ,  36( 1),  25–43 . 
 Taylor, M., & Carlson, S. M. (1997).  Th e relation between individual diff erences in fantasy and theory of 
mind.  Child Development ,  68( 3),  436–55 . 
 Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H. (2005).  Understanding and sharing intentions: 
Th e origins of cultural cognition.  Behavioral and Brain Sciences ,  28( 5),  675–91 . 
 Tomasello, M., & Haberl, K. (2003).  Understanding attention: 12- and 18-month-olds know what is new for 
other persons.  Developmental Psychology ,  39 ,  906–12 . 
 Vaccari, C., & Marschark, M. (1997).  Communication between parents and deaf children: Implications for 
social-emotional development.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry ,  38 ,  793–801 . 
 Watson, A. C., Nixon, C. L., Wilson, A., & Capage, L. (1999).  Social interaction skills and theory of mind 
in young children.  Developmental Psychology ,  35 ,  386–91 . 
 Wellman, H. M. (1990).  Th e Child’s Th eory of Mind .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Wellman, H. M. (2011).  Developing a theory of mind. In U. Goswami (Ed.),  Th e Blackwell Handbook of 
Childhood Cognitive Development, 2nd edn ( pp.  258–284 ).  New York :  Blackwell . 
 Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001).  A meta-analysis of theory-of-mind development: Th e 
truth about false belief.   Child Development ,  72( 3),  655–84 . 
 Wellman, H. M., & Estes, D. (1986).  Early understanding of mental entities: a reexamination of childhood 
realism.  Child Development ,  57( 4),  910–23 . 
 Wellman, H. M., Fang, F., Liu, D., Zhu, L., & Liu, G. (2006).  Scaling of theory-of-mind understandings in 
Chinese children.   Psychological Science ,  17( 12),  1075–81 . 
 Wellman, H. M., Fang, F., & Peterson, C. C. (2011).  Sequential progressions in a theory of mind scale: 
Longitudinal perspectives.  Child Development ,  82 ,  780–92 . 

71
 Wellman, H. M., & Hickling, A. K. (1994).  Th e mind’s “I”: children’s conception of the mind as an active 
agent.  Child Development ,  65( 6),  1564–80 . 
 Wellman, H. M., Hollander, M., & Schult, C. A. (1996).  Young children’s understanding of thought bubbles 
and of thoughts.  Child Development ,  67( 3),  768–88 . 
 Wellman, H. M., & Johnson, C. N. (2008).  Developing dualism: From intuitive understanding to transcen-
dental ideas. In A. Antonietti, A. Corradini & E. Lowe (Eds),  Psychophysical dualism today: An interdis-
ciplinary approach ( pp.  3–35 ).  Lanham :  Lexington Books . 
 Wellman, H. M., & Liu, D. (2004). Scaling of theory-of-mind tasks.  Child Development ,  75 (2), 523–41. 
 Wellman, H. M., Lopez-Duran, S., LaBounty, J., & Hamilton, B. (2008).  Infant attention to intentional 
action predicts preschool theory of mind.  Developmental Psychology ,  44( 2),  618–623 . 
 Wellman, H. M., Phillips, A. T., Dunphy-Lelii, S., & LaLonde, N. (2004).  Infant social attention predicts 
preschool social cognition.  Developmental Science ,  7( 3),  283–8 . 
 White, S., Hill, E., Happ é , F. & Frith, U. (2009).  Th e Strange Stories: Revealing mentalizing impairments in 
autism.   Child Development ,  80 ,  1097–117 . 
 Winner, E., & Gardner, H. (1993).  Metaphor and irony: Two levels of understanding. In A. Ortony (Ed.), 
 Metaphor and Th ought, 2nd edn ( pp.  425–43 ).  New York :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Winner, E., & Leekam, S. (1991).  Distinguishing irony from deception: Understanding the speaker’s 
second-order intention.  British Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  9( 2),  257–70 . 
 Woolfe, T., Want, S. C., & Siegal, M. (2002).  Signposts to development:  Th eory of mind in deaf children. 
 Child Development ,  73( 3),  768–78 . 
 Yamaguchi, M., Kuhlmeier, V. A., Wynn, K., & VanMarle, K. (2009).  Continuity in social cognition from 
infancy to childhood.  Developmental Science ,  12( 5),  746–52 . 
 Yirmiya, N., Erel, O., Shaked, M., & Solomonica-Levi, D. (1998).  Meta-analyses comparing theory of mind 
abilities of individuals with autism, individuals with mental retardation, and normally developing indi-
viduals.  Psychological Bulletin ,  124( 3),  283–307 . 
 Youngblade, L. M., & Dunn, J. (1995).  Individual diff erences in young children’s pretend play with mother 
and sibling: Links to relationships and understanding of other people’s feelings and beliefs.  Child 
Development ,  66 ,  1472–92 . 
REFERENCES

 Chapter 5 
 Can theory of mind grow up? 
Mindreading in adults, and its 
implications for the development 
and neuroscience of mindreading  
 Ian   Apperly  
 Introduction  
 Why would one study theory of mind in adults? This question would seem ridiculous in almost 
any other domain of cognition. Yet in more than 30 years of exciting research on mindreading, 
studies of children and non-human animals have had such a strong grip on the theoretical imagi-
nation that it may be difﬁ cult even to notice that we do not know how adults do it, let alone to 
appreciate why we might care. To see how anomalous this situation is, just imagine asking the 
same question in relation to language or reasoning, or cognition of number, space or causality. In 
these cases, and for almost any other topic in cognition, there is a long history of research in adults 
that has yielded core bodies of empirical phenomena and cognitive models that aim to account 
for them. Yet, despite regular claims for the importance of mindreading for important things that 
adults do—such as everyday social interaction and communication, moral and legal reasoning—
little attention has been paid to how mindreading abilities might need to be implemented in order 
to perform such roles. However, in recent years this situation has begun to change rapidly. In the 
ﬁ rst part of this chapter I shall survey this growing literature and advance the view that we need to 
think of adults as having “two systems” for mindreading. 
 The absence of cognitive models of mindreading in adults also has unattended consequences in 
the ﬁ elds where research has been ﬂ ourishing. Developmental studies, for all the insights they have 
given, continue to be conducted with little attention to the mature system that development yields. 
Indeed, there is almost no research beyond 6 or 7 years of age, as if there were nothing more to 
mindreading than the ability to pass tests for the minimal possession of key mindreading concepts. 
And neuroscientiﬁ c studies, for all their impressive convergence on a “mindreading network” of 
brain regions, have been limited in their ability to identify the functional contribution of different 
regions, because unlike other topics in cognitive neuroscience, there have been very limited cogni-
tive accounts of the functions that might be performed. Later in the chapter, I shall discuss how 
the growing literature on the cognitive basis of mindreading in adults offers new perspectives on 
neuroscientiﬁ c and developmental research. 
 When do we mindread?  
 Before diving into the ﬁ ndings, it is worth reﬂ ecting on what work we believe that mindreading 
actually does in adults. The success of empirical research on mindreading has led to a tendency 

WHEN DO WE MINDREAD?
73
in the ﬁ eld to see mindreading everywhere, so that every communicative exchange and every 
social interaction is often thought to be mediated by cascading inferences about thoughts, desires, 
knowledge, and intentions. Interestingly, this tendency runs against some early discussions of 
mindreading, which emphasized that inferences about mental states were likely to be cognitively 
demanding, and only made when necessary (e.g. Perner, 1991). It is also inconsistent with sug-
gestions that a great deal of co-ordinated communication can be achieved without mindreading 
inferences (e.g. Breheny, 2006; Pickering & Garrod, 2004). It has resulted in recent accusations 
of “theory-of-mind-ism” in research on social interaction, and to suggestions that the “theory of 
mind” paradigm should be abandoned entirely (e.g. Hutto, 2009; Leudar & Costall, 2009). I believe 
that a sober assessment of this situation requires us to acknowledge two things. On the one hand, 
we should not assume that mindreading is at work in a given situation just because the situation 
can be glossed in such terms. For example, when one person holds a door open for another person 
whose hands are occupied, it is an open question whether the helper infers the helped person’s 
intention to open the door themselves, and careful work would be necessary to distinguish this 
from the possibility that the helper acted on the basis of a social script about door-opening. On the 
other hand, it is undoubtedly true that we do frequently ascribe mental states to each other, and it 
is important to understand how and when we do so. The main focus of this chapter will concern 
this latter point. 
 It is beyond doubt that in everyday activities we regularly represent the mental states of others. 
We often tell one another what we think, want or know directly, and in order for this to be under-
stood the listener must, of course, represent these mental states. We also routinely appeal to such 
mental states when we want to explain or justify the actions of ourselves or others (Malle, 2008). 
Such circumstances may be relatively trivial, as when I tell you of my desire for beer. But they may 
also be much more serious, as when we evaluate the guilt or innocence of a defendant in a court of 
law by considering whether their actions were intentional or accidental, and performed in knowl-
edge or ignorance of their consequences. Viewed this way, mindreading clearly has the potential to 
be as ﬂ exible and as complicated as any other problem of reasoning, and has precisely the wrong 
characteristics for processing in a specialized cognitive module (Apperly, 2010; cf. Fodor, 1983, 
2000). To the degree that this is correct, we should expect mindreading to be relatively effortful, 
drawing on limited resources for memory and executive control. 
 On the other hand, it is also commonly supposed that mindreading serves a critical role in 
fast-moving social interaction and competition, enabling us, for example, to work out what 
a speaker is talking about on the basis of their eye gaze and to execute competitive bluffs and 
counter-bluffs in sport. Of course, we must be cautious against theory-of-mind-ism, and remem-
ber that mindreading may not always be necessary. However, there seem good prima facie reasons 
for supposing that mindreading inferences are, indeed, made in some such circumstances. To this 
degree, we should expect mindreading to show at least some key characteristics of a modular proc-
ess (e.g. Fodor, 1983, 2000; Leslie, 2005), to be relatively effortless, and to make few demands on 
memory or executive control. Otherwise, the demands of mindreading might detract from our 
ability to perform the main task at hand, such as acting on a speaker’s request or passing the ball 
to the best person. 
 What should be clear, however, is that there is a tension between the requirement that mind-
reading be extremely ﬂ exible, on the one hand, and fast and highly efﬁ cient on the other. Such 
characteristics tend not to co-occur in cognitive systems, because the very characteristics that make 
a cognitive process ﬂ exible—such as unrestricted access to the knowledge of the system—are the 
same characteristics that make cognitive processes slow and effortful. Instead, ﬂ exibility and efﬁ -
ciency tend to be traded against one another. This trade-off is reﬂ ected in Fodor’s distinction 

CAN THEORY OF MIND GROW UP?
74
between “modular” vs. “central” cognitive processes (Fodor, 1983, 2000). This need for a trade-off is 
why, in domains as diverse as reasoning (Evans, 2003), social cognition (Gilbert, 1998) and number 
cognition (Feigenson, Dehane & Spelke, 2004) researchers often propose that human adults have 
two types of cognitive process operating in that domain, which make complementary trade-offs 
between ﬂ exibility and cognitive efﬁ ciency. The above examples suggest that there are good rea-
sons for expecting the same thing for mindreading, and this will be my working hypothesis in the 
following sections (see Apperly, 2010; Apperly & Butterﬁ ll, 2009, for a fuller discussion). 
 How can we study mindreading in adults  1 ? 
 Research on children is dominated by questions about the nature and origins of our conceptual 
understanding of mental states (e.g. Baillargeon, Scott & He, 2010; Perner, 1991; Wellman, Cross & 
Watson 2001). Typical pass/fail tasks designed to test this conceptual understanding, such as false 
belief tasks (Wimmer & Perner, 1983) or visual perspective-taking tasks (Flavell, Everett, Croft & 
Flavell, 1981), are of no use for studying adults because nobody really doubts that a typical adult 
has such basic mindreading concepts. Researchers have taken several approaches to this problem. 
 One solution to this problem is to test mindreading concepts that are more subtle or complex, 
where there might plausibly be some variation among adults. For example, there is evidence that 
older children and adults advance through a series of increasingly sophisticated theories about 
the origins and nature of knowledge (e.g. Chandler, Boyes & Ball, 1990; Kuhn, 2009; Robinson 
& Apperly, 1998). However, such studies are limited by the fact that sophisticated concepts are 
unlikely to be representative of the mindreading that might underpin many of our everyday social 
interactions. Other work has shown variation in adults’ ability to understand stories about social 
situations involving white lies, blufﬁ ng, sarcasm, irony or faux-pas (Happ é , 1994). Understanding 
such situations surely requires inferences about the mental states of the story characters. However, 
it is unclear whether it requires concepts that are more “advanced” than those of younger children. 
Instead, I would suggest that such tests identify variance in adults’ ability to  apply such concepts in 
a ﬂ exible, context-sensitive manner. This ability is as vital for everyday mindreading as possessing 
the concepts in the ﬁ rst place, and plausibly has both an extended developmental course and vari-
ability in the mature system of different adults. 
 A second approach to studying mindreading in adults follows a broad tradition that seeks insights 
into the nature of adults’ reasoning by examining the heuristics and biases that are apparent in 
their everyday judgements and decisions. Such studies may pose mindreading problems where 
the “right” answer is somewhat uncertain, such as judging how another person will make a dif-
ﬁ cult perceptual discrimination, or interpret ambiguous verbal messages (e.g. Epley, Morewedge, 
& Keysar, 2004). In tasks with a clear “right” answer—such as predicting the incorrect search of 
someone with a false belief about an object’s location—researchers may ask participants to rate 
their certainty about their answer (e.g. Birch & Bloom, 2007; see also Mitchell, Robinson, Isaacs 
& Nye, 1996). Findings from these studies suggest that adults’ judgements about others are prone 
to biasing interference from their own perspectives—a phenomenon variously labelled “egocen-
tric bias” (Nickerson, 1999), “reality bias” (Mitchell et al., 1996), and “curse of knowledge” (Birch 
& Bloom, 2007). Such effects may be most apparent when adults are put under time pressure 
(Epley et al., 2004), or when placed under a concurrent memory load (Lin, Keysar & Epley, 2010). 
 1   For most of the current chapter I will be concerned with methods and ﬁ ndings from typical, neurologically 
intact adults. Several other chapters discuss research on adults using neuropsychological and neuroimaging 
methods. 

MINDREADING AS FLEXIBLE, BUT EFFORTFUL THINKING
75
These studies yield valuable insights into the cognitive basis of mindreading, by suggesting that 
unbiased, non-heuristic mindreading may require time and cognitive effort. However, they give 
limited insights into why this might be the case, and whether all processing steps in mindreading 
are cognitively effortful, or only some. 
 A third approach to studying mindreading in adults uses tasks that require simple judgements 
about beliefs, desires, and visual perspectives that are conceptually similar to those used in studies 
of young children. Following methods widely adopted in cognitive psychology these tasks enable 
the measurement of adults’ response times across many repeated trials, and so avoid the problem 
that adults make few errors on such tasks. For example, in one early study of this kind, German 
and Hehman (2006) presented adults with multiple trials of a belief-desire reasoning task, which 
showed adults to be slower to make judgements when a character had a false belief, rather than 
a true belief, and when s/he had a negative, rather than a positive desire. Because these tasks are 
simple and repetitive, they may lack the subtlety, sophistication, and uncertainty of much everyday 
mindreading, which is captured by the tasks described above. However, they have two signiﬁ cant 
advantages. First, they enable much more ﬁ ne-grained questions to be asked about the component 
processes of mindreading. For example, it may be possible to ask whether working memory is nec-
essary for the process of inferring a mental state or the process of using that information to guide 
social interaction, or both. Secondly, they require simple mindreading concepts similar to those 
required in most developmental and neuroscientiﬁ c studies, and so may provide a stronger link to 
studies of these different participant groups than the methods described above. 
 In the following sections, I combine evidence from each of these approaches to illustrate what 
we are learning about the complex nature of mindreading in adults. These ﬁ ndings motivate the 
suggestion that mindreading can be  both ﬂ exible and effortful,  and inﬂ exible, effortless, and even 
automatic. 
 Mindreading as ﬂ exible, but effortful thinking  
 Discussion about the cognitive basis of mindreading has largely consisted in debates between advo-
cates of simulation-theory, theory-theory and modularity-theory (e.g. Davies & Stone, 1995a,b), 
which can appear somewhat insular when viewed from outside. The broader literature on cogni-
tion in adults already has extensive bodies of research on different aspects of “thinking,” including 
formal and practical reasoning (Byrne, 2005; Johnson-Laird, 1983) and online comprehension 
during conversation and reading (Garnham, 1987; Pickering & Garrod, 2004). The limited contact 
between this literature and research on mindreading is truly surprising, because it is almost trivi-
ally true that information about mental states—what people know, think, intend, etc.—can and 
does feature in all aspects of reasoning, decision-making, and discourse processing. Put another 
way, mindreading is not something we tend to do in isolated and disinterested bouts. Rather, it is 
an activity that is useful mainly by being part of our everyday thinking and comprehension. This 
literature is therefore an obvious place to look for expectations about how at least some aspects of 
mindreading will be achieved. 
 There are, of course, many alternative accounts of reasoning, decision-making and comprehen-
sion that differ in important ways. However, common themes are:
 1. Such thinking involves the on-line construction of some form of mental model of the situation 
under consideration. 
 2. Models can include information explicitly mentioned (e.g. by the speaker, the story, or in the 
task instructions) and information from inferences beyond the given information. 

CAN THEORY OF MIND GROW UP?
76
 3. Model construction and maintenance is demanding of limited resources for memory and 
executive control. 
 4. Consequently, what information is represented or inferred will depend upon what memory 
and executive resources are available, and on whether the thinker takes it to be worthwhile or 
relevant to elaborate the model.    
 These themes provide a set of expectations about the characteristics of adults’ thinking about 
thoughts, and there is good evidence to suggest that mindreading does indeed ﬁ t these expecta-
tions in many circumstances. 
 Many components of mindreading are effortful 
 The focus of research on the ages at which children ﬁ rst demonstrate critical mental state con-
cepts might lead to the supposition that the later use of such concepts showed little interesting 
variability. Yet a number of studies now suggest that mindreading problems that are hardest when 
children ﬁ rst pass developmentally sensitive tasks (such as false belief vs. true belief problems) 
continue to require the most cognitive effort for older children and adults. As already mentioned, 
German and Hehman (2006) presented adults with short stories from which they had to infer a 
character’s belief and desire in order to predict their action. German and Hehman (2006) found 
that adults were slower (and more error-prone 2 ) on trials that required thinking about false beliefs 
and negative desires, compared with true beliefs and positive desires, which is the same pattern of 
relative difﬁ culty observed in 3–6-year-old children on developmentally sensitive tasks (e.g. Leslie, 
German & Polizzi, 2005). This ﬁ nding clearly suggests that psychologically relevant parameters, 
such as the valence of belief and desire, inﬂ uence the effort adults must put in to solving mindread-
ing tasks. However, in common with most mindreading tasks in the developmental literature, the 
task required adults to infer the character’s mental states from the story, to hold this information in 
mind and to use it in combination with further facts from the story in order to predict the charac-
ter’s action. This leaves it unclear which of these component processes required cognitive effort. 
 Further studies have gone some way to isolating these distinct components from one another. 
Apperly, Warren, Andrews, Grant, & Todd (2011) adapted the belief-desire paradigm and obviated 
the need for participants to infer the character’s mental states by stating these directly. Participants 
read sentences describing which one of two boxes contained some hidden food, which box the 
character thought contained the food (his belief could be true or false), and whether he wished to 
ﬁ nd or avoid the food. All participants had to do was hold this information brieﬂ y in mind, and 
then combine it to predict which box the character would open (e.g. if he had a false belief and a 
desire to avoid the food he would open the box containing the food on the mistaken belief that 
this box was empty). Although participants no longer had to infer the character’s mental states the 
valence of his belief (true vs. false) and desire (positive vs. negative), nonetheless, inﬂ uenced their 
performance. In a further study, Apperly et al. (2008) obviated both the need to infer a character’s 
mental states and the need to predict their action. Participants read sentences describing the colour 
and location of a hidden ball and a character’s belief about this situation, and responded to a probe 
 2   Even when using very simple mindreading tasks, adult participants do show residual errors. For simple 
tasks these errors clearly do not reﬂ ect a lack of the relevant concepts. Usually, they are either random, with 
no systematic condition differences, or they follow the same pattern of variation across conditions as are 
observed in response times. In what follows, I will not mention errors unless they show something interest-
ingly different from response times. 

MINDREADING AS FLEXIBLE, BUT EFFORTFUL THINKING
77
picture that simply required them to recall either belief or reality. Again, false belief trials were 
harder for participants than a baseline “neutral” belief trial, suggesting that the mere fact of having 
to hold someone’s false belief brieﬂ y in mind comes at a measurable processing cost. 
 Using a rather different paradigm in which participants made rapid judgements about the sim-
ple visual perspective of a character standing in a room, Samson, Apperly, Braithwaite, Andrews, & 
Bodley (2010) were able to study the demands of mindreading inferences independent of demands 
associated withholding such information in mind or using it for further inferences. They found 
that participants were slower to judge the character’s perspective when it was different from the 
participants’, suggesting that, like young children, adults experienced egocentric interference when 
they made judgements about someone else’s perspective. Complementary evidence comes from 
Keysar, Barr, Balin, & Brauner (2000), who were able to study participants’ ability to  use informa-
tion about someone else’s perspective under conditions designed to minimize the demands of 
inferring this information or holding it in mind. These authors examined adults’ ability to take 
account of someone’s visual perspective when following their instructions to move objects around 
a simple array. The instructor could not see all of the items in the array, and so participants had 
to rule out these items as potential referents for instructions. Importantly, since participants were 
given ample time to identify these items, and since the array was in full view throughout the trial, 
any failure to take account of the instructor’s perspective should not be due to difﬁ culty with infer-
ring that perspective or holding that information in mind for an extended period of time. Rather 
the potential difﬁ culty in this task is with  using the information about the instructor’s perspec-
tive to guide interpretation. In fact, adults are surprisingly error-prone on this task, and indeed 
they are more error-prone at using the instructor’s perspective than at a comparison condition in 
which they must interpret instructions according to an arbitrary, non-social rule (Apperly, Carroll, 
Samson, Qureshi, Humphreys, & Moffatt, 2010). 
 In summary, recent work shows that it is possible to separate component processes in mindread-
ing—including inferring mental states, holding this information in mind, and using this infor-
mation. The evidence suggests that these processes may each contribute to making mindreading 
cognitively effortful. In the next section I review evidence suggesting that much of the variation in 
“effort” across mindreading problems reﬂ ects the differential recruitment of cognitive resources 
for memory and executive function.  
 Mindreading frequently depends on memory and executive function 
 The broader literature suggests that adults’ success on reasoning and comprehension tasks is fre-
quently correlated with their success on tests of memory and executive function, that success is 
impaired if participants must simultaneously perform a second task that taxes memory or execu-
tive function, and that it may also be impaired in old age (e.g. McKinnon & Moscovitch, 2007). A 
growing literature suggests that the same pattern is typically true for mindreading. 
 By using a pre-test to select adults with low vs. high working memory spans, Linn, Keysar & 
Epley (2010) found that adult participants with lower spans were less likely to use their mind-
reading abilities when following instructions from a speaker with a different visual perspective. 
By looking for between-task correlations German and Hehman (2006) found that adults’ per-
formance on their belief-desire task was related to performance on tests of inhibitory control, 
processing speed and working memory, with the most important factors being inhibitory control 
and processing speed. This study also found that elderly participants (over the age of 60) per-
formed less well than young participants at belief-desire reasoning. Similarly, Phillips, Bull, Allen, 
Insch, Burr, & Ogg (2011) found that elderly adults performed less well than young adults on false 
belief tasks (though not true belief tasks), and that this difference was partially mediated by group 

CAN THEORY OF MIND GROW UP?
78
differences in working memory performance (see also Mckinnon & Moscovitch, 2007, for similar 
results). Other studies using tasks that require more subtle or complex mindreading have revealed 
inconsistent evidence of group differences between younger and older participants, and inconsist-
ent evidence of relationships with other cognitive abilities. However, for the reasons discussed 
earlier, the demands on mindreading made by more complex tasks are confounded with a range 
of other requirements on memory, executive function, and context-sensitive processes. This com-
plexity may explain the inconsistent pattern of results observed (see e.g. Rakoczy, Harder-Kasten, 
& Sturm, 2012 for a recent summary and discussion). 
 Dual task methods can go beyond correlational studies to provide evidence that concurrent 
performance of a memory or executive task impairs performance on a mindreading task. This 
approach has found evidence that mindreading can be impaired by a concurrent working memory 
task (McKinnon & Moscovitch, 2007), as well as by tasks that tax inhibition and task switching 
(Bull, Phillips, & Conway, 2008) and verbal repetition (Newton & de Villiers, 2007). However, 
although these studies show impaired mindreading performance, the tasks used do not make it 
possible to discern whether participants’ difﬁ culty was with mindreading inferences, holding such 
information in mind or using the information to make inferences about behavior. Two recent 
studies make some progress on this question. Linn, et al. (2010) found that adults placed under 
memory load were less able to use information about a speaker’s perspective when following their 
instructions. Qureshi, Apperly and Samson (2010) found that a concurrent inhibitory control task 
increased adults’ egocentric interference when judging another’s visual perspective. 
 In summary, although there is some variation across studies, and some uncertainty about the 
precise relationships revealed, these studies converge with the evidence from patients with brain 
injury (see Chapter 10) on the conclusion that mindreading often requires memory and executive 
function. 
 Mindreading inferences are non-automatic, and sensitive to context 
and motivation 
 It is sometimes stated, simply as a matter of fact, that mindreading inferences are “automatic,” 
suggesting that we cannot help but ascribe mental states when given a stimulus that affords such 
inferences (e.g. Friedman & Leslie, 2004; Sperber & Wilson, 2002; Stone, Baron-Cohen, & Knight, 
1998). Yet, from the perspective of the broader literature on adults’ thinking, this claim is surpris-
ing. Although there is plenty of evidence that adults routinely and rapidly make inferences that 
go beyond the information given in a reasoning or comprehension task, it is equally clear that 
these inferences are not obligatory or stimulus-driven, but are instead dependent on participants’ 
motivation for devoting cognitive resources to this aspect of the task (e.g. Sanford & Garrod, 1998; 
McKoon & Ratcliff, 1998; Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998). Only recently has evidence begun to bear on 
this question in relation to mindreading. 
 Apperly et al. (2006a) presented participants with video scenarios involving a target charac-
ter who came to have either a true or a false belief about the location of a hidden object. These 
stimuli clearly afforded mindreading inferences about the character’s beliefs, but the instructions 
only required participants to keep track of the location of the hidden object. Our interest was in 
whether participants would automatically track the character’s belief even though they had no 
speciﬁ c reason for doing so. Critical data came from probe questions presented at unexpected 
points in the videos, which showed participants to be relatively fast at answering questions about 
the location of the hidden object (which they were instructed to track) but signiﬁ cantly slower to 
answer matched questions about the character’s false belief (which they had not been instructed 
to track). No such difference in response times to belief and reality probes was found in a second 

MINDREADING AS FLEXIBLE, BUT EFFORTFUL THINKING
79
condition in which participants were instructed to track the character’s belief, suggesting that the 
difference observed in the ﬁ rst condition arose because participants had not inferred the charac-
ter’s belief automatically. Importantly, this ﬁ nding does not imply that adults only infer beliefs 
under instruction! Two further studies indicate that varying the scenarios or the context can lead 
participants to infer beliefs spontaneously (Back & Apperly, 2010; Cohen & German, 2009), and 
this is a good thing, since the real world does not typically furnish us with explicit prompts to 
 mindread. However, evidence of spontaneous inferences should be distinguished from the claim 
that mindreading inferences are made in an automatic, stimulus-driven manner, because if infer-
ences are spontaneous then this opens up questions about the contextual conditions that deter-
mine the frequency and nature of mindreading. 
 Important insight into the potential for mindreading to be inﬂ uenced by contextual factors 
comes from a study by Converse, Lin, Keysar, & Epley (2008). These authors administered a pre-test 
in which participants were induced to be in either a happy or a sad mood, and then tested partici-
pant’s vulnerability to egocentric interference from their own perspective in two different ToM 
paradigms. Consistent with the view that happy people rely on more heuristic processing, whereas 
sad people undertake more deliberate processing, these authors found that happy participants 
showed signiﬁ cantly greater egocentric biases than sad participants. This study not only suggests 
that mindreading is non-automatic, but that researchers should pay much more attention to the 
factors that inﬂ uence the propensity for mindreading, including characteristics of the participant 
(such as mood) and characteristics of the target, such as their race, sex or class, or other dimensions 
of similarity and difference to the participant. 
 It is also important to recognize that the proposition that mindreading inferences are not strictly 
automatic does not entail that they are typically very slow and effortful. A number of studies 
arising out of the psycholinguistic tradition suggest that this need not be the case. For example, 
although there is robust evidence that listeners may fail to take account of the simple perspective 
of a speaker when interpreting what they say (e.g. Keysar et al. 2000), participants are less likely 
to look at objects that cannot be seen from the speaker’s perspective (e.g. Nadig & Sedivy, 2002), 
suggesting that information about the speaker’s perspective has some cognitive effects (see also 
Ferguson & Breheney, 2012, for related ﬁ ndings regarding false beliefs). This has led to the sug-
gestion that participants’ errors might arise from difﬁ culty with integration of information about 
the speaker’s perspective with linguistic processing of their message (Barr, 2008). However, recent 
evidence suggests that even such integration of another’s perspective need not be very effortful 
or time-consuming, particularly when no compelling alternative interpretation is available from 
one’s own perspective (Ferguson & Breheney, 2011). 
 Altogether, there is direct evidence to suggest that mindreading frequently occurs spontane-
ously. In a wide range of circumstances people clearly do not need to be explicitly directed to take 
account of what other people see, think or feel. Nonetheless, these inferences are not automatic, 
and the likelihood of spontaneous mindreading depends on the context and on the participant’s 
mood. The broader literature on inferences made during discourse provides compelling grounds 
for thinking that future work will ﬁ nd that the likelihood of spontaneous mindreading, as well as 
the extent of elaboration of such inferences, will depend on participants’ motivation and on the 
availability of cognitive resources for memory and executive control. 
 Summary 
 The view of mindreading that emerges from research reviewed in the sections above is as follows. 
At one extreme end of the scale, exempliﬁ ed by a jury’s deliberations about the evidence for and 
against a defendant having acted knowledgably and intentionally, mindreading may be truly slow, 

CAN THEORY OF MIND GROW UP?
80
deliberative, and effortful. However, the general literature concerning inferences made online dur-
ing comprehension should lead us to expect that many mindreading inferences may often be made 
without too much deliberative scratching of chins, and used quickly enough to keep up with an 
unfolding discourse or text. Nonetheless, such mindreading will require cognitive effort and will 
depend on the availability of the necessary motivation and cognitive resources. 
 Mindreading as a cognitively efﬁ cient, but inﬂ exible 
and limited process 
 Discussions about the possible automaticity of mindreading typically underestimate how difﬁ cult 
it is to determine that a cognitive process is performed in an automatic manner (e.g. Moors & 
De Houwter, 2008). For example, it is certainly not sufﬁ cient to show that mindreading occurs 
without instruction, or even that it occurs relatively quickly. For as already described, much cogni-
tive processing can occur spontaneously and quite rapidly, but the fact that it does so only when 
participants are appropriately motivated and have sufﬁ cient resources suggests that such process-
ing is not automatic. However, there are good reasons in principle for thinking that at least some 
mindreading needs to be less like “thinking” and more like perception in character. To this degree, 
we should expect mindreading processes to be less dependent on participants’ motivations or cog-
nitive resources, and also to be more limited in their scope than the ones described so far. Recent 
research also lends support to this view of mindreading. 
 Evidence that mindreading may occur when unnecessary or unhelpful 
 One characteristic of processes that are more perception-like or modular is that they occur at 
least somewhat independently of participants’ motivation or purpose, and may even interfere with 
their primary objectives. Evidence from three different paradigms suggests that mindreading may 
sometimes show such characteristics. 
 Zwickel (2009) presented participants with very simple animations of isosceles triangles that 
appeared to be moving in a random fashion, in a simple goal-directed fashion (e.g. one triangle 
chased another), or in a complex goal-directed fashion (e.g. one triangle coaxed another). Previous 
research has found that participants’ spontaneous descriptions of these animations differ, with 
simple and complex goal-directed animations eliciting descriptions of goals, and only complex 
goal-directed animations eliciting descriptions of more complex mental states (Abell, Happ é , & 
Frith, 2000). During the animations a dot occasionally appeared on one or other side of a triangle 
and participants’ explicit task was to judge whether the dot appeared to the left or the right. On 
half of the trials the triangle happened to be pointing upwards when the dot appeared, and on 
the other half it happened to be pointing downwards. Of course, this was strictly irrelevant to the 
participants’ task of making left-right judgments of the dots. Nonetheless, in the two goal-directed 
conditions participants were slower to make left-right judgements for downward-facing triangles 
than for upward-facing triangles, whereas there was no such effect for the random movement con-
dition. It is notable that, if a triangle is perceived to have a “perspective,” then for upward-facing 
triangles, the triangle’s left or right was aligned with the participant’s own left and right, whereas 
the left side of a downward-facing triangle was on the participants’ right side, and vice versa. Thus, 
participants’ slow left-right judgments for downward-facing goal-directed triangles can be under-
stood as being the result of interference from task-irrelevant processing of the triangle’s “perspec-
tive” in the goal-directed conditions but not the random condition. It is notable that this effect was 
largest of all for the complex goal-directed animations. However, it is not clear whether this was 
because these stimuli invited the richest ascriptions of mental states, or because these stimuli gave 

MINDREADING AS A COGNITIVELY EFFICIENT, BUT INFLEXIBLE AND LIMITED PROCESS 
81
the more compelling sense of animacy. Nor is it clear whether participants were processing the tri-
angle’s physical, spatial perspective, or whether they were, in some sense, attributing a psychologi-
cal, visual perspective to the triangle. Either would be sufﬁ cient to support a left-right distinction. 
Importantly, though, this does appear to be a case in which some form of perspective-taking is 
occurring independently of participants’ purposes, and in fact this interferes with their perform-
ance on the main task. 
 A second paradigm converges on the same conclusions, this time in the case of very simple visual 
perspective-taking. Samson et al. (2010) presented participants with pictures of a room with dots 
on the wall, and an avatar positioned in the room such that he either saw all of the dots (so his 
perspective was congruent with participants’) or he saw a subset of the dots (so his perspective 
was incongruent with participants’). On the trials that are critical for the current discussion, the 
avatar’s perspective was irrelevant because participants were simply asked to judge how many dots 
they saw in the room from their own “self” perspective. Nonetheless, participants’ responses were 
slower when the avatar’s perspective happened to be incongruent, rather than congruent with their 
own. This effect was apparent when participants’ “self” judgements were mixed with other trials 
on which they made explicit judgments about the avatar, and also in a further experiment in which 
participants only ever made judgements about their own perspective. In the latter case, the avatar’s 
perspective was entirely irrelevant to the entire task, and yet participants appeared to process his 
perspective, and this caused interference when it differed from their own. 
 A third paradigm converges on related conclusions, this time for processing of belief-like states.  3 
Kov á cs, T é gl á s, & Endress (2010) presented participants with animations in which a ball rolled 
around a scene, sometimes appearing to remain behind an occluding wall, and sometimes rolling 
out of the scene. The animations also included an agent who witnessed different parts of the event 
sequence across trials and ended up either with the same belief as the participant about the ball’s 
presence or absence, or the opposite belief. However, the agent was irrelevant to the participants’ 
task, because participants were simply required to press a response button if the ball was behind 
the wall when the wall was lowered at the end of the animation. The ball was, in fact, equally likely 
to be present irrespective of whether it had appeared to remain or to leave the scene during the 
animation. Unsurprisingly, adults were faster to detect the ball when the animation led them to 
expect the ball to be present than when they expected it to be absent. Importantly, though, this 
effect was modulated by the irrelevant beliefs of the agent: when the ball was unexpectedly present 
from the participants’ point of view participants were faster to detect it if the agent happened to 
believe that it was present and slower to detect it when the agent happened to believe it was absent. 
In this case, processing of the agent’s perspective was actually helpful, rather than unhelpful, but 
nonetheless it was clearly irrelevant to participants’ main task of detecting balls appearing behind 
the wall, suggesting that it was relatively stimulus-driven and automatic. 
 Evidence that mindreading is cognitively efﬁ cient 
 A second characteristic of perception-like, modular processing is that it makes few demands on 
domain-general resources for its operation. One way to test this experimentally is to see whether 
effects such as those just described persist even when participants’ resources are taxed by another 
task. 
 3   It is a moot point whether adults or infants in such paradigms are representing beliefs per se, or simpler 
belief-like states (Apperly & Butterﬁ ll, 2009). However, what is critical here is that interference arises in a 
situation where the agent has a false belief, rather than a different visual perspective. 

CAN THEORY OF MIND GROW UP?
82
 Qureshi, et al. (2010) presented Samson et al.’s visual perspective-taking task either alone or at 
the same time as a task that taxed executive control. Their rationale was that participants’ irrelevant 
processing of the avatar’s perspective might, nonetheless, be consuming of executive resources, 
and if this were so then the secondary task should reduce this irrelevant processing and so reduce 
the interference that participants suffered when judging their own perspective. In fact, this study 
found that the secondary task  increased interference from the avatar’s irrelevant perspective, sug-
gesting that calculating his perspective was cognitively efﬁ cient, and that executive control was 
instead required for resisting interference from this perspective. 
 Evidence for the same conclusion comes from Schneider, Bayliss, Becker, & Dux (2012). These 
authors monitored adults’ eye ﬁ xations while viewing video scenarios in which the character in the 
video came to have either a true or a false belief about an object’s location. Although adults always 
knew the object’s true location and although the character’s beliefs were apparently irrelevant, 
adults nonetheless spent longer looking at the incorrect location for the object when this was 
where the character incorrectly believed the object was located, compared with when the character 
had a true belief. Importantly, adults showed no awareness of tracking the character’s beliefs, and 
this evidence of “implicit” processing was replicated in a second study in which participants simul-
taneously performed a distracting secondary task. 
 The ﬁ ndings from these two studies suggest that simple visual perspective-taking and simple 
belief ascription not only occur in a relatively automatic manner, but also can be cognitively efﬁ -
cient so that these processes are not disrupted by a secondary task. 
 Evidence that mindreading is limited 
 A third characteristic of perception-like, modular processing is that automaticity and efﬁ ciency 
do not come for free, but are gained at the expense of limits on the kinds of problem that can be 
solved. A well-studied example is the ability of infants, children, adults, and many non-human 
species to track the precise numerosity of items in a set (see e.g. Feigenson et al., 2004). This abil-
ity is cognitively efﬁ cient, but also extremely limited, in that it can only “count” to 3. Importantly, 
such limitations are not merely a correlate of modular processing; limits reﬂ ect the way in which 
modular processing manages to be efﬁ cient, by restricting itself to processing of just some kinds 
of information (e.g. Fodor, 1983, 2000). It follows that, to the degree that mindreading shows 
other characteristics of modular processing, we should expect it also to be limited to process some 
problems, but not others. 
 A recent study that ﬁ ts with this expectation of limited processing was conducted by Surtees, 
Butterﬁ ll and Apperly (2012; see also Low & Watts, in press, described later). These authors tested 
whether Samson et al.’s (2010) ﬁ nding that adults automatically process  what items were seen by 
an avatar in a cartoon room would extend to  how  items were seen by the avatar. In their task the 
avatar faced out of the room, sitting behind a table on which digits could appear. Digits such as the 
number “8” are rotationally symmetrical, and so would appear the same to both the avatar and the 
participant. These trials were compared with others using digits such as the number “6” that would 
look like a “six” to one viewer and a “nine” to the other. Recall that Samson et al. (2010) found that 
participants were slower to judge  what they themselves could see when the avatar saw something 
different. In contrast, Surtees et al. (2012) found no evidence that adults were slower to judge  how 
the digit appeared to them when it happened to appear differently for the avatar. Naturally, we 
must be cautious about drawing strong conclusions from these negative ﬁ ndings, but nonetheless 
this study provides preliminary evidence ﬁ tting with the expectation that automatic mindreading 
will be limited in its scope.   

IMPLICATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT
83
 Interim summary: two systems for mindreading in adults? 
 The foregoing sections show that recent research has greatly extended the methods available for 
studying mindreading in adults. However, on key questions about the cognitive characteristics of 
mindreading the results emerging from this work point in quite different directions. Some evidence 
suggests that mindreading shows the characteristics of ﬂ exible, but effortful thinking, while other 
evidence suggests that it shows the characteristics of efﬁ cient, but inﬂ exible modular processing. 
What are we to make of these ﬁ ndings? There is certainly some wisdom in the view that we should 
be cautious. Many of the paradigms described are novel, at least within the mindreading literature, 
and most ﬁ ndings reported are relatively new. Any new ﬁ eld of enquiry is likely to produce a higher 
than average number of anomalous ﬁ ndings, and in 5 or 10 years there might be a much better 
evidence base to suggest that mindreading is more like thinking than perception, or vice versa. 
 However, I think there are good grounds for taking both characterizations of mindreading seri-
ously. First, the ﬁ ndings from adults may be relatively new, but the evidence comes from multiple 
tasks and approaches that provide reassuring convergence suggesting that both characterizations 
of mindreading have merit. Secondly, the evidence base is potentially much broader if we also look 
to studies of children and infants. Here, too, we ﬁ nd good grounds for supposing that mindreading 
has the characteristics of effortful thinking when studied in children (e.g. Carlson & Moses, 2001), 
but also apparently contradictory evidence that it has more perception-like qualities when studied 
in infants (Baillargeon, et al., 2010). Thirdly, such apparently contradictory results abound in psy-
chological research in other cognitive domains, such as number and physical cognition, social cog-
nition and general reasoning (e.g. Evans, 2003; Feigenson et al., 2004; Gilbert, 1998). In these other 
domains, this apparent contradiction is resolved by supposing that adults actually operate with 
“two systems,” each having distinct processing characteristics. For these reasons, it seems at least 
plausible to hypothesize that adults implement two kinds of solutions for mindreading, consist-
ing both of ﬂ exible processes for “thinking” about the minds of others, and a number of modules 
that pull off the same trick in a cognitively efﬁ cient manner for a limited subset of mindreading 
problems (e.g. Apperly & Butterﬁ ll, 2009; Apperly, 2010). 
 Understanding the cognitive basis of mindreading in adults is surely a worthwhile project in its 
own right. However, it also has further utility in informing our understanding of development and 
neural basis of mindreading. In the ﬁ nal sections of this chapter I shall explore some important 
implications of the emerging evidence about the multi-faceted nature of mindreading in adults. 
 Implications for development  
 The growing literature on mindreading in adults should have a signiﬁ cant impact on studies of 
development for several reasons. First, it is producing new methods based upon the measurement 
of response times that can be adapted for use with “older” children who pass standard develop-
mental tests of mindreading. Such methods suggest that children’s use of information about the 
minds of others becomes signiﬁ cantly more accurate through middle childhood and adolescence 
(Dumontheil, Apperly, & Blakemore, 2010; Epley et al., 2004), that different belief-desire rea-
soning problems continue to vary in difﬁ culty even after children ﬁ rst “pass” the tasks (Apperly 
et al., 2011), and that 6-year-olds show just the same degree of automatic perspective-taking 
as adults (Surtees & Apperly, 2012). Secondly, the cognitive basis of mindreading in adults can 
assist with interpretation of developmental ﬁ ndings. For example, there is good evidence that 
adults who have severely impaired grammar as a result of brain injury may nonetheless be able to 
pass both 1st and 2nd order mindreading tasks (e.g. Apperly et al., 2006b ; Varley & Siegal, 2000; 

CAN THEORY OF MIND GROW UP?
84
Varley, Siegal & Want, 2001). This suggests that developmental associations between grammar 
and mindreading (e.g. Milligan, Astington & Dack, 2007) cannot be the result of grammar hav-
ing a constitutive role in the mature mindreading system that children are developing, but must 
instead be due to grammar serving a role in the developmental construction of mindreading 
(Apperly, Samson & Humphreys, 2009). Such conclusions are difﬁ cult to reach without evidence 
from adults. Thirdly, the adult system is the end-point that any adequate theory of development 
must be able to explain. It should be clear from the complex picture of the adult system described 
above that developmental accounts focusing only on when infants or children should be credited 
with basic mindreading concepts are in danger of seriously underestimating their explanatory 
task. This is so because such accounts often have rather little to say about what happens after 
children pass basic experimental paradigms. In the following paragraphs I will consider in very 
broad terms what questions a two-systems account of mindreading in adults should make us ask 
about development. 
 How do adults acquire two systems for mindreading? 
 As described in other chapters of this volume, most research on mindreading in children focuses 
on 2–6-year-olds and suggests that the ability to make correct judgements about other people’s 
beliefs, desires and intentions has a protracted developmental course. Not only is there good evi-
dence of incremental acquisition of an increasingly sophisticated conceptual grasp of mental states 
(Wellman & Liu, 2004), but progress appears to depend critically on developments in both lan-
guage, and executive function and memory (e.g. Carlson & Moses, 2001; Milligan, Astington & 
Dack, 2007). Although such research seldom looks much beyond early childhood, it seems natural 
to see this as charting the early development of the adult system for mindreading that has the char-
acteristics of ﬂ exible, but cognitively effortful thinking. 
 Because of this well-known body of ﬁ ndings in children, much excitement has attended recent 
evidence suggesting that infants are also capable of mindreading, at least when tested using meth-
ods that allow this ability to be observed in eye movements, looking time or other spontaneous 
behaviors, rather than in overt judgements (see e.g. Baillargeon et al., 2010 for a recent review). 
Much of the excitement concerns the simple possibility that mindreading might be observed at 
much younger ages than previously thought. However, just as interesting from a cognitive point 
of view is the fact that infants’ mindreading must be cognitively efﬁ cient, since infants have few 
resources for language or executive control. The ﬁ ndings from infants remain somewhat contro-
versial (e.g. Hutto, Herschbach & Southgate, 2011; Perner, 2010), but for current purposes I shall 
work with the hypothesis that infants are indeed mindreading in some meaningful sense. Instead, 
the question on which I would like to focus is how the abilities of infants are related to those of 
older children and adults. 
 The infant system grows up 
 The dominant view among researchers studying mindreading in infants appears to be that infants’ 
abilities will be essentially continuous with the full-blown mindreading abilities of older children 
and adults (e.g. Baillargeon et al., 2010; Leslie, 2005). That is to say, infants possess foundational 
mindreading concepts and abilities that are, at ﬁ rst, only “implicit” and only observable via indi-
rect experimental methods. However, over developmental time, and with increasing availability 
of language, executive function and critical social knowledge, children become increasingly able 
to use these concepts in ﬂ exible and sophisticated ways, and to use them as the basis for explicit 
judgements. This developmental pattern is depicted in the top panel of Figure 5.1, and is clearly 

IMPLICATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT
85
plausible as an account of the relationship between the abilities of infants and adults. However, 
one important consequence of this proposal is that although infants’ abilities may start out being 
cognitively efﬁ cient, they will clearly not remain so once they have been integrated with language, 
executive function and an ever-increasing database of knowledge. This follows from Fodor’s (1983, 
2000) analysis, which holds that it is precisely the absence of such integration that explains how 
modular processing can be cognitively efﬁ cient. 
 This means that there must be some additional developmental explanation of the cognitively 
efﬁ cient mindreading abilities of adults. One potential way in which this might occur is that cer-
tain mindreading problems that are both sufﬁ ciently frequent and sufﬁ ciently regular in their 
demands will become automatized into routines. For example, it might be that over developmental 
time most people encounter the need to calculate what someone sees with sufﬁ cient frequency 
that this becomes automatized, so that “what someone sees” is calculated whenever we see an agent 
apparently attending to objects in her visual ﬁ eld. 
 The infant system remains intact 
 Importantly, though, this is not the only possible set of developmental relationships. As depicted in 
the bottom panel of Figure 5.1, another possibility is that the abilities observed in infants remain 
(+ Language, Executive function,
Knowledge)
Automatization
(+ Language, Executive
function, Knowledge)
Infant 
system 
grows up
Infant 
system 
remains 
intact
Efﬁcient &
limited
Effortful &
Flexible
Automatization
(a)
(b)
Effortful &
Flexible
Efﬁcient &
limited
 Figure 5.1  Alternative relationships between the mindreading abilities of infants, children and adults. 
In panel (a) the mindreading abilities infants become progressively integrated with language, execu-
tive function and knowledge over the course of development, giving rise to the ﬂ exible but effortful 
abilities of adults. Some of these abilities are then automatized into efﬁ cient, but inﬂ exible routines. In 
panel (b) the mindreading abilities of infants remain largely intact into adulthood, where they enable 
adults to perform some mindreading in an efﬁ cient but inﬂ exible manner. Young children undergo 
a protracted process of learning to reason about the minds of others. This developmental process 
requires language, executive function, and accumulating knowledge, and gives rise to the ﬂ exible, 
but effortful mindreading abilities of adults. The dashed lines suggest that this model is compatible 
with the abilities of infants having some inﬂ uence on the development of children’s reasoning about 
mental states, and with adults automatizing some of their effortful mindreading abilities. 
 NB. I am grateful to Oliver Poole and Lionel Apperly for allowing their photographs to be used.  

CAN THEORY OF MIND GROW UP?
86
intact and uncluttered by demands upon language or executive control, so that they continue to 
support cognitively efﬁ cient mindreading into adulthood. On this account, although the infant 
system may provide critical support, ﬂ exible and effortful mindreading would develop as a quite 
separate process, perhaps in much the way envisaged by developmental psychologists before the 
recent ﬁ ndings from infants. Of course, this hypothesis does not preclude the possibility that some 
initially effortful mindreading might become automatized over developmental time, but only on 
this hypothesis will adults inherit at least some of their efﬁ cient capacities for mindreading from 
infants. 
 Clearly, these accounts present quite different views of the developmental origins of adults’ two 
systems for mindreading. So how might we decide between them? Although the most popular 
current suggestion is that the infant system grows up, it is noteworthy that many other domains of 
cognition, such as number, physical cognition, agency and causality, there is good evidence for the 
alternative account, that infant abilities remain intact into adulthood (for a recent extensive review 
and discussion, see Carey, 2009). Of course, these precedents alone are insufﬁ cient to show that the 
same will be true for mindreading. However, Carey’s account does indicate where decisive evidence 
might be found; in the nature of the limits on efﬁ cient mindreading observed in infants and adults. 
Recall from earlier that efﬁ cient mindreading in both infants and adults will necessarily come at the 
cost of inﬂ exible limits on the kinds of information that can be processed. In adults this will be the 
case irrespective of whether efﬁ cient mindreading abilities are inherited from infants, or whether 
they are automatized. However, if adults’ efﬁ cient abilities arise as a result of automatization, then 
there is no reason to suppose that these limits will be the same as those observed in infants. If, on 
the other hand, adults inherit efﬁ cient mindreading abilities from infants, then they should show 
similar limits. This is the case for number cognition, where both infants’ and adults’ capacities 
for precise enumeration are limited to three items. As Carey (2009) points out, such “signature 
limits” are a powerful device for detecting whether infants and adults are using the same cognitive 
processes to solve a problem. Stephen Butterﬁ ll and I have argued elsewhere that there is indeed 
preliminary evidence for such a signature limit in the abilities of infants and the efﬁ cient abilities 
of adults, which both may be restricted to process relations between agents and objects, rather 
than agents and propositions (Apperly, 2010; Apperly & Butterﬁ ll, 2009; Butterﬁ ll and Apperly, 
in press). And this proposal has received recent support from Low and Watts (in press) who ﬁ nd 
evidence that young children’s “implicit” understanding of false belief allows them to ascribe false 
beliefs about an object’s location but not about an object’s identity. However, this speciﬁ c proposal 
matters less in the current context than the general proposition that there is more than one way in 
which the mindreading abilities of infants can develop through childhood into those we observe in 
adults, and that there are viable ways of distinguishing between these developmental hypotheses. 
 Implications for understanding the neural basis of mindreading  
 Research on the neural basis of mindreading has been strongly inﬂ uenced by traditional devel-
opmental approaches, with two notable consequences. First, the tasks employed typically involve 
presentation of stories or cartoons that resemble tests of young children’s explicit reasoning about 
mental states, and so these tasks should be expected to test adults’ “thinking” about mental states. 
Secondly, studies are typically premised on the assumption that mindreading consists primarily 
in the domain-speciﬁ c ability to understand and represent mental states (e.g. Frith & Frith, 2003; 
Saxe, Carey & Kanwisher, 2004). Thus, although a number of brain areas are commonly held to 
constitute a “mindreading” brain network, notably including medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), 
temporal poles and bilateral temporo-parietal junction (TPJ), debate has typically been limited 

IMPLICATIONS FOR UNDERSTANDING THE NEURAL BASIS OF MINDREADING
87
to asking which of these areas is most selectively involved, and might therefore qualify as the 
location of the neural seat of mindreading. Perhaps the clearest evidence emerging from this line 
of thinking comes from a series of studies by Saxe and colleagues (e.g. Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003; 
Saxe & Powell, 2006). These authors ﬁ rst identiﬁ ed brain areas that survived a very neat contrast 
between activation observed while participants responded to short stories concerning false beliefs 
vs. false photographs, and then tested which of these areas were most selectively activated during 
other judgements about mental states in contrast to other judgements, including personal prefer-
ences, personality, physical appearance. These studies consistently ﬁ nd that right-TPJ shows the 
largest and most selective activation for mental states, whereas other areas of the “mindreading 
network” either show lower activations, or activations for a wider range of judgements. This pat-
tern has led to suggestions that r-TPJ is  the  domain-speciﬁ c neural basis of mindreading (e.g. 
Saxe, 2006). 
 This interpretation of these studies remains highly contested (e.g. Decety & Lamm, 2007; 
Mitchell, 2008; Legrand & Ruby, 2009), but it is not my current interest to enter into this 
debate. Studies of the cognitive basis of mindreading, reviewed above, clearly do nothing to 
rule in or rule out the possibility that there are genuinely domain-specific representations and 
processes involved in mindreading. However, they do suggest very clearly that there is a great 
deal more to mindreading than possessing specialized mindreading concepts or representa-
tions. At the very least, doing useful work with such concepts will involve the ability to make 
flexible inferences in a context-sensitive manner, to do this within the context of a mental 
model of the on-going situation, and all the while to resist interference from self-perspective. 
These considerations suggest that the benefits of tightly-controlled subtractive methods for 
identifying neural activation that could be specific to mindreading will likely come at a cost. 
In particular, they risk causing researchers to overlook functional and neural processes that 
are less specific, but equally essential to a full understanding of mindreading. Therefore I will 
briefly focus on studies using different methods, which cast light on the broader neural basis 
of mindreading. 
 Medial prefrontal cortex features prominently among the other neural regions implicated in 
mindreading. However, in the broader literature mPFC is also implicated in a range of other tasks, 
including generation of temporary integrated representations of events, and imposing structure 
on otherwise vague or uncertain problems (see e.g. Legrand & Ruby, 2009). As discussed above, 
mindreading frequently requires context-sensitive inferences, made on the ﬂ y, using limited 
information about the situation. Might it be, then, that mPFC is involved in serving this role for 
mindreading? In a recent study, Jenkins and Mitchell (2009) presented participants with min-
dreading tasks that orthogonally varied whether the scenarios concerned a character’s mental 
states or their preferences, and whether a speciﬁ c mindreading inference was relatively clear, given 
the context, or whether the situation was more ambiguous. Consistent with other work, this study 
found that r-TPJ was selectively sensitive to the difference between scenarios involving men-
tal states rather than preferences, whereas mPFC was not selectively sensitive to this difference. 
In contrast, mPFC was sensitive to the difference between scenarios involving clearly-speciﬁ ed 
rather than ambiguous inferences, whereas r-TPJ was not. Naturally, this ﬁ nding must be inter-
preted with some caution given how little agreement there is on the functions of mPFC in general 
(see e.g. Legrand & Ruby, 2009), or the functional necessity of mPFC for mindreading in particu-
lar (e.g. Bird Castelli, Malik, Frith, & Husain, 2004). Nonetheless, it serves to illustrate how it is 
possible to go beyond asking which regions of the “mindreading network” are most speciﬁ cally 
involved in mindreading, in order to understand how the multiple functional requirements of 
mindreading are fulﬁ lled. 

CAN THEORY OF MIND GROW UP?
88
 Not only is it the case that commonly-used subtractive methods bias researchers to ask just one 
kind of question about regions of the “mindreading network”, but they also risk leading research-
ers to overlook additional functional and neural processes that might be critically necessary for 
mindreading. One such illustration comes from the case study of a patient, WBA, who, following 
a stroke, sustained a right frontal lesion that only showed limited encroachment on regions of 
the “mindreading network,” but encroached substantially on brain regions frequently implicated 
in cognitive control (Samson, Apperly, Kathirgamanathan, & Humphreys, 2005). WBA showed 
impairment on a range of neuropsychological tests for working memory and executive function, 
including inhibitory control. Across a range of mindreading tasks he showed a pronounced ten-
dency for “egocentrism”, responding on the basis of his own belief, desire or perspective, rather 
than that of the other person. Nonetheless, on a false belief task designed to reduce the tendency for 
egocentrism by reducing the salience of participants’ self-perspective, WBA was able to perform 
successfully. These results indicate that having the ability in principle to think about someone else’s 
perspective is not nearly sufﬁ cient for reliable mindreading. To put that ability into practice in a 
typical range of circumstances also requires the ability to inhibit interference from one’s own per-
spective, and this ability was impaired by WBA’s right frontal lesion. This conclusion receives con-
verging support from several functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and event-related 
potential (ERP) studies using designs that that manipulate demands on self-perspective inhibition 
within the context of a mindreading task (e.g. McCleery, Surtees, Graham, Richards, & Apperly, 
2011; van der Meer, Groenewold, Nolen, Pijnenborg, & Aleman, 2011; Vogeley et al., 2001). These 
studies show lateral frontal brain regions—notably inferior frontal gyrus—being recruited in the 
service of mindreading. Such activation is not observed in the most tightly-controlled subtraction 
designs—such as the comparison between false belief and false photograph tasks—because the 
relevant activation is subtracted out. 
 What I hope this brief section illustrates is that emerging evidence on the cognitive basis of 
mindreading in adults has signiﬁ cant consequences for how neuroscientiﬁ c investigations 
of  mindreading are designed and interpreted. The large number of studies that seek to identify the 
neural basis of domain-speciﬁ c mindreading processes make a valuable contribution to under-
standing. However, there are strong grounds for thinking that this will be just one part of a full 
account of the neural basis of mindreading. 
 General conclusion  
 For more than 30 years research on our ability to understand agents in terms of mental states 
has been remarkably productive, but at the same time surprisingly narrow in its scope. We have 
learned a great deal about how and when children ﬁ rst come to mindread, the degree to which 
these abilities are shared with other species, and, most recently, the neural basis of some aspects of 
mindreading. However, we have only scratched the surface of understanding the mature abilities 
that children develop, and how adults use these abilities on-line as they communicate and socialize, 
or talk, read, and think about mental states. This situation is changing rapidly, and it is motivating 
changes in how we conceptualize mindreading. In addition to answering questions about who has 
mindreading concepts and when they have them, an adequate theory of mindreading must explain 
how we ever make use of such abilities. In particular, it must explain how we manage to be both 
extremely subtle and sophisticated mindreaders, yet simultaneously achieve at least some mind-
reading rapidly enough to keep up with fast-moving social interactions. I hope to have made the 
case that mindreading in adults is not merely a fast-emerging new sub-topic in the mindreading 
literature, but that it is providing critical new insights about the nature of mindreading itself. 

89
REFERENCES
 References 
 Abell, F., Happ é , F., & Frith, U. (2000).  Do triangles play tricks? Attribution of mental states to animated 
shapes in normal and abnormal development .  Cognitive Development ,  15 (1),  1–16 . 
 Apperly, I. A. (2010).  Mindreaders: Th e Cognitive Basis of “Th eory of Mind”.  Hove :  Psychology Press/
Abingdon: Taylor & Francis Group . 
 Apperly, I. A. & Butterfi ll, S. A., (2009).  Do humans have two systems to track beliefs and belief-like states? 
 Psychological Review ,  116 (4),  953–70 . 
 Apperly, I. A., Carroll, D. J., Samson, D., Qureshi, A., Humphreys, G. W. & Moff att, G. (2010).  Why are 
there limits on theory of mind use? Evidence from adults’ ability to follow instructions from an ignorant 
speaker .  Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,  63 (6),  1201–17 . 
 Apperly, I. A., Back, E., Samson, D., & France, L. (2008). Th e cost of thinking about false beliefs: Evidence 
from adult performance on a non-inferential theory of mind task.  Cognition .  106 , 1093–108. 
 Apperly, I. A., Riggs, K. J., Simpson, A., Chiavarino, C. & Samson, D. (2006a).  Is belief reasoning auto-
matic?  Psychological Science ,  17 (10),  841–4 . 
 Apperly, I. A., Samson, D., & Humphreys, G. W. (2009).  Studies of adults can inform accounts of theory of 
mind development .  Developmental Psychology ,  45 (1),  190–201 . 
 Apperly, I. A., Samson, D., Carroll, N., Hussain, S., & Humphreys, G. W. (2006b) . Intact 1st and 2nd order 
false belief reasoning in a patient with severely impaired grammar.  Social Neuroscience ,  1 (3–4),  334–48 
(Special issue on theory of mind). 
 Apperly, I. A., Warren, F., Andrews, B. J., Grant, J. & Todd, S. (2011) . Error patterns in the belief-desire 
reasoning of 3- to 5-year-olds recur in reaction times from 6 years to adulthood: evidence for develop-
mental continuity in theory of mind.  Child Development ,  82 (5),  1691–703 . 
 Back, E., & Apperly, I. A. (2010) . Two sources of evidence on the non-automaticity of true and false belief 
ascription.  Cognition ,  115 (1),  54–70 . 
 Baillargeon, R., Scott, R. M., & He, Z. (2010) . False-belief understanding in infants.  Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences ,  14 ,  110–18 . 
 Barr, D. J. (2008)  Pragmatic expectations and linguistic evidence: Listeners anticipate but do not integrate 
common ground .  Cognition ,  109 (1),  18–40 . 
 Birch, S. A. J. & Bloom, P. (2007) . Th e curse of knowledge in reasoning about false beliefs.  Psychological 
Science ,  18 (5),  382–6 . 
 Bird, C. M., Castelli, F., Malik, O., Frith, U., Husain, M . (2004) Th e impact of extensive medial frontal lobe 
damage on ‘theory of mind’ and cognition.  Brain ,  127 (4),  914–28 . 
 Breheny, R. (2006)  Communication and folk psychology ,  Mind & Language,  21 (1),  74–107 . 
 Bull, R., Phillips, L. H. & Conway, C. (2008). Th e role of control functions in mentalizing: Dual task studies 
of theory of mind and executive function.  Cognition .  107 , 663–72. 
 Butterfi ll, S. & Apperly I. A. (In press) . How to construct a minimal theory of mind.  Mind & Language . 
 Byrne, R. M. J. (2005).  Th e Rational Imagination: How People Create Alternatives To Reality .  Cambridge : 
 MIT Press . 
 Carlson, S. M., & Moses, L. J. (2001).  Individual diff erences in inhibitory control and children’s theory of 
mind .  Child Development ,  72 ,  1032–53 . 
 Carey, S. (2009)  Th e Origin of Concepts.  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Chandler, M., Boyes, M., & Ball, L. (1990).  Relativism and stations of epistemic doubt .  Journal of 
Experimental Child Psychology ,  50 ,  370–95 . 
 Cohen, A. S. & German, T. C. (2009).  Encoding of others’ beliefs without overt instruction .  Cognition ,  111 , 
 356–63 . 
 Converse, B. A., Lin, S., Keysar, B., & Epley, N. (2008) . In the mood to get over yourself: Mood aff ects 
theory-of-mind use.  Emotion ,  8 ,  725–30 . 
 Davies, M. & Stone, T. (Eds). (1995a).  Folk Psychology: Th e Th eory of Mind Debate .  Oxford :  Blackwell . 

CAN THEORY OF MIND GROW UP?
90
 Davies, M. & Stone, T. (Eds). (1995b).  Mental Simulation: Evaluations and Applications .  Oxford :  Blackwell . 
 Decety, J., & Lamm, C. (2007).  Th e role of the right temporoparietal junction in social interaction: How 
low-level computational processes contribute to meta-cognition .  Neuroscientist ,  13 ,  580–93 . 
 Dumontheil, I., Apperly, I. A., & Blakemore, S. J. (2010).  Online use of mental state inferences continues to 
develop in late adolescence .  Developmental Science,  13 (2),  331–8 . 
 Epley, N., Morewedge, C., & Keysar, B. (2004).  Perspective taking in children and adults: Equivalent ego-
centrism but diff erential correction .  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology ,  40 ,  760–8 . 
 Evans, J. St. B. T. (2003)  In two minds: Dual-process accounts of reasoning .  Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 
 7 (10),  454–9 . 
 Feigenson, L., Dehane, S. & Spelke, E. S. (2004)  Core systems of number .  Trends in Cognitive Sciences ,  8 (7), 
 307–14 . 
 Ferguson, H. J., & Breheny, R. (2011).  Eye movements reveal the time-course of anticipating behavior 
based on complex, confl icting desires .  Cognition ,  119 ,  179–96 . 
 Ferguson, H. J. and Breheny, R. (2012).  Listeners’ eyes reveal spontaneous sensitivity to others’ perspec-
tives.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology.  48 ,  257–63 . 
 Flavell, J. H., Everett, B. A., Croft , K., & Flavell, E. R. (1981).  Young children’s knowledge about 
visual-perception—further evidence for the level 1-level 2 distinction .  Developmental Psychology ,  17 , 
 99–103 . 
 Fodor, J. (1983).  Th e Modularity of Mind: An Essay on Faculty Psychology .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Fodor, J. (2000).  Th e Mind Doesn’t Work Th at Way: Th e Scope and Limits of Computational Psychology. 
 Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Friedman, O., & Leslie, A. M. (2004).  Mechanisms of belief-desire reasoning: Inhibition and bias . 
 Psychological Science ,  15 ,  547–52 . 
 Frith, U., & Frith, C. D. (2003).  Development and neurophysiology of mentalising.  Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London ,  Series B ,  Biological Sciences ,  358 ,  459–73 . 
 Garnham, A. (1987).  Mental Models as Representations of Discourse and Text.  Chichester :  Ellis Horwood . 
 German, T. P. & Hehman, J. A. (2006)  Representational and executive selection resources in “theory of 
mind”: Evidence from compromised belief-desire reasoning in old age .  Cognition ,  101 ,  129–52 . 
 Gilbert, D. T. (1998).  Ordinary personology . In D. T. Gilbert, S. T., Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds),  Th e Handbook 
of Social Psychology (4th edn, pp.  89–150 ).  New York :  McGraw Hill . 
 Happ é , F. G. E. (1994).  An advanced test of theory of mind: Understanding of story characters’ thoughts 
and feelings by able autistic, mentally handicapped, and normal children and adults .  Journal of Autism 
and Developmental Disorders ,  24 ,  129–54 . 
 Hutto, D. D. (2009).  Folk psychology as narrative practice .  Journal of Consciousness Studies ,  16 (6–8),  9–39 . 
 Hutto, D. D., Herschbach, M. & Southgate, V. (2011)  Social cognition: Mindreading and alternatives. 
Editorial to the special issue .  Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 2(3), 375–95. 
 Jenkins, A. C. & Mitchell, J. P. (2009).  Mentalizing under uncertainty: Dissociated neural responses to 
ambiguous and unambiguous mental state inferences .  Cerebral Cortex ,  21 (8),  1560–70 . 
 Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983)  Mental Models: Toward a Cognitive Science of Language, Inference, and 
Consciousness.  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Keysar, B., Barr, D. J., Balin, J. A., & Brauner, J. S. (2000).  Taking perspective in conversation: the role of 
mutual knowledge in comprehension .  Psychological Sciences ,  11 ,  32–8 . 
 Kov á cs, Á. M., T é gl á s, E. & Endress, A. D. (2010).  Th e social sense: Susceptibly to others’ beliefs in human 
infants and adults .  Science ,  330 ,  1830–4 . 
 Kuhn, D. (2009).  Th e importance of learning about knowing: Creating a foundation for development of 
intellectual values .  Child Development Perspectives ,  3 (2),  112–17 . 
 Legrand D., Ruby P. (2009)  What is self-specifi c? Th eoretical investigation and critical review of neuroim-
aging results .  Psychological Review ,  116 (1),  252–82 . 

91
 Leslie, A. M. (2005).  Developmental parallels in understanding minds and bodies .  Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences ,  9 (10),  459–62 . 
 Leslie, A. M., German, T. P., & Polizzi, P. (2005).  Belief-desire reasoning as a process of selection .  Cognitive 
Psychology ,  50 ,  45–85 . 
 Leudar, I & Costall, A. (2009)  Against Th eory of Mind.  Basingstoke :  Palgrave Macmillan . 
 Lin, S., Keysar, B., & Epley, N. (2010).  Refl exively mindblind: Using theory of mind to interpret behavior 
requires eff ortful attention .  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology ,  46 ,  551–6 . 
 Low, J. & Watts, J. (in press).  Attributing false-beliefs about object identity is a signature blindspot in 
humans’ effi  cient mindreading system .  Psychological Science. 
 Malle, B. F. (2008).  Fritz Heider’s legacy: Celebrated insights, many of them misunderstood .  Social 
Psychology ,  39 ,  163–73 . 
 McCleery, J. P., Surtees, A., Graham, K. A., Richards, J. & Apperly, I. A. (2011).  Th e neural and cognitive 
time-course of theory of mind .  Journal of Neuroscience.  31 (36):  12849–54. 
 McKinnon, M. C. & Moscovitch, M. (2007)  Domain-general contributions to social reasoning: Th eory of 
mind and deontic reasoning re-explored .  Cognition ,  102 (2),  179–218 . 
 McKoon, G. & Ratcliff , R. (1998).  Memory-based language processing: Psycholinguistic research in the 
1990s .  Annual Review of Psychology ,  49 ,  25–42 . 
 Milligan, K., Astington, J. W. & Dack, L. A. (2007)  Language and theory of mind: Meta-analysis of 
the relation between language ability and false-belief understanding .  Child Development .  78 (2), 
 622–46 . 
 Mitchell, J. P. (2008).  Activity in right temporo-parietal junction is not selective for theory-of-mind . 
 Cerebral Cortex ,  18 (2),  262–71 . 
 Mitchell, P., Robinson, E. J., Isaacs, J. E. & Nye, R. M. (1996).  Contamination in reasoning about false 
belief: An instance of realist bias in adults but not children .  Cognition ,  59 ,  1–21 . 
 Moors, A. & De Houwter, J. (2008).  Automaticity: A theoretical and conceptual analysis .  Psychological 
Bulletin ,  132 (2),  297–326 . 
 Nadig, A. S., & Sedivy, J. C. (2002).  Evidence for perspective-taking constraints in children’s on-line refer-
ence resolution .  Psychological Science ,  13 ,  329–36 . 
 Newton, A. M. & de Villiers, J. G. (2007)  Th inking while talking: Adults fail nonverbal false belief reason-
ing .  Psychological Science ,  18 (7),  574–9 . 
 Nickerson, R. S. (1999). How we know—and sometimes misjudge—what others know: Imputing one’s own 
knowledge to others.  Psychological Bulletin ,  125 ,  737–59 . 
 Perner, J. (1991).  Understanding the Representational Mind .  Brighton :  Harvester . 
 Perner, J. (2010). Who took the cog out of cognitive science? – Mentalism in an era of anti-cognitivism. 
In: P. A. Frensch & R. Schwarzer (Eds),  Cognition and Neuropsychology: International Perspectives on 
Psychological Science (Vol. 1, pp. 241–61). Hove, UK: Psychology Press. 
 Phillips, L. H., Bull, R., Allen, R., Insch, P., Burr, K. & Ogg, W. (2011).  Lifespan aging and belief reasoning: 
Infl uences of executive functions and social cue detection .  Cognition ,  120 ,  236–47 . 
 Pickering, M. J. & Garrod, S. (2004).  Toward a mechanistic psychology of dialogue .  Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences ,  27 ,  169–226 . 
 Qureshi, A., Apperly, I. A. & Samson, D. (2010).  Executive function is necessary for perspective-selection, 
not Level-1 visual perspective-calculation: Evidence from a dual-task study of adults .  Cognition ,  117 (2), 
 230–6 . 
 Rakoczy, H., Harder-Kasten, A., & Sturm, L. (2012).  Th e decline of theory of mind in old age is (partly) 
mediated by developmental changes in domain-general abilities .  British Journal of Psychology ,  103 , 
 58–72 . 
 Robinson, E. J., & Apperly, I. A. (1998). Adolescents’ and adults’ views about the evidential basis for beliefs: 
Relativism and determinism re-examined.  Developmental Science ,  1 , 279–90. 
REFERENCES

CAN THEORY OF MIND GROW UP?
92
 Samson, D., Apperly, I. A., Braithwaite, J., Andrews, B., & Bodley S. (2010).  Seeing it their way: Evidence 
for rapid and involuntary computation of what other people see .  Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Human Perception and Performance  36 (5),  1255–66 . 
 Samson, D., Apperly, I. A., Kathirgamanathan, U. & Humphreys, G. W. (2005).  Seeing it my way: A case of 
selective defi cit in inhibiting self-perspective .  Brain .  128 ,  1102–11 . 
 Sanford, A. J. & Garrod, S. C. (1998).  Th e role of scenario mapping in text comprehension .  Discourse 
Processes ,  26 ,  159–90 . 
 Saxe, R. (2006)  Uniquely human social cognition .  Current Opinion in Neurobiology  16 ,  235–9 . 
 Saxe, R., Carey, S., & Kanwisher, N. (2004).  Understanding other minds: Linking developmental psychol-
ogy and functional neuroimaging .  Annual Review of Psychology ,  55 ,  87–124 . 
 Saxe, R., & Kanwisher, N. (2003).  People thinking about thinking people. Th e role of the temporo-parietal 
junction in ‘‘theory of mind.’’  Neuroimage ,  19 ,  1835–42 . 
 Saxe, R., & Powell, L. (2006).  It’s the thought that counts: Specifi c brain regions for one component of 
Th eory of Mind .  Psychological Science ,  17 ,  692–9 . 
 Schneider, D., Bayliss, A. P., Becker, S. I., & Dux, P. E. (2012). Eye movements reveal sustained implicit 
processing of other’s mental states.  Journal of Experimental Psychology: General ,  141 , 433–8. 
 Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (2002).  Pragmatics, Modularity & Mindreading .  Mind and Language ,  17 ,  3–23 . 
 Stone, V. E., Baron-Cohen, S., & Knight, R. T. (1998). Frontal lobe contributions to theory of mind.  Journal 
of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  10 , 640–56. 
 Surtees, A. & Apperly, I. A. (2012).  Egocentrism and automatic perspective-taking in children and adults . 
 Child Development ,  83 (2),  452–60 . 
 Surtees, A., Butterfi ll, S., & Apperly, I. A. (2012). Cognitive features of Level-2 perspective-taking in chil-
dren and adults.  British Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  30 (1), 75–86 
 van der Meer, L., Groenewold, N. A., Nolen, W. A., Pijnenborg, M., & Aleman, A. (2011).  Inhibit yourself 
and understand the other: Neural basis of distinct processes underlying Th eory of Mind .  Neuroimage , 
 56 (4),  2364–74 . 
 Varley, R. & Siegal, M. (2000).  Evidence for cognition without grammar from causal reasoning and ‘theory 
of mind’ in an agrammatic aphasic patient .  Current Biology ,  10 ,  723–6 . 
 Varley, R., Siegal, M., & Want, S. C. (2001).  Severe impairment in grammar does not preclude theory of 
mind .  Neurocase ,  7 ,  489–93 . 
 Vogeley, K., Bussfeld, P., Newen, A., Herrmann, S., Happ é , F., Falkai, P., Maier, W., Shah, N. J., Fink, 
G. E., & Zilles, K. (2001).  Mind reading: neural mechanisms of theory of mind and self-perspective . 
 Neuroimage ,  14 ,  170–81 . 
 Wellman, H., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001).  Meta-analysis of theory of mind development: the truth about 
false-belief .  Child Development ,  72 (3),  655–84 . 
 Wellman, H. M. & Liu, D. (2004).  Scaling of theory-of-mind tasks .  Child Development ,  75 ,  523–41 . 
 Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983).  Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining function of wrong 
beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception .  Cognition ,  13 ,  103–28 . 
 Zwaan, R. A. & Radvansky, G. A. (1998).  Situation models in language comprehension and memory . 
 Psychological Bulletin ,  123 ,  162–85 . 
 Zwickel, J. (2009).  Agency attribution and visuo-spatial perspective taking .  Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 
16(6),  1089–93. 

 Chapter 6 
 Mind attribution is for morality  
 Liane Young and Adam   Waytz 
   Morality—judging others’ behavior to be right or wrong, as well as behaving in a right or wrong 
manner towards others—is an essential component of social life. Morality depends critically on 
our ability to attribute minds to entities that engage in moral actions (towards ourselves and oth-
ers) and the entities that experience these actions (our own actions and others’). 
 The cognitive capacities for attributing minds to others and considering the speciﬁ c contents of 
those minds (i.e. mental state reasoning or theory of mind) allow us to understand and interact 
with individuals and even entire groups of individuals. More speciﬁ cally, mental state reason-
ing represents a critical cognitive input for behavior explanation, action prediction, and moral 
evaluation. We deploy our mental state reasoning abilities in order to explain people’s past actions 
(e.g. Lisa looked for her shoes in the garage because she  forgot her mother had moved them to the 
closet); to predict people’s future behavior (e.g. Mike will tell Barbara his favorite dog joke  not 
knowing  that Barbara’s dog has just been hit by a car); and to make moral judgments (e.g. Grace 
must be a bad person for putting what she  thinks is poison into someone else’s coffee). Our capac-
ity to consider other people’s mental states, including their thoughts, their true or false beliefs, and 
their helpful or harmful intentions, helps us to navigate our social environment. Indeed, as much 
research has shown, mental state reasoning functions ﬂ exibly across domains, one of which is 
morality, the focus of this chapter. 
 The novel claim we make in this chapter is that the  primary  service of mental state reasoning 
may be for moral cognition and behavior, broadly construed. In particular, the cognitive capacities 
for mental state reasoning become less relevant when morality is not at stake. We are motivated 
to understand the actions of relevant moral agents, to predict people’s actions when those actions 
affect us, directly or indirectly, and to evaluate moral agents as current or future allies or enemies. 
Computations like these crucially elicit mental state reasoning. 
 In this chapter, we will therefore review the literature on mental state reasoning for moral cog-
nition—both for judging other moral actors, from the position of “judge” on high, and also for 
ﬁ guring out, as “actors” on the ground, so to speak, who might help us or hurt us, to whom we 
have moral obligations (for helping or, minimally, not hurting), and whom we ought to trust or 
avoid (see Figure 6.1). 
 Morality on high  
 In this ﬁ rst section, we discuss the critical role of mental states for third-party moral judgments, 
including how people judge moral agents who harm others. Mental state reasoning is a key cognitive 
process for evaluating the guilty and innocent intentions of moral agents (Hart, 1968; Kamm, 2001; 
Mikhail, 2007). Indeed, recent research on the interaction of mental state reasoning and moral cog-
nition has focused on the dominant role of agents’ mental states vs. the outcomes of agents’ actions 
for our moral judgments (Cushman, 2008; Young, Cushman, Hauser, & Saxe, 2007). 

MIND ATTRIBUTION IS FOR MORALITY
94
 To target the distinct roles of mental states and outcomes, many of these studies present scenarios 
in which agents produce either a negative outcome (harm to another person) or a neutral outcome 
(no harm), based on the belief that they would cause the negative outcome (“negative” belief/
harmful intention) or the neutral outcome (“neutral” belief/innocent intention). Participants 
deliver a moral judgment—evaluating the agent’s action as permissible or forbidden, or deciding 
how much moral blame the agent deserves for his or her behavior. 
 An example illustrates the possible tension between mental states and outcomes:
 Grace and her co-worker are taking a tour of a chemical factory. Grace stops to pour herself and her 
co-worker some coffee. Nearby is a container of sugar. The container, however, has been mislabeled 
“toxic”, so Grace thinks that the powder inside is toxic. She spoons some into her co-worker’s coffee and 
takes none for herself. Her co-worker drinks the coffee, and nothing bad happens. 
 This scenario pits harmful intentions against neutral outcomes in representing a failed attempt to 
harm. In an alternative scenario:
  A container of poison sits near the coffee. The container, however, has been mislabeled “sugar”, so Grace 
thinks the powder inside is sugar. She spoons some into her co-worker’s coffee. Her co-worker drinks 
her coffee and ends up dead.   
 In this key scenario, an accident occurs—a bad outcome due to a false belief (but not malicious 
intent). Across studies relying on similar stimuli, participants assigned more moral weight to 
the agent’s belief and intent, compared to the outcomes (Young et al., 2007). A simple metric of 
this effect is that participants almost universally judge an attempted harm (e.g. trying but fail-
ing to poison someone) as morally worse than an accidental harm (e.g. accidentally poisoning 
someone). 
 Other research has investigated not only the simple contrast between intentions and out-
comes but also the relative contributions of distinct internal and external factors (e.g. outcome, 
causation, belief, and desire) for different kinds of moral judgments (e.g. character, permis-
sibility, blame, and punishment) (Cushman, 2008; Cushman, Dreber, Wang, & Costa, 2009). 
Importantly, the agent’s  belief  about whether his or her action would cause harm dominated 
moral judgments across the board, followed by the agent’s  desire to cause harm. The relative 
contribution of beliefs vs. outcomes was greatest for judgments about the moral character of 
the agent or the moral permissibility of the action. Punishment judgments depended relatively 
more on outcomes. Nevertheless, these ﬁ ndings indicate the key role of mental state factors for 
moral judgments. 
 Notably, mental state factors may underlie moral judgments even in cases where outcomes 
appear, on the surface, to determine moral judgments. Consider the case of accidents. Many people 
Judge
Actor
Ally
Enemy
 Figure 6.1  Mental state reasoning for moral cognition occurs at multiple levels. Arrows indicate direc-
tion of mind attribution. Observers who make third party judgments (“Morality on high”) attribute 
mind to moral actors. Moral actors who interact with allies and enemies engage in mental state rea-
soning for afﬁ liation, action understanding and prediction (“Morality on the ground”). Actors may 
also infer the mind of an evalutive judge (“From the mind on the ground to the mind on high”).  

MORALITY ON HIGH
95
assign some blame to agents who cause harmful outcomes, even when they didn’t intend to cause 
the harmful outcomes. (An interesting exception is psychopathy—in the absence of an emotional 
response to the harmful outcome, psychopaths rely primarily on the stated innocent intent and 
deliver abnormally lenient judgments of accidents; Young, Koenigs, Kruepke, & Newman, 2012). 
Recall the scenario in which Grace accidentally poisons her co-worker because she mistakes the 
poison for sugar. Again, participants mostly excuse Grace on the grounds of her false belief and 
innocent intention, but they nevertheless assign some moral blame to Grace for the harm done. 
Behavioral and neural evidence suggests that this moral blame is determined not simply by the 
harmful outcome of Grace’s action; instead, participants’ assessment of Grace’s mental state drives 
this judgment (Young, Nichols, & Saxe, 2010b). Participants judge Grace’s false belief as more 
unjustiﬁ ed or unreasonable when it leads to a bad (vs. neutral) outcome, and therefore they judge 
Grace to be more morally blameworthy. Consistent with this behavioral pattern, activity in brain 
regions for mental state reasoning, including the right temporo-parietal junction (RTPJ) (Jenkins 
& Mitchell, 2009; Perner, Aichhorn, Kronbichler, Staffen, & Ladurner, 2006; Saxe & Kanwisher, 
2003; Young, Camprodon, Hauser, Pascual-Leone, & Saxe, 2010a), is selectively enhanced when 
people make moral judgments in response to bad outcomes. In other words, people revise their 
evaluations of agents’ mental states (e.g. whether beliefs were justiﬁ ed or reasonable) in light of 
the outcome. To summarize, even when we judge accidents harshly, we may do so primarily by 
considering important mental state factors (e.g. belief justiﬁ cation, negligence, recklessness) and 
not simply the outcome of the action. 
 Most of the time, then, internal, unobservable mental states (e.g. beliefs, intentions, desires) 
carry more moral weight than external outcomes. Extraordinarily, recent research suggests that 
mental states overwhelm even other external factors, including external, situational constraints 
(e.g. whether an agent could have done otherwise) (Woolfolk, Doris, & Darley, 2006). In one study, 
participants read variations of the following story:
  Bill discovers that his wife Susan and his best friend Frank have been involved in a love affair. All three 
are ﬂ ying home from a group vacation on the same airplane.   
 In one variation of the story, their plane is hijacked by a gang of ruthless kidnappers who surround 
the passengers with machine guns, and order Bill to shoot Frank in the head; otherwise, they will 
shoot Bill, Frank, and the other passengers. Bill recognizes the opportunity to kill his wife’s lover 
and get away with it. He wants to kill Frank and does so. In another variation: “Bill forgives Frank 
and Susan and is horriﬁ ed when the situation arises but complies with the kidnappers’ demand to 
kill Frank.” When Bill  wanted  to kill Frank, participants actually judged Bill to be more responsible 
for Frank’s death, and the killing to be more morally wrong, even though Bill’s desire played no 
causal role in Frank’s death in either case. Mental state factors are clearly at the forefront of our 
minds when we’re making moral judgments. 
 Blaming immoral agents for their harmful desires and intentions, as in the case of vengeful Bill 
above, may be easy and automatic for most people (although a key exception, patients with focal 
lesions to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vMPFC), is discussed further below). Forgiving 
accidents, however, presents a greater challenge. Prior research indicates substantial individual 
differences among healthy adults in the moral judgments of accidents (Cohen & Rozin, 2001; 
Sargent, 2004; Young & Saxe, 2009a). In one study, participants who showed greater recruitment of 
brain regions for mental state reasoning, i.e. the RTPJ, were more likely to forgive accidents, show-
ing greater consideration of the agent’s innocent intention (vs. the action’s harmful outcome), 
compared with participants with lower RTPJ responses during moral judgment (Young & Saxe, 
2009a). 

MIND ATTRIBUTION IS FOR MORALITY
96
 In development, full forgiveness or exculpation for accidents does not emerge until approxi-
mately 7 years of age, surprisingly late in childhood. Interestingly, 5-year-old children appear to 
be capable of reasoning about false beliefs: in the paradigmatic “false belief task,” children predict 
that observers will look for a hidden object where they last saw the object and not in its true cur-
rent location (Flavell, 1999; Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001). However, these same children will 
largely fail to forgive accidents to the same extent as healthy adults: if a false belief leads an agent 
to unknowingly cause harm to another (e.g. as a result of mistaking poison for sugar), the agent is 
judged just as bad as though the harm had been caused on purpose (Piaget, 1965/1932). Thus, the 
ability to integrate mental states (like beliefs and intentions) into moral judgments, vs. the ability 
to simply encode mental states, may reﬂ ect distinct developmental achievements, with distinct 
functional proﬁ les in the RTPJ (Young & Saxe, 2008). Consistent with this hypothesis, adults diag-
nosed with Asperger’s Syndrome, who pass standard false belief tasks, also deliver especially harsh 
moral judgments of accidents (Moran et al., 2011). 
 Whereas neurotypical adults have particular difﬁ culty exculpating accidents, another popula-
tion shows a speciﬁ c deﬁ cit in delivering moral judgments of failed attempts to harm, includ-
ing failed murder attempts—harmful intentions in the absence of harmful outcomes (Young, 
Bechara, Tranel, Damasio, Hauser, & Damasio, 2010). Patients with focal lesions to the vMPFC 
judged attempted harms as more morally permissible compared to neurotypical control partici-
pants. Strikingly, vMPFC patients even judged attempted harms as more morally permissible than 
accidents—a reversal of the normal pattern of moral judgments (Cushman, 2008). Consistent with 
these behavioral data, a recent fMRI study indicates a positive correlation between vMPFC activ-
ity and moral judgments of failed attempts to harm; neurotypical participants with high vMPFC 
responses judged failed attempts more harshly than individuals with low vMPFC responses (Young 
& Saxe, 2009a). Together, these results suggest that vMPFC patients may be unable to trigger an 
appropriate emotional response to abstract mental state information, i.e. harmful intentions. The 
vMPFC may not play a role in encoding mental states per se; rather, the vMPFC supports emo-
tional responses to mental state content. This account is consistent with prior work revealing a 
role for the vMPFC in generating emotional responses to any abstract information (Bechara & 
Damasio, 2005). Thus, vMPFC patients deliver moral judgments based primarily on the neutral 
(permissible) outcome, reﬂ ecting a “no harm, no foul” mentality. 
 What, then, are the neural mechanisms that directly support the encoding and integration of 
mental states in moral judgments? Recent evidence suggests that speciﬁ c brain regions support 
multiple distinct cognitive components of mental state reasoning for moral judgment—the ini-
tial encoding of the agent’s mental state (Young & Saxe, 2008), the use and integration of mental 
states (e.g. with outcomes) for moral judgment (Young et al., 2007), spontaneous mental state 
inference when mental states are not explicitly provided in the scenario (Young & Saxe, 2009b), 
and even post-hoc reasoning about beliefs and intentions to rationalize or justify moral judg-
ments (Kliemann, Young, Scholz, & Saxe, 2008; Young, Nichols, & Saxe, 2010c; Young, Scholz, & 
Saxe, 2011). 
 Building on prior research on the neural substrates for mental state reasoning in the service of 
action prediction and explanation (Perner et al., 2006; Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003), recent research 
suggests that a key brain region for moral judgment is the RTPJ. In one study, mentioned above, 
individual differences in moral judgments were signiﬁ cantly correlated with individual differences 
in the RTPJ response (Young & Saxe, 2009a). Participants with a high RTPJ response during moral 
judgment, and a putatively more robust mental state representation (e.g. of the false belief and 
innocent intention), assigned less blame to agents causing accidental harm. Participants with a low 
RTPJ response (and weaker mental state representation) assigned more blame, similar to young 

MORALITY ON THE GROUND
97
children and individuals with Asperger’s Syndrome (Moran et al., 2011). One source of develop-
mental change in moral judgments (from a reliance on outcomes to a reliance on mental states) 
may therefore be the maturation of speciﬁ c brain regions for representing mental states such 
as beliefs—consistent with recent research suggesting the RTPJ may be late maturing (Gweon, 
Dodell-Feder, Bedny, & Saxe, 2012; Saxe, Whitﬁ eld-Gabrieli, Scholz, & Pelphrey, 2009). 
 Finally, disrupting RTPJ activity also disrupts the use of mental state information for moral judg-
ment. A recent study probing moral judgments used transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to 
produce a temporary “virtual lesion” in the RTPJ (Young et al., 2010b). After using fMRI to func-
tionally localize the RTPJ in each participant, ofﬂ ine and online TMS were used to modulate neural 
activity in two experiments. In both experiments, TMS to the RTPJ vs. the control region reduced 
participants’ reliance on mental states in their moral judgments, and consequently increased the 
role of outcomes. For example, disrupting RTPJ activity led to more lenient judgments of failed 
attempts to harm; participants based their moral judgments more on the neutral outcome (vs. the 
harmful intent). Thus, compromised mental state reasoning in the case of neurodevelopmental 
disorders (e.g. high functioning autism) or via TMS leads to abnormal moral cognition. 
 The ﬁ ndings reviewed in this section provide behavioral and neural evidence for mental state 
reasoning as a key cognitive process for moral judgment. In sum, evaluating moral agents and their 
actions requires observers to represent and assess the underlying mental states. 
 Morality on the ground  
 In this second section, we argue that the key relationship between mind attribution and morality 
extends beyond the domain of judgment. As social animals, we are not merely passive observers or 
judges of other people’s moral and immoral actions; instead, we are active participants in the social 
world. We engage in good and bad behaviors toward others, and we must decide how to act toward 
whom and, in turn, determine who is capable of helping or hurting us. In other words, as moral 
actors, we must determine who is friend and who is foe. Indeed, the motivation for afﬁ liation with 
others (e.g. to infer potential allies) and the motivation for action prediction (e.g. to infer potential 
enemies) are major determinants of mind attribution (Epley, Waytz, & Cacioppo, 2007; Waytz, 
Gray, Epley, & Wegner, 2010; Waytz, Morewedge, Epley, Monteleone, Gao, & Cacioppo, 2010). It 
is the  moral salience of these social contexts that requires and engages mind attribution both for 
understanding others and for anticipating their actions. 
 Whether reasoning about allies or enemies, people must engage in mind attribution. Determining 
who’s with us and who’s against us (and, at a more basic level, who counts as “us” vs. “them”) 
through intergroup categorization, is typically an automatic and spontaneous process (Brewer, 
1979). Minimal cues to in- and out-group status lead people to encode alliances and coalitions 
(Kurzban, Tooby, & Cosmides, 2001; Turner, Brown, & Tajfel, 1979). Furthermore, the same neural 
architecture responds to in- and out-group members after minimal exposure to these individuals. 
The amygdala, a region involved in processing motivationally relevant information, is responsive 
to faces of both in-group members and out-group members depending on the processing goals of 
the perceiver (Lieberman, Hariri, Jarcho, Eisenberger, & Bookheimer, 2005; Van Bavel, Packer, & 
Cunningham, 2008). Intergroup categorization thus allows us to determine who in our social envi-
ronment is capable of helping and harming us, and whom we ourselves might be able to help or 
harm. Thus, allies and enemies alike require social reasoning but elicit distinct motivational strate-
gies. As we argue below, the motivation for afﬁ liation underlies our reasoning about allies, whereas 
the motivation for action prediction, for anticipating future actions or even attacks, underlies our 
reasoning about enemies. 

MIND ATTRIBUTION IS FOR MORALITY
98
 The motivation to afﬁ liate with others, and to do good for others, triggers the desire to know oth-
ers’ minds. Understanding the minds of other people is critical for coordination, cooperation, and 
communication (Epley, & Waytz, 2010). Indeed, a number of research programs have suggested 
that the capacity for understanding other minds is precisely the capacity that has allowed humans 
to operate effectively in large social groups (Baron-Cohen, 1995; Humphrey, 1976; Tomasello, 
Carpenter, Call, Behne, & Moll, 2005). Furthermore, interpersonal liking is often correlated with 
mind attribution (Kozak, Marsh, & Wegner, 2006), and people will attribute particular mental 
states, such as secondary emotions, preferentially to in- vs. out-group members (Harris & Fiske, 
2006; Leyens et al., 2000). Thus, the motivation for social connection, especially with those within 
our own moral circle, is a major determinant of mind attribution. 
 In particular, motivation for social connection leads people to more accurately infer people’s 
emotions from facial or vocal cues (Pickett, Gardner, & Knowles, 2004). This motivation can also 
increase people’s tendency to perceive mental states in non-human entities, such as supernatural 
agents, technology, and pets, thereby anthropomorphizing them (Aydin, Fischer, & Frey, 2010; 
Epley, Akalis, Waytz, & Cacioppo, 2008; Epley, Waytz, Akalis, & Cacioppo, 2008). Furthermore, 
neuroimaging studies have shown that cooperation and generous behavior toward others elicit 
activity in brain regions that support social cognition including the medial prefrontal cortex 
(MPFC) (McCabe, Houser, Ryan, Smith, & Trouard, 2001; Waytz, Zaki, & Mitchell, 2012), demon-
strating the deployment of mind attribution for positive moral behavior. These ﬁ ndings show that 
when people seek positive social interactions with other moral agents, they engage in mental state 
reasoning and may even become hyperattentive to speciﬁ c features (e.g. emotions) of their social 
partners’ mental states. 
 Likewise, the motivation to harm others, including our enemies, and to defend against others’ 
harmful actions, also requires a robust understanding of other minds, especially for predicting 
future actions or attacks. Thus, negative moral interactions are also accompanied by the desire to 
know others’ mental states. As we describe below, the motivation to understand and predict others’ 
actions is therefore another major determinant of mind attribution (Dennett, 1987; Epley et al., 
2007). 
 A number of studies have demonstrated that motivation to attain mastery over others leads to 
mind attribution. In one instance, this effect obtains for non-human agents; entities that operate 
unpredictably and that require explanation elicit more attribution of human-like mental states (i.e. 
anthropomorphism) (Waytz, Morewedge et al., 2010; Morewedge, 2009). When people are moti-
vated to gain control or to explain events in the environment, they will often do so by looking to 
anthropomorphic Gods or other mentalistic agents (Gray & Wegner, 2010a; Kay, Gaucher, Napier, 
Callan, & Laurin, 2008; Kay, Moscovitch, & Laurin, 2010; Kelemen & Rosset, 2009). Together, these 
studies support the idea that the motivation to explain, predict, and understand—the motivation 
to attain mastery over others—increases mental state reasoning. 
 Functional neuroimaging evidence suggests that when people are placed in competitive situ-
ations with others, in which they must predict and understand others’ behavior, brain regions 
for mental state reasoning including the MPFC (Decety, Jackson, Sommerville, Chaminade, & 
Meltzoff, 2004) and TPJ (Halko, Hlushchuk, Hari, & Schurmann, 2009) are robustly recruited. 
One study using positron emission topography (PET) demonstrated that during a competitive 
game, the MPFC was preferentially engaged when participants believed they were playing an entity 
capable of strategic moral or immoral behavior (a human being) vs. an entity incapable of such 
behavior (Gallagher, Jack, Roepstorff, & Frith, 2002). Together, these studies suggest that mind 
attribution supports not only good moral behavior, such as cooperation with allies, but also stra-
tegic interaction with unpredictable others, including enemies. 

MORALITY ON THE GROUND
99
 To demonstrate the relationship between mind attribution and distinct moral motivations 
towards enemies and allies, we conducted a series of studies targeting both the motivation for 
social connection and the motivation for action prediction in a single paradigm (Waytz & Young, 
2012). In a ﬁ rst study, American participants answered questions about the United States Army 
and the Taliban, obvious ally and enemy groups, respectively. Participants rated how much they 
desired social connection with each group and how much they were motivated to predict the 
actions of each group. Motivation for social connection predicted attribution of mind to the 
US Army (in-group/ally), whereas motivation for action prediction did not. By contrast, moti-
vation for action prediction predicted attribution of mind to the Taliban (out-group/enemy), 
whereas motivation for social connection did not. A second study asked American Democrats and 
Republicans (during the contentious 2010 mid-term elections) to evaluate both the Democratic 
and Republican party on similar measures, and the same pattern of results emerged. Motivation 
for social connection uniquely predicted mind attribution toward participants’ own political party, 
whereas motivation for action prediction uniquely predicted mind attribution toward the oppos-
ing political party. Taken together, these ﬁ ndings demonstrate that anticipating both positive and 
negative social interactions (with other moral agents) provokes mind attribution. 
 Although these dual motivations for effective social interaction engage mind attribution, they 
may engage different forms of mind attribution. In fact, fMRI research demonstrates that different 
nodes of the neural network for theory of mind are preferentially engaged by cooperation vs. com-
petition. In one study, in which participants were instructed to play a strategic game, the posterior 
cingulate was more involved in cooperation, whereas the MPFC was more involved in competition 
(Decety et al., 2004). Another study demonstrated that reasoning about others’ cooperative men-
tal states vs. deceptive mental states recruited distinct brain regions for theory of mind. Whereas 
both cooperation and deception elicited activation in the TPJ and precuneus, deception selectively 
increased activation in the MPFC (Lissek et al., 2008). Based on this pattern, the authors suggest 
that different systems are involved in processing mental states that match an observer’s expecta-
tions (in this case, cooperative intentions) vs. mental states intended to undermine the observer’s 
expectations. More broadly, these neural ﬁ ndings suggest distinct cognitive processes for mental 
state reasoning in cooperative vs. competitive contexts. 
 One hypothesis regarding the differential types of mind attribution for cooperation vs. competi-
tion suggests two distinct dimensions of mind. People think about mind in terms of  agency (i.e. 
the capacity to plan, to think, and to intend), as well as  experience  (i.e. the capacity to feel pain and 
pleasure) (Gray, Gray, & Wegner, 2007). The attribution of experience grants a person status as a 
moral  patient (i.e. someone who is capable of  experiencing  the moral acts of others), whereas the 
attribution of agency grants a person status as a moral  agent (i.e. someone who is capable of  doing 
moral acts to others) (Gray & Wegner, 2009; Gray & Wegner, 2010b). Therefore, people express 
more moral concern toward moral patients, whereas they view moral agents as morally responsible 
and, therefore, blameworthy or praiseworthy for their actions (Gray et al., 2007). 
 The tendency to associate experience and agency with distinct moral characters suggests the 
motivation for social connection, and the motivation for action prediction might differentially trig-
ger attributions of experience and agency, respectively. The desire to give moral care to and receive 
moral care from another person through prosocial behavior, including cooperation. Therefore, 
the motivation for social connection should preferentially increase the attribution of  experience 
to others. By contrast, the motivation for action prediction entails identifying entities that are 
capable of planning and acting intentionally and, furthermore, determining the content of those 
plans and intentions. This motivation should be uniquely linked to the preferential attribution of 
 agency to others (Kozak & Czipri, 2011). Two studies demonstrate that when people are tasked with 

MIND ATTRIBUTION IS FOR MORALITY
100
predicting the actions of a group vs. tasked with afﬁ liating with that group, they prioritize infor-
mation about the group’s capacity for agency vs. experience (Waytz & Young, 2012). Additional 
behavioral and neural research should uncover whether differential motivations for positive and 
negative moral interactions map onto the attributions of distinct dimensions of mind. 
 Most important, considerable research suggests that moral action, and the motivation to engage 
in moral action—whether positive or negative—depends crucially on mind attribution. People 
consider the minds of other moral actors not only when judging third-party behavior, but also 
when attempting themselves to engage with others, either allies or enemies. Behaving well and 
behaving badly may reside on opposite ends of the moral spectrum, but both depend crucially on 
mental state reasoning—reasoning about the mind of friends and foes. 
 From the mind on the ground to the mind on high  
 In this chapter, we have described how mind attribution is critical for judging moral actions as well 
as for engaging in good and bad actions towards others. Yet another link between mind attribution 
and morality, to be explored in future research, is the moral actor’s consideration of an evalua-
tive mind or an ultimate judge (see Figure 6.1). A number of studies suggest that when people 
decide whether to engage in righteous or reproachable actions, they consider whether others are 
watching, a tendency commonly known as impression management (Leary & Kowalski, 1995). For 
instance, in monetary exchange games that allow people to behave selﬁ shly or generously, people 
behave more cooperatively when merely primed with reminders of a judgmental God (Shariff & 
Norenzayan, 2007) or cues that others are watching (Haley & Fessler, 2005). Perceiving the presence 
of a mindful, non-human agent also increases honesty and hesitance to cheat in a game (Bering, 
McLeod, & Shackleford, 2005; Waytz, Cacioppo, & Epley, 2010). 
 Future research should investigate whether personal decisions about acting morally or immor-
ally, in fact, engage the tendency to search for or perceive a mind on high—either the mind of peer 
observers or an ultimate moral judge. For now, though, it is clear that mind attribution plays a 
primary role in both moral judgment and social interactions between moral actors. 
 References 
 Aydin, N., Fischer, P., & Frey, D. (2010).  Turning to God in the face of ostracism: Eff ects of social exclusion 
on religiousness .  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ,  36 ,  742–53. 
 Baron-Cohen, S. (1995).  Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism and Th eory of Mind .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Bechara, A., & Damasio, A. R. (2005).  Th e somatic marker hypothesis: A neural theory of economic deci-
sion .  Games and Economic Behavior ,  52 ,  336–72 . 
 Bering, J. M., McLeod, K. A. & Shackelford, T. K. (2005).  Reasoning about dead agents reveals possible 
adaptive trends .  Human Nature ,  16 ,  60–81 . 
 Brewer, M. B. (1979).  In-group bias in the minimal intergroup situation: A cognitive-motivational analysis . 
 Psychological Bulletin ,  86 ,  307–24 . 
 Cohen, A. B., & Rozin, P. (2001).  Religion and the morality of mentality .  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology ,  81 (4),  697–710 . 
 Cushman, F. (2008).  Crime and punishment: Distinguishing the roles of causal and intentional analysis in 
moral judgment .  Cognition ,  108 (2),  353–80 . 
 Cushman, F., Dreber, A., Wang, Y., & Costa, J. (2009).  Accidental outcomes guide punishment in a “trem-
bling hand” game.  PLoS One ,  4 (8),  e6699 . 
 Decety, J., Jackson, P. L., Sommerville, J. A., Chaminade, T., & Meltzoff , A. N. (2004).  Th e neural bases of 
cooperation and competition: an fMRI investigation .  Neuroimage ,  23 (2),  744–51 . 
 Dennett, D. C. (1987).  Th e Intentional Stance .  Cambridge:  MIT Press . 

101
REFERENCES
 Epley, N., Akalis, S., Waytz, A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2008).  Creating social connection through inferential 
reproduction: Loneliness and perceived agency in gadgets, gods, and greyhounds .  Psychological Science , 
 19 ,  114–20 . 
 Epley, N., & Waytz, A. (2010).  Mind perception . In D. T. G. S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds),  Th e Handbook 
of Social Psychology, 5th edn (pp.  498–541 ).  New York :  Wiley . 
 Epley, N., Waytz, A., Akalis, S., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2008).  When we need a human: Motivational determi-
nants of anthropomorphism .  Social Cognition ,  26 (2),  143–55 . 
 Epley, N., Waytz, A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2007).  On seeing human: A three-factor theory of anthropomor-
phism .  Psychological Review ,  114 (4),  864–86 . 
 Flavell, J. H. (1999).  Cognitive development: Children’s knowledge about the mind .  Annual Review of 
Psychology,  50 ,  21–45 . 
 Gallagher, H. L., Jack, A. I., Roepstorff , A., Frith, C. D. (2002).  Imaging the intentional stance in a com-
petitive game .  Neuroimage ,  16 ,  814–21. 
 Gray, H. M., Gray, K., & Wegner, D. M. (2007).  Dimensions of mind perception .  Science ,  315 (5812), 
 619–19 . 
 Gray, K., & Wegner, D. A. (2009).  Moral typecasting: Divergent perceptions of moral agents and moral 
patients .  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  96 (3),  505–20 . 
 Gray, K., & Wegner, D. M. (2010a).  Blaming God for our pain: Human suff ering and the divine mind . 
 Personality and Social Psychology Review ,  14 (1),  7–16 . 
 Gray, K., & Wegner, D. M. (2010b).  Torture and judgments of guilt .  Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology ,  46 (1),  233–5 . 
 Gweon, H., Dodell-Feder, D., Bedny, M., & Saxe, R. (2012).  Th eory of mind performance in children cor-
relates with functional specialization of a brain region for thinking about thoughts .  Child Development, 
83(6): 1853–68. 
 Haley, K. J., & Fessler, D. M. T. (2005).  Nobody’s watching? Subtle cues aff ect generosity in an anonymous 
economic game .  Evolution and Human Behavior ,  26 ,  245–56 . 
 Halko, M-L., Hlushchuk, Y., Hari, R., & Schurmann, M. (2009).  Competing with peers: Mentalizing-
related brain activity refl ects what is at stake .  Neuroimage ,  46 (2),  542–8 . 
 Harris, L. T., & Fiske, S. T. (2006).  Dehumanizing the lowest of the low—Neuroimaging responses to 
extreme out-groups .  Psychological Science ,  17 ,  847–53 . 
 Hart, H. L. A. (1968).  Punishment and Responsibility .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Humphrey, N. K. (1976).  Th e social function of intellect . In P. P. G. Bateson & R. A. Hinde (Eds),  Growing 
Points in Ethology .  Oxford :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Jenkins, A. C., & Mitchell, J. P. (2009).  Mentalizing under uncertainty: dissociated neural responses to 
ambiguous and unambiguous mental state inferences .  Cereb Cortex ,  20 (2),  404–10 . 
 Kamm, F. M. (2001).  Morality, Mortality: Rights, Duties, and Status .  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Kay, A. C., Gaucher, D., Napier, J. L., Callan, M. J., & Laurin, K. (2008).  God and the Government: Testing 
a compensatory control mechanism for the support of external systems .  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology ,  95 ,  18–35 . 
 Kay, A. C., Moscovitch, D. M., & Laurin, K. (2010).  Randomness, attributions of arousal, and belief in god . 
 Psychological Science ,  21 ,  216–18 . 
 Kelemen, D., & Rosset, E. (2009).  Th e human function compunction: Teleological explanation in adults. 
 Cognition ,  111 ,  138–43 . 
 Kliemann, D., Young, L., Scholz, J., & Saxe, R. (2008).  Th e infl uence of prior record on moral judgment . 
 Neuropsychologia ,  46 (12),  2949–57 . 
 Kozak, M. J., & Czipri, A. (2011).  Behind Enemy Minds: Mind Attribution and Perceived Th reat .  New York: 
 Pace University . (Manuscript in preparation). 
 Kozak, M. J., Marsh, A. A., & Wegner, D. M. (2006).  What do I think you’re doing? Action identifi cation 
and mind attribution .  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  90 ,  543–55 . 

MIND ATTRIBUTION IS FOR MORALITY
102
 Kurzban, R., Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (2001).  Can race be erased? Coalitional computation and social 
categorization .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America ,  98 (26), 
 15387–92 . 
 Leary, M. R., & Kowalski, R. M. (1995).  Social Anxiety .  London :  Guildford Press . 
 Leyens, J., Paladino, P. M., Rodriguez-Torres, R., Vaes, J., Demoulin, S., Rodriguez-Perez, A., & 
Gaunt, R. (2000).  Th e emotional side of prejudice: Th e attribution of secondary emotions to in-groups 
and out-groups .  Personality and Social Psychology Review ,  4 ,  186–97 . 
 Lieberman, M. D., Hariri, A., Jarcho, J. M., Eisenberger, N. I., & Bookheimer, S. Y. (2005).  An fMRI inves-
tigation of race-related amygdala activity in African-American and Caucasian-American individuals . 
 Nature Neuroscience ,  8 (6),  720–2 . 
 Lissek, S., Peters, S., Fuchs, N., Witthaus, H., Nicolas, V., Tegenthoff , M., et al. (2008).  Cooperation and 
deception recruit diff erent subsets of the theory of mind network .  PLoS ONE ,  3 ,  e2023. 
 McCabe, K., Houser, D., Ryan, L., Smith, V., & Trouard, T. (2001).  A functional imaging study of coopera-
tion in two-person reciprocal exchange .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America ,  98 (20),  11832–5 . 
 Mikhail, J. M. (2007).  Universal moral grammar: theory, evidence and the future .  Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences ,  11 (4),  143–52 . 
 Moran, J. M., Young, L. L., Saxe, R., Lee, S. M., O’Young, D., Mavros, P. L., et al. (2011).  Impaired theory 
of mind for moral judgment in high-functioning autism .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 
USA  108 : 2688–2692. 
 Morewedge, C. K. (2009).  Negativity bias in attribution of external agency .  Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General ,  138 ,  535–45 . 
 Perner, J., Aichhorn, M., Kronbichler, M., Staff en, W., & Ladurner, G. (2006).  Th inking of mental and 
other representations: the roles of left  and right temporo-parietal junction .  Soc Neurosci ,  1 (3–4),  245–58 . 
 Piaget, J. (1965/1932).  Th e Moral Judgment of the Child .  New York :  Free Press . 
 Pickett, C. L., Gardner, W. L., & Knowles, M. (2004).  Getting a cue: Th e need to belong and enhanced sen-
sitivity to social cues .  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ,  30 ,  1095–107 . 
 Sargent, M. J. (2004).  Less thought, more punishment: need for cognition predicts support for punitive 
responses to crime .  Pers Soc Psychol Bull ,  30 (11),  1485–93 . 
 Saxe, R., & Kanwisher, N. (2003).  People thinking about thinking people. Th e role of the temporo-parietal 
junction in “theory of mind”.  Neuroimage ,  19 (4),  1835–42 . 
 Saxe, R. R., Whitfi eld-Gabrieli, S., Scholz, J., & Pelphrey, K. A. (2009).  Brain regions for perceiving and 
reasoning about other people in school-aged children .  Child Dev ,  80 (4),  1197–209 . 
 Shariff , A. F., & Norenzayan, A. (2007).  God is watching you: Priming God concepts increases prosocial 
behavior in an anonymous economic game .  Psychological Science ,  18 ,  803–9 . 
 Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H. (2005).  Understanding and sharing intentions: 
Th e origins of cultural cognition .  Behavioral and Brain Sciences ,  28 (5),  675–91 . 
 Turner, J. C., Brown, R. J., & Tajfel, H. (1979).  Social comparison and group interest in in-group favourit-
ism .  European Journal of Social Psychology ,  9 (2),  187–204 . 
 Van Bavel, J. J., Packer, D. J., & Cunningham, W. A. (2008).  Th e neural substrates of in-group bias: a func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging investigation .  Psychological Science ,  19 (11),  1131–9 . 
 Waytz, A., Cacioppo, J. T., & Epley, N. (2010).  Who sees human? Th e stability and importance of individual 
diff erences in anthropomorphism .  Perspectives on Psychological Science ,  5 ,  219–32 . 
 Waytz, A., Gray, K., Epley, N., & Wegner, D. M. (2010).  Causes and consequences of mind perception . 
 Trends in cognitive sciences ,  14 (8),  383–8 . 
 Waytz, A., Morewedge, C. K., Epley, N., Monteleone, G., Gao, J. H., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2010). Making 
sense by making sentient: Eff ectance motivation increases anthropomorphism.  Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology ,  99 (3), 410. 

103
 Waytz, A., & Young, L. (submitted).  Attributing Mind Across Enemy Lines: When we Treat Outgroups as 
Mental Agents . 
 Waytz, A., Zaki, J., Mitchell, J. P. (2012).  Response of the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex predicts altruistic 
behavior .  Journal of Neuroscience ,  32 ,  7646–50 . 
 Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001).  Meta-analysis of theory-of-mind development: Th e truth 
about false belief .  Children Development ,  72 (3),  655–84 . 
 Woolfolk, R. L., Doris, J. M., & Darley, J. M. (2006).  Identifi cation, situational constraint, and social cogni-
tion: Studies in the attribution of moral responsibility .  Cognition ,  100 (2),  283–301 . 
 Young, L., Bechara, A., Tranel, D., Damasio, H., Hauser, M., & Damasio, A. (2010a).  Damage to ventro-
medial prefrontal cortex impairs judgment of harmful intent .  Neuron ,  65 ,  845–51 . 
 Young, L., Camprodon, J., Hauser, M., Pascual-Leone, A., & Saxe, R. (2010b).  Disruption of the right 
temporo-parietal junction with transcranial magnetic stimulation reduces the role of beliefs in moral 
judgment .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Science,  107 ,  6753–8 . 
 Young, L., Cushman, F., Hauser, M., & Saxe, R. (2007).  Th e neural basis of the interaction between theory 
of mind and moral judgment .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,  104 (20),  8235–40 . 
 Young, L., Nichols, S., & Saxe, R. (2010b).  Investigating the neural and cognitive basis of moral luck: It’s not 
what you do but what you know .  Review of Philosophy and Psychology ,  1 ,  333–49 . 
 Young, L., & Saxe, R. (2008).  Th e neural basis of belief encoding and integration in moral judgment . 
 NeuroImage ,  40 ,  1912–20 . 
 Young, L., & Saxe, R. (2009a).  Innocent intentions: a correlation between forgiveness for accidental harm 
and neural activity .  Neuropsychologia ,  47 (10),  2065–72 . 
 Young, L., & Saxe, R. (2009b).  An fMRI investigation of spontaneous mental state inference for moral judg-
ment .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  21 ,  1396–405 . 
 Young, L., Scholz, J., & Saxe, R. (2011).  Neural evidence for “intuitive prosecution”: Th e use of mental state 
information for negative moral verdicts .  Social Neuroscience ,  6 ,  302–15 . 
 Young, L., Koenigs, M., Kruepke, M., & Newman, J. (2012).  Psychopathy increases perceived moral per-
missibility of accidents .  Journal of Abnormal Psychology ,  121 , 659–667. 
REFERENCES

 Chapter 7 
 Issues in the measurement 
of judgmental accuracy  
 David A.   Kenny 
 Introduction  
 One of the oldest topics of research in the social sciences is the measurement of individual differ-
ences in how well it is that people know others. Judgmental accuracy (JA) refers to the ability of 
people to understand one another. In the prototypical study, a judge is given information about a 
target (e.g. a photograph or videotape) and asked something about the target. It is then determined 
if that answer is correct or not. Among the domains studied are the target’s personality, opinions, 
attitudes, moods, emotions, and thoughts. Various other terms for JA have been used—empathy, 
empathic accuracy, decoding skill, social skills, interpersonal competence, lie and deception detec-
tion, interpersonal sensitivity, understanding, and social intelligence to name just some. Simply 
put JA concerns the ability of a person to understand others. JA is thought to be a one of the four 
branches of emotional intelligence (Mayer & Salovey, 1997), the perception, appraisal and expres-
sion of emotion branch. 
 JA involves a judge and target. I use in this chapter the term “item” to refer a single rating made 
by a judge about a given target 1 on a single dimension. The major focus here is on the case in which 
the judge and target are strangers to each other. With such a constraint, judges have the same infor-
mation available to them about a given target. When judge and target have a relational history, all 
sorts of prior information are available. In particular, the judge may have an expectation for the 
target’s typical response. 
 From the very beginning of research on JA, a key issue is the extent to which there are individual 
differences in judgmental accuracy. To what extent are some people better at understanding others 
and others worse? A related question has examined whether particular types of people, e.g. women 
or leaders, are better judges than others or whether other types of people, e.g. those diagnosed as 
autistic, are worse judges than others. 
 This chapter focuses on the measurement of individual differences in JA; that is, the degree to 
which some persons are consistently better at this task than are others. As will be seen, the measure-
ment of JA is quite difﬁ cult and the one goal of this chapter is to understand why it is so difﬁ cult. 
A second goal is to offer suggestions to improve that effort. 
 Most of the early work on JA focused on self-report inventories, but the current consensus is that 
judges have little or no insight about their level of JA. For instance, Ickes (1993) stated:
  In general, the evidence from the studies my colleagues and I have conducted suggests that people lack 
metaknowledge regarding their own empathic accuracy. (p. 603) 
 1   For some measures of JA, the same target is used more than once, in others only a single target is used, and 
in others the target is a not one person but more than one person.  

INTRODUCTION
105
 Hall, Andrzejewski, & Yopchick (2009) ﬁ nd a weak positive correlation of about Table 7.1 between 
self-reported ability and actual ability. An alternative, but relatively unexplored, strategy is to use 
peer ratings of JA (though see a promising exception in Elfenbein, Barsade, & Eisenkraft, 2011). 2 
Both Rosenthal, Hall, DiMatteo, Rogers, & Archer (1979) and Costanzo & Archer (1989) have used 
peer ratings to validate JA measures. One advantage of peer ratings, over self-ratings, is that one 
can aggregate ratings over many peers to increase both reliability and validity. However, most of 
current work in the assessment of JA uses instruments. 
 Instruments to measure JA can be divided into two basic types: standardized instruments (e.g. 
the PONS (Rosenthal et al., 1979) or the CARAT (Buck, 1976)) and standardized formats (e.g. 
Ickes empathic accuracy paradigm (1993) or Buck’s slide viewing technique (Sabatelli, Buck, & 
Kenny, 1986)). A standardized instrument is based on the logic of a personality or intelligence test. 
The same items are used for all judges taking the test. In a standardized format, the basic task is the 
same, but the targets are specially chosen for the judges. 
 The focus in this chapter is on standardized instruments to measure JA. Several different investi-
gators had developed a standardized instrument to measure judgmental accuracy. For this chapter, 3 
I have selected a heterogeneous, but clearly non-random collection of eight of these measures: 
 ◆  Communication of Affect Receiving Ability Test  (CARAT; Buck, 1976): 30 spontaneous facial 
video clips of adult targets watching four categories of emotionally evocative slides—scenic, 
pleasant people, unpleasant, and unusual. 
 ◆  Diagnostic Analysis of Non-verbal Accuracy Scale  (DANVA or DANVA-2-AF; Nowicki & Duke, 
1994): 24 posed photographs of adult facial expressions of six targets and four emotions—
happiness, sadness, anger, and fear.  
 ◆  Eyes (Reading the mind in the eyes; Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Hill, Raste, & Plumb, 2001): 
the revised test with 36 items, each a picture of the eyes, with four response alternative (e.g. 
playful, comforting, irritated, or bored).  
 ◆  Interpersonal Perception Task 30 (IPT30; Costanzo & Archer, 1989): 30 audiovisual excerpts 
of individual targets talking or small groups of targets interacting. Content covers intimacy, 
kinship, competition, status, and deception.  
 ◆  Interpersonal Perception Task 15 (IPT15; Archer & Costanzo, 1993): the 15 “best” audiovisual 
excerpts selected from the IPT30. 
 ◆  Proﬁ le of Non-verbal Sensitivity (PONS; Rosenthal et al., 1979): a 220-item test contain-
ing 2-second clips of all combinations of face, body, electronically ﬁ ltered speech, and 
random-spliced speech (total of 11 channels) of an adult female target portraying 20 different 
affective situations. 
 ◆  Sternberg & Smith 1 (S&S1; Sternberg & Smith, 1985): a 70-item test that presents a picture of 
two people and the judge is asked if the two are in a relationship or not. 
 ◆  Sternberg & Smith 2 (S&S2; Sternberg & Smith, 1985): a 70-item test that presents a picture of 
two people and the judge is asked which of the two people is the subordinate and which is the 
supervisor. 
 2    It is interesting to note that emotional intelligence branch that shows the weakest level of peer agreement 
(about 8% of the variance in two studies) is the perception, appraisal and expression of emotion branch, the 
one emotional intelligence branch that is closest to JA.  
 3   The survey of instruments is skewed toward older and more “classical” measures. Although more modern 
measures have somewhat higher reliability than do the measures, they are, nonetheless, still much lower 
than what most researchers expect.  

ISSUES IN THE MEASUREMENT OF JUDGMENTAL ACCURACY 
106
 Appendix 7A contains more details about each of the measures and where the numeric values that 
are reported in this chapter come from. Should the reader want to take one of these tests, an online 
version of the Eyes test is available at http://glennrowe.net/BaronCohen/Faces/EyesTest.aspx. 
 Historically, these standardized measures are plagued by issues of very low internal consistency 
reliability. For instance, after reviewing the literature on the poor reliability of measures of JA, 
Kenny & Albright (1987) noted (p. 393)  
  Our position is not that individual differences are nonexistent in interpersonal accuracy. Rather, we 
believe that the variability of such differences is rather limited. 
 More recently, Hall, Halberstadt, & O’Brien (1997, p. 302) noted: 4 
  Consistent with prior experience …, the nonverbal decoding tests showed weak internal consistency. 
Cronbach’s alpha coefﬁ cients for the male and female subtests of the IPT, CARAT, and PONS ranged 
from .10 to .35, with a median of .21. 
 Alphas of .21, unheard of in most areas of social science, are quite commonplace in the study of JA. 
 Table 7.1 presents the internal consistency estimates of reliability of measurement for eight dif-
ferent measures of JA. Appendix 7A gives what studies were used to compute the reliability esti-
mate. It should be noted that sometimes (e.g. CARAT, IPT15, and IPT30), the original reliabilities 
were much too optimistic. No doubt in the initial selection of items, items were chosen because of 
higher inter-item correlations. If there was such capitalization on chance, the expectation would be 
for lower correlations in subsequent samples. For these measures, a more recent, and likely more 
representative value is used. Table 7.1 also presents  P , which is deﬁ ned here as the mean proportion 
of the items that were answered correctly. To help interpret this value, the number of alternatives 
for the test is given. 
 From the reliabilities, using the Spearman–Brown prophecy correlation, the average inter-item 
correlation,  r 1,1 , is computed, which is the correlation of one item with one other item and can be 
viewed as the reliability of a single item. Because the  r 1,1 correlation does not depend on the number 
 Table 7.1  Number of items ( k ), the proportion of items correct of ( P ), number of alternative answers 
( # Alt ), Cronbach alpha reliability ( α ), average inter-item correlation ( r 1,1 ), and reliability with 24 items 
( r 24,24 ) for eight selected measures of judgmental accuracy a 
Test
 k 
 P 
 # Alt 
  α  
 r 1,1 
 r 24,24 
CARAT
 30
.600
4
.460
.028
.405
DANVA
 32
.889
4
.880
.186
.846
Eyes
 36
.728
4
.488
.026
.389
IPT-30
 30
.557
2 & 3
.290
.013
.246
IPT-15
 15
.631
2 & 3
.240
.021
.336
PONS
220
.773
2
.860
.027
.401
S&S I
 41
.600
2
.620
.038
.489
S&S II
 36
.740
2
.590
.038
.490
 a See Appendix A for more information on measures and the sources used. 
 4    The PONS measured used is the short form. 

INTRODUCTION
107
of items, the  r 1,1 correlations are more comparable across measures with a different number of 
items. Also given in Table 7.1 is the  r 24,24  which is a forecast of the test’s reliability if it had 24 items. 
This column gives a forecast of each test’s reliability with same number of items. 
 In terms of the  r 1,1 , it is seen that the median value is about.03 which leads to a reliability for a 
scale with 24 items of .390. How does an inter-item correlation of .03 compare with other psycho-
metric tests? The answer is not very well. In terms of cognitive ability tests, for the Peabody Picture 
Vocabulary Test, the value of  r 1,1 is .085 and for the Raven’s Matrices test it is .109. So it is seen that 
these values are about three times higher than for most measures of JA. Self-report measures are 
even higher, with the Rosenberg self-esteem scale at .340, for Beck Depression Inventory at .300, 
and for the Bem Masculinity and Femininity scale at .190. Clearly, the measures of  r 1,1 for JA are 
much lower that what are typically found in psychological measurement. 
 Some caution needs to be taken in interpreting these low reliability measures. Certainly, many of 
these internal consistency estimates of reliability are very low and well below the generally agreed-
upon minimal standard of .70. However, these values do not indicate that measures of JA have  no 
reliability. Some measures of JA, but not all, have poor reliability, but still about half of their vari-
ance is reliable. An important lesson to be learned is that JA is very difﬁ cult to measure, something 
that should be confronted and not ignored. 
 Alternative measures of reliability 
 Given these low internal consistency reliabilities, some have argued that internal consistency for-
mulas are inappropriate in the measurement of JA. The lack of enthusiasm for internal consistency 
measures of reliability is hardly surprising with one study (Mayer & Geher, 1996) reporting a reli-
ability of only .24 for a 96-item scale! 
 One alternative proposed is a test-retest correlation. However, as discussed by Gignac (2009) a 
test-retest correlation can be a very misleading measure of reliability:
  Consider the three following variables: height, intelligence, and extraversion. The correlations between these 
variable measured in adults would all be expected to be less than .20, which would preclude any meaningful 
aggregation of the scores … However, these same aggregated scores would be expected to have very high 
levels of test-retest reliability, because all three of the scores would not be expected to change. (p. 22)  
 Although it may be comforting to know that the measure is stable, test-retest measures are not very 
informative measures of reliability. 
 It has also been argued that because JA is a multidimensional construct (Schlegel, Grandjean, 
& Scherer, 2011) and, as such, an internal consistency measure is inappropriate. From a multidi-
mensional inventory, a parallel forms measure of reliability would be the appropriate measure of 
reliability. To compute a parallel forms reliability, in principle a second form of the test would need 
to be created and correlated with the original test. Practically, a split-half reliability is computed as 
follows. As a hypothetical example, presume that a judge’s skill at reading a target’s non-verbal skill 
is due to three different skills—skill at reading the face, body, and voice. These different skills might 
well be weakly and perhaps even negatively correlated. However, within-test items that only con-
tain the face there should show good internal consistency. To compute a split-half reliability, the 
items need to be divided into three sets containing items from each of the dimensions, face, body, 
and voice. Then each of these sets is split in half, form one and form two, and then the sum of the 
items from form one is correlated with the sum from form two. This correlation is then adjusted by 
Spearman–Brown prophecy formula for doubling a test to obtain a measure of reliability. So if the 
scale had 10 face items, eight body items, and 12 voice items, each form would have ﬁ ve face items, 
four body items, and six voice items. 

ISSUES IN THE MEASUREMENT OF JUDGMENTAL ACCURACY 
108
 Parallel forms reliability lead to larger reliability values than internal consistency, but often not a 
lot larger. For instance for a 40-item test with 10 dimensions, each with four items, a .05 inter-item 
correlation within dimension and a .02 between items for different dimensions (the average latent 
correlation between dimensions being .4), the split-half reliability would only be .009 greater than 
the internal consistency reliability (.659 vs. .650). Not only are the beneﬁ ts not as great as might 
be thought, there are signiﬁ cant costs involved in adopting this strategy. First, some sort of theory 
dimensionality must be available to classify the items into different types. That is, one needs an a 
priori theory to divide the items up into different types. Second, causal assumptions become more 
complicated. If the researcher hopes to show that his or her measure of JA is a cause of a given 
outcome or is caused by a given antecedent, it is important to show that the effect is for the overall 
construct and not just the separate components. Returning to the example of non-verbal ability 
with three dimensions (face, body, and voice), if gender differences were found, it would be impor-
tant to know if that gender difference occurred in all three dimensions, and if non-verbal ability 
predicted interpersonal success, it would be important to know if all three dimensions did so. 
 Even if a split-half reliability is computed to determine reliability, it is still necessary that items 
with each dimension show internal consistency. Demonstrating replicability of measurement is 
key to establishing a measure’s reliability.  
 Validity of JA 
 Reliability, although important, is not the most important attribute of a JA measure. What is of the 
essence is validity. Reviewed here, very brieﬂ y, is evidence of convergent (do two measures of the 
construct correlate with each other?) and predictive validity (does the measure correlate with other 
constructs associated with the theoretical construct). 
 In terms of convergent validity, the different tests of JA correlate very weakly at best. Based on 
prior analyses of Hall (2001), the correlation between different measures of JA tend be very low, 
perhaps averaging about .10. With such small correlations, sometimes even a negative correlation 
is found. In fact the two Sternberg & Smith (1985) measures correlate –.09 with each other. The 
low convergent validity points to multi-dimensionality in the measurement of JA, an issue dis-
cussed above when parallel forms reliability was discussed. 
 It can also be asked if measures of JA have predictive validity. If measures consistently corre-
lated a given variable in a meaningful way, then there would be evidence that the measure is tap-
ping what it purports to be measuring. In the ﬁ rst ever meta-analyses published in  Psychological 
Bulletin , Hall (1978) found evidence for gender differences nonverbal decoding ability, the aver-
age correlation being .20 with females scoring higher than men. Hall et al. (2009) found an aver-
age correlation of –.04 for masculinity and .12 for femininity. In a large meta-analysis of 206 
independent studies, Hall et al. (2009) found consistent, but positive personality traits ( r = .08), 
negative personality ( r =  − .07), self-rated social competence ( r = .10), and other-rated social 
competence ( r = .07). Although many of the effect sizes are small at best, the pattern of results is 
consistent. JA measures do correlate meaningfully and consistently with the variables that they 
should correlate with.  
 Strategies for improving the reliability of measurement of JA  
 Presented here are three ways for improving the reliability and in principle the validity of meas-
ures of JA. Not discussed, but a very successful strategy is to use that of the PONS—use a lot of 
items. However, note the DANVA has just 24, only about one-ninth as many at the PONS, but even 
greater reliability. 

STRATEGIES FOR IMPROVING THE RELIABILITY OF MEASUREMENT OF JA
109
 “Easy” tests 
 Previous analyses of JA have used classical test theory (CTT). That model states that the observed 
score equals a true score plus error. A more appropriate model is item response theory (IRT), 
which is used to describe the probability that the judge makes the correct response. In the classical 
IRT model, it is assumed that the response is dichotomous, correct or incorrect, and not continu-
ous as assumed by CTT. Moreover, IRT has an explicit model of guessing. 
 Appendix 7B outlines the IRT model that was used in the simulation. A measure of JA is assumed 
to contain 24 equally discriminable and difﬁ cult items. Varied is the true variance, or  σ , as either .5 
or 1.0. The  α reliability of 24-item test, assuming no guessing, would be about .75 for   σ  = 1.0 and 
.53 for   σ  = .5. Also assumed that if the participant does not know the correct answer, a random 
guess is made and it is assumed that there are just two alternatives. The one parameter that is varied 
is across trials is the average difﬁ culty of the items. A very difﬁ cult test would have as the average 
proportion correct or  P  near .5 (not zero due to guessing) and a very easy test would have a prob-
ability near one. The usual view is that reliability should be near its maximum when the average 
probability is about half way between chance and perfect or .75 when there are two alternatives. As 
seen in Table 7.1, many JA tests have as the average number correct about .75 (assuming just two 
alternatives). The following quote from Hall, Andrzejewski, Murphy, Schmid Mast, & Feinstein 
(2008) reveals the logic of having a test with  P  equal to .75:
 (T)he PONS test was designed to have a proportion accuracy of about .75 (midway between the guess-
ing level of .50 and perfect accuracy of 1.00), in the belief that scores midway between guessing and 
perfect accuracy would be optimal for revealing individual differences. (p. 1479)   
 Thus, we might expect that Cronbach’s alpha would maximize when the average is near .75. 
However, as seen in Figure 7.1, alpha reliability does not maximize at .75, but at a value higher than 
that. Moreover, as explained in Appendix B, IRT predicts that alpha would maximize for values of 
0.880 for  σ  = 1 which corresponds to  P of .853 and equals 0.640 for  σ = .5 which corresponds to 
a  P of .827. Interestingly and importantly, it should be noted that the DANVA, which has the best 
reliability, has by far the largest probability correct.      
 Why does this happen? Consider what would happen when the average probability correct or  P is 
.75. Consider two people who both have low ability, Jack scoring 1.5 standard deviations below the 
mean and Jill scoring 2.0 standard deviations below the mean. Jack has a 53.6% chance of getting 
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.5
0.6
0.7
P or Proportion Correct
Alpha
Lie
Detection
S & S1
Tests
SD = 1.0
SD = 0.5
S & S2
Pons
0.8
0.9
1
 Figure 7.1  Alpha (assuming 24 items) as a function of the proportion correct.  

ISSUES IN THE MEASUREMENT OF JUDGMENTAL ACCURACY 
110
an item correct whereas Jill has only a 51.6% chance of getting an item correct. Jack should do bet-
ter on a test than Jill, but luck would play a big role here. For Jack to have at least a 75% chance of 
outscoring Jill, the test would need to be about 567 items! If, however, the test was changed and the 
probability of someone of average ability getting the item correct was raised to .88, Jill has about 
a 54.7% of getting an item correct, whereas Jack has a 59.9% chance. Now for Jack to have at least 
a 75% chance of outscoring Jill, there would need to be about 83 items. Luck would play a much 
smaller role in determining who is better if the test is “easy.” 
 The literature does suggest that here is a relationship between how easy a JA test is and how reli-
able it is. At one end is lie detection where the mean level is about .54 and individual differences are 
very weak (Bond & DePaulo, 2006). At the other end is the DANVA, which is relatively easy with 
a mean level of .89 and high levels of reliability. Figure 7.1 also contains the forecasted reliabilities 
for each of the standardized tests with two response alternatives, as well as lie detection, under 
the assumption that the test has 24 items. We see that all of the values fall near the SD = 0.5 which 
indicate weak reliability. (The fact that S&S1 is higher is likely due to capitalization on chance due 
to dropping many of the items.) 
 It is also noted that the PONS subscale with the lowest alpha reliability (randomized-spliced 
audio with no video) has the lowest mean score ( P  = .627), whereas the two subscales tied with larg-
est reliability (random-spliced audio with face video and content-ﬁ ltered audio with ﬁ gure video) 
have the two highest mean scores ( P = .884 and .853, respectively; see Tables 3.1 and 3.5 in Rosenthal 
et al., 1979). This illustrates that test reliability could be enhanced greatly if tests were made easier. 
Finally, across the 11 subtests of the PONS, the correlation of  P with the reliability is .82. 
 It should be pointed out that if tests are easier, it would probably be easier to increase the number 
of items as the items would likely be completed more quickly. Thus, it would be possible to use 
the strategy developed for the PONS of having a large number of items to increase reliability. 
Additionally, it should be pointed out that a very “easy” test would not be very useful at discrimi-
nating ability differences of those who are very skilled at JA. 
 Using the psychometric correct answer 
 There has been considerable debate around the issue of what is considered to be the correct answer 
in the JA. The ﬁ rst and most obvious choice is to use the truth to determine the correct answer. 
However, some standardized instruments use posed emotions (e.g. PONS) making the meaning 
of the truth unclear. In this case, it is presumed that the target is posing the proper emotion. 
Particularly for cases in which there is no clear true answer, researchers have used two different 
strategies. One idea is to use an expert opinion, usually the researcher. The other idea is to use what 
is called a  consensus answer , the answer that a plurality of respondents choose. 
 One alternative that appears to not be used is what might be called the  psychometric truth . It is 
assumed that all the items measure the same construct, if only weakly. So the “truth” is determined 
by a psychometric standard, e.g. the correlation of the item with the mean of the other items, com-
monly called the item-total corrected correlation. If the item has a non-trivial, negative item-total 
corrected correlation, the scoring of the item would be reversed, making the false answer now the 
true answer. By using such a scaling, one would improve the reliability of measurement. 
 Such a strategy has likely not been previously adopted or even recommended because it seems 
nonsensical—why score an item where the wrong answer is treated as the right answer? The reason 
is that sometimes doing the right thing can lead to a bad result, but that does not mean that doing 
the right thing is wrong. As an over-simpliﬁ ed example, imaging if judging happiness the only rel-
evant cue is whether the target is smiling or not. If someone is smiling, it is much more likely that 

CONCLUSION
111
the person is happy. Imagine further that for some targets, they may be smiling, but they are not 
happy. For these targets, a judge who used the cue of smiling would be wrong, but the judge would 
be wrong by using the right strategy. 
 I realize that is a controversial suggestion, but it would be relatively easy to check. What is needed 
is a test with many participants and some sort of criterion measure to assess validity. First, it would 
be determined through the item-total corrected correlations which items need to be reversed. Then 
the sum of those items, unreversed, should correlate negatively with the criterion measure. 
 Embodied JA 
 Measuring JA using a standardized instrument such as the PONS or DANVA has some advantages 
but it has disadvantages. The two major advantages are ﬁ rst that it is relatively easy to administer 
a standardized test and that because all judges view the same set of items, individual differences 
represent a pure measure of decoding ability, i.e. receiving ability. The major disadvantage is that 
the judgment task is decontextualized. The judges are not given any meaningful context about the 
behaviors that they observe. Moreover, the target is a total stranger to the judge, they have no social 
interaction history, and they are not interacting with target when the behavior occurs. Everyday 
person perception is embodied and unfolds over time in social-interaction contexts in which the 
judge and target have goals and a history. Wilhelm & Perrez (2004) have shown that judges take 
advantage of this knowledge, and they know how their partner typically responds, they can assume 
that their partner is responding as they would respond, and they can even predict their partner’s 
emotional response when they are not together. 
 Certainly embodied person perception is more difﬁ cult to study, but those difﬁ culties may well 
be worth it to reveal individual differences in person perception. One suggestion is to employ 
a standardized format with different targets. So for instance, using a standardized format, how 
accurate someone is at reading fellow group members can be measured. A useful tool with stand-
ardized formats is the Social Relations Model (Kenny, 1994). Within that model, a set of judges 
rates multiple targets who may well also be judges. In these analyses, “item” is the target, and the 
consistency of judges can be measured across targets: If Sam is a good judge of Jack, is he also a 
good judge of Jill? An estimate of that proportion is .06 (see Appendix 7C), which can be viewed 
as an inter-item correlation or  r 1,1 where the item is target. Such a value is somewhat higher than 
the inter-item correlation using standardized instruments, but not a lot higher. The reliability of 
judgment can be measured, assuming a ﬁ xed number of targets. For example, with 10 targets, that 
reliability is .39. Biesanz (2010) has extended the Social Relations Model to account for multivari-
ate responses for each target. 
 There are two ﬁ nal points about measuring accuracy in a more naturalistic context I want 
to make. First, successful person perceivers realize that the target has changed, which requires 
a research design in which the judge observes the target over time (Neyer, Banse, & Asendorpf, 
1999). Secondly, it is important to realize that accuracy in person perception often occurs through 
the use of heuristics, e.g. assumed similarity. Recent work by West & Kenny (2011) captures how it 
is that judges can be both biased and accurate. 
 Conclusion 
 The topic covered in this chapter is extensive, and so many key topics in the measurement of JA 
are not considered here. One of the most important is that guessing is not usually random. The 
classic paper by Wagner (1993) emphasized the importance of base rates in the response measures, 
something not considered in this chapter. 

ISSUES IN THE MEASUREMENT OF JUDGMENTAL ACCURACY 
112
 The chapter has documented the apparent contradiction that standardized measures of JA have 
low reliability yet have some degree of validity. Certain partial remedies have been suggested, but 
further work is needed. The hope would be that increased knowledge about JA, as well as the appli-
cation of psychometrics, would lead to further improvements in the measurement of JA. Being 
able to understand others is a remarkable skill that humans possess and it is then important that 
science can measure that skill. 
 Acknowledgements 
 I want to thank Judith Hall who earlier provided me with advice on several key issues and made 
numerous helpful comments on a prior draft. Katja Schlegel also provided me with several valuable 
comments. Finally, I want to acknowledge that much of the work on this chapter was undertaken 
when I received an Erskine Fellowship from Christchurch University, Christchurch New Zealand. 
 References 
 Archer, D., & Costanzo, M. (1993).  Th e Interpersonal Perception Task-15 (IPT-15) .  Berkeley :  University of 
California Extension Media Center . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Hill, J., Raste, Y., & Plumb, I. (2001).  Th e “Reading the Mind in 
the Eyes” test revised version: a study with normal adults, and adults with Asperger syndrome or 
high-functioning autism .  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry ,  42 ,  241–51 . 
 Biesanz, J. C. (2010).  Th e social accuracy model of interpersonal perception: Assessing individual diff er-
ences in perceptive and expressive accuracy .  Multivariate Behavioral Research ,  45 ,  853–85 . 
 Bond, C. F., Jr., & DePaulo, B. M. (2006).  Accuracy of deception judgments .  Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin ,  10 ,  214–34 . 
 Buck, R. (1976).  A test of nonverbal receiving ability: Preliminary studies .  Human Communication 
Research ,  2 ,  162–71 . 
 Costanzo, M., & Archer, D. (1989).  Interpreting the expressive behavior of others: Th e Interpersonal 
Perception Task .  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior ,  13 ,  225–45 . 
 deAyala, R. J. (2009).  Th e Th eory and Practice of Item Response Th eory .  New York :  Guilford Press . 
 Elfenbein, H. A, Barsade, S., & Eisenkraft , N. (2011).  Do We Know Emotional Intelligence When We See It? 
Th e Properties and Promise of Observer Ratings . Unpublished paper,  Washington  University, St Louis . 
 Elfenbein, H. A., Foo, M. D., Boldry, J. G., & Tan, H. H. (2006).  Dyadic eff ects in nonverbal communica-
tion: A variance partitioning analysis .  Cognition and Emotion ,  20 ,  149–59 . 
 Gignac, G. E. (2009).  Th e psychometrics in the measurement of emotional intelligence . In Stough, C., 
Saklofske, D. H., & Parker, J. D. A. (Eds),  Assessing Emotional Intelligence: Th eory, Research, and 
Applications (pp.  9–40 ).  New York :  Springer . 
 Hall, J. A. (1978).  Gender eff ects in decoding nonverbal cues .  Psychological Bulletin ,  85 ,  845–57 . 
 Hall, J. A. (2001).  Th e PONS test and the psychometric approach to measuring interpersonal sensitivity . 
In J. A. Hall and F. J. Bernieri (Eds),  Interpersonal Sensitivity: Th eory and Measurement (pp.  143–60 ). 
 Mahwah :  Erlbaum . 
 Hall, J. A., Andrzejewski, S. A., Murphy, N. A., Schmid Mast, M., & Feinstein, B. (2008).  Accuracy of 
judging others’ traits and states: Comparing mean levels across tests .  Journal of Research in Personality , 
 42 ,  1476–89 . 
 Hall, J. A., Andrzejewski, S. A., & Yopchick, J. E. (2009).  Psychosocial correlates of interpersonal sensitiv-
ity: A meta-analysis .  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior ,  33 ,  149–80 . 
 Hall, J. A., Halberstadt, A. G., & O’Brien, C. E. (1997).  “Subordination” and nonverbal sensitivity: A study 
and synthesis of fi ndings based on trait measures .  Sex Roles ,  37 ,  295–317 . 

113
REFERENCES
 Ickes, W. (1993).  Empathic accuracy .  Journal of Personality ,  61 ,  587–610 . 
 Ickes, W., Buysse, A., Pham, H., Rivers, K., Erickson, J. R., Hancock, M., et al. (2000).  On the diffi  culty 
of distinguishing “good” and “poor” perceivers: A social relations analysis of empathic accuracy data . 
 Personal Relationships ,  7 ,  219–34 . 
 Kenny, D. A. (1994).  Interpersonal Perception: A Social Relations Analysis .  New York :  Guilford . 
 Kenny, D. A., & Albright, L. (1987).  Accuracy in interpersonal perception: A social relations analysis . 
 Psychological Bulletin ,  102 ,  390–402 . 
 Kenny, D. A., & La Voie, L. (1984).  Th e social relations model . In L. Berkowitz (Ed.),  Advances in 
Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 18 (pp.  142–82 ).  Orlando :  Academic . 
 Malone, B. E., & DePaulo, B. M. (2001).  Measuring sensitivity to deception . In J. A. Hall & F. J. Bernieri 
(Eds),  Interpersonal Sensitivity: Th eory and Measurement (pp.  103–24 ).  Mahwah :  Erlbaum . 
 Mayer, J. D., & Geher, G. (1996).  Emotional intelligence and the identifi cation of emotion .  Intelligence ,  22 , 
 89–113 . 
 Mayer, J. D., & Salovey, P. (1997).  What is emotional intelligence? In P. Salovey & D. Sluyter (Eds), 
 Emotional Development and Emotional Intelligence: Implications for Educators (pp.  3–31 ).  New York : 
 Basic Books . 
 Neyer, F. J., Banse, R., & Asendorpf, J. B. (1999).  Th e role of projection and empathic accuracy in dyadic 
perception between older twins .  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships ,  16 ,  419–42 . 
 Nowicki, S., Jr., & Duke, M. P. (1994).  Individual diff erences in the nonverbal communication of aff ect: Th e 
Diagnostic Analysis of Nonverbal Accuracy Scale .  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior ,  18 ,  9–35 . 
 Patterson, M. L., Foster, J. L., & Bellmer, C. (2001).  Another look at accuracy and confi dence in social 
judgments .  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior ,  25 ,  207–19 . 
 Patterson, M. L., & Stockbridge, E. (1998).  Eff ects of cognitive demand and judgment strategy on person 
perception accuracy .  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior ,  22 ,  253–63 . 
 Ragsdale, G., & Foley, R. A. (2011).  A maternal infl uence on reading the mind in the eyes mediated 
by executive function: Diff erential parental infl uences on full and half-siblings .  PLoS One ,  6 , 
 e232360 . 
 Rosenthal, R., Hall, J. A., DiMatteo, M. R., Rogers, P. L., & Archer, D. (1979).  Sensitivity to Nonverbal 
Communication: Th e PONS Test .  Baltimore :  Johns Hopkins . 
 Sabatelli, R. M., Buck, R., & Kenny, D. A. (1986).  A social relations analysis of nonverbal communication 
accuracy in married couples .  Journal of Personality ,  53 ,  513–27 . 
 Schlegel, K., Grandjean, D., & Scherer, K. R. (2011).  Emotion recognition: Unidimensional ability or a set 
of modality- and emotion-specifi c skills?  Personality and Individual Diff erences ,  53 ,  16–21 . 
 Sternberg, R. J., & Smith, C. (1985).  Social intelligence and decoding skills in nonverbal communication . 
 Social Cognition ,  3 ,  168–92 . 
 Th omas, G., & Fletcher, G. J. (2003).  Mind-reading accuracy in intimate relationships: Assessing the 
roles of the relationship, the target, and the judge .  Journal of Personal and Social Psychology ,  85 , 
 1079–94 . 
 Wagner, H. L. (1993).  On measuring performance in category judgment studies of nonverbal behavior . 
 Journal of Nonverbal Behavior ,  17 ,  3–28 . 
 West, T. V., & Kenny, D. A. (2011).  Th e truth and bias model of judgment .  Psychological Review ,  118 , 
 357–78 . 
 Wilhelm, P., & Perrez, M. (2004).  How is my partner feeling in diff erent daily-life settings? Accuracy of 
spouse’s judgements about their partner’s feelings at work and at home .  Social Indicators Research ,  67 , 
 183–246 . 
 Woods, E. (1996).  Associations of nonverbal decoding ability with indices of person-centered communica-
tive ability .  Communication Reports ,  9 ,  13–22 . 

ISSUES IN THE MEASUREMENT OF JUDGMENTAL ACCURACY 
114
 Appendix 7A:  Details about sources used for entries in Table 7.1  
 ◆  CARAT: Buck (1976) reported a reliability of 56. Used here is the value reported by Hall (2001, 
p. 152), which is lower than the Buck’s original value. The mean is taken from Buck (1976).  
 ◆  DANVA (Diagnostic Analysis of Non-verbal Accuracy Scale):  this is the Faces-Receptive scale 
described by Nowicki & Duke (1994). The mean was computed from Table 2 and the reliabil-
ity from Table 3. 
 ◆  Eyes (reading the mind in the eyes): the alpha reliability was computed from Baron-Cohen 
et al. (2001) using means and standard deviations of the normal sample. Interesting, a very 
similar alpha reliability of .481 is given in Ragsdale & Foley (2011). The mean was also taken 
from the normal sample in Baron-Cohen et al. (2001).  
 ◆  IPT 15: Archer & Costanzo (1993) report a reliability of .38. Used here is the average from 
Patterson, Foster, and Bellmer (2001), three values reported by Hall (2001), and Woods 
(1996). The mean is taken from Archer & Costanzo (1993). 
 ◆  IPT 30: Costanzo & Archer (1989) report a reliability of 52. Used here is the average of the 
values reported by Hall (2001) and Patterson and Stockbridge (1998). The mean is taken from 
Costanzo & Archer (1989).  
 ◆  PONS: The reliability and means are taken from Tables 3.1 and 3.5 of Rosenthal et al. (1979). 
 ◆  S&S1: the mean is taken from Table 1 of Sternberg & Smith (1985) and the item reliability 
from page 180. Note that 29 items were dropped from the scale because of low item total 
correlations. Because the scale was not cross-validated, likely the reliability is inﬂ ated. 
The reliability of the full 70 item scale is .34.  
 ◆  S&S2: the mean is taken from Table 1 of Sternberg & Smith (1985) and the item reliability 
from page 180. Note that 34 items were dropped from the scale because of low item total 
correlations. Because the scale was not cross-validated, likely the reliability is inﬂ ated. 
The reliability of the full 70-item scale is.47. 
 Appendix 7B:  Details concerning the IRT model of JA 
and simulation 
 In the IRT model, the ability of an individual  i to know the answer to a question is denoted here 
as  r  i  where the subscript will be dropped for simpliﬁ cation. It is assumed that all items are equally 
difﬁ cult (akin to item means) and equally sensitive, where the sensitivity parameters (akin to fac-
tor loadings) are set to one. Although these are very strong assumptions, relaxing them does not 
substantially change the conclusions that follow. It is assumed that ability or  r has a normal distri-
bution with a mean of zero and a variance of   σ  . In the simulation,   σ  is set to 0.5 and 1.0. As is the 
usual convention in IRT, the value of  r  is multiplied by 1.7 to approximate as logistic distribution. 
 In this simulation, the item difﬁ culty parameter, assumed to be constant across items for any 
given trial, is  f where 1  −  e  f  /[1 +  e  f  ] ( e being the irrational number that approximately equals 2.718) 
the gives the probability that someone of average ability ( r = 0) knowing the correct answer. The 
larger the value of  f , the more difﬁ cult the test. The probability of someone with average ability 
knowing the correct answer is given by  e  -f  /(1 +  e  -f  ). Note that if  f  is zero, then this probability is 
.5, Within the IRT model, the probability of a person with ability  r knowing the correct answer is 
given by  e  r-f  /(1 +  e  r-f  ) (and the subscript  i  is dropped for  r ). 

APPENDIX 7C: SOCIAL RELATIONS VARIANCE PARTITIONING OF JA
115
 In IRT, if someone does not know the correct answer, the person guesses. Two alternatives are 
assumed and it is assumed that the probability of being correct is assumed is .5. Guessing can be 
added to the model by what is called in IRT as the three-parameter model and the probability of 
being correct equals: 
 
 
e
e
e
r
f
r
f
r
f
r
f
+
+
−+
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
1
0 5 1
1
e
 
 (A1) 
 The predicted proportion correct of someone of average ability ( r = 0) or  P is: 
 
 
0 5 1
2
1+
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
−
−
e
e
f
f
 
 (A2) 
 Thus, when  f equals 0,  P  equals .75. 
 The model in Equation A1 was estimated with 24 items and the standard deviation of indi-
vidual differences or   σ  was either 0.5 or 1.0. The value of Cronbach’s alpha, assuming no guessing, 
would be .75 for   σ   s  = 1.0 and .53 for   σ   s  = 0.5. In the simulation the parameter  f , the item difﬁ culty 
parameter, was allowed to range from 5 to  − 5 in increments of .25. A total of 100 trials each with 
500 cases were run. For each trial we saved  P , the average proportion correct and Cronbach’s alpha. 
The results are shown in Figure 7.1 and show that alpha maximizes at a value greater than  P equal 
to .75. 
 Within IRT, reliability is measured by a parameter called  information . Following deAyala (2009, 
p. 144), the information maximizes at the point when  f (the item difﬁ culty parameter in IRT) 
equals:  
 
 −
+
+
.
+
693
0 5.
6 8. σ  
 (A3) 
 This value is called the offset. Note that Equation A3 equals 0.880 for  σ = 1, which corresponds 
to  P of .853 and equals 0.640 for  σ  = .5, which corresponds to a  P of .827. Note that both of these 
values are considerably larger than .75. These two values correspond closely to the values obtained 
in our simulation (see Figure 7.1). 
 The model could be complicated to allow some items to be more diagnostic than other items 
(akin to larger factor loadings in CTT) and for item difﬁ cult to vary. However, the major point 
that is made in this section that the optimal value of  P is greater than .75 is not affected by these 
assumptions. 
 Appendix 7C:   Social relations variance partitioning of JA 
 With the Social Relations Model (SRM), the set of judges rate the same set of targets, who may very 
well be the same persons as the judges. For each judge-target pair, an accuracy score is computed. 
Within the SRM, the variance in accuracy is partitioned into the following sources: 
 Judge: Are some judges better than others at the task? 
 Target: Are some targets easier to judge than others? 
 Relationship: Are people better at judging some persons more than others, controlling for judge and 
target effects? 
 Error: Unpredicted variance. 

ISSUES IN THE MEASUREMENT OF JUDGMENTAL ACCURACY 
116
 Without replications, relationship and error variance are confounded. Most studies have not 
attempted to measure group variance. 
 In Table 7.A3 are the proportions of judge, target, and relationship/error variance. The following 
studies are included; 
 Kenny & La Voie (1984): The average across three studies of emotion and deception detection are 
presented. 
 Ickes, Buysse, Pham, Rivers, Erickson, Hancock, et al. (2000): The average across the two studies of 
empathic accuracy that do not use standardized stimuli. 
 Elfenbein, Foo, Boldry, & Tan, (2006): One study involving the perception of emotion. 
 Also reported in the table is (judge variance)/(judge variance + relationship/error variance) which 
is a close analogue to the inter-item (target) correlation or  r 1,1  and the reliability of judgment 
assuming ten targets. 
 Not directly relevant to this paper is the interesting result that target is the dominant source of 
variance: Some targets are easy to judge and others are most difﬁ cult. The statement by Malone & 
DePaulo (2001) is quite relevant here:
 It is possible that most of the variance … is due to differences in the judgeability of targets as opposed 
to the sensitivity of the perceivers. (p. 113)   
 Not included in the table is the study by Thomas & Fletcher (2003) which has quite different 
results, yielding  r 1,1 of .62 and an internal consistency estimate with 10 targets of .94. The large 
value found in this study, but perhaps it is due to the fact that judges were placed in a highly emo-
tional situation. 
 Table 7.A3  Social relations variance partitioning and reliability values from three studies 
Study
Judge
Target
Relationship/
error
 r 1,1 
Reliablity a 
Kenny & La Voie 
(1984)
.03
.42
.55
.05
.35
Ickes et al. (2000)
.00
.33
.67
.00
.00
Elfenbein et al. 
(2006)
. 09 
. 28 
. 63 
. 13 
. 59 
Average
.04
.34
.62
.06
.39
 a Assuming 10 targets. 

 Section 2 
 Neural systems 
and mechanisms 

This page intentionally left blank 

 Chapter 8 
 Brain electrophysiological studies 
of theory of mind 
 Mark A.   Sabbagh  
 For nearly 100 years, brain encephalographic recordings (EEG) have provided a way of monitor-
ing brain activity to gain a window into both the overall condition of the brain, and the brain’s 
contribution to cognitive activity (see Millett, 2001 for a review). It is currently widely used as a 
relatively low cost (per subject), non-invasive technique in the ﬁ eld of cognitive neuroscience that 
makes few physical demands of study participants. Although there are now several research tech-
niques that can be used to connect characteristics of EEG recordings with cognition, only two of 
them have been used in theory of mind research. The ﬁ rst, and most common, is the event-related 
potential (ERP) technique in which the EEG is recorded time locked to the presentation of a par-
ticular stimulus that requires a theory of mind judgment. The EEG signals from each trial are aver-
aged to capture the stable, reliable characteristics of the brain response, which are typically what 
are reported in ERP studies. The second is correlating characteristics of resting-state or baseline 
recordings of EEG with theory of mind performance. In this brief review, we will summarize the 
ﬁ ndings from a small, but growing number of studies that have used these methods to characterize 
the neural correlates of theory of mind.  
 Event-related potential studies of belief/desire reasoning 
 A primary strength of the ERP technique is that it has the potential to capture in ﬁ ne tempo-
ral detail (typically 1–4-millisecond resolution), and reasonable spatial detail, the neurocognitive 
events that are associated with the processing of a particular class of stimulus. There are, how-
ever, two challenges of applying the ERP methodology to the study of theory of mind. The ﬁ rst is 
that it is not entirely possible to determine precisely when someone has made an inference about 
someone’s mental state. Take, for example, the standard false belief task, which is common in both 
developmental research and in much of the research that I will review below. In a typical false belief 
task, one story protagonist leaves an object in one hiding place and then leaves the scene. While that 
character is gone, a second character takes the object out of the original hiding place and places it in 
an alternative hiding place. At this point in the story, the ﬁ rst story character has a false belief about 
the location of the object. Yet, it is difﬁ cult to pinpoint when someone hearing the story might infer 
or realize that the ﬁ rst character has that false belief. Indeed, such inferences might be made slowly 
as information is integrated across time. Because of this difﬁ culty, the time-locked nature of ERP 
is not obviously well-suited to investigating the neurocognitive processes by which individuals 
develop inferences about others’ beliefs. 
 A second problem with applying the ERP method to standard theory of mind tasks is that, as 
with most cognitive neuroscience techniques, ERP typically requires participants to endure at least 
40 trials of a particular condition type to maximize the signal-averaging beneﬁ ts. While solving 

BRAIN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIES OF THEORY OF MIND 
120
one typical false belief task might rely on theory of mind skills, it seems possible that after 40 or 
more, participants might fall back into a routine or pattern in which they are solving the task in 
ways other than reasoning about false beliefs. 
 Sabbagh & Taylor (2000) carried out the ﬁ rst attempt to address these issues and apply the ERP 
technique to reasoning about false beliefs. In their tasks, participants read scenarios in which an 
actor placed two objects in a scene. After the ﬁ rst actor leaves the scene, a second actor enters and 
moves one of the objects that the ﬁ rst actor originally set. Thus, the ﬁ rst actor has a true belief 
about the location of one of the objects, and a false belief about the other. Following the story, a test 
question about the ﬁ rst actor’s beliefs was presented (one word at a time) such that participants 
did not know which object was going to be asked about until the ﬁ nal word of the sentence (e.g. 
“According to Chester, where is the [object]”). In this way, Sabbagh & Taylor (2000) argued that, 
although theory of mind relevant inferences may have been occurring throughout the study, they 
had to be reasoning about the ﬁ rst actor’s beliefs at the moment when they knew what question 
they were answering. Furthermore, because they were unsure whether they would be asked about 
reality or belief, they could not rely on simple response strategies to correctly answer questions. 
 Along with 40 false belief trials, participants were also given 40 “false photograph” trials that 
involved the same scenarios except that instead of the story being about an actor who left the 
room while an object was moved, the stories were about actors who took pictures of a room before 
things were moved. The false belief test questions had the same format, and even involved the same 
objects as the false belief trials (e.g. According to the photo, where is the [object]”). This control 
condition is important as it has many of the same surface task demands of the false belief task, but 
does not require reasoning about mental states. 
 ERPs elicited by the ﬁ nal word of the test question in the false belief and false photograph trials 
were compared and showed a clear, focal dissociation in a slow-wave component of the ERP over 
left anterior frontal regions. Speciﬁ cally, the slow wave associated with belief reasoning was more 
positive than the slow wave associated with photo reasoning. The dissociation emerged at around 
300 milliseconds after the onset of the sentence ﬁ nal word of the test question and was maintained 
throughout the rest of the ERP recording epoch (1000 milliseconds). The ﬁ ndings also revealed a 
difference, emerging at roughly the same time, over a positive component at parietal sites whereby 
belief reasoning had a diminished amplitude relative to reasoning about photographs. No source 
localization analyses were performed, but the ﬁ ndings were generally consistent with cortical 
sources in the medial frontal regions, and the inferior parietal regions, both of which have shown 
sensitivity to the distinction between belief and photo reasoning in other neuroimaging studies 
(e.g. Saxe, Whitﬁ eld-Gabrieli, Scholz, & Pelphrey, 2005). 
 Another study (Liu, Sabbagh, Gehring & Wellman, 2005) used a similar methodology, with two 
key differences. The ﬁ rst difference was that instead of reading false belief stories, participants 
watched simpliﬁ ed cartoon-style animations of a scene in which a character was left with a true 
belief about the location of one object, and a false belief about the location of the other. The stories 
were narrated by an experimenter in real-time. At the end of the story, the narrator asked the test 
question (“Where will Garﬁ eld look for this”) and then showed a picture of either the false belief 
or the true belief object. Thus, instead of a word being the stimulus that elicited the ERP, here it was 
the picture. The second change was the comparison condition—in this case, the ERPs elicited after 
the belief questions were contrasted with ERPs elicited after a question about reality (i.e. “Really, 
where is this?”). Although judgments about reality are arguably not as well matched with belief 
judgments as were the photo judgments from the previous study, the results of the two studies were 
remarkably similar. Speciﬁ cally, the ERPs elicited in the belief and reality conditions were dissoci-
ated in a slow wave component over left anterior frontal areas, beginning at about 300 milliseconds 

EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDIES OF BELIEF/DESIRE REASONING
121
post-stimulus, just as in Sabbagh & Taylor (2000). The only difference was that whereas the belief 
ERP was more positive than the photo ERP in Sabbagh & Taylor (2000), here the belief ERP was 
more negative than the reality ERP. It is unclear what to make of this difference, particularly given 
the similarity of the timing and the scalp topography of the dissociation. Perhaps more surprising, 
this study did not provide strong evidence for a corresponding slow wave effect in parietal regions. 
Nonetheless, these two ERP studies are consistent in showing that frontal lobes make an early con-
tribution to theory of mind reasoning. 
 The ERP ﬁ ndings regarding a late slow wave effect (either positive or negative) associated with 
reasoning about false beliefs has been replicated with many different kinds of stimuli, and also 
now across multiple labs in other countries (e.g. Germany: Meinhardt, Sodian, Thoermer, Dohnel, 
& Sommer, 2011; China: Wang, Liu, Gao, Chen, Zhang & Lin, 2008; Zhang, Sha, Zheng Ouyang, 
& Li, 2009). To gain further evidence regarding the contribution that the frontal slow wave might 
be making to false belief reasoning, David Liu and colleagues (Liu, Meltzoff & Wellman, 2009a) 
adapted tasks that have been used with preschool-aged children for measuring reasoning about 
different kinds of mental states—beliefs and desires—for use in an ERP paradigm. In the key trials, 
children were told about two story characters who had either different desires or different beliefs 
that were relevant to the contents of a closed box. The box was then opened, and the contents were 
revealed to be consistent with one character’s beliefs or desires. ERPs were recorded time locked to 
the opening of the box, which were preceded by a question designed to guide participants’ process-
ing about beliefs or desires (e.g. “Who will say, ‘I want some,’ when they see this …?” or “Who will 
say, ‘I was wrong,’ when they see this …?”). ERPs elicited in these conditions were compared with 
those elicited in a control condition that asked about where the items that come in the box might 
be put away. Results showed that a positive frontal slow wave (similar to that shown in Sabbagh & 
Taylor, 2000) was stronger (relative to control) in the belief and desire conditions. This paradigm 
did elicit a right lateralized parietal slow wave effect, which was stronger (relative to control) in the 
belief condition only. These ﬁ ndings join recent ﬁ ndings from fMRI (e.g. Saxe & Powell, 2006) in 
suggesting that frontal lobe contributions to theory of mind might be important for representing 
mental states more generally, whereas parietal lobe contributions might be particularly important 
for reasoning about beliefs speciﬁ cally. 
 Studies with children 
 Along with being relatively inexpensive, EEG methods have the general advantage of perhaps the 
least taxing of the cognitive neuroscience techniques from the standpoint of the participant. Even 
dense-array EEG (up to 256 channels) acquisition “hats” or “nets” can be applied comfortably in 
minutes by a single researcher in an open room. Because of this convenience, EEG/ERP methods 
can, at least in principle, be applied to participants from a wide range of ages. This is a particularly 
important advantage for theory of mind research, because much of the interest in this area has cen-
tered on the rapid, generally stereotyped development of theory of mind skills in preschool-aged 
children, and the neurobiological events that may contribute to abnormalities in its development 
during early childhood (as in the case of autism). Because the same recording methods and experi-
mental paradigms can (again, at least in principle) be used with children of different ages and with 
adults, EEG/ERP methods provide a clear opportunity for looking at how the neural mechanisms 
that are associated with various aspects of theory of mind reasoning change over time. 
 This was recently attempted by Liu and colleagues (Liu, Sabbagh, Gehring & Wellman, 2009b) 
who used the same basic paradigm that this group had used in the study described above (Liu, 
Sabbagh, Gehring & Wellman, 2004) with a group of 6-year-old children and a second group 

BRAIN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIES OF THEORY OF MIND 
122
of adults. Unlike standard false belief tasks that 4-year-olds pass easily, the ERP false belief task 
required children to track and answer questions about two mental states (a true belief and a false 
belief) as opposed to just one. Accordingly, 6-year-olds varied in their behavioral performance on 
this false belief task and many showed systematically poor performance. This variability allowed 
for the comparison of ERP effects among “passers” and (for lack of a better term) “failers.” The 
ﬁ ndings here were striking. Adults showed the same pattern that was seen in Liu et al. (2005)—a 
slow wave dissociation emerging at right anterior frontal sites 300 milliseconds post-stimulus with 
the belief ERP being more negative than the reality ERP. For the children, false belief “passers” 
showed the same effect as the adults, though its timing was somewhat later and the scalp distribu-
tion was somewhat broader, likely reﬂ ecting that increased efﬁ ciency of neural processing with age 
and development (see e.g. Johnson, 2001). False belief “failers,” however, showed no systematic 
dissociation between belief and reality ERPs over left frontal areas, or any other electrode sites. 
These ﬁ ndings show that focal frontal lobe contributions are critical to theory of mind reasoning 
both in adults and young children. 
 Even more recently, Lindsay Bowman and colleagues (Bowman, Liu, Meltzoff & Wellman, 2012) 
adapted the paradigm for comparing the neural correlates of belief and desire reasoning for use 
with 8- and 9-year-old children. These ﬁ ndings showed that, like the adults, there was a left lateral-
ized late slow wave effect associated with reasoning about both beliefs and desires. The other effect 
that was seen in adults, a right lateralized slow wave effect over parietal areas for reasoning about 
beliefs was seen when analyzing trials on which children showed accurate performance. These 
ﬁ ndings suggest that the functional recruitment of right parietal areas for reasoning speciﬁ cally 
about beliefs may be a later developing feature of the neural correlates of theory of mind reasoning 
(see also Saxe et al., 2009). 
 Using a different paradigm, Meinhardt and colleagues (Meinhardt, et al., 2011) came to similar 
conclusions about both the consistency of the frontal late slow wave (LSW) in reasoning about 
false beliefs, and developmental changes in the contribution of the parietal regions. In their study, 
6–8-year-old children and adults watched vignettes in which a story character developed either a 
true or a false belief about the location of an object. At the end of the vignette, ERPs were recorded 
as participants watched the character acting either in accordance with his beliefs (true or false) or 
unexpectedly (i.e. counter to their beliefs). Results showed that for children and adults reasoning 
about false beliefs was associated with a frontal LSW and parietal effect not seen for reasoning about 
true beliefs. For adults, the parietal effect had a somewhat more central distribution whereas for 
children, the parietal effect was focused (although still broadly distributed) over parietal regions. 
 Comparisons between the scalp distributions of these ﬁ ndings to those from other studies are 
limited by differences in the electrode referencing schemes that were used (for a fuller discus-
sion, see “Issues and new directions for ERP studies”). Nonetheless, the ﬁ ndings do converge on a 
general developmental picture in which children’s early theory of mind reasoning may rely criti-
cally on neurocognitive processes within medial frontal regions, whereas parietal contributions to 
theory of mind reasoning that are seen in adults may continue to develop and be reﬁ ned through 
late childhood.  
 ERP studies of mental state decoding  
 In the belief/desire reasoning tasks described above, participants are asked to use contextual back-
ground information about an individual to make an inference about that individual’s likely mental 
state, and then assess how that person might act in a given situation based upon that mental state. 
Another, complementary, aspect of theory of mind is what we might call “decoding” others’ mental 

ERP STUDIES OF MENTAL STATE DECODING
123
states—the process associated with determining others’ mental states based less on our idiosyn-
cratic knowledge of other persons and their histories and more on immediately available informa-
tion such as gaze direction, facial expression, speech prosody, and so forth (see e.g. Sabbagh, 2004). 
Of course, mental state decoding and belief/desire reasoning work in concert to render accurate 
judgments about others’ mental states in everyday situations. Nonetheless, because the two proc-
esses rely on fundamentally different kinds of information, they may also rely on fundamentally 
distinct neurocognitive processes. 
 In some ways, the ERP technique is highly amenable to the study of mental state decoding. 
First, it is relatively easy to control the moment that someone engages in mental state decoding. 
Secondly, because the process does not necessarily rely on developing a context of idiosyncratic 
personal histories the way belief/desire reasoning does, the necessary numbers of trials can be car-
ried out quickly. Yet, despite this natural ﬁ t, we know of very little work that has used ERP to exam-
ine the neurocognitive processes associated with mental state decoding. Indeed, the only study 
we know about was done by Sabbagh, Moulson, & Harkness (2004), who adapted Baron-Cohen 
Wheelwright, Hill, Raste, & Plumb’s (2001) “Reading the Mind in the Eyes” task for use in an ERP 
paradigm. In their study, adults saw either a mental state term (e.g. “desiring”) or a sex term (e.g. 
“female”) that was followed by a picture of the eye region of a face. The participants’ task was to 
determine whether the mental state term or the sex term was an accurate description of eye picture. 
ERPs were recorded to the presentation of the picture of the eyes, as this was when participants 
were decoding either the mental states or the sex depicted in the picture. Results showed that there 
were two ERP effects that reliably dissociated trials in which participants made judgments about 
mental states from those in which participants made sex judgments. The ﬁ rst was an N270 effect 
over right anterior frontal regions, and the second was a right temporal negative slow wave effect. 
For both of these components, ERPs associated with mental state decoding were more negative 
than those associated with sex decoding. 
 Although Sabbagh et al. (2004) is the only study that has used ERP to investigate the proc-
esses of mental state decoding from within the theory of mind framework, there are two bodies 
of ERP  literature that are highly relevant to this question. The ﬁ rst concerns the ERP correlates 
of gaze direction perception. Gaze direction perception is highly relevant to mental state decod-
ing as it provides information about other’s attentional states (e.g. Baron-Cohen, 1994). Research 
from several laboratories has suggested that much of the brain’s specialized electrophysiological 
response to faces—speciﬁ cally, the N170 component over occipital-temporal regions) may result 
from processing that is speciﬁ c to the eye region of the face (e.g. Itier, Alain, Kvacevic & McIntosh, 
2007; Puce, Allison, Bentin, Gore & McCarthy, 1998). However, this specialized component does 
not appear to reliably index sensitivity to gaze direction (see Itier & Batty, 2009 for a review). 
Instead, the cognitive operations that are associated with making judgments related to gaze direc-
tion appear later in the ERP record and have a more anterior temporal frontal distribution (e.g. 
Itier et al., 2007; Conty, N’Diaye, Tijus, & George, 2007). In one particularly interesting study, 
Senju and colleagues (Senju, Tojo, Yaguchi, & Hasegawa, 2005) compared the ERPs elicited in 
an oddball paradigm in which pictures that showed an actor either displaying direct or averted 
gaze were targets in the context of a standard that showed an actor with downcast eyes. Results 
showed that perception of gaze direction (both direct and averted) was associated with a right 
temporal N270 component, similar to that seen in the Sabbagh et al. (2004) mental state decod-
ing paper. Considering these ﬁ ndings together, it may be that the temporal N270 component is 
associated with mental state processing associated with gaze direction processing. What was par-
ticularly notable about Senju et al.’s (2005) ﬁ ndings was that 12-year-olds with autism also showed 
the N270 effect when making judgments about gaze direction. However, the effect was bilaterally 

BRAIN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIES OF THEORY OF MIND 
124
distributed, thereby suggesting that the organization of neural systems for decoding mental states 
may differ in autism as compared with typically developing children. 
 A second literature that is directly relevant to mental state decoding concerns emotion recogni-
tion. Emotion recognition—typically operationalized as the ability to accurately identify other’s 
emotions based upon facial expressions—can be thought of as a special case of mental state decod-
ing insofar as both involve making a judgment about someone’s mental state based upon available 
perceptual information. There are many ERP studies of facial emotion recognition, most of which 
investigate differences in neural responding to the six basic emotions (fear, anger, happiness, sad-
ness, disgust, surprise), with a particular interest in understanding (1) whether the neural response 
to negative emotions differs from positive or neutral emotions, and (2) how the emotionality of the 
face affects the early perceptual processing of facial features and conﬁ gurations, and 3) how these 
effects are modulated by attention (see e.g. Batty & Taylor, 2003; Eimer, Holmes & McGlone, 2003 
for nice examples). Within this framework, however, little attention has been paid to the processes 
underlying the decoding of more subtle emotional expressions that are likely to be important 
in everyday mental state attribution (e.g. detecting that an interlocutor is confused). One recent 
attempt was undertaken by Debrulle, Brodeur, & Hess (2011) who presented participants with 
full face stimuli displaying ambiguous expressions (models were in fact not asked to display any 
particular expression). Participants were asked to judge whether a given face was neutral, positive, 
negative, or ambiguous. Results were broadly consistent with prior ﬁ ndings (including Sabbagh 
et al., 2004) in showing that (among other things) N270 component over anterior frontal regions 
discriminated neutral from valenced judgments. Although more work needs to be done to clarify 
the exact nature of these effects, it does appear that the N270 component of visually evoked ERPs 
may be a reliable index of the neurocognitive systems critical for mental state decoding. 
 Issues and new directions for ERP studies 
 In a sense, the studies that we have described so far share an experimental logic with PET or fMRI 
studies that have sought to “localize” the neural regions that subserve some aspect of theory of 
mind reasoning. That is, they have sought to compare the neural activations elicited by mental 
state reasoning with those elicited in some control condition (i.e. reality reasoning or photograph 
reasoning) with the aim of identifying special regions of the brain that are engaged for reasoning 
about mental states. However, the term “localize” does not readily apply to ERP effects. As is appar-
ent in the above studies, the spatial distribution of a particular EEG/ERP effect can be broad, which 
on its own allows for only a general characterization about the location of the effect (e.g. inferior 
frontal region). 
 There are two problems that pose difﬁ culties for more detailed characterization of sources. The 
ﬁ rst, and most serious, is what is sometimes called the “equivalent dipole problem”—any given 
ERP effect is mathematically consistent with more than one cortical source. Of course, this is not 
to say that some degree of reliable inference about cortical regions can be made for ERP effects. 
Indeed, methods for accurately localizing cortical sources of ERP effects are improving rapidly due 
to better recording techniques that allow for high spatial density sampling of scalp electrical ﬁ elds, 
and increased understanding of the physical and anatomical constraints that govern how electrical 
signals propagate from neural dipoles to the scalp. 
 The second is a less obvious technical difference in how different researchers characterize EEG 
at a given electrode site. Voltage is measured as a difference between two sites—an active site and 
a “reference” site where there is supposed to be an approximation of zero activity. Some research-
ers assume a “mastoid reference” which is the average activity recorded at electrodes placed on the 

ISSUES AND NEW DIRECTIONS FOR ERP STUDIES
125
mastoid bones, where there is thought to be little or no activity. Others using a dense recording 
array (up to 256 channels) use an “average reference” wherein the average of all electrodes (which, 
given the dipolar nature of neuroelectric generators, should theoretically be zero) is used as the 
reference. A discussion of the pros and cons of each method is beyond the scope of this chapter, 
but, the choice that a given researcher makes has important implications for the characterizing 
the precise spatial distribution of condition effects, making it different to compare across stud-
ies. Although somewhat arcane, the problem is quite serious. For instance, although frontal LSW 
effects are apparent in all studies that have sought to discriminate mental state (and especially false 
belief) reasoning from reasoning in control conditions, differences in recording techniques made 
it difﬁ cult to know whether the effects are homologous or heterogenous across studies. 
 Of course, these spatial imprecisions can be reduced by adopting sound practices in recording 
and analyzing EEG (i.e. use of many electrodes spaced evenly over the scalp, precise characteriza-
tion of electrode positions using photogrammetry or 3D imaging, etc.). Also, while researchers 
should strive to minimize these imprecisions, some level might be tolerable given the low-cost and 
ease of EEG recording. As was noted above, EEG is readily applicable to a wide variety of sensi-
tive populations (e.g. children, individuals with autism), and this advantage has made it a reliable 
ﬁ rst-pass technique for understanding the neurocognitive underpinnings of various cognitive 
processes. The fact that the extant studies on false belief reasoning and mental state understand-
ing more generally have rendered such similar ﬁ ndings is certainly impressive and can be taken 
as further evidence that the same is true for the role of EEG in understanding the neurocognitive 
systems underlying theory of mind. 
 These studies that have used ERP within a “localization” approach, however, should not over-
shadow a more distinct advantage of ERP which is that it provides an exquisitely sensitive charac-
terization of the timing of a particular neurocognitive process. This advantage may be particularly 
important for understanding the neural bases of theory of mind. Arguably, deploying theory of mind 
reasoning even in a highly constrained task context requires the coordination of multiple processes. 
For instance, to make a judgment about others’ mental states, one must generate a representation 
of the semantic content of those mental states (which itself can rely on numerous factors, such as 
remembering a person’s speciﬁ c history, etc.) and enact whatever executive processes are necessary 
for decision making based upon those representations of others’ mental states. Theorizing about 
both how to best characterize these cognitive operations and their interplay is critically constrained 
by understanding the timing of their relative contributions to ﬁ nal theory of mind judgments. 
 In one such study, McCleery and colleagues (McCleery, Surtees, Graham, Richards & Apperly, 
2011) adopted a task developed to examine the cognitive dynamics of visual perspective taking 
for use in an ERP paradigm. In this task, participants were shown a picture of a stage set in which 
three walls were visible (left, back, and right). On the walls of the room, there was some number 
of “disks” (black dots) in some arrangement and all visible to participants. The key manipulation 
was that also within the room there was a character (or “avatar”) who had either a full or partial 
view of the total disks. On some trials, the participants’ task was to say how many disks partici-
pants themselves see and on other trials say how many the avatar sees. A key manipulation was 
that some of the time, participants saw the same as the avatars, whereas other times there was a 
discrepancy. This design allows for main effect comparisons of (1) the neural mechanisms associ-
ated with perspective taking (through the self-other comparison) and (2) the neural mechanisms 
associated with resolving conﬂ ict between two response options (when participants and avatars 
see the same vs. different numbers of disks). Although some there were some complexities in the 
results, the ﬁ ndings were clear in showing that right (and to some extent, left) posterior regions 
were the ﬁ rst to index a difference in making judgments about one’s own vs. another’s perspective, 

BRAIN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIES OF THEORY OF MIND 
126
with differences emerging on a slow positive ERP component, similar to the posterior slow wave 
that was present in the ERP studies described above. This component was slower to peak when 
making judgments about others’ perspective than when making judgments about one’s own. Later 
in the ERP, a late slow wave 600–800 milliseconds post-stimulus, a lateral frontal component dif-
ferentiated instances in which individuals had to make a judgment when participants and avatars 
saw the same vs. different numbers of disks. Integrating these ﬁ ndings with others from the ERP 
and broader neuroimaging literature, the authors concluded that a posterior temporal parietal 
system is associated with computing differences in visual perspective whereas the frontal system is 
associated with selecting the appropriate response from the conﬂ icting options. Most compelling 
was that the timing of the effects showed that the computation of another’s perspective preceded 
the response execution. 
 Still another advantage of ERP studies is that the components of an evoked potential are largely 
similar across a wide range of studies. For instance, ERPs that are evoked with visual stimuli (as 
has been the case with all studies to date) have a typical signature response that has been well char-
acterized across numerous studies over time. Three such components that are relevant to under-
standing the neural processes associated with theory of mind are the N2 (a negative deﬂ ection 
over central-frontal areas peaking around 200 milliseconds post-stimulus), P3 a slower, positive 
deﬂ ection over parietal areas peaking between 300–600 milliseconds post-stimulus), and LSW, 
which can be negative or positive over lateral frontal regions that emerges around 500 milliseconds 
post-stimulus and continues to the end of a 1 second of the recording epoch. A long history of ERP 
research in a more psychophysiological tradition has aimed to catalog the types of manipulations 
that alter the timing, amplitudes, and spatial distributions of these effects. The result is that ERP 
effects that are elicited in theory of mind studies such as those described above can be constrained 
by these standard psychophysiological interpretations of the components. Some researchers have 
applied this kind of reasoning to their results. For instance, Liu et al. (2009b) leveraged a large ERP 
literature to marshal evidence that the left lateralized negative LSW effect for false belief reasoning 
they saw in children (who passed) and adults reﬂ ected ongoing conceptual operations in working 
memory required to reason through false belief scenarios. Similarly, McCleery, et al. (2011) relied 
on past work to argue that their centrally distributed positive LSW effects reﬂ ected the operations 
necessary for negotiating conﬂ icting response options, which is a critical task demand in most 
theory of mind judgments. These constraints on theorizing provide a distinct advantage that com-
plement other neuroimaging work in theory of mind. 
 More theoretical and methodological work can be done to take advantage of the psychophysio-
logical aspects of ERPs to better understand the neurocognitive underpinnings of theory of mind. 
For instance, the parietal slow wave component that is typically associated with belief reasoning 
is very much akin to the later P3 component of the visual evoked potential (sometimes called 
the P3b). The P3 is one of the most discussed ERP components in the literature and even a par-
tial review of this literature is beyond the scope of this chapter (but see Polich, 2007 for a recent 
review). A particularly promising direction is to develop theory of mind paradigms that can take 
advantage of the P3b and its theoretical interpretations to better understand the cognitive contri-
bution that parietal regions make to theory of mind reasoning. 
 Resting state EEG studies  
 Studies with adults 
 During awake mental relaxation, EEG alpha (8–13 Hz) becomes synchronized and thus ampli-
ﬁ ed across the scalp. In contrast, during mental activity, activity in the alpha band becomes 

RESTING STATE EEG STUDIES
127
desynchronized as cortical circuits engage in task-speciﬁ c cognitive activity (see Klimesch, 1999, 
for a review). Thus, EEG alpha power can serve as a reasonably precise inverse measure of cortical 
activity; that is, relatively stronger alpha power reﬂ ects less mental activity (Gevins, 1998). Within 
this context, EEG alpha has been used as a measure of individual differences in tonic cortical acti-
vation. In particular, researchers have been focused on how regional differences in tonic cortical 
activation may be a trait-like characteristic that might predispose individuals to particular cogni-
tive or affective styles (Davidson, 1998; Hagemann, Naumann, Thayer, & Bartussek, 2002). 
 To the extent that there are individual differences in theory of mind skills, we might expect that 
different patterns of tonic cortical activation would provide insight into the neurobiological bases 
of these differences. To our knowledge, there has been only one such attempt. Sabbagh & Flynn 
(2006) explored whether individual differences in healthy university students’ resting state EEG 
might be associated with mental state decoding. Using the reading the mind in the eyes task (as did 
Sabbagh et al., 2004) results from individual differences and group analyses showed that individu-
als with tonic activation at right mid-frontal leads was positively associated with performance on 
the mental state decoding task. There were no signiﬁ cant effects at posterior parietal leads. These 
ﬁ ndings suggest that stable, individual differences in mental state decoding might be associated 
with tonic activation of the right frontal regions. 
 Although there has only been one attempt to link characteristics of resting EEG to individual dif-
ferences in theory of mind performance in adults, we think that there are a number of reasons that 
this could represent an important direction for future research. In adults and children, a large body 
of work in affective neuroscience has used measures of EEG activation to better understand indi-
vidual differences in different aspects of affective style, which themselves are associated with social 
competence in everyday situations (see e.g. Davidson, 1998). This work might offer an opportunity 
to provide an unexpected link between affective style and theory of mind. For example, like mental 
state decoding, clinical mood disorder symptoms of anhedonia and dysphoria are also associ-
ated with increased tonic activation of right frontal regions (e.g. Gotlib, Ranganath & Rosenfeld, 
1998). Interestingly, a growing body of literature suggests that dysphoric individuals are better at 
mental state decoding than non-dysphoric controls (e.g. Harkness, Sabbagh, Jacobson, Chowdrey, 
& Chen, 2005; Harkness, Jacobson, Duong, & Sabbagh, 2010). Further research with EEG will be 
useful in further solidifying the connection between affective style and theory of mind. 
 Studies with children 
 Resting EEG can be used in the developmental context to provide a reliable measure of functional 
cortical maturation (Thatcher, 1992). Over the preschool period, the alpha rhythm (for children 
between 6 and 9 Hz, as opposed to 8–12 Hz for adults) becomes increasingly dominant in the base-
line EEG. Most important for the present purposes, there are regional changes in alpha coherence 
(the non-linear correlation in signal at any two electrodes). These changes in alpha coherence are 
caused by increases in synchronized neuronal ﬁ ring both within and across neural populations 
that reﬂ ect the developmental changes in the organization of neurocognitive systems (Nunez, 
1995). Recent advances in EEG analysis, such as standardized low-resolution electromagnetic 
tomography (sLORETA; Pascual-Marqui, 2002) have made it possible to use coherence measures 
to estimate the intracerebral sources of spectral EEG power. When applied in the developmental 
context, we can assume that regional changes in source-localized current density estimated from 
baseline EEG recordings reﬂ ect ongoing neurodevelopmental processes within that region. 
 With this in mind, Sabbagh, Bowman, Evraire, and Ito (2009) investigated the association between 
regional cortical maturation and performance on a battery of standard theory of mind tasks to bet-
ter understand the neural bases of theory of mind in preschool-aged children. Of particular interest 

BRAIN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIES OF THEORY OF MIND 
128
was whether the neural systems whose development is positively associated with theory of mind 
development are homologous with those that are important for theory of mind reasoning in adults. 
The results from the source-localization analyses were clear in showing that individual differences 
in the current-source estimates attributable to the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (dMPFC) and the 
right temporal parietal juncture (RTPJ) were associated with preschoolers’ performance on the the-
ory of mind battery. These associations were present when individual differences in preschoolers’ 
executive functioning and language skills were statistically controlled. What is more, these regions 
showed substantial overlap with those that have been identiﬁ ed in fMRI studies of theory of mind 
reasoning in adults (e.g. Saxe, 2006). 
 Sabbagh et al. (2009) pointed out several limitations in their ﬁ ndings. Among the most impor-
tant concerned the nature of the source-localization analyses. As noted above, cortical source 
localization based upon EEG is problematic because of the equivalent dipole problem, which 
affects these ﬁ ndings as well. Of course, the equivalent dipole problem is minimized as increas-
ingly accurate models of how electrical signals propagate through the brain, skull, and scalp. For 
now, the average parameters for these models are well-characterized for adults, although, con-
siderably less work has been done to establish the appropriate parameters for estimating sources 
in children. Because of this, Sabbagh, et al. (2009) used the adult models and urged caution in 
interpreting their results. 
 A second, more theoretical issue, is that there are fundamental ambiguities surrounding how to 
interpret this concurrent relation between regional current-source density and children’s theory 
of mind skills. One possibility, favored by Sabbagh et al. (2009), is that the functional maturation 
of these regions may constitute a rate-limiting factor on the emergence of explicit theory of mind 
skills in preschool aged children such that as these regions become more functionally mature so 
too does children’s ability to explicitly reason about representational mental states. Of course, both 
endogenous and exogenous factors might affect the maturation of these regions, but the critical 
point is that the maturation of these regions is itself important to children’s theory of mind devel-
opment. An alternative possibility is that somehow children’s explicit representational theory of 
mind skills spur the functional maturation of these brain regions. The EEG measures that Sabbagh 
et al. (2009) used are well suited to using longitudinal research that can do a better job of establish-
ing causal relations among these different developmental achievements.  
 Mu-suppression 
 Along with providing insight into the biological bases of young children’s theory of mind devel-
opment, a small group of researchers have been using EEG measures as a way of understanding 
infants’ understanding of intentional action. Although alpha rhythms can be detected to some 
degree at all regions of an EEG recording array, there are some regional differences in character. 
One particularly well-studied characteristic of alpha is the so-called mu rhythm which is recorded 
from leads positioned over the motor cortex (e.g. Cz, C3, C4). The mu rhythm is desynchronized 
(or “suppressed”) during intentional motor planning and execution, presumably because the neu-
ral circuits that were generating the mu rhythm at baseline (rest) become engaged to complete the 
motor task. 
 The phenomenon of mu suppression has recently been leveraged by researchers interested in 
“mirror neuron” approaches to the origins of social cognitive processes. A detailed review of the 
general approach is beyond the scope of this chapter. In brief, the term “mirroring” is used to 
capture instances in which a particular neural mechanism becomes active in both the production 
and observation of intentional actions (Jeannerod, 2001; Prinz, 1997). Mirroring is of particular 
interest to researchers in social cognition because the mechanism seems to provide a framework 

CONCLUSIONS
129
for interpreting others’ goal-oriented actions—seeing one’s own actions as equivalent to another’s 
elevates the hypothesis that others’ intentions are similar to one’s own in the same context. 
 In one study, Southgate, Johnson, El Karoui & Csibra (2010) used the phenomenon of mu sup-
pression to investigate the extent to which 9-month-old infants are able to predict others’ goals in 
action. In their study, infants were presented with a hand posed in a “grasp” shape about to reach 
behind an occluder, which to an adult looks like the beginning of an attempt to grab a hidden 
object. In three control conditions, the same stimulus elements were maintained but reconﬁ gured 
so that a detection of an impending “grasp object” intention was less likely. Results showed that 
the mu rhythm was desynchronized only in the stimulus condition in which it appeared that the 
hand was about to grasp something behind an occluder. These ﬁ ndings are striking in that the 
infants never saw the action completed—thus, the authors argue that they perceived the action 
as goal-directed and in doing so, activated the neural circuitry that is associated with the observa-
tion, planning and execution of goal-directed action. These ﬁ ndings were also consistent with an 
earlier study that showed similar ﬁ ndings of mu-suppression with children observing the actual 
outcomes of goal-directed activities (Southgate, Johnson, Osborne & Csibra, 2009). 
 While these ﬁ ndings are intriguing, some caution should be used in their interpretation. 
Although data were recorded from all over the scalp, only the data from the central electrodes 
where mu is typically found are reported. It is possible that alpha suppression occurred over the 
scalp more generally during action observation, which may raise questions about whether the 
true nature of the motor cortex’s involvement. One possibility is that the suppression seen during 
action observation comes from a source other than motor cortex. Some hint that this may be true 
comes from Marshall, Young & Meltzoff (2011) who recently sought to specify in more detail the 
scalp topography of mu suppression during action observation and execution with the goal of 
determining whether mu suppression can be considered as a neurophysiological correlate of the 
human mirror system. In their study, infants were presented with a live actor who demonstrated a 
simple novel action—pressing a button on a box to make a sound. Then, infants alternated between 
watching the experimenter perform the action, or performing the action themselves, while EEG 
was continuously recorded. Results showed that when infants performed the action themselves, 
the mu rhythm was suppressed over central sites (located over the motor cortex) and not elsewhere 
on the scalp. In contrast, when infants watched others perform the action, there was evidence of 
alpha attenuation not just at the central sites but all across the scalp. The broad distribution of 
alpha suppression more generally at all sites during observation may suggest one of two things. 
Either action observation activates a large cortical network within which it is unclear whether the 
central sites are representing an independent contribution to that process. Or, the broad topogra-
phy of the alpha attenuation indicates a broader, potentially deeper cortical process that spreads 
effects to the central recording sites. Clearly, more work is necessary to conﬁ rm the extent to which 
mu-suppression can be seen as a neural correlate of the mirror system that is arguably important 
for theory of mind development. 
 Conclusions  
 Here, I have reviewed how brain electrophysiological recordings, ERP/EEG, have helped to better 
understand the neural and neurodevelopmental bases of theory of mind, and outlined ways in 
which their continued use will provide an important complement to other neuroimaging meth-
ods. It is our hope that given its ease of use and, hopefully, increasingly standardized methods of 
EEG recording and analysis, electrophysiological data of the kind described above can provide 
critical data particularly with respect to the neural correlates of the development of theory of 
mind, its precursors, and its abnormalities in populations with known neurogenetic disorders.  

BRAIN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIES OF THEORY OF MIND 
130
 References 
 Baron-Cohen, S. (1994). How to build a baby that can read minds.  Current Psychology of Cognition  13 , 
513–52. 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Hill, J., Raste, Y. & Plumb, I. (2001).  Th e “Reading the mind in the 
eyes,” test revised version: A study with normal adults, and adults with Asperger syndrome or high 
functioning autism .  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines  42 ,  241–51 . 
 Batty, M., & Taylor, M.J. (2003).  Early processing of the six basic facial emotional expressions .  Cognitive 
Brain Research  17 ,  613–20 . 
 Bowman, L., Liu, D., Meltzoff , A. & Wellman, H.M. (2012).  Neural correlates of belief and desire reasoning 
in 7- and 8-year-old children: An event-related potential study .  Developmental Science  15 , 618–32. 
 Conty, L., N’Diaye, K., Tijus, C., & George, N. (2007).  When eye creates the contact! ERP evidence for 
early dissociation between direct and averted gaze motion processing .  Neuropsychologia  45 ,  3024–3037 . 
 Davidson, R. J. (1998).  Anterior electrophysiological asymmetries, emotion, and depression: Conceptual 
and methodological conundrums .  Psychophysiology  35 ,  607–14 . 
 Debruille, B., Brodeur, M., B., & Hess, U. (2011).  Assessing the way people look to judge their intentions . 
 Emotion  11 ,  533–43 . 
 Eimer, M., Holmes, A., & McGlone, F. (2003).  Th e role of spatial attention in the processing of facial 
expression: An ERP study of rapid brain responses to six basic emotions .  Cognitive, Aff ective and 
Behavioral Neuroscience  3 ,  97–110 . 
 Gevins, A. (1998).  Th e future of electroencephalography in assessing neurocognitive functioning . 
 Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology  106 ,  165–72 . 
 Gotlib, I.H., Ranganath, C. & Rosenfeld, J.P. (1998). Frontal EEG alpha asymmetry, depression and cogni-
tive functioning.  Cognition and Emotion  12 , 449–78. 
 Hagemann, D., Naumann, E., Th ayer, J.F., & Bartussek, D. (2002).  Does resting electroencephalograph 
asymmetry refl ect a trait? An application of latent state-trait theory .  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology  82 ,  619–41. 
 Harkness, K.L., Jacobson, J.A., Duong, D. & Sabbagh, M.A. (2010). Mental state decoding in remitted 
major depression: Eff ects of sad versus happy mood induction.  Cognition and Emotion  24 , 497–513 
 Harkness, K.L., Sabbagh, M.A., Jacobson, J.A., Chowdrey, N., & Chen, T. (2005). Sensitivity to subtle 
social information in dysphoric college students: Evidence for an enhanced theory of mind.  Cognition 
and Emotion  19 , 999–1026. 
 Itier, R.J., Alain, C., Kovacevic, N., & McIntosh, A.R. (2007).  Explicit vs. implicit gaze processing assessed 
by ERPs .  Brain Research  1177 ,  79–89 . 
 Itier, R.J., & Batty, M. (2009).  Neural bases of eye and gaze processing: Th e core of social cognition . 
 Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews  33 ,  843–63 . 
 Jeannerod, M. (2001).  Neural simulation of action: A unifying mechanism for motor cognition . 
 NeuroImage  14 ,  S103–9 . 
 Johnson, M.H. (2001).  Functional brain development in humans .  Nature Reviews Neuroscience  2 ,  490–501 . 
 Klimesch, W. (1999).  EEG alpha and theta oscillations refl ect cognitive and memory performance: A review 
and analysis .  Brain Research Reviews  29 ,  169–95 . 
 Liu, D., Meltzoff , A.N., & Wellman, H.M. (2009a).  Neural correlates of belief- and desire-reasoning .  Child 
Development  80 ,  1163–71 . 
 Liu, D., Sabbagh, M.A., Gehring, W.J., & Wellman, H.M. (2004).  Decoupling beliefs from reality in the 
brain: An ERP study of theory of mind .  NeuroReport  15 ,  991–5 . 
 Liu, D., Sabbagh, M.A., Gehring, W.J., & Wellman, H.M. (2005).  An ERP study of 5-year-olds theory of 
mind .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  190–190 . 
 Liu, D., Sabbagh, M.A., Gehring, W.J., & Wellman, H.M. (2009b).  Neural correlates of theory of mind rea-
soning in adults and children .  Child Development  80 ,  318–26 . 

131
REFERENCES
 Marshall, P.J., Young, T., & Meltzoff , A.N. (2010).  Neural correlates of action observation and execution 
in 14-month-old infants: An event-related EEG desynchronization study .  Developmental Science  14 , 
 474–80 . 
 McCleery, J.P., Surtees, A.D.R., Graham, K.A., Richards, J.E., & Apperly, I.A. (2011).  Th e neural and cog-
nitive time course of theory of mind .  Journal of Neuroscience  31 ,  12849–54 . 
 Meinhardt, J., Sodian, B., Th oermer, C., Dohnel, K., & Sommer, M. (2011).  True and false belief reason-
ing in children and adults: An event related potential study of theory of mind .  Developmental Cognitive 
Neuroscience  1 ,  67–76 . 
 Millett, D. (2001).  Hans Berger—From psychic energy to the EEG .  Perspectives in biology and medicine  44 , 
 522–42 . 
 Nunez, P.L. (1995).  Neocortical Dynamics and Human EEG Rhythms .  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Pascual-Marqui, R.D. (2002).  Standardized low-resolution brain electromagnetic tomography (sLORETA): 
Technical details .  Methods and Findings in Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology  24 ,  5–12 . 
 Polich, J. (2007).  Updating P300: An integrative theory of P3a and P3b .  Clinical Neurophysiology  118 , 
 2128–48 . 
 Prinz, W. (1997).  Perception and action planning .  European Journal of Cognitive Psychology  9 ,  129–54 . 
 Puce, A., Allison, T., Bentin, S., Gore, S.C., & McCarthy, G. (1998).  Temporal cortex activation in humans 
viewing eye and mouth movements .  Journal of Neuroscience  18 ,  2188–99 . 
 Sabbagh, M.A. (2004).  Understanding orbitofrontal contributions to theory-of-mind reasoning: 
Implications for autism .  Brain and Cognition  55 ,  209–19 . 
 Sabbagh, M.A., Bowman, L.C., & Evraire, L.E. (2009).  Neurodevelopmental correlates of theory of mind in 
preschool children .  Child Development  80 ,  1147–62 . 
 Sabbagh, M.A., & Flynn, J. (2006).  Mid-frontal EEG alpha asymmetries predict individual diff erences in 
one aspect of theory of mind: Mental state decoding .  Social Neuroscience  1 ,  299–308 . 
 Sabbagh, M.A., Moulson, M.C., & Harkness, K.L. (2004).  Neural correlates of mental state decoding in 
human adults: An event-related potential study .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  16 ,  415–26 . 
 Sabbagh, M.A., & Taylor, M. (2000).  Neural correlates of theory-of-mind reasoning: An event-related 
potential study .  Psychological Science  11 ,  46–50 . 
 Saxe, R. (2006). Uniquely human social cognition.  Current Opinion in Neurobiology  16 , 235–9. 
 Saxe, R., & Powell, L.J. (2006).  It’s the thought that counts: Specifi c brain regions for one component of 
theory of mind .  Psychological Science  17 ,  692–9 . 
 Saxe, R., Whitfi eld-Gabrieli, S., Scholz, J., & Pelphrey, K.A. (2009).  Brain regions for perceiving and rea-
soning about other people in school-aged children .  Child Development  80 ,  1197–209 . 
 Senju, A., Tojo, Y., Yaguchi, K., & Hasegawa, T. (2005).  Deviant gaze processing in children with autism: 
An ERP study .  Neuropsychologia  43 ,  1297–306 . 
 Southgate, V., Johnson, M.H., El Karoui, I., & Csibra, G. (2010).  Motor system activation reveals infants 
on-line prediction of others’ goals .  Psychological Science  21 ,  355–9 . 
 Southgate, V., Johnson, M.H., Osborne, T., & Csibra, G. (2009).  Predictive motor activation during action 
observation in human infants .  Biology Letters  5 ,  769–72 . 
 Th atcher, R.W. (1992).  Cyclic cortical reorganization during early-childhood .  Brain and Cognition  20 , 
 24–50 . 
 Wang, Y.W., Liu, Y., Gao, Y.X., Chen, J., Zhang, W.X., & Lin, C.D. (2008).  False belief reasoning in the 
brain: An ERP study .  Science in China. Series C, Life Sciences  51 ,  72–9 . 
 Zhang, T., Sha, W.J., Zheng, X.R., Ouyang, H.L., & Li, H. (2009).  Inhibiting one’s own knowledge in false 
belief reasoning: An ERP study .  Neuroscience Letters  467 ,  194–8 . 

 Chapter 9 
 Functional neuroimaging 
of theory of mind 
 Jorie Koster-Hale and Rebecca   Saxe 
 Introduction  
 In the decade since the last edition of  Understanding Other Minds , the number of papers that use 
human neuroimaging tools to investigate the neural basis of theory of mind (ToM) has exploded 
from four (described in Frith & Frith’s 2000 chapter) to, as of 2013, well over 400. Studying ToM 
with neuroimaging  works . Unlike many aspects of higher-level cognition, which tend to produce 
small and highly variable patterns of responses across individuals and tasks, ToM tasks gener-
ally elicit activity in an astonishingly robust and reliable group of brain regions. In fact, conver-
gence on this answer came almost immediately. By 2000, Frith and Frith concluded that “studies in 
which volunteers have to make inferences about the mental states of others activate a number of 
brain areas, most notable the medial [pre]frontal cortex [(mPFC)] and temporo-parietal junction 
[(TPJ)].” These regions remain the focus of most neuroimaging studies of ToM and social cogni-
tion, more than a decade later (see Adolphs, 2009, 2010; Carrington & Bailey, 2009; Frith & Frith, 
2012; and Van Overwalle, 2008 for some recent reviews). To our minds, this consensus is one of the 
most remarkable scientiﬁ c contributions of human neuroimaging, and the one least foreshadowed 
by a century of animal neuroscience. 
 Nevertheless, most of the fundamental questions about  how our brains allow us to understand 
other minds remain unanswered; we have mainly discovered where to look next. We hope that this 
gap means the next decade of neuroimaging ToM will be even more exciting than the last one. In 
this chapter, we offer a perspective on the contribution that neuroimaging has made to the science 
of ToM in the last decade, and some thoughts on the contribution that it could make in the next. 
The chapter has three sections: “Theory of mind and the brain” reviews the existing evidence for a 
basic association between thinking about people’s thoughts and feelings and activity in this group 
of brain regions. “A strong hypothesis” discusses some objections, both theoretical and empirical, 
to a strong interpretation of this association, and our responses. “Where next?” highlights newer 
approaches to functional imaging data, which we expect will contribute to the future neuroscience 
of ToM, their strengths and their limitations.  
 Theory of mind and the brain  
 Theory of mind brain regions 
 Over the course of development, human children make a remarkable discovery: other people have 
minds both similar to and distinct from their own. Other people see the world from a different 
angle, have different desires and preferences, and acquire different knowledge and beliefs. Children 
learn that other people’s minds contain representations of the world which are often true and 

THEORY OF MIND AND THE BRAIN
133
reasonable, but which may be strange, incomplete, or even entirely false. These discoveries (i.e. 
“building a Theory of Mind”) help children to make sense of some otherwise mystifying behav-
iors: why mom would eat broccoli, even though there is chocolate cake available (e.g. Repacholi & 
Gopnik 1997), or why she is looking for the milk in the fridge, even though dad just put it on the 
table (e.g. Wimmer & Perner 1983). 
 As readers of this volume know well, developmental psychologists historically focused on one 
key transition in this developmental process—when and how children come to understand false 
beliefs. Assessing understanding of false beliefs has been taken to be a good measure of ToM capac-
ity because it requires a child to understand both that someone can maintain a representation of 
the world, and that this representation may not match the true state of reality or the child’s own 
beliefs. In a standard version of the false belief task, children might see that, while their mother 
thinks the milk is in the fridge (having put it there 5 minutes ago), it is now actually on the table. 
The children are asked: “Where will she look for the milk?” or “Why is she looking in the fridge?”. 
Five-year-old children, like adults, usually predict that she will look in the fridge, because that is 
where she thinks the milk is (Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001). Three-year-olds, however, pre-
dict that she will look on the table, explaining that she wants the milk and the milk is on the 
table (at least when asked explicitly; see, e.g. Onishi & Baillargeon (2005), Saxe (in press), and 
Southgate, Senju, & Csibra (2007), for further discussion of ToM behavior in pre-verbal children). 
In fact, when three-year-olds see her look in the fridge instead, some will go so far as to fabricate 
belief-independent explanations, stating that she no longer wants the milk, and must be looking 
for something else (Wellman et al., 2001; Wimmer & Perner 1983). 
 Building off decades of experience in developmental psychology, the ﬁ rst neuroimaging stud-
ies of ToM also used versions of false belief tasks. Adults, lying in positron emission tomography 
(PET) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanners, read short stories describing a person’s 
action (see Figure 9.2), and were asked to explain that action (usually silently to themselves, to 
avoid motion artifacts). These early studies revealed increased levels of blood oxygen and glu-
cose uptake (indirect measures of metabolic activity, henceforth called “activity”), in a small, but 
consistent group of brain regions—left and right TPJ and mPFC, as noted by the Friths, and also 
medial parietal cortex (precuneus, PC) and more anterior regions of the superior temporal sulcus 
(STS), down to the temporal poles (Figure 9.1). 
 Figure 9.1  Brain regions commonly recruited in Theory of Mind tasks. (Left) Average activity in 63 
subjects reading stories about false beliefs, compared to stories about false photographs (P < 0.05, 
corrected; see Dodell-Feder et al., 2011; Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003) overlaid on an average brain. 
Colored ellipses indicate standard locations of the right TPJ (red), left TPJ (yellow), right anterior STS 
(orange) medial parietal/precuneus (blue), and mPFC (green). Other three panels: activity in the same 
task in three example individual participants, overlaid on the same average brain anatomy for easy 
comparison (P < 0.001, uncorrected). Thanks to Nicholas Dufour for the images. See also Plate 2.  

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
134
 Activity during the false belief task is, of course, far from sufﬁ cient evidence that these brain 
regions have any role in understanding other minds. We believe this proposition becomes more 
compelling after reviewing the range of different experimental tasks and paradigms that have 
been used successfully over the years, across laboratories and countries, each aiming to elicit some 
aspect of “understanding other minds.” While some studies used complex verbal narratives, other 
researchers have used simple sentences or non-verbal cartoons; some studies explicitly instruct 
participants to think about a person’s thoughts, and others have elicited ToM spontaneously. The 
heterogeneity of methods, materials, and participant demographics makes it especially impressive 
that these studies have converged on the same regions of the brain. In this section, we will review a 
sample of these different procedures. 
 In the original theory of mind functional MRI experiments, both the content of the mate-
rials and the explicit instructions focused participants’ attention on (or away from) thinking 
about someone’s mind. For example, in an early PET study, Fletcher Happe, Frith, Baker, Dolan, 
Frackowiak, et al. (1995) told participants that they would be reading different kinds of verbal 
passages. Just before each item, the participant was told what kind of story was coming next. If 
it was a “mental” story, participants were instructed that it was “vital to consider the thoughts 
and feelings of the characters,” and then shown a story revolving around someone’s mental states 
(see example in Figure 9.2). If the story was a “physical” story, participants were ﬁ rst instructed 
that thinking about thoughts and feelings was irrelevant and undesirable, then shown a control 
story (see example in Figure 9.2). After each story, participants were instructed to silently answer 
an action-explanation question, such as “Why did the prisoner say that?”. Glucose consumption 
increased in the theory of mind brain regions while people read the mental stories, relative to the 
control stories.      
 The same design has been used with non-verbal stimuli. In an early fMRI experiment (Gallagher, 
Happ é , Brunswick, Fletcher, Frith, & Frith 2000), participants both read the stories used by Fletcher 
et al. (1995) and were shown cartoons depicting visual jokes that either relied on ToM (in which 
understanding the joke depended on attribution of either a false belief or ignorance), or other 
types of humor (such as puns, idioms, and physical humor). Again, participants were cued in 
advance about whether to expect a mental or control cartoon (for examples, see Figure 9.2). For 
both types of cartoons, they were asked to silently contemplate the meaning; for mental cartoons, 
they were also explicitly instructed to consider the thoughts and feelings of the characters. With 
less than 20 minutes of scanning for each task, Gallagher and colleagues found that the same 
group of brain regions showed increased activity for both verbal and non-verbal ToM stimuli; 
these regions include the bilateral temporal-parietal junction and the middle prefrontal cortex. 
Similar convergence of the activity elicited by verbal and non-verbal stimuli has been found by 
Kobayashi, Glover & Temple (2007). 
 Sommer, D ö hnel, Sodian, Meinhardt, Thoermer, & Hajak (2007) also used non-verbal stimuli 
to focus participants’ attention on the thoughts of a character, but without explicitly cuing the 
condition. They showed participants a series of cartoon images depicting a story—Betty hides her 
ball, Nick moves it, and then Betty comes back to look for her ball. In half of the trials, Betty looks 
into the box where she thinks the ball is (the expected condition); in the other half, she looks into 
the other box (the unexpected condition). Participants judged whether, based on the character’s 
beliefs, the character’s action was expected or unexpected. Rather than explicitly labeling the men-
tal and control conditions, a key contrast was between the beginning of the trial, before mental 
state inferences were possible, and the end of the trial, when participants had presumably made 
belief inferences to complete the task. The second key contrast was between trials in which Betty 
had a false belief (so that predicting her action required considering her thoughts) and trials in 

THEORY OF MIND AND THE BRAIN
135
Mental
Control
During the war, the Red army capture a member of the Blue 
army. They want him to tell them where his armies' tanks are. 
They know that they are either by the sea or in the mountains. 
They know that the prisoner will not want to tell them, he will 
want to save his army, and so he will certainly lie to them. The 
prisoner is very brave and very clever, he will not let them ﬁnd 
his tanks. The tanks are really in the mountains. Now when the
 other side ask him where his tanks are he says, "They are in the 
mountains."
Two enemy powers have been at war for a very long time. Each 
army has won several battles, but now the outcome could go 
either way. The forces are equally matched. However, the Blue 
army is stronger than the Yellow army in air foot soldiers and 
artillery. But the yellow army is stronger than the Blue army in air 
power. On the day of the ﬁnal battle, which will decide the 
outcome of the war, there is heavy fog over the mountains 
where the ﬁghting is about to occur. Low-lying clouds hang 
over the soldiers. By the end of the day, the Blue army has won.
Brad had no money, but just had to have the beautiful ruby ring 
for his wife. Seeing no salespeople around, he quietly made his 
way closer to the counter. He was seen running out the door.
While playing in the waves, Sarah’s Frisbee went ﬂying toward 
the rocks in the shallow water. While searching for it, she
 stepped on a piece of glass. Sarah had to wear a bandage on 
her foot for a week.
The path to the castle leads via the lake. But children tell the 
tourists: ‘‘The way to the castle goes through the woods.’’ The 
tourists now think that the castle is via the woods or lake?
The sign to the monastery points to the path through the woods. 
While playing the children make the sign point to the golf 
course. According to the sign the monastery is now in the 
direction of the golf course or woods?
How likely is Queen Elizabeth to think that keeping a diary is 
important?
How likely is Queen Elizabeth to sneeze when a cat is nearby?
John was on a hike with his girlfriend. He had an engagement 
ring in his pocket and at a beautiful overlook he proposed 
marriage. His girlfriend said that she could not marry him and 
began crying. John sat on a rock and looked at the ring.
Joe was playing soccer with his friends. He slid in to steal the ball 
away, but his cleat stuck in the grass and he rolled over his ankle, 
breaking his ankle and tearing the ligaments. His face was 
ﬂushed as he rolled over.
That morning, people sat around looking at each other, 
wondering if they were dreaming, because everything looked 
purple. Some people were shocked. Some people thought that
 it was funny to see everybody all purple. But even the smartest 
scientists didn’t know what had happened. 
The whole world had turned purple overnight. Just about 
everything was purple, included the sky and the ocean and the 
mountains and the trees. The tallest skyscrapers and the tiniest 
ants were all purple. The bicycles and furniture and food were 
purple. Even the candy was purple. 
In spite of her neighbourhood, Erica has a strong dislike of 
violence, and believes that conﬂicts can usually be resolved 
without ﬁsts. 
Erica lives in Los Angeles. One night recently she was in a bar 
where a ﬁght broke out between two drunk men and she was 
caught in between.
Sam thinks he can grow trees with fruit that taste like pizza.
How likely is it that Sam wants these trees for a treehouse too?
In the backyard are trees with fruit that taste like pizza when 
ripe. How likely is it that these trees can be used for building a 
treehouse?
 Figure 9.2  Samples of experiments that elicit thinking about thoughts and feelings by manipulating 
the content of the stimuli. Sample stimuli from Fletcher et al. (1995), Gallagher et al. (2000), Mason 
& Just (2010), Perner et al. (2006), Lombardo et al. (2010), Bruneau et al. (2012), Saxe et al. (2009), 
Saxe & Wexler (2005), Young et al. (2010b).  

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
136
which Betty knew where the ball was all along (so her action could be predicted based on the actual 
location of the ball). 1 Both contrasts revealed activity in ToM brain regions. 
 Another way to endow non-verbal stimuli with mentalistic content is by altering the move-
ments of simple geometric shapes (Heider & Simmel, 1944). For example, in a PET study, Castelli, 
Happ é , Frith, & Frith (2000) showed participants animations of two triangles moving around. 
Participants were instructed that while some of the triangles “just move about with random move-
ment […] disconnected from each other” (the control condition), other animations would show 
“two triangles doing something more complex together, as if they are taking into account their 
reciprocal feelings and thoughts […] for example, courting each other” (the mental condition). 
Participants watched the animations, and then described what the triangles were doing. ToM ani-
mations elicited more activity than the random animations in the TPJ, the nearby superior tem-
poral sulcus (STS), and the mPFC. 
 Some experiments elicit thinking about thoughts simply by describing those thoughts in words. 
For example, participants can answer questions about people’s mental characteristics, such as 
“How likely is Queen Elizabeth to think that keeping a diary is important?” vs. their physical traits, 
such as “How likely is Queen Elizabeth to sneeze when a cat is nearby?” (Lombardo, Chakrabarti, 
Bullmore, Wheelwright, Sadek, Suckling, et al., 2010; Mitchell, Macrae, & Banaji, 2006); or they 
can read single sentences describing thoughts (“He thinks that the nuts are rancid”) or facts (“It is 
likely that the nuts are rancid”; Zaitchik, Walker, Miller, LaViolette, Feczko, & Dickerson, 2010). In 
both cases, the items related to mental states elicited more activity in ToM regions than the control 
conditions. 
 Other experiments elicit thinking about thoughts indirectly. Saxe & Kanwisher (2003) used ver-
bal stories based on either inferences about false beliefs or about physical events, similar to Fletcher 
et al. (1995). However, participants were not given any explicit instructions about the different 
kinds of stories. In Experiment 1, participants did not give any response, while in Experiment 2, 
they responded to ﬁ ll-in-the-blank questions about details in the stories. Similarly, Mason & Just 
(2010) had participants read short stories about actions, and then answer simple comprehen-
sion questions. Critically, the stories elicited spontaneous inferences about unstated, but implied, 
events; some of these inferences were about a character’s thoughts (mental), and some about 
purely physical events (control). Compared with the original Fletcher et al. (1995) stories, the 
stories in these experiments (see examples in Figure 9.2) were shorter, and included less (or no) 
explicit description of thoughts and feelings (see also Bruneau, Pluta, & Saxe, 2011). Instead, the 
thoughts and feelings of the characters had to be inferred. Listening to the mental stories elicited 
strong activation in ToM regions relative to the control stories, suggesting consideration of the 
character’s thoughts despite the absence of explicit instruction. 
 Another procedure for eliciting spontaneous ToM in the scanner was developed by Spiers & 
Maguire (2006). Participants engaged in naturalistic actions (e.g. driving a taxicab through bus-
tling London streets) in a rich virtual reality environment. After the scan and without prior warn-
ing, participants reviewed their performance, and were asked to recall their spontaneous thoughts 
 1   In the original study, this contrast could have been due to a difference between false vs. true beliefs, or between 
representing a belief (required for the false trials) and making a prediction based solely on the actual location 
of the ball (possible for the true beliefs). Subsequent work has shown that activation observed by Sommer 
et al. (2007) is due to the latter: individuals often simply reduce the information they need to process by 
choosing not to represent true beliefs as a mental state (Apperly et al., 2007), and when this is controlled for, 
neuroimaging has revealed indistinguishably high activation for true and false beliefs (D ö hnel, Schuwerk, 
Meinhardt, Sodian, Hajak, & Sommer, 2012; Jenkins & Mitchell, 2010; Young et al., 2010b).  

THEORY OF MIND AND THE BRAIN
137
during each of the events. These recollections were coded for content concerning the thoughts 
and intentions of the taxicab customers and the other drivers and pedestrians on the road (e.g. 
“I reckon that she’s going to change her mind”) and used these coded events to predict neural 
responses. They found that when participants were thinking about someone else’s intentions, but 
not during other events, regions in the ToM network showed increased activity. 
 Other studies have targeted spontaneous consideration of others’ intentions by asking partici-
pants to make moral judgments. Morally relevant facts appear to rely in part on consideration of 
intentions (Cushman, 2008), and evoke increased activity in the ToM network, relative to other 
facts in a story (Young & Saxe, 2009a). The same brain regions are recruited when participants are 
forced to choose between acting on a personal desire vs. a conﬂ icting moral principle, compared 
to deciding between two conﬂ icting personal desires (Sommer, Rothmayr, D ö hnel, Meinhardt, 
Schwerdtner, Sodian, et al., 2010). These regions are also recruited in children watching an anima-
tion of one person intentionally harming another, compared to animations of other painful and 
non-painful situations (Decety, Michalska, & Akitsuki, 2008). 
 In fact, when participants read a story, they appear to automatically represent the thoughts and 
feelings of the characters in order to make sense of the plot, even if instructed to perform an 
orthogonal task. For example, Koster-Hale & Saxe (2011) had participants read short verbal sto-
ries, and then make a delayed-match-to-sample judgment, indicating whether a single probe word 
occurred in the story (match) or not (non-match); half of the stories described a false belief and 
half described physical representations. Despite the word-level task (and no mention of ToM in 
the explicit instructions), the contrast revealed activation across the ToM network. Similarly, in 
two fMRI experiments with children aged 5–12 years, children heard child-friendly verbal sto-
ries, describing characters’ thoughts and feelings vs. physical events; children answered orthogonal 
(delayed-match-to-sample) questions about each story. As with adults, we found increased activa-
tion in the ToM network when children were listening to stories involving thoughts and feelings 
(Saxe, Whitﬁ eld-Gabrieli, Scholz, & Pelphrey, 2009; Gweon, Dodell-Feder, Bedny, & Saxe, 2012). 
 Thinking about thoughts and feelings can be also manipulated by changing the task while 
holding the stimuli constant (Figure 9.3). In an early PET study, Goel, Grafman, Sadato, & Hallett 
(1995) showed participants sets of 75 photographs of objects, some modern and familiar, and 
some from pre-ﬁ fteenth century North American aboriginal culture. Participants either judged 
whether the object was elongated along the principal axis (the control task) or whether “some-
one with the background knowledge of Christopher Columbus could infer the [object’s] func-
tion” (the mental task). They found increased ToM activation when participants were considering 
Christopher Columbus, but not when making the physical judgments. Similarly, Walter and col-
leagues showed participants sequences of three cartoon images (Schnell, Bluschke, Konradt, 
& Walter. 2011; Walter, Schnell, Erk, Arnold, Kirsch, Esslinger, et al., 2010). Participants either 
judged, on each picture, whether “the protagonist feels worse/equal/better, compared to the 
previous picture” (the mental task) or whether “the number of living beings [in the image is] 
smaller/equal/greater, compared to the previous picture” (the control task). In another set of 
studies, Baron-Cohen and others (Adams, Rule, Franklin Jr, Wang, Stevenson, Yoshikawa, 2010; 
Baron-Cohen & O’Riordan, 1999; Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, & Hill, 2001; Platek, Keenan, 
Gallup, & Mohamed, 2004) showed participants pictures of a person’s eyes. Participants pressed 
a button to indicate either the mental/emotional state of the person in the picture (e.g.  embar-
rassed ,  ﬂ irtatious ,  worried ; the mental task) or their gender (the control task). Mitchell, Banaji, & 
MacRae (2005) asked participants to either judge either how happy a person was to be photo-
graphed (mental) or how symmetric their face was (control). In all of these cases, the mental tasks 
activated the ToM regions more than the control tasks.  

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
138
Stimulus 
Mental Task 
Worried or friendly? 
(In each panel) 
Does he feel better or 
worse than in the 
previous panel? 
Why does she feel this 
way? 
Where does the girl 
think the chocolate is? 
 Figure 9.3  Samples of experiments that elicit thinking about thoughts and feelings by holding the 
stimulus constant, and manipulating the participants’ task. Examples from Adams et al. (2010), 
Schnell et al. (2010), Spunt & Lieberman (2012), and Saxe, Schulz & Jiang (2006).  

THEORY OF MIND AND THE BRAIN
139
 Spunt and colleagues have recently developed a clever paradigm for eliciting ToM using a sim-
ple task manipulation. In their ﬁ rst experiment, Spunt, Satpute, & Lieberman (2011) showed 
participants pictures of simple human actions (e.g. a person riding a bike), and instructed them 
to silently answer one of three questions:  why  the person is doing the action (e.g. to get exercise), 
 what  the person is doing (e.g. riding a bike), or  how  the person is doing it (e.g. holding handle-
bars). These questions require successively less consideration of the mind of the person and, 
correspondingly, showed successively less ToM region activity. Spunt & Lieberman (2012) repli-
cated the result using a similar paradigm with brief naturalistic ﬁ lm clips of facial expressions of 
emotions. Participants judged either  how  the person is expressing their emotion (e.g. “looking 
down and away,” the control task) or  why she is feeling that emotion (e.g. “she is confused because 
a friend let her down,” the mental task). Again, ToM regions were recruited more when thinking 
about why than how. 
 Using these types of parametric designs and analyzing the continuous magnitude of response in 
ToM regions may provide a powerful tool for studying the neural basis of ToM, especially in com-
bination with computational models of ToM, which offer quantitative predictions of both when 
and how much (or how likely) people are thinking about others’ thoughts. For example, Bhatt, 
Lohrenz, Camerer, & Montague (2010) created a competitive buying and selling game in which 
participants could try to bluff about the value of an object. The authors predicted that reliance on 
ToM would increase in proportion to the riskiness of the bluff, i.e. the discrepancy between the 
object’s true value and the proposed price. Consistent with this idea, a region near the right TPJ 
showed activity correlated with bluff riskiness across trials. They suggested that participants may 
be more likely to engage in ToM, engage in more ToM, or engage in ToM for longer, when they are 
making a riskier bluff relative to a less risky bluff, and this relationship is continuous over a large 
range of possible risks. 
 Along with manipulating thinking about thoughts across stimuli and tasks, it is also possible 
to look at when participants are thinking about thoughts within a single ongoing stimulus and 
task. Stories about human actions and beliefs can be broken down into sections, separating the 
description of the background and set-up from the speciﬁ c sentence that describes or suggests a 
character’s mental states. Thinking about other minds can thus be pinned to a speciﬁ c segment 
within an ongoing story. The right temporo-parietal junction, in particular, shows activity at the 
point within a single story when a character’s thoughts are mentioned (Mason & Just, 2010; Saxe 
& Wexler, 2005; Young & Saxe, 2008). A similar manipulation, dividing a 60-second story into 
20-second segments, only one of which has mental information, has been used in children (Saxe 
et al., 2009). 
 In sum, neuroimaging experiments on understanding other minds produce similar results, 
across a wide range of participants, methods, and materials. Similar experiments have been 
conducted in Britain, the USA, Japan, Germany, China, the Netherlands, and Italy (e.g. Anna 
Leshinskaya, personal communication; Moriguchi, Ohnishi, Lane, Maeda, Mori, Nemoto, et al., 
2006; Perner, Aichhorn, Kronbichler, Staffen, & Ladurner, 2006; Schnell et al., 2010; Markus van 
Ackeren, personal communication). The same brain regions are found in participants ranging 
from 5 years old (Decety et al., 2008; Gweon et al., 2012; Saxe et al., 2009) to at least 65 years old 
(e.g. Bedny, Pascual-Leone, & Saxe, 2009; Fletcher et al., 1995. These regions  are recruited in adults 
with high functioning autism (Dufour, Redcay, Young, Mavros, Moran, Triantafyllou et al., 2012), 
and adults who have been completely blind since birth (Bedny et al., 2009); ongoing work in our 
laboratory suggests they are found in congenitally deaf adults as well. As described above, the 
same set of regions responds whether the stimuli are presented in text or with pictures, visually or 
aurally. Participants can be thinking about the thoughts and feelings of a real person or a ﬁ ctional 

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
140
character. 2 The stimuli can include complex narratives, or just a single thought; participants can 
be instructed to consider others’ thoughts and feelings, or be led to do so spontaneously. 
 The range of tasks, stimuli, and populations make it all the more striking that these experiments 
converge on the same conclusions. A consistent group of brain regions shows increased metabolic 
activity across all of these experiments in the “mental” or “theory of mind” condition, namely 
regions in bilateral temporo-parietal junction, medial parietal/precuneus, medial prefrontal cor-
tex, and anterior superior temporal sulcus. Though this generalization is striking on its own, a 
key question is: why? Which cognitive process, invoked by all of these diverse tasks, is speciﬁ cally 
necessary and sufﬁ cient to elicit activity in these brain regions? 
 Speciﬁ city 
 During the initial discovery of the ToM brain regions, the ﬁ rst experiments (e.g. Fletcher et al., 
1995; Gallagher et al., 2000) compared two conditions that differed on multiple dimensions. 
Compared with the control stories, the stories about false beliefs also included more individual 
characters, more speciﬁ c human actions, more implied human emotions, more invisible causal 
mechanisms, more social roles, more unexpected events, more demand to consider false represen-
tations of the world, different syntax, and so on. In fact, an inherent risk of such complex stimuli 
is that there may be hidden dimensions along which the stimuli grouped into separate conditions 
differ and that it is these differences, rather than the intended manipulation, that lead to differen-
tial brain activity. 
 Given all these dimensions, how can we infer which are the necessary and sufﬁ cient features 
that led to activity in each region during a given task? One approach is to try to design an experi-
ment that contrasts  minimal pairs : stimuli and tasks that differ only in one key dimension, but are 
exactly identical on all other dimensions. Taking this approach, Saxe, Schulz, and Jiang (2006b) 
were able to match both the stimulus and the participant’s response, using task instructions to 
change just how the participants construed the stimulus. The stimulus was a stick-ﬁ gure animation 
of a girl. Modeled after a false-belief transfer (change of location) task, a bar of chocolate moved 
from one box to another, while the girl either faced toward the transfer or away. In the ﬁ rst half of 
the experiment, rather than introducing the task as a false-belief task, participants were trained to 
treat the stick-ﬁ gure as a physical cue to the ﬁ nal location of the chocolate bar using three rules, 
including the critical Rule 1: “Facing = last; Away = ﬁ rst. If the girl is facing the boxes at the end of 
the trial, press the button for the last box. If the girl is looking away from the boxes, press the but-
ton for the ﬁ rst box.” Participants were accurate in the task, but found it difﬁ cult and unnatural. In 
the second half of the experiment, participants were then told that for Rule 1, another strategy was 
possible: namely to view the stick-ﬁ gure as a person and to consider that person’s thoughts. Rule 1 
was equivalent to judging, based on what the character had seen, where she thought the chocolate 
was. Both ways of solving “Rule 1” generate the same behavioral responses, but only in the second 
half of the experiment were participants construing Rule 1 as referring to a character’s thoughts. 
We found that, though the stimuli and the responses were identical across tasks, right TPJ activity 
was signiﬁ cantly higher in the second half, when participants were using ToM to solve the puzzle, 
rather than the simple association rule. 
 2   Interestingly, participants can also be assigning hypothetical thoughts and preferences to themselves (e.g. 
Lombardo et al., 2010; Vogeley et al., 2001). Note, however, that not all metacognition elicits ToM activ-
ity. The link between attributing hypothetical thoughts to the self, vs. other kinds of metacognition, is not 
completely clear (see Saxe & Offen, 2009). 

THEORY OF MIND AND THE BRAIN
141
 Another approach to dealing with the many dimensions of ToM stimuli is to systematically vary 
or match each of these dimensions in a long series of experiments. Although each experiment has 
many differences between the mental and control conditions, across the whole set of experiments, 
most other kinds of differences are eliminated, leaving only one systematic factor: thinking about 
thoughts. 
 For example, Gallagher et al. (2000) showed that none of the low-level features of the original 
verbal stimuli (e.g. number of nouns, number of straight edges, retinal position) are  necessary to 
elicit activity in these brain regions, because they found the same patterns of activity in response to 
verbal false belief stories and non-verbal false belief cartoons. Within verbal stories, it is not neces-
sary to explicitly state a character’s thoughts or beliefs: there is activity in these regions both when 
people read about a character’s thoughts and when they infer those thoughts from the character’s 
actions (Mason & Just, 2010; Young & Saxe, 2009a). Nor is it necessary that the beliefs in question 
be false: true beliefs, false beliefs, and beliefs whose veracity is unknown are all sufﬁ cient to elicit 
robust activity in these brain regions (D ö hnel, Schuwerk, T., Meinhardt, J., Sodian, B., Hajak, G., & 
Sommer, 2012; Jenkins et al., 2010; Young, Nichols, & Saxe, 2010c). 
 Other experiments showed that the presence of a human character in the stimuli is not  sufﬁ -
cient : stories that describe a character’s physical appearance, or even their internal (but not mental) 
experiences, like hunger or queasiness or physical pain, elicit much less response than stories about 
the character’s beliefs, desires, and emotions (Bedny et al., 2009; Bruneau et al., 2011; Lombardo 
et al., 2010; Saxe & Powell 2006). It is also not sufﬁ cient for a story to describe invisible causal 
mechanisms (like melting and rusting, Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003), unexpected events (like a ball of 
dough that rises to be as big as a house, Young, Dodell-Ferer & Saxe, 2010b; Gweon et al., 2012), or 
people’s stable social roles (including kinship and professional relationships, Saxe & Wexler, 2005; 
Gweon et al., 2012), if the story does not also invoke thinking about a person’s thoughts. 
 One particularly important dimension to test was whether considering any representation of the 
world, mental or otherwise, would be sufﬁ cient to elicit activity in these brain regions. Understanding 
other minds often requires the ability to suspend one’s own beliefs and knowledge, and consider 
the world as it would seem from another perspective. These cognitive processes have been called 
 meta-representation  (the ability to conceive of distinct representations of the world, Aichhorn, 
Perner, Weiss, Kronbichler, Staffen, & Ladurner, 2009; Perner, 1991; Perner et al., 2006), and  decou-
pling (the ability to suspend one’s own knowledge in order to respond from a different perspective, 
Leslie & Frith, 1990; Liu, Sabbagh, & Gehring, 2004). Since meta-representation and decoupling are 
such essential ingredients of understanding other minds, and especially understanding false beliefs, 
many scientists initially hypothesized that brain regions recruited by false belief tasks most likely 
performed one of these two functions. To test this hypothesis, we need stimuli or tasks that require 
meta-representation and decoupling, but are not about understanding other minds. Currently, the 
best such example are stories about “false signs” and “false maps” (Zaitchik, 1990). Like beliefs, signs 
and maps represent (and sometimes misrepresent) reality. Thinking about the world as depicted in 
a map requires the capacity for meta-representation; when the map is wrong, reasoning about the 
world as it seems in the map requires decoupling from one’s own knowledge of reality. Nevertheless, 
stories about false signs and maps elicit much less activity in these brain regions (especially right 
TPJ) than stories about beliefs (Aichhorn et al., 2009; Perner et al., 2006; Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003). 
 In sum, tasks and stimuli that require, or robustly suggest, thinking about thoughts lead to 
activity in these regions. Thinking about thoughts can be manipulated by changing participants’ 
instructions for the same stimuli, or by changing the stimuli with the same instructions. Very 
similar stimuli and tasks, however, which focus on physical objects, physical representations, or 
externally observable properties, do not lead to activity in these regions. 

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
142
 Links to behavior 
 The review in the previous sub-section shows that tasks and stimuli that evoke thinking about 
thoughts also elicit metabolic activity in the ToM brain regions. However, there is even stronger 
evidence for a link between activity in these regions and understanding other minds: across trials, 
across individuals, and across development, performance on behavioral tests of ToM is related to 
brain activity in these same regions. 
 Most adults pass standard laboratory ToM tasks 100% of the time, leaving little room for 
inter-individual variability in accuracy. However, by using tasks with no simple right answer, it is 
possible to reveal individual differences in mental state attribution. Imagine, for example, learning 
about a girl Grace, who was on a tour of a chemical plant. While making coffee, Grace found a jar 
of white powder, labeled “sugar,” next to the coffee machine. She put the white powder, which was 
actually a dangerous toxic poison, in someone else’s coffee. They drank the poison and got sick. Is 
Grace morally blameworthy? These scenarios require weighing what Grace intended (her mental 
state) against what she did (the outcome). Participants disagree in their judgments; some people 
think she is completely innocent (because she believed the powder was sugar), whereas others 
assign some moral blame (because she hurt someone). This difference is correlated with neural 
activity during moral judgments across individuals; the more activity there was in a participant’s 
right TPJ, in particular, the more the participant forgave Grace for her accidental harms (Young 
& Saxe, 2009b). 
 An alternative strategy is to measure the quantity and quality of people’s spontaneous mentalis-
tic attributions to ambiguous stimuli. For example, when viewing the simple animations of a small 
and large moving triangle (Castelli et al., 2000), people generate very rich mentalistic interpretations 
from the simple movements depicted in these stimuli (e.g. “the child is pretending to do nothing, 
to fool the parent”). People differ in the amount, and appropriateness, of the thoughts and feelings 
that they infer from the animations. People who have more activity in ToM brain regions, while 
watching the animations give more appropriate descriptions of the triangles’ thoughts and feelings 
after the scan (Moriguchi et al., 2006). Relatedly, Wagner, Kelley, & Heatherton (2011) showed par-
ticipants still photographs of natural scenes, approximately a quarter of which contained multiple 
people in a social interaction. Participants performed an orthogonal categorization task (“ani-
mal, vegetable, mineral?”). Individuals who scored high on a separate questionnaire, measuring 
tendencies to think about others’ thoughts and feelings (the “empathy quotient”; Baron-Cohen 
& Wheelwright 2004; Lawrence, Shaw, Baker, Baron-Cohen, & David, 2004) also showed higher 
activity in mPFC in response to photographs of interacting people. 
 Differences in ToM are easier to ﬁ nd in young children, who are still learning how to understand 
other minds. Interestingly, two recent studies from our laboratories suggest that, overall, getting 
older, and getting better at understanding other minds, is associated not with more activity in ToM 
brain regions but with more selective activity. Children from 5 to 12 years old all have adult-like 
neural activity when listening to stories about characters’ thoughts and feelings. What is differ-
ent is that ToM regions in younger children show similarly high activity when listening to any 
information about characters in the story, including the characters’ physical appearance or social 
relationships (Saxe et al., 2009; Gweon et al., 2012), whereas in older children and adults, the ToM 
brain regions are recruited only when listening to information about thoughts and feelings (Saxe 
& Powell, 2006; Saxe et al., 2009). This developmental difference in the selectivity of the ToM brain 
regions is correlated with age, but also with performance outside the scanner on difﬁ cult ToM tasks 
(Gweon et al., 2012). Moreover, the correlation between neural “selectivity” and behavioral task 
performance remains signiﬁ cant in the right TPJ, even after accounting for age. 

THEORY OF MIND AND THE BRAIN
143
 One limitation of all the foregoing studies is that they are necessarily correlational. The strong-
est evidence that some brain regions are involved in a cognitive task is to show that disrupting 
those regions leads to biases or disruption in task performance. Transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(TMS) offers a tool for temporarily disrupting a targeted brain region. We (Young, Camprodon, 
Hauser, Pascual-Leone, & Saxe, 2010a) compared people’s moral judgments following TMS to 
either right TPJ or a control brain region 5 cm away. TMS to right TPJ, but not the control region, 
produced moral judgments temporarily biased away from considerations of mental state informa-
tion. Innocent accidents appeared more blameworthy, while failed attempts appeared less blame-
worthy, as though it mattered less what the agent believed she was doing, and more what she 
actually did. People didn’t lose the ability to make moral judgments altogether; they still judged 
that it is completely morally wrong to intentionally kill, and not wrong at all to simply serve some-
one soup. Disrupting the right TPJ thus appears to leave moral judgment overall intact, but impairs 
people’s ability to integrate considerations of the character’s thoughts into their moral judgments. 
Converging evidence comes from another TMS study: TMS to right TPJ made adults slower to 
recognize a false belief in a simple (non-moral) false belief task (Costa, Torriero, & Oliveri, 2008). 
 Another way to study the necessary contributions of a brain region is to work with people who 
have suffered permanent focal (i.e. local) damage to that region, typically due to a stroke. Samson, 
Apperly, and colleagues (Apperly & Butterﬁ ll 2009; Apperly, Samson, & Humphreys, 2005; Samson, 
Apperly, & Humphreys, 2007) have conducted a series of elegant studies using this approach. 
Initially, these authors tested a large group of people, with damage to many different brain regions, 
on a set of carefully controlled tasks. They then identiﬁ ed individuals with a speciﬁ c pattern of per-
formance: individuals who passed all the control tasks (e.g. measuring memory, cognitive control, 
etc.), but still failed to predict a character’s actions based on their false beliefs. Next, the scientists 
used a lesion-overlap analysis to ask which brain region was damaged in all, and only, the patients 
with this diagnostic proﬁ le of performance. The answer was the left TPJ, one of the same brain 
regions identiﬁ ed by fMRI.  3 
 Summary 
 The literature from the last 10 years thus suggests a generalization—there are cortical regions in 
the human brain where activity is associated with  understanding other minds in three ways:
   1.     Metabolic measures of activity reliably increase when the participant is thinking about 
thoughts, across a wide range of stimuli and tasks, but not in response to a variety of similar 
control tasks and stimuli.  
 2.  Activity is correlated with behavioral measures of thinking about thoughts. 
 3.  Disrupting activity leads to deﬁ cits in thinking about thoughts. 
 So far, these claims are relatively uncontroversial. As we noted above, there is a broad consensus in 
social cognitive neuroscience. However, much controversy remains about the proper interpreta-
tion of these data. 
 Exactly what is the nature of these regions, their functions, and their contribution to think-
ing about thoughts? Here’s a strong hypothesis: one or more of these regions has the speciﬁ c 
 3    It is worth noting that the effects of lesions to the right TPJ, one of the regions argued to be most selective 
for ToM, haven’t yet been effectively tested. The candidate participants all had extensive and diffuse damage 
to the right hemisphere, and failed the control tasks, making it impossible to test ToM deﬁ cits speciﬁ cally.  

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
144
cognitive function of representing people’s mental states and experiences—that is, of thinking 
about thoughts. Whenever we are thinking about thoughts, there are neurons in these regions 
ﬁ ring. These neurons are gathered in spatial proximity (i.e. into a “region”) because they have 
related computational properties that are distinct from the computation properties of neurons 
in the surrounding cortex.  4 The pattern of ﬁ ring, in space and time, of these neurons encodes 
aspects of someone’s thoughts. As an analogy, consider the way MT neurons encode speed and 
direction of motion, and face area neurons encode aspects of facial features that are relevant to 
face identity (Freiwald, Tsao, & Livingstone, 2009; Georgopoulos, Schwartz, & Kettner, 1986). In 
the proposed hypothesis, the neurons in the ToM brain regions encode aspects and dimensions of 
inferred thoughts. Scrambling the pattern of activity in these neurons would therefore lead to an 
inability to discriminate one inferred mental state from another, for example, making all minds 
appear homogenous: people might all seem to have the same desires and preferences, and the same 
knowledge and beliefs. More serious damage to these regions might make it impossible to think 
about other minds at all, without similarly impairing the rest of cognition. 
 There certainly is not enough evidence to prove that this strong hypothesis is right; a more 
immediate question is whether it is obviously wrong. There are at least two classes of potential 
objections: theoretical arguments, based on general principles of how the brain works, and empiri-
cal arguments, based on the results of other experiments in cognitive neuroscience. In the next 
section, we describe some of these objections, and some of our responses to them. 
 A strong hypothesis 
 Objections from theoretical considerations  
 Many authors have expressed discomfort with the project of trying to link speciﬁ c cognitive func-
tions with delineated brain regions. For example, a decade after their 2nd edition UoM chapter, 
Chris and Uta Frith wrote: “We passionately believe that social cognitive neuroscience needs to 
break away from a restrictive phrenology that links circumscribed brain regions to underspeci-
ﬁ ed social processes” (Frith & Frith, 2012). Others have echoed this accusation of phrenology; for 
example, Bob Knight criticizes the “phrenological notion that a given innate mental faculty is based 
solely in just one part of the brain” (Knight, 2007), and William Uttal recently argued that “any 
studies using brain images that report single areas of activation exclusively associated with any par-
ticular cognitive process should a priori be considered to be artifacts of the arbitrary thresholds set 
by investigators and seriously questioned” (Uttal, 2011). Most such theoretical objections include 
variations on three themes: social cognitive neuroscientists are accused of (incorrectly) viewing 
regions as (1) functioning in isolation, (2) internally functionally homogenous, and (3) spatially 
bounded and distinct. Here, we address each of these concerns in turn. 
 First, does claiming that a region has a speciﬁ c function (e.g. in thinking about thoughts) entail 
suggesting that this region functions in isolation? To put it more extremely, are we claiming that, 
for example, the right temporo-parietal junction (RTPJ) could pass a false belief task on its own? 
Obviously not. Performing any cognitive task necessarily depends on many different cognitive 
and computational processes, and therefore brain regions. No interesting behavioral task can be 
accomplished by a single region. The tasks of the mind and brain—recognizing a friend, under-
standing a sentence, deciding what to eat for dinner—must all be accomplished by a long sequence 
 4   These distinct properties may derive entirely from patterns of connectivity, not from the structure of the 
neurons themselves. 

A STRONG HYPOTHESIS
145
of processing steps, passing information between many different regions or computations, from 
sensory processing all the way to motor action. The function of a neuron or a brain region should 
never be identiﬁ ed with completing a cognitive task. Thus, for example, “passing a false belief task” 
is not even a candidate function of a brain region. Any time an individual passes a false belief task, 
many brain regions—involved in perceiving the stimuli, manipulating ideas in working memory, 
making a decision, and producing a response—will all be required (Bloom & German, 2000). 
 More generally, we expect that the functions of regions (or neural population, regardless of 
spatial organization) will be to receive a class of inputs, and transform them into output, which 
make different information relatively explicit. Therefore, the speciﬁ c questions about any neural 
population should include: what input does it receive, what output does it produce, and what 
information is made explicit in that transformation? Of course, the answers to these questions will 
require us to understand the position of this neural population within a larger network, especially 
when characterizing a region’s input and output. In the case of the ToM regions, a related question 
concerns the relationships between the different regions within the network. At least ﬁ ve cortical 
regions are commonly recruited during many different social cognitive tasks: how is information 
passed between, and transformed by, each of these spatially distinct regions? 
 Thus, studying the function of a brain region means studying in isolation one component of a 
system that could never function in isolation. This description may sound ominous, but scientiﬁ c 
progress frequently requires us to break complex systems into component parts. While the pieces 
could not function in isolation, understanding their isolated contributions is necessary to under-
standing the function of the integrated system. For any given neural population, it is reasonable to 
ask: what classes of stimuli and tasks predictably and systematically elicit increased activity in the 
population as a whole? Which dimensions of stimuli lead to activity in distinct subpopulations of 
neurons? Both traditional and new fMRI methods help answer these questions, albeit somewhat 
indirectly (more on this, in “Where next?”). 
 The second objection is that studying brain regions leads to the false assumption that groups of 
spatially adjacent neurons are functionally homogenous. The regions we study in fMRI are orders 
of magnitude larger than what we believe are the true computational units of brain processing, 
the neurons. Changes in blood oxygenation measured by fMRI inevitably reﬂ ect averages over the 
activity of many thousands of individual neurons. Why is it useful to study oxygen ﬂ ow to chunks 
of cortex approximately 1–5 cm 2 in size, which are so much bigger than neurons, but so much 
smaller than the networks required to complete a task? 
 Our suggestion is that there is no reason, a priori. It just happens, as a matter of empirical fact, 
that many interesting computational properties of the brain can be detected by studying the organ-
ization of neural responses on this scale. Aggregating the responses of neighboring neurons often 
produces informative population averages. Results obtained via fMRI reﬂ ect the same distinc-
tions found in directly observable population codes (e.g. Kamitani and Tong, 2005; Kriegeskorte 
& Bandettini, 2007). This empirical fact may have a theoretical explanation. Neurons with similar 
or related functions may be spatially clustered to increase the computational efﬁ ciency of frequent 
comparisons (e.g. lateral inhibition). Blood-oxygen delivery to the cortex may follow the contours 
of neural computations, to increase the hemodynamic efﬁ ciency of simultaneously getting oxygen 
to all of the neurons that need it (Kanwisher, 2010). However, these arguments are not necessary 
premises; for fMRI to be useful, we only need the empirically observable fact that useful and reli-
able generalizations can be made for hemodynamic activity in patches of cortex at the spatial scale 
of millimeters. 
 Of course, though, neurons within a region or an fMRI voxel are never functionally homog-
enous. Consider the analogy of primary visual cortex—neurons in V1 have visual receptive ﬁ elds, 

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
146
meaning that activity can be induced by a pattern of bars of light falling on a speciﬁ c region of the 
retina. However, neurons in V1 differ from one another in where on the retina one should place 
the light (retinotopy), how large the pattern should be (size and spatial frequency preferences), and 
the orientation to which the bars should be rotated (orientation selectivity), to elicit a maximal 
response. There is also a separate (but systematically interleaved) population of neurons for which 
the response depends on color, but not orientation or size. Furthermore, some neurons primarily 
send information to subsequent regions of visual cortex (e.g. excitatory neurons) whereas other 
neurons primarily modulate the response of neighboring neurons in V1 (e.g. inhibitory interneu-
rons). As far as we know, the metabolic activity measured by fMRI reﬂ ects a combination of activ-
ity in all of these different populations. Consequently, we should never assume that the amount of 
“activity” we measure in a region with fMRI represents (or would correlate very well with) the rate 
of ﬁ ring of any individual neuron inside that region. Similarly, we cannot assume that if two differ-
ent stimuli or tasks elicit similar magnitudes of activity in a region, then they are eliciting responses 
in the same, or even shared, neural populations. Completely non-overlapping subpopulations of 
neurons could produce the same magnitude of fMRI activity within a region. Any interpretation 
of fMRI data must be sensitive to this possibility. In fact, studying the organization of functional 
subpopulations within a region (e.g. which dimensions of stimuli are represented by distinct sub-
populations within a region) may be one of the most powerful ways that fMRI will contribute to 
the neuroscience of ToM. We describe these methods in greater detail in “Where next?.” 
 The third potential objection is that studying regions with fMRI leads researchers to imag-
ine boundaries between discrete regions, when the truth is a continuous distribution of neural 
responses over the cortical sheet. The data we described in the ﬁ rst section shows that cortex is 
not functionally homogenous with regard to theory of mind, and regional distinctions are not all 
“artifacts of arbitrary thresholds.” Still, there is a legitimate reason why cognitive neuroscientists 
may be reluctant to call any reliable functional regularity discovered by fMRI a “region.” These 
“regions” may turn out to be just one piece of a larger continuous functional map over cortex, not 
computationally distinct areas of their own (Kriegeskorte, Goebel, & Bandettini, 2006). 
 Cortical responses at scales measurable by fMRI are organized along multiple orthogonal spatial 
principles. One is the division of cortex into cytoarchitectonic “areas,” like primary visual cor-
tex (V1) and primary auditory cortex (A1). Orthogonal to the division of cortex into areas are 
topographic principles. Most visual regions, for example, are organized by retinotopy: moving 
across the cortical sheet, the region of the visual ﬁ eld eliciting a maximal response varies smoothly, 
covering the whole visual ﬁ eld from fovea to periphery, top to bottom, and left to right. Likewise, 
multiple distinct motor areas are organized by somatotopy, and auditory areas by tonotopy. 
 These orthogonal principles of cortical organization create a challenge for cognitive neurosci-
entists, because in charting new territory, away from well-understood sensory and motor systems, 
we may claim to discover new functional regions associated with higher-order cognitive proc-
esses, which are really just one end of a larger map (cf. Konkle & Oliva, 2012). To make the puzzle 
concrete, imagine looking at functional responses to visual stimuli across occipital cortex for the 
ﬁ rst time, without the beneﬁ t of the history of visual neuroscience. One tempting way to divide 
the occipital cortex into functional “regions” might be by retinotopy—one group of patches that 
responds to foveal stimuli, and a different group of patches that responds to peripheral stimuli. 
This foveal vs. peripheral difference is highly robust, replicable within and across subjects, within 
and across tasks, and correlated with behavior (i.e. visual performance in corresponding regions 
of the visual ﬁ eld). Nevertheless, other considerations, such as cytoarchitecture, connectivity, and 
processing time, suggest that this is the wrong division for capturing functional and computa-
tional regularities. Identifying a robust functional regularity that divides one patch of cortex from 

A STRONG HYPOTHESIS
147
another is not the same thing as identifying a true cortical area—a region that is computationally 
distinct from its neighbors, with distinct cytoarchitecture, connectivity, and topography (Friston, 
Holmes, Worsley, Poline, Frith, & Frackowiak, 1995; Kanwisher, 2010; Kriegeskorte et al., 2006; 
Worsley, Evans, Marrett, & Neelin, 1992). Instead of studying the “peripheral patches,” neurosci-
entists divide the cortex into V1, V2, V3, MT, etc., each of which is then internally organized (in 
part) by retinotopy. 
 Imagine you are a social cognitive neuroscientist, looking at a new bit of cortex, and you see a 
new functional regularity—a patch of cortex that shows a high response when the individual is 
thinking about stories, cartoons, or movies depicting the contents of another mind. Which kind 
of functional regularity is this? On the one hand, these data could signal the discovery of a true 
computational area, like V1. On the other hand, the observed functional regularity might be more 
like “peripheral patches,” one part of a stimulus space or dimension that is mapped across cortex, 
but crosscuts multiple computational areas. 
 We believe that current fMRI data cannot resolve this puzzle directly. One approach may therefore 
be to suspend judgment until other sources of evidence are available. If patches of cortex involved 
in understanding other minds are true cortical areas, it will be possible to distinguish them from 
their anatomical neighbors by cytoarchitecture, connectivity, and/or topography. Non-invasive 
functional imaging tools do not yet have high enough resolution to reveal cytoarchitecture in vivo. 
To study the links between function and cytoarchitecture with current technology, we would need 
to collect functional data to identify the regions  in vivo , and then analyze the neuroanatomy of the 
same individual post mortem. 
 A weaker, but more accessible, source of evidence is patterns of connectivity. In some cases, 
cortical areas can be differentiated by their proﬁ les of connectivity. It has become increasingly 
possible to measure the pattern of connections between regions using neuroimaging. Diffusion 
imaging (DTI), which looks at the predominant direction of water diffusion, allows us to visualize 
the dominant pathways of axons connecting brain regions. Using diffusion, we can ask whether a 
patch of cortex involved in understanding other minds shows a different pattern of connectivity 
than its neighbors to the rest of the brain. Initial evidence suggests it does, at least in the case of the 
right TPJ. Mars, Sallet, Sch ü ffelgen, Jbabdi, Toni, & Rushworth (2012) found that the broad area of 
right temporo-parietal cortex (BA 39/40) can be sub-divided into three clusters, based on DTI con-
nectivity alone, and one of these clusters is functionally correlated (during a resting baseline) with 
the other ToM regions, including medial prefrontal and medial parietal cortex. Although Mars and 
colleagues did not directly test whether the region deﬁ ned by connectivity and the region deﬁ ned 
by function (i.e. active in ToM tasks) share the same boundaries, the results are suggestive. 
 Currently, however, neither cytoarchitecture nor connectivity analyses give a deﬁ nitive evidence 
that patches of cortex recruited by mental state reasoning tasks are true cortical areas. An alter-
native approach might therefore be to consider the alternative hypothesis directly— that these 
regions are one part of a larger, continuous map. If we compare the cortical patches we are studying 
to their anatomical neighbors, is there a plausible higher-level “stimulus space,” which could unite 
these responses into one map? 
 Again, the right TPJ is an interesting example. The right TPJ region that is activated by ToM 
tasks (as described in “Theory of mind and the brain”) has two very close anatomical neighbors. 
One neighbor (up toward parietal cortex in the right inferior intraparietal sulcus (IPS), but con-
fusingly sometimes also called RTPJ) is recruited by unexpected events that demand attention. 
These events may be unexpected because they are rare, or because a generally reliable cue was 
misleading on this occasion. Redirecting attention toward an unexpected event leads to metabolic 
activity in this region (Corbetta & Shulman, 2002; Mitchell, 2008; Serences, Shomstein, Leber, 

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
148
Golay, Egeth, & Yantis, 2005). Damage to this region makes it hard for objects and events in the 
contralateral visual ﬁ eld to attract attention, producing left hemiﬁ eld neglect (Corbetta, Patel, & 
Shulman, 2008). Some authors have noted that false belief tasks typically involves an unexpected 
event (Corbetta et al., 2008; Decety & Lamm, 2007; Mitchell, 2008): for example, false belief tasks 
often hinge on an object unexpectedly changing location while the protagonist is out of room, and 
require the participant to shift attention between both locations. In fact, the region that is recruited 
during exogenous attention tasks is so close to the region recruited during ToM tasks that some 
concluded that these are actually just two different ways to identify the same region (Corbetta, 
Kincade, Ollinger, McAvoy & Shulman, 2000; Mitchell, 2008). More recently, however, both meta-
analyses and high-resolution scanning within individual subjects suggest that there are actually 
two distinct cortical regions (or “patches”), and the region recruited by attention tasks is approxi-
mately 10 mm superior to the region recruited by ToM tasks (Scholz, Triantafyllou, Whitﬁ eld-
Gabrieli, Brown, & Saxe, 2009; Decety & Lamm, 2007). Also, the region that is recruited during 
false belief tasks is not recruited by unexpected transfers of location in stories about false maps 
and physical representations, as described above (e.g. Young et al., 2010b). Nevertheless, it remains 
an interesting possibility that the exogenous attention response and the ToM response are part of 
a larger continuous map across cortex, a topography of different kinds of unexpected attentional 
shifts. The more superior end of this map could direct attention toward unexpected positions in 
space and time, while the more inferior end of the map could direct attention toward unexpected 
people, actions, or inferred thoughts. 
 A second topographical “stimulus space” of which the RTPJ could be a part runs anteriorly, 
through the right superior temporal sulcus (STS), and down toward the temporal pole. As with 
the RTPJ and the right IPS, the RTPJ and the posterior STS were initially conﬂ ated, but have sub-
sequently been shown to be spatially distinct (Gobbini, Koralek, Bryan, Montgomery, & Haxby, 
2007). Multiple parts of the STS are recruited when participants observe other people’s actions 
in photographs, ﬁ lm clips, point light walkers or animations (Pelphry, Mitchell, McKeown, 
Goldstein, Allison, & McCarthy, 2003; Pelphrey, Morris, Michelich, Allison, & McCarthy, 2005; 
Hein & Knight, 2008). The STS is large, and Kevin Pelphrey and colleagues (Pelphrey et al., 2005; 
Pelphrey & Morris 2006) propose that it contains a pseudo-somatotopic map of observed actions: 
others’ mouth motions represented most anteriorly, followed by hand and body movements, fol-
lowed by head and eye movements represented most posteriorly. An intriguing possibility is that 
the temporo-parietal junction, which is at the most posterior end of the superior temporal sulcus, 
is part of this same map. Whereas hand and body movements convey information about what a 
person is doing and intending, head and eye movements convey information about what a person 
is looking at and seeing. Thus, the STS may contain a map of others actions that move from exter-
nally observable body movements (anterior end) toward invisible mental states (posterior end), 
culminating in the RTPJ, which responds to thinking about what a person is thinking. 
 In principle, either of these mapping hypotheses, or both, could be true. Evidence that a ToM 
region, e.g. the RTPJ, is part of a larger cortical map might come in the form of a response that 
moves continuously across contiguous patches of cortex, modulated by continuous changes in a 
stimulus dimension (Konkle & Oliva, 2012). For example, if the RTPJ is one end of an attention 
map, we might expect to see that surprising facts about physical entities elicit activity relatively far 
from the TPJ, but that as the unexpected stimulus becomes more social and interpersonal, activ-
ity moves continuously across the map, ending at the RTPJ. Similarly, if the RTPJ is the “abstract” 
or “head” end of a map of observable social actions, we’d expect to see continuous changes in the 
location of activity, as depictions of human actions become either more abstract or physically 
higher on the body. Finally, both could be true. The RTPJ could exist at its precise location because 

A STRONG HYPOTHESIS
149
that is where a region that deals with unexpected information converges with a region that deals 
with human actions. We would be enthusiastic to see someone test these hypotheses further. 
 For now, however, we suggest that it does not matter for any of our empirical purposes whether 
the RTPJ (or any other patch of cortex recruited in ToM tasks) is a true cortical area, or whether it 
is one end of a larger map, as deﬁ ned by cytoarchitecture, connectivity, and topography. In either 
case, there is a robust functional regularity replicable within and across subjects, within and across 
tasks, and correlated with behavior: a bounded, adjacent patch of cortex where activity is high 
during a range of ToM tasks. Without committing to whether they are true computational “areas,” 
or just the equivalent of “Peripheral Patches,” we believe that it is fruitful to continue to study 
these coherent patches as “regions,” in order to discover the computations and representations that 
underlie thinking about other minds. 
 Given everything else we know about the brain, it is not surprising that systematic response 
proﬁ les are linked to regions of cortex much bigger than a neuron and much smaller than a net-
work. The challenge now is to integrate the huge, and growing, list of empirical discoveries and to 
construct hypotheses about the computations and representations in the neural populations we 
are studying. These empirical results form the basis of a different set of potential objections to the 
hypothesis that there is a strong speciﬁ c link between cortical regions, like the TPJ, mPFC, and PC, 
and thinking about thoughts. 
 Empirical objections 
 An empirical objection to our argument in “Theory of mind and the brain” might begin by point-
ing out that our review of the literature was selective. In addition to the dozens of articles we cited, 
there are dozens of others that claim so-called “ToM regions” are active in tasks that do not involve 
thinking about thoughts, or are not active in tasks that do involve thinking about thoughts. How 
can we integrate these other data into a coherent hypothesis? 
 First, what about claims that “ToM regions” are active in tasks that do not involve thinking 
about thoughts? The RTPJ is again a useful example. As we mentioned above, some authors ini-
tially believed that the same region of RTPJ involved in false belief tasks was also recruited during 
any exogenous shift of attention and/or biological motion perception. Other literature suggests 
that the RTPJ is involved in maintaining a representation of one’s own body, by integrating mul-
ti-sensory information and locating the body in space (Blanke et al., 2005; Blanke & Arzy, 2005; 
Tsakiris et al., 2008). Experiments that ask people to mentally rotate their own body or imagine 
their body in different parts of space, as well as those that induce changes in bodily self-perception 
(with e.g. rubber hands) ﬁ nd activation in this region (Arzy, Thut, Mohr, Michel, & Blanke, 2006; 
Blanke & Arzy, 2005). TMS and intracranial stimulation to this region has been shown to lead to 
out-of-body experiences, confusion of the body vs. the environment, and illusory changes in the 
orientation of body parts (Blanke et al., 2002, 2005; Tsakiris et al., 2008). 
 How do we interpret these results, which seem to contradict our theory? In general, we could 
consider ﬁ ve possibilities. The ﬁ rst is that one group of scientists has made an error, leaving an 
unnoticed confound in their experimental paradigm. Could the body representation tasks also 
involve thinking about thoughts? Could the false belief task accidentally induce updating main-
taining a representation of one’s own body? These are empirical questions, but we consider both 
possibilities highly unlikely. The second option is that there is some deep common computa-
tion, served by the same neural population that is required by these different classes of tasks. One 
option here would be “decoupling” (Gallagher & Frith, 2003; Leslie & Frith 1990; Liu, Sabbagh, & 
& Gehring, 2004), maintaining distinct representational reference frames, e.g. for one’s own and 
other minds, for current vs. imaginary body positions, and so on. The third option is that the same 

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
150
neurons can assume distinct and even unrelated functional roles, depending on the context and 
the pattern of activity in other neural populations (e.g. Miller & Cohen, 2001). On this view, think-
ing about thoughts and maintaining a body representation are cognitively unrelated, in spite of 
being implemented by the same neurons. The fourth option is that distinct neuronal populations 
are involved in thinking about thoughts and maintaining a body representation, but these neurons 
are interleaved within the RTPJ, just as color- and orientation-sensitive neural populations are 
interleaved in V1. 
 Finally, the ﬁ fth option is that distinct neuronal populations are involved in thinking about 
thoughts vs. maintaining one’s body representation, exogenous attention shifts, and biological 
motion perception. These neural populations are not interleaved: they are contained in distinct 
regions that are merely nearby on the cortical sheet. We ﬁ nd this last option most plausible. Standard 
fMRI methods, which involve extensive spatial blurring at three stages (acquisition, preprocessing, 
and group averaging; Fedorenko & Kanwisher, 2009; Logothetis, 2008), are strongly biased to con-
ﬂ ate neighboring regions that are truly distinct. Even so, the existing evidence suggests that the 
region involved in body representations is lateral (MNI x-coordinates typically around 64mm) 
to the region involved in thinking about thoughts (x-coordinates around 52 mm). As described 
above, this was also true of the regions involved in biological motion perception (Gobbini et al., 
2007) and exogenous attention (Decety & Lamm, 2007; Scholz et al., 2009); these are almost com-
pletely non-overlapping in individual subjects. 
 A different kind of challenge arises from examples of tasks that apparently do involve thinking 
about thoughts, but do not elicit activity in TPJ, mPFC, or PC. Two interesting examples are visual 
perspective-taking tasks, and recognition of facial expressions of emotions from photographs. In 
visual perspective taking tasks, the participant sees an image of a character in a 3D space, and is 
asked to imagine the view of the room from the viewpoint of the character. For example, partici-
pants may be asked to report how many dots the character can see (the third person perspective), 
versus how many dots the participants themselves can see (including those that are out of the 
character’s view, the ﬁ rst person perspective). This perspective-taking task clearly involves think-
ing about the character’s visual access, which could be construed as a mental state. Nevertheless, 
this task typically does not elicit activity in the same regions as thinking about thoughts (Aichhorn 
et al., 2006; Vogeley May, Ritzl, Falkai, Zilles, & Fink, 2004). Similarly, participants in hundreds of 
fMRI experiments have viewed photographs of human faces expressing various basic emotional 
expressions (e.g. sad, afraid, angry, surprised, happy, neutral). Although these images do depict 
evidence of another person’s emotional experience, they also typically do not elicit activity in the 
same regions as thinking about thoughts (Costafreda et al., 2008; Lamm, Batson, & Decety, 2007; 
Vuilleumier et al., 2001). 
 What should we conclude from these examples? One option is to make a forward inference, 
using the evidence from these tasks to change our hypothesis about the brain regions’ functions. 
Here, the forward inference might be that the ToM brain regions are responsible for only a subset 
of mental state processing. We could conclude that different brain regions are involved in thinking 
about different classes of internal experiences: bodily states, emotional states, perceptual states, or 
epistemic states (e.g. thinking, knowing, doubting, etc.). The so-called ToM brain regions might 
be speciﬁ cally involved in representing epistemic states, while regions of insula represent others’ 
emotions and regions of parietal cortex represent others’ perceptual states. 
 Another option is to make a reverse inference: using the pattern of neural activity to change our 
analysis of the cognitive processes required by the task. Reverse inferences are risky because they 
require a lot of conﬁ dence in the functional speciﬁ city of the brain region(s) involved (Poldrack, 
2006a). However, we think ToM brain regions are good candidates to support reverse inference, 

WHERE NEXT?
151
given the converging evidence across the many experiments described above. In this case, a reverse 
inference might be that these visual perspective taking and emotional face tasks do not actually 
elicit thinking about thoughts, and instead are solved by alternative computational strategies. For 
example, rather than truly considering someone’s perceptual experiences, line-of-sight tasks may 
be solved using mental rotation and geometric calculation. Emotional facial expressions may be 
recognized (akin to object recognition) without always requiring a representation of the person’s 
internal state. 
 In these particular cases, we are open to either the forward or reverse inference; only further 
experimentation will tell which is the better generalization. In general, we believe that in this 
domain, inferences can be made in both directions, forward and reverse. The absence of activation 
in perspective taking and emotion recognition tasks provides an important constraint on the pos-
sible functions of ToM brain regions (the forward inference). At the same time, the fact that visual 
perspective-taking and emotion recognition rely on different brain regions from reading stories 
about thoughts provides evidence that these tasks depend on different cognitive processes (the 
reverse inference). It’s the give and take of these two kinds of inferences, as evidence accumulates, 
that allows us to build a coherent understanding of both cognitive and neural function. 
 Summary 
 Taken together, these ﬁ rst two sections illustrate the main contributions of the ﬁ rst decade of neu-
roimaging the understanding of other minds. We have discovered a robust, replicable functional 
regularity in the human brain: regions that have increased activity when participants think about 
thoughts. These regions may be true cortical areas or parts of larger topographical maps, but in 
either case, understanding other minds is a major organizing principle of responses over cortex. 
The function of these regions is not to complete a task, but to transform some class of input into 
some output; and the class of input has something to do with thinking about minds, and not 
bodies or abstract representations. Of course, this description remains unsatisfying and largely 
underspeciﬁ ed. Nevertheless, we are optimistic that the second decade of this research program 
will continue to improve our speciﬁ cations. In particular, we are excited about newly emerging 
methods for fMRI data analysis that focus on the second aspect of a region’s function: the features 
within its preferred stimulus class that organize differential responses within each of the ToM 
regions. 
 Where next? 
 Differences between theory of mind regions  
 One step in specifying the computations performed by ToM regions will be understanding the 
division of labor and information transfer between the different regions. Overall, ToM regions 
show similar proﬁ les to most of the contrasts we described. However, research in the last 5 years 
has begun to tease apart the functional proﬁ les of these regions, and the differences are intriguing, 
though much work still remains to be done to form a coherent view of how they all ﬁ t together. 
 The most striking contrast comes from a task that elicits very robust activity in the medial ToM 
regions (mPFC and precuneus), but not the lateral ToM regions (TPJ and anterior STS): think-
ing about personality traits, especially of the self and close others (Whitﬁ eld-Gabrieli et al., 2011; 
Moran et al., 2011a; Saxe, Moran, Scholz, & Gabrieli, 2006a; Krienen, Tu, & Buckner, 2010). In a 
typical version of the experiment, participants in the scanner see single words describing personal-
ity traits (e.g. “lazy,” “talkative”, “ambitious”) and judge whether each one is desirable or undesirable 

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
152
(the semantic control condition), is true of a famous person (the other control condition), or is 
true of themselves (the self condition). MPFC and precuneus regions show much higher activ-
ity during the self condition; moreover, within the self condition, activity in mPFC is higher for 
the words that participants say  are true of themselves (Moran et al., 2011a), and the amount of 
activity in mPFC for each item presented in the self task (but not in the semantic or other tasks) 
predicts participants’ subsequent memory for those items on a surprise memory test (Mitchell, 
Macrae, & Banaji, 2006; Jenkins & Mitchell, 2009). These data are compelling to us: the mPFC, 
but not the TPJ, is involved in reﬂ ection about one’s own stable traits and attributes (Lombardo 
et al., 2010). Similarly, elaborating one’s own autobiographical memories leads to activity in medial 
ToM regions, whereas imagining someone else’s experiences on similar occasions elicits activity in 
bilateral TPJ (Rabin, Gilboa, Stuss, Mar, & Rosenbaum, 2010). 
 In fact, coding information in terms of similarity to the self may be a key computation of mPFC. 
In one series of studies (Tamir & Mitchell, 2010), participants judged the likely preferences of 
strangers (e.g. is this person likely to “fear speaking in public” or “enjoy winter sports”) about 
whom they had almost no background information. Under those circumstances, the response of 
the mPFC (but not TPJ) was predicted by the discrepancy between the attributions made to the 
target and the participant’s own preference for the same items: the more another person was per-
ceived as different from the self, for a speciﬁ c item, the larger the response in mPFC. 
 Another distinction, supported by multiple studies, suggests that sub-regions of mPFC are most 
recruited when thinking about someone’s negative emotions or bad intentions, whereas the TPJ 
makes no distinction based on valence. For example, Bruneau, Pluta, & Saxe (2011) found that 
only the mPFC showed a higher response to stories about very sad events (e.g. a person proposes 
marriage and is rejected) compared to neutral or positive events (e.g. the marriage proposal is 
accepted). In a PET study, Hayashi, Abe, Ueno, Shigemune, Mori, Tashiro, et al. (2010) found that 
a region in mPFC was recruited when people were considering an actor’s dishonesty as a factor in 
moral judgments; and in an fMRI study, Young & Saxe (2009a) found that a region in ventral mPFC 
was correlated with moral judgments of attempted harms, which are morally wrong only because 
of the actor’s negative intentions. Converging with these neuroimaging studies, lesion studies sug-
gest that focal damage to ventral mPFC creates disproportionate difﬁ culty in understanding bad 
intentions, and in integrating those intentions into moral judgments (Koenigs et al., 2007). 
 In this vein, further work has been done to examine the response proﬁ le of mPFC. The “regions” 
implicated in ToM are very large, especially in the mPFC, and there may be multiple sub-divisions, 
each with different response proﬁ les. Proposed distinctions along the ventral-dorsal axis of mPFC 
include: similarity to self (such that self-relevant processes elicit responses more ventrally (e.g. 
Mitchell et al., 2006; Jacques. Conway, Lowder, & Cabeza, 2011), interpersonal closeness (peo-
ple who are closer, or more important to the self elicit responses more ventrally, Krienen et al., 
2010), or affective content (“hot” affective states elicit responses more ventrally (Ames, Jenkins, 
Banaji, & Mitchell, 2008; D’Argembeau et al., 2007; Mitchell & Banaji, 2005), while “cool” cog-
nitive states elicit responses more dorsally (Kalbe, Schlegel, Sack, Nowak, Dafotakis, Bangard, 
et al., 2010; Shamay-Tsoory & Aharon-Peretz, 2007; Shamay-Tsoory, Tomer, Berger, Goldsher, & 
Aharon-Peretz, 2005). Thus, while there may be a convergent theoretical account of the mPFC, and 
its responses to other people’s negative intentions and emotions, one’s own personality traits, and 
ambiguous inferences about preferences, another possibility is that these response proﬁ les reﬂ ect 
distinct sub-regions within mPFC, each contributing a distinct computation to understanding 
other minds. 
 Intriguingly, none of these distinctions have shown to affect the lateral ToM regions. In contrast, 
one dimension that seems to inﬂ uence the magnitude of response in TPJ more than mPFC is 

WHERE NEXT?
153
whether someone’s thought or feeling is unexpected, given the other information you have about 
that person. Saxe & Wexler (2005) introduced characters whose social background was mundane 
(e.g. New Jersey) or unusual (e.g. a polyamorous cult). Participants then read about that char-
acter’s thoughts and feelings (e.g. a husband who believed it would be either fun or awful if his 
wife had an affair). On their own, neither the background nor the content of the belief affected 
the magnitude of response in the TPJ, but there was a signiﬁ cant interaction: whichever thought 
was unlikely, given the character’s social background, elicited a larger response in the right TPJ. 
Recently, Cloutier, Gabrieli, O’Young, & Ambady (2011) provided a conceptual replication of this 
result: participants saw photographs of people labeled as Democratic or Republican, paired with 
opinions that were either typical of their political afﬁ liation or typical of the opposite afﬁ liation. 
Opinions that were unexpected given the protagonist’s political background (e.g. a Republican 
wanting liberal Supreme Court judges) elicited a higher response in most of the ToM regions, 
including bilateral TPJ and mPFC. Finally, a third study suggests that the conﬂ ict between back-
ground and belief is necessary for increased activation, not just sufﬁ cient. In the absence of speciﬁ c 
background information about the believer, there is no difference in the response of any ToM 
region to absurd vs. commonsense beliefs (e.g. “John believes that swimming in the pool is a good 
way to grow ﬁ ns/cool off,” Young et al., 2010b). 
 Although they are preliminary, we ﬁ nd these results exciting because they are consistent with the 
idea that activity in TPJ reﬂ ects a process of forming a coherent model of another’s mind. We expect 
other people to be coherent, uniﬁ ed entities, and strive to resolve inconsistencies with that expecta-
tion (see Hamilton & Sherman, 1996). Consequently, when a target’s behavior violates a previous 
impression of that person, observers spend more time processing the behavior (Bargh & Thein, 
1985; Higgins & Bargh, 1987) and more time searching for the cause of the behavior (Hamilton, 
1988). Concomitantly, more activity in TPJ occurs precisely when participants are likely exerting 
effort to integrate a person’s thoughts and feelings into a coherent model of their whole mind; that 
is, when participants are building a “theory” of a mind (Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997). 
 These results suggest that while TPJ activity may be related to the discrepancy between a thought 
or feeling and other information about the protagonist, mPFC and PC activity may be related to 
discrepancies between the protagonist’s thoughts or feelings and the participant’s own thoughts or 
feelings on the same topic. Thus, whereas TPJ may be involved in integrating a belief or preference 
into a coherent model of another’s mind (e.g. Young et al., 2010c), mPFC and precuneus activity 
may reﬂ ect a different “anchor-and-adjust” strategy, that helps identify other people’s thoughts and 
preferences by starting with one’s own preferences, and then adjusting them as necessary (Tamir 
& Mitchell, 2010). Taken together, these results suggest that medial and lateral ToM regions sup-
port distinct computations within ToM. These distinctions help us separate ToM into its real (i.e. 
neurally-realized) component parts, and formulate hypotheses about each of the more speciﬁ c 
functions of individual regions within the group.  
 Magnitude: “more” theory of mind 
 Until now, we asked simply whether ToM brain regions do or do not show activity in response to a 
task or stimulus. However, this is clearly an over-simpliﬁ cation; activation is continuous, not dis-
crete, making it very tempting to ask, “Which stimulus and task dimensions within the domain of 
thinking about minds modulate the activation in these brain regions?” The magnitude of activity, 
over tasks or stimuli, could reveal not only what class of stimuli is processed in a region, but also 
which dimensions of those stimuli and tasks elicit more or less processing. 
 Interestingly, initial attempts to modulate activation in the ToM network mostly discovered fea-
tures that do not elicit differential magnitudes of response. For example, most of the ToM regions 

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
154
show an equally high response to explicit descriptions of beliefs that are true or false (Young & 
Saxe, 2008), justiﬁ ed or unjustiﬁ ed (Young, Nichols, & Saxe, 2010c), and well-intentioned or bad 
(i.e. a girl who believes she is putting poison in her friends coffee, vs. believes that she is putting 
sugar in the coffee, Young, Cushman, Hauser, & Saxe, 2007). In the TPJ, at least, it also does not 
matter to whom the thought or feeling is attributed: there is an equally strong response to beliefs 
attributed to similar or dissimilar others (Saxe & Wexler, 2005), or to members of one’s own group 
vs. an enemy group (Bruneau & Saxe, 2010; Bruneau, Dufour & Saxe, 2012). 
 Part of the reason for this lack of success may be that we do not yet have satisfactory cogni-
tive or computational theories of ToM that allow us to predict when “more” ToM processing will 
be required, or even exactly what “more” means. Some intuitive possibilities have already proven 
empirically false. For example, making it harder to infer what a character believes, by making 
the available evidence more ambiguous, does not lead to more activity in TPJ regions (Jenkins 
& Mitchell, 2009). In fact, we (Dodell-Feder et al., 2011) found that, while some stories about 
thoughts systematically elicit more activity than others, in each ToM region, we could not ﬁ nd 
any feature (e.g. vividness, unexpectedness, length, syntactic complexity) that predicted these dif-
ferences in activity, with the partial exception of the precuneus, which showed greater activity to 
stories that involved more people. 
 Researchers with a background in computer science or game theory often suggest one particular 
dimension for “more” ToM processing—the depth of embedding of one mental state within another. 
Thus, many people intuit, reasoning about an embedded belief (e.g. “Carla believes that Ben thinks 
that she eats too much junk food”) should require more ToM processing that reasoning about a simple 
belief (e.g. “Carla believes that she eats too much junk food.”) When we tested this hypothesis directly 
using verbal stories, we found that no ToM regions showed greater activity for the more embedded 
beliefs (Koster-Hale & Saxe, 2011). Other brain regions did show more activity—regions involved in 
language processing and regions involved difﬁ cult memory and cognitive control tasks, like dorsola-
teral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). Our interpretation of these results is that embedding beliefs inside 
other beliefs makes the reasoning problem harder, but does not lead to greater ToM processing, per 
se. This ﬁ nding converges with results from patient populations and aging adults showing that failure 
to pass second-order false belief tasks may, in fact, be due to domain-general impairment, rather than 
diminished ToM processing (Slessor, Phillips, & Bull, 2007; Zaitchik et al., 2006). 
 This highlights a more general problem with trying to elicit ToM in games. Difﬁ cult games often 
demand ToM reasoning, but similar patterns of behavior can be achieved by logical problem solv-
ing. Thus, in games designed to allow for more or less sophisticated ToM reasoning, some papers 
ﬁ nd ToM regions correlated with increasing “levels of embedding” (e.g. Coricelli & Nagel, 2009), 
whereas other papers implicate control/memory brain regions, such as DLPFC (e.g. Yoshida et al., 
2010). Some participants may, some of the time, discover non-mentalistic strategies to play the 
game, and patterns of play alone are less diagnostic than one might hope. 
 Thus, making progress in understanding what features or dimensions drive these regions, we 
believe, will again require both forward and reverse inferences. Cognitive or computational theo-
ries should suggest possible dimensions of ToM inferences that may be reﬂ ected in “more” activity 
in ToM regions; but at the same time, the dimensions that do, and do not, modulate the magnitude 
of response in ToM brain regions may provide important clues for developing theories of what 
these brain regions are actually doing. 
 Patterns within theory of mind regions 
 Finally, as well as looking at changes in overall activity, a third strategy is to look for divisions of func-
tional responses across the neural populations within each region. Two relatively novel methods for 

WHERE NEXT?
155
analyzing fMRI data may allow neuroscientists to look inside ToM regions. Distinctions between 
neural subpopulations within regions may provide clues to how these regions function. 
 The ﬁ rst method is repetition-suppression, also called functional adaptation. Repetition-
suppression analyses take advantage of the observation that after processing a stimulus or task 
once, activity in a neuron or brain region in response to an identical stimulus or task is suppressed, 
or adapted (Grill-Spector, Henson, & Martin, 2006). By manipulating the features of the repeated 
stimulus, so that some are identical and some are different from the original stimulus, it is possible 
to ask what counts as the same stimulus for a particular brain region (Kourtzi & Kanwisher, 2001). 
If the repeated stimulus is effectively the same with regard to the features represented by the brain 
region, then the region’s response will be suppressed or adapted. On the other hand, if a feature 
that is represented in the brain region has been sufﬁ ciently modiﬁ ed, the brain region’s response 
will “recover” from adaptation. 
 This method has been used frequently and effectively to study visual representations of objects 
and places (Poldrack, 2006b). To date, only one study has taken advantage of this approach to test 
hypotheses about ToM. Jenkins, Macrae, & Mitchell (2008) asked whether attributing a preference 
(e.g. “enjoys winter sports”) to oneself, a similar stranger, or a dissimilar stranger, depend on the 
same neural subpopulations within mPFC. They found that thinking about another,  similar other 
person after thinking about the self led to repetition suppression, while thinking about the self and 
then a dissimilar other led to recovery from adaption. These results support the hypothesis that the 
mPFC represents other minds in terms of their similarity to the self. 
 Currently, we are using a similar strategy to investigate the components of mental state attribu-
tions. People read short stories in which a key mental state was repeated twice, with some elements 
changed. After the ﬁ rst mental state sentence (e.g. “Megan thinks that Julie is being too ﬂ irty”), the 
repetition either changed the agent (e.g. “Gina thinks”), the attitude verb (e.g. “Megan  worries 
that”), the content (e.g. “Megan thinks that Julie should be more ﬂ irty”), all three, or none of these 
elements. In preliminary data, we ﬁ nd that ToM brain regions recover from adaptation for each 
kind of change on its own (compared to no change), suggesting that these regions encode all three 
elements of a mental state attribution. Interestingly, while the mPFC shows the most recovery 
when the content of the mental state changes, the left temporoparietal junction (LTPJ) shows the 
most recovery when the attitude verb changes, and the RTPJ shows equal recovery for any kind of 
change. If these results hold up to further analyses, they may provide clues about the contributions 
of each ToM brain region to thinking about the minds of others. 
 The second method, multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA), looks for subtle, but reliable spatial 
patterns within a single region (or local neighborhood) of cortex. By looking at spatial separability, 
MVPA provides a more direct measure of the existence of functionally separable sub-populations 
of neurons than repetition suppression. Each “voxel” (the fMRI equivalent of a pixel) may have 
some, possibly very small, preference for one kind of stimulus over another due to biases in the 
neuronal populations toward one type of information-processing vs. another; pattern analyses 
measure the similarities and differences between these patterns across space (Haxby, 2001). A few 
studies have begun to use pattern analyses to study ToM (e.g. Gilbert et al., 2008). In one promis-
ing example, Peelen, Wiggett, & Downing (2006) found that the pattern of activation in the mPFC 
reliably reﬂ ected the content of another person’s emotion (e.g. sad vs. angry), independent of the 
stimulus modality (e.g. vocal expressions vs. body posture). Recently, we found that MVPA can be 
used to distinguish types of mental states within the RTPJ (Koster-Hale et al., 2013). Speciﬁ cally, 
we ﬁ nd that the spatial patterns of responses across voxels (but not the magnitude of response) 
distinguished between harms committed intentionally vs. accidentally. This distinction cannot be 
detected in the pattern of activity in any other ToM brain region (or in any other part of the brain). 

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
156
Moreover, we ﬁ nd that individual differences in the neural pattern predict individual differences 
in moral judgment: the individuals who have the most distinct neural patterns are also those who 
show the greatest behavioral difference in their moral judgments of intentional vs. accidental 
harms. Together, these results begin to show which distinctions are represented within a region, 
and point toward the underlying distinctions and computations in ToM. We are very excited by 
this line of inquiry, and expect that both repetition suppression and multi-voxel pattern analyses 
will be important contributors to the next decade of neuroimaging studies of ToM.   
 Limits of neuroimaging  
 We are optimistic that there is a lot still to learn about ToM from neuroimaging. We hope that the 
“neuroimaging” chapter of  Understanding Other Minds,  4th edition will be as different from this 
one as this one is from the Friths’ chapter in the 2nd edition. However, it is also important to be 
realistic. Neuroimaging is cumbersome, expensive, and fundamentally limited. Many basic ques-
tions about ToM cannot be addressed with neuroimaging. For example, a scientiﬁ c theory of how 
humans understand other minds should address questions like: “When and why do we (sponta-
neously) seek to understand another’s thoughts?”, “How do we ﬁ gure out the actual content of 
someone else’s thoughts (i.e. what they are thinking) from speciﬁ c cues?”, “How do we choose 
whether or not to incorporate others’ thoughts into our own decisions and actions?”, and “Why do 
we care emotionally about others’ thoughts and feelings?” None of these questions have yet been 
approached using neuroimaging, and may pose much harder challenges than the simpler ques-
tions we have addressed so far. Contemporary neuroimaging technology does not even allow us 
to address many fundamental questions about the neural mechanisms of ToM. Existing tools are 
extremely slow and blurry, by comparison to the speed and precision of neural computation: they 
cannot decipher what is the input of a region, how that input is transformed, or where the output 
from that region is sent, during a ToM task. 
 If our ﬁ nal horizon is a complete theory of how brain regions allow us to understand other 
minds, we will need to make dramatic progress on (1) the “psychophysics” of ToM in adulthood, 
to allow precise quantitative measurements of people’s use of ToM; (2) a computational model 
of ToM that is sufﬁ ciently explicit to make quantitative predictions about adult judgments (e.g. 
Baker, Saxe, & Tenenbaum, 2011); and (3) a mechanism of how neurons and networks of neurons 
might implement that computational model, by sequentially transforming patterns of input into 
patterns of output that make different information explicit. That horizon is still far away. However, 
the fact that we can give a characterization of some of the boundary conditions that a successful 
account of ToM needs to meet is part of what makes this such an exciting time to participate in the 
cognitive neuroscience of understanding other minds.  
 References 
 Adams, R., Jr., Rule, N. O., Franklin Jr, R. G., Wang, E., Stevenson, M. T., Yoshikawa, S. (2010). 
 Cross-cultural reading the mind in the eyes: An fMRI investigation .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 22 (1): 97–108. 
 Adolphs, R. (2009).  Th e social brain: neural basis of social knowledge .  Annual review of psychology  60 : 693. 
 Adolphs, R. (2010).  Conceptual challenges and directions for social neuroscience .  Neuron ,  65 (6):  752–67 . 
 Aichhorn, M. et al. (2006).  Do visual perspective tasks need theory of mind?  NeuroImage ,  30 (3):  1059–68 . 
 Aichhorn, M., Perner, J., Kronbichler, M., Staff en, W., & Ladurner, G. (2009).  Temporo-parietal junction 
activity in theory-of-mind tasks: Falseness, beliefs, or attention .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  21 (6): 
1179–92. 

157
REFERENCES
 Ames, D. L., Jenkins, A. C., Banaji, M. R., & Mitchell, J. P. (2008).  Taking another person’s perspective 
increases self-referential neural processing .  Psychological Science  19 (7):  642–4 . 
 Apperly, I. & Butterfi ll, S. (2009).  Do humans have two systems to track beliefs and belief-like states? . 
 Psychological Review  116 (4):  953–70 . 
 Apperly, I. A., Samson, D., Chiavarino, C., Bickerton, W. L., & Humphreys, G. W. (2007). Testing the 
domain-specifi city of a theory of mind defi cit in brain-injured patients: Evidence for consistent per-
formance on non-verbal, “reality-unknown” false belief and false photograph tasks.  Cognition  103 (2): 
300–321. 
 Apperly, I. A., Samson, D., & Humphreys, G. W. (2005).  Domain-specifi city and theory of mind: evaluat-
ing neuropsychological evidence .  Trends in Cognitive Sciences  9 (12):  572–7 . 
 Arzy, S., Th ut, G., Mohr, C., Michel, C. M., & Blanke, O. (2006). Neural basis of embodiment: distinct 
contributions of temporoparietal junction and extrastriate body area.  Journal of Neuroscience  26 (31): 
8074–81. 
 Baker, C. L., Saxe, R. R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2011).  Bayesian theory of mind: modeling joint belief-desire 
attribution .  Proceedings of the Th irty-Th ird Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 
 2469–74 . 
 Bargh, J. A., & Th ein, R. D. (1985).  Individual construct accessibility, person memory, and the 
recall-judgment link: Th e case of information overload .  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 49 (5):  1129 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., O’Riordan, M., Jones, R., Stone, V., & Plaisted, K. (1999).  A new test of social sensitivity: 
Detection of faux pas in normal children and children with Asperger syndrome .  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders  29 , 407–18. 
 Baron-Cohen, S., & Wheelwright, S. (2004).  Th e empathy quotient: an investigation of adults with 
Asperger syndrome or high functioning autism, and normal sex diff erences .  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders  34 (2):  163–75 . 
 Baron  Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Hill, J., Raste, Y., & Plumb, I. (2001). Th e “Reading the mind in the 
eyes” test revised version: A study with normal adults, and adults with asperger syndrome or high -
functioning autism.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  42 (2): 241–51. 
 Bedny, M., Pascual-Leone, A., & Saxe, R. R. (2009).  Growing up blind does not change the neural bases of 
Th eory of Mind .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  106 (27): 
 11312–17 . 
 Bhatt, M., Lohrenz, T., Camerer, C. F., & Montague, P. R. (2010).  Neural signatures of strategic types in a 
two-person bargaining game . In  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  107 (46): 19720–5 
 Blanke, O., & Arzy, S. (2005). Th e out-of-body experience: disturbed self-processing at the 
temporo-parietal junction.  Neuroscientist  11 (1): 16–24. 
 Blanke, O., Mohr, C., Michel, C. M., Pascual-Leone, A., Brugger, P., Seeck, M., et al. (2005). Linking 
out-of-body experience and self processing to mental own-body imagery at the temporoparietal junc-
tion.  Journal of Neuroscience  25 (3): 550–7. 
 Bloom, P., & German, T. (2000).  Two reasons to abandon the false belief task as a test of theory of mind . 
 Cognition  77 (1):  B25–31 . 
 Bruneau E., Dufour N., & Saxe R. (2012) Social cognition in members of confl ict groups: behavioural and 
neural responses in Arabs, Israelis and South Americans to each other’s misfortunes. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society, London, B Biological Sciences  367 (1589): 717–30. 
 Bruneau, E. G., Pluta, A., & Saxe, R. (2011).  Distinct roles of the “shared pain” and “theory of mind” net-
works in processing others” emotional suff ering .  Neuropsychologia pp. 1–13 . 
 Bruneau, E. G., & Saxe, R. (2010).  Attitudes toward the outgroup are predicted by activity in the precuneus 
in Arabs and Israelis .  NeuroImage  52 (4):  1704–11 . 
 Carrington, S. J., & Bailey, A. J. (2009).  Are there theory of mind regions in the brain? A review of the neu-
roimaging literature .  Human Brain Mapping  30 (8):  2313–35 . 

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
158
 Castelli, F., Happ é , F., Frith, U., & Frith, C. (2000).  Movement and mind: a functional imaging study of 
perception and interpretation of complex intentional movement patterns .  NeuroImage  12 (3):  314–25 . 
 Cloutier, J., Gabrieli, J. D. E., O’Young, D., & Ambady, N. (2011).  An fMRI study of violations of social 
expectations: When people are not who we expect them to be .  NeuroImage  57 (2):  583–8 . 
 Cohen, S. B., Wheelwright, S., & Hill, J. (2001).  Th e “reading the mind in the eyes” test revised version: A 
study with normal adults, and adults with Asperger syndrome or high-functioning autism .  Journal of 
Child Psychology and Psychiatry ,  42 (2): 241–51. 
 Corbetta, M., Kincade, J. M., Ollinger, J. M., McAvoy, M. P., & Shulman, G. L. (2000).  Voluntary orient-
ing is dissociated from target detection in human posterior parietal cortex .  Nature Neuroscience  3 : 
 292–7.  
 Corbetta, M., & Shulman, G. L. (2002).  Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain . 
 Nature Review Neuroscience  3 :  201–15 . 
 Corbetta, M., Patel, G., & Shulman, G. L. (2008).  Th e reorienting system of the human brain: from envi-
ronment to theory of mind .  Neuron  58 (3):  306–24 . 
 Coricelli, G., & Nagel, R. (2009). Neural correlates of depth of strategic reasoning in medial prefrontal cor-
tex.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  106 (23): 9163–8. 
 Costa, A., Torriero, S., & Oliveri, M. (2008).  Prefrontal and temporo-parietal involvement in taking others’ 
perspective: TMS evidence .  Behavioural Neurology  19 (1–2):  71–4 . 
 Costafreda, S. G., Brammer, M. J., David, A. S., & Fu, C. H. (2008).  Predictors of amygdala activation dur-
ing the processing of emotional stimuli: A meta-analysis of 385 PET and fMRI studies .  Brain Research 
Reviews  58 (1):  57–70 . 
 Cushman, F. (2008).  Crime and punishment: Distinguishing the roles of causal and intentional analyses in 
moral judgment .  Cognition  108 (2):  353–80 . 
 D’Argembeau, A., Ruby, P., Collette, F., Degueldre, C., Balteau, E., Luxen, A., et al. (2007).  Distinct regions 
of the medial prefrontal cortex are associated with self-referential processing and perspective taking . 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  19 (6): 935–944. 
 Decety, J., & Lamm, C. (2007).  Th e role of the right temporoparietal junction in social interaction: how 
low-level computational processes contribute to meta-cognition .  Th e Neuroscientist ,  13 (6):  580–93 . 
 Decety, J., Michalska, K. J., & Akitsuki, Y. (2008).  Who caused the pain? An fMRI investigation of empathy 
and intentionality in children .  Neuropsychologia  46 (11):  2607–14 . 
 Dodell-Feder, D., Koster-Hale, J., Bedny, M., & Saxe, R. (2011).  fMRI item analysis in a theory of mind 
task .  NeuroImage  55 (2):  705–12 . 
 D ö hnel, K., Schuwerk, T., Meinhardt, J., Sodian, B., Hajak, G., & Sommer, M. (2012).  Functional activity 
of the right temporo-parietal junction and of the medial prefrontal cortex associated with true and false 
belief reasoning .  NeuroImage  60 (3): 1652. 
 Dufou,r N., Redcay, E, Young, L., Mavros, P., Moran, J., Triantafyllou, C., Gabrieli, J., & Saxe, R. (2012). 
What explains variability in brain regions associated with Th eory of Mind in a large sample of neurotyp-
ical adults and adults with ASD? In N. Miyake, D. Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds),  Proceedings of the 34th 
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 312–17). Austin: Cognitive Science Society. 
 Fedorenko, E., & Kanwisher, N. (2009).  Neuroimaging of language: Why hasn’t a clearer picture emerged? 
 Language and Linguistics Compass  3 (4):  839–65 . 
 Fletcher, P., Happe, F., Frith, U., Baker, S. C., Dolan, R. J., Frackowiak, R. S., & Frith, C. D. (1995).  Other 
minds in the brain: a functional imaging study of “theory of mind” in story comprehension.  Cognition 
 57 (2): 109–28. 
 Freiwald, W. A., Tsao, D. Y., & Livingstone, M. S. (2009).  A face feature space in the macaque temporal 
lobe .  Nature  12 (9):  1187–96 . 
 Friston, K. J., Holmes, A. P., Worsley, K. J., Poline, J. P., Frith, C. D., & Frackowiak, R. S. J. (1995). 
 Statistical parametric maps in functional imaging: a general linear approach .  Human Brain Mapping  2 : 
 189–210 . 

159
 Frith, C. D., & Frith, U. (2000). Th e physiological basis of theory of mind. In: S. Baron-Cohen, H. 
Tager-Flusberg, & D. Cohen (Eds),  Understanding Other Minds: Perspective from Developmental Social 
Neuroscience (pp. 335–56). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Frith, C., & Frith, U. (2012).  Social neuroscience .  Annual Review of Psychology  63 : 287–313. 
 Gallagher, H. L., & Frith, C. D. (2003).  Functional imaging of “theory of mind” .  Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 7 ,  77–83 . 
 Gallagher, H., Happ é , F., Brunswick, N., Fletcher, P. C., Frith, U., & Frith, C. D. (2000).  Reading the 
mind in cartoons and stories: an fMRI study of “theory of mind” in verbal and nonverbal tasks . 
 Neuropsychologia  38 (1):  11–21 . 
 Georgopoulos, A., Schwartz, A., & Kettner, R. (1986).  Neuronal population coding of movement direction . 
 Science  233 (4771):  1416–19 . 
 Gilbert, S. J., Meuwese, J. D., Towgood, K. J., Frith, C. D., & Burgess, P. W. (2009). Abnormal functional 
specialization within medial prefrontal cortex in high-functioning autism: a multi-voxel similarity 
analysis.  Brain  132 (4): 869–78. 
 Gobbini, M., Koralek, A. C., Bryan, R. E., Montgomery, K. J., & Haxby, J. V. (2007).  Two takes on the 
social brain: A comparison of theory of mind tasks .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  19 (11): 1803–14. 
 Goel, V., Grafman, J., Sadato, N., & Hallett, M. (1995).  Modeling other minds .  NeuroReport  6 :  1741–6 . 
 Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff , A. N. (1997).  Words, Th oughts, and Th eories. Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press . 
 Grill-Spector, K., Henson, R., & Martin, A. (2006).  Repetition and the brain: neural models of 
stimulus-specifi c eff ects .  Trends in Cognitive Sciences  10 (1):  14–23 . 
 Gweon, H., Dodell-Feder, D., Bedny, M., & Saxe, R. (2012).  Th eory of mind performance in children cor-
relates with functional specialization of a brain region for thinking about thoughts .  Child Development 
83: 1853–68. 
 Hamilton, D. L. (1988).  Causal attribution viewed from an information-processing perspective. In: D. 
Bar-Tal & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds),  Th e Social Psychology of Knowledge (pp. 359–85). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Hamilton, D. L., & Sherman, S. J. (1996).  Perceiving persons and groups .  Psychological Review  103 (2):  336 . 
 Haxby, J. V. (2001).  Distributed and overlapping representations of faces and objects in ventral temporal 
cortex .  Science  293 (5539):  2425–30 . 
 Hayashi, A., Abe, N., Ueno, A., Shigemune, Y., Mori, E., Tashiro, M., & Fujii, T. (2010). Neural correlates 
of forgiveness for moral transgressions involving deception.  Brain Research  1332 : 90–9. 
 Heider, F., & Simmel, M. (1944).  An experimental study of apparent behavior .  American Journal of 
Psychology  57 (2):  243–59 . 
 Hein, G., & Knight, R. T. (2008). Superior temporal sulcus-it’s my area: or is it?  Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience  20 (12): 2125–36. 
 Higgins, E. T., & Bargh, J. A. (1987).  Social cognition and social perception .  Annual Review of Psychology 
 38 (1):  369–425 . 
 Jacques, P., Conway, M. A., Lowder, M. W., & Cabeza, R. (2011).  Watching my mind unfold versus yours: 
An fMRI study using a novel camera technology to examine neural diff erences in self-projection of self 
vs. other perspectives .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  23 (6): 1275–84 
 Jenkins, A., Macrae, C., & Mitchell, J. (2008).  Repetition suppression of ventromedial prefrontal activity 
during judgments of self and others .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  105 (11):  4507 . 
 Jenkins, A., & Mitchell, J. (2010).  Mentalizing under uncertainty: Dissociated neural responses to ambigu-
ous and unambiguous mental state inferences .  Cerebral Cortex  20 (2): 404–410. 
 Kalbe, E., Schlegel, M., Sack, A. T., Nowak, D. A., Dafotakis, M., Bangard, C., et al. (2010).  Dissociating 
cognitive from aff ective theory of mind: a TMS study .  Cortex ,  46 (6):  769–80 . 
 Kamitani, Y., & Tong, F. (2005).  Decoding the visual and subjective contents of the human brain .  Nature 
Neuroscience  8 (5):  679–85 . 
REFERENCES

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
160
 Kanwisher, N. (2010).  Functional specifi city in the human brain: a window into the functional architecture 
of the mind . In  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  107 (25): 11163–70. 
 Kobayashi, C., Glover, G. H., & Temple, E. (2007). Children’s and adults’neural bases of verbal and nonver-
bal “theory of mind”.  Neuropsychologia  45 :  1522–32 . 
 Koenigs, M., Young, L., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Cushman, F., Hauser, M., et al. (2007).  Damage to the 
prefrontal cortex increases utilitarian moral judgements .  Nature  446 (7138):  908–11 . 
 Konkle, T., & Oliva, A. (2012).  A real-world size organization of object responses in occipto-temporal cor-
tex .  Neuron 74(6): 1114–24 . 
 Koster-Hale, J., Saxe, R., Dungan, J., & Young, L. L. (2013). Decoding moral judgments from 
neural representations of intentions.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  110 (14): 
5648–5653. 
 Koster-Hale, J., & Saxe, R. R. (2011).  Th eory of Mind brain regions are sensitive to the content, not 
the structural complexity, of belief attributions . In:  L. Carlson, C. Hoelscher, & T. F. Shipley (Eds), 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Cognitive Science Society Conference, pp. 3356–61. 
 Kourtzi, Z. & Kanwisher, N. (2001).  Representation of perceived object shape by the human lateral occipi-
tal complex .  Science  293 (5534):  1506 . 
 Knight, R. T. (2007).  Neural networks debunk phrenology .  Science  316 (5831):  1578–9 . 
 Kriegeskorte, N., & Bandettini, P. (2007).  Analyzing for information, not activation, to exploit 
high-resolution fMRI .  NeuroImage  38 (4):  649–62 . 
 Kriegeskorte, N., Goebel, R., & Bandettini, P. A. (2006).  Information-based functional brain mapping . 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA  103 (10),  3863–8 . 
 Krienen, F. M., Tu, P. C., & Buckner, R. L. (2010).  Clan mentality: Evidence that the medial prefrontal cor-
tex responds to close others .  Journal of Neuroscience  30 (41):  13906–15 . 
 Lamm, C., Batson, C. D., & Decety, J. (2007).  Th e neural substrate of human empathy: eff ects of 
perspective-taking and cognitive appraisal .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  19 (1):  42–58 . 
 Lawrence, E. J., Shaw, P., Baker, D., Baron-Cohen, S., & David, A. S. (2004).  Measuring empathy: reliability 
and validity of the empathy quotient .  Psychological Medicine ,  34 (5):  911–24 . 
 Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1990).  Prospects for a cognitive neuropsychology of autism: Hobson’s choice . 
 Psychological Review  97 (1):  122–31 . 
 Liu, D., Sabbagh, M., A., Gehring, W. J., & Wellman, H. M. (2004).  Decoupling beliefs from reality in the 
brain: an ERP study of theory of mind .  Neuroreport 15(6): 991–5. 
 Logothetis, N. K. (2008).  What we can do and what we cannot do with fMRI .  Nature ,  453 (7197):  869–78 . 
 Lombardo, M. V., Chakrabarti, B., Bullmore, E. T., Wheelwright, S. J., Sadek, S. A., Suckling, J., 
et al. (2010).  Shared neural circuits for mentalizing about the self and others .  Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience ,  22 (7):  1623–35 . 
 Mars, R. B., Sallet, J., Sch ü ff elgen, U., Jbabdi, S., Toni, I., & Rushworth, M. F. (2012).  Connectivity-based 
subdivisions of the human right “temporoparietal junction area”: Evidence for diff erent areas participat-
ing in diff erent cortical networks .  Cerebral Cortex  22 (8): 1894–903. 
 Mason, R. A., & Just, M. A. (2010).  Diff erentiable cortical networks for inferences concerning people’s 
intentions vs. physical causality .  Human Brain Mapping ,  32 (2): 313–29. 
 Miller, E. K., & Cohen, J. D. (2001).  An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function .  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience ,  24 :  167–202 . 
 Mitchell, J. P. (2008).  Activity in right temporo-parietal junction is not selective for theory-of-mind . 
 Cerebral Cortex ,  18 (2):  262–71 . 
 Mitchell, J. P., Banaji, M. R., & MacRae, C. N. (2005).  Th e link between social cognition and self-referential 
thought in the medial prefrontal cortex .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  17 (8): 1306–15. 
 Mitchell, J., Macrae, C. N., & Banaji, M. R. (2006).  Dissociable medial prefrontal contributions to judg-
ments of similar and dissimilar others .  Neuron ,  50 (4):  655–63 . 

161
 Moran, J. M., Lee, S. M., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2011a).  Dissociable neural systems supporting knowledge 
about human character and appearance in ourselves and others .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 
 23 (9):  2222–30 . 
 Moran, J. M., Young, L. L., Saxe, R., Lee, S. M., O’Young, D., Mavros, P. L., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2011b). 
 Impaired theory of mind for moral judgment in high-functioning autism .  Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences ,  108 (7):  2688–92 . 
 Moriguchi, Y., Ohnishi, T., Lane, R. D., Maeda, M., Mori, T., Nemoto, K., et al. (2006).  Impaired 
self-awareness and theory of mind: An fMRI study of mentalizing in alexithymia .  NeuroImage  32 (3): 
 1472–82 . 
 Onishi, K., & Baillargeon, R. (2005).  Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs?  Science ,  308 (5719):  255 . 
 Peelen, M. V., Wiggett, A. J., & Downing, P. E. (2006).  Patterns of fMRI activity dissociate overlapping 
functional brain areas that respond to biological motion .  Neuron ,  49 (6):  815–22 . 
 Pelphrey, K. A., Mitchell, T. V., McKeown, M. J., Goldstein, J., Allison, T., & McCarthy, G. (2003).  Brain 
activity evoked by the perception of human walking: Controlling for meaningful coherent motion . 
 Journal of Neuroscience ,  23 ,  6819–25 . 
 Pelphrey, K. A., Morris, J. P., Michelich, C. R., Allison, T., & McCarthy, G. (2005).  Functional anatomy 
of biological motion perception in posterior temporal cortex: An fMRI study of eye, mouth and hand 
movements .  Cerebral Cortex ,  15 (12):  1866–76 . 
 Pelphrey, K. A., & Morris, J. P. (2006).  Brain mechanisms for interpreting the actions of others from 
biological-motion cues .  Current Directions in Psychological Science ,  15 (3):  136 . 
 Perner, J. (1991).  Understanding the Representational Mind .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Perner, J., Aichhorn, M., Kronbichler, M., Staff en, W., & Ladurner, G. (2006).  Th inking of mental and 
other representations: Th e roles of left  and right temporo-parietal junction .  Social Neuroscience 1(3–4): 
245–58. 
 Platek, S., Keenan, J. P., Gallup Jr, G. G., & Mohamed, F. B. (2004).  Where am I? Th e neurological corre-
lates of self and other .  Cognitive Brain Research  19 (2):  114–22 . 
 Poldrack, R. A. (2006a).  Can cognitive processes be inferred from neuroimaging data?  Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences  10 (2):  59–63 . 
 Poldrack, R. A. (2006b).  Region of interest analysis for fMRI .  Social Cognitive and Aff ective Neuroscience 
 2 (1):  67–70 . 
 Rabin, J. S., Gilboa, A., Stuss, D. T., Mar, R. A., & Rosenbaum, R. S. (2010).  Common and unique neural 
correlates of autobiographical memory and theory of mind .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  22 (6): 
1095–111. 
 Repacholi, B. M., & Gopnik, A. (1997).  Early reasoning about desires: Evidence from 14-and 
18-month-olds .  Developmental Psychology  33 (1):  12 . 
 Samson, D., Apperly, I. A., & Humphreys, G. W. (2007).  Error analyses reveal contrasting defi cits in “the-
ory of mind”: Neuropsychological evidence from a 3-option false belief task .  Neuropsychologia  45 (11): 
 2561–9 . 
 Saxe R. (In press).  Th e new puzzle of theory of mind development . In: M. R. Banaji & S. A. Gelman (Eds), 
 Th e Development of Navigating the Social Cognition. World: What infants, children, and other species can 
teach us . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Saxe, R., & Kanwisher, N. (2003).  People thinking about thinking people . Th e role of the temporo-parietal 
junction in “theory of mind.”  NeuroImage  19 (4):  1835–42 . 
 Saxe, R., Moran, J. M., Scholz, J., & Gabrieli, J. (2006a).  Overlapping and non-overlapping brain regions 
for theory of mind and self refl ection in individual subjects .  Social Cognitive and Aff ective Neuroscience 
 1 (3):  229–34 . 
 Saxe, R., & Off en, S. (2010).  Seeing ourselves: What vision can teach us about metacognition . In: G. 
Dimaggio, & P. H. Lysaker (Eds),  Metacognition and Severe Adult Mental Disorders: From basic research 
to treatment (pp. 13–29). New York: Taylor & Francis. 
REFERENCES

FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF THEORY OF MIND 
162
 Saxe, R., & Powell, L. J. (2006).  It’s the thought that counts: specifi c brain regions for one component of 
theory of mind .  Psychological Science  17 (8):  692–9 . 
 Saxe, R. R., Schulz, L. E., & Jiang, Y. V. (2006b).  Reading minds vs. following rules: dissociating theory of 
mind and executive control in the brain .  Social Neuroscience ,  1 (3–4):  284–98 . 
 Saxe, R., & Wexler, A. (2005).  Making sense of another mind: Th e role of the right temporo-parietal junc-
tion .  Neuropsychologia  43 (10):  1391–9 . 
 Saxe, R., Whitfi eld-Gabrieli, S., Scholz, J., & Pelphrey, K. A. (2009). Brain regions for perceiving and rea-
soning about other people in school-aged children.  Child Development ,  80 (4):  1197–209 . 
 Scholz, J., Triantafyllou, C., Whitfi eld-Gabrieli, S., Brown, E. N., & Saxe, R. (2009).  Distinct regions of 
right temporo-parietal junction are selective for theory of mind and exogenous attention .  PLoS ONE 
 4 (3):  e4869–e4869 . 
 Schnell, K., Bluschke, S., Konradt, B., & Walter, H. (2011).  Functional relations of empathy and mentaliz-
ing: An fMRI study on the neural basis of cognitive empathy .  NeuroImage  54 (2): 1743–54. 
 Serences, J. T., Shomstein, S., Leber, A. B., Golay, X., Egeth, H. E., & Yantis, S. (2005).  Coordination of vol-
untary and stimulus-driven attentional control in human cortex .  Psychological Science  16 : 114–22 . 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., & Aharon-Peretz, J. (2007).  Dissociable prefrontal networks for cognitive and aff ec-
tive theory of mind: a lesion study .  Neuropsychologia  45 (13): 3054–67. 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S., Tomer, R., Berger, B. D., Goldsher, D., & Aharon-Peretz, J. (2005).  Impaired aff ec-
tive theory of mind is associated with right ventromedial prefrontal damage .  Cognitive and Behavioral 
Neurology  18 (1): 55–67. 
 Slessor, G., Phillips, L. H., & Bull, R. (2007).  Exploring the specifi city of age-related diff erences in theory of 
mind tasks .  Psychology and Aging ,  22 (3):  639–43 . 
 Sommer, M., D ö hnel, K., Sodian, B., Meinhardt, J., Th oermer, C., & Hajak, G. (2007).  Neural correlates of 
true and false belief reasoning .  NeuroImage ,  35 (3):  1378–84 . 
 Sommer, M., Rothmayr, C., D ö hnel, K., Meinhardt, J., Schwerdtner, J., Sodian, B., & Hajak, G. (2010). 
 How should I decide? Th e neural correlates of everyday moral reasoning .  Neuropsychologia ,  48 (7): 
 2018–26 . 
 Southgate, V., Senju, A., & Csibra, G. (2007).  Action anticipation through attribution of false belief by 
2-year-olds .  Psychological Science  18 (7): 587–92. 
 Spiers, H. J., & Maguire, E. A. (2006).  Th oughts, behaviour, and brain dynamics during navigation in the 
real world .  NeuroImage ,  31 (4):  1826–40 . 
 Spunt, R. P., & Lieberman, M. D. (2012).  An integrative model of the neural systems supporting the com-
prehension of observed emotional behavior .  NeuroImage  59 (3), 3050. 
 Spunt, R., Satpute, A. B., & Lieberman, M. (2011).  Identifying the what, why, and how of an observed 
action: an fMRI study of mentalizing and mechanizing during action observation .  Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience  23 (1): 63–74. 
 Tamir, D. I. & Mitchell, J. P. (2010).  Neural correlates of anchoring-and-adjustment during mentalizing . 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,  107 (24):  10827 . 
 Tsakiris, M., Costantini, M., & Haggard, P. (2008). Th e role of the right temporo-parietal junction in main-
taining a coherent sense of one’s body.  Neuropsychologia  46 (12): 3014–18. 
 Uttal, W. R. (2011).  Mind and Brain: A Critical Appraisal of Cognitive Neuroscience . Cambridge: MIT Press. 
 Van Overwalle, F. (2008).  Social cognition and the brain: A meta-analysis .  Human Brain Mapping  30 (3): 
829–58. 
 Vogeley, K., Bussfeld, P., Newen, A., Herrmann, S., Happe, F., Falkai, P., … & Zilles, K. (2001). Mind read-
ing: neural mechanisms of theory of mind and self-perspective.  Neuroimage  14 (1): 170–81. 
 Vogeley, K., May, M., Ritzl, A., Falkai, P., Zilles, K., & Fink, G. R. (2004).  Neural correlates of fi rst-person 
perspective as one constituent of human self-consciousness .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  16 , 
 817–27. 

163
 Vuilleumier, P., Armony, J. L., Driver, J., & Dolan, R. J. (2001).  Eff ects of attention and emotion on face 
processing in the human brain:: an event-related fMRI study .  Neuron ,  30 (3):  829–41 . 
 Wagner, D. D., Kelley, W. M., & Heatherton, T. F. (2011).  Individual diff erences in the spontaneous recruit-
ment of brain regions supporting mental state understanding when viewing natural social scenes . 
 Cerebral Cortex ,  21 (12):  2788–96 . 
 Walter, H., Schnell, K., Erk, S., Arnold, C., Kirsch, P., Esslinger, C., et al. (2010).  Eff ects of a genome-wide 
supported psychosis risk variant on neural activation during a theory-of-mind task .  Molecular 
Psychiatry  16 (4): 462–70. 
 Wellman, H., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001).  Meta-analysis of theory-of-mind development: Th e truth 
about false belief .  Child Development , 72(3):  655–84 . 
 Whitfi eld-Gabrieli, S., Moran, J. M., Nieto-Casta ñó n, A., Triantafyllou, C., Saxe, R., & Gabrieli, J. D. 
(2011).  Associations and dissociations between default and self-reference networks in the human brain . 
 NeuroImage ,  55 (1):  225–32 . 
 Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983).  Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining function of wrong 
beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception .  Cognition  13 (1):  103–28 . 
 Worsley, K. J., Evans, A. C., Marrett, S., & Neelin, P. (1992).  A three- dimensional statistical analysis for 
CBF activation studies in human brain .  Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism  12 (6):  900–18 . 
 Yoshida, W., Seymour, B., Friston, K. J., & Dolan, R. J. (2010). Neural mechanisms of belief inference dur-
ing cooperative games.  Journal of Neuroscience  30 (32): 10744–51. 
 Young, L., Camprodon, J. A., Hauser, M., Pascual-Leone, A., & Saxe, R. (2010a).  Disruption of the right 
temporoparietal junction with transcranial magnetic stimulation reduces the role of beliefs in moral 
judgments .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,  107 (15):  6753–8 . 
 Young, L., Cushman, F., Hauser, M., & Saxe, R. (2007).  Th e neural basis of the interaction between theory 
of mind and moral judgment .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  104 (20): 8235–40. 
 Young, L., Dodell-Feder, D., & Saxe, R. (2010b).  What gets the attention of the temporo-parietal junction? 
An fMRI investigation of attention and theory of mind .  Neuropsychologia ,  48 (9):  2658–64 . 
 Young, L., Nichols, S., & Saxe, R. (2010c).  Investigating the neural and cognitive basis of moral luck: it’s not 
what you do but what you know .  Review of Philosophy and Psychology ,  1 (3):  333–49 . 
 Young, L., & Saxe, R. (2008).  Th e neural basis of belief encoding and integration in moral judgment . 
 NeuroImage ,  40 (4):  1912–20 . 
 Young, L., & Saxe, R. (2009a).  An fMRI investigation of spontaneous mental state inference for moral judg-
ment .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  21 (7):  1396–405 . 
 Young, L., & Saxe, R. (2009b).  Innocent intentions: A correlation between forgiveness for accidental harm 
and neural activity .  Neuropsychologia  47 (10): 2065–72. 
 Zaitchik, D. (1990).  When representations confl ict with reality: Th e preschooler’s problem with false beliefs 
and .  Cognition  35 :  41–68 . 
 Zaitchik, D., Koff , E., Brownell, H., Winner, E., & Albert, M. (2006).  Inference of beliefs and emotions in 
patients with Alzheimer .  Neuropsychology  20 ,  11–20 . 
 Zaitchik, D., Walker, C., Miller, S., LaViolette, P., Feczko, E., & Dickerson, B. C. (2010).  Mental state attri-
bution and the temporoparietal junction: An fMRI study comparing belief, emotion, and perception . 
 Neuropsychologia  48 (9):  2528–36 . 
REFERENCES

 Chapter 10 
 Theory of mind: Insights from patients 
with acquired brain damage  
 Dana  Samson  and   Caroline  Michel 
 There is a general agreement that one way in which we are able to understand other people’s minds 
is by using knowledge and processes by which we impute invisible mental states such as beliefs, 
intentions or emotions in order to explain and predict people’s behavior, an ability referred to as 
 Theory of Mind (ToM, Premack & Woodruff, 1978). Yet despite this consensus, it remains unclear 
what cognitive and neural mechanisms underlie this ability. 
 Some evidence suggests that ToM relies on  effortful processes . For example, children start to 
reason accurately and explicitly about complex mental states, such as beliefs, at the same time as 
they undergo important developments in their language and executive function abilities (Carlson 
& Moses, 2001; Villiers & Pyers, 2002). Furthermore, adults do not seem to always engage auto-
matically in belief reasoning (Apperly, Riggs, Simpson, Chiavarino, & Samson, 2006a) and they 
often fail to take someone else’s perspective into account (Keysar, Barr, Balin, & Brauner, 2000), 
especially when they are under cognitive load or time pressure (Epley, Keysar, Van Boven, & 
Gilovich, 2004). 
 There is also evidence that ToM is  not a unitary function . For example, neuroimaging studies 
have shown that reasoning about other people’s mental states activates a network of distinct brain 
areas (for a meta-analysis, see Van Overwalle, 2009; see also Chapter 9). Furthermore, lesions to 
different brain areas can lead to ToM impairments. The ﬁ rst reports of ToM impairments were 
observed following acquired brain lesions to the right hemisphere (Happ é , Brownell, & Winner, 
1999; Siegal, Carrington, & Radel, 1996; Surian & Siegal, 2001) and the frontal lobes (Lough & 
Hodges, 2002; Stone, Baron-Cohen, & Knight, 1998; Stuss, Gallup, & Alexander, 2001), but there 
is now also evidence of impairments following damage to the temporo-parietal junction (Samson, 
Apperly, Chiavarino, & Humphreys, 2004), and subcortical structures such as the amygdala (Stone, 
Baron-Cohen, Calder, Young, & Keane, 2003) and the basal ganglia (Bodden, Dodel, & Kalbe, 
2010). This diversity of lesion localization is consistent with the idea that ToM is sustained by a 
distributed network of brain regions, and it is very likely that different brain regions play different 
roles. 
 While we have good reasons to expect that ToM relies, at least partly, on effortful processes and 
that it should not necessarily be construed as a unitary function, we still lack a detailed account of 
the cognitive and neural architecture of ToM. The aim of this chapter is to show how the study of 
the patterns of association and dissociation of deﬁ cits in patients with acquired brain lesions can 
help identify the building blocks of ToM and specify the nature of these building blocks in relation 
to high-order cognition functions such as executive function and language. Indeed, if ToM can be 
broken down in sub-processes that are relatively independent one from another at the functional 
and neural level, then we can expect that an acquired brain lesion may selectively affect one type of 

INHIBITING ONE’S OWN PERSPECTIVE
165
ToM sub-processes while leaving the others unaffected. Furthermore, if some ToM sub-processes 
rely on high-order functions such as executive function and language, we may expect that a deﬁ cit 
affecting the putative critical executive or language processes should impact on the efﬁ ciency with 
which these ToM sub-processes are operating. 
 In the following sections, we show the contribution of neuropsychological studies in highlight-
ing what may be some of the ToM building blocks and what may be the nature of these building 
blocks at the cognitive and neural level. In doing so, we will mainly focus on ToM knowledge and 
processes which allow us to infer  cognitive , rather than affective mental states, the latter being the 
focus of a different chapter (see Chapter 11).       
 Inhibiting one’s own perspective  
 Other people’s desires, emotions, or knowledge are often different to our own, and it is thus crucial 
to be able to put our own perspective aside when we try to understand or predict other people’s 
behaviors. This is illustrated in one of the most famous examples of ToM scenarios: the “Sally and 
Anne” story (Baron-Cohen, Leslie, & Frith, 1985). In that story, Sally puts her marble into her 
Top-down
Motor state
Emotional state
Bottom-up
Top-down
Bottom-up
Bottom-up
Top-down
Bottom-up
Mental state content
Self/Other
distinction
TEMPORARY
REPRESENTATION
LONG-TERM
KNOWLEDGE
(a)
(b)
(c)
Conceptual 
knowledge 
about the world 
including
theory of mind 
knowledge
(d)
(e)
(e)
(e)
Object of attention
Mental state content
(c)
(e)
 Figure 10.1  A schematic representation of the hypothesized components underlying our ability to 
understand other people’s minds (adapted from Samson, 2009). Components (a–d) are traditionally 
associated with ToM and include: (a) processes allowing us to distinguish our own mental states from 
that of others, including mechanisms inhibiting our own perspective; (b) processes allowing us to 
monitor the environment in order to track relevant cues to infer a content to other peoples’ mental 
states; (c) a short-term memory system allowing us to hold in mind the inferred content of mental 
states; and (d) a long-term memory system storing ToM knowledge. Components (e) are low-level 
and bottom-up processes which can bypass and/or feed into ToM components. 
 Adapted from Samson, D. Reading other people’s mind: insights from neuropsychology.  Journal of 
Neuropsychology ,  3 (1): 3–16 © 2009, John Wiley and Sons, with permission.  

THEORY OF MIND: INSIGHTS FROM PATIENTS WITH ACQUIRED BRAIN DAMAGE
166
basket and goes out for a walk. While she is away, Anne takes the marble out of the basket and puts 
it into her box. Sally then comes back and wants to play with her marble. If asked where Sally will 
ﬁ rst look for her marble, most adults (and already most children from the age of 5; Wimmer & 
Perner, 1983) will say that Sally will ﬁ rst open her basket, despite the fact that they know that the 
marble is not in there, and despite the fact that they themselves would have opened the box, rather 
than the basket if asked to get the marble. Thus, in order to correctly predict what Sally will do, we 
have to put our own perspective aside in order to realize that Sally has a different view about the 
location of the object. 
 Neuropsychological studies have shown that the ability to put one’s own perspective aside can 
be selectively affected by acquired brain damage, suggesting that some cognitive and neural proc-
esses are speciﬁ cally dedicated to the inhibition of our own perspective and not to other aspects of 
perspective taking (see (a) in Figure 10.1). Direct evidence for this comes from a single case study 
of a patient, WBA, who sustained right lateral prefrontal brain lesions following a stroke (Samson, 
Apperly, Kathirgamanathan, & Humphreys, 2005). The performance of patient WBA was com-
pared across two non-verbal and video-based false belief tasks in which the demands in terms of 
self-perspective inhibition were manipulated (see Figure 10.2). In both tasks and on false belief 
trials, a protagonist was not aware that the location of an object had changed. In the task with high 
self-perspective inhibition demands (reality-known condition), and similarly to classic false belief 
scenarios, the patient was shown the new location of the target object and had to resist interference 
from that knowledge in order to infer that the protagonist in the scenario had a false belief. Patient 
WBA was unable to ascribe a false belief to the protagonist in those conditions (he scored 1/12 
correct). In contrast, in the task with low self-perspective inhibition demands (reality-unknown 
condition), the patient wasn’t shown the precise location of the object before or after the change, 
but was simply made aware that the object location had changed. Here, knowledge of the location 
of the object could not interfere with the realization that the protagonist’s belief was false (see 
Figure 10.2). In that latter case, patient WBA was able to ascribe a false belief to the protagonist 
(he scored 11/12 correct). Thus, patient WBA was only impaired at ascribing a false belief when he 
knew the true state of the world. 
 Further evidence supporting the claim that patient WBA suffered from a selective deﬁ cit in 
inhibiting his own perspective comes from another modiﬁ ed false belief task in which three types 
of response options were given. The patient watched a protagonist witnessing what another pro-
tagonist put in a branded box (e.g. protagonist B watched protagonist A put an apple in an empty 
cornﬂ akes box). On false belief trials, protagonist B then left the scene, and in his absence, protago-
nist A changed the content of the box (e.g. protagonist A removed the apple form the cornﬂ akes 
box and put a wooden spoon in the cornﬂ akes box). Protagonist B then came back to the scene, 
and the patient was asked what protagonist B thought is inside the box. Three options were given: 
(1) protagonist B thinks there is an apple in the box (i.e. the response expected if the patient cor-
rectly inferred the protagonist’s false belief), (2) protagonist B thinks there is a wooden spoon in 
the box (i.e. the response expected if the patient transposed his own knowledge of the real state of 
the world), or (3) protagonist B thinks there are cornﬂ akes in the box (i.e. the response expected 
if the patient used a simpliﬁ ed strategy that bypasses the integration of the previous sequences of 
events in order to infer the belief content). In this task, patient WBA only scored 2/16 correct on 
false belief trials, and all his errors consisted in wrongly transposing his own perspective to that of 
the other person (Samson, Apperly, & Humphreys, 2007). 
 Several additional observations have helped characterize the processes underlying the ability to 
inhibit one’s own perspective. First, patient WBA’s difﬁ culties in inhibiting his own perspective 
were not only apparent in belief reasoning tasks, but were also apparent when he was asked to infer 

MONITORING THE ENVIRONMENT
167
someone else’s visual experience, desire, or emotion (Samson et al., 2005). This suggests that the 
same self-perspective inhibition processes may be involved irrespective of the nature of the mental 
state to reason about. 
 Secondly, WBA’s brain lesions also affected his performance on standard executive function 
tasks, including tasks measuring general inhibition abilities. However, recent ﬁ ndings suggest that 
not all patients with inhibitory control difﬁ culties will show a selective deﬁ cit in self-perspective 
inhibition (Houthuys, 2010). Patients with frontal lesions can show different types of inhibitory 
control difﬁ culties. They can have difﬁ culties inhibiting salient, but irrelevant external informa-
tion, which can lead to a high distractibility and an inability to focus on a task goal. Alternatively, 
they can have difﬁ culties inhibiting internally generated irrelevant thoughts, which can lead to 
perseveration of thoughts and actions as well as an inability to change their thoughts or actions 
in response to external cues (Burgess, Dumontheil, & Gilbert, 2007). It seems that it is the latter 
type of patients who suffer from a deﬁ cit in self-perspective inhibition and not the former type 
(Houthuys, 2010). Thus, we could speculate that the inhibitory processes involved in resisting 
interference from our own perspective are not the same as just any inhibitory processes, but that 
they may be the same as those that control internally generated thoughts. This would need to be 
conﬁ rmed by other studies. 
 Finally, patient WBA’s lesion location points to the right lateral prefrontal cortex as part of the 
neural substrate of our ability to inhibit our own perspective. This is consistent with a recent neu-
roimaging study which also points to that region as being involved in the inhibition of one’s own 
perspective (van der Meer, Groenewold, Nolen, Pijnenborg, & Aleman, 2011). 
 The evidence reported here from patients with acquired brain damage can have a wider impact 
in understanding the origin of ToM difﬁ culties in other populations. For example, by using a simi-
lar approach of contrasting ToM tasks with high and low demands in self-perspective inhibition, 
it has been shown that ageing disproportionally affects the ability to inhibit one’s own perspective 
(Bailey & Henry, 2008). 
 Monitoring the environment  
 While one may be able to successfully put aside one’s own perspective (realizing that the other 
person may have a different mental state), this ability alone would still not be sufﬁ cient to infer the 
speciﬁ c content of the other person’s perspective. We also need to select, monitor, and integrate 
the relevant cues in the speciﬁ c situation at hand in order to provide the appropriate inputs for 
reasoning about the other person’s mental state content (see (b) in Figure 10.1). For example, what 
is the type of relevant information we need to take into account to predict where Sally is going 
to look for her marble? How far back in the past do we need to go to ﬁ nd the relevant informa-
tion? Neuropsychological studies indicate that some processes may be speciﬁ cally dedicated to the 
monitoring of the environment, rather than to other aspects of ToM processing. 
 Evidence for a role of environment monitoring comes from another case study of a patient, PF, 
who suffered from a stroke affecting the left temporo-parietal areas of the brain (Samson et al., 
2007, 2004). Unlike patient WBA, patient PF was not more impaired in the false belief task that 
placed the highest demands on self-perspective inhibition. On the contrary, she performed better 
on the task with high self-perspective inhibition demands (scoring 11/12 correct) than the task 
with low self-perspective inhibition demands (scoring 2/12 correct). One explanation for this pro-
ﬁ le of performance is that PF was sensitive to how directly the instructions invited her to consider 
the other person’s perspective. Indeed, besides the varying demands in self-perspective inhibition, 
the reality-known and reality-unknown false belief tasks also differed in their task instructions 

THEORY OF MIND: INSIGHTS FROM PATIENTS WITH ACQUIRED BRAIN DAMAGE
168
(see Figure 10.2). In the reality-known condition, i.e. the task in which PF scored well, the instruc-
tions explicitly stated that she had to predict what the other person would do. In contrast, in the 
reality-unknown condition, i.e. the task in which PF performed poorly, PF was asked to locate a 
target object, and nothing in the instructions reminded her that the other person’s perspective 
may have been relevant to locate the object. Patient PF’s difﬁ culties may have thus arisen from not 
spontaneously tracking the other person’s belief. 
 Furthermore, in the three-option false belief task described earlier, only 20% of PF’s errors con-
sisted in transposing her own perspective, unlike patient WBA, for whom 100% of his errors were 
egocentric errors (Samson et al., 2007). PF’s other errors consisted in choosing the most likely 
content of the branded box, suggesting that PF did not take into account the previous sequences of 
events, and may have fallen back on a simpliﬁ ed mentalizing strategy of imputing as belief content 
what the person may have inferred from simply “looking” at the box. Two further observations of 
PF’s performance across the different false belief tasks are worth noting: (i) her errors were mostly 
made in the ﬁ rst half of the tasks and (ii) her errors were not conﬁ ned to false belief trials; they 
also appeared on true belief trials (Samson et al., 2007). It appeared as if the patient did not real-
ize which cues would be relevant, and only found them out through trial and error. For example, 
over the course of trials, PF seemed to have realized that when the protagonist in the scenario left 
(a)
(b)
 Figure 10.2  Sequences of events in the false belief trials of the reality-known and the 
reality-unknown belief reasoning tasks (Apperly et al., 2004; Samson et al., 2004, 2005). In both 
tasks, false belief trials are mixed with true belief and control trials. (a) The reality-known false belief 
task matches the classic false belief paradigm. Participants are asked to predict which box the woman 
will open ﬁ rst to ﬁ nd the green object. On the false belief trials, the woman is unaware of the change 
of location and participants know the new location of the object. Thus, to infer that the woman 
will open the wrong box, participants need to resist interference from their own knowledge of the 
object’s location (high self-perspective inhibition condition). (b) The reality-unknown false belief task 
was adapted from a task used with non-human animals (Call & Tomasello, 1999). Participants are 
asked to locate the green object and are told that the woman will try to help them ﬁ nd the object 
by using a pink marker. At the beginning of each trial, only the woman (and not the participant) is 
shown the content of the boxes. On false belief trials, the woman is unaware of the change of loca-
tion and, participants know that there has been a change of location, but do not know where the 
object is located. Thus, to infer that the woman points to the wrong box, participants do not have 
to deal with the interference of their own knowledge of the object’s location (low self-perspective 
 inhibition condition).  

CONSTRUCTING AND HOLDING A TEMPORARY REPRESENTATION IN MIND
169
the scene, s/he didn’t know that the state of the world had changed. If on the true belief trials, the 
protagonist also left the room, but there was no change of the state of the world, or the person came 
back in the room on time to see the change, patient PF then incorrectly attributed a lack of knowl-
edge or false belief. Thus, patient PF seemed to over-generalize the consequences of the protago-
nist leaving the room without integrating this information with other clues (e.g. what happened 
when the protagonist was away; when did the protagonist leave or come back in relation to when 
the changes were made in the room, etc.). Interestingly, such over-generalizations have also been 
reported in young children (Sodian & Thoermer, 2008). Collectively, the proﬁ le of performance of 
patient PF indicated that her difﬁ culties were not linked to a deﬁ cit in self-perspective inhibition, 
but were rather related to a deﬁ cit in spontaneously tracking other people’s mental states and/or 
monitoring the environment to ﬁ nd cues to the other person’s mental state content. 
 Interestingly, patient PF’s difﬁ culties observed in the false belief tasks extended to a carefully 
matched false photograph task, where she had to infer that a photograph misrepresented the real 
state of the world (Apperly, Samson, Chiavarino, Bickerton, & Humphreys, 2007). This association 
of deﬁ cit is consistent with neuroimaging studies in healthy adults which have shown that the left 
temporo-parietal junction (damaged in the case of patient PF) is activated not only when healthy 
adults reason about false beliefs, but also when they reason about non-social representations of 
the world such as false signs (for example, a sign indicating the direction of a speciﬁ c place can be 
displaced so that it indicates the wrong direction; Aichhorn, Perner, Weiss, Kronbichler, Staffen, & 
Ladurner, 2009). This is perhaps not surprising as even for non-social representations of the world 
such as photographs, it is necessary to pay attention to the correct clues to infer the content of the 
representation (the content of a photograph will depend, for example, on the time point at which 
the photograph was taken, the angle of the shot, etc.). 
 In sum, the pattern of responses of patient PF indicates that self-perspective inhibition is 
not the sole source of processing core to belief reasoning and that processes are also required 
to monitor the environment. It is possible that an impairment of these latter processes is at the 
origin of ToM difﬁ culties in other disorders than acquired brain lesions to the temporo-parietal 
junction.  
 Constructing and holding a temporary representation in mind  
 Inferring someone else’s mental state requires the ability to represent temporarily in memory the 
content of the other person’s mental states (see (c) in Figure 10.1). This can be particularly com-
plex information in the case of mental states that are propositional attitudes, such as beliefs (e.g. 
“Sally thinks that the marble is in the basket”) or certain forms of desires (e.g. “Sally wants that 
Anne puts the marble back in the basket”), requiring the need to represent and hold in mind the 
embedded information. 
 There is evidence that complex embeddings require high working memory resources. For exam-
ple, it has been shown that when healthy adults perform a working memory task while simul-
taneously performing a belief reasoning task, the efﬁ ciency with which they infer false beliefs is 
signiﬁ cantly reduced, with the detrimental effects of the concurrent working memory task being 
larger for second-order (e.g. “Peter thinks that Sally thinks that the marble is in the basket”) than 
ﬁ rst-order false belief inferences (e.g. “Sally thinks that the marble is in the basket,” McKinnon 
& Moscovitch, 2007). In other words, the more perspectives are needed to be monitored and 
integrated, the larger the detrimental effect of the concurrent working memory task. Similarly, it 
has been shown that brain-damaged patients’ residual working memory capacities signiﬁ cantly 
predicted their performance on a second-order, but not ﬁ rst-order false belief task (McDonald 

THEORY OF MIND: INSIGHTS FROM PATIENTS WITH ACQUIRED BRAIN DAMAGE
170
& Bibby, 2005). Thus, working memory resources seem to be differentially recruited depending on 
the complexity of the mental state contents that we represent in our minds. 
 Besides the role of working memory, other authors have hypothesized that language and par-
ticularly grammar would play a crucial role in representing propositional attitudes (de Villiers & 
Pyers, 2002). Indeed, propositional attitudes are verbalized by means of complement clauses which 
reﬂ ect the embedded nature of the clause (e.g. “Sally thinks that (the marble is in the basket)”), 
and it is therefore possible that the same grammatical structure is necessary to represent someone 
else’s belief in our mind. 
 There is evidence that children’s ability to process embedded sentences (complement or relative 
clauses) correlates with their performance on a false belief task (Smith, Apperly, & White, 2003; 
de Villiers & Pyers, 2002), suggesting that the mastering of complex grammar may give them the 
means to discover the properties of propositional attitudes such as beliefs. However, this does not 
mean that grammar is still necessary once an individual has a fully-ﬂ edged theory of mind. On 
the contrary, neuropsychological studies suggest that adults with grammatical processing deﬁ cits 
following brain damage can still reason about false beliefs (Apperly, Samson, Carroll, Hussain, & 
Humphreys, 2006b; Varley & Siegal, 2000; Varley, Siegal, & Want, 2001). One of these studies docu-
mented the case of a patient, PH, who suffered a left hemisphere stroke and who, as a consequence 
of his lesions, had severe grammar processing difﬁ culties (Apperly et al., 2006b). When reading a 
sentence, patient PH relied on the meaning of each single word to infer the meaning of the whole 
sentence without taking into account grammar. Thus, he would be unable to distinguish the mean-
ing of reversible sentences such as “the man is followed by the dog” and “the man follows the dog”. 
Patient PH was impaired both at processing relative clause sentences (he scored 7/14 correct) and 
complement clause sentences (he scored 3/12 correct, Apperly et al., 2006b). However, he had no 
difﬁ culties in non-verbal false belief reasoning tasks, scoring between 10/12 and 12/12 correct on 
three different tasks which required inferring that someone else has a false belief (ﬁ rst-order false 
belief tasks) and he even scored 12/12 in a non-verbal second-order false belief task. These results 
indicate that although the mastering of complex grammar may help children reasoning about 
beliefs, grammar does not seem to play a fundamental role anymore in adulthood, not even for 
complex mental state contents such as second-order beliefs. Thus, so far it remains unclear in what 
format we hold propositional attitudes in working memory.  
 Theory of mind long-term knowledge  
 Making sense of other people’s minds requires not only a set of processes that allow us to infer 
other people’s mental states, but also long-term semantic knowledge about mental states that can 
be used to guide the inferential processes (see (d) in Figure 10.1). Although nobody would deny the 
existence of long-term knowledge about mental states, this “knowledge” component of the ToM 
architecture has so far received little attention in the literature. 
 Some authors have construed ToM knowledge as including abstract general rules or laws about 
the mind (i.e. ToM knowledge is seen as a folk theory about how the mind works; e.g. Gopnik, 2003; 
Gopnik & Wellman, 1992). These rules or laws would specify the relation between mental states 
and objects or events in the world (e.g. given that an object is within a viewer’s line of sight, the 
viewer will see it), the relation between mental states and behaviors (e.g. people’s actions are deter-
mined by their representation of the world rather than by the world itself), the relations amongst 
mental states (e.g. perceptions lead to beliefs), as well as other properties (e.g. mental states have a 
tendency to change, mental states differ between individuals). While such a conceptualization of 
ToM as a “theory” has been questioned (see for example Gordon, 1986), it is more widely accepted 

THEORY OF MIND LONG-TERM KNOWLEDGE
171
that ToM knowledge includes a set of concepts referring to different types of mental states, with 
each concept differing from others according to speciﬁ c semantic features. For example, concepts 
referring to epistemic mental states can vary according to the level of certitude that they represent 
(e.g. knowing, thinking, or guessing). Adults’ rich repertoire of mental state terms testiﬁ es that we 
code in memory ﬁ ne-grained conceptual distinctions between mental states, and it has been pro-
posed that it is through the exposure to and the acquisition of a rich lexical repertoire that children 
discover the distinctive properties of ToM concepts (see for example, Peterson & Siegal, 2000). The 
question remains to what extent such a rich lexical repertoire and/or the associated ﬁ ne-grained 
distinctions at the conceptual level are necessary to infer other people’s mental states. 
 In principle, neuropsychological studies offer the possibility to investigate this question by stud-
ying how the loss of such a rich repertoire and/or the associated ﬁ ne-grained conceptual distinc-
tions impacts on a patient’s ability to infer other people’s mental states. In line with this approach, 
one study tested a patient, CM, who suffered from semantic dementia and who showed a massive 
atrophy of the left temporal pole (Michel, Dricot, Lhommel, Grandin, Ivanoiu, Pillon et al., 2011). 
The patient showed a severe impairment in tasks probing his general semantic knowledge about 
the world (e.g. living and non-living entities, abstract and concrete entities), and more relevant 
to our question of interest, the patient had a severely impoverished ability to use and understand 
mental state terms. For example, when asked to judge which of two words was closest in meaning to 
a target word, CM only scored 24/48 correct for mental state words (a score signiﬁ cantly below the 
level of performance of matched control participants who all scored above 42/48 correct). Despite 
his poor understanding of mental state terms, the patient was perfectly able to infer other peo-
ple’s mental states in non-verbal tasks, including other people’s intentions (he correctly inferred 
23/28 intentions with Sarfati, Brunet, & Hardy-Bayl é’ s, 2003, material), other people’s knowledge 
gained from various physical interactions with objects (he scored 21/24 and 23/24 correct on tasks 
adapted from those used in developmental research, O’Neill, Astington, & Flavell, 1992; Pillow, 
1993), as well as other people’s beliefs (he scored 11/12 correct for both the reality-known and 
reality-unknown versions of the false belief task described earlier). This proﬁ le suggests that a 
rich lexico-semantic repertoire of terms denoting mental states is not necessary to reason about 
people’s mental states. 
 Another important question regarding ToM knowledge relates to the organization in the mind 
and brain of ToM concepts compared to other types of concepts (e.g. other social concepts, such 
as those referring to personality traits, moral, and social conventions, or non-social concepts such 
as those related to the physical world). Several neuroimaging studies have found that some brain 
regions are more activated for social than non-social concepts suggesting that conceptual knowl-
edge might be organized in the mind and brain along a social/non-social dimension. However, 
these studies offer a limited insight into our question of interest, for several reasons. First, these 
studies have led to different conclusions regarding the localization of social knowledge, some local-
izing it in the temporal poles (e.g. Ross & Olson, 2010; Simmons, Reddish, Bellgowan, & Martin, 
2010; Zahn, Moll, Krueger, Huey, Garrido, & Grafman, 2007), whereas others localized it in the 
medial prefrontal cortex (Mason, Banﬁ eld, & Macrae, 2004; Mitchell, Heatherton, & Macrae, 2002; 
Mitchell, Bajani & Macrae, 2005). Secondly, ToM concepts have actually not been speciﬁ cally (if 
at all) tested in these studies. The “social concepts” have mainly been contrasted with non-social 
concepts, without any investigation of how mental state concepts speciﬁ cally are organized relative 
to other social or non-social concepts. Thus, how ToM-related concepts are organized in the mind 
and brain remains an open question. Finally, preferential activity observed in a brain region for a 
speciﬁ c semantic category does not vouch for the  necessary role of this brain region for the given 
semantic category. 

THEORY OF MIND: INSIGHTS FROM PATIENTS WITH ACQUIRED BRAIN DAMAGE
172
 The neuropsychological approach offers a way to overcome these limitations. First, neuropsy-
chological studies offer a way to disentangle the different possibilities regarding the localization of 
social knowledge in the brain by assessing how social knowledge is speciﬁ cally affected by a brain 
lesion in the putative areas. Zahn and colleagues (Zahn, Moll, Iyengar, Huey, Tierney, Krueger, 
et al., 2009) recently conducted such a study showing that a dysfunction of the right temporal pole 
was associated with a disproportionate impairment in processing social concepts compared to 
non-human animal function concepts. The authors concluded that the right temporal pole is nec-
essary for representing conceptual social knowledge. As far as the left temporal pole is concerned, 
patient CM’s good performance on ToM tasks despite a massive atrophy of the left temporal pole 
(Michel et al., 2011) suggests that at least ToM-related social concepts necessary to infer intentions, 
knowledge and beliefs would not be subtended by the left temporal pole (or at least not by the left 
temporal pole alone). Thus, if a repository for social knowledge was localized in the temporal pole 
as some authors proposed, it seems that it might be right lateralized or represented bilaterally. 
 Neuropsychological studies might also bring some answers to the other questions that have 
been left open by neuroimaging studies. The “social” category used in neuroimaging studies, as 
well as in Zahn et al. (2009) study, might be further divided in subcategories such as ToM-related 
concepts and various other kinds of social conceptual knowledge. Any selective deﬁ cit in patients 
would reﬂ ect that the dimension along which the affected and the preserved concepts differ could 
be a relevant principle for how knowledge is organized in the mind and brain, and that the brain 
area affected is necessary for the (most) impaired category of concepts. To the best of our knowl-
edge, there is no such evidence in the literature, and the data collected on patient CM (Michel 
et al., 2011) were not informative as the patient was equally impaired for the various categories of 
concepts tested when these were presented verbally (i.e. there was no difference globally between 
social and non-social concepts, and no difference between mental states and personality trait 
concepts). 
 To summarize, the kind of ToM knowledge necessary to understand other people’s minds 
and how this knowledge is organized in the mind and brain remain open questions for future 
research. 
 Low-level and high-level components to understand 
other people’s minds  
 The different building blocks highlighted in the preceding sections show that using ToM to under-
stand other people’s minds requires the use of conceptual knowledge, the support of working 
memory and the recruitment of various inferential processes. Collectively, this shows that ToM 
is made of high-level cognitive components. It is thus not surprising that it takes time for chil-
dren to become efﬁ cient at using their ToM and furthermore, that their ToM development occurs 
alongside important changes in their executive function and language abilities (Carlson & Moses, 
2001; de Villiers & Pyers, 2002). This can also explain why even healthy adults do not necessarily 
automatically track other people’s mental states (Apperly, 2006a) and why they often succumb 
to egocentric biases (Bernstein, Erdfelder, Meltzoff, Peria, & Loftus, 2011; Birch & Bloom, 2007; 
Epley et al., 2004; Keysar et al., 2000). However, this is not to suggest that we can only understand 
other people’s minds by using our ToM or that using our ToM necessarily requires the full use of 
high-level cognitive representations and top-down processes. Indeed, in some circumstances tak-
ing into account someone else’s visual experience, intention, emotion or even false belief can be 
facilitated by low-level processes which can give automatically and effortlessly useful information 
related to other people’s mental states (see (e) in Figure 10.1). This useful information could be 

CONCLUSIONS
173
acquired by bypassing the ToM components described earlier (see (a–d) in Figure 10.1) and/or 
could provide an input to the ToM components to support ToM reasoning. 
 One type of low-level process that can help us understand other people’s mental states is that of 
visuo-motor priming sustained by the “mirror neuron system” (see Chapters 14 and 15). Through 
these visuo-motor priming mechanisms, observing someone else performing an action automati-
cally activates a motor representation similar to the one we would activate ourselves if we were to 
do the action (e.g. Buccino, Binkofski, Fink, Fadiga, Gallese, Fogassi, et al., 2001). This mechanism 
might provide rich information about the other person’s motor plan and could perhaps be used to 
predict what the other person will do. Similarly, there is evidence for emotional contagion effects 
whereby we automatically share other people’s emotional states when we see others displaying 
these states behaviorally (e.g. Preston & de Waal, 2002; see also Chapters 12 and 13). In these cases, 
we could easily gain rich and useful information about other people’s affective states. Finally, other 
low-level processes automatically draw our attention to what other people are looking at (Allison, 
McCarthy, & Puce, 2000; Driver, Davis, Ricciardelli, Kidd, Maxwell, & Baron-Cohen, S., 1999). This 
would provide useful information about their visual experience (Samson, Apperly, Braithwaite, 
Andrews, & Bodley Scott, 2010) and their preferences toward objects in the environment (Tipper, 
2010). 
 The automaticity of these low-level processes means that some information about other peo-
ple’s mental states can be gained without accessing complex conceptual knowledge or monitor-
ing the environment in a top-down manner, and thus bypassing some of the ToM components 
described earlier (see (b) and (d) in Figure 10.1). Furthermore, the automaticity of these low-level 
processes provides a way of enhancing the salience of the content of other people’s mental states 
without having to inhibit one’s own perspective, and thus bypassing another ToM component 
described earlier (see (a) in Figure 10.1). Hence, it might be that these low-level processes offer a 
way to understand some aspects of other people’s minds and that they may be sufﬁ cient in some 
circumstances to interact with other people without the need to engage in complex and effortful 
computations. This may explain some of the intriguing recent ﬁ ndings showing that infants and 
even non-human animals are sensitive to other individuals’ mental states (Emery & Clayton, 2009; 
Hare, Call, Agnetta, & Tomasello, 2000; Kovacs, Teglas, & Endress, 2010; Onishi & Baillargeon, 
2005). Furthermore, if spared by their brain lesions, these low-level processes may give to patients 
with ToM impairments valuable support for their social interactions. However, such low-level 
processes alone do not provide the ﬂ exibility and scope to understand, reason and talk about the 
subtlety of people’s mental states. 
 It is also possible that in some circumstances low-level processes interact with the high-level 
ToM components by providing useful input to ToM reasoning (Frith & Frith, 2012). They may 
even support the development of ToM components during childhood. If this is the case, impair-
ments to the low-level processes may have cascading effects on the development and efﬁ cient use 
of ToM components. Whether, when and how low-level and high-level components interact is an 
open question for future research. 
 Conclusions  
 One of the current challenges in ToM research is to unravel the functional and neural architecture 
of the representations and processes which allow us to ascribe mental states. We hope to have illus-
trated that the study of the impaired and spared abilities of patients with acquired brain damage 
offers a valuable source of evidence to build such architecture and to specify the relations between 
the different building blocks with more general executive function and language processes. 

THEORY OF MIND: INSIGHTS FROM PATIENTS WITH ACQUIRED BRAIN DAMAGE
174
 We have discussed four types of building blocks that could form the basis of the ToM archi-
tecture, with each being independently represented in the brain (and mind) so that a lesion (or 
dysfunction) could selectively impair one of these building blocks while leaving the others spared. 
The ﬁ rst two building blocks refer to processes that appear executive in nature and that play a core 
role in the ToM inferential processes. One type of process allows us to resist interference from our 
own perspective enabling us to consider other people’s discrepant mental states. The other type of 
process allows us to monitor the environment to detect and integrate relevant cues enabling us to 
give a speciﬁ c content to other people’s mental states. Further research is needed to characterize 
more precisely these processes and identify their neural substrates. 
 The third building block is a working memory support to represent and temporarily hold in our 
mind the content of other people’s (as well as our own) mental states. Grammar (in the linguistic 
sense) does not seem to play a critical role in supporting the way mental states are represented in 
working memory. Thus, the question for future research is how we represent mental states, espe-
cially complex ones such as propositional attitudes that consist of embedded information. 
 The fourth building block consists of a system storing ToM knowledge in long-term memory. 
Preliminary ﬁ ndings indicate that the social/non-social distinction may be a relevant dimension 
along which our conceptual knowledge is organized in the mind and brain, but more studies are 
needed to speciﬁ cally investigate how ToM knowledge is organized relative to other types of social and 
non-social knowledge. Even if we progress in understanding the topography of conceptual knowl-
edge, it will be important to determine the minimum knowledge necessary to infer other people’s 
mental states. The only related evidence so far is that we don’t need to be able to use or understand a 
rich and extensive repertoire of terms denoting mental state terms to reason about mental states. 
 These four building blocks support the ToM reasoning that accompanies explicit mentalizing. 
However, we highlighted that we also have other, more low-level processes by which valuable infor-
mation about other people’s minds may be gained. Information gained by these processes may not 
be construed as mental states, but may help in interacting efﬁ ciently with other people without the 
need to recruit effortful processes and complex representations. Whether, when and how low-level 
and high-level components interact are important questions for future research. Similarly to many 
other open questions highlighted in this chapter, neuropsychological ﬁ ndings may continue to be 
one valuable source of evidence to ﬁ nd the answers to these questions. 
 References 
 Aichhorn, M., Perner, J., Weiss, B., Kronbichler, M., Staff en, W., & Ladurner, G. (2009).  Temporo-parietal 
junction activity in theory-of-mind tasks: falseness, beliefs, or attention .  Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience  21 (6):  1179–92 . 
 Allison, T., McCarthy, G., & Puce, A. (2000).  Social perception from visual cues: role of the STS region . 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences  4 (7):  267–78 . 
 Apperly, I. A., Riggs, K. J., Simpson, A., Chiavarino, C., & Samson, D. (2006).  Is belief reasoning auto-
matic?  Psychological Science  17 (10):  841–4 . 
 Apperly, I. A., Samson, D., Carroll, N., Hussain, S., & Humphreys, G. W. (2006).  Intact fi rst- and 
second-order false belief reasoning in a patient with severely impaired grammar .  Social Neuroscience 
 1 (3–4):  334–48 . 
 Apperly, I. A., Samson, D., Chiavarino, C., & Humphreys, G. W. (2004).  Frontal and temporo-parietal lobe 
contributions to theory of mind: Neuropsychological evidence from a false-belief task with reduced lan-
guage and executive demands .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  16 :  1773–84 . 
 Apperly, I. A., Samson, D., Chiavarino, C., Bickerton, W-L., & Humphreys, G. W. (2007).  Testing 
the domain-specifi city of a theory of mind defi cit in brain-injured patients: evidence for consistent 

175
REFERENCES
performance on non-verbal, “reality-unknown” false belief and false photograph tasks .  Cognition 
 103 (2):  300–21 . 
 Bailey, P. E., & Henry, J. D., 2008.  Growing less empathic with age: disinhibition of the self-perspective . 
 Journals of Gerontology. Series B, Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences ,  63 (4):  219–26 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985).  Does the autistic child have a “theory of mind”? 
 Cognition  21 (1):  37–46 . 
 Bernstein, D. M., Erdfelder, E., Meltzoff , A. N., Peria, W., & Loft us, G. R. (2011).  Hindsight bias from 3 to 
95 years of age .  Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition  37 (2):  378–91 . 
 Birch, S. A. J., & Bloom, P. (2007).  Th e curse of knowledge in reasoning about false beliefs .  Psychological 
Science  18 (5):  382–7 . 
 Bodden, M. E., Dodel, R., & Kalbe, E. (2010).  Th eory of mind in Parkinson’s disease and related basal gan-
glia disorders: a systematic review .  Movement Disorders  25 (1):  13–27 . 
 Buccino, G., Binkofski, F., Fink, G. R., Fadiga, L., Gallese, V., Fogassi, L., et al. (2001).  Action observa-
tion activates premotor and parietal areas in a somatotopic manner: an fMRI study .  European Journal of 
Neuroscience  13 (2):  400–4 . 
 Burgess, P. W., Dumontheil, I., & Gilbert, S. J. (2007).  Th e gateway hypothesis of rostral prefrontal cortex 
(area 10) function .  Trends in Cognitive Sciences  11 (7):  290–8 . 
 Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (1999).  A non-verbal false belief task: the performance of children and great apes . 
 Child Development  70 (2):  381–95 . 
 Carlson, S. M., & Moses, L. J. (2001).  Individual diff erences in inhibitory control and children’s theory of 
mind .  Child Development  72 (4):  1032–53 . 
 Driver, J., Davis, G., Ricciardelli, P., Kidd, P., Maxwell, E., & Baron-Cohen, S. (1999).  Gaze perception 
triggers refl exive visuospatial orienting .  Visual Cognition  6 (5):  509–40 . 
 Emery, N. J., & Clayton, N. S. (2009).  Comparative social cognition .  Annual Review of Psychology  60 :  87–113.  
 Epley, N., Keysar, B., Van Boven, L., & Gilovich, T. (2004).  Perspective taking as egocentric anchoring and 
adjustment .  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  87 (3): pp. 327–39 . 
 Frith, C. D., & Frith, U. (2012).  Mechanisms of social cognition .  Annual Review of Psychology ,  63 :  287–313 . 
 Gopnik, A. (2003).  Th e theory theory as an alternative to the innateness hypothesis . In L. Antony & N. 
Hornstein (Eds),  Chomsky and His Critics (pp.  238–254 ).  Oxford :  Blackwell Publishing . 
 Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. M. (1992).  Why the child’s theory of mind really is a theory .  Mind and 
Language  7 (1–2):  145–71 . 
 Gordon, R. M. (1986).  Folk psychology as simulation .  Mind and Language  1 (2):  158–71 . 
 Happ é , F., Brownell, H., & Winner, E. (1999).  Acquired “theory of mind” impairments following stroke . 
 Cognition  70 (3):  211–40 . 
 Hare, B., Call, J., Agnetta, B., & Tomasello, M. (2000).  Chimpanzees know what conspecifi cs do and do not 
see .  Animal Behaviour  59 (4):  771–85 . 
 Houthuys, S. (2010). Th e functional and neural basis of belief and desire reasoning. Unpublished PhD the-
sis, University of Birmingham. 
 Keysar, B., Barr, D. J., Balin, J. A., & Brauner, J. S. (2000).  Taking perspective in conversation: Th e role of 
mutual knowledge in comprehension .  Psychological Science  11 (1):  32–8 . 
 Kovacs, A. M., Teglas, E., & Endress, A. D. (2010).  Th e Social Sense: Susceptibility to Others’ Beliefs in 
Human Infants and Adults .  Science  330 (6012):  1830–4 . 
 Lough, S., & Hodges, J. R. (2002).  Measuring and modifying abnormal social cognition in frontal variant 
frontotemporal dementia .  Journal of Psychosomatic Research  53 (2):  639–46 . 
 Mason, M. F., Banfi eld, J. F., & Macrae, C. N. (2004).  Th inking about actions: the neural substrates of per-
son knowledge .  Cerebral Cortex  14 (2):  209–14 . 
 McDonald, S., & Bibby, H. (2005).  Th eory of mind aft er traumatic brain injury .  Neuropsychologia ,  43 (1): 
 99–114 . 

THEORY OF MIND: INSIGHTS FROM PATIENTS WITH ACQUIRED BRAIN DAMAGE
176
 McKinnon, M. C., & Moscovitch, M. (2007).  Domain-general contributions to social reasoning: theory of 
mind and deontic reasoning re-explored .  Cognition ,  102 (2):  179–218 . 
 Michel, C., Dricot, L., Lhommel, L. Grandin, C., Ivanoiu, A., Pillon, A. et al. (2011). On the role of the left  
anterior temporal lobe in social cognition: Neuropsychological evidence from a patient with semantic 
dementia. Poster presented at the  Social Brain Symposium , Bruxelles, Belgium, 14 November 2011. 
 Mitchell, J. P., Banaji, M. R., & Macrae, C. N. (2005).  General and specifi c contributions of the medial pre-
frontal cortex to knowledge about mental states .  NeuroImage  28 (4):  757–62 . 
 Mitchell, J. P., Heatherton, T. F., & Macrae, C. N. (2002).  Distinct neural systems subserve person and 
object knowledge .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA ,  99 (23), pp. 15238–43 . 
 van der Meer, L., Groenewold, N., Nolen, W., Pijnenborg, M., & Aleman, A. (2011).  Inhibit your self and 
understand the other: Neural basis of distinct processes underlying theory of mind .  NeuroImage  56 (4): 
 2364–74 . 
 O’Neill, D. K., Astington, J. W., & Flavell, J. H. (1992).  Young children’s understanding of the role that sen-
sory experiences play in knowledge acquisition .  Child Development  63 (2),  474–90 . 
 Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005).  Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs?  Science 
 308 (5719):  255–8 . 
 Peterson, C. C., & Siegal, M. (2000).  Insights into theory of mind from deafness and autism .  Mind and 
Language  15 (1):  123–45 . 
 Pillow, B. H. (1993).  Preschool children’s understanding of the relationship between modality of percep-
tual access and knowledge of perceptual properties .  British Journal of Developmental Psychology  11 (4): 
 371–89 . 
 Premack, D., & Woodruff , G. (1978).  Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind?  Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences  4 :  515–26 . 
 Preston, S. D., & de Waal, F. B. M. (2002).  Empathy: Its ultimate and proximate bases .  Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences  25 (1):  1–20 . 
 Ross, L. A., & Olson, I. R. (2010).  Social cognition and the anterior temporal lobes .  NeuroImage  49 (4): 
 3452–62 . 
 Samson, D. (2009).  Reading other people’s mind: insights from neuropsychology .  Journal of 
Neuropsychology  3 (1):  3–16 . 
 Samson, D., Apperly, I. A., & Humphreys, G. W. (2007).  Error analyses reveal contrasting defi cits in “the-
ory of mind”: neuropsychological evidence from a 3-option false belief task .  Neuropsychologia  45 (11): 
 2561–69 . 
 Samson, D., Apperly, I. A., Braithwaite, J. J., Andrews, B. J., & Bodley Scott, S. E. (2010).  Seeing it their 
way: Evidence for rapid and involuntary computation of what other people see .  Journal of Experimental 
Psychology. Human Perception and Performance ,  36 (5):  1255–66 . 
 Samson, D., Apperly, I. A., Chiavarino, C., & Humphreys, G. W. (2004).  Left  temporoparietal junction is 
necessary for representing someone else’s belief .  Nature Neuroscience  7 (5):  499–500 . 
 Samson, D., Apperly, I. A., Kathirgamanathan, U., & Humphreys, G. W. (2005).  Seeing it my way: a case of 
a selective defi cit in inhibiting self-perspective .  Brain ,  128 :  1102–11 . 
 Sarfati, Y., Brunet, E., & Hardy-Bayl é , M. C. (2003).  Comic-strip Task: Attribution of Intentions to Others . 
 Service de Psychiatrie Adulte, H ô pital de Versailles ,  Le Chesnay, France . 
 Siegal, M., Carrington, J., & Radel, M. (1996).  Th eory of mind and pragmatic understanding following 
right hemisphere damage .  Brain and Language  53 (1):  40–50 . 
 Simmons, W. K., Reddish, M., Bellgowan, P. S. F., & Martin, A. (2010).  Th e selectivity and functional con-
nectivity of the anterior temporal lobes .  Cerebral Cortex  20 (4):  813–25 . 
 Smith, M., Apperly, I. A., & White, V. (2003).  False belief reasoning and the acquisition of relative clause 
sentences .  Child Development  74 (6):  1709–19 . 
 Sodian, B., & Th oermer, C. (2008).  Precursors to a theory of mind in infancy: perspectives for research on 
autism .  Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology  61 (1):  27–39 . 

177
 Stone, V. E., Baron-Cohen, S., & Knight, R. T. (1998).  Frontal lobe contributions to theory of mind .  Journal 
of Cognitive Neuroscience  10 (5):  640–56 . 
 Stone, V. E., Baron-Cohen, S., Calder, A. J., Young, A. W., & Keane, J. (2003.  Acquired theory of mind 
impairments in individuals with bilateral amygdala lesions .  Neuropsychologia  41 (2):  209–20 . 
 Stuss, D. T., Gallup, G. G., & Alexander, M. P. (2001).  Th e frontal lobes are necessary for “theory of mind. ” 
 Brain  124 :  279–86 . 
 Surian, L., & Siegal, M. (2001).  Sources of performance on theory of mind tasks in right 
hemisphere-damaged patients .  Brain and Language  78 (2):  224–32 . 
 Tipper, S. P. (2010).  From observation to action simulation: the role of attention, eye-gaze, emotion, and 
body state .  Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology  63 (11):  2081–105. 
 Van Overwalle, F. (2009).  Social cognition and the brain: a meta-analysis .  Human Brain Mapping  30 (3): 
 829–58 . 
 Varley, R., & Siegal, M. (2000.  Evidence for cognition without grammar from causal reasoning and “theory 
of mind” in an agrammatic aphasic patient .  Current Biology  10 (12):  723–6 . 
 Varley, R., Siegal, M., & Want, SC. (2001).  Severe impairment in grammar does not preclude theory of 
mind .  Neurocase  7 (6):  489–93 . 
 Villiers, J. G. D., & Pyers, J. E. (2002).  Complements to cognition: a longitudinal study of the relationship 
between complex syntax and false-belief-understanding .  Cognitive Development  17 :  1037–60. 
 Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983).  Beliefs about beliefs: representation and constraining function of wrong 
beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception .  Cognition  13 (1):  103–28 . 
 Zahn, R., Moll, J., Iyengar, V., Huey, E. D., Tierney, M., Krueger, F., et al. (2009).  Social conceptual impair-
ments in frontotemporal lobar degeneration with right anterior temporal hypometabolism .  Brain 
 132 (3):  604–16 . 
 Zahn, R., Moll, J., Krueger, F., Huey, E. D., Garrido, G., & Grafman, J. (2007).  Social concepts are repre-
sented in the superior anterior temporal cortex .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
USA  104 (15):  6430–35 . 
REFERENCES

 Chapter 11  
 Understanding emotional and cognitive 
empathy: A neuropsychological 
perspective 
 Anat   Perry and   Simone  Shamay-Tsoory 
   Awful disasters descended upon FJ. She was happily married to MJ, and they had three lovely chil-
dren, until one day MJ said he decided to leave her. But that was only the beginning—for the next 
few months he started verbally abusing her and her children (which he never did before), left the 
house, abandoned all his responsibilities to others—taking the children from school, answering 
phone calls, cutting back on work, etc. FJ refused to accept that her marriage had suddenly col-
lapsed, and that it was beyond mending. Whatever FJ tried, she felt she just couldn’t get through to 
MJ. For friends around them, this was another typical divorce story, but FJ kept saying she felt MJ 
has gradually become a completely different person—this was not the MJ she fell in love with, mar-
ried and raised a family with. They went through a terrible divorce, at times involving the police 
and social workers in the community. A few months following the divorce, MJ was hospitalized 
with a chronic headache and a CT scan found a large tumor in his frontal lobe, which had probably 
been there and growing for the last couple of years. In a way, FJ had been right; this wasn’t the MJ 
she married. 
 Probably every ﬁ rst year Psychology or Neuroscience student is familiar with the famous case 
report of Phineas Gage, which presented one of the ﬁ rst descriptions of aberrant social conduct 
following brain damage (Harlow, 1868). Neuroscience research since Harlow’s time has shown 
that impaired empathic abilities among people with different brain lesions, tumors and patholo-
gies may account in part for the social and behavioral disturbances often observed among such 
patients. These seminal studies have a two-way effect—they further our knowledge of brain net-
works that enable empathy, and they may contribute to future diagnosis and therapeutic develop-
ment of different social deﬁ cits and pathologies. Importantly, progress has been made in the past 
decade, both in the psychological terminology and through neuroimaging studies, in differentiat-
ing between sub-components of empathy, i.e. emotional and cognitive empathy, and further dif-
ferentiating cognitive empathy to its’ affective and cognitive components. This chapter will provide 
a theoretical framework for understanding of emotional and cognitive empathy. Combing the 
ﬁ ndings from lesion studies, electrophysiology and imaging data of healthy and patient groups, a 
neuroanatomical model for empathy and its relationship with theory of mind will be proposed.  
 How do we normally empathize with others? 
A psychological background  
 Empathy is a broad concept, which generally denotes our ability to identify with or to feel what the 
other is feeling. In order to empathize with the other, we need to ﬁ rst understand  what that person 

HOW DO WE NORMALLY EMPATHIZE WITH OTHERS? A PSYCHOLOGICAL BACKGROUND 
179
is going through, feeling or thinking. Two main psychological approaches have dominated the dis-
cussion of how we understand others’ minds—simulation-theory and theory-theory (Carruthers, 
1996; Davies & Stone, 1995). Simulation-theory suggests that we use our own mental mechanisms 
to estimate and predict the mental processes of others. According to this theory, we automatically 
create within ourselves a simulation of the others’ motor acts, and in accordance with these acts, 
we feel the desires, preferences, and beliefs of the sort we assume the other to have. Instead of act-
ing on that decision, it is taken “off-line,” and used to predict the intention and emotions of the 
other (Gallese & Goldman, 1998; Goldman, 1989; Gordon, 1986; Heal, 1986; Kosslyn, 1978; Stich, 
1992). 
 The second theory, theory-theory, posits that children, as they grow up, use the same cognitive 
mechanisms that adults use in science, that is they develop theories. These theories help them 
investigate the world around them, infer from one situation to the next, and predict others’ behav-
iors and emotions. In other words, understanding others and empathizing with them arise from 
 theoretical reasoning involving known causal laws, or knowledge of how people in general, or 
people with the other’s speciﬁ c characteristics, are likely to think or feel (Churchland, 1988; Fodor, 
1987; Gopnik, 1993; Lewis, 1972; Wellman, 1990). This ability, of attributing mental states such 
as beliefs, intents, desires, pretending, knowledge, etc., to oneself and others, and understanding 
that others have beliefs, desires and intentions that may be different from one’s own has also been 
labeled theory of mind (ToM; Frith & Frith, 1999; Premack & Woodruff, 1978). 
 Developmental studies indicate that emotional contagion (e.g. contagious crying) is observed 
very early in young babies (e.g. Simner, 1971), while cognitive perspective taking abilities, ascrib-
ing agency, understanding intentions, and joint attention skills are acquired during later cognitive 
development (e.g. Carpenter, Nagell, and Tomasello, 1998; Johnson, 2003). More advanced ToM 
skills usually appear only by 3 or 4years of age. These include understanding “false-belief”, i.e. 
that the other may have a belief that you know is false (e.g. (Flavell, Everett, Croft, & Flavell, 1981; 
Flavell, Flavell, & Green, 1983; Wimmer & Perner, 1983). In a typical false-belief task (also known 
as the “Sally-Anne task”), the child is asked where a person (e.g. Sally) will look for a toy that she 
left in a certain place and that was moved by another person (e.g. Anne) when Sally was out of the 
room. Understanding that Sally will not know the new location of the toy relies on the ability to 
distinguish between Sally’s false belief and reality (Wimmer & Perner, 1983). 
 Current evolutionary evidence also supports the existence of several systems mediating empa-
thy. De Waal (2008) suggests that the phylogenetically earliest system is the emotional contagion 
system, in which one is affected by another’s emotional or arousal state. On the other hand, the 
cognitive empathic perspective-taking system is a more advanced system and involves higher cog-
nitive functions including mental state attribution. Indeed, emotional contagion has been reported 
in rodents (Langford, Crager, Shehzad, Smith, Sotocinal, Levenstadt, et al., 2006), while only the 
closest living relatives of humans, the chimpanzees, possess rudimentary traits of cognitive aspects 
of empathy such as theory of mind (Call & Tomasello, 2008). 
 Indeed, empathy is a broad concept that refers to the cognitive, as well as the emotional reactions 
of one individual to the observed experiences of another. Neuroimaging, lesion and behavioral 
studies with humans and animals have been increasingly capable of characterizing the neural basis 
of empathy, thus providing new insights into the question of how we understand others’ minds. 
Recent evidence supports a model of two separate brain systems for empathy: an emotional system 
and a cognitive system. The capacity to experience affective reactions to the observed experiences of 
others or share a “fellow feeling” has been described as  “emotional empathy” . Emotional empathy 
may involve several related underlying processes, including, among others, emotional contagion, 
emotion recognition, and shared pain. This might be where a kind of “simulation theory” takes. 

UNDERSTANDING EMOTIONAL AND COGNITIVE EMPATHY: A NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
180
On the other hand, the term  “cognitive empathy” describes empathy as a cognitive “role-taking” 
ability, or the capacity to engage in the cognitive process of adopting another’s psychological point 
of view (Frith & Singer 2008). This ability may involve a “theory-theory” kind of reasoning, i.e. 
making inference regarding the other’s affective and cognitive mental states (Shamay-Tsoory, 
Aharon-Peretz & Perry, 2009). 
 This suggests that, while the two systems may work together, they may be behaviorally, devel-
opmentally and neuroanatomically dissociable. Here, we will focus on these two systems from a 
neuropsychological point of view—reviewing the current research from imaging, lesion studies, 
and different pathologies related to empathic abilities.  
 Emotional empathy  
 According to Preston & de Waal’s (2002) perception-action hypothesis, perception of a behavior 
in another automatically activates one’s own representations for the behavior, and output from 
this shared representation automatically proceeds to motor areas of the brain where responses 
are prepared and executed. This state-matching reaction has been related to the simulation the-
ory. The most prominent evidence for the biological feasibility of the simulation theory is the 
seminal discovery of mirror neurons in the macaque monkey, a particular class of visuo-motor 
neurons that discharge both when the monkey does a particular goal-directed action and when 
it observes another individual (monkey or human) doing a similar action (di Pellegrino, Fadiga, 
Fogassi, Gallese, & Rizzolatti, 1992; Gallese, Fadiga, Fogassi, & Rizzolatti, 1996; Rizzolatti, Fadiga, 
Gallese, & Fogassi, 1996). Such neurons have been discovered primarily in areas F5 of the monkey’s 
pre-motor cortex (roughly corresponding in humans to Brodmann (BA) areas 44 and parts of BA 
45), in the rostral part of the inferior parietal lobule (IPL, particularly in area PFG) and in the ante-
rior intraparietal sulci (AIP) (Fogassi, Ferrari, Gesierich, Rozzi, Chersi, & Rizzolatti, 2005; Rozzi, 
Ferrari, Bonini, Rizzolatti, & Fogassi, 2008). Given its observation-execution properties, it was sug-
gested that the mirror neuron system (MNS) is particularly well suited to provide the appropriate 
mechanism for imitation, emotional contagion, and by extension, enabling empathy. 
 Neuroimaging studies in humans found different brain regions that similarly to the MNS in 
the monkey, are activated on the one hand by motor performance and, on the other hand, by 
seeing similar movements made by others. Such activity was found primarily in the rostral part 
of the IPL, the lower part of the precentral gyrus and the posterior part of the inferior frontal 
gyrus (IFG) (Buccino, Binkofski, Fink, Fadiga, Fogassi, Gallese, et al., 2001; Decety, Chaminade, 
Grezes, & Meltzoff, 2002; Grafton, Arbib, Fadiga, & Rizzolatti, 1996; Grezes, Armony, Rowe, & 
Passingham, 2003; Grezes, Costes, & Decety, 1998; Iacoboni et al., 1999; Rizzolatti et al., 1996). 
There is consistent and strong evidence for the involvement of the IFG in emotional contagion and 
emotion recognition. Chakrabarti, Bullmore, & Baron-Cohen (2006) found a positive correlation 
between a validated measure of empathy (the empathy quotient, EQ) and IFG activation, when 
viewing video clips depicting basic emotions. Indeed, it has been suggested that overt facial mim-
icry (as measured by an electro-myograph or through observation) is related to emotional con-
tagion and emotion understanding (Niedenthal, 2007). The existence of mirror neurons related 
to emotional facial expressions in the human IFG suggests that the human MNS may be used to 
convert observed facial expressions into a pattern of neural activity that would be suitable for pro-
ducing similar facial expressions and provide the neural basis for emotional contagion (Keysers & 
Gazzola, 2009). Jabbi and colleagues (Jabbi, Swart, & Keysers, 2007) have reported that observing 
positive and disgust facial expressions activated parts of the IFG and that participants’ empathy 
scores were predictive of their IFG activation while witnessing facial expressions. Additionally, two 

EMOTIONAL EMPATHY
181
neuroimaging studies, one which involved emotion recognition (Schulte-Ruther, Markowitsch, 
Fink, & Piefke, 2007) and one that involved empathizing with people suffering serious threat or 
harm (Nummenmaa, Hirvonen, Parkkola, & Hietanen, 2008) have further emphasized the speciﬁ c 
role of the IFG in emotional empathy. Cortical lesions involving the IFG, particularly in BA 44, 
are associated with impaired emotional contagion and deﬁ cits in emotion recognition, suggesting 
that the IFG not only participates in tasks that involve emotional empathy, but is also  necessary 
for emotional empathy. Shamay-Tsoory et al. (2009) studied eight patients with IFG damage, and 
compared their results with those of ventro-medial (VM) lesion patients, posterior lesion patients 
and healthy controls. The IFG patients differed from the other groups in the emotional empa-
thy subscales of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI, Davis, 1983), an empathy questionnaire 
that differentiates between cognitive and emotional components of empathy. In addition, these 
patients were signiﬁ cantly worse in an emotional recognition task, but did not differ from healthy 
individuals in the ToM tasks. The authors show a double dissociation between IFG patients and 
VM patients, who showed signiﬁ cantly different results in the cognitive subscale and ToM task 
(Shamay-Tsoory et al., 2009). 
 A different neural manifestation that has been tentatively associated with the MNS in humans is 
a modulation of electroencephalographic (EEG) oscillations in the 8–13 frequency range, coined 
mu rhythms (Pineda, 2005). Mu rhythms are desynchronized and their power attenuated when 
engaging in motor activity (Gastaut, 1952) and, crucially, also while observing actions executed 
by someone else (Cochin, Barthelemy, Lejeune, Roux, & Martineau, 1998; Cochin, Barthelemy, 
Roux, & Martineau, 1999; Cohen-Seat, Gastaut, Faure, & Heuyer, 1954; Gastaut & Bert, 1954; 
Muthukumaraswamy, Johnson, & McNair, 2004). The visual-motor coupling suggested by this 
pattern led several investigators to suggest that it reﬂ ects a “resonance system”, simulating others’ 
motor actions (see Pineda, 2005, for a review). In the last few years, several studies linked mu sup-
pression to higher social behaviors, such as understanding others social interactions (Oberman, 
Pineda, & Ramachandran, 2007), intentions (Perry, Troje, & Bentin, 2010) and empathy (Cheng, 
Lee, Yang, Lin, Hung, & Decety, 2008a; Cheng, Yang, Lin, Lee, & Decety, 2008b, Perry et al., 2010). 
 However, not only motor regions exhibit mirror-like mechanisms.  Tactile processing mecha-
nisms have also been shown to have mirror properties. The second and third somatosensory cor-
tices can be vicariously recruited by the sight of other people being touched, performing actions 
or experiencing somatic pain (see Keysers, Kaas, & Gazzola, 2010, for a review).  Smelling a foul 
odor engages the same sub-regions of the anterior insula as does watching another person express 
smell-induced disgust (Wicker, Keysers, Plailly, Royet, Gallese, & Rizzolatti, 2003).  Shared pain 
appears to involve regions related to the ﬁ rst hand experience of pain, such as parts of the pain 
matrix. Speciﬁ cally, a network including the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the insula was 
reported to respond to both felt and observed pain (Decety, Yang, & Cheng, 2010). Activation 
in the ACC and insula has been also found to correlate with the participant’s judgments of the 
subjective severity of pain experienced by others on the basis of the other’s facial pain expression 
(Saarela, Markowitsch, Fink, & Piefke, 2007). This indicates that empathizing with people in pain 
is associated with hemodynamic activity in the brain that is similar to the activity that occurs when 
people feel pain themselves. 
 Finally, emotional empathy is also crucially dependent to the limbic system, and particularly 
on the amygdala. This brain structure, which is constructed of a complex collection of nuclei, is 
known for its substantial role in both experiencing and recognizing emotions, especially fear, and 
in social behavior and reward learning in general (see Adolphs, 2010, for a review). Adolphs and 
colleagues (Adolphs, Tranel, Hamann, Young, Calder, Phelps, et al., 1999) examined a cohort of 
nine individuals with rare bilateral amygdale damage. Compared with controls, the subjects as a 

UNDERSTANDING EMOTIONAL AND COGNITIVE EMPATHY: A NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
182
group were signiﬁ cantly impaired in recognizing fear, although individual performances ranged 
from severely impaired to essentially normal. An extensive line of research has been done on a spe-
ciﬁ c patient, SM, with bilateral amygdale damage, who does not seem to recognize fear in others or 
to experience the feeling of fear or danger in herself (Adolphs, Tranel, Damasio, & Damasio, 1994). 
Impaired emotion recognition has also been linked to abnormal amygdala activation in psychi-
atric illnesses in which the behavioral relevance of social stimuli is abnormally evaluated, ranging 
from phobias (e.g. Larson, Schaefer, Siegle, Jackson, Anderle, & Davidson, 2006) to depression (e.g. 
Pezawas, 2005) schizophrenia (e.g. Das, Kemp, Flynn, Harris, Liddell, Whitford et al., 2007; Gur 
Calkins, Gur, Horan, Nuechterlein, & Seidman, 2007) and autism (e.g. Spezio, Adolphs, Hurley, 
& Piven, 2007). Interestingly, a similar impairment has also been found in ﬁ rst-degree relatives of 
people with autism and may constitute part of an “endophenotype” for impaired amygdala func-
tion in autism (Dalton Nacewicz, Alexander, & Davidson, 2007; Adolphs, Spezio, Parlier, & Piven, 
2008). 
 To conclude, the core process enabling emotional empathy appears to be the generation of cor-
responding (to the target) emotional response (e.g. through the insula in shared pain, the amy-
gdala in fear), and the corresponding motor representation related to the emotion (e.g. IFG, mu 
rhythms). The neural networks that participate in this system are detailed in Figure 11.1. Although 
this system appears to be bottom-up, it seems that top-down processes can modulate this auto-
matic system and perhaps aspects of higher order cognitive process, as well as cognitive empathy, 
interact with emotional empathy in such cases (e.g. Lamm, Meltzoff, & Decety, 2010; Perry, Bentin, 
Ben-Ami Bartal, Lamm, & Decety, 2010). 
 Cognitive empathy  
 Some complex forms of empathy involve the ability to create a theory about the other’s mental 
state and cognitively take the perspective of others. This process of understanding another person’s 
perspective, termed “cognitive empathy” is very much related to having ToM abilities. While one 
IFG
ACC
Amygdala
Insula
IPL
 Figure 11.1  Brain regions associated with emotional empathy. See also Plate 3.  

COGNITIVE EMPATHY
183
dimension of ToM relates to others’ beliefs and desires, another dimension concerns the emotional 
and social meaning of others’ intentions (Brothers & Ring, 1992). Brothers & Ring (1992) referred 
to these dimensions as “cold” and “hot” aspects of ToM, and suggested that both forms of cogni-
tion contribute to understanding others’ actions. The distinction between “cold” aspects of mental 
representations (cognitive ToM) as opposed to “hot” aspects of mental representations (affective 
ToM), has been further extended and examined in lesion studies (e.g. Shamay-Tsoory Tomer, 
Berger, Goldsher, & Aharon-Peretz, 2005; Shamay-Tsoory & Aharon-Peretz, 2007) and functional 
imaging studies (Hynes, Baird, & Grafton, 2006; V ö llm, Taylor, Richardson, Corcoran, Stirling, 
McKie, S., et al., 2006). These have differentiated between cognitive and affective ToM, referring to 
reasoning about beliefs vs. reasoning about emotions, respectively. If we take the example of “false 
belief,” cognitive false belief requires understanding what someone thinks about what someone 
else thinks (belief about belief), while affective false belief refers to understanding what someone 
thinks about what someone else feels (belief about emotions). Consistent with the possibility that 
ToM skills comprise several distinct processes that meet different cognitive demands, recent stud-
ies have identiﬁ ed a set of brain regions involved in ToM: the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), the 
superior temporal sulcus (STS), the temporoparietal junction (TPJ) and the temporal poles (TP) 
(Frith & Singer, 2008; Van Overwalle & Baetens, 2009). A recent review of imaging studies of ToM, 
(Carrington & Bailey, 2009) found that 93% of the 40 studies reviewed report activation in the 
mPFC. The TPJ region was active in 58% of the studies reviewed and the STS (including the IPL) 
in 50% of the studies. Based on a separate meta-analysis, Van Overwalle & Baetens (2009) pro-
posed that the TPJ is mainly responsible for transient mental inferences about other people (e.g. 
their goals, desires, and beliefs), while the mPFC subserves the attribution of more enduring traits 
and qualities about the self and other people. The ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) role in 
self-reﬂ ection has been lately shown in an fMRI study by Mitchell and colleagues (Mitchell, 2009), 
placing it as a key region necessary for evaluating the similarities and differences distinguishing 
the mental states of oneself from others. It is possible that situations that involve affective ToM 
entail more self-reﬂ ection as compared with situations involving cognitive ToM, which are more 
detached. Therefore the vmPFC, which is highly connected to the amygdala, appears to be particu-
larly necessary for affective mentalizing, as opposed to neutral or cognitive forms of mentalizing, 
along with mentalizing about others who are different from oneself, which have been linked to 
the modulation of dorsal regions of the mPFC (dmPFC; e.g. Mitchell, Macrae and Banaji, 2006). 
In addition, Kalbe and colleagues (Kalbe, Schlegel, Sack, Nowak, Dafotakis, Bangard, et al., 2010) 
have recently reported impaired cognitive ToM, following 1Hz repetitive Transcranial Magnetic 
Stimulation (TMS) which interfered with cortical activity of the dorsolateral PFC (dlPFC). 
 The frontal lobes, especially regions of the PFC, have been associated with executive aspects 
of cognition, social and moral behavior ever since description of frontal lobe syndromes-related 
changes in personality, social behavior, and emotional regulation emerged in the nineteenth cen-
tury (Eslinger, Flaherty-Craig, & Benton, 2004). There is ample evidence that the orbitofrontal 
cortex (OFC) mediates affective information, emotional stimuli, and social behavior. Lesions 
in the OFC result, among other things, in impaired empathy (Eslinger, 1998; Shamay-Tsoory, 
Tomer, Goldsher, Berger, & Aharon-Peretz, 2004) and deﬁ cits in complex ToM abilities (Stone 
Baron-Cohen, & Knight, 1998). Shamay-Tsoory, Tibi-Elhanani, & Aharon-Peretz (2006) com-
pared the performance of patients with lesions localized either in the vmPFC (part of the OFC), 
dorsolateral, TPJ, or superior parietal to healthy controls, with a battery of naturalistic affective 
and cognitive ToM stories (about false beliefs, false attribution, irony and lies). Compared with 
controls, patients with VM damage were impaired at providing appropriate mental state explana-
tions for the affective ToM stories (see also Shamay-Tsoory et al., 2009). In addition, these patients’ 

UNDERSTANDING EMOTIONAL AND COGNITIVE EMPATHY: A NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
184
performance in the affective ToM was signiﬁ cantly impaired as compared with their performance 
in cognitive ToM stories. Furthermore, ratings of levels of emotionality of each story suggested 
that levels of affective load correlated with number of errors in the stories in the VM group, indi-
cating that the more the emotional load involved in the story the greater the difﬁ culty posed for the 
subjects in this group (see Figure 11.2). 
 To conclude, it appears that cognitive empathy involves higher order cognitive functions that 
involve self–other differentiation, and cognitive and affective ToM. Self-other distinction and affec-
tive ToM involve a network in which the OFC (speciﬁ cally vmPFC), and the TPJ to some extent, 
are core regions. The dlPFC and dmPFC also seem to be involved in cognitive ToM, although more 
studies are needed to further dissociate brain regions necessary for each sub-component of ToM. 
 Neuropsychiatric deﬁ cits in empathy  
 There has been a marked increase in empathy and ToM studies in psychiatric populations that 
examine the pattern of brain activity in response to social perception tasks among patients. The 
failure of most studies to ﬁ nd clear activation or deactivation in speciﬁ c brain regions, indicates 
the difﬁ culties in recruiting a homogenous patient group, adjusting the behavioral measures and 
ﬁ nding the appropriate control groups. Nonetheless, studying empathy in psychiatric populations 
may have important contributions to both basic research and to diagnosis and therapy. Some of 
these contributions are discussed below. 
 Autism 
 Autistic spectrum disorders (ASD) include a wide range of deﬁ cits in social cognitive skills, includ-
ing deﬁ cits in ToM abilities, i.e. in understanding thoughts and intentions of others, and differen-
tiating between one’s own knowledge and the knowledge of the other (e.g. Baron Cohen, 2000). 
In an fMRI study, Lombardo and colleagues (Lombardo, Chakrabarti, Bullmore, Sadek, Pasco, 
Wheelwright, et al., 2010) have demonstrated that while typical individuals recruit the ACC and 
the vmPFC in response to self and other-referential processing respectively, in autism, vmPFC 
responded equally to self and other. Furthermore, the magnitude of neural self-other distinc-
tion in ventromedial prefrontal cortex was strongly related to the magnitude of early childhood 
social impairments in autism. Individuals whose vmPFC made little to no distinction between 
dmPFC
vmPFC
TPJ
dlPFC
 Figure 11.2  Brain regions associated with cognitive empathy. See also Plate 4.  

SCHIZOPHRENIA
185
mentalizing about self and other were the most socially impaired in early childhood. In a different 
fMRI study (Schulte-Ruther, et al., 2011), individuals with autism and healthy control subjects 
were asked to identify the emotional state observed in a facial stimulus (other-task) or to evaluate 
their own emotional response (self-task). Activations in these tasks were found in vmPFC only in 
control subjects, while more dorsal activation was found in ASD subjects. During the self-task, 
ASD subjects activated an additional network of frontal and inferior temporal areas. The authors 
concluded that subjects with ASD may use an atypical cognitive strategy to gain access to their own 
emotional state in response to other people’s emotions. The differences between the results of these 
two studies may be due to the different tasks used, or to a different subgroup of ASD individuals. 
However, both studies strengthen the notion that this complex disorder is correlated with abnor-
malities in brain regions that enable our understanding of others, and the differentiation between 
self and others. 
 Mirror neuron system dysfunction and autism  
 To examine MNS abnormalities in individuals with ASD, Dapretto and colleagues studied high 
functioning children with ASD and matched controls, in an fMRI experiment involving imitation 
and observation of emotional expressions. Although there were no behavioral differences between 
the groups, children with ASD showed no mirror activity in the IFG. Moreover, activity in this area 
was inversely related to symptom severity in the social domain (Dapretto, Davies, Pfeifer, Scott, 
Sigman, Bookheimer, et al., 2006; see also Uddin, Davies, Scott, Zaidel, Bookheimer, Iacoboni, 
et al., 2008; Schulte-Ruther, Greimel, Markowitsch, Kamp-Becker, Remschmidt, Fink, et al., 2010 
for similar results). 
 In line with this, studies of EEG mu suppression in individuals with ASD show normal mu 
suppression while self-performing hand movements, but no suppression when passively view-
ing someone else performing the same movements (Martineau, Schmitz, Assaiante, Blanc, & 
Barthelemy, 2004; Oberman, Hubbard, McCleery, Altschuler, Ramachandran, & Pineda 2005; 
Oberman, Ramachandran, & Pineda, 2008; but see Raymaekers, Wiersema, & Roeyers, 2009). 
Oberman and colleagues (2008) found a positive correlation between the amount of mu sup-
pression and the putative ability of the observer to identify with the agent moving on the screen: 
Both ASD and typically developed individuals showed greater suppression to familiar hands (of 
family members) compared with those of strangers. These studies strengthen the notion that ASD 
patients may have dysfunction in mirror neuron systems, however, further studies are needed to 
validate this claim and especially to understand what is the cause (MNS dysfunction, Autism) and 
what is the effect.  
 Schizophrenia 
 Schizophrenia constitutes a complex mental disorder, which includes what is typically referred to 
as “positive symptoms” (delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, disorganized or catatonic 
behavior), and/or “negative symptoms” (affective  fl attening, alogia, or anhedonia). Patients suffer-
ing from schizophrenia show impaired emotional and social behavior, such as misinterpretation 
of social situations and lack of ToM skills. Differentiating between cognitive and affective ToM, 
Shamay-Tsoory and colleagues (2007) showed that patients with schizophrenia made signiﬁ cantly 
more errors in the affective conditions, compared with controls. Furthermore, correlation analy-
sis indicated that impaired affective ToM in these patients correlated with their level of negative 
symptoms. These results indicate that individuals with high level of negative symptoms of schizo-
phrenia may demonstrate selective impairment in their ability to attribute affective mental states. 

UNDERSTANDING EMOTIONAL AND COGNITIVE EMPATHY: A NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
186
Following this study, the performance of 24 patients with schizophrenia was compared with the 
responses of patients with localized lesions in the VM or dorsolateral PFC, patients with non-frontal 
lesions, and healthy control subjects. Patients with schizophrenia and those with VM lesions made 
similar errors on “affective ToM” tasks showed normal results in cognitive ToM conditions. The 
authors concluded that the pattern of mentalizing impairments in schizophrenia resembled those 
seen in patients with lesions of the frontal lobe, particularly with VM damage, providing support 
for the notion of a disturbance of the fronto-limbic circuits in schizophrenia (Shamay-Tsoory, 
Aharon-Peretz, & Levkovitz, 2007). Strengthening this notion, an fMRI study using a modiﬁ ed 
emotional-Stroop task, showed that patients with schizophrenia were signiﬁ cantly less efﬁ cient 
than the healthy controls during the emotional incongruent Stroop trials, and when emotionally 
incongruent trials were compared with congruent trials, relative deactivations of the subgenual 
cingulate gyrus and the vmPFC observed in the healthy controls were not found in the patient 
group. Importantly, activities of these regions inversely correlated with emotional interference to 
performance efﬁ ciency and response accuracy respectively in the patient group (Park, Park, Chun, 
Kim, & Kim, 2008). Recently, an important study showed that ToM skills are related to gray matter 
volume (GMV) in the vmPFC in Schizophrenia (Hooker, Bruce, Lincoln, Fisher, & Vinogradov, 
2011). The authors used voxel-based morphometry and a multi-method behavioral assessment of 
ToM processing, including performance-based, self-report, and interview-rated ToM assessments, 
to investigate whether ToM skills were related to vmPFC GMV. As expected, compared with healthy 
participants, schizophrenia participants had worse ToM performance and lower self-reported ToM 
processing in daily life. Importantly, schizophrenia participants had less vmPFC GMV than healthy 
participants. Moreover, among schizophrenia participants, all three measures of ToM processing 
were associated with vmPFC GMV, such that worse ToM skills were related to less VMPFC GMV. 
This association remained strong for self-reported and interview-rated ToM skills, even when con-
trolling for the inﬂ uence of global cognition. Together, these studies suggest a strong correlation 
between abnormalities in vmPFC, and cognitive empathy skills in schizophrenia patients.  
 MNS dysfunction and schizophrenia  
 The discovery of the MNS had led to much excitement, and was seen as an opportunity to fur-
ther our understanding of different disorders of social cognition and empathy. It has been sug-
gested in the last few years that both the positive and the negative symptoms of schizophrenia may 
be due to a dysfunctional MNS (e.g. Arbib & Mundhenk, 2005; Buccino & Amore, 2008; Burns, 
2006), although only little support has been found for these hypotheses (Enticott, Hoy, Herring, 
Johnston, Daskalakis, & Fitzgerald, 2008; Singh, Pineda, & Cadenhead, 2011) and more research 
is needed in order to understand the relationship between these brain networks and the complex 
disorder of schizophrenia. 
 Psychopathy  
 Patients with OFC lesions described above have sometimes been described as expressing “acquired 
sociopathy” (Blair & Cipolotti, 2000; Tranel, Bechara, & Denburg, 2002), a term denoting aber-
rant behavior, high levels of aggression, and a callous disregard for others following OFC lesions. 
Similarly, criminal offenders with psychopathic tendencies show impaired emotional and social 
behavior, such as lack of emotional responsiveness to others and deﬁ cient empathy. To assess the 
emotional and cognitive aspects of ToM in people with psychopathic tendencies, Shamay-Tsoory, 
Harari, Aharon-Peretz, & Levkovitz (2010) used a task that examines affective vs. cognitive ToM 
processing in separate conditions. ToM abilities of criminal offender diagnosed with antisocial 

INTERACTIONS BETWEEN THE TWO EMPATHY SYSTEMS
187
personality disorder with high psychopathy features was compared with that of participants with 
localized lesions in the OFC or dorsolateral participants with non-frontal lesions, and healthy 
control subjects. Individuals with psychopathy and those with OFC lesions were impaired on the 
“affective ToM” conditions, but not in “cognitive ToM” conditions, compared with the control 
groups. This study suggests that mentalizing impairments in psychopathy resembles remarkably 
that seen in participants with lesions of the frontal lobe, particularly with OFC damage, and pro-
vides support for the notion of amygdala-OFC dysfunction in psychopathy (Blair, 2007; Finger, 
Marsh, Mitchell, Reid, Sims, Budhani, et al., 2008). However, it should be noted that regardless 
of the similarities between acquired frontal lesions and developmental psychopathy, comparison 
between these groups should be treated with caution as essential differences exist between these 
individuals. Importantly, while both groups may demonstrate reactive aggression, instrumental 
aggression is typically reported in developmental psychopathy, but rarely reported after OFC dam-
age (Mitchell, Avny & Blair, 2006). 
 Frontotemporal dementia  
 Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is a progressive neurodegenerative syndrome with diverse clini-
cal presentations. Among the most prominent features are progressive aphasia and bizarre affect 
with a “personality change.” These may include disinhibition and impulsivity, distractibility and 
impersistence, and perseverative behavior, in addition to social deﬁ cits such as lack of empathy, 
emotional unconcern, apathy, and irritability (for a review, see Grossman, 2002). Shany-Ur and 
colleagues (Shany-Ur, Poorzand, Grossman, Growdon, Jang, Ketelle, et al., 2012) investigated 
whether face-to-face testing of comprehending insincere communication would effectively dis-
criminate among different neurodegenerative disease patients. The authors examined the ability 
to comprehend lies and sarcasm from a third-person perspective, using contextual cues, in 102 
patients with either FTD, Alzheimer’s disease, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) or vascular 
cognitive impairment, and 77 healthy older adults. Participants answered questions about videos 
depicting social interactions involving deceptive, sarcastic, or sincere speech using the Awareness 
of Social Inference Test, which assesses poor understanding of emotional expressions and dif-
ﬁ culty integrating contextual information that is part of normal social encounters (McDonald, 
Flanagan, Rollins, 2002). All subjects equally understood sincere remarks, but FTD patients dis-
played impaired comprehension of lies and sarcasm compared with normal controls. In other 
groups, impairment was not disease-speciﬁ c, but was proportionate to general cognitive impair-
ment. Analysis of the task components revealed that only FTD patients were impaired on per-
spective taking and emotion reading elements and that both FTD patients and PSP patients had 
impaired ability to represent others opinions and intentions (i.e. ToM). Moreover, test perform-
ance correlated with informants’ ratings of subjects’ empathy, perspective taking and neuropsychi-
atric symptoms in everyday life. All patient groups exhibited some deﬁ ciencies in these complex 
social communication tasks, which require multiple cognitive and emotional processes. However, 
FTD patients showed uniquely focal and severe impairments at every level of ToM and emotion 
reading skills, showing an inability to identify even obvious examples of deception and sarcasm. 
These results suggest that FTD may target a speciﬁ c neural network necessary for perceiving social 
salience and social outcomes (Shany-Ur et al., 2012).  
 Interactions between the two empathy systems  
 The differentiation between these two systems enabling empathy suggests that under normal cir-
cumstances every interaction with another may trigger independently both an emotional response 

UNDERSTANDING EMOTIONAL AND COGNITIVE EMPATHY: A NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
188
(emotional empathy) as well as cognitive evaluation of his state of mind or perspective (cognitive 
empathy). The other’s emotions are “shared” through brain areas involved in resonance or simula-
tion, such as the human MNS. In addition, the ability to accurately infer the other’s perspective 
and imagine their state of mind is activated, requiring self-other decoding and ToM abilities. Both 
functional neuroimaging and lesion studies in humans indicate that the vmPFC plays a crucial role 
in the network performing cognitive empathic function. This system is phylogenetically younger 
and is unique to primates and human adults. 
 Although both emotional and cognitive components of empathy may operate partly auton-
omously, it is likely that every empathic response will evoke both components to some extent, 
depending on the social context. Zaki and colleagues showed that empathically accurate, as com-
pared with inaccurate, judgments depended both on the activation of structures within the human 
MNS, thought to be involved in emotional empathy, and on the activation of regions implicated 
in mental state attribution, or cognitive empathy, such as the medial prefrontal cortex. These data 
demonstrate that activity in these two sets of brain regions tracks with the accuracy of attribu-
tions made about another’s internal emotional state (Zaki, Bolger, & Ochsner, 2009). Moreover, 
in a second study, the authors manipulated the degree to which one could use non-verbal and 
contextual cues in order to infer about the target’s emotions. They found that conditions in which 
biasing of neural activity was seen toward the MNS, tracked with perceivers’ behavioral reliance on 
non-verbal cues; In contrast, conditions in which biasing was seen toward what they called a “men-
tal state attribution system’, including the TPJ and mPFC, was tracked with perceivers’ reliance on 
contextual cues when drawing inferences about targets’ emotions. Future studies may further this 
focus on the interactions between the two systems and the different conditions that may affect the 
activation of each. Different variables such as the level of emotions involved, the past experiences 
of the empathizer, gender, relationship with the protagonist and the perceived similarity between 
Brain Mechanism
Process
Response
Related Lesions
& Pathologies
Simulation:
IFG / IPL
Self & Other Pain:
Pain Matrix
Self & Others Emotions:
Amygdala
Affective ToM:
vmPFC, TPJ
Cognitive ToM:
dlPFC, dmPFC
Self/Other differentiation:
vmPFC
Emotional
contagion 
Shared pain
Emotion
recognition 
Affective
Mentalizing
Cognitive
Mentalizing
Emotional
Empathy 
Cognitive
Empathy
IFG lesions
Autism,
Schizophrenia
Amygdala
damage
vmPFC lesions
Psychopathy
FT Dementia
Autism, Schizop-
hrenia?
 
 Figure 11.3  Summary and proposed model.  

189
REFERENCES
the individual and the protagonist may differentially activate the emotional and the cognitive sys-
tems. Research of complex conditions, such as autism and schizophrenia, which are characterized 
by (among others) their deﬁ cits in social cognition and empathic abilities, may highly beneﬁ t from 
the progress in this ﬁ eld. Exploring these questions using a combination of several research tools 
such as lesion studies, neuroimaging, electrophysiology, genetics and animal research may prove 
to be essential in characterizing the relationship between these two systems and the conditions in 
which each system is activated. See Figure 11.3 for a proposed model.       
 References 
 Adolphs, R. (2010).  What does the amygdala contribute to social cognition?  Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences  1191 :  42–61 . 
 Adolphs, R., Spezio, M. L., Parlier, M., & Piven, J. (2008) . Distinct face processing strategies in parents of 
autistic children.   Current Biology  18 :  1090–3 . 
 Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. (1994) . Impaired recognition of emotion in facial 
expressions following bilateral damage to the human amygdala.  Nature  372 :  669–72. 
 Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Hamann, S., Young, A. W., Calder, A. J., Phelps, E. A., Anderson, A., Lee, G. P., 
&Damasio, A. R. (1999) . Recognition of facial emotion in nine subjects with bilateral amygdala dam-
age.  Neuropsychologia  37 :  1111–17 . 
 Arbib, M. A., & Mundhenk T. N. (2005)  Schizophrenia and the mirror-neuron system: an essay . 
 Neuropsychologia  43 :  268–80. 
 Baron-Cohen, S. (2000) . Th eory of mind and autism: A fi ft een year review. In: S. Baron-Cohen, 
H. Tager-Flusberg & D. J. Cohen (Eds),  Understanding Other Minds: Perspectives from Developmental 
Cognitive Neuroscience (pp. 1–20) .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Blair R. J. (2007) . Dysfunctions of medial and lateral orbitofrontal cortex in psychopathy.  Annals of the New 
York Academy of Sciences  1121 :  461–79 . 
 Blair R. J., & Cipolotti L. (2000).  Impaired social response reversal. A case of “acquired sociopathy” .  Brain 
 123 : 1122–41 . 
 Brothers, L., & Ring, B. (1992) . A neuroethological framework for the representation of minds.  Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience  4 :  107–18 . 
 Buccino, G., & Amore M. (2008) . Mirror neurons and the understanding of behavioural symptoms in psy-
chiatric disorders.  Current Opinion in Psychiatriatry  21 :  281–5 . 
 Buccino, G., Binkofski, F., Fink, G. R., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., et al. (2001) . Action observa-
tion activates premotor and parietal areas in a somatotopic manner: an fMRI study.  European Journal of 
Neuroscience  13 (2):  400–4 . 
 Burns, J. (2006) . Th e social brain hypothesis of schizophrenia.  World Psychiatry  5 :  77–81 . 
 Call, J, & Tomasello, M. (2008) . Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? 30 years later.  Trends in 
Cognitive Science  12 :  187–92 . 
 Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998).  Social cognition, joint attention, and communicative 
competence from 9 to 15 months of age .  Monographs in Social Research in Child Dev elopment  63 :  176 . 
 Carrington, S. J., Bailey, A. J. (2009) . Are there theory of mind regions in the brain? A review of the neu-
roimaging literature.  Human Brain Mapping  30 :  2313–35 . 
 Carruthers, P., &Smith, P. K. (Eds). (1996).  Th eories of Th eories of Mind :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Chakrabarti, B., Bullmore, E. T., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2006).  Empathizing with basic emotions: Common 
and discrete neural substrates .  Social Neuroscience  1 (3–4):  364–84. 
 Cheng, Y., Lee, P. L., Yang, C. Y., Lin, C. P., Hung, D., & Decety, J. (2008a) . Gender diff erences in the mu 
rhythm of the human mirror-neuron system.  PLoS ONE  3 (5):  e2113 . 
 Cheng, Y., Yang, C-Y., Lin, C-P., Lee, P-L., & Decety, J. (2008b) . Th e perception of pain in others suppresses 
somatosensory oscillations: A magnetoencephalography study.  NeuroImage  40 (4):  1833–40 . 

UNDERSTANDING EMOTIONAL AND COGNITIVE EMPATHY: A NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
190
 Cochin, S., Barthelemy, C., Roux, S., & Martineau, J. (1999) . Observation and execution of movement: 
similarities demonstrated by quantifi ed electroencephalography.  European Journal of Neuroscience 
 11 (5):  1839–42 . 
 Cochin, S., Barthelemy, C., Lejeune, B., Roux, S., & Martineau, J. (1998). Perception of motion and qEEG 
activity in human adults.  Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology  107 (4): 287–95. 
 Churchland, P. N. (1988).  Matter and Consciousness . Cambridge:  MIT Press . 
 Davis, M. H. (1980) . A multidimensional approach to individual diff erences in empathy.  JSAS Catalog of 
Selected Documents in Psychology  10 ,  85 . 
 Dalton, K. M., Nacewicz, B. M., Alexander, A. L., & Davidson, R. J. (2007) . Gaze-fi xation, brain activation, 
and amygdala volume in unaff ected siblings of individuals with autism.  Biological Psychiatry  61 :  512–20. 
 Dapretto, M., Davies M. S., Pfeifer J. H., Scott A. A., Sigman M., Bookheimer S. Y., et al. (2006) . 
Understanding emotions in others: Mirror neuron dysfunction in children with autism spectrum disor-
ders.  Nature Neuroscience ,  9 ,  28–30 . 
 Davis, M. H. (1983). Measuring individual diff erences in empathy: Evidence for a multidimensional 
approach.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  44 (1): 113–26. 
 Davies, M., & Stone, T. (Eds). (1995).  Mental Simulation . Oxford:  Basil Blackwell . 
 Das, P., Kemp, A. H., Flynn, G., Harris, A. W., Liddell, B. J., Whitford, T. J., et al. (2007) . Functional 
disconnections in the direct and indirect amygdala pathways for fear processing in schizophrenia. 
 Schizophrenia Res earch  90 :  284–94 . 
 de Waal, F. B. (2008) . Putting the altruism back into altruism: the evolution of empathy.  Annual Review of 
Psychology  59 :  279–300 . 
 Decety, J., Chaminade, T., Grezes, J., & Meltzoff , A. N. (2002) . A PET exploration of the neural mecha-
nisms involved in reciprocal imitation.  NeuroImage  15 (1):  265–72 . 
 Decety J., Yang C. Y., & Cheng Y. (2010) . Physicians down-regulate their pain empathy response: An 
event-related brain potential study.  NeuroImage  50 :  1676–82 . 
 di Pellegrino, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (1992) . Understanding motor events: 
a neurophysiological study.  Experimental Brain Research  91 (1):  176–80 . 
 Enticott P. G., Hoy K. E., Herring S. E., Johnston P. J., Daskalakis Z. J., & Fitzgerald P. B. (2008).  Reduced 
motor facilitation during action observation in schizophrenia: A mirror neuron defi cit?  Schizophrenia 
Res earch  102 : 116–21 . 
 Eslinger, P. J. (1998)  Neurological and neuropsychological bases of empathy .  European Neurology  39 : 
 193–9 . 
 Eslinger, P. J., Flaherty-Craig, C. V., & Benton, A. L. (2004) . Developmental outcomes aft er early prefrontal 
cortex damage.  Brain and Cognition  55 (1):  84–103 . 
 Finger E. C., Marsh A. A., Mitchell D. G. V., Reid M. E., Sims C., Budhani S., et al. (2008).  Abnormal 
ventromedial prefrontal cortex function in children with psychopathic traits during reversal learning . 
 Archives of General Psychiatry  65 ,  586–94 . 
 Flavell, J. H., Everett, B. A., Croft , K., & Flavell, E. R. (1981).  Young children’s knowledge about visual per-
ception: Further evidence for the Level 1-Level 2 distinction .  Developmental Psychology  17 ,  99–103 . 
 Flavell, J. H., Flavell, E. R., & Green, F. L. (1983) . Development of the appearance—reality distinction. 
 Cognitive Psychology  15 (1):  95–120 . 
 Fodor, J. A. (1987).  Psychosemantics . Camridge:  MIT Press. 
 Fogassi, L., Ferrari, P. F., Gesierich, B., Rozzi, S., Chersi, F., & Rizzolatti, G. (2005) . Parietal lobe: from 
action organization to intention understanding.  Science  308 (5722):  662–7 . 
 Frith, C. D., & Frith, U. (1999) . Interacting minds—a biological basis.  Science  286 (5445):  1692–5 . 
 Frith C. D., & Singer T. 2008 . Th e role of social cognition in decision making.  Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society of London, B, Biological Sciences  363 :  3875–86 . 
 Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Rizzolatti, G. (1996) . Action recognition in the premotor cortex.  Brain 
 119 (Pt 2):  593–609 . 

191
 Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998) . Mirror neurons and the simulation theory of mind-reading.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences  2 (12):  493–501 . 
 Gastaut, H. (1952) . Etude  é lectrocorticographique de la r é activit é des rythmes rolandiques.  Revue 
Neurologique  87 (2):  176–82 . 
 Gastaut, H. J., & Bert, J. (1954) . EEG changes during cinematographic presentation.  Electroencephalography 
and Clinical Neurophysiology  6 :  433–44 . 
 Goldman, A. (1989).  Interpretation psychologized  Mind Lang uage  4 ,  161–85. 
 Gopnik, A. (1993) . How we know our minds: the illusion of fi rst-person knowledge of intentionality. 
 Behaviour & Brain Sci ences  16 :  1–14 . 
 Gordon, R. (1986) . Folk psychology as simulation.  Mind Language  1 ,  158–71 . 
 Graft on, S. T., Arbib, M. A., Fadiga, L., & Rizzolatti, G. (1996) . Localization of grasp representations in 
humans by positron emission tomography.2. Observation compared with imagination .  Experimental 
Brain Research  112 (1):  103–11 . 
 Grezes, J., Armony, J. L., Rowe, J., & Passingham, R. E. (2003) . Activations related to “mirror” and “canoni-
cal” neurones in the human brain: An fMRI study.  NeuroImage  18 (4):  928–37 . 
 Grezes, J., Costes, N., & Decety, J. (1998). Top down eff ect of strategy on the perception of human biologi-
cal motion: a PET investigation.  Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  15 : 553–82. 
 Grossman, M. (2002) . Frontotemporal dementia: a review.  Journal of the International Neuropsychology 
Soc iety  8 ,  566–83 . 
 Gur, R. E., Calkins, M. E., Gur, R. C., Horan, W. P., Nuechterlein, K. H., Seidman, L. J., Stone, W. 
S. (2007). Th e Consortium on the Genetics of Schizophrenia: neurocognitive endophenotypes. 
 Schizophrenia Bulletin  33 (1), 49–68. 
 Gur, R. E., Loughead, J., Kohler, C. G., Elliott, M., Lesko, K., Ruparel, K., Wolf, D. H., Bilker W. B., & 
Gur, R. C. (2007) . Limbic activation associated with misidentifi cation of fearful faces and fl at aff ect in 
schizophrenia.  Archives of General Psychiatry  64 ,  1356–66 . 
 Harlow, J. M. (1868) . Recovery from the passage of an iron bar through the head.  Publications of the 
Massachusetts Medical Society  2 :  327–47 . 
 Heal, J. (Ed.). (1986).  Replication and functionalism . Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press . 
 Hooker, H. I., Bruce, L., Lincoln, S. H., Fisher, M., & Vinogradov, S. (2011)  Th eory of mind skills are 
related to gray matter volume in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia .  Biological 
Psychiatry  70 (12):  1169–78. 
 Hynes, C. A., Baird, A. A., & Graft on, S. T. (2006) . Diff erential role of the orbital frontal lobe in emotional 
vs. cognitive perspective-taking.  Neuropsychologia  44 ,  374–83 . 
 Iacoboni, M., Woods, R. P., Brass, M., Bekkering, H., Mazziotta, J. C., & Rizzolatti, G. (1999) . Cortical 
mechanisms of human imitation.  Science  286 (5449):  2526–8 . 
 Jabbi, M., Swart, M., Keysers, C. (2007) . Empathy for positive and negative emotions in the gustatory cor-
tex.  NeuroImage  34 :  1744–53 . 
 Johnson, S. (2003) . Detecting agents.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London.  Series B: 
Biological Sciences  358 (1431):  549 . 
 Kalbe, E., Schlegel, M., Sack, A. T., Nowak, D. A., Dafotakis, M., Bangard, C., Brand, M., Shamay-Tsoory, 
S., Onur, O. A., & Kessler, J. (2010).  Dissociating cognitive from aff ective theory of mind: a TMS study. 
 Cortex  46 ,  769–80 . 
 Keysers, C., & Gazzola, V. (2007) . Integrating simulation and theory of mind: from self to social cognition. 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences  11 (5):  194–6 . 
 Keysers, C., Kaas, J. H., & Gazzola, V. (2010) . Somatosensation in social perception.  National Revue of 
Neurosci ence  11 :  417–28 . 
 Kosslyn, S. (1978) . Measuring the visual angle of the mind’s eye.  Cognitive Psychol ogy  10 ,  356–89 . 
 Lamm, C., Meltzoff , A. N., & Decety, J. (2010) . How do we empathize with someone who is not like us? A 
functional magnetic resonance imaging study .  Journal of Cognitive Neurosci ence  22 ,  362–76 . 
REFERENCES

UNDERSTANDING EMOTIONAL AND COGNITIVE EMPATHY: A NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
192
 Langford D. J., Crager S. E., Shehzad Z., Smith S. B., Sotocinal S. G., Levenstadt J. S. Chanda M. L, Levitin 
D. J., & Mogil J. S. (2006) . Social modulation of pain as evidence for empathy in mice.  Science  312 , 
 1967–70 . 
 Larson, C. L., Schaefer, H. S., Siegle, G. J., Jackson, C. A., Anderle, M. J., & Davidson, R. J. (2006) . Fear is 
fast in phobic individuals: amygdala activation in response to fear-relevant stimuli.  Biological Psychiatry 
 60 ,  410–17 . 
 Lewis, D. (1972) . Psychophysical and theoretical identifi cations .  Australasian Journal of Philosophy  50 , 
 249–58 . 
 Lombardo, M. V., Chakrabarti, B., Bullmore, E. T., Sadek, S. A., Pasco, G., Wheelwright, S. J., Suckling, J., 
& Baron-Cohen, S. (2010) . Atypical neural self-representation in autism.  Brain  133 ,  611–24 . 
 Martineau, J., Schmitz, C., Assaiante, C., Blanc, R., & Barthelemy, C. (2004) . Impairment of a cortical 
event-related desynchronization during a bimanual load-lift ing task in children with autistic disorder. 
 Neuroscience Letters  367 (3):  298–303 . 
 McDonald, S., Flanagan, S., & Rollins, J. (2002).  Th e Awareness of Social Inference.  TestSuff olk :  Th ames 
Valley Test Co., Ltd . 
 Mitchell, J. P. (2009).  Inferences about mental states .  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society London, 
B, Biological Sciences  364 ,  1309–16 . 
 Mitchell, J. P., Macrae, C. N., & Banaji, M. R. (2006) Dissociable medial prefrontal contributions to judg-
ments of similar and dissimilar others.  Neuron  50 (4): 655–63. 
 Mitchell, D., Avny, S., & Blair, R. J. (2006). Divergent patterns of aggressive and neurocognitive characteris-
tics in acquired versus developmental psychopathy.  Neurocase  12 (3): 164–78 
 Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., Johnson, B. W., & McNair, N. A. (2004) . Mu rhythm modulation during 
observation of an object-directed grasp.  Brain Research in Cognitive Brain Research  19 (2):  195–201 . 
 Niedenthal, P. (2007) . Embodying emotion.  Science  316 (5827): 1002. 
 Nummenmaa, L., Hirvonen, J., Parkkola, R., & Hietanen, J. K. (2008) . Is emotional contagion special? An 
fMRI study on neural systems for aff ective and cognitive empathy.  NeuroImage  43 ,  571–80 . 
 Oberman, L. M., Hubbard, E. M., McCleery, J. P., Altschuler, E. L., Ramachandran, V. S., & Pineda, J. A. 
(2005) . EEG evidence for mirror neuron dysfunction in autism spectrum disorders.  Brain Research: 
Cognitive Brain Research  24 (2):  190–8 . 
 Oberman, L. M., Pineda, J. A., & Ramachandran, V. S. (2007) . Th e human mirror neuron system: A link 
between action observation and social skills.  Social Cognitve Aff ective Neuroscience  2 (1):  62–6 . 
 Oberman, L. M., Ramachandran, V. S., & Pineda, J. A. (2008) . Modulation of mu suppression in chil-
dren with autism spectrum disorders in response to familiar or unfamiliar stimuli: Th e mirror neuron 
hypothesis.   Neuropsychologia  46 (5):  1558–65 . 
 Park, I. H., Park, H. J., Chun, J. W., Kim, E. Y., & Kim, J. J. (2008) . Dysfunctional modulation of emotional 
interference in the medial prefrontal cortex in patients with schizophrenia.  Neuroscience Letters  440 , 
 119–24. 
 Perry, A., Bentin, S., Ben-Ami Bartal, I., Lamm, C., & Decety, J. (2010) . “Feeling” the pain of those who 
are diff erent from us—modulation of EEG in the mu/alpha range.  Cognitive, Aff ective and Behavioral 
Neuroscience  10 ,  493–504 . 
 Perry, A., Troje, N. F., & Bentin, S. (2010)  Exploring motor system contributions to the perception of social 
information: Evidence from EEG activity in the mu/alpha frequency range .  Social Neuroscience  5 (3): 
 272–84 . 
 Pezawas, L., Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Drabant, E. M., Verchinski, B. A., Munoz, K. E., Kolachana, B. 
S., Egan, M. F., Mattay, V. S., Hariri, A. R., & Weinberger, D. R. (2005) . 5-HTTLPR polymorphism 
impacts human cingulate-amygdala interactions: a genetic susceptibility mechanism for depression. 
 National  Neurosci ence  8 :  828–34 . 
 Pineda, J. A. (2005) . Th e functional signifi cance of mu rhythms: translating “seeing” and “hearing” into 
“doing”.  Brain Research and Brain Research Reviews  50 (1):  57–68 . 

193
 Premack, D., & Woodruff , G. (1978) . Chimpanzee problem-solving: a test for comprehension.  Science 
 202 (4367):  532–5 . 
 Preston, S. D., & de Waal, F. B. M. (2002) . Empathy: Its ultimate and proximate bases.  Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences  25 (1):  1–20 . 
 Raymaekers, R., Wiersema, J., & Roeyers, H. (2009) . EEG study of the mirror neuron system in children 
with high functioning autism.  Brain Research  1304 :  113–21 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Gallese, V., & Fogassi, L. (1996) . Premotor cortex and the recognition of motor 
actions.  Brain Research and Cognitive Brain Research  3 (2):  131–41 . 
 Rozzi, S., Ferrari, P. F., Bonini, L., Rizzolatti, G., & Fogassi, L. (2008) . Functional organization of infe-
rior parietal lobule convexity in the macaque monkey: electrophysiological characterization of motor, 
sensory and mirror responses and their correlation with cytoarchitectonic areas.  European Journal of 
Neurosci ence  28 (8): 1569–88. 
 Saarela, M. V., Hlushchuk, Y., Williams, A. C., Schurmann, M., Kalso, E., & Hari, R. (2007) . Th e compas-
sionate brain: humans detect intensity of pain from another’s face.  Cerebral Cortex  17 :  230–7 . 
 Schulte-Ruther, M., Markowitsch, H. J., Fink, G. R., & Piefk e, M. (2007) . Mirror neuron and theory of 
mind mechanisms involved in face-to-face interactions: a functional magnetic resonance imaging 
approach to empathy.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  19 ,  1354–72 . 
 Schulte-Ruther, M., Greimel, E., Markowitsch, H. J., Kamp-Becker, I., Remschmidt, H., Fink, G. R., & 
Piefk e, M. (2010) . Dysfunctions in brain networks supporting empathy: An fMRI study in adults with 
autism spectrum disorders.  Social Neuroscience  6 :  1–21 . 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., & Aharon-Peretz, J. (2007) . Dissociable prefrontal networks for cognitive and aff ec-
tive theory of mind: a lesion study.  Neuropsychologia  45 :  3054–67 . 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Aharon-Peretz, J., & Levkovitz, Y. (2007)  Th e neuroanatomical basis of aff ective 
mentalizing in schizophrenia: comparison of patients with schizophrenia and patients with localized 
prefrontal lesions .  Schizophrenia Research  90 ,  274–83. 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Aharon-Peretz, J., & Perry, D. (2009).  Two systems for empathy: a double dissocia-
tion between emotional and cognitive empathy in inferior frontal gyrus vs. ventromedial prefrontal 
lesions .  Brain  132 ,  617–27 . 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Harari, H., Aharon-Peretz, J., & Levkovitz, Y. (2010).  Th e role of the orbitofrontal 
cortex in aff ective theory of mind defi cits in criminal off enders with psychopathic tendencies .  Cortex 
 46 (5):  668–77 . 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Shur, S., Barcai-Goodman, L., Medlovich, S., Harari, H., & Levkovitz, Y. (2007). 
 Dissociation of cognitive from aff ective components of theory of mind in schizophrenia .  Psychiatry 
Research  149 ( 1–3 ):  11–23 . 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Tibi-Elhanani, Y. & Aharon-Peretz, J. (2006).  Th e ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
is involved in understanding aff ective, but not cognitive theory of mind stories .  Social Neuroscience 
 1 ( 3–4 ):  149–66 . 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Tomer, R., Berger, B. D., Goldsher, D., & Aharon-Peretz, J. (2005) . Impaired “aff ec-
tive theory of mind” is associated with right ventromedial prefrontal damage.  Cognitive and behavioral 
neurology  18 (1):  55–67 . 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Tomer, R., Goldsher, D., Berger, B. D., & Aharon-Peretz, J. (2004).  Impairment 
in cognitive and aff ective empathy in patients with brain lesions: anatomical and cognitive correlates . 
 Journal of Clinical Experimental Neuropsychology  8 ,  1113–27 . 
 Shany-Ur, T., Poorzand, P., Grossman, S., Growdon, M. E., Jang, J. Y., Ketelle, R. S., Miller, B. L., & 
Rankin, K. P. (2012). Comprehension of insincere communication in neurodegenerative disease: Lies, 
sarcasm, and theory of mind.  Cortex  48 (10): 1329–41. 
 Simner, M. L. (1971)  Newborn’s response to the cry of another infant .  Developmental Psychology  5 :  136–50. 
 Singh, F., Pineda, J., & Cadenhead, K. S. (2011) . Association of impaired EEG mu wave suppression, nega-
tive symptoms and social functioning in biological motion processing in fi rst episode of psychosis. 
 Schizophrenia Research  130 ,  182–6. 
REFERENCES

UNDERSTANDING EMOTIONAL AND COGNITIVE EMPATHY: A NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
194
 Spezio, M. L., Adolphs, R., Hurley, R. S., & Piven, J. (2007) . Abnormal use of facial information in 
high-functioning autism.  Journal of Autism and Development Disord ers  37 :  929–39 . 
 Stich, S. A. N., & Nichols, S. (1992) . Folk psychology: simulation vs. tacit theory.  Mind and Language 
 7 :  29–65 . 
 Stone, V. E., Baron-Cohen, S., & Knight, R. T. (1998) . Frontal lobe contributions to theory of mind.  Journal 
of Cognitive Neuroscience  10 (5):  640–56. 
 Tranel, D., Bechara, A., & Denburg, N. L. (2002) . Asymmetric functional roles of right and left  ventro-
medial prefrontal cortices in social conduct, decision-making, and emotional processing.  Cortex  38 : 
 589–612 . 
 Uddin, L. Q., Davies, M. S., Scott, A. A., Zaidel, E., Bookheimer, S. Y., Iacoboni, M., et al. (2008) . Neural 
basis of self and other representation in autism: An FMRI study of self-face recognition.  PLoS ONE  3 : 
3526. 
 Van Overwalle F., & Baetens K. (2009) . Understanding others’ actions and goals by mirror and mentalizing 
systems: a meta-analysis.  NeuroImage  48 (3):  564–84 . 
 V ö llm, B. A., Taylor, A. N. W., Richardson, P., Corcoran, R., Stirling, J., McKie, S., et al. (2006) . Neuronal 
correlates of theory of mind and empathy: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study in a 
non-verbal task.  NeuroImage  29 :  90–8 . 
 Wellman, H. (1990).  Th e Child’s Th eory of Mind . Cambridge:  MIT Press . 
 Wicker, B., Keysers, C., Plailly, J., Royet, J. P., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (2003) . Both of us disgusted in 
My insula: the common neural basis of seeing and feeling disgust.  Neuron  40 (3):  655–64 . 
 Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983) . Beliefs about beliefs: representation and constraining function of wrong 
beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception.  Cognition  13 (1):  103–28 . 
 Zaki, J., Bolger, N., & Ochsner, K. (2009) . Unpacking the informational bases of empathic accuracy. 
 Emotion  9 :  478–87 . 

 Chapter 12 
 Empathy and the brain  
 Cade   McCall and   Tania  Singer 
 Feeling what others feel is basic to human social life. We wince when we see someone’s ﬁ nger sliced 
by a razor, when we see that person’s face twist in pain, or even when we read about the event. Both 
physical cues and our imaginations are enough for us to infer and experience the affective states of 
others. These abilities have clear functional beneﬁ ts, allowing us to learn from others’ pain and to 
offer help and support when they’re needed. While empathy is closely related to mentalizing about 
others’ thoughts and intentions, sharing feelings is distinct from reading minds. In recent years, 
social neuroscience has made major strides in understanding empathy. Research on its neural rep-
resentations and modulation has produced a complex picture. There is no single brain region 
underlying empathy, but a variety of networks that work together to produce (and prevent) vicari-
ous feeling. Signiﬁ cant questions remain, particularly regarding the different domains of empathic 
experience, its developmental trajectories, and the translation of shared feelings into behavior. This 
chapter provides an overview of this work and highlights possible new directions for research. 
 Deﬁ ning empathy  
 Deﬁ nitions of empathy vary widely in their focus and breadth. Based heavily on groundbreak-
ing work in psychology (Batson, 2009b; Eisenberg & Fabes, 1990; Wispe, 1986), social neu-
roscientists have honed in on a relatively speciﬁ c construct for the purposes of research. One 
deﬁ nition of empathy recently proposed by neuroscientists, for example, has four key components 
(de Vignemont & Singer, 2006; Decety & Jackson, 2004; Singer & Lamm, 2009). First, empathy 
refers to an affective state. Secondly, that state is elicited by the inference or imagination of another 
person’s state. Thirdly, that state is isomorphic with the other person’s state. Fourthly, the empa-
thizer knows that the other person is the source of the state. In other words, empathy is the experi-
ence of vicariously feeling what another person is feeling without confounding the feeling with 
one’s own direct experience (see Figure 12.1). 
 This deﬁ nition distinguishes empathy from related phenomena. While mentalizing or cogni-
tive perspective-taking may help us infer another person’s affective state, it does not necessarily 
produce an affective state in ourselves. For example, mentalizing might produce the inference, “I 
see him smiling so he must be happy,” while empathizing would produce the experience, “I am 
happy because he’s happy.” In gross terms, mentalizing represents more “cold” cognitive analysis of 
the scene and empathy the “warm” experiential response. Nevertheless, while these two constructs 
may be distinct on paper, mentalizing and empathy are closely related in mental life (Jackson, 
Brunet, Meltzoff, & Decety, 2006). For example, mentalizing plays a key part in providing the cues 
necessary to trigger empathic reactions. Conversely, empathic experience likely contributes to our 
mentalizing abilities by teaching us the meanings of speciﬁ c affective cues. 
 Emotional contagion is another closely related phenomenon. In emotional contagion one 
“catches” the affective state of another person, but without awareness of the state’s source 

EMPATHY AND THE BRAIN
196
(de Vignemont & Singer, 2006; Hatﬁ eld, Cacioppo, & Rapson, 1994). The automatic spread of 
panic through a crowd or the collective crying among babies in a nursery are examples. The criti-
cal difference between empathy and emotional contagion is that empathy maintains a self-other 
distinction. In other words, it is clear to the empathizer that the target is the source of the affective 
state. Nevertheless, emotional contagion is likely a developmental precursor for empathy (Hatﬁ eld, 
Rapson, & Le, 2009; Singer & Lamm, 2009). Moreover, the mechanisms responsible for emotional 
contagion may also function in full-blown empathy, but with the ﬁ ne-tuning of the self-other 
distinction (Decety & Jackson, 2004). 
 Sympathy and pity are also affective responses to another person’s state, but without the isomor-
phic quality of empathy (Batson, 2009b). For example, “The fact that he’s angry makes me sad,” or 
“I’m happy that he’s comfortable.” Note that neither sympathy nor pity involves a clear element of 
emotional contagion. They are, however, likely to involve some degree of mentalizing as the empa-
thizer uses various cues and beliefs about the other person’s goals and experiences to infer an affec-
tive state. In terms of affect, sympathy is less direct than empathy (de Vignemont & Singer, 2006; 
Singer & Lamm, 2009); it involves feeling  for  someone, not feeling  as someone (Batson, 2009b). 
 The term “compassion” is often used interchangeably with empathy. There is, however, an impor-
tant distinction based on motivation and behavior. Compassion is characterized by the motivation 
to alleviate the distress of another (Baumeister & Vohs, 2007). Although empathy may allow a 
compassionate individual to know when and how to act (Batson, 2009a; Eisenberg, 2000), empathy 
does not always result in compassion. In fact, empathic distress may lead the empathizer to avoid 
the target individual (Batson, Fultz, & Schoenrade, 1987; Eisenberg & Fabes, 1990). Conversely, 
compassion is an approach-oriented response to the affective state of the other. It represents the 
prosocial consequences of empathic experience. One can also imagine antisocial responses that 
rely upon empathy (Singer & Lamm, 2009). Take, for example, a torturer who is uniquely skilled 
at knowing what will cause pain to his victims. The ability to experience vicarious pain would help 
him know how to hurt others. 
 The four parts of this deﬁ nition of empathy provide a relatively well circumscribed territory 
for the study of this phenomenon. When it comes to neural underpinnings, we expect empathic 
 Figure 12.1  The conceptual relationship between emotional contagion, empathy, and compassion.  

NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF EMPATHIC STATES
197
neural responses to represent affect (i) and to do so in a way that reﬂ ects the speciﬁ c affective state 
(iii) of the empathized other (ii). At the same time, we expect distinctions between self and other 
representations indicative of the fact that the empathizer’s feeling is vicarious and not direct (iv). 
 Neural representations of empathic states  
 In recent years, researchers have created a novel set of experimental paradigms to study the neuro-
science of empathy. Initially this work was built on the premise that if empathy represents shared 
affect, then the neural representations of those vicarious states should show at least some overlap 
with self-generated representations of that same affective state (Avenanti, Bueti, Galati, & Aglioti, 
2005; Botvinick, Jha, Bylsma, Fabian, Solomon, & Prkachin, 2005; Jackson, Meltzoff, & Decety, 
2005; Keysers, Wicker, Gazzola, Anton, Fogassi, & Gallese, 2004; Morrison, Lloyd, Di Pellegrino, & 
Roberts, 2004;Singer, Seymour, O’Doherty, Kaube, Dolan, & Frith, 2004; Wicker, Keysers, Plailly, 
Royet, Gallese, & Rizzolatti, 2003). This “shared network hypothesis” emerged, in part, out of evi-
dence for shared cognitive and neural representations of action and perception (Preston & de Waal, 
2002; Gallese & Goldman, 1998; Prinz, 1997; Prinz, 2005). Research on the cognition mechanisms 
underlying action, for example, has consistently demonstrated that watching another person exe-
cuting an action can interfere with the planning and execution of an incongruent action, and can 
facilitate the planning and execution of a congruent action. These types of ﬁ ndings suggest that 
a common coding exists for one’s own actions and the perceived actions of others (Prinz, 2005; 
Prinz, 1997). This evidence was further bolstered by the discovery of mirror neurons in Macaque 
monkeys, neurons that respond to both action and the perception of action (di Pellegrino, Fadiga, 
Fogassi, Gallese, & Rizzolatti, 1992; Gallese, Fadiga, Fogassi, & Rizzolatti, 1996; Rizzolatti & 
Craighero, 2004). Cognitive neuroscience, in turn, has demonstrated overlaps between regions 
representing one’s own and others actions (Buccino, Binkofski, Fink, Fadiga, Fogassi, Gallese, et al., 
2001; Jeannerod, 2001). Together these data led researchers to suggest that social cognition is built 
on the automatic simulation of others’ behaviors (Gallese & Goldman, 1998; Keysers & Gazzola, 
2007; Rizzolatti, Fogasi, & Gallese, 2001). The brain perceives others’ actions and through their 
simulation infers the meanings of those actions. 
 Following this line of reasoning, the shared network hypothesis of empathy suggests that we 
understand others’ affective states by recruiting the same networks that represent our own affective 
states. Direct and vicarious feeling rely on similar mechanisms. 
 Empathy for pain 
 While the shared network hypothesis has been tested in several affective domains, empathy for pain 
has been a particularly fruitful target. Pain lends itself to this line of research because it is easily 
manipulated and depicted within the laboratory. Both pain and empathizing for another person’s 
pain are common and salient experiences. Perhaps most importantly, the “pain matrix”, or net-
works responsible for representing pain (Apkarian, Bushnell, Treede, & Zubieta, 2005; Derbyshire, 
2000; Peyron, Laurent, & Garcia-Larrea, 2000), is relatively well understood. As a consequence, 
researchers can make clear predictions about locations of overlapping representation and can 
theorize about the speciﬁ c features of pain that are vicariously represented. 
 Social neuroscientists have used two distinct methods to manipulate and measure empathy for 
pain in the laboratory: picture-based and cue-based paradigms. In picture-based paradigms (e.g. 
Jackson et al., 2005), participants view pictures or videos depicting painful situations. For example, 
they might see a q-tip stroking a hand during a non-painful trial or a needle puncturing a hand 
during a painful trial (Lamm, Meltzoff, & Decety, 2010). Alternatively, the images can depict the 

EMPATHY AND THE BRAIN
198
face of an individual as he or she experiences pain (Saarela, Hlushchuk, Williams, Schurmann, 
Kalso, & Hari, 2007). These studies allow researchers to measure neural responses while manipu-
lating the nature of the vicarious stimulus, the location of that stimulus on the target’s body, and 
the affective response of the pained individual. 
 Cue-based paradigms, on the other hand, use actual people instead of images as stimuli (Singer 
et al., 2004). During these experiments, multiple participants both receive and witness the delivery 
of painful stimuli (i.e. electric shocks to the hand). On each trial in such a study, a cue indicates 
(a) whether or not the stimulus for that trial will be painful, and (b) the recipient of that stimu-
lus (i.e. self or other). Because this paradigm uses arbitrarily assigned cues to indicate trial type, 
any responses that emerge during other-recipient trials are entirely cue-triggered and cannot be 
caused by emotional contagion. They cannot be driven by simply seeing the recipient’s body or by 
expressions of affect. In other words, empathic responses in these studies are the consequence of 
knowing the other person is in pain and imagining that state, not in perceiving the other person’s 
actual response to that pain. The other important feature of this paradigm is that it includes both 
direct and vicarious pain trials; participants both experience and witness experience pain. As a 
consequence, researchers can perform a direct, within-subject comparison between a participant’s 
own pain and his or her reaction to another’s pain (see also Corradi-Dell’Acqua, Hofstetter, & 
Vuilleumier, 2011). 
 According to shared network hypotheses, empathy for another person’s pain should activate 
components of the pain matrix. This activation should emerge when contrasting neural activity 
during trials depicting painful vs. non-painful trials. In experiments that include direct pain trials, 
one should also ﬁ nd overlap between self and other pain representations. Although cue-based and 
picture-based paradigms furnish distinct patterns of data, recent meta-analyses provide strong 
evidence for a core network for empathy for pain. One image-based meta-analysis representing 
9 separate studies (Lamm, Decety, & Singer, 2011) and two coordinate-based meta-analyses rep-
resenting 32 (Lamm et al., 2011) and 40 studies (Fan, Duncan, Greck, & Northoff, 2011) found 
signiﬁ cant bilateral anterior insula (AI), dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and anterior 
midcingulate cortex (aMCC) activity during empathy for pain across a variety of experiments 
conducted by different research groups (Figure 12.2, Panel 1). Critically, these areas overlap with 
areas that emerged in a meta-analysis of activity during the direct experience of pain (Figure 12.2, 
Panel 4; Lamm et al., 2011).      
 Participant self-reports of empathic states and traits corroborate the role of these areas during 
the representation of vicarious pain. Activity in the ACC and left AI during other pain trials cor-
relate (Singer et al., 2004; Singer, Seymour, O’Doherty, Stephan, Dolan, & Frith, 2006; Jackson 
et al., 2005; Lamm, Batson, & Decety, 2007a) with dispositional measures of empathy such as 
the Balanced Emotional Empathy Scale (Mehrabian & Epstein, 1972) and the Empathic Concern 
subscale of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (Davis, 1983). Similar ﬁ ndings have been reported 
with the Empathy Quotient (Baron-Cohen & Wheelwright, 2004) and measures of emotional con-
tagion (Lamm et al., 2007a; Doherty, 1997); see also (Jabbi, Swart, & Keysers, 2007). Reports of 
perceived target pain intensity or unpleasantness on a trial-by-trial basis also correlate with ACC 
and AI activity during those trials (Jackson et al., 2005; Saarela et al., 2007; Singer, Snozzi, Bird, 
Petrovic, Silani, Heinrichs, et al., 2008; Lamm, Nusbaum, Meltzoff, & Decety, 2007b; Cheng, Lin, 
Liu, Hsu, Lim, Hung, et al., 2007). 
 The core regions found across studies on empathy for pain map onto some, but not all, of 
the pain matrix. Here, qualitative distinctions between features of painful experience are criti-
cal. Speciﬁ cally, the pain matrix can be divided into regions that represent sensory discriminative 
(the location of the pain, the quality of the nociceptive input, etc.) vs. affective and motivational 
components of pain (the experience of unpleasantness, avoidance motivation, etc.; Apkarian 

NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF EMPATHIC STATES
199
et al., 2005; Peyron et al., 2000). Somatosensory cortices (S1 and S2) and the posterior insula are 
implicated in the sensory discriminative components of pain (Apkarian et al., 2005; Maih ö fner, 
Herzner, & Handwerker, 2006). In line with their role in pain localization, both the posterior insula 
and somatosensory cortices show activity contralateral to the location of the painful stimulus on 
 Figure 12.2  Results of a meta-analysis of empathy for pain studies (Lamm et al., 2011). The areas 
highlighted in Panel 1 showed signiﬁ cantly more activity when participants observed others in pain 
(as compared with trials in which they observed others not in pain). Panel 1 includes data from both 
cue-based and picture-based paradigms. Panel 2 depicts regions that showed higher activations for 
this contrast in picture-based paradigms. Conversely, Panel 3 depicts regions that showed higher acti-
vation for this contrast in cue-based paradigms. Panel 4 depicts areas that were common to both the 
experience of pain and the observation of others in pain (the bright spectrum) as well as areas that 
were unique to the direct experience of pain (the dark spectrum). See also Plate 5. 
 Analyses from Lamm, C., Decety, J., & Singer, T. (2011). Meta-analytic evidence for common and distinct neural 
networks associated with directly experienced pain and empathy for pain.  NeuroImage  54 (3): 2492–502. © 2011, 
Elsevier. 

EMPATHY AND THE BRAIN
200
the body (Bingel, Quante, Knab, Bromm, Weiller, & Buchel, 2003; Brooks, Nurmikko, Bimson, 
Singh, & Roberts, 2002). Moreover, damage to the SI and SII (but not the AI or ACC) selectively 
impairs the ability to discern the quality and localization of pain without impairing the ability to 
experience an unpleasant feeling that varies with stimulus intensity (Ploner, Freund, & Schnitzler, 
1999). Activation in S2, furthermore, varies with self reports of the sensory-discrimination, but 
not the other components of the pain (Maih ö fner et al., 2006; Melzack, 1975). 
 On the other hand, the areas active across empathy for pain paradigms (the AI, dACC, and 
aMCC) have been implicated in pain’s abstract and affective features (Price, 2000). AI activity, 
for example, varies not only with the level of noxious input, but additionally as a function of 
self-reported intensity (Kong, Gollub, Polich, Kirsch, Laviolette, Vangel, et al., 2008). Similarly, 
activity in the ACC correlates with self-reported unpleasantness of pain (Rainville, Duncan, Price, 
Carrier, & Bushnell, 1997). Not surprisingly then, vicarious pain involves feelings of discomfort 
and aversion without necessarily involving the more sensory-speciﬁ c qualities of the stimulus. 
This is not to say, however, that areas associated with the sensory components of pain are never 
involved in empathic experience. Instead, it appears that different networks lead to the elicitation 
of the empathy and that the empathic experience of pain converges on this core network (Lamm 
et al., 2011). 
 Different routes to empathic experience 
 Comparisons between the results of cue-based and picture-based empathy for pain paradigms 
reveal important differences in patterns of activation. These differences suggest that the brain elic-
its empathic states through different computational routes (Decety & Hodges, 2006; Decety and 
Jackson, 2004; Singer, 2006). Along these lines, meta-analyses reveal that picture-based paradigms 
elicit activation in the anterior inferior parietal cortex (supramarginal gyrus and intraparietal sul-
cus) and ventral premotor areas (inferior frontal gyrus, pars opercularis; Figure 12.2, Panel 2; 
Lamm et al., 2011). Importantly, the joint activation of these two areas is also common to research 
on action observation (Van Overwalle & Baetens, 2009) and in the hearing or reading of sentences 
describing action (Aglioti & Pazzaglia, 2010). In fact, sequences of abstract non-biological stimuli 
(Schubotz & von Cramon, 2004) also activate this network, leading some to propose that it is 
involved in the prediction of external events (Schubotz, 2007). Given this account, the images in 
picture-based paradigms may set into motion a cascade of computations that ultimately provide 
predictive models of affective experience (Lamm et al., 2011). Participants attend to the picture of 
a knife pressing against a ﬁ nger, these networks model the knife slicing through the skin that, in 
turn, elicits affective representations of the consequent laceration. Importantly, this cascade begins 
with the image of a body part and the implication of an event. 
 In the absence of images of the body, such a cascade of events is impossible. Instead, vicari-
ous pain necessarily relies upon imagining the state of the other. Accordingly, cue-based vs. 
image-based events recruit more areas such as the precuneus, ventral parts of the medial prefrontal 
cortex, the posterior superior temporal cortex, the temporo-parietal junction, and the temporal 
poles (Figure 12.2, Panel 3;Lamm et al., 2011). These areas are traditionally implicated in Theory 
of Mind or mentalizing (Gallagher & Frith, 2003; Van Overwalle & Baetens, 2009). It is likely, then, 
that empathy in cue-based paradigms depends upon mentalizing processes. Participants imagine 
the condition of the other person and those processes, in turn, elicit empathic states. 
 The evidence that cue-based and picture-based paradigms elicit empathy via two different 
routes underscores the fact that understanding others relies on the activation of multiple different 
networks subserving social cognition (Singer, 2006). In everyday life, the brain uses bodily cues, 
symbols and pure imaginative inference to elicit empathic experience. While we consider empathic 

NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF EMPATHIC STATES
201
states as distinctly affective in nature, the mechanisms that lead to empathic responses can rely on 
computations that would traditionally be labeled as cognitive. This amalgamation of processes 
allows us to feel empathy in both strictly symbolic circumstances (i.e. while reading a book) and 
more obviously visceral ones (i.e. while watching a boxing match). Moreover, the fact that various 
processes elicit empathy suggests that modulating empathic responses, learning empathic skills, 
and transforming empathy into prosocial behavior may involve a variety of different strategies that 
tap speciﬁ c mechanisms.  
 Distinctions between direct and vicarious pain 
 One key component in our deﬁ nition of empathy is that empathizing individuals share the affec-
tive state of a target, but preserve the distinction between self and other. The empathizer still iden-
tiﬁ es the target as the source of the experience. As such, one would expect differences between the 
neural representations of direct and vicarious pain. At the experiential level this point is obvious; 
watching a needle puncture someone else’s skin can be distressing, but it’s not the same feeling as 
getting pricked yourself. It’s not surprising, then, that paradigms designed to directly compare self 
and vicarious pain ﬁ nd a host of activity that is unique to the direct experience of pain (Lamm 
et al., 2011). 
 In particular, cue-based paradigms (e.g. Singer et al., 2004) elicit strong activations in contral-
ateral S1, posterior insula, and contralateral S2 during self pain, but no signiﬁ cant activity in these 
areas during the vicarious experience of pain. These ﬁ ndings again suggest that the sensory dis-
criminative components of the pain matrix are not necessary for empathic experience. Although 
picture-based paradigms ﬁ nd higher activity in S1 and S2, those patterns often emerge ipsilat-
erally as well and on trials in which participants are exposed to both painful and non-painful 
stimuli (Lamm et al., 2011). Moreover, even patients with a congenital insensitivity to pain display 
signiﬁ cant activity in bilateral S1 when seeing pictures of others in pain (Danziger, Faillenot, & 
Peyron, 2009). Together these data argue against a speciﬁ c mapping of the somatosensory features 
during vicarious pain. It is more likely that the activation in somatosensory cortices found in 
picture-based studies is a consequence of a more general activation elicited by the observation of 
touch on body parts (Keysers, Kaas, & Gazzola, 2010; Lamm et al., 2011). 
 Representations of direct and vicarious pain also appear to differ within the insula and cingu-
late cortex. While both activate anterior portions of the insula, direct pain uniquely activates its 
posterior subdivisions, which are associated more with sensory features of pain (Figure 12.2, Panel 
4; Decety & Lamm, 2009; Lamm et al., 2011). Similarly, direct pain activates a larger portion of 
the cingulate cortex (Lamm et al., 2011) with distinct activation patterns (Decety & Lamm, 2009; 
Morrison & Downing, 2007). Connectivity analyses furthermore suggest that overlapping regions 
responsible for both self and vicarious affect are embedded in larger and divergent networks (Jabbi, 
Bastiaansen, & Keysers, 2008; Zaki, Ochsner, Hanelin, Wager, & Mackey, 2007). 
 While it is clear that activation patterns are distinct for direct and vicarious pain, their signiﬁ -
cant overlap in areas critical for affective experience supports the claim that they rely upon some 
of the same computations. The spatial resolution of fMRI, however, prevents us from determining 
whether or not the two states activate the same subpopulations of neurons within the overlap-
ping voxels. Except for one subject in one single cell recording study (Hutchison, Davis, Lozano, 
Tasker, & Dostrovsky, 1999), there is no direct evidence for precise neuronal overlap between direct 
and vicarious pain. Nevertheless, recent work using multivariate pattern analysis of fMRI data 
provides the strongest evidence yet (Corradi-Dell’Acqua et al., 2011). This study looked at mul-
tivoxel patterns of activity during direct thermal pain to the hand and the observation of hands 
in painful situations. Whole brain analyses revealed similar patterns in the AI (bilaterally) in the 

EMPATHY AND THE BRAIN
202
two conditions. Region of interest analyses, furthermore, found overlap in the middle insula and 
middle cingulate cortex. The fact that distributed ensembles of voxels and not simply isolated 
voxels showed common patterns provides powerful evidence for the shared network hypothesis 
of empathy for pain. 
 The role of the anterior insula and cingulate cortex in empathy 
 The core network found in empathy for pain (the AI and dACC/aMCC) also emerges in research 
on empathy for other forms of affect. For example, participants in a study on disgust (Jabbi et al., 
2008) either tasted a bitter liquid, watched videos of actors tasting bitter liquids, or imagined doing 
so. All three scenarios elicited activity in the AI and adjacent frontal operculum. Similarly, both 
inhaling disgusting odorants and seeing faces expressing disgust activated portions of the ACC and 
AI (Wicker et al., 2003). These regions further emerged in studies on empathic responses to bodies 
expressing fear (Gelder, Snyder, Greve, Gerard, & Hadjikhani, 2004) and anger (Grosbras & Paus, 
2005). Even the sweat of anxious individuals triggered activity in these areas (Prehn-Kristensen, 
Wiesner, Bergmann, Wolff, & Jansen, 2009). Evidence also suggests that these areas are involved in 
representing vicarious responses to more obviously social experiences. Speciﬁ cally, they emerged 
when participants were exposed to scenes in which targets were embarrassed (Krach, Cohrs, 
Loebell, Kircher, Sommer, Jansen, et al., 2011) or socially excluded (Masten, Eisenberger, Borofsky, 
Pfeifer, McNealy, Mazziotta, et al., 2009). Together these data suggest that the AI and dACC/aMCC 
comprise a network for a multitude of empathic experiences (Bernhardt & Singer, 2012). Given 
that, what computations occur in these areas and how do they work together to produce empathic 
experience? 
 The anterior insula 
 The insula has long been associated with interoception (Craig, 2002). Functional neuroimaging 
studies demonstrate its involvement in a wide variety of visceral representations including thirst, 
bladder distension, sexual arousal, temperature perception, disgust, autonomic arousal, and (of 
course) pain (Craig, 2009). The AI, speciﬁ cally, is implicated in the conscious perception of inter-
nal states (Craig, 2009), its engagement correlating with interoceptive abilities (Critchley, 2005). 
For example, AI activity predicts accuracy on a heartbeat detection task in which one compares 
one’s own heartbeat to external feedback. Both performance on this task and self-reports of vis-
ceral awareness also correlate with the cortical thickness of the AI (Critchley, Wiens, Rotshtein, 
Ohman, & Dolan, 2004). 
 Damasio famously linked the insula’s bodily associations with emotional experience. According 
to his inﬂ uential model (Damasio, 1994), this region integrates visceral and sensory signals and, 
in doing so, produces emotional experience. The link between interoceptive awareness and emo-
tional experience has, indeed, been supported by empirical data (Barrett, Quigley, Bliss-Moreau, 
& Aronson, 2004; Pollatos, Gramann, & Schandry, 2007). Craig (2002, 2009) has further proposed 
that bodily states are initially represented in the posterior or mid insula, and are then remapped 
in the AI where they contribute to consciously accessible feeling states. In the domain of pain, 
these claims are further supported by recent work using direct electrical stimulation of the corti-
cal surface during presurgery evaluations of patients with epilepsy (Mazzola, Isnard, Peyron, & 
Mauguiere, 2011). In over 4000 cortical stimulations of 164 patients, only stimulation of the pos-
terior insula and medial parietal operculum elicited pain responses. Connectivity patterns within 
the insula and between the insula and other structures further support a posterior-to-anterior 
mapping of visceral input to conscious and affective remapping (Craig, 2002, 2009). 

NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF EMPATHIC STATES
203
 With its dense connections to both limbic and forebrain regions (Craig, 2009; Critchley et al., 
2004; Kurth, Zilles, Fox, Laird, & Eickhoff, 2010), the AI is ideally situated to be a conduit between 
bodily states and more conscious emotional experience. Accordingly, the AI emerges in multi-
ple studies in which participants focus on their feelings. For example, AI emerged when partici-
pants attended to joyful voices (Johnstone, Reekum, Oakes, & Davidson, 2006), or read a sentence 
expressing a joyful feeling and imagined themselves feeling that joy (Takahashi, Matsuura, Koeda, 
Yahata, Suhara, Kato, et al., 2008). The role of the AI in affective experience is nicely illustrated by 
research on alexithymia, a subclinical phenomenon in which individuals have difﬁ culty identify-
ing and describing their emotions. In one study, participants completed a task in which they were 
exposed to a series of images. Their task on each trial was to either rate their emotional reaction to 
the image (to introspect) or to simply judge the color balance of the image. Alexithymics showed 
relatively reduced AI activity when introspecting about their emotional responses to unpleasant 
images (Silani, Bird, Brindley, Singer, Frith, & Frith, 2008). Similarly, alexithymics showed reduced 
empathic responses in anterior insula when perceiving close others in pain (Bird, Silani, Brindley, 
White, Frith, & Singer, 2010). 
 The AI is probably involved not only in the conscious representation of affective states, but also 
in computations of prediction and prediction error (Paulus & Stein, 2006; Singer, Critchley, & 
Preuschoff, 2009). In one study on the anticipation of pain participants completed a series of trials 
in which they either received painful or non-painful stimulation (Ploghaus, Tracey, Gati, Clare, 
Menon, Matthews, et al., 1999). Before each trial, the type of stimulation was revealed via a colored 
light. Participants showed signiﬁ cant AI activity when they saw the pain cue, but before the deliv-
ery of the pain, indicating a representation of anticipation of the painful shock. Based on these 
and other data, researchers have proposed that AI computes predication error between anticipated 
states and actual visceral input (Paulus & Stein, 2006; Singer et al., 2009). These affective predic-
tions have two critical consequences (Singer et al., 2004; Singer et al., 2009). First, they allow us to 
anticipate our physiological reactions to emotional stimuli. Secondly, they simulate the affective 
reactions of other people (i.e. vicarious pain). 
 Neuroeconomics research further implicates the AI in processing and prediction of risk and 
uncertainty (Critchley, Mathias, & Dolan, 2001; Grinband, Hirsch, & Ferrera, 2006; Paulus, 
RogalskY, Simmons, Feinstein, & Stein, 2003; Preuschoff, Quartz, & Bossaerts, 2008). The AI 
is active during tasks which are risky, ambiguous, or complex (Elliott, Friston, & Dolan, 2000; 
Grinband et al., 2006; Huettel, Stowe, Gordon, Warner, & Platt, 2006). These data suggest that the 
AI predicts risk and uncertainty and computes errors between those predictions and actual out-
comes (Singer et al., 2009). For example, bilateral AI activity emerged when participants waited for 
the outcome of a risky decision and the level of activity reﬂ ected the risk prediction error once the 
outcome was known (Preuschoff et al., 2008). 
 Based on these ﬁ ndings and on the involvement of the AI in representing direct and vicarious 
feeling states, Singer and colleagues have suggested a broader model of AI functioning (Singer et al., 
2009). Within this model the AI integrates information about online and projected feeling states. It 
processes incoming sensory, bodily, and contextual information, while generating predictions for 
the affective consequences of anticipated events. By comparing these two channels of data, it cal-
culates and reﬁ nes estimates of outcomes, uncertainty, and their prediction errors. Together these 
functions produce a global feeling state, which reﬂ ects the integration of interoception, prediction, 
and risk. Critically, this integration would allow the AI to drive emotional learning and decision 
making. When considered in terms of empathy, the AI may compute the projected feelings states of 
another person and may, furthermore, compare those states with online information (e.g. facial or 
vocal expressions, bodily state, and etc.). Such computations would allow us to learn from others’ 

EMPATHY AND THE BRAIN
204
positive or negative experiences and to, perhaps, provide help or support when they are needed. In 
other words, we can learn and make decisions, not only from our own emotional states, but from 
the observed or imagined states of others. 
 The cingulate cortex 
 The cingulate cortex also emerges across studies on empathy, speciﬁ cally the dACC/aMCC. 
Functionally, this region has been implicated in a wide variety of phenomena. A recent 
meta-analysis of 939 studies found that overlapping portions of the dACC/aMCC are involved 
in representing negative affect, pain, and cognitive control (Shackman, Salomons, Slagter, Fox, 
Winter, & Davidson, 2011). Other data also implicate the regions in response selection (Medford 
& Critchley, 2010). Researchers consistently ﬁ nd concurrent activation in the AI and these regions 
of the cingulate, particularly in emotion-related paradigms (Craig, 2009; Medford & Critchley, 
2010). In line with those ﬁ ndings, resting state fMRI connectivity analyses show a close functional 
relationship between the AI and these areas (Taylor, Seminowicz, & Davis, 2009; Harrison, Pujol, 
Ortiz, Fornito, Pantelis, & Yucel, 2008), a relationship that is supported by dense anatomical inter-
connections (Bernhardt & Singer, 2012; Medford & Critchley, 2010). 
 As mentioned above, these portions of the ACC contribute to the affective component of the 
pain matrix (Apkarian et al., 2005; Rainville et al., 1997). Speciﬁ cally, they’re associated with the 
motivational component of the response and likely play a critical role in preparing responsive 
action (Morrison & Downing, 2007; Vogt & Sikes, 2009). In line with this account, the dACC/
aMCC receives direct projections from pain pathways; caudal divisions of the cingulate near the 
dACC/aMCC also have strong functional connections to sensorimotor regions (Margulies, Kelly, 
Uddin, Biswal, Castellanos, & Milham, 2007). Research on animal models provides evidence that 
these regions are involved in motivated action. Ablation of the ACC in rats selectively reduces 
avoidant behavior without reducing sensitivity to noxious stimuli (LaGraize Labuda, Rutledge, 
Jackson, & Fuchs, 2004). Furthermore, single neuron recordings in monkeys have identiﬁ ed neu-
rons in the ACC that selectively ﬁ re in response to cues for forthcoming pain or reward stimuli that 
they can either approach or avoid (Koyama, Keichiro, Tanaka, & Mikami, 2001). 
 The joint activation of AI and regions of the ACC also emerges frequently in studies on emotion 
(Craig, 2009; Medford & Critchley, 2010). As with pain, dACC/aMCC activity here may represent 
the mapping of affective responses into motivational and somatic domains (Craig, 2009; Pollatos 
et al., 2007; Medford & Critchley, 2010). Accordingly, joint ACC and AI activity has been shown 
in response to emotional facial expressions and, more to the point, is associated with heart rate 
changes (Critchley, Rotshtein, Nagai, O’Doherty, Mathias, & Dolan, 2005a). Further evidence links 
aMCC activity more generally with autonomic arousal (Critchley, Tang, Glaser, Butterworth, & 
Dolan, 2005b). Within the domain of empathy, the link between the AI and the dACC/aMCC likely 
represents the causal chain from projections of the target’s feeling state to motivational and behav-
ioral responses. In other words, feeling that others are in distress can drive us to ﬂ inch, cringe, or 
act. Of course the nature of the behavioral response varies. We will return to the behavioral conse-
quences of empathy at the end of this chapter. 
 Empathy in somatosensation 
 Although we have focused on the role of the AI and ACC in empathy, research also demonstrates 
empathy for touch in regions more directly associated with somatosensation (Blakemore, Bristow, 
Bird, Frith, & Ward, 2005; Ebisch, Perrucci, Ferretti, Gratta, Romani, & Gallese, 2008; Keysers 
et al., 2004, 2010; see also Keysers Thioux, and Gazzola, this volume). Participants have consistently 
shown common activation in the secondary somatosensory cortex when they both experience 

THE MODULATION OF EMPATHIC RESPONSES
205
and observe touch. In one fMRI study, participants watched videos of legs being stroked, or had 
their own legs stroked in a similar fashion. This overlap in activation within in the secondary 
somatosensory cortex in the two conditions (Keysers et al., 2004) has been replicated in replicated 
in subsequent research (Ebisch et al., 2008; Schaefer, Xu, Flor, & Cohen, 2009). One study, further-
more, identiﬁ ed an individual who experiences conscious tactile sensation when watching another 
person being touched (Ebisch et al., 2008). While both she and normal controls showed responses 
to observed touch in the somatosensory cortices, the activity was signiﬁ cantly greater for this indi-
vidual. Together these data demonstrate that the observation and experience of somatosensation 
recruits common networks. 
 The modulation of empathic responses  
 It is doubtful that anyone feels empathy for all people at all times. In fact, it is quite easy to come up 
with situations in which we feel more or less empathy toward an individual based on who that person 
is or how they have behaved. There are also clear differences between individuals in the ability or moti-
vation to empathize with others. Given this wide variability, understanding the modulation of empa-
thy is critical to understanding the phenomenon itself. Along these lines, researchers have explored the 
effects of context, interpersonal factors, and individual empathic capacities to better understand how 
and why empathic responses vary (see also de Vignemont and Singer, 2006; Hein & Singer, 2008). 
 Our ability and willingness to empathize with others is strongly affected by their identity and 
behavior. While the original cue-based, empathy-for-pain paradigm described above looked at 
empathy for loved ones (Singer et al., 2004), follow-up research has used the same paradigm to 
examine empathy for strangers. In one such study (Singer et al., 2006), participants came into the 
lab and interacted with confederates whom they believed to be other participants and who differed 
in their fair or unfair behavior toward the participant. They ﬁ rst completed an economic game with 
the confederates. During the game, one confederate played fairly and the other participant played 
unfairly, “defecting” in economic exchanges by failing to reciprocate the participant’s offers. Later, 
the participant and confederates completed the empathy-for-pain task. When fair players received 
painful shocks, participants exhibited the same empathic response exhibited in the prior study 
(i.e. activity in the AI and ACC). When unfair players received shocks, however, male participants 
showed relatively reduced responses in these regions. Moreover, they exhibited increased activity 
in areas that have typically been associated with reward processing (i.e. the nucleus accumbens). 
These increases also correlated with the self-reported desire for revenge. 
 This effect was replicated in a subsequent study in which participants witnessed both ingroup 
and outgroup members receiving a painful stimulus (Hein, Silani, Preuschoff, Batson, & Singer, 
2010). Participants were soccer fans and they interacted with fellow fans of their favorite team 
(in-group members) and fans of their favorite team’s rival (out-group members). The results 
showed stronger responses in the left AI when participants witnessed an in-group member vs. an 
out-group member suffer. As with unfair players in the earlier study, witnessing out-group mem-
bers elicited activation in the nucleus accumbens that was modulated by group perception. 
 Characteristics of a target person’s perceived affective state can also moderate the empathic 
response. In one study (Saarela et al., 2007), participants were shown photos of faces of chronic 
pain patients who were experiencing varying levels of acute pain. Participants showed more activ-
ity in several areas including the AI and ACC when exposed to the acute pain photos. Moreover, 
their estimates of targets’ pain intensity correlated with the strength of activation in these areas 
(left ACC, left inferior parietal lobule (IPL), and bilateral AI). Here, the affective facial cues modu-
lated the empathic responses, even in the absence of bodily cues about the painful stimulus itself. 

EMPATHY AND THE BRAIN
206
 Conversely, contextual information can alter empathic responses to identical images of the body. 
In one study, participants were shown similar images of hands undergoing medical procedures 
(Lamm et al., 2007b). One image type depicted a painless biopsy performed on an anesthetized 
hand while the other depicted a painful injection into a hand. Despite the relatively abstract infor-
mation about the nature of the photos, participants showed reduced empathic responses in the 
AI and aMCC when exposed to the anesthetized vs. non-anesthetized hand. Knowing the con-
sequences of a painful event can also affect the empathic neural response. For example, when 
participants watched videos of a painful procedure, they showed weaker activity in the aMCC and 
AI when they believed that procedure to be therapeutically effective than when they believed it to 
be ineffective. 
 Attention and imagination also play critical parts in the modulation of empathy. Participants 
who observed images of hands in painful situations showed stronger activation in the AI and ACC 
when they focused on the intensity of the person’s pain as opposed to physical features of the image 
(Gu & Han, 2007). Similarly, perspective-taking can alter the neural response. Participants imagin-
ing themselves in a painful situation vs. imagining another person in that situation show enhanced 
responses to the images, notably in the insula and aMCC (Jackson et al., 2006; Lamm et al., 2007a). 
 As mentioned in the previous section, individual differences in self-report measures of empa-
thy (Baron-Cohen & Wheelwright, 2004; Davis, 1983; Mehrabian & Epstein, 1972) correlate with 
empathic responses to equivalent stimuli. Conversely, empathic deﬁ cits, on the other hand, emerge 
in various clinical phenomena. Of course the most obvious disorder for which we would expect def-
icits is psychopathy. While there is not yet direct evidence for a reduced empathic neural response 
in psychopaths, less AI grey matter volume has been associated with weaker empathy scores in 
adolescents with conduct disorder (Sterzer, Stadler, Poustka, & Kleinschmidt, 2007). Research on 
adult psychopaths, furthermore, has shown reduced activity of the amygdala and AI during the 
anticipation of pain (Birbaumer, Veit, Lotze, Erb, & Hermann, 2005). More data are necessary to 
make a claim about the neural nature of empathic deﬁ cits in psychopathy. 
 The data on empathic deﬁ cits in alexithymics are clearer. As mentioned above, alexithymics have 
reduced introspective abilities which appear to translate into reduced empathic responses (Silani 
et al., 2008). Silani and colleagues’ ﬁ ndings have been replicated in subsequent research (Bird 
et al., 2010). Again, empathic neural activation elicited by the pain of a close other was modulated 
by individual levels of alexithymia. Importantly, this sample included individuals with autism 
spectrum conditions. When analyses accounted for levels of alexithymia, empathic responses were 
comparable between autistic and control groups. As such, although alexithymia and autism spec-
trum disorders show high comorbidity, there is no necessary deﬁ cit in empathy in autism. This 
double dissociation further underscores the distinction between empathic and mentalizing abili-
ties as autism spectrum disorders are known to be associated with severe theory of mind deﬁ cits 
(Baron-Cohen, 1995). 
 While we commonly consider empathy to be a positive trait, there are some domains in which 
a controlled empathic response is clearly beneﬁ cial. Health practitioners, for example, would have 
a terrible time if they winced or cringed every time they had to perform a painful procedure. One 
study by Cheng and colleagues (2007) addressed this point, exposing both acupuncturists and 
laymen to images of needles being inserted into different parts of the body. As predicted, only 
the laymen showed neural activation characteristic of empathic responses. Of course, is seems 
likely that while acupuncturists may control their empathic responses to pain, they likely pre-
serve empathic responses in other domains. After all, different circumstances require different 
responses. Along those lines, the complex relationship between empathy and behavior is the topic 
of our ﬁ nal section. 

OUTLOOK
207
 From empathy to prosocial behavior  
 Although our deﬁ nition of empathy does not refer directly to behavior, one would expect such a 
basic component of social life to inﬂ uence it. Indeed, the network of regions we’ve focused on here 
suggest a causal pathway from other-oriented prediction to conscious feeling state to motivation 
(Bernhardt & Singer, 2012; Craig, 2009). As such, empathy likely prepares one to respond and, 
possibly, to act. At the individualistic level, sharing other peoples’ feelings allows us react to their 
distress or joy so that we can avoid their mistakes or emulate their successes. In more prosocial 
terms, empathy allows us to respond to the needs of distressed others or to share in their joy. 
 These two putative functions of empathy can imply very different behavioral consequences. 
Accordingly, empathy researchers have long drawn a key distinction between two different 
empathic reactions: empathic concern and empathic distress (Batson, 2009a; Eisenberg, 2000; 
Klimecki & Singer, 2012). Empathic concern is akin to sympathy. The concerned individual 
responds to the distressed state of another, but with an approach motivation—they feel a desire 
to care for the target. Empathic distress, on the other hand, is an aversive state associated with 
avoidance motivation. The empathically distressed individual assumes the distressed feelings of 
the target to such an extent that they must physically or symbolically ﬂ ee the situation. They are 
incapable of helping. 
 Social neuroscience is only beginning to explore this difference and to better understand how 
empathy might lead to the kind of approach behaviors associated with helping. Lamm and col-
leagues (2007a), for example, point to the fact that when participants consider a painful scene 
using self (vs. other) perspective-taking, they show a stronger activation in components of the 
core empathy network (the insula and the aMCC) and in the amygdala (which among other things 
plays a critical role in fear-related behaviors; LeDoux, 2003). The assumption of the ﬁ rst person 
perspective here may push the experience into empathic distress such that the individual experi-
ences the kinds of personal distress and avoidance motivation associated with direct pain. 
 On the other hand, Hein and colleagues (2010) have provided neural evidence that empathy 
can motivate costly helping. As part of the abovementioned study on empathy for in-group vs. 
out-group members, participants had the opportunity to receive a painful stimulus in order to 
reduce the painful stimulus delivered to another player. Participants who showed more AI activa-
tion while seeing an in-group member suffer were more likely to help that person. Conversely, 
participants who showed more nucleus accumbens activity (associated with reward), while seeing 
the out-group member suffer, were less likely to help. 
 Work on social exclusion extends these ﬁ ndings (Masten, Morelli, & Eisenberger, 2010). During 
this fMRI experiment, participants observed one person being excluded by two other people dur-
ing a computerized ball-tossing game (Williams et al., 2000). After the scanning period, partici-
pants were asked to send emails to the players whom they had observed. Coders rated the degree to 
which the emails sent to the ostracized individual were comforting, supportive, and attempted to 
be helpful. Analyses revealed positive relationships between these prosocial communications and 
activity in the right AI and the medial prefrontal cortex during the exclusionary event (Masten et 
al., 2010; see also Mathur, Harada, Lipke, & Chiao, 2010). Given these data, it appears that empathic 
experience, and its neural components, can indeed promote helping behaviors. 
 Outlook  
 A crucial question for the future study of empathy is how and why vicarious feelings sometimes 
lead to empathic distress and avoidance, and other times lead to empathic concern and helping. 
Emotion regulation likely plays an important role in these processes, but which speciﬁ c regulatory 

EMPATHY AND THE BRAIN
208
strategies are effective, the nature of their neural representations, and how they interact with neu-
ral representations of empathy remain to be seen. 
 Important questions also remain regarding the relationship between empathy and different 
psychopathologies. For example, how does empathy manifest (or fail to manifest) in individuals 
with depression, borderline personality disorder, or narcissistic personality disorder (see Ritter, 
Dziobek, Preissler, R ü tter, Vater, & Fydrich, 2011)? It will also be critical to disentangle ways in 
which mentalizing pathways and empathy pathways are differentially affected in these disorders. 
Besides the obvious application in clinical domains, this line of research will help distinguish 
between the various mechanisms that drive social cognition. 
 The plasticity of empathy is another key frontier. Can one be trained to be more empathic or to 
better transform the empathic response into prosocial action? If so, what are the components of 
effective empathy training? Along similar lines, neuroscience is only beginning to investigate the 
developmental trajectory of empathy (e.g. Decety, Michalska, & Akitsuki, 2008) and, more gener-
ally, social emotions. Future work in this domain will help identify the critical periods in which 
social emotions emerge, and the factors that facilitate their emergence. 
 Ideally, these new lines of inquiry will translate the basic ﬁ ndings from the neuroscience of empa-
thy into everyday beneﬁ ts. Empathy, after all, is one of human nature’s more appealing traits. 
 Acknowledgements 
 We would like to thank Ralf Hartmann for his assistance in creating Figure 12.1. We also thank 
Claus Lamm and Boris Bernhardt for their help with Figure 12.2. 
 References 
 Aglioti, S.M., & Pazzaglia, M. (2010).  Representing actions through their sound .  Experimental brain 
research. Experimentelle Hirnforschung. Experimentation cerebrale  206 :  141–51 . 
 Apkarian, A.V., Bushnell, M.C., Treede, R.D., & Zubieta, J.K. (2005).  Human brain mechanisms of pain 
perception and regulation in health and disease.  European Journal of Pain  9 :  463–84 . 
 Avenanti, A., Bueti, D., Galati, G., & Aglioti, S.M. (2005).  Transcranial magnetic stimulation highlights the 
sensorimotor side of empathy for pain .  Nature neuroscience  8 :  955–60 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S. (1995).  Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind .  Cambridge:  MIT Press/
Bradford Books . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., & Wheelwright, S. (2004).  Th e empathy quotient: an investigation of adults with 
Asperger syndrome or high functioning autism, and normal sex diff erences .  Journal of Autism 
Development Disorders  34 :  163–75 . 
 Barrett, L.F., Quigley, K.S., Bliss-Moreau, E., & Aronson, K. R. (2004).  Interoceptive sensitivity and 
self-reports of emotional experience.  Journal of Personal Social Psychol ogy  87 :  684–97 . 
 Batson, C. D. (2009a).  Empathy-induced altruistic motivation . In: M. Mikulincer & P. R. Shaver (Eds), 
 Prosocial Motives ,  Emotions ,  and Behavior (pp. 15–34) .  Washington, D.C. :  American Psychological 
Association . 
 Batson, C. D. (2009b).  Th ese things called empathy: eight related, but distinct phenomena . In: J. Decety & 
W. Ickes (Eds),  Th e Social Neuroscience of Empathy (pp. 3–15).  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Batson, C.D., Fultz, J. & Schoenrade, P.A. (1987).  Distress and empathy: Two qualitatively distinct vicari-
ous emotions with diff erent motivational consequences .  Journal of Personality  55 :  19–39 . 
 Baumeister, R.F. & Vohs, K.D. (2007).  Encyclopedia of Social Psychology .  Th ousand Oaks:   Sage 
Publications . 
 Bernhardt, B. & Singer, T. (2012).  Th e neural basis of empathy .  Annual Reviews of Neuroscience  35: 1–23 . 

209
REFERENCES
 Bingel, U., Quante, M., Knab, R., Bromm, B., Weiller, C. & Buchel, C. (2003).  Single trial fMRI reveals 
signifi cant contralateral bias in responses to laser pain within thalamus and somatosensory cortices . 
 NeuroImage  18 :  740–8 . 
 Birbaumer, N., Veit, R., Lotze, M., Erb, M., Hermann, C., Grodd, W., & Flor, H. (2005).  Defi cient fear con-
ditioning in psychopathy: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study.  Archives of General Psychiatry 
 62 :  799–805 . 
 Bird, G., Silani, G., Brindley, R., White, S., Frith, U. & Singer, T. (2010).  Empathic brain responses in 
insula are modulated by levels of alexithymia, but not autism.  Brain: Journal of Neurology  133 :  1515–25 . 
 Blakemore, S.J., Bristow, D., Bird, G., Frith, C., & Ward, J. (2005).  Somatosensory activations during the 
observation of touch and a case of vision-touch synaesthesia.  Brain  128 :  1571–83 . 
 Botvinick, M., Jha, A.P., Bylsma, L.M., Fabian, S.A., Solomon, P.E., & Prkachin, K.M. (2005).  Viewing 
facial expressions of pain engages cortical areas involved in the direct experience of pain.  NeuroImage 
 25 :  312–19 . 
 Brooks, J.C., Nurmikko, T.J., Bimson, W.E., Singh, K.D., & Roberts, N. (2002).  fMRI of thermal pain: 
eff ects of stimulus laterality and attention.  NeuroImage  15 :  293–301 . 
 Buccino, G., Binkofski, F., Fink, G.R., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., Seitz, R.J., Zilles, K., Rizzolatti, 
G. & Freund, H.J. (2001).  Action observation activates premotor and parietal areas in a somatotopic 
manner: an fMRI study.  European Journal of Neuroscience  13 :  400–4 . 
 Cheng, Y., Lin, C.P., Liu, H.L., Hsu, Y.Y., Lim, K.E., Hung, D., & Decety, J. (2007).  Expertise modulates the 
perception of pain in others.  Current Biology  17 :  1708–13 . 
 Corradi-Dell’Acqua, C., Hofstetter, C., & Vuilleumier, P. (2011).  Felt and seen pain evoke the same local 
patterns of cortical activity in insular and cingulate cortex.  Journal of Neuroscience  31: 17966–8006 . 
 Craig, A.D. (2002).  How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiological condition of the body. 
 National Review of Neuroscience  3 :  655–66 . 
 Craig, A.D. (2009).  How do you feel—now? Th e anterior insula and human awareness.  National Review of 
Neuroscience  10 :  59–70 . 
 Critchley, H.D. (2005).  Neural mechanisms of autonomic, aff ective, and cognitive integration.  Journal of 
Comprehensive Neurology  493 :  154–66 . 
 Critchley, H.D., Mathias, C.J., & Dolan, R.J. (2001).  Neural activity in the human brain relating to uncer-
tainty and arousal during anticipation.  Neuron  29 :  537–45 . 
 Critchley, H.D., Rotshtein, P., Nagai, Y., O’Doherty, J., Mathias, C.J., & Dolan, R.J. (2005a).  Activity in the 
human brain predicting diff erential heart rate responses to emotional facial expressions.  NeuroImage  24 : 
 751–62 . 
 Critchley, H.D., Tang, J., Glaser, D., Butterworth, B., & Dolan, R.J. (2005b).  Anterior cingulate activity 
during error and autonomic response.  NeuroImage  27 :  885–95 . 
 Critchley, H.D., Wiens, S., Rotshtein, P., Ohman, A. & Dolan, R. J. (2004).  Neural systems supporting inte-
roceptive awareness.  Nature Neuroscience  7 :  189–95 . 
 Damasio, A.R. (1994).  Descartes’ error and the future of human life.  Scientifi c American  271 :  144 . 
 Danziger, N., Faillenot, I., & Peyron, R. (2009).  Can we share a pain we never felt? Neural correlates of 
empathy in patients with congenital insensitivity to pain.  Neuron  61 ,  203–12 . 
 Davis, M.H. (1983).  Measuring individual diff erences in empathy: evidence for a multidimensional 
approach.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  44:  113–26 . 
 de Vignemont, F., & Singer, T. (2006).  Th e empathic brain: how, when and why?  Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences  10 :  435–41 . 
 Decety, J., & Hodges, S.D. (2006).  Th e social neuroscience of empathy. In: P. A. M. Lange (Ed.),  Bridging 
Social Psychology Benefi ts of Transdisciplinary Approaches  (pp. 103–10).  Mahwah :  Erlbaum . 
 Decety, J. & Jackson, P.L. (2004).  Th e functional architecture of human empathy.  Behavioral Cognitive 
Neuroscience Review  3 :  71–100 . 

EMPATHY AND THE BRAIN
210
 Decety, J. & Lamm, C. (2009).  Empathy and intersubjectivity. In J. T. Cacioppo & G. G. Bernston (Eds), 
 Handbook of Neuroscience for the Behavioral Sciences (pp. 940–57).  New York:  John Wiley and Sons ,. 
 Decety, J., Michalska, K. & Akitsuki, Y. (2008).  Who caused the pain? An fMRI investigation of empathy 
and intentionality in children.  Neuropsychologia  46 :  2607–14 . 
 Derbyshire, S.W. (2000).  Exploring the pain “neuromatrix”.  Current Review of Pain  4 :  467–77 . 
 di Pellegrino, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (1992).  Understanding motor events: 
a neurophysiological study.  Experimental Brain Research  91 :  176–80 . 
 Doherty, R. (1997).  Th e emotional contagion scale: A measure of individual diff erences.  Journal of 
Non-verbal Behavior  21 :  123 . 
 Ebisch, S., Perrucci, M., Ferretti, A., Gratta, C.D., Romani, G., & Gallese, V. (2008).  Th e sense of touch: 
Embodied simulation in a visuotactile mirroring mechanism for observed animate or inanimate touch. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  20 :  12 . 
 Eisenberg, N. (2000).  Emotion, regulation, and moral development.   Annual Review of Psychology  51 :  665–97 . 
 Eisenberg, N., & Fabes, R.A. (1990).  Empathy: Conceptualization, measurement, and relation to prosocial 
behavior.  Motivation and Emotion  14 :  131–49 . 
 Elliott, R., Friston, K.J., & Dolan, R.J. (2000).  Dissociable neural responses in human reward systems. 
 Journal of Neuroscience  20 :  6159–65 . 
 Fan, Y., Duncan, N., Greck, M.D., & Northoff , G. (2011).  Is there a core neural network in empathy? An 
fMRI based quantitative meta-analysis.  Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews  35 :  11 . 
 Gallagher, H.L., & Frith, C.D. (2003).  Functional imaging of ‘theory of mind’.  Trends in Cognitive Science  7 : 
 77–83 . 
 Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Rizzolatti, G. (1996).  Action recognition in the premotor cortex.  Brain 
 119 (Pt 2):  593–609 . 
 Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998).  Mirror neurons and the simulation theory of mind-reading.  Trends in 
Cognitive Science  2 :  493–501 . 
 Gelder, B.D., Snyder, J., Greve, D., Gerard, G., & Hadjikhani, N. (2004).  Fear fosters fl ight: a mechanism 
for fear contagion when perceiving emotion expressed by a whole body.  Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Science USA  101 :  6 . 
 Grinband, J., Hirsch, J., & Ferrera, V.P. (2006).  A neural representation of categorization uncertainty in the 
human brain.  Neuron  49 :  757–63 . 
 Grosbras, M.H., & Paus, T. (2005).  Brain networks involved in viewing angry hands or faces.  Cerebral 
Cortex, 16(8): 1087–96 . 
 Gu, X., & Han, S. (2007).  Attention and reality constraints on the neural processes of empathy for pain. 
 Neuroimage  36 :  256–67 . 
 Harrison, B., Pujol, J., Ortiz, H., Fornito, A., Pantelis, C. & Yucel, M. (2008).  Modulation of brain 
resting-state netwoks by sad mood induction.  PLos  One  3 :  e1794 . 
 Hatfi eld, E., Cacioppo, J.T., & Rapson, R. (1994).  Emotional Contagion,  New York:  Cambridge University 
Press . 
 Hatfi eld, E., Rapson, R., & Le, Y. (2009).  Emotional contagion and empathy.  In J. Decety & W. Ickes (Eds), 
Th e Social Neuroscience of Empathy (pp. 19–30), Boston: MIT Press. 
 Hein, G., Silani, G., Preuschoff , K., Batson, C.D., & Singer, T. (2010).  Neural responses to ingroup and 
outgroup members’ suff ering predict individual diff erences in costly helping.  Neuron  68 :  149–60 . 
 Hein, G., & Singer, T. (2008).  I feel how you feel, but not always: the empathic brain and its modulation. 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology  18 :  153–8 . 
 Huettel, S., Stowe, C.J., Gordon, E.M., Warner, B.T. & Platt, M. (2006).  Neural signatures of economic 
preferences for risk and ambiguity.  Neuron  49 :  765–75 . 
 Hutchison, W.D., Davis, K.D., Lozano, A.M., Tasker, R.R., & Dostrovsky, J.O. (1999).  Pain-related neurons 
in the human cingulate cortex.  Nature Neuroscience  2 :  403–5 . 

211
 Jabbi, M., Bastiaansen, J., & Keysers, C. (2008).  A common anterior insula representation of disgust obser-
vation, experience and imagination shows divergent functional connectivity pathways.  PLoS One  3 : 
 e2939 . 
 Jabbi, M., Swart, M., & Keysers, C. (2007).  Empathy for positive and negative emotions in the gustatory 
cortex.  Neuroimage  34 :  1744–53 . 
 Jackson, P.L., Brunet, E., Meltzoff , A.N., & Decety, J. (2006).  Empathy examined through the neural mech-
anisms involved in imagining how I feel vs. how you feel pain.  Neuropsychologia  44 :  752–61 . 
 Jackson, P.L., Meltzoff , A.N., & Decety, J. (2005).  How do we perceive the pain of others? A window into 
the neural processes involved in empathy.  Neuroimage  24 :  771–9 . 
 Jeannerod, M. (2001).  Neural simulation of action: A unifying mechanism for motor cognition. 
 NeuroImage  14 :  103–9 . 
 Johnstone, T., Reekum, C.V., Oakes, T., & Davidson, R. (2006).  Th e voice of emotion: an fMRI study of 
neural reponses to angry and happy vocal expressions.  Social Cognitive and Aff ective Neuroscience  1 : 
 242–9 . 
 Keysers, C., & Gazzola, V. (2007).  Integrating simulation and theory of mind: from self to social cognition. 
 Trends in Cognitive Science  11 :  194–6 . 
 Keysers, C., Kaas, J.H., & Gazzola, V. (2010).  Somatosensation in social perception.  National Review of 
Neuroscience  11 :  417–28 . 
 Keysers, C., Wicker, B., Gazzola, V., Anton, J.L., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2004).  A touching sight: SII/PV 
activation during the observation and experience of touch.  Neuron  42 :  335–46 . 
 Klimecki, O., & Singer, T. (2013). Empathy from the perspective of social neuroscience. In J. Armony & 
P. Vuilleumier (Eds),  Handbook of Human Aff ective Neuroscience (pp. 533–51). New York: Cambridge 
University Press . 
 Kong, J., Gollub, R.L., Polich, G., Kirsch, I., Laviolette, P., Vangel, M., Rosen, B., & Kaptchuk, T.J. (2008). 
 A functional magnetic resonance imaging study on the neural mechanisms of hyperalgesic nocebo 
eff ect.   Journal of Neuroscience  28 :  13354–62 . 
 Koyama, T., Keichiro, K., Tanaka, Y., & Mikami, A. (2001).  Anterior cingulate activity during 
pain-avoidance and reward in monkeys.  Neuroscience Research  39 :  421–30 . 
 Krach, S., Cohrs, J., Loebell, N.D.E., Kircher, T., Sommer, J., Jansen, A., Paulus, F.M. (2011).  Your fl aws 
are my pain: linking empathy to vicarious embarrassment.  PLoS One  6 :  e18675 . 
 Kurth, F., Zilles, K., Fox, P.T., Laird, A.R., & Eickhoff , S.B. (2010).  A link between the systems: functional 
diff erentiation and integration within the human insula revealed by meta-analysis.  Brain Structure and 
Function  214 :  519–534 . 
 Lagraize, S., Labuda, C., Rutledge, M., Jackson, R., & Fuchs, P. (2004).  Diff erential eff ect of anterior cingu-
late cortex lesion on mechanical hypersensitivity and escape/avoidance behavior in an animal model of 
neuropathic pain.   Experimental Neurology  188 :  139–48 . 
 Lamm, C., Batson, C.D., & Decety, J. (2007a).  Th e neural substrate of human empathy: eff ects of 
perspective-taking and cognitive appraisal.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  19 :  42–58 . 
 Lamm, C., Decety, J., & Singer, T. (2011).  Meta-analytic evidence for common and distinct neural networks 
associated with directly experienced pain and empathy for pain.  NeuroImage  54 :  2492–502 . 
 Lamm, C., Meltzoff , A.N., & Decety, J. (2010).  How do we empathize with someone who is not like us? A 
functional magnetic resonance imaging study.  Journal of cognitive neuroscience  22 :  362–76 . 
 Lamm, C., Nusbaum, H.C., Meltzoff , A.N., & Decety, J. (2007b).  What are you feeling? Using functional 
magnetic resonance imaging to assess the modulation of sensory and aff ective responses during empa-
thy for pain.  PloS one  2 :  e1292 . 
 Ledoux, J. (2003).  Th e emotional brain, fear, and the amygdala.  Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology  23 :  727–38 . 
 Maih ö fner, C., Herzner, B., & Handwerker, H. (2006).  Secondary somatosensory cortex is important 
for the sensory-discriminative dimension of pain: A functional MRI study.  European Journal of 
Neuroscience  23 :  1377–83 . 
REFERENCES

EMPATHY AND THE BRAIN
212
 Margulies, D., Kelly, A., Uddin, L., Biswal, B., Castellanos, F., & Milham, M. (2007).  Mapping the func-
tional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.  NeuroImage  37 :  579–88 . 
 Masten, C., Morelli, S., & Eisenberger, N. (2010).  An fMRI investigation of empathy for ‘social pain’ and 
subsequent prosocial behavior.  NeuroImage  55 ,  381–8 . 
 Masten, C.L., Eisenberger, N.I., Borofsky, L.A., Pfeifer, J.H., McNealy, K., Mazziotta, J.C. & Dapretto, 
M. (2009).  Neural correlates of social exclusion during adolescence: understanding the distress of peer 
rejection.  Social Cognitive and Aff ective Neuroscience  4 :  143–57 . 
 Mathur, V., Harada, T., Lipke, T. & Chiao, J. (2010).  Neural basis of extraordinary empathy and altruistic 
motivation.  NeuroImage  51 :  1468–75 . 
 Mazzola, L., Isnard, J., Peyron, R. & Mauguiere, F. (2011).  Stimulation of the human cortex and the experi-
ence of pain: Wilder Penfi eld’s observations revisited.  Brain 135(Pt 2): 631–40 . 
 Medford, N., & Critchley, H.D. (2010).  Conjoint activity of anterior insular and anterior cingulate cortex: 
awareness and response.  Brain Structure & Function  214 :  535–49 . 
 Mehrabian, A., & Epstein, N. (1972).  A measure of emotional empathy.  Journal of Personality  40:  525–43 . 
 Melzack, R. (1975).  Th e McGill Pain Questionnaire: Major properties and scoring methods.  Pain  1 :  22 . 
 Morrison, I. & Downing, P.E. (2007).  Organization of felt and seen pain responses in anterior cingulate 
cortex.  NeuroImage  37 :  642–51 . 
 Morrison, I., Lloyd, D., di Pellegrino, G., & Roberts, N. (2004).  Vicarious responses to pain in anterior cin-
gulate cortex: Is empathy a multisensory issue?  Cognitive Aff ective Behavioral Neuroscience  4 :  270–8 . 
 Paulus, M.P., Rogalsky, C., Simmons, A., Feinstein, J.S., & Stein, M.B. (2003).  Increased activation in 
the right insula during risk-taking decision making is related to harm avoidance and neuroticism. 
 NeuroImage  19 :  1439–48 . 
 Paulus, M.P., & Stein, M.B. (2006).  An insular view of anxiety.  Biological Psychiatry  60 :  383–7 . 
 Peyron, R., Laurent, B., & Garcia-Larrea, L. (2000).  Functional imaging of brain responses to pain .  A 
review and meta-analysis (2000) .  Neurophysiology Clinic  30 :  263–88 . 
 Ploghaus, A., Tracey, I., Gati, J.S., Clare, S., Menon, R.S., Matthews, P.M., & Rawlins, J.N. (1999). 
 Dissociating pain from its anticipation in the human brain.  Science  284 :  1979–81 . 
 Ploner, M., Freund, H., & Schnitzler, A. (1999).  Pain aff ect without pain sensation in a patient with a post-
central legion .  Pain  81 :  211–14 . 
 Pollatos, O., Gramann, K., & Schandry, R. (2007).  Neural systems connecting interoceptive awareness and 
feelings.  Human Brain Mapping  28 :  9–18 . 
 Prehn-Kristensen, A., Wiesner, C., Bergmann, T., Wolff , S., & Jansen, O. (2009).  Induction of empathy by 
the smell of anxiety.  PLoS One  4 :  e5987 . 
 Preston, S.D. & de Waal, F.B. (2002).  Empathy: Its ultimate and proximate bases.  Behavioural Brain Science 
 25 :  1–20 ; discussion 20–71. 
 Preuschoff , K., Quartz, S.R., & Bossaerts, P. (2008).  Human insula activation refl ects risk prediction errors 
as well as risk.  Journal of Neuroscience  28 :  2745–2752 . 
 Price, D. 2000.  Psychological and neural mechanisms of the aff ective dimension of pain.  Science  288 :  1769–72 . 
 Prinz, W. (1997).  Perception and action planning.  Journal of Cognitive Psychology  9 :  129–54 . 
 Prinz, W. (2005).  Experimental approaches to action. In: J. Roessler & N. Eilan (Eds),  Agency and 
Self-Awareness (pp. 165–87).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Rainville, P., Duncan, G.H., Price, D.D., Carrier, B., & Bushnell, M.C. (1997).  Pain aff ect encoded in 
human anterior cingulate, but not somatosensory cortex.  Science  277 :  968–71 . 
 Ritter, K., Dziobek, I., Preissler, S., R ü tter, R., Vater, A., Fydrich, T., Lammers, C., Heekeren, H., & 
Roepke, S. (2011).  Lack of empathy in patients with narcissistic personality disorder.  Psychiatry Research 
 187 :  241–7 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004).  Th e mirror-neuron system.  Annual Review of Neuroscience  27 : 
 169–92 . 

213
 Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2001).  Neurophysiological mechanisms underlying the under-
standing and imitation of action.  Nature Reviews Neuroscience  2 :  661–70 . 
 Saarela, M.V., Hlushchuk, Y., Williams, A.C., Schurmann, M., Kalso, E., & Hari, R. (2007).  Th e compas-
sionate brain: humans detect intensity of pain from another’s face.  Cerebral Cortex  17 :  230–7 . 
 Schaefer, M., Xu, B., Flor, H., & Cohen, L. (2009).  Eff ects of diff erent viewing perspectives on somatosen-
sory activations during observation of touch.  Human Brain Mapping  30 :  2722–30 . 
 Schubotz, R.I. (2007).  Prediction of external events with our motor system: toward a new framework. 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences  11 :  211–18 . 
 Schubotz, R.I., & von Cramon, D.Y. (2004).  Sequences of abstract non-biological stimuli share ventral pre-
motor cortex with action observation and imagery.  Journal of Neuroscience  24 :  5467–74 . 
 Shackman, A., Salomons, T., Slagter, H., Fox, A., Winter, J., & Davidson, R. (2011).  Th e integration of neg-
ative aff ect, pain and cognitive control in the cingulate cortex.  National Review of Neuroscience  12 :  13 . 
 Silani, G., Bird, G., Brindley, R., Singer, T., Frith, C., & Frith, U. (2008).  Levels of emotional awareness and 
autism: an fMRI study.  Social Neuroscience  3 :  97–112 . 
 Singer, T. (2006).  Th e neuronal basis and ontogeny of empathy and mind reading: review of literature and 
implications for future research.  Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews  30 :  855–63 . 
 Singer, T., Critchley, H.D., & Preuschoff , K. (2009).  A common role of insula in feelings, empathy and 
uncertainty.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences  13 :  334–40 . 
 Singer, T., & Lamm, C. (2009).  Th e social neuroscience of empathy.  Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences  1156 :  81–96 . 
 Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J., Kaube, H., Dolan, R.J., & Frith, C.D. (2004).  Empathy for pain 
involves the aff ective, but not sensory components of pain.  Science  303 :  1157–62 . 
 Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J.P., Stephan, K.E., Dolan, R.J., & Frith, C.D. (2006).  Empathic neural 
responses are modulated by the perceived fairness of others.  Nature  439 :  466–9 . 
 Singer, T., Snozzi, R., Bird, G., Petrovic, P., Silani, G., Heinrichs, M., & Dolan, R.J. (2008).  Eff ects of oxy-
tocin and prosocial behavior on brain responses to direct and vicariously experienced pain.  Emotion  8 : 
 781–91 . 
 Sterzer, P., Stadler, C., Poustka, F., & Kleinschmidt, A. (2007).  A structural neural defi cit in adolescents 
with conduct disorder and its association with lack of empathy.  NeuroImage  37 :  335–42 . 
 Takahashi, H., Matsuura, M., Koeda, M., Yahata, N., Suhara, T., Kato, M. & Okuba, Y. (2008).  Brain acti-
vations during judgments of positive self-conscious emotion and positive basic emotion: Pride and joy. 
 Cerebral Cortex  18 :  893–903 . 
 Taylor, K., Seminowicz, D., & Davis, K. (2009).  Two systems of resting state connectivity between the 
insula and cingulate cortex.  Human Brain Mapping  30 :  14 . 
 van Overwalle, F., & Baetens, K. (2009).  Understanding others’ actions and goals by mirror and mentaliz-
ing systems: A meta-analysis.  NeuroImage  48 :  564–84 . 
 Vogt, B., & Sikes, R. (2009).  Cingulate nociceptive circuitry and roles in pain processing: the cingulate pre-
motor pain model. In: B. Vogt (Ed.),  Cingulate Neurobiology and Disease  (pp. 311–38).  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press . 
 Wicker, B., Keysers, C., Plailly, J., Royet, J.P., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (2003).  Both of us disgusted in 
my insula: the common neural basis of seeing and feeling disgust.  Neuron  40 :  655–64 . 
 Williams, K., Cheung, C., & Choi, W. (2000).  Cyberostracism: eff ects of being ignored over the Internet. 
 Journal of Personal and Social Psychol ogy  79 :  748–62 . 
 Wispe, L. (1986).  Th e distinction between sympathy and empathy: to call forth a concept, a work is needed. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  50 :  314–21 . 
 Zaki, J., Ochsner, K.N., Hanelin, J., Wager, T.D., & Mackey, S.C. (2007).  Diff erent circuits for diff erent 
pain: patterns of functional connectivity reveal distinct networks for processing pain in self and others. 
 Social Neuroscience  2 :  276–91 . 
REFERENCES

 Chapter 13 
 Neural sources of empathy: 
An evolving story 
 Jamil   Zaki and   Kevin  Ochsner 
 Compared with many other animals on the planet, human beings are small, slow, soft, and weak. 
Yet, we have unequivocally won the cross-species competition for global domination. What allowed 
us, as physical underdogs, to claim this unlikely victory? In other words, what makes humans 
special? 
 While many disciplines have addressed this question in some way, psychologists’ answer has 
evolved over time. Until recently, the dominant view held that human uniqueness was bound up 
in our  intrapersonal abilities, such as the use of arbitrary symbols (Deacon, 1997; Pinker, 1994; 
Pinker & Bloom, 1990), and recursive syntax (Chomsky, 1980; Hauser, Chomsky, & Fitch, 2002) 
in language, or our ability to mentally “time travel” in reﬂ ecting on past experiences and planning 
future actions (Suddendorf & Corballis, 1997, 2007; Tulving, 2002). Although these faculties are 
undoubtedly critical, in the last decade human specialness has come to be seen as much more 
 interpersonal : embodied, for example, in our abilities to understand (Brothers, 1997; Leslie, 1994), 
learn from (Csibra & Gergely, 2006; Moll & Tomasello, 2007), and share intentions with others 
(Tomasello, 2000; Tomasello, Carpenter, Call, Behne, & Moll, 2005). 
 Together, such abilities contribute to the multi-faceted construct of empathy. Empathy is thought 
to comprise multiple related, but distinct processing steps, including (1) vicariously sharing oth-
ers’ internal states, (2) explicitly considering (and perhaps understanding) others’ states and their 
sources, and (3) expressing motivation to improve others’ experiences (e.g. by reducing their suf-
fering). Together, these components of empathy support our abilities to cooperate on everything 
from hunting trips to the development of scientiﬁ c theory (Tomasello, 2009), and motivate us to 
protect each others’ well being (Batson, 2011; de Waal, 2008). 
 Given empathy’s enormous importance, psychologists of all stripes have developed new tools 
and techniques, ranging from time data in infants (Hamlin, Wynn, & Bloom, 2007; Thomsen, 
Frankenhuis, Ingold-Smith, & Carey, 2011) to cross-species comparative studies (Flombaum 
& Santos, 2005; Silk, Brosnan, Vonk, Henrich, Povinelli, Richardson, et al., 2005), to explore 
empathic abilities. Human neuroscience has been no different. Since the spread of tools like 
fMRI for measuring task-related brain activity two decades ago, researchers have called for these 
tools to be used in characterizing the neural bases of empathy, and many more researchers have 
answered this call. The resulting avalanche of data has clariﬁ ed some of the myriad ways in 
which  perceivers  (individuals paying attention to, thinking about, or responding to another 
person) represent the experiences of social  targets  (individuals who are the focus of perceivers’ 
attention). 
 Here, we don’t aim to exhaustively review this vast literature, but rather to offer a three-part sur-
vey and glimpse of the future. The ﬁ rst section will describe extant neuroscience work on empa-
thy, which has largely focused on localizing and characterizing the neural systems underlying two 

A TALE OF TWO SYSTEMS
215
components of empathy:  experience sharing  (perceivers’ tendency to vicariously experience tar-
gets’ sensorimotor, visceral, and affective states) and  mental state attribution  (perceivers’ explicit 
consideration of targets’ internal states), each of which has been explored by dozens of studies. 
This work has provided a powerful, mechanistic snapshot of some features of empathy. 
 The second section will explain why extant neuroscientiﬁ c models of empathy remain incom-
plete, and as such, this domain of research is at a critical turning point. This is because a descrip-
tion of individual social cognitive processes—the “pieces” that make up empathy—is far removed 
from a holistic picture of how the human brain puts those pieces together, and allows perceivers to 
understand and respond to targets. This is not always appreciated in social cognitive neuroscience: 
researchers often treat processes such as experience sharing and mentalizing as though they were 
separate “processing streams” operating in isolation. 
 The third and last section of this chapter will focus on a critical shift in the ﬁ eld away from this 
modular view of empathy, and suggest some direction for future research. Here, we will describe 
how the ﬁ rst stage of empathy research is now giving way to a second stage that focuses on the  inter-
actions  between multiple cognitive and neural mechanisms that constitute empathy, especially 
when perceivers encounter complex, ecologically valid social cues. This second stage of evolution 
is ongoing, and the way it plays out will determine the course of research on the neuroscience of 
empathy—and the issues this ﬁ eld will be able to address—in the coming decades.  
 A tale of two systems  
 Understanding and responding to others’ internal states are enormously complex tasks. Luckily, 
perceivers have access to a number of methods for accomplishing them. They can stereotype social 
targets (Devine, 1989; Quadﬂ ieg, Turk, Waiter, Mitchell, Jenkins, & Macrae, 2009), project their 
own internal states onto targets (Gilovich, Medvec, & Savitsky, 2000; Ross, Greene, & House, 1977), 
apply analysis of variance to others’ behaviors to derive underlying traits and preferences (Kelley, 
1973), and avail themselves of any number of other social cognitive “tools” (Ames, 2004). That 
said, the lion’s share of neuroscientiﬁ c research on empathy has focused on two of these tools—
experience sharing and mental state attribution. Neuroscientists have explored these processes 
and their underlying neural systems through starkly independent lines of research. Here, we will 
discuss each of these empirical programs in turn. 
 Experience sharing 
 The ﬁ rst line of research deals with the mechanisms through which one person comes to vicari-
ously experience others’ internal states. Psychologists and neuroscientists posit that experience 
sharing occurs because perception (e.g. of a target in pain) and experience (e.g. a perceiver feel-
ing pain themselves) are deeply linked, and as such observing targets will naturally cause per-
ceivers to take on those targets’ states (Dijksterhuis & Bargh, 2001; Preston & de Waal, 2002). 
Perception-experience coupling is a centuries-old idea in philosophy (Smith, 1790/2002), and 
more recently has been supported by observations that perceivers indeed take on the postures 
(Chartrand & Bargh, 1999), facial expressions (Dimberg, Thunberg, & Elmehed, 2000), autonomic 
arousal (Vaughan & Lanzetta, 1980), and moods (Neumann & Strack, 2000) that they observe in 
others. In many ways, the idea of experience sharing follows from the more general theory of 
 embodied cognition , which posits that concepts related to physical states (including, presumably, 
those of other people) are processed through sensory and motor representations (Barsalou, 2008; 
Decety, 1996; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Alpert, 1997; Niedenthal, Barsalou, Ric, & Krauth-Gruber, 
2005; Zaki, Davis, & Ochsner, 2012). 

NEURAL SOURCES OF EMPATHY: AN EVOLVING STORY 
216
 Over the last 20 years, neuroscientists have characterized several regions of the human brain 
that exhibit a property consistent with experience sharing, which we will refer to as  neural reso-
nance . These regions respond to both perceivers’ experience of a state and to their observation 
of targets experiencing that same state. As it turns out, neural resonance is widespread, and its 
localization depends on the type of internal state perceivers experience or observe. For exam-
ple, perceivers engage the putative “mirror neuron system,” encompassing premotor, inferior 
frontal, and inferior parietal cortex (Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004), both when executing and 
observing motor acts. When experiencing and observing non-painful touch, perceivers engage 
somatosensory cortex (Keysers, Kaas, & Gazzola, 2010; Keysers, Wicker, Gazzola, Anton, Fogassi, 
& Gallese, 2004). When experiencing pain and observing targets in pain, perceivers also engage 
somatosensory cortex (Avenanti, Bueti, Galati, & Aglioti, 2005), but additionally recruit activity 
in regions related to the interoceptive and affective components of pain, including the ante-
rior insula and anterior cingulate cortex (Jackson, Meltzoff, & Decety, 2005; Morrison, Lloyd, 
di Pellegrino, & Roberts, 2004; Ochsner, Zaki, Hanelin, Ludlow, Knierim, Ramachandran, et 
al., 2008; Singer, Seymour, O’Doherty, Kaube, Dolan, & Frith, 2004). Newer data suggest that 
even the hippocampus and posterior medial frontal cortex exhibit resonant properties during 
action imitation (Mukamel, Ekstrom, Kaplan, Iacoboni, & Fried, 2010). Hereafter, we will refer 
to brain regions that exhibit neural resonance as the  experience sharing system  ( ESS) , with the 
understanding that this is a loose, functional deﬁ nition, and not one based on cytoarchitectonic 
properties or connectivity. 
 Regardless of the speciﬁ c states being observed and experienced, neural resonance has generated 
a great deal of excitement, for at least two reasons. First, resonance has been put forward as the 
likely neural basis of shared representations. Second, resonance often has been nominated as the 
primary driver of empathy (Gallese & Goldman, 1998; Gallese, Keysers, & Rizzolatti, 2004). 
 The ﬁ rst of these claims is plausible and well supported. Neural resonance is highly consistent 
(Keysers & Gazzola, 2009; Rizzolatti & Sinigaglia, 2010) across studies and can be modulated by 
the same factors that modulate experience sharing, such as social context and perceiver motiva-
tions (Singer, Seymour, O’Doherty, Stephan, Dolan, & Frith, 2006; Xu, Zuo, Wang, & Han, 2009). 
Furthermore, one criticism often leveled at work on the ESS is that voxels represent relatively 
large patches of neural “real estate,” and as such it is difﬁ cult to know whether neural resonance 
ﬁ ndings actually reﬂ ect overlapping activation in cellular populations or the activation of distinct 
populations that co-exist within single voxels. One extant study has addressed this concern by 
using multivariate techniques that hone in on multi-voxel patterns of activation while perceiv-
ers experienced pain and observed targets in pain. This relatively sensitive measure replicated the 
main ﬁ nding of neural resonance across the two conditions (Corradi-Dell’acqua, Hofstetter, & 
Vuilleumier, 2011). 
 The second of these claims—that neural resonance is the primary mediator of empathy—is 
much less well supported. This is because virtually all studies of neural resonance focus on obser-
vation and experience of relatively “low-level” states that include strong sensorimotor and visceral 
components, such as pain, disgust, motor intentions, and facial expressions. However, empathy 
involves sharing not only such low-level states with targets, but also sharing “higher level” affective 
states and understanding the sources of those states. Critically, high level states are often irreduc-
ible to lower level visceral or sensorimotor states; for example, the identical motor program of 
pushing someone could be employed for the very different high level purposes of starting a ﬁ ght 
or saving someone from an oncoming bus (Jacob & Jeannerod, 2005). Furthermore, there are 
many instances in which a target’s state diverges from that of a perceiver (e.g. when a target falsely 
believes something that a perceiver does not or is trying to hide or control expression of their true 

ISOLATED SYSTEMS AS A RED HERRING
217
feelings); in these cases, assuming one’s own internal states are shared by a target can hinder inter-
personal understanding (Epley, Keysar, Van Boven, & Gilovich, 2004; Gilovich et al., 2000). 
 Mental state attribution 
 Errors arising from imputing one’s own internal states onto others, in fact, spurred early research 
in a very different tradition: the study of so-called “theory of mind.” Since Premack & Woodruff’s 
(1978) pioneering work with chimpanzees, scientists have studied the ability of humans (and some 
other animals) to ascribe unique mental states to others, and to utilize inferences about mental 
states during social interactions (an ability we will refer to as  mental state attribution ). Mental state 
attribution, in various forms, has been a major topic of research for decades, with special attention 
being paid to its developmental trajectory (Flavell, 1999), and its breakdown in autism spectrum 
disorders (Baron-Cohen, Leslie, & Frith, 1985). 
 Cognitive neuroscience research on mental state attribution over the last 15 years has borrowed 
a number of paradigms from these developmental and clinical traditions, usually asking perceiv-
ers to draw inferences about the beliefs, knowledge, intentions, and emotions of others based on 
written vignettes, pictures, or cartoons. Related work has adapted social psychological paradigms 
on person perception by asking perceivers to judge the stable traits (as opposed to transient states) 
of themselves and of targets. Regardless of the type of judgment being made about others or the 
medium in which target cues are presented, such tasks produce a strikingly consistent pattern of 
activation in a network that includes medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), temporoparietal junction 
(TPJ), posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), and temporal poles. As with the ESS, we will refer to this 
set of regions as the mental state attribution system (MSAS), understanding that this categorization 
is loose and functional (for more descriptions of the MSAS and its functions, see Baron-Cohen, 
Ring, Wheelwright, Bullmore, Brammer, & Simmons, 1999; Castelli, Frith, Happ é , & Frith, 2002; 
Fletcher, Happe, Frith, Baker, Dolan, Frackowiak, et al., 1995; Goel, Grafman, Sadato, & Hallett, 
1995; Mitchell, 2009a; Mitchell, Heatherton, & Macrae, 2002; Ochsner, Knierim, Ludlow, Hanelin, 
Ramachandran, Glover, et al., 2004; Olsson & Ochsner, 2008; Peelen, Atkinson, & Vuilleumier, 
2010; Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003). The speciﬁ c roles of these cortical regions are, it seems, not limited 
to MSA-related computations. For example, the TPJ is likely related to orienting attention based 
on exogenous cues (Corbetta, Patel, & Shulman, 2008; Mitchell, 2008), the PCC’s position as a 
convergence point for both sensory and motor information may support a role in assessing the 
salience of social stimuli (Vogt, Vogt, & Laureys, 2006), and the mPFC is often engaged by mak-
ing non-social decisions under conditions of uncertainty (Daw, O’Doherty, Dayan, Seymour, & 
Dolan, 2006). Overall, the MSAS likely supports a suite of sub-processes that underlie a broader 
ability to “project” one’s self into distal scenarios or points of view (including the past, future, and 
uncertain or counterfactual concepts, as well as targets’ non-observable mental states; see Buckner, 
Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008; Mitchell, 2009b; Spreng, Mar, & Kim, 2009). 
 Isolated systems as a red herring  
 At ﬁ rst blush, it may seem that experience sharing and mental state attribution should be functional 
cousins, intimately linked as processes that support the broader construct of empathy. A close look 
reveals that—at least at the level of the brain—there is a striking lack of family resemblance, how-
ever. As readers may have noticed, the brain regions making up the ESS and the MSAS are almost 
completely non-overlapping (Figure 13.1). This dissociation holds up under meta-analytic scru-
tiny: studies engaging one system rarely concurrently engage the other (van Overwalle & Baetens, 
2009). Even within individual studies, the types of cues typically engaging one system often do not 

NEURAL SOURCES OF EMPATHY: AN EVOLVING STORY 
218
engage the other. Speciﬁ cally, the ESS is often responsive to  sensorimotor cues (e.g. facial expres-
sions of emotion) that suggest internal states, whereas the MSAS is more responsive to  contextual 
cues that describe the likely sources of those states (Gobbini, Koralek, Bryan, Montgomery, & 
Haxby, 2007; Wheatley, Milleville, & Martin, 2007; Zaki, in press). 
 Furthermore, the ESS and MSAS sometimes “compete” for control over behavior. For example, 
perceivers asked  not to imitate the movements of targets attenuate activity in the mirror neuron 
system, but increase activity in the mPFC and TPJ (Brass, Ruby, & Spengler, 2009). Similarly, when 
sensorimotor and contextual cues about a target’s emotion conﬂ ict (imagine, for instance, seeing 
someone crying, but understanding that he has just won an Olympic gold medal), perceivers’ can 
rely on either type of cue in judging what they believe a target truly feels (Aviezer, Hassin, Ryan, 
Grady, Susskind, Anderson, et al., 2008; Carroll & Russell, 1996). Recently, we found that, in such 
situations, reliance on sensorimotor cues engaged activity in the ESS and dampened activity in 
the MSAS, whereas reliance on contextual cues produced the opposite pattern of activity (Zaki, 
Hennigan, Weber, & Ochsner, 2010). 
 Thus, the ability to empathically connect with and understand another person seems to frac-
tionate into two disparate social “information processing streams,” supported by two dissociable 
neural systems. Yet ostensibly, both of these processes and neural systems serve the same ends: 
understanding and sharing targets’ internal states. If this is true, then what speciﬁ c role does each 
system play in supporting empathy more broadly? Typically, reviews of this literature hold that 
these processes provide relatively independent contributions to empathy (Decety & Jackson, 2004; 
Shamay-Tsoory, 2010; Singer, 2006). Others suggest avenues through which these processes could 
interact with each other (Keysers & Gazzola, 2007; Uddin, Iacoboni, Lange, & Keenan, 2007). 
 However, until recently it was difﬁ cult to answer questions about whether and how multiple 
neural systems combine to support empathy, because empathy—as a multi-component phenom-
ena—was rarely studied in neuroscience. Instead, as the review of extant data above suggests, the 
“ﬁ rst stage” of empathy research focused on characterizing single processes by engaging them in 
relative phenomenological isolation through the use of highly controlled unimodal, static, and 
artiﬁ cial social cues and tasks (e.g. viewing pictures of actors posing a canonical emotional expres-
sion, imitating isolated target movements, or answering questions about vignettes describing 
MPFC
ACC
PCC
Precuneus
PMC
TP
pSTS
IPL
TPJ
AI
 Figure 13.1  Brain regions comprising the ESS (light gray) and MSAS (dark gray). IPL = inferior parietal 
lobule; TPJ = temporoparietal junction; pSTS = posterior superior temporal sulcus; TP = temporal pole; 
AI = anterior insula; PMC = premotor cortex; PCC = posterior cingulate cortex; ACC = anterior 
 cingulate cortex; mPFC = medial prefrontal cortex.  

ISOLATED SYSTEMS AS A RED HERRING
219
mental states). The reasons for beginning with such paradigms were powerful; so little was known 
about the neural bases of empathy that maximal experimental control was critical to gaining any 
insights about its constituent processes. Indeed, the control offered by simpliﬁ ed social paradigms 
was foundational in allowing scientists to build a functional architecture of empathy’s building 
blocks. 
 This approach, however, also had the side effect of stacking the deck in favor of a viewing empa-
thy’s sub-processes as isolated. This is because the tasks and stimuli used to study the ESS and 
MSAS were typically designed to engage these processes in isolation. For example, when viewing 
a context-free picture of an emotional facial expression, perceivers have access only to sensorimo-
tor cues, and as such are likely to draw heavily on experience sharing, especially because studies of 
the ESS rarely require perceivers to draw explicit inferences about target states. On the other hand, 
studies of mentalizing ask perceivers to draw just such inferences, based on heavily contextualized 
stimuli (e.g. vignettes describing the sources of targets’ false beliefs). In other words, studies of the 
ESS and MSAS often employ tasks and stimuli that are “optimized” to each system and its relevant 
cognitive process. As such, it is unsurprising that perceivers respond by deploying the system called 
on by the experimental setting, in a manner consistent with modular separation between experi-
ence sharing and mental state attribution. 
 These differences between tasks suggest that the historical division between studies of the ESS 
and MSAS is both helpful and unhelpful to understanding empathy. On the one hand, it is use-
ful to the extent that a careful approach to exploring the speciﬁ c contexts in which each system 
is engaged can provide useful model of when and how social cues will trigger different forms of 
information processing. On the other hand, this approach is unhelpful if focusing on the ESS or 
MSAS in isolation leads to overly constrained theories of empathy (Zaki & Ochsner, 2012). Even 
worse, models that draw a bright line between experience sharing and mental state attribution 
may be overlooking a potentially central stimulus and task confound. As we will discuss below (see 
“Coactivation of ESS and MSAS”), the neural systems underlying these processes may be respon-
sive to speciﬁ c perceiver goals: for example, the ESS is engaged when perceivers attend to  how 
a target is expressing an emotion, whereas the MSAS is engaged by perceivers’ attention to  why 
targets feel the emotions they are expressing. Furthermore, differing classes of social stimuli likely 
draw perceiver attention naturally towards the “how” or “why” of targets’ actions and expressions, 
and these are typically the types of cues that studies of the ESS and MSAS have employed. Similarly, 
different tasks, e.g. imitating a targets’ facial expression vs. judging how a target likely feels based 
on that expression—orient perceivers towards different goals and engage different neural systems, 
even when based on nearly identical stimuli (Carr, Iacoboni, Dubeau, Mazziotta, & Lenzi, 2003; 
Mitchell et al., 2002). 
 “First stage” empathy research typically—though not always—divided programs of research 
along more than one of these dimensions. Studies of the ESS typically used low level sensorimotor 
cues and either passive viewing or imitation tasks, whereas studies of the MSAS often used more 
contextualized cues and drew perceivers’ attention towards explicit judgments of target states. Do 
the resulting ﬁ ndings necessarily mean that experience sharing and mental state attribution are 
isolated in natural contexts? It is quite difﬁ cult to answer this question, because we do not know 
whether differences in neural activity in studies of the ESS and MSAS reﬂ ect stimulus type, task, or 
perceiver attentional set, as opposed to true distinctions between information processing streams. 
 Critical here is the fact that the social cues perceivers encounter outside the laboratory are often 
substantially different than those employed by the lion’s share of extant research. Speciﬁ cally, 
“real-world” social cues are typically dynamic (unfolding over time), multimodal (including 
concurrent sensorimotor and contextual information), and contextually embedded (such that 

NEURAL SOURCES OF EMPATHY: AN EVOLVING STORY 
220
interpretations of any one cue are often altered or constrained by other cues or a perceiver’s prior 
knowledge; see Keysers & Gazzola, 2007; Zaki & Ochsner, 2009). The gulf separating laboratory 
and naturalistic social cues would not be problematic if these cues produced the same patterns of 
brain activity, and only differed in, for example, the intensity of this activity (i.e. differing  quantita-
tively ). However, early evidence suggests this is not the case. Indeed, naturalistic social information 
seems to produce patterns of information processing and brain activity that differ  qualitatively  
from those produced by simpliﬁ ed cues like those used in typical social cognitive neuroscience 
studies, including engaging both the ESS and MSAS, and producing interactions between these 
systems. 
 This is important, in part, because it is under-acknowledged in much of the neuroscience litera-
ture on empathy. Resulting theoretical models, in turn, may over-emphasize the ability to under-
stand empathy as a whole based on tasks examining isolate pieces of typical social experiences. By 
way of analogy, this may be something like drawing inferences about the way that the brain processes 
the sound of an orchestra based on data describing how the brain processes the sound of each indi-
vidual instrument, ignoring the unique types of information (e.g. harmonies across instruments) 
that emerge at the orchestral level in the real world stimulus of interest (Zaki, under revision). 
 Theories emphasizing the dissociability of the MSAS and ESS run the risk of either missing or 
glossing over this complexity, and as a consequence, formulating models of empathy that rest too 
heavily on single processes. For example, two competing and well-known theories have claimed 
that interpersonal cognition can be largely localized to  either the ESS  or MSAS (Gallese et al., 
2004; Saxe, 2005). The resulting debate, while provocative, is probably misguided, because each 
side bases its argument on evidence derived from studies examining only one piece of the larger 
social puzzle. 
 Putting the pieces together  
 So far, we have chronicled the work researchers have done in characterizing the neural bases of two 
empathic sub-processes—experience sharing and mental state attribution—and described some 
conceptual limitations that hinder the ability of descriptions of single social cognitive “pieces” to 
translate into descriptions of empathy as it likely operates in more ecologically valid contexts (cf. 
Neisser, 1980). 
 This second point is not meant to discredit work on single social cognitive processes. Quite the 
opposite—such research is not only important, but also constitutes the only reasonable starting 
point for building a neuroscience of empathy. That said, we (Zaki, in press; Zaki & Ochsner, 2009) 
and others (e.g. Keysers & Gazzola, 2007) have advocated for following this research with a “second 
stage” of work focusing not on single processes in isolation, but on how perceivers put these pieces 
together, by deploying multiple, interactive empathic processes when encountering complex social 
cues. 
 Luckily, this second stage is well underway. Largely in the last 3 years, researchers have updated 
their approach to examine the brain’s response to just the type of complex social information we 
have described above. This work capitalizes on ﬁ rst stage characterizations of the ESS and MSAS to 
study how these systems respond when pieces of social information (e.g. dynamic biological move-
ment and linguistic cues about beliefs or emotions) are joined to form a coherent whole. 
 This work has produced a sea change in the way neuroscientists view empathy. Instead of con-
ceiving of experience sharing and mental state attribution as isolated social cognitive processing 
streams, we now have a picture of these processes as intimately tied in at least 3 ways: As reviewed 
below (1) the ESS and MSAS are concurrently engaged by naturalistic social cues, (2) these neural 

PUTTING THE PIECES TOGETHER
221
systems become functionally coupled with each other during complex social cognitive tasks, and 
(3) activation of both of these systems predict empathy-related outcomes, including accuracy 
about targets’ internal states and perceivers’ motivation to engage in prosocial behavior towards 
targets. 
 Coactivation of the ESS and MSAS 
 Early data led to the suggestion that the ESS and MSAS were fundamentally dissociable, but—as 
mentioned above—this was based on stimuli and paradigms designed to isolate single social cog-
nitive processes. Outside the laboratory, social targets more often than not present us with a bar-
rage of multimodal social cues that unfold over time (e.g. a friend looks uncomfortable, then 
reveals that she has just lost her job, and then leans forward and begins crying). Such cues tap all 
of our social capacities simultaneously and demand that we integrate over many social signals in 
forming a coherent representation of targets’ internal states. Intuitively, we might expect that such 
demands would engage multiple social cognitive processes and neural systems. 
 Consistent with this, several studies combining complex, dynamic social stimuli with the require-
ment for explicit inferences about targets’ states (requirements often present in typical social inter-
actions) have consistently demonstrated concurrent engagement of both areas within the ESS 
and MSAS. In many cases, these studies also help to reveal the speciﬁ c contextual triggers that 
produce such coactivation. For example, watching videos of targets executing motor acts engages 
areas within the ESS involved in sharing motor intentions; if these videos are further paired with 
demands to draw explicit inferences about targets’ intentions—or situational cues drawing atten-
tion to targets’ likely intentions—they also engage areas in the MSAS (de Lange, Spronk, Willems, 
Toni, & Bekkering, 2008; Spunt, Satpute, & Lieberman, 2010; Wheatley et al., 2007). Similarly, 
engaging in a joint attention task with a target engages regions within both of these neural sys-
tems (Redcay, Dodell-Feder, Pearrow, Mavros, Kleiner, Gabrieli, et al., 2010). Together, these data 
suggest that areas within the ESS may engaged relatively automatically by dynamic social stimuli 
(e.g. moving social targets), but that requirements to further digest the internal states implied by 
targets’ movements brings the MSAS online as well (Spunt & Lieberman, 2011). 
 These patterns of coactivation translate to emotion perception as well. For example, when per-
ceivers view videos of targets expressing emotions, they typically engage both areas within the ESS 
and MSAS (Wolf, Dziobek, & Heekeren, 2010; Zaki, Weber, Bolger, & Ochsner, 2009). Furthermore, 
the system that comes online most strongly under such circumstances may depend on perceivers’ 
inferential goals. A recent study elegantly demonstrated this point: when attending to the way tar-
gets  express their emotions (e.g. through laughing), perceivers prominently engaged the ESS—and 
especially regions involved in sharing motor intentions—whereas attending to the  sources of tar-
get emotions (e.g. hearing a good joke), perceivers most strongly engaged the MSAS (Spunt & 
Lieberman, 2013). Such ﬁ ndings not only provide us with a more holistic picture of coactivation 
in these systems, but also reﬁ ne our understanding of the speciﬁ c social sensitivities exhibited by 
these neural systems. 
 These data make an important point about how theories of empathy should discuss prior data. 
That is, the fact that the ESS and MSAS can be dissociated using simpliﬁ ed stimuli and tasks does 
not necessitate, or even imply, that those systems are dissociable in the majority of social contexts. 
In fact, studies employing naturalistic methods suggest that the demands of most social situations 
would engage these systems—and the processes they underlie—simultaneously. This probability 
motivates a shift away from an “either / or” argument about whether the MSAS or ESS is central to 
empathy, and towards a “when and how” approach to better discriminating the situations likely to 
engage one or both systems. 

NEURAL SOURCES OF EMPATHY: AN EVOLVING STORY 
222
 Functional coupling between systems 
 In addition to being engaged together, a parsimonious account of empathy might posit that 
processes such as experience sharing and mental state attribution should intricately interact 
during naturalistic social cognition. For example, understanding the sources behind a target’s 
likely internal states (e.g. that he has just won a gold medal) could cause perceivers to vastly 
reinterpret that target’s sensorimotor cues (e.g. crying). Presumably, this efﬁ cient use of multi-
ple pieces of social information could be instantiated through communication between the ESS 
and MSAS. 
 Consistent with this approach, a number of studies have documented functional coupling 
between the ESS and MSAS during social cognitive tasks. For example, classic work on neu-
ral resonance demonstrates that areas within the “pain matrix” (especially the anterior insula 
and anterior cingulate cortex) are engaged both when targets experience pain themselves and 
when they observe targets in pain (Singer et al., 2004). However, this does not mean that these 
regions are performing identical computations during both pain perception and experience. 
On the contrary, the interpretation of a single region’s activity depends on the other regions 
with which that region communicates during a given task. Our own group has examined this 
idea within the context of empathy for pain. We found that the ACC and AI were engaged 
during both experience and observation of pain (Ochsner et al., 2008), but that these regions 
demonstrated very different patterns of connectivity across these tasks: during observation, 
but not experience, ACC and AI became functionally coupled with areas within the MSAS 
(Zaki, Ochsner, Hanelin, Wager, & Mackey, 2007). Similar connectivity patterns also apply to 
the experience and observation of disgust (Jabbi, Bastiaansen, & Keysers, 2008). Together, these 
data suggest that, during experience sharing tasks, neural resonance—shared activity for self 
and other experience—may depend on communication with regions involved in mental state 
attribution. 
 Other studies have tested the other side of this equation: examining the connectivity of areas 
in the MSAS during an explicit social inference task. For example, Lombardo, Chakrabarti, 
Bullmore, Wheelwright, Sadek, Suckling, et al. (2010) asked perceivers to draw inferences about 
their own preferences and those of targets. Both of these conditions engaged many regions clas-
sically making up the MSAS, including the mPFC, PCC, and TPJ. Interestingly, during both types 
of inference, the mPFC and TPJ were also functionally connected with many regions in the ESS, 
regardless of whether participants answered questions about themselves or social targets. This 
suggests that even relatively simple inferences about targets may require communication between 
regions involved in drawing such inferences and regions involved in sharing of intention and 
affect with targets. 
 Connectivity can also be studied  across perceivers and targets. For example, Schippers, Roebroeck, 
Renken, Nanetti, & Keysers (2010) asked targets to manually pantomime simple actions ( à  la cha-
rades ) while being scanned using fMRI; perceivers were later scanned while guessing what gestur-
ers were attempting to communicate. Using an innovative analysis, the researchers demonstrated 
that activity in  targets’ motor cortex while they executed a gesture predicted activity in  perceivers’ 
motor cortex while they perceived those gestures. Interestingly, however, targets’ motor activation 
also predicted activity within perceivers’ MSAS—speciﬁ cally the mPFC—suggesting that perceiv-
ers process targets’ intentions using both the ESS and MSAS. Further, communication between the 
mPFC and areas within the ESS are modulated by perceivers’ intentions to actively guess what tar-
gets are pantomiming vs. passively viewing target actions (Schippers & Keysers, 2011), again sug-
gesting that situational and motivational context critically affect the interplay between empathic 
sub-processes. 

PUTTING THE PIECES TOGETHER
223
 Predicting social cognitive outcomes 
 When mapping the neural architecture of any complex cognitive process, a key concern is that 
brain activity in a given region does not actually index the computational process a researcher is 
interested in. Empathy is not excepted from this issue, and based in imaging data alone, it is dif-
ﬁ cult to know exactly what engagement of, for example, ESS regions during a shared experience 
task actually means psychologically. 
 This has been especially problematic because of the distance that has historically separated psy-
chological and neuroscientiﬁ c approaches to empathy. Social psychological approaches—perhaps 
not surprisingly—lean heavily on behavior to indicate the operation of empathic processes. For 
example, perceivers’ accuracy for targets’ internal states can serve as an indicator of how much 
perceivers engage both mentalizing and experience sharing (Ickes, 1997; Levenson & Ruef, 1992; 
Tetlock & Kim, 1987), whereas stereotyping or derogation of targets can index the absence of these 
processes (Devine, 1989; Harris & Fiske, 2007). Similarly, perceivers’ choices to engage in prosocial 
behavior can serve as an index of their concern for targets’ well being (Batson, 2011). 
 By contrast, neuroimaging studies of empathy—especially during the “ﬁ rst stage”—concentrated 
far less on behavioral outcomes, and more on relationships between stimuli and brain activity. For 
example, perceivers might be scanned while observing targets in pain or making guesses about 
targets’ intentions, and related brain activity would be interpreted as relevant to the empathic 
sub-process that task putatively engages. In almost all cases, these paradigms do not produce vari-
ance in behavior, either because they required no responses from perceivers (as in many passive 
experience sharing tasks) or employed very simple social inference tasks that produce near perfect 
accuracy. 
 This precluded neuroimaging studies of empathy from mapping brain activity directly on to 
behavior, reducing the ability of researchers to draw maximally strong inferences about neu-
roimaging results. For example, although the ESS is engaged during observation of pain, in the 
absence of brain-behavior relationships, it is difﬁ cult to know whether this activation actually 
tracks with experience sharing, or instead tracks concurrent, but less interesting, processing step 
(e.g. remembering one’s own painful experiences, desire to escape the discomfort of observing suf-
fering, a perceiver’s attempt to distract himself from viewing the unpleasant stimulus). Individual 
difference correlations (Jabbi, Swart, & Keysers, 2007) and lesion studies (Shamay-Tsoory, 
Aharon-Peretz, & Perry, 2009) provide a partial remedy to this concern, but cannot replace the 
utility of brain-behavior links. 
 Other domains within cognitive neuroscience have fruitfully studied brain-behavior correlations. 
Notably, memory researchers used the  subsequent memory  paradigm to link encoding-related 
activation in the medial temporal lobe and inferior frontal cortex to successful retrieval of mem-
oranda (Brewer, Zhao, Desmond, Glover, & Gabrieli, 1998; Wagner, Schacter, Rotte, Koutstaal, 
Maril, Dale, et al., 1998). The “second stage” of empathy research has picked up this trend, by 
relating activity in the MSAS and ESS to subsequent social behaviors, including accuracy for social 
information and subsequent prosocial behavior. 
 With respect to accuracy, early work “piggybacked” on the original subsequent memory par-
adigm to examine whether and how brain activity would predict accurate recall for social—as 
opposed to non-social—information. A spate of studies demonstrated that MSAS activity when 
perceivers encounter socially relevant stimuli (e.g. trait adjectives) predicted successful retrieval 
of this information, but only when perceivers were drawing social inferences about those stimuli 
(e.g. how much an adjective described a social target, as opposed to how many vowels it contained) 
(Hasson, Furman, Clark, Dudai, & Davachi, 2008; Macrae, Moran, Heatherton, Banﬁ eld, & Kelley, 
2004; Mitchell, Macrae, & Banaji, 2004). A later study took this approach into a more naturalistic 

NEURAL SOURCES OF EMPATHY: AN EVOLVING STORY 
224
context, demonstrating that reliable patterns of activity within both MSAS and ESS areas pre-
dicted the accuracy with which perceivers recall targets’ descriptions of autobiographical events 
(Stephens, Silbert, & Hasson, 2010). 
 Our group has examined brain-behavior correlations in the affective domain, by studying the 
neural correlates of accurate inferences about targets’ emotions based on naturalistic social cues 
(Ickes, 1997; Levenson & Ruef, 1992; Zaki, Bolger, & Ochsner, 2008; Zaki & Ochsner, 2011). In 
our studies, perceivers watch videos of targets describing emotional events, and continuously rate 
how positive or negative they believed targets feel. Importantly, targets themselves had previously 
rated their emotions at each moment using the same scale perceivers employed. This allows us to 
quantitatively operationalize interpersonal accuracy as the correlation between perceivers’ ratings 
of targets emotions and targets’ self-ratings. Using this approach, we have demonstrated that accu-
racy is predicted by activity in regions in both the MSAS and ESS (Harvey, Zaki, Lee, Ochsner, & 
Green, in press; Zaki et al., 2009). 
 Finally, a small set of studies has examined brain activity related to the use of mental state infor-
mation during game theoretic decision-making. Although not measuring accuracy  per se , these 
tasks offer the attractive possibility of formally modeling the use of mental states in interpersonal 
strategizing. For example, in both the “work / shirk” and “beauty contest” games, perceivers’ must 
strategically infer what others will think in order to maximize their own gains. In both of these 
games, perceivers level of social inference (e.g. how much their decisions reﬂ ect thinking about 
others’ minds) can be quantiﬁ ed; and, in both cases, activity in the MSAS—and speciﬁ cally the 
mPFC—tracks with this measure (Coricelli & Nagel, 2009; Hampton, Bossaerts, & O’Doherty, 
2008). This strengthens the inference that the MSAS directly tracks with the insightful, task-related 
use of others’ mental states during social interactions. 
 A second growing literature has focused on brain-behavior correlations in another domain: 
using brain activity to predict prosocial behaviors such as sharing resources and helping social 
targets. The motives behind prosocial behavior have been the topic of a high proﬁ le debate among 
social psychologists. Interestingly, this debate can be recast along the dimensions of experience 
sharing and mental state attribution: whereas Cialdini and colleagues (Cialdini, Brown, Lewis, 
Luce, & Neuberg 1997; Cialdini, Schaller, Houlihan, Arps, Fultz, & Beaman, 1987) suggested that 
prosocial behavior stemmed from a sense of “oneness” or overlapping identity with targets (akin 
to experience sharing), Batson and colleagues (Bateson, 1991, 2011; Bateson et al., 1991) countered 
that a speciﬁ c form of other oriented cognition (akin to mental state attribution) was the stronger 
driver of prosocial behavior. 
 Which one of these mechanisms supports prosociality? Neuroscience can provide converging 
evidence through which this question can be addressed, by examining the extent to which activity 
in the MSAS and ESS predicts later prosocial acts. Like so many features of second stage neuro-
science work on empathy, the emerging answer seems to be that both systems are involved, in a 
context-dependent manner. For example, ESS activity consistent with perceivers’ sharing of tar-
gets’ pain (Hein, Silani, Preuschoff, Batson, & Singer, 2010; Masten, Morelli, & Eisenberger, 2011) 
and reward (Harbaugh, Mayr, & Burghart, 2007; Zaki, Lopez, & Mitchell, 2013; Zaki & Mitchell, 
2011) predicts perceivers’ willingness to make costly decisions that help those targets. In other 
cases, activity in the MSAS (especially the mPFC) when perceivers consider targets’ internal states 
predicts their later willingness to act prosocially (Morelli, Rameson, & Lieberman, 2012; Waytz, 
Zaki, & Mitchell, 2012). 
 The speciﬁ c contextual factors that determine when activity in the MSAS or ESS will best pre-
dict prosocial behavior remain relatively unexplored. Future work should address this issue, and 
examine whether prosocial behavior prompted by experience sharing and mental state attribution, 

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
225
respectively, differ in their subjective or behavioral features. Nonetheless, the small, but growing 
literature on this topic clearly provides evidence consistent with both sides of the psychological 
debate: under at least some conditions, it seems that both of these processes can drive prosocial 
motivations. 
 Conclusions and future directions  
 For all of our impressive mental ﬁ repower, most humans (including both authors of this chapter) 
would not last a week alone in the wild. But put us together in a group, and we can survive just 
about anything. Why? In simple terms, it is because we are built for other people, in more ways than 
one. Behaviorally, our species has thrived on coordinated interpersonal actions. Psychologically, 
we are equipped with myriad affective and cognitive mechanisms perfectly suited to understand-
ing and relating to other minds. Empathy and all of its components are foundational to who we are 
and why we succeed as a species. 
 Although empathy has been a perennial topic among philosophers, the neuroscience of empa-
thy is in its teenage years. Given its immaturity, the rapid evolution of this domain of research is 
especially impressive. Here we have chronicled two of these evolutionary “stages.” In the ﬁ rst stage, 
researchers characterized the neural systems supporting two major empathic sub-processes: the 
ESS, which is involved in sharing targets’ sensorimotor and visceral states, and the MSAS, which is 
involved in perceivers’ explicit inferences about targets’ states. 
 This work was hugely important in building a functional architecture of empathy. However, it 
was also hamstrung by two important problems. First, in mapping the neural bases of empathic 
sub-processes, researchers necessarily began by using highly simpliﬁ ed non-naturalistic social 
cues, and this sometimes led to overly constrained models of empathy as comprising a number of 
“pieces” that operated in relative isolation. Secondly, ﬁ rst stage empathy research in neuroscience 
rarely related brain activity to observable social behaviors, making it difﬁ cult to draw direct con-
clusions about the functional role of the ESS and MSAS. 
 The “second stage” of this program has begun to remedy these issues. Critically, however, it 
has not overwritten the ﬁ rst stage, but rather built on the important insights of earlier work. 
Speciﬁ cally, it has capitalized on ﬁ rst-stage descriptions of the ESS and MSAS to further demon-
strate (1) that these systems are concurrently engaged by naturalistic, multimodal social cues, (2) 
that they interact with each other when processing such stimuli, and (3) that their engagement 
can predict subsequent social-behavioral outcomes such understanding targets’ internal states and 
motivations to help targets. This work provides an integrative view of empathy as tapping multi-
ple, functionally connected sets of brain regions to translate complex social cues into inferences 
about others’ internal states. Further, second stage research has highlighted the context-dependent 
nature of empathy: depending on situational features, the same social cues can engage very differ-
ent patterns of activity across the ESS and MSAS, and the activity of these systems can differentially 
predict subsequent social behaviors (cf. Hein & Singer, 2008). Overall, the second stage of empathy 
research has reﬁ ned and integrated models of isolated empathic sub-processes into more holistic 
accounts of an integrated “system” of processes that perceivers deploy ﬂ exibly based on current 
social goals and information. 
 This summary begs the question of what a “third stage” of neuroscience research on empathy 
might bring. Although this is difﬁ cult (if not impossible) to predict, the insights garnered by the 
ﬁ rst two stages of work suggest some exciting possibilities, two of which we will mention here. 
First, extant work has yet to capture—in any meaningful way—a central feature of social encoun-
ters: the fact that perceivers themselves are also usually targets, and visa-versa. Unless they are 

NEURAL SOURCES OF EMPATHY: AN EVOLVING STORY 
226
watching television, perceivers rarely observe targets without themselves being observed. As such, 
much of perceivers’ ongoing social cognitive labor entails iteratively sampling their effect on tar-
gets (wondering, e.g. “Does she know I’m paying attention? How is what I’m saying now affecting 
him?”), and adjusting their behavior accordingly (Neisser, 1980; Schilbach, 2010). Future work 
should examine whether these unique features of social interactions are subserved by the same 
networks of brain regions that are involved in observing non-interactive targets, or whether extant 
work may have yet to chart the neural bases of some critical features of everyday empathy. 
 A second exciting avenue for suture work lies in the use of quantitative models to formally 
describe the role of neural systems in producing social behavior. First and second stage research 
on empathy have equipped us with reliable insights about the neural signatures of processes such 
as mental state attribution, and we can now use these signatures to directly model the relation-
ship between these processes and “downstream” inferences, decisions, and behaviors. This type 
of advance also has the potential to increase our understanding of potential parallels between 
social cognition and other domains, such as perceptual decision-making (Freeman, Schiller, 
Rule, & Ambady, 2010; Zaki, in press) and reinforcement learning (Behrens, Hunt, Woolrich, & 
Rushworth, 2008; Jones, Somerville, Li, Ruberry, Libby, Glover, et al., 2011). 
 The neuroscience of empathy has evolved fruitfully by consistently building on prior work to 
reﬁ ne and improve the questions and models this ﬁ eld produces. So long as this trajectory con-
tinues, this ﬁ eld will continue growing at an amazing pace, and producing fundamental insights 
about the nature of our critical social abilities. 
 References 
 Ames, D. R. (2004).  Inside the mind reader’s tool kit: projection and stereotyping in mental state inference . 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  87 (3):  340–53 . 
 Avenanti, A., Bueti, D., Galati, G., & Aglioti, S. M. (2005).  Transcranial magnetic stimulation highlights 
the sensorimotor side of empathy for pain .  Nature Neuroscience  8 (7):  955–60 . 
 Aviezer, H., Hassin, R. R., Ryan, J., Grady, C., Susskind, J., Anderson, A., et al. (2008).  Angry, disgusted, 
or afraid? Studies on the malleability of emotion perception .  Psychology Science  19 (7):  724–32 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985).  Does the autistic child have a “theory of mind”? 
 Cognition  21 (1):  37–46 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Ring, H. A., Wheelwright, S., Bullmore, E. T., Brammer, M. J., Simmons, A., et al. 
(1999).  Social intelligence in the normal and autistic brain: an fMRI study .  European Journal of 
Neuroscience  11 (6):  1891–8 . 
 Barsalou, L. W. (2008).  Grounded cognition .  Annual Review of Psychology  59 :  617–45 . 
 Batson, C. D. (1991).  Th e Altruism Question: Toward A Social-psychological Answer : Hillsdale:  Lawrence 
Erlbaum . 
 Batson, C. D. (2011).  Altruism in Humans .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Batson, C. D., Batson, J. G., Slingsby, J. K., Harrell, K. L., Peekna, H. M., & Todd, R. M. (1991).  Empathic 
joy and the empathy-altruism hypothesis .  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  61 (3):  413–26 . 
 Behrens, T. E., Hunt, L. T., Woolrich, M. W., & Rushworth, M. F. (2008).  Associative learning of social 
value .  Nature  456 (7219):  245–9 . 
 Brass, M., Ruby, P., & Spengler, S. (2009).  Inhibition of imitative behaviour and social cognition . 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, B Biological Science  364 (1528):  2359–67 . 
 Brewer, J. B., Zhao, Z., Desmond, J. E., Glover, G. H., & Gabrieli, J. D. (1998).  Making memories: brain 
activity that predicts how well visual experience will be remembered .  Science  281 (5380):  1185–7 . 
 Brothers, L. (1997).  Friday’s Footprint: How Society Shapes the Human Mind .  New York :  Oxford University 
Press . 

227
 Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2008).  Th e brain’s default network: anatomy, 
function, and relevance to disease .  Annals of the New York Academy of Science  1124 :  1–38 . 
 Carr, L., Iacoboni, M., Dubeau, M. C., Mazziotta, J. C., & Lenzi, G. L. (2003).  Neural mechanisms of 
empathy in humans: a relay from neural systems for imitation to limbic areas .  Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences USA  100 (9):  5497–502 . 
 Carroll, J. M., & Russell, J. A. (1996).  Do facial expressions signal specifi c emotions? Judging emotion from 
the face in context .  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  70 (2):  205–18 . 
 Castelli, F., Frith, C., Happe, F., & Frith, U. (2002).  Autism, Asperger syndrome and brain mechanisms for 
the attribution of mental states to animated shapes .  Brain  125 (Pt 8):  1839–49 . 
 Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999).  Th e chameleon eff ect: the perception-behavior link and social 
interaction .  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  76 (6):  893–910 . 
 Chomsky, N. (1980).  Rules and Representations .  New York :  Columbia University Press . 
 Cialdini, R. B., Brown, S. L., Lewis, B. P., Luce, C., & Neuberg, S. L. (1997).  Reinterpreting the 
empathy-altruism relationship: when one into one equals oneness .  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology  73 (3):  481–94 . 
 Cialdini, R. B., Schaller, M., Houlihan, D., Arps, K., Fultz, J., & Beaman, A. L. (1987).  Empathy-based 
helping: is it selfl essly or selfi shly motivated?  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  52 (4):  749–58 . 
 Corbetta, M., Patel, G., & Shulman, G. L. (2008).  Th e reorienting system of the human brain: from 
environment to theory of mind .  Neuron  58 (3):  306–24 . 
 Coricelli, G., & Nagel, R. (2009).  Neural correlates of depth of strategic reasoning in medial prefrontal 
cortex .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA  106 (23):  9163–8 . 
 Corradi-Dell’acqua, C., Hofstetter, C., & Vuilleumier, P. (2011).  Felt and seen pain evoke the same local 
patterns of cortical activity in insular and cingulate cortex .  Journal of Neuroscience  31 (49):  17996–8006 . 
 Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2006).  Social learning and social cognition: Th e case for pedagogy . In Y. 
Munakata & M. Johnson (Eds),  Processes of Change in Brain and Cognitive Development. Attention and 
Performance, XXI (Vol.  249–274 ).  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Daw, N. D., O’Doherty, J. P., Dayan, P., Seymour, B., & Dolan, R. J. (2006).  Cortical substrates for 
exploratory decisions in humans .  Nature  441 (7095):  876–9 . 
 de Lange, F. P., Spronk, M., Willems, R. M., Toni, I., & Bekkering, H. (2008).  Complementary systems for 
understanding action intentions .  Current Biology  18 (6):  454–7 . 
 de Waal, F. B. (2008).  Putting the altruism back into altruism: the evolution of empathy .  Annual Review of 
Psychology  59 ,  279–300 . 
 Deacon, T. W. (1997).  Th e Symbolic Species: the Co-evolution of Language and the Brain, 1st edn.  New York : 
 W. W. Norton . 
 Decety, J. (1996).  Do imagined and executed actions share the same neural substrate?  Brain Research in 
Cognitive Brain Research  3 (2):  87–93 . 
 Decety, J., & Jackson, P. L. (2004).  Th e functional architecture of human empathy .  Behaviour and Cognitive 
Neuroscience Review  3 (2):  71–100 . 
 Devine, P. (1989).  Stereotypes and prejudice: Th eir automatic and controlled components .  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology  56 (1):  5–18 . 
 Dijksterhuis, A., & Bargh, J. (2001).  Th e perception-behavior Expressway: Automatic eff ects of social 
perception on social behavior .  Advances in Experimental Social Psychology  33 :  1–40 . 
 Dimberg, U., Th unberg, M., & Elmehed, K. (2000).  Unconscious facial reactions to emotional facial 
expressions .  Psychology Science  11 (1):  86–9 . 
 Epley, N., Keysar, B., Van Boven, L., & Gilovich, T. (2004).  Perspective taking as egocentric anchoring and 
adjustment .  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  87 (3):  327–39 . 
 Flavell, J. (1999).  Cognitive development: Children’s knowledge about other minds .  Annual Review 
Psychology  50 :  21–45 . 
REFERENCES

NEURAL SOURCES OF EMPATHY: AN EVOLVING STORY 
228
 Fletcher, P. C., Happe, F., Frith, U., Baker, S. C., Dolan, R. J., Frackowiak, R. S., et al. (1995).  Other minds 
in the brain: a functional imaging study of “theory of mind” in story comprehension .  Cognition  57 (2): 
 109–28 . 
 Flombaum, J. I., & Santos, L. R. (2005).  Rhesus monkeys attribute perceptions to others .  [Comparative 
Study Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural Research Support, Non-U. S .  Gov’t Research Support, U. S . 
 Gov’t, Non-P.H.S .  Research Support, U. S .  Gov’t, P.H.S.] .  Current Biology  15 (5):  447–52 . 
 Freeman, J. B., Schiller, D., Rule, N. O., & Ambady, N. (2010).  Th e neural origins of superfi cial and 
individuated judgments about ingroup and outgroup members .  Human Brain Mapping  31 (1):  150–9 . 
 Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998).  Mirror neurons and the simulation theory of mind-reading .  Trends in 
Cognitive Science  2 (12):  493–501 . 
 Gallese, V., Keysers, C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2004).  A unifying view of the basis of social cognition .  Trends in 
Cognitive Science  8 (9):  396–403 . 
 Gilovich, T., Medvec, V. H., & Savitsky, K. (2000).  Th e spotlight eff ect in social judgment: An egocentric 
bias in estimates of the salience of one’s own actions and appearance .  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology  78 :  211–22 . 
 Gobbini, M. I., Koralek, A. C., Bryan, R. E., Montgomery, K. J., & Haxby, J. V. (2007).  Two takes on the 
social brain: a comparison of theory of mind tasks .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  19 (11):  1803–14 . 
 Goel, V., Grafman, J., Sadato, N., & Hallett, M. (1995).  Modeling other minds .  Neuroreport  6 (13):  1741–6 . 
 Hamlin, J. K., Wynn, K., & Bloom, P. (2007).  Social evaluation by preverbal infants .  Nature  450 (7169): 
 557–9 . 
 Hampton, A. N., Bossaerts, P., & O’Doherty, J. P. (2008).  Neural correlates of mentalizing-related 
computations during strategic interactions in humans .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 
USA  105 (18):  6741–6 . 
 Harbaugh, W. T., Mayr, U., & Burghart, D. R. (2007).  Neural responses to taxation and voluntary giving 
reveal motives for charitable donations .  Science  316 (5831):  1622–5 . 
 Harris, L. T., & Fiske, S. T. (2007).  Social groups that elicit disgust are diff erentially processed in mPFC . 
 Social Cognitive & Aff ective Neuroscience  2 (1):  45–51 . 
 Harvey, P. O., Zaki, J., Lee, J., Ochsner, K., & Green, M. F. (in press).  Neural substrates of empathic 
accuracy in people with schizophrenia .  Schizophrenia Bulletin . 
 Hasson, U., Furman, O., Clark, D., Dudai, Y., & Davachi, L. (2008).  Enhanced intersubject correlations 
during movie viewing correlate with successful episodic encoding .  Neuro n  57 (3):  452–62 . 
 Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N., & Fitch, W. T. (2002).  Th e faculty of language: what is it, who has it, and how 
did it evolve? [Review] .  Science  298 (5598):  1569–79 . 
 Hein, G., Silani, G., Preuschoff , K., Batson, C. D., & Singer, T. (2010).  Neural responses to ingroup and 
outgroup members’ suff ering predict individual diff erences in costly helping .  Neuron  68 (1):  149–60 . 
 Hein, G., & Singer, T. (2008).  I feel how you feel, but not always: the empathic brain and its modulation . 
 Current Opinions in Neurobiology  18 (2):  153–8 . 
 Ickes, W. (1997).  Empathic Accuracy .  New York :  Guilford Press . 
 Jabbi, M., Bastiaansen, J., & Keysers, C. (2008).  A common anterior insula representation of disgust 
observation, experience and imagination shows divergent functional connectivity pathways .  PLoS One 
 3 (8):  e2939 . 
 Jabbi, M., Swart, M., & Keysers, C. (2007).  Empathy for positive and negative emotions in the gustatory 
cortex .  NeuroImage  34 (4):  1744–53 . 
 Jackson, P. L., Meltzoff , A. N., & Decety, J. (2005).  How do we perceive the pain of others? A window into 
the neural processes involved in empathy .  NeuroImage  24 (3):  771–9 . 
 Jacob, P., & Jeannerod, M. (2005).  Th e motor theory of social cognition: a critique .  Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences  9 (1):  21–5 . 
 Jones, R. M., Somerville, L. H., Li, J., Ruberry, E. J., Libby, V., Glover, G., et al. (2011).  Behavioral and 
neural properties of social reinforcement learning .  Journal of Neuroscience  31 (37):  13039–45 . 

229
 Kelley, H. (1973).  Th e process of causal attribution .  American Psychology  28 (2):  107–28 . 
 Keysers, C., & Gazzola, V. (2007).  Integrating simulation and theory of mind: from self to social cognition . 
 Trends in Cognitive Science  11 (5):  194–6 . 
 Keysers, C., & Gazzola, V. (2009).  Expanding the mirror: vicarious activity for actions, emotions, and 
sensations .  Current Opinions in Neurobiology  19 (6):  666–71 . 
 Keysers, C., Kaas, J. H., & Gazzola, V. (2010).  Somatosensation in social perception .  Nature Reviews in 
Neuroscience  11 (6):  417–28 . 
 Keysers, C., Wicker, B., Gazzola, V., Anton, J. L., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2004).  A touching sight: SII/PV 
activation during the observation and experience of touch .  Neuron  42 (2):  335–46 . 
 Kosslyn, S. M., Th ompson, W. L., & Alpert, N. M. (1997).  Neural systems shared by visual imagery and 
visual perception: a positron emission tomography study .  NeuroImage  6 (4):  320–34 . 
 Leslie, A. M. (1994).  Pretending and believing: issues in the theory of ToMM .  Cognition  50 ( 1–3 ):  211–38 . 
 Levenson, R. W., & Ruef, A. M. (1992).  Empathy: a physiological substrate .  Journal of Personality & Social 
Psychology  63 (2):  234–46 . 
 Lombardo, M. V., Chakrabarti, B., Bullmore, E. T., Wheelwright, S. J., Sadek, S. A., Suckling, J., 
et al. (2010).  Shared neural circuits for mentalizing about the self and others .  Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience  22 (7):  1623–35 . 
 Macrae, C. N., Moran, J. M., Heatherton, T. F., Banfi eld, J. F., & Kelley, W. M. (2004).  Medial prefrontal 
activity predicts memory for self .  Cerebral Cortex  14 (6):  647–54 . 
 Masten, C. L., Morelli, S. A., & Eisenberger, N. I. (2011).  An fMRI investigation of empathy for ‘social pain’ 
and subsequent prosocial behavior .  NeuroImage  55 (1):  381–8 . 
 Mitchell, J. P. (2008).  Activity in right temporo-parietal junction is not selective for theory-of-mind . 
 Cerebral Cortex  18 (2):  262–71 . 
 Mitchell, J. P. (2009a).  Inferences about mental states .  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London, B Biological Science  364 (1521):  1309–16 . 
 Mitchell, J. P. (2009b).  Social psychology as a natural kind .  Trends in Cognitive Science  13 (6):  246–51 . 
 Mitchell, J. P., Heatherton, T. F., & Macrae, C. N. (2002).  Distinct neural systems subserve person and 
object knowledge .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA  99 (23):  15238–43 . 
 Mitchell, J. P., Macrae, C. N., & Banaji, M. R. (2004).  Encoding-specifi c eff ects of social cognition on the 
neural correlates of subsequent memory .  Journal of Neuroscience  24 (21):  4912–17 . 
 Moll, H., & Tomasello, M. (2007).  Cooperation and human cognition: the Vygotskian intelligence 
hypothesis .  [Review] .  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, B Biological Sciences 
 362 (1480):  639–48 . 
 Morelli, S. A., Rameson, L. T., & Lieberman, M. D. (2012).  Th e neural components of empathy: Predicting 
daily prosocial behavior .  Social Cognitive and Aff ective Neuroscience . 
 Morrison, I., Lloyd, D., di Pellegrino, G., & Roberts, N. (2004).  Vicarious responses to pain in anterior cingulate 
cortex: is empathy a multisensory issue?   Cognitive and Aff ective Behavioural Neuroscience  4 (2):  270–8 . 
 Mukamel, R., Ekstrom, A. D., Kaplan, J., Iacoboni, M., & Fried, I. (2010).  Single-neuron responses in 
humans during execution and observation of actions .  Current Biology . 
 Neisser, U. (1980).  On “social knowing” .  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin  6 (4):  601–5 . 
 Neumann, R., & Strack, F. (2000).  “Mood contagion”: the automatic transfer of mood between persons . 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  79 (2):  211–23 . 
 Niedenthal, P., Barsalou, L. W., Ric, F., & Krauth-Gruber, S. (2005).  Embodiment in the acquisition and 
use of emotion knowledge . In L. Feldman Barrett, P. Niedenthal & P. Winkielman (Eds),  Emotion and 
Consciousness (pp.  21–50 ).  New York :  Guilford Press . 
 Ochsner, K. N., Knierim, K., Ludlow, D. H., Hanelin, J., Ramachandran, T., Glover, G., et al. (2004). 
 Refl ecting upon feelings: an fMRI study of neural systems supporting the attribution of emotion to self 
and other .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  16 (10):  1746–72 . 
REFERENCES

NEURAL SOURCES OF EMPATHY: AN EVOLVING STORY 
230
 Ochsner, K. N., Zaki, J., Hanelin, J., Ludlow, D. H., Knierim, K., Ramachandran, T., et al. (2008).  Your 
pain or mine? Common and distinct neural systems supporting the perception of pain in self and 
others .  Social Cognitive Aff ective Neuroscience  3 (2):  144–60 . 
 Olsson, A., & Ochsner, K. N. (2008).  Th e role of social cognition in emotion .  Trends in Cognitive Science 
 12 (2):  65–71 . 
 Peelen, M. V., Atkinson, A. P., & Vuilleumier, P. (2010).  Supramodal representations of perceived emotions 
in the human brain .  Journal of Neuroscience  30 (30):  10127–34 . 
 Pinker, S. (1994).  Th e Language Instinct, 1st edn.  New York :  W. Morrow and Co. 
 Pinker, S., & Bloom, P. (1990).  Natural language and natural selection .  Behavioural Brain Science  13 : 
 707–84 . 
 Premack, D., & Woodruff , G. (1978).  Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind?  Behavioural Brain 
Science  1 :  515–26 . 
 Preston, S. D., & de Waal, F. B. (2002).  Empathy: Its ultimate and proximate bases .  Behavioural Brain 
Science  25 (1):  1–20 ; discussion  20–71 . 
 Quadfl ieg, S., Turk, D. J., Waiter, G. D., Mitchell, J. P., Jenkins, A. C., & Macrae, C. N. (2009).  Exploring 
the neural correlates of social stereotyping .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  21 (8):  1560–70 . 
 Redcay, E., Dodell-Feder, D., Pearrow, M. J., Mavros, P. L., Kleiner, M., Gabrieli, J. D., et al. (2010).  Live 
face-to-face interaction during fMRI: A new tool for social cognitive neuroscience .  NeuroImage  50 (4): 
 1639–47 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004).  Th e mirror-neuron system .  Annual Review of Neuroscience  27 , 
 169–92 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., & Sinigaglia, C. (2010).  Th e functional role of the parieto-frontal mirror circuit: 
interpretations and misinterpretations .  Nature Review of Neuroscience  11 (4):  264–74 . 
 Ross, L., Greene, D., & House, P. (1977).  Th e false consensus eff ect: An egocentric bias in social perception 
and attribution processes .  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology  13 (3):  279–301 . 
 Saxe, R. (2005).  Against simulation: the argument from error .  Trends in Cognitive Science  9 (4):  174–9 . 
 Saxe, R., & Kanwisher, N. (2003).  People thinking about thinking people .  Th e role of the temporo-parietal 
junction in “theory of mind” .  NeuroImage  19 (4):  1835–42 . 
 Schilbach, L. (2010).  A second-person approach to other minds .  Nature Review of Neuroscience  11 (6):  449 . 
 Schippers, M. B., & Keysers, C. (2011).  Mapping the fl ow of information within the putative mirror neuron 
system during gesture observation .  NeuroImage  57 (1):  37–44 . 
 Schippers, M. B., Roebroeck, A., Renken, R., Nanetti, L., & Keysers, C. (2010).  Mapping the information 
fl ow from one brain to another during gestural communication .  Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Science, USA  107 (20):  9388–93 . 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S. G. (2010).  Th e neural bases for empathy .  Th e Neuroscientist . 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Aharon-Peretz, J., & Perry, D. (2009).  Two systems for empathy: a double 
dissociation between emotional and cognitive empathy in inferior frontal gyrus vs. ventromedial 
prefrontal lesions .  Brain  132 (Pt 3):  617–27 . 
 Silk, J. B., Brosnan, S. F., Vonk, J., Henrich, J., Povinelli, D. J., Richardson, A. S., et al. (2005). 
 Chimpanzees are indiff erent to the welfare of unrelated group members .  [Research Support, N.I.H., 
Extramural Research Support, Non-U. S .  Gov’t Research Support, U. S .  Gov’t, P.H.S.] .  Nature  437 (7063): 
 1357–9 . 
 Singer, T. (2006).  Th e neuronal basis and ontogeny of empathy and mind reading: review of literature and 
implications for future research .  Neuroscience and Biobehaviour Review  30 (6):  855–63 . 
 Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J., Kaube, H., Dolan, R. J., & Frith, C. D. (2004).  Empathy for pain 
involves the aff ective, but not sensory components of pain .  Science  303 (5661):  1157–62 . 
 Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J. P., Stephan, K. E., Dolan, R. J., & Frith, C. D. (2006).  Empathic 
neural responses are modulated by the perceived fairness of others .  Nature  439 (7075):  466–9 . 

231
 Smith, A. (1790/2002).  Th e Th eory of Moral Sentiments .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Spreng, R. N., Mar, R. A., & Kim, A. S. (2009).  Th e common neural basis of autobiographical memory, 
prospection, navigation, theory of mind, and the default mode: a quantitative meta-analysis .  Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience  21 (3):  489–510 . 
 Spunt, R. P., & Lieberman, M. D. (2011).  An integrative model of the neural systems supporting the 
comprehension of observed emotional behavior .  NeuroImage  59 (1): 3050–9. 
 Spunt, R. P., & Lieberman, M. D. (2013).  Th e busy social brain: an fMRI study of cognitive load during 
action observation .  Psychological Science  24 (1): 80–6 
 Spunt, R. P., Satpute, A. B., & Lieberman, M. D. (2010).  Identifying the What, Why, and How of an 
Observed Action: An fMRI Study of Mentalizing and Mechanizing during Action Observation .  Journal 
of Cognitive Neuroscience 23 (1): 63 
 Stephens, G. J., Silbert, L. J., & Hasson, U. (2010).  Speaker-listener neural coupling underlies successful 
communication .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, USA  107 (32):  14425–30 . 
 Suddendorf, T., & Corballis, M. C. (1997).  Mental time travel and the evolution of the human mind . 
 [Review].  Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs  123 (2):  133–67 . 
 Suddendorf, T., & Corballis, M. C. (2007).  Th e evolution of foresight: What is mental time travel, and is it 
unique to humans? [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural Research Support, Non-U. S .  Gov’t Review]. 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences  30 (3),  299–313 ; discussion  313–351 . 
 Tetlock, P. E., & Kim, J. I. (1987).  Accountability and judgment processes in a personality prediction task . 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  52 (4):  700–9 . 
 Th omsen, L., Frankenhuis, W. E., Ingold-Smith, M., & Carey, S. (2011).  Big and mighty: preverbal infants 
mentally represent social dominance .  [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural Research Support, Non-U. 
S .  Gov’t] .  Science  331 (6016):  477–80 . 
 Tomasello, M. (2000).  Th e Cultural Origin of Human Cognition .  Cambridge :  Harvard University Press . 
 Tomasello, M. (2009).  Why We Cooperate .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H. (2005).  Understanding and sharing intentions: 
the origins of cultural cognition .  Behaviour and Brain Sciences  28 (5):  675–91 ; discussion  691–735 . 
 Tulving, E. (2002).  Episodic memory: from mind to brain .  [Case Reports] .  Annual Review of Psychology  53 ,  1–25 . 
 Uddin, L. Q., Iacoboni, M., Lange, C., & Keenan, J. P. (2007).  Th e self and social cognition: the role of 
cortical midline structures and mirror neurons .  Trends in Cognitive Science  11 (4):  153–7 . 
 van Overwalle, F., & Baetens, K. (2009).  Understanding Others’ Actions and Goals by Mirror and 
Mentalizing Systems: A Meta-analysis .  NeuroImage  48 (3):  564–84 . 
 Vaughan, K. B., & Lanzetta, J. T. (1980).  Vicarious instigation and conditioning of facial expressive and 
autonomic responses to a model’s expressive display of pain .  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 38 (6):  909–23 . 
 Vogt, B. A., Vogt, L., & Laureys, S. (2006).  Cytology and functionally correlated circuits of human posterior 
cingulate areas .  NeuroImage  29 (2):  452–66 . 
 Wagner, A. D., Schacter, D. L., Rotte, M., Koutstaal, W., Maril, A., Dale, A. M., et al. (1998).  Building 
memories: remembering and forgetting of verbal experiences as predicted by brain activity .  Science 
 281 (5380):  1188–91 . 
 Waytz, A., Zaki, J., & Mitchell, J. (2012).  Response of dorsomedial prefrontal cortex predicts altruistic 
behavior .  Journal of Neuroscience  32 :  7646–50 . 
 Wheatley, T., Milleville, S. C., & Martin, A. (2007).  Understanding animate agents: distinct roles for the 
social network and mirror system .  Psychology Science  18 (6):  469–74 . 
 Wolf, I., Dziobek, I., & Heekeren, H. R. (2010).  Neural correlates of social cognition in naturalistic settings: 
a model-free analysis approach .  NeuroImage  49 (1):  894–904 . 
 Xu, X., Zuo, X., Wang, X., & Han, S. (2009).  Do you feel my pain? Racial group membership modulates 
empathic neural responses .  Journal of Neuroscience  29 (26):  8525–9 . 
REFERENCES

NEURAL SOURCES OF EMPATHY: AN EVOLVING STORY 
232
 Zaki, J. (in press).  Cue integration: A common framework for physical perception and social cognition . 
 Perspectives in Psychological Sciences . 
 Zaki, J., Bolger, N., & Ochsner, K. (2008).  It takes two: Th e interpersonal nature of empathic accuracy . 
 Psychological Science  19 (4):  399–404 . 
 Zaki, J., Davis, J. I., & Ochsner, K. (2012).  Overlapping activity in anterior insula during interoception and 
emotional experience .  NeuroImage  62 (1):  493–9 . 
 Zaki, J., Hennigan, K., Weber, J., & Ochsner, K. N. (2010).  Social cognitive confl ict resolution: 
Contributions of domain-general and domain-specifi c neural systems .  Journal of Neuroscience  30 (25): 
 8481–8 . 
 Zaki, J., Lopez, G., & Mitchell, J. (2013).  Person-invariant value: Orbitofrontal activity tracks revealed 
social preferences . 
 Zaki, J., & Mitchell, J. (2011).  Equitable decision making is associated with neural markers of subjective 
value .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, USA  108 (49):  19761–6 . 
 Zaki, J., & Ochsner, K. (2009).  Th e need for a cognitive neuroscience of naturalistic social cognition .  Annals 
of the New York Academy of Science  1167 ,  16–30 . 
 Zaki, J., & Ochsner, K. (2011).  Reintegrating accuracy into the study of social cognition .  Psychology Inquiry 
 22 (3):  159–82 . 
 Zaki, J., & Ochsner, K. (2012).  Th e neuroscience of empathy: Progress, pitfalls, and promise .  Nature 
Neuroscience  15 (5):  675–80 . 
 Zaki, J., Ochsner, K. N., Hanelin, J., Wager, T., & Mackey, S. C. (2007).  Diff erent circuits for diff erent pain: 
Patterns of functional connectivity reveal distinct networks for processing pain in self and others .  Social 
Neuroscience  2 (3–4):  276–91 . 
 Zaki, J., Weber, J., Bolger, N., & Ochsner, K. (2009).  Th e neural bases of empathic accuracy .  Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Science, USA  106 (27):  11382–7 . 

 Chapter 14 
 Mirror neuron system 
and social cognition  
 Christian Keysers ,  Marc Thioux,    and Valeria Gazzola  
 For humans understanding and predicting the actions of others and being able to learn by observ-
ing the actions of a teacher are essential foundation for success. It is only in the last two decades, 
with the discovery of mirror neurons, that we start to have an understanding of how the brain 
enables these essential capacities. Even more recently, still, we start to understand that a similar 
mechanism may apply to how we perceive the sensations and emotions of others. Here, we will 
introduce the key methods used to study mirror neurons (directly with single cell recordings or 
indirectly using a range of non-invasive methods), review their properties, localization, and func-
tions in monkeys and humans. Finally, we will discuss the possible extension of mirror neurons to 
sensations and emotions, and examine the psychiatric relevance of this system. 
 Mirror neurons in the monkey  
 Mirror neurons were ﬁ rst discovered in the ventral premotor cortex (area F5, Figure 14.1) of 
the macaque monkey (Fujii, Hihara, & Iriki, 2008; Gallese, Fadiga, Fogassi, & Rizzolatti, 1996). 
Neurons in region F5 are active, while the monkey executes goal-directed actions, such as grasping 
an object or shelling a peanut. For each premotor neuron, the execution of only a particular subset 
of all possible actions is linked to an increase in ﬁ ring rate. This subset will be called ‘effective exe-
cuted actions’, and represents a tuning curve of the premotor neuron. Electrostimulation in area 
F5 induce overt behavior such as grasping a nearby object (Graziano, Taylor, & Moore, 2002). This 
shows that neurons in F5 are part of the cascade of neurons that trigger a monkey’s own actions. 
 Unlike motor neurons in the primary motor cortex (M1) that code the nitty-gritty details of 
how the monkey will move his body, F5 neurons are akin to generals in the army: they deter-
mine  what should be done, rather than precisely how it should be done (Rizzolatti, Camarda, 
Fogassi, Gentilucci, Luppino, & Matelli, 1988; Thioux, Gazzola, & Keysers, 2008). For instance, 
while different populations of M1 neurons control grasping an object with the hand and with the 
mouth, many F5 neurons respond similarly during these two actions. The ﬁ ring of neurons in F5 
is thus associated with a particular goal (grasping), rather than with a particular muscle movement 
(Rizzolatti et al., 1988). 
 Originally, F5 neurons were thought to deal exclusively with the execution of the monkey’s own 
actions. A signiﬁ cant number of F5 neurons, however, also responds while the monkey does not 
move its body, but simply views another individual perform certain actions. Actions, the obser-
vation of which trigger activity in a certain premotor neuron, will be called ‘effective observed 
actions’ (e.g. grasping or shelling a peanut), and form the visual tuning curve of premotor neurons. 
According to the relationship between the visual and motor tuning curve, visuo-motor F5 neurons 
can be classiﬁ ed as non-congruent (the tuning curves do not overlap) or as ‘mirror neurons’ (the 

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
234
curves do overlap). Box 14.1 speciﬁ es the main classes of visuo-motor neurons encountered in F5 
and indicates the proportion of neurons falling in each class.    
 Neurons with overlapping visual and motor tuning curves were dubbed ‘mirror neurons’ because 
when monkey A sees monkey B grasp a banana, for example, such neurons in A will correspond 
to the grasping motor programs of A. These grasping programs in A now mirror the activity in 
the brain of monkey B, which is currently also activating its grasping motor program, since he 
is grasping. The mirror neurons in A thus act like a mirror reﬂ ection or resonance of the motor 
programs that lead to the observed behavior in B. Non-congruent neurons should therefore not 
be called mirror neurons. The term ‘mirror neuron’ has been widely accepted in the literature, but 
it shouldn’t be taken to suggest that mirror neurons, like a true mirror, reproduce every detail of 
an observed action. Instead, mirror neurons produce something akin to an impressionist paint-
ing of the action that has been seen; in broad strokes, they capture the goal of the observed action 
through the observing monkey’s own, subjective motor vocabulary. 
 More recently, mirror neurons have also been recorded in the anterior half of the convexity of 
the inferior parietal lobule of the macaque (area PFG and to a lesser extent, PF (Rozzi, Ferrari, 
Bonini, Rizzolatti, & Fogassi, 2008), see Figure 14.1). These parietal mirror neurons have proper-
ties that are surprisingly similar to those of F5 neurons and are composed of similar proportions 
of non-congruent and mirror neurons. In both brain regions only 10–20% of neurons have mir-
ror properties. A further set of mirror neurons have been reported in the anterior bank of the 
intraparietal sulcus (Fujii et al., 2008). The fact that mirror neurons have not yet been found in 
other locations in the macaque brain, however, cannot be taken as evidence that only F5, PF, PFG, 
and the intraparietal sulcus contain mirror neurons: mirror neurons have not been systematically 
searched for outside of these brain regions. Studies mapping the uptake of glucose in the macaque 
brain while monkeys observe and execute actions suggest that a much wider network of regions 
might be active during both conditions, including the somatosensory cortices (Evangeliou, Raos, 
Galletti, & Savaki, 2009; Raos, Evangeliou, & Savaki, 2004). Whether these regions, however, con-
tain mirror neurons, or separate, but intermixed populations of neurons active during observation 
and execution remains to be understood. 
F5
PF/PFG
anterior bank IPS
PF/PFG
?
dorsal premotor
primary somatosensory
superior 
parietal 
lobule
secondary 
somatosensory
ventral premotor
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
 Figure 14.1  Localization of the mirror neuron system. Locations in which mirror neurons have been 
found in monkeys (left), with most of the brain still unexplored (question marks). Location of the 
putative MNS as identiﬁ ed using fMRI in humans. 
 Adapted from Gazzola, V. & Keysers, C. The observation and execution of actions share motor and somatosensory 
voxels in all tested subjects: single-subject analyses of unsmoothed fMRI data,  Cereberal Cortex  19, 1239–55. © 
2009, Oxford University Press, with permission.  For permission to reuse this material, please visit http://www.oup.
co.uk/academic/rights/permissions.

MIRROR NEURONS IN THE MONKEY
235
 Box 14.1 Types of visuo-motor neurons
 Neurons responding both during the execution and observation/audition of actions can be 
classiﬁ ed based on the relationship between their visual/auditory (dotted) and motor (solid) 
tuning curves. The last two columns of the table below indicate the approximate proportion 
of neurons in each category (as percentage of motor neurons responding to action observa-
tion) based on Gallese et al. (1996) for F5 and Rozzi et al. (2008) for PFG. Broadly and strictly 
congruent neurons are separated by a dotted line to indicate that, rather than a sharp distinc-
tion, one should see this difference as one of degree, with individual neurons varying along a 
continuum from very strict to very broad. 
Family
Deﬁ nition and example
Visual (dotted) and motor (solid) 
tuning curves
F5
PFG
Non-
congruent
 Non-congruent: there is no 
overlap between visual and 
motor tuning curves and no 
logical relationship 
 Example: effective executed 
action include tearing an 
object apart, but not grasping. 
Effective observed action 
include grasping, but not 
tearing. 
 
 
7%
11%
 Logically related: there is no 
overlap between visual and 
motor tuning curves, but a 
logical relationship 
 Example: effective executed 
actions include grasping, but 
not placing, while effective 
observed actions include 
placing, but not grasping. 
Given that an experimenter’s 
placing food often precedes the 
monkey’s grasping of that food, 
a logical relationship exists in 
the form of a causal chain of 
events 
 
 
6%
Mirror
  Broadly congruent: there is 
overlap between motor and 
visual tuning curves, but the 
overlap is partial, with some 
actions only being effective in 
one of the modalities 
 
 
61%
54%
(Continued)

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
236
 Region PF/PFG has reciprocal anatomical connections with the visual cortex lining the STS. 
Many neurons in the STS show visual responses that are similar to those of mirror neurons, but 
STS neurons lack the motor properties that make mirror neurons so unique (Keysers & Perrett, 
2004; Matelli et al., 2006; Rozzi, Calzavara, Belmalih, Borra, Gregoriou; Rozzi et al., 2008). These 
STS neurons could send PF/PFG neurons visual information that causes the visual properties of 
mirror neurons in PF/PFG, and this information could then be transmitted from PF/PFG to F5 
through the reciprocal connections between these regions (Keysers & Perrett, 2004; Rozzi et al., 
2006). Recent neuroimaging studies using fMRI in monkeys have shown that the mirror neuron 
system may be composed of multiple circuits operating in parallel. One circuit transmits infor-
mation from STS to PF/PFG and to the convexity of area F5, the other transmits information 
from the STS to the anterior intraparietal cortex to regions on F5 hidden in the arcuate sulcus. It 
remains unclear how these two routes differ, but the former may convey more information about 
the actions of the agent, and the latter about the properties of the object that is the goal of the 
action (Nelissen, Borra, Gerbella, Rozzi, Luppino, Vanduffel, et al., 2011). 
 Additional properties of monkey mirror neurons  
 Object-directed actions 
 Most of the mirror neurons in the convexity of F5 (F5c) respond exclusively to  object-directed 
actions. A mirror neuron responding to the observation and execution of grasping a peanut for 
instance will not respond to seeing the same action mimed, i.e. performed without the object 
(Gallese et al., 1996; Umilta, Kohler, Gallese, Fogassi, Fadiga, Keysers, et al., 2001). This matches 
the motor properties of F5c neurons, the vast majority of which seem to trigger actions directed at 
objects (i.e. ‘transitive’ actions). A minority of mirror neurons additionally responds to the sight of 
intransitive actions visually similar to the effective motor and visual action: a neuron responding 
Family
Deﬁ nition and example
Visual (dotted) and motor (solid) 
tuning curves
F5
PFG
 Example: effective executed 
actions restricted to a precision 
grip with the hand, effective 
observed actions include 
precision grip with the 
hand, but also whole hand 
prehension and grasping with 
the mouth 
 Strictly congruent: the tuning 
curves overlap very tightly. 
 Example: precision grip with the 
hand is the only effective action 
during both observation and 
execution 
 
 
32%
29%
Box 14.1 (Continued)

ADDITIONAL PROPERTIES OF MONKEY MIRROR NEURONS
237
during grasping an object with the mouth might also respond to the sight of lip-smacking, an 
afﬁ liative gesture frequently performed by monkeys (Ferrari, Gallese, Rizzolatti, & Fogassi, 2003). 
These neurons are thought to serve as an important pre-adaptation for the passage from actions to 
symbolic gestures, and thereby for the emergence of language (Keysers, 2011). The preference for 
transitive actions observed in F5c also holds for parietal area PFG, but it remains unclear whether 
other brain regions may contain a higher proportion of mirror neurons preferring intransitive 
actions (e.g. dorsal premotor cortex).  
 Occlusion 
 About 50% of the mirror neurons in F5c responding to the sight of grasping an object, but not to 
the sight of a hand miming a grasp, also respond to seeing a hand reaching behind an occluding 
screen, if and only if the monkey has previously seen an object being hidden behind that screen 
(Umilta et al., 2001). Mirror neurons therefore seem part of a circuitry combining present, but 
incomplete visual information with past information stored in memory.  
 Sound 
 Some mirror neurons also respond to the sound of their effective executed actions. Many mirror neu-
rons responding during the execution and observation of peanut shelling also respond to the sound 
of peanut shelling. Some only respond when the sound and the vision of the effective action occur 
contemporarily, others respond to either modality alone, but more to their combination, and oth-
ers will respond maximally to either modality (Keysers, Kohler, Umilta, Nanetti, Fogassi, & Gallese, 
2003; Kohler, Keysers, Umilta, Fogassi, Gallese, & Rizzolatti, 2002). It is often difﬁ cult to determine 
the latency of visual mirror neurons, because the sight of most actions unfolds over hundreds of 
milliseconds (e.g. reaching, grasping then shelling a peanut), and it then becomes difﬁ cult to deter-
mine whether a given spike is a late response to an early component of the action (e.g. reaching), or 
a fast response to a later component (e.g. shelling), given that early components could be predictors 
for later components. In the auditory modality, this is easier to do, as only the ﬁ nal interaction with 
the object (e.g. shelling) produces the sound. On average, we found auditory mirror neuron to start 
responding 120ms after the onset of the sound of the effective action, suggesting a rapid and relatively 
direct route from the sensory input to mirror neurons (Keysers et al., 2003; Kohler et al., 2002).  
 Action discrimination 
 It is possible to deduce which of two actions another individual is performing with >90% accuracy 
from the ﬁ ring rate of F5c mirror neurons in the brain of an observing and/or listening monkey 
(Keysers et al., 2003), which is not lower than the accuracy during motor execution. That the ﬁ ring of 
premotor neurons carries so much information about the actions of other individuals is remarkable 
given that a decade ago, the premotor cortex was considered not to have any functions in perception.  
 Embedding in larger action schemes 
 Speciﬁ c motor acts (e.g. grasping) can be embedded into larger action sequences (e.g. grasping 
to eat or grasping to place). About half of F5 and PFG neurons change their ﬁ ring rate during 
the execution of a speciﬁ c act based on what sequences the act is embedded in (Bonini, Serventi, 
Simone, Rozzi, Ferrari, & Fogassi, 2011). Interestingly, this is true for mirror neurons in both 
regions as well—a grasping neuron that responds more to grasping to eat than grasping to place 
will also respond more to the sight of someone else grasping to eat than grasping to place, and 
vice versa (Bonini, Rozzi, Serventi, Simone, Ferrari, & Fogassi, 2010). Obviously, the neurons 

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
238
cannot magically know, whether someone else will grasp to eat or place, but in these experiments 
the type of object being grasped (food vs. non-edible object) and the presence of a cup into 
which the object needs to be placed helped the monkey know what context the act is embedded 
into. If the monkey is prevented from witnessing such cues, the selectivity disappears (Bonini 
et al., 2011).  
 The how, what and why of actions 
 If we sit together at a bar, and I see you take some peanuts, this action has three levels of descrip-
tion:  How , e.g. you are cupping the peanuts with your hand, you are precision grasping a single 
peanut, or you are using a spoon;  What , e.g. you are taking the peanuts or your glass and  Why , 
e.g. you are grasping them to eat them yourselves, or to hand them over to me. The distinction 
between strictly congruent mirror neurons and broadly congruent mirror neurons draws a dis-
tinction between how and what. Because strictly congruent mirror neurons care about the exact 
way in which actions are performed, they can provide information about  how . Because broadly 
congruent mirror neurons often respond similarly to actions achieving the same purpose with 
different means, they provide information about  what is being performed (e.g. grasping) inde-
pendently of how (e.g. with the hand or mouth). Finally, the selectivity of ~50% of mirror neurons 
in PFG and F5c for the sequence in which an action is embedded suggests that these neurons 
additionally contain information about the  why  of the action. Thus, because F5 and PFG contain a 
mix of these different mirror neurons (strictly and broadly congruent, with and without sequence 
preference), these regions contain information about all three levels of description. With regard to 
why, it is likely however, that the highest level of why remains opaque to these regions. It is unlikely, 
for instance, that response properties in these regions could speciﬁ cally encode that you hand 
me these peanuts to see the surprise and pain the wasabi coating will trigger on my face (Thioux 
et al., 2008). Thinking about the reason why someone is doing something generates an increase of 
activity in mentalizing brain regions known to be involved in processing the state of mind of other 
people (Spunt, Satpute, & Lieberman, 2011), which indicates that at least some of the inferences 
concerning the why of an action are processed outside the mirror neuron system. 
 The human mirror neuron system  
 The deﬁ nition of mirror neurons includes that a single neuron be involved both during action 
execution and during the perception (observation/listening) of the same action. In humans, this 
deﬁ nition is challenging, because the activity of single neurons can only rarely be recorded (Keysers 
& Gazzola, 2010; Mukamel, Ekstrom, Kaplan, Iacoboni, & Fried, 2010). However, the existence of 
a system that has the same properties as the mirror neurons in monkeys, and which is therefore 
called the putative mirror neuron system (pMNS) is now well established in humans by more 
than a decade of experiments based on a variety of less invasive techniques (see Box 14.2). Taken 
together, these techniques have established two basic facts.   
 Existence 
 Measuring TMS evoked motor potentials (Avenanti, Bolognini, Maravita, & Aglioti, 2007; 
Aziz-Zadeh, Iacoboni, Zaidel, Wilson, & Mazziotta, 2004; Fadiga, Craighero, & Olivier, 2005; 
Fadiga, Fogassi, Pavesi, & Rizzolatti, 1995; Urgesi Maieron, Avenanti, Tidoni, Fabbro, & Aglioti, 
2010) and motor reaction times (Brass, Bekkering, Wohlschlager, & Prinz, 2000), while participants 
perceive the actions of others has shown that viewing or hearing actions facilitates the execution 
of corresponding actions and interferes with the execution of antagonistic actions. This can only 

THE HUMAN MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM
239
 Box 14.2 How to study the mirror neuron system in human 
 Based on the deﬁ nition of mirror neurons in the monkey, a brain area should only be consid-
ered to be putatively mirror if it is involved  both in action observation (or listening)  and execu-
tion. A number of techniques have been used to establish whether this is true of some neurons 
and/or brain regions in humans. 
 TMS (transcranial magnetic stimulation) 
 A single magnetic pulse, given on a particular location of M1’s homunculus, evokes a twitch in 
a corresponding muscle that is measured using electromyography, leading to a MEP measure-
ment. If a human MNS exists, seeing or hearing someone else perform an action involving the 
same muscle should increase the MEP, but one involving other muscles should not (see, for 
example, Fadiga et al., 1995). Repetitive TMS (rTMS) can also be used to interfere with normal 
processing in a restricted area of the brain shortly before using the MEP technique described 
above to test if this particular area is part of the MNS that causes the MEP modulation during 
observation (for example Avenanti et al., 2007).  
 Psychophysics 
 Instead of triggering motor programs using TMS one can also ask participants to execute cer-
tain actions in response to a cue and simultaneously show seemingly task irrelevant actions. 
Again, if there is a MNS, the execution of a particular action should be  accelerated  by viewing 
actions using the same muscle and should be  slowed by viewing actions using an antagonistic 
muscle (for example, see Brass et al., 2000; Kilner et al., 2003). 
 PET (positron emission tomography) and fMRI (functional magnetic 
resonance imaging) 
 T he distribution of injected radioactive molecules of water or oxygen (PET), or the distribu-
tion of changes in the distortions of the magnetic ﬁ eld due to blood oxygenation (fMRI) can be 
used to localize brain regions activated while viewing or hearing the actions of others. The same 
procedure is then used to visualize the brain regions involved in action execution, preferably 
in the same participants. Only voxels activated both during the perception and execution of 
actions will be considered part of the putative MNS (for example, Gazzola & Keysers, 2009). 
 Repetition suppression fMRI 
 For many neurons, the repetition of the same stimulus causes a reduction of the activity to that 
stimulus. If action observation and execution are indeed encoded by the same (population of) 
neurons, asking the subject to watch the very same action he/she just performed (or the other 
way around) should cause a reduction of the activity similar to the one caused by the repetition 
of two consecutive visual stimuli. Areas showing this reduction will then be consider part of 
the putative MNS (for example, Kilner et al., 2009). While this method initially encountered 
much enthusiasm, it is now rather contested (Bartels et al., 2008). This is because if repetition 
suppression is found in a region, neurons in that region may still not encode the property that 
(Continued)

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
240
be the case if at least some neurons involved in executing a motor program receive excitatory input 
from sensory neurons responding to the sight or sound of the same action. Interestingly, repetitive 
TMS over the premotor cortex, but not the primary motor cortex reduces this facilitation, indicat-
ing that this convergence of sensory and motor information occurs in the premotor cortex, where 
mirror neurons exist in monkeys (Avenanti et al., 2007). These ﬁ ndings are highly compatible with 
the notion of a human mirror neuron system, as mirror neurons need to get sensory information 
regarding their preferred action. However, mirror neurons in the strict sense need to increase their 
ﬁ ring rate during both the execution and the perception of an action. Whether that is the case, 
cannot directly be deduced from these experiments—synaptic facilitation can be strong enough to 
modulate the activation of a motor neuron while the individual is performing an action, but too 
weak to trigger spiking at rest. Additionally, Avenanti et al. also noticed that disturbing the activ-
ity of SI can lead to a reduction of the visual facilitation of action execution if the visual stimulus 
contains salient somatosensory components (e.g. joint stretching). This suggests that the somato-
sensory system might play a role in the pMNS. 
 Independent evidence for a recruitment of the motor and somatosensory system during action 
observation stems from the observation that perceiving the actions of others is linked with changes 
triggered the suppression (Bartels et al., 2008). Conversely, if repetition suppression does not 
occur in a particular region, this may be due to neurons in this region not showing repetition 
suppression or to the region not containing enough mirror neurons to trigger a measurable 
suppression or that repetition suppression mislocates the relevant neurons. In our own stud-
ies, mirror neurons in monkeys indeed failed to show repetition suppression (Keysers et al., 
2003). 
 Pattern classiﬁ cation fMRI 
 If a MNS exists, the pattern of activity across pMNS regions should be similar during action 
perception and execution. Accordingly, after training a pattern classiﬁ er to discriminate brain 
activity when participants hear or view actions A and B, the algorithm should automatically 
discriminate above chance the patterns associated with executing actions A and B (for example, 
Etzel et al., 2008). 
 EEG/MEG (electroencephalogram or magnetoencephalogram) 
 EEG and MEG measure, through the scalp, currents that are generated by synchronous activ-
ity of populations of neurons. The mu-rhythm amongst that signal has more energy while the 
subject is at rest and is disrupted as soon as an action is performed. If a MNS exists a similar 
suppression should occur while perceiving the actions of others. An alternative approach is to 
stimulate the median nerve, which produces a disruption of the mu and beta rhythms similar 
to the one produced by action execution. Studying whether this induced disruption is modi-
ﬁ ed by action observation is another method to assess the existence of a MNS in humans (for a 
review, see Pineda, 2005). Finally, using source localization, one can test if activity during action 
perception depends on sources that overlap with those during action execution, but the limited 
spatial resolution of source localization makes this approach less attractive. 
Box 14.2 (Continued)

THE HUMAN MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM
241
in two frequency bands of the power-spectrum of the EEG and MEG signal that resemble those 
associated with executing similar actions. These two bands are jointly called the mu-rhythm, with 
the lower frequency band around 10 Hz being referred to as alpha or lower alpha, and the higher 
20 Hz band referred to as beta or upper alpha. This visual modulation of a motor rhythm was 
ﬁ rst observed in 1954, four decades before the discovery of mirror neurons, by Gastaut and Bert 
in a surprisingly modern experiment: “[the rolandic mu-rhythm] is blocked when the subject 
performs a movement … It also disappears when the subject identiﬁ es himself with an active 
person represented on the screen … During a sequence of ﬁ lm showing a boxing match … less 
than a second after the appearance of the boxers all type of rolandic activity disappears in spite 
of the fact that the subject seems completely relaxed” (Gastaut & Bert, 1954, p. 439). Once mirror 
neurons were described, this phenomenon received renewed interest, with a number of experi-
ments now conﬁ rming its existence using EEG (Cochin, Barthelemy, Lejeune, Roux, & Martineau, 
1998; Cochin, Barthelemy, Roux, & Martineau, 1999; Muthukumaraswamy & Johnson, 2004b; 
Muthukumaraswamy & Johnson, 2004a; Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2004; Pineda, 2005) and 
MEG (Hari, Forss, Avikainen, Kirveskari, Salenius, & Rizzolatti, 1998). 
 Most recently, a small number of neurons have been tested for mirror properties in the human 
cortex (Keysers & Gazzola, 2010, Mukamel, et al., 2010). This was done while patients had elec-
trodes implanted to localize the origin of epileptic seizures. These recordings evidenced 11 neu-
rons that behaved like broadly congruent mirror neurons in the monkey, with some responding 
during the execution and observation of hand actions (whole hand or precision grasp), and others 
during the execution and observation of facial expressions (smile or frown). Because the localiza-
tion of the electrodes is dictated by the likely source of the seizures, they did not include ventral 
premotor cortex or inferior parietal regions, but instead, the supplementary motor area and the 
medial temporal lobe, both of which turned out to contain neurons responding during action 
observation and execution.  
 Localization 
 Secondly, PET and fMRI studies that map brain activity in the same participants during (i) action 
execution and (ii) viewing or hearing others perform similar actions have helped map regions that 
could contain mirror neurons in humans. A number of brain regions were found to respond with 
augmented blood ﬂ ow or BOLD signal in both cases (Figure 14.1, see (Keysers, Kaas, & Gazzola, 
2010; Caspers, Zilles, Laird, & Eickhoff, 2010; Keysers & Gazzola, 2009) for reviews). This net-
work includes ventral premotor and inferior parietal cortices, which contain mirror neurons in 
monkeys, and additional areas including the dorsal premotor, supplementary motor, primary 
and secondary somatosensory, dorsal posterior parietal cortex and the cerebellum (Aziz-Zadeh, 
Wilson, Rizzolatti, & Iacoboni, 2006; Caspers et al., 2010; Dinstein, Hasson, Rubin, & Heeger, 2007; 
Gazzola, Aziz-zadeh, & Keysers, 2006; Filimon, Nelson, Hagler, & Sereno, 2007; Gazzola, Rizzolatti, 
Wicker, & Keysers, 2007a; Grezes, Armony, Rowe, & Passingham, 2003; Keysers & Gazzola, 2009; 
Ricciardi, Bonino, Sani, Vecchi, Guazzelli, Haxby et al., 2009; Turella, Erb, Grodd, & Castiello, 
2009). However, the limited spatial resolution of traditional fMRI and PET cannot show that the 
same neurons within a voxel are responsible for the augmented BOLD response during action 
execution and action perception, so it is therefore appropriate to refer to this network as the “puta-
tive MNS,” where putative acknowledges the fact that in some of these regions, different neurons 
within a voxel could be responsible for the activity during action execution and action percep-
tion. Additionally, BOLD fMRI is known to be sensitive to synaptic activity even in the absence of 
changes in ﬁ ring rate of the neurons (Lippert, Steudel, Ohl, Logothetis, & Kayser, 2010) and aug-
mentations in BOLD during action observation and execution could reﬂ ect subthreshold synaptic 

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
242
inputs, rather than neural ﬁ ring in some of the cases. Putative however does not question the 
existence of a MNS in humans per se, because the existence is now established by the single cell 
recordings (Mukamel et al., 2010). 
 Repetition suppression fMRI (see Box 14.2) has been used to provided further evidence that 
at least the human premotor and posterior parietal cortex also contain mirror neurons (Chong, 
Cunnington, Williams, Kanwisher, & Mattingley, 2008; Dinstein et al., 2007; Kilner, Neal, Weiskopf, 
Friston, & Frith, 2009; Lingnau, Gesierich, & Caramazza, 2009). However, repetition suppression 
has been shown to mislocalize certain neural properties (Bartels, Logothetis, & Moutoussis, 2008), 
and results derived from that method should be considered with great care. Also, if Blood Oxygen 
Level Dependent (BOLD) mainly measures synaptic processes, repetition suppression is likely 
only to work if the sensory and motor input to mirror neuron comes through the same synapses, 
which is not necessarily the case. 
 Although mu-suppression has been widely used to show that the motor system is recruited 
during action observation, until recently, the limited resolution of EEG made it difﬁ cult to local-
ize what brain regions were responsible for mu-suppression during action observation and exe-
cution. In a recent study (Arnstein, Cui, Keysers, Maurits, & Gazzola, 2011), EEG was measured 
inside the scanner while simultaneously measuring fMRI BOLD. Participants were shown mov-
ies of hand actions and control stimuli, and were asked to perform simple motor actions in the 
scanner. Results indicate that trials with high mu-suppression were trials in which BOLD soma-
tosensory and dorsal premotor activity was high during both action observation and execution, 
but not trials in which the ventral premotor activation was high. Thus mu-suppression EEG and 
classical fMRI during action observation do measure overlapping processes, but mu-suppression 
may not originate from the ventral premotor cortex that has historically been most associated 
with the MNS, but with a number of regions that have received less attention, including the 
somatosensory cortex. 
 Finally, with the advent of pattern classiﬁ cation methods to look at the distributed pattern of 
activation in regions of the cortex during action observation and execution, it has become pos-
sible to examine whether the pattern of activity is indeed similar while participants perform and 
perceive actions. This is important, because neuroscience converges to attribute representations 
to distributed patterns of activity of many neurons, rather than with single neurons. In the ﬁ rst 
successful study of that kind, it was shown that premotor, posterior parietal and somatosensory 
cortices indeed show similar patterns of activation while performing and listening to actions (Etzel 
Gazzola, & Keysers, 2008). Shortly thereafter, similar results were obtained for performing and 
viewing actions (Oosterhof, Wiggett, Diedrichsen, Tipper, & Downing, 2010). 
 Properties of the human mirror neuron system  
 Object and non-object directed actions 
 In humans, there is evidence that the pMNS also responds to actions not directed at objects (intran-
sitive actions). EEG/MEG studies show a suppression of the mu-rhythm during ﬁ nger movements 
observation (Babiloni, Babiloni, Carducci, Cincotti, Cocozza, Del Percio, et al., 2002; Calmels, 
Holmes, Jarry, Hars, Lopez, Paillard, et al., 2006; Cochin et al., 1998, 1999); TMS studies show a 
motor-evoked potential (MEP) facilitation during the observation of ﬁ nger ﬂ exion and extension 
(Baldissera, Cavallari, Craighero, & Fadiga, 2001; Clark, Tremblay, & Ste-Marie, 2004; Fadiga et al., 
1995); fMRI studies ﬁ nd premotor activity while observing ﬁ nger lifting (Iacoboni, Woods, Brass, 
Bekkering, Mazziotta, & Rizzolatti, 1999), hand gestures (Schippers, Gazzola, Goebel, & Keysers, 
2009; Schippers, Roebroeck, Renken, Nanetti, & Keysers, 2010; Lui, Buccino, Duzzi, Benuzzi, Crisi, 

PROPERTIES OF THE HUMAN MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM
243
Baraldi, et al., 2008) and the pantomime of object related actions without the object (Buccino, 
Binkofski, Fink, Fadiga, Fogassi, Gallese, et al., 2001); and psychophysical studies show that seeing 
another person moving their ﬁ ngers (Brass et al., 2000) or arm (Kilner, Paulignan, & Blakemore, 
2003) facilitates the execution of similar movement. Nevertheless when intransitive and transi-
tive actions are directly compared, transitive actions seem to elicit more pMNS activity (Buccino 
et al., 2001; Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2004), but see (Rossi, Tecchio, Pasqualetti, Ulivelli, Pizzella, 
Romani, et al., 2002). 
 How, What and Why 
 In the monkey, the combination of strictly and broadly congruent mirror neurons enables the 
MNS to contain information about  what  was performed (the goal) and  how  it was performed 
(the means). In humans, too, there is evidence for the representation of both goals and means 
in the pMNS (Thioux et al., 2008). TMS experiments evidence selective facilitation of the mus-
cles involved in the observed action (Alaerts, Heremans, Swinnen, & Wenderoth, 2009; Urgesi, 
Candidi, Fabbro, Romani, & Aglioti, 2006). FMRI experiments show that actions with familiar 
goals, but means the actor cannot reproduce still triggers activation in regions of the motor 
cortices recruited while the observer performs actions within its motor program that have the 
same goal (Aziz-Zadeh, Sheng, Liew, & Damasio, 2011; Gazzola et al., 2007a; Gazzola, Van Der 
Worp, Mulder, Wicker, Rizzolatti, & Keysers, 2007b), possibly allowing us to mirror at least 
the goal of non-human (robotic or animal) actions as well. Additionally, repetition suppres-
sion fMRI should be interpreted with care (Box 14.2), but it has been found that parts of the 
pMNS respond less to the sight of an action if it is preceded by an action sharing the same goal 
(Hamilton & Grafton, 2006, 2008). Because in monkeys, broadly congruent mirror neurons 
are twice as numerous as strictly congruent ones (Gallese et al., 1996; Rozzi et al., 2008), goals 
should prevail over means in the MNS, a ﬁ nding compatible with the observation that if asked 
to reproduce an action, humans tend to reproduce the goal rather than the means (Bekkering, 
Wohlschlager, & Gattis, 2000), but speciﬁ c tasks instructions can modify that tendency toward 
means (Bird, Brindley, Leighton, & Heyes, 2007a). Finally, in analogy to the sequence selectiv-
ity in humans, the human pMNS seems to be differentially activated by grasping in contexts 
that suggest different future actions (Iacoboni, Molnar-Szakacs, Gallese, Buccino, Mazziotta, 
& Rizzolatti, 2005). This suggests a certain level of ‘why’ coding in the pMNS. More abstract 
aspects of why however most likely require additional brain regions (Schippers et al., 2010; 
Spunt et al., 2011; Thioux et al., 2008).  
 Sounds 
 The human pMNS, as its macaque equivalent, is also activated by the sound of an action (Caetano, 
Jousmaki, & Hari, 2007; Gazzola et al., 2006; Pizzamiglio, Aprile, Spitoni, Pitzalis, Bates, D’Amico, 
et al., 2005), even in congenitally blind participants (Ricciardi et al., 2009) showing that the pMNS 
can develop independently of vision. In terms of what vs. how, auditory responses in the pMNS 
are a particularly interesting case. While the sight of an action usually involves information about 
the means and the goal (we see a hand press a piano key), the sound of an action often carries no 
information about what body part was used to perform the action (e.g. one could press a piano 
key with the foot, nose or hand and produce the same sound). Auditory mirror responses therefore 
epitomize the pMNS’s capacity to mirror what was done (press a key) without direct informa-
tion about how it was done, probably by activating the motor programs the listener would use 
most frequently to produce the same sound. It shows that the MNS projects the perceiver’s own 

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
244
motor programs onto the sensory evidence of other people’s actions, rather than objectively mir-
roring the details of how the other has performed the action. Interestingly, the response of auditory 
pMNS has been shown to be plastic into adult life (see “Plasticity and development”). 
 Correlation with empathy 
 People that report being more empathic in life, as measured using self report empathy ques-
tionnaires (IRI (Davis, 1980), or EQ (Baron-Cohen & Wheelwright, 2004)) have sometimes 
been found to activate region associated with the MNS more strongly (see Baird, Scheffer, & 
Wilson, 2011 for a critical review). Positive correlations were found between premotor and SI 
activation to the sound of neutral hand actions and the perspective taking subscale of the IRI 
(Gazzola et al., 2006). Similarly, during the observation of facial expressions, higher ventral pre-
motor activation was measured in participants with higher scores on the emotional subscales 
of the IRI (Jabbi, Swart, & Keysers, 2007), on the IRI total score (Pfeifer, Iacoboni, Mazziotta, & 
Dapretto, 2008) or on the EQ (Chakrabarti, Bullmore, & Baron-Cohen, 2006). Lesions to the 
ventral premotor cortex have also been found to reduce self reported empathy in the emo-
tional subscales, conﬁ rming an association of this region with empathy (Shamay-Tsoory, 
Aharon-Peretz, & Perry, 2009). The association of self-reported empathy and pMNS activation 
is, however, not extremely robust. In the same sample in which we found a correlation between 
pMNS activation and the perspective taking score while listening to the sound of actions, we 
failed to ﬁ nd a similar correlation while viewing the actions of others. In a number of other 
studies in our lab, we also failed to ﬁ nd similar associations. Because studies typically publish 
correlations if they ﬁ nd them, but not if they do not, it is difﬁ cult to judge what proportion of 
studies that correlated IRI scores with pMNS activation indeed found such correlation. The key 
question may be under what conditions, differences in self-report empathy lead to measurable 
differences in pMNS activations.  
 Anticipation 
 While observing the actions of others in a predictable context, activity in the MNS seems to pre-
dict the actions of others by ~200 ms. Infants suppress their mu-rhythm a couple of hundreds of 
milliseconds before the onset of a predictable arm movement (Southgate, Johnson, Osborne, & 
Csibra, 2009). Viewing a hand rhythmically ﬂ ex and extend the wrist, adult observers will modulate 
the excitability of their own wrist muscles with the same frequency, but about 200ms in advance 
of the observed movement (Borroni, Montagna, Cerri, & Baldissera, 2005). TMS-induced motor 
evoked potentials are facilitated by the vision of a grasping action, but more so when viewing a 
frame taken before the grasp than by a frame depicting the grasping itself (Urgesi et al., 2010). 
Given that it takes at least 100 ms for the brain to relay auditory and visual information to the 
MNS (Keysers et al., 2003; Kohler et al., 2002), this suggests that the MNS is part of a system that 
will anticipate predictable events. Interestingly, while exploring the ﬂ ow of information in the 
MNS while viewing the actions of others, we found that although the information ﬂ ow is initially 
from visual to premotor regions, the ﬂ ow later inverts, with a preponderance of backward ﬂ ow 
of information from premotor to visual regions (Schippers & Keysers, 2011). This observation 
is compatible with the notion that the MNS serves to predict upcoming sensory evidence about 
the actions of others (Gazzola & Keysers, 2009; Schippers & Keysers, 2011). Such anticipation 
may become particularly important when two agents have to act jointly: our sensorimotor delays 
normally make us react with a delay of ~200ms to sensory signals, anticipating the actions of oth-
ers by about 200ms would then ensure that we can act in real time to the (anticipated) actions of 
others (Kokal & Keysers, 2010).  

PLASTICITY AND DEVELOPMENT
245
 Plasticity and development  
 Expertise 
 FMRI experiments suggest that expertise in a domain is associated with increased activity in the 
putative MNS to the sight/sound of actions of that domain. Ballet dancers who have learned a 
speciﬁ c dance style have higher level of activity in the pre-motor and parietal cortex while watch-
ing that dance relative to a dance unknown to them (Calvo-Merino, Glaser, Grezes, Passingham, 
& Haggard, 2005). Professional pianists activate the putative MNS more then piano novices 
when viewing a hand play the piano (Haslinger, Erhard, Altenmuller, Schroeder, Boecker, & 
Ceballos-Baumann, 2005).  
 Training 
 Practice-related changes in the activation of the putative MNS can be observed after relatively short 
periods of training. Five weeks of dance training boosts activations in the pMNS when observing 
the learned dance sequences relative to other matched sequences (Cross, Hamilton, & Grafton, 
2006) and this increase correlated with the dancers’ appreciation of their ability to reproduce the 
sequences. Also, although piano na ï ve participants do not signiﬁ cantly activate their premotor 
cortex to the sound of piano music, after only ﬁ ve half-hour lessons of piano, they do (Lahav, 
Saltzman, & Schlaug, 2007). Finally, when participants ﬁ rst observe movies involving index and 
little-ﬁ nger movements, MEPs increase in the index, but not the little ﬁ nger for the observation of 
index ﬁ nger abduction, and vice-versa for the observation of little-ﬁ nger abduction. After being 
trained to perform index abductions when seeing little-ﬁ nger movements and vice-versa for a cou-
ple of hours, participants in this group showed a reversed effect: facilitation of MEPs of the index 
abductor when viewing little ﬁ nger abduction and vice versa (Catmur, Walsh, & Heyes, 2007). 
 Hebbian learning 
 Since an actor is spectator and auditor of her own actions, during hand actions for instance, pari-
etal and pre-motor neurons controlling an action ﬁ re at the same time as neurons in the STS 
that respond to the observation and sound of this speciﬁ c hand action (some of which irrespec-
tive of the view point). These sensory and motor neurons that ﬁ re together would wire together, 
i.e. strengthen their connexions through Hebbian synaptic potentiation (Keysers & Perrett, 
2004) (see also Heyes (2001) for a similar model based on association learning). After repeated 
self-observation/audition, the motor neurons in the premotor and parietal regions would now 
receive such strong synaptic input from sensory STS neurons responding to the sight and sound 
of the action, that they would become mirror. The same pairing between execution and observa-
tion would also occur in cases in which an individual is imitated by another (Brass & Heyes, 2005; 
Heyes, 2001; Del Giudice, Manera, & Keysers, 2009). For instance, a child cannot observe its own 
facial expressions, but the adult who imitates the child’s expression would serve as a mirror, trig-
gering in the child’s STS an activity pattern, representing what the expression sounds and looks 
like, that becomes associated with the pre-motor cortex activity producing the expression that was 
imitated (Del Giudice et al., 2009). Hebbian learning could explain the emergence of the MNS in 
infants and its plasticity in adulthood. This perspective does not preclude the possibility that some 
genetic factors may guide its development. Genetic factors could for instance canalize (Del Giudice 
et al., 2009) Hebbian learning by equipping the baby with a tendency to perform spontaneous 
and cyclic movements and to look preferentially at biological motion congruent with its actions 
to provide the right activity patterns for Hebbian learning to occur. Also, it does not preclude that 

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
246
mirror neurons may exist at birth for certain actions (e.g. tongue protrusion, see below). What is 
important in this perspective is that the MNS is no longer a speciﬁ c social adaptation, that evolved 
to permit action understanding, but is a simple consequence of sensory-motor learning that has 
to occur for an individual to be able to visually control his own actions (Brass and Heyes, 2005; 
Del Giudice et al., 2009; Oztop & Arbib, 2002). Note that due to sensorimotor latencies, there is 
a systematic time-lag between motor activity and sensory consequences that endow this Hebbian 
learning with predictive properties (see “Functions of the motor mirror neuron system”). Hebbian 
learning would of course work both ways: not only would it train connections from sensory to 
motor cortices, but also the reverse connections, from motor to sensory cortices. The latter could 
then serve to anticipate what the actor should see in ~200 ms, based on the motor program it 
currently executes, and these internal models could explain why information from premotor to 
sensory cortices is observed during action observation and action execution (Gazzola & Keysers, 
2009; Schippers & Keysers, 2011). 
 Neonatal imitation 
 Imitative abilities in newborns are often taken to suggest that the MNS is partially genetically 
predetermined. Infants younger than a month tend to imitate some facial expressions (Meltzoff 
& Moore, 1977). Tongue protrusion is the most frequently imitated behavior, but some experi-
ments also report lips protrusion, mouth opening, eye-blinking, and ﬁ nger movements imitation 
(Anisfeld, 1991; Meltzoff & Decety, 2003; Meltzoff & Moore, 1977). What remains unclear, is how 
this neonatal imitation relates to the MNS (Brass & Heyes, 2005; Heyes, 2001; Meltzoff & Decety, 
2003; Meltzoff & Moore, 1977). It could represent the activity of a primitive and specialized system 
that is fundamentally different from the adult MNS or a genetic pre-wiring of what will become 
the adult MNS. Longitudinal studies that measure the neural basis of such neonatal imitation and 
follow it until mature imitation arises later in life will be necessary to settle this debate. 
 MNS activity in children 
 Few studies have measured putative MNS activity in children. EEG shows mu-suppression dur-
ing action observation in children aged 4 to 10 years with the degree of mu-suppression inde-
pendent of age (Lepage & Theoret, 2006). In addition, babies aged 14–16 months show more 
mu- and beta-suppression, while they view other babies crawl (which they can do themselves) 
than when they see other babies walk (which they cannot yet do) (van Elk, Van Schie, Hunnius, 
Vesper, & Bekkering, 2008). This effect was stronger in more experienced walkers. The change in 
EEG rhythms occurring during the ﬁ rst years of life however makes it difﬁ cult to extend this EEG 
approach to infants below the age of one year. Shimada and Hiraki (Shimada & Hiraki, 2006) 
therefore used near infrared sprectroscopy, to test if younger children already activate their motor 
cortices while viewing the actions of others. They found that even 6–7-month-old infants already 
activate brain regions involved in hand action execution, while they view the hand actions of 
others. This suggests that action perception and execution may already be coupled by a MNS in 
6-month-old babies, and that this system changes relatively little from 4 to 10 years of age. 
 Action understanding in infants 
 By the end of the ﬁ rst year, infants readily recognize the goals of observed actions. For instance, 
6-month-old infants were habituated to seeing an experimenter grasp one of two toys (Woodward, 
1998). After habituation, the position of the toys was inverted. Infants suddenly looked longer 
when the experimenter started picking the other toy (despite the fact that the movement trajectory 

SIMILAR SYSTEMS FOR EMOTIONS AND SENSATIONS
247
was the same as during habituation). They were less interested when the experimenter picked 
the old toy in the new location, suggesting that infants at that age already encode the goal of 
an observed action (i.e.  what  was grasped). This effect depends on the infant’s ability to grasp. 
Three-month-old babies cannot yet reach and grasp objects by themselves, and they do not show 
the above-mentioned goal habituation. If they are ﬁ tted with a ‘sticky’ glove to which toys adhere, 
and become able to retrieve toys by themselves, when re-tested in the observation condition they 
start to show the goal habituation effect (Sommerville, Woodward, & Needham, 2005). The results 
of these habituation studies were recently corroborated by the analysis of anticipative eye-gaze 
behaviors in infants between 4 and 10 months of age (Kanakogi & Itakura, 2011). The experiment 
demonstrates that infants’ ability to predict the goal of a grasping action (by gazing at the target in 
advance of the grasp) develops with their ability to perform the same action. This link between the 
capacity to perform an action (grasping) and the capacity to understand similar actions in others 
suggests that the MNS, linking observation and execution, might be involved. 
 Similar systems for emotions and sensations 
 Touch 
 Similarly to what occurs in the MNS for actions, in an fMRI experiment we showed that the second-
ary, and to a lesser extent, primary somatosensory cortex is activated not only when participants 
are touched on their own body, but also when seeing others be touched in similar ways (Keysers, 
Wicker, Gazzola, Anton, Fogassi, & Gallese, 2004). A number of fMRI studies have now conﬁ rmed 
this original ﬁ nding (Blakemore, Bristow, Bird, Frith, & Ward, 2005; Ebisch, Perrucci, Ferretti, Del 
Gratta, Romani, & Gallese, 2008). In addition, Brodmann Area 2, a sector of the primary somato-
sensory cortex responsible for combining tactile and proprioceptive information, becomes active 
both when participants manipulate objects and when they see or hear other’s do so (Keysers et al., 
2010). This suggests that a mechanism similar to mirror neurons in the motor domain may apply 
to the somatosensory domain—we activate brain regions involved in our own tactile and proprio-
ceptive experiences when seeing those of others. A recent single cell recording study in monkeys 
has conﬁ rmed that some neurons with somatosensory properties indeed also respond to the sight 
of other people being touched in parietal area VIP (Ishida, Nakajima, Inase, & Murata, 2010). 
 The case of mirror-touch synaesthesia is probably an instance of unusually high vicarious acti-
vation of this neuronal circuit for touch. A little over 1% of people experience touch upon seeing 
someone else being touched (Banissy, Cohen Kadosh, Maus, Walsh, & Ward, 2009). Touch is typi-
cally experienced on the same body part that was seen to be touched. One such individual was 
scanned using fMRI while observing videos of someone being touched (Blakemore et al., 2005). 
The study revealed a hyper-activity in the somatosensory cortices, the pre-motor cortex, and the 
anterior insula of this person relative to control participants. The phenomenon seems therefore 
to correspond to the over-activity of one component of the mirror neuron system, where the 
re-enactment of the feeling of touch is operated. Interestingly, individuals presenting this form of 
synaesthesia seem to be particularly empathic (Banissy & Ward, 2007) and show superior perform-
ance in the recognition of facial expressions (Banissy, Garrido, Kusnir, Duchaine, Walsh, & Ward, 
2011), further strengthening the idea that empathy—the capacity to feel what goes on in others—
depends on vicarious activation of similar states in the self. 
 Pain 
 Functional MRI and EEG studies suggest that witnessing the pain of other individuals activates 
regions of the pain matrix involved in feeling pain, including the somatosensory, insular and 

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
248
anterior cingulate cortices (for reviews, see Lamm, Decety, & Singer, 2011; Keysers et al., 2010). 
Rare single cell recordings in epileptic patients suggest that single neurons in the anterior cingulate 
cortex indeed respond to both the experience of pinpricks and the observation of other individu-
als being pinpricked (Hutchison, Davis, Lozano, Tasker, & Dostrovsky, 1999). In addition, seeing 
a needle penetrate someone else’s skin leads to relaxation of the muscles in the observer that cor-
respond to the pricked region, suggesting an interaction between the mirroring of pain and the 
motor system (Avenanti, Minio-Paluello, Bufalari, & Aglioti, 2009). These effects are stronger in 
more empathic individuals (Avenanti et al., 2009; Singer Seymour, O’Doherty, Kaube, Dolan, & 
Frith, 2004). Patients with congenital insensitivity to pain, caused by a lack of peripheral nocicep-
tors, allow investigating whether ﬁ rst-hand experience of  somatic pain is necessary for empathiz-
ing with the pain of others. Compared to control participants, these patients report normal ratings 
of other people’s pain if they can see the facial expressions, but not if this information is removed 
(Danziger, Prkachin, & Willer, 2006). These patients also show relatively normal, although less 
consistent, vicarious activations in the insula and anterior cingulate cortex when witnessing the 
pain of others (Danziger, Faillenot, & Peyron, 2009). Somatic pain is however not the only form of 
pain—pain experience and pain matrix activation along with pain facial expressions can be trig-
gered by social factors including the separation from a loved one or social exclusion (Eisenberger, 
2012). Because this social pain does not require the small diameter nociceptors these patients are 
lacking, congenitally pain insensitive patients might vicariously leverage social pain experiences 
to empathize with the somatic and social pains of others. Whether participants that never experi-
enced any form of pain are capable of empathy for pain thus remains unknown.  
 Emotions 
 Finally, when observing the emotional facial expressions of others, participants not only acti-
vate regions they would use to generate similar expressions (van der Gaag, Minderaa, & Keysers, 
2007)—this motor sharing appears to trigger activity in the anterior insula of the observer in 
regions that become active when the observer experiences similar emotions (Jabbi & Keysers, 
2008; Jabbi et al., 2007; Wicker, Keysers, Plailly, Royet, Gallese, & Rizzolatti, 2003, for a review 
see Bastiaansen, Thioux, & Keysers, 2009). Again, this phenomenon is more pronounced in more 
empathic individuals (Jabbi et al., 2007). 
 The vicarious brain 
 Together, this data suggests that mirror neurons in the motor system may be a speciﬁ c example of 
a more general phenomenon: our brain vicariously activates representations of our own actions, 
sensations and emotions while viewing those of others (Keysers, 2011). Lesions in each of these 
systems seem to be followed by impairments in the recognition of other people’s states (Adolphs, 
Damasio, Tranel, Cooper, & Damasio, 2000; Calder, Keane, Manes, Antoun, & Young, 2000). 
 Functions of the motor mirror neuron system  
 We now start to have a relatively detailed understanding of the properties of mirror neurons in 
monkeys, and about factors that inﬂ uence the BOLD activity in the pMNS in humans. In contrast, 
one of the biggest challenges for research in the next decade will most likely be to reach an under-
standing of the function of this remarkable system. At present, many speculations exist, most of 
which are very plausible deductions from properties of the system, but hard evidence supporting 
the causal relationship between (p)MNS activity and that function remains scarce. What we write 

FUNCTIONS OF THE MOTOR MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM
249
below should thus be seen as a primer for further thoughts and experiments, rather than a deﬁ ni-
tive guide to the function of this system. 
 Action recognition 
 That mirror neurons link the observation/audition of an action to motor programs for the same 
action suggests that they may play a key role in perceiving what others do and how they are doing 
it by triggering an internal simulation of the perceived actions (Thioux et al., 2008). Evidence 
that the MNS indeed contributes to our understanding of other people’s actions primarily derives 
from studies that show that TMS induced perturbations of regions associated with the pMNS or 
neurological lesions in such regions cause (subtle) deﬁ cits in action understanding. Disrupting 
the ventral premotor cortex using repetitive TMS (rTMS) impairs participants’ capacity to judge 
how heavy a box is when seeing someone else lift the box (Pobric & Hamilton, 2006). Participants 
that suffer from limb apraxia have difﬁ culties in deciding whether a hand gesture they observe is 
meaningful or meaningless, with performance in this perceptual task being correlated with their 
capacity to imitate intransitive gestures (Pazzaglia, Smania, Corato, & Aglioti, 2008b). Lesion anal-
ysis showed that patients with limb apraxia who showed more action recognition difﬁ culties were 
more likely to have lesions in ventral premotor cortex. The fact that many patients with apraxia 
and lesions in the MNS were still able to perceive some of the gestures correctly shows that the 
MNS is not the only system that can help recognize actions, but the signiﬁ cant deﬁ cits observed in 
the majority of patients shows that it can signiﬁ cantly contribute to action recognition. In addi-
tion, participants with apraxia also have difﬁ culties in recognizing the sound of other people’s 
actions, with those suffering from apraxia of the mouth more impaired in recognizing mouth 
action sounds, and those suffering from apraxia of the limb more impaired in recognizing hand 
action sounds (Pazzaglia, Pizzamiglio, Pes, & Aglioti, 2008a), in agreement with the somatotopic 
organization of the auditory MNS (Gazzola et al., 2006). Another approach to selecting patients 
with lesions in the frontal pMNS regions is to look for patients with Broca’s aphasia. Patients with 
Broca’s aphasia have been shown to be more impaired in sequencing elements of a hand action 
(e.g. putting four photos taken during a grasping action into the correct order) than performing a 
similar task on physical phenomena (e.g. ordering photos of a bicycle falling to the ground) (Fazio, 
Cantagallo, Craighero, D’ausilio, Roy, Pozzo, et al., 2009). Unbiased lesion mapping approaches 
have also been used to explore the neural basis of action understanding. Kalenine et al. (Kalenine, 
Buxbaum, & Coslett, 2010) asked 47 patients with left hemisphere strokes and preserved language 
capacities to determine which of two movies depicted a certain action (e.g. painting a wall). The 
distractor movie could either be semantically different from the correct movie (e.g. hammering), 
or could simply differ from the correct movie in terms of kinematics (e.g. moving hand up and 
down at speed inappropriate for painting). It turned out that patients with lesions overlapping 
with the parietal pMNS were impaired at telling the difference between the correct and distrac-
tor movies when the distractor differed in terms of kinematics. Also lesions along the posterior 
middle temporal gyrus lead to impairments in the semantic condition, but not in the other one. 
Finally, the ventral premotor cortex is also involved in mirroring a very speciﬁ c type of action: 
facial expressions (van der Gaag et al., 2007), and lesions to this area impair the recognition of 
facial expressions (Adolphs et al., 2000). 
 Imitation 
 Given their propensity to match observed actions with motor programs necessary to execute the 
same action, mirror neurons have been proposed to play a role in imitation (Brass & Heyes, 2005; 

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
250
Heyes, 2001; Iacoboni, 2009). fMRI has demonstrated that activity in the ventral premotor cortex 
(ventral BA44 in particular) during imitation of ﬁ nger movements is higher than the combination 
of the activity during the observation and the execution of the same movements (Iacoboni et al., 
1999; Molnar-Szakacs, Iacoboni, Koski, & Mazziotta, 2005) and rTMS induced disruption of this 
region impairs imitation of an action, but not its execution in response to a spatial cue (Heiser, 
Iacoboni, Maeda, Marcus, & Mazziotta, 2003). Imitation is likely, however, to require more than a 
simple matching between action perception and action execution (Gergely, Bekkering, & Kiraly, 
2002; Tessari, Canessa, Ukmar, & Rumiati, 2007) and brain systems in addition to the MNS are 
likely to be essential for dynamically controlling the contribution of the MNS to behavior in a 
social setting (Kokal, Gazzola, & Keysers, 2009). 
 Ethologists and developmental psychologists have introduced an important distinction between 
emulation and imitation. Emulation refers to replicating the goal of an observed action without 
necessarily copying the means. Imitation in the strict sense requires that the detailed movements 
used to achieve this action be also copied. Considering that the majority of mirror neurons are of 
the broadly congruent type, observing an action should trigger a varied set of motor programs that 
would allow the observer to achieve the same goal. Of these, the motor system is likely to favor the 
most economical for the observer rather than the one chosen by the demonstrator, making emula-
tion a more natural consequence of mirror neurons than imitation. This seems to be the case for 
both human infants (Bekkering et al., 2000) and monkeys (Subiaul Cantlon, Holloway, & Terrace, 
2004), both of which seem to emulate, rather than imitate. True imitation using the MNS would 
require additional mechanisms that select the motor output of strictly congruent mirror neurons, 
and the necessity of these additional mechanisms may explain why adult humans can imitate while 
monkeys very seldom do so—despite the fact that both have mirror neurons. 
 Language 
 The MNS has also been considered to play a role in the evolution of language (Rizzolatti & Arbib, 
1998). The fact that mirror neurons in the monkey were discovered in F5, which is likely to be the 
homologue to ventral BA6, BA44 or 45 in humans, all of which are involved in spoken language, 
supports this idea. Mirror neurons could facilitate language evolution in two ways.
First, the acoustic signal composing speech is ambiguous. A certain sound for instance will be 
perceived as a/k/in front of an/a/, but as a/p/in front of an/u/. The motor theory of speech percep-
tion proposes that the human brain resolves this ambiguity, at least in part, by activating the motor 
programs it would use to produce this sequence of sounds (Liberman, Cooper, Shankweiler, & 
Studdert-Kennedy, 1967). If this motor program involves pushing the tongue on the palate, we 
will perceive a/k/, if it involves closing the lips, a/p/. In favour of this theory, one recent experiment 
found for instance that the perception of spoken syllables interferes with the articulation of speech 
sounds (Yuen, Davis, Brysbaert, & Rastle, 2010). FMRI and TMS studies show that the premotor 
and motor cortices, respectively, that are involved in producing speech sounds, become reactivated 
while we listen to the sounds of other people’s speech, and rTMS experiments show that interfering 
with this activity impairs speech perception (Iacoboni, 2008). Importantly, the regions involved 
correspond to those in which auditory mirror neurons were found in monkeys (Keysers et al., 
2003; Kohler et al., 2002), and where human brain activity is increased while hearing and perform-
ing goal directed mouth actions (Gazzola et al., 2006) and encompass classical MNS areas. 
 Secondly, according to embodied semantics, the meaning of action words like “running” might 
in part be stored in the motor programs we use to run. Indeed, when reading sentences, the 
premotor cortex becomes activated in a somatotopic fashion, with words like running, grasp-
ing and chewing activating regions involved in executing actions with the foot, hand and mouth, 

FUNCTIONS OF THE MOTOR MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM
251
respectively (Aziz-Zadeh et al., 2006; Hauk, Johnsrude, & Pulverm ü ller, 2004; Pulverm ü ller, 2005). 
The fact that these activations fall within regions showing mirror activity to the sight of other 
people performing similar actions (Aziz-Zadeh et al., 2006) suggests that some neurons might link 
the sound of action words to the motor representations much like mirror neurons link the sound 
of the action itself to the motor representations (Gazzola et al., 2006; Keysers et al., 2003; Kohler 
et al., 2002). In evolution, onomatopoeic words such as “crack” [a nut], which indeed sound like 
the action, may have served to recruit mirror neurons to convey action meaning through words. 
Modern language, with its fully arbitrary association of words and meanings may represent an 
evolution of this system (Keysers, 2011). 
 Although the MNS could therefore help in language and its evolution, the MNS is obviously 
not sufﬁ cient for language: monkeys have mirror neurons, but no language and many words are 
not about actions (e.g. ‘blue’) and, therefore, cannot be embodied in our motor cortex. The scope 
of MNS theories of language are therefore necessarily limited to speciﬁ c sub-aspects of language 
(Toni, De Lange, Noordzij, & Hagoort, 2008) and understanding how the MNS interacts with 
other systems to enable language will remain an important issue. 
 Prediction 
 In the Hebbian model presented above, for simplicity’s sake, we considered that while observing 
oneself while executing an action, activity in the premotor cortex is simultaneous with sensory 
representations of the same action in the STS. While this is approximately true at the time scale of 
entire actions, it takes ~200 ms for the causal chain of events linking premotor and STS activity to 
unfold: premotor activity trigger primary motor activity, which triggers muscle movements, the 
resulting visual or auditory signals (re-afference) need to go through the many synaptic stages of 
auditory and visual processing to project onto the synaptic connections in the parietal and premo-
tor cortices. This means that while we reach and grasp a cup in front of us, motor programs for 
 grasping  will be active while the STS is still sending representations of the  reaching phase back to 
parietal and premotor neurons. What gets to wire together is thus not the premotor command for 
grasping with the vision of grasping, but the command for  grasping with the vision of the  reaching 
that typically precedes grasping by ~200 ms. The Hebbian model thus predicts that mirror activ-
ity would anticipate actions about to occur in ~200 ms. This is exactly what seems to be the case 
(Borroni et al., 2005; Southgate et al., 2009; Urgesi et al., 2010) and has important consequences for 
the function of the MNS. Instead of retrieving information about the actions that  have occurred, 
it seems to trigger motor representations of the actions to come in the next hundreds of milli-
seconds. These anticipated motor representations then seem to be sent back to the STS (Gazzola 
and Keysers, 2009; Iacoboni, Koski, Brass, Bekkering, Woods, Dubeau, et al., 2001; Schippers and 
Keysers, 2011), where they are compared with the future sensory input, generating a prediction 
error (Gazzola & Keysers, 2009). The MNS might therefore be best understood as a predictive 
model (Kilner, Friston, & Frith, 2007), that generates hypothesis about people’s future actions and 
dynamically compares them with people’s next move to generate a dynamically adjusting model of 
other people’s intentions (i.e. future actions). In line with this interpretation, we would expect that 
while viewing predictable actions, more information ﬂ ow should actually travel from premotor to 
sensory cortices (predictions) than the other way around (prediction errors). For unpredictable 
actions, the opposite should be true. This is exactly what we found while participants try to guess 
the meaning of hand gestures. In the unpredictable beginning of a gesture, information ﬂ ow is 
stronger from sensory to premotor regions. Later, as gestures become more predictable, informa-
tion ﬂ ow predominates in the opposite, premotor to sensory direction (Schippers & Keysers, 2011). 
In nature, anticipating the behavior of a prey or predator can mean the difference between life and 

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
252
death. For humans, it can provide a competitive edge in sports (Aglioti, Cesari, Romani, & Urgesi, 
2008), but most importantly, it can be key to truly joint actions (Kokal et al., 2009)—for two people 
to act in synchrony, each partner’s brain has to anticipate the actions of the other partner by ~200 
ms to have enough time to program and execute his own action in behavioral synchrony with those 
observed. To act in ‘real time’ with someone else, our brain actually has to anticipate. Only by doing 
so can two people lift a set dinner table without tipping over the glasses, skillfully dance together or 
even just clap in synchrony. Again, information ﬂ ow from premotor to sensory regions is observed 
during joint actions (Kokal & Keysers, 2010), and could provide the neural basis for such anticipa-
tions. The fact that such sophisticated computations seem to be the outcome of simple Hebbian 
learning is an elegant property of the synaptic plasticity in the brain. 
 Learning by observation 
 Many have argued that the MNS can help the emergence of culture by equipping humans with 
the capacity to imitate. Incremental culture and technology however have to adopt the  successful 
actions of others, but not their unsuccessful attempts. The motor MNS alone cannot perform this 
ﬁ ltering, as it would respond equally to successful and unsuccessful actions. The fact that similar 
systems exist for emotions may resolve this problem. Individual trial-and-error learning occurs 
when we perform an action and the outcome is more positive then expected, with dopaminer-
gic reward prediction error signals increasing the likelihood of that particular behavior in the 
future (Schultz, 2006). Conceptually combining MNS for actions and similar systems for emotions 
means that while observing the actions and outcomes of others, we would vicariously activate 
motor  and emotional representation of similar actions and outcomes, respectively. Only those 
simulated actions that lead to unexpectedly positive simulated outcomes would then trigger vicari-
ous dopaminergic reward prediction signals that would consolidate those simulated behaviors that 
were successful. Thus, observation learning could actually uses the same mechanisms that govern 
individual learning, but operate on vicarious representations provided by MNS and similar mirror 
like mechanisms for vicarious reward (Keysers, 2011).  
 Support mentalizing 
 Mentalizing refers to the capacity to  consciously  attribute mental states and beliefs to other individ-
uals and has been associated with activity in the medial prefrontal cortex (Amodio & Frith, 2006). 
The tasks investigated in that literature differ from those in the literature on the MNS—mentalizing 
experiments do not typically involve the movies of actions used for MNS experiments, but explicitly 
encourage participants to  consciously think about what other people  think , while MNS experiments 
involve seeing/hearing the actions of others without being encouraged to think about the thoughts 
behind the actions (Keysers & Gazzola, 2007). It remains unclear how the MNS contributes to men-
talizing. Some propose that the MNS could feed into the distinct mentalizing brain system when 
the thoughts of others need to be deduced from their actions: much as we can mentalize about our 
own actions (why does my heart beat stronger each time I see her?), we could mentalize about the 
vicarious representations of other people’s actions, sensations and emotions (Keysers & Gazzola, 
2007). Others emphasize that across many studies, the medial prefrontal cortex involved in men-
talizing is only seldom found to be activated in the same studies as the MNS, suggesting that these 
two systems are often rather independent (Van Overwalle & Baetens, 2009). Understanding when 
and how the MNS and mentalizing brain regions collaborate will be an important question for 
the future (de Lange, Spronk, Willems, Toni, & Bekkering, 2008; Thioux et al., 2008), and studying 
the effective connectivity between these brain regions will be essential. In a ﬁ rst step toward that 

DYSFUNCTIONS OF THE MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM
253
direction, we studied connectivity across brains while a participant tries to understand the meaning 
of the gestures of another. We found that regions of both the pMNS and the mentalizing system of 
the observers carried information about the state of the motor cortices in the gesturer. If the state 
of these motor cortices is taken to reﬂ ect the intentions behind the gestures, that both the mental-
izing network and the pMNS of the observer contained information about these states suggests that 
they resonate with the motor intentions of the sender (Schippers et al., 2010). In the same line, it 
was demonstrated that empathic accuracy (the ability to accurately judge the emotions and state of 
mind of another person) is associated with increased activity in both systems (Zaki, Weber, Bolger, 
& Ochsner, 2009), and mentalizing about another person or about oneself increases the connectiv-
ity between the brain regions involved in this ability and the pMNS (Lombardo, M. V., Chakrabarti, 
Bullmore, Wheelwright, Sadek, Suckling, Consortium, & Baron-Cohen, 2010).  
 Dysfunctions of the mirror neuron system  
 Compulsive imitation 
 Following frontal lobe lesion, some patients demonstrate a tendency to imitate the behaviors of 
other people, like scratching their forehead, clapping their hands, and so on (De Renzi, Cavalleri, & 
Facchini, 1996; Lhermitte, 1983; Lhermitte, Pillon, & Serdaru, 1986). The patients persist in imitat-
ing the behavior of the experimenter even after being explicitly told to stop doing so. According to 
one large survey, the phenomenon would be observed in about 40% of patients with frontal lobe 
lesions, and would virtually never occur as a consequence of post-rolandic brain lesions (De Renzi 
et al., 1996). Infarct to the anterior cerebral artery resulting in medial frontal lesions seems to be 
a frequent cause. The fact that most humans do not overtly and compulsively imitate the actions 
performed by others indicates the existence of a supervisory system in the brain that ensures that 
of all the premotor programs that mirror neurons activate, only those that are appropriate in a 
particular situation will be executed while the others are somehow inhibited (Shallice, Burgess, 
Schon, & Baxter, 1989). The medial frontal lesions inducing compulsive imitation behaviors prob-
ably disrupt this system. The idea of inhibitory control ﬁ nds further support from the fact that 
fMRI studies that measure an activation of premotor cortices during action observation some-
times simultaneously measure an inhibition of M1, as if to block the motor output of simulation 
(Gazzola and Keysers, 2009; Gazzola et al., 2007a).  
 Autism spectrum disorders 
 A number of studies have been conducted to test whether autism spectrum disorders (ASD) would 
be characterized by a dysfunction of the MNS. Roughly, the idea is that since the MNS seems to 
be supporting our ability to understand other individuals’ actions and to share their inner experi-
ences, a dysfunction at this level could explain the social difﬁ culties encountered by those with 
ASD (Iacoboni & Dapretto, 2006; Oberman & Ramachandran, 2007; Rizzolatti, Fabbri-Destro, & 
Cattaneo, 2009; Williams, Whiten, Suddendorf, & Perrett, 2001). 
 Several research teams have used EEG to measure Mu-suppression during the observation of 
hand actions in individuals with ASD and control participants (Box 14.2). Some have reported 
an absence or a reduction of the Mu wave suppression in ASD, and concluded that the pre-motor 
cortex was not (or less) active during the observation of hand actions (Bernier, Dawson, Webb, & 
Murias, 2007; Oberman, Hubbard, Mccleery, Altschuler, Ramachandran, & Pineda, 2005). Other 
studies, however, found normal mu-suppression in similar conditions (Fan, Decety, Yang, Liu, & 
Cheng, 2010; Raymaekers Wiersema, & Roeyers, 2009), or when the subject performing the action 
was familiar to the participant (Oberman, Ramachandran, & Pineda, 2008). 

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
254
 Using fMRI to investigate the MNS activity during the observation of hand actions has not 
provided further support to the hypothesis of a MNS dysfunction in ASD. In one study, partici-
pants with ASD activated the inferior frontal gyrus (BA44) more than controls while observing 
meaningless gestures (Martineau, Andersson, Barth é l é my, Cottier, & Destrieux, 2010). In another 
study, the authors demonstrated a normal habituation of the BOLD signal when the same action 
was viewed or executed multiple times (Dinstein, Thomas, Humphreys, Minshew, Behrmann, & 
Heeger, 2010), suggesting that participants with ASD re-enacted the observed hand actions just 
like controls. In accordance with this conclusion, at least two studies have also showed behavio-
rally that the execution of a movement was slowed-down by the concurrent observation of an 
incongruent movement in autism (Bird, Leighton, Press, & Heyes, 2007b; Spengler, Bird, & Brass, 
2010). In one study, the participants with ASD also demonstrated a normal sensitivity to biological 
motion, with a more pronounced interference effect when observing a human relative to a robotic 
arm (Bird et al., 2007b). 
 In general, the research on the observation of hand actions has not lent strong support to the 
MNS hypothesis of autism. It will be important however to explore the factors that may inﬂ uence 
the activation of the MNS in ASD, like for instance the degree of identiﬁ cation with the actor 
(Oberman et al., 2008). Moreover, some problems have been identiﬁ ed in the timely processing of 
action plans during the execution of sequences of actions (e.g. reaching, grasping and bringing to 
the mouth), which might have consequences on the response of the pre-motor cortex during the 
observation of such complex actions (Cattaneo, Fabbri-Destro, Boria, Pieraccini, Monti, Cossu, 
et al. 2007). The SMA is an area where an atypical activity has been observed in ASD during the 
perception of hand actions (Marsh & Hamilton, 2011), but it is unsure whether the difference 
between groups was the consequence of reduced mirror neuron activity or a difference in the level 
of activity during the baseline visual condition. 
 Other studies have investigated the response of the MNS to the observation of facial expressions. 
In children, a lack of activity in the inferior frontal gyrus pars opercularis was documented and 
taken as evidence of an MNS dysfunction (Dapretto, Davies, Pfeifer, Scott, Sigman, Bookheimer, 
et al., 2006). Testing adult participants, we found no evidence for a group difference in this area, 
nor any other. However, we found that activity in the same portion of the IFG increased with age 
in ASD. Although the activity was below the normal level for participants in their 20s, older partici-
pants activated this area as much as controls when viewing dynamic facial expressions. Moreover, 
the level of activity in the region was positively correlated with the scores on a social functioning 
scale (Bastiaansen, Thioux, Nanetti, Van Der Gaag, Ketelaars, Minderaa, et al., 2011). These ﬁ nd-
ings may indicate a delay in the wiring of the mirror neurons involved in the re-enactment of 
facial movements. Using electromyography to record the spontaneous facial reactions associated 
with the observation of emotional facial expressions, it was found that the number of facial reac-
tions that were congruent with the observed emotion tended to increase with age in children with 
ASD, while this number was consistently high in typically developing children of 7 years and older 
(Beall, Moody, Mcintosh, Hepburn, & Reed, 2008). Facial movements have a special status regard-
ing the development of the MNS, since it is not possible to observe one’s own facial movements 
(see “Plasticity and development”). Moreover, faces also have a very special status for children with 
ASD who tend to look less at faces than typically developing children. Further research into the 
early development of the MNS for faces may provide valuable insights into the social difﬁ culties 
experienced by individuals with ASD. 
 In conclusion, although it is not in its infancy anymore, the research on the possible involvement 
of the MNS in the aetiology of ASD has struggled to provide consistent evidences. The devel-
opment of the MNS for faces might be at risk. In general however, it will be important to try 

255
REFERENCES
identifying the factors that may inﬂ uence the MNS response, keeping in mind that these factors 
might lie outside of the MNS itself, for instance in the attention paid to biological stimuli, and the 
degree of identiﬁ cation with the actor. 
 Acknowledgements 
 The work was supported by grants of the Dutch science foundation (N.W.O.), including NIHC 
grants to CK (056-13-013, 056-13-017, 452-04-305) and a VENI grant to VG (451-09-006). MT 
was funded by N.W.O. grant 056-13-017. 
 References 
 Adolphs, R., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., Cooper, G., & Damasio, A. R. (2000).  A role for somatosensory 
cortices in the visual recognition of emotion as revealed by three-dimensional lesion mapping .  Journal 
of Neuroscience  20 ,  2683–90 . 
 Aglioti, S. M., Cesari, P., Romani, M., & Urgesi, C. (2008).  Action anticipation and motor resonance in 
elite basketball players .  Nature Neuroscience  11 ,  1109–16 . 
 Alaerts, K., Heremans, E., Swinnen, S. P. & Wenderoth, N. (2009).  How are observed actions mapped to 
the observer’s motor system? Infl uence of posture and perspective .  Neuropsychologia  47 :  415–22 . 
 Amodio, D. M., & Frith, C. D. (2006).  Meeting of minds: the medial frontal cortex and social cognition . 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience  7 ,  268–77 . 
 Anisfeld, M. 1991.  Neonatal imitation .  Developmental Review  11 ,  60–97 . 
 Arnstein, D., Cui, F., Keysers, C., Maurits, N. M., & Gazzola, V. (2011).  μ -suppression during action 
observation and execution correlates with BOLD in dorsal premotor, inferior parietal, and SI cortices . 
 Journal of Neuroscience  31 ,  14243–9 . 
 Avenanti, A., Bolognini, N., Maravita, A., & Aglioti, S. M. (2007).  Somatic and motor components of 
action simulation .  Current Biology  17 ,  2129–35 . 
 Avenanti, A., Minio-Paluello, I., Bufalari, I., & Aglioti, S. M. (2009).  Th e pain of a model in the personality 
of an onlooker: infl uence of state-reactivity and personality traits on embodied empathy for pain . 
 NeuroImage  44 ,  275–83 . 
 Aziz-Zadeh, L., Iacoboni, M., Zaidel, E., Wilson, S., & Mazziotta, J. (2004).  Left  hemisphere motor 
facilitation in response to manual action sounds .  European Journal of Neuroscience  19 ,  2609–12 . 
 Aziz-Zadeh, L., Sheng, T., Liew, S. L., & Damasio, H. (2011).  Understanding otherness: Th e neural bases of 
action comprehension and pain empathy in a congenital amputee .  Cerebral Cortex  22 , 811–19. 
 Aziz-Zadeh, L., Wilson, S. M., Rizzolatti, G., & Iacoboni, M. (2006).  Congruent embodied representations 
for visually presented actions and linguistic phrases describing actions .  Current Biology  16 ,  1818–23 . 
 Babiloni, C., Babiloni, F., Carducci, F., Cincotti, F., Cocozza, G., Del Percio, C., Moretti, D. V., & Rossini, 
P. M. (2002).  Human cortical electroencephalography (EEG) rhythms during the observation of simple 
aimless movements: A high-resolution EEG study .  NeuroImage  17 ,  559–72 . 
 Baird, A. D., Scheff er, I. E., & Wilson, S. J. (2011).  Mirror neuron system involvement in empathy: a critical 
look at the evidence .  Social Neuroscience  6 ,  327–35 . 
 Baldissera, F., Cavallari, P., Craighero, L., & Fadiga, L. (2001).  Modulation of spinal excitability during 
observation of hand actions in humans .  European Journal of Neuroscience  13 ,  190–4 . 
 Banissy, M. J., Cohen Kadosh, R., Maus, G. W., Walsh, V., & Ward, J. (2009).  Prevalence, characteristics 
and a neurocognitive model of mirror-touch synaesthesia .  Experimental Brain Research  198 ,  261–72 . 
 Banissy, M. J., Garrido, L., Kusnir, F., Duchaine, B., Walsh, V., & Ward, J. (2011).  Superior facial expression, 
but not identity recognition, in mirror-touch synesthesia .  Journal of Neuroscience  31 ,  1820–4 . 
 Banissy, M. J. & Ward, J. (2007).  Mirror-touch synesthesia is linked with empathy .  Nature Neuroscience  10 , 
 815–6 . 

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
256
 Baron-Cohen, S., & Wheelwright, S. (2004).  Th e empathy quotient: An investigation of adults with 
Asperger syndrome or high functioning autism, and normal sex diff erences .  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders ,  34 ,  163–75 . 
 Bartels, A., Logothetis, N. K., & Moutoussis, K. (2008).  fMRI and its interpretations: an illustration on 
directional selectivity in area V5/MT .  Trends in Neurosciences  31 ,  444–53 . 
 Bastiaansen, J. A., Th ioux, M., & Keysers, C. (2009).  Evidence for mirror systems in emotions . 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, London, B Biological Science  364 ,  2391–404 . 
 Bastiaansen, J. A., Th ioux, M., Nanetti, L., van der Gaag, C., Ketelaars, C., Minderaa, R., & Keysers, C. 
(2011).  Age-related increase in inferior frontal gyrus activity and social functioning in autism spectrum 
disorder .  Biological Psychiatry  69 ,  832–8 . 
 Beall, P. M., Moody, E. J., McIntosh, D. N., Hepburn, S. L., & Reed, C. L. (2008).  Rapid facial reactions 
to emotional facial expressions in typically developing children and children with autism spectrum 
disorder .  Journal of Experimental Child Psychology  101 ,  206–23 . 
 Bekkering, H., Wohlschlager, A., & Gattis, M. (2000).  Imitation of gestures in children is goal-directed . 
 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology A  53 ,  153–64 . 
 Bernier, R., Dawson, G., Webb, S., & Murias, M. (2007).  EEG mu rhythm and imitation impairments in 
individuals with autism spectrum disorder .  Brain and Cognition  64 ,  228–37 . 
 Bird, G., Brindley, R., Leighton, J., & Heyes, C. (2007a).  General processes, rather than “goals,” explain 
imitation errors .  Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance  33 ,  1158–69 . 
 Bird, G., Leighton, J., Press, C., & Heyes, C. (2007b).  Intact automatic imitation of human and robot 
actions in autism spectrum disorders .  Proceedings of the Royal Society: B Biological Sciences  274 , 
 3027–31 . 
 Blakemore, S. J., Bristow, D., Bird, G., Frith, C., & Ward, J. (2005).  Somatosensory activations during the 
observation of touch and a case of vision-touch synaesthesia .  Brain  128 ,  1571–83 . 
 Bonini, L., Rozzi, S., Serventi, F. U., Simone, L., Ferrari, P. F., & Fogassi, L. (2010).  Ventral premotor and 
inferior parietal cortices make distinct contribution to action organization and intention understanding . 
 Cerebral Cortex  20 ,  1372–85 . 
 Bonini, L., Serventi, F. U., Simone, L., Rozzi, S., Ferrari, P. F., & Fogassi, L. (2011).  Grasping neurons 
of monkey parietal and premotor cortices encode action goals at distinct levels of abstraction during 
complex action sequences .  Journal of Neuroscience  31 ,  5876–86 . 
 Borroni, P., Montagna, M., Cerri, G., & Baldissera, F. (2005).  Cyclic time course of motor excitability 
modulation during the observation of a cyclic hand movement .  Brain Research  1065 ,  115–24 . 
 Brass, M., Bekkering, H., Wohlschlager, A., & Prinz, W. (2000).  Compatibility between observed and 
executed fi nger movements: comparing symbolic, spatial, and imitative cues .  Brain and Cognition  44 , 
 124–43 . 
 Brass, M., & Heyes, C. (2005).  Imitation: is cognitive neuroscience solving the correspondence problem? 
 Trends in Cognitive Science  9 ,  489–95 . 
 Buccino, G., Binkofski, F., Fink, G. R., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., Seitz, R. J., Zilles, K., Rizzolatti, 
G., & Freund, H. J. (2001).  Action observation activates premotor and parietal areas in a somatotopic 
manner: an fMRI study .  European Journal of Neuroscience  13 ,  400–4 . 
 Caetano, G., Jousmaki, V., & Hari, R. (2007).  Actor’s and observer’s primary motor cortices stabilize 
similarly aft er seen or heard motor actions .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, USA  104 , 
 9058–62 . 
 Calder, A. J., Keane, J., Manes, F., Antoun, N., & Young, A. W. (2000).  Impaired recognition and 
experience of disgust following brain injury .  Nature Neuroscience  3 ,  1077–8 . 
 Calmels, C., Holmes, P., Jarry, G., Hars, M., Lopez, E., Paillard, A., & Stam, C. J. (2006).  Variability of 
EEG synchronization prior to and during observation and execution of a sequential fi nger movement . 
 Human Brain Mapping  27 ,  251–66 . 

257
 Calvo-Merino, B., Glaser, D. E., Grezes, J., Passingham, R. E., & Haggard, P. (2005).  Action observation 
and acquired motor skills: an FMRI study with expert dancers .  Cerebral Cortex  15 ,  1243–9 . 
 Caspers, S., Zilles, K., Laird, A. R., & Eickhoff , S. B. (2010).  ALE meta-analysis of action observation and 
imitation in the human brain .  NeuroImage  50 ,  1148–67 . 
 Catmur, C., Walsh, V., & Heyes, C. (2007).  Sensorimotor learning confi gures the human mirror system . 
 Current Biology  17 ,  1527–31 . 
 Cattaneo, L., Fabbri-Destro, M., Boria, S., Pieraccini, C., Monti, A., Cossu, G., & Rizzolatti, G. (2007). 
 Impairment of actions chains in autism and its possible role in intention understanding .  Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Science, USA  104 ,  17825–30 . 
 Chakrabarti, B., Bullmore, E. & Baron-Cohen, S. (2006).  Empathizing with basic emotions: common and 
discrete neural substrates .  Social Neuroscience  1 ,  364–84 . 
 Chong, T. T., Cunnington, R., Williams, M. A., Kanwisher, N., & Mattingley, J. B. (2008).  fMRI adaptation 
reveals mirror neurons in human inferior parietal cortex .  Current Biology  18 ,  1576–80 . 
 Clark, S., Tremblay, F., & Ste-Marie, D. (2004).  Diff erential modulation of corticospinal excitability during 
observation, mental imagery and imitation of hand actions .  Neuropsychologia  42 ,  105–12 . 
 Cochin, S., Barthelemy, C., Lejeune, B., Roux, S., & Martineau, J. (1998).  Perception of motion and qEEG 
activity in human adults .  Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology  107 ,  287–95 . 
 Cochin, S., Barthelemy, C., Roux, S., & Martineau, J. (1999).  Observation and execution of movement: 
similarities demonstrated by quantifi ed electroencephalography .  European Journal of Neuroscience  11 , 
 1839–42 . 
 Cross, E. S., Hamilton, A. F., & Graft on, S. T. (2006).  Building a motor simulation de novo: observation of 
dance by dancers .  NeuroImage  31 ,  1257–67 . 
 Danziger, N., Faillenot, I., & Peyron, R. (2009).  Can we share a pain we never felt? Neural correlates of 
empathy in patients with congenital insensitivity to pain .  Neuron  61 ,  203–12 . 
 Danziger, N., Prkachin, K. M., & Willer, J-C. (2006).  Is pain the price of empathy? Th e perception of 
others’ pain in patients with congenital insensitivity to pain .  Brain  129 ,  2494–507 . 
 Dapretto, M., Davies, M. S., Pfeifer, J. H., Scott, A. A., Sigman, M., Bookheimer, S. Y., & Iacoboni, 
M. (2006).  Understanding emotions in others: mirror neuron dysfunction in children with autism 
spectrum disorders .  Nature Neuroscience  9 ,  28–30 . 
 Davis, M. H. (1980).  A multidimensional approach to individual diff erences in empathy .  JSAS Catalog of 
Selected Documents in Psychology  10 ,  85 –104. 
 de Lange, F. P., Spronk, M., Willems, R. M., Toni, I., & Bekkering, H. (2008).  Complementary systems for 
understanding action intentions .  Current Biology  18 ,  454–7 . 
 de Renzi, E., Cavalleri, F., & Facchini, S. (1996).  Imitation and utilization behavior .  Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry  61 ,  396–400 . 
 del Giudice, M., Manera, V., & Keysers, C. (2009).  Programmed to learn? Th e ontogeny of mirror neurons . 
 Developmental Science  12 ,  350–63 . 
 Dinstein, I., Hasson, U., Rubin, N., & Heeger, D. J. (2007).  Brain areas selective for both observed and 
executed movements .  Journal of Neurophysiology  98 ,  1415–27 . 
 Dinstein, I., Th omas, C., Humphreys, K., Minshew, N., Behrmann, M., & Heeger, D. J. (2010).  Normal 
movement selectivity in autism .  Neuron  66 ,  461–9 . 
 Ebisch, S. J., Perrucci, M. G., Ferretti, A., del Gratta, C., Romani, G. L., & Gallese, V. (2008).  Th e sense of 
touch: Embodied simulation in a visuotactile mirroring mechanism for observed animate or inanimate 
touch .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  20 ,  1611–23 . 
 Eisenberger, N. I. (2012).  Th e pain of social disconnection: examining the shared neural underpinnings of 
physical and social pain .  Nature Reviews Neuroscience  13 ,  421–34 . 
 Etzel, J. A., Gazzola, V., & Keysers, C. (2008).  Testing simulation theory with cross-modal multivariate 
classifi cation of fMRI data .  PLoS One  3 ,  e3690 . 
REFERENCES

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
258
 Evangeliou, M. N., Raos, V., Galletti, C., & Savaki, H. E. (2009).  Functional imaging of the parietal cortex 
during action execution and observation .  Cerebral Cortex  19 ,  624–39 . 
 Fadiga, L., Craighero, L., & Olivier, E. (2005).  Human motor cortex excitability during the perception of 
others’ action .  Current Opinion in Neurobiology  15 ,  213–18 . 
 Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Pavesi, G., & Rizzolatti, G. (1995).  Motor facilitation during action observation: a 
magnetic stimulation study .  Journal of Neurophysiology  73 ,  2608–11 . 
 Fan, Y-T., Decety, J., Yang, C-Y., Liu, J-L., & Cheng, Y. (2010).  Unbroken mirror neurons in autism 
spectrum disorders .  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry ,  and Allied Disciplines  51 ,  981–8 . 
 Fazio, P., Cantagallo, A., Craighero, L., D’Ausilio, A., Roy, A. C., Pozzo, T., Calzolari, F., Granieri, E., & 
Fadiga, L. (2009).  Encoding of human action in Broca’s area .  Brain  132 ,  1980–8 . 
 Ferrari, P. F., Gallese, V., Rizzolatti, G., & Fogassi, L. (2003).  Mirror neurons responding to the observation 
of ingestive and communicative mouth actions in the monkey ventral premotor cortex .  European 
Journal of Neuroscience  17 ,  1703–14 . 
 Filimon, F., Nelson, J. D., Hagler, D. J., & Sereno, M. I. (2007).  Human cortical representations for 
reaching: mirror neurons for execution, observation, and imagery .  NeuroImage  37 ,  1315–28 . 
 Fujii, N., Hihara, S., & Iriki, A. (2008).  Social cognition in premotor and parietal cortex .  Social 
Neuroscience  3 ,  250–60 . 
 Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Rizzolatti, G. (1996).  Action recognition in the premotor cortex .  Brain 
 119 (Pt 2),  593–609 . 
 Gastaut, H. J., & Bert, J. (1954).  EEG changes during cinematographic presentation; moving picture 
activation of the EEG .  Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology  6 ,  433–44 . 
 Gazzola, V., Aziz-Zadeh, L., & Keysers, C. (2006).  Empathy and the somatotopic auditory mirror system in 
human .  Current Biology  16 ,  1824–9 . 
 Gazzola, V., & Keysers, C. (2009).  Th e observation and execution of actions share motor and 
somatosensory voxels in all tested subjects: single-subject analyses of unsmoothed fMRI data .  Cerebral 
Cortex  19 ,  1239–55 . 
 Gazzola, V., Rizzolatti, G., Wicker, B., & Keysers, C. (2007a).  Th e anthropomorphic brain: Th e mirror 
neuron system responds to human and robotic actions .  NeuroImage  35 ,  1674–84 . 
 Gazzola, V., van der Worp, H., Mulder, T., Wicker, B., Rizzolatti, G., & Keysers, C. (2007b).  Aplasics born 
without hands mirror the goal of hand actions with their feet .  Current Biology  17 ,  1235–40 . 
 Gergely, G., Bekkering, H., & Kiraly, I. (2002).  Rational imitation in preverbal infants .  Nature  415 ,  755 . 
 Graziano, M. S., Taylor, C. S., & Moore, T. (2002).  Complex movements evoked by microstimulation of 
precentral cortex .  Neuron  34 ,  841–51 . 
 Grezes, J., Armony, J. L., Rowe, J., & Passingham, R. E. (2003).  Activations related to “mirror” and 
“canonical” neurones in the human brain: an fMRI study .  NeuroImage  18 ,  928–37 . 
 Hamilton, A. F., & Graft on, S. T. (2006).  Goal representation in human anterior intraparietal sulcus . 
 Journal of Neuroscience  26 ,  1133–7 . 
 Hamilton, A. F., & Graft on, S. T. (2008).  Action outcomes are represented in human inferior frontoparietal 
cortex .  Cerebral Cortex  18 ,  1160–8 . 
 Hari, R., Forss, N., Avikainen, S., Kirveskari, E., Salenius, S., & Rizzolatti, G. (1998).  Activation of human 
primary motor cortex during action observation: a neuromagnetic study .  Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA  95 ,  15061–5 . 
 Haslinger, B., Erhard, P., Altenmuller, E., Schroeder, U., Boecker, H., & Ceballos-Baumann, A. O. (2005). 
 Transmodal sensorimotor networks during action observation in professional pianists .  Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience  17 ,  282–93 . 
 Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., & Pulverm ü ller, F. (2004).  Somatotopic representation of action words in human 
motor and premotor cortex .  Neuron  41 ,  301–7 . 
 Heiser, M., Iacoboni, M., Maeda, F., Marcus, J., & Mazziotta, J. C. (2003).  Th e essential role of Broca’s area 
in imitation .  European Journal of Neuroscience  17 ,  1123–8 . 

259
 Heyes, C. (2001).  Causes and consequences of imitation .  Trends in Cognitive Science  5 ,  253–61 . 
 Hutchison, W. D., Davis, KD., Lozano, A. M., Tasker, R. R., & Dostrovsky, J. O. (1999).  Pain-related 
neurons in the human cingulate cortex .  Nature Neuroscience  2 ,  403–5 . 
 Iacoboni, M. (2008).  Th e role of premotor cortex in speech perception: evidence from fMRI and rTMS . 
 Journal of Physiology, Paris  102 ,  31–4 . 
 Iacoboni, M. (2009).  Neurobiology of imitation .  Current Opinion in Neurobiology  19 ,  661–5 . 
 Iacoboni, M., & Dapretto, M. (2006).  Th e mirror neuron system and the consequences of its dysfunction . 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience  7 ,  942–51 . 
 Iacoboni, M., Koski, L. M., Brass, M., Bekkering, H., Woods, R. P., Dubeau, M. C., Mazziotta, J. C. 
& Rizzolatti, G. (2001).  Reaff erent copies of imitated actions in the right superior temporal cortex . 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, USA  98 ,  13995–9 . 
 Iacoboni, M., Molnar-Szakacs, I., Gallese, V., Buccino, G., Mazziotta, J. C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2005). 
 Grasping the intentions of others with one’s own mirror neuron system .  PLoS Biology  3 ,  e79 . 
 Iacoboni, M., Woods, R. P., Brass, M., Bekkering, H., Mazziotta, J. C., & Rizzolatti, G. (1999).  Cortical 
mechanisms of human imitation .  Science  286 ,  2526–8 . 
 Ishida, H., Nakajima, K., Inase, M., & Murata, A. (2010).  Shared mapping of own and others’ bodies in 
visuotactile bimodal area of monkey parietal cortex .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  22 ,  83–96 . 
 Jabbi, M., & Keysers, C. (2008).  Inferior frontal gyrus activity triggers anterior insula response to emotional 
facial expressions .  Emotion  8 ,  775–80 . 
 Jabbi, M., Swart, M., & Keysers, C. (2007).  Empathy for positive and negative emotions in the gustatory 
cortex .  NeuroImage  34 ,  1744–53 . 
 Kalenine, S., Buxbaum, L. J., & Coslett, H. B. (2010).  Critical brain regions for action recognition: lesion 
symptom mapping in left  hemisphere stroke .  Brain  133 ,  3269–80 . 
 Kanakogi, Y., & Itakura, S. (2011).  Developmental correspondence between action prediction and motor 
ability in early infancy .  Nature Communications  2 ,  341 . 
 Keysers, C. (2011).  Th e Empathic Brain . Amsterdam: Social Brain Press. 
 Keysers, C., & Gazzola, V. (2007).  Integrating simulation and theory of mind: from self to social cognition . 
 Trends in Cognitive Science  11 ,  194–6 . 
 Keysers, C., & Gazzola, V. (2009).  Expanding the mirror: vicarious activity for actions, emotions, and 
sensations .  Current Opinion in Neurobiology  19 ,  666–71 . 
 Keysers, C., & Gazzola, V. (2010).  Social neuroscience: mirror neurons recorded in humans .  Current 
Biology  20 ,  R353–4 . 
 Keysers, C., Kaas, J. H., & Gazzola, V. (2010).  Somatosensation in social perception .  Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience  11 ,  417–28 . 
 Keysers, C., Kohler, E., Umilta, M. A., Nanetti, L., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2003).  Audiovisual mirror 
neurons and action recognition .  Experimental Brain Research  153 ,  628–36 . 
 Keysers, C., & Perrett, D. I. (2004).  Demystifying social cognition: A Hebbian perspective .  Trends in 
Cognitive Science  8 ,  501–7 . 
 Keysers, C., Wicker, B., Gazzola, V., Anton, J. L., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2004).  A touching sight: SII/PV 
activation during the observation and experience of touch .  Neuron  42 ,  335–46 . 
 Kilner, J. M., Friston, K. J., & Frith, C. D. (2007).  Predictive coding: an account of the mirror neuron 
system .  Cognitive Process  8 ,  159–66 . 
 Kilner, J. M., Neal, A., Weiskopf, N., Friston, K. J., & Frith, C. D. (2009).  Evidence of mirror neurons in 
human inferior frontal gyrus .  Journal of Neuroscience  29 ,  10153–9 . 
 Kilner, J. M., Paulignan, Y., & Blakemore, S. J. (2003).  An interference eff ect of observed biological 
movement on action .  Current Biology  13 ,  522–5 . 
 Kohler, E., Keysers, C., Umilta, M. A., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (2002).  Hearing sounds, 
understanding actions: action representation in mirror neurons .  Science  297 ,  846–8 . 
REFERENCES

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
260
 Kokal, I., Gazzola, V., & Keysers, C. (2009).  Acting together in and beyond the mirror neuron system . 
 NeuroImage  47 ,  2046–56 . 
 Kokal, I., & Keysers, C. (2010).  Granger causality mapping during joint actions reveals evidence for 
forward models that could overcome sensory-motor delays .  PLoS One  5 ,  e13507 . 
 Lahav, A., Saltzman, E., & Schlaug, G. (2007).  Action representation of sound: audiomotor recognition 
network while listening to newly acquired actions .  Journal of Neuroscience  27 ,  308–14 . 
 Lamm, C., Decety, J., & Singer, T. (2011).  Meta-analytic evidence for common and distinct neural networks 
associated with directly experienced pain and empathy for pain .  NeuroImage  54 ,  2492–502 . 
 Lepage, J. F., & Th eoret, H. (2006).  EEG evidence for the presence of an action observation-execution 
matching system in children .  European Journal of Neuroscience  23 ,  2505–10 . 
 Lhermitte, F. (1983).  ‘Utilization behavior’ and its relation to lesions of the frontal lobes .  Brain  106 (Pt 2) , 
 237–55 . 
 Lhermitte, F., Pillon, B., & Serdaru, M. (1986).  Human autonomy and the frontal lobes .  Part I: Imitation 
and utilization behavior: a neuropsychological study of 75 patients.  Annals of Neurology  19 ,  326–34 . 
 Liberman, A. M., Cooper, F. S., Shankweiler, D. P., & Studdert-Kennedy, M. (1967).  Perception of the 
speech code .  Psychological Review  74 ,  431–61 . 
 Lingnau, A., Gesierich, B., & Caramazza, A. (2009).  Asymmetric fMRI adaptation reveals no evidence for 
mirror neurons in humans .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, USA  106 ,  9925–30 . 
 Lippert, M. T., Steudel, T., Ohl, F., Logothetis, N. K., & Kayser, C. (2010).  Coupling of neural activity and 
fMRI-BOLD in the motion area MT .  Magnetic Resonance Imaging  28 ,  1087–94 . 
 Lombardo, M. V., Chakrabarti, B., Bullmore, E. T., Wheelwright, S. J., Sadek, S. A., Suckling, J., 
Consortium, M. A., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2010).  Shared neural circuits for mentalizing about the self 
and others .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  22 ,  1623–35 . 
 Lui, F., Buccino, G., Duzzi, D., Benuzzi, F., Crisi, G., Baraldi, P., Nichelli, P., Porro, C. A. & Rizzolatti, G. 
(2008).  Neural substrates for observing and imagining non-object-directed actions .  Social Neuroscience 
 3 ,  261–75 . 
 Marsh, L. E., & Hamilton, A. F. D. C. (2011).  Dissociation of mirroring and mentalizing systems in autism . 
 NeuroImage  56 ,  1511–19 . 
 Martineau, J., Andersson, F., Barth é l é my, C., Cottier, J-P., & Destrieux, C. (2010).  Atypical activation of 
the mirror neuron system during perception of hand motion in autism .  Brain Research  1320C ,  168–75 . 
 Meltzoff , A. N., & Decety, J. (2003).  What imitation tells us about social cognition: a rapprochement 
between developmental psychology and cognitive neuroscience .  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society, London, B Biological Sciences  358 ,  491–500 . 
 Meltzoff , A. N., & Moore, M. K. (1977).  Imitation of facial and manual gestures by human neonates .  Science 
 198 ,  75–8 . 
 Molnar-Szakacs, I., Iacoboni, M., Koski, L., & Mazziotta, J. C. (2005).  Functional segregation within 
pars opercularis of the inferior frontal gyrus: evidence from fMRI studies of imitation and action 
observation .  Cerebral Cortex  15 ,  986–94 . 
 Mukamel, R., Ekstrom, A. D., Kaplan, J., Iacoboni, M., & Fried, I. (2010).  Single-neuron responses in 
humans during execution and observation of actions .  Current Biology  20 ,  750–6 . 
 Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., & Johnson, B. W. (2004a).  Changes in rolandic mu rhythm during observation 
of a precision grip .  Psychophysiology  41 ,  152–6 . 
 Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., & Johnson, B. W. (2004b).  Primary motor cortex activation during action 
observation revealed by wavelet analysis of the EEG .  Clinical Neurophysiology  115 ,  1760–6 . 
 Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., Johnson, B. W., & McNair, N. A. (2004).  Mu rhythm modulation during 
observation of an object-directed grasp .  Brain Research, Cognitive Brain Research  19 ,  195–201 . 
 Nelissen, K., Borra, E., Gerbella, M., Rozzi, S., Luppino, G., Vanduff el, W., Rizzolatti, G., & Orban, G. A. 
(2011).  Action observation circuits in the macaque monkey cortex .  Journal of Neuroscience  31 ,  3743–56 . 

261
 Oberman, L. M., Hubbard, E. M., McCleery, J. P., Altschuler, EL., Ramachandran, V. S., & Pineda, J. A. 
(2005).  EEG evidence for mirror neuron dysfunction in autism spectrum disorders .  Brain Research, 
Cognitive Brain Research  24 ,  190–8 . 
 Oberman, L. M., & Ramachandran, V. S. (2007).  Th e simulating social mind: the role of the mirror 
neuron system and simulation in the social and communicative defi cits of autism spectrum disorders . 
 Psychological Bulletin  133 ,  310–27 . 
 Oberman, L. M., Ramachandran, V. S., & Pineda, J. A. (2008).  Modulation of mu suppression in children 
with autism spectrum disorders in response to familiar or unfamiliar stimuli: the mirror neuron 
hypothesis .  Neuropsychologia  46 ,  1558–65 . 
 Oosterhof, N. N., Wiggett, A. J., Diedrichsen, J., Tipper, S. P., & Downing, P. E. (2010).  Surface-based 
information mapping reveals crossmodal vision-action representations in human parietal and 
occipitotemporal cortex .  Journal of Neurophysiology  104 ,  1077–89 . 
 Oztop, E., & Arbib, M. A. (2002).  Schema design and implementation of the grasp-related mirror neuron 
system .  Biological Cybernetics  87 ,  116–40 . 
 Pazzaglia, M., Pizzamiglio, L., Pes, E., & Aglioti, S. M. (2008a).  Th e sound of actions in apraxia .  Current 
Biology  18 ,  1766–72 . 
 Pazzaglia, M., Smania, N., Corato, E., & Aglioti, S. M. (2008b).  Neural underpinnings of gesture 
discrimination in patients with limb apraxia .  Journal of Neuroscience  28 ,  3030–41 . 
 Pfeifer, J. H., Iacoboni, M., Mazziotta, J. C., & Dapretto, M. (2008).  Mirroring others’ emotions relates to 
empathy and interpersonal competence in children .  NeuroImage  39 ,  2076–85 . 
 Pineda, J. A. (2005).  Th e functional signifi cance of mu rhythms: translating “seeing” and “hearing” into 
“doing” .  Brain Resarch, Brain Research Review  50 ,  57–68 . 
 Pizzamiglio, L., Aprile, T., Spitoni, G., Pitzalis, S., Bates, E., D’Amico, S., & di Russo, F. (2005).  Separate 
neural systems for processing action- or non-action-related sounds .  NeuroImage  24 ,  852–61 . 
 Pobric, G., & Hamilton, A. F. (2006).  Action understanding requires the left  inferior frontal cortex .  Current 
Biology  16 ,  524–9 . 
 Pulverm ü ller, F. (2005).  Brain mechanisms linking language and action .  Nature Reviews Neuroscience  6 , 
 576–82 . 
 Raos, V., Evangeliou, M. N., & Savaki, H. E. (2004).  Observation of action: grasping with the mind’s hand . 
 NeuroImage  23 ,  193–201 . 
 Raymaekers, R., Wiersema, J. R., & Roeyers, H. (2009).  EEG study of the mirror neuron system in children 
with high functioning autism .  Brain Research  1304 ,  113–21 . 
 Ricciardi, E., Bonino, D., Sani, L., Vecchi, T., Guazzelli, M., Haxby, J. V., Fadiga, L., & Pietrini, P. (2009). 
 Do we really need vision? How blind people “see” the actions of others .  Journal of Neuroscience  29 , 
 9719–24 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., & Arbib, M. A. (1998).  Language within our grasp .  Trends in Neuroscience  21 ,  188–94 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., Camarda, R., Fogassi, L., Gentilucci, M., Luppino, G., & Matelli, M. (1988).  Functional 
organization of inferior area 6 in the macaque monkey .  II .  Area F5 and the control of distal movements . 
 Experimental Brain Research  71 ,  491–507 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., Fabbri-Destro, M., & Cattaneo, L. (2009).  Mirror neurons and their clinical relevance . 
 Nature Clinical Practice Neurology  5 ,  24–34 . 
 Rossi, S., Tecchio, F., Pasqualetti, P., Ulivelli, M., Pizzella, V., Romani, G. L., Passero, S., Battistini, N., 
& Rossini, P. M. (2002).  Somatosensory processing during movement observation in humans .  Clinical 
Neurophysiology  113 ,  16–24 . 
 Rozzi, S., Calzavara, R., Belmalih, A., Borra, E., Gregoriou, G. G., Matelli, M., & Luppino, G. (2006). 
 Cortical connections of the inferior parietal cortical convexity of the macaque monkey .  Cerebral Cortex 
 16 ,  1389–417 . 
 Rozzi, S., Ferrari, P. F., Bonini, L., Rizzolatti, G., & Fogassi, L. (2008).  Functional organization of inferior 
parietal lobule convexity in the macaque monkey: electrophysiological characterization of motor, 
REFERENCES

MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
262
sensory and mirror responses and their correlation with cytoarchitectonic areas .  European Journal of 
Neuroscience  28 ,  1569–88 . 
 Schippers, M. B., Gazzola, V., Goebel, R., & Keysers, C. (2009).  Playing charades in the fMRI: are mirror 
and/or mentalizing areas involved in gestural communication?  PLoS One  4 ,  e6801 . 
 Schippers, M. B., & Keysers, C. (2011).  Mapping the fl ow of information within the putative mirror neuron 
system during gesture observation .  NeuroImage  57 ,  37–44 . 
 Schippers, M. B., Roebroeck, A., Renken, R., Nanetti, L., & Keysers, C. (2010).  Mapping the information 
fl ow from one brain to another during gestural communication .  Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, USA  107 ,  9388–93 . 
 Schultz, W. (2006).  Behavioral theories and the neurophysiology of reward .  Annual Review of Psychology 
 57 ,  87–115 . 
 Shallice, T., Burgess, P. W., Schon, F., & Baxter, D. M. (1989).  Th e origins of utilization behavior .  Brain 
 112 (Pt 6) ,  1587–98 . 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Aharon-Peretz, J., & Perry, D. (2009).  Two systems for empathy: a double 
dissociation between emotional and cognitive empathy in inferior frontal gyrus vs. ventromedial 
prefrontal lesions .  Brain  132 ,  617–27 . 
 Shimada, S., & Hiraki, K. (2006).  Infant’s brain responses to live and televized action .  NeuroImage  32 , 
 930–9 . 
 Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J., Kaube, H., Dolan, R. J., & Frith, C. D. (2004).  Empathy for pain 
involves the aff ective, but not sensory components of pain .  Science  303 ,  1157–62 . 
 Sommerville, J. A., Woodward, A. L., & Needham, A. (2005).  Action experience alters 3-month-old 
infants’ perception of others’ actions .  Cognition  96 ,  B1–11 . 
 Southgate, V., Johnson, M. H., Osborne, T., & Csibra, G. (2009).  Predictive motor activation during action 
observation in human infants .  Biological Letters  5 ,  769–72 . 
 Spengler, S., Bird, G., & Brass, M. (2010).  Hyperimitation of actions is related to reduced understanding of 
others’ minds in autism spectrum conditions .  Biological Psychiatry  68 ,  1148–55 . 
 Spunt, R. P., Satpute, A. B., & Lieberman, M. D. (2011).  Identifying the what, why, and how of an observed 
action: an fMRI study of mentalizing and mechanizing during action observation .  Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience  23 ,  63–74 . 
 Subiaul, F., Cantlon, J. F., Holloway, R. L., & Terrace, H. S. (2004).  Cognitive imitation in rhesus macaques . 
 Science  305 ,  407–10 . 
 Tessari, A., Canessa, N., Ukmar, M., & Rumiati, R. I. (2007).  Neuropsychological evidence for a strategic 
control of multiple routes in imitation .  Brain  130 ,  1111–26 . 
 Th ioux, M., Gazzola, V., & Keysers, C. (2008).  Action understanding: how, what and why .  Current Biology 
 18 ,  R431–4 . 
 Toni, I., de Lange, F. P., Noordzij, M. L., & Hagoort, P. (2008).  Language beyond action .  Journal of 
Physiology, Paris  102 ,  71–9 . 
 Turella, L., Erb, M., Grodd, W., & castiello, U. (2009).  Visual features of an observed agent do not modulate 
human brain activity during action observation .  NeuroImage  46 ,  844–53 . 
 Umilta, M. A., Kohler, E., Gallese, V., Fogassi, L., Fadiga, L., Keysers, C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2001).  I know 
what you are doing .  a neurophysiological study .  Neuron  31 ,  155–65 . 
 Urgesi, C., Candidi, M., Fabbro, F., Romani, M., & Aglioti, S. M. (2006).  Motor facilitation during 
action observation: topographic mapping of the target muscle and infl uence of the onlooker’s posture . 
 European Journal of Neuroscience  23 ,  2522–30 . 
 Urgesi, C., Maieron, M., Avenanti, A., Tidoni, E., Fabbro, F., & Aglioti, S. M. (2010).  Simulating the future 
of actions in the human corticospinal system .  Cerebral Cortex  20 ,  2511–21 . 
 van der Gaag, C., Minderaa, R. B., & Keysers, C. (2007).  Facial expressions: what the mirror neuron system 
can and cannot tell us .  Social Neuroscience  2 ,  179–222 . 

263
 van Elk, M., van Schie, H. T., Hunnius, S., Vesper, C., & Bekkering, H. (2008).  You’ll never crawl alone: 
neurophysiological evidence for experience-dependent motor resonance in infancy .  NeuroImage  43 , 
 808–14 . 
 van Overwalle, F., & Baetens, K. (2009).  Understanding others’ actions and goals by mirror and 
mentalizing systems: A meta-analysis .  NeuroImage  48 ,  564–84 . 
 Wicker, B., Keysers, C., Plailly, J., Royet, J. P., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (2003).  Both of us disgusted in 
My insula: the common neural basis of seeing and feeling disgust .  Neuron  40 ,  655–64 . 
 Williams, J. H., Whiten, A., Suddendorf, T., & Perrett, D. I. (2001).  Imitation, mirror neurons and autism . 
 Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews  25 ,  287–95 . 
 Woodward, A. L. (1998).  Infants selectively encode the goal object of an actor’s reach .  Cognition  69 ,  1–34 . 
 Yuen, I., Davis, M. H., Brysbaert, M., & Rastle, K. (2010).  Activation of articulatory information in speech 
perception .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA  107 ,  592–7 . 
 Zaki, J., Weber, J., Bolger, N., & Ochsner, K. (2009).  Th e neural bases of empathic accuracy .  Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, USA  106 ,  11382–7 . 
REFERENCES

 Chapter 15 
 The mirror mechanism: Understanding 
others from the inside  
 Giacomo   Rizzolatti  and   Maddalena  Fabbri-Destro  
 Introduction 
 A fundamental issue of cognitive neuroscience is to understand how we are able to comprehend 
actions and intentions of others. A striking characteristic of this process is that typically we inter-
pret others’ behavior as a mark of something rather insubstantial as mental activity. The behaviors 
of others are clues to theirs goals and intention waiting to be recognized. 
 The most common interpretation of this ability is that it derives from the observers’ capacity to 
logically infer others’ internal mental states from the available sensory information, and to ascribe to 
them a causal role in generating the observed behavior (e.g. Carruthers & Smith, 1996; Malle, Moses, 
& Baldwin, 2001). An alternative view is that advanced by phenomenologists (see Merleau-Ponty, 
1962). According to them we make sense, in normal everyday life, of others’ behavior as if it was our 
own. We make sense of others without resorting to inferential processes, but relying instead on an 
immediate and direct understanding of  what others do and  why  they are doing. 
 It would be dogmatic to assume that there is one and only one way in which we recognize actions 
and intentions of others. There are undoubtedly various ways in which we can solve this prob-
lem. A point, however, must be stressed. There is, a fundamental difference from the direct way 
of others’ understanding, proposed by the phenomenologists, and theories relying on inferential 
reasoning. Inferential reasoning does not differentiate, a priori, the understanding of physical phe-
nomena from that of actions done by of our conspeciﬁ cs. The inferential understanding of an 
apple falling from a tree does not include empathy with the apple. The same is true if you apply the 
inferential mechanism to the understanding of human behavior. You perfectly understand what 
is going on, but not a fundamental aspect of it: the feeling of what occurred to another individual. 
No empathy between you and the other person is present. In contrast, this empathic aspect is cap-
tured by the phenomenological explanation of others’ behavior. Not only what an individual does 
is understood, but also, within limits, what he feels in doing it. 
 Neurobiological evidence for a direct understanding of behavior of others has been provided 
by the discovery of a speciﬁ c class of neurons in the monkey premotor cortex. These neurons- 
called mirror neurons-discharge both when people perform a given motor act and when they 
observe someone else performing a similar motor act (di Pellegrino, Fadiga, Fogassi L., Gallese, & 
Rizzolatti, 1992; Gallese, Fadiga, Fogassi, & Rizzolatti, 1996; Rizzolatti et al., 1996a). Subsequently, 
mirror neurons have been also found in the parietal cortex of the monkey (Fogassi, Ferrari, 
Gesierich, Rozzi, Chersi, & Rizzolatti, 2005), in motor and viscero-motor human brain centers 
(see Fabbri-Destro & Rizzolatti, 2008; Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004) and in song-producing motor 
areas of birds (Keller & Hahnloser, 2009; Prather, Peters, Nowicki, & Mooney, 2008). 
 Mirror neurons have been demonstrated by single neuron studies (monkeys, birds, and some 
human data), as well as by non-invasive techniques—EEG, MEG, PET, fMRI, TMS (mostly human 

THE MIRROR MECHANISM IN THE MONKEY
265
data). All of them have in common a basic mechanism (the “mirror mechanism”) that transforms 
sensory representations of actions into a motor format. According to its anatomical location, this 
mechanism subserves different functions, ranging from the recognition of song of conspeciﬁ cs in 
birds to action understanding and empathy in humans. 
 We shall describe ﬁ rst the functional proprieties of monkey mirror neurons. We shall then dis-
cuss the mirror mechanism in humans by presenting data that suggest that the motor encoding of 
actions is critical for perceiving the motor acts of others not only in terms of their goals, but also 
in terms of their intention. We shall conclude with some considerations on the relations between 
the mirror mechanism and autism. 
 The mirror mechanism in the monkey  
 Mirror neurons are  motor neurons . Therefore, to understand their functions one must ﬁ rst have 
clear the basic proprieties of the motor areas where the mirror neurons are located. Before describ-
ing the properties of mirror neurons we will brieﬂ y summarize the properties of frontal and pari-
etal motor areas 
 The organization of the motor cortex in the monkey 
 The agranular (motor) frontal cortex of the macaque monkey occupies the caudal part of the fron-
tal lobe. According to the classical subdivision of Brodmann (1909), this cortex is formed by two 
large cytoarchitectonic areas—4 and 6. In recent years, the combination of classic architectonic 
and neurochemical techniques has proven to be extremely useful for a more objective assessment 
of architectonic areas (Belmalih, Borra, Contini, Gerbella, Rozzi, & Luppino, 2007; Geyer, Matelli, 
Luppino, & Zilles, 2000). 
 This combination, applied to the motor cortex, resulted in the parcellation presented in 
Figure 15. 1 (Belmalih, Borra, Contini, Gerbella, Rozzi, & Luppino, 2009; Matelli, Luppino, 
& Rizzolatti, 1985, 1991). In this parcellation, area F1 roughly corresponds to area 4 (primary 
motor cortex), whereas each of the three main sectors of Brodmann area 6 (mesial, dorsal, and 
ventral area 6) are formed by a caudal and a rostral subdivision. Speciﬁ cally, the mesial sector 
is formed by areas F3 (SMA) and F6 (pre SMA), the dorsal sector by F2 and F7 (together called 
dorsal premotor cortex) and F4 and F5 (together called ventral premotor cortex).  
 The motor areas located rostrally to the primary motor area F1 can be grouped into two 
major classes (see Rizzolatti & Luppino 2001). The caudal premotor areas F2, F3, F4, F5 consti-
tute the ﬁ rst class. They receive their main input from the parietal lobe. The rostral premotor 
areas F6, and F7 constitute the second class. They receive their main input from the prefrontal 
cortex. 
 Studies on the organization of the parieto-frontal connections showed that motor and 
parietal areas are connected one with another in a very specific way (Rizzolatti, Luppino, & 
Matelli, 1998). In particular areas of the superior parietal lobule (SPL) are connected with 
dorsal and mesial premotor areas, while areas of the inferior parietal lobule (IPL) are con-
nected with ventral premotor areas. Prefrontal projections to the motor cortex are primarily 
directed to rostral premotor areas (Gerbella, Belmalih, Borra, Rozzi, & Luppino, 2010; Lu, 
Preston, & Strick, 1994; Luppino, Matelli, Camarda, & Rizzolatti, 1993; Rizzolatti & Luppino 
2001). Thus, caudal and rostral premotor areas play a different functional role in motor con-
trol. Caudal premotor areas, together with parietal areas, are involved in transformation of 
sensory information into potential motor acts. In contrast, rostral premotor areas are funda-
mental for determining, according to the external and internal contingencies, when potential 
motor acts will be executed.  

THE MIRROR MECHANISM: UNDERSTANDING OTHERS FROM THE INSIDE
266
 Premotor area F5 
 Area F5 forms the rostral part of the ventral premotor cortex. There is evidence that F5, originally 
considered as a single entity, is constituted by three sectors (Belmalih et al. 2009). One called F5 
“convexity” (F5c), is located on the post-arcuate cortex convexity. The others, F5 “posterior” and 
“anterior” (F5p and F5a, respectively), lie within the post-arcuate bank, at different antero-posterior 
levels (Figure 15. 1). 
 Single neuron recording studies from area F5 revealed that most of its neurons code speciﬁ c 
goals, rather than individual movements (Rizzolatti, Camarda, Fogassi, Gentilucci, Luppino, & 
Matelli, 1988; Umilt à , Escola, Intskirveli, Grammont, Rochat, Caruana, et al., 2008). Using the 
effective motor act as the classiﬁ cation criterion, F5 neurons were subdivided into various classes. 
Among them, the most represented are: “grasping,” “holding,” “tearing,” and “manipulating” neu-
rons. Neurons of a given class respond weakly or not at all when similar movements are executed 
for a different goal. 
 F5 contains neurons responding not only during execution of motor acts, but also to the pres-
entation of visual stimuli (Rizzolatti et al., 1988). F5 visuo-motor neurons fall into two classes—
“canonical” neurons and “mirror” neurons. 
 Figure 15.1  Mesial and lateral views of the macaque brain. The Figure shows the cytoarchitectonic 
parcellation of the frontal motor cortex (areas indicated with F and Arabic numbers) and of the pari-
etal lobe (areas indicated with P and Latin letters). Areas buried within the intraparietal sulcus are 
shown on the right in an unfolded view of the sulcus. The left inset shows the subareas forming area 
F5.   AIP, anterior intraparietal area; As, superior arcuate sulcus; Ai inferior arcuate sulcus; C, central 
sulcus; Ca, calcarine ﬁ ssure; CG, cingulate cortex; FEF, frontal eye ﬁ eld; IP, intraparietal sulcus; L, lat-
eral sulcus; LIP, lateral intraparietal area; MIP, medial intraparietal area; Lu, lunate sulcus; P, principal 
sulcus POs, parieto-occipital sulcus; STS, superior temporal sulcus. See also Plate 6.  

THE MIRROR MECHANISM IN THE MONKEY
267
 Canonical neurons, mostly located in area F5p, discharge to the presentation of 3D objects (Murata, 
Fadiga, Fogassi, Gallese, Raos, & Rizzolatti, 1997; Raos, Umilt à ,   Murata, Fogassi, & Gallese, 2006). 
They have been systematically studied using a paradigm that allows one to separate activity related 
to object presentation, action preparation, and action execution. The most interesting result was that 
the majority of canonical neurons responded selectively to objects of a certain size, shape, and orien-
tation. Typically, visual speciﬁ city was congruent with motor speciﬁ city (Murata et al., 1997). 
 The second category of F5 visuomotor neurons corresponds to mirror neurons. They are mostly 
located in F5c (Figure 15.1). This area contains a hand/mouth motor representation, with the hand 
represented mostly in its medial part, and the mouth in the lateral one. 
 Parietal areas PFG, AIP, LIP, and the superior temporal sulcus region 
 It is well known that the anterior region of the superior temporal sulcus (STSa) contains neurons 
responding to the observation of arm and hand movements (Barraclough, Xiao, Oram, & Perrett, 
2006; Perrett et al., 1989). STS neurons do not discharge, however, in association with motor activ-
ity. They cannot be, therefore considered, mirror neurons. 
 Recently, an fMRI study was carried out to deﬁ ne the pathways that link STS with F5. This study 
revealed that during action observation three regions were activated: STS, IPL, and the cortex 
around the arcuate sulcus. A subsequent ROIs analysis showed that various sectors of STS (both 
in its upper and lower banks) and two areas of IPL became active (see Figure 15.2; Nelissen et al., 
2011;). In agreement with these ﬁ ndings, single neuron recording demonstrated the presence of 
mirror neurons in areas PFG (Fogassi et al., 2005; Rozzi, Ferrari, Bonini, Rizzolatti, & Fogassi, 
2008) and AIP (S. Rozzi, unpublished data). 
 Another area of the parietal lobe also appears to host mirror neurons—area lateral intraparietal 
area (LIP), which forms with the frontal eye ﬁ eld a circuit involved in the organization of eye move-
ments. The properties of mirror neurons located in area LIP have been described by Shepherd and 
colleagues (Shepherd, Klein, Deaner, & Platt, 2009). They found that a set of LIP neurons ﬁ red 
both when the monkey looked in the neuron-preferred direction and when it saw another monkey 
looking in the same direction. Interestingly, another subset of LIP neurons that discharged when 
the recorded monkey looked toward a certain direction was, in contrast, suppressed when the 
observed monkey looked in the same direction. The authors suggested that LIP mirror neurons 
contribute to the sharing of observed attention and might play role in imitative behavior.  
 Functional proprieties of mirror neurons: understanding the goal of 
others’ motor acts 
 Mirror neurons discharge both when the monkey  performs a hand goal-directed motor act (e.g. 
grasping, manipulating, tearing) and when it  observes the same, or a similar, motor act performed 
by the experimenter or by a conspeciﬁ c (Figure 15.3; Di Pellegrino et al., 1992; Gallese et al., 1996; 
Rizzolatti et al., 1996a). In contrast, they do not discharge during the observation of biological 
movements mimicking a motor act but devoid of a goal.      
 The two sets of mirror neurons most frequently found are those related to mouth and hand 
actions. Among mouth actions, biting and chewing are the most represented. The most common 
among hand actions are grasping, manipulating and holding. Although the visual responses of most 
mirror neurons are invariant with respect to visual aspects of the stimulus that trigger them, some 
of them show speciﬁ city for the direction of the hand movement, the space sector (left or right) in 
which the observed motor act is presented or the hand (left or right) used by the observed agent. 
 What is the functional role of the parieto-frontal mirror neurons? The most accepted hypothesis 
is that they are involved in understanding the goal of the observed motor acts. If this is correct, 

THE MIRROR MECHANISM: UNDERSTANDING OTHERS FROM THE INSIDE
268
they should become active, not only in response to visual stimuli, but also when there is sufﬁ cient 
information in the environment to understand the goal of the observed motor act. 
 Evidence in favor of this hypothesis came from two series of experiments: the ﬁ rst tested whether 
F5 mirror neurons were able to recognize actions from their sound (Kohler, Keysers, Umilt à , Fogassi, 
Gallese, & Rizzolatti, 2002), while the second tested whether the mental representation of an action 
could trigger their activity (Umilt à , Kohler, Gallese, Fogassi, Fadiga, Keysers, et al., 2001). 
(a)
(b)
 Figure 15.2   The mirror circuit for grasping. (a) The three main nodes of the mirror network.   STS: 
 superior temporal sulcus; IPS: intraparietal sulcus; IAS: inferior arcuate sulcus. The neurons located in 
the cortex within STS are visual neurons without mirror properties. Mirror neurons are located in the 
cortex within and around the other two other sulci. (b) Detailed organization of the grasping mirror 
circuit. Flattened representation of STS, IPS/IPL (inferior parietal lobule) and IAS. FEF = frontal eye ﬁ elds, 
F5c = F5 convexity, F5p = F5 (bank) posterior, F5a = F5 (bank) anterior. Visual information on observed 
actions is sent forward from STS through parietal cortex to area F5 along two functional routes: a 
STPm—PFG—F5c and a LB2—AIP—F5a/p route, indicated with light and dark gray arrows, respec-
tively. Area 45B receives parietal input from LIPa and also has direct connections with the lower bank 
STS (light gray arrows). The dark shaded areas specify the functional routes. Abbreviations: parietal 
and frontal lobe areas, see Fig.1; STS ﬁ elds are indicated with their conventional names: MT/V5, MTp, 
MSTd, FST, LST, STPm, lower bank 1 and 2 (LB1; LB2) upper bank 1 and 2 (UB1; UB2). See also Plate 7.
Reproduced from Nelissen, K., Borra, E., Gerbella, M., Rozzi, S., Luppino, G., Vanduffel, W., Rizzolatti, G., & Orban, 
G.A., Action observation circuits in the macaque monkey cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 31, 3743–3756 © 2011, 
The Society for Neuroscience, with permission  .

THE MIRROR MECHANISM IN THE MONKEY
269
 Kohler et al. (2002) recorded F5 mirror neuron activity while the monkey was observing a 
“noisy” action (e.g. ripping a piece of paper), or was presented with the same noise without seeing 
it. The results showed that about 15% of mirror neurons responded to the presentation of actions 
accompanied by sounds and also responded to the presentation of the sound alone. 
 The rationale of the second experiment was the following. If mirror neurons are involved in 
action understanding, they should discharge also under conditions in which the monkey does 
not see the occurring action, but has sufﬁ cient clues to create a mental representation of what 
the experimenter does. The neurons were tested in two basic conditions. In one, the monkey was 
shown a fully visible action directed toward an object (“full vision” condition). In the other condi-
tion, the monkey saw the same action but with its ﬁ nal critical part hidden (“hidden” condition). 
Before each trial, the experimenter placed a piece of food behind the screen so that the monkey 
knew that there was an object there. Only those mirror neurons were studied that discharged to 
the observation of the ﬁ nal part of a grasping movement and/or to holding. The results showed 
that more than half of the tested neurons discharged in the hidden condition. Out of them, about 
half did not show any difference in the response strength between the hidden and full vision condi-
tions, while the other half responded more strongly in the full vision condition. 
 In conclusion, both of these experiments showed that the activity of mirror neurons correlates 
with action understanding. The visual features of the observed actions are fundamental to trigger 
mirror neurons only insomuch as they allow the understanding of the observed actions. If other 
(a)
(b)
500 msec
 Figure 15.3  Example of a F5 mirror neuron. The neuron discharge during monkey grasping move-
ments and when monkey observes grasping movements done by the experimenter. 
 Reproduced from di Pellegrino, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V. and Rizzolatti, G. (1992). Understanding 
motor events: a neurophysiological study.  Experimental Brain Research  91 (1): 176–80. © 1992, with kind permis-
sion from Springer Science and Business Media.  

THE MIRROR MECHANISM: UNDERSTANDING OTHERS FROM THE INSIDE
270
cues describing the action are available, mirror neurons signal the action even in the absence of 
visual stimuli. 
 Other properties of mirror neurons 
 A recent study investigated whether the discharge of mirror neurons of F5 is modulated by the dis-
tance at which the observed act is performed (Caggiano, Fogassi, Rizzolatti, Thier, & Casile, 2009). 
The results showed that this was indeed the case. About half of the recorded neurons showed 
stronger discharge when the action was in the monkey’s peripersonal space (i.e. the space within 
its reach), while half preferred the extrapersonal space (i.e. the space outside its reach). Some of 
the studied neurons encoded space according to a metric representation. Most interestingly, other 
neurons encoded information in terms of operational space by discharging according to whether 
the monkey could interact with the object or not. These neurons may play an important role in 
deciding the monkey’s future action. 
 Typically, the visual responses of mirror neurons have been studied in a naturalistic context. 
More recently, however, in order to assess the mirror neuron properties in a more quantitative way, 
the discharge of mirror neurons has been recorded while the monkey observed video clips showing 
different motor acts. It was found that mirror neurons do not require necessarily the observation 
of a live person interacting with objects. They also respond to actions shown in movies, although 
their discharge is typically weaker in this last condition. 
 Using ﬁ lmed motor acts Caggiano, Fogassi, Rizzolatti, Pomper, Thier, Giese, et al. (2011) stud-
ied the responses of mirror neurons to the observation of motor acts performed in an egocentric 
(subjective) perspective or in two types of third-person views (lateral or frontal view). The results 
showed that the responses of about 25% of the tested neurons was invariant relative to the point 
of view from which the motor act was observed, while the remaining ones appeared to encode the 
three different perspectives in equal percentage. Examples are shown in Figure 15.4. 
 The authors proposed that view-dependent mirror neurons might provide, through feedback 
connections, a link between neurons coding the goal of an observed motor act and neurons that 
code its pictorial aspects. In this way, F5 neurons, through a bottom-up mechanism, could deter-
mine a  full perception of the observed motor act, which includes its meaning (goal) as well as the 
its visual details. 
 A recent study by Kraskov, Dancause, Quallo, Shepherd, & Lemon (2009), showed that about 
half of the pyramidal tract neurons (PTNs) recorded from area F5, exhibited mirror activity. 
Furthermore, some pyramidal tract neurons ﬁ red actively when the monkey grasped food, but 
showed suppression during action observation. The authors suggested that PTNs might play a role 
in inhibition of self-movements during action observation. 
 It was recently shown that there is another area of the parietal lobe that contains neurons with 
mirror properties—area VIP (Ishida, Nakajima, Inase, & Murata, 2009). This area, buried in the 
intraparietal sulcus, forms with frontal area F4 a circuit transforming somatosensory sensory and 
visual stimuli presented in the space around the monkey body-parts (peripersonal space) into head, 
mouth and arm movements (Colby, Duhamel, & Goldberg, 1993; Duhamel, Colby, & Goldberg, 
1998; Fogassi, Gallese, Fadiga, Luppino, Matelli, & Rizzolatti, 1996;Gentilucci, Scandolara, Pigarev, 
& Rizzolatti, 1983; Graziano, Yap, & Gross, 1994). 
 Ishida and colleagues demonstrated that many VIP neurons, coding peripersonal space, also 
respond to stimuli presented in the peripersonal space of another individual located at about one 
meter far from the monkey and facing it. It is important to keep in mind that, although Ishida and 
colleagues did not study motor responses, area VIP is strictly connected with area F4. It is plausible, 

THE MIRROR MECHANISM IN THE MONKEY
271
(a)
180º
Neuron 1
Neuron 2
0º
90º
180º
90º
0º
(b)
40
20
0
–1.5
–1
–0.5
0.5
1
1.5
Time (s)
0
Spike rate (Hz)
Neuron 3
0º
90º
180º
20
10
0
–1.5
–1
–0.5
0.5
1
1.5
Time (s)
0
Spike rate (Hz)
Neuron 4
0º
90º
180º
20
10
0
–1.5
–1
–0.5
0.5
1
1.5
Time (s)
0
Spike rate (Hz)
0º
90º
180º
40
20
0
–1.5
–1
–0.5
0.5
1
1.5
Time (s)
0
Spike rate (Hz)
 Figure 15.4  Responses of mirror 
neurons to actions observed from 
three different points of view. 
(a) Experimental conditions (frontal 
point of view: 180°; side view: 90°; 
subjective point of view: 0°); 
(b) Responses of four mirror neu-
rons during observation of ﬁ lmed 
goal-directed actions. Responses 
were aligned with the moment 
when the monkey touched the 
object). Neuron 1 showed a selec-
tivity for actions presented in the 
subjective point of view (0°)). 
Neuron 2 showed a modulation for 
actions presented from a frontal 
point of view (180°), Neuron 3 
showed a modulation for actions 
presented from a side view (90°). 
The activity of Neuron 4 was modu-
lated by actions seen from all tested 
points of view. See also Plate 8. 
 Reproduced from Caggiano, V., Fogassi, 
L., Rizzolatti, G., Pomper, J. K., Thier, 
P., Giese, M. & Casile, A. View-based 
encoding of actions in mirror neurons 
of area F5 in macaque premotor cortex. 
 Current Biology  21 (2): 144–8. 
© 2011, with permission from Elsevier.  

THE MIRROR MECHANISM: UNDERSTANDING OTHERS FROM THE INSIDE
272
therefore, that neuronal responses that seem merely visual actually represent potential motor acts 
directed toward speciﬁ c body parts. 
 The study of VIP neurons is of great interest because it shows that the mirror mechanism of this 
area encodes body-directed, rather than object-directed motor acts, thus opening fascinating pos-
sibilities on the mechanisms for encoding the body of others. 
 There are no single neuron studies that investigated the presence of mirror neurons in area F4 
and in the ventro-rostral sector of F2, sectors that also receive visual input from posterior pari-
etal lobe. Human studies (Filimon, Nelson, Hagler, & Sereno, 2007, see also Buccino, Binkofski, 
Fink, Fadiga, Fogassi, Gallese, et al., 2001) suggest, however, that reaching mirror neurons could 
be present in these areas. 
 One must be very cautious in considering as “mirror area” a motor area that responds to visual 
stimuli without an extremely accurate control of the possibility of unspeciﬁ c motor activity dur-
ing visual stimulus presentation. This is particularly true for the superior parietal lobule, dorsal 
premotor cortex and primary motor cortex, all areas that are involved in covert motor preparation 
(Crammond & Kalaska, 2000; Kalaska & Crammond, 1995), besides motor execution. Thus, the 
ﬁ ndings of visual responses in these areas during action observation obtained in 2-DG experi-
ments (e.g. Raos, Evangeliou, & Savaki, 2007) should be considered as only indicative of the pos-
sibility of the presence of mirror neurons in those areas.  
 Functional proprieties of mirror neurons: understanding 
the intentions of others’ motor acts 
 Single neuron studies show that mirror neurons are not only crucial for understanding motor acts, 
but can also be involved in coding the motor intention of an action performed by another indi-
vidual (Bonini, Rozzi, Serventi, Simone, Ferrari, & Fogassi, 2009; Fogassi et al., 2005). 
 In order to understand the further properties of mirror neurons, it is necessary to clearly deﬁ ne 
the difference between “motor act” and “action.” We deﬁ ne  motor act as a series of movements with 
a speciﬁ c goal. We deﬁ ne  action as a series of motor acts that, when executed, allow the achieve-
ment of biological useful goals. 
 In order to investigate the neural basis of motor intention coding, experiments were carried out 
in which we assessed whether neurons discharging during the execution of grasping were inﬂ u-
enced by the type of action in which they were embedded (Bonini et al., 2009; Fogassi et al., 2005). 
Grasping neurons were recorded from areas PFG and F5 while the monkey executed a motor task 
or observed the same task (performed by an experimenter) in which the motor act (grasping) was 
embedded into two different actions (grasping to eat and grasping to place) (Figure 15.5). The 
results showed that a high percentage of parietal and premotor neurons discharged differently 
during the execution of grasping, depending on the ﬁ nal goal of the action (either eating or plac-
ing) in which grasping was embedded. On the basis of these ﬁ ndings it has been proposed (Fogassi 
et al., 2005; Rizzolatti, Ferrari, Rozzi, & Fogassi, 2006) that parietal and premotor neurons form 
pre-wired chains, in which a neuron coding a given motor act is facilitated by the previously exe-
cuted one. According to this proposal, a neuron coding for instance a grasping act, is not a multi-
purpose unit, but belongs to a chain aimed for a speciﬁ c ultimate goal. Thus, any time an agent has 
the intention (ﬁ nal goal) of performing an action, speciﬁ c neuronal chains are activated. Note that 
this model would also account for the ﬂ uidity with which the different motor acts of an action are 
executed one after another, as shown by kinematic studies (Jeannerod 1988; Rosenbaum, Cohen, 
Jax, Weiss, & van der Wel, 2007). 
 Similarly to the motor task, during the visual task it has been found that most mirror neurons dis-
charge differently when observing a grasping act embedded within different actions (Figure 15.5). 

THE MIRROR MECHANISM IN HUMANS
273
It was proposed that the neuronal selectivity for the action goal during grasping observation repre-
sents a prediction of the action outcome. Thus, in agreement with the “chain” interpretation of the 
results of the motor task, the observation of a motor act embedded in an action, would activate a 
chain corresponding to a speciﬁ c intention. This activation would allow one to understand imme-
diately the motor intentions of others.   
 The mirror mechanism in humans  
 Immediately following the discovery of mirror neurons in the monkey, a large number of neuro-
physiological and brain-imaging studies demonstrated the presence of a mirroring mechanism 
(a)
(c)
75
0
0.5 s
spk/s
Execution (motor task)
Observation (Visual task)
(b)
MOTOR TASK
VISUAL TASK
 Figure 15.5  Example of an F5 mirror neuron modulated by action intention.  ( a) Paradigm used for 
the motor task. The monkey, starting from a ﬁ xed position, reaches and grasps a piece of food or an 
object, then it brings the food to the mouth and eats it (I, grasp-to-eat), or places it into a container 
(II/III, grasp-to-place). (b) Paradigm used for the visual task. The experimenter, starting from a ﬁ xed 
position, reaches and grasps a piece of food or an object, then brings the food to the mouth and eats 
it (I, grasp-to-eat) or places it into a container (II, grasp-to-place). (c) Discharge of the neuron during 
execution (left) and observation (right) of the two actions. Rasters and histograms are aligned (green 
lines) on the contact between the monkey or experimenter’s hand and the object. Red: neuron dis-
charge during grasp-to-eat condition; gray: neuron discharge during grasp-to-place condition. Blue 
bars indicate the onset of the hand movement, yellow bars indicate the contact between the hand 
and the container in the grasp-to-place condition. See also Plate 9. 
 Adapted from Bonini, L., Rozzi, S., Serventi, F. U., Simone, L., Ferrari, P. F., & Fogassi, L. Ventral premotor and 
 inferior parietal cortices make contribution to action organization and intention understanding.  Cereberal Cortex 
 20 (6): 1372–85. © 2010, Oxford University Press, with permission. For permission to reuse this material, please visit  
http://www.oup.co.uk/academic/rights/permissions.  

THE MIRROR MECHANISM: UNDERSTANDING OTHERS FROM THE INSIDE
274
in humans and described its basic properties (see Fabbri-Destro & Rizzolatti, 2008; Rizzolatti & 
Craighero, 2004). In the following sections we will review the most signiﬁ cant studies on the func-
tional role of the mirror mechanism in human behavior. 
 fMRI studies: the localization of the human mirror mechanism 
 Initial PET studies already showed that the mirror mechanism for hand-grasping actions was 
located in humans in the same regions as in the monkey. These regions comprised IPL, including 
the cortex located inside the intraparietal sulcus, and the ventral sector of the precentral gyrus plus 
the caudal part of the inferior frontal gyrus (Grafton, Arbib, Fadiga, & Rizzolatti, 1996; Rizzolatti, 
Fadiga, Matelli, Bettinardi, Paulesu, Perani, et al., 1996b). These data were fully conﬁ rmed in the 
following years by a large number of fMRI studies (Caspers, Zilles, Laird, & Eickhoff, 2010; see 
Figure 15.6). 
 A series of studies of cortical activations during the observation of transitive motor acts showed 
that, in the  precentral gyrus , these acts are localized according to a rough somatotopic organiza-
tion similar to that of the classical homunculi of motor physiology (Buccino et al., 2001; Sakreida, 
Schubotz, Wolfensteller, & von Cramon, 2005; Saygin, Wilson, Hagler, Bates, & Sereno, 2004; 
Shmuelof and Zohary, 2006; Ulloa & Pineda 2007; Wheaton, Carpenter, Mizelle, & Forrester, 
2008). The observation of motor acts done by mouth, hand, and foot, produce a somatotopic 
activation: the leg motor acts were located dorsally, the mouth ventrally, and the hand in an inter-
mediate position. 
 A somatotopic organization is also present in the  inferior parietal lobe  along to and within 
the intraparietal sulcus. The mouth is located rostrally, the hand in an intermediate position and 
the leg caudally (Buccino et al., 2001). A recent study attempted to better deﬁ ne this organiza-
tion (Jastorff, Begliomini, Fabbri-Destro, Rizzolatti, & Orban, 2010). Four motor acts (grasping, 
dragging, dropping, and pushing) performed with the mouth, hand and foot were presented to 
volunteers. The results showed that, superimposed to the somatotopic organization, the parietal 
Observation
 Figure 15.6  Lateral view of the two hemispheres of the human brain showing areas activated in 
neuroimaging studies during action observation. The depicted activations result from a meta-analysis 
performed on 87 studies. The three man nodes of activation are: the superior temporal sulcus; the 
inferior parietal lobule, including the intraparietal sulcus plus a small part of superior parietal lobule; 
the premotor cortex, mainly its ventral part, plus the posterior part of the inferior frontal gyrus. See 
also Plate 10. 
 Adapted from Caspers, S., Zilles, K., Laird, A. R., & Eickhoff, S. B. ALE meta-analysis of action observation and imi-
tation in the human brain.  NeuroImage  50 (3): 1148–67. © 2010, with permission from Elsevier.  

THE MIRROR MECHANISM IS INVOLVED IN UNDERSTANDING THE GOAL OF OTHERS’ MOTOR ACTS 
275
organization appears to be also inﬂ uenced by the behavioral signiﬁ cance of the observed motor 
acts. For the motor acts tested in that study the activation was mostly found in area AIP, that is an 
area coding hand movements. Furthermore, there was a subdivision between the localization of 
self-directed (grasping and dragging) and outward-directed motor acts (dropping and pushing). 
The former activated ventral sectors of AIP, while the latter activated the dorsal sectors of the same 
region, as well as the adjacent dorso-caudal cortex. It therefore appears that in the premotor cortex, 
acts that are executed with the same effector tends to be clustered together, while the parietal cortex 
tends to classify the motor acts on the basis of their positive or negative meaning for the observer. 
 Some experiments addressed the issue of the localization of the observation of reaching move-
ments. The cortical representation of reaching was studied by Filimon et al. (2007) in a fMRI 
study. They used as stimuli photographs of abstract wooden shapes. These abstract shapes served 
as target for the reach. They were chosen in order to prevent object verbalizing and to motivate the 
reach because naturalistic reaching usually occurs toward objects. The results showed activation in 
the superior parietal and dorsal premotor cortex (see also Buccino et al., 2001). These data suggest 
that reaching mirror neurons could be present in these areas. 
 The dorsal premotor cortex and superior parietal lobule have also been occasionally found to 
be active during the observation and execution of grasping movement (Gazzola & Keysers, 2009; 
Gr è zes, et al., 2003). Although it is possible that these activations are due to a mirror mechanism, 
it is more likely that they reﬂ ect motor preparation. In favor of this interpretation are monkey 
single-neuron data showing the involvement of these areas in covert motor preparation (Kalaska 
& Crammond, 1995; Crammond & Kalaska, 2000).   
 The mirror mechanism is involved in understanding the 
goal of others’ motor acts  
 Various fMRI studies provided evidence that, as in the monkeys, the human mirror mechanism 
located in the parieto-frontal circuits is involved in understanding the goal of the observed motor 
acts. Gazzola and colleagues (Gazzola, Rizzolatti, Wicker, & Keysers, 2007) instructed volunteers to 
observe video-clips in which either a human or a robot arm grasped objects. In spite of differences 
in shape and kinematics between the human and robot arms, the parieto-frontal mirror circuit was 
activated in both conditions. 
 These results were extended by Peeters and colleagues (Peeters, Simone, Nelissen, Fabbri-Destro, 
Vanduffel, Rizzolatti, et al., 2009), who investigated the cortical activations in both monkeys and 
humans in response to the observation of motor acts performed by a human hand, a robot hand, 
and a variety of tools. They found that regardless of the type of effector used, the hand-grasping 
network, formed by intraparietal and ventral premotor cortex, was always active in both humans 
and monkeys. Interestingly, only in humans, the observation of tool motor acts produced activa-
tion in a rostral sector of the left anterior supramarginal gyrus, which was not activated during the 
observation of hand grasping movements. This ﬁ nding and the lack of a region in the monkey spe-
ciﬁ cally active during tool act observation even following prolonged tool use, suggest that, in evo-
lution, humans acquired a speciﬁ c brain region devoted to tool use and tool use understanding. 
 While most studies on mirror networks used visual stimuli, some presented auditory stimuli, 
contrasting those typical of speciﬁ c actions with others possessing characteristics unrelated to 
human actions. In an fMRI study, Lewis, Brefczynski, Phinney, Janik, & DeYoe (2005) presented 
to volunteers animal vocalization and sounds of tools manipulated by hands. The results showed 
a clear dissociation between the two types of stimuli. Hearing and categorizing animal vocaliza-
tions preferentially activated the middle portion of the superior temporal gyrus bilaterally, while 

THE MIRROR MECHANISM: UNDERSTANDING OTHERS FROM THE INSIDE
276
hearing and categorizing sounds of tools activated the parieto-frontal mirror circuit. Similarly, 
Gazzola, Aziz-Zadeh, & Keysers (2006) showed that listening to the sound of hand and mouth 
motor acts activated this last circuit and the activation was somatotopically organized in the left 
premotor cortex. 
 There is no doubt, that, in some cases, the observation of motor behavior might require a mech-
anism different from mirroring in order to be understood. The capacity of humans to recognize 
animals’ actions that do not belong to human motor repertoire and cannot be captured by a motor 
generalization, is a typical example in this regard. Evidence for a non-mirror mechanism in action 
recognition has been provided by Buccino and colleagues (2004a) in an fMRI study in which 
volunteers were presented with video clips showing motor acts that did (biting and reading) or 
did not belong to the human motor repertoire (lip smacking and barking). Although all volun-
teers recognized the observed motor acts, no activation of parieto-frontal mirror areas was found 
for those actions that did not belong to human motor repertoire (e.g. barking). The areas that 
became active in the last case were occipital and STS areas. By contrast, the sight of motor acts that 
were within the observers’ motor repertoire (e.g. dog, monkey and human biting) activated the 
parieto-frontal mirror network. 
 These data indicate that the recognition of others’ motor behavior can rely, in some instances, 
on the mere processing of its visual aspects. This visual recognition appears similar to that carried 
out in the ventral stream areas for the recognition of inanimate objects. It allows for the recogni-
tion of the observed behavior, but does not provide the observer with cues that are necessary 
for a real understanding of the conveyed message (e.g. the communicative intent of the barking 
dog). By contrast, when the observed action “intrudes” into the motor system through the mirror 
mechanism, that action is not only visually recognized but also understood, because its motor 
goal-relatedness is shared by the observer and the agent. In other words, the observed action is 
understood from the  inside  as a motor possibility and not just from the  outside as a mere visual 
experience. 
 This point was recently discussed by Frith & Frith (2007). They maintained that, although the 
parieto-frontal mirror mechanism was active in all conditions in which the motor task has to 
be directly understood, when volunteers were required to judge the reasons behind the observed 
actions there was an activation of a sector of the anterior cingulate cortex and of other areas of the 
so-called “mentalizing network” (e.g. STSp and tempo-parietal junction; see Frith & Frith 2007). 
Activation of the same network was also shown in a study that investigated unusual actions per-
formed in implausible vs. plausible contexts, as well as in experiments that studied the neural basis 
of reason inference in non-stereotypic actions (Brass, Schmitt, Spengler, & Gergely, 2007; de Lange, 
Spronk, Willems, Toni, & Bekkering, 2008; Liepelt, Von Cramon, & Brass, 2008). 
 TMS studies show that, in humans, both transitive and 
 intransitive gestures are coded by the mirror mechanism  
 Crucial evidence that the motor system in humans has mirror properties was provided by tran-
scranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) studies. Fadiga et al. (1995) recorded motor-evoked poten-
tials (MEPs), elicited by stimulation of the left motor cortex, from the right hand and arm muscles 
in volunteers required to observe an experimenter grasping objects (transitive hand actions) or 
performing meaningless arm gestures (intransitive arm movements). The results showed that the 
observation of both transitive and  intransitive  actions determined an increase of the recorded 
MEPs with respect to the control conditions. The increased selectively concerned those muscles 
that participants used for producing the observed movements. 

277
ENCEPHALOGRAPHIC RECORDINGS STUDIES
 Strafella & Paus (2000) used a double-pulse TMS technique in order to establish whether the 
duration of intracortical recurrent inhibition observed during action execution, also occurred 
during action observation. The results conﬁ rmed this hypothesis suggesting that MEP’s facilita-
tion during movement observation results from a facilitation of the primary motor cortex, due to 
mirror activity of the premotor areas, rather than from other mechanisms. 
 The ﬁ nding that, in humans, intransitive movements, and not only goal-directed actions, are 
coded by the mirror mechanism was conﬁ rmed by Maeda et al. (2002) in a study in which they 
investigated the effect of hand orientation on cortical excitability. In a fundamental study, Gangitano 
et al. (2001) recorded MEPs from the hand muscles of normal volunteers, while they were observing 
grasping movements made by another individual. The MEPs were recorded at different intervals 
following the movement onset. The results showed that the motor cortical excitability faithfully fol-
lowed the grasping movement phases of the observed action. This represents a crucial demonstra-
tion of the direct coding (not semantically mediated) of the observed motor acts. 
 Recently Cattaneo and colleagues (Cattaneo et al., 2009) showed that mirror coding might 
depend on the content of the observed behavior. They recorded motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) 
to TMS from the right  opponens pollicis (OP) muscle in participants that observed an experimenter 
either merely opening and closing normal and reverse pliers or using them to grasp objects. The 
observation of tool movements (i.e. opening and closing the pliers without grasping anything) 
activated a cortical representation of the hand movements involved in the observed motor behav-
ior. By contrast, the observation of the tool grasping action activated a cortical representation of 
the  observed motor goal, irrespective of the individual movements and the order of movements 
required to achieve it. These ﬁ ndings crucially demonstrate that the human parieto-frontal mirror 
network encodes not only motor acts, but also movements. 
 Encephalographic recordings studies conﬁ rm that observed 
motor acts are directly coded on the motor cortical system  
 Movement execution determines a desynchronization of the rhythms recorded from the rolandic 
(motor) region. A typical rolandic rhythm is “mu” rhythm. This rhythm ﬁ rst described by Gastaut 
et al. (1952) under the name of “rolandic rhythm  en arceau ”, has a frequency around 13 Hz and a 
particular arch-like morphology. Subsequent analysis (Hari, 2006; Tiihonen et al., 1989) revealed 
that its arch-like appearance is due to the coexistence of (at least) two not harmonic frequency 
components whose spectral peaks were distributed around 10 Hz (alpha band) and 20 Hz (beta 
band). 
 Altschuler and co-workers (Altschuler et al., 1997) reported that, besides execution, desynchro-
nization of mu rhythm can also be achieved by observing movements. This ﬁ nding was later con-
ﬁ rmed by several researchers (Babiloni et al., 2002; Caetano et al., 2007; Cochin et al., 1998, 1999; 
Muthukumaraswamy & Johnson, 2004; Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2004; Nishitani & Hari, 2000; 
Perry & Bentin, 2009; Press et al., 2011). It was, therefore, proposed, that the cortical desynchro-
nization during action observation is due to the mirror mechanism—observing others directly 
activates the premotor cortex and consequently it’s connected motor areas. This determines the 
occurrence of the rolandic desynchronization. 
 This desynchronization explanation was conﬁ rmed by Nishitani & Hari (2000). Using MEG, 
they asked participants to either grasp an object with their right hand, observe the same action 
being performed by the experimenter, and to observe and replicate the seen action. The results 
showed that, during execution of the motor act, there was an initial activation of the left inferior 
frontal cortex (area 44) followed by that of the left primary motor cortex. During observation 

THE MIRROR MECHANISM: UNDERSTANDING OTHERS FROM THE INSIDE
278
and imitation, the sequence of activations was similar although obviously starting from the visual 
areas. 
 Further studies investigated if there is a dynamic correlation between the desynchronization of 
rolandic rhythms during movement execution, movement imagery, and movement observation. 
The data showed that the velocity of both executed and imagined movement modulates the same 
cortical frequency bands in a similar fashion (Kilner et al., 2003; Press et al., 2011; Yuan, Perdoni, 
& He, 2010) reported that a similar modulation also occurs during the observation of a biologi-
cal motion of the arm. These ﬁ ndings provide further strong evidence for a direct (not semanti-
cally mediated) mapping mechanism of the observed movements on the motor cortex (the mirror 
mechanism). 
 Single mirror neuron data in humans  
 Single neurons recordings in humans are limited by obvious ethical reasons. The same reasons 
limit the localization of cortical brain regions from which single neurons can be recorded. Thus, 
there are no available data, up to now, on mirror neurons located in the parieto-frontal circuits. In 
contrast, neurons with apparent mirror properties have been recorded from human medial frontal 
and temporal cortices in epileptic patients. These neurons were tested, while patients executed or 
observed hand grasping actions and facial emotional expressions (Mukamel et al., 2010). 
 Many of these neurons, located in the supplementary motor areas and the hippocampus, 
responded to both observation and execution of these actions. Others showed excitation during 
action execution and inhibition during action observation. The precise functional meaning of 
these neurons is not clear and, unfortunately, there are no monkey data that may throw light on 
their behavioral signiﬁ cance. However, judging from the type of structures from which they have 
been recorded, it may be possible that mirroring could be also involved in cognitive functions 
higher than those discussed in the present chapter. 
 Mirror neurons have also been recorded from a sector of the anterior cingulate cortex process-
ing sensory information for pain. This type of neuron responded both to thermal stimuli in the 
noxious range and to observation of painful stimuli delivered to the examiner, although, in this 
case, with less intensity (Hutchinson et al., 1999).  
 The mirror mechanism is involved in imitation 
and imitation learning  
 The term imitation has different meaning in various research ﬁ elds (see Hurley & Chater, 2005). 
Typically, experimental psychologists use this term to deﬁ ne the capacity of an individual to repli-
cate an observed motor act after having seen it executed by others. Ethologists deﬁ ne imitation as 
the capacity to acquire a motor behavior previously not present in the observer’s motor repertoire 
by observation, and to replicate it using the same movements employed by the teacher (Tomasello 
& Call, 1997). 
  Imitation as a replica of a motor act already present in observer’s motor repertoire has been 
extensively investigated by Prinz and his coworkers (Prinz, 2002). They established that the more 
a motor act resembles one that is present in the observer’s motor repertoire, the greater the ten-
dency to do it. Perception and execution must therefore possess, according to them, a “common 
representational domain.” 
 The discovery of mirror neurons suggested a reformulation of this concept by considering the 
“common representational domain” not as an abstract, amodal domain (Prinz, 1987), but rather 
as a motor mechanism directly activated by the observed actions. 

THE MIRROR MECHANISM IS INVOLVED IN IMITATION AND IMITATION LEARNING 
279
 It was argued against this proposal that monkeys are unable to imitate and, therefore, the mirror 
mechanism cannot be involved in this capacity. However, as already mentioned, the human mir-
ror mechanism is able to code intransitive meaningless gestures. Direct evidence that the human 
mirror mechanism is involved in imitation was provided by an fMRI study by Iacoboni et al. 
(1999). These authors studied normal human volunteers in two conditions: “observation-only” 
and “observation-execution”. In the “observation-only” condition, volunteers were shown a mov-
ing ﬁ nger, a cross on a stationary ﬁ nger, or a cross on empty background. The instruction was to 
observe the stimuli. In the “observation-execution” condition, the same stimuli were presented, 
but this time, the instruction was to lift the right ﬁ nger, as fast as possible, in response to them. The 
crucial contrast was between the trials in which the volunteers made the movement in response to 
an observed action (“imitation”) and the trials in which the movement was triggered by the cross 
(a non-imitative behavior). The results showed that the activation was stronger during “imitation” 
in the posterior part of the inferior frontal gyrus. Similar results were also obtained by Koski et al. 
(2002) and Gr è zes et al. (2003). 
 Further evidence that the mirror mechanism is involved in imitation was found using repetitive 
TMS (rTMS). In a group of volunteers the caudal part of the left inferior frontal gyrus (Broca’s 
area) was stimulated while they (a) pressed keys on a keyboard, (b) pressed the keys in response 
to a point of red light which, directed onto the keyboard, indicated which key to press, or (c) imi-
tated a similar movement executed by another individual. The data showed that rTMS lowered the 
participants’ performance during imitation, but not during the other two tasks (Heiser, Iacoboni, 
Maeda, Marcus, & Mazziotta, 2003). 
 The mirror mechanism is also involved in  imitation learning . An interesting model based on 
ethological studies of ape behavior has been proposed by Byrne (2002). According to this model, 
learning by imitation results from the integration of two distinct processes. First, the observer seg-
ments the action to be imitated into its individual elements, thus converting it into a string of acts 
belonging to the observer motor repertoire. Secondly, the observer organizes these motor acts into 
a sequence that replicates that of the demonstrator. 
 The neural basis of imitation learning was investigated by Buccino et al. (2004b) in an fMRI 
study. Musically naive participants were asked to imitate guitar chords played by an expert guitar-
ist. Cortical activations were mapped during the following events: (a) observation of the chords 
made by the expert player, (b) pause, (c) execution of the observed chords, and (d) rest. In addi-
tion, there were other conditions to control for observation not followed by imitation and for 
non-imitative motor activity. The results showed that during observation for imitation there was 
activation of a cortical network formed by IPL and the dorsal part of PMv, plus the  pars opercularis 
of IFG. This circuit was also active during observation in the control conditions in which partici-
pants merely observed the chords, or observed them with the instruction to subsequently perform 
an action not related to guitar chord execution. During the pause, activation was found in the 
imitation condition in the same circuit as during observation, but, most interestingly, also in the 
middle frontal cortex (area 46) and in the anterior mesial cortex. Motor activations dominate the 
picture during chord execution. 
 A subsequent fMRI study, based on a similar experimental design, but carried out in both expert 
and naive guitarists conﬁ rmed the joint role of the mirror areas and prefrontal lobe in imitation 
learning. In particular, it was conﬁ rmed the fundamental role that area 46 plays in combining dif-
ferent motor acts in a new speciﬁ c motor pattern (Vogt, Buccino, Wohlschlager, Canessa, Shah, & 
Zilles, 2007). 
 In summary, these data show that during new motor pattern formation there is a strong activation 
of the mirror mechanism. Imitation learning is, however, based on a two-step mechanism. First, 

THE MIRROR MECHANISM: UNDERSTANDING OTHERS FROM THE INSIDE
280
the observed actions are decomposed into elementary motor acts that activate, via mirror mecha-
nisms, the corresponding motor representations in the parietal and frontal lobe. Subsequently, 
these motor representations are re-combined to ﬁ t the observed model. For this re-combination, a 
crucial role is played by frontal area 46.  
 Emotions and the mirror mechanism  
 According to Ekman (1999), humans share ﬁ ve basic emotions: fear, sadness, happiness, 
anger, and disgust. This last emotion has been classiﬁ ed among the basic ones also by Darwin 
(1872). 
 Disgust is one of the emotions most investigated in neurophysiological studies. Brain imag-
ing studies showed that when an individual is exposed to disgusting odors or tastes, there is an 
intense activation of two structures: the amygdala and the insula (Augustine, 1996; Royet, Plailly, 
Delon-Martin, Kareken, & Segebarth, 2003; Wicker, Keysers, Plailly, Royet, Gallese, & Rizzolatti, 
2003). 
 The insula is a complex structure. A recent meta-analysis by Kurth, Zilles, Fox, Laird, & Eickhoff 
(2010), based on a large number of fMRI studies, provided a comprehensive correlative func-
tional picture of human insula. According to Kurth et al. there are four distinct functional ﬁ elds 
in human insula: the sensorimotor, the socio-emotional, the olfactory-gustatory and, ﬁ nally, the 
cognitive ﬁ eld. A conjunction analysis across these domains revealed that, aside from the sensori-
motor ﬁ eld, all the other ones share activations in the cognitive ﬁ eld, a sector located in the anterior 
dorsal insula. 
 The sensorimotor ﬁ eld is located in the dorsal-posterior part of the insula. It is adjacent to SII 
and appears to represent a ventral extension of the primary somatosensory cortex. This ﬁ eld medi-
ates elaboration of sensory information similar to that carried out in SII and adjacent areas. It is 
 not related to emotions. The anterior sector receives a rich input from olfactory and gustatory cent-
ers and, in addition, a visual input from the inferotemporal lobe (Mesulam & Mufson, 1982). Its 
electrical stimulation produces motor behaviors related to food ingestion (dorsal part) and disgust 
responses (ventral part). The part of the insula concerned with emotional behaviors is located in 
the ventral part of the insula. In both humans and monkeys, the electrical stimulation of the insula 
produces body movements often accompanied, in its ventral part, by autonomic and viscero-motor 
responses (Caruana, Jezzini, Sbriscia-Fioretti, Rizzolatti, & Gallese, 2011; Krolak-Salmon, Henaff, 
Isnard, Tallon-Baudry, Guenot, Vighetto, et al., 2003; Penﬁ eld & Faulk, 1955). 
 On the basis of previous brain imaging studies (Phillips, Young, Scott, Calder, Andrew, 
Giampietro, et al., 1998; Sprengelmeyer, Rausch, Eysel, & Przuntek, 1998; Zald, & Pardo, 2000) 
showing that, in humans, observation of faces showing disgust activates the anterior insula, Wicker 
et al. (2003) investigated whether the area within the insula that activates during the  experience of 
disgust, would also show activation during the observation of faces expressing disgust. 
 This fMRI study consisted of two sessions. In the ﬁ rst, the participants were exposed to unpleas-
ant and pleasant odorants; in the second they watched a video showing the face expression of 
people snifﬁ ng an unpleasant, a pleasant or a neutral odor. Three main structures became active 
during the exposure to smells: the amygdala, the insula and the anterior cingulate. The amygdala 
was activated by both unpleasant and pleasant odors. In the insula, pleasant odorants produced a 
relatively weak activation located in a posterior part of the right insula, while disgusting odorants 
activated the anterior sector bilaterally. The results of visual runs showed activations in various 
cortical and subcortical centers, but not in the amygdala. The left anterior insula and the anterior 
cingulate were activated only during the observation of disgust. 

THE MIRROR MECHANISM AND AUTISM
281
 The most important result of the study was the demonstration that precisely the same foci 
within the anterior insula that were activated by the exposure to disgusting odorants were also acti-
vated by the observation of disgust. These data strongly suggest that the insula (and the anterior 
cingulate) contain neural populations that becomes active both when the participants experience 
disgust and when they see it in others. 
 The hypothesis that we recognize others’ emotion by activating structures mediating the same 
emotion in ourselves has been advanced by various authors (Calder, Keane, Manes, Antoun, & 
Young, 2000; Carr, Iacoboni, Dubeau, Mazziotta, & Lenzi, 2003; Gallese, Keysers, & Rizzolatti, 
2004; Singer, Seymour, O’Doherty, Kaube, Dolan, & Frith, 2004). Particularly inﬂ uential in this 
respect has been the work by Damasio (2003). According to his ﬁ ndings, mostly based on brain 
lesions, the neural basis of emotion understanding is the activation of an “as-if-loop”, the core 
structure of which is the insula (Damasio, 2003). 
 It should be stressed that the direct activation of viscero-motor structures like the insula does 
not exclude that we may recognize emotions indirectly, using cognition. Some particular visual 
feature representing emotion, like in schematic faces, can determine emotion recognition without 
necessarily eliciting the observed emotion. 
 The mirror mechanism and autism  
 Autistic syndrome disorder (ASD) is a heterogeneous developmental syndrome characterized by 
marked impairments in social interaction and communication as well as increased repetitive stere-
otyped behaviors and/or restricted interests (Kanner, 1943). 
 Although ASD is not associated with severe motor disturbances, many studies have reported 
motor deﬁ cits including alterations in motor milestone development (Teitelbaum, Teitelbaum, 
Nye, Fryman, & Maurer, 1998), clumsiness, motor incoordination, disturbances in reach-to-grasp 
movement (Ghaziuddin & Butler, 1998; Miyahara, Tsujii, Hori, Nakanishi, Kageyama, & Sugiyama, 
1997), deﬁ cits in gross and ﬁ ne motor movement (Noterdaeme, Mildenberger, Minow, & Amorosa, 
2002), and impaired postural control (Kohen-Raz, Volkmar, & Cohen, 1992; Minshew, Sung, 
Jones, & Furman, 2004). These disturbances are to be added to those dealing with intrusive and 
abnormal movements, including repetitive hand ﬂ apping, stereotypy, and self-injurious behav-
iors (Gritti, Bove, Di Sarno, D’Addio, Chiapparo, & Bove, 2003; Mooney, Gray, & Tonge, 2006; 
Nayate, Bradshaw, & Rinehart, 2005). Furthermore, there is preliminary evidence that praxis deﬁ -
cits in children with ASD correlate positively with social, communicative, and behavioral impair-
ments (Dowell, Mahone, & Mostofsky, 2009; Dziuk, Gidley Larson, Apostu, Mahone, Denckla, & 
Mostofsky, 2007; Qiu et al., 2010). 
 Taken together, this impressive amount of data indicating a profound deﬁ cit in the motor sys-
tem organization, suggest, a priori, the existence of a deﬁ ciency of a normal development of the 
mirror mechanism, which is a motor mechanism, in ASD. Note also that the crucial symptoms of 
ASD (impairment in communication, language, and emotion) appear to match functions that are 
mediated by the mirror mechanism. On the basis of these considerations the hypothesis has been 
advanced (Williams, Whiten, Suddendorf, & Perrett, 2001; see Ramachandran 2011) that there is 
a relation between a deﬁ ciency in the abilities underpinned by mirror mechanism and the core 
deﬁ cit of autism. 
 Some evidence in favor of this hypothesis comes from EEG studies on mu rhythm in autistic 
children. They showed that while individuals with autism present a suppression of mu rhythm 
during voluntary movements, this suppression is absent when they watched someone else per-
forming the movement (Ramachandran 2011). Similar data were also found by Martineau and 

THE MIRROR MECHANISM: UNDERSTANDING OTHERS FROM THE INSIDE
282
colleagues (Martineau, Cochin, Magne, & Barthelemy, 2008). Oberman, Ramachandran, & Pineda 
(2008) investigated how familiarity between the observing individual and the person performing 
the movements modulated the entity of mu rhythm suppression. Their study revealed that mu 
suppression depended on the familiarity of the observer with the agent and that children with 
autism might show mu suppression when a familiar person performs the action. 
 Evidence in favor of a deﬁ cit of the mirror mechanism in ASD also came from an fMRI study. 
High functioning children with autism and matched controls were scanned while imitating and 
observing emotional expressions. The results showed a signiﬁ cantly weaker activation in inferior 
frontal gyrus (IFG) in children with autism than in typically developing (TD) children. Most inter-
estingly, the activation was inversely related to symptom severity (Dapretto, Davies, Pfeifer, Scott, 
Sigman, Bookheimer, et al., 2006). 
 Impaired motor facilitation during action observation was also reported in autism using TMS 
(Enticott, Kennedy, Rinehart, Tonge, Bradshaw, Taffe, et al., 2012; Th é oret, Halligan, Kobayashi, 
Fregni, Tager-Flusberg, & Pascual-Leone, 2005). Furthermore, unlike TD individuals that, when 
viewing persons face-to-face, tend to imitate them in a mirror way, children with autism do not 
show this preference (Avikainen, Wohlschl ä ger, Liuhanen, H ä nninen, & Hari, 2003). This imita-
tion peculiarity is most likely due to a deﬁ cit of mirror mechanism coding other person’s move-
ments on one’s own. 
 Recently, the deﬁ cit of the mirror mechanism in autism has been addressed from another per-
spective (Cattaneo, Fabbri-Destro, Boria, Pieraccini, Monti, Cossu et al., 2007). TD children and 
children with autism were tested while they observed either an experimenter grasping a piece of 
food for eating or grasping a piece of paper for placing it into a container (Figure 15.5). The EMG 
activity of the mylohyoid muscle (MH), a muscle involved in opening of the mouth, was recorded. 
The results showed that in TD children, the observation of food grasping determined the activa-
tion of MH, while this activation was lacking in children with autism. In other words, while the 
observation of an action done by another individual  intruded  into the motor system of a TD 
observer, this  intrusion  was lacking in children with autism. This ﬁ nding indicates that, in autism, 
the mirror mechanism is “dormant” during action observation and the immediate, experiential 
understanding of others’ intention is absent. 
 Both autistic and TD children were also asked to perform the two actions described above (grasp 
to eat and grasp to place), while EMG of MH muscle was recorded. In TD children the muscle 
became active as soon they moved the arm to reach the food. In contrast, no MH muscle activa-
tion was observed during food reaching and grasping in autistic children. MH muscle activation 
appeared only when the children brought the food to their mouth. These data indicate on the one 
side that ASD children are unable to organize their motor acts into a unitary action characterized 
by a speciﬁ c intention, on the other they show a deﬁ cit in the mirror mechanism reﬂ ected by the 
absence of motor activation of the muscles involved in the observed action. 
 These ﬁ ndings show an apparent contradiction between the cognitive capacities of the children 
to report the purpose of the experimenter’s action and their lack of motor resonance with the 
action. In order to clarify this incongruence a further experiment was performed in which TD 
and autistic children were shown with goal-directed motor acts and asked to report what the actor 
was doing and why he was doing it (Boria, Fabbri-Destro, Cattaneo, Sparaci, Sinigaglia, Santelli, 
et al., 2009). These tasks test two different abilities; ﬁ rst to recognize a motor act (e.g. grasping an 
object) and second to understand the intention behind it (e.g. grasping to eat). The results showed 
that both TD and ASD children were able to recognize  what the actor was doing, but ASD children 
failed in recognizing  why the actor was doing it. ASD children systematically attributed to the 
actor the intention that could be derived by the semantics of the object, e.g. intention to cut when 

283
REFERENCES
scissors were shown, regardless of how the object was grasped. This ﬁ nding indicates that ASD 
children interpret the behavior of others on the basis of the standard use of objects rather than of 
the behavior of the actors. ASD children therefore appear to have deﬁ ciencies in reading the inten-
tion of others from their behavior. 
 It may sound surprising that children with autism have no problem in recognizing the motor act 
of others (e.g. grasping) when this appears one of the major functions of the mirror mechanism. 
This, however, is easily explained if one take into consideration that this capacity could be solved 
by STS activity. The difference between STS and mirror mechanism in perception consists not in 
motor act recognition, but in the capacity of the mirror mechanism to generalize the observed 
motor act and to allow one to understand the intention behind it as if done by observer himself 
(Rizzolatti & Sinigaglia, 2010). 
 It is important to conclude on this point with a sentence by Marc Jeannerod (2004, p. 392): 
“Mere visual perception, without involvement of the motor system would only provide a descrip-
tion of the visible aspects of the movements of the agent, but it would not give precise information 
about the intrinsic components of the observed action which are critical for understanding what 
the action is about, what is its goal, and how to reproduce it”. This sentence beautifully describes 
how superﬁ cial and devoid of real understanding is the visual/inferential way of understanding 
others relative to that we deﬁ ned as understanding “from the inside”. 
 Acknowledgements 
 This work was supported by ERC grant COGSYSTEMS to GR, by Regione-Universit à  Emilia-
Romagna and by Fondazione Banca Monte Parma. 
 References 
 Altschuler, E. L., Vankov, A., Wang, V., Ramachandran, V. S., & Pineda JA. (1997).  Person see, person do: 
Human cortical electrophysiological correlates of monkey see monkey do cells . Presented at a  poster 
session, at the 27th Annual Meeting of the Society for Neuroscience ,  New Orleans . 
 Augustine, J. R. (1996).  Circuitry and functional aspects of the insular lobe in primates including humans . 
 Brain Research Reviews  22 :  229–44 . 
 Avikainen, S., Wohlschl ä ger, A., Liuhanen, S., H ä nninen, R., & Hari R. (2003).  Impaired mirror-image 
imitation in Asperger and high-functioning autistic subjects .  Current Biology  13 :  339–41 . 
 Babiloni, C., Babiloni, F., Carducci, F., Cincotti, F., Cocozza, G., Del Percio, C., Moretti, D. V., & Rossini, 
P. M. (2002).  Human cortical electroencephalography (EEG) rhythms during the observation of simple 
aimless movements: a high-resolution EEG study .  NeuroImage  17 :  559–72 . 
 Barraclough, N. E., Xiao, D., Oram, M. W., & Perrett, D. I. (2006).  Th e sensitivity of primate STS neurons to 
walking sequences and to the degree of articulation in static images .  Progress in Brain Research  154 :  135–48 . 
 Belmalih, A., Borra, E., Contini, M., Gerbella, M., Rozzi, S., & Luppino, G. (2007).  A multiarchitectonic 
approach for the defi nition of functionally distinct areas and domains in the monkey frontal lobe . 
 Journal of Anatomy  211 :  199–211 . 
 Belmalih, A., Borra, E., Contini, M., Gerbella, M., Rozzi, S., & Luppino, G. (2009).  Multimodal 
architectonic subdivision of the rostral part (area F5) of the macaque ventral premotor cortex .  Journal of 
Comparative Neurology  512 :  183–217 . 
 Bonini, L., Rozzi, S., Serventi, F. U., Simone, L., Ferrari, P. F., & Fogassi, L. (2010).  Ventral premotor 
and inferior parietal cortices make contribution to action organization and intention understanding . 
 Cerebral Cortex  20 :  1372–85 . 
 Boria, S., Fabbri-Destro, M., Cattaneo, L., Sparaci, L., Sinigaglia, C., Santelli, E., Cossu, G., & Rizzolatti, 
G. (2009).  Intention understanding in autism .  PLoS One 4 :  e5596 . 

THE MIRROR MECHANISM: UNDERSTANDING OTHERS FROM THE INSIDE
284
 Brass, M., Schmitt, R. M., Spengler, S. & Gergely, G. (2007).  Investigating action understanding: inferential 
processes vs. action simulation .  Current Biology  17 :  2117–121 . 
 Brodmann, K. (1909).  Vergleichende Lokalisationslehre der Groshirnrinde . 
 Buccino, G., Binkofski, F., Fink, G. R., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., Seitz, R. J., Zilles, K., Rizzolatti, 
G., & Freund, H. J. (2001).  Action observation activates premotor and parietal areas in a somatotopic 
manner: an fMRI study .  European Journal of Neuroscience  13 :  400–4 . 
 Buccino, G., Lui, F., Canessa, N., Patteri, I., Lagravinese, G., Benuzzi, F., Porro, C. A., & Rizzolatti, G. 
(2004a).  Neural circuits involved in the recognition of actions performed by nonconspecifi cs: an FMRI 
study .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  16 :  114–26 . 
 Buccino, G., Vogt, S., Ritzl, A., Fink, G. R., Zilles, K., Freund, H. J., & Rizzolatti G. (2004b).  Neural 
circuits underlying imitation learning of hand actions: An event-related fMRI study .  Neuron  42 :  323–34 . 
 Byrne, R. W. (2002).  Seeing actions as hierarchically organized structures: Great ape manual skills . In A. N. 
Meltzoff  & W Prinz (Eds),  Th e Imitative Mind: Development, Evolution and Brain Bases (pp.  122–40 ). 
 Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Caetano, G., Jousm ä ki, V., & Hari, R. (2007).  Actor’s and observer’s primary motor cortices stabilize 
similarly aft er seen or heard motor actions .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  104 : 
 9058–62 . 
 Caggiano, V., Fogassi, L., Rizzolatti, G., Th ier, P., & Casile, A. (2009).  Mirror neurons diff erentially encode 
the peripersonal and extrapersonal space of monkeys .  Science  324 :  403–6 . 
 Caggiano, V., Fogassi, L., Rizzolatti, G., Pomper, J. K., Th ier, P., Giese, M., & Casile, A. (2011).  View-based 
encoding of actions in mirror neurons of area F5 in macaque premotor cortex .  Current Biology  21 : 
 144–8 . 
 Calder, A. J., Keane, J., Manes, F., Antoun, N., & Young, A. W. (2000).  Impaired recognition and 
experience of disgust following brain injury .  Nature Neuroscience  3 :  1077–8 . 
 Carr, L., Iacoboni, M., Dubeau, M. C., Mazziotta, J. C., & Lenzi, GL. (2003).  Neural mechanisms of 
empathy in humans: a relay from neural systems for imitation to limbic areas .  Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences  100 :  5497–502 . 
 Carruthers, P., & Smith, P. K. (1996).  Th eories of Th eories of Mind .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Caruana, F., Jezzini, A., Sbriscia-Fioretti, B., Rizzolatti, G., & Gallese, V. (2011).  Emotional and social 
behaviors elicited by electrical stimulation of the insula in the macaque monkey .  Current Biology  21 : 
 195–9 . 
 Caspers, S., Zilles, K., Laird, A. R., & Eickhoff , S. B. (2010).  ALE meta-analysis of action observation and 
imitation in the human brain .  NeuroImage  15 :  1148–67 . 
 Cattaneo, L., Caruana, F., Jezzini, H., & Rizzolatti, G. (2009).  Representation of goal and movements 
without overt motor behavior in the human motor cortex: a TMS study .  Journal of Neuroscience  29 : 
 11134–8 . 
 Cattaneo, L., Fabbri-Destro, M., Boria, S., Pieraccini, C., Monti, A., Cossu, G., & Rizzolatti, G. (2007). 
 Impairment of actions chains in autism and its possible role in intention understanding .  Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences  104 :  17825–30 . 
 Cochin, S., Barthelemy, C., Lejeune, B., Roux, S., & Martineau, J. (1998).  Perception of motion and qEEG 
activity in human adults .  Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology  107 :  287–95 . 
 Cochin, S., Barthelemy, C., Roux, S., & Martineau, J. (1999).  Observation and execution of movement: 
similarities demonstrated by quantifi ed electroencephalography .  European Journal of Neuroscience  11 : 
 1839–42 . 
 Colby, C. L., Duhamel, J-R., & Goldberg, M. E. (1993).  Ventral intraparietal area of the macaque: anatomic 
location and visual response properties .  Journal of Neurophysiology  69 :  902–14 . 
 Crammond, D. J., & Kalaska, J. F. (2000).  Prior information in motor and premotor cortex: activity during 
the delay period and eff ect on pre-movement activity .  Journal of Neurophysiology  84 :  986–1005 . 

285
 Damasio, A. R. (2003).  Feelings of emotion and the self .  Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences  1001 : 
 253–61 . 
 Dapretto, M., Davies, M. S., Pfeifer, J. H., Scott, A. A., Sigman, M., Bookheimer, S. Y., & Iacoboni, 
M. (2006).  Understanding emotions in others: mirror neuron dysfunction in children with autism 
spectrum disorders .  Nature Neuroscience  9 :  28–30 . 
 Darwin, C. (1872).  Th e Expression of Emotions in Man and Animals . London:  John Murray . 
 de Lange, F. P., Spronk, M., Willems, R. M., Toni, I., & Bekkering, H. (2008).  Complementary systems for 
understanding action intentions .  Current Biology  18 :  454–57 . 
 di Pellegrino, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (1992).  Understanding motor events: 
a neurophysiological study .  Experimental Brain Research  91 :  176–80 . 
 Dowell, L. R., Mahone, E. M., & Mostofsky, S. H. (2009).  Associations of postural knowledge and basic 
motor skill with dyspraxia in autism: implication for abnormalities in distributed connectivity and 
motor learning .  Neuropsychology  23 :  563–70 . 
 Duhamel, J-R., Colby, C. L., & Goldberg, M. E. (1998).  Ventral intraparietal area of the macaque: 
congruent visual and somatic response properties .  Journal of Neurophysiology  79 :  126–36 . 
 Dziuk, M. A., Gidley Larson, J. C., Apostu, A., Mahone, E. M., Denckla, M. B., & Mostofsky, S. H. 
(2007).  Dyspraxia in autism: association with motor, social, and communicative defi cits .  Developmental 
Medicine & Child Neurology  49 :  734–9 . 
 Ekman, P. (1999).  Handbook of Cognition and Emotion . Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
 Enticott, P. G., Kennedy, H. A., Rinehart, N. J., Tonge, B. J., Bradshaw, J. L., Taff e, J. R., Daskalakis, Z. J., 
& Fitzgerald, P. B. (2012).  Mirror Neuron Activity Associated with Social Impairments but not Age in 
Autism Spectrum Disorder .  Biological Psychiatry  71 :  427–33 . 
 Fabbri-Destro, M., & Rizzolatti, G. (2008).  Mirror neurons and mirror systems in monkeys and humans . 
 Physiology (Bethesda)  23 :  171–9 . 
 Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Pavesi, G., & Rizzolatti, G. (1995).  Motor facilitation during action observation: a 
magnetic stimulation study .  Journal of Neurophysiology  73 :  2608–11 . 
 Fogassi, L., Ferrari, P. F., Gesierich, B., Rozzi, S., Chersi, F., & Rizzolatti, G. (2005).  Parietal lobe: From 
action organization to intention understanding .  Science  302 :  662–7 . 
 Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Luppino, G., Matelli, M., & Rizzolatti G. (1996).  Coding of peripersonal 
space in inferior premotor cortex (area F4) .  Journal of Neurophysiology  76 :  141–57 . 
 Filimon, F., Nelson, J. D., Hagler, D. J., & Sereno, M. I. (2007).  Human cortical representations for 
reaching: mirror neurons for execution, observation, and imagery .  NeuroImage  37 :  1315–28 . 
 Frith, C. D., & Frith, U. (2007).  Social cognition in humans .  Current Biology  17 :  724–32 . 
 Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Rizzolatti, G. (1996).  Action recognition in the premotor cortex .  Brain 
 119 :  593–609 . 
 Gallese, V., Keysers, C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2004).  A unifying view of the basis of social cognition .  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences  8 :  396–403 . 
 Gangitano, M., Mottaghy, F. M., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2001).  Phase-specifi c modulation of cortical motor 
output during movement observation .  NeuroReport  12 :  1489–92 . 
 Gastaut, H., Terzian, H., & Gastaut, Y. (1952).  Etude d’une activit é  é lectroenc é phalographique m é cconue: 
“Le rythme rolandique en arceau” .  Mars Medical  89 :  296–310 . 
 Gazzola, V., Aziz-Zadeh, L., & Keysers, C. (2006).  Empathy and the somatotopic auditory mirror system in 
humans .  Current Biology  16 :  1824–9 . 
 Gazzola V, & Keysers C. (2009). Th e observation and execution of actions share motor and somatosensory 
voxels in all tested subjects: single-subject analyses of unsmoothed fMRI data.  Cerebral Cortex  19: 
1239–55, 
 Gazzola, V., Rizzolatti, G., Wicker, B., & Keysers, C. (2007).  Th e anthropomorphic brain: Th e mirror 
neuron system responds to human and robotic actions .  NeuroImage  35 :  1674–84 . 
REFERENCES

THE MIRROR MECHANISM: UNDERSTANDING OTHERS FROM THE INSIDE
286
 Gentilucci, M., Scandolara, C., Pigarev, I. N., & Rizzolatti, G. (1983).  Visual responses in the postarcuate 
cortex (area 6) of the monkey that are independent of eye position .  Experimental Brain Research  50 : 
 464–8 . 
 Gerbella, M., Belmalih, A., Borra, E., Rozzi, S., & Luppino, G. (2010).  Cortical connections of the 
macaque caudal ventrolateral prefrontal areas 45A and 45B .  Cerebral Cortex  20 :  141–68 . 
 Geyer, S., Matelli, M., Luppino, G., & Zilles, K. (2000).  Functional neuroanatomy of the primate isocortical 
motor system .  Anatomy and Embryology  202 :  443–74 . 
 Ghaziuddin, M., & Butler, E. (1998).  Clumsiness in autism and Asperger syndrome: a further report . 
 Journal of Intellectual Disability Research  42 :  43–8 . 
 Graft on, S. T., Arbib, M. A., Fadiga, L., & Rizzolatti, G. (1996).  Localization of grasp representations in 
humans by PET: 2 .  Observation compared with imagination .  Experimental Brain Research  112 :  103–11 . 
 Graziano, M. S., Yap, G. S., & Gross, G. (1994).  Coding the visual space by premotor neurons .  Science  266 : 
 1054–7 . 
 Gr è zes, J., Armony, J. L., Rowe, J., & Passingham, R. E. (2003).  Activations related to “mirror” and 
“canonical” neurones in the human brain: an fMRI study .  NeuroImage  18 :  928–37 . 
 Gritti, A., Bove, D., Di Sarno, A. M., D’Addio, A. A., Chiapparo, S., & Bove, R. M. (2003).  Stereotyped 
movements in a group of autistic children .  Functional Neurology  18 :  89–94 . 
 Hari, R. (2006).  Action-perception connection and the cortical mu rhythm .  Progress in Brain Research  159 : 
 253–60 . 
 Heiser, M., Iacoboni, M., Maeda, F., Marcus, J., & Mazziotta, J. C. (2003).  Th e essential role of Broca’s area 
in imitation .  European Journal of Neuroscience  17 :  1123–8 . 
 Hurley, S., & Charter, N. (2005).  Pespective on Imitation: From Neuroscience to Social Science, Vol. 1. 
 Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Hutchinson, W. D., Davis, K. D., Lozano, A. M., Tasker, R. R., & Dostrovsky, J. O. (1999).  Pain-related 
neurons in the human cingulate cortex .  Nature Neuroscience  2 :  403–5 . 
 Iacoboni, M., Woods, R. P., Brass, M., Bekkering, H., Mazziotta, J. C., & Rizzolatti, G. (1999).  Cortical 
mechanisms of human imitation .  Science  286 :  2526–8 . 
 Ishida, H., Nakajima, K., Inase, M., & Murata, A. (2009).  Shared mapping of own and others’ bodies in 
visuotactile bimodal area of monkey parietal cortex .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  22 :  83–96 . 
 Jastorff , J., Begliomini, C., Fabbri-Destro, M., Rizzolatti, G., & Orban, G. A. (2010).  Coding observed 
motor acts: diff erent organizational principles in the parietal and premotor cortex of humans .  Journal of 
Neurophysiology  104 :  128–40 . 
 Jeannerod, M. (1988) . Th e Neural and Behavioral Organization of Goal-directed Movements.  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press . 
 Jeannerod, M. (2004).  Action from within .  International Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology  2 : 
 376–402 . 
 Kalaska, J. F., & Crammond, D. J. (1995).  Deciding not to GO: neuronal correlates of response selection in 
a GO/NOGO task in primate premotor and parietal cortex .  Cerebral Cortex  5 :  410–28 . 
 Kanner, L. (1943).  Autistic disturbances of aff ective contact .  Nervous Child  2 :  217–50 . 
 Keller, G. B., & Hahnloser, R. H. (2009).  Neural processing of auditory feedback during vocal practice in a 
songbird .  Nature  457 :  187–90 . 
 Kilner, J. M., Salenius, S., Baker, S. N., Jackson, A., Hari, R., & Lemon, R. N. (2003).  Task-dependent 
modulations of cortical oscillatory activity in human subjects during a bimanual precision grip task . 
 NeuroImage  18 :  67–73 . 
 Kohen-Raz, R., Volkmar, F. R., & Cohen, D. J. (1992).  Postural control in children with autism .  Journal of 
Autism and Developmental Disorders  22 :  419–32 . 
 Kohler, E., Keysers, C., Umilt à , M. A., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (2002).  Hearing sounds, 
understanding actions: Action representation in mirror neurons .  Science  297 :  846–8 . 

287
 Koski, L., Wohlschlager, A., Bekkering, H., Woods, R. P., Dubeau, M. C., Mazziotta, J. C., & Iacoboni, M. 
(2002).  Modulation of motor and premotor activity during imitation of target-directed actions .  Cerebral 
Cortex  12 :  847–55 . 
 Kraskov, A., Dancause, N., Quallo, M. M., Shepherd, S., & Lemon, R. N. (2009).  Corticospinal neurons in 
macaque ventral premotor cortex with mirror properties: a potential mechanism for action suppression? 
 Neuron  64 :  922–30 . 
 Krolak-Salmon, P., Henaff , M. A., Isnard, J., Tallon-Baudry, C., Guenot, M., Vighetto, A., Bertrand, O., 
& Mauguiere, F. (2003).  An attention modulated response to disgust in human ventral anterior insula . 
 Annals of Neurology  53 :  446–53 . 
 Kurth, F., Zilles, K., Fox, P., Laird, A., & Eickhoff , S. (2010).  A link between the systems: functional 
diff erentiation and integration within the human insula revealed by meta-analysis .  Brain Structure and 
Function  214 :  519–34 . 
 Lewis, J. W., Brefczynski, J. A., Phinney, R. E., Janik, J. J., & DeYoe, E. A. (2005).  Distinct cortical pathways 
for processing tool vs. animal sounds .  Journal of Neuroscience  25 :  5148–58 . 
 Liepelt, R., Von Cramon, D. Y., & Brass, M. (2008).  How do we infer other’s goals from non stereotypic 
actions? Th e outcome of context-sensitive inferential processing in right inferior parietal and posterior 
temporal cortex .  NeuroImage  43 :  784–92 . 
 Lu, M. T., Preston, J. B., & Strick, P. L. (1994).  Interconnections between the prefrontal cortex and the 
premotor areas in the frontal lobe .  Journal of Comparative Neurology  341 :  375–92 . 
 Luppino, G., Matelli, M., Camarda, R., & Rizzolatti, G. (1993).  Corticocortical connections of area F3 
(SMA-proper) and area F6 (pre-SMA) in the macaque monkey .  Journal of Comparative Neurology  338 : 
 114–40 . 
 Maeda, F., Kleiner-Fisman, G., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2002).  Motor facilitation while observing hand actions: 
specifi city of the eff ect and role of observer’s orientation .  Journal of Neurophysiology  87 :  1329–335 . 
 Malle, B. F., Moses, J. L., & Baldwin, D. A. (2001).  Intentions and Intentionality: Foundations of Social 
Cognition .  Cambridge : MIT press . 
 Martineau, J., Cochin, S., Magne, R., & Barthelemy, C. (2008).  Impaired cortical activation in autistic 
children: is the mirror neuron system involved?  International Journal of Psychophysiology  68 :  35–40 . 
 Matelli, M., Luppino, G., & Rizzolatti, G. (1985).  Patterns of cytochrome oxidase activity in the frontal 
agranular cortex of the macaque monkey .  Behavioral Brain Research  18 :  125–36 . 
 Matelli, M., Luppino, G., & Rizzolatti, G. (1991).  Architecture of superior and mesial area 6 and the 
adjacent cingulate cortex in the macaque monkey .  Journal of Comparative Neurology  311 :  445–62 . 
 Merleau-Ponty M. (1962).  Phenomenology of Perception (transl. C. Smith). London: Routledge. 
 Mesulam, M. M., & Mufson, E. J. (1982).  Insula of the Old World Monkey .  III: Eff erent cortical output and 
comments on function .  Journal of Comparative Neurology  212 :  38–52 . 
 Minshew, N. J., Sung, K., Jones, B. L., & Furman, J. M. (2004).  Underdevelopment of the postural control 
system in autism .  Neurology  63 :  2056–61 . 
 Miyahara, M., Tsujii, M., Hori, M., Nakanishi, K., Kageyama, H., & Sugiyama T. (1997).  Brief report: 
motor incoordination in children with Asperger syndrome and learning disabilities .  Journal of Autism 
and Developmental Disorders  27 :  595–603 . 
 Mooney, E. L., Gray, K. M., & Tonge, B. J. (2006).  Early features of autism: Repetitive behaviors in young 
children .  European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry  15 :  12–18 . 
 Mukamel, R., Ekstrom, A. D., Kaplan, J., Iacoboni, M., & Fried, I. (2010).  Single-neuron responses in 
humans during execution and observation of actions .  Current Biology  20 :  750–6 . 
 Murata, A., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., Raos, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (1997).  Object representation in 
the ventral premotor cortex (area F5) of the monkey .  Journal of Neurophysiology  78 :  2226–30 . 
 Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., & Johnson, B. W. (2004a).  Primary motor cortex activation during action 
observation revealed by wavelet analysis of the EEG .  Clinical Neurophysiology  115 :  1760–6 . 
REFERENCES

THE MIRROR MECHANISM: UNDERSTANDING OTHERS FROM THE INSIDE
288
 Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., Johnson, B. W., & McNair, N. A. (2004b).  Mu rhythm modulation during 
observation of an object-directed grasp .  Cognitive Brain Research  19 :  195–201 . 
 Nayate, A., Bradshaw, J. L., & Rinehart, N. J. (2005).  Autism and Asperger’s disorder: are they movement 
disorders involving the cerebellum and/or basal ganglia?  Brain Research Bulletin  67 :  327–34 . 
 Nelissen, K., Borra, E., Gerbella, M., Rozzi, S., Luppino, G., Vanduff el, W., Rizzolatti, G., & Orban, G. A. 
(2011).  Action observation circuits in the macaque monkey cortex .  Journal of Neuroscience  31 :  3743–56 . 
 Nishitani, N., & Hari, R. (2000).  Temporal dynamics of cortical representation for action .  Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences  97 :  913–18 . 
 Noterdaeme, M., Mildenberger, K., Minow, F., & Amorosa, H. (2002).  Evaluation of neuromotor defi cits 
in children with autism and children with a specifi c speech and language disorder .  European Child & 
Adolescent Psychiatry  11 :  219–25 . 
 Oberman, L. M., Ramachandran, V. S., & Pineda, J. A. (2008).  Modulation of mu suppression in children 
with autism spectrum disorders in response to familiar or unfamiliar stimuli: the mirror neuron 
hypothesis .  Neuropsychologia  46 :  1558–65 . 
 Peeters, R., Simone, L., Nelissen, K., Fabbri-Destro, M., Vanduff el, W., Rizzolatti, G., & Orban, G. A. 
(2009).  Th e representation of tool use in humans and monkeys: common and uniquely human features . 
 Journal of Neurophysiology  29 :  11523–39 . 
 Penfi eld, W., & Faulk, M. E. (1955).  Th e insula: further observations on its function .  Brain  78 :  445–70 . 
 Perrett, D. I., Harries, M. H., Bevan, R., Th omas, S., Benson, P. J., Mistlin, A. J., Chitty, A. J., Hietanen, J. 
K., & Ortega, J. E. (1989).  Frameworks of analysis for the neural representation of animate objects and 
actions .  Journal of Experimental Biology  146 :  87–113. 
 Perry, A., & Bentin, S. (2009).  Mirror activity in the human brain while observing hand movements: 
a comparison between EEG desynchronization in the mu-range and previous fMRI results .  Brain 
Research  1282 :  126–32 . 
 Phillips, M. L., Young, A. W., Scott, S. K., Calder, A. J., Andrew, C., Giampietro, V., Williams, S. C., 
Bullmore, E. T., Brammer, M., & Gray, J. A. (1998).  Neural responses to facial and vocal expressions of 
fear and disgust .  Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences  265 :  1809–17 . 
 Prather, J. F., Peters, S., Nowicki, S., & Mooney, R. (2008).  Precise auditory-vocal mirroring in neurons for 
learned vocal communication .  Nature  451 :  249–50 . 
 Press, C., Cook, J., Blakemore, S. J., & Kilner J. (2011).  Dynamic modulation of human motor activity 
when observing actions .  Journal of Neuroscience  31 :  2792–800 . 
 Prinz, W. (1987).  Ideomotor action . In H. Heuer & A. Sanders (Eds),  Perspective on Perception and Action 
(pp.  47–76 ).  Hillsdale :  Erlbaumpp . 
 Prinz, W. (2002).  Experimental approaches to imitation . In A. Meltzoff  & W. Prinz (Eds),  Th e Imitative 
Mind: Development, Evolution, and Brain Bases (pp.  143–62 ).  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Qiu, A., Adler, M., Crocetti, D., Miller, M. I., & Mostofsky, S. H. (2010).  Basal ganglia shapes predict 
social, communication, and motor dysfunctions in boys with autism spectrum disorder .  Journal of the 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry  49 :  539–51 . 
 Ramachandran, V. S. (2011).  Th e Tell-tale Brain. Unlocking the Mystery of Human Nature . London:  William 
Heinemann . 
 Raos, V., Evangeliou, M. N., & Savaki, H. E. (2007).  Mental simulation of action in the service of action 
perception .  Journal of Neuroscience  27 :  12675–83 . 
 Raos, V., Umilt à , M. A., Murata, A., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2006).  Functional properties of 
grasping-related neurons in the ventral premotor area F5 of the macaque monkey .  Journal of 
Neurophysiology  95 :  709–29 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., Camarda, R., Fogassi, L., Gentilucci, M., Luppino, G., & Matelli M. (1988).  Functional 
organization of inferior area 6 in the macaque monkey .  II .  Area F5 and the control of distal movements . 
 Experimental Brain Research  71 :  491–507 . 

289
 Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004).  Th e mirror neuron system .  Annual Review of Neuroscience  27 : 
 169–92 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Gallese, V., & Fogassi, L. (1996a).  Premotor cortex and the recognition of motor 
actions .  Cognitive Brain Research  3 :  131–41 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Matelli, M., Bettinardi, V., Paulesu, E., Perani, D., & Fazio, F. (1996b). 
 Localization of grasp representation in humans by PET: 1 .  Observation vs. execution .  Experimental 
Brain Research  111 :  246–55 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., Ferrari, P. F., Rozzi, S., & Fogassi, L. (2006).  Th e inferior parietal lobule: where action 
becomes perception .  Wiley: Novartis Foundation Symposium  270 :  129–40 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., & Luppino, G. (2001).  Th e cortical motor system .  Neuron  31 :  889–901 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., Luppino, G., & Matelli, M. (1998).  Th e organization of the cortical motor system: new 
concepts .  Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology  106 :  283–96 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., & Sinigaglia, C. (2010).  Th e functional role of the parieto-frontal mirror circuit: 
interpretations and misinterpretations .  Nature Review Neuroscience  11 :  264–74 . 
 Rosenbaum, D. A., Cohen, R. G., Jax, S. A., Weiss, D. J., & van der Wel, R. (2007).  Th e problem of serial 
order in behavior: Lashley’s legacy .  Human Movement Science  26 :  525–54 . 
 Rozzi, S., Ferrari, P. F., Bonini, L., Rizzolatti, G., & Fogassi, L. (2008).  Functional organization of inferior 
parietal lobule convexity in the macaque monkey: electrophysiological characterization of motor, 
sensory and mirror responses and their correlation with cytoarchitectonic areas .  European Journal of 
Neuroscience  28 :  1569–88 . 
 Royet, J. P., Plailly, J., Delon-Martin, C., Kareken, D. A., & Segebarth, C. (2003).  fMRI of emotional 
responses to odors: Infl uence of hedonic valence and judgment, handedness, and gender .  NeuroImage 
 20 :  713–28 . 
 Sakreida, K., Schubotz, R. I., Wolfensteller, U., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2005).  Motion class dependency in 
observers’ motor areas revealed by functional magnetic resonance imaging .  Journal of Neuroscience  25 : 
 1335–42 . 
 Saygin, A. P., Wilson, S. M., Hagler, D. J., Bates, E., & Sereno, M. I. (2004).  Point-light biological motion 
perception activates human premotor cortex .  Journal of Neuroscience  24 :  6181–8 . 
 Shepherd, S. V., Klein, J. T., Deaner, R. O., & Platt, M. L. (2009).  Mirroring of attention by neurons in 
macaque parietal cortex .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  106 :  9489–94 . 
 Shmuelof, L., & Zohary, E. (2006).  A mirror representation of others’ actions in the human anterior parietal 
cortex .  Journal of Neuroscience  26 :  9736–42 . 
 Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J., Kaube, H., Dolan, R. J., & Frith, C. D. (2004).  Empathy for pain 
involves the aff ective but not sensory components of pain .  Science 303 :  1157–62 . 
 Sprengelmeyer, R., Rausch, M., Eysel, U. T., & Przuntek, H. (1998).  Neural structures associated with 
recognition of facial expressions of basic emotions .  Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 
 265 :  1927–31 . 
 Strafella, A. P., & Paus, T. (2000).  Modulation of cortical excitability during action observation: a 
transcranial magnetic stimulation study .  NeuroReport  11 :  2289–92 . 
 Teitelbaum, P., Teitelbaum, O., Nye, J., Fryman, J., & Maurer, R. G. (1998).  Movement analysis in infancy 
may be useful for early diagnosis of autism .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  95 :  13982–7 . 
 Th  é oret, H., Halligan, E., Kobayashi, M., Fregni, F., Tager-Flusberg, H., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2005). 
 Impaired motor facilitation during action observation in individuals with autism spectrum disorder . 
 Current Biology  15 :  R84–5 . 
 Tiihonen, J., Kajola, M., & Hari, R. (1989).  Magnetic mu rhythm in man .  Neuroscience  32 :  793–800 . 
 Tomasello, M., & Call, J. (1997).  Primate Cognition .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Ulloa, E. R., & Pineda, J. A. (2007).  Recognition of point-light biological motion: mu rhythms and mirror 
neuron activity .  Behavioral Brain Research  183 :  188–94 . 
REFERENCES

THE MIRROR MECHANISM: UNDERSTANDING OTHERS FROM THE INSIDE
290
 Umilt à , M. A., Kohler, E., Gallese, V., Fogassi, L., Fadiga, L., Keysers, C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2001).  “I know 
what you are doing”: A neurophysiological study .  Neuron  32 :  91–101 . 
 Umilt à , M. A., Escola, L., Intskirveli, I., Grammont, F., Rochat, M., Caruana, F., Jezzini, A., Gallese, V., 
& Rizzolatti, G. (2008).  When pliers become fi ngers in the monkey motor system .  Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences  105 :  2209–213. 
 Vogt, S., Buccino, G., Wohlschlager, A. M., Canessa, N., Shah, N. J., Zilles, K., Eickhoff , S. B., Freund, H. 
J., Rizzolatti, G., & Fink, G. R. (2007).  Prefrontal involvement in imitation learning of hand actions: 
Eff ects of practice and expertise .  NeuroImage  37 :  1371–83 . 
 Wheaton, L. A., Carpenter, M., Mizelle, J. C., & Forrester, L. (2008).  Preparatory band specifi c premotor 
cortical activity diff erentiates upper and lower extremity movement .  Experimental Brain Research  184 : 
 121–6 . 
 Wicker, B., Keysers, C., Plailly, J., Royet, J-P, Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (2003).  Both of us disgusted in 
My insula .  Th e common neural basis of seeing and feeling disgust .  Neuron  3 :  655–64 . 
 Williams, J. H. G., Whiten, A., Suddendorf, T., & Perrett, D. I. (2001).  Imitation, mirror neurons and 
autism .  Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews  25 :  287–95 . 
 Yuan, H., Perdoni, C., & He, B. (2010).  Decoding speed of imagined hand movement from EEG . (2010a). 
 Conference Proceedings of IEEE English Medical and Biological Society  2010 , pp.  142–5 . 
 Zald, D. H., & Pardo, J. V. (2000).  Functional neuroimaging of the olfactory system in humans . 
 International Journal of Psychophysiology  36 :  165–81 . 

 Chapter 16 
 Social neuropeptides in the human 
brain: Oxytocin and social behavior  
 Markus Heinrichs ,  Frances S. Chen , 
and   Gregor  Domes 
 The neuropeptide oxytocin (OXT) plays a central role in mammalian social life. Its function in 
regulating social approach, social memory, and attachment has been documented in numerous 
species (Carter, 1998; Insel & Young, 2001; Winslow & Insel, 2004). In humans, oxytocin also regu-
lates emotion reading, social stress-buffering, and trust (Heinrichs, von Dawans, & Domes, 2009; 
Meyer-Lindenberg, Domes, Kirsch, & Heinrichs, 2011). Recent studies on clinical populations sug-
gest that impaired functioning of the oxytocin system may contribute to mental disorders associ-
ated with social deﬁ cits including autism, social anxiety disorder, borderline personality disorder, 
and schizophrenia (Meyer-Lindenberg et al., 2011). This chapter will review recent advances in 
human oxytocin research, focusing on how this “social neuropeptide” contributes to a core aspect 
of human sociality: the motivation and ability to understand the minds of others. 
 Neurophysiology of the oxytocin system  
 OXT is synthesized in magnocellular neurons in the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of 
the hypothalamus. It is processed along axonal projections to the posterior lobe of the pituitary, 
where it is stored in secretory vesicles and released into peripheral circulation. In addition to the 
release from axonal terminals, there is also dendritic release into the extracellular space, result-
ing in both local action and diffusion through the brain to reach distant targets (Ludwig & Leng, 
2006). Furthermore, smaller OXT-producing parvocellular neurons in the paraventricular nucleus 
project directly to other regions in the brain including the amygdala, hippocampus, striatum, 
suprachiasmatic nucleus, bed nucleus of stria terminalis, and brainstem. In these regions, OXT acts 
as a neuromodulator or neurotransmitter. For example, OXT modulates neural populations in the 
central amygdala (Huber, Veinante, & Stoop, 2005; Viviani, Charlet, van den Burg, Robinet, Hurni, 
Abatis, et al., 2011). The distribution of OXT receptors in the brain, however, is not yet fully known. 
For an overview of studies on endogenous levels of OXT and human behavior, see Heinrichs et al. 
(2009). For an overview of the neurogenetic mechanisms of the OXT system, including neuroim-
aging studies, see Meyer-Lindenberg et al. (2011) and Kumsta and Heinrichs (2013). 
 Methods in human oxytocin research  
 Several methods are currently available for investigating the relationship between OXT and behav-
ior. In combination with established behavioral and neuroimaging paradigms, these methods make 
it possible to document OXT’s actions on the behavioral level as well as on the neural level. Each 
method’s unique strengths and limitations inﬂ uence its suitability for research on a speciﬁ c target 

SOCIAL NEUROPEPTIDES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN: OXYTOCIN AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
292
population. The use of these methods in parallel has provided largely converging evidence on the 
relationship between OXT and behavior, although some important questions remain regarding 
whether data collected using the different methods can be interpreted in comparable ways. 
 Plasma and cerebrospinal ﬂ uid 
 Peripheral OXT levels can readily be measured in samples of blood plasma, and several studies 
suggest that plasma OXT levels correlate with psychological functioning. However, the relation-
ship between peripheral neuropeptide levels and central nervous system availability of these neu-
ropeptides is unclear (Anderson, 2006; Carter, Pournajaﬁ -Nazarloo, Kramer, Ziegler, White-Traut, 
Bello, et al., 2007; Horvat-Gordon, Granger, Schwartz, Nelson, & Kivlighan, 2005; Landgraf & 
Neumann, 2004). Therefore, the interpretation of peripheral neuropeptide levels in psychological 
terms remains controversial (Heinrichs et al., 2009). 
 A second method for measuring OXT levels is through samples of cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (CSF). 
Relative to plasma, the OXT level in CSF is a more direct measure of the availability of the neu-
ropeptide in the brain (Born, Lange, Kern, McGregor, Bickel, & Fehm, 2002) and is more directly 
relevant for behavioral effects and psychopathology than peripheral levels (Heinrichs & Domes, 
2008). However, collecting CSF is a signiﬁ cantly more invasive procedure than collecting plasma, 
which limits the use of this method for research. 
 Molecular genetics 
 Molecular genetics allows for the study of naturally-occurring inter-individual variations in the 
OXT system along with their implications for human social behavior. Genetic material can be 
easily obtained through saliva samples, which increases the ﬂ exibility of this method and its suit-
ability for potentially sensitive target populations such as infants. In humans, the oxytocin receptor 
is encoded by a gene located on chromosome 3p25 (Inoue, Kimura, Azuma, Inazawa Takemura 
Kikuchi, et al., 1994). Several recent studies have linked variation in the DNA sequence of the 
oxytocin receptor gene ( OXTR ) to social behavior and cognition. The two  OXTR  single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) which have been most commonly linked to social behavior and cognition 
in recent studies are rs53576 (G/A) and rs2254298 (G/A) (Meyer-Lindenberg et al., 2011). As both 
SNPs are located in the intronic (non-coding) region of  OXTR , further research on the molecular 
level will be necessary to clarify the precise relationship between these SNPs and the functionality 
of the oxytocin receptor (Kumsta & Heinrichs, 2013).  
 Intranasal administration 
 Intranasal administration of OXT provides the most direct method for studying the immediate 
effects of OXT on human brain activity and behavior. Generally, intranasal administration has been 
favored in recent research because it is the most effective and direct means available for experimen-
tally manipulating neuropeptide levels in the human brain (Born et al., 2002; Heinrichs & Domes, 
2008). Intranasal administration, unlike other methods, therefore allows causal inferences to be drawn 
between central OXT availability, and social behavior or cognition. Except where otherwise men-
tioned, the remainder of this chapter therefore focuses on studies conducted using this method.  
 Oxytocin and social approach  
 Social approach can be viewed as a psychological prerequisite for understanding the minds of 
others. OXT enhances the motivation to initiate and sustain social contact by dampening social 

OXYTOCIN AND SOCIAL APPROACH
293
stress reactivity, increasing the motivation to engage in positive social interaction, and promoting 
emotions and cognitions associated with attachment and social bonding. 
 Overcoming social stress 
 Stressful social interactions, in particular with unfamiliar others, induce a well-characterized pattern 
of behavioral and physiological responses (often called the “ﬁ ght-or-ﬂ ight” response). The endo-
crine component of this response includes hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis activation 
and the secretion of CRH, ACTH, and cortisol. A number of studies suggest that OXT dampens this 
endocrine response during social stress. Breastfeeding women—in whom endogenous secretion 
of OXT is naturally increased—show muted cortisol responses to psychosocial stressors (Altemus, 
Deuster, Galliven, Carter, & Gold, 1995; Heinrichs, Meinlschmidt, Neumann, Wagner Kirschbaum 
Ehlert & Hellhammer, 2001). Healthy males randomly assigned to receive both social support and 
OXT during preparation for the “Trier Social Stress Test” (TSST) (Kirschbaum, Pirke, & Hellhammer, 
1993) had lower cortisol responses, lower subjective anxiety, and higher reported calmness in the 
TSST than participants who received only social support, only OXT, or neither social support nor 
OXT (Heinrichs, Baumgartner, Kirschbaum, & Ehlert, 2003) (Figure 16.1). The physiological and 
psychological stress-buffering effects of OXT have been replicated and extended in other studies (de 
Oliveira, Zuardi, Graeff, Queiroz, & Crippa, 2011; Quirin, Kuhl, & Dusing, 2011).  
0
Time (min)
No Social Support + Placebo
AUC
AUC (nmol*90min/l)
0
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
No Social Support + Oxytocin
Social Support + Placebo
Social Support + Oxytocin
–30 –20 –10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
10
15
Salivary free cortisol (nmol/l)
20
25
 Figure 16.1  Mean salivary free cortisol concentrations ( ± SEM) during psychosocial stress expo-
sure (TSST). Participants were randomly assigned to receive intranasal oxytocin (24 IU) or placebo 
and either no social support or social support from their best friend before stress. The shaded area 
indicates the period of the stress tasks (public speaking followed by mental arithmetic in front of a 
panel of evaluators). The areas under the individual response curves (AUC) represent cumulative cor-
tisol release (calculated by aggregating data from 8 saliva sampling points) throughout the session. 
Signiﬁ cant interaction effects on cortisol were observed (social support by time effect,  p < .001; social 
support by oxytocin by time effect,  P < 0.01). 
 Adapted from Heinrichs, M., Baumgartner, T., Kirschbaum, C., & Ehlert, U.  Biological Psychiatry, 54 (12), Social 
support and oxytocin interact to suppress cortisol and subjective responses to psychosocial stress.  pp. 1389–98. 
Copyright (2003), with permission from Elsevier.  

SOCIAL NEUROPEPTIDES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN: OXYTOCIN AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
294
 Variation in the oxytocin receptor gene also seems to inﬂ uence stress reactivity and responses to 
social support. Individuals homozygous for the G allele of rs53576 show a lower startle response than 
individuals with one or two copies of the A allele, although the stressor in this case was non-social 
(Rodrigues, Saslow, Garcia, John, & Keltner, 2009). The G allele of  OXTR rs53576 has also been 
positively associated with the tendency to seek explicit social support during times of stress, at least 
in individuals for whom such behavior is culturally normative (Kim, Sherman, Sasaki, Xu, Chu, 
Ryu, et al., 2010). The same allele also interacts with social support to reduce physiological and 
psychological response to social stress in men (Chen, Kumsta, von Dawans, Monakhov, Ebstein, & 
Heinrichs, 2011c). Finally, receiving support and physical contact from a partner has been associ-
ated with an increase in plasma OXT (Grewen, Girdler, Amico, & Light, 2005), although on the 
other hand high levels of plasma OXT has also been associated with relationship stress in women 
(Taylor, Gonzaga, Klein, Hu, Greendale, & Seeman, 2006). 
 Overall, OXT seems to enhance the buffering effect of positive social interactions on stress 
responsiveness. The underlying biological mechanisms of this effect are now being investigated 
(Gamer & Buchel, 2011; Norman, Cacioppo, Morris, Malarkey, Berntson, & Devries, 2011). It is 
likely that the baseline sensitivity of the central nervous system (CNS) to OXT is inﬂ uenced by sig-
niﬁ cant events occurring early in life. Early parental separation stress, for example, has been shown 
to reduce men’s sensitivity to intranasal OXT (Meinlschmidt & Heim, 2007). 
 On the neural level, the amygdala has been identiﬁ ed as one of the regions involved in the exci-
tatory regulation of behavioral and endocrine stress responses (Dedovic et al., 2009). Increased 
activation of the amygdala has been consistently shown in response to aversive environmental 
stimuli (Pessoa & Adolphs, 2010, and in turn has been shown to contribute to the activation of 
the HPA axis in response to stress (Dedovic, Duchesne, Andrews, Engert, & Pruessner, 2009). The 
amygdala along with other subcortical regions contains a high density of OXT receptors and might 
thus represent a major target of central OXT (Gimpl & Fahrenholz, 2001). Furthermore, varia-
tion in the oxytocin receptor gene has been associated with amygdala volume (Furman, Chen, & 
Gotlib, 2011b; Inoue, Yamasue, Tochigi, et al., 2010) as well as amygdala activation during emo-
tional face processing (Inoue et al., 2010). In animal studies, inhibitory oxytocinergic interneurons 
in the amygdala have been identiﬁ ed which suppress the output into autonomic target regions 
in the brain stem (Huber et al., 2005). Converging evidence from functional imaging studies has 
shown that intranasal OXT suppresses amygdala reactivity to aversive visual stimuli and reduces 
amygdala-brainstem coupling (Baumgartner, Heinrichs, Vonlanthen, Fischbacher, & Fehr, 2008; 
Domes, Heinrichs, Glascher, Buchel, Braus, & Herpertz, 2007a; Gamer, Zurowski, & Buchel, 2010; 
Kirsch, Esslinger, Chen, Mier, Lis, Siddhanti, et al., 2005), which might be in part an underlying 
mechanism for the observed stress-reducing effect of OXT. 
 Trust and motivation to engage socially 
 In humans, one important indicator of psychological readiness for social approach is trust. In the 
ﬁ rst study to investigate the role of OXT in interpersonal trust (Kosfeld, Heinrichs, Zak, Fischbacher, 
& Fehr, 2005), participants’ willingness to take social risks (in a trust game) vs. non-social risks (in 
a lottery game) was assessed. Participants who had received OXT showed greater trust relative to 
the placebo group (Figure 16.2). The effect was speciﬁ c to the social context; OXT did not inﬂ uence 
non-social risk-taking. The effect of OXT on trust has since been replicated in several follow-up 
studies (e.g. Mikolajczak, Gross, Lane, Corneille, de Timary, & Luminet, 2010a; Mikolajczak, Pinon, 
Lane, de Timary, & Luminet, 2010b). 
 A subsequent study suggested that OXT reduces negative behavioral responses to betrayal 
(Baumgartner et al., 2008). After playing several rounds of a trust game, participants were informed 

OXYTOCIN AND SOCIAL APPROACH
295
that their social partners had made selﬁ sh decisions that were disadvantageous to the participant 
(i.e. betrayed the participant’s trust). Participants who had received intranasal OXT—in contrast to 
those who had received placebo—continued to make decisions indicative of sustained trust. OXT 
also increased the desire for future social interactions following an experience of inclusion in a 
game of “cyberball,” a virtual ball-tossing game designed to manipulate feelings of social inclusion 
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Individual investor's average transfer (MUs)
Risk experiment
Relative frequency
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Individual investor's average transfer (MUs)
Trust experiment
Relative frequency
Placebo group
Oxytocin group
Placebo group
Oxytocin group
(b)
(a)
 Figure 16.2  Transfers in the trust and risk experiments. Each observation represents the average 
transfer amount (in monetary units, MU) per investor across four transfer decisions. (a) Relative 
 frequency of investors’ average transfers in the oxytocin (ﬁ lled bars) and placebo (open bars) groups 
in the trust experiment: subjects given oxytocin showed signiﬁ cantly higher transfer levels. (b) Relative 
frequency of investors’ average transfers in the oxytocin (ﬁ lled bars) and placebo (open bars) groups 
in the risk experiment: subjects in the oxytocin and the placebo group show statistically identical 
transfer levels. 
 Adapted from Kosfeld, M., Heinrichs, M., Zak, P. J., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. Oxytocin increases trust in humans. 
 Nature  435 (7042) pp. 673–6. © 2011, with permission from Nature Publishing Group.  

SOCIAL NEUROPEPTIDES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN: OXYTOCIN AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
296
or exclusion, although it did not provide a buffer against the negative feelings associated with blunt 
social ostracism (Alvares, Hickie, & Guastella, 2010). 
 In addition to increasing trusting behavior, OXT has also been shown to increase generosity 
(Zak, Stanton, & Ahmadi, 2007) and to enhance perceived trustworthiness and attractiveness in 
facial expressions (Theodoridou, Rowe, Penton-Voak, & Rogers, 2009). High levels of plasma 
OXT also seem to correlate with trust and trustworthiness (Zak, Kurzban, & Matzner, 2005). 
Furthermore, it has been reported that OXT administration enhances envy and gloating in a social 
game (Shamay-Tsoory, Fischer, Dvash, Harari, Perach-Bloom, & Levkovitz, 2009), suggesting that 
OXT’s effects on social behavior may not be modulated solely through prosocial emotions. The few 
studies that have directly investigated the speciﬁ city of these effects through the inclusion of both 
social and non-social stimuli suggest that the effects are more pronounced for social stimuli (Keri 
& Benedek, 2009; Norman, Cacioppo, Morris, Karelina, Malarkey, DeVries, et al., 2010). More 
recent research suggests that OXT effects are sensitive to the social context (Bartz, Zaki, Bolger, & 
Ochsner, 2011). Prior social information, such as brief prior face-to-face contact with a social part-
ner, seems to enhance the effects of OXT on cooperative or prosocial behavior (Declerck, Boone, 
& Kiyonari, 2010). OXT effects on trust and cooperation also appear to be modulated by group 
membership, with stronger effects being observed among in-group members than out-group 
members (Chen, Kumsta, & Heinrichs, 2011b; De Dreu, Greer, Handgraaf, et al., 2010; De Dreu, 
Greer, Van Kleef, Shalvi, & Handgraaf, 2011). 
 Social bonding and attachment 
 In many mammalian species, OXT plays a crucial role in attachment and social bonding (Carter, 
1998; Insel & Young, 2001; Young & Wang, 2004). In humans, OXT administration reduced plasma 
cortisol levels and increased positive communication in both men and women during a couple 
conﬂ ict (Ditzen, Schaer, Gabriel, Bodenmann, Ehlert, & Heinrichs, 2009), suggesting that central 
OXT facilitates human pair bonding in a manner parallel to that observed in prior animal studies. 
In men with an insecure attachment pattern, OXT also enhanced secure interpretations of ambig-
uous attachment-related scenarios (Buchheim, Heinrichs, George, Pokorny, Koops, Henningsen, 
et al., 2009). Genetic variability of the oxytocin receptor has been linked to attachment anxiety in 
adult females (Chen et al., 2011c). Secure attachment in adults is associated with healthy social 
functioning and reduced psychological responses to social stress (Ditzen, Schmidt, Strauss, Nater, 
Ehlert, & Heinrichs, 2008). 
 OXT has also been implicated in the human parent-infant attachment relationship. OXT 
administration increased fathers’ responsiveness toward their toddlers during play (Naber, van 
Ijzendoorn, Deschamps, van Engeland, & Bakermans-Kranenburg, 2010). Levels of plasma OXT 
in pregnant women predict maternal behaviors and cognitions toward the infant after birth 
(Feldman, Weller, Zagoory-Sharon, & Levine, 2007). Variation in the oxytocin receptor gene has 
been linked to maternal sensitivity to child behavior (Bakermans-Kranenburg & van Ijzendoorn, 
2008), as well as infant attachment security with the caregiver (Chen & Johnson, 2012). 
 The existing literature suggests that OXT promotes social approach behavior by reducing social 
stress reactivity, enhancing stress-buffering effects of positive social interaction, increasing moti-
vation to engage in social interactions, and increasing trusting behavior, cooperation, and willing-
ness to take social risks. OXT also promotes the maintenance of social relationships by enhancing 
secure attachment representations and increasing parents’ responsiveness to their children. On the 
neural level, evidence suggests that OXT dampens amygdala reactivity to aversive social stimuli 
and reduces amygdala-brainstem coupling. OXT therefore promotes the initiation and mainte-
nance of close social contact essential for learning about the mental states of others.   

OXYTOCIN AND SOCIAL COGNITION
297
 Oxytocin and social cognition 
 Reasoning about others’ mental states depends critically on the ability to recognize and recall the 
emotional states experienced by others. OXT appears to regulate both emotion recognition (a 
cognitive component of empathy) and social memory. 
 Emotion recognition and empathy 
 OXT plays a central role in the recognition and processing of facial expressions of emotion. In the 
“Reading the Mind in the Eyes” Test (RMET), which was developed to assess the social cognitive 
abilities of adults with ASD (Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Hill Raste, & Plumb, 2001), participants 
are asked to judge other individuals’ emotional or mental states based on photos of those individu-
als’ eyes. Healthy men who had received OXT were more accurate on the RMET than those who 
had received placebo, particularly on the difﬁ cult items (Figure 16.3) (Domes, Heinrichs, Michel, 
Berger, & Herpertz, 2007b). The G allele of  OXTR  rs53576 has also been associated with better 
 performance on the RMET (Rodrigues et al., 2009). The effects of OXT on emotion recognition 
accuracy have also been found to vary based on baseline individual differences in empathic abili-
ties. In one study, intranasal OXT improved empathic accuracy (measured as the match between 
a participant’s ratings of emotional states displayed by another individual in a ﬁ lm clip, and 
the displayed individual’s own ratings his or her actual feelings) only in individuals with lower 
self-reported social-cognitive competency. 
 Studies which have investigated whether OXT selectively improves the recognition of speciﬁ c 
emotions have thus far yielded mixed results. Some studies have documented that OXT speciﬁ -
cally enhances processing of positive facial expressions (Di Simplicio, Massey-Chase, Cowen, & 
Harmer, 2009; Marsh, Yu, Pine, & Blair, 2010) or speciﬁ cally decreases aversion to angry faces 
(a)
Reading the mind in the eyes test
(mean p correct answers +/– s.e.)
0,90
0,85
0,80
0,75
0,70
0,65
0,60
0,55
0,00
Total score
all items
p<.02
Placebo
24 IU Oxytocin
n.s.
p<.006
Subscore
easy items
Subscore
difﬁcult items
(b)
 Figure 16.3  (a) Oxytocin improved performance in the RMET compared with placebo. 
(b) Performance in the RMET as a function of item difﬁ culty: oxytocin improved performance 
on the difﬁ cult items and not on the easy items. 
 Adapted from Biological Psychiatry, 61 (6), Gregor Domes, Markus Heinrichs, Andre Michel, Christoph Berger and, Sabine 
C. Herpertz, Oxytocin Improves “Mind-Reading” in Humans, pp. 731–33, Copyright (2007), with permission from Elsevier.  

SOCIAL NEUROPEPTIDES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN: OXYTOCIN AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
298
(Evans, Shergill, & Averbeck, 2010). In contrast, other studies have reported improved recogni-
tion only of fearful faces after OXT administration (Fischer-Shofty, Shamay-Tsoory, Harari, & 
Levkovitz, 2010), or no effect on emotion recognition in a visual search task (Guastella, Carson, 
Dadds, Mitchell, & Cox, 2009a). Another recent study showed enhanced emotion recognition for 
both happy and angry faces at very short presentation durations of 17–83 milliseconds, suggesting 
that at least during the early stages of visual processing, OXT promotes recognition of a range of 
emotional expressions (Schulze, Lischke, Greif, Herpertz, Heinrichs, & Domes, 2011). 
 A related line of research has investigated the effects of OXT on visual attention to neutral and 
emotional faces, which is generally assumed to play a crucial role in the recognition of facial emo-
tions (Adolphs, 2002). Three of these studies reported that OXT increased gazing time on the eye 
region compared with other parts of the face (Andari et al., 2010; Gamer et al., 2010; Guastella, 
Mitchell, & Dadds, 2008a), suggesting that improved facial emotion recognition after OXT treat-
ment might be due at least in part to increased eye gaze. However, two other studies were not able 
to replicate increased eye gaze (Domes, Lischke, Berger, Grossmann, Hauenstein, Heinrichs, et al., 
2010; Lischke, Berger, Prehn, Heinrichs, Herpertz, & Domes, 2011). It is possible that OXT inter-
acts with baseline individual differences to enhance recognition of speciﬁ c emotions and modulate 
eye gaze only under certain conditions. 
 Relative to studies investigating the effects of OXT on emotion recognition (generally theorized 
to represent a cognitive facet of empathy), research on OXT effects on emotional empathy, i.e. 
the vicarious feeling of an emotion, has so far been limited (Hurlemann, Patin, Onur, et al., 2010; 
Singer, Snozzi, Bird, et al., 2008). One recent study reported positive effects of intranasal OXT on 
emotional empathy but not cognitive empathy (Hurlemann et al., 2010), and another reported 
positive effects of OXT on “compassion-focused imagery” (Rockliff, Karl, McEwan, Gilbert, Matos, 
& Gilbert, 2011). 
 Social memory 
 Early work showed that OXT administration modulates semantic memory (Fehm-Wolfsdorf, Born, 
Voigt, & Fehm, 1984), and more recent studies suggest that OXT may more speciﬁ cally modulate 
social memory. A study in healthy males showed that intranasal OXT selectively reduced implicit 
memory of socially relevant but not non-social words (Heinrichs, Meinlschmidt, Wippich, Ehlert, 
& Hellhammer, 2004). In another study, intranasal OXT selectively improved recognition memory 
for faces but not for nonsocial stimuli (Rimmele, Hediger, Heinrichs, & Klaver, 2009). Whether 
and how OXT administration inﬂ uences memory for speciﬁ c emotions remains unclear; existing 
studies have documented different effects depending on the timing of OXT administration. In one 
study, OXT administered after a learning task, improved memory after both a 30-minute and 1-day 
delay for faces that had displayed angry or neutral (and not happy) expressions during the learn-
ing task (Savaskan, Ehrhardt, Schulz, Walter, & Schachinger, 2008), although there was no effect 
of OXT on explicit memory for which of the speciﬁ c facial expressions had been associated with 
speciﬁ c identities. In another study, however, intranasal OXT administered before a learning task 
enhanced memory for happy faces over angry and neutral faces (Guastella, Mitchell, & Mathews, 
2008b). 
 In summary, converging evidence suggests that OXT modulates the ability to decode and recall 
socially-relevant cues including those contained in facial expressions of emotion. These abilities 
are core components of a broader capacity to reason about others’ mental states. Whether OXT 
has selective effects on recognition and memory of speciﬁ c emotions remains unclear, as does the 
degree to which these effects are modulated by OXT-induced changes in patterns of visual atten-
tion. Targeted future research may help address these open questions. 

PSYCHOBIOLOGICAL THERAPY FOR SOCIAL DISORDERS
299
 Psychobiological therapy for social disorders  
 OXT’s striking effects on human social behavior point to the potential therapeutic value of 
intranasal OXT for mental disorders characterized by social deﬁ cits. The possibility that atypi-
cal functioning of the OXT system contributes to speciﬁ c mental disorders is supported by 
research comparing endogenous levels of OXT in healthy and clinical samples. Atypically low 
 levels of plasma OXT have been observed in several mental disorders including autism spectrum 
disorders (ASD) (Green, Fein, Modahl, Feinstein, Waterhouse, & Morris, 2001), schizophrenia 
(Goldman, Marlow-O’Connor, Torres, & Carter, 2008; Keri, Kiss, & Kelemen, 2008), and depres-
sion (Cyranowski, Hofkens, Frank, Seltman, Cai, & Amico, 2008). In patients with depression, 
those with higher anxiety levels were found to have lower levels of plasma OXT (Scantamburlo, 
Hansenne, Fuchs, Pitchot, Mar é chal, Pequeux, et al., 2007). Furthermore, variability of the oxy-
tocin receptor gene has been linked to risk for autism (Jacob, Brune, Carter, Leventhal, Lord, & 
Cookjr, 2007; Lerer, Levi, Salomon, Darvasi, Yirmiya, & Ebstein, 2008; Wu, Jia, Ruan, Liu, Guo, 
Shuang, et al., 2005), although at least one null effect has also been reported (Tansey, Brookes, Hill, 
Cochrane, Gill, Skuse, et al., 2010). Because only a small fraction of intravenously-administered 
neuropeptide passes through the blood-brain barrier (Kang & Park, 2000), this method of OXT 
administration has limited applicability in clinical settings. Furthermore, intravenous infusion 
could potentially have side effects due to actions on hormone systems. Intranasal administration, 
which provides a direct pathway to the brain, currently shows the most promise as a clinical inter-
vention methodology (Born et al., 2002; Heinrichs et al., 2009). 
 Several systematic, randomized control trials on the therapeutic effects of intranasal OXT treat-
ment are now underway (see the ClinicalTrials website: http://clinicaltrials.gov). Although none of 
these trials are yet complete, preclinical studies in patients have already yielded promising initial 
results of a single dose of intranasal OXT on mental disorders characterized by social deﬁ cits. An 
overview of these studies is given below. 
 Autism spectrum disorder 
 Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by speech and 
communication deﬁ cits, repetitive or compulsive behaviors in combination with restricted inter-
ests, and severe impairments in social functioning. In a recent study on adolescent males with 
ASD (Guastella, Einfeld, Gray, et al., 2010), a single dose of intranasal OXT improved performance 
on the RMET (Baron-Cohen et al., 2001). In another study (Andari, Duhamel, Zalla, Herbrecht, 
Leboyer, & Sirigu, 2010), intranasal OXT administered to adults with ASD increased social inter-
actions and feelings of trust with ﬁ ctitious partners in a simulated ball game (“cyberball”). In the 
same study, OXT administration also increased ASD patients’ gazing time toward the eye region of 
facial photos. OXT administered intravenously has also been shown to improve understanding of 
emotional speech and decrease repetitive behaviors in individuals with ASD (Bartz & Hollander, 
2008), although it should be noted that only a small fraction of intravenously administered OXT 
is thought to pass the blood-brain barrier. Overall, these studies suggest that OXT has therapeutic 
potential for core deﬁ cits associated with ASD, speciﬁ cally by enhancing emotion recognition, 
reducing repetitive behaviors, and improving responsiveness to others. 
 Social anxiety disorder 
 Social anxiety disorder (SAD) is marked by extreme anxiety and discomfort in social settings 
and a fear of negative evaluation by others. After depression and alcoholism, it is the third most 
common mental health disorder in the United States (Kessler, McGonagle, Zhao, Nelson, Hughes, 

SOCIAL NEUROPEPTIDES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN: OXYTOCIN AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
300
Eshleman, et al., 1994). In one study, patients with SAD received either intranasal OXT or placebo 
a total of four times in combination with ﬁ ve weekly sessions of brief exposure intervention 
(Guastella, Howard, Dadds, Mitchell, & Carson, 2009b). Patients receiving OXT showed improved 
public speech performance, although—possibly due to the low frequency of sessions—a more 
generalized overall improvement in treatment outcome was not observed. In an fMRI study 
(Labuschagne, Phan, Wood, et al., 2010), SAD patients and healthy controls matched pictures of 
fearful, angry, and happy faces after OXT and placebo administration. In the placebo condition, 
patients with SAD exhibited amygdala hyperactivity to fearful faces relative to the control group. 
While OXT administration did not change amygdala reactivity to emotional faces in the control 
group, it dampened amygdala reactivity to fearful faces in the SAD group (Labuschagne et al., 
2010). These ﬁ ndings suggest that OXT may have a speciﬁ c effect on fear-related amygdala activ-
ity particularly when the amygdala is hyperactive as in SAD.  
 Borderline personality disorder 
 Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is characterized by emotional instability, impulsivity, iden-
tity diffusion, and dysfunctional social relationships. In BPD, the perception of rejection from a 
partner or close other often leads to angry outbursts or impulsive, suicidal, or self-injurious behav-
ior. The suite of behaviors associated with BPD is theorized to be a result of disrupted functioning 
of the attachment and afﬁ liative systems (Stanley & Siever, 2010). A recent pilot study suggests that 
OXT reduces stress reactivity in BPD patients during the TSST (Simeon, Bartz, Hamilton, et al., 
2011). In another study, OXT administration decreased cooperative responses within the context 
of a social dilemma game; however, these effects were observed in a relatively small and mixed-sex 
sample of 14 adult BPD patients (Bartz, Simeon, Hamilton, et al., 2010a) and therefore warrant 
replication. Several clinical trials involving larger sample sizes are currently being conducted to 
examine the therapeutic value of OXT for patients with BPD (see clinicaltrials.gov). 
 Schizophrenia 
 Schizophrenia is a chronic brain disorder characterized by severely disorganized thought patterns, 
hallucinations and delusions, and disrupted affect. Schizophrenia has been associated with altera-
tions in plasma OXT levels (Heinrichs et al., 2009). In animal models of schizophrenia, systematic 
OXT administration has been shown to have antipsychotic-like effects, including reversed pre-
pulse inhibition deﬁ cits induced by amphetamine or the phencyclidine analogue MK 801 (Feifel 
& Reza, 1999). In humans, schizophrenia patients receiving a course of intranasal OXT for three 
weeks in addition to antipsychotics showed reduced positive and negative symptoms of schizo-
phrenia (Feifel, Macdonald, Nguyen, et al., 2010). In another study (Goldman, Gomes, Carter, 
& Lee, 2011), emotion recognition in schizophrenia patients improved following administration 
of 20 IU of OXT in polydipsic relative to non-polydipsic patients, although performance fell in 
patients administered 10 IU of OXT. 
 Conclusions and future directions  
 This chapter has reviewed research linking OXT to both the motivation and ability to reason about 
the mental states of others. OXT promotes social approach by reducing social stress reactivity, 
increasing the motivation to interact with others, and enhancing trust and bonding. OXT also 
regulates social cognition, including the ability to recognize and recall others’ emotional states. For 
individuals with pathologies in these domains, pharmacological intervention in the OXT system 
is a promising new angle for treatment. Initial studies with intranasal OXT in patients with mental 

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
301
disorders characterized by social deﬁ cits (including autism, social anxiety disorder, borderline per-
sonality disorder, and schizophrenia) have been encouraging, especially given that these “social 
disorders” are notoriously difﬁ cult to treat or (as in the case of ASD) currently cannot be effectively 
treated at all. 
 Figure 16.4 depicts an integrative model of the relationships among the human central OXT sys-
tem, social anxiety and stress, and social approach behavior. In this model, neuropeptide admin-
istration is seen as a means of supporting and enhancing psychotherapeutic interventions, rather 
than as an isolated alternative route to a cure. For example, treatment with intranasal OXT in 
combination with interaction-based psychotherapy may enhance patients’ willingness to interact 
socially (e.g. in cognitive-behavioral group therapy), as well as to confront feared social situations 
outside of therapy sessions. We propose the term “psychobiological therapy” for this novel integra-
tive approach (Figure 16.4). 
ANXIETY
STRESS
↑HPA AXIS
↑AMYGDALA
SOCIAL APPROACH
BEHAVIOR
(e.g., SOCIAL SUPPORT,
PHYSICAL CONTACT)
+
+
+
+
-
BEHAVIOR 
THERAPY
OXYTOCIN
STIMULATION
CENTRAL 
OXYTOCINERGIC
SYSTEM
PSYCHO-
BIOLOGICAL
THERAPY
HEALTH
PSYCHO-
PATHOLOGY
(e.g., social
anxiety disorder)
+
+
SOCIAL STRESS-BUFFERING
COPING
 Figure 16.4  Integrative translational model of the interactions of the oxytocin system, social approach 
behavior, and social stress in humans.  Left side : Social stress and social anxiety stimulate the amygda-
la–cingulate circuit and the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis. In healthy individuals, stress 
and anxiety encourages social approach behavior as a coping strategy. It also stimulates oxytocin 
release, which further promotes social approach behavior. Furthermore, positive social interaction 
(e.g. physical contact) is itself associated with OXT release and therefore promotes continued social 
approach. OXT reduces amygdala and HPA axis reactivity to social stressors, and as such serves as an 
important mediator of the anxiolytic and stress-protective effects of positive social interaction (“social 
buffering”).  Right side : Patients with mental and developmental disorders characterized by severe 
deﬁ cits in social interactions (e.g. autism, social anxiety disorder, borderline personality disorder) may 
beneﬁ t from novel “psychobiological therapy” approaches wherein psychotherapy is combined with 
administration of OXT or OXT receptor agonists. 
 Reprinted from Progress in Brain Research, 170, Markus Heinrichs and Gregor Domes, Neuropeptides and social 
 behaviour: effects of oxytocin and vasopressin in humans, pp. 337–350, Copyright (2008), with permission from Elsevier.  

SOCIAL NEUROPEPTIDES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN: OXYTOCIN AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
302
 Although signiﬁ cant progress has been made in understanding OXT’s role in human social 
behavior, important details remain to be clariﬁ ed in further research. A precise mapping of the 
distribution of OXT receptors in the human brain is crucial. This may be achieved through the 
development of speciﬁ c radioactive labelling of neuropeptides in positron emission tomography, 
in combination with  in vitro studies identifying OXT binding sites in the human brain (Loup, 
Tribollet, Dubois-Dauphin, & Dreifuss, 1991), as well as fMRI studies identifying brain areas 
responsive to OXT administration (Heinrichs & Domes, 2008; Meyer-Lindenberg, 2008). The 
mechanisms by which OXT, as well as OXT receptor agonists and antagonists, reach the brain 
following different forms of administration is an area for further study that may eventually lead 
to more effective methods for neuropeptide delivery. The development of non-peptidergic drugs 
(Decaux, Soupart, & Vassart, 2008) acting on OXT receptors is an important parallel goal. Targeted 
research on the relationship between central and peripheral release of oxytocin will be necessary to 
establish whether and how plasma OXT levels can be interpreted in terms of psychological function, 
in healthy subjects, as well as in patients. Further studies associating speciﬁ c genetic variants with 
behavioral and neural responses to OXT administration may help clarify how naturally-occurring 
individual differences inﬂ uence the functioning of the OXT system. Continuing research on oxy-
tocin’s role in human social behavior is contributing to a broader understanding of the neuroen-
docrinology of the social brain and may eventually lead to the development of more effective 
treatments for social disorders.  
 References 
 Adolphs, R. (2002) . Recognizing emotion from facial expressions: psychological and neurological 
mechanisms.  Behavioral Cognitive Neuroscience Reviews  1 :  21–62 . 
 Altemus, M., Deuster, P. A., Galliven, E., Carter, C. S., & Gold, P. W. (1995) . Suppression of 
hypothalmic-pituitary-adrenal axis responses to stress in lactating women.  Journal of Clinical 
Endocrinology and Metabolism  80 :  2954–9 . 
 Alvares, G. A., Hickie, I. B., & Guastella, A. J. (2010) . Acute eff ects of intranasal oxytocin on subjective and 
behavioral responses to social rejection.  Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology  18 :  316–21 . 
 Andari, E., Duhamel, J. R., Zalla, T., Herbrecht, E., Leboyer, M., & Sirigu, A. (2010) . Promoting social 
behavior with oxytocin in high-functioning autism spectrum disorders.  Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  107 :  4389–94 . 
 Anderson, G. M. (2006) . Report of altered urinary oxytocin and AVP excretion in neglected orphans 
should be reconsidered.  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  36 :  829–30 . 
 Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., & van Ijzendoorn, M. H. (2008) . Oxytocin receptor  (OXTR) and 
serotonin transporter (5-HTT) genes associated with observed parenting.  Social Cognitive and Aff ective 
Neuroscience  3 :  128–34 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Hill, J., Raste, Y., & Plumb, I. (2001) . Th e “Reading the Mind in 
the Eyes” Test revised version: a study with normal adults, and adults with Asperger syndrome or 
high-functioning autism.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines  42 :  241–51 . 
 Bartz, J. A., & Hollander, E. (2008) . Oxytocin and experimental therapeutics in autism spectrum disorders. 
 Progress in Brain Research  170 ,  451–62 . 
 Bartz, J. A., Simeon, D., Hamilton, H., Kim, S., Crystal, S., Braun, A., et al. (2010a).  Oxytocin can hinder 
trust and cooperation in borderline personality disorder.  Social Cognitive and Aff ective Neuroscience 6: 
556–63 . 
 Bartz, J. A., Zaki, J., Bolger, N., & Ochsner, K. N. (2011) . Social eff ects of oxytocin in humans: context and 
person matter.  Trends in Cognitive Science  15 :  301–9 . 
 Baumgartner, T., Heinrichs, M., Vonlanthen, A., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. (2008) . Oxytocin shapes the 
neural circuitry of trust and trust adaptation in humans.  Neuron  58 :  639–50 . 

303
REFERENCES
 Born, J., Lange, T., Kern, W., McGregor, G. P., Bickel, U., & Fehm, H. L. (2002) . Sniffi  ng neuropeptides: a 
transnasal approach to the human brain.  Nature Neuroscience  5 :  514–16 . 
 Buchheim, A., Heinrichs, M., George, C., Pokorny, D., Koops, E., Henningsen, P., O’Connor, M. F., & 
G ü ndel, H. (2009) . Oxytocin enhances the experience of attachment security.  Psychoneuroendocrinology 
 34 :  1417–22 . 
 Carter, C. S. (1998) . Neuroendocrine perspectives on social attachment and love.  Psychoneuroendocrinology 
 23 :  779–818 . 
 Carter, C. S., Pournajafi -Nazarloo, H., Kramer, K. M., Ziegler, T. E., White-Traut, R., Bello, D., & 
Schwertz, D. (2007) . Oxytocin: behavioral associations and potential as a salivary biomarker.  Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences  1098 :  312–22 . 
 Chen, F. S., Barth, M. E., Johnson, S. L., Gotlib, I. H., & Johnson, S. C. (2011a) . Oxytocin receptor  (OXTR) 
polymorphisms and attachment in human infants.  Frontiers in Psychology  2 :  200. 
 Chen, F. S., & Johnson, S. C. (2012) . An oxytocin receptor gene variant predicts relationship anxiety in 
females and autism-spectrum traits in males.  Social Psychological and Personality Science  3 : 93–9. 
 Chen, F. S., Kumsta, R., & Heinrichs, M. (2011b) . Oxytocin and intergroup relations: Goodwill is not a 
fi xed pie.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  108 :  E45 . 
 Chen, F. S., Kumsta, R., von Dawans, B., Monakhov, M., Ebstein, R. P., & Heinrichs, M. (2011c). Common 
oxytocin receptor gene  (OXTR) polymorphism and social support interact to reduce stress in humans. 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)  108 : 19937–42. 
 Cyranowski, J. M., Hofk ens, T. L., Frank, E., Seltman, H., Cai, H. M., & Amico, J. A. (2008) . Evidence of 
dysregulated peripheral oxytocin release among depressed women.  Psychosomatic Medicine  70 ,  967–75 . 
 De Dreu, C. K., Greer, L. L., Handgraaf, M. J., Handgraaf, M. J., Shalvi, S., Van Kleef, G., et al. (2010) . Th e 
neuropeptide oxytocin regulates parochial altruism in intergroup confl ict among humans.  Science  328 : 
 1408–1411 . 
 De Dreu, C. K., Greer, L. L., Van Kleef, G. A., Shalvi, S., & Handgraaf, M. J. (2011) . Oxytocin promotes 
human ethnocentrism.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 108 :  1262–6 . 
 de Oliveira, D. C., Zuardi, A. W., Graeff , F. G., Queiroz, R. H., & Crippa, J. A. (2011) . Anxiolytic-like eff ect 
of oxytocin in the simulated public speaking test.  Journal of Psychopharmacology  26 : 497–504. 
 Decaux, G., Soupart, A., & Vassart, G. (2008) . Non-peptide arginine-vasopressin antagonists: the vaptans. 
 Lancet  371 :  1624–32 . 
 Declerck, C. H., Boone, C., & Kiyonari, T. (2010) . Oxytocin and cooperation under conditions of uncertainty: 
the modulating role of incentives and social information.   Hormones and Behavior  57 :  368–74 . 
 Dedovic, K., Duchesne, A., Andrews, J., Engert, V., & Pruessner, J. C. (2009) . Th e brain and the stress axis: 
the neural correlates of cortisol regulation in response to stress.  NeuroImage  47 ,  864–71 . 
 Di Simplicio, M., Massey-Chase, R., Cowen, P., & Harmer, C. (2009) . Oxytocin enhances processing of 
positive vs. negative emotional information in healthy male volunteers.  Journal of Psychopharmacology 
 23 :  241–8 . 
 Ditzen, B., Schaer, M., Gabriel, B., Bodenmann, G., Ehlert, U., & Heinrichs, M. (2009) . Intranasal 
oxytocin increases positive communication and reduces cortisol levels during couple confl ict.  Biological 
Psychiatry  65 :  728–31 . 
 Ditzen, B., Schmidt, S., Strauss, B., Nater, U. M., Ehlert, U., & Heinrichs, M. (2008) . Adult attachment 
and social support interact to reduce psychological but not cortisol responses to stress.  Journal of 
Psychosomatic Research  64 :  479–86 . 
 Domes, G., Heinrichs, M., Glascher, J., Buchel, C., Braus, D. F., & Herpertz, S. C. (2007a) . Oxytocin 
attenuates amygdala responses to emotional faces regardless of valence.  Biological Psychiatry  62 : 
 1187–90 . 
 Domes, G., Heinrichs, M., Michel, A., Berger, C., & Herpertz, S. C. (2007b) . Oxytocin improves 
“mind-reading” in humans.  Biological Psychiatry  61 :  731–3 . 

SOCIAL NEUROPEPTIDES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN: OXYTOCIN AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
304
 Domes, G., Lischke, A., Berger, C., Grossmann, A., Hauenstein, K., Heinrichs, M., & Herpertz, S. C. 
(2010) . Eff ects of intranasal oxytocin on emotional face processing in women.   Psychoneuroendocrinology 
 35 :  83–93 . 
 Evans, S., Shergill, S. S., & Averbeck, B. B. (2010) . Oxytocin decreases aversion to angry faces in an 
associative learning task.  Neuropsychopharmacology  35 :  2502–9 . 
 Fehm-Wolfsdorf, G., Born, J., Voigt, K. H., & Fehm, H. L. (1984) . Human memory and neurohypophyseal 
hormones: opposite eff ects of vasopressin and oxytocin.  Psychoneuroendocrinology  9 :  285–92 . 
 Feifel, D., Macdonald, K., Nguyen, A., Cobb, P., Warlan, H., Galangue, B., et al. (2010) . Adjunctive 
intranasal oxytocin reduces symptoms in schizophrenia patients.  Biological Psychiatry  68 :  678–80 . 
 Feifel, D., & Reza, T. (1999) . Oxytocin modulates psychotomimetic-induced defi cits in sensorimotor gating. 
 Psychopharmacology  141 :  93–8 . 
 Feldman, R., Weller, A., Zagoory-Sharon, O., & Levine, A. (2007) . Evidence for a neuroendocrinological 
foundation of human affi  liation: plasma oxytocin levels across pregnancy and the postpartum period 
predict mother-infant bonding.  Psychological Science  18 :  965–70 . 
 Fischer-Shoft y, M., Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Harari, H., & Levkovitz, Y. (2010) . Th e eff ect of intranasal 
administration of oxytocin on fear recognition.  Neuropsychologia  48 :  179–84 . 
 Furman, D. J., Chen, M. C., & Gotlib, I. H. (2011) . Variant in oxytocin receptor gene is associated with 
amygdala volume.  Psychoneuroendocrinology  36 :  891–7 . 
 Gamer, M., & Buchel, C. (2011) . Oxytocin specifi cally enhances valence-dependent parasympathetic 
responses.  Psychoneuroendocrinology  37 : 87–93. 
 Gamer, M., Zurowski, B., & Buchel, C. (2010) . Diff erent amygdala subregions mediate valence-related and 
attentional eff ects of oxytocin in humans.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America  107 :  9400–5 . 
 Gimpl, G., & Fahrenholz, F. (2001) . Th e oxytocin receptor system: Structure, function, and regulation. 
 Physiological Reviews  81 :  629–83 . 
 Goldman, M., Gomes, A. M., Carter, C. S., & Lee, R. (2011) . Divergent eff ects of two diff erent doses 
of intranasal oxytocin on facial aff ect discrimination in schizophrenic patients with and without 
polydipsia.  Psychopharmacology  216 :  101–10 . 
 Goldman, M., Marlow-O’Connor, M., Torres, I., & Carter, C. S. (2008) . Diminished plasma oxytocin in 
schizophrenic patients with neuroendocrine dysfunction and emotional defi cits.  Schizophrenia Research 
 98 :  247–55 . 
 Green, L., Fein, D., Modahl, C., Feinstein, C., Waterhouse, L., & Morris, M. (2001) . Oxytocin and autistic 
disorder: alterations in peptide forms.  Biological Psychiatry  50 :  609–13 . 
 Grewen, K. M., Girdler, S. S., Amico, J., & Light, K. C. (2005) . Eff ects of partner support on resting 
oxytocin, cortisol, norepinephrine, and blood pressure before and aft er warm partner contact. 
 Psychosomatic Medicine  67 :  531–8 . 
 Guastella, A. J., Carson, D. S., Dadds, M. R., Mitchell, P. B., & Cox, R. E. (2009a).  Does oxytocin infl uence 
the early detection of angry and happy faces?  Psychoneuroendocrinology  34 :  220–5 . 
 Guastella, A. J., Einfeld, S. L., Gray, K. M., Rinehart, N. J., Tonge, B. J., Lambert, T. J., et al. (2010) . 
Intranasal oxytocin improves emotion recognition for youth with autism spectrum disorders.  Biological 
Psychiatry  67 :  692–4 . 
 Guastella, A. J., Howard, A. L., Dadds, M. R., Mitchell, P., & Carson, D. S. (2009b) . A randomized 
controlled trial of intranasal oxytocin as an adjunct to exposure therapy for social anxiety disorder. 
 Psychoneuroendocrinology  34 :  917–23 . 
 Guastella, A. J., Mitchell, P. B., & Dadds, M. R. (2008a) . Oxytocin increases gaze to the eye region of 
human faces.  Biological Psychiatry  63 :  3–5 . 
 Guastella, A. J., Mitchell, P. B., & Mathews, F. (2008b) . Oxytocin enhances the encoding of positive social 
memories in humans.  Biological Psychiatry  64 :  256–8 . 

305
 Heinrichs, M., Baumgartner, T., Kirschbaum, C., & Ehlert, U. (2003) . Social support and oxytocin interact 
to suppress cortisol and subjective responses to psychosocial stress.  Biological Psychiatry  54 :  1389–8 . 
 Heinrichs, M., & Domes, G. (2008) . Neuropeptides and social behaviour: eff ects of oxytocin and 
vasopressin in humans.  Progress in Brain Research  170 :  337–50 . 
 Heinrichs, M., Meinlschmidt, G., Neumann, I., Wagner, S., Kirschbaum, C., Ehlert, U., & Hellhammer, 
D. H. (2001) . Eff ects of suckling on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis responses to psychosocial stress 
in postpartum lactating women.  Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism  86 :  4798–804 . 
 Heinrichs, M., Meinlschmidt, G., Wippich, W., Ehlert, U., & Hellhammer, D. H. (2004) . Selective amnesic 
eff ects of oxytocin on human memory.  Physiology and Behavior  83 :  31–8 . 
 Heinrichs, M., von Dawans, B., & Domes, G. (2009) . Oxytocin, vasopressin, and human social behavior. 
 Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology  30 :  548–57 . 
 Horvat-Gordon, M., Granger, D. A., Schwartz, E. B., Nelson, V. J., & Kivlighan, K. T. (2005) . Oxytocin is 
not a valid biomarker when measured in saliva by immunoassay.  Physiology and Behavior  84 :  445–8 . 
 Huber, D., Veinante, P., & Stoop, R. (2005) . Vasopressin and oxytocin excite distinct neuronal populations 
in the central amygdala.  Science  308 :  245–8 . 
 Hurlemann, R., Patin, A., Onur, O. A., Cohen, M. X., Baumgartner, T., Metzler, S., et al. (2010) . Oxytocin 
enhances amygdala-dependent, socially reinforced learning and emotional empathy in humans.  Journal 
of Neuroscience  30 :  4999–5007 . 
 Inoue, H., Yamasue, H., Tochigi, M., Abe, O., Liu, X., Kawamura, Y., et al. (2010) . Association between the 
oxytocin receptor gene and amygdalar volume in healthy adults.  Biological Psychiatry  68 : 1066–72. 
 Inoue, T., Kimura, T., Azuma, C., Inazawa, J., Takemura, M., Kikuchi, T., Kubota, Y., Ogita, K., & Saji, 
F. (1994) . Structural organization of the human oxytocin receptor gene.  Journal of Biological Chemistry 
 269 :  32451–6 . 
 Insel, T. R., & Young, L. J. (2001) . Th e neurobiology of attachment.  Nature Reviews Neuroscience  2 :  129–36 . 
 Jacob, S., Brune, C., Carter, C., Leventhal, B., Lord, C., & Cookjr, E. (2007) . Association of the oxytocin 
receptor gene  (OXTR)  in Caucasian children and adolescents with autism.  Neuroscience Letters  417 :  6–9 . 
 Kang, Y. S., & Park, J. H. (2000) . Brain uptake and the analgesic eff ect of oxytocin—its usefulness as an 
analgesic agent.  Archives of Pharmaceutical Research  23 :  391–5 . 
 Keri, S., & Benedek, G. (2009) . Oxytocin enhances the perception of biological motion in humans. 
 Cognitive ,  Aff ective & Behavioral Neuroscience  9 :  237–41 . 
 Keri, S., Kiss, I., & Kelemen, O. (2008) . Sharing secrets: Oxytocin and trust in schizophrenia.  Social 
Neuroscience  4: 1–7 . 
 Kessler, R. C., McGonagle, K. A., Zhao, S., Nelson, C. B., Hughes, M., Eshleman, S., Wittchen, H. U., & 
Kendler, K. S. (1994).  Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in the 
United States. Results from the National Comorbidity Survey .  Archives of General Psychiatry  51 :  8–19 . 
 Kim H. S., Sherman, D. K., Sasaki, J. Y., Xu, J., Chu, T. Q., Ryu, C., Suh, E. M., Graham, K., & Taylor, S. E. 
(2010) . Culture, distress, and oxytocin receptor polymorphism  (OXTR) interact to infl uence emotional 
support seeking.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  107 : 
 15717–21 . 
 Kirsch, P., Esslinger, C., Chen, Q., Mier, D., Lis, S., Siddhanti, S., Gruppe, H., Mattay, V. S., Gallhofer, B., 
& Meyer-Lindenberg, A. (2005) . Oxytocin modulates neural circuitry for social cognition and fear in 
humans.  Journal of Neuroscience  25 :  11489–93 . 
 Kirschbaum, C., Pirke, K. M., & Hellhammer, D. H. (1993) . Th e “Trier Social Stress Test”—a tool for 
investigating psychobiological stress responses in a laboratory setting.  Neuropsychobiology  28 :  76–81 . 
 Kosfeld, M., Heinrichs, M., Zak, P. J., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. (2005) . Oxytocin increases trust in 
humans.  Nature  435 :  673–6 . 
 Kumsta, R., & Heinrichs, M. (2013). Oxytocin, stress and social behavior: Neurogenetics of the human 
oxytocin system.  Current Opinion in Neurobiology ,  23 , 11–16. 
REFERENCES

SOCIAL NEUROPEPTIDES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN: OXYTOCIN AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
306
 Labuschagne, I., Phan, K. L., Wood, A., Angstadt, M., Chua, P., Heinrichs, M., et al. (2010) . Oxytocin 
attenuates amygdala reactivity to fear in generalized social anxiety disorder.  Neuropsychopharmacology 
 35 :  2403–13 . 
 Landgraf, R., & Neumann, I. D. (2004) . Vasopressin and oxytocin release within the brain: a 
dynamic concept of multiple and variable modes of neuropeptide communication.  Frontiers in 
Neuroendocrinology  25 :  150–76 . 
 Lerer, E., Levi, S., Salomon, S., Darvasi, A., Yirmiya, N., & Ebstein, R. P. (2008) . Association between the 
oxytocin receptor  (OXTR) gene and autism: relationship to Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales and 
cognition.  Molecular Psychiatry  13 :  980–8 . 
 Lischke, A., Berger, C., Prehn, K., Heinrichs, M., Herpertz, S. C., & Domes, G. (2011) . Intranasal oxytocin 
enhances emotion recognition from dynamic facial expressions and leaves eye-gaze unaff ected.  
 Psychoneuroendocrinology  37 : 475–81. 
 Loup, F., Tribollet, E., Dubois-Dauphin, M., & Dreifuss, J. J. (1991) . Localization of high-affi  nity binding 
sites for oxytocin and vasopressin in the human brain. An autoradiographic study .  Brain Research  555 : 
 220–32 . 
 Ludwig, M., & Leng, G. (2006) . Dendritic peptide release and peptide-dependent behaviours.  Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience  7 :  126–36 . 
 Marsh, A. A., Yu, H. H., Pine, D. S., & Blair, R. J. (2010) . Oxytocin improves specifi c recognition of positive 
facial expressions.  Psychopharmacology  209 :  225–32 . 
 Meinlschmidt, G., & Heim, C. (2007) . Sensitivity to intranasal oxytocin in adult men with early parental 
separation.  Biological Psychiatry  61 :  1109–11 . 
 Meyer-Lindenberg, A. (2008) . Impact of prosocial neuropeptides on human brain function.  Progress in 
Brain Research  170 :  463–70 . 
 Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Domes, G., Kirsch, P., & Heinrichs, M. (2011) . Oxytocin and vasopressin in the 
human brain: social neuropeptides for translational medicine.   Nature Reviews Neuroscience 12: 524–38 . 
 Mikolajczak, M., Gross, J. J., Lane, A., Corneille, O., de Timary, P., & Luminet, O. (2010a) . Oxytocin 
makes people trusting, not gullible.  Psychological Science  21 :  1072–4 . 
 Mikolajczak, M., Pinon, N., Lane, A., de Timary, P., & Luminet, O. (2010b) . Oxytocin not only increases 
trust when money is at stake, but also when confi dential information is in the balance.  Biological 
Psychology  85 :  182–4 . 
 Naber, F., van Ijzendoorn, M. H., Deschamps, P., van Engeland, H., & Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J. 
(2010) . Intranasal oxytocin increases fathers’ observed responsiveness during play with their children: a 
double-blind within-subject experiment.  Psychoneuroendocrinology  35 ,  1583–6 . 
 Norman, G. J., Cacioppo, J. T., Morris, J. S., Karelina, K., Malarkey, W. B., DeVries, A. C., & Berntson, 
G. G. (2010) . Selective infl uences of oxytocin on the evaluative processing of social stimuli.  Journal of 
Psychopharmacology  25 : 1313–19. 
 Norman, G. J., Cacioppo, J. T., Morris, J. S., Malarkey, W. B., Berntson, G. G., & Devries, A. C. (2011) . 
Oxytocin increases autonomic cardiac control: moderation by loneliness.  Biological Psychology  86 : 
 174–80 . 
 Pessoa, L., & Adolphs, R. (2010) . Emotion processing and the amygdala: from a “low road” to “many roads” 
of evaluating biological signifi cance.  Nature Reviews Neuroscience  11 :  773–83 . 
 Quirin, M., Kuhl, J., & Dusing, R. (2011) . Oxytocin buff ers cortisol responses to stress in individuals with 
impaired emotion regulation abilities.  Psychoneuroendocrinology  36 :  898–904 . 
 Rimmele, U., Hediger, K., Heinrichs, M., & Klaver, P. (2009) . Oxytocin makes a face in memory familiar. 
 Journal of Neuroscience  29 :  38–42 . 
 Rockliff , H., Karl, A., McEwan, K., Gilbert, J., Matos, M., & Gilbert, P. (2011) . Eff ects of intranasal 
oxytocin on “compassion focused imagery.”  Emotion  11 : 1388–96. 

307
 Rodrigues, S., Saslow, L., Garcia, N., John, O., & Keltner, D. (2009) . Oxytocin receptor genetic variation 
relates to empathy and stress reactivity in humans.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America  106 :  21437–41. 
 Savaskan, E., Ehrhardt, R., Schulz, A., Walter, M., & Schachinger, H. (2008) . Post-learning intranasal 
oxytocin modulates human memory for facial identity.  Psychoneuroendocrinology  33 :  368–74 . 
 Scantamburlo, G., Hansenne, M., Fuchs, S., Pitchot, W., Mar é chal, P., Pequeux, C., Ansseau, M., 
& Legros, J. J. (2007) . Plasma oxytocin levels and anxiety in patients with major depression. 
 Psychoneuroendocrinology  32 ,  407–10 . 
 Schulze, L., Lischke, A., Greif, J., Herpertz, S. C., Heinrichs, M., & Domes, G. (2011) . Oxytocin increases 
recognition of masked emotional faces.  Psychoneuroendocrinology  36 :  1378–82 . 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Fischer, M., Dvash, J., Harari, H., Perach-Bloom, N., & Levkovitz, Y. (2009) . 
Intranasal administration of oxytocin increases envy and schadenfreude (gloating).  Biological Psychiatry 
 66 :  864–70 . 
 Simeon, D., Bartz, J., Hamilton, H., Crystal, S., Braun, A., Ketay, S., et al. (2011) . Oxytocin administration 
attenuates stress reactivity in borderline personality disorder: a pilot study.  Psychoneuroendocrinology 
 36 : 1418–21. 
 Singer, T., Snozzi, R., Bird, G., Petrovic, P., Silani, G., Heinrichs, M. et  al. (2008) . Eff ects of oxytocin and 
prosocial behavior on brain responses to direct and vicariously experienced pain.  Emotion  8 :  781–91 . 
 Stanley, B., & Siever, L. J. (2010) . Th e interpersonal dimension of borderline personality disorder: toward a 
neuropeptide model.  American Journal of Psychiatry  167 :  24–39 . 
 Tansey, K. E., Brookes, K. J., Hill, M. J., Cochrane, L. E., Gill, M., Skuse, D., Correia, C., Vicente, A., Kent, 
L., Gallagherm L., & Anney, R. J. (2010) . Oxytocin receptor  (OXTR) does not play a major role in the 
aetiology of autism: genetic and molecular studies.  Neuroscience Letters  474 :  163–7 . 
 Taylor, S. E., Gonzaga, G. C., Klein, L. C., Hu, P., Greendale, G. A., & Seeman, T. E. (2006) . Relation of 
oxytocin to psychological stress responses and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis activity in 
older women.  Psychosomatic Medicine  68 :  238–45 . 
 Th eodoridou, A., Rowe, A. C., Penton-Voak, I. S., & Rogers, P. J. (2009) . Oxytocin and social perception: 
oxytocin increases perceived facial trustworthiness and attractiveness.  Hormones and Behavior  56 : 
 128–32 . 
 Viviani, D., Charlet, A., van den Burg, E., Robinet, C., Hurni, N., Abatis, M., Magara, F., & Stoop, R. 
(2011) . Oxytocin selectively gates fear responses through distinct outputs from the central amygdala. 
 Science  333 :  104–7 . 
 Winslow, J. T., & Insel, T. R. (2004) . Neuroendocrine basis of social recognition.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  14 :  248–53 . 
 Wu, S., Jia, M., Ruan, Y., Liu, J., Guo, Y., Shuang, M., Gong, X., Zhang, Y., Yang, X., & Zhang, D. (2005) . 
Positive association of the oxytocin receptor gene  (OXTR) with autism in the Chinese Han population. 
 Biological Psychiatry  58 :  74–7 . 
 Young, L. J., & Wang, Z. (2004) . Th e neurobiology of pair bonding.  Nature Neuroscience  7 :  1048–54 . 
 Zak, P. J., Kurzban, R., & Matzner, W. T. (2005) . Oxytocin is associated with human trustworthiness. 
 Hormones and Behavior  48 :  522–7 . 
 Zak, P. J., Stanton, A. A., & Ahmadi, S. (2007) . Oxytocin increases generosity in humans.  PLoS One  2 : 
 e1128 . 
REFERENCES

 Chapter 17 
 Prenatal and postnatal testosterone 
effects on human social and 
emotional behavior  
 Bonnie   Auyeung and   Simon  Baron-Cohen  
 Hormones are important chemical messengers that we use to regulate and control virtually all 
our physiological processes, from metabolism to activation of the immune system and the regula-
tion of mood. They are also essential in the processes of reproduction, growth and development 
(Larsen, Kronenberg, Melmed, & Polonsky, 2002). 
 Animal studies of the effects of hormones have provided some of the clearest evidence for the 
role of various hormones in our bodies. More speciﬁ cally, manipulation of glands producing 
particular hormones can have signiﬁ cant effects on physical development, as well as behavior 
(Christensen & Gorski, 1978; Collaer & Hines, 1995; Goy, Bercovitch, & McBrair, 1988; Goy & 
McEwen, 1980; Hines, Davis, Coquelin, Goy, & Gorski, 1985). Mammals in particular have been 
widely studied, with castration (and thus reduction in gonadal hormones) being a common 
early experiment. These experiments show that hormones are essential to the sexual differen-
tiation of both the body and the brain (see Collaer & Hines, 1995, for a review). It has long 
been recognized that castration of males at birth affects the development of masculine geni-
talia, while administration of androgens to females masculinizes their genitalia (Jost, 1970). 
Castrated males also usually show feminized neural development, cognition, and behavior; 
while females treated with androgen show masculinized neural development, cognition, and 
behavior. Similar experiments have been conducted in a wide range of mammals, comparing 
castrated males, normal males, normal females, and females treated with androgens on a range 
of sexually dimorphic features. These consistently demonstrate the importance of sex steroid 
hormones (testosterone in particular) in the development of the brain and behavior (Arnold 
& Gorski, 1984; Breedlove, 1994; Goy & McEwen, 1980; MacLusky & Naftolin, 1981; Williams 
& Meck, 1991). 
 While the effects of testosterone on non-human mammal sexual behavior have been extensively 
studied, there is now increasing evidence that this and other hormones also have a substantial effect 
on aspects of  human  social and emotional behavior (Baron-Cohen, Lutchmaya, & Knickmeyer, 
2004; Cohen-Bendahan, van de Beek, & Berenbaum, 2005a; Hines, 2004). This chapter aims to 
review these ﬁ ndings by presenting a series of longitudinal studies designed to elucidate the behav-
ioral effects of both prenatal and postnatal testosterone exposure in children and young adults. We 
discuss whether sex steroids, speciﬁ cally testosterone, are also related to our social cognition, and 
speciﬁ cally to understanding other minds. 

TIMING AND CRITICAL PERIODS
309
 Timing and critical periods  
 The timing of hormonal effects is crucial when studying lasting effects on development. There are 
generally thought to be two types of hormonal effects: organizational and activational (Phoenix, 
Goy, Gerall, & Young, 1959). Organizational effects are most likely to occur during early develop-
ment when most neural structures are being established, producing  permanent changes in the 
brain (Phoenix et al., 1959). In contrast, activational effects are short term and are dependent on 
current hormone levels. It is thought that organizational effects are maximal during certain criti-
cal periods of development. These are hypothetical time windows in which a tissue can be formed 
(Hines, 2004). Outside the critical period, the effect of the hormone will be limited, protecting 
the animal from disruptive inﬂ uences. This means, for example, that circulating sex hormones 
necessary for adult sexual functioning do not cause unwanted alterations to tissues, despite the 
same hormones might having been essential in laying down cellular organization during the initial 
development of those tissues. 
 Animal research indicates that the critical period for sexual differentiation of the brain occurs 
when sex differences in serum testosterone are highest (Collaer & Hines, 1995). It is likely that this 
is an important period for sexual differentiation of the human brain as well. It is difﬁ cult to get 
accurate measurements of hormone levels for humans, but studies that have sampled fetal serum, 
plasma, and amniotic ﬂ uid during pregnancy have indicated that in typical human male fetuses, 
there is a surge in fetal testosterone (FT) levels between weeks 8–24 of gestation, peaking around 
week 16 (Abramovich & Rowe, 1973; Clements, Reyes, Winter, & Faiman, 1976; Reyes, Boroditsky, 
Winter, & Faiman, 1974; Reyes, Winter, & Faiman, 1973; Smail, Reyes, Winter, & Faiman, 1981). 
During this period, male fetuses produce more than 2.5 times the levels observed in females 
(Beck-Peccoz, Padmanabhan, Baggiani, Cortelazzi, Buscaglia, Medri, et al., 1991). From week 25 
of gestation, there is then a decline, to barely detectable levels until birth. Therefore, we can assume 
that the signiﬁ cant effects of FT on development are likely to occur within this window. For typical 
human female fetuses, levels are generally very low throughout uterine development and during 
childhood (Hines, 2004; see Figure 17.1). 
1000
Amniocentesis
Window
500
0
10
20
males
females
Critical
period
30
birth
Weeks
10
20
30
40
50
Testosterone (ng/dl)
 Figure 17.1  Sex differences in FT levels pre- and postnatally.  

PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL TESTOSTERONE EFFECTS ON HUMAN SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL BEHAVIOR 
310
 Prenatal hormone effects in humans  
 Studies in clinical conditions 
 Some naturally occurring medical conditions lead to atypical hormone levels. Since artiﬁ cial 
manipulation of the hormone environment during critical periods of development is patently 
unethical, such medical conditions are a natural experiment for evaluating the impact of andro-
gens and other hormones on development. 
 One such condition is congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), a genetic mutation which causes 
excess adrenal production of androgen hormones (including testosterone and other hormones 
responsible for the development of masculinizing features) beginning prenatally in both males 
and females (New, 1998). 
 Behaviors showing large sex differences are the clearest candidates for studying effects of sex 
steroids (such as testosterone) on later development (Cohen-Bendahan et al., 2005a; Collaer & 
Hines, 1995; Hines, 2004). Studies of individuals with CAH have found that girls with the condi-
tion show masculinization of behavioral performance in activities such as spatial orientation, visu-
alization, targeting, personality, cognitive abilities and sexuality (Hampson, Rovet, & Altmann, 
1998; Hines, Fane, Pasterski, Matthews, Conway, & Brook, 2003; Resnick, Berenbaum, Gottesman, 
& Bouchard, 1986). While CAH provides an opportunity to investigate the effects of additional 
androgen exposure, the rare occurrence of CAH makes it difﬁ cult to obtain large enough groups 
and it is unclear if the research ﬁ ndings generalize to the wider population. Critics have also argued 
that CAH-related characteristics other than prenatal androgen exposure could be responsible for 
the atypical cognitive proﬁ les observed in this population (Fausto-Sterling, 1992; Quadagno, 
Briscoe, & Quadagno, 1977). 
 Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrine disorder in women, affecting one in 
15 women. It is a characterized by disruption of the ovulation cycle, a number of small cysts around 
the edge of their ovaries (polycystic ovaries), and excessive production and/or secretion of andro-
gens (masculinizing hormones) referred to as “hyperandrogenism” (Norman, Dewailly, Legro, & 
Hickey, 2007). The daughters of women with PCOS show lower empathy quotient (EQ) scores, a 
measure on which typical girls usually show higher scores than boys (Palomba, Marotta, Di Cello, 
Russo, Falbo, Orio, et al., 2012). In the same study, daughters of women with PCOS also showed 
higher systemizing quotient (SQ) scores, a measure on which boys typically score higher than girls. 
These ﬁ ndings are consistent with the idea that PCOS increases androgen exposure  in utero , and 
that this increased exposure leads the fetus to have more masculinized behavior in later life.  
 Studies using amniotic ﬂ uid measurements 
 Amniocentesis is the process of extracting a sample of amniotic ﬂ uid during the second trimester 
of pregnancy to detect clinical abnormalities in the fetus. Amniocentesis is typically performed 
during a relatively narrow time window, which coincides with the hypothesized critical period for 
human sexual differentiation (between approximately weeks 8 and 24 of gestation—see Figure 
17.1; Hines, 2004). Samples taken in this way conﬁ rm that both male and female human fetuses 
produce testosterone, with male fetuses producing on average 2.5 times the levels observed in 
females. 
 Males produce testosterone from both the adrenal glands and the testes. The female fetus also 
produces androgens, but at much lower levels, mainly from the adrenal glands. In early prenatal 
life, this testosterone enters the amniotic ﬂ uid via diffusion through the fetal skin, and later enters 
the ﬂ uid via fetal urination (Robinson, Judd, Young, Jones, & Yen, 1977). Once produced, it is 

PRENATAL HORMONE EFFECTS IN HUMANS
311
carried by the blood to tissues around the body, and also crosses the blood–brain barrier to affect 
not just somatic tissue, but also neural development. Testosterone levels are also affected by other 
processes. For example, underproduction of aromatase may result in higher FT levels by impairing 
conversion of testosterone to estrogen (Abramovich, 1974). Similarly, dihydrotestosterone (DHT) 
is produced from testosterone and may be a stronger activator of the androgen receptor than tes-
tosterone itself (Larsen et al., 2002). Whilst these processes limit the conclusions we can draw from 
a snapshot measurement of FT level in the amniotic ﬂ uid, it is a useful starting point from which 
to develop our understanding. 
 A number of studies have linked elevated levels of FT in the amniotic ﬂ uid with the masculi-
nization of certain behaviors, beginning shortly after birth. In particular, the Cambridge Child 
Development Project is an ongoing longitudinal study investigating the relationship between pre-
natal hormone levels and the development of later behavior (Baron-Cohen et al., 2004; Knickmeyer 
& Baron-Cohen, 2006). Mothers of participating children all underwent amniocentesis for clinical 
reasons. To date, these otherwise typically developing children have been tested postnatally at sev-
eral time points. The ﬁ ndings from this study related to social and emotional understanding are 
discussed next, with particular reference to the child’s development of a theory of mind.  
 Social development 
 Eye contact in infants is one of the earliest building blocks in social development and commu-
nication. The ﬁ rst study aimed to test if FT and estradiol levels showed any relationship to eye 
contact in a sample of 70 typically developing 12-month-old children (Lutchmaya, Baron-Cohen, 
& Raggatt, 2002a). Frequency and duration of eye contact were measured using videotaped ses-
sions. Sex differences were found, with girls making signiﬁ cantly more eye contact than boys. The 
amount of eye contact inversely correlated with FT levels when the sexes were combined and also 
within the boys (Lutchmaya et al., 2002a). No relationships were observed between eye contact 
and estradiol levels. These results indicate that FT plays a role in shaping the neural mechanisms 
underlying social development (Lutchmaya et al., 2002a). 
 A second study tested if FT was related to the development of language, speciﬁ cally examin-
ing the relationship between vocabulary size and FT and estradiol levels, as measured during 
amniocentesis. Vocabulary size was assessed at 18 and 24 months of age using the communicative 
development inventory, a self-administered checklist of words for parents to complete (Hamilton, 
Plunkett, & Shafer, 2000). Girls had signiﬁ cantly larger vocabularies than boys at both time points 
(Lutchmaya, Baron-Cohen, & Raggatt, 2002b) and results showed that levels of FT inversely pre-
dicted rate of vocabulary development (Lutchmaya et al., 2002b). 
 A follow-up of these children at 4 years of age used the children’s communication checklist, a ques-
tionnaire designed to screen for communication difﬁ culties in children 4–16 years of age (Bishop, 
1998). The quality of social relationships subscale demonstrated an association between higher FT 
levels and poorer quality of social relationships for both sexes combined (but not within each sex). 
A lack of signiﬁ cant correlations within each sex may reﬂ ect the small sample size ( n = 58).  
 Mentalizing/theory of mind 
 Mentalizing is the major focus of this volume and can be deﬁ ned as the ability to put oneself into 
the mind of another person to infer what the person is thinking or feeling. It is also referred to as 
employing a theory of mind, or mindreading. The “moving geometric shapes” task was used: the 
children were asked to describe cartoons with two moving triangles whose interaction with each 
other suggested social relationships and psychological motivations (Knickmeyer, Baron-Cohen, 

PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL TESTOSTERONE EFFECTS ON HUMAN SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL BEHAVIOR 
312
Raggatt, Taylor, & Hackett, 2006). Sex differences were observed, with girls using more mental 
and affective state terms to describe the cartoons compared with boys; however, no relationships 
between FT levels and frequency of mental or affective state terms were observed. Girls were found 
to use more intentional propositions than males, and a negative relationship between FT levels 
and frequency of intentional propositions was observed when the sexes were combined, as well as 
in boys alone. Boys used more neutral propositions than females. FT was a signiﬁ cant predictor of 
the frequency of neutral propositions when the sexes were combined. 
 Another method to measure mentalizing is the child version of the “Reading the Mind in the 
Eyes” test. This measure consists of 28 pictures from the eye region of the face, each depicting 
a mental state, some including subtle emotions (Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Spong, Scahill, & 
Lawson, 2001). This revealed a signiﬁ cant, negative correlation with FT, with higher levels pre-
dicting lower mindreading capability. Within sex analyses revealed a signiﬁ cant negative correla-
tion between FT and the Eyes test within both boys and girls (Chapman, Baron-Cohen, Auyeung, 
Knickmeyer, Taylor, & Hackett, 2006). The signiﬁ cance within each sex is important because it 
points to a more sensitive dependency on FT level than in the entire population, where boys have 
much higher levels of FT. 
 To understand the neural mechanisms by which this could take place we have investigated how 
FT affects brain development. The right temporo-parietal junction (RTPJ) is one region that is 
associated with tasks requiring one to think about other people’s thoughts and mental states (Saxe, 
2010). Increases in FT predict increased gray matter in the RTPJ, and this brain region shows a 
male>female pattern of sexual dimorphism. This provides further clues suggesting a link between 
FT exposure and the neural development of mentalizing. 
 Gender-typical behavior 
 Children from the Cambridge Child Development Project were followed up using Pre-School 
Activities Inventory (PSAI). This is a standardized questionnaire measure of gender-typical play in 
both boys and girls. The PSAI includes 24 items and is completed by a parent to describe the child’s 
behavior. Higher scores reﬂ ect more male-typical behavior, and females with CAH obtain elevated 
(more male-typical) scores on the PSAI (Hines, Brook, & Conway, 2004), suggesting sensitivity 
to the effects of prenatal androgen exposure. A signiﬁ cant relationship exists between FT levels 
and sexually differentiated play behavior in both girls and boys (Auyeung, Baron-Cohen, Ashwin, 
Knickmeyer, Taylor, Hackett, et al., 2009a). 
 The Bem Sex Role Inventory (BSRI) is a questionnaire developed to measure feminine and mas-
culine personality traits on the basis of cultural deﬁ nitions of sex-typed social desirability (Bem, 
1974). This is a 60-item (20 feminine, 20 masculine, and 20 non-gender related items) question-
naire. Examination of scores on this measure indicated that higher FT levels are associated with 
higher masculinity scores on the BSRI when boys and girls are examined together, and when girls 
are examined alone. No relationships are found between FT levels and scores on the femininity 
scale. Within sex results suggest that girls exposed to higher testosterone levels  in utero are per-
ceived as exhibiting more masculinized behavior (Auyeung, 2008). 
 Empathy 
 Empathy is the drive to identify another person’s emotions and thoughts, and to respond to these 
with an appropriate emotion (Baron-Cohen, 1999). This is an aspect of social interaction where 
females show a strong advantage. Sex differences in the precursors of empathy are seen from birth, 
with female babies showing a stronger preference for looking at social stimuli (faces) 24 hours after 

PRENATAL HORMONE EFFECTS IN HUMANS
313
birth (Connellan, Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Batki, & Ahluwalia, 2000), and more eye contact at 
12 months of age (Lutchmaya et al., 2002a). Girls also tend to show more comforting, sad expres-
sions or sympathetic vocalizations than boys when witnessing another’s distress as early as 1 year 
of age (Hoffman, 1977). 
 Girls generally scored higher than boys on the Empathy Quotient-Child Version (EQ-C) at 
ages 6–8 years, which is by parent-report. A signiﬁ cant negative correlation between FT levels and 
EQ-C score is observed when the sexes are combined, and also within boys alone (Chapman et al., 
2006). 
 Autistic traits 
 Autism Spectrum Conditions (ASC) are a group of related conditions characterized by impair-
ments in reciprocal social interaction and communication, alongside strongly repetitive behaviors 
and unusually narrow interests (APA, 1994). Autism is much more prevalent in males than females 
(Chakrabarti & Fombonne, 2005; Gillberg, Cederlund, Lamberg, & Zeijlon, 2006), so the possibil-
ity that androgens may have a role to play in the etiology of these conditions has been explored. 
 Studies have examined the effects of FT on the later development of autism and autistic traits. In 
the ﬁ rst of these studies, autistic traits were measured using the Quantitative Checklist for Autism 
in Toddlers (Q-CHAT) (Allison, Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Charman, Richler, Pasco, et al., 
2008). The Q-CHAT questionnaire was completed by mothers who had also undergone amnio-
centesis, providing measurements of FT level and fetal estradiol (FE)—a second hormone which 
forms prenatally from testosterone and is considered to be the most biologically active estrogen 
(Collaer & Hines, 1995). Samples of postnatal testosterone (PT) levels were also taken from saliva 
at 3–4 months of age in a small sample of these children. The study revealed a signiﬁ cant sex differ-
ence in autistic traits, with boys scoring higher (indicating more autistic traits) than girls. Q-CHAT 
scores were predicted by FT levels only, with both sex and the FT/Sex interaction excluded from the 
model (Auyeung, Taylor, Hackett, & Baron-Cohen, 2010). 
 The relationship between FT and Q-CHAT score was also visible within in the subset of chil-
dren who participated in the follow up study measuring postnatal testosterone (PT) levels at 3–4 
months. However, no relationships between FE, PT levels and Q-CHAT scores were observed. In 
addition, FE and PT levels showed no sex differences or relationships with FT levels Auyeung, 
et al., 2013. 
 FT measurements were also directly evaluated against a child’s score on the Childhood Autism 
Spectrum Test (CAST) (Scott, Baron-Cohen, Bolton, & Brayne, 2002; Williams, Scott, Stott, Allison, 
Bolton, Baron-Cohen, et al., 2005) and the Autism Spectrum Quotient-Child Version (AQ-Child) 
(Auyeung, Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, & Allison, 2008). The CAST is a validated and widely used 
autism screening measure used to detect who is at risk for ASC. The AQ-Child is a measure that 
quantiﬁ es autistic traits and has been used widely in research. 
 FT levels are positively associated with higher scores (indicating greater number of autistic traits) 
on both the CAST and the AQ-Child. For the AQ-Child, this relationship is seen within both males 
and females as well as when the sexes are combined, suggesting this is an effect of FT, rather than 
an effect of sex. The relationship between CAST scores and FT is also seen within boys, but not girls 
(Auyeung, Baron-Cohen, Chapman, Knickmeyer, Taylor, & Hackett, 2009b).  
 Summary of the Cambridge Child Development Project 
 Table 17.1 describes the measures used in the Cambridge Child Development Project to identify 
sex differences in behavior and the links with FT for boys and girls together. For each measure, the 

PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL TESTOSTERONE EFFECTS ON HUMAN SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL BEHAVIOR 
314
direction of the sex differences (if present) is shown. The ﬁ nal column indicates whether FT levels 
(independent of sex) were a signiﬁ cant predictor in the associated regression analyses. 
 Limitations of measuring prenatal exposure to hormones 
in amniotic ﬂ uid 
 The ﬁ ndings presented in Table 17.1 make use of testosterone levels in amniotic ﬂ uid (sampled via 
amniocentesis). The beneﬁ t of this method is that it provides a sample that is close to the fetus and 
is collected as part of normal clinical practice for mothers thought to be at risk of complications 
during pregnancy or birth. Amniocentesis is generally also conducted in a fairly narrow time win-
dow, aiding repeatability of measurements. Ideally, it would be most useful to make direct meas-
urements of testosterone at regular intervals throughout gestation and into postnatal life. Even for 
amniocentesis, it is not currently possible to obtain repeated samples of FT because the procedure 
carries a risk of causing miscarriage (about 1%) (d’Ercole et al., 2003; Sangalli et al., 2004). It is 
also known that hormones ﬂ uctuate during the day and between days, even in fetuses (Seron-Ferre 
et al., 1993; Walsh et al., 1984). 
 Table 17.1  Cambridge Child Development Project 
 Characteristic 
 Measure 
 Child’s age 
 Sex difference  Results 
Eye contact
Frequency
12 months
Yes (F>M)
Higher FT predicts less eye 
contact
Vocabulary size
Communicative 
development 
inventory
18–24 months
 Yes 
 (F>M) 
Higher FT predicts smaller 
vocabulary size
Social relationships
Children’s 
communication 
checklist
4 years
 Yes 
 (F>M) 
Higher FT predicts poorer 
quality of social relationships
Mental and affective 
language
Intentional 
propositions
4 years
 Yes 
 (F>M) 
Higher FT predicts less mental 
and affective language
Mindreading
Reading the 
mind in the eyes
6–9 years
No
Higher FT predicts poorer 
mindreading
Gender-typical play
PSAI
6–9 years
 Yes 
 (F<M) 
Higher FT predicts more 
male-typical play preferences
Gender-role behavior
BSRI
6–9 years
 Yes 
 (F<M) 
Higher FT predicts more 
male-typical sex role 
characteristics
Empathy
Empathy 
quotient
6–9 years
 Yes 
 (F>M) 
Higher FT is associated with 
less empathy
Autistic traits
Q-CHAT
18–24 months
Yes (F<M)
Higher FT predicts more 
autistic traits
Autistic traits
AQ-Child
6–10 years
Yes (F<M)
Higher FT predicts more 
autistic traits
Autistic traits
CAST
6–10 years
Yes (F<M)
Higher FT predicts more 
autistic traits

POSTNATAL HORMONE EFFECTS IN HUMANS
315
 Given the estimated timeline for testosterone secretion, the most promising time to measure FT 
is probably at prenatal weeks 8–24 (Smail, Reyes, Winter, & Faiman, 1981), but this is still a rela-
tively wide range. Research in non-human primates has also shown that androgens masculinize 
different behaviors at different times during gestation, suggesting different behaviors may also 
have different sensitive periods for development (Goy et al., 1988). 
 For all these reasons, the inferences we can therefore draw about the single measurement of 
FT are necessarily limited. At the same time, a signiﬁ cant correlation between amniotic FT and a 
behavior should represent a conservative estimate of the potential effect of FT exposure on that 
behavior. 
 Human behavior is complex, and biological, social or cultural factors are continuously interact-
ing, making it challenging to investigate the causes of behavior. To the extent that social factors 
have been controlled within the experiments presented above, these were restricted to demo-
graphic variables such as maternal age, parental education, and number of siblings, and behaviors 
and traits are likely to be inﬂ uenced by a range of social factors that have not been measured in 
these studies. 
 Postnatal hormone effects in humans 
 Studies of current (activational) hormones 
 Studies of postnatal hormone exposure have examined the effects of current (or activational) hor-
mones. One obvious example of hormonal variation is the menstrual cycle, but the other obvious 
example of postnatal hormone exposure is during puberty. Studies in non-human mammals have 
investigated whether changes during puberty represent a critical period for the effects of steroid 
hormones. Gonadectomy in male ferrets before puberty, but after the early critical period does not 
affect sexual development when these animals are treated with testosterone in adulthood (Baum 
& Erskine, 1984). Early steroid hormone deprivation results in systemic reduction in sensitivity to 
later androgen effects (Gotz & Dorner, 1976). More recent ﬁ ndings suggest that steroid hormones 
during puberty have an activational effect on brain development (Schulz, Molenda-Figueira, & 
Sisk, 2009). These results indicate that although the critical window during perinatal development 
is vitally important for early sexual differentiation of the brain, the pubertal period also plays a 
large role in “ﬁ ne-tuning” the organizational effects of steroid hormones (Romeo, Richardson, & 
Sisk, 2002). 
 During puberty, changes occur in adrenal androgens, rapid growth in body size, fat composi-
tion, and the development of secondary sex characteristics (Forbes & Dahl, 2010). Studies examin-
ing the relationships between puberty, hormone changes and the effects on social cognition and 
emotion have been relatively few. This is because onset of puberty varies greatly between individu-
als as well as between sexes, so recruitment of appropriate age groups can be difﬁ cult. In addition, 
there is little research in this age group due to the discomfort and embarrassment associated with 
trying to obtain reliable and accurate information on sexual maturation. Other studies have relied 
on parental or self-report measures of puberty which can have difﬁ culties (Petersen, Crockett, 
Richards, & Boxer, 1988). It is also hard to disentangle the physical aspects of maturation from the 
co-occurring social changes associated with this age group. 
 Much of what is known about adolescent development in humans comes from studies that do 
not speciﬁ cally include biological measures of pubertal development (such as hormone levels). For 
example, brain regions such as the rostral prefrontal cortex which are involved in executive func-
tions are still developing during adolescence (Dumontheil, Burgess, & Blakemore, 2008). A study 
that used a narrow age range and measures of pubertal development showed a positive correlation 

PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL TESTOSTERONE EFFECTS ON HUMAN SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL BEHAVIOR 
316
between pubertal development and an increased tendency toward sensation-seeking (Martin, Kelly, 
Rayens, Brogli, Brenzel, Smith, et al., 2002). The increase in sensation-seeking during puberty may 
relate to the increase in risk-taking observed in adolescents, which seems to decline in adulthood 
(Zuckerman, 1971). How the development of these systems is related to the effect of puberty or 
changes in steroid hormones is not known. 
 Efforts have been made to examine the links between prenatal and activational hormone effects 
on behavior in same-sex and opposite-sex twins, the assumption being that girls from pairs of 
opposite-sex twins are exposed to higher levels of prenatal testosterone, compared with same-sex 
twin girls (Cohen-Bendahan, Buitelaar, van Goozen, Orlebeke, & Cohen-Kettenis, 2005b). Such 
studies control for postnatal environmental effects by comparing data with similar measurements 
of same-sex female twins. The activational effects of testosterone are assessed using salivary testo-
sterone measures in addition to a measure of pubertal status using the Tanner drawings (Tanner, 
1962). Although there is some evidence of associations between free testosterone levels and per-
sonality traits (such as aggressive impulses and boredom susceptibility in boys, and experience 
seeking and extraversion in girls), no clear associations between circulating testosterone levels and 
behavioral traits are apparent. 
 More recently, sex differences have been observed in the relationship between circulating tes-
tosterone levels using bloodspot samples and thickness in areas of the brain associated with high 
androgen receptor density (including the left inferior parietal lobule, middle temporal gyrus, 
calcarine sulcus and right lingual gyrus; Bramen, Hranilovich, Dahl, Chen, Rosso, Forbes, et al., 
2012). These ﬁ ndings provide new evidence for the role of testosterone in pubertal structural brain 
development and sexual differentiation. However, further work is needed to ascertain how these 
changes may relate to social, cognitive and emotional development.  
 Studies of testosterone administration 
 The majority of ﬁ ndings discussed so far have relied on observations in clinical conditions character-
ized by atypical exposure to hormones or by obtaining samples of amniotic ﬂ uid, blood, or saliva to 
measure hormone levels and relating these to measurements of interest. In some cases, it is also possi-
ble to study the effects of directly altering circulating hormone levels (though prenatal manipulation 
of hormone levels would be unethical). Recent studies in adult women have used a sublingual admin-
istration of testosterone, leading to a short-term large increase in circulating testosterone. Using this 
method, a series of studies have examined the effects of a single dose of testosterone vs. placebo on 
social and emotional behavior (see Bos, Panksepp, Bluthe, & van Honk, 2012b, for a review). 
 Administration studies have shown that testosterone decreases theory of mind and facial emotion 
recognition in these women. Using the “Reading the Mind in the Eyes” test, a measure examining 
subtle emotion and mental states from pictures of the eye region, testosterone administration led 
to lower scores compared with placebo (van Honk, Schutter, Bos, Kruijt, Lentjes, & Baron-Cohen, 
2011). Interestingly, the 2D:4D digit length ratios (thought to be a proxy for prenatal hormone 
exposure) of the women tested in this study predicted approximately 50% of the variance in the 
effect of testosterone on task performance. The authors suggest that the testosterone administra-
tion effect may be primed by prenatal exposure to testosterone (van Honk et al., 2011). 
 Testosterone administration has also been shown to decrease recognition of angry expressions, 
and the authors hypothesize that testosterone may reduce the recognition of social threat, which 
may point toward a role for testosterone is social aggression (van Honk & Schutter, 2007). Angry 
faces may be an implicit signal of threat or competition, and testosterone administration has also 
been shown to increase gaze to the eye region of threatening faces that are viewed unconsciously, 
suggesting a role for testosterone in implicit social-dominance (Terburg, Aarts, & van Honk, 2012). 

POSTNATAL HORMONE EFFECTS IN HUMANS
317
Testosterone has also been shown to reduce empathic facial imitation (Hermans, Putman, & van 
Honk, 2006). In an fMRI study, testosterone administration activated areas such as the orbit-
ofrontal cortex and amygdala (both considered to be emotion processing regions) when look-
ing at angry vs. happy facial expressions, again suggesting a role for testosterone in social threat 
(Hermans, Ramsey, & van Honk, 2008). A recent fMRI study also suggests that administration of 
testosterone alters functional connectivity between brain regions when looking at social stimuli. 
Testosterone (vs. placebo) decreases connectivity between the amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex 
(OFC) (Bos, Hermans, Ramsey, & van Honk, 2012a), and amygdala activation shifts away from the 
OFC, towards the thalamus (van Wingen, Mattern, Verkes, Buitelaar, & Fernandez, 2010). 
 Testosterone is also related to trust. Administration of testosterone is related to rating pictures as 
being less trustworthy compared with placebo, even when baseline testosterone levels do not differ 
(Bos, Terburg, & van Honk, 2010). Administration of testosterone increases the responsiveness of the 
amygdala to untrustworthy faces, perhaps due to heightened social vigilance (Bos et al., 2012a). 
 Testosterone decreases the amount of collaboration between two participants by increasing the 
egocentricity of the individual’s choices (Wright, Bahrami, Johnson, Di Malta, Rees, Frith, et al., 
2012), and decreases generosity (Zak, Kurzban, Ahmadi, Swerdloff, Park, Efremidze, et al., 2009). 
However, another study found that testosterone administration increases social cooperation in 
individuals with low levels of prenatal testosterone exposure (measured using 2D:4D ratio) (van 
Honk, Montoya, Bos, van Vugt, & Terburg, 2012), which provide some evidence that responses fol-
lowing testosterone administration may, in part, be dependent on early organizational effects. 
 Following testosterone (vs. placebo) administration, women have been found to increased acti-
vation in the thalamo-cingulate region, insula, and the cerebellum in response to infant crying, 
indicating testosterone may have a role in modulating parental care (Bos, Hermans, Montoya, 
Ramsey, & van Honk, 2010). 
 Testosterone also affects responsivity to reward. Using the IOWA gambling task, women show an 
increase in risk-taking after testosterone administration (van Honk, Schutter, Hermans, Putman, 
Tuiten, & Koppeschaar, 2004). Using a monetary incentive delay task, testosterone administra-
tion increases ventral striatum activation, associated with reward anticipation, in individuals with 
low appetitive motivation (behavior directed toward goals that are usually associated with reward 
processes) (Hermans, Bos, Ossewaarde, Ramsey, Fernandez, & van Honk, 2010). 
 Participants who  believe  that they received testosterone, regardless of whether they actually 
received it or not, behave more unfairly than those who believed that they were treated with pla-
cebo. In fact, testosterone administration increases the frequency of fair bargaining (Eisenegger, 
Naef, Snozzi, Heinrichs, & Fehr, 2010). 
 Although these studies provide interesting and novel evidence for testosterone administration 
effects, the sample sizes are small and further replication of the results is needed. These studies also 
include mainly females, and while they do control for the phase of the menstrual cycle, which itself 
predicts emotion recognition (Derntl, Kryspin-Exner, Fernbach, Moser, & Habel, 2008a) and brain 
function (e.g. amygdala response) (Derntl, Windischberger, Robinson, Lamplmayr, Kryspin-Exner, 
Gur, et al., 2008b), many of the women are also using oral contraceptives, which suppress ovarian 
hormone production (Fleischman, Navarrete, & Fessler, 2010). The effects of how all these factors 
interact and the effects of social and emotional behavior need further investigation.  
 Testosterone vs. oxytocin administration 
 Interestingly, another hormone oxytocin, has seemingly “opposite” results to those found for testo-
sterone when examining its effect on aspects of human social behavior (Heinrichs, von Dawans, & 
Domes, 2009). In one study, duration and pattern of social gaze toward the eye region (predictive 

PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL TESTOSTERONE EFFECTS ON HUMAN SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL BEHAVIOR 
318
of the ability to interpret the meaning of social situations and the intentions of others (Klin, Jones, 
Schultz, Volkmar, & Cohen, 2002)) in men was increased by administration of an intranasal dose 
of oxytocin (Guastella, Mitchell, & Dadds, 2008). Oxytocin increases trust in social situations, sug-
gesting that it might serve an afﬁ liative purpose in humans as well as animals (especially among 
in-group members) (Kosfeld, Heinrichs, Zak, Fischbacher, & Fehr, 2005). 
 Oxytocin exerts inﬂ uence on neural circuits involved a wide range of social-cognitive abili-
ties such as eye gaze, mentalizing, emotion-recognition and learning (Baumgartner, Heinrichs, 
Vonlanthen, Fischbacher, & Fehr, 2008; Domes, Heinrichs, Glascher, Buchel, Braus, & Herpertz, 
2007; Domes, Lischke, Berger, Grossmann, Hauenstein, Heinrichs, et al., 2010; Gamer, Zurowski, & 
Buchel, 2010; Kirsch, Esslinger, Chen, Mier, Lis, Siddhanti et al., 2005; Labuschagne, Phan, Wood, 
Angstadt, Chua, Heinrichs, et al., 2010; Pincus, Kose, Arana, Johnson, Morgan, Borckardt, et al., 
2010; Riem, Bakermans-Kranenburg, Pieper, Tops, Boksem, Vermeiren, et al., 2011). Regions in 
these studies which are affected by oxytocin, such as the amygdala, fusiform gyrus, ventromedial 
prefrontal cortex, insula, superior temporal gyrus, and inferior frontal gyrus (Petrovic, Kalisch, 
Singer, & Dolan, 2008), are consistently atypical in conditions where difﬁ culties in social cognition 
are a deﬁ ning feature, such as ASC (Di Martino, Ross, Uddin, Sklar, Castellanos, & Milham, 2009; 
Lombardo, Baron-Cohen, Belmonte, & Chakrabarti, 2011). Extensive reviews on oxytocin effects 
can be found elsewhere (Heinrichs et al., 2009; Striepens, Kendrick, Maier, & Hurlemann, 2011). 
 The disparate effects of administering testosterone and oxytocin are becoming clearer, and it has 
recently been proposed that steroids and neuropeptides are important in different environments 
(Bos, et al., 2012b). For example, testosterone may increase vigilance and motivation for action and 
may reduce social cognition in environments that demand action (such as in emergencies or high 
stress situations). Neuropeptides such as oxytocin may increase social cognition in environments 
that are safe or that do not demand action. The subtleties of these interactions need further test-
ing (Bos et al., 2012b). It will be important to consider the environment and situational contexts 
when interpreting the ﬁ ndings from research of this kind, where the vast majority of studies are 
conducted in laboratory settings. 
 Furthermore, unlike testosterone studies that mainly include females, the majority of studies of 
oxytocin have only included males. These samples are mainly chosen as a result of the practicalities 
of the side effects associated with each hormone. The generalizability of results from these studies 
has not yet been thoroughly tested, and possible sex-dependent outcomes have not been ruled out. 
 Future directions  
 In much of the research described in this chapter, the role of the social environment has not been 
considered in depth. Social interactions undoubtedly play an important role in the development 
of social and emotional behavior. For example, research on gender-based expectations may cause 
parents, teachers or caregivers to elicit and reinforce expected behavior from children (Stern & 
Karraker, 1989), thus shaping the child’s behavior. Further work on the role of the environment 
and how various factors interact with hormone levels and behavior will be very important. 
 The relationships between hormones and behavior in humans are likely to depend on many 
factors and these studies in the main report correlations with hormone levels measured at a single 
time point. Research in animals has generally shown that hormonal effects on behavior may be 
dose and time-dependent (Cohen-Bendahan et al., 2005a; Hines, 2004), and these issues need to 
be clariﬁ ed. The replication of results in larger sample sizes would also help to increase the range 
of hormone levels observed in these studies and assist in identifying any factors that are linked with 
levels in the extreme range. 

CONCLUSIONS
319
 It will also be valuable to further establish the relationships between direct measures of hor-
mones (e.g. amniotic ﬂ uid or serum measures) and physical characteristics (e.g. 2D:4D ratio, or 
dermatoglyphics), which have been used as proxy measures of hormone exposure. The beneﬁ t of 
using these types of measurements is that they are easy to obtain and have also been linked to many 
areas of development. However, limited evidence exists for a relationship between these proxy 
measures and exposure to prenatal hormones (Lutchmaya, Baron-Cohen, Raggatt, Knickmeyer, 
& Manning, 2004). If such a link is further conﬁ rmed using direct measures of hormones, it could 
simplify future investigations of hormone effects. 
 In studies of puberty, it will be beneﬁ cial for the ﬁ eld to include in-depth studies that investi-
gate the contribution of pubertal development, hormone levels, and social inﬂ uences on develop-
ment. The degree to which genetic variation is coupled with changes in hormone exposure is also 
unknown and it may be that changes in hormone levels are simply a manifestation of a genetic 
inﬂ uence. This is an interesting area for future research, since investigations of current testosterone 
levels have shown rates of heritability between 50 and 66% (Harris, Vernon, & Boomsma, 1998; 
Hoekstra, Bartels, & Boomsma, 2006). Sex hormones also have an epigenetic role in changing gene 
expression throughout development and likely interact with sex chromosome effects on sexual 
differentiation (McCarthy & Arnold, 2011; McCarthy, Auger, Bale, De Vries, Dunn, Forger, et al., 
2009), and further exploration of applications to social behavior would be important. 
 With regards to administration studies, it is worth reiterating the point made earlier, that the 
majority of studies that have used this methodology have restricted their samples to either a female 
sample when using testosterone, or a male sample when using oxytocin. As a result, the ﬁ ndings of 
the abovementioned administration studies may not necessarily generalize to samples of the oppo-
site sex. Future studies should compare the responses of males and females to ascertain whether 
there may be any sex-dependent effects. Testosterone administration studies also include those 
who are using oral contraceptives, which itself is a hormone manipulation. It would be important 
for this area for studies to investigate how oral or hormone contraception may interact with the 
testosterone administration. 
 Conclusions  
 Research suggests that human social and emotional behavior, including theory of mind and empa-
thy, are affected by gonadal hormones, in particular exposure to testosterone. The role of prena-
tal testosterone appears to be vital for early organization of the brain, and in the programming 
of sexual differentiation during critical periods of development. In humans, the most important 
period appears to be early-mid pregnancy. This ﬁ nding has been repeated in studies looking at 
a number of behavioral measures and is also conﬁ rmed in those who are naturally exposed to 
elevated levels of the hormone through clinical conditions. It is also generally supported by studies 
in non-human mammals. 
 In later life, the effects of hormones such as testosterone during puberty have been shown to also 
predict behavior. It is thought that these effects “activate” or “ﬁ ne-tune” the early organization of 
the brain, although the exact relationships between these two time periods are far from clear. To 
some extent, the activational effect of hormones during puberty appears to be dependent on expo-
sure during the organizational period of early development, when key tissues are ﬁ rst formed. 
 Whilst the above conclusions appear to generally hold, there is still much work needed to further 
understand the subtle effects that speciﬁ c changes to hormone levels may have. Administration 
of hormones to an individual can provide some further clues. Generally speaking, such studies 
have concluded that increased testosterone levels seem to be involved with decreased social and 

PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL TESTOSTERONE EFFECTS ON HUMAN SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL BEHAVIOR 
320
emotional behavior, including theory of mind and empathy, whereas administration of oxytocin 
increases these social and emotional behaviors. 
 More recent studies are beginning to identify the physical processes that may be involved in 
the effects of hormones on development and behavior. This research is generally at an early stage, 
though there is an indication that speciﬁ c areas of the brain are more developed in those with 
higher prenatal testosterone levels. Functional MRI (fMRI) studies involving administration of 
particular hormones also indicate greater or reduced response from speciﬁ c brain regions due to 
changes in testosterone or oxytocin levels. Such experiments are useful because they do not require 
a longitudinal design, but at the same time cannot easily examine organizational effects. The ways 
in which steroids interact with neuropeptides and other hormones, as well as the cause of natural 
variation of sex steroids in general, is still not well understood. 
 The investigation of both organizational and activational hormone exposure on behavioral 
development remains an area needing much more detailed research. In addition to helping us map 
the process of human development, ﬁ ndings in this area could have major implications for clinical 
conditions characterized by social and emotional difﬁ culties, such as autism. 
 The science examining hormonal effects on social and emotional development continues to 
evolve at a rapid pace. Many important studies are underway, including (in our lab in collaboration 
with the Danish State Serum Institute) a study testing if prenatal sex steroid hormones are elevated 
in a large sample of people who developed autism spectrum conditions, characterized in part by 
difﬁ culties in understanding other minds.  
 References 
 Abramovich, D. R. (1974).  Human sexual diff erentiation—  in utero  infl uences .  Journal of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology  81 :  448–53 . 
 Abramovich, D. R., & Rowe, P. (1973).  Foetal plasma testosterone levels at mid-pregnancy and at term: 
Relationship to foetal sex .  Journal of Endocrinology  56 :  621–2 . 
 Allison, C., Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Charman, T., Richler, J., Pasco, G., et al. (2008).  Th e 
Q-CHAT (Quantitative Checklist for Autism in Toddlers): A normally distributed quantitative measure 
of autistic traits at 18–24 months of age: Preliminary report .  Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders  38 :  1414–25 . 
 American Psychiatric Association. (1994).  DSM-IV Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 
4th edn .  Washington DC :  APA . 
 Arnold, A. P., & Gorski, R. A. (1984).  Gonadal steroid induction of structural sex diff erences in the central 
nervous system .  Annual Review of Neuroscience  7 :  413–42 . 
 Auyeung, B., Ahluwalia, J., Th omson, L., Taylor, K., Hackett, G., O’Donnell, K. J., et al. (2013).  Prenatal versus 
postnatal sex steroid hormone eff ects on autistic traits in children at 18–24 months of age.  Mol Autism.  
 Auyeung, B. (2008).  Foetal Testosterone, Cognitive Sex Diff erences and Autistic Traits. Th esis,  University of 
Cambridge ,  United Kingdom . 
 Auyeung, B., Baron-Cohen, S., Ashwin, E., Knickmeyer, R., Taylor, K., Hackett, G., et al. (2009a).  Fetal 
testosterone predicts sexually diff erentiated childhood behavior in girls and in boys .  Psychology Sci ence 
 20 :  144–8 . 
 Auyeung, B., Baron-Cohen, S., Chapman, E., Knickmeyer, R., Taylor, K., & Hackett, G. (2009b).  Fetal 
testosterone and autistic traits .  British Journal of Psychology  100 :  1–22 . 
 Auyeung, B., Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., & Allison, C. (2008).  Th e Autism Spectrum Quotient: 
Children’s Version (AQ-Child) .  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  38 :  1230–40 . 
 Auyeung, B., Taylor, K., Hackett, G., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2010).  Foetal testosterone and autistic traits in 18 
to 24-month-old children .  Molecular Autism  1: 11 . 

321
 Baron-Cohen, S. (1999).  Th e extreme male-brain theory of autism . In H. Tager Flusberg (Ed.), 
 Neurodevelopmental Disorders (pp. 401–29) .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Lutchmaya, S., & Knickmeyer, R. (2004).  Prenatal Testosterone in Mind .  Cambridge :  MIT 
Press . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Spong, A., Scahill, L., & Lawson, J. (2001).  Are intuitive physics 
and intuitive psychology independent? A test with children with Asperger syndrome .  Journal of 
Developmental and Learning Disorders  5 :  47–78 . 
 Baum, M. J., & Erskine, M. S. (1984).  Eff ect of neonatal gonadectomy and administration of testosterone on 
coital masculinization in the ferret .  Endocrinology  115 :  2440–4 . 
 Baumgartner, T., Heinrichs, M., Vonlanthen, A., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. (2008).  Oxytocin shapes the 
neural circuitry of trust and trust adaptation in humans .  Neuron ,  58 ,  639–650 . 
 Beck-Peccoz, P., Padmanabhan, V., Baggiani, A. M., Cortelazzi, D., Buscaglia, M., Medri, G., et al. 
(1991).  Maturation of hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal function in normal human fetuses: circulating 
levels of gonadotropins, their common alpha-subunit and free testosterone, and discrepancy between 
immunological and biological activities of circulating follicle-stimulating hormone .  Journal of Clinical 
Endocrinology and Metabolism  73 :  525–32 . 
 Bem, S. L. (1974).  Th e measurement of psychological androgyny .  Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology  42 :  155–62 . 
 Bishop, D. V. M. (1998).  Development of the children’s communication checklist (CCC): A method for 
assessing qualitative aspects of communicative impairment in children .  Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry  6 :  879–91 . 
 Bos, P. A., Hermans, E. J., Montoya, E. R., Ramsey, N. F., & van Honk, J. (2010).  Testosterone 
administration modulates neural responses to crying infants in young females . 
 Psychoneuroendocrinology  35 :  114–21 . 
 Bos, P. A., Hermans, E. J., Ramsey, N. F., & van Honk, J. (2012a).  Th e neural mechanisms by which 
testosterone acts on interpersonal trust .  NeuroImage  61 :  730–7 . 
 Bos, P. A., Panksepp, J., Bluthe, R. M., & van Honk, J. (2012b).  Acute eff ects of steroid hormones and 
neuropeptides on human social-emotional behavior: A review of single administration studies .  Frontiers 
in Neuroendocrinology  33 :  17–35 . 
 Bos, P. A., Terburg, D., & van Honk, J. (2010).  Testosterone decreases trust in socially naive humans . 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA  107 :  9991–5 . 
 Bramen, J. E., Hranilovich, J. A., Dahl, R. E., Chen, J., Rosso, C., Forbes, E. E., et al. (2012).  Sex matters 
during adolescence: testosterone-related cortical thickness maturation diff ers between boys and girls . 
 PLoS One  7 :  e33850 . 
 Breedlove, S. M. (1994).  Sexual diff erentiation of the human nervous system .  Annual Review of Psychology 
 45 :  389–418 . 
 Chakrabarti, S., & Fombonne, E. (2005).  Pervasive developmental disorders in preschool children: 
Confi rmation of high prevalence .  American Journal of Psychiatry  162 :  1133–41 . 
 Chapman, E., Baron-Cohen, S., Auyeung, B., Knickmeyer, R., Taylor, K., & Hackett, G. (2006).  Fetal 
testosterone and empathy: Evidence from the Empathy Quotient (EQ) and the “Reading the Mind in the 
Eyes” test .  Social Neuroscience  1 :  135–48 . 
 Christensen, L. W., & Gorski, R. A. (1978).  Independent masculinization of neuroendocrine systems by 
intracerebral implants of testosterone or estradiol in the neonatal female rat .  Brain Research  146 :  325–40 . 
 Clements, J. A., Reyes, F. I., Winter, J. S., & Faiman, C. (1976).  Studies on human sexual development. III. 
Fetal pituitary and serum, and amniotic fl uid concentrations of LH, CG, and FSH .  Journal of Clinical 
Endocrinology of Metabolism  42 :  9–19 . 
 Cohen-Bendahan, C. C., van de Beek, C., & Berenbaum, S. A. (2005a).  Prenatal sex hormone eff ects on 
child and adult sex-typed behavior: Methods and fi ndings .  Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews  29 : 
 353–84 . 
REFERENCES

PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL TESTOSTERONE EFFECTS ON HUMAN SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL BEHAVIOR 
322
 Cohen-Bendahan, C. C. C., Buitelaar, J. K., van Goozen, S. H. M., Orlebeke, J. F., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. 
T. (2005b).  Is there an eff ect of prenatal testosterone on aggression and other behavioral traits? A study 
comparing same-sex and opposite-sex twin girls .  Hormones and Behavior 47(2):  230–7 . 
 Collaer, M. L., & Hines, M. (1995).  Human behavioural sex diff erences: A role for gonadal hormones 
during early development?  Psychology Bulletin  118 :  55–107 . 
 Connellan, J., Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Batki, A., & Ahluwalia, J. (2000).  Sex diff erences in 
human neonatal social perception .  Infant Behavior and Development  23 :  113–18 . 
 d’Ercole, C., Shojai, R., Desbriere, R., Chau, C., Bretelle, F., Piechon, L., et al. (2003). Prenatal screening: 
Invasive diagnostic approaches.  Child’s Nervous System  19 (7–8): 444–7. 
 Derntl, B., Kryspin-Exner, I., Fernbach, E., Moser, E., & Habel, U. (2008a).  Emotion recognition accuracy 
in healthy young females is associated with cycle phase .  Hormonal Behaviour  53 :  90–5 . 
 Derntl, B., Windischberger, C., Robinson, S., Lamplmayr, E., Kryspin-Exner, I., Gur, R. C., et al. (2008b). 
 Facial emotion recognition and amygdala activation are associated with menstrual cycle phase . 
 Psychoneuroendocrinology  33 :  1031–40 . 
 Di Martino, A., Ross, K., Uddin, L. Q., Sklar, A. B., Castellanos, F. X., & Milham, M. P. (2009).  Functional 
brain correlates of social and non-social processes in autism spectrum disorders: an activation 
likelihood estimation meta-analysis .  Biological Psychiatry  65 :  63–74 . 
 Domes, G., Heinrichs, M., Glascher, J., Buchel, C., Braus, D. F., & Herpertz, S. C. (2007).  Oxytocin 
Attenuates Amygdala Responses to Emotional Faces Regardless of Valence .  Biological Psychiatry  62 : 
 1187–90 . 
 Domes, G., Lischke, A., Berger, C., Grossmann, A., Hauenstein, K., Heinrichs, M., et al. (2010).  Eff ects of 
intranasal oxytocin on emotional face processing in women .  Psychoneuroendocrinology  35 :  83–93 . 
 Dumontheil, I., Burgess, P. W., & Blakemore, S. J. (2008).  Development of rostral prefrontal cortex and 
cognitive and behavioural disorders .  Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology  50 :  168–81 . 
 Eisenegger, C., Naef, M., Snozzi, R., Heinrichs, M., & Fehr, E. (2010).  Prejudice and truth about the eff ect 
of testosterone on human bargaining behaviour .  Nature  463 :  356–9 . 
 Fausto-Sterling, A. (1992).  Myths of Gender .  New York :  Basic Books . 
 Fleischman, D. S., Navarrete, C. D., & Fessler, D. M. (2010).  Oral contraceptives suppress ovarian hormone 
production .  Psychological Science  21 :  750–2 ; author reply 753. 
 Forbes, E. E., & Dahl, R. E. (2010).  Pubertal development and behavior: hormonal activation of social and 
motivational tendencies .  Brain Cognition  72 :  66–72 . 
 Gamer, M., Zurowski, B., & Buchel, C. (2010).  Diff erent amygdala subregions mediate valence-related and 
attentional eff ects of oxytocin in humans .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA  107 : 
 9400–5 . 
 Gillberg, C., Cederlund, M., Lamberg, K., & Zeijlon, L. (2006).  Brief report: “the autism epidemic.” Th e 
registered prevalence of autism in a Swedish urban area .  Journal of Autism Development Disorders  36 : 
 429–35 . 
 Gotz, F., & Dorner, G. (1976).  Sex hormone-dependent brain maturation and sexual behaviour in rats . 
 Endokrinologie  68 :  275–82 . 
 Goy, R. W., Bercovitch, F. B., & McBrair, M. C. (1988).  Behavioral masculinization is independent of 
genital masculinization in prenatally androgenized female rhesus macaques .  Hormones and Behavior  22 : 
 552–71 . 
 Goy, R. W., & McEwen, B. S. (1980).  Sexual Diff erentiation of the Brain .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Guastella, A. J., Mitchell, P. B., & Dadds, M. R. (2008).  Oxytocin increases gaze to the eye region of human 
faces .  Biological Psychiatry  63 :  3–5 . 
 Hamilton, A., Plunkett, K., & Shafer, G. (2000).  Infant vocabulary development assessed with a British 
Communicative Inventory: Lower scores in the UK than the USA .  Journal of Child Language  27 : 
 689–705 . 

323
 Hampson, E., Rovet, J. F., & Altmann, D. (1998).  Spatial reasoning in children with congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase defi ciency .  Developmental Neuropsychology  14 :  299–320 . 
 Harris, J. A., Vernon, P. A., & Boomsma, D. I. (1998).  Th e heritability of testosterone: A study of Dutch 
adolescent twins and their parents .  Behavior Genetics  28 :  165–71 . 
 Heinrichs, M., von Dawans, B., & Domes, G. (2009).  Oxytocin, vasopressin, and human social behavior . 
 Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology  30 :  548–57 . 
 Hermans, E. J., Bos, P. A., Ossewaarde, L., Ramsey, N. F., Fernandez, G., & van Honk, J. (2010).  Eff ects 
of exogenous testosterone on the ventral striatal BOLD response during reward anticipation in healthy 
women .  NeuroImage  52 :  277–83 . 
 Hermans, E. J., Putman, P., & van Honk, J. (2006).  Testosterone administration reduces empathetic 
behavior: a facial mimicry study .  Psychoneuroendocrinology  31 :  859–66 . 
 Hermans, E. J., Ramsey, N. F., & van Honk, J. (2008).  Exogenous testosterone enhances responsiveness to 
social threat in the neural circuitry of social aggression in humans .  Biological Psychiatry  63 :  263–70 . 
 Hines, M. (2004).  Brain Gender .  New York :  Oxford University Press, Inc . 
 Hines, M., Brook, C., & Conway, G. S. (2004).  Androgen and psychosexual development: Core gender 
identity, sexual orientation and recalled childhood gender role behavior in women and men with 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) .  Journal of Sex Research  41 :  75–81 . 
 Hines, M., Davis, F. C., Coquelin, A., Goy, R. W., & Gorski, R. A. (1985).  Sexually dimorphic regions in 
the medial preoptic area and the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis of the guinea pig brain: a description 
and an investigation of their relationship to gonadal steroids in adulthood .  Journal of Neuroscience  5 : 
 40–7 . 
 Hines, M., Fane, B. A., Pasterski, V. L., Matthews, G. A., Conway, G. S., & Brook, C. (2003).  Spatial 
abilities following prenatal androgen abnormality: Targeting and mental rotations performance in 
individuals with congenital adrenal hyperplasia .  Psychoneuroendocrinology  28 :  1010–26 . 
 Hoekstra, R., Bartels, M., & Boomsma, D. I. (2006).  Heritability of testosterone levels in 12-year-old twins 
and its relation to pubertal development .  Twin Research and Human Genetics  9 :  558–65 . 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1977).  Sex diff erences in empathy and related behaviors .  Psychological Bulletin  84 :  712–22 . 
 Jost, A. (1970).  Hormonal factors in the sex diff erentiation of the mammalian foetus .  Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London: B Biological Sciences  259 :  119–30 . 
 Kirsch, P., Esslinger, C., Chen, Q., Mier, D., Lis, S., Siddhanti, S., et al. (2005).  Oxytocin modulates neural 
circuitry for social cognition and fear in humans .  Journal of Neuroscience  25 :  11489–93 . 
 Klin, A., Jones, W., Schultz, R., Volkmar, F., & Cohen, D. (2002).  Visual fi xation patterns during viewing 
of naturalistic social situations as predictors of social competence in individuals with autism .  Archives of 
General Psychiatry  59 :  809–16 . 
 Knickmeyer, R., Baron-Cohen, S., Raggatt, P., Taylor, K., & Hackett, G. (2006).  Fetal testosterone and 
empathy .  Hormonal Behaviour  49 :  282–92 . 
 Knickmeyer, R. C., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2006).  Fetal testosterone and sex diff erences .  Early Human 
Development  82 :  755–60 . 
 Kosfeld, M., Heinrichs, M., Zak, P. J., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. (2005).  Oxytocin increases trust in 
humans .  Nature  435 :  673–6 . 
 Labuschagne, I., Phan, K. L., Wood, A., Angstadt, M., Chua, P., Heinrichs, M., et al. (2010).  Oxytocin 
attenuates amygdala reactivity to fear in generalized social anxiety disorder .  Neuropsychopharmacology 
 35 :  2403–13 . 
 Larsen, P. R., Kronenberg, H. M., Melmed, S., & Polonsky, K. S. (Eds). (2002).  Williams Textbook of 
Endocrinology, 10th edn.  Philadelphia :  Saunders . 
 Lombardo, M. V., Baron-Cohen, S., Belmonte, M. K., & Chakrabarti, B. (2011).  Neural endophenotypes 
of social behaviour in autism spectrum conditions . In J. Decety & J. Cacioppo (Eds),  Oxford Handbook 
of Social Neuroscience (pp. 830–47) .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
REFERENCES

PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL TESTOSTERONE EFFECTS ON HUMAN SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL BEHAVIOR 
324
 Lutchmaya, S., Baron-Cohen, S., & Raggatt, P. (2002a).  Foetal testosterone and eye contact in 12 month 
old infants .  Infant Behavioural Development  25 :  327–35 . 
 Lutchmaya, S., Baron-Cohen, S., & Raggatt, P. (2002b).  Foetal testosterone and vocabulary size in 18- and 
24-month-old infants .  Infant Behavioural Development  24 :  418–24 . 
 Lutchmaya, S., Baron-Cohen, S., Raggatt, P., Knickmeyer, R., & Manning, J. T. (2004).  2nd to 4th digit 
ratios, fetal testosterone and estradiol .  Early Human Development  77 :  23–8 . 
 MacLusky, N., & Naft olin, F. (1981).  Sexual diff erentiation of the central nervous system .  Science  211 :  1294–303 . 
 Martin, C. A., Kelly, T. H., Rayens, M. K., Brogli, B. R., Brenzel, A., Smith, W. J., et al. (2002).  Sensation 
seeking, puberty, and nicotine, alcohol, and marijuana use in adolescence .  Journal of the American 
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry  41 :  1495–502 . 
 McCarthy, M. M., & Arnold, A. P. (2011).  Reframing sexual diff erentiation of the brain .  Nature 
Neuroscience  14 :  677–83 . 
 McCarthy, M. M., Auger, A. P., Bale, T. L., De Vries, G. J., Dunn, G. A., Forger, N. G., et al. (2009).  Th e 
epigenetics of sex diff erences in the brain .  Journal of Neuroscience  29 :  12815–23 . 
 New, M. I. (1998).  Diagnosis and management of congenital adrenal hyperplasia .  Annual Review of 
Medicine  49 :  311–28 . 
 Norman, R. J., Dewailly, D., Legro, R. S., & Hickey, T. E. (2007).  Polycystic ovary syndrome .  Lancet  370 :  685–97 . 
 Palomba, S., Marotta, A., Di Cello, A., Russo, T., Falbo, A., Orio, F., et al. (2012).  Pervasive developmental 
disorders in children of hyperandrogenic women with polycystic ovary syndrome: a longitudinal 
case-control study .  Clinical Endocrinology (Oxford) 77(6): 898–904 . 
 Petersen, A. C., Crockett, L., Richards, M., & Boxer, A. (1988).  A self-report measure of pubertal status: 
Reliability, validity, and initial norms .  Journal of Youth and Adolescence  17 :  117–33 . 
 Petrovic, P., Kalisch, R., Singer, T., & Dolan, R. J. (2008).  Oxytocin attenuates aff ective evaluations of 
conditioned faces and amygdala activity .  Journal of Neuroscience  28 :  6607–15 . 
 Phoenix, C. H., Goy, R. W., Gerall, A. A., & Young, W. C. (1959).  Organizing action of prenatally 
administered testosterone propionate on the tissues mediating mating behavior in the female guinea 
pig .  Endocrinology  65 :  369–82 . 
 Pincus, D., Kose, S., Arana, A., Johnson, K., Morgan, P. S., Borckardt, J., et al. (2010).  Inverse eff ects of 
oxytocin on attributing mental activity to others in depressed and healthy subjects: a double-blind 
placebo controlled FMRI study .  Frontiers in Psychiatry  1 :  134 . 
 Quadagno, D. M., Briscoe, R., & Quadagno, J. S. (1977).  Eff ects of perinatal gonadal hormones on 
selected non-sexual behavior patterns: A critical assessment of the non-human and human literature . 
 Psychological Bulletin  84 :  62–80 . 
 Resnick, S. M., Berenbaum, S. A., Gottesman, I. I., & Bouchard, T. J. (1986).  Early hormonal infl uences on 
cognitive functioning in congenital adrenal hyperplasia .  Developmental Psychology  22 :  191–8 . 
 Reyes, F. I., Boroditsky, R. S., Winter, J. S., & Faiman, C. (1974).  Studies on human sexual development. 
II. Fetal and maternal serum gonadotropin and sex steroid concentrations .  Journal of Clinical 
Endocrinology and Metabolism  38 :  612–17 . 
 Reyes, F. I., Winter, J. S., & Faiman, C. (1973).  Studies on human sexual development. I. Fetal gonadal and 
adrenal sex steroids.  Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism  37 :  74–8 . 
 Riem, M. M., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., Pieper, S., Tops, M., Boksem, M. A., Vermeiren, R. R., et al. 
(2011).  Oxytocin modulates amygdala, insula, and inferior frontal gyrus responses to infant crying: A 
randomized controlled trial .  Biological Psychiatry  70 (3): 291–7. 
 Riem, M. M., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., Pieper, S., Tops, M., Boksem, M. A., Vermeiren, R. R., et al. 
(2011). Oxytocin modulates amygdala, insula, and inferior frontal gyrus responses to infant crying: A 
randomized controlled trial.  Biological Psychiatry  18: 663–7. 
 Robinson, J., Judd, H., Young, P., Jones, D., & Yen, S. (1977).  Amniotic fl uid androgens and estrogens in 
midgestation .  Journal of Clinical Endocrinology  45 :  755–61 . 

325
 Romeo, R. D., Richardson, H. N., & Sisk, C. L. (2002).  Puberty and the maturation of the male brain and 
sexual behavior: recasting a behavioral potential .  Neuroscience and Biobehaviour Review  26 :  381–91 . 
 Sangalli, M., Langdana, F., & Th urlow, C. (2004). Pregnancy loss rate following routine genetic 
amniocentesis at Wellington Hospital.  New Zealand Medical Journal  117 (1191): U818. 
 Saxe, R. (2010).  Th e right temporo-parietal junction: a specifi c brain region for thinking about thoughts . . 
In A. Leslie & T. German (Eds),  Handbook of Th eory of Mind Florence:  Psychology Press  . 
 Schulz, K. M., Molenda-Figueira, H. A., & Sisk, C. L. (2009).  Back to the future: Th e organizational-activational 
hypothesis adapted to puberty and adolescence .  Hormonal Behaviour  55 :  597–604 . 
 Scott, F. J., Baron-Cohen, S., Bolton, P., & Brayne, C. (2002).  Th e CAST (Childhood Asperger Syndrome Test): 
Preliminary development of a UK screen for mainstream primary-school-age children .  Autism  6 :  9–13 . 
 Seron-Ferre, M., Ducsay, C. A., & Valenzuela, G. J. (1993). Circadian rhythms during pregnancy.  Endocrine 
Reviews  14 (5): 594–609. 
 Smail, P. J., Reyes, F. I., Winter, J. S. D., & Faiman, C. (1981).  Th e fetal hormonal environment and its eff ect 
on the morphogenesis of the genital system . In S. J. Kogan & E. S. E. Hafez (Eds),  Pediatric Andrology 
(pp.  9–19 ).  Boston :  Martinus Nijhoff  . 
 Stern, M., & Karraker, K. H. (1989).  Sex stereotyping of infants: A review of gender labeling studies .  Sex 
Roles  20 :  501–22 . 
 Striepens, N., Kendrick, K. M., Maier, W., & Hurlemann, R. (2011).  Prosocial eff ects of oxytocin and 
clinical evidence for its therapeutic potential .  Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology  32 :  426–50 . 
 Tanner, J. M. (1962).  Growth at Adolescence: With a General Consideration of the Eff ects of Hereditary and 
Environmental Factors Upon Growth and Maturity From Birth to Maturity, 2nd edn.  Oxford :  Blackwell . 
 Terburg, D., Aarts, H., & van Honk, J. (2012).  Testosterone aff ects gaze aversion from angry faces outside 
of conscious awareness .  Psychological Science  23 :  459–63 . 
 van Honk, J., Montoya, E. R., Bos, P. A., van Vugt, M., & Terburg, D. (2012).  New evidence on testosterone 
and cooperation .  Nature  485 :  E4–5 ; discussion E5–6. 
 van Honk, J., & Schutter, D. J. (2007).  Testosterone reduces conscious detection of signals serving social 
correction: implications for antisocial behavior . 
 van Honk, J., Schutter, D. J., Bos, P. A., Kruijt, A. W., Lentjes, E. G., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2011). 
 Testosterone administration impairs cognitive empathy in women depending on second-to-fourth digit 
ratio .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, USA  108 :  3448–52 . 
 van Honk, J., Schutter, D. J., Hermans, E. J., Putman, P., Tuiten, A., & Koppeschaar, H. (2004). 
 Testosterone shift s the balance between sensitivity for punishment and reward in healthy young women . 
 Psychoneuroendocrinology  29 :  937–43 . 
 van Wingen, G., Mattern, C., Verkes, R. J., Buitelaar, J., & Fernandez, G. (2010).  Testosterone reduces 
amygdala-orbitofrontal cortex coupling .  Psychoneuroendocrinology  35 :  105–13 . 
 Walsh, S. W., Ducsay, C. A., & Novy, M. J. (1984). Circadian hormonal interactions among the mother, 
fetus, and amniotic fl uid.  American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology ,  150 (6): 745–53. 
 Williams, C. L., & Meck, W. H. (1991).  Th e organizational eff ects of gonadal steroids on sexually dimorphic 
spatial ability .  Psychoneuroendocrinology  16 :  155–76 . 
 Williams, J., Scott, F., Stott, C., Allison, C., Bolton, P., Baron-Cohen, S., et al. (2005).  Th e CAST 
(Childhood Asperger Syndrome Test): Test accuracy .  Autism  9 :  45–68 . 
 Wright, N. D., Bahrami, B., Johnson, E., Di Malta, G., Rees, G., Frith, C. D., et al. (2012).  Testosterone 
disrupts human collaboration by increasing egocentric choices .  Proceedings of the Royal Society - 
Biological Sciences  279 :  2275–80 . 
 Zak, P. J., Kurzban, R., Ahmadi, S., Swerdloff , R. S., Park, J., Efremidze, L., et al. (2009).  Testosterone 
administration decreases generosity in the ultimatum game .  PLoS One  4 :  e8330 . 
 Zuckerman, M. (1971).  Dimensions of sensation seeking .  Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology  36 : 
 45–52 . 
REFERENCES

 Chapter 18 
 Understanding the genetics of empathy 
and the autistic spectrum  
 Bhismadev   Chakrabarti and   Simon   Baron-Cohen  
 Understanding other minds is at the heart of social functioning. We constantly process a multitude 
of social cues across a range of sensory modalities, and respond to them. Empathy plays a central 
role in all such processes, and is deﬁ ned as the capacity to understand the emotions and mental 
states of others, and respond to them with an appropriate emotion. There is considerable variation 
of empathy in the general population, and individuals with autism spectrum conditions (ASC) are 
largely represented at the low end of this distribution. 
 Recent years have seen signiﬁ cant advances in understanding the neurobiology of empa-
thy and its individual differences (Chakrabarti & Baron-Cohen, 2006; Singer & Lamm, 2009). 
Independently, human molecular genetics has made enormous advances in the past decade, both 
in delineating the role of speciﬁ c genes as well as making it possible to identify a large number 
of sequence variations (e.g. polymorphisms) in the whole human genome at once. This is not to 
discount the important role that experience and learning plays in the development of empathy, 
but this chapter focuses narrowly on the role of genes (Baron-Cohen, 2011; Bowlby, 1969). It is 
therefore timely to take a multilevel perspective in the study of empathy that spans from genes to 
cognition. In this chapter, we provide a brief overview of genetic approaches to study empathy and 
other trait measures of ASC. We then describe a recent study from our group, using dimensional 
phenotypic measures of empathy and autistic traits. Finally, we discuss some initial studies that 
relate genetic variation to “intermediate phenotypes” (also known as endophenotypes) relevant to 
autism and empathy. 
 Empathy and its heritability  
 Empathy is not a unitary construct, and most theoretical accounts suggest the existence of at least 
two factors, which are cognitive empathy (which includes “theory of mind”) and affective empathy 
(which includes “emotional contagion”). A third component that includes prosocial behaviour has 
also been suggested (Chakrabarti & Baron-Cohen 2006; Preston & de Waal, 2002). The importance 
of this fractionation is apparent in identifying neurological dissociations between the different 
components of empathy. For example, it is suggested that people with psychopathic personality 
disorder may have intact cognitive empathy (hence being able to deceive others), but impaired 
affective empathy (hence being able to hurt others), whilst people with autism may show the oppo-
site proﬁ le (hence ﬁ nding the social world confusing because of their deﬁ cit in cognitive empathy, 
but not being over-represented among criminal offenders, having no wish to hurt others, suggest-
ing their affective empathy may be intact; Baron-Cohen, 2011; Jones, Happ é , Gilbert, Burnett, & 
Viding, 2010; Rogers, Viding, Blair, Frith, & Happ é , 2006). 

INSIGHTS FROM AUTISM GENETICS
327
 Before embarking on a discussion about the genetic underpinnings of empathy, it is essential to 
establish that an individual’s genetic composition contributes to his/her levels of empathy. A stand-
ard approach to do this has been to test for heritability of “trait empathy” (i.e. stable individual 
differences in empathy) or other aspects of social behaviour by comparing monozygotic (MZ) and 
dizygotic (DZ) twins. Nearly all of these studies have shown a greater correlation of empathy meas-
ures in MZ compared with DZ twins, suggesting a partially genetic basis for trait empathy (Davis, 
Luce, & Kraus, 1994; Loehlin & Nichols, 1976; Matthews, Batson, Horn, & Rosenman, 1981). 
Measures have included the Questionnaire Measure of Emotional Empathy (QMEE) (Mehrabian 
& Epstein, 1972). (Rushton, Fulker, Neale, Nias, & Eysenck, 1986), in a large-scale twin study, and 
which suggested a high heritability estimate of 68% for emotional empathy. Other twin studies, 
particularly in children, have used behavioural observation paradigms of empathy in a laboratory 
situation. These involve simulating scripted situations (e.g. the experimenter tripping on a chair, 
or the mother of the child getting her ﬁ nger caught while closing a suitcase), while video-recording 
the child’s reactions. A study of 14- and 20-month-old twins using this paradigm conﬁ rmed a 
genetic contribution to empathic concern (Zahn-Waxler, Radke-Yarrow, Wagner, & Chapman, 
1992). A more recent twin study on 409 twin pairs by the same group showed that genetic effects 
on the prosocial behaviour component of empathy (measured using video-recorded behaviour 
in a laboratory setting) increase with age, while shared environmental effects decrease with age 
(Knafo, Zahn-Waxler, Van Hulle, Robinson, & Rhee, 2008). In contrast, twin studies of cognitive 
empathy (measured using a theory of mind paradigm) have reported a greater genetic component 
in early compared with late childhood (Hughes, Jafﬁ , Happé, Taylor, Caspi, & Mofﬁ tt, 2005). In 
summary, there is considerable evidence for a moderate to high genetic contribution to each of the 
component processes of empathy, quantiﬁ ed using observational measures. 
 In adults, self-reported measures of empathy have been widely used as one of the key measures 
of social behaviour. A number of such trait and observational measures of social behaviour have 
been studied for genetic contributions (Ebstein, Israel, Chew, Zhong, & Knafo, 2010). Important 
among these are behavioural assays of face perception and emotion perception. Face recognition is 
associated with a strong genetic component (Wilmer et al., 2010). Recognition of emotions from 
the eye region of the face, as tested by the “Reading the Mind in the Eyes” Task (RMET), shows a 
strong degree of familiality (Baron-Cohen & Hammer, 1997; Losh & Piven, 2007;). Questionnaire 
measures of social functioning using the Social Responsivity Scale (SRS; Constantino & Todd, 2000, 
2005; Sung, Dawson, Munson, Estes, Schellenberg, & Wijsman, 2005) and of autistic traits using the 
Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ; Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Skinner, Martin, & Clubley, 2001) 
also reveal strong familiality (Bishop, Maybery, Maley, Wong, Hill, & Hallmayer, 2004; Wheelwright, 
Auyeung, Allison, & Baron-Cohen, 2010), as well as heritability in twin studies (Hoekstra, Bartels, 
Verweij, & Boomsma, 2007). These studies corroborate ﬁ ndings from the early twin studies in sug-
gesting a genetic underpinning for empathy and social behaviour relevant to ASC.  
 Insights from autism genetics  
 ASC entail a disability in social and communication development, alongside unusually narrow 
interests (“obsessions”) and repetitive behaviour (APA, 1987; ICD-10, 1994). ASC have a genetic 
basis, indicated by signiﬁ cantly higher concordance rates in MZ than in DZ twins, and with some 
heritability estimates of over 90% (Bailey, Le Couteur, GottesmanBolton, Simmonoff, Yuzda, 
et al., 1995; Folstein & Rutter, 1977). Over the last three decades, a number of strategies have 
been used to discover genes related to ASC. A common feature in most of these studies has been 

UNDERSTANDING THE GENETICS OF EMPATHY AND THE AUTISTIC SPECTRUM
328
the use of clinical diagnosis of ASC as a categorical phenotype. In these studies, people with a 
diagnosis of ASC are compared with a group of people without a clinical diagnosis, matched on 
a variety of measures. This approach has implicated multiple genes, along with environmental 
(Wagner, Reuhl, Cheh, McRae, & Halladay, 2006) and epigenetic factors (Crespi & Badcock, 2008; 
Nagarajan Patzel, Martin, Yasui, Swanberg, & Hertz-Picciotto, 2008; LaSalle & Yasui, 2009). Mixed 
evidence from genome-wide linkage studies of samples that do not differentiate between classic 
(low-functioning) autism and Asperger syndrome (AS) has found linkage peaks in nearly all chro-
mosomes (Abrahams & Geschwind, 2008). 
 Genome wide association studies (GWAS) are a more recent development, and use oligonu-
cleotide microarrays that allow for simultaneous genotyping of common polymorphisms from 
nearly all known human genes. The initial GWAS on autism, using the traditional case-control 
design, found signiﬁ cantly associated polymorphisms in genes located on multiple chromosomes 
(AGPC, 2007; Wang, Zhang, Ma, Bucan, Glessner, Abrahams, et al., 2009). Oligonucleotide micro-
arrays enable the detection of single nucleotide variations (e.g. change from an A to a C). Advances 
in the last ﬁ ve years have allowed the detection of larger segments of DNA across the genome (usu-
ally 1000 bases or longer), which are present in multiple copies or are deleted altogether in certain 
individuals. These are referred to as copy-number variations (CNV), and are believed to arise as 
de-novo events during gametogenesis. Rare  de novo copy number variations (CNV) can poten-
tially account for up to 10–24% of cases in families have only one child with ASC (Jacquemont, 
Sanlaville, Redon, Raoul, Cormier-Daire, Lyonnet, et al., 2006; Pinto, Pagnamenta, Klei, Anney, 
Merico, Regan, et al., 2010; Sebat, Lakshmi, Malhotra, Troge, Lese-Martin, Walsh, et al., 2007). In 
summary, case-control genetic studies of ASC suggest that:
 1.  ASC is an oligogenic condition (i.e. it is unlikely that there will be a single gene whose mal-
function will explain all features of this condition).  
  2.     Both rare CNVs as well as common sequence variants (single nucleotide polymorphisms; 
SNPs) are associated with this condition (Arking, Cutler, Brune, Teslovich, West, Ikeda, et al., 
2008; Corvin, Craddock, & Sullivan, 2010; Glessner, Wang, Cai, Korvatska, Kim, Wood, et al., 
2009; Holt & Monaco, 2011; Pinto et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2009).    
 While genotyping common and rare sequence variants of the whole human genome has become a 
routine procedure over the last few years, most studies have continued to use the classic case-control 
design. This poses some potential problems, particularly for autism research. The heterogeneity 
within ASC is not captured in this design, as most of these studies group people with classic autism 
together with those on the broader spectrum (having a diagnosis of high functioning autism 
(HFA) or AS). This raises the possibility of potential confounds due to factors such as language 
delay, below average IQ (seen in classic autism, but not in AS) or co-occurring (a term we prefer to 
the more medical term “comorbid,” for obvious reasons) conditions such as epilepsy and hyper-
activity. In addition, a commonly used measure for verifying a current clinical diagnosis of autism 
(e.g. the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) (Lord, Rutter, Goode, Heemsbergen, 
Jordan, Mawhood, et al., 1989) is 
 1.  optimized for diagnosing classic autism, and not AS/HFA; 
 2.  does not include one key dimension of the autistic symptomatology (repetitive behaviour) in 
its ﬁ nal scoring algorithm, both of which could result in a biased sampling within the clinical 
cohorts. 

BRIDGING THE GENOTYPE-PHENOTYPE GAP IN ASC USING A DIMENSIONAL AND CASE-CONTROL APPROACH
329
 In view of the heterogeneity within ASC, and given the existence of the “broader autism pheno-
type” (BAP) (Piven, Palmer, Jacobi, Childress, & Arndt, 1997) or subthreshold instances of ASC, 
an emerging consensus in autism phenotypic studies suggests that autistic traits are distributed on 
a continuum not just within clinic samples, but right across the general population. Behavioural 
genetic studies conﬁ rm this, suggesting that the etiology of autistic traits is similar in the general 
population as well as the extreme ends of the continuum (Robinson, Koenen, McCormick, Munir, 
Hallett, Happ é , et al., 2011). The AQ is one such trait measure that captures the population vari-
ability in autistic traits in both social and repetitive behaviour domains (Baron-Cohen et al., 2001). 
Another self-report measure focusing speciﬁ cally on empathy is the empathy quotient (EQ), a 
40-item questionnaire that provides a continuous range of scores across the general population 
(Baron-Cohen & Wheelwright, 2004). These, and other similar trait measures such as the SRS 
(Constantino, Przybeck, Friesen, & Todd, 2000) provide a dimensional measure of the social func-
tioning in the general population, and people with ASC tend to cluster toward the low end of the 
score distribution. 
 Bridging the genotype-phenotype gap in ASC using a dimensional 
and case-control approach  
 Interestingly, while most phenotypic studies of ASC (using questionnaires, computer-based 
tasks, and neuroimaging) have focused on the higher functioning end of the autistic spectrum, 
large-scale genetic studies have primarily tested the “lower-functioning” end, largely focusing on 
classic autism. This presents a disconnection between advances at the phenotypic and genotypic 
ends of the sequence from DNA to cognition. A small number of pioneering studies have attempted 
to bridge this disconnect by studying the dimensional phenotypes within ASC using linkage and 
association studies (Campbell, Warren, Sutcliffe, Lee, & Levitt, 2010; Conciatori, Stodgell, Hyman, 
O’Bara, Militerni, Bravaccio, et al., 2004; Losh, Sullivan, Trembath, & Piven, 2008). We attempted 
to bridge this disconnect by conducting two parallel candidate gene association studies, which we 
describe in the next section. The ﬁ rst is of empathy (measured using the EQ) and autistic traits 
(measured using the AQ) in the general population. The second is of Asperger syndrome, which is 
marked by social and behavioural impairments and unusually narrow interests, but is not associ-
ated with language or general cognitive delays during development. 
 A key feature of our studies was in the choice of multiple candidate genes from three groups of 
genes, deﬁ ned by gene function. This approach has been used in other conditions (Pharoah, Tyrer, 
Dunning, Easton, & Ponder, 2007), but not in the study of ASC. Traditionally, genetic association 
studies of ASC have either studied one or a small number of candidate genes, or on the whole 
genome (Losh et al., 2008). We chose 68 candidate genes for these two experiments, derived from 
three functional categories:
 1.  Sex hormone-related genes; 
 2.  Genes involved in neural development and connectivity; 
 3.  Genes involved in social and emotional responsivity (see Table 18.1). We searched for common 
genetic variants (SNPs) on the assumption that autistic traits are continuously distributed in 
the general population so the genetic contributions to individual differences in empathy or 
autistic traits are likely to be normative variants rather than “disease”-causing mutations. 
 Each of the three functional categories derives from a clear neurocognitive theory of ASC, outlined 
next. 

UNDERSTANDING THE GENETICS OF EMPATHY AND THE AUTISTIC SPECTRUM
330
 The fetal androgen theory suggests that genes involved in sex steroid synthesis and transport 
might be related to empathy and ASC (Baron-Cohen, Knickmeyer, & Belmonte, 2005; Auyeung 
et al., chapter 17 in this book). Much of the empirical basis of this theory derives from studies that 
have measured levels of fetal testosterone (FT), measured in amniotic ﬂ uid in the general popu-
lation. FT levels correlate  negatively with markers of social behaviour, such as eye-contact at 12 
months old, vocabulary size at 24 months old (Lutchmaya, Baron-Cohen, & Raggatt, 2002), and 
social development at 4 years old (Knickmeyer, Baron-Cohen, Raggatt, & Taylor, 2005). FT cor-
relates negatively with scores on the EQ and the RMET at 8 years old (Chapman, Baron- Cohen, 
Auyeung, Knickmeyer, Hackett, & Taylor, 2006). FT levels also correlate  positively with narrow 
interests at 4 years old (Knickmeyer et al., 2005), SQ, AQ at 8 years old (Auyeung, Baron- Cohen, 
Chapman, Knickmeyer, Taylor, & Hackett, 2006; Auyeung, Baron-Cohen, Ashwin, Knickmeyer, 
Taylor, Hackett, et al., 2009), and autistic traits at as young as 18–30 months of age (Auyeung, 
Taylor, Hackett, & Baron-Cohen, 2010). 
 The neural connectivity theory, based on evidence from studies of rodent and human brains, 
suggest that the key abnormality in autism might be related to neural growth and connectivity 
(Belmonte, Cook Jnr, Anderson, Rubenstein, Greenough, Beckel-Mitchener, et al., 2004; Wass, 
2011). ASC has a neurodevelopmental origin and an emerging body of genetic evidence suggests a 
crucial role for genes involved in neural growth, synaptic development and function (Bourgeron, 
2009). At the phenotypic end, several studies show functional (Just, Cherkassky, Keller, & Minshew, 
2004; Minshew & Williams, 2007; Shih, Shen,  Ö ttl, Keehn, Gaffrey, & M ü ller, 2010; Villalobos, 
Mizuno, Dahl, Kemmotsu, & M ü ller, 2005; Welchew, 2005) and structural underconnectivity in the 
autistic brain (Barnea-Goraly, Kwon, Menon, Eliez, Lotspeich, & Reiss, 2004; Keller, Kana, & Just, 
2007; Sahyoun, Belliveau, & Mody, 2010; Sundaram, Kumar, Makki, Behen, Chugani, & Chugani, 
2008), which is also marked by abnormal growth patterns (Courchesne, Pierce, Schumann, 
Redcay, Buckwalter, Kennedy, et al., 2007; Courchesne, Campbell & Solso, 2011). We therefore 
hypothesized that variations in genes governing neural development and synaptic function could 
contribute to autistic traits. 
 Finally, the social-emotional responsivity theory suggests that the atypical social behaviour 
patterns in ASC might be related in part to genes known to modulate social behaviour in ani-
mals (Chakrabarti, Kent, Suckling, Bullmore, & Baron-Cohen, 2006; Dawson, Carver, Meltzoff, 
Panagiotides, McPartland, & Webb, 2002; Insel, O’Brien, & Leckman, 1999). These included genes 
involved in the oxytocin and vasopressin systems, as well as other neuropeptides involved in endog-
enous reward systems, such as opioids and cannabinoids. Some of these genes have been associated 
with autism in previous genetic studies, and these are shown in Table 18.1. 
 These 68 candidate genes were tested in two experiments. 216 SNPs with a minor allele fre-
quency (MAF)  ≥ 0.2 in the Caucasian population were chosen from these genes (full list of SNPs are 
available in (Chakrabarti, Dudbridge, Kent, Wheelwright, Hill-Cawthorne, Allison, et al., 2009)). 
This approach, of selecting multiple common SNPs per gene, has the advantage of checking for 
informative associations both directly and indirectly (Collins, Guyer, & Chakravarti, 1997). The 
median SNP density across all genes was one SNP per 14.1 kb. 125 of these SNPs have been geno-
typed in one or more populations in the HapMap database (Release 23a). All volunteers contrib-
uted mouth swabs for DNA extraction. These were anonymized and DNA was genotyped for the 
216 SNPs using standard PCR-based assays (TaqMan® SNP genotyping assays, Applied Biosystems 
Inc., California, USA). The two experiments conducted were as follows:
 1.  Experiment 1: An association study for EQ and AQ was conducted on the population sample 
( n = 349) using non-parametric analysis of variance for each SNP. Chi-square statistics and 

BRIDGING THE GENOTYPE-PHENOTYPE GAP IN ASC USING A DIMENSIONAL AND CASE-CONTROL APPROACH
331
 Table 18.1  List of all genes included in the association study, along with brief functional roles where 
known. Genes marked in bold indicate those previously linked to ASC through genetic linkage/asso-
ciation studies 
 Neural development and connectivity 
 NGF, BDNF, NTF3, NTF5, NGFR, NTRK1, 
NTRK2, NTRK3, TAC1,IGF1,IGF2 
Neuronal survival, differentiation and growth.
 RAPGEF4 
Growth and differentiation of neurons. Mutations associated 
with classic autism.
 VGF 
Upregulated directly by NGF and expressed in neuroendocrine cells.
 VEGF 
Promotes cell growth and migration, especially during 
angiogenesis and vasculogenesis, often observed during hypoxia.
Modulated directly by PTEN.
 ARNT2 
Neural response to hypoxia
 NLGN1, NLGN4X  ,AGRIN 
Synapse formation and maintenance in CNS neurons.  NLGN4X 
mutations have been linked to autism.
 NRCAM 
Neuronal adhesion and directional signalling during axonal cone 
growth.
 EN-2(AUTS1) 
Neuronal migration and cerebellar development. EN-2 has been 
previously linked to ASCs in several studies.
 HOXA1 
Hindbrain patterning. Mixed evidence suggests a link with ASCs.
 Social and emotional responsivity 
 OXT, OXTR , AVPR1A ,AVPR1B 
Linked to social attachment behaviour in humans and other 
mammals. AVPR1A and  OXTR have previously been associated 
with ASCs.
 CNR1,OPRM1,TRPV1 
Mediate endogenous reward circuits, in tandem with 
dopaminergic pathways.Implicated in underlying rewarding 
features of social interactions.
 MAOB 
Synaptic breakdown of dopamine and serotonin. Suggested links 
with social cognition.
 WFS1 
Mutations linked to affective disorders. Overexpressed in 
amygdala during fear response, though exact functional role is 
not known.
 GABRB3 , GABRG3 ,GABRA6, ABAT 
Mediate inhibitory (GABA-ergic) neurotransmission as well as 
play a role in early cortical development.  GABRA6 is expressed 
strongly in the cerebellum;  GABRB3, GABRG3, ABAT have all 
been associated with ASCs.
 VIPR1 
Suggested involvement in neural pathways underlying 
pheromone processing. Mutations associated with social 
behavioural abnormalities in mice. Its endogenous ligand (VIP) 
shows an overexpression in neonatal children with autism.
 Sex hormone biosynthesis, metabolism and transport 
 DHCR7 
Metabolism of cholesterol: precursor for sex hormones 
(mutations associated with near-universal presence of ASC)
(Continued)

UNDERSTANDING THE GENETICS OF EMPATHY AND THE AUTISTIC SPECTRUM
332
asymptotic  p -values (two-tailed) were generated from this test. A sex-speciﬁ c analysis was con-
ducted for all X-linked genes.  
 2.  Experiment 2: A case-control association study of AS was conducted on all cases of AS ( n = 
174) and a subset of the population sample ( n  = 155). The controls were selected to be sex-
matched with the cases, whilst having an AQ score <25. An AQ <25 cut-off was employed to 
exclude a small number of individuals who scored high on AQ even though they did not have 
a formal diagnosis. For each SNP, a Cochrane-Armitage chi-square statistic (1 d.f.) was calcu-
lated to test the null hypothesis that the different alleles have the same distribution in cases and 
controls. Asymptotic  P -values (two-tailed) were calculated. 
 To control for multiple testing of SNPs within genes as well as for multiple phenotypes, permu-
tation testing was conducted using UNPHASED (Dudbridge, 2008) for Experiment 1, and using 
PLINK (Purcell, Neale, Todd-Brown, Thomas, Ferreira, Bender, et al., 2007) for Experiment 2. 
Since each candidate gene was individually selected on the basis of a priori hypothesis, inde-
pendent of other genes, permutation tests were performed separately for each gene. In each 
permutation, the phenotypes were randomly reassigned among participants, keeping the geno-
types ﬁ xed to preserve their correlation structure. The multiple phenotypes for each subject 
were permuted together so as to preserve the correlation structure among phenotypes. Each 
SNP was then tested for association to each permuted phenotype and the minimum  P -value 
recorded. The permutation was repeated 1000 times and the corrected  P -value was the estimated 
proportion of permutations in which the minimum  P -value was less than or equal to the mini-
mum  P -value seen in the original data. When the Family Wise Error Rate (FWER)- corrected 
 P -value is signiﬁ cant, we may infer that at least one SNP in the gene is associated and that there 
is gene-wise signiﬁ cance. This gene-wise p-value thus reﬂ ects the p-value of the most signiﬁ cant 
SNP after FWER correction. 
 In Experiment 1, autistic traits and/or empathy (measured on AQ and/or EQ) were nominally 
associated at  P < = 0.05 with SNPs from 19 genes. In Experiment 2, SNPs from 14 genes were 
nominally associated at  P < = 0.05 with AS. Across both experiments, six genes showed nominal 
Table 18.1 (Continued)
 Neural development and connectivity 
 CYP1A1,CYP1B1,CYP3A,CYP7A1, CY
P11A,CYP11B1,CYP17A1,CYP19A1,C
YP21A2, POR 
Synthesis of sex hormones such as progesterone, estrogen, 
cortisol, aldosterone and testosterone.  CYP21A2 and  POR 
mutations associated with CAH.
 HSD11B1,HSD17B2,HSD17B3, 
HSD17B4 
Local regulation of sex steroids.
 STS, SULT2A1,SRD5A1,SRD5A2 
Steroid hormone metabolism
 SHBG,SCP2,TSPO,SLC25A12, 
SLC25A13 
Intracellular transport of sex steroids as well as their important 
precursors and/or metabolites.Mixed evidence suggests an 
association of  SLC25A12 with classic autism.
 AR 
Intracellular receptor for testosterone
 ESR1,ESR2 
Receptors for estrogen
 CGA, CGRPR, LHB, LHRHR, LHCGR, 
FSHB 
Regulation of reproductive functions.

BRIDGING THE GENOTYPE-PHENOTYPE GAP IN ASC USING A DIMENSIONAL AND CASE-CONTROL APPROACH
333
signiﬁ cance at  P < = 0.05. (See Figure 18.1 for a distribution of all nominally signiﬁ cant genes 
across the two experiments). 
 Eight genes in Experiment 1 and 5 genes in Experiment 2, showed gene-wise signiﬁ cance after 
1000 permutations across all phenotypes. Two genes ( CYP11B1 and  NTRK1 ) survived FWER cor-
rection in both the experiments, and are therefore strong candidates for future replication studies. 
Genes in all three functional groups were found to be signiﬁ cantly associated both with empathy 
and/or autistic traits, as well as with a diagnosis of AS. This provides further support for the non-
unitary nature of autistic traits and AS (Happ é , Ronald, & Plomin, 2006). 
 In the sex steroid group, the estrogen receptor beta ( ESR2 ) was associated signiﬁ cantly in both 
experiments. Particularly, the C allele in rs1271572 and rs1152582 was associated with higher AQ 
in the typical population, and were also found to be more frequent in cases than in controls.  ESR2 
codes for the main estrogen receptor expressed in the brain. In the fetal brain testosterone is aro-
matized to estradiol and exerts its effects on neural development through acting on these receptors, 
and mediating selective cell survival. It promotes the defeminization of the developing male brain 
in mice (Kudwa, Bodo, Gustafsson, & Rissman, 2005). Estrogen is thought to mediate social inter-
action in rodents, and this is supported by the presence of estrogen receptors in areas of the brain 
involved in emotion and affective behaviour, such as the amygdala and the hippocampus. 
 CYP17A1  catalyses the production of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA, a precursor of testo-
sterone), as well as androstenedione (a precursor of estradiol). Higher levels of androstenedione 
were found in males and females with ASC in a recent study on an independent sample (Ruta, 
Ingudomnukul, Taylor, Chakrabarti, & Baron-Cohen, 2011). Polymorphisms in  CYP17A1 have 
been associated with PCOS in women (Park, Lee, Ramakrishna, Cha, & Baek, 2008), a condition 
known to be elevated in ASC (Ingudomnukul, Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, & Knickmeyer, 2007). 
 CYP11B1  is cellularly localized in the mitochondria and converts11-deoxycortisol to cortisol. 
Experiment 2:
As case-control
nominal association
(uncorrected p<0.05)
Experiment 1:
EQ/AQ nominal
association
(uncorrected p<0.05)
HSD11B1
LHCDR
CYP17A1
CYP19A1
SCP2
IGF1
NTF3
OXT
CYP11B1*
ESR1
ESR2
ARNT2
NTRK1*
NTRK3*
HSD17B4
HSD17B2*
NLGN4X
EN-2*
HOXA1
OXTR
GABRB3*
AVPR1B*
CNR1*
GABRA6
MAOB
VIPR
WFS1*
 Figure 18.1  Genes showing nominal association with (1) AS case-control analysis, (2) autistic 
trait measures (AQ, EQ) in the population sample. Intersections summarize genes that show a 
nominal association in both experiments. Gene functional groups are colour coded: gray (sex 
hormone-related), light gray (neural connectivity related) and dark gray (social-emotional responsivity 
related). Genes in bold indicate replications of associations reported in earlier studies. * Indicates a 
nominally signiﬁ cant association with EQ. See also Plate 11.  

UNDERSTANDING THE GENETICS OF EMPATHY AND THE AUTISTIC SPECTRUM
334
Polymorphisms in this gene and the  CYP11A gene are associated with congenital adrenal hyper-
plasia (CAH; Kuribayashi, Nomoto, Massa, Oostdijk, Wit, Wolffenbuttel, et al., 2005) in which FT 
is elevated. CAH is associated with higher AQ than in the general population (Knickmeyer, Baron-
Cohen, Fane, Wheelwright, Mathews, Conway, et al., 2006). Together, these results implicate genes 
involved in the synthesis and metabolism of sex steroids in the aetiology of autistic traits, empathy, 
and AS, and provides some of the ﬁ rst genetic evidence in support of the role of sex-steroids in 
ASC and related trait measures. 
 In the neurodevelopmental group, four genes ( HOXA1 ,  NLGN4X, NTRK1 , and  ARNT2 ) survived 
FWER correction. rs10951154 in  HOXA1  has been previously associated with head size in ASC, as 
well as with head growth rate (Muscarella, Guarnieri, Sacco, Militerni, Bravaccio, Trillo, et al., 2007). 
We found that the G-allele carriers had more autistic traits than the  AA homozygotes. This is con-
sistent with the ﬁ nding that the G allele has been found to be associated with larger head size and 
greater head growth rate (Muscarella et al., 2007). rs12836764 in the  NLGN4X UTR was signiﬁ cantly 
associated with both EQ and AQ in females. This supports earlier ﬁ ndings implicating this gene in 
autism (Jamain, Quach, Betancur, R å stam, Colineaux, Gillberg, et al., 2003). A large-scale association 
study of autism found a signiﬁ cant association with neurexins (AGPC, 2007) that interact with neu-
roligins in mediating glutamatergic synaptogenesis. Among the molecules related to neurotrophin 
function, a strong association was seen in  NTRK1 with empathy (in Experiment 1), and with AS (in 
Experiment 2).  NTRK1  is situated within a peak (1q21–2) reported in the ﬁ rst ever linkage study of 
AS (Ylisaukko-oja, Nieminen-von Wendt, Kempas, Sarenius, Varilo, von Wendt, et al., 2004) and thus 
provides an independent validation. Nerve growth factor (NGF), signaling through TrkA (the pro-
tein product of  NTRK1 ), mediates most neurotrophic action of NGF (Sofroniew, Howe, & Mobley, 
2001). A primary role of the TrkA in the developing brain is in determining the fate and growth of 
neurites, in whether they become axons or dendrites (Da Silva, Hasegawa, Miyagi, Dotti, & Abad-
Rodriguez, 2005). Additionally, two SNPs in the  ARNT2  gene were found to be associated in both 
the experiments. This gene is involved both in the development of the neuroendocrine cells in the 
hypothalamus (Michaud, DeRossi, May, Holdener, & Fan, 2000), as well as in the neural response to 
hypoxia (Maltepe, Keith, Arsham, Brorson, & Simon, 2000). These ﬁ ndings point to a key role played 
by these neurodevelopmental genes in the development of empathy and autistic traits. 
 In the social-emotional responsivity group, four genes ( MAOB ,  GABRB3 ,  WFS1 ,  OXT ) were 
found to be signiﬁ cant after FWER correction.  MAOB was signiﬁ cantly associated in females only, 
and this is consistent with the earlier studies showing the importance of this locus in social cog-
nition, both in humans and mouse models (Good, Lawrence, Simon-Thomas, Price, Ashburner, 
Friston, et al., 2003; Grimsby, Toth, Chen, Kumazawa, Klaidman, Adams, et al., 1997). The ration-
ale for testing GABA-related genes came from the fact that social behaviour has been linked to 
GABA-ergic activity in the CNS (File & Seth, 2003), and that GABA receptors play a crucial role 
early in cortical development through their effect on neuronal migration, as well as on develop-
ment of excitatory and inhibitory synapses. In this sense, GABA-related genes could have been 
placed in both the neurodevelopmental group of candidate genes too. We found  GABRB3 was 
signiﬁ cantly associated with empathy (EQ) in the typical sample, thus corroborating a role of 
this locus (15q11-q13) in autism (Ashley-Koch, Mei, Jaworski, Ma, Ritchie, Menold, et al., 2006; 
Buxbaum, Silverman, Smith, Greenberg, Kilfarski, Reichart, et al., 2002). Gabrb3 knockout mice 
have been shown to demonstrate low social and exploratory behaviour as well as smaller cerebel-
lar vermal volumes, pointing to a potential animal model for autism (DeLorey, Sahbaie, Hashemi, 
Homanics, & Clark, 2007). 
 Another signiﬁ cant association in this functional group of genes was the Wolframin ( WFS1 ) 
gene. Wolframin is strongly expressed in the amygdala, especially in response to fear-inducing 

ENDOPHENOTYPES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
335
stimuli (Koks, Planken, Luuk, & Vasar, 2002). The amygdala is one of the key brain regions where 
functional and structural abnormalities have been consistently found in ASC (Baron-Cohen, Ring, 
Bullmore, Wheelwright, S., Ashwin, & Williams, 2000). 2 SNPs in  WFS1 showed a strong associa-
tion with both AQ and EQ. One of these, rs734312, is a non-synonymous coding SNP and belongs 
to a haplotype that shows an increased risk for affective disorders (Koido, K õ ks, Nikopensius, 
Maron, Altm ä e, Heinaste, et al., 2004). Finally, three genes from the oxytocin-vasopressin system 
( OXTR ,  OXT , and  AVPR1B ) were found to be nominally associated with ASC and/or with AQ 
and EQ. These genes have suggestive links with autism (Insel et al., 1999; Jacob, Brune, Carter, 
Leventhal, Lord, & Cook Jr, et al., 2007; Tops et al., 2011; Wermter, Kamp-Becker, Hesse, Schulte-
K ö rne, Strauch, K., & Remschmidt, 2009; Wu Jia, Ruan, Liu, Guo, Shuang, et al., 2005; Wu et al., 
2012) and with social behaviour in animal models. Of these,  OXT  survived a FWER correction in 
Experiment 2. Oxytocin is of particular interest, given the recent reports of oxytocin levels being 
low in autism, and treatment effects of both intranasal and intravenous administration of oxytocin 
(Hollander, Novotny, Hanratty, Yaffe, DeCaria, Aronowitz, et al., 2003). Oxytocin levels are also 
correlated with empathy and prosocial measures, such as the Eyes Test (Domes, Heinrichs, Michel, 
Berger, & Herpertz, 2007) and trust in neuroeconomics (Kosfeld, Heinrichs, Zak, Fischbacher, & 
Fehr, 2005). This provides partial support for the involvement of the oxytocin-vasopressin system 
in autistic traits. Together, these results support the idea that genes implicated in social and emo-
tional responsivity contribute to individual differences in traits related to ASC. 
 In summary, in the two studies described above, we identiﬁ ed 9 candidate genes, some of which 
are associated with autistic traits in the general population and/or AS. These genes fall into the 
three functional categories related to sex-steroid synthesis and metabolism, neural development 
and connectivity, and social-emotional responsivity, providing some support for three theories 
of autism. It is essential that these are replicated in independent samples, and validated through 
molecular genetic techniques such as gene expression measurement. Importantly, these associa-
tions should be validated against other relevant endophenotypes. 
 Endophenotypes and future directions  
 Endophenotypes are deﬁ ned as measurable intermediate phenotypes that are generally closer to 
the action of the gene and thus exhibit higher genetic signal-to-noise ratios (Gottesman & Gould, 
2003). A range of endophenotypic measures have been suggested for empathy and autistic behav-
iour, and social cognition and emotion processing ranks highly among these (Losh & Piven, 2007). 
In our study described above, we did a preliminary test of two such endophenotypic measures (the 
“Reading the Mind in the Eyes” Test, and the Embedded Figures Test) for cross-validation of our 
trait association results, in a small subset of the general population sample. This found a nominal 
association in seven genes with these measures that overlapped with the signiﬁ cantly associated 
genes in either/both of the two main experiments (Chakrabarti et al., 2009). While this analysis 
was preliminary, and under-powered, this provides a framework for future studies. Additional 
endophenotypes that have been put forward to study social behaviour in humans involve the use 
of neuroimaging Hariri, Drabant, Munoz, Kolachana, Mattay, Egan, et al. (2005); Hariri, Mattay, 
Tessitore, Kolachana, Fera, Goldman, et al. (2002), showed that variability in serotonin transporter 
( SLC6A4 ) genotype modulates amygdala response to fear faces. Using the same paradigm Meyer-
Lindenberg, Kolachana, Gold, Olsh, Nicodemus, Mattay, et al. (2008) showed that polymorphisms 
in the arginine vasopressin receptor 1A ( AVPR1A ) gene (previously linked to autism) are related 
to the amygdala response to faces displaying fear or anger. Work from our and other groups has 
shown that variations in the cannabinoid receptor ( CNR1 ) gene modulate striatal response to 

UNDERSTANDING THE GENETICS OF EMPATHY AND THE AUTISTIC SPECTRUM
336
happy faces (Chakrabarti & Baron- Cohen, 2006; Domschke, Dannlowski, Ohrmann, Lawford, 
Bauer, Kugel, et al., 2008). While the studies above rely on a more bottom-up response to emotion 
(since the task involves passive viewing of facial expressions, or doing a matching task), a recent 
imaging genetic study reported the genetic variation underlying cognitive component of empathy 
(Walter, Schnell, Erk, Arnold, Kirsch, Esslinger, et al., 2010). Future research should further char-
acterize such endophenotypes in ASC in combination with ideal candidate genes. In this regard, a 
range of robust endophenotypes pertaining to autism and empathy have been put forward, both 
at the behavioural and neural levels (Lombardo, Baron-Cohen, Belmonte, & Chakrabarti, 2011; 
Losh, Adolphs, Poe, Couture, Penn, Baranek, et al., 2009). 
 The emerging picture that dimensional endophenotypes, rather than categorical diagnostic 
entities are useful targets for future genetic research is also reﬂ ected by the recent move to incor-
porate more dimensional measures in the new version of the DSM (DSM-5). This approach raises 
the issue of speciﬁ city, i.e. the endophenotypes may not be speciﬁ c to certain categorical diagnos-
tic entities. There is considerable evidence to suggest similarities in the social cognitive impair-
ments between ASC and schizophrenia (Couture, Penn, Losh, Adolphs, Hurley, & Piven, 2010; 
King & Lord, 2011). Indeed, the polymorphism associated with differences in neural response in a 
ToM task was ﬁ rst reported from a GWA study of schizophrenia (Walter et al., 2010). The lack of 
disease-speciﬁ city of endophenotypic measures is mirrored by a similar overlap across diagnostic 
entities seen in genetic studies (Burbach & van der Zwaag, 2009; Guilmatre, Dubourg, Mosca, 
Legallic, Goldenberg, Drouin-Garraud, et al., 2009). The proposed future direction is therefore one 
where speciﬁ c genetic loci will be characterized with their role in well-deﬁ ned endophenotypes. 
One such genetic loci that has been well characterized is 7q11. Deletions in this locus are associated 
with Williams-Beuren Syndrome (where individuals are highly social), and duplications have been 
associated with ASC (Sanders, Hus, Luo, Murtha, Moreno-De-Luca, Chu, et al., 2011). 
 In closing, in this chapter we have presented a brief overview of genetics approaches to study 
empathy and autism. We have then discussed two recent genetic association experiments from 
our lab, one on autistic traits and empathy, and one on Asperger Syndrome. Finally, we have sug-
gested potential avenues for future research, particularly using cross-validation through relevant 
endophenotypes. This combination of a functional hypothesis-driven search for candidate genes, 
alongside the development of ﬁ ne-tuned quantitative phenotypic measures of brain and behav-
iour, will slowly bridge the gap between genes to cognition in the study of empathy and autism. 
 Acknowledgements 
 Parts of this chapter have been reprinted from (Chakrabarti and Baron-Cohen, 2011) and 
(Chakrabarti et al., 2009). We are grateful to Michael Lombardo, Ian Craig, Frank Dudbridge, and 
Lindsey Kent for valuable discussions. 
 References 
 Abrahams, B. S., & Geschwind, D. H. (2008).  Advances in autism genetics: on the threshold of a new 
neurobiology.  Nature Reviews Genetics  9 (5):  341–55 . 
 AGPC. (2007).  Mapping autism risk loci using genetic linkage and chromosomal rearrangements.  Nature 
Genetics  39 :  319–28 . 
 APA. (1987).  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , 3rd edn.  Washington DC :  American 
Psychiatric Association . 
 Arking, D. E., Cutler, D. J., Brune, C. W., Teslovich, T. M., West, K., Ikeda, M., Rea, A., et al. (2008).  A 
common genetic variant in the neurexin superfamily member CNTNAP2 increases familial risk of 
autism.  American Journal of Human Genetics  82 (1):  160–4 . 

337
 Ashley-Koch, A., Mei, H., Jaworski, J., Ma, D., Ritchie, M., Menold, M., et al. (2006).  An analysis 
paradigm for investigating multi-locus eff ects in complex disease: Examination of three GABA A 
receptor subunit genes on 15q11-q13 as risk factors for autistic disorder.  Annals of Human Genetics  70 : 
 281–92 . 
 Auyeung, B., Baron- Cohen, S., Chapman, E., Knickmeyer, R., Taylor, K., & Hackett, G. (2006).  Foetal 
testosterone and the child systemizing quotient.  European Journal of Endocrinology  155 (1):  123–30 . 
 Auyeung, B., Baron-Cohen, S., Ashwin, E., Knickmeyer, R., Taylor, K., Hackett, G., & Hines, M. (2009). 
 Fetal testosterone predicts sexually diff erentiated childhood behavior in girls and in boys.  Psychological 
Science  20 (2):  144 . 
 Auyeung, B., Taylor, K., Hackett, G., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2010).  Foetal testosterone and autistic traits in 18 
to 24-month-old children ,  Molecular Autism  1 :  11 . 
 Bailey, A., Le Couteur, A., Gottesman, I., Bolton, P., Simmonoff , E., Yuzda, E., & Rutter, M. (1995).  Autism 
as a strongly genetic disorder: evidence from a British twin study.   Psychological Medicine  25 :  63–77 . 
 Barnea-Goraly, N., Kwon, H., Menon, V., Eliez, S., Lotspeich, L., & Reiss, A. (2004).  White matter 
structure in autism: preliminary evidence from diff usion tensor imaging.  Biological Psychiatry  55 (3): 
 323–6 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S. (2011).  Zero Degrees of Empathy: A New Th eory of Human Cruelty . London:  Allen Lane . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Knickmeyer, R., & Belmonte, M. (2005).  Sex Diff erences in the Brain: Implications for 
Explaining Autism.  Science  310 (5749):  819–23 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Ring, H., Bullmore, E., Wheelwright, S., Ashwin, C., & Williams, S. (2000).  Th e 
amygdala theory of autism.  Neuroscience and Behavioural Reviews  24 :  355–64 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., & Wheelwright, S. (2004).  Th e empathy quotient (EQ) .  An investigation of adults with 
Asperger Syndrome or high functioning autism, and normal sex diff erences .  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders  34 :  163–75 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Skinner, R., Martin, J., & Clubley, E. (2001).  Th e autism spectrum 
quotient (AQ): Evidence from Asperger Syndrome/high functioning autism, males and females, 
scientists and mathematicians.  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  31 :  5–17 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., & Hammer, J. (1997). Parents of children with Asperger syndrome: What is the cognitive 
phenotype?  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  9 (4): 548–54. 
 Belmonte, M., Cook Jnr, E., Anderson, G., Rubenstein, J., Greenough, W., Beckel-Mitchener, A., et al. 
(2004).  Autism as a disorder of neural information processing: directions for research and targets for 
therapy.  Molecular Psychiatry  9 :  646–63 . 
 Bishop, D., Maybery, M., Maley, A., Wong, D., Hill, W., & Hallmayer, J. (2004).  Using self-report to 
identify the broad phenotype in parents of children with autistic spectrum disorders: a study using the 
Autism-Spectrum Quotient.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  45 (8):  1431–6 . 
 Bourgeron, T. (2009).  A synaptic trek to autism.  Current Opinion in Neurobiology  19 (2):  231–4 . 
 Bowlby, J. (1969).  Attachment .  London :  Hogarth Press . 
 Burbach, J. P. H., & van der Zwaag, B. (2009).  Contact in the genetics of autism and schizophrenia.  Trends 
in Neurosciences  32 (2):  69–72 . 
 Buxbaum, J., Silverman, J., Smith, C., Greenberg, D., Kilfarski, M., Reichart, J., Cook Jr, E., et al. (2002). 
 Association between a GABRB3 polymorphism and autism.  Molecular Psychiatry  7 :  311–16 . 
 Campbell, D. B., Warren, D., Sutcliff e, J. S., Lee, E. B., & Levitt, P. (2010).  Association of MET with social 
and communication phenotypes in individuals with autism spectrum disorder.  American Journal of 
Medical Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics  153 (2):  438–46 . 
 Chakrabarti, B., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2011).  Genes related to autistic traits and empathy.  From DNA to 
Social Cognition  19–36 . 
 Chakrabarti, B., & Baron- Cohen, S. (2006).  Empathizing: Neurocognitive developmental mechanisms 
and individual diff erences.  Progress in Brain Research ,  156 (Special issue on “Understanding Emotions”), 
 406–17 . 
REFERENCES

UNDERSTANDING THE GENETICS OF EMPATHY AND THE AUTISTIC SPECTRUM
338
 Chakrabarti, B., Dudbridge, F., Kent, L., Wheelwright, S., Hill-Cawthorne, G., Allison, C., et al. (2009). 
 Genes related to sex steroids, neural growth, and social-emotional behavior are associated with autistic 
traits, empathy, and Asperger syndrome.  Autism Research  2 (3):  157–77 . 
 Chakrabarti, B., Kent, L., Suckling, J., Bullmore, E., & Baron- Cohen, S. (2006).  Variations in human 
cannabinoid receptor ( CNR1 ) gene modulate striatal response to happy faces.  European Journal of 
Neuroscience  23 (7):  1944–8 . 
 Chapman, E., Baron- Cohen, S., Auyeung, B., Knickmeyer, R., Hackett, G., & Taylor, K. (2006).  Foetal 
testosterone and empathy: evidence from the empathy quotient (EQ) and the “Reading the mind in the 
Eyes Test.”  Social Neuroscience  1 :  135–48 . 
 Collins, F., Guyer, M., & Chakravarti, A. (1997).  Variations on a Th eme: Cataloging Human DNA 
Sequence Variation.  Science  278 (5343):  1580–1 . 
 Conciatori, M., Stodgell, C., Hyman, S., O’Bara, M., Militerni, R., Bravaccio, C., et al. (2004).  Association 
between the HOXA1 A218G polymorphism and increased head circumference in patients with autism. 
 Biological Psychiatry  55 (4):  413–19 . 
 Constantino, J., Przybeck, T., Friesen, D., & Todd, R. (2000).  Reciprocal social behaviour in children with 
and without pervasive developmental disorders.  Developmental and Behavioural Pediatrics  1 :  2–11 . 
 Constantino, J., & Todd, R. (2000).  Genetic structure of reciprocal social behaviour.  American Journal of 
Psychiatry  157 ,  2043–5 . 
 Constantino, J., & Todd, R. (2005).  Intergenerational transmission of subthreshold autistic traits in the 
general population.  Biological Psychiatry  57 (6):  655–60 . 
 Corvin, A., Craddock, N., & Sullivan, P. F. (2010).  Genome-wide association studies: a primer . 
 Psychological Medicine  40 :  1063–77 . 
 Courchesne, E., Campbell, K., & Solso, S. (2011).  Brain growth across the life span in autism: age-specifi c 
changes in anatomical pathology.  Brain Research  1380 :  138–45 . 
 Courchesne, E., Pierce, K., Schumann, C. M., Redcay, E., Buckwalter, J. A., Kennedy, D. P., et al. (2007). 
 Mapping early brain development in autism.  Neuron  56 (2):  399–413 . 
 Couture, S. M., Penn, D. L., Losh, M., Adolphs, R., Hurley, R., & Piven, J. (2010).  Comparison of 
social cognitive functioning in schizophrenia and high functioning autism: more convergence than 
divergence.  Psychological Medicine  40 (04):  569–79 . 
 Crespi, B., & Badcock, C. (2008).  Psychosis and autism as diametrical disorders of the social brain. 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences  31 (03):  241–61 . 
 Da Silva, J. S., Hasegawa, T., Miyagi, T., Dotti, C. G., & Abad-Rodriguez, J. (2005).  Asymmetric membrane 
ganglioside sialidase activity specifi es axonal fate.  Nature neuroscience ,  8 (5):  606–15 . 
 Davis, M., Luce, C., & Kraus, S. (1994).  Th e heritability of characteristics associated with dispositional 
empathy.  Journal of Personality  62 (3):  369–91 . 
 Dawson, G., Carver, L., Meltzoff , A., Panagiotides, H., McPartland, J., & Webb, S. (2002).  Neural 
correlates of face and object recognition in young children with autism spectrum disorder, 
developmental delay and typical development.  Child Development  73 :  700–17 . 
 DeLorey, T., Sahbaie, P., Hashemi, E., Homanics, G., & Clark, J. (2007).  Gabrb3 gene defi cient mice 
exhibit impaired social and exploratory behaviors, defi cits in non-selective attention and hypoplasia of 
cerebellar vermal lobules: A potential model of autism spectrum disorder.  Behavioural Brain Research 
187(2): 207–20 . 
 Domes, G., Heinrichs, M., Michel, A., Berger, C., & Herpertz, S. C. (2007).  Oxytocin improves” 
mind-reading” in humans.  Biological Psychiatry  61 (6):  731 . 
 Domschke, K., Dannlowski, U., Ohrmann, P., Lawford, B., Bauer, J., Kugel, H., et al. (2008).  Cannabinoid 
receptor 1 ( CNR1 ) gene: impact on antidepressant treatment response and emotion processing in major 
depression.  European Neuropsychopharmacology  18 (10):  751–9 . 
 Dudbridge, F. (2008).  Likelihood-based association analysis for nuclear families and unrelated subjects with 
missing genotype data.  Human Heredity  66 (2):  87–98 . 

339
 Ebstein, R. P., Israel, S., Chew, S. H., Zhong, S., & Knafo, A. (2010).  Genetics of Human Social Behavior. 
 Neuron  65 (6):  831–44 . 
 File, S. E., & Seth, P. (2003).  A review of 25 years of the social interaction test.  European Journal of 
Pharmacology  463 (1–3),  35–53 . 
 Folstein, S., & Rutter, M. (1977).  Infantile autism: A genetic study of 21 twin pairs.  Journal of Child 
Psycholology and Psychiatry  18 :  297–321 . 
 Glessner, J. T., Wang, K., Cai, G., Korvatska, O., Kim, C. E., Wood, S., et al. (2009).  Autism genome-wide 
copy number variation reveals ubiquitin and neuronal genes.  Nature  459 (7246):  569–73 . 
 Good, C., Lawrence, K., Simon-Th omas, N., Price, C., Ashburner, J., Friston, K., et al. (2003). 
 Dosage-sensitive X-linked locus infl uences the development of amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex, and 
fear recognition in humans.  Brain  126 ,  1–16 . 
 Gottesman, I. I., & Gould, T. D. (2003).  Th e endophenotype concept in psychiatry: etymology and strategic 
intentions.  American Journal of Psychiatry  160 (4):  636 . 
 Grimsby, J., Toth, M., Chen, K., Kumazawa, T., Klaidman, L., Adams, J., et al. (1997).  Increased stress 
response and bold beta- phenylethylamine in MAOB- defi cient mice.  Nature Genetics  17 :  206–10 . 
 Guilmatre, A., Dubourg, C., Mosca, A. L., Legallic, S., Goldenberg, A., Drouin-Garraud, V., et al. (2009). 
 Recurrent rearrangements in synaptic and neurodevelopmental genes and shared biologic pathways in 
schizophrenia, autism, and mental retardation.  Archives of General Psychiatry  66 (9):  947–56 . 
 Happ é , F., Ronald, A., & Plomin, R. (2006).  Time to give up on a single explanation for autism.  Nature 
Neuroscience  9 (10):  1218–20 . 
 Hariri, A., Drabant, E., Munoz, K., Kolachana, B., Mattay, V., Egan, M., et al. (2005).  A susceptibility gene 
for aff ective disorders and the response of the human amygdala.  Archives of General Psychiatry  62 (2): 
 146–52 . 
 Hariri, A., Mattay, V., Tessitore, A., Kolachana, B., Fera, F., Goldman, D., et al. (2002).  Serotonin 
transporter genetic variation and the response of the human amygdala.  Science  297 :  400–3 . 
 Hoekstra, R., Bartels, M., Verweij, C., & Boomsma, D. (2007).  Heritability of Autistic traits in the general 
population.  Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine  161 :  372–7 . 
 Hollander, E., Novotny, S., Hanratty, M., Yaff e, R., DeCaria, C., Aronowitz, B., & Mosovich, S. (2003). 
 Oxytocin infusion reduces repetitive behaviors in adults with autistic and Asperger’s disorders. 
 Neuropsychopharmacology  28 (1):  193–8 . 
 Holt, R., & Monaco, A. P. (2011).  Links between genetics and pathophysiology in the autism spectrum 
disorders.  EMBO Molecular Medicine  3 (8):  438–50 . 
 Hughes, C., Jaff ee, S. R., Happ é , F., Taylor, A., Caspi, A., & Moffi  tt, T. E. (2005). Origins of individual 
diff erences in theory of mind: From nature to nurture?  Child Development  76 (2): 356–70. 
 ICD-10. (1994).  International Classifi cation of Diseases, Vol. 10.  Geneva :  World Health Organization . 
 Ingudomnukul, E., Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., & Knickmeyer, R. (2007).  Elevated rates of 
testosterone-related disorders in women with autism spectrum conditions.  Hormones and Behavior 
 51 (5):  597–604 . 
 Insel, T., O’Brien, D., & Leckman, J. (1999).  Oxytocin, vasopressin, and autism: is there a connection? 
 Biological Psychiatry  45 (2):  145–57 . 
 Jacob, S., Brune, C. W., Carter, C. S., Leventhal, B. L., Lord, C., & Cook Jr, E. H. (2007).  Association of the 
oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) in Caucasian children and adolescents with autism.  Neuroscience Letters 
 417 (1),  6–9 . 
 Jacquemont, M. L., Sanlaville, D., Redon, R., Raoul, O., Cormier-Daire, V., Lyonnet, S., et al. (2006). 
 Array-based comparative genomic hybridization identifi es high frequency of cryptic chromosomal 
rearrangements in patients with syndromic autism spectrum disorders.  Journal of Medical Genetics 
 43 (11):  843–9 . 
 Jamain, S., Quach, H., Betancur, C., R å stam, M., Colineaux, C., Gillberg, I. C., et al. (2003).  Mutations of the 
X-linked genes encoding neuroligins NLGN3 and NLGN4 are associated with autism.  Nature  34 ,  27–9 . 
REFERENCES

UNDERSTANDING THE GENETICS OF EMPATHY AND THE AUTISTIC SPECTRUM
340
 Jones, A. P., Happ é , F. G. E., Gilbert, F., Burnett, S., & Viding, E. (2010).  Feeling, caring, knowing: diff erent 
types of empathy defi cit in boys with psychopathic tendencies and autism spectrum disorder.  Journal of 
Child Psychology and Psychiatry  51 (11):  1188–97 . 
 Just, M., Cherkassky, V., Keller, T., & Minshew, N. (2004).  Cortical activation and synchronization during 
sentence comprehension in high-functioning autism: evidence of underconnectivity.  Brain  127 :  1811–21 . 
 Keller, T. A., Kana, R. K., & Just, M. A. (2007).  A developmental study of the structural integrity of white 
matter in autism.  Neuroreport ,  18 (1):  23–28 . 
 King, B. H., & Lord, C. (2011).  Is schizophrenia on the autism spectrum?  Brain research ,  1380 ,  34–41 . 
 Knafo, A., Zahn-Waxler, C., Van Hulle, C., Robinson, J. L., & Rhee, S. H. (2008). Th e developmental 
origins of a disposition toward empathy: Genetic and environmental contributions.  Emotion , 
 8 (6):737–52. 
 Knickmeyer, R., Baron-Cohen, S., Fane, B. A., Wheelwright, S., Mathews, G. A., Conway, G. S., et al. 
(2006).  Androgens and autistic traits: A study of individuals with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 
 Hormones and Behavior  50 (1):  148–53 . 
 Knickmeyer, R., Baron-Cohen, S., Raggatt, P., & Taylor, K. (2005).  Foetal testosterone, social cognition, 
and restricted interests in children.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  46 (2):  198–210 . 
 Koido, K., K õ ks, S., Nikopensius, T., Maron, E., Altm ä e, S., Heinaste, E., et al. (2004).  Polymorphisms in 
wolframin ( WFS1 ) gene are possibly related to increased risk for mood disorders.  International Journal 
of Neuropsychopharmacology  8 (2):  235–44 . 
 Koks, S., Planken, A., Luuk, H., & Vasar, E. (2002).  Cat odour exposure increases the expression of 
wolframin gene in the amygdaloid area of rat.  Neuroscience Letters  322 (2):  116–20 . 
 Kosfeld, M., Heinrichs, M., Zak, P., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. (2005).  Oxytocin increases trust in humans. 
 Nature  435 (2):  673–6 . 
 Kudwa, A. E., Bodo, C., Gustafsson, J., & Rissman, E. F. (2005).  A previously uncharacterized role for 
estrogen receptor: Defeminization of male brain and behavior.  Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences,  USA  102 (12):  4608 . 
 Kuribayashi, I., Nomoto, S., Massa, G., Oostdijk, W., Wit, J., Wolff enbuttel, B., et al. (2005).  Steroid 
11-beta-hydroxylase defi ciency caused by compound heterozygosity for a novel mutation, p G314R, in one 
CYP11B1 allele, and a chimeric CYP11B2/CYP11B1 in the other allele.   Hormone Research  63 :  284–93 . 
 LaSalle, J. M., & Yasui, D. H. (2009).  Evolving role of MeCP2 in Rett syndrome and autism.  Epigenomics 
 1 (1):  119–30 . 
 Loehlin, J., & Nichols, R. (1976).  Heredity, Environment and Personality .  Austin :  University of Texas Press . 
 Lombardo, M. V., Baron-Cohen, S., Belmonte, M. K., & Chakrabarti, B. (2011).  Neural endophenotypes 
for social behaviour in autism spectrum conditions. In: J. Decety & J. T. Cacioppo (Eds),  Oxford 
Handbook of Social Neuroscience . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Lord, C., Rutter, M., Goode, S., Heemsbergen, J., Jordan, H., Mawhood, L., et al. (1989).  Autism 
diagnostic observation schedule: A standard observation of communicative and social behaviour. 
 Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  19 :  185–212 . 
 Losh, M., & Piven, J. (2007).  Social-cognition and the broad autism phenotype: identifying genetically 
meaningful phenotypes.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  48 (1):  105–12 . 
 Losh, M., Sullivan, P. F., Trembath, D., & Piven, J. (2008).  Current developments in the genetics of autism: 
from phenome to genome.  Journal of Neuropathology and Experimental Neurology  67 (9):  829–37 . 
 Losh, M., Adolphs, R., Poe, M. D., Couture, S., Penn, D., Baranek, G. T., et al. (2009).  Neuropsychological 
profi le of autism and the broad autism phenotype.  Archives of General Psychiatry  66 (5):  518–26 . 
 Lutchmaya, S., Baron-Cohen, S., & Raggatt, P. (2002).  Foetal testosterone and vocabulary size in 18- and 
24-month-old infants.  Infant Behavior and Development  24 (4):  418–24 . 
 Maltepe, E., Keith, B., Arsham, A., Brorson, J., & Simon, M. (2000).  Th e role of ARNT2 in tumor 
angiogenesis and the neural response to hypoxia.  Biochemistry and Biophysics Research Communication 
 273 (1):  231–8 . 

341
 Matthews, K., Batson, C., Horn, J., & Rosenman, R. (1981).  “Principles in his nature which interest him in 
the fortune of others …  ”: Th e heritability of empathic concern for others .  Journal of Personality  49 (3): 
 237–47 . 
 Mehrabian, A., & Epstein, N. (1972).  A measure of emotional empathy.  Journal of Personality  40 :  525–43 . 
 Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Kolachana, B., Gold, B., Olsh, A., Nicodemus, K. K., Mattay, V., et al. (2008). 
 Genetic variants in AVPR1A linked to autism predict amygdala activation and personality traits in 
healthy humans.  Molecular Psychiatry  14 (10):  968–75 . 
 Michaud, J., DeRossi, C., May, N., Holdener, B., & Fan, C. (2000).  ARNT2 acts as the dimerization partner 
of SIM1 for the development of the hypothalamus.  Mechanics of Development  90 (2):  253–61 . 
 Minshew, N. J., & Williams, D. L. (2007).  Th e new neurobiology of autism: Cortex, connectivity, and 
neuronal organization.   Archives of Neurology  64 (7):  945 . 
 Muscarella, L., Guarnieri, V., Sacco, R., Militerni, R., Bravaccio, C., Trillo, S., et al. (2007).  HOXA1 
gene variants infl uence head growth rates in humans.  American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B: 
Neuropsychiatric Genetics  144B (3):  388–90 . 
 Nagarajan, R. P., Patzel, K. A., Martin, M., Yasui, D. H., Swanberg, S. E., Hertz-Picciotto, I., et al. (2008). 
 MECP2 promoter methylation and X chromosome inactivation in autism.  Autism Research  1 (3): 
 169–78 . 
 Park, J. M., Lee, E. J., Ramakrishna, S., Cha, D. H., & Baek, K. H. (2008).  Association study for single 
nucleotide polymorphisms in the  CYP17A1 gene and polycystic ovary syndrome.  International Journal 
of Molecular Medicine  22 (2):  249 . 
 Pharoah, P. D., Tyrer, J., Dunning, A. M., Easton, D. F., & Ponder, B. A. (2007).  Association between 
common variation in 120 candidate genes and breast cancer risk.  PLoS Genet ics  3 (3):  e42 . 
 Pinto, D., Pagnamenta, A. T., Klei, L., Anney, R., Merico, D., Regan, R., et al. (2010).  Functional impact of 
global rare copy number variation in autism spectrum disorders.  Nature 466(7304): 368–72 . 
 Piven, J., Palmer, P., Jacobi, D., Childress, D., & Arndt, S. (1997).  Broader autism phenotype: evidence 
from a family history study of multiple-incidence autism families.  American Journal of Psychiatry  154 : 
 185–90 . 
 Preston, S. D., & De Waal, F. (2002). Empathy: Its ultimate and proximate bases.  Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences  25 (1): 1–20. 
 Purcell, S., Neale, B., Todd-Brown, K., Th omas, L., Ferreira, M. A. R., Bender, D., et al. (2007).  PLINK: 
a tool set for whole-genome association and population-based linkage analyses.  American Journal of 
Human Genetics  81 (3):  559–75 . 
 Robinson, E. B., Koenen, K. C., McCormick, M. C., Munir, K., Hallett, V., Happe, F., et al. (2011). 
 Evidence that autistic traits show the same etiology in the general population and at the quantitative 
extremes (5%, 2.5%, and 1%) .  Archives of General Psychiatry  68 (11):  1113–21 . 
 Rogers, J., Viding, E., Blair, R. J., Frith, U., & Happe, F. (2006).  Autism spectrum disorder and 
psychopathy: shared cognitive underpinnings or double hit?  Psychological Medicine  36 (12):  1789–8 . 
 Rushton, J., Fulker, D., Neale, M., Nias, D., & Eysenck, H. (1986).  Altruism and aggression: Th e heritability 
of individual diff erences.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  50 (6):  1192–8 . 
 Ruta, L., Ingudomnukul, E., Taylor, K., Chakrabarti, B., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2011).  Increased serum 
androstenedione in adults with autism spectrum conditions.  Psychoneuroendocrinology  36 :  1154–63 
 Sahyoun, C. P., Belliveau, J. W., & Mody, M. (2010).  White matter integrity and pictorial reasoning in 
high-functioning children with autism.  Brain and Cognition  73 (3):  180–8. 
 Sanders, S. J., Hus, V., Luo, R., Murtha, M. T., Moreno-De-Luca, D., Chu, S. H., et al. (2011).  Multiple 
recurrent de novo CNVs, including duplications of the 7q11 .  23 Williams syndrome region, are strongly 
associated with autism .  Neuron  70 (5):  863–85 . 
 Sebat, J., Lakshmi, B., Malhotra, D., Troge, J., Lese-Martin, C., Walsh, T., et al. (2007).  Strong association 
of   de novo  copy number mutations with autism.  Science  316 (5823):  445–9 . 
REFERENCES

UNDERSTANDING THE GENETICS OF EMPATHY AND THE AUTISTIC SPECTRUM
342
 Shih, P., Shen, M.,  Ö ttl, B., Keehn, B., Gaff rey, M. S., & M ü ller, R. A. (2010).  Atypical network connectivity 
for imitation in autism spectrum disorder.  Neuropsychologia 48(10): 2931–9 . 
 Singer, T., & Lamm, C. (2009).  Th e social neuroscience of empathy.  Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences ,  1156 (Th e Year in Cognitive Neuroscience 2009),  81–96 . 
 Sofroniew, M., Howe, C., & Mobley, W. (2001).  Nerve growth factor signaling, neuroprotection, and neural 
repair.  Annual Review of Neuroscience  24 :  1217–81 . 
 Sundaram, S. K., Kumar, A., Makki, M. I., Behen, M. E., Chugani, H. T., & Chugani, D. C. (2008). 
 Diff usion tensor imaging of frontal lobe in autism spectrum disorder.  Cerebral Cortex  18 :  2659–65 . 
 Sung, Y., Dawson, G., Munson, J., Estes, A., Schellenberg, G., & Wijsman, E. (2005).  Genetic investigation 
of quantitative traits related to autism: Use of multivariate polygenic models with ascertainment 
adjustment.  American Journal of Human Genetics  76 (1):  68–81 . 
 Tops  , M., Van IJzendoorn, M. H., Riem, M. M., Boksem, M. A., & Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J. 
(2011). Oxytocin receptor gene associated with the effi  ciency of social auditory processing.  Frontiers in 
Psychiatry ,  2 . 
 Villalobos, M. E., Mizuno, A., Dahl, B. C., Kemmotsu, N., & M ü ller, R. A. (2005).  Reduced functional 
connectivity between V1 and inferior frontal cortex associated with visuomotor performance in autism. 
 NeuroImage  25 (3):  916–25 . 
 Wagner, G. C., Reuhl, K. R., Cheh, M., McRae, P., & Halladay, A. K. (2006).  A new neurobehavioral 
model of autism in mice: pre-and postnatal exposure to sodium valproate.  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders  36 (6):  779–93 . 
 Walter, H., Schnell, K., Erk, S., Arnold, C., Kirsch, P., Esslinger, C., et al. (2010).  Eff ects of a genome-wide 
supported psychosis risk variant on neural activation during a theory-of-mind task.  Molecular 
Psychiatry  16 (4):  462–70 . 
 Wang, K., Zhang, H., Ma, D., Bucan, M., Glessner, J. T., Abrahams, B. S., et al. (2009).  Common genetic 
variants on 5p14 .  1 associate with autism spectrum disorders .  Nature  459 (7246):  528–33 . 
 Wass, S. (2011).  Distortions and disconnections: disrupted brain connectivity in autism.  Brain and 
Cognition  75 (1):  18 . 
 Welchew, D. (2005).  Functional dysconnectivity of the medial temporal lobe in Asperger’s syndrome. 
 Biological Psychiatry  57 :  991–8 . 
 Wermter, A. K., Kamp-Becker, I., Hesse, P., Schulte-K ö rne, G., Strauch, K., & Remschmidt, H. (2009). 
 Evidence for the involvement of genetic variation in the oxytocin receptor gene ( OXTR ) in the 
etiology of autistic disorders on high-functioning level.  American Journal of Medical Genetics. Part B, 
Neuropsychiatric Genetics 153B(2): 629–639. 
 Wheelwright, S., Auyeung, B., Allison, C., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2010).  Defi ning the broader, medium and 
narrow autism phenotype among parents using the autism spectrum quotient (AQ ) .  Molecular Autism 
 1 :  10 . 
 Wilmer, J. B., Germine, L., Chabris, C. F., Chatterjee, G., Williams, M., Loken, E., … & Duchaine, B. 
(2010). Human face recognition ability is specifi c and highly heritable.  Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences  107 (11): 5238–41. 
 Wu, N., Li, Z., & Su, Y. (2012). Th e association between oxytocin receptor gene polymorphism (OXTR) and 
trait empathy.  Journal of aff ective disorders  138 (3): 468–72. 
 Wu, S., Jia, M., Ruan, Y., Liu, J., Guo, Y., Shuang, M., et al. (2005).  Positive association of the oxytocin 
receptor gene ( OXTR ) with autism in the Chinese Han population.  Biological Psychiatry  58 (1):  74–7 . 
 Ylisaukko-oja, T., Nieminen-von Wendt, T., Kempas, E., Sarenius, S., Varilo, T., von Wendt, L., et al. 
(2004).  Genome-wide scan for loci of Asperger syndrome.  Molecular Psychiatry  9 (2):  161–8 . 
 Zahn-Waxler, C., Radke-Yarrow, M., Wagner, E., & Chapman, M. (1992).  Development of concern for 
others.  Developmental Psychology  28 :  126–36 . 

 Section 3 
 Psychiatric, 
neurodevelopmental, and 
neurological disorders 

This page intentionally left blank 

 Chapter 19 
 Theory of mind in deaf children:  
 Illuminating the relative roles of 
language and executive functioning in 
the development of social cognition  
 Jennie   Pyers and   Peter A. de   Villiers 
 In the mid-1990s several independent programs of research and theorizing proposed that studies 
of deaf children could illuminate the role of language in children’s theory of mind (ToM) or more 
broadly in their social cognitive development. For example, in a theoretical paper about the rela-
tionship between language and thought, Jackendoff (1996) argued that language was necessary for 
making explicit judgments about the truth and falsity of propositions. In a footnote he noted that 
a colleague had recognized that an implication of his theory was that language-delayed deaf chil-
dren would have difﬁ culty with false-belief (FB) tasks. Just at that time, two independent research 
groups conﬁ rmed that hypothesis: one with late signing deaf children (Peterson & Siegal, 1995) 
and the other with orally-taught deaf children (Gale, de Villiers, de Villiers, & Pyers, 1996). Indeed, 
deaf children with hearing parents provide a strong test of the hypothesis that language plays a 
causal role in ToM development because these children experience varying degrees of language 
delay, but typically have a normal IQ and active sociability. 
 In this chapter we ﬁ rst discuss some crucial methodological challenges in studying ToM devel-
opment in deaf children. In the light of these methodological issues, we review the most compre-
hensive studies of deaf children’s explicit FB reasoning and how language and executive function 
(EF) ability does and does not affect this development. Since the initial ground-breaking research, 
the picture of deaf children’s ToM has gotten considerably more complex. The resulting picture 
conﬁ rms other arguments that many different components constitute a fully articulated “theory 
of mind” (e.g. Wellman & Liu, 2004), and each of these components may be differentially affected 
by language acquisition and/or executive functioning. We will show that some social cognitive 
understandings, such as those embodied in deceptive games with low verbal requirements, do 
not appear to be delayed by language-impairment resulting from deafness and are predicted by 
inhibitory control (an aspect of EF) not language skills. Others, such as reasoning about states of 
knowledge and ignorance and explicit judgments about false beliefs are considerably delayed and 
closely predicted by language, but not by deaf children’s EF. 
 Methodological issues 
 The existing literature points to signiﬁ cant limitations in FB reasoning in deaf children, but dif-
ferent studies report widely variable ages at which deaf children of hearing parents succeed on 
either high-verbal or low-verbal measures of FB understanding. Some of this variability may be 

THEORY OF MIND IN DEAF CHILDREN
346
attributed to the diversity of the deaf samples studied, and some may be attributed to methodo-
logical differences in the assessment of deaf children. 
 Key to what makes deaf children an ideal population in which to investigate the relative contri-
butions of language and EF to ToM development is the diversity of deaf children’s language expe-
rience. Typically two distinct populations of deaf children are included in studies of ToM. Deaf 
children born to deaf parents (DoD) function as a control population because, despite their deaf-
ness, they have native exposure to an accessible ﬁ rst language, a natural sign language. Thus, they 
have normal language acquisition, albeit in a different modality from typically-hearing (TH) chil-
dren. On the other hand, deaf children born to hearing parents (DoH) have greater variability in 
their language experience: some acquire a natural sign language, some learn only a manually coded 
version of the spoken language of their community (e.g. signed English), and others never learn 
to sign and are exposed only to oral language. Whatever their language experience, DoH children 
typically display some degree of language delay without any corresponding congenital cognitive 
deﬁ cit (Marschark, 1993). While the language delay makes DoH children the ideal population in 
which to test the effects of language on ToM, the diversity within this group can yield widely differ-
ent levels of performance. As such, studies that provide the strongest information about the effects 
of language on ToM in deaf children include detailed information about the children’s language 
experience as well as measures of their ability in their preferred language, signed or spoken. 
 Background variables, beyond language experience, can also impact children’s performance. 
Relative to the TH children who are commonly recruited from university-afﬁ liated preschools, 
deaf children in the United States come from more diverse socio-economic backgrounds (SES) 
and may have other physical and cognitive challenges. Several of these background variables that 
might impact children’s ToM performance are summarized in Table 19.1. Ideally, researchers 
should include large samples of deaf children in their studies to minimize the effect of these other 
variables. However, with only 0.64% of children in the United States diagnosed as hard-of-hearing 
or deaf (Mitchell, 2006), recruiting large samples of deaf children remains difﬁ cult and expen-
sive. Alternatively, researchers could address the variability in deaf samples either by ﬁ nding a 
TH sample that closely matches the deaf sample on SES and on general cognitive ability, or by 
statistically controlling for all of the background variables, a difﬁ cult task with the usual small 
sample sizes. 
 Approaches to deaf education also shape the characteristics of the deaf population to which 
researchers have the easiest access. The current educational practice in the United States and in 
many other Western countries is to work toward deaf children’s full integration into educational 
programs for typically-developing children. As soon as deaf children develop the social, cogni-
tive, and linguistic foundations deemed necessary to succeed, they are often placed in mainstream 
schools with TH children, and they learn with the support of sign language interpreters and/or 
additional ampliﬁ cation services. Deaf children can enter the mainstream in some cases as early as 
preschool or as late as high school. Some deaf children never transfer into integrated programs for 
a variety of reasons including parental choice or not having acquired the foundational skills that 
the program considers necessary for educational success. The practice of transferring deaf chil-
dren to integrated programs means that many older deaf children with age-appropriate language 
and cognitive abilities are no longer enrolled in programs that educate only deaf children. Thus 
studies that target only deaf children enrolled in special schools or programs for the deaf may not 
be representative of the most successful deaf children. This limitation is greater for studies that 
include children beyond the preschool and kindergarten years; deaf children start to move into 
the mainstream during the early elementary years, leaving behind classrooms where children who 

METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES
347
 Table 19.1  Background variables that must be accounted for to best interpret data from studies of 
deaf children 
SES
SES affects FB performance in typically developing children, with children 
from higher SES families outperforming children from less privileged 
backgrounds (Cicchetti, Rogosch, Maughan, Toth, & Bruce, 2003; Shatz, 
Diesendruck, Martinez-Beck, & Akar, 2003). When deaf and hearing children 
are matched for SES and non-verbal IQ, native signers perform equivalently 
or even better than TH children on FB tasks, and the reported difference 
between DoH and DoD children is much smaller (Courtin, 2000; Schick, de 
Villiers, de Villiers, & Hoffmeister, 2007).
Non-verbal 
intelligence
The inclusion of measures of non-verbal intelligence such as spatial working 
memory ensures that the children in the sample have a normal intellectual 
level and reduces the likelihood that any limitations observed in ToM 
performance are due to limitations in general intellectual ability.
Physical or cognitive 
impairments aside 
from deafness
Deafness sometimes is co-morbid with other physical or intellectual 
disabilities that may affect performance on FB tasks independently of 
language (Marschark, 1993). Such information gathered from the school 
helps guide researchers as to whether it is necessary to exclude these 
children from the ﬁ nal analyses.
General language 
ability
For deaf children exposed only to a spoken language, measures of spoken 
language development that have been validated with deaf children are 
appropriate. In the United States, such measures include the CELF and 
the Rhode Island Test of Language Structure (Engen & Engen, 1983). 
The assessment of sign language ability is much more difﬁ cult without 
standardized measures. Several researchers have developed their own 
language measures to compare sign language development in DoD and DoH 
children (e.g. Schick et al., 2007), but these measures do not always allow 
for cross-linguistic comparisons of signed and spoken language acquisition. 
Signed translations of spoken language measures are not valid measures of 
natural sign language acquisition.
Age of ﬁ rst language 
exposure/age of 
ampliﬁ cation
Age of ﬁ rst exposure to language impacts language ability (Mayberry & 
Lock, 2003). For non-native signing children, age of ﬁ rst language exposure 
is typically the age at which they entered a signing program; for oral deaf 
children it is usually the age when they receive their ﬁ rst ampliﬁ cation 
to enhance their auditory access to spoken language. In the United 
States, all children who are identiﬁ ed with a hearing-loss at birth receive 
state-supported early intervention that provides both auditory and language 
intervention. However, some families ﬁ rst choose an oral-only methodology, 
but later introduce their child to a sign language when the child struggles 
with acquiring a spoken language.
Language exposure 
in the home
For signing children, the degree to which hearing parents learn a sign 
language varies. Some parents become more ﬂ uent than others (Moeller 
& Schick, 2006; Vaccari & Marschark, 1997). In addition, some hearing 
parents of deaf children speak more than one spoken language in the 
home, reducing the amount of English heard by orally taught deaf 
children.

THEORY OF MIND IN DEAF CHILDREN
348
have other needs beyond deafness outnumber children who otherwise exhibit typical cognitive, 
physical, and social development. 
 Beyond careful consideration of the variability in deaf children’s backgrounds, researchers’ test-
ing methods can impact the children’s performance. First, most deaf children primarily acquire 
linguistic information through the visual channel by viewing signs or reading lips. Some tra-
ditional FB measures engage TH children’s ability to monitor visual and auditory information 
simultaneously: a TH child can readily look away from the experimenter to view action taking 
place in a dollhouse and still listen to the experimenter’s narrative. For deaf children the traditional 
tasks often require shifting their visual attention from the tester to the test stimuli. Modiﬁ ed ToM 
measures can reduce the demands made on deaf children’s visual attention. For example, some 
researchers have designed storybooks that can be propped up underneath the experimenter’s face 
and in front of which the experimenter can sign (Schick et al., 2007), an adaptation that many sign-
ing parents use with their deaf children (Lieberman, Hatrak, & Mayberry, 2011). 
 Many oral deaf children rely not only on lip-reading, but also on what auditory information they 
can glean using their ampliﬁ cation systems. In the educational setting, teachers use a variety of 
ampliﬁ cation systems that transmit their voices directly to the hearing aids of the children in their 
classrooms, ﬁ ltering out ambient background noise. Experimenters should also use such equip-
ment when working with deaf children with some usable audition to maximize spoken language 
access. Close work with educators and speech therapists can create a testing situation that elicits an 
oral deaf child’s best performance. 
 For signing children, deaf native signing experimenters elicit children’s best linguistic perform-
ance. When a deaf native signing experimenter is not available, deaf or hearing ﬂ uent signers can 
also serve as experimenters. Some evidence indicates that deaf signers perform differently in the 
presence of non-ﬂ uent hearing signers, modifying their signs to conform less to the grammatical 
rules of the sign language (Cokely, 1983; Lucas & Valli, 1989). The least optimal testing situation 
is one in which a hearing non-signer administers the test and the language of the experimenter 
is translated by a sign language interpreter, commonly the classroom interpreter used in the pro-
gram. In this situation, the child has to shift attention from the experimenter, to the interpreter, 
to the test stimuli. We know little about how well signing deaf children can shift their visual atten-
tion in such a situation (Corina & Singleton, 2009), and we know even less about how effectively 
young deaf children can use an interpreter. In studies with educational interpreters in the United 
States, 60% of the interpreters did not demonstrate advanced enough skills to ensure full access for 
children (Schick, Williams, & Kupermintz, 2006), and they were particularly deﬁ cient in conveying 
affect and prosody (Schick, 2004). More disturbingly, educational interpreters who are assigned 
to work with young preschool and elementary aged children typically scored the weakest on an 
assessment of educational interpretation (Schick et al., 2006). The very real limitations of using an 
interpreter to translate a non-signing experimenter’s instructions compromises the researcher’s 
ability to compare deaf children’s performance to that of TH children who are tested without the 
intervention of an interpreter. Low ToM performance in an interpreted situation may have more 
to do with task translation issues and controlling visual attention than true limitations in ToM 
reasoning. 
 Finally, to answer the question of whether language experience impacts ToM, researchers must 
work to ensure that any struggles observed in language-delayed deaf children are speciﬁ cally asso-
ciated with their general language ability, not just their ability to follow the instructions of the 
task. One way researchers have attempted to address this issue is to develop non-verbal or mini-
mally verbal tasks that do not require children to understand complex language to succeed. Some 

A COMPREHENSIVE STUDY OF FALSE BELIEF REASONING
349
minimally verbal measures are classic FB tasks presented as picture sequences that are adminis-
tered with minimal language support and that require children to make a forced choice between 
two or more alternatives (de Villiers & de Villiers, 2012; Pyers & Senghas, 2009, Schick et al., 2007; 
Woolfe, Want, & Siegel, 2002). Other minimally verbal tasks have been adapted from behavioral 
tasks used with non-human primates. These tasks engage the children in hide-and-seek games 
where they have to monitor the knowledge state of an informed or an uninformed confederate 
(Figueras-Costa & Harris, 2001; Schick et al., 2007).  
 A comprehensive study of false belief reasoning  
 Schick et al. (2007) most closely approximates the ideal design and control considerations laid out 
above. Unlike most of the previous work, Schick et al. tested a substantial sample of both orally 
taught ( n = 86) and ASL signing ( n  = 90) deaf children to provide sufﬁ cient statistical power. Most 
importantly, sufﬁ cient numbers of native-signing DoD 4-year-olds were studied so that their per-
formance on a variety of low and high verbal ToM tasks could be compared with that of TH chil-
dren matched on SES, age, and non-verbal IQ. In addition extensive assessment of the children’s 
language acquisition was carried out, including measures of expressive and receptive vocabulary; 
receptive general syntax; and comprehension of tensed false complement clauses with verbs of 
communication (following de Villiers & Pyers, 2002). The oral deaf children were assessed in spo-
ken English; the signing children (both the DoD and DoH groups) in American Sign Language 
(ASL). Special tests were developed to assess the ASL vocabulary, general syntax, and complement 
comprehension of the signing children. All of the testing was carried out by examiners with appro-
priate qualiﬁ cations for working with either signing or oral deaf children: the signing participants 
by deaf examiners with native-signing ASL skills; and the oral deaf children by testers familiar with 
the speech of deaf children. 
 Schick et al. (2007) report several primary ﬁ ndings. First, language-delayed deaf children with 
hearing parents, whether they were educated in oral or signing schools, performed signiﬁ cantly 
worse on both high and low-verbal FB tasks than both the native-signing deaf children and the 
TH controls, indicating that the language demands of the standard tasks were not the cause of 
their poorer performance. Second, deafness alone does not affect ToM performance because 
native-signing deaf children and the TH control children performed at an equivalent level to each 
other on both the standard verbal FB tasks and the low-verbal analogs of the ToM tasks. 
 Hierarchical linear regression analyses determined whether background variables (age, hearing 
loss, non-verbal IQ, and sequence memory) or various aspects of the children’s language skills 
were predictive of their reasoning about states of knowledge and FB. Importantly, the same pat-
tern of predictors was found for the oral deaf children (tested in spoken English) and the signing 
deaf children (tested in ASL). The performance of both the oral and the signing deaf children 
on the standard verbal FB tasks was independently predicted by age, receptive vocabulary, and 
the children’s processing of tensed false complement clauses with verbs of communication (as de 
Villiers & Pyers (2002) found for hearing preschoolers). Levels of hearing loss, non-verbal IQ, and 
sequence memory were not independent predictors of FB reasoning once age was controlled for. 
And comprehension of general syntactic features of spoken English or ASL was not as predictive 
of FB reasoning as vocabulary or processing of complement clauses. Passing the low verbal ToM 
tasks was independently predicted by age and processing of false complement clauses with com-
munication verbs. The other background and language measures were not signiﬁ cant independent 
predictors for either oral or signing deaf children.  

THEORY OF MIND IN DEAF CHILDREN
350
 Other studies of false belief reasoning in deaf children  
 Two other studies using low verbal FB reasoning tasks with native signing and late signing deaf 
children add important nuances to the ﬁ ndings of Schick et al. (2007), although they tested older 
samples of deaf children and did not provide the same degree of age and SES matching of deaf 
children with a control group of TH children. Woolfe et al. (2002) found that native signing chil-
dren performed signiﬁ cantly better than late signers on a low verbal “thought bubble” test of FB 
reasoning, even though the two groups of children did not differ in their raw scores on a standard-
ized test of British Sign Language comprehension. They argue that the native signing children’s 
early exposure to comprehensible conversation and language about their own and others’ mental 
states therefore is a more important factor in their ToM reasoning than their current knowledge of 
sign language syntax. Note, however, that the BSL assessment administered by Woolfe et al did not 
assess the children’s comprehension of false complement clauses. Schick et al. (2007) also found 
that general ASL syntax was not a signiﬁ cant predictor of ToM in signing deaf children; processing 
of false complements with verbs of communication was the strongest predictor. 
 Two studies by Meristo, Falkman, Hjelmquist, Tedoldi, Surian, & Siegal (2007) support the 
importance of ongoing comprehensible language and conversation in facilitating development 
of a well-articulated ToM. Native signers of Italian Sign Language (ISL) who were educated in 
bilingual educational environments that used ISL as well as spoken language outperformed native 
signers educated in oral-only instructional environments on the thought bubble FB reasoning task 
devised by Woolfe et al. (2002). There were no signiﬁ cant differences between native signers in oral 
environments, late signers in oral environments, and late signers in bilingual-bicultural schools. 
As was the case in the study by Woolfe et al., the ISL native signers in the two different educational 
environments performed at the same level on a test of their comprehension of ISL (an ISL transla-
tion of the test of comprehension of BSL). A second study of Estonian and Swedish deaf children 
showed similar ﬁ ndings when the children were tested on a battery of verbal FB and advanced ToM 
tasks. Again the authors stress the crucial role of ﬂ uent, comprehensible communication through-
out the day for optimizing the ToM development of deaf children, even when the children have 
input in a natural sign language at home. 
 Finally, research on Nicaraguan deaf signers by Pyers & Senghas (Pyers, 2005; Pyers & Senghas, 
2009) supports the notion that adult deaf individuals may acquire elaborate social interactional 
skills and function well in their communities, but unless they have acquired an appropriately com-
plex syntax in their sign language, they may still fail low-verbal, but explicit FB reasoning tasks. 
Adults who were members of the early cohorts in the evolution of Nicaraguan Sign Language (NSL) 
were much poorer at reasoning about characters’ FB (or emotions based on FB) than younger indi-
viduals from the later sign language cohorts. The older, early cohort adults also had less complex 
and formally elaborated syntax in their NSL. In addition, when called upon to describe what was 
happening in brief videotaped scenarios of mistakes and deceptive actions (see de Villiers and 
Pyers, 2001), the older cohort used more language involving physical causation and desire-based 
explanations, while the younger cohort produced more mental state explanations with belief and 
knowledge verbs and complement clauses (Pyers, 2005). 
 All of these studies argue that language plays a crucial role in the ToM development of deaf chil-
dren (and by extension, of TH children as well). Delays in the acquisition of mental state vocabulary, 
complex aspects of syntax that may enable representation of the content of false beliefs (de Villiers 
& de Villiers, 2009), and impoverished and less comprehensible communication may impair deaf 
children’s understanding of cognitive states, especially in situations where they are false. However, 
could the mechanism by which language delay has its impact on ToM understanding in deaf 

EF AND DEAFNESS
351
children not be directly on the underlying conceptual development, but on the executive function-
ing skills that are needed for the explicit reasoning tasks by which the children are assessed? 
 Executive functioning and false belief reasoning  
 An inﬂ uential account of children’s mastery of explicit reasoning about FB appeals to the devel-
opment or maturation of executive functioning (EF) skills between the ages of 3 and 5. EF skills 
include the planning, monitoring, and control of behavior. Three aspects of the EF system have 
received most of the attention in research and theory about ToM development. First, inhibitory 
control, especially in situations of conﬂ ict between competing tasks or alternative behaviors 
(Carlson & Moses, 2001; Carlson, Moses, & Breton, 2002). Secondly, ﬂ exible rule following where 
there are conditional rules or set shifting when there are well-learned competing rules that the 
child needs to ignore (Frye, Zelazo, & Palfrai, 1995). Thirdly, working memory, which enables the 
child to keep the competing alternatives in mind (Davis & Pratt, 1995; Keenan, 2000). 
 Logical analysis of the usual FB reasoning tasks suggests that succeeding at them requires each 
of these three skills. In unseen location change tasks the child has to remember where the desired 
object was before and where it has been moved to and resist the lure of the current location of the 
object (reality) in order to respond correctly in terms of the false belief of the relevant character. 
Similarly, in the unexpected contents task the child is explicitly asked to remember what they 
thought was in the box before they looked inside, and therefore, they must inhibit the tendency to 
respond with what they have now seen has been substituted for the box’s usual contents. Several 
studies of TH children have reported signiﬁ cant correlations between one or more of these fea-
tures of EF and ToM development, even when age and verbal IQ are controlled for (Carlson & 
Moses, 2001; Carlson, Moses, & Breton, 2002; Frye et al., 1995; Davis & Pratt, 1995). 
 EF and deafness  
 Several studies investigating EF and ToM in deaf children stand in contrast to the ﬁ ndings with 
TH children, and report that the inhibitory control and set shifting skills of deaf children do not 
seem to be closely related to their explicit reasoning about FB in verbal or low-verbal tasks. Woolfe 
et al. (2002) tested age-matched native signers and late signers in a version of the Wisconsin 
Dimensional Card Sort and found that although the native signers were signiﬁ cantly better than 
the late signers on a low-verbal FB reasoning task, there was no difference between the two groups 
on the set-shifting task. Similarly, Meristo & Hjelmquist (2009) tested three groups of deaf stu-
dents matched for age and non-verbal IQ: bilingually-instructed native signers, orally-instructed 
native signers, and bilingually-instructed late signers. The children were given a battery of verbal 
ToM and executive function tasks (administered in sign language by native signing research assist-
ants). Although the native-signing deaf children from the bilingual educational settings were sig-
niﬁ cantly better than the other deaf groups on the ToM reasoning tasks, there were no signiﬁ cant 
differences between the groups in verbal working memory (backwards digit span), set shifting 
(on the Wisconsin Card Sorting test) or conﬂ ict inhibitory control. Furthermore, when age and 
non-verbal IQ were partialled out, only verbal working memory was signiﬁ cantly correlated with 
FB reasoning on the standard verbal tasks. There was no correlation between conﬂ ict inhibition or 
set shifting and FB reasoning for the deaf children. 
 de Villiers & de Villiers (2012) studied 45 oral deaf children and 45 TH controls on a battery 
of EF, language, deception, and FB reasoning tasks. The younger of the deaf children (average 
age 5;3, range 4–6,  n  = 29) were closely matched with 18 of the hearing children (average age 

THEORY OF MIND IN DEAF CHILDREN
352
5;2, range 4–6) in age and non-verbal sequence memory. There were no signiﬁ cant differences 
between these two matched groups of children on widely used EF tasks that included a two meas-
ures of conﬂ ict inhibitory control (the Day-Night Stroop test and the Knock-Tap hand game) or 
on a dimensional card sort set shifting task. However, the deaf children were signiﬁ cantly worse 
than the hearing children on both the standard verbal FB unseen object displacement and unex-
pected contents tasks and on two low verbal “thought bubble” tests of FB understanding based on 
the procedures used by Woolfe et al. (2002) and Schick et al. (2007). Furthermore, the deaf chil-
dren were signiﬁ cantly impaired relative to the TH children in their mastery of general English 
sentence syntax and their memory for false complement clauses with verbs of communication 
(de Villiers & Pyers, 2002; Schick et al., 2007). For both the deaf and the TH groups, performance 
on the FB tasks was independently predicted by the children’s language and especially by their 
processing of false complement clauses, even when age and sequence memory were controlled 
for. None of the EF measures predicted FB reasoning in the deaf children, and they were weaker 
predictors than the language measures were for the hearing children. 
 Taken together, these studies with deaf children show that while EF may be necessary for success 
at explicit FB reasoning tasks, these skills are not the proximal predictors of deaf children’s level 
of performance on those tasks (see also de Villiers, 2005). The strongest predictors seem to be the 
children’s language skills. 
 Interestingly, on two low verbal deception games (the sticker-in-the-hand game and a deceptive 
pointing game) there were no signiﬁ cant differences between the deaf children and the hearing 
children in level of performance (de Villiers & de Villiers, 2012). The children’s deception scores 
were signiﬁ cantly predicted by their sequence memory and their inhibitory control, not by their 
language. Thus, there seems to be a dissociation of deception and explicit FB reasoning tasks for 
deaf children: the deaf children were on a par with their hearing peers on deception games, but 
showed signiﬁ cant delays in explicit FB reasoning even when the language demands of the tasks 
were minimized. de Villiers & de Villiers (2012) suggested that deception at this level could be han-
dled by behavior rules without explicit representation of mental states (cf. Perner, 2010; Poivinelli 
& Vonk, 2004; Ruffman, Taumoepeau, & Perkins, 2012).  
 Continued growth in ToM reasoning in deaf individuals  
 A few of the earlier cross-sectional studies of FB reasoning in deaf individuals suggested that their 
impaired language acquisition and impoverished communication might produce lasting deﬁ cits 
in ToM, hinting at a critical period for the development of a conceptual understanding of FB 
(Edmondson, 2006; Morgan & Kegl, 2006; Russell, Hosie, Gray, Scott, Hunter, Banks, et al., 1998). 
However, two more complete longitudinal studies have documented acquisition of FB under-
standing even as late as early adulthood. Deaf Australian elementary school children showed 
delayed, albeit eventual, acquisition of FB understanding on standard verbal tasks (Wellman, Fang, 
& Peterson, 2011). Some members of a population of adult Nicaraguan signers who, as children, 
acquired a new, emerging sign language that had limited mental-state vocabulary initially failed 
low-verbal FB tasks, but after the very same signers acquired verbs of belief and knowledge as adults, 
they subsequently improved their FB performance on a low verbal FB task (Pyers & Senghas, 2009). 
This pattern of late acquisition provides strong evidence that the acquisition of FB understanding 
is not bounded by a critical period. Crucially, all participants in the study of Nicaraguan sign-
ers had otherwise typical social and environmental experience—their sole limitation was related 
to the complexity of their mental-state language. In extreme cases of deprivation—nutritional, 
social, and language—late acquisition of FB understanding may not be possible. 

INTENTION AND DESIRES
353
 Development of other aspects of theory of mind  
 As in the case of research on TH children, study of ToM development in deaf individuals has 
been dominated by research on FB understanding in preschool and early elementary school. 
However, ToM development begins in infancy as children begin to exhibit attention to other’s 
minds by following the eye-gaze of others (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2002), engaging in joint attention 
(Tomasello, Carpenter, Call, Behne, & Moll, 2005), and understanding others’ goals and inten-
tions (Meltzoff, 1995). Similarly, FB understanding in the late preschool years is preceded by an 
understanding of how knowledge is acquired, speciﬁ cally how seeing and knowing are related 
(Flavell, 1992; Pratt & Bryant, 1990), and of non-belief mental states, such as desires (Bartsch & 
Wellman, 1989). This section of the chapter reviews the research on those other components of 
ToM development in deaf children and considers the way in which language delay may impact 
them.  
 Intention and desires  
 Children’s ﬁ rst insight into others’ minds emerges when they ﬁ rst see humans as intentional agents. 
Between 10–12 months of age, infants show sensitivity in looking-time measures to the goals not 
the means of human action (Gergly, N á dasdy, Csibra, & B í r ó , 1995; Sommerville & Woodward, 
2005). By 18 months, toddlers readily imitate the goal of a human’s novel, but incomplete action 
(Meltzoff, 1995). Crucially, an understanding that behaviors are in the service of goals marks this 
early understanding; toddlers do not slavishly imitate the behavior of a model, but will vary their 
behavior to achieve the apparent goal of the model. 
 One study with deaf 4–7-year-olds demonstrated equivalent performance to TH children on a 
gesture imitation task, with both groups making imitation errors that violated the way in which 
the hand moved, but remaining faithful to the ultimate goal of the movement trajectory (Want & 
Gattis, 2005). This pattern of errors indicated that, by 4 years of age, both hearing and deaf chil-
dren had represented the goal of the action. However, an understanding of intentionality begins 
in infancy, and we know little of whether deaf infants struggle with an early understanding of 
intentionality, but overcome this delay by age four. 
 Several studies have shown that deaf children of hearing parents also show delays in reason-
ing about desires and intentions. The ﬁ rst showed that deaf children of hearing parents strug-
gle to interpret the intention- and desire-based meanings of eye gaze, failing to correctly infer 
the desire and intentions represented in a schematic drawing of a face, with only 9-year-olds 
exhibiting performance similar to that of TH 4-year-olds (Scott, Russell, Gray, Hosie & Hunter, 
1999). This delay is quite striking given that pre-linguistic 10-month-olds with normal hear-
ing reliability reliably follow the eye gaze of an experimenter (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2005) and 
TH 2-year-olds infer desire from eye gaze at above chance levels (Lee, Eskritt, Symons, & Muir, 
1998). More low-verbal behavioral tasks conducted with deaf toddlers are needed to fully 
understand the degree to which language experience affects an understanding of intentionality 
and desire. 
 Three other studies that have addressed deaf children’s desire reasoning have been in the context 
of predicting and explaining emotions. Oral deaf children between the ages of 5 and 10 who failed 
FB tasks also struggled to predict a character’s emotion based on their desires, although they were 
less impaired on the desire-based emotion items than on the FB-based ones (Pyers & de Villiers, 
2003). However, deaf 6-year-olds enrolled in a school where emotion reasoning was emphasized in 
the curriculum were actually more likely to explain emotions in terms of underlying desires than 
their TH peers (Rieffe & Terwogt, 2000). 

THEORY OF MIND IN DEAF CHILDREN
354
 In the population of Nicaraguan signers, understanding of desire-based emotions and FB-based 
emotions were clearly dissociated: failers of a low-verbal FB task readily predicted emotions based 
on a character’s desire in a minimally verbal task (Pyers & de Villiers, 2003; Pyers, 2005). Thus, any 
limitation in reasoning about desires seems to be overcome before success on FB tasks, and deaf 
children’s understanding of desires as a source of behaviors and emotions appears more robust 
than their understanding of false beliefs. This is in keeping with the proposal by Wellman (1990) 
that a desire-based ToM emerges before a belief-based one. 
 Sources-of-knowledge  
 Understanding FB is contingent upon understanding how other people’s perceptual experiences 
inﬂ uence their knowledge states—if the boy does not  see the chocolate moved from the cupboard 
to the refrigerator, he does not  know where it is. Thus, understanding the relationship between 
sensory perception and knowledge should develop before an understanding of FB (Wellman & 
Liu, 2004). By age three TH children readily understand Level 1 visual perspective taking—that if 
someone cannot see the object you can see, that person does not know the identity of the object 
(Flavell, Everett, Croft, & Flavell, 1981). Yet this understanding does not readily generalize to all 
senses simultaneously. Children who understand the relationship between seeing and knowing 
do not seem to exhibit the same understanding of the relationship between feeling and knowing, 
and they struggle to understand the modality speciﬁ c nature of knowledge, e.g. that you cannot 
identify the color of an object by only touching it (O’Neill, Astington, & Flavell, 1992). 
 Wellman & Liu (2004) included in their ToM scale a “knowledge access” task that taps chil-
dren’s understanding of the relationship between seeing and knowing. Deaf children of hearing 
parents exhibit delays relative to TH peers on this task, but just like the TH children, they mas-
ter this concept before they pass traditional FB tasks (Peterson, Wellman, & Liu, 2005; Wellman, 
Fang, & Peterson, 2011). The “knowledge access” task is a bit more difﬁ cult than the traditional 
seeing-knowing tasks in that it involves complex language, requires the child to inhibit their own 
knowledge of the object’s identity (e.g. Birch & Bloom, 2003), and asks the child to predict anoth-
er’s state of ignorance rather than to report who would be a knowledgeable informant (e.g. O’Neill 
& Gopnik, 1991; Robinson, Haigh, & Pendle, 2008). Nevertheless, language-delayed deaf children’s 
limitation in understanding seeing and knowing was also observed using a minimally verbal task 
adapted from Povinelli & de Blois (1992). Deaf children of hearing parents exhibited delays on this 
task, and their performance correlated with their performance on a low-verbal FB measure and 
with their language skills (Schick et al., 2007). 
 Oral deaf children of hearing parents are also delayed relative to TH children on a task adapted from 
Pratt & Bryant (1990) that taps the seeing-knowing and hearing-knowing relationships. While hear-
ing children succeeded on this task by 4 years of age, deaf children of hearing parents did not pass the 
task until 5.5 years of age (Schmidt & Pyers, 2011). Most importantly, deaf children are were equally 
delayed on both sensory modalities, even though they have had more limited experience with auditory 
information relative to visual information. Thus, on a variety of low and high verbal tasks assessing 
their understanding of the relationship between sensory perception and knowledge, DoH children 
acquire this understanding well after the age at which typically developing children master it.  
 Early implicit false belief understanding in indirect tasks 
 A rapidly growing body of research suggests that in addition to an early understanding of peo-
ple’s goals and intentions, by age 2 or so toddlers have an implicit understanding of others’ states 

EARLY IMPLICIT FALSE BELIEF UNDERSTANDING IN INDIRECT TASKS
355
of knowledge and beliefs, even when those beliefs are not in keeping with reality (Baillargeon, 
Scott, & He, 2010; Low & Perner, 2012). It is not clear how elaborated those concepts are at this 
age, but they appear to be sufﬁ ciently robust to drive toddlers expectations, selective atten-
tion, and anticipatory looking. Some researchers have argued that the difference between this 
early evidence for understanding of FB and the later emergence of explicit reasoning about FB 
around age 4 lies in the methods used to assess the children’s knowledge. Traditional FB tasks 
and their variants  directly  ask about a character’s belief or behavior; the research on infants and 
toddlers uses  indirect tests that infer the children’s understanding from their eye gaze, anticipa-
tory looking, or spontaneous helping behavior (Baillargeon et al., 2010; Buttelman, Carpenter, 
& Tomasello, 2009). 
 Theorists differ on how they regard the difference between children’s apparent knowledge on 
indirect vs. direct tests of FB understanding. Clements & Perner (1994) suggested that anticipatory 
eye gaze reﬂ ected an “implicit” understanding of false belief, and an understanding shown on indi-
rect, but not direct tests of a concept is considered a hallmark of implicit or unconscious knowl-
edge in the literature on consciousness (Low & Perner, 2012). Apperly & Butterﬁ ll (2009) suggest 
there may be two conceptual systems in ToM development: an early-emerging unconscious system 
that tracks “belief-like” states and is sensitive to another person’s engagement with or access to 
an object or event, and a more abstract, explicit system of concepts with a more articulated rep-
resentation of the propositional content of beliefs and states of knowledge. Others (e.g. Perner, 
2010; Ruffman, Taumoepeau, & Perkins, 2012) have distinguished between the early learning of 
behavioral regularities or rules that may be more situation-speciﬁ c, and support expectations and 
spontaneous behaviors without reference to mental-state representations. 
 These positions continue to maintain that there is maturation or learning of new conceptual 
representations in the early preschool years that is reﬂ ected in the children’s performance on tradi-
tional direct tests of FB understanding (Perner, 2010; San Juan & Astington, 2012; Wellman, Cross, 
& Watson, 2001). In contrast, other researchers argue that the infant and toddler research shows 
that the core concepts of ToM, including FB, are available to children during the second year of life 
and may be a part of an innate or early-maturing ToM module (Baillargeon et al., 2010; Leslie & 
Polizzi, 1998; Roth & Leslie, 1998). However, toddlers cannot make use of that knowledge in the 
direct, explicit FB reasoning tasks that are used to assess FB because of limited EF resources such as 
working memory and inhibitory control, skills that are required by those tasks. 
 The research on EF in deaf children described earlier (de Villiers & de Villiers, 2012; Meristo & 
Hjelmquist, 2009; Woolfe et al., 2002) indicates that while inhibitory control and set shifting may 
be prerequisites for success on explicit FB reasoning tasks, those aspects of EF do not seem to be 
the proximal causes of different levels of performance in those tasks. Language and exposure to 
ﬂ uent communication appear to be the more important proximal predictors. However, we know 
little to nothing about the early development of EF in deaf children (Marschark, 1993; Marschark 
& Spencer, 2011). 
 The research on different aspects of ToM in deaf children that we summarized above all used 
direct, explicit measures of the children’s understanding and reasoning, even when verbal demands 
of the tasks were minimized. But would language delayed deaf children with hearing parents show 
early-emerging implicit ToM understanding in the indirect, spontaneous procedures developed 
for studying TH infants and toddlers? Gale et al. (2009) and de Villiers & de Villiers (2012) dem-
onstrated that on a low-verbal sticker-in-the-hand hide-and-seek game that involved spontaneous 
deception, language delayed signing and oral deaf children were not delayed in their deceptive 
behaviors relative to native signing deaf children or matched TH controls, but the youngest chil-
dren in their studies were 4 years of age. 

THEORY OF MIND IN DEAF CHILDREN
356
 In a small-scale study of 10 deaf DoH toddlers (17–28 months) with hearing parents Meristo 
et al. (2012) compared their anticipatory looking in a non-verbal true belief and FB scenario with 
the same behavior in age-matched TH toddlers matched for age. The parents of the deaf children 
used spoken Swedish supported by some signs from Swedish Sign Language, but none of the tod-
dlers had mastered many signs. Half of the deaf children had cochlear implants and the other ﬁ ve 
used hearing aids. 
 All of the children watched videotaped scenarios in which the familiar cartoon mouse Jerry ran 
down a tunnel in the shape of a Y and hid in one of two boxes at the end of each arm. He was then fol-
lowed down the tunnel by the cat Tom. On the test trials Jerry changed his hiding place from one box to 
the other before Tom entered the tunnel. On the true belief trial Tom was present in the video and saw 
Jerry move from one box to the other; on the FB trial Tom was not present when the change of location 
took place. Half of each group of children saw a true belief trial followed by a FB trial; the other half 
saw the trials in the opposite order. An automated eye tracker measured how long the toddlers watched 
the exits from each arm of the Y-tunnel or the boxes they led to once Tom entered the tunnel. The TH 
toddlers spent signiﬁ cantly more time looking at the location that Jerry had moved to in the true belief 
condition, but signiﬁ cantly more time looking at the empty location (where Tom last saw him) in the 
FB condition, indicating that their spontaneous attention was sensitive to Tom’s state of knowledge. 
The deaf children also looked more at the correct exit and box in the true belief condition, but in the 
FB condition they all still looked at the box containing Jerry and none of them looked at the empty box 
or exit that corresponded to Tom’s FB about where he had last seen the mouse. 
 These deaf toddlers did not show the sensitivity to the character’s belief state in spontaneous, 
anticipatory attention that was demonstrated by the hearing children. Meristo and colleagues 
suggest two possible interrelated reasons for this result: ﬁ rst, that impoverished communica-
tion between the hearing parents and their deaf children impairs the children’s acquisition of 
mental-state concepts or of joint attentional processes that build on the children’s gestures and 
pointing; and second, that early language sharing in hearing caregiver-child dyads may enhance 
executive functioning abilities that are necessary in this anticipatory looking task where the child 
has to inhibit the lure of reality and look away from the box containing the mouse. The impover-
ished communicative interaction between hearing caregivers and their deaf infants and toddlers 
might delay that EF development. As we point out above, EF does not seem to be delayed at age 4 
in language-impaired deaf children with normal range non-verbal IQs and memory development 
when it is tested in low verbal tasks; but we do not know whether the earliest emerging components 
of EF are impaired prior to age 3 in these children. 
 Considering the role of joint attention  
 DoH children with delayed language acquisition seem to experience broad delays in understand-
ing others’ mental states in addition to their difﬁ culties with explicit reasoning about FB. Both 
joint attention and language may play a causal role in DoH children’s impaired ToM, and they both 
are likely to interact, as language and gestural communication seems to play a crucial role in the 
development of joint attention (Slaughter, Peterson, & Carpenter, 2009). 
 Joint attention, the ability to manage attention to both a communication partner and another 
thing or event, has been posited as a precursor to a full-blown ToM (Moore & Corkum, 1994). 
Children with autism show delays in joint attention with greater delays in initiating rather than 
responding to joint attention (Mundy, 2003). DoH children also show some limitations with 
respect to joint attention, and these limitations may have long-ranging consequences for both their 
language acquisition and social-cognitive development. 

CONSIDERING THE ROLE OF JOINT ATTENTION
357
 Overwhelmingly, the ﬁ ndings about joint attention in deaf children come out of observational 
studies of parent-child interaction, and these observational studies show that DoH children 
have much less experience with joint attention and the quality of that joint attention is signif-
icantly poorer than what is observed in typically hearing children. Hearing parents spend less 
time engaging in coordinated joint attention with their deaf 12- and 18-month-olds than deaf 
parents with deaf children and hearing parents with hearing TH children (Meadow-Orlans & 
Spencer, 1996). This limitation in joint attention seems to persist into the second year of life, with 
deaf 24-month-olds with hearing parents experiencing fewer sustained bouts of joint attention 
than typically hearing dyads (Gale & Schick, 2009). Another study with slightly different ﬁ ndings 
showed that DoH children spent more time than hearing children in coordinated joint attention, 
but the quality of this time was strikingly different. For deaf children, almost none of this time 
was in symbol-infused joint attention where children were exposed to new words (Prezbindowski, 
Adamson, & Lederberg, 1998). 
 That the quantity and quality of joint attention for DoH children is signiﬁ cantly lower than for 
typically developing children may be the origin of an array of ToM delays. First, joint attention 
seems to be the hallmark of uniquely human social cognition (Tomasello, Carpenter, Call, Behne, 
& Moll, 2005). When sharing attention with another person, infants are afforded an opportunity to 
learn that intentions and goals can be shared (Tomasello, 1995). While the amount of joint atten-
tion experience required to support an understanding of shared intentions and goals is unclear, 
one study comparing hearing infants to deaf infants with and without cochlear implants, showed 
that more time in joint attention positively correlated with higher maternal perception of social 
competence (Tasker, Nowakowski, Matilda, & Schmidt, 2010), a ﬁ nding that is further bolstered 
by longitudinal studies with typically developing children that have shown that infants’ engage-
ment in joint attention at 20 months positively correlates with their performance on a battery of 
theory of mind measures at 44 months of age (Charman, Baron-Cohen, Swettenham, Baird, Cox, 
& Drew, 2000). Beyond the amount of joint attention engagement, the quality of joint attention 
also impacts later ToM development. In a longitudinal study, maternal sensitivity to their infant’s 
internal states at 10 months, a measure that included commenting and elaborating on joint atten-
tion, was highly correlated with children’s FB scores at 54 months (Ereky-Stevens, 2008). 
 While experience with joint attention allows for the child to experience a “meeting of the minds,” 
joint attention is where early language learning is situated, and children’s engagement in joint 
attention is predictive of their later language ability (Carpenter, Nagell, & Tomasello, 1998; Mundy 
& Gomes, 1996; Tomasello & Farrar, 1986). Speciﬁ cally the degree to which infants respond to 
bids for joint attention positively correlates with their receptive and productive vocabulary scores 
at 30 months (Morales, Mundy, Delgado, Yale, Messinger, Neal, & Schwartz, 2000). The relation-
ship between joint attention and language development is present earlier in development: reliably 
following gaze at 10 months of age predicts vocabulary scores at 18 months (Brooks & Meltzoff, 
2005). The early impact that joint attention has on vocabulary development likely also has con-
sequences for more complex language development, such that the language delays faced by deaf 
children because of their hearing-impairment may be compounded by their limited joint attention 
experience. 
 The development of ToM and of language is dependent upon extensive experience with 
high-quality, symbol-infused joint attention. As such, the ToM delays observed in most deaf chil-
dren of hearing families may originate in the hearing parents’ struggle to engage in joint attention 
with their deaf children; none of the observational studies of deaf children observed children’s 
failure to point or to follow eye-gaze as has been observed for children with autism. Instead, deaf 
children exhibit the appropriate joint attention behaviors, but they are given limited opportunity 

THEORY OF MIND IN DEAF CHILDREN
358
to engage in them. This limitation has a two-fold impact on deaf children’s ToM development. 
First, what is seen as one of the key precursors to a mature ToM is impoverished, likely impacting 
later developments in ToM reasoning. Secondly, the limited experience with joint attention can 
delay language development and language is highly predictive of successful FB reasoning during 
the preschool years (see Milligan, Astington, & Dack, 2007 for a review). Thus, a key locus of ToM 
intervention for deaf children with hearing families may be in teaching hearing parents how to 
initiate and sustain high-quality joint attention with their deaf children who have the capacity, but 
limited opportunity, to do so.  
 Conclusions 
 The case of DoH children sheds light on the way in which environment, speciﬁ cally language 
experience, shapes the development of a mature ToM. The research on ToM in deaf children that 
we have summarized in this chapter leads us to several conclusions:
   1.     Language acquisition and comprehensible communication from infancy are essential for the 
development of ToM on a normal timetable. DoH children with language delays and impov-
erished communicative interactions are signiﬁ cantly delayed in several aspects of their ToM 
development. 
 2 .  Initial evidence suggests that this delay in ToM includes not only explicit, propositional rea-
soning about FB and states of knowledge in preschoolers, but also implicit, spontaneous 
expectations and anticipatory behaviors in infants and toddlers. Much more research is needed 
on these early stages of ToM understanding in both language-delayed deaf toddlers and native 
signing deaf children.  
  3  .   Any impairment in communication between hearing caregivers and their deaf children may 
lead to failures in initiating and sustaining high-quality joint attention with their deaf infants 
may contribute to both further language acquisition delays and to impaired understanding of 
the mental states of others.  
 4 .  The degree of impairment seen in explicit ToM tasks is most strongly predicted by the acquisi-
tion of complex language by the deaf children and by the degree of language delay that they 
experience. Early interventions with a comprehensible natural sign language or effective 
ampliﬁ cation systems enhance spoken language acquisition (Remmel & Peters, 2009) can con-
siderably mitigate these delays in social cognition.  
 5 .  Development of a fully articulated ToM seems to not be constrained by a critical period, and 
can continue well into later childhood or even adulthood (Peterson, 2009; Pyers & Senghas, 
2009; Wellman et al., 2011). Thus, the research on the development of ToM in deaf children 
has not only led to a better understanding of the importance of language experience in that 
development, it has argued against any strong critical period for ToM development and pro-
vided some optimism for the effectiveness of interventions to facilitate deaf children’s social 
cognitive development. 
 References 
 Apperly, I., & Butterfi ll, S. (2009).  Do humans have two systems to track beliefs and belief- like states? 
 Psychological Review  20 :  521–36 . 
 Baillargeon, R., Scott, R., & He, Z. (2010).  False-belief understanding in infants.  Trends in Cognitive Science 
 14 :  110–18 . 

359
 Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. (1989).  Young children’s attribution of action to beliefs and desires.  Child 
Development  60 (4):  946–64 . 
 Birch, S. J., & Bloom, P. (2003).  Children are cursed: An asymmetric bias in mental-state attribution. 
 Psychological Science  14 (3):  283–6 . 
 Brooks, R., & Meltzoff , A. N. (2002).  Th e importance of eyes: How infants interpret adult looking behavior. 
 Developmental Psychology  38 (6):  958–66 . 
 Brooks, R., & Meltzoff , A. N. (2005).  Th e development of gaze following and its relation to language. 
 Developmental Science  8 (6):  535–43 . 
 Buttelman, D., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2009).  Eighteen-month-old infants show false belief 
understanding in an active helping paradigm.  Cognition  112 :  337–42 . 
 Carlson, S., & Moses, L. (2001).  Individual diff erences in inhibitory control and children’s theory of mind. 
 Child Development  72 :  1032–53 . 
 Carlson, S., Moses, L., & Breton, C. (2002).  How specifi c is the relation between executive function and theory 
of mind: contributions of inhibitory control and working memory.  Infant and Child Development  11 :  73–92 . 
 Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Social cognition, joint attention, and communicative 
competence from 9 to 15 months of age.  Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development 
 63 (4, Serial No. 255). 
 Charman, T., Baron-Cohen, S., Swettenham, J., Baird, G., Cox, A., & Drew, A. (2000).  Testing joint 
attention, imitation, and play as infancy precursors to language and theory of mind.  Cognitive 
Development  15 (4):  481–98 . 
 Cicchetti, D., Rogosch, F. A., Maughan, A., Toth, S. L., & Bruce, J. (2003).  False belief understanding in 
maltreated children.  Development and Psychopathology  15 (4):  1067–91 . 
 Clements, W., & Perner, J. (1994).  Implicit understanding of belief.  Cognitive Development  9 :  377–95 . 
 Cokely, D. (1983).  When is a pidgin not a pidgin? An alternate analysis of the ASL-English contact 
situation.  Sign Language Studies  38 1–24 . 
 Corina, D., & Singleton, J. (2009).  Developmental social cognitive neuroscience: Insights from deafness. 
 Child Development  80 (4):  952–67 . 
 Courtin, C. (2000).  Th e impact of sign language on the cognitive development of deaf children: Th e case of 
theories of mind.   Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education  5 (3):  266–76 . 
 Davis, H. & Pratt, C. (1995).  Th e development of children’s theory of mind: Th e working memory 
explanation.  Australian Journal of Psychology  47 :  25–31 . 
 de Villiers, J. G. & de Villiers, P. A. (2009).  Complements enable representation of the contents of false 
beliefs: Th e evolution of a theory. In S. Foster-Cohen (Ed.),  Language acquisition (pp. 169–95). 
 Basingstoke :  Palgrave-McMillan Press . 
 de Villiers, J. G. & Pyers, J. E. (2002).  Complements to cognition: A longitudinal study of the relationship 
between complex syntax and false-belief-understanding.  Cognitive Development  17 :  1037–60 . 
 de Villiers, P. A. (2005).  Th e role of language in theory of mind development: What deaf children tell us. In 
J. W. Astington & J. A. Baird (Eds),  Why Language Matters for Th eory of Mind (pp.  266–97 ).  New York : 
 Oxford University Press . 
 de Villiers, P. A., & de Villiers, J. G. (2012).  Deception dissociates from false belief reasoning in deaf 
children: Implications for the implicit vs. explicit theory of mind distinction.  British Journal of 
Developmental Psychology  30 (1):  188–209 . 
 de Villiers, P. A. & Pyers, J. (2001).  Complementation and false-belief representation. In M. Almgren, 
A. Barrena, M. J. Ezeizabarrena, I. Idiazabal, & B. MacWhinney (Eds.),  Research on Child Language 
Acquisition: Proceedings of the 8th Conference of the International Association for the Study of Child 
Language . (pp.  984–1005 ).  Somerville :  Cascadilla Press . 
 Edmondson, P. (2006).  Deaf children’s understanding of other people’s thought processes.  Educational 
Psychology in Practice  22 :  159–69 . 
REFERENCES

THEORY OF MIND IN DEAF CHILDREN
360
 Engen, E. & Engen, T. (1983).  Th e Rhode Island Test of Language Structure (RITLS) .  Austin :  Pro-Ed . 
 Ereky-Stevens, K. (2008).  Associations between mothers’ sensitivity to their infants’ internal states and 
children’s later understanding of mind and emotion.  Infant and Child Development  17 (5):  527–43 . 
 Figueras-Costa, B., & Harris, P. (2001).  Th eory of mind development in deaf children: A nonverbal test of 
false-belief understanding.  Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education  6 (2):  92–102 . 
 Flavell, J. H. (1992).  Perspectives on perspective taking. In H. Beilin & P. B. Pufall (Eds),  Piaget’s Th eory: 
Prospects and Possibilities (pp.  107–39 ).  London :  Psychology Press . 
 Flavell, J. H., Everett, B. A., Croft , K., & Flavell, E. R. (1981).  Young children’s knowledge about visual 
perception: Further evidence for the Level 1–Level 2 distinction.  Developmental Psychology  17 (1): 
 99–103 . 
 Frye, D., Zelazo, P., & Palfrai, T. (1995).  Th eory of mind and rule-based reasoning.  Cognitive Development 
 10 :  483–527 . 
 Gale, E., de Villiers, P., de Villiers, J., & Pyers, J. (1996).  Language and theory of mind in oral deaf children.  
In A. Stringfellow, D. Cahana-Amitay, E. Hughes, & A. Zukowski (Eds),  Proceedings of the 20th Annual 
Boston University Conference on Language Development, Vol. 1 . (pp.  213–24 ).  Somerville :  Cascadilla Press . 
 Gale, E., de Villiers, P., Schick, B., Hoff meister, R., & Pyers, J. ( 2009 ).  Deception in Oral and Signing Deaf 
Children: Not Delayed nor Dependent on Complex Language. Poster presented at the biennial meeting of 
the Society for Research in Child Development, Denver, CO. 
 Gale, E., & Schick, B. (2009).  Symbol-infused joint attention and language use in mothers with deaf and 
hearing toddlers.  American Annals of the Deaf  153 (5):  484–503 . 
 Gergely, G., N á dasdy, Z., Csibra, G., & B í r ó , S. (1995).  Taking the intentional stance at 12 months of age. 
 Cognition  56 (2):  165–93 . 
 Jackendoff , R. (1996).  How language helps us think.  Pragmatics and Cognition  4 :  1–34 . 
 Keenan, T. (2000).  Mind, memory, and metacognition: Th e role of memory span in children’s developing 
understanding of the mind. In J. W. Astington (Ed.),  Minds in the Making: Essays in Honor of David R. 
Olson (pp.  233–49 ).  Oxford :  Blackwell Publishers . 
 Lee, K., Eskritt, M., Symons, L. A., & Muir, D. (1998).  Children’s use of triadic eye gaze information for 
“mind reading.”  Developmental Psychology  34 (3):  525–39 . 
 Leslie, A., & Polizzi, P. (1998).  Inhibitory processing in the false belief task: Two conjectures.  Developmental 
Science  1 :  247–54 . 
 Lieberman, A., Hatrak, M., & Mayberry, R. I. (2011).  Th e development of eye gaze control for linguistic 
input in deaf children. In N. Danis, K. Mesh, & H. Sung, (Eds),  Proceedings of the 35th Annual Boston 
University Conference on Language Development (pp.  391–404 ).  Somerville :  Cascadilla Press . 
 Low, J., & Perner, J. (2012).  Implicit vs. explicit theory of mind: State of the art.  British Journal of 
Developmental Psychology  30 :  1–13 . 
 Lucas, C., & Valli, C. (1989).  Language contact in the American deaf community . In C. Lucas (Ed.),  Th e 
Sociolinguistics of the Deaf Community (pp  11–40 ).  San Diego :  Academic Press . 
 Marschark, M. (1993).  Psychological Development of Deaf Children .  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Marschark, M. & Spencer, P. (Eds) (2011).  Th e Oxford Handbook of Deaf Studies, Language and Education, 
Vol. 1, 2nd edn.  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Mayberry, R. I., & Lock, E. (2003).  Age constraints on fi rst vs. second language acquisition: Evidence for 
linguistic plasticity and epigenesis . Brain and Language  87 (3):  369–84 . 
 Meadow-Orlans, K. P., & Spencer, P. E. (1996).  Maternal sensitivity and the visual attentiveness of children 
who are deaf .  Early Development & Parenting  5 (4):  213–23 . 
 Meltzoff , A. N. (1995).  Understanding the intentions of others: Re-enactment of intended acts by 
18-month-old children.  Developmental Psychology  31 (5):  838–50 . 
 Meristo, M., Falkman, K. W., Hjelmquist, E., Tedoldi, M., Surian, L., & Siegal, M. (2007).  Language access 
and theory of mind reasoning: Evidence from deaf children in bilingual and oralist environments. 
 Developmental Psychology  43 (5):  1156–69 . 

361
 Meristo, M., & Hjelmquist, E. (2009).  Executive functions and theory-of-mind among deaf children: 
Diff erent routes to understanding other minds?  Journal of Cognition and Development  10 (1–2): 
 67–91 . 
 Meristo, M., Morgan, G., Geraci, A., Iozzi, L., Hjelmquist, E., Surian, L., & Siegal, M. (2012).  Belief 
attribution in deaf and hearing infants.  Developmental Science  15 :  1–9 . 
 Milligan, K., Astington, J. W., & Dack, L. A. (2007). Language and theory of mind: Meta-analysis of the 
relation between language ability and false-belief understanding.  Child Development  78 , 622–46. 
 Mitchell, R. E. (2006).  How many deaf people are there in the United States? Estimates from the survey of 
income and program participation.  Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education  11 (1):  112–19 . 
 Moeller, M. P., & Schick, B. (2006).  Relations between maternal input and theory of mind understanding in 
deaf children.  Child Development  77 (3):  751–66 . 
 Moore, C., & Corkum, V. (1994).  Social understanding at the end of the fi rst year of life.  Developmental 
Review  14 (4):  349–72 . 
 Morgan, G., & Kegl, J. (2006).  Nicaraguan Sign Language and theory of mind: Th e issue of critical periods 
and abilities.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  47 (8):  811–19 . 
 Moses, L. (2001).  Executive accounts of theory-of-mind development.  Child Development  72 :  688–90 . 
 Mundy, P. (2003).  Th e neural basis of social impairments in autism: the role of the dorsal medial-frontal 
cortex and anterior cingulate system.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  44 (6):  793–809 . 
 Mundy, P., & Gomes, A. (1998). Individual diff erences in joint attention skill development in the second 
year.  Infant Behavior and Development  21 : 468–82. 
 O’Neill, D. K., Astington, J. W., & Flavell, J. H. (1992).  Young children’s understanding of the role that 
sensory experiences play in knowledge acquisition.  Child Development  63 (2):  474–90 . 
 O’Neill, D. K., & Gopnik, A. (1991).  Young children’s ability to identify the sources of their beliefs. 
 Developmental Psychology  27 (3):  390–7 . 
 Perner, J. (2010).  Who took the cog out of cognitive science: Mentalism in an era of anti-cognitivism. In 
P. A. Frensch & R. Schwarzer (Eds),  Cognition and Neuropsychology: Proceedings of the 29th 
International Congress of Psychology, Vol. 1.  London :  Psychology Press . 
 Peterson, C. C. (2009).  Development of social-cognitive and communication skills in children born deaf. 
 Scandinavian Journal of Psychology  50 :  475–83 . 
 Peterson, C. C., & Siegal, M. (1995).  Deafness, conversation and theory of mind.  Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry  36 (3):  459–74 . 
 Peterson, C. C., Wellman, H., & Liu, D. (2005).  Steps in theory of mind development among children with 
autism, deafness or typical development.  Child Development  76 :  502–17 . 
 Povinelli, D., & de Bois, S. (1992).  Young children’s ( Homo sapiens ) understanding of knowledge formation 
in themselves and others.  Journal of Comparative Psychology  106 (3):  228–38 . 
 Povinelli, D., & Vonk, J. (2004).  We don’t need a microscope to explore the chimpanzee mind.  Mind and 
Language  19 :  1–28 . 
 Pratt, C., & Bryant, P. (1990).  Young children understand that looking leads to knowing (so long as they are 
looking into a single barrel).  Child Development  61 (4):  973–82 . 
 Prezbindowski, A. K., Adamson, L. B., & Lederberg, A. R. (1998).  Joint attention in deaf and hearing 22 
month-old children and their hearing mothers.  Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology  19 (3): 
 377–87 . 
 Pyers, J. (2005). Th e relationship between language and false-belief understanding: Evidence from learners 
of an emerging sign language in Nicaragua . Dissertation Abstracts International ,  66 . 
 Pyers, J., & de Villiers, P. ( 2003 ). Th eory of mind and understanding emotions: What is the role of 
complex language? Poster session presented at the biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child 
Development, Tampa, FL. 
 Pyers, J., & Senghas, A. (2009).  Language promotes false-belief understanding: Evidence from Nicaraguan 
sign language.  Psychological Science  20 :  805–12 . 
REFERENCES

THEORY OF MIND IN DEAF CHILDREN
362
 Remmel, E., & Peters, K. (2009).  Th eory of mind and language in children with cochlear implants.  Journal 
of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education  14 ,  218–36 . 
 Rieff e, C., & Terwogt, M. (2000).  Deaf children’s understanding of emotions: Desires take precedence. 
 Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  41 (5):  601–8 . 
 Robinson, E. J., Haigh, S. N., & Pendle, J. C. (2008).  Children’s working understanding of the knowledge 
gained from seeing and feeling.  Developmental Science  11 (2):  299–305 . 
 Roth, D., & Leslie, A. (1998).  Solving belief problems: Toward a task analysis.  Cognition  66 ,  1–31 . 
 Ruff man, T., Taumoepeau, M., & Perkins, C. (2012).  Statistical learning as a basis for social understanding 
in children.   British Journal of Developmental Psychology  30 :  59–74 . 
 Russell, P., Hosie, J., Gray, C., Scott, C., Hunter, N., Banks, J. & Macaulay, M. (1998).  Development of 
theory of mind in deaf children.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  39 :  903–10 . 
 San Juan, V., & Astington, J. (2012).  Bridging the gap between implicit and explicit understanding: How 
language development promotes the processing and representation of false belief.  British Journal of 
Developmental Psychology  30 :  105–22 . 
 Schick, B., de Villiers, P., de Villiers, J., & Hoff meister, R. (2007).  Language and theory of mind: A study of 
deaf children.  Child Development  78 (2):  376–96 . 
 Schick, B., Williams, K., & Kupermintz, H. (2006).  Look who’s being left  behind: Educational interpreters 
and access to education for deaf and hard-of-hearing students.  Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf 
Education  11 (1):  3–20 . 
 Schick, B. (2004).  How might learning through an educational interpreter infl uence cognitive development? 
In E. A. Winston (Ed.),  Educational Interpreting: How It Can Succeed (pp.  73–87 ).  Washington, DC : 
 Gallaudet University Press . 
 Schmidt, E., & Pyers, J. (2011).  Children’s understanding of the link between sensory perception and 
knowledge. In L. Carlson, C. Hoelscher, & T. Shipley (Eds),  Th e Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting 
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.  3016–21 ).  Austin :  Cognitive Science Society . 
 Scott, C., Russell, P. A., Gray, C. D., Hosie, J. A., & Hunter, N. (1999).  Th e interpretation of line of regard 
by prelingually deaf children.  Social Development  8 (3):  412–26 . 
 Shatz, M., Diesendruck, G., Martinez-Beck, I., & Akar, D. (2003).  Th e infl uence of language and 
socioeconomic status on children’s understanding of false belief.  Developmental Psychology  39 (4): 
 717–29 . 
 Slaughter, V., Peterson, C. C., & Carpenter, M. (2009).  Maternal mental state talk and infants’ early gestural 
communication.  Journal of Child Language  36 :  1053–74 . 
 Sommerville, J. A., & Woodward, A. L. (2005).  Pulling out the intentional structure of action: the relation 
between action processing and action production in infancy.  Cognition  95 (1):  1–30 . 
 Tasker, S. L., Nowakowski, M. E., & Schmidt, L. A. (2010). Joint attention and social competence in 
deaf children with cochlear implants.  Journal of Developmental and Physical Disabilities  22 (5): 
509–32. 
 Tomasello, M. (1995).  Joint attention as social cognition. In C. Moore & P. Dunham (Eds),  Joint Attention: 
Its Origins and Role in Development . (pp.  85–101 ).  Hillsdale :  Erlbaum . 
 Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H. (2005).  Understanding and sharing intentions: 
Th e origins of cultural cognition.  Behavioral and Brain Sciences  28 (5):  675–735 . 
 Tomasello, M., & Farrar, M. Y (1986). Joint attention and early language.  Child Development  57 : 1454–63. 
 Vaccari, C., & Marschark, M. (1997).  Communication between parents and deaf children: Implications for 
social-emotional development.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  38 :  793–801 . 
 Want, S. C., & Gattis, M. (2005).  Are “late-signing” deaf children “mindblind”? Understanding goal 
directedness in imitation.  Cognitive Development  20 (2):  159–72 . 
 Wellman, H. (1990).  Th e Child’s Th eory of Mind .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 

363
 Wellman, H., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001).  Meta-analysis of theory-of-mind development: Th e truth 
about false belief.  Child Development  72 :  655–84 . 
 Wellman, H., Fang, F., & Peterson, C. C. (2011).  Sequential progressions in a theory-of-mind scale: 
Longitudinal perspectives.  Child Development  82 (3):  780–92 . 
 Wellman, H. M., & Liu, D. (2004).  Scaling of theory-of-mind tasks.  Child Development  75 (2):  523–41 . 
 Woolfe, T., Want, S. C., & Siegal, M. (2002).  Signposts to development: Th eory of mind in deaf children. 
 Child Development  73 (3):  768–78 . 
 
REFERENCES

 Chapter 20 
 Social cognition in individuals with 
psychopathic tendencies  
 James  Blair   and   Stuart F.   White 
   The goal of this chapter is to consider social cognition in individuals with psychopathic tenden-
cies. As such, we will ﬁ rst consider the nature of psychopathy. Following this, we will brieﬂ y outline 
our position on psychopathy: the integrated emotion systems (IES) model. This model will be 
used as the backdrop for considering social cognition in individuals with psychopathic tendencies. 
Speciﬁ cally, the model advocates a multi-system approach to social cognition with computation-
ally distinct architectures proposed for cognitive empathy (theory of mind), motor empathy and 
different forms of emotional empathy (responses to sad/fear, responses to pain, responses to dis-
gust, responses to anger). The ability of individuals with psychopathic tendencies to show these 
forms of social cognition will be considered in turn. The chapter will then conclude with a consid-
eration of a developmental consequence of the dysfunctional empathy/emotional systems seen in 
psychopathy, i.e. a profound disruption in moral judgment.  
 Psychopathy  
 The disorder of  psychopathy  characterizes an individual who shows pronounced emotional deﬁ -
cits and is at increased risk for displaying antisocial behavior (Frick, 1995; Hare, 2003). The emo-
tional deﬁ cits present clinically as reduced guilt and “empathy” (callous and unemotional (CU) 
traits). The disorder is developmental. It has been shown that CU traits in particular and the dis-
order more generally are relatively stable from childhood into adulthood (Lynam, Caspi, Mofﬁ tt, 
Loeber, & Stouthamer-Loeber, 2007; Munoz & Frick, 2007). In addition, the functional impair-
ments seen in adults with psychopathy (e.g. in responding to emotional expressions, aversive con-
ditioning, passive avoidance learning, reversal learning, extinction) are also seen in adolescents 
with psychopathic tendencies. 
 Assessment scales for psychopathy include the Antisocial Process Screening Device (Frick & 
Hare, 2001) and Psychopathy Checklist—Youth Version (Forth, Kosson, & Hare, 2007) for adoles-
cents and the Psychopathy Checklist-Revised (Hare, 2003) for adults. These typically identify three 
dimensions of behavior (Cooke, Michie, & Hart, 2006; Frick, Bodin, & Barry, 2000; Neumann, 
Kosson, Forth, & Hare, 2006) though the exact number is debated (Cooke et al., 2006). These three 
dimensions include:
 1. An emotional factor focusing on CU traits 
  2. An arrogant and deceitful interpersonal style involving narcissism.  
 3. Impulsive and irresponsible behavior (Cooke et al., 2006; Frick et al., 2000; Neumann et al., 
2006). 

THE INTEGRATED EMOTION SYSTEMS MODEL
365
 Three (or more) factor solutions of psychopathy assessment measures do not imply that the disor-
der involves a triad of impairments. The strong assumption underlying this chapter is that there is a 
single underlying impairment that gives rise to the presence of CU traits and that this increases the 
risk for antisocial behavior (and presumably narcissism, although this latter relationship remains 
underspeciﬁ ed). Neurocognitive impairments may be identiﬁ ed that are particularly associated 
with each of the three factors. This does not mean, however, that  psychopathy involves all of these 
impairments. Indeed, impairments in “cold” (non-affect driven) executive functions—those 
relating to working memory and “inhibitory control” are associated with an increased risk for 
impulsive behavior (Mofﬁ tt, 1993; Seguin, Boulerice, Harden, Tremblay, & Pihl, 1999). However, 
individuals with psychopathy, as youths or adults, show no signiﬁ cant impairment in these forms 
of executive function (Blair, Newman, Mitchell, Richell, Leonard, Morton, et al., 2006; Hart, Forth, 
& Hare, 1990; LaPierre, Braun, & Hodgins, 1995). The suggestion is that psychopathy is associ-
ated with elevated CU traits and that these traits put the individual at increased risk for antisocial 
behavior. However, individuals can also be at risk for (more impulsive) antisocial behavior if they 
show “cold” executive dysfunction. In short, there are many developmental routes to an elevated 
risk for antisocial behavior (Blair, 2004; Frick & Marsee, 2006). 
 It should also be noted that the disorder of psychopathy is not equivalent to the DSM-IV diag-
noses of conduct disorder or antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) or their ICD-10 counterparts. 
These psychiatric diagnoses concentrate on the presence of antisocial behaviors, rather than under-
lying causes, such as the emotion dysfunction seen in psychopathy (Blair, Mitchell, & Blair, 2005). 
As such, they capture individuals whose difﬁ culties relate to executive dysfunction (Mofﬁ tt, 1993), 
as well as individuals whose difﬁ culties relate to CU traits. As a consequence, individuals meeting 
the criteria for conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder are more heterogeneous in their 
pathophysiology than individuals meeting criteria for psychopathy (Karnik, McMullin, & Steiner, 
2006). It should be noted, however, that DSM-5 looks likely to introduce a CU speciﬁ er when con-
sidering the diagnosis of conduct disorder (CD) and that the diagnosis of ASPD will include com-
ponents of psychopathy. While the disorder of psychopathy will still not be equivalent to the DSM 
diagnoses of CD and ASPD, there will be closer relationship of these conceptualizations.  
 The integrated emotion systems model  
 The IES model provides a cognitive neuroscience perspective on psychopathy (Blair, 2007). Core 
theoretical components of this model are:
 1.  Emotional expressions serve as reinforcers. Actions associated with the reward of another 
individual’s happiness will be represented as “good.” In contrast, actions associated with the 
punishment of another individual’s sadness or fear will be represented as “bad.” 
 2.  There are relatively independent emotion learning systems that process the reinforcement 
provided by speciﬁ c emotional expressions; the amygdala is particularly associated with the 
processing of fearful and sad expressions (i.e. activation of the amygdala by such expressions 
initiates stimulus-reinforcement learning such that representations of objects/actions associ-
ated with these expressions acquire valence), the insula is associated with disgusted expres-
sions, and the inferior frontal cortex with angry expressions. It is as a direct developmental 
consequence of these emotional learning systems that humans have developed multiple moral-
ities: care-based (actions associated with harming/helping others), disgust-based (actions 
associated with the disgust of others) and conventional (actions associated with hierarchical 
violations leading to interpersonal anger). 

SOCIAL COGNITION IN INDIVIDUALS WITH PSYCHOPATHIC TENDENCIES
366
 3.  Emotional learning systems feed reinforcement expectancy information to ventromedial 
prefrontal cortex (vmPFC). vmPFC represents this information allowing successful decision 
making, including moral decision making. This is particularly important in situations when it 
is necessary to choose between response options. 
 4.  These neural systems are critical when deciding upon behavioral choices. They are also critical 
because they allow moral transgressions and prosocial actions to gain emotive force. 
 According to the IES model, the roles of the amygdala in stimulus-reinforcement learning, the cau-
date in prediction error signaling and vmPFC in the representation of reinforcement expectancy 
information are all disrupted in psychopathy (Blair, 2007; Finger, Marsh, Blair, Reid, Sims, Ng, 
et al., 2011). In contrast, the roles of insula and inferior frontal cortex in response to disgusted and 
angry expressions are not. Importantly, this is a  cognitive neuroscience model—the emphasis is on 
functional roles within neural systems. There is no assumption that because the role of the amy-
gdala in stimulus-reinforcement learning is disrupted, all functions of the amygdala are disrupted. 
Similarly, there is no assumption that because the insula’s response to disgust information is intact, 
all functions of the insula are intact.  
 Social cognition  
 Social cognition involves the processing of information relating to conspeciﬁ cs in the brain. 
Aspects of social cognition that will be concentrated on in this chapter include the different proc-
esses subsumed under the term empathy and some of the processes consequent on, or related to, 
them; i.e. (social) decision making and moral reasoning. 
 Empathy can be deﬁ ned as “an affective response more appropriate to someone else’s situation 
than to one’s own” (Hoffman, 1987, p. 48). Empathy has been considered a unitary process. Thus, 
Preston and de Waal (2002) have argued that “empathy [is] a super-ordinate category that includes 
all sub-classes of phenomena that share the same mechanism. This includes emotional contagion, 
sympathy, cognitive empathy, helping behavior, etc.” (Preston & de Waal, 2002, p. 4). However, 
strong arguments have been put forward against unitary models of empathy in which all classes of 
the phenomenon  share the same mechanism  (Blair, 2005; Blair, 2006) and evidence against unitary 
models is growing (Decety, 2011). According to the alternative view, at least three main divisions 
of social cognitive process that are generally referred to as empathy can be distinguished: cognitive, 
motor, and emotional empathy (Blair, 2005; Blair, 2006). These rely on partial overlapping neural 
architectures (Blair, 2005; Blair, 2006). Cognitive empathy occurs when the individual represents 
the internal mental state of another individual. As such it reﬂ ects the narrower deﬁ nitions of ToM 
(Baron-Cohen, Leslie, & Frith, 1985). Motor empathy occurs when the individual mirrors the 
motor responses of the observed actor. Emotional empathy reﬂ ects emotional responses to emo-
tional social cues (expressive displays of affect and pain, but also verbal stimuli, such as the phrase 
“Adam just lost his house”). 
 The current chapter will brieﬂ y consider the ability of individuals with psychopathic traits to 
perform these three distinct empathic processes as well as a major developmental consequence of 
them—moral reasoning.  
 Cognitive empathy (theory of mind) and psychopathic traits  
 Theory of mind (ToM) refers to the ability to represent the mental states of others, i.e. their 
thoughts, desires, beliefs, intentions, and knowledge (Frith, 1989). ToM allows the attribution of 

MOTOR EMPATHY AND PSYCHOPATHIC TRAITS
367
mental states to self and others in order to explain and predict behavior. Neural regions considered 
critical for mediating theory of mind include medial frontal cortex, temporal parietal junction, 
posterior cingulate cortex, and temporal pole (Amodio & Frith, 2006; Lombardo, Chakrabarti, 
Bullmore, Wheelwright, Sadek, Suckling, et al., 2010; Saxe & Baron-Cohen, 2006). 
 There are no indications of ToM impairment in individuals with psychopathy. Six out of seven 
studies assessing the ability of individuals with psychopathic tendencies on ToM measures have 
reported no impairment (Blair, Sellars, Strickland, Clark, Williams, Smith, et al., 1996; Dolan & 
Fullam, 2004; Jones, Happe, Gilbert, Burnett, & Viding, 2010; Richell, Mitchell, Newman, Leonard, 
Baron-Cohen, & Blair, 2003; Shamay-Tsoory, Harari, Aharon-Peretz, & Levkovitz, 2010; Widom, 
1978). Only one study has reported impairment and this used a rating scale that is not a typical 
measure of ToM (Widom, 1976). 
 People with autism have been shown to present with impairment in ToM (Baron-Cohen, 
Wheelwright, Hill, Raste, & Plumb, 2001; Frith, 1989). Interestingly, several studies with individu-
als with psychopathic tendencies have used measures that demonstrate ToM impairment in indi-
viduals with autism (Blair et al., 1996; Dolan & Fullam, 2004; Jones et al., 2010; Richell et al., 2003). 
Yet none of these studies revealed ToM impairment in individuals with psychopathic tendencies. 
 These ﬁ ndings are consistent with suggestions that functions mediated by neural regions impli-
cated in ToM (medial frontal cortex, temporal parietal junction, posterior cingulate cortex and 
temporal pole) are not, with the possible exception of posterior cingulate cortex, considered 
impaired in psychopathy (Blair, 2007; Finger et al., 2011). Kiehl has proposed that the functions of 
all of cingulate cortex is disrupted in psychopathy (Kiehl, 2006). We would argue that the ToM data 
indicates that at least some functions of posterior cingulate cortex remain intact. 
 Three of the studies did report subtle impairments on tasks involving the representation of the 
 emotional states of others (Dolan & Fullam, 2004; Jones et al., 2010; Shamay-Tsoory et al., 2010). 
In perhaps the most interesting of these, Shamay-Tsoory and colleagues (2010) demonstrated that 
these emotional deﬁ cits closely followed those found in patients with orbital frontal cortex dam-
age. Orbital frontal cortex, and its role in the representation of emotional information, is thought 
to be dysfunctional in psychopathy (Blair, 2007). 
 Motor empathy and psychopathic traits  
 Motor empathy is deﬁ ned as the tendency to automatically mimic and synchronize facial expres-
sions, vocalizations, postures, and movements with those of another person (Hatﬁ eld, Cacioppo, 
& Rapson, 1994). A neurocognitive account of motor empathy has been developed (Carr, Iacoboni, 
Dubeau, Mazziotta, & Lenzi, 2003; Decety & Jackson, 2004). This account relied heavily on the 
discovery of mirror neurons—neurons that show activity during the execution and also the 
observation of an action (Rizzolatti, Fogassi, & Gallese, 2001). Human fMRI work has suggested a 
commonality between regions involved in action execution and those activated when actions are 
observed (Blakemore & Decety, 2001). 
 Within the neurocognitive account of motor empathy, the perception of another individual’s 
state activates the observer’s corresponding representations, which in turn activate somatic and 
autonomic responses. At the anatomical level, superior temporal cortex, posterior parietal and 
inferior frontal cortex have been implicated (Carr et al., 2003). Connections from these regions 
to the insula are then thought to allow this representation information to generate emotional 
responses through limbic areas (Carr et al., 2003). 
 At one stage, this mirror neuron based account was a popular model of all empathy supposedly 
allowing cognitive, motor and emotional empathy to occur (Carr et al., 2003; Decety & Jackson, 

SOCIAL COGNITION IN INDIVIDUALS WITH PSYCHOPATHIC TENDENCIES
368
2004; Keysers & Gazzola, 2006). However, this approach is open to considerable criticism (Blair, 
2005, 2006) and at least some early adoptees of the view now place considerably less reliance on 
the construct in their theorizing (Decety, 2011). While mirror neuron based accounts struggle to 
account for all aspects of empathy, they are extremely useful when considering motor empathy—
the automatic mimicking and synchronizing of facial expressions, vocalizations, postures, and 
movements with those of another person. Indeed, it is not difﬁ cult to see how the activity of mir-
ror neurons could underpin motor empathy. The sight of another committing an act would prime 
those neurons mediating the act in the viewer and thus increase the probability that the viewer 
would elicit the act in the presence of other environmental stimuli triggering its display. 
 What about motor empathy in psychopathy, however? Partly because mirror neurons have not 
been seriously considered as the basis of an account of the disorder, no real work has investigated 
the issue in this population. Of the regions implicated in the human mirror neuron system (supe-
rior temporal cortex, posterior parietal and inferior frontal cortex; Carr et al., 2003), only activity 
within superior temporal cortex is consistently observed to be dysfunctional in individuals with 
psychopathic tendencies (Blair, 2010). While there is an account that considers the functioning of 
superior temporal cortex to be compromised in psychopathy (Kiehl, 2006), and thus should pre-
dict that the mirror neuron system is compromised in this population, there are no data to support 
the idea. Moreover, if mirror neuron system based accounts of autism prove to be useful (Thioux 
& Keysers, 2010), it is unlikely that they will be useful as the basis of accounts of psychopathic ten-
dencies given the marked differences in the pattern of impairment between these two conditions 
(Blair, 2008). In short, the existing data suggests that motor empathy, like cognitive empathy/ToM, 
is intact in individuals with psychopathic tendencies.  
 Emotional empathy and psychopathic traits  
 As noted above, emotional empathy reﬂ ects emotional responses to emotional social cues (emo-
tional expressions). As such, it is important to consider what function emotional empathy serves. 
We have argued that facial expressions of emotion have speciﬁ c  communicatory functions, that 
they impart speciﬁ c information to the observer (Blair, 2003; see also; Fridlund, 1992). From this 
point of view, empathy to facial and vocal emotional expressions is effectively the “translation” of 
the communication by the observer. Moreover, because of the different implications of these com-
municatory signals, they are translated in several separable neural systems (Blair, 2003). More spe-
ciﬁ cally, they prompt learning; the individual associates the valence of the emotional expression 
so that the object/action the individual is displaying the emotional reaction to comes to have this 
valence. The idea is that this forms the basis of (different forms of) moral judgment (Blair, 2007). 
 Processing the fear and sadness of others 
 Fearfulness and sadness can be viewed as aversive reinforcers that reduce the probability that a 
particular behavior will be performed in the future (Blair, 2003). Indeed, observational fear studies 
in animals have shown that fearful faces can be considered to be aversive unconditioned stimuli 
that rapidly convey information to others that a novel stimulus is aversive and should be avoided 
(Mineka & Cook, 1993). Similarly, it has been argued that sad facial expressions also act as aversive 
unconditioned stimuli discouraging actions that caused the display of sadness in another indi-
vidual and motivating reparatory behaviors (Blair, 1995). 
 The amygdala has been implicated in aversive (and appetitive) conditioning including instru-
mental learning (Cardinal & Everitt, 2004; LeDoux, 2007). If fearful and sad expressions induce 
aversive conditioning (they can be considered aversive unconditioned stimuli that when associated 

EMOTIONAL EMPATHY AND PSYCHOPATHIC TRAITS
369
with novel stimuli will provide negative valence to these novel stimuli), then it is to be expected 
that that the amygdala will be importantly involved in their processing (Blair, 2003). In line with 
this, amygdala lesions have been consistently associated with impairment in the recognition of 
fearful expressions (Adolphs, 2002). While less robustly observed than the fear recognition impair-
ment, impairment in the recognition of sad expressions is not uncommonly found in patients with 
amygdala lesions (Adolphs & Tranel, 2004; Schmolck & Squire, 2001). Indeed, a review of patient 
performance across studies reported that approximately half of all patients with amygdala damage 
present with impairment for the recognition of sad expressions (Fine & Blair, 2000). Strikingly, and 
highly consistent with the above, recent animal work has shown that amygdala lesions block the 
acquisition and expression of observational fear (Jeon, Kim, Chetana, Jo, Ruley, Lin, et al., 2010). 
 Both children and adults with psychopathic tendencies relatively consistently show impairment 
in the recognition of fearful and sad facial and vocal affect (Blair, Colledge, Murray, & Mitchell, 
2001b; Blair, Mitchell, Richell, Kelly, Leonard, Newman, et al., 2002; Dadds, Perry, Hawes, Merz, 
Riddell, Haines, et al., 2006; Dolan & Fullam, 2006; Stevens, Charman, & Blair, 2001). Indeed, a 
meta-analytic review of the ﬁ eld reported a robust link between psychopathy/antisocial behavior 
and speciﬁ c deﬁ cits in the recognition of fearful expressions (Marsh & Blair, 2008). Moreover, both 
adults with psychopathy and children with psychopathic tendencies show reduced autonomic 
responses (Blair, 1999; Blair, Jones, Clark, & Smith, 1997) and reduced attention to (Kimonis, 
Frick, Fazekas, & Loney, 2006) the sad expressions of others. Importantly, it was these ﬁ ndings, and 
previous work demonstrating that augmentation of the startle reﬂ ex (a function in which the amy-
gdala plays a critical role) was reduced in psychopathy, that ﬁ rst lead to the suggestion of amygdala 
dysfunction in this population (Blair, Morris, Frith, Perrett, & Dolan, 1999; Patrick, 1994). 
 One interesting feature to note here is that the amygdala does not only allow aversive condi-
tioning, it also plays a role in attention, priming stimulus features that have emotional content 
(Gallagher & Schoenbaum, 1999). This is particularly interesting with respect to fearful expressions 
as the amygdala plays a role in directing gaze toward features of the face that are particularly impor-
tant for the recognition of the fearful expression, notably the eyes. Patients with amygdala damage 
show reduced gaze toward the eyes of individuals displaying fear and show a reduction in the fear 
recognition deﬁ cit when instructed to attend to the eyes (Adolphs, Gosselin, Buchanan, Tranel, 
Schyns, & Damasio, 2005). In a series of studies, Dadds and colleagues have shown that youth with 
psychopathic traits similarly direct gaze less toward the eyes (Dadds, El Masry, Wimalaweera, & 
Guastella, 2008) and show improvement in their fear recognition following instructions to attend 
to the eyes (Dadds et al., 2006). There have been suggestions that this impact of the amygdala 
on gaze direction “explains” the fear recognition deﬁ cit—that the impairment in psychopathic 
tendencies is in attending to the facial features of the fearful expression rather than the emotional 
response to these features (Dadds et al., 2008). However, recent data shows that this interpretation 
is incorrect. Using a continuous ﬂ ash suppression paradigm in which fearful or neutral faces were 
presented to the non-dominant eye and a scrambled image was presented to the dominant eye 
so that participants were only conscious of the scrambled image, Lilienfeld and colleagues dem-
onstrated that recognition deﬁ cits for fearful expressions were present even under presentation 
conditions too rapid for group differences in gaze direction to have an impact (Sylvers, Brennan, & 
Lilienfeld, 2011). As such, the suggestion is that the amygdala’s response to fearful and sad expres-
sions is disrupted in psychopathy and that this in turn leads to reduced gaze direction to emotional 
salient facial features, presumably exacerbating the reduction relative to healthy individuals, in 
responding to these expressions. 
 Functional neuroimaging data has generally supported the neuropsychological data. Certainly, 
the amygdala is signiﬁ cantly more responsive to fearful than to other emotional expressions (see, 

SOCIAL COGNITION IN INDIVIDUALS WITH PSYCHOPATHIC TENDENCIES
370
for a meta-analytic review, Murphy, Nimmo-Smith, & Lawrence, 2003). Less work has examined 
the neural response to sad expressions, but amygdala responses to this expression are also reported 
(e.g. Blair et al., 1999; Drevets, Lowry, Gautier, Perrett, & Kupfer, 2000). With respect to fMRI 
work with youth with psychopathic tendencies, reduced amygdala responses have been shown to 
fearful expressions (Jones, Laurens, Herba, Barker, & Viding, 2009; Marsh, Finger, Mitchell, Reid, 
Sims, Kosson, et al., 2008) and, in youth with conduct disorder, to sad expressions (Passamonti, 
Fairchild, Goodyer, Hurford, Hagan, Rowe, et al., 2010). Less work has been conducted with adults, 
but a non-clinical sample showed reduced amygdala responses to fearful expressions as a function 
of psychopathy (Gordon, Baird, & End, 2004); however, it should be noted that another study with 
a clinical sample did not (Pardini & Phillips, 2010). In short, the response to the sadness and fear 
of others is disrupted in individuals with psychopathic traits. 
 Processing the pain of others 
 Responding to another in pain most typically activates the insula and dorsomedial frontal cortex 
(Jackson, Rainville, & Decety, 2006; Singer & Lamm, 2009), although other regions such as the 
amygdala, striatum and periaqueductal gray also appear to be implicated (Decety, 2011). The liter-
ature on the response to pain has typically viewed the response to the pain of others in terms of the 
activation of shared representations between the self and other that allow the individual to con-
sciously feel the emotion state (within this literature, the pain) of the other individual (Bastiaansen, 
Meffert, Hein, Huizinga, Ketelaars, Pijnenborg, et al., 2011; Jackson et al., 2006; Singer & Lamm, 
2009). Indeed, the literature suggests that at least insula and dorsomedial frontal cortex are acti-
vated by the sight of another in pain and personal experience of pain (Lamm, Decety, & Singer, 
2011). However, as noted above, a critical function of emotional expressions is to convey valence 
information to guide others behavior and “teach” them the valence of novel objects/actions (Blair, 
2003; Fridlund, 1992). Aberrant conscious experience might be important to understand psycho-
pathy, but more fundamental impairments in emotional learning are more likely to be relevant. 
The insula, amygdala, and striatum are all involved in different aspects of stimulus-reinforcement 
learning. As such, the systems identiﬁ ed to respond to the pain of others are systems that might 
associate the valence of the pain to others with the action/object that caused that pain leading to 
this action/object being valued as aversive. This process is assumed to be impaired in psychopathy 
(Blair, 1995). 
 Two psychophysiological studies reported that individuals with psychopathy show reduced 
autonomic responses to the pain of others (Aniskiewicz, 1979; House & Milligan, 1976). Our own 
recent fMRI work with youth with psychopathic tendencies has indicated that these youth show 
reduced neural responses to the sight of another individual’s pain within rostral anterior cingulate 
cortex, striatum and the amygdala (Marsh et al., in press). In short, the response to the pain of oth-
ers is disrupted in individuals with psychopathic traits.  
 Processing the disgust of others 
 Disgusted expressions are also reinforcers, but reinforcers that most frequently provide valence 
information about foods (Rozin, Haidt, & McCauley, 1993). Disgusted expressions are particularly 
important for the rapid transmission of taste aversions; the observer is warned not to approach 
the food that the emoter is displaying the disgust reaction to. FMRI work has shown that the 
amygdala responds to primary disgust stimuli (i.e. aversive tastes and odors; Small, Gregory, Mak, 
Gitelman, Mesulam, & Parrish, 2003). Moreover, insula lesions block the acquisition and expres-
sion of taste aversion learning (Cubero, Thiele, & Bernstein, 1999). In other words, the insula 

MORAL JUDGMENT
371
allows the representation of the aversive taste that can then be associated with the sensory qualities 
of the novel food. If disgusted expressions are important for taste aversion learning then they too 
should recruit the insula. From the earliest studies (e.g. Phillips, Young, Scott, Calder, Andrew, 
Giampietro, et al., 1998), neuroimaging work shows that they do (see, for a meta-analytic review, 
Murphy et al., 2003). In addition, neuropsychological work shows that patients with damage to the 
insula present with selective impairment for the recognition of disgusted expressions (e.g. Calder, 
Keane, Manes, Antoun, & Young, 2000). In other words, the insula allows the representation of the 
aversive taste whether this be a primary disgust stimulus (i.e. a taste or odor) or a communication 
of aversive taste through the disgusted expression of another. This can then be associated with the 
sensory qualities of the novel food. 
 With isolated exceptions (Kosson, Suchy, Mayer, & Libby, 2002), the recognition of disgust 
expressions has not been found to be impaired in individuals with psychopathic tendencies (see, 
for a meta-analytic review, Marsh & Blair, 2008). Even the Kosson et al. (2002) study only reported 
impairment when the psychopathic participants responded with their left and not when they 
responded with their right hands—as such the result cannot be considered to reﬂ ect impaired 
recognition of disgust expressions  per se . In short, the response to the disgust of others does not 
appear to be disrupted in individuals with psychopathic traits. 
 Processing the anger of others 
 Angry expressions are known to curtail the behavior of others in situations where social rules 
or expectations have been violated (Averill, 1982). It has been argued that displays of anger or 
embarrassment do not act as unconditioned stimuli for aversive conditioning or instrumental 
learning, but rather as important signals to modulate current behavioral responding, particularly 
in situations involving hierarchy interactions (Blair, 2003). They appear to serve to inform the 
observer to stop the current behavioral action rather than to convey any information as to whether 
that action should be initiated in the future. Angry expressions, in short, trigger response reversal 
(Blair, 2003), a function that inferior frontal cortex is particularly involved in (Cools, Clark, Owen, 
& Robbins, 2002)—particularly regarding the actual change in response (cf. Budhani, Marsh, Pine, 
& Blair, 2007). From the earliest work (Blair et al., 1999), neuroimaging studies have shown that 
the neural response to angry expressions involves inferior frontal cortex (see, for a meta-analytic 
review, Murphy et al., 2003). 
 Individuals with psychopathy show no indications of signiﬁ cant impairment in the response to 
another individual’s anger. Impairment in the recognition of anger is not typically reported in this 
population (see, for a meta-analytic review, Marsh & Blair, 2008). Moreover, the neuroimaging 
work indicates that the response to angry expressions is intact in youth and adults with psycho-
pathic tendencies (Marsh et al., 2008; Pardini & Phillips, 2010; Passamonti et al., 2010). In short, 
the response to the anger of others does not appear to be disrupted in individuals with psycho-
pathic traits. 
 Moral judgment 
 The past 15 years have seen great change in the understanding the development of morality. 
Following the relatively long dominance of positions that morality reﬂ ected rational thought 
(Colby & Kohlberg, 1987), positions emerged stressing the importance of emotion, ﬁ rst from 
data from a clinical population, individuals with psychopathy (Blair, 1995) and then later data 
with healthy adults (Greene, Sommerville, Nystrom, Darley, & Cohen, 2001; Haidt, 2001). More 
recently, still there has been a push back against emotion-based positions. This is partly due to a 

SOCIAL COGNITION IN INDIVIDUALS WITH PSYCHOPATHIC TENDENCIES
372
growing recognition of the complexity of the computations that are subsumed within the term 
moral. 
 For instance, it is important to distinguish judgments of “badness,” or affectively negative 
occurrences (e.g. a hurricane kills ﬁ ve people) from judgments of “immorality” (e.g. a person 
kills ﬁ ve people; Nichols, 2002). As noted by Nichols, emotion-based systems generate judgments 
of “badness”, but could not—on their own—generate judgments of “immorality” (an individual 
killing ﬁ ve people and a hurricane killing ﬁ ve people are both “bad”, but only the ﬁ rst is usu-
ally considered as immoral). For an act to be considered “immoral” there must not only be an 
emotion-based sense of “badness”, but also a representation of the perpetrator’s intent. Indeed, 
it should be noted that intent information, based on ToM, appears to supersede emotion infor-
mation during development (Piaget, 1932; Young, Camprodon, Hauser, Pascual-Leone, & Saxe, 
2010). As such an emotion-based account cannot provide a full explanation of adult moral rea-
soning. However, such an account can allow an understanding of the basis of  moral develop-
ment (even if it does not allow for an account of the development of all aspects of adult moral 
reasoning). 
 According to the IES model, individuals with elevated psychopathic traits show impairment in 
the amygdala’s role in responding to/learning from fearful, sad, and pain expressions (Blair, 2007). 
Developmentally, this leads to such individuals regarding care-based transgressions (actions that 
frighten, upset, or hurt others) as less aversive than healthy individuals do. In contrast, the insu-
la’s role in responding to/learning from disgusted expressions and inferior frontal cortex’s role in 
responding to angry expressions is considered intact. Consequently, developmentally, it is argued 
that the processing of disgust-based (actions associated with the disgust of others) and conven-
tional (actions associated with hierarchical violations leading to interpersonal anger) transgres-
sions should be intact. Finally, it is worth also mentioning that the model assumes that the role of 
vmPFC in representing reinforcement expectancy information is disrupted in psychopathy. This is 
important to note as reinforcement expectancies guide behavior—both judgments of badness, but 
also whether actions should be performed or not (Blair, 2007). 
 In line with this, several studies have shown that individuals with psychopathy show impairment 
in processing care based transgressions (Blair, 1995, 1997; Koenigs, Kruepke, Zeier, & Newman, 
2011). Moreover, the recruitment of the amygdala and vmPFC during care-based reasoning is dis-
rupted in youth and adults with psychopathic tendencies (Glenn, Raine, & Schug, 2008; Harenski, 
Harenski, Shane, & Kiehl, 2010; Marsh, Finger, Fowler, Jurkowitz, Schechter, Yu, et al., 2011). 
 Data suggests intact conventional transgressions processing (Blair, 1995, 1997; see also; Nucci 
& Herman, 1982), as well as disgust-based transgression processing (Glenn, Iyer, Graham, Koleva, 
& Haidt, 2009) in this population. The Glenn et al. (2009) study is worth describing in more 
detail. This comprised a very large study with healthy adults ( n =2517) relating psychopathic 
traits, as indexed by Levenson’s Self-report Psychopathy Scale (Levenson, Kiehl, & Fitzpatrick, 
1995), to performance on the Moral Foundations Questionnaire (Glenn et al., 2009). This is a 
measure assessing an individual’s commitment to the domains of morality (e.g. the care-based, 
disgust-based and conventional domains; (Glenn et al., 2009). In line with previous work (Blair, 
1995), the Glenn et al. study (2009) reported that higher psychopathic tendencies were related to 
notably less commitment to care-based norms, but intact commitment to conventional norms. In 
addition, importantly, this study extended earlier work by also demonstrating: (i) little relationship 
between psychopathic tendencies and commitment to disgust-based norms; and (ii) that psycho-
pathic tendencies were associated with an increased willingness to violate norms  of  any type for 
money (Glenn et al., 2009). This last ﬁ nding is potentially very important. A basic tenet of the IES 
model is that emotional learning systems allow norms to acquire emotive force, force which guides 

CONCLUSIONS
373
attitudes toward these norms. Only one of these emotional learning systems is thought be dis-
rupted in psychopathic traits, but all are thought to feed reinforcement expectancy information to 
vmPFC. The vmPFC is thought to represent this information and allow appropriate decision mak-
ing, particularly in situations where there are multiple reinforcements to be evaluated. In short, the 
“willingness to violate” data support earlier data indicating impairment in reinforcement-based 
decision making in individuals with psychopathic tendencies (Blair, Colledge, & Mitchell, 2001a) 
and critically indicate that this is present whatever the nature of the reinforcement (disgust- and 
anger-based as well as distress cue-based). 
 With respect to this latter point, other social reasoning tasks have been shown to rely on the role of 
vmPFC in representing reinforcement expectancies. For example, in the Prisoner’s Dilemma task, 
participants are required to choose whether to cooperate with another player or not. Contingencies 
are set up such that the most reinforcing option is to defect, but only if the other person cooperates. 
Otherwise, mutual cooperation is the most rewarding option. Healthy participants show greater 
vmPFC activation when choosing to cooperate presumably because of the greater probability of 
receiving reward—assuming, as is typically the case, the partner also cooperates (Rilling, Glenn, 
Jairam, Pagnoni, Goldsmith, Elfenbein, et al., 2007; Rilling, Gutman, Zeh, Pagnoni, Berns, & Kilts, 
2002). However, adults with elevated psychopathic traits do not (Rilling et al., 2007). Moreover, 
adults with elevated psychopathic traits are signiﬁ cantly more likely to defect (Mokros, Menner, 
Eisenbarth, Alpers, Lange, & Osterheider, 2008; Rilling et al., 2007). The suggestion would be that 
this is due to their weaker representation of the rewards of cooperation within vmPFC. The same 
explanation can be used to explain their impaired performance on other social decision making 
games, such as the Ultimatum and Dictator games, performance similar to that shown by patients 
with vmPFC damage (Koenigs, Kruepke, & Newman, 2010). 
 In short, speciﬁ c aspects of moral judgment are dysfunctional in psychopathy. Learning about 
the badness of care-based transgressions, which is reliant on the amygdala’s response to distress 
cue stimuli, is disrupted. However, learning about the badness of disgust-based and conventional 
transgressions appears intact. Interestingly, although certain types of decision based on this infor-
mation, particularly choice behavior, requiring the representation of the reinforcements associated 
with two or more options and necessitating appropriate reinforcement signaling within vmPFC 
is dysfunctional both in the context of speciﬁ c forms of moral reasoning task and in other social 
reasoning tasks more generally. 
 Conclusions  
 In conclusion, rather than a unitary mechanism, social cognition and empathy are terms that sub-
sume a variety of computational processes that are mediated by at least partially separable neural 
systems within the brain. We have distinguished here between cognitive, motor and emotional 
empathy and even within the category of emotional empathy between systems involved in the 
response to fear/sadness, pain, disgust and anger. Work with patients with psychopathy is inter-
esting for social cognition because it shows, differently from work with autism, how these com-
putational processes can be selectively disrupted. Unlike patients with autism, individuals with 
psychopathy have no impairment in cognitive empathy (ToM). Nor do they have impairment in 
motor empathy. Their impairments are conﬁ ned to aspects of emotional empathy. But even here 
the deﬁ cits are selective. Responding to and learning from angry and disgusted expressions appears 
intact. However, learning from and responding to fearful/sad and painful expressions is not. This 
selective impairment has severe developmental consequences. The individual fails to learn to avoid 
actions that upset and harm others. Their moral judgment is impaired, but, more importantly, 

SOCIAL COGNITION IN INDIVIDUALS WITH PSYCHOPATHIC TENDENCIES
374
their behavior toward others is disrupted. The individual becomes more able to commit actions 
that will harm others if they will lead to advantage for the self. 
 Acknowledegments 
 This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institute of 
Mental Health, National Institutes of Health under grant number 1-ZIA-MH00286008. The 
authors have no conﬂ icts of interest or ﬁ nancial disclosures to report. 
 Author’s contribution to the Work was done as part of the Author’s ofﬁ cial duties as a NIH 
employee and is a Work of the United States Government. Therefore, copyright may not be estab-
lished in the United States.  
 References 
 Adolphs, R. (2002) . Neural systems for recognizing emotion.  Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 12 (2): 169–77 . 
 Adolphs, R., Gosselin, F., Buchanan, T. W., Tranel, D., Schyns, P., & Damasio, A. R. (2005) . A mechanism 
for impaired fear recognition aft er amygdala damage.  Nature  433 (7021): 68–72 . 
 Adolphs, R., & Tranel, D. (2004) . Impaired judgments of sadness but not happiness following bilateral 
amygdala damage.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  16 (3): 453–62 . 
 Amodio, D. M., & Frith, C. D. (2006) . Meeting of minds: the medial frontal cortex and social cognition. 
 Nature Review in Neuroscience  7 (4): 268–77 . 
 Aniskiewicz, A. S. (1979) . Autonomic components of vicarious conditioning and psychopathy.  Journal of 
Clinical Psychology  35 : 60–7 . 
 Averill, J. R. (1982).  Anger and Aggression: An Essay on Emotion .  New York :  Springer-Verlag . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985).  Does the autistic child have a “theory of mind”? 
 Cognition  21 : 37–46 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Hill, J., Raste, Y., & Plumb, I. (2001) . Th e “Reading the Mind in 
the Eyes” Test revised version: a study with normal adults, and adults with Asperger syndrome or 
high-functioning autism.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  42 (2): 241–51 . 
 Bastiaansen, J. A., Meff ert, H., Hein, S., Huizinga, P., Ketelaars, C., Pijnenborg, M., Bartels, A., Minderaa, 
R., Keysers, C., & de Bildt, A. (2011) . Diagnosing autism spectrum disorders in adults: the use of 
Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) module 4.  Journal of Autism Development Disorders 
 41 (9): 1256–66 . 
 Blair, K. S., Newman, C., Mitchell, D. G., Richell, R. A., Leonard, A., Morton, J., & Blair, R. J. R. 
(2006) . Diff erentiating among prefrontal substrates in psychopathy: neuropsychological test fi ndings. 
 Neuropsychology  20 (2): 153–65 . 
 Blair, R. J. R. (1995) . A cognitive developmental approach to morality: Investigating the psychopath. 
 Cognition  57 : 1–29 . 
 Blair, R. J. R. (1997) . Moral reasoning in the child with psychopathic tendencies.  Personality and Individual 
Diff erences  22 : 731–9 . 
 Blair, R. J. R. (1999) . Responsiveness to distress cues in the child with psychopathic tendencies.  Personality 
and Individual Diff erences  27 : 135–45 . 
 Blair, R. J. R. (2003) . Facial expressions, their communicatory functions and neurocognitive substrates. 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, London, B Biological Science  358 (1431): 561–72 . 
 Blair, R. J. R. (2004) . Th e roles of orbital frontal cortex in the modulation of antisocial behavior.  Brain and 
Cognition  55 (1): 198–208 . 
 Blair, R. J. R. (2005) . Responding to the emotions of others: Dissociating forms of empathy through the 
study of typical and psychiatric populations.  Consciousness and Cognition  14 (4): 698–718 . 

375
REFERENCES
 Blair, R. J. R. (2006) . Dissociable systems for empathy. In G. Bock & J. Goode (Eds),  Empathy and Fairness 
(pp.  134–41 ).  Chichester :  John Wiley and Sons . 
 Blair, R. J. R. (2007) . Th e amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex in morality and psychopathy.  Trends 
in Cognitive Science  11 (9): 387–92 . 
 Blair, R. J. R. (2008) . Fine cuts of empathy and the amygdala: dissociable defi cits in psychopathy and 
 autism.  Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology  61 (1): 157–70 . 
 Blair, R. J. R. (2010) . Neuroimaging of psychopathy and antisocial behavior: a targeted  review.  Current 
Psychiatry Reports  12 : 76–82 . 
 Blair, R. J. R., Colledge, E., & Mitchell, D. G. (2001a).  Somatic markers and response reversal: is there 
orbitofrontal cortex dysfunction in boys with psychopathic tendencies?  Journal of Abnormal Childhood 
Psychology  29 (6): 499–511 . 
 Blair, R. J. R., Colledge, E., Murray, L., & Mitchell, D. G. (2001b) . A selective impairment in the processing 
of sad and fearful expressions in children with psychopathic tendencies.  Journal of Abnormal Childhood 
Psychology ,  29 (6): 491–498 . 
 Blair, R. J. R., Jones, L., Clark, F., & Smith, M. (1997).  Th e psychopathic individual: A lack of 
responsiveness to distress cues?  Psychophysiology  34 : 192–8 . 
 Blair, R. J. R., Mitchell, D. G., Richell, R. A., Kelly, S., Leonard, A., Newman, C., & Scott, S. K. (2002) . 
Turning a deaf ear to fear: impaired recognition of vocal aff ect in psychopathic individuals.  Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology  111 (4): 682–6 . 
 Blair, R. J. R., Mitchell, D. G. V., & Blair, K. S. (2005).  Th e Psychopath: Emotion and the Brain .  Oxford : 
 Blackwell . 
 Blair, R. J. R., Morris, J. S., Frith, C. D., Perrett, D. I., & Dolan, R. (1999) . Dissociable neural responses to 
facial expressions of sadness and anger.  Brain  122 : 883–93 . 
 Blair, R. J. R., Sellars, C., Strickland, I., Clark, F., Williams, A., Smith, M., & Jones, L. (1996) . Th eory of 
mind in the psychopath.  Journal of Forensic Psychiatry  7 : 15–25 . 
 Blakemore, S. J., & Decety, J. (2001) . From the perception of action to the understanding of intention. 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience  2 (8): 561–7 . 
 Budhani, S., Marsh, A. A., Pine, D. S., & Blair, R. J. R (2007) . Neural correlates of response reversal: 
Considering acquisition.  NeuroImage  34 (4): 1754–65 . 
 Calder, A. J., Keane, J., Manes, F., Antoun, N., & Young, A. W. (2000) . Impaired recognition and 
experience of disgust following brain injury.  Nature Neuroscience  3 : 1077–8 . 
 Cardinal, R. N., & Everitt, B. J. (2004) . Neural and psychological mechanisms underlying appetitive 
learning: links to drug addiction.  Current Opinion in Neurobiology  14 (2): 156–62 . 
 Carr, L., Iacoboni, M., Dubeau, M. C., Mazziotta, J. C., & Lenzi, G. L. (2003) . Neural mechanisms of 
empathy in humans: a relay from neural systems for imitation to limbic areas.  Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA  100 (9): 5497–502 . 
 Colby, A., & Kohlberg, L. (1987).  Th e Measurement of Moral Judgement .  New York :  Cambridge University 
Press . 
 Cooke, D. J., Michie, C., & Hart, S. (2006) . Facets of clinical psychopathy: Toward clearer measurement. 
In C. J. Patrick (Ed. ),  Th e Handbook of Psychopathy (pp. 91–106) .  New York :  Guilford Press . 
 Cools, R., Clark, L., Owen, A. M., & Robbins, T. W. (2002) . Defi ning the neural mechanisms of 
probabilistic reversal learning using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  22 (11): 4563–7 . 
 Cubero, I., Th iele, T. E., & Bernstein, I. L. (1999) . Insular cortex lesions and taste aversion learning: eff ects 
of conditioning method and timing of lesion.  Brain Res earch  839 (2): 323–30 . 
 Dadds, M. R., El Masry, Y., Wimalaweera, S., & Guastella, A. J. (2008) . Reduced eye gaze explains “fear 
blindness” in childhood psychopathic traits.  Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry  47 : 455–63 . 

SOCIAL COGNITION IN INDIVIDUALS WITH PSYCHOPATHIC TENDENCIES
376
 Dadds, M. R., Perry, Y., Hawes, D. J., Merz, S., Riddell, A. C., Haines, D. J., Solak, E., & 
Abeygunawardane, A. I. (2006) . Attention to the eyes and fear-recognition defi cits in child 
psychopathy.  British Journal of Psychiatry  189 : 280–1 . 
 Decety, J. (2011) . Dissecting the neural mechanisms mediating empathy.  Emotion Review  3 : 92–108 . 
 Decety, J., & Jackson, P. L. (2004) . Th e functional architecture of human empathy.  Behaviour and Cognitive 
Neuroscience Review  3 (2): 71–100 . 
 Dolan, M., & Fullam, R. (2004) . Th eory of mind and mentalizing ability in antisocial personality disorders 
with and without psychopathy.  Psychology & Medicine  34 (6): 1093–102 . 
 Dolan, M., & Fullam, R. (2006) . Face aff ect recognition defi cits in personality-disordered off enders: 
Association with psychopathy.  Psychology & Medicine  36 (11): 1563–9 . 
 Drevets, W. C., Lowry, T., Gautier, C., Perrett, D. I., & Kupfer, D. J. (2000).  Amygdalar blood fl ow 
responses to facially expressed sadness .  Biological Psychiatry  47 (8S): 160S . 
 Fine, C., & Blair, R. J. R(2000) . Mini review: Th e cognitive and emotional eff ects of amygdala damage. 
 Neurocase  6 : 435–50 . 
 Finger, E. C., Marsh, A. A., Blair, K. S., Reid, M. E., Sims, C., Ng, P., Pine, D. S., & Blair, R. J. R. (2011) . 
Disrupted reinforcement signaling in the orbital frontal cortex and caudate in youths with conduct 
disorder or oppositional defi ant disorder and a high level of psychopathic traits.  American Journal of 
Psychiatry ,  168 (2):  834–841 . 
 Forth, A. E., Kosson, D. S., & Hare, R. D. (2007).  Th e Psychopathy Checklist: Youth Version .  Toronto : 
 Multi-HealthSystems . 
 Frick, P. J. (1995) . Callous-unemotional traits and conduct problems: a two-factor model of psychopathy in 
children.  Issues in Criminological and Legal Psychology  24 : 47–51 . 
 Frick, P. J., Bodin, S. D., & Barry, C. T. (2000) . Psychopathic traits and conduct problems in community 
and clinic-referred samples of children: Further development of the psychopathy screening device. 
 Psychology Assessment  12 (4): 382–93 . 
 Frick, P. J., & Hare, R. D. (2001).  Th e Antisocial Process Screening Device .  Toronto :  Multi-Health Systems . 
 Frick, P. J., & Marsee, M. A. (2006).  Psychopathy and developmental pathways to antisocial behavior in 
youth. In: C. J. Patrick (Ed. ), Handbook of Psychopathy (pp.  353–374 ).  New York :  Guilford . 
 Fridlund, A. (1992) . Darwin’s anti-Darwinism in the expression of the emotions in man and animals. 
 International Review of Emotion (Vol. 2, pp. 117–37). New York: Wiley. 
 Frith, U. (1989).  Autism: Explaining the Enigma .  Oxford :  Blackwell . 
 Gallagher, M., & Schoenbaum, G. (1999) . Functions of the amygdala and related forebrain areas in 
attention and cognition.  Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences  877 : 397–411 . 
 Glenn, A. L., Iyer, R., Graham, J., Koleva, S., & Haidt, J. (2009) . Are all types of morality compromised in 
psychopathy.  Journal of Personality Disorders  23 : 384–98 . 
 Glenn, A. L., Raine, A., & Schug, R. A. (2008) . Th e neural correlates of moral decision-making in 
psychopathy.  Molecular Psychiatry  14 : 5–6 . 
 Gordon, H. L., Baird, A. A., & End, A. (2004) . Functional diff erences among those high and low on a trait 
measure of psychopathy.  Biological Psychiatry  56 (7): 516–21 . 
 Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley, J. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2001) . An fMRI 
investigation of emotional engagement in moral judgment.  Science  293 :  1971–2 . 
 Haidt, J. (2001) . Th e emotional dog and its rational tail: a social intuitionist approach to moral judgment. 
 Psychology Review  108 (4): 814–34 . 
 Hare, R. D. (2003).  Hare Psychopathy Checklist-Revised (PCL-R), 2nd edn .  Toronto :  Multi Health Systems . 
 Harenski, C. L., Harenski, K. A., Shane, M. S., & Kiehl, K. A. (2010) . Aberrant neural processing of moral 
violations in criminal psychopaths.  Journal of Abnormal Psychology  119 (4): 863–74 . 
 Hart, S. D., Forth, A. E., & Hare, R. D. (1990) . Performance of criminal psychopaths on selected 
neuropsychological tests.  Journal of Abnormal Psychology  99 : 374–9 . 

377
 Hatfi eld, E., Cacioppo, J. T., & Rapson, R. (1994).  Emotional Contagion .  New York :  Cambridge University 
Press . 
 Hoff man, M. L. (1987) . Th e contribution of empathy to justice and moral judgment. In N. Eisenberg & 
J. Strayer (Eds),  Empathy and its Development (pp.  47–80 ).  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 House, T. H., & Milligan, W. L. (1976) . Autonomic responses to modeled distress in prison psychopaths. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  34 : 556–60 . 
 Jackson, P. L., Rainville, P., & Decety, J. (2006) . To what extent do we share the pain of others? Insight from 
the neural bases of pain empathy.  Pain  125 (1–2): 5–9 . 
 Jeon, D., Kim, S., Chetana, M., Jo, D., Ruley, H. E., Lin, S. Y., Rabah, D., Kinet, J. P., & Shin, H. S. (2010) . 
Observational fear learning involves aff ective pain system and Cav1. 2 Ca2+ channels in ACC .  Nature 
Neuroscience  13 (4): 482–8 . 
 Jones, A. P., Happe, F. G., Gilbert, F., Burnett, S., & Viding, E. (2010) . Feeling, caring, knowing: diff erent 
types of empathy defi cit in boys with psychopathic tendencies and autism spectrum disorder.  Journal of 
Child Psychology & Psychiatry  51 (11): 1188–97 . 
 Jones, A. P., Laurens, K. R., Herba, C. M., Barker, G. J., & Viding, E. (2009) . Amygdala hypoactivity 
to fearful faces in boys with conduct problems and callous-unemotional traits.  American Journal of 
Psychiatry  166 : 95–102 . 
 Karnik, N. S., McMullin, M. A., & Steiner, H. (2006) . Disruptive behaviors: conduct and oppositional 
disorders in adolescents.  Adolescent Medical Clinic  17 (1): 97–114 . 
 Keysers, C., & Gazzola, V. (2006) . Toward a unifying neural theory of social cognition.  Progressive Brain 
Research  156 : 379–401 . 
 Kiehl, K. A. (2006) . A cognitive neuroscience perspective on psychopathy: Evidence for paralimbic system 
dysfunction.  Psychiatry Research  142 : 107–28 . 
 Kimonis, E. R., Frick, P. J., Fazekas, H., & Loney, B. R. (2006) . Psychopathy, aggression, and the processing 
of emotional stimuli in non-referred girls and boys.  Behavioural Sciences & the Law  24 (1): 21–37 . 
 Koenigs, M., Kruepke, M., & Newman, J. P. (2010) . Economic decision-making in psychopathy: a 
comparison with ventromedial prefrontal lesion patients.  Neuropsychologia  48 (7): 2198–204 . 
 Koenigs, M., Kruepke, M., Zeier, J., & Newman, J. P. (2011) . Utilitarian moral judgment in psychopathy. 
 Social & Cognitive Aff ective Neurosci ence  7 (6):708–14. 
 Kosson, D. S., Suchy, Y., Mayer, A. R., & Libby, J. (2002) . Facial aff ect recognition in criminal psychopaths. 
 Emotion  2 (4): 398–411 . 
 Lamm, C., Decety, J., & Singer, T. (2011) . Meta-analytic evidence for common and distinct neural networks 
associated with directly experienced pain and empathy for pain.  NeuroImage  54 (3): 2492–502 . 
 LaPierre, D., Braun, C. M. J., & Hodgins, S. (1995) . Ventral frontal defi cits in psychopathy: 
Neuropsychological test fi ndings.  Neuropsychologia  33 : 139–51 . 
 LeDoux, J. E. (2007) . Th e amygdala.  Current Biology  17 (20): R868–74 . 
 Levenson, M. R., Kiehl, K. A., & Fitzpatrick, C. M. (1995) . Assessing psychopathic attributes in a 
non-institutionalized population.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  68 : 151–8 . 
 Lombardo, M. V., Chakrabarti, B., Bullmore, E. T., Wheelwright, S. J., Sadek, S. A., Suckling, J., & 
Baron-Cohen, S. (2010) . Shared neural circuits for mentalizing about the self and others.  Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience  22 (7):  1623–1635 . 
 Lynam, D. R., Caspi, A., Moffi  tt, T. E., Loeber, R., & Stouthamer-Loeber, M. (2007) . Longitudinal evidence 
that psychopathy scores in early adolescence predict adult psychopathy.  Journal ofAbnormalPsychology 
 116 (1): 155–65 . 
 Marsh, A. A., & Blair, R. J. R. (2008) . Defi cits in facial aff ect recognition among antisocial populations: a 
meta-analysis.  Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews  32 (3): 454–65 . 
 Marsh, A. A., Finger, E. C., Fowler, K. A., Jurkowitz, I. T., Schechter, J. C., Yu, H. H., Pine, D. S., & Blair, 
R. J. (2011) . Reduced amygdala-orbitofrontal connectivity during moral judgments in youths with 
disruptive behavior disorders and psychopathic traits.  Psychiatry Research  194 (3):279–86. 
REFERENCES

SOCIAL COGNITION IN INDIVIDUALS WITH PSYCHOPATHIC TENDENCIES
378
 Marsh, A. A., Finger, E. C., Mitchell, D. G. V., Reid, M. E., Sims, C., Kosson, D. S., Towbin, K. E., 
Leibenluft , E., Pine, D. S., & Blair, R. J. R. (2008) . Reduced amygdala response to fearful expressions in 
children and adolescents with callous-unemotional traits and disruptive behavior disorders.  American 
Journal of Psychiatry  165 (6): 712–20 . 
 Mineka, S., & Cook, M. (1993) . Mechanisms involved in the observational conditioning of fear.  Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General  122 : 23–38 . 
 Moffi  tt, T. E. (1993) . Th e neuropsychology of conduct disorder.  Development and Psychopathology 
 5 : 135–52 . 
 Mokros, A., Menner, B., Eisenbarth, H., Alpers, G. W., Lange, K. W., & Osterheider, M. (2008) . 
Diminished cooperativeness of psychopaths in a prisoner’s dilemma game yields higher rewards.  Journal 
ofAbnormalPsychology  117 (2): 406–13 . 
 Munoz, L. C., & Frick, P. J. (2007) . Th e reliability, stability, and predictive utility of the self-report version of 
the Antisocial Process Screening Device.  Scandinavian Journal of Psychology  48 : 299–312 . 
 Murphy, F. C., Nimmo-Smith, I., & Lawrence, A. D. (2003) . Functional neuroanatomy of emotions: a 
meta-analysis.  Cognitive ,  Aff ective & Behavioral Neuroscience  3 (3): 207–33 . 
 Neumann, C. S., Kosson, D. S., Forth, A. E., & Hare, R. D. (2006) . Factor structure of the Hare 
Psychopathy Checklist: Youth Version (PCL: YV) in incarcerated adolescents.  Psychology Assessment 
 18 : 142–54 . 
 Nichols, S. (2002) . Norms with feeling: toward a psychological account of moral judgment.  Cognition 
 84 (2): 221–36 . 
 Nucci, L. P., & Herman, S. (1982) . Behavioral disordered children’s conceptions of moral, conventional, and 
personal issues.  Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology  10 : 411–25 . 
 Pardini, D. A., & Phillips, M. (2010) . Neural responses to emotional and neutral facial expressions in 
chronically violent men.  Journal of Psychiatry Neuroscience  35 (6): 390–8 . 
 Passamonti, L., Fairchild, G., Goodyer, I. M., Hurford, G., Hagan, C. C., Rowe, J. B., & Calder, A. J. 
(2010) . Neural abnormalities in early-onset and adolescence-onset conduct disorder.  Archives of General 
Psychiatry  67 (7): 729–38 . 
 Patrick, C. J. (1994) . Emotion and psychopathy: Startling new insights.  Psychophysiology  31 : 319–30 . 
 Phillips, M. L., Young, A. W., Scott, S. K., Calder, A. J., Andrew, C., Giampietro, V., Williams, S. C., 
Bullmore, E. T., Brammer, M., & Gray, J. A. (1998) . Neural responses to facial and vocal expressions 
of fear and disgust.  Proceedings of the Royal Society, London, B Biological Sciences  265 (1408): 1809–17 . 
 Piaget, J. (1932).  Th e Moral Development of the Child .  London :  Routledge and Kegan Paul . 
 Preston, S. D., & de Waal, F. B. (2002) . Empathy: Its ultimate and proximate bases.  Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences  25 (1): 1–20 . 
 Richell, R. A., Mitchell, D. G., Newman, C., Leonard, A., Baron-Cohen, S., & Blair, R. J. (2003).  Th eory of 
mind and psychopathy: can psychopathic individuals read the “language of the eyes”?  Neuropsychologia 
 41 (5): 523–6 . 
 Rilling, J. K., Glenn, A. L., Jairam, M. R., Pagnoni, G., Goldsmith, D. R., Elfenbein, H. A., & Lilienfeld, 
S. O. (2007) . Neural correlates of social cooperation and non-cooperation as a function of psychopathy. 
 Biological Psychiatry  61 (11): 1260–71 . 
 Rilling, J. K., Gutman, D., Zeh, T., Pagnoni, G., Berns, G., & Kilts, C. (2002) . A neural basis for social 
cooperation.  Neuron  35 (2): 395–405 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2001) . Neurophysiological mechanisms underlying the 
understanding and imitation of action.  Nature Reviews in Neuroscience  2 (9): 661–70 . 
 Rozin, P., Haidt, J., & McCauley, C. R. (1993) . Disgust. In M. Lewis & J. M. Haviland (Eds),  Handbook of 
emotions (pp.  575–94 ).  New York :  Guilford Press . 
 Saxe, R., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2006) . Th e neuroscience of theory of mind.  Social Neuroscience  1 (3–4),  i–ix . 
 Schmolck, H., & Squire, L. R. (2001) . Impaired perception of facial emotions following bilateral damage to 
the anterior temporal lobe.  Neuropsychology  15 (1): 30–8 . 

379
 Seguin, J. R., Boulerice, B., Harden, P. W., Tremblay, R. E., & Pihl, R. O. (1999) . Executive functions and 
physical aggression aft er controlling for attention defi cit hyperactivity disorder, general memory, and 
IQ.  Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry  40 (8): 1197–208 . 
 Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Harari, H., Aharon-Peretz, J., & Levkovitz, Y. (2010) . Th e role of the orbitofrontal 
cortex in aff ective theory of mind defi cits in criminal off enders with psychopathic tendencies.  Cortex 
 46 (5): 668–77 . 
 Singer, T., & Lamm, C. (2009) . Th e social neuroscience of empathy.  Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences  1156 : 81–96 . 
 Small, D. M., Gregory, M. D., Mak, Y. E., Gitelman, D., Mesulam, M. M., & Parrish, T. (2003) . 
Dissociation of neural representation of intensity and aff ective valuation in human gustation.  Neuron 
 39 : 701–11 . 
 Stevens, D., Charman, T., & Blair, R. J. R. (2001) . Recognition of emotion in facial expressions and vocal 
tones in children with psychopathic tendencies.  Journal of Genetic Psychology  162 (2): 201–11 . 
 Sylvers, P. D., Brennan, P. A., & Lilienfeld, S. O. (2011) . Psychopathic traits and preattentive threat 
processing in children: a novel test of the fearlessness hypothesis.  Psychology Science  22 (10): 1280–7 . 
 Th ioux, M., & Keysers, C. (2010) . Empathy: shared circuits and their dysfunctions.  Dialogues in Clinical 
Neuroscience  12 (4): 546–52 . 
 Widom, C. S. (1976) . Interpersonal and personal construct systems in psychopaths.  Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology  44 : 614–23 . 
 Widom, C. S. (1978) . An empirical classifi cation of female off enders.  Criminal Justice and Behavior  5 : 35–52 . 
 Young, L., Camprodon, J. A., Hauser, M., Pascual-Leone, A., & Saxe, R. (2010) . Disruption of the right 
temporoparietal junction with transcranial magnetic stimulation reduces the role of beliefs in moral 
judgments.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  107 : 6753–8 . 
REFERENCES

 Chapter 21 
 Two systems for action comprehension 
in autism: Mirroring and mentalizing  
 Antonia Hamilton and Lauren   Marsh 
 Introduction  
 Understanding other minds 
 Imagine in a caf é , you order a cup of coffee and soon after, see the barista reaching toward the 
teabags. You quickly infer that she is about to make tea, but did she mis-hear your order, or is she 
serving someone else already? The ability to rapidly infer the goal of another person’s action and 
make a guess about her underlying intention is critical in everyday social interaction. 
 Research on social cognition and the problem of understanding other minds has, over the last 
30 years, been largely dominated by the idea of “Theory of mind, that is, the ability to consider 
the internal, mental states of other individuals. In Premack & Woodruff’s (1978) original paper 
on Theory of Mind, they considered the problem of how to infer another actor’s  intentions , but 
research in the 30 years since then has been largely dominated by the question of how to infer an 
actor’s  beliefs . This is largely because false-belief tasks provide a clear-cut (and possibly the only) 
way to assess a participant’s representational theory of mind (Dennett, 1978). However, in the last 
few years, interest has grown in the brain and cognitive systems, which allow us to infer an actor’s 
goal or intention by watching her actions. 
 The present chapter examines the problem of understanding goals and intentions in other 
minds, and the integrity of these systems in autism. In the ﬁ rst part, we summarize recent research 
on action understanding in the typical brain, distinguishing between brain networks associated 
with mirroring and those associated with mentalizing. In the second part, we examine current 
theories of action understanding in autism, in relation to recent behavioural and neuroimaging 
evidence. Finally, we evaluate the data in relation to the theories and consider some important 
future directions. 
 Part 1:  Two networks in the typical brain  
 Neuroimaging studies over the last 15 years have identiﬁ ed two distinct brain networks which 
are reliably engaged when typical individuals engage in non-verbal social interactions including 
observing actions (and possibly inferring goals), imitating actions, and considering other people’s 
beliefs and desires. These two networks are associated with distinct cognitive functions and theo-
retical approaches. We brieﬂ y review the major and recent studies of each network. 
 The mirror neuron system 
 Mirror neurons are deﬁ ned as single cells which respond when an individual performs an action 
and observes an equivalent action. Such neurons have been recorded in the premotor and parietal 

PART 1: TWO NETWORKS IN THE TYPICAL BRAIN
381
cortex of the macaque monkey (Fogassi, Ferrari, Gesierich, Rozzi, Chersi, & Rizzolatti, 2005; 
Gallese, Fadiga, Fogassi, & Rizzolatti, 1996; di Pellegrino, Fadiga, Fogassi, Gallese, & Rizzolatti, 
1992). Although individual mirror neurons have not been studied in the same regions in the human 
brain, neuroimaging evidence suggests that equivalent systems can be found (Van Overwalle, 2009; 
Caspers, Zilles, Laird, & Eickhoff, 2010). The controversy (Hickok, 2009)over whether the mirror 
neuron system in monkeys is the same as the system identiﬁ ed in humans has largely been resolved 
by two recent fMRI studies. The ﬁ rst demonstrated matching ﬁ ne-scale patterns of activity in 
parietal cortex during performance and observation of ﬁ nger and hand actions, which implies 
that very similar neuronal populations are engaged in each task as predicted by the mirror neu-
ron hypothesis (Oosterhof, Wiggett, Diedrichsen, Tipper, & Downing, 2010). Secondly, Kilner, 
Neal, Weiskopf, Friston, & Frith (2009) asked participants to alternately perform and observe hand 
actions during fMRI. Suppression of the BOLD signal in inferior frontal gyrus was found when the 
action performed matched the previous observed action and when the action observed matched 
the previous performed action. The best explanation for this pattern of activity is that performed 
and observed actions both engage the same population of neurons, as required by the mirror 
neuron hypothesis. Thus, these two studies provide the strongest evidence yet for populations 
of neurons in the human brain with the same mirror properties as those found in the macaque 
brain. Throughout this chapter, we use the term “mirror systems” as a compact way to describe 
the human mirror neuron system without requiring the presence of mirror neurons themselves, 
and we use the term “mirroring” to refer to activity within classic mirror system regions which is 
assumed to link representations of performed and observed actions. 
 Since the discovery of human mirror systems, a number of claims have been made concerning 
their function. The mirror system seems to match observed actions onto the observer’s own motor 
system, so it has been claimed that this system allows action comprehension and imitation “from 
the inside” (Rizzolatti, Giacomo, & Sinigaglia, 2010). Similar mirror processes have been impli-
cated in emotional contagion (Singer, Seymour, O’Doherty, Kaube, Dolan, & Frith, 2004; Wicker, 
Bruno, Keysers, Plailly, Royet, Gallese, et al., 2003). Some suggest that these processes may provide a 
fundamental step toward language (Rizzolatti, Giacomo, & Arbib, 1998), empathy (Gallese, 2003a) 
and even mentalizing (Gallese, Vittorio, & Goldman, 1998) abilities. Thus, the mirror system has 
been hailed as a unifying basis for social cognition (Gallese, Vittorio, Keysers & Rizzolatti, 2004). 
However, the evidence for some of these claims remains weak. 
 In the present section, we focus on the claim that the mirror system provides the brain basis for 
understanding other people’s actions, goals and intentions. Multiple studies have reported that 
the core human mirror system regions of inferior parietal lobule (IPL) and premotor cortex are 
engaged when typical individuals observe another person acting (reviewed in Caspers et al., 2010). 
But can we go further and consider what cognitive processes might take place in these regions? 
When we see an action, for example, a child picking an apple, we can represent the action in mul-
tiple ways. It is possible to encode the shape of the child’s hand (a kinematic feature), the object 
the child reaches toward (a goal feature) and the child’s overall intention of picking the apple. The 
human brain likely represents all these features simultaneously, but can we distinguish how and 
where these are encoded? 
 Recent work suggests that kinematic and goal features of observed actions engage slightly dif-
ferent components within the human mirror system. Studies examining kinematic processing in 
the human brain indicate involvement of both higher order visual systems and inferior frontal 
gyrus (IFG). For example, if you see a person lift a box, you can normally infer the weight of 
the box based on kinematic factors such as the velocity of the actor’s lifting action (Hamilton, 
Joyce, Flanagan, Frith, & Wolpert, 2007). However, this ability is disrupted if repetitive transcranial 

TWO SYSTEMS FOR ACTION COMPREHENSION IN AUTISM: MIRRORING AND MENTALIZING
382
magnetic stimulation is used to create a “virtual lesion” (Pascual-Leone, Walsh, & Rothwell, 2000) 
of the IFG (Pobric & Hamilton, 2006; Hamilton & Grafton, 2006). BOLD responses in IFG are 
also sensitive to different hand apertures during grasping actions (Hamilton, & Grafton, 2008) 
and to different grasp types for example, ring pull vs. precision grip (Kilner et al., 2009). Evidence 
from single cell recordings in macaque monkeys also provides support for the idea that kinematic 
analysis occurs in area F5 (the monkey homologue of human IFG) as different types of grasp elicit 
different neuronal ﬁ ring rates (Bonini, Serventi, Simone, Rozzi, Ferrari, & Fogassi, 2011; Spinks, 
Kraskov, Brochier, Umilta, & Lemon, 2008). 
 In contrast, studies of goal processing suggest that the parietal mirror system, in particular 
anterior intraparietal sulcus (aIPS), is sensitive to action goals, independent of the kinematics 
that were used to achieve that goal. Hamilton & Grafton (2006)used a repetition suppression 
task in which participants watched movies of a hand reaching for a food item or tool during 
fMRI scanning. Data analysis compared trials where the goal of the action was the same as the 
previous trial (e.g. take-cookie followed by take-cookie)compared with trials where the goal 
of the action was different to the previous trial (e.g. take-disk followed by take-cookie). The 
results show that BOLD signal in just one cortical region, the left aIPS, was suppressed when 
participants saw a repeated action-goal regardless of the hand trajectory used. This pattern of 
response is predicted only in brain regions which contain neuronal populations that are sensitive 
to the manipulated features of the movies (taking a cookie vs. a disk) (Grill-Spector, Henson, & 
Martin, 2006). This means that aIPS contains neuronal populations which are sensitive to action 
goals. Oosterhof et al. (2010) also found evidence for the encoding of action goals in aIPS using 
a multi-voxel pattern analysis method that compared ﬁ ne-grained activation of voxels across 
conditions. Further studies found that the IPL also encodes action outcomes, regardless of the 
action kinematics (Hamilton & Grafton, 2009). In this study the same object was acted upon, 
only the means by which the goal was achieved was manipulated. Action outcome resulted in 
differential BOLD responses in the IPL regardless of the action kinematics. Data from mon-
keys is also compatible with this position, with reports of single neurons which differentiate 
reach-to-eat and reach-to-place actions in the IPL (Fogassi et al., 2005). Note that goal here is 
deﬁ ned very simply in terms of the identity of the object a person grasps, for example, taking a 
cookie compared with taking a computer disk. More complex action sequences and their goals 
might be represented elsewhere. 
 Together, these studies demonstrate that the human mirror system responds selectively to 
observed actions, and that different types of action processes depend more on different compo-
nents of the mirror system. In particular, kinematic features of an action are encoded in the fron-
tal mirror system, while goal features are encoded in the parietal mirror system. However, these 
mirror systems are not necessarily the only brain regions with a role in action understanding. As 
detailed in the next section, some action comprehension tasks also engage brain areas associated 
with mentalizing. 
 The mentalizing system 
 Mentalizing is the process of attributing mental states (beliefs, desires, and intentions) to another 
actor. Multiple studies have identiﬁ ed a mentalizing network in the brain, comprising medial pre-
frontal cortex (mPFC) and temporoparietal junction (TPJ). Temporal poles and precuneus are 
also sometimes found (see Gallagher & Frith, 2003; Amodio & Frith, 2006; Saxe & Kanwisher, 
2003, for reviews). These regions are engaged when reading stories which require mental state 
attributions (Saxe & Powell, 2006; Young, Dodell-Feder, & Saxe, 2010) or when considering the 

PART 1: TWO NETWORKS IN THE TYPICAL BRAIN
383
beliefs and future actions of others in interactive games (Fletcher et al., 1995). For example, play-
ing rock-paper-scissors encourages participants to think (“he thinks I’ll do rock, but I’ll do scissors 
and trick him”), and computational models can track this type of belief inference occurring in 
mPFC and TPJ (Hampton & Bossaerts, 2008; Yoshida, Seymour, Friston, & Dolan, 2010). However, 
the mentalizing network is not only engaged in tasks requiring explicit verbal belief inference. We 
focus here on the increasing number of studies that report engagement of this network during 
non-verbal or minimally verbal tasks in which participants attribute intentions or consider the 
longer term motivations underlying an action. 
 One of the earliest non-verbal mentalizing studies recorded brain activity while participants 
viewed animated triangles moving on the screen (Castelli, Happ é , Frith, & Frith, 2000). For some 
of these animations, typical individuals spontaneously describe the action in terms of the mental 
states of the triangles (e.g. “the big triangle is coaxing the little triangle”), while for others the 
action of the triangles is purposeless. Observation of the mentalizing triangles results in activation 
of mPFC and TPJ, despite the lack of verbal stimuli or instructions. 
 More recently, spontaneous activation of mentalizing systems during action observation was 
reported by Brass, Schmitt, Spengler, & Gergely (2007). In this study Brass and colleagues showed 
participants movies of unusual actions (e.g. turning on a light with your knee). In some cases, the 
context made the action rational (e.g. turning on a light with your knee because your hands are 
fully occupied), but in other movies the same action was judged as irrational (turning on the light 
with your knee when your hands are free). Brass et al. report greater activation in the mentalizing 
network including TPJ and mPFC when participants viewed irrational actions compared with 
rational ones. Critically, this activation was not related to the unfamiliarity of the actions because 
all actions were unusual. Rather, the engagement of TPJ and mPFC reﬂ ected the judged rational-
ity of the actions. This study shows that observation of human actions without instructions to 
mentalize can engage brain regions associated with mentalizing if the observed actions are hard 
to interpret. 
 Further studies have reﬁ ned our knowledge of when action understanding engages 
 mentalizing brain systems. de Lange, Spronk, Willems, Toni, & Bekkering (2008) showed par-
ticipants images of ordinary actions, actions which had an unusual intention and actions which 
had unusual kinematic features. This study found that while participants watched actions with 
an unusual intention, there was greater activity in the STS and mPFC, whereas actions with 
unusual kinematic features activated the IFG more. This study suggests that both mirror and 
mentalizing systems are complimentary systems which both contribute to action understand-
ing. The additional recruitment of the mentalizing system for action understanding in social 
contexts is also reported in a study by Ramsey & Hamilton (2010). In this study, participants 
watched short movies of a toy animal hiding in one of two locations. Following the hiding 
phase, an actor came out from behind a curtain, surveyed the possible locations and reached 
into one to ﬁ nd the toy. Similar to the previously mentioned studies, the results showed com-
plimentary activation of both mirror and mentalizing systems; the IFG was sensitive to action 
trajectory while the mPFC and right temporal pole were sensitive to successful search behav-
iour. The design of these studies does not allow strong conclusions about whether participants 
were attributing beliefs to the actor or only considering intentions, but both studies show that 
tasks focused on intentions with no explicit belief component are processed differently from 
tasks that focus on simple goals. 
 Differential engagement of mentalizing and mirroring systems in the brain can also be driven 
by task demands. In an fMRI study by Spunt, Satpute, & Lieberman (2011), participants showed 

TWO SYSTEMS FOR ACTION COMPREHENSION IN AUTISM: MIRRORING AND MENTALIZING
384
increased BOLD responses in IPL and IFG regions during action observation when participants 
were asked to think about  how  the actions were being performed. In the same subjects and with 
the same action stimuli, mPFC and TPJ were more active when participants were asked to think 
about  why the actions were being performed. This study shows a nice dissociation between levels 
of action processing in the brain. It seems that the mirror systems are recruited for kinematic 
analysis of actions, such as “they are gripping a tin can”, but the mentalizing system is recruited for 
long-term intentionality judgments, such as “they are recycling the can to save the environment.” 
Again, this study does not distinguish long-term intentions (“I want to recycle”) from beliefs that 
underlie the intention (“It is good to recycle”).  
 Summary 
 All of these studies suggest that the MNS is not the only brain system engaged in action com-
prehension, but that more complex tasks and situations may call on the mentalizing network. 
At least two ways in which mirroring and mentalizing systems might be related can be described 
(Hamilton, 2008). Under a “mirroring ﬁ rst” model (Figure 21.1, black arrows), full engagement of 
frontal and parietal mirror regions is a necessary precondition for mentalizing about an observed 
action. In contrast, in a visual inference model (Csibra & Gergely, 2007), visual information alone 
is sufﬁ cient to determine the goal of an action and engage in mentalizing, and frontal mirror sys-
tems are not required. Understanding how the mirroring and mentalizing networks are related is 
an important area for future research. It is also a critical question in making sense of action under-
standing in autism. We consider the evidence for the integrity and relationship of mirroring and 
mentalizing processes in autism in the next section. 
Visual input
Longer-term
intentions
TPJ
IPL
aIPS
STS
MTG
Immediate
goals
Motor
kinematics
Visual
kinematics
mPFC
IFG
 Figure 21.1  Brain and cognitive systems for action comprehension. 
 Left: Brain systems involved in mirroring (IFG: inferior frontal gyrus; IPL: inferior parietal lobule, aIPS: anterior intra-
parietal sulcus), mentalizing ‘(mPFC)’: medial prefrontal cortex; TPJ: temporoparietal junction), and visual process-
ing of human actions (MTG: middle temporal gyrus; STS: superior temporal sulcus). Right: A sketch of a cognitive 
model of action processing. Under a mirroring ﬁ rst model (black arrows) visual information processed (MTG/STS) is 
ﬁ rst matched onto the observers own motor system (IFG), before the goal of the action is extracted (aIPS/IPL) and 
then longer-term intentions can be deﬁ ned (TPJ/mPFC). Under a visual inference model (dashed grey arrows), the 
visual processing (MTG/STS)is sufﬁ cient to allow immediate extraction of goals (aIPS/IPL) and longer term intentions 
(TPJ/mPFC) without the requirement for motor activation.  

PART 2: MIRRORING AND MENTALIZING IN AUTISM
385
 Part 2:  Mirroring and mentalizing in autism  
 Typically, we automatically attribute goals and intentions to the agents that we observe. However, 
individuals with autism may not make these same attributions. Currently, there are two competing 
theories that claim that people with autism have difﬁ culty understanding goals and intentions of 
others. These are the “mentalizing theory” and the “broken mirror theory.” Each of these theories 
proposes that one of the two reviewed action understanding networks function atypically in autism. 
In the mentalizing theory, it is proposed that only the mentalizing network is abnormal, while at 
least basic processing in the mirror system is normal. In contrast, the broken mirror theory proposes 
that a core deﬁ cit in mirroring leads to difﬁ culties with mentalizing. In the next section, we examine 
each of these theories, then consider the evidence from each, looking at traditional behavioural 
tasks, implicit measures, such as eye tracking and EMG, and neuroimaging measures. 
 Mentalizing theory 
 There is little disputing the repeated ﬁ nding that many children and adults with autism have par-
ticular difﬁ culties with false belief tasks (Baron-Cohen, Leslie, & Frith, 1985; Frith, 2001). Brain 
activity in mentalizing regions when participants with autism watch the animated triangles movies 
is also abnormal (Castelli, Frith, Happ é , & Frith, 2002). The mentalizing theory proposes that these 
difﬁ culties are symptoms of an inability to represent other people’s mental states (Frith, Morton, & 
Leslie, 1991), or to decouple mental states from reality (Leslie, 1987). Within this ﬁ eld, there is an 
important distinction between implicit and explicit mentalizing (Apperly & Butterﬁ ll, 2009). 
 Explicit theory of mind is measured with traditional false-belief tasks such as Maxi’s chocolate in 
which one actor has a false-belief about the location of an object. Participants are typically asked to 
say or point to the place where Maxi will look for his chocolate (Wimmer & Perner, 1983). Typical 
children under around 4.5 years old often fail this task, and autistic individuals with a verbal men-
tal age below 9.2 years also tend to fail (Happ é , 1995). However, more able individuals with autism 
often pass false-belief tasks, and may even pass more complex second order tasks (Happ é , 1994). 
Thus, there is a dissociation between the time course of explicit false belief development in typical 
children (emerging at around 4.5 years and complete by 8 years) and the time course of autism 
(emerging between 1 and 2 years of age and lasting throughout the lifespan). This has led to a 
search for precursors to mentalizing and to the investigation of other theories of autism. 
 In contrast to the late development of explicit mentalizing, implicit mentalizing seems to be 
present from early infancy (Kovacs, Teglas, & Endress, 2010; Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005) and is 
measured by recording gaze durations and eye movements when participants view movies in which 
an actor has a false belief. Recent data demonstrate that even high functioning adults with Asperger’s 
syndrome who pass verbal false belief tasks fail to show implicit mentalizing in an eye tracking task 
(Senju, Southgate, White, & Frith, 2009). It is now argued that failure of implicit mentalizing is the 
core difﬁ culty in autism (Frith, 2012). This resolves the difﬁ culties over the time course of mental-
izing failure, because implicit mentalizing develops over the ﬁ rst two years of life at the same time 
that autism emerges, and implicit mentalizing remains impaired in high-functioning adults with 
autism. Brain imaging data on implicit mentalizing in autism is not yet available, but it is possible 
that current tasks such as describing the behaviour of animated triangles tap into implicit mental-
izing resources. Brain activation in this task is abnormal in high functioning adults with autism, 
despite their good explicit theory of mind skills (Castelli et al., 2002). 
 Research on implicit mentalizing and the precise difference between implicit and explicit tasks 
is ongoing, and further developments in understanding the role of implicit theory of mind in 
autism are likely. For present purposes, we contrast a pure mentalizing theory of autism with a 

TWO SYSTEMS FOR ACTION COMPREHENSION IN AUTISM: MIRRORING AND MENTALIZING
386
broken mirror theory. The pure mentalizing theory predicts that mentalizing is a single, core deﬁ -
cit in autism and that other social brain systems are unaffected or secondarily affected. For exam-
ple, basic goal understanding processes should be intact in autism under the mentalizing theory 
because these do not require the mentalizing network. However, there is still debate over whether 
difﬁ culties with mentalizing are a single, core deﬁ cit in autism or whether these are a consequence 
of abnormal processing in other social brain systems, for example the mirror system. We consider 
this question in the next section. 
 Broken mirror theory 
 The broken mirror theory claims that developmental failure of the mirror system is the primary 
social difﬁ culty in autism, and a cause of poor mentalizing. Under this theory, deﬁ cits in under-
standing the kinematic and goal features of an action would lead to further difﬁ culties in under-
standing emotions and mental states. Initial evidence in support of this theory came primarily 
from studies of imitation. When typical adults imitate hand actions, the mirror system is acti-
vated (Buccino, Binkofski, & Riggio, 2004; Decety, Chaminade, Gr è zes, & Meltzoff, 2002; Iacoboni, 
1999) and damage to the mirror system in adults causes imitation difﬁ culties (Heilman, Rothi, 
& Valenstein, 1982). Children with autism may also have trouble with imitation tasks, as sum-
marized in a meta-analysis (Williams, Whiten, & Singh, 2004). Some studies report abnormal 
brain responses in autistic children during imitation (Dapretto et al., 2006) and action observation 
(Nishitani, Avikainen, & Hari, 2004; Oberman, Hubbard, McCleery, Altschuler, Ramachandran, 
& Pineda, 2005). Based on these ﬁ ndings, it was suggested that dysfunction of the mirror sys-
tem in children with autism might cause ﬁ rst a lack of imitation, and later difﬁ culties in under-
standing other people’s intentions or emotions in social situations (Iacoboni & Dapretto, 2006; 
Ramachandran & Oberman, 2006; Williams, Whiten, Suddendorf, & Perrett, 2001). 
 A more recent variant of the broken mirror theory focuses not on comprehension of individual 
goal directed actions, but on the prediction of actions in a sequence. The account is based on 
the ﬁ nding that mirror neurons in parietal cortex encode actions as part of a sequence (Fogassi 
et al., 2005). For example, some mirror neurons in inferior parietal lobule (IPL) respond selec-
tively when the monkey brings food to his mouth or sees someone bring food to their mouth, but 
not when bringing a small object toward the shoulder or seeing someone bring an object to their 
shoulder. They suggest these mirror neurons allow an observer to chain actions together and rep-
resent intentions. Building on this work, Cattaneo, Fabbri-Destro, Boria, Pieraccini, Monti, Cossu, 
et al. (2007) measured electromyographic (EMG) recordings from a jaw-opening muscle (mylohy-
oid MH) in children when they were performing simple reach-to-eat and reach-to-place actions. 
In typical children, MH activity increased during the reach phase of a reach-to-eat action, but not 
of a reach-to-place action, and similar results were found for observation of actions. Thus, typical 
children chain together the reach and mouth-open actions of an eating sequence, and show simi-
lar predictive mouth opening when observing others. In contrast, matched children with autism 
did not show this anticipatory mouth opening, during either performance or observation. Based 
on these data, Rizzolatti & Fabbri-Destro (2010) put forward an action-chaining hypothesis of 
autism. They suggest that predicting actions and inferring intentions in this way is a precursor to 
mentalizing and belief inference skills. If this is true, then a deﬁ cit in action chaining could lead to 
the social deﬁ cits we see in autism (Rizzolatti, Fabbri-Destro, & Cattaneo, 2009). 
 Contrasting the mentalizing and broken mirror theories, some important differences emerge. 
The traditional mentalizing theory derives from a symbolic, abstract view of cognition (Leslie, 
1987), while the broken mirror account is associated with an embodied approach which empha-
sizes the role of simulation in understanding others (Gallese, 2003b; Goldman, 2006). Similarly, the 

PART 2: MIRRORING AND MENTALIZING IN AUTISM
387
mentalizing theory places the primary deﬁ cit in “high level” reasoning about and representation of 
mental states, and assumes that abnormal social behaviour in simple situations are a consequence 
of this. Meanwhile, the broken mirror theory focuses on lower level problems with imitation and 
assumes that failure on theory of mind tasks arises because simpler simulation mechanisms are 
dysfunctional in autism. Neither theory attempts to account for all the characteristics of autism, 
including non-social problems such as repetitive behaviours or differences in perceptual process-
ing that might be attributed to weak central coherence (Frith & Happ é , 1994). 
 To test and discriminate between the mentalizing theory and the broken mirror theory, it is 
interesting to examine the realms where they overlap. In particular, goals and intentions are rel-
evant to both theories. Mirror neurons in macaque monkeys respond only to goal-directed actions 
(Fogassi et al., 2005; Gallese et al., 1996; Umilt à , Kohler, Gallese, Fogassi, Fadiga, Keysers, et al., 
2001), so goals are key to the original idea of mirror neuron function. The human mirror system 
seems to be more general, with some response even to actions without a goal, but goal-directed 
actions are a powerful stimulus which robustly activate this system (Gazzola, Rizzolatti, Wicker, 
& Keysers, 2007; Iacoboni, Molnar-Szakacs, Gallese, Buccino, Mazziotta, & Rizzolatti, 2005; Koski, 
Wohlschl ä ger, Bekkering, Woods, Dubeau, Mazziotta, et al., 2002). Damage to the human parietal 
mirror system, e.g. from stroke, is known to cause difﬁ culties with understanding and performing 
meaningful or goal-directed actions (Buxbaum, Kyle, & Menon, 2005). Therefore, a lack of goal 
understanding in autism is a key prediction of the broken mirror theory. 
 In this section, we evaluate the claims that either the whole mirror system or the ability to chain 
actions in a sequence is abnormal in autism. We focus mainly on recent studies that use implicit 
(eyetracking or EMG) measures of action comprehension and on neuroimaging studies. A large 
number of studies of imitation in autism have been reviewed in greater depth elsewhere (Hamilton, 
2008; Southgate & Hamilton, 2008; Williams et al., 2001).  
 Behavioural studies of action understanding in autism 
 Multiple studies have reported poorer imitation performance in children with autism compared 
with typical children on general batteries of imitation tasks, including imitation of meaningless 
actions, mimicry of facial expressions and the spatial perspective taking component of imita-
tion. These results have led to the claim that there is a global imitation impairment in autism 
(Williams et al., 2004). However, more recent studies suggest autistic children successfully imitate 
when explicitly instructed to do so, whether imitating hand actions (Beadle-Brown, 2004) or facial 
expressions (McIntosh, Reichmann-Decker, Winkielman, & Wilbarger, 2006). They also show bet-
ter performance in a highly structured imitation task than in a task requiring spontaneous imita-
tion (Hepburn & Stone, 2006). 
 An interesting comparison in imitation studies is between imitation of a goal and imitation 
of kinematic features or action style, because these fall at different levels of the action hierarchy. 
Hobson and colleagues (Hobson & Hobson, 2008; Hobson & Lee, 1999) tested children with autism 
on a novel action imitation task. For example, children were shown how to scrape two objects 
together to make a sound and were asked to copy. Children with autism were able to perform the 
same, goal directed action, but failed to mimic the style (loud or soft) with which the action was 
performed. Intact goal-directed imitation in children with autism has also been seen in a simple 
hand movement task. Autistic children and controls matched for verbal mental age were tested on 
Bekkering’s goal directed imitation task (Bekkering, Wohlschlaeger, & Gattis, 2000). In this task 
children were asked to copy an experimenter who touched one of two targets on the table in front 
of them. The experimenter sometimes made an ipsilateral movement of her hand to the nearest 
dot (e.g. left hand to left dot) and sometimes made a contralateral movement of her hand to the 

TWO SYSTEMS FOR ACTION COMPREHENSION IN AUTISM: MIRRORING AND MENTALIZING
388
further dot (e.g. right hand to left dot). Both groups of children accurately imitated the action 
goal, i.e. they touched the appropriate dot on the table. More importantly, both typical and autistic 
children made systematic hand errors; when the demonstrator moved her hand across her body, 
the child correctly imitated the goal, but failed to use the appropriate hand (Hamilton, Brindley, & 
Frith, 2007). This is the pattern of behaviour taken by Bekkering and colleagues to be a signature 
of goal directed imitation. Children with autism are not imitating only the outcome of the action, 
but must be identifying the goal and selecting how to achieve that goal. Thus, the data provides 
evidence that both typical and autistic children have a goal hierarchy and can understand and imi-
tate the goal of an adult’s action. Furthermore, children with autism can and go beyond the imme-
diately visible goal of an adult’s action and imitate goals which they had not seen achieved. Two 
independent studies (Aldridge, Stone, Sweeney, & Bower, 2000; Carpenter, Pennington, & Rogers, 
2001) found that children with autism completed the action of pulling apart the dumb-bell even 
when the adult demonstrator had never successfully performed the action. In summary, it seems 
that autistic children are able to imitate actions, when given clear and explicit instructions to do 
so. The behavioural evidence reviewed here suggests that simple goal representation is intact in 
autism, contrary to the predictions of the broken mirror hypothesis. 
 Understanding of more complex goals or action sequences is being increasingly studied in 
autism, but results are contradictory. One study using a picture ordering task to compare under-
standing of mental state sequences to simpler goal-directed action sequences found that indi-
viduals with autism had no problems understanding and ordering the goal directed sequences 
(Baron-Cohen, Leslie, & Frith, 1986). However, a similar study found participants with autism 
did have trouble understanding object-directed action sequences (Zalla, Labruyere, & Georgieff, 
2006), but surprisingly not interactive action sequences. 
 More recently, a study by Boria, Fabbri-Destro, Cattaneo, Sparaci, Sinigaglia, Santelli, et al. 
(2009) demonstrated poorer understanding of subsequent actions in children with autism. In this 
study, children were shown static images of a hand either touching an object, grasping-to-use it or 
grasping-to-place it. Children were asked what the actor was doing and why. Children with autism 
were able to distinguish touching and grasping actions. They were also able to identify subsequent 
use of the object, as well as typically developing children in the grasp-to-use condition. However, 
their performance was substantially poorer when identifying the grasp-to-place actions, with 
object-use dominating their responses, despite the grasp type rendering this action implausible. 
Boria and colleagues argue that children with autism are unable to use the motor information to 
make an inference about the subsequent action, providing evidence for the action chaining theory. 
However, in their second similar experiment, children with autism were able to identify grasp-to-
place actions if an image of the end goal was also present. Boria argues that this evidence corrobo-
rates their initial ﬁ nding and children with autism are not just making stereotyped, object-use 
responses. An alternative explanation for this improved ability in the second experiment could be 
that the imagination demands are reduced as the action end point is visible. A better test of this 
effect should test different, dynamic grasps with the possible end points visible. This will reduce 
the imagination demand of the task and will require correct analysis of the motor properties of the 
grasp to infer the subsequent action.  
 Implicit measures of action understanding in autism 
 Eye tracking studies of action observation have also been used to assess mirror neuron function 
in autistic children. Typically, eye movements during action observation and action execution 
are predictive of the actions that they are monitoring. It has been suggested that these predic-
tive eye movements are reﬂ ective of mirror neuron function as eye movements during action 

PART 2: MIRRORING AND MENTALIZING IN AUTISM
389
observation mirror those during action execution (Flanagan & Johansson, 2003). In support of 
this claim (Cannon & Woodward, 2008) demonstrated that predictive eye movements during 
action observation are disrupted by simultaneous performance of sequential ﬁ nger movements, 
but not by the rehearsal of sequences of numbers. In a study of autistic 5-year olds (Falck-Ytter, 
2010) demonstrated that infants with autism were able to anticipate actions to the same degree as 
typical infants and adults. This ﬁ nding suggests that even young children with autism are able to 
predict the actions of others and provides evidence against impaired action chaining in autism. 
 However, other studies of action chaining in autism do suggest difﬁ culties. Cattaneo et al. 
(2007), as described earlier, showed that children with autism failed to produce predictive MH 
muscle activation during the performance or observation of a reach-to-eat action, in contrast to 
typical control children. They argue that this indicates a failure of action chaining in participants 
with autism. One limitation in this study is the failure to exclude dyspraxia in the autistic sample of 
participants; dyspraxia is often comorbid with autism (Ming, Brimacombe, & Wagner, 2007) and 
impacts on motor control, but it is not linked to mentalizing. 
 Further evidence for impaired action chaining in autism comes from a study by Fabbri-Destro, 
Cattaneo, Boria, & Rizzolatti (2009) who used a similar methodology to that of Johnson-Frey, 
McCarty, & Keen (2004). In this study, children with and without autism were asked to pick up a 
block and move it to either a small or large container whilst their movement time was measured. 
Throughout the experiment, the task demands of the reach action remained constant. However, 
manipulating the size of the container increased the task demands of the place action. Despite the 
controlled demands of the reach action across conditions, typically developing children modi-
ﬁ ed the speed of the initial reach action such that they were slower when the following action 
was harder and faster when the following action was easier. This bias is thought to reﬂ ect future 
planning of the second action in the sequence. In children with autism, the speed of the reach 
action was not biased by the difﬁ culty of the following action, indicating a lack of action planning. 
Overall, the evidence for impaired action chaining in autism is mixed. Eye-tracking studies show 
that online action prediction is functioning typically in autistic children. Studies that use more 
complex action sequences do reveal differences between typical and autistic children, although 
they fail to control for motor ability in their tasks. Further research is needed to assess the action 
chaining account of the broken mirror hypothesis.  
 Neuroimaging studies of action understanding in autism 
 Neuroimaging techniques provide the most rigorous tests of the integrity of the mirror system in 
autism. A number of early studies report differences between typical and autistic participants. For 
example, Oberman et al. (2005) report reduced mu wave suppression during observation and exe-
cution of hand actions in typical participants, but mu suppression only occurred during execution 
tasks in the autistic participants. In addition, Théoret, Halligan, Kobayashi, Fregni, Tager-Flusberg, 
& Pascual-Leone (2005) demonstrated that motor evoked potentials, induced by transcranial 
magnetic stimulation during action observation were reduced for autistic participants. However, 
no group differences in magneto-encephalographic recordings were found between typical and 
autistic participants during the observation of hand actions (Avikainen, Kulom ä ki, & Hari, 1999). 
It is important to note that all of these studies used measures with very limited localization of 
effects and participant numbers were low. 
 fMRI studies provide evidence with better spatial resolution and can identify speciﬁ c brain 
abnormalities in a more convincing way. Dapretto, Davies, Pfeifer, Scott, Sigman, Bookheimer, 
et al. (2006) conducted the ﬁ rst study to provide evidence for the broken mirror hypothe-
sis with fMRI. In their study, participants were asked to observe and imitate emotional facial 

TWO SYSTEMS FOR ACTION COMPREHENSION IN AUTISM: MIRRORING AND MENTALIZING
390
expressions during fMRI scanning. They report reduced activation in the IFG component of 
the mirror system during observation and imitation in autistic participants. Furthermore, the 
amount of activation signiﬁ cantly correlated with autistic symptom severity. However, imita-
tion of emotional facial expressions is not a goal-directed action task and it is very different 
from the original hand-grasping studies that were used to study the mirror neuron system in 
monkeys (Gallese et al., 1996). Therefore, this study provides only weak evidence for the broken 
mirror hypothesis. 
 In a more comparable study of hand actions, Dinstein, Thomas, Humphreys, Minshew, 
Behrmann, & Heeger (2010) asked participants to perform and observe sequences of simple hand 
postures during fMRI scanning. They report no group differences between autistic and typical 
participants during observation or execution of hand postures in mirror neuron regions. In addi-
tion, autistic participants demonstrated normal movement selectivity for repeated hand postures 
in left anterior intraparietal sulcus (aIPS) and ventral premotor cortex (vPM) in both observation 
and execution conditions. This study provides the ﬁ rst robust evidence against mirror system dys-
function in autism. 
 Only one study has tried to assess the integrity of both mirror and mentalizing systems in autism 
in the same study (Marsh & Hamilton, 2011). Manipulation of action rationality was used as a tool 
to engage the mentalizing system. As previously reported, Brass et al. (2007) demonstrated that 
irrational actions automatically activate the mentalizing system in the typical observer, even with 
no prior instruction to mentalize. By using matched rational and irrational action stimuli Marsh 
and Hamilton (2011) were able to dissociate mirroring and mentalizing systems in the autistic 
brain in a non-verbal, action observation task. 
 Eighteen adults with autism and 19 age and IQ-matched typical adults completed the experi-
ment. They watched movies of simple, goal-directed reach actions to either a piece of food or a tool 
during fMRI scanning. Some actions were rational (Figure 21.2, R1 & R2) while in others the hand 
took an irrational route to reach the target object (Figure 21.2, I1 & I2). Control movies depicting a 
shape drifting across the screen were also shown. The results showed that both typical and autistic 
participants engage mirror regions, in particular left aIPS when observing hand actions. In addi-
tion, this area was also sensitive to action goals in both participant groups. As the left aIPS is the 
established goal processing region of the mirror system as deﬁ ned in Hamilton & Grafton (2006, 
2008), this result provides evidence against a global mirror neuron deﬁ cit in autism and corrobo-
rates behavioural evidence that suggests that goal understanding is intact in autism. 
 In contrast, differences between the typical and autistic participants emerged when regions out-
side the mirror system were examined, and when action rationality was considered. In both typical 
and autistic participants, the right aIPS was activated for irrational actions compared with rational 
actions. However, in the mPFC, only typical participants differentiate irrational from rational 
actions. mPFC activity in the autistic participants remained the same regardless of the rational-
ity of the observed action. These results demonstrate that, within the same group of participants, 
responses in the mirror system to observed actions can be normal while responses in the mental-
izing system are abnormal.  
 Summary 
 Evidence for the integrity of mirroring and mentalizing brain systems in autism has been reviewed 
above. In typical individuals, the mirror system encodes action kinematics and goals, while the 
mentalizing system plays a role in making inferences about the actors’ beliefs and intentions. 
Evidence for poor mentalizing in autism is clear cut, but there is much less support for the proposal 
that this social difﬁ culty originates in failure of mirror systems. Many studies have demonstrated 

CONCLUSIONS
391
good goal understanding in autism, together with normal brain responses in mirror systems. 
However, people with autism may have difﬁ culty understanding sequences of actions, or chaining 
actions together and this area warrants further exploration. 
 Conclusions  
 From the studies reviewed in this chapter, no clear cut evidence emerges for a fundamental mir-
ror system deﬁ cit in autism. Behavioural studies have shown that people with autism have a 
good understanding of action goals. Furthermore, two independent neuroimaging studies have 
reported that the parietal component of the mirror system is functioning typically in individu-
als with autism. Some evidence for the action chaining account exists, but stringent neuroimag-
ing studies need to test this further. Few studies have directly tested the integrity of mentalizing 
Z = 64
0.6
0.4
ASC
Typical
Parameter estimates
0.2
0
R1
R1
R2
l1
l2
S
R1
R2
l1
l2
S
R2
l1
l2
S
0
Parameter estimates
–0.2
R1 R2
l1
l2
S
(a) Stimuli
(b) alPS
(c) mPFC
R1
R2
X = -8
l1
l2
S
 Figure 21.2  Responses of mirroring and mentalizing brain systems in autism.   (a) Still frames of the 
ﬁ ve movies types used in Marsh & Hamilton (2011). In each movie the hand started on the right, 
moved across to pick up an object and returned its original position. R1: rational action, R2: rational 
action with a barrier, I1: irrational action, I2: irrational action with a barrier, S: control movie show-
ing three shapes, one of which moved linearly across the screen. (b) Activity in left aIPS was greater 
 during the observation of hand actions compared with moving shapes in both autism and typical 
participants. (c) Activity in mPFC was sensitive to action rationality in the typical group, but not in the 
autism group.  

TWO SYSTEMS FOR ACTION COMPREHENSION IN AUTISM: MIRRORING AND MENTALIZING
392
systems in relation to action understanding in autism, but initial reports suggest that this may be 
functioning atypically. 
 An important future direction in this ﬁ eld is to establish the relationship between the mirror sys-
tem and the mentalizing system. How does kinematic and goal information about actions translate 
into an understanding of intention? Action rationality is a new tool that can tap in to both mirror 
and mentalizing systems and studies comparing rational and irrational actions may be able to 
provide us with a better understanding of the interactions between mirroring and mentalizing. 
However, a better understanding of what action rationality is and why irrational actions engage the 
mentalizing system is also needed. Implicit measures, such as eye-tracking, give us insight into the 
fast, automatic processing of actions and can allude to subtle differences in perception in autism. 
 References 
 Aldridge, M. A., Stone, K. R., Sweeney, M. H., & Bower, T. G. R. (2000).  Preverbal children with autism 
understand the intentions of others.  Developmental Science  3 : 294–301 . 
 Amodio, D., & Frith, C. D. (2006).  Meeting of minds: Th e medial frontal cortex and social cognition. 
 Nature Reviews of Neuroscience  7 (4):268–77. 
 Apperly, I. A., & Butterfi ll, S. A. (2009).  Do humans have two systems to track beliefs and belief-like states? 
 Psychological Review  116 (4): 953–70 . 
 Avikainen, S, Kulom ä ki, T., & Hari, R. (1999).  Normal movement reading in Asperger subjects. 
 Neuroreport  10 (17): 3467–70 . Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10619627 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985).  Does the autistic child have a “theory of mind.’’ 
 Cognition  21 : 37–46 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A., & Frith, U. (1986).  Mechanical, behavioural and intentional understanding of 
picture stories in autistic children.  British Journal of Developmental Psychology  4 : 113–25 . 
 Beadle-Brown, J. (2004).  Elicited imitation in children and adults with autism : the eff ect of diff erent types 
of actions.  Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities (1991),  17: 37–48 . 
 Bekkering, H., Wohlschlaeger, A., & Gattis, M. (2000).  Imitation of Gestures in Children is Goal-directed. 
 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology  53 (1): 153–64 . 
 Bonini, L., Serventi, F. U., Simone, L., Rozzi, S., Ferrari, P. F., & Fogassi, L. (2011).  Grasping neurons 
of monkey parietal and premotor cortices encode action goals at distinct levels of abstraction during 
complex action sequences.  Journal of neuroscience   : Offi  cial Journal of the Society for Neuroscience 
 31 (15): 5876–86 . 
 Boria, S., Fabbri-Destro, M., Cattaneo, L., Sparaci, L., Sinigaglia, C., Santelli, E., Cossu, G., & 
Rizzolatti, G. (2009).  Intention understanding in autism.  PloS one  4 (5): e5596 . 
 Brass, M., Schmitt, R. M., Spengler, S., & Gergely, G. (2007).  Investigating action understanding: 
inferential processes vs. action simulation.  Current Biology  17 : 2117–121 . 
 Buccino, G, Binkofski, F., & Riggio, L. (2004).  Th e mirror neuron system and action recognition.  Brain and 
Language  89 : 370–6 . 
 Buxbaum, L. J., Kyle, K. M., & Menon, R. (2005).  On beyond mirror neurons: internal representations 
subserving imitation and recognition of skilled object-related actions in humans.  Brain Research. 
Cognitive Brain Research  25 (1): 226–39 . 
 Cannon, E. N., & Woodward, A. L. (2008).  Action anticipation and interference : A test of prospective gaze , 
Paper presented at the  30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . 
 Carpenter, M., Pennington, B. F., & Rogers, S. J. (2001).  Understanding of others’ intentions in children 
with autism.  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  31 (6): 589–99 . Available at: http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11814270 
 Caspers, S., Zilles, K., Laird, A. R., & Eickhoff , S. B. (2010).  ALE meta-analysis of action observation and 
imitation in the human brain.  NeuroImage  50 (3): 1148–67 . 

393
REFERENCES
 Castelli, F., Frith, C., Happ é , F., & Frith, U. (2002).  Autism, Asperger syndrome and brain mechanisms 
for the attribution of mental states to animated shapes.  Brain   : Journal of Neurology  125 (Pt 8): 1839–49 . 
Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12135974 
 Castelli, F, Happ é , F., Frith, U., & Frith, C. (2000).  Movement and mind: a functional imaging study of 
perception and interpretation of complex intentional movement patterns.  NeuroImage  12 (3): 314–25 . 
 Cattaneo, L., Fabbri-Destro, M., Boria, S., Pieraccini, C., Monti, A., Cossu, G., & Rizzolatti, G. (2007). 
 Impairment of actions chains in autism and its possible role in intention understanding.  Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, USA  104 (45): 17825–30 . 
 Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2007).  Obsessed with goals: Functions and mechanisms of teleological 
interpretation of actions in humans.  Acta Psychologica  124 (1): 60–78 . 
 Dapretto, M., Davies, M. S., Pfeifer, J. H., Scott, A. A., Sigman, M., Bookheimer, S. Y., & Iacoboni, 
M. (2006).  Understanding emotions in others: mirror neuron dysfunction in children with autism 
spectrum disorders.   Nature Neuroscience  9 (1): 28–30 . 
 de Lange, F. P., Spronk, M., Willems, R. M., Toni, I., & Bekkering, H. (2008). Complementary systems for 
understanding action intentions.  Current biology: CB  18 (6):454–7. 
 Decety, J., Chaminade, T., Gr è zes, J., & Meltzoff , A. N. (2002). A PET exploration of the neural 
mechanisms involved in reciprocal imitation.  NeuroImage  15 (1): 265–72. 
 Dennett, D. (1978).  Beliefs about beliefs.  Behavioral and Brain Sciences  4 :  568–70 . 
 di Pellegrino, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (1992). Understanding motor events: 
a neurophysiological study.  Experimental Brain Research  91 : 176–80. 
 Dinstein, I., Th omas, C., Humphreys, K., Minshew, N., Behrmann, M., & Heeger, D. J. (2010).  Normal 
movement selectivity in autism.  Neuron  66 (3): 461–9 . 
 Fabbri-Destro, M., Cattaneo, L., Boria, S., & Rizzolatti, G. (2009).  Planning actions in autism. 
 Experimental Brain Research. Experimentelle Hirnforschung. Exp é rimentationc é r é brale  192 (3): 521–5 . 
 Falck-Ytter, T. (2010).  Young children with autism spectrum disorder use predictive eye movements in 
action observation.  Biology Letters  6 (3): 375–8 . 
 Flanagan, R. J., & Johansson, R. (2003).  Action plans used in action observation.  Nature  424 : 769–71 . 
 Fletcher, P. C., Happe, F., Frith, U., Baker, S. C., Dolan, R. J., Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Frith, C. D. (1995). 
Other minds in the brain: a functional imaging study of “theory of mind” in story comprehension. 
 Cognition  57 : 109–28. 
 Fogassi, L., Ferrari, P. F., Gesierich, B., Rozzi, S., Chersi, F., & Rizzolatti, G. (2005).  Parietal lobe: from 
action organization to intention understanding.  Science  308 (5722): 662–7 . 
 Frith, U. (2001).  Mind blindness and the brain in autism.  Neuron  32 (6): 969–79 . Available at: http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11754830 
 Frith, U. (2012).  Why we need cognitive explanations of autism, 38 Bartlett Lecture 2010.  Quarterly Journal 
of Experimental Psychology (Hove)  65 (11):2073–92. 
 Frith, U., & Happ é , F. (1994).  Autism: beyond “theory of mind. ”  Cognition  50 (1–3): 115–32 . Available at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12212920 
 Frith, U, Morton, J., & Leslie, A. (1991).  Th e cognitive basis of a biological disorder: autism.  Trends in 
Neurosciences  14 (10): 433–8 . 
 Gallagher, H. L., & Frith, C. D. (2003).  Functional imaging of “theory of mind. ”  Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 7 (2): 77–83 . Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12584026 
 Gallese, V. (2003a).  Th e roots of empathy: the shared manifold hypothesis and the neural basis of 
intersubjectivity.  Psychopathology  36 (4): 171–80 . 
 Gallese, V. (2003b).  Th e manifold nature of interpersonal relations: the quest for a common mechanism. 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, B, Biological Sciences  358 (1431): 517–28 . 
 Gallese, V, Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Rizzolatti, G. (1996).  Action recognition in the premotor cortex.  Brain 
 119 : 593–609 . 

TWO SYSTEMS FOR ACTION COMPREHENSION IN AUTISM: MIRRORING AND MENTALIZING
394
 Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998).  Mirror neurons and the mind-reading.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2 (12): 493–501 . 
 Gallese, V., Keysers, C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2004).  A unifying view of the basis of social cognition.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences  8 (9): 396–403 . 
 Gazzola, V., Rizzolatti, G., Wicker, B., & Keysers, C. (2007).  Th e anthropomorphic brain: the mirror 
neuron system responds to human and robotic actions.  NeuroImage  35 (4): 1674–84 . 
 Goldman, A. (2006).  Simulating Minds .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Grill-Spector, K., Henson, R., & Martin, A. (2006).  Repetition and the brain: neural models of 
stimulus-specifi c eff ects.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences  10 (1): 14–23 . 
 Hamilton, A. F. de C, Brindley, R. M., & Frith, U. (2007).  Imitation and action understanding in 
autistic spectrum disorders: How valid is the hypothesis of a defi cit in the mirror neuron system? 
 Neuropsychologia  45 (8): 1859–68 . 
 Hamilton, A. F. de C., & Graft on, S. T. (2006).  Goal representation in human anterior intraparietal sulcus. 
 Journal of Neuroscience  26 : 1133–7 . 
 Hamilton, A. F. de C., & Graft on, S. T. (2008).  Action outcomes are represented in human inferior 
frontoparietal cortex.  Cerebral Cortex  18 (5): 1160–8 . 
 Hamilton, A. F. de C., & Graft on, S. T. (2009).  Repetition suppression for performed hand gestures 
revealed by fMRI.  Human Brain Mapping  30 (9): 2898–906 . doi:10.1002/hbm.20717 
 Hamilton, A. F. de C., Joyce, D. W., Flanagan, J. R., Frith, C. D., & Wolpert, D. M. (2007).  Kinematic cues 
in perceptual weight judgement and their origins in box lift ing.  Psychological Research  71 (1): 13–21 . 
 Hampton, A. N., & Bossaerts, P. (2008).  Neural correlates of mentalizing-related computations during 
strategic interactions in humans.  Signals  105 (18): 6741–6 . 
 Happ é , F. G. (1994).  An advanced test of theory of mind: understanding of story characters’ thoughts and 
feelings by able autistic, mentally handicapped, and normal children and adults.  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders  24 (2): 129–54 . Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8040158 
 Happ é , F. G. (1995).  Th e role of age and verbal ability in the theory of mind task performance of 
subjects with autism.  Child Development  66 (3): 843–55 . Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/7789204 
 Heilman, K. M., Rothi, L. J., & Valenstein, E. (1982).  Two forms of ideomotor apraxia.  Neurology 
 32 (4): 342–6 . 
 Hepburn, S. L., & Stone, W. L. (2006).  Longitudinal research on motor imitation in autism.  Imitation and 
the Social Mind .  New York :  Guildford Press . 
 Hickok, G. (2009).  Eight problems for the mirror neuron theory of action understanding in monkeys and 
humans.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  21 (7): 1229–43 . 
 Hobson, R. P., & Hobson, J. A. (2008).  Dissociable aspects of imitation: a study in autism.  Journal of 
Experimental Child Psychology  101 (3): 170–85 . 
 Hobson, R. P., & Lee, A. (1999).  Imitation and identifi cation in autism.  Journal of Child Psychology 
and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines  40 (4): 649–59 . Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10357170 
 Iacoboni, M. (1999).  Cortical mechanisms of human imitation. Science  286 (5449): 2526–8 . 
 Iacoboni, M., & Dapretto, M. (2006).  Th e mirror neuron system and the consequences of its dysfunction. 
 Nature Reviews of Neuroscience  7 (12): 942–51 . 
 Iacoboni, M., Molnar-Szakacs, I., Gallese, V., Buccino, G., Mazziotta, J. C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2005). 
 Grasping the intentions of others with one’s own mirror neuron system.  PLoS Biology  3 (3): e79 . 
 Johnson-Frey, S., McCarty, M., & Keen, R. (2004).  Reaching beyond spatial perception: Eff ects of intended 
future actions on visually guided prehension.  Visual Cognition  11 (2): 371–99 . 
 Kilner, J. M., Neal, A., Weiskopf, N., Friston, K. J., & Frith, C. D. (2009).  Evidence of mirror neurons in 
human inferior frontal gyrus.  Journal of Neuroscience  29 (32): 10153–9 . 

395
 Koski, L., Wohlschl ä ger, A., Bekkering, H., Woods, R. P., Dubeau, M-C., Mazziotta, J. C., & Iacoboni, M. 
(2002).  Modulation of motor and premotor activity during imitation of target-directed actions.  Cerebral 
Cortex  12 (8): 847–55 . Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12122033 
 Kovacs, A. M., Teglas, E., & Endress, A. D. (2010).  Th e social sense: Susceptibility to others’ beliefs in 
human infants and adults.  Science  330 (6012): 1830–4 . 
 Leslie, A. M. (1987).  Pretense and representation : Th e origins of “theory of mind. ”  Cognitive Development 
 94 (4): 412–26 . 
 Marsh, L., & Hamilton, A. (2011).  Dissociation of mirroring and mentalizing systems in autism. 
 NeuroImage  56 (3): 1511–19 . 
 McIntosh, D. N., Reichmann-Decker, A., Winkielman, P., & Wilbarger, J. L. (2006).  When the social 
mirror breaks: defi cits in automatic, but not voluntary, mimicry of emotional facial expressions in 
autism.  Developmental Science  9 (3): 295–302 . 
 Ming, X., Brimacombe, M., & Wagner, G. C. (2007).  Prevalence of motor impairment in autism spectrum 
disorders.  Brain & Development  29 (9): 565–70 . 
 Nishitani, N., Avikainen, S., & Hari, R. (2004).  Abnormal imitation-related cortical activation sequences in 
Asperger’s syndrome.  Annals of Neurology  55 (4): 558–62 . 
 Oberman, L. M., Hubbard, E. M., McCleery, J. P., Altschuler, E. L., Ramachandran, V. S., & Pineda, J. A. 
(2005).  EEG evidence for mirror neuron dysfunction in autism spectrum disorders.  Brain Research. 
Cognitive Brain Research  24 (2): 190–8 . 
 Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005).  Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs?  Science 
 308 (5719): 255–8 . 
 Oosterhof, N. N., Wiggett, A. J., Diedrichsen, J., Tipper, S. P., & Downing, P. E. (2010).  Surface-based 
information mapping reveals crossmodal vision-action representations in human parietal and 
occipitotemporal cortex.  Journal of Neurophysiology  104 (2): 1077–89 . 
 Pascual-Leone, A., Walsh, V., & Rothwell, J. (2000).  Transcranial magnetic stimulation in cognitive 
neuroscience—virtual lesion, chronometry, and functional connectivity.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  10 (2): 232–7 . Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10753803 
 Pobric, G., & Hamilton, A. F. DeC. (2006).  Action understanding requires the left  inferior frontal cortex. 
 Current Biology  16 : 424–9 . 
 Premack, D., & Woodruff , G. (1978).  Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind?  Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences  4 : 515–26 . 
 Ramachandran, B. V. S., & Oberman, L. M. (2006).  Broken mirrors: A theory of autism.  Scientifi c American 
 295 (5):62–9. 
 Ramsey, R., & Hamilton, A. F. DeC. (2010).  How does your own knowledge infl uence the perception of 
another person’s action in the human brain?  Social Cognitive and Aff ective Neuroscience  7 (2):242–51. 
 Rizzolatti, G., & Arbib, M. A. (1998).  Language within our grasp .  Trends in Neuroscience  21 (5):188–94. 
 Rizzolatti, G., & Fabbri-Destro, M. (2010).  Mirror neurons: from discovery to autism.  Experimental Brain 
Research. Experimentelle Hirnforschung. Exp é rimentationc é r é brale ,  200 (3–4),  223–37 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., & Sinigaglia, C. (2010).  Th e functional role of the parieto-frontal mirror circuit: 
interpretations and misinterpretations.  Nature Reviews Neuroscience  11 (4): 264–74 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., Fabbri-Destro, M., & Cattaneo, L. (2009).  Mirror neurons and their clinical relevance. 
 Neurology  5 (1):24–34 
 Saxe, R., & Powell, L. J. (2006). It’s the thought that counts: specifi c brain regions for one component of 
theory of mind.  Psychological Science  17 (8): 692–9. 
 Saxe, R., & Kanwisher, N. (2003).  People thinking about thinking people Th e role of the temporo-parietal 
junction in “theory of mind. ”  NeuroImage  19 : 1835–42 . 
 Senju, A., Southgate, V., White, S., & Frith, U. (2009).  Mindblind eyes: an absence of spontaneous theory of 
mind in Asperger syndrome.  Science  325 (5942): 883–5 . 
REFERENCES

TWO SYSTEMS FOR ACTION COMPREHENSION IN AUTISM: MIRRORING AND MENTALIZING
396
 Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J., Kaube, H., Dolan, R. J., & Frith, C. D. (2004).  Empathy for pain 
involves the aff ective, but not sensory components of pain.  Science  303 : 1157–62 . 
 Southgate, V, & Hamilton, A. F. De C. (2008).  Unbroken mirrors: Challenging a theory of autism.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences  12 (6): 225–9 . 
 Spinks, R. L., Kraskov, A., Brochier, T., Umilta, M. A., & Lemon, R. N. (2008).  Selectivity for grasp 
in local fi eld potential and single neuron activity recorded simultaneously from M 1 and F 5 in the 
awake macaque monkey.  Journal of Neuroscience   : Offi  cial Journal of the Society for Neuroscience 
 28 (43): 10961–71 . 
 Spunt, R. P., Satpute, A. B., & Lieberman, M. D. (2011).  Identifying the what, why, and how of an observed 
action: an fMRI study of mentalizing and mechanizing during action observation.  Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience  23 (1): 63–74 . 
 Th  é oret, H., Halligan, E., Kobayashi, M., Fregni, F., Tager-Flusberg, H., & Pascual-Leone, a. (2005). 
 Impaired motor facilitation during action observation in individuals with autism spectrum disorder. 
 Current Biology CB  15 (3): R 84–5 . 
 Umilt à , M. a, Kohler, E., Gallese, V., Fogassi, L., Fadiga, L., Keysers, C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2001).  I know 
what you are doing .  a neurophysiological study .  Neuron  31 (1): 155–65 . Available at: http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11498058 
 Van Overwalle, F. (2009).  Social cognition and the brain: a meta-analysis.  Human Brain Mapping 
 30 (3): 829–58 . 
 Wicker, B., Keysers, C., Plailly, J., Royet, J. P., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (2003).  Both of us disgusted in 
My insula: Th e common neural basis of seeing and feeling disgust.  Neuron  40 (3): 655–64 . Available at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14642287 
 Williams, J. H. G., Whiten, A., & Singh, T. (2004).  A systematic review of action imitation in autistic 
spectrum disorder.   Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  34 (3): 285–99 . Available at: http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15264497 
 Williams, J. H., Whiten, A., Suddendorf, T., & Perrett, D. I. (2001).  Imitation, mirror neurons and autism. 
 Neuroscience Biobehavioral Review  25 (4): 287–95 . 
 Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983).  Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining function of wrong 
beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception.  Cognition  13 : 103–28 . 
 Yoshida, W., Seymour, B., Friston, K. J., & Dolan, R. J. (2010).  Neural mechanisms of belief inference 
during cooperative games.  Journal of Neuroscience  30 (32): 10744–51 . 
 Young, L., Dodell-Feder, D., & Saxe, R. (2010).  What gets the attention of the temporo-parietal junction? 
An fMRI investigation of attention and theory of mind.  Neuropsychologia  48 (9): 2658–64 . 
 Zalla, T., Labruyere, N., & Georgieff , N. (2006).  Goal-directed action representation in autism.  Journal of 
Autism Development and Disorders  36 (4): 527–40 . 
 

 Chapter 22 
 Autism: Self and others  
 Peter R.   Hobson    and Jessica A.   Hobson 
 Introduction  
 For some scientists, the self is a ﬁ ction. Yet how I think of myself as a thinker, how I experience 
my potential to choose and to act, how I assume responsibility and have feelings of pride, guilt or 
shame over the ways I behave, how I am subject to states of admiration, envy, or jealousy in relation 
to others, or how I think and feel about my qualities as a person extending from the past through 
the present to the future—indeed, how frequently I use the word “I” in communicating with other 
people, to express my self-anchored perspective—all these qualities of experience testify to the 
signiﬁ cance of a sense of self and the importance of “I-thoughts.” 
 If being a self is so central a part of human mental life, then we might do well to consider the 
varieties of experience that contribute to selfhood, and to investigate how these evolve over the 
course of development. The study of atypical development—and in the present instance, the study 
of autism—might add something additional in allowing us to distinguish among potentially sepa-
rable components of the self, only some of which are compromised in cases of disorder. We might 
also be in a position to trace distinct developmental pathways to fully-ﬂ edged self-experience. 
 The story of self-development is one in which an individual is both connected to, and differenti-
ated from, the non-personal world on the one hand and people on the other. Therefore we need to 
consider the kinds of relation that exist between persons with autism and the world, and build up 
a picture of the kinds of connectedness and differentiation that they display and experience with 
people and things (Hobson, 1990). For instance, some but not all of our self-experience appears to 
be tied in with experience of other embodied people who are recognized to be selves in their own 
right, and whose subjective life may include their having feelings and thoughts toward ourselves. 
To the extent that self-other relations, and more speciﬁ cally experiences of other people’s attitudes 
to the self, are atypical among young children with autism, this might have profound implications 
for the structure and content of their developing self-awareness. 
 It is sometimes helpful to distinguish between unreﬂ ective and reﬂ ective levels of self-awareness. 
Expressions of a person’s  senses  of (unreﬂ ected-upon) self include the ability to walk around furni-
ture in a room, or (arguably) to maintain appropriate distance from someone else in the course of 
social interaction. Expressions of reﬂ ective self-awareness include the capacities to think and care 
about oneself and one’s mental states or behaviour, and the most explicit forms of self-awareness 
entail that one has an idea or  concept of self. If we discover atypicalities in self-awareness among 
individuals with autism, therefore, it will be important to consider whether these implicate abnor-
malities in individuals’ sense of self, or concept of self, or both. At the same time, autism may 
reconﬁ gure our view of the distinctions among different kinds of self-awareness. For example, 
we may discover there are forms of self/other-consciousness that that antedate and underpin ful-
ly-ﬂ edged “I-thoughts” and that straddle the unreﬂ ective/reﬂ ective divide. 

AUTISM: SELF AND OTHERS
398
 We begin with two classic clinical descriptions that capture how autism involves disorder in 
self-other relations  and self-awareness. 
 Clinical descriptions 
 Kanner (1943) considered that the group of 11 children he described had “inborn autistic distur-
bances of affective contact” (p. 250). He noted how “people, so long as they left the child alone, 
ﬁ gured in about the same manner as did the desk, the bookshelf, or the ﬁ ling cabinet” (p. 246). 
Kanner’s case descriptions illustrate these children’s qualities of self-awareness as well as their lack 
of connectedness with others. For example, their seeming imperviousness to other people some-
times extended to a marked failure to respond to others calling the child’s own name, or an insen-
sitivity to others’ attitudes to the self. Of one boy, it was reported that he “ … rarely responded to 
any form of address, even to the calling of his name … It made no difference whether one spoke 
to him in a friendly or harsh way” (p. 227–8). Kanner noted how such abnormality extended to 
self-expressions in language, for example, when another boy stumbled and nearly fell, and said of 
himself: “You did not fall down.” Kanner remarked how it was around the sixth year of life that 
the children he studied gradually learnt to speak of themselves in the ﬁ rst person and the person 
addressed in the second person. 
 Alongside these features, Kanner recorded abnormalities in non-verbal aspects of self/other 
awareness. For example, one child was said to move among other children “like a strange being, as 
one moves between the pieces of furniture in a room” (p. 241). Kanner also described a number of 
instances in which the children related not to what another person had just done, but to the hand 
that was in the way or the foot that stepped upon the child’s blocks. Yet not all aspects of the self 
are equally affected. When it came to the children’s attitudes toward objects, it seemed to Kanner 
that typically, the autistic child, “… is interested in them, can play with them happily for hours. He 
can be very fond of them, or get angry with them … When with them, he has a gratifying sense of 
undisputed power and control” (p. 246). 
 Kanner also noted how the children took pleasure in achievements such as completing puzzles. 
Yet such pleasure was also notable for something else: of one child, Kanner wrote: “He blew out a 
match with an expression of satisfaction with the achievement, but did not look up to the person 
who had lit the match” (p. 224), and of another: “She showed no interest in test performances. The 
concept of test, of sharing an experience or situation, seemed foreign to her” (p. 229). It is striking 
how what we take to be a natural orientation toward other people’s attitudes to what we, as selves, 
have achieved, was notable for its absence among some of these children. 
 Of course, one should not take such descriptions to apply to all children with autism, especially 
given that the clinical picture evolves over time. Extending both the range and depth of clinical 
observation, Bosch (1970) illustrated how affected individuals sometimes appear to lack a sense 
of possessiveness as well as self-consciousness and shame, to be delayed in “acting” on others by 
demanding or ordering, and to be missing something of the “self-involvement, the acting with, 
and the identiﬁ cation with the acting person” (p. 81). As a reﬂ ection of this, a “delay occurs in the 
constituting of the other person in whose place I can put myself … [and] … in the constituting of 
a common sphere of existence, in which things do not simply refer to me but also to others” (p. 89). 
In these ways, Bosch framed his account of self- and other-awareness with reference to attitudes 
implicated in relational stances. If a child does not experience such attitudes as possessiveness or 
shame for him- or herself, and/or does not register and identify with the attitudes and actions of 
others, then that child will be deprived of a vital source of knowledge about the subjective life of 
other people and the shared world in which we co-exist. 

CONTROLLED STUDIES OF CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS WITH AUTISM
399
 A complementary perspective on the self in autism is that provided by ﬁ rst-hand accounts of 
self-experience from able adolescents and adults with autism (Frith and Happ é , 1999). For instance, 
Grandin (1992) wrote that even in adulthood, she “had an odd lack of awareness of my oddities of 
speech and mannerisms until I looked at videotapes” (p. 113). Here, it is striking that only when 
confronted with herself depicted on videotape, rather than apprehending herself through the atti-
tudes of others, could she become aware of her mannerisms. Moreover, as Happ é (1991) has noted, 
Grandin’s accounts are remarkable for their lack of emphasis on her own emotional or family life, 
and for their portrayal of autism as an abnormality of perceptual processing and cognitive style. 
On the face of it, this seems to reﬂ ect not only her (probable) unengagement with others, but also 
her unengagement with her self -as-unengaged with others. 
 Having drawn on the richness of clinical descriptions, we turn to controlled studies in order to 
ascertain whether any abnormalities in manifestations of self-other relations are speciﬁ c to indi-
viduals with autism, rather than (for example) a reﬂ ection of severe learning difﬁ culties that also 
occur among children without autism. A further aim is to delineate more precisely those qualities 
of self-other relations and understanding that are impaired in autism, and to discover more about 
the kinds of self-awareness that are relatively intact. 
 Controlled studies of children and adolescents with autism  
 Relational self/other-awareness 
 We restrict ourselves to brief illustrations of research in the domains of person-with-person inter-
actions and person-person-world relations. Our intention is to consider how self-other commu-
nication involves transactions between two embodied individuals who are connected with each 
other, yet who treat each other as separate and differentiated centres of subjectivity. This structure 
to interpersonal communication is critical for the development of human beings’ understanding 
of persons-with-minds (e.g. Hobson, 1993a,b). 
 We begin with an early study by Dawson, Hill, Spencer, & Galpert (1990), who studied 16 autis-
tic children aged 2–6 years and 16 typically developing children matched for receptive language. 
Participants were videotaped interacting with their mothers in three different contexts: free play, 
a more structured situation in which the mother asked the child to help her to put away some 
toys, and a face-to-face situation over snack time. There were not signiﬁ cant group differences in 
the frequency or duration of gaze at the mother’s face, nor the frequency or duration of smiles in 
face-to-face interactions over a snack. However, children with autism were much less likely than 
typically developing children to combine their smiles with eye contact in a single act that seemed to 
convey an intent to communicate feelings. Not only this, but whereas 10 out of 14 typically devel-
oping children with codable data smiled in response to their mother’s smile, only three out of 15 
children with autism ever did so. It was also observed that the mothers of the children with autism 
were less likely to smile in response to their children’s smiles, which after all were rarely combined 
with sustained eye contact. 
 We cite this study for the reason that it lends itself to interpretation from the point of view of 
self-other relations and communication. Only rarely were the children with autism seen to convey 
their feelings to their communicative partner, or to communicate in such a way that this appeared 
to be for the mother. Correspondingly, they appeared not to register or respond to their mothers’ 
smiles as smiles for themselves. 
 Or again, Wimpory, Hobson, Williams, & Nash (2000) elicited parental reports of their young 
children’s ﬁ rst 2 years of life. Children who were subsequently diagnosed as having autism con-
trasted with those without autism in being said to show less intense eye gaze or turn-taking with 

AUTISM: SELF AND OTHERS
400
others, and fewer expressions of greeting, anger and distress toward people. Their attitudes were 
not other-person-directed, nor did they take the form of self-to-other communication in the way 
that was reported for the young children without autism. 
 Additional aspects of self-other connectedness and differentiation may be illustrated by ﬁ nd-
ings from a study by Sigman, Kasari, Kwon, & Yirmiya (1992). These researchers videotaped 30 
young children with autism who had a mean age of under 4 years, together with matched children 
without autism, in the presence of an adult who appeared to hurt herself by hitting her ﬁ nger with 
a hammer, simulated fear toward a remote-controlled robot, and pretended to be ill by lying down 
on a couch for a minute, feigning discomfort (and see Charman, Swettenham, Baron-Cohen, Cox, 
Baird, & Drew, 1997, for similar events involving 20-month-olds). In each of these situations, 
children with autism were unusual in rarely looking at or relating to the adult, or being affected by 
the adults’ attitudes to the robot. These observations exemplify the children’s lack of engagement 
with other people’s attitudes toward a shared world—a world that, amongst other things, contains 
themselves. 
 It is important to emphasize that not  all aspects of relationships are affected to the same degree 
among persons with autism. For instance, their attachment to a signiﬁ cant caregiver may be rela-
tively intact. There are several published studies that indicate how young children with autism 
 do respond to separation from and reunion with their caregivers, at least in the short-term (e.g. 
Rogers, Ozonoff & Maslin-Cole, 1991; Shapiro, Sherman, Calamari & Koch, 1987; Sigman & 
Mundy, 1989). Many (not all) 2–5-year-old children with autism are like matched learning disa-
bled children in showing somewhat variable mood changes such as fretting when their caregiver 
leaves them, and upon reunion they tend to spend more time alongside the caregiver than a 
stranger. Therefore the children’s relationship with their caregivers is clearly special, even though 
many qualities of their self-other relatedness are atypical (Beurkens, Hobson, & Hobson, 2013). 
Attachments to signiﬁ cant others appear to be organized by principles that differ from those that 
are critical for other-person-centred engagement and perspective-shifting. 
 Self-conscious emotions 
 Prototypically, self-conscious emotions reﬂ ect a person’s state of self within or with respect 
to a social context. Feelings such as coyness, embarrassment, guilt, pride, jealousy or shame 
are sometimes called “social” or even “complex” emotions, on the grounds that they seem to 
entail sophisticated understandings of self and other people along with relatively high levels of 
self-consciousness. However, it is important not to pre-judge whether young children require 
a concept of self in order to experience this or that self-conscious emotion. At least some social 
emotions may have a complex structure that comes as a biological given rather than an outcome 
of social-cognitive development. The study of autism may help us to see the degree to which 
this is so. 
 Again we can learn much from what parents report about their children. Hobson, Chidambi, Lee, 
& Meyer (2006) interviewed parents of children with and without autism who were aged between 
approximately 6 and 13 years and matched for verbal ability (roughly that of typically developing 
3–9-year-olds). Parents felt they could recognize in their children with autism not only emotions 
such as anger and fear, but also emotional responsiveness to other people’s mood states, as well 
as shyness, non-person-directed pride, and jealousy. Yet seldom could they cite clear instances of 
other-person-centred emotions such as guilt, shame, pity, empathic concern, or embarrassment. 
One parent who gave a convincing account of her child’s jealousy, said this about his expressions 
of concern: “He might be worried, but he doesn’t have that empathy sort of concern—he doesn’t 
show that at all … Empathetic sadness isn’t there.” 

CONTROLLED STUDIES OF CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS WITH AUTISM
401
 These reports from parents dovetail with what may be gleaned from self-reports elicited from 
verbally ﬂ uent children and adolescents with autism. For example, Kasari, Chamberlain, & 
Bauminger (2001) described how high-IQ children with autism reported feeling guilt, but only 
14% of participants with autism (vs. 42% of those with typical development) spoke of guilt over 
physical harm to others, and none referred to emotional harm such as hurting someone’s feelings. 
When speaking of embarrassment, fewer participants with autism explicitly mentioned an audi-
ence (also Capps, Yirmiya, & Sigman, 1992). In “self-understanding interviews” conducted by Lee 
& Hobson (1998), children with autism were not only restricted in the feelings they expressed 
about themselves, but they also failed to mention friends or being members of a social group. 
Therefore not merely do that children and adolescents with autism seem to have difﬁ culty in 
responding to another person’s feelings or attitudes as belonging to that person and at times 
shaping their own feelings, but also this limitation is apparent in their own descriptions of what 
they feel. 
 Thirdly, there is evidence from quasi-experimental studies. Kasari, Sigman, Baumgartner, & 
Stipek (1993) tested matched young children with and without autism (mean age 42 months) and 
typically developing children of the same level of ability (mean age 23 months). Each participant 
completed a puzzle, and the investigator and parent reacted neutrally; then the child completed 
a second puzzle, and after three seconds, both adults gave praise. Although children with autism 
were like the comparison children in being inclined to smile when they succeeded with the puzzles, 
those with autism were less likely to draw attention to what they had done or to look up to an adult, 
and less likely to show pleasure in being praised. Their pride assumed a strangely “asocial” form. It 
seems that pride has two components, namely pride in accomplishing something—a feeling that 
is not “social”—and pride before other people. 
 In a similar way, Hobson et al. (2006) contrived situations in which participants might feel 
pride, guilt, and coyness/embarrassment. Again, children with autism were relatively less likely 
than matched participants without autism to manifest other-person-directed expressions of the 
feelings. For example, when they felt responsible for the leg falling off a doll, they were less likely 
to show a “guilty looks” pattern of orientation toward the tester that included expressions of relief 
when the tester reassured them that the doll was already broken; and when they received the atten-
tions of a cuddly toy wielded by a playful tester, they rarely showed “re-engagement looks” that 
give coyness a specially intimate quality. This was despite the fact that the participants with autism 
showed many signs of being aware when they were the focus of attention. It seemed that there was 
a dissociation between these participants’ self-consciousness in being observed, and their ability 
to be affected by and engaged with the attitudes of a particular embodied other person. This may 
correspond with the contrast between the ability of children with autism to remove rouge from 
their faces when they perceive themselves in a mirror, or indeed to recognize their bodies after a 
delay (Lind & Bowler, 2009), and their relative lack of coyness in that same context (Dawson & 
McKissick, 1984; Neuman & Hill, 1978; Reddy, Williams, Costantini, & Lan, 2010; Spiker & Ricks, 
1984). 
 The crux is that social emotions such as concern, guilt or social pride are manifestations of affec-
tive engagement with other people as centres of subjectivity, embodied persons with whom one is 
linked and from whom one is differentiated (also Hobson, Harris, García-Pérez, & Hobson, 2009). 
Yet could not the same be said, perhaps even more strongly, of the emotion of jealousy? There is 
good evidence, both from parent report in the research by Hobson et al. (2006) already cited, and 
also from experimental studies conducted by Bauminger (2004; Bauminger, Chomsky-Smolkin, 
Orbach-Caspi, Zachor, & Levy-Shiff, et al., 2007), that children with autism manifest and experi-
ence jealousy. Surely this contradicts the idea that their self-other relatedness is impaired? 

AUTISM: SELF AND OTHERS
402
 Not necessarily. There may be more diversity among social emotions than we have realized. 
Perhaps jealousy is a biologically prepared emotional state tied in with processes of attachment 
rather than intersubjectivity, and like attachment, relatively spared among individuals with 
autism. This is not to suggest that attachment relationships are irrelevant for the development of 
self-experience. Indeed, self-related aspects of feelings of jealousy might make a contribution to the 
self-awareness of children with autism. Dissociations among different social emotions in autism 
highlight the possibility that certain seemingly complex emotions (including but not necessarily 
restricted to jealousy) do not require as much as we might have imagined by way of intersubjective 
experience or cognitive-conceptual sophistication.  
 Imitation 
 The reason that so much attention has been paid to young children’s developing propensities 
and abilities to imitate other people, is that here we may ﬁ nd not only reﬂ ections of developing 
self-other awareness, but also pointers to the mechanisms through which new levels of self-other 
understanding might be achieved. There is a complex and in part conﬂ icting literature on this 
topic. On the one hand, there are many clinical and experimental reports to indicate that chil-
dren with autism ﬁ nd it hard and/or are rarely moved to imitate a range of emotional expres-
sions, bodily movements, and pantomimed actions of other people (e.g. DeMyer, Alpern, Barton, 
DeMyer, Churchill, Hingtgen, et al., 1972; Rogers, Hepburn, Stackhouse, & Wehner, 2003). On 
the other hand, children with autism are able to copy the goal-directed actions of someone else 
(e.g. Charman & Baron-Cohen, 1994), and are prone to “echo” the behavior of others. Moreover, 
several studies have reported how children with autism show responsiveness to being imitated, so 
that they often become more socially engaged and interactive when an adult imitates their actions 
(Dawson & Adams, 1984; Dawson & Galpert, 1990). Therefore the speciﬁ c qualities of the chil-
dren’s imitative deﬁ cits may betray something about the basis for their limitations in self-other 
awareness, and the speciﬁ c qualities of their imitative abilities illuminate how they develop some 
forms of self-consciousness and self-concept. 
 Two aspects of imitation are especially revealing, insofar as they appear to tap the process of 
identifying with someone else. Hobson & Lee (1999) tested matched groups of children with and 
without autism aged between 9 and 19 years (and verbal mental ages between 4 and 13 years) for 
their ability to imitate a person demonstrating four novel goal-directed actions on objects in two 
contrasting “styles.” In one condition, the demonstrator made a toy policeman-on-wheels move 
along by pressing down on its head either with his wrist cocked or with extended index and mid-
dle ﬁ ngers. In other conditions, he showed either gentle or harsh styles of action. The results were 
that children with autism were perfectly able to copy the demonstrator’s actions, for example in 
pressing down the policeman’s head to make him move, but contrasted with control participants 
insofar as very few adopted the demonstrator’s style of acting upon the objects. Instead of adopt-
ing the wrist or two-ﬁ nger approach to activating the toy, for example, most of them pressed 
down on the policeman’s head with the palm of a hand. Here there appeared to be a contrast 
between children’s ability to observe and copy intended actions  per se , relatively intact in autism, 
and the propensity to identify with and thereby imitate a  person’s expressive mode of relating to 
objects and events in the world. Secondly, when the demonstrator held a pipe-rack against his own 
shoulder in order to strum it with a stick, a substantial majority of the control participants posi-
tioned the pipe-rack against their own shoulder before strumming it, but most of the children with 
autism positioned the pipe-rack at a distance in front of them, on the table. Again with respect to 
self-orientation, the children with autism did not identify with the other and perform the actions 
from a person-centered perspective (also Meyer & Hobson, 2004). 

CONTROLLED STUDIES OF CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS WITH AUTISM
403
 Awareness of oneself as having mental states 
 The most systematic body of controlled experimental research on self-awareness of mental states 
comes from work in the “theory-of-mind” tradition. Early empirical research in this area included 
that by Perner, Frith, Leslie, & Leekam (1989), who reported that children with autism found dif-
ﬁ culty in judging whether or not they themselves (and not only an experimenter) knew what was 
inside a container, on the basis of whether they had had an opportunity to look inside the container 
for themselves. In the late 1990’s, Frith & Happ é (1999) offered an overview and theoretical inter-
pretation of such research, augmenting experimental evidence with examples of impoverished 
introspective self-reports from three men with Asperger syndrome (originally Hurlburt, Happ é , 
& Frith, 1994) as well as ﬁ rst-person accounts by writers who have autism. For these authors, 
self-consciousness “may be seen as the product of a speciﬁ c neurocognitive mechanism” (p. 18) 
that they take to underlie theory-of-mind abilities. However, it is plausible that causative arrows 
ﬂ y in the opposite direction: a young child’s experiences of engagement with others’ attitudes 
toward the self and a shared world may constitute the psychological “mechanism” for developing 
self-reﬂ ective awareness and acquiring mental state concepts. 
 A careful review by Williams (2010) brings us up-to-date on the sources of evidence that indeed, 
individuals with autism are impaired in recognizing their own mental states. Two examples from 
Williams’ own work in collaboration with Happ é serve to illustrate recent studies. First, Williams 
& Happ é (2009a) returned to re-examine a result from the earlier study by Perner et al. (1989), 
suggesting that children with autism found it easier to report their own previously held false belief 
about the contents of a Smarties tube than to identify the false belief of someone else. Williams 
& Happ é (2009a) noted that here, participants had been asked to make explicit statements about 
their belief over the contents of the tube—a belief that subsequently turned out to be false—
prior to being asked what that early belief had been. Therefore they might simply have responded 
by drawing upon what they recalled they had said, rather than needing to recall what they had 
believed. Williams & Happ é (2009a) introduced a novel design in which a tester pretended to 
have cut a ﬁ nger and asked participants to fetch a plaster (Band-Aid). Participants had to choose 
from among three boxes, only one of which was a plasters box (but, in fact, contained candles), 
thereby demonstrating but not stating their false belief that this would contain plasters. When 
subsequently asked what they had thought was in this box, participants with autism showed more 
difﬁ culty in answering this question than a similar question framed in relation to what another 
person would think. The authors concluded that children with autism may be relatively more 
impaired at recognizing their own vis- à -vis others’ mental states of belief. 
 A second study by Williams & Happ é (2010) was designed to contribute to somewhat conﬂ ict-
ing evidence (Phillips, Baron-Cohen, & Rutter, 1998; Russell & Hill, 2001) on whether children 
with autism can recognize their own intentions. Participants were given a “knee-jerk task” (Lang & 
Perner, 2002) in which they were asked if they had intended to move their leg when, in fact, a knee 
reﬂ ex had been elicited by the tester. The results were that compared with matched participants 
without autism, those with autism more often claimed that their reﬂ ex movement had been under 
their intentional control. Such diminished awareness of their own intentions was related to their 
ability to recognize others’ mental states, as assessed by performance on false belief tasks. 
 If awareness of oneself as having mental states is compromised in autism, then what inﬂ uence 
might this have on remembering, and perhaps especially recalling personally experienced events? 
 Lind (2010) has provided an excellent review of research on various aspects of self-experience among 
individuals with autism, and in particular, the relation between atypicalites in self-experience and 
memory. Lind makes the point that having a concept of self might be important for encoding 

AUTISM: SELF AND OTHERS
404
and retrieving personally signiﬁ cant memories, yet it is also the case that the ability to have lively 
memories of one’s past personal experiences makes a vital contribution to one’s notion and 
sense of self. She discusses how partial self-knowledge and self-concepts among children with 
autism are reﬂ ected in impairments in autobiographical episodic memory. The evidence includes 
impoverished accounts of speciﬁ c personal experiences in participants’ reports of task-related 
events, natural everyday happenings, and past aspects of their lives (e.g. Bruck London, Landa, & 
Goodman, 2007; Crane & Goddard, 2008; Goddard, Howlin, Dritschel, & Patel, 2007; Klein, Chan, 
& Loftus, 1999; Losh & Capps, 2003; Millward, Powell, Messer, & Jordan, 2000). Their restricted 
non-autobiographical episodic memory, for instance in “remembering” things rather than simply 
“knowing” them (Bowler, Gardiner, & Grice, 2000), may also attest to deﬁ cits in re-experiencing 
themselves as a subject of experience. Indeed, these limitations may extend to imagining a future 
self, and amount to a restriction on what Lind calls the “temporally extended self-concept” (Lind, 
2010, p. 430). 
 In addition to this, there is tentative but growing evidence that children with autism may 
not show the usual enhanced processing of information that is encoded in relation to the self 
(e.g. Henderson, Zahka, Kojkowski, Inge, Schwartz, Hileman, et al., 2009; Lombardo, Barnes, 
Wheelwright, & Baron-Cohen, 2007; Toichi, Kamio, Okada, Sakihama, Youngstrom, Findling, 
et al., 2002). Or again, to judge from their drawings, they may experience themselves as relatively 
undifferentiated human ﬁ gures (Lee & Hobson, 2006). Yet it is important to remember that some 
features of self-experience appear to be relatively intact among individuals with autism, even if 
these often although not exclusively focus on semantic (rather than episodic), physical (rather 
than psychological), and individual (rather than socially embedded) characteristics (e.g. Lee & 
Hobson, 1998). 
 Communication and language 
 Here, we come full-circle, to consider self-other relations in verbal as well as non-verbal 
communication. 
 If a child is to adjust his or her language according to situational and communicative context as 
construed by conversational partners, then that individual needs to co-ordinate linguistic expres-
sions with what he or she interprets to be the perspectives expressed and anticipated by the partner. 
More than this, he or she needs the propensity to engage with the other’s perspective in such a way 
as to make the appropriate adjustments, a motivational as well as a cognitive matter. Therefore, if 
children with autism are relatively unengaged with other people’s attitudes, it might be expected 
that they would show limited in sensitivity to pragmatic adjustments in language. 
 Consider ﬁ rst a study of one aspect of non-verbal communication. Hobson & Meyer (2005) 
devised an original methodology (the “Sticker Test”) and demonstrated that whereas children 
without autism would often employ a point-to-themselves (i.e. a location on their own body) 
to communicate that a tester should place a sticker on herself (i.e. the corresponding location on 
her body), this was much less frequently the case among children with autism. Here the children 
without autism appeared to identify with the tester in assuming that she would interpret the child’s 
self-orientated action as one with which she should identify, in order to place the sticker on her 
own (i.e. the tester’s) body. Participants with autism seldom adjusted their communication in this 
mutually coordinated, person-anchored way. 
 An intimately related aspect of the pragmatics of verbal language is the comprehension and use 
of deictic terms. Deictic terms such as “here” and “there” or “this” and “that”—as well as “I” and 
“you”—have meanings that are anchored in the embodied stances of speaker and listener. From 
his observations of children with autism, Kanner concluded that personal pronouns “ are repeated 

CONTROLLED STUDIES OF CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS WITH AUTISM
405
just as heard , with no change to suit the altered situation” (Kanner, 1943, p. 244). Instead of relating 
the other person’s utterance to that person’s attitude and then identifying with the other person’s 
stance, children with autism tend to adopt speech forms that correspond with  their experience 
of the circumstances in which the words are uttered, and therefore to repeat utterances as heard 
(Charney, 1981; Jordan, 1989; Lee, Hobson, & Chiat, 1994). This represents a failure to recognize 
and assume the other person’s attitude-in-speaking. Indeed, in a study by Loveland & Landry 
(1986), correct production of I/you pronouns by autistic children was related to the number of 
their spontaneous initiations of joint attention with an experimenter. This suggests that correct 
usage of deictic terms and pronouns may reﬂ ect a special quality of engagement and co-reference 
between self and other. 
 Evidence compatible with this account of atypical self- and other-reference comes from studies by 
Jordan (1989) and Lee et al. (1994), where in settings such as being the object of a puppet’s tickling, 
or when referring to photographs of themselves, children with autism would sometimes give proper 
names to themselves or the experimenter sitting alongside, rather than using the pronouns “me” or 
“you.” Participants with autism had a relatively detached, almost third-person attitude to photo-
graphs of themselves and the experimenter. In contrast, children without autism seemed to identify 
with the depictions of themselves, and to see and care about the photographed person as “me.” 
 In a study of deictic communication (Hobson, García-Pérez, & Lee, 2010), we employed 
semi-structured tests to determine whether children with autism produce and comprehend such 
person-centred expressions. In several respects, they behaved rather like matched comparison 
children without autism, but there were also subtle and telling group differences. In particular, 
a majority of children with autism, but not a single child in the comparison group, sometimes 
referred to a location that was distant from themselves with the terms “this” or “here” (rather than 
“that” or “there”), or pointed with unusual precision with what we came to call a “laser-beam 
point” that was sometimes accompanied by lining up an eye behind the look. Not only this, but 
also participants with autism were less likely to accompany points with a look back to the person 
for whom the points should have been intended. 
 These ﬁ ndings show us something further about atypicalities in self-other relations among chil-
dren with autism. In the typical case, a point is understood by a listener with reference to current 
discourse, so that it is not necessary for a speaker to be exact in conveying what is meant, only 
precise enough to communicate which of several alternatives is the referent singled out. “This” 
and “here” are terms used in relation to speaker-listener locations and the topic of discourse, so 
that “this” can refer to an immediately proximal location, a room, a town, a country, and so on. 
Yet when the children with autism made overly speciﬁ c “laser-beam points,” or when they used 
the word “this” to refer to a distal location, they appeared to be operating within an egocentric 
framework rather than one that had reference to common ground (Clark, 1996) shared between 
themselves and the tester. Whereas participants without autism mostly looked back to the person 
for whom their points were intended and framed, such looks were less frequent among those with 
autism. An additional ﬁ nding was that some children with autism found it difﬁ cult to appreci-
ate the meaning of the tester’s atypical gesture (a head-nod to indicate location) when this was 
intended as a communication for the children themselves. Each atypicality appears to reﬂ ect chil-
dren’s limited co-ordination of interpersonal experience and reciprocal role-taking in relation to a 
shared world experienced jointly in common with others.  
 Neuroscientiﬁ c perspectives 
 One neurofunctional approach attempting to capture atypicalities in preconceptual self-other 
relations is that concerned with the operation of “mirror neurones” (e.g. Decety & Chaminade, 

AUTISM: SELF AND OTHERS
406
2003; Gallese, 2001). Although there is some evidence, both from fMRI ﬁ ndings (Dapretto, Davies, 
Pfeifer, Scott, Sigman, & Bookheimer, et al., 2006) and EEG patterns of mu frequency suppression 
(Oberman, Hubbard, McCleery, Altschuler, Ramachandran, & Pineda, 2005) that such functioning 
may be atypical among children with autism, the claims of the “mirror neuron” theory of autism 
(Williams, Whiten, Suddenforf, & Perrett, 2001) are disputed on both empirical and theoretical 
grounds (e.g. Southgate & Hamilton, 2008). 
 Another important perspective on self-other connectedness and differentiation is that elabo-
rated by Lombardo and Baron-Cohen (2011), who have combined a theoretical elaboration of 
ideas from social psychology with neurofunctional investigations. These authors emphasize the 
importance of comparing how individuals with autism thinking about themselves on the one 
hand (self-referential processing), and thinking about other people on the other. In the former 
respect, they stress how little is known about impairments in sources of information about the self 
among persons with autism, for instance through interoceptive (e.g. somatosensory or visceral) 
information (also Mundy, Sullivan, & Mastergeorge, 2009; Silani, Bird, Brindley, Singer, Frith, & 
Frith, 2008). They illustrate the importance of this issue through a transcranial magnetic stimula-
tion study in which they reported that among participants with Asperger syndrome, corticospi-
nal excitability to viewing another’s pain was reduced (Minio-Paluello, Baron-Cohen, Avenanti, 
Walsh, & Aglioti, 2009). They consider the possibility that such individuals may be aroused by such 
appraisals (Ben Shalom, Mostofsky, Hazlett, Goldberg, Landa, Faran, et al., 2006), but unable to 
draw on such information to feel empathy. 
 There is also a body of work concerned with the functioning of those parts of the brain that 
appear to be implicated in thinking about self and other. For example, Lombardo et al. (2007) 
have reported that the right temporo-parietal junction, which is thought to be a brain region sub-
serving the representation of mental states, was hypoactive among participants with ASD when 
mentalizing about self and others. On the other hand, in a study of brain functioning while par-
ticipants reﬂ ected on themselves or others (Lombardo et al., 2009), the ventromedial prefrontal 
cortex responded atypically, in what the authors describe as “an egocentrically equivalent fashion 
for both self and other” (Lombardo & Baron-Cohen, 2011, p. 137). Moreover, the degree to which 
this part of the prefrontal cortex responded most “egocentrically” to the mental characteristics of 
self corresponded with participants’ degree of social impairment in early childhood. 
 Lombardo and Baron-Cohen have argued that if self-referential processing is important for 
explaining some of the mechanisms involved in mindblindness among individuals with autism, 
one would expect there to be speciﬁ c areas of the brain that respond atypically for thinking about 
the mental states speciﬁ cally of oneself. When typical participants are asked to “mentalize” about 
themselves and others, for instance, they show increased activation in the middle cingulate cortex 
when the focus is themselves, rather than others; when participants with autism were asked to do 
this, they responded more when thinking about the mental states of others vis- à -vis themselves 
(Lombardo, Chakrabarti, Bullmore, Sadek, Pasco, Wheelwright, et al., 2010). One conclusion 
drawn by the authors is that there cannot be one general-purpose mechanism accounting for all 
deﬁ cits in mentalizing about oneself and others. 
 In view of the attention that such neurofunctional studies have attracted, it is important to 
remember that they need to be interpreted with caution. We simply do not know whether atypical-
ities in neurological functioning among individuals beyond early childhood underlie—and point 
to the mechanisms of—psychological abnormality, or whether instead they reﬂ ect the outcome of 
developmental processes that might originate elsewhere. There are complications over the rela-
tions between the development of understandings of mind (or “mentalizing”) on the one hand, 
and the mechanisms of self-other connectedness and differentiation on the other. In particular, 

AUTISM AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF SELF
407
basic processes of intersubjective engagement may provide necessary foundations for mental state 
concepts, and thinking involving these concepts might become a feature of partly localized neu-
rological functioning. 
 Autism and the development of self  
 One lesson to be drawn from the clinical and experimental evidence we have cited, is that there are 
several strands to the story of the development of self in typical and atypical development. We have 
seen there is substantial evidence that individuals with autism have limitations in self-awareness. 
The evidence comes from domains as diverse as self-other relations and social emotions, imita-
tion, “theory-of-mind,” memory, and linguistic functioning, and is complemented by evidence 
from neurofunctional studies (also Hobson, 2010; Lombardo & Baron-Cohen, 2010). Although 
much (not all) of the most decisive evidence pertains to features of self-awareness that bear an 
intimate connection to the children’s social relations, it remains unclear how far the children’s 
limitations in self-awareness reﬂ ect their atypical engagement with and restricted understanding 
of other people. 
 In particular, we have given little consideration to possible abnormalities in the children’s 
pre-reﬂ ective sense of self, in relation to their own bodily experience. On the one hand, there are 
grounds for believing that certain forms of bodily self-experience are intact. For instance, Williams & 
Happ é (2009b) reported that children with autism were proﬁ cient in a test in which they positioned 
a mouse to move one of several coloured squares on a computer screen, and had to judge which was 
under their intentional control and which “distractor” squares were under the control of the com-
puter, suggesting no impairment in their sense of physical agency. On the other hand, there is a need 
to account for individuals’ reports of bodily hypo- or hyper-sensitivity to sound, light, touch or pain 
(Minshew & Hobson, 2008). Are these simply a reﬂ ection of an inability to reﬂ ect on inner experien-
tial states (Frith & Happ é , 1999), or do they betray something more basic about self-experience and 
self-other relations? There are related, seemingly “basic” abnormalities in the social sphere. Hobson 
et al. (2006) report that in every one of a (modestly sized) group of children with autism, parents 
described abnormalities in their offspring’s sense of bodily space. Here is one illustrative vignette:
 “He does that, he bumps into people in the supermarket. He’s so unaware of other people, if someone’s 
looking at something on a shelf he’ll go in between them and the shelf … it’s just like everybody’s an 
object” 
 Drawing on phenomenological considerations and self-reports from people with autism, Farley 
(2010) has argued that individuals with autism have profoundly unusual experience of their own 
bodies, and that this renders them both prone to disconnection from, and over-sensitive to, their 
social and non-social environment. From a neuroscientiﬁ c perspective, Mundy, Gwaltney, & 
Henderson (2010) suggest that autism involves early impairments in the capacity for rapid inte-
grated processing of proprioceptive and interoceptive (self-referenced) information on the one 
hand, and other-referenced (exteroceptive) information on the other, as manifest, for example, 
in failures of joint attention. It may prove that the distinctions we make between individual and 
social experience, between physical and psychological contents to self-awareness, and between 
non-reﬂ ective and reﬂ ective self-awareness, are far from straightforward. 
 Having said this, it is worth returning to what we have discovered about the atypicalities of 
self-other experience among individuals with autism in the social domain. In summary, children 
with autism have a relative dearth of engagement with other people’s feelings  as located in the 
other people and of importance for themselves in one way or another. This importance might 

AUTISM: SELF AND OTHERS
408
either take the form of concern for the other, or for themselves in the eyes of the other, or for what 
the world means for the other and therefore what it might mean for the self. It is not that they fail 
to react to others’ expressions of feeling, for instance, but often they seem to lack the self-other 
organization of attitude and action. Neither are they gripped by other people, nor are they so easily 
moved to assimilate or adjust to the stance of someone else, whether in settings of social referenc-
ing or imitation or communication. Along with this, as Bosch (1970) suggested long ago, they ﬁ nd 
difﬁ culty in constituting a “common sphere of existence” with other people. Frith & De Vignemont 
(2005) offer an interesting elaboration of such a view, suggesting that people with Asperger syn-
drome suffer from a disconnection between a strong na ï ve egocentric stance, where the other per-
son is represented in relation to the self, and an allocentric stance detached from interactions with 
people, where the existence or mental states of other people need to be represented as independent 
from the self. 
 The question that all this raises is whether we need to introduce structures of self/other connected-
ness and differentiation into our account of the most basic forms of human social experience, and 
whether the processes that so organize social relations are weak or missing among children who develop 
autism. We propose that the answer to this question is “Yes.” (This is an over-simpliﬁ cation, because 
we believe that the developmental basis for autism is a systemic breakdown in person-person-world 
relations that can be affected by other factors such as congenital blindness, but these are exceptional 
cases). More speciﬁ cally, and from early in life, typically developing individuals identify with other 
people (Freud, 1955/21). In identifying with someone else, the self not only responds to another 
individual’s bodily-expressed orientation from that other person’s stance, but also assimilates that 
orientation so that it becomes a possible mode of relating for the self. 
 In order to understand some of the profound implications of this process for typical develop-
ment, consider how one-year-olds’ acts of showing or pointing out things to other people reﬂ ects 
their engagement with others as separate sources of attitude to objects and events in the world. 
Moreover, identifying with the attitudes of others is a primary way to establish a connection 
between ﬁ rst-person phenomenological experience of, say, feelings of distress or possessiveness 
or agency, and other people’s experiences of these kinds (Barresi & Moore, 1996). This kind of 
non-inferential and pre-conceptual process lays the foundations for developments around the 
middle of the second year of life, when children acquire the abilities to conceptualize what it means 
for people to have their own “selves” and psychological stances, to exercise self-reﬂ ective aware-
ness, and to introduce (originally person-anchored) perspectives to new objects in symbolic play 
(Hobson, 1993, 2002). 
 If it is the case that this form of biologically given structuring of social engagement is not fully in 
place for some children, their acquisition of concepts of self and others (with minds) will be com-
promised to the degree that they miss out on preconceptual forms of experience of relations with 
embodied, and bodily expressive, other people. If they are seldom affected (through identiﬁ cation) 
by the other person’s attitudes  as the attitudes of another self with whom they are engaged—or 
indeed, if they are limited in identifying with themselves as experienced in the past and projected 
into the future (also Farley, 2010)—they will be seriously constrained in developing the full range 
of social emotions, in imitating others, in developing autobiographical and other forms of epi-
sodic memory, in making pragmatic adjustments in communication, and in acquiring many other 
aspects of self-awareness. Yet as we have seen, many children with autism have some concept of self 
and some capacity to acquire self-reﬂ ection (although there are no studies on whether this ability 
is hard-won and achieved relatively late in childhood). Their concepts of self and their range of 
self-directed attitudes are limited in virtue of their abnormality in some, but only some, of several 
dissociable lines of development that contribute to the typical development of self. 

409
REFERENCES
 Acknowledgement 
 Some sections of this paper are adapted from a chapter entitled “Autism: Self and other,” to appear 
in S. Gallagher (Ed.),  Oxford Handbook of the Self (2012), by permission of Oxford University Press, 
Inc. We gratefully acknowledge the support of the Baily Thomas Charitable Trust. This chapter 
was written while the ﬁ rst author was a Fellow and the second author was a Visiting Scholar at the 
Center for Advanced Study in Behavoural Sciences (CASBS) at Stanford University. 
 References 
 Barresi, J., & Moore, C. (1996) . Intentional relations and social understanding.  Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences  19 :  107–54 . 
 Bauminger, N. (2004) . Th e expression and understanding of jealousy in children with autism.  Development 
and Psychopathology  16 :  157–77 . 
 Bauminger, N., Chomsky-Smolkin, L., Orbach-Caspi, E., Zachor, D., & Levy-Shiff , R. (2007) . Jealousy and 
emotional responsiveness in young children with ASD.  Cognition and Emotion  22 : 595–619. 
 Ben Shalom, D., Mostofsky, S. H., Hazlett, R. L., Goldberg, M. C., Landa, R. J., Faran, Y. et al. (2006) 
 Normal physiological emotions, but diff erences in expression of conscious feelings in children with 
high-functioning autism .  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  36 :  395–400 . 
 Beurkens NM, Hobson JA, Hobson RP. (2013).  Autism severity and qualities of parent-child relations. 
 Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,  43, 168–178 . 
 Bosch, G. (1970).  Infantile Autism (transl. D. Jordan & I. Jordan).  New York :  Springer-Verlag . 
 Bowler, D. M., Gardiner, J. M., & Grice, S. (2000) . Episodic memory and remembering in adults with 
Asperger’s syndrome.  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  30 :  305–16 . 
 Bruck, M., London, K., Landa, R., & Goodman, J. (2007).  Autobiographical memory and suggestibility in 
children with autism spectrum disorder .  Development and Psychopathology  19 :  73–95 . 
 Capps, L., Yirmiya, N., & Sigman, M. (1992) . Understanding of simple and complex emotions in 
non-retarded children with autism.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  33 :  1169–82 . 
 Charman, T., & Baron-Cohen, S. (1994) . Another look at imitation in autism.  Development and 
Psychopathology  6 :  403–13 . 
 Charman, T., Swettenham, J., Baron-Cohen, S., Cox, A., Baird, G., & Drew, A. (1997) . Infants with autism: An 
investigation of empathy, pretend play, joint attention, and imitation.  Developmental Psychology  33 :  781–9 . 
 Charney, R. (1981) . Pronoun errors in autistic children: Support for a social explanation.  British Journal of 
Disorders of Communication  15 :  39–43 . 
 Clark, H. H. (1996).  Using Language .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Crane, L., & Goddard, L. (2008)  Episodic and semantic autobiographical memory in adults with autism 
spectrum disorders .  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  38 :  498–506 . 
 Dapretto, M., Davies, M. S., Pfeifer, J. H., Scott, A. A., Sigman, M., Bookheimer, S. Y., et al. (2006) . 
Understanding emotions in others: Mirror neuron dysfunction in children with autism spectrum 
disorders.  Nature Neuroscience  9 :  28–30 . 
 Dawson G., & Adams, A. (1984) . Imitation and social responsiveness in autistic children.  Journal of 
Abnormal Child Psychology  12 :  209–26 . 
 Dawson, G., & Galpert, L. (1990) . Mother’s use of imitative play for facilitating the social behavior of 
autistic children.  Development and Psychopathology  2 :  151–62 . 
 Dawson, G., Hill, D., Spencer, A., Galpert, L., & Watson, L. (1990) . Aff ective exchanges between young 
autistic children and their mothers.  Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology  18 :  335–45 . 
 Dawson, G., & McKissick, F. C. (1984) . Self-recognition in autistic children.  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders  14 :  383–94 . 

AUTISM: SELF AND OTHERS
410
 Decety, J., & Chaminade, T. (2003) . When self represents the other: A new cognitive neuroscience view on 
psychological identifi cation.  Consciousness and Cognition  12 :  577–96 . 
 DeMyer, M. K., Alpern, G. D., Barton, S., DeMyer, W. E., Churchill, D. W., Hingtgen, J. N., Bryson, C. 
Q., Pontius, W., & Kimberlin, C. (1972.)  Imitation in autistic, early schizophrenic, and non-psychotic 
subnormal children .  Journal of Autism and Childhood Schizophrenia  2 :  264–87 . 
 Farley, A. (2010).  Bodily Experience, Intersubjectivity and Re-experiencing in Autism. Poster presented at 
conference on Embodiment, intersubjectivity, and psychopathology, Heidelberg, Germany, September. 
 Freud, S. (1955/1921).  Identifi cation . In: J. Strachey (Ed.),  Th e Standard Edition of the Complete 
Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. xviii, pp.  105–10 ).  London :  Hogarth . 
 Frith, U., & Happ é , F. (1999).  Th eory of mind and self-consciousness: What is it like to be autistic?  Mind 
and Language  14 :  1–22 . 
 Frith, U., & de Vignemont, F. (2005) . Egocentrism, allocentrism, and Asperger syndrome.  Consciousness 
and Cognition  14 :  719–38 . 
 Gallese, V. (2001) . Th e “shared manifold” hypothesis: From mirror neurons to empathy.  Journal of 
Consciousness Studies  8 :  33–50 . 
 Goddard, L., Howlin, P., Dritschel, B., & Patel, T. (2007)  Autobiographical memory and social 
problem-solving in Asperger syndrome .  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  37 :  291–300 . 
 Grandin, T. (1992) . An inside view of autism. In E. Schopler & G. B. Mesibov (Eds),  High-functioning 
Individuals with Autism (pp 105–26) .  New York :  Plenum Press . 
 Happ é , F. G. E. (1991).  Th e autobiographical writings of three Asperger syndrome adults: Problems of 
interpretation and implications for theory . In U. Frith (Ed.),  Autism and Asperger Syndrome (pp. 
 207–42) .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Henderson, H. A., Zahka, N. E., Kojkowski, N. M., Inge, A. P., Schwartz, C. B., Hileman, C. M., et al. 
(2009)  Self-referenced memory, social cognition, and symptom presentation in autism .  Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry  50 :  853–61 . 
 Hobson, J. A., Harris, R., García-Pérez, R., & Hobson, R. P. (2009) . Anticipatory concern: A study in 
autism.  Developmental Science  12 :  249–63 . 
 Hobson, R. P. (1990) . On the origins of self and the case of autism.  Development and Psychopathology  2 :  163–81 . 
 Hobson, R. P. (1993a).  Autism and the Development of Mind .  Hove :  Erlbaum . 
 Hobson, R. P. (1993b) . Th e emotional origins of social understanding.  Philosophical Psychology  6 :  227–49 . 
 Hobson R. P. (2002).  Th e Cradle of Th ought .  London :  Macmillan /New York, Oxford University Press. 
 Hobson, R. P. (2010) . Explaining autism: Ten reasons to focus on the developing self.  Autism  14 :  391–407 . 
 Hobson, R. P., Chidambi, G., Lee, A., & Meyer, J. (2006) . Foundations for self-awareness: An exploration 
through autism.  Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development  284 :  1–165 . 
 Hobson, R. P., García-Pérez, R., & Lee, A. (2010) . Person-centred (deictic) expressions and autism.  Journal 
of Autism and Developmental Disorders  40 :  403–15 . 
 Hobson, R. P., & Lee, A. (1999) . Imitation and identifi cation in autism.  Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry  40 :  649–59 . 
 Hobson, R. P., & Meyer, J. A. (2005) . Foundations for self and other: A study in autism.  Developmental 
Science  8 :  481–91 . 
 Hurlburt, R. T., Happ é , F., & Frith, U. (1994) . Sampling the form of inner experience in three adults with 
Asperger syndrome.  Psychological Medicine  24 :  385–95 . 
 Jordan, R. R. (1989) . An experimental comparison of the understanding and use of speaker-addressee 
personal pronouns in autistic children.  British Journal of Disorders of Communication  24 :  169–79 . 
 Kanner, L. (1943) . Autistic disturbances of aff ective contact.  Nervous Child  2 :  217–50 . 
 Kasari, C., Chamberlain, B., & Bauminger, N. (2001) . Social emotions and social relationships: Can 
children with autism compensate? In J. A. Burack, T. Charman, N. Yirmiya, & P. R. Zelazo (Eds),  Th e 
Development of Autism (pp.  309–23 ).  Mahwah :  Erlbaum . 

411
 Kasari, C., Sigman, M. D., Baumgartner, P., & Stipek, D. J. (1993) . Pride and mastery in children with 
autism.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  34 :  352–62 . 
 Klein, S. B., Chan, R. L., & Loft us, J. (1999) . Independence of episodic and semantic self-knowledge: Th e 
case from autism.  Social Cognition  17 :  413–36 . 
 Lang, B., & Perner, J. (2002) . Understanding of intention and false belief and the development of 
self-control.  British Journal of Developmental Psychology  20 :  67–76 . 
 Lee, A., & Hobson, R. P. (1998) . On developing self-concepts: A controlled study of children and 
adolescents with autism.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  39 :  1131–41 . 
 Lee, A., & Hobson, R. P. (2006).  Drawing self and others: How do children with autism diff er from those 
with learning diffi  culties?  British Journal of Developmental Psychology  24 :  547–65 . 
 Lee A., Hobson, R. P., & Chiat, S. (1994) . I, you, me and autism: An experimental study.  Journal of Autism 
and Developmental Disorders  24 :  155–76 . 
 Lind, S. E. (2010) . Memory and the self in autism.  Autism  14 :  430–56 . 
 Lind, S., & Bowler, D. M. (2009) . Delayed self-recognition in children with autism spectrum disorder. 
 Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  39 :  643–50 . 
 Lombardo, M. V., Barnes, J. L.,Wheelwright, S. J., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2007).  Self-referential cognition 
and empathy in autism .  PLoS One  2 :  e883 . 
 Lombardo, M. V., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2010) . Unraveling the paradox of the autistic self.  WIREs Cognitive 
Science  1 :  393–403 . 
 Lombardo, M. V., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2011) . Th e role of the self in mindblindness in autism.  Consciousness 
and Cognition  20 :  130–40 . 
 Lombardo, M. V., Chakrabarti, B., Bullmore, E. T., Sadek, S. A., Pasco. G., Wheelwright, S. J., Suckling, 
J., MRC AIMS Consortium, & Baron-Cohen, S. (2010).  Atypical neural self-representation in autism . 
 Brain  133 :  611–24 . 
 Losh, M., & Capps, L. (2003)  Narrative ability in high-functioning children with autism or Asperger’s 
syndrome .  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  33 :  239–51 . 
 Loveland, K. A., & Landry, S. H. (1986).  Joint attention and language in autism and developmental 
language delay .  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  16 :  335–49 . 
 Meyer, J. A., & Hobson, R. P. (2004).  Orientation in relation to self and other: Th e case of autism . 
 Interaction Studie s  5 :  221–44 . 
 Millward, C., Powell, S., Messer, D., & Jordan, R. (2000) . Recall for self and other in autism: Children’s 
memory for events experienced by themselves and their peers.  Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders  30 :  15–28 . 
 Minio-Paluello, I., Baron-Cohen, S., Avenanti, A., Walsh, V., & Aglioti, S. M. (2009) . Absence of 
embodied empathy during pain observation in Asperger syndrome.  Biological Psychiatry  65 :  55–62 . 
 Minshew, N.J., & Hobson, J.A. (2008) . Sensory sensitivities and performance on sensory perceptual tasks in 
high-functioning individuals with autism.  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 38 :  1485–1498 . 
 Mundy, P., Gwaltney, M., & Henderson, H. (2010) . Self-referenced processing, neurodevelopment and joint 
attention in autism.  Autism  14 :  408–29 . 
 Mundy, P., Sullivan, L, & Mastergeorge, A. M. (2009) . A parallel and distributed-processing model of joint 
attention, social cognition and autism.  Autism Research  2 :  2–21 . 
 Neuman, C. J., & Hill, S. D. (1978) . Self-recognition and stimulus preference in autistic children. 
 Developmental Psychobiology  11 :  571–8 . 
 Oberman, L. M., Hubbard, E. M., McCleery, J. P., Altschuler, E. L., Ramachandran, V., & Pineda, J. A. 
(2005) . EEG evidence for mirror neuron dysfunction in autism spectrum disorders.  Cognitive Brain 
Research  24 :  190–8 . 
 Perner, J., Frith, U., Leslie, A. M., & Leekam, S. R. (1989) . Explorations of the autistic child’s theory of 
mind: Knowledge, belief, and communication.  Child Development  60 :  689–700 . 
REFERENCES

AUTISM: SELF AND OTHERS
412
 Phillips, W., Baron-Cohen, S., & Rutter, M. (1998) . Understanding intention in normal development and 
autism.  British Journal of Developmental Psychology  16 :  337–48 . 
 Reddy, V., Williams, E., Costantini, C., & Lan, B. (2010) . Engaging with the self: Mirror behavior in 
autism, Down syndrome and typical development.  Autism  14 :  531–46 . 
 Rogers, S. J., Hepburn, S. L., Stackhouse, T., & Wehner, E. (2003) . Imitation performance in toddlers with 
autism and those with other developmental disorders.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  44 : 
 763–81 . 
 Rogers, S. J., Ozonoff , S., & Maslin-Cole, C. (1991) . A comparative study of attachment behavior in young 
children with autism or other psychiatric disorders.  Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry  30 :  483–8 . 
 Russell, J., & Hill, E. L. (2001) . Action monitoring and intention reporting in children with autism.  Journal 
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  42 :  317–28 . 
 Shapiro, T. Sherman, M., Calamari, G., & Koch, D. (1987) . Attachment in autism and other developmental 
disorders.  Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry  26 :  485–90 . 
 Sigman M., & Mundy, P. (1989) . Social attachments in autistic children.  Journal of the American Academy of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry  28 :  74–81 . 
 Sigman, M. D., Kasari, C., Kwon, J. H., & Yirmiya, N. (1992) . Responses to the negative emotions of others 
by autistic, mentally retarded, and normal children.  Child Development  63 :  796–807 . 
 Silani, G., Bird, G., Brindley, R., Singer, T., Frith, C., & Frith, U. (2008) . Levels of emotional awareness and 
autism: An fMRI study.  Social Neuroscience  3 :  97–112 . 
 Southgate, V., & Hamilton, A. F. de C. (2008) . Unbroken mirrors: challenging a theory of autism.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences  12 :  225–9 . 
 Spiker, D., & Ricks, M. (1984) . Visual self-recognition in autistic children: Developmental relationships. 
 Child Development  55 :  214–25 . 
 Toichi, M., Kamio, Y., Okada, T., Sakihama, M., Youngstrom, E. A., Findling, R. L., et al. (2002)  A lack of 
self-consciousness in autism .  American Journal of Psychiatry  159 :  1422–4 . 
 Williams, D. (2010).  Th eory of  own  mind in autism .  Autism  14 :  474–94 . 
 Williams, D. M., & Happ é , F. (2009a).  What did I say? vs. What did I think? Attributing false beliefs to self 
amongst children with and without autism .  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  39 :  865–73 . 
 Williams, D. M., & Happ é , F. (2009b).  Pre-conceptual aspects of self-awareness in Autism Spectrum 
Disorder: Th e case of action-monitoring .  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  39 :  251–9 . 
 Williams, D. M., & Happ é , F. (2010).  Representing intentions in self and others: studies of autism and 
typical development .  Developmental Science  13 :  307–19 . 
 Williams, J. H. G., Whiten, A., Suddendorf, T., & Perrett, D. I. (2001).  Imitation, mirror neurons and 
autism .  Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews  25 :  287–95 . 
 Wimpory, D. C., Hobson, R. P., Williams, J. M., & Nash, S. (2000).  Are infants with autism socially 
engaged? A study of recent retrospective parental reports .  Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders  30 :  525–36 . 

 Chapter 23 
 A review of theory of mind 
interventions for children and 
adolescents with autism spectrum 
conditions 
 Julie A.   Hadwin and   Hanna   Kovshoff 
 Overview 
 Theory of mind (ToM) reﬂ ects an understanding that people have mental states (desires, beliefs, 
intentions) that are linked to feelings and behavior (Baron-Cohen, 2000). Typically, children 3–4 
years of age start to show some ability to recognize that they themselves and others have beliefs, 
that these are sometimes false and that a person will act on them irrespective of the reality of 
a situation (Wimmer & Perner, 1983). The measurement of false belief (or ﬁ rst-order ToM) is 
argued to be a key marker in children’s understanding of mental states (Perner, 1993) and its emer-
gence at this age in development has been characterized as a conceptual shift in children’s think-
ing (Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001). Further research has found that the development of ToM 
can be advanced to some extent by a favorable social environment (McElwain & Volling, 2004; 
Perner, Ruffman, & Leekam, 1994) or more advanced language skills (Dunn, Brown, Slomkowski, 
Tesla, & Youngblade, 1991). In addition, researchers increasingly recognize that some aspects of 
ToM (e.g. joint attention, understanding of desires and true beliefs) are evident earlier in develop-
ment (Charman, Baron-Cohen, Swettenham, Baird, Cox, & Drew, 2000; Wellman & Liu, 2004; 
Wellman & Woolley, 1990) and that ToM continues to improve throughout childhood and beyond 
(Happ é , 1994; Kaland, M ø ller-Nielsen, Smith, Lykke Mortensen, Callesen, & Gottlieb, 2005; Liddle 
& Nettle, 2006). 
 A large body of research has found that children and adolescents with autism spectrum condi-
tions (ASC) experience difﬁ culties understanding mental states or show delayed ToM develop-
ment (Baron-Cohen, 2000) and its emergence is often linked to increased verbal skills (Luckett, 
Powell, Messer, Thornton, & Schultz, 2002). One of the core diagnostic criterion linked to ASC is a 
difﬁ culty in reciprocal social interaction and communication (American Psychiatric Association, 
2000). In typical development, better ToM skills have been linked to more effective and extensive 
social relationships in both children (Liddle & Nettle, 2006; McElwain & Volling, 2004) and adults 
(Stiller & Dunbar, 2007). The relationship between ToM and social behavior has also been sup-
ported in some studies with children and adolescents with ASC (Frith, Happ é , & Siddons, 1994); 
although further research has not shown this link (Plumet & Tardiff, 2005). Researchers increas-
ingly recognize that ToM deﬁ cits are likely to be only one of several elements that can explain 
the proﬁ le of social and communication difﬁ culties in autism (Tager-Flusberg, 2007). Given the 
positive associations between ToM and social behavior in typically developing children and, in 

A REVIEW OF THEORY OF MIND INTERVENTIONS FOR CHILDREN
414
some individuals with ASC, theoretical and empirical work has continued to investigate ToM as 
one factor that potentially underpins social behavior in autism and several studies have developed 
methods to teach ToM to this population. 
 The majority of these studies have aimed to establish whether it is possible to show improved 
understanding in ToM through intensive teaching. Teaching effectiveness has been assessed by 
exploring its impact on structurally and conceptually similar and dissimilar tasks. Researchers 
have suggested that a demonstration of teaching effects to non-taught tasks is critical to argue 
that any conceptual change has taken place (Iao, Leekam, Perner, & McConachie, 2011; Knoll & 
Charman, 2000). Further research has assessed the broader impact of ToM teaching on related 
social and communication skills. In addition, given the recognized difﬁ culties in generalizing ToM 
to social behavior (Frith & Happ é , 1994), a small number of studies have included social skills 
training in conjunction with ToM teaching in order to help children and adolescents with ASC to 
understand the relevance of mental states in day-to-day situations. 
 In this review, we highlight the diverse and innovative methods that have been developed over 
the last 15 years to foster the development of mental state understanding in children and ado-
lescents with ASC. We present studies that have focused on teaching false belief understanding, 
as well as those that have adopted a developmental approach to teach related constructs that, in 
typical development, have been found to emerge before or after false belief understanding. The 
overall aim of the chapter is to assess the effectiveness of teaching ToM to children with ASC and 
to consider possible future directions for the development of this research. We speciﬁ cally focus 
on studies that have aimed to teach children about beliefs as representations of the world and how 
they link to behavior and emotion. (See the Appendix for a summary of teaching studies.) In addi-
tion, because the typical approach to teaching ToM requires children having basic language skills, 
we also explore a growing body of research that has aimed to teach non-verbal constructs (e.g. joint 
attention) related to the development of ToM. 
 Teaching individuals with autism spectrum conditions 
to understand false belief  
 In a typical ToM scenario, an object is transferred from one location to another without the pro-
tagonist’s knowledge, so that this character then has a false belief about its location (Baron-Cohen, 
Leslie, & Frith, 1985; Wimmer & Perner, 1993). Children are asked to predict where a protagonist will 
go to retrieve the object or where he or she thinks the object is (reviews by Doherty, 2009; Wellman 
et al., 2001). Young children and children with ASC often make behavioral and emotional predictions 
based on the objects real location, and not on the protagonist’s belief about where or what the object 
is (Baron-Cohen et al., 1985). Variations of this traditional transfer task have been developed to assess 
conceptually equivalent constructs: children’s understanding that people can hold false beliefs about 
the contents of a container (i.e. the deceptive appearance task) or the difference between what an 
object really is vs. what it appears to be (the appearance-reality distinction; Flavell, Flavell, & Green, 
1983). Further studies have measured children’s understanding of how a protagonist feels when 
they discover that their belief is false (Hadwin & Perner, 1991; Harris, Johnson, Hutton, Andrews, & 
Cooke, 1989). Others have looked at the behavioral or emotional consequences around embedded 
beliefs (i.e. beliefs about beliefs or second-order ToM; Perner & Wimmer, 1985). Moving beyond the 
false belief literature Happ é (1994) also developed a set of strange stories to explore children’s under-
standing of ToM-related social constructs, such as sarcasm, irony, and humor. 
 Teaching ToM to children and adolescents with ASC has to some extent captured the diver-
sity of this basic literature. Wellman and colleagues, for example, taught children with ASC to 

TEACHING INDIVIDUALS WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM CONDITIONS TO UNDERSTAND FALSE BELIEF 
415
understand false beliefs via transfer task using thought bubbles (Wellman, Baron-Cohen, Caswell, 
Carlos Gomez, Swettenham, Toye, et al., 2002). Children were taught in ﬁ ve stages, from introduc-
ing thought bubbles (stage 1) to working through increasingly complex tasks to highlight a pro-
tagonist’s thought about an object’s location, to understanding false belief (stage 5). After teaching, 
children were asked to think about a character’s thoughts without the use of a thought bubble. 
Across two studies, the results consistently showed that the majority of children learnt to pass 
false belief tasks and they were able to transfer that knowledge to similar tasks. When tested on 
novel paradigms that were conceptually easier or equivalent to taught tasks the results were less 
clear: only a quarter of the children showed some ability to pass these tasks across the two studies. 
However, because most children were able to progress through the learning stages, the authors 
argued that the use of thought bubbles represents an effective and simple strategy to teach children 
with ASC to understand mental states. 
 Other researchers have used photographs to teach mental state understanding to children 
with ASC. Swettenham and colleagues used photographs to teach ToM based on previous work, 
which found that children with ASC understand that photographs represent events in the world 
(Swettenham, Baron-Cohen, Gomez, & Walsh, 1996). The study used a manikin’s head with a slot 
in the top where pictures could be placed to convey the idea of mental states as representations of 
the world. Children with ASC were taught to think about false beliefs for 1 hour a day over 5 days 
in four steps, which focused initially on the picture-in-the-head analogy (step 1), and progressed 
to consider links between this analogy and mental states or behaviors (steps 3 and 4). The study 
provided corrective feedback and explanations for incorrect answers. It showed that most children 
were able to understand that what people see can be represented as a photo in the head and that 
this representation was linked to subsequent behavior. In addition, it showed that links between 
photos and behavior generalized more broadly to show some understanding of knowledge acquisi-
tion (seeing leads to knowing) and false belief, as measured by the deceptive appearance task. The 
authors argued that successful demonstration of passing novel tasks in some children supported 
the use of photographs to teach ToM to children with ASC. 
 McGregor, Whiten, & Blackburn (1998) adopted this approach to teach false belief under-
standing to children and adults with ASC and typically developing children compared with a 
non-teaching control group. The study used errorless learning techniques across three teaching 
schedules. The authors argued that a minimum amount of correction is most likely to promote 
conceptual learning. Initially, the authors minimized verbal input and increased the use of visual 
cues by emphasizing a doll protagonist’s intentions in a false belief transfer task. In the second 
schedule, the authors used the picture-in-the-head technique and the third combined both of 
these teaching methods. The results showed that performance in passing false beliefs tasks in both 
typically developing children and children with ASC was signiﬁ cantly better in the experimental 
compared with the control group; indicating that all children and adults were able to learn to pass 
ToM tasks. Further analysis also revealed that learning was most effective in both groups using the 
picture-in-the-head technique. In addition, both teaching groups were able to use the instruction 
to make correct novel predictions about their own false beliefs, and typically developing children 
also showed some generalization from teaching to tasks that involved false beliefs judgments based 
on real life actors. McGregor et al. suggested that, because participants were able to use teaching 
to pass non-taught tasks, some conceptual change must have taken place. They proposed that 
future research should use the picture-in-the-head approach combined with errorless learning 
techniques to further assess the impact of change in individuals with ASC to real life settings. 
 The photograph method has also been used in a study that taught children with ASC to under-
stand mental states, as well as to develop their executive function (EF) skills (Fisher & Happ é , 2005). 

A REVIEW OF THEORY OF MIND INTERVENTIONS FOR CHILDREN
416
EF (e.g. planning, inhibition, ﬂ exible thinking) and mental state understanding are associated in 
typical development (Pellicano, 2007). Speciﬁ c aspects of EF (e.g. monitoring) have been found 
to be impaired in children with ASC (Happ é , Booth, Charlton, & Hughes, 2006). In this teaching 
study, children were randomly allocated to groups that focused on either EF or ToM. Teaching in 
both domains was delivered in ﬁ ve stages and to criterion, so that the overall amount of teaching 
ranged between 4 and 10 days, with 25 minutes per day. EF teaching focused on the Wisconsin 
card-sorting task reﬂ ecting mental ﬂ exibility. This task requires children to initially sort or match 
cards according to one dimension (e.g. colour). Each time a child sorts a card they are told if they 
are right or wrong. During the task the sorting rule changes (e.g. from colour to number) and the 
time children take to change the rule as indicated in the number of errors they make is used as a 
marker of performance. Teaching involved the use of “brain tools” (laminated pieces of card used 
to demonstrate different sorting dimensions) to complete tasks that require ﬂ exibility of thought 
(stage 1) to independent ﬂ exibility at stage 5. ToM teaching also involved ﬁ ve stages based on the 
picture-in-the-head method that used dolls with slots in their heads so photographs could be 
inserted. It ranged from teaching children that thoughts are like pictures in the head (stage 1) to 
understanding thoughts without pictures (stage 5). 
 The results showed that children were able to move through the ToM stages with teaching, with 
the majority of children showing improvements after teaching and at follow up. Teaching also 
led to improved performance on a seeing leads to knowing task. Interestingly, the study showed 
that improvement in mental state understanding was positively associated with language, indi-
cating that children with better language skills might beneﬁ t most from ToM teaching. Children 
also improved on EF tasks through teaching, although there was no evidence of generalization 
to non-taught EF tasks. Teaching EF also led to improvement in ToM, where this effect was most 
signiﬁ cant at follow-up. The authors suggested that improvements in ToM via EF teaching might 
reﬂ ect the similarity between ToM and EF tasks (both require ﬂ exibility of thought and shift-
ing between rules or different states of the world). Importantly, ToM allows individuals to reﬂ ect 
on their own plans and intentions or what they know and do not know. While children in both 
teaching groups showed improvement in EF and ToM, this change was not reﬂ ected in day-to-day 
behavior as reported by teachers. 
 The use of structured progressive techniques and repetition to teach ToM understanding is 
reﬂ ected in early teaching studies. Swettenham (1996) used computers to teach false belief. He 
suggested that children with ASC would beneﬁ t from a computer medium because they could con-
trol their speed of learning in a predictable environment. The study compared the effectiveness of 
teaching in children with ASC, typically developing and children with Down syndrome. Teaching 
consisted of two short sessions over 4 days and included a 3-month follow-up assessment. The 
results showed that over eight teaching sessions, all groups showed learning. The typically develop-
ing children and children with ASC did not differ in their learning rate and both groups were sig-
niﬁ cantly better learners compared with the group of children with Down syndrome. All children 
were able to pass non-taught tasks at the follow-up session. In addition, the majority of typically 
developing children and those with Down syndrome were also able to pass novel ToM tasks imme-
diately after teaching and this learning was still evident in the typical group at follow-up. 
 LeBlanc and colleagues used technology via video modeling and additional cues to teach per-
spective taking to three children with ASC (LeBlanc, Coates, & Danesshvar, 2003). Children were 
assessed on a standard false belief task, a hide and seek task (a transfer task that used footprints as 
behavior cues to locate hidden objects) and a deceptive appearance task. Videos were developed 
to show the correct answers to the hide and seek and deceptive appearance tasks and rewards (e.g. 
food, stickers) were given for correct answers. The results indicated that all three children who took 

A DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH TO TEACHING THEORY OF MIND
417
part were able to pass similar ToM tasks as a result of teaching. In addition, two of the three chil-
dren also passed a novel false belief task after teaching. The authors argued that a video medium is 
useful for ensuring that children attend to relevant cues to understand the perspective of another. 
In addition, they suggested that this approach to teaching serves to enhance motivation and atten-
tion in this group of children. 
 Moving on from videos, Bowler & Strom (1998) used actors to teach children with ASC, typi-
cally developing children, and children with learning difﬁ culties false belief using four different 
versions of a transfer task. Each version provided increasingly salient cues to the actors’s belief, 
where these included no cue (standard task); the person going to the original location where the 
object was hidden (behavioral cue); the person looking surprised when the object was not there 
(emotional cue); and ﬁ nally exposing participants to their own belief violations (own false belief 
cue). The study also included a control group of children who experienced the standard false 
belief transfer task (three times), as well as their own false belief cue. Like some previous research 
(McGregor et al., 1998), this study relied on the salience of the cues and no corrective feedback 
was given for incorrect responses. The study showed that children with ASC and typically develop-
ing older children were able to use the behavioral and emotional cues to pass a greater number of 
false belief questions compared with the control group. Younger typically developing children and 
those with learning difﬁ culties did not beneﬁ t from these additional cues. The authors suggested 
that there is an age below which typically developing children are unable to use cues to pass false 
belief tasks. Consistent with Fischer & Happ é (2005), they also suggested that false belief under-
standing depends on verbal ability; children with learning difﬁ culties who had low verbal ability 
relative to the other groups made less progress. 
 While several studies have taught ﬁ rst order ToM using a false belief transfer task, one study used 
the understand the appearance–reality (A–R) distinction as the basis for teaching (Starr & Baine, 
1996). A–R tasks involve assessing children’s understanding that making outward and superﬁ cial 
changes to an object (e.g. making a white pencil look red by looking at it through a red ﬁ lter) does 
not inﬂ uence or alter its identity (see Doherty, 2009). Starr and Baine taught children with ASC 
to understand A–R size and colour distinctions through Direct Instruction (i.e. introduce the task 
and model the correct answer). Teaching consisted of working through colour and size tasks in 
two daily sessions for 5 days or until children were able to provide correct answers. The results 
showed that while some children were able to provide correct answers to the tasks during teaching 
and for non-taught similar A–R tasks after teaching, this learning was not maintained over time 
(see Swettenham, 1996 for similar results). The authors argued that their result suggests that active 
teaching underpinned children’s ability to pass tasks. 
 A developmental approach to teaching theory of mind  
 Several have taught children with ASC to understand mental states by following the typical 
developmental stages leading up to false belief understanding (e.g. Begeer, Gevers, Clifford, 
Verhoeve, Kat, Hoddenbach, et al., 2011; Hadwin, Baron-Cohen, Howlin, & Hill, 1996; Howlin, 
Baron-Cohen, & Hadwin, 1999; Ozonoff & Miller, 1995). Hadwin and colleagues taught con-
structs linked to the development of ToM including pretend play and emotional understanding, 
as well as more basic perspective taking. Children with ASC received eight 30-minute sessions in 
one of these three teaching domains. Teaching in each domain was split into ﬁ ve levels; sessions 
started with developmentally more simple tasks and progressed onto more advanced tasks. For 
example, perspective taking started with very basic ideas (that we can see the same object in dif-
ferent ways) and moved through more complex tasks (seeing leads to knowing, true belief and 

A REVIEW OF THEORY OF MIND INTERVENTIONS FOR CHILDREN
418
false belief.) Pretend play moved from sensorimotor play to imaginative play and emotion pro-
gressed from recognizing facial expression to belief-based emotion. In order to facilitate learn-
ing and generalization children were taught simple rules or principles that aimed to capture the 
conceptual level they were working at. The results showed that children were able to progress 
through the stages to show some improvement in their level of understanding. This change was 
most evident in the belief and emotion teaching domains where tasks were very structured. In 
addition, children showed some generalization to non-taught tasks and this learning was main-
tained at 2 months follow-up. 
 Part of this research also assessed the impact of teaching emotions, belief and pretend play on 
children’s ability to expand conversation and on their use of mental state terms in speech (Hadwin, 
Baron-Cohen, Howlin, & Hill, 1997). Previous research had found that children with ASC show 
speciﬁ c deﬁ cits in the pragmatic or social aspects of language. Tager-Flusberg (2000), for example, 
highlighted that conversational ability, including expanding on current conversational topics or 
adding new topics into a conversation, was poor in individuals with ASC and these pragmatic 
difﬁ culties were attributed to deﬁ cits in ToM (review by Nilsen & Fecica, 2011). Hadwin and col-
leagues explored whether teaching ToM skills would enhance conversational skills in ASC and lead 
to an increased use of mental state terms in speech. They found that children’s ability to expand 
and introduce new topics into a discussion was positively associated with children’s expressive and 
receptive language abilities, but these abilities did not change as a result of ToM teaching. Further 
research has shown that teaching conversational skills to children with ASC does not improve ToM 
skills; Chin & Bernard-Opitz, 2000. 
 Ghim, Lee & Park (2001) similarly used developmental levels to teach perspective taking, knowl-
edge acquisition and belief understanding to children with ASC and typically developing children. 
They showed improvement with teaching to pass non-taught and novel tasks, where this effect was 
maintained 2 weeks later. Children with learning difﬁ culties did not show improvement equivalent 
to the other two groups. Similarly, McGregor, Whiten & Blackburn (1998) worked with adults 
and children with ASC and utilized developmental levels in teaching ToM. Teaching consisted 
of two or three 1-hour sessions taught at three levels of understanding. The ﬁ rst level focused on 
seeing-leads-to-knowing, the second on a story-based false belief and the third on video presented 
false belief scenarios. The use of mixed media was employed to facilitate transfer of knowledge to 
real life. This study used “errorless learning” techniques, such that children were able to see the 
belief of the story-based protagonist via pictures in their head (dolls with slots in their heads). 
The results showed that six of the ten participants were able to pass non-taught false beliefs tasks 
after teaching. Like other researchers (e.g. Swettenham et al., 1996), the authors suggested that the 
picture-in-the-head technique for teaching ToM was a useful tool to help individuals with ASC to 
understand that people can hold representations about the world. 
 While the majority of intervention studies have taught children individually, two recent reports 
utilized a social cognitive intervention developed by Steerneman and colleagues to teach ToM 
to small groups of children and adolescents with ASC (Begers, Gevers, Clifford, Verhoeve, Kat, 
Hoddenbach, & Boer, 2011; Gevers, Clifford, Mager & Boer, 2006; see Steerneman, Jackson, Pelzer 
& Muris, 1996). In both studies groups of 5–6 children with ASC were taught concepts related to 
ToM every week for around 3–4 months. Teaching focused on basic ToM skills, such as recogniz-
ing emotions, pretence and imitation, beliefs and false beliefs, and also included more advanced 
constructs reﬂ ecting second order tasks ToM, as well as irony and humor. In addition, parents were 
introduced to ToM and over ﬁ ve monthly sessions were taught methods to encourage their chil-
dren to use ToM skills in everyday life. Both studies assessed ToM before and after teaching using 
a battery of ToM tasks to measure simple and more advanced ToM skills (see Muris, Steernman, 

A DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH TO TEACHING THEORY OF MIND
419
Meesters, Merckelbach, Horselenberg, van den Hogen, et al., 1999). In addition, parent report 
adaptive behavior in both studies was measured before and after teaching. 
 Gevers, Clifford, Mager, & Boer (2006) found that children with ASC showed improvements in 
imitation, as well as pretend play, humor and belief understanding. In addition, parents reported 
improved scores on some aspects of social adaptation related to interpersonal relationships, social 
skills and play. No detail on individual differences in learning was provided. Begeer et al. (2011) 
used the same intervention program in a study for a larger group of high functioning children 
with ASC who were randomly allocated to a teaching ToM or waiting list control group. As well 
as running sessions for parents, this study also involved parents in the last 15 minutes of every 
child intervention session. In addition, it measured the impact of ToM teaching on self-report 
emotional awareness and empathic skills. Overall, the intervention groups showed improvement 
on the overall ToM skills relative to the control group. The beneﬁ ts of teaching in the ToM group, 
however, showed a mixed proﬁ le of learning. Children showed some improvement post-teaching 
in assessments related to belief understanding, but there was no overall improvement in the more 
basic or advanced ToM skills. In addition, the ToM group showed some improvement on tasks 
tapping an understanding of emotions; but there was no group difference for empathic or parent 
report social skills. The lack any improvement in ToM tasks via teaching to the use of these skills in 
real life settings is consistent with previous research (e.g. Fischer & Happ é , 2005). 
 Silver & Oakes (2001) used developmental levels to focus exclusively on teaching emotional 
understanding to children with ASC. Half of the children received lessons as usual and the other 
half completed a computer emotion trainer task. Similar to previous research (Hadwin et al., 1996), 
emotional concepts were taught from simple to complex using multiple examples at each level 
(recognizing facial expressions or basing emotions on others’ desires, beliefs or likes and dislikes 
of characters). The results of this study showed that all children in the training group improved in 
their emotional understanding, compared with those in the control group. In addition, the study 
showed some generalization of teaching to non-taught tasks, as well as to novel tasks that assessed 
children’s understanding of ToM related social constructs (Happ é , 1994). Like Swettenham (1996), 
the authors argued that the use of a computer program was engaging and motivating for children. 
They proposed that some of the concepts taught at the more complex levels might have facilitated 
generalization to novel tasks. 
 While the focus of interest in the current review is on studies that aimed to link emotional 
understanding to underlying beliefs and desires, it is worth noting one further study that adopted 
a multimedia approach to teaching emotions to children with ASC. Golan and colleagues, taught 
emotions using the Mindreading DVD, a computer-based program designed for children from 
age 4 to adulthood (Golan & Baron-Cohen, 2006). The DVD contains 412 emotions portrayed by 
actors and actresses of different ages, male and female, and of different ethnicities, and contains 
both computer games and an emotions library. After 10 weeks of using this DVD for a minimum 
of 2 hours per week, this study found that individuals with Asperger syndrome improved signiﬁ -
cantly in emotion recognition. More recently, this research group has developed a second DVD by 
entitled The Transporters (2010). This DVD contains a children’s animation program aimed at 
pre-school and primary school age children on the autistic spectrum. The characters in the ﬁ lm 
are all vehicles (trains, trams, tractors, cable cars), but with human faces that display appropriate 
(though exaggerated) emotional expressions for the short stories that form each episode. Research 
based on this work has found that after watching the DVD for just 15 minutes per day for a 1 month 
period, children with ASC improved signiﬁ cantly in their emotion recognition ability relative to a 
control group of children with the same diagnosis who did not watch the DVD, where this ability 
generalized to unseen material (Golan, Ashwin Granader, McClintock, Day, Leggett, et al., 2010). 

A REVIEW OF THEORY OF MIND INTERVENTIONS FOR CHILDREN
420
 Teaching theory of mind and social skills 
 One of the earliest ToM papers taught children with ASC to understand both ﬁ rst order and more 
advanced ToM tasks, including constructs linked to intention and deception (Ozonoff & Miller, 
1995). Teaching in this study was extensive, compared with other studies, and consisted of 14 ses-
sions of 90 minutes that spanned over 4 months. Half of the sessions focused on teaching children 
social skills (expressing interest, reading non-verbal signals and emotional expression) and the 
other half on teaching ToM. Social skills support also included social outings, as well as parties and 
children were encouraged to use their perspective taking skills during these activities. ToM sessions 
aimed to teach the underpinnings of perspective taking including how people acquire information 
or knowledge (e.g. seeing-leads-to knowing), as well as ﬁ rst and second-order ToM. The results 
indicated that four out of ﬁ ve children in the teaching group improved in their understanding of 
mental states compared with the four control group children. However, parent and teacher ratings 
of social skills did not differ between the teaching and control groups either before or after teach-
ing. The authors concluded that while they were able to teach children with ASC to pass ToM tasks, 
children did not appear to access these skills in every-day social situations. 
 A similar study combined ToM teaching with social skills training using a single case study for 
a child with ASC who demonstrated difﬁ culties in emotional regulation (Feng, Ya-yu, Lo, Tsai, 
& Cartledge, 2008). Training consisted of assessment and explanation of ToM tasks, followed by 
role play (or maintenance sessions) with a small group of peers who had good levels of social 
skills. Training took place on a one-to-one basis four times per week and continued for around 
10 weeks. The ToM assessment and teaching followed a developmental pattern, considering basic 
and more advanced understanding of desire and belief based emotion, as well as ﬁ rst and second 
order false beliefs, where these were embedded in situations the child would typically experi-
ence. The social skills training addressed difﬁ culties with emotional regulation and appropriate 
expression of needs and these were assessed through observation. In contrast to previous research 
(Ozonoff & Miller, 1995; Begeers et al., 2011), the results showed improvement in ToM skills, 
as well as in social interaction. In addition, the authors highlighted that these skills generalized 
to novel settings. The authors attributed this positive result to the combined effect of ToM and 
social skills training, the use of maintenance sessions and the varied teaching approach adopted 
during training (i.e. the use of multiple and dynamic exemplars, role play and the inclusion of 
maintenance sessions). Though the results of this study are promising, this basic approach needs 
to be extended to conﬁ rm the ﬁ nding in larger groups of children and with those with varying 
abilities.  
 Joint attention and theory of mind  
 Linked to a developmental approach to understanding and teaching ToM in children and ado-
lescents with ASC, one further construct that has been highlighted as an important precursor 
to its development is joint attention (Howlin, 2008). Joint attention (JA) refers to the ability to 
coordinate attention with social partners to objects and events in the environment, using gaze, 
gesture or language (Scaife & Bruner, 1975). Typically, it emerges between the ages of 8 and 15 
months (Bakeman & Adamson, 1984; Jones, Carr, & Feeley, 2006) and researchers have argued that 
its development is critical for early social communication (Bakeman & Adamson, 1984). JA skills 
have been separated into two categories—responding to JA (reﬂ ecting an ability to follow the line 
of regard and points of others); and initiating joint attention (which includes making eye contact, 
pointing and showing items of interest in order to share an item or event with another person; see 
reviews by Meindl & Cannella-Maone, 2011; Mundy & Jarrold, 2010). 

JOINT ATTENTION AND THEORY OF MIND
421
 Disruptions in JA processes (e.g. a lack of interest in parents’ gaze, reduced eye contact, failure 
to point for interest) are often noted in young children with ASC (Charman, Baird, Simonoff, 
Loucas, Chandler, Meldrum, et al., 2007; 2003; Mundy, Sigman, & Kasari, 1990) and this absence is 
considered to be one of the ﬁ rst indices of social and communication difﬁ culties in this population 
(Murray, Creaghead, Manning-Courtney, Shear, Bean, & Prendeville, 2008; Whalen, Schriebman, 
& Ingersoll, 2006). Early home recordings of children who later went on to receive a diagnosis 
of ASC have highlighted a lack of JA skills. For example, two studies examined ﬁ rst year birth-
day party videotapes to look for the presence or absence of early JA (Osterling & Dawson, 1994; 
Werner, Dawson, Osterling, & Dinno, 2000). At 12 months of age children who went on to receive 
a diagnosis of ASC (compared with typically developing peers) were less likely to look at others, to 
show or point at objects, or respond to their name being called. In a further study, failure to initiate 
JA (pointing for interest) or to engage in pretend play at 18 months of age was linked to a later diag-
nosis of ASC in 80% of cases (Baron-Cohen, Cox, Baird, et al., 1996). Difﬁ culties responding to JA 
at 14 months was also shown to be predictive of an ASC diagnosis by two years of age (Sullivan, 
Finelli, Marvin, Garrett-Mayer, Bauman, & Landa, 2007). In a related line of research, younger sib-
lings of children with ASC were monitored over time to see whether any early behavior would pre-
dict a later diagnosis of ASC. The results highlighted that all of the children who went on to receive 
a diagnosis showed early social communication impairments, characterized as reduced interest or 
pleasure in others, and fewer initiations of social interaction (limited eye contact and social smil-
ing, and a lack of pointing to or sharing items of interest with others; Bryson, Zwaigenbaum, Brian, 
Roberts, Szatmari, Rombough, et al., 2007). 
 While some theories suggest that JA and ToM reﬂ ect a common pathway of atypical develop-
ment in children with ASC, research has generally lagged behind in linking up these two constructs. 
One study measured the extent to which infants at 20 months of age spontaneously switched their 
attention or looked between a moving toy and another person. They found that the presence of 
these JA skills at 20 months was linked to ToM ability when infants were 44 months of age; even 
when initial IQ and language skills were taken into account. The study supports the proposition 
that JA is a developmental precursor to ToM (Charman et al., 2000). Similarly, Charman (2003) 
found that better JA skills at 20 months were associated with improved language outcomes and less 
symptom severity at 42 months in a sample of children with ASC. 
 ToM intervention studies that have adopted a developmental approach have tended to focus 
on teaching tasks related to the origins of knowledge and beliefs (e.g. Begeer et al., 2011). The 
last 15 years has also seen a proliferation of research studies focusing on teaching JA skills to chil-
dren with autism. While this research largely sits beyond the scope of the current review, there are 
some key ﬁ ndings and similarities between these two literatures that are important to note. Some 
intervention studies have aimed to teach or focus on aspects of JA attention that emerge earlier in 
development or that are evident in children with ASC. Some evidence suggests that the different 
components of JA dissociate in development. Responding to JA, for example, is not problematic 
for children with ASC who have a mental age over 30–36 months, while initiating JA is typically 
absent in children with ASC, irrespective of age (Mundy, Sigman, & Kasari, 1994; review by Mundy 
& Jarrold, 2010). Other researchers have argued that responding to JA is a developmental precursor 
to initiating JA and that these two skills should be addressed sequentially and separately in inter-
vention programs (Kasari, Gulsrud, Wong, Kwon, & Locke, 2010; Murray et al., 2008). However, 
similar to ToM studies, some difﬁ culties with generalization have been found; while several stud-
ies have been able to show an improvement in responding to JA in young children with ASC the 
emergence of this skill has typically not led to any change in initiating JA (Schertz & Odom, 2007; 
Taylor & Hoch, 2008). 

A REVIEW OF THEORY OF MIND INTERVENTIONS FOR CHILDREN
422
 Similar to ToM interventions, several different methods have been used to teach children with 
ASC to initiate or respond to JA (or both) including those that adopt highly structured applied 
behavior analysis techniques (Taylor & Hoch, 2008) or others that have used more naturalistic 
play routines (Kasari, Freeman, & Paparella, 2006). In addition, they have used different agents to 
facilitate change (researchers, parents, peers). Kasari et al., (2010), for example, used caregivers of 
children with ASC to encourage generalization of skills outside the JA teaching sessions. They ran-
domized 38 caregiver and toddler pairs (mean age = 30.82 months) into intervention and waiting 
list control groups, and taught responding JA followed by instruction in initiating JA. Play routines 
were used whereby the parent was taught to follow a child’s interest, and expand their play and 
joint attention repertoire. Relative to the waiting list control group, they found that children in the 
intervention group showed more joint engagement and speciﬁ cally increased responding to JA. In 
contrast, however, initiating JA was not found to improve, even though it was directly targeted by 
parents. 
 One further issue in this literature relates to the consequences for children who successfully 
engage in JA during teaching or training. Within a teaching paradigm, consequences for success-
ful joint engagement can be non-social (e.g. a tangible item) or social (e.g. social attention). The 
function of JA in typical development is social communication and attention. Some researchers 
have suggested that intervention programs should aim to provide naturalistic social attention as a 
consequence to a child engaging in joint attention (review by Meindl & Cannella-Malone, 2011). 
Two recent studies have successfully taught children with ASC to engage in JA using social atten-
tion as a consequence. Naoi, Tsuchiya, Yamamoto, & Nakamura (2008), for example, trained three 
children between the ages of 5 and 8 years to initiate JA using preferred items as the attending 
stimuli and adult attention as the social consequence and found that initiating JA increased for all 
three participants. Taylor & Hoch (2008) also reported positive effects of training both responding 
and initiating JA in three children aged 3–8 years using social interaction and physical contact as 
consequences for engaging in joint attention; where this strategy was successful for two of the three 
children. Similar to Feng et al. (2008), the results serve to highlight that embedding teaching in a 
social context has beneﬁ cial effects for learning and generalization. 
 Summary  
 Most studies have found that children and adolescents with ASC are able to learn to pass ToM tasks 
through teaching and to transfer their knowledge to conceptually similar tasks that had not been 
directly taught (e.g. Beger et al., 2011; Bowler & Strom, 1998; Wellman et al., 2001). Further studies 
have shown that some children were able to generalize learning to novel tasks (Fischer & Happ é , 
2005; LeBlanc Coates, Daneshvar, Charlop-Christy, & Morris, 2003; Silver & Oakes, 2001) and 
researchers have argued that this type of generalization does reﬂ ect conceptual change. In general, 
studies have used a structured approach to teaching ToM that allows children to practice tasks 
through the use of multiple examples and some researchers have argued this approach to teaching 
is the most beneﬁ cial for learning (Hadwin et al., 1996; Silver & Oakes, 2001; Swettenham, 1996; see 
also Iao, Leekam, Perner, & McConachie, 2011). Other researchers have suggested that a develop-
mental approach can facilitate the development of ToM, where teaching can mirror learning that 
occurs in typical development. In general, this approach has found that children can move from 
basic to more complex constructs (Hadwin et al., 1996, 1997; Silver & Oakes, 2001). Consistent 
with the emergence of ToM skills in children and adolescents with ASC (Luckett, 2002), the results 
of some studies indicate that the beneﬁ ts of ToM teaching are moderated by language ability, with 
those children who have better language skills showing most change (Bowler & Stromm, 1998; 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
423
Fischer & Happ é , 2005). Further research should explore more clearly why some children and ado-
lescents with ASC are able to learn ToM skills through teaching, while others show little beneﬁ t. 
 The beneﬁ ts of teaching ToM to broader social and communication skills is mixed: some stud-
ies have been able to demonstrate a positive impact of ToM teaching to improved social behavior 
more generally (Gevers et al., 2006; Feng et al., 2008). Considering results more broadly, how-
ever, this result is uncommon (Beeger et al., 2011; Fischer & Happ é , 2005; Hadwin et al., 1997; 
Ozonoff & Miller, 1995). These ﬁ ndings reﬂ ect the mixed picture in basic research in children 
with ASC that has considered associations between ToM understanding and its use in social 
interaction and communication (review by Nilsen & Fecica, 2011). This lack of generalization 
has raised questions about what children learn during ToM teaching; do they learn about mental 
states or have they acquired strategies for passing tasks that they experience repeatedly and that 
have a reliable and predictive structure and format (Swettenham, 2000; Howlin, 2008). The lack 
of generalization of ToM to day-to-day behavior has led some researchers to argue that longer 
term ToM teaching built into an educational curriculum, or a combination of ToM teaching 
alongside social skills workshops, would be most beneﬁ cial in terms of developing and utilizing 
ToM skills in different contexts (Feng et al., 2008; Ozonoff & Miller, 1995). In order to more 
clearly understand different formats in teaching ToM, future research needs to adopt a more rig-
orous randomized control design approach in the development of intervention studies to enable 
a better understanding of the beneﬁ ts of ToM (Beeger et al., 2011). In addition, studies that are 
able to consider the impact of change at a neural level (e.g., to demonstrate increased activity 
in brain regions known to be activated during theory of mind tasks) would allow researchers to 
more clearly demonstrate the impact of teaching on understanding of key constructs (review by 
Carrington & Bailey, 2009). 
 The majority of studies start teaching ﬁ rst-order ToM; around what a typical 3- or 4-year-old 
child would understand. Some researchers have proposed that interventions can be targeted at 
recognized precursors of ToM, such as pretend play or joint attention (Howlin, 2008). Where this 
approach to intervention has emphasized social reward and social application children have been 
found to beneﬁ t more from teaching (e.g. Taylor & Hoch, 2008). However, similar to the ToM 
intervention research, this literature is also limited by the number of studies that have explored 
the extent to which JA skills are generalized outside of the training setting, and whether the social 
function of JA is effectively established and maintained over time. Interventions targeted toward 
increasing JA skills may serve to scaffold or facilitate the development of social interaction and lan-
guage ability, which may, in turn, have a positive impact on the development of ToM. One beneﬁ t 
of teaching JA is that its impact on children with less language ability can be explored and further 
research should assess the relationship between JA teaching with language development and the 
emergence of basic ToM constructs (see Charman et al., 2000). 
 Despite some of the limitations in this literature, many authors have acknowledged that teach-
ing ToM can be useful to individuals with ASC in order to help them to think about mental states; 
something that they would not do naturally in the course of development. The main aim of any 
intervention is to give children and adults the basic tools to understand mental states in order to 
help them negotiate their social world.  
 Acknowledgements 
 The writing of this chapter was supported by an Action Medical Research grant awarded to the 
ﬁ rst author (SP4598): the leading UK-wide medical research charity dedicated to helping babies 
and children. 

A REVIEW OF THEORY OF MIND INTERVENTIONS FOR CHILDREN
424
 References 
 American Psychiatric Association (2000).  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders , 4th edn. 
 Washing DC :  American Psychiatric Association . 
 Bakeman, R. & Adamson, L. B. (1984) . Coordinating attention to people and objects in mother–infant and 
peer–infant interaction.  Child Development  55 :  1278–89 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S. (2000) . Th eory of mind and autism: A fi ft een year review. In: S. Baron-Cohen, H. 
Tager-Flusberg, D. J. Cohen (Eds),  Understanding Other Minds: Perspectives from Developmental 
Cognitive Neuroscience , 2nd edn (pp.  3–20 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Baldwin, D., & Crowson, M. (1997).  Do children with autism use the Speaker’s Direction 
of Gaze (SDG) strategy to crack the code of language?  Child Development  68 :  48–57 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Cox, A., Baird, G., Sweettenham, J., & Nighingale, N. (1996). Psychological markers 
in the detection of autism in infancy in a large population.  British Journal of Psychiatry  168 (2): 
158–63. 
 Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M. & Frith, U. (1985).  Does the autistic child have a theory of mind?  Cognition 
 21 :  37–46 . 
 Begeer, S., Gevers, C., Cliff ord, P., Verhoeve, M., Kat, K., Hoddenbach, E., & Boer, F. (2011) . Th eory 
of mind training in children with autism: A randomized controlled trial.  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders  4 :  997–1006 . 
 Bowler, D. M., & Strom, E. (1998) . Elicitation of fi rst-order theory of mind in children with autism.  Autism 
 2 :  33–44 . 
 Bryson, S. E., Zwaigenbaum, L., Brian, J., Roberts, W., Szatmari, P., Rombough, V., & McDermott, C. 
(2007) . A prospective case series of high-risk infants who developed autism.  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders  37 :  12–24 . 
 Carrington, S. J. & Bailey, A. J. (2009). Are there theory of mind regions in the brain? A review of the 
neuroimaging literature.  Human Brain Mapping 30 : 2313–35. 
 Charman, T. (2003). Screening and surveillance for autism spectrum disorder in research and practice. 
 Early Child Development and Care  173 (4): 363–74. 
 Charman, T., Baird, G., Simonoff , E., Loucas, T., Chandler, S., Meldrum, D., & Pickles, A. (2007) . Effi  cacy 
of three screening instruments in the identifi cation of autistic-spectrum disorders.  British Journal of 
Psychiatry  191 :  554–9 . 
 Charman, T., Baron-Cohen, S., Swettenham, J., Baird, G., Cox, A., & Drew, A. (2000) . Testing joint 
attention, imitation, and play as infancy precursors to language and theory of mind.  Cognitive 
Development  15 :  481–98 . 
 Chin, H. Y., & Berbard-Opitz, V. (2000) . Teaching conversational skills to children with autism: Eff ect on 
the development of a theory of mind.  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  30 :  569–83 . 
 Doherty, M. J. (2009).  Th eory of Mind .  Hove :  Psychology Press . 
 Dunn, J. R., Brown, C., Slomkowski, C., Tesla, C., & Youngblade, L. (1991) . Young children’s 
understanding of other people’s feelings and beliefs: Individual diff erences and their antecedents.  Child 
Development  62 :  1352–66 . 
 Flavell, J. H., Flavell, E. R., & Green, F. L. (1983) . Transitional period in the development of the 
appearance-reality distinction.  International Journal of Behavioural Development  12 :  509–26 . 
 Feng, H., Ya-yu, L., Tsai, S., & Cartledge, G. (2008) . Th e eff ects of theory of mind and social skill training 
on the social competence of a sixth grade student.  Journal of Positive Behaviour Intervention  10 : 
 228–42 . 
 Fisher, N., & Happ é , F. (2005) . A training study of theory of mind and executive function in children with 
autistic spectrum disorders.  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  35 :  757–71 . 
 Frith, U., Happ é , F., & Siddons, F. (1994) . Autism and theory of mind in everyday life.  Social Development 
 3 :  108–24 . 

425
 Gevers, C., Cliff ord, P., Mager, M., & Boer, F. (2006) . Brief report: A theory of mind based social cognition 
training program for school-aged children with pervasive developmental disorders; an open study of its 
eff ectiveness.   Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  36 :  561–71 . 
 Ghim, H-R., Lee, H., & Park, S. (2001). Autistic children’s understanding of false belief: studies based on 
computerized animation task. Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Epigenetic Robotics, 
Sweden. 
 Golan, O., Ashwin, E., Granader, Y., McClintock, S., Day, K., Leggett, V., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2010) . 
Enhancing emotion recognition in children with autism spectrum conditions: An intervention using 
animated vehicles with real emotion faces.  Journal of Autism and developmental Disorders  40 :  269–79 . 
 Golan, O., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2006) . Systemizing empathy: teaching adults with Asperger syndrome of 
high-functioning autism to recognize complex emotions using interactive media.  Development and 
Psychopathology  18 :  591–617 . 
 Hadwin, J. A., Baron-Cohen, S., Howlin, P., & Hill, K. (1996).  Can we teach children with autism to 
understand emotions, belief or pretence?  Development and Psychopathology  8 :  345–65 . 
 Hadwin, J. A., Baron-Cohen, S., Howlin, P., & Hill, K. (1997).  Does teaching a theory of mind have an eff ect on 
social communication in children with autism?  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  27 :  519–37 . 
 Hadwin, J. A., & Perner, J. (1991) . Pleased and surprised: children’s cognitive theory of emotion.  British 
Journal of Developmental Psychology  9 :  215–34 . 
 Happ é , F. G. E. (1994) . An advanced test of theory of mind: Understanding of story characters’ thoughts 
and feelings by able autistic, mentally handicapped, and normal children and adults.  Journal of Autism 
and Developmental Disorders  24 :  129–54 . 
 Happ é , F., Booth, R., Charlton, R., & Hughes, C. (2006) . Executive function defi cits in autism spectrum 
disorders and attention-defi cit/hyperactivity disorder: Examining profi les across domains and ages. 
 Brain and Cognition  61 :  25–39 . 
 Harris, P. L., Johnson, C. N., Hutton, D., Andrews, G. M., & Cooke, T. (1989) . Young children’s theory of 
mind and emotion.  Cognition and Emotion  3 :  379–400 . 
 Howlin, P. (2008).  Can children with autism spectrum disorders be helped to acquire a theory of mind? 
 Revista de Logopedia, Foniatria y Audiologia  28 :  74–89 . 
 Howlin, P., Baron-Cohen, S., & Hadwin, J. A. (1999).  Teaching Children with Autism to Mind-read . 
 Chichester :  John Wiley and Sons . 
 Iao, L., Leekam, S., Perner, S., & McConachie, H. (2011) . Further evidence for non-specifi city of theory of 
mind in preschoolers: Training and transferability in the understanding of false beliefs and false-signs. 
 Journal of Cognition and Development  12 :  56–79 . 
 Jones, E. A., Carr, E. G., & Feeley, K. M. (2006) . Multiple eff ects of joint attention intervention for children 
with autism.  Behavior Modifi cation  30 :  782–834. 
 Kaland, N., M ø ller-Nielsen, A., Smith, L., Lykke Mortensen, E., Callesen, K., & Gottlieb, D. (2005) . Th e 
Strange Stories test: A replication study of children and adolescents with Asperger syndrome.  European 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry  14 :  73–82 . 
 Kasari, C., Freeman, S., & Paparella, T. (2006). Joint attention and symbolic play in young children with 
autism: a randomized controlled intervention study.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  47 (6): 
611–20. 
 Kasari, C., Gulsrud, A. C., Wong, C., Kwon, S., & Locke, J. (2010) . Randomized controlled caregiver 
mediated joint engagement intervention for toddlers with autism.  Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders  40 :  1045–56 . 
 Knoll, M., & Charman, T. (2000).  Teaching false belief and visual perspective taking skills in your children: 
can a theory of mind be trained?  Child Study Journal  30 :  273–304 . 
 LeBlanc, L. A., Coates, A. M., Daneshvar, S., Charlop-Christy, M. H., & Morris, C. (2003) . Using video 
modeling and reinforcement to teach perspective-taking skills to children with autism.  Journal of 
Applied Behaviour Analysis  36 :  253–7 . 
REFERENCES

A REVIEW OF THEORY OF MIND INTERVENTIONS FOR CHILDREN
426
 Liddle, B., & Nettle, D. (2006) . Higher-order theory of mind and social competence in school-age children. 
 Journal of Cultural and Evolutionary Psychology  4 :  231–46 . 
 Luckett, T., Powell, S. D., Messer, D. J., Th ornton, M. E., & Schultz, J. (2002).  Do children with autism who 
pass false belief tasks understand the mind as active interpreter?  Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders  32 :  127–40 . 
 McElwain, N. L., & Volling, B. L. (2004) . Attachment security and parental sensitivity during infancy: 
Associations with friendship quality and false belief understanding at age four.  Journal of Social and 
Personal Relationships  21 :  639–67 . 
 McGregor, E., Whiten, A., & Blackburn, P. (1998) . Teaching theory of mind by highlighting intention 
and illustrating thoughts: A comparison of their eff ectiveness with 3-year-olds and autistic individuals. 
 British Journal of Developmental Psychology  16 :  281–300 . 
 McGregor, E., Whiten, A., & Blackburn, P. (1998) . Transfer of the picture-in-the-head analogy to natural 
context to aid false belief understanding in autism.  Autism  2 :  367–87 . 
 Meindl, J. N., & Cannella-Malone, H. I. (2011) . Initiating and responding to joint attention bids in children 
with autism: A review of the literature.  Research in Developmental Disabilities  32 :  1441–54 . 
 Mundy, P., Sigman, M., & Kasari, C. (1994) . Joint attention, developmental level, and symptom 
presentation in autism.  Development and Psychopathology  6 :  389–401 . 
 Mundy, P., Sigman, M., & Kasari, C. (1990) . A longitudinal study of joint attention and language 
development in autistic children.  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  20 :  115–28 . 
 Mundy, P., & Jarrold, W. (2010).  Infant joint attention, neural networks and social cognition .  Neural 
Networks  23 :  985–97 . 
 Muris, P., Steernman, P., Meesters, C., Merckelbach, H., Horselenberg, R., van den Hogen, T., & van 
Dongen, L. (1999) . Th e TOM test: A new instrument for assessing theory of mind in normal children 
and children with pervasive developmental disorders.  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 
 29 :  67–80 . 
 Murray, D. S., Creaghead, N. A., Manning-Courtney, P., Shear, P. K., Bean, J., & Prendeville, J-A. (2008) . 
Th e relationship between joint attention and language in children with autism spectrum disorders. 
 Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities  23 :  5–14 . 
 Naoi, N., Tsuchiya, R., Yamamoto, J-I. & Nakamura, K. (2008) . Functional training for initiating joint 
attention in children with autism.  Research in Developmental Disabilities  29 :  595–609 . 
 Nilsen, E. S., & Fecica, A. M. (2011) . A model of communicative perspective-taking for typical and atypical 
populations of children.  Developmental Review  32 :  55–78 . 
 Naoi, N., Tsuchiya, R., Yamamoto, J-I., & Nakamura, K. (2008) . Functional training for initiating joint 
attention in children with autism.  Research in Developmental Disabilities  29 :  595–609 . 
 Osterling J., & Dawson, G. (1994) . Early recognition of children with autism: A study of fi rst birthday home 
videotapes.  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  17 :  247–57 . 
 Ozonoff , S., & Miller, J. N. (1995) . Teaching theory of mind: a new approach to social skills training for 
individuals with autism.  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  25 :  415–33 . 
 Pellicano, E. (2007).  Links theory of mind and executive function in young children with autism: clues to 
developmental primacy .  Developmental Psychology  43 :  974–90 . 
 Perner, J. (1993)  Understanding the Representational Mind .  London :  MIT Press . 
 Perner, J., Ruff man, T., & Leekam, S. R. (1994) . Th eory of mind is contagious: You catch it from your sibs. 
 Child Development  4 :  1228–38 . 
 Perner, J., & Wimmer, H. (1985).  “John thinks that Mary thinks that … ” Attribution of second-order 
beliefs by 5 to 10 year-old children .  Journal of Experimental Child Psychology  39 :  437–71 . 
 Plumet, M-H., & Tardiff , C. (2005) . Understanding the functioning of social interaction with autistic 
children. In: L. Anolli, S. Duncan Jr, M. S. Magnusson, & G. Riva (Eds),  Th e Hidden Structure of 
Interaction: From Neurons to Culture Patterns .  Amsterdam :  IOS Press . 

427
 Scaife, M., & Bruner, J. S. (1975) . Th e capacity for joint visual attention in the infant.  Nature  253 :  265–6 . 
 Schertz, H. H., & Odom, S. L. (2007) . Promoting joint attention in toddlers with autism: A parent-mediated 
developmental model.  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  37 :  1562–75 . 
 Silver, M., & Oakes, P. (2001) . Evaluation of a new computer intervention to teach people with autism or 
Asperger syndrome to recognize and predict emotions in others.  Autism  5 :  299–316 . 
 Starr, E. M., & Baine, D. A. (1996) . Th eory of mind and children with autism: A direct instruction approach 
to teaching the colour and size appearance reality distinction.  Exceptionality Education Canada  6 : 
 69–88 . 
 Steerneman, P., Jackson, S., Pelzer, H., & Muris, P. (1996) . Children with social handicaps: An intervention 
program using a Th eory of Mind approach.  Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry  1 :  251–63 . 
 Stiller, J., & Dunbar, R. (2007).  Perspective-taking and social network size in humans .  Social Networks  29 : 
 93–104 . 
 Sullivan, M., Finelli, J., Marvin, A., Garrett-Mayer, E., Bauman, M., & Landa, R. (2007) . Response to joint 
attention in toddlers at risk for autism spectrum disorder: A prospective study.  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders  37 :  37–48 . 
 Swettenham, J. (1996).  Can children with autism be taught to understand false beliefs using computers? 
 Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  37 :  157–65 . 
 Swettenham, J. (2000) . Teaching theory of mind to individuals with autism. In: S. Baron-Cohen, H. 
Tager-Flusberg, & D. J. Cohen (Eds),  Understanding Other Minds (pp.  442–56 ).  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press . 
 Swettenham, J., Baron-Cohen, S., Gomez, J-C., & Walsh, S. (1996) . What’s inside someone’s head? 
Conceiving of the mind as a camera helps children with autism acquire an alternative to a theory of 
mind.  Cognitive Neuropsychiatry  1 :  73–88 . 
 Tager-Flusberg, H. (2007) . Evaluating the theory-of-mind hypothesis of autism.  Current Directions in 
Psychological Science  16 :  311–15 . 
 Tager-Flusberg, H. (2000) . What language reveals about the understanding of mind in children with 
autism. In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, & D. Cohen (Eds),  Understanding Other Minds (pp. 
 124–9 ).  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Taylor, B. A., & Hoch, H. (2008) . Teaching children with autism to respond to and initiate bids for joint 
attention.  Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis  41 :  377–91 . 
 Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001) . Meta-analysis of theory of mind development: Th e truth 
about false belief.  Child Development  72 :  655–84 . 
 Wellman, H. M., Baron-Cohen, S., Caswell, R., Carlos Gomez, J., Swettenham, J., Toye, E., & Lagattuta, 
K. (2002).  Th ought-bubbles help children with autism acquire an alternative to a theory of mind . 
 Autism  6 :  343–63 . 
 Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta-analysis of theory-of-mind development: Th e truth 
about false belief.  Child Development  72 (3): 655–84. 
 Wellman, H. M., & Liu, D. (2004), Scaling of theory-of-mind tasks.  Child Development  75 : 523–41. 
 Wellman, H. M., & Woolley, J. D. (1990).  From simple desires to ordinary beliefs: Th e early development of 
everyday psychology .  Cognitio n  35 :  245–75 . 
 Werner, E., Dawson, G., Osterling, J., & Dinno, N. (2000).  Brief report: Recognition of autism spectrum 
disorder before one year of age: A retrospective study based on home videotapes .  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders  30 :  157–62 . 
 Whalen, C., Schreibman, L., & Ingersoll, B. (2006). Th e collateral eff ects of joint attention training on 
social initiations, positive aff ect, imitation, and spontaneous speech for young children with autism. 
 Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  36 (5): 655–64. 
 Wimmer, H. & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining function of wrong 
beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception.  Cognition  13 : 41–68. 
REFERENCES

This page intentionally left blank 

 Section 4 
 Comparative and 
philosophical perspectives 

This page intentionally left blank 

 Chapter 24 
 Culture and the evolution of 
interconnected minds 
 Andrew   Whiten 
 Introduction: The “deep social mind” of  Homo sapiens 
 The now vast research literature on “understanding other minds” shows us that humans are invet-
erate mentalists, and studies of child development trace the construction of increasingly sophis-
ticated cognitive penetration of the workings of the mind in self and others. As reviewed below, 
some non-human animals show some of the more elementary foundations of this capacity, but in 
its adult forms our baroque human mental interpenetration is unparalleled in its complexity and 
depth. 
 Why are we like this? Much of the analysis of our understanding of other minds is relatively 
mechanistic and concerned with how the system works and how it gets constructed during ontoge-
netic development. The present volume largely reﬂ ects these preoccupations. Evolutionary and 
comparative analyses of the kind discussed in this chapter do also address these questions, but 
are also very much concerned with the adaptive function of the capacities: what part they play in 
the lives of the species studied, and why they have evolved in the forms they have. What part does 
“understanding other minds” play in the larger picture of the particular forms of animal life that 
our species displays, and why did evolution come up with such an extraordinary phenomenon? 
 This chapter begins by reprising and elaborating a little on an answer to this question that sets 
human mindreading (aka theory of mind, as elsewhere in this volume) in a larger functional frame-
work. In the next section I outline this framework in terms of four major human socio-cognitive 
characteristics that together constitute what I have described, from a comparative perspective, as a 
distinctively “deep social mind,” adapted to the ecological niche that characterized the most recent 
phase of our evolutionary history (Whiten, 1999, 2006).  
 The human socio-cognitive niche  
 What kinds of lives have our ancestors lived over the past million years or so that shaped the 
modern human mind? Much archaeological evidence converges to describe a form of subsistence 
characterized as hunting and gathering, that gave way to agriculture only in the last 10 000 years 
or so—a mere blink on the scale of evolutionary timespans (Whiten, 1999, 2006). An impressive 
example of this evidence is sophisticated wooden hunting spears that have been dated to as much 
as 400 000 years ago (Thieme, 1997). During the last century many contemporary small-scale soci-
eties also subsisted by hunting and gathering, and anthropologists established that across many 
varying tropical regions, this typically involves animals being hunted and plant foods gathered, 
with much of the bounty brought back to a home base to be shared in egalitarian fashion amongst 
the members of the band (Marlowe, 2005). 

CULTURE AND THE EVOLUTION OF INTERCONNECTED MINDS
432
 The archaeological evidence suggests that this niche, unprecedented in apes, has had long stand-
ing signiﬁ cance in shaping the human mind. It was an extraordinary outcome to an evolution-
ary story that began with our early ancestors of a few million years ago being faced with major 
loss of forest cover in Africa and becoming bipedal apes, venturing into new and more open 
savannah-woodland habitats. In doing so, they were exposed to an impressive array of formidable 
predators including several large canine and feline species. It is an extraordinary fact about our 
evolutionary history that our ancestors not only survived these predator risks, but evolved over 
time into big game hunters themselves, competing with these “professional predators” so well that 
hunting became a mainstay of their foraging niche, unlike their earlier ancestors and their ape rela-
tives that remained in the forest. 
 How was this possible? A promising hypothesis offered by Tooby & deVore (1987) was that 
evolving humans developed what these authors characterized as a “cognitive niche,” in which such 
intelligent innovations as hunting with weapons and traps allowed attacks on prey that could be 
just as successful—often more so—than those mounted by existing mammalian predators using 
their specialized morphological “weapons” of teeth, strength, speed, and claws. Moreover, the cog-
nitive niche could evolve faster than the latter through the exercise of intelligence. 
 This analysis is highly plausible as far as it goes, but I have suggested that it fails to capture several 
major elements of the psychology that underwrites the success of the human hunter-gatherer way 
of life. Together these elements describe not just a cognitive niche, but crucially a sociocognitive 
niche, that I have referred to by the expression “deep social mind” (Whiten, 1999, 2006). This 
encompasses four principal, inter-dependent cognitive and behavioural clusters. These include 
“understanding other minds,” but this is only one, integral part of a broader complex of adapta-
tions. I shall ﬁ rst outline these and later focus on their evolutionary origins. They take unique 
forms in our own species, but precursors of all of them have been identiﬁ ed through careful com-
parative studies (Whiten and Erdal, 2012). 
 Egalitarianism and cooperation 
 Analyses by David Erdal and myself (Erdal & Whiten, 1994, 1996) systematically conﬁ rmed that 
across 24 hunter-gatherer ethnographies, egalitarianism is a hallmark of hunter-gatherers. It is 
manifested in several different, interconnected ways, most notably in food sharing, with foodstuffs 
brought back to the camp shared out according to need, rather than initial ownership or even kin-
ship, and also in a lack of formal leadership. These characteristics are not seen in our closest ape 
relatives, but they appear to be universally associated with a hunter-gatherer way of life in small 
bands numbering only about 20–50 people (Marlowe, 2005). Such a small and interdependent 
social world probably characterized much of our most recent evolutionary history, spanning hun-
dreds of millennia until the emergence of agriculture. 
 Cooperation within a hunter-gather band also takes forms unprecedented among non-human 
primates. These include not only cooperation within a whole suite of hunting, gathering and 
other subsistence activities like camp-making, but cooperation that spans and integrates these. An 
important instance of the latter is the typical division of labour in which men are largely respon-
sible for hunting and women for gathering, with the resources they collect brought back to the 
central camp and shared out. Here, there is also information-sharing such that both hunters and 
gatherers’ foraging the next day may be guided by what other members of the band have witnessed 
the previous day—such as active burrows, or fruiting bushes, in particular parts of the home range. 
All this means that a human hunting-gathering band acts much like a formidable “group-level 
predator” that can compete very successfully with other species whose foraging niches signiﬁ cantly 
overlap, such as social carnivores like lions. 

THE HUMAN SOCIO-COGNITIVE NICHE
433
 The next three characteristics to be outlined play crucial roles in facilitating this capacity of 
human hunting-gathering bands to operate much like a single, well-coordinated “superorganism.” 
The societies of the super-altruistic social insects, like bees and ants, have also deservedly been 
called superorganisms. What is distinctive about the human style of superorganism is the sophisti-
cated forms of social cognition that underlie its nature and competitiveness. These reinforce each 
other in ways outlined further below.  
 Mindreading (MR—aka theory of mind) 
 There appear to be few formal studies of mindreading in hunter-gatherer societies, although Avis 
and Harris long ago (1991) demonstrated the emergence of false belief attribution in Baka pygmy 
children at a similar age to that common in industrialized societies. Cross-cultural differences in 
MR have been identiﬁ ed (Lillard, 1998), but the existence of a common MR core can reasonably be 
seen as a basic human capacity (Shahaiean, Peterson, Slaughter, & Wellman, 2011; Wellman, Fang, 
& Peterson, 2011). 
 Among the consequences of this at the band level are that the minds of its members interpen-
etrate each other to depths unknown in other primates, facilitating the operation of the band as the 
uniquely coordinated, superorganismic “group-level predator” described above. 
 Culture 
 The cultures of hunter-gatherers may appear “simple” in some ways compared with those of 
agricultural and industrial societies. The material cultures of the latter have become gigantic of 
course, whereas nomadic hunter-gatherers can often carry all their goods on their backs when they 
intermittently shift campsites. However, the cultures of hunter-gatherers vastly surpass anything 
known in other primates and extend to phenomena that are again crucial to operating as a highly 
successful group-level predator, including language, social norms and rules, and technologies for 
gathering, hunting and trapping prey (Hewlett, Fouts, Boyette, & Hewlett, 2011; Lee & deVore, 
1968). 
 What is particularly distinctive in human culture is its cumulative character: the ability to contin-
uously build on the culturally inherited achievements of past generations to construct artifacts and 
actions that would be beyond any single individual to invent in their lifetimes (Tomasello, 1999). 
The range of weaponry that allowed evolving humans to become big game hunters alongside the 
competing big cats and canines of Africa is one important example, that Tooby and deVore had in 
mind in writing of the “cognitive niche.” However, the larger phenomenon of culture (including 
cumulative culture) is plainly a socio-cognitive achievement.  
 Language 
 Our unique linguistic form of communication performs many functions in a hunter-gatherer band, 
but in the context of the present theme, it facilitates the coordination and information-sharing 
that allows a band to operate so well as a group-level predator. For example, it facilitates band-level 
negotiation and planning of the strategies to be adopted by different hunting and gathering sub-
groupings, and their ultimate integration. 
 An adaptive complex: the distinctive hominid context for 
“understanding other minds” 
 Each of the four main socio-cognitive characteristics outlined above contribute to the concept 
of “deep social mind” in different ways, and these reinforce each other to constitute an adaptive 

CULTURE AND THE EVOLUTION OF INTERCONNECTED MINDS
434
complex underwriting the hunting gathering niche that characterized our evolutionary history. 
Perhaps most obviously, MR makes human minds “deeply social” through the ways in which each 
mind deeply penetrates others in the social band. The mutual interpenetrations this encompasses 
mean that one can legitimately consider the band as sharing  a  mind—a concept expressed in every-
day language when we say that having discussed some issue, we are “of one mind” on the matter. 
 In the case of culture, there is a different, although related sense of deep social mind at stake: our 
minds are deeply social in that they are largely populated by all we absorb from the accumulated 
culture we are born into. The contents of what is absorbed vary around the world of course, as well 
as over historical time, but in each case the mind is deeply socially shaped by its cultural acquisi-
tions, from technologies to religions and other customs. 
 Language, in turn, makes our minds deeply social because, for example, people spend much time 
telling others about what is “on their mind” or asking what others have “in mind.” In that respect, 
language can be thought of as one, particularly powerful, tool to allow mindreading (and its con-
verse when we broadcast the contents of our mind to others—“mindwriting?”) to operate. 
 Finally, coming full circle in the set of characteristics outlined above, egalitarianism is associated 
with a deeply social mind insofar as individual goals are subjugated to socially-levelling ones, and 
sophisticated forms of hunter-gatherer cooperation mean that individuals’ actions are designed 
speciﬁ cally to interdigitate with others’, to greater effect. 
 The central import of all I have said so far is that MR is embedded in a larger, multi-stranded 
phenomenon of deep social mind, the signiﬁ cance of which can be discerned in the behavioural 
and ecological niches that mark out the evolution of our species over past millennia. My emphasis 
has been on what is distinctive in all this, in comparison to our closest primate relatives. However, 
a wealth of research discoveries in the last decade or two in particular allows us to make sub-
stantial reconstructions of the earlier evolutionary foundations that shaped the architecture of 
these human specialties. In the context of the present volume, two of them seem to beg special 
attention—mindreading, and culture. 
 Mindreading in present-day and ancestral primates  
 This chapter spends less time on this topic than on the one relating to culture. What non-human 
primates (henceforth “primates”) take into account in relation to the states of minds of others has 
been subject to several excellent recent reviews that the reader can be referred to (Call & Santos, 
2012; Call & Tomasello, 2008). Primate social learning, traditions and culture have also been exten-
sively reviewed (Caldwell & Whiten, 2010; Hopper & Whiten, 2012; Whiten, 2012a), but not from 
the perspective of understanding other minds, which is what I shall pursue later in the chapter. 
 One of the recent reviews on primate mindreading was entitled “Does the chimpanzee have a 
theory of mind? 30 years later” (Call & Tomasello, 2008). This represents a substantial period of 
research—indeed somewhat longer than the period since explicit studies of children’s theory of 
mind began—and it offers an intriguing history of scientiﬁ c discoveries, with marked ﬂ uctuations 
in the conclusions drawn about whether primates have anything like a theory of mind, and if so 
what forms it takes. 
 Following Premack & Woodruff’s (1978) initial (but quite heavily critiqued) experimental 
attacks on the question, there was a considerable lag before more work appeared. On the one 
hand this took the form of observations on spontaneous social behavior, such as what Richard 
Byrne and I (Whiten & Byrne, 1988a,b) called “tactical deception,” which revealed episodes in 
which monkeys and apes appeared to take into account what others could or could not see, might 
remember (thus what they might “know” or not), or intend. These cast a different, naturalistic 

MINDREADING IN PRESENT-DAY AND ANCESTRAL PRIMATES
435
perspective on the possibility of primate mindreading and laid the foundations for experimen-
tal investigations that were later completed to test the interpretations we offered. However, their 
purely observational basis meant they were limited in terms of the conclusions about mindreading 
they could support—further experimental testing was essential to move the ﬁ eld forward. 
 Accordingly, new attempts at experimental investigations began in earnest. Initially, Povinelli, 
Nelson, & Boysen (1990) offered some evidence that chimpanzees could discriminate when 
human interactants could or could not see something, but a whole series of extensively control-
led studies then followed that delivered a negative verdict on this possibility. Chimpanzees given 
the choice of begging for food from one familiar person versus another would choose someone 
facing them rather than facing away, but the discrimination broke down when ﬁ ner distinctions 
were required, such as between a blindfold over the eyes versus over the mouth (Povinelli & Eddy, 
1996). These were quite surprising results, at least to some familiar with chimpanzees, because the 
discriminations that chimpanzees failed to make sometimes concerned what appear to we humans 
as starkly different conﬁ gurations: indeed some of the images of such contrasts, between a person 
with a bucket over their head versus the bucket being held, have become famous text book illustra-
tions. Studies of monkeys that tackled similar questions came to a convergent, negative conclusion 
in relation to the possibility of anything like psychological attribution in primates (Cheney & 
Seyfarth, 1991)—after all, recognizing the distinction between seeing and not seeing something 
was recognized as one of the earliest stages in the development of children’s understanding of 
mind (Flavell, Everett, Croft, & Flavell, 1981). 
 In their substantial 1997 review of primate cognition, Tomasello and Call accordingly delivered 
an essentially negative view on the likelihood of primate theory of mind, concluding that “there 
is no solid evidence that non-human primates understand the intentionality or states of mind 
of others” (p. 340). However, all changed over the next decade, in large part because of a new set 
of studies by Tomasello and Call’s own research group. In a 2008 review, the same authors now 
concluded that “there is solid evidence from several different experimental paradigms that chim-
panzees understand the goals and intentions of others, as well as the perception and knowledge of 
others” (Call & Tomasello, 2008, p. 187). 
 The picture began to change with a new approach that paired chimpanzees not with humans, 
but with other chimpanzees, and also put them into the kind of competitive situations that charac-
terized the earlier tactical deception database. Here, chimpanzees were faced with a situation where 
they had a chance to grab one of two attractive food items before a more dominant chimpanzee 
was released head-on into the same enclosure a moment later (Hare, Call, Agnetta, & Tomasello, 
2000). Although the subject could see both items, one of them was hidden from the dominant’s 
perspective by a small opaque screen. The subject tended to choose the food item hidden from 
the dominant, but did not show a preference when the screen was made transparent. This sug-
gests that, consistent with some of the observations of spontaneous deception that involved hiding 
some part of themselves from another individual, chimpanzees recognize the key geometric con-
ﬁ gurations that amount to what we normally distinguish as someone being able to see something, 
or not being able to see it (Br ä uer, Call, & Tomasello, 2007; Whiten, 2013). 
 Later, Hare, Call, & Tomasello (2006) more directly tested the use of this ability in deception, 
conﬁ rming that chimpanzees would tend to steal a food item from a human on a side that provided 
them with cover from the person’s visual ﬁ eld, rather than a transparent option on the other side. 
A similar discrimination was made in relation to stealing food where one option made a noise 
that would alert the person to what was going on, versus another that allowed a discrete and quiet 
approach (Hare et al., 2006). Chimpanzees thus appear to take into account the effects of their 
behavior not only on what other apes can or cannot see, but what they can or cannot hear. 

CULTURE AND THE EVOLUTION OF INTERCONNECTED MINDS
436
 A further development of the conspeciﬁ c competition paradigm showed chimpanzees making 
adaptive distinctions when they had to remember which of two locations the dominant protago-
nist would have seen earlier, which amounts to taking into account what the protagonist  knew , 
rather than simply what they could currently  see (Hare, Call, & Tomasello, 2001). However, exten-
sions of these and other paradigms to create tests of the attribution of false beliefs have drawn 
only negative results (Call & Tomasello, 1999; Kaminski, Call, & Tomasello, 2008), leading Call & 
Tomasello (2008) to note in their 30-year review that “despite several seemingly valid attempts, 
there is currently no evidence that chimpanzees understand false beliefs” (p. 187). However, taking 
into account these and also the more positive results of the studies reviewed above, they arrived 
at a signiﬁ cantly different stance than they had in 1997: “Our conclusion for the moment is, thus, 
that chimpanzees understand others in terms of a perception-goal psychology, as opposed to a 
full-ﬂ edged, human-like belief-desire psychology” (p. 187). 
 This statement draws on additional studies addressing not only the attribution of informational 
states like seeing, knowing and believing, but also the attribution of intentions. An important 
study concerning the attribution of intentions drew on the spirit of Whiten’s (1996) proposal that 
one powerful way to identify the attribution of states of mind in a non-verbal creature would be 
to assume the mindreader recognizes these as intervening variables operating in the mindread 
individual, computed on the basis of multiple, alternative, observable circumstances faced by that 
individual, that help predict (and/or explain) its responses in multiple, alternative contexts. Call, 
Hare, Carpenter, & Tomasello (2004) engineered multiple contexts in which a chimpanzee might 
infer an interactant was either unwilling or unable to complete an offer of food they had begun, 
and obtained positive results that thus implied a capacity to attribute intent. This represents one 
important component in the “perception-goal” psychology alluded to above. 
 Cultural transmission—from mind to mind  
 Mindreading makes for a society of interconnected minds in an obvious and explicit way: indeed, 
we might say that true mindreading is deﬁ ned by such connections. Because humans become 
such out-and-out mentalists during their childhoods, doing such things as using language 
replete with mental state terminology to discuss their own and others’ minds, it seems entirely 
justiﬁ ed to describe human groups as constituted by interconnected minds, a core aspect of deep 
social mind. 
 Can we really say something similar of culture and the psychological attributes that make it 
possible? One important afﬁ rmative answer is that culture exempliﬁ es deep social mind insofar 
as the contents of our minds include vast swathes of information inherited from other minds, in 
some cases from minds long dead, but passed on to us through a sometimes extremely long series 
of intervening generations—as illustrated by such miscellaneous examples as the concepts of the 
spear, the wheel, and gods. Our minds are clearly deeply socially constituted, in this respect, but 
does this process imply understanding other minds? I suggest the answer must be: “not necessar-
ily.” Traditions are now known to pass from generation to generation in an expanding range of 
animals, including primates and other mammals, birds and ﬁ sh (e.g. Thornton & Clutton-Brock, 
2011; Whiten, Hinde, Stringer, & Laland, 2011, 2012). For example, travel routes have been shown 
by translocation experiments to be inherited by social learning in several species of ﬁ sh (Laland, 
Atton, & Webster, 2011). In such a process, some form of representation of the route concerned 
must thus pass with sufﬁ cient ﬁ delity from the brains of the ﬁ rst set of ﬁ shes to those of the ﬁ sh 
who acquire the routes from them, and to this extent we have an “inter-mental” process—infor-
mation has somehow leapt from brain to brain. However, the ﬁ sh who inherit the routes do not 

CULTURAL TRANSMISSION—FROM MIND TO MIND
437
need to understand or “read” the minds of their cultural ancestors to achieve this: they need only 
observe them or perhaps even only follow or join their shoal, to acquire the tradition. 
 The connectedness between minds that underlies cultural transmission may become more 
direct, however, when we begin to discriminate among forms of social transmission and focus 
on the most sophisticated. Two in particular are relevant—intentional teaching and imitation. 
Intentional teaching achieves this status insofar as it relies minimally on an ability to recognize 
what a potential pupil does or does not know, and thus requires teaching about. More complex 
attributions could include what the pupil believes, or even falsely believes. 
 The link between imitation and explicit mindreading is more subtle and complex and addressed 
in some rather different ways by different authors. A fundamental point is that mindreading and 
imitation require a translation between the perspectives of others and oneself—in both, one needs 
in some sense to be able to “stand in the shoes” of the other to make the appropriate translation 
between other and self (Whiten, 1996). In mindreading, one needs to re-represent in one’s brain 
the mental state of another, such as their false beliefs. In imitation, one needs to translate from 
one’s perception of what it is for another individual to, for example, tie their shoelace in a certain 
way, to what it will be for you to generate a behavioural copy of this, from your own quite different 
perspective. The analogy is perhaps particularly pertinent in the case of “simulation” theories of 
mindreading, in which one succeeds by putting oneself in the position of the other and in effect 
imagining what it is like to “be” them (Stone & Davies, 1996). Empathy is another case where the 
link to imitation is evident, for in empathy, in a sense, one imitates the emotional state of another 
individual (Iacoboni, 2012). In line with such considerations, Meltzoff & Gopnik, 1993; Meltzoff, 
2005) proposed that imitation in infancy provides a developmental precursor to theory of mind, 
because it allows the infant to associate states of mind (its own) with the corresponding behav-
ioural manifestations seen in others. From the different perspective of autism research, Rogers & 
Pennington (1991) suggested that early deﬁ cits in imitation represent the start of a cascade of prob-
lems in autism that are later manifested in delays in theory of mind achievements. Evidence for an 
early deﬁ cit in imitation in autism is extensive (Williams, Whiten, & Singh, 2004) and there is also 
evidence consistent with the proposed linkage with theory of mind difﬁ culties (Perra, Williams, 
Whiten, Fraser, Benzie, & Perrett, 2008), although this remains a controversial and contested area 
of research (Rogers & Williams, 2006; Southgate & Hamilton, 2008). 
 Research on mirror neurons has suggested a speciﬁ c neural substrate relevant to these theo-
ries, for mirror neurons have been implicated in imitation in humans (Iacoboni, Woods, Brass, 
Bekkering, Mazziotta, & Rizzolatti, 1999; Iacoboni, 2012), as well as recognition of others’ goals 
in monkeys (Umilta, Kohler, Gallese, Fogassi, Fadiga, Keysers, et al., 2001; Rizzolatti, 2005), lead-
ing to hypotheses concerning a role for mirror neurons in the evolution of mindreading (Gallese 
& Goldman, 1998; Gallese, 2005, 2005). Williams, Whiten, Suddendorf, & Perrett (2001) brought 
several of the above issues together to suggest links between distorted mirror neuron function and 
both imitation and theory of mind deﬁ cits in autism (see Dapretto, Davies, Pfeifer, Scott, Sigman, 
Bookheimer, et al., 2006). 
 The above considerations suggest that attempts to reconstruct and understand the evolution of 
“understanding other minds” should, in the case of cultural transmission, focus particularly on 
the processes of imitation and teaching. Further below I do this, including examining evidence 
that any such processes suggest selectivity in relation to such psychological elements as the inten-
tions and rationality of different actions in others. More broadly, aspects of cultural transmission 
relevant to our focus on “Deep Social Mind” include such phenomena as contagion and conform-
ity (doing what a majority of others are doing, just because others are acting this way: Claidiere & 
Whiten, 2012b) and over-imitation (faithfully copying others despite blatant evidence the acts are 

CULTURE AND THE EVOLUTION OF INTERCONNECTED MINDS
438
not effective: Lyons, Young, & Keil, 2007, Lyons, Damrosch, Lin, Macris, & Keil, et al., 2011; Whiten 
et al., 2009a), that imply a special power of elements of the social world to be overridingly inﬂ uen-
tial and deeply penetrate an individual’s decision-making. 
 Reconstructing ancestral cultural capacities  
 The most recent phases of the evolution of human cultures and cultural capacities can be traced 
through a variety of complementary methods including archaeology, cultural phylogenetics and 
studies of the core characteristics of the hunting and gathering way of life identiﬁ ed across mul-
tiple instances of such societies today and in the recent past (Whiten et al., 2011, 2012). To trace 
earlier evolutionary phases in the common ancestor we share with other primates, a commonly 
accepted procedure is to test for elements of culture shared across a clade or family of related spe-
cies such as the apes, and accordingly attribute these elements to inheritance from the appropriate 
common ancestor of that group (Byrne, 1995). 
 In doing this for the last common ancestor we shared with chimpanzees approximately 6 million 
years ago, or with the ancestor shared with all the great apes around 14 million years ago, I have 
considered in turn three main aspects of culture: (i) the range of traditions and their distribution 
in time and space; (ii) the behavioural contents of the traditions; and (iii) the underlying transmis-
sion mechanisms (Whiten, 2005, 2011). Here, the topic of this volume leads me to focus mostly on 
the latter, ﬁ rst treating the other two relatively brieﬂ y; for a fuller treatment see Whiten (2011). 
 The range of ape traditions and their distributions have been inferred on the basis of collated 
reports across multiple long-term ﬁ eld studies for two species in particular. For chimpanzees, these 
delineated 39 different traditions spanning food processing, tool use and forms of social and sexual 
behavior (Whiten, Goodall, McGrew, Nishida, Reynolds, Sugiyama, et al., 1999, Whiten, Goodall, 
McGrew, Nishida, Reynolds, Sugiyama, et al., 2001; Whiten, 2005), a corpus that has expanded 
with further studies (McGrew, 2004; Whiten, 2010). Chimpanzees can be assigned to a particular 
locality on the basis of the unique cultural proﬁ le they display from among these possibilities, as 
can humans. A similar picture obtains among orangutans, if perhaps a little less rich in its mani-
festations (van Schaik, Ancrenaz, Borgen, Galdikas, Knott, Singleton, et al., 2003; van Schaik & 
Burkart, 2011), so that the existence of a cultural life constituted by multiple traditions of varied 
behavioural kinds can likely be attributed not only to our last common ancestor with chimpan-
zees, but to the great ape ancestral stock of around 14 million years ago. The inferences drawn 
from observational studies of wild apes have been supported by experiments with captive apes 
demonstrating a capacity to sustain traditions through repeated transmission events, extending 
across several communities in the case of chimpanzees (Whiten, Horner, & de Waal, 2005; Whiten, 
Spiteri, Horner, Bonnie, Lambeth, Schapiro, et al., 2007; Horner, Whiten, Flynn, & de Waal 2006: 
for comparable child studies see Whiten & Flynn, 2010; Flynn & Whiten, 2012). 
 The behavioural  contents that make up these ape cultures span most of the principal domains 
of ape behavior. In the case of chimpanzees they include a remarkable range of kinds of tool use 
that is shared with (although of course vastly exceeded by) our own species and these include some 
particular forms of special interest to students of human evolution, notably hammer and anvil use 
(to crack nuts) and other forms of percussive and force-based tool use (Whiten et al., 2009b) that 
indicate important foundations for the tool knapping and other stone age cultures that occupied 
most of the last two million years of  Homo history. 
 Imitation and other cultural transmission processes. 
 “Do apes ape?” asked Tomasello (1996). The answer to this question depends as much upon how 
imitation is deﬁ ned as on the relevant empirical data. Whiten & Ham (1992) deﬁ ned imitation as 

RECONSTRUCTING ANCESTRAL CULTURAL CAPACITIES
439
copying the form of another individual’s action. This was later contrasted with “emulation,” in 
which instead of copying the actions of the other individual, an observer learns from the results 
of their actions and then seeks to recreate these (Tomasello, 1990, 1996). Some researchers distin-
guish imitation from emulation by insisting that imitation must involve bodily copying. Others 
instead allow that the “form” of another’s actions that an imitator might copy include a particu-
lar sequential or hierarchically-organized program of action subcomponents (Byrne & Russon, 
1998), which might be describable in terms of bodily actions, but might also involve tool use or 
other objects moved in particular ways. 
 Imitation deﬁ ned as bodily copying is often hard to distinguish from emulation because an ape 
action that is going to serve as an experimental model typically gains rewards by acting on the 
world, and the results of this are thus likely to be confounded with the bodily movements responsi-
ble. One way this has been circumvented is to train a participant to act on command (“do this”) in 
a “Simon says” game, in which after the participant has grasped the copying ground rule through 
a series of training actions, it is tested on a battery of relatively novel actions. Both chimpanzees 
and an orangutan have been shown capable of mastering this game and generating a signiﬁ cant 
number of matches, recognizable by coders blind to what model action the participant has just 
seen (Custance, Whiten, & Bard, 1995; Call, 2001). The battery used in both studies required a 
range of bodily imitations including facial, gestural and whole body instances. Interestingly, only 
these apes have successfully mastered the essential copying idea behind the game played, whereas 
several studies of this kind have failed to achieve this with monkeys. This implies that only the apes 
are capable of understanding the underlying concept of imitation—they can tell when they are 
imitating or not—expressing a distinctive level of attunement with the model (in these studies, 
another species of ape—a human—with a body morph somewhat similar yet in some ways differ-
ent to that of the participant). 
 In a study testing social learning of nut-cracking behavior in chimpanzees na ï ve to the tech-
nique, Marshall-Pescini & Whiten (2008) recorded several sequences in which the young observer 
participants, while holding no hammer stone nor having any nut to crack, began spontaneously to 
produce hammering actions with their arms whilst watching the already-proﬁ cient model ham-
mering a nut open. In some cases a rough behavioural synchrony of observer and model was 
observed (for a video clip, see the electronic supplementary information to Marshall-Pescini & 
Whiten, 2008). This may suggest that the observed actions were being coded in the observer chim-
panzee in action terms, consistent with the operation of mirror neurons. This is an interesting 
possibility, because on the one hand, we know of mirror neurons through studies of monkeys, 
rather than apes (because of ethical reasons for not pursuing invasive single-cell recording with 
apes), and these neurons have been argued not to be involved in imitation, because the monkeys 
concerned do not show evidence of imitation; instead they have been suggested to function in the 
interpretation of other’s goal-direction actions (Rizzolatti, 2005). In apes, mirror neurons may 
have been co-opted into their imitative capacities, as appears to be the case for humans (Iacoboni, 
2012). 
 Other reasons to discount any simple dichotomy of the kind “apes emulate, humans imitate” 
include experiments explicitly testing for emulation learning through the use of “ghost conditions” 
in which there is no model to copy, the movements of objects that would normally be manipu-
lated by a model being instead engineered through artiﬁ cial means and thus displaying only the 
environmental results of (hidden) actions that an emulator is supposed to learn from (Hopper, 
2010). Hopper, Spiteri, Lambeth, Schapiro, Horner, & Whiten (2007) found that when the task was 
a complex and challenging tool use one, chimpanzees could not learn from such a ghost condi-
tion. In this task, food was stuck behind a blockage, which could be lifted up using a stick tool to 

CULTURE AND THE EVOLUTION OF INTERCONNECTED MINDS
440
release the food, and in the ghost condition this was made to happen through the block and/or tool 
being made to move by the pulling of hidden ﬁ shing line, with no model chimpanzee involved. 
By contrast, when they saw a chimpanzee use the tool to free the blockage they would copy this, 
with sufﬁ cient ﬁ delity to generate different tool use traditions when the initial models applied 
different techniques (Whiten et al., 2005). This suggests that in such situations they need to see 
what is done with a tool, by an agent. However, with a simpler, manual task in which a small door 
was simply slid to one side or the other to reveal a food reward, chimpanzees did learn in a ghost 
condition (Hopper, Lambeth, Schapiro, & Whiten, 2008). Together with other recent evidence of 
emulation (Tennie, Call, & Tomasello, 2010), this suggests that these apes have a portfolio of social 
learning skills that are deployed differentially according to context. Further, direct evidence of 
this comes from a study by Horner & Whiten (2005) in which young chimpanzees showed a ten-
dency to imitate the main parts of a sequence of actions to extract a food reward from a box when 
this was opaque and they could not see that certain actions were actually causally irrelevant, but 
missed these out when a transparent version of the box was involved, thus taking a more emulative 
approach. 
 This selectivity in relation to contextual information about physical causality has also been 
found in relation to information about what we might call psychological causality, linking again to 
the topic of MR. Here, Buttelmann, Carpenter, Call, & Tomasello (2007) designed tests modeled 
on those of Gergely, Bekkering, & Kiraly (2002) who had shown that human infants, who would 
readily imitate an adult using the bizarre action of butting a light with their head to switch it on 
so long as this person’s hands were free, were rarely willing to do so if the hands were occupied. 
This implied that infants operate a quite sophisticated model of human action that recognizes the 
conditions under which actions may be freely chosen, intentional, and thus worth copying even 
if superﬁ cially rather odd. Buttelmann and colleagues showed that chimpanzees also made this 
distinction, in relation to three different scenarios in which human models used their head, foot or 
bottom to switch on a light or sound (sitting on an object, in the latter case), either with their hands 
occupied (so using other means was the rational thing to do) or hands free (so using other means 
indicated this was an intentionally chosen technique). Tomasello & Carpenter (2005) also showed 
that like human infants, when presented with human models attempting, but failing to achieve a 
certain outcome, chimpanzees would themselves then attain this outcome, apparently recognizing 
and completing the model’s perceived intentions. This evidence converges with that of Call et al. 
(2004) reviewed above in the section on evidence of MR in apes. 
 Another aspect of social learning that underlines the power of the social world in shaping 
behavior is conformity. Conformity is doing what others do just because others are doing it, and 
in particular, following the majority. In humans, this tendency was graphically illustrated long 
ago by social psychology experiments in which participants were asked to make perceptual judg-
ments, such as which of three lines was longest, in a group context (Asch, 1956). Unbeknownst to 
the participant, other members of the group were confederates of the experimenter, and in some 
conditions of the experiment they all consistently judged one line longer that was patently not: 
nevertheless a signiﬁ cant number of participants followed suit, demonstrating strong conformity. 
Recent studies reviewed by Claidiere & Whiten (2012) have shown this tendency is not restricted 
to humans, but has occurred in our own studies of primates, including chimpanzees (Whiten et al., 
2005; Dindo, de Waal, & Whiten, 2009) and in a variety of other species including ﬁ sh (Pike & 
Laland, 2010). 
 I have recently suggested that another aspect of social learning—“over-imitation”—shares with 
conformity the central feature of allowing social information to override personal information 
when the two are in conﬂ ict Whiten (2012b) In over-imitation, a child copies aspects of another 

CONCLUSIONS: EVOLUTIONARY FOUNDATIONS OF INTERCONNECTED MINDS
441
individual’s behavior even though these can be readily seen to have no causal signiﬁ cance for 
the outcome at stake. This was evident when Horner & Whiten (2005) repeated the experiment 
described above in which a model performed both causally relevant and causally irrelevant actions 
on either an opaque box or a transparent box. Whilst chimpanzees have behaved differently on 
witnessing either the transparent or the opaque condition, imitating only in the latter case, chil-
dren were found to copy in blanket fashion in both conditions. Lyons et al. (2007, 2011) have rep-
licated these results with larger sample sizes and additional controls, and dubbed the phenomenon 
“over-imitation.” Tested in this way, it has appeared to be a characteristic of human social learning, 
extending to adults (McGuigan, Makinson, & Whiten, 2011), that we did not see in chimpanzees. 
However, one recent study did suggest an allied phenomenon. In this study, chimpanzees were 
shown to learn by observation to construct a long stick-tool from two smaller ones in order to 
gain some out-of-reach food (Price, Lambeth, Schapiro, & Whiten, 2009). However, a handful 
of control participants, who had seen no model, managed to work this out for themselves. The 
intriguing result emerged when the chimpanzees were later tested with the food closer so that the 
long tool was not needed: now, the individual learners gave up using the long tool; but the social 
learners persevered in using it (awkwardly), demonstrating yet again the power of socially-gained 
information to override the personal information available.  
 Conclusions: evolutionary foundations of interconnected minds  
 Before one can discuss evolutionary foundations, one has to have a good account of what it is that 
one is investigating the foundations of. In the case of this volume, the short answer is of course the 
topic of “understanding other minds,” typically investigated over the last 30 years or so as “theory 
of mind,” or “mindreading.” However, a richer and broader literature has come to suggest that MR 
is but one part of a larger complex of forms of social cognition that I outlined in the ﬁ rst part of 
this chapter, that together constitute what I called “Deep Social Mind”, incorporating MR, culture, 
cooperation and language. Once this adaptive complex is sufﬁ ciently well speciﬁ ed, one can begin 
to investigate evolutionary origins, using the comparative method to identify fundamental phe-
nomena shared by ourselves and our closest primate relatives—the subject of the remainder of the 
chapter. 
 Elsewhere Erdal and I offer an evolutionary analysis ranging over all four of the principal “pil-
lars” of Deep Social Mind outlined above (Whiten and Erdal, 2012), but here I have focused on 
the two that have the most particular relevance to the present volume; ﬁ rst MR, and second, the 
socio-cognitive underpinnings of culture. The latter topic has occupied the greater part of our 
most recent research efforts and accordingly has been discussed in the most depth here. 
 The last dozen or so years of research in primate MR have been an exciting period witness-
ing something of a sea-change in what new experimental evidence has taught us. At the turn of 
the century such evidence was largely negative, but the spate of new investigations, highlights of 
which were outlined above, have “converted” two of the original skeptics to conclude that apes are 
best characterized as “perception-goal” psychologists (Call & Tomasello, 2008). This conclusion 
comes full circle to achieve consistency with some of the inferences made on the basis of much 
earlier observational studies of wild and captive primates (see also Suddendorf & Whiten, 2001 
and (Whiten, 2013)). Humphrey (1980) for example, suggested some primates were “natural psy-
chologists”; and now the experimental work is circumscribing the scope of that natural psychol-
ogy, concerned with understanding some basic aspects of perception, or seeing, and goals and 
intentions. In the ﬁ rst edition of  Understanding Other Minds , reviewing our studies of primate 
deception and counter deception, I tentatively concluded that “some chimpanzees at least seem 

CULTURE AND THE EVOLUTION OF INTERCONNECTED MINDS
442
capable of discriminating between the apparent and real  intentions of others that occur in cases 
of potential deception” (Whiten, 1993, p 375; Whiten & Byrne, 1988a,b), as well as discriminating 
when another individual can see something or not, or is likely to notice something or not (Whiten, 
1993, p 377–8). 
 There is, thus, something of a consensus spanning ﬁ eld observations and experiments with 
captive individuals, that apes achieve a signiﬁ cant attunement with the minds of others, in cir-
cumstances where the others’ psychological states—their view of the world, their motivations and 
intentions—may be quite different to the self’s (Whiten, 2013). Of course, this is not to say that 
apes conceive of other minds as such: their achievements in this sphere can equally be seen as a 
sophisticated kind of behaviour-reading—but then, humans are not telepathists either and must 
read psychological states like seeing and wanting through observables (in the case of seeing, based 
on observable geometry, transparency, eyes open and so on). These are the means through which 
attunement to other minds occurs. 
 It follows that it will be this kind of self-other attunement that is available to apes when we shift 
our focus onto imitation and kindred kinds of observational learning from others. Here, attune-
ment likewise has to bridge between other’s and self’s perceptual and motoric engagement with 
the world. The motivation to “be like you” can be very strong, as indicated by such evidence of 
conformity as was reviewed above—although to be sure, this motivation becomes yet stronger in 
our own species, as we see in the phenomenon of over-imitation. At the same time, we have seen 
that apes do not “mindlessly ape” others: copying is selective in several ways, discriminating such 
variables as physical causality in what a model is manipulating, the intentions of the model, and 
the constraints under which they operate. Consistent with the account offered in this chapter, a 
recent book on  The Primate Mind (de Waal & Ferrari, 2012) was subtitled  Built to connect with 
other minds . The evidence reviewed here suggests that in living apes, and by inference in our com-
mon ape ancestors, the connections can be both strongly motivated and sophisticated in their 
discriminative architecture. This would have provided signiﬁ cant foundations for the elaborate 
understanding of minds we human mentalists achieve. 
 References 
 Asch, S. E. (1956).  Studies of independence and conformity: I. A minority of one against a unanimous 
majority .  Psychology Monographs  70 :  1–70 . 
 Avis, J. & Harris, P. L. (1991).  Belief-desire reasoning among Baka children: evidence for a universal 
conception of mind.  Child Development  62 :  460–7 . 
 Br ä uer, J., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2007).  Chimpanzees really know what others can see in a competitive 
situation.  Animal Cognition  10 :  439–48 . 
 Buttelmann, D., Carpenter, M., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2007).  Enculturated chimpanzees imitate 
rationally.  Developmental Science  10 :  31–8 . 
 Byrne, R. W. (1995).  Th e Th inking Ape: Evolutionary Origins of Intelligence .  New York :  Oxford University 
Press . 
 Byrne, R. W. & Russon, A. E. (1998).  Learning by imitation: a hierarchical approach.  Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences  21 :  667–721 . 
 Caldwell, C. A. & Whiten, A. (2010).  Social learning in monkeys and apes: cultural animals? In: C. 
Campbell, A. Fuentes, K. MacKinnon, S. Bearder, & R. Stumpf, (Eds),  Primates in Perspective 2nd edn, 
pp.  652–62 .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Call, J. (2001).  Body imitation in an enculturated orangutan ( Pongo pygmaeus ).  Cybernetics and Systems: An 
International Journal  32 :  97–119 . 

443
 Call, J., Hare, B. H., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2004).  “Unwilling” versus “unable”: Chimpanzees’ 
understanding of human intentional action?  Developmental Science  7 :  488–98 . 
 Call, J. & Santos, L. R. (2012).  Understanding other minds. In: J. Mitani, J. Call, P. Kappeler, R. Palombit, & 
J. Silk (Eds),  Th e Evolution of Primate Societies (pp. 664–81).  Chicago :  Chicago University Press . 
 Call, J. & Tomasello, M. (1999).  A non-verbal false belief task: the performance of children and great apes. 
 Child Development  70 :  381–95 . 
 Call, J. & Tomasello, M. (2008).  Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? 30 years later.  Trends in 
Cognitive Science  12 :  187–92 . 
 Cheney, D. R. and Seyfarth R. M. (1991).  Reading minds or reading behavior? Tests for a theory of mind 
in monkeys. In: A. Whiten (Ed.),  Natural Th eories of Mind; Evolution, Development and Simulation of 
Everyday Mindreading (pp.  175–94) .  Oxford :  Basil Blackwell . 
 Claidi è re, N. & Whiten, A. (2011).  Integrating the study of conformity and culture in humans and 
non-human animals .  Psychological Bulletin  138 (1): 126–45. 
 Custance, D. M., Whiten, A., & Bard, K. A. (1995).  Can young chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes ) imitate 
arbitrary actions? Hayes and Hayes (1952) revisited .  Behaviour  132 :  837–59 . 
 Dapretto, M., Davies, M. S., Pfeifer, J. H., Scott, A. A., Sigman, M., Bookheimer, S. Y., & Iacoboni, 
M. (2006).  Understanding emotions in others: Mirror neuron dysfunction in children with autism 
spectrum disorders.   Nature Neuroscience  9 :  28–30 . 
 De Waal, F. B. M. & Ferrari, P. F. (Eds) (2012).  Th e Primate Mind: Made to Connect with Other Minds . 
 Cambridge :  Harvard University Press . 
 Dindo, M., de Waal, F. B. M., & Whiten, A. (2009).  In-group conformity sustains diff erent foraging 
traditions in capuchin monkeys ( Cebus apella ).  PLoS One  4 :  e7858 . Available at: http://dx.plos.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0007858 
 Erdal, D., & Whiten, A. (1994).  On human egalitarianism: an evolutionary product of Machiavellian status 
escalation?  Current Anthropology  35 :  175–83 . 
 Erdal, D., & Whiten, A. (1996).  Egalitarianism and Machiavellian intelligence in human evolution. In: 
P. Mellars and K. Gibson (Eds),  Modelling the Early Human Mind (pp.  139–50) .  Cambridge :  McDonald 
Institute Monographs . 
 Flavell, J. H., Everett, B. A., Croft , K., & Flavell, E. R. (1981).  Young children’s knowledge about visual 
perception: further evidence for the level 1–level 2 distinction.  Developmental Psych ology  17 :  99–103 . 
 Flynn, E. G., & Whiten, A. (2012).  Experimental “microcultures” in young children: identifying biographic, 
cognitive and social predictors of information transmission.  Child Dev elopment  83 :  911–25 . 
 Gallese, V. (2005).  “Being like me”: Self-other identity, mirror neurons and empathy. In: S. Hurley and N. 
Chater (Eds)  Perspectives on Imitation, Volume 1, Mechanisms of Imitation and Imitation in Animals 
(pp.  101–18) .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998).  Mirror neurons and the simulation theory of mind-reading.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sci ence  2 :  493–501 . 
 Gergely, G., Bekkering, H., & Kiraly, I. (2002).  Rational imitation in preverbal infants.  Nature  415 :  755 . 
 Hare, B., Call, J., Agnetta, B., & Tomasello, M. (2000).  Chimpanzees know what conspecifi cs do and do not 
see.  Animal Behaviour  59 :  771–86. 
 Hare, B., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2001).  Do chimpanzees know what conspecifi cs know?  Animal 
 Behaviour  61 :  139–51 . 
 Hare, B., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2006).  Chimpanzees deceive a human competitor by hiding.  Cognition 
 101 :  495–514 . 
 Hewlett, B. S., Fouts, H. N., Boyette, A., & Hewlett, B. L. (2011).  Social learning among Congo Basin 
hunter-gatherers.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B  366 :  1168–78 . 
 Hopper, L. M. (2010).  “Ghost” experiments and the dissection of social learning in humans and animals. 
 Biological Reviews  85 :  685–701 . 
REFERENCES

CULTURE AND THE EVOLUTION OF INTERCONNECTED MINDS
444
 Hopper, L. M., Lambeth, S. P., Schapiro, S. J., & Whiten, A. (2008).  Observational learning in chimpanzees 
and children studied through “ghost” conditions.   Proceedings of the Royal Society, London B  275 :  835–40 . 
 Hopper, L. M., Spiteri, A., Lambeth, S. P., Schapiro, S. J., Horner, V., & Whiten, A. (2007).  Experimental 
studies of traditions and underlying transmission processes in chimpanzees.  Animal Behaviour  73 : 
 1021–32 . 
 Hopper, L. M. & Whiten, A. (2012).  Th e comparative and evolutionary psychology of social learning 
and culture. In: J. Vonk & T. Shackelford (Eds),  Th e Oxford Handbook of Comparative Evolutionary 
Psychology (pp. 451–73) .  Oxford University Press . 
 Horner, V. K. & Whiten, A. (2005).  Causal knowledge and imitation/emulation switching in chimpanzees 
( Pan troglodytes ) and children .  Animal Cogn ition  8 :  164–81 . 
 Horner, V., Whiten, A., Flynn, E., & de Waal, F. B. M. (2006).  Faithful replication of foraging techniques 
along cultural transmission chains by chimpanzees and children.  Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, USA  103 :  13878–83 . 
 Humphrey, N. K. (1980).  Nature’s psychologists. In: B. Josephson & V. Ramachandran (Eds),  Consciousness 
and the Physical World (pp. 57–80) .  London :  Pergamon Press . 
 Iacoboni, M., Woods, R. P., Brass, M., Bekkering, H., Mazziotta, J. C., & Rizzolatti, G. (1999).  Cortical 
mechanisms of human imitation .  Science  286 :  2526–8 . 
 Iacoboni, M. (2012).  Th e human mirror system and its role in imitation and empathy. In: F. B. M. de Waal 
& P. F. Ferrari (Eds),  Th e Primate Mind: Built to Connect with Other Minds (pp. 32–47).  Cambridge : 
 Harvard University Press . 
 Kaminski, J., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2008).  Chimpanzees know what others know, but not what they 
believe.  Cognition  109 :  224–34 . 
 Laland, K. N., Atton, N. & Webster, M. M. (2011).  From fi sh to fashion: experimental and theoretical 
insights into the evolution of culture.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B  366 :  958–68 . 
 Lee, R. B. & DeVore, I. (Eds) (1968).  Man the Hunter .  Chicago :  Aldine de Gruyter . 
 Lillard, A. (1998).  Ethnopsychologies: Cultural variations in theories of mind.  Psychological  Bulletin  123 :  3–32 . 
 Lyons, D. E., Young, A. G., & Keil, F. C. (2007).  Th e hidden structure of overimitation.  Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA  104 : 19 751–6 . 
 Lyons, D. E., Damrosch, D. H., Lin, J. K., Macris, D. M., & Keil, F. C. (2011).  Th e scope and limits of 
overimitation in the transmission of artefact culture.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 
 366 :  1158–67 . 
 Marlowe, F. W. (2005).  Hunter-gatherers and human evolution.  Evolutionary Anthropol ogy  14 :  54–67 . 
 Marshall-Pescini, S., & Whiten, A. (2008).  Social learning of nut-cracking behavior in East African 
sanctuary-living chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes schweinfurthii  ) .  Journal of Comparative Psychol ogy  122 : 
 186–94 . 
 McGrew, W. C. (2004  Th e Cultured Chimpanzee: Refl ections on Cultural Primatology .  Cambridge : 
 Cambridge University Press . 
 McGuigan, N., Makinson, J., & Whiten, A. (2011).  From over-imitation to super-copying: Adults imitate 
causally irrelevant aspects of tool use with higher fi delity than young children.  British Journal of 
Psychol ogy  102 :  1–18 . 
 Meltzoff , A. N. (2005).  Imitation and other minds: the “like me” hypothesis. In: S. Hurley & N. Chater 
(Eds),  Perspectives on Imitation, Volume 2, Imitation, Human Development and Culture ( pp.  55–77) . 
 Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Meltzoff , A. N. & Gopnik, A. (1993).  Th e role of imitation in understanding persons and developing a 
theory of mind . In: S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, & J. D. Cohen (Eds),  Understanding Other 
Minds: Perspectives from Autism (pp.  335–66) .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Perra, O., Williams, J. H. G., Whiten, A., Fraser, L., Benzie, H. & Perrett, D. I. (2008)  Imitation and 
“theory of mind” competencies in discrimination of autism from other neurodevelopmental disorders . 
 Research in Autism Spectrum Dis orders  2 :  456–68 . 

445
 Pike, T. W., & Laland, K. N. (2010).  Conformist learning in nine-spined sticklebacks’ foraging decisions . 
 Biology Letters  6 (4):  466–8 . 
 Povinelli, D. J. & Eddy, T. J. (1996  What young chimpanzees know about seeing.  Monographs of the Society 
Research in Child Dev elopment  61 :  1–152 . 
 Povinelli, D. J., Nelson, K. E., & Boysen, S. T. (1990).  Inferences about guessing and knowing by 
chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes ) .  Journal of Comparative Psychol ogy  104 :  203–10 . 
 Premack, D., & Woodruff , G. (1978).  Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind?  Behavioral and  Brain 
Sciences  1 :  515–26 . 
 Price, E. E., Lambeth, S. P., Schapiro, S. J., & Whiten, A. (2009).  A potent eff ect of observational learning 
on chimpanzee tool construction.  Proceedings of the Royal Society B  276 :  3377–83 . 
 Rizzolatti, G. (2005).  Th e mirror neuron system and imitation. In: S. Hurley & N. Chater (Eds),  Perspectives on 
Imitation, Volume 1, Mechanisms of Imitation and Imitation in Animals (pp.  55–76) .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Rogers, S. J., & Pennington, B. F. (1991).  A theoretical approach to the defi cits in infantile autism . 
 Developmental Psychopathol ogy  3 :  137–62 . 
 Rogers, S. J. & Williams, J. H. G. (2006).  Imitation and the Social Mind: Autism and Typical Development . 
 New York :  Guilford Press . 
 Shahaeian, A., Peterson, C. C., Slaughter, V., & Wellman, H. M. (2011).  Culture and the sequence of steps 
in theory of mind development.  Developmental Psy chology  47 :  1239–47 . 
 Southgate, V. & Hamilton, A. F. de C. (2008).  Unbroken mirrors: challenging a theory of autism.  Trends in 
Cognitive Science  12 :  225–9 . 
 Stone, T., & Davies, M. (1996).  Th e mental simulation debate: a progress report. In: P. Carruthers & P. K. 
Smith (Eds)  Th eories of Th eories of Mind (pp.  119–37) .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Suddendorf, T., & Whiten, A. (2001).  Mental evolution and development: Evidence for secondary 
representation in children, great apes and other animals.  Psychological  Bulletin  127 :  629–50 . 
 Tennie, C., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2010)  Evidence for emulation in chimpanzees in social settings using 
the fl oating peanut task.  PLoS ONE  5 ,  e10544 . 
 Th ieme, H. (1997).  Lower Paleolithic hunting spears from Germany.  Nature  385 :  807–10 . 
 Th ornton, A., & Clutton-Brock, T. (2011).  Social learning and the development of individual and group 
behavior in mammal societies.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B  366 :  978–87. 
 Th ornton, A., & Clutton-Brock, T. (2011).  Social learning and the development of individual and group 
behavior in mammal societies.   Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B  366 :  978–87 . 
 Tomasello, M. (1990).  Cultural transmission in the tool use and communicatory signalling of chimpanzees? 
In: S. Parker & K. Gibson (Eds),  Language and Intelligence in Monkeys and Apes: Comparative 
Developmental Perspectives (pp.  274–311 ).  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Tomasello, M. (1996).  Do apes ape? In: C. M. Heyes & B. G. Galef (Eds),  Social Learning in Animals: Th e 
Roots of Culture (pp.  319–46) .  London :  Academic Press . 
 Tomasello, M. (1999).  Th e Cultural Origins of Human Cognition .  Cambridge :  Harvard University Press . 
 Tomasello, M., & Call, J. (1997).  Primate Cognition . Oxford:  Oxford University Press . 
 Tomasello, M., & Carpenter, M. (2005).  Th e emergence of social cognition in three young chimpanzees . 
 Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Dev elopment  70 (1, Serial No. 279). 
 Tooby, J., & DeVore, I. (1987  Th e reconstruction of hominid behavioral evolution through strategic 
modelling. In: W. G. Kinzey (Ed.),  Th e Evolution of Human Behavior: Primate Models (pp.  183–227) . 
 New York :  SUNY Press . 
 Umilta, M. A., Kohler, E., Gallese, V., Fogassi, L., Fadiga, L., Keysers, C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2001).  I know 
what you are doing: a neuropsychological study .  Neuron  31 :  155–65. 
 van Schaik, C. P. (2009).  Geographic variation in the behavior of wild great apes: is it really cultural? In: 
K. N. Laland & B. G. Galef (Eds),  Th e Question of Animal Culture (pp  70–98) .  Cambridge :  Harvard 
University Press . 
REFERENCES

CULTURE AND THE EVOLUTION OF INTERCONNECTED MINDS
446
 van Schaik, C. P., & Burkart, J. M. (2011). Social learning and evolution: Th e cultural intelligence 
hypothesis.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B  367 : 1008–16. 
 van Schaik, C. P., Ancrenaz, M., Borgen, G., Galdikas, B., Knott, C. D., Singleton, I., Suzuki, A., Utami, S. 
S., & Merrill, M. (2003).  Orangutan cultures and the evolution of material culture.  Science  299 ,  102–5 . 
 Wellman, H. M., Fang F. X., & Peterson, C. C. (2011).  Sequential progressions in a theory of mind scale: 
longitudinal perspectives.  Child. Dev elopment  82 :  780–92 . 
 Whiten A. (1993).  Evolving a theory of mind: Th e nature of non-verbal mentalism in other primates . 
In: S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, D. Cohen, & F. Volkmar (Eds),  Understanding Other Minds: 
Perspectives from Autism (pp.  367–96).  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Whiten, A. (1996).  When does behavior reading become mindreading?  In P. Carruthers and P. K. Smith 
(Eds),  Th eories of Th eories of Mind (pp.  277–92) .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Whiten, A. (1999).  Th e evolution of deep social mind in humans . In: M. Corballis & S. E. G. Lea (Eds), 
 Th e Descent of Mind (pp.  155–75) .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press. 
 Whiten, A. (2005).  Th e second inheritance system of chimpanzees and humans .  Nature  437 :  52–5 . 
 Whiten, A. (2006).  Th e place of “deep social mind” in the evolution of human nature . In M. A. Jeeves (Ed.), 
 Human Nature (pp. 20 7–22) .  Edinburgh :  Royal Society of Edinburgh . 
 Whiten, A. (2010).  A coming of age for cultural Panthropology. In: E. Lonsdorf, S. Ross & T. Matsuzawa 
(Eds),  Th e Mind of the Chimpanzee .  Chicago :  Chicago University Press . 
 Whiten, A. (2011).  Th e scope of culture in chimpanzees, humans and ancestral apes.  Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B  366 :  997–1007 . 
 Whiten, A. (2012a).  Primate social learning, traditions and culture . In: J. Mitani, J. Call, P. Kappeler, R. 
Palombit & J. Silk (Eds),  Th e Evolution of Primate Societies (pp. 682–700) .  Chicago :  Chicago University 
Press . 
 Whiten, A. (2012b).  Social cognition: making us smart, or sometimes making us dumb? Overimitation, 
conformity, non-conformity and the transmission of culture in ape and child . In: M. Banaji & S. Gelman 
(Eds),  Th e Development of Social Cognition (pp. 150–4) .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Whiten, A. (2013).  Humans are not alone in computing how others see the world.    Animal Behaviour   86  
 (in press) . 
 Whiten, A., & Byrne, R. W. (1988a).  Tactical deception in primates .  Behavioral and  Brain  Sciences  11 :  233–73 . 
 Whiten, A., & Byrne, R. W. (1988b).  Th e manipulation of attention in primate tactical deception . In: R. W. 
Byrne & A. Whiten (Eds),  Machiavellian Intelligence: Social Expertise and the Evolution of Intellect in 
Monkeys, Apes and Humans (pp.  211–23) . Oxford:  Oxford University Press . 
 Whiten, A., & Erdal, D. (2012).  Th e human socio-cognitive niche and its evolutionary origins.  Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B  367 :  2119–29 . 
 Whiten, A., & Flynn, E. G. (2010).  Th e transmission and evolution of experimental “microcultures” in 
groups of young children .  Developmental Psychology  46 :  1694–709 . 
 Whiten, A., Goodall, J., McGrew, W. C., Nishida, T., Reynolds, V., Sugiyama, Y., Tutin, C. E. G., 
Wrangham, R. W., & Boesch, C. (1999).  Cultures in chimpanzees.  Nature  399 :  682–5 . 
 Whiten, A., Goodall, J., McGrew, W. C., Nishida, T., Reynolds, V., Sugiyama, Y., et al. (2001).  Charting 
cultural variation in chimpanzees .  Behaviour  138 :  1481–516 . 
 Whiten, A., & Ham, R. (1992).  On the nature and evolution of imitation in the animal kingdom: 
Reappraisal of a century of research.  Advances in the Study of Behaviour  11 :  239–83 . 
 Whiten, A., Hinde, R. A., Stringer, C. B., & Laland, K. N. (2011).  Introduction. Culture eEvolves . 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B  366 :  938–48 . 
 Whiten, A., Hinde, R. A., Stringer, C. B. & Laland, K. N. (Eds) (2012).  Culture Evolves .  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press . 
 Whiten, A., Horner, V., & de Waal, F. B. M. (2005).  Conformity to cultural norms of tool use in 
chimpanzees.  Nature  437 :  737–40 . 

447
 Whiten, A., McGuigan, H., Hopper, L. M. and Marshall-Pescini, S. (2009a).  Imitation, over-imitation, 
emulation and the scope of culture for child and chimpanzee.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B  364 :  2417–28 . 
 Whiten, A., Schick, K., & Toth, N. (2009b).  Th e evolution and cultural transmission of percussive 
technology: integrating evidence from paleoanthropology and primatology.  Journal of Human Evol ution 
 57 :  420–35 . 
 Williams, J. H. G., Whiten, A., and Singh, T. (2004).  A systematic review of action imitation in autistic 
spectrum disorder .  Journal of Autism Developmental Dis orders  34 :  285–99 . 
 Williams, J. H. G., Whiten, A., Suddendorf, T., & Perrett, D. I. (2001).  Imitation, mirror neurons and 
autism .  Neuroscience and Biobehavioural Rev iews  25 :  287–95 . 
REFERENCES

 Chapter 25 
 Mindreading by simulation:  The roles 
of imagination and mirroring  
 Alvin I.   Goldman  and   Lucy  C. Jordan  
 Criteria of adequacy for a theory of “theory of mind”  
 There is consensus in cognitive science that ordinary people are robust mindreaders and that min-
dreading begins early in life. Many other questions concerning mindreading, however, remain in 
dispute, including the four that follow:
 (1) By what method(s) do cognizers read other people’s minds—that is, attribute mental 
states to them? Which cognitive capacities, mechanisms, or processes play pivotal roles in 
mindreading? 1 Call this the task-execution question.  
 (2) How did the human species, and how do individuals, acquire mindreading capacities? What 
are the phylogenetic and ontogenetic parts of the story? Call this the  acquisition question. 
  (3) What neural substrates underlie mindreading? In other words, does the proposed story pass 
neuroscientiﬁ c muster? Call this the neural plausibility question. 
 (4) How does the proffered story of mindreading mesh with the general story of human cogni-
tion? Is mindreading a typical example of cognition, or is it a singularity—a one-off piece of 
cognitive hardware? Call this the question of mesh.    
 Any theory or approach to mindreading must answer these questions, or most of them. It should 
provide systematic answers that address the entire scope of mindreading: the full range of states 
that get attributed and the full range of contexts or cues on which mental attributions are based. 
The mental states imputed to others include at least three types: emotions (e.g. fear, anger, disgust), 
sensations (pain, touch, tickle), and propositional attitudes (belief, desire, intention). Attribution 
of all such states needs to be covered by an adequate theory. Our own approach will offer plausible 
answers to all of the foregoing questions. In that sense it constitutes a “full scope” approach. Some 
of its rivals, by contrast, don’t pass this test of adequacy. The rationality or teleological approach, for 
example (cf. Dennett, 1987; Gergely, Nadasdy, Csibra, & Biro, 1995; Csibra, Biro, Koos, & Gergely, 
2003) seems to lack the resources to explain attributions of sensations or emotions.  2 
 1    People read their own minds as well as the minds of others. How ﬁ rst-person mindreading is executed is a 
question of equal importance and difﬁ culty as the third-person mindreading question. For this reason it 
cannot be addressed within the conﬁ nes of this chapter, so it is left for another day. (See Goldman, 2006, 
Chapters 9–10 for an earlier foray into this territory.)  
 2   A standard taxonomy of approaches to mindreading  other than simulation theory includes the rationality 
theory, the child-scientist version of the theory-theory, and the modularity version of the theory-theory. 

HIGH-LEVEL SIMULATIONAL MINDREADING
449
 Levels of mindreading  
 The general contours of the simulation approach have been laid down by a number of contribu-
tors. In the 1980s philosophers advocated simulation (or “replication”) as an alternative to the 
dominant functionalist, or theory-theory, approach to folk psychology (Gordon, 1986; Heal, 1986; 
Goldman, 1989). In the 1990s a developmental slant on simulation theory was presented by Harris 
(1992). Later in the 1990s and 2000s neuroscientiﬁ c ﬁ ndings steered much of the impetus for 
simulation theory (Gallese & Goldman, 1998; Currie & Ravenscroft, 2002; Decety & Greze, 2006; 
Goldman & Sripada, 2005; Gallese, 2007). The present chapter begins by reviewing the original 
model that focused on the mindreading of propositional attitudes. It then moves to a later variant 
directed at the attribution of emotions, sensations, and intentional motion. The second half of the 
chapter examines more recent ﬁ ndings that could play pivotal roles in the ongoing debate. 
 Many treatments of theory of mind postulate two or more levels, components, or systems of 
mindreading, and we too offer a bi-level approach (cf. Goldman, 2006). However, not all duplex 
theories draw the same partitions or have the same rationale. An early two-component architec-
ture similar to one we favor is that of Tager-Flusberg & Sullivan (2000). They distinguish a “social 
cognitive” component and a “social perceptual” component. Their social-cognitive component 
features a conceptual understanding of the mind as a representational system, and is highly inter-
active with other domains such as language. The social-perceptual component is involved in the 
perception of biological and intentional motion and the recognition of emotion via facial expres-
sion. This distinction maps well onto our distinction between “high-level” mindreading of the 
attitudes vs. “low-level,” or mirror-based, mindreading of non-propositional states. Essentially 
the same distinction is carved out neurologically by Waytz and Mitchell (2011). Our two meth-
ods of mindreading exemplify many of the contrasts that typify the popular dual-systems, or 
dual-processes, approach in contemporary cognitive science. Low-level mindreading is compara-
tively fast, stimulus-driven, and automatic; high-level mindreading is comparatively slow, reﬂ ec-
tive, and controlled. 
 Apperly advocates a different two-systems approach (Apperly & Butterﬁ ll, 2009; Apperly, 2011). 
Both of his systems concern the propositional attitudes, but two systems are posited by analogy 
with numerical cognition. One system is characterized as efﬁ cient, but inﬂ exible, the other as ﬂ ex-
ible, but effortful. It is hard to get a ﬁ rm grip on his systems, however, partly because the account 
changes signiﬁ cantly between the two publications. The 2009 publication distinguishes between 
two types of states that are mindread—“registrations” and “beliefs”—but registrations disappear 
in the 2011 publication.  
 High-level simulational mindreading  
 Early formulations of the simulation theory (ST) correspond to what we call high-level mindread-
ing. To pinpoint its most signiﬁ cant features, we contrast it with its perennial foil, theory-theory 
(TT). We begin with an example:
  Shaun just left the house and drove away. I ask you where he is going, and you reply: “He didn’t say. But 
I know he wants an espresso and thinks that the best espresso is at Sergio’s caf é . So he probably decided 
to go to Sergio’s.” 
 For detailed expositions and critiques of these rivals, see Goldman (2006), Chapters 3–5. Selected prob-
lems for some of these rivals are sprinkled throughout this chapter, but length limits preclude detailed 
treatments. 

MINDREADING BY SIMULATION: THE ROLES OF IMAGINATION AND MIRRORING 
450
 You have executed a mindreading process, the upshot being the attribution of a certain decision to 
Shaun. How did you arrive at this? TT would reconstruct your mental process as in Figure 25.1. You 
start with three beliefs, two speciﬁ cally about Shaun and one about human psychology in general. 
All the beliefs are depicted as ovals on the left of Figure 25.1. You believe of Shaun that he wants 
an espresso and thinks that Sergio’s is the best (nearby) espresso place. Your general belief about 
human psychology is the “theoretical” proposition that people generally choose actions most likely 
(by their lights) to satisfy their desires. These three “premise” beliefs are fed into your reasoning 
mechanism, which outputs the conclusion that Shaun decided to go to Sergio’s. 
 Several things about this simple TT story are noteworthy. First, the mindreader’s states that do 
all the “work” in the TT story are belief states, and the only processor used is a theoretical reasoning 
mechanism. The same would hold of somebody trying to understand and explain the workings of 
a physical system. Nothing transpires under the theory-oriented account like putting oneself in the 
target system’s shoes. Secondly, the belief states that do the work are structurally rather complex. 
They are all metarepresentational states, which refer to states of the target that are themselves rep-
resentational (have content). Shaun is portrayed as having a desire and a belief, each of which is a 
representational state. Third, under TT, mindreading’s aptness for success critically depends on the 
content of the mindreader’s na ï ve psychological theory. If this theory is ample enough in detail and 
(approximately) descriptively correct, it may tend to supply fairly accurate mental attributions. 
But if it is meager or misguided, it will frequently lead the mindreader astray. This will happen 
especially when the target’s mental processes are sophisticated and complex. 
 One form of TT exploits the adequacy or inadequacy of the mindreader’s psychological the-
ory to explain inﬂ uential patterns of error found in early childhood mindreading, especially 
errors in (verbal) false-belief tasks. Proponents of this form of TT—so-called “child scientist” 
Shaun wants
an espresso
Shaun thinks
Sergio's is the best
espresso place
Shaun will decide
to go to Sergio's
Belief state of the mindreader.
Internal text represents belief content.
KEY
Theoretical reasoning mechanism
of the mindreader.
People choose actions
they believe to be most
likely to satisfy their desires
 Figure 25.1   TT-type mindreading process. Reproduced from Alvin I. Goldman, Joint Ventures: Mindreading, 
Mirroring, and Embodied Cognition, Figure 5.1 ©  Oxford University Press, 2013 with permission. For per-
mission to reuse this material, please visit http://www.oup.co.uk/academic/rights/permissions.  

HIGH-LEVEL SIMULATIONAL MINDREADING
451
theory-theorists—contend that children gradually reﬁ ne and improve their theory of mind dur-
ing their early years, much as adult scientists reﬁ ne their theories over time. One such reﬁ nement 
is the replacement of a non-representational theory of mind by a representational theory. The 
later-developing representational theory allows them to conceptualize the possibility of false 
belief and thereby improve their performance in false-belief tasks between 3 and 4 years of age. 
 A second form of TT, the modularity theory, denies that children develop a theory of mind by 
a science-like process. Rather a theory of mind is an innate endowment of one or more dedicated 
modules (Baron-Cohen, 1995; Leslie, 1994). How, then, might this sort of theory explain compara-
tively poor performance by 3-year-olds on false-belief tasks? Leslie, German, and Polizzi (2005) 
introduce an additional, non-modular mechanism, the selection-processor, to account for this 
phenomenon. The selection processor selects among candidate belief contents in a target agent’s 
mind by inhibiting the default content—namely, the content true of the world—and instead selects 
an alternative content (which is false of the world). Three-year-olds are weak at this task because 
their selection processor includes an inhibitory mechanism that hasn’t fully matured at three years. 
Thus, 3-year-olds have a performance problem with false-belief tasks, not a conceptual problem, 
as child-scientist theory-theorists claim. Despite this difference, both types of TT hold that mind-
reading is executed by reliance on a theory of mind, whether an innate theory (embedded in one 
or more modules) or a gradually developing one. 
 Could the same tasks be executed in a less informationally demanding manner? Speciﬁ cally, 
could they be done with less reliance on reﬁ ned generalizations about causal connections among 
mental states? ST takes this tack. It conjectures that mindreaders exploit their own mind as a proto-
type, or model, of the target’s mind. If different minds have the same fundamental processing char-
acteristics, and if the attributor puts her own mind in the same “starting-state” as the target’s and 
lets it be guided by her own cognitive mechanisms, mental mimicry may allow her to determine 
what the target is going to do. ST embraces this alternative hypothesis, depicted in Figure 25.2. 
I want an
espresso
Sergio’s is the best
espresso place
Pretend belief
Pretend desire or decision
Imagination faculty
KEY
Decision-making mechanism
I will go
to Sergio’s
Shaun will decide
to go to Sergio’s
 Figure 25.2   High-level ST mindreading process. Reproduced from Alvin I. Goldman, Joint Ventures: 
Mindreading, Mirroring, and Embodied Cognition, Figure 5.1 ©  Oxford University Press, 2013 with permis-
sion. For permission to reuse this material, please visit http://www.oup.co.uk/academic/rights/permissions.  

MINDREADING BY SIMULATION: THE ROLES OF IMAGINATION AND MIRRORING 
452
 A distinctive feature of Figure 25.2 is the presence of shaded shapes, which represent pretend 
states, i.e. products of pretense or imagination. Imagination is assumed to be a faculty that, when 
you wish to be in a speciﬁ ed mental state M, proceeds to construct an M-like state in you. By an 
“M-like state” we mean a state that is (at least functionally) very similar to a genuine state M, but 
would normally be produced by cognitive mechanisms other than imagination (e.g. perception, 
reasoning, emotion-generation). One crucial similarity between a genuine M-state and M-like 
state is that they produce similar output states when fed into a cognitive mechanism, for exam-
ple, a choice or decision-making mechanism. Figure 25.2 depicts the mindreader as construct-
ing a pretend desire (intended to “match” Shaun’s relevant desire or goal) and a pretend belief 
(intended to match Shaun’s relevant belief). These pretend states are fed into a decision-making 
mechanism, which operates over these inputs and generates an output state: a decision. This 
output state is also depicted by shading because it is still under the control of the imagination. 
Notice that Figure 25.2, unlike Figure 25.1, makes no reference to a factual reasoning mechanism 
or to a psychological theory of mental processes. The need for theoretical reasoning is replaced 
in ST by a simulation process, which in this case employs a decision-making mechanism that 
helps to replicate Shaun’s decision-making process. The simulation routine terminates when the 
decision-making mechanism outputs a decision. This decision is attributed to Shaun (as shown 
at the far right of the diagram), the attribution being a genuine (hence unshaded) belief of the 
mindreader. 
 Do any interesting predictions ﬂ ow from the simulationist model? One prediction is that if 
the mindreader’s imagination performs poorly in constructing the target’s starting state(s), the 
mindreading routine is not likely to succeed (be accurate). A second prediction requires more 
ground-laying. Mindreading by simulation runs the risk of letting the mindreader’s own mental 
states get entangled with the pretend ones. A mindreader, after all, will always have her own “genu-
ine” desires, beliefs, and intentions alongside the pretend ones. These genuine desires and thoughts 
must be segregated from the pretend ones, an activity that may not be trivial. There is a danger that 
genuine states will interfere with pretend ones, causing confusion and error. To avoid such entan-
glement, genuine states must be “quarantined” or “inhibited” to avoid confusion with mimicked 
states of the target. Thus, intensive use of simulation predicts a high incidence of mindreading 
error—speciﬁ cally, egocentric error, reﬂ ecting the penetration of the mindreader’s own genuine 
desires, beliefs, and emotions into the interpersonal tracking process. 
 Would egocentric errors be equally predicted by TT? Since a theorizing mindreader would also 
have her own thoughts running on a parallel track with those of the target, doesn’t she face an equal 
danger of interference? If so, egocentric mindreading errors will not constitute a discriminating 
test of the rival theories. We argue that the likelihood of interference is higher under ST than TT. 
Why? Because customary cognitive acts and processes are more similar to—hence easier to confuse 
with—states of mental mimicry posited by ST than the kinds of cognitive acts and processes pos-
ited by TT. Under TT, states deployed during mindreading are exclusively metarepresentational, 
whereas those deployed during simulation are ﬁ rst-order states. Hence, it should be easier for nor-
mal thoughts and plans to mistakenly encroach or insinuate themselves into simulated thoughts 
and plans than under theory-guided mindreading. 
 Now, the mindreading literature is replete with reports of egocentric errors, or biases (includ-
ing, but not restricted to, false-belief attribution errors). Much of it goes under the heading of 
“curse of knowledge,” a phrase originally introduced in a study of adults who were forewarned 
that their targets’ knowledge differed from their own, but nonetheless allowed their own knowl-
edge states to seep into attributions to their targets, generating poor task performance (Camerer, 

HIGH-LEVEL SIMULATIONAL MINDREADING
453
Loewenstein, & Weber, 1989; Nickerson, 1999). The same leakage phenomenon is found in chil-
dren (Birch & Bloom, 2003, 2004). For the reasons indicated, this lends greater support to ST as 
compared with TT.  3   
 Although ST easily comports with the observed pattern of egocentric biases, shouldn’t it predict 
much more error than is actually observed? Shouldn’t simulation lead to rampant error in virtue 
of the fact that pretend beliefs, desires, and emotions must surely be different from their genu-
ine counterparts? How can imagination-generated states resemble genuine states so closely that 
similar decisions or new beliefs get outputted when the pretend vs. genuine states are inputted 
into similar cognitive mechanisms? Is there really evidence for a tight enough similarity between 
pretend and genuine states to support high levels of mindreading accuracy? Yes. Cognitive sci-
ence and neuroscience is replete with evidence that imagination is powerful enough to produce 
states that closely match their counterparts. This is most thoroughly researched in the domains of 
visual and motoric imagery. Neuroscientiﬁ c studies conﬁ rm that visual and motor imagery has 
substantial neurological correspondence with vision and motor execution respectively (Kosslyn, 
Thompson, & Alpert, 1997, Kosslyn, Pascual-Leone, Felician, & Camposano, 1999; Jeannerod, 
2001). Chronometric studies of motor imagery are particularly striking (Decety, Jeannerod, & 
Preblanc, 1989; Currie & Ravenscroft, 2002, p. 75 ff). Just how powerful and accurate is imagina-
tion in non-perceptual and non-motoric cases, however? A recent study described in the section 
below entitled “The power of imagination” demonstrates the unexpected power of imagination, 
which should help deﬂ ate skepticism about simulation. 
 A major strand of the ST-TT debate has hinged on the plausibility of the thesis that a complex 
skill like mindreading is driven by a theory that unfolds during a child’s early years. Early defenders 
of (the child-scientist version of) TT claimed to ﬁ nd evidence that children revise their theory of 
belief between two and four years of age, yielding mature competence only around four (Wellman, 
1990; Perner, 1991; Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997). The details of this claim, however, were blown out of 
the water when Onishi & Baillargeon (2005) found false-belief competence (in non-verbal tasks) 
at 15 months of age. In many parts of cognitive science, however, there is impressive evidence of 
statistical learning (speciﬁ cally, Bayesian learning). Does this support a new form of TT as over 
against the simulation hypothesis? 
 A study by Baker, Saxe, & Tenenbaum (2009; cf. Baker, Saxe, & Tenenbaum, forthcoming) is a 
good example of an empirical defense of theory-based mindreading supported by Bayesian infer-
ence. They propose “a computational framework based on Bayesian inverse planning for modeling 
human action understanding … which represents an intuitive theory of intentional agents’ behav-
ior .… The mental states that caused an agent’s behavior are inferred by … Bayesian inference, 
integrating the likelihood of the observed actions with the prior over mental states” (2009, p.329). 
If the cognitive reality of this framework is indeed empirically sustained, as they claim, doesn’t it 
decisively support TT over ST? 
 Interestingly, Baker and colleagues themselves concede that their ﬁ ndings do not favor TT over 
ST. The reason is that mindreaders who use Bayesian methods to ascribe mental states to others 
 3   The reasoning relies on Bayesian conditionalization. When the likelihood of O given H 1 is greater than 
the likelihood of O given H 2 , observation of O will increase the posterior probability of H 1  more than it 
increases the posterior probability of H 2 . The present contrast between ST and TT is aimed mainly at the 
child-scientist version of TT. As reported above, Leslie’s form of modularity theory shares with ST a reliance 
on inhibitory mechanisms.  

MINDREADING BY SIMULATION: THE ROLES OF IMAGINATION AND MIRRORING 
454
may simply be running their Bayesian reasoning capacity as a simulation of the target. Thus, as 
Baker et al. write:
 [T]he models we propose here could be sensibly interpreted under either account. . . . On a simulation 
account, goal inference is performed by inverting one’s own planning process—the planning mecha-
nism used in model-based reinforcement learning—to infer the goals most likely to have generated 
another agent’s observed behavior. (2009, p.347) 
 Low-level simulational mindreading  
 The best evidence for low-level simulational mindreading, we submit, is found in research on emo-
tion  mirroring . First we examine evidence for the existence of mirroring, that is, mental-state conta-
gion. Then we present evidence that mirrored states are used as the causal basis for mindreading. 
 Both animal and human studies show that the anterior insula is the “gustatory cortex” and pri-
mary locus of the primitive distaste response, disgust (Rozin, Haidt, & McCauley, 2000; Phillips, 
Young, Senior, Brammer, Andrew, Calder, et al., 1997). Against this background, Wicker, Keysers, 
Plailly, Royet, Gallese, & Rizzolatti (2003) performed a functional imaging study in which partici-
pants ﬁ rst viewed movies of other people smelling the contents of a glass (disgusting, pleasant, or 
neutral) and displaying congruent facial expressions. After ﬁ rst serving in this observer capacity, 
the same participants then had their own brains scanned while inhaling disgusting or pleasant 
odorants through a mask on the nose and mouth. The core ﬁ nding was that the left anterior insula 
and the right anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) were preferentially activated both during the inhal-
ing of disgusting odorants and during the observation of facial expressions of disgust. Thus, there 
is indeed mirroring (or contagion) for disgust. 
 This study presented no evidence concerning the mindreading of disgust (via observed facial 
expressions). For evidence that mindreading  is based on mirrored disgust, however, we turn to 
neuropsychology. Patient NK, studied by Calder et al. (2000), suffered damage to the insula and 
basal ganglia. In questionnaire responses NK showed himself to be selectively impaired in experi-
encing disgust. He was also signiﬁ cantly and selectively impaired in recognizing—that is, attribut-
ing—disgust. It is hard to explain why NK would have this paired deﬁ cit unless the experience of 
disgust is (normally) causally involved in its attribution. A paired deﬁ cit in experience and attri-
bution of disgust seems to be most readily explicable on the assumption that disgust attribution 
(in observational circumstances) is mediated by its experience. In other words, a normal person 
uses his intact disgust-experience system to attribute disgust to others. Note that NK was normal 
with respect to attributing other emotions via observation of facial expressions. Nor was a visual 
deﬁ cit a possible explanation, since NK had the same selective deﬁ cit in attributing disgust based 
on non-verbal sounds. Similar ﬁ ndings exist with respect to fear and the amygdala (Goldman & 
Sripada, 2005; Goldman, 2006: 115 ff). 
 TT proponents have not offered any systematic account of these ﬁ ndings. One cannot appeal to 
damage to a hypothesized theorizing system to account for the disgust-attribution impairment, 
because the relevant patients performed normally when attributing other emotions based on facial 
or auditory stimuli. Is there a separate theorizing system for each distinct emotion, and was such 
a theorizing system coincidentally impaired when disgust experience was impaired? Recalling our 
criteria of adequacy proposed in section 1, the absence of any story of face-based emotion mind-
reading is a signiﬁ cant count against TT. 
 Sensations such as pain are another sub-category of low-level mindreading. The most relevant 
studies here are by Avenanti, Bueti, Galati, & Aglioti (2005), and Avenanti, Paluello, Bufalari, & 
Aglioti (2006). When a participant experiences pain, motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) elicited by 

LOW-LEVEL SIMULATIONAL MINDREADING
455
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) indicate a marked reduction of corticospinal excitabil-
ity. Avenanti and colleagues found a similar reduction of excitability when participants merely 
observed someone else receiving a painful stimulus, for example, a sharp needle being pushed into 
his hand. Thus, there appeared to be mirroring of pain in the observer. Moreover, when Avenanti 
and colleagues had participants judge the intensity of pain purportedly felt by a model, judgments 
of sensory pain seemed to be based on the mirroring of pain experienced by the participant. 
 The conclusion that mirrored pain is the causal basis of pain attribution is clouded a bit, how-
ever, by Danziger, Faillernot, & Peyron’s (2009) ﬁ ndings from twelve patients with congenital 
insensitivity to pain. Compared to normal controls in pain recognition tasks, these patients did 
not differ much in their estimates of the painfulness to other people of various verbally described 
events. Nor did they differ much from controls in their estimates of degree of pain judged on the 
basis of facial expression. However, as Carruthers (2011) points out, these individuals with con-
genital insensitivity to pain may have acquired a different route to pain mindreading than normal 
people. The ﬁ ndings do not disprove the hypothesis (which Danziger and colleagues embrace) that 
normal subjects use simulation in reaching their judgments of pain attribution. 
 Carruthers presses problems for another putative example of low-level simulational mindread-
ing, one concerning face-based mindreading of fear. Adolphs studied a patient, SM, who had a 
paired-deﬁ cit for fear perfectly analogous to the one for disgust displayed by NM. SM, who suffers 
from bilateral amygdala damage, lacks normal experience of fear and was also selectively impaired 
in fear attribution. This suggests that the mindreading of fear, like disgust, is ripe for interpretation 
in simulational terms. However, a later study of SM (Adolphs, Gosselin, Buchanan, Tranel, Schyns, 
& Damasio, 2005) showed that she was abnormal in scanning her target’s eye areas. When she was 
directed to scan the eyes thoroughly, she improved on fear attribution. Thus, use of fear experience 
is apparently not strictly necessary for face-based fear attribution, which ostensibly runs counter 
to a low-level simulational story for fear attribution. However, we can make a similar hypothesis 
about this case as Carruthers does for those patients congenitally insensitive to pain. Perhaps SM 
simply developed (under instructions) a skill for face-based mindreading that differs from the 
simulation heuristic used by normal subjects. 
 Moreover, other patients with amygdala damage have been studied, with results that support 
the ST story. Sprengelmeyer, Young, Schroeder, Grossenbacher, Federlein, Buttner, et al. (1999) 
studied patient NM, who showed selective fear-recognition impairment not only using visual face 
observation, but also using postural and vocal emotional stimuli. These recognition impairments 
of NM cannot be explained by appeal to inadequate facial scanning, because the targets’ eyes were 
not visible during the bodily posture task, and played no role in the vocal expression task. So it 
seems that fear impairment due to amygdala damage does indeed provide a causal explanation of 
NM’s recognition impairment, in conformity with the ST account. 
 Even if one grants that mental attribution in these cases is caused by the mirroring of others’ emo-
tions and sensations, one might balk at the idea that this qualiﬁ es as  simulation -based attribution. Why 
does it so qualify? Here is our answer. Consider the diagram in Figure 25.3, where an unshaded shape 
(on the left side of the diagram, depicting mental states of the target) represents an actual occurrence 
of disgust and a shaded shape (on the right side of the diagram, depicting states of the observer) rep-
resents an observation-induced disgust experience. Just as the Figure 25.2 mindreader imputes a spe-
ciﬁ c decision to her target because she herself “makes” that very decision, so the Figure 25.3 observer 
undergoes a mirrored experience of disgust, classiﬁ es it as an instance of disgust, and projects—i.e. 
imputes—it to the target. Such a projection of a self-experienced state is a signature of simulational 
mindreading. Thus, it seems reasonable to regard this as a species of simulation and simulation-based 
mindreading, even though it is distinguishable from high-level simulational mindreading in some 

MINDREADING BY SIMULATION: THE ROLES OF IMAGINATION AND MIRRORING 
456
respects (for example, by not being a product of imagination). Both cases involve a process of (genu-
ine or attempted) mental matching between attributor states and target states. The mirror-produced 
mindreading may be called a  single-step  simulation process because simulation takes place more or 
less directly, whereas the decision case is a  multi-step  simulation process.      
 Our discussion thus far reviews older evidence pertaining to high- and low-level simulational 
mindreading. In the remainder of the chapter we adduce more recent lines of evidence and assess 
their bearing on simulation theory and its competitors. 
 The power of imagination  
 As noted under “High-level simulational mindreading,” ST implies that mindreaders’ success in 
high-level mindreading depends on their ability to enact starting states that sufﬁ ciently match 
those of the target. It follows that if simulational mindreading is to succeed, imagination must be 
a highly precise mechanism, capable not only of generating suitable pretend states, but of ﬁ rmly 
holding their progeny in mind while a multi-step simulational exercise unfolds. What is called for 
is no minor feat. Is the human imagination powerful enough to meet the challenge? 
 What exactly does it mean to say that we imagine things from another person’s perspec-
tive? In what sense are mindreaders capable of imagining how a target thinks or feels? The 
sense of imagination we have in mind is a kind of enactment imagination, or E-imagination 
(Goldman, 2006, Chapter 7). To E-imagine a state is to recreate the feeling of a state, or conjure 
up what it is like to experience that state—in a sense, to enact that very state. To E-imagine 
feeling embarrassed involves using one’s imagination to create inside oneself a pretend state 
that phenomenally feels somewhat like embarrassment. This enactment sense of imagination 
should be distinguished from another everyday notion of imagination that consists in imagin-
ing that such-and-such is the case (as if someone asked you to imagine that you are embar-
rassed.). This ordinary sense of “imagine” means something like suppose or assume that you 
are embarrassed—which merely requires you to think about or consider a hypothetical situa-
tion of embarrassment. It does not require you to conjure up in yourself something resembling 
the feeling of embarrassment.  4  
State of the Target
Disgust states
Facial expression of disgust
Perception of facial disgust
KEY
Mirrored disgust 
States of the Observer-mindreader
Target is
disgusted
 Figure 25.3   Low-level ST mindreading process.  Reproduced from Alvin I. Goldman, Joint Ventures: 
Mindreading, Mirroring, and Embodied Cognition, Figure 5.1 ©  Oxford University Press, 2013 with permis-
sion. For permission to reuse this material, please visit http://www.oup.co.uk/academic/rights/permissions.  
 4    We intend our use of the word ‘imagination’ to be understood in the E-imagination sense. 

THE POWER OF IMAGINATION
457
 Inspired by evidence of similarities between perception and mental imagery, researchers recently 
conducted a study to test the effect of imagined eating on actual subsequent eating (Morewedge, 
Huh, & Vosgerau, 2010). The results indicate a striking similarity between the states that result 
from actual eating and those that result from merely imagined eating—namely, both activities 
result in habituation to the presented stimulus. A series of experiments were conducted to ensure 
that it was in fact the act of imagining eating that led to a decrease in consumption, and that this 
decrease in consumption was, indeed, an effect of habituation. The important experiments and 
results for our purposes are summarized next. 
 The ﬁ rst experiment was designed to test whether repeatedly imagining consuming a particular 
food would inﬂ uence subsequent consumption of that food. Participants were divided into three 
groups, each of which imagined performing 33 repetitive actions. The control group imagined 
putting 33 quarters into a laundry machine (an action similar to putting M & M’s in one’s mouth); 
the second group imagined putting 30 quarters into a laundry machine and then eating 3 M & M’s; 
and the third group imagined putting 3 quarters into a laundry machine and then eating 30 M & 
M’s. All participants then ate freely from a bowl of M & M’s until they indicated that they were 
ﬁ nished eating. How much each participant ate from the bowl was measured and compared. The 
results showed that participants who imagined eating 30 M & M’s subsequently ate signiﬁ cantly 
fewer M & M’s than participants in the other groups. 
 Another experiment tested whether the decrease in consumption was due to habituation or if 
it was a priming effect resulting from repeated exposure to the stimulus. This time participants 
either imagined eating 3 or 30 M & M’s or they imagined putting 3 or 30 M & M’s into a bowl; 
then, as before, participants ate freely from a bowl of M & M’s. Again, results revealed that subjects 
who imagined eating 30 M & M’s ate signiﬁ cantly less than those who only imagined eating 3; but 
results also showed that subjects who imagined putting 30 M & M’s in a bowl ended up eating 
signiﬁ cantly more than subjects who imagined putting only 3 in a bowl. This experiment strongly 
suggests that not only is priming not the cause of the decrease in consumption, but may even have 
the opposite effect of increasing subsequent food intake. A further experiment was designed to 
determine if imaginary eating was habituating people to particular food (causing them to eat less 
of it), or if it was an overall primed feeling of “fullness” responsible for the decrease in food intake. 
Here participants imagined eating either 3 or 30 M & M’s or cubes of cheese, and then ate freely 
from a bowl of cheese cubes. The participants who imagined eating 30 cubes ate signiﬁ cantly less 
than those who imagined eating 3; but participants who imagined eating 30 M & M’s did not differ 
in subsequent cheese consumption from those who imagined eating 3 M & M’s. Thus, it seems that 
the effect of imaginary eating is stimulus speciﬁ c—providing additional evidence that the reduc-
tion in food intake is a result of habituation, and not of priming. 
 The results of this study are striking. Merely imagining eating can impact how much we actu-
ally eat. But how is a study concerning food consumption relevant to mindreading? We argue 
that this study is easily interpreted as a demonstration of the power of imagination, and to that 
extent supports our version of ST. In order for the case to be convincing, there are two things that 
need to be established: (1) the study’s use of imaginary eating counts as an instance of imagina-
tion in our enactment sense of the word, and (2) the states generated by the imagination really 
do appropriately resemble their actual counterparts. Our ﬁ rst task is relatively straightforward 
given the study’s experimental design. Participants in the ﬁ rst experiment were asked to repeatedly 
imagine themselves eating units of food one at a time, not merely to imagine that they had eaten 
a certain amount of food. Furthermore, results indicated that merely thinking about a particu-
lar food repeatedly was not enough. For the habituation effect to occur a person had to actually 
imagine undergoing the experience of eating a particular food. However, this is just how we have 

MINDREADING BY SIMULATION: THE ROLES OF IMAGINATION AND MIRRORING 
458
characterized an act of enactment imagination: as an attempt to re-enact or re-experience a par-
ticular feeling or state. 
 What about our second task? Have Morewedge and colleagues shown that imagining eating 
is capable of producing accurate pretend states, similar to those that result from actually eating? 
When a person actually eats a particular food, they gradually habituate. Their desire to eat the 
food, along with the motivation to obtain it, gradually decreases. If presented with a different 
food, however, the person’s desire and motivation recover. This implies that habituation effects 
are stimulus speciﬁ c (Epstein, Saad, Handley, Roemmich, Hawk, & McSweeney, 2003). If this is 
what happens when we actually eat, then something sufﬁ ciently similar to habituation should 
result when we repeatedly imagine ourselves eating: additionally, it should be the case that if we 
imagine eating something only a few times we do not habituate. The results of the Morewedge et 
al. study clearly demonstrate that imagined eating results in habituation, similar to when a person 
has actually eaten. Furthermore, given that habituation effects are stimulus speciﬁ c the imagined 
consumption of a particular food should cause a person to habituate to that food only. As the study 
demonstrates, this is exactly what happens. 
 Imagined consumption is a clear instance of enactment imagination as well as of the resem-
blance that can obtain between imagination-induced states and their genuine counterparts. But 
imaginary eating is not a case of mindreading. Can more be done to make the connection between 
this research and simulational mindreading clear? After all, if ST is right, mindreaders use their 
imagination in tasks involving a variety of mental states. So we need to establish that imagination 
can produce pretend states that closely resemble actual states across a respectable spectrum of 
cases. We maintain that research on imagined consumption gives us reason to think the imagina-
tion has this capacity. 
 According to Morewedge et al., “Habituation to food occurs too quickly for it to result from 
digestive feedback, so it is commonly thought to occur as a result of top-down cognitive processes 
(such as beliefs, memories, or expectations) or pre-ingestive sensory factors (such as texture or 
smell)” (2010, p.1531). This study demonstrates that habituation can occur as a result of imagina-
tion alone, without any inﬂ uence from sensory information. This is signiﬁ cant because habitua-
tion is a very general phenomenon, speciﬁ c neither to food nor to eating. Research indicates that 
we habituate to a wide range of complex emotions, attitudes, feelings, and moods: from states of 
happiness and love to states of fear and anxiety (Solomon, 1980). This study conﬁ rms that the 
power of imagination could be very general indeed.  5 
 Mindreading acquisition  
 Recall that our second criterion of adequacy requires a comprehensive theory of mindreading to 
give a plausible, empirically sustainable story about how the mindreading capacity is acquired. 
Past research on the time-course of childhood mentalizing had important implications for theo-
ries of how mindreading is acquired, such as the child-scientist approach to theory-theory. This 
 5   Additional conﬁ rmatory evidence comes from research on memory distortion involving imagination 
(Schacter, Guerin, & St Jacques, 2011). A study by Mazzoni & Memon (2003) indicated that the strength 
of subjects’ beliefs that events occurred increased more when they imagined events than when they simply 
read about them. Nash et al. (2009) showed that imagining that one has performed an act produces about 
as many false memories of actually having done it as viewing a doctored video that suggests that one did 
perform the act. 

MINDREADING ACQUISITION
459
approach claims that mental-state attributions are driven by naive psychological theories that are 
initiated and gradually revised in the early years. This claim has been increasingly undercut, how-
ever, by recent research revealing sensitivity to false beliefs even in pre-verbal infants (e.g. Onishi 
& Baillargeon, 2005). 
 How does the simulation theory ﬁ t with such evidence? What is ST’s position on the acquisition 
of the mentalizing capacity? ST does not take a ﬁ rm stance vis- à -vis nativism. It is prepared to 
“go with the ﬂ ow” of evidence. For example, it is prepared to say that the processes or methods of 
mindreading (or dispositions to use such processes) are part of our native endowment. It might be 
more skeptical about claims that particular mental-state concepts (belief, desire, pleasure, etc.) are 
all innate. It is prepared, however, to accommodate the former type of nativism if empirical stud-
ies provide warrant for this position. ST’s theoretical apparatus does not preclude such strands of 
nativism. Indeed, one might say something stronger from the vantage-point of ST. If imagination 
is an innate capacity, perhaps young infants automatically compute imaginary states for people 
around them. Then we would expect the practice of generating imaginary states to be no more 
cognitively demanding than one’s own largely automatic production of mental states. This section 
will discuss how well such expectations comport with recent evidence in developmental psychol-
ogy. Our primary focus is a compelling new study conducted by Kovacs, Teglas, & Endress, (2010) 
plus the simulational hypothesis we claim to be consistent with this study. 6 
 Unlike standard false-belief tasks, this study was designed to investigate mindreading mecha-
nisms implicitly—making no reference to others’ beliefs, and not requiring any behavioral pre-
dictions based on others’ beliefs. The study had two components: one testing the reaction time 
(RT) of adult participants and the other measuring the looking time (LT) of 7-month-old infants. 
Participants watched a series of short movies involving an animated agent, a ball, and a table with 
an occluder. At the beginning of each movie the animated agent entered the scene and placed the 
ball on the table in front of the occluder. 7 The ball then rolled behind the occluder. At this point, 
depending on the experiment, the ball either stayed in place or rolled off the screen. Then the agent 
left the scene. The ball’s ﬁ nal location and the time the agent left the scene were varied, such that 
the agent would have a true belief about the ball’s location if he left after the ball reached its ﬁ nal 
location and a false belief if he left before. The critical variables involved the participant’s beliefs 
about the ball’s presence or absence and the agent’s “beliefs,” such that the participant, the agent, 
both, or neither could believe the ball was behind the occluder (Kovacs, Teglas, & Endress 2010, 
p. 1831). At the end of the movie, the agent re-entered the scene and the occluder was lowered, 
revealing the ball to be either present or absent. Adult participants were instructed to press a but-
ton as soon as they detected the ball. Their RTs and the infants’ LTs were measured in each of the 
four conditions. 
 The experimental conditions, for both adults and infants, were compared to a baseline condition 
where neither the participants nor the agent believed the ball to be behind the occluder. 8 The most 
important experiment with adult participants was one in which only the agent believed the ball 
 6    Although we focus on the results of the Kovacs et al. study, we ﬁ nd the wording of their study potentially 
misleading and worry that it may not convey the researchers’ true intentions. Because of this, we will out-
line the results as reported in the study, but the conclusions drawn will be our own and are not intended to 
match those of the authors.  
 7   ‘Agent’ always refers to the animated character in the ﬁ lm and ‘participant’ refers to the adult or infant par-
ticipant in the study. 
 8   However, recall that in none of the conditions were the agent’s beliefs relevant to the task.  

MINDREADING BY SIMULATION: THE ROLES OF IMAGINATION AND MIRRORING 
460
to be behind the occluder. Results indicated that participants’ RTs were faster in this case than in 
the baseline condition, despite no difference in the participants’ beliefs in either condition. Kovacs 
et al. take this result to demonstrate that the participants not only automatically computed the 
agents’ beliefs, but that these beliefs inﬂ uenced the participants’ behavior, despite the agents’ beliefs 
being inconsistent with their own (1832). Additionally, the participants’ RTs did not signiﬁ cantly 
differ when only the agent believed the ball to be behind the occluder and when they themselves 
believed it to be. Kovacs et al. further conclude: “Thus both types of belief representations speeded 
up the participants’ RTs to similar extents, a result consistent with the view that the agent’s beliefs 
are stored similarly to participants’ own representations about the environment” (2010, p.1832). 
 The crucial results with the infant participants similarly involved a comparison between the 
infants’ LTs in two conditions: one in which only the agent believed the ball to be behind the 
occluder and the other in which neither the infant nor the agent believed the ball to be there. When 
no ball appeared behind the occluder, the infants looked longer (indicating their “surprise” by the 
outcome) in the condition where only the agent believed, or expected, the ball to be there. Again, 
this suggests not only that the infants computed the agent’s belief, but also that this belief inﬂ u-
enced the infants’ behavior despite conﬂ icting with their own (genuine) beliefs. It is similarly inter-
esting that with both adults and infants, very similar results obtained even when the agent did not 
return to the scene and thus was not present when the occlusion was lowered. Infants and adults 
seemed to compute and maintain the agent’s beliefs even when the agent was no longer present. 
 What do these results mean for the study of mindreading? More speciﬁ cally, how do they ﬁ t with 
what ST says about mindreading? Concerning the question of acquisition, the infant results are of 
primary interest. How do they ﬁ t with theory-driven vs. simulation-driven mindreading processes 
depicted in Figures 25.1 and 25.2 respectively? A Figure 25.1-type story would say that at 7 months 
of age infants not only compute the beliefs of other agents, but that these computations are based 
on the infants’ beliefs about the beliefs of the agent. In other words, TT-type explanations rely on 
the infants’ possession of relatively complex metarepresentational states, plus their possession of 
some body of psychological laws or generalizations.  9   Thus, TT’s approach to mindreading is infor-
mation rich, and requires a degree of cognitive or informational sophistication that one be may 
hesitant to attribute to 7-month-old infants. 
 By contrast, the Figure 25.2-type story suggests that the same sort of tracking of the agent’s 
thoughts has another, simpler interpretation. ST implies that infants track an agent’s perspective 
in the same way they maintain their own perspective. Just as infants have their own current repre-
sentations of the environment, they also track other possible states of the environment. This sort 
of explanation, in contrast to Figure 25.1-type theories, is an information-poor approach, because 
it does not attribute to the infants any additional theoretical knowledge or metarepresentational 
states. To perform perspective computations, ST only requires that infants possess states with 
object-level representational content—information about the way the world seems from the shoes 
of the agent. This means that infants may track the content of an agent’s belief (possible states of 
the environment) without encoding anything concerning his beliefs or other mental states. 
 Given what we have said so far, ST is in as good a position as TT to account for the Kovacs study. 
Might there be reasons to think it may be in a better position to explain its ﬁ ndings? We argue that 
there are. First of all, TT has to say that pre-verbal infants compute metarepresentations. Is it psy-
chologically plausible to impute such cognitively complex mental states to infants? Would it not be 
 9   Depending on the particular TT-type approach we are discussing, such theories may also require that 
infants possess other complex theoretical beliefs about human psychology. 

THE NEURAL BASIS OF MINDREADING
461
preferable, if possible, to account for the infants’ behavior without attributing to them such extra 
computational work or informational baggage? If so, then the ST explanation is clearly preferable, 
because it accounts for the evidence without positing the extra complexity of metarepresentational 
states or a body of psychological generalizations. 
 Concerning the question of acquisition, there are other reasons to think the Kovacs study sup-
ports a simulation story about mindreading. What this study shows, we have claimed, is that 
7-month-old infants generate representations of the world that reﬂ ect another person’s perspec-
tive—but to represent the world as it seems to another person just is to use one’s imagination. 10 
Although it seems unlikely that at 7 months infants engage in explicit acts of mindreading (i.e. 
attribution of mental states to others), they certainly appear to engage in mindreading-like activ-
ity; furthermore, this mindreading-like activity involves use of their imagination. This means that 
before they ever engage in a single act of mindreading, infants are already experienced imaginers. 
By the time they get to the point of attributing mental states to other people, they have spent years 
spontaneously and automatically imagining the world from other people’s perspectives. 
 The neural basis of mindreading  
 Now we apply the third question of adequacy to our version of simulation theory: Is this theory 
 neurally plausible , given available empirical evidence? One issue is whether recent evidence from 
cognitive neuroscience supports (or is consistent with) the claim that simulation is a common 
method, if not the predominant method, of mindreading. A second issue is whether neuroscience 
supports our speciﬁ c version of ST, i.e. a bi-level or duplex version of ST. Because neuroscientiﬁ c 
evidence was already adduced in support of the existence of mirroring and the grounds for linking 
it to ST, we won’t say more about the ﬁ rst issue. We shall concentrate on the second. 
 Waytz & Mitchell (2011) present the neuroscientiﬁ c case for a duplex model of simulational 
mindreading as follows. First, they review the extensive evidence of multiple mirroring phenom-
ena, sometimes referred to as “shared neural representations.” These include regions in the inferior 
frontal cortex and superior parietal lobe (i.e. the parieto-frontal circuit) which are involved in 
the production and observation of goal-directed motor action. 11 They also include a wide range 
of regions for the mirroring of pain, touch, disgust, and fear (cf. Rizzolatti & Sinigaglia, 2008). 
Networks in these areas are what we treated under the heading of low-level simulation. 
 Another set of brain regions has been identiﬁ ed, however, that serves as a substrate for what 
Buckner & Carroll (2007) call self-projection. These regions, known collectively as the “default net-
work” (Raichle, MacLeod, Snyder, Powers, Gusnard, & Shulman, 2001), consist of the medial pre-
frontal cortex, precuneus and posterior cingulate, and lateral parietal cortex. The default network 
 10   This is where our conclusions may come apart from those drawn by Kovacs et al. While the conclusions 
drawn in the study seem to claim that 7-month-old infants are representing the beliefs of the agent along-
side their own beliefs; we claim that the results of this study only demonstrate that infants are generating 
representations of the world that reﬂ ect what the target’s or agent’s beliefs  would be (not that they represent 
them  as beliefs). Furthermore, the study itself makes no mention of the imagination—rather, the results 
demonstrate that infants engage in an activity that epitomizes our conception of the use of imagination in 
simulation. 
 11   The mirroring theory has characteristically claimed that mirroring is used to understand the actions of oth-
ers. There is continuing debate, however, over which speciﬁ c brain networks comprise the action-observation 
system, and how exactly they function. For example, Kilmer (2011) defends a two-pathway model of action 
understanding, featuring a dorsal pathway in addition to the initially discovered ventral pathway. 

MINDREADING BY SIMULATION: THE ROLES OF IMAGINATION AND MIRRORING 
462
has repeatedly been linked to tasks in which people imagine experiencing ﬁ ctitious events, con-
sider the possibility of experiencing speciﬁ ed events in the future, or recall their experiences from 
the past. It has also been reported by studies in which participants contemplated other people’s 
mental states (Frith & Frith, 2003). Thus, the default network is an excellent candidate for the 
neural substrate of high-level simulational mindreading. Moreover, this network seems to be quite 
different (non-identical) from any of the circuits or processes involved in mirroring. 
 Finally, Waytz & Mitchell point out that there are dissociable functions of mirroring and 
self-projection. Perceivers mirror only when they see or hear another person’s physical actions, 
observe an emotional expression, or witness a painful situation such as a needle penetrating a 
hand. But mindreading also occurs when subjects represent targets who are not immediately 
present, and hence are not observable. Such targets include ﬁ ctitious individuals or individuals 
known only by description, where no observable cues are available. Waytz & Mitchell consider this 
a demonstration of a dissociation between mirroring and self-projection. They cite a mentalizing 
study by Zaki, Hennigan, Weber, & Ochsner (2010) in which participants inferred a target’s emo-
tional state under three conditions: during perceptually cued trials, during context-only trials, and 
when participants had both perceptual and contextual information. Consistent with the proposed 
division of labor between two systems of mentalizing, they found that perceptual cues tended to 
elicit stronger activation in mirror-related brain regions (the fronto-parietal circuit) whereas con-
textual cues engaged the default network. 
 Lombardo, Chakraharti, Bullmore, Wheelwright, Sadek, Suckling, et al. (2010) take a somewhat 
different perspective on the two-systems approach based on their ﬁ nding of functional connectiv-
ity patterns during mentalizing of both self and other. They don’t deny the dissociability claim of 
Waytz & Mitchell, but they argue that the functional connectivity patterns revealed in their studies 
support a slightly different picture than the one offered here. Indeed, they advance the thesis that 
some aspects of both high-level and low-level social cognitive processes are “grounded” within 
a framework of embodied cognition. We don’t believe that there are fundamental differences 
between their view and ours. At any rate, we ﬁ nd no reason to disagree with a very similar picture 
presented by Zaki & Ochsner (2012), who also stress functional connectivity between the two sys-
tems during experiences of empathy. As Zaki & Ochsner express it, “naturalistic” (i.e. ecologically 
valid) situations involve many dynamic social cues (featuring both sensorimotor and contextual 
information), and such cues unsurprisingly generate dynamical neural interactions among sim-
pler processes (low-level and high-level processes). These more complex processes could not be 
understood, Zaki & Ochsner acknowledge, without a prior understanding of the simpler processes 
in isolation, which are coupled during complex social tasks (2012: 678). By our lights, this is a 
reasonably clear recognition that there  are simpler processes, which we take to be the low-level and 
high-level families of processes of our model.  12 It is the existence and distinctness of these “sim-
pler” processes that comprise the core thesis defended in this section. 
 ST’s “mesh” with evolutionary theory  
 We turn ﬁ nally (and brieﬂ y) to the fourth question of section 1—“Does our theory mesh with 
successful theories in other cognitive domains and with plausible accounts of the architecture and 
 12   One non-trivial point of difference, however, is that Zaki and Ochsner identify the higher-level processes as 
“mentalizing” processes, implying that lower-level (“shared representation”) processes are not involved in 
mentalizing. By contrast, we claim that the latter also serve as a causal basis of mentalizing. 

463
REFERENCES
evolution of cognition?” Do successful theories of other parts of cognition invoke similar explana-
tory faculties or processes, and does a reasonable account of brain evolution ﬁ nd a natural home 
for simulationist stories of mindreading? 
 Begin with ST’s account of high-level mindreading, in which imagination occupies a central 
role. It makes good sense, we submit, to assign a pivotal role to imagination because this faculty 
has demonstrated its power and versatility in many other domains of cognition. Its robust power 
and versatility are amply exhibited in such diverse phenomena as visual and motor imagery, the 
planning of action sequences, and the reduction of food consumption. With respect to low-level 
mindreading, the discovery of mirror neurons and mirror systems has revolutionized research 
and thinking about many aspects of low-level cognition (Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004; Gallese, 
Keysers, & Rizzolatti, 2004). Contemporary social neuroscience is replete with new insights related 
to mirroring. A primitive kind of mindreading based on mirroring is a good ﬁ t with much of this 
literature. 
 ST also comports well with current understandings of brain evolution. As Anderson (2010) tells 
the story, it is very common for neural circuits originally established for one purpose to be exapt-
ed—that is, exploited, recycled, redeployed—during evolution and put to different uses, without 
necessarily losing their original functions. Nature has a pervasive strategy of opportunistically 
exploiting existing neural hardware to solve new problems—or to create new solutions to old 
problems. Creating whole brain structures de novo in order to tackle problems would be expensive. 
Instead, nature prefers a redeployment strategy. This idea meshes well with ST’s story of low-level 
mindreading. So, for example, suppose that nature had earlier hit upon the strategy of devising 
mechanisms by which shared representations are generated in the heads of two interacting indi-
viduals. A mental representation (or event) in one individual’s brain leads to the generation of a 
matching representation (or event) in an observer. Once this kind of interpersonal transmission 
mechanism has evolved, members of the species can secure valuable information by piggy-backing 
a mental attribution mechanism on top of the shared-representation, or mirroring, mechanism. 
This is a cheap way to create a reliable mindreading device. It would be unsurprising if something 
like this evolutionary story were true. 
 This is what we mean in saying that ST “meshes” well with what is known, or reasonably believed, 
about brain evolution. According to many philosophers of science, consilience with existing theory 
is one form of evidence for a new theory. Thus, another chunk of evidential support is added in 
favor of ST, on top of the more direct kinds of evidence presented in preceding sections. 
 References 
 Adolphs, R., Gosselin, F., Buchanan, T. W., Tranel, D., Schyns, P., & Damasio, A. R. (2005) . A mechanism 
for impaired fear recognition aft er amygdala damage.  Nature  433 :  68–72 . 
 Anderson, M. L. (2010) . Neural reuse: A fundamental organizational principle of the brain.  Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences  33 :  245–66 . 
 Apperly, I. A. (2011).  Mindreaders: Th e Cognitive Basis of Th eory of Mind.  Hove :  Psychology Press . 
 Apperly, I. A., & Butterfi ll, S. A. (2009).  Do humans have two systems to track beliefs and belief-like states? 
 Psychological Review  116 (4):  953–70 . 
 Avenanti, A., Bueti, D., Galati, G., & Aglioti, S. M. (2005) . Transcranial magnetic stimulation highlights 
the sensorimotor side of empathy for pain.  Nature Neuroscience  8 :  955–60 . 
 Avenanti, A., Paluello, I. M., Bufalari, J., & Aglioti, S. M. (2006) . Stimulus-driven modulation of 
motor-evoked potentials during observation of others’ pain.  NeuroImage  32 :  316–24 . 
 Baker, C. L., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009) . Action understanding as inverse planning.  Cognition  113 : 
 329–49 . 

MINDREADING BY SIMULATION: THE ROLES OF IMAGINATION AND MIRRORING 
464
 Baker, C. L., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2012) . Bayesian theory of mind: Modeling joint belief-desire 
attribution. In:  Proceedings of the Th irty-Th ird Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 
2469–74). 
 Baron-Cohen, S. (1995).  Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism and Th eory of Mind .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Birch, S. A. J., & Bloom, P. (2003) . Children are cursed: an asymmetric bias in mental-state attribution. 
 Psychological Science  14 :  283–6 . 
 Birch, S. A. J., & Bloom, P. (2004) . Understanding children’s and adults’ limitations in mental state 
reasoning.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences  8 :  255–60 . 
 Buckner, R. L., & Carroll, D. C. (2007) . Self-projection and the brain.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences  11 : 
 49–57 . 
 Calder, A. J., Keane, J., Manes, F., Antoun, N., & Young, A. W. (2000). Impaired recognition and 
experience of disgust following brain injury.  Nature Neuroscience  3 : 1077–1078. 
 Camerer, C., Loewenstein, G., & Weber, M. (1989) . Th e curse of knowledge in economic settings: an 
experimental analysis.  Journal of Political Economy  97 :  1232–54 . 
 Carruthers, P. (2011) . Opacity of Mind.  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Csibra, G., Biro, S., Koos, O., & Gergely, G. (2003) . One-year old infants use teleological representations of 
actions productively.  Cognitive Science  27 :  111–33 . 
 Currie, G., & Ravenscroft , I. (2002) . Recreative Minds.  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Danziger, N., Faillernot, I., & Peyron, R. (2009) . Can we share a pain we never felt? Neural correlates of 
empathy in patients with congenital insensitivity to pain.  Neuron  61 :  203–12 . 
 Decety, J., Jeannerod, M., & Preblanc, C. (1989) . Th e timing of mentally represented actions.  Behavioral 
and Brain Research  34 :  35–42 
 Decety, J., & Greze, J. (2006) . Th e power of simulation: Imagining one’s own and other’s behavior.  Brain 
Research  1079 :  4–14 . 
 Dennett, D. (1987) . Th e Intentional Stance.  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Epstein, L. H., Saad, F. G., Handley, E. A., Roemmich, J. N., Hawk, L. W., & McSweeney, F. K. (2003) . 
Habituation of salivation and motivated responding for food in children.  Appetite  41 (3):  283–9 . 
 Frith, U., & Frith, C. D. (2003) . Development and neurophysiology of mentalizing.  Philosophical 
Transaction of the Royal Society of London, Series B: Biological Sciences  459 :  358 . 
 Gallese, V. (2007).  Before and below “theory of mind”: embodied simulation and the neural correlates of 
social cognition .  Philosophical Transactions of Royal Society B: Biology  362 (1480): 659–69. 
 Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998) . Mirror neurons and the simulation theory of mindreading.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences  2 :  493–501 . 
 Gallese, V., Keysers, C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2004) . A unifying view of the basis of social cognition.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences  8 :  396–403 . 
 Gergely, G., Nadasdy, Z., Csibra, G., & Biro, S. (1995) . Taking the intentional stance at 12 months of age. 
 Cognition  56 :  165–93 . 
 Goldman, A. I. (1989) . Interpretation psychologized.  Mind and Language  4 :  161–85 . 
 Goldman, A. I. (2006).  Simulating Minds: Th e Philosophy, Psychology, & Neuroscience of Mindreading.  New 
York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Goldman, A. I., & Sripada, C. (2005) . Simulationist models of face-based emotion recognition.  Cognition 
 94 :  193–213 . 
 Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff , A. N. (1997).  Words, Th oughts, and Th eories . Cambridge: MIT Press. 
 Gordon, R. M. (1986) . Folk psychology as simulation.  Mind and Language  1 :  158–71 . 
 Harris, P. L. (1992) . From simulation to folk psychology: Th e case for development.  Mind and Language  7 : 
 120–44 . 
 Heal, J. (1986) . Replication and functionalism. In: J. Butterfi eld (Ed.),  Language, Mind, & Logic 
(pp. 135–50) .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 

465
 Jeannerod, M. (2001) . Neural simulation of action: A unifying mechanism for motor cognition. 
 NeuroImage  14 :  S103–9 . 
 Kilmer, J. M. (2011) . More than one pathway to action understanding.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences  15 (8): 
 352–7 . 
 Kosslyn, S. M., Pascual-Leone, A., Felician, O., & Camposano, S. (1999) . Th e role of area 17 in visual 
imagery: Convergent evidence from PET and from rTMS.  Science  284 :  167–70 . 
 Kosslyn, S. M., Th ompson, W. L., & Alpert, N. M. (1997) . Neural systems shared by visual imagery and 
visual perception: a positron emission tomography study.  NeuroImage  6 :  320–34 . 
 Kovacs, A. M., Teglas, E., & Endress, A. D. (2010) . Th e social sense: Susceptibility to others’ beliefs in 
human infants and adults.  Science  330 :  1830–4 . 
 Leslie, A. (1994) . Pretending and believing: Issues in the theory of ToMM.  Cognition  50 :  211–38 . 
 Leslie, A., German, T., & Polizzi, P. (2005) . Belief-desire reasoning as a process of selection.  Cognitive 
Psychology  50 :  45–85 . 
 Lombardo, M. V., Chakraharti, B., Bullmore, E. T., Wheelwright, S. J., Sadek, S. A., Suckling, J., & 
Baron-Cohen, S. (2010) . Shared neural circuits for mentalizing about the self and others.  Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience  22 (7):  1623–33 . 
 Mazzoni, G., & Memon, A. (2003) . Imagination can create false autobiographical memories.  Psychological 
Science  14 :  186–8 . 
 Morewedge, C. K., Huh, Y. E., & Vosgerau, J. (2010) . Th ought for food: Imagined consumption reduces 
actual consumption.  Science  330 :  1530–3 . 
 Nash, R. A., Kimberly, A. W., & Lindsay, D. S (2009) . Digitally manipulating memory: Eff ects of doctored 
videos and imagination in distorting beliefs and memories.  Memory  and Cognition  37 (4):  414–24 . 
 Nickerson, R. S. (1999) . How we know—and sometimes misjudge—what others know: imputing one’s own 
knowledge to others.  Psychological Bulletin  125 :  737–59 . 
 Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs?  Science  308: 
255–8. 
 Perner, J. (1991).  Understanding the Representational Mind .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Phillips, M. L., Young, A. W., Senior, C., Brammer, M., Andrew, C., Calder, A. J., Bullmore, E. T., Perrett, 
D. I., Rowland, D., Williams, S. C. R., Gray, J. A., & David, S. (1997) . A specifi c neural substrate for 
perceiving facial expressions of disgust.  Nature  389 :  495–8 . 
 Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. J., Gusnard, D. A., and Shulman, G. L. (2001) . 
A default mode of brain function.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA  98 :  676–82 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004) . Th e mirror-neuron system.  Annual Review of Neuroscience  27 : 
 169–92 . 
 Rizzolatti, G., & Sinigaglia (2008).  Mirrors in the Brain: How Our Minds Share Actions and Emotions . 
 Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Rozin, P., Haidt, J., & McCauley, C. (2000) . Disgust. In: M. Lewis and J. Haviland (Eds),  Handbook of 
Emotions (pp. 575–94) .  New York :  Guilford Press . 
 Schacter, D. L., Guerin, S. A., & St Jacques, P. L. (2011) . Memory distortion: an adaptive perspective. 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences  15 (10):  467–474 . 
 Solomon, R. L. (1980) . Th e opponent-process theory of acquired motivation: Th e costs of pleasure and the 
benefi ts of pain.  American Psychologist  35 (8):  691–712 . 
 SprengelmeyerR., Young, A. W., Schroeder, U., Grossenbacher, P. G., Federlein, J., Buttner, T., & 
Przuntek, H. (1999) .  Knowing no fear.  Proceedings of the Royal Society, B: Biology  266 :  2451–6 . 
 Tager-Flusberg, H., & Sullivan, K. (2000) . A componential view of theory of mind: evidence from Williams 
Syndrome.  Cognition  76 :  59–89 . 
 Waytz, A., & Mitchell, J. P. (2011) . Two mechanisms for simulating other minds: Dissociations between 
mirroring and self-projection.  Current Directions in Psychological Science  20 (3):  197–200 . 
REFERENCES

MINDREADING BY SIMULATION: THE ROLES OF IMAGINATION AND MIRRORING 
466
 Wellman, H. (1990).  Th e Child’s Th eory of Mind .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Wicker, B., Keysers, C., Plailly, J., Royet, J-P., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (2003) . Both of us disgusted in 
my insula: Th e common neural basis of seeing and feeling disgust .  Neuron  40 :  655–64 . 
 Zaki, J., Hennigan, K., Weber, J., & Ochsner, K. N. (2010) . Social cognitive confl ict resolution: 
Contributions of domain-general and domain-specifi c neural systems.  Journal of Neuroscience  30 : 
 8481–8 . 
 Zaki, J., & Ochsner, K. N. (2012) . Th e neuroscience of empathy: progress, pitfalls and promise.  Nature 
Neuroscience  15 (5):  675–80 . 
 

 Chapter 26 
 Mindreading the self 
 Peter   Carruthers 
 This chapter contrasts two different kinds of account of our knowledge of our own thoughts. 
According to standard theories, self-knowledge of at least a subset of thoughts is direct and non-
interpretive. According to the alternative, which will be elaborated and defended here, self-knowl-
edge results from turning our mindreading capacities on ourselves, relying on the same sensory 
channels that we employ for other-knowledge and utilizing many of the same sensory cues. 
 Introduction  
 Philosophers have traditionally assumed that self-knowledge is special. Knowledge of one’s own 
thoughts, in particular (one’s beliefs, judgments, desires, hopes, fears, decisions, and intentions) is 
supposed to be especially intimate, direct, and reliable. Indeed, Descartes (1641) famously believed 
that one’s knowledge of one’s own current thoughts is infallible (one cannot be mistaken about 
them), and that those thoughts themselves are self-presenting (to have them is to have infallible 
knowledge of them). Nor was Descartes by any means alone in holding such beliefs. Similar views 
were endorsed by Aristotle (see Caston, 2002), Augustine (see Bolyard, 2009; Mendelson, 2009), 
Locke (1690), and many others. While philosophers today don’t endorse anything so extreme, 
almost all hold that knowledge of at least a subset of one’s own thoughts is authoritative (incapa-
ble of being challenged by others) and privileged (arrived at in a special way that isn’t available to 
others). Indeed, similar views are common even among cognitive scientists, especially those who 
believe that third-person mindreading capacities are grounded in ﬁ rst-person awareness (Gallese 
& Goldman, 1998; Rizzolatti, Fogassi, L., & Gallese, 2001; Goldman, 2006; Meltzoff & Brooks, 
2008). In fact, some sort of tacit commitment to the special nature of self-knowledge has a strong 
claim to be a human universal. For although no work has been done on the subject by anthro-
pologists in small-scale societies, it seems that such views have been endorsed across time and 
place (whether tacitly or explicitly) whenever people have reﬂ ected and written on the question 
(Carruthers, 2011). 
 The present chapter will suggest that this widespread view is radically mistaken. Far from being 
special, self-knowledge results from turning our mindreading abilities on ourselves. The same 
mental faculty that evolved for reading the minds of others and negotiating the social world gets 
turned toward the self, issuing in knowledge of our own thoughts (although often, also, in false 
beliefs about them). On this view, the mindreading faculty is arranged as one of the consumer sys-
tems for “globally broadcast” attended perceptual information (in the sense of Baars, 1988, 1997), 
for of course mindreading would need to have access to such information in order to perform 
its primary function. Plainly, attributing thoughts to other people requires observations of their 
behavior and physical circumstances. Self-knowledge can then rely on anything that is accessible 
through these same sensory channels, including one’s own behavior and context, but also one’s own 
visual imagery, inner speech, felt affect, and other forms of sensory experience. For imagery utilizes 

MINDREADING THE SELF
468
the same mechanisms as does perception, and is globally broadcast in the same manner (Kosslyn, 
1994; Kosslyn & Thompson, 2003). So while knowledge of our own sensory states is direct, knowl-
edge of our own thoughts is just as interpretive in nature as knowledge of the thoughts of others, 
and relies on many of the same kinds of sensory cue. 
 Our discussion of these contrasting accounts will proceed as follows. In “Confabulation and 
dual-method theories,” evidence of confabulation in attributing thoughts to ourselves will be 
discussed, providing one major strand of support for the views just outlined. This section will 
also consider the defensive moves that are available to defenders of the special character of 
self-knowledge. Then in “The interpretive sensory-access account” the interpretive sensory-access 
account of self-knowledge will be elaborated in somewhat more detail. “Dissociation data” con-
siders potential dissociation evidence from schizophrenia and autism. “Brain imaging evidence” 
discusses some of the brain-imaging evidence that bears on the issue.  
 Confabulation and dual-method theories  
 More than half a century of careful research in social psychology has produced voluminous evi-
dence that people will often confabulate about their own current or very recently past thoughts. 
That is, they issue reports of their current or recent thoughts that are manifestly false, but seem-
ingly without any awareness of the falsity of their claims. Moreover, in many cases these reports 
are just the ones that third-party observers with access to the same information would attribute 
to the subjects, suggesting that in these instances, at least, self-attributions of thoughts result 
from turning one’s mindreading abilities on oneself. Philosophers wishing to defend anything 
resembling the traditional view of self-knowledge have been forced to embrace dual-method 
accounts as a result of this data (Nichols & Stich, 2003; Goldman, 2006). They claim that some-
times we turn our mindreading abilities on ourselves (often resulting in confabulation), but 
on other occasions we have access to our own thoughts that is direct and non-interpretive. The 
present section will sketch some examples of confabulation, before evaluating the dual-method 
response. 
 Confabulation data 
 A signiﬁ cant portion of the evidence has been collected by those working within the 
“self-perception” framework initiated by Bem (1967). For example, Wells & Petty (1980) found 
that nodding one’s head while listening to a message on a tape signiﬁ cantly increases peo-
ple’s expressed agreement with the message thereafter, while shaking one’s head while listen-
ing signiﬁ cantly decreases agreement. (Subjects were told that they were testing how well the 
headphones stay on people’s heads, and that the message was incidental to the purpose of the 
experiment.) It seems that subjects interpret their own behavior as agreement or disagreement 
with the message, and adjust their reports of their own degree of belief in the subject of the 
message accordingly. 
 Bri ñ ol & Petty (2003) replicated this result, and were able to demonstrate that it is not a con-
sequence of priming or positive mood caused by the head movements. They varied the persua-
siveness of the message, ﬁ nding that when the message is persuasive the original result replicates, 
whereas when the message is  un persuasive the opposite occurs: those nodding their heads agree 
with the message even less, while those shaking their heads agree with it more. The experimenters 
were able to show that subjects interpret their head movements as agreeing or disagreeing with 
their own internal reactions while listening to the message (such as saying to oneself, “What an 
idiot!”), and they were able to ﬁ nd no evidence of mood changes. 

CONFABULATION AND DUAL-METHOD THEORIES
469
 Bri ñ ol and Petty (2003) also conducted a separate experiment in which subjects had to write 
three statements about themselves that might impact their careers, writing either with their right 
or their left hands. They were then asked for their degree of conﬁ dence in the statements that they 
had written. Right-handers who wrote with their left hands expressed signiﬁ cantly lower conﬁ -
dence, presumably because the shaky writing is interpreted by the mindreading system as a sign 
of hesitancy and uncertainty. Indeed, third parties who looked only at the written statements and 
were asked about the degree of conﬁ dence of the writer showed exactly the same effect. 
 These data are consistent with a mixed account, according to which reports of one’s thoughts 
can be  inﬂ uenced  by mindreading while  also depending on some privileged channel of informa-
tion. But many other results in the literature cannot easily be interpreted in this way. For example, 
Wegner & Wheatley (1999) asked subjects to report on their intentions in experiments in which 
(they believed) they were jointly controlling the cursor on a computer screen with another subject 
(who was in fact a confederate of the experimenters). Immediately after each trial they were asked 
to record the extent to which they had intended the ﬁ nal position of the cursor on a 100-point 
scale ranging from 1 (“I allowed the stop to happen”) to 100 (“I intended to make the stop”). In 
one condition the confederate was told to play no part in the movement of the cursor, in fact giv-
ing subjects complete control. On average people still rated their degree of intent at only 56, just 
above the mid-point. Presumably, they made the reasonable assumption that control would be 
shared and therefore anchored on the mid-point of the scale, only adjusting upwards slightly in 
conditions in which they in fact had complete control (perhaps being sensitive to the presence of 
less resistance on the computer-mouse than they had expected). 
 This is already a remarkable result. For we can assume that the subjects made a decision to stop 
just prior to the time when they did (since the confederate played no role). We can also assume 
that they would have been paying close attention to their states of intending, since they knew that 
they would need to report on them immediately thereafter. But if their own decisions were directly 
available to them, then one would predict that they should have had a powerful sense of causality 
in these circumstances. For we know that in general temporally-contiguous events give people a 
strong sense of causation (McCloskey, Colebatch, Potter, & Burke, 1983; Young, 1995). The absence 
of any such effect speaks powerfully against the idea of direct introspective access to intentions. 
 In other conditions the confederate was instructed via headphones in such a way as to bring 
the cursor to a halt next to a particular type of object depicted on the screen (such as a beach 
ball), in circumstances in which the subject would hear the name of that type of object (ostensi-
bly as a distracter). When the word was heard many seconds in advance of the stop, subjects on 
average scored the degree to which they had intended the stop at 45, presumably because they 
were sensitive to some resistance in the movements of the mouse in conditions in which the 
confederate in fact had ultimate control. But when the word was heard just before the stop, they 
scored their degree of intent at over 60. Presumably, their mindreading systems interpreted the 
coincidence of stopping near the object that had just been named as evidence of an intention to 
stop at that point. 
 Let me ﬁ nish this brief sampling of confabulation data with some discussion of the “dissonance” 
tradition in social psychology, from which hundreds of supporting references could be provided. 
In a typical type of experiment, subjects will be induced to write an essay arguing for a conclusion 
that is the contrary of what they believe. In one condition, subjects may be led to think that they 
have little choice about doing so (for example, the experimenter might emphasize that they have 
previously agreed to participate in the experiment). In the other condition, subjects are led to think 
that they have freely chosen to write the essay (perhaps by signing a consent form on top of the 
essay-sheet that reads, “I freely agree to participate in this experiment.”) 

MINDREADING THE SELF
470
 The normal ﬁ nding in such experiments is that subjects in the free-choice condition (and only 
in the free-choice condition) change their reported attitudes on the subject-matter of the essay. 
This happens, although there are typically no differences in the quality of the arguments pro-
duced in the two conditions. If subjects in the free-choice condition have previously been strongly 
opposed to a rise in university tuition costs, for example (either measured in an unrelated survey 
some weeks before the experiment, or by assumption, since almost all people in the subject pool 
have similar attitudes), then following the experiment they might express only weak opposition 
or perhaps even positive support for the proposed increase. Such effects are generally robust and 
highly signiﬁ cant, even on matters that the subjects rate as important to them, and the changes in 
reported attitude are often quite large. 
 We know that freely undertaken counter-attitudinal advocacy gives rise to negatively valenced 
states of arousal, which dissipate as soon as subjects express an attitude that is more consistent 
with their advocacy (Elliot & Devine, 1994). Indeed, even  pro -attitudinal advocacy will give rise 
to changes in expressed attitude in circumstances where subjects are induced to believe that their 
honest advocacy will turn out to have bad consequences (Scher & Cooper, 1989). In circumstances 
where subjects are offered a variety of methods for making themselves feel better about what they 
have done (an attitude questionnaire, a question about their degree of responsibility, and a ques-
tion about the importance of the topic), they will use whatever method is offered to them ﬁ rst 
(Simon, Greenberg, & Brehm, 1995; Gosling, Denizeau, & Oberl é , 2006). For example, if asked 
ﬁ rst about the importance of the question of tuition raises, they will say that it is of little impor-
tance (even though in questionnaires administered a few weeks previously they rated it as of high 
importance), thereafter going on to express an unchanged degree of opposition to the change and 
rating themselves as highly responsible for what they did. 
 The best explanation of these patterns of result is that subjects’ mindreading systems auto-
matically appraise them as having freely chosen to do something bad, resulting in negative 
affect. Then when confronted with the attitude questionnaire they rehearse various possible 
responses, responding affectively to each in the manner outlined by Damasio (1994), Gilbert 
& Wilson (2007), and others. They select the one that “feels right” in the circumstances, which 
is one that provides an appraisal of their actions as being signiﬁ cantly  less bad. As a result of 
making that selection, their bad feelings go away. For example, saying (and hearing themselves 
say) that they do not oppose a raise in tuition (contrary to what they believe) enables their 
earlier actions to be appraised as  not bad , and as a result they cease to feel bad. In contrast, it 
seems quite unlikely that subjects should really be changing their minds prior to selecting an 
answer on the questionnaire, with their novel belief then being available to be authoritatively 
reported. For we know for sure that they do not change their beliefs unless offered the chance 
to express them, and there is no plausible mechanism via which a question about one’s beliefs 
should lead to the formation of a new belief in these circumstances (which can then be veridi-
cally reported). 
 Such results are deeply problematic for traditional accounts of self-knowledge. For one would 
think that a direct question about one’s beliefs (e.g. about the goodness or badness of a tuition 
raise, or about the importance of the issue) would have the effect of activating the relevant belief 
from memory. There seems no reason why a judgment of this sort should remain unconscious 
or be otherwise inaccessible to the subject. However, if subjects had authoritative access to this 
activated belief, then it would be mysterious how they could at the same time express an inconsist-
ent belief and make themselves feel better by doing so. For if they say one thing while being aware 
that they think something else, then they would be aware of themselves as lying. And that ought to 
make them feel worse, not better.  

CONFABULATION AND DUAL-METHOD THEORIES
471
 Dual method theories 
 Someone wishing to defend a traditional account of self-knowledge might acknowledge the 
soundness of the data on confabulation, while pointing out that they only show that  people 
sometimes attribute thoughts to themselves on the basis of self-directed mindreading. 
Consistently with the data, one can maintain that sometimes people have direct access to their 
thoughts, whereas on other occasions they rely on self-directed mindreading. Views of just this 
sort are defended by Nichols & Stich (2003) and Goldman (2006). Plainly, more needs to be 
said. For an account that simply asserts that sometimes we rely on self-directed mindreading 
and sometimes on introspection makes no predictions about when confabulation might be 
expected to occur, and it therefore cannot explain the patterning of the confabulation data. 
What is needed is some speciﬁ cation of the circumstances in which each of the two methods 
will be employed. 
 Nichols & Stich (2003) draw a distinction between detecting one’s mental states and explain-
ing one’s mental states (or one’s behavior). Introspection can only do the former. This is because 
explanation presupposes causation, and yet the causal relations that obtain among our thoughts, 
and between our thoughts and our actions, surely cannot be introspected. In contrast, while min-
dreading cannot directly detect a mental state, explanation falls squarely within its domain. What 
Nichols and Stich propose, then, is that subjects will resort to self-directed mindreading whenever 
they are asked why they did something or why they think something. In such circumstances con-
fabulation will occur whenever the cues available for mindreading are misleading ones. In contrast, 
when asked simply to report on a current or recent thought, they should be able to access it directly, 
and confabulation will  not occur. 
 The distinction between detecting and explaining might well be capable of accommodating 
some of the data on confabulation. But it plainly cannot capture it all. In particular, it cannot 
account for any of the examples discussed above. For in the self-perception and dissonance studies 
subjects are just asked to say how strongly they believe something. No explanations are required. 
It therefore remains a mystery why subjects should opt to mindread themselves when (by hypoth-
esis) their thoughts are directly available for report. It might be felt, however, that the dual-control 
studies of Wegner & Wheatley (1999) are different. For in this case subjects are asked to divide 
responsibility for an outcome between themselves and another agent, which requires a judgment 
of their respective causal contributions. Even so, it remains puzzling that people’s judgments of 
causality should anchor so closely around the midpoint in the subject-controlled trials. For if their 
intentions were accessible to them through introspection, as traditional accounts suppose, then 
the temporal contiguity between these and the outcome should have given subjects a powerful 
sense of control. 
 Goldman (2006) does not address the problem of explaining the patterning in the confabula-
tion data. But Goldman (2009) opts to say that introspection is employed for conscious thoughts, 
whereas self-directed mindreading is needed for unconscious ones. All instances of confabula-
tion are therefore explained as occurring in circumstances where the relevant thoughts are not 
conscious. There are, though, two broad kinds of account of conscious thought, and each makes 
Goldman’s reply problematic. One claims that conscious thoughts are thoughts that we know our-
selves to possess, either in general, or in the right sort of direct non-interpretive way. The other 
claims that conscious thoughts are ones that are “globally broadcast” to a wide range of executive, 
affective, and inferential systems. Let us consider these in turn. 
 If conscious thoughts are ones that we know ourselves to possess in some manner or other 
(whether by introspection or via self-directed mindreading), then it will be of no help to appeal to 

MINDREADING THE SELF
472
the conscious–unconscious distinction in explaining instances of confabulation. For if conscious 
thoughts can involve self-directed mindreading then we should expect confabulation to occur in 
these cases too. On the other hand, if conscious thoughts are ones that we know ourselves to pos-
sess directly and non-interpretively, then we are no closer to saying in what circumstances confab-
ulation can be expected. For it is already agreed that confabulation results from self-interpretation. 
So to say that confabulation may be expected in connection with unconscious thoughts is just to 
say that self-interpretation may produce errors in cases where we rely on self-interpretation. This 
is, of course, circular. 
 The remaining option for Goldman is to say that we have direct access to globally broadcast 
thoughts, whereas we need to rely on self-directed mindreading for the remainder. One problem 
for this option is that there is little evidence that thoughts (judgments, decisions, and the rest) are 
ever globally broadcast in the way that sensory or sensory-involving states are. For all of the evi-
dence that we have of global broadcasting in the brain pertains to sensory states (Baars, 1988, 1997, 
2002, 2003; Dehaene & Naccache, 2001; Dehaene, Naccache, Cohen, Bihan, Mangin, Poline, et al., 
2001, Dehaene, Sergent, & Changeux, 2003, Dehaene, Changeux, Naccache, Sackur, & Sergent 
2006; Baars, Ramsoy, & Laureys, 2003; Kreiman, Fried, & Koch, 2003). Another problem is that 
the best-validated models that we have of working memory, which also seems to employ a global 
broadcasting architecture, assume that it always implicates the maintenance, rehearsal, and manip-
ulation of sensory-involving representations, including visual imagery and inner speech (Baddeley, 
2006; M ü ller and Knight, 2006; Postle, 2006; D’Esposito, 2007; Jonides, Lewis, Nee, Lustig, Berman, 
& Moore, 2008). Moreover, it would be problematic, in any case, for Goldman to explain why the 
subjects’ real thoughts in the confabulation experiments sketched in “Confabulation data” should 
 not have been globally broadcast, if such a thing is possible at all. For everyone agrees that atten-
tion is the main determinant of global broadcast and entry into working memory, and in the cir-
cumstances of those experiments one would expect subjects to be attending to their judgments or 
intentions, since they were either asked directly about them, or knew that they would need to give 
a report just a few moments later. 
 I conclude that dual-method theories cannot account for the full extent of the confabulation 
data. As a result, the only theory that does so successfully is one that claims that self-directed 
mindreading is the only access that any of us  ever has to our own thoughts. This account will be 
elaborated in Section 3, before some additional evidence is considered under “Dissociation data” 
and “Brain imaging evidence.” 
 The interpretive sensory-access account  
 According to the interpretive sensory-access theory sketched in Section 1 and developed in detail 
in Carruthers (2011), the mindreading system is arranged as one of the consumers of globally 
broadcast sensory-involving information in the brain. It evolved initially for other-directed social 
purposes, whether of a “Machiavellian” sort (Byrne & Whiten, 1988, 1997), or for purposes of 
cooperation and collaboration (Richerson & Boyd, 2005; Hrdy, 2009), or both. This requires it 
to have access to perceptual information about the world, although by default it would also have 
access to any form of globally broadcast representation (including the attended outputs of pro-
prioception and other forms of bodily experience). As a result, the mindreading faculty will also 
have access to imagistic representations (whether visual, motor, or in inner speech or hearing), 
since these utilize the same mechanisms as perception and can be globally broadcast in the same 
way (Paulescu, Frith, & Frackowiak, 1993; Kosslyn, 1994; Shergill, Brammer, Fukuda, Bullmore, 
Amaro, Murray, et al., 2002; Kosslyn & Thompson, 2003). This means that attributions of sensory 

THE INTERPRETIVE SENSORY-ACCESS ACCOUNT
473
states to oneself are comparatively direct and immediate, since such states are available to the min-
dreading faculty as input. 
 It is important to realize that the mindreading system will have access to more than just strictly 
sensory non-conceptual states. This is because conceptual information of varying degrees of 
abstractness is generally bound into the content of any given sensory state and broadcast along 
with it. Thus, Kosslyn (1994), for example, characterizes the early stages of visual processing as a 
continual “questioning” of non-conceptual visual input by conceptual systems, which seek a “best 
match” with their representations of what objects and events of the relevant kind should look like. 
When a match is found, it is bound into the content of the visual percept to be broadcast along with 
it for yet other conceptual systems to consume and draw inferences from. In this way, there can 
be a cascade of increasingly abstract concepts bound into any given perceptual state, as successive 
conceptual systems receive the products of earlier systems’ work, and categorize the input accord-
ingly (Barrett, 2005). As a result, one doesn’t just see textured surfaces and shapes, one sees  a face ; 
and one doesn’t just see  a face, one sees  one’s mother ; and so on. Likewise for hearing: one doesn’t 
just hear a stream of phonemes, one hears someone  calling one’s name , for example. 
 The work of the mindreading faculty, too, can be bound into the contents of globally broadcast 
perception or imagery. As a result, one doesn’t just see someone’s arm moving in the direction 
of a transparent object, one sees her as  reaching for a drink ; and one doesn’t just hear a stream of 
phonemes when someone talks, but one hears him as  wanting to know the way to the church ; and so 
on, and so forth. Likewise one’s own outer or inner speech can be heard as  judging that the church is 
straight ahead . In either case the only access that this gives one to an underlying attitude is interpre-
tive in character, depending on the combined work of the mindreading and language faculties. Yet, 
of course, an item of inner speech is not itself an attitude of any sort. So the event of hearing oneself 
as judging that the church is straight ahead is not itself an event of judging anything. Rather, at best, 
it expresses or is caused by such a judgment. 
 On the interpretive sensory-access account, then, while one generally has direct (non-interpretive) 
knowledge of one’s own sensory-involving states, the only access that one has to propositional atti-
tudes of judging, deciding, intending, and so on (whether one’s own or someone else’s) is interpre-
tive, mediated by some form of sensory or imagistic awareness. The interpretive sensory-access 
theory comports well with global broadcasting accounts of the architecture of human cognition, as 
well as with widely accepted theories of working memory. It is also directly supported by the exten-
sive confabulation data discussed earlier, since self-attributions of mental states will be subject to 
just the same sorts of errors of interpretation as attributions of mental states to other people. In 
contrast, no form of direct-access theory of self-knowledge has any of these beneﬁ ts. 
 The interpretive sensory-access account is also supported by a widespread agreement among 
psychologists who study human metacognition or “thinking about [one’s own] thinking” (includ-
ing judgments of learning, feelings of knowing, and conﬁ dence judgments). This is that metacog-
nitive judgments are inferential and cue-based, relying on a variety of sensorily-accessible cues 
(Reder, 1987; Metcalfe, Schwartz, & Joaquim, 1993; Koriat, 1995, 1997; Dunlosky & Metcalfe, 
2009). People rely on such things as feelings of familiarity, or the swiftness with which an answer 
comes to mind, when judging whether they know something, or when judging their degree of 
conﬁ dence. There is nothing here to suggest that they have direct access to their underlying states 
of mind. Yet these ﬁ ndings are, of course, just what the interpretive sensory-access theory would 
predict. 
 All the evidence considered so far is strongly supportive of the interpretive sensory-access 
account. But it remains to consider some other evidence that might be thought, on the contrary, to 
support the distinctive and separate character of self-knowledge. 

MINDREADING THE SELF
474
 Dissociation data  
 One way of showing that the interpretive sensory-access account is incorrect would be to dem-
onstrate dissociations in one’s competence to acquire self-knowledge and other-knowledge. The 
account predicts that these should not occur, since each form of knowledge is held to employ the 
same mindreading faculty utilizing the same sensory channels (albeit sometimes relying on dif-
ferent forms of evidence, such as inner speech or visual imagery in the case of self-knowledge). 
Just such claims of dissociation have been made by Nichols & Stich (2003), Goldman (2006), and 
Robbins (2009) in respect of either schizophrenia, autism, or both. The present section will discuss 
these syndromes in turn. 
 Schizophrenia 
 There is now extensive evidence of mindreading deﬁ cits in schizophrenia generally (see Br ü ne, 
2005, and Sprong, Schothorst, Vos, Hox, & Van Engeland, 2007, for wide-ranging reviews of the 
existing literature). Indeed, even ﬁ rst-degree relatives of people with schizophrenia show min-
dreading deﬁ cits that are independent of age, education, and IQ (Janssen, Krabbendam, Jolles, 
& van Os, 2003). So one might wonder whether people with schizophrenia  also  show deﬁ cits in 
self-knowing. If they do not, as Robbins (2009) speculates, then this would present an anomaly for 
the interpretive sensory-access account. 
 A test of this hypothesis is provided by Koren, Seidman, Poyurovsky, Goldsmith, Viksman, Zichel, 
et al. (2004), Koren, Seidman, Goldsmith, & Harvey (2006), who used the Wisconsin Card Sorting 
Task (WCST) in conjunction with measures of metacognitive ability. Following each sorting of a 
card (and before receiving feedback), patients were asked to indicate their conﬁ dence in the cor-
rectness of their performance on a 100-point scale, after which they had to indicate whether they 
wanted that trial to count toward their ﬁ nal score (which would impact how much money they 
would win). Koren and colleagues looked especially for correlations between the various measures 
of performance and other measures that are known to be predictive of real-world competence and 
successful independent living. (Speciﬁ cally, they used measures of insight into one’s own illness 
and measures of competence to consent to treatment.) They found only small-to-moderate cor-
relations between the basic WCST scores and the latter. However, the results from the measures of 
metacognitive ability correlated quite highly with the measures of successful real-world function-
ing. These ﬁ ndings have since been conﬁ rmed by Stratta, Daneluzzo, Riccardi, Bustini, & Rossi 
(2009). And in a separate experimental paradigm, Lysaker, Dimaggio, Carcione, Procacci, Buck, 
Davis, et al. (2010) found that measures of metacognitive self-awareness are a good predictor of 
successful work performance of people with schizophrenia over a 6-month period. 
 It would seem, then, that self-directed metacognitive abilities are inversely related to the sever-
ity of schizophrenic illness. This allows us to conclude that metacognitive abilities are generally 
damaged in people with schizophrenia; for the severity of their disease correlates with an increased 
inability to monitor their current mental lives and to choose adaptively as a result. This is just what 
would be predicted if both self-knowledge and other-knowledge utilize the same mindreading 
faculty, as the interpretive sensory-access theory suggests. 
 Nichols & Stich (2003) claim that a speciﬁ c form of schizophrenia—namely, passivity schiz-
ophrenia—demonstrates a dissociation in the reverse direction. They think that these patients 
exhibit a failure of self-knowledge together with normal mindreading abilities. The ﬁ rst part of this 
claim has at least a superﬁ cial plausibility. For such people complain that their own actions aren’t 
under their control. A patient might say, for example, “When I decide to comb my hair, it isn’t me 
who controls the movement of my arm, but the FBI.” Such patients are also apt to complain of 

DISSOCIATION DATA
475
“hearing voices” (in reality their own self-generated inner speech), and they may believe that other 
people are inserting thoughts into their heads against their will. 
 There are two things wrong with Nichols and Stich’s suggestion, however. One is that there is 
no reason to think that people with passivity schizophrenia have normal mindreading abilities. In 
part this criticism is motivated by the very strong association between schizophrenia and mind-
reading deﬁ cits generally, as discussed above. But it is also supported by an fMRI study conducted 
by Br ü ne, Lissek, Fuchs, Witthaus, Peters, Nicolas, et al. (2008), speciﬁ cally with patients suffering 
from passivity kinds of schizophrenic illness. While these people succeeded on the simple mind-
reading tasks they were asked to complete, they employed a very different network of brain regions 
when doing so than do normal controls. This suggests that their mindreading  system isn’t normal, 
even if they are partly able to compensate in other ways. 
 In the second place, however, classic passivity symptoms are not best explained by the failure of 
a self-knowledge system. Rather they are better explained by the failure of one of the main compo-
nents of the action-control system (Frith, Blakemore, & Wolpert, 2000a, b). This is a comparator 
mechanism that is hypothesized to receive a so-called “forward model” of the expected sensory 
consequences of movement, created from the “efference copy” of the motor instructions for that 
movement, comparing this with the afferent sensory feedback from the movement itself, and ena-
bling one to make swift on-line corrections as the movement unfolds (Wolpert & Kawato, 1998; 
Wolpert & Ghahramani, 2000; Jeannerod, 2006). We know that this system is damaged in passiv-
ity forms of schizophrenia speciﬁ cally. For patients with passivity symptoms are unable to make 
online corrections in their own movements in the absence of visual feedback (Frith, 1992). There 
is reason to think that systematic damage to the comparator system would give rise to experiences 
of the sort that might well issue in a sense of alien control, as I shall now explain. 
 One of the normal effects of the comparator system is to “damp down” conscious experience 
of any incoming perceptual information that matches the predictions of the forward model. This 
is because if everything is proceeding as expected then no attention needs to be paid to it. As a 
result, sensory experience of one’s own movements is normally greatly attenuated. This is why it 
is impossible to tickle yourself (Blakemore, Frith, & Wolpert, 1998, 1999). It is also why someone 
unwrapping a candy at the theatre will barely hear the noise they are making, while those around 
them are greatly disturbed. It turns out, however, that patients with passivity forms of schizophre-
nia  can  tickle themselves, and their experiences of their own actions  are n ot modulated by their 
motor intentions (Blakemore, Smith, Steel, Johnson, & Frith, 2000). Hence, they will experience 
their own movements with the same sort of sensory vividness as would be present if someone else 
were making their movements for them, and they will experience their own inner speech just as if 
another person were speaking. This is, of course, exactly what they report. 
 I conclude, therefore, that there is no reason to think that patients with schizophrenia (or speciﬁ c 
forms of schizophrenia) demonstrate a dissociation between self-knowledge and other-knowledge. 
There is nothing, here, to challenge the interpretive sensory-access account. 
 Autism 
 Nichols and Stich (2003) and Goldman (2006) argue that autism represents a dissociation between 
mindreading (which is widely agreed to be damaged in this population) and self-awareness, which 
they claim remains intact. They place considerable reliance on a study by Farrant, Boucher, & 
Blades (1999), who tested children with autism (as well as learning-disabled and normal children 
matched for verbal mental age) on a range of metamemory tasks. Since they were able to ﬁ nd no 
signiﬁ cant differences between the groups, the authors conclude that metacognition is unimpaired 

MINDREADING THE SELF
476
in autism. It should be emphasized, however, that almost all of the children with autism who par-
ticipated in this study were sufﬁ ciently well advanced to be able to pass ﬁ rst-level false-belief tasks. 
So we should predict that they would have some understanding of their own minds, too, and that 
they should be capable of completing simple metacognitive tasks. 
 Moreover, none of the experimental tasks employed by Farrant and colleagues required subjects 
to attribute current or recently past thoughts to themselves. On the contrary, the tasks could be 
solved by anyone who possessed the requisite mental concepts who was also a smart behaviorist. 
For example, one experiment tested whether the children with autism were aware that it is easier 
to learn a small number of items than a larger number. Not surprisingly, the children did well on 
this test. For they would have had ample opportunity over a number of years of schooling to have 
established a reliable correlation between the number of items studied in a task and the number of 
responses that are later evaluated as correct. (Note that the average age of the children with autism 
in this experiment was eleven years.) 
 In contrast with the claims of Nichols & Stich (2003) and Goldman (2006), many studies have 
found paired deﬁ cits of mindreading and self-knowledge among children with autism. Some of 
these have looked at children’s awareness of their own intentions. Thus, Williams & Happ é (2010) 
used the knee-jerk response, for example, asking groups of children whether or not they had  meant 
to move their leg. The children with autism were much worse than the control groups in identify-
ing their knee-jerk as unintended, and in all groups success was highly correlated with success in a 
set of third-person false-belief tasks. 
 In a separate set of experiments, Williams & Happ é (2010) measured capacities to attribute 
intentions in the third-person as well as in the ﬁ rst. Subjects were asked to complete a picture, such 
as a drawing of a girl with a missing ear, or a cup with a missing handle. But in each case they drew 
on a sheet of transparent acetate that had been laid over another, so that although they thought 
they were completing one picture, they were in fact completing a different one. For example, in 
drawing what they intended to be the ear on the side of a girl’s head they had in fact drawn a handle 
on a cup. When the ruse was revealed to them, they were asked what they had meant to draw. They 
then watched a video of the same task being undertaken by another child, and were asked the same 
question in the third person. 
 The results of this experiment were that the children with autism were signiﬁ cantly worse at 
identifying both their own and others’ intentions than were the ability-matched children with 
developmental delay. In both groups success was strongly correlated with success in a number of 
false-belief tasks. It would appear from these data that the capacity to attribute intentions to oneself 
is just as damaged in children with autism as is the capacity to attribute intentions to other people, 
and that both result from the difﬁ culties that such children have with mindreading in general. 
 Other studies have looked at the capacity to attribute false beliefs to oneself and to others, often 
using the unexpected contents test (or “Smarties task”). Typically-developing children begin to 
pass both versions of this task at about the same age, normally around four (Wellman, Cross, & 
Watson, 2001). A number of experimenters have found that children with autism are equivalently 
delayed on this task for both  self and  other (Baron-Cohen, 1991, 1992; Russell & Hill, 2001; Fisher, 
Happ é , & Dunn, 2005). Some, however, have found that performance is signiﬁ cantly  better  on the 
 self question than on the  other question, suggesting that self-awareness might be comparatively 
spared in autism (Perner, Frith, Leslie, & Leekam, 1989; Leslie & Thaiss, 1992). 
 Williams & Happ é  (2009) reasoned that the differentially better performance on the  self question 
found in some studies might be due to the fact that the children are asked at the outset to  say what 
they think is in the container. Children with autism might then succeed in the task by remember-
ing what they had previously said, rather than by recalling or reasoning about their earlier belief. 

DISSOCIATION DATA
477
Williams and Happ é  therefore devised a version of the task that would elicit belief spontaneously, 
without requiring any verbal expression. The experimenter pretended at the outset of the inter-
view to have cut her ﬁ nger, and asked the subject to fetch her a band aid, in circumstances where 
a number of different types of container were in plain sight, but out of the experimenter’s reach. 
When the child opened the band-aid box, however, he would ﬁ nd that it contained crayons. The 
same  self and  other questions were then asked as usual. The results were that children with autism 
performed poorly in both versions of this task relative to controls. 
 In fact, Williams & Happ é (2009) found that the children with autism experienced signiﬁ cantly 
more difﬁ culty in the  self  version of the task than when predicting what another person would 
think. A similar ﬁ nding is reported by Lombardo, Barnes, Wheelwright, & Baron-Cohen (2007). 
Their subjects with autism had signiﬁ cantly more impairment in measures of understanding their 
own emotions than they displayed with regard to other people’s emotions. These ﬁ ndings might 
be thought to suggest a partial dissociation between self-knowledge and other-knowledge. A more 
plausible suggestion, however, is made by Williams and Happ é . This is that whatever rules and 
heuristics the children with autism have learned in order to help them cope, and to enable them to 
attribute mental states to people, will generally be outward-looking in character and focused on 
the social world. For it is the social world that they ﬁ nd especially threatening and unpredictable. 
So the difference may be one of performance, and does nothing to suggest that competence in 
mindreading can be spared relative to competence in self-attribution. 
 Finally, it is worth mentioning some studies by Klein, Chan, & Loftus (1999), Klein, Cosmides, 
Costabile, & Mei (2002), Klein, Cosmides, Murray, & Tooby (2004) of an individual with autism, 
which are claimed to demonstrate a dissociation between self-knowledge and other-knowledge. 
Although this individual has severely impaired episodic recall, and fails to distinguish among the 
personalities of close family members, he has a stable model of his own personality traits that cor-
relates pretty well with the estimates of those who know him best. It seems, then, that not only can 
reliable self-knowledge of traits be obtained in the absence of episodic memory, but also that it is 
independent of any capacity to gain knowledge of the personality traits of other people. 
 Knowledge of one’s personality traits is not the same as knowledge of one’s current or recently 
past thoughts, of course, which is our focus in this chapter. However, it might be thought to imply 
it. Knowing that people are acting selﬁ shly, or generously, or stubbornly seems to require knowl-
edge of their goals, as well as an understanding of their construal of the situation (their beliefs). 
So if our conceptions of people’s personalities are built up gradually from our evaluations of their 
actions as they occur, then such knowledge would seem to presuppose a capacity to attribute cur-
rent thoughts to the agents in question. It is not obvious, however, that one’s beliefs about people’s 
personalities are always constructed in this way, especially when that person is oneself. Rather, one’s 
self-conception may initially be constructed, in whole or in part, from the evaluations of others. 
If one’s parent comments, “Don’t be so stubborn,” this might lead one to encode, “I am stubborn.” 
And once one has formed a stable self-conception, this will be apt to inﬂ uence one’s behavior in a 
self-fulﬁ lling manner. Conceiving oneself to be stubborn, one will be apt to act stubbornly; believ-
ing oneself to be generous, one will be more likely to do generous things; and so on. 
 Thus, if the individual studied by Klien and colleagues had formed his self-conception in such 
a manner, then the degree of correlation with other’s personality assessments of him can be 
explained without needing to suppose that he has the capacity to attribute current thoughts to 
himself at all. And we can also explain why his judgments of the personality traits of his family are 
comparatively undifferentiated. For it seems likely that children have many fewer opportunities 
to observe other peoples’ personality-relevant evaluations of close family members than they are 
aware of receiving themselves. 

MINDREADING THE SELF
478
 Even if we suppose that the individual with autism studied by Klein et al. (1999, 2004) had 
developed his self-conception on the basis of piecemeal evaluations of his own actions, however, 
the discrepancy between his trait-knowledge for  self and familiar  others  can be explained by the 
interpretive sensory-access account. Simplifying somewhat, in order to judge that other people are 
acting generously one needs to attribute to them knowledge that someone needs help, combined 
with sufﬁ cient motivation to provide that help despite signiﬁ cant costs to themselves. This will 
require mindreading. But in order to judge that one is oneself acting generously it is far from clear 
that one needs to attribute to oneself knowledge that someone needs help. Rather, the ﬁ rst-order 
fact that someone does need help will sufﬁ ce, thereby reﬂ ecting one’s knowledge without requir-
ing one to metarepresent one’s state of knowledge. And in order to know that one is overcoming 
a signiﬁ cant cost to oneself while providing that help one can rely on subjectively experienced 
feelings of affective conﬂ ict. These are, of course, only accessible to the mindreading system in 
the ﬁ rst person (consistently with the interpretive sensory-access account of self-knowledge). The 
discrepancy between this individual’s knowledge of his own personality traits and the traits of his 
family members may therefore result from a difference in performance, not reﬂ ecting any differ-
ence in competence in attributing mental states within the two domains. 
 I conclude, therefore, that there is no reason to think that people with autism demonstrate a disso-
ciation between self-knowledge and other-knowledge, any more than people with schizophrenia do.  
 Brain imaging evidence  
 A widespread consensus has emerged concerning the network of brain regions that is speciﬁ -
cally implicated in third-person mindreading. These include the medial prefrontal cortex, pos-
terior cingulate cortex, superior temporal sulcus, and temporo-parietal junction (Frith & Frith, 
2003; Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003; Saxe & Powell, 2006; Saxe, 2009; Lombardo, Chakrabarti, Bullmore, 
Wheelwright, Sadek, Suckling, et al., 2010). The question for us is whether the same, or a distinct, 
brain network is implicated in self-knowledge. We ﬁ rst consider studies that have paired  self and 
 other mental-state attribution tasks, before examining studies of metacognition. 
 Self and other 
 There have been remarkably few studies that have directly targeted our question. There have, how-
ever, been numerous imaging experiments of knowledge of personality traits in oneself and others 
(e.g. Kelley, Macrae, Wyland, Caglar, Inati, & Heatherton, 2002; Kjaer, Nowak, & Lou, 2002; Lou, 
Luber, Crupain, Keenan, Nowak, & Kjaer, 2004; Macrae, Moran, Heatherton, Banﬁ eld, & Kelley, 
2004; Pfeifer, Lieberman, & Dapretto, 2007; but see Gillihan & Farah, 2005, for a powerful critique 
of the assumptions made by such studies). These are of little direct relevance for us, since no one 
thinks that a personality trait is the sort of thing that one can directly introspect. Even if the initial 
acquisition of trait-knowledge requires thought-attribution, the adults in these studies are likely 
to have well-established models of their own personality traits, in which case they can answer 
questions about themselves directly from memory without needing to reason at all (Klein & Lax, 
2010). It is small wonder, then, that many studies ﬁ nd different patterns of activation in the two 
conditions—albeit with very little consistency across experiments. 
 In one of the very few studies to contrast third-person mindreading with attribution of current 
mental states to oneself, Ochsner, Knierim, Ludlow, Hanelin, Ramachandran, Glover, et al. (2004) 
scanned subjects while they viewed a series of photographs, in three separate conditions. In one, 
they had to judge their own emotional reaction to the image (pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral). 
In another, they had to judge the emotional reaction of a character depicted within the image 

BRAIN IMAGING EVIDENCE
479
(pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral). And in the third base-line condition they had to judge whether 
the photograph had been taken indoors or outdoors. Many of the regions of the mindreading 
network were found to be active in common between the  self and  other  conditions. These included 
medial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate, and the superior temporal sulcus. 
 However,  self judgments activated medial prefrontal cortex to a greater extent than did  other 
judgments. This effect is likely to result from the fact that medial prefrontal cortex seems to be 
active whenever one processes social information generally (Saxe & Powell, 2006), and because 
one would expect deeper and more elaborated processing in relation to the self (Gillihan & Farah, 
2005).  Other judgments, in contrast, distinctively activated an area of left lateral prefrontal cortex, 
which the experimenters interpret as an area implicated in maintaining and manipulating infor-
mation about the external world.  Other judgments also differentially activated an area of visual 
cortex, which the experimenters interpret as resulting from the greater attention paid to visual 
stimuli when judging the emotional state of another person. So there is nothing in these ﬁ ndings 
to suggest the existence of distinctive mechanisms for self-knowledge. 
 Most other studies that purport to contrast  self and  other mental-state attribution have failed 
to pair other-directed mindreading tasks with attributions of current mental states to oneself. For 
example, Saxe, Moran, Sholz, & Gabrieli (2006) claim to ﬁ nd areas of both overlap and non-overlap 
for  self and  other . However, the design of their study is an odd one. The  other conditions are 
intended to test for false-belief reasoning. Subjects were scanned while reading either a false-belief 
story or a story involving a false photograph or map. As one might expect, the main elements of 
the mindreading network were active in this condition, including medial prefrontal cortex and the 
temporo-parietal junction bilaterally. In the  self condition, in contrast, subjects read a series of trait 
adjectives, and either had to judge whether or not the adjective applied to themselves, or whether 
it was positive or negative. Since this task doesn’t require one to attribute any current mental states 
to oneself, people will either answer from memory (using a stable self-model), or by mindreading 
and generalizing from items in episodic memory. 
 Likewise, Lombardo et al. (2010) conducted an extensive imaging study with a self–other design. 
In each case mentalizing judgments were contrasted with physical judgments. In the  self condition, 
subjects had to use a four-point scale to answer questions like, “How likely are you to think that 
keeping a diary is important?” This was contrasted with physical questions like, “How likely are 
you to sneeze when a cat is nearby?” The  other condition was identical, except that the questions all 
related to the Queen. (This study was conducted in the UK.) Note, however, that subjects weren’t 
asked to make judgments about their current thoughts and attitudes. Rather, they were asked to 
estimate what their attitudes  would be toward various suggested possibilities (such as keeping a 
diary). Since these questions might be ones that some subjects had never previously considered, 
they might have had to engage in the same sort of simulative reasoning process that they would use 
when trying to determine the likely attitudes of another person. Moreover, other subjects might 
have been able to answer the  self questions directly from memory (for example, if they knew that 
they update a diary every day). 
 I conclude that while very few studies have contrasted the brain regions involved in mindreading 
with those that are active when one attributes a current or very recently past mental state to oneself, 
what evidence there is supports the interpretive sensory-access account. 
 Metacognition in the brain 
 Although many investigations of metacognition in the brain have failed to ﬁ nd activity in the 
mindreading network, this is likely to be an artifact of the experimental designs that have been 

MINDREADING THE SELF
480
used. For instance, Maril, Simons, Weaver, & Schacter (2005) set out to differentiate between feel-
ings of knowing and tip-of-the-tongue states. Since these are both metacognitive in nature, the 
interpretive sensory-access theory predicts that the contribution made by the mindreading system 
should be washed out when either one is subtracted from the other. Even when the brain activa-
tions involved in both of these kinds of feeling were combined together by the experimenters, they 
were contrasted with the combined “know” and “don’t know” responses. Of course these, too, 
are equally metacognitive. Likewise in the studies by Reggev, Zuckerman, & Maril (2011), when 
episodic and semantic feelings of knowing were combined together they were contrasted with the 
brain activity involved in the “don’t know” response. Since both sets of conditions involve meta-
cognitive states, the interpretive sensory-access account predicts that activity should not be seen in 
the mindreading network. 
 Quite different results can be obtained when metacognitive judgments are contrasted with 
ﬁ rst-order ones. For example, Chua, Schacter, Rand-Giovannetti, & Sperling (2006) investigated 
the brain regions that are active when subjects make metacognitive conﬁ dence judgments. They 
contrasted judgments of conﬁ dence with ﬁ rst-order judgments of recognition. One form of differ-
ential activity was found in orbitofrontal cortex. While this lies outside the mindreading network, 
it nevertheless makes good sense. For this is one of the main brain regions where affective feelings 
are represented, and judgments of conﬁ dence are often grounded in feelings of conﬁ dence. But in 
addition, differential activity was found in posterior cingulate cortex and in regions of medial and 
lateral parietal cortex that include the temporo-parietal junction. Although the authors themselves 
don’t notice the point, these are vital elements of the mindreading network, as we noted earlier. 
 In a later study, Chua, Schacter, & Sperling (2009) contrasted metamemory judgments with 
two distinct kinds of ﬁ rst-order judgment, one of which consisted of judgments of recognition, 
as before, but the other of which involved judgments of facial attractiveness (which was used as 
an additional control). The investigators found differential activity in a number of areas. These 
included posterior cingulate and areas of medial and lateral parietal cortex that contain the 
temporo-parietal junction. But in addition they found activity in medial prefrontal cortex, which 
is also generally thought to be part of the mindreading network—albeit a region whose functions 
may also be somewhat more general. Almost all components of the mindreading network were 
thereby found to be active. 
 These results provide further support for the interpretive sensory-access theory, while being 
correspondingly problematic for those who believe that self-awareness is direct and independent 
of mindreading. 
 Conclusion 
 This chapter has contrasted two views of knowledge of one’s own thoughts. According to the ﬁ rst, 
self-knowledge of at least a subset of thoughts is direct, non-interpretive, and especially reliable. 
According to the second, self-knowledge results from turning our mindreading capacities on 
ourselves, utilizing sensory-involving cues (including visual imagery and inner speech as well 
as perceptions of our own behavior). These cues need to be interpreted, just as the mindreading 
system needs to interpret sensory input when attributing thoughts to other people. We have seen 
that the interpretive sensory-access account comports well with global broadcasting theories of 
the architecture of cognition, as well as with sensory-involving theories of working memory, 
and that it can explain the widespread data on confabulation for thoughts collected by social 
psychologists. In contrast, a direct-access account cannot explain this data. Moreover, there is 
no convincing evidence of dissociations between self-knowledge and other-knowledge in either 

481
schizophrenia or autism, and nor do there appear to be different brain networks implicated in the 
two forms of knowledge. So the interpretive sensory-access theory is currently better supported 
by the evidence.  
 Acknowledgements 
 Some of the material in this chapter is drawn from Carruthers (2011), with permission of the 
author and Oxford University Press.  
 References 
 Baars, B. (1988).  A Cognitive Th eory of Consciousness . Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press . 
 Baars, B. (1997).  In the Th eatre of Consciousness . Oxford:  Oxford University Press . 
 Baars, B. (2002) . Th e conscious access hypothesis: origins and recent evidence.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 6 : 47–52 . 
 Baars, B. (2003) . How brain reveals mind: Neuroimaging supports the central role of conscious experience. 
 Journal of Consciousness Studies  10 : 100–14 . 
 Baars, B., Ramsoy, T., & Laureys, S. (2003) . Brain, consciousness, and the observing self.  Trends in 
Neurosciences  26 : 671–5 . 
 Baddeley, A. (2006).  Working Memory, Th ought, and Action . Oxford:  Oxford University Press . 
 Baron-Cohen, S. (1991) . Th e development of theory of mind in autism: Deviance and delay.  Psychiatric 
Clinics of North America  14 : 33–51 . 
 Baron-Cohen, S. (1992) . Out of sight or out of mind: Another look at deception in autism.  Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry  33 : 1141–55 . 
 Barrett, H. (2005) . Enzymatic computation and cognitive modularity.  Mind and Language  20 : 259–87 . 
 Bem, D. (1967) . Self-perception: An alternative interpretation of cognitive dissonance phenomena. 
 Psychological Review  74 : 183–200 . 
 Blakemore, S-J., Frith, C., & Wolpert, D. (1999) . Spatiotemporal prediction modulates the perception of 
self-produced stimuli.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  11 : 551–9 . 
 Blakemore, S-J., Smith, J., Steel, R., Johnson, E., & Frith, C. (2000) . Th e perception of self-produced 
sensory stimuli in patients with auditory hallucinations and passivity experiences: Evidence for a 
breakdown in self-monitoring.  Psychological Medicine  30 : 1131–9 . 
 Blakemore, S-J., Wolpert, D., & Frith, C. (1998) . Central cancellation of self-produced tickle sensation. 
 Nature Neuroscience  1 : 635–40 . 
 Bolyard, C. (2009) . Medieval skepticism. In: E. Zalta (Ed.),  Th e Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . <http://
plato.stanford. edu/archives/spr2009/entries/skepticism-medieval>. 
 Bri ñ ol, P., & Petty, R. (2003) . Overt head movements and persuasion: a self-validation analysis.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology  84 : 1123–39 . 
 Br ü ne, M. (2005) . “Th eory of mind” in schizophrenia: A review of the literature.  Schizophrenia Bulletin 
 31 : 21–42 . 
 Br ü ne, M., Lissek, S., Fuchs, N., Witthaus, H., Peters, S., Nicolas, V., Juckel, G., & Tegenthoff , M. 
(2008) . An fMRI study of theory of mind in schizophrenic patients with “passivity” symptoms. 
 Neuropsychologia  46 : 1992–2001 . 
 Byrne, R. & Whiten, A. (Eds) (1988).  Machiavellian Intelligence . Oxford:  Oxford University Press . 
 Byrne, R. & Whiten, A. (Eds) (1997).  Machiavellian Intelligence II . Cambridge:  Cambridge University 
Press . 
 Carruthers, P. (2011).  Th e Opacity of Mind: An Integrative Th eory of Self-Knowledge . Oxford:  Oxford 
University Press . 
 Caston, V. (2002).  Aristotle on consciousness .  Mind  111 : 751–815 . 
REFERENCES

MINDREADING THE SELF
482
 Chua, E., Schacter, D., & Sperling, R. (2009) . Neural correlates of metamemory: A comparison of 
feeling-of-knowing and retrospective confi dence judgments.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 21 : 1751–65 . 
 Chua, E., Schacter, D., Rand-Giovannetti, E., & Sperling, R. (2006) . Understanding metamemory: 
Neural correlates of the cognitive process and subjective level of confi dence in recognition memory. 
 NeuroImage  29 : 1150–60 . 
 D’Esposito, M. (2007) . From cognitive to neural models of working memory.  Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society B  362 : 761–72 . 
 Damasio, A. (1994).  Descartes’ Error . London: Papermac. 
 Dehaene, S., & Naccache, L. (2001) . Toward a cognitive neuroscience of consciousness: basic evidence and 
a workspace framework.  Cognition  79 : 1–37 . 
 Dehaene, S., Changeux, J-P., Naccache, L., Sackur, J., & Sergent, C. (2006) . Conscious, preconscious, and 
subliminal processing: a testable taxonomy.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences  10 : 204–11 . 
 Dehaene, S., Naccache, L., Cohen, L., Bihan, D., Mangin, J., Poline, J., & Riviere, D. (2001) . Cerebral 
mechanisms of word priming and unconscious repetition masking.  Nature Neuroscience  4 : 752–8 . 
 Dehaene, S., Sergent, C., & Changeux, J. (2003) . A neuronal network model linking subjective reports 
and objective physiological data during conscious perception.  Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences  100 : 8520–5 . 
 Descartes, R. (1641).  Meditations on First Philosophy . In E. Anscombe & P. Geach (Eds & transl. ),  Descartes 
Philosophical Writings . London: Th omas Nelson & Sons (1954). 
 Dunlosky, J., & Metcalfe, J. (2009).  Metacognition . London:  Sage Publications . 
 Elliot, A., & Devine, P. (1994) . On the motivational nature of cognitive dissonance: Dissonance as 
psychological discomfort.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  67 : 382–94 . 
 Farrant, A., Boucher, J., & Blades, M. (1999) . Metamemory in children with autism.  Child Development 
 70 : 107–31 . 
 Fisher, N., Happ é , F., & Dunn, J. (2005) . Th e relationship between vocabulary, grammar, and false belief 
task performance in children with autistic spectrum disorders and children with moderate learning 
diffi  culties.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  46 : 409–19 . 
 Frith, C. (1992).  Th e Cognitive Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia . Hillsdale:  Erlbaum . 
 Frith, C., Blakemore, S-J., & Wolpert, D. (2000a) . Explaining the symptoms of schizophrenia: 
Abnormalities in the awareness of action.  Brain Research Reviews  31 : 357–63 . 
 Frith, C., Blakemore, S-J., & Wolpert, D. (2000b) . Abnormalities in the awareness and control of action. 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B  355 : 1771–88 . 
 Frith, U., & Frith, C. (2003) . Development and neurophysiology of mentalizing.  Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences  358 ,  459–73 . 
 Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998) . Mirror neurons and the simulation theory of mindreading.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences  2 : 493–501 . 
 Gilbert, D., & Wilson, T. (2007) . Prospection: Experiencing the future.  Science  317 : 1351–4 . 
 Gillihan, S., & Farah, M. (2005) . Is self special? A critical review of evidence from experimental psychology 
and cognitive neuroscience.  Psychological Bulletin  131 : 76–97 . 
 Goldman, A. (2006).  Simulating Minds . Oxford:  Oxford University Press . 
 Goldman, A. (2009) . Replies to the commentators.  Philosophical Studies  144 : 477–91 . 
 Gosling, P., Denizeau, M., & Oberl é , D. (2006) . Denial of responsibility: A new mode of dissonance 
reduction.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  90 : 722–33 . 
 Hrdy, S. (2009).  Mothers and Others . Cambridge:  Harvard University Press . 
 Janssen, I., Krabbendam, L., Jolles, J., & van Os, J. (2003) . Alterations in theory of mind in patients with 
schizophrenia and nonpsychotic relatives.  Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavic a  108 : 110–17 . 
 Jeannerod, M. (2006).  Motor Cognition . Oxford:  Oxford University Press . 

483
 Jonides, J., Lewis, R., Nee, D., Lustig, C., Berman, M., & Moore, K. (2008) . Th e mind and brain of 
short-term memory.  Annual Review of Psychology  59 : 193–224 . 
 Kelley, W., Macrae, C., Wyland, C., Caglar, S., Inati, S., & Heatherton, T. (2002) . Finding the self? An 
event-related fMRI study.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  14 : 785–94 . 
 Kjaer, T., Nowak, M., & Lou, H. (2002) . Refl ective self-awareness and conscious states: PET evidence for a 
common midline parietofrontal core.  NeuroImage  17 : 1080–6 . 
 Klein, S., Chan, R., & Loft us, J. (1999) . Independence of episodic and semantic self–knowledge: Th e case 
from autism.  Social Cognition  17 : 413–36 . 
 Klein, S., Cosmides, L., Costabile, K., & Mei, L. (2002) . Is there something special about the self? A 
neuropsychological case study.  Journal of Research in Personality  36 : 490–506 . 
 Klein, S., Cosmides, L., Murray, E., & Tooby, J. (2004).  On the acquisition of knowledge about personality 
traits: Does learning about the self engage diff erent mechanisms than learning about others?  Social 
Cognition  22 : 367–90 . 
 Klein, S., & Lax, M. (2010) . Th e unanticipated resilience of trait self-knowledge in the face of neural 
damage.  Memory  18 : 918–48 . 
 Koren, D., Seidman, L., Goldsmith, M., & Harvey, P. (2006) . Real-world cognitive—and metacognitive—
dysfunction in schizophrenia: A new approach for measuring (and remediating) more “right stuff .”  
 Schizophrenia Bulletin  32 : 310–26 . 
 Koren, D., Seidman, L., Poyurovsky, M., Goldsmith, M., Viksman, P., Zichel, S., & Klein, E. (2004) . 
Th e neuropsychological basis of insight in fi rst-episode schizophrenia: A pilot metacognitive study. 
 Schizophrenia Research  70 : 195–202 . 
 Koriat, A. (1995) . Dissociating knowing and the feeling of knowing: Further evidence for the accessibility 
model.  Journal of Experimental Psychology: General  124 : 311–33 . 
 Koriat, A. (1997) . Monitoring one’s own knowledge during study: A cue-utilization approach to judgments 
of learning.  Journal of Experimental Psychology: General  126 : 349–70 . 
 Kosslyn, S. (1994).  Image and Brain . Cambridge: MIT Press . 
 Kosslyn, S., & Th ompson, W. (2003) . When is early visual cortex activated during visual mental imagery. 
 Psychological Bulletin  129 : 723–46 . 
 Kreiman, G., Fried, I., & Koch, C. (2003) . Single neuron correlates of subjective vision in the human 
medial temporal lobe.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  99 : 8378–83 . 
 Leslie, A., & Th aiss, L. (1992) . Domain specifi city in conceptual development: Evidence from autism. 
 Cognition  43 : 225–51 . 
 Locke, J. (1690).  An Essay Concerning Human Understanding , J. Yolton (Ed. ). London: J. Dent & Sons 
(1965, two volumes). . 
 Lombardo, M., Barnes, J., Wheelwright, S., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2007) . Self-referential cognition and 
empathy in autism.  PLoSOne  9 : e833 . 
 Lombardo, M., Chakrabarti, B., Bullmore, E., Wheelwright, S., Sadek, S., Suckling, J., MRC AIMS 
Consortium, & Baron-Cohen, S. (2010) . Shared neural circuits for mentalizing about the self and 
others.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  22 : 1623–35 . 
 Lou, H., Luber, B., Crupain, M., Keenan, J., Nowak, M., & Kjaer, T. (2004) . Parietal cortex and 
representation of the mental self.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA  101 : 6827–32 . 
 Lysaker, P., Dimaggio, G., Carcione, A., Procacci, M., Buck, K., Davis, L., & Nicolo, G. (2010) . 
Metacognition and schizophrenia: Th e capacity for self-refl ectivity as a predictor for prospective 
assessments of work performance over six months.  Schizophrenia Research  122 : 124–30 . 
 Macrae, C., Moran, J., Heatherton, T., Banfi eld, J., & Kelley, W. (2004) . Medial prefrontal activity predicts 
memory for self.  Cerebral Cortex  14 ,  647–54 . 
 Maril, A., Simons, J., Weaver, J., & Schacter, D. (2005) . Graded recall success: An event-related fMRI 
comparison of tip of the tongue and feeling of knowing.  NeuroImage  24 : 1130–8 . 
REFERENCES

MINDREADING THE SELF
484
 McCloskey, D., Colebatch, J., Potter, E., & Burke, D. (1983) . Judgments about onset of rapid voluntary 
movements in man.  Journal of Neurophysiology  49 : 851–63 . 
 Meltzoff , A., & Brooks, R. (2008) . Self-experience as a mechanism for learning about others.  Developmental 
Psychology  44 : 1257–65 . 
 Mendelson, M. (2009) . Saint Augustine. In E. Zalta (Ed. ),  Th e Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 
Available at: <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2009/entries/augustine/>. 
 Metcalfe, J., Schwartz, B., & Joaquim, S. (1993).  Th e cue-familiarity heuristic in metacognition .  Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition  19 : 851–61 . 
 M ü ller, N., & Knight, R. (2006) . Th e functional neuroanatomy of working memory: contributions of 
human brain lesion studies.  Neuroscience  139 : 51–8 . 
 Nichols, S., & Stich, S. (2003).  Mindreading . Oxford:  Oxford University Press . 
 Ochsner, K., Knierim, K., Ludlow, D., Hanelin, J., Ramachandran, T., Glover, G., & Mackey, S. (2004). 
 Refl ecting upon feelings: An fMRI study of neural systems supporting the attribution of emotion to self 
and other .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  16 : 1746–72 . 
 Paulescu, E., Frith, D., & Frackowiak, R. (1993).  Th e neural correlates of the verbal component of working 
memory .  Nature  362 : 342–5 . 
 Perner, J., Frith, U., Leslie, A., & Leekam, S. (1989) . Explorations of the autistic child’s theory of mind: 
Knowledge, belief, and communication.  Child Development  60 :  689–700 . 
 Pfeifer, J., Lieberman, M., & Dapretto, M. (2007) . “I know you are but what am I?”: Neural bases of self- 
and social knowledge retrieval in children and adults.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  19 : 1323–37 . 
 Postle, B. (2006) . Working memory as an emergent property of the mind and brain.  Neuroscience 
 139 : 23–38 . 
 Reder, L. (1987) . Strategy selection in question answering.  Cognitive Psychology  19 : 90–138 . 
 Reggev, N., Zuckerman, M., & Maril, A. (2011) . Are all judgments created equal? An fMRI study of 
semantic and episodic metamemory predictions.  Neuropsychologia  49 : 3036–45 . 
 Richerson, P., & Boyd, R. (2005).  Not By Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human Evolution . 
Chicago:  University of Chicago Press . 
 Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2001) . Neurophysiological mechanisms underlying the 
understanding and imitation of action.  Nature Reviews Neuroscience  2 : 661–70 . 
 Robbins, P. (2009) . Guilt by dissociation: Why mindreading may not be prior to metacognition aft er all. 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences  32 : 159–60 . 
 Russell, J., & Hill, E. (2001) . Action-monitoring and intention reporting in children with autism.  Journal of 
Child Psychology and Psychiatry  42 : 317–28 . 
 Saxe, R. (2009) . Th eory of mind (neural basis). In: W. Banks (Ed. ),  Encyclopedia of Consciousness , Vol. 2, 
401–10 Cambridge:  MIT Press . 
 Saxe, R., & Kanwisher, N. (2003).  People thinking about thinking people: Th e role of the temporo-parietal 
junction in “theory of mind.”  NeuroImage  19 : 1835–42 . 
 Saxe, R., & Powell, L. (2006) . It’s the thought that counts: Specifi c brain regions for one component of 
theory of mind.  Psychological Science  17 : 692–9 . 
 Saxe, R., Moran, J., Sholz, J., & Gabrieli, J. (2006) . Overlapping and non-overlapping brain regions for 
theory of mind and self refl ection in individual subjects.  Scan  1 : 229–34 . 
 Scher, S., & Cooper, J. (1989) . Motivational basis of dissonance: Th e singular role of behavioral 
consequences.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  56 : 899–906 . 
 Shergill, S., Brammer, M., Fukuda, R., Bullmore, E., Amaro, E., Murray, R., & McGuire, P. (2002) . 
Modulation of activity in temporal cortex during generation of inner speech.  Human Brain Mapping 
 16 : 219–27 . 
 Simon, L., Greenberg, J., & Brehm, J. (1995) . Trivialization: Th e forgotten mode of dissonance reduction. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  68 : 247–60 . 

485
 Sprong, M., Schothorst, P., Vos, E., Hox, J., & Van Engeland, H. (2007) . Th eory of mind in schizophrenia: 
Meta-analysis.  British Journal of Psychiatry  191 : 5–13 . 
 Stratta, P., Daneluzzo, E., Riccardi, I., Bustini, M., & Rossi, A. (2009) . Metacognitive ability and social 
functioning are related in persons with schizophrenic disorder.  Schizophrenia Research  108 : 301–2 . 
 Wegner, D., & Wheatley, T. (1999) . Apparent mental causation: Sources of the experience of the will. 
 American Psychologist  54 : 480–91 . 
 Wellman, H., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001) . Meta-analysis of theory-of-mind development: Th e truth 
about false belief.  Child Development  72 : 655–84 . 
 Wells, G., & Petty, R. (1980) . Th e eff ects of overt head movements on persuasion.  Basic and Applied Social 
Psychology  1 : 219–30 . 
 Williams, D., & Happ é , F. (2009) . “What did I say?” vs. “What did I think?”: Attributing false beliefs to self 
amongst children with and without autism.  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  39 : 865–73 . 
 Williams, D., & Happ é , F. (2010).  Representing intentions in self and other: Studies of autism and typical 
development .  Developmental Science  13 : 307–19 . 
 Wolpert, D., & Ghahramani, Z. (2000) . Computational principles of movement neuroscience.  Nature 
Neuroscience  3 : 1212–17 . 
 Wolpert, D., & Kawato, M. (1998) . Multiple paired forward and inverse models for motor control.  Neural 
Networks  11 : 1317–29 . 
 Young, M. (1995) . On the origin of personal causal theories.  Psychonomic Bulletin and Review  2 : 83–104 . 
 
REFERENCES

This page intentionally left blank 

Index
A
ABAT  331
abstraction, infants  24
accidents, moral judgements  94–6
acquisition question  448
action chaining, studies in autism  389
action discrimination, mirror neurons  237
action prediction  97, 98, 99–100, 136
action rationality studies, autism  390, 392
action sequence studies, autism  388
action understanding
in autism
behavioral studies  387–8
broken mirror theory  386–7
implicit measures  388–9
mentalizing theory  385–6, 387
neuroimaging studies  389–90, 391
brain and cognitive systems  384
infants  246–7
non-mirror mechanisms  276
role of mentalizing  382–4
role of mirror neurons  249, 381–2, 384
humans  275–6
monkeys  267–70, 272–3
role of superior temporal sulcus  148
activational effects on development  309
affective content, functional imaging studies  152
affective empathy  326
see also emotional empathy
afﬁ liation  97–8, 99–100
AGRIN  331
alexithymia  203, 206
alpha activity, resting state EEG studies  126–7
amniocentesis studies of hormone levels  310–11
limitations  314–15
amygdala  182
effect of testosterone administration  317
and emotional empathy  181–2, 368–70
and empathy for fear  455
integrated emotion systems model  365, 366, 372
role in stress response  294
and social anxiety disorder  300
Wolframin expression  334–5
androgens
effects on females  308
clinical conditions  310
see also testosterone
androstenedione, levels in autism  333
anger, empathy for  202
anger recognition  365
effect of testosterone administration  316
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)  182
involvement in empathy  198, 201
involvement in pain perception  181, 200
see also cingulate cortex
anterior insula (AI)
involvement in empathy  198, 201–4
involvement in pain perception  200
see also insula
anterior midcingulate cortex (aMCC)
involvement in empathy  198, 202, 202–4
involvement in pain perception  200
see also cingulate cortex
anthropomorphism  98
anticipation, role of mirror neurons  244
anticipatory intervening paradigm  5, 7
antisocial personality disorder (ASPD)  365
appearance–reality (A–R) tasks, teaching interventions 
in autism  417
apraxia, action recognition problems  249
AQ-Child (Autistic Spectrum Quotient-Child Version) 
scores, relationship to fetal testosterone levels  
313, 314
AR  332
ARNT2  331, 334
Asperger’s syndrome
candidate gene association study  329–35
emotion understanding, teaching interventions  419
empathy for pain  406
implicit mentalizing  385
moral judgements  96
see also autism
attachment
in autism  400
role of oxytocin  296
autism  413
action understanding
behavioral studies  387–8
implicit measures  388–9
neuroimaging studies  389–90, 391
communication and language  404–5
non-literal language understanding  64
dissociation  475–8
effect of oxytocin administration  299
emotion recognition impairment  182
empathy  206, 367
empathy proﬁ le  326
false belief understanding  59
functional imaging studies  139, 184–5, 406
future research directions  392
Note: page numbers in italics refer to ﬁ gures and tables. Footnotes are indicated by the sufﬁ x ‘n’ followed by the 
note number, for example 448n1.

INDEX
488
autism (cont’d)
gaze direction perception  123–4
genetic studies  327–9
candidate genes  331–2
endophenotypes  335–6
gene association study design  329–30, 332
study results  332–5
imitation, controlled studies  402
mirror neuron system function  185, 253–4, 281–3, 
405–6
relationship to fetal testosterone levels  313, 314
self, development of  407–8
self-awareness
clinical descriptions  398
ﬁ rst-hand accounts  399
of mental states  403–4
self-conscious emotions, controlled studies  400–2
self–other relations, controlled studies  399–400
theories of  330
broken mirror theory  386–7
mentalizing theory  385–6, 387
theory of mind interventions  414, 422
beneﬁ ts  423
developmental approach  417–19
teaching false belief understanding  414–17
teaching joint attention  420–2
teaching social skills  420
automatic mindreading  78–9, 80, 173
cognitive efﬁ ciency  81–2
limitations  82, 164
unnecessary or unhelpful processes  80–1
aversive conditioning  368–9
taste aversion learning  370–1
AVPR1 genes  331
AVPR1A  335
AVPR1B  335
awareness of events
infants’ understanding of  53–4
see also perspective-taking
B
Bayesian learning  20–1, 453–4
domains  28
framework principles  21, 22
understanding of personality traits  27–9
BDNF  331
behavior-reading, infants  7–10
belief
direct and indirect tests  41n5
dissociation  41–2
ERP studies  119–22
Introduction and Elimination rules  37–9
role in moral judgments  94–5
supposition versus simulation  39–40
see also false belief understanding
belief-desire psychology  51
belief-desire tasks, adult studies  75, 76–7
role of working memory  77–8
Bem Sex Role Inventory score, inﬂ uence of fetal 
testosterone levels  312
biases
adults’ judgements  74
see also egocentric bias
blindfold studies of infants  9–10, 22–6
gaze-following  53
blindsight  41n5
bluff, functional imaging studies  139
body-directed encoding, VIP neurons  270, 272
bonding, role of oxytocin  296
borderline personality disorder (BPD), effect of 
oxytocin  300
brain
cortical organization  146–7
functional heterogeneity of neurons  145–6
localization of function  144–5
neural basis of mindreading  86–8
see also functional imaging studies
scale of neural responses  145
brain–behavior correlations  223–5
brain lesion studies  164–5
amygdala  181–2, 455
of emotional empathy  181
frontal lobe  178
insula and basal ganglia  454
left temperoparietal lesion  167–9
right lateral prefrontal cortex lesion  166–7
semantic dementia  171
working memory impairment  169–70
see also case studies; stroke damage; transcranial 
magnetic stimulation
broadly congruent mirror neurons  235–6, 238, 243
Broca’s aphasia  249
broken mirror theory of autism  386–7, 390–1
C
Cambridge Child Development Project  311–14
canonical neurons  267
case studies
CM (semantic dementia)  171, 172
Phineas Gage  178
NK ( insula damage)  454
NM (amygdala damage)  455
PF (left tempero-parietal lesion)  167–9, 170
SM (bilateral amygdale damage)  182, 455
WBA (right lateral prefrontal brain lesion)  166–7
CAST (Childhood Autism Spectrum Test) score, 
relationship to fetal testosterone levels  313, 314
castration experiments  308
caudate, integrated emotion systems model  366
causal explanation
children’s’ understanding  44–6
role of belief, Introduction and Elimination rules  
37–9
teleology  35–7
cerebellum, mirror neurons  241
cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (CSF), oxytocin levels  292
CGA  332
CGRPR  332
charity, principle of  37
children
belief  40–1
developmental pattern  84–6
dissociation  41–2
false belief understanding  54–6, 133
early sensitivity  42–4
ERP studies  121–2

INDEX
489
implicit understanding  354–6
functional imaging studies, developmental 
differences  142
late childhood development  63–4, 65
mirror neuron system activity  246
probabilistic models of learning  20–1
resting state EEG studies  127–8
teleology  35–7, 47
understanding of caused behavior  44–5
understanding of personality traits  26–9
understanding of reasons for action  45–6
see also deaf children; infants
“child-scientist” theory-theory  450–1, 453
chimpanzees
cultural proﬁ les  438
imitation  439–40, 441
mindreading  434–6, 441–2
China, theory of mind development sequence  57–8
cingulate cortex
activation during metacognition  480
involvement in empathy  198, 200, 201–2, 204
involvement in pain perception  181, 200
in psychopathy  367
classical test theory (CTT)  109
CNR1  331, 335–6
cognitive empathy  180, 182–4, 326, 366
interaction with emotional empathy  187–9, 188
in psychopathy  366–7
collaborative behaviour
effect of testosterone  317
functional imaging studies  99
hunter-gatherers  432
common primate ancestors  438–41
communication in autism  404–5
non-literal language understanding  64
teaching interventions  418
Communication of Affect Receiving Ability Test 
(CARAT)  105, 106, 114
comparator system  475
compassion, relationship to empathy  196
competitive situations, functional imaging studies  98, 
99
compulsive imitation  253
concern, empathic  207
conduct disorder  365
confabulation  468–70
dual-method theories  471–2
conformity  437
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)  310, 334
connectivity patterns, cortical  147
contextual factors, inﬂ uence on mindreading  79
contextual information, modulation of empathic 
responses  206, 218
cooperation
effect of testosterone  317
functional imaging studies  99
hunter-gatherers  432
copy number variations (CNV), in autism  328
core knowledge theories  19
cortical organization  146–7
cortisol response, effect of oxytocin  293
coyness, in autism  401
CU (callous and unemotional) traits, psychopathy  364, 
365
cue-based paradigms, empathy for pain  198
computational route  200–1
cultural differences
in executive-function development  56
in false belief understanding  55
in social attribution  29
in theory of mind development sequence  57–8, 65
cultural transmission  436–7
culture  434
hunter-gatherers  433
reconstructing ancestral cultural capacities  438–41
“curse of knowledge” effect  74
CYP genes  332
CYP11A  334
CYP11B1  333, 333–4
CYP17A1  333
D
deaf adults
functional imaging studies  139
late acquisition of false belief reasoning  352
deaf children  345, 358
background variables  346, 347
educational approaches  346
executive function  351–2
development  355, 356
false belief understanding  19
implicit understanding  354–6
study results  349–50
imitation  353
joint attention limitations, DoH children  356–8
non-literal language understanding  64
research methods  348
seeing-knowing understanding  354
theory of mind development  59–61, 65–6
pretense understanding  62–3
understanding of desires and intentions  353–4
variation in language experience  346, 347, 348–9
deception understanding
in frontotemporal dementia  187
functional imaging studies  99
decoupling
functional imaging studies  141
infants  12
“deep social mind”
culture  436–7
evolution, role of hunter-gatherer existence  431–4
default network  461–2
deitic terms, usage in autism  404–5
dementia
frontotemporal  187
semantic  171
depression, impaired emotion recognition  182
desire reasoning, deaf children  353–4
development  54–6, 55, 84–6, 127–8
activational effects  309
in autism  407–8
cultural differences  56, 57–8, 65
deaf children  59–61, 62–3, 65–6, 355, 356
effects of hormones  309, 311–314

INDEX
490
cultural differences (cont’d)
of executive function  56, 351–2, 355, 356
functional imaging studies  142
late  63–4, 65
of mirror neuron system  245–7
probabilistic models  21–2
puberty  315–15, 319
two-system account  83–6
DHCR7  331
Diagnostic Analysis of Non-Verbal Accuracy Scale 
(DANVA, DANVA-2-AF)  105, 106
reliability  108, 109, 110, 114
“difference-making” approach, causal explanation  37
diffusion imaging (DTI)  147
digit length ratios  316
disgust
empathy for  202, 280–1, 454
in psychopathy  370–1, 372
integrated emotion systems model  365, 366
dissociation  41–2, 47, 474
in autism  475–8
between mirroring and self-projection  462
in schizophrenia  474–5
dissonance studies  469–70
distance, relationship to mirror neuron responses  270
distress, empathic  207
diverse beliefs (DB) awareness  57, 58
diverse desires (DD) awareness  57
domains  28
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC)
involvement in empathy  202–4
see also cingulate cortex
dorsal premotor cortex, mirror activity  275
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC)  183, 184
Down syndrome, theory of mind interventions  416
dual-method accounts of self-knowledge  468, 471–2
E
eating, imagination study  457–8
EEG studies see electroencephalography
effortful processes  76–80, 164
role of TPJ  153
egalitarianism  434
egocentric bias  74, 77, 452–3
after stroke damage  88
electrode implantation studies, mirror neuron system  
241
electroencephalography (EEG)  3, 119
resting state EEG studies
adults  126–7
children  127–8
mu-suppression  128–9
studies of mirror neuron system  240, 241, 242
in autism  253, 281–2
children  246
see also event-related potential (ERP) studies; 
mu-suppression
Elimination rules  37–9
embedded beliefs
brain lesion studies  169–70
functional imaging studies  154
embedded motor actions, mirror neuron response  
237–8
embodied judgmental accuracy  111
embodiment theories  215
emotional contagion  179
relationship to empathy  195–6
emotional empathy  179, 180–2, 248, 366
functions  368
interaction with cognitive empathy  187–9, 188
in psychopathy
anger processing  371
disgust processing  370–1
fear and sadness processing  368–70
pain processing  370
see also empathy
emotional experience, role of insula  202, 203
emotional intelligence  105n2
emotional responses, role of ACC and AI  204
emotion recognition
coactivation of ESS and MSAS  221
ERP studies  124
functional imaging studies  137, 138, 139, 150–1
integrated emotion systems model  365–6
interventions in autism  419
role of mirror neurons  280–1
role of oxytocin  297–8
emotions, self-conscious, studies in autism  400–2
empathic concern  207
empathic distress  207
empathy  178–80, 214, 366, 437
behavioral consequences  207
brain–behavior correlations  223–5
cognitive  182–4
components of  326
correlation with mirror neuron activity  244, 247
deﬁ nitions  195–7
emotional  180–2
ESS and MSAS systems  215–217
coactivation  221
dissociation  217–20
functional coupling  222
functional imaging studies  198–200, 199, 202–5
different computational routes  200–1
distinctions between direct and vicarious pain  
201–2
future research areas  207–8, 225–6
heritability  327
candidate genes  331–2
endophenotypes  335–6
gene association study design  329–30, 332
insights from autism genetics  327–9
study results  332–5
inﬂ uence of fetal testosterone levels  312–13, 314
interaction between emotional and cognitive systems  
187–9, 188
modulation of responses  205–6
neuropsychiatric defects  184–7
see also autism; psychopathy; schizophrenia
and oxytocin  298
picture-based and cue-based paradigms  197–8
self-conscious emotions, studies in autism  400–2
shared network hypothesis  197, 198
see also cognitive empathy; emotional empathy; 
motor empathy
empathy quotient (EQ)  329

INDEX
491
emulation  250
non-human primates  438–40
EN-2(AUTS1)  331
enactment imagination (E-imagination)  456–8
encoding of experience  13–14
environment monitoring  165, 174
brain lesion study  167–9
envy, effect of oxytocin  296
equivalent dipole problem
EEG studies  128
ERP studies  124
ESR genes  332
ESR2  333
event-related potential (ERP) studies  88
advantages  125–6
of belief/desire reasoning  119–21
in children  121–2
of mental state decoding  122–4
technical problems  124–5
evolutionary theories, “mesh” with simulation theory  
462–3
evolution of the mind
reconstructing ancestral cultural capacities  438–41
role of hunter-gatherer existence  431–4
executive function
in autism, teaching interventions  415–16
development  56, 351
deaf children  351–2, 355, 356
in psychopathy  365
role in mindreading  77–8
experience sharing  215–17
experience sharing system (ESS)  216, 218, 225
coactivation with MSAS  221
dissociation from MSAS system  217–20
functional coupling with MSAS  222
eye closure, infants’ understanding  22
Eyes see Reading the Mind in the Eyes test
eye tracking studies
in Asperger’s syndrome  385
in autism  388–9
deaf children  356
infants  5
F
F5  266–7
classes of neurons  235–6
kinematic processing  382
mirror neurons  233–4
see also mirror neuron system
facial expression perception  180, 249
anger, in psychopathy  371
in autism  254
disgust  202, 280–1, 454
in psychopathy  370–1
effect of oxytocin  297–8
effect of testosterone administration  316
fear and sadness processing  368–9
impairment in psychopathy  369–70
modulation of empathic responses  205
see also emotion recognition
false-belief tasks
factors in success  12–14
infants’ failure in  10–12
unexpected events  148
false belief understanding  57, 168, 179
adult studies  75, 76–7
role of working memory  77–8
in autism  59, 385, 403, 476–7
developmental approach  417–19
teaching interventions  414–17
brain lesion studies  170
left temperoparietal lesion  167–9
right lateral prefrontal cortex lesion  166–7
chimpanzees  436
cognitive versus affective  183
cultural differences in age of achievement  55
deaf children  19, 59
late acquisition  352
methodological issues  345–9
role of executive functioning  351–2
study results  349–50
direct and indirect tests  41n5
early sensitivity  42–4
ERP studies  119–22
functional imaging studies  133–4, 136
study design  140
implicit understanding  354–6
infants  4–7, 14–15, 54–6, 133
approaches  44–6
blindfold studies  9–10
ignorance rule  7
Mistaken Max  35–6
and moral judgements  94–5, 96
non-automatic nature  78–9
role of executive functioning  351–2, 351–2
see also belief
familiarization-test paradigms  52
fear, empathy for  202, 365, 368–9, 455
impairment in psychopathy  369–70
fear recognition, role of amygdala  182
fetal androgen theory  330
fetal testosterone levels  309, 310–11
Cambridge Child Development Project  311–14
limitations of amniotic ﬂ uid measurements  314–15
“ﬁ ght-or-ﬂ ight” response  293
ﬁ rst-person mindreading  448n1
ﬁ sh, social learning  436–7
framework principles  21, 22
framework theories  20
frontal lobe lesions  178, 183
compulsive imitation  253
frontal lobes
and belief reasoning  120–1, 122
role in mindreading  88
see also inferior frontal gyrus; orbitofrontal cortex; 
prefrontal cortex
frontotemporal dementia  187
FSHB  332
functional adaptation analysis  155
functional imaging studies  88, 132, 143, 183
in autism  184–5, 254, 282, 389–90, 391, 406
of cooperation and competition  98, 99
differences between theory of mind regions  151–3
of empathy  180–1, 198–205, 199, 280–1

INDEX
492
functional imaging studies (cont’d)
brain–behavior correlations  223–5
ESS and MSAS systems  215–22
of false belief understanding  133–4
inter-individual variability  142
limitations  156
magnitude of responses  153–4
of mentalizing  383
of mirror neuron system  239, 241–2, 274–6, 279, 
381–2, 384
in autism  254, 282
of moral judgement-making  95, 96–7
of pantomiming  222
patterns within ToM regions  154–6
sample stimuli  135, 136
in schizophrenia  186
of self-knowledge  478–80
of social concepts  171
of social inference  222
strong hypothesis  143–4
empirical objections  149–51
theoretical objections  144–9
study designs  134–40
necessary and sufﬁ cient features  140
of testosterone administration  317
use of transcranial magnetic stimulation  143
G
GABR genes  331
GABRB3  334
Gage, Phineas  178
gaze direction, role of amygdala  369
gaze direction perception, ERP studies  123–4
gaze-following, infants  53
gender-typical behavior, inﬂ uence of fetal testosterone 
levels  312, 314
generosity, effect of oxytocin  296
genome wide association studies (GWAS), of autism  
328
goal processing  382
grammar, developmental associations with 
mindreading  83–4
grammatical processing defects, false belief reasoning  
170
gray matter volume, ventromedial prefrontal cortex  
186
guilt, in autism  401
H
habituation-test paradigms (familiarization-test 
paradigms)  52
heartbeat detection task  202
Hebbian learning  245–6, 251
helping behavior
children  42–3
role of empathy  207
hidden emotion (HE) awareness  57
hierarchical Bayesian modelling (HBM)  21
high-level mindreading  172
simulation theory process  451–4
theory-theory process  450–1
hormones  308
effects on development  309
future research areas  318–19, 320
postnatal effects, studies of activational hormones  
315–16
see also oxytocin; testosterone
how, what and why of actions, mirror neuron responses
humans  243
monkeys  238
HOXA1  331, 334
HSD genes  332
hunter-gatherers  431–3
I
IGF1, IGF2  331
ignorance rule, false-belief tasks  7
imagination
memory distortion  458n5
power of  456–8
role in simulation theory process  452, 453
imitation
in autism  386, 387–8, 402
compulsive  253
deaf children  353
non-human primates  438–40
over-imitation  437–8, 440–1
role in cultural transmission  437
role of mirror neurons  249–50, 278–9
imitation learning  279–80
implicit mentalizing
in autism  385
and simulation theory  459–60
impression management  100
indirect elicited-response task  11–12
infants
action understanding  246–7
blindfold studies  22–6
evidence for mind reading  3–5, 14–15
behavior-reading interpretations  7–10
false-belief task failures  10–12
predictive behavior  5–7
false belief understanding  54
early sensitivity  42–4
gaze-following  53
imitation  440
intention understanding  51–3
mindreading abilities  84–5
mindreading system, alternative developmental 
accounts  84–6
mirror neuron system development  245–7
mu-suppression studies  128–9
testosterone levels  309
understanding of agents’ awareness of events  53–4
understanding of perception  22–6
inferior frontal gyrus (IFG)  88, 182
integrated emotion systems model  365, 366
involvement in empathy  180–1, 200
kinematic processing  381–2
inferior parietal lobe (IPL)  180, 182, 265
and belief reasoning  120, 122
mirror neurons  267, 274–5, 381, 386
insula  182, 280–1
integrated emotion systems model  365, 366
involvement in empathy  198, 201–4
involvement in pain perception  181, 198–200, 201–2

INDEX
493
involvement in taste aversion learning  370–1
mirroring of disgust  454
integrated emotion systems (IES) model  365–6, 372–3
intention understanding  469
in autism  403, 476
children  41, 45–6, 47, 51–3
deaf children  353
role in moral judgments  94–5
role of mirror neurons  272–3
see also false belief understanding; Mistaken Max
interpersonal closeness, functional imaging studies  152
Interpersonal Perception Test 15 (IPT15)  105, 106, 114
Interpersonal Perception Test 30 (IPT30)  105, 106, 114
interpreters, use in studies of deaf children  348
interpretive sensory-access theory  472–3
intranasal oxytocin administration  292
intraparietal sulcus
goal processing  382
involvement in empathy  200
mirror neurons  234
see also mirror neuron system
Introduction rules  37–9
Iran, theory of mind development sequence  58
irony, children’s’ understanding  63–4
item response theory (IRT)  109, 114–15
J
jealousy, in autism  401–2
joint actions, role of mirror neurons  244, 252
joint attention
limitations in deaf (DoH) children  356–8
teaching interventions in autism  420–2, 423
jokes, children’s’ understanding  63–4
judgmental accuracy  104
item response theory (IRT)  114–15
peer ratings versus self-ratings  104–5
Social Relations Model (SRM)  115–16
judgmental accuracy measures  105–6
improvement of reliability  108
“easy” tests  109–10
embodied JA  111
using psychometric correct answer  110–11
reliability  114
estimates of  106–8
validity  108
K
kinematic processing  381–2
“knee-jerk task”  403, 476
knowledge, curse of  452–3
see also egocentric bias
knowledge access (KA) awareness  57, 58
“knowledge task,” performance of deaf children  354
L
language  434
in autism  404–5
non-literal language understanding  64
teaching interventions  418
hunter-gatherers  433
language development, relationship to fetal testosterone 
levels  311, 314
language evolution, role of mirror neurons  250–1
“laser-beam points,” children with autism  405
lateral intraparietal area (LIP)  266
mirror neurons  267
late slow wave (LSW) effect, ERP studies  122, 125, 
126
learning by observation, role of mirror neurons  252
LHB  332
LHCGR  332
LHRHR  332
“like-me” framework principle  22, 24–5
limbic system, and emotional empathy  181–2
localization of brain function  144–5
long-term knowledge of ToM  165, 170–1, 170–2, 174
looking in expectation, children  42
looking-time studies  3, 4–5, 42
interpretation  5
low-level mindreading  173, 449, 454–6
M
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
studies of mirror neuron system  239–40, 241–2, 
243
see also functional imaging studies
magnetoencephalography (MEG)
studies in autism  389
studies of mirror neuron system  240, 241, 277–8
MAOB  331, 334
mastery, attainment over others  98
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC)  87, 98, 99, 128, 133, 
183
differences from other ToM regions  152–3, 155
involvement in empathy  200, 217
mentalizing  382–3
role in moral judgment  96
and self-knowledge  479, 480
MEG studies see magnetoencephalography
memory
in autism  403–4
long-term knowledge impairment  171–2
role in mindreading  77–8
social, effect of oxytocin  298
working memory impairment  169–70
mentalizing  276, 382–4, 462n12
relationship to empathy  195
relationship to fetal testosterone levels  311–12, 314
role of mirror neurons  252–3
mentalizing theory of autism  385–6, 387, 390–1
functional imaging studies  390, 391, 406
mental state attribution  217
ERP studies  122–4
functional imaging studies  155
resting state EEG studies  126–7
mental state attribution system (MSAS)  217, 218, 225
coactivation with ESS  221
dissociation from ESS system  217–20
functional coupling with ESS  222
mental state,self-awareness, autism  403–4
metacognition  140n2
functional imaging studies  480
metaphor, children’s’ understanding  63
meta-representation, functional imaging studies  141

INDEX
494
mindreading  72
acquisition  458–61
cognitively efﬁ cient, but inﬂ exible thinking  80
evidence for cognitive efﬁ ciency  81–2
limitations  82
unnecessary or unhelpful processes  80–1
criteria for an adequate theory  448
ﬂ exible and effortful thinking  75–7, 79–80
contextual and motivational inﬂ uences  79
non-automatic nature  78–9
role of memory and executive function  77–8
functions  72–3
hunter-gatherers  433
in non-human primates  434–6, 441–2
simulation theory
high-level mindreading  451–4
low-level mindreading  454–6
power of imagination  456–8
study methods  74–5
trade-offs  73–4
two-system account  83
implications for developmental studies  83–6
implications for neural basis of mindreading  86–8
see also action understanding; empathy; false belief 
understanding; self-knowledge
mindreading brain network  86–8
mirroring  128–9, 461, 462
simulation theory  454–6
“mirroring ﬁ rst” model  384
mirror neurons  267
mirror neuron system  19, 173, 180–1, 197, 216, 264–5, 
380–2, 384, 437
broadly congruent neurons  235–6
connections with STS  236
dysfunctions
in autism  185, 253–4, 281–3, 386–7, 389–90, 391, 
405–6
compulsive imitation  253
in schizophrenia  186
functions  248–9
action recognition  249
emotion recognition  280–1
empathy  244, 367–8
imitation  249–50, 278–80, 439
learning by observation  252
mentalizing  252–3
prediction  251–2
role in language evolution  250–1
humans  273–4
development  245–7
encephalographic studies  277–8
evidence for existence  238, 240–1
localization  241–2, 274–5
plasticity  245
properties  242–4
role in action understanding  275–6
single neuron studies  278
study techniques  239
TMS studies  276–7
location  234
monkeys  233–6
area F5  266–7
circuit for grasping  268
functional properties  267–73
organization of motor cortex  265–6
parietal areas and STS  267
properties  236–8
strictly congruent neurons  236
view dependence  270, 271
VIP neurons  270, 272
mirror-touch synaesthesia  247
Mistaken Max  35–6, 41, 45–6
supposition versus simulation  39–40
M-like states  452
modularity theories  19, 25, 451
modular processing
limitations  82
unnecessary or unhelpful processes  80–1
molecular genetics, study of oxytocin system  292
morality  93
impression management  100
morality on the ground  97–100
moral judgements  93–7
functional imaging studies  137, 142, 143, 152, 156
in psychopathy  371–3
motivation, inﬂ uence on mindreading  79
motor cortex, organization in the monkey  265–6
motor empathy  366
and mirror neurons  367–8
in psychopathy  368
multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA)  155
mu-suppression  128–9, 181
studies in autism  185, 253, 281–2, 389, 406
studies of mirror neuron system  241, 242, 246, 253, 
277–8, 281–2
N
native signing deaf children
theory of mind development  59–60
see also deaf children
neonatal imitation  246
nerve growth factor (NGF)  334
neural basis of mindreading  86–8
simulation theory  461–2
neural connectivity theory of autism  330
neural plausibility question  448
neural resonance  216
neurexins  334
neuroimaging see functional imaging studies
neurons, functional heterogeneity  145–6
NGF  331
NLGN genes  331
NLGN4X  334
non-congruent F5 neurons  233, 234, 235
non-human primates
imitation  438–9
mindreading  434–6, 441–2
see also chimpanzees; orang-utans
non-literal language, children’s understanding  63–4
non-verbal communication, in autism  404
non-verbal stimuli, functional imaging studies  134, 
136, 137, 138, 139
NRCAM  331
NTF3, NTF5  331
NTRK genes  331
NTRK1  333, 334

INDEX
495
O
object-directed actions, mirror neuron response
humans  242–3
monkeys  236–7
object permanence  3
occlusion, mirror neuron response  237
OPRM1  331
orang-utans, imitation  439
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC)  183
activation during metacognition  480
effect of testosterone administration  317
effects of brain lesions  186–7
in psychopathy  367
organizational effects on development  309
orientation, correlation with search  8
“ought,” reasons versus rationality  36
outcomes, role in moral judgments  94–5
over-imitation  437–8, 440–1
OXT  331, 335
OXTR (oxytocin receptor gene)  331, 334, 335
polymorphism  292
inﬂ uence on attachment and bonding  296
inﬂ uence on emotion recognition  297
inﬂ uence on stress response  294
oxytocin (OXT)  335
comparison with testosterone  317–18
future research areas  302
neurophysiology  291
research methods  291–2
and social approach  292–3
role in attachment and social bonding  296
role in interpersonal trust  294–6, 295
stress-reducing effect  293–4
and social cognition
emotion recognition and empathy  297–8
modulation of social memory  298
therapeutic use  299–301
oxytocin system, integrative model  301
P
P3 component, ERP studies  126
pain
congenital insensitivity to  248, 455
mirror responses  278
pain, empathy for  181, 197, 222, 247–8, 454–5
in Asperger’s syndrome  406
functional imaging studies  198–200, 199
different computational routes  200–1
distinctions between direct and vicarious pain  
201–2
involvement of anterior insula  202–4
involvement of cingulate cortex  204
modulation of responses  205–6
picture-based and cue-based paradigms  197–8
in psychopathy  370
shared network hypothesis  198
pain matrix  198–200, 222
pain perception, role of insula  202
pantomiming, functional imaging studies  222
parallel forms reliability, JA measures  107–8
parental care, role of testosterone  317
parietal lobe  266
activation during metacognition  480
mirror activity  274–5
mirror neurons  234, 236, 241, 242, 267
see also mirror neuron system
projections to premotor cortex  265
see also inferior parietal lobe (IPL)
pars opercularis, involvement in empathy  200
passivity schizophrenia  474–5
pattern classiﬁ cation fMRI, studies of mirror neuron 
system  240, 242
“people search in the last place that they saw 
something” rule  8
perception, infants’ understanding  22–6
perception-action hypothesis  180
perception-like nature of mindreading
cognitive efﬁ ciency  81–2
limitations  82
unnecessary or unhelpful processes  80–1
personality traits  26
children’s understanding  26–9, 477
perspectives
adults’ understanding  77
studies  80–1
children’s understanding  40, 46
encoding of  13–14
self-perspective inhibition, brain lesion study  
166–7
supposition  40
perspective-taking  437
in autism, teaching interventions  418
deaf children  354
ERP studies  125–6
functional imaging studies  150–1
modulation of empathic responses  206, 207
power of imagination  456–8
phenomenology  264
phobias, impaired emotion recognition  182
phrenology  144
picture-based paradigms, empathy for pain  197–8
computational route  200–1
picture-in-the-head technique, teaching false belief 
understanding  415, 418
pity, relationship to empathy  196
plasticity, mirror neuron system  245
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)  310, 333
POR  332
positron emission tomography (PET) see functional 
imaging studies
posterior cingulate  99
involvement in empathy  217
see also cingulate cortex
posterior insula
role in pain perception  198–200, 201
see also insula
posterior superior temporal cortex, involvement in 
empathy  200
precentral gyrus, mirror activity  274
precuneus (PC)  133
differences from other ToM regions  152, 153
involvement in empathy  200
magnitude of responses  153–4
mentalizing  382

INDEX
496
prediction
role of insula  203
role of mirror neurons  244, 251–2
predictive behavior, infants  5–7
prefrontal cortex  183–4
brain lesion study  166–7
functional studies in autism  184–5
see also medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC)
premotor cortex
mirror neurons  233, 241, 242, 275, 381
see also mirror neuron system
monkeys
area F5  266–7
organization  265–6
preschool development  54–6, 65
cultural variation  57–8
resting state EEG studies  127–8
sequence of understandings  57
see also infants
pretend states, simulation theory  452, 453
pretense understanding, deaf children  62–3
pride, in autism  401
probabilistic models of development  21–2
probabilistic models of learning  20–1
understanding of personality traits  27–9
Proﬁ le of Non-verbal Sensitivity (PONS)  105, 106
reliability  108, 109, 110, 114
prosocial behaviors  224–5, 326
brain-behavior correlations  224–5
psychometric truth  110–11
psychopathy  95, 186–7, 206
cognitive empathy  366–7
emotional empathy
anger processing  371
disgust processing  370–1
fear and sadness processing  368–70
pain processing  370
empathy proﬁ le  326
integrated emotion systems model  365–6
moral judgement  371–3
motor empathy  368
neurocognitive impairments  364–5
psychophysics, study of mirror neuron system  239
pubertal development  315–16
future research areas  319
Punch and Judy, children’s responses  12, 14
pyramidal tract neurons, mirror activity  270
Q
Q-CHAT (Quantitative Checklist for Autism 
in Toddlers) score, relationship to fetal 
testosterone levels  313, 314
R
RAPGEF4  331
rationalizing  36
Reading the Mind in the Eyes test  105, 106, 106
effect of oxytocin  297
ERP studies  123
familiality of performance  327
inﬂ uence of fetal testosterone levels  311–12
inﬂ uence of testosterone administration  316
reliability  114
resting state EEG studies  126–7
reality bias  74
referential expressions interpretation, children  42
repetition-suppression analysis  155
study of mirror neuron system  239–40, 242, 243
resonance theories  19
reward responses, role of testosterone  317
right temporo-parietal junction (RTPJ)  87, 99, 128, 
133, 183, 184
activation during metacognition  480
activation in non-ToM tasks  149–50
differences from other ToM regions  152–3, 155
diffusion imaging (DTI)  147
functional imaging studies  139
in autism  406
involvement in empathy  200, 217
mentalizing  382–3
right, effect of fetal testosterone  312
role in moral judgment  95, 96, 96–7
“stimulus space”  147–9
lesion studies  143
risk prediction, role of insula  203
S
sad events, functional imaging studies  152
sadness, empathy for  365, 368–9
impairment in psychopathy  369–70
“Sally and Anne” story  4, 7, 165–6, 179
Sam the Mouse  41
sarcasm understanding
children  63–4
in frontotemporal dementia  187
schizophrenia  336
dissociation  474–5
effect of oxytocin administration  300
impaired emotion recognition  182, 185–6
SCP2  332
seeing-knowing understanding, deaf children  354
selection processor  451
self, concept of  397
self-awareness  397
in autism
clinical descriptions  398
development  407–8
ﬁ rst-hand accounts  399
self-awareness of mental states  403–4
self-conscious emotions  400–2
self-experience, role in infants’ understanding  24–6
self-knowledge  467–8, 480–1
confabulation theories  468–70
dissociation  474
in autism  475–8
in schizophrenia  474–5
dual-method theories  471–2
functional imaging studies  478
of metacognition  480
paired self and other tasks  478–9
interpretive sensory-access theory  472–3
self–other relations, in autism  399–400
self-perspective inhibition  165, 174
brain lesion study  166–7

INDEX
497
self-projection  461, 462
semantic dementia, case study  171
sensation-seeking, adolescents  316
sensorimotor ﬁ eld, insula  280
shared network hypothesis of empathy  197, 198
SHBG  332
signature limits  86
sign language use
deaf children  346, 347, 348
relationship to theory of mind development  59–60
similarity to self, functional imaging studies  152
simulation theory  39, 179
acquisition of mindreading  458–61
bi-level approach  449
foundations  449
high-level mindreading  451–4
low-level mindreading  454–6
“mesh” with evolutionary theory  462–3
neural basis of mindreading  461–2
power of imagination  456–8
single neuron studies, mirror neuron system
in humans  278
in monkeys  266–7
SLC6A4  335
SLC25A12, SLC25A13  332
slow wave effect, ERP studies  120–1
smell perception, mirror properties  181
social anxiety disorder (SAD), effect of oxytocin 
administration  299–300
social approach, role of oxytocin
attachment and social bonding  296
interpersonal trust  294–6, 295
stress-reducing effect  293–4
social attribution, understanding of personality traits  
27–9
social behaviors, brain-behavior correlations  223–5
social cognition  366
role of oxytocin
emotion recognition and empathy  297–8
modulation of social memory  298
social-cognitive component of mindreading  449
social connection, role of mindreading  98–100
social development, relationship to fetal testosterone 
levels  311, 314
social-emotional responsivity theory of autism  330
social inference, functional imaging studies  222
social knowledge, association with temporal poles  
171–2
social learning  439–41
ﬁ sh  436–7
social-perceptual component of mindreading  449
Social Relations Model (SRM)  111, 115–16
social skills, teaching interventions in autism  420
social threat recognition, effect of testosterone 
administration  316–17
socio-cognitive niche  441
cognitive and behavioural characteristics  432–4
origins in hunter-gatherer existence  431–2,
socio-economic backgrounds, deaf children  346, 347
somatosensory cortex
mirror neurons  241
role in empathy  204–5, 216
role in pain perception  198–200, 201
sounds, mirror neuron response
humans  243–4, 275–6
monkeys  237, 269
source-localization analysis, EEG studies  128
split-half reliability, JA measures  107–8
SRD5A1, SRD5A2  332
SS1 and SS2 subsystems  43–4
Sternberg & Smith, tests of judgmental accuracy  105, 
106, 114
“Sticker Test”  404
“stimulus spaces”  147–9
stress response, effect of oxytocin  293–4
strictly congruent mirror neurons  236, 238, 243
stroke damage
action recognition problems  249
functional imaging studies  143
left tempero-parietal lesion  167–9
mindreading impairment  88
right lateral prefrontal cortex lesion  166–7
STS  332
subsequent memory paradigm  223
SULT2A1  332
superior parietal lobe, mirror activity  275
superior temporal cortex, in psychopathy  368
superior temporal sulcus (STS)  133, 148, 183
connections with mirror neuron system  236, 267
supplementary motor cortex, mirror neurons  241
suppositional reasoning  39–40
supramarginal gyrus, involvement in empathy  200
sympathy, relationship to empathy  196
synaesthesia, mirror-touch  247
T
TAC1  331
tactical deception, non-human primates  434–5
tactile processing, mirror properties  181
task-execution question  448
taste aversion learning  370–1
teaching, role in cultural transmission  437
teleology  35–7, 47
teleology-in-perspective  40, 46
temporal poles  183
involvement in empathy  200, 217
mentalizing  382
role in social knowledge  171–2
temporo-parietal junction (TPJ)  87, 99, 133, 136
see also right temporo-parietal junction
testosterone
fetal and infant levels  309
future research areas  318–19, 320
postnatal effects  319
activational effects  316
administration studies  316–17
comparison with oxytocin  317–18
prenatal effects  319, 330
amniotic ﬂ uid measurements  310–11
Cambridge Child Development Project  311–14
limitations of amniotic ﬂ uid measurements  
314–15
studies in clinical conditions  310
test-retest correlation, JA measures  107

INDEX
498
theory of mind (ToM) see mindreading
theory of mind components  165, 174
low- and high-level  172–3
Theory of Mind Scale sequence  57
cultural variation  57–8, 65
pretense understanding  63
progression of deaf children  60–2
theory-theory  19, 25, 179
“child-scientist” theory  450–1, 453
mindreading process  450
modularity theory  451
thinking, children’s’ understanding  63
thought bubbles, teaching false belief understanding  
415
tool use, evolution  438
touch, empathy for  204–5, 247
traditions, reconstructing cultural capacities  438
training studies  19–20
blindfolds  22–6
mirror neuron system  245
trait bias  27, 28
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
of inferior frontal gyrus  381–2
to RTPJ  149
studies in autism  389, 406
studies of mirror neuron system  238, 239, 240, 249, 
276–7
during imitation  279
studies of moral judgement  97, 143
TrkA  334
TRPV1  331
trusting behavior
effect of testosterone administration  317
role of oxytocin  294–6, 295, 318
TSPO  332
twins
studies of empathy  327
studies of hormonal effects  316
U
unexpected events, functional imaging studies  147–8, 153
unusual actions, mentalizing  383
V
VEGF  331
ventral intraparietal area (VIP), mirror activity  270, 
272
ventromedial brain lesions  181
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC)  183–4, 188
functional imaging studies, in autism  406
functional studies in autism  184–5
gray matter volume  186
integrated emotion systems model  366
in psychopathy  372, 373
VGF  331
video clips
mirror neuron responses, monkeys  270
theory of mind interventions in autism  416–17
view dependence, mirror neuron responses  270, 271
violation of expectation paradigm  42
VIPR1  331
virtual reality environments, use in functional imaging 
studies  136–7
visceral awareness  202
visual inference model  384
visual perception, mirror properties  181
visuo-motor priming  173
W
WFS1 (Wolframin gene)  331, 334–5
Williams-Beuren syndrome  336
Wisconsin Card Sorting Task, study in schizophrenia  
474
Wolframin  334–5
working memory
brain lesion studies  169–70
role in ToM  165, 174

