
Understanding Flowers and Flowering


Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
Understanding Flowers 
and Flowering
An Integrated Approach
Second Edition
Beverley Glover
1

1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© Beverley Glover 2014
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
First Edition published in 2007
Second Edition published in 2014
Impression: 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013944236
ISBN 978–0–19–966159–6 (hbk.)
ISBN 978–0–19–966160–2 (pbk.)
Printed and bound by
CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials 
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.

v
understanding why and how certain genetic com­
ponents of the floral transition mechanism are con­
served and others are less so.
I hope that this book might serve as a starting 
point for those interested in taking such an integrat­
ed approach to the study of flowers. I have writ­
ten it, and revised it for this second edition, with 
the intention of helping to bridge the gaps between 
the different disciplines that work with flowers. My 
aim is to provide students and researchers study­
ing one aspect of floral biology with an overview 
of other important aspects of flowers, both to help 
them to set their own work in context and to en­
courage them to consider experiments which might 
lead to greater integration of the field. In particu­
lar, I hope that this book will encourage dialogue 
between floral biologists of all varieties, with a 
long-term view to ensuring a continuing increase in 
interdisciplinary studies of flowers.
The book is divided into three main sections. Sec­
tion I is introductory, giving some necessary back­
ground to the evolution of flowers and to the history 
of scientific thought on flowers and flowering. In 
this second edition the chapter on the evolution of 
flowers has been extensively revised and updated. 
Section II considers the molecular mechanisms that 
control flower induction, flower development, and 
floral mating type, providing coverage of the genet­
ic material available for shaping by natural selec­
tion. This section is initially focused on a very few 
species of model plants, looking at the molecular 
similarities which unite all flowers. In the later chap­
ters it considers the development and reproductive 
strategies of plants from a range of species, with a 
new chapter on the floral transition in diverse spe­
cies, and extensive revision of the chapter on floral 
development in various groups. Section III extends 
Flowers are the features of plants that most endear 
them to human beings. We grow flowers in our gar­
dens, we display them in our homes, and they fea­
ture prominently in our artistic history. Scientists, 
too, have been fascinated by flowers, and there is a 
long tradition of botanical study of floral structure 
and floral ecology. However, it is only in the last few 
decades that the tools of molecular genetics have 
been applied to flower induction, development, 
and morphology. The data arising from these stud­
ies, when combined with painstaking observation 
and analysis of the interactions of plants with their 
pollinators, are beginning to provide the first truly 
integrated understanding of both how and why 
flowers take the forms we so admire.
Traditionally, flowers are studied from one of a 
number of viewpoints. Molecular biologists may 
study the genetic control of flower induction or 
flower development, usually focusing on a single 
model species. Evolutionary biologists may study 
how flowers evolved, the forms of the earliest flow­
ers, or the morphology of flowers of ancient line­
ages alive today. Pollination biologists may study 
the interactions between plants and their pollinat­
ing animals, the natural selection exerted by those 
pollinators, and how these pressures affect plant 
population dynamics. However, it is becoming 
clear that these various disciplines each have enor­
mous power to inform and shape the work of the 
others. An understanding of how flower colour is 
controlled biochemically and genetically, for ex­
ample, can be of great benefit when studying how 
pollinator-imposed selection might have influ­
enced the evolution of petal colour within a group 
of plants. Similarly, an understanding of how time 
of flowering influences competition with other spe­
cies in the same community can be of great help in 
Preface

vi      PREFACE
Waser, Enrico Coen, and the Cambridge University 
Botanic Garden for their great generosity in sharing 
images, Matthew Dorling and Heather Whitney for 
photographic assistance, Mike Webb for biochemi­
cal pathways, and Rosie Bridge for line drawings. 
For this second edition I owe a great debt to Alison 
Reed, whose brilliant drawings and photographs 
have greatly enhanced the figures throughout the 
book. Thanks also to Roy Barlow and Don Man­
ning for their excellent cover design for the first 
edition, which has been adapted by the OUP team 
for edition 2. At Oxford University Press, Ian Sher­
man has provided steadfast support for this project, 
dealing with various changes to the schedule with 
calm good humour, while Helen Eaton, Christine 
Rode and Lucy Nash have kindly shepherded me 
through the production process. On a personal note 
I am still grateful to Jocelyn, Duncan, and Katie 
Taylor for lending me the space and quiet to re­
ally begin writing the first edition, rather than just 
thinking about it. In recent years, and particularly 
during the development of this second edition, I 
have relied heavily on Sam Brockington and Ed­
wige Moyroud for the discussion of ideas and the 
development of new lines of thought, as well as 
for practical and personal support in day-to-day 
academic life. Thank you both. And finally, as with 
everything I do, the writing of a second edition has 
only been possible because of the patience and sup­
port of Stuart, Sam, and Katie—I do appreciate you 
all, really.
this analysis much further, considering the expla­
nations for the differences between flowers, rather 
than their similarities. This section moves between 
molecular explanations for flower morphology and 
the ecological consequences of that morphology, 
in an attempt to integrate what we know both of 
how and why different flowers take their different 
forms. A new chapter on the lability of floral form 
considers how floral traits change within phylo­
genetic contexts. Finally, the epilogue attempts to 
draw out some themes which persist throughout 
the book, suggesting possible future directions for 
the field.
Many people have contributed to the develop­
ment of both the first and second editions of this 
book, and I am particularly grateful to all members 
of my own research laboratory, past and present, 
for enthusiastic support and helpful discussions 
at many points in the process. The second edition 
has benefited from the suggestions and advice of 
reviewers of the first edition, and I am particularly 
grateful to Doug Soltis, Elena Kramer, and Martin 
Ingrouille for constructive comments. John Parker, 
Caroline Dean, David Hanke, Cathie Martin, Jeff 
Ollerton, Rob Raguso, and Nick Waser read vari­
ous sections of the book in detail, and I must thank 
them all for the time and care that they took and for 
their excellent suggestions and advice. Many peo­
ple were kind enough to provide me with images 
for figures. While these are acknowledged in the 
relevant figure legends, I particularly thank Nick 

vii
Contents
Preface	
v
SECTION I  INTRODUCTION	
1
1	 The evolution of flowers	
3
1.1	 The origin of flowering plants	
3
1.2	 Seed plant reproductive structures	
7
1.3	 The first flowers	
8
1.4	 Floral diversification	
12
1.5	 Morphological diversity of the flower	
13
1.6	 An introduction to angiosperm phylogeny	
13
2	 Historical interpretations of flower induction and flower development	
16
2.1	 The foliar theory of the flower	
16
2.2	 The foliar theory in an evolutionary context	
21
2.3	 The transition to flowering	
22
2.4	 Developmental explanations of floral induction	
22
2.5	 Environmental explanations of floral induction	
23
2.6	 The florigen problem	
25
SECTION II  THE MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF FLOWERING: 
INDUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT	
27
PART A  Induction of Flowering	
29
3	 Flower induction in Arabidopsis thaliana	
31
3.1	 Arabidopsis thaliana as a model system for the study of flowering	
31
3.2	 Mechanisms of gene silencing	
35
3.3	 Flowering-time mutants	
38
4	 The autonomous pathways for floral inhibition and induction	
43
4.1	 The floral inhibition pathway	
43
4.2	 The autonomous induction pathway	
47
4.3	 Other endogenous factors that influence flowering time	
50

viii      CONTENTS
5	 The photoperiodic pathway of floral induction	
52
5.1	 Sensing daylight	
52
5.2	 Measuring time	
58
5.3	 Integrating light and clock signals	
60
6	 The vernalization pathway of floral induction and the role of gibberellin	
63
6.1	 The vernalization promotion pathway	
63
6.2	 The gibberellin promotion pathway	
67
6.3	 Does gibberellin act in the vernalization promotion pathway 
as well as independently?	
69
7	 Integrating the Arabidopsis thaliana flower induction pathways	
70
7.1	 Integrating the flowering-time pathways	
70
7.2	 Function of flowering-time integrators	
71
8	 Flower induction beyond Arabidopsis thaliana	
77
8.1	 The Arabidopsis flower induction model in other species	
77
8.2	 Flower induction in rice: a model short day plant	
77
8.3	 Flower induction in wheat and barley: a novel vernalization pathway	
81
8.4	 Flower induction in perennials	
82
8.5	 Flower induction in legumes	
85
8.6	 Flower induction in other species	
85
PART B  Development of Flowers	
87
9	 Changes at the shoot apical meristem in response to floral induction	
89
9.1	 Physiological changes at the shoot apical meristem	
89
9.2	 Shoot apical meristem anatomy	
90
9.3	 Gene expression patterns in the shoot apical meristem	
91
9.4	 Floral meristem identity genes act downstream 
of the flowering-time integrators	
92
9.5	 Floral meristem identity genes	
92
10	 Development of the floral organs	
102
10.1	 The original ABC model of flower development	
102
10.2	 The role of D function genes	
109
10.3	 The role of E function genes	
110
10.4	 The role of cadastral genes	
111
10.5	 The quartet model of organ identity	
113
11	 The ABC model and the diversity of plant reproductive structures	
115
11.1	 Evolutionary history of MADS box transcription factors	
115
11.2	 ABC genes in gymnosperms	
117
11.3	 ABC genes in early diverging angiosperms	
119
11.4	 ABC genes in monocots	
120
11.5	 ABC genes in the basal eudicots	
124

CONTENTS      ix
11.6	 Variations on the ABC model	
124
11.7	 Is A function unique to the Brassicaceae?	
125
12	 Function and development of gametophytes	
127
12.1	 Alternation of generations in multicellular organisms	
127
12.2	 Diversity of gametophyte form	
129
12.3	 The angiosperm female gametophyte	
129
12.4	 The angiosperm male gametophyte	
132
12.5	 Events following pollination	
135
13	 Outcrossing and self-fertilization	
136
13.1	 Reducing self-pollination in a hermaphroditic flower	
136
13.2	 Monoecy	
138
13.3	 Dioecy	
140
13.4	 Self-incompatibility (SI)	
142
13.5	 Sporophytic self-incompatibility (SSI)	
142
13.6	 Gametophytic self-incompatibility (GSI) 	
146
13.7	 Heteromorphic self-incompatibility	
148
13.8	 Ensuring self-pollination	
149
SECTION III  POLLINATION SUCCESS: MOLECULAR AND ECOLOGICAL 
INTERACTIONS	
151
PART A  How and Why Does Floral Form Vary?	
153
14	 Why are flowers different? Pollination syndromes: the theory	
155
14.1	 Cross-pollination	
155
14.2	 Abiotic pollen vectors	
155
14.3	 Biotic pollen vectors	
157
14.4	 Principles underlying the pollination syndrome concept	
157
14.5	 The pollination syndromes	
158
15	 Diverse floral shape and structure	
167
15.1	 Controlling corolla size	
167
15.2	 Controlling corolla symmetry	
169
15.3	 Controlling petal shape	
172
15.4	 Generating a nectar spur	
173
15.5	 Generating a composite inflorescence	
174
16	 Colouring the flower	
176
16.1	 Colour as a signal	
176
16.2	 Plant pigments	
178
16.3	 Carotenoid synthesis	
178
16.4	 Flavonoid synthesis	
181
16.5	 Betalains	
185

x      CONTENTS
17	 Enhancing flower colour	
188
17.1	 Mixing pigments	
188
17.2	 Co-pigmentation	
189
17.3	 Regulation of pigment distribution	
189
17.4	 The effects of metal ions	
193
17.5	 The importance of pH	
194
17.6	 The role of petal cell shape	
196
17.7	 Structural colour and structural enhancement of colour	
198
18	 Lability of floral form	
200
18.1	 Lability of floral size	
200
18.2	 Lability of floral symmetry	
201
18.3	 Lability of nectar spur length	
204
18.4	 Lability of flower colour	
205
18.5	 Lability of epidermal morphology	
207
18.6	 Lability of floral scent	
209
PART B  The Influence of Pollinators on Floral Form	
211
19	 Are flowers under selective pressure to increase pollinator attention?	
213
19.1	 Competition for pollinator attention	
213
19.2	 Facilitation of pollination	
214
19.3	 Techniques for investigating the role of pollinator attention 
in limiting fitness	
214
19.4	 Evidence based on fruit and seed set following hand pollination	
217
19.5	 Evidence from mixed species plots	
218
19.6	 Analysis of character traits potentially displaced 
by pollination competition	
220
20	 Do pollinators discriminate between different floral forms?	
223
20.1	 What pollinators see	
223
20.2	 What pollinators sense in other ways	
225
20.3	 Discrimination between petals of different colours	
227
20.4	 Discrimination between corollas of different sizes	
232
20.5	 Discrimination between zygomorphic and actinomorphic flowers	
234
20.6	 Discrimination between flowers with different petal cell shapes	
234
20.7	 Discrimination between flowers on the basis of scent	
235
21	 Pollination syndromes: the evidence	
236
21.1	 Historical context	
236
21.2	 Putting the assumptions together	
237
21.3	 Evidence for pollination syndromes	
240
21.4	 Evidence against pollination syndromes	
241
21.5	 The most effective pollinator?	
243
Epilogue	
245
References	
247
Index	
283

Plate 1  The Gnetophytes. (a) Ephedra distachya subsp. monostachya (male). Photo by Le.Loup.Gris (Wikimedia Commons). (b) Welwitschia 
mirabilis (male). Photo by Franzfoto (Wikimedia Commons). (c) Gnetum latifolium var. funiculare. Photo by Vinayaraj (Wikimedia Commons). 
See also Figure 1.2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Plate 2  The flower of Amborella trichopoda. Photograph kindly 
supplied by Sangtae Kim and Pam Soltis (University of Florida). 
See also Figure 1.4.
Plate 3  Species in which the floral transition has been studied. (a) Pisum sativum (Fabales). Photo by Rasbak. (b) Triticum species (Poales). Photo 
by Optograph. (c) Populus species (Malpighiales). Photo by Matt Lavin. (d) Arabis alpina (Brassicales). Photo by Franz Xaver. (e) Oryza sativa (Poales). 
Photo by C.T. Johansson. (f) Beta vulgaris (Caryophyllales). Photo by Forest and Kim Starr. All images from Wikimedia Commons. See also Figure 8.1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(f)
(e)
(d)

Plate 4  Early floral meristem identity mutants. (a) The Antirrhinum flo 
mutant (left) has inflorescence shoots produced in place of the flowers 
found in the axils of wild type bracts (right). Image kindly supplied by 
Enrico Coen (John Innes Centre). (b) The Arabidopsis ap1 mutant is 
slightly better converted to the floral form, with indeterminate floral 
structures arising from the meristem. See also Figure 9.2.
(a)
(b)
Plate 5  The original ABC mutants. (a) apetala 1 (A function in 
Arabidopsis). (b) ovulata (A function in Antirrhinum) (right) compared 
with wild type (left). (c) apetala 3 (B function in Arabidopsis). 
(d) deficiens (B function in Antirrhinum) (right) compared with wild type 
(left). (e) agamous (C function in Arabidopsis). (f) plena (C function in 
Antirrhinum) (right) compared with wild type (left). Antirrhinum images 
kindly supplied by Enrico Coen (John Innes Centre). Image (e) provided 
by Ian Furner (University of Cambridge). See also Figure 10.2.
(e)
(b)
(d)
(f)
(c)
(a)
Plate 6  The long tasselled flowers of a wind-pollinated grass hang 
far from the main body of the plant. See also Figure 14.1.
Plate 7  Insect-pollinated flowers. (a) Magnolia (Magnoliales) 
flowers are beetle-pollinated. (b) The fly-pollinated flowers of Fatsia 
japonica (Apiales). (c) Bumblebee entering a Hebe flower (Lamiales). 
(d) Many daisies (Asterales) are butterfly-pollinated. (e) The flowers of 
Angraecum sesquipedale (Asparagales) have very long nectar spurs 
and are pollinated by extremely long-tongued moths. Photographs (a), 
(d), and (e) kindly supplied by Cambridge University Botanic Garden 
and H. Rice. See also Figure 14.3.
(c)
(e)
(d)
(b)
(a)

Plate 8  Vertebrate-pollinated flowers. 
(a) The pendant form of Fuchsia 
flowers (Myrtales) is ideal for hovering 
hummingbirds. (b) Bird of paradise (Strelitzia 
regina, Zingiberales) flowers provide a sturdy 
landing platform for non-hovering birds. 
Photograph kindly supplied by Cambridge 
University Botanic Garden. (c) The flowers 
of Strongylodon macrobotrys, the jade 
vine (Fabales), hang far below the foliage, 
making them readily accessible to bats. 
See also Figure 14.4.
(c)
(b)
(a)
Plate 9  Floral mimicry. (a) The titan arum 
(Amorphophallus titanium, Alismatales) 
attracts pollinators by releasing a strong 
scent reminiscent of rotting flesh. Image 
kindly provided by Cambridge University 
Botanic Garden. (b) Ophrys episcopalis 
(Asparagales), which mimics female 
insects to achieve pollination through 
pseudocopulation. Image kindly provided 
by Richard Bateman (Royal Botanic Garden, 
Kew). (c) The composite inflorescence of 
Gorteria diffusa (Asterales) mimics its 
pollinating flies. See also Figure 14.5.
(c)
(b)
(a)

Plate 10  Zygomorphy and actinomorphy. (a) Many flowers are 
radially symmetrical, or actinomorphic. (b) The flowers of Antirrhinum 
species are bilaterally symmetrical, or zygomorphic. See also 
Figure 15.2.
(b)
(a)
Plate 11  The enantiostylous flower of Solanum heterodoxum 
(Solanales). The style is the filamentous pink organ. Image kindly 
provided by Sandy Knapp (Natural History Museum, London). 
See also Figure 15.3.
Plate 12  The petals of Aquilegia formosa (Ranunculales) are heavily 
modified to produce nectar spurs. Image kindly provided by Scott 
Hodges (UCSB). See also Figure 15.4.
Plate 13  Composite inflorescences in the daisy family. (a) The 
capitulum of Gerbera hybrida, with zygomorphic outer florets 
(each with one large petal) and actinomorphic inner florets. (b) The 
capitulum of Senecio vulgaris usually contains only actinomorphic disc 
florets. See also Figure 15.5.
(b)
(a)

Plate 14  Carotenoids give the yellow and orange colours to (a) Freesia (Asparagales), (b) Gerbera hybrida (Asterales), and (c) lilies (Liliales). 
The photo in (b) is a modified version of a photo by Mauro Girotto (Wikimedia Commons). See also Figure 16.2.
(b)
(c)
(a)
Plate 15  Anthocyanins give the purple, magenta, and pink colours to (a) Petunia hybrida (Solanales, delphinidin and petunidin), (b) Antirrhinum 
majus (Lamiales, cyanidin), and (c) Pelargonium (Geraniales, pelargonidin). The photo in (c) is adapted from a photo by Rameshng (Wikimedia 
Commons). See also Figure 16.4.
(a)
(b)
(c)

Plate 17  Pigment regulation. (a) Viola cornuta ‘Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow’ is fully purple 5–8 days after pollination (left), but opens 
as a white flower (middle) in which pigmentation steadily increases (right). Image kindly provided by Martha Weiss (Georgetown University, 
Washington, DC). (b) The delila mutant of Antirrhinum lacks pigmentation in the tube as a result of loss of activity of a bHLH transcription factor. 
(c) The Venosa locus produces pigmentation over the petal veins in a pale Antirrhinum flower. VENOSA encodes a MYB transcription factor. 
(d) The an11 mutant of petunia lacks pigmentation as a result of loss of activity of a WD40 protein. The transposon in the AN11 locus excises 
somatically, generating patches of wild type red tissue. Image kindly provided by Ronald Koes (Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam). See also Figure 17.1.
(b)
(d)
(a)
(c)
Plate 16  Betalains give the yellow, purple, and pink colours to (a) Portulaca oleracea, (b) Mirabilis jalapa, and (c) Sesuvium portulacastrum 
(all Caryophyllales). All images kindly provided by Sam Brockington (Cambridge). See also Figure 16.6.
(a)
(b)
(c)

Plate 18  Metals and pH both affect flower colour. (a) The Himalayan blue poppy owes its blue colour to an interaction between anthocyanin and 
iron. Photograph kindly supplied by Cambridge University Botanic Garden. (b) Hydrangea flowers can be blue or pink, depending on the metal ions 
present in the soil. (c) Morning glory flowers have a high vacuolar pH. Image kindly provided by Felix Jaffe. (d) An unstable pH4 mutant of petunia, 
with revertant wild type red (acidic) sectors on a mutant bluish-pink (more alkaline) background. Image kindly provided by Ronald Koes (Vrije 
Universiteit, Amsterdam). See also Figure 17.2.
(b)
(a)
(d)
(c)

Plate 19  Petal cell shape affects flower 
colour. (a) Wild type Antirrhinum petal 
epidermis, composed of conical cells. (b) mixta 
mutant petal epidermis, composed of flat 
cells. (c) Wild type (left) and mixta mutant 
(right) flowers, showing the difference in 
colour attributable to the cell shape. See also 
Figure 17.3.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Plate 20  Structural colour. (a) Tulip ‘Queen of the Night’ has iridescent rainbow colours on top of purple pigmentation. (b) This iridescent effect 
is caused by a diffraction grating. (c) The bright yellow buttercup reflects yellow light very strongly. (d) The buttercup acts as a double mirror, 
reflecting yellow and white light together on to nearby surfaces such as a child’s chin. See also Figure 17.4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Chin
Sunlight
+/– 15º
Ranunculus
ower

Plate 21  Variation in zygomorphy in the Antirrhineae. (a) Highly 
zygomorphic Antirrhinum majus. (b) Moderately zygomorphic Maurandya 
scandens. (c) Slightly zygomorphic Mabrya acerifolia. (d) Almost 
actinomorphic Rhodochiton atrosanguineum. All scale bars 1 cm. 
See also Figure 18.1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Plate 22  Variation in nectar spur length. 
(a) Gymnadenia conopsea flowers have very 
long nectar spurs. (b) Gymnadenia rhellicani 
flowers have almost no nectar spur. Images 
kindly provided by Matt Box (Sainsbury 
Laboratory, Cambridge University). See also 
Figure 18.3.
(a)
(b)

Plate 23  Development of the Clarkia gracilis 
petal spot. Early expression of DFR2 in the spot 
region, in the presence of F3′H but not F3′5′H, 
results in red cyanidin pigment. Later expression 
of DFR1 throughout the petal, in the presence 
of F3′5′H, results in mauve malvidin production. 
See also Figure 18.4.
F3¢H
F3¢5¢H
F3¢H
DFR2
DFRI
DHK
DHQ
DHQ
DHM
MALVIDIN
DHQ
CYANIDIN
CYANIDIN
EARLY
LATE
DHK
Plate 24  Flowers for which pollinators have been shown to discriminate between colour morphs. (a) Mimulus lewisii. (b) Mimulus cardinalis. 
Images (a) and (b) kindly provided by Toby Bradshaw (Washington State University). (c) Antirrhinum majus wild type and incolorata lines. 
(d) Antirrhinum majus wild type and sulfurea lines. Images (c) and (d) kindly provided by Enrico Coen (John Innes Centre). See also Figure 20.2.
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)

Plate 25  Flowers with significant nectar guides. (a) Delphinium nelsonii. Image kindly supplied by Nick Waser (University of California – Riverside). 
(b) Clarkia xantiana subsp. xantiana. Image kindly provided by Vince Eckhart (Grinnell College, USA). See also Figure 20.3.
(a)
(b)
Plate 26  Flowers for which pollinators have been shown to discriminate 
on the basis of size. Ipomopsis aggregata. Image kindly provided by Nick 
Waser (University of California – Riverside). See also Figure 20.4.

Plate 27  Plants for which the main pollinator type can be accurately predicted from floral morphology. (a) Penstemon centranthifolius 
(hummingbird-pollinated). (b) Penstemon heterophyllus (bee-pollinated). Images (a) and (b) kindly supplied by Scott Armbruster (University of 
Portsmouth). See also Figure 21.1.
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
Plate 28  Plants that have cast doubt on the pollination syndrome concept. 
(a) Viola cazorlensis. Image kindly supplied by Carlos Herrera (Seville). (b) Microloma 
sagittatum with its sunbird pollinator. Image kindly supplied by Anton Pauw 
(Stellenbosch). See also Figure 21.2.

SECTION I
Introduction


Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
of these traits are shown in Fig. 1.1. They have fully 
protected and enclosed ovules with two layers of 
protective integuments surrounding them, enclosed 
in a carpel within which the seed eventually devel­
ops. Their wood contains true, continuous vessels, 
as well as the more widespread tracheids in which 
water has to cross a membrane between individual 
cells. Their phloem consists of sieve tube elements 
and the unique companion cells, both derived from 
the same mother cell. Angiosperms have distinctive 
pollen, with columnar structures providing sup­
port for the surface layer. In addition, only angio­
sperms undergo double fertilization, whereby two 
genetically identical sperm cells are released into 
the ovary with one fertilizing the egg and the other 
fusing with the central cell to form the endosperm. 
Traditionally, fossil evidence was all that was avail­
able to probe the origins of the angiosperms, but, 
more recently, molecular data obtained from extant 
species have been used to inform the debate. The 
following two sections consider insights from these 
two types of evidence into the age and nature of the 
earliest angiosperms, and their relationships with 
other seed plants.
1.1.1  Fossil evidence for angiosperm origins
Fossil evidence dates the origin of the angiosperms 
to the early Cretaceous period, with the oldest fossil 
flowers (125 million years ago), angiosperm fruits 
(121 million years ago), angiosperm pollen (130 mil­
lion years ago), and angiosperm leaves (120 million 
years ago) all supporting this conclusion (Hughes 
1994; Krassilov and Dobruskina 1995; Brenner 1996; 
Friis et al. 1999, 2001; Sun et al. 2002). The oldest fos­
sils suggest that the first angiosperms were aquatic 
plants. For example, Archaefructus, a fossil dated to 
The oldest fossil flower currently known is around 
125 million years old. Flowers, and the plants that 
produce them (angiosperms or flowering plants), 
are relatively recent innovations in evolutionary 
terms. The first land plants, which did not possess 
flowers, arose around 470 million years ago, but 
fossil evidence indicates that only after another 340 
million years did the angiosperms appear. However, 
following their appearance in the fossil record of the 
early Cretaceous period, the angiosperms spread 
geographically from their point of origin in the 
tropics and diversified dramatically to become the 
ecologically dominant plant group in the great ma­
jority of terrestrial habitats. This extraordinary geo­
graphic and morphological radiation took a mere 40 
million years, and was even more extraordinary for 
the number of species it generated. The 250–400,000 
species of extant angiosperms represent the most 
species-rich plant group by far, and are exceeded in 
numbers in the speciose animal kingdom only by the 
arthropods. Furthermore, the differences in growth 
habit, morphology, and life history within the an­
giosperms are vast, leading Darwin to describe the 
speed and scale of this recent radiation as ‘an abomi­
nable mystery’. It is not possible to provide here a 
full analysis of the extensive literature on the origins 
and radiation of angiosperms and their flowers. The 
aim of this chapter is to provide an overview of the 
key issues surrounding the origin of the flowering 
plants and their flowers, and to conclude with an in­
troduction to the major groups of flowering plants, 
many of which will be referred to in later chapters.
1.1  The origin of flowering plants
Angiosperms are defined by a number of features, 
of which possession of a flower is only one. Some 
CHAPTER 1
The evolution of flowers

4      INTRODUCTION
the angiosperms). If the eudicots were already pre­
sent in the early Cretaceous period, it is likely that 
the first angiosperms arose considerably earlier. 
Molecular analyses also date the origin of the an­
giosperms a little earlier than 130 million years ago 
(see Section 1.1.2 below).
The fossil record suggests that the angiosperms 
rapidly diversified from their aquatic origins to oc­
cupy understorey and early successional niches on 
dry land, with this first diversification occurring 
during the early Cretaceous period (Friis et al. 2005). 
Their subsequent radiation over the course of the 
Cretaceous quickly led to the adoption of late suc­
cessional ecological positions, presumably as their 
size and woodiness increased. The scarcity of angio­
sperm wood in the early Cretaceous fossil record, 
along with the apparently small size of early an­
giosperm seed and leaves, supports the conclusion 
that the early angiosperms were small herbaceous 
124.6 million years ago, has the long thin stems and 
highly dissected compound leaves that are typical 
of aquatic species. Perhaps even more convincingly, 
it is found with fossilized fish mixed in with the 
plant tissue (Sun et al. 2002). Similarly, Friis et  al. 
(2001) identified a fossil flower from deposits up 
to 125 million years old as a member of the Nym­
phaeales (the modern water lilies), on the basis of 
its unique centrally protruding floral axis and its 
distinctive seeds with wavy cell walls in their seed 
coats.
The recent identification of Leefructus mirus, a 
fossil with features diagnostic of the eudicot order 
Ranunculales, in deposits dated at 122–125 million 
years old, suggests that the angiosperms might be 
older than paleontologists had previously thought 
(Sun et al. 2011). The eudicots are a more recently 
derived group of the angiosperms (see Section 1.6 
and Fig. 1.5 for an overview of relationships within 
Stigma
Style
Ovary
(c)
(d)
(b)
(a)
Ovules
Pollen tube
Pollen grain
Sperm
Sperm nuclei
Egg
Antipodals
Embryo sac
Tectum
Foot layer
Columella
Intine
Figure 1.1  Some defining features of angiosperms. (a) Enclosed ovules, enfolded within the carpel. (b) Double fertilization, with two sperm nuclei 
arriving in the pollen tube. One fertilizes the egg cell and the other fertilizes the central cell with its two nuclei, generating the triploid endosperm. 
(c) Columnar pollen exine, shown in cross section. (d) Wood with true vessels as well as the narrower tracheids found in gymnosperms.

The evolution of flowers      5
of the angiosperms, on the basis of both fossil and 
morphological evidence (Crane et al. 1995). There 
are currently three extant genera of gnetophytes, 
namely Gnetum, Ephedra, and Welwitschia, which 
share a range of morphological similarities with 
some angiosperms (see Fig. 1.2). In particular, leaf 
morphology and venation in Gnetum closely resem­
ble that of angiosperms, their xylem does contain 
vessels, and some gnetophytes produce reproduc­
tive structures containing both male and female 
parts. Double fertilization, often considered to be 
a defining feature of angiosperms, has also been 
documented in both Ephedra and Gnetum (Fried­
man 1990). However, recent molecular studies have 
refuted this hypothesis (see below), and have even 
questioned the status of the Gnetophytes as a di­
vision, suggesting that they are part of the Conif­
erophytes (Qiu et al. 1999; Chaw et al. 2000). These 
recent studies confirm the monophyletic nature of 
the extant gymnosperms, indicating that none of 
them provide a clear link to the angiosperms.
The fossil record informs the debate on the re­
lationship of angiosperms to other land plant lin­
eages by providing details of extinct groups. Two 
extinct gymnosperm groups in particular, the Ben­
nettitales and the Mesozoic ‘seed ferns’ (such as 
Caytonia), have frequently been proposed as ances­
tors or close relatives of the angiosperms, and sev­
eral studies based on fossil and extant morphology 
linked the Bennettitales, the Gnetophytes, and the 
angiosperms into a clade known as the anthophytes 
(Crane 1985; Doyle and Donoghue 1986). These 
conclusions were based on the distinctive morphol­
ogies of the extinct plants, analysed by painstaking 
­species with a weedy lifestyle, whether on land or in 
fresh water. Some authors have speculated that this 
herbaceous habit followed an early loss of woodi­
ness, since most gymnosperms are woody and most 
of the earliest diverging groups of extant angio­
sperms are also woody (Willis and McElwain 2002).
The first angiosperms appear to have originated 
in tropical regions, only spreading to higher lati­
tudes after 20–30 million years (Barrett and Willis 
2001). The earliest angiosperm fossils (of pollen) 
have been found in modern-day Israel and Mo­
rocco, land that lay just north of the equator in the 
early Cretaceous period. The subsequent spread 
of the angiosperms into higher latitudes was very 
rapid, accompanied by an increasing dominance of 
those areas already occupied (as measured by the 
relative proportions of angiosperm and other pol­
len types retained in the fossil record) (Willis and 
McElwain 2002).
The identity and morphology of the last com­
mon ancestor of the angiosperms and other land 
plant groups have long been a source of debate. 
The most closely related extant group is the gym­
nosperms, traditionally viewed as a cluster of three 
or four divisions. Of these divisions, the conifers 
(Coniferophytes) are familiar, and dominate many 
high-latitude forests. The cycads (Cycadophytes) 
are currently less prominent, but fossil records 
indicate that they were once ecologically highly 
significant. The Ginkgophytes are currently repre­
sented by only one surviving species, Ginkgo biloba, 
a commonly grown tree in parks and gardens. The 
remaining group, the Gnetophytes, was, until re­
cently, considered likely to be the closest relative 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1.2  The Gnetophytes. (a) Ephedra distachya subsp. monostachya (male). Photo by Le.Loup.Gris (Wikimedia Commons). (b) Welwitschia 
mirabilis (male). Photo by Franzfoto (Wikimedia Commons). (c) Gnetum latifolium var. funiculare. Photo by Vinayaraj (Wikimedia Commons). 
See also Plate 1.

6      INTRODUCTION
different evolutionary rates, and concluded that the 
angiosperms originated 167–199 million years ago 
(Bell et al. 2010). The same study dated the origin of 
key angiosperm clades, with the eudicots appear­
ing around 130 million years ago, the Rosids arising 
108–121 million years ago, and the Asterids appear­
ing 101–119 million years ago (see Section 1.6). These 
dates are highly compatible with the fossil record, 
suggesting only that the very earliest angiosperms 
have not yet been retrieved from fossils. The dating 
of the eudicots at 130 million years old is particu­
larly interesting, given the recent discovery of the 
eudicot fossil Leefructus mirus from deposits 122–125 
million years old (Sun et al. 2011).
If the angisoperms originated 167–199 million 
years ago, the absence of angiosperm fossils from 
deposits earlier than 130 million years can be read­
ily explained in a number of ways. It is possible that 
the fossil record does not contain the very earliest 
angiosperms because they were not woody, were 
relatively rare within their communities, or were 
predominantly found in dry or alpine environments 
not conducive to fossil formation. Some authors 
have suggested that their early Cretaceous diversi­
fication actually represents a migration event from 
a previous habitat less suited for fossil formation.
The molecular phylogenies of Qiu et al. (1999) 
and Chaw et al. (2000) have also shed light on ques­
tions of relatedness between gymnosperm groups 
and the early angiosperms (see Figs. 1.2 and 1.3). 
microscopical observation of fossils. Caytonia, for 
instance, has ovules almost entirely enclosed with­
in cupules, bearing some similarity to angiosperm 
carpels. The Bennettitales have many morphologi­
cal features in common with angiosperms, most 
notably the production of a bisexual reproductive 
shoot surrounded by sterile (possibly perianth-like) 
organs. Because these fossil taxa cannot be incorpo­
rated into molecular phylogenies, attempts to in­
tegrate them into our understanding of seed plant 
relationships requires a combined molecular/mor­
phological approach. Such approaches often pro­
duce conflicting results, but it is certainly likely that 
some of these extinct lineages represent branches of 
the land plant phylogeny that diverged along the 
branch leading to angiosperms.
1.1.2  Molecular evidence for angiosperm origins
Molecular evidence for the origins of angiosperms 
is based on the comparison of DNA sequences or 
fingerprints from extant species. In addition, use of 
a molecular clock, which calculates the age of diver­
gence of two sequences according to the number of 
differences between them, can provide estimates of 
the date of evolutionary events. Recent molecular 
dating studies have used methods to allow for di­
vergent evolutionary rates, particularly those aris­
ing following branching of a lineage, when different 
branches might experience very different evolution­
ary rates according to whether they adopt a woody 
(long generation time) or herbaceous (short genera­
tion time) habit (Smith and Donoghue 2008).
Early molecular dating studies indicated an ori­
gin of the angiosperms considerably earlier than the 
130 million years ago that the fossil record suggests. 
Studies indicated variously that the angiosperms 
arose in the late Carboniferous period, 290 million 
years ago (Kenrick 1999; Qiu et al. 1999), and that the 
monocotyledonous angiosperms diverged from the 
dicotyledonous species 250–200 million years (Wolfe 
et al. 1989) or 300 million years ago (Martin et al. 
1989). However, improvements in dating technology 
are mainly responsible for the convergence of recent 
reports on an age for the angiosperms of 140–180 
million years (Sanderson et al. 2004; Bell et al. 2005a). 
The most recent detailed study used a ‘relaxed clock’ 
method that allowed different ­lineages to experience 
ANGIOSPERMS
CYCADOPHYTES
GINKGOPHYTES
CONIFEROPHYTES
GNETOPHYTES
Figure 1.3  Molecular evidence and morphological evidence 
suggest different relationships between the angiosperms and the 
various groups of extant gymnosperms. Molecular data (left) place 
the angiosperms as sister group to the monophyletic gymnosperms, 
whereas traditional morphological analysis (right) placed the 
angiosperms and the gnetophytes as sister taxa.

The evolution of flowers      7
they were probably woody, not herbaceous, despite 
the relative scarcity of early fossilized angiosperm 
wood. Following the publication of the phylogeny 
of Qiu et al. (1999), the position of Amborella as the 
most basal extant angiosperm was controversial for 
a while. Goremykin et al. (2003) analysed 61 protein-
coding genes common to 13 fully sequenced land 
plant chloroplast genomes, which placed the ori­
gin of Amborella later than the origin of the mono­
cots. However, the controversy was short-lived 
and the position of Amborella as sister to the other 
angiosperms has been confirmed by numerous 
other studies (see detailed discussion in Stefanovic 
et al. 2004; Soltis and Soltis 2004; Soltis et al. 2004; 
Martin et al. 2005; Lockhart and Penny 2005). This 
controversy highlights some of the important con­
siderations involved in designing approaches to re­
construct phylogeny, and also emphasizes the point 
that any phylogenetic tree can only be viewed as 
the current best hypothesis based on available data.
1.2  Seed plant reproductive structures
The reproductive structures of most plant lineages 
prior to the angiosperms, including most of the 
gymnosperms, were unisexual. The evolution of 
seeds freed plants to reproduce in the absence of a 
film of external water (previously necessary to al­
low fragile free-swimming male gametes to fuse 
with a static egg). In seed plants the female gameto­
phyte is surrounded by parental sporophyte tissue, 
usually derived from bracts. These enfolding bracts 
act to protect the ovule and may also serve as a 
protective coat when the seed is dispersed. In gym­
nosperms the ovule is not completely enclosed in 
sporophyte tissue, but is protected within a cham­
ber, into which wind-blown pollen is drawn after 
being trapped by a drop of secreted liquid.
In the cycads, dioecy is the rule, with female 
plants producing clusters of ovules on the edges 
of modified leaves called megasporophylls. The 
whole female reproductive structure forms an ovu­
late cone. Male plants produce cones of differently 
specialized leaves, the scale-like microsporophylls, 
arranged in a spiral phyllotaxis to produce a cone. 
These microsporophylls possess a pollen sac on 
their abaxial surface, each of which produces nu­
merous pollen grains. A similar system operates 
To the astonishment of many botanists, the extant 
gnetophytes resolved in a single clade with the 
conifers, refuting the suggestion that their ances­
tors were the precursors of the angiosperms. In­
stead, the extant gymnosperms have been shown 
to be monophyletic and to have diverged from the 
total land plant lineage around 300 million years 
ago. They can therefore be thought of as the sister 
group to angiosperms, and do not necessarily pro­
vide much relevant information about the likely 
morphology of the ancestral angiosperm. Indeed, 
the derived nature of many extant gymnosperm 
reproductive structures, combined with the par­
tial nature of the fossils of extinct gymnosperms, 
makes it very hard to draw conclusions even about 
the nature of ancestral gymnosperm reproductive 
structures.
The phylogeny of Qiu et al. (1999) provides use­
ful information on the relationships of early di­
verging angiosperm clades, which can be used to 
infer features of ancestral angiosperm reproductive 
structures. The Nymphaeales (water lilies) are in­
deed ancestral to many other plant groups, but are 
not the sister group of all the other angiosperms. 
This position was awarded to Amborella trichopoda, 
the only extant species of the Amborellales, and a 
native of New Caledonia (see Section 1.6; Fig. 1.4). 
Amborella is a small weedy shrub, supporting the 
idea that the basal angiosperms were understorey 
or early successional species, but indicating that 
Figure 1.4  The flower of Amborella trichopoda. Photograph kindly 
supplied by Sangtae Kim and Pam Soltis (University of Florida). 
See also Plate 2.

8      INTRODUCTION
unisexual reproductive cones occur either together 
on a single plant or each on a separate plant. The 
combination of male and female organs on a single 
shoot is an angiosperm innovation. The develop­
ment of a single shoot containing both male and fe­
male reproductive organs was therefore a key event 
in the evolution of flowers.
Discussion of the development of a bisexual re­
productive shoot is complicated by the lack of clear 
homology between gymnosperm cones and angio­
sperm flowers. Since the cones of cycads and the 
pollen cones of conifers are condensed branches 
with the scales representing leaves, they could 
be described as homologous to a flower (with the 
reproductive and perianth organs derived from 
leaves). However, the compound cones of the Gne­
tophytes and female conifers are clearly not ho­
mologous to flowers. In these cones the scales are 
modified stems, and so the structure is much more 
like an angiosperm inflorescence, where each flow­
er is formed from a separate axillary meristem. 
Whatever the homology relationships, the evolu­
tion of the flower required the development of a bi­
sexual shoot, which may then have required much 
subsequent reduction to form the flowers we see 
today. Assuming that the ancestor of angiosperms 
and gymnosperms produced its male and female 
reproductive structures on separate shoots, each 
composed of a spiral of organs, then the develop­
ment of a bisexual shoot (and later flower) requires 
either the development of female organs at the top 
of the male shoot or the development of male or­
gans at the base of the female shoot. All angiosperm 
flowers contain an outer whorl of male reproduc­
tive organs and an inner whorl of female repro­
ductive organs, suggesting that this evolution of 
bisexual flowers occurred only once (Cronk 2001). 
A single exception to this rule (with male reproduc­
tive structures inside a whorl of female ones) has 
been identified in the inside-out flower of Lacan­
donia schismatica (Pandanales), as a result either of 
homeotic organ conversion or of reduction of the 
inflorescence to resemble a flower (for a review, see 
Garray-Arroyo et al. 2012).
An adaptive explanation for the combination of 
male and female reproductive organs in the same 
shoot was proposed by Frohlich (2002), who ob­
served that ectopic sterile ovules are sometimes 
in Ginkgo, although the ovules are born in pairs 
on stems rather than as a cone. In contrast, most 
conifers are monoecious, producing male and fe­
male cones on the same individual plant, although 
some taxa within the group are dioecious (such as 
the junipers and yews). The Gnetophytes are usu­
ally dioecious, although some species of the genus 
Ephedra are monoecious. Analysis of cone struc­
ture has revealed that the pollen cone of conifers 
is a condensed branch with the microsporophylls 
representing the modified leaves along the branch. 
However, the seed cone of conifers, and both cone 
types in the Gnetophytes, are thought to be derived 
from a condensed branch with branches. In this sce­
nario the central stem produces bracts with modi­
fied stems in their axils—the modified stems are the 
scales of the cone (Judd et al. 2007).
1.3  The first flowers
Despite the absence of a clear picture of the last 
common ancestor of angiosperms and gymno­
sperms, there are clearly some key innovations that 
arose in the angiosperm lineage and gave rise to 
flowers, such as the combining of male and female 
reproductive structures within a small space on the 
same shoot and the production of perianth organs 
(Theissen et al. 2002). Indeed, it is these innovations 
that give us the modern definition of a flower (the 
bisexual reproductive shoot of an angiosperm, in which 
the reproductive organs are surrounded by whorls of ster­
ile organs). Analysis of the development of these in­
novations allows us to build a general picture of the 
evolution of the first flowers.
1.3.1  A bisexual reproductive shoot
The typical angiosperm flower is hermaphrodite, 
and this is believed to be the ancestral condition 
for flowers. Although there are many examples 
of derived unisexual flowers—either on hermaph­
roditic plants (monoecy) or on unisexual plants 
­(dioecy)—the majority of angiosperm flowers pro­
duce both male and female reproductive organs. 
This is in marked contrast to the reproductive 
structures of most other plant lineages, where uni­
sexual reproductive structures are the norm. In the 
gymnosperms, as described above, the two types of 

The evolution of flowers      9
­radiata, PrFLL is expressed in male cones only, and 
a duplicate gene, NEEDLY, which has been lost 
from the angiosperm lineage, is expressed only in 
female cones. Frohlich interpreted these observa­
tions as implying that the angiosperm flower is de­
scended from an ancestor of the male gymnosperm 
cone. In the ancestral angiosperm lineage the genes 
responsible for ovule development were recruited 
to the control of PrFLL, resulting in the production 
of ectopic ovules, and eventually the evolution of 
carpels. However, more recent data have largely 
disproved the exclusively male expression of PrFLL 
and the exclusively female expression of NEEDLY 
in gymnosperms. First, Shindo et al. (2001) showed 
that the PrFLL-like gene of Gnetum parvifolium is 
expressed in the female reproductive structure, 
rather than the male one. Dornelas and Rodriguez 
(2005) similarly showed that the PrFLL-like gene of 
Pinus caribaea is expressed in female, but not male, 
cones. Vazquez-Lobo et al. (2007) reported expres­
sion patterns for the PrFLL-like and NEEDLY genes 
from Picea abies, Podocarpus recihii and Taxus globosa, 
finding that both genes are expressed in both male 
and female reproductive structures of all three spe­
cies. A recent comparison of transcriptome profiles 
of the male and female cones of Ginkgo biloba, the 
cycad Zamia fisheri and the gnetophyte Welwitschia 
mirablis with the transcriptomes of flowers of Arabi­
dopsis thaliana (Brassicales) and Oryza sativa (Poa­
les) detected no significant differences between the 
proportion of gymnosperm orthologous genes that 
were expressed both in the male cone and in the 
angiosperm flowers, and the proportion of gymno­
sperm orthologous genes that were expressed both 
in the female cone and in the angiosperm flowers 
(Tavares et al. 2010). From this analysis the authors 
concluded that the angiosperm flower was not a 
‘mostly male’ structure, as its transcript content did 
not more closely resemble a male cone than a fe­
male cone.
If the bisexual shoot did not evolve by the ec­
topic development of ovules on a male cone (or 
vice versa), it must have evolved by the conver­
sion of organs at the axis of a male cone into the 
female form, or by the conversion of the organs at 
the base of a female cone into the male form. These 
homeotic models do not imply that the flower is 
predominantly male or female, but that ­conversion 
produced by the male reproductive cones of the 
gnetophyte Welwitschia, and appear to attract pol­
linating insects to the male branches by exuding the 
same droplets of liquid that are secreted by fertile 
female ovules (Endress 1996). This would provide 
a selective advantage in terms of male fitness (pol­
len export) to a male shoot with additional female 
characters. From there it is easy to imagine the full 
feminization of the ectopic ovules into fertile struc­
tures. Bisporangiate cones are also occasionally 
produced by other gymnosperms, and the pres­
ence of ovule droplets is commonly reported in 
these cones (Rudall et al. 2011). Flores-Renteria et al. 
(2011) even observed that the bisporangiate cones 
of Pinus johannis were fully fertile, unlike the sterile 
ovules in male cones reported in Welwitschia. Other 
authors have noted that bisexual shoots facilitate 
selfing, which is potentially of great importance to 
plants (like the early angiosperms) invading new 
habitats.
Several models have been proposed to explain 
the evolution of the bisexual shoot from a molecu­
lar genetic perspective. These focus on two sets of 
genes—those controlling the conversion of the mer­
istem to the reproductive form (particularly LEAFY; 
see Chapters 7 and 9), and those controlling the pro­
duction of male organs in the angiosperm flower 
(B function genes; see Chapter 10). This section will 
outline these models, but the reader might find the 
models clearer when they have read later chapters 
on floral meristem and floral organ development.
The first model to take a genetic approach to the 
evolution of bisexual flowers was the Mostly Male 
Theory. In this model the bisexual shoot evolved 
by the production of ectopic ovules in the centre 
of a male cone, the cone retaining a ‘mostly male’ 
identity (Frohlich 2002). This hypothesis was based 
on analysis of sequence and expression patterns of 
genes predicted to regulate gymnosperm cone de­
velopment, which suggested that an angiosperm 
gene required for flower production (LEAFY) is 
most closely related to a gymnosperm gene in­
volved in male (but not female) cone development 
(Frohlich and Parker 2000). The PrFLL gene of Pinus 
radiata (and the equivalent gene in Welwitschia and 
Ginkgo) is very similar to the angiosperm LEAFY 
gene, which encodes a protein crucial in deter­
mining the floral nature of the meristem. In Pinus 

10      INTRODUCTION
hypotheses. Loss of B function gene expression 
from the upper regions of a male axis would result 
in the production of female organs within whorls 
of male organs. Similarly, gain of B function gene 
expression in the lower regions of a female axis 
would result in the production of male organs out­
side whorls of female organs (Theissen et al. 2002). 
The current lack of functional tools with which to 
explore gymnosperm cone development limits our 
ability to test these various hypotheses.
1.3.2  Evolution of the perianth
The typical angiosperm flower produces two whorls 
of sterile protective perianth organs—often, but 
not always, differentiated into protective green se­
pals and attractive petals. The production of these 
perianth organs was another angiosperm innova­
tion. However, it is not necessary to assume that 
the first angiosperm flower possessed a perianth. 
Indeed, some authors have argued to the contrary, 
proposing a perianth-less structure containing both 
male and female reproductive organs as the first 
flower (Theissen et al. 2002). Some fossil evidence 
does seem to support this hypothesis, including the 
morphology of Archaefructus and other early fossil 
angiosperms (Sun et al. 1998). Other authors have 
argued that the specialized habitats of early fossil 
angiosperms, particularly the aquatic ones, might 
have resulted in specialized floral morphology and 
even secondary loss of a perianth. However, it is 
clear that at some point the bisexual reproductive 
shoot was surrounded by sterile organs to generate 
the familiar form of the angiosperm flower.
The development of the perianth may have 
occurred in a number of ways. One hypothesis pro­
poses that the perianth developed by loss of repro­
ductive function of the outermost male organs, a 
model that has molecular support from studies of 
ranunculid flower development (Kramer and Irish 
1999). Alternatively, bract-like structures may have 
been modified to produce a perianth, shifiting posi­
tion on the shoot to develop immediately outside 
the reproductive organs. Both mechanisms have 
some support, and some authors postulate that the 
perianth evolved multiple times. However, a re­
view of the available evidence (Specht and Bartlett 
2009) suggests that the ancestral flower did have a 
of one organ type into the other results in a more 
nearly equal shoot. They are therefore more com­
patible with the transcriptomic analysis of Tavares 
et al. (2010). Theissen et al. (2002) described these 
ideas as the ‘Out of Male’ hypothesis and the ‘Out 
of Female’ hypothesis, depending on the shoot type 
in which the conversion occurred. Homeotic con­
version of organ types is not usually attributed to 
meristematic function genes like LEAFY, but to the 
genes controlling floral organ development that are 
discussed in Chapter 10. The key set of genes to this 
discussion are called the B function genes, and in 
the angiosperm flower they specify the develop­
ment of the stamens (male reproductive structures) 
in conjunction with the expression of C function 
genes. They also specify petal development, but 
that is incidental to this discussion. The C function 
genes alone specify carpel development (female 
­reproductive structure ­development). Both B and C 
function genes encode transcription factors called 
MADS box proteins, which activate transcription 
of the downstream genes involved in organ iden­
tity (see Chapters 10 and 11 for further details). 
Genes related to angiosperm B function genes have 
been isolated from conifers, and from Gnetum, and 
are expressed in the male cones, but not in the fe­
male cones (Sundstrom and Engstrom 2002; Winter 
et al. 2002). Similarly, genes related to angiosperm 
C function genes have been isolated from Gne­
tum, Cycas, and Picea, and shown to be expressed 
in both the female cones and the male cones, indi­
cating that C function is active in all reproductive 
structures in gymnosperms (Rutledge et al. 1998; 
Tandre et al. 1998; Zhang et al. 2004). The true roles 
of these genes in gymnosperms remain hypotheti­
cal, as no functional tests have yet been possible. 
However, on the basis of expression patterns alone, 
it appears that expression of the C function genes, 
in angiosperms and in gymnosperms, confers a re­
productive identity on an organ. It is expression of 
the B function gene that determines which sort of 
reproductive structure is produced. Expression of B 
function genes as well as C function genes results in 
the development of a male reproductive structure, 
a pollen cone. Expression of C function genes alone 
results in the development of a female reproductive 
structure, a seed cone. These observations provide 
the basis for the Out of Male and Out of Female 

The evolution of flowers      11
It was noted in Section 1.1.1 that similar flower-
like structures also evolved in the now extinct 
Bennettitales, a group of gymnosperms that were 
widespread between 248 and 140 million years ago 
(Willis and McElwain 2002). Some species of this 
group combined both male and female reproduc­
tive organs on a single axis, and appear to have 
enclosed those organs within a circle of bracts, su­
perficially like angiosperm flowers. There is debate 
as to whether these bracts opened, like the perianth 
organs of flowers, or whether structural constraints 
would have prevented this. It is also unclear wheth­
er the bracts contained pigmentation, believed to 
be a significant factor in the success of angiosperm 
flowers.
1.3.4  Evolution of the differentiated perianth
The perianth of most angiosperms is clearly divided 
into protective green sepals and attractive colour­
ful petals. However, this differentiation of roles is 
a derived feature that appears to have been gained 
and/or lost in multiple different angiosperm line­
ages. The early diverging angiosperm groups often 
exhibit a perianth that shows gradual transition 
from sepaloid outer organs to petaloid inner organs, 
with no clear division point (discussed by Ronse de 
Craene et al. 2003). This morphology is facilitated 
by their perianth phyllotaxy, which in many spe­
cies is spiral and continuous, rather than discretely 
whorled. This gradual transition of perianth organs 
is shown by Amborella (Buzgo et al. 2004), the Nym­
phaeales (Warner et al. 2008), and some other early 
diverging groups.
Differentiation of the perianth can in theory oc­
cur either by modification of inner sepals to pro­
duce petals, or by production of sterile stamens 
that evolve morphologically to produce petals. Both 
mechanisms have been shown to have occured in 
different lineages, with a sepal-derived origin of 
petals usually postulated in early-diverging an­
giosperm groups and the monocots, but a stamen-
derived origin of petals assumed for the eudicots. 
Some studies have assumed that the petals of the 
core eudicots (see Section 1.6) evolved only once, 
from stamens, although recent reports have sug­
gested that this is an over-simplification of a group 
which has itself experienced repeated petal loss 
­perianth (that is, there was a single ancestral origin), 
and that this perianth was lost repeatedly in multi­
ple lineages, including some of the earliest diverging 
groups (see Section 1.6), such as the Hydatellaceae 
(Nymphaeales) and the Chloranthaceae (Chloran­
thales). Given the great morphological similarities 
between sepals and leaves, most authors now agree 
that the sepals (and thus the ancestral perianth) are 
derived from bracts. During subsequent evolution 
of the angiosperm flower a differentiated perianth 
arose in multiple lineages. The inner organs of this 
differentiated perianth, the petals, are thought to 
have evolved from both sepals and stamens in dif­
ferent lineages (see Section 1.3.3).
1.3.3  Early ‘flower’ morphology
The first angiosperm flowers with perianth organs 
almost certainly did not have separate sepals and 
petals, but an undifferentiated and unspecialized 
perianth. Analysis of the fossil record and of ex­
tant basal angiosperms suggests that the anthers of 
these flowers made a lot of pollen, while the ovules 
may not yet have been entirely enclosed by carpel 
tissue, in the same way that the carpels of Amborella 
are not fully closed (Dilcher 2000; Endress and Iger­
sheim 2000). The carpel tissue that had developed 
would have enfolded individual groups of ovules, 
with the multiple fused carpels of many modern 
flowers still to evolve.
The presence of small unisexual flowers with few 
flower parts as well as large bisexual flowers with 
many flower parts as fossils in deposits of similar 
ages has led to a range of suggestions as to the like­
ly morphology of the first flowers (Endress 1987). 
The larger fossil flowers are reminiscent of those 
of modern-day Magnolia or waterlily, and both the 
Magnoliales and the Nymphaeales are early di­
verging groups. However, the smaller fossil flow­
ers resemble those of the Piperales (containing the 
spice peppers). Interpretation of these fossil data 
is further complicated by the possibility that even 
early fossil flowers had diverged from the ancestral 
morphology. For example, adaptation to an aquatic 
lifestyle might change flower morphology consid­
erably, and many of the earliest angiosperm fossils 
show clear evidence of an aquatic habit (Friis et al. 
2001; Sun et al. 2002).

12      INTRODUCTION
suite of novel colours, shapes, structures, scents, 
and rewards. At the same time, animal pollination 
is more likely than abiotic pollination to result in 
reproductive isolation, particularly where specific 
pollinating animals are attracted only to a subset of 
floral attributes but the wind is random in its dis­
persal of pollen. Such reproductive isolation may 
have facilitated speciation and divergence of form, 
further increasing the speed of angiosperm radia­
tion. Finally, full closure of the carpel and the ability 
to recognize and reject self pollen through biologi­
cal means may have evolved in concert to reinforce 
outcrossing (Dilcher 2000).
That rapid evolution coincided with the recruit­
ment of animal pollinators is not in doubt, with 
the advantages of outcrossing and the ability to ex­
change genetic information between widely spaced 
individuals representing major benefits in terms of 
increased genetic diversity and thus ‘evolvability’. 
What is less clear is the extent to which angiosperm 
and flower radiation can be directly attributed to a 
subsequent coevolution between angiosperms and 
pollinating insects. This attractive hypothesis has 
informed much of pollination ecology for decades, 
and can best be summarized by viewing flowers 
with a perianth as an angiosperm’s way of manipu­
lating an insect into carrying its pollen around for 
it. Once the flower has acquired the ability to ma­
nipulate one insect, it may radiate (genetic variabil­
ity permitting) into as many different forms as there 
are insects with different preferences to manipulate.
There is some fossil evidence to support the hy­
pothesis that angiosperm radiation was the result 
of angiosperm–insect coevolution. Fossils of early 
Cretaceous flowers show some features indicative 
of animal pollination, including a larger size than 
necessary for wind pollination (Crane et al. 1995). 
The first Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths) ap­
pear in the fossil record at the same time as the 
first angiosperms, and some groups of the Hy­
menoptera (bees, wasps, and ants) also appear to 
have evolved at the same time. However, there is 
little correlation between the origin or speciation of 
other insect groups and the origin and speciation of 
the angiosperms (Willis and McElwain 2002). This 
suggests that angiosperm–insect coevolution may 
have played an important role in the great diver­
sification of some groups and floral forms, but that 
and gain (Ronse de Craene 2007; Brockington et al. 
2012). The molecular genetic basis of these various 
evolutions of the differentiated perianth probably 
involves similar homeotic mutations to those that 
generated the bisexual reproductive shoot. The mo­
lecular basis of perianth morphology will be dis­
cussed for several examples in Chapter 11.
1.4  Floral diversification
The first angiosperm flowers were borne by a lin­
eage that subsequently underwent a dramatic ra­
diation, including an astonishing diversification 
of floral form. It has been hypothesized that this 
process was initiated by the association of male and 
female organs on the same axis, which increased the 
effectiveness of animal pollination (previously less 
significant than wind pollination for most plant spe­
cies). An alternative hypothesis is that the appear­
ance of coloured pigments in the new flowers had 
a dramatic effect on their attractiveness to animals, 
again establishing biotic pollination as the norm. 
Studies of the colour vision of a range of arthropods 
have inferred that the Cambrian ancestors of today’s 
insects possessed the same trichromatic colour per­
ception system as that used by modern pollinating 
insects to discriminate between flowers (Chittka 
1996). If insects were pre-adapted for viewing flow­
er colour 500 million years ago, then the appearance 
of coloured pigments in the perianth organs of the 
first flowers may have rapidly led to a strong asso­
ciation between flowers and animal pollinators. In­
creased animal pollination is likely to have resulted 
in increased outcrossing, in part through the dual 
service provided by an animal in both removing 
pollen from the anthers and applying non-self pol­
len to the stigma of a single flower in a single visit. 
This increase in outcrossing will have increased the 
amount of recombination between plant genomes 
and therefore the speed of angiosperm evolution 
(Dilcher 2000). Outcrossing can be both advan­
tageous and disadvantageous to plants, having 
consequences for the genetic make-up of popula­
tions and effective population size (Barrett 2002; 
Charlesworth 2006; see also Chapter 13). However, 
in many situations, selection will strongly favour 
adaptations that maintain increased outcrossing, 
resulting in the appearance and maintenance of a 

The evolution of flowers      13
1.6  An introduction to angiosperm 
phylogeny
Throughout this book, reference will be made to 
many different angiosperm species. In many cases 
the aim will be to allow the reader to make com­
parisons between species, or to draw evolutionary 
conclusions. To allow ready access to a skeleton an­
giosperm phylogeny, this section and the associated 
Fig. 1.5 provide an overview of current thinking on 
relationships of different groups of flowering plants. 
This summary is based on the work of the Angio­
sperm Phylogeny Group (APG), and the phylog­
eny published as APG III (Angiosperm Phylogeny 
Group 2009). The APG is an informal collaboration 
of plant systematists from several different coun­
tries, who work together to update and publish a 
holistic picture of the whole angiosperm phylogeny, 
often incorporating detailed data on specific groups 
contributed by other plant systematists. Their phy­
logeny has come to be regarded as the most reliable 
reference point for angiosperm relationships.
The phylogeny presented in Fig. 1.5 is based 
on orders of plants. Within each of these orders 
are variable numbers of families. Throughout this 
book, species will be described at first mention in 
a chapter, with their order in brackets following 
the species name. The two exceptions to this rule 
are the molecular genetic models Arabidopsis thali­
ana (Brassicales) and Antirrhinum majus (Lamiales), 
which are discussed in almost every chapter and 
are introduced in detail at first mention. Readers 
who are interested in more detailed phylogeny can 
find family relationships within each of the orders 
on the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website (<www.
mobot.org/mobot/research/apweb>), along with 
updates to the phylogeny as they occur.
At the base of the angiosperm phylogeny are a 
set of three sequentially branching orders, known 
together as the early diverging angiosperms. The 
Amborellales, at the base of the tree, contains only 
Amborella trichopoda, described above (see Sec­
tion 1.1.2) and now much studied as the earliest 
diverging extant angiosperm. The Nymphaeales 
contains the waterlilies, and the Austrobailey­
ales is a group of mainly tropical shrubs. After 
these three orders, the phylogeny branches into 
three points. The group known as the ­Magnoliids 
a significant part of this radiation must instead be 
attributed to the short lifespans and high rates of 
outcrossing of the new plants, and their consequent 
rapid acquisition of new habitats and new niches.
1.5  Morphological diversity of the flower
The radiation of the angiosperms has resulted in 
a tremendous variety of floral form. This variety 
encompasses size, shape, symmetry, organ num­
ber, whorl number, phyllotaxis, organ elaboration, 
colour, pigmentation pattern, texture, scent, and 
reward availability. The ecological and evolution­
ary explanations for this variety are discussed in 
Section III of this book, while its molecular genetic 
basis is discussed within Sections II and III (notably 
Chapters 11, 15, 16, 17, and 18). However, it is worth 
noting at this point that this diversity is not even­
ly distributed across the angiosperm phylogeny. 
While the eudicot group contains by far the greatest 
species diversity, estimated at around 70% of angio­
sperm species, its floral diversity is restricted to the 
details rather than the body plan of the whole flow­
er. Eudicot flowers generally have a whorled phyl­
lotaxis, differentiated perianth, and floral organs in 
groups of five (although there are deviations from 
this basic pattern). Their diversity is at the level of 
size, symmetry, organ elaboration, colour, texture, 
and scent. The monocots also have whorled phyl­
lotaxis, with floral organs in groups of three. They 
usually produce an undifferentiated perianth with 
two whorls of brightly coloured tepals, or else have 
dramatically modified wind-pollinated flowers 
such as those of the grasses (Poales). It is in the early 
diverging angiosperm groups, where species diver­
sity is only a few per cent of the angiosperm total, 
that the greatest diversity in floral body plan occurs. 
As noted earlier, species in these groups have spi­
ral, whorled, or transitional phyllotaxis. They show 
great variation in organ number, as well as diversity 
of colour, scent, and floral elaboration. There is vari­
ation in the shape of their ovules and carpels, and 
in the degree to which the carpels are fully closed. 
It is likely that the relatively more constrained form 
of the eudicot flower has facilitated greater species 
diversification by establishing a successful and flex­
ible floral form that is subject to variable selection 
pressures from different pollinators.

14      INTRODUCTION
Dipsacales
Paracryphiales
Apiales
Bruniales
Escalloniales
Asterales
Aquifoliales
Boraginales
Solanales
Lamiales
Gentianales
Garryales
Ericales
Cornales
Caryophyllales
Berberidopsidales
Santalales
Brassicales
Malvales
Huertaeales
Sapindales
Picramniales
Crossosomatales
Myrtales
Geraniales
Fagales
Cucurbitales
Rosales
Fabales
Malpighiales
Oxalidales
Celastrales
Zygophyllales
Vitales
Saxifragales
Dilleniaceae
Gunnerales
Buxales
Trochodendrales
Sabiales
Proteales
Ranunculales
Ceratophyllales
Zingiberales
Commelinales
Poales
Arecales
Asparagales
Liliales
Pandanales
Dioscoreales
Petrosaviales
Alismatales
Acorales
Magnoliales
Canellales
Laurales
Piperales
Chloranthales
Austrobaileyales
Nymphaeales
Amborellales
Monocots
Core eudicots
Asterids
Rosids
Core eudicots
Eudicots
Magnoliid
Early diverging
Figure 1.5   A summary of angiosperm phylogeny, based on APG III (Angiosperm Phylogeny Group 2009).

The evolution of flowers      15
eudicots, including the Ranunculales (buttercup 
family), precede the branching of the Core Eud­
icots. The Core Eudicots contains many orders, 
some branching independently but most contained 
within the Rosids or the Asterids. Important groups 
within the Rosids include the Fabales (containing 
key model and crop legumes, such as pea, soybean, 
and Medicago truncatula), the Malvales (cotton), and 
the Brassicales (vegetable brassicas and the main 
genetic model, Arabidopsis thaliana). The Asterids 
also contains important orders, notably the Aster­
ales (the species-rich daisies, including sunflower), 
the Solanales (including potato, tomato, and au­
bergine), and the Lamiales (containing the genetic 
model Antirrhinum majus).
For a thorough treatment of the diversity of the 
flowering plants in a phylogenetic context I recom­
mend the books of Soltis et al. (2005) and Judd et al. 
(2007).
contains the Magnoliales, Laurales, Canellales, 
Piperales, and possibly the Chloranthales (which 
are sometimes excluded from the rest of the group). 
Many of these orders contain flowers that appear 
primitive, or show features in common with the 
early diverging angiosperms, but it is not clear 
whether these traits are ancestral or secondarily 
derived. The Monocots are a very important group, 
containing 11 orders, including the economically 
important Poales (the grasses). Within this order are 
many important model and crop species, including 
maize, rice, and wheat. The Liliales contains many 
horticulturally important species, such as lily, tu­
lip, and freesia, while the Asparagales contains 
the enormously speciose orchid family. The third 
branch contains the Ceratophyllales and the Eud­
icots. The Eudicots are the most species-rich section 
of the tree, representing around 70% of angiosperm 
species diversity. Five orders of early diverging 

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 2
Historical interpretations of flower 
induction and flower development
The modern analysis of flowers and flowering 
rests on a wealth of literature concerned with the 
description and interpretation of plant form. Chief 
among these works is Goethe’s foliar theory, which 
proposes that all aerial plant organs are analogous 
to a single organ, which he calls the leaf. The foliar 
theory has underpinned all work on flower devel­
opment, including modern molecular genetic anal­
yses, as well as providing a frame of reference for 
evolutionary studies. This chapter describes Goe­
the’s theory with reference to the flower, and its use 
and expansion by twentieth-century botanists. An 
analysis of the differences and similarities between 
vegetative and floral organs is presented, providing 
a framework for a section that interprets the foliar 
theory in an evolutionary context. The second half 
of the chapter moves on to consider historical inter­
pretations of the transition from the vegetative state 
to the flowering state, describing the mechanisms 
proposed by early plant physiologists to explain 
this transition. Again, this overview is designed 
to provide context for further chapters on the cur­
rent state of knowledge with regard to this floral 
transition.
2.1  The foliar theory of the flower
The scientific study of plant morphology, and in 
particular the study of comparative morphology, 
both of different organs within a plant and of the 
same organ from different plants, was effectively 
the invention of the great German philosopher Jo­
hann Wolfgang von Goethe. In 1790, Goethe pub­
lished his seminal essay on the metamorphosis of 
plants (translated and discussed by Arber 1946), in 
which he proposed that all plant organs could be 
thought of as equivalent or analogous to a single 
type organ, which he called the leaf. However, it is 
important to establish that he was not proposing a 
developmental or evolutionary concept, with other 
plant organs being descended from a leaf. Indeed, 
it might have helped to separate his thinking on 
equivalence from later evolutionary thinking on 
relatedness if he had used a different name for his 
hypothetical type organ. Nageli (1884) suggested 
‘phyllome’ as a more suitable name, a suggestion 
with which later morphological botanists such as 
Arber (1937) strongly concurred. Because Goethe’s 
theory implied no developmental or evolutionary 
progression, it is effectively reciprocal. Thus it is 
just as easy to describe leaves as analogous to petals 
as it is to describe petals as analogous to leaves. In 
essence, Goethe’s view was that reproduction (and 
the development of reproductive organs) ought to 
be treated as a function of the entire plant, and that 
the flowering shoot could not be understood except 
in relation to the vegetative shoot of the same plant 
(Arber 1937). This holistic approach was a new de­
velopment in a field that had previously relied on 
analysis of individual components of organisms. Its 
genius lay in the detail with which it compared dif­
ferent parts of the same plant, combined with the 
simplicity of its approach. This approach involved 
no speculation about the meaning behind the anal­
ogy of different plant organs. It provided, however, 
a data set, free of preconceptions, which was then 
adopted by later evolutionary and developmental 
biologists and has provided remarkable support for 
their theories.

Historical interpretations      17
usually remains indeterminate in the inflorescence 
shoot, allowing indeterminate growth similar to 
that shown previously by the vegetative shoot. 
The inflorescence shoot’s direction of growth and 
its function—the production and support of lateral 
organs—are also the same as those of the vegetative 
shoot.
Differences between the inflorescence shoot and 
the vegetative shoot are primarily related to the 
organs that they produce, and these will be con­
sidered individually below. However, within the 
shoot itself a number of changes may occur. First, 
in some species, phyllotaxy in the inflorescence 
shoot is altered, with organs being produced in a 
pattern different from that of the vegetative shoot. 
Secondly, the distance between lateral organs may 
vary. In many species the inflorescence shoot is 
characterized by internodes shorter than those of 
the vegetative shoot. Finally, the details of cellular 
differentiation within the epidermis of the stem 
itself may be altered. For example, the vegetative 
stem of Antirrhinum majus (snapdragon, Lamiales) 
Goethe’s analysis of the equivalence of the differ­
ent plant organs to a basic vegetative unit was sum­
marized by Arber (1937), from which the following 
analysis of each of the reproductive structures is de­
rived and expanded. Pairs of analogous structures 
are shown in Fig. 2.1.
2.1.1  Inflorescence shoot
The inflorescence shoot consists of the shoot api­
cal meristem (SAM), the stem which is laid down 
from the rib meristematic region of the SAM, and 
the bracts, flowers, and secondary branches that are 
produced laterally from that stem. Its similarities to 
the vegetative stem from which it derives are clear. 
There is little difficulty in accepting such similari­
ties, as the two are merely different phases in the 
life cycle of the SAM, which itself undergoes no 
major reorganization of structure in the transition 
from the vegetative to the flowering stage, although 
many changes in patterns of gene expression with­
in that structure have been observed. The  SAM 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(e)
(d)
Figure 2.1  Analogous floral and 
reproductive organs in tobacco (Nicotiana 
tabacum, Solanales). (a) The inflorescence 
shoot (left) is analogous to the vegetative 
shoot (right). (b) The bract (below) is 
analogous to the leaf (above). (c) The sepal 
(below) is analogous to the leaf (above). 
(d) The petal (below) is analogous to the leaf 
(above). (e) The stamen (below) is analogous 
to the leaf (above).

18      INTRODUCTION
in the floral shoot can therefore be thought of as 
a ­reversion by the axis to a more juvenile growth 
form. Such retention of juvenile characteristics in 
mature organisms is termed neoteny, and has been 
hypothesized to be responsible for many apparent 
saltational leaps in the animal fossil record, includ­
ing the divergence of humans from apes. It is also 
well known in plants, where it can be responsible 
for significant morphological evolution—for exam­
ple, in floral form (Box et al. 2008; Box and Glover 
2010). A third, and equally significant, difference 
between the flowering shoot and a vegetative shoot 
is the determinacy of the meristem and consequent­
ly of the shoot. The early morphologists were con­
cerned with the fate of the meristematic cells within 
a flower, believing that consumption of the meris­
tem by the terminal organs (the carpels) would indi­
cate a significant difference from the activity of the 
axillary shoot. However, careful analysis has shown 
that many species retain an apex to the floral axis, 
clearly distinct from the floral organs (see Fig. 2.2; 
Arber 1937). Instead of consumption by the carpels, 
then, the floral meristem is simply determinate and 
ceases to produce more organs ­after the flower is 
is entirely hairless, but the inflorescence stem is cov­
ered with short multicellular trichomes with glan­
dular heads.
2.1.2  Floral shoot
The floral shoot consists of the floral meristem and 
the lateral organs derived from it. It should not be 
considered analogous to the main vegetative shoot 
(derived directly from the SAM) but to the axillary 
shoots which develop from the flanks of the SAM. 
In the same way, the floral meristems develop on 
the flanks of the inflorescence meristem. The floral 
shoot usually arises in the axil of a leaf-like organ, 
the bract, whereas the axillary vegetative shoot al­
ways arises in the axil of a leaf. So the architecture 
of the floral shoot, and its positioning with respect 
to the main axis of plant growth, is very similar to 
that of a vegetative axillary shoot. The function of 
the floral shoot is also analogous—the production 
and support of lateral organs.
However, the differences between the floral shoot 
and an axillary vegetative shoot are not solely re­
stricted to the organs that they produce, very differ­
ent though those may seem. There are again three 
significant differences between the floral shoot and a 
vegetative shoot. First, phyllotaxy is almost always 
altered in the floral shoot, with whorled phyllotaxy 
being the norm in flower development (with nota­
ble exceptions), irrespective of the usual phyllotaxy 
adopted by the leaves of the plant. Secondly, and 
more significantly, there is an enormous difference 
in the extent to which the shoot elongates. The axis 
of a vegetative shoot will almost always elongate, 
so that the leaves are separated by well-defined 
internodes. In contrast, the floral axis very rarely 
elongates at all after the production of the first se­
pal, producing organs so closely placed that fusions 
both within and between different whorls of floral 
organs are common. This difference was noted by 
Goethe, and has been described as the primary di­
vergence between floral and vegetative shoots (Ar­
ber 1937). However, there are examples of primary 
vegetative shoots adopting a similar form—many 
species (e.g. in the Brassicales) adopt a rosette form 
in the juvenile phase, with almost no internodal 
elongation at all. The loss of internodal expansion 
Figure 2.2  The shoot apical meristem still present between the 
carpels in a flower of Ranunculus acris (Ranunculales) (redrawn from 
Arber 1937).

Historical interpretations      19
2.1.3  Bracts
If the evidence suggests that the vegetative and 
reproductive shoots are analogous, the various 
appendages borne by these shoots are increas­
ingly difficult to relate to one another. The bract is 
the easiest case, being positionally and morpho­
logically often barely distinguishable from a leaf. 
Bracts, like leaves, are lateral organs produced by 
the SAM and which subtend a meristem. They 
are also in possession of dorsoventrality, are usu­
ally laminate in form, and are frequently green and 
photosynthetic.
The differences between bracts and leaves are 
usually limited to details of size, shape, pigmenta­
tion, and cellular differentiation, although there are 
some species in which bracts are entirely absent. In 
many species the bracts are smaller than the foli­
age leaves, perhaps reflecting the transition of the 
plant from an organism primarily concerned with 
photosynthetic production to an organism con­
cerned with investing the products of that photo­
synthesis in reproduction. In some plants the bracts 
have become modified to attract pollinators to the 
flowers, and may therefore contain anthocyanin or 
other pigments, either as well as or at the expense of 
chlorophyll. Similarly, plants that use their bracts in 
this way, such as some species of Cornus (Cornales), 
may develop light-focusing papillae on their bracts 
(Kay et al. 1981), while other species may show dif­
ferent trichome distributions on their bracts relative 
to their leaves.
2.1.4  Sepals
The first whorl of perianth organs, containing the 
sepals, is often morphologically very similar to a 
whorl of leaves. The sepals are produced as lateral 
appendages from the floral meristem, and are usu­
ally laminate in form and green in colour. Excep­
tions to this occur in species where both whorls 
of perianth organs are specialized for pollinator 
attraction, either as two very similar whorls, such 
as in the Liliales, or as two very different whorls, 
such as in Fuchsia (Myrtales). In both cases the two 
whorls of petaloid organs are sometimes known 
as tepals. Apart from this particular difference, 
related to adoption of a novel function, the sepals 
complete. It is likely that this determinacy, unusual 
in a plant meristem, is secondarily imposed. Genet­
ic analyses have revealed that floral meristem deter­
minacy can be broken by mutation of a single gene 
(called AGAMOUS in Arabidopsis thaliana; Coen and 
Meyerowitz 1991) and the meristem returned to an 
indeterminate state (see Fig. 2.3). The analogy be­
tween floral and vegetative meristems is therefore 
not broken by the determinacy of the floral meris­
tem, a secondarily imposed character controlled by 
a single gene.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3  The indeterminate nature of the AGAMOUS mutant 
flower (b), which produces flowers within flowers, confirms that 
determinacy has been imposed upon the wild type floral meristem 
(a) by the action of this single gene. Photographs kindly supplied by 
Ian Furner (University of Cambridge).

20      INTRODUCTION
2.1.6  Stamens
The outer whorl of reproductive organs, the sta­
mens, was also considered analogous to leaves by 
Goethe. The similarities of stamens to leaves lie 
in the presence of chlorophyll and in their growth 
form, which consists of elongation in a single plane 
(although usually with little or no laminar growth). 
Their differences may seem more striking, but can 
again be attributed to minor adaptations to chang­
ing function. The absence of a laminar form may 
at first seem significant. However, analysis of mu­
tants with perturbations in leaf development has 
shown that, in order for a leaf to develop a lamina, 
it must first have dorsoventrality (Waites and Hud­
son 2001). Put simply, a leaf cannot grow sideways 
unless it can detect which way is up, which way is 
down, and thus which way is sideways. There is no 
need for a stamen to have dorsoventrality, as it is 
simply a filament supporting the pollen-containing 
locules. In the absence of dorsoventrality a laminar 
form cannot develop, so the lack of a lamina can 
be interpreted as a consequence of the loss of dor­
soventrality. That leaves the locules themselves as 
the only significant difference between stamens and 
leaves.
A further argument in favour of the analogy be­
tween leaves and stamens is the interrelationship 
between petals and stamens. A variety of authors, 
beginning with Goethe himself, observed significant 
similarities between stamens and petals. It had also 
been noted that the absence of stamens in species 
which produce some female-only flowers was often 
associated with a reduction in petal development. 
Modern molecular genetic analyses have ­confirmed 
the association between petals and stamens, with 
both requiring the activity of ‘­B-function’ genes 
(see Chapter 10) for their development (Coen and 
Meyerowitz 1991). It follows, then, that if petals are 
analogous to leaves, and petals and stamens are 
variations on the same theme, then stamens must 
also be analogous to leaves.
2.1.7  Carpels
The female reproductive structures have tradition­
ally presented the greatest difficulty to people in­
tent on interpreting the flower in a foliar context. 
usually differ from leaves only in their size, often 
being much smaller.
2.1.5  Petals
The second whorl of perianth organs can, in species 
with a simple undifferentiated perianth, be mor­
phologically very similar to leaves, too. However, 
in many species, particularly in some of the eud­
icots with zygomorphic (or bilaterally symmetrical) 
flowers, the petals can be morphologically very dis­
tinct both from leaves and from one another. How­
ever great the differences in morphology between 
petals and leaves may seem, they are nonetheless 
analogous in terms of their position as lateral ap­
pendages from a meristem. Other similarities in­
clude dorsoventrality and a laminar form. Both 
petals and leaves can clearly be seen to distinguish 
their dorsal surface from their ventral surface. The 
leaves of most angiosperm species differentiate sto­
mata at a considerably higher frequency on their 
ventral epidermis than on their dorsal epidermis. 
Internally, the palisade mesophyll (the columnar 
cells that provide the extended surface area for 
photosynthesis) is located on the dorsal side of the 
leaf. Similarly, many petals develop specialized epi­
dermal cells on their dorsal surfaces, and may even 
be differentially pigmented or patterned on their 
dorsal and ventral surfaces. The laminar form, pro­
duced by growth perpendicular to an initial axis, is 
also common to both leaves and petals.
If the similarities between petals and leaves are 
in major architectural and developmental charac­
teristics, the differences are largely in the detail of 
function. Petals are not usually green and photosyn­
thetic, but instead may contain pigments that make 
them stand out against vegetation. This can be in­
terpreted as a secondary adaptation to their specific 
function as pollinator attractants. Similarly, petals 
usually have no palisade mesophyll (since they do 
not photosynthesize), and often develop elaborate 
papillate epidermal cells to enhance their apparent 
colour and texture. These differences, like changes 
in size and shape, do not reflect major differences 
between petals and leaves, but rather minor modi­
fications of a similar ground plan, and therefore do 
not perturb Goethe’s vision of the analogous nature 
of leaves and petals.

HISTORICAL INTERPRETATIONS    21
Modified leaf
Sporangia
Single fused
carpel
Three fused
carpels
 Figure 2.4    Development of the angiosperm 
carpel. A modiﬁ ed leaf with sporangia at the 
edges folds up to make a single fused carpel, 
several of which may fuse together in a 
single gynoecium. 
make up a fl ower look as if they could be produced 
with only a few variations using the same basic de-
velopmental programmes that make leaves. Flow-
ers, in fact, seem to be nothing more than bunches 
of slightly strange leaves bearing spore-producing 
structures. 
 2.2  The foliar theory in an evolutionary 
context
    The observations of Goethe on the analogous na-
ture of leaves and fl oral organs paved the way for 
later evolutionary interpretations of fl ower devel-
opment. Where organs can be seen to represent 
variations on a theme, it is only a short step to blur 
the boundaries between them and imagine inter-
mediate forms. This ‘fuzzy’ approach to plant mor-
phology ( Rutishauser and Isler  2001 ) fi ts perfectly 
with the idea, propounded by Darwin, that organ-
isms were formed by gradual transitions between 
types. Goethe’s work provided important data 
that supported the theory of evolution by natural 
selection, suggesting that the various organs of the 
fl ower evolved by gradual changes, as a result of 
mutations, from an ancestral leaf-like structure. 
As evolutionary theory became accepted as part of 
mainstream biology, Goethe’s ideas were seamless-
ly incorporated into an evolutionary context, with 
his cautious ‘analogous’ converted to a more radical 
‘related to’ or ‘derived from.’
Goethe himself had some diffi culties with the car-
pel, and it was not until microscopical techniques 
advanced considerably that it was possible to see 
how the development of each carpel was analogous 
to the development of a leaf. Each carpel is essen-
tially composed of a folded up leaf-like structure, 
with ovules developing on its adaxial side (see 
 Fig.   2.4  ). In most species, multiple carpels fuse to-
gether to form a single compound pistil. Ovules 
aside, the only differences between carpels and 
leaves are the development of specialized stigmatic 
cells and the patterning of the vasculature. The stig-
matic cells, and the stylar tissue beneath them, are 
clearly adaptations to the function of the carpel, and 
can be interpreted as secondary consequences of the 
novel function. The signifi cance of the patterning of 
carpel vasculature has been the subject of much de-
bate in the literature. The essential problem is that 
leaves have a dominant mid-vein with secondary 
vasculature branching outwards from it, whereas 
carpels have dominant lateral veins with secondary 
veins branching inwards from them. Although it is 
not clear how the distribution of vasculature could 
have altered, it has generally come to be accepted 
that this pattern refl ects the lateral positions of the 
ovules, and the need to supply them with nutrients, 
and is thus likely to be a secondary consequence of 
ovule development.
  Overall, then, comparative morphology shows us 
that Goethe’s foliar theory of the fl ower was both 
innovative and insightful. All of the organs that 

22      INTRODUCTION
flower by grafting a single induced leaf from anoth­
er plant on to it. It is clear from this physical separa­
tion of processes that floral evocation requires the 
production of a signal by the induced organs, which 
is transported to the apical meristem and activates 
flower production. The mechanisms of induction 
and evocation, and the nature of the signal between 
them, have long been the subjects of physiological 
analysis.
2.4  Developmental explanations 
of floral induction
The variables that interact to determine when a 
plant is induced to flower can include develop­
mental stimuli and environmental stimuli. For the 
majority of plants in temperate climates the envi­
ronment is a key factor in the decision to flower, 
as producing vulnerable flowers and seeds in the 
depths of winter, for example, would not be a suc­
cessful strategy. For this reason, environmental 
stimuli are considered in much greater depth than 
developmental ones, both in this chapter and in the 
literature as a whole. Developmental factors are of 
more importance to plants living in environments 
with little annual variation. It is unusual, for in­
stance, to find a tropical forest species with a floral 
transition determined by factors such as day length 
or temperature, which are more or less constant in 
that environment.
The developmental factors that may influence the 
floral transition generally refer to the age and health 
of the plant. Some trees, for example, can only 
flower after a certain number of years of growth. 
This ensures that the tree has had time to build up 
a store of photosynthate with which to support any 
developing seeds and fruit. Similarly, some herba­
ceous and weedy species flower after the produc­
tion of a certain number of leaves, again allowing 
for the development of sufficient photosynthetic 
tissue to support the nutritional needs of non-
photosynthetic flowers, seed, and fruit (King 1997). 
Although the human observer might interpret these 
responses as implying a ‘counting’ mechanism 
within the plant, it is more likely that each leaf pro­
duces a certain amount of a stimulatory substance, 
and that the ‘right’ number of leaves are required 
to produce sufficient stimulus to cross a threshold, 
The idea that floral organs are only a few muta­
tions different from leaves has been the founda­
tion stone of modern molecular genetic analysis of 
flower development. Genetic analysis in the 1980s 
and 1990s identified lines of plants with mutations 
that caused interconversion of floral organs. Com­
bination of these mutations into a single plant line 
resulted in a plant that produced four whorls of 
leaves in place of the four whorls of floral organs, 
finally providing the molecular ‘proof’ for Goethe’s 
foliar theory (Coen and Meyerowitz 1991). These 
mutant lines, and the genes in question, are dis­
cussed in more detail in Chapter 10. However, their 
interpretation, and indeed much of the impetus for 
their identification, rely heavily on the historical 
work of Goethe himself.
2.3  The transition to flowering
The history of scientific work on flower develop­
ment may belong to comparative morphologists, 
but the history of work on the transition to flower­
ing lies with plant physiologists. The transition to 
flowering consists of a major phase change in the 
plant’s life cycle. A plant that has previously pro­
duced only leaves and axillary meristems from its 
apical meristem must now switch to producing 
bracts and floral meristems, along with any chang­
es to the general axis, phyllotaxy, and pattern of 
growth. This switch can be thought of as a ‘deci­
sion’ on the part of the plant—it is not a random 
event, but occurs in response to one or several of a 
large set of potential stimuli, which vary from spe­
cies to species. The transition to flowering can be 
broken down into two distinct processes, induction 
and evocation. Floral induction is the commitment 
of the plant to start producing flowers, which often 
happens as a result of processes occurring in the 
leaves. Once induced, a plant is set on the path to 
flowering, even though no flowers have yet been 
produced. The induced plant then evokes the pro­
duction of flowers by triggering changes in gene 
expression in the apical meristem. Induction and 
evocation are usually considered separately for the 
simple reason that they often occur in distinct or­
gans. It is possible to induce many plants to flower 
by providing appropriate stimuli to a single leaf, 
and it is possible to evoke an uninduced plant to 

Historical interpretations      23
time to flower depends on a large number of fac­
tors, and is a reflection of the selective pressures 
that the plant experiences. It is essential that flow­
ers are produced in sufficient time to set seed before 
winter weather conditions kill off developing tis­
sues. The vulnerability of the developing seed and 
the harshness of the local climate will interact to 
determine how late any individual plant can afford 
to leave flowering. At the same time, if seed or fruit 
is to be dispersed by animals, it is essential for that 
seed or fruit to be mature while the animals are for­
aging. Again, this will depend on the animals used, 
whether they migrate, hibernate, or feed all winter, 
and how the local climate conditions affect the ani­
mals themselves. Flowers themselves may also rely 
on animals for pollination, and if this is the case, 
flowers must be produced when the appropriate 
pollinators are active. Finally, competition between 
flowers of different species for pollinator attention 
has been hypothesized to drive some plant species 
to flower at a time slightly suboptimal with regard 
to the above factors, simply to avoid competition 
and reduced levels of pollination (see Chapter 19).
So photoperiodic plants are plants that use day 
length to predict when their optimal flowering time 
is approaching, and flower accordingly. In fact, there 
are two types of photoperiodic plants—long day 
plants and short day plants. This is a very important 
distinction in photoperiodic research, and one that 
the early plant physiologists had to establish in order 
to avoid much later confusion. A long day plant is a 
plant that flowers when the days are longer than a 
certain minimum length. The minimum length itself 
will vary greatly between different species, but the 
key point is that long day plants flower only when the 
days exceed this length. In a temperate climate this 
means that the plant is likely to flower in late spring 
or early summer. Many common European garden 
and crop plants are long day plants, including species 
such as wheat (Poales), lettuce (Asterales), and sugar 
beet (Caryophyllales). Short day plants, on the other 
hand, are plants that require the days to be shorter 
than a certain maximum length in order to flower. 
Again, the critical length itself can vary widely, but it 
is the flowering when days are shorter than this that 
defines a short day plant. Short day plants are usu­
ally found in latitudes lower than those of long day 
plants. In a temperate climate they are represented 
beyond which flowering responses are activated. 
The early literature on flower induction is primar­
ily concerned with the search for this stimulatory 
substance, as discussed in Section 2.6.
It is likely that all plants, even those with a strong 
environmental stimulation of flowering, use devel­
opmental cues to a certain extent. The production 
of organs that do not contribute to the carbon bal­
ance of the plant is an expensive business, and one 
not undertaken unless the plant is sufficiently large 
and in sufficiently good health. The only exception 
to this general rule is that, in extreme cases of stress, 
flower induction may occur to ensure that seed is 
produced before a plant dies. This can often be ob­
served in badly treated garden and house plants!
2.5  Environmental explanations 
of floral induction
The early plant physiologists established very 
quickly that the environmental variables which 
seemed to influence flowering were day length, 
temperature, and, to a lesser extent, water stress.
2.5.1  Day length
The most commonly used environmental variable 
is the length of time for which light is available, the 
day length. Almost all plants outside equatorial 
regions have flowering responses at least partially 
triggered by day length.
Plants that use light availability to tell them when 
to flower are described as photoperiodic. Photo­
periodic plants use day length, and the change in 
day length as the seasons progress, to predict which 
season and therefore which weather conditions will 
come next. In the same way, if one had no access to a 
calendar, it would be more reliable to predict when 
autumn would arrive by measuring the shorten­
ing days than it would be to base everything on the 
weather. A late hot spell in September, for instance, 
could hide how far advanced autumn was, but day 
length is an entirely reliable indicator.
The fact that plants use day length to determine 
when to flower implies that there is an optimal time 
for flowering to occur. This optimal time is different 
between species, and within species it may differ in 
relation to geographical distribution. The optimal 

24   INTRODUCTION
the timings of signals derived from the clock and 
signals derived from the light regime.
  It was a short step from establishing that plants 
sensed the light regime to investigating where in 
the plant this occurred. Perhaps surprisingly, it has 
been shown quite conclusively that day length is 
measured in the leaves of the plant, not in the mer-
istem, even though it is the meristem that actually 
undergoes the change from a vegetative to a repro-
ductive state. Again, very simple physiological ex-
periments provided this important breakthrough. 
Plants were kept in non-inductive conditions, with 
only single organs exposed to the correct day length. 
This could be achieved by placing a box around the 
organ in question, with a light in that box under 
separate control from the main lights of the room. 
These experiments showed that providing a single 
leaf with the appropriate day length was enough to 
cause fl owering to occur. However, exposing just 
the apex of the plant had no effect at all. Although it 
may seem counter-intuitive to measure day length 
in the leaves and then send a signal to the meristem 
to cause fl owering to occur, in fact there are a num-
ber of good reasons why leaves are the best place 
to sense the light regime. Leaves have a much big-
ger surface area than the apical meristem, and are 
adapted to maximize light capture. They also act 
as a fail-safe mechanism—measuring light in many 
by species that fl ower very early in spring, such as 
the snowdrop and the crocus (both Asparagales), 
and by autumn-fl owering species, such as chrysan-
themum (Asterales). ( Figure  2.5 shows the respons-
es of long and short day plants to an example light 
regime; note that it refers to critical night length, not 
day length, as explained below.) 
  Having established that plants appeared to fl ower 
in response to day length, it then took a number of 
simple experiments to show that plants actually ap-
peared to be measuring the length of the night, not 
the day. This was shown by interrupting the ‘day’ 
experienced by plants in controlled growth condi-
tions, by turning the lights off for a variety of peri-
ods. These interruptions had no effect whatsoever 
on fl owering. However, interrupting the ‘night’ by 
turning the lights on for short periods had dramatic 
effects on fl owering. The effect of fl ashes of light 
during the night was to persuade the plants that 
the nights were much shorter than they really were, 
and to induce early fl owering in long day plants 
but to repress fl owering in short day plants. These 
experiments also showed that red and far red light 
were the most effective at disturbing the plants’ 
fl owering responses (Borthwick  et al . 1952). We now 
know that these ‘night breaks’ affected fl owering by 
interfering with the normal cycling of the circadian 
clock (see  Chapter  5  ), causing a mismatch between 
Long day plant with maximum critical night length:
6 am
6 pm
6 am
No flowering
flowering
flowering
No flowering
Long day plant with maximum critical night length:
Short day plant with minimum critical night length:
Short day plant with minimum critical night length:
 Figure 2.5    Responses of long and short day plants with varying critical night lengths. The long day plant will only ﬂ ower in the light regime 
shown if its critical night length is longer than the period of darkness. The short day plant will only ﬂ ower if its critical night length is shorter than 
the period of darkness. 

Historical interpretations      25
Like the sensing of photoperiod, temperature sens­
ing has been shown to take place in the leaves of 
the plant, although there is also evidence that apical 
meristems can be induced to flower by the chilling 
of them alone, through the repression of meristem-
expressed genes (Searle et al. 2006).
2.5.3  Water stress
Early physiological experiments also showed that 
various kinds of stress could induce flowering. The 
most effective of these is water stress. Droughting 
plants, or even cutting off their roots, is frequently 
able to induce flowering, as has been shown for ex­
ample in Citrus latifolia (Sapindales) (Southwick and 
Davenport 1986). This seems to ensure that a plant 
which is unlikely to survive does at least set seed 
for the next generation. It is a phenomenon which 
has been studied less extensively than light- or 
­temperature-induced flowering. One explanation 
for this is that drought stress is not generally con­
ducive to the production of much seed or seed of 
very good quality, so this form of flower induction 
is unlikely to be of use in agriculture or horticulture.
2.6  The florigen problem
Once the early plant physiologists had established 
that it was leaves that sensed the light regime, they 
quickly realized that there must be a signal which 
travelled from the induced leaves to the apical mer­
istem to activate the floral transition. The search for 
this signal was one of the most active areas of plant 
research for many years. Although a single protein 
(FT; see Chapters 5 and 7) has now been identified 
as the key signal moving between leaf and meris­
tem to induce flowering in Arabidopsis, we also 
now know that multiple signals interact to evoke 
the flowering response in the meristem, and that 
the process is much more complex than anything 
previously imagined.
2.6.1  Florigen
It was initially hypothesized that the signal sent by 
the induced leaf to the apical meristem was likely to 
be a plant growth regulator (otherwise known as a 
plant hormone). There were a number of pieces of 
different leaves at once means that if some leaves 
are shaded and do not perceive the correct day 
length, other leaves are likely not to be. The plant 
thus has multiple chances to perceive day length, 
and multiple chances to flower.
These experiments provided a baseline for mod­
ern research into the floral transition. The early 
physiologists had established that most plants 
flowered in response to the light regime, that they 
needed either days longer than a certain minimum 
(long day plants) or days shorter than a certain 
maximum (short day plants), that they appeared to 
measure night length rather than day length, and 
that they did this measuring in their leaves. Modern 
research (discussed in Chapter 5) has focused on the 
mechanism by which light is perceived, the clock 
that allows plants to measure day length, and the 
signalling that connects the two.
2.5.2  Temperature
The second most commonly used environmental 
stimulus to regulate flowering time is tempera­
ture. However, temperature signals are generally 
used in addition to photoperiod, and most often by 
plants that live for several years and only flower in 
some of them. Temperature provides information 
on the passing of years rather than seasons. Hen­
bane, Hyoscyamus niger (Solanales), for example, is 
a long day plant, but will not flower at all unless 
it has been exposed to cold. It is biennial and only 
flowers in its second year. Putting the photoperiod 
and cold requirement together, we can see that 
henbane, which germinates in the spring, cannot 
flower in its first summer, because it has not been 
induced by cold. It cannot flower in winter, or the 
next spring, despite having been induced by cold, 
because it is in the wrong day length. Only in the 
second summer, when the cold induction has hap­
pened and the day length is right, will the plant 
flower. The degree of cold needed to induce flower­
ing and the amount of time it is needed for vary a 
lot between species according to the environments 
in which they occur. Treating a plant with cold to 
induce flowering is called vernalization, and it is 
used extensively in agriculture, where crops may 
be sown in the autumn but will not flower until 
the following spring, induced by the winter cold. 

26      INTRODUCTION
that non-induced leaves emit a signal that travels to 
the apical meristem and prevents flowering. When 
the leaves are induced, it is the absence of this in­
hibitory message which allows the transition of 
the meristem. Initially, the anti-florigen hypothesis 
assumed a specific inhibitory signal that only pre­
vented flowering, and was common to all species. It 
is now generally accepted that the anti-florigen hy­
pothesis is a useful model which could apply to the 
release of any growth regulator or other signalling 
molecule, and which might vary in different species 
(Colasanti and Sundaresan 2000).
2.6.3  The source/sink resource allocation model
Another model to explain the evocation of flower­
ing by induced leaves is the source/sink resource 
allocation model, which states that the meristem 
of a non-induced plant is not sufficiently supplied 
with the appropriate nutrients to change into a 
flowering meristem. Induction of the leaves chang­
es the source/sink properties of various organs 
of the plant, resulting in a rush of nutrients to the 
meristem, which can then undergo the transition to 
flowering. Although there is no specific evidence 
to support source/sink relations as the major de­
terminant of flowering, it is certainly the case that 
extra energy, along with sufficient nitrogen and 
phosphate for all the RNA and protein synthesis 
associated with flowering, is required at the apex. 
The source/sink properties of plant organs clearly 
do change during development, and it is very likely 
that there are many such changes at the transition to 
flowering, some of which are probably critical to the 
correct development of flowers (Heyer et al. 2004).
The various ideas and models that have arisen 
from the work of the early plant physiologists have 
been as important in understanding the data aris­
ing from modern molecular genetic analyses of the 
floral transition as the ideas of Goethe have been in 
understanding floral development. In Section II of 
this book, we look at the current state of knowledge 
of these processes.
evidence to support this suggestion. Most compel­
lingly, it could be shown that the signal travelled 
at about the same speed as the phloem stream (by 
analysing time from leaf induction to changes in 
enzyme activity in the meristem). Ring-girdling ex­
periments were then conducted, removing only the 
phloem from a ring around the stem of the plant 
(and thus blocking the phloem at that point). Ring-
girdled plants no longer flowered, unless a leaf had 
been induced above the ring. This served to confirm 
the idea that the signal travelled in the phloem, the 
location of much of plant growth regulator trans­
port (Zeevaart 1976).
Grafting experiments suggested to the early plant 
physiologists that the same signal could induce 
flowering in all species. They therefore concluded 
that the signal represented a novel plant growth 
regulator, present in all plants, and they named it 
‘florigen’ (Chailakhyan 1936, cited in Hoffmann-
Benning et al. 2002). The evidence in support of 
florigen was initially very convincing. Numerous 
reports were published in which a single induced 
leaf of species A was grafted on to the stem of a plant 
of species B (which was kept under non-inductive 
conditions), resulting in the appearance of flowers 
on plant B. The number of species to which this 
applied was large, and led to a concerted effort to 
identify the mysterious florigen. However, no novel 
plant growth regulator could be extracted from the 
phloem of these plants. And as research continued, 
it became clear that the same signal did not promote 
flowering in all species. One of the final nails in the 
florigen coffin was the discovery that grafting an in­
duced leaf from tobacco (Solanales) on to the stem 
of a potato plant (also Solanales) resulted in the pro­
duction not of potato flowers but of potato tubers 
(discussed by Martinez-Garcia et al. 2001).
2.6.2  The anti-florigen theory
An alternative hypothesis to explain the transmis­
sion of a signal from the leaves to the meristem is 
known as the anti-florigen theory. This proposes 

SECTION II
The Molecular Mechanisms 
of Flowering: Induction 
and Development


PART A
Induction of Flowering


Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
which have allowed the development of models 
explaining the different ways in which the flower­
ing response can be induced.
3.1  Arabidopsis thaliana as a model 
system for the study of flowering
3.1.1  Why Arabidopsis?
Arabidopsis thaliana is commonly referred to sim­
ply as Arabidopsis, although its traditional English 
names are thale cress and mouse ear cress. It is a 
weed native across Eurasia and East Africa, and a 
member of the Brassicaceae and Brassicales, a family 
and order in the Rosid clade of the Eudicots. Arabi­
dopsis was selected as a model species by plant ge­
neticists as early as the 1950s, but it was not until the 
1980s that it became the system of choice for the ma­
jority of plant scientists (Redei 1973). By December 
2000, when its complete genome sequence was pub­
lished (The Arabidopsis Genome Initiative 2000), 
Arabidopsis had become so much the most usable 
plant model species that to work on anything else 
was highly unusual. In the post-genomic era, Arabi­
dopsis continues to be the main focus, with many 
facilities and services available that allow experi­
ments which would be unthinkable with any other 
species. In particular, advances in next-generation 
sequencing technology have allowed the sequenc­
ing of the genomes of multiple Arabidopsis lines, 
with an aim of having 1001 different Arabidopsis 
genomes comparable by the time this edition is in 
print (<http://1001genomes.org>).
In the wild, Arabidopsis tolerates a very wide 
range of conditions. It is commonly found as a 
Section II of this book explores our current state of 
knowledge concerning the induction, evocation, 
and development of flowers. In the twenty-first 
century, research into these processes is almost 
exclusively conducted through molecular genetic 
and genomic approaches. The molecular genetic 
approach uses the backwards-seeming logic of 
searching for a plant with a mutation that prevents 
a process from occurring properly. By analysing the 
process in the mutant plant, and by identifying and 
analysing the mutated gene, it is possible to build 
up a picture of how a normal plant and a normal 
gene work. When molecular genetic analysis be­
comes the usual way of exploring a biological pro­
cess, there is a tendency for the majority of work to 
focus on one or a few species. This is partly because 
information already gained in a species informs 
the next set of experiments, but also partly because 
there are some species which are simply better 
suited for molecular genetic analysis than others. 
Thus the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, is by far 
the best-studied animal, simply because a num­
ber of features of its biology make it an excellent 
model system. Similarly, the weedy annual plant 
Arabidopsis thaliana (Brassicales) has become the 
most extensively studied plant species. Once model 
species have been established, genome sequencing, 
and more recently next-generation re-sequencing 
of multiple lines or varieties of the model species, 
allow intensive genomic characterization as well. 
This chapter introduces Arabidopsis and the rea­
sons why it has become the model of choice for the 
study of floral induction. It then goes on to look 
at the description and characterization of mutants 
with perturbations in floral induction, mutants 
CHAPTER 3
Flower induction in Arabidopsis 
thaliana

32      Induction of Flowering
Being such a widespread plant, Arabidopsis is 
not entirely homogeneous. In its many different 
habitats it is found as a range of natural accessions 
(sometimes called ecotypes), each with significant 
differences in development, morphology, and be­
haviour. Even the commonly used laboratory lines 
have thousands of polymorphisms (Putterill et al. 
2004), which may be morphological, easily identi­
fied by the naked eye, or molecular, requiring the 
use of DNA fingerprinting techniques to identify 
them. In both cases they provide useful tools for the 
mapping of genes of interest, as we shall see below. 
More recently, the natural variation present in the 
different ecotypes has been the focus of studies to 
explore the nature of plant adaptation to different 
environments (e.g. Todesco et al. 2010).
A final advantage of Arabidopsis as a model system 
is the remarkable ease with which transgenes can be 
introduced into its genome. Most plant species have 
not yet been tested for ease of transformation, and 
many that have were found to be resistant. Although 
it is relatively easy to introduce transgenes into some 
species, such as the garden snapdragon Antirrhinum 
majus (Lamiales), it is then incredibly difficult to re­
generate new plants from their transgenic cells (Hei­
dmann et al. 1998). However, an annually increasing 
number of plants are being reported as ‘transforma­
ble’, and the techniques used all rely on tissue culture 
garden weed, in disturbed fields, on railway lines, 
and on walls. This unfussy approach to habitat 
was one of the first reasons why Arabidopsis was 
identified as a useful plant model—it is perfect­
ly capable of completing its life cycle on sterile, 
chemically defined media in a Petri dish. Other 
advantages include its small size and fast life 
cycle. The mature plant can be grown within 1 cm2 
of space, and in soil does not usually spread more 
than 8–10 cm in diameter and 12–15 cm in height 
(see Fig. 3.1). Arabidopsis has a very short gen­
eration time—just 6 to 8 weeks—allowing several 
generations of a mutant to be studied within a 
relatively short period. It is self-fertile, which is 
very important for genetic analysis as it allows 
the simple generation of homozygotes. However, 
Arabidopsis can also be cross-pollinated to gener­
ate double and triple mutants. A single plant can 
produce over 1000 seeds, making segregation anal­
ysis straightforward. Its small genome is another 
great advantage. It has a haploid DNA complement 
of around 130,000 kilobase pairs—only 15 times 
that of the bacterium Escherichia coli, 5 times that 
of yeast, and about half the amount that Drosophila 
has. Mice, humans, and most other flowering plants 
have 30 to 40 times as much DNA as Arabidopsis, 
making their molecular analysis much more un­
wieldy (Redei 1973).
(a)
(c)
(b)
Figure 3.1  Arabidopsis thaliana. 
(a) Seedlings growing on an agar plate. 
(b) A mature vegetative plant. (c) During 
the reproductive phase of the life cycle.

FLOWER INDUCTION IN ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA      33
induce chemical damage to DNA. Typically, seed 
are soaked in EMS prior to germination. The chemi­
cal induces single base changes in the DNA, known 
as point mutations, by alkylating bases, primar­
ily guanine. Alkylation causes mispairing of bases, 
with alkylated guanine pairing to thymine rather 
than cytosine, thus introducing single base pair 
changes when DNA is copied. A second approach 
uses X-rays to cause deletions of pieces of DNA or 
large-scale rearrangements of sections of chromo­
some. Thirdly, it is possible to use transformation 
technologies to insert foreign DNA randomly into 
the genome. Insertion of foreign DNA into a gene 
causes mutation of that gene, and has the added 
advantage of providing a tag or handle which can 
later be used for molecular cloning of the mutated 
gene. This approach, called T-DNA or insertion mu­
tagenesis, is the method of choice for large-scale 
mutagenesis programmes. However, individual re­
search groups focusing on a single developmental 
process might prefer EMS mutagenesis because it is 
simpler and generates new mutants more quickly.
These seed which are mutagenized, for example 
by soaking in EMS, are called the M0 generation 
(M for mutant). They germinate and the plants that 
they produce are most likely to be heterozygous 
for any mutation. This is simply because it is van­
ishingly unlikely that damage to DNA will occur 
at precisely the same position on two homologous 
chromosomes. This heterozygous generation is called 
the M1 generation. Since most mutations are reces­
sive, M1 plants usually look perfectly normal. M1 
plants are allowed to self-pollinate and set seed, 
and the seed grows into the plants of the M2 gen­
eration. In the M2 generation there will be segrega­
tion of the mutation, so one in four plants will be 
wild type, two in four will be heterozygous, and the 
final one in four will be homozygous for the muta­
tion. Assuming this mutation causes a visible phe­
notype, the mutant plants will be easy to pick out 
from the rest (see Fig. 3.2).
3.1.3  Complementation analysis: finding out 
how many genes have been mutagenized
When a mutagenesis programme goes well, a large 
number of mutants with interesting phenotypes 
might appear in the M2 generation. Usually only 
for regeneration. In general, plants are transformed 
using the crown gall-inducing bacterium Agrobacteri­
um tumefaciens, which has the ability to transfer a por­
tion of a plasmid into the genome of a host plant cell. 
In modern genetic engineering, a modified version 
of both the bacterium and its plasmid are used. 
The transgene of interest is inserted into the modi­
fied plasmid, which is then transferred back into 
the bacterial cell (Zupan et al. 2000). A piece of plant 
tissue, typically a leaf disc or a section of root or 
hypocotyl, is infected with the Agrobacterium, and 
gene transfer occurs. It is then necessary to culture 
the transformed plant tissue on a variety of chemi­
cal media, to kill any remaining bacterial cells and 
potentially invading fungi, while supplying the nu­
trients and plant growth regulators that will allow 
regeneration of a new plant. Even in species that are 
amenable to this process, the tissue culture can take 
many months, and is labour intensive. However, 
Arabidopsis is routinely transformed using a much 
simpler and faster procedure. Flowering Arabidop­
sis plants are dipped into a culture of Agrobacterium 
containing the transgene in the modified plasmid. 
After a few minutes the plants are removed and re­
turned to the greenhouse. The Agrobacterium inserts 
the transgene into the ovules within the flowers. 
When the plants set seed over the next few weeks, a 
proportion of those seeds will contain the transgene, 
as a result of its presence in the egg from which they 
developed. Seed from the dipped plants is sown on a 
selective medium, which allows the identification of 
transgenic plants, and they are simply picked off and 
used in further experiments. The speed and simplic­
ity of this procedure has added greatly to the range 
and extent of experiments which can be conducted 
using Arabidopsis (Clough and Bent 1998).
3.1.2  Generating mutants in Arabidopsis
The best genetic approach to a developmental pro­
cess is to find mutants which prevent that process 
from occurring normally. The rationale behind this 
method is that the study of the impaired function 
would give one insight into the genes and pro­
teins involved in the normal process. Generating 
mutants in Arabidopsis is a simple process, and is 
usually done in one of three different ways. EMS 
mutagenesis uses ethyl methane sulfonate (EMS) to 

34      Induction of Flowering
parents were homozygous for their mutation. So 
if the mutation in mutant 1 and the mutation in 
­mutant 2 are in the same gene, A, the progeny of 
this cross will have one mutated allele of gene A 
from each parent. They will still not have a func­
tional version of gene A, and will still look mutant. 
However, if the mutation in mutant 1 and the muta­
tion in mutant 2 are in different genes, A and B, the 
story is very different. In this case, mutant 1 will be 
homozygous for a mutation in gene A, but homozy­
gous for a wild type allele of gene B. Mutant 2 will 
be homozygous for a mutant allele at gene B, but 
also homozygous for a wild type allele at gene A. So 
in this case the progeny of the cross will have one 
wild type allele of gene A (from mutant 2) and one 
mutant allele (from mutant 1), and one wild type 
allele of gene B (from mutant 1) and one mutant al­
lele (from mutant 2). These plants will be heterozy­
gous at both loci, so will have a functional copy of 
each gene. Since the functional copies are usually 
dominant, and the mutant copies recessive, these 
plants will appear wild type. Very simply, then, if 
the progeny of a cross between two mutant plants is 
also mutant, then the two mutations are in the same 
those mutants with a phenotype relevant to the 
process of interest are selected—so the 17 mutants 
(for example) which have problems with the induc­
tion of flowering are picked, but the dwarf plants 
and the yellow plants and the plants with strange-
shaped leaves are ignored. However, before any 
analysis of these mutants is carried out, it is impor­
tant to establish how many genes they represent. In 
theory, 17 mutants with the same phenotype might 
mean 17 different genes have been mutagenized, 
a different one in each plant, or that a single gene 
has been mutagenized 17 times. Or, more likely, one 
has managed something in between. The process of 
sorting out how many genes have been mutagen­
ized is called complementation analysis.
Complementation analysis begins by making 
a cross between two mutant lines (illustrated in 
Fig. 3.3). Thus pollen from mutant 1 is used to pol­
linate flowers of mutant 2. Remember that both 
M0
M1
+/–
+/–
M2
–/–
+/–
Figure 3.2  Mutagenesis of seed (M0) results in the growth of 
heterozygous plants, in which recessive mutations are masked by 
dominant wild type alleles (M1). Homozygous mutants are selected in 
the next generation (M2).
x
x
Mutant 1
a1a1 
Mutant 2 
a2a2
Mutant
a1a2
Mutant 1
aaBB
Mutant 2
AAbb
Heterozygote AaBb 
phenotypically wild 
type
Figure 3.3  Complementation analysis determines whether two 
phenotypically similar mutants contain mutations in the same (left) or 
different (right) genes.

FLOWER INDUCTION IN ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA      35
plant, using the transformation protocol described 
earlier. The one that restores a normal phenotype to 
the mutant plant is the one which has been mutated.
Recent advances in next-generation sequencing 
technologies are raising the possibility of ­identifying 
mutations by simply sequencing whole or partial 
genomes of mutant and wild type siblings to iden­
tify the points of difference, allowing mapping and 
cloning in a single step.
Once cloned, the gene of interest can be analysed 
in a number of ways, including investigating its ex­
pression pattern within the plant, the consequences 
of changing that expression pattern using trans­
genic methods, and identifying other proteins with 
which its protein product interacts.
3.1.5  Reverse genetic approaches 
in Arabidopsis
The genetic approach described above has been 
responsible for enormous advances in understand­
ing many processes, including floral induction. In 
recent years, and particularly following the publica­
tion of the genome sequence, it has become increas­
ingly possible to use a reverse genetic approach as a 
counterpoint to the traditional genetic method. The 
reverse genetic approach begins with a gene, per­
haps one with a sequence similar to another gene 
that has an interesting function, and progresses to­
wards an understanding of its function. Many thou­
sands of insertion lines containing foreign DNA tags 
have been generated by a range of research groups 
and consortia, and the DNA flanking the tags se­
quenced and made available on the Internet, mak­
ing it a simple matter to search for tags which have 
inserted in or near a gene of interest (see <http://
signal.salk.edu/cgi-bin/tdnaexpress>). The lines 
containing these tags can then be ordered and the 
plants grown for phenotypic characterization and 
further experimental analysis.
3.2  Mechanisms of gene silencing
Before we go on to discuss the specific approaches 
used to study flowering time in Arabidopsis, it is 
necessary to introduce a particular set of mecha­
nisms of gene regulation. Throughout the chapters 
gene. However, if the progeny of a cross between 
two mutants is wild type, then the two mutations 
are in different genes as the mutants are able to com­
plement one another.
3.1.4  Cloning genes following mutagenesis
Once mutants have been identified and character­
ized, it is useful to isolate the mutated gene and in­
vestigate its normal function. There are a number 
of different ways of going about this. If the mutant 
was generated by insertion mutagenesis, then it is 
possible to use the transgene as a tag with which to 
clone the gene. A variety of PCR-based techniques 
(such as TAIL-PCR, iPCR, and Genome Walking) 
allow the amplification and isolation of a piece of 
DNA for which the sequence of one flanking region 
(i.e. the transgene) is known.
If the mutation was generated using EMS then it is 
necessary to map the position of the mutation within 
the genome (see Fig. 3.4). Once that has been done, 
it is a simple matter to analyse the DNA sequence 
within that region using the whole genome se­
quence available on public databases. Mutations are 
mapped on to the genome using the many polymor­
phisms, both morphological and molecular, that ex­
ist between different laboratory lines of Arabidopsis. 
Mapping populations are readily available, contain­
ing many polymorphisms at known map positions. 
These are crossed to the mutant lines of interest, and 
the resulting F1 generation is self-pollinated to pro­
duce a segregating F2 population. Within this popu­
lation the new mutation will segregate with some of 
the polymorphisms, but completely independently 
from others. This indicates that the mutation is on 
the same chromosome as those polymorphisms 
with which it segregates. Fine mapping of the mu­
tation involves investigating how frequently there 
is crossing over between the mutated genes and 
other polymorphisms on the same chromosome. 
This approach allows one to pinpoint the location 
of the newly mutated gene between known poly­
morphisms. Investigation of the genome sequence 
within that area may indicate the presence of several 
genes, but it is usually a simple matter to find out 
which is responsible for the mutant phenotype. The 
usual approach is to take wild type copies of each of 
the candidate genes and insert them into the mutant 

36      Induction of Flowering
(a)  Stage 1
(b)  Stage 2
1
2
Unknown chromosome position for locus *
*
*
*
*
1 in 5 through chiasma formation.
* far from 
1 in 1000 through chiasma formation.
* is close to
Locus 1
self
F1
F2
self
F1
F2
3
3
3
3
3
3
Locus 2
Mapping population with markers
on each chromosome
3
4
5
×
×
×
F1
F2
self
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
*
*
All markers combine with * except    ,
so * is on chromosome 3
Figure 3.4  Mapping allows the position of a mutated genetic locus to be determined. (a) In stage 1, crosses between the mutant and a mapping 
population with polymorphisms on each chromosome allow the identification of which chromosome the mutation is on. (b) In stage 2, fine 
mapping allows the position of the mutation on the chromosome to be determined.
that follow I shall assume a basic understanding of 
gene function, and of the regulation of gene expres­
sion through transcription factors interacting with 
RNA polymerase and the promoter sequences usu­
ally found upstream of gene coding regions. The 
resulting RNA is translated to protein, in the central 
dogma of molecular biology: DNA → RNA → pro­
tein. In cases where particular genes are behaving in 
unusual ways the text will explain the novel process. 
However, it has become increasingly clear in the last 

FLOWER INDUCTION IN ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA      37
­description focuses on the plant system. In the 
Arabidopsis genome around 300 loci that code for 
microRNAs (miRNAs) have so far been identified. 
These DNA sequences are transcribed and produce 
an RNA molecule which contains two regions of 
complementary sequence, reading in opposite di­
rections. The molecule therefore folds to generate 
a hairpin or stem loop structure, with the comple­
mentary arms base paired and the unique sequence 
forming a loop between them. This structure is 
usually around 70 nucleotides long. A specialized 
member of the Dicer RNase protein family then 
cuts away the loop, leaving a double-stranded RNA 
molecule around 22 nucleotides long. This sepa­
rates into single strands, which associate with the 
RISC complex and target complementary messen­
ger RNAs for degradation. The elegance of this sys­
tem lies in the degree of control it gives a cell over 
the amounts of protein produced by individual 
genes that are targeted by miRNAs. First, the usual 
mechanisms can control the amount of mRNA tran­
scribed from the gene, and therefore the amount of 
protein produced. However, transcriptional control 
of the targeting miRNA locus then allows variable 
amounts of miRNA to be produced too, giving very 
fine control over the final amount of non-cleaved 
mRNA remaining to be translated into functional 
protein (for a review, see Voinnet 2009).
3.2.2  Chromatin modifications and gene 
regulation
A variety of structural modifications to the DNA in 
the genome can also have significant effects on the 
regulation of individual genes. One of the most fre­
quently referred to in the next few chapters is DNA 
methylation. This is the addition of a methyl group 
(CH3) to a cytosine or adenine base in the DNA. 
The conversion of a cytosine to a 5-methylcytosine 
molecule does not affect its base pairing, but does 
seem in general to reduce transcription. The mech­
anisms by which methylation reduces transcrip­
tion are not yet understood, but it is clear that the 
more methylation occurs in a region of the genome, 
the more silent that region appears to be. Methyl 
groups are added to the DNA through the activities 
of a diverse family of proteins called DNA methyl­
transferases. In plants a number of genes have been 
decade that much gene regulation occurs through 
more complex mechanisms, operating either at the 
level of the chromatin itself, or through small RNA 
molecules that interfere with the basic processes of 
transcription and translation. These mechanisms are 
briefly introduced here, to save repetition in the fol­
lowing chapters.
3.2.1  Gene silencing involving small RNA 
molecules
The cells of plants, and other eukaryotes, contain 
systems that enable them to detect and destroy 
foreign nucleic acids introduced by viruses. These 
systems have also been recruited to the control of 
endogenous gene regulation, where they provide 
an impressive degree of fine-tuning, allowing the 
evolution of complex developmental pathways. 
The basic defence system involves a group of RNA 
molecules called small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), 
first discovered not in Arabidopsis but in petunia 
and tobacco (both Solanales) in 1999 (Hamilton 
and Baulcombe 1999). These molecules are usually 
double-stranded pieces of RNA, 21–24 nucleotides 
in length with 2 nucleotide overhangs at either end. 
They are produced by cleavage of larger double-
stranded RNA molecules found in viral genomes or 
as a result of transgene insertion. The larger mol­
ecules are cleaved by one or more of a small family 
of RNaseIII enzymes called Dicer(s). The siRNAs 
separate into single strands which base pair with 
complementary messenger RNA molecules (usu­
ally derived from the invading virus or transgene, 
but sometimes endogenous mRNAs transcribed 
from the host genome are also targeted). The siR­
NAs are associated with a complex of proteins 
called the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), 
which contains one of the family of Argonaute pro­
teins. Argonaute cleaves the bound messenger RNA 
strand, preventing its translation and the produc­
tion of a functional protein. In this way, foreign nu­
cleic acid molecules are destroyed, along with the 
transcripts produced from them by the host cell 
machinery (for a review, see Mello and Conte 2004).
The same basic machinery is sometimes used 
in the regulation of endogenous gene expression 
in all eukaryotes. There are slight differences in 
mechanism between plants and animals, and this 

38      Induction of Flowering
­complex is involved, and what else is happening in 
neighbouring regions of the genome.
3.3  Flowering-time mutants
The molecular genetic approaches outlined above 
have generated enormous insights into the ways in 
which flowering is induced in Arabidopsis. In the 
chapters that follow we shall focus on the results 
of this analysis, looking at the pathways that have 
been proposed to induce and repress flowering and 
the genes and proteins that work within them. The 
rest of this chapter focuses on the original mutants 
that began this process of discovery, and the ways 
in which they are categorized. Over 80 genes have 
been shown to influence floral induction to some 
degree, although many have effects on other devel­
opmental processes as well.
3.3.1  Arabidopsis is a vernalization-sensitive 
facultative long day plant
Arabidopsis is a useful model for the study of the 
floral transition, because it uses several different 
pathways and thus provides insight into a wide 
range of processes. To begin with, Arabidopsis is 
clearly a plant that has developmental control of its 
floral transition. Even when grown under optimal 
environmental conditions for flowering, Arabidop­
sis remains vegetative until it has produced a ro­
sette of leaves—it will not flower immediately after 
germinating. In fact, this observation indicates that 
Arabidopsis has an autonomous pathway which 
represses the flowering response until a certain 
developmental stage has been reached. Second­
ly, Arabidopsis is a long day plant. If grown in a 
growth room with 16 hours of daylight and 8 hours 
of darkness every 24 hours, Arabidopsis plants will 
flower within 2 to 3 weeks of germination. Howev­
er, if grown in a growth room at the same tempera­
ture but with 12 hours of daylight and 12 hours of 
darkness, the plants will show no sign of flowering 
after the same time period has passed. They clearly 
measure day length (or night length) and respond 
to photoperiod by flowering only when the days are 
longer than a certain critical minimum. However, 
this photoperiodic response is not absolute. A plant 
shown to encode these enzymes, including DRM2, 
which is responsible for adding methyl groups 
at previously unmethylated sites in the genome. 
Methylation of the DNA in some sequences can 
be heritable through cell divisions, and several DNA 
methyltransferases have been shown to be responsi­
ble for semiconservative replication of methyl marks 
(reviewed by Furner and Matzke 2010). As with 
RNA-mediated gene regulation, regulation of the ac­
tivity of the genes encoding these enzymes can influ­
ence the transcription of many structurally unrelated 
genes. It is not yet clear how the position of novel 
methylation in the genome is determined. It is likely 
that a number of mechanisms are at work, with each 
responding to a variety of different cues. One mech­
anism links RNA-dependent regulation to methyla­
tion, as it has been shown that siRNAs and miRNAs 
can direct methylation at the genomic locations re­
sponsible for double-stranded RNA synthesis and to 
regions homologous to them. This mechanism ap­
pears to be important in silencing transposons and 
viral insertions in the genome (reviewed by Furner 
and Matzke 2010).
Structural changes to the histone proteins around 
which DNA is wound to generate chromatin can 
also influence gene regulation. A variety of chemi­
cal modifications are possible, but the best studied 
is acetylation and deacetylation of lysine residues 
in the histone tails (the N-termini of the histone 
proteins). As with DNA methylation, these pro­
cesses involve the activities of enzymes, which 
are themselves encoded by genes and hence un­
der transcriptional control. Acetylation by histone 
acetyltransferase enzymes introduces an extra neg­
ative charge, loosening the link between the DNA 
molecule and histone, allowing the cell’s tran­
scriptional machinery freer access to the DNA. In 
contrast, deacetylation by histone deacetylase will 
increase silencing of that region of the genome (re­
viewed by Chen and Tian 2007). It is also possible 
for histones to be methylated (reviewed by Liu et al. 
2010a). Methylation of certain lysine residues in 
histone molecules acts like DNA methylation to re­
duce transcription, but methylation of other lysine 
residues appears to enhance transcription of associ­
ated DNA (Xu et al. 2008). All of these effects vary 
according to the amino acid position on the his­
tone molecule that is affected, which histone in the 

FLOWER INDUCTION IN ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA      39
plants flower early in their first spring, before full 
summer with its attendant droughts arrives (Stinch­
combe et al. 2004). By extending molecular analysis 
into a range of accessions, it has been possible to use 
this one model species to investigate developmen­
tally controlled, photoperiod-sensitive, and cold-
induced flowering responses.
3.3.2  Classification of flowering-time mutants
When mutant plants are first described, they are 
classified and categorized according to their pheno­
type alone. Later, as molecular information on gene 
function is accrued, it sometimes becomes apparent 
that the initial classification was unhelpful. How­
ever, since only phenotypic data are available in 
the first instance, it continues to make sense to clas­
sify according to those data. Arabidopsis mutants 
in floral induction are traditionally described as 
either late flowering or early flowering (illustrated 
in Fig. 3.5). These classifications refer to their time 
(or developmental stage) of flowering in different 
growth rooms. A late flowering Arabidopsis mutant 
is one whose behaviour in a long day growth room 
is similar to that of a wild type plant in a short day 
room—it flowers later than a wild type plant would 
entirely limited by photoperiod would never flower 
in the growth room with 12-hour days. Arabidopsis, 
on the other hand, continues to grow vegetatively in 
the short day room for several weeks after its coun­
terparts in the long day room have flowered, and 
then it flowers itself. For this reason it is described 
as a facultative long day plant—long days promote 
flowering and cause it to occur early, but in their 
absence the plant will still flower eventually (Jack 
2004). This shows that, besides its photoperiodic 
induction pathway, Arabidopsis must also contain 
an autonomous pathway which induces flowering 
eventually, irrespective of environmental variables. 
Finally, Arabidopsis is also sensitive to vernaliza­
tion. Accessions from parts of the world with cold 
winters germinate in the autumn and remain veg­
etative until the next spring. Any remaining long 
days in their autumn growth season do not induce 
flowering, because they require between 1 and 3 
months of cold temperature to become responsive 
to day length. Accessions from warmer regions usu­
ally germinate in spring or summer and flower in 
the same year that they germinate. This most prob­
ably occurs through lack of this vernalization re­
quirement, but it could also result from especially 
great sensitivity to vernalization, ensuring that the 
Wild type
Long days
Wild type
Short days
Early 
f lowering 
mutant
Long days
Early 
f lowering 
mutant
Short days
Late 
f lowering 
mutant
Long days
Late 
f lowering 
mutant
Short days
Light/dark regime
Day x
Day x + n
Figure 3.5  Flowering-time mutants are described according to how they behave under long and short day conditions. Wild type plants flower at 
an early time point under long day conditions, but at a later time point under short day conditions. Early flowering mutants flower at the early time 
point in both long and short days. Late flowering mutants flower at the later time point in both long and short days.

40      Induction of Flowering
Late flowering mutants in class 1 show the typi­
cal late flowering in long days and produce more 
rosette leaves than wild type plants in this situa­
tion. Their response to short days is an even more 
dramatic delay in flowering, producing even more 
rosette leaves before being induced to flower. These 
mutants are clearly still responsive to photoperiod. 
Their ability to measure day length is nicely dem­
onstrated by the fact that they flower earlier in long 
days than in short days. However, compared with 
wild type plants they are always very slow to flow­
er. It seems, then, that these mutants are lacking a 
promoter of flowering not related to photoperiod. 
They are perturbed in an autonomous promotion 
pathway, one which is always required to initiate 
flowering.
Late flowering mutants in class 2 also show 
the typical late flowering in long days, producing 
around 12 leaves before flowering. However, when 
placed in the short day room these mutants still 
flower after producing 12 leaves. In contrast to class 
1 mutants, class 2 mutants do not discriminate be­
tween different day lengths, but behave as though 
in short days regardless of how long the days are. 
This phenotype suggests an inability to measure 
day length, with the mutants always convinced 
that the days are short. The mutated genes in these 
plants might include those encoding the proteins 
which perceive light or measure time, so that no 
promotive long day signal is ever perceived, even 
if it is present.
Early flowering mutants can also be divided 
into two distinct classes. Early flowering mutants 
in class 1 show the typical response of flowering 
too early in the short day room—producing flow­
ers with only around 6 leaves. If these plants are 
moved into the long day room, they flower even 
earlier—after making as few as 3 or 4 leaves. These 
mutants, like those in late flowering class 1, are 
clearly still sensitive to photoperiod, as they flower 
later in short days than they do in long days. How­
ever, they flower earlier than they are ‘supposed’ to, 
whatever the day length. These mutants are lack­
ing something which represses flowering until the 
plant has reached a certain developmental stage. So 
this mutant class should make it possible to iden­
tify the genes that provide a developmental brake 
to flowering, giving the plant a chance to build up 
do in the long day room. An early flowering Arabi­
dopsis mutant, on the other hand, is one whose 
behaviour in a short day growth room is similar 
to that of a wild type plant in a long day room—it 
flowers earlier than a wild type plant would do in 
the short day room (Coupland 1995).
Because time of year, age of seed, and growth room 
temperature can all affect the rate of Arabidopsis 
growth and development, researchers often measure 
flowering time in terms of number of leaves rather 
than in number of days (Koornneef et al. 1991). Us­
ing this scheme, a wild type plant might flower after 
producing 6 leaves in a long day room, but not until 
it had produced 12 leaves in a short day room. A late 
flowering mutant is a plant which would not flower 
until it had produced 12 leaves in the long day room. 
An early flowering mutant, in contrast, is a plant 
which would flower after producing only 6 leaves in 
the short day room.
These classifications only refer to time of floral 
induction in a particular growth room—the late 
flowering mutant is defined by its behaviour in 
long days, whereas the early flowering mutant is 
defined by its behaviour in short days. In fact, these 
categories can be broken down further, as shown in 
­Table 3.1. Note that the number of leaves is simply 
an indication of relative flowering time. The absolute 
number of leaves formed before flowering depends 
on the individual mutant and may also be variable 
between plants carrying the same mutation.
This further classification of flowering-time mu­
tants is determined by their behaviour in the other 
day length—late flowering mutants are divided up 
by their behaviour in short days, and early flower­
ing mutants are divided up by their behaviour in 
long days (Koorneef 1991).
Table 3.1  Approximate number of leaves produced before flowering 
by wild type and four mutant categories of Arabidopsis.
Long days
Short days
Wild type
  6 leaves
12 leaves
Late flowering class 1
12 leaves
18 leaves
Late flowering class 2
12 leaves
12 leaves
Early flowering class 1
  4 leaves
  6 leaves
Early flowering class 2
  6 leaves
  6 leaves

FLOWER INDUCTION IN ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA      41
that gene B works before gene A in the pathway. It 
is also possible that the double mutant has the phe­
notypes of both parents. In this case we say that 
there is no epistasy between the genes, which work 
in different pathways and do not interact. Epistatic 
analysis is most easily imagined with morphologi­
cal mutants, where crossing a mutant with no roots 
to a mutant with short roots would generate a dou­
ble mutant with no roots—showing that one needs 
to make a root before one worries about its length. 
On the other hand, crossing a mutant with no roots 
to a mutant with purple leaves is likely to generate 
a mutant with no roots and purple leaves—because 
the pathways are unrelated. However, the process 
can be used to investigate more complex processes 
such as floral induction. In these cases, phenotype 
is not defined simply as late or early flowering, 
but factors such as the expression patterns of other 
known genes within the mutants are taken into ac­
count as well (Coupland 1995).
3.3.4  Arabidopsis contains one 
repression-of-flowering pathway and four 
promotion-of-flowering pathways
Epistatic analysis of the sort described above, us­
ing mutants including those above and other lines 
with perturbed responses to cold, has shown that at 
least five genetic pathways regulate flowering time 
in Arabidopsis (Simpson and Dean 2002). There is a 
single endogenous repression pathway which acts 
to prevent flowering. Its job is to delay flowering 
until the plant has reached a certain developmental 
stage and has the photosynthate to support develop­
ing flowers and seed. There are then four promotion 
pathways. Having multiple promotion pathways 
gives the plant plasticity, because it means that weak 
promotion in one pathway can be compensated for 
by strong promotion in another pathway, ensuring 
that flowering always happens. Two of these pro­
motion pathways respond to environmental signals 
while two of them are under endogenous control. 
The photoperiodic promotion pathway relies on 
photoreceptors and a circadian clock to transduce 
information about day length. The vernalization 
promotion pathway is activated by exposure to low 
temperatures. The ability of plants like Arabidopsis 
a certain amount of photosynthetic tissue before it 
starts to expend energy on producing flowers and 
seed.
Early flowering mutants in class 2 also show the 
typical pattern of flowering with only 6 leaves in 
short days. However, unlike mutants in class 1, they 
will also flower in the long day room only after they 
have produced 6 leaves. These mutants appear to 
be unable to respond to different photoperiods, and 
perceive all days as being long days. In the same 
way as mutants in late flowering class 2, these mu­
tants have some problem with the perception of 
light or time. However, whereas that problem made 
mutants in late flowering class 2 behave as though 
all days were short, mutants in early flowering class 
2 behave as though all days were long. In fact, these 
mutations may turn out to be in similar genes, with 
the differences in phenotype related to whether the 
mutation makes the gene more or less active.
3.3.3  Epistatic analysis places flowering-time 
genes into pathways
The phenotypes of flowering-time mutants give 
some clues as to which pathways they might op­
erate in—those regulated by light, developmental 
cues, or temperature. This is confirmed by conduct­
ing epistatic analysis to test whether two mutated 
genes operate in the same pathway or different 
ones. If they function in the same pathway then epi­
static analysis also indicates in which order they are 
required within that pathway.
Epistatic analysis begins by producing a double 
mutant (aabb) by crossing two different mutant 
plants (aaBB and AAbb) and selfing the heterozy­
gote progeny (AaBb). There are a number of possi­
ble phenotypes which might show up in this double 
mutant plant. If the double mutant (aabb) has the 
same phenotype as one of the parents (say aaBB), 
the gene A is epistatic to the gene B. That means that 
gene A and gene B work in the same pathway, with 
gene A acting before gene B. The logic behind this 
is that if the two genes work in the same pathway, 
and if the pathway is blocked at the earlier point 
(A), then the phenotypic effect of mutating a gene 
further down the pathway (B) will be invisible. Al­
ternatively, the double mutant (aabb) may have the 
same phenotype as parent plant AAbb—indicating 

42      Induction of Flowering
pathway culminates in repression of the flowering-
time integrators by the product of a gene called 
FLC. The autonomous promotion pathway results 
in downregulation of FLC, and thus allows activa­
tion of the flowering-time integrators. The vernali­
zation promotion pathway also operates through 
downregulation of FLC, allowing induction of the 
flowering-time integrator genes. The photoperiod­
ic promotion pathway bypasses FLC, and directly 
activates the flowering-time integrator genes. Gib­
berellin is also able to directly induce expression of 
flowering-time integrators, bypassing the FLC block. 
It can be seen, then, that the pathways all converge 
on the activity of a small subset of flowering-time 
integrator genes, either directly or through FLC. At 
any one time point these genes will be experienc­
ing some degree of inhibition and some degree of 
activation. When the activation signals are stronger 
than the inhibition, the flowering-time integrators 
will be expressed and the floral transition will occur.
to flower under non-inductive conditions indicates 
that plants must contain an autonomous promotion 
pathway, which ensures flowering occurs if all else 
fails. The fourth promotion pathway in Arabidopsis 
is the gibberellin pathway, which acts independent­
ly of the other pathways and may serve to activate 
flowering in response to certain developmental 
triggers. These different pathways are discussed in 
the next four chapters.
3.3.5  Integrating the flowering-time pathways
The various flowering-time pathways can be 
thought of as converging on a set of genes, which 
are known as the flowering-time integrators. The 
identification of these genes, whose function or 
expression is regulated by more than one of the 
input pathways, was described by Simpson and 
Dean (2002) as ‘a key step forward in our under­
standing of flowering time control’. The inhibition 

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 4
The autonomous pathways for floral 
inhibition and induction
The autonomous pathways for floral inhibition and 
induction are central to the entire process of flo­
ral transition in Arabidopsis. The floral inhibition 
pathway is the central regulator of flowering, acting 
throughout the plant’s life to ensure that flowering 
does not occur until the appropriate environmental, 
developmental, and physiological cues have been 
received. Without this inhibition pathway, Arabi­
dopsis plants could flower immediately on germi­
nating, before sufficient photosynthate had been 
produced to support the developing flowers and 
seeds. The inhibition pathway, as we shall discuss 
below, essentially operates through a single protein 
repressing the transcription of genes necessary for 
the floral transition to occur at the shoot apical mer­
istem. Other proteins interact to enhance this basic 
repression mechanism. On the other hand, the au­
tonomous induction pathway is equally essential 
to the life history of a weedy annual. Unlike long-
lived perennial plants, Arabidopsis does not have 
the option of delaying flowering indefinitely until 
perfect environmental conditions are perceived. 
Instead, the autonomous induction pathway acts 
antagonistically to the inhibition pathway to ensure 
that the plant flowers eventually, irrespective of a 
lack of inductive environmental signals. These two 
pathways are the central players in the control of 
Arabidopsis flowering, around which the environ­
mentally induced pathways that we shall discuss in 
later chapters revolve.
4.1  The floral inhibition pathway
The floral inhibition (or repression) pathway is the 
central regulator of flowering time in Arabidopsis. 
The repression caused by this pathway is constitu­
tive, and can only be broken by signals that either 
downregulate or bypass it. In Chapters 5 and 6 we 
shall consider how environmental signals achieve 
just that, but we must begin with a discussion of 
how the inhibition pathway itself works. The floral 
transition requires activation of a set of genes in the 
shoot apical meristem which convert the meristem 
from the vegetative state to the inflorescence state. 
The identities and functions of these floral meris­
tem identity genes will be discussed in Chapter 9. In 
particular, it is essential that three genes described 
as flowering-time integrators are expressed (a con­
cept introduced towards the end of Chapter  3). 
These genes, FT, LEAFY (LFY), and AGAMOUS-
LIKE 20 (AGL20) (also known as SUPPRESSION 
OF OVEREXPRESSION OF CONSTANS 1 (SOC1)), 
activate the floral meristem identity genes, and it is 
thought that all pathways affecting flowering time 
are integrated at these three genes (He and Amasino 
2005). The three genes themselves will be discussed 
in more detail in Chapter 7. The inhibition pathway 
works by repressing transcription of the flowering-
time integrators, thus ensuring that the floral mer­
istem identity genes are not activated and that the 
meristem remains vegetative (see Fig. 4.1). Repres­
sion of the flowering-time integrators is achieved 
primarily through the action of the FLOWERING 
LOCUS C (FLC) protein, reinforced by the activity 
of FRIGIDA (FRI). Dominant alleles at either locus 
result in plants that are extremely late flowering. 
Loss of function of either gene reduces the repres­
sion of flowering and causes an early flowering 
phenotype. In order for the plant to flower, signals 
promoting flowering must overcome repression of 

44      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
to promoter sequences but failing to activate tran­
scription. Initial reports focused on establishing the 
central role of FLC in floral repression. Loss of FLC 
function causes early flowering, while ectopic ex­
pression of FLC from the cauliflower mosaic virus 
35S (CaMV 35S) promoter caused plants to flower 
extremely late, with some failing to flower at all, se­
nescing and dying after producing over 80 rosette 
leaves but never bolting (Michaels and Amasino 
1999). Early experiments showed that the level of 
FLC transcript in a range of backgrounds correlated 
directly with the time those plants took to initiate 
flowering (Sheldon et al. 2000b). Later work con­
firmed that FLC transcript abundance correlated 
directly with FLC protein abundance across a range 
of genetic, developmental, and environmental vari­
ables, indicating that FLC regulation operates at the 
transcriptional level (Rouse et al. 2002).
More recently, analysis of FLC activity has cen­
tred around two aspects: the regulation of FLC 
expression both by proteins within the floral re­
pression pathway and by proteins in floral promo­
tion pathways, and the regulation by FLC of genes 
such as the flowering-time integrators. The activi­
ties of floral repressors that enhance FLC function 
are discussed below, while the regulation of FLC 
expression by floral promotion pathways is dis­
cussed in Section 4.2, as well as in Chapters 5 and 6. 
the flowering-time integrators by FLC. This can be 
achieved in either of two ways. Proteins in the au­
tonomous and vernalization promotion pathways 
promote flowering by downregulating FLC expres­
sion. These proteins directly target the FLC gene, 
and, through a number of routes, reduce its expres­
sion level to the point where it no longer represses 
the flowering-time integrators. The alternative ap­
proach is taken by proteins in the photoperiod and 
gibberellin-based promotion pathways. These pro­
teins act to directly activate the flowering-time inte­
grators, simply bypassing repression by FLC. This 
sets up a conflict at the flowering-time integrators, 
with numerous promotive signals, plus an FLC-
based inhibitory signal which varies in strength, 
converging on them and controlling their expres­
sion levels and subsequent functions.
4.1.1  FLC
The FLC gene was isolated using positional clon­
ing, and encodes a MADS box protein, a member 
of a large family of transcription factors found in 
all eukaryote genomes (Michaels and Amasino 
1999). The central role of FLC is to repress the ex­
pression of the flowering-time integrators, and it 
was always thought likely that the protein would 
act as a negative regulator of transcription, binding 
FRI-C
SWR1
PAF1
PAF1 complex
Transcriptional
elongation
FLC
Histone variant
exchange
SWR1 complex
FRI complex
Transcriptional
activation
PIE1
FRI
FLX
FES1
FRL1
SUF4
Esd1
VIP3
VIP6
VIP4
ELF7
AtSWC6
FLC
Flowering integrators
Floral meristem identity genes
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1  The floral inhibition pathway. (a) Expression of the flowering-time integrators, and thus the floral meristem identity genes, is 
prevented by FLC, itself enhanced by FRI-C and the SWR1 and PAF1 complexes. (b) The FRI complex, SWR1 complex, and PAF1 complex enhance 
FLC activity in different ways. FRI-C activates transcription, SWR1 modifies histone content, and PAF1 methylates histones and elongates 
transcripts. Redrawn from Yun et al. (2011).

The autonomous pathways      45
FLC–SVP complex is the central repressor of flower­
ing, rather than FLC alone.
4.1.2  FRI and FRIGIDA LIKE 1 (FRL1)
The main enhancer of FLC activity, FRI, was iden­
tified in 2000 by Johanson et al. It had long been 
known that the requirement for vernalization in 
Arabidopsis was attributable to a single locus, FRI. 
Where a dominant FRI allele is present, an Arabi­
dopsis ecotype will flower only after a period of 
cold treatment (i.e. it is late flowering without cold), 
but where a recessive fri allele is present (as is the 
case with all lab lines) the Arabidopsis ecotype does 
not require vernalization and flowers early. FRI was 
isolated by map-based cloning, and found to en­
code a 609-amino-acid protein with little sequence 
similarity to proteins from other species. The pro­
tein contains two coiled-coil domains, one near the 
N terminus and one near the C terminus. Analysis 
of FRI loci in Arabidopsis ecotypes confirmed that 
most early flowering varieties contained muta­
tions within FRI (Johanson et al. 2000). This result 
was confirmed by the later analysis of Le Corre 
et al. (2002), who sequenced FRI from 25 Western 
European ecotypes of Arabidopsis and concluded 
that recent positive selection for early flowering 
had occurred within a set of isolated populations, 
resulting in variation at the FRI locus. It had previ­
ously been shown that FRI is necessary for FLC ex­
pression (Michaels and Amasino 1999), but in 2001 
Michaels and Amasino also demonstrated that, in 
the absence of a functional FLC allele, FRI has no 
effect on flowering time in long or short days. The 
role of FRI as an enhancer of FLC activity was thus 
clearly established.
Since mutagenesis has traditionally been con­
ducted in lab lines of Arabidopsis, which all con­
tain non-functional fri alleles, it is only since the 
discovery of the role of FRI that investigation into 
proteins which interact with it has begun. Michaels 
et al. (2004) conducted a mutant screen for early 
flowering plants in an Arabidopsis line containing 
a dominant FRI allele in a Columbia background. 
They identified the frl1 mutant, and confirmed 
that it had no phenotypic effect in a normal Co­
lumbia (i.e. fri mutant) background. The FRL1 
gene was isolated using a T-DNA insertion as a 
Chapter  7 is primarily concerned with the activi­
ties of the flowering-time integrators. However, it 
is worth mentioning here the way in which FLC 
represses the activity of those flowering-time inte­
grators. Hepworth et al. (2002) focused on the role 
of FLC in repression of SOC1, and identified a key 
region of 351 base pairs in the SOC1 promoter. This 
region was essential for repression of SOC1 expres­
sion by FLC, but also necessary for activation of 
SOC1 expression by CONSTANS (CO, a promoter 
of flowering operating in the photoperiod path­
way; see Chapter 5). FLC was shown to bind to this 
351-base-pair region in vitro, probably at a CarG box 
site identified within the sequence. CarG boxes are 
the binding motifs usually recognized by MADS 
box transcription factors. Hepworth et al. (2002) 
proposed that FLC and CO compete for binding of 
similar regions within the SOC1 promoter, and that 
it is only when insufficient FLC protein is present 
that sufficient CO-driven activation can occur to 
cause SOC1 expression and subsequent function.
Searle et al. (2006) and Helliwell et al. (2006) ex­
tended this analysis and demonstrated that FLC 
also binds to the promoter of FD, the protein prod­
uct (a bZIP transcription factor) of which is asso­
ciated with FT in the shoot apical meristem at the 
floral transition, and to a CArG box in the first in­
tron of FT itself. This binding represses transcrip­
tion of these key flowering pathway integrators and 
delays the floral transition. Taking a transgenic ap­
proach with targeted expression in different tissues, 
Searle et al. (2006) showed that ectopic expression 
of FLC in leaves reduces expression of FT and SOC1 
and delays flowering accordingly, and that ectopic 
expression of FLC in the shoot apical meristem re­
duces expression of FD and SOC1, and similarly 
delays flowering.
An additional MADS box protein, SHORT VEG­
ETATIVE PHASE (SVP), has been shown to inter­
act with FLC and enhance its binding of promoter 
sequences (Lee et al. 2007; Li et al. 2008). Lee et al. 
(2007) showed that ectopic expression of FLC (and 
its enhancer FRI) could not delay flowering in an 
svp mutant background, although they strongly 
delayed flowering in wild type. Li et al. (2008) con­
firmed that SVP and FLC interact physically in vivo. 
These results suggest that FLC acts with SVP in the 
repression of floral integrators. It is possible that the 

46      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
compared with wild type, and earlier still in long 
days, confirming its role in a non-photoperiod-
dependent floral repression pathway. The gene was 
isolated using a T-DNA insertion in the mutant as a 
tag, and the very large (2055-amino-acid) protein it 
encodes found to resemble chromatin remodelling 
proteins from vertebrates with roles in the activa­
tion of gene expression. Two nuclear localization 
signals make it very likely that the protein is nuclear 
localized and plays a role in chromatin remodelling 
and gene expression. On the basis of this charac­
terization, the authors investigated a potential role 
for PIE1 in activation of FLC expression. They dis­
covered that PIE1 does regulate FLC expression in 
the shoot apical meristem, but not in other tissues, 
such as the root. This function is consistent with the 
expression pattern of PIE1, which is restricted to 
the shoot apical meristem. It appears that PIE1 is 
involved in the activation of FLC expression by FRI, 
and delays flowering time through this enhance­
ment of FLC activity (Noh and Amasino 2003).
The similar roles of ESD1 and PIE1 are explained 
by their joint function in a protein complex resem­
bling the yeast SWR1 complex (Lázaro et al. 2008). 
This complex modifies the histone content of chro­
matin, allowing transcription to occur. In Arabidop­
sis, ESD1, PIE1, and SWC6 physically interact and 
are necessary for the histone acetylation and methyl­
ation required for high levels of FLC expression. This 
SWR1 complex is proposed to be recruited to the FLC 
promoter by the FRI-C complex (Choi et al. 2011).
4.1.4  VERNALIZATION INDEPENDENCE genes 
and the PAF1 complex
Another protein complex, also first defined in yeast, 
has also been shown to interact with FLC. In 2002, 
Zhang and van Nocker reported the results of a 
screen for mutants which flowered early and had 
reduced levels of FLC expression. They called these 
new mutant lines the vernalization independence lines 
(vip), and they represent a class of mutants with 
perturbations in genes involved in FLC upregula­
tion. The VIP4 gene was isolated first, and found 
to encode an extremely hydrophilic protein with 
similarity to animal and yeast proteins involved in 
forming multiprotein complexes. VIP4 is expressed 
tag, and found to ­encode a protein 23% identical 
to FRI but with no large blocks of conserved se­
quence. Analysis of FRL1 function in a number of 
backgrounds confirmed that its only role is to fa­
cilitate the FRI-mediated expression of FLC. In an 
frl1 mutant background, FRI has no effect on FLC 
transcription. Analysis of the Arabidopsis genome 
sequence revealed a further five genes with signifi­
cant sequence similarity to FRI and FRL1, suggest­
ing that FLC regulation may be more complex than 
was originally thought (Michaels et al. 2004).
These observations were brought together by 
Choi et al. (2011), who showed that FRI and FRL1 
act together as part of a larger complex. The FRI 
protein is the central scaffold for this complex, 
which is known as FRI-C. FRL1 stabilizes the com­
plex, along with another protein, FES1 (FRIGIDA 
ESSENTIAL 1). FES1 and FLX (FLC EXPRESSOR) 
act within the complex to activate transcription, 
while SUF4 (SUPPRESSOR OF FRIGIDA 4) binds 
directly to the FLC promoter. The FRI-C complex 
also recruits chromatin modification factors to the 
FLC locus, ensuring continued active transcription 
of the FLC mRNA (Choi et al. 2011).
4.1.3  EARLY IN SHORT DAYS 1 (ESD1), 
PHOTOPERIOD INDEPENDENT EARLY FLOWERING 
1 (PIE1) and the SWR1 complex
The esd1 mutant causes early flowering, as a result 
of a reduction of FLC expression (Martin-Trillo et al. 
2006). Analysis of esd1 in conjunction with other 
mutants suggests that the ESD1 protein is a strong 
inducer of FLC expression, but may also act on oth­
er genes involved in the repression of flowering, as 
the esd1/fca double mutant is earlier flowering than 
the fca mutant alone. Map-based cloning revealed 
that ESD1 encodes ACTIN-RELATED PROTEIN 
6 (AtARP6), which is required for modification of 
FLC chromatin. These modifications, which include 
methylation and acetylation of histones, are neces­
sary to achieve high levels of FLC expression and 
subsequent repression of flowering (Martin-Trillo 
et al. 2006).
PIE1 was first described from a screen to identify 
new early flowering mutants (Noh and Amasino 
2003). The pie1 mutant flowers early in short days 

The autonomous pathways      47
4.2  The autonomous induction pathway
The autonomous induction (or promotion) pathway 
was first formally described by Maarten Koornneef 
and colleagues, who conducted a mutant screen for 
flowering-time loci and then used epistatic analy­
sis to describe the pathways within which these 
loci operated (Koornneef et al. 1991, 1998). Genes 
that confer autonomous promotion of flowering 
in Arabidopsis were identified by the isolation of 
late flowering mutants that retain photoperiod 
sensitivity and respond strongly to vernalization. 
That is, the mutants flowered later than wild type 
plants in long days, but later still in short days, and 
their flowering could be promoted by cold treat­
ment. Such late flowering mutants were clearly not 
deficient in photoperiod-induced flowering, nor 
in vernalization-induced flowering, but in some 
general regulator of floral induction. Koornneef’s 
original analysis identified four genes in this au­
tonomous flowering pathway—FCA, FY, FPA, and 
FVE. However, a variety of other genes are now also 
considered to act in this pathway, including LUMI­
NIDEPENDENS (LD) (Lee et al. 1994b), FLK (Lim 
et al. 2004), and FLD (Sanda and Amasino 1996). The 
proteins encoded by all of these genes have been 
shown to autonomously promote flowering in the 
same way—by repressing the FLC-based repres­
sion of flowering in the floral inhibition pathway 
(see Fig. 4.2). Indeed, this repression appears to be 
the result of direct inhibition of FLC activity in all 
cases, as each protein operates, albeit in different 
ways, to prevent the accumulation of FLC mRNA 
in shoot apical meristem cells (Simpson 2004). Each 
mutant has increased levels of FLC transcript when 
compared with wild type plants (Michaels and 
Amasino 1999).
4.2.1  FCA
The best studied of the genes operating in the 
autonomous induction pathway is FCA. The FCA 
gene was isolated by positional cloning and en­
codes a 747-amino-acid protein which interacts 
with RNA (Macknight et al. 1997). Specifically, 
FCA is classed as a plant-specific RNA-recognition 
­motif-type RNA-binding-domain-containing pro­
tein, or RRM for short. In fact the protein contains 
throughout the plant, but is not downregulated 
after vernalization, confirming that it plays a role 
in an autonomous enhancement of FLC (and thus 
repression of flowering) pathway (Zhang and van 
Nocker 2002).
The following year the VIP3 gene was isolated, 
by positional cloning, and found to encode a pro­
tein consisting almost entirely of repeated WD 
(tryptophan and aspartate) motifs. Such a structure 
is indicative of a protein which acts as a scaffold for 
the assembly of multiprotein complexes. Ectopic 
expression of VIP3 from the CaMV 35S promoter 
was insufficient to activate FLC expression, even 
though FLC transcript levels are reduced in the vip3 
mutant. This suggested that VIP3 acts with other 
proteins to activate FLC expression, perhaps in a 
complex for which it provides the base (Zhang et al. 
2003).
Oh et al. (2004) reported that VIP6 encodes a 
protein with significant similarity to a yeast pro­
tein, CTR9, which forms part of the polymerase 
­II-associated factor 1 (PAF1) complex. The PAF1 
complex comprises five proteins which interact 
with RNA polymerase II to regulate gene expres­
sion through the methylation of histones and the 
elongation of transcripts. In the same year, He et al. 
(2004) also described a mutation in a gene they 
called EARLY FLOWERING 8 (ELF8). Loss of func­
tion of ELF8 resulted in loss of FLC transcript and 
early flowering. The ELF8 locus is in fact the same 
locus as the VIP6 locus, and both groups noted the 
similarity of the protein product to the CTR9 com­
ponent of the yeast PAF1 complex. Indeed, Oh et al. 
(2004) also noted that the protein encoded by VIP4, 
previously described in yeast as forming multi­
protein complexes, is now also known to associate 
within the PAF1 complex. Another component of 
this complex is encoded by the EARLY FLOWER­
ING 7 (ELF7) locus. The elf7 mutant flowers early 
in both long and short days and contains no detect­
able FLC transcript (He et al. 2004). The ELF7 gene 
encodes a protein with great similarity to the PAF1 
component of the yeast PAF1 complex. These data 
provide considerable support for the presence in 
Arabidopsis of a multiprotein complex involved 
in regulating transcription of FLC by methylating 
histones to ensure continued elongation of newly 
forming mRNA transcripts.

48      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
(Macknight et al. 2002). Perhaps surprisingly, FCA 
transcript is found throughout the plant, and is 
present in particularly high levels not only in shoot 
meristems but also in the root apical meristem and 
root lateral meristems. Consistent with this expres­
sion pattern, fca mutant plants have shorter roots 
with 20% fewer lateral roots than wild type plants 
(Macknight et al. 2002). These data suggest that 
FCA plays other roles in plant development, be­
sides that in promoting flowering. Recent reports 
suggest that FCA acts as a more general regulator 
of RNA 3′ processing, modifying transcript length 
and preventing intergenic transcription through­
out the genome (Sonmez et al. 2011). FCA has long 
been known to activate responses over distances 
of some cells, as it has been shown not to act cell-
autonomously. Furner et al. (1996) demonstrated 
that fca mutant sectors in a wild type plant flow­
ered at the same time as wild type.
4.2.2  FY
The molecular identity of FY was established in 2003 
as a result of a search for proteins that interacted 
with the WW domain of FCA. The gene encodes a 
protein with seven WD40 repeats and which shows 
significant sequence and structural similarity to a 
yeast protein that operates as part of a complex that 
cleaves and polyadenylates RNA (Simpson et  al. 
2003). This protein is very conserved throughout 
studied angiosperms, with proteins from Sorghum 
bicolor (Poales) and Medicago truncatula (Fabales) 
both showing very strong similarity. This is not sur­
prising, as total loss of function of FY is lethal at the 
embryo stage (Henderson et al. 2005). Analysis of FY 
function indicated that, like FCA, it acts as a 3′-end 
RNA-processing factor, important at many stages 
of plant growth. FCA has three main functions in 
the induction of flowering. First, through physical 
interaction with FCA it interferes with FLC RNA 
accumulation, and thus allows floral meristem con­
version genes to be expressed (Manzano et al. 2009). 
The importance of FY in this interaction is clear from 
transgenic experiments. Ectopic expression of FCA 
from the CaMV 35S promoter in Arabidopsis caus­
es early flowering, but this construct has no effect 
in an fy mutant background (Simpson et al. 2003). 
two RRM domains, both in the N terminal region, 
and a C terminal WW domain, a region which is 
usually, and in this case has been confirmed to be, 
involved in protein–protein interactions. The WW 
domain is essential for FCA function (Simpson 
et al. 2003). The FCA transcript is found through­
out the plant, although it is most abundant in areas 
of active cell division, including the root and shoot 
apical meristems (Simpson 2004). Within those cells 
the FCA protein is located in the nucleus, consistent 
with a role in RNA binding. Macknight et al. (1997) 
were able to confirm that FCA does bind RNA in 
vitro, with a preference for U- or G-rich sequences, 
but will not bind DNA.
FCA has been shown to downregulate FLC by 
interfering with RNA processing. The FCA protein 
promotes early polyadenylation of an FLC anti­
sense transcript. This leads to downregulation of 
FLC sense transcription, apparently through chang­
es to the histone methylation status of the locus (Liu 
et al. 2010b).
The FCA transcript has alternative polyadenyla­
tion sequences, which play an important role in its 
function (see below). This alternative polyadenyla­
tion is conserved in FCA-like sequences in Bras­
sica napus (Brassicales) and Pisum sativum ­(Fabales) 
FPA
FY
LD
FVE
FLK
FLD
FLC
FRI-C
FCA
Figure 4.2  Diagram of the autonomous induction pathway. Proteins 
acting in the autonomous induction pathway repress FLC, eventually 
overcoming its repression of flowering.

The autonomous pathways      49
plants to flower early in short days, and generated 
an almost day-neutral behaviour with respect to 
photoperiod (Schomburg et al. 2001). Recent reports 
suggest that although FPA functions independently 
of FCA, the mode of action is very similar. Hornyik 
et al. (2010) investigated FPA function and conclud­
ed that the protein controls alternative RNA cleav­
age and polyadenylation, with consequent effects 
on chromatin. Sonmez et al. (2011) demonstrated 
that this activity was not just restricted to the regu­
lation of FLC, but occurred more widely throughout 
the genome.
4.2.4  FLK
The FLK gene was one of the last two genes in the 
autonomous promotion pathway to be identified, 
and was isolated, using the T-DNA in an inser­
tion mutant as a tag, in 2004. The flk mutant flow­
ers extremely late, and contains no detectable FLK 
transcript but a tenfold increase in FLC transcript 
compared with wild type plants. This elevated 
FLC expression results in a downregulation of the 
flowering-time integrators, FT and SOC1. The gene 
encodes a protein with three K-homology-type 
RNA-binding domains, very similar to those found 
in animal RNA-binding proteins (Lim et al. 2004). 
The protein is predominantly nuclear localized, in 
keeping with its function in RNA binding. It is clear 
that FLK functions to downregulate FLC through 
RNA interference, just as FCA/FY and FPA do, but 
FLK is likely to operate through the facilitation of 
protein–RNA interactions, rather than through pre­
mature polyadenylation.
4.2.5  FLD
The four proteins described above all regulate FLC 
through RNA processing and subsequent effects on 
chromatin. It is therefore not surprising that other 
genes identified through mutant screens as mem­
bers of the autonomous induction pathway have 
turned out to encode enzymes involved in that 
chromatin modification. FLD and FVE both fall into 
this category, and regulate FLC through chromatin 
modification. The fld mutant is late flowering and 
has elevated levels of FLC transcript. However, in 
Clearly FY protein is essential for the FCA-induced 
downregulation of FLC. Secondly, FY is necessary 
for the regulation of FCA itself. The FCA/FY com­
plex promotes premature polyadenylation within 
the third intron of FCA RNA, as opposed to the nor­
mal polyadenylation at the 3′ end of the molecule. 
This results in the production of a truncated RNA 
molecule that encodes a short inactive protein, and 
may also result in chromatin modification at the 
FLC locus (Quesada et al. 2003). This negative au­
toregulation of FCA was unexpected, and appears 
to be developmentally controlled, suggesting that 
at key times and places in the plant it may be pos­
sible to generate variable amounts of FCA protein. 
Certainly bypassing this autoregulation causes 
early flowering. The importance of FY in FCA au­
toregulation is demonstrated by the great reduction 
of the amount of short FCA transcript present in the 
fy mutant background, compared with wild type 
(Simpson et al. 2003). Thirdly, it has recently been 
shown that FY has a role in premature polyadenyla­
tion of the FLC transcript independently of any as­
sociation with FCA. Feng et al. (2011) showed that 
the presence of FY caused proximal polyadenyla­
tion of FLC RNA and reduced total FLC transcript 
even in an fca mutant background.
4.2.3  FPA
FPA is another gene encoding an RNA-binding 
protein, and like FCA it has recently been shown to 
have a more general role in gene silencing through­
out the plant life cycle (Baurle et al. 2007). FPA does 
not interact directly with FCA or FY, and appears 
to regulate FLC independently. FPA was isolated 
by positional cloning and encodes another RRM-
containing protein (Schomburg et al. 2001). FPA con­
tains three RRMs and a protein interaction SPOC 
(SPEN paralog and ortholog C-terminal) domain 
at the C terminus. The RRMs are all located in the 
N terminal region of what is a rather large protein 
(901 amino acids). FPA transcript is found through­
out the plant at low levels, but is strongest in mer­
istematic regions, particularly the inflorescence 
meristems (both apical and axillary). The protein 
is nuclear-localized. Ectopic expression of FPA in 
Arabidopsis using the CaMV 35S promoter caused 

50      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
complex 2 (PRC2), known to be necessary for re­
pressive methylation of chromatin.
4.2.7  LUMINIDEPENDENS (LD)
LD was the first gene of the autonomous induction 
pathway to be identified at the molecular level, al­
though we still know little about how it functions. 
The LD gene was isolated using a T-DNA insert as 
a tag, and encodes a homeodomain protein, a struc­
ture usually associated with DNA binding and tran­
scriptional regulation. The simplest role that can be 
hypothesized for LD from this sequence is a role in 
transcriptional repression of FLC (Lee et al. 1994b). 
However, it has also been proposed that LD may 
function in RNA binding, rather than DNA bind­
ing. In rare cases the homeodomain motif has been 
shown to interact with RNA, and this mechanism 
would be consistent with the known importance of 
RNA processing in the autonomous pathway (Simp­
son 2004). The LD transcript is found throughout 
the plant, although it is most strongly expressed in 
shoot and root apical meristems and leaf primordia. 
An LD-GUS fusion protein was found to be nuclear 
localized (Aukerman et al. 1999). Recent reports 
suggest that LD may repress FLC transcription by 
inhibiting a protein that acts as a positive regulator 
of FLC. The SUF4 (SUPPRESSOR OF FRIGIDA 4) 
locus encodes a zinc finger containing protein that 
interacts with the FRI-C complex and the FLC pro­
moter (Kim et al. 2006). In the absence of the FRI-C 
complex (in an fri mutant background), the SUF4 
protein is bound by LD, perhaps limiting its ability 
to bind the FLC promoter.
4.3  Other endogenous factors 
that influence flowering time
Although the two pathways described above are 
the central endogenous regulators of flowering time 
in Arabidopsis, many other factors can also influ­
ence the floral transition. For example, in some 
species the floral transition will not occur until the 
plant is a certain size, irrespective of the nutrients 
it has received (Bernier and Perilleux 2005). Devel­
opmental factors such as these only really apply 
to more long-lived plants, particularly perennials. 
an flc mutant background the fld mutation has no 
effect on flowering time, confirming that the role 
of FLD is to suppress FLC. FLD was isolated us­
ing a map-based approach, and encodes a protein 
containing a domain involved in chromatin re­
modelling. The protein is highly conserved, clearly 
functioning as a ‘dimethylated histone H3 at lysine 
4 (H3K4me2) demethylase’, very similar to proteins 
with the same role in humans and other eukaryotes 
(He et al. 2003; Liu et al. 2007). FLD expression is not 
sufficient to entirely eliminate FLC expression, but 
merely to reduce it (He et al. 2003; Simpson 2004). 
The role of FLD is apparently downstream of the 
premature polyadenylation resulting from the ac­
tivities of the RNA binding proteins. Investigation 
of the genetic interactions of these loci by Liu et al. 
(2010b) concluded that the premature polyadenyla­
tion appears to trigger FLD-dependent demethyla­
tion in the main body of the gene, downstream of 
the early polyadenylation site. This results in sup­
pression of both sense and antisense transcription 
from the FLC locus, and many other loci throughout 
the genome. A recent report by Yu et al. (2011) indi­
cated that FLD interacts physically with a histone 
deacetylase, explaining why early reports on the 
nature of the fld mutant included the observation 
that the FLC locus appeared to be hyperacetylated 
in the absence of FLD.
4.2.6  FVE
FVE also encodes a protein involved in chromatin 
structure and subsequent gene expression. Like 
FLK, it was isolated in 2004, using a map-based ap­
proach, and provided the last pieces of the autono­
mous induction pathway puzzle. The FVE protein 
contains six WD40 repeat domains, and shares se­
quence and structural elements with proteins from 
yeast and mammals that are present in complexes 
involved in chromatin modification. Like FLD, FVE 
has been shown to be involved in histone deacety­
lation of FLC chromatin, modifying FLC transcript 
level in the process. FLC chromatin was found to 
have excess acetylated histones in the fve mu­
tant, compared with wild type (Ausin et al. 2004). 
Pazhouhandeh et al. (2011) explored the interactions 
of FVE with other proteins, and concluded that it 
acts as a scaffold for a CLF-polycomb repressive 

The autonomous pathways      51
not thought of specifically as a flowering-time gene, 
because its role is clearly in controlling phase transi­
tion during development in general, it is clear from 
the phenotype of the emf1 mutant that other factors 
besides the inhibition and autonomous induction 
pathways are also necessary for appropriate devel­
opment and accurate timing of flowering.
However, even short-lived annuals like Arabidop­
sis undergo certain life stage transitions before 
flowering can occur. Loss of function of genes such 
as EMBRYONIC FLOWER 1 (EMF1) eliminates ro­
sette formation and transforms the apical meristem 
into an inflorescence meristem from the point of 
germination (Aubert et al. 2001). Although EMF1 is 

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 5
The photoperiodic pathway 
of floral induction
It is nearly 100 years since the formal discovery that 
flowering time in many plant species was regulated 
by day length, and yet we have only recently be­
gun to understand how this regulation occurs. In 
1920, Garner and Allard published a categorization 
of plants into three types: those that flowered when 
days were longer than a critical period, those that 
flowered when days where shorter than a critical 
length, and those whose flowering did not appear 
to be affected by day length. The third group, day 
neutral plants, flower in response to triggers con­
sidered in Chapters 4 and 6. The remaining two 
groups, long day plants and short day plants, expe­
rience photoperiodic induction of flowering. In this 
chapter we shall consider the photoperiodic regula­
tion of flowering in Arabidopsis, which is a facul­
tative long day plant (i.e. one whose flowering is 
brought forward by long days, rather than one with 
an absolute requirement for them). Understand­
ing the photoperiodic induction pathway requires 
an analysis of how light is perceived, how time is 
measured, and how the two signals are integrated 
to activate responses. In Chapter 8 we shall contrast 
what we know of Arabidopsis floral induction with 
the systems in other species, particularly the short 
day plant rice (Poales).
5.1  Sensing daylight
Plants clearly have the ability to absorb light, be­
cause doing so is an essential component of photo­
synthesis. Leaves are adapted to function as solar 
panels, and thus make an ideal site for the percep­
tion of daylight. However, it is the presence of par­
ticular photoreceptors that allows plants to perceive 
the range of wavelengths present in incident light, 
and to convert that perception into signals. Exten­
sive physiological work over many years has dem­
onstrated that red light, far red light, and blue light 
are all important in photoperiodic induction, al­
though their relative importance varies in different 
species and under different conditions.
5.1.1  Sensing red and far red light: 
phytochromes
Red light (650–670 nm) and far red light (705–740 nm) 
are perceived by phytochromes, which are soluble 
cytosol proteins that form a dimer, each member of 
which has a tetrapyrrole chromophore covalently 
bonded to the GAF subdomain in their N terminal 
photosensory domain (see Fig. 5.1a). Recent reports 
of crystallization of bacterial phytochromes sug­
gest that the chromophore is almost buried within 
a pocket formed by the GAF subdomain (Wagner 
et al. 2005). This chromophore, called phytochro­
mobilin, selectively absorbs particular wavelengths 
of light, allowing the whole molecule (protein plus 
chromophore) to act as a photoreceptor and acti­
vate downstream responses. The chromophore is 
an open chain of four pyrrole rings. The C termi­
nus of phytochrome contains two repeats of a motif 
called a PAS domain, and the N terminus contains 
a single PAS domain. These domains are believed 
to be involved in signal relay through protein–
protein interactions with other molecules, includ­
ing transcription factors (Yanovsky and Kay 2003). 
The C terminus also contains a histidine-kinase-
related domain (HKRD) with serine/threonine ki­
nase activity. The presence of this domain has led to 

The photoperiodic pathway      53
(a)
(b)
N-terminal moiety
C-terminal moiety
NT
PAS
GAF
S
PHY
Chromophore
PAS
PAS
HKRD
O
O
O
D
Z
H
N
O–
O–
Z
B
C
NH
NH
O
Z
S-Cys-S
90º rotation
(C4 = C5)
90º
180º
Z to E
isomerization
(C15 = C16)
5
4
15
16
HN+
CHCH2
A
Figure 5.1  Phytochromes. (a) The chromophore is bonded to the GAF domain in the N terminal portion of the phytochrome protein. The 
PAS domains and the histidine kinase-related domain are towards the C terminus. Redrawn from Nagatani (2010). (b) The chromophore of 
phytochrome takes one of two forms, depending on the light regime. Contradictory data suggest that either the rotation or the isomerization 
shown occurs during the interconversion. Redrawn from Nagatani (2010). Reproduced with permission from Elsevier.
one active form of phytochrome A (Shinomura et al. 
2000; Wang and Deng 2003). Alternatively, it may 
be the case that continuous far red light is able to 
establish and maintain a small fraction of the phyto­
chrome A population in the Pfr form over an unusu­
ally extended period (Quail 2002).
The five phytochrome proteins in Arabidopsis 
are encoded by five different genes. The genes are 
called PHYTOCHROME A to E (PHYA–PHYE), and 
the molecules that they encode are referred to as 
phytochrome A, B, C, D, and E. A plant with a lesion 
in one of the PHY genes will still make the other 
four phytochromes and still be responsive to light. 
Analysis of the individual mutants has allowed 
dissection of the roles of the five different phyto­
chromes, and it has become clear that the physi­
ological model described above is oversimplified. 
Phytochromes B, C, D, and E all perceive red light, 
whereas phytochrome A distinguishes between far 
red light and darkness (Quail 2002). Phytochrome 
A is classed as a labile phytochrome, being readily 
degraded in the light, whereas the other four phyto­
chromes are considered stable. Some of the phyto­
chrome molecules also seem to be more important 
than others in different responses by plants to light.
The differences between the activities of the dif­
ferent phytochromes are attributable to differences 
in the protein structures and also to differences in 
their light lability. Phytochrome A is extremely light 
labile, being degraded within minutes of the light 
the suggestion that phytochromes activate respons­
es by phosphorylating their target proteins (Rubio 
and Deng 2005). A recent report confirmed that the 
HKRD domain was necessary both for correct sub­
cellular localization and for spectral sensitivity of 
phytochrome A (Müller et al. 2009).
Traditionally, phytochrome function was de­
scribed physiologically and was thought to depend 
on interconversion of the chromophore between 
two states according to the available light (see 
Fig. 5.1b). The Pr form of the molecule absorbs red 
light, and is converted into the Pfr form through a 
conformational change. The Pfr form then absorbs 
far red light and is converted back to the Pr form. In 
the light, the transition between the two forms sets 
up a stable equilibrium, but in the dark Pfr declines 
progressively as the Pr form is more stable. The Pfr 
form is usually the active form, the one that causes 
things to happen in the plant, and so when it is ab­
sent, in the dark, the plant can no longer activate 
downstream light responses (Quail 2002). Although 
this model still holds generally true for phytochrome 
function, more detailed analysis in Arabidopsis has 
revealed the presence of five different phytochrome 
molecules, each of which responds to light in subtly 
different ways. In particular, while the Pfr form of 
phytochrome has been shown to be the active form 
for four of the five molecules, it has been proposed 
that a short-lived intermediate generated during 
the switching between Pr and Pfr may be at least 

54      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
transition. However, phytochrome A is also known 
to play important roles in seed germination and in 
de-etiolation of light-deprived tissues (reviewed by 
Mathews 2010).
Phytochrome B is the major form of phytochrome 
present in light-grown tissue, and it mediates ger­
mination, de-etiolation, and shade avoidance re­
sponses. It also plays an important role in the floral 
transition. Phytochromes A and B are ancient pro­
tein lineages, both having arisen before the diver­
gence of the angiosperms and the gymnosperms 
(reviewed by Mathews 2010). Phytochrome C has 
a narrower range of roles in leaf development 
and perception of photoperiod, and is also an an­
cient, although less strongly conserved, protein. 
Phytochrome D is found only in the Brassicaceae, 
following a duplication of the the PHYB gene in 
that lineage. Phytochrome E originated before the 
divergence of the eudicots, but is not conserved 
in all plant families. There is some redundancy of 
function in Arabidopsis, particularly between phy­
tochromes A and E, and between phytochromes B 
and D (reviewed by Mathews 2010). It is also appar­
ent that the different phytochromes have different 
dimerization requirements. Phytochrome A forms 
only homodimers, whereas phytochromes C, D, 
and E must heterodimerize with phytochrome B. 
Phytochrome B is also functional as a homodimer 
(Clack et al. 2009).
The chromophores themselves are encoded by 
a different set of genes, called the HY genes. HY1 
and HY2 are both necessary to make phytochromo­
bilin (the chromophore, which absorbs light), and 
loss of function of either of these genes results in a 
plant that lacks functional molecules of all the phy­
tochromes because there are no chromophores to 
bond to the core proteins. These mutants are usual­
ly deficient in all phytochrome-mediated responses. 
Phytochromobilin is synthesized within the plas­
tids and then released into the cytosol, where it is 
bonded to the main phytochrome proteins. HY1 
was isolated through positional cloning and shown 
to encode the enzyme heme oxygenase (Davis et al. 
1999). Heme oxygenase cleaves the heme precur­
sor of chromobilin into the intermediate biliverdin, 
in the first committed step of chromophore syn­
thesis. There are three other genes in Arabidopsis 
which are predicted to encode heme oxygenases, 
treatment needed to activate it (Nagy and Schafer 
2002). It has been suggested that the phosphoryla­
tion status of the protein may influence both its la­
bility and its activity level. This lability may serve to 
ensure that plants do not respond with large-scale 
developmental changes (such as flowering) to very 
brief periods of illumination. Phytochrome A is 
also at its most active on exposure to far red light. 
In contrast, the other four phytochrome molecules 
are all light stable and are most active on exposure 
to red light (Yanovsky and Kay 2003). In addition, 
phytochrome A protein has a daily oscillation pat­
tern when plants are grown in short days. In short 
day regimes, phytochrome A protein levels peak 
during the night, but in long days they remain con­
stant throughout the day (Mockler et al. 2003).
The importance of phytochrome A (and far red 
light) in the floral transition has been demonstrated 
using Arabidopsis plants exposed to varying light 
regimes. Wild type plants that are exposed to a nor­
mal short day (12 hours), followed by several hours 
of only far red light, flower early (at the same time 
as plants exposed to normal long days). However, 
phyA mutant plants flower late under this regime, 
as they are not able to perceive the far red light ex­
tension to the day. Exposure of wild type plants to 
short days followed by several hours of only red 
light results in late flowering (at the same time as 
plants exposed only to short days), indicating that 
far red light (and the phytochrome A which per­
ceives it) is more important than red light (and the 
other phytochromes) in the flowering response. 
Similar experiments have shown that exposing 
plants to short days, but breaking up the long night 
with short periods of light (light breaks), results in 
early flowering. Although all wavelengths of light 
are somewhat effective as light breaks, far red light 
was shown to be the most effective of all (Goto et al. 
1991; Putterill 2001). Far red light alone is insuffi­
cient to allow photosynthesis, but has been shown 
to be sufficient for flowering. Mockler et al. (2003) 
grew wild type and phyA mutant plants on nutri­
ent media that met the plants’ energy requirements 
in the absence of photosynthesis. Plants were kept 
in continuous far red light, and wild type plants 
flowered at the normal time, whereas phyA mutant 
plants were extremely late flowering. Clearly far red 
light and phytochrome A are essential for the floral 

The photoperiodic pathway      55
(Martinez-Garcia et al. 2000; Leivar and Quail 2011). 
The data initially suggested a positive interaction, 
with PIF proteins acting to recruit light-activated 
and nuclear-imported phytochrome proteins to the 
promoters of target genes, whose transcription is 
then directly activated. However, detailed analysis 
of the functional relationships of the PIF proteins 
and phytochrome revealed the opposite. The physi­
cal interaction of an active form of PHYB with a 
PIF results in rapid degradation of the PIF, within 
minutes. The binding results in phosphorylation 
of the PIF, apparently targeting it for degradation 
by the ubiquitin–proteasome system (reviewed by 
Leivar and Quail 2011). A return to the dark, and re­
moval of the light-induced phytochrome molecules, 
restores PIF levels in the nucleus. The PIF proteins 
appear to be primarily positive transcriptional reg­
ulators, so phytochrome signalling occurs through 
repression of transcription of their target genes. 
Ectopic expression of PIF3, or its downregulation 
through antisense technology, results in perturba­
tion of many photoresponses, including flowering 
time (Ni et al. 1998), and the PIF proteins have been 
shown to regulate around 1000 genes, directly or in­
directly (Leivar and Quail 2011).
The influence of phytochromes on gene expres­
sion may operate through several different path­
ways and at several different rates. Microarray 
experiments have indicated that the expression 
profiles of 10% of all genes change in response to 
far red light perceived through phytochrome A. Of 
the genes that responded within 1 hour of treat­
ment, 44% encoded transcription factors (Tepper­
man et al. 2001). It is unlikely that all of these genes 
are regulated through a PIF-mediated pathway, 
and although some are likely to be activated as a 
result of downstream processes, it is also possible 
that some are regulated by as yet unknown rapid 
response systems.
Direct interactions with transcription factors are 
not the only way in which phytochrome proteins 
function. The active form of phytochrome A has 
also been shown to phosphorylate other proteins 
besides the PIFs, including autophosphorylation 
of itself. The active (Pfr) form of the molecule is 
over twice as effective as the Pr form at causing 
such phosphorylation (Fankhauser et al. 1999), 
confirming that light activation is important in 
and reports suggest that these have reduced and 
partially redundant functions in the generation of 
the chromophore (Emborg et al. 2006). HY2, isolated 
by map-based cloning, encodes biliverdin reductase 
(otherwise known as phytochromobilin synthase), 
which catalyses the final step of chromophore syn­
thesis in a ferredoxin-dependent reaction (Kohchi 
et al. 2001).
The mode of action of active phytochromes is still 
not entirely understood, with both direct interac­
tion with transcription factors and phosphoryla­
tion apparently being involved. However, it is clear 
that after the conversion of Pr to Pfr on exposure 
to light, all five phytochrome molecules move from 
the cytoplasm to the nucleus (Quail 2002). This 
transition is very rapid, occurring within only a few 
minutes of light treatment. The Pr form of PHYA is 
anchored within the cytoplasm by interactions with 
other proteins, but the Pfr form no longer interacts 
with the anchor and thus is free to be trafficked into 
the nucleus (Wang and Deng 2003; Chen and Chory 
2011). In contrast, PHYB movement appears to de­
pend upon conformational changes revealing its 
nuclear localization signal.
The movement of phytochrome to the nucleus is 
likely to be crucial to its function, since one known 
mode of rapid phytochrome action is through 
the interaction of its PAS domain with transcrip­
tion factors, particularly the basic helix-loop-helix 
PIF (PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING) proteins. 
There are at least seven PIF genes in the Arabidop­
sis genome, part of a 15-member subgroup of the 
bHLH transcription factor family (Leivar and Quail 
2011). The subfamily is named for PIF3, the first 
of the group identified, which was isolated from 
a screen for proteins to which PHYB bound. Both 
the active light-induced forms of PHYA and PHYB 
have been shown to bind PIF3 in yeast (although 
PHYB binds tenfold more strongly than PHYA; Ni 
et al. 1998; Zhu et al. 2000), and all other PIF pro­
teins are also bound by the light-induced forms 
of one of the phytochrome molecules (Leivar and 
Quail 2011). All PIF proteins bind PHYB through 
a conserved N-terminal sequence called the ac­
tive phytochrome B-binding (APB) motif (Khanna 
et al. 2004). PIF3 was shown to bind G-box motifs 
(CACGTG) in the promoters of other genes, and the 
other PIF proteins tested also bind the same motif 

56      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
CRY1 associates with chromophores, primarily fla­
vin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and also possibly 
pterin (5,10-methyltetrahydrofolate), which absorb 
blue light (Lin 2000). Analysis of the state of FAD 
on purification suggests that the oxidized form is 
the ground state in plants in the dark. On exposure 
to blue light, the oxidized FAD is reduced, and the 
reduced form is no longer sensitive to blue light. A 
conformational change associated with this reduc­
tion could result in subsequent signal transduction 
(Gyula et al. 2003). However, other authors argue 
that a circular electron shuttle (with no oxidation or 
reduction) might also explain the light sensitivity 
of cryptochromes (for reviews of both mechanisms, 
see Liu et al. 2011a).
CRY2 (originally known as FHA) was isolated us­
ing the CRY1 cDNA as a probe (Lin et al. 1998), and 
encodes a protein that is 51% identical to CRY1 in 
terms of amino acid sequence. However, there are 
clear differences between CRY1 and CRY2 function, 
probably as a result of their differential regulation. 
Both proteins are nuclear localized, but CRY2 has 
been shown to be the more crucial for the floral 
transition. CRY2 protein (but not CRY2 mRNA) is 
downregulated in blue light, as a result of light-
induced phosphorylation triggering protein deg­
radation (Lin et al. 1998). The cry2 mutant is late 
flowering in long days, while ectopic expression 
of CRY2 (using the CaMV 35S promoter) results in 
early flowering in short days (Lin 2000).
Less is known about the signalling cascade down­
stream of cryptochromes than about that of phy­
tochromes, but it is likely that there are some 
similarities. For example, Shalitin et al. (2002) showed 
that protein–protein interactions are important for 
CRY2 function, and that CRY proteins undergo blue-
light-dependent phosphorylation, rather as PHYA 
does in far red light. Multiple serine residues of a CRY 
are phosphorylated in response to blue light, as a re­
sult of both autophosporylation and the activities of 
undescribed protein kinases. Shalitin et al. (2002) con­
cluded from these data that, in the dark, CRY2 is un­
phosphorylated, inactive, and stable. However, when 
blue light activates CRY2 it autophosphorylates, trig­
gers responses, and activates its own degradation. 
The importance of phosphorylation in cryptochrome-
mediated photoresponses was shown by an investi­
gation of cry2 mutant alleles that express full length 
this response. A particular target of phytochrome 
phosphorylation activity appears to be the PHYTO­
CHROME KINASE SUBSTRATE 1 protein (PKS1), 
initially isolated through its physical interaction 
with phytochrome A, but also shown to interact 
with phytochrome B. The PKS1 protein is localized 
to the plasma membrane (Lariguet et al. 2006), and 
its phosphorylation by active phytochromes con­
firms this pathway of phytochrome-mediated sig­
nalling (Fankhauser et al. 1999).
5.1.2  Sensing blue light: cryptochromes
Blue light is perceived through two entirely differ­
ent sets of photoreceptors, the phototropins and the 
cryptochromes. The phototropins are not known to 
influence flowering time, but play roles in cellular 
responses such as chloroplast movement and sto­
matal aperture, having a significant effect on pho­
tosynthetic efficiency. However, the cryptochromes 
are very important for photoperiodic induction of 
flowering, as well as for hypocotyl growth, and 
have been found in animals as well as plants. Se­
quence analysis suggests that the plant crypto­
chromes are ancient, and evolved shortly after the 
origin of eukaryotes. This ancestral cryptochrome 
was then lost in the animal lineage, but shortly after 
the animal–plant divergence the animals acquired a 
new cryptochrome, by modification of an existing 
photolyase (Cashmore et al. 1999).
There are three cryptochromes present in Arabi­
dopsis, encoded by different genes—CRY1, CRY2, 
and CRY3. Unlike the other two, CRY3 functions 
in the chloroplasts and mitochondria, and has very 
specific roles and a distinct protein structure. CRY1 
and CRY2 are both nuclear-localized, with CRY2 
thought to be the most active in the regulation of 
flower induction.
CRY1 was isolated first, from a T-DNA tagged line 
of the cry1 mutant (originally known as hy4) (Ah­
mad and Cashmore 1993). The CRY1 gene encodes a 
681-amino-acid protein with an N terminal domain 
very similar to that of the microbial enzyme DNA 
photolyase. DNA photolyases are enzymes activat­
ed by blue and UVA light to bind to and repair py­
rimidine dimers caused by the exposure of DNA to 
UVB light (Eckardt 2003). However, the plant cryp­
tochromes do not have photolyase activity. Instead, 

The photoperiodic pathway      57
operating through a protein called CONSTITUTIVE 
PHOTOMORPHOGENESIS 1 (COP1). A large class 
of mutants isolated from early genetic screens in 
Arabidopsis show similar or identical phenotypes, 
including anthocyanin accumulation, chloroplast 
development, epidermal cell differentiation, inhibi­
tion of hypocotyl elongation, and cotyledon open­
ing, all in the dark (Yamamoto et al. 1998). These 
responses are normally restricted to light-grown 
plants, but are constitutive in this class of mutants. 
The proteins involved are referred to as COP/DET/
FUS proteins, and they act as repressors of certain 
responses in the dark, but are themselves deacti­
vated in the light. A large subset of these proteins 
are nuclear-localized components of a ubiquitin-
protease pathway that targets degradation of down­
stream proteins, including a key transcription factor 
which activates expression of many light-regulated 
genes (reviewed by Quail 2002).
The best studied member of this group of genes 
is COP1, which encodes a protein with a RING-
finger domain and WD40 repeats, characteristic of 
­protein–protein interactions (Deng et al. 1992). Many 
of the other COP/DET/FUS genes encode subunits 
of one of two oligomeric complexes involved in 
degradation of ubiquitinated proteins. The CUL4-
DDB1-COP1-SPA complex and the CUL4-DDB1-
DET1-COP10 complex both combine RING pro­
teins, WD repeat proteins, and ubiquitin ligases 
(Chen et al. 2006; Chen et al. 2010). They both func­
tion as E3 ubiquitin–protein ligase complexes, tar­
geting proteins for degradation by binding them to 
ubiquitin (Quail 2002). One of the primary targets 
of the COP1-containing complex is a transcription 
factor called HY5 (Oyama et al. 1997). The HY5 gene 
encodes a bZIP transcriptional activator that binds 
to the promoters of light-responsive genes. How­
ever, HY5 protein is only present in the nucleus in 
the light, being virtually absent from the cell in the 
dark (a 15- to 20-fold difference in protein level has 
been measured; Osterlund et al. 2000). In the dark, 
the COP1 complex has been shown to bind HY5, 
targeting it for degradation. However, in the light, 
COP1 becomes significantly less abundant in the 
nucleus, allowing HY5 to function (see Fig. 5.2). A 
similar interaction is thought to occur between the 
COP1 complex and the MYB transcription factor 
LAF1 and the helix-loop-helix transcription factor 
(but apparently non-functional) CRY2 proteins. In all 
cases the absence of blue-light-triggered responses 
was correlated with the absence of blue-light-induced 
phosphorylation (Shalitin et al. 2003).
There is evidence that the C terminal domains 
of the cryptochromes cause constitutive responses 
which are downregulated by the N terminal do­
mains unless they receive blue light illumination. 
Yang et al. (2000) showed that, in the absence of 
the N terminal domains, the C terminal domains 
of CRY1 and CRY2 are constitutively active, caus­
ing photomorphogenic responses (including early 
flowering) even in the dark. Presumably they are 
maintained in an inactive state by the N terminal 
domains in the dark, and only released into activity 
on exposure to blue light.
CRY2 (but not CRY1) is ubiquitinated in response 
to blue light, triggering its degradation. This degra­
dation is dependent upon the flavin chromophore—
a mutant form of CRY2 that cannot bind flavin is 
not degraded in blue light (Liu et al. 2008). It has 
also been shown that CRY1 and CRY2 interact with 
COP1 (a downstream component of both phyto­
chrome and cryptochrome signalling; see below) 
in the nucleus in the dark (Wang et al. 2001). In 
some cop1 mutant backgrounds, CRY2 degradation 
in blue light is perturbed (reviewed by Liu et al. 
2011a). These data have led to the suggestion that 
the perception of blue light by cryptochromes trig­
gers degradation or deactivation of COP1, which 
eventually allows enhanced transcription of other 
genes (Gyula et al. 2003).
The interaction of the cryptochromes and the 
various phytochromes ensures that day and night 
are correctly identified in all of the different light 
regimes a plant may experience during its develop­
ment. At least part of this interaction is physical, 
with phytochrome B and cryptochrome 2 physical­
ly interacting in vitro and co-localizing to speckles 
in the nucleus on exposure to light (Mas et al. 2000).
5.1.3  Light-induced signals
The signal transduction pathways further down­
stream of the photoreceptors are currently the sub­
ject of intensive characterization, mostly because 
of their extreme complexity. We do know a con­
siderable amount about one downstream pathway, 

58      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
on the ability of plants to measure time. All eukary­
otes have biological clocks, although the first cir­
cadian rhythm recorded in any organism was the 
daily leaf movements of plants (leaves tend to be 
fully open in the day but fold up to some extent at 
night; Barak et al. 2000). In order for such rhythms 
to be truly representative of a circadian clock, and 
not of tissue responses to immediate light or dark 
conditions, they must be maintained, if imperfectly, 
when the organism is kept in a constant light re­
gime. Clock-based responses are also unaffected by 
changing temperature, unlike most biological pro­
cesses. In all organisms where the clock has been 
analysed it is based on a transcription/­translation 
feedback loop, although the actual proteins in­
volved are different in plants and animals. The 
basic model is one in which a clock gene autoregu­
lates itself at a speed which takes approximately 24 
hours. The clock is entrained by daily light signals 
to keep it running accurately. When organisms are 
kept in constant darkness their clock usually drifts 
slightly away from the 24-hour optimum. In the 
model, light signals occurring at the transition from 
dark to light every morning ensure the transcrip­
tion of a clock gene (although, since the clock is 
basically light independent, transcription should 
occur even in the absence of light). This is trans­
lated into a clock protein, which activates clock-
controlled genes and is responsible for all the other 
clock-controlled responses. However, the protein 
also represses the transcription of its own gene, ei­
ther directly or through activation of an inhibitor of 
its own transcription, or through repression of an 
activator. When protein levels fall below a certain 
threshold, transcription can begin again.
It has always been thought likely that a model 
based on a single oscillatory gene would be too sim­
ple, and that the clock would consist of multiple in­
teracting loops, to provide the necessary robustness. 
However, the basic principles of these loops are 
likely to follow the simple model described above.
The isolation of clock elements to test this model 
has involved extremely elegant genetic screens. For 
example, several clock genes were isolated using a 
screen that relied on the circadian expression ­patterns 
of certain genes. The promoter of one such gene, 
CAB2, was fused to the gene for firefly ­luciferase, 
and introduced into transgenic Arabidopsis plants. 
HFR1, both of which are also important in regulat­
ing photomorphogenesis (Seo et al. 2003; Duek et al. 
2004; Yang et al. 2005).
The light-induced change in COP1 nuclear abun­
dance is mediated by the activities of at least PHYA, 
PHYB, CRY1, and CRY2, and requires the presence 
of a 110-amino-acid domain in the COP1 protein 
called the cytoplasmic localization signal (CLS; 
Stacey et al. 1999). Analysis of protein function 
has shown that the CLS induces nuclear export of 
COP1, removing it from the nucleus in the light and 
preventing its activity as part of the E3 ubiquitin–
protein ligase complex (Subramanian et al. 2004). 
However, some recent reports have suggested alter­
native ways in which the interaction of the COP1 
complex with transcription factors could vary in 
the light and the dark, arguing that the kinetics of 
COP1 movement between nucleus and cytoplasm 
may be too slow to adequately account for the dif­
ferences observed (Chen and Chory 2011).
5.2  Measuring time
As well as perceiving the quality of daylight avail­
able, photoperiodic induction of flowering depends 
COP1
HY5
Degradation
(a) Events in the nucleus in the dark
COP1
HY5
Transcription of
light-responsive
genes
(b) Events in the nucleus in the light
Figure 5.2  The COP1 protein mediates transcriptional responses to 
light. (a) In the dark, COP1 binds to the HY5 transcriptional activator 
in the nucleus and targets it for degradation. (b) In the light, COP1 is 
exported to the cytosol, allowing HY5 to activate transcription.

The photoperiodic pathway      59
domain, whereas most plant MYB proteins contain 
two copies. Levels of transcript and protein of both 
CCA1 and LHY circle on a circadian pattern, peak­
ing at dawn. Ectopic expression of either gene from 
the CaMV 35S promoter downregulates the expres­
sion level of the other, and ruins the rhythmicity of 
the clock. The cca1 mutant still retains rhythmic pat­
terns of gene expression (Green and Tobin 1999), as 
does a loss-of-function lhy mutant (Mizoguchi et al. 
2002), although in both mutants those rhythmic 
patterns deviate to some extent from wild type, and 
both flower early in short days. However, a dou­
ble mutant lacking functional copies of both genes 
is completely arrhythmic, flowering early in short 
days, showing random leaf movements, and having 
no rhythmic patterns of gene expression (Mizogu­
chi et al. 2002). These data suggest that the LHY and 
CCA1 proteins are partially redundant, overlap­
ping in function incompletely.
The TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1 (TOC1) 
gene has an expression pattern that also cycles 
These transgenic plants were mutagenized and then 
the progeny were monitored under time-lapse video 
cameras. Wild type plants expressed luciferase (i.e. 
glowed) on a 24-hour cycle, but those with muta­
tions in clock genes glowed on arrhythmic cycles 
(Millar et al. 1995). Several criteria which a gene must 
meet to be considered a core part of the clock were 
identified. First, the gene should have an expression 
pattern that cycles over 24 hours; secondly, it should 
control its own expression in a negative feedback 
loop; thirdly, by clamping the gene (fixing its expres­
sion at a high or low level) it should be possible to 
stop the clock.
The Arabidopsis circadian clock has been shown 
to consist of three interlocking loops. The central os­
cillator is based around the activities of three main 
proteins (see Fig. 5.3). CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSO­
CIATED 1 (CCA1) and LATE ELONGATED HYPOC­
OTYL (LHY) both encode transcription factors of 
the MYB family, although they are unusual in con­
taining only a single copy of the MYB DNA-binding 
PRR7, PRR9
CCA1, LHY
TOC1
GI?
GI?
?
?
PRR7
PRR9
LHY
ZTL
GI
TOC1
CCA1
Figure 5.3  The circadian clock operates through a set of interconnecting feedback loops. TOC1, CCA1, and LHY form the central oscillator, which 
is made more robust by interaction with morning and evening loops. Redrawn from Harmer (2009).

60      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
LHY and CCA1 downregulation of TOC1, to the 
point where lack of TOC1 (assisted by ZTL-induced 
degradation in the dark) has resulted in sufficiently 
little LHY and CCA1 to allow TOC1 transcription to 
begin again, takes approximately 24 hours to com­
plete (Alabadi et al. 2001).
The LHY/CCA1/TOC1 central oscillator pro­
vides the basic rhythmicity to the system, but is 
not sufficient either to maintain a robust clock or to 
explain various experimental observations of plant 
behaviour under different light regimes. For these 
reasons the clock model has been expanded to in­
clude a morning loop and an evening loop, each 
interacting with the central oscillator (all reviewed 
by Harmer 2009).
Correct rhythmicity of the clock is maintained 
by daily entrainment. Without exposure to a light 
burst each morning, the clock tends to run to 
slightly more than 24 hours. Somers et al. (1998) 
showed that phytochrome A and phytochrome B 
are necessary to ensure red light signals entrain 
the clock, that cryptochrome 1 and phytochrome 
A are necessary for blue light entrainment, but that 
cryptochrome 2 does not seem to be involved in 
circadian clock input. CCA1 and LHY act as part 
of this morning loop. They activate transcription 
of several TOC-like genes encoding additional 
­pseudo-response regulators that input light signals 
to entrain the clock. However, these PRR proteins 
also in turn inhibit CCA1 and LHY transcription, 
providing a negative feedback loop in the morning 
(Locke et al. 2006).
The evening loop also provides robustness to the 
system, although its genetic components are not 
yet well understood. It is thought that TOC1, LHY, 
and CCA1 all negatively regulate an unknown fac­
tor (perhaps partly provided by GIGANTEA; see 
below) that is itself a positive regulator of TOC1 
expression. Again, this loop provides negative feed­
back control to regulate the amount of TOC1 pro­
tein produced in the evening (reviewed by Harmer 
2009). The three interacting loops provide a circa­
dian clock that is both sensitive and robust.
5.3  Integrating light and clock signals
An ability to perceive day length and an ability to 
follow a 24-hour pattern are not sufficient to explain 
over 24 hours, but with a peak at dusk. Ectopic ex­
pression of TOC1 causes arrhythmicity, while toc1 
mutants have shorter circadian patterns (typically 
21 hours in constant light) and flower late in long 
days (Strayer et al. 2000). Expression levels of both 
CCA1 and LHY are reduced in a toc1 mutant back­
ground, compared with wild type. TOC1 was iso­
lated by map-based cloning, and encodes a protein 
containing an N terminal motif very similar to the 
receiver domain of response regulators from two-
component signal transduction systems (Strayer 
et al. 2000). However, the conserved aspartates that 
normally undergo phosphorylation in these sys­
tems are replaced by other amino acids in TOC1, so 
perhaps it has a different function. The TOC1 pro­
tein appears to be unable to undergo phosphoryla­
tion in vitro, leaving the function of the receiver-like 
domain unclear, and leading to the protein’s cur­
rent classification as a ‘pseudo-response regulator’ 
(Makino et al. 2000). The C terminus of TOC1 con­
tains a domain very similar to that of the transcrip­
tion factor CONSTANS (see below). Mas et al. (2003) 
showed that the gradual reduction in TOC1 protein 
levels after the dusk peak was caused not only by 
transcriptional repression by LHY and CCA1, but 
also by post-translational modification. The ZEIT­
LUPE (ZTL) gene encodes a protein that contains a 
number of domains, including an F-box motif, and 
that acts as part of an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex 
(Somers et al. 2000). The ztl mutant has constitu­
tive levels of TOC1 protein (although the mRNA 
expression pattern continues to cycle in a circadian 
manner). This excess of TOC1 protein is caused by 
the failure of TOC1 degradation in the dark, which 
requires a functional ZTL protein (Mas et al. 2003).
Putting these data together, a model has emerged 
in which TOC1 upregulates expression of LHY and 
CCA1 through an unknown transcriptional regula­
tor intermediary. The LHY and CCA1 proteins have 
been shown to bind to the promoter of the TOC1 
gene, where they repress its transcription. High 
constant levels of LHY or CCA1 (in transgenic 
plants) result in low constant levels of TOC1 pro­
tein. The TOC1 promoter contains a 200-base-pair 
region which is essential for rhythmicity, and it is to 
this that LHY and CCA1 have been shown to bind 
(Alabadi et al. 2001). The entire feedback loop, from 
TOC1 upregulation of LHY and CCA1, through 

The photoperiodic pathway      61
Short days
Long days
CO
FT
Figure 5.4  The CONSTANS gene (above) is expressed in a circadian 
pattern. It is only able to activate FT expression (below) when its 
expression coincides with daylight—that is, in long days (right-hand 
panel). Redrawn from Yanovsky and Kay (2003). Reproduced with 
permission from Nature Publishing.
promoter in both light and dark, it is only during 
the light period that FT expression is upregulated, 
causing the floral transition to occur (Valverde et al. 
2004). This elegant model of integration has finally 
resolved the question of how photoperiod induces 
flowering, some 85 years after the phenomenon was 
formally described (see Fig. 5.4; Yanovsky and Kay 
2003).
The role of light in allowing CO to activate FT 
expression was investigated by Valverde et al. 
(2004). First, they showed that blue light treatment 
increased FT transcript level in an ectopically ex­
pressing CO background, far red light had some ef­
fect (but less than blue light), and red light did not 
enhance FT transcription. They also showed that 
the cry1, cry2, and phyA mutants had less FT tran­
script than wild type plants, confirming that both 
cryptochromes and phytochrome A are necessary to 
allow far red and blue light to initiate CO activation 
of FT expression. The key role that light plays in CO 
activity is in stabilizing the protein. The CO protein 
produced in the evening is stable, but CO protein 
produced during the hours of darkness is rapidly 
degraded. Application of proteasome inhibitors was 
shown to stabilize CO protein during dark periods, 
suggesting that the protein is ­normally  ­degraded 
the very precise photoperiodic induction require­
ments of many plant species. The two features must 
be integrated in such a way that the plant only 
flowers when the appropriate critical day length 
is achieved. Understanding the integration of light 
and clock signals has involved analysis of mu­
tants in which photoperiodic control of flowering 
is perturbed, but in which other circadian or light 
responses are not affected—that is, those not per­
turbed either in the clock itself or in the photorecep­
tors, both of which will of course alter photoperiodic 
control of flower induction.
It is now believed that signals from the circadian 
clock and the phytochromes are integrated by the 
GIGANTEA (GI) and CONSTANS (CO) genes. The 
co mutant was originally identified as late flower­
ing in long days but flowering at the normal time 
in short days (Koornneef et al. 1991). CO was cloned 
using a map-based approach (Putterill et al. 1995). 
The gene encodes a protein with two zinc finger 
domains, commonly found in transcription factors, 
and also regions indicative of protein–protein inter­
actions. This protein appears to function as a tran­
scriptional activator. It is expressed in both leaves 
and stems, at very low abundance, but not in the 
shoot apical meristem. CO expression is regulated 
by the endogenous circadian clock on a 24-hour 
cycle that peaks around 12 hours after dawn. Thus 
in short days CO expression does not overlap with 
the period of daylight, but in longer days there is 
an overlap of CO expression and daylight in the 
evening (Suarez-Lopez et al. 2001). The CO protein 
directly causes floral induction by activating ex­
pression of FT, one of the flowering-time integra­
tors (see Chapter 7) and a key necessary component 
of the floral transition. However, CO is only able to 
activate FT expression in daylight. This means that 
CO gene expression is regulated by the circadian 
clock, but CO protein function is controlled by the 
presence of daylight. Therefore CO protein can only 
activate FT expression if it is present during a light 
evening—that is, in long days. In short days, CO 
is never expressed at the time which would allow 
it to activate FT. In support of this model, ectopic 
expression of CO from the CaMV 35S promoter 
does cause increased FT expression, but only dur­
ing the hours of daylight. Although CO transcript 
is equally abundant as a result of this constitutive 

62      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
after dawn (Fowler et al. 1999). This expression pat­
tern turns out to be crucial to the function of GI in 
mediating the interaction between CO and light. 
The GI protein forms a complex with an ­F-box pro­
tein to degrade CDF1 (CYCLING DOF FACTOR 1), 
a key repressor of CO. However, since the interac­
tion between the F-box protein and GI is activated 
by light (particularly blue light), and GI expression 
is controlled by the circadian clock, the complex 
only forms when it is light into the late afternoon/
early evening—that is, in long days. This complex 
then acts to degrade CDF1, allowing CO activity 
(Sawa et al. 2007).
The observation that circadian rhythmicity of 
gene expression patterns is altered in plants either 
ectopically expressing GI or containing a gi mutant 
allele suggests that GI also feeds back into the cen­
tral circadian oscillator (Mizoguchi et al. 2005). It is 
likely that other genes will also be shown to act as 
intermediates between CO expression and CO func­
tion in a variety of similar ways.
by the proteasome unless light signals prevent this 
degradation (Valverde et al. 2004).
A number of genes have been predicted to play 
roles upstream of CONSTANS, moderating CO 
expression and thus regulating the interaction 
between clock-induced CO expression and light-
controlled CO activity. The GIGANTEA (GI) gene, 
for example, acts upstream of CO (Putterill et al. 
2004). The gi mutant flowers late in long days and 
has reduced levels of CO expression (Simpson 
2003). GI was isolated by two groups, one using 
a ­T-DNA tagging approach and the other using a 
map-based approach. The gene encodes a large nov­
el protein, which was initially predicted to contain 
multiple membrane-spanning domains (Fowler et al. 
1999; Park et al. 1999). However, the GI protein 
was subsequently shown to be nuclear localized 
when fused to green fluorescent protein in both 
transient assays (Huq et al. 2000) and stable expres­
sion (Mizoguchi et al. 2005). The expression pattern 
of GI is circadian-regulated, peaking 8–10 hours 

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 6
The vernalization pathway of floral 
induction and the role of gibberellin
Day length is not the only environmental signal used 
by plants to optimize the timing of flower produc­
tion. Temperature is also a factor, and particularly 
vernalization—that is, exposure to a prolonged pe­
riod of cold. This is a sensible adaptation of plants in 
temperate climates to prevent the risk of autumn ger­
mination leading to flowering in winter, a time when 
pollinators are scarce and freezing temperatures may 
inhibit seed production. At the same time, the plant 
growth regulator gibberellin has been shown to be 
a powerful promoter of flowering in many species. 
Since gibberellins are produced by differentiating 
plastids, linking flowering to high gibberellin lev­
els allows plants to coordinate reproduction with 
the potential for high levels of photosynthetic ac­
tivity. For some time there was speculation that the 
­vernalization-induced flower induction pathway 
operated through gibberellins, but we now know 
that, in Arabidopsis at least, vernalization and gib­
berellin represent two independent pathways which 
can both induce flowering. Chandler et al. (2000) 
showed that vernalization was not affected in mu­
tant backgrounds which failed to make or perceive 
gibberellins, as well as those defective in abscisic 
acid and phytochrome B signalling. In this chapter 
we consider the two pathways separately, before 
looking at the evidence that they overlap. In Chapter 
7 we shall integrate all of the flowering-time path­
ways discussed in Chapters 4, 5, and 6 to produce 
a holistic model of the Arabidopsis floral transition.
6.1  The vernalization promotion pathway
Photoperiodic induction is the most commonly cit­
ed and best studied example of the environmental 
regulation of flowering. However, flowering is likely 
to be accelerated by any condition that reliably in­
dicates the passage of winter and the onset of more 
favourable conditions for reproduction. Although 
day length is one such reliable indicator, the end 
of a long period of cold weather is another good 
sign that winter has passed. Many plants flower in 
response to a period of between 1 and 3 months of 
exposure to temperatures between 1 and 10°C. The 
precise cold requirements vary from species to spe­
cies and from plant accession to plant accession, and 
can be extremely specific. This strategy is adopted 
by many wild species, and has also been bred into 
many of our crop varieties, to produce lines which 
will overwinter in the vegetative state and flower 
in the spring or summer (see Fig. 6.1; Simpson and 
Dean 2002). Such cold-induced regulation of flower­
ing is known as vernalization (from the Latin vernus, 
meaning ‘of the spring’; Sung and Amasino 2004b).
Vernalization involves two separate processes. 
First, the plant must perceive the prolonged peri­
od of cold temperature. Then it must ‘remember’ 
that perception in order to induce flowering later 
in the spring or summer, when the cold has passed. 
Very few plants flower immediately on release from 
the cold period, so it is clear that the ‘memory’ of 
winter is retained over many weeks and months. 
Analysis of vernalization in Arabidopsis has been 
broken down into analysis of cold perception and 
analysis of the maintenance of the vernalized state. 
Although the mechanism by which a plant ‘remem­
bered’ cold seemed initially the most challenging 
problem to solve, it has been the perception of ver­
nalization that has proved more difficult to analyse 
using conventional genetic approaches.

64      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
Initial analysis of cold-induced flowering in 
Arabidopsis established that a requirement for ver­
nalization segregated as a monogenic trait, which 
mapped to the FRIGIDA (FRI) locus (Simpson and 
Dean 2002). FRI was introduced in Chapter 4. The 
main function of the protein is to enhance expression 
of FLC, the main repressor of flowering in Arabidop­
sis. FLC represses flowering by downregulating the 
flowering-time integrator genes, such as FT. Hav­
ing established that many Arabidopsis plants with 
a summer annual habit (i.e. those that do not need a 
cold period to induce flowering) contain mutations 
in FRI or FLC, attention focused on the mechanism 
of vernalization interaction with these genes (Simp­
son and Dean 2002). The first intron of FLC is neces­
sary for maintenance of FLC repression after cold 
treatment, but other regions of the gene are needed 
for the initial downregulation, confirming the hy­
pothesis that cold repression and maintenance of 
that repression are two different processes (Sheldon 
et al. 2002). Vernalization results in a reduction in 
FLC transcript levels in the plant, and this reduced 
expression is maintained after plants are transferred 
to warmer environments. Increasing periods of cold 
exposure result in increasing downregulation of 
FLC, a quantitative effect which appears to be re­
lated to the extent of the initial downregulation of 
FLC, rather than the security of maintenance of the 
repressed state (Sheldon et al. 2006). The mainte­
nance of the FLC repressed state through mitosis, 
and the temporal separation between the timing of 
cold treatment and the onset of flowering, led to the 
hypothesis that vernalization operated through epi­
genetic control of FLC expression.
In support of the suggestion of an epigenetic 
method of response to cold treatment, prolonged 
growth in cold temperatures was shown to reduce 
methylation level across the genome. It was further 
shown that genome-wide demethylation, whether 
induced by chemical means, through the use of 
transgenes, or in mutant plants, promoted earlier 
flowering in Arabidopsis (Finnegan et al. 1998; Shel­
don et al. 2000a). These data seemed to contradict 
the idea that vernalization induced an epigenetic 
repression of FLC transcription, until Sheldon et al. 
(1999) showed that plants expressing an antisense 
METHYLTRANSFERASE 1 gene, and with only 
15% of the wild type level of genomic methylation, 
It has long been known that prolonged periods of 
cold are perceived by cells in the shoot apical meris­
tem and root apical meristem of Arabidopsis. This 
perception can be passed on to new daughter cells 
through mitotic divisions, long after the cold period 
has passed, but cannot be passed on through meio­
sis. This is a logical system which ensures that the 
next generation of plants starts with a fresh slate and 
no ‘memory’ of the winter their parents experienced. 
It is also a hallmark of many epigenetic changes, 
such as DNA methylation, that they are conserved 
through mitosis but not meiosis. Extensive experi­
ments with in vitro regeneration of various vernal­
ized tissues of Lunaria biennis (honesty, Brassicales) 
revealed that only tissues containing actively di­
viding cells regenerated into plants that retained a 
memory of vernalization (Wellensiek 1962). It seems 
necessary for cells to be dividing, or at least under­
going DNA replication, for vernalization to be suc­
cessful (Sung and Amasino 2004b). Since the apical 
meristems are the source of the most active cell di­
vision within the plant, it is hardly surprising that 
vernalization seems to operate through these tissues.
summer
spring
winter
autumn
summer
spring
winter
autumn
Winter wheat
Spring wheat
Figure 6.1  Variation in vernalization sensitivity is used in agriculture 
to increase the number of harvests possible in a year. Vernalization-
sensitive winter wheat (top) is sown in autumn, germinates and 
remains vegetative in the winter, and then flowers and sets seed in 
spring. Vernalization-insensitive spring wheat (bottom) is sown in 
spring and germinates, grows, and produces a crop in the summer, 
without the requirement for a period of cold.

The vernalization pathway      65
comes from the perfectly normal expression, and 
response to cold, of acclimation-induced genes in 
mutants compromised in vernalization (vrn1 and 
vrn2; see below). Liu et al. (2002) also showed that 
ectopic expression of CBF1, the first transcription 
factor gene to be upregulated upon cold acclima­
tion, has no effect on FLC transcript levels or on 
flowering time. It is possible that vernalization and 
cold acclimation do share some elements of a com­
mon pathway, even if the majority of their actions 
seem to be separate, although the data are currently 
ambiguous. Some reports suggest that the HIGH 
EXPRESSION OF OSMOTICALLY RESPONSIVE 
GENES 1 (HOS1) gene is involved in both processes, 
with hos1 mutants showing reduced cold acclima­
tion and thus reduced freezing tolerance, reduced 
CBF expression, early flowering, and reduced FLC 
transcript levels (Lee et al. 2001). The HOS1 gene en­
codes a RING-finger protein that acts as an E3 ligase 
required for ubiquitin-mediated protein degrada­
tion (Dong et al. 2006). This protein is translocated 
from the cytoplasm to the nucleus in response to 
exposure to cold (Lee et al. 2001). However, more 
recent analyses suggest that the link between HOS1 
and vernalization is an artefact of the role that HOS1 
plays in general stress responses. Bond et al. (2011) 
demonstrated that VIN3, the first induced gene in 
the vernalization response (see below), behaves 
normally in a hos1 mutant background. These au­
thors also found little difference in flowering time 
and FLC transcript levels between wild type and 
hos1 mutants, leaving the link between cold accli­
mation and vernalization in doubt.
How plants remember exposure to a period of 
cold was solved before we understood how they 
recognize cold, primarily due to analysis of two 
mutants, the vernalization (vrn) mutants, in which 
flowering is not induced in response to a prolonged 
period of cold. The vrn1 mutant experiences a re­
duction in FLC expression during its exposure to 
cold, but on return to warmer conditions the FLC 
transcript level recovers and flowering is not in­
duced (Levy et al. 2002). This suggests that the 
mutant can perceive cold but then fails to retain 
a memory of it. VRN1 was isolated by map-based 
cloning and encodes a protein containing two B3 
DNA-binding domains and a nuclear localization 
signal—that is, a protein with several hallmarks of 
flowered early and had reduced FLC transcript 
levels. Since demethylation usually allows tran­
scription, rather than represses it, the authors con­
cluded that methylation inhibits a repressor of FLC 
expression, and that such methylation is reduced 
by vernalization. Finnegan et al. (2005) conducted 
a detailed analysis of the effects of demethylation 
and vernalization on the FLC locus. They showed 
that both processes resulted in reduced acetylation 
of histones H3 and H4 in the promoter of FLC and 
in neighbouring genes. However, DNA demethyla­
tion also resulted in repression of other MADS box 
genes with roles in flowering, lending support to the 
idea that methylation inhibits a repressor of MADS 
box genes in general, and may therefore affect flow­
er induction in a rather indirect way. More recent 
work has demonstrated that vernalization results in 
a number of repressive marks being placed on the 
FLC chromatin, particularly methylation of histone 
3 lysine 9 (H3K9) and histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27), 
and that these modifications are only maintained in 
mitotically active cells (Finnegan and Dennis 2007).
Vernalization is conceptually and mechanisti­
cally different from cold acclimation, where short 
periods of cold temperatures induce responses that 
prepare plants for freezing temperatures. It is essen­
tial that these two processes are discrete, to ensure 
that plants are not tricked into flowering by short 
cold spells in autumn. However, both cold acclima­
tion and vernalization must occur at temperatures 
above freezing, as both require metabolic activ­
ity which would be severely inhibited by subzero 
temperatures (Sung and Amasino 2004b). Given the 
rapid temperature changes experienced by plants in 
many habitats, cold acclimation can be induced by 
only a short period of chilling, with one day suffi­
cient for Arabidopsis. In contrast, vernalization of 
Arabidopsis is optimal after 30–40 days of continu­
ous cold, a period of time sufficient to overcome the 
FRI-induced enhancement of FLC expression (Lee 
and Amasino 1995). Cold acclimation may operate 
through changes in membrane fluidity at different 
temperatures, altered calcium ion fluxes, and protein 
phosphorylation, although none of these processes 
are sufficiently stable to induce the memory of win­
ter that is part of vernalization (Sung and Amasino 
2004b). Further evidence for the mechanistic differ­
ences between cold acclimation and ­vernalization 

66      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
no cold effect for the plant to remember. VIN3 ex­
pression is induced quantitatively on exposure to a 
long period of cold temperature, and as VIN3 tran­
script levels increase in the plant, FLC transcript lev­
els decrease. VIN3 expression ceases after the plant 
is returned to warmer temperatures, becoming un­
detectable within 3 days of warmth, at which point 
the VRN2 complex takes over the maintenance of 
the induced state. VIN3 was isolated by map-based 
cloning and encodes a plant homeodomain-finger-
containing protein (PHD protein), a structure usu­
ally involved in chromatin remodelling or DNA 
binding (Sung and Amasino 2004a). The VIN3 pro­
tein has been shown to bind to the 5′ region of the 
FLC locus as part of the VRN2 complex (Wood et al. 
2006). It appears that VIN3 is necessary to target the 
VRN2 complex to FLC, but that once targeted the 
complex remains in place even after VIN3 transcrip­
tion stops due to a return to warmth. During vernal­
ization, acetylation levels of FLC chromatin decrease 
in response to the binding of the VRN2 complex, 
and this deacetylation is followed by methylation. 
In the vin3 mutant neither deacetylation nor meth­
ylation of FLC occurs, whereas the vrn1 and vrn2 
mutant lines experience deacetylation of FLC but 
reduced methylation (Sung and Amasino 2004a). In 
the vrn1 mutant, methylation of lysine 9 on histone 
H3 is lost, while in the vrn2 background no histone 
H3 methylation occurs (Bastow et al. 2004).
Like VRN1 and VRN2, LIKE HETEROCHRO­
MATIN PROTEIN 1 (LHP1) is also necessary to 
maintain repression of FLC after exposure to cold, 
although it may in addition have wider roles in 
other aspects of plant development. LHP1 is a 
chromodomain protein, very similar to animal and 
yeast proteins that maintain chromatin in particular 
states. LHP1 protein is enriched in the chromatin of 
FLC after exposure to cold, binding to methylated 
histone, and remains in position after the plant is 
returned to warm temperatures. The involvement 
of LHP1 as well as polycomb group proteins in the 
flower induction process confirms that the epige­
netic control of FLC operates through mechanisms 
very similar to those present in animals and fungi 
(Mylne et al. 2006; Sung et al. 2006).
These experiments have allowed us to build up 
a complete picture of the vernalization induction 
of flowering in Arabidopsis. During a prolonged 
a transcription factor. GFP fusion experiments con­
firmed that VRN1 is nuclear localized, supporting 
the idea that it is involved in transcriptional regula­
tion. Levy et al. (2002) showed that the expression 
levels of VRN1 mRNA did not change on exposure 
to cold temperatures, confirming that the gene 
plays a role in maintenance of the vernalized state, 
rather than induction of it. Ectopic expression of 
VRN1 from the CaMV 35S promoter induced early 
flowering without vernalization, and even earlier 
flowering with a cold treatment. Finally, Levy et al. 
(2002) showed that VRN1 protein binds DNA, in­
cluding FLC, in vitro, and proposed that VRN1 
binds to the FLC locus in vivo, targeting complexes 
(possibly including VRN2; see below) to it which 
cause methylation and subsequent inactivation of 
the gene.
The vrn2 mutant, which is vernalization-insen­
sitive, also experiences cold-dependent reduction 
in FLC transcript levels, but return of FLC expres­
sion on increasing temperature (Gendall et al. 2001). 
VRN2 was isolated by map-based cloning and en­
codes a protein with a nuclear localization signal 
and several features indicative of a member of the 
polycomb group of proteins. Polycomb proteins 
regulate gene transcription by modifying chromatin 
structure, and are active in both plant and animal 
development (Gendall et al. 2001; Chanvivattana 
et al. 2004). Just like VRN1, VRN2 expression pat­
tern is not affected by vernalization, and the pro­
tein is nuclear localized at all times. VRN2 has been 
shown to interact physically with other polycomb 
group proteins, and is therefore thought to function 
as part of a polycomb complex to maintain the chro­
matin of the FLC gene (to which it may be targeted 
by VRN1) in a state incompatible with transcription 
through histone modifications (Chanvivattana et al. 
2004).
The observation that VRN1 and VRN2 are ex­
pressed even in the absence of vernalization in­
dicated that they could not be responsible for the 
cold-induced repression of FLC expression, but only 
for its maintenance following the action of some 
other protein. In 2004, Sung and Amasino reported 
the identification of VERNALIZATION INSENSI­
TIVE 3 (VIN3) as the solution to this mystery. In the 
vin3 mutant, repression of FLC expression does not 
occur in response to vernalization, and there is thus 

The vernalization pathway      67
­living in different habitats has recently been the fo­
cus of much attention. Studies of variation in flow­
ering time have very frequently isolated FRI and 
FLC as key loci determining ecotypic differences, 
confirming the importance of the vernalization 
pathway in fitting plants to their local environ­
ments (e.g. Strange et al. 2011).
6.2  The gibberellin promotion pathway
Almost all of the classic plant growth regulators 
have been linked with the floral transition. There 
is evidence from a range of species that, under ap­
propriate conditions, gibberellin, auxin, cytokinin, 
and brassinosteroids can each influence flowering 
time. This is hardly surprising, as levels of each 
of the major plant growth regulators (PGRs) are 
affected by environmental conditions, including 
nutrient and water availability and light quality. 
General changes to plant development as a result 
of these environmental stimuli may include a direct 
effect on flower induction, or an indirect one oper­
ating through changes in source/sink relationships 
of various tissues. However, within Arabidopsis 
at least there is evidence to suggest that gibberel­
lins directly promote flower induction, and that 
this promotion operates through a pathway which 
is genetically distinct from the autonomous, pho­
toperiodic, and vernalization induction pathways 
discussed previously.
Gibberellins are tetracyclic diterpenoids, and over 
130 different forms of gibberellin have been de­
scribed from plants, fungi, and bacteria (Gomi and 
Matsuoka 2003). They are synthesized in differen­
tiating chloroplasts, and the biosynthetic pathway 
leading to their production has been characterized 
by biochemical and molecular genetic methods. The 
primary signal that high gibberellin levels send to the 
plant is one of good conditions. In high-quality light, 
and with sufficient water and nutrients available, 
young leaves develop rapidly and more chloroplasts 
differentiate, leading to increased gibberellin lev­
els. Gibberellins are perceived by soluble receptors 
within the cell (AtGID1a, AtGID1b, and AtGID1c in 
Arabidopsis). When bound by gibberellins, the gib­
berellin receptors also interact with DELLA proteins 
(of which five are encoded by the Arabidopsis ge­
nome) and target them for degradation by the 26S 
cold treatment, VIN3 expression is initiated, and 
the VIN3 protein causes deacetylation of FLC chro­
matin. VIN3 protein is associated with VRN2 in a 
multiprotein complex which may target FLC chro­
matin for repression through histone methylation 
(Wood et al. 2006). VRN1 and VRN2, along with 
LHP1, are responsible for methylation of the modi­
fied FLC gene, preventing its transcription, and this 
methylation is stable on return to warmer tempera­
tures, providing the ‘memory’ of winter (see gene 
expression patterns in Fig. 6.2). In the absence of 
FLC expression the flowering-time integrators can 
be expressed and flowering can be induced.
It is worth noting that a second, poorly character­
ized, vernalization induction pathway operates in 
Arabidopsis. Loss of FLC activity in a null mutant 
line does not totally remove the vernalization re­
sponse. Polycomb proteins have also been shown to 
repress the activity of different MADS box genes—
AGL19, AGL24, MAF1, and MAF2. AGL19 induces 
expression of floral meristem identity genes (see 
Chapter 9), bypassing both FLC and the flowering-
time integrators that it represses. Although this 
pathway has been little studied, recent data sug­
gest that VIN3 may play a role in maintaining the 
repressed state of AGL19 (Schoenrock et al. 2006; 
reviewed by Alexandre and Hennig 2008).
As was mentioned in Chapter 3, the natural vari­
ation between different ecotypes of Arabidopsis 
Expression
level
Time after cold treatment
Figure 6.2  Graph showing expression levels of various genes 
following vernalization. FLC transcript levels (solid line) start high, 
repressing flowering. VIN3 (dashed line) is induced by cold treatment, 
and represses FLC expression, before expression levels decline again. 
VRN1 and VRN2 (dots and dashes) expression is unaffected by 
vernalization. However, the VRN1 and VRN2 proteins (arrow) act to 
maintain the repressed state of the FLC locus.

68      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
for direct transcription of LEAFY in response to gib­
berellin signals. Appropriate LFY expression is de­
pendent upon a MYB recognition motif within the 
LFY promoter, and this motif is bound by AtMYB33 
(Blazquez et al. 1998; Blazquez and Weigel 2000; Gocal 
et al. 2001). Since DELLA proteins act as the molecular 
switches through which gibberellin signalling occurs, 
they are also important in the flowering response. 
Achard et al. (2006) showed that DELLA proteins 
delay the onset of flower production under high salt 
conditions, supporting a role for gibberellin in the 
general induction of flowering through the degrada­
tion of these repressors.
Further evidence for the role of gibberellins in 
flower induction, and particularly of their inde­
pendence from the other floral induction pathways, 
comes from mutant studies. The spindly (spy) mu­
tant has constitutively active gibberellin signalling, 
and flowers early (Jacobsen and Olszewski 1993). 
The mutant is also resistant to inhibitors of gibberel­
lin synthesis, and the gene encodes an enzyme in­
volved in post-translational protein modification (an 
O-linked N-acetylglucosamine transferase), which 
acts as a negative regulator of gibberellin signalling 
(Jacobsen et al. 1996; Thornton et al. 1999). Loss of this 
negative regulation of gibberellin signalling results 
in an early transition to flowering. Further evidence 
comes from the work of Chandler et al. (2000), who 
analysed double mutant plants containing lesions in 
the autonomous pathway promoter FCA and lesions 
in gibberellin synthesis or perception. Plants that are 
fca mutants have a strong vernalization requirement, 
as the autonomous promotion pathway is perturbed 
and FLC expression remains high. Double mutants 
between fca and ga1, and between fca and gai, were 
produced and analysed. The GA1 gene encodes ent 
kaurane synthase, the enzyme required for the first 
committed step of gibberellin synthesis, and so ga1 
mutants produce no gibberellin. The ga1 mutant is 
late flowering in long days, and rarely flowers at all 
in short days. However, the double mutants were still 
responsive to vernalization and photoperiod, con­
firming that gibberellin induces flowering through 
a separate pathway. The GAI gene is required for the 
perception of gibberellin, and gai mutants can grow 
on toxic levels of gibberellin. Again, gai/fca dou­
ble mutants were responsive to vernalization and 
photoperiod, indicating that gibberellin promotes 
proteasome (Nakajima et al. 2006). DELLA proteins 
are named for a group of amino acids which make 
up a conserved motif within their sequence. These 
proteins are nuclear-localized negative regulators of 
transcriptional responses—their degradation in the 
presence of gibberellin allows gibberellin-induced 
genes to be expressed.
The first piece of evidence in support of the pres­
ence of a gibberellin induction pathway is the ob­
servation that treating Arabidopsis plants with 
exogenous gibberellins promotes earlier flowering. 
In fact, application of gibberellin seems to promote 
the floral transition in all rosette plants investigat­
ed, but has a different effect in non-rosette plants. 
Plants with elongated stems at the vegetative stage 
seem to experience further stem elongation when 
treated with gibberellins, but do not flower early 
(Corbesier and Coupland 2005). The molecular 
mechanism of action of exogenous gibberellin is as 
yet unclear, but there is evidence that gibberellin 
application may induce expression of LEAFY and 
SOC1 (both flowering-time integrators, while LFY 
is also classed as a floral meristem identity gene; 
see Chapters 7 and 9). Blazquez et al. (1998) showed 
that growth on 1% sucrose enhanced expression 
of a GUS reporter gene fused to the promoter of 
LEAFY. Although treatment with gibberellin alone 
had no obvious effect on reporter gene activity, the 
combination of gibberellin and 1% sucrose resulted 
in much stronger (more than double) reporter gene 
expression than was caused by sucrose alone. Eriks­
son et al. (2006) further showed that GA4 is the active 
gibberellin which induces upregulation of LEAFY 
and therefore flowering, and that its concentration 
at the shoot apical meristem increases shortly be­
fore the floral transition occurs. More recent reports 
also suggest that gibberellins can enhance expres­
sion of FT, the gene encoding the mobile promoter 
of flowering that travels to the meristem after long 
days are perceived in the leaves (see Chapter  5; 
Hisamatsu and King 2008), and the SPL genes acti­
vated in the meristem at the floral transition (Jung 
et al. 2012).
Gibberellin promotes flowering in short days 
through a GAMYB-dependent activation of LEAFY. 
The gibberellin-responsive MYB transcription factor, 
AtMYB33, is necessary to allow gibberellin to activate 
LEAFY expression, and is presumably responsible 

The vernalization pathway      69
in activating LEAFY expression, this has led to the 
proposition that gibberellin is able to bypass the au­
tonomous inhibition pathway and induce flowering 
by direct activation of flowering-time integrators or 
even floral meristem identity genes. Such a direct 
response might be seen as a sensible response of a 
short-lived plant to the information that high lev­
els of gibberellin provide—namely that the young 
leaves are vigorous and growing, and that there is 
plenty of light for photosynthesis. Since good con­
ditions are by no means guaranteed in the life of a 
short-lived annual, it may be beneficial to be able to 
respond rapidly to such conditions when they arise.
6.3  Does gibberellin act in the 
vernalization promotion pathway 
as well as independently?
The proposal that vernalization may promote flow­
ering through gibberellin is a long-standing one in 
the literature, and should be considered distinct 
from analysis of the gibberellin promotion path­
way. Evidence in favour of a role for gibberellin in 
the vernalization pathway was provided by Ha­
zebroek et al. (1993), who observed an increase in 
the activity of an enzyme of gibberellin synthesis 
following vernalization. Using shoot apical mer­
istems of Thlaspi arvense (pennycress, Brassicales), 
they measured an increase in the activity of ent-
kaurenoic acid hydroxylase after a prolonged cold 
treatment. This increase resulted in increased syn­
thesis of a gibberellin, GA9, albeit a less biologically 
active one than many. A model was proposed in 
which vernalization resulted in methylation chang­
es to genes encoding enzymes of gibberellin biosyn­
thesis (including ent-kaurenoic acid hydroxylase), 
allowing enhanced gibberellin production and thus 
early flowering (Sheldon et al. 2000a). Such a model 
is consistent with what we know of how vernaliza­
tion works, independently of gibberellin. However, 
there is little other evidence to support a role for 
gibberellin in the vernalization promotion pathway, 
and the genetic data in Arabidopsis indicate quite 
clearly that the pathways usually function indepen­
dently of one another.
flowering through an independent pathway. Al­
though much remains to be discovered about the 
way in which gibberellin promotes the floral tran­
sition in Arabidopsis, these genetic studies make it 
clear that the gibberellin induction pathway must be 
thought of as distinct from the autonomous, photo­
periodic, and vernalization pathways.
Whatever the details of gibberellin signalling, it 
is clear that gibberellin does not promote flower­
ing through repression of FLC, unlike the autono­
mous and vernalization induction pathways (see 
Figure 6.3). FLC transcript levels are unchanged in 
response to gibberellin application and subsequent 
early flowering (Sheldon et al. 2000b), indicating 
that gibberellin operates downstream of FLC. In 
conjunction with the observed role of gibberellin 
Flowering integrators
Floral meristem identity genes
FLC
GA
GA
Vernalization
Figure 6.3  Despite early hypotheses that gibberellin and the 
vernalization promotion pathway were parts of the same process, 
it is now clear that they operate at different points in the pathway 
that represses flowering. Vernalization represses the activity of the 
floral repressor FLC, whereas gibberellin bypasses FLC and directly 
activates expression of the flowering integrators and floral meristem 
identity genes.

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 7
Integrating the Arabidopsis thaliana 
flower induction pathways
In the previous three chapters we have discussed the 
various pathways that regulate the floral transition in 
Arabidopsis. Chapter 4 considered the floral inhibi­
tion pathway, which prevents the plant from flow­
ering until it has grown vegetatively and acquired 
sufficient photosynthate to fuel seed production. It 
also considered the autonomous induction path­
way which ensures that the plant will always flower 
eventually, even if it does not experience inductive 
environmental conditions. Chapter 5 discussed the 
photoperiodic promotion pathway, which encour­
ages the floral transition in long days, indicative of 
summer and good growth conditions. Chapter 6 con­
sidered the influence of vernalization on flowering, a 
pathway which operates in ecotypes inhabiting more 
northerly latitudes, where floral induction occurs af­
ter winter has passed. It also discussed the ability of 
gibberellin, the plant growth regulator produced by 
young leaves in response to good conditions, to bring 
forward the floral transition. An average Arabidopsis 
plant will experience inhibitory and promotive sig­
nals from each of these pathways to a greater or lesser 
extent at any one point in its life. When the promotive 
signals (from any combination of the induction path­
ways) become stronger than the inhibitory signals 
the transition to flowering will occur. In this chapter 
we shall investigate how the pathways are brought 
together to result in a single response, through the ac­
tivities of the flowering-time integrator genes.
7.1  Integrating the flowering-time 
pathways
The various flowering-time pathways can be thought 
of as converging on a set of genes, known as the 
flowering-time integrators. It is tempting to think 
of the pathways converging on the activity of FLC, 
the floral repressor, but in fact FLC is situated im­
mediately upstream of the point of convergence. As 
Fig. 7.1 shows, although several of the pathways 
do moderate FLC activity, others bypass it, and so 
the true point of convergence cannot be at FLC it­
self. Instead, integration of the different pathways 
is achieved by the genes that are downregulated by 
FLC. The identification of these genes, a set of loci 
each of whose function or expression is regulated by 
more than one of the input pathways, was described 
by Simpson and Dean (2002) as ‘a key step forward in 
our understanding of flowering time control.’
Before moving on to discuss the details of the flow­
ering pathway integrators themselves, it is useful to 
summarize how the pathways converge on these 
genes. The inhibition pathway culminates in strong 
FLC expression and therefore strong repression of 
the flowering-time integrators. The autonomous 
promotion pathway results in downregulation of 
FLC, through a combination of mRNA degradation 
and chromatin remodelling, and thus allows activa­
tion of the flowering-time integrators. The vernali­
zation promotion pathway also operates through 
epigenetic downregulation of FLC by VIN3, and 
its maintenance in a non-transcribed state by the 
VRN2 complex. This also allows induction of the 
flowering-time integrator genes. To this point these 
three pathways (inhibition, autonomous induction, 
and vernalization) have all directly targeted FLC. 
However, the remaining two pathways (photoperi­
odic promotion and gibberellins) both act on the 
genes downstream of FLC. The photoperiodic pro­
motion pathway bypasses FLC, and in response to 

INTEGRATING THE FLOWER INDUCTION PATHWAYS      71
7.2  Function of flowering-time 
integrators
It can be seen that the flowering-time integrators 
are critical to the Arabidopsis floral transition. 
There are three main genes described within this 
category, and we shall discuss the function of each 
in turn. However, it is useful to note first that all 
of them act, either directly or in combination with 
other proteins, as transcriptional regulators, and 
they promote flowering by activating the expres­
sion of genes which operate at the meristem to com­
mit it to the reproductive state. The activity of each 
of the flowering-time integrators is based around 
the expression of a subset of these ‘floral meristem 
identity genes’ (FMI genes). The FMI genes will be 
discussed in detail in Chapter 9, when we consider 
the physiological and molecular changes that occur 
at the meristem as the plant becomes committed to 
the reproductive state.
Not only is the regulatory activity of each flowering-
time integrator slightly different, but also the output 
pathways that lead into them vary slightly (Jack 
2004). Fig. 7.2 shows a schematic of how each of 
the five flowering-time pathways interacts with the 
flowering integrators. Of the three integrator genes, 
SOC1 is the most crucial hub, being positively regu­
lated by the photoperiodic induction pathway and 
by gibberellins, and negatively regulated by FLC 
(and thus integrating the vernalization, autono­
mous promotion, and inhibition pathways). FT is 
positively regulated by the photoperiodic induction 
pathway, but negatively regulated by FLC, and thus 
also integrates the vernalization, autonomous pro­
motion, and inhibition pathways. Only gibberellins 
have no known direct effect on FT. LFY is positively 
regulated by gibberellins, and also by SOC1, and 
thus also integrates everything upstream of SOC1 
with gibberellin-induced promotion.
7.2.1  FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT)
The ft mutant was one of the original late flowering 
lines identified by Koornneef et al. (1991). The mu­
tant has normal expression of LEAFY (LFY), but a 
double mutant between lfy and ft has substantially 
reduced expression of APETALA1 (AP1). Both LFY 
and AP1 function as floral meristem identity genes, 
circadian clock-regulated CONSTANS (CO) expres­
sion resulting in stable CO protein translation in the 
presence of the ­daylight-activated forms of phyto­
chromes and cryptochromes, the flowering-time in­
tegrator genes are directly activated. Gibberellin is 
also able to directly induce expression of flowering-
time integrators, bypassing the FLC block. It can be 
seen, then, that the pathways all converge on the 
activity of a small subset of flowering-time integra­
tor genes, immediately downstream of FLC, either 
directly or through modification of FLC activity. At 
any one time point these genes will be experienc­
ing some degree of inhibition as a result of FLC ac­
tion (varying in its strength according to the relative 
strength of signal from the inhibition, autonomous 
promotion, and the vernalization pathways), and 
some degree of activation as a result of gibberellin-
induced signals and/or CO activity. When the com­
bined activation signals are stronger than the re­
maining FLC-based inhibition, the flowering-time 
integrators will be expressed and the floral transi­
tion will occur.
Flowering integrators
Floral meristem identity genes
FLC
Autonomous
induction
Photoperiodic
induction
GA
GA
Vernalization
Figure 7.1  The four flowering induction pathways converge on the 
flowering-time integrators, either directly or through repression of FLC.

72      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
­enhancer of transcription transformed randomly 
into the genome. One of the early flowering lines 
they selected contained an insertion that mapped to 
the same place as the FT locus, and they were able to 
use the insertion to isolate the gene. Kobayashi et al. 
(1999) also isolated the FT locus, this time using a 
T-DNA insertion line. The FT locus encodes a small 
globular protein related to membrane-­associated 
mammalian proteins that can bind hydrophobic li­
gands. Accordingly it was predicted to play a role 
in signal transduction, through binding to other 
molecules, and has since been shown to act as a 
transcriptional regulator in a complex with more 
conventional DNA-binding proteins. The protein is 
over 50% identical at the amino acid level to the pro­
tein encoded by the floral meristem identity gene 
TERMINAL FLOWER 1 (discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 9). Indeed, Hanzawa et al. (2005) showed 
that only a single amino acid controlled the differ­
ence between the protein functioning as FT or as 
TFL1, providing evidence for extreme functional la­
bility of this class of protein. The single amino acid 
is part of a region which may act as a molecular sur­
face for interactions with other molecules, including 
the promoters of target genes (Ahn et al. 2006).
Kardailsky et al. (1999) conducted an analysis 
of the effects of ectopic expression of FT from the 
CaMV 35S promoter, and concluded that FT expres­
sion was sufficient to induce flowering. The trans­
genic plants showed early and excessive expression 
of AP1, although only in the floral primordia, sug­
gesting that AP1 activation requires the presence of 
another protein not present in vegetative tissues. 
The transgenic plants also contained higher lev­
els of LFY transcript than wild type, a surprising 
­observation in view of the normal LFY expression 
seen in the ft mutant. Ectopic expression of FT was 
sufficient to rescue a constans mutant, confirming 
the hypothesis that FT acts downstream of CO, to 
integrate the photoperiodic induction pathways 
with the other floral induction pathways. Striking­
ly, the combination of ectopic expression of FT and 
ectopic expression of LFY resulted in plants that 
entirely bypassed the vegetative stage of develop­
ment. These double transgenic lines produced a sin­
gle terminal flower on germination, and produced 
no leaves at all, only the cotyledons formed during 
embryogenesis (Kardailsky et al. 1999).
necessary for the conversion of the meristem to the 
reproductive state, and are discussed in more detail 
in Chapter 9. LFY also acts as a flowering pathway 
integrator (see Section 7.2.3 below). However, in 
the context of the ft mutant, both API and LFY can 
be thought of as markers for the floral transition, 
so reduced AP1 expression in an ft/lfy mutant back­
ground confirms the importance of FT in regulating 
flowering.
The FT locus was isolated by two independent 
research groups in 1999. Kardailsky et al. (1999) 
generated activation-tagged lines of plants, with an 
Photoperiod induction
Autonomous
promotion
Vernalization
FLC
FT
SOC1
GA
LFY
Floral meristem identity genes
Figure 7.2  The different floral induction pathways are integrated 
slightly differently by SOC1, FT, and LFY. Only SOC1 integrates all 
four pathways. LFY responds directly to gibberellin (GA), as well 
as indirectly to everything that regulates SOC1. FT integrates all 
pathways except GA, to which it is not responsive (redrawn from 
Jack 2004).

INTEGRATING THE FLOWER INDUCTION PATHWAYS      73
to flower induction, warm temperature has been 
shown to induce early flowering in Arabidopsis 
(Balasubramanian et al. 2006). Mutant or transgenic 
lines with reduced or increased FT activity are often 
perturbed in this response, suggesting a role for FT 
in the integration of temperature signalling into the 
decision of when to flower (Blazquez et al. 2003; Lee 
et al. 2007).
One of the most satisfying features of the FT 
gene is the demonstration that its protein can move 
from induced leaves to the shoot apical meristem, 
where it evokes the flowering response. This move­
ment has been shown by a number of authors us­
ing a number of different techniques. Corbesier 
et al. (2007) made transgenic Arabidopsis plants ex­
pressing an FT:GFP fusion protein from a promoter 
expressed only in phloem companion cells, and ob­
served that whereas mRNA was detected only in the 
companion cells, GFP was detectable in the vascula­
ture, moving towards the shoot apical meristem. In 
a reverse experiment, Mathieu et al. (2007) fused FT 
to three copies of yellow fluorescent protein (YFP), 
making a protein too large to be trafficked between 
cells. Expression of this construct from the CaMV 
35S promoter induced early flowering, as did ex­
pression of it from a shoot apical meristem-specific 
promoter, but expression from a companion cell-
specific promoter did not induce early flowering, 
suggesting that immobilization of the protein in 
the companion cells inhibited its normal function. 
Jaeger and Wigge (2007) further showed the role 
of FT protein movement in flower induction by at­
taching a nuclear localization signal to the protein, 
restricting it to the nucleus of the cell in which it 
was synthesized. Expression of this construct from 
the CaMV 35S promoter was sufficient to induce 
flowering, but expression from a companion cell-
specific promoter was not. Previous experiments 
by Huang et al. (2005) and others had shown that 
FT activates its own expression in the shoot apical 
meristem in a positive feedback loop. Furthermore, 
once activated, expression of endogenous FT is sta­
ble and does not require any additional factors to 
maintain it. These data may finally shed some light 
on the identity of the mysterious ‘florigen’ beloved 
of the early plant physiologists. FT is transcribed 
and translated in leaves in response to appropriate 
signals from the various flowering-time pathways. 
In the endogenous situation, FT expression itself 
is induced by the photoperiodic induction pathway, 
and repressed by FLC (and therefore indirectly in­
duced by the vernalization and autonomous promo­
tion pathways). The gibberellin promotion pathway 
does not seem to operate through FT. Evidence for 
the photoperiodic induction of FT was provided 
by Kobayashi et al. (1999), who fused a rat gluco­
corticoid receptor to CO and ectopically expressed 
the construct in Arabidopsis. This experimental ap­
proach localizes the transgenic protein in the cyto­
plasm, until an artificially applied steroid binds the 
receptor, allowing the protein to move into the nu­
cleus. Since CO functions as a transcription factor, it 
can only be active when inside the nucleus. Induc­
tion of CO activity in these plants by treatment with 
the steroid caused rapid induction of FT expression 
within 12 hours. As discussed in Chapter 5, CO 
protein is only stably produced and therefore able 
to induce FT expression in daylight, providing the 
photoperiodic control to the system (Valverde et al. 
2004). Recent reports suggest that FT expression is 
restricted, until CO protein levels reach a threshold, 
by the activity of the negative regulators TEMPRA­
NILLO (TEM) 1 and 2. TEM1 and TEM2 encode 
transcription factors with AP2 domains which bind 
directly to the FT promoter. Ectopic expression re­
duces FT transcription and delays flowering, while 
loss of function increases FT transcript levels and 
promotes flowering. The competition between TEM 
and CO is probably won by CO in long days when 
sufficient stable protein is present to activate FT 
transcription (Castillejo and Pelaz 2008).
However, FT is not solely responsive to the pho­
toperiodic induction pathway. At the same time the 
FT locus receives inhibitory signals from FLC (and 
is therefore influenced by the vernalization, auton­
omous induction, and inhibition pathways). This 
was most simply demonstrated by Hepworth et al. 
(2002), who showed that ectopic expression of FLC 
resulted in a total absence of FT transcript in trans­
genic plants. More recently, Helliwell et al. (2006) 
showed that FLC protein binds to the first intron of 
FT as part of a multiprotein complex. This complex 
is assumed to function to inhibit FT transcription.
Recent reports have suggested an additional role 
for FT in regulating the floral transition. Although 
not classically regarded as one of the pathways 

74      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
meristem as the floral transition occurs. However, 
SOC1 expression is reduced in mutant lines with 
lesions in genes active in the photoperiodic and au­
tonomous induction pathways. Borner et al. (2000) 
screened for and isolated an insertion mutant with 
an insertion in the SOC1 locus, and described the 
phenotypic consequences of mutation of the gene. 
Loss of function mutants are late flowering, where­
as ectopic expression of SOC1 results in an early 
flowering phenotype. Ectopic expression of SOC1 
is sufficient to overcome mutations in the long day 
and autonomous flowering pathways, allowing 
plants to flower at the normal time (Mouradov et al. 
2002). Expression of SOC1 was also found to be up­
regulated by gibberellin application.
Also in 2000, Lee et al. identified SOC1 from a 
screen for suppressors of FRI activity. Using a trans­
genic approach involving the random insertion of 
transcriptional enhancers into the genome, they es­
tablished that ectopic expression of SOC1, without 
other genetic changes, was sufficient to induce early 
flowering. These authors showed that SOC1 expres­
sion was positively regulated by the vernalization, 
autonomous, and photoperiodic flower induction 
pathways.
In the same year, Samach et al. (2000) also isolated 
SOC1 as a gene with a rapid increase in expression 
level following induction of CO activity using a 
steroid-activated form of CO in transgenic plants. 
SOC1 transcript increased in abundance threefold 
within 4 hours of steroid treatment, and the authors 
then showed that SOC1 was expressed at 10 times 
higher levels in plants ectopically expressing CO 
than in wild type plants. These data indicate a role 
for SOC1 in integrating the photoperiodic induc­
tion pathway.
SOC1 expression is induced by the photoperi­
odic pathway and by gibberellin, and is repressed 
by FLC (and therefore indirectly induced by the au­
tonomous and vernalization promotion pathways, 
and repressed by the inhibition pathway). ­Unlike 
FT, then, SOC1 is a true integrator of all of the 
­flowering-time pathways.
Gibberellin has been shown to directly enhance 
SOC1 expression (Borner et al. 2000), particularly in 
short days, and SOC1 then activates LFY expression. 
SOC1 binds directly to the promoters of three genes 
The protein that is produced is mobile, travelling 
through the phloem to reach the shoot apical meris­
tem. It should therefore also be graft-transmissible. 
Once the FT protein reaches the meristem it then 
induces expression of FT in those cells, and this 
expression is stable. These results show us how 
the evocation of flowering in the meristem can be 
caused by a mobile signal, and how such evocation 
can be stable once it occurs.
One further protein is required to allow FT to 
activate expression of the floral meristem identity 
genes. Recent reports have identified a basic leucine 
zipper (bZIP) transcription factor which interacts 
with the FT protein and is necessary for the flo­
ral transition to occur. FD was initially identified 
by Koornneef et al. (1991) as necessary for the flo­
ral transition, but has been little studied since. In 
2005, two groups reported that FD is expressed at 
the shoot apical meristem prior to the floral transi­
tion, and encodes a bZIP transcription factor that 
interacts physically with FT protein. The presence 
of the FD protein is necessary for the induction of 
AP1 expression (i.e. for the induction of floral mer­
istem identity) by FT (Abe et al. 2005; Wigge et al. 
2005). FD expression is upregulated once FT pro­
tein arrives at the meristem, an upregulation previ­
ously prevented by FLC (Searle et al. 2006). These 
data about FD function provide further support for 
the idea of a meristem ‘waiting’ for the arrival of 
FT mRNA and ready to be stably converted to the 
flowering state.
7.2.2  SUPPRESSION OF OVEREXPRESSION OF 
CONSTANS 1 (SOC1)/AGAMOUS-LIKE 20 (AGL20)
Like FT, SOC1 was described by several different 
groups in the same year. It was given two different 
names, each reflecting the method by which it was 
isolated. It will be referred to as SOC1 throughout 
this work, as that is the name used most frequently 
in the literature, although AGL20 (AGAMOUS-LIKE 
20) provides more information about the molecular 
identity of the encoded protein. SOC1 was analysed 
by Borner et al. (2000) because it encodes a MADS 
box transcription factor with an expression pattern 
indicative of a role in the floral transition. In partic­
ular, SOC1 expression is induced in the shoot apical 

INTEGRATING THE FLOWER INDUCTION PATHWAYS      75
7.2.3  LEAFY (LFY)
The third flowering-time integrator, LFY, is more 
usually described as a meristem identity gene (see 
Chapter 9), primarily because it has been shown to 
act downstream of SOC1, which activates its tran­
scription. However, it can also respond directly to 
gibberellin signalling, and so is also thought of as the 
third flowering-time integrator (Jack 2004). Through 
SOC1, LFY responds to signals from the photoperi­
odic, vernalization, and autonomous promotion 
pathways, but these are all integrated directly by 
SOC1. However, LFY expression is also directly in­
duced by the application of gibberellin. Blazquez 
et al. (1998) showed that treatment with gibberellin 
alone had no effect on the activity of a reporter gene 
fused to the LFY promoter, but that the combina­
tion of gibberellin and 1% sucrose resulted in much 
stronger (more than double) reporter gene expres­
sion than was caused by sucrose alone. Eriksson 
et al. (2006) demonstrated that GA4 is the active gib­
berellin that induces upregulation of LEAFY. It has 
also been shown that gibberellin promotes flower­
ing in short days through a GAMYB-dependent 
activation of LFY. The gibberellin-responsive MYB 
transcription factor, AtMYB33, is necessary to al­
low gibberellin to activate LFY expression, and is 
presumably responsible for direct transcription of 
LEAFY in response to gibberellin signals. Appro­
priate LFY expression is dependent upon an MYB 
recognition motif within the LFY promoter, and 
this motif is bound by AtMYB33 (Blazquez et al. 
1998; Blazquez and Weigel 2000; Gocal et al. 2001). A 
separate promoter element is responsible for LFY in­
duction in response to long days (i.e. the photoperi­
odic promotion pathway operating through SOC1; 
Blazquez and Weigel 2000).
The activity of LFY as a floral meristem identity 
gene will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 9.
These three flowering-time integrators may not 
represent the complete picture, and others may re­
main to be discovered. Evidence for the presence of 
other floral pathway integrators comes from genetic 
analysis. Moon et al. (2005) showed that a triple mu­
tant between soc1, ft, and lfy was still able to flower 
under long day conditions. Although the triple mu­
tant flowered extremely late, and the flowers that it 
encoding SQUAMOSA PROMOTER BINDING 
PROTEIN-LIKE transcription factors—SPL3, SPL4, 
and SPL5—and activates their transcription (Jung 
et  al. 2012). These three genes promote the floral 
transition when expressed. In short day conditions, 
gibberellin signalling induces expression of the 
SPL3, SPL4, and SPL5 genes in a SOC1-dependent 
manner, providing a mechanism through which 
SOC1 integrates gibberellin induction into the floral 
transition (Jung et al. 2012). Not surprisingly, inhibi­
tion of gibberellin synthesis results in reduced ex­
pression of the SPL genes.
The photoperiodic pathway activates SOC1 
through the actions of CO (Samach et al. 2000), 
and analysis of the SOC1 promoter has indicated 
that overlapping promoter elements respond to 
FLC and CO signals, allowing repression and ac­
tivation to occur at the same time, creating the 
necessary conflict at the flowering-time integrator 
(Hepworth et al. 2002). Within the SOC1 promoter 
a MADS box binding motif was identified, and FLC 
was shown to bind to this site in vitro. Mutation of 
this site in planta prevented FLC repression of SOC1 
expression. This particular region of the SOC1 pro­
moter was not bound by CO, but a nearby region 
responded to CO activity (Hepworth et al. 2002). 
FLC represses SOC1 expression by binding the 
SOC1 promoter with SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE 
(SVP), another MADS box protein that seems to act 
together with FLC to produce an inhibitory com­
plex (Li et al. 2008).
It has also been shown that removal of FLC-based 
repression of SOC1 is insufficient to result in strong 
expression of the gene. Moon et al. (2003) showed 
that vernalization (and thus reduction in FLC activ­
ity) was not sufficient to induce SOC1 expression in 
a gibberellin-deficient mutant line (ga1, deficient in 
the first enzyme of gibberellin biosynthesis) grown 
in short days. Therefore, without a photoperiodic 
induction signal, gibberellin is necessary to induce 
SOC1 expression.
Taken together these data describe a gene whose 
expression is tightly controlled by multiple inputs 
converging on its promoter, and whose protein 
product can also induce transcription of other genes 
in a manner dependent on the presence of other sig­
nals and proteins.

76      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
additional integrators. However, in the mean time 
the flowering-time integrators provide a satisfying 
mechanism by which the signals from multiple dif­
ferent flowering-time pathways can be integrated 
and translated into the developmental response of 
meristem transition and flower production.
produced were developmentally abnormal, its abil­
ity to flower at all suggests that there is some other 
route through which floral induction signals can be 
directed to the floral meristem identity genes. Fur­
ther genetic screens for enhancers of the flowering-
time integrator mutant phenotypes may identify 

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 8
Flower induction beyond Arabidopsis 
thaliana
In the previous four chapters we have discussed the 
various pathways that regulate the floral transition 
in Arabidopsis, and their integration to generate a 
developmental response. Arabidopsis is an excellent 
model for analysis of the floral transition, because it 
is responsive to so many variables. Although not all 
plants respond to all of photoperiod, vernalization, 
gibberellins, and endogenous signals, all plants do 
respond to at least one of these. Our current depth 
of understanding of all of these pathways in Arabi­
dopsis allows us to explore whether the processes 
are similar in a range of species, or whether novel 
signalling modules are at work. In this chapter we 
look at the evidence that the same or similar path­
ways operate in other species. We shall look in most 
detail at the short day plant rice, and then also con­
sider a number of perennial species, with a final 
look at Gregor Mendel’s famous genetic model, the 
garden pea (see Fig. 8.1).
8.1  The Arabidopsis flower induction 
model in other species
It is all too easy to forget that model species are only 
intended to provide the beginning of the answers 
to questions, rather than the full story. Although 
we now have a good picture of how the floral tran­
sition is controlled in Arabidopsis, this does not 
mean that we understand the control of flowering 
in all plants. The focus for the next few decades of 
­flowering-time research will be to investigate the ex­
tent to which the Arabidopsis flowering-time model 
applies to other species, and to explore what inno­
vations other species have evolved to fit their floral 
transitions to their particular environments. One 
crucial question that must be addressed is the ex­
tent to which the long day photoperiodic induction 
pathway seen in Arabidopsis operates to control 
flowering in short day plants (i.e. those that flower 
when the days are shorter than a certain maximum 
length). It will also be important to assess the extent 
to which each of the other Arabidopsis pathways 
functions to induce flowering in day neutral plants. 
The best studied model apart from Arabidopsis is 
currently rice, which has been analysed both be­
cause of its economic importance and because it is a 
short day plant. However, work is now progressing 
on a range of species that show different flowering 
responses, including perennial species for which 
the floral transition is an annual problem requiring 
a reversion to the vegetative state afterwards.
8.2  Flower induction in rice: a model 
short day plant
Rice (Oryza sativa, Poales; see Fig. 8.2a) is one of the 
world’s most important food crops, providing sta­
ple carbohydrate and protein for half the world’s 
human population. It is also a facultative short day 
plant, which synchronizes its flowering and repro­
duction with the rainy season in its usual habitats 
(Putterill et al. 2004). Although it may seem strange 
for a wind-pollinated plant to flower under wet 
conditions, seed set is enhanced when sufficient 
water is available, and damp conditions are impor­
tant for germination of rice seed. The practice of 
flooding rice fields has primarily evolved to reduce 
weeds, pests, and pathogens, as rice itself can toler­
ate flooded conditions but has no specific need for 
them. Rice has no vernalization requirement, as it 

78      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
the function of orthologues of Arabidopsis genes. 
These approaches have been significantly enhanced 
in recent years by the publication of the rice genome 
sequence in 2002, allowing ready identification of 
sequences similar to those regulating flowering in 
Arabidopsis, and also facilitating identification of 
QTLs following coarse mapping.
The first gene involved in the rice floral transi­
tion to be studied at the molecular level was iso­
lated in 2000. The PHOTOPERIODIC SENSITIVITY 
5 (SE5) gene encodes a protein related to HY1 of 
Arabidopsis, and is needed for the synthesis of 
the chromophores on all phytochrome molecules 
(Izawa et al. 2000). The se5 mutant flowers early in 
long days and in short days. These data confirmed 
that ­phytochrome-induced signals in long days 
normally delay flowering in rice, whereas in Arabi­
dopsis they activate it. However, analysis of the rice 
genome sequence suggests that the light receptors 
themselves differ slightly from those in Arabidopsis. 
is adapted to life in warm environments. It is there­
fore of immense economic importance to establish 
how the short-day-induced flowering of rice occurs, 
since this is the only significant environmentally 
controlled promotive pathway that it contains.
The floral transition in rice makes an interesting 
comparison to that of Arabidopsis not only because 
it is a short day plant, but also because it is a mono­
cot. The monocots diverged from the eudicot line­
age very early in the history of the angiosperms (see 
Chapter 1), so a comparison of the control of flower­
ing in the two lineages provides useful information 
about what is conserved and what is unique to each 
system. This in turn provides insight into the floral 
transition in early angiosperms, and into the novel 
pathways that have evolved since.
Analysis of the rice floral transition has primar­
ily been conducted through mapping of quanti­
tative trait loci (QTLs), and, to a lesser extent, by 
using a candidate gene approach to investigate 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(f)
(e)
(d)
Figure 8.1  Species in which the floral transition has been studied. (a) Pisum sativum (Fabales). Photo by Rasbak. (b) Triticum species (Poales). 
Photo by Optograph. (c). Populus species (Malpighiales). Photo by Matt Lavin. (d) Arabis alpina (Brassicales). Photo by Franz Xaver. (e) Oryza sativa 
(Poales). Photo by C.T. Johansson. (f) Beta vulgaris (Caryophyllales). Photo by Forest and Kim Starr. All images from Wikimedia Commons. See also 
Plate 3.

FLOWER INDUCTION BEYOND ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA      79
Analysis of the rice genome has revealed that 
genes with very similar sequences to CCA1 and 
TOC1 are present, suggesting that the rice circadian 
clock functions in an essentially similar way to the 
Arabidopsis one. The rice CCA1 orthologue was 
shown to have a circadian-regulated expression 
pattern similar to that of Arabidopsis CCA1 (Izawa 
et al. 2002). Further studies have indicated that ex­
pression profiles of rice orthologues of Arabidopsis 
clock-associated genes generally overlap with those 
of their Arabidopsis counterparts, leading to a gen­
eral conclusion that the circadian clock in rice (and 
indeed in other angiosperms) is the same as that in 
Arabidopsis (reviewed by Song et al. 2010).
Many of the other components of the Arabidopsis 
photoperiodic induction pathway also seem to be 
present in rice, although they function in slightly 
different ways. A rice orthologue of GIGANTEA, 
OsGI, was identified by analysis of genes differen­
tially regulated in wild type and se5 mutant plants 
(Hayama et al. 2002). The protein encoded by OsGI 
is very similar to that encoded by GI, and it appears 
that the proteins fulfil similar roles, although the 
downstream outcomes of their activities are diver­
gent. Ectopic expression of OsGI, using the CaMV 
35S promoter, delays flowering, whereas ectopic 
GI expression in Arabidopsis induces flowering. In 
the transgenic rice plants, expression levels of Hd1 
(the CO orthologue; see below) were increased, sug­
gesting that OsGI functions to upregulate Hd1, just 
as GI functions to upregulate CO. However, the FT 
orthologue, Hd3a, was expressed at lower levels in 
these transgenic plants, whereas ectopic expression 
of GI and enhanced CO expression increases FT 
transcript levels in Arabidopsis. These data led to 
the conclusion that the same pathway components 
are present in rice as in Arabidopsis, but that the 
central role of CO in inducing FT expression seems 
to be reversed in rice, with enhanced Hd1 expres­
sion resulting in decreased Hd3a activity. OsGI itself 
behaves much as Arabidopsis GI does, peaking in 
expression in the evening and activating expres­
sion of the CO orthologue, Hd1 (Hayama et al. 2003; 
Simpson 2003). However, it may also play an ad­
ditional role not shown by Arabidopsis GI. Recent 
reports indicate that OsGI also activates expression 
of Early heading date 1 (Ehd1) at dawn, through a 
blue-light-mediated response (Itoh et al. 2010). Ehd1 
Specifically, while orthologues of PHYA, PHYB, and 
PHYC are apparent in the rice genome, there is no 
sign of PHYD or PHYE orthologues. As noted in 
Chapter 5, PHYD is thought to be a Brassicaceae-
specific gene, whereas PHYE shows limited conser­
vation in different plant families (Mathews 2010). 
PHYA, PHYB, and PHYC are the three ancient mem­
bers of the phytochrome family. In contrast, three 
genes encoding cryptochromes appear to be pre­
sent, compared with the two in Arabidopsis (Izawa 
et al. 2003). OsCRY1a and OsCRY1b share significant 
sequence similarity with Arabidopsis CRY1, while 
OsCRY2 is apparently the orthologue of Arabidop­
sis CRY2 (Zhang et al. 2006). This suggests that de­
tailed analysis of day length measurement in rice 
will reveal small differences in the ways in which 
different wavelengths of light are perceived in 
Arabidopsis.
Short days
(b)
(a)
Long days
Hd1
Hd3a
F lowering
No f lowers
Figure 8.2  (a) A rice plant in flower (foreground). (b) The Hd1 
gene (above) is expressed in a circadian pattern. It is only able to 
activate Hd3a expression (below) when its expression coincides with 
darkness—that is, in short days (left panel). Compare with Figure 5.4.

80      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
Since rice is a facultative short day plant, rather 
than an obligate one, it must have a floral promo­
tion pathway that operates in long days, just as the 
Arabidopsis endogenous promotion pathway does. 
This long day promotion pathway has only recently 
been described (Komiya et al. 2009), and is entirely 
distinct from the Arabidopsis endogenous pathway. 
In long days, rice flowers an average of 30 days later 
than in short day conditions. This is partly due to 
the repression of Hd3a expression by Hd1 in the 
light. The fact that this is an active repression, not 
just absence of activation, is demonstrated by the 
flowering time of the hd1 mutant—late in short 
days, but earlier than wild type in long days. Phy­
tochrome signalling is thought to be necessary to 
determine whether Hd1 acts as a repressor or acti­
vator of Hd3a. Hd3a expression levels are also kept 
low in long days by the activity of Ghd7. This small 
protein with a CCT domain has no orthologue in 
Arabidopsis, and the expression of the gene en­
coding it is strongly upregulated in long days. The 
protein functions as a repressor of transcription of 
Ehd1, which, as noted earlier, is itself an activator of 
Hd3a expression (Doi et al. 2004; Itoh et al. 2010). The 
combination of repression by Hd1 and inhibition 
through loss of the inductive Ehd1 signal means 
that a rice plant in long days has no Hd3a activity. 
Instead, flowering is induced in long days by RICE 
FLOWERING LOCUS T 1 (RFT1), the closest para­
logue of Hd3a in the rice genome, encoding a pro­
tein that is 91% identical to Hd3a. Downregulation 
of RFT1 results in delayed flowering in long days. 
In the wild type plant, RFT1 expression increases in 
the leaves in long days, and the protein then moves 
through the phloem to the apical meristem. Thus it 
seems that rice has acquired a second florigen, us­
ing one FT-like protein (Hd3a) to promote flower­
ing in short days and another (RFT1) to promote 
flowering in non-inductive long day conditions 
(Komiya et al. 2009).
The rice orthologue of the second major Arabi­
dopsis flowering-time integrator plays a rather dif­
ferent role from its Arabidopsis counterpart. The 
OsSOC1 gene (also known as OsMADS50) was iso­
lated by a screen for MADS box genes with similar­
ity to Arabidopsis FLC (Tadege et al. 2003), and was 
found to map to the known flowering-time locus 
Hd9. In fact the OsSOC1 protein has greater sequence 
encodes a B type response regulator protein with 
DNA binding activity, and it has no clear ortho­
logue in the Arabidopsis genome (Doi et al. 2004). 
Its expression is also necessary for Hd3a expression 
(FT; see below), suggesting that Ehd1 has evolved 
as a second signal through which GI-transduced 
circadian signals can result in the expression of a 
florigen-like signal.
Loci involved in flower induction in rice are tra­
ditionally named Heading date (Hd) loci, and two of 
the Hd loci encode the rice orthologues of CO and 
FT. Yano et al. (2000) isolated Hd1 by map-based 
cloning and found that it encodes the rice CO or­
thologue, a protein very similar in sequence to CO 
itself. Hd1 expression is controlled by the circadian 
clock in the same way that CO expression is, with 
maximum transcript occurring at night in short 
days, but in the later afternoon/early evening in 
long days. Hd3a encodes a protein with strong se­
quence similarity to FT, the crucial flowering-time 
integrator in Arabidopsis. Although expression of 
Hd3a first appears in the leaf in short days, the pro­
tein has been shown to move to the apex, just as 
FT does in Arabidopsis. As was discussed in Chap­
ter  5, in Arabidopsis CO expression in the light 
causes activation of FT expression, but CO expres­
sion in the dark (i.e. in short days) does not induce 
FT activity. However, in rice the situation appears 
to be entirely the opposite (compare Fig. 8.2b with 
Fig. 5.4). In the dark, Hd1 expression induces Hd3a 
expression, which then induces flowering. Howev­
er, when Hd1 expression occurs in the light (i.e. in 
long days) it does not induce Hd3a expression and 
flowering does not occur (Izawa et al. 2002; Kojima 
et al. 2002). Indeed, exposure to a single 10-minute 
burst of light during the night is sufficient to sup­
press Hd3a expression and delay flowering (Ishi­
kawa et al. 2005). It is thought that phytochrome B 
signalling is important in determining whether Hd1 
expression results in Hd3a expression or repression 
(Ishikawa et al. 2009).
No orthologue of FD has been identified in the 
rice genome, raising questions about the mode of 
action of Hd3a (reviewed by Tsuji et al. 2011). Since 
FT-based induction of flowering requires an asso­
ciation between FT and a DNA-binding protein, it is 
likely that some other DNA-binding protein fulfils 
the same role in rice.

FLOWER INDUCTION BEYOND ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA      81
Overall, the photoperiodic induction pathway in 
rice seems remarkably similar to that of Arabidop­
sis, with a few minor additions, suggesting that the 
evolution of long and short day plants has involved 
tinkering with the basic mechanisms of photoperi­
odic induction, rather than the development of two 
distinct systems. However, since rice is not sensitive 
to vernalization it is perhaps not surprising that no 
clear orthologues of FLC, FRI, VRN1, or VRN2 have 
been identified in the rice genome, suggesting that 
no equivalent vernalization-promotion pathway is 
present (Izawa et al. 2003). Perhaps most surprising 
is the discovery that the flowering of rice in non-
inductive long days is induced not by a pathway 
similar to the Arabidopsis endogenous floral induc­
tion pathway, but by a second FT gene induced over 
a longer time frame in non-inductive conditions. In 
fact the absence of the FLC module for floral in­
hibition means that the Arabidopsis endogenous 
pathway could not operate in rice, and this sec­
ond FT pathway is an evolutionarily parsimonious 
solution.
8.3  Flower induction in wheat and barley: 
a novel vernalization pathway
The photoperiodic control of flower induction in 
other cereals so far appears to be similar to the path­
ways identified in rice and Arabidopsis. However, 
many cereals have an additional vernalization re­
quirement, which rice does not share. For example, 
both wheat and barley (both Poales) need around 
60 days of cold to induce flowering. In both species, 
spring varieties, which are planted in the spring 
and flower immediately without the need for ver­
nalization, have been bred. The difference between 
these spring varieties and traditional vernalization-
requiring winter varieties has been mapped to three 
major QTLs, named VERNALIZATION1, VERNAL­
IZATION2, and VERNALIZATION3 (VRN1, VRN2, 
and VRN3). These loci should not be confused with 
the Arabidopsis VRN1 and VRN2 loci, to which 
they are not orthologous (Andersen et al. 2004).
The VRN1 loci have been identified in both 
wheat and barley, and renamed TmAP1 (or WAP1 
or TaVRT-1) and BM5, respectively (Danyluk et al. 
2003; Trevaskis et al. 2003; Yan et al. 2003). Both genes 
similarity to SOC1 than to FLC, and a number of ex­
periments have indicated that its function is more 
similar to that of SOC1 than to that of FLC. Expres­
sion of OsSOC1 increases at the floral transition, as 
would be expected for a flowering-time integrator, 
while ectopic expression of OsSOC1 in Arabidopsis 
complements the soc1 mutant. Ectopic expression 
of OsSOC1 in a wild type Arabidopsis background 
induces early flowering. In contrast, suppression 
of OsSOC1 by RNA interference (RNAi) methods 
causes late flowering in rice (Lee et al. 2004). Since 
Arabidopsis SOC1 expression is downregulated 
by FLC, Tadege et al. (2003) investigated potential 
FLC/OsSOC1 interactions in rice. They were able 
to identify a CarG box in the OsSOC1 promoter, 
which appeared to be suitable for FLC binding, but 
they could not identify an FLC orthologue by li­
brary screening, searching through EST collections, 
or analysis of the rice genome sequence. However, 
ectopic expression of Arabidopsis FLC in rice delays 
flowering by 2–4 weeks, and also delays upregula­
tion of OsSOC1. These data suggest that another 
MADS box protein, recognizing similar binding 
motifs to FLC, may be involved in OsSOC1 down­
regulation (Andersen et al. 2004). The differences 
between Arabidopsis and rice SOC1 become ap­
parent when their modes of action are considered. 
Whereas SOC1 in Arabidopsis integrates the flower 
induction pathways, OsSOC1 apparently operates 
further upstream. It is necessary for the expression 
of Ehd1, the response regulator protein that trans­
duces clock signals such as CO, and also for the 
expression of RFT1, the long day florigen (Komiya 
et al. 2009). Expression of both genes is prevented 
in an OsSOC1 mutant background, placing OsSOC1 
firmly within the photoperiodic induction pathway, 
where it is mainly active in leaves, not in the apical 
meristem.
The LEAFY orthologue in rice also appears to 
­differ from its Arabidopsis counterpart. RICE 
FLORICAULA/LEAFY (RFL) promotes flowering, 
and when its expression is downregulated in an 
RNAi line the flowering response is strongly sup­
pressed (Rao et al. 2008). However, it is clearly 
upstream of the general integration of flowering 
signals, as its expression increases that of both Os­
SOC1 and RFT1, and seems to be most effective in 
the leaves.

82      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
VRN2 expression is associated with reduced VRN3 
expression.
Perhaps surprisingly, this signalling pathway ap­
parently functions in a loop. Loukoianov et al. (2005) 
demonstrated that VRN1 expression results (either 
directly or indirectly) in reduced VRN2 expression. 
Distelfield et al. (2009) proposed that VRN1 is the 
primary point at which vernalization acts. By en­
hancing VRN1 expression, a period of cold removes 
the VRN2 block to flowering, activates the VRN3 
induction of flowering, and at the same time allows 
VRN1 to begin activating the changes at the apical 
meristem necessary to cause flower development. 
This signalling cascade provides a mechanism to in­
duce flowering after cold, and confirms the position 
of FT (VRN3 in wheat or Hd3a in rice) as a key in­
tegrator of floral induction pathways in the cereals.
The data emerging for wheat and barley sug­
gest that, unlike photoperiodic induction, vernali­
zation has evolved multiple times and that each 
evolutionary event has involved the recruitment of 
similar but distinct genes from the flowering-time 
pathways. In the cereals the FT and AP1 proteins 
play recognizable roles, but an absence of FLC/FRI 
means that vernalization operates through the FT 
pathway with independently recruited controls.
8.4  Flower induction in perennials
Most crop plants are annuals, like Arabidopsis. 
However, for many plant species a perennial life 
cycle is the norm. In these species, flowering is fol­
lowed by a return to vegetative growth and the cy­
cle is repeated, often many times over many years. 
Perennials are often polycarpous, with some mer­
istems committing to the flowering state each year 
while others remain vegetative. Polycarpy requires 
an extra level of control, allowing some meristems 
to undergo the floral transition but preventing oth­
ers from doing so. This is believed to be achieved 
through a range of competence or juvenile/adult 
mechanisms, with only competent (adult) meris­
tems undergoing the floral transition (Battey and 
Tooke 2002). The number of meristems undergo­
ing the floral transition may also be determined by 
environmental factors. For example, in the wall­
flower (Cheiranthus cheiri, Brassicales), variations in 
the temperature perceived by the apical meristem 
encode orthologues of the Arabidopsis floral meris­
tem identity gene APETALA1 (AP1). Transcripts of 
these genes are upregulated by exposure to cold in 
winter varieties of wheat and barley, but are consti­
tutively expressed at high levels in spring varieties. 
These findings were unexpected, as they appear 
to suggest that a key component of the Arabidop­
sis floral meristem identity system is involved in 
a much earlier stage of floral induction in cereals, 
acting to induce the floral transition in response to 
vernalization. The identification of a CArG box in 
the promoter of wheat TmAP1, and the observation 
that spring varieties usually have a deletion of part 
of the promoter in this region, suggests that another 
MADS box protein acts upstream of this AP1-like 
factor (Yan et al. 2003).
Wheat VRN2 was isolated in 2004, using a map-
based approach (Yan et al. 2004). The VRN2 locus 
contains two genes, both encoding proteins with a 
zinc finger domain and a CCT domain. There are no 
clear orthologues of VRN2 in Arabidopsis. In con­
trast to the behaviour of VRN1, the VRN2 locus is 
a dominant repressor of flowering, which is down­
regulated by vernalization. No VRN2 transcript is 
detectable after vernalization has occurred. Loss of 
function of VRN2 results in the production of spring 
lines of wheat with no requirement for cold induc­
tion. Again, it was surprising that a protein acting 
as a dominant repressor of flowering, and inactivat­
ed by cold, was not the expected direct orthologue 
of the Arabidopsis protein (i.e. FLC).
The VRN3 gene was isolated through a map-
based approach, and the only annotated gene found 
in the appropriate genomic regions of both wheat 
and barley was an FT-like sequence (Yan et al. 2006). 
Analysis of genetic interactions showed that VRN3 
activates expression of VRN1, in a module very like 
the FT-induced expression of floral meristem iden­
tity genes in Arabidopsis (see Chapter 7). In wheat, 
VRN3 interacts with an FD-like protein, FDL2, and 
the VRN1 promoter, to activate VRN1 transcrip­
tion (Li and Dubcovsky 2008). Both genetic and 
transgenic experiments further suggest that VRN2 
represses VRN3 expression, blocking the floral tran­
sition until its own levels decline after exposure to 
cold (Yan et al. 2004, 2006). Experimental data show 
that reduced VRN2 expression is associated with 
increased VRN3 expression, and that increased 

FLOWER INDUCTION BEYOND ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA      83
8.4.2  Flower induction in poplar
Trees are the extreme examples of the perennial 
form, with some species making the transition be­
tween vegetative growth and flowering many hun­
dreds of times within an individual life cycle. The 
publication of the full genome sequence of Populus 
trichocarpa (poplar, Malpighiales) (Tuskan et al. 2006) 
provided the opportunity to explore this repeated 
cycle using candidate gene approaches (as trees are 
not generally amenable to genetic approaches). Like 
rice, poplar has no clear orthologue of FLC (Lese­
berg et al. 2006). Instead, attention has been focused 
on the roles of a pair of recently duplicated FT-like 
genes, FT1 and FT2.
Using a series of transgenic and environmen­
tal manipulations of the transcription profiles of 
these two genes, Hsu et al. (2011) demonstrated that 
FT1 induces the flowering response in response to 
vernalization (much as occurs in wheat and bar­
ley), and that FT2 induces vegetative growth in 
the summer and the transition to dormancy in au­
tumn through photoperiodic control (see Fig. 8.3). 
In a naturally growing poplar tree, FT1 transcript 
is abundant only in winter. If trees are transplanted 
in November into a 25 degrees Centigrade regime 
the levels of FT1 trancript do not rise, irrespective 
of day length, confirming that this is a cold-induced 
response rather than a short-day response. Induc­
tion of FT1 expression from a heat shock promoter 
resulted in flowering within 30 days, demonstrat­
ing that this cold-induced gene promotes the flow­
ering response.
In contrast, FT2 transcript is found in the leaves 
and buds of wild-grown poplar trees in the spring 
and summer growing season, when days are long 
and the weather is warm. Transplanting trees in 
November into a growth room at 25 degrees Cen­
tigrade did not induce FT2 expression unless the 
day length was also increased to 16 hours. This in­
dicates that FT2 expression is controlled by a photo­
periodic pathway effective in long days, much like 
the Arabidopsis one. However, FT2 does not induce 
flowering. Ectopic expression of FT2 using a heat 
shock promoter enhanced vegetative growth, but 
only resulted in a few small indications of flower­
ing if expression levels were increased significant­
ly above those found in the wild. Hsu et al. (2011) 
result in the production of varying numbers of axil­
lary meristems competent to adopt the floral fate, 
as opposed to those constrained to the vegetative 
fate (Battey and Tooke 2002). In this way the total 
numbers of flowers and total reproductive output 
can be adapted to the varying conditions of differ­
ent years, a sensible system for a species which has 
many opportunities to flower and should optimize 
maximum flowering to coincide with optimal envi­
ronmental conditions.
8.4.1  Flower induction in Arabis alpina
Arabis alpina is a perennial relative of Arabidopsis, 
in the Brassicaceae, and has therefore been used as 
a model system in which to examine perenniality. 
In order to flower, Arabis alpina requires vernaliza­
tion, with at least 12 weeks of cold necessary to in­
duce a full flowering response. However, there is 
no apparent photoperiodic induction pathway in 
this species, implying that the passage of winter 
is the only requirement to induce flowering each 
year. Wang et al. (2009) identified a mutant lacking 
the vernalization requirement and able to flower 
continuously for 12 months. This mutant, perpetual 
flowering 1 (pep1), was found to contain a lesion at 
the AaFLC locus. Analysis of AaFLC revealed a very 
different response to vernalization compared with 
that of Arabidopsis FLC. Although AaFLC tran­
script levels were high before vernalization, and re­
duced during the cold treatment, on return to warm 
temperatures transcript levels returned to normal. 
Similarly, Wang et al. (2009) showed that histone 
methylation of AaFLC in response to vernaliza­
tion mirrored that of Arabidopsis FLC, but whereas 
these repressive chromatin marks persist in Arabi­
dopsis after a return to warm temperatures, at the 
AaFLC locus they were lost after the end of the cold 
period. The authors concluded that the basic mech­
anism of vernalization in Arabis alpina matched that 
of Arabidopsis, but that the loss of AaFLC repres­
sion on the return to warmth allowed AaFLC to re­
press all subsequent meristems that had not been 
induced to flower during the first winter, ensuring 
they grew vegetatively until the following winter 
cold allowed the next repression of AaFLC and the 
next flush of flowering.

84      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
in the second year) and a photoperiodic response 
(to ensure that flowering occurs in the summer of 
the second year). Beta vulgaris has provided a use­
ful model for the study of the floral transition in 
biennial species, as its importance as a crop has re­
sulted in a good investment in genetic and genomic 
resources. It is also interestingly placed phyloge­
netically, being a member of the Caryophyllales, an 
order towards the base of the Asterids. It appears 
that beet uses two paralogues of FT to regulate its 
two flowering responses. Recent work by Pin et al. 
(2010) showed that both BvFT1 and BvFT2 are ex­
pressed in the leaves of beet, but at different times. 
BvFT1 is expressed during the juvenile phase of 
development, and represses the bolting (stem elon­
gation) and flowering response. It does this very 
strongly—ectopic expression of BvFT1 in either beet 
or Arabidopsis repressed flowering, indicating that 
the protein function is clearly distinct from that of 
Arabidopsis FT. Its expression levels fall after expo­
sure to a period of cold, suggesting that it is acting 
as a negative regulator of flowering which is itself 
repressed by vernalization. BvFT2, in contrast, is 
expressed in mature leaves during the growing sea­
son, and is required for the floral transition. Ectopic 
expression of BvFT2 induced flowering in Arabi­
dopsis and beet, and downregulation of BvFT2 in 
beet using an RNAi approach prevented flowering 
even in long days. This gene seems to be acting in a 
more Arabidopsis-like fashion, and the authors pro­
posed that BvFT1 prevents flowering by repressing 
BvFT2 transcription until vernalization releases the 
concluded that FT2 was a regulator of vegetative 
growth in long days. However, its loss of expres­
sion in autumn when the days are getting shorter 
is also associated with the transition to dormancy. 
If expression levels of FT2 in the transgenic plants 
were maintained at ‘summer-like’ levels during 
the short days of winter, vegetative growth did not 
cease, identifying a second role for FT2 in allow­
ing the onset of dormancy when its photoperiod-
controlled transcription ceases.
More detailed analyses are needed to determine 
how cold induces FT1 expression and how long 
days induce FT2 expression, and to explore how 
both proteins induce the appropriate develop­
mental response. A previous study demonstrated 
the presence of a CO orthologue in poplar, with a 
circadian-regulated expression pattern much like 
that seen in Arabidopsis (Böhlenius et al. 2006), so 
it is likely that at least some of the upstream con­
trol of expression of the FT genes is conserved with 
Arabidopsis. Hsu et al. (2011) did note that FT1 and 
FT2 differ in amino acid sequence in a loop of the 
protein which is known to be crucial to its function 
in Arabidopsis (see Chapter 9), suggesting that mi­
nor modifications of duplicated proteins might be 
sufficient to generate novel developmental control.
8.4.3  Flower induction in biennial sugar beet
The biennial life form is quite common for herba­
ceous plants, and usually involves both a vernaliza­
tion response (to ensure that flowering occurs only 
Winter
Cold temperatures
FT1
Reproductive
onset
FT2
Vegetative growth
Reproductive development
Autumn
Short days
Spring/summer
Long days, warm temperatures
Figure 8.3  Expression patterns of poplar FT1 and FT2. FT1 transcript is cold-induced, and activates the floral transition. FT2 transcript is long 
day-induced, and activates vegetative growth.

FLOWER INDUCTION BEYOND ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA      85
are all required for inhibition of flowering in short 
days. Mutation in any of these genes causes early 
flowering in short days, but does not affect flow­
ering time in long days. Grafting experiments with 
wild type root stocks and shoots of these mutants 
revealed that all three genes induce transduction of 
a mobile, graft-transmissible signal. Pea therefore 
also contains a floral repression pathway, operat­
ing only in short days, which functions through the 
transmission of a signal from vegetative tissue to 
the apex (Weller et al. 1997).
Analysis of the pea genome, alongside that of 
other legumes, has shown that the FT gene fam­
ily is apparently extended in these plants. Pea 
contains five FT-like loci (Weller et al. 2009; Hecht 
et al. 2011). One of these has been shown to cor­
respond to the GIGAS locus, and to induce the 
flowering response in both long and short days, 
but the functions of the other four are unknown. 
Given the data in species such as beet and poplar 
which show that FT signalling can induce different 
developmental transitions, it will be important to 
establish the function of each of these paralogous 
genes in order to fully understand the floral transi­
tion in pea.
The floral transition has recently been analysed 
in other legume species, with the models Medicago 
truncatula and Lotus japonicus being particularly 
amenable to genetic and genomic approaches. For 
example, Laurie et al. (2011) analysed the functions 
of the five FT loci in Medicago, demonstrating that 
three of these genes could complement the Arabi­
dopsis ft mutant. They concluded that only MtFTa1 
expression was upregulated by both long days 
and vernalization, and that the phenotypes both of 
plants ectopically expressing MtFTa1 and of plants 
with a transposon-induced mutation in the gene 
indicated that MtFTa1 is the sole inducer of flower­
ing in response to vernalization, but that it works 
partially redundantly with other signals to induce 
flowering in response to long days.
8.6  Flower induction in other species
The breadth and depth of understanding of the 
Arabidopsis floral transition has facilitated a can­
didate gene approach to flowering in many species. 
block. One surprising observation was that BvFT2 
RNAi plants (with reduced BvFT2 expression) were 
still able to flower in response to vernalization—
suggesting that an alternative pathway can cause 
the floral transition in the absence of BvFT2 activity. 
Interestingly, Pin et al. (2010) noted that the two FT 
paralogues in beet differ in sequence in the same 
loop of the protein as that also shown to be signifi­
cant for determining protein function in Arabidop­
sis and poplar (see above; also see Chapter 9).
8.5  Flower induction in legumes
Flowering time has been studied in legumes (Fa­
bales) since Gregor Mendel developed the garden 
pea as a model system for the analysis of inherit­
ance. The rationale for studying flowering time in 
pea is based on its unique suitability for both genet­
ic and physiological studies. Although it is a long 
day plant, like Arabidopsis, it has the added benefit 
of being easy to graft, thus allowing researchers to 
investigate whether something missing from a mu­
tant line is mobile. Mobile signals will travel from 
wild type root stocks into mutant shoots grafted to 
them, and rescue the mutant. Immobile signals will 
not do so. Extensive genetic stocks are also avail­
able in pea.
A number of flowering-time mutants have been 
described in pea, and these have been reviewed by 
Weller et al. (1997) and Weller et al. (2009). Analy­
sis of these mutants has led to the identification 
of a number of flowering-time pathways, some of 
which are very similar to those of Arabidopsis. For 
example, the gigas (gi) mutant flowers late in long 
days, but later still in short days, indicating that 
pea contains an autonomous floral induction path­
way, operating in both long and short days. Graft­
ing a gi shoot on to a wild type root revealed that 
the signal produced by the GI gene is mobile, as the 
mutant shoot flowered at the normal time follow­
ing this graft (Beveridge and Murfet 1996). Recent 
work has shown that GI encodes an FT-like protein, 
PsFTa1 (Hecht et al. 2011). Thus pea contains an au­
tonomous floral induction pathway that operates 
through a mobile, FT-like, signalling molecule.
Similarly, the STERILE NODES (SNE), DIE NEU­
TRALIS (DNE), and PHOTOPERIOD (PPD) genes 

86      INDUCTION OF FLOWERING
as diverse as sunflower (Asterales), maize (Poales), 
and various legumes (Fabales). Although the details 
of control of expression, mode of action, and interac­
tion with other proteins vary from species to species, 
it is becoming apparent that many of the molecular 
switches in the floral transition are conserved across 
the angiosperms.
This approach has been further enhanced by the 
enormous amounts of genomic data that have 
emerged from expressed sequence tag (EST), tran­
scriptome, and genome projects over the last dec­
ade. Accordingly, reports have indicated that many 
of the major players in the Arabidopsis story, par­
ticularly FT, are also involved in flowering in species 

PART B
Development of Flowers


Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
1972). Both changes are predictable, as approximate­
ly 50% of the transcripts in a typical floral organ are 
not found in leaves of the same species, highlight­
ing the need for the transcription and translation 
of flower-specific genes. It has been shown that ap­
plication of chemical inhibitors of RNA or protein 
synthesis to the SAM of Sinapis alba (white mustard, 
Brassicales) is sufficient to prevent the flowering 
response, even when the plant has been exposed 
to the usual inductive conditions. Recent high-
throughput approaches have started to pin down 
the precise transcriptional changes that occur at the 
SAM after floral evocation. For example, Torti et al. 
(2012) used laser microdissection along with deep 
sequencing of cDNA populations to identify 202 
genes induced in the Arabidopsis SAM at the point 
of floral transition.
RNA and protein synthesis are not the only meta­
bolic processes that occur as the meristem under­
goes its transition to the reproductive state. Rises in 
sucrose and ATP levels have also been recorded in 
S. alba, presumably to support the increased rate of 
RNA and protein turnover (Bodson 1985; Bodson 
and Outlaw 1985). Increases in invertase activity 
and mitochondrion number have also been corre­
lated with the change in meristem state.
The cell cycle is another important process affect­
ed by the change in meristem state. The rate of cell 
division within the meristem has been shown to in­
crease following floral induction in several species. 
For example, in S. alba exposure to one long day is 
sufficient to induce the photoperiodic floral promo­
tion pathway, and leads to the plant flowering. The 
single long day also results in a mitotic wave across 
the SAM, caused by a shortening of the G2 phase of 
Section IIA of this book was concerned with the 
multiple environmental and developmental stimuli 
that combine to induce the transition from the veg­
etative state to the floral state. Section IIB turns to 
look at the consequences of that transition. In this 
chapter we consider the changes that occur at the 
shoot apical meristem once the decision to flower 
has been taken by the plant. These changes involve 
the expression of a succession of floral meristem 
identity genes, which convert the meristem to the 
reproductive state. Floral meristem identity genes 
can be defined as those genes that specify the floral 
fate of lateral meristems arising from a reproductive 
shoot apical meristem. At the same time, it is im­
portant that apical meristem indeterminacy is main­
tained, to allow multiple flowers to be produced. 
Later chapters in this section will analyse the devel­
opment of the floral organs from a floral meristem, 
and the development of the all-important gametes 
within the reproductive organs themselves.
9.1  Physiological changes at the shoot 
apical meristem
Once floral induction has occurred, and the plant is 
committed to flowering, many physiological chang­
es occur at the shoot apical meristem (SAM) to 
prepare it for the developmental transition it must 
undergo. Without these physiological changes, the 
floral transition will not usually occur successfully. 
An increase in the rate of RNA synthesis is one of 
the earliest events that occur in the SAM, in order 
to support the transcription of novel genes. The rate 
of protein synthesis also increases (Jacqmard et al. 
CHAPTER 9
Changes at the shoot apical meristem 
in response to floral induction

90      Development of Flowers
comparing mutant and wild type plants, and others 
have been described more recently using transcrip­
tomic approaches (Torti et al. 2012).
The Arabidopsis SAM is a typical, if small, exam­
ple (see Fig. 9.1). It consists of around 100 cells, and 
that number remains constant despite continuous 
cell division and cell differentiation throughout the 
life of the plant. The SAM is composed of three cell 
layers. The outermost layer is called the L1, and is 
a single cell thick. These cells divide anticlinally to 
generate the epidermis of the plant. Below the L1 
layer is the L2, usually 2–3 cells thick, and again 
composed of cells which predominantly divide an­
ticlinally in the meristem, but also divide periclinal­
ly in the leaf primordia to generate the mesophyll 
layers. The L3 layer may be many cell layers thick. 
Cells in the L3 divide periclinally and anticlinally. 
Since these cell layers are maintained throughout 
the life of the SAM and the plant that it produces, 
all cells derived from a single layer are clonally 
cycling cells and a return to cycling by non-cycling 
G2 cells. G2 is the cell cycle phase between S (DNA 
synthesis) and M (mitosis), and is where many mer­
istematic cells ‘rest’ between cell cycles. This short­
ening of the G2 phase is followed by a shortening 
of G1 and S phases, which together speed up cell 
cycling and also synchronize it so that all cells in 
the SAM are cycling together. Meristematic cell cy­
cle length is reduced from approximately 86 hours 
to around 32 hours as a result of these changes, al­
though it is not clear why the more rapid division 
of cells is necessary for a successful floral transition 
(Gonthier et al. 1987).
9.2  Shoot apical meristem anatomy
One of the key changes that occur at the SAM in 
response to the floral transition is an alteration in 
the expression patterns of certain genes. Many such 
expression pattern changes were discovered by 
(a)
(b)
(c)
L1
CZ
PZ
RM
L2
L3
Figure 9.1  Anatomy of the shoot apical meristem (SAM). (a) The SAM is made up of three cell layers—L1, L2, and L3. (b) It can also be 
divided into a central zone (CZ), peripheral zones (PZ), and rib meristem (RM), with lateral meristems arising at the sides. (c) Three-dimensional 
reconstruction of an Arabidopsis SAM, with developing leaf primorida. The tissue was fixed, stained using a propidium iodide pseudo-Schiff 
reaction to label cell walls, mounted in a chloral hydrate-based medium, and imaged using a Leica SP scanning laser confocal microscope. Image 
kindly supplied by John Runions and Jim Haseloff (University of Cambridge).

Changes at the shoot apical meristem      91
using a number of techniques. One option is to 
fuse the promoter of a gene of interest to a reporter 
gene, such as GUS (β-glucoronidase, which stains 
blue) or GFP (green fluorescent protein, which fluo­
resces under appropriate illumination), and trans­
fer the construct into a transgenic plant (Jefferson 
et al. 1987). GUS staining kills the tissue, but GFP 
allows the monitoring of expression patterns and 
their changes in a living plant (Haseloff and Amos 
1995). For both reporters there can be difficulties as­
sociated with the length of time for which the signal 
lasts, making accurate analysis of temporal changes 
in expression pattern difficult. These techniques are 
also only possible in a system where it is easy to iso­
late promoter sequence and plant transformation 
is routine. They are often used in Arabidopsis, but 
less frequently in other species. A good alternative 
is to use in situ hybridization to investigate expres­
sion pattern. In this technique, plant tissue is fixed, 
dehydrated, and embedded, as for normal micros­
copy, and then sectioned. Thin sections of tissue are 
placed on microscope slides, and are then probed 
with the antisense strand of a transcript of interest, 
usually fused to a coloured marker. Coloured stain 
can then be observed through a microscope in cells 
expressing the gene of interest. An advantage of in 
situ hybridization is that it is possible to probe se­
rial sections with different genes, giving an accurate 
impression of the expression patterns of multiple 
genes at a particular time point (Jackson 1992).
Genes may have one of three possible expres­
sion patterns with regard to the floral transition at 
the meristem. Some genes have fixed patterns of 
expression, which do not change as the meristem 
undergoes the transition. These genes are likely to 
be very important in general meristem function, 
and may play roles in maintaining meristem activ­
ity. Genes such as the CLV genes mentioned earlier 
may fall into this category, and do not play specific 
roles in the floral transition.
Other genes may show modified patterns of ex­
pression. These genes are expressed in the SAM at 
both the vegetative and reproductive stages, but the 
layers or zones in which they are expressed vary as 
the SAM undergoes the floral transition. Such genes 
are likely to be involved in processes that require 
modification when the meristem changes state, 
such as the control of phyllotaxy (the positioning 
related to one another. This can be seen in chimaeric 
mutants, where, for example, the L1 cells may be 
lacking a gene required for pigment synthesis but 
the L2 and L3 cell layers are wild type (reviewed by 
Tilney-Bassett 1986).
Besides its layers, the SAM can also be divided 
into three functional zones. In the very centre of the 
SAM is the central zone, or stem cell niche, charac­
terized by cells with a low rate of division relative to 
the rest of the SAM. These cells are thought of as a 
back-up population, which can enter into more rap­
id mitosis should cell proliferation in the rest of the 
SAM not meet the needs of various developmental 
programmes. The peripheral zone encircles the cen­
tral zone like a doughnut. The peripheral zone is 
where the majority of cell division occurs, and on 
the edges of the peripheral zone cells are recruited 
to various developmental programmes and become 
part of leaves or other plant organs. At the base of 
the meristem is the region known as the rib meris­
tem. Periclinal cell divisions within the rib meristem 
generate the stem of the plant, and ensure that the 
SAM stays at the top of the developing structure.
Extensive analysis of SAM function and mainte­
nance in Arabidopsis has been conducted in recent 
years, and this has established a well-supported 
model for its functioning and regulation (reviewed by 
Stahl and Simon 2010). The WUSCHEL (WUS) gene 
is expressed in the organizing centre, a group of cells 
below the central zone, and encodes a homeodomain 
transcription factor necessary for the maintenance of 
cell division in the central and peripheral zones. The 
central zone cells secrete CLAVATA3 (CLV3), a small 
glycopeptide that acts as a ligand for the CLAVATA1 
(CLV1) leucine-rich repeat receptor kinase, present 
on the outer membranes of cells in the organizing 
centre and peripheral zones. Interaction of CLV3 
and CLV1 triggers cell differentiation in response to 
excess cell division, and also reduces expression of 
WUS. Together these genes act as a feedback loop 
that serves to keep meristem size constant under all 
environmental conditions.
9.3  Gene expression patterns 
in the shoot apical meristem
The expression patterns of genes thought to play 
a role in conversion of the SAM can be analysed 

92      Development of Flowers
the meristem to the reproductive state. These genes 
are not usually expressed prior to the floral transi­
tion, and are therefore genetically and developmen­
tally downstream of the flowering-time integrators.
9.5  Floral meristem identity genes
In this section we shall consider the function of 
each of the major floral meristem identity genes 
in turn, looking at both the Arabidopsis genes and 
their orthologues in Antirrhinum majus (Lamiales). 
Antirrhinum is a good genetic model, with active 
transposons generating many mutants, and has 
large flowers in which morphological abnormali­
ties are easily spotted. Meristem conversion has 
been studied almost as extensively in Antirrhinum 
as in Arabidopsis, and the combination of data 
from both species has allowed important advances 
in our understanding of the subject. A key charac­
teristic of floral meristem identity is that many of 
the genes are involved in mutual regulatory inter­
actions. These interactions make any discussion of 
floral meristem identity more complex, but they 
serve in nature to provide buffering against envi­
ronmental noise and to ensure that meristem con­
version occurs correctly and does not revert once 
it has occurred (Blazquez et  al. 2006). Although 
LEAFY, APETALA1, and CAULIFLOWER are con­
sidered to be the three most crucial floral meristem 
identity genes, we shall also discuss the roles of 
­TERMINAL FLOWER  1, APETALA 2, UNUSUAL 
FLORAL ­ORGANS, and AGAMOUS, all of which 
are necessary for the development of normal, deter­
minate floral meristems on the flanks of a normal, 
indeterminate inflorescence meristem.
9.5.1  LEAFY (LFY)
The central role of LFY in the conversion of the mer­
istem is a major unifying principle of angiosperm 
development, with LFY orthologues identified in 
many species from diverse parts of the plant king­
dom (Jack 2004). Interestingly, LFY appears to be a 
plant-specific gene, with no clear homologues in 
any non-plant genome. It has recently been shown 
that its role in the moss Physcomitrella patens is to en­
sure cell division within the developing embryonic 
sporophyte, which arrests at the first cell division 
of lateral organs and lateral meristems). One ex­
ample of an Arabidopsis gene with a modified ex­
pression pattern is CDC2, which encodes a protein 
kinase that controls both the G1 to S phase cell cycle 
transition and entry into mitosis, and so is essential 
for cell division and growth. The gene is expressed 
throughout the meristem in the vegetative state, 
but transcript is concentrated in the rib meristem 
region of floral meristems, arising either on the 
flanks of the SAM or when a final terminal flower 
is produced (Martinez et al. 1992). This pattern cor­
responds to the shift in maximum mitotic activity 
to the rib region in the floral meristem, to build the 
carpels and receptacle of the mature flower.
The final category of genes contains those with 
stage-specific expression in the apical meristem. 
Such genes are only expressed either following 
the floral transition, or before the floral transition. 
These are the key genes whose expression is nec­
essary to convert the meristem to the floral state, 
and it is these genes that we call the floral meristem 
identity genes.
9.4  Floral meristem identity genes act 
downstream of the flowering-time 
integrators
In Chapter 7, three key Arabidopsis flowering-time 
integrator genes were introduced. The FT gene 
encodes a membrane-associated protein which in­
tegrates signals from the photoperiodic induction 
pathway (through CO), and the autonomous pro­
motion, inhibition, and vernalization pathways 
(all through its repression by FLC). The FT protein 
moves from the leaves to the SAM. The SOC1 gene 
encodes a MADS box transcription factor that is 
repressed by FLC (and thus integrates the autono­
mous promotion, inhibition, and vernalization 
pathways) but activated by long days (through CO) 
and by gibberellin. The third flowering-time inte­
grator, LEAFY, primarily acts as a floral meristem 
identity gene whose expression is induced by SOC1. 
However, it can also be directly activated by gib­
berellin, causing it to be classed as a flowering-time 
integrator as well. The three flowering-time integra­
tors activate the expression of the floral meristem 
identity genes, which are essential for conversion of 

Changes at the shoot apical meristem      93
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.2  Early floral meristem identity mutants. (a) The Antirrhinum 
flo mutant (left) has inflorescence shoots produced in place of the 
flowers found in the axils of wild type bracts (right). Image kindly 
supplied by Enrico Coen (John Innes Centre). (b) The Arabidopsis 
ap1 mutant is slightly better converted to the floral form, with 
indeterminate floral structures arising from the meristem. See also 
Plate 4.
localized to the nucleus, as expected for a transcrip­
tion factor.
LFY is expressed strongly in young floral organ 
primordia and floral meristems, but only in inflo­
rescence meristems at the initial point of transition, 
consistent with its role in specifying floral identity 
(Weigel et al. 1992). Strangely, although FLO is also 
expressed in floral meristems and bract primordia, 
it is only expressed in the organ primordia that will 
become sepals, petals, and carpels, but is absent 
from the developing stamen primordia (Coen et al. 
1990). Both genes are initially expressed in the inflo­
rescence meristem at the floral transition, but rap­
idly resolve outwards to a region where the lateral 
meristems and bracts are specified.
Experiments to investigate the putative function 
of LFY in vegetative meristems demonstrated that 
the LFY protein is a developmental switch sufficient 
following fertilization in a mutant lacking both of 
the moss LFY orthologues (Maizel et al. 2005; Tan­
ahashi et al. 2005). In gymnosperms there are also 
two orthologues of LFY, and expression patterns 
suggest that they play a role in meristem function 
and conversion (Mouradov et al. 1998; Vazquez-
Lobo et al. 2007; reviewed by Moyroud et al. 2010). 
In angiosperms the LFY protein is both necessary 
and sufficient to specify a floral meristem fate in 
many (but not all) developmental contexts, and the 
protein has a dual role in integrating signals from 
the floral inductive pathways (see Chapter 7) and 
acting as a floral meristem identity gene by acti­
vating downstream genes controlling floral organ 
development.
LFY is the best characterized gene involved in 
conversion of the meristem to the floral state. Plants 
that are lfy mutants produce inflorescence shoots 
where their flowers should be, subtended by bracts. 
Some flowers do develop in the mutant lines, but 
they are abnormal and have characteristics of sec­
ondary inflorescences, including indeterminacy. 
Thus the basic conversion of the meristem to the 
reproductive state has occurred in these lines, but 
the flowers themselves cannot be properly pro­
duced without LFY activity. LFY was isolated using 
the Antirrhinum orthologue (FLORICAULA, FLO) 
as a probe in the genomic region to which LFY had 
been mapped (Weigel et al. 1992). The Antirrhinum 
FLO gene had been cloned first from a transposon 
tagged mutant line (Coen et al. 1990). The Arabi­
dopsis and Antirrhinum proteins are 70% identical 
at the amino acid sequence level, and the flo mutant 
has a phenotype similar to that of the lfy mutant, 
with bracts subtending ectopic inflorescence shoots 
(see Fig. 9.2a). However, the flo mutant is more ex­
treme in phenotype than even a null lfy mutant, as 
the conversion of flowers to inflorescence meris­
tems is complete in Antirrhinum. Neither protein 
has real sequence similarity to previously described 
proteins with known biochemical functions. Since 
their initial isolation they have been shown to func­
tion as transcription factors, binding DNA directly 
through a helix-turn-helix motif hidden in an unu­
sual protein fold (Hames et al. 2008). This function is 
consistent with their role in the activation of down­
stream genes involved in the development of floral 
organs, and the LFY protein has been shown to be 

94      Development of Flowers
other genes, each of which is crucial for the proper 
development of a floral meristem.
Recent studies of LEAFY function in a wider 
range of angiosperm species have revealed addi­
tional roles for the protein. Specification of inflo­
rescence architecture is related to LFY expression 
pattern in a range of species. Both Arabidopsis and 
Antirrhinum produce racemes (in which the SAM 
remains indeterminate and the flowers develop 
from axillary meristems). However, many other 
plants, including petunia and tobacco (both Solana­
les), produce cymes (in which the primary meristem 
forms a flower and the axillary meristem becomes 
the new inflorescence meristem, before itself becom­
ing a flower when a new axillary meristem is ready 
to take over, and so on indefinitely). In species with 
cymes, LFY interacts with the UFO homologue (see 
Section 9.5.6) to specify floral identity, and the UFO 
homologue is only expressed in the apical meris­
tem, and then in the subsequently dominant mer­
istems, after the axillary meristems which will take 
over indeterminate growth have been formed (Lee 
et al. 1997; Souer et al. 1998; reviewed by Moyroud 
et al. 2010). Similarly, studies in maize (Poales), pea 
(Fabales) and Arabidopsis have suggested that LFY 
also has a role in specifying meristem growth, more 
generally than just at the floral stage. Moyroud 
et al. (2010) speculated that the functions of LFY in 
stimulating meristematic growth and specifying 
floral meristem identity might be separable, with 
different degrees of importance in different species. 
Finally, a recent report by Yamaguchi et al. (2012) 
implicated LFY in adaxial identity of cells in the 
pedicel, influencing floral positioning.
9.5.2  APETALA 1 (AP1)
Plants with mutations in AP1 have phenotypes very 
similar to that of the lfy mutant, suggesting that AP1 
is also necessary for the floral identity of the meris­
tem. The phenotype is, if anything, slightly less dra­
matic, with a fuller conversion of the inflorescence 
meristem to the floral form (see Fig. 9.2b). Sepals do 
form in ap1 mutants, but they are leaf-like, and sec­
ondary flowers form within the axils of these sepals. 
In turn, the first whorl organs of these secondary 
flowers may also form tertiary flowers in their ax­
ils (Mandel et al. 1992). AP1 encodes a transcription 
to convert all lateral meristems into solitary flowers, 
and even to convert the SAM into a single flower, 
although this latter conversion takes some develop­
mental time to complete (Weigel and Nilsson 1995). 
Ectopic expression of LFY in transgenic Arabidopsis 
plants using the CaMV 35S promoter results in the 
conversion of all lateral or axillary meristems into 
flowers. Thus the axillary meristems in the axils of 
the rosette leaves form precocious flowers, instead 
of remaining dormant and forming branches later 
in development. Similarly, the lateral meristems 
in the axils of the cauline leaves also form single 
flowers. Eventually, the SAM is also converted to a 
terminal flower. Strikingly, the same construct was 
shown to have the same dramatic effects on mer­
istem identity in other species, including tobacco 
(Nicotiana tabacum, Solanales). Ectopic expression of 
LFY in aspen (Populus tremula, Malpighiales) result­
ed in the production of flowers in the axils of leaves, 
and the early conversion of the SAM to a terminal 
flower. Whereas aspen trees ordinarily take around 
20 years to flower, these conversions all occurred 
within a few months (Weigel and Nilsson 1995). 
Similarly, ectopic expression of LFY in citrus trees 
(Sapindales) has also been shown to reduce their 
time to flowering, from over 6 years to within 1 year 
(Pena et al. 2001).
The immediate cellular consequences of LFY ac­
tivity are not yet well described, although we do 
know that LFY is directly involved in the activation 
of expression of AP1 and CAL (see below), as well 
as AGAMOUS and APETALA3. Recent reports sug­
gest that it also activates the expression of a num­
ber of other genes, including LATE ­MERISTEM 
­IDENTITY 1 (LMI1), which encodes a homeodo­
main leucine-zipper transcription factor. LMI1 is 
required for activation of CAL expression, and in its 
absence the meristem defects of weak lfy mutant al­
leles are substantially worsened (Saddic et al. 2006). 
Progress in understanding LFY function has been 
much enhanced by the development of a model for 
the protein’s DNA binding specificity (Moyroud 
et al. 2011). Application of this model to the Arabi­
dopsis genome identified 2677 genes adjacent to 
LFY binding sites, including key floral regulators 
such as AP1 and TFL1 (see below). It seems likely 
that LFY has such a strong effect on meristem iden­
tity because it activates transcription of a suite of 

Changes at the shoot apical meristem      95
identity genes not regulated by AP1 (Mandel and 
Yanofsky 1995). Nonetheless, ectopic expression of 
AP1 in citrus was able to induce early flowering, 
just as ectopic expression of LFY was (Pena et  al. 
2001). Further evidence for LFY acting upstream 
of AP1 comes from work by Wagner et al. (1999), 
who showed that inducible activation of LFY re­
sulted in an almost immediate upregulation of 
AP1 expression. Furthermore, the AP1 promoter 
contains a region bound by LFY in vitro, suggest­
ing that the regulation of AP1 expression by LFY is 
direct (Parcy et al. 1998). More recently, Pastore et al. 
(2011) showed that the activation of AP1 expression 
by LFY involved a physical interaction of LFY with 
the LATE MERISTEM IDENTITY 2 MYB transcrip­
tion factor (also known as AtMYB17). LFY is not 
the only regulator of AP1 expression, since (as was 
described in Chapter 7) the FT-FD protein complex 
also directly activates AP1 expression.
Matters are slightly less clear-cut in Antirrhinum, 
where the squa mutant contains normal amounts of 
flo transcript and vice versa (Huijser et al. 1992), 
and the single mutants are so much more extreme 
than in Arabidopsis that the double mutant sug­
gests much less synergy between the genes. It 
has been suggested that in Antirrhinum the FLO 
and SQUA proteins act together in the induction 
of downstream genes, rather than in a more linear 
pathway.
AP1 exerts its affect on meristem identity through 
its role as a transcriptional activator of other genes. 
The most recent and exhaustive study (Kaufmann 
et al. 2010) identified a total of 249 genes which 
were both significantly differentially expressed in 
response to AP1 expression and had promoter re­
gions that the AP1 protein bound in vitro. These 
genes included a disproportionately high number 
of sequences encoding further transcription factors, 
and also included LFY, FD, and TFL1 (see below), 
suggesting that AP1 is involved in a transcriptional 
feedback loop with its own regulators.
The function of AP1 in floral meristem identity 
is apparently ancient, at least within the eudicots. 
Pabon-Mora et al. (2012) used virus-induced gene 
silencing to explore the role of the AP1-like genes in 
two species of the Ranunculales (opium poppy and 
Californian poppy), and found that the genes were 
necessary for correct transition of the meristem.
factor which is a member of the MADS box fam­
ily, and was isolated by a combination of mapping 
and a candidate gene approach (Mandel et al. 1992). 
MADS box transcription factors, such as SOC1 and 
FLC (see Chapters 4 and 7), are characterized by a 
region of 50 amino acids containing a DNA-binding 
and dimerization domain. The MADS box family is 
very large, with over 40 members apparent in the 
Arabidopsis genome. AP1 is expressed in the floral 
meristems, from the first time point at which they 
are visible on the flanks of the inflorescence meris­
tem, and remains expressed in petal and sepal pri­
mordia during flower development (Mandel et al. 
1992).
The Antirrhinum orthologue of AP1 is SQUA­
MOSA (SQUA), which encodes a MADS box tran­
scription factor with 68% sequence identity to 
AP1 (Huijser et al. 1992). The squa mutant is more 
extreme than the ap1 mutant, but slightly less dra­
matic than flo. Most floral meristems are converted 
to inflorescence meristems, in a reiterating pattern, 
but the plant does occasionally produce anomalous 
flowers. Like AP1, SQUA is also expressed in the 
wild type floral meristem, but not the inflorescence 
meristem, and it remains expressed in all develop­
ing floral organs except the stamens.
In both Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum, double 
mutant phenotypes between lfy/ap1 and flo/squa 
are more extreme phenotypically than either single 
mutant. The lfy/ap1 double mutant is very similar 
phenotypically to the flo single mutant, in that the 
conversion of floral meristems to inflorescence mer­
istems is essentially complete.
Genetic analyses have indicated that AP1 func­
tions downstream of LFY in the conversion of the 
meristem to the floral state. Ectopic expression of 
LFY does not confer any phenotypic change in an 
ap1 mutant background, implying that LFY works 
through AP1 (Weigel and Nilsson 1995). In contrast, 
ectopic expression of AP1 from the same CaMV 
35S promoter does induce early flowering and con­
version of meristems to the floral state, even in a 
lfy mutant background. The flowers produced by 
these plants are abnormal, with perturbations in or­
gan identity and development. These data confirm 
that AP1 functions downstream of LFY, but that 
the pathway is not entirely linear, with LFY being 
necessary for the activation of certain floral organ 

96      Development of Flowers
enhances LFY expression, perhaps operating as a 
positive feedback loop to ensure the full conversion 
of the meristem to the floral state.
A CAL orthologue has been isolated from Bras­
sica oleracea, and it has been shown that the variety 
grown for vegetable cauliflowers (B. oleracea var. 
botrytis) contains a mutation within the CAL coding 
sequence, resulting in the production of a truncated 
150-amino-acid protein rather than the wild type 
255-amino-acid version (Kempin et al. 1995).
9.5.4  TERMINAL FLOWER 1 (TFL1)
The TFL1 gene is required for a less obvious aspect 
of meristem conversion, namely the maintenance 
of the apical meristem in the inflorescence state, 
and therefore indeterminate. When LFY is first ex­
pressed, its transcript can be found right up into 
the apex of the plant, but it is shortly afterwards re­
stricted to the flanks of the apical meristem, where 
the lateral floral meristems arise. Without this re­
striction, LFY would convert the apical meristem to 
the floral state and the plant’s growth would stop. 
The TFL1 protein is involved in repressing the flo­
ral nature of the apical meristem, and maintaining 
it in the inflorescence state and indeterminate. In 
tfl1 mutants, up to five ordinary flowers are made 
and then the apical meristem itself becomes floral, 
producing a single terminal flower. In the tfl1 mu­
tant the LFY and AP1 genes are expressed in apical 
regions of the meristem as well as in the usual pe­
ripheral regions, indicating that one role of TFL1 is 
to repress LFY and AP1 expression in the apex. This 
appears to work through a feedback loop. Before 
the vegetative to reproductive transition, TFL1 is ex­
pressed in the apical meristem but at low levels and 
not in the apex itself. It is upregulated in the apex it­
self following the floral transition, probably by LFY, 
and then represses LFY and AP1 expression in the 
apical meristem (Bradley et al. 1997). Conversely, 
in the lfy mutant, TFL1 is expressed in the ectopic 
shoots that are formed where flowers should be, 
and produced from the axillary meristems on the 
flanks of the apical meristem (Ratcliffe et al. 1999). 
So, in the absence of the LFY-induced enhancement 
of TFL1 expression in the SAM itself, and exclu­
sion from lateral meristems, the gene is expressed 
9.5.3  CAULIFLOWER (CAL)
The CAL gene is probably the least well understood 
of the floral meristem identity genes. Because it rep­
resents a Brassicaceae-specific duplication of AP1, 
around 60 million years ago, no comparative analy­
sis with systems such as Antirrhinum has been pos­
sible (Lowman and Purugganan 1999). CAL was 
isolated in a search for genes with sequence similar­
ity to API, and encodes a MADS box transcription 
factor that is 76% identical in amino acid sequence 
to AP1 (Kempin et al. 1995). The cal mutant has no 
discernible phenotypic differences from a wild type 
plant, but the ap1/cal double mutant plant has a 
very striking phenotype. Where flowers should be, 
the plant continues to proliferate inflorescence mer­
istem, from which no organs develop. This results 
in the production of heads of meristematic tissue 
several millimetres across and resembling minia­
ture vegetable cauliflowers. CAL is therefore clearly 
necessary for the correct transition of the inflores­
cence meristem to the floral meristem and the pro­
duction of flowers. However, it is also apparent that 
AP1 can compensate for the loss of CAL, since the 
cal single mutant is phenotypically wild type. The 
partial redundancy between these genes has made 
determining the function of CAL more difficult. A 
recent analysis of the four main functional domains 
of AP1 and CAL, generating chimaeric proteins 
containing all possible combinations of the domains 
from the two proteins, concluded that the K domain 
(a region of MADS box proteins involved in interac­
tions with other proteins; see Chapter 11) was par­
ticularly significant in differentiating the functions 
of AP1 and CAL (Alvarez-Buylla et al. 2006).
CAL mRNA accumulates in young floral meris­
tems, but does not persist in any floral organ during 
development, unlike AP1. This difference suggests 
that CAL cannot compensate for the loss of AP1 in 
its later activities, such as the activation of particu­
lar floral organ identity genes (Kempin et al. 1995). 
One clear function of CAL is to enhance AP1 activa­
tion of LFY expression. Although genetic and mo­
lecular data agree that AP1 acts downstream of LFY, 
in the ap1/cal double mutant LFY expression levels 
are significantly reduced, especially in the early 
stages of its expression (Bowman et al. 1993). This 
has led to the conclusion that the AP1/CAL duo 

Changes at the shoot apical meristem      97
probe, TFL1 was isolated the following year (Brad­
ley et al. 1997), and was concurrently isolated from a 
T-DNA insertion mutant by another group (Ohshi­
ma et al. 1997). The two proteins are 70% identical, 
and there are also very similar proteins present in 
the rice genome. The biochemical nature of TFL1 
and CEN is not yet clear, but they have most simi­
larity to animal phosphatidylethanolamine-binding 
proteins, which associate with membrane protein 
complexes. This suggests that they are involved 
in signal transduction at the cell membrane. How­
ever, TFL1 is also 55% identical to the flowering-
time integrator FT, which clearly functions in a 
transcriptional complex with FD (Kardailsky et al. 
1999). Recent reports confirm that TFL1 also colo­
calizes with FD in the nucleus, and appears to func­
tion as part of a transcriptional repressor complex, 
even though it has no DNA binding ability itself 
(Hanano and Goto 2011). These data suggest that 
FT and TFL1 operate by mediating transcriptional 
regulation, but they play opposite roles in the con­
version of the meristem (Kardailsky et al. 1999). As 
was discussed in Chapter 7, Hanzawa et al. (2005) 
showed that only a single amino acid controlled the 
difference between the protein functioning as FT or 
as TFL1. The single amino acid is part of a region 
which may act as a surface for interactions with 
other molecules (Ahn et al. 2006).
Indeterminate inflorescences and determinate 
inflorescences are widely scattered throughout 
the plant phylogenetic tree, suggesting either that 
indeterminacy evolved multiple times, or that it 
was lost multiple times. The presence of the same 
mechanism to maintain an indeterminate meristem, 
operating through the same proteins, in two species 
as phylogenetically distant as Antirrhinum and 
Arabidopsis, suggests that indeterminate inflores­
cences may be the ancestral state, at least within the 
eudicots, with indeterminacy lost in those species 
with determinate inflorescence meristems (Brad­
ley et al. 1997). Iwata et al. (2012) recently demon­
strated that the continuous flowering (extremely 
indeterminate) varieties of rose (Rosales), thought 
to have arisen in China some time between ad 1000 
and ad 1800, result from a transposon insertion in 
the TFL1 orthologue. The wild type gene confers a 
once-flowering phenotype, where the meristem is 
indeterminate in spring only.
in lateral meristems which remain indeterminate. 
Further evidence for the feedback loop comes from 
transgenic experiments. Ectopic expression of LFY 
or AP1 from the CaMV 35S promoter results in a 
reduction in TFL1 transcript levels in the apical 
meristem (Liljegren et al. 1999), whereas ectopic ex­
pression of TFL1 from the same promoter results in 
reduced levels of AP1 and LFY transcript (Ratcliffe 
et al. 1998). This feedback loop is clearly essential to 
maintain the apical meristem in the indeterminate 
state while allowing determinate floral meristems 
to form on its flanks.
The Antirrhinum orthologue of TFL1 is CEN­
TRORADIALIS (CEN). In situ hybridization experi­
ments have revealed that CEN is expressed 2 to 3 
days after FLO, and not at all in flo mutants. Thus 
in Antirrhinum it also appears that FLO expression 
induces CEN expression, and the CEN protein then 
excludes FLO expression from the apical region of 
the meristem, keeping it in the inflorescence form.
The CEN gene was cloned before TFL1, using a 
transposon tagged mutant line of Antirrhinum (see 
Fig. 9.3; Bradley et al. 1996). Using this sequence as a 
Figure 9.3  Maintaining indeterminacy. The cen mutant in 
Antirrhinum experiences conversion of the indeterminate inflorescence 
meristem to a determinate floral meristem. Image kindly supplied by 
Enrico Coen (John Innes Centre).

98      Development of Flowers
Genes encoding over 150 proteins with AP2-like 
domains have now been identified in the Arabidop­
sis genome, and the functions of most of them are 
unknown (Wessler 2005). However, there is evidence 
that AP2 itself may regulate the activity of some of 
these genes, as ap2 mutant plants have altered ex­
pression patterns of some AP2-like genes (Okamuro 
et al. 1997). It is also becoming clear that AP2 has 
roles in some parts of vegetative plant develop­
ment, perhaps through the activation of AP2-like 
genes. These roles will be considered more fully in 
Chapter 10. The AP2 domain was initially thought 
to be plant-specific, but recent evidence points to 
its existence in cyanobacteria, bacteriophages, and 
ciliates (Wessler 2005). The cyanobacterium AP2-like 
protein has been shown to bind DNA in vitro (Mag­
nani et al. 2004). It has been suggested that the plant 
AP2-like proteins were derived by lateral gene trans­
fer from a prokaryote, as they do not appear to be 
present in any other eukaryote (apart from a single 
ciliate) and they contain few or no introns, a sign of 
a recent prokaryotic ancestor (Magnani et al. 2004).
AP2 is expressed continuously in both inflores­
cence and floral meristems, and in all four types 
of floral organs, as well as in the stem and leaves 
(­Jofuku et al. 1994). However, this expression pattern 
does not reflect the true activity of AP2, as recent 
analysis has shown that it is post-­transcriptionally 
repressed in certain tissues by a microRNA (Chen 
2004). This repression only really affects the role of 
AP2 in floral organ identity, so will be discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 10.
Antirrhinum orthologues of AP2 were not iden­
tified through mutant screens, but by isolation of 
AP2-like sequences and characterization of their 
function. Two AP2-like genes have been identified, 
and are called LIPLESS 1 (LIP1) and LIP2. Plants 
with mutations in either gene are phenotypically 
wild type. A double mutant between both genes has 
defects in floral organ identity but none in meris­
tem conversion, suggesting that AP2 and its Antir­
rhinum orthologues have divergent roles in floral 
meristem identity (Keck et al. 2003).
9.5.6  UNUSUAL FLORAL ORGANS (UFO)
The UFO gene has an effect on meristem identity in 
both long and short days. When ufo mutant plants 
9.5.5  APETALA 2 (AP2)
The AP2 gene has two main roles in flower develop­
ment. It is required for the maintenance of the floral 
identity of the meristem, and so is classed as a floral 
meristem identity gene, but it is also involved later 
in sepal and petal development, so is also classed 
as an organ identity gene (see Chapter 10). In this 
section we shall focus only on the role of AP2 in 
specifying floral meristem identity. In long days, 
ap2 mutant plants are phenotypically normal with 
regard to meristem identity, but in short days they 
resemble ap1 mutants, with sepals converted to 
leaves and indeterminate flowers developing inside 
these leaves, often in a reiterating pattern (Bowman 
et al. 1993). Thus without signals from the photo­
periodic induction pathway, ap2 mutant plants fail 
to convert their inflorescence meristems into floral 
meristems. This suggests that the AP2 protein is 
required for the conversion of inflorescence meris­
tems into floral meristems, but only when the plant 
is flowering in response to the autonomous or gib­
berellin promotion pathway, not the photoperiodic 
promotion pathway. It may be that high levels of FT 
expression can bypass the need for AP2 activity (see 
Chapter 7).
AP2 encodes a protein with very little similarity 
to anything else that had been functionally char­
acterized when it was cloned. However, it has a 
domain that includes a nuclear localization signal, 
suggesting that it might be a transcription factor. 
It also contains a domain initially thought to be in­
volved in protein–protein interactions. This domain 
is 68 amino acids long, and is repeated directly, giv­
ing a central 136-amino-acid domain, which has 
come to be called the AP2 domain (Jofuku et al. 
1994). A variety of evidence suggests that the AP2 
domain functions as a DNA-binding domain, sup­
porting the idea that AP2 is a transcriptional regula­
tor. The AP2 domain contains a region predicted to 
form an amphipathic alpha helix, and tobacco AP2 
domains have been shown to bind DNA (Ohme-
Takagi and Shinshi 1995). Dinh et al. (2012) showed 
in particular that the second of the two repeats in 
the AP2 domain binds an AT-rich target sequence. 
Recent reports indicate that AP2 can function both 
as a transcriptional activator and as a transcription­
al repressor, and interacts with an unusually large 
number of target genes (Yant et al. 2010).

Changes at the shoot apical meristem      99
on transcription factors or their cofactors then the 
functional consequence of UFO activity could be in 
transcriptional regulation. Chae et al. (2008) showed 
that UFO interacts physically with the C terminus 
of LFY, and that this complex binds the promoter of 
APETALA 3 (a floral organ identity gene; see Chap­
ter 10). For AP3 transcription to occur, Chae et al. 
(2008) showed that proteasome activity was nec­
essary, strongly suggesting that UFO functions by 
targeting inhibitory factors at the AP3 promoter for 
degradation and allowing transcriptional activation 
by LFY to occur.
Both UFO and FIM are expressed in the floral 
meristems of the two species, consistent with their 
role as specifying the determinate floral nature of 
the meristem. UFO and FIM are expressed later in 
the development of the floral meristem than some 
other meristem identity genes, including LFY, but 
clearly earlier than the organ identity genes. Ex­
pression of both UFO and FIM initiates in the centre 
of the floral meristem and then resolves into a ring, 
leaving a clear area at the centre of the apex (Simon 
et al. 1994; Ingram et al. 1995). Neither of the genes 
is expressed in the apical meristem itself, but only 
in the lateral floral meristems. Later in development 
expression is restricted further to a few cells at the 
base of the sepal and petal primordia. The expres­
sion pattern of the FAP genes overlaps that of FIM 
itself, adding weight to the idea that they interact in 
vivo (Ingram et al. 1997).
FIM acts downstream of FLO and SQUA, with 
a complete absence of FIM transcript in the meris­
tems of flo mutants, and a great delay in its timing 
of expression in squa mutants (Simon et al. 1994). 
UFO has also been shown to act with LFY. Even be­
fore the biochemical analyses of Chae et al. (2008) 
described earlier, it had been observed that in an 
lfy mutant background there is no phenotypic dif­
ference between ufo mutants, plants that are wild 
type at the UFO locus, and plants ectopically ex­
pressing UFO (Lee et al. 1997). These data led to the 
suggestion that LFY and UFO work together to ac­
tivate downstream genes involved in floral organ 
development.
In contrast, UFO is also known to act upstream of 
AP1. Hepworth et al. (2006) showed that the floral 
meristems arising from a ufo mutant inflorescence 
meristem were initially bract-like as a result of the 
are grown in long days, the flowers have increased 
numbers of organs in all whorls, suggesting that 
the determinacy of the floral meristem is disrupted. 
When ufo mutants are grown in short days, the flow­
ers are replaced by shoots which are intermediate 
in appearance between flowers and inflorescences, 
again suggesting that the determinacy of the mer­
istem, and specifically its conversion from inflores­
cence to floral, is affected by this gene. UFO seems 
to be necessary, particularly in short days, to ensure 
the full floral identity of the lateral meristems, al­
though its role is not as important as that of earlier 
floral meristem identity genes such as LFY, without 
which no conversion occurs at all (Levin and Mey­
erowitz 1995; Wilkinson and Haughn 1995).
The Antirrhinum orthologue of UFO is FIM­
BRIATA (FIM), and the fim mutant is very similar 
to the ufo mutant, although the phenotype is less 
extreme. The fim mutant shows defects in floral or­
gan development and reduced determinacy of the 
floral meristems, but does not have reversion of 
floral meristems to an inflorescence fate in the way 
that the ufo mutant has. FIM was isolated from a 
transposon tagged mutant line of Antirrhinum and 
found to encode a protein with very little similarity 
to proteins then in the available databases (Simon 
et al. 1994). UFO was isolated using FIM as a probe, 
and the two proteins were found to be 60% identi­
cal (Ingram et al. 1995). However, later analyses sug­
gested that the FIM and UFO proteins contain an 
F-box motif, a domain present in cell cycle-associ­
ated cyclin proteins and some transcription factors, 
and which is known to provide substrate specificity 
to certain types of ubiquitin ligases. FIM/UFO may 
therefore act to target proteins for degradation. FIM 
has been shown to physically bind three members 
of a small family of proteins called the FIM-associat­
ed proteins (FAPs), which are related to human and 
yeast proteins involved in the targeting of proteins 
for degradation, particularly during cell cycle pro­
gression (Ingram et al. 1997). It has also been shown 
that the phenotypic consequences of ectopic expres­
sion of UFO from the CaMV 35S promoter are sup­
pressed by mutations in the COP9 signalosome, a 
complex that selects proteins for degradation. One 
role of UFO and FIM therefore seems to be in the 
targeted degradation of particular proteins (Wang 
et al. 2003). If this targeted degradation is focused 

100      Development of Flowers
various elements of the AG genomic sequence to 
demonstrate that the large (3 kilobases) second in­
tron is necessary for the correct spatial expression 
of AG. A reporter gene expressed solely from the 
AG promoter was expressed in vegetative tissues 
as well as in the floral meristem, indicating that the 
second intron contains sequence which represses 
vegetative expression of AG.
AG expression is known to be activated by LFY 
(Parcy et al. 1998), and the LFY protein has been 
shown to bind in vitro to the second intron of AG 
(Busch et al. 1999). The subsequent restriction of AG 
transcript to the third and fourth whorls of the de­
veloping flowers is the result of the combination of 
LFY and WUSCHEL (WUS) activity. WUS encodes 
a homeodomain transcription factor necessary to 
specify cellular proliferation in meristems, and 
without which shoot apical meristems terminate 
prematurely (Laux et al. 1996). The WUS protein 
has also been shown to bind to the second intron 
of AG, but only in the presence of LFY, and acts 
in a negative feedback loop (Lohmann et al. 2001). 
WUS activity induces AG expression in the cor­
rect primordia, but AG then downregulates WUS 
expression in those cells, causing them to stop pro­
liferating and causing the meristem to assume a 
determinate state. Recent work has shown that this 
downregulation occurs through AG binding to the 
WUS locus and recruiting polycomb group genes 
that cause histone methylation and transcriptional 
silencing of WUS (Liu et al. 2011b). In the ag mutant 
the lack of this WUS downregulation results in the 
maintenance of the indeterminate state of the floral 
meristem (Lenhard et al. 2001). This feedback loop 
does not occur in a vegetative meristem, due to the 
lack of LFY activity.
Ectopic expression of AG in Arabidopsis alters 
not only flower morphology but also the numbers 
of organs in whorls and the numbers of whorls, 
confirming the role of AG in inducing the determi­
nate meristem state.
The Antirrhinum functional orthologue of AG 
is PLENA (PLE), which was isolated from a trans­
poson insertion line and encodes a protein that is 
64% identical to AG (Bradley et al. 1993). The ple 
mutant phenotype is less extreme than ag, showing 
altered floral organ development and some inde­
terminacy, but not the reversion of floral meristems 
limitation of LFY and AP1 transcript to a very small 
number of cells. Expression of UFO from the AP1 
promoter was unable to complement this phenotype, 
suggesting that UFO is required before AP1 is active.
The petunia orthologue of UFO is called DOU­
BLE TOP (DOT), and has a stronger role in meris­
tem conversion than is seen for UFO or FIM. The dot 
mutant produces no floral meristems, resembling 
an Arabidopsis lfy mutant, whereas ectopic expres­
sion of DOT converts the SAM into a single flower 
(Souer et al. 2008). In this system, with an inflores­
cence architecture of cymes rather than racemes, it 
is DOT activity that is crucial for floral meristem 
identity, with the LFY orthologue (ABERRANT 
LEAF AND FLOWER, ALF) dependent on DOT for 
its activity and function. Together ALF and DOT ac­
tivate expression of the floral organ identity genes 
in petunia (Souer et al. 2008).
9.5.7  AGAMOUS (AG)
The final floral meristem identity gene, AG, is very 
similar to AP2 in that it is better known for its role 
in floral organ identity, but does have a limited role 
in ensuring the complete determinacy of the floral 
meristem. Flowers that are ag mutant are always in­
determinate. They produce a whorl of sepals, two 
whorls of petals, and then start again, producing 
indefinite numbers of whorls of sepals and petals. 
Under short day conditions the floral meristem of 
an ag mutant may revert to an inflorescence meris­
tem, producing an inflorescence shoot from within 
the flower. AG therefore plays a role not only in the 
determinacy of the floral meristem but also in the 
maintenance of the floral state of the meristem, after 
the switch has occurred as a result of the activities 
of the other proteins (Yanofsky et al. 1990).
The AG gene was isolated from a T-DNA tagged 
line, and encodes a MADS box transcription factor. 
The gene is expressed slightly later than LFY and 
AP1, and appears in the central region of the floral 
meristem, and then later in the developing stamen 
and carpel primordia in whorls 3 and 4 (Yanofsky 
et al. 1990).
Unusually, although the 5′ promoter region of 
AG is important for the regulation of its expression, 
so are some intragenic regions. Sieburth and Mey­
erowitz (1997) used a GUS reporter gene fused to 

Changes at the shoot apical meristem      101
(Kramer et al. 2004; Causier et al. 2005; for a more 
detailed discussion see Chapter 10).
To summarize, the conversion of the lateral mer­
istems from inflorescence to floral following the 
transition of the apical meristem from vegetative to 
reproductive requires the activity of a suite of floral 
meristem identity genes. The timing of the expres­
sion of these genes suggests that they function se­
quentially. The flowering-time integrators, acting in 
response to the signals from the various floral pro­
motion and inhibition pathways, activate the floral 
meristem identity genes, with LFY, then AP1, and 
then AG gradually committing the meristem fur­
ther and further towards the floral state.
to the inflorescence state. The role of PLE seems to 
be more focused on floral organ identity and meris­
tem determinacy than on maintenance of the floral 
meristem state. However, the regulation of the two 
genes is very similar, with a transposon insertion in 
the second intron of PLE causing ectopic expression 
of the gene in vegetative tissues, and recent reports 
confirming the presence of a LFY binding site in the 
intron (Causier et al. 2009). Differences in protein 
function may be attributable to the observation that 
PLE and AG represent members of different ancient 
lineages, both derived originally from the same 
MADS box transcription factor, but having experi­
enced extensive divergence in the intervening time 

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 10
Development of the floral organs
In Chapter 9 we discussed the floral meristem 
­identity genes, which act sequentially to commit 
the lateral meristems on the flanks of an inflores­
cence meristem to the floral state. This involves 
inhibiting the indeterminacy of the meristems, so 
that they do not continue to proliferate, by down­
regulating WUS, the homeodomain transcription 
factor that maintains cell division within the meris­
tem. It also involves activating the expression of the 
genes required for the specification of particular flo­
ral ­organs—that is, the floral organ identity genes. 
The pathway to flower development is a cascade, 
with flowering-time integrators activating floral 
meristem identity genes which in turn activate flo­
ral organ identity genes. The floral organ identity 
genes themselves encode transcription factors, and 
are predicted to activate the many structural genes 
required to form the new organs, as well as further 
regulatory genes controlling processes such as pig­
ment synthesis. The expression patterns of the floral 
organ identity genes determine the positions of de­
veloping organs, and those expression patterns are 
themselves determined in part by cadastral genes 
(genes whose function is to specify the domain of 
expression of other genes). Floral organ identity 
genes act together as transcriptional complexes to 
ensure expression of the correct structural genes in 
each whorl of the developing flower.
10.1  The original ABC model of flower 
development
The ABC model of flower development was formal­
ly proposed in 1991, and was based on concurrent 
genetic studies in Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum 
(Coen and Meyerowitz 1991). The model has been 
integral to our modern understanding of flower 
development, and has been shown to apply, at 
least in basic form, to all angiosperm species tested 
(see Chapter 11 for a discussion of floral diversity 
and divergence from the model). The model rests 
on Goethe’s foliar theory of the flower (see Chap­
ter 2) in assuming that all floral organs are modi­
fied leaves, and that without the expression of key 
floral organ identity genes, the organs in the flower 
would develop as leaves.
Angiosperm flowers usually have four whorls. A 
whorl is the domain in which a single type of floral 
organ is produced, and may consist of one or more 
concentric circles (if one or more rings of each organ 
are produced). In some species the whorl bounda­
ries are blurred, and in dioecious species one whorl 
of reproductive organs is absent from the adult 
stage (although it may be identifiable early in devel­
opment). Some basal angiosperms produce flowers 
with a spiral arrangement of their floral organs, but 
even in these cases it is usually possible to distin­
guish between the spirals which make up each of 
the four sets of organs. According to the original 
ABC model, in the outer whorl (called whorl 1), 
only A function genes are expressed on top of the 
usual leaf developmental programme genes. In the 
presence of A function genes, the primordia un­
dergo modifications to the basic leaf developmental 
programme which result in their development into 
sepals. In the second whorl in (whorl 2), both A and 
B function genes are expressed on top of the stand­
ard leaf developmental genes. In the presence of 
both A and B function genes, the primordia under­
go more dramatic modifications that result in them 
developing into petals. In the third whorl (whorl 3) 
the A function genes are no longer expressed. The B 
function genes remain active, and C function genes 

Development of the floral organs      103
how the genes within the model work. The second 
key point about the model is that it assumes that the 
boundaries of A and C function gene activity are set 
by mutual antagonism, rather than by reference to 
external factors. A and C function do not overlap 
because each downregulates the other, and so they 
maintain a strict boundary. However, in the absence 
of either function (in a mutant, for instance) the ex­
pression of the other function would extend all the 
way across the meristem. Thus, in a mutant with a 
deletion of the C function genes, A function gene 
expression would be expected to invade whorls 3 
and 4, with consequent effects on the identity of the 
organs in those whorls.
The model was derived from analysis of floral 
homeotic mutants with the wrong organs develop­
ing in particular whorls. The genetic screens which 
identified these mutants were conducted indepen­
dently in Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis, by Enrico 
Coen’s group in the John Innes Centre in Norwich, 
England, and Elliot Meyerowitz’s group in CalTech, 
California. Meyerowitz’s Arabidopsis work was 
based on a variety of mutant collections, generat­
ed by EMS and X-rays, while Coen’s Antirrhinum 
work focused on transposon mutagenized plants. 
However, both groups identified mutants that fell 
into the same three classes, which they named A, B, 
and C, and which are described in Fig. 10.1b.
Mutants in class A had carpels instead of sepals 
in whorl 1, stamens instead of petals in whorl 2, 
normal stamens in whorl 3, and normal carpels in 
whorl 4. Mutants in class B had normal sepals in 
whorl 1, sepals instead of petals in whorl 2, carpels 
instead of stamens in whorl 3, and normal carpels 
in whorl 4. Class C mutants had normal sepals in 
whorl 1, normal petals in whorl 2, petals instead of 
stamens in whorl 3, and sepals instead of carpels 
in whorl 4. Although various mutants that showed 
abnormal development of particular organs were 
found, these were the only three classes of homeotic 
mutants observed—that is, only these three catego­
ries of mutants experienced complete conversion of 
one type of organ into another.
The ABC model was produced from these mu­
tants by assuming that each mutant class carried a 
mutation in a particular gene (named A, B, or C). 
Each gene was postulated to be normally expressed 
(in a wild type plant) in the whorls that were 
are now also expressed. In the presence of both B 
and C function genes the primordia are modified 
even more dramatically and develop into stamens. 
Finally, in the innermost whorl (whorl 4) the B func­
tion genes are downregulated and only C function 
genes are expressed. In the presence of C function 
genes alone the primordia are modified and devel­
op into carpels. This model is shown diagramati­
cally in Fig. 10.1a.
There are two key points about the model that 
must be grasped in order to understand its simplic­
ity. First, and most importantly, the model states 
that organ identity is a function of the ABC genes 
expressed in developing primordia, not a function 
of the position of the whorl of primordia within a 
flower. The organs do not develop directly as a re­
sult of the position of their primordia, but only as a 
result of the expression of the genes. For example, 
the model predicts that loss of B function gene ex­
pression in whorl 2 would result in whorl 2 organs 
developing as sepals. This is because the gene ex­
pression pattern in that whorl would be A alone, 
and A alone specifies sepal identity, even though 
the position of the primordia (in whorl 2) would 
lead one to predict the development of petals. This 
point underpins all of the subsequent discussion of 
A
B
C
sepal
petal
stamen carpel
Whorl 1
Whorl 2
Whorl 3
Whorl 4
Wild type
Sepal
Petal
Stamen
Carpel
Mutant A
Carpel
Stamen
Stamen
Carpel
Mutant B
Sepal
Sepal
Carpel
Carpel
Mutant C
Sepal
Petal
Petal
Sepal
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.1  The original ABC model. (a) Diagram of the expression 
patterns of three gene functions in four whorls, generating four wild 
type organs. (b) Table describing the organs found in the four different 
whorls of plants with mutations in A, B, and C function genes.

104      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
function mutant if C function has spread across the 
meristem (Bowman et al. 1991). Indeed, in situ hy­
bridization revealed that the C function gene, AGA­
MOUS (AG), is expressed in whorls 1 and 2 in an 
ap2 mutant background, confirming this aspect of 
the model (Drews et al. 1991). The AP2 gene encodes 
the only non-MADS box protein in the ABC model, 
a protein containing the core AP2 domain that has 
since been identified in many other proteins (Jofuku 
et al. 1994). Recent reports have demonstrated that 
AP2 functions as a transcription factor, with the 
second repeat of the AP2 domain binding AT-rich 
DNA sequences present in the intron of the C func­
tion gene AGAMOUS (Dinh et al. 2012; see Section 
10.1.3). AP2 is expressed throughout the plant and 
is required for activation of other genes involved in 
diverse aspects of plant development. AP2 is also 
directly involved in other aspects of plant develop­
ment. For example, correct AP2 function is neces­
sary for maintenance of the stem cell population in 
the vegetative shoot apical meristem of Arabidop­
sis (Wuerschum et al. 2006). The expression of AP2 
throughout the plant, and particularly in all four 
whorls of the flower, initially seemed to contradict 
the ABC model, which predicted a whorl 1- and 
2-specific expression pattern (Jofuku et al. 1994). 
However, it has since been shown that AP2 is trans­
lationally repressed by a microRNA (miR172) that is 
most active in whorls 3 and 4, leaving a functional 
AP2 protein present only in whorls 1 and 2 (Chen 
2004). Careful in situ hybridization analysis further 
revealed that AP2 expression is much stronger in 
the outer floral whorls than in the inner ones, irre­
spective of the activity of miR172, and that the func­
tion of miR172 appears to be to mop up any AP2 
transcript that has leaked into whorls 3 and 4 (Wol­
lmann et al. 2010). Therefore, within the flower, AP2 
meets all the criteria of an A function gene, being ac­
tive only in whorls 1 and 2 (even if it is transcribed 
more widely), repressing C function expression, 
and being necessary for correct sepal and petal de­
velopment. It is only when the other roles of AP2 
are considered, including the specification of floral 
meristem identity and diverse roles in vegetative 
development, that it becomes clear that classic A 
function is an oversimplification of the role of AP2.
The second A function gene in Arabidopsis is 
APETALA 1 (AP1) (which was also introduced in 
phenotypically disturbed in the mutant. So genes in 
class A were predicted to be active in whorls 1 and 
2, genes in class B are active in whorls 2 and 3, and 
genes in class C are active in whorls 3 and 4. These 
expression patterns produce the model described 
above, and are sufficient to explain the phenotype 
of the B function mutant (loss of B function leads 
to an expression pattern of A, A, C, C, which the 
model predicts would generate sepal, sepal, car­
pel, carpel—precisely the phenotype observed in a 
B function mutant). To explain the phenotypes of 
the A and C function mutants it is necessary to pos­
tulate the mutual repression of the A and C func­
tion genes, so that loss of one causes the other to 
spread across the meristem. A C function mutant 
would then have the expression pattern A, AB, AB, 
A, which would lead to a phenotype of sepal, petal, 
petal, sepal. The reverse applies to the A function 
mutant. Finally, the model was tested using com­
binations of mutants. Coen and Meyerowitz (1991) 
used the model to predict the phenotypes of dou­
ble mutant combinations in Arabidopsis, and then 
generated those mutants through genetic crosses. 
All double mutants carried the predicted pheno­
type, confirming the validity of the model. A triple 
mutant containing neither A, B, nor C gene activity 
produced four whorls of leaves where its floral or­
gans should be, lending support to Goethe’s foliar 
theory.
10.1.1  A function genes
The concept of A function is the part of the ABC 
model that has stood up least well to detailed mo­
lecular analysis. Extension of the model to a wide 
range of species has also revealed difficulties with 
conventional A function. Here we shall focus on A 
function in Arabidopsis, and comment on the situa­
tion in Antirrhinum. Chapter 11 discusses a revised 
concept of A function in the light of studies in a 
broad range of species.
In Arabidopsis there are two A function genes, 
although both play other roles in plant develop­
ment. The APETALA 2 (AP2) gene (introduced in 
Chapter  9) acts as an A function gene, as well as 
playing its role in floral meristem identity. The ap2 
mutant has carpels/stamens/stamens/carpels in 
its four whorls, the expected phenotype of an A 

Development of the floral organs      105
(Sundstrom et al. 2006). Unlike AP2, AP1 has little 
role in the repression of C function genes. In ap1 
mutant flowers the C function gene AGAMOUS 
is not expressed ectopically in whorls 1 and 2, in­
dicating that AP1 is not involved in the repression 
of AG activity (Weigel and Meyerowitz 1993). AP1 
therefore meets some of the criteria of an A func­
tion gene, being restricted in its expression pattern 
to whorls 1 and 2 by C function gene activity (and 
B function activity) and being necessary to specify 
correct sepal and petal development, but it does 
not itself repress C function activity, indicating that 
the different aspects of A function activity can be 
separated.
The situation in Antirrhinum is even more com­
plex. The original Antirrhinum A function mutant, 
ovulata, has the same phenotype as ap1 and ap2 mu­
tant flowers (see Fig. 10.2b; Carpenter and Coen 
1990), but molecular analysis revealed that this phe­
notype results from ectopic expression of the Antir­
rhinum C function gene PLENA (PLE), as a result 
of a transposon insertion within an intron of PLE 
(Bradley et al. 1993). No other A function mutants 
have been identified from Antirrhinum mutagen­
esis programmes, although multiple examples of 
the B and C function mutants have been obtained.
To investigate the possibility that genetic redun­
dancy between several A function genes was re­
sponsible for the absence of a mutant, Keck et  al. 
(2003) isolated two AP2-like genes from Antirrhi­
num and investigated their function. The genes 
were named LIPLESS I and LIPLESS 2 (LIP1 and 
LIP2), and encode proteins that are 72% identical to 
one another, with each being 65% identical to AP2. 
A reverse genetic approach was used to identify 
transposon insertions in each gene, but both mu­
tants were found to be phenotypically wild type. 
However, the double mutant created by crossing 
them did show phenotypic abnormalities. In the 
lip1/lip2 double mutant, sepals were converted to 
leaf-like organs and petals were much reduced, 
with no lips and underdeveloped lobes. Stamens 
were also shorter than wild type, and the ovules 
were carpelloid in structure, resulting in female ste­
rility. Both genes were found to be expressed in se­
pal primordia early in development, and then later 
in developing petals and carpels. The C function 
gene PLENA was expressed normally in whorls 3 
Chapter 9). The ap1 mutant flower has the classic 
carpel/stamen/stamen/carpel phenotype (shown 
in Fig. 10.2a.), although the more important role 
of the gene in floral meristem identity may mask 
the floral homeotic phenotype except in long days 
(Mandel et al. 1992). AP1 encodes a MADS box tran­
scription factor, and is the first of the ABC genes to 
be expressed in the floral meristem, because of its 
essential role in establishing the floral identity of 
that meristem (Mandel et al. 1992). The initial ex­
pression of AP1 is in all four floral whorls, but it is 
repressed by the activity of the C function gene, and 
confined to whorls 1 and 2 later in flower develop­
ment (Gustafson-Brown et al. 1994). It has recently 
been shown that this restriction of AP1 transcript is 
also a direct result of the activity of the B function 
genes (APETALA 3 and PISTILLATA; see below), 
whose protein products bind to the AP1 promoter 
(e)
(b)
(d)
(f)
(c)
(a)
Figure 10.2  The original ABC mutants. (a) apetala 1 (A function in 
Arabidopsis). (b) ovulata (A function in Antirrhinum) (right) compared 
with wild type (left). (c) apetala 3 (B function in Arabidopsis). 
(d) deficiens (B function in Antirrhinum) (right) compared with 
wild type (left). (e) agamous (C function in Arabidopsis). (f) plena 
(C function in Antirrhinum) (right) compared with wild type (left). 
Antirrhinum images kindly supplied by Enrico Coen (John Innes 
Centre). Image (e) provided by Ian Furner (University of Cambridge). 
See also Plate 5.

106      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
by AP3 and DEF are 61% identical, and both of 
them encode MADS box transcription factors. In 
situ hybridization revealed that both AP3 and DEF 
are expressed in the second and third whorl organ 
primordia from a very early stage, right through 
to development of the mature petals and stamens 
(Jack et al. 1992; Schwarz-Sommer et al. 1992). In 
fact, analysis of a temperature-sensitive def mutant 
line, in which DEF activity can be repressed at vari­
ous stages of development by transferring plants to 
different temperature regimes, revealed that DEF 
activity is necessary throughout petal development. 
Loss of DEF expression in later stages of petal de­
velopment results in a reversion to more sepaloid 
characters, such as green streaks at the edges of 
the tissue (Zachgo et al. 1995). Although transgenic 
experiments are rarely conducted in Antirrhinum, 
which is very difficult to transform, ectopic expres­
sion of AP3 in Arabidopsis using the CaMV 35S 
promoter resulted in the conversion of the carpels 
to stamens, confirming that B and C activity is suf­
ficient to induce stamen formation. In the fourth 
whorl of these transgenic plants, expression of the 
other Arabidopsis B function gene, PISTILLATA 
(PI), was activated, suggesting that AP3 and PI reg­
ulate each other’s expression.
The PI gene also encodes a MADS box transcrip­
tion factor, and was isolated through its similar­
ity to the second B function gene of Antirrhinum, 
GLOBOSA (GLO) (Goto and Meyerowitz 1994). 
GLO had been previously isolated in a search for 
novel MADS box transcription factors in Antirrhi­
num (Trobner et al. 1992). The two proteins are 58% 
identical at the amino acid level, and mutation of 
either gene results in plants that are phenotypically 
identical to def and ap3 mutants. Both genes are also 
expressed throughout the petals and stamens from 
early development to maturity (Trobner et al. 1992; 
Goto and Meyerowitz 1994). The apparent identity 
of the ap3 and pi (or def and glo) mutant phenotypes 
was surprising in view of the differences in the gene 
sequences. Outside the MADS box domain, the pro­
teins encoded by the two B function genes in each 
species are quite dissimilar. However, molecular 
analysis established that DEF and GLO function 
as a heterodimer, and only activate transcription 
of downstream genes once they have heterodimer­
ized. Since the heterodimer is absent from both 
and 4 in this double mutant, and its expression did 
not extend into whorls 1 and 2. These data suggest 
that LIP1 and LIP2 act together to specify some as­
pects of A function in Antirrhinum. They are clearly 
necessary for correct sepal and petal development, 
and are expressed in whorls 1 and 2. However, un­
like AP2 they play no role in repressing the activity 
of C function genes, and so loss of their function 
does not result in homeotic conversion of organs.
The AP1 orthologue in Antirrhinum is SQUA­
MOSA (SQUA) (which was introduced in Chap­
ter 9). However, the squa mutant does not have an 
A function mutant phenotype, instead displaying 
an extreme conversion of floral meristems to in­
florescence meristems. This suggests that SQUA is 
involved primarily in the establishment of floral 
meristem identity, and does not play much of a role 
in organ morphogenesis, unlike AP1.
10.1.2  B function genes
B function has been the simplest of the ABC func­
tions to understand. Molecular analysis has re­
vealed that there are two B function genes, both 
of which encode MADS box transcription factors, 
and that these proteins act as a heterodimer. The 
system is conserved between Arabidopsis and An­
tirrhinum, and indeed genes from one species can 
act in place of the equivalent gene from the other 
species. The B function genes do not seem to play 
any other role in plant development, and their ex­
pression profile is restricted to the second and third 
whorl of the developing flower. The only area of B 
function activity that still requires significant analy­
sis is the regulation of their expression within such 
tightly defined boundaries, as this regulation does 
not appear to occur as a result of their interactions 
with other ABC genes.
The first B function gene in Arabidopsis is 
APETALA 3 (AP3). The ap3 mutant has the classic 
B function phenotype of sepals/sepals/carpels/
carpels (see Fig. 10.2c). AP3 was cloned using the 
Antirrhinum B function gene DEFICIENS (DEF) as 
a probe (Jack et al. 1992). DEF had previously been 
isolated by subtractive hybridization using def mu­
tant and wild type tissue (Sommer et al. 1990).
The def mutant also has the classic B function 
phenotype (see Fig. 10.2d). The proteins encoded 

Development of the floral organs      107
striking number of genes appear to be direct or in­
direct targets of B function activity. In Arabidopsis, 
microarray analysis has indicated that 200–1100 
genes depend on the activity of AP3 and PI for 
their expression, the number varying with devel­
opmental stage and experimental design (Zik and 
Irish 2003; Wellmer et al. 2004; Wuest et al. 2012). 
Mara et al. (2010) found that three genes nega­
tively regulated by the AP3-PI heterodimer were 
required for photomorphogenesis, suggesting that 
their downregulation by B function might allow 
petals to develop without reference to the light 
regime (which is significant in regulating leaf size 
and shape). Wuest et al. (2012) used conditional ex­
pression of an artificial microRNA to downregulate 
AP3 and PI at different developmental stages, and 
discovered that early expression of the B function 
genes was necessary for maximal transcriptional 
effects on other genes, but that later expression 
was particularly important for petal (as opposed 
to stamen) development. In Antirrhinum, macroar­
rays have been used to explore genes differentially 
expressed between sepal and petal development, 
and at different stages of petal development, ­using 
the temperature-sensitive def-101 allele (Bey et al. 
2004). Over 500 genes were found to be differen­
tially regulated during petal development, and 
of those that were upregulated, the most frequent 
groups were of genes involved in cell cycle, cell 
growth, or secondary metabolism, all essential fea­
tures of petal development.
The striking similarity of the sequences and 
mode of action of the B function genes in Arabi­
dopsis and Antirrhinum led Irish and Yamamoto 
(1995) to investigate whether the proteins they en­
code could cross species boundaries. They created 
a construct containing the DEF cDNA fused to the 
AP3 promoter, and transferred it into Arabidopsis 
plants mutant for AP3. The construct was able to 
rescue a weak mutant phenotype completely, and a 
strong mutant phenotype partially, confirming that 
B function has been conserved to a very high degree 
throughout eudicot evolution.
10.1.3  C function genes
C function is relatively simple, in that it is controlled 
by a single gene in each species analysed. That gene 
mutants, they are phenotypically identical (Trobner 
et al. 1992). The same has proved to be true of AP3 
and PI, which also function as a heterodimer. It has 
also been shown that the two B function genes in 
each species are responsible for the maintenance of 
each other’s transcription. Although the transcrip­
tion of DEF and GLO is initially regulated by other 
factors, once they are both active they take over the 
regulation of one another, and the same is true of 
AP3 and PI (Schwarz-Sommer et al. 1992; Goto and 
Meyerowitz 1994).
The activation of B function gene expression is 
primarily achieved through the actions of floral 
meristem identity genes. In Arabidopsis, LEAFY 
has been shown to induce AP3 expression. The lfy 
mutant has reduced levels of AP3 expression and 
a reduced domain of AP3 activity (Weigel and 
Meyerowitz 1993). The UFO protein is also neces­
sary for AP3 expression, as the ufo mutant contains 
reduced levels of AP3 transcript and fewer petals 
and stamens (Levin and Meyerowitz 1995). Trans­
genic experiments have shown that LFY and UFO 
together are sufficient to activate AP3 expression. 
Although ectopic expression of LFY and UFO from 
the CaMV 35S promoter results in plants that die 
before flowering, it was possible to show that the 
transgenic seedlings expressed AP3 by adding an 
AP3 promoter fused to a reporter gene to the ex­
periment. In the transgenic seedlings, reporter gene 
activity was observed, indicating that AP3 expres­
sion had occurred (Parcy et al. 1998). It is also ap­
parent that B function gene expression is repressed 
during vegetative growth by the activity of DELLA 
proteins. Gibberellin directly inactivates DELLA 
proteins, and thus causes flower development by 
allowing expression of AP3 and PI (Yu et al. 2004). 
This direct activation of B function genes (and also 
AGAMOUS, the C function gene) is a secondary 
route through which gibberellins induce flowering, 
alongside their role in activating floral meristem 
identity genes (discussed in Chapter 6).
One current area of fruitful research into B func­
tion is the analysis of downstream genes. Until 
recently, subtractive and differential methods had 
been used to identify a small number of genes act­
ing downstream of the B function genes. However, 
high-throughput techniques have recently been 
applied to this problem, and have revealed that a 

108      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
its expression is restricted to whorls 3 and 4 even 
in a double lip1/lip2 mutant (Keck et al. 2003). Con­
versely, AG itself represses AP1 expression, which 
is initially throughout the floral meristem but is re­
stricted to whorls 1 and 2 following the expression 
of AG (Gustafson-Brown et al. 1994). It is clear that 
the postulated mutual A/C repression of the origi­
nal ABC model operates through both A function 
genes. AP2 represses AG in whorls 1 and 2, but is 
not itself influenced by AG activity, instead being 
restricted in its zone of action by miR172. AG re­
presses AP1 in whorls 3 and 4, but is not itself influ­
enced by AP1 activity. C function represses one of 
the A function genes, and is itself repressed by the 
other one (see Fig. 10.3). The expression domain of 
the C function genes is also determined by a num­
ber of other genes, the cadastral genes (which are 
discussed in Section 10.4).
Although AG and PLE are very similar in se­
quence and play the same C function role in Arabi­
dopsis and Antirrhinum, it has become clear that 
they are non-orthologous genes derived from a 
duplication in a common ancestor. This duplication 
led to two lineages of closely related MADS box 
genes. In Arabidopsis, these lineages are represent­
ed by AG and SHATTERPROOF. In Antirrhinum, 
PLE is the orthologue of SHATTERPROOF while 
FARINELLI is the orthologue of AG. It is hypoth­
esized that C function represents the ancestral role 
of the original, pre-duplication gene, and that this 
function has been retained by different members 
of the duplicated gene pair—by the AG gene in the 
Arabidopsis lineage, but by the SHATTERPROOF-
like gene (PLE) in the Antirrhinum lineage (Caus­
ier et al. 2005). Regulation of the C function gene 
is also involved in floral meristem identity, main­
taining the determinate nature of the meristem, and 
so, like A function genes, C function genes are clas­
sified as both floral meristem identity genes and 
floral organ identity genes. The C function mutants 
have a sepal/petal/petal/sepal phenotype (see 
Figs. 10.2e and f), although the indeterminacy of the 
floral meristem in the mutants makes it hard to fol­
low the development of the inner whorls, as extra 
whorls of organs develop within the first four. The 
AGAMOUS (AG) gene was isolated from a T-DNA 
tagged line of Arabidopsis and encodes a MADS 
box transcription factor (Yanofsky et al. 1990). The 
Antirrhinum C function gene, PLENA (PLE), was 
isolated from a mutant line containing a transposon 
insertion in the gene, and the proteins encoded by 
PLE and AG were shown to be 64% identical (Brad­
ley et al. 1993). However, it has become clear that AG 
and PLE are non-orthologous genes derived from a 
duplication in a common ancestor (see below).
Initial activation of AG expression requires the 
activities of LFY and WUS. Ectopic expression of 
LFY causes ectopic expression of AG (Parcy et al. 
1998), and the second intron of AG has been shown 
to contain sequences which are bound in vitro by 
LFY (Busch et al. 1999). This second intron had pre­
viously been shown to be essential for correct regu­
lation of AG expression (Sieburth and Meyerowitz 
1997). The WUS homeodomain transcription factor 
is active very early in flower development in whorls 
3 and 4, and also binds to the second intron of AG 
to activate its expression (Lohmann et al. 2001). AG 
then downregulates WUS expression to ensure that 
the floral meristem remains determinate (Lohmann 
et al. 2001). An additional cofactor, PERIANTHIA 
(PAN), has recently been shown to act with LFY and 
WUS in the activation of AG expression, and also 
binds to the second intron of AG (Das et al. 2009; 
Maier et al. 2009). In addition, gibberellin has been 
shown to activate AG expression through inactiva­
tion of DELLA proteins that inhibit B and C func­
tion gene expression (Yu et al. 2004).
The expression of AG in whorls 3 and 4 of the de­
veloping flower is regulated in part by antagonism 
with AP2, the A function gene, as in ap2 mutants 
AG expression spreads into whorls 1 and 2 (Drews 
et al. 1991). However, in Antirrhinum, PLE expres­
sion is not regulated by the LIP1 and LIP2 genes, as 
AP1
AP2
AG
Figure 10.3  The C function gene, AGAMOUS, is repressed from 
whorls 1 and 2 by one of the A function genes, APETALA 2, but 
represses the activity of the other A function gene, APETALA 1, in 
whorls 3 and 4.

Development of the floral organs      109
later when single loss of function mutants in either 
gene were shown to have wild type ovule develop­
ment (Vandenbussche et al. 2003b). FBP11 activity is 
sufficient to induce ovule formation, as ectopic ex­
pression of the gene in petunia, using the CaMV 35S 
promoter, causes the formation of ectopic ovules 
on the sepals of whorl 1 and the petals of whorl 2 
(­Colombo et al. 1995).
Investigation of FBP7- and FBP11-like genes in 
Arabidopsis revealed that the MADS box-encoding 
gene SEEDSTICK (STK) is orthologous to both FBP7 
and FBL11 (Pinyopich et al. 2003). STK was shown 
to act redundantly with two other MADS box genes, 
SHATTERPROOF 1 (SHP1) and SHP2, to specify 
ovule identity in Arabidopsis. Pinyopich et al. (2003) 
showed that the stk mutant has defects in funiculus 
development, but that the ovules are otherwise nor­
mal. Similarly, a double mutant between shp1 and 
shp2 has perturbations in seed dehiscence, but ovule 
development is undisturbed. However, a triple shp1/
shp2/stk mutant has arrested ovule development, in­
dicating that at least one of the three genes must be 
active to specify the ovule fate. SHP1 and SHP2 en­
code MADS box proteins that are more similar to the 
C function AG than to the D function STK (they are 
the gene lineage that gives rise to the C function gene 
PLENA in Antirrhinum). The fact that each of the STK, 
SHP1, and SHP2 genes is also sufficient for ovule de­
velopment was shown by Favaro et al. (2003). Ectopic 
expression of STK, SHP1, or SHP2 was sufficient to 
induce the formation of ectopic ovules on sepals 
and petals. However, it was also shown that ectopic 
expression of STK induced expression of SHP1 and 
SHP2 in outer whorls of the flower, implying that 
the three genes regulate each other’s expression 
and function together to specify ovule identity. The 
downstream targets of the ovule-specifying complex 
are currently under analysis. Matias-Hernandez et al. 
(2010) identified the ­VERDANDI (VDD) gene as a 
direct target of the complex that encodes a transcrip­
tion factor necessary for correct specification of cell 
identities within the ovule.
The D function genes are thought to act together 
with the C function gene AG to specify ovule identi­
ty. Ectopic expression of STK in Arabidopsis induc­
es ectopic AG expression (Favaro et al. 2003). Recent 
studies of transposon-induced mutants in petunia 
further support this model of combinatorial action. 
apparently works through similar mechanisms, 
whichever gene lineage is providing the function. 
Causier et al. (2009) used in planta mutagenesis to 
demonstrate that the LFY binding site and other 
conserved regions of the Antirrhinum PLE second 
intron are essential to proper spatial and temporal 
expression of the gene, just as they are in Arabidop­
sis AG. However, subsequent mutations have dif­
ferentiated the ability of the non-C function lineage 
in each species to fulfill the C function role if ec­
topically expressed. Although expression of Arabi­
dopsis SHP in the third and fourth floral whorls is 
sufficient to induce carpel and stamen formation 
(Pinyopich et al. 2003), a splice site mutation has 
introduced an extra amino acid into Antirrhinum 
FAR, and ectopic expression of this gene causes sta­
men, but not carpel, initiation (Airoldi et al. 2010).
10.2  The role of D function genes
An additional class of homeotic genes, the D func­
tion genes, was described in Petunia hybrida (Sola­
nales) in 1995. The D function genes are required for 
ovule and placenta development within the carpel, 
and without their activity the ovules are replaced 
by carpelloid structures. The D function genes are 
late acting and work in combination with the C 
function genes to specify ovule development.
The mature Arabidopsis ovule consists of a hap­
loid embryo sac with two layers of protective in­
teguments, connected to the maternal tissue by a 
stalk-like structure called the funiculus. The Arabi­
dopsis ovule differentiates from the inner carpel 
wall, although in petunia the ovules are produced 
directly from the floral meristem, which remains 
active after the emergence of the carpel primordia. 
The development of the gametes themselves will be 
discussed in Chapter 12, but the ovule represents an 
appendage of a floral organ, within the carpels, and 
so is considered in this section.
The D function genes were defined following the 
discovery that two MADS box proteins in petunia, 
FLORAL BINDING PROTEIN 7 (FBP7) and FBP11, 
were necessary for ovule development. Downregu­
lation of both FBP7 and FBP11 by co-suppression 
resulted in the replacement of ovules by carpelloid 
structures (Angenent et al. 1995). The fact that the 
two genes function redundantly was demonstrated 

110      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
their job, and therefore necessary for petal, stamen, 
and carpel development (Pelaz et al. 2000). The tri­
ple mutant also had reduced determinacy of the flo­
ral meristem, suggesting that the E function genes 
act with AGAMOUS to maintain the determinate 
state of the floral meristem.
A fourth E function gene was later identified in 
Arabidopsis. SEP4 encodes a protein with very 
strong sequence similarity to the other SEP proteins, 
and with an initially similar expression pattern in 
all four whorls of the young flower. This expression 
later resolves into a strong signal in whorl 1, with 
weaker expression in the rest of the flower. Ditta 
et al. (2004) identified a mutant line with a T-DNA 
insertion in SEP4, and found the plant to be pheno­
typically wild type. However, when they construct­
ed a sep1/sep2/sep3/sep4 quadruple mutant they 
discovered that the flowers produced four whorls 
of leaf-like organs. The conversion of floral organs 
to leaves (rather than sepals, as in the sep1/sep2/sep3 
triple mutant) was apparent from the larger size of 
the organs, the amoeboid shape of their epidermal 
cells, and the branched nature of their trichomes 
(Arabidopsis sepal trichomes do not branch). These 
data indicate that SEP4 is necessary for sepal devel­
opment, whereas the other three SEP genes are only 
necessary for the development of petals, stamens, 
and carpels.
Transgenic plants ectopically expressing any one 
of the SEP genes using the CaMV 35S promoter 
are not phenotypically very different to wild type, 
showing only mild alterations to the sepals (see 
Fig. 10.4b). However, combination of the E func­
tion genes with the ABC genes is sufficient to con­
vert leaves into floral organs. Specifically, Honma 
and Goto (2001) showed that ectopic expression of 
SEP3, SEP2, AP3, PI, and AP1 (i.e. A, B, and E) was 
sufficient to convert all leaves to petals. They also 
showed that ectopic expression of SEP3, AG, PI, and 
AP3 (i.e. B, C, and E) was sufficient to convert all 
cauline leaves (but not rosette leaves) to stamens 
(see Fig. 10.4c). These experiments demonstrated 
that the ABC genes are sufficient in combination 
with the E function genes to convert vegetative or­
gans into floral ones.
The interactions between the ABC and E genes 
are based on physical contact and complex for­
mation, rather than on regulation of one another. 
Heijmans et al. (2012b) found that the petunia D 
function genes FBP7 and FBP11 not only specified 
ovule development, but also played a role in floral 
determinacy, and that their functions in ovule de­
velopment are at least partially redundant with the 
same functions specified by the petunia C function 
genes. It is perhaps not surprising that carpel and 
ovule development, which is essential for female 
reproductive success, is apparently specified by 
an interacting and partially redundant network of 
MADS box transcription factors.
10.3  The role of E function genes
The E function genes were the latest addition to the 
ABC model, and their identification finally showed 
how combinations of transcription factors could be 
sufficient to induce floral organ identity. Although 
the ABC genes are each necessary to specify par­
ticular floral organ identities, they are not sufficient. 
Ectopic expression of the B function genes AP3 and 
PI, for example, is sufficient to convert all floral 
organs to petals or stamens, but has no effect on 
leaves (Krizek and Meyerowitz 1996). The B func­
tion genes are sufficient within the flower to modify 
organ fate, but insufficient to convert leaves into 
petals. Addition of the E function genes into the 
equation, however, is sufficient to convert vegeta­
tive organs to floral ones. The E function genes are 
necessary for the development of all floral organs 
except sepals.
SEPALLATA 1 (SEP1), SEP2, and SEP3 all encode 
MADS box transcription factors, and they are all 
expressed in whorls 2, 3, and 4 of the developing 
flower. SEP1 and SEP2 are also expressed in whorl 
1 (Flanagan and Ma 1994; Savidge et al. 1995; Man­
del and Yanofsky 1998). This led Pelaz et al. (2000) 
to develop the hypothesis that the SEP genes might 
be involved in floral organ development. Transpo­
son insertion mutants were identified in each of the 
three genes, and each single mutant was shown to 
be phenotypically wild type, as were double mutant 
combinations. However, in a triple mutant of all 
three genes the petals, stamens, and carpels were all 
converted to sepals, so the flower develops just like 
a B and C function double mutant (see Fig. 10.4a). 
The E function genes therefore act redundantly, but 
are necessary for the B and C function genes to do 

Development of the floral organs      111
10.4  The role of cadastral genes
The ABCDE genes rely on precisely defined expres­
sion patterns to ensure the production of appropri­
ate floral organs in the correct places. While some of 
these expression patterns are determined at least in 
part by mutual inhibition, such as the boundary be­
tween the A and C function genes, other expression 
patterns are determined by additional factors. A 
gene that delimits whorls and organ primordia ter­
ritories but has no obvious direct role of its own is 
called a cadastral gene. Cadastral genes may oper­
ate through the spatial regulation of the expression 
patterns of other genes or through the inhibition of 
cell proliferation in regions delimiting organogenic 
territories (Breuil-Broyer et al. 2004). Analysis of 
cadastral genes determining floral organ position­
ing has lagged some way behind the analysis of the 
Pelaz et al. (2000) showed that the ABC genes have 
normal expression patterns in sep1/sep2/sep3 triple 
mutant plants, and it had previously been shown 
that the SEP genes are normally expressed in ABC 
mutants (Flanagan and Ma 1994; Savidge et al. 1995). 
However, yeast two-hybrid studies have revealed 
physical interactions between ABC and E proteins. 
For example, AG has been shown to bind SEP1, 
SEP2, and SEP3 (Fan et al. 1997), and the AP3–PI 
heterodimer has been shown to associate with SEP3 
and AP1 (Honma and Goto 2001). These physical 
interactions are the basis of floral organ identity, 
providing complexes that function together to acti­
vate transcription of downstream genes involved in 
the detailed development of each organ.
The DEFH84, DEFH200, and DEFH72 genes func­
tion as the orthologues of SEP1, SEP2, and SEP3 in 
Antirrhinum (reviewed by Jack 2001).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 10.4  E function genes. (a) A triple 
mutant between sep1/sep2/sep3 has four 
whorls of sepals and an indeterminate 
meristem. Image kindly supplied by Gary 
Ditta and Marty Yanofsky (UCSD). (b) A plant 
ectopically expressing SEP3 shows only 
slight alterations to the sepals. (c) A plant 
ectopically expressing AP3, PI, AG, and SEP3 
has conversion of leaves to stamens. Images 
(b) and (c) kindly supplied by Koji Goto 
(Research Institute for Biological Sciences, 
Okayama).

112      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
mix of elements. Several motifs in the SUP promot­
er have been shown to be responsible for aspects of 
the temporal and spatial expression pattern, along 
with regions of the coding sequence that are likely 
to be regulated by methylation (Ito et al. 2003).
10.4.2  Regulating the C function 
expression domain
A number of cadastral genes control the extent of 
C function gene expression, marking the boundary 
between the second and third whorls and prevent­
ing the conversion of the petals into reproductive 
organs. In Arabidopsis, the repression of AG ex­
pression from whorls 1 and 2 is under the control of 
AP2, as discussed earlier, along with several other 
proteins. The genes encoding LEUNIG (LUG), 
SEUSS (SEU), and STERILE APETALA (SAP) all 
interact with AP2 to repress AG. In single mutants 
with lesions in any of these three genes, AG tran­
script is found in whorls 1 and 2 (Liu and Meyerow­
itz 1995; Byzova et al. 1999; Franks et al. 2002). LUG 
encodes a transcriptional co-repressor protein with 
several WD repeat domains, while SEU encodes a 
glutamine-rich protein with a conserved dimeri­
zation domain (Conner and Liu 2000; Franks et al. 
2002). It has been hypothesized that SEU acts as a 
bridge to mediate interaction between LUG and a 
protein complex composed of ABCE model tran­
scription factors in whorls 1 and 2 that is targeted 
to the second intron of AG by the specific DNA-
binding activity of AP2 and represses AG transcrip­
tion (Jack 2004; discussed by Liu and Mara 2010). 
Although AP2, LUG, and SEU are all expressed 
in all four whorls of the developing flower, their 
floral organ identity genes, but information is be­
ginning to emerge on the ways in which the bound­
aries of ABCDE gene expression are set.
10.4.1  Regulating the B function 
expression domain
The best studied floral cadastral gene is the 
­SUPERMAN (SUP) gene of Arabidopsis, which 
negatively regulates B function gene expression in 
whorl 4, restricting it to whorls 2 and 3. The sup 
mutant produces stamens in whorl 4, as a result of 
ectopic expression of the B function genes AP3 and 
PI in those organ primordia (see Fig. 10.5a; Bowman 
et al. 1992). SUP encodes a complex transcription 
factor protein with a zinc-finger domain, a serine/
proline-rich domain, a basic domain, and a leucine-
zipper motif (Sakai et al. 1995). SUP is not expressed 
until after the first detection of the B function genes, 
when its transcript appears in the stamen primor­
dia, adjacent to the boundary between the stamens 
and the carpels. This expression pattern has led to 
the suggestion that SUP is initially activated by AP3 
and PI, and then acts in a negative feedback loop to 
inhibit their extension into whorl 4. The SUP pro­
tein has been shown to work at least in part through 
the inhibition of cell proliferation at the boundary 
between the third and fourth whorls. Bereterbide 
et al. (2001) showed that ectopic expression of SUP 
in tobacco reduced cell number in many organs, 
with the result that individual plants were much 
shorter than wild type. Given such an effect, regu­
lation of SUP expression is particularly important. 
The precise expression pattern of SUP depends in 
part on epigenetic effects, and relies on a complex 
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.5  Cadastral genes control the 
activity patterns of other genes. (a) The 
superman mutant has inappropriate B 
function in whorl 4, generating extra 
stamens (sepals and petals removed). 
(b) The stylosa/fistulata double mutant 
has inappropriate C function in whorls 1 
and 2, generating stamens in whorl 2 and 
carpelloid sepals in whorl 1. Image kindly 
provided by the much missed Zsuzsanna 
Schwarz-Sommer (MPIZ, Cologne).

Development of the floral organs      113
The fistulata (fis) mutant also has ectopic PLE ex­
pression in whorl 2 and develops staminoid petals 
­(McSteen et al. 1998). FIS encodes a miRNA (miRFIS), 
related to the miR169 family (Cartolano et al. 2007). 
A double mutant between sty and fis produces car­
pelloid sepals in whorl 1 and stamens in whorl 2, 
essentially developing with an A function mutant 
phenotype (see Fig. 10.5b). This confirms that STY 
and FIS act as cadastral genes to ensure repression 
of C function in whorls 1 and 2, allowing A function 
genes to specify correct sepal and petal development 
(Motte et al. 1998).
10.5  The quartet model of organ identity
The combined data on floral organ identity led to 
the model that tetramers of MADS box proteins 
function to specify the identity of each floral or­
gan (Theissen and Saedler 2001). Many MADS box 
proteins have been shown to associate with other 
MADS box proteins in yeast two-hybrid and in vitro 
assays, and we know that some MADS box proteins 
(such as the B function genes) operate as a heterodi­
mer. Theissen and Saedler (2001) therefore hypoth­
esized that two dimers of MADS box proteins bind 
together and act as a complex to specify the activity 
of downstream target genes in each whorl. The situ­
ation is clearest in whorls 2 and 3, where the tetram­
ers are proposed to consist of AP1, PI, AP3, and a 
SEP protein, and PI, AP3, AG, and a SEP protein, 
repression of AG only occurs in whorls 1 and 2. This 
is likely to be because the post-translational repres­
sion of AP2 in whorls 3 and 4 means that the pro­
tein complex cannot be targeted to the AG sequence 
in cells in those whorls (Chen 2004). However, a 
recent report suggests that LUG and SEU play an 
additional role in whorls 1 and 2, acting also to re­
press miR172 and thus to ensure that AP2 activity is 
not inhibited in these outer whorls (Grigorova et al. 
2011). This conclusion was based on a combination 
of mutant analysis, chromatin binding experiments, 
and yeast two-hybrid assays, and indicates a role 
for LUG and SEU in the maintenance of A function 
activity in whorls 1 and 2, as well as in the repres­
sion of C function from those whorls. SEU and LUG 
may play additional, AG-independent roles in the 
development of petals and sepals, including regula­
tion of cell number, vasculature development, and 
organ polarity (Franks et al. 2006).
The RABBIT EARS (RBE) protein plays a similar 
role to that of SEU and LUG in the repression of AG 
activity in whorls 1 and 2. The rbe mutant has ec­
topic expression of AG in whorl 2, and consequent 
partial conversion of petals to stamens. RBE en­
codes a zinc-finger protein with many similarities 
to SUPERMAN (Takeda et al. 2003). The RBE gene is 
required not only to specify the boundary between 
whorls 2 and 3, but also to specify the boundaries 
between organs within a whorl, as some rbe mutant 
alleles have fusion of sepals and/or petals (Krizek 
et al. 2006). It has recently been shown that RBE 
acts to regulate the activity of another microRNA, 
miR164. The latter post-transcriptionally regulates 
the activity of a set of NAC domain transcription 
factors, CUC1 and CUC2, which together results in 
correct organ number and organ boundary devel­
opment in the Arabidopsis flower (Baker et al. 2005; 
Mallory et al. 2004; Sieber et al. 2007). Huang et al. 
(2012) demonstrated that RBE is a transcriptional 
repressor of miR164, and so influences organ whorl 
boundaries through a downstream effect on CUC1 
and CUC2 expression.
Several cadastral genes also act to control the re­
gion of C function activity in Antirrhinum. ­STYLOSA 
(STY) is the orthologue of LUG (Navarro et al. 2004), 
and sty mutants have ectopic expression of the 
C function gene PLE in whorl 2, and, as a conse­
quence, their petals are staminoid (Motte et al. 1998). 
AP1/2
AG
AP3
SEP 1/2/3
SEP4
PI
sepal
petal
stamen
carpel
Figure 10.6  The revised ABCE model in Arabidopsis. Tetramers of 
proteins specify the development of each whorl of organs. In whorls 
1 and 4, multiple copies of the SEP and A/C function proteins are 
believed to make up the tetramers.

114      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
and AG (C function). Perhaps not surprisingly, the 
E function protein SEP3 was most abundant in their 
assays, indicating a core supporting role in all of the 
quartet combinations. Further experiments report­
ed in the same paper confirmed that these higher-
order transcriptional complexes bound together to 
target DNA sequences.
When the data described in this chapter are taken 
together, it is clear that the floral meristem identi­
ty genes activate the expression of suites of floral 
organ identity genes, their domains of expression 
bound by cadastral genes, and that these floral or­
gan identity genes function as transcriptional acti­
vators to induce expression of the structural genes 
required to build the various floral organs.
respectively. In whorl 4 it is postulated that two AG 
molecules and two SEP proteins interact, while in 
whorl 1 it is possible that two AP1 proteins interact 
with two SEP4 molecules (see Fig. 10.6.). This model 
was initially tested by in vitro DNA-binding assays 
and analysis of protein combination in protoplasts. 
More compelling evidence in support of floral quar­
tets was provided by Smaczniak et al. (2012), who 
expressed the ABCE genes fused to GFP from their 
native promoters, and then isolated protein com­
plexes from floral tissues by immunoprecipitation 
using anti-GFP antibodies. The proteins in these 
complexes were identified biochemically, reveal­
ing that complexes of AP3 and PI (B function) in­
teracted with SEP3 (E function), AP1 (A function), 

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 11
The ABC model and the diversity 
of plant reproductive structures
In Chapter 10 we discussed floral organ develop­
ment in Arabidopsis, and the functions of a set of 
transcription factors in activating the structural 
genes necessary for correct organ development 
in the correct position. The majority of these ABC 
genes encode MADS box transcription factors, a 
very ancient family of DNA-binding proteins. By 
tracing the evolutionary history of this gene fam­
ily we can investigate the molecular processes that 
underlie the evolution of flowers, and by tracing 
the variation in regulation and function of this gene 
family we can explore the basis of floral morpho­
logical variation. In addition, this chapter consid­
ers in more detail the status of the A function genes 
as an integral part of the ABC model. Since flow­
ers are one of the key distinguishing features of the 
angiosperms, and have been argued to be respon­
sible for their astonishing radiation into the most 
species-rich plant division by far, the evolution of 
these transcription factors is of particular interest in 
reconstructing plant evolutionary history.
11.1  Evolutionary history of MADS box 
transcription factors
MADS box genes are defined by a highly conserved 
180-base-pair DNA sequence, the MADS box, which 
encodes the DNA-binding domain of the MADS 
box protein. This MADS domain folds into an N ter­
minal extension followed by an antiparallel coiled 
coil of α-helices that lies flat on the minor groove 
of DNA (Pellegrini et al. 1995). The basic structur­
al similarity of all MADS domains means that all 
MADS domain proteins bind to similar DNA se­
quences, with a consensus motif of CC(A/T)6GG, 
known as a CarG box (Theissen et al. 2002). It has 
recently been shown that the MADS domain itself 
evolved by duplication of the DNA binding domain 
of subunit A of a prokaryotic topoisomerase IIA, 
probably in an early ancestor of the eukaryotic line­
age (Gramzow et al. 2010).
MADS box genes can be divided on the basis of 
sequence homology and structural properties of the 
proteins they encode into two types, known as type 
I and type II. Both types are present in plants, ani­
mals, and fungi, suggesting not only that a MADS 
box gene was present in the single-celled eukaryote 
that was the last common ancestor of these three 
great multicellular kingdoms, but also that a gene 
duplication event had already occurred in that line­
age, giving rise to at least two MADS box genes at 
least 1 billion years ago (Alvarez-Buylla et al. 2000). 
In a more detailed analysis, Gramzow et al. (2010) 
aligned MADS box genes from all available major 
eukaryotic lineages. They identified a number of 
instances of loss of either type I or type II MADS 
box genes, and a surprising absence of MADS box 
sequences in the excavate lineage (Trichomonas vagi­
nalis and Giardia lamblia), but found that the distri­
bution of type I and type II genes was consistent 
with a duplication having occurred in or before the 
most recent common ancestor of the extant eukary­
otic lineages.
In animals, type I MADS boxes include the hu­
man SERUM RESPONSE FACTOR (SRF) gene 
family, a highly conserved group of genes with 
roles in response to growth factors and subsequent 
development. Fungal type I MADS boxes include 
MINICHROMOSOME MAINTENANCE 1 (MCM1) 
of yeast, which regulates the cell cycle and cell 

116      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
I (Intervening) domain, a K (Keratin-like) domain, 
and a C (C terminal) domain. The MADS domain is 
responsible for DNA binding but also plays a role 
in dimerization. The I domain is only weakly con­
served, consists of around 30 amino acids, and is 
involved in the selective formation of DNA-binding 
dimers (Reichmann et al. 1996). Although dimers 
can potentially form between any combination of 
MADS box proteins, only certain dimer combina­
tions bind DNA. Without the I domain, the speci­
ficity of the interaction between dimers and DNA 
is lost. The K domain contains hydrophobic amino 
acids at regular intervals, generating an amphip­
athic helix involved in protein–protein interactions 
(reviewed by Kaufmann et al. 2005). The K domain 
is absent from type II MADS boxes in animals and 
fungi, and seems to be a plant-specific innovation, 
perhaps enhancing flexibility of transcriptional 
regulation by allowing multiple complexes to form 
from different combinations of MADS domain pro­
teins (Alvarez-Buylla et al. 2000). The C terminus 
of the plant type II MADS boxes is the most vari­
able region of the protein, and can fulfil a number 
of functions. It may be involved in transcriptional 
activation, through interaction with components 
of the cell’s core transcriptional machinery, or it 
may be necessary for the formation of multiprotein 
complexes which themselves are necessary for tran­
scriptional activation (Egea-Cortines et al. 1999).
The plant type II MADS box genes can be di­
vided into two types, known as the MIKCc and 
MIKC* types (Henschel et al. 2002). There are 40 
MIKCc genes in the Arabidopsis genome, and only 
6 MIKC* genes (Kwantes et al. 2012). The differences 
between these two groups of proteins include much 
longer I domains in MIKC* MADS boxes and diver­
gent K domains. Both types of gene are present in 
the moss Physcomitrella, as well as in the lycophyte 
Selaginella, suggesting that they are derived from a 
gene duplication event that occurred early in land 
plant evolution. This gene duplication can be dated 
to before the divergence of the bryophyte groups 
from the vascular plants, around 450 million years 
ago (Henschel et al. 2002). The MIKC* genes have 
only recently been the subject of molecular genetic 
analyses. These suggest important roles in gameto­
phyte development, and analysis of the gene family 
across the land plant lineage suggests that this role 
growth. The plant type I MADS boxes have been 
less well studied than the plant type II MADS 
boxes. They are defined by their similarity to the 
MADS domain of animal SRF, but show a number 
of clear differences from the type II genes. Plant 
type I MADS box genes are generally shorter than 
type II genes, are usually formed of a single exon, 
and are focused in a few regions of the genome 
where recent duplications seem to have occurred. 
Parenicova et al. (2003) divided the 61 Arabidopsis 
type I MADS box genes into three subfamilies with 
distinct structural elements, the Mα, Mβ, and Mγ 
subgroups. Dimerization within subgroups has 
been shown to be rare, with type I MADS boxes act­
ing either as heterodimers between subgroups or as 
single proteins (Immink et al. 2009). The great vari­
ability and low expression levels of the Arabidopsis 
type I MADS box genes have contributed to the lack 
of generalizations about their function. However, a 
number of recent analyses suggest that they might 
frequently play roles in male and female gameto­
phyte development, and in embryo and endosperm 
function (reviewed by Masiero et al. 2011).
The animal type II MADS box genes are involved 
in muscle-specific gene regulation, while the small 
number of fungal type II MADS boxes (two in 
yeast) have yet to be fully characterized (reviewed 
by Becker and Theissen 2003). However, the plant 
type II MADS box proteins have been extensively 
studied, and include the ABC genes discussed in 
Chapter 10.
There are 46 type II MADS box genes in the 
Arabidopsis genome, and all plant type II MADS 
boxes share a common domain structure, which 
has led to them also being known as MIKC MADS 
boxes (see Fig. 11.1; Munster et al. 1997; Heijmans 
et al. 2012a). In addition to the MADS domain, de­
scribed above, plant type II MADS boxes contain an 
DNA
binding
N
C
C
K
I
MADS
Dimerization Protein–protein interactions
Figure 11.1  The structural domains of plant type II MADS box 
proteins, with their functions indicated underneath.

THE ABC MODEL AND DIVERSITY OF STRUCTURES      117
Several homologues of Arabidopsis B function 
genes have been isolated from conifers, notably 
from Pinus radiata (Monterey pine) and Picea abies 
(Norway spruce), and similar B function-like genes 
have also been isolated from Gnetum. The gymno­
sperm B function-like genes always resolve as the 
most ancestral of the B function genes in phyloge­
netic analyses (Zahn et al. 2005). In situ hybridiza­
tion studies have shown that all of these genes are 
expressed in the pollen cones, but not in the female 
cones, and usually in no other plant tissue at all. 
This strongly suggests that the gymnosperm B func­
tion genes have a role in male reproductive struc­
ture development, just as the B function genes have 
a role in producing stamens in angiosperm flowers. 
Interestingly, it appears that the formation of heter­
odimers which are obligate for functionality is a re­
cent trait in the B function genes. Winter et al. (2002) 
showed that one of the two Gnetum B function pro­
teins, GGM2, preferentially formed homodimers in 
vitro, rather than heterodimerizing with AP3, DEF, 
might be a conserved one that originated in the ear­
liest land plant groups (Kwantes et al. 2012).
The MIKCc type II MADS box genes are the better 
studied subgroup. They can be further subdivided 
into clades, the number of which depends on the 
method of analysis used. Becker and Theissen (2003) 
divided the group into 13 clades, each described by 
the name of the first clade member to be identified. 
Functional analysis of the genes in these clades has 
led to hypotheses about the functions of the ances­
tral gene in each group. Analysis of the groups in 
different plant species has determined that at least 
six distinct MIKCc MADS box genes were present 
in the last common ancestor of the gymnosperms 
and the angiosperms, which diverged around 300 
million years ago.
11.2  ABC genes in gymnosperms
Among the clades of MADS box proteins identi­
fied in both angiosperms and gymnosperms are the 
groups containing the B function genes and the C 
and D function genes. Analysis of the function of 
these genes in plants that do not produce flowers 
has helped us to understand the evolution of the 
angiosperm flower we see today. Most molecular 
work on gymnosperms is conducted on conifers, 
and a lesser amount on cycads and gnetophytes, 
particularly the tree Gnetum gnemon (see Chapter 1 
for a reminder of the relationships between the dif­
ferent gymnosperms). The reproductive structures 
of conifers differ from those of angiosperms in sev­
eral major respects, and are described in detail in 
Chapter 1, along with a discussion of the homology 
between gymnosperm cones and angiosperm repro­
ductive structures. Briefly, conifers do not produce 
hermaphroditic reproductive structures, but two 
types of cones (see Fig. 11.2a). The male cones are 
usually quite small, and release pollen. The female 
cones contain the ovules, which in turn contain the 
female gametes, on individual scales. Notably, the 
ovules are not entirely enclosed within maternal 
tissue as they are in the angiosperms. Another big 
difference between gymnosperm and angiosperm 
reproductive structures is the absence of a perianth 
in gymnosperms, resulting in reproductive struc­
tures that rarely attract animals to transfer gametes.
C
(a)
(b)
C
Male cone
Female cone
B
Figure 11.2  Gymnosperms and the ABC genes. (a) Male (left) and 
female (right) pine cones. (b) B and C function genes are sufficient to 
specify male cone development, while C function genes alone specify 
female cone development.

118      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
C function genes, just as in Arabidopsis, confers a 
reproductive identity on an organ. It seems to be 
the case in gymnosperms that it is expression of the 
B function gene that determines which sort of re­
productive structure is produced. Expression of B 
function genes as well as C function genes results in 
the development of a male reproductive structure, 
a pollen cone. Expression of just C function genes 
alone results in the development of a female repro­
ductive structure, a seed cone (see Fig. 11.2b). This 
ability of B function genes to specify male identity 
to a reproductive structure also fits with the role of 
B function genes in producing stamens in the third 
whorl of the angiosperm flower. On the basis of 
these observations it has been proposed that the de­
velopment of the classic hermaphroditic reproduc­
tive structure of the angiosperms involved a change 
in B function activity in an axis of a gymnosperm 
that produced only male or only female cones. 
Loss of B function gene expression from the upper 
regions of a male axis would result in the produc­
tion of female organs within whorls of male organs. 
Similarly, gain of B function gene expression in the 
lower regions of a female axis would result in the 
production of male organs outside whorls of female 
organs (Theissen et al. 2002). These scenarios are 
discussed further in Chapter 1.
The presence of E function genes in the gymno­
sperms is currently uncertain. The SEP genes of 
Arabidopsis form a distinct clade in MADS box 
phylogenies, and no member of that clade has been 
isolated from a gymnosperm. However, the SEP 
clade clusters in a superclade with the AGAMOUS 
LIKE 6 (AGL6) genes, and members of this group 
have been identified in Pinus, Picea, and Gnetum. 
The function of AGL6 in Arabidopsis has not been 
well defined, but several recent reports in petunia 
(Solanales), wheat, and rice (both Poales) have in­
dependently suggested that AGL6 clade genes have 
a role as E function genes redundant with the SEP 
clade genes (Ohmori et al. 2009; Rijpkema et al. 2009; 
Thompson et al. 2009). The work in petunia found 
that an agl6 mutant allele, when combined with a 
sep mutant, results in a greater degree of floral or­
gan perturbation than is seen in a sep mutant alone 
(Rijpkema et al. 2009). In maize, the positional clon­
ing of a mutant allele perturbing floral organ and 
floral meristem development identified another 
or GLO. This result was replicated in a yeast two-
hybrid analysis, and it was further shown that the 
GGM2 homodimers were able to bind DNA in a per­
fectly functional manner. Obligate heterodimeriza­
tion, as shown by the Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum 
B function proteins, may therefore have evolved 
later in B function history, following further gene 
duplication events. In many other respects the 
gymnosperm B function genes appear very simi­
lar to angiosperm ones. Indeed, Sundstrom and 
Engstrom (2002) showed that ectopic expression of 
the B function genes DAL11 and DAL12 from Picea 
abies in Arabidopsis resulted in the same phenotype 
as that observed when the endogenous B function 
gene PI was ectopically expressed, even though the 
spruce proteins also form homodimers.
Genes that fall into the C/D function clade have 
been isolated from all seed plant groups, including 
the gymnosperms Cycas, Ginkgo, Gnetum, and Picea 
(a conifer). Each of these C function genes has been 
shown to be expressed in both the seed cones and 
the pollen cones, indicating that C function is ac­
tive in all reproductive structures in gymnosperms. 
This mirrors the situation in angiosperms where C 
function genes are expressed in both whorls 3 and 
4, specifying the reproductive identity of organs in 
those whorls. In one of the earliest reports of gym­
nosperm C function, Rutledge et al. (1998) showed 
that the Picea mariana (black spruce) SAG1 gene 
was expressed in the pollen and seed cones, and 
that ectopic expression of the gene in Arabidopsis 
phenocopied ectopic expression of AGAMOUS 
itself, generating first whorl carpels and second 
whorl stamens. In a very similar paper, published 
concurrently, Tandre et al. (1998) showed that the 
Picea abies (Norway spruce) C function gene DAL2 
was also expressed in reproductive organs and 
could mimic AGAMOUS activity when ectopically 
expressed in Arabidopsis. More recently, Zhang 
et al. (2004) showed that the C function gene from 
the cycad Cycas edentata could complement the 
Arabidopsis agamous mutant when expressed using 
the Arabidopsis AGAMOUS promoter. These data 
confirm the strong conservation of C function pro­
teins over 300 million years of evolutionary history.
Thus it appears that the last common ancestor of 
gymnosperms and angiosperms had a functional 
set of B and C/D function genes. Expression of the 

THE ABC MODEL AND DIVERSITY OF STRUCTURES      119
specify reproductive identity, just as the related SEP 
genes do in angiosperms, there may be no need for 
a separate SQUA-like lineage in the gymnosperms. 
However, the duplication event that led to the es­
tablishment and subsequent radiation of this clade 
may be in part responsible for some of the radiation 
of angiosperm floral form.
11.3  ABC genes in early diverging 
angiosperms
In Chapter 1 (Section 1.5) we noted that the greatest 
diversity of floral body plans occurs in the earliest 
diverging groups of angiosperms, while the more 
recently evolved monocots and eudicots have rela­
tively constrained basic floral morphology, despite 
enormous diversity of morphological detail. In par­
ticular, the early diverging angiosperms are char­
acterized by an undifferentiated perianth, spirals 
rather than whorls of organs, variable numbers of 
floral organs, and transitional organs present as one 
set of organs grades into the next. It is likely that this 
less constrained floral body plan is retained from an 
ancestral angiosperm, and so it is particularly inter­
esting to understand how it is produced with refer­
ence to the eudicot ABC model. A number of authors 
have discussed the idea of a ‘fading borders’ model, 
where the ABC genes do not occupy discrete zones 
of the floral meristem but instead have focal regions 
with weaker expression either side (e.g. Soltis et al. 
2007, 2009). Such a model could certainly explain 
the transitional organs observed, and the apparent 
flexibility of organ number. It is supported by gene 
expression studies, although the non-model nature 
of early diverging angiosperms means that no ge­
netic or transgenic evidence is yet available. Kim 
et al. (2005) used quantitative RT-PCR and in situ 
hybridization approaches to determine the expres­
sion patterns of A, B, C/D, and E class genes from 
Amborella (Amborellales), Nuphar (Nymphaeales), 
and Illicium (Austrobaileyales). Their data indicate 
that A function genes (from the SQUA-like clade) 
play no specific role in floral organ identity. The 
Nuphar SQUA-like gene was expressed through­
out the plant, most strongly in the leaves and in 
the carpels. B function genes from all three basal 
angiosperm species had floral-specific expression 
patterns, but these patterns were broader than 
AGL6 gene (Thompson et al. 2009). The rice mutant 
has a similar phenotype to the maize mutant, and 
combination of the agl6 mutant allele with a sep 
mutant allele increased the severity of the pheno­
type (Ohmori et al. 2009). Although mutant data 
are not available from gymnosperms, the expres­
sion profiles of the AGL6 genes isolated from these 
species at least correlate with a role in reproductive 
development. The most detailed analysis of a gym­
nosperm AGL6 gene was conducted by Carlsbecker 
et al. (2004), who showed that DAL1 from Picea abies 
was expressed at low levels in vegetative branches 
but at higher levels in reproductive branches, with 
no expression detected before the 3–5 year mark, 
when these trees make the transition to the repro­
ductive stage. Similarly, AGL6-like sequences from 
Pinus and Gnetum are also most strongly expressed 
in reproductive tissues, perhaps suggesting that an 
E function-like role had originated before the diver­
gence of gymnosperms and angiosperms (reviewed 
by Melzer et al. 2010).
However, it appears that the last common ances­
tor of the angiosperms and gymnosperms did not 
have A function genes. The clade of MADS box 
genes containing the A function genes is known 
as the SQUA-like genes, and contains many genes 
from a diverse range of plants, including AP1 of 
Arabidopsis (described in Chapter 10). SQUA-like 
genes have been isolated from monocots (maize, 
rice, barley, and wheat, all Poales) and early diverg­
ing angiosperms (including Nuphar, Nymphaeales), 
as well as from several eudicot species. This clade 
had therefore apparently been established at the 
base of the angiosperm phylogenetic tree. However, 
no gene in this clade has yet been isolated from any 
gymnosperm species, suggesting that the clade is 
younger than the divergence of the angiosperms 
and the gymnosperms (Becker and Theissen 2003; 
Melzer et al. 2010). The absence of A function genes 
from the gymnosperm lineage is not entirely sur­
prising, given the variable function of genes from 
this lineage in angiosperms (see Chapter 10 and 
discussion in Section 11.7 of this chapter). In many 
angiosperm species, including Antirrhinum, the 
SQUA-like genes are primarily involved in floral 
meristem function, not specifically in sepal and 
petal identity. Since studies in gymnosperms sug­
gest that the potential E function AGL6-like genes 

120      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
of petaloid perianth organs, and that green sepals 
are not normally present. The two outer whorls of 
brightly coloured organs are often referred to as te­
pals. The wind-pollinated monocots, including the 
grasses such as maize, rice, and wheat (all Poales), 
produce very different floral structures again. Most 
grasses produce separate male and female flow­
ers, and those flowers do not produce petals or se­
pals. Instead each flower has a lemma and a palea, 
which function in a similar way to sepals to protect 
the developing flower. Within these, in most de­
rived grasses, is a pair of small globular structures 
called the lodicules, nominally in whorl 2 of the 
flower, which expand on flower opening and force 
the palea and lemma away from the reproductive 
structures, allowing access to the wind. Inside the 
lodicules are the stamens or carpels (see Fig. 11.3a). 
those seen in eudicots. The Amborella B function 
genes were expressed in whorls 2, 3, and 4, the 
Nuphar genes in all four whorls of the flower, and 
the Illicium genes in whorls 1, 2, and 3. However, 
C function genes showed a more restricted ex­
pression pattern, being mostly confined to whorls 
3 and 4. SEP and AGL6 genes were generally ex­
pressed throughout the flower, consistent with an E 
­function-like role in floral meristem identity. These 
data support the establishment of a basic ‘ABC-like’ 
model early in the angiosperm lineage, even if that 
model was more flexible in the position and num­
ber of organs than the eudicot ABC model is today.
In the final section of Chapter 1 it was noted that 
the flowers of many species in the magnoliids also 
share characters in common with the early diverg­
ing angiosperms. However, the position of the 
magnoliids relative to the eudicots and monocots 
is unclear, with many phylogenies representing the 
three groups as a polytomy. Accordingly, we cannot 
be certain whether the apparently ancestral features 
of magnoliid flowers are conserved or derived. For 
this reason I shall not discuss them in detail, but will 
simply mention that various authors have provided 
evidence to suggest that the fading borders model 
might also apply to flowers within the magnoliids 
(Kim et al. 2005; Chanderbali et al. 2009).
11.4  ABC genes in monocots
Within the angiosperms, ABC genes have been most 
extensively studied in the core eudicots (where 
Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum are placed) and the 
monocots. Within the monocots, the economically 
important grasses have been the subject of most 
work. Among the clades of MIKC MADS box genes 
identified in the monocots are the groups contain­
ing all of the A, B, C/D, and E function genes.
There are two main floral forms in monocots, 
each usually producing whorls of floral organs 
containing three organs per whorl. The petaloid, or 
animal-attracting, monocots produce flowers that 
look superficially like eudicot flowers. This group 
includes common garden flowers such as tulips and 
lilies (both Liliales), daffodils and freesias, as well 
as the orchids (all Asparagales). However, closer in­
spection of these flowers reveals that their reproduc­
tive organs are usually surrounded by two whorls 
B
E
B
(a)
Lemma/palea
Lodicules
Carpels
Stamens
C
A?
A?
C
(b)
Figure 11.3  Grasses and the ABC genes. (a) Two flowers of maize, 
enclosed within a pair of glumes. The entire structure is known as a 
spikelet. Each flower has a lemma and a palea in the outer whorl, 
lodicules in the second whorl (barely visible), and stamens in the third 
whorl. Maize is monoecious and these are male flowers, so have no 
fourth whorl carpels. Image kindly provided by Bob Schmidt (UCSD). 
(b) B, C, E, and possibly A function genes specify organ identity in 
grass flowers.

THE ABC MODEL AND DIVERSITY OF STRUCTURES      121
shown to heterodimerize in vitro and bind DNA as 
a heterodimer, just as the Arabidopsis proteins do. 
Remarkably, ZMM16 was also able to bind DNA 
as a heterodimer with Arabidopsis AP3 (the SI1 
orthologue), but not with Arabidopsis PI (its own 
orthologue). Similarly, SI1 was able to bind DNA 
as a heterodimer with Arabidopsis PI but could 
not interact with Arabidopsis AP3. Expression of 
SI1 from the AP3 promoter in an ap3 mutant line of 
Arabidopsis resulted in partial rescue of the mutant 
phenotype, with both petal and stamen develop­
ment being restored (although neither organ was 
completely normal). Similarly, ZMM16 was partial­
ly able to rescue a pi mutant (Whipple et al. 2004). 
These data reveal the remarkable degree of conser­
vation between monocot and eudicot B function 
genes, despite the over 100 million years of evolu­
tion that separate them and the disparate second 
whorl structures they induce. The fact that those 
structures are truly homologous was demonstrated 
by analysis of B function activity in an early diverg­
ing grass without lodicules. Streptochaeta does not 
produce lodicules, but has second whorl bracts, and 
phylogenetic trees indicate that it is basal to the de­
rived grasses which do produce lodicules. Whipple 
et al. (2007) reasoned that, if B function genes had 
been recruited separately to determine lodicule de­
velopment and petal development, then they would 
not be expressed in the bracts of Streptochaeta. In situ 
hybridization confirmed their expression in these 
second whorl bracts, indicating that the role of B 
function genes in second whorl organ development 
is ancient, and that the various morphologies of 
those organs are derived secondarily.
As with both the gymnosperms and the eudicots, 
C function genes similar to AG function in the devel­
opment of both types of reproductive structure in the 
grasses. Both maize and rice MADS box genes which 
fall into the C/D function clade have been shown to be 
expressed in the third and fourth whorls of the devel­
oping flowers (Goto et al. 2001; Yamaguchi et al. 2006). 
There appears to have been a major gene duplication 
of AGAMOUS-like genes within the grass family, with 
at least four AG-like genes present in the rice genome 
and six in maize, representing two C-lineage clades 
(rice OsMADS58 and OsMADS3, and their maize or­
thologues ZmZAG1 and ZmZMM2/ZmZMM23) and 
two D-lineage clades (OsMADS13 and OsMADS21, 
Molecular analysis of ABC genes in grasses has re­
vealed that the lemma and palea are homologous to 
sepals, and that the lodicules are homologous to the 
petals of eudicots (see Fig. 11.3b).
11.4.1  Grasses
Despite the obvious morphological differences be­
tween the second whorl organs of grasses and spe­
cies with petaloid flowers, the B function genes, 
which have been particularly well characterized 
in the grasses, are apparently functionally almost 
identical to their eudicot orthologues, differing only 
in their downstream targets. Studies have analysed 
the functions of both AP3/DEF-like genes and PI/
GLO-like genes, and have used genetic and trans­
genic approaches as well as expression analysis. 
For example, in rice, loss of function of OsMADS4, 
a GLO/PI orthologue, has been shown to result in 
homeotic transformation of the second whorl lodi­
cules into paleas and lemmas, as is normally found 
in the first whorl. Stamens were also converted into 
carpels. This phenotype is identical to the sepal/
sepal/carpel/carpel phenotype of a eudicot B func­
tion mutant, confirming both the orthology of the 
genes and the homology (at least from a develop­
mental genetic perspective) of the lodicules with 
petals (Kang et al. 1998). Similarly, loss of function 
of OsMADS16, an AP3 homologue, also results in 
a classic B function mutant phenotype (Nagasawa 
et al. 2003). Analysis of the rice genome sequence re­
vealed the presence of only the single AP3/DEF-like 
gene, OsMADS16, but of two PI/GLO-like genes, Os­
MADS2 and OsMADS4 (reviewed by Yoshida 2012).
Detailed studies of the B function genes have also 
been conducted in maize. Ambrose et al. (2000) de­
scribed the phenotype of the silky1 mutant, lacking 
a functional version of the single maize AP3/DEF-
like gene. The mutant flowers produced paleas and 
lemmas in the second whorl and carpels in the third 
whorl, again identical to a eudicot B function mu­
tant phenotype. The SI1 gene was shown to be ex­
pressed in developing organ primordia in whorls 2 
and 3 of the flower. Whipple et al. (2004) extended 
this work by investigating the relationship between 
SI1 and the ZMM16 protein, encoded by one of the 
three maize GLO/PI-like genes (ZMM16, ZMM18, 
and ZMM29). The two B function proteins were 

122      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
monocots. In maize, five genes fall into this clade, 
and there are three in rice, clustering as three sub-
clades derived from a duplication event at the base 
of the monocots and a second duplication near the 
base of the grasses (Preston and Kellogg 2006; Ciaffi 
et al. 2011). Analysis of expression patterns suggests 
that these genes play a range of roles, most proba­
bly in floral meristem determination as well as veg­
etative development (Becker and Theissen 2003). 
There is no evidence to suggest an Arabidopsis-
style A function role in specifying development of 
the outer two whorls for the grass SQUA-like genes. 
The other A function gene in the Arabidopsis model 
is the non-MADS box AP2 (see Chapter 10). A re­
cent report from barley does suggest that grass AP2 
genes play roles in development at least of whorl 2 
floral organs (Nair et al. 2010). HvAP2 is necessary 
for lodicule development, and mutation of this lo­
cus causes production of small lodicules which fail 
to open the flower fully. The gene is regulated by a 
microRNA, miR172, just as AP2 is in Arabidopsis 
(Chapter 10). Although there is no apparent effect 
of HvAP2 on first whorl organ development, the 
conservation of this microRNA-mediated regula­
tion of second whorl development does imply that 
some aspects of A function had developed prior to 
the divergence of the monocots and the eudicots. 
Considering the complexities of A function gene 
activity in Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum, it is not 
surprising that this aspect of the grass ABC model 
should be the least clear. However, the presence of 
these genes in grasses, as in early diverging angio­
sperms, compared with their absence in the gymno­
sperms, may provide some of the genetic inspiration 
underlying the evolution of perianth organs.
11.4.2  Petaloid monocots
ABC genes have been identified from a variety of 
petaloid monocots, including tulip, lily, and Aga­
panthus (all Liliales), and asparagus, crocus, and 
various orchids (all Asparagales). In most cases the 
gene expression patterns have led to the hypothesis 
that the B, C, and E function parts of the ABC model 
apply to these flowers just as they do to the eud­
icots and grasses, with one key difference—in those 
petaloid monocots with two whorls of coloured te­
pals, B function gene expression is not confined to 
and their maize orthologues ZmZAG2/ZmZMM1 and 
ZmZMM25) (Ciaffi et al. 2011). Subfunctionalization 
of these genes has occurred, with no single gene 
fulfilling the complete role of AG (i.e. specifying sta­
men and carpel development, inhibiting A function 
in whorls 3 and 4, and maintaining meristem deter­
minacy). Genetic loss of OsMADS3 function resulted 
in the conversion of stamens to lodicules but did not 
affect carpels, indicating that OsMADS3 is required 
for stamen development in whorl 3 but not for carpel 
development. However, OsMADS58 RNAi knock-
down lines produced flower-within-a-flower pheno­
types with perturbed carpels, indicating that this C 
function gene is required to maintain floral meristem 
determinacy as well as to induce carpel formation 
(Yamaguchi et al. 2006). Such subfunctionalization 
and subsequent complexity are likely to be found in 
many species with genomes more complex than that 
of Arabidopsis, not just in grasses.
E function genes also appear to play roles in 
grass flower development. In the maize genome, 
at least 10 MADS box genes falling into the greater 
E function clade (eight SEP and two AGL6 genes) 
have been identified (seven in rice), and reports 
suggest that the expression patterns of each are dis­
tinct but overlapping, and that together they cover 
a broad range. These expression patterns suggest 
that the genes play a number of partially redun­
dant roles in flower development, including a role 
in the maintenance of floral meristem determinacy 
(Theissen et al. 2000). Within rice, the SEP-like gene 
OsMADS1 has been shown to be necessary for cor­
rect development of all floral organs, rather like the 
orthologous E function SEP1 gene of Arabidopsis. 
The Osmads1 mutant has reduced determinacy of 
the floral meristem, but also produces flowers with 
palea- and lemma-like lodicules, a reduced num­
ber of stamens, and an increased number of carpels 
(Jeon et al. 2000). Similarly, mutation of OsMADS6, 
an AGL6-like gene, results in perturbations to lodi­
cules, paleas, stamens, and ovules, as well as re­
duced meristem determinacy (Ohmori et al. 2009). 
As with B and C function, it is apparent that E func­
tion as it is understood in eudicots is also present in 
grass flowers.
The A function genes have not yet been well char­
acterized in the grasses, although several members 
of the SQUA-like clade have been isolated from 

THE ABC MODEL AND DIVERSITY OF STRUCTURES      123
(outer tepals, inner lateral tepals, and the showy 
inner labellum). In Vanilla planifolia, Phragmipedium 
longifolium, and Phalaenopsis they found that outer 
tepals expressed only clade 1 and 2 genes, inner 
lateral tepals expressed high levels of clade 1 and 
2 genes but low levels of clade 3 and 4 genes, and 
the labellum expressed low levels of clade 1 and 2 
genes but high levels of clade 3 and 4 genes. More 
detailed analyses of gene function are necessary to 
resolve the role of the ABC genes in development of 
the complex orchid flower.
One surprising aspect of B function in petaloid 
monocots is that, unlike the experiments described 
in Section 11.4.1, which confirm that the B func­
tion proteins in maize operate as a heterodimer, 
the petaloid monocot B function proteins appear 
to homodimerize. Kanno et al. (2003) isolated two 
AP3-like genes and one PI-like gene from Tulipa 
gesneriana. All three genes are expressed in whorls 
1, 2, and 3, confirming their role in the development 
of both whorls of tepals and the stamens. Each of 
the AP3-like proteins was shown to heterodimerize 
with the PI-like protein and bind DNA as a heter­
odimer. However, the PI-like protein was also able 
to bind DNA as a homodimer, an ability not shown 
by the eudicot B function proteins. These data sug­
gest that the obligate nature of heterodimer forma­
tion in the eudicot and grass B function proteins 
might be a convergent evolutionary phenomenon. 
Similar results have also been reported in Lilium re­
gale, where AP3-like proteins heterodimerize with a 
PI-like protein, but the PI-like protein can also bind 
DNA as a homodimer (Winter et al. 2002). These 
data suggest that the evolution of obligate B func­
tion heterodimerization was a two-step process, 
with the AP3-like descendents of a gene duplica­
tion in the eudicots losing the ability to homodi­
merize first, followed by the PI-like descendents 
(see Section 11.5).
A function genes have not been well characterized 
in petaloid monocots, but the data available suggest 
that they function in floral meristem development 
rather than in organ specification, just as in grasses. 
Chen et al. (2007) identified two SQUA-like genes 
from the orchid Phalaenopsis and showed them to be 
expressed throughout the plant, most strongly in the 
developing floral bud. Heterologous expression in 
tobacco (Solanales) induced an early floral transition, 
whorls 2 and 3, but is also found in whorl 1. The 
two (often, but not always, identical) whorls of col­
oured tepals are therefore both developing under 
the control of petal identity genes (see Fig. 11.4). 
Where mutant or transgenic experiments have been 
possible with these species, they have confirmed 
this model. However, expression analyses suggest 
that the situation might be more complex in the or­
chid family. Analysis of A, B, C/D, and E function 
gene expression in Dendrobium indicated that the E 
function SEP-like gene was expressed throughout 
the flower, as expected, but that so too were the C 
function gene and two of the three B function genes 
identified (Xu et al. 2006). In contrast, Mondragon-
Palomino and Theissen (2011) showed that varia­
tion in expression levels of the four duplicate DEF 
genes found in orchids was in principle sufficient 
to explain the differentiation of three tepal types 
(a)
(b)
Tepals
Tepals
Carpels
Stamens
B
B
E
B
C
A?
A?
C
Figure 11.4  Petaloid monocots and the ABC genes. (a) Lilies have 
two whorls of coloured tepals, an inner whorl of three and an outer 
whorl of three. (b) B, C, E, and possibly A function genes specify organ 
identity in petaloid monocot flowers, with the B function genes being 
expressed in whorls 1, 2, and 3.

124      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
between B function proteins (although it is not it­
self thought to directly interact with other proteins). 
The presence of the paleoAP3 motif in petaloid 
monocot B function genes can then explain their 
ability to homodimerize, when the Arabidopsis and 
Antirrhinum proteins cannot (Kramer et al. 2006).
Within the basal eudicots that pre-date the pale­
oAP3/euAP3 duplication event, lineage-specific 
gene duplications have also occurred. For instance, 
the Ranunculales have experienced two separate 
duplication events within the AP3 gene lineage, 
giving rise to three distinct AP3-like genes, each 
with the paleoAP3 C terminal motif. Detailed anal­
ysis of this gene family in Aquilegia has revealed 
that the proteins can function as heterodimers with 
the PI protein (Kramer et al. 2007), despite lack­
ing the euAP3 domain. RNAi studies have shown 
that the duplicate genes have apparently experi­
enced both subfunctionalization and neofunction­
alization. AqAP3-1 has acquired a new role in the 
development of sterile staminodes, AqAP3-2 speci­
fies stamen formation, and AqAP3-3 is required for 
petal development (Sharma et al. 2011; Sharma and 
Kramer 2013).
11.6  Variations on the ABC model
The discovery that the petaloid monocots use an 
AB/AB/BC/C variation on the ABC model to spec­
ify their distinctive floral structure illustrates the 
inherent flexibility of the system. Simply by modi­
fying the expression pattern of one or more of the 
ABC genes, through mutations to their promoter 
sequences or to upstream factors, it is possible to 
produce a flower with altered positions of floral 
organs. It is likely that the varying floral structures 
of many species can be explained through shifts 
to the expression patterns of their ABC genes. For 
example, the monocots are not the only plants to 
produce brightly coloured first whorl organs, and 
the expansion of B function gene expression into 
whorl 1 may turn out to explain the bright blue se­
pals of Delphinium (Ranunculales), the bright pink 
sepals of Fuchsia (Myrtales), and many other in­
stances of petaloid sepals. Similarly, the dogwood 
Cornus (Cornales) is one of many examples that at­
tract pollinators through brightly coloured bracts, 
which may in some species be the result of ectopic B 
supporting an AP1-like role in meristem specifica­
tion. Similarly to grasses, members of the other 
A function gene family, AP2, can also be found 
in petaloid monocots. For example, Tsaftaris et al. 
(2012) recently reported the identification of three 
AP2-like genes in saffron crocus (Asparagales), and 
noted that they were expressed throughout the 
plant. However, without an indication of function 
or of regulation by microRNAs it is not possible to 
say whether such genes play a role in specification 
of outer whorl organs in the flower.
11.5  ABC genes in the basal eudicots
It is apparent from the previous sections that the B, 
C/D, and E function parts of the ABC model were 
established before the divergence of the monocots 
and eudicots, and that some aspects of A function 
were also present. A function is discussed in more 
detail in Section 11.7. However, there is still one 
major difference in floral developmental genetics 
between the basal orders of eudicots and the core 
eudicots that must be discussed. This difference 
concerns the B function genes. While the duplica­
tion event that gave rise to the DEF/AP3 and GLO/
PI lineages arose before the divergence of gymno­
sperms and angiosperms, a further—and crucial—
gene duplication event occurred in the AP3 lineage 
in the basal eudicots. Kramer et al. (2006) date this 
duplication event to after the divergence of the Ra­
nunculales, but before the base of the core eudicots, 
suggesting that it occurred around the position of 
the Buxales and Trochodendrales. The ancestral 
AP3 gene contains a C terminal motif known as 
the paleoAP3 motif, and in one of the lineages de­
rived from this duplication event, the TM6 lineage, 
this motif is retained. However, in the second line­
age derived from the duplication, the euAP3 line­
age, either an eight nucleotide insertion or a single 
nucleotide deletion, each of which would cause a 
frameshift, has generated a novel C terminal mo­
tif, the euAP3 motif (Vandenbussche et al. 2003a; 
Kramer et al. 2006). The TM6 lineage has been lost 
from both Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum, but in 
those species where it is retained it is thought that 
B function is partitioned semi-redundantly between 
the TM6 and euAP3 genes. Most notably, the euAP3 
C terminal domain facilitates heterodimerization 

THE ABC MODEL AND DIVERSITY OF STRUCTURES      125
stamens (reviewed by Teeri et al. 2002). However, 
it appears that at least one of the E function genes 
operates slightly differently in Gerbera from their 
known mode of action in Arabidopsis. The Gerbera 
gene GERBERA REGULATOR OF CAPITULUM 
DEVELOPMENT 1 (GRCD1) is orthologous to the E 
function SEP genes of Arabidopsis, and, like the SEP 
genes, is expressed in all floral organs. However, 
downregulation of GRCD1 function through an 
antisense approach resulted in the conversion of 
the sterile stamens (found in female flowers) into 
a second whorl of petals. These data suggest that 
this particular Gerbera E function gene has non-­
redundant whorl-specific activity, operating with 
the B and C function genes to specify stamen de­
velopment (Kotilainen et al. 2000). This contrasts 
markedly with the position in Arabidopsis, where 
the E function genes are redundant, only resulting 
in a phenotypic change when all three are inactivat­
ed together, and influence the development of all 
floral organs, rather than just one whorl. However, 
other E function genes in Gerbera do fulfil the usual 
role, with GRCD4 and GRCD5 operating in a simi­
lar way to the Arabidopsis SEP genes (Rukolainen 
et al. 2010).
The production of unisexual flowers is not unique 
to the Asteraceae, occurring also in monoecious 
systems such as maize, and in dioecious systems 
such as Silene dioica (red campion, Caryophyllales). 
These will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 
13. In some species that produce unisexual flowers, 
the abortion of one type of reproductive organ has 
been shown to be correlated with the downregula­
tion of the appropriate B or C function genes, but it 
is not yet clear how the relationship between floral 
gender and ABC gene function is controlled. These 
and many other variations on the basic ABC mod­
el remain to be analysed, but the current depth of 
knowledge on the control of floral organ identity in 
Arabidopsis serves as an excellent starting point for 
such studies.
11.7  Is A function unique 
to the Brassicaceae?
In Section 10.1.1 of Chapter 10 we discussed A func­
tion, the specification of sepal and petal identity, in 
(and  possibly A) function expression in those or­
gans (Feng et al. 2012).
The case of the sterile staminodes of the Ranun­
culales, induced by modified B function activity, 
was described in Section 11.5. Another novel organ 
that has been shown to develop through a variation 
on the basic ABC model consists of the pappus hairs 
of the composite inflorescence of daisies (Asterales). 
All members of the Asteraceae family produce a 
composite inflorescence, with the sex of flowers 
varying across the capitulum. In Gerbera hybrida, 
female flowers are produced in the outer whorls 
and hermaphrodite flowers in the inner whorls. 
The flowers do not have sepals, which would be 
awkwardly placed in a condensed inflorescence. 
Instead, structures called pappus hairs form in the 
first whorl, where they act as parachutes for the seed 
later in development (see Fig. 11.5). B, C/D, and E 
genes from Gerbera have been shown by transgenic 
experiments and expression analyses to fulfil essen­
tially similar roles to their Arabidopsis counterparts 
(although note that both TM6 and euAP3 lineages of 
AP3 are present, so B function involves some sepa­
ration of functions). In particular, analysis of the B 
function genes has confirmed that the pappus hairs, 
like the palea and lemma of the grass flower, are 
simply variations on the theme of a sepal. Loss of 
function of Gerbera AP3 or PI genes through anti­
sense downregulation results in the conversion of 
the petals to pappus hairs and the stamens to car­
pels. Similarly, ectopic expression of PI converts the 
pappus hairs in whorl 1 to petals and the carpels to 
Figure 11.5  Pappus hairs (arrowed) develop in the first whorl 
position around each floral meristem in the capitulum of a daisy.

126      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
across the angiosperms. In addition to the data pre­
sented above, she reported evidence from tobacco 
and petunia (both Solanales) to suggest that AP2-
like genes do not generally play a role in sepal and 
petal specification. More extensive data were avail­
able for AP1-like genes, but again evidence from 
pea (Pisum sativum, Fabales), petunia, tomato, and 
tobacco (all Solanales), apple (Rosales), Silene latifo­
lia (Caryophyllales), birch (Betula pendula, Fagales), 
and various daisies (Asterales) suggested that the 
conserved role of AP1-like genes was in floral mer­
istem identity, not in floral organ specification. It is 
possible that conventional A function activity, in­
volving the specification of sepals and petals and 
repression of C function activity, is unique to the 
Brassicaceae, where its evolution may have been 
facilitated by the recent gene duplication event 
that gave rise to AP1 and CAULIFLOWER (see 
Chapter 9). Without A function it is still possible 
to initiate four distinct organs on a florally defined 
­meristem—if the default situation is to produce se­
pals, addition of B function in whorl 2 could gener­
ate petals, B + C function in whorl 3 could generate 
stamens, and C function in whorl 4 could generate 
carpels. The evidence to date suggests that this two 
gene model might more accurately reflect the diver­
sity of angiosperm flowers.
Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum. In Arabidopsis it is 
provided by the MADS box gene AP1, which also 
plays a role in floral meristem specification, and 
by the non-MADS box transcription factor AP2. 
These proteins interact with the C function protein 
AG and a microRNA (miR172) to specify sepal and 
petal development in whorls 1 and 2. However, the 
situation in Antirrhinum is more complex, with no 
identified A function mutant. Reverse genetic ap­
proaches revealed that the two AP2 orthologues in 
Antirrhinum acted redundantly to specify some as­
pects of petal development, but could not be said to 
provide classical A function (Keck et al. 2003). The 
AP1 orthologue in Antirrhinum, SQUA, is neces­
sary for floral meristem identity, but has no role in 
floral organ development (Huijser et al. 1992).
The observation that A function does not seem to 
be provided in Antirrhinum by the AP2 or AP1 genes 
could reflect loss of the module in Antirrhinum, or 
its gain in Arabidopsis. In this chapter we have 
seen that the early diverging angiosperms lack 
conventional A function, since Nuphar SQUA is 
expressed throughout the plant (see Section 11.3), 
and that the monocot A function genes also seem to 
play more general roles in floral meristem conver­
sion. Litt (2007) reviewed the evidence on function 
of the gene lineages containing AP2 and AP1 from 

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 12
Function and development 
of gametophytes
In previous chapters we have considered the induc­
tion and development of flowers, without paying 
much attention to the reason for their existence. The 
role of flowers is to ensure the transfer of a small but 
precious package, the pollen grain, from one plant 
to another. That pollen grain contains the sperm, 
which fertilizes an egg cell retained within the tis­
sues of another flower, resulting in the formation of 
a zygote and, in due course, a new generation of 
plants that will produce flowers in their turn. Al­
though the details of seed and fruit development 
are beyond the scope of this book, it is necessary 
to provide a brief summary of the events that oc­
cur within the male and female reproductive organs 
of the flower. Here, meiosis and then haploid mito­
sis produce an independent generation, the game­
tophyte, including the gametes. In this chapter we 
discuss the development of male and female game­
tophytes, and then briefly consider the events that 
occur when they are brought together.
12.1  Alternation of generations 
in multicellular organisms
The alternation of generations in plants is a topic 
often considered deeply confusing. In general, this 
confusion stems from a failure to understand the 
life cycles of all multicellular organisms, includ­
ing animals. Put simply, in multicellular eukary­
otes there are three types of life cycle, shown in 
Fig. 12.1. The existence of three alternative forms 
of life cycle is most probably a simple consequence 
of multicellularity evolving multiple times, each 
independently. There are several possible ways of 
developing a multicellular sexual life cycle from a 
unicellular one, and it seems that animals, plants, 
and fungi have each adopted different systems. 
These different life cycles have different genetic 
effects and so have different evolutionary conse­
quences, although these differences should not be 
thought of as driving the evolution of the different 
forms, which almost certainly arose through simple 
chance. The different life cycles are defined on the 
basis of where ordinary mitotic cell divisions occur 
relative to the process of meiosis.
The animal life cycle (and that of many brown 
algae) is based on gametic meiosis (see Fig. 12.1a). 
In organisms that have gametic meiosis, most of 
the life cycle is spent in the diploid stage, and ac­
cordingly animal bodies are composed of diploid 
cells. When reproduction occurs, those diploid cells 
undergo meiosis to produce gametes directly, and 
those gametes immediately fuse to make a diploid 
zygote. Thus animal cells only undergo mitosis in 
the diploid state, and the haploid cells of animals 
have one job and one job alone—to fuse together to 
make a new diploid cell.
The fungi, and some of the green algae, have a life 
cycle that operates in exactly the opposite way (see 
Fig. 12.1b). The zygote is diploid, formed by the fu­
sion of two haploid gametes, but instead of under­
going mitosis to produce a body, it first undergoes 
meiosis and becomes haploid again. These haploid 
cells then undergo mitosis to produce the fungal 
body, which is still haploid. Gametes are produced 
by this haploid body through more mitotic divi­
sions. Thus, in contrast to the animal system, fungal 
cells only undergo mitosis in the haploid state, and 
the diploid cells of fungi have one job and one job 

128      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
sporic meiosis (see Fig. 12.1c). In an organism with 
sporic meiosis, mitosis occurs in both the haploid and 
the diploid stages of the life cycle. The diploid zygote 
undergoes mitosis to produce a diploid body, just 
like an animal. This diploid body undergoes meiosis 
to produce haploid cells, which are not gametes but 
are called spores. The spores do not fuse with other 
haploid cells, but instead behave like the haploid 
cells of a fungus—they undergo mitosis to produce a 
haploid body. This haploid body then undergoes fur­
ther mitosis to produce the haploid gametes, which 
fuse to make a diploid zygote again. Thus there are 
essentially two types of body—a haploid type and 
a diploid type. The haploid body is known as the 
gametophyte, because it produces gametes, and the 
diploid body is called the sporophyte, because it pro­
duces spores. All land plants have both diploid and 
haploid phases in their life cycles. Although all ter­
restrial plants show sporic meiosis, they vary greatly 
in the length of time they spend in the haploid and 
diploid states, and also in the independence or inter­
dependence of the two phases.
Different life cycles carry different genetic conse­
quences. Undergoing mitosis in the haploid state, 
as fungi and the plant gametophyte do, places enor­
mous selective pressure on expressed genes. A gene 
expressed in the haploid stage cannot be masked 
by a corresponding dominant allele, so all alleles of 
genes expressed in the haploid stage are directly ex­
posed to selection. Since the haploid gametophyte 
undergoes the complex processes of cell growth, 
cell division, and cell differentiation, many genes 
are expressed during this stage. In animals, the 
haploid phase is limited to a single cell, the gamete, 
which does not have to do much—no mitosis, no 
growth, and no development of complex organs. 
Therefore lethal recessive alleles can pass unnoticed 
in the animal haploid stage and then be masked by 
dominant alleles in the diploid stage. However, for 
a plant, those lethal alleles will never get through 
the gametophyte stage. Accordingly, plants cannot 
carry lethal recessive alleles across generations, and 
so have a much lower genetic load than animals do 
(although note that mutation within the lifetime of 
a long-lived plant can result in a high genetic load 
within individuals). Plant populations have gener­
ally healthier genetic make-ups than animal popula­
tions and are less subject to inbreeding depression.
(a)
Fertilization
Fertilization
Fertilization
Gametes
(N)
Gametes
(N)
Gametes
(N)
Gametophyte
(N)
Meiosis
Mitosis
Spores
(N)
Spores (N)
Mitosis
Meiosis
Sporophyte
Meiosis
Mitosis
Mitosis
Mitosis
Zygote
(2N)
Zygote
(2N)
Zygote
(2N)
Gametic meiosis
e.g. animals
Zygotic meiosis
e.g. fungi
Sporic meiosis
e.g. plants
(b)
(c)
(2N)
(N)
Figure 12.1  Different multicellular life cycles. (a) Gametic meiosis, 
as seen in animals. (b) Zygotic meiosis, as found in fungi. (c) Sporic 
meiosis, found in plants.
alone—to undergo meiosis to make a new haploid 
cell. This system is known as zygotic meiosis.
The third type of life cycle is the one that some 
green algae and all land plants use, and is known as 

DEVELOPMENT OF GAMETOPHYTES      129
from the same or a nearby gametophyte, and the 
new diploid (sporophyte) plant grows from the ga­
metophyte tissue.
In the seed plants, the size and duration of the 
gametophyte stage have been reduced even further, 
to only a few cell divisions. The female gameto­
phyte is retained wholly or partly within the spo­
rophyte body, as the egg sac (within the carpel of 
angiosperms). The male gametophyte is simply the 
pollen grain, built within the sporophyte tissue but 
released into the wind or on to an animal’s body. 
When the angiosperm male gametophyte reaches 
a stigma it germinates, eventually releasing the 
sperm cells into the egg sac to fertilize the egg. The 
detailed anatomy of gametophytes (egg sacs and 
pollen grains) is somewhat variable among the an­
giosperms, but that variability is on a very different 
scale from the variation in gametophyte form across 
the green plant lineage.
12.3  The angiosperm female 
gametophyte
The female gametophyte is also known as the meg­
agametophyte. In angiosperms it is found within 
the ovule, within the carpel of the flower (see 
Fig. 12.2a). Several female gametophyte forms are 
known in flowering plants, consisting of a variety 
of cell and nuclei numbers. The most common form 
(and the one found in Arabidopsis), called the Po­
lygonum form, consists of seven haploid cells, one 
of which contains two haploid nuclei (so there are 
eight nuclei in total). These seven cells are of four 
types. At the top of the embryo sac, furthest from 
12.2  Diversity of gametophyte form
As mentioned in Section 12.1, all land plants have 
sporic meiosis, indicating that it is an ancestral 
state, typical of the first land plants. However, with­
in the constraints of an alternating haploid/­diploid 
multicellular form, plants vary greatly in the length 
of time they spend in the haploid and diploid 
states, and also in the relative independence of 
the two phases. Over the course of their evolution, 
land plants have undergone a transition from hap­
loid or gametophyte dominance, with a dependent 
sporophytic phase, to dominance of a free-living 
diploid or sporophytic phase. It is possible that the 
increasing dominance of the plant life cycle by the 
diploid sporophyte through evolutionary time re­
flects the high mortality of the gametophyte stage. 
By reducing the gametophyte stage to only a few 
cell divisions, angiosperms may have succeeded in 
minimizing this mortality while retaining the abil­
ity to lose catastrophic mutations before they enter 
a diploid phase. An alternative explanation is that 
all land plants retain the egg attached to the female 
gametophyte, and so can protect and nourish both 
the egg and, after fertilization, the zygote and de­
veloping embryo (sporophyte). This opportunity 
to provide early support to the developing sporo­
phyte might have led to the development of larger 
and more complex sporophyte forms.
In early diverging land plants, such as mosses 
and liverworts, the gametophyte stage of the life 
cycle is dominant. Thus the familiar tufted green 
moss plant is the haploid gametophyte, as is the 
green thallus of liverworts found in damp places. 
In both of these groups of bryophytes, the diploid 
sporophyte is parasitic and retained attached to 
the gametophyte body throughout its develop­
ment. In moss plants, the little brown stalked head 
which grows on top of the tufted green body is the 
sporophyte.
The life cycle of all vascular plants is sporophyte 
dominant. For example, the typical fronded fern 
plant is diploid, producing haploid spores on the 
undersides of the leaves. These spores germinate 
to produce the gametophyte stage, which is a flat 
green blob of tissue, very like liverwort thallus in 
appearance. The eggs that are produced and re­
tained on this gametophyte are fertilized by sperm 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 12.2  The angiosperm female gametophyte. (a) Position 
of ovules within the Arabidopsis carpel. (b) Megasporogenesis in 
Arabidopsis. (c) Megagametogenesis in Arabidopsis.

130      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
tetrasporic megasporogenesis, cell division does 
not occur after either meiotic division. The final 
megaspore has four haploid nuclei, which undergo 
mitosis to produce around 16 nuclei in the mature 
megagametophyte.
Since the development of the megaspore is a 
phase of sporophyte development, it is genes ex­
pressed in the sporophyte that control megasporo­
genesis. Mutations in such genes often manifest 
themselves as female infertility, due to failure of 
the megaspore mother cell to develop, or failure of 
meiosis to occur, or incorrect positioning or polar­
ity of the embryo sac within the ovule (reviewed 
by Yadegari and Drews 2004). A recent report by 
Makkena et al. (2012) implicated the MYB transcrip­
tion factors FOURLIPS (FLP) and MYB88 in con­
trolling the entry of the megaspore mother cell into 
meiosis. In flp mutants and flp/myb88 double mu­
tants the megaspore mother cell either fails to enter 
meiosis or undergoes abnormal meiosis. FLP and 
MYB88 were first described for their role in stomatal 
development, where they restrict the guard mother 
cell to a single symmetric division through the regu­
lation of genes involved in cell cycle progression. It 
is likely that they are regulating similar pathways 
during megasporogenesis. In contrast, reports have 
implicated small RNA pathways operating in the 
sporophyte cells around the ovule in limiting the 
number of megaspores generated (Olmedo-Monfil 
et al. 2010). Arabidopsis lines that lack a function­
al copy of ARGONAUTE 9 (AGO9), a protein that 
binds small interfering RNAs and so is crucial in 
regulating gene silencing, produce excess numbers 
of megaspores, indicating that both positive and 
negative factors regulate the entry into meiosis.
12.3.2  Megagametogenesis
Megagametogenesis consists of a number of mitotic 
cell divisions, which result in the mature megaga­
metophyte. In the most common system this simply 
involves the single haploid spore undergoing three 
rounds of mitosis to produce eight haploid nuclei 
(see Fig. 12.2c). As with the entry into meiosis in 
megasporogenesis, the entry into mitosis is partially 
regulated by factors expressed in the surrounding 
sporophyte tissues, particularly small interfering 
RNA pathway components such as ARGONAUTE 5 
the point at which sperm will later enter (the mi­
cropyle), are three antipodal cells. Below these is 
the central cell, which contains two nuclei, and will 
later be fertilized by a single sperm to generate the 
triploid nutritive endosperm. Below this is a single 
egg cell (the gamete) flanked by two synergid cells 
which play roles in attracting pollen tubes. The fe­
male gametophyte is retained at all times within the 
tissues of the sporophyte parent, but from there it 
plays a crucial role in directing the growth of the 
incoming pollen tube. It also expresses genes that 
control the initiation of seed development after 
fertilization, and later control the development of 
both the embryo and the endosperm (Yadegari and 
Drews 2004; Drews et al. 2011).
The development of the megagametophyte is a 
two-stage process (reviewed by Beger and Twell 
2011). First, a cell within the sporophyte tissue, 
known as the megaspore mother cell, undergoes 
meiosis and gives rise to four haploid nuclei. This 
process is called megasporogenesis. Usually three 
of these nuclei degrade, and the fourth, the mega­
spore, then undergoes mitosis to produce the eight 
haploid nuclei of the mature gametophyte. This 
process is called megagametogenesis.
12.3.1  Megasporogenesis
Megasporogenesis is a relatively simple process, 
during which a single meiotic event gives rise to 
four haploid nuclei. Ma (2005) provides an excellent 
summary of chromosome behaviour during meiosis 
in plants. In different plant species the four hapoid 
nuclei may be packaged into one, two, or four 
cells. Most commonly, in plants which pro­duce  a 
Polygonum-type megagametophyte, the mega­spore 
mother cell within the ovule produces four haploid 
cells, as cell division occurs after both meiosis I and 
meiosis II. Three of these haploid cells undergo 
cell death, leaving a single haploid megaspore (see 
Fig. 12.2b). However, in other species, cell division 
occurs after only one, or even neither, of the mei­
otic divisions. In species with bisporic megasporo­
genesis, cell division occurs only after meiosis I, 
so meiosis II results in the production of two cells, 
each containing two haploid nuclei. One of these 
survives and enters megagametogenesis to produce 
a final total of six haploid nuclei. In species with 

DEVELOPMENT OF GAMETOPHYTES      131
Arabidopsis, generated using transposon insertions 
perturbing segregation ratios in the next generation. 
These mutants affect all processes from the first mi­
totic division of megagametogenesis, through meg­
agametophyte development, to later embryo sac 
functions including post-fertilization processes such 
as embryo development. The authors were able to 
amplify sequence flanking the inserted transposons, 
and catalogue the genes perturbed in the mutants. 
The proportions of proteins of different types in­
volved at different stages varied quite significantly. 
During megagametogenesis itself, genes with roles 
in secondary metabolism seemed to be particularly 
important, along with genes involved in protein 
degradation. During the later fertilization process, 
genes related to energy metabolism and stress re­
sponses seemed to be more important.
Cell walls do not usually form in the megaga­
metophyte until all divisions have occurred, al­
lowing migration of nuclei during development. 
Specifically, one nucleus from the top of the embryo 
sac, and one from the bottom (the micropylar end, 
where the pollen tube will arrive) migrate to the 
centre of the structure and fuse, either immediately 
or at fertilization, to generate the diploid central 
cell which will be fertilized to give rise to the trip­
loid endosperm. This fusion requires the RPL21M 
protein, a mitochondrial 50S ribosomal subunit, 
and in a mutant defective in the production of this 
protein the nuclear membranes of the two central 
cell nuclei fail to merge (Portereiko et al. 2006). In 
different species other gametophyte cells may also 
undergo different differentiation events. For exam­
ple, in Arabidopsis, the three antipodal cells (those 
furthest from the micropyle) undergo cell death 
shortly before fertilization occurs.
Pattern formation within the embryo sac has re­
cently been shown to depend on gradients of auxin. 
The micropyle acts as a souce of auxin, actively ex­
pressing genes required for auxin synthesis, and a 
gradient exists from high auxin concentration at the 
micropylar end to low auxin concentration at the 
antipodals. Pagnussat et al. (2009) showed that this 
gradient was the result of auxin synthesis at the mi­
cropyle, rather than of auxin transport within the 
embryo sac. They further showed that perturbing 
auxin levels resulted in interconversion of the cell 
types within the megagametophyte.
(AGO5) (Tucker et al. 2012). Genes expressed in the 
megaspore are also important. In Arabidopsis, the 
mitotic divisions require the activity of CHROMA­
TIN REMODELLING PROTEIN 11 (CHR11), as 
transgenic lines with CHR11 silenced are unable to 
proliferate nuclei and so fail to ­undergo megagame­
togenesis (Huanca-Mamani et al. 2005).
Megagametogenesis is the whole of the game­
tophyte’s life, and it is genes expressed by the ga­
metophyte that determine correct gametogenesis. 
Mutations that perturb cell division or any essential 
metabolic function will be lethal at this stage, and 
can usually be identified because of perturbed seg­
regation ratios in the progeny of a plant. Classically, 
a megagametophytic mutation will result in an ab­
sence of 50% of the seeds in a pod or silique. For 
example, Ebel et al. (2004) showed that the plant ret­
inoblastoma protein, RBR1, is essential for correct 
megagametogenesis in Arabidopsis. The rbr1 mu­
tants could only be maintained as heterozygotes, as 
the megagametophyte failed to develop normally 
if it carried the rbr1 mutant allele. The RBR1 pro­
tein is involved in cell cycle control in plants and 
animals, and the rbr1 mutant megagametophytes 
underwent excessive mitotic divisions, resulting in 
a non-­viable embryo sac. This mutant phenotype 
also supports the suggestion that the ancestral an­
giosperm megagametophyte contained more cells, 
but that genes such as RBR1 have been recruited to 
reduce cell division and minimize the gametophyte 
lifespan. In theory, mutations in genes expressed in 
the sporophyte may also affect megagametogen­
esis, by altering the environment surrounding the 
developing gametophyte or inhibiting its access to 
water or essential nutrients.
Yadegari and Drews (2004) reported the identifi­
cation of over 150 mutants with perturbed megaga­
metogenesis, and described their classification into 
mutations affecting different stages of gametophyte 
formation. Detailed characterization of the lesions 
occurring in these mutants is complex, as visuali­
zation of gametogenesis is not simple, given that 
it occurs within living tissues of the sporophyte. 
However, molecular characterization of these mu­
tated genes will greatly enhance our understand­
ing of how the angiosperm female gametophyte 
develops and functions. Similarly, Pagnussat et  al. 
(2005) described 130 gametophytic mutants in 

132      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
of sporopollenin, which protects the contents from 
dehydration and mechanical damage as they are 
transferred between plants (see Fig. 12.3a). This pol­
len coat also serves to mediate interactions between 
the microgametophyte and the female sporophyte 
tissue that it lands on, and so plays an important 
role in mating success. The pollen coat is mainly de­
rived from sporophytic tissue on the inside of the 
stamen locules.
The development of the microgametophyte is 
a two-stage process (see Fig. 12.3b). First, a cell 
within the sporophyte tissue (within the stamen), 
known as the microspore mother cell, undergoes 
meiosis and gives rise to a tetrad of four haploid 
cells (for a summary of the events that occur during 
meiosis, see Ma 2005). This process is called micro­
sporogenesis. The tetrads are initially enclosed in a 
Little is known about the evolutionary history of 
this simple eight-celled megagametophyte. Other 
lineages of land plants, including gymnosperms, 
inevitably produce megagametophytes containing 
many more cells. Reports of a nine-celled megaga­
metophyte in Amborella trichopoda (Amborellales), 
the sister to all other extant angiosperms, sug­
gested that early angiosperms might also have 
produced larger megagametophytes (Friedman 
2006; Rudall 2006). However, a megagametophyte 
with four cells and four nuclei is found in other 
early diverging angiosperms, in the Nymphaeales 
and Austrobaileyales (reviewed by Friedman and 
Ryerson 2009). It has therefore been hypothesized 
that the ancestral state for the angiosperm megaga­
metophyte might have been a four cell, four nuclei 
structure, which then experienced a duplication to 
generate an eight nuclei structure (with an addi­
tional division occurring in Amborella). Pagnussat 
et al. (2009) postulated that, if such a duplication oc­
curred in the context of an auxin gradient, the dupli­
cated module furthest from the micropyle (and thus 
with least auxin) would produce sterile antipodals, 
rather than an egg. One of the four nuclei arising 
from this duplication might then have migrated to 
the central cell, facilitating the evolution of the trip­
loid endosperm characteristic of angiosperms.
12.4  The angiosperm male gametophyte
The male gametophyte, also known as the micro­
gametophyte, begins life within the stamens of the 
flower, and completes its development by germi­
nating to produce a pollen tube—usually within 
the style of a (hopefully different) flower. It is even 
more reduced than the female gametophyte, and so 
has less scope for variability in structure between 
different plants. Essentially, the microgametophytes 
are pollen grains, and the locules of the stamens of 
most plants are filled with many hundreds or even 
thousands of them. The mature microgametophyte 
consists of three haploid cells. A larger vegetative 
cell contains two sperm cells, which go on to ferti­
lize the egg cell and the diploid central cell of the 
female gametophyte. The vegetative nucleus it­
self also travels down the developing pollen tube, 
alongside the sperm nuclei. The whole microga­
metophyte is coated with a specialized outer layer 
(b)
(a)
1
2
Microspore
Tetrad of
microspores
Microgametogenesis
4
5
3
Figure 12.3  The angiosperm male gametophyte. (a) Mature 
microgametophytes are coated with elaborate sporopollenin. 
(b) Microsporogenesis and microgametogenesis in Arabidopsis. 
The tetrad of microspores present at stage 2 disassociate before 
undergoing microgametogenesis.

DEVELOPMENT OF GAMETOPHYTES      133
attached to them (Zhao et al. 2002). In the ems1 mu­
tant, excess microspore mother cells develop at the 
expense specifically of the tapetal layer. However, 
since the tapetum is necessary for pollen develop­
ment, this mutant is male sterile. It seems that the 
EMS1 protein is also essential for the division of 
cells following meiosis, as the microspore mother 
cells in the ems1 mutant undergo meiotic separation 
of chromosomes and chromatids but do not form 
new cell membranes around the new nuclei. These 
incomplete microspores are then incapable of under­
going mitosis. EMS1 encodes a leucine-rich receptor-
like protein that localizes to cell membranes and 
is hypothesized to be present in the membranes of 
tapetal precursor cells (Zhao et al. 2002). It may be 
bound by the TAPETUM DETERMINANT 1 (TPD1) 
protein, which is a very small, possibly secreted pro­
tein, encoded by a gene expressed in the developing 
microspore mother cells (Yang et al. 2003a). Mutation 
of TPD1 results in a very similar phenotype to that 
of the ems1 mutant, namely an increase in micro­
spore mother cells at the expense of tapetum. TPD1 
and EMS have been shown to physically interact 
(Jia et al. 2008), supporting the hypothesis that these 
two proteins interact to regulate the respective num­
bers of tapetal cells and microspore mother cells. 
Other leucine-rich repeat receptor kinases are also 
involved in distinguishing tapetal and microspore 
mother cells, possibly through the same pathway. 
Colcombet et al. (2005) reported that a double mu­
tant between the SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS 
RECEPTOR KINASE 1 and 2 genes (SERK1 and 
SERK2) showed a phenotype similar to that of the 
ems1 mutant, with an absence of tapetum and an 
excess of microspore mother cells. It has been hy­
pothesized that EMS1, SERK1, and SERK2 form a 
heteromeric receptor complex that is bound by the 
TPD1 ligand (Jia et al. 2008). It is certainly likely that 
a number of receptors and ligands are involved in 
this feedback loop, to provide multiple checkpoints 
in this essential process. Following this establish­
ment of cell fate and cell number, a collection of 
downstream genes, including several encoding 
transcriptional regulators, act together to ensure 
correct differentiation of microspore mother cells 
(reviewed by Ma 2005 and by Chang et al. 2011). 
Mutation of any of these genes results in a failure 
of microsporogenesis and subsequent male sterility.
thick callose wall, which is broken down by an en­
zyme secreted from the stamen wall, releasing the 
microspores. These microspores then enlarge and 
undergo an asymmetric mitotic division to produce 
a large vegetative cell and a small generative cell, 
which is retained within the vegetative cell. This 
process is called microgametogenesis. The genera­
tive cell divides again to produce two sperm cells, 
although this division may not occur until after pol­
lination has been achieved (McCormick 2004).
12.4.1  Microsporogenesis
Microsporogenesis occurs within the stamen. Spe­
cifically, on top of the stamen filament an anther is 
formed, which usually consists of four cell layers 
enclosing the microspore mother cells. The inner­
most of these four layers, the tapetum, has a key role 
in pollen grain development. When the microspore 
mother cells initiate meiosis, callose is deposited on 
their outer surfaces. Thus the tetrads of microspores 
are surrounded by callose. These tetrads then disas­
sociate from the tapetum, generating a space called 
the locule. Within the locule, callase released by the 
tapetum degrades the callose outer walls and frees 
the four microspores from each tetrad (Ma 2005). 
They are then free to enlarge and begin mitotic divi­
sions to produce the microgametophytes.
As with megasporogenesis, microsporogenesis is 
controlled by genes expressed by the sporophyte it­
self (that is, the diploid parental tissue). Such genes 
must ensure the correct formation of the crucial cell 
layers in the anther, alongside their role in regulating 
the onset of meiosis. For example, a feedback loop 
operating between the BARELY ANY MERISTEM 
1/2 (BAM1/2) leucine-rich receptor-like kinases 
and the SPOROCYTELESS (SPL) transcription fac­
tor controls the relative production of somatic cells 
of the anther walls and microspore mother cells 
(Hord et al. 2006; reviewed by Chang et  al. 2011). 
Perturbation of SPL results in a reduction in micro­
spore mother cell formation, while perturbation of 
BAM1/2 results in loss of the inner three cell lay­
ers of the anther, replaced by microspore mother 
cells. Similarly, the EXCESS MALE SPOROCYTES 
1 (EMS1) gene is necessary for the normal devel­
opment of both the tapetum cells in the innermost 
layer of the anther and the microspore mother cells 

134      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
pollen) it occurs during pollen tube growth after 
pollination (Ma 2005). The developing pollen grain 
is coated with two protective layers—the exine and 
the intine. The exine is made of highly elaborate 
sporopollenin, which mediates interactions with 
stigmatic cells, whereas the intine is made from cel­
lulose, pectin, and proteins. Both layers appear to 
be mainly derived from the anther tapetum. The 
mature pollen grain is then dehydrated ready for 
release into the outside world.
As with megagametogenesis, microgametogen­
esis is regulated by genes expressed by the game­
tophyte nuclei themselves. However, because the 
tapetum contributes to pollen coat development, 
there is also a clear role for sporophytically ex­
pressed genes in microgametogenesis. For exam­
ple, the genes described earlier that are necessary 
to correctly specify tapetal and microspore fate also 
influence gametophyte development. Those micro­
spores which survive in mutants defective in these 
genes fail to undergo correct gametogenesis due 
to the abnormal tapetal layer surrounding them. 
Similarly, the parental sporophyte tissue expresses 
many genes involved in building the pollen coat. 
Plants carrying mutations in these genes are usually 
male sterile, as a result of perturbed exine and intine 
development. For example, the male sterile 2 mutant 
of Arabidopsis carries a lesion in a gene encoding 
a protein that promotes the synthesis of long-chain 
molecules, such as sporopollenin (cross-linked ca­
rotenoids). The mutant produces non-viable pollen 
grains with thin cell walls lacking an exine (Aarts 
et al. 1997). A number of such mutants are reviewed 
by Ma (2005).
Male gametophytic mutants influence segrega­
tion ratios in the progeny of plants, usually result­
ing in abortion of 50% of pollen grains. However, 
unlike the situation with female gametophytic 
mutants, where this results in a 50% reduction in 
seed set, the vast excess of pollen relative to egg 
cells means that male gametophytic mutants can 
be difficult to identify using conventional screens. 
Instead, perturbations in the segregation ratios of 
other markers are used to pick out male gameto­
phyte mutations. Since many thousands of genes 
are likely to be expressed in the male gametophyte, 
it is not surprising that many mutants have been 
described. Indeed, microarray analysis of genes 
Once cell identity is established, the microspores 
themselves develop in response to sporophyte-
expressed genes. These genes specifically control 
the meiotic divisions that produce the microspores. 
Many essential genes are required for correct pair­
ing and separation of chromosomes during meiosis 
(Ma 2005). Later, the TETRASPORE (TES) gene is 
essential for the formation and expansion of cell 
plates between the meiotically produced haploid 
nuclei. The tes mutants produce large microspores 
containing four haploid nuclei in a single cell. The 
TES protein is a kinesin which may determine mi­
crotubule positioning within the cell, a necessary 
component of cell division. The absence of the TES 
protein is correlated with an absence of the radial 
arrays of microtubules usually seen when the mi­
crospores undergo cell division (Yang et al. 2003b; 
Oh et al. 2008).
Detailed analysis of microsporogenesis has been 
used in the dissection of evolutionary relationships 
between flowering plants. One key character is the 
timing of the cell divisions in relation to the nu­
clear divisions, while another is the orientation of 
formation of successive cell plates during meiosis. 
Analysis of these traits in early diverging angio­
sperms has revealed a surprising degree of variabil­
ity between taxa, and suggests that the details of 
microsporogenesis are relatively labile in evolution­
ary time (Furness et al. 2002).
12.4.2  Microgametogenesis
Following microsporogenesis, the anther locules 
contain free microspores. These become heavily 
vacuolized, pushing the nucleus to the edge of the 
cell. The microspores then undergo a stereotyped 
set of cell divisions (one asymmetric, one symmet­
ric), to produce the three nuclei of the microgame­
tophyte. The first mitosis is asymmetric because 
the nucleus is at the periphery of the cell. The large 
daughter cell is the vegetative cell, and contains 
most of the cytoplasm from the microspore. The 
smaller cell, the generative cell, is entirely engulfed 
by the vegetative cell. It then undergoes a further, 
symmetric division to produce two sperm cells. 
This final division occurs within the developing 
pollen grain in some species (those with trinucleate 
pollen), but in other species (those with binucleate 

DEVELOPMENT OF GAMETOPHYTES      135
species, the pollen grain germinates. The develop­
ing pollen tube grows through the carpel tissue, in a 
special tissue called the transmitting tract. The pol­
len tube itself is a remarkable structure, thought to 
have evolved from an earlier spore-derived struc­
ture with a filamentous or branching form adapted 
for uptake of nutrients from surrounding tissues 
(discussed in Rudall and Bateman 2007). Indeed, 
in the gymnosperm Ginkgo biloba the pollen tube 
branches extensively within the female tissues, ex­
tracting nutrients over a period of several months 
before releasing motile sperm. In angiosperms, 
genes expressed in the stigma and style (that is, 
female sporophytic genes) play important roles in 
guiding the germinating pollen tube towards the 
embryo sac. The vegetative nucleus and the sperm 
nuclei migrate with the pollen tube, staying close 
to the growing tip. The pollen tube is attracted to 
the micropylar end of an ovule by a number of fe­
male gametophytic chemical messengers, and there 
bursts within a synergid, releasing the two sperm 
cells into the entrance to the embryo sac. The syn­
ergids die, allowing the sperm cells to fuse with the 
embryo sac proper. One sperm nucleus enters mito­
sis with the egg cell, to produce a diploid embryo, 
while the other enters mitosis with the diploid cen­
tral cell to produce a triploid tissue, the endosperm. 
Analysis of a number of Arabidopsis mutants has 
shown that the female gametophyte guides the pol­
len tube to the micropyle and from there into the 
synergids, arrests pollen tube growth, causes pol­
len tube bursting, and prevents further pollen tubes 
from entering the embryo sac (reviewed by Dressel­
haus 2006). Mechanisms are also in place to ensure 
that the male and female gametes are at the same 
stage of the cell cycle when fertilization occurs. The 
appropriate cell cycle stage varies between plant 
species, but is consistent within a single species 
(reviewed by Weterings and Russell 2004). The en­
dosperm grows and divides to provide the nutritive 
tissue in the seed, while the embryo undergoes cell 
division and development to produce the next spo­
rophyte generation. The outer layers of the ovule, 
the integuments, become the seed coat that protects 
the developing embryo. Development of this new 
generation is beyond the scope of this book.
expressed in the pollen grain suggested a likely 
total of around 4000 pollen-expressed genes across 
the Arabidopsis genome. The expressed genes in­
cluded a high proportion of essential genes with 
roles in signal transduction and cell wall biogenesis 
(Honys and Twell 2003). Many of the mutants that 
have been described so far underline the impor­
tance of the asymmetry of the first mitotic division. 
For example, the gemini pollen 1 mutant produces 
pollen grains with apparently randomly orientated 
first divisions, which then arrest after that first divi­
sion (Park et al. 1998). The cells produced by this 
first division express vegetative cell markers, indi­
cating that the vegetative cell is the default state in 
the absence of asymmetry. The GEM1 protein binds 
to microtubules and appears to be involved in mi­
crotubule positioning, apparently essential for the 
appropriate asymmetry of the first mitotic division 
(Twell et al. 2002). Similarly, the two-in-one (tio) mu­
tant microsporophyte completes asymmetric nu­
clear division, but fails to produce cell membranes 
as a result of failed cell plate formation, resulting in 
binucleate pollen that does not produce sperm cells 
(Oh et al. 2005). Other mutants are affected in the 
number of mitotic divisions that occur, and there­
fore the number of sperm cells produced, and in the 
positioning of the vegetative and generative cells 
with respect to one another (all reviewed by Twell 
2011). As with the female gametophyte, analysis of 
small RNA pathways indicates that these are also 
present and active in microgametophyte develop­
ment (Grant-Downton et al. 2009). It is clear that 
many genes are involved in microgametogenesis, 
and it should therefore be noted that the reduced 
size and duration of the male gametophyte stage of 
the angiosperm life cycle is still quite sufficient to 
ensure that few lethal mutations are retained within 
the genome.
12.5  Events following pollination
Mature pollen arrives at the stigmatic surface at the 
distal end of a carpel through any number of routes, 
although the important role of animal pollinators 
will be discussed in detail in Section III of this book. 
Once at the stigma of a suitable flower of the same 

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 13
Outcrossing and self-fertilization
This section of the book has focused on the devel­
opment of the angiosperm flower. The flower that 
has been discussed so far is a ‘perfect’ (hermaph­
rodite) flower, containing both male and female 
reproductive structures, and producing, through 
sporogenesis and gametogenesis, both male and 
female gametes. Hermaphroditism carries both ad­
vantages and disadvantages. Perfect flowers can, 
assuming no other constraints, self-pollinate and 
fertilize their own ovules. This sexual reproduction 
without the need for another individual of the same 
species gives the plant a certain set of advantages. 
The most important of these is guaranteed reproduc­
tion, irrespective of the availability of likely mates, 
and without relying solely on asexual reproduction 
(such as the production of runners or tubers). Since 
self-fertilization is a sexual process, involving inde­
pendent assortment of chromosomes at meiosis and 
the possibility of recombination between chromo­
somes, it does not result in the same lack of genetic 
variability that is the consequence of asexual repro­
duction. This guaranteed sexual reproduction gives 
self-pollinating plants the ability to colonize new 
habitats, and it is a common trait in weedy species. 
A second advantage of self-fertilization is the sav­
ing in energy and nutrients that would otherwise be 
spent producing costly rewards for pollinators. It is 
perhaps not surprising, then, that around 20% of an­
giosperm species are predominantly self-­pollinating 
(Barrett 2002). In the final section of this chapter we 
shall discuss the evolution of traits that promote 
self-pollination as a breeding system. However, 
self-fertilization does carry a disadvantage relative 
to outcrossing, which is that the genetic variabil­
ity produced, although greater than in an asexual 
population, is considerably less than that seen in an 
outbreeding population. The reduction in viability 
of inbred progeny compared with outcrossed prog­
eny is known as inbreeding depression, and is rec­
ognized as the primary selective pressure resulting 
in strategies to avoid self-fertilization (Barrett 2002). 
The balance between the relative importance of as­
sured reproduction and genetic variability differs in 
different species, largely as a result of their habitats, 
life cycles, and the niches that they occupy (Charles­
worth 2006). For the majority of this chapter we 
shall consider the developmental and biochemical 
ways in which self-fertilization can be reduced or 
prevented.
13.1  Reducing self-pollination 
in a hermaphroditic flower
Self-pollination can occur within a flower, or be­
tween flowers on the same plant. Pollination within 
a single flower is called autogamy, and is an obvi­
ous consequence of producing hermaphrodite flow­
ers. Autogamy may occur simply as a result of the 
positioning of stamens and anthers, or it may be 
facilitated by visiting animals. Weedy plants that 
self-pollinate (such as Arabidopsis) do not usually 
require an animal pollinator, as pollen is transferred 
directly from the stamens on to the stigma, which 
are in very close proximity. Autogamy can be most 
simply reduced by separating the stamens and 
stigma physically within the flower (herkogamy) 
or by separating the timing of their development 
(dichogamy).
13.1.1  Herkogamy
Herkogamous flowers have their anthers and stig­
ma positioned such that pollen cannot be passively 

Outcrossing and self-fertilization      137
have reported similar results in a range of systems. 
However, not all studies have found correlations 
between herkogamy and outcrossing. Medrano 
et al. (2005) found no increase in outcrossing associ­
ated with increased herkogamy in six populations 
of Narcissus longispathus (Asparagales). This study 
highlights a number of problems with herkogamy 
as a method of reducing outcrossing. Herkogamy 
is dependent on pollinator foraging behaviour to 
ensure that the non-autogamous pollen deposited 
on the stigma is collected from a different individ­
ual, not from a different flower on the same plant. 
It is also reliant on the pollinator not brushing by 
the stigma when it leaves the flower, a problem in 
the N. longispathus system as the pollinator often 
grooms on the edge of the flower, near the stigma, 
after feeding.
transferred to the stigma (see Fig. 13.1a). This trait 
acts to prevent self pollen reaching the stigma, un­
less it is transferred by an animal. Even when self 
pollen is transferred by a foraging animal, the 
animal is likely to carry pollen from other indi­
viduals as well, which means that a herkogamous 
flower should receive a mixed load of self and non-
self pollen. Takebayashi et al. (2006) investigated 
­within-population variability in herkogamy in Gilia 
achilleifolia (Ericales), a small blue-flowered Cali­
fornian phlox which has the stigma extended some 
way out of the flower, beyond the stamens. They 
found that a greater degree of herkogamy (meas­
ured as the distance between the stigma and the 
top of the stamen) was correlated with a greater de­
gree of outcrossing, confirming the hypothesis that 
herkogamy reduces self-pollination. Other studies 
Anther
(a)
(b)
(c)
Stigma
Figure 13.1  Reducing self pollination in 
a hermaphrodite flower. (a) Herkogamy. 
(b) Dichogamy—protandry. (c) Dichogamy—
protogyny.

138      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
reversal of the usual order of development of the 
reproductive organs. As we have seen in previous 
chapters, the fourth whorl organs, the carpels, usu­
ally develop last in floral meristems. Remarkably, 
some plant species are heterodichogamous, produc­
ing flowers that are protandrous and flowers that 
are protogynous. Wang et al. (2012) showed that the 
two flower types were produced in a 1:1 ratio by 
the basal eudicot Kingdonia uniflora (Ranunculales).
Protogyny is predicted to be a more efficient in­
hibitor of autogamy than protandry. In protandrous 
flowers, pollen may persist until after the stigma be­
comes receptive, causing self-pollination. Another 
advantage of protogynous flowers is that they have 
the ability to ‘top up’ any ovules which have not re­
ceived outcross pollen with their own pollen when 
it is released. Since protogyny is more effective than 
protandry, but protandry is more common, it has 
been proposed that the main benefit of protandry 
is in preventing interference between stamens and 
stigmas, by separating them, rather than in reducing 
inbreeding depression. Such interference results in 
the wastage of pollen on self stigmas, when it could 
contribute to male fitness if properly dispersed. 
Sargent et al. (2006) modelled the evolution of di­
chogamy, and found that both avoiding inbreeding 
depression and avoiding interference between stig­
ma and stamens played important roles in the ap­
pearance of dichogamy under different conditions. 
This may go some way towards explaining the sur­
prising prevalence of dichogamy (particularly pro­
tandry) in biochemically self-incompatible species 
(which should not need additional mechanisms to 
prevent self-fertilization; Bertin 1993).
Comparative studies have demonstrated a cor­
relation between pollinator type and dichogamy. 
Protandrous species are often pollinated by bees or 
flies, whereas protogynous species are often wind- 
or beetle-pollinated (Sargent and Otto 2004). These 
correlations suggest that, as we saw with herkoga­
my, pollinator foraging behaviour can have signifi­
cant consequences for the effectiveness of strategies 
to minimize self-pollination.
13.2  Monoecy
The only developmental mechanism that com­
pletely ensures that autogamy does not occur is the 
Surprisingly, a recent report indicates that herkog­
amy varies in different populations of Arabidopsis. 
Traditional lab lines show slight reverse herkogamy, 
where the anthers are positioned slightly above the 
stigma, shedding pollen directly on to it. However, 
in two different wild populations, Luo and Widmer 
(2013) recorded the occurrence of approach herkog­
amy, in which the stigma is positioned above the 
anthers. Plants from these populations had consid­
erably reduced seed set in insect-free greenhouses, 
compared with Col-0, indicating that herkogamy 
is also a system arising in natural populations of 
a predominant selfer that reduces self-fertilization 
and presumably allows enhanced outcrossing.
13.1.2  Dichogamy
Dichogamy is a slightly more reliable method of 
preventing autogamous pollination than herkoga­
my. Dichogamous flowers have the timing of anther 
dehiscence separated from the timing of stigma re­
ceptivity. Dichogamy is extremely common, with as 
many as 87% of angiosperm species showing some 
degree of temporal separation of male and female 
function (Bertin and Newman 1993). The great ad­
vantage of dichogamy over herkogamy is that it is 
not possible for an animal pollinator to acciden­
tally transfer pollen from within the flower on to 
the receptive stigma. However, the same difficulty 
occurs with foraging behaviour—if pollinators for­
age primarily within an inflorescence then the pol­
len they transfer to receptive stigmas will still be 
self pollen, just from different flowers on the same 
plant. An impressive adaptation to reduce this par­
ticular problem is shown by some species in which 
the flowers of an individual exhibit synchronous 
dichogamy, all maturing as males at one time point 
and as females at another.
There are two variations of dichogamy, depend­
ing on which reproductive structure matures first. 
In protandrous flowers the anthers dehisce and 
the pollen is shed several days before the stigma is 
receptive (see Fig. 13.1b). In protogynous flowers, 
which are less common, the stigma is receptive sev­
eral days before the anthers dehisce and then ceases 
to be receptive before the pollen is actually released 
(see Fig. 13.1c). A possible explanation for the rela­
tive infrequency of protogyny is that it requires a 

Outcrossing and self-fertilization      139
a much bigger advantage of monoecy than any ef­
fect on outcrossing rate, which is seen as a second­
ary consequence of responding to selective pressure 
to maximize reproductive output under different 
conditions.
Monoecy is believed to be a derived condition 
(Richards 1997). A number of plant species pro­
duce both unisexual and hermaphroditic flowers, 
and these are believed to represent evolutionary 
intermediates. Andromonoecious plants, such as 
Cucumis melo (melon, Cucurbitales), produce both 
male and hermaphroditic flowers, whereas gy­
nomonoecious plants, such as various Poa species 
(Poales), produce both female and hermaphroditic 
flowers. It has been observed that andromonoecious 
plants with few resources produce a greater propor­
tion of male flowers than their better resourced con­
temporaries. These data suggest that the ability to 
vary male and female output, rather than avoidance 
of autogamy, is the driving force behind the evolu­
tion of monoecy.
The development of monoecy from hermaphro­
ditic flowers requires male sterility and female ste­
rility to be expressed developmentally and spatially 
within the same individual plant. It is likely that 
this involves specific loss of B or C function gene 
activity in whorl 3 to make female flowers, and spe­
cific loss of C function gene activity in whorl 4 to 
make male flowers (see Chapter 10). It is usually 
the case that there is a distinct pattern of arrange­
ment of male and female flowers within a monoe­
cious plant. For instance, most grasses have female 
flowers at the bottom of the inflorescence and male 
flowers at the top (see Fig. 13.2). This architectural 
separation of reproductive function is probably 
easier to produce developmentally than a more 
integrated arrangement, as promoter activity of B 
and C function genes can be tied to developmen­
tal stage. However, it should be remembered that 
the B and C function genes are only necessary to 
differentiate male and female function, but that 
other genes may actually specify that function. Perl-
Treves et al. (1998) examined three AGAMOUS-like 
(C function) genes in Cucumis sativus (cucumber, 
Cucurbitales), and found no changes in expres­
sion correlated with hormone treatments that alter 
floral sex. Boualem et al. (2009) found that varia­
tion in ethylene biosynthesis was correlated with 
separation of male and female functions into differ­
ent flowers. Monoecious plants are hermaphroditic, 
as they produce both male and female gametophytes 
(and thus gametes), but the individual flowers on a 
monoecious plant are of a single sex. This strategy 
still allows self-pollination between different flow­
ers of the same individual (geitonogamy) to occur, 
and so is not a very effective method of preventing 
self-pollination. However, it is quite common, with 
around 5% of angiosperm species being entirely 
monoecious, and another 4.5% producing both mo­
noecious and hermpahroditic flowers.
Monoecy has often been associated with ineffi­
cient pollination systems. It is common in grasses 
and wind-pollinated trees, and has recently been 
found to be particularly frequent in tropical Aus­
tralian tree species (Gross 2005). This may reflect 
the infrequency or absence of specialized pollina­
tors such as birds, bats, and large bees in the Aus­
tralian forests, and the prevalence of generalist 
pollinators such as beetles, flies, small bees, and 
thrips. When pollination is unreliable or inefficient, 
monoecy may be selectively advantageous over di­
oecy (see below) because pollen does not have to 
travel between individuals, just between flowers, to 
achieve fertilization. It may also be advantageous 
to advertise strongly to such inefficient pollinators 
by providing ‘spare’ male flowers with plenty of re­
warding pollen.
A second major advantage of monoecy is that it 
allows the plant to vary the number of male flow­
ers and the number of female flowers it produces 
according to its age, health, or environment. For 
instance, in many monoecious trees, young plants 
have almost entirely male flowers, whereas older 
trees have mostly female flowers. Older trees have 
usually built up more resources and can afford to 
support fruit, whereas younger trees benefit from 
the ability to contribute to the next generation with­
out the investment in costly fruit and seed. Simi­
larly, drought-stressed monoecious plants in dry 
habitats tend to produce mostly male flowers while 
those in more moderate habitats tend to produce 
more female flowers (Freeman et al. 1981). Light, 
nutrients, and water have all been shown to in­
crease female production in various monecious spe­
cies. This ability to selectively allocate resources to 
different reproductive functions is often considered 

140      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
13.3  Dioecy
Dioecy is a relatively common solution to the prob­
lem of self-fertilization, with around 6% of angio­
sperm species showing complete separation of the 
sexes (Barrett 2002). Dioecy is scattered throughout 
the angiosperm phylogenetic tree, suggesting that it 
has evolved independently many times. As many as 
160 plant families include dioecious species, and it 
has been predicted that the trait has evolved around 
100 times independently. However, there are a few 
plant families where dioecy is particularly preva­
lent. These include the Euphorbiaceae (in the Mal­
pighiales), the Cucurbitaceae (Cucurbitales), and the 
Urticaceae (Rosales) (Ainsworth 2000).
Dioecy is often viewed as the logical end point of 
mechanisms to separate sexual function in space or 
time. However, although it does effectively elimi­
nate self-fertilization, it also carries a great risk of 
reproduction failing entirely. Dioecy would clearly 
be a big disadvantage to weedy species and those 
that regularly colonize new habitats. Attempts to 
model the evolution of dioecy have concluded that 
avoiding inbreeding is one selective pressure that 
may be responsible for its appearance, but sexual 
specialization may be equally important (Freeman 
et al. 1997). Sexual specialization involves the devel­
opment of characters that enhance male or female 
reproductive success. For example, the enlarged 
feathery stigmas of female wind-pollinated flow­
ers would interfere with activity of stamens, and so 
retaining the two organs in separate flowers or on 
separate plants is advantageous. Similarly, female 
flowers must be borne on branches strong enough 
to support developing fruit, while male flowers 
may benefit from thinner, more flexible branches 
that encourage pollen dispersal. This differential 
development to maximize a single sexual function 
may, like the differential allocation of resources to 
sexual functions in monoecious plants, actually rep­
resent the driving force behind the evolution of di­
oecy, with the elimination of self-pollination simply 
being a fortuitous consequence.
Dioecy can evolve through monoecy, and dioecy 
has also been shown to revert to monoecy—for exam­
ple, in the genus Momordica (Cucurbitales; Schaefer 
and Renner 2010). An alternative evolutionary 
route to dioecy is through one of the intermediate 
development of monoecious or andromonecious 
individuals in Cucumis. Another plant growth regu­
lator, gibberellin, has also been shown to influence 
floral sex, and some of the maize (Poales) mutants 
with disruptions in moneocy are thought to be per­
turbed in gibberellin synthesis or perception (Del­
laporta and Calderon-Urrea 1994). Of course, the 
pleiotropic nature of plant growth regulator func­
tion makes it likely that perturbation of synthesis 
or perception of a plant growth regulator will have 
an influence, even if it is non-specific, on floral or­
gan development. Maize has so far proved the best 
system in which to explore the development of mo­
noecy, with a number of mutants identified. The 
tasselseed group of mutants produce hermaphrodite 
flowers in their male inflorescences. In addition to 
mutants with lesions in the production of enzymes 
involved in gibberellin and jasmonic acid produc­
tion and degradation, the tasselseed mutants have 
pointed to a role for ABC genes in unisexual flower 
development. In particular, the TS4 locus encodes 
miR172, which restricts activity of the A function 
gene APETALA2 to whorls 1 and 2 in Arabidopsis, 
and TS6 encodes an AP2-like gene that is targeted 
by this microRNA (Chuck et al. 2007).
Figure 13.2  Monoecy. Flowers of each sex are often 
developmentally separated in the plant.

Outcrossing and self-fertilization      141
use an XY sex determining mechanism, the most 
common sex chromosome system in plants.
The differentiation of male or female flowers on a 
dioecious individual requires the same developmen­
tal modifications as those already discussed for mo­
noecious plants. The timing of abortion of male or 
female organs varies greatly across different species. 
It has been suggested that dividing unisexual flow­
ers into two groups—type I, in which the flowers 
initiate as hermaphrodite but become unisexual by 
termination of development of one set of organs, and 
type II, in which the flowers initiate as ­unisexual—
would assist efforts to understand the different de­
velopmental processes at work (Diggle et al. 2011). 
Interestingly, male flowers and female flowers of 
both dioecious and monoecious plants tend to ar­
rest at similar developmental stages within a single 
species.
The hypothesis that ABC function genes are at 
least involved in sexual differentiation in dioecious 
plants has been proved correct for Rumex acetosa. B 
function genes in this species are expressed only in 
male flowers, and only in the stamen whorl. They 
are not expressed in the sepaloid perianth organs of 
either male or female flowers. C function genes are 
expressed in both sexes, initially in both the stamen 
and carpel whorls. However, as the ‘inappropri­
ate’ set of organs aborts, transcript of the C func­
tion gene becomes undetectable in those organs. 
Thus in the female flowers C function expression is 
lost from the developing stamens at the time when 
their development ceases, and in the male flowers 
C function expression is lost from the carpel at the 
time when its development ceases (Ainsworth et al. 
1995). However, further reports of C function activ­
ity being maintained in aborted carpel primordia 
in a mutant Rumex plant producing both flower 
types suggest that loss of C function activity can­
not cause the cessation of development in this spe­
cies, but may itself be a consequence of abortion of 
organ development in individuals of different sex 
(Ainsworth et al. 2005). A related mechanism for 
female-specific flower development was demon­
strated in Silene latifolia, where an orthologue of 
the Arabidopsis SUPERMAN gene (see Chapter 10) 
was found to be expressed solely in female flowers. 
In Arabidopsis, SUP represses activity of the B func­
tion genes in whorl 4, allowing carpel development, 
states of androdioecy or gynodioecy. Androdioecy 
(male individuals and hermaphrodite individuals) 
is extremely rare, and is thought to occur when 
selection favours the reappearance of hermaph­
roditism in a dioecious population (Pannell 2002). 
Gynodioecy (female individuals and hermaphro­
dite individuals) is much more common, and is the 
more likely route from hermaphroditism to dioecy. 
Females would be at an advantage in an otherwise 
hermaphrodite population if their increased rate of 
outcrossing reduced inbreeding depression. Once 
such a gynodioecious population is established 
there may be selective advantage to the hermaph­
rodites in maximizing pollen output, establishing 
males and a fully dioecious population. The com­
mon European weed Plantago coronopus (Lamiales) 
is a familiar example of a gynodioecious species 
(Koelewijn and van Damme 1996).
Sex determination in dioecious plants is com­
plex, largely because the multiple origins of the 
trait seem to be associated with multiple develop­
mental mechanisms. In some species, plant growth 
regulators play key roles and sex determination is 
environment dependent. In 15 angiosperm fami­
lies it has been shown that sex chromosomes, non-
recombining chromosomes, or chromosomal re­
gions in which female sterility/fertility and male 
sterility/fertility loci are tightly linked control the 
development of dioecy (Ming et al. 2011). These fam­
ilies are widely distributed in the angiosperm phy­
logeny, and are not related by any obvious features 
of habitat or life history. Both between and within 
these families distinct sex determining mechanisms 
are found, possibly representing different stages 
in sex chromosome evolution. Silene latifolia (cam­
pion, Caryophyllales) contains sex chromosomes 
that operate under the same active Y system as is 
seen in mammals, with XY individuals developing 
as males and XX individuals developing as females 
(Grant et al. 1994). In contrast, Rumex acetosa (sorrel, 
also Caryophyllales) uses a dosage-dependent sys­
tem similar to that of Drosophila melanogaster, with 
an X:autosome ratio of more than 1.0 resulting in 
female development and a ratio of less than 0.5 re­
sulting in male development (Ainsworth 2000). The 
Rumex acetosa system may represent loss of a degen­
erated Y chromosome in a system that was original­
ly XY, as other Rumex species (such as R. acetosella) 

142      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
‘mating types.’ An incompatible pollination occurs 
when one or both of the S haplotypes in the male 
parent is the same as one or both of the S haplotypes 
in the female parent.
Self-incompatibility can be divided into two main 
forms, according to whether the male determinant 
of the system is produced by haploid pollen grains 
or by the diploid parental anther tissue. Within 
each of these two divisions, multiple molecular 
mechanisms may be at work in different species. 
In gametophytic self-incompatibility it is the geno­
type of the pollen grain, the gametophyte, that is 
key. Since pollen grains are haploid, they carry only 
one S haplotype (see Fig. 13.3). In sporophytic self-
incompatibility it is the genotype of the parent plant 
from which the pollen grain came—the diploid 
­sporophyte—that matters. Since sporophytes are 
diploid, the pollen grain will carry the imprint of 2 
S haplotypes (Fig. 13.4). Differences in the mecha­
nism of preventing fertilization also separate the best 
studied gametophytic and sporophytic systems. In 
gametophytic self-incompatibility in the Solanales, 
the growth of the pollen tube is inhibited within the 
tissue of the style. In sporophytic self-­incompatibility 
in the Brassicales, the germination of the pollen 
grain is inhibited on the surface of the stigma and 
no pollen tube enters the style. Of the 90 families of 
angiosperms that have self-incompatibility, no fam­
ily consists entirely of self-incompatible species. It is 
also the case that sporophytic and gametophytic self-
incompatibility systems are not found within a single 
family. Gametophytic self-incompatibility is thought 
to be the more common of the two types, but exam­
ples of sporophytic self-incompatibility have been 
more thoroughly characterized.
13.5  Sporophytic self-incompatibility (SSI)
The best studied sporophytic self-incompatibility 
system is that found in the Brassicaceae (Brassicales), 
because of the importance of this family in crop pro­
duction. However, sporophytic self-­incompatibility 
is also found in other large families, including the 
Asteraceae (Asterales), the Convolvulaceae (Sola­
nales), and the Caryophyllaceae (Caryophyllales). 
It is not yet clear whether similar molecular systems 
a role which it might also be playing in this dioe­
cious system (Kazama et al. 2009).
It is currently not clear how sex determination 
through sex chromosomes is linked to sexual differ­
entiation at the level of floral organ development. It 
has been suggested that the basal eudicot Thalictrum 
dioicum, a member of the Ranunculales, might pro­
vide a system in which to link these two stages of 
dioecious development. T. dioicum flowers produce 
type II unisexual flowers—no carpel primordia are 
found in male plants and no stamen primordia are 
found in females. B and C function gene expression 
has been analysed in this species, and although the 
presence of multiple copies of both types of genes 
makes the analysis complex, there is clear segrega­
tion of expression patterns with plant gender. This 
suggests that sex determination methods in this spe­
cies operate through complete repression of the tran­
scription of organ identity genes (Di Stilio et al. 2005).
13.4  Self-incompatibility (SI)
It is clear that developmental separation of male 
and female reproductive functions occurs for com­
plex reasons, only some of which may be related to 
preventing self-fertilization. Such separation can 
vary greatly in its effectiveness, and all mechanisms 
except dioecy do allow some self-­fertilization. How­
ever, in around 90 angiosperm families, and up to 
50% of angiosperm species, it has been reported that 
some form of biochemical self-incompatibility ex­
ists (McClure and Franklin-Tong 2006). ­Biochemical 
self-incompatibility results in the failure of self 
pollen to fertilize an ovule of the same individual, 
whether the pollen grain was produced on the same 
flower or on a different flower. In those families 
where self-incompatibility has been studied, the 
control of this block to self-fertilization can be attrib­
uted to a single genetic locus, the S locus. The S lo­
cus does not necessarily represent one single gene, 
but is a closely linked region of the chromosome 
containing several genes which together control 
self-incompatibility. The S locus exists in multiple 
forms, known as haplotypes (rather than alleles, 
since multiple genes are present, although the term 
‘S allele’ is often used, too), providing different 

Outcrossing and self-fertilization      143
S1 S2
S2 S3
S3 S4
x
1
2
x
1
2
1
2
x
Figure 13.3  Gametophytic self-
incompatibility. Pollen grains carry only a 
single mating type, according to their own 
haploid genotype.
haplotypes rather complex (Hiscock and McInnis 
2003).
The Brassica self-incompatibility reaction can be 
divided into two stages. Firstly, self pollen, or at 
least pollen with the appropriate genotype to trig­
ger the response, is recognized by the presence of 
the same S haplotype in the male and female par­
ents. Secondly, this recognition stimulates a signal 
transduction cascade that leads to pollen rejection. 
The self-incompatibility response in Brassica is con­
trolled by a single S locus, at which up to 80 different 
S haplotypes have been identified. The locus itself 
are at work in each of these families, but reports 
suggest that not all of the components of the Bras­
sica system are present in other examples of SSI 
(reviewed by Iwano and Takayam 2012). Sporo­
phytic self-incompatibility can be genetically com­
plex, because different S locus haplotypes may be 
dominant, recessive, or co-dominant, and these 
relationships may differ between the male compo­
nents of the system and the female components. 
Thus a particular S locus haplotype may be domi­
nant in the stigma but co-dominant in the pol­
len, making the analysis of relationships between 
S1
S2
S2
S3
S3
S4
x
1
2
x
x
1
2
1
2
x
Figure 13.4  Sporophytic self-
incompatibility. Pollen grains carry the 
imprint of the parent plant’s diploid 
genotype.

144      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
(Takasaki et al. 2000). The haplotype specificity of 
the SRK protein has been shown, through analy­
sis of variants with substitutions at various posi­
tions, to be attributable to a small number of amino 
acid sites in the extracellular domain of the protein 
(Boggs et al. 2009).
Similar experiments have been conducted with 
SLG, and have concluded that it is not sufficient 
alone to determine female S locus type, but that it 
acts with SRK and enhances its activity. Introduc­
tion of the SLG28 gene into a heterozygous line of 
B. rapa carrying S52 and S60 failed to confer recog­
nition or rejection of S28 pollen. However, cross­
ing these plants to the transgenic plants described 
above, which express SRK28, resulted in a signifi­
cant enhancement of rejection of S28 pollen, with 
much lower seed set than was shown by the plants 
containing SRK28 alone. From these data it is appar­
ent that SRK is the female specificity determinant 
in Brassica, and that SLG enhances the recognition 
process in the stigma (Takasaki et al. 2000). One pos­
sibility is that SLG determines the strength of the 
incompatible reaction, with strong incompatibil­
ity resulting from particular SLG alleles but weak 
incompatibility resulting from other SLG alleles 
­(Hiscock and McInnis 2003).
13.5.2  The male determinant of SSI in Brassica
Similar approaches have been taken to establish 
which genes at the S locus determine the male mat­
ing type of a plant. The S locus cysteine-rich (SCR) 
gene (also sometimes known as S-locus pollen protein 
11, or SP11) encodes a small cysteine-rich protein 
that is present only in the anthers and has a signal 
peptide for secretion (Schopfer et al. 1999; Takayama 
et al. 2000). Schopfer et al. (1999) demonstrated the 
role of the SCR gene in male mating type using both 
loss-of-function and gain-of-function approaches. 
First, they showed that a self-compatible mutant 
line of Brassica oleracea lacked the SCR transcript. 
Then they introduced the SCR6 gene transgenically 
into a line homozygous for the S2 haplotype. Pol­
len from all 12 resulting transformants shown to 
express the transgene was rejected by the stigmas 
of plants homozygous for the S6 haplotype, con­
firming the importance of the SCR gene in the male 
phenotype.
contains as many as 14 expressed genes (­Watanabe 
et al. 2000), and the genes determining the male and 
female components of the SI response are distinct, 
although closely linked. The tight linkage ensures 
that male and female self-incompatibility alleles 
are not brought together in inappropriate combina­
tions through meiotic recombination. In contrast, 
the genes involved in the signal transduction cas­
cade that causes pollen rejection appear to be en­
tirely unlinked and are scattered throughout the 
genome.
13.5.1  The female determinant of SSI in Brassica
The S locus contains multiple genes, so identi­
fying the female and male components of self-
incompatibility involved analysis of their expres­
sion patterns and functions. Two Brassica S locus 
genes encode proteins only detected in the stigma. 
These two highly polymorphic genes are called the 
S locus receptor kinase (SRK) and the S locus glyco­
protein (SLG). SLG encodes an abundant glycopro­
tein, which is secreted into the cell wall matrix of 
the stigmatic papillae (Nasrallah et al. 1985; Kan­
dasamy et al. 1989), while SRK encodes a membrane-
spanning receptor kinase, with an extracellular do­
main, a transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic 
domain with serine/threonine kinase activity (Stein 
et al. 1991). The extracellular domain is structurally 
very similar to the SLG protein. Because of this sim­
ilarity it has been hypothesized that SLG was pro­
duced by a partial duplication of SRK. Stein et al. 
(1996) confirmed that the SRK protein is localized to 
the plasma membrane of stigmatic papillae.
Analysis of mutant lines of Brassica in which 
self-compatibility has been lost confirmed the im­
portance of the SRK gene in determining female 
self-incompatibility. Several such lines have been 
shown to contain mutations within SRK. Transgenic 
work also supports this conclusion. Introduction of 
the SRK gene from S locus haplotype S28 into a Bras­
sica rapa line containing the S60 haplotype resulted 
in the production of plants that rejected S28 pollen. 
These data confirmed that the SRK gene is sufficient 
to determine which S type the female reproductive 
organs function as. The transgenics continued to 
reject S60 pollen, so the SRK28 transgene had sim­
ply added to their female self-incompatibility type 

Outcrossing and self-fertilization      145
auto-phosphorylation of the SRK, maintaining it in 
an inactive state in the absence of the SCR ligand 
(Cabrillac et al. 2001). If the SCR and SRK are of the 
same haplotype, then the SCR binds to the SRK, 
and residues in the SRK kinase domain are phos­
phorylated (Takayama et al. 2001). At the same time 
the SRK dimer is stabilized, and this phosphoryl­
ated stable dimer is an active signalling molecule 
(reviewed by Iwano and Takayama 2012). This 
change to SRK conformation leads to an intracel­
lular signal transduction cascade that inhibits pol­
len germination. The signal transduction cascade 
downstream of SRK acts through degradation of 
factors essential for pollen tube growth. ARC1, 
a stigma-specific U-box E3 ubiquitin ligase con­
taining an Armadillo motif, is bound by SRK and 
phosphorylated (Gu et al. 1998; Stone et al. 2003). 
Further experiments indicate that transgenic plants 
expressing an antisense version of ARC1 show loss 
of their SI responses (Stone et al. 1999). Yeast two-
hybrid studies also suggest that a kinase-associated 
protein phosphatase, calmodulin, and a nexin all 
bind to the SRK (Vanoosthuyse et al. 2003). Down­
stream of the immediate SRK-driven signal it is 
thought that multiple diverse signalling pathways, 
including auxin signalling, interact to suppress pol­
len germination.
13.5.4  Loss of SSI in Arabidopsis
One obvious member of the Brassicaceae that does 
not show SSI is Arabidopsis. Tsuchimatsu et al. (2010) 
demonstrated that the loss of self-­incompatibility in 
European ecotypes of Arabidopsis was attributable 
to a 213-base-pair inversion of DNA within the SCR 
region of the S locus. Re-inversion of this region 
in transgenic plants of the Wei-1 ecotype restored 
self-incompatibility, confirming that the SRK region 
and all downstream responses were still functional. 
However, in many ecotypes further degradation of 
the S locus has occurred.
13.5.5  SSI in other plant families
Sporophytic self-incompatibility has been most 
extensively studied in the Brassicaceae, but recent 
reports of its control in the Convolvulaceae (Sola­
nales) and the Asteraceae (Asterales) suggest that 
Further analysis of SCR protein function has 
revealed how haploid pollen grains can carry the 
imprint of two S locus haplotypes, resulting in spo­
rophytic self-incompatibility. When the SCR9 gene 
was expressed in bacterial cells, and the SCR9 pro­
tein was purified, the protein alone resulted in a 
self-incompatibility response when applied to stig­
matic cells of a plant carrying the S9 haplotype, but 
not of a plant carrying the S8 haplotype (Takayama 
et al. 2000). Within the plant, the SCR genes are ex­
pressed early in anther development in the tapetal 
cells that line the inside of the anther, as well as in 
the developing microspores (Takayama et al. 2000). 
As pollen grains develop within the anther, SCR 
protein is rubbed from the tapetum on to the sur­
face of the pollen grain. As a result, pollen grains 
carry SCR proteins encoded by both SCR alleles 
present in the parent plant, even though the hap­
loid gametes within them only carry a single allele 
at the SCR locus.
The dominance of SCR alleles is a reflection of their 
expression patterns, regulated by RNA-­directed 
DNA methylation. Dominant SCR alleles are ex­
pressed tapetally and gametophytically, whereas re­
cessive alleles are only expressed in the tapetum or 
are silenced completely in a heterozygous context. 
Tapetum-specific expression is sufficient to provide 
a coating of SCR protein to the outside of the pollen 
grain, maintaining self-incompatibility in a homozy­
gous recessive individual. The silencing of recessive 
alleles in the presence of a dominant allele has been 
observed in B. rapa, B. oleracea, and Arabidopsis ly­
rata (Kusaba et al. 2002; Shiba et al. 2002). Tarutani 
et al. (2010) showed that silencing of the recessive 
SCR allele is due to methylation, ­directed by a small 
non-coding RNA, SP11 methylation inducer (Smi), en­
coded by regions of the S locus flanking the SCR in 
dominant haplotypes.
13.5.3  The SSI response in Brassica
When a pollen grain lands on a stigma, the pollen 
coat SCR diffuses into the cell wall of the stigmat­
ic papillae, where it binds to the receptor domain 
of the SRK. Prior to SCR binding, the SRK is pre­
sent as loose dimers associated with two thiore­
doxin-H-like proteins (Mazzurco et al. 2001). The 
thioredoxin-H-like proteins are thought to prevent 

146      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
13.6.1  The female determinant of GSI 
in the Solanaceae
A small glycoprotein, present in mature styles, is 
the female determinant in the gametophytic self-
incompatibility system. The protein was initially 
identified on the basis of its abundance in the style 
and its segregation with the S locus in Nicotiana alata 
(Anderson et al. 1986). The protein was noted to have 
significant structural and sequence similarity with a 
group of fungal ribonucleases, or RNases, and was 
then shown to have ribonuclease activity, and so was 
named S-RNase. Gray et al. (1991) confirmed that 
­S-RNases prevent protein production, both within 
a pollen tube and in an in vitro system, and showed 
that S-RNases degraded all mRNAs, not specific 
substrates. Transformation experiments similar to 
those used to test the female determinant of sporo­
phytic self-incompatibility have shown conclusively 
that S-RNase is sufficient to determine female mat­
ing type in N. alata. Introduction of the gene encod­
ing S-RNase from the SA2 haplotype into a different 
genetic background (a hybrid between N. alata and 
N. langsdorffii) resulted in the production of plants 
that specifically rejected SA2 pollen (but not pol­
len grains carrying other S haplotypes) (Murfett 
et al. 1994). Similarly, introduction of the S3 S-RNase 
gene from Petunia inflata into an individual carrying 
the S1S2 haplotype induced the ability to recognize 
and reject S3 pollen (Lee et al. 1994a). To date, it ap­
pears that S-RNase is the only protein involved in 
specifying female mating type in the Solanaceaous 
gametophytic self-incompatibility system.
13.6.2  The male determinant of GSI 
in the Solanaceae
F box proteins, which target other proteins for 
degradation, have been shown to be the male de­
terminants of gametophytic SI in both petunia and 
Antirrhinum (Plantaginaceae, in the Lamiales). F 
box proteins in many cellular contexts bind specific 
proteins to the SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, 
targeting them for degradation by the 26S protea­
some. In GSI it is thought that F box proteins target 
non-self S-RNases for degradation, allowing pollen 
tubes to grow. Genes encoding F box proteins were 
first shown to be linked to the S locus by sequencing 
it has evolved multiple times through different mo­
lecular mechanisms. Within the Convolvulaceae, 
research has focused on Ipomoea trifida with ongoing 
efforts to isolate the genes at the S locus through a 
variety of approaches. Although little is yet known 
about what does constitute the S locus in this spe­
cies, it has been shown that genes with sequence 
similarity to SRK and SLG do not segregate with the 
S locus, which suggests that they are not involved in 
self-incompatibility, and are expressed in all tissues 
rather than in a stigma-specific manner (Kowyama 
et al. 1996; Rahmann et al. 2007). In the Asteraceae, 
similar conclusions have been drawn from work 
with Senecio squalidus. Hiscock et al. (2003) reported 
that SRK-like sequences did not segregate with the 
S locus and were not specifically expressed in the 
stigma. Recent work in Senecio has focused on genes 
encoding glycoproteins which are expressed in the 
stigma and do segregate with the S locus, although 
their molecular function is as yet unknown (His­
cock and Tabah 2003), and on transcriptome-based 
analyses of stigma-specific transcripts, which have 
provided a number of additional candidate genes 
for further analysis (Allen et al. 2011).
13.6  Gametophytic self-incompatibility 
(GSI)
Gametophytic self-incompatibility has been studied 
in most detail in the Solanaceae, although it is found 
in 60–90 families, including the Rosaceae (Rosales), 
Leguminosae (Fabales), Plantaginaceae (Lamiales), 
and Papaveraceae (Ranunculales) (Franklin-Tong 
and Franklin 2003). As with sporophytic self-
incompatibility, gametophytic self-­incompatibility 
is controlled by a single S locus which is highly 
polymorphic and contains the determinants of both 
male and female function tightly linked. However, 
since male S type is determined by the genotype of 
the haploid pollen grain, the gametophyte, there 
are no issues of dominance with respect to the male 
function. Gametophytic self-­incompatibility in the 
best studied system, that of the Solanaceae, differs 
from sporophytic self-­incompatibility in that pollen 
grains do germinate but are inhibited within the 
transmitting tract of the style, rather than on the 
stigmatic surface.

Outcrossing and self-fertilization      147
similar quantities of RNase. Instead, those research­
ers showed that S-RNases were sequestered in a 
vacuolar compartment in the pollen tube, which 
broke down after pollination with an incompat­
ible (self) pollen grain. They further showed that 
a stylar protein called HT-B was necessary for the 
release of S-RNases from the vacuole. HT-B was 
one of the first to be identified of a number of modi­
fier proteins that interact in the GSI recognition 
system. This particular protein is significantly de­
graded following pollination with an incompatible 
pollen grain, but less so after a compatible pollina­
tion. In transgenic plants expressing an antisense 
HT-B construct, the pollen tube vacuole did not 
break down after an incompatible pollination. The 
authors therefore proposed an alternative to the 
simple RNase degradation model (Goldraij et al. 
2006; and reviewed by McClure and Franklin-Tong 
2006 and McClure et al. 2011). These authors sug­
gested that S-RNases might be compartmentalized 
into pollen tube vacuoles in compatible reactions, 
and only released to inhibit pollen tube growth 
in incompatible (self) reactions. The SLF proteins 
might therefore be involved in targeting the non-
matching HT-B proteins for degradation, prevent­
ing vacuolar breakdown, rather than in directly 
degrading the S-RNases themselves.
The relatively recent discovery of the male deter­
minant of gametophytic SI means that our under­
standing of this system lags considerably behind our 
understanding of sporophytic self-­incompatibility. 
Much exciting work remains to be done, to uncover 
the details of the incompatibility reaction and any 
downstream responses.
13.6.4  GSI in other plant families
Gametophytic self-incompatibility has been studied 
in several plant groups, and extremely similar mech­
anisms seem to be at work in the Solanales (Petunia, 
Nicotiana), the Lamiales (Antirrhinum), and the Ro­
sales (Prunus). However, it seems that an entirely dif­
ferent system of gametophytic self-­incompatibility 
operates in poppy (Ranunculales). In Papaver rhoeas, 
small secreted proteins known as Papaver rhoeas 
style S (PrsS) proteins determine the female mating 
type (Foote et al. 1994), and the incompatible reac­
tion occurs in the pollen grain. Sequencing of the S 
of the genomic region surrounding S-RNase in An­
tirrhinum hispanicum (Lai et al. 2002). These genes 
were named S locus F box (SLF) genes, and were 
then shown to influence compatibility when intro­
duced transgenically into different backgrounds 
(Qiao et al. 2004; Sijacic et al. 2004). Rather surpris­
ingly, there seem to be few alleles of SLF. This obser­
vation, combined with the difficulty in explaining 
how a single pollen SLF protein could recognize 
the potentially infinite variety of non-self S-RNase 
alleles, led Kubo et al. (2010) to look at the male 
determinant of GSI more closely in petunia. They 
established that multiple SLF genes were linked to 
the S locus and were specifically expressed in pol­
len, suggesting that the male determinant is not a 
single SLF but a variety of them, able to recognize 
a great diversity of S-RNase molecules, but not the 
matching one. These data led to a revision of the 
basic model of GSI, which is now known as a col­
laborative non-self recognition system.
13.6.3  The GSI response in the Solanaceae
Before the male determinant of gametophytic self-
incompatibility was identified, debate centred on 
its likely role in prohibiting RNase activity. The 
observation that compatible S-RNases do enter the 
pollen tube (Luu et al. 2000) indicated that the male 
determinant was likely to inhibit RNase activity, 
rather than act as a gatekeeper, guarding the pol­
len tube. The identification of the male determi­
nant as an F box protein seemed to reinforce this 
model, and SLF has been shown to bind S-RNase, 
using yeast two-hybrid analysis (Qiao et al. 2004). 
F box proteins are most likely to act within the pol­
len tube to degrade all the S-RNases entering from 
the style. In this model, when a matching S-RNase 
enters the pollen tube it is not recognized and de­
graded by any of the F box proteins, and is able to 
inhibit pollen tube growth. Accordingly, the Sola­
naceous GSI system can be thought of as a non-self 
recognition system—all the non-matching S-RNase 
proteins are recognized and degraded by the SLF 
proteins, but the matching S-RNase escapes. How­
ever, some studies have suggested an alternative 
model. Goldraij et al. (2006) reported that non-self 
S-RNases are not degraded in Nicotiana alata, where 
compatible and incompatible pollen tubes contain 

148      DEVELOPMENT OF FLOWERS
that produce thrum flowers are heterozygous (Ss). 
Pollen from heterozygous plants shows dominance 
of the ‘thrum’ (S) haplotype, allowing it to fertilize 
homozygote pin (ss) plants. Crosses between the 
two types produce 50% heterozygous (and there­
fore thrum) flowers and 50% homozygous (and 
therefore pin) flowers. A similar genetic system 
operates in other, unrelated species, such as buck­
wheat (Fagopyrum esculentum, Caryophyllales). This 
system places pollen on specific parts of the pol­
linator’s body, from where it is most likely to be 
deposited on a stigma of the opposite flower type. 
This prevents half of the pollen being wasted on the 
wrong stigma type, which would reject it biochemi­
cally, and thus saves energy and resources as well 
as reducing blockage of the stigma by incompatible 
pollen. Molecular genetic approaches are currently 
being used to dissect the S locus in both primrose 
and buckwheat (Li et al. 2011).
The biochemical self-incompatibility that is pre­
sent in heteromorphic systems may work in differ­
ent physiological ways in different floral morphs. 
For example, Massinga et al. (2005) showed that in­
compatible pollen tubes were inhibited on the stig­
matic surface of the long-styled form of Pentanisia 
prunelloides (wild verbena, Gentianales), but within 
the style of the short-styled form. The style length 
polymorphism in this species is associated with an 
anther length polymorphism, and these influence 
pollination by butterflies, which carry pollen on 
locus revealed that the male determinant of GSI in 
this system, Papaver rhoeas pollen S (PrpS), encodes a 
transmembrane protein, with an extracellular loop 
shown to bind to the secreted PrsS protein (Wheeler 
et al. 2009). The interaction between the two proteins 
results in calcium movement into the germinat­
ing pollen tube, triggering a set of downstream re­
sponses that result in programmed cell death. PrpS 
has no sequence homology with proteins of known 
function from other plant systems, so the details of 
its mode of function are currently unclear (Wheeler 
et al. 2010).
13.7  Heteromorphic self-incompatibility
In around 20 different families of angiosperms 
there are species which have a heteromorphic self-
incompatibility system, where the biochemical self-
incompatibility type is associated with particular 
morphological traits (Barrett 2002). The common 
primrose, Primula vulgaris (Ericales), is a good ex­
ample of this type of system. It has sporophytic 
self-incompatibility with only two S haplotypes, 
which also control the position of the anthers and 
stigma within the flower. In ‘pin’ flowers the style 
extends above the anthers, and in ‘thrum’ flow­
ers the style sits below the anthers (see Fig. 13.5). 
Plants that produce pin flowers are genetically ho­
mozygous recessive (ss) at the S locus, and plants 
Thrum
Pin
Anther
Style
Figure 13.5  Heteromorphic self-
incompatibility, a form of reciprocal 
herkogamy.

Outcrossing and self-fertilization      149
self-incompatibility are a prerequisite for a selfing 
system, many other aspects of floral morphology 
can become adapted in ways that optimize self-
pollination. The transition to selfing is thought to 
begin in most cases with the loss of the biochemi­
cal self-incompatibility system (as described above 
in Arabidopsis; Tsuchimatsu et al. 2010). This loss 
is often followed by a reduction in flower size, 
by the loss or reduction of scent and nectar pro­
duction, by a reduction in herkogamy to position 
anthers and stigma at the same height, and by a 
reduction in flower opening. This reduced open­
ing is taken to extremes in cleistogamous flowers, 
which do not open at all, and instead achieve self-
pollination within the closed perianth organs. It is 
not always possible to predict which morphological 
traits will be most clearly associated with selfing. 
In Collinsia (Lamiales), a genus that contains both 
selfing and outcrossing species but no biochemical 
self-­incompatibility, the floral trait most strongly 
associated with selfing was shown to be loss of di­
chogamy, rather than floral size or spatial position­
ing of reproductive organs (Kalisz et al. 2012).
Efforts to explore the molecular genetic basis of 
the transition to selfing have focused on a number 
of species closely related to genetic models. For 
example, Sicard et al. (2011) demonstrated that the 
evolution of selfing in Capsella rubella (Brassicales) 
was accompanied by a reduction in petal size attrib­
utable to a shorter period of cell division compared 
with outcrossing relatives.
Those plants that do not allow self-fertilization 
must ensure that they achieve outcrossing. The in­
teractions of plants with their pollinators, and the 
adaptations that facilitate those interactions, are the 
subject of the third section of this book.
their heads or proboscises according to the anther 
length of the flower from which it came.
In addition to the distylous systems described 
above, in which two different forms of flower are pro­
duced, some species have three different floral forms, 
with stigmas at short, medium, and tall heights. 
These flowers produce two whorls of anthers, and 
within each floral morph the two anther whorls are 
at the reciprocal heights relative to the stigma (so 
flowers with short stigmas have medium and long 
anthers). This system is known as tristyly.
The existence of reciprocal floral types with dif­
ferences in style and anther height is not always 
associated with biochemical self-incompatibility. 
When such reciprocal herkogamy occurs alone it is 
known as heterostyly, which may be more common 
than full heteromorphic self-incompatibility. Both 
heterostyly and heteromorphic self-incompatibility 
require the linkage of genes controlling a number of 
traits at a single locus. Research to date has focused 
on the population dynamics and evolution of het­
erostyly (discussed by Mast and Conti 2006).
13.8  Ensuring self-pollination
Around 20% of angiosperm species are predomi­
nantly self-fertilizing, and the transition from out­
breeding to selfing has occurred very frequently 
in the evolutionary history of the flowering plants 
(Barrett 2002). It might be expected that selfing 
is a default state for a plant, and that, in order to 
achieve it, it is simply necessary not to acquire, or 
to lose, the various traits described earlier in this 
chapter. Although hermaphrodite plants (and pref­
erably hermaphrodite flowers) without biochemical 


SECTION III
Pollination Success: Molecular 
and Ecological Interactions


PART A
How and Why Does Floral Form Vary?


Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
individual. The alternative is self-pollination, when 
pollen is transferred from the anther of a single 
flower on to the stigma of the same flower (autoga­
my), or from the anther of one flower to the stigma 
of a second flower on the same plant (geitonogamy). 
Self-pollination is thought of as an adaptation to 
unreliable pollen vectors, particularly seen in short-
lived annual plants and those species that regularly 
invade new habitats. However, self-pollination is 
not optimal for genetic recombination, and so in 
the long term may compromise the genetic diver­
sity and evolutionary lability of a population (see 
discussion in Chapter 13). Therefore a great many 
flowering plants have adaptations that maximize 
their potential for cross-pollination. Since plants 
are immobile, this transport of pollen from plant to 
plant must be accomplished with the aid of a pollen 
vector, which may be abiotic or biotic.
14.2  Abiotic pollen vectors
14.2.1  Wind pollination
Abiotic pollen vectors consist primarily of the wind 
and water. Of these, wind pollination (anemoph­
ily) is by far the more common, being found in 18% 
of angiosperm families (including the ecologically 
dominant Poaceae, the grasses) as well as in the co­
nifers (Ackerman 2000). Wind pollination is a sec­
ondarily derived state in angiosperm flowers, as the 
earliest flowers are believed to have been pollinated 
by beetles (Thien et al. 2000). Anemophily is thought 
to evolve in response to changes in the environment 
that decrease the efficiency of biotic pollination 
while enhancing the success of wind pollination, 
In Chapter 8 we considered the newly emerging 
data on how different plants make the transition 
to flowering. However, when focusing on the de­
velopment of flowers themselves, we have so far 
largely ignored the concept that the flowers of dif­
ferent species may be very different from one an­
other. However, it is clear from a merely cursory 
glance around any garden in the summer months 
that flowers come in an enormous variety of sizes, 
shapes, colours, and scents. In Section III of this 
book we shall focus on the differences between 
flowers, as opposed to the molecular similarities 
that unite them. In this chapter we begin by con­
sidering the different ways in which flowers can be 
pollinated. It is a basic premise underlying much of 
floral biology that differences in pollination system 
explain many of the differences in floral form, as a 
result of selective pressure applied by pollinator be­
haviour both on floral traits that optimize animal 
foraging efficiency and on floral traits that optimize 
contact between the animal’s body and the plant’s 
reproductive organs. The evidence to support this 
premise is not as compelling as we might like to 
think, as will be discussed in later chapters (see in 
particular Chapter 21). To set the stage for those 
discussions, in this chapter we shall look at the his­
torical concept of the pollination syndrome and the 
predictions that it makes about floral morphology.
14.1  Cross-pollination
If cross-pollination is to occur within a popula­
tion of flowering plants, it is necessary for pollen 
to be transported from the anthers in a flower of 
one individual to the stigma in a flower of a second 
CHAPTER 14
Why are flowers different? Pollination 
syndromes: the theory

156      How and Why Does Floral Form Vary?
flowers, and, where present, do not usually produce 
much scent or pigmentation. The loss of a brightly 
coloured and strongly scented corolla is unsurpris­
ing in view of the unconscious nature of the wind as 
a pollen vector. Similarly, nectar production is usu­
ally lost when wind pollination evolves (Friedman 
and Barrett 2008). The stamen filaments of wind-
pollinated flowers are usually long, exposing the 
locules to the wind and generating an aeroelastic 
release of the pollen as energy is transferred from 
the wind to the stamen through the long filament 
(Urzay et al. 2009). The pollen grains themselves are 
smooth-surfaced, small in size, and enormous in 
quantity. Small size and a smooth surface have been 
shown to enhance the aerodynamic properties of 
pollen travelling in wind (Niklas 1985), while large 
quantities are necessary to increase the chances of 
wind-blown pollen reaching a stigma. The stigmas 
themselves are usually long and feathery, and pro­
trude a considerable way beyond the outer edges 
of the flower, maximizing the surface area avail­
able for pollen capture (Culley et al. 2002). Wind-
pollinated grass flowers are shown in Fig. 14.1.
14.2.2  Water pollination
Water pollination (hydrophily) is a relatively rare 
system of gamete transfer, but it is employed by a 
few species of grasses and waterweeds, occurring 
in only 31 genera of 11 different families, mostly 
in the monocots (Cox 1988). In most hydrophilous 
and has arisen around 65 times in the angiosperms 
(Friedman and Barrett 2008). Examples of environ­
mental changes that might cause a shift towards 
wind pollination include variations in pollinator 
abundance, migration into an area with a very dry 
climate, or the arrival of another plant species which 
might compete for pollinator attention (­Culley et al. 
2002). Many plant species have been shown to be 
both wind- and animal-pollinated, either simulta­
neously or at different times within the same season 
(Cox 1991). This combination of biotic and abiotic 
pollination systems is known as ambophily, and 
may be the transitional route through which full 
wind pollination most commonly evolves.
Angiosperm species that are wind-pollinated typ­
ically show a particular set of characteristics. Most 
of these characteristics have been shown to enhance 
the success of wind pollination, so can be thought 
of as adaptations to a wind-pollinated reproductive 
system (Culley et al. 2002). As wind pollination is a 
passive process, many of these adaptations are relat­
ed to the environments and habitats in which ane­
mophilous plants live, rather than to the features of 
their flowers. To begin with, wind-pollinated species 
typically inhabit environments with stronger winds 
but lower humidity than those of biotically pollinat­
ed species. Wind-pollinated plants are found in hab­
itats with low rainfall, ensuring that pollen is not 
washed away. Wind-­pollinated species are usually 
found in moderately high densities within an area, 
but with low densities of other species surrounding 
them. This combination of features maximizes the 
chances of released pollen landing on another indi­
vidual of the same species.
Besides common features of environment and 
habitat, wind-pollinated species also share a typi­
cal set of floral characteristics. Flowers and inflo­
rescences are commonly held above or away from 
vegetation, which maximizes access by the wind to 
reproductive organs. Very often the inflorescences 
are pendulous, like those of willow trees (Malpighi­
ales). The flowers within these inflorescences are 
usually unisexual. It would be hard to prevent self 
pollen clogging the stigmas of flowers exposed to 
the wind, if both male and female reproductive or­
gans were present in a small area. The outer two 
whorls of floral organs, the petals and sepals, are 
usually much reduced or absent in wind-pollinated 
Figure 14.1  The long tasselled flowers of a wind-pollinated grass 
hang far from the main body of the plant. See also Plate 6.

WHY ARE FLOWERS DIFFERENT?      157
flowers, but instead view flowers as food sources. 
The reward offered is usually a mixture of nectar, 
a sugar solution (which may contain various con­
centrations of several different sugars, along with 
other nutrients), and pollen itself, which is very rich 
in amino acids. When collecting this food, animals 
inadvertently brush against the reproductive or­
gans of the flower, causing pollen to be transferred 
from stamens to their bodies, and from their bodies 
on to stigmatic surfaces. Many flowers have struc­
tural features that enhance this inadvertent contact 
between pollinator body and floral reproductive 
organs, such as narrow corolla tubes, dorsally po­
sitioned anthers that deposit pollen on the back 
or head of the pollinator, or long nectar spurs that 
force the pollinator to crawl inside the flower to ac­
cess the reward.
14.4  Principles underlying the pollination 
syndrome concept
Biotic pollen vectors consist of a range of animals—
most commonly insects, as well as birds, bats, and 
a small number of other vertebrates. In a seminal 
book published in 1966, Faegri and van der Pijl 
bravely set out to ‘formulate the general principles 
of pollination ecology, applicable anywhere.’ A ma­
jor device used by those authors was the pollination 
syndrome, a suite of floral traits associated with the 
attraction of a particular group of pollinators. The 
assumption behind the pollination syndrome con­
cept is that coevolution between plant and animal, 
or else adaptation of the plant to existing animal 
traits, has led to the acquisition by plants of floral 
features that maximize their chances of attract­
ing and being pollinated by a particular animal or 
group of animals.
14.4.1  Do flowers act as specialist or general 
advertisements?
The pollination syndrome concept explains the dif­
ferences between different flowers as consequences 
of the types of animals that they attract. This con­
cept relies on the principle that characteristics such 
as particular colours, scents, shapes, and markings 
are specific to flowers pollinated by specific types 
species, pollen is released below the water surface 
and carried passively by currents to female repro­
ductive structures. This mechanism of water polli­
nation is used by many marine plants, such as the 
Caribbean turtle grass, Thalassia testudinum (Alis­
matales), which releases pollen grains underwater, 
bound up in strands of mucilage. These are carried 
by currents below the water surface, and the muci­
lage encourages them to stick to the female flowers, 
which are also underwater.
However, in some species, pollen is released on to 
the surface of the water and is carried on the sur­
face to female reproductive structures. The pollen of 
such plants—for example, Elodea canadensis (Cana­
dian waterweed, also Alismatales)—is ornamented 
with many tiny spikes, which trap pockets of air and 
ensure that the pollen floats. Anther dehiscence is 
often explosive, scattering the pollen grains widely 
across the water surface. The female reproductive 
structures may always be held at surface level in 
some hydrophilous angiosperms, but in others the 
female flower closes around the pollen and is then 
withdrawn below the water surface after pollina­
tion. A variation on the theme of releasing pollen on 
to the water surface is shown by species of Vallisneria 
(tape-grass, also Alismatales), which release entire 
male flowers on to the water, with the pollen never 
leaving the anthers until it arrives at a female flower.
The female flowers of many hydrophilous spe­
cies create depressions in the surface tension of the 
water, encouraging passing pollen grains to slide 
down towards them. This system is most effective 
in relatively still, stable water conditions, and can 
be easily perturbed by strong winds. Although 
hydrophilous flowers do produce relatively large 
quantities of pollen, the use of water surface ten­
sion dynamics to facilitate pollination means that 
less pollen is required than might be predicted (Cox 
1988).
14.3  Biotic pollen vectors
Biotic pollen vectors provide some or all of the pol­
lination service for the majority of flowering plants. 
The frequency with which we observe this interac­
tion leads to a common assumption that plants and 
animals are cooperating in a mutualistic associa­
tion. However, animals rarely deliberately pollinate 

158      How and Why Does Floral Form Vary?
reduce the likelihood of coevolution occurring be­
tween individual species. A plant will experience 
maximum reproductive fitness if it maximizes pol­
len dispersal between individuals of the same spe­
cies, without its stigmas becoming clogged with 
pollen of other species and without wasting much 
energy on nectar production. Therefore the optimal 
pollen vector will be an animal that alights only 
briefly on each flower, moves rapidly between in­
dividuals, is faithful to only one plant species, and 
does not eat much.
The animal will conserve energy if there is little 
need to forage, and so should prefer flowers with a 
large reward, where it can stay for a long time. If the 
reward is insufficient in one species it should forage 
on a range of plant species.
In addition, very specific interactions between 
plant and pollinator carry their own risks. A one-
on-one relationship between flower and pollinator 
should mean that little pollen is wasted, and so its 
production can be less prolific, saving energy. Fe­
male fertility should also be enhanced, as foreign 
pollen will not be applied to the stigma, where it 
can block acceptable pollen from germinating. 
However, such an extreme specialist can expect to 
set no seed at all if the pollinator is absent in any 
one season, due to disease or climatic changes, a sit­
uation which would be catastrophic for an annual 
plant and might also be very disadvantageous for 
a perennial.
It is generally argued that for these reasons the 
evolution of plants and their pollinators has fol­
lowed a middle road, with groups of flowers adapt­
ing to selective pressures imposed by groups of 
animals, rather than one-on-one species-specific 
interactions. It is the broad association between a 
group of flowers and the group of animals that pol­
linates them that has come to be called a pollination 
syndrome (Faegri and van der Pijl 1966).
14.5  The pollination syndromes
A pollination syndrome classically describes a suite 
of adaptations shown by a flower to a taxonomic or­
der of animals, and by those animals to a particular 
group of plants, which may not be phylogenetically 
related to each other. The adaptations shown by 
the animals may be behavioural or morphological, 
of animals. The different floral characteristics can be 
viewed as animal-specific advertisements, adapted 
to maximize the chances of attracting a particular 
type of bee or butterfly or beetle.
However, there is an alternative way of explain­
ing the many differences between different flowers. 
It was Darwin himself who first articulated the rea­
son why flowers are brightly coloured:
Flowers rank amongst the most beautiful productions 
of nature; but they have been rendered conspicuous on 
contrast with the green leaves, and in consequence at 
the same time beautiful, so that they may be easily ob­
served by insects. (Darwin 1859)
At first sight this might be read as consistent with 
the pollination syndrome concept, in stating that 
different colours attract different animals. In fact 
all that this quote means is that colour (and by ex­
tension shape and scent) simply provides contrast 
between flowers and the green vegetation around 
them. In this case any feature that makes a flower 
stand out even more against the green backdrop is 
likely to enhance the success of that flower in at­
tracting pollinators. Accordingly, from this point 
of view, all the different floral characteristics are 
simply an enormous number of different ways that 
plants have hit upon that make their flowers more 
attractive to a broad spectrum of pollinators. In­
stead of providing species-specific advertisements, 
the different floral characteristics might simply rep­
resent an almost infinite number of different adver­
tisements, all of which serve to attract animals in 
general.
It is likely that certain plant species produce ad­
vertisements that target particular animal pollina­
tors, and that other plant species produce generalist 
advertisements. However, we should bear in mind 
that the pollination syndrome concept rests on the 
idea of specialization, and may not be compatible 
with a view of flowers as non-specific advertisers of 
rewards to generalist pollinators.
14.4.2  Plants and pollinators want different 
things, making species-specific interactions 
unlikely
Plants and their pollinators have different require­
ments of the interaction, and these differences may 

WHY ARE FLOWERS DIFFERENT?      159
Thien et al. 2000). When considering a pollination 
syndrome, it is useful to begin with the features 
of the animal’s biology that are relevant to its role 
as an agent of pollen transfer. Beetles have mouth 
parts positioned parallel to the axis of the body, 
which limits their ability to manipulate food sourc­
es, particularly those with depth. They are also 
quite big animals, with a moderately high demand 
for protein as well as carbohydrate. Beetles do not 
have good colour vision, but do have a strong sense 
of smell and a particular attraction to fruity smells. 
Flowers that have become adapted for pollination 
by beetles might be expected to have character­
istics which make them both attractive to beetles 
and easy to obtain food from once the animal has 
landed. These features would include the provision 
of a floral reward consisting of both nectar (for sug­
ar) and pollen (for protein) in a flat structure from 
which the reward can be lapped. Beetle-­pollinated 
flowers are usually saucer- or bowl-shaped, with 
nectar secreted into the shallow bowl, and often 
have excess anthers to produce extra pollen as a re­
ward. Since colour vision is unimportant to beetles, 
while the plants can only show morphological ad­
aptations, which may include flower size, structure, 
colour, reward, and timing of floral induction and 
opening. A pollination syndrome can result from 
coevolution, or from adaptation of the plant to pre-
existing animal traits. A table summarizing the key 
floral traits traditionally associated with different 
pollinators is shown in Fig. 14.2.
14.5.1  Beetle pollination (cantherophily)
Beetle pollination is widely believed to have been 
the first pollination syndrome, the one used by the 
first angiosperms, as the Coleoptera (the beetles) 
constitute one of the oldest orders of insects and 
were already numerous at the time when the an­
giosperms came into existence, having themselves 
arisen around 260–280 million years ago (Pon­
omarenko 1995). Fossilized pollen found in the di­
gestive tracts of beetles has shown that these insects 
had already acquired the habit of grazing on the 
pollen of cycads, conifers, and other gymnosperms, 
before the angiosperms appeared (Labandeira 1997; 
COLOUR
SHAPE
SCENT
REWARD
BEETLE
White/cream
Dish/bowl
Fruity, quite 
strong
Nectar to lap, 
some excess 
pollen
FLY
White/cream/
pale yellow
Dish-like or 
more complex
Minimal
Small amount 
of nectar
BEE
Blue/yellow/
ultraviolet
Deep tube, 
bilateral
symmetry
Minimal
More nectar, 
some excess 
pollen
BUTTERFLY
Yellow/red/
orange
Deep tubes 
with landing 
platforms
Minimal
Only nectar
MOTH
White
Bilateral 
symmetry,
deep tubes
Strong, sweet, 
at night
Plentiful nectar
BIRD
Red/orange
Pendant or 
bilateral and 
upright, tube
Minimal
Much nectar
BAT
White
Large, saucer 
shaped
Strong, butyric 
acid
Copious nectar 
and much 
excess pollen
Figure 14.2  Table showing the general features of flowers involved in different pollination syndromes.

160      How and Why Does Floral Form Vary?
14.5.2  Fly pollination (myophily)
The Diptera (the order of true flies) show the great­
est variation in methods and habits of pollination of 
any group of insects. This makes it hard to define 
the morphological traits that we would expect to 
see in a fly-pollinated flower. Indeed, some flies be­
have very like beetles, and pollinate flowers that are 
morphologically very similar to beetle-­pollinated 
flowers (Thien et al. 2000). Other flies may have 
more in common with wasps, and pollinate flowers 
with very different structural features. One feature 
of flies that has been utilized by flowering plants 
is their persistence throughout all seasons. Flies are 
one of the few groups of insects that are not strictly 
periodic, and, as such, many plants that flower un­
der adverse conditions or at odd times of the year 
can be entirely dependent on flies for their pollina­
tion. Another feature common to all flies is that they 
do not feed their offspring, and are usually lighter-
bodied than many other insects. In consequence 
they do not need much food, and fly-pollinated 
flowers usually supply only a small quantity of nec­
tar. Although there is much variation within the or­
der, in general flies are more visually acute animals 
than beetles, and have a positive preference for pale 
and yellow colours. Fly-pollinated flowers are of­
ten coloured cream or yellow, and do not usually 
have much scent. Classic examples of fly-pollinated 
flowers include species such as carrot and other 
members of the Apiaceae (Apiales), as well as spe­
cies such as groundsel and other daisies (Asterales). 
A fly-pollinated Fatsia japonica flower (Apiales) is 
shown in Fig. 14.3b.
14.5.3  Bee pollination (melittophily)
Of the Hymenoptera, the bees have specialized 
most towards a diet of nectar and pollen. Wasps 
will take nectar to meet their sugar requirements, 
but do not actively collect either nectar or pollen. 
There are a few specialized instances of ants feeding 
on nectar, often from extra-floral nectaries, but for 
the most part it is the bees that are the great pollina­
tors of the Hymenopteran order. Bees are large ani­
mals, and have a substantial energy requirement. 
They usually forage for nectar for themselves, and 
beetle-pollinated flowers might be expected to 
waste little energy on the production and modifica­
tion of pigments, but instead to produce a strong 
scent. Many beetle-pollinated flowers do produce 
a fruity fragrance, and they are often greenish or 
off-white in colour. The classic example of a beetle-
pollinated flower is magnolia (Magnoliales), which 
has remained essentially unchanged for 100 million 
years and is still pollinated by the same sorts of ani­
mals (see Fig. 14.3a). Lilies (Liliales), wild roses (Ro­
sales), and some poppies (Ranunculales) are also 
often beetle-pollinated.
(c)
(e)
(d)
(b)
(a)
Figure 14.3  Insect-pollinated flowers. (a) Magnolia (Magnoliales) 
flowers are beetle-pollinated. (b) The fly-pollinated flowers of Fatsia 
japonica (Apiales). (c) Bumblebee entering a Hebe flower (Lamiales). 
(d) Many daisies (Asterales) are butterfly-pollinated. (e) The flowers of 
Angraecum sesquipedale (Asparagales) have very long nectar spurs 
and are pollinated by extremely long-tongued moths. Photographs (a), 
(d), and (e) kindly supplied by Cambridge University Botanic Garden 
and H. Rice. See also Plate 7.

WHY ARE FLOWERS DIFFERENT?      161
14.5.4  Butterfly pollination (psychophily)
In contrast to bees, the other most prominent group 
of pollinating invertebrates in temperate climates 
does not feed its offspring and has relatively low 
energy requirements. Butterflies are relatively light 
in weight, and usually alight on flowers, which 
reduces their energy expenditure. They also have 
long tongues, often 1 to 2 cm in length. Flowers 
that are pollinated by butterflies usually combine a 
flat structure to alight on with deep tubes in which 
the nectar is secreted. This can be achieved either 
by presenting a tube-shaped flower with a land­
ing rim around it, as in buddleia (Lamiales), or else 
by clustering a number of small tubes together to 
produce a larger flat surface, the system used by 
daisies (Asterales) (see Fig. 14.3d). Butterflies are 
not known to have much sense of smell at all, and 
butterfly-pollinated flowers do not usually produce 
much scent. However, butterflies do have good 
colour vision, and can see red. Butterfly-pollinated 
flowers are usually brightly coloured, with reds and 
yellows often predominant. This prevalence of red 
does not necessarily reflect a butterfly preference for 
red, but could simply occur because red is more vis­
ible to butterflies than to bees, and red flowers are 
therefore less likely to have been depleted of nectar 
by bees, making them attractive to butterflies.
14.5.5  Moth pollination (phalaenophily 
or sphingophily)
Although moths and butterflies are members of the 
same insect order, the Lepidoptera, their methods 
of pollination and the structures of the flowers they 
visit are completely different. The major reason 
for this is the difference in their behaviour—many 
moths are nocturnal, whereas butterflies are diur­
nal. Moths also prefer not to land on flowers, but 
to collect their nectar while hovering. Many moths 
are also much heavier in the body than butterflies. 
The combination of a heavy body and hovering 
flight means that moths have very high energy 
requirements indeed, and moth-pollinated flow­
ers usually produce more nectar than butterfly- or 
bee-­pollinated flowers. To facilitate nectar collec­
tion while the moth is hovering, moth-pollinated 
pollen to feed to larvae back in their hive or brood 
chamber. The pollen is carried on their bodies, in 
specialized structures that range from simply hav­
ing hairy feet to having pollen baskets on the hind 
legs, and it is then groomed off back at the hive. In 
response to these features, bee-pollinated flowers 
are usually quite large, in order to bear the weight 
of the animal, and they often have a clear land­
ing platform. They are also often closed, with pet­
als or other structures that must be pushed aside 
by the bee before it can access the nectar. This type 
of mechanism prevents nectar robbing by other 
animals, and helps to keep bees constant, as the 
supply of nectar is likely to be good. Inside these 
large flowers there is usually a reasonable volume 
of fairly concentrated nectar, and a small amount 
of excess pollen. Bees have the ability to perceive 
depth, and many species have long tongues. The 
nectar is often secreted at the base of deep corolla 
tubes or nectar spurs, again denying access to spe­
cies without the size and tongue length to access it. 
Since pollen found on the bee’s body is groomed off 
and fed to the larvae, many bee-pollinated flowers 
have dorsal anthers that deposit at least some of the 
pollen on the back of the bee’s neck, a position from 
which it cannot easily be groomed. Bees have good 
colour vision and can see in ultraviolet, blue, and 
yellow, but do not have receptors to perceive red, 
which they see only as a weak green signal. Bee-
pollinated flowers are usually brightly coloured, 
with yellow and blue being considered classic bee 
colours. However, many bee-pollinated flowers are 
red or pink. It has been shown that in many of these 
cases the presence of UV-absorbing pigments modi­
fies the red to a colour which is more highly vis­
ible to the bee (see Chapter 20; Chittka and Waser 
1997). As quite intelligent animals, bees are sensi­
tive to nectar guides, which enable them to handle 
the flowers more quickly by directing them straight 
to the nectar. Many bee-pollinated flowers have 
nectar guides visible either in the range of the spec­
trum that humans can see or else in the ultraviolet 
part. Classic examples of bee-pollinated flowers in­
clude the garden snapdragon (Antirrhinum majus), 
rosemary, and foxgloves (all Lamiales), and nettles 
(Rosales). A bumblebee visiting a Hebe (Lamiales) 
inflorescence is shown in Fig. 14.3c.

162      How and Why Does Floral Form Vary?
almost all of their energy from nectar, still eat the oc­
casional insect to meet their protein requirements. 
The classic pollinating bird is the hummingbird, 
which is found only in the Americas, but a variety of 
other groups also feed on nectar, including the Af­
rican sunbirds, Australian lorikeets, and American 
honey-creepers. Different types of birds have differ­
ent feeding strategies. For example, hummingbirds 
hover beneath or in front of flowers while feeding, so 
hummingbird-pollinated flowers tend to be either 
pendant, like a fuchsia (Myrtales) (see Fig. 14.4a), 
or stand out with free space in front. Sunbirds, on 
the other hand, perch while feeding, so sunbird-
pollinated flowers have a perch with the nectary 
facing towards it (see Fig. 14.4b). Bird-pollinated 
flowers are usually either brush- or tube-shaped, 
and the nectar is secreted into spurs, which are 
usually shorter and wider than those on butterfly-
pollinated flowers. They must also be quite tough, 
as a beak is both stronger and harder than a but­
terfly’s tongue. One of the key features of a bird-
pollinated flower is the quantity of nectar secreted. 
Birds are larger animals than the invertebrates dis­
cussed previously, and their energy requirements 
can be very high indeed. They feed from flowers 
that produce very large quantities of quite concen­
trated nectar, so much so that it will actually drip 
from the flowers at certain times of the year. Birds 
have good colour vision (see Chapter 20), and the 
flowers they pollinate are usually red, often with 
contrasting yellow marks to act as nectar guides. 
However, scent is not important in bird pollination. 
Classic examples of bird-pollinated flowers include 
red columbine (Ranunculales), poinsettia and pas­
sion flower (both Malpighiales), eucalyptus (Myr­
tales), and hibiscus (Malvales).
14.5.7  Bat pollination (chiropterophily)
A quarter of all bat species use flowers for food to 
some extent, and a few species rely on flowers for 
all of their nutritional requirements. There are even 
some crop plants that are dependent on bat polli­
nation, such as durian (Malvales; Bumrungsri et al. 
2009). Bats are large, heavy animals which some­
times land on the flowers they feed from. Those 
flowers tend to be large and robust, and usually 
saucer-shaped for ease of lapping nectar. Because 
flowers are usually bilaterally symmetrical, and 
presented to the pollinator with the petal lobes bent 
backwards and the corolla tube open for easy ac­
cess. To prevent theft of this large supply of easily 
accessible nectar by other animals, it is common 
for moth-pollinated flowers to close up or fold 
over during the day, and only open at night. Alter­
natively, the nectar may be presented in a tube so 
long that it is inaccessible to other animals. Moth 
proboscises are longer than those of any other in­
sect, and moth-pollinated flowers often have much 
longer nectar spurs than any other flower type. The 
extreme example of this relationship is the story 
of the Madagascan orchid (Angraecum sesquipedale, 
Asparagales), which has a nectar spur up to 30 cm 
in length (see Fig. 14.3e). In 1862, on seeing one of 
these plants in flower at the Royal Botanic Gardens, 
Kew, Darwin predicted that there must exist a moth 
with a proboscis long enough to reach the nectar at 
the bottom of the spur. He was proved correct in 
1903 with the identification of the hawkmoth (Xan­
thopan morganii ssp. praedicta), which has a tongue 
of similar length to the nectar spur, and has been 
shown to pollinate the flower (Wasserthal 1997). 
Colour vision is often irrelevant to moths, par­
ticularly night-flying species, and moth-pollinated 
flowers are often white or cream. This allows them 
to stand out against the dark vegetation at night. 
However, moths do have a good sense of smell, and 
it is usual for moth-pollinated flowers to release a 
strong scent, often in the evening. Classic examples 
of moth-pollinated flowers include gardenia (Genti­
anales) and some honeysuckles (Dipsacales).
14.5.6  Bird pollination (ornithophily)
Since the first pollinating animals were insects, the 
later emergence of pollinating vertebrates meant 
that these animals had access to flowers already 
adapted for pollination by another animal. There 
are sufficient similarities between butterfly- and 
bird-pollinated flowers to suggest that the early pol­
linating birds fed from flowers which had evolved 
with butterfly pollinators. There is speculation as to 
how bird pollination first arose, with some authors 
suggesting that birds hunting nectar-gathering in­
sects in flowers accidentally discovered nectar. It is 
certainly true that even hummingbirds, which take 

WHY ARE FLOWERS DIFFERENT?      163
insectivorous bats. In contrast, the sonar apparatus 
is sometimes reduced, as little time is spent hunting 
insects. Flower bats have longer tongues and nar­
rower snouts than insectivores, and the tongue of­
ten has papillae on the end for lapping up the nectar. 
Classic examples of bat-pollinated flowers include 
many cacti (Caryophyllales), as well as members of 
the Bignoniaceae (trumpet creepers, Lamiales) and 
the Bombacaceae (Malvales).
14.5.8  Deceit pollination
The term ‘deceit pollination’ covers such an enor­
mous range of relationships that it would be impos­
sible to describe them all in this section. Instead we 
shall consider three examples of deceit pollination, 
each involving increasingly specialized flowers that 
appear to have evolved very specifically with par­
ticular pollinating animals. Although the relation­
ships considered in this section are more complex 
than the basic pollination syndromes described 
earlier, they still represent recognizable syndromes 
with clearly apparent matches between floral mor­
phology and animal behaviour.
The simplest form of deceit pollination is a ver­
sion of Batesian mimicry, a phenomenon that ­occurs 
bats must find the flowers at night, they are not 
usually within the foliage, but either hang below it 
for easy access (see Fig. 14.4c) or actually develop 
on the trunk of the plant itself. Bat-pollinated flow­
ers produce more nectar than any other flower type, 
with as much as 15 ml sometimes recorded from a 
single flower. Those bat species that have become 
entirely dependent on flowers eat pollen as their 
only protein source. The flowers they visit usu­
ally have greatly enlarged anthers, and sometimes 
a very great number of them. The flowers of some 
bat-pollinated species commonly develop over 2000 
anthers per flower. Those anthers may only open at 
night, to prevent pollen robbing by beetles. Since 
bats are nocturnal, the flowers themselves may 
sometimes only open at night and may only last 
one night before senescing. Bats are colour-blind, 
so flower colour is irrelevant in attracting them. 
Bat-pollinated flowers are usually white to cream 
or sometimes a greenish pink colour. The main 
attractant used by flowers to attract bats is scent. 
Bat-­pollinated flowers generate a very strong scent, 
often containing butyric acid. Bats that are special­
ized to feed on nectar often have a nasal cavity 
larger than that of insectivorous bats, suggesting 
that scent is more important to flower bats than to 
(c)
(b)
(a)
Figure 14.4  Vertebrate-pollinated 
flowers. (a) The pendant form of Fuchsia 
flowers (Myrtales) is ideal for hovering 
hummingbirds. (b) Bird of paradise (Strelitzia 
regina, Zingiberales) flowers provide a sturdy 
landing platform for non-hovering birds. 
Photograph kindly supplied by Cambridge 
University Botanic Garden. (c) The flowers 
of Strongylodon macrobotrys, the jade 
vine (Fabales), hang far below the foliage, 
making them readily accessible to bats. See 
also Plate 8.

164      How and Why Does Floral Form Vary?
by loss of nectar from a rewarding flower with ap­
propriate floral morphology, rather than by mor­
phological evolution of an already nectarless flower 
to match nearby rewarding species.
A less diffuse system of deceit pollination is 
called sapromyophily. Sapromyophilous flowers at­
tract carrion and dung flies and carrion and dung 
beetles, by mimicking the appearance and scent of 
a piece of rotting flesh or of carnivore or herbivore 
faeces. The insects are attracted to the flower to feed 
or lay their eggs, and transfer pollen in the process. 
The flower provides no reward to the insect, and 
may in fact reduce its fitness by causing eggs to be 
laid on a structure which will not provide suste­
nance to any larvae that hatch. A range of different 
colours and scents are used by sapromyophilous 
flowers, but they are commonly dark red, brown, 
or blue-tinged. They may have a surface cover­
ing of fine hairs, which is believed to enhance the 
visual mimicry of dead flesh. Most flowers that at­
tract egg-laying insects also release a strong scent. 
A recent report of the components of the scents of 
a range of sapromyophilous flowers in the family 
Apocynaceae (Gentianales) observed that differ­
ent species released different mixtures of hexanoic 
acid, carboxylic acids, pyrazines, heptanal, octanal, 
dimethyl oligosulphides, indole, and cresol, and 
that the mix of compounds released gave specific 
corpse, urine, or dung odours (Jürgens et al. 2006). 
Remarkably, the stinkhorn fungus, Clathrus archeri, 
has convergently evolved a similar set of volatiles, 
which attract flies for spore dispersal (Johnson and 
Jürgens 2010). To facilitate the dispersal of scent, 
some flowers are thermogenic, generating heat 
through a salicylic acid-activated signal transduc­
tion cascade. The fine hairs present on many such 
flowers might also enhance scent production and 
dispersal. There are many examples of sapromyo­
philous flowers, particularly in the orchid family, 
but the most famous example is the world’s largest 
inflorescence, the titan arum (Amorphophallus tita­
nium, Alismatales) (see Fig. 14.5a).
The most specialized system of deceit pollination 
is that used by flowers which mimic the female of a 
species of insect, and invite the male to attempt to 
mate with them. The colours and scents produced 
by these mimicking flowers are highly species spe­
cific, and may include the release of compounds that 
when one organism mimics another and has par­
ticular features of the model attributed to it, not 
necessarily correctly. For example, the yellow and 
black banding of hoverflies is a form of Batesian 
mimicry, causing predatory birds to avoid the hov­
erfly in case it has the same poisonous sting as the 
wasps and bees that it mimics. A similar situation 
exists where species of plants mimic the flowers of 
other species, but do not provide a reward. This sort 
of pollination system requires the mimic to produce 
flowers of the appropriate colour, shape, and scent 
to match the model, but that do not produce nec­
tar. The match does not have to be perfect, as the 
visual acuity of many pollinators is insufficient to 
distinguish between generally similar flowers. For 
instance, in the Asparagales the rewardless orchid 
Orchis israelitica has been shown to function as a 
mimic of the nectar-supplying Bellevalia flexuosa, 
even though the similarity between them is only at 
the very general level of inflorescence architecture, 
approximate floral shape, and white colour (Gali­
zia et al. 2005). Another orchid species, Dactylorhiza 
sambucina, produces no reward and mimics a range 
of rewarding species. Within Europe there are two 
colour morphs of this species, yellow and magenta, 
and recent reports indicate that negative frequency-
dependent selection maintains this colour polymor­
phism, as naïve bees preferentially visit the rarer 
morph, having not yet learned to associate it with 
a lack of reward (Gigord et al. 2001). This form of 
mimicry occurs where a large number of flowering 
plants of different species grow in a defined area 
and flower at similar times. The flowers mimicked 
may be pollinated by any of the common pollinating 
animals, so the mimic may develop all the features 
(except the reward) of any of the standard pollina­
tion systems. This sort of pollination by deceit saves 
the plant energy, but it can only be successful when 
the mimic is at low frequencies in the community; 
otherwise the pollinators will abandon both the 
mimic and the genuine flowers. It is most successful 
when the effects of direct competition are reduced. 
For instance, Internicola and Harder (2012) showed 
that the non-rewarding orchid Calypso bulbosa sets 
most seed early in the season, while the pollinators 
are still relatively naïve and before the majority of 
the nearby rewarding plants are in flower. This form 
of deceit pollination is thought to evolve primarily 

WHY ARE FLOWERS DIFFERENT?      165
astonishing. The orchid releases a range of very 
specific volatiles that closely mimic the sex phero­
mones of the female wasp. Some of these, such as 
(omega-1)-hydroxy acids and (omega-1)-oxo ac­
ids, are not found elsewhere in the plant kingdom 
(Ayasse et al. 2003). A number of related species 
produce similarly impressive mimics (reviewed by 
Schlüter and Schiestl 2008; see Fig. 14.5b).
A less extreme but nonetheless remarkable exam­
ple is the South African ‘beetle daisy’ (Gorteria dif­
fusa, Asterales). The composite inflorescence of these 
daisies contains bright orange ray florets, several of 
which develop large black spots (see Fig. 14.5c). The 
spots are composed of both intense pigmentation 
mimic the insect’s pheromones. Colours usually in­
volve yellows, purples, blues, and browns, and may 
be distributed on the flower to mimic the appear­
ance of the wing cases or thorax of the female. No 
reward is provided to the pollinating animal, but 
because this kind of mimicry releases instinctive 
behaviour, the animal cannot learn to avoid these 
flowers, and so they are not as frequency-­limited as 
food deceivers. A classic example of a flower pol­
linated in this way is the fly orchid (Ophrys insec­
tifera), which mimics the female of the scoliid wasp 
(Campsoscolia ciliata). Although the visual similarity 
between the flower and the wasp is very striking, it 
is the scents produced by the flower that are most 
(c)
(b)
(a)
Figure 14.5  Floral mimicry. (a) The titan 
arum (Amorphophallus titanium, Alismatales) 
attracts pollinators by releasing a strong 
scent reminiscent of rotting flesh. Image 
kindly provided by Cambridge University 
Botanic Garden. (b) Ophrys episcopalis 
(Asparagales), which mimics female 
insects to achieve pollination through 
pseudocopulation. Image kindly provided 
by Richard Bateman (Royal Botanic Garden, 
Kew). (c) The composite inflorescence of 
Gorteria diffusa (Asterales) mimics its 
pollinating flies. See also Plate 9.

166      How and Why Does Floral Form Vary?
(fly  pollination) to the very specialized (some of 
the deceit pollination examples). Although there 
is little doubt that some specialized flowers have 
evolved traits that make them more attractive to 
particular animals, there is a great deal of debate 
in the literature as to whether the majority of ‘ordi­
nary’ flowers can really be said to show pollination 
syndromes. In the next few chapters we shall dis­
cuss the mechanisms by which the great diversity of 
shapes and colours is generated, before returning to 
consider the adaptive significance of these features 
in ­Section IIIB.
and specialized cells that add three-dimensionality 
and sheen. They attract male bee flies (Megapalpus 
capensis) by mimicking the female flies that often 
spend the night in the closed inflorescences (Johnson 
and Midgely 1997), and by inducing aggregating and 
mating behaviours (Ellis and Johnson 2010). These 
are perhaps some of the most extreme examples of 
coevolution between plant and pollinator, and cer­
tainly give much credit to the idea that floral features 
have evolved in response to pollinator preferences.
The different pollination syndromes discussed 
in this chapter vary from the extremely diffuse 

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 15
Diverse floral shape and structure
This section of the book is focused on the changes 
that can occur to floral form, and on the effects of 
those changes on pollinator behaviour. In Chapter 
10 we discussed the ABC model of flower develop­
ment, and the molecular changes that occur to gen­
erate the correct arrangements of the four whorls of 
floral organs—sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels. 
In Chapter 14 we considered the traditional idea 
that different pollinators might have preferences for 
different shapes, structures, and sizes of flowers. In 
later chapters we shall investigate the evidence in 
support of this hypothesis, along with the evidence 
that such features are labile in evolutionary time, 
but before that we must consider the molecular and 
developmental processes which lead to diversity of 
floral form. In this chapter, then, we start with a ba­
sic flower, such as the flower of Arabidopsis, and 
consider the ways in which its form can be altered 
by known developmental programmes. We shall fo­
cus on the petals, or corolla, as the whorl of organs 
of primary importance in attracting potential pol­
linators, and consider changes to its size, its sym­
metry, the shape of its component petals, and its 
position within an inflorescence.
15.1  Controlling corolla size
As we saw in Chapter 10, a petal develops from a 
primordium of dividing cells, which arises on the 
floral meristem in response to the activity of organ 
identity genes. The final size of the petals, and thus 
the corolla they form, is a factor of the combined 
amount of cell division and cell expansion that oc­
curs throughout the development of each organ. 
Only these processes can influence plant organ 
size. In animals, cell death and cell migration may 
also play roles, but plant cells do not migrate, and 
programmed cell death in plants results only in 
dead structures (such as xylem vessels), as there is 
no mechanism for removing dead cells (Meyerow­
itz 1996). Cell division is the process by which a 
single cell replicates its DNA and then divides into 
two daughter cells, partitioning the DNA equally 
between the two daughters. Cell expansion is the 
process by which post-mitotic cells increase in 
size, largely through vacuolation and associated 
cell wall loosening. Earlier cell growth is driven by 
an increase in cytoplasmic mass, but the vast ma­
jority of increase in cell size is due to post-mitotic 
expansion through vacuolar expansion (Sugimoto-
Shirasu and Roberts 2003). In theory, then, it would 
seem relatively easy to change final petal size. An 
increase in cell division rate should result in more 
cells, increasing petal size, while a decrease in cell 
division rate should have the opposite effect. Simi­
larly, an increase in the extent to which cells expand 
should increase overall organ size, while a decrease 
should result in smaller cells and a smaller organ.
The extent to which the control of organ size is 
both robust and delicate can be seen from the as­
tonishing degree to which petal shape and size are 
uniform within a species, but have the potential to 
be extraordinarily variable between species. Analy­
sis of patterns of cell division and expansion within 
a single petal has shown that the processes are con­
trolled in a coordinated way. Using markers for cell 
cycle and electron microscopical techniques to fol­
low cell expansion, Reale et al. (2002) described the 
patterns of cell behaviour in a developing petal of 
Petunia hybrida (Solanales). They found that cell di­
vision was initially distributed uniformly through­
out the tissue. However, the decline of cell division 
was not uniform, beginning first at the base of the 
petal and then spreading to form a gradient from 

168      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
result from changes in total cell number, which are 
not compensated for by changes in cell size. ANT 
appears to control cell number not by affecting the 
rate of cell division, but by regulating the duration 
of cell division in a developing organ. ANT sustains 
the expression of D-type cyclins, which are neces­
sary for progress through the cell cycle, increasing 
the window of time during which cell division can 
occur. The ANT protein is a transcription factor with 
similar domains to APETALA2, the A function pro­
tein we met in Chapters 9 and 10, and it may act 
by directly maintaining transcription of these cyclin 
genes (Mizukami 2001). It has been shown that an 
auxin-inducible gene, ARGOS, prolongs the expres­
sion of ANT, and therefore acts upstream of it to 
maintain this competence for division (sometimes 
called meristematic competence) of the cells within 
developing organs (Hu et al. 2003). The involve­
ment of auxin in this process suggests that larger-
scale forces are at work, and that overall organ size 
is likely to represent a balance between a variety of 
environmental signals integrated at the point of con­
trolling cell division and expansion. Indeed, ANT 
expression is inhibited by the auxin-­responsive tran­
scriptional repressor AUXIN ­RESPONSE ­FACTOR 2 
(ARF2), which in turn can be inactivated by brassi­
nosteroid signalling (Schruff et al. 2006; Vert et al. 
2008). Interestingly, the ARGOS-LIKE (ARL) gene 
has been shown to respond to brassinosteroid ap­
plication, and maintains not cell division but cell 
expansion in developing tissues. Transgenic plants 
expressing reduced levels of ARL through RNAi in­
activation have smaller lateral organs than wild type, 
including petals (Hu et al. 2006). ARL has significant 
sequence similarity to ARGOS, both encoding ER-
localized proteins with putative transmembrane 
domains, and it is likely that this protein family is 
essential to the control of organ size through the in­
tegration of a variety of signals.
An unrelated protein, BIG BROTHER (BB), has 
been shown to control maximum organ size by tar­
geting the proteins necessary for cell division for 
degradation, and thus controlling the length of time 
during which cell division can occur. Plants mutant 
at the BB locus have much larger floral organs than 
wild type, and transgenic plants ectopically express­
ing BB have much smaller organs (see  Fig.  15.1). 
The protein regulates the duration of the phase of 
base to tip. Cell expansion was coordinated with 
decline of cell division, beginning first in the basal 
part of the petal and then spreading throughout the 
whole tissue. The complexity of this developmen­
tal pattern confirms that control mechanisms must 
be at work to ensure appropriate final size of the 
organ.
An increasing body of evidence suggests that the 
control of organ size is indeed a rather complex pro­
cess. In particular, it is becoming apparent that cell 
division and cell expansion are necessary to organ 
growth, but that the rates of these two processes 
alone do not control the final organ size. Instead, 
there appear to be mechanisms present that moni­
tor organ growth and that balance the number and 
size of cells to achieve the correct end point (Shpak 
et al. 2003). A number of studies have now shown 
that altering either cell division or cell expansion 
through the use of transgenes does not necessar­
ily lead to a change in organ size, because the other 
process adapts to compensate. For example, ectopic 
expression of the auxin-binding protein 1 (ABP1) 
from Arabidopsis in tobacco (Solanales) causes an 
increase in cell expansion. However, cell division is 
reduced and the organs therefore end up the same 
size as wild type, but are composed of fewer, larger 
cells (Jones et al. 1998). Similarly, ectopic expres­
sion of CycD3;1, a cyclin gene that induces progress 
through the cell cycle, causes an increase in cell 
number in Arabidopsis but no overall change in or­
gan size. Instead, organs are found to be composed 
of numerous but very small and poorly differenti­
ated cells (Dewitte et al. 2003). Studies such as these 
suggest that an intrinsic mechanism coordinates 
cell division and cell expansion, to control overall 
organ growth.
If the rate of cell division is not a factor in over­
all organ size, it is becoming clear that the dura­
tion of the phase of cell division is. Analysis of the 
­AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) gene of Arabidopsis sug­
gests that it might function as a checkpoint through 
which control of organ size is exerted. Unlike the 
examples described above, changes in ANT func­
tion do result in changes in overall organ size. Loss 
of ANT function results in leaves and petals smaller 
than wild type, while increased ANT expression 
in transgenic plants increases the sizes of all or­
gans (Mizukami and Fischer 2000). These changes 

Diverse floral shape and structure      169
growth regulator in the complex network of signals 
that regulate petal size (Brioudes et al. 2009).
Changing petal size may not be as simple a mat­
ter as we initially thought, but it has clearly hap­
pened many thousands of times throughout the 
evolutionary history of the angiosperms, to create 
the enormous range of petal sizes we see today. 
Understanding the control mechanism that coordi­
nates cell division and cell expansion will be nec­
essary for us to understand how petal size can be 
adapted in complex flowers.
15.2  Controlling corolla symmetry
The Arabidopsis flower is radially symmetrical, as 
are the flowers of many common species such as 
buttercup (Ranunculales), rose (Rosales), lily, and 
tulip (both Liliales) (see Fig. 15.2a). It is possible to 
draw many lines of symmetry on the face of these 
flowers. A radially symmetrical flower (also called 
an actinomorphic or polysymmetric flower) is the 
default form that develops through the activities 
of the ABC genes, as they direct identical develop­
ment in all regions of each concentric whorl on the 
floral meristem. However, many plants produce 
flowers that are bilaterally symmetrical (also called 
zygomorphic or monosymmetric flowers). It is only 
possible to draw a single line of symmetry on the 
face of these flowers, as not all organs within a 
whorl are identical (see Fig. 15.2b). The changes in 
shape that generate zygomorphy may be to any of 
the four types of floral organ. Zygomorphy of the 
reproductive organs can influence pollen placement 
on or capture from pollinating animals, and can also 
cell division and proliferation, not the rate or inten­
sity of that proliferation, and affects final cell num­
ber, not cell size. BB encodes an E3 ubiquitin ligase, 
a protein that binds other proteins to ubiquitin con­
jugating enzymes, preparing them for degradation. 
These data strongly suggest that maximum organ 
size is regulated by preventing further cell division 
through degradation of key proteins necessary for 
the cell cycle (Disch et al. 2006).
The importance of the duration of the cell divi­
sion phase is shown by a third example, the kluh 
mutant of Arabidopsis, which has small petals and 
leaves as a result of premature arrest of the period of 
cell division in the different organs. KLUH encodes 
a cytochrome P450 monooxygenase (CYP78A5) 
that induces a mobile signal to maintain cell divi­
sion in developing organs (Anastasiou et al. 2007). 
This signal appears to integrate organ growth not 
only within a flower but also across a whole inflo­
rescence, and therefore represents a mechanism by 
which flower size might be held constant within an 
individual plant (Eriksson et al. 2010).
Although a majority of the factors regulating 
petal size have been shown to work through con­
trol of the phase of cell division, it is also apparent 
that regulation of cell expansion can influence or­
gan growth. One of two possible transcripts of the 
BIG PETAL gene, BPEp, has been shown to limit the 
extent of cell expansion in the Arabidopsis petal, 
limiting final organ size (Szecsi et al. 2006). BPEp en­
codes a bHLH transcription factor, presumably reg­
ulating genes involved in cell wall loosening and 
turgor. Its expression is in turn positively regulated 
by jasmonate signalling, implicating a third plant 
BB ox
WT
bb-1
Figure 15.1  The bb mutant (right) has larger floral organs than wild type, while plants overexpressing BB (left) have smaller floral organs. 
Images kindly provided by Michael Lenhard (University of Potsdam).

170      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
a clear structure, such as the ventral keel on sweet 
pea flowers.
The key to producing a zygomorphic flower is to 
supply it with a signal that marks a region of the 
developing floral meristem as top or bottom. It is 
not possible to study this type of process in a spe­
cies like Arabidopsis, with actinomorphic flowers, 
but a considerable amount of work has been done 
on this problem in Antirrhinum. The Antirrhinum 
flower is zygomorphic with respect to both petals 
and stamens. The flowers have five petals—two 
large dorsal ones, two smaller lateral ones, and a 
single ventral petal which has a distinctive bend in 
it, creating the lip or hinge that acts as the landing 
platform for pollinating bees. There are also five sta­
men primordia, but the single dorsal stamen aborts, 
leaving two lateral stamens and two longer, hairier 
ventral stamens.
Analysis of the generation and maintenance of 
zygomorphy in Antirrhinum has been primarily 
concerned with four mutant lines—cycloidea (cyc), 
dichotoma (dich), radialis (rad), and divaricata (div). 
The cyc mutant has an incomplete conversion from 
zygomorphy to actinomorphy. The lateral petals of 
the mutant are converted into ventral petals, and 
the dorsal petals are morphologically somewhere 
between dorsal and lateral petals. The ventral petal 
is unaffected, giving a flower with three ventral pet­
als and two dorsal/lateral petals. This incomplete 
loss of zygomorphy results in a flower described 
as semi-peloric, based on Linnaeus’s description of 
fully actinomorphic mutants of Linaria vulgaris as 
peloric (or monstrous). The dich mutant produces 
flowers with a similar phenotype to those of cyc, but 
slightly less dramatic in their conversion. However, 
if the two mutant lines are crossed together to create 
a cyc/dich double mutant then the flowers produced 
are fully peloric or completely radially symmetri­
cal, with all the petals converted to the ventral form 
(Luo et al. 1996).
The key to understanding these mutants is the 
ventralization of organs in the mutant form. This 
led to the conclusion that CYC and DICH provide 
dorsalizing signals to the developing floral mer­
istem. In fact, both the CYC and DICH genes are 
expressed in overlapping domains in the dorsal 
portion of the floral bud, and remain so expressed 
throughout flower development. CYC is expressed 
affect the extent of within-flower self-­pollination. 
Important as these forms of zygomorphy may be, 
the most striking zygomorphic flowers have altera­
tions to either the petals or to petaloid sepals. Classic 
examples of zygomorphic flowers include Antirrhi­
num, sweet peas (Fabales), and many orchid spe­
cies (Asparagales). A consequence of zygomorphy 
is that flowers come to have a clear top and bottom, 
and so are also said to have dorsoventral symmetry, 
or dorsoventrality. One advantage of dorsoventral­
ity is that it confers position on each organ within 
the flower, allowing organs in different positions to 
adopt different morphologies. Organs can be identi­
fied and described as the dorsal (top) petals, lateral 
(side) sepals, ventral (bottom) stamens, and so on. 
When each developing organ has a specific position 
then it is possible to modify the development of 
individual organs so that the flower produced has 
(b)
(a)
Figure 15.2  Zygomorphy and actinomorphy. (a) Many flowers are 
radially symmetrical, or actinomorphic. (b) The flowers of Antirrhinum 
species are bilaterally symmetrical, or zygomorphic. See also Plate 10.

Diverse floral shape and structure      171
from the cyc/dich double mutant. Corley et al. (2005) 
suggested that RAD acts as a repressor of transcrip­
tion, and proposed that it competes with DIV in the 
dorsal part of the flower, inhibiting DIV binding to 
promoters of target genes and thus preventing any 
ventralizing activity. Zygomorphy in Antirrhinum 
can therefore be seen as a result of the activities 
of two TCP proteins and two MYB proteins. The 
TCP proteins and one MYB protein provide dor­
salizing signals, while the other MYB protein pro­
vides antagonistic ventralizing signals to the floral 
meristem.
A rarer form of symmetry seen in the flowers of 
some species is left–right asymmetry, most com­
monly seen in the reproductive organs. Asymmetri­
cal female reproductive organs result in a condition 
known as enantiostyly, which occurs in at least 
12 families of angiosperms (Endress 2001; Jesson 
and Barrett 2005; see Fig. 15.3). This curving of the 
stigma and style to one side of the flower occurs 
mainly in flowers that are buzz-pollinated (pol­
linated through vibratile pollen release by pollen-
gathering bees), and it may be that the curvature 
reduces damage to the style when large animals 
land on and grasp the stamens. Jesson and Barrett 
(2002) showed that enantiostyly increased outcross­
ing rate, even where both right- and left-styled 
flowers are present on the same individual plant, 
presumably by decreasing the frequency with 
in the dorsal petals and dorsal stamen primordium, 
while DICH is expressed in a slightly narrower 
range encompassing the dorsal stamen primordium 
and the dorsal part of the dorsal petals. CYC and 
DICH are paralogues, created by a gene duplication 
event within the Plantaginaceae (Gübitz et al. 2003), 
and both encode TCP family transcription factors. 
Both proteins seem to act early in development to 
limit growth in the dorsal region of the meristem, 
ensuring that the dorsal organ primordia stay with­
in the region they define. The mutant floral meris­
tem starts to differ from wild type at the time that 
sepal primordia become visible, and this restriction 
of dorsal primordium growth culminates in the 
abortion of the dorsal stamen. Later in flower devel­
opment, CYC and DICH promote petal lobe growth 
so that the dorsal petals end up larger than the 
others. The result of this expression pattern is that 
every organ primordium in a developing Antirrhi­
num flower has a unique combination of expression 
of CYC, DICH, and the organ identity (ABC) genes. 
The only primordia that have the same patterns are 
those which are mirror images of each other, and 
this provides the bilateral symmetry to the flower 
(Luo et al. 1996).
DIVARICATA, by contrast, acts to provide a ven­
tralizing signal to the floral meristem, and the div 
mutant has an abnormal ventral petal with little or 
no hinge and lip region. DIV encodes a transcrip­
tion factor from the MYB family, and is expressed 
throughout the developing flower (Galego and 
Almeida 2002). The explanation for the ability of 
DIV to act only in the ventral and lateral petals while 
expressed throughout the flower comes from an 
analysis of the role of RADIALIS (RAD). RAD also 
encodes a MYB transcription factor, but one from 
a different subfamily to DIV. Most plant MYB pro­
teins contain two repeats of the MYB domain, and 
are classed as R2R3 MYBs. The RAD protein con­
tains a single MYB domain, and is therefore classed 
as a one-repeat MYB. There is some evidence to 
suggest that the MYB domain in one-repeat MYBs 
is not able to bind DNA. RAD is expressed in the 
dorsal regions of the developing flower, in a spatial 
and temporal pattern which suggests that it is acti­
vated by CYC and DICH (Corley et al. 2005). This 
activation is confirmed by the reduction of RAD ex­
pression in a cyc mutant, and its complete absence 
Figure 15.3  The enantiostylous flower of Solanum heterodoxum 
(Solanales). The style is the filamentous pink organ. Image kindly 
provided by Sandy Knapp (Natural History Museum, London). See also 
Plate 11.

172      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
a line of Antirrhinum with a temperature-sensitive 
transposon inserted in the PALLIDA gene. Flowers 
that are pal mutant are white. Transposon excision 
was induced by exposure of plants to a 15°C growth 
regime, resulting in clones of red epidermal cells 
descended from the single cell in which the trans­
poson had excised from the PAL locus. Transposon 
excision was induced at a number of time points in 
petal development, and the size and shape of the re­
sulting sectors were mapped on to models of petal 
development. This study revealed that petal growth 
rate was relatively constant, and that the asym­
metric shape of the Antirrhinum petal results from 
changes in the direction of growth rather than from 
local differences in the rate of growth. However, 
petal growth was shown to be anisotropic (stronger 
in one direction than another), with an average of 
15% more cell divisions along the principal axis of 
growth than along the axis perpendicular to it. The 
main growth direction was shown to rotate as the 
petal grew, giving the final asymmetric shape. Mod­
els such as this will be useful in describing the de­
velopment of other petal shapes, and comparisons 
between species should allow us to dissect the fac­
tors responsible for the many different petal shapes 
seen in modern angiosperms.
Final petal shape is also dependent upon the gen­
eration of surface curvature. Curvature of the petal 
surface is produced by differential growth of the 
margins relative to the central region of the tissue. 
In fact, many petals are essentially flat, showing no 
such curvature. However, the chances of this occur­
ring by chance are very low, implying the existence 
of genetic mechanisms that regulate growth rate to 
ensure no curvature is produced (Nath et al. 2003). 
In some species, petal curvature is an important 
part of corolla appearance, and in these cases it is 
likely that similar genetic mechanisms regulate rel­
ative growth differently to produce the final petal 
shape. In Antirrhinum, organ curvature is inhibited 
by the action of the CINCINNATA gene. Plants that 
are cin mutants have curved leaves as a result of ex­
cessive growth of the margins relative to the central 
region of the tissue. Further analysis indicated that 
this was a result of delayed cell expansion/division 
in the centre of the leaf relative to the margins. The 
CIN gene encodes a transcription factor from the 
TCP family, to which CYC and DICH also belong 
which self pollen is passed to the stigma. They fur­
ther showed that enantiostylous flowers set more 
seed than straight-styled flowers when pollen avail­
ability was a limiting factor on female reproductive 
ouput (Jesson and Barrett 2005). In most described 
cases, both left- and right-handed flowers are found 
on the same individual, suggesting an essentially 
random process. This situation is known as mono­
morphic enantiostyly. However, in three families, 
left- and right-handedness is separated on differ­
ent individual plants (Barrett et al. 2000), a situation 
known as dimorphic enantiostyly. In one of these 
cases, Heteranthera multiflora (Commelinales), it 
has been shown that style direction segregates in a 
Mendelian fashion, with the right-styled form dom­
inant over the left (Jesson and Barrett 2002). Little is 
yet known about the developmental control of this 
form of asymmetry.
A little understood form of floral symmetry is 
the development of petals contorted to the left or 
the right, such that each petal is asymmetric but 
the whole corolla has rotational symmetry. Such 
contortions are most prominent in the floral bud. 
It is possible for contort flowers to show fixed be­
haviour, where only the right- or left-handed form 
is present in a species. Alternatively, an unfixed 
pattern where left- and right-handedness is shown 
by an individual plant is also possible. Within the 
rosids, most contort species show an unfixed pat­
tern. However, in the other subclass of eudicots, 
the asterids, a fixed pattern is usually shown at the 
species or higher taxonomic level. Currently noth­
ing is known about the development of this form of 
asymmetry, and there is no explanation as to why 
the rosids and the asterids should show such differ­
ent behaviour (Endress 2001).
15.3  Controlling petal shape
The shape of a petal is a result of the distribution 
of cell divisions and the distribution and direction 
of cell expansion which occur during its develop­
ment. As such, the development of petal shape is an 
integral part of the development of petal size, con­
trolled by the coordinating forces described earlier 
in this chapter. The development of petal shape has 
been most successfully studied using clonal analy­
sis and modelling. Rolland-Lagan et al. (2003) used 

Diverse floral shape and structure      173
which is significantly reduced in the div mutant 
flower. AmMYBML1 encodes a MYB transcription 
factor expressed in the ventral petal, in the epider­
mis of both lobe and tube, but also in the adaxial-
most mesophyll in the hinge region. Examination 
of this region indicated that the adaxial-most meso­
phyll cells expand more than the abaxial ones, caus­
ing the bend of the petal to make the hinge. Ectopic 
expression of AmMYBML1 in tobacco petals causes 
the excess expansion of all petal mesophyll cells, 
supporting the idea that the gene is important in 
hinge development (Perez-Rodriguez et al. 2005). 
The CIN gene is also expressed in the cells of this 
region, and may act to reinforce other signals caus­
ing tissue bending, possibly through its repression 
of cell division (Crawford et al. 2004).
Elaboration of epidermal surfaces may also con­
tribute to final petal appearance. The ventral petal 
of Antirrhinum contains a number of specialized 
epidermal cell types, including conical-papillate 
cells in the lobes, long trichomes on the lip, and 
twin lines of shorter trichomes leading down into 
the throat. These specialized cells may act as nectar 
guides or to trap pollen from visiting bees, and they 
may also be involved in regulating petal tempera­
ture and scent production (Perez-Rodriguez et al. 
2005).
15.4  Generating a nectar spur
The presence of one or more nectar spurs is anoth­
er way in which floral form can be varied. Nectar 
spurs can form on one particular petal (or sepal) of 
a zygomorphic flower, as is seen in Linaria vulgaris 
(toadflax, Lamiales) and many species of orchids 
(Asparagales), or on all petals or sepals, as is seen 
for instance in various species of Aquilegia (Ranun­
culales) (see Fig. 15.4). These spurs usually contain 
nectar, either secreted from a nectary within the 
spur or collected as it runs off a nectary elsewhere in 
the flower. This nectar is only accessible to particu­
lar pollinators, and so nectar spurs act to reproduc­
tively isolate different floral morphologies through 
pollinator choice. For example, Linaria vulgaris is 
primarily pollinated by long-tongued bumblebees 
that can access the base of the nectar spur, although 
shorter-tongued insect species may rob the flower of 
nectar by chewing through the nectar spur from the 
(Nath et al. 2003). Subsequent studies in Arabidop­
sis have shown that CIN-like proteins interact with 
the ASYMMETRIC LEAVES 2 (AS2) transcription 
factor to downregulate expression of class 1 KNOX 
genes, which play an important role in inducing 
cell proliferation (Li et al. 2012). This suggests that 
the phenotype of cin mutants can be explained by 
a loss of CIN activity resulting in increased KNOX 
activity and thus increased cell division in the leaf 
margins.
Similar processes may be involved in the control 
of petal curvature, although CIN itself does not 
seem to operate in the same way in the petal. Plants 
that are cin mutants have smaller petals than wild 
type flowers, and fewer cells. These data indicate 
that CIN promotes petal growth by extending the 
cell division window in the petal lobes (Crawford 
et al. 2004). A different approach to petal curvature 
was taken by Liang and Mahadevan (2011), who an­
alysed the development of the lily flower (Liliales) 
from bud stage to fully mature petal using a com­
bination of imaging and mathematical modelling. 
They concluded that the bud burst and subsequent 
recurvature of the petals to generate the fully open 
flower were the result of differential growth across 
the petal, with excess growth at the petal margins 
driving the curvature of the mature organs and pro­
viding the strain necessary to open the flower.
The petals of some species show distinct archi­
tectural features. For example, the ventral petal of 
Antirrhinum has a distinctive hinge or lip region, 
which forms the landing platform for pollinating 
bees. Although all Antirrhinum petals show dif­
ferences between the basal portions (which fuse to 
form the corolla tube) and the distal regions (which 
remain separate as lobes), the division between the 
two is most marked in the ventral petal. Elaboration 
of landing platforms is a common developmental 
process in many animal-pollinated flowers, and one 
which involves a very clear fold in a petal. A num­
ber of genes have been shown to play roles in land­
ing platform development in Antirrhinum. The div 
mutant has a highly disturbed ventral petal, with 
no hinge formation. This may reflect the loss of the 
ventralizing signal and the lack of activity of down­
stream genes which contribute to hinge develop­
ment. One such gene is the Antirrhinum majus MYB 
MIXTA LIKE 1 (AmMYBML1) gene, expression of 

174      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
genes (HIRZINA and ­INVAGINATA) encoding ho­
meodomain transcription factors, similar to SHOOT 
MERISTEMLESS (STM) of Arabidopsis. STM is re­
quired for apical meristem maintenance, and caus­
es cells to undergo division. Ectopic expression of 
STM-like genes in the developing petals of these 
Antirrhinum mutants resulted in nectar spur devel­
opment (Golz et al. 2002). These data suggest that 
normal nectar spur development involves the activ­
ity of homeodomain transcription factors to cause 
plentiful cell division in appropriate petal tissue. In 
further support of this hypothesis, Box et al. (2011) 
isolated orthologues of HIRZINA and INVAGINATA 
from spurred Linaria vulgaris, and found HIRZINA 
in particular to be strongly expressed in develop­
ing petals. Ectopic expression of these KNOX genes 
in tobacco resulted in the formation of ectopic out­
growths of the petal, resembling short nectar spurs. 
However, the authors also noted that the majority 
of nectar spur growth in Linaria vulgaris was attrib­
utable to cell expansion, with only a short period of 
cell division early in development, suggesting that 
factors besides KNOX genes must also be involved 
in spur outgrowth. Similarly, Puzey et al. (2011) 
described the growth of nectar spurs in various 
Aquilegia species, and found that anisotropic cell ex­
pansion accounted for the measurable spur devel­
opment, not additional cell division. This finding 
also supports a role for a regulator of cell expan­
sion, rather than or in addition to KNOX genes, in 
nectar spur development.
15.5  Generating a composite 
inflorescence
Although modifications to corolla size and shape 
can have dramatic effects on the appearance of the 
whole flower, an even more dramatic effect can be 
achieved by modification of the entire inflorescence, 
so that it mimics the appearance of a single large 
flower. This form of floral development is found in 
at least 17 plant families, but is particularly charac­
teristic of the daisy family (Asteraceae), where the 
entire inflorescence is condensed into a head-like 
structure (the capitulum), containing hundreds, or 
sometimes thousands, of flowers (often referred to 
as florets). The common daisy is a good example of 
outside (Newman and Thomson 2005). Sometimes 
spurs do not contain nectar, and their presence acts 
as a dishonest signal, encouraging pollinator prob­
ing and pollen transfer without a reward.
Petal spurs require elaborate outgrowth of a 
small region of the petal, and their development is 
not well understood. An actinomorphic mutant of 
Linaria with all petals converted to the ventral form 
and making spurs was described by Linnaeus and 
has been reported many times since. This mutant 
has been shown to be defective in the function of a 
CYC-like gene (through an epigenetic effect), dem­
onstrating that spur development acts downstream 
of genes that control floral symmetry (Cubas et al. 
1999). More recently, two mutants of Antirrhinum 
majus which produced ectopic nectar spurs on the 
ventral petal were identified. Antirrhinum does not 
normally produce a nectar spur, although many 
other members of the Antirrhineae do. Both ­mutants 
were shown to contain transposon insertions in 
Figure 15.4  The petals of Aquilegia formosa (Ranunculales) are 
heavily modified to produce nectar spurs. Image kindly provided by 
Scott Hodges (UCSB). See also Plate 12.

Diverse floral shape and structure      175
an infinite number of flowers. Most species in fact 
produce a relatively consistent number of flowers, 
but this was explained as a function of spatial con­
straint on the densely packed head. However, re­
cent work has demonstrated that the inflorescence 
meristem of Gerbera hybrida is indeterminate, and 
requires the activity of a gene called GRCD2, en­
coding a MADS box transcription factor, to confer 
determinacy and ensure formation of the correct 
number of flowers. Reduction of GRCD2 expression 
levels, using antisense technology, resulted in the 
continued development of the centre of the inflores­
cence, producing new flowers long after a wild type 
inflorescence had stopped and formed a single seed 
head (Uimari et al. 2004).
The flowers of members of the Asteraceae typi­
cally lack a whorl of sepals, which would be cum­
bersome when producing a composite inflorescence 
that mimics a single flower. Instead, most species 
have a whorl of fine hairs, known as pappus bristles, 
around the base of each corolla (seen developing in 
Fig. 11.5). These bristles are involved in dispersal of 
the resulting seed, using the wind as the agent of 
dispersal, and are highly modified sepals, produced 
through the activities of genes orthologous to those 
that produce sepals in Arabidopsis (see Chapter 11).
Analysis of the differentiation of the flowers of 
a composite inflorescence into multiple types has 
focused on floral symmetry and the activities of 
CYC-like genes. This work is discussed in Chapter 
18, where we consider how floral symmetry and 
the various other features of diverse floral forms 
change in an evolutionary context.
this growth form, but other familiar plants with this 
type of composite inflorescence include dandelions, 
the cultivated chrysanthemums and Gerbera (see 
Fig. 15.5a), and the groundsels. A composite inflo­
rescence may be composed of a single type of flow­
er, such as the inflorescence of common groundsel 
(Senecio vulgaris; see Fig. 15.5b), or of multiple dif­
ferent morphological forms. Where different floral 
forms are present they may vary in colour (for ex­
ample, the yellow and white flowers of the daisy 
inflorescence), symmetry (daisies have both zygo­
morphic flowers, which are the outer white ones, 
and actinomorphic flowers, which are the central 
yellow ones), and sexuality. Where differences in 
symmetry occur in a capitulum, the zygomorphic 
flowers are known as ray florets and the actinomor­
phic flowers are known as disc florets. It is relative­
ly common for the different flowers in a composite 
inflorescence to vary in sexuality. For example, Ger­
bera hybrida has hermaphrodite central flowers but 
female outer flowers.
The development of a composite inflorescence in­
volves a reduction in internode length relative to an 
ordinary inflorescence. This causes all the flowers 
to develop closely together, and is associated with 
a widening of the inflorescence meristem to form 
the typical head-shaped structure. Flowers are usu­
ally produced in a spiral phyllotaxis in members of 
the Asteraceae, and the developing floral meristems 
produce some of the clearest examples of spiral pat­
terning seen in plants. It was traditionally thought 
that the inflorescence meristem of the Asteraceae 
was indeterminate, with the potential to produce 
(b)
(a)
Figure 15.5  Composite inflorescences in the daisy family. (a) The capitulum of Gerbera hybrida, with zygomorphic outer florets (each with 
one large petal) and actinomorphic inner florets. (b) The capitulum of Senecio vulgaris usually contains only actinomorphic disc florets. See also 
Plate 13.

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 16
Colouring the flower
One of the most obvious ways in which flowers 
­differ from one another, more immediately striking 
even than the differences in size, shape, and sym­
metry discussed in the previous chapter, is in their 
colour. This colour is usually the result of pigment 
deposition in the petals, but in some species bright­
ly coloured bracts, sepals, or stamens can provide 
a similarly striking display. The colour of a flower 
has traditionally been viewed as one of the ways in 
which plants attract pollinating animals, and there 
is considerable literature on the preferences of dif­
ferent pollinators for different colours. In recent 
years these data have been reinterpreted, with the 
current emphasis more on contrast against vegeta­
tion and on search image formation, rather than on 
particular colours as ‘favourites’ of particular ani­
mals. In this chapter we shall consider the different 
biochemical pathways through which flowers can 
become coloured, paving the way for a discussion 
of the regulation, patterning, and enhancement of 
colour in the next chapter.
16.1  Colour as a signal
Colour is a signal used by plants for a wide vari­
ety of purposes. Colour is used to signal ripening 
of fruit, and to attract animals to eat that fruit and 
disperse the seeds it contains. Colour can also be 
used to signify the unpalatibility or toxicity of cer­
tain tissues, again often including fruits, particular­
ly unripe fruits. Colour can also be an accident—the 
orange colour of autumn leaves is usually attrib­
uted to the breakdown and reabsorption of green 
chlorophyll by the plant, leaving behind the orange 
and brown waste products of the breakdown reac­
tions and the orange and yellow carotenoids that 
were masked by the green chlorophyll. Similarly, 
visible red colouration of leaves and stems is often 
a side effect of the production of UV-absorbing an­
thocyanins and flavonoids in response to a range of 
stresses, particularly high light levels.
The bright colours of flowers are primarily a sig­
nal to attract pollinating insects by making the floral 
tissue stand out against a green background. As we 
noted in Chapter 14, Darwin himself observed the 
importance of pigmentation in flowers, and argued 
that colour is simply a means of providing flowers 
with contrast against vegetation. This argument is 
supported by modern analysis of insect visual acu­
ity, which indicates that vegetation is visually very 
similar to bark, soil, and stone from an insect’s point 
of view (Kevan et al. 1996). All of these materials 
weakly reflect light across the whole range of an in­
sect’s visual spectrum. Leaves differ from the rest 
only in absorbing red light, but since red is at the 
very periphery of the visual spectrum for most in­
sects, this makes little difference. All flowers, then, 
whatever their colour, stand out against this gener­
ally dull background (Kevan et al. 1996). However, 
it has also been argued that particular colours may 
act as signals to particular groups of animals. It is 
certainly the case that the visual ranges of different 
animals vary somewhat. Insects are able to see into 
the ultraviolet but usually, with the exception of the 
Lepidoptera, they are unable to easily detect light at 
the red end of the spectrum. Birds often have tetra­
chromatic vision, seeing from the ultraviolet right 
through to red, while bats have very poor colour vi­
sion (see Chapter 20 for a full description of bee and 
bird visual capability). In these circumstances there 
is little point in a bat-pollinated flower reflecting 
UV through specialized surface structures, or in a 
beetle-pollinated flower investing heavily in antho­
cyanins (which allow only red to be reflected), and 

COLOURING THE FLOWER    177
structures. However, most plant colour is produced 
through the synthesis of pigments that absorb sub-
sets of the visible spectrum, refl ecting back only 
what they do not absorb, and causing the tissue to 
be perceived as the refl ected colours. Chlorophyll 
absorbs light in both the red and blue parts of the 
spectrum, refl ecting only green light, and causes 
leaves to appear green to us. Similarly, a fl ower that 
we perceive as red contains pigments that absorb 
yellow, green, and blue light, leaving red light as 
the only wavelength visible to us which is refl ected. 
White tissues refl ect all visible wavelengths equally, 
while black tissues absorb all visible wavelengths 
(light refl ection by white, black, and red fl owers is 
shown in  Fig.   16.1  ). Where an animal has a differ-
ent set of photoreceptors to us, similar black and 
white effects can be obtained by absorbing or re-
fl ecting light across all the wavelengths visible to 
that animal. 
the colours of fl owers may indeed provide clues as 
to the identity of their pollinators. It is also the case 
that some rather dramatic changes in fl oral colour 
are associated with pollination and changing levels 
of nectar availability. For example, it has been shown 
that pollination of  Viola cornuta  (Malpighiales) is 
necessary to cause a change in pigmentation from 
white to purple, a change which presumably signals 
a change in nectar availability and fl oral receptiv-
ity to pollinating insects (Farzad  et al.  2002). There 
are many reports of similar changes in fl oral colour, 
often associated with anthesis or pollination. As an-
other example, Darwin forwarded a letter to  Nature 
in 1877 describing the change in colour of a Brazil-
ian species of  Lantana  (Lamiales), which progresses 
from yellow, through orange to purple, following 
pollination. Recent reports have confi rmed that this 
change in fl ower colour serves to direct pollinating 
butterfl ies to fl owers that are still receptive, while 
retaining a large coloured infl orescence which is 
more visible from a distance than a smaller infl ores-
cence would be (Weiss 1991). Even more strikingly, 
a recent report by Willmer  et al.  (2009) demonstrated 
that this sort of colour change is reversible in the 
African legume  Desmodium setigerum (Fabales). The 
fl owers of this species are receptive for only one 
day, and change slowly from lilac to turquoise over 
a period of 24 hours. Mechanical tripping of the 
keel by a pollinator speeds up the colour change 
so that the fl ower becomes white/turquoise within 
2–3 hours. However, if little pollen is deposited on 
the stigma during this pollination event, the fl ower 
can revert to lilac in the afternoon, becoming more 
visible to pollinators and gaining a second opportu-
nity for pollination. When we consider these exam-
ples, in which fl ower colour is tightly controlled and 
changed by the plant, it is clear that fl ower colour 
must be acting as a more specifi c signal than sim-
ply contrast with vegetation. However, analysis of 
the attractiveness of particular colours to particular 
animals has resulted in less convincing evidence for 
the signifi cance of colours as unique signals for in-
dividual animals. This issue will be considered in 
more detail in  Chapters  20 and  21 .
  Biological colours can be produced in two differ-
ent ways. Some animals, and a few plants, produce 
‘structural’ colours, caused by the refl ection of par-
ticular wavelengths of light from nanoscale physical 
Amount 
of light 
reflected
Amount 
of light 
reflected
Amount 
of light 
reflected
UV  blue green red IR
UV  blue green red IR
UV  blue green red IR
 Figure 16.1    Flower colour depends on absorption and reﬂ ection 
of light by pigments. If a ﬂ ower contains no pigment, and absorbs no 
light, the reﬂ ected light of all colours makes it appear white (top). If 
the ﬂ ower absorbs light of all visible wavelengths it appears black. If 
the ﬂ ower absorbs all light except red, and reﬂ ects the red light, it will 
appear red (bottom). 

178      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
2006). However, a recent report showed that the pea 
aphid (Acyrthosiphon pisum) can, uniquely, produce 
its own carotenoids because its genome contains 
genes that encode carotenoid cyclase–carotenoid 
synthase enzymes and carotenoid desaturases, de­
rived by lateral gene transfer from fungal genomes 
(Moran and Jarvik 2010).
The carotenoids are a family of isoprenoid deriva­
tives. Isoprenoids themselves are lipid molecules, 
with an estimated 22,000 different types known. 
They have essential roles as membrane sterols, com­
ponents of chlorophyll, cytokinins, abscisic acid, 
and strigolactones, and a variety of roles in plant 
secondary metabolism. They are usually classified 
by the number of carbon atoms they contain. The 
carotenoid family contains conjugated polyene mol­
ecules, composed of 40 carbon atoms. The molecule 
is produced by the joining of eight 5-carbon isopre­
noid units such that the arrangement of the units 
is reversed at the centre. Carotenoid hydrocarbons 
are known as carotenes, and include pigments such 
as zeaxanthin. The addition of oxygen to these mol­
ecules creates the oxygenated carotenoids, or xan­
thophylls, which are also important pigments.
The absorption spectrum of a particular carote­
noid molecule is determined by the conjugated pol­
yene system and by additional structural features. 
Each conjugated double bond increases the wave­
length of maximum absorption by 7–35 nm (Good­
win 1980). Thus deep orange flowers may contain 
lycopene, orange flowers contain β-carotene, and 
yellow flowers often contain highly oxidized xan­
thophylls (see Fig. 16.2).
Carotenoids are synthesized within plastids, al­
though the genes encoding the enzymes necessary 
for their synthesis are located within the nucleus. 
The enzymes must therefore be transported after 
translation across the plastid membrane. All iso­
prenoids, including carotenoids, are produced from 
a 5-carbon isoprenoid called isopentenyl pyroph­
osphate (IPP). The major source of plastidic IPP is 
from pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate 
(Hirschberg 1999). IPP is converted into dimethy­
lallyl pyrophosphate (DMAPP) by an isomerization 
reaction catalysed by isopentenyl pyrophosphate 
isomerase (IPPI). This enzyme has been shown to 
be the rate-limiting step in carotenoid synthesis in 
bacteria and yeast (Kajiwara et al. 1997).
16.2  Plant pigments
Whichever organs they are found in, plant pig­
ments can be divided into three chemical classes—
the flavonoids, the betalains, and the carotenoids. 
The flavonoids are the major floral pigments in an­
giosperms, and different subsets of the flavonoids 
give rise to ivory and cream colours ­(flavonols and 
flavones), yellow and orange colours (aurones and 
chalcones), and the red-pink-purple-blue range 
(the anthocyanins). Flavonoids are water soluble 
and accumulate in cell vacuoles. They also play a 
range of other important roles in plants, includ­
ing defence against pathogens and predators, 
protection against damaging UV light, and par­
ticipation in pollen development and germina­
tion. The betalains are a group of pigments found 
exclusively in the angiosperm order Caryophyl­
lales, and nowhere else in the plant kingdom 
(although they are also produced by Basidiomy­
cete fungi). They give the red colour to beetroot, 
but are also responsible for flower colouration 
within this order (for example, in pink and red 
cactus flowers). The carotenoids are much more 
widespread, although less significant as floral 
pigments than the anthocyanins. They are lipid-
soluble and are found in plastids throughout the 
plant. Carotenoids give yellow and orange colour 
to some flowers, although their more important 
role is as an essential component of the photosyn­
thetic apparatus.
16.3  Carotenoid synthesis
Carotenoids are among the most widespread pig­
ments in the natural world, and have the most var­
ied functions of any group of pigments. In plants 
they play important roles in photosynthesis, where 
they act as accessory light-harvesting pigments and 
as photo-protectants (Hirschberg 1999), as well as 
acting as floral and fruit pigments. In mammals 
they are the precursors for vitamin A synthesis, and 
in fish they are essential for phototropic responses 
(Goodwin 1980). Animals cannot usually synthe­
size carotenoids directly, but modify plant-derived 
carotenoids present in their diets for diverse pur­
poses. For example, the red plumage of flamingos is 
produced using modified carotenoids (Grotewold 

Colouring the flower      179
the 15-carbon farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP), and 
a final addition creates the 20-carbon molecule ge­
ranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP). The prenyl 
transferases involved in these different steps have 
not yet been well characterized. One reason for this 
is that carotenoid synthesis occurs in all organs of 
all plants, but different genes may encode the en­
zymes that are active in different locations and at 
different times. It is therefore quite difficult to de­
fine the precise enzymes involved in the produc­
tion of a particular carotenoid in the flowers of a 
particular species. However, it is believed that dif­
ferent prenyl transferases interact with the different 
substrates to produce each of GPP, FPP, and GGPP. 
In Arabidopsis, ten nuclear genes encode GGPP 
synthase. Of the proteins encoded by these genes, 
at least two are located in the plastids, at least two 
in the endoplasmic reticulum, and at least one in 
the mitochondria. Some of the genes are expressed 
throughout the plant, one is specific to flowers and 
root tissue, one is entirely flower-specific, and one 
is entirely root-specific (Okada et al. 2000). When a 
simple plant with a small genome, such as Arabi­
dopsis, shows such complexity in the activity of 
only one of these enzymes, it is not surprising that 
we cannot yet say precisely which genes are active 
in the petal carotenoid pathway of many species.
Up to this point in the pathway, intermediates 
may be used to make cytokinins, monoterpenes, 
sterols, triterpenes and sesquiterpenes, phytol, and 
gibberellins, as well as carotenoids. The first com­
mitted step of carotenoid synthesis is the condensa­
tion of two molecules of GGPP to form the 40-carbon 
molecule phytoene, which is a colourless molecule 
formed by the head-to-head condensation of the 
two GGPP molecules. This generates the reversal 
of the molecular arrangement at the centre charac­
teristic of carotenoids. This coupling reaction, an 
electrophilic attack on a double bond, is a two-step 
process and is catalysed by the enzyme phytoene 
synthase (Chappell 1995). It is considered the bot­
tleneck in carotenoid synthesis, and is the target of 
attempts to increase carotenoid production through 
genetic engineering (Farre et al. 2011; Ruiz-Sola 
and ­Rodriguez-Concepcion 2012). Genes encoding 
phytoene synthase have been isolated from a num­
ber of species, including a single gene copy from 
Arabidopsis, and share domains encoding prenyl 
Assuming that IPP and DMAPP are both present, 
the synthesis of carotenoids proceeds along a reg­
ular pathway, which can be followed in Fig. 16.3. 
Prenyl transferases with different substrate specifi­
cities build up a 20-carbon molecule in a succession 
of steps. One IPP molecule is condensed with one 
DMAPP molecule to produce a 10-carbon com­
pound known as geranyl pyrophosphate (GPP). 
The addition of another IPP molecule produces 
(a)
(c)
(b)
Figure 16.2  Carotenoids give the yellow and orange colours to (a) 
Freesia (Asparagales), (b) Gerbera hybrida (Asterales), and (c) lilies 
(Liliales). The photo in (b) is a modified version of a photo by Mauro 
Girotto (Wikimedia Commons). See also Plate 14.

180   HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
  Lycopene itself is a carotenoid, and all other ca-
rotenoids can be derived from it. The different path-
ways that give rise to the different carotenoid end 
products are complex. However, all carotenoids 
can be formally derived from lycopene by reactions 
involving hydrogenation, dehydrogenation, cycli-
zation, insertion of oxygen, double-bond migra-
tion, methyl migration, chain elongation, and chain 
shortening (Goodwin 1980). Differential cyclization 
of one or both ends of lycopene is the branch point 
that determines which carotenoids are produced by 
further reactions.
 Final fl ower colour can be attributed as much to 
the amounts of carotenoid present as to the types 
of carotenoid involved. Moehs  et al.  (2001) showed 
that variation in marigold (Asterales) fl ower colour 
was correlated with the amount of xanthophylls 
present, and also with the expression levels of all 
the carotenoid biosynthetic genes. These data sug-
gest that regulation of carotenoid synthesis occurs 
primarily through the transcriptional control of the 
transferase activity with other enzymes, notably 
squalene synthases (Chappell 1995).
  The conversion of phytoene to lycopene involves 
two steps, although in bacteria and fungi the con-
version uses only one bifunctional enzyme (Moise 
 et  al.  2005). In plants, phytoene is converted fi rst 
into a ζ-carotene by phytoene desaturase. Phytoene 
desaturase uses plastoquinone and then oxygen as 
electron acceptors during this reaction, and is encod-
ed by genes expressed at constant levels through-
out fl ower development (Al-Babili  et al.  1996). The 
enzyme ζ-carotene desaturase (ZDS) converts the 
ζ-carotene to 7,9,9′,7′-tetra- cis -lycopene, and then 
lycopene itself is produced using the enzyme ca-
rotenoid isomerase. Mutation in genes encoding 
carotenoid isomerase results in the accumulation 
of tetra- cis- lycopene and a subsequent shift in the 
absorption spectrum of the tissue (all reviewed 
by Farre  et al.  2011, and in detail by Ruiz-Sola and 
Rodriguez-Concepcion 2012). The pathway to this 
point is shown in  Fig.  16.3 .
OPP
Geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate
Phytoene
Phytofluene
β-Carotene
Neurosporene
Lycopene
 Figure 16.3    The carotenoid synthesis pathway produces lycopene, from which all other carotenoids can be derived. 

Colouring the flower      181
Usually, however, chalcone is modified to a col­
ourless flavanone, and flavanone then feeds into one 
of three further pathways. First, flavanone may be 
directly converted into flavones by enzymes called 
flavone synthases. Flavones vary in colour from 
very pale to bright yellow, depending on their de­
gree of hydroxylation. Flavones may provide some 
yellow colouration to flowers, but are more usually 
thought of as co-pigments (see Chapter 17). Alter­
natively, flavanone can be converted into dihydro­
flavonol by the enzyme flavanone 3-hydroxylase, 
a dioxygenase. Dihydroflavonols can be modified 
by another dioxygenase, flavonol synthase, to form 
various flavonols. The flavonols are usually colour­
less, but act as co-pigments, stabilizing and modi­
fying the colour of other pigment molecules (see 
Chapter 17). They also absorb light strongly in the 
UV, and so may appear coloured to insects that can 
see in that range. Thirdly, dihydroflavonols may be 
converted to anthocyanidins by the activity of two 
enzymes, dihydroflavonol 4-reductase and antho­
cyanidin synthase. The unstable products of an­
thocyanidin synthase may be further modified by 
glycosylation, methylation, and acetylation to form 
anthocyanins. Anthocyanins provide a number of 
different colours, depending on a number of factors 
(see Fig. 16.4). One factor is the degree of hydroxyla­
tion of the B ring. There are thought to be up to 1000 
different forms of anthocyanin in nature, although 
many of them probably occur only rarely (Andersen 
and Jordheim 2006). The colours that they produce 
range from orange/brick red (pelargonidins; one 
hydroxyl on the B ring), to red/magenta (cyani­
dins; two hydroxyls on the B ring), to purple/blue 
(delphinidins; 3 hydroxyls on the B ring), with in­
creased blueness determined by an increase in hy­
droxyl groups. Methylation of an anthocyanin tends 
to shift its colour towards red, compared with bluer 
unmethylated molecules. Acylation with aromatic 
groups shifts the pigments towards the blue range, 
whereas aliphatic acylation increases the stability of 
the anthocyanins in solution.
The amount of pigment present in a tissue can 
also determine the perceived colour. Flavonoid 
concentrations vary dramatically both between and 
within species. For example, wild cornflower pet­
als (Asterales) are reported to comprise 0.7% dry 
weight anthocyanin, while more intensely coloured 
genes encoding the biosynthetic enzymes, perhaps 
in ways similar to the regulation of anthocyanin 
synthesis (discussed in Chapter 17).
16.4  Flavonoid synthesis
The flavonoids are a group of phenolic compounds 
in which two six-carbon rings are linked by a three-
carbon unit. All flavonoids absorb in the wave­
length ranges 250–270 nm and 330–350 nm, and 
some in the range 520–550 nm, so that they appear 
as visible pigmentation to most animals, although 
the colour that they appear will vary with the ani­
mal’s ability to perceive reflected ultraviolet light. 
Flavonoids are water soluble and accumulate in the 
vacuoles of plant cells. Flavonoids play a number 
of roles in plant physiology and development. They 
may be involved in defence against pathogens and 
predators, they are a component of the legume–
Rhizobium signalling pathway, they are required 
for correct pollen development and pollen tube 
growth, they protect sensitive tissues from ultravio­
let radiation, and they act as antioxidants and metal 
chelators. Within the flower their main role is as 
pigments and co-pigments, with different classes of 
flavonoids contributing different colours.
The first committed step of flavonoid synthesis 
is the condensation of three molecules of malonyl 
CoA (derived from acetyl CoA) with one molecule 
of p-coumaroyl CoA (derived from the shikimate 
pathway and general phenylpropanoid metabo­
lism) to produce chalcone, the key intermediate in 
the synthesis of all flavonoids (Martin and Gerats 
1993). Chalcone itself is usually yellow or orange, 
and may accumulate as a pigment in its own right 
(as for example in safflower, Carthamus tinctorius, 
Asterales; Tanaka et al. 2008). In a few species it is 
converted into a yellow aurone, the pigment which 
provides the yellow colour to some other daisy 
flowers, such as Dahlia and Cosmos species (Na­
kayama 2002), and the yellow throat to the Antir­
rhinum flower. Aurones are derived from chalcones 
by hydroxylation of the B-ring moiety and/or oxi­
dative cyclization. In Antirrhinum, both of these re­
actions are catalysed by aureusidin synthase, which 
is encoded by a gene with strong similarity to more 
general plant polyphenol oxidases (Nakayama et al. 
2000; Sato et al. 2001).

182      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
production and the synthesis of cyanogenic com­
pounds (Martin and Gerats 1993).
The first committed enzyme of flavonoid syn­
thesis, which condenses malonyl CoA with this 
4-coumaroyl CoA to produce a yellow chalcone, is 
chalcone synthase (CHS). The NIVEA (NIV) gene 
encodes CHS in Antirrhinum, and loss of gene 
function through mutation results in pure white 
flowers in which no flavonoids are produced at all 
(Wienand et al. 1982). A large number of nivea mu­
tant alleles have been described, and it is clear that 
NIVEA function is determined partly by accurate 
regulation of its expression. Although NIV appears 
to be the only locus encoding chalcone synthase 
in Antirrhinum, multiple CHS encoding genes are 
present in many species. Eight CHS loci have been 
described in petunia (Koes et al. 1986), and the po­
tential for redundancy between so many genes may 
explain the absence of a CHS mutant in this species. 
Maize has also been shown to contain two loci en­
coding CHS (Coe et al. 1981; Dooner 1983), although 
the expression patterns of the two transcripts do not 
appear to overlap.
The next step in the pathway, the isomerization of 
chalcone into a colourless flavanone by the closure 
of the C ring, occurs spontaneously at a low rate 
but is accelerated by the enzyme chalcone isomer­
ase (CHI) (Mol et al. 1985). CHI mutants usually ac­
cumulate chalcone as well as reduced quantities of 
anthocyanin, indicating that although CHI may not 
be strictly necessary for anthocyanin synthesis, it is 
required to prevent this step of the pathway lim­
iting the rate of pigment production. Petunia has 
garden varieties accumulate up to 15% dry weight 
anthocyanin. Similarly, the concentration of antho­
cyanin in deep purple pansy varieties may be as 
high as 30% dry weight.
Anthocyanin synthesis has been characterized 
both from a biochemical perspective and from a 
molecular one, and the pathway is summarized in 
Fig. 16.5. The most detailed studies have used the 
petals of Antirrhinum and petunia (Solanales) as 
models. Antirrhinum flowers normally produce a 
magenta anthocyanin, called cyanidin. Petunia flow­
ers produce a purple anthocyanin, delphinidin, as 
well as petunidin. Since the blueness of the anthocy­
anin is determined by the degree of hydroxylation of 
the B ring, in theory a plant can always hydroxylate 
the molecule less, and thus make less blue anthocya­
nins, but it will not necessarily have the enzymes to 
hydroxylate it more, and so cannot make bluer an­
thocyanins. In fact, investigation of this hypothesis in 
petunia revealed that the enzymes of the biosynthet­
ic pathway have a greater efficiency for conversion 
of their usual substrates, and cannot therefore easily 
produce orange pelargonidins (Mol et al. 1998).
The p-coumaroyl CoA for flavonoid biosynthesis 
comes from general phenylpropanoid metabolism, 
and is shown in Fig. 16.5. The first enzyme of phe­
nylpropanoid metabolism is phenylalanine am­
monia lyase (PAL), which catalyses the conversion 
of phenylalanine to cinnamate (Martin and Gerats 
1993). Cinnamate is converted to a hydroxycin­
namic CoA ester (4-coumaroyl CoA) through two 
steps, and this intermediate feeds into a number of 
pathways, including those responsible for lignin 
)
b
(
)
a
(
(c)
Figure 16.4  Anthocyanins give the purple, magenta, and pink colours to (a) Petunia hybrida (Solanales, delphinidin and petunidin), 
(b) Antirrhinum majus (Lamiales, cyanidin), and (c) Pelargonium (Geraniales, pelargonidin). The photo in (c) is adapted from a photo by Rameshng 
(Wikimedia Commons). See also Plate 15.

COLOURING THE FLOWER    183
OH
O
CoAS
HO2C
O
SCoA
3 x
OH
O
OH
HO
OH
O
O
HO
OH
OH
R1
R2
O
O
HO
OH
OH
OH
O
OH
HO
OH
OH
OH
O
HO
OH
OH
OH
Tetrahydroxychalcone
R1,R2 = H-Leucopelargonidin
R1 = OH,R2 = H-Leucocyanidin
R1,R2 = OH-Leucodelphinidin
R1,R2 = H-Dihydrokaempferol
R1 = OH,R2 = H-Dihydroquercetin
R1,R2 = OH-Dihydromyricetin
R1,R2 = H-Naringenin
R1 = OH,R2 = H-Eriodictyol
R1,R2 = OH-Pentahydroxyflavanone
R1,R2 = H-Pelargonidin
R1 = OH,R2 = H-Cyanidin
R1,R2 = OH-Delphinidin
p-Coumaroyl CoA
Malonyl CoA
R2
R1
R1
R2
R1
R2
 Figure 16.5    The anthocyanin synthetic pathway. The different products depend on the groups found at positions R 1 and R 2 . 

184      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
Gerats 1993). In petunia the AN3 (ANTHOCYANIN3) 
locus encodes F3H.
The ivory dihydroflavonol produced in step three 
is reduced by dihydroflavonol 4-reductase (DFR) to 
give an ivory-coloured leucoanthocyanidin. The 
PALLIDA (PAL) gene of Antirrhinum is responsi­
ble for DFR production, and mutation results in 
­ivory-coloured flowers (Martin et al. 1985; Coen 
et al. 1986), while the ANTHOCYANIN6 (AN6) locus 
encodes DFR in petunia (Beld et al. 1989). It is DFR 
in petunia that exhibits substrate specificity and 
that is therefore responsible for the failure of the 
petal to produce pelargonidin if F3′H and F3′5′H ac­
tivities are not present. Petunia DFR shows strong 
substrate specificity for dihydroquercetin (one ex­
tra hydroxylation) and dihydromyricetin (two hy­
droxylations), as opposed to dihydrokaempferol 
(no extra hydroxylations) (Martin and Gerats 1993).
Leucoanthocyanidin is converted into a coloured 
anthocyanidin by the action of a leucoanthocya­
nidin dioxygenase (also called anthocyanidin syn­
thase). The Antirrhinum locus CANDICA (CANDI) 
is required for these conversions, and encodes a 
protein with strong sequence similarity to other di­
oxygenases, including INC (Martin et al. 1991). Mu­
tations at this locus again result in ivory-coloured 
flowers. The petunia orthologue of CANDI, ANT17, 
is highly expressed in petals and its transcript is ab­
sent from regulatory mutants which do not produce 
anthocyanin (Weiss et al. 1993).
Anthocyanidin is glycosylated to form an antho­
cyanin by UDP glucose-flavonoid 3-O-glucosyl­
transferase (UF3GT). The addition of this glucose 
molecule stabilizes the pigment and enables it to 
be transported across the vacuolar membrane from 
the cytosol, where all previous steps in the pathway 
have occurred. In maize the BRONZE1 (BZ1) locus 
encodes UF3GT, and in bz1 mutants anthocyanidin 
accumulates in the cytosol and polymerizes with 
proteins to form a bronze-coloured complex (Lar­
son and Coe 1977). Recent reports suggest that there 
might be some species-specific diversity in the or­
der in which glucose molecules are added and in 
the activities and even origins of the enzymes con­
cerned (reviewed by Tanaka et al. 2008).
Anthocyanin is thought to be transported across 
the vacuolar membrane by a number of meth­
ods. The best studied system requires glutathione 
been shown to contain two transcripts of CHI, with 
different expression patterns (van Tunen et al. 1988).
The flavanone produced in the second step is 
one of the molecules which can be hydroxylated 
on the B ring to generate bluer end products. The 
dihydroflavonol produced in the next step (below) 
is the other intermediate that can act as substrate 
for extra hydroxylations. In Antirrhinum, flavo­
noid 3′-hydroxylase (F3′H) activity adds a single 
hydroxyl group to the B ring, leading to the final ac­
cumulation of cyanidin (magenta) as the pathway’s 
end product, instead of pelargonidin (orange/brick 
red). The EOSINA (EOS) gene of Antirrhinum en­
codes F3′H, and eos mutants accumulate pelargoni­
din as a consequence (Martin and Gerats 1993). Two 
loci encode F3′H in petunia, each active in different 
parts of the flower (Brugliera et al. 1999). In some 
plants, including petunia, a related enzyme, flavo­
noid 3′5′-hydroxylase (F3′5′H), is able to add two 
hydroxyl groups to the B ring, leading to the final 
production of the blue anthocyanin, delphinidin. 
Two genes encode F3′5′H in petunia, and their ex­
pression patterns differ, ensuring that both the petal 
tube and limbs contain the enzyme (Stotz et al. 1985; 
Holton et al. 1993). Interestingly, sequence analysis 
of F3′H and F3′5′H from various species indicates 
that F3′5′H was derived from F3′H before the diver­
gence of angiosperms and gymnosperms. However, 
within the daisies (Asteraceae) a separate, and quite 
recent, origin of F3′5′H has occurred, also by dupli­
cation and modification of F3′H (Seitz et al. 2006).
In the third step of the anthocyanin pathway, 
­flavanone-3-hydroxylase (F3H) catalyses the hydrox­
ylation of flavanone to produce very palely pigment­
ed dihydroflavonols. These dihydroflavonols may be 
used as substrates for flavonol production by flavonol 
synthase or stay within the anthocyanin synthetic 
pathway. Within the anthocyanin pathway they may 
also be subject to one or more extra hydroxylations 
by F3′H and F3′5′H. The INCOLORATA (INC) locus 
of Antirrhinum encodes F3H, and mutations at this 
locus result in an ivory phenotype. Unusually for a 
locus encoding an enzyme, the wild type INC allele 
is only semi-dominant. Therefore the heterozygote 
INC/inc produces a reduced amount of anthocyanin 
relative to the wild type homozygote. This observa­
tion suggests that F3H may be a rate-limiting step in 
anthocyanin production in Antirrhinum (Martin and 

Colouring the flower      185
In Antirrhinum, petunia, and many other species 
the anthocyanin undergoes a second glycosylation, 
adding an additional sugar. In both these cases the 
sugar is rhamnose, and the glycosylation is cata­
lysed by the enzyme rhamnosyl transferase (RT). 
This second glycosylation may serve to stabilize 
and enhance colour—petunia mutants lacking RT 
activity are slightly less blue than wild type (Martin 
and Gerats 1993). The activities of acyl transferases 
and methyl transferases can also influence antho­
cyanin colour at this stage. These enzymes can gen­
erally modify any anthocyanin, irrespective of the 
degree of hydroxylation of the B ring, but the final 
colour produced will depend on the combination of 
core anthocyanin structure and the various modifi­
cations (sometimes known as decorations) resulting 
from the activites of these late-acting enzymes.
Within the vacuole, anthocyanin is sometimes 
stored in membraneless matrixes, known as antho­
cyanic vacuolar inclusions, which appear to act as 
traps for anthocyanin (Markham et al. 2000). The 
packing and storage of anthocyanins also influenc­
es final petal colour (Grotewold 2006), and will be 
discussed in Chapter 17.
16.5  Betalains
The betalains have been less well studied than the 
carotenoids and anthocyanins. They replace antho­
cyanins as the colouration in flowers and fruit of 
the order Caryophyllales (see Fig. 16.6). However, 
within that order the families Caryophyllaceae (the 
pinks) and Molluginaceae (the carpetweeds) do not 
S-transferase (GST) as a molecular chaperone for 
the transporter. The BRONZE2 (BZ2) locus of maize 
(Poales) encodes GST, and bz2 mutants accumu­
late anthocyanin in the cytoplasm, where it is oxi­
dized to a bronze colour (Marrs et al. 1995). GST 
transports anthocyanin to the vacuole via a multi­
drug ­resistance-like protein (a type of transporter), 
encoded by a pair of orthologous genes in maize. 
The ZmMRP3 locus encodes the transporter ac­
tive in vegetative tissue, while ZmMRP3 encodes 
a nearly identical protein active in the develop­
ing kernels (Goodman et al. 2004). In petunia the 
­ANTHOCYANINLESS 9 (AN9) locus also encodes 
a GST responsible for the final step of floral antho­
cyanin synthesis. However, plants contain many 
GSTs, and phylogenetic analysis suggests that BZ2 
and AN9 evolved independently from one another 
and from different types of GST. This conclusion 
is particularly striking in light of the ability of BZ2 
to rescue an an9 mutant, and vice versa. However, 
since both genes are transcriptionally regulated by 
the same proteins, which control the anthocyanin 
biosynthetic pathway in both species, it is likely that 
their recent evolutionary history has followed very 
similar patterns (Alfenito et al. 1998).
An alternative route for vacuolar transport of 
anthocyanins might involve the use of MATE 
(multidrug and toxin extrusion) transporters. The 
Arabidopsis MATE protein TT12 (TRANSPARENT 
TESTA 12) is necessary for the vacuolar transport 
of the proanthocyanidins that colour the seed coat, 
and has also been shown to transport anthocyanins 
in vitro (Marinova et al. 2007).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 16.6  Betalains give the yellow, purple, and pink colours to (a) Portulaca oleracea, (b) Mirabilis jalapa, and (c) Sesuvium portulacastrum 
(all Caryophyllales). All images kindly provided by Sam Brockington (Cambridge). See also Plate 16.

186      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
condensation of betalamic acid, and come in two 
main colour groups. The betacyanins, formed when 
betalamic acid interacts with a derivative of dihy­
droxyphenylalanine, are red to purple, while the 
betaxanthins, formed from the condensation of beta­
lamic acid with an amino acid, are yellow to orange 
(see Fig. 16.7). The betacyanins can also be modified 
by the addition of glycosyl or acyl groups, and over 
50 betacyanins are currently known (Tanaka et al. 
2008).
The early and late steps of betalain synthesis are 
thought to be catalysed by enzymes, but many of the 
intermediate reactions in the synthetic pathway may 
occur spontaneously (Strack et al. 2003). The absence 
of molecular and genetic model systems within the 
Caryophyllales has, to date, precluded any detailed 
analysis of betalain synthesis. Feeding experiments 
make betalains and do make anthocyanins. It has 
been proposed that an ancestor of the Caryophylla­
les made both betalains and anthocyanins, but that 
within each family one pathway was lost (Strack 
et al. 2003). It is not unusual for a plant species to 
produce both carotenoids and betalains, or both fla­
vonoids and betalains, but there is no known spe­
cies that produces both anthocyanins and betalains. 
This mutual exclusivity may reflect the overlapping 
absorption spectra of anthocyanins and betalains, 
and therefore the lack of advantage in producing 
two similarly coloured pigments (Grotewold 2006). 
Common betalain-pigmented plants include beet­
root, the petals of the Christmas cactus, and the 
brightly coloured bracts of Bougainvillea.
The betalains are water-soluble nitrogen-con­
taining pigments synthesized from tyrosine by the 
N
H
CO2H
HO
HO
N
H
O
CO2H
HO2C
NH2
HO
O
L-Tyr
HO
HO
CO2H
NH2
CO2H
HO
HO
N
H
N
CO2H
HO2C
CO2H
HO
O
N
H
HN
CO2H
HO2C
cyclo-DOPA
BetalamicAcid
3-methoxytyramine
DOPA
Betanidin
Betaxanthin
Figure 16.7  The final product of betalain synthesis depends on what is conjugated to betalamic acid.

Colouring the flower      187
unlike anthocyanins they are not pH sensitive and 
so are considerably more stable. Phylogenetic anal­
yses indicate that the genes encoding the betalain-
specific glucosyltransferases are very closely related 
to those encoding flavonoid-specific glucosyltrans­
ferases (reviewed by Strack et al. 2003).
The observation that betalain glucosyltransfe­
rases are related to flavonoid glucosyltransferases 
is one of several pieces of data pointing to a com­
plex and labile evolutionary history for betalains. 
Comparative genetic studies suggest that many of 
the genes encoding enzymes of anthocyanin syn­
thesis are expressed in betalain-producing species 
(Shimada et al. 2005). Similarly, Christenet et  al. 
(2004) found that homologues of the sequence en­
coding DOD could be isolated from a number of 
­anthocyanin-producing taxa. Recent character map­
ping studies by Brockington et al. (2011), based on 
updated phylogenies of the Caryophyllales, sug­
gested that multiple transitions between betalain 
synthesis and anthocyanin synthesis have occurred 
within the order, in both directions. Taken togeth­
er these various lines of evidence suggest that the 
switch between synthesis of anthocyanins and syn­
thesis of betalains might involve only a few muta­
tions to genes encoding key enzymes, allowing for 
a very labile evolutionary history.
and other biochemical approaches have suggested a 
variety of potential routes to betalain synthesis, but 
there is as yet no consensus on whether the same 
pathway is used by all betalain-producing plants 
or on which pathway that might be. Tanaka et al. 
(2008) provide a detailed review of the current bio­
chemical hypotheses, and only a brief summary is 
given here. Betalain synthesis ­begins with the hy­
droxylation of tyrosine to give two precursor mol­
ecules of L-5,6-dihydroxy-­phenylalanine (L-DOPA) 
(Piatelli 1981). This reaction is catalysed by a tyrosi­
nase or phenol-oxidase complex (Delgado-Vargas 
and Paredes-Lopez 2002), and genes encoding such 
enzymes have been isolated from Portulaca grandi­
flora, Beta vulgaris, and Phytolacca americana (Joy et al. 
1995, Steiner et al. 1999). L-DOPA is then converted 
to betalamic acid by DOPA-4,5-dioxygenase (DOD). 
A sequence encoding DOD has also been identified 
from Portulaca grandiflora, where it was shown to 
induce betalain production on transient expression 
in a white-flowered variety (Christinet et al. 2004). 
Betalamic acid then condenses either with cyclo-
DOPA to produce betanidin and later betacyanins, 
or with amino acids to generate betaxanthins (see 
Fig. 16.6).
Like flavonoids, betalains are stored in the vacu­
ole of plant cells in a glycosylated form. However, 

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 17
Enhancing flower colour
The production of coloured tissues, particularly 
insect-attracting petals, depends upon the synthesis 
of the pigments described in Chapter 16. However, 
very few flowers are coloured simply by the synthe­
sis of a single pigment, and equally few petals are 
composed of a single block of unchanging colour. 
In the same way as an artist’s palette can be used to 
produce an almost infinite variety of colours, plants 
are able to mix, modify, and enhance pigments to 
produce a vast array of final petal colours. These col­
ours are usually distributed across the flower in pat­
terns, which vary in their degree of regularity and 
complexity between different species. While colour 
contrast is much more important than pattern for at­
tracting pollinators from a distance, pattern becomes 
important at close range, and allows animals to dis­
tinguish between flowers of different species and to 
learn to ‘handle’ flowers (extract the reward) with 
the minimum possible expenditure of energy (Kevan 
et al. 1996). In this chapter we shall consider the ef­
fects of mixing pigments together, the regulation of 
pigment distribution in the flower, and a number of 
other ways in which plants are able to modify the fi­
nal colour of the flower. Although much of the work 
described in this section has been conducted using 
human-visible pigments, it should be borne in mind 
throughout that the patterning we perceive on a 
flower may be very different from that perceived by 
an insect, and therefore that the UV-absorbing pig­
ments visible to the insect eye are also likely to be 
subject to the same regulatory mechanisms.
17.1  Mixing pigments
The colour that a flower appears is very rarely the 
colour of a single pure pigment, either carotenoid 
or flavonoid. In almost all species investigated, 
multiple pigments are present within petals and it 
is their combination that gives the final colour. This 
combination will vary according to whether the pig­
ments are mixed within the vacuole (i.e. multiple 
flavonoids), or are produced in different plastids, or 
a combination of these factors. In particular, plastid 
distribution may vary across the flower, giving very 
different colour outcomes. Mature red rose petals 
(Rosales) contain no pigment-rich plastids, so the 
red colour is purely a result of anthocyanin deposi­
tion in vacuoles. In contrast, yellow and sometimes 
red carotenoid-containing chromoplasts are present 
throughout the petals of wallflower, Erysimum cheiri 
(Brassicales), blending visually with the magenta 
anthocyanin in the vacuole to produce the orangey-
brown colour of the mature flowers (Weston and 
Pyke 1999). The importance of plastid distribution 
in determining pattern has been shown in culti­
vated primroses (Ericales), where the central eye 
of the flower is composed of carotenoid-containing 
pigments, while the rest of the petal is pigmented 
by flavonoids. The carotenoids in this case give a 
much stronger yellow colour than the paler flavo­
noids (Anon. 1921).
Some combinations of pigments have more dra­
matic effects than others. In particular, a combina­
tion of a yellow flavonoid (aurone) with a yellow 
carotenoid may appear little different from the 
carotenoid alone, because aurones are rarely pro­
duced in significant quantities. In general, carot­
enoids impart much stronger and heavier colours 
to petals than do apparently similarly coloured fla­
vonoids. For example, the bright yellow of garden 
Forsythia flowers (Lamiales) is due to the yellow ca­
rotenoids present, while the yellow flavonoids also 
produced in the petals apparently have little effect 
on final flower colour (Rosati et al. 1998).

Enhancing flower colour      189
anthocyanins, while aromatic acyl groups such as 
sinapayl shift the pigment towards blue. Recent evi­
dence indicates that cinnamic acids also play a role 
in co-pigmentation of non-acylated anthocyanins, 
changing the absorption spectrum of common pig­
ments such as malvin (Markovic et al. 2005).
17.3  Regulation of pigment distribution
Since the type of pigments and co-pigments pro­
duced has such a range of effects on flower col­
our, it is hardly surprising that the pigmentation 
pathways should be under tight regulatory con­
trol. This regulation is both spatial and temporal, 
generating colour patterns on almost all flowers, 
and in some species changing the colours of pet­
als during their development. For example, the 
flowers of Viola cornuta cultivar ‘Yesterday, Today 
and Tomorrow’ (a  garden variety of pansy, Mal­
pighiales) change from white through pale lilac to 
purple over the space of 5–8 days (see Fig. 17.1a). 
This change in colour has been shown to be the re­
sult of a steady increase in anthocyanin production 
over the time period, which is very likely to be the 
result of transcriptional regulation of the genes en­
coding the enzymes of anthocyanin biosynthesis. 
Although such a colour change may seem extraor­
dinary, its dependence upon pollination (without 
which the petals remain white) suggests that plant 
growth regulator-mediated signals from germinat­
ing pollen tubes trigger the change in anthocyanin 
regulation, perhaps to change the attractiveness 
or visibility of the flower to potential pollinators 
(Farzad et al. 2002). A similar, but reversible, colour 
shift in the petals of Desmodium setigerum (Fabales) 
was described in Chapter 16 (Willmer et al. 2009), 
although its biochemical and molecular basis is not 
yet known.
It has been shown that the activities of the genes 
encoding the enzymes of anthocyanin biosynthesis 
are predominantly regulated at the transcriptional 
level, rather than through post-transcriptional pro­
cesses. It can be inferred from this that the majority 
of observed petal pigmentation patterns are speci­
fied by the expression patterns of regulatory genes 
that control the activity of the biosynthetic genes 
(Mol et al. 1998). The analysis of pigment regulation 
17.2  Co-pigmentation
A co-pigment is a compound that modifies the ap­
parent colour of a pigment despite having little or 
no colour itself. Co-pigments are believed to have 
the ability to modify all varieties of anthocyanin, 
and this modification may involve a shift in absorp­
tion spectrum or simply an enhancement of the ap­
parent brightness of the pigment. This enhancement 
is usually as a result of stabilization of the structural 
form of the anthocyanin molecule (Markovic et al. 
2005).
Many flavonols and flavones act as co-pigments, 
and are thought to form stacked complexes with 
anthocyanin, causing a shift in the absorption spec­
trum of the anthocyanin molecule (Mol et al. 1998). 
These stacked complexes can also contain metal 
ions, further modifying final colour. The pigment/
co-pigment/metal structure that generates the 
blue colour of cornflowers (Asterales) is described 
in Section 17.4. Flavonols are usually colourless 
or pale yellow, and are derived from dihydrofla­
vonols through enzymatic conversion by flavonol 
synthase. There are therefore four ways in which 
flavonols may affect final flower colour: by being 
yellow, and mixing with reddish anthocyanins to 
give a final orange colour; by absorbing UV and 
thus changing final flower colour to an insect’s eye; 
by competing with the anthocyanin synthetic path­
way for dihydroflavonol (see Fig. 16.5 in Chapter 
16) and thus reducing the final concentration of an­
thocyanin produced; and by acting as a co-pigment, 
where they enhance or modify anthocyanin colour. 
Analysis of petunia (Solanales) mutants with le­
sions in flavonol synthase activity, along with in­
vestigation of the effects of ectopic expression of the 
gene encoding flavonol synthase, have shown that 
flavonols play roles in both substrate competition 
and co-pigmentation in this species (Holton et al. 
1993).
Cinnamic acids have also been shown to play an 
important role in co-pigmentation. They often con­
stitute the main acyl groups in acylated anthocya­
nins, and their stabilizing effects on the pigments 
enhance the final petal colour, which is otherwise 
subject to bleaching when exposed to acidic pH 
(Figueiredo et al. 1996). Aliphatic acyl groups such 
as malanyl are particularly effective in stabilizing 

190      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
that genes encoding enzymes required early in the 
anthocyanin synthetic pathway can be activated 
independently of genes encoding enzymes that act 
late in the pathway.
17.3.1  bHLH proteins
The best characterized example of a floral pigment 
regulatory protein is the bHLH transcription fac­
tor DELILA (DEL) of Antirrhinum majus. Mutations 
at the DEL locus result in wild type red lobes, but 
the corolla tube of the flower is white (Goodrich 
et al. 1992; see Fig. 17.1b). The DELILA protein is 
very similar in sequence to R of maize. The bHLH 
domain that defines members of this family is also 
common to the MYC family of transcription fac­
tors in animals, and functions as a DNA-binding 
domain. Extensive analysis of DEL function has 
determined that the protein activates the late antho­
cyanin biosynthetic genes, specifically those encod­
ing F3H, DFR, and UFGT (Martin et al. 1991). The 
regulation of DFR by DEL has been analysed in de­
tail. In the wild type Antirrhinum flower, pigmen­
tation is first deposited in a ring at the base of the 
has focused on anthocyanins rather than carote­
noids, since carotenoids are essential to many other 
aspects of plant growth and so cannot be manipu­
lated as easily. By convention, anthocyanin regu­
latory loci are divided into those that specifically 
control anthocyanin deposition (by regulating ‘late’ 
biosynthetic genes, some way down the pathway), 
and those that control the synthesis of anthocyanins 
and other flavonoids (by regulating ‘early’ biosyn­
thetic genes). A number of genes have been shown 
to be important in both pathways, and three key 
groups of proteins have been shown to be involved. 
The most important of these are transcriptional 
activators of the MYB and basic helix-loop-helix 
(bHLH) families. In maize (Poales), the MYB pro­
tein C1 and the bHLH protein R have been shown 
to activate expression of the structural genes encod­
ing all enzymes of anthocyanin synthesis (early and 
late), from chalcone synthase onwards, in kernel 
aleurone cells (reviewed in Martin et al. 1991). How­
ever, it appears that the evolution of complex flo­
ral pigmentation patterns in eudicots has involved 
subfunctionalization of the roles of multiple dupli­
cated members of the MYB and bHLH families, so 
(b)
(d)
(a)
(c)
Figure 17.1  Pigment regulation. 
(a) Viola cornuta ‘Yesterday, Today and 
Tomorrow’ is fully purple 5–8 days after 
pollination (left), but opens as a white 
flower (middle) in which pigmentation 
steadily increases (right). Image kindly 
provided by Martha Weiss (Georgetown 
University, Washington, DC). (b) The 
delila mutant of Antirrhinum lacks 
pigmentation in the tube as a result of 
loss of activity of a bHLH transcription 
factor. (c) The Venosa locus produces 
pigmentation over the petal veins in 
a pale Antirrhinum flower. VENOSA 
encodes a MYB transcription factor. 
(d) The an11 mutant of petunia lacks 
pigmentation as a result of loss 
of activity of a WD40 protein. The 
transposon in the AN11 locus excises 
somatically, generating patches of wild 
type red tissue. Image kindly provided 
by Ronald Koes (Vrije Universiteit, 
Amsterdam). See also Plate 17.

Enhancing flower colour      191
in leaf anthocyanin production in response to stress 
(Zhang et al. 2003; Feyissa et al. 2009). Later studies 
suggest that AtMYC2 plays a number of important 
roles in photomorphogenesis and hormone signal­
ling, and may have only a limited endogenous role 
in anthocyanin production under stress conditions 
(Yadav et al. 2005).
17.3.2  MYB proteins
The joint function of the bHLH factor R and the MYB 
protein C1 in anthocyanin activation in maize led to 
a general expectation that MYB proteins would also 
be important in the regulation of anthocyanin syn­
thesis in eudicot flowers. A number of studies have 
demonstrated that MYB proteins do play important 
roles in regulating anthocyanin synthesis, and that 
they have particularly key roles in controlling the 
patterning of pigmentation. All MYB proteins share 
1, 2, or 3 repeats of a helix-helix-turn-helix domain, 
which binds DNA. The protein family is ancient, 
with MYB transcription factors also known to play 
important roles in animal cell proliferation.
In petunia, an MYB protein, ANTHOCYANIN2 
(AN2), is necessary for anthocyanin synthesis. AN2 
is not particularly similar in sequence to C1 outside 
of the conserved MYB domain, and it is thought that 
pigment regulation in monocot and eudicot line­
ages might be under the control of different groups 
of MYB transcription factors. Nonetheless, expres­
sion of petunia AN2 is able to complement a maize 
c1 mutant (Quattrocchio et al. 1999). AN2 activates 
late biosynthetic genes, particularly DFR, and is hy­
pothesized to function in concert with AN1. Hob­
allah et al. (2007) explored the function of AN2 in 
Petunia axillaris, a white-flowered species, relative to 
pigmented Petunia integrifolia. They found that wild-
collected and botanic garden accessions of P. axillaris 
contained alleles of AN2 with a variety of frameshift 
and nonsense mutations at different positions. They 
further showed that introduction of a functional 
AN2 allele into P. axillaris using a transgenic ap­
proach resulted in pigmented flowers but decreased 
attractiveness to the usual hawkmoth pollinator, a 
clear demonstration that regulation of anthocyanin 
synthesis is critical to pollination success.
Additional MYB transcription factors regulate 
vegetative anthocyanin production in petunia, and 
tube, then in the lobes, and finally in the body of the 
tube. Mutation of the promoter region of PALLIDA 
(encoding DFR see Chapter 16) releases it from the 
control of DEL. Analysis of a number of promoter 
mutations has established that DEL is responsible 
for PALLIDA activity in each of the regions of the 
flower at the correct developmental stage (Almeida 
et al. 1989). DEL has also been shown to be func­
tional in heterologous hosts, activating anthocyanin 
synthesis in flowers of tobacco and leaves of to­
mato (both Solanales). Interestingly, although these 
experiments were conducted using a constitutive 
promoter, and DEL transcript was detected in all 
tissues, DFR was only activated in a subset of plant 
organs. This implies that DEL functions in conjunc­
tion with other, developmentally regulated factors 
(Mooney et al. 1995).
The DEL orthologue in petunia is JAF13, a bHLH 
protein very similar in sequence to DEL, which has 
also been shown to activate DFR expression (Quat­
trocchio et al. 1998). However, recent reports indi­
cate that another bHLH protein, less similar to DEL 
and R, is also required for anthocyanin regulation 
in petunia. ANTHOCYANIN1 (AN1) encodes a 
bHLH protein with only limited sequence similar­
ity to JAF13 (and DEL and R), but a closer relation­
ship to another maize protein, INTENSIFIER (IN). 
The IN locus is an inhibitor of anthocyanin synthe­
sis in maize kernels, but AN1 has been shown to ac­
tivate DFR expression, in the same way that JAF13 
does, and also to interact with an MYB protein, AN2 
(Spelt et al. 2000, 2002). It also appears that AN1 may 
play a role in cell pH, as the an1 mutant is allelic to 
the ph6 mutant and the AN1 protein interacts physi­
cally with PH4, a MYB transcription factor with a 
role in regulating vacuolar pH (Quattrocchio et al. 
2006; see Section 17.5).
A similar situation seems to exist in Arabidop­
sis, where two of the 139 bHLH transcription fac­
tors show particular sequence similarity to IN and 
AN1. Both GLABRA3 (GL3) and MYC-146 (also 
known as AtMYC2) were shown to activate an­
thocyanin synthesis when transiently expressed 
in white varieties of Matthiola incana (Brassicales) 
(Ramsay et al. 2003). While GL3 was initially identi­
fied as a locus involved in trichome development, it 
has been shown to act semi-redundantly with EN­
HANCER OF GL3 (EGL3) and to play a critical role 

192      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
Antirrhinum or within a recent ancestral lineage, 
before further duplication of ROSEA to give RO­
SEA1 and ROSEA2. The VENOSA protein also con­
tains the necessary amino acid motifs for interaction 
with a bHLH protein. Analysis of transcription of 
biosynthetic genes in different genetic backgrounds 
revealed that VENOSA induces expression of CHI, 
F3H, F3′H, and UFGT (Schwinn et al. 2006). The ex­
pression domain of VENOSA itself is restricted to 
the cells surrounding the veins (Shang et al. 2011). 
However, anthocyanin is only produced in the epi­
dermis. Shang et al. (2011) proposed that the specific­
ity of anthocyanin to the epidermis over the veins is 
provided by the interaction between vein-­associated 
VENOSA and epidermal-specific DELILA.
The genes encoding two more MYB transcription 
factors, MYB305 and MYB340, are also known to be 
expressed in Antirrhinum flowers, although mutant 
phenotypes have not been described for either locus 
(Moyano et al. 1996). These genes are worth consid­
ering because they provide a unique insight into the 
precision with which flavonoid production can be 
regulated. The primary function of these genes ap­
pears to be in the regulation of flavonols in the car­
pel and stamens. The MYB305 and MYB340 proteins 
are virtually identical across their DNA-­binding do­
mains, differing in only four amino acids, and they 
both bind to the promoters of the genes encoding 
PAL, CHI, and F3H, and activate transcription of 
the genes. MYB340 is the stronger activator of the 
two proteins, producing more transcript of all three 
of the structural genes than MYB305. However, 
MYB305 has a much stronger binding affinity for 
biosynthetic gene promoters than does MYB340. 
Since the weaker activator binds more strongly, and 
the stronger activator binds much more weakly, 
coexpression of the two genes results in 50% less 
biosynthetic gene transcript than does expression 
of MYB340 alone, because the proteins are in com­
petition with each other (Moyano et al. 1996). These 
data show that flavonoids are subject to very precise 
regulation by gearing mechanisms, and that similar 
proteins may interact to regulate petal pigmenta­
tion. A gene with very high sequence similarity to 
MYB305 and MYB340 has been described from pea 
(Pisum sativum, Fabales). Myb26 is expressed in de­
veloping pea flowers, with transcript levels increas­
ing as anthocyanin deposition occurs. However, 
also specify pattern-specific pigmentation in the 
flower. DEEP PURPLE (DPL) and PURPLE HAZE 
(PHZ) encode proteins that cluster with AN2 and 
the pH-regulating AN4 in phylogenetic analyses, 
suggesting that they are the products of recent du­
plication events (Albert et al. 2011). Ectopic expres­
sion of either gene results in pigmented leaves and 
stems, but their endogenous expression in leaves oc­
curs in response to high light levels. In the flowers, 
DPL was shown to regulate the production of an­
thocyanins over the veins in the corolla tube, while 
PHZ is responsible for pigment production in petal 
surfaces exposed to light at the bud stage. Both of 
these phenotypes are masked by the full pigment in 
petunia lines with a functional AN2 allele, but can 
be detected in an2 mutants (Albert et al. 2011).
Three lines of Antirrhinum, venosa, roseacolorata, 
and roseadorsea, show variation in pigment pattern­
ing through the activities of genes encoding MYB 
transcription factors (Schwinn et al. 2006). The RO­
SEA locus has been shown to comprise two genes, 
ROSEA1 and ROSEA2, and a number of mutations 
in each coding sequence contribute to the differ­
ent patterning and pigment intensity seen in the 
­roseacolorata and roseadorsea mutant lines. The ROSEA 
genes were isolated using sequence similarity to 
AN2 and maize C1, but are themselves likely to be 
the product of a recent intrachromosomal duplica­
tion event (Schwinn et al. 2006). ROSEA1 and RO­
SEA2 activate the expression of overlapping subsets 
of the anthocyanin synthetic genes. ROSEA1 was 
shown to activate transcription of all of the late bio­
synthetic genes, with particularly strong effects on 
F3′H, F3H, DFR, and UFGT. In contrast, ROSEA2 
seems to only significantly enhance expression of 
F3′H. Both proteins contain the appropriate amino 
acid motif for interaction with a bHLH protein, and 
double mutant analysis confirms that there is an in­
teraction between the ROSEA loci and the bHLH-
encoding DELILA.
The dominant Venosa allele is only visible in an 
Antirrhinum background which is not fully pig­
mented, but in a paler flower it results in the pro­
duction of magenta anthocyanin in the epidermal 
tissue overlying the petal veins (see Fig. 17.1c). The 
VENOSA protein is very similar in sequence to RO­
SEA1 and 2, and it has been suggested that ROSEA 
and VENOSA arose by duplication either within 

Enhancing flower colour      193
The combination of the pigment and co-pigment 
with the metals results in a molecule that gives the 
flower a very bright blue colour, even though the 
anthocyanin alone is red/magenta (Shiono et al. 
2005). The packaging of multiple pigment and ionic 
components in this way leads to the production of 
structures known as supermolecular pigments, or 
superpigments. In the case of cornflower this struc­
ture is called protocyanin (Shiono et al. 2005).
Equally remarkably, the bright blue colour of 
Himalayan poppy, Meconopsis grandis (Ranuncu­
lales), is due to the interaction between iron and 
the magenta anthocyanin cyanidin (see Fig. 17.2a). 
Yoshida et al. (2006) were able to reproduce the blue 
colour of Himalayan blue poppy petals in vitro by 
mixing cyanidin with flavonol co-pigments, iron, 
and magnesium under low pH conditions. The iron 
was the most crucial factor apart from the cyanidin. 
Unusually for a blue flower, vacuolar pH in the 
Himalayan poppy is very acidic (see Section 17.5).
Another good example of this type of interaction 
is the variable colour of the flowers of Hydrangea 
(Cornales), which is commonly grown in gardens 
(see Fig. 17.2b). Hydrangea flowers are blue if there 
is aluminium in the soil, as aluminium and the pig­
ment delphinidin form a very stable, very blue com­
plex. The aluminium ions affect pigment colour not 
only by complexing directly with the delphinidin, 
but also by encouraging its stacking into a super­
pigment molecule (Schreiber et al. 2010). If there is 
less aluminium available in the soil, and more mo­
lybdenum, the same pigment interacts with the mo­
lybdenum ions, causing the flowers to appear light 
pink instead. The presence of this changeable an­
thocyanin pigment in Hydrangea is exploited by gar­
deners, who may water the soil around their plants 
with a solution containing the appropriate ion to 
generate the final flower colour of their choice. The 
aluminium–delphinidin complex is known to be 
acid-stable, giving the very blue colour even in an 
acidic pH which would normally make the delphi­
nidin appear red (Kondo et al. 2005).
Since anthocyanins are water soluble and re­
tained in the vacuole, complexing with metal ions 
requires a mechanism to transport these ions across 
the vacuolar membrane. In 2009, Momonoi et al. de­
scribed the isolation of a vacuolar iron transporter 
from the purple and blue tulip, Tulipa gesneriana 
the Myb26 protein is not able to complement the 
petunia an2 mutant, suggesting that Myb26, like 
MYB340 and MYB350, activates a set of earlier bio­
synthetic genes (Uimari and Strommer 1997).
17.3.3  WD repeat proteins
The third group of proteins with an important role 
in pigment regulation are the WD repeat (WDR) 
proteins. These proteins produce a seven-bladed 
propeller motif and act as surfaces for the interac­
tions of other proteins, such as the transcription 
factors previously discussed (Ramsay and Glover 
2005). The first WDR protein shown to play a role 
in anthocyanin regulation was ANTHOCYANIN11 
(AN11) of petunia. The an11 mutant has reduced 
activity of the late biosynthetic genes (from DFR 
onwards), and produces flowers with white petals 
as a result (Fig. 17.1d). WDR proteins are so con­
served across enormous evolutionary distances that 
the human sequence with most similarity to AN11 
was able to complement an an11 mutant phenotype 
in a transient expression experiment (de Vetten 
et al. 1997). Although no WDR protein has yet been 
shown to be involved in pigment regulation in An­
tirrhinum, the characterization of the Arabidopsis 
protein TTG1 as a WDR protein required for both 
anthocyanin synthesis and trichome development 
suggested that the role of a WDR protein in this 
regulatory pathway might be ubiquitous to the eu­
dicots (Walker et al. 1999). More recently, this hy­
pothesis has been strengthened by the identification 
of WDR proteins involved in anthocyanin species 
in a wide range of species, particularly fruit crops 
such as apple (Rosales), grape (Vitales), and pome­
granate (Myrtales), and ornamental flowers such as 
morning glory (Solanales).
17.4  The effects of metal ions
Interactions between floral pigments and metal ions 
can also alter the final colour of the petals. For exam­
ple, the bright blue colour of cornflowers is not sim­
ply due to the presence of a blue pigment. Instead it 
stems from an interaction between six molecules of 
the magenta anthocyanin, cyanidin, six molecules 
of a flavone co-pigment, one ion each of the met­
als iron and magnesium, and two calcium ions. 

194      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
its transient expression in purple cells causes them 
to blue. It is likely that similar transporters are nec­
essary to move aluminium and magnesium into the 
vacuole in other species.
17.5  The importance of pH
The pH of petal cells can also affect the final colour 
of the flower, as pH determines the conformation of 
(Liliales). The tepals of this flower are purple, but 
with a much bluer patch at the base, and previous 
studies had shown that cells from the blue patch 
had a higher iron content than cells from the rest 
of the tepal (Shoji et al. 2007). Monomoi et al. (2009) 
isolated the iron transporter on the basis of its se­
quence similarity to Arabidopsis and rice iron trans­
porters. They showed that the gene is most strongly 
expressed in the blue regions of the petal, and that 
(b)
(a)
(d)
(c)
Figure 17.2  Metals and pH both affect flower colour. (a) The Himalayan blue poppy owes its blue colour to an interaction between anthocyanin 
and iron. Photograph kindly supplied by Cambridge University Botanic Garden. (b) Hydrangea flowers can be blue or pink, depending on the metal 
ions present in the soil. (c) Morning glory flowers have a high vacuolar pH. Image kindly provided by Felix Jaffe. (d) An unstable pH4 mutant of 
petunia, with revertant wild type red (acidic) sectors on a mutant bluish-pink (more alkaline) background. Image kindly provided by Ronald Koes 
(Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam). See also Plate 18.

Enhancing flower colour      195
into vacuoles, confirming their importance in regu­
lating vacuolar pH and thus flower colour.
The ability of vacuolar pH, controlled by mem­
brane transporters, to alter flower colour without 
any change in the types of pigment produced gives 
plants the flexibility to alter petal colour temporally, 
after pigments have been made in the mature flow­
er. Stewart et al. (1975) observed that the colours of 
several wild flower species became bluer as they 
aged, and that this blueing was correlated with an 
increase in petal pH.
Petal pH has been shown to be under the control 
of genetic factors in a number of species, including 
Primula sinensis (Ericales), Papaver rhoeas (Ranuncu­
lales), Tropaeolum majus (Brassicales), Lathyrus odora­
tus, and the clover Trifolium pratense (both Fabales), 
and this is likely to be the case in many other spe­
cies, too. Petunia has proved to be the best model 
system in which to investigate effects less dramatic 
than those of morning glory, and seven loci that de­
termine petal cell pH have been identified (de Vlam­
ing et al. 1983; Mol et al. 1998). In petunia, these loci 
work to maintain the acid status of the vacuole and 
thus the red colour of the anthocyanin. Wild type 
petunia flowers have a vacuolar pH of 5.5, whereas 
it rises to as much as 6 in some of the ph1–7 mu­
tants (de Vlaming et al. 1983). PH6 was isolated first, 
and shown to correspond to the bHLH-encoding 
locus AN1 (Spelt et al. 2002), while PH4 encodes a 
MYB-related transcription factor (Quattrocchio et al. 
2006). The pH4 mutant shows an increased vacuolar 
pH, from the wild type 5.5 to around 6.0, and as a 
result the flower appears a slightly bluer shade (see 
Fig. 17.2d). The PH4 gene is expressed in the petal 
epidermis, and the MYB transcription factor that it 
encodes can interact with the bHLH proteins AN1 
and JAF13. These data suggest that AN1 interacts 
with different MYB proteins to activate different 
pathways—with AN2 to activate anthocyanin syn­
thesis, but with PH4 to regulate cell pH. Mutation 
of PH4 had little effect on the expression of antho­
cyanin synthetic genes (Quattrocchio et al. 2006).
The mechanism by which two transcription fac­
tors regulate vacuolar pH was explained when the 
PH5 gene was isolated using transposon-tagged 
lines (Verweij et al. 2008). PH5 is expressed in the 
petunia petal, and encodes an H+-ATPase (from a 
subfamily known as type P3A) that is localized to 
the anthocyanin molecule and its resulting absorp­
tion spectrum. Acidic conditions stabilize red forms 
of anthocyanin, whereas alkaline conditions cause 
a colour shift towards blue. For example, the light 
blue petals of Ipomoea tricolor (morning glory, Sola­
nales) owe their colour to the effect of a high petal 
pH on their anthocyanin (see Fig. 17.2c). The closed 
buds of these flowers are purplish red and their cells 
have a pH of 6.6. However, when the flowers open, 
the petal cell pH increases to 7.7, and the pigment 
changes colour to sky blue (Yoshida et al. 1995). To 
confirm that this change in colour was solely due 
to a change in pH, Yoshida et al. (1995) also showed 
that aluminium and iron had no role in morning 
glory colouration, and that the anthocyanin was 
stabilized by the same caffeic acid co-pigment in 
both the bud and mature flower stages. Treatment 
of open flowers with an acidifying environment 
(carbon dioxide) resulted in a reduction in petal cell 
pH and a reversion of the colour to purple. When 
investigating the mechanism of this in vivo pH 
change, Yoshida et al. (2005) observed that an Na+/
H+ exchanger was present only in petal vacuolar 
membranes, and was present at particularly high 
levels in mature flowers. This suggests that the in­
creased pH is due to active transport of Na+ and/or 
K+ from the cytosol to the vacuoles. Further support 
for this mechanism comes from the characteriza­
tion of a mutant of Ipomoea nil that fails to undergo 
colour change on maturity and remains purple. 
­Fukada-Tanaka et al. (2000) confirmed that the dif­
ference between purple mutant and blue wild type 
tissue was entirely due to a difference in pH, with the 
mutant tissue retaining a pH about 0.7 lower than 
wild type petals. Isolation of the gene perturbed in 
the purple mutant, InNHX1, confirmed that it en­
coded a protein with strong sequence similarity to 
Arabidopsis and rice vacuolar Na+/H+ exchangers. 
The InNHX1 transcript is most abundant in petals 
12 hours prior to bud opening, an expression pat­
tern that is strongly correlated with the timing of 
change in colour (Yamaguchi et al. 2001). A similar 
gene, InNHX2, was also isolated from floral cDNA, 
and was also found to increase in expression levels 
in the 12 hours before bud opening. Using mutant 
strains of yeast sensitive to cation presence, Ohni­
shi et al. (2005) demonstrated that both InNHX1 and 
InNHX2 catalyse the transport of both Na+ and K+ 

196      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
petal cells, more similar to those of the leaf epider­
mis (see Fig. 17.3b). The significance of the conical-
papillate cells in enhancing colour is shown by the 
fact that the mixta mutant was originally identi­
fied in a screen of mutagenized plants because 
it was paler in colour than wild type flowers (see 
Fig. 17.3c). The mutant petal has a matt appearance, 
unlike the velvety sparkle of the wild type petal 
(Noda et al. 1994).
By comparing the ability of epidermal cells to fo­
cus light in the wild type and mixta mutant lines, 
conical-papillate cells have been shown to enhance 
visible pigmentation. Conical-papillate cells focus 
light approximately twice as well as the mutant flat 
cells, and they focus it into the region of the epi­
dermis where the pigment is contained (Gorton and 
Vogelmann 1996). It has also been shown that the 
wild type Antirrhinum petals reflected significantly 
less light away from the flower than mixta mutant 
petals did, and absorbed significantly more light. 
These differences can be attributed to the focus­
ing of the light on to the pigments in the epider­
mal cells, and to the reduction in reflection of light 
at low angles of incidence, resulting in the greater 
depth of colour of wild type conical-celled flowers 
(Gorton and Vogelmann 1996). This trick is used by 
many plant species to enhance petal colour.
Isolation of the MIXTA gene revealed that it 
encodes a MYB transcription factor, presumably 
responsible for the activation of structural genes 
involved in cytoskeletal arrangement and cell wall 
deposition (Noda et al. 1994). Transgenic experi­
ments have demonstrated that the MIXTA protein is 
sufficient to activate the conical-papillate cell form, 
even when expressed in other tissues, such as the 
leaf (Glover et al. 1998).
The mixta mutant has been used to test the idea 
that conical-papillate petal cells, and the brighter 
colour that they generate, enhance pollination suc­
cess. Plants of the wild type and mixta mutant lines 
were grown in a field plot and the stamens were re­
moved from the flowers to prevent self-pollination. 
The subsequent development of fruit was used as 
an indicator of a pollinator visit. The shape of the 
petal cells had a highly significant effect on the 
likelihood of fruit set (and thus a pollinator visit). 
Flat-celled flowers set significantly fewer fruits than 
conical-papillate celled flowers (Glover and Martin 
the vacuolar membrane (and possibly also to the 
plasma membrane, the more usual localization of 
this type of transporter). The PH5 protein was able 
to complement a yeast mutant with defects in two 
genes encoding H+-ATPase. The transcription fac­
tors AN1 and PH4 interact with the WDR protein 
AN11 to activate transcription of PH5. However, 
ectopic expression of PH5 in an an1 or ph4 mutant 
background could not fully restore wild type pH, 
indicating that the transcription factors also regu­
late the expression of other genes with a role in 
vacuolar acidification (Verweij et al. 2008).
Yamaguchi et al. (2001) isolated the petunia ortho­
logue of the InNHX1 gene, responsible for increased 
pH of the Ipomoea nil flower, but found no particu­
larly strong expression of the gene in petals. This is 
unsurprising, considering that petunia employs an 
opposite mechanism to that of Ipomoea, namely an 
active reduction in petal pH.
17.6  The role of petal cell shape
A very subtle way in which the colour of a petal can 
be enhanced is by distribution of specialized cell 
types in the epidermal layers. In a study that exam­
ined the surface structures of 201 species of flower 
from 60 families, 79% were found to have some 
form of cone-shaped cells on the epidermis oriented 
towards potential pollinators, described as conical-
papillate cells (Kay et al. 1981). The frequency of 
this specialized cell morphology within the flower­
ing plants, and its almost universal restriction to the 
petal, argue for an adaptive explanation involving 
the function of the petal in pollinator attraction. It 
was proposed that conical-papillate cells increased 
the amount of light absorbed by the pigments in 
flowers, enhancing the perceived colour of the petal 
(Kay et al. 1981). Conical-papillate cells might also 
scatter light reflected back from the inner layers of 
the petal more evenly than would flat cells, result­
ing in a sparkling effect, or a velvety texture to the 
petal.
In Antirrhinum, the conical-papillate cells (see 
Fig. 17.3a) are found only on the adaxial epider­
mis of the petal lobes (where they will be seen by 
potential pollinators as they approach the flower). 
The mixta mutant of Antirrhinum fails to develop 
conical-papillate petal cells and instead has flat 

Enhancing flower colour      197
of increased grip, or cues to pollinator position on 
the flower. It has long been known that bees can be 
trained to recognize the petals of different species 
by the shape of the cells. Bees were provided with 
a food reward when they touched epidermal layers 
composed of certain cell types, but no reward when 
they touched cells of other shapes. They learned 
very quickly to associate the reward with the texture 
of the petal, and would search for food only when 
presented with the epidermal tissue that usually ac­
companied the reward (Kevan and Lane 1985). Re­
cent experiments with resin casts of wild type and 
mixta mutant Antirrhinum petals confirmed that 
bees can discriminate between them using touch 
alone. More significantly, bee preference for coni­
cal epidermal surfaces was stronger when artificial 
flowers were presented vertically rather than hori­
zontally (Whitney et al. 2009a). When the same ex­
periment was repeated with Antirrhinum flowers, it 
was found that the preference for the wild type line 
was lost when flowers were presented horizontally 
1998). However, a similar result was observed when 
conical-papillate celled white Antirrhinum flow­
ers were compared with flat-celled/white flowers 
(both generated by crossing wild type and mixta 
mutant lines to the nivea mutant, which lacks chal­
cone synthase and thus all of flavonoid synthesis). 
Although conical-papillate and flat-celled surfaces 
were identical to the human eye in the absence of 
pigmentation, the flat-celled flowers experienced 
reduced fruit set and a reduction in pollinator visits 
(Glover and Martin 1998). These data provided the 
first indication that enhanced colour was unlikely 
to be the main explanation for the evolutionary suc­
cess of conical-papillate cells, and more recent ex­
periments have confirmed that bumblebees have no 
intrinsic preference for the wild type Antirrhinum 
colour compared with the mixta mutant (Dyer et al. 
2007).
An alternative explanation for the specialized 
shape of petal epidermal cells is that the texture of 
a flower may provide tactile benefits in the form 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 17.3  Petal cell shape affects flower 
colour. (a) Wild type Antirrhinum petal 
epidermis, composed of conical cells. (b) mixta 
mutant petal epidermis, composed of flat 
cells. (c) Wild type (left) and mixta mutant 
(right) flowers, showing the difference in 
colour attributable to the cell shape. See also 
Plate 19.

198      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
film interference occurring at the surface where 
the petrol and water (or detergent and air) meet 
causes reflection of rainbow colours, which vary 
with the angle of observation—they are iridescent. 
Structural colours are well known in the animal 
kingdom, where butterflies, beetles, and birds com­
monly produce bright and iridescent effects using 
nanoscale structures. Whitney et al. (2009b) pub­
lished the first report of structural colour in flow­
ers, on the petals of Hibiscus trionum (Malvales) and 
various tulip species and cultivars. Recent work in 
my laboratory has confirmed that the same struc­
tures are widespread throughout the angiosperms. 
In these flowers, colour is produced by a diffraction 
grating—a series of regular folds of the cuticle on 
top of flat petal epidermal cells. These folds act in 
the same way as the data grooves on a compact disc 
to reflect different wavelengths of light at different 
angles. The rainbow effect is most visible on a dark-
pigmented background, such as that of the ‘Queen 
of the Night’ tulip variety (see Fig. 17.4a and b). The 
developmental control of these cuticular folds is not 
yet well understood, but is likely to involve coordi­
nation of the timing and amount of cuticle synthesis 
relative to the timing and anisotropy of cell growth. 
Whitney et al. (2009b) demonstrated that the irides­
cence arising from a diffraction grating could be 
learned by bumblebees as a cue to identify reward­
ing flowers.
Structural effects can act more subtly to enhance 
pigment colour, as we have seen with conical cells. 
Highly glossy surfaces can be produced by the 
presence of a very smooth, flat cuticle layer, and 
effective light scattering can be achieved by larger-
scale disordered structures, such as conical cells. 
One particularly impressive example of structural 
enhancement of pigment colour is shown by the 
buttercup, Ranunculus repens (Ranunculales) (see 
Fig. 17.4c and d). In the common children’s game, 
reflection of yellow light from the buttercup flow­
er on to the chin signals that the child likes butter. 
In fact, Vignolini et al. (2012) demonstrated that 
the strong yellow reflection stems from a dou­
ble mirror system within the buttercup petal. The 
smooth cuticle layer acts as a mirror, reflecting a 
significant portion of light away before it enters the 
petal. Such light as does enter passes through the 
so that bees could land on them easily. Similarly, Al­
corn et al. (2012) showed that bumblebee preference 
for the wild type conical-celled form of petunia over 
the flat-celled ph1mutant was increased when the 
flowers were gently shaken (on a lab shaking plat­
form). These recent studies suggest that, although 
conical cells do visibly enhance flower colour, their 
primary adaptive function might be to enhance pol­
linator grip on the flower.
A third way in which conical cells might be per­
ceived as adaptations to enhance the attractiveness 
of the petal is through a role in regulating intrafloral 
microclimate. The temperature within a flower has 
been shown to influence nectar secretion rate, nectar 
evaporation rate, and nectar concentration. It may 
also influence scent diffusion. There is also some ev­
idence to suggest that a high intrafloral temperature 
is itself attractive to insects, particularly in cooler 
climates and at dawn (Dyer et al. 2006). Analyses of 
intrafloral temperature have demonstrated small, 
variable, but sometimes significant differences be­
tween the wild type and mixta mutant lines of An­
tirrhinum under different conditions (Comba et al. 
2000; Whitney et al. 2011).
Finally, conical petal epidermal cells can also in­
fluence the degree of petal reflexing and thus the 
apparent surface area of the petal. This change in 
apparent surface area may play a role in enhancing 
flower visibility at a distance.
It is likely that conical petal cells influence pol­
linator behaviour through each of these different 
methods in different species. However, in the con­
text of flower colour, it is certainly clear that conical 
petal epidermal cells do enhance the appearance of 
anthocyanin by focusing light into the cell vacuoles.
17.7  Structural colour and structural 
enhancement of colour
A final way in which plants can enhance the col­
our of their flowers is through the use of nanoscale 
structures. ‘Structural colour’ is the production of 
colour by a transparent material that interferes with 
incident light as a result of its nanoscale characteris­
tics. The most familiar examples are those of petrol 
on a puddle, or a soap bubble. In both cases, thin 

ENHANCING FLOWER COLOUR    199
  The complexity of the many ways of altering 
fi nal fl ower colour has added support to the idea 
that colour is intricately linked to the attraction of 
specifi c pollinators. In the next section of this book 
we shall consider the lability of fl oral form, and 
whether pollinators and plants are really linked in 
an evolving series of specifi c relationships. 
carotenoid-containing epidermal layer, which ab-
sorbs wavelengths other than yellow. This yellow 
light is then refl ected back from a second mirror, a 
thin air interface that separates the epidermis from 
a diffusive starch-containing layer of cells below. 
The yellow light joins with the refl ected white light 
to give a very strong beam of colour. 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Chin
Sunlight
+/– 15º
Ranunculus
flower
 Figure 17.4    Structural colour. (a) Tulip ‘Queen of the Night’ has iridescent rainbow colours on top of purple pigmentation. (b) This iridescent 
effect is caused by a diffraction grating. (c) The bright yellow buttercup reﬂ ects yellow light very strongly. (d) The buttercup acts as a double mirror, 
reﬂ ecting yellow and white light together on to nearby surfaces such as a child’s chin. See also Plate 20. 

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 18
Lability of floral form
This section of the book is focused on the changes 
that can occur to floral form, and on the effects of 
those changes on pollinator behaviour. In Chapters 
15, 16, and 17 we discussed the molecular genetic 
and developmental processes that lead to a diverse 
range of floral forms, considering size, shape, sym­
metry, and colour. In each of these contexts we 
considered the generation of a particular floral 
morphology in the species in which it has been best 
studied. However, to understand whether floral 
form is sufficiently labile in an evolutionary sense 
to respond to shifts in pollinator type or preference, 
generating the sorts of pollination syndromes that 
were discussed in Chapter 14, we need to look at 
change in floral form between closely related spe­
cies and at repeated evolution of traits across the 
angiosperm phylogeny. In this chapter, then, we 
shall take key aspects of floral form and discuss the 
evidence that they are evolutionarily labile. Where 
traits are shown to change repeatedly we shall also 
discuss what is known about the molecular genetic 
basis of morphological evolution. In many cases 
these molecular genetic data are limited by the lack 
of genomic resources available for the comparator 
species, or by their genetically intractable nature. 
However, despite these difficulties, great advances 
in understanding floral lability have been made in 
recent years.
18.1  Lability of floral size
Flower size is enormously variable across the an­
giosperms, spanning a range varying from less than 
1 millimetre in some aquatic plants to the 1 metre 
diameter of the giant flowers of Rafflesia (Malpighi­
ales). Changes in flower size are often generally 
correlated with changes in plant size, changes in 
ploidy level, and changes in habitat. They may also 
be involved in trade-offs with flower number. Sar­
gent et  al. (2007) explored flower size and flower 
number in 251 species from 63 families, and found 
a significant negative correlation between the size 
and number of flowers. However, specific changes 
just to flower size can indicate a shift in breeding 
system or pollinator type. For example, selfing 
flowers are usually smaller than outcrossers, and 
bat-pollinated flowers are often larger than insect-
pollinated ones (although it should be noted that 
the very largest flowers of all are often pollinated 
by beetles or by carrion flies, possibly as a result of 
unusually specific selective pressures; Davis et al. 
2008). A recent analysis of flower size across a plant 
group was conducted in several genera of the coffee 
family, Rubiaceae (in the Gentianales), where flower 
size varies between approximately 2 mm in length 
and 40–50 mm in length (Razafimandimbison et al. 
2012). The authors mapped flower size on to a 
phylogeny of the group, finding that large flowers 
were ancestral and that small flowers had probably 
evolved only once. Small flowers in this system are 
associated with a shift to pollinators with a shorter 
proboscis, particularly small bees and flies.
In Chapter 15 we discussed the control of flower 
size, noting that cell division and cell expansion 
were closely co-regulated to ensure reproducibility 
of organ size. However, a number of examples of 
proteins that could decouple these processes were 
discussed, and these represent candidate loci for 
molecular changes that might underlie the lability 
of flower size. Analysis of the developmental basis 
of smaller flowers in a number of selfers has con­
cluded either that the duration of flower growth 
has been reduced, or that the rate of flower growth 
has decreased. For example, Sicard et al. (2011) 

Lability of floral form      201
expression of the CYC and DICH orthologues ter­
minates much earlier than it does in Antirrhinum, 
possibly contributing to the reduced zygomorphy 
of the corolla (Hileman et al. 2003). A more extreme 
example of loss of zygomorphy in the Lamiales is 
seen in wind-pollinated Plantago species, where 
Preston et al. (2011) were unable to identify ortho­
logues of RAD and DIV, and also found loss of a 
dorsally expressed CYC-like gene. They concluded 
that the entire floral symmetry gene network had 
disintegrated in this genus, associated with the shift 
from insect to wind pollination.
demonstrated that the reduction in petal size that 
accompanied the evolution of selfing in Capsella 
rubella (Brassicales) can be attributed to a shorter 
period of cell division than is seen in outcrossing 
Capsella grandiflora. The duration of the cell division 
window has previously been shown to be impor­
tant in regulating organ size in Arabidopsis, and is 
controlled by the AINTEGUMENTA transcription 
factor (Mizukami and Fischer 2000). In Capsella, 
quantitative trait loci (QTL) analysis suggests that 
multiple loci interact to determine flower size, but it 
is likely that at least some of them encode the regu­
lators of organ size, such as AINTEGUMENTA (dis­
cussed in Chapter 15).
18.2  Lability of floral symmetry
Floral symmetry is generally classified in a binary 
fashion, as either actinomorphic (radially sym­
metrical) or zygomorphic (bilaterally symmetrical), 
although there is considerable variation between 
flowers in the extent of zygomorphy and the num­
bers of organ whorls it encompasses. The develop­
mental genetic basis of zygomorphy in Antirrhinum 
was discussed in Chapter 15. Dorsal identity is 
attributed to the action of a recently duplicated 
pair of TCP family transcription factors (CYC and 
DICH) and a MYB transcription factor (RAD), while 
another MYB protein (DIV) provides ventralizing 
signals (see Section 15.2 for a full description; Luo 
et al. 1996; Galego and Almeida 2002; Corley et al. 
2005). Within the same tribe as Antirrhinum (the 
Antirrhineae, all part of the Lamiales), many spe­
cies show much reduced or expanded zygomorphy 
compared with that of Antirrhinum, reflecting the 
evolutionary lability of the degree of zygomorphy 
(see Fig. 18.1). For example, the corolla of Mabrya 
acerifolia has almost complete actinomorphy. The 
flower of Mohavea confertiflora aborts the top three 
stamens (i.e. the dorsal and both lateral stamens), 
not just the dorsal one, but its corolla shows little 
deviation from radial symmetry. These differences 
have been correlated with differences in the expres­
sion patterns of the CYC and DICH orthologues. 
Unlike the situation in Antirrhinum, both genes in 
Mohavea are expressed in the lateral stamen primor­
dia as well as in the dorsal one, resulting in the abor­
tion of all three stamens. However, in the petals the 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 18.1  Variation in zygomorphy in the Antirrhineae. 
(a) Highly zygomorphic Antirrhinum majus. (b) Moderately 
zygomorphic Maurandya scandens. (c) Slightly zygomorphic Mabrya 
acerifolia. (d) Almost actinomorphic Rhodochiton atrosanguineum. 
All scale bars 1 cm. See also Plate 21.

202      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
in petal development when differential growth was 
most apparent. In the Dipsacales, Howarth et al. 
(2011) showed that CYC2 was expressed through­
out the corolla in radially symmetrical Viburnum 
plicatum, but restricted to the dorsal, or dorsal and 
lateral, petals in related zygomorphic species. Simi­
larly, Zhang et al. (2010, 2012) showed that CYC-like 
genes were dorsally expressed in several zygomor­
phic species of the Malpighiales, but either absent, 
barely expressed, or expressed throughout the floral 
meristem in related actinomorphic species. These 
studies all provide evidence both for independent 
recruitment of CYC-like genes to the development 
of zygomorphy and for the lability of floral sym­
metry, occurring through changes to the function or 
expression of CYC-like genes.
The evolution of zygomorphy has been studied in 
less depth in the monocots. CYC itself is not present 
in monocots, as it is derived from a gene duplica­
tion event at the base of the core eudicots (Howarth 
and Donoghue 2006). However, related TCP fam­
ily members have been shown to have asymmetric 
expression patterns in monocot flowers. Bartlett 
and Specht (2011) demonstrated that zygomorphic 
flowers from the Zingiberales had ventral-specific 
expression of genes encoding TCP transcription fac­
tors, while Preston and Hileman (2012) showed that 
similar genes were ventrally expressed in zygomor­
phic flowers of Commelina but expressed throughout 
the floral meristem of actinomorphic Tradescantia 
(both Commelinales). Preston and Hileman (2012) 
also showed asymmetric expression of B function 
genes in Commelina, supporting the hypothesis that 
differential expression of floral organ identity genes 
might be partially responsible for zygomorphy in 
monocot flowers, including orchids (Mondragon-
Palomino and Theissen 2008).
Variation in floral symmetry is a hallmark of 
the composite inflorescences produced by mem­
bers of the Asteraceae (Asterales). For example, 
garden daisies have both zygomorphic flowers 
(the outer white ones) and actinomorphic flowers 
(the central yellow ones). More complex capitula 
show a variety of intermediate floral forms, rang­
ing from extremely zygomorphic through mildly 
zygomorphic to actinomorphic. The zygomorphic 
flowers in a daisy capitulum are known as ray flo­
rets, and the actinomorphic flowers as disc florets. 
Zygomorphy has evolved approximately 38 times 
from actinomorphy across the angiosperm phyloge­
ny, and is a hallmark of some of the most species-rich 
plant groups (Endress 2001). Work on the evolution­
ary lability of floral symmetry has focused on as­
sessing whether evolution of zygomorphy involves 
repeated recruitment of the same molecular compo­
nents to direct similar developmental programmes, 
or whether different developmental pathways ap­
ply in different taxa (Cubas 2003). Within the Fa­
bales, reports from Lotus japonicus, Lupinus nanus, 
and Pisum sativum indicate that CYC-like genes have 
been recruited to the development of zygomorphy 
in this order and are also involved in shifts of floral 
symmetry within it. The LjCYC2 gene was isolated 
from Lotus japonicus by Feng et al. (2006) and shown 
to be expressed in the dorsal part of developing 
flowers, just as CYC itself is in Antirrhinum. Loss of 
LjCYC2 expression resulted in ventralization of the 
dorsal petal, while ectopic expression of LjCYC2 re­
sulted in dorsalization of the lateral and ventral pet­
als. Wang et al. (2008) took a neutral, non-candidate 
approach and isolated genes from mutants of pea 
(Pisum sativum) with perturbations in floral sym­
metry. They discovered that mutations in PsCYC2 
and PsCYC3 were responsible for the observed 
phenotypes, and further showed that PsCYC1 also 
has a dorsal-specific expression pattern. Similarly, 
Citerne et al. (2006) showed that a CYC-like gene 
was expressed in the dorsal part of the developing 
flower of Lupinus nanus. Surprisingly, however, the 
radially symmetrical phenotype of a close relative, 
Cadia purpurea, was not caused by loss of expression 
of this CYC-like gene, but by its ectopic expression 
throughout the developing flower. Therefore CYC-
like genes have not only been recruited to specify 
floral zygomorphy in the Fabales (a separate evo­
lutionary origin of zygomorphy to that of Antirrhi­
num), but also their ectopic expression has resulted 
in a novel phenotype—dorsalization of the ventral 
organs and therefore actinomorphy of whole flow­
ers within this group.
A number of similar studies have reported that 
CYC-like genes are involved in various independ­
ent transitions to zygomorphy across the eudicots. 
In the Brassicales, Busch and Zachgo (2007) showed 
that zygomorphic Iberis amara had strongly dorsal-
specific expression of IaTCP1, a CYC-like gene, late 

Lability of floral form      203
RAY locus. Surprisingly, constitutive expression of 
one of these genes, RAY1, in radiate Senecio vulgaris 
resulted in shortening and reduced zygomorphy of 
the ray florets. Constitutive expression of RAY2 in­
creased the ventralization of the ray florets, making 
them tubular and more actinomorphic. A similar 
system was reported in Gerbera hybrida, where there 
is a gradual transition in floret zygomorphy from 
the outer ray florets to the central disc florets. Bro­
holm et al. (2008) showed that GhCYC2 is expressed 
in a gradient, being most strongly expressed in the 
outer regions of the developing capitulum, and 
barely detectable in the central regions. Constitu­
tive expression of GhCYC2 induced zygomorphy in 
the central disc florets. In Helianthus annuus (sun­
flower), double-flowered mutants, in which some or 
all of the disc florets are converted to a zygomor­
phic form, have been linked to capitulum-wide ex­
pression of HaCYC2c, which is usually expressed 
only in the outer whorl of ray florets (see Fig. 18.2; 
Zygomorphy in daisies has been studied in Sene­
cio, Gerbera, and Helianthus, and differential ex­
pression of duplicated CYC-like genes appears to 
be responsible for the different floral symmetries. 
Senecio vulgaris has been a useful system in which 
to study daisy floret symmetry because in the UK it 
is found in two forms—a radiate morph, which has 
both zygomorphic ray florets and actinomorphic 
disc florets, and a non-radiate morph, which has 
only actinomorphic disc florets. The non-radiate 
form is believed to be ancestral, while the radiate 
form is thought to have arisen by introgression of 
genetic material from Senecio squalidus (the Oxford 
ragwort, a non-native but naturalized species with 
both actinomorphic and zygomorphic flowers; Ab­
bott et al. 1992). The ray floret trait segregates as a 
single locus (the RAY locus), and Kim et al. (2008) 
showed that different alleles of two CYC-like genes 
segregated with presence or absence of ray florets, 
and that these CYC-like genes were linked to the 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 18.2  Variation in zygomorphic and 
actinomorphic florets in sunflower. (a) Wild 
type sunflower has zygomorphic ray florets 
surrounding actinomorphic disc florets. 
(b) A double-flowered mutant has 
zygomorphic florets throughout the 
capitulum. (c) In the wild type sunflower 
(left), HaCYC2c is expressed only in the 
outer florets (grey colour), but in the 
double-flowered mutant (right) it is 
expressed throughout the capitulum. 
Figures (a) and (b) kindly provided by Mark 
Chapman (University of Southampton).

204      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
the flowers with the longest spurs are pollinated 
by hawkmoths. By mapping spur length and pol­
linator type on to a phylogeny of the genus, Whit­
tall and Hodges (2007) showed that spur lengths 
in Aquilegia had increased over evolutionary time, 
and that the majority of spur length increase was 
associated with shifts from one pollinator type to 
another. The authors concluded that spur length 
evolution proceeded in a series of steps, with rapid 
evolutionary change associated with a change of 
range bringing a new combination of plant and pol­
linator into contact. Lability of nectar spur length 
has also been studied in a number of different or­
chid (Asparagales) groups. Box et al. (2008) mapped 
spur length on to a phylogeny of the Orchidinae, 
and established that the short spurs of Gymnadenia 
odoratissima and G. austriaca were derived by an 
earlier termination of spur growth in comparison 
with the ancestral long-spurred species G. conop­
sea (see Fig. 18.3). They also showed that the short 
spur of Dactylorhiza viridis was derived in a simi­
lar way relative to the long-spurred D. fuchsii. Spur 
length is highly variable in another orchid, Disa 
draconis, with populations in different habitats of 
South Africa showing significantly different spur 
lengths associated with different pollinator types. 
Johnson and Steiner (1997) showed that plants on 
a lowland sand plain had spurs on average 48 mm 
in length, and were pollinated by a tanglewing fly 
with a proboscis 57 mm long. Artificial shortening 
of these spurs reduced pollen receipt and fruit set in 
this population. However, mountain populations of 
the same plant had spurs around 35 mm in length, 
Chapman et al. 2012). The same authors conducted 
a phylogenetic analysis of CYC-like genes in the 
Asteraceae, concluding that sunflower contained 
at least 10 members of the family, and that differ­
ent members of the gene family had been shown to 
influence zygomorphy in Gerbera, Senecio, and Heli­
anthus. The size of the CYC-like gene family in the 
Asteraceae is most probably attributable to a whole 
genome duplication at the base of the family, and 
subsequent subfunctionalization and neofunction­
alization of these genes in different lineages may be 
partially responsible for the variety of floret symme­
try and organization produced by different daisies.
18.3  Lability of nectar spur length
Nectar spurs have been described as a key innova­
tion, facilitating pollinator specificity and subse­
quent plant reproductive isolation and speciation. 
In many different plant groups the presence or 
length of nectar spurs is apparently highly labile. 
For example, in the Antirrhineae, nectar spurs are 
variously long, short, or absent, and even within a 
single genus of the tribe, Linaria, nectar spur length 
varies from a few millimetres to several centimetres. 
These differences in spur length, and those in many 
other groups, have often been assumed to corre­
late with shifts between pollinators with different 
proboscis lengths. The North American species in 
the genus Aquilegia (Ranunculales) display a great 
variety of spur lengths. The shorter-spurred spe­
cies are generally bee pollinated, the mid-length-
spurred species are hummingbird pollinated, and 
(a)
(b)
Figure 18.3  Variation in nectar spur 
length. (a) Gymnadenia conopsea flowers 
have very long nectar spurs. (b) Gymnadenia 
rhellicani flowers have almost no nectar 
spur. Images kindly provided by Matt 
Box (Sainsbury Laboratory, Cambridge 
University). See also Plate 22.

Lability of floral form      205
observed in any garden. Breeders have used the 
variation in flower colour present in many species 
to select a range of horticultural varieties in differ­
ent colours. Across the angiosperms, flower colour 
varies enormously. If we look more closely within 
families or genera it is also possible to see a great 
variety of flower colour, with evolutionary transi­
tions between colour types. Within Antirrhinum the 
most common colours are ivory, yellow, and ma­
genta, but various shades of pink, pink and ivory 
patterns, and even purple (in New World species) 
are observed. Similarly, within Linaria, species are 
found with white, yellow, pink, and purple flowers, 
and in Aquilegia, flowers can be red, yellow, blue, or 
white. The direction of change in flower colour in 
Aquilegia is associated with shifts in pollinator type. 
The work by Whittall and Hodges (2007) on nec­
tar spur evolution in the genus indicated that there 
have been multiple shifts from bee to hummingbird 
pollination, and from hummingbird to moth polli­
nation. Many of these shifts in pollinator type are 
associated with shifts in flower colour. Seven in­
dependent losses of anthocyanin production have 
been inferred in the genus (producing white or yel­
low flowers, associated with moth pollinators), and 
four transitions between red and blue anthocyanin 
(two in each direction) (Whittall et al. 2006; Hodges 
and Derieg 2009). In one of these independent loss­
es of anthocyanin production, Whittall et al. (2006) 
reported that genes encoding enzymes acting late 
in anthocyanin biosynthesis, such as DFR and ANS, 
were downregulated, suggesting that the pheno­
typic shift and consequent pollinator shift was at­
tributable to changes in a transcriptional regulator 
of anthocyanin pathway genes.
Perhaps the best studied case of lability of flower 
colour within a genus, associated with a shift in pol­
linator type, is that of Mimulus (Lamiales). In a land­
mark paper (discussed in more detail in Chapter 20), 
Bradshaw and Schemske reciprocally introgressed 
the carotenoid-inducing YUP allele from M. cardi­
nalis into M. lewisii, and the carotenoid-­repressing 
YUP allele from M. lewisii into M. cardinalis (see Fig­
ure 20.2; see also Chapter 20). The parental species 
are pollinated primarily by hummingbirds (red/
orange M. cardinalis) and bumblebees (pink M. 
lewisii), respectively, but the novel-coloured lines 
experienced significantly increased visitation from 
pollinated by a horsefly with a proboscis 22–35 mm 
long. This divergent response to pollinator-induced 
selection for different spur lengths is a likely driver 
of speciation in many different plant groups.
Analysis of the molecular events underlying evo­
lutionary change in nectar spur development has 
been hampered by the lack of clear information 
on how the spur is built in any model system. In 
Section 15.4 we discussed the data from the Antir­
rhineae (Linaria and two spurred mutants of Antir­
rhinum), which suggest that KNOX genes might 
be important in regulating ectopic cell division to 
initiate nectar spur formation. However, these data 
are circumstantial and not yet well supported by 
matching data from other systems. Box et al. (2012) 
followed up their analysis of spur ontogeny in 
Dactylorhiza fuchsii by identifying KNOX genes ex­
pressed in the developing flower and demonstrat­
ing that ectopic expression of one of these genes in 
tobacco (a very distantly related model, in the Sola­
nales) could induce petal tube outgrowth. Howev­
er, the orchids are a genetically intractable system, 
and it is unlikely that more definitive evidence will 
emerge from these studies. In contrast, the variation 
in spur length within Linaria provides an opportu­
nity to explore correlations between KNOX gene 
expression and spur development within an evo­
lutionary context (B. J. Glover, unpublished data). 
Although KNOX genes have been implicated in the 
initiation of nectar spur growth, it is clear that the 
majority of spur length in both Linaria and Aquilegia 
is attributable to cell expansion, not cell division, 
which suggests that other genes might be responsi­
ble for evolutionary changes in nectar spurs. In Aq­
uilegia, Puzey et al. (2012) found that differences in 
anisotropic cell expansion accounted for the meas­
urable differences in spur morphology between 
species, suggesting that the molecular drivers of 
spur lability might be genes involved in determin­
ing cell shape.
18.4  Lability of flower colour
The synthesis of floral pigments was described in 
Chapter 16, and a variety of ways in which flower 
colour can be modified were discussed in Chap­
ter 17. The colour of flowers is an extremely labile 
trait, as can be seen from the great diversity of hues 

206      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
the evolution of flower colour and pattern has also 
been studied in this genus. The European species of 
Antirrhinum do not produce blue-toned anthocya­
nins, but a North American species of the Antirrhi­
neae known variously as A. kelloggii, Neogaerrhinum 
strictum, and Asarina stricta does. It is not clear that 
this plant does fall within the genus Antirrhinum, 
but various phylogenies place it as sister to the 
European Antirrhinum group. Ishiguro et al. (2012) 
found that A. kelloggii contains two functional copies 
of a gene encoding F3′5′H, which have apparently 
been lost from the European section of Antirrhinum. 
These genes were shown to act in petunia (Solana­
les) to increase delphinidin synthesis, confirming 
their role in hydroxylation of the anthocyanin mole­
cule. Within the European Antirrhinum complex, the 
variation in flower colour between yellow, magenta, 
and ivory is thought to be primarily controlled by 
three loci—ROSEA and ELUTA, encoding MYB 
transcription factors (see Section 17.3.2 in Chapter 
17), and SULFUREA, which has not yet been iso­
lated (Schwinn et al. 2006). It is difficult to assess 
the direction of evolutionary change within the 
European section of Antirrhinum, as the radiation 
within the group is relatively recent. However, Whi­
bley et al. (2006) explored the genetic basis of flower 
colour variation between sympatric A. majus subsp. 
pseudomajus (magenta) and A. majus subsp. striatum 
(yellow), and found that they expressed different al­
leles of ROS, EL, and SULF. Crosses between these 
subspecies resulted in some orange flowers in the 
F2, but Whibley et al. (2006) hypothesized that this 
colour morph was not found in wild Antirrhinum 
species because it was unattractive to pollinating 
bees, suggesting that this mechanism might main­
tain reproductive isolation between A. majus subsp. 
pseudomajus and A. majus subsp. striatum. Many of 
the ivory-flowered European species of Antirrhi­
num have anthocyanic veins. This venation pattern 
is regulated by another MYB transcription factor, 
VENOSA (see Section 17.3.2 in Chapter 17; Shang 
et al. 2011), and is only visible in a background that 
is not fully anthocyanic. Shang et al. (2011) proposed 
that the veined form of Antirrhinum was ancestral 
to the fully pigmented form, with at least two shifts 
to full red flowers within the genus. Their pol­
linator studies, along with those of Whitney et al. 
(2013), suggested that veined flowers were visited 
the ‘wrong’ pollinator. The authors concluded that 
this particular flower colour polymorphism was at­
tributable to mutation at a single locus, and that it 
had significant effects on the identity of pollinators 
attracted to the flowers.
The vast majority of studied instances of an evo­
lutionary transition in flower colour are the result 
of loss of function of either a regulator of the an­
thocyanin pathway or of part of the pathway it­
self. Wessinger and Rausher (2012) reported that, 
although many white-flowered mutants have been 
found to have lesions in genes encoding anthocya­
nin biosynthetic enzymes, of the recorded cases of 
fixation of a white allele in a population or spe­
cies all examples involved changes to the activity 
of a regulatory transcription factor. Those authors 
also investigated colour shifts between blue and 
red, noting that the great majority of such transi­
tions involved the loss of blue pigmentation, usu­
ally through degradation of the gene encoding 
flavanone 3′5′ hydroxylase (F3′5′H; see Chapter 
16). From these data it is apparent that flower col­
our shifts usually involve loss of part of an estab­
lished pigmentation pathway, and occur relatively 
frequently. For example, Smith and Rausher (2011) 
observed that there have been two shifts from blue 
flowers to red flowers in the genus Iochroma (Sola­
nales), one of which (in I. gesnerioides) they attrib­
uted to deletion of the gene encoding F3′5′H along 
with downregulation of the gene encoding F3′H. 
However, in Phlox drummondii (Ericales) a unique 
gain of function allele has been reported (Hopkins 
and Rausher 2011). A dark red flowered form of P. 
drummondii, which usually has light blue flowers, 
is found in populations in the southern USA grow­
ing sympatrically with blue-flowered P. cuspidata. 
The novel colour morph of P. drummondii, which 
acts to reinforce reproductive isolation between P. 
cuspidata and P. drummondii, is the result of two mo­
lecular changes. Loss of the gene encoding F3′5′H 
is responsible for the loss of blue tone to the antho­
cyanin, as in previous studies. However, the intense 
dark red of the novel morph was attributed to gain 
of an allele that conferred stronger expression of a 
MYB regulator of anthocyanin synthesis.
Given that much of our understanding of the ba­
sic anthocyanin synthetic pathway is derived from 
work in Antirrhinum majus, it is not surprising that 

Lability of floral form      207
in the ancestor of the genus, and on the mechanisms 
that might underlie their loss and positional change 
in various species and subspecies.
18.5  Lability of epidermal morphology
In Section 17.6 of Chapter 17 we discussed the idea 
that epidermal cell shape could influence flower 
colour, temperature, and the grip offered to forag­
ing insects. The presence of conical-papillate petal 
epidermal cells is a trait that is apparently ancient 
within the angiosperm lineage, being found in Am­
borella (Amborellales) and among species such as 
Cabomba in the Nymphaeales. The MYB transcrip­
tion factor subfamily, the MIXTA-like genes (also 
known as MYB subgroup 9), which regulates the 
production of conical petal cells, is also ancient. 
Brockington et al. (2013) showed that a duplication 
event generated two subgroup 9 lineages before 
the divergence of the gymnosperms and the an­
giosperms, and that within the eudicots additional 
duplication events have occurred in both branches, 
generating four clades of genes. Analysis of the evo­
lutionary lability of petal epidermal morphology 
has focused on three transitions: the loss of conical 
by bumblebees as often as, or more often than, red 
flowers, with behavioural studies indicating that the 
cyanic veins might act as learned nectar guides.
Venation patterning is just one of a number of 
patterns of flower colour that are labile within plant 
groups. Another very variable trait is the presence 
of petal spots—that is, regions of the corolla with 
dense accumulations of pigment. These spots often 
contain a different pigment to that found through­
out the rest of the petal tissue. Martins et al. (2013) 
investigated the molecular basis of petal spot vari­
ation in Clarkia gracilis (Myrtales), in which dif­
ferent subspecies produce spots at the base of the 
petal, in the centre of the petal, or not at all. They 
found that this variation in spot morphology could 
be attributed to the interactions of two genetic loci 
that regulate expression of a duplicate copy of the 
gene encoding dihydoflavonol reductase (DFR2). 
Early expression of DFR2 in the spot region, in the 
presence of F3′H but not F3′5′H, resulted in an in­
tense spot of red cyanidin pigment. Later expres­
sion of DFR1 throughout the petal, in the presence 
of F3′5′H, resulted in malvidin production and a 
background mauve colouration (see Fig. 18.4). Petal 
spots appear to be ancestral in Clarkia, but this study 
shed useful light on how they might have evolved 
F3¢H
F3¢5¢H
F3¢H
DFR2
DFRI
DHK
DHQ
DHQ
DHM
MALVIDIN
DHQ
CYANIDIN
CYANIDIN
EARLY
LATE
DHK
Figure 18.4  Development of the Clarkia gracilis 
petal spot. Early expression of DFR2 in the spot 
region, in the presence of F3′H but not F3′5′H, 
results in red cyanidin pigment. Later expression 
of DFR1 throughout the petal, in the presence of 
F3′5′H, results in mauve malvidin production. See 
also Plate 23.

208      HOW AND WHY DOES FLORAL FORM VARY?
but in the commonly grown broad bean (Vicia faba) 
they are found only on the lateral (or wing) petals. 
These differences may reflect variation in the way 
that pollinators interact with the flower. Bradshaw 
et al. (2010) examined the epidermal surfaces of the 
labellum (the complex inner tepal in the ventral 
position) of orchids from the sexually deceptive 
genus Ophrys. They found considerable variation 
in the position, extent, and cuticular patterning of 
both conical cells and trichomes, and noted that, in 
those species with highly reflective patches at the 
centre of the labellum, the presence of this glossy 
speculum correlated with the presence of flattened 
epidermal cells. Similarly, Mudalige et al. (2003) 
showed that different species of Dendrobium orchids 
had different distributions of conical and flat cells 
on the labellum and other tepals. Analysis of the 
relationships between these morphological transi­
tions and the pollinator interactions of the different 
orchid species might provide insight into the func­
tional significance of conical cells in these highly 
specialized flowers.
Conical epidermal cells might be a defining fea­
ture of a petal to a developmental biologist, but they 
are not limited solely to petals. Across the angio­
sperms a number of groups have experienced a loss 
of animal pollination and an associated loss of pet­
als, followed by a reversion to animal pollination 
in some derived lineages. In these systems, sepals 
and/or stamens have been recruited to a role in pol­
linator attraction, and in some cases have become 
modified to be more petal-like. Di Stilio et al. (2009) 
showed that the reversion to insect pollination was 
accompanied by a gain of conical cells on the se­
pals of Thalictrum thalictroides (Ranunculales), and 
by a gain of conical cells on the stamens of T. fila­
mentosum, whereas wind-pollinated T. dioicum had 
only flat floral epidermal cells. The authors also 
showed that this gain of conical epidermal cells on 
novel organs probably occurred through the activ­
ity of MIXTA-like genes, as the expression of these 
genes coincided with the presence of conical cells 
on the sepals and stamens on the insect-­pollinated 
species, but was restricted to the carpels of the 
wind-­pollinated one. It is clear that epidermal mor­
phology is a highly labile floral trait, with numer­
ous gains, losses, and changes of position reported 
across the angiosperm lineage.
cells in response to pollinator shifts, the variation 
in conical cell distribution on petals with different 
functions, and the gain of conical cells on petaloid 
bracts and stamens.
The loss of conical cells has been reported in 
many lineages. Around 20% of petaloid angio­
sperms have petal epidermal cells that are not coni­
cal, and many of these are found in groups where 
the ancestral state is very likely to be the presence 
of conical cells. For instance, a number of species 
of Solanum (Solanales) have been found to have flat 
petal epidermal cells, possibly in response to a shift 
to buzz pollination which requires little or no petal 
handling by the bee. Similarly, flat-celled species are 
found in Nicotiana (Solanales), often associated with 
a switch to hovering moth pollinators. In the An­
tirrhineae, flat petal epidermal cells are associated 
with a shift to hovering hummingbird pollination 
(all examples from B. J. Glover, unpublished data). 
These transitions suggest that conical cells might be 
most relevant to pollinators that land on and ma­
nipulate the petals, such as bees. It has also been 
suggested that the presence of conical cells might 
correlate with flowers which are presented at angles 
that are difficult to handle, but Rands et al. (2011) 
found no evidence to support this idea. Ojeda et al. 
(2009) recorded enormous variety in the presence of 
conical cells on the different petal types (dorsal, lat­
eral, and ventral) of the zygomorphic legume flow­
ers (Fabales). The functional basis of this variation 
is not known in most cases, but in a more detailed 
study, Ojeda et al. (2012) showed that four species of 
Lotus native to the Canary Islands had lost conical 
epidermal cells from the dorsal petal, in conjunction 
with a shift from bee to bird pollination. Phyloge­
netic character mapping indicated that this loss had 
occurred only once, before the radiation of the four 
species. It is therefore likely that this evolutionary 
transition occurred when the ancestor of the four 
Lotus species colonized the Canary Islands and ac­
quired a new major pollinator.
Petal epidermal cells are not just labile in a bi­
nary presence/absence way between lineages, but 
also vary in their distribution on the different pet­
als of zygomorphic flowers, and in their positions 
within individual petals. For example, Ojeda et al. 
(2009) reported that most legume flowers had coni­
cal cells on the dorsal petal (the standard, or flag), 

Lability of floral form      209
was shown to reduce interspecific hybridization—
applying the same scent to both flowers increased 
cross-pollination. The great majority of research 
into species-level differences in floral scent and 
the consequences for pollinator attraction has been 
conducted in the orchids (Asparagales). Many or­
chids achieve pollination by food mimicry (resem­
bling a rewarding species despite producing no 
nectar) or sexual mimicry (resembling a female in­
sect to attract mate-searching males). In both cases 
the floral scent has been shown to be a key compo­
nent of the mimicry. Various studies, particularly in 
the sexually deceptive genus Ophrys, have shown 
that floral scent mixes are highly labile and specific 
to particular species, and in turn attract specific 
insect species as pollinators (reviewed by Ayasse 
et al. 2011).
Studies of evolutionary lability are necessarily 
constrained by the need for a comparative approach 
within a solid phylogenetic context. It is rare to 
find a system in which the direction of floral trait 
change can be readily mapped on to a well-resolved 
phylogeny, identifying genetically amenable sister 
species for comparison of the molecular, as well as 
ecological, correlates of the morphological change. 
However, as the examples discussed in this chapter 
show, it is certainly possible to explore the question 
of floral lability for a number of traits, if the system 
is chosen carefully. The data discussed in this chap­
ter demonstrate that floral traits can and do change, 
with mutations to the regulation or function of the 
transcription factors that control particular devel­
opmental pathways often being the source of the 
observed variation. In the next section of the book 
we shall discuss the evidence that this floral labil­
ity results in frequent occurrence of the pollination 
syndromes described in Chapter 14.
18.6  Lability of floral scent
The production of floral scent has not been dis­
cussed much in this book, but it is a trait that is 
believed to be highly labile, and which clearly has 
important associations with particular pollinators. 
The biosynthetic pathway of floral scent production 
has been well studied in a number of species, par­
ticularly in petunia (Dudareva and Pichersky 2006). 
Verdonk et al. (2005) showed that scent production 
in petunia was regulated by an MYB transcription 
factor called ODORANT 1 (ODO1). In a landmark 
paper published in 2011, Klahre et al. showed that 
the pollinator shift between moth-pollinated Petu­
nia axillaris and bird-pollinated P. exserta could be 
partly attributed to ODO1. In a cross between the 
two species, scent production (a P. axillaris trait) 
mapped to two QTLs, one of which was identified 
as ODO1. As with flower colour, it appears that the 
production of floral scent can evolve by mutation of 
the gene encoding the MYB transcription factor that 
regulates the pathway.
Various studies have shown that floral scents can 
attract specific sets of floral visitors, contributing to 
reproductive isolation and speciation. The specific­
ity of the scent can be attributed either to a specific 
compound produced by an individual species, or 
to a particular mix of more commonly occurring 
scent compounds in particular ratios. Both the pro­
duction of specific compounds and the constitution 
of floral scent mixes have been shown to be evolu­
tionarily labile across groups of plants. For exam­
ple, Waelti et al. (2007) showed that moth-pollinated 
Silene latifolia (Caryophyllales) produced floral 
scent comprising 44% monoterpenoids and 23% 
benzenoids, whereas bee- and butterfly-pollinated 
S. dioica produced 33% monoterpenoids and 46% 
benzenoids. This variation in scent composition 


PART B
The Influence of Pollinators 
on Floral Form


Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
habitat, then the limits to the reproductive success 
of an individual plant are not imposed by the pol­
lination system. If this is the case, increasing the 
showiness of the flower, or specializing in some 
way to attract a subset of pollinators, will have no 
positive effect on the plant’s fitness. Indeed, since 
pigments and elaborate petal structures are costly 
in terms of energy and key nutrients such as nitro­
gen, in the absence of a beneficial increase in seed 
set or pollen export such structures will actually 
have a negative effect on plant fitness. Elaboration 
of floral attractants only enhances the reproductive 
success of a plant if by doing so more of that plant’s 
pollen reaches an appropriate stigma, or more of its 
egg cells are fertilized by sperm from incoming pol­
len grains. If the plant is already dispersing pollen 
and being pollinated quite successfully, then there 
is no pressure to change.
Pollination competition falls into two differ­
ent categories, which have different evolutionary 
consequences. The variety that we are most con­
cerned with in this chapter is exploitation competi­
tion. Exploitation competition occurs when a plant 
receives insufficient visits by pollinators because 
one or more other plants nearby are more attrac­
tive. This situation results in the first plant setting 
less seed, or contributing fewer male gametes to 
the gene pool. The fitness of the plant is therefore 
compromised. Exploitation competition can be 
intraspecific or interspecific. When it is intraspe­
cific it may be predicted to drive elaboration of 
floral structures and increase showiness of flow­
ers. When it is interspecific it is more likely to re­
sult in pressure to alter habitat or flowering time, 
or else to specialize in attracting a smaller subset 
In the previous section of this book we discussed 
a variety of ways in which flower visibility and 
appearance can be enhanced, through changes to 
size, shape, structure, and colour. The underlying 
assumption of much of the work on flower develop­
ment and morphology is that these features serve to 
increase the attractiveness of the flower to pollinat­
ing animals, thus maximizing pollinator attention, 
and consequently seed set and fitness. As we dis­
cussed in Chapter 14, it has long been believed that 
these elaborations are the consequence of adapting 
to attract particular types of pollinating animals, re­
sulting in pollination syndromes. In Chapter 21 we 
will analyse in detail the evidence for the existence 
of these syndromes. However, before we consider 
whether pollination syndromes do exist, and in­
deed whether pollinating animals do exert selective 
pressure on floral form at all, we need to consider 
whether there is evidence that two underlying as­
sumptions are met. In Chapter 20 we will look at the 
evidence that pollinating animals actually discrimi­
nate between the traits described in the previous 
section—if they cannot or do not, then those traits 
cannot be under selective pressure unless they en­
hance pollen transfer indirectly. In this chapter we 
shall address an even more fundamental issue—do 
plants actually benefit from increased pollinator at­
tention and should floral attractiveness therefore be 
expected to increase across generations?
19.1  Competition for pollinator attention
The pollination syndrome concept rests on the idea 
that individual plants are competing for pollinator 
attention. If there is no pollen limitation in a given 
CHAPTER 19
Are flowers under selective pressure 
to increase pollinator attention?

214   INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
 19.2  Facilitation of pollination
    Attempts to identify and quantify the importance of 
pollination competition are made more diffi cult by 
the complicating factor of facilitation of pollination. 
In some cases, the presence of more fl owers nearby, 
whether of the same or different species, may ac-
tually increase the pollination success of a particu-
lar plant. Such an increase in pollination success is 
likely to be frequency dependent, and when a cer-
tain number of nearby plants is reached the balance 
will tip towards a competitive situation (illustrated 
in  Fig.   19.1  ). For example, a single individual plant 
fl owering in an otherwise barren environment may 
simply not be spotted by passing pollinators, or 
may be judged insuffi ciently rewarding to be worth 
stopping for. The addition of other plants in bloom 
to the same locality will increase the chances of a 
pollinator visiting the area and thus increase the 
chances of the fi rst plant receiving pollination ser-
vices. However, when the number of nearby plants 
increases suffi ciently, the original plant will fi nd it-
self competing with its neighbours, and its fi tness 
may decline accordingly. Some of the methods used 
to identify pollination competition take into ac-
count the importance of facilitation, but other meth-
ods may not fully register its contribution. 
 19.3  Techniques for investigating 
the role of pollinator attention 
in limiting ﬁ tness
 There are three main methods used to investigate 
the role of pollination competition in limiting plant 
fi tness. The aim of each method is primarily to 
of pollinators. Interspecifi c exploitation competi-
tion is anecdotally of commercial importance, with 
many fruit farmers reporting that fl owering weed 
crops decrease fruit set of their orchard trees. Free 
(1968) observed honeybee behaviour in fruit or-
chards containing dandelions, and confi rmed that 
most bees foraged preferentially on dandelions, 
both for nectar and for pollen, at the expense of the 
fruit trees.
  The second form of pollination competition, in-
terference competition, is only ever interspecifi c. It 
occurs when pollen of the wrong species lands on 
a stigma, where it can begin to germinate and clog 
up the surface, reducing the chances of the right 
pollen grains germinating successfully and thereby 
decreasing female fi tness. At the same time, place-
ment of pollen on the stigmas of plants of another 
species effectively wastes that pollen, resulting in 
reduced male fi tness. Interference competition can 
have more signifi cant effects than exploitation com-
petition, particularly in situations where density 
of a particular plant species is low relative to the 
densities of other species (Kunin 1993). Interference 
competition may be expected to drive changes that 
minimize the number of pollinating animal spe-
cies visiting a plant or the number of plant species 
visited by each pollinator, preventing interspecifi c 
pollen transfer. Such changes might include altera-
tions in habitat or fl owering time, but might also in-
clude increased specialization towards the foraging 
preferences of a limited subset of pollinators. This 
latter set of changes is only possible if a suffi cient 
number of specialist pollinators are available, and 
is heavily dependent on the density of both plant 
and pollinator.
++
++++
+
Plot
Seed set 
grey
flowers
 Figure 19.1    Facilitation and competition 
in mixed species plots. Addition of ﬂ owers 
of species B (white) to a plot of ﬂ owers of 
species A (grey) initially facilitates pollination 
of species A by attracting more pollinators 
to the plot. However, when relatively 
high proportions of species B are present, 
competition for pollination occurs and 
ﬁ tness of species A is compromised. 

ARE FLOWERS UNDER SELECTIVE PRESSURE?      215
the absence of fertilization, a situation which obvi­
ously does not contribute to female fitness and will 
often actually decrease it through waste of resourc­
es. Similarly, seed number within fruit is also varia­
ble within species, and so it is necessary to quantify 
seed set, not fruit set, even if the plant is known not 
to produce fruit entirely free from seed. Ideally, the 
set of viable seed should be scored (by allowing the 
seed to germinate), to ensure that non-viable hybrid 
seed is not being counted. An even greater difficulty 
in correctly scoring female fitness is that increased 
seed set in one part of the plant, or one flowering 
season, may be offset by reduced seed set in other 
parts or future seasons. This reflects the costly na­
ture of seed and fruit development, and the fact that 
seed set in many plants is limited not by pollination 
competition but by resource availability. It is there­
fore not sufficient to hand-pollinate all flowers on 
a single branch of a tree, and compare them with 
control branches—the control branches might be 
setting less seed because their resources have been 
allocated to the hand-pollinated branch. It is simi­
larly inappropriate to hand-pollinate all the flowers 
on a tree in a single growing season, without ref­
erence to the subsequent seasons—in subsequent 
seasons seed set might be reduced to compensate 
for the increased resource use in the experimental 
season. Little is known about the effects of nutrient 
acquisition and use in one year on the reproduc­
tive success of a plant in subsequent years (Horvitz 
and Schemske 1988). However, it has been clearly 
shown in several tropical orchid species (Aspara­
gales) that increased fruit set in one season (as a 
result of hand pollination) can result in significant 
negative effects on vegetative growth, inflorescence 
production, and flower production in subsequent 
years (Montalvo and Ackermann 1987; Ackerman 
and Montalvo 1990). Ideally, then, these experi­
ments should compare seed set of a plant on which 
every single flower has been hand-pollinated for 
its entire life with seed set of a control plant. Such 
experiments are most easily performed with short-
lived annuals, so many of the data generated using 
this method can only be extrapolated to long-lived 
plants with some caution. Several authors have 
pointed out that assuming that seed set is limited 
by either pollen limitation or female resource avail­
ability is an oversimplification, with many plants 
establish whether such competition occurs or has oc­
curred in a particular situation, and then, if possible, 
to quantify the extent or importance of that competi­
tion. These methods only provide data on particu­
lar plants growing in particular habitats, and it has 
been difficult to extrapolate from these data, as they 
themselves are highly variable. Each method has ad­
vantages and disadvantages, but each provides use­
ful information and therefore all three methods are 
used where appropriate in current studies.
19.3.1  Fruit and seed set following hand 
pollination
Perhaps the simplest method of identifying pollina­
tion competition is to hand-pollinate flowers and 
observe the effects on fruit and seed set, relative 
to control flowers not hand-pollinated but open to 
natural pollinators. In theory, such an experiment 
will reveal what proportion of ovules in the control 
plants is unfertilized because of an insufficient sup­
ply of suitable pollen. This may be due to a shortage 
of pollinator attention, or else to an excess of hetero­
specific pollen clogging the stigma. In practice, this 
method is open to several criticisms. First, it takes 
no account of the male component of fitness. It is 
not sufficient to assume that male fitness is directly 
related to female fitness, even though in many cases 
it might be. If the reduced seed set of the control 
flowers is attributable to insufficient pollinator at­
tention, then male fitness might well be similarly 
affected. However, if the limitation is due to hetero­
specific pollen clogging the stigma, then variations 
in pollinator foraging habits may, for example, mean 
that the pollinator has moved on only to plants of 
the same species, and has actually caused the ex­
perimental plant’s male fitness to be extremely 
high. Since this experimental method makes no ob­
servation of pollinator behaviour, and male fitness 
is notoriously variable, it is likely that erroneous 
conclusions about the degree of pollination compe­
tition, if not about its absolute occurrence, are often 
drawn from its use. Secondly, this method must be 
used with great caution to ensure that female fitness 
is accurately recorded. For example, simply scoring 
fruit set in hand-pollinated and control plants is in­
sufficient, as many species can produce fruit even in 

216      INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
facilitation and the point at which seed set begins to 
fall, marking the onset of competition.
The major drawback of this method of identify­
ing pollination competition is the extent to which it 
is labour intensive. The difficulties associated with 
producing a range of plots and recording pollina­
tor visitation as well as scoring seed set are such 
that only small plots are used, containing only two 
or three species, and data are only available from 
a very small number of habitats. Furthermore, it 
is usually only possible to use small fast-growing 
plants, or those that can be easily transplanted, in 
these artificial plots. It is accordingly difficult to ex­
trapolate from these data to the likely importance of 
pollination competition for larger, long-lived plants 
such as trees, and for plants growing in extremely 
species-diverse habitats, such as tropical forests.
19.3.3  Character displacement
The third method used to identify pollination com­
petition is the least direct one. In this method, plant 
species within a phylogenetic group growing in a 
particular environment are analysed to see whether 
characters appear to have been displaced by the 
need to avoid pollination competition (illustrated 
in Fig. 19.2). For example, a study might consider 
all the species of a particular genus in one locality, 
predicting that, if pollination competition had been 
a problem in the past, present-day floral features 
would vary between species to attract different 
pollinators. Alternatively, all the species in a habi­
tat which attract a single type of pollinator might 
be studied, to assess whether the timing of their 
flowering is staggered to minimize competition. 
The power of these studies is that they can look at 
a large number of species in a wide range of habi­
tats. Plant life habit does not matter in these studies, 
so trees can readily be compared with shrubs and 
annuals. Geographically distant localities can be 
compared, often using previously published data. 
An obvious null hypothesis in these experiments 
is that flower form or flowering time (or whatever 
feature is studied) is constrained by phylogeny, and 
thus that closely related species should have similar 
characters. Deviation from this null hypothesis is 
easy to spot and can be readily analysed using sta­
tistical methods. However, the major drawback of 
likely to be operating at an equilibrium between 
these two limiting factors (for a detailed discussion 
of the causes and consequences of pollen limitation, 
see Ashman et al. 2004). Wesselingh (2007) proposed 
an alternative approach to counter the problem of 
separating pollen limitation from resource avail­
ability. She argued that viewing the plant as made 
up of independent physiological units, consisting of 
individual inflorescences or branches or other units, 
according to plant growth habit, might yield more 
useful insight. Within one of these units resource re­
allocation could be expected to occur, but between 
them it might be less likely. Wesselingh suggested 
that studies focused on comparing seed set between 
hand-pollinated and open-pollinated units might 
therefore be revealing.
A variation on the method described above is to 
compare seed set of open-pollinated flowers under 
different natural pollinator regimes—for instance, 
at different times of the season or before and after 
events (such as disease or natural disasters) that 
dramatically alter pollinator availability. However, 
the same difficulties of interpretation apply to this 
form of analysis.
19.3.2  Mixed species plots
A direct way to measure the effect of pollination 
competition on fitness is to compare artificial plots 
containing a single plant species with those con­
taining a mix of species. If the plots are in the same 
environment, the only variables should be the num­
ber and species composition of plants in them. It is 
then possible to measure a number of factors relat­
ing to fitness, including pollinator visitation rates, 
fruit set, and seed set. As before, seed set is a much 
more useful measure of female fitness than fruit set. 
Recording pollinator visitation will give a measure 
of the extent to which any negative consequences 
of mixed plots are due to competition for pollina­
tor attention as opposed to the inhibitory effects of 
heterospecific pollination, and from that it may be 
possible to estimate the male component of fitness. 
It is also possible, using such plots, to assess where 
facilitation of pollination turns into competition. If 
a range of plots containing a decreasing proportion 
of the plant of interest is used, then it becomes pos­
sible to chart the increase in seed set associated with 

ARE FLOWERS UNDER SELECTIVE PRESSURE?      217
annual plants, including the insect-pollinated rela­
tive of Arabidopsis thaliana, A. lyrata (Sandring and 
Agren 2009). One of the best studies of pollination 
limitation using hand pollination was published in 
1988 by Horvitz and Schemske, who concluded that 
their system under investigation was not statisti­
cally significantly limited for pollinator attention. 
Plants of Calathea ovandensis (Zingiberales) growing 
in a Mexican forest were examined. This species is 
herbaceous, flowering in multiple years, but only 
usually producing a single inflorescence per plant 
per year. Pairs of plants at similar developmental 
stages and within a few metres of one another were 
chosen for analysis, and all flowers in the inflores­
cence of one plant were hand-pollinated, while no 
flowers on the control plant were pollinated. Since 
all flowers within an inflorescence were treated, 
and most plants produce only a single inflorescence 
per year, these authors effectively hand-pollinated 
entire plants for comparison with controls. They 
found that hand-pollinated inflorescences initiated 
24% more fruits than controls, but since not all initi­
ated fruit developed fully, they only set 6.8% more 
mature fruit. Total seed set did increase by 12.6% 
in the hand-pollinated inflorescences, but this dif­
ference was not statistically significant. The authors 
could not therefore conclude that there was direct 
evidence that this species was suffering pollination 
limitation in this locality. Instead, they concluded 
that seed set was likely to be resource limited, a con­
clusion strongly supported by the abortion of fruit 
early in development in the hand-pollinated plants. 
It should be noted here that pollination limitation 
and resource limitation are not mutually exclusive 
conditions for a plant, and that it is possible that 
the interaction between these limiting factors actu­
ally determines reproductive success. Campbell and 
Halama (1993) showed that pollen availability lim­
ited seed number per flower of Ipomopsis aggregata 
(Ericales), but that nutrient availability limited the 
number of flowers produced.
In a more recent example of this approach, 
Ghazoul (2006) hand-pollinated four flowers on 
each of 50 Raphanus raphanistrum (wild radish, Bras­
sicales) plants in experimental plots, and merely 
tagged four flowers at the same developmental 
stage on 50 control plants. Pollen limitation was 
analysed by comparing fruit and seed set of the 
this approach is that it can only ever be correlative. 
No direct proof of current pollination competition is 
produced, and its previous presence can only ever 
be indirectly inferred with caution. Without know­
ing whether the species under analysis evolved 
sympatrically or allopatrically it can be very diffi­
cult to draw conclusions from simple observations 
of current characters. Indeed, some authors have ar­
gued that plants seldom coexist under stable condi­
tions for long enough for pollination competition to 
drive character displacement, suggesting that even 
where such displacement is observed it may be too 
simplistic to attribute it to previous competition for 
pollinator attention (Feinsinger 1987).
19.4  Evidence based on fruit 
and seed set following hand pollination
In the last 30 years many studies have been published 
describing the consequences of hand pollination of 
fruit and seed set. These studies cover many differ­
ent species, although predominantly short-lived and 
Spring 
Summer
(a)
(b)
Figure 19.2  Character displacement to minimize pollination 
competition. (a) Two plants which would otherwise compete for 
pollinator attention can stagger their flowering time to prevent 
overlap. (b) Alternatively, other floral characters, such as colour, 
can be displaced to attract different pollinators.

218      INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
these data that this particular species was limited 
for pollinator attention when its pollinator popula­
tion declined following severe weather conditions. 
Other circumstances that might be expected to have 
an impact on pollinator populations include chang­
es in predator populations, disease epidemics, and 
alteration to habitats, including habitat loss. It is 
likely that many different sets of circumstances fre­
quently result in pollination limitation for a range 
of different plant species growing in variable habi­
tats all over the world.
19.5  Evidence from mixed species plots
Analysis of pollination competition in mixed spe­
cies plots has an advantage over other methods in 
that it allows facilitation of pollination to be moni­
tored at the same time. A study conducted in 2006 
by Ghazoul provides a textbook example of how 
relative population densities determine whether 
mixing flowering species together results in com­
petition or facilitation of pollination. This result is 
consistent with the proposition that facilitation and 
competition are simply opposite ends of a continu­
um of interactions. For our purposes, the existence 
of such a continuum means that, even where facili­
tation seems to be occurring in a particular habitat, 
it is possible that at other times in the flowering 
season or in other localities with variable popula­
tion densities, competition for pollination is oc­
curring between the same groups of plant species. 
Such competition may be expected to result in ad­
aptations to increase floral attractiveness or to make 
flowers more distinctive than those of other mem­
bers of the community. At the same time, facilita­
tion may actually increase intraspecific competition 
for pollinator attention, by ensuring that there is 
maximum seed set by those flowers of each species 
that are most attractive.
Ghazoul (2006) established seven field plots 
containing 50 Raphanus raphanistrum (wild radish, 
Brassicales) plants and 50 Cirsium arvense (creep­
ing thistle, Asterales) plants. The number of inflo­
rescences on the C. arvense plants varied naturally, 
and was recorded twice daily over 8 days. At the 
same time the number of pollinating insects visit­
ing the R. raphanistrum flowers within a 2-minute 
time window was also recorded. The total number 
hand-pollinated plants versus the controls. Al­
though this experiment lacks the thoroughness of 
the previously described study, it was conducted 
with plants in defined plots and could control for 
environmental differences. The author found that 
hand-pollinated flowers set 50% more seed than 
control flowers, and that this difference was statisti­
cally significant.
A recent review of pollen limitation analysed all 
of the published literature describing hand polli­
nation as an attempt to supplement pollen supply. 
Knight et al. (2005) found that most studies recorded 
fruit set, rather than seed set. Of the 482 published 
reports on the effect of hand pollination on fruit set, 
304 (63%) showed significant pollen limitation in 
the control plants.
Studies observing fruit and seed set in wild situ­
ations with variable pollinator profiles have also 
found evidence for pollination limitation. Bumblebee-
pollinated Antirrhinum majus plants in an experi­
mental field plot in Norfolk flowered all summer, 
but the bees were most active in June and early July. 
Early in the summer as many as 88% of the flowers 
were pollinated (measured by emasculating flowers 
to prevent self-pollination, tagging, and then scor­
ing fruit set). Later in the summer when the bees 
were less numerous only 41% of flowers were pol­
linated (B. J. Glover, unpublished data).
A more striking example of this approach was 
provided by Rathcke (2000), who analysed fruit 
set of a bird-pollinated shrub in the Bahamas in re­
sponse to hurricanes. Pavonia bahamensis (Bahama 
swamp-bush, a member of the Malvales and en­
demic to the Bahamas) is pollinated by two bird 
species, the Bahama Honeycreeper (or Bananaquit) 
and the Bahama Woodstar. During the winter flow­
ering season of 1994–95, both bird species were 
frequently observed on Bahama swamp-bush flow­
ers, 98% of stigmas that were monitored received 
pollen, and fruit set was close to 100%. Following a 
severe hurricane in October 1996 (Hurricane Lili, a 
Category 2 storm), both bird species were virtually 
absent in the flowering season of 1996–97. At the 
same time only 49% of stigmas received pollen, and 
fruit set dropped to only 11%. Since almost all fruit 
in this species contains the same number of seeds, 
fruit set is a reliable indicator of seed set and thus 
of total female reproductive fitness. It is clear from 

ARE FLOWERS UNDER SELECTIVE PRESSURE?      219
consequence to the plants. In contrast, when L. sali­
caria was added to the plots, L. alatum plants expe­
rienced reductions in both seed set and number of 
visitors per flower. The reduction in pollinator vis­
its was more significant than that observed in the 
single species plots, suggesting that the reduction in 
seed set might reflect insufficient pollinator visits, 
as well as the transfer of heterospecific pollen. This 
is another example of a specific situation in which 
competition for pollinator attention may occur. 
However, the mobility of most plant species, often 
aided by the activity of humans, makes it very like­
ly that large numbers of plants regularly come into 
contact with invasive species and suffer pollination 
competition as a result. A similar finding was re­
ported by Chittka and Schürkens (2001), who com­
pared bumblebee visits to flowers, and seed set per 
inflorescence, of plots of Stachys palustris (Lamiales) 
growing on German riverbanks with and without 
the Asian invasive Impatiens glandulifera (Ericales). 
This species has been shown to have a higher sugar 
production rate than any native European flower 
in which this has been measured. Not surprisingly, 
bumblebee visits to S. palustris and seed set of the 
inflorescences were both significantly reduced in 
those plots that also contained I. glandulifera plants. 
Again, in this situation it is likely that selection will 
favour any variation in the S. palustris flowers that 
makes them more attractive to pollinators generally, 
or more attractive to a specific subset of pollinators. 
Another recent example of this type of analysis was 
provided by Kandori et al. (2009). These authors 
demonstrated that the Japanese native dandelion 
(Taraxacum japonicum, Asterales), growing in both 
artificial and wild plots, received fewer pollinator 
visits and set less seed when the invasive Taraxacum 
officinale was also present, even though T. officinale is 
apomictic. The relatively higher nectar production 
of T. officinale is probably responsible for its greater 
attractiveness, and also probably explains its long 
history of being blamed for the depletion of fruit 
tree pollinators (Free 1968).
Using genetic markers to assess outcrossing in 
the progeny of plants in mixed species plots led Bell 
et al. (2005b) to conclude that pollination competi­
tion affected seed quality as well as seed quantity. 
In plots containing Lobelia siphilitica (Asterales) as 
well as Mimulus ringens (Lamiales)—plants that 
of pollinating insects within the plot was then re­
corded in a subsequent 2-minute window, and the 
proportion of insects visiting the R. raphanistrum 
flowers was calculated from these two observa­
tions. These data thus allowed a comparison of the 
proportion of pollinators visiting species 1 with the 
number of inflorescences of species 2 present. At 
relatively low numbers of C. arvense inflorescences 
(fewer than 32), the presence of extra inflorescences 
increased pollinator visitation to R. raphanistrum. 
Therefore small numbers of flowers of a second 
species facilitated pollination of one plant species. 
However, as the number of C. arvense inflorescences 
increased above 32, a decreasing proportion of pol­
linators visited the R. raphanistrum flowers. When 
over 300 C. arvense inflorescences were present in 
the plot, pollinator visits to R. raphanistrum ceased 
almost entirely. Competition for pollinator attention 
thus became extreme when R. raphanistrum was at 
a lower relative density within the mixed plot. This 
study suffers from a number of problems, notably 
that the presence of insect visitors does not neces­
sarily equate to subsequent seed set. However, pre­
vious experiments reported within the same paper 
had shown a correlation between flower visitation 
and seed set, so it is likely that the same correla­
tion held true in this particular study. It is certainly 
the case that an absence of insect visitors, as seen 
when large numbers of competing inflorescences 
were present, will result in a significant reduction 
in seed set.
In a study that used similar methods, Brown et al. 
(2002) investigated the consequences of pollina­
tion competition from an invasive Eurasian species 
in the Myrtales, Lythrum salicaria (purple looses­
trife), for seed set in the American Lythrum alatum 
(winged loosestrife). Over 2 years they measured 
pollinator visits at 15-minute intervals and seed set 
per fruit for 15 fruits per plant, comparing plants in 
single species plots and mixed species plots. They 
found that increasing the number of L. alatum plants 
in a single species plot had no significant effect on 
seed set per fruit. It did cause a reduction in visi­
tor numbers per flower per 15-minute interval, sig­
nificantly so when the number of plants within a 
plot was tripled. However, since there was no effect 
on seed set it seems likely that this increased com­
petition for pollination attention was of no fitness 

220      INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
be sufficiently strong for these mutants to be at a 
selective advantage strong enough to enable them 
to persist and eventually dominate a population. 
At the same time, the environment in which a plant 
finds itself will have a significant effect on flowering 
time. No amount of pollination competition should 
be sufficient to drive a species to flower under ex­
tremely cold conditions, or with insufficient time to 
set seed before frost hinders metabolic and devel­
opmental activity. In tropical environments, varia­
tions in rainfall pattern will also be important, and 
flowering may be constrained to those seasons with 
adequate water availability, unless the plant has ad­
aptations that allow water storage. However, even 
with these limitations, a number of studies have 
found apparent displacement of flowering time in a 
manner that strongly suggests the existence of com­
petition for pollinator attention.
Aizen and Vázquez (2006) considered the flow­
ering time of a group of unrelated bird-pollinated 
species in South America. They used data for 13 
different species, each from a different genus, but 
found growing together at three different sites. Each 
plant produced ornithophilous-appearing flowers, 
usually red and tubular with large quantities of nec­
tar. For each species, the hummingbird Sephanoides 
sephanoides had been recorded as the main flower 
visitor, and had also been shown to transport pollen 
of each species. These hummingbird-pollinated spe­
cies were shown to have a much broader range of 
flowering times than was usual for plants flowering 
in these three localities. Other, non-bird-pollinated 
plants tended to flower in late spring, whereas the 
hummingbird-pollinated species flowered through­
out spring and summer. Flowering times were com­
pared with a number of models, and the authors 
concluded that flowering times of these 13 species 
were overdispersed, flowering over a broader range 
of times than would be predicted based on the be­
haviour of other plants in the same environment. 
They therefore concluded that this system provided 
evidence that competition for the attention of the 
hummingbird pollinator had occurred, resulting 
in displacement of flowering times by either evolu­
tionary or ecological processes.
In a similar study, using a group of more close­
ly related plant species and their bat pollinators, 
Lobo et al. (2003) also showed that flowering time 
both have similar blue flowers and coexist in Ameri­
can meadows—the Mimulus plants set significantly 
fewer seeds per fruit than in single species plots. 
This reduction in seed set was also associated with 
a reduction in outcrossing rate, from 0.63 to 0.43, 
indicating that pollination limitation had resulted 
in an increased rate of self-pollination and thereby 
reduced seed quality and likely fitness of progeny.
19.6  Analysis of character traits 
potentially displaced by pollination 
competition
Studies that search for evidence of pollination compe­
tition through displacement of character traits have 
primarily focused on flowering time (commonly re­
ferred to as flowering phenology in the ecological 
literature, although not in the literature concerned 
with the molecular regulation of ­flowering-time 
control). The suggestion that competition for polli­
nator attention might lead to displacement of flow­
ering time in plants growing together is based on 
two processes. First, it is possible that evolutionary 
displacement of flowering times may occur, with 
those individuals flowering at times slightly offset 
from their competitors being most successful and 
setting most seed. Alternatively, an ecological sort­
ing process may serve to eliminate species from a 
locality if their flowering competes too directly with 
other species, resulting in assemblages of plants that 
do not flower together. However, several factors will 
also limit the extent to which flowering time can be 
displaced. To start with, flowering time is under 
strict genetic control, as discussed in Section IIA of 
this book. The many different environmental and 
endogenous factors that interact to regulate flow­
ering time are not easily perturbed, as there are so 
many checkpoints and fail-safes within the complex 
network of interactions. For displacement of flower­
ing time to occur, then, it is necessary for mutations 
to occur in one or more key genes that are sufficient 
to influence the end point of the entire network. 
Such mutations do occur in crop plants, where they 
have allowed breeders to manipulate flowering time 
to commercial advantage, and so it is likely that they 
will also occur from time to time in wild species. It 
is also necessary for competition for pollination to 

ARE FLOWERS UNDER SELECTIVE PRESSURE?      221
hummingbirds. Waser reported that plants which 
flowered at the margins of the flowering period for 
their species, and that therefore overlapped with 
the other species, set 30–45% fewer seeds per flow­
er than plants which flowered at displaced times. 
Similarly, plants grown in mixed species plots set 
25–50% fewer seeds than those in single species 
plots, and plants hand-pollinated with pollen from 
the other species set significantly fewer seeds than 
control plants. These studies provide evidence for 
the importance of displaced flowering time in main­
taining reproductive success in these species.
An extremely detailed analysis by Stone et al. 
(1998) demonstrated that assemblages of closely re­
lated species can show displacement of a number of 
characters to minimize competition for pollination. 
Working with ten species of Acacia (Fabales) grow­
ing together in mixed habitats in Tanzania, they first 
showed that, although most species flowered dur­
ing the rainy season, two species flowered in the dry 
season. This restriction of flowering to a less favour­
able time of year can be interpreted as a mechanism 
to avoid competition. They also showed that there 
was some partitioning of pollinator species between 
tree species, but that this partitioning was only ever 
partial, and substantial overlap in pollinating spe­
cies existed. However, they were able to show that a 
novel character trait had been displaced to minimize 
competition for pollination and heterospecific pol­
len transfer. In habitats where multiple Acacia trees 
flowered together after the autumn rains, the tim­
ing of pollen release within a single day had been 
partitioned. Thus all trees of each Acacia species re­
leased their pollen together, but the timing of pollen 
release was different for each species. Some species 
had peak pollen availability as early as 6 a.m., while 
others released maximum pollen as late as 4 p.m. 
The window of peak pollen availability was usually 
little more than an hour, allowing ample time for all 
co-flowering species to independently release pol­
len each day. The local pollinator populations had 
learned to follow this daily synchronous release of 
pollen, foraging from each species at the most re­
warding time. Megachilid bees, honeybees, and flies 
showed temporal patterns of flower visitation that 
ensured they visited each tree species at the time of 
maximum pollen availability. This partitioning of 
pollen release ensured that the pollinators served 
appeared to be displaced to minimize pollination 
competition. Flowering patterns of trees from the 
family Bombacaceae (Malvales) were compared in 
three different geographic locations that differed in 
rainfall patterns. All of the trees studied had been 
reported to be pollinated by nectarivorous bats, and 
also by moths. Within each locality, the flowering 
time of the trees was staggered so that maximum 
flower production of each species occurred sequen­
tially, rather than together. This did not seem to be 
related to rainfall, but did correlate with phylog­
eny (the same species tended to flower at the same 
time in different habitats) and with the presence of 
other bat-pollinated species and the need to avoid 
concurrent flowering. Interestingly, analysis of the 
pollen content of bat faeces suggested that the pol­
linating bats specialized on whichever tree was at 
the peak of its flowering in a single location, essen­
tially feeding on only one pollen type at a time, for 
periods of up to a month. This specialization by a 
major group of pollinators on the most abundantly 
flowering species will act to reinforce selective pres­
sures inhibiting concurrent flowering, by strongly 
punishing trees that flower earlier or later than the 
mean for their species. In this way clear displace­
ment of flowering time can be maintained and fur­
ther pollination competition prevented.
A recent study confirms that concurrent flower­
ing of species that usually flower sequentially can 
have detrimental effects on fitness. The organ pipe 
cactus (Stenocereus thurberi, Caryophyllales), has a 
peak flowering time approximately 1 month later 
than two other species of cactus that grow alongside 
it in Mexico. All three species are bat-­pollinated. 
Fleming (2006) showed that the fruit set by those 
individual organ pipe cacti that flower early, and 
therefore concurrently with the two competing spe­
cies, contained sterile seeds. He further showed 
that pollination with heterospecific pollen caused 
the development of fruit, but that the seed within 
lacked embryos. Selective pressure will therefore 
act to maintain displacement of flowering time in 
these species, as concurrent flowering reduces vi­
able seed set. A similar study by Waser (1978) drew 
similar conclusions for the interaction between Del­
phinium nelsonii (Ranunculales) and Ipomopsis ag­
gregata (Ericales) in Colorado. These species flower 
sequentially, and are both pollinated by broad-tailed 

222      INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
species can range from positive facilitation of pol­
lination through very minimal effects to strong com­
petition for pollination, severely limiting seed set in 
affected individuals. The nature of this interaction 
varies with the frequency of different plants within 
a habitat, and can operate either through the direct 
attraction of pollinators or through the consequenc­
es of pollinator fidelity for heterospecific pollen 
transfer, or through both mechanisms together. An 
understanding of how these interactions between 
concurrently flowering plants operate can inform 
agricultural practice, as well as strategies to conserve 
and restore species, particularly in response to cli­
mate change. However, the purpose of this chapter 
was simply to ask whether competition for pollina­
tor attention sometimes occurs. If plants compete for 
pollination services, and those individuals within a 
species with showier flowers attract more or better 
pollinators (or make better use of each visit), we can 
expect showier flowers to become the norm. Indeed, 
the strength of such natural selection on floral traits 
may increase in the near future. Recent models of 
climate change forecast a smaller number of pollina­
tors globally. These models suggest that selection on 
floral traits will be strongest in species-rich habitats, 
where competition for pollination services is likely 
to be strongest if animal species diversity declines. 
It is therefore predicted that plants in biodiversity 
hotspots (such as tropical forests or the South Afri­
can Cape flora) will be at increased risk of extinc­
tion if they are not able to specialize on particularly 
abundant pollinators or substantially enhance their 
floral attractiveness (Vamosi et al. 2006). In the un­
certain and constantly changing circumstances ex­
perienced by most flowering plants, it is a daunting 
task to quantify the frequency and importance of the 
selection imposed by pollination limitation relative 
to the many other selection pressures that plants 
face. However, the fact that pollination competition 
occurs is sufficient to allow flowers to evolve into 
more elaborate structures and for pollination syn­
dromes to exist, at least in theory. In Chapter 20 we 
consider another key concept underlying the pol­
lination syndrome theory, before in Chapter 21 we 
assess whether specialized pollination systems are 
the rule or the exception.
only one tree species at a time, minimizing both 
competition for pollinator attention and the interfer­
ing effects of heterospecific pollen transfer.
A number of studies have considered displace­
ment of characters other than timing of flower­
ing and pollen release. For example, Armbruster 
et al. (1994) considered length of nectar tube and 
position of pollen placement on the pollinators of 
a group of species of Stylidium (Asterales) flower­
ing together in Western Australia. They reported 
that overlap in pollination system (determined by 
nectar tube length and the position and length of 
the pollen-­depositing column) was virtually absent 
from groups of co-flowering species, suggesting 
that character displacement had occurred. Similarly, 
Smith and Rausher (2008) found that the presence 
of Ipomoea purpurea (Solanales) flowers resulted in 
increased selection favouring clustering of anthers 
around the stigma of I. hederacea flowers, possibly to 
maximize self-pollination.
Not all studies of character displacement have 
found evidence to support the idea that pollinator 
attention is limiting. Ollerton et al. (2007) reported 
that the parasitic plant, Orobanche elatior (Lamiales), 
and its host, Centaurea scabiosa (Asterales), flower 
concurrently in England and share a common pol­
linator, the bumblebee Bombus pascuorum. The host 
species is also pollinated by a number of other in­
sects, but the authors postulated that the use of a 
common pollinator species might drive character 
displacement. However, they were unable to find 
any differences in flowering time, placement of pol­
len on the bee’s body, or daily timing of pollinator 
visits, suggesting that competition between these 
two plant species was insufficient to drive such 
character displacement.
In this chapter we have considered evidence, col­
lected through a number of different methods, that 
shows the presence of competition for pollinator at­
tention, either in the present or in the evolutionary 
past of a group of plants. At least one of these meth­
ods, namely the analysis of displaced characters 
such as flowering time, in fact shows an absence of 
competition for pollination in the current environ­
ment. The data considered show that the interaction 
between flowering plants of the same or different 

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 20
Do pollinators discriminate between 
different floral forms?
In Chapter 19 we concluded that some plants, at 
some times, experience competition for pollinator 
attention. In such circumstances, natural selection 
will favour traits that enhance the attractiveness of 
flowers to their pollinators. In this chapter we in­
vestigate whether the different shapes, structures, 
and colours that flowers produce have the poten­
tial to enhance pollinator visitation. To do this, they 
must fulfil two criteria. First, they must be visible to 
the appropriate pollinator, or detectable using some 
other sense. Secondly, the pollinator must discrimi­
nate between different floral forms. Simply because 
a change in floral form is detectable to an animal, it 
does not necessarily follow that the animal will dis­
criminate between the original and the novel form. 
Such discrimination will only occur if one form pro­
vides an advantage to the animal, either by being 
easier to detect or handle in some way, or by pro­
viding a superior reward of nectar or pollen. In this 
chapter, then, we shall begin by discussing the cur­
rent evidence on what different pollinating animals 
can see and detect in other ways. Then we shall con­
sider the experimental evidence that pollinators do 
discriminate between different floral forms, focus­
ing on colour, shape, and scent. An understanding 
of which floral features are discriminated by polli­
nators will allow us to assess the usefulness of the 
pollination syndrome concept in Chapter 21.
20.1  What pollinators see
Animal vision depends on two components—the 
presence of structural features that allow objects 
to be detected, and the presence of the neural 
processing ability to translate such signals. Our 
understanding of animal vision varies greatly be­
tween different types of pollinators. In this section 
we shall consider two comparatively well-studied 
examples, bees and birds.
20.1.1  Bees
Bees, like all other insects, possess compound eyes. 
This means that the eye is composed of several 
thousand independent units, known as ommatidia. 
Each ommatidium consists of a small lens, around 
20 µm in diameter, that focuses light on to a set of 
photoreceptor cells. Each ommatidium functions 
as a mini eye in its own right, collecting light from 
a small cone-shaped section of the world that is 
slightly offset from the section viewed by the neigh­
bouring ommatidia.
Bumblebee and honeybee colour vision, like hu­
man colour vision, is trichromatic, based on three 
colours. The ommatidia contain photoreceptor cells, 
containing opsin pigments, which perceive green 
(540 nm), blue (430 nm), and ultraviolet (UV, 340 nm) 
light. They do not contain photoreceptors for red, 
leading to a common misconception that bees can­
not see red. However, the spectral sensitivity curve 
of the green receptor has an extended tail, and reach­
es to around 650 nm, well beyond the orange/red 
boundary (Chittka and Waser 1997). This allows bees 
to perceive red light, although it may be difficult to 
distinguish from green light of a lower intensity. Bee 
colour vision is therefore very different from human 
colour vision, being weaker with regard to one of 
our primary colours but containing an extra colour, 
UV, which we cannot see. As a result, it is essential to 
accurately measure colour using spectrophotometry 

224      INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
at a range of wavelengths when considering how a 
flower looks to a bee, rather than relying on the hu­
man eye (see Fig. 20.1). Indeed, bee colour vision has 
recently been shown to be more complex than was 
previously thought. All the ommatidia of Bombus 
impatiens contain green receptor cells, but they do 
not all contain blue and UV receptor cells. There are 
three types of ommatidia in the eye—those contain­
ing green and blue photoreceptors, those containing 
green and UV photoreceptors, and those containing 
all three types of photoreceptor, shown by in situ hy­
bridization of probes for the UV absorbing pigment 
to sections of the eye (Spaethe and Briscoe 2005). 
This means that different ommatidia may perceive 
a flower as different colours, adding to the complex 
task of the neural processing systems in decoding 
the signals they receive. In addition to differences in 
colour sensitivity, it is thought that different regions 
of the compound eye are specialized for different 
functions (Srinivasan 2010). The front and lower part 
of the eye are predominantly focused on colour vi­
sion, while the dorsal region of the eye is specialized 
for the recognition of polarization of light. As well 
as these differences within the eye, it is also likely 
that colour vision varies between individuals within 
a population, as well as between the many different 
species of bee.
Compound eyes do not provide the same degree 
of resolution as the simple eyes of vertebrates, and 
it has been estimated that the honeybee eye has a 
resolving ability around 100–170 times worse than 
that of the human eye (Chittka and Raine 2006; 
Srinivasan 2010). Combined with this relatively 
poor resolution, insects also appear to have rela­
tively poor visual processing, and it is necessary for 
at least 15 ommatidia to perceive a flower for the 
bee to recognize it by its colour alone (Chittka and 
Raine 2006). It is clearly the case that larger flow­
ers should be recognizable at greater distances than 
smaller flowers on the basis of their colour. Spaethe 
et al. (2001) confirmed that it took longer for bees 
to find flowers as their size decreased, even though 
their colour remained constant.
However, bees do not only use colour to identify 
flowers, but rely at greater distances on the contrast 
between flowers and green vegetation (Chittka and 
Raine 2006). This so-called ‘green contrast’ provides 
a reliable means of identifying a target (the flower) 
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
(a)
Wavelength (nm)
Relative reﬂectance
P. dubium
P. argentea
F. vesca
C. latifolia
V. canina
300
400
500
600
700
(b)
EB
EU
EG
Background
450
400
350
300
550
500
V. canina
C. latifolia
F. vesca
L. corniculatus
P. argentea
P. dubium
Figure 20.1  Bee colour vision. (a) A set of typical floral spectral 
reflectance functions. The flowers measured are yellow Potentilla 
argentea (with UV reflectance), red Papaver dubium (with UV 
reflectance), blue Viola canina (without UV reflectance), violet 
Campanula latifolia (with UV reflectance), and white Fragaria vesca 
(without UV reflectance). (b) The colour hexagon shows how colours 
look to a bee. The continuous curve denotes the spectrum locus, 
in 10-nm steps from 300 to 550 nm. The bottom segment of the 
spectrum locus connects the loci of 300 and 550 nm in nine 
mixtures of the two lights in ratios of 0.9:01, 0.8:0.2, and so on. 
Colour loci for the flowers whose reflectance spectra are given in 
(a) are marked here. Both parts of this figure kindly provided by Lars 
Chittka (QMUL).

DO POLLINATORS DISCRIMINATE?      225
contains one of a number of different carotenoids, 
and the combination of different carotenoids in the 
oil with different opsin pigments results in a wide 
range of optimum colour sensitivities, varying be­
tween species (Varela et al. 1993). All birds have red 
photopigment (peak sensitivity around 565 nm), 
and many birds are most sensitive to colours at the 
red end of the spectrum. Most birds also have pho­
topigments with peak sensitivity at around 500 nm 
and at 470 nm. However, the peak sensitivity of the 
fourth photopigment varies, peaking at either 405 
nm or 365 nm. Therefore, for some birds, colour vi­
sion extends into the UV range (Chen et al. 1984), 
and so covers a wider spectrum of colours than that 
of either humans or insects. This UV sensitivity of 
the fourth photopigment has evolved ­repeatedly—
for example, in seagulls, many songbirds, and 
parrots (reviewed by Osorio and Vorobyev 2008). 
Hummingbirds are not known to have particularly 
strong sensitivity to red, and do not show a strong 
preference for red when offered a choice of coloured 
feeders, although many hummingbird-­pollinated 
flowers produce red pigment (Goldsmith and Gold­
smith 1979). One possible explanation for this is that 
red flowers are harder for bees to handle (because 
they show little contrast to green in insect vision), 
and are therefore preferentially visited by birds as 
their nectar is less likely to be depleted than that 
of more strongly bee-visible flowers (Raven 1972; 
Rodriguez-Girones and Santamaria 2004).
20.2  What pollinators sense 
in other ways
Pollinating animals may also be attracted to flow­
ers over a range of distances by their scent. Scent 
functions as a long-distance cue for moths, beetles, 
and some bees, and at more moderate distances for 
butterflies. It is also known to act as a short-range 
landing cue or nectar guide for a large array of in­
sects. Once the pollinator is on a flower, tactile cues 
may be important in allowing rapid handling of the 
flower, and may therefore make flowers with cer­
tain surface properties more attractive than those 
without them. Taste may also play a part in flower 
discrimination, if particular nectar qualities can be 
associated with features that can be discriminated 
at longer ranges.
against the almost universal background colour of 
plants. It greatly increases the distance at which 
flowers are visible to bees, although larger flow­
ers will still be visible as coloured objects at greater 
distances than will smaller flowers. A consequence 
of the use of green contrast by bees is that the dif­
ference between a flower’s colour and green can be 
of more importance in bee discrimination than the 
intensity or brightness of the colour itself, particu­
larly when the flower is small (Spaethe et al. 2001).
In addition to colour, bees can also recognize dif­
ferent patterns and shapes. Many studies over the 
last century have shown that bees can be trained 
to recognize a variety of abstract patterns, at a 
range of angles. Shape and pattern recognition by 
bees is thought to work through learning abstracts 
of the patterns, or rules, rather than photographi­
cally memorizing particular patterns. Abstracting 
the key features of a pattern requires less memory 
capacity and fewer neurons than the sort of pho­
tographic memory that humans often use. In par­
ticular, a number of studies have shown that bees 
can detect patterns of symmetry, and the axis of that 
symmetry, which may be important in accessing the 
nectar reward in a zygomorphic flower (Giurfa et al. 
1996; Horridge 1996).
20.1.2  Birds
Birds have camera eyes like those of other verte­
brates, including humans. This means that their re­
solving power at various distances is more similar 
to our own than is that of insects. Indeed, since bird 
eyes occupy around 50% of the volume of the skull, 
compared with 5% in humans, the image projected 
on to the bird retina is considerably more detailed 
than that projected on to a human retina (reviewed 
by Jones et al. 2007). However, bird colour vision is 
quite complex, and may vary significantly between 
different species of bird. Essentially, bird eyes con­
tain cone cells with pigments, opsins, which absorb 
light of different colours. Bird vision is tetrachro­
matic, based on the presence of four different types 
of cone cell, each of which contains one of the four 
different photopigments (Bennett and Thery 2007). 
However, the colours that these absorb are modi­
fied by the presence of a drop of oil through which 
light must pass to reach the pigments. The oil 

226      INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
particular scents with food, associating scent cues 
with food more quickly than they can visual cues, 
and retaining stronger associations between scents 
and food than between visual cues and food. Their 
ability to learn scent-based cues depends both on 
the concentration of scent compounds present and 
the ratios of different molecules present in a mixed 
scent. The perception and learning of olfactory cues 
has not been well studied in many other animal 
groups. It is likely to be particularly complex in ani­
mals that do not rely heavily on visual signals, such 
as some beetles, moths, and bats.
The sense of touch is much more similar between 
different animals than either vision or olfaction. 
However, differences in body size will significantly 
influence the range and scale of structures that an 
animal can perceive tactilely. The great variety of 
cell types present on petals suggests that insect feet 
and antennae can distinguish shapes and structures 
as small as a single cell in size, and behavioural ex­
periments have confirmed this ability (Kevan and 
Lane 1985; Whitney et al. 2009a). Indeed, studies of 
the Colorado potato beetle in contact with various 
leaf surfaces suggest that nanoscale sculpturing of 
the surface of plant epidermal cells can also be de­
tected by insect feet, with beetles finding surfaces 
covered with wax crystals or folds of cuticle more 
slippery than smooth surfaces, irrespective of the 
shape of the underlying cells (Prum et al. 2012).
The sense of taste depends on receptors triggered 
by contact with particular molecules. Most animals 
can sense sweet and salt, with other taste receptors 
varying more between species. Electrophysiologi­
cal techniques have revealed that insects typically 
have four different types of taste-sensitive neuron, 
responding to sugar, water, low salt concentrations, 
and high salt concentrations, and they may also 
respond to the presence of amino acids (Hallem 
et al. 2006). These are all triggered by the activities 
of taste receptors, of which Drosophila melanogaster 
has 68 (Hallem et al. 2006). Bees themselves de­
tect taste using the forelegs, the antennae, and the 
mouthparts, with hair receptors localized in hair-
like structures called sensilla. Perhaps surprisingly, 
analysis of the honeybee genome revealed the pres­
ence of only 10 genes encoding taste receptors—
compared with the 68 receptors (encoded by 60 
genes) in Drosophila (Robertson and Wanner 2006). 
The scents produced by flowers can travel very 
great distances. For example, the amines volatilized 
by the inflorescence of titan arum (Amorphophallus 
titanium, Alismatales) attract pollinating bees and 
flies over distances of hundreds of metres, as indi­
vidual plants are very widely dispersed within the 
environment. Scent make-up is very complex, with 
over 1700 volatile organic compounds isolated from 
hundreds of plant families (Knudsen et  al. 2006). 
Different animal species are able to detect differ­
ent scent components to different degrees, and so 
will perceive mixes of these compounds differently. 
They may also draw different information from dif­
ferent odours. Some scents carry very specific infor­
mation (such as organic decay or sex pheromones), 
while others are more ubiquitous and can be learned 
by insects (particularly bees, moths, and butterflies) 
as generally associated with floral rewards.
Insects are well equipped to perceive odour, usu­
ally having large antennae containing neurons that 
can detect a wide range of chemicals. Insect odour 
perception has been best studied in the fruit fly, 
Drosophila melanogaster, which produces 62 odour 
receptor proteins, a family of G protein-coupled re­
ceptors with seven transmembrane domains (Ache 
and Young 2005; Hallem et al. 2006). Although the 
general mechanisms of odour perception, and the 
types of proteins involved, are comparable in other 
insects studied, it is likely that Drosophila has a sim­
pler olfactory system with regard to floral scents 
than do pollinating insects, which distinguish be­
tween many compounds in their foraging bouts. 
Although bees have not been studied in as much 
detail, bee antennae are thought to contain around 
130 types of odour receptor (Chittka and Raine 
2006), making the understanding of bee response to 
different floral scents a much more complex prob­
lem than that of visual response to colour. Guerrieri 
et al. (2005) tested the ability of bees to distinguish 
between a range of arbitrarily chosen odours, and 
observed that alcohols, aldehydes, and ketones 
were the most important chemicals in bee scent 
perception, with the majority of odour receptors 
focused on discriminating between molecules of 
these types. These compounds are not all common­
ly released by flowers, and so bee discrimination of 
floral scents may differ somewhat from this general 
model. It is also clear that bees can learn to associate 

DO POLLINATORS DISCRIMINATE?      227
flowers with different forms. However, unless the 
differences between the two floral forms are very 
carefully described and controlled, this can result in 
equally problematic data, as the flowers may vary 
in more features than just the one under analysis. 
Such experiments are also constrained by the avail­
ability of individual species with variation in an ex­
perimentally interesting trait, such as flower colour.
The literature contains many examples of at­
tempts to assess pollinator discrimination between 
petals of different colours. In some cases discrimi­
nation is clear, in others the animals showed no 
discrimination, and in many cases some animals 
discriminated while others did not. For example, 
experiments with white and violet alfalfa flowers 
(Fabales) in a growth room indicated that honey­
bees did not discriminate between flower colours. 
When a similar trial was conducted in the field, 
honeybees again showed no discrimination, but 
pollen-gathering leafcutter bees much preferred the 
purple flowers (Pedersen 1967). Similarly, experi­
ments with equal numbers of purple- and white-
flowered plants of Vigna sinensis (cowpea, Fabales) 
showed that bumblebees visited purple flow­
ers three times as often as white flowers, but that 
honeybees visited white flowers twice as often as 
purple flowers (Leleji 1973). These experiments in­
dicate that the attraction of multiple pollinators can 
result in mixed selective pressures, even where one 
animal shows very clear discrimination, a key is­
sue that we shall return to in Chapter 21. In another 
example, Raphanus raphanistrum (wild radish, Bras­
sicales) has yellow or white flowers, controlled by 
a single genetic locus. The frequency of the yellow 
morph varied from 7% to 60% in the populations 
studied by Kay (1976), but in all of these popula­
tions the butterfly Pieris rapae much preferred the 
yellow form to the white. On the site with 60% yel­
low flowers, 307 visits to wild radish flowers by the 
butterflies were observed—and 306 of the 307 visits 
were to yellow flowers. However, honeybees show 
no preference for yellow flowers over white ones, 
maintaining the polymorphism within the popula­
tion. In 1986, Stanton et al. followed up this work 
by investigating the consequences of pollinator 
preferences for maternal and paternal reproductive 
success in Raphanus raphanistrum. Since the white 
allele is dominant over the yellow one, they were 
A number of explanations have been put forward 
for this surprising result, including the suggestion 
that the more reliable food source of bees, com­
pared with most insects, allows a reduced range 
of taste perception (reviewed by Sanchez 2011). 
Bee taste perception is certainly sensitive in some 
ways—their sweet receptors are sensitive enough to 
allow discrimination between sucrose at concentra­
tions varying by only 0.5%, although their preferred 
range is 20–30%. Analysis of hummingbird re­
sponses to sucrose feeders at various concentrations 
has shown that 40% sucrose is preferred over lower 
concentrations (Stromberg and Johnsen 1990). This 
discrimination between rewards at different con­
centrations could be used to select between flowers 
if it can be linked to a colour or shape difference that 
is remotely detectable. However, temperature may 
also influence the perceived taste of a substance if 
taste receptors are not buffered for temperature. For 
example, there is evidence that some insect sweet 
receptors perceive warmer sucrose as sweeter than 
cooler sucrose of the same concentration (Uehara 
and Morita 1972). Another effect of temperature on 
reward relates to the need for warm-blooded ani­
mals to heat ingested food to body temperature. For 
hummingbirds this metabolic cost may have a sig­
nificant effect on their perception of the quality of 
reward offered by a flower (Lotz et al. 2003). These 
factors may result in selective pressure to moderate 
flower temperature as well as nectar quality.
20.3  Discrimination between petals 
of different colours
Investigation of pollinator discrimination between 
different floral traits is experimentally difficult. It 
has traditionally been approached in two different 
ways. Bee behavioural scientists have tended to use 
artificial stimuli, often simple pieces of coloured 
card, to investigate behavioural responses to sin­
gle factors such as colour, size, or shape. These ex­
periments can be difficult to interpret from a plant 
evolution standpoint, because they do not necessar­
ily mimic structures and colours that can easily be 
achieved in nature with the resources available to 
the plant. Plant evolutionary biologists have tended 
to compare pollinator responses to, or seed set in, 

228      INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
animals do sometimes discriminate between flow­
ers of different colours, as we would expect if they 
can link colour to quality or availability of reward, 
or if certain colours are easier to see or learn than 
others. This should be sufficient for flower colour 
to be under selection in some circumstances, and 
thus to form part of pollination syndromes. How­
ever, these studies all suffer from the classic diffi­
culty of the unknown nature of the polymorphism. 
The observed difference in flower colour may not 
be the only difference between two naturally oc­
curring morphs of a plant species, and pollina­
tors may actually be discriminating on the basis of 
other differences besides colour. This is particularly 
likely where flower colour is genetically linked to 
a trait such as nectar quality or flower size. Recent 
attempts to address this difficulty have focused on 
using near isogenic lines (NILs) produced by exten­
sive backcrossing, or using molecularly character­
ized mutant lines. These allow an assessment of the 
strength of direct selection on isolated phenotypic 
traits, although such data are only applicable to 
wild situations where the trait in question can seg­
regate independently of other aspects of pollinator 
attraction.
Bradshaw and Schemske (2003) provided clear 
evidence that both bumblebees and hummingbirds 
distinguish between different coloured forms of 
Mimulus (Lamiales), using NILs. This followed on 
from their previous work (Schemske and Bradshaw 
1999) using a segregating F2 population resulting 
from a cross between Mimulus lewisii and Mimulus 
cardinalis. M. lewisii is normally pink, as a result of 
anthocyanin deposition, and is primarily pollinated 
by bumblebees (see Fig. 20.2a). M. cardinalis is nor­
mally orange/red, as a result of both anthocyanin 
and carotenoid deposition, and is primarily polli­
nated by hummingbirds (see Fig. 20.2b). These two 
types of animal rarely visit the ‘incorrect’ flower 
type—some observations of pollinator behaviour in 
mixed plots have shown that hummingbirds only 
visit M. cardinalis and that 98.9% of bee visits are to 
M. lewisii (Ramsey et al. 2003), although other stud­
ies suggest that the incidence of crossover visits is 
somewhat higher than this. In the segregating F2 
population, bumblebee visits were shown to in­
crease when flower size increased, and to be nega­
tively correlated with carotenoid and anthocyanin 
able to assess male reproductive success by grow­
ing progeny of yellow parents and noting whether 
they had white or yellow flowers. They discovered 
that, despite pollinator preference for the yellow 
morph, female reproductive success of white and 
yellow flowered plants was equal, suggesting that 
resource limitation is more important than pol­
linator limitation in female fitness of this system. 
However, nearly 75% of the progeny of yellow-
flowered plants were themselves yellow-flowered, 
indicating that their male parent was also yellow. 
In this example, pollinator discrimination in favour 
of the yellow morph has clear consequences for the 
male fitness of yellow-flowered plants. In contrast, 
Schemske and Bierzychudek (2001) showed that 
the pollinating beetle, Trichochorous sp., showed no 
preference for blue- or white-flowered forms of the 
desert annual Linanthus parryae (Ericales), suggest­
ing that other factors maintain this polymorphism 
within the population.
One factor that has been shown to complicate 
matters when analysing pollinator discrimination 
between different floral colours is the tendency of 
many animals to behave in a frequency-dependent 
manner. In theory, pollinators should preferentially 
visit more common floral forms, because they are 
easier to learn to handle and easier to remember. In 
wild populations, then, particular colour morphs 
can be selected against simply because they are 
rare. This has been shown in particular detail with 
the tall morning glory, Ipomoea purpurea (Solanales), 
and its native American pollinators, mainly bum­
blebees. The wild type flower is blue-purple, but a 
white-flowered form commonly arises in natural 
populations, and is present at a range of frequen­
cies. When white flowers are present at frequen­
cies below around 25%, bumblebees discriminate 
against white flowers more than would be expected 
based solely on their frequency. However, when the 
frequency of white flowers increases to 50%, bum­
blebees no longer show any colour discrimination 
(Epperson and Clegg 1987; Clegg and Durbin 2003). 
This positive-frequency-dependent discrimination 
may serve to limit the extent to which novel flower 
colour mutations can spread through populations.
Despite the different preferences shown by differ­
ent animals, the studies described above, and many 
similar studies, provide evidence that pollinating 

DO POLLINATORS DISCRIMINATE?      229
it likely, although not certain, that colour is the only 
significant factor in the choices made by pollinators. 
However, since the pollinators were not flower na­
ïve, but accustomed to foraging among wild varie­
ties of both species in which colour is linked with a 
number of other traits, including nectar availability, 
it is possible that the animals had learned that col­
our was a cue that they could usually expect to be 
associated with a desirable reward.
A similar study by Hopkins and Rausher (2012) 
demonstrated that shifts in flower colour could in­
fluence pollinator behavior not through different 
choices of different pollinators, but by influencing 
flower constancy within a single pollinator type. In 
Texas the usual pale blue flowers of Phlox drummon­
dii (Ericales) are replaced by a dark red flowered 
form when the species grows sympatrically with 
Phlox cuspidata, which also has pale blue flowers. The 
novel colour morph of P. drummondii is the result of 
loss of the gene encoding flavanone 3′5′­hydroxylase 
(F3′5′H; see Chapter 16), resulting in redder antho­
cyanin, and gain of an allele conferring stronger 
expression of a MYB regulator of anthocyanin syn­
thesis. Hopkins and Rausher showed that strong 
selection favoured in particular the darker pigment 
allele when the two species were planted together, 
but that there was no selection acting on either the 
levels, whereas hummingbird visits increased with 
increased anthocyanin levels and increased nectar 
volume (Schemske and Bradshaw 1999). To analyse 
these data further, Bradshaw and Schemske (2003) 
introgressed the YUP locus, responsible for carot­
enoid deposition, from each species into the other 
background, through four generations, ensuring 
97% genetic identity between the new lines and 
their most similar parent. This resulted in orange-
coloured M. lewisii flowers and deep pink M. cardi­
nalis flowers. Nectar production (a highly significant 
factor in pollinator attraction) was compared be­
tween parent and new lines, and was found not to 
be significantly different. Mixed plots containing 
50 wild type and 50 novel plants of a species were 
grown, with the two species being investigated 
separately. Pollinator visits were recorded, and re­
vealed that orange-flowered M. lewisii received 68-
fold more visits from hummingbirds than the wild 
type pink, but a significant reduction in bumblebee 
visits. Similarly, the pink-flowered M. cardinalis re­
ceived 74-fold more visits from bumblebees than 
the wild type orange (although little reduction in 
hummingbird visits). These experiments show that 
both bumblebees and hummingbirds exhibit strong 
discrimination on the basis of petal colour. The near 
isogenic nature of the lines used in this study makes 
(d)
(c)
(a)
(b)
Figure 20.2  Flowers for which 
pollinators have been shown to 
discriminate between colour morphs. 
(a) Mimulus lewisii. (b) Mimulus 
cardinalis. Images (a) and (b) 
kindly provided by Toby Bradshaw 
(Washington State University). 
(c) Antirrhinum majus wild type and 
incolorata lines. (d) Antirrhinum majus 
wild type and sulfurea lines. Images 
(c) and (d) kindly provided by Enrico 
Coen (John Innes Centre). See also 
Plate 24.

230      INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
(2007) conducted a detailed analysis of bumblebee 
behaviour in response to the nivea mutant, and con­
cluded that the mutant was significantly less visible 
than red flowers at a range of distances, as a result 
of the similarity of the white flower colour to green 
vegetation when viewed through a bee’s visual sys­
tem. This similarity reduced the ‘green contrast’ of 
the nivea mutant relative to wild type flowers.
Recently it has even proved possible to use mo­
lecularly characterized loci controlling flower col­
our and scent in genetic model species to compare 
the relevant importance of these two cues to pol­
linators. Work by Klahre et al. (2011) analysing the 
interaction between petal colour and scent produc­
tion in attracting hawkmoths is described in Section 
20.7 below.
20.3.1  Discrimination in favour of nectar guides
Many flowers produce markings on their petals that 
are believed to act as nectar guides, directing polli­
nators towards the nectar or pollen reward. These 
are predicted to reduce the time taken to handle a 
flower, and therefore increase the attractiveness of 
the plant by improving the energetic efficiency of 
foraging. A very few studies have investigated pol­
linator discrimination between flowers with differ­
ences in this specialized subset of petal colours.
Scora (1964) showed that bees and wasps use 
the nectar guides on Monarda punctata flowers (La­
miales), consisting of three to five spots or lines of 
pigment in the back of the throat, to position them­
selves correctly to access the nectar. Scora used col­
chicine treatment to produce mutant plants without 
the nectar guides, but with otherwise normal flow­
ers. These initially appeared to attract bees and 
wasps to the same degree as wild type flowers, but 
the pollinators rejected the flowers after landing, 
without trying to probe for nectar.
A particularly well-studied system in which nec­
tar guides have been shown to be important is that 
of Delphinium nelsonii (Ranunculales), which has 
two sets of pollinators—hummingbirds and bum­
blebees (Waser and Price 1981). The flowers are 
usually deep blue, but occasional albino flowers 
arise in natural populations. The seed set of white 
flowers and blue flowers is very similar if they are 
hand-pollinated, suggesting that they are equally 
hue or the intensity alleles when P. cuspidata was 
not present. By exploring pollinator behaviour in 
mixed field plots they were able to show that flower 
constancy by butterfly pollinators was the expla­
nation for the selective pressure. When both Phlox 
species produced pale blue flowers, the swallowtail 
butterfly (Battus philenor) moved between the two 
species without discrimination, generating subfer­
tile interspecific hybrid seed. However, when the 
dark-flowered forms (dark red or dark blue) of 
P. drummondii were grown with P. cuspidata, the but­
terflies discriminated between flowers of different 
colours, reducing interspecific pollen flow and thus 
limiting the rate of hybrid production.
As with the study described above, where the 
genetic basis of flower colour was well known, the 
use of mutant or transgenic lines which have been 
subjected to extensive molecular characterization 
allows the assessment of pollinator discrimination 
between different colour morphs with absolute con­
fidence. Antirrhinum majus has proved to be an ex­
tremely useful model for this kind of work, being 
both bumblebee-pollinated and a classic molecular 
genetic model. Jones and Reithel (2001) investigat­
ed the responses of wild American bumblebees to 
experimental plots containing wild type red, white 
incolorata mutant (see Fig. 20.2c) (INC encodes fla­
vanone 3-hydroxylase; see Chapter 16), and yellow 
sulfurea mutant lines of Antirrhinum (see Fig. 20.2d). 
Different bees exhibited different preferences, with 
individual animals expressing strong preferences 
for either red or yellow flowers within a foraging 
bout. Similarly, Glover and Martin (1998) analysed 
pollinator responses to the nivea mutant of An­
tirrhinum, which contains a deletion of the gene 
encoding chalcone synthase (the first step of the 
anthocyanin synthetic pathway; see Chapter 16) 
and is therefore white. The petals contain no UV-
absorbing pigment, as well as no visible pigment, 
and are therefore white to the bee eye as well as to 
the human eye. Analysis of seed set of emasculated 
flowers in mixed plots indicated that the nivea mu­
tant flowers set significantly less seed than wild 
type red flowers, even though they were equally 
fertile when hand-pollinated. The extent of pollina­
tor discrimination varied with the number of pol­
linators present in the plot, but in all circumstances 
nivea mutants were discriminated against. Dyer et al. 

DO POLLINATORS DISCRIMINATE?      231
to bumblebee pollinators. Further work on the same 
lines, using naïve Bombus terrestris foragers, con­
cluded that the bees were not innately attracted to 
venation-patterned flowers, choosing them at a fre­
quency only slightly higher than that at which they 
selected ivory flowers. Whitney et al. (2013) sug­
gested that bumblebee preference for venation pat­
terning in the field was most likely to be a learned 
fertile. However, the seed set of open-pollinated al­
bino flowers is as much as 45% lower than that of 
blue flowers, and white flowers in artificial plots re­
ceive 24% fewer visits from pollinators than do blue 
flowers. Both bees and hummingbirds released into 
cages containing both blue and white flowers pre­
ferred the blue flowers. This appeared to be due to a 
difference in handling time between the two flower 
morphs, resulting from the ‘disappearance’ of the 
nectar guides in the white flowers. The blue flowers 
have a nectar guide, consisting of two small white 
petals that frame the entrance to the concealed nec­
taries (see Fig. 20.3a). These are not visible against 
the white background in the albino flowers. It takes 
up to 1.8 times as long for an animal to extract nec­
tar from the white flowers as from the blue flow­
ers, and up to 2.2 times as long for it to fly between 
white flowers as between blue flowers. This results 
in a significant difference in the total time taken 
to process a white flower and a blue flower, even 
though they provide identical nectar rewards. In 
this case, pollinator discrimination between differ­
ent colours of flower is directly attributable to the 
visibility of the nectar guides against the different 
backgrounds, and the consequent effects on han­
dling time (Waser and Price 1981).
Venation patterns (lines of pigmentation overly­
ing the vasculature) are common in many groups 
of flowering plants, and have been hypothesized 
to act as nectar guides, directing foraging animals 
to the reward. A recent study by Leonard and Pa­
paj found that artificial nectar guides consisting of 
thin radiating lines enhance the speed with which 
bumblebees find the reward in artificial flowers 
(Leonard and Papaj 2011). The work of Shang et al. 
(2011) on the developmental control of venation 
patterning was introduced in Chapter 17. To test 
the functional significance of venation patterning, 
the authors also planted out field plots of a set of 
near isogenic lines of Antirrhinum majus, including 
red, veined, pink, ivory, and white flower colours. 
They observed three species of bumblebee forag­
ing in their plots, and found that all three species 
significantly favoured red flowers over pink, ivory, 
or white ones, but that there was no significant 
bumblebee preference for red over veined flowers. 
They concluded that venation patterning, as seen in 
many wild Antirrhinum species, is highly attractive 
(a)
(b)
Figure 20.3  Flowers with significant nectar guides. (a) Delphinium 
nelsonii. Image kindly supplied by Nick Waser (University of 
California – Riverside). (b) Clarkia xantiana subsp. xantiana. Image 
kindly provided by Vince Eckhart (Grinnell College, USA). See also 
Plate 25.

232      INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
with particular rewards, in this case warmer su­
crose. Bees were presented with two colours of 
artificial flower, pink and purple. The colour differ­
ence was very slight, and bees had previously been 
shown not to discriminate between the two colours 
when both were equally rewarded. The purple flow­
ers were then heated to several degrees Centigrade 
above ambient, while the pink flowers were not, and 
both were provided with sucrose solution. The bees 
quickly learned only to land on the purple flowers, 
which contained the warmer reward. This ability to 
learn an association between flower colour and a 
particular reward may explain pollinator discrimi­
nation between apparently equally visible flower 
colours, if one colour is associated with other ben­
eficial properties such as enhanced nectar supply, 
warmth, or reduced handling time.
20.4  Discrimination between corollas 
of different sizes
There have been fewer experimental demonstra­
tions of pollinator discrimination between flowers 
of different sizes, despite the prediction, based on 
our knowledge of bee vision, that insects should 
strongly favour larger flowers because of their en­
hanced visibility. Spaethe et al. (2001) demonstrated 
that a decrease in target size from 28 mm to 5 mm 
diameter was correlated with an increase in time to 
find the flower from 10 seconds to over 2 minutes. 
One reason for the shortage of convincing experi­
mental data may be that flower size is not as vari­
able as might be expected, as perturbations in cell 
division or cell expansion are compensated for by 
reciprocal changes to the other process (see Chap­
ter 15). However, where experimental systems have 
been identified in which flower size varies signifi­
cantly and reproducibly within a population, then it 
has been possible to show that both bees and hum­
mingbirds discriminate on the basis of various as­
pects of corolla size. There is some evidence in each 
case to suggest that reward production increases 
with flower size, so such discrimination may be due 
to a learned association between flower size and re­
ward quality or quantity.
Some of the most thorough and convincing work 
has been conducted by Candace Galen over a num­
ber of years on Polemonium viscosum, the alpine 
response to the utility of the veins in directing the 
animal towards the nectar reward.
It is not just bumblebees and hummingbirds 
that respond to patterns on flowers. The presence 
of dark spots on the inflorescences of Daucus carota 
subsp. maxima (Apiales) attracts Musca domestica 
flies ­(Eiskowitch 1980). The South African daisy 
Gorteria diffusa (Asterales) has black spots on its ray 
florets and is pollinated by a small bee-fly, Megapal­
pus capensis. Capitula of G. diffusa with black spots 
received more fly visits than capitula from which 
the spotted ray florets had been removed, although 
in some cases this may be the result of sexual de­
ception, with male flies attempting to mate with 
the spots, rather than of a simple nectar guide effect 
(Johnson and Midgley 1997; Ellis and Johnson 2010).
Frequency-dependent behaviour may also in­
fluence pollinator discrimination between flowers 
with and without nectar guides. Clarkia xantiana 
subsp. xantiana (Myrtales) produces pale pink flow­
ers and is polymorphic for the presence of nectar 
guides. These consist of dramatic spots of deep red 
pigment, surrounded by a white area, at the base of 
each petal (see Fig. 20.3b; the genetic basis of petal 
spot formation in the related Clarkia gracilis is dis­
cussed in Chapter 18). Eckhart et al. (2006) showed 
that the pollinators of C. xantiana (several species 
of bee) showed no discrimination between flowers 
with spots and flowers without them, unless they 
were presented at different frequencies. When flow­
er frequencies were varied, one bee species prefer­
entially visited the more common form, whether 
that was spotted or spotless, while two other bee 
species preferentially visited the rarer form. As with 
petal colour in general, it appears that frequency-
dependent foraging strategies can serve to compli­
cate our understanding of pollinator discrimination 
between different forms of nectar guide.
20.3.2  Discrimination between colours as a cue 
to other differences
Pollinating animals may discriminate between dif­
ferent petal colours not only because some colours 
are more visible, or provide more handling infor­
mation than others, but also through learned asso­
ciations. Dyer et al. (2006) showed that bumblebees 
could learn to associate particular flower colours 

DO POLLINATORS DISCRIMINATE?      233
nectar than narrower flowers, and that there was 
a relationship between nectar production, corolla 
width, and hummingbird visitation. Flowers with 
wide corollas exported significantly more pollen 
as a consequence. I. aggregata is shown in Fig. 20.4, 
being visited by its other main pollinator, a large 
bumblebee.
It is important to note that the selection pres­
sure imposed by pollinators on floral shape is not 
only by direct floral discrimination and choice. 
Fulton and Hodges (1999) showed that the hawk­
moths which are the major pollinator of Aquilegia 
pubescens (Ranunculales) exert selective pressure on 
floral position through their choices—when flowers 
were positioned pendantly, as opposed to their nor­
mal upright position, they were visited ten times 
less frequently than flowers in the normal position. 
However, artificial shortening of the nectar spurs 
of A. pubescens had no effect on hawkmoth visita­
tion rates—pollinator choice was not related to spur 
skypilot (Ericales). This plant produces flowers 
with different degrees of corolla width or flare at 
different elevations in Colorado. The flowers of 
upland plants, growing in tundra habitats, have co­
rollas on average 12% wider than those of lowland 
plants growing at the timberline. The upland plants 
are bumblebee-pollinated, whereas the lowland 
plants are pollinated by a range of different insects, 
but mostly by flies. Both sets of plants are self-
incompatible, so effective pollination is essential 
for seed set. Bumblebees entering a mixed plot visit 
the wide-flowered plants first, and wide-flowered 
plants set more seed than narrow-flowered plants. 
Pollen removal by bumblebees has also been shown 
to be correlated with corolla flare (Galen and Stan­
ton 1989), indicating that the male component of 
fitness is also related to corolla size through bum­
blebee discrimination. Estimates of the selective ad­
vantage of wider corollas in attracting bumblebees 
predicted that the 12% difference in corolla flare 
could be achieved in only one to three generations 
(Galen 1996a,b). Pollinators are not the only ani­
mals to distinguish between alpine skypilots with 
different degrees of corolla flare. Nectar-gathering 
ants, which often sever the stigma and cause female 
infertility, preferentially visit short flowers with 
wide corollas. To test whether reduced corolla flare 
would protect against this damage, Galen and Cuba 
(2001) constricted floral growth using glue, so that 
flowers attained their normal size but had corollas 
36–46% narrower than usual. When ants were pre­
sented with mixed arrays of untreated control flow­
ers and the manipulated narrower flowers, they 
chose the wider controls 68% of the time. However, 
such protection is not selectively advantageous in 
the wild, because when bumblebees were allowed 
to pollinate a mixed array of the two flower types, 
the narrower manipulated flowers set 62% fewer 
seeds than the controls. These experiments confirm 
that pollinating bumblebees, as well as predatory 
ants, can and do discriminate between flowers of 
the same species with different widths of corolla.
Work with Ipomopsis aggregata (Ericales), a hum­
mingbird-pollinated plant that grows in the Rocky 
Mountains of America, has shown that birds also 
discriminate between flowers with different widths 
and lengths. Campbell et al. (1991) showed that 
wider flowers in their study site produced more 
Figure 20.4  Flowers for which pollinators have been shown to 
discriminate on the basis of size. Ipomopsis aggregata. Image kindly 
provided by Nick Waser (University of California – Riverside). See also 
Plate 26.

234      INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
pollinator visits than actinomorphic flowers and 
also produced more surviving juvenile offspring.
20.6  Discrimination between flowers 
with different petal cell shapes
In Section 17.6 we discussed the variety of roles 
that petal epidermal cell shape can play in modi­
fying flower colour, texture, and temperature. The 
fact that bumblebees can discriminate between wild 
type Antirrhinum plants with conical petal epider­
mal cells and isogenic mixta mutants with flat petal 
cells was shown by Glover and Martin (1998). Fruit 
set was recorded in mixed field plots of emasculat­
ed flowers, and the conical-celled form was shown 
to set significantly more fruit, reflecting more pol­
linator visits. These data were confirmed by Comba 
et al. (2000), who observed that bumblebees failed 
to land on flat-celled mixta flowers as often as on 
conical-celled wild type flowers, and that they also 
rejected flat-celled flowers without probing them 
more frequently than they did conical-celled flow­
ers. The current consensus is that bees discriminate 
between flowers with different shapes of epidermal 
cells on the basis of the grip that they provide, and 
can use the effect of conical cells on light capture 
as a colour cue to guide their choice of easy-to-grip 
flowers. It has long been known that immobile bees 
can be trained to recognize the petals of different 
species (and extend their proboscis) by the shape of 
the cells (Kevan and Lane 1985). Experiments with 
epoxy replicas of wild type and mixta mutant An­
tirrhinum petals confirmed that free-foraging bees 
can discriminate between them using touch alone. 
Bee preference for conical epidermal surfaces was 
stronger when artificial flowers were presented 
vertically rather than horizontally (Whitney et al. 
2009a). When the same experiment was repeated 
with Antirrhinum flowers, it was found that all 
preference for the wild type (conical-celled) line 
was lost when flowers were presented horizontal­
ly so that bees could land on them easily. In addi­
tional support of this explanation for bee preference 
for conical cells, Alcorn et al. (2012) showed that 
bumblebee preference for the wild type conical-
celled form of petunia over a flat celled mutant 
was increased when the flowers were moving. 
length. Shortening nectar spurs did have a strong 
effect on pollination efficiency, with hawkmoths 
removing significantly fewer pollen grains from 
flowers with short nectar spurs than from flowers 
with long nectar spurs, explaining the retention of 
the long spur trait even in the absence of direct pol­
linator discrimination.
20.5  Discrimination between 
zygomorphic and actinomorphic flowers
Although zygomorphy (bilateral symmetry) has 
evolved multiple times in the angiosperms, and is 
often described as a key specialization to attract a 
particular subset of pollinators (Cubas 2003), there 
have been few experimental attempts to investigate 
pollinator discrimination between floral morphs 
with different symmetries. This is mainly due to 
the difficulty of identifying suitable model systems. 
Very few species exhibit naturally occurring varia­
tion in floral symmetry to any great degree. Howev­
er, the use of actinomorphic mutants, such as those 
of Antirrhinum majus, is also problematic, as their 
phenotypes may be so extreme as to prohibit polli­
nation at all. For example, the radially symmetrical 
cycloidea/dichotoma double mutant (see Chapter 15, 
Section 15.2) produces a tightly closed corolla which 
is so narrow that free-flying bumblebees, the nor­
mal pollinator, cannot enter the flower to probe for 
nectar (B. J. Glover, unpublished data). Many stud­
ies have shown that bees can distinguish between 
artificial shapes with different symmetries (Giurfa 
et al. 1999), but it is only very recently that evidence 
for pollinator discrimination between differently 
symmetrical floral forms of the same species has 
arisen. A recent study using Erysimum mediohispani­
cum (Brassicales) has shown pollinator discrimina­
tion in favour of zygomorphy. This plant, growing 
in the Sierra Nevada, shows continuous variation 
in flower shape from purely actinomorphic to quite 
strongly zygomorphic with the two abaxial petals 
considerably larger than the two adaxial ones. One 
of its major pollinators in the study site is the beetle 
Meligethes maurus. Gomez et al. (2006) studied flow­
er morphology and a number of components of fit­
ness in a wild population of E. mediohispanicum, and 
reported that zygomorphic flowers received more 

DO POLLINATORS DISCRIMINATE?      235
When the moths were trained that the non-innately 
attractive scent of bat-pollinated Agave palmeri (As­
paragales) was associated with a reward, they then 
selected flowers impregnated with A. palmeri scent 
from the artificial flower array, in addition to select­
ing the ‘moth flower’ scented targets (Riffell et al. 
2013).
The ability of hawkmoth pollinators to discrimi­
nate between flowers with different scents was also 
demonstrated by Klahre et al. (2011). Red-flowered 
Petunia exserta (Solanales) is bird-pollinated and 
largely scentless, whereas white-flowered P. axillaris 
is strongly scented and pollinated by Manduca sexta. 
By reciprocally introgressing the locus controlling 
scent production between these two species, Klahre 
et al. were able to produce red P. exserta-like flow­
ers with scent, and white P. axillaris-like flowers that 
were scentless. In a pairwise comparison between 
scented and non-scented varieties of either P. exserta 
or P. axillaris, hawkmoths preferred scented flowers. 
However, when presented with a scentless white 
P. axillaris flower and a scented red P. exserta flower, 
hawkmoths showed no consistent preference for ei­
ther type, which suggests that visual and olfactory 
cues are of equal significance in foraging decisions. 
Experiments such as this, where near-isogenic lines 
are used to compare the combined effects of mul­
tiple cues, provide great insight into pollinator 
discrimination.
In this chapter we have considered how pollina­
tors sense various features of flowers, and whether 
there is convincing evidence that they do sometimes 
discriminate between such features. Although it is 
by no means clear from the literature that all diver­
sity in floral form is of significance to pollinating 
animals, there are certainly data to suggest that 
polymorphisms in flower size, flower shape, flower 
colour, and flower scent are all sometimes noted 
and responded to by pollinators. These data pro­
vide the evidence of natural selection operating on 
floral form that is necessary before any attempt can 
be made to classify floral diversity with regard to 
the preferences of particular pollinators. In the next 
chapter we shall look in more detail at pollination 
syndromes, considering the other assumptions un­
derlying the concept and the evidence as to whether 
the concept is useful.
These recent studies suggest that, although conical 
cells do visibly enhance flower colour, their primary 
adaptive function might be to enhance pollinator 
grip on the flower. It is through this effect on grip 
and foraging efficiency that some pollinating ani­
mals can discriminate between flowers with differ­
ent shaped petal epidermal cells.
20.7  Discrimination between flowers 
on the basis of scent
Analysis of pollinator response to floral scent has 
been considerably more difficult than analysis of 
visual responses, because variation in scent produc­
tion is less obvious to the investigator than is vari­
ation in appearance. However, a number of studies 
have established that pollinating animals do distin­
guish between flowers on the basis of their scent. 
For example, Dobson et al. (1999) showed that the 
scent released by the pollen of Rosa rugosa (Rosales) 
flowers had a significant effect on their attractive­
ness to bumblebees. These flowers produce no nec­
tar and attract pollen-gathering bees. Emasculated 
flowers received fewer bee visits than controls, but 
attractiveness was significantly enhanced by apply­
ing eugenol, an odour normally released by rose 
pollen, to the emasculated flowers. Similarly, Ash­
man et al. (2005) showed that odour extracts of male 
flowers, when applied to the female flowers of the 
wild strawberry Fragaria virginiana (Rosales), in­
creased the frequency of approaches by several spe­
cies of small bees to those flowers. A recent study 
by Riffell et al. (2013) established that moths are also 
able to distinguish between different floral scents, 
have an innate preference for the scent mixtures 
found in flowers from which moths usually forage, 
and can learn to associate other floral scent mixtures 
with a nectar reward. Flower-naïve individuals of 
Manduca sexta were introduced to an array of artifi­
cial flowers impregnated with volatile organic com­
pounds extracted from a variety of flowers, some 
of which were regular food sources for hawkmoths, 
and others of which were not. The moths prefer­
entially selected the artificial flowers impregnated 
with ‘moth flower’ volatiles over those impreg­
nated with volatiles from more generalized flowers. 

Understanding Flowers and Flowering. Second Edition. Beverley Glover.
© Beverley Glover 2014. Published 2014 by Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 21
Pollination syndromes: the evidence
In Chapter 14 we discussed the concept of a pollina­
tion syndrome—that is, a suite of floral characters 
such as those described in Chapters 15, 16, and 17, 
which have evolved together because they enhance 
pollination by a particular taxonomic or functional 
group of animals. This concept has underpinned 
much of floral biology for many years, and our 
purpose in this chapter is to assess the usefulness 
of the concept in understanding flowers and flow­
ering. We shall begin by considering why and how 
the pollination syndrome concept has become so 
entrenched in the literature on flowering, and then 
assess whether the key assumptions that underlie 
it are met. Finally, we shall assess the experimental 
evidence that pollination syndromes do exist, and 
the experimental evidence against them—those cas­
es where the major pollinator in the native habitat is 
not that which the flower’s morphology would lead 
us to predict. This chapter will also provide a brief 
overview of the relative importance of generaliza­
tion and specialization in pollination ecology.
21.1  Historical context
The recognition that pollinating animals are es­
sential for reproductive success in many flower­
ing plants came in 1761, in the work of Koelreuter 
(discussed and partially translated by Waser 2006). 
By 1793, Sprengel was already assigning likely pol­
linators to plants on the basis of their floral form, 
and attempting to classify flowers into groups ac­
cording to their rewards and the numbers of their 
floral parts (Waser 2006). A century or so later 
came the first attempt to classify flowers accord­
ing to the morphological and structural features 
that suited them for pollination by different ani­
mals. Delpino’s scheme was the forerunner of the 
pollination syndromes that we know today (Waser 
2006). However, much of the scientific enthusiasm 
for pollination syndromes can be traced to Charles 
Darwin and the controversy surrounding his the­
ories. Darwin’s own work on orchid pollination 
was one of the earlier essays on the relationships 
between suites of floral characters and their animal 
pollinators. In the rush to find evidence to support 
Darwin’s new evolutionary theory, the visually 
obvious similarities between flower size and pol­
linator size, flower colour and pollinator prefer­
ences, and flower structure and pollinator feeding 
mechanism were seized upon by many authors as 
clear examples of the consequences of natural se­
lection. The thorough description of the different 
pollination syndromes by Faegri and van der Pijl 
(1966), along with several other authors, with ref­
erence to corolla size and shape, colour, scent, and 
reward production, formally established the pol­
lination syndrome as the paradigm within which 
pollination ecology was conducted. It was only in 
the 1980s that experimental approaches were first 
used to assess whether particular floral traits were 
under selection by pollinators. Although these ex­
periments (some of which are described in Chapter 
20) did reveal the existence of pollinator selection 
on floral form, they did not address the frequency 
with which such selection occurs. In 1996, two criti­
cal essays were published, both questioning the 
utility of the pollination syndrome concept, and 
setting out the difficulties with its entrenchment in 
the botanical literature (Herrera 1996; Waser et al. 
1996). Both papers suggested that generalization, 
with flowers receiving pollinator service from more 
than one type of animal, was more frequent in na­
ture than the pollination syndrome-dominated lit­
erature might lead us to expect. One concern was 

Pollination syndromes: the evidence      237
limited by lack of pollinator attention (or too gen­
eral pollinator attention, resulting in interference 
competition). What is not as easy to assess is how 
frequently such limitations occur. The best study 
giving any quantitative data is the review by Knight 
et al. (2005) of published reports of pollen limita­
tion. As many as 63% of published studies did re­
cord pollen limitation of control plants, although 
the variety of methods used in the different studies 
makes even this conclusion tentative. In addition, it 
is likely that studies which failed to find pollen limi­
tation are under-represented in the published data 
set, since negative results are less likely to be pub­
lished. There are also vastly insufficient data for us 
to conclude whether pollinator attention limits the 
fitness of plants in all or a few particular habitats, 
and whether it occurs occasionally in a plant lifes­
pan, for all of the lifespan, or something in between. 
In short, Assumption 1 is qualitatively true, but we 
do not know very much about it at a quantitative 
level.
2.  Pollinators discriminate between different 
floral morphs within a species, exerting 
selection on floral traits
We discussed Assumption 2 in Chapter 20, and con­
cluded that some pollinators certainly discriminate 
between many differences in floral form, including 
those of colour, size, and scent. Although assessment 
of pollinator discrimination does require appropri­
ate consideration of pollinator sensory capabilities, 
there is sufficient evidence that it does occur to al­
low us to predict its occurrence between many other 
floral morphs.
It is a great deal harder to demonstrate selective 
pressure than it is to demonstrate pollinator discrim­
ination, so many authors assume that one follows 
from the other. It is likely that this is often, although 
not always, the case. Studies such as those of Can­
dace Galen with the alpine skypilot (Ericales) have 
demonstrated changes in floral morphology over 
generations to be consistent with selective pressure 
imposed by pollinators, making it likely that such 
selective pressure does occur in other systems. What 
is not yet known is how significant different floral 
traits are for different pollinators. For example, it is 
that positive cases of pollinator selection were over-
reported in relation to negative cases, generating a 
situation where we can say qualitatively that such 
selection occurs, but nothing quantitative about its 
relative frequency or importance. Most studies also 
fail to take account of constraints that might prevent 
plants from adapting, even when selection by pol­
linators is strong. This requires an understanding of 
the genetic control of flower development as well 
as an overview of the other ecological constraints 
on a flower, such as the need to avoid predators (for 
example, the nectar-robbing ants studied in Polemo­
nium viscosum by Galen and Cuba 2001). It also re­
quires an appreciation of the relationship between 
the traits of the flower and the lifetime fitness of the 
plant. It is only in recent years that a more integra­
tive approach to analysing pollination syndromes 
has been reported, and the data from such studies 
now allow us to make initial comments on the util­
ity of the pollination syndrome concept.
21.2  Putting the assumptions together
The pollination syndrome concept rests on a num­
ber of assumptions, although they are rarely stated 
explicitly. These are as follows:
1.	 Plant reproductive success is limited by a lack of 
pollinator attention.
2.	 Pollinators discriminate between different floral 
morphs within a species, exerting selection on 
floral traits.
3.	 Plants can respond to that selective pressure, 
having the necessary genetic variability with re­
spect to key traits.
4.	 Plants are not penalized in other ways for re­
sponding to that selective pressure.
5.	 This sequence of events has occurred in a major­
ity, or even a substantial majority, of the plant–
pollinator interactions that we see today.
6.	 This has resulted in a degree of specialization in 
many or most plant–pollinator interactions.
1.  Plant reproductive success is limited 
by a lack of pollinator attention
We discussed Assumption 1 in Chapter 19, and con­
cluded that plant reproductive success is sometimes 

238      INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
to reduce the attraction of herbivores. The flowers 
are usually pollinated by night-­flying hawkmoths, 
attracted by scent released from night-opening flow­
ers. However, when plants are attacked by the hawk­
moth caterpillars, scent production is reduced and 
flowers shift to diurnal opening, enhancing pollina­
tion by hummingbirds. In this example, selection has 
favoured flexibility of floral traits, but the situation 
provides a good example of why selection would not 
always favour increased scent production, even if it 
did enhance moth pollination. Changes to other flo­
ral traits might also carry costs. For example, chang­
es to floral pigmentation might be expected to affect 
floral temperature, heat load, and ultraviolet dam­
age to tissues. The most obvious cost of an increase 
in floral size, pigmentation, or reward production 
is that of increased use of resources. Therefore we 
should not expect that all floral traits will respond 
to pollinator-imposed selection, as some will be con­
strained by other parameters. A good deal of further 
research is needed to establish how frequently and 
how severely interactions with the abiotic environ­
ment, and with predators, constrain floral responses 
to pollinator-imposed selection.
5.  This sequence of events has occurred 
in a majority, or even a substantial majority, 
of the plant–pollinator interactions that we 
see today
Assumption 5 cannot be tested experimentally, as 
it considers events which have occurred during 
evolutionary time. At best we can hope to extrapo­
late from experimental evidence obtained on extant 
plants. Since we know that this sequence of as­
sumptions can be true for some plants today, we can 
certainly assume that it was true for some plants in 
the past. However, we are again faced with the dif­
ficulty of making any quantitative statement about 
the frequency of its occurrence.
6.  This has resulted in a degree of specialization 
in many or most plant–pollinator interactions
This final assumption must be true for the organ­
izing principle of the pollination syndrome to be 
useful. If it is not true, then pollination syndromes 
likely that traits that directly affect reward availabil­
ity are under stronger selective pressure than those 
that affect the colour of the flower.
3.  Plants can respond to that selective pressure, 
having the necessary genetic variability 
with respect to key traits
In several earlier chapters we discussed the genetic 
control of floral size, shape, symmetry, colour, and 
pattern. It is clear that many of these traits are under 
the control of multiple loci, often acting in a coordi­
nated fashion as a result of the activity of transcrip­
tion factors. Mutations to the coding or regulatory 
regions of these transcription factors, or to the regu­
latory regions of the genes they interact with, may 
result in morphological changes on which selective 
pressure can act. There is certainly no shortage of 
genetic material with the potential to be variable, 
and most of the traits under discussion are quanti­
tative (e.g. spur length, pigment content, petal size) 
and should therefore be developmentally labile. In­
deed, much evidence exists from a number of spe­
cies that variation within floral traits that influence 
pollinators is heritable, although it may also have 
an environmental component (Mitchell and Shaw 
1993; Campbell 1996; Galen 1996a,b). In Chapter 18 
we considered examples of lability of floral traits 
within a variety of phylogenetic frameworks, find­
ing evidence that variation in traits was present and 
differentially fixed in different populations or spe­
cies. It is therefore clear that plants can respond to 
selective pressure with shifts in floral morphology.
4.  Plants are not penalized in other ways 
for responding to that selective pressure
In Chapter 20 we discussed the possibility that traits 
which enhance attractiveness to pollinators might 
also have detrimental consequences. For example, 
Galen and Cuba (2001) showed that increased corol­
la flare in the alpine skypilot made the flowers more 
attractive to bumblebee pollinators but also more 
vulnerable to nectar-robbing ants which damaged 
carpels and reduced female fertility. Similarly, Kes­
sler et al. (2010) showed that Nicotiana attenuata (Sola­
nales) alters its pollinator-attracting scent production 

Pollination syndromes: the evidence      239
of animal species visiting a plant, they counted the 
number of functional groups (such as long-tongued 
bees, or pollen-gathering bees) recorded. They con­
cluded that around 75% of flowering plant species 
for which data were available were specialized on 
a single functional group, even if that group con­
tained multiple species. For example, Silene vulgaris 
(Caryophyllales) is pollinated by 26 species, but all 
of these are nocturnal moths, acting as a single func­
tional group (Fenster et al. 2004). We do not currently 
know to what extent behavioural patterns and dis­
criminatory abilities vary between species within 
a single pollinator functional group, making it dif­
ficult to assess how valid such groups are as units 
of specialization. A further complication in all of 
these studies is the need to be sure that the recorded 
flower visitors are actually pollinating. Padysakova 
et al. (2013) identified more than seven bee species, 
butterflies, three types of fly, and three bird species 
visiting the flowers of Hypoestes aristata (Lamiales) in 
one location in Cameroon, but found that only three 
species of large bees were actually pollinating the 
plant. Specialization in terms of pollinator species is 
the important consideration for the evolution of pol­
lination syndromes, whereas non-pollinating flower 
visitors can be highly variable and generalist.
Specialization between plants and pollinators is 
frequently asymmetric, adding further complexity 
to the identification of pollination syndromes. Spe­
cialist flowers pollinated by only a small number 
of animals are often using animals which are them­
selves great generalists, foraging from very many 
different plant species. Similarly, specialist polli­
nators which forage on a limited number of plant 
species are often foraging from plants that experi­
ence pollination service from a great many other 
animal species. This asymmetry in pollination biol­
ogy can provide increased stability, increasing the 
survival chances of rare or highly specialist species 
(Bascompte et al. 2003). The complexities presented 
by asymmetry and by distinguishing feeding from 
pollinating flower visitors has led to an emerging 
trend towards visualizing pollination in terms of 
networks, rather than species-by-species interac­
tions. The number of species in the network and its 
degree of connectedness can be useful when esti­
mating robustness of a community to abiotic per­
turbation (reviewed by Vazquez et al. 2009).
represent tidy ideas that are not reflected by what 
we see in nature, and should be treated with a great 
deal of caution. While the statement that a flower 
exhibits a particular pollination syndrome does not 
imply that it is only visited by a single species, it 
does imply that a substantial proportion of its pol­
lination is achieved by a single functional (usually 
taxonomic) group of animals. Hence, a pollination 
syndrome implies some degree of specialization 
and is inconsistent with the idea of flowers as gen­
eral advertisers of rewards to all passing animals. 
The assumption that plant–pollinator interactions 
are specialized has pervaded the literature for many 
years, but recently more empirical approaches have 
been taken to test this assumption. These approach­
es have been based on the assessment of the num­
ber of pollinating species per plant species, and the 
number of plant species visited per pollinator, and 
they have found that generalization is much more 
common than expected. These approaches are re­
viewed extensively elsewhere (see Waser et al. 1996; 
Waser and Ollerton 2006). Waser et al. (1996) con­
cluded that moderate generalization was the rule 
in most published plant–pollinator systems, with 
the variation in pollinator availability (and, less 
commonly, efficiency) limiting the extent to which 
plants could specialize on single pollinators. Simi­
larly, they pointed out that the limited flowering 
seasons of many plant species, and the variability 
in numbers of short-lived plants of any one species 
in each habitat each year, would limit the extent to 
which pollinators could specialize on single plant 
species. In all the studies that Waser et al. cited, the 
great majority of plant species were visited by (and, 
where this was tested, actually pollinated by) more 
than one animal species. These species were often 
of multiple genera or even orders.
In contrast, Fenster et al. (2004) argued that spe­
cialization and pollination syndromes should not 
be thought of as acting at the level of species, but at 
the level of ‘functional groups.’ They argued that the 
precise species which pollinated a flower was of no 
relevance, but that what mattered in terms of floral 
evolution was the selective pressure that this animal 
would impose, which would depend on its general 
morphological and behavioural characters. They re­
assessed some of the literature that Waser et al. (1996) 
had reviewed, but instead of counting the number 

240      INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
the full range of pollinators of a flower, not just the 
most common or ‘expected’ ones. A number of such 
studies have provided support for the pollination 
syndrome concept.
Wilson et al. (2004) described the morphology 
of and visitors to 49 different species of Penstemon, 
Keckiella, and Nothochelone (Lamiales), which are 
collectively thought of as garden penstemons (see 
Fig.  21.1a and b). Animals were recorded as pol­
linating if they visited a flower and left with pol­
len on their body. The authors found that flower 
colour segregated very neatly with pollinator—
bird-­pollinated flowers were shades of red or pink 
whereas bee-pollinated flowers were purple, blue, 
yellow, or white. They also found that bee-­pollinated 
flowers differed in floral morphology according to 
the size of their pollinator. Large open corollas were 
pollinated by large bees, whereas flowers with long 
thin corollas were pollinated by smaller bees. This 
distinction was less clear between bird- and bee-
pollinated flowers, with some intermediate forms 
present. Overall, Wilson et al. (2004) concluded 
that it was possible to correctly predict the main 
pollinator of a penstemon on the basis of its floral 
morphology, and that the pollination syndromes 
are therefore useful tools in this system. Similar 
conclusions were drawn from a smaller-scale study 
of four species of Ipomoea (Solanales) in the south­
ern USA. I. hederacea and I. trichocarpa have floral 
morphologies suggestive of bee pollination, with 
This final assumption, then, is either true or false 
depending on how specialization is defined. If it is 
true that most flowers are specialized at the level of 
functional groups, then the pollination syndrome 
concept has the potential to be a useful organizing 
principle for pollination ecology. We shall next con­
sider some of the published evidence that plants and 
pollinators are linked in pollination syndromes, and 
some of the published examples where they are not.
21.3  Evidence for pollination syndromes
Evidence that the pollination syndromes are useful 
tools comes from studies in which floral morphol­
ogy is described, the pollinator is predicted from 
floral morphology, and then the plant is observed 
in its native habitat to see which animals do pro­
vide pollination service. Very few such studies 
have been reported, and almost all date to the past 
20 years. It can be difficult to perform these stud­
ies well, because they should ideally measure pol­
lination, not visitation. Many animals may visit a 
flower without providing much, if any, pollination 
service. Indeed, some flower visitors rob nectar or 
damage flowers, and might therefore introduce se­
lective pressures to minimize floral attractiveness 
to them. Assessing which species are the true pol­
linators and measuring pollination efficiency is dif­
ficult in a wild situation. It is also important to note 
(a)
(b)
Figure 21.1  Plants for which the main 
pollinator type can be accurately predicted 
from floral morphology. (a) Penstemon 
centranthifolius (hummingbird-pollinated). 
(b) Penstemon heterophyllus (bee-pollinated). 
Images (a) and (b) kindly supplied by Scott 
Armbruster (University of Portsmouth). See 
also Plate 27.

Pollination syndromes: the evidence      241
number of plant species with very similar flowers. 
The pollination syndrome concept predicts that the 
pollinator would be the same in such cases. Pauw 
(2006) observed pollinator visits to six species of 
South African orchids (Asparagales) with very 
similar flowers. All of the flowers studied were 
greenish-yellow, with shallow corollas, had a pun­
gent scent, and secreted oil. The only animal species 
found to visit these flowers was the female of the 
oil-collecting bee Redivivia peringueyi, and analysis 
of captured bees confirmed that they carried pol­
linia from the orchids on their bodies. This is a rela­
tively specialized pollination syndrome, and it is in 
these specialized cases that the concept is likely to 
be of most value in predicting pollinator species.
21.4  Evidence against pollination 
syndromes
Similar sorts of studies have also found against the 
pollination syndrome concept. By investigating the 
reproductive behaviour of plant species that sup­
posedly show a particular pollination syndrome, 
some authors have found that the real pollinator 
is not the one predicted. Similarly, some studies of 
groups of plant species have failed to find overall 
correlations between floral morphology and polli­
nator. These studies are usually very similar in de­
sign to those discussed above, suggesting that their 
failure to match flowers to pollination syndromes 
reflects the inconsistency with which the concept is 
useful, rather than flaws in any particular study.
Hingston and McQuillan (2000) identified the 
animals visiting 114 native Tasmanian plant spe­
cies, and found that pollination syndromes did not 
predict floral visitors. Although they did not record 
pollination, only visitation, their results were still 
rather discouraging for the pollination syndrome 
concept. Some flowers appeared to have many 
characters associated with a particular syndrome, 
but were not visited by the appropriate animals. Al­
most all flowers had visitors from more than one or­
der of animals, and flowers of the same species had 
different visitors in different habitats. The authors 
therefore concluded that pollination syndromes 
were unreliable indicators of pollinating species, at 
least in the Tasmanian flora.
blue and purple flowers, wide corollas, and small 
volumes of nectar at average concentrations of 41% 
sucrose. Analysis of animals feeding from these 
flowers revealed that around 75% of their visitors 
were bumblebees, as predicted. Similarly, I. hederi­
folia and I. quamoclit have red flowers with narrow 
corollas, and secrete larger volumes of nectar with a 
concentration of 29% sucrose. Over 80% of the visits 
to these flowers were made by butterflies.
Machado and Lopes (2004) conducted a similar 
study of unrelated plants in a particular tropical dry 
forest habitat in Brazil. They recorded floral morphol­
ogy and floral visitors for 99 species, and were able 
to identify trends along the lines of the pollination 
syndromes. For example, hummingbird-­pollinated 
flowers were usually red, most bat-­pollinated flow­
ers were white, and actinomorphy was common in 
flowers pollinated by small insects. Also in Brazil, 
Danieli-Silva et al. (2011) used a network approach 
to assess whether floral morphology accurately pre­
dicted pollinator type in the flowers of a grassland 
community. They identified animals as pollinators if 
their bodies both touched the stigma during flower 
visitation and had pollen on them when they left the 
flower. These authors found that 69% of the interac­
tions in their network were between plants and the 
functional groups of insects that floral morphology 
predicted would pollinate them.
The true test of pollinator efficiency is reproduc­
tive success, and Hargreaves et al. (2004) were able to 
show that seed set was very strongly dependent on 
visitation by the predicted pollinator, a sunbird, in 
the African sugarbush (Protea roupelliae, Proteales). 
The flowers have dark pink bracts, no scent, but 
large quantities of nectar. They are visited by a range 
of nectarivorous birds, but also by a large number 
of different insect species. Their floral morphology 
would suggest that their main pollinator is a bird, 
but it was possible that any of these visitors was the 
actual pollinator. Hargreaves et al. (2004) excluded 
birds, but not insects, from inflorescences, using 
large mesh cages. They found that 75% of caged 
inflorescences set less than 5% of the maximum 
possible seed, whereas less than a third of uncaged 
inflorescences performed as badly, confirming that 
birds were the major pollinators of these plants.
A different approach to investigating pollina­
tion syndromes is to ask which animals pollinate a 

242      INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
success. Although most of the other variable flower 
morphological traits studied did show some cor­
relation with seed set, spur length did not show 
any correlation at all, indicating that it is not cur­
rently under selective pressure by the hawkmoth 
and is therefore not part of the current pollination 
syndrome of this plant. Even more strikingly, Her­
rera showed that fruit production, flower produc­
tion, plant size, and herbivory all affected seed set 
to a greater degree than all accumulated differences 
in floral morphology. He therefore concluded that 
selection on floral morphology may be virtually ir­
relevant in comparison with other ecological factors 
that determine plant fitness.
Analysis of plant reproductive behaviour has 
undermined confidence in even some of the most 
specialized of pollination syndromes. Zhang et al. 
(2005) showed that the apparently sapromyophil­
ous inflorescences of Tacca chantrieri (Dioscoreales) 
were predominantly self-pollinated in China, rather 
than pollinated by flies. The inflorescences contain 
dark purple bracts and flowers that are nearly black. 
However, the anthers were found to dehisce before 
the flowers opened, depositing pollen very effec­
tively on the adjacent stigmas. Selfing rates were 
estimated using molecular markers (isozymes) and 
found to vary from 76% to 94%. Therefore, although 
this species has a highly specialist floral morphol­
ogy strongly suggestive of one particular pollina­
tion syndrome, in its native habitat it is primarily 
self-pollinated. A similarly surprising result was 
reported by Pauw (1998), who discovered that the 
supposedly insect-pollinated milkweed, Microloma 
sagittatum (Gentianales), was in fact pollinated by 
sunbirds (see Fig. 21.2b). The plant produces pol­
len in pollinaria, which had previously only been 
thought to attach to insect bodies. However, obser­
vation in the native habitat revealed that sunbirds 
collect nectar from the flower, and in the process the 
pollinaria attach to their tongues, from where they 
are transferred to the next flower. The pollinaria are 
attached using a microscopic groove which clips to 
the edge of the tongue. Pauw (1998) also showed 
that caged plants, visited by a single sunbird but no 
insects, were successfully pollinated. This is anoth­
er striking example in which the floral morphology 
would have predicted an entirely different pollina­
tor from the one observed (Ollerton 1998).
A detailed analysis of a specialized pollination 
syndrome was published by Herrera (1993), who 
studied the floral morphology and female reproduc­
tive success of a Spanish endemic violet, Viola cazor­
lensis (Malpighiales), over 5 years (see Fig.  21.2a). 
This violet is pollinated by a single species, the 
diurnal hawkmoth, Macroglossum stellatarum. The 
flowers are characterized by a particularly long thin 
nectar spur (averaging around 25 mm in length), 
which had been assumed to be part of the plant’s 
pollination syndrome, fitting the long proboscis 
of the moth. However, Herrera showed that spur 
length had no effect at all on female reproductive 
(a)
(b)
Figure 21.2  Plants that have cast doubt on the pollination 
syndrome concept. (a) Viola cazorlensis. Image kindly supplied by 
Carlos Herrera (Seville). (b) Microloma sagittatum with its sunbird 
pollinator. Image kindly supplied by Anton Pauw (Stellenbosch). 
See also Plate 28.

Pollination syndromes: the evidence      243
et al. (2009) indicate that this may be the common 
situation globally. The arguments about the relative 
importance of generalization and specialization in 
pollination ecology are likely to continue for some 
time, but their resolution may depend on a change in 
terminology so that flowers are described with ref­
erence to their full range of pollinators, rather than 
to one ‘ideal’ pollinator. Indeed, many authors have 
pointed out the importance of considering the effects 
of multiple pollinators on a species. Flowers have 
often been described as having one ‘major’ pollina­
tor and one or more ‘minor’ pollinators. However, 
even this terminology is insufficiently precise, and 
other authors have proposed the term ‘most effec­
tive pollinator.’ Stebbins (1970) proposed that pol­
lination ecologists should focus on those pollinators 
that visit a flower ‘most frequently and effectively’, 
as they would be the likeliest to impose selective 
pressure. Mayfield et al. (2001) reported that these 
two elements were not necessarily linked. They 
showed that the most frequent visitors to flowers 
of Ipomopsis aggregata (Ericales) at a site in western 
Colarado were hummingbirds, but that bumblebees 
were more effective both at pollen removal and at 
ensuring seed production. A single bumblebee visit 
resulted in the removal of an average of 112.7 pollen 
grains, and the production of 4.36 seeds, whereas a 
single hummingbird visit resulted in the removal of 
38.1 pollen grains and the production of only 1.08 
seeds. However, bumblebees visited Ipomopsis flow­
ers only one-third to one-quarter as frequently as 
hummingbirds did. The flowers have the morphol­
ogy supposedly typical of bird-pollinated flowers, 
being red with long corollas, but bumblebees visit 
these flowers particularly when hummingbirds are 
rare and the nectar available is abundant. It may be 
that in years when few hummingbirds visit a popu­
lation, bumblebees learn to associate the colour and 
shape of I. aggregata flowers with a rich reward. This 
would imply that the plant is under selective pres­
sure in two different directions. Its most frequent 
pollinator, the hummingbird, may be expected to 
impose one set of pressures, while its most effective 
pollinator, the bumblebee, will impose another. The 
floral form seen in the wild might be thought of as 
a compromise, and one which must ensure that it 
does not exclude either pollinator. It would be inter­
esting to observe floral morphology in a population 
A recent and extremely wide-ranging study has 
concluded that pollination syndromes do not al­
low us to correctly predict pollinators for the ma­
jority of plants. Ollerton et al. (2009) conducted a 
multivariate analysis of the floral traits associated 
with traditional pollination syndromes, generat­
ing three-dimensional spaces associated with each 
syndrome. They then recorded the same floral traits 
from flowers from six different communities on 
different continents, and tested each species for fit 
to the positions of known pollination syndromes. 
Their results showed that the great majority of 
plant species (479 of the 482 species they analysed) 
did not produce flowers which fit within one of the 
spaces associated with the traditional pollination 
syndromes. Real flowers were generally more vari­
able in morphology than idealized ones, express­
ing combinations of traits associated with multiple 
pollination syndromes. The authors then recorded 
the most frequent effective pollinator of each of 
the plants under study, using pollen removal and 
contact between animal body and floral reproduc­
tive organs to ensure only effective pollinators were 
recorded. Averaged across the six communities, in 
only 29% of species was the main pollinator the 
one that would have been predicted from floral 
morphology, basing this prediction on the animal 
type associated with the classical pollination syn­
drome nearest in space to the position occupied by 
the actual flower. The authors concluded that the 
traditional pollination syndromes largely failed to 
describe the real variation in floral morphology and 
also failed to identify the true associations between 
plants and their pollinators.
21.5  The most effective pollinator?
The literature tells us that the assumptions which 
underlie the pollination syndrome concept are 
sometimes true, and that authors in some cases 
have found evidence for the existence of pollina­
tion syndromes—that is, that plants are sometimes 
pollinated by the animals that their floral morphol­
ogy would lead us to predict. However, there are 
also many recorded cases where pollinator identity 
does not match floral morphology, or where floral 
morphology cannot be assigned to a specific tra­
ditional syndrome, and the recent data of Ollerton 

244      INFLUENCE OF POLLINATORS ON FLORAL FORM
apply selective pressure in favour of reduced co­
rolla flare, but such a reduction in corolla flare has 
no consequence for the other major pollinators, 
bumblebees. If the same is true for the Ipomopsis ex­
ample described above, it may be that the flowers 
have the appearance of hummingbird-pollinated 
flowers simply because the traits favoured by the 
hummingbirds are selectively neutral with regard 
to the bumblebees. Indeed, it is not difficult to im­
agine situations in which a pollinator which is very 
clearly neither the most common nor the most ef­
fective applies selective pressure that does result 
in a specialized floral morphology, simply because 
the trait under selection does not affect pollination 
by the major pollinators. Such examples would cer­
tainly cause deviations from the classical pollina­
tion syndromes.
This chapter has considered the evidence that 
pollination syndromes are real—that is, that flow­
ers are pollinated by the animal that their morphol­
ogy would lead us to predict. It is difficult to draw 
firm quantitative conclusions, because the literature 
is patchy and the quality of the observations var­
ies greatly. However, it is clear that in some cases 
the pollination syndrome is a useful concept, par­
ticularly if applied with caution. It is also clear 
that much more work remains to be done on the 
frequency of pollination by different animals, the 
effectiveness of that pollination, and the selective 
pressures imposed by each animal. Only then can 
we hope to fully describe floral morphology with 
respect to pollinating animals, and only then can we 
really link the interactions of plants with their polli­
nators to the genes that control flower development 
and floral form, the major aim of this book.
pollinated by only one of these two animals over 
several generations. More importantly, it would be 
extremely useful to have similar data for other spe­
cies. If it is often the case that one pollinator is more 
efficient but another is more abundant, it is hardly 
surprising that many flowers fail to match the ex­
pectations of traditional pollination syndromes. In­
deed, it may be that in some of those studies that 
recorded the most frequent pollinator as not being 
that expected by the flower’s morphology, a less 
frequent visitor was more efficient at pollination, 
and the flower was actually responding to selective 
pressure imposed by the more effective pollinator.
Aigner (2004, 2006) pointed out that it is not only 
pollination frequency and pollinator effectiveness 
that determine what selective pressure is imposed 
on a flower, but also whether trade-offs occur be­
tween fitness for pollination by different animals. 
A situation where two different pollinators are ap­
plying opposing selective pressures, and increased 
fitness for one reduces the effectiveness of the other 
may, in fact, be quite rare. Perhaps more common 
would be a situation in which one pollinator ap­
plies pressure in one direction, but this has no con­
sequences for other pollinators. In Aigner’s own 
work with species of Dudleya (Saxifragales), hum­
mingbirds were shown to remove dye (as a mark­
er for pollen) more effectively and deposit pollen 
more successfully in flowers with corollas which 
had been artificially narrowed. However, although 
bumblebees, the other major pollinator of these 
plants, were more effective than hummingbirds at 
pollinating wider flowers, they were not themselves 
more effective with flowers of any particular width. 
In this case, hummingbirds might be expected to 

245
Epilogue
When I decided to write this book I had a single aim 
that seemed very clear in my mind—to link what 
we know of the molecular and genetic control of 
how flowers come to look as they do with what we 
know from evolutionary and ecological perspec­
tives about why they look as they do. My impetus 
was a firm belief that the traditional analysis of 
plant–pollinator interactions would be enhanced by 
a better understanding of the molecular processes 
underpinning floral morphology, and that the tra­
ditional molecular and developmental analysis of 
floral morphology would also benefit from an ap­
preciation of the consequences of that morphology 
for a real plant in its natural habitat. Twenty-one 
chapters and two editions later I am no less con­
vinced of the need for an integrative approach. But 
I have also come to realize that such an approach 
is not straightforward when so much ambiguity 
remains in the various specialist fields of floral bi­
ology. In particular, the current debates about the 
utility of the pollination syndrome concept, and 
the relative frequencies and symmetry of speciali­
zation and generalization in interactions between 
plants and pollinators, make it far from easy for a 
molecular developmentalist to contextualize their 
own research. It becomes tempting in these circum­
stances to oversimplify to a degree that will only 
antagonize the true pollination ecologist. I hope 
that, if nothing else, this book will serve to show 
each sort of specialist the complexity of the rest of 
the field, and perhaps encourage collaboration and 
discussion as to the way forward.
Despite the difficulties in presenting an integrat­
ed picture of floral biology, some major themes have 
come to the fore. In particular, flexibility seems to be 
as significant in plant development as it is in plant 
breeding system. Despite the apparent complexity 
of the developmental pathways leading to floral in­
duction, floral organ development, and final flower 
morphogenesis, plant development nevertheless 
has the flexibility to respond to environmental in­
puts and is equally labile in evolutionary time. 
The characteristic flexibility of plant development 
is usually interpreted as an adaptation to survival 
as an immobile organism in a world populated by 
mobile animals (although it could equally be ar­
gued that the mobility of animals is an adaptation 
to survival in the absence of flexible development!). 
In the same way, most plants exhibit great flexibil­
ity of breeding system, tolerating self-fertilization 
under marginal conditions, varying their repro­
ductive output as males or females in response to 
environmental pressures, and recruiting different 
pollen vectors in different habitats. This flexibility 
can also be interpreted as an adaptation to a ses­
sile life cycle in a changeable world populated by 
mobile animals.
In the same way that developmental flexibil­
ity is mirrored by breeding system flexibility, the 
presence of redundant mechanisms operating as 
fail-safes in development is mirrored by the likely 
general nature of plant–pollinator interactions. Al­
most uniquely among the eukaryotes, plant devel­
opment is characterized by an enormous degree of 
redundancy. The proportion of genes in the Arabi­
dopsis genome that encode transcriptional regula­
tors is several times the proportion of similar genes 
found in the Drosophila genome. These transcrip­
tional regulators act in overlapping cascades to reg­
ulate the expression of redundant structural genes 
found in large multigene families. The resulting 
redundancy acts as a safety net, ensuring success­
ful plant development even in the absence of one or 
several component factors. Redundancy may be a 

246      EPILOGUE
underlines the vital nature of both processes to plant 
reproductive success. The angiosperms are the most 
speciose plant group by some distance, and they also 
represent the bulk of terrestrial biomass (both plant 
and animal). They have colonized more habitats and 
occupied more niches than any other plant group. 
And this success can be traced to the reproductive 
innovations made by the first angiosperms—the 
development of flowers. Flowers, and the flexibility 
and redundancy inbuilt in their development and 
function, are responsible for the astonishing radia­
tion of the angiosperms and their continued success 
today. To fully understand that success we will need 
to continue our exploration of flower development, 
evolution, and pollination ecology in an open and 
integrative spirit, encouraging the disparate fields of 
floral biology to cross-fertilize each other with ideas 
just as the angiosperms encourage cross-fertilization 
through flowers themselves.
necessary adaptation of an organism that is continu­
ally exposed to damaging ultraviolet light, ensuring 
survival and reproduction even when cells and the 
genes they contain are damaged by daily exposure 
to sunlight. In the same way, the generalist nature 
of plant–pollinator interactions also provides safety 
nets, ensuring plant reproduction in the absence of 
the usual or most effective pollinator. This general­
ism may be at the level of functional groups, with 
multiple species of animal functioning in the same 
way with regard to pollen deposition and removal, 
or it may be at a higher level, with several clearly 
distinct types of animal all attracted to subsets of 
the same set of floral characters. The ability to self-
fertilize, or reproduce asexually through vegetative 
organs, provides the ultimate safety net in plant re­
production.
The importance of both flexibility and fail-safe 
mechanisms in floral development and pollination 

247
Ainsworth, C. (2000). Boys and girls come out to play: the 
molecular biology of dioecious plants. Annals of Botany 
86:211–221.
Ainsworth, C., S. Crossley, V. Buchanan-Wollaston, M. 
Thangavelu, and J. Parker. (1995). Male and female flow­
ers of the dioecious plant sorrel show different patterns 
of MADS box gene expression. Plant Cell 7:1583–1598.
Ainsworth, C., A. Rahman, J. Parker, and G. Edwards. 
(2005). Intersex inflorescences of Rumex acetosa demon­
strate that sex determination is unique to each flower. 
New Phytologist 165:711–720.
Airoldi, C., S. Bergonzi, and B. Davies. (2010). Single ami­
no acid change alters the ability to specify male or fe­
male organ identity. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the USA 107:18898–18902.
Aizen, M., and D. Vázquez. (2006). Flowering phonologies 
of hummingbird plants from the temperate forest of 
southern South America: is there evidence of competi­
tive displacement? Ecogeography 29:357–366.
Alabadi, D., T. Oyama, M. Yanovsky, F. Harmon, P. Mas, 
and S. Kay. (2001). Reciprocal regulation between TOC1 
and LHY/CCA1 within the Arabidopsis circadian clock. 
Science 293:880–883.
Al-Babili, S., J. Lintig, H. Haubruck, and P. Beyer. (1996). 
A novel, soluble form of phytoene desaturase from Nar­
cissus pseudonarcissus chromoplasts is Hsp70-complexed 
and competent for flavinylation, membrane association 
and enzymatic activation. Plant Journal 9:601–612.
Albert, N., D. Lewis, H. Zhang, K. Schwinn, P. Jameson, 
and K. Davies. (2011). Members of an R2R3-MYB tran­
scription factor family in Petunia are developmentally 
and environmentally regulated to control complex flo­
ral and vegetative pigmentation patterning. Plant Jour­
nal 65:771–784.
Alcorn, K., H. Whitney, and B. J. Glover. (2012). Flower 
movement increases pollinator preference for flowers 
with better grip. Functional Ecology 26:941–947.
Alexandre, C., and L. Hennig. (2008). FLC or not FLC: the 
other side of vernalization. Journal of Experimental Bota­
ny 59:1127–1135.
Aarts, M., R. Hodge, K. Kalantidis, D. Florack, Z. Wilson, 
B. Mulligan, W. Stiekema, R. Scott, and A. Pereira. (1997). 
The Arabidopsis MALE STERILITY 2 protein shares 
similarity with reductases in elongation/­condensation 
complexes. Plant Journal 12:615–623.
Abbott, R. J., P. A. Ashton, and D. G. Forbes. (1992). In­
trogressive origin of the radiate groundsel, Senecio vul­
garis L. var. hibernicus Syme: Aat3 evidence. Heredity 
60:295–299.
Abe, M., Y. Kobayashi, S. Yamamoto, Y. Daimon, A. Yama­
guchi, Y. Ikeda, H. Ichinoki, A. Notaguchi, K. Goto, and 
T. Araki. (2005). FD, a bZIP protein mediating signals 
from the floral pathway integrator FT at the shoot apex. 
Science 309:1052–1056.
Achard, P., H. Cheng, L. de Grauwe, J. Decat, H. Schoutteten, 
T. Moritz, D. V. D. Straeten, J. Peng, and N. P. Harberd. 
(2006). Integration of plant responses to environmentally 
activated phytohormonal signals. Science 311:91–94.
Ache, B., and J. Young. (2005). Olfaction: diverse species, 
conserved principles. Neuron 48:417–430.
Ackerman, J. (2000). Abiotic pollen and pollination: eco­
logical, functional and evolutionary perspectives. Plant 
Systematics and Evolution 222:167–185.
Ackerman, J., and A. Montalvo. (1990). Short- and long-
term limitations to fruit production in a tropical orchid. 
Ecology 71:263–272.
Ahmad, M., and A. R. Cashmore. (1993). HY4 gene of A. 
thaliana encodes a protein with characteristics of a blue-
light photoreceptor. Nature 366:162–166.
Ahn, J. H., D. Miller, V. J. Winter, M. J. Banfield, J. H. Lee, 
S. Y. Yoo, S. R. Henz, R. L. Brady, and D. Weigel. (2006). A 
divergent external loop confers antagonistic activity on 
floral regulators FT and TFL1. EMBO Journal 25:605–614.
Aigner, P. (2004). Floral specialisation without trade-offs: 
optimal corolla flare in contrasting pollination environ­
ments. Ecology 85:2560–2569.
Aigner, P. (2006). The evolution of specialised floral phe­
notypes in a fine-grained pollination environment. In 
N. Waser and J. Ollerton (eds), Plant–Pollinator Interac­
tions, pp. 23–46. University of Chicago Press, London.
References

248      References
Anon. (1921). Letters to Editor. Nature 107:301.
Arber, A. (1937). The interpretation of the flower: a study 
of some aspects of morphological thought. Biological Re­
views 12:157–184.
Arber, A. (1946). Goethe’s botany. Chronica Botanica 10:63–126.
Armbruster, W. S., M. Edwards, and E. Debevec. (1994). 
Floral character displacement generates an assemblage 
structure of Western Australian triggerplants (Stylidi­
um). Ecology 75:315–329.
Ashman, T., T. Knight, J. Steets, P. Amarasekare, M. Burd, 
D. Campbell, M. Dudash, M. Johnston, S. Mazer, R. 
Mitchell, M. Morgan, and W. Wilson. (2004). Pollen 
limitation of plant reproduction: ecological and evolu­
tionary causes and consequences. Ecology 85:2408–2421.
Ashman, T., M. Bradburn, D. Cole, B. Blaney, and R. Ra­
guso. (2005). The scent of a male: the role of floral vola­
tiles in pollination of a gender dimorphic plant. Ecology 
86:2099–2105.
Aubert, D., L. Chen, Y. Moon, D. Martin, L. Castle, C. 
Yang, and Z. R. Sung. (2001). EMF1, a novel protein in­
volved in the control of shoot architecture and flower­
ing in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 13:1865–1875.
Auckerman, M. J., I. Lee, D. Weigel, and R. M. Amasino. 
(1999). The Arabidopsis flowering-time gene LUMI­
NIDEPENDENS is expressed primarily in regions of cell 
proliferation and encodes a nuclear protein that regu­
lates LEAFY expression. Plant Journal 18:195–203.
Ausin, I., C. Alonso-Blanco, J. Jarillo, L. Ruiz-Garcia, and 
J. Martinez-Zapater. (2004). Regulation of flowering 
time by FVE, a retinoblastoma-associated protein. Na­
ture Genetics 36:162–166.
Ayasse, M., F. P. Schiestl, H. F. Paulus, F. Ibarra, and W. 
Francke. (2003). Pollinator attraction in a sexually de­
ceptive orchid by means of unconventional chemicals. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 
270:517–522.
Ayasse, M., J. Stoekl, and W. Franke. (2011). Chemical ecol­
ogy and pollinator-driven speciation in sexually decep­
tive orchids. Phytochemistry 72:1667–1677.
Baker, C., P. Sieber, F. Wellmer, and E. Meyerowitz. (2005). 
The early extra petals 1 mutant uncovers a role for micro­
RNA miR164c in regulating petal number in Arabidop­
sis. Current Biology 15:303–315.
Balasubramanian, S., S. Sureshkumar, J. Lempe, and 
D. Weigel (2006). Potent induction of Arabidopsis thaliana 
flowering by elevated growth temperature. PLoS Genet­
ics 2:e106.
Barak, S., E. Tobin, C. Andronis, S. Sugano, and R. Green. 
(2000). All in good time: the Arabidopsis circadian clock. 
Trends in Plant Science 5:517–522.
Barrett, P. M., and K. J. Willis. (2001). Did dinosaurs invent 
flowers? Dinosaur-angiosperm coevolution revisited. 
Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 
76:411–447.
Alfenito, M., E. Souer, C. Goodman, R. Buell, J. Mol, 
R. Koes, and V. Walbot. (1998). Functional complemen­
tation of anthocyanin sequestration in the vacuole by 
widely divergent glutathione S-transferases. Plant Cell 
10:1135–1149.
Allen, A., C. Thorogood, M. Hegarty, C. Lexer, and 
S. Hiscock. (2011). Pollen-pistil interactions and self-
incompatibility in the Asteraceae: new insights from 
studies of Senecio squalidus. Annals of Botany 108:687–698.
Almeida, J., R. Carpenter, T. P. Robbins, C. Martin, and 
E. S. Coen. (1989). Genetic interactions underlying flow­
er colour patterns in Antirrhinum majus. Genes and Devel­
opment 3:1758–1767.
Alvarez-Buylla, E., S. Liljegren, S. Pelaz, S. Gold, C. Burg­
eff, G. Ditta, F. Vergara-Silva, and M. Yanofsky. (2000). 
MADS-box gene evolution beyond flowers: expression 
in pollen, endosperm, guard cells, roots and trichomes. 
Plant Journal 24:457–466.
Alvarez-Buylla, E., B. Garcia-Ponce, and A. Garay-Arroyo. 
(2006). Unique and redundant functional domains of 
APETALA1 and CAULIFLOWER, two recently dupli­
cated Arabidopsis thaliana floral MADS-box genes. Jour­
nal of Experimental Botany 57:3099–3107.
Ambrose, B., D. Lerner, P. Ciceri, C. Padilla, M. Yanofsky, 
and R. Schmidt. (2000). Molecular and genetic analyses 
of the silky1 gene reveal conservation in floral organ 
specification between eudicots and monocots. Molecular 
Cell 5:569–579.
Anastasiou, E., S. Kenz, M. Gerstung, D. Maclean, J. Tim­
mer, C. Fleck, and M. Lenhard. (2007). Control of plant 
organ size by KLUH/CYP78A5-dependent intercellular 
signalling. Developmental Cell 13:843–856.
Andersen, C. H., C. S. Jensen, and K. Petersen. (2004). 
Similar genetic switch systems might integrate the flo­
ral inductive pathways in dicots and monocots. Trends 
in Plant Science 9:105–107.
Andersen, O., and M. Jordheim. (2006). The anthocyanins. 
In: Anderson O.M., Markham K.R. (eds) Flavonoids: Chem­
istry, biochemistry and applications, pp. 471–530. CRC Press, 
Boca Raton, FL.
Anderson, M., E. Cornish, S. Mau, E. Williams, R. Hoggart, 
A. Atkinson, I. Boenig, B. Grego, R. Simpson, P. Roche, 
J. Haley, J. Penschow, H. Niall, G. Treager, J. Coughlan, 
R. Crawford, and A. Clarke. (1986). Cloning of cDNA 
for a stylar glycoprotein associated with expression of 
self-incompatibility in Nicotiana alata. Nature 321:38–44.
Angenent, G., J. Franken, M. Busscher, A. Vandijken, 
J. Vanwent, H. Dons, and A. van Tunen. (1995). A novel 
class of MADS box genes is involved in ovule develop­
ment in petunia. Plant Cell 7:1569–1582.
Angiosperm Phylogeny Group. (2009). An update of the 
Angiosperm Phylogeny Group classification for the or­
ders and families of flowering plants: APG III. Botanical 
Journal of the Linnean Society 161:105–121.

References      249
Bernier, G., and C. Perilleux. (2005). A physiological over­
view of the genetics of flowering time control. Plant Bio­
technology Journal 3:3–16.
Bertin, R. (1993). Incidence of monoecy and dichogamy 
in relation to self-fertilization in angiosperms. American 
Journal of Botany 80:557–560.
Bertin, R., and C. Newman. (1993). Dichogamy in angio­
sperms. Botanical Review 59:112–152.
Beveridge, C., and I. Murfet. (1996). The gigas mutant in 
pea is deficient in the floral stimulus. Physiologia Plan­
tarum 96:637–645.
Bey, M., K. Stuber, K. Fellenberg, Z. Schwarz-Sommer, 
H. Sommer, H. Saedler, and S. Zachgo. (2004). Charac­
terisation of Antirrhinum petal development and iden­
tification of target genes of the class B MADS box gene 
DEFICIENS. Plant Cell 16:3197–3215.
Blazquez, M., and D. Weigel. (2000). Integration of floral 
inductive signals in Arabidopsis. Nature 404:889–892.
Blazquez, M., R. Green, O. Nilsson, M. Sussman, and 
D. Weigel. (1998). Gibberellins promote flowering of 
Arabidopsis by activating the LEAFY promoter. Plant 
Cell 10:791–800.
Blazquez, M., J. Ahn, and D. Weigel. (2003). A thermosen­
sory pathway controlling flowering time in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Nature Genetics 33:168–171.
Blazquez, M., C. Ferrandiz, F. Madueno, and F. Parcy. 
(2006). How floral meristems are built. Plant Molecular 
Biology 60:855–870.
Bodson, M. (1985). Changes in adenine nucleotide content 
in the apical bud of Sinapis alba L. during floral transi­
tion. Planta 163:34–37.
Bodson, M., and W. Outlaw (1985). Elevation in the su­
crose content of the shoot apical meristem of Sinapis alba 
at floral evocation. Plant Physiology 79:420–424.
Boggs, N., K. Dwyer, M. Nasrallah, and J. Nasrallah. 
(2009). In vivo detection of residues required for ligand-
selective activation of the S-locus receptor in Arabidop­
sis. Current Biology 19:786–791.
Böhlenius, H., T. Huang, L. Charbonnel-Campaa, A. Brun­
ner, S. Jansson, S. Strauss, and O. Nilsson. (2006). CO/FT 
regulatory module controls timing of flowering and sea­
sonal growth cessation in trees. Science 312:1040–1043.
Bond, D., E. Dennis, and J. Finnegan. (2011). The low tem­
perature response pathways for cold acclimation and 
vernalization are independent. Plant Cell and Environ­
ment 34:1737–1748.
Borner, R., G. Kampnann, J. Chandler, R. Gleissner, E. Wis­
man, K. Apel, and S. Melzer. (2000). A MADS domain 
gene involved in the transition to flowering in Arabidop­
sis. Plant Journal 24:591–599.
Borthwick, H. A., Hendricks, S. B., Parker, M. W., Toole, 
E. H. and Toole, V. K. (1952). A reversible photoreaction 
controlling seed germination. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the USA 38:662–666.
Barrett, S. C. H. (2002). The evolution of plant sexual di­
versity. Nature Reviews Genetics 3:274–284.
Barrett, S. C. H., L. K. Jesson, and A. M. Baker. (2000). 
The evolution and function of stylar polymorphisms in 
flowering plants. Annals of Botany 85:A253–A265.
Bartlett, M., and C. Specht. (2011). Changes in expression 
pattern of the TEOSINTE BRANCHED1-line genes in 
the Zingiberales provide a mechanism for evolutionary 
shifts in symmetry across the order. American Journal of 
Botany 98:1–17.
Bascompte, J., P. Jordano, C. Melian, and J. Olesen. (2003). 
The nested assembly of plant–animal mutualistic net­
works. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the USA 100:9383–9387.
Bastow, R., J. S. Mylne, C. Lister, Z. Lippman, R. A. Mar­
tienssen, and C. Dean. (2004). Vernalization requires 
epigenetic silencing of FLC by histone methylation. Na­
ture 427:164–167.
Battey, N. H., and F. Tooke. (2002). Molecular control and 
variation in the floral transition. Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology 5:62–68.
Baum, D. A. (1998). The evolution of plant development. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology 1:79–86.
Baurle, I., L. Smith, D. Baulcombe, and C. Dean. (2007). 
Widespread role for the flowering time regulators FCA 
and FPA in RNA-mediated chromatin silencing. Science 
318:109–112.
Becker, A., and G. Theissen. (2003). The major clades of 
MADS-box genes and their role in the development and 
evolution of flowering plants. Molecular Phylogenetics 
and Evolution 29:464–489.
Beld, M., C. Martin, H. Huits, A. Stuitje, and A. G. M. Ger­
ats. (1989). Flavonoid synthesis in Petunia; partial char­
acterisation of dihydroflavonol 4-reductase genes. Plant 
Molecular Biology 13:491–502.
Bell, C., D. Soltis, D, and P. Soltis. (2005a). The age of the 
angiosperms: A molecular timescale without a clock. 
Evolution 59:1245–1258.
Bell, C., D. Soltis, and P. Soltis. (2010). The age and diversi­
fication of the angiosperms re-revisited. American Jour­
nal of Botany 97:1296–1303.
Bell, J., J. Karron, and R. Mitchell. (2005b). Interspecific 
competition for pollination lowers seed production and 
outcrossing in Mimulus ringens. Ecology 86:762–771.
Bennett, A., and M. Thery. (2007). Avian colour vision and 
colouration: multidisciplinary evolutionary biology. 
American Naturalist 169:S1–S6.
Bereterbide, A., M. Hernould, S. Castera, and A. Mouras. 
(2001). Inhibition of cell proliferation, cell expansion 
and differentiation by the Arabidopsis SUPERMAN gene 
in transgenic tobacco plants. Planta 214:22–29.
Berger, F., and D. Twell. (2011). Germline specification 
and function in plants. Annual Reviews in Plant Biology 
62:461–484.

250      References
Breuil-Broyer, S., P. Morel, J. Almeida-Engler, V. Cous­
tham, I. Negrutiu, and C. Trehin. (2004). High-­resolution 
boundary analysis during Arabidopsis thaliana flower 
development. Plant Journal 38:182–192.
Brioudes, F., C. Joly, J. Szecsi, E. Varaud, J. Leroux, F. 
Bellvert, C. Bertrand, and M. Bendahmane. (2009). Jas­
monate controls late development stages of petal growth 
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Journal 60:1070–1080.
Brockington, S., R. Walker, B. Glover, P. Soltis, and D. Sol­
tis. (2011). Complex evolution of pigmentation in the 
Caryophyllales. New Phytologist 190:854–864.
Brockington, S., P. Rudall, M. Frohlich, D. Oppenheimer, 
P. Soltis, and D. Soltis. (2012). “Living stones” reveal 
alternative petal identity programmes within the core 
eudicots. Plant Journal 69:193–203.
Brockington, S., R. Alvarez-Fernandez, J. Landis, K. Al­
corn, R. Walker, M. Thomas, L. Hileman, and B. Glover. 
(2013). Evolutionary analysis of the MIXTA gene family 
highlights potential targets for the study of cellular dif­
ferentiation. Molecular Biology and Evolution 30:526–540.
Broholm, S., S. Tahtiharju, R. Laitinen, V. Albert, T. Teeri, 
and P. Elomaa. (2008). A TCP domain transcription 
factor controls flower type specification along the ra­
dial axis of the Gerbera (Asteraceae) inflorescence. Pro­
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 
105:9117–9122.
Brown, B. J., R. J. Mitchell, and S. A. Graham. (2002). 
Competition for pollination between an invasive spe­
cies (purple loosestrife) and a native congener. Ecology 
83:2328–2336.
Brugliera, F., G. Barr-Rewell, T. Holton, and J. Mason. 
(1999). Isolation and characterisation of a flavonoid 
3′-hydroxylase cDNA clone corresponding to the Ht1 
locus of Petunia hybrida. Plant Journal 19:441–451.
Bumrungsri, S., E. Sripaoraya, T. Chongsiri, K. Sridith, and 
P. A. Racey. (2009). The pollination ecology of durian 
(Durio zibethinus, Bombacaceae) in southern Thailand. 
Journal of Tropical Ecology 25:85–92.
Busch, A., and S. Zachgo. (2007). Control of corolla mon­
osymmetry in the Brassicaceae Iberis amara. Proceed­
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 104:
16714–16719.
Busch, M., K. Bomblies, and D. Weigel. (1999). Activa­
tion of a floral homeotic gene in Arabidopsis. Science 
285:585–587.
Buzgo, M., P. Soltis, and D. Soltis. (2004). Floral develop­
ment and morphology of Amborella trichopoda (Amborel­
laceae). International Journal of Plant Science 165:925–947.
Byzova, M., J. Franken, M. Aarts, J. de Almeida-Engler, 
G. Engler, C. Mariani, M. Campagne, and G. Angenent. 
(1999). Arabidopsis STERILE APETALA, a multifunc­
tional gene regulating inflorescence, flower and ovule 
development. Genes and Development 13:1002–1014.
Boualem, A., C. Troadec, I. Kovalski, M. Sari, R. Perl-
Treves, and A. Bendahmane. (2009). A conserved ethyl­
ene biosynthesis enzyme leads to andromonoecy in two 
Cucumis species. PLoS One 4:e6144.
Bowman, J., D. Smyth, and E. Meyerowitz. (1991). Genetic 
interactions among floral homeotic genes of Arabidop­
sis. Development 112:1–20.
Bowman, J., H. Sakai, T. Jack, D. Weigel, U. Mayer, and 
E. Myerowitz. (1992). Superman, a regulator of floral ho­
meotic genes in Arabidopsis. Development 114:599–615.
Bowman, J., J. Alvarez, D. Weigel, E. Meyerowitz, and 
D. Smyth. (1993). Control of flower development in 
Arabidopis thaliana by APETALA1 and interacting genes. 
Development 119:721–743.
Box, M., R. Bateman, B. Glover, and P. Rudall. (2008). 
Floral ontogenetic evidence of repeated speciation via 
paedomorphosis in subtribe Orchidinae (Orchidaceae). 
Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 157:429–454.
Box, M., and B. Glover. (2010). A plant developmental­
ist’s guide to paedomorphosis. Trends in Plant Science 
15:241–246.
Box, M. S., S. Dodsworth, P. Rudall, R. Bateman, and 
B. Glover. (2011). Characterisation of Linaria KNOX 
genes suggests a role in petal spur development. Plant 
Journal 608:703–714.
Box, M., S. Dodsworth, P. Rudall, R. Bateman, and B. Glov­
er. (2012). Flower-specific KNOX phenotype in the or­
chid Dactylorhiza fuchsia. Journal of Experimental Botany 
63:4811–4819.
Bradley, D., R. Carpenter, H. Sommer, N. Hartley, and 
E. Coen. (1993). Complementary floral homeotic pheno­
types result from opposite orientations of a transposon 
at the PLENA locus of Antirrhinum. Cell 72:85–95.
Bradley, D., R. Carpenter, L. Copsey, C. Vincent, S. Roth­
stein, and E. Coen. (1996). Control of inflorescence ar­
chitecture in Antirrhinum. Nature 379:791–797.
Bradley, D., O. Ratcliffe, C. Vincent, R. Carpenter, and 
E. Coen. (1997). Inflorescence commitment and architec­
ture in Arabidopsis. Science 275:80–83.
Bradshaw, E., P. Rudall, D. Devey, M. Thomas, B. Glover, 
and R. Bateman. (2010). Comparative labellum micro­
morphology of the sexually deceptive temperate orchid 
genus Ophrys: diverse epidermal cell types and multiple 
origins of structural colour. Botanical Journal of the Lin­
nean Society 162:504–540.
Bradshaw, H., and D. Schemske. (2003). Allele substitution 
at a flower colour locus produces a pollinator shift in 
monkeyflowers. Nature 426:176–178.
Brenner, G. J. (1996). Evidence for the earliest stages of 
angiosperm pollen evolution: a paleoequatorial section 
from Israel. In D. W. Taylor and L. J. Hickey (eds) Flow­
ering Plant Origin, Evolution and Phylogeny, pp. 91–115. 
Chapman and Hall, New York.

References      251
Chang, F., Y. Wang, S. Wang, and H. Ma. (2011). Molecu­
lar control of microsporogenesis in Arabidopsis. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology 14:66–73.
Chanvivattana, Y., A. Bishopp, D. Schubert, C. Stock, 
Y. Moon, Z. R. Sung, and J. Goodrich. (2004). Interac­
tion of Polycomb-group proteins controlling flowering 
in Arabidopsis. Development 131:5263–5276.
Chapman, M., S. Tang, D. Draeger, S. Nambeesan, 
H. Shaffer, J. Barb, S. Knapp, and J. Burke. (2012). Genet­
ic analysis of floral symmetry in Van Gogh’s sunflowers 
reveals independent recruitment of CYCLOIDEA genes 
in the Asteraceae. PLoS Genetics 8:e1002628.
Chappell, J. (1995). Biochemistry and molecular biology of 
the isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway in plants. Anuual 
Review of Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology 
46:521–547.
Charlesworth, D. (2002). Self-incompatibility: how to stay 
incompatible. Current Biology 12:R424–R426.
Charlesworth, D. (2006). Evolution of plant breeding sys­
tems. Current Biology 16:R726–R735.
Chaw, S., C. Parkinson, Y. Cheng, T. Vincent, and J. Palm­
er. (2000). Seed plant phylogeny inferred from all three 
plant genomes: Monophyly of extant gymnosperms 
and origin of Gnetales from conifers. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the USA 97:4086–4091.
Chen, D., J. Collins, and T. Goldsmith. (1984). The ultra­
violet receptor of bird retinas. Science 285:337–340.
Chen, D., B. Guo, S. Hexige, T. Zhang, D. Shen, and F. Ming. 
(2007). SQUA-like genes in the orchid Phalaenopsis are 
expressed in both vegetative and reproductive tissues. 
Planta 226:369–380.
Chen, H., Y. Shen, X. Tang, L. Yu, J. Wang, L. Guo, 
Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, S. Feng, E. Strickland, N. Zeng, 
and X. Deng. (2006). Arabidopsis CULLIN4 forms an 
E3 ubiquitin ligase with RBX1 and the CDD complex 
in mediating light control of development. Plant Cell 18:
1991–2004.
Chen, H., X. Huang, G. Gusmaroli, W. Terzhagi, O. Lau, 
Y. Yanagawa, Y. Zhang, J. Li, J. Lee, D. Zhu, and X. Deng. 
(2010). Arabidopsis CULLIN4-damaged DNA binding 
protein 1 interacts with CONSTITUTIVELY PHOTO­
MORPHOGENIC1-SUPPRESSOR OF PHYA complexes 
to regulate photomorphogenesis and flowering time. 
Plant Cell 22:108–123.
Chen, M., and J. Chory. (2011). Phytochrome signalling 
mechanisms and the control of plant development. 
Trends in Cell Biology 21:664–671.
Chen, X. (2004). A microRNA as a translational repressor 
of APETALA2 in Arabidopsis flower development. Sci­
ence 303:2022–2025.
Chen, Z. J., and L. Tian. (2007). Roles of dynamic and re­
versible histone acetylation in plant development and 
polyploidy. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1769:295–307.
Cabrillac, D., J. Cock, C. Dumas, and T. Gaude. (2001). The 
S-locus receptor kinase is inhibited by thioredoxins and 
activated by pollen coat proteins. Nature 410:220–223.
Campbell, D. (1996). Evolution of floral traits in a her­
maphroditic plant: field measurements of heritabilities 
and genetic correlations. Evolution 50:1442–1453.
Campbell, D., and K. Halama. (1993). Resource and pollen 
limitations to lifetime seed production in a natural plant 
population. Ecology 74:1043–1051.
Campbell, D., N. Waser, M. Price, E. Lynch, and R. Mitch­
ell. (1991). Components of phenotypic selection: pollen 
export and flower corolla width in Ipomopsis aggregata. 
Evolution 45:1458–1467.
Carlsbecker, A., K. Tandre, U. Johanson, M. Englund, 
and P. Engstrom. (2004). The MADS box gene DAL1 
is a potential mediator of the juvenile-to-adult transi­
tion in Norway spruce (Picea abies). Plant Journal 40:
546–557.
Carpenter, R., and E. Coen. (1990). Floral homeotic muta­
tions produced by transposon-mutagenesis in Antirrhi­
num majus. Genes and Development 4:1483–1493.
Cartolano, M., R. Castillo, N. Efremova, M. Kuckenberg, 
J. Zethof, T. Gerats, Z. Schwarz-Sommer, and M. Vanden­
bussche. (2007). A conserved microRNA module exerts 
homeotic control over Petunia hybrida and Antirrhinum 
majus floral organ identity. Nature Genetics 39:901–905.
Cashmore, A., J. Jarillo, Y. Wu, and D. Liu. (1999). Cryp­
tochromes: blue light receptors for plants and animals. 
Science 284:760–765.
Castillejo, C., and S. Pelaz. (2008). The balance between 
CONSTANS and TEMPRANILLO activities determines 
FT expression to trigger flowering. Current Biology 
18:1338–1343.
Causier, B., R. Catillo, J. Zhou, R. Ingram, Y. Xue, Z. 
Schwarz-Sommer, and B. Davies. (2005). Evolution in 
action: following function in duplicated floral homeotic 
genes. Current Biology 15:1508–1512.
Causier, B., D. Bradley, H. Cook, and B. Davies. (2009). 
Conserved intragenic elements were critical for the evo­
lution of the floral C-function. Plant Journal 58:41–52.
Chae, E., Q. Tan, T. Hill, and V. Irish. (2008). An Arabidopsis 
F-box protein acts as a transcriptional co-factor to regu­
late floral development. Development 135:1235–1245.
Chanderbali, A., V. Albert, J. Leebens-Mack, N. Altman, 
D. Soltis, and Soltis, P. (2009). Transcriptional signatures 
of ancient floral developmental genetics in avocado 
(Persea americana, Laureaceae). Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the USA 106:8929–8934.
Chandler, J., J. M. Martinez-Zapater, and C. Dean. (2000). 
Mutations causing defects in the biosynthesis and re­
sponse to gibberellins, abscisic acid and phytochrome 
B do not inhibit vernalization in Arabidopsis fca-1. Planta 
210:677–682.

252      References
required for flower development in Antirrhinum majus. 
Cell 63:1311–1322.
Colasanti, J., and V. Sundaresan. (2000). “Florigen” en­
ters the molecular age: long-distance signals that cause 
plants to flower. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 25:236–240.
Colcombet, J., A. Boisson-Cernier, R. Ros-Palau, C. Vera, 
and J. Schroeder. (2005). Arabidopsis SOMATIC EM­
BRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR KINASES 1 and 2 are es­
sential for tapetum development and microspore matu­
ration. Plant Cell 17:3350–3361.
Colombo, L., J. Franken, E. Koetje, J. van Went, H. Dons, 
G. Angenent, and A. van Tunen. (1995). The petunia 
MADS box gene FBP11 determines ovule identity. Plant 
Cell 7:1859–1868.
Comba, L., S. A. Corbet, H. Hunt, S. Outram, J. S. Parker, 
and B. J. Glover. (2000). The role of genes influencing 
the corolla in pollination of Antirrhinum majus. Plant, 
Cell and Environment 23:639–647.
Conner, J., and Z. Liu. (2000). LEUNIG, a putative tran­
scriptional corepressor that regulates AGAMOUS ex­
pression during flower development. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the USA 97:12902–12907.
Corbesier, L., and G. Coupland. (2005). Photoperiodic 
flowering of Arabidopsis: integrating genetic and physi­
ological approaches to characterisation of the floral 
stimulus. Plant, Cell and Environment 28:54–66.
Corbesier, L., C. Vincent, S. Jang, F. Fornara, Q. Fan, 
I. Searle, A. Giakountis, S. Farrona, L. Gissot, C. Turn­
bull, and Coupland, G. (2007). FT protein movement 
contributes to long-distance signaling in floral induc­
tion of Arabidopsis. Science 316:1030–1033.
Corley, S. B., R. Carpenter, L. Copsey, and E. Coen. (2005). 
Floral asymmetry involves an interplay between TCP 
and MYB transcription factors in Antirrhinum. Pro­
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 
102:5068–5073.
Coupland, G. (1995). Genetic and environmental con­
trol of flowering time in Arabidopsis. Trends in Genetics 
11:393–397.
Cox, P. A. (1988). Hydrophilous pollination. Annual Re­
views in Ecology and Systematics 19:261–280.
Cox, P. (1991). Abiotic pollination—an evolutionary es­
cape for animal-pollinated angiosperms. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B 333:
217–224.
Crane, P. (1985). Phylogenetic analysis of seed plants and 
the origin of angiosperms. Annals of the Missouri Botani­
cal Garden 72:716–793.
Crane, P. R., E. M. Friis, and K. R. Pedersen. (1995). The 
origin and early diversification of angiosperms. Nature 
374:27–33.
Crawford, B. C. W., U. Nath, R. Carpenter, and E. S. Coen. 
(2004). CINCINNATA controls both cell differentiation 
Chittka, L. (1996). Does bee colour vision predate the evo­
lution of flower colour? Naturwissenschaften 83:136–138.
Chittka, L., and N. M. Waser. (1997). Why red flowers 
are not invisible to bees. Israel Journal of Plant Sciences 
45:169–183.
Chittka, L., and S. Schürkens. (2001). Successful invasion 
of a floral market. An exotic Asian plant has moved in 
on Europe’s river-banks by bribing pollinators. Nature 
146:653.
Chittka, L., and N. Raine. (2006). Recognition of flowers by 
pollinators. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 9:428–435.
Choi, K., J. Kim, H. Hwang, S. Kim, C. Park, S. Kim, and 
I. Lee. (2011). The FRIGIDA complex activates transcrip­
tion of FLC, a strong flowering repressor in Arabidop­
sis, by recruiting chromatin modification factors. The 
Plant Cell 23:289–303.
Christinet, L., F. Burdet, M. Zaiko, U. Hinz, and J. Zryd. 
(2004). Characterization and functional identification 
of a novel plant 4,5-extradiol dioxygenase involved in 
betalain pigment biosynthesis in Portulaca grandiflora. 
Plant Physiology 134:265–274.
Chuck, G., R. Meeley, E. Irish, H. Sakai, and S. Hake. (2007). 
The maize tasselseed4 microRNA controls sex determi­
nation and meristem cell fate by targeting Tasselseed6/
indeterminate spikelet1. Nature Genetics 39:1517–1521.
Ciaffi, M., A. Paolacci, O. Tanzarella, and E. Porceddu. 
(2011). Molecular aspects of flower development in 
grasses. Sexual Plant Reproduction 24:247–282.
Citerne, H., R. T. Pennington, and Q. C. B. Cronk. (2006). 
An apparent reversal in floral symmetry in the legume 
Cadia is a homeotic transformation. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the USA 103:12017–12020.
Clack, T., A. Shokry, M. Moffet, P. Liu.M. Faul, and R. Shar­
rock. (2009). Obligate heterodimerization of Arabidop­
sis phytochromes C and E and interaction with the PIF3 
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor. Plant Cell 
21:786–799.
Clegg, M., and M. Durbin. (2003). Tracing floral adapta­
tions from ecology to molecules. Nature Reviews Genetics 
4:206–215.
Clough, S. J., and A. F. Bent. (1998). Floral dip: a simplified 
method for Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Journal 16:735–743.
Coe, E. H., S. McCormick, and S. A. Modena. (1981). White 
pollen in maize. Journal of Heredity 72:318–320.
Coen, E., and E. Meyerowitz. (1991). The war of the 
whorls: genetic interactions controlling flower develop­
ment. Nature 353:31–37.
Coen, E. S., R. Carpenter, and C. Martin. (1986). Transpos­
able elements generate novel patterns of gene expres­
sion in Antirrhinum majus. Cell 47:285–296.
Coen, E., J. M. Romero, S. Doyle, R. Elliott, G. Murphy, 
and R. Carpenter. (1990). floricaula: a homeotic gene 

References      253
petunia encodes a novel WD-repeat protein conserved 
in yeast, plants and animals. Genes and Development 
11:1422–1434.
de Vlaming, P., A. W. Scram, and H. Wiering. (1983). Genes 
affecting flower colour and pH of flower limb homoge­
nates in Petunia hybrida. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 
66:271–278.
Dewitte, W., C. Riou-Khamlichi, S. Scofield, J. M. S. Healy, 
A. Jacqmard, N. J. Kilby, and J. A. H. Murray. (2003). Al­
tered cell cycle distribution, hyperplasia, and inhibited 
differentiation in Arabidopsis caused by the D-type cy­
clin CYCD3. Plant Cell 15:79–92.
Diggle, P., V. Di Stilio, A. Gschwend, E. Golenberg, 
R. Moore, J. Russell, and J. Sinclair. (2011). Multiple de­
velopmental processes underlie sex differentiation in 
angiosperms. Trends in Genetics 27:368–376.
Dilcher, D. (2000). Towards a new synthesis: major evo­
lutionary trends in the angiosperm fossil record. Pro­
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 
97:7030–7036.
Dinh, T., T. Girke, X. Liu, L. Yant, M. Schmid, and X. Chen. 
(2012). The floral homeotic protein APETALA2 recog­
nizes and acts through an AT-rich sequence element. 
Development 139:1978–1986.
Disch, S., E. Anastasiou, V. Sharma, T. Laux, J. Fletcher, 
and M. Lenhard. (2006). The E3 ubiquitin ligase BIG 
BROTHER controls Arabidopsis organ size in a dosage-
dependent manner. Current Biology 16:272–279.
Distelfeld A., C. Li, and J. Dubcovsky (2009). Regulation of 
flowering in temperate cereals. Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology 12:178–184.
Di Stilio, V., E. Kramer, and D. Baum. (2005). Floral MADS 
box genes and homeotic gender dimorphism in Thal­
ictrum dioicum (Ranunculaceae)—a new model for the 
study of dioecy. The Plant Journal 41:755–766.
Di Stilio, V., C. Martin, A. Schulfer, and C. Connelly. 
(2009). An ortholog of MIXTA-like 2 controls epider­
mal cell shape in flowers of Thalictrum. New Phytologist 
183:718–728.
Ditta, G., A. Pinyopich, P. Robles, S. Pelaz, and M. Yanof­
sky. (2004). The SEP4 gene of Arabidopsis thaliana func­
tions in floral organ and meristem identity. Current Biol­
ogy 14:1935–1940.
Dobson, H., E. Danielson, and I. van Wesep. (1999). Pollen 
odor chemicals as modulators of bumble bee foraging 
on Rosa rugosa Thunb. (Rosaceae). Plant Species Biology 
14:153–166.
Doi, K., T. Izawa, T. Fuse, U. Yamanouchi, T. Kubo, 
Z. Shimatani, M. Yano, and A. Yoshimura. (2004). Ehd1, 
a B-type response regulator in rice, confers short-day 
promotion of flowering and controls FT-like gene ex­
pression independently of Hd1. Genes and Development 
18:926–936.
and growth in petal lobes and leaves of Antirrhinum. 
Plant Physiology 135:244–253.
Cronk, Q. C. B. (2001). Plant evolution and development 
in a post-genomic context. Nature Reviews Genetics 
2:607–619.
Cubas, P. (2003). Floral zygomorphy, the recurring evolu­
tion of a successful trait. BioEssays 26:1175–1184.
Cubas, P., C. Vincent, and E. S. Coen. (1999). An epigenetic 
mutation responsible for natural variation in floral sym­
metry. Nature 401:157–161.
Culley, T., S. Weller, and A. Sakai. (2002). The evolution of 
wind pollination in angiosperms. Trends in Ecology and 
Evolution 17:361–369.
Danieli-Silva, A., J. de Souza, A. Donatti, R. Campos, 
J. Vicente-Silva, L. Freitas, and I. Varassin. (2011). Do 
pollination syndromes cause modularity and predict 
interactions in a pollination network in tropical high-
altitude grasslands? Oikos 121:35–43.
Danyluk, J., N. Kane, G. Breton, A. Limin, D. B. Fowler, 
and F. Sarhan. (2003). TaVRT-1, a putative transcription 
factor associated with vegetative to reproductive transi­
tion in cereals. Plant Physiology 132:1849–1860.
Darwin, C. (1859). On the Origin of Species by Means of Nat­
ural Selection. Murray, London.
Das, P., T. Ito, F. Wellmer, T. Vernoux, A. Dedieu, J. Traas, 
and E. Meyerowitz. (2009). Floral stem cell termination 
involves the direct regulation of AGAMOUS by PERI­
ANTHIA. Development 136:1605–1611.
Davis, C., P. Endress, and D. Baum. (2008). The evolu­
tion of floral gigantism. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 
11:49–57.
Davis, S., J. Kurepa, and R. Vierstra. (1999). The Arabidopsis 
thaliana HY1 locus, required for phytochrome-chromo­
phore biosynthesis, encodes a protein related to heme 
oxygenases. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci­
ences of the USA 96:6541–6546.
de Bodt, S., J. Raes, K. Florquin, S. Rombauts, P. Rouze, 
G. Theissen, and Y. Van de Peer. (2003). Genomewide 
structural annotation and evolutionary analysis of the 
type I MADS-box genes in plants. Journal of Molecular 
Evolution 56:573–586.
Delgado-Vargas, F., and O. Paredes-Lopez. (2002). Anthocy­
anins and betalains. In: Natural Colorants for Food and Nu­
traceutical Uses, pp. 167–219. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Dellaporta, S., and A. Calderon-Urrea. (1994). The sex de­
termination process in maize. Science 266:1501–1505.
Deng, X., M. Matsui, N. Wei, D. Wagner, A. Chu, K. 
­Feldmann, and P. Quail. (1992). COP1, an Arabidopsis 
regulatory gene, encodes a protein with both a zinc-­
binding motif and a G beta homologous domain. Cell 
71:791–801.
de Vetten, N., F. Quattrocchio, J. Mol, and R. Koes. (1997). 
The an11 locus controlling flower pigmentation in 

254      References
involved in the control of floral architecture in Antirrhi­
num majus. EMBO Journal 18:5370–5379.
Eiskowitch, D. (1980). The role of dark flowers in the polli­
nation of certain Umbelliferae. Journal of Natural History 
14:737–742.
Ellis, A., and S. Johnson. (2010). Floral mimicry enhances 
pollen export: the evolution of pollination by sexual 
deceit outside of the Orchidaceae. American Naturalist 
176:E143–E151.
Emborg, T., J. Walker, B. Noh, and R. Viestra. (2006). Mul­
tiple heme oxygenase family members contribute to 
the biosynthesis of the phytochrome chromophore in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 140:856–868.
Endress, P. K. (1987). The early evolution of the angio­
sperm flower. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 2:300–304.
Endress, P. K. (1996). Structure and function of female and 
bisexual organ complexes in Gnetales. International Jour­
nal of Plant Science 157:S113–S125.
Endress, P. K. (2001). Evolution of floral symmetry. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology 4:86–91.
Endress, P., and A. Igersheim. (2000). The reproductive 
structures of the basal angiosperm Amborella trichopoda 
(Amborellaceae). International Journal of Plant Science 
161:S237–S248.
Epperson, B., and M. Clegg. (1987). Frequency-dependent 
variation for outcrossing rate among flower colour 
morphs of Ipomoea purpurea. Evolution 41:1302–1311.
Eriksson, S., H. Bohlenius, T. Moritz, and O. Nilsson. 
(2006). GA4 is the active gibberellin in the regulation 
of LEAFY transcription and Arabidopsis floral initiation. 
Plant Cell 18:2172–2181.
Eriksson, S., L. Stransfield, N. Adamski, H. Breuninger, 
and M. Lenhard. (2010). KLUH/CYP78A5 dependent 
growth signalling coordinates floral organ growth in 
Arabidopsis. Current Biology 20:527–532.
Faegri, K., and L. van der Pijl. (1966). The Principles of Pol­
lination Ecology. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Fan, H., Y. Hu, M. Tudor, and H. Ma. (1997). Specific in­
teractions between the K domains of AG and AGLs, 
members of the MADS domain family of DNA binding 
proteins. Plant Journal 12:999–1010.
Fankhauser, C., K. Yeh, J. C. Lagarias, H. Zhang, T. Elich, 
and J. Chory. (1999). PKS1, a substrate phosphoryl­
ated by phytochrome that modulates light signalling in 
Arabidopsis. Science 284:1539–1541.
Farre, G., C. Bai, R. Twyman, T. Capell, P. Christou, and 
C. Zhu. (2011). Nutritious crops producing multiple 
carotenoids—a metabolic balancing act. Trends in Plant 
Science 16:532–540.
Farzad, M., R. Griesbach, and M. R. Weiss. (2002). Floral 
colour change in Viola cornuta L. (Violaceae): a model 
system to study regulation of anthocyanin production. 
Plant Science 162:225–231.
Dong, C., M. Agarwal, Y. Zhang, Q. Xie, and J. Zhu. (2006). 
The negative regulator of plant cold responses, HOS1, 
is a ring E3 ligase that mediates the ubiquitination and 
degradation of ICE1. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the USA 103:8281–8286.
Dooner, H. K. (1983). Coordinate genetic regulation of fla­
vonoid biosynthetic enzymes in maize. Molecular and 
General Genetics 189:136–141.
Dornelas, M., and A. Rodriguez. (2005). A FLORICAULA/
LEAFY gene homolog is preferentially expressed in de­
veloping female cones of the tropical pine Pinus caribaea 
var. caribaea. Genetics and Molecular Biology 28:299–307.
Doyle, J., and M. Donoghue. (1986). Seed plant phylogeny 
and the origin of angiosperms: an experimental cladistic 
approach. Botanical Review 52:321–431.
Dresselhaus, T. (2006). Cell–cell communication during 
double fertilization. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 
9:41–47.
Drews, G., J. Bowman, and E. Meyerowitz. (1991). Nega­
tive regulation of the Arabidopsis homeotic gene AGA­
MOUS by the APETALA2 product. Cell 65:991–1002.
Drews, G., D. Wang, J. Steffen, K. Schumaker, and R. Yade­
gari. (2011). Identification of genes expressed in the an­
giosperm female gametophye. Journal of Experimental 
Botany 62:1593–1599.
Dudareva, N., and E. Pichersky. (2006). Biology of Floral 
Scent. Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton, FL.
Duek, P., M. Elmer, V. Van Oosten, and C. Fankhauser. 
(2004). The degradation of HFR1, a putative bHLH class 
transcription factor involved in light signaling, is regu­
lated by phosphorylation and requires COP1. Current 
Biology 14:2296–2301.
Dyer, A. G., H. M. Whitney, S. E. J. Arnold, B. J. Glover, 
and L. Chittka. (2006). Bees associate warmth with floral 
colour. Nature 442:525.
Dyer, A. G., H. M. Whitney, S. E. J. Arnold, B. J. Glover, 
and L. Chittka. (2007). Mutations perturbing petal cell 
shape and anthocyanin synthesis influence bumblebee 
perception of Antirrhinum majus flower colour. Arthro­
pod Plant Interactions 1:45–55.
Ebel, C., L. Mariconti, and W. Gruissem. (2004). Plant ret­
inoblastoma homologues control nuclear proliferation 
in the female gametophyte. Nature 429:776–780.
Eckardt, N. (2003). A component of the cryptochrome blue 
light signalling pathway. Plant Cell 15:1051–1052.
Eckhart, V., N. Rushing, G. Hart, and J. Hansen. (2006). 
Frequency-dependent pollinator foraging in polymor­
phic Clarkia xantiana ssp. xantiana populations: implica­
tions for flower colour evolution and pollinator interac­
tions. Oikos 112:412–421.
Egea-Cortines, M., H. Saedler, and H. Sommer. (1999). 
Ternary complex formation between the MADS-box 
proteins SQUAMOSA, DEFICIENS and GLOBOSA is 

References      255
Flores-Renteria, L., A. Vazquez-Lobo, A. Whipple, D. Pin­
ero, J. Marquez-Guzman, and C. Dominguez. (2011). 
Functional bisporangiate cones in Pinus johannis (Pinace­
ae): implications for the evolution of bisexuality in seed 
plants. American Journal of Botany 98:130–139.
Foote, H., J. Ride, V. Franklin-Tong, E. Walker, M. Law­
rence, and C. Franklin. (1994). Cloning and expression 
of a distinctive class of self-incompatibility (S) gene 
from Papaver rhoeas L. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the USA 91:2265–2269.
Fowler, S., K. Lee, H. Onouchi, A. Samach, K. Richard­
son, B. Morris, G. Coupland, and J. Putterill. (1999). 
GIGANTEA: a circadian clock-controlled gene that 
regulates photoperiodic flowering in Arabidopsis and 
encodes a protein with several possible membrane-
spanning domains. EMBO Journal 18:4679–4688.
Franklin-Tong, V., and C. Franklin. (2003). Gametophytic 
self-incompatibility inhibits pollen tube growth us­
ing different mechanisms. Trends in Plant Science 8:
598–605.
Franks, R., C. Wang, J. Levin, and Z. Liu. (2002). SEUSS, a 
member of a novel family of plant regulatory proteins, 
represses floral homeotic gene expression with LE­
UNIG. Development 129:253–263.
Franks, R. G., Z. Liu, and R. L. Fischer. (2006). SEUSS and 
LEUNIG regulate cell proliferation, vascular develop­
ment and organ polarity in Arabidopsis petals. Planta 
224:801–811.
Free, J. (1968). Dandelion as a competitor to fruit trees for 
bee visits. Journal of Applied Ecology 5:169–178.
Freeman, D. C., E. D. McArthur, K. Harper, and A. Blauer. 
(1981). Influence of environment on the floral sex ratio 
of monoecious plants. Evolution 35:194–197.
Freeman, D., J. Doust, A. El-Keblawy, K. Miglia, and 
E. McArthur. (1997). Sexual specialization and inbreed­
ing avoidance in the evolution of dioecy. Botanical Re­
view 63:65–92.
Friedman, J., and S. Barrett. (2008). A phylogenetic analy­
sis of the evolution of wind pollination in the angio­
sperms. International Journal of Plant Sciences 169:49–58.
Friedman, W. (1990). Double fertilisation in Ephedra, a 
nonflowering seed plant: its bearing on the origin of an­
giosperms. Science 247:951–954.
Friedman, W. E. (2006). Embryological evidence for devel­
opmental lability during early angiosperm evolution. 
Nature 441:337–340.
Friedman, W., and K. Ryerson. (2009). Reconstructing the 
ancestral female gametophyte of angiosperms: insights 
from Amborella and other ancient lineages of flowering 
plants. American Journal of Botany 96:129–143.
Friis, E. M., K. R. Pedersen, and P. R. Crane. (1999). Early 
angiosperm diversification: the diversity of pollen asso­
ciated with angiosperm reproductive structures in Early 
Favaro, R., A. Pinyopich, R. Battaglia, M. Kooiker, L. Borghi, 
G. Ditta, M. Yanofsky, M. Kater, and L. Colombo. (2003). 
MADS-box protein complexes control carpel and ovule 
development in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 15:2603–2611.
Feinsinger, P. (1987). Effects of plant species on each oth­
er’s pollination: is community structure influenced? 
Trends in Ecology and Evolution 2:123–126.
Feng, C., X. Liu, Y. Yu, D. Xie, R. Franks, and J. Wang. 
(2012). Evolution of bract development and B-class 
MADS box gene expression in petaloid bracts of Cornus 
s.l. (Cornaceae). New Phytologist 196:631–643.
Feng, W., Y. Jacob, K. Veley, L. Ding, X. Yu, G. Choe, and 
S. Michaels. (2011). Hypomorphic alleles reveal FCA-
independent roles for FY in the regulation of FLOWER­
ING LOCUS C. Plant Physiology 155:1425–1434.
Feng, X., Z. Zhao, Z. Tian, et al. (2006). Control of petal 
shape and floral zygomorphy in Lotus japonicus. Pro­
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 
103:4970–4975.
Fenster, C., W. S. Armbruster, P. Wilson, M. Dudash, and 
J. Thomson. (2004). Pollination syndromes and floral 
specialization. Annual Reviews in Ecology, Evolution and 
Systematics 35:375–403.
Feyissa, D., T. Lovdal, K. Olsen, R. Slimestad, and C. Lil­
lo. (2009). The endogenous GL3, but not EGL3, gene is 
necessary for anthocyanin accumulation as induced by 
nitrogen depletion in Arabidopsis rosette stage leaves. 
Planta 230:747–754.
Figueiredo, P., M. Elhabiri, K. Toki, N. Saito, O. Dangles, 
and R. Brouillard. (1996). New aspects of anthocya­
nin complexation. Intramolecular copigmentation as a 
means for colour loss? Phytochemistry 41:301–308.
Finnegan, E. J., R. K. Genger, K. Kovac, W. J. Peacock, and 
E. S. Dennis. (1998). DNA methylation and the promo­
tion of flowering by vernalization. Proceedings of the Na­
tional Academy of Sciences of the USA 95:5824–5829.
Finnegan, E. J., K. A. Kovac, E. Jaligot, C. C. Sheldon, 
W. J. Peacock, and E. S. Dennis. (2005). The downregu­
lation of FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) expression in 
plants with low levels of DNA methylation and by ver­
nalization occurs by distinct mechanisms. Plant Journal 
44:420–432.
Finnegan, J., and E. Dennis. (2007). Vernalization-induced 
trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 at FLC is not 
maintained in mitotically quiescent cells. Current Biol­
ogy 17:1978–1983.
Flanagan, C., and H. Ma (1994). Spatially and temporally 
regulated expression of the MADS box gene AGL2 in 
wild type and mutant Arabidopsis flowers. Plant Mo­
lecular Biology 26:581–595.
Fleming, T. (2006). Reproductive consequences of early 
flowering in organ pipe cactus, Stenocereus thurberi. In­
ternational Journal of Plant Sciences 167:473–481.

256      References
food-deceptive flower mimicry system. Behavioural Ecol­
ogy 16:159–168.
Garner, W., and H. Allard. (1920). Effect of the relative 
length of day and night and other factors of the envi­
ronment on growth and reproduction in plants. Journal 
of Agricultural Research 18:553–606.
Garray-Arroyo, A., A. Pineyro-Nelson, B. Garcia-Ponce, 
M. Sanchez, and E. Alvarez-Buylla. (2012). When ABC be­
comes ACB. Journal of Experimental Botany 63:2377–2395.
Gendall, A. R., Y. Y. Levy, A. Wilson, and C. Dean. (2001). The 
VERNALIZATION 2 gene mediates the epigenetic regu­
lation of vernalization in Arabidopsis. Cell 107:525–535.
Ghazoul, J. (2006). Floral diversity and the facilitation of 
pollination. Journal of Ecology 94:295–304.
Gigord, L., M. Macnair, and A. Smithson. (2001). Negative 
frequency-dependent selection maintains a dramatic 
flower colour polymorphism in the rewardless orchid 
Dactylorhiza sambucina (L.) Soo. Proceedings of the Nation­
al Academy of Sciences of the USA 98:6253–6255.
Giurfa, M., B. Eichmann, and R. Menzel. (1996). Symmetry 
perception in an insect. Nature 382:458–461.
Giurfa, M., A. Dafni, and P. Neal. (1999). Floral symme­
try and its role in plant-pollinator systems. International 
Journal of Plant Sciences 160:S41–S50.
Glover, B. J., and C. Martin. (1998). The role of petal cell 
shape and pigmentation in pollination success in Antir­
rhinum majus. Heredity 80:778–784.
Glover, B. J., M. Perez-Rodriguez, and C. Martin. (1998). 
Development of several epidermal cell types can be 
specified by the same MYB-related plant transcription 
factor. Development 125:3497–3508.
Gocal, G., C. Sheldon, F. Gubler, T. Moritz, D. Bagnall, 
C. MacMillan, S. Li, R. Parish, E. Dennis, D. Weigel, 
and R. King. (2001). GAMYB-like genes, flowering, and 
gibberellin signalling in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 
127:1682–1693.
Goldraij, A., K. Kondo, C. Lee, C. Hancock, M. Sivaguru, S. 
Vazquez-Santana, S. Kim, T. Phillips, F. Cruz-­Garcia, and 
B. McClure. (2006). Compartmentalization of ­S-RNase 
and HT-B degradation in self-incompatible Nicotiana. 
Nature 439:805–810.
Goldsmith, T., and K. Goldsmith. (1979). Discrimination of 
colours by the black-chinned hummingbird, Archilochus 
alexandri. Journal of Comparative Physiology A 130:209–220.
Golz, J. F., E. J. Keck, and A. Hudson. (2002). Spontane­
ous mutations in KNOX genes give rise to a novel floral 
structure in Antirrhinum. Current Biology 12:515–522.
Gomez, J., F. Perfectti, and J. Camacho. (2006). Natural 
selection on Erysimum mediohispanicum flower shape: 
insights into the evolution of zygomorphy. American 
Naturalist 168:531–545.
Gomi, K., and M. Matsuoka. (2003). Gibberellin signalling 
pathway. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 6:489–493.
Cretaceous floras from Portugal. Annals of the Missouri 
Botanical Garden 86:259–296.
Friis, E., K. Pedersen, and P. Crane. (2001). Fossil evidence 
of water lilies (Nymphaeales) in the Early Cretaceous. 
Nature 410:357–360.
Friis, E., K. Pedersen, and P. Crane. (2005). When Earth 
started blooming: insights from the fossil record. Cur­
rent Opinion in Plant Biology 8:5–12.
Frohlich, M. W. (2002). The Mostly Male theory of flower 
origins: summary and update regarding the Jurassic 
pteridosperm Pteroma. In: Q. C. B. Cronk, R. M. Bate­
man, and J. A. Hawkins (eds) Developmental Genetics and 
Plant Evolution, pp. 85–108. Taylor and Francis, London.
Frohlich, M. W., and D. S. Parker. (2000). The mostly male 
theory of flower evolutionary origins: from genes to fos­
sils. Systematic Botany 25:155–170.
Fukada-Tanaka, S., Y. Inagaki, T. Yamaguchi, N. Saito, and 
S. Iida. (2000). Colour-enhancing protein in blue petals. 
Nature 407:581.
Fulton, M., and S. Hodges. (1999). Floral isolation between 
Aquilegia formosa and Aquilegia pubescens. Proceedings of 
the Royal Society of London Series B 266:2247–2252.
Furner, I. J., and M. Matzke. (2010). Methylation and de­
methylation of the Arabidopsis genome. Current Opin­
ion in Plant Biology 14:137–141.
Furner, I. J., J. Ainscough, J. Pumfrey, and L. Petty. (1996). 
Clonal analysis of the late flowering fca mutant of Arabi­
dopsis thaliana: cell fate and cell autonomy. Development 
122:1041–1050.
Furness, C., P. Rudall, and F. B. Sampson. (2002). Evolu­
tion of microsporogenesis in angiosperms. International 
Journal of Plant Science 163:235–260.
Galego, L., and J. Almeida. (2002). Role of DIVARICATA in 
the control of dorsoventral asymmetry in Antirrhinum 
flowers. Genes and Development 16:880–891.
Galen, C. (1996a). Rates of floral evolution: adaptation to 
bumblebee pollination in an alpine wildflower, Polemo­
nium viscosum. Evolution 50:120–125.
Galen, C. (1996b). The evolution of floral form: insights 
from an alpine wildflower, Polemonium viscosum (Po­
lemoniaceae). In: D. Lloyd and S. Barrett (eds), Floral 
Biology, pp. 273–291. Chapman and Hall, New York.
Galen, C., and M. Stanton. (1989). Bumble bee pollina­
tion and floral morphology: factors influencing pol­
len dispersal in the alpine sky pilot, Polemonium vis­
cosum (Polemoniaceae). American Journal of Botany 76:
419–426.
Galen, C., and J. Cuba (2001). Down the tube: pollinators, 
predators and the evolution of flower shape in the alpine 
skypilot, Polemonium viscosum. Evolution 55:1963–1971.
Galizia, C. G., J. Kunze, A. Gumbert, A. K. Borg-Karlson, 
S. Sachse, C. Markl, and R. Menzel. (2005). Relation­
ship of visual and olfactory signal parameters in a 

References      257
Gross, C. (2005). A comparison of the sexual systems in 
the trees from the Australian tropics with other tropical 
biomes—more monoecy but why? American Journal of 
Botany 92:907–919.
Grotewold, E. (2006). The genetics and biochemistry of flo­
ral pigments. Annual Review of Plant Biology 57:761–780.
Gu, T., M. Mazzurco, W. Sulaman, D. Matias, and D. Gor­
ing. (1998). Binding of an arm-repeat protein to the 
kinase domain of the S-locus receptor kinase. Proceed­
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 95:
382–387.
Guerrieri, F., M. Schubert, J. Sandoz, and M. Giurfa. (2005). 
Perceptual and neural olfactory similarity in honeybees. 
PLoS Biology 3:e60.
Gustafson-Brown, C., B. Savidge, and M. Yanofsky. (1994). 
Regulation of the Arabidopsis floral homeotic gene 
Apetala1. Cell 76:131–143.
Gyula, P., E. Schafer, and F. Nagy. (2003). Light perception 
and signalling in higher plants. Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology 6:446–452.
Hallem, E., A. Dahanukar, and J. Carlson. (2006). Insect 
odor and taste receptors. Annual Review of Entomology 
51:113–135.
Hamès, C., D. Ptchelkine, C. Grimm, E. Thevenon, E. Moy­
roud, F. Gerard, J. Martiel, R. Benlloch, F. Parcy, and 
C. Müller. (2008). Structural basis for LEAFY floral 
switch function and similarity with helix-turn-helix 
proteins. EMBO Journal 27:2628–2637.
Hamilton, A.J., and D.C. Baulcombe. (1999). A species of 
small antisense RNA in posttranscriptional gene silenc­
ing in plants. Science 286:950–952.
Hanano, S., and K. Goto. (2011). Arabidopsis TERMINAL 
FLOWER1 is involved in the regulation of flowering 
time and inflorescence development through transcrip­
tional repression. Plant Cell 23:3172–3184.
Hanzawa, Y., T. Money, and D. Bradley. (2005). A single 
amino acid converts a repressor to an activator of flow­
ering. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
USA 102:7748–7753.
Hargreaves, A., S. Johnson, and E. Nol. (2004). Do floral 
syndromes predict specialisation in plant pollination 
systems? An experimental test in an ‘ornithophilous’ 
African Protea. Oecologia 140:295–301.
Harmer, S. (2009). The circadian system in higher plants. 
Annual Review of Plant Biology 60:357–377.
Haseloff, J., and B. Amos. (1995). GFP in plants. Trends in 
Genetics 11:328–329.
Hayama, R., T. Izawa, and K. Shimamoto. (2002). Isolation 
of rice genes possibly involved in the photoperiodic 
control of flowering by a fluorescent differential display 
method. Plant Cell Physiology 43:494–504.
Hayama, R., S. Yokoi, S. Tamaki, M. Yano, and K. Shi­
mamoto. (2003). Adaptation of photoperiodic control 
Gonthier, R., A. Jacqmard, and G. Bernier. (1987). Changes 
in cell cycle duration and growth fraction in the shoot 
meristem of Sinapis during floral transition. Planta 170:
55–59.
Goodman, C., P. Casati, and V. Walbot. (2004) A multidrug 
resistance-associated protein involved in anthocyanin 
transport in Zea mays. Plant Cell 16:1812–1826.
Goodrich, J., R. Carpenter, and E. S. Coen. (1992). A com­
mon gene regulates pigmentation pattern in diverse 
plant species. Cell 68:955–964.
Goodwin, T. W. (1980). The Biochemistry of the Carotenoids. 
Volume 1. Chapman and Hall, New York.
Goremykin, V. V., K. I. Hirsch-Ernst, S. Wolfl, and F. H. 
Hellwig. (2003). Analysis of the Amborella trichopoda 
chloroplast genome sequence suggests that Amborella is 
not a basal angiosperm. Molecular Biology and Evolution 
20:1499–1505.
Gorton, H. L., and T. C. Vogelmann. (1996). Effects of epi­
dermal cell shape and pigmentation on optical prop­
erties of Antirrhinum petals at visible and ultraviolet 
wavelengths. Plant Physiology 112:879–888.
Goto, K., and E. Meyerowitz. (1994). Function and regu­
lation of the Arabidopsis floral homeotic gene PISTIL­
LATA. Genes and Development 8:1548–1560.
Goto, K., J. Kyozuka, and J. Bowman. (2001). Turning flo­
ral organs into leaves, leaves into floral organs. Current 
Opinion in Genetics and Development 11:449–456.
Goto, N., T. Kumagai, and M. Koornneef. (1991). Flower­
ing responses to light breaks in photomorphogenic mu­
tants of Arabidopsis thaliana, a long-day plant. Physiologia 
Plantarum 83:209–215.
Gramzow, L., M. Ritz, and G. Theissen. (2010). On the 
origin of MADS-domain transcription factors. Trends in 
Genetics 26:149–153.
Grant, S., B. Hunkirchen, and H. Saedler. (1994). Develop­
mental differences between male and female flowers in 
the dioecious plant Silene latifolia. Plant Journal 6:471–480.
Grant-Downton, R., S. Hafidh, D. Twell, and H. Dickinson. 
(2009). Small RNA pathways are present and functional 
in the Arabidopsis male gametophyte. Molecular Plant 
2:500–512.
Gray, J., B. McClure, I. Boenig, M. Anderson, and A. 
Clarke. (1991). Action of the style product of the self-
incompatibility gene of Nicotiana alata (S-RNase) on in 
vitro-grown pollen tubes. Plant Cell 3:271–283.
Green, R., and E. Tobin. (1999). Loss of the circadian clock-
associated protein 1 in Arabidopsis results in altered 
clock-regulated gene expression. Proceedings of the Na­
tional Academy of Sciences of the USA 96:4176–4179.
Grigorova, B., C. Mara, C. Hollender, P. Sijacic, X. Chen, 
and Z. Liu. (2011). LEUNIG and SEUSS co-repressors 
regulate miR172 expression in Arabidopsis flowers. De­
velopment 138:2451–2456.

258      References
Herrera, C. (1993). Selection on floral morphology and en­
vironmental determinants of fecundity in a hawk moth-
pollinated violet. Ecological Monographs 63:251–275.
Herrera, C. (1996). Floral traits and plant adaptation to in­
sect pollinators: a devil’s advocate approach. In: D. Lloyd 
and S. Barrett (eds), Floral Biology, pp. 65–87. Chapman 
and Hall, New York.
Heyer, A., M. Raap, B. Schroeer, B. Marty, and L. Will­
mitzer. (2004). Cell wall invertase expression at the 
apical meristem alters floral, architectural and repro­
ductive traits in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Journal 39:
161–169.
Hicks, K., A. Millar, I. Carre, D. Somers, M. Straume, 
D. Meeks-Wagner, and S. Kay. (1996). Conditional cir­
cadian dysfunction of the Arabidopsis early-flowering 3 
mutant. Science 274:790–792.
Hicks, K., T. Albertson, and D. Wagner (2001). EARLY 
FLOWERING 3 encodes a novel protein that regulates 
circadian clock function and flowering in Arabidopsis. 
Plant Cell 13:1281–1292.
Hileman, L., E. Kramer, and D. Baum (2003). Differen­
tial regulation of symmetry genes and the evolution of 
flower morphologies. Proceedings of the National Acad­
emy of Sciences of the USA 100:12814–12819.
Hingston, A., and P. McQuillan. (2000). Are pollination 
syndromes useful predictors of floral visitors in Tasma­
nia? Austral Ecology 25:600–609.
Hirschberg, J. (1999). Production of high-value compounds: 
carotenoids and vitamin E. Current Opinion in Biotechnol­
ogy 10:186–191.
Hisamatsu, T., and R. King. (2008). The nature of floral sig­
nals in Arabidopsis. II. Roles for FLOWERING LOCUS 
T (FT) and gibberellins. Journal of Experimental Botany 
59:3821–3829.
Hiscock, S., and S. McInnis. (2003). Pollen recognition and 
rejection during the sporophytic self-incompatibility 
response: Brassica and beyond. Trends in Plant Science 
8:606–613.
Hiscock, S., and D. Tabah. (2003). The different mecha­
nisms of sporophytic self-incompatibility. Philosophi­
cal Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series B 
358:1037–1045.
Hiscock, S., S. McInnis, D. Tabah, C. Henderson, and A. 
Brennan. (2003). Sporophytic self-incompatibility in Sene­
cio squalidus L. (Asteraceae)—the search for S. Journal of 
Experimental Botany 54:169–174.
Hoballah, M., T. Gubitz, J. Stuurman, L. Broger, M. Bar­
one, T. Mandel, A. Dell’Olivo, M. Arnold, and C. Kuh­
lemeier. (2007). Single gene-mediated shift in pollinator 
attraction in Petunia. Plant Cell 19:779–790.
Hodges, S., and N. Derieg. (2009). Adaptive radiations: 
from field to genomic studies. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the USA 106:9947–9954.
pathways produces short-day flowering in rice. Nature 
422:719–722.
Hazebroek, J. P., J. D. Metzger, and E. R. Mansager. (1993). 
Thermoinductive regulation of gibberellin metabolism 
in Thlaspi arvensei. Plant Physiology 102:547–552.
He, Y., and R. M. Amasino. (2005). Role of chromatin 
modification in flowering-time control. Trends in Plant 
Science 10:30–35.
He, Y., S. D. Michaels, and R. M. Amasino. (2003). Regula­
tion of flowering time by histone acetylation in Arabi­
dopsis. Science 302:1751–1754.
He, Y., M. Doyle, and R. M. Amasino. (2004). PAF1-­complex-
mediated histone methylation of FLOWERING LOCUS C 
chromatin is required for the vernalization-responsive, 
winter-annual habit in Arabidopsis. Genes and Develop­
ment 18:2774–2784.
Hecht, V., R. Laurie, J. Vander Schoor, S. Ridge, C. Knowles, 
L. Liew, F. Sussmilch, I. Murfet, R. Macknight, and 
J. Weller. (2011). The pea GIGAS gene is a FLOWERING 
LOCUS T homolog necessary for graft-transmissible 
specification of flowering but not for responsiveness to 
photoperiod. Plant Cell 23:147–161.
Heidmann, I., N. Efremova, H. Saedler, and Z. Schwarz-
Sommer. (1998). A protocol for transformation and regen­
eration of Antirrhinum majus. Plant Journal 13:723–728.
Heijmans, K., P. Morel, and M. Vandenbussche. (2012a). 
MADS-box genes and floral development: the dark 
side. Journal of Experimental Botany 63:5397–5404.
Heijmans, K., K. Ament, A. Rijpkema, J. Zethof, M. 
Wolters-Arts, T. Gerats, and M. Vandenbussche. (2012b). 
Redefining C and D in the Petunia ABC. Plant Cell 24:
2305–2317.
Helliwell, C. A., C. C. Wood, M. Robertson, W. J. Peacock, 
and E. S. Dennis. (2006). The Arabidopsis FLC protein 
interacts directly in vivo with SOC1 and FT chromatin 
and is part of a high-molecular-weight protein complex. 
Plant Journal 46:183–192.
Henderson, I. R., F. Liu, S. Drea, G. G. Simpson, and C. 
Dean. (2005). An allelic series reveals essential roles for 
FY in plant development in addition to flowering-time 
control. Development 132:3597–3607.
Henschel, K., R. Kofuji, M. Hasebe, H. Saedler, T. Munster, 
and G. Theissen. (2002). Two ancient classes of MIKC-
type MADS-box genes are present in the moss Physcom­
itrella patens. Molecular Biology and Evolution 19:801–814.
Hepworth, S. R., F. Valverde, D. Ravenscroft, A. Moura­
dov, and G. Coupland. (2002). Antagonistic regulation of 
flowering-time gene SOC1 by CONSTANS and FLC via 
separate promoter motifs. EMBO Journal 21:4327–4337.
Hepworth, S. R., J. E. Klenz, and G. W. Haughn. (2006). 
UFO in the Arabidopsis inflorescence apex is required for 
floral-meristem identity and bract suppression. Planta 
223:769–778.

References      259
Hu, Y., H. Poh, and N. Chua. (2006). The Arabidopsis 
­ARGOS-LIKE gene regulates cell expansion during or­
gan growth. Plant Journal 47:1–9.
Huanca-Mamani, W., M. Garcia-Aguilar, G. Leon-­Martinez, 
U. Grossniklaus, and J. Vielle-Calzada. (2005). CHR11, a 
chromatin-remodeling factor essential for nuclear prolif­
eration during female gametogenesis in Arabidopsis thali­
ana. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
USA 102:17231–17236.
Huang, T., H. Boehlenius, S. Eriksson, F. Parcy, and O. 
Nilsson. (2005). The mRNA of the Arabidopsis gene FT 
moves from leaf to shoot apex and induces flowering. 
Science 309:1694–1696.
Huang, T., F. Lopez-Giraldez, J. Townsend, and V. Irish. 
(2012). RBE controls microRNA164 expression to effect 
floral organogenesis. Development 139:2161–2169.
Hughes, N. F. (1994). The Enigma of Angiosperm Origins. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Huijser, P., J. Klein, W. Lonnig, H. Meijer, H. Saedler, and 
H. Sommer. (1992). Bracteomania, an inflorescence 
anomaly, is caused by the loss of function of the MADS-
box gene squamosa in Antirrhinum majus. EMBO Journal 
11:1239–1249.
Hun, S., I. Shogo, and I. Takato. (2010). Similarities in the 
circadian clock and photoperiodism in plants. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology 13:594–603.
Hunaca-Mamani, W., M. Garcia-Aguilar, G. Leon-­Martinez, 
U. Grossniklaus, and J. Vielle-Calzada. (2005). CHR11, a 
chromatin-remodeling factor essential for nuclear prolif­
eration during female gametogenesis in Arabidopsis thali­
ana. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
USA 102:17231–17236.
Huq, E., J. Tepperman, and P. Quail. (2000). GIGANTEA is 
a nuclear protein involved in phytochrome signalling in 
Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci­
ences of the USA 97:9789–9794.
Immink, R., I. Tonaco, S. de Folter, A. Schchennikova, A. van 
Dijk, J. Busscher-Lange, J. Borst, and G. Angenent. (2009). 
SEPALLATA3: the “glue” for MADS box transcription 
factor complex formation. Genome Biology 10:R24.
Ingram, G., J. Goodrich, M. Wilkinson, R. Simon, G. 
Haughn, and E. Coen. (1995). Parallels between UNU­
SUAL FLORAL ORGANS and FIMBRIATA, genes con­
trolling flower development in Arabidopsis and Antir­
rhinum. Plant Cell 7:1501–1510.
Ingram, G., S. Doyle, R. Carpenter, E. Schultz, R. Simon, 
and E. Coen. (1997). Dual role for fimbriata in regulating 
floral homeotic genes and cell division in Antirrhinum. 
EMBO Journal 16:6521–6534.
Internicola, A., and L. Harder. (2012). Bumble-bee learn­
ing selects for both early and long flowering in food-­
deceptive plants. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Bio­
logical Sciences 279:1538–1543.
Hoffmann-Benning, S., D. Gage, L. McIntosh, H. Kende, 
and J. Zeevaart. (2002). Comparison of peptides in the 
phloem sap of flowering and non-flowering Perilla 
and lupine plants using microbore HPLC followed by 
­matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight 
mass spectrometry. Planta 216:140–147.
Holton, T. A., F. Brugliera, and Y. Tanaka. (1993). Cloning 
and expression of flavonol synthase from Petunia hybri­
da. Plant Journal 4:1003–1010.
Honma, T., and K. Goto. (2001). Complexes of MADS-box 
proteins are sufficient to convert leaves into floral or­
gans. Nature 409:525–529.
Honys, D., and D. Twell. (2003). Comparative analysis of 
the Arabidopsis pollen transcriptome. Plant Physiology 
132:640–652.
Hopkins, R., and M. Rausher. (2011). Identification of two 
genes causing reinforcement in the Texas wildflower 
Phlox drummondii. Nature 469:411–414.
Hopkins, R., and M. Rausher. (2012). Pollinator-mediated 
selection on flower colour alleles drives reinforcement. 
Science 335:1090–1092.
Hord, C., C. Chen, B. Deyoung, S. Clark, and H. Ma. 
(2006). The BAM1/BAM2 receptor-like kinases are im­
portant regulators of Arabidopsis early anther develop­
ment. Plant Cell 18:1667–1680.
Hornyik, C., L. Terzi, and G. Simpson. (2010). The Spen 
family protein FPA controls alternative cleavage and 
polyadenylation of RNA. Developmental Cell 18:203–213.
Horridge, G. (1996). The honeybee (Apis mellifera) detects 
bilateral symmetry and discriminates its axis. Journal of 
Insect Physiology 42:755–764.
Horvitz, C., and D. Schemske. (1988). A test of the pollina­
tor limitation hypothesis for a neotropical herb. Ecology 
69:200–206.
Howarth, D., and M. Donoghue. (2006). Phylogenetic 
analysis of the “ECE” (CYC/TB1) clade reveals dupli­
cations predating the core eudicots. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the USA 103:9101–9106.
Howarth, D., T. Martins, E. Chimney, and M. Donoghue. 
(2011). Diversification of CYCLOIDEA expression in the 
evolution of bilateral flower symmetry in Caprifoliaceae 
and Lonicera (Dipsacales). Annals of Botany 107:1521–1532.
Hsu, C-Y., J. Adams, H. Kim, K. No, C. Ma, S. Strauss, 
J. Drnevich, L. Vandervelde, J. Ellis, B. Rice, N. Wickett, 
L. Gunter, G. Tuskan, A. Brunner, G. Page, A. Barakat, 
J. Carlson, C. dePamphilis, D. Luthe, and C. Yuceer. 
(2011). FLOWERING LOCUS T duplication coordinates 
reproductive and vegetative growth in perennial pop­
lar. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
USA 108:10756–10761.
Hu, Y., Q. Xie, and N. Chua. (2003). The Arabidopsis auxin-
inducible gene ARGOS controls lateral organ size. Plant 
Cell 15:1951–1961.

260      References
Jackson, D. (1992). In situ hybridization in plants. In: D.J. 
Bowles, S.J. Gurr and M. McPhereson (eds) Molecular 
Plant Pathology: a practical approach, pp. 163–174. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford.
Jacobsen, S. E., and N. E. Olszewski. (1993). Mutations at 
the SPINDLY locus of Arabidopsis alter gibberellin sig­
nal transduction. Plant Cell 5:887–896.
Jacobsen, S., K. Binkowski, and N. Olszewski. (1996). 
SPINDLY, a tetratricopeptide repeat protein involved 
in gibberellin signal transduction in Arabidopsis. Pro­
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 
93:9292–9296.
Jacqmard, A., J. Miksche, and G. Bernier. (1972). Quanti­
tative study of nucleic acids and proteins in the shoot 
apex of Sinapis alba during transition from the vegeta­
tive to the reproductive condition. American Journal of 
Botany 59:714–721.
Jaeger, K., and Wigge, P. (2007). FT protein acts as a long-
range signal in Arabidopsis. Current Biology 17:1050–1054.
Jefferson, R., T. Kavanagh, and M. Bevan. (1987). GUS fu­
sions: beta-glucuronidase as a sensitive and versatile 
gene fusion marker in higher plants. EMBO Journal 
6:3901–3907.
Jeon, J., S. Jang, S. Lee, J. Nam, C. Kim, S. Lee, Y. Chung, 
S. Kim, Y. Lee, Y. Cho, and G. An. (2000). leafy hull sterile 
1 is a homeotic mutation in a rice MADS box gene af­
fecting flower development. Plant Cell 12:871–884.
Jesson, L. K., and S. C. H. Barrett. (2002). Solving the puz­
zle of mirror-image flowers. Nature 417:707.
Jesson, L., and S. Barrett. (2005). Experimental tests of the 
function of mirror-image flowers. Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society 85:167–179.
Jia, G., X. Liu, H. Owen, and D. Zhao. (2008). Signaling of 
cell fate determination by the TPD1 small protein and 
EMS1 receptor kinase. Proceedings of the National Acad­
emy of Sciences of the USA 105:2220–2225.
Jofuku, K., B. Denboer, M. Van Montagu, and J. Okamuro. 
(1994). Control of Arabidopsis flower and seed devel­
opment by the homeotic gene APETALA2. Plant Cell 
6:1211–1225.
Johanson, U., J. West, C. Lister, S. Michaels, R. Amasino, 
and C. Dean,. (2000). Molecular analysis of FRIGIDA, 
a major determinant of natural variation in Arabidopsis 
flowering time. Science 290:344–347.
Johnson, S. D., and J. J. Midgley. (1997). Fly pollination 
in Gorteria diffusa (Asteraceae) and a possible mimetic 
function for dark spots on the capitulum. American Jour­
nal of Botany 84:429–436.
Johnson, S., and K. Steiner. (1997). Long-tongued fly pol­
lination and evolution of floral spur length in the Disa 
draconis complex (Orchidaceae). Evolution 51:45–53.
Johnson S., and A. Jürgens. (2010). Convergent evolution 
of carrion and faecal scent mimicry in fly-pollinated 
Irish, V., and Y. Yamamoto. (1995). Conservation of floral 
homeotic gene function between Arabidopsis and An­
tirrhinum. Plant Cell 7:1635–1644.
Ishiguro, K., M. Taniguchi, and Y. Tanaka. (2012). Func­
tional analysis of Antirrhinum kelloggii flavonoid 3′-
hydroxylase and flavonoid 3′,5′-hydroxylase genes; criti­
cal role in flower colour and evolution in the genus An­
tirrhinum. Journal of Plant Research 125:451–456.
Ishikawa, R., S. Tamaki, S. Yokoi, N. Inagaki, T. Shinomu­
ra, M. Takano, and K. Shimamoto. (2005). Suppression 
of the floral activator Hd3a is the principle cause of the 
night break effect in rice. Plant Cell 17:3326–3336.
Ishikawa, R., T. Shinomura, M. Takano, and K. Shimam­
oto. (2009). Phytochrome dependent quantitative con­
trol of Hd3a transcription is the basis of the night break 
effect in rice flowering. Genes and Genetic Systems 84:
179–184.
Ito, T., H. Sakai, and E. Meyerowitz. (2003). Whorl-specific 
expression of the SUPERMAN gene of Arabidopsis is me­
diated by cis elements in the transcribed region. Current 
Biology 13:1524–1530.
Itoh, H., Y. Nonoue, M. Yano, and T. Izawa (2010). A pair 
of floral regulators sets critical day length for Hd3a flo­
rigen expression in rice. Nature Genetics 42:635–638.
Iwano, M., and S. Takayama. (2012). Self/non-self dis­
crimination in angiosperm self-incompatibility. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology 15:78–83.
Iwata, H., A. Gaston, A. Remay, T. Thouroude, J. Jeauffre, 
K. Kawamura, L. Oyant, T. Araki, B. Denoyes, and F. 
Foucher. (2012). The TFL1 homologue KSN is a regu­
lator of continuous flowering in rose and strawberry. 
Plant Journal 69:116–125.
Izawa, T., T. Oikawa, S. Tokutomi, K. Okuno, and K. Shi­
mamoto. (2000). Phytochromes confer the photoperiod­
ic control of flowering in rice (a short-day plant). Plant 
Journal 22:391–399.
Izawa, T., T. Oikawa, N. Sugiyama, T. Tanisaka, M. Yano, 
and K. Shimamoto. (2002). Phytochrome mediates the 
external light signal to repress FT orthologues in pho­
toperiodic flowering of rice. Genes and Development 16:
2006–2020.
Izawa, T., Y. Takahashi, and Yano, M. (2003). Comparative 
biology comes into bloom: genomic and genetic com­
parison of flowering pathways in rice and Arabidopsis. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology 6:113–120.
Jack, T. (2001). Relearning our ABCs: new twists on an old 
model. Trends in Plant Science 6:310–316.
Jack, T. (2004). Molecular and genetic mechanisms of floral 
control. Plant Cell 16:S1–S17.
Jack, T., L. Brockman, and E. Meyerowitz. (1992). The ho­
meotic gene APETALA3 of Arabidopsis thaliana encodes 
a MADS box and is expressed in petals and stamens. 
Cell 68:683–697.

References      261
(1999). Activation tagging of the floral inducer FT. Sci­
ence 286:1962–1965.
Kaufmann, K., R. Melzer, and G. Theissen. (2005). MIKC-
type MADS-domain proteins: structural modularity, pro­
tein interactions and network evolution in land plants. 
Gene 347:183–198.
Kaufmann, K., F. Wellmer, J. Muino, T. Ferrier, S. Wuest, 
V. Kumar, A. Serrano-Mislata, F. Madueno, P. Krajewski, 
E. Meyerowitz, G. Angenent, and J. Riechmann. (2010). 
Orchestration of floral initiation by APETALA1. Science 
328:85–89.
Kay, Q. O. N. (1976). Preferential pollination of yellow-
flowered morphs of Raphanus raphanistrum by Pieris and 
Ersistralis spp. Nature 261:230–232.
Kay, Q. O. N., H. S. Daoud, and C. H. Stirton. (1981). Pig­
ment distribution, light reflection and cell structure 
in petals. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 83:
57–84.
Kazama, Y., M. Fujiwara, A. Koizumi, K. Nishihara, R. 
Nishiyama, E. Kifune, T. Abe, and S. Kawano. (2009). 
A SUPERMAN-like gene is exclusively expressed in fe­
male flowers of the dioecious plant Silene latifolia. Plant 
and Cell Physiology 50:1127–1141.
Keck, E., P. McSteen, R. Carpenter, and E. Coen. (2003). 
Separation of genetic functions controlling organ iden­
tity in flowers. EMBO Journal 22:1058–1066.
Kempin, S., B. Savidge, and M. Yanovsky. (1995). Molecu­
lar basis of the cauliflower phenotype in Arabidopsis. Sci­
ence 267:522–525.
Kenrick, P. (1999). The family tree flowers. Nature 402:
358–359.
Kessler, D., C. Diezel, and I. Baldwin. (2010). Changing 
pollinators as a means of escaping herbivores. Current 
Biology 20:237–242.
Kevan, P. G., and M. A. Lane. (1985). Flower petal micro­
texture is a tactile cue for bees. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the USA 82:4750–4752.
Kevan, P., M. Giurfa, and L. Chittka. (1996). Why are there 
so many and so few white flowers? Trends in Plant Sci­
ence 1:280–284.
Khanna, R., E. Huq, E. Kikis, B. Al-Sady, C. Lanzatella, 
and P. Quail. (2004). A novel molecular recognition mo­
tif necessary for targeting photoactivated phytochrome 
signaling to specific basic helix-loop-helix transcription 
factors. Plant Cell 16:3033–3044.
Kim, M., M. Cui, P. Cubas, A. Gillies, K. Lee, M. Chapman, 
R. Abbott, and E. Coen. (2008). Regulatory genes control 
a key morphological and ecological trait transferred be­
tween species. Science 322:1116–1119.
Kim, S., J. Koh, M. Yoo, H. Kong, Y. Hu, H. Ma, P. Soltis, 
and D. Soltis. (2005). Expression of floral MADS-box 
genes in basal angiosperms: implications for the evolu­
tion of floral regulators. Plant Journal 43:724–744.
angiosperm flowers and a stinkhorn fungus. South Af­
rican Journal of Botany 76:796–807.
Jones, A. M., K. H. Im, M. A. Savka, M. J. Wu, N. G. DeWitt, 
R. Shillito, and A. N. Binns. (1998). Auxin-­dependent 
cell expansion mediated by overexpressed auxin bind­
ing protein 1. Science 282:1114–1117.
Jones, K. N., and J. S. Reithel. (2001). Pollinator-mediated 
selection on a flower colour polymorphism in experi­
mental populations of Antirrhinum (Scrophulariaceae). 
American Journal of Botany 88:447–454.
Jones, M., K. Pierce, and D. Ward (2007). Avian vision: a 
review of form and function with special consideration 
to birds of prey. Journal of Exotic Pet Medicine 16:69–87.
Joy, R., M. Sugiyama, H. Fukuda, and A. Komamine. 
(1995). Cloning and characterization of polyphenol oxi­
dase cDNAs of Phytolacca americana. Plant Physiology 107:
1083–1089.
Judd, W., C. Campbell, E. Kellogg, P. Stevens, and M. 
Donoghue. (2007). Plant Systematics: A phylogenetic ap­
proach, 3rd edition. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA.
Juergens, A., S. Doetterl, and U. Meve. (2006). The chemi­
cal nature of fetid floral odors in stapeliads (Apocynace­
ae-Asclepiadoideae-Ceropegieae). New Phytologist 172:
452–468.
Jung, J., Y. Ju, P. Seo, J. Lee, and C. Park. (2012). The SOC1-
SPL module integrates photoperiod and gibberellic acid 
signals to control flowering time in Arabidopsis. Plant 
Journal 69:577–588.
Kajiwara, S., P. D. Fraser, K. Kondo, and N. Misawa. 
(1997). Expression of an exogenous isopentenyl diphos­
phate isomerase gene enhances isoprenoid biosynthesis 
in Escherichia coli. Biochemical Journal 324:421–426.
Kalisz, S., A. Randle, D. Chaiffetz, M. Faigeles, A. Butera, and 
C. Beight. (2012). Dichogamy correlates with outcross­
ing rate and defines the selfing syndrome in the mixed-­
mating genus Collinsia. Annals of Botany 109:571–582.
Kandasamy, M., D. Paolillo, C. Faraday, J. Nasrallah, and 
M. Nasrallah. (1989). The S-locus specific glycoproteins 
of Brassica accumulate in the cell wall of developing 
stigma papillae. Developmental Biology 134:462–472.
Kandori, I., T. Hirao, S. Matsunaga, and T. Kurosaki. 
(2009). An invasive dandelion unilaterally reduces the 
reproduction of a native congener through competition 
for pollination. Oecologia 159:559–569.
Kang, H., J. Jeon, S. Lee, and G. An. (1998). Identification 
of class B and class C floral organ identity genes from 
rice plants. Plant Molecular Biology 38:1021–1029.
Kanno, A., H. Saeki, T. Kameya, H. Saedler, and G. Theis­
sen. (2003). Heterotropic expression of class B floral ho­
meotic genes supports a modified ABC model for tulip 
(Tulipa gesneriana). Plant Molecular Biology 52:831–841.
Kardailsky, I., V. Shukla, J. Ahn, N. Dagenais, S. Chris­
tensen, J. Nguyen, J. Chory, M. Harrison, and D. Weigel. 

262      References
flowering mutants in Arabidopsis thaliana. Molecular and 
General Genetics 229:57–66.
Koornneef, M., C. Alonso-Blanco, H. Blankestijn-DeVries, 
C. J. Hanhart, and A. J. Peeters. (1998). Genetic interac­
tions among late-flowering mutants of Arabidopsis. Ge­
netics 148:885–892.
Kowyama, Y., K. Kakeda, K. Kondo, T. Imada, and T. Hat­
tori. (1996). A putative receptor protein kinase gene in 
Ipomoea trifida. Plant Cell Physiology 37:681–685.
Kramer, E. M., and V. F. Irish. (1999). Evolution of genetic 
mechanisms controlling petal development. Nature 
399:144–148.
Kramer, E. M., M. A. Jaramillo, and V. S. Di Stilio. (2004). 
Patterns of gene duplication and functional evolution 
during the diversification of the AGAMOUS subfam­
ily of MADS box genes in angiosperms. Genetics 166:
1011–1023.
Kramer, E. M., H. Su, C. Wu, and J. Hu. (2006). A simpli­
fied explanation for the frameshift mutation that cre­
ated a novel C-terminal motif in the APETALA3 gene 
lineage. BMC Evolutionary Biology 6:30.
Kramer, E., L. Holappa, B. Gould, M. Jaramillo, D. Set­
nikov, and P. Santiago. (2007). Elaboration of B gene 
function to include the identity of novel floral organs in 
the lower eudicot Aquilegia (Ranunculaceae). Plant Cell 
19:750–766.
Krassilov, V. A., and I. A. A. Dobruskina. (1995). An­
giosperm fruit from the Lower Cretaceous of Israel 
and origins in rift valleys. Paleontological Journal 29:
110–115.
Krizek, B., and E. Meyerowitz. (1996). The Arabidopsis 
homeotic genes APETALA3 and PISTILLATA are suf­
ficient to provide the B class organ identity function. 
Development 122:11–22.
Krizek, B. A., M. W. Lewis, and J. C. Fletcher. (2006). RAB­
BIT EARS is a second-whorl repressor of AGAMOUS 
that maintains spatial boundaries in Arabidopsis flow­
ers. Plant Journal 45:369–383.
Kubo, K., T. Entani, A. Takara, N. Wang, A. Fields, Z. Hua, 
M. Toyoda, S. Kawashima, T. Ando, A. Isogai, T. Kao, 
and S. Takayama. (2010). Collaborative non-self recog­
nition system in S-RNase-based self-incompatibility. 
Science 330:796–799.
Kunin, W. (1993). Sex and the single mustard: population 
density and pollinator behaviour effects on seed set. 
Ecology 74:2145–2160.
Kusaba, M., C. Tung, M. Nasrallah, and J. Nasrallah. 
(2002). Monoallelic expression and dominance interac­
tions in anthers of self-incompatible Arabidopsis lyrata. 
Plant Physiology 128:17–20.
Kwantes, M., D. Liebsch, and W. Verelst. (2012). How 
MIKC* MADS-box genes originated and evidence for 
their conserved function throughout the evolution of 
Kim, S., K. Choi, C. Park, H. Hwang, and I. Lee. (2006). 
SUPPRESSOR OF FRIGIDA 4, encoding a C2H2-type 
zinc finger protein, represses flowering by transcrip­
tional activation of Arabidopsis FLOWERING LOCUS 
C. Plant Cell 18:2985–2998.
King, J. (1997). Reaching for the Sun. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge.
Klahre, U., A. Gurba, K. Hermann, M. Saxenhofer, E. 
Bossolini, P. Guerin, and C. Kuhlemeier. (2011). Pollina­
tor choice in Petunia depends on two major genetic loci 
for floral scent production. Current Biology 21:730–739.
Knight, T., J. Steets, J. Vamosi, S. Mazer, M. Burd, D. 
Campbell, M. Dudash, M. Johnston, R. Mitchell, and 
T. Ashman. (2005). Pollen limitation of plant reproduc­
tion: pattern and process. Annual Reviews of Ecology, Evo­
lution and Systematics 36:467–497.
Knudsen, J., R. Eriksson, J. Gershenzon, and B. Stahl. 
(2006). Diversity and distribution of floral scent. Botani­
cal Review 72:1–120.
Kobayashi, Y., H. Kaya, K. Goto, M. Iwabuchi, and T. Ara­
ki. (1999). A pair of related genes with antagonistic roles 
in mediating flowering signals. Science 286:1960–1962.
Koelewijn, H., and J. van Damme. (1996). Gender varia­
tion, partial male sterility and labile sex expression in 
gynodioecious Plantago coronopus. New Phytologist 132:
67–76.
Koes, R. E., C. E. Spelt, H. J. Reif, P. van den Elzen, E. Velt­
kamp, and J. N. M. Mol. (1986). Floral tissue of Petunia 
hybrida (V30) expresses only one member of the chal­
cone synthase multigene family. Nucleic Acids Research 
14:5229–5239.
Kohchi, T., K. Mukougawa, N. Frankenberg, M. Masuda, 
A. Yokota, and J. Lagarias. (2001). The Arabidopsis HY2 
gene encodes phytochromobilin synthase, a ferredoxin-
dependent biliverdin reductase. Plant Cell 13:425–436.
Kojima, S., Y. Takahashi, Y. Kobayashi, L. Monna, T. Sa­
saki, T. Araki, and M. Yano. (2002). Hd3a, a rice ortholog 
of the Arabidopsis FT gene, promotes transition to flow­
ering downstream of Hd1 under short-day conditions. 
Plant Cell Physiology 43:1096–1105.
Komiya, R., S. Yokoi, and K. Shimamoto (2009). A gene 
network for long-day flowering activates RFT1 encod­
ing a mobile flowering signal in rice. Development 136:
3443–3450.
Kondo, T., Y. Toyama-Kato, and K. Yoshida. (2005). Essen­
tial structure of co-pigment for blue sepal-color devel­
opment of hydrangea. Tetrahedron Letters 46:6645–6649.
Kotilainen, M., P. Elomaa, A. Uimari, V. Albert, D. Yu, and 
T. Teeri. (2000). GRCD1, an AGL2-like MADS box gene, 
participates in the C function during stamen develop­
ment in Gerbera hybrida. Plant Cell 12:1893–1902.
Koornneef, M., C. J. Hanhart, and J. H. van der Veen. 
(1991). A genetic and physiological analysis of late 

References      263
of Arabidopsis plants containing the FRIGIDA gene. 
Plant Physiology 108:157–162.
Lee, I., M. Auckerman, S. Gore, K. Lohman, S. Michaels, 
L. Weaver, M. John, K. Feldmann, and R. Amasino. 
(1994b). Isolation of LUMINIDEPENDENS: a gene in­
volved in the control of flowering time in Arabidopsis. 
Plant Cell 6:75–83.
Lee, I., D. Wolfe, O. Nilsson, and D. Weigel. (1997). A 
LEAFY co-regulator encoded by UNUSUAL FLORAL 
ORGANS. Current Biology 7:95–104.
Lee, J., S. Yoo, S. Park, I. Hwang, J. Lee, and J. Ahn. (2007). 
Role of SVP in the control of flowering time by ambi­
ent temperature in Arabidopsis. Genes and Development 
21:397–402.
Lee, S., J. Kim, J. Han, M. Han, and G. An. (2004). Func­
tional analyses of the flowering time gene OsMADS50, 
the putative SUPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION OF 
CO 1/AGAMOUS LIKE 20 (SOC1/AGL20) ortholog in 
rice. Plant Journal 38:754–764.
Leivar, P., and P. Quail. (2011). PIFs: pivotal components 
in a cellular signalling hub. Trends in Plant Science 16:
19–28.
Leleji, O. (1973). Apparent preference by bees for differ­
ent flower colours in cowpeas (Vigna sinensis (L) Savi ex 
Hassk. Euphytica 22:150–153.
Lenhard, M., A. Bohnert, G. Jürgens, and T. Laux. (2001). 
Termination of stem cell maintenance in Arabidopsis 
floral meristems by interactions between WUSCHEL 
and AGAMOUS. Cell 105:805–814.
Leonard, A., and D. Papaj. (2011). ‘X’ marks the spot: the 
possible benefits of nectar guides to bees and plants. 
Functional Ecology 25:1293–1301.
Leseberg, C., A. Li, H. Kang, M. Duvall, and L. Mao. 
(2006). Genome-wide analysis of the MADS-box gene 
family in Populus trichocarpa. Gene 378:84–94.
Levin, J., and E. Meyerowitz. (1995). UFO: an Arabidopsis 
gene involved in both floral meristem and floral organ 
development. Plant Cell 7:529–548.
Levy, Y. Y., S. Mesnage, J. S. Mylne, A. R. Gendall, and 
C. Dean. (2002). Multiple roles of Arabidopsis VRN1 in 
vernalization and flowering time control. Science 297:
243–246.
Li, C., and J. Dubcovsky. (2008). Wheat FT protein regulates 
VRN1 transcription through interactions with FDL2. 
Plant Journal 55:543–554.
Li, D., C. Liu, L. Shen, Y. Wu, H. Chen, M. Robertson, C. 
Helliwell, T. Ito, E. Meyerowitz, and H. Yu. (2008). A 
repressor complex governs the integration of flowering 
signals in Arabidopsis. Developmental Cell 15:110–120.
Li, J., M. Webster, M. Smith, and P. Gilmartin. (2011). Flo­
ral heteromorphy in Primula vulgaris: progress towards 
isolation and characterisation of the S locus. Annals of 
Botany 108:715–726.
vascular plant gametophytes. Molecular Biology and Evo­
lution 29:293–302.
Labandeira, C. C. (1997). Insect mouthparts: ascertaining 
the paleobiology of insect feeding strategies. Annual Re­
views in Ecology and Systematics 28:153–193.
Lai, Z., W. Ma, B. Han, L. Liang, Y. Zhang, G. Hng, and 
Y. Xue. (2002). An F-box gene linked to the self-incom­
patibility (S) locus of Antirrhinum is expressed spe­
cifically in pollen and tapetum. Plant Molecular Biology 
50:29–42.
Lariguet, P., I. Schepens, D. Hodgson, U. V. Pedmale, 
M. Trevisan, C. Kami, M. Carbonnel, J. M. Alonso, 
J. R. Ecker, E. Liscum, and C. Fankhauser. (2006). PHY­
TOCHROME KINASE SUBSTRATE 1 is a phototro­
pin 1 binding protein required for phototropism. Pro­
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 
103:10134–10139.
Larson, R. L., and E. H. Coe. (1977). Gene-dependent fla­
vonoid glucosyltransferase in maize. Biochemical Genet­
ics 15:153–156.
Laurie, R., P. Diwadkar, M. Jaudal, L. Zhang, V. Hecht, 
J. Wen, M. Tadege, K. Mysore, J. Putterill, J. Weller, and 
R. Macknight. (2011). The Medicago FLOWERING LO­
CUS T homolog, MtFTa1, is a key regulator of flowering 
time. Plant Physiology 156: 2207–2224.
Laux, T., K. Mayer, J. Berger, and G. Jurgens. (1996). The 
WUSCHEL gene is required for shoot and floral meris­
tem integrity in Arabidopsis. Development 122:87–96.
Lázaro, A., A. Gómez-Zambrano, L. López-González, M. 
Piñeiro, and J. Jarillo. (2008). Mutations in the Arabi­
dopsis SWC6 gene, encoding a component of the SWR1 
chromatin remodelling complex, accelerate flowering 
time and alter leaf and flower development. Journal of 
Experimental Botany 59:653–666.
Le Corre, V., F. Roux, and X. Reboud. (2002). DNA poly­
morphism at the FRIGIDA gene in Arabidopsis thaliana: 
extensive nonsynonymous variation is consistent with 
local selection for flowering time. Molecular Biology and 
Evolution 19:1261–1271.
Lee, H., S. Huang, and T. Kao. (1994a). S proteins control 
rejection of incompatible pollen in Petunia inflata. Nature 
367:560–563.
Lee, H., S. Suh, E. Park, E. Cho, J. Ahn, S. Kim, J. Lee, 
Y. Kwon, and I. Lee. (2000). The AGAMOUS-LIKE 20 
MADS domain protein integrates floral inductive path­
ways in Arabidopsis. Genes and Development 14:2366–2376.
Lee, H., L. Xiong, Z. Gong, M. Ishitani, B. Stevenson, and J. 
Zhu. (2001). The Arabidopsis HOS1 gene negatively regu­
lates cold signal transduction and encodes a RING finger 
protein that displays cold-regulated nucleo-­cytoplasmic 
partitioning. Genes and Development 15:912–924.
Lee, I., and R. Amasino. (1995). Effect of vernalization, pho­
toperiod, and light quality on the flowering phenotype 

264      References
Liu, Z., and E. Meyerowitz. (1995). LEUNIG regulates 
AGAMOUS expression in Arabidopsis flowers. Devel­
opment 121:975–991.
Liu, Z., and C. Mara. (2010). Regulatory mechanisms for 
floral homeotic gene expression. Seminars in Cell and De­
velopmental Biology 21:80–86.
Lobo, J., M. Quesada, K. Stoner, E. Fuchs, Y. Herrerias-
Diego, J. Rojas, and G. Saborio. (2003). Factors affecting 
phonological patterns of bombacaceous trees in season­
al forests in Costa Rica and Mexico. American Journal of 
Botany 90:1054–1063.
Locke, J. C. W., L. Kozma-Bognar, P. D. Gould, B. Fehér, 
É. Kevei, F. Nagy, M. S. Turner, A. Hall, and A. J. Millar. 
(2006). Experimental validation of a predicted feedback 
loop in the multi-oscillator clock of Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Molecular Systems Biology 2:59.
Lockhart, P., and D. Penny.(2005). The place of Amborella 
within the radiation of angiosperms. Trends in Plant Sci­
ence 10:201–202.
Lohmann, J., R. Hong, M. Hobe, M. Busch, F. Parcy, R. Si­
mon, and D. Weigel. (2001). A molecular link between 
stem cell regulation and floral patterning in Arabidop­
sis. Cell 105:793–803.
Lotz, C., C. Martinez del Rio, and S. Nicolson. (2003). 
Hummingbirds pay a high cost for a warm drink. Jour­
nal of Comparative Physiology B 173:455–462.
Loukoianov, A., L. Yan, A. Blechl, A. Sanchez, and J. Dub­
covsky. (2005). Regulation of VRN-1 vernalization genes 
in normal and transgenic polyploid wheat. Plant Physi­
ology 138:2364–2373.
Lowman, A., and M. Purugganan. (1999). Duplication of 
the Brassica oleracea APETALA1 floral homeotic gene 
and the evolution of domesticated cauliflower. Journal 
of Heredity 90:514–520.
Luo, D., R. Carpenter, C. Vincent, L. Copsey, and E. Coen. 
(1996). Origin of floral asymmetry in Antirrhinum. Na­
ture 383:794–799.
Luo, Y., and Widmer, A. (2013). Herkogamy and its effects 
on mating patterns in Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS ONE 
8:e57902.
Luu, D., X. Qin, D. Morse, and M. Cappadocia. (2000). 
S-RNase uptake by compatible pollen tubes in gameto­
phytic self-incompatibility. Nature 407:649–651.
Ma, H. (2005). Molecular genetic analyses of microsporo­
genesis and microgametogenesis in flowering plants. 
Annual Reviews of Plant Biology 56:393–434.
McClure, B., and V. Franklin-Tong. (2006). Gametophytic 
self-incompatibility: understanding the cellular mecha­
nisms involved in ‘self’ pollen tube inhibition. Planta 
224:233–245.
McClure, B., F. Cruz-Garcia, and C. Romero. (2011). Com­
patibility and incompatibility in S-RNase-based systems. 
Annals of Botany 108:647–658.
Li, Z., B. Li, W. Shen, H. Huang, and A. Dong. (2012). TCP 
transcription factors interact with AS2 in the repression 
of class-I KNOX genes in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Jour­
nal 71:99–107.
Liang, H., and L. Mahadevan. (2011). Growth, geometry 
and mechanics of a blooming lily. Proceedings of the Na­
tional Academy of Sciences of the USA 108:5516–5521.
Liljegren, S., C. Gustafson-Brown, A. Pinyopich, G. Ditta, 
and M. Yanofsky. (1999). Interactions among APETA­
LA1, LEAFY and TERMINAL FLOWER 1 specify mer­
istem fate. Plant Cell 11:1007–1018.
Lim, M., J. Kim, Y. Kim, K. Chung, Y. Seo, I. Lee, J. Kim, 
C. Hong, H. Kim, and C. Park. (2004). A new Arabidopsis 
gene, FLK, encodes an RNA binding protein with K ho­
mology motifs and regulates flowering time via FLOW­
ERING LOCUS C. Plant Cell 16:731–740.
Lin, C. (2000). Plant blue-light receptors. Trends in Plant 
Science 5:337–342.
Lin, C., H. Yang, H. Guo, T. Mockler, J. Chen, and A. Cash­
more. (1998). Enhancement of blue-light sensitivity of 
Arabidopsis seedlings by a blue light receptor crypto­
chrome 2. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the USA 95:2686–2690.
Litt, A. (2007). An evaluation of A function: evidence from 
the APETALA1 and APETALA2 gene lineages. Interna­
tional Journal of Plant Sciences 168:73–91.
Liu, C., F. Lu, X. Cui, and X. Cao. (2010a). Histone meth­
ylation in higher plants. Annual Review of Plant Biology 
61:395–420.
Liu, F., V. Quesada, P. Crevillen, I. Baurle, S. Swiezewski, 
and C. Dean. (2007). The Arabidopsis RNA binding pro­
tein FCA requires a lysine-specific demethylase 1 ho­
molog to downregulate FLC. Molecular Cell 28:398–407.
Liu, F., S. Marquardt, C. Lister, S. Swiezewski, and C. 
Dean. (2010b). Targeted 3′ processing of antisense tran­
scripts triggers Arabidopsis FLC chromatin silencing. 
Science 327:94–97.
Liu, H., X. Yu, K. Li, J. Klejnot, H. Yang, D. Lisiero, and C. 
Lin. (2008). Photoexcited CRY2 interacts with CIB1 to 
regulate transcription and floral initiation in Arabidop­
sis. Science 322:1535–1539.
Liu, H., B. Liu, C. Zhao, M. Pepper, and C. Lin. (2011a). 
The action mechanisms of plant cryptochromes. Trends 
in Plant Science 16:684–691.
Liu, J., S. Gilmour, M. Thomashow, and S. van Nocker. 
(2002). Cold signalling associated with vernalization in 
Arabidopsis thaliana does not involve CBF1 or abscisic 
acid. Physiologia Plantarum 114:125–134.
Liu, X., Y. Kim, R. Mueller, R. Yumul, C. Liu, Y. Pan, X. 
Cao, J. Goodrich, and X. Chen. (2011b). AGAMOUS ter­
minates floral stem cell maintenance in Arabidopsis by 
directly repressing WUSCHEL through recruitment of 
Polycomb Group proteins. Plant Cell 23:3654–3670.

References      265
Mandel, M. A., C. Gustafson-Brown, B. Savidge, and M. 
Yanofsky. (1992). Molecular characterisation of the Arabi­
dopsis floral homeotic gene APETALA1. Nature 360:
273–277.
Manzano, D., S. Marquardt, A. Jones, I. Baurle, F. Liu, and 
C. Dean. (2009). Altered interactions within FY/AtCPSF 
complexes required for Arabidopsis FCA-mediated 
chromatin silencing. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the USA 106:8772–8777.
Mara, C., T. Huang, and V. Irish. (2010). The Arabidopsis 
floral homeotic proteins APETALA3 and PISTILLATA 
negatively regulate the BANQUO genes implicated in 
light signaling. Plant Cell 22:690–702.
Marinova, K., L. Pourcel, B. Weder, M. Schwarz, D. Barron, J. 
Routaboul, I. Debeaujon, and M. Klein. (2007). The Arabi­
dopsis MATE transport TT12 acts as a vacuolar flavonoid/
H+-antiporter active in proanthocyanidin-­accumulating 
cells of the seed coat. Plant Cell 19:2023–2038.
Markham, K. R., K. S. Gould, C. S. Winefield, K. A. Mitch­
ell, S. J. Bloor, and M. R. Bloase. (2000). Anthocyanic 
vacuolar inclusions—their nature and significance in 
flower colouration. Phytochemistry 55:327–336.
Markovic, J., N. Petranovic, and J. Baranac. (2005). The co­
pigmentation effect of sinapic acid on malvin: a spectro­
scopic investigation on colour enhancement. Journal of 
Photochemistry and Photobiology B 78:223–228.
Marrs, K. A., M. R. Alfenito, A. M. Lloyd, and V. Walbot. 
(1995). A glutathione S-transferase involved in vacuolar 
transfer encoded by the maize gene Bronze-2. Nature 
375:397–400.
Martin, C., and T. Gerats. (1993). The control of flower col­
oration. In: B. R. Jordan (ed.), The Molecular Biology of 
Flowering, pp. 219–255. CAB International, Wallingford.
Martin, C., R. Carpenter, H. Sommer, H. Saedler, and E. 
Coen. (1985). Molecular analysis of instability in flower 
pigmentation of Antirrhinum majus following isolation 
of the PALLIDA locus by transposon tagging. EMBO 
Journal 4:1625–1630.
Martin, C., A. Prescott, S. Mackay, J. Bartlett, and E. Vri­
jlandt. (1991). The control of anthocyanin biosynthesis 
in flowers of Antirrhinum majus. Plant Journal 1:37–49.
Martin, W., A. Gierl, and H. Saedler. (1989). Molecular 
evidence for pre-Cretaceous angiosperm origins. Nature 
339:46–48.
Martin, W., O. Deusch, N. Stawski, N. Grunheit, and V. 
Goremykin. (2005). Chloroplast genome phylogenetics: 
why we need independent approaches to plant molecu­
lar evolution. Trends in Plant Science 10:203–209.
Martin-Trillo, M., A. Lazaro, R. S. Poethig, C. Gomez-­
Mena, M. A. Pineiro, J. M. Martinez-Zapater, and J. A. 
Jarillo. (2006). EARLY IN SHORT DAYS 1 (ESD1) en­
codes ACTIN-RELATED PROTEIN 6 (AtARP6), a pu­
tative component of chromatin remodelling complexes 
McCormick, S. (2004). Control of male gametophyte de­
velopment. Plant Cell 16:S142–S153.
Macknight, R., I. Bancroft, T. Page, C. Lister, R. Schmidt, 
K. Love, L. Westphal, G. Murphy, S. Sherson, C. Cob­
bett, and C. Dean. (1997). FCA, a gene controlling flow­
ering time in Arabidopsis, encodes a protein containing 
RNA-binding domains. Cell 89:737–745.
Macknight, R., M. Duroux, R. Laurie, P. Dijkwel, G. Simp­
son, and C. Dean. (2002). Functional significance of the 
alternative transcript processing of the Arabidopsis flo­
ral promoter FCA. Plant Cell 14:877–888.
McSteen, P., C. Vincent, S. Doyle, R. Carpenter, and E. 
Coen. (1998). Control of floral homeotic gene expression 
and organ morphogenesis in Antirrhinum. Development 
125:2359–2369.
Machado, I., and A. Lopes. (2004). Floral traits and pol­
lination systems in the Caatinga, a Brazilian tropical dry 
forest. Annals of Botany 94:365–376.
Magnani, E., K. Sjolander, and S. Hake. (2004). From endo­
nucleases to transcription factors: evolution of the AP2 
DNA binding domain in plants. Plant Cell 16:2265–2277.
Maier, A., S. Stehling-Sun, H. Wollmann, M. Demar, R. 
Hong, S. Haubeiss, D. Weigel, and J. Lohmann. (2009). 
Dual roles of the bZIP transcription factor PERIAN­
THIA in the control of floral architecture and homeotic 
gene expression. Development 136:1613–1620.
Maizel, A., M. A. Busch, T. Tanahashi, J. Perkovic, M. Kato, 
M. Hasebe, and D. Weigel. (2005). The floral regulator 
LEAFY evolves by substitutions in the DNA binding 
domain. Science 308:260–263.
Makino, S., T. Kiba, A. Imamura, N. Hanaki, A. Nakamura, 
T. Suzuki, M. Taniguchi, C. Ueguchi, T. Sugiyama, and 
T. Mizuno. (2000). Genes encoding pseudo-response 
regulators: insight into his-to-asp phosphorelay and cir­
cadian rhythm in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell Physiol­
ogy 41:791–803.
Makkena, S., E. Lee, F. Sack, and R. Lamb. (2012). The 
R2R3 MYB transcription factors FOUR LIPS and MYB88 
regulate female reproductive development. Journal of 
Experimental Botany 63:5545–5558.
Malcomber, S., and E. Kellog. (2005). SEPALLATA gene di­
versification: brave new whorls. Trends in Plant Science 
10:427–435.
Mallory, A., D. Dugas, D. Bartel, and B. Bartel. (2004). Mi­
croRNA regulation of NAC-domain targets is required 
for proper formation and separation of adjacent em­
bryonic, vegetative and floral organs. Current Biology 
14:1035–1046.
Mandel, M. A., and M. Yanofsky. (1995). A gene triggering 
flower formation in Arabidopsis. Nature 377:522–524.
Mandel, M., and M. Yanofsky. (1998). The Arabidopsis 
AGL9 MADS box gene is expressed in young flower 
primordia. Sexual Plant Reproduction 11:22–28.

266      References
proteins (ARC1, THL1 and THL2) in the yeast two-­
hybrid system. Plant Molecular Biology 45:365–376.
Medrano, M., C. Herrera, and S. Barrett. (2005). Herkoga­
my and mating patterns in the self-compatible daffodil 
Narcissus longispathus. Annals of Botany 95:1105–1111.
Mello, C.C., and D. Conte. (2004). Revealing the world of 
RNA interference. Nature 431:338–342.
Melzer, R., Y. Wang, and G. Theissen. (2010). The naked 
and the dead: the ABCs of gymnosperm reproduction 
and the origin of the angiosperm flower. Seminars in Cell 
and Developmental Biology 21:118–128.
Meyerowitz, E. M. (1996). Plant development: local con­
trol, global patterning. Current Opinion in Genetics and 
Development 6:475–479.
Michaels, S. D., and R. M. Amasino. (1999). FLOWERING 
LOCUS C encodes a novel MADS domain protein that 
acts as a repressor of flowering. Plant Cell 11:949–956.
Michaels, S. D., and R. M. Amasino. (2001). Loss of FLOW­
ERING LOCUS C activity eliminates the late-flowering 
phenotype of FRIGIDA and autonomous pathway mu­
tations but not responsiveness to vernalization. Plant 
Cell 13:935–941.
Michaels, S. D., I. C. Bezerra, and R. M. Amasino. (2004). 
FRIGIDA-related genes are required for the winter-­
annual habit in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the USA 101:3281–3285.
Millar, A. J., I. A. Carre, C. A. Strayer, N. Chua, and S. A. 
Kay. (1995). Circadian clock mutants in Arabidopsis 
identified by luciferase imaging. Science 267:1161–1163.
Ming, R., A. Bendahmane, and S. Renner. (2011). Sex chro­
mosomes in land plants. Annual Reviews in Plant Biology 
62:485–514.
Mitchell, R., and R. Shaw. (1993). Heritability of floral 
traits for the perennial wild flower Penstemon centran­
thifolius (Scrophulariaceae): clones and crosses. Heredity 
71:185–192.
Mizoguchi, T., K. Wheatley, Y. Hanzawa, L. Wright, M. 
Mizoguchi, H. Song, I. Carre, and G. Coupland. (2002). 
LHY and CCA1 are partially redundant genes required 
to maintain circadian rhythms in Arabidopsis. Develop­
mental Cell 2:629–641.
Mizoguchi, T., L. Wright, S. Fujiwara, F. Cremer, K. Lee, 
H. Onouchi, A. Mouradov, S. Fowler, H. Kamada, J. 
Putterill, and G. Coupland. (2005). Distinct roles of GI­
GANTEA in promoting flowering and regulating circa­
dian rhythms in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17:2255–2270.
Mizukami, Y. (2001). A matter of size: developmental con­
trol of organ size in plants. Current Opinion in Plant Biol­
ogy 4:533–539.
Mizukami, Y., and R. L. Fischer. (2000). Plant organ size 
control: AINTEGUMENTA regulates growth and cell 
numbers during organogenesis. Proceedings of the Na­
tional Academy of Sciences of the USA 97:942–947.
that positively regulates FLC accumulation in Arabidop­
sis. Development 133:1241–1252.
Martinez, M., J. Jørgensen, M. Lawton, C. Lamb, and P. 
Doerner. (1992). Spatial pattern of cdc2 expression in re­
lation to meristem activity and cell proliferation during 
plant development. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the USA 89:7360–7364.
Martinez-Garcia, J., E. Huq, and P. Quail. (2000). Direct 
targeting of light signals to a promoter element-bound 
transcription factor. Science 288:859–863.
Martinez-Garcia, J., J. Garcia-Martinez, J. Bou, and S. Prat. 
(2001). The interaction of gibberellins and photoperiod 
in the control of potato tuberization. Journal of Plant 
Growth Regulation 20:377–386.
Martins, T., J. Berg, S. Blinka, M. Rausher, and D. Baum. 
(2013). Precise spatio-temporal regulation of the antho­
cyanin biosynthetic pathway leads to petal spot forma­
tion in Clarkia gracilis. New Phytologist 197:958–969.
Mas, P., F. Devlin, S. Panda, and S. A. Kay. (2000). Func­
tional interaction of phytochrome B and cryptochrome 
2. Nature 408:207–211.
Mas, P., W. Kim, D. Somers, and S. Kay. (2003). Targeted 
degradation of TOC1 by ZTL modulates circadian func­
tion in Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 426:567–570.
Masiero, S., L. Colombo, P. Grini, A. Schnittger, and M. 
Kater. (2011). The emerging importance of type I MADS 
box transcription factors for plant reproduction. Plant 
Cell 23:865–872.
Massinga, P., S. Johnson, and L. Harder. (2005). Hetero­
morphic incompatibility and efficiency of pollination in 
two distylous Pentanisia species (Rubiaceae). Annals of 
Botany 95:389–399.
Mast, A., and E. Conti. (2006). The primrose path to het­
erostyly. New Phytologist 171:439–442.
Mathews, S. (2010). Evolutionary studies illuminate the 
structural-functional model of plant phytochromes. 
Plant Cell 22:4–16.
Mathieu, J., N. Warthmann, F. Kuttner, and Schmid, M. 
(2007). Export of FT protein from phloem companion 
cells is sufficient for floral induction in Arabidopsis. Cur­
rent Biology 17:1055–1060.
Matias-Hernandez, L., R. Battaglia, F. Galbiati, M. Rubes, 
C. Eichenberger, U. Grossniklaus, M. Kater, and L. Co­
lombo. (2010). VERDANDI is a direct target of the MADS 
domain ovule identity complex and affects embryo sac 
differentiation in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 22:1702–1715.
Mayfield, M., N. Waser, and M. Price. (2001). Exploring 
the ‘most effective pollinator principle’ with complex 
flowers: bumblebees and Ipomopsis aggregata. Annals of 
Botany 88:591–596.
Mazzurco, M., W. Sulaman, H. Elina, J. M. Cock, and D. 
Goring. (2001). Further analysis of the interactions be­
tween the Brassica S receptor kinase and three interacting 

References      267
Mouradov, A., T. Glassick, B. Hamdorf, L. Murphy, B. 
Fowler, S. Marla, and R. D. Teasdale. (1998). NEEDLY, 
a Pinus radiata ortholog of FLORICAULA/LEAFY genes, 
expressed in both reproductive and vegetative meris­
tems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
USA 95:6537–6542.
Mouradov, A., F. Cremer, and G. Coupland. (2002). Con­
trol of flowering time: interacting pathways as a basis 
for diversity. Plant Cell 14:S111–S130.
Moyano, E., J. F. Martinez-Garcia, and C. Martin. (1996). 
Apparent redundancy in myb gene function provides 
gearing for the control of flavonoid biosynthesis in An­
tirrhinum flowers. Plant Cell 8:1519–1532.
Moyroud, E., E. Kusters, M. Monniaux, R. Koes, and F. 
Parcy. (2010). LEAFY blossoms. Trends in Plant Science 
15:346–352.
Moyroud, E., E. Minguet, F. Ott, L. Yant, D. Pose, M. Mon­
niaux, S. Blanchet, O. Bastien, E. Thevenon, D. Weigel, 
M. Schmid, and F. Parcy. (2011). Prediction of regulatory 
interactions from genome sequences using a biophysi­
cal model for the Arabidopsis LEAFY transcription fac­
tor. Plant Cell 23:1293–1306.
Mudalige, R., A. Kuehnle, and T. Amore. (2003). Pigment 
distribution and epidermal cell shape in Dendrobium 
species and hybrids. HortScience 38:573–577.
Müller, R., A. Fernández, A. Hiltbrunner, E. Schäfer, and T. 
Kretsch. (2009). The histidine kinase-related domain of 
Arabidopsis phytochrome A controls the spectral sen­
sitivity and the subcellular distribution of the photore­
ceptor. Plant Physiology 150:1297–1309.
Murfett, J., T. Atherton, B. Mou, C. Gasser, and B. McClure. 
(1994). S-RNase expressed in transgenic Nicotiana caus­
es S-allele-specific pollen rejection. Nature 367:563–566.
Munster, T., J. Pahnke, A. DiRosa, J. Kim, W. Martin, H. 
Saedler, and G. Theissen. (1997). Floral homeotic genes 
were recruited from homologous MADS-box genes 
preexisting in the common ancestor of ferns and seed 
plants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the USA 94:2415–2420.
Mylne, J. S., L. Barrett, F. Tessadori, S. Mesnage, L. John­
son, Y. V. Bernatavichute, S. E. Jacobsen, P. Fransz, and 
C. Dean. (2006). LHP1, the Arabidopsis homologue of 
HETEROCHROMATIN PROTEIN 1, is required for 
epigenetic silencing of FLC. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the USA 103:5012–5017.
Nagasawa, N., M. Miyoshi, Y. Sano, H. Satoh, H. Hirano, 
H. Sakai, and Y. Nagato. (2003). SUPERWOMAN1 and 
DROOPING LEAF genes control floral organ identity in 
rice. Development 130:705–718.
Nagatani, A. (2010). Phytochrome: structural basis for its 
functions. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 13:565–570.
Nageli, C. (1884). Mechanisch-physiologische Theorie der 
Abstammungslehre.
Mockler, T., H. Yang, X. Yu, D. Parikh, Y. Cheng, S. 
Dolan, and C. Lin. (2003). Regulation of photoperi­
odic flowering by Arabidopsis photoreceptors. Proceed­
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 100:
2140–2145.
Moehs, C. P., L. Tian, K. W. Osteryoung, and D. DellaP­
enna. (2001). Analysis of carotenoid biosynthetic gene 
expression during marigold petal development. Plant 
Molecular Biology 45:281–293.
Moise, A. R., J. von Lintig, and K. Palczewski. (2005). Re­
lated enzymes solve evolutionarily recurrent problems 
in the metabolism of carotenoids. Trends in Plant Science 
10:178–186.
Mol, J. N. M., M. P. Robbins, R. A. Dixon, and E. Velt­
kamp. (1985). Spontaneous and enzymic rearrangement 
of naringenin chalcone to flavanone. Phytochemistry 
24:2267–2269.
Mol, J., E. Grotewold, and R. Koes. (1998). How genes paint 
flowers and seeds. Trends in Plant Science 3:212–217.
Mondragon-Palomino, M., and G. Theissen. (2008). MADS 
about the evolution of orchid flowers. Trends in Plant 
Science 13:51–59.
Mondragon-Palomino, M., and G. Theissen. (2011). Con­
served differential expression of paralogous ­DEFICIENS- 
and GLOBOSA-like MADS box genes in the flowers of 
Orchidaceae: refining the “orchid code”. Plant Journal 66:
1008–1019.
Momonoi, K., K. Yoshida, S. Mano, H. Takahashi, C. Na­
kamori, K. Shoji, A. Nitta, and M. Nishimura. (2009). A 
vacuolar iron transporter in tulip, TgVit1, is responsible 
for blue coloration in petal cells through iron accumula­
tion. Plant Journal 59:437–447.
Montalvo, A., and J. Ackermann. (1987). Limitations to 
fruit production in Ionopsis utricularioides (Orchidaceae). 
Biotropica 19:24–31.
Moon, J., S. Suh, H. Lee, K. Choi, C. Hong, N. Paek, S. Kim, 
and I. Lee. (2003). The SOC1 MADS-box gene integrates 
vernalization and gibberellin signals for flowering in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 35:613–623.
Moon, J., H. Lee, M. Kim, and I. Lee. (2005). Analysis of 
flowering pathway integrators in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 
Physiology 46:292–299.
Mooney, M., T. Desnos, K. Harrison, J. Jones, R. Carpenter, 
and E. Coen. (1995). Altered regulation of tomato and 
tobacco pigmentation genes caused by the delila gene of 
Antirrhinum. Plant Journal 7:333–339.
Moran, N., and T. Jarvik. (2010). Lateral transfer of genes 
from fungi underlies carotenoid production in aphids. 
Science 328:624–627.
Motte, P., H. Saedler, and Z. Schwarz-Sommer. (1998). 
STYLOSA and FISTULATA: regulatory components of 
the homeotic control of Antirrhinum floral organogen­
esis. Development 125:71–84.

268      References
Noh, Y., and R. Amasino. (2003). PIE1, an ISWI family 
gene, is required for FLC activation and floral repres­
sion in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 15:1671–1682.
Oh, S., H. Zhang, P. Ludwig, and S. van Nocker. (2004). A 
mechanism related to the yeast transcriptional regulator 
Paf1c is required for expression of the Arabidopsis FLC/
MAF MADS box gene family. Plant Cell 16:2940–2953.
Oh, S., A. Johnson A. Smertenko, D. Rahman, S. Park, P. 
Hussey, and D. Twell. (2005). A divergent cellular role 
for the FUSED kinase family in the plant-specific cytoki­
netic phragmoplast. Current Biology 15:2107–2111.
Oh, S., V. Bourdon, M. Pal, H. Dickinson, and D. Twell. 
(2008). Arabidopsis kinesins HINKEL and TETRASPORE 
act redundantly to control cell plate expansion during 
cytokinesis in the male gametophyte. Molecular Plant 
1:794–799.
Ohme-Takagi, M., and H. Shinshi. (1995). Ethylene-­
inducible DNA binding proteins that interact with an 
ethylene-responsive element. Plant Cell 7:173–182.
Ohmori, S., M. Kimizu, M. Sugita, A. Miyao, H. Hirochika, 
E. Uchida, Y. Nagato, and H. Yoshida. (2009). MOSAIC 
FLORAL ORGANS I, an AGL6-like MADS box gene, 
regulates floral organ identity and meristem fate in rice. 
Plant Cell 21:3008–3025.
Ohnishi, M., S. Fukada-Tanaka, A. Hoshino, J. Takada, Y. 
Inagaki, and S. Iida. (2005). Characterisation of a novel 
Na+/H+ antiporter gene InNHX2 and comparison of In­
NHX2 with InNHX1, which is responsible for blue flow­
er colouration by increasing the vacuolar pH in the Jap­
anese morning glory. Plant Cell Physiology 46:259–267.
Ohshima, S., M. Murata, W. Sakamoto, Y. Ogura, and F. 
Motoyoshi. (1997). Cloning and molecular analysis of 
the Arabidopsis gene Terminal Flower 1. Molecular and 
General Genetics 254:186–194.
Ojeda, I., J. Francisco-Ortega, and Q. Cronk. (2009). Evo­
lution of petal epidermal micromorphology in Legumi­
nosae and its use as a marker of petal identity. Annals of 
Botany 104:1099–1110.
Ojeda, I., A. Santos-Guerra, J. Caujape-Castells, R. Jaen-
Molina, A. Marrero, and Q. Cronk. (2012). Compara­
tive micromorphology of petals in Macaronesian Lotus 
(Leguminosae) reveals a loss of papillose conical cells 
during the evolution of bird pollination. International 
Journal of Plant Sciences 173:365–374.
Okada, K., T. Saito, T. Kakagawa, M. Kawamukai, and Y. 
Kamiya. (2000). Five geranylgeranyl diphosphate syn­
thases expressed in different organs are localised into 
three subcellular compartments in Arabidopsis. Plant 
Physiology 122:1045–1056.
Okamuro, J., B. Caster, R. Villarroel, M. van Montagu, and 
K. D. Jofuku. (1997). The AP2 domain of APETALA2 
defines a large new family of DNA binding proteins in 
Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci­
ences of the USA 94:7076–7081.
Nagy, F., and E. Schafer. (2002). Phytochromes control 
photomorphogenesis by differentially regulated, inter­
acting signalling pathways in higher plants. Annual Re­
view of Plant Biology 53:329–355.
Nair, S., N. Wang, Y. Turuspekov, M. Pourkheirandish, S. 
Sinsuwongwat, G. Chen, M. Sameri, A. Tagiri, I. Hon­
da, Y. Watanabe, H. Kanamori, T. Wicker, N. Stein, Y. 
Nagamura, T. Matsumoto, and T. Komatsuda. (2010). 
Cleistogamous flowering in barley arises from the sup­
pression of microRNA-guided HvAP2 mRNA cleavage. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 
107:490–495.
Nakajima, M., A. Shimada, Y. Takashi, Y. Kim, S. Park, 
M. Ueguchi-Tanaka, H. Suzuki, E. Katoh, S. Iuchi, M. 
Kobayashi, T. Maeda, M. Matsuoka, and I. Yamaguchi. 
(2006). Identification and characterisation of Arabidop­
sis gibberellin receptors. Plant Journal 46:880–889.
Nakayama, T. (2002). Enzymology of aurone biosynthesis. 
Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering 94:487–491.
Nakayama, T., K. Yonekura-Sakakibara, T. Sato, S. Kikuchi, 
Y. Fukui, M. Fukuchi-Mizutani, T. Ueda, M. Nakao, Y. 
Tanaka, T. Kusumi, and T. Nishino. (2000). Aureusidin 
synthase: a polyphenol oxidase homolog responsible 
for flower colouration. Science 290:1163–1166.
Nasrallah, J., T. Kao, M. Goldberg, and M. Nasrallah. 
(1985). A cDNA clone encoding an S-locus-specific gly­
coprotein from Brassica oleracea. Nature 318:263–267.
Nath, U., B. C. W. Crawford, R. Carpenter, and E. Coen. 
(2003). Genetic control of surface curvature. Science 299:
1404–1407.
Navarro, C., N. Efremova, J. Golz, R. Rubiera, M. Kucken­
berg, R. Castillo, O. Tietz, H. Saedler, and Z. Schwarz-
Sommer. (2004). Molecular and genetic interactions be­
tween STYLOSA and GRAMINIFOLIA in the control of 
Antirrhinum vegetative and reproductive development. 
Development 131:3649–3659.
Newman, D. A., and J. D. Thomson. (2005). Effects of 
nectar robbing on dynamics and bumblebee foraging 
strategies in Linaria vulgaris (Scrophulariaceae). Oikos 
110:309–320.
Ni, M., J. Tepperman, and P. Quail. (1998). PIF3, a phy­
tochrome-interacting factor necessary for normal pho­
toinduced signal transduction, is a novel basic helix-
loop-helix protein. Cell 95:657–667.
Niklas, K. (1985). The aerodynamics of wind pollination. 
Botanical Review 51:328–386.
Nobutoshi, Y., Y. Ayako, A. Mitsutomo, D. Wagner, and Y. 
Komeda. (2012). LEAFY controls Arabidopsis pedicel 
length and orientation by affecting adaxial-abaxial cell 
fate. Plant Journal 69:844–856.
Noda, K., B. J. Glover, P. Linstead, and C. Martin. (1994). 
Flower colour intensity depends on specialised cell 
shape controlled by a MYB-related transcription factor. 
Nature 369:661–664.

References      269
Park, D., D. Somers, Y. Kim, Y. Choy, H. Lim, M. Soh, H. 
Kim, S. Kay, and H. Nam. (1999). Control of circadian 
rhythms and photoperiodic flowering by the Arabidopsis 
GIGANTEA gene. Science 285:1579–1582.
Park, S., R. Howden, and D. Twell. (1998). The Arabidopsis 
thaliana gametophytic mutation gemini pollen 1 disrupts 
microspore polarity, division asymmetry and pollen cell 
fate. Development 125:3789–3799.
Pastore, J., A. Limpuangthip, N. Yamaguchi, M. Wu, Y. 
Sang, S. Han, L. Malaspina, N. Chavdaroff, A. Yama­
guchi, and D. Wagner. (2011). LATE MERISTEM IDEN­
TITY2 acts together with LEAFY to activate APETALA1. 
Development 138:3189–3198.
Pauw, A. (1998). Pollen transfer on birds’ tongues. Nature 
394:731–732.
Pauw, A. (2006). Floral syndromes accurately predict polli­
nation by a specialised oil-collecting bee (Rediviva pering­
ueyi, Melittidae) in a guild of South African orchids 
(Coryciinae). American Journal of Botany 93:917–926.
Pazhouhandeh, M., J. Molinier, A. Berr, and P. Genschik. 
(2011). MSI4/FVE interacts with CUL4-DDB1 and a 
PRC2-like complex to control epigenetic regulation of 
flowering time in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the Nation­
al Academy of Sciences of the USA 108:3430–3435.
Pedersen, M. W. (1967). Cross-pollination studies involv­
ing three purple-flowered alfalfas, one white-flowered 
line, and two pollinator species. Crop Science 7:59–62.
Pelaz, S., G. Ditta, E. Baumann, E. Wisman, and M. 
Yanofsky. (2000). B and C floral organ identity func­
tions require SEPALLATA MADS-box genes. Nature 
405:200–202.
Pellegrini, L., T. Song, and T. Richmond. (1995). Structure 
of serum response factor core bound to DNA. Nature 
376:490–498.
Pena, L., M. Martin-Trillo, J. Juarez, J. A. Pina, L. Navarro, 
and J. M. Martinez-Zapater. (2001). Constitutive expres­
sion of Arabidopsis LEAFY or APETALA1 genes in cit­
rus reduces their generation time. Nature Biotechnology 
19:263–267.
Perez-Rodriguez, M., F. Jaffe, E. Butelli, B. J. Glover, and 
C. Martin. (2005). Development of three different cell 
types is associated with the activity of a specific MYB 
transcription factor in the ventral petal of Antirrhinum 
majus flowers. Development 132:359–370.
Perl-Treves, R., A. Kahana, N. Rosenman, Y. Xiang, and L. 
Silberstein. (1998). Expression of multiple AGAMOUS-
like genes in male and female flowers of cucumber (Cu­
cumis sativus L.). Plant Cell Physiology 39:701–710.
Piatelli, M. (1981). The betalains: structure, biosynthesis, 
and chemical taxonomy. In: E. Conn (ed.), The Biochem­
istry of Plants: A comprehensive treatise, pp. 557–575. Aca­
demic Press, New York.
Pin, P., R. Benlloch, D. Bonnet, E. Wremerth-Weich, T. 
Kraft, J. Gielen, and O. Nilsson. (2010). An antagonistic 
Ollerton, J. (1998). Sunbird surprise for syndromes. Nature 
394:726–727.
Ollerton, J., A. Stott, E. Allnutt, S. Shove, C. Taylor, and 
E. Lamborn. (2007). Pollination niche overlap between a 
parasitic plant and its host. Oecologia, 151:473–485.
Ollerton, J., R. Alarcon, N. Waser, M. Price, S. Watts, L. 
Cranmer, A. Hingston, C. Peter, and J. Rotenberry. 
(2009). A global test of the pollination syndrome hy­
pothesis. Annals of Botany 103:1471–1480.
Olmedo-Monfil, V., N. Duran-Figueroa, M. Arteaga-
Vazquez, E. Demesa-Arevalo, D. Autran, D. Grimanelli, 
R. Slotkin, R. Martienssen, and J. Vielle-Calzada. (2010). 
Control of female gamete formation by a small RNA 
pathway in Arabidopsis. Nature 464:628–632.
Osorio, D., and M. Vorobyev. (2008). A review of the evolu­
tion of animal colour vision and visual communication 
signals. Vision Research 48:2042–2051.
Osterlund, M., C. Hardtke, N. Wei, and X. Deng. (2000). 
Targeted destabilization of HY5 during light-regulated 
development of Arabidopsis. Nature 405:462–466.
Oyama, T., Y. Shimura, and K. Okada. (1997). The Arabi­
dopsis HY5 gene encodes a bZIP protein that regulates 
stimulus-induced development of root and hypocotyl. 
Genes and Development 11:2983–2995.
Pabon-Mora, N., B. Ambrose, and A. Litt. (2012). Poppy 
APETALA1/FRUITFULL orthologs control flowering 
time, branching, perianth identity, and fruit develop­
ment. Plant Physiology 158:1685–1704.
Padysakova, E., M. Bartos, R. Tropek, and S. Janecek. 
(2013). Generalization versus specialization in pollina­
tion systems: visitors, thieves and pollinators of Hy­
poestes aristata (Acanthaceae). PLoS One 4:e59299.
Pagnussat, G., H. Yu, Q. Ngo, S. Rajani, S. Mayalagu, 
C. Johnson, A. Capron, L. Xie, D. Ye, and V. Sunda­
resan. (2005). Genetic and molecular identification 
of genes required for female gametophyte develop­
ment and function in Arabidopsis. Development 132:
603–614.
Pagnussat, G., M. Alandete-Saez, J. Bowman, and V. 
Sundaresan. (2009). Auxin-dependent patterning and 
gamete specification in the Arabidopsis female gameto­
phyte. Science 324:1684–1689.
Pannell, J. (2002). The evolution and maintenance of an­
drodioecy. Annual Reviews of Ecology and Systematics 
33:397–425.
Parcy, F., O. Nilsson, O., M. Busch, I. Lee, and D. Weigel. 
(1998). A genetic framework for floral patterning. Nature 
395:561–566.
Parenicova, L., S. de Folter, M. Kieffer, D. Horner, C. Fav­
alli, J. Busscher, H. Cook, R. Ingram, M. Kater, B. Davies, 
G. Angenent, and L. Colombo. (2003). Molecular and 
phylogenetic analyses of the complete MADS-box tran­
scription factor family in Arabidopsis: new openings to 
the MADS world. Plant Cell 15:1538–1551.

270      References
Qiu, Y., J. Lee, F. Bernasconi-Quadroni, D. E. Soltise, P. Sol­
tis, M. Zanis, E. A. Zimmer, Z. Chen, V. Savolainen, and 
M. W. Chase. (1999). The earliest angiosperms. Nature 
402:404–407.
Quail, P. H. (2002). Phytochrome photosensory signalling 
networks. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 3:85–93.
Quattrocchio, F., J. F. Wing, K. van der Woude, J. N. M. 
Mol, and R. Koes. (1998). Analysis of bHLH and MYB 
domain proteins: species-specific regulatory differences 
are caused by divergent evolution of target anthocyanin 
genes. Plant Journal 13:475–488.
Quattrocchio, F., J. Wing, K. van der Woude, E. Souer, 
N. de Vetten, J. Mol, and R. Koes. (1999). Molecular anal­
ysis of the anthocyanin2 gene of petunia and its role in 
the evolution of flower colour. Plant Cell 11:1433–1444.
Quattrocchio, F., W. Verweij, A. Kroon, C. Spelt, J. Mol, and 
R. Koes. (2006). PH4 of Petunia is an R2R3 MYB protein 
that activates vacuolar acidification through interac­
tions with basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factors 
of the anthocyaninin pathway. Plant Cell 18:1274–1291.
Quesada, V., R. Macknight, C. Dean, and G. G. Simpson. 
(2003). Autoregulation of FCA pre-mRNA process­
ing controls Arabidopsis flowering time. EMBO Journal 
22:3142–3152.
Rahmann, M., K. Uchiyama, M. Kuno, N. Hirashima, 
K. Suwabe, T. Tsuchiya, Y. Kagaya, I. Kobayashi, K. 
Kakeda, and Y. Kowyama. (2007). Expression of stigma- 
and anther-specific genes located in the S locus region of 
Ipomoea trifida. Sexual Plant Reproduction 20:73–85.
Ramsay, N. A., and B. J. Glover. (2005). MYB-bHLH-WD40 
protein complex and the evolution of cellular diversity. 
Trends in Plant Science 10:63–70.
Ramsay, N. A., A. R. Walker, M. Mooney, and J. C. Gray. 
(2003). Two basic-helix-loop-helix genes (MYC-146 and 
GL3) from Arabidopsis can activate anthocyanin biosyn­
thesis in a white flowered Matthiola incana mutant. Plant 
Molecular Biology 52:679–688.
Ramsey, J., H. D. Bradshaw, and D. Schemske. (2003). Com­
ponents of reproductive isolation between the monkey­
flowers Mimulus lewisii and M. cardinalis (Phrymaceae). 
Evolution 57:1520–1534.
Rands, S., B. Glover, and H. Whitney. (2011). Floral epider­
mal structure and flower orientation: getting to grips with 
awkward flowers. Arthropod–Plant Interactions 5:279–285.
Rao, N., K. Prasad, P. Kumar, and U. Vijayraghavan. 
(2008). Distinct regulatory role for RFL, the rice LFY ho­
molog, in determining flowering time and plant archi­
tecture. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the USA 105:3646–3651.
Ratcliffe, O., I. Amaya, C. Vincent, S. Rothstein, R. Carpen­
ter, E. Coen, and D. Bradley. (1998). A common mecha­
nism controls the life cycle and architecture of plants. 
Development 125:1609–1615.
pair of FT homologs mediates the control of flowering 
time in sugar beet. Science 330:1397–1400.
Pinyopich, A., G. Ditta, B. Savidge, S. Liljegren, E. Bau­
mann, E. Wisman, and M. Yanofsky. (2003). Assessing 
the redundancy of MADS-box genes during carpel and 
ovule development. Nature 424:85–88.
Ponomarenko, A. G. (1995). The geological history of bee­
tles. In: J. Pakaluk and S. A. Slipinski (eds), Biology, Phy­
logeny and Classification of Coleoptera. Muzeum I Instytut 
Zoologii PAN, Warsaw.
Portereiko, M., L. Sandaklie-Nikolova, A. Lloyd, C. Dever, 
D. Otsuga, and G. Drews. (2006). NUCLEAR FUSION 
DEFECTIVE 1 encodes the Arabidopsis RPL21M pro­
tein and is required for karyogamy during female ga­
metophyte development and fertilisation. Plant Physiol­
ogy 141:957–965.
Preston, J., and E. Kellogg. (2006). Reconstructing the evo­
lutionary history of paralogous APETALA1/FRUITFULL-
like genes in grasses (Poaceae). Genetics 174:421–437.
Preston, J., and L. Hileman. (2012). Parallel evolution of 
TCP and B-class genes in Commelinaceae flower bilat­
eral symmetry. EvoDevo 3:6.
Preston, J., C. Martinez, and L. Hileman. (2011). Gradual 
disintegration of the floral symmetry gene network is 
implicated in the evolution of a wind-pollination syn­
drome. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the USA 108:2343–2348.
Prum, B., R. Seidl, H. Bohn, and T. Speck. (2012). Impact 
of cell shape in hierarchically structured plant surfac­
es on the attachment of male Colorado potato beetles 
(Leptinotarsa decemlineata). Beilstein Journal of Nanotech­
nology 3:57–64.
Putterill, J. (2001). Flowering in time: genes controlling 
photoperiodic flowering in Arabidopsis. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B 356:
1761–1767.
Putterill, J., F. Robson, K. Lee, R. Simon, and G. Cou­
pland. (1995). The CONSTANS gene of Arabidopsis 
pomotes flowering and encodes a protein showing 
similarities to zinc finger transcription factors. Cell 80:
847–857.
Putterill, J., R. Laurie, and R. Macknight. (2004). It’s time 
to flower: the genetic control of flowering time. BioEs­
says 26:363–373.
Puzey, J., S. Gerbode, S. Hodges, E. Kramer, and L. Ma­
hadevan. (2012). Evolution of spur length diversity in 
Aquilegia petals is achieved solely through cell shape 
anisotropy. Proceedings of the Royal Society Series B 279:
1640–1645.
Qiao, H., F. Weng, L. Zhao, J. Zhou, Z. Lai, Y. Zhang, T. 
Robbins, and Y. Xue. (2004). The F-box protein AhSLF-
S2 controls the pollen function of S-RNase-based self 
incompatibility. Plant Cell 16:2307–2322.

References      271
Rouse, D. T., C. C. Sheldon, D. J. Bagnall, W. J. Peacock, 
and E. S. Dennis. (2002). FLC, a repressor of flowering, 
is regulated by genes in different inductive pathways. 
Plant Journal 29:183–191.
Rubio, V., and X. Deng. (2005). Phy tunes: phosphoryla­
tion status and phytochrome-mediated signalling. Cell 
120:290–292.
Rudall, P. J. (2006). How many nuclei make an embryo sac 
in flowering plants? BioEssays 28:1067–1071.
Rudall, P., and R. Bateman. (2007). Developmental bases 
for key innovations in the seed plant microgameto­
phyte. Trends in Plant Science 12:317–326.
Rudall, P., J. Hilton, F. Vergara-Silva, and R. Bateman. 
(2011). Recurrent abnormalities in conifer cones and the 
evolutionary origins of flower-like structures. Trends in 
Plant Science 16:151–159.
Ruiz-Sola, M.A., and M. Rodríguez-Concepción (2012). 
Carotenoid biosynthesis in Arabidopsis: a colorful path­
way. The Arabidopsis Book 10:e0158.
Rukolainen, S., Y. Ng, V. Albert, P. Elomaa, and T. Teeri. 
(2010). Large scale interaction analysis predicts that 
the Gerbera hybrida floral E function is provided both 
by general and specialized proteins. BMC Plant Biology 
10:129.
Rutishauser, R., and B. Isler. (2001). Developmental genet­
ics and morphological evolution of flowering plants, 
especially bladderworts (Utricularia): fuzzy Arberian 
morphology complements classical morphology. Annals 
of Botany 88:1173–1202.
Rutledge, R., S. Regan, O. Nicolas, P. Fobert, C. Cote, 
W. Bosnich, C. Kauffeldt, G. Sunohara, A. Seguin, 
and D. Stewart. (1998). Characterization of an AGA­
MOUS homologue from the conifer black spruce 
(Picea mariana) that produces floral homeotic conver­
sions when expressed in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 15:
625–634.
Saddic, L. A., B. Huvermann, S. Bezhani, Y. Su, C. M. Win­
ter, C. S. Kwon, R. P. Collum, and D. Wagner. (2006). 
The LEAFY target LMI1 is a meristem identity regulator 
and acts together with LEAFY to regulate expression of 
CAULIFLOWER. Development 133:1673–1682.
Sakai, H., L. Medrano, and E. Meyerowitz. (1995). Role 
of Superman in maintaining Arabidopsis floral whorl 
boundaries. Nature 378:199–203.
Samach, A., H. Onouchi, S. Gold, G. Ditta, Z. Schwarz-
Sommer, M. Yanofsky, and G. Coupland. (2000). Distinct 
roles of CONSTANS target genes in reproductive devel­
opment in Arabidopsis. Science 288:1613–1616.
Sanchez, M. (2011). Taste perception in honeybees. Chemi­
cal Senses 36:675–692.
Sanda, S., and R. M. Amasino. (1996). Ecotype-specific ex­
pression of a flowering mutant phenotype in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Plant Physiology 111:641–644.
Ratcliffe, O., D. Bradley, and E. Coen. (1999). Separation 
of shoot and floral identity in Arabidopsis. Development 
126:1109–1120.
Rathcke, B. J. (2000). Hurricane causes resource and pol­
lination limitation of fruit set in a bird-pollinated shrub. 
Ecology 81:1951–1958.
Raven, P. (1972). Why are bird-visited flowers predomi­
nantly red? Evolution 26:674.
Razafimandimbison, S., S. Ekman, T. McDowell, and B. 
Bremer. (2012). Evolution of growth habit, inflorescence 
architecture, flower size, and fruit type in Rubiaceae: 
its ecological and evolutionary implications. PLoS One 
7:e40851.
Razem, F. A., A. El-Kereamy, S. R. Abrams, and R. D. Hill. 
(2006). The RNA-binding protein FCA is an abscisic acid 
receptor. Nature 439:290–294.
Reale, L., A. Porceddu, L. Lanfaloni, C. Moretti, S. Zenoni, 
M. Pezzotti, B. Romano, and F. Ferranti. (2002). Patterns 
of cell division and expansion in developing petals of 
Petunia hybrida. Sexual Plant Reproduction 15:123–132.
Redei, G. P. (1973). Arabidopsis as a genetic tool. Annual Re­
views of Genetics 9:111–127.
Reichmann, J., B. Krizek, and E. Meyerowitz, (1996). Di­
merization specificity of Arabidopsis MADS domain ho­
meotic proteins APETALA1, APETALA3, PISTILLATA 
and AGAMOUS. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the USA 93:4793–4798.
Richards, A. (1997). Plant Breeding Systems, 2nd edn. Chap­
man and Hall, London.
Riffell, J., H. Lei, L. Abrell, and J. Hildebrand. (2013). Neu­
ral basis of a pollinator’s buffet: olfactory specialisation 
and learning in Manduca sexta. Science 339:200–204.
Rijpkema, A., J. Zethof, T. Gerats, and M. Vandenbussche. 
(2009). The petunia AGL6 gene has a SEPALLATA-like 
function in floral patterning. Plant Journal 60:1–9.
Robertson, H., and K. Wanner. (2006). The chemoreceptor 
superfamily in the honeybee, Apis mellifera: expansion 
of the odorant, but not gustatory, receptor family. Ge­
nome Research 16:1395–1403.
Rodriguez-Girones, M., and L. Santamaria. (2004). Why 
are so many bird flowers red? PLoS Biology 2:e306.
Rolland-Lagan, A., A. J. Bangham, and E. Coen. (2003). 
Growth dynamics underlying petal shape and symme­
try. Nature 422:161–163.
Ronse de Craene, L. (2007). Are petals sterile stamens or 
bracts? The origin and evolution of petals in the core 
eudicots. Annals of Botany 100:621–630.
Ronse de Craene, L., P. Soltis, and D. Soltis. (2003). Evolu­
tion of floral structures in basal angiosperms. Interna­
tional Journal of Plant Science 164:S329–S363.
Rosati, C., A. Cadic, M. Duron, M. Amiot, M. Tacchini, S. 
Martens, and G. Forkmann. (1998). Flavonoid metabo­
lism in Forsythia flowers. Plant Science 139:133–140.

272      References
Schopfer, C., M. Nasrallah, and J. Nasrallah. (1999). The 
male determinant of self-incompatibility in Brassica. Sci­
ence 286:1697–1700.
Schreiber, H., A. Swink, and T. Godsey. (2010). The chemi­
cal mechanism for Al3+ complexing with delphinidin: 
a model for the bluing of hydrangea sepals. Journal of 
Inorganic Biochemistry 104:732–739.
Schruff, M., M. Spielman, S. Tiwari, S. Adams, N. Fenby, 
and R. Scott. (2006). The AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR 
2 gene of Arabidopsis links auxin signalling, cell divi­
sion, and the size of seeds and other organs. Develop­
ment 133:251–261.
Schwarz-Sommer, Z., I. Hue, P. Huijser, P. Flor, H. Hansen, 
F. Tetens, W. Lonnig, H. Saedler, and H. Sommer. (1992). 
Characterisation of the Antirrhinum floral homeotic 
MADS-box gene deficiens: evidence for DNA binding 
and autoregulation of its persistent expression through­
out flower development. EMBO Journal 11:251–263.
Schwinn, K., J. Venail, Y. Shang, S. Mackay, V. Alm, E. 
Butelli, R. Oyama, P. Bailey, K. Davies, and C. Martin. 
(2006). A small family of MYB-regulatory genes controls 
floral pigmentation intensity and patterning in the ge­
nus Antirrhinum. Plant Cell 18:831–851.
Scora, R. (1964). Dependency of pollination on patterns in 
Monarda (Labiatae). Nature 204:1011–1012.
Searle, I., Y. He, F. Turck, C. Vincent, F. Fornara, S. Kroe­
ber, R. A. Amasino, and G. Coupland. (2006). The tran­
scription factor FLC confers a flowering response to 
vernalization by repressing meristem competence and 
systemic signalling in Arabidopsis. Genes and Develop­
ment 20:898–912.
Seitz, C., C. Eder, B. Deiml, S. Kellner, S. Martens, and G. 
Forkmann. (2006). Cloning, functional identification 
and sequence analysis of flavonoid 3′-­hydroxylase 
and flavonoid 3′,5′-hydroxylase cDNAs reveals in­
dependent evolution of flavonoid 3′,5′-hydroxylase 
in the Asteraceae family. Plant Molecular Biology 61:
365–381.
Seo, H.S., J. Y. Yang, M. Ishikawa, C. Bolle, M. L. Balles­
teros, and N. H. Chua. (2003). LAF1 ubiquitination by 
COP1 controls photomorphogenesis and is stimulated 
by SPA1. Nature 423:995–999.
Shalitin, D., H. Yang, T. Mockler, M. Maymon, H. Guo, G. 
Whitelam, and C. Lin. (2002). Regulation of Arabidopsis 
cryptochrome by blue-light-dependent phosphoryla­
tion. Nature 417:763–767.
Shalitin, D., X. Yu, M. Maymon, T. Mockler, and C. Lin. 
(2003). Blue light-dependent in vivo and in vitro phos­
phorylation of Arabidopsis cryptochrome 1. Plant Cell 
15:2421–2429.
Shang, Y., J. Venail, S. Mackay, P. Bailey, K. Schwinn, 
P. Jameson, C. Martin, and K. Davies. (2011). The mo­
lecular basis for venation patterning of pigmentation 
Sanderson, M., J. Thorne, N. Wikström, and K. Bremer. 
(2004). Molecular evidence on plant divergence times. 
American Journal of Botany 91:1656–1665.
Sandring, C., and J. Agren. (2009). Pollinator mediated se­
lection on floral display and flowering time in the per­
ennial herb Arabidopsis lyrata. Evolution 63:1292–1300.
Sargent, R., and S. Otto. (2004). A phylogenetic analysis 
of pollination mode and the evolution of dichogamy in 
angiosperms. Evolutionary Ecology Research 6:1183–1199.
Sargent, R., M. Mandegar, and S. Otto. (2006). A model 
of the evolution of dichogamy incorporating sex-ratio 
selection, anther-stigma interference and inbreeding de­
pression. Evolution 60:934–944.
Sargent, R., C. Goodwillie, S. Kalisz, and R. Ree. (2007). 
Phylogenetic evidence for a flower size and number 
trade-off. American Journal of Botany 94:2059–2062.
Sato, T., T. Nakayama, S. Kikuchi, Y. Fukui, K. Yonekura-
Sakakibara, T. Ueda, T. Nishino, Y. Tanaka, and T. Ku­
sumi. (2001). Enzymatic formation of aurones in the 
extracts of yellow snapdragon flowers. Plant Science 
160:229–236.
Savidge, B., S. Rounsley, and M. Yanofsky. (1995). Tempo­
ral relationship between the transcription of two Arabi­
dopsis MADS box genes and the floral organ identity 
genes. Plant Cell 7:721–733.
Sawa, M., D. Nusinow, S. Kay, and T. Imaizuma. (2007). 
FKF1 and GIGANTEA complex formation is required 
for day-length measurement in Arabidopsis. Science 
318:261–265.
Schaefer, H., and S. Renner. (2010). A three-genome phy­
logeny of Momordica (Cucurbitaceae) suggests seven re­
turns from dioecy to monoecy and recent long-distance 
dispersal to Asia. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 
54:553–560.
Schemske, D., and H. Bradshaw. (1999). Pollinator prefer­
ence and the evolution of floral traits in monkeyflowers 
(Mimulus). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the USA 96:11910–11915.
Schemske, D., and P. Bierzychudek. (2001). Evolution of 
flower colour in the desert annual Linanthus parryae: 
Wright revisited. Evolution 55:1269–1282.
Schlüter, P., and F. Schiestl. (2008). Molecular mechanisms 
of floral mimicry in orchids. Trends in Plant Science 
13:228–235.
Schoenrock, N., R. Bouveret, O. Leroy, L. Borghi, C. Koe­
hler, W. Gruissem, and L. Hennig. (2006). Polycomb-
group proteins repress the floral activator AGL19 in the 
FLC-independent vernalization pathway. Genes and De­
velopment 20:1667–1678.
Schomburg, F. M., D. A. Patton, D. W. Meinke, and R. M. 
Amasino. (2001). FPA, a gene involved in floral induc­
tion in Arabidopsis, encodes a protein containing RNA-
recognition motifs. Plant Cell 13:1427–1436.

References      273
development in tulip cv. Murasakizuisho requires ferric 
ions. Plant & Cell Physiology 48:243–251.
Shpak, E. D., C. T. Berthiaume, E. J. Hill, and K. U. To­
rii. (2003). Synergistic interaction of three ERECTA-
family receptor-like kinases controls Arabidopsis organ 
growth and flower development by promoting cell pro­
liferation. Development 131:1491–1501.
Sicard, A., N. Stacey, K. Hermann, J. Dessoly, B. Nueffer, 
I. Baurle, and M. Lenhard. (2011). Genetics, evolution 
and adaptive significance of the selfing syndrome in the 
genus Capsella. Plant Cell 23:3156–3171.
Sieber, P., F. Wellmer, J. Gheyselinck, J. Reichmann, and 
E. Meyerowitz. (2007). Redundancy and specialization 
among plant microRNAs: role of the miR164 family in 
developmental robustness. Development 134:1051–1060.
Sieburth, L., and E. Meyerowitz. (1997). Molecular dissec­
tion of the AGAMOUS control region shows that cis ele­
ments for spatial regulation are located intragenically. 
Plant Cell 9:355–365.
Sijacic, P., X. Wang, A. Skirpan, Y. Wang, P. Dowd, A. Mc­
Cubbin, S. Huang, and T. Kao. (2004). Identification 
of the pollen determinant of S-RNase-mediated self-
incompatibility. Nature 429:302–305.
Simon, R., R. Carpenter, S. Doyle, and E. Coen. (1994). 
Fimbriata controls flower development by mediating 
between meristem and organ identity genes. Cell 78:
99–107.
Simon, R., M. Igeno, and G. Coupland. (1996). Activation 
of floral meristem identity genes in Arabidopsis. Nature 
84:59–62.
Simpson, G. G. (2003). Evolution of flowering in response 
to day length: flipping the CONSTANS switch. BioEssays 
25:829–832.
Simpson, G. G. (2004). The autonomous pathway: epige­
netic and post-transcriptional gene regulation in the 
control of Arabidopsis flowering time. Current Opinion in 
Plant Biology 7:570–574.
Simpson, G. G., and C. Dean. (2002). Arabidopsis, the ro­
setta stone of flowering time? Science 296:285–289.
Simpson, G. G., P. P. Dijkwel, V. Quesada, I. Henderson, 
and C. Dean. (2003). FY is an RNA 3′ end-processing 
factor that interacts with FCA to control the Arabidopsis 
floral transition. Cell 113:777–787.
Smaczniak, C., R. Immink, J. Muino, R. Blanvillain, M. 
Busscher, J. Busscher-Lange, Q. Dinh, S. Liu, A. West­
phal, S. Boeren, F. Parcy, L. Xu, C. Carles, G. Angenent, 
and K. Kaufmann. (2012). Characterization of MADS-
domain transcription factor complexes in Arabidopsis 
flower development. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the USA 109:1560–1565.
Smith, R., and M. Rausher. (2008). Experimental evidence 
that selection favours character displacement in the 
ivyleaf morning glory. American Naturalist 171:1–9.
and its effect on pollinator attraction in flowers of Antir­
rhinum. New Phytologist 189:602–615.
Sharma, B., and E. Kramer. (2013). Sub- and neo-function­
alization of APETALA3 paralogs have contributed to the 
evolution of novel floral organ identity in Aquilegia (col­
umbine, Ranunculaceae). New Phytologist 197:949–957.
Sharma, B., C. Guo, H. Kong, and E. Kramer. (2011). Petal-
specific subfunctionalization of an APETALA3 paralog 
in the Ranunculales and its implications for petal evolu­
tion. New Phytologist 90:870–883.
Sheldon, C., J. E. Burn, P. P. Perez, J. Metzger, J. A. Ed­
wards, W. J. Peacock, and E. S. Dennis. (1999). The FLF 
MADS box gene: a repressor of flowering in Arabidopsis 
regulated by vernalization and methylation. Plant Cell 
11:445–458.
Sheldon, C., E. J. Finnegan, D. T. Rouse, M. Tadege, D. J. 
Bagnall, C. A. Helliwell, W. J. Peacock, and E. S. Dennis. 
(2000a). The control of flowering by vernalization. Cur­
rent Opinion in Plant Biology 3:418–422.
Sheldon, C., D. T. Rouse, E. J. Finnegan, W. J. Peacock, and 
E. S. Dennis. (2000b). The molecular basis of vernaliza­
tion: the central role of FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC). 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 
97:3753–3758.
Sheldon, C., A. Conn, E. S. Dennis, and W. J. Peacock. 
(2002). Different regulatory regions are required for 
the vernalization-induced repression of FLOWERING 
LOCUS C and for the epigenetic maintenance of repres­
sion. Plant Cell 14:2527–2537.
Sheldon, C., E. J. Finnegan, E. S. Dennis, and W. J. Peacock. 
(2006). Quantitative effects of vernalization on FLC1 
and SOC1 expression. Plant Journal 45:871–883.
Shiba, H., M. Iwano, T. Entani, K. Ishimoto, H. Shimosa­
to, F. Che, Y. Satta, A. Ito, Y. Takada, M. Watanabe, A. 
Isogai, and S. Takayama. (2002). The dominance of al­
leles controlling self-incompatibility in Brassica pollen is 
regulated at the RNA level. Plant Cell 14:491–504.
Shimada, S., Y. Inoue, and M. Sakuta. (2005). Anthocya­
nidin synthase in non-anthocyanin-producing Caryo­
phyllales species. Plant Journal 58:950–959.
Shinomura, T., K. Uchida, and M. Furuya. (2000). Elemen­
tary processes of photoperception by phytochrome A 
for high-irradiance response of hypocotyl elongation in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 122:147–156.
Shindo, S., K. Sakakibara, R. Sano, K. Ueda, and M. Hasebe. 
(2001). Characterization of a FLORICAULA/LEAFY 
homologue of Gnetum parvifolium and its implications 
for the evolution of reproductive organs in seed plants. 
International Journal of Plant Science 162:1199–1209.
Shiono, M., N. Matsugaki, and K. Takeda. (2005). Structure 
of the blue cornflower pigment. Nature 436:791.
Shoji, K., N. Miki, N. Nakajima, K. Momonoi, C. Kato, and 
K. Yoshida. (2007). Perianth bottom-specific blue color 

274      References
Souer, E., A. B. Rebocho, M. Bliek, E. Kusters, R. A. M. de 
Bruin, and R. Koes. (2008). Patterning of inflorescences 
and flowers by the F box protein DOUBLE TOP and the 
LEAFY homolog ABERRANT LEAF AND FLOWER of 
petunia. Plant Cell 20:2033–2048.
Southwick, S., and T. Davenport. (1986). Characterization 
of water stress and low temperature effects on flower 
induction in citrus. Plant Physiology 81:26–29.
Spaethe, J., and A. Briscoe. (2005). Molecular characteri­
sation and expression of the UV opsin in bumblebees: 
three ommatidial subtypes in the retina and a new pho­
toreceptor organ in the lamina. Journal of Experimental 
Biology 208:2347–2361.
Spaethe, J., J. Tautz, and L. Chittka. (2001). Visual con­
straints in foraging bumblebees: flower size and colour 
affects search time and flight behaviour. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 98:3898–3903.
Specht, C., and M. Bartlett. (2009). Flower evolution: the 
origin and subsequent diversification of the angiosperm 
flower. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution and Systemat­
ics 40:217–243.
Spelt, C., F. Quattrocchio, J. N. M. Mol, and R. Koes. (2000). 
anthocyanin1 of Petunia encodes a basic helix-loop-helix 
protein that directly activates transcription of structural 
anthocyanin genes. Plant Cell 12:1619–1631.
Spelt, C., F. Quattrocchio, J. N. M. Mol, and R. Koes. (2002). 
ANTHOCYANIN1 of Petunia controls pigment synthe­
sis, vacuolar pH, and seed coat development by geneti­
cally distinct mechanisms. Plant Cell 14:2121–2135.
Srinivasan, M. (2010). Honeybees as a model for vision, 
perception and cognition. Annual Review of Entomology 
55:267–284.
Stacey, M., S. Hicks, and A. von Arnim. (1999). Discrete 
domains mediate the light-responsive nuclear and cy­
toplasmic localization of Arabidopsis COP1. Plant Cell 
11:349–363.
Stahl, Y., and R. Simon. (2010). Plant primary meristems: 
shared functions and regulatory mechanisms. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology 13:53–58.
Stanton, M., A. Snow, and S. Handel. (1986). Floral evolu­
tion: attractiveness to pollinators increases male fitness. 
Science 232:1625–1627.
Stebbins, G. L. (1970). Adaptive radiation of reproductive 
characteristics in angiosperms, I: pollination mechanisms. 
Annual Reviews in Ecology and Systematics 1:307–326.
Stefanović, S., D. Rice, and J. Palmer. (2004). Long branch 
attraction, taxon sampling, and the earliest angiosperms: 
Amborella or monocots? BMC Evolutionary Biology 4:35.
Stein, J., B. Howlett, D. Boyes, M. Nasrallah, and J. Nas­
rallah. (1991). Molecular cloning of a putative receptor 
protein kinase gene encoded at the self-incompatibility 
locus of Brassica oleracea. Proceedings of the National Acad­
emy of Sciences of the USA 88:8816–8820.
Smith, S., and M. Donoghue. (2008). Rates of molecular 
evolution are linked to life history in flowering plants. 
Science 322:86–89.
Smith, S., and M. Rausher. (2011). Gene loss and parallel 
evolution contribute to species differences in flower col­
our. Molecular Biology and Evolution 28:2799–2810.
Soltis, D., and P. Soltis. (2004). Amborella not a “basal 
angiosperm”? Not so fast. American Journal of Botany 
91:997–1001.
Soltis, D., V. Albert, V. Savolainen, K. Hilu, Y. Qiu, M. 
Chase, J. Farris, S. Stefanovic, D. Rice, J. Palmer, and P. 
Soltis. (2004). Genome-scale data, angiosperm relation­
ships, and ‘ending incongruence’: a cautionary tale in 
phylogenetics. Trends in Plant Science 9:477–483.
Soltis, D., P. Soltis, P. Endress, and M. Chase. (2005). Phy­
logeny and Evolution of Angiosperms. Sinauer Associates, 
Sunderland, MA.
Soltis, D., A. Chanderbali, S. Kim, M. Buzgo, and P. Soltis. 
(2007). The ABC model and its applicability to basal an­
giosperms. Annals of Botany 100:155–163.
Soltis, P., S. Brockington, M. Yoo, A. Piedrahita, M. Latvis, 
M. Moore, A. Chanderbali, and D. Soltis. (2009). Flo­
ral variation and floral genetics in basal angiosperms. 
American Journal of Botany 96:110–128.
Somers, D., P. Devlin, and S. A. Kay. (1998). Phytochromes 
and cryptochromes in the entrainment of the Arabidopsis 
circadian clock. Science 282:1488–1490.
Somers, D., T. Schultz, M. Milnamow, and S. A. Kay. 
(2000). ZEITLUPE encodes a novel clock-associated PAS 
protein from Arabidopsis. Cell 101:319–329.
Sommer, H., P. Beltran, P. Huijser, H. Pape, W. Lonnig, H. 
Saedler, and Z. Schwarz-Sommer. (1990). Deficiens, a 
homeotic gene involved in the control of flower mor­
phogenesis in Antirrhinum majus: the protein shows 
homology to transcription factors. EMBO Journal 9:
605–613.
Song, Y. H., S. Ito, and T. Imaizumi. (2010). Similarities in 
the circadian clock and photoperiodism in plants. Cur­
rent Opinion in Plant Biology 13:594–603.
Sonmez, C., I. Baurle, A. Magusin, R. Dreos, S. Laubinger, 
D. Weigel, and C. Dean. (2011). RNA 3′ processing func­
tions of Arabidopsis FCA and FPA limit intergenic tran­
scription. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the USA 108:8508–8513.
Sonneveld, T., K. Tobutt, S. Vaughan, and T. Robbins. 
(2005). Loss of pollen-S function in two self-compatible 
selections of Prunus avium is associated with deletion/
mutation of an S haplotype-specific F-box gene. Plant 
Cell 17:37–51.
Souer, E., A. van der Krol, D. Kloos, C. Spelt, M. Bliek, J. 
Mol, and R. Koes. (1998). Genetic control of branching 
pattern and floral identity during Petunia inflorescence 
development. Development 125:733–742.

References      275
Subramanian, C., B. Kim, N. Lyssenko, X. Xu, C. Johnson, 
and A. von Arnim. (2004). The Arabidopsis repressor of 
light signalling, COP1, is regulated by nuclear exclu­
sion: mutational analysis by bioluminescence resonance 
energy transfer. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the USA 101:6798–6802.
Sugimoto-Shirasu, K., and K. Roberts. (2003). ‘Big it up’: 
endoreduplication and cell cycle control in plants. Cur­
rent Opinion in Plant Biology 6:544–553.
Sun, G., D. L. Dilcher, S. Zheng, and Z. Zhou. (1998). In 
search of the first flower: a Jurassic angiosperm, Archae­
fructus, from northeast China. Science 282:1692–1695.
Sun, G., Q. Ji, D. Dilcher, S. Zheng, K. Nixon, and X. Wang. 
(2002). Archaefructaceae, a new basal angiosperm fam­
ily. Science 296:899–904.
Sun, G., D. Dilcher, H. Wang, and Z. Chen. (2011). A eu­
dicot from the Early Cretaceous of China. Nature 471:
625–628.
Sundstrom, J., and P. Engstrom. (2002). Conifer reproduc­
tive development involves B-type MADS-box genes 
with distinct and different activities in male organ pri­
mordia. Plant Journal 31:161–169.
Sundstrom, J. F., N. Nakayama, K. Glimelius, and V. Irish. 
(2006). Direct regulation of the floral homeotic APETA­
LA1 gene by APETALA3 and PISTILLATA in Arabidop­
sis. Plant Journal 46:593–600.
Sung, S., and R. M. Amasino. (2004a). Vernalization in 
Arabidopsis thaliana is mediated by the PHD finger pro­
tein VIN3. Nature 427:159–163.
Sung, S., and R. M. Amasino. (2004b). Vernalization and 
epigenetics: how plants remember winter. Current Opin­
ion in Plant Biology 7:4–10.
Sung, S., Y. He, T. W. Eshoo, Y. Tamada, L. Johnson, K. Na­
kahigashi, K. Goto, S. E. Jacobsen, and R. M. Amasino. 
(2006). Epigenetic maintenance of the vernalized state 
in Arabidopsis thaliana requires LIKE HETEROCHRO­
MATIN PROTEIN 1. Nature Genetics 38:706–710.
Szecsi, J., C. Joly, K. Bordji, E. Varaud, J. Cock, C. Dumas, 
and M. Bedahmane. (2006). BIGPETALp, a bHLH tran­
scription factor, in involved in the control of Arabidop­
sis petal size. EMBO Journal 25:3912–3920.
Tadege, M., C. Sheldon, C. Helliwell, N. Upadhyaya, E. 
Dennis, and W.J. Peacock. (2003). Reciprocal control of 
flowering time by OsSOC1 in transgenic Arabidopsis 
and by FLC in transgenic rice. Plant Biotechnology Jour­
nal 1:361–369.
Takasaki, T., K. Hatakeyama, G. Suzuki, M. Watanabe, A. 
Isogai, and K. Hinata. (2000). The S receptor kinase de­
termines self-incompatibility in Brassica stigma. Nature 
403:913–916.
Takayama, S., H. Shiba, M. Iwano, H. Shimosato, F. Che, N. 
Kai, M. Watanabe, G. Suzuki, K. Hinata, and A. Isogai. 
(2000). The pollen determinant of self-incompatibility in 
Stein, J., R. Dixit, M. Nasrallah, and J. Nasrallah. (1996). 
SRK, the stigma-specific S locus receptor kinase of Bras­
sica, is targeted to the plasma membrane in transgenic 
tobacco. Plant Cell 8:429–445.
Steiner, U., W. Schliemann, H. Bohm, and D. Strack. (1999). 
Tyrosinase involved in betalain biosynthesis of higher 
plants. Planta 208:114–124.
Stellari, G., M. A. Jaramillo, and E. M. Kramer. (2004). Evo­
lution of the APETALA3 and PISTILLATA lineages of 
MADS-box-containing genes in the basal angiosperms. 
Molecular Biology and Evolution 21:506–519.
Stewart, R. N., K. H. Norris, and S. Asen. (1975). Micro­
spectrophotometric measurement of pH and pH ef­
fect on color of petal epidermal cells. Phytochemistry 
14:937–942.
Stinchcombe, J., C. Weinig, M. Ungerer, K. Olsen, C. Mays, 
S. Halldorsdottir, M. Purugganan, and J. Schmitt. (2004). 
A latitudinal cline in flowering time in Arabidopsis thali­
ana modulated by the flowering time gene FRIGIDA. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 
101:4712–4717.
Stone, G., P. Willmer, and J. A. Rowe. (1998). Partitioning 
of pollinators during flowering in an African Acacia 
community. Ecology 79:2808–2827.
Stone, S., M. Arnoldo, and D. Goring. (1999). A breakdown 
of Brassica self-incompatibility in ARC1 antisense trans­
genic plants. Science 286:1729–1731.
Stone, S., E. Anderson, R. Mullen, and D. Goring. (2003). 
ARC1 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase and promotes the 
ubiquitination of proteins during the rejection of self-­
incompatible Brassica pollen. Plant Cell 15:885–898.
Stotz, G., P. de Vlaming, H. Wiering, A. W. Schram, and 
G. Forkman. (1985). Genetic and biochemical studies on 
flavonoid 3′-hydroxylation in flowers of Petunia hybrida. 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics 70:300–305.
Strack, D., T. Vogt, and W. Schliemann. (2003). Recent ad­
vances in betalain research. Phytochemistry 62:247–269.
Strange, A., P. Li, C. Lister, J. Anderson, N. Warthmann, 
C. Shindo, J. Irwin, M. Nordborg, and C. Dean. (2011). 
­Major-effect alleles at relatively few loci underlie dis­
tinct vernalization and flowering variation in Arabidop­
sis accessions. PLoS One 6:e199949.
Strayer, C., T. Oyama, T. Schultz, R. Raman, D. Somers, 
P. Mas, S. Panda, J. Kreps, and S. Kay. (2000). Cloning 
of the Arabidopsis clock gene TOC1, an autoregulatory 
response regulator homolog. Science 289:768–771.
Stromberg, M., and P. Johnsen. (1990). Hummingbird 
sweetness preferences; taste or viscosity? The Condor 
92:606–612.
Suarez-Lopez, P., K. Wheatley, F. Robson, H. Onouchi, F. 
Valverde, and G. Coupland. (2001). CONSTANS medi­
ates between the circadian clock and the control of flow­
ering in Arabidopsis. Nature 410:1116–1120.

276      References
The Arabidopsis Genome Initiative. (2000). Analysis of the 
genome of the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Na­
ture 408:796–815.
Theissen, G., and H. Saedler. (2001). Plant biology—floral 
quartets. Nature 409:469–471.
Theissen, G., and A. Becker. (2004). Gymnosperm ortho­
logues of class B Floral homeotic genes and their impact 
on understanding flower origin. Critical Reviews in Plant 
Sciences 23:129–148.
Theissen, G., A. Becker, A. Di Rosa, A. Kanno, J. T. Kim, T. 
Münster, K. U. Winter, and H. Saedler. (2000). A short 
history of MADS-box genes in plants. Plant Molecular 
Biology 42:115–149.
Theissen, G., A. Becker, K. Winter, T. Munster, C. Kirch­
ner, and H. Saedler. (2002). How the land plants learned 
their floral ABCs: the role of MADS-box genes in the 
evolutionary origin of flowers. In: Q. C. B. Cronk, R. M. 
Bateman, and J. A. Hawkins (eds), Developmental Genet­
ics and Plant Evolution, pp. 173–205. Taylor and Francis, 
London.
Thien, L. B., H. Azuma, and S. Kawano. (2000). New per­
spectives on the pollination biology of basal angiosperms. 
International Journal of Plant Sciences 161:S225–S235.
Thompson, B., L. Bartling, C. Whipple, D. Hall, H. Sakai, 
R. Schmidt, and S. Hake. (2009). bearded-ear encodes a 
MADS box transcription factor critical for maize floral 
development. Plant Cell 21:2578–2590.
Thornton, T., S. Swain, and N. Olszewski. (1999). Gib­
berellin signal transduction presents the SPY who 
­O-GlcNAc’d me. Trends in Plant Science 4:424–428.
Tilney-Bassett, R. (1986). Plant Chimeras. Edward Arnold, 
London.
Todesco, M., S. Balasubramanian, T. Hu, B. Traw, M. Hor­
ton, P. Epple, C. Kuhns, S. Sureshkumar, C. Schwartz, 
C. Lanz, R. Laitinen, J. Chory, V. Lipka, J. Borevitz, J. 
Dangl, J. Bergelson, M. Nordborg, and D. Weigel. 
(2010). Natural allelic variation underlying a ma­
jor fitness tradeoff in Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 465:
632–636.
Torti, S., F. Fornara, C. Vincent, F. Andres, K. Nordström, 
U. Göbel, D. Knoll, H. Schoof, and G. Coupland. (2012). 
Analysis of the Arabidopsis shoot meristem transcrip­
tome during floral transition identifies distinct regula­
tory patterns and a leucine-rich repeat protein that pro­
motes flowering. Plant Cell 24:444–462.
Trevaskis, B., D. Bagnall, M. Ellis, W. J. Peacock, and E. 
Dennis. (2003). MADS box genes control vernalization-
induced flowering in cereals. Proceedings of the Natioanl 
Academy of Sciences of the USA 100:13099–13104.
Trobner, W., L. Ramirez, P. Motte, I. Hue, P. Huijser, W. 
Lonnig, H. Saedler, H. Sommer, and Z. Schwarz-­
Sommer. (1992). GLOBOSA—a homeotic gene which 
interacts with DEFICIENS in the control of Antirrhinum 
floral organogenesis. EMBO Journal 11:4693–4704.
Brassica campestris. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the USA 97:1920–1925.
Takayama, S., H. Shimosato, H. Shiba, M. Funato, F. Che, 
M. Watanabe, M. Iwano, and A. Isogai. (2001). Direct 
ligand-receptor complex interaction controls Brassica 
self-incompatibility. Nature 413:534–538.
Takebayashi, N., D. Wolf, and L. Delph. (2006). Effect of 
variation in herkogamy on outcrossing within a popula­
tion of Gilia achilleifolia. Heredity 96:159–165.
Takeda, S., N. Matsumoto, and K. Okada. (2003). RABBIT 
EARS, encoding a SUPERMAN-like zinc-finger protein, 
regulates petal development in Arabidopsis thaliana. De­
velopment 131:425–434.
Tanabe, Y., M. Hasebe, H. Sekimoto, T. Nishiyama, M. Ki­
tani, K. Henschel, T. Muenster, G. Theissen, H. Nozaki, 
and M. Ito. (2005). Characterization of MADS-box genes 
in charophycean green algae and its implication for the 
evolution of MADS-box genes. Proceedings of the Nation­
al Academy of Sciences of the USA 102:2436–2441.
Tanahashi, T., N. Sumikawa, M. Ato, and M. Hasebe. 
(2005). Diversification of gene function: homologs of 
the floral regulator FLO/LFY control the first zygotic cell 
division in the moss Physcomitrella patens. Development 
132:1727–1736.
Tanaka, Y., N. Sasaki, and A. Ohmiya. (2008). Biosynthesis 
of plant pigments: anthocyanins, betalains and carot­
enoids. Plant Journal 54:733–749.
Tandre, K., M. Svenson, M. E. Svensson, and P. Eng­
strom. (1998). Conservation of gene structure and ac­
tivity in the regulation of reproductive organ devel­
opment of conifers and angiosperms. Plant Journal 15:
615–623.
Tarutani, Y., H. Shiba, M. Iwano, T. Kakizaki, G. Suzu­
ki, M. Watanabe, A. Isogai, and S. Takayama. (2010). 
Trans-acting small RNA determines dominance rela­
tionships in Brassica self-incompatibility. Nature 466:
983–986.
Tavares, R., M. Cagnon, I. Negrutiu, and D. Mouchiroud 
(2010). Testing the recent theories for the origin of the 
hermaphrodite flower by comparison of the transcrip­
tomes of gymnosperms and angiosperms. BMC Evolu­
tionary Biology 10:240.
Teeri, T., V. Albert, P. Elomaa, J. Hamalainen, M. Kotilain­
en, E. Pollanen, and A. Uimari. (2002). Involvement of 
non-ABC MADS-box genes in determining stamen and 
carpel identity in Gerbera hybrida (Asteraceae). In: Q. 
C. B. Cronk, R. M. Bateman, and J. A. Hawkins (eds), 
Developmental Genetics and Plant Evolution, pp. 173–205. 
Taylor and Francis, London.
Tepperman, J., T. Zhu, H. Chang, X. Wang, and P. H. 
Quail. (2001). Multiple transcription factor genes are 
early targets of phytochrome A signalling. Proceed­
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 98:
9437–9442.

References      277
neo-­functionalization during floral MADS box gene 
evolution by C-terminal frameshift mutations. Nucleic 
Acids Research 31:4401–4409.
Vandenbussche, M., J. Zethof, E. Souer, R. Koes, G. Torn­
ielli, M. Pezzotti, S. Ferrario, G. Angenent, and T. Gerats. 
(2003b). Toward the analysis of the petunia MADS box 
gene family by reverse and forward transposon inser­
tion mutagenesis approaches: B, C, and D floral organ 
identity functions require SEPALLATA-like MADS box 
genes in petunia. Plant Cell 15:2680–2693.
Vanoosthuyse, V., G. Tichtinsky, C. Dumas, T. Gaude, and 
J. M. Cock. (2003). Interaction of calmodulin, a sorting 
nexin and kinase-associated protein phosphatase with 
the Brassica oleracea S locus receptor kinase. Plant Physi­
ology 133:919–929.
van Tunen, A. J., R. E. Koes, C. E. Spelt, A. R. van der 
Krol, A. R. Stuitje, and J. N. M. Mol. (1988). Cloning 
of the two chalcone flavanone isomerase genes from 
Petunia hybrida: coordinate, light regulated and differ­
ential expression of flavonoid genes. EMBO Journal 7:
1257–1263.
Varela, F., A. Palacios, and T. Goldsmith. (1993). Colour vi­
sion of birds. In: H. Zeigler (ed.), Vision, Brain and Behav­
iour in Birds. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Vazquez, D., N. Bluthgen, L. Cagnolo, and N. Chacoff. 
(2009). Uniting pattern and process in plant–animal 
mutualistic networks: a review. Annals of Botany 103:
1445–1457.
Vazquez-Lobo, A., A. Carlsbecker, F. Vergara-Silva, E. 
Alvarez-Bullya, D. Pinero, and P. Engström. (2007). 
Characterization of the expression patterns of LEAFY/
FLORICAULA and NEEDLY orthologs in female and 
male cones of the conifer genera Picea, Podocarpus, 
and Taxus: implications for current evo-devo hypoth­
eses for gymnosperms. Evolution and Development 9:
446–459.
Verdonk, J., M. Haring, A. van Tunen, and R. Schuurink. 
(2005). ODORANT1 regulates fragrance biosynthesis in 
petunia flowers. Plant Cell 17:1612–1624.
Vert, G., C. Walcher, J. Chory, and J. Nemhauser. (2008). 
Integration of auxin and brassinosteroid pathways by 
AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR 2. Proceedings of the Na­
tional Academy of Sciences of the USA 105:9829–9834.
Verweij, W., C. Spelt, G. Di Sansebastiano, J. Vermeer, L. 
Reale, F. Ferranti, R. Koes, and F. Quattrocchio. (2008). 
An H+ P-ATPase on the tonoplast determines vacuolar 
pH and flower colour. Nature Cell Biology 10:1456–1462.
Vignolini, S., M. Thomas, M. Kolle, T. Wenzel, P. Rudall, J. 
Baumberg, B. Glover, and U. Steiner. (2012). Directional 
scattering from Ranunculus acris: how the buttercup 
lights up your chin. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 
9:1295–1301.
Voinnet, O. (2009). Origin, biogenesis and activity of plant 
microRNAs. Cell 136:669–687.
Tsaftaris, A., K. Pasentsis, P. Madesis, and A. Argiriou. 
(2012). Sequence characterization and expression analy­
sis of three APETALA2-like genes from saffron crocus. 
Plant Molecular Biology Reporter 30:443–452.
Tsuchimatsu, T., K. Suwabe, R. Shimizu-Inatsuqi, S. 
Isokawa, P. Pavlidis, T. Stadler, G. Suzuki, S. Takayama, 
M. Watanabe, and K. Shimizu. (2010). Evolution of self-
compatibility in Arabidopsis by a mutation in the male 
specificity gene. Nature 464:1342–1346.
Tsuji, H., K. Taoka, and K. Shimamoto. (2011). Regulation 
of flowering in rice: two florigen genes, a complex gene 
network, and natural variation. Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology 14:45–52.
Tucker, M., T. Okada, Y. Hu, A. Scholefield, J. Taylor, and 
A. Koltunow. (2012). Somatic small RNA pathways pro­
mote the mitotic events of megagametogenesis during 
female reproductive development in Arabidopsis. De­
velopment 139:1399–1404.
Tuskan, G., S. DiFazio, S. Jansson et al. (2006). The genome 
of black cottonwood, Populus trichocarpa (Torr. & Gray). 
Science 313:1596–1604.
Twell, D. (2011). Male gametogenesis and germline speci­
fication in flowering plants. Sexual Plant Reproduction 
24:149–160.
Twell, D., S. Park, T. Hawkins, D. Schubert, R. Schmidt, A. 
Smertenko, and P. Hussey. (2002). Mor1/Gem1 has an 
essential role in the plant-specific cytokinetic phragmo­
plast. Nature Cell Biology 4:711–714.
Uehara, S., and H. Morita. (1972). The effect of tempera­
ture on the labellar chemoreceptors of the blowfly. Jour­
nal of General Physiology 59:213–226.
Uimari, A., and J. Strommer. (1997). Myb26: a MYB-like 
protein of pea flowers with affinity for promoters of 
phenylpropanoid genes. Plant Journal 12:1273–1284.
Uimari, A., M. Kotilainen, P. Elomaa, D. Yu, V. A. Albert, 
and T. H. Teeri. (2004). Integration of reproductive 
meristem fates by a SEPALLATA-like MADS-box gene. 
Proceedings of the Natioanl Academy of Sciences of the USA 
101:15817–15822.
Urzay, J., S. Llewellyn Smith, E. Thompson, and B. Glov­
er. (2009). Wind gusts and plant aeroelasticity effects 
on the dynamics of pollen shedding: a hypothetical 
­turbulence-initiated wind-pollination mechanism. Jour­
nal of Theoretical Biology 259:785–792.
Valverde, F., A. Mouradov, W. Soppe, D. Ravenscroft, A. 
Samach, and G. Coupland. (2004). Photoreceptor regu­
lation of CONSTANS protein in photoperiodic flower­
ing. Science 303:1003–1006.
Vamosi, J., T. Knight, J. Steets, S. Mazer, M. Burd, and T. 
Ashman. (2006). Pollination decays in biodiversity hot­
spots. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
USA 103:956–961.
Vandenbussche, M., G. Theissen, Y. Van de Peer, and 
T. Gerats. (2003a). Structural diversification and 

278      References
Waser, N., and J. Ollerton. (2006). Plant–Pollinator Interac­
tions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Waser, N., L. Chittka, M. Price, N. Williams, and J. Oller­
ton. (1996). Generalization in pollination systems, and 
why it matters. Ecology 77:1043–1060.
Wasserthal, L. (1997). The pollinators of the Malagasy star 
orchids Angraecum sesquipedale, A. sororium, and A. com­
pactum and the evolution of extremely long spurs by 
pollinator shift. Botanica Acta 110:343–359.
Watanabe, M., G. Suzuki, S. Takayama, A. Isogai, and K. 
Hinata. (2000). Genomic organization of the SLG/SRK 
region of the S locus in Brassica species. Annals of Botany 
85:155–160.
Weigel, D., and E. Meyerowitz. (1993). Activation of floral 
homeotic genes in Arabidopsis. Science 261:1723–1726.
Weigel, D., and O. Nilsson. (1995). A developmental 
switch sufficient for flower initiation in diverse plants. 
Nature 377:495–500.
Weigel, D., J. Alvarez, D. Smyth, M. Yanofsky, and E. Mey­
erowitz. (1992). LEAFY controls floral meristem identity 
in Arabidopsis. Cell 69:843–859.
Weiss, D., A. van der Luit, J. Kroon, J. Mol, and J. Kooter. 
(1993). The petunia homologue of the Antirrhinum majus 
candi and Zea mays A2 flavonoid genes; homology to fla­
vanone 3-hydroxylase and ethylene-forming enzyme. 
Plant Molecular Biology 22:893–897.
Weiss, M. R. (1991). Floral colour changes as cues for pol­
linators. Nature 354:227–229.
Wellensiek, S. J. (1962). Dividing cells as the locus for ver­
nalization. Nature 195:307–308.
Weller, J., J. Reid, S. Taylor, and I. Murfet. (1997). The ge­
netic control of flowering in pea. Trends in Plant Science 
2:412–418.
Weller, J., V. Hecht, L. Liew, F. Sussmilch, B. Wenden, C. 
Knowles, and J. Vander Schoor. (2009). Update on the 
genetic control of flowering in garden pea. Journal of Ex­
perimental Botany 60:2493–2499.
Wellmer, F., J. Reichmann, M. Alves-Ferreira, and E. 
Meyerowitz. (2004). Genome-wide analysis of spatial 
gene expression in Arabidopsis flowers. Plant Cell 16:
1314–1326.
Wesselingh, R. (2007). Pollen limitation meets resource al­
location: towards a comprehensive methodology. New 
Phytologist 174:26–37.
Wessinger, C., and M. Rausher. (2012). Lessons from flow­
er colour evolution on targets of selection. Journal of Ex­
perimental Botany 63:5741–5749.
Wessler, S. R. (2005). Homing into the origin of the AP2 
DNA binding domain. Trends in Plant Science 10:54–56.
Weston, E., and K. Pyke. (1999). Developmental ultrastruc­
ture of cells and plastids in the petals of wallflower (Ery­
simum cheiri). Annals of Botany 84:763–769.
Weterings, K., and S. Russell. (2004). Experimental analy­
sis of the fertilisation process. Plant Cell 16:S107–S118.
Vyskot, B., and R. Hobza. (2004). Gender in plants: sex 
chromosomes are emerging from the fog. Trends in Ge­
netics 20:432–438.
Waelti, M., J. Muhlemann, A. Widmer, and F. Schiestl. (2007). 
Floral odour and reproductive isolation in two species of 
Silene. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 21:111–121.
Wagner, D., R. Sablowski, and E. Meyerowitz. (1999). 
Transcriptional activation of APETALA1 by LEAFY. Sci­
ence 285:582–584.
Wagner, J., J. Brunzelle, K. Forest, and R. Viestra. (2005). 
A light-sensing knot revealed by the structure of the 
chromophore-binding domain of phytochrome. Nature 
438:325–331.
Waites, R., and A. Hudson. (2001). The Handlebars gene is 
required with Phantastica for dorsoventral asymmetry 
of organs and for stem cell activity in Antirrhinum. De­
velopment 128:1923–1931.
Walker, A. R., R. A. Davison, A. C. Bolognesi-Winfield, C. 
M. James, N. Srinivasan, T. Blundell, J. J. Esch, M. D. 
Marks, and J. C. Gray. (1999). The TRANSPARENT TES­
TA GLABRA 1 locus which regulates trichome differ­
entiation and anthocyanin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis 
encodes a WD40 repeat protein. Plant Cell 11:1337–1345.
Wang, H., and X. Deng. (2003). Dissecting the phytochrome 
A-dependent signalling network in higher plants. Trends 
in Plant Science 8:172–178.
Wang, H., L. Ma, J. Li, H. Zhao, and X. Deng. (2001). Direct 
interaction of Arabidopsis cryptochromes with COP1 in 
light control development. Science 294:154–158.
Wang, R., S. Farrona, C. Vincent, A. Joecker, H. Schoof, F. 
Turck, C. Alonso-Blanco, G. Coupland, and M. Albani. 
(2009). PEP1 regulates perennial flowering in Arabis al­
pina. Nature 459:423–427.
Wang, X., P. Zhang, Q. Du, H. He, L. Zhao, Y. Ren, and P. 
Endress. (2012). Heterodichogamy in Kingdonia (Circaes­
teraceae, Ranunculales). Annals of Botany 109:1125–1132.
Wang, Z., Y. Luo, X. Li, L. Wang, S. Xu, J. Yang, L. Weng, S. 
Sato, S. Tabata, M. Ambrose, C. Rameau, X. Feng, X. He, 
and D. Luo. (2008). Genetic control of floral zygomor­
phy in pea (Pisum sativum). Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the USA 105:10414–10419.
Warner, K. A., P. J. Rudall, and M. W. Frohlich. (2008). Dif­
ferentiation of perianth organs in Nymphaeales. Taxon 
57:1096–1109.
Waser, N. (1978). Competition for hummingbird pollina­
tion and sequential flowering in two Colorado wild­
flowers. Ecology 59:934–944.
Waser, N. (2006). Specialization and generalization in 
plant–pollinator interactions: a historical perspective. 
In: N. Waser and J. Ollerton (eds), Plant–Pollinator Inter­
actions, pp. 3–17. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Waser, N., and M. Price. (1981). Pollinator choice and sta­
bilizing selection for flower colour in Delphinium nelso­
nii. Evolution 35:376–390.

References      279
Wilkinson, M., and G. Haughn. (1995). UNUSUAL FLO­
RAL ORGANS controls meristem identity and organ 
primordia fate. Plant Cell 7:1485–1499.
Willis, K. J., and J. C. McElwain. (2002). The Evolution of 
Plants. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Willmer, P., D. Stanley, K. Steijven, I. Matthews, and C. 
Nuttman. (2009). Bidirectional flower color and shape 
changes allow a second opportunity for pollination. 
Current Biology 19:919–923.
Wilson, P., M. Castellanos, J. Hogue, J. Thomson, and W. 
S. Armbruster. (2004). A multivariate search for pollina­
tion syndromes among penstemons. Oikos 104:345–361.
Winter, K., C. Weiser, K. Kaufmann, A. Bohne, C. Kirchner, 
A. Kanno, H. Saedler, and G. Theissen. (2002). Evolu­
tion of class B floral homeotic proteins: obligate heter­
odimerization originated from homodimerization. Mo­
lecular Biology and Evolution 19:587–596.
Wolfe, K. H., M. Gouy, Y. Yang, P. Sharp, and W. Li. (1989). 
Date of the monocot–dicot divergence estimated from 
chloroplast DNA sequence data. Proceedings of the Na­
tional Academy of Sciences of the USA 86:6201–6205.
Wollmann, H., E. Mica, M. Todesco, J. Long, and D. Weigel. 
(2010). On reconciling the interactions between APETA­
LA2, miR172 and AGAMOUS with the ABC model of 
flower development. Development 137:3633–3642.
Wood, C. C., M. Robertson, G. Tanner, W. J. Peacock, E. 
S. Dennis, and C. A. Helliwell. (2006). The Arabidopsis 
thaliana vernalization response requires a polycomb-like 
protein complex that also includes VERNALIZATION 
INSENSITIVE 3. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the USA 103:14631–14636.
Wuerschum, T., R. Gross-Hardt, and T. Laux. (2006). 
APETALA2 regulates the stem cell niche in the Arabidop­
sis shoot meristem. Plant Cell 18:295–307.
Wuest, S., D. O’Maoileidigh, L. Rae, K. Kwasniewska, A. 
Raganelli, K. Hanczaryk, A. Lohan, B. Loftus, E. Graciet, 
and F. Wellmer. (2012). Molecular basis for the specifica­
tion of floral organs by APETALA3 and PISTILLATA. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 
109:13452–13457.
Xu, L., Z. Zhao, A. Dong, L. Soubigou-Taconnat, J. Renou, 
A. Steinmetz, and W. Shen. (2008). Di- and tri- but not 
monomethylation on histone H3 lysine 36 marks ac­
tive transcription of genes involved in flowering time 
regulation and other processes in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Molecular and Cellular Biology 28:1348–1360.
Xu, Y., L. Teo, J. Zhou, P. Kumar, and Yu, H. (2006). Floral 
organ identity genes in the orchid Dendrobium crumena­
tum. Plant Journal 46:54–68.
Yadav, V., C. Mallappa, S. Gangappa, S. Bhatia, and S. 
Chattopadhyay. (2005). A basic helix-loop-helix tran­
scription factor in Arabidopsis, MYC2, acts as a repres­
sor of blue light-mediated photomorphogenic growth. 
Plant Cell 17:1953–1966.
Wheeler, M., B. de Graaf, N. Hadjiosif, R. Perry, N. Poulter, 
K. Osman, S. Vatovec, A. Harper, F. Franklin, and V. 
Franklin-Tong. (2009). Identification of the pollen self-
incompatibility determinant in Papaver rhoeas. Nature 
459:992–995.
Wheeler, M., S. Vatovec, and V. Franklin-Tong. (2010). 
The pollen S-determinant in Papaver: comparisons with 
known plant receptors and protein ligand partners. 
Journal of Experimental Botany 61:2015–2025.
Whibley, A., N. Langlade, C. Andalo, A. Hanna, A. Bang­
ham, C. Thebaud, and E. Coen. (2006). Evolutionary 
paths underlying flower color variation in Antirrhinum. 
Science 313:963–966.
Whipple, C., P. Ciceri, C. Padilla, B. Ambrose, S. Bandong, 
and R. Schmidt. (2004). Conservation of B-class floral 
homeotic gene function between maize and Arabidopsis. 
Development 131:6083–6091.
Whipple, C., M. Zanis, E. Kellogg, and R. Schmidt. (2007). 
Conservation of B class gene expression in the second 
whorl of a basal grass and outgroups links the origin of 
lodicules and petals. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the USA 104:1081–1086.
Whitney, H., L. Chittka, T. Bruce, and B. Glover. (2009a). 
Conical epidermal cells allow bees to grip flowers and 
increase foraging efficiency. Current Biology 19:1–6.
Whitney, H., M. Kolle, P. Andrew, L. Chittka, U. Steiner, 
and B. Glover. (2009b). Floral iridescence, produced by 
diffractive optics, acts as a cue for animal pollinators. 
Science 323:130–133.
Whitney, H., K.M.V. Bennett, M. Dorling, L. Sandbach, 
D. Prince, L. Chittka, and B. Glover. (2011). Why do 
so many petals have conical epidermal cells? Annals of 
Botany 108:609–616.
Whitney, H., G. Milne, S. Rands, S. Vignolini, C. Martin, 
and B. Glover. (2013). The influence of pigmentation 
patterning on bumblebee foraging from flowers of An­
tirrhinum majus. Naturwissenscaften 100:249–256.
Whittall, J., and S. Hodges. (2007). Pollinator shifts drive 
increasingly long nectar spurs in columbine flowers. 
Nature 447:706–709.
Whittall, J., C. Voelckel, D. Kliebenstein, and S. Hodges. 
(2006). Convergence, constraint and the role of gene ex­
pression during adaptive radiation: Floral anthocyanins 
in Aquilegia. Molecular Ecology 15:4645–4657.
Wienand, U., H. Sommer, Z. Schwarz, N. Shephard, H. 
Saedler, F. Kreuzaler, H. Ragg, K. Hahlbrock, R. Har­
rison, and P. A. Peteson. (1982). A general method to 
identify plant structural genes among genomic DNA 
clones using transposable element induced mutations. 
Molecular and General Genetics 187:195–201.
Wigge, P. A., M. C. Kim, K. E. Jaeger, W. Busch, M. Schmid, 
J. U. Lohmann, and D. Weigel. (2005). Integration of spa­
tial and temporal information during floral induction in 
Arabidopsis. Science 309:1056–1059.

280      References
Yanofsky, M., H. Ma, J. Bowman, G. Drews, K. Feldmann, 
and E. Meyerowitz. (1990). The protein encoded by the 
Arabidopsis homeotic gene agamous resembles tran­
scription factors. Nature 346:35–39.
Yanovsky, M. J., and S. A. Kay. (2003). Living by the calen­
dar: how plants know when to flower. Nature Reviews 
Molecular Cell Biology 4:265–275.
Yant, L., J. Mathieu, T. Dinh Thanh, F. Ott, C. Lanz, H. Wol­
lmann, X. Chen, and M. Schmid. (2010). Orchestration 
of the floral transition and floral development in Arabi­
dopsis by the bifunctional transcription factor APETA­
LA2. Plant Cell 22:2156–2170.
Yoshida, H. (2012). Is the lodicule a petal: Molecular evi­
dence? Plant Science 184:121–128.
Yoshida, K., T. Kondo, Y. Okazaki, and K. Katou. (1995). 
Cause of blue petal colour. Nature 373:291.
Yoshida, K., M. Kawachi, M. Mori, M. Maeshima, M. 
Kondo, M. Nishimura, and T. Kondo. (2005). The in­
volvement of tonoplast proton pumps and Na+(K+)/H+ 
exchangers in the change of petal colour during flower 
opening of morning glory, Ipomoea tricolor cv. Heavenly 
Blue. Plant and Cell Physiology 46:407–415.
Yoshida, K., S. Kitahara, D. Ito, and T. Kondo. (2006). Fer­
ric ions involved in the flower colour development of 
the Himalayan blue poppy Meconopsis grandis. Phyto­
chemistry 67:992–998.
Yu, C., X. Liu, M. Luo, C. Chen, X. Lin, G. Tian, Q. Lu, 
Y Cui, and K. Wu. (2011). HISTONE DEACETYLASE 
6 interacts with FLOWERING LOCUS D and regu­
lates flowering in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 156:
173–184.
Yu, D., M. Kotilainen, E. Pollanen, M. Mehto, P. Elomaa, 
Y. Helariutta, V. A. Albert, and T. H. Teeri. (1999). Organ 
identity genes and modified patterns of flower devel­
opment in Gerbera hybrida (Asteraceae). Plant Journal 
17:51–62.
Yu, H., T. Ito, Y. Zhao, J. Peng, P. Kumar, and E. Mey­
erowitz. (2004). Floral homeotic genes are targets of 
gibberellin signaling in flower development. Proceed­
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 101:
7827–7832.
Yun, H., Y. Hyun, M. Kang, Y. Noh, B. Noh, and Y. Choi. 
(2011). Identification of regulators required for the reac­
tivation of FLOWERING LOCUS C during Arabidopsis 
reproduction. Planta 234:1237–1250.
Zachgo, S., E. Andrade Silva, P. Motte, W. Trobner, H. Sae­
dler, and Z. Schwarz-Sommer. (1995). Functional analy­
sis of the Antirrhinum floral homeotic DEFICIENS gene 
in vivo and in vitro by using a temperature-sensitive 
mutant. Development 121:2861–2875.
Zahn, L., J. Leebens-Mack, C. dePamphlis, H. Ma, and G. 
Theissen. (2005). To B or not to B a flower: the role of 
DEFICIENS and GLOBOSA orthologs in the evolution 
of the angiosperms. Journal of Heredity 9:225–240.
Yadegari, R., and G. Drews. (2004). Female gametophyte 
development. Plant Cell 16:S133–S141.
Yamaguchi, T., S. Fukada-Tanaka, Y. Inagaki, N. Saito, 
K. Yonekura-Sakakibara, Y. Tanaka, T. Kusumi, and S. 
Iida. (2001). Genes encoding the vacuolar Na+/H+ ex­
changer and flower coloration. Plant and Cell Physiology 
42:451–461.
Yamaguchi, T., D. Lee, A. Kiyao, H. Hirochika, G. An, and 
H. Hirano. (2006). Functional diversification of the two 
C-class MADS box genes OsMADS3 and OsMADS58 in 
Oryza sativa. Plant Cell 18:15–28.
Yamaguchi, N., A. Yamaguchi, M. Abe, D. Wagner, and Y. 
Komeda. (2012). LEAFY controls Arabidopsis pedicel 
length and orientation by affecting adaxial-abaxial cell 
fate. Plant Journal 69:844–856.
Yamamoto, Y., M. Matsui, L. Ang, and X. Deng. (1998). 
Role of a COP1 interactive protein in mediating light-
regulated gene expression in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 
10:1083–1094.
Yan, L., A. Loukoianov, G. Tranquilli, M. Helguera, T. Fa­
hima, and J. Dubcovsky. (2003). Positional cloning of 
the wheat vernalization gene VRN1. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the USA 100:6263–6268.
Yan, L., A. Loukoianov, A. Blechl, G. Tranquilli, W. Ram­
akrishna, P. SanMiguel, J. Bennetzen, V. Echenique, and 
J. Dubcovsky. (2004). The wheat VRN2 gene is a flower­
ing repressor down-regulated by vernalization. Science 
303:1640–1644.
Yan, L., D. Fu, C. Li., A. Blechl, G. Tranquilli, M. Bonafede, 
A. Sanchez, M. Valarik, S. Yasuda, and J. Dubcovsky. 
(2006). The wheat and barley vernalization gene VRN3 
is an orthologue of FT. Proceedings of the National Acad­
emy of Sciences of the USA 103:19581–19586.
Yang, C., M. Spielman, J. Coles, Y. Li, S. Ghelani, V. Bourdon, 
R. Brown, B. Lemmon, R. Scott, and H. Dickinson. (2003a). 
TETRASPORE encodes a kinesin required for male mei­
otic cytokinesis in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 34:220–240.
Yang, H., Y. Wu, R. Tang, D. Liu, Y. Liu, and A. Cashmore. 
(2000). The C termini of Arabidopsis cryptochromes me­
diate a constitutive light response. Cell 103:815–827.
Yang, J., R. Lin, J. Sullivan, U. Hoecker, B. Liu, L. Xu, X. Deng, 
and H. Wang. (2005). Light regulates COP1-­mediated 
degradation of HFR1, a transcription factor essential for 
light signalling in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17:804–821.
Yang, S., L. Xie, H. Mao, C. Puah, W. Yang, L. Jiang, V. 
Sundaresan, and D. Ye. (2003b). TAPETUM DETERMI­
NANT 1 is required for cell specialisation in the Arabi­
dopsis anther. Plant Cell 15:2792–2804.
Yano, M., Y. Katayose, M. Ashikari, U. Yamanouchi, L. 
Monna, T. Fuse, T. Baba, K. Yamamoto, Y. Umehara, 
Y. Nagamura, and T. Sasaki. (2000). Hd1, a major pho­
toperiod sensitivity quantitative trait locus in rice, is 
closely related to the Arabidopsis flowering time gene 
CONSTANS. Plant Cell 12:2473–2483.

References      281
Zhang, W., E. Kramer, and C. Davis. (2012). Similar genet­
ic mechanisms underlie the parallel evolution of floral 
phenotypes. PLoS One 7:e36033.
Zhang, Y., S. Gong, Q. Li, Y. Sang, and H. Yang. (2006). 
Functional and signaling mechanism analysis of rice 
CRYPTOCHROME 1. Plant Journal 46:971–983.
Zhao, D.-Z., G.-F. Wang, B. Speal, and H. Ma. (2002). The 
EXCESS MICROSPOROCYTES1 gene encodes a puta­
tive leucine-rich repeat receptor protein kinase that con­
trols somatic and reproductive cell fates in the Arabidop­
sis anther. Genes & Development 16:2021–2031.
Zhu, Y., J. M. Tepperman, C. D. Fairchild, and P. H. Quail. 
(2000). Phytochrome B binds with greater apparent af­
finity than phytochrome A to the basic helix-loop-helix 
factor PIF3 in a reaction requiring the PAS domain of 
PIF3. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
USA 97:13419–13424.
Zik, M., and V. Irish. (2003). Global identification of target 
genes regulated by APETALA3 and PISTILLATA floral 
homeotic gene action. Plant Cell 15:207–222.
Zupan, J., T. R. Muth, O. Draper, and P. Zambryski. (2000). 
The transfer of DNA from Agrobacterium tumefaciens 
into plants: a feast of fundamental insights. Plant Journal 
23:11–28.
Zeevart, J. (1976) Physiology of flower formation. Annual 
Review of Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology 
27:321–348.
Zhang, F., A. Gonzalez, M. Zhao, C. Payne, and A. Lloyd. 
(2003). A network of redundant bHLH proteins func­
tions in all TTG1-dependent pathways of Arabidopsis. 
Development 130:4859–4869.
Zhang, H., and S. van Nocker. (2002). The VERNALIZA­
TION INDEPENDENCE 4 gene encodes a novel regula­
tor of FLOWERING LOCUS C. Plant Journal 31:663–673.
Zhang, L., S. C. Barrett, J. Y. Gao, J. Chen, W. W. Cole, Y. 
Liu, Z. L. Bai, and Q. J. Li. (2005). Predicting mating pat­
terns from pollination syndromes: the case of “sapro­
myophily” in Tacca chantrieri (Taccaceae). American Jour­
nal of Botany 92:517–524.
Zhang, P., H. T. W. Tan, K.-H. Pwee, and P. P. Kumar. 
(2004). Conservation of class C function of floral organ 
development during 300 million years of evolution 
from gymnosperms to angiosperms. Plant Journal 37:
566–577.
Zhang, W., E. Kramer, and C. Davis. (2010). Floral symme­
try genes and the origin and maintenance of zygomor­
phy in a plant-pollinator mutualism. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the USA 107:6388–6393.


283
Index
A
AaFLC, in Arabis alpina  83
ABC genes 
in basal eudicots  124
in early diverging angiosperms  
119–20
in gymnosperms  117–19
in monocots  120–4
in petaloid monocots  122–4
role in sexual differentiation  141
in unisexual flower development  
140
ABC model 
flower development  102–9
variations  124–5
ABERRANT LEAF AND FLOWER 
(ALF), Petunia orthologue of 
LFY  100
Acacia (Fabales), flowering time  221
actinomorphy  169–70, 201–4
ACTIN-RELATED PROTEIN ESD1 6 
(AtARP6)  46
active phytochrome B-binding (APB) 
motif  55
A function, unique to Brassicaceae?  
125–6
A function genes 
absent in gymnosperms  119
in Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum  
104–6
expression  102–3
in petaloid monocots  123–4
AGAMOUS (AG) 
C function gene  104, 108
floral meristem identity gene  
100–1
mutation  19
in ovule development  109–10
AGAMOUS-LIKE genes 
AGL19 and AGL24  67
AGL20  43
see also SUPPRESSION OF 
OVEREXPRESSION OF 
CONSTANS 1 (SOC1)
in grasses  121–2
in gymnosperms  118–19
Agave palmeri (Asparagales), bat 
pollination  235
Agrobacterium tumefaciens, use in 
transformation  33
ANT17, Petunia orthologue of 
CANDI  184
AINTEGUMENTA (ANT), in 
Arabidopsis  168
AINTEGUMENTA (ANT), 
transcription factor  201
alternation of generations  127–8
ambophily  156
Amborella trichopoda (Amborellales) 
A, B, C/D, and E class genes  
119–20
basal angiosperm  7, 13, 207
megagametophyte  132
perianth organs  13
Amorphophallus titanium (titan arum, 
Alismatales)  165, 226
androdioecy  141
anemophily see wind pollination
angiosperms 
characteristics  3, 4
early diverging groups  119–20
evolutionary origin  3–7
female gametophyte  129–30
hermaphroditic reproductive 
structure  118
male gametophyte  132–3
phylogeny, overview  13–15
speciosity  3, 246
Angraecum sesquipedale (Madagascan 
orchid, Asparagales)  162
anthocyanic vacuolar inclusions  185
anthocyanidins  181
ANTHOCYANIN genes, in Petunia  
184, 191, 193
ANTHOCYANINLESS 9 (ANL9), in 
Petunia  185
anthocyanins 
co-pigments  190
effect of pH  195
lability  205–7
as pigments  181–3, 205–7
transport  184–5
anti-florigen theory  26
Antirrhinum 
ABC model of flower development 
102–4
cadastral genes  113
cyanidin  182
flower colour  206
gametophytic self-incompatibility  
146–7
introduction of transgenes  32
as model species for meristem 
conversion  92
nectar spurs  174
pollinator discrimination studies  
230, 231
vegetative vs inflorescence stem  
17–18
zygomorphic flower  170
APETALA1 (AP1) 
A function gene  104–5
ectopic expression  95, 97
floral meristem identity gene  71, 
94–5
orthologues in wheat and barley  
81–2
APETALA2 (AP2) 
A function gene  104, 140
Antirrhinum orthologues  98
protein structure/function  98
roles in flower development  98
APETALA3 (AP3) 
B function gene  106
and DEF  124
ectopic expression  106
floral organ identity gene  99
gene duplication event  124
in grasses  121
Aquilegia (Ranunculales) 
A. formosa  173–4
AP3 gene family  124

284      Index
as pollinators  162, 204, 205, 208, 
209, 218, 220, 221, 242
vision  225
see also hummingbirds
bisexuality, evolution  8–10
blue light 
sensing  56–7
in floral induction  60–2, 79–80
BM5, in barley  81–2
bracts  10, 17, 18, 19
brightly coloured  124
expression of FLO  93
Brassicaceae (Brassicales) 
A function genes  125–6
B. napus, FCA-like sequences  48
B. oleracea (cauliflower), CAL 
orthologue  96
sporophytic self-incompatibility 
(SSI)  142–5
breeding systems, flexibility  245
BRONZE (BZ) locus, in maize  184, 
185
bumblebees see bees
butterflies 
in fossil record  12
as pollinators  148, 160, 161, 177, 
209
response to colour  227, 230
response to scent  209, 225, 226
structural colour  198
as visitors  239, 241
BvFT1 and BvFT2  84–5
C
Cabomba (Nymphaeales)  207
cadastral genes  102, 108, 111–13, 141
Calathea ovandensis (Zingiberales), 
hand-pollination  217
callose/callase  133
CaMV 35S promoter see ectopic 
expression
CANDICA (CANDI) locus in 
Antirrhinum  184
cantherophily see beetles
Capsella (Brassicales), reduction in 
petal size  201
CarG box  45
carotenoids 
as pigments  178–81
strength of colour  189
synthesis  178
carpels  20–1
Caryophyllales, betalain pigments  
185–7
CAULIFLOWER (CAL), floral 
meristem identity gene  96
Caytonia  5, 6
B
BARELY ANY MERISTEM  1/2 
(BAM1/2) 133
barley, flower induction  81–2
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) 
transcription factors  55, 190–1
Batesian mimicry  163–4
bats 
colour vision  176, 241
as pollinators  162–3, 220–1, 241
bees 
colour vision  161
flower colour preferences  227–8
odour perception  226
pattern/shape recognition  225
as pollinators  160–1, 204, 205, 207, 
208, 209, 218, 222
preference for conical epidermal 
cells  234
preferential foraging  214
response to scent  235
taste perception  226–7
use of nectar guides  230
vision  223–5
beetles 
attracted to carrion-like scent  164, 
200
lack of colour discrimination  228
pollen robbing  163
as pollinators  138, 155, 159–60, 
176, 234
sense of touch  226
betalains  178, 185–7
Beta vulgaris (sugar beet, 
Caryophyllales) 
BvFT1 and BvFT2  84–5
floral induction  78, 84–5
B function genes 
activation  107
in Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum  
106–7
asymmetric expression  202
in basal eudicots  124
downstream targets  107
in evolutionary development  
10, 20
expression  102–3
in grasses  121
highly conserved  107, 121
in petaloid monocots  122–3
regulation of expression  112
BIG BROTHER (BB) protein  168–9
BIG PETAL (BPEp) gene  169
biological clocks  58
birds 
colour vision  176
and flower colour  241
Aquilegia (continued)
A. pubescens, hawkmoth pollination 
233–4
nectar spurs  173–4, 204
Arabidopsis thaliana (Brassicales) 
ABC model of flower development 
102–4
AGAMOUS gene  19
autonomous induction 
pathway  43
bHLH transcription factors  191
cadastral genes  111–13, 141
circadian clock  58–60
floral inhibition pathway  43–7
flower induction  31–42
flowering-time mutants  38–42
generation of mutants  33
genes encoding GGPP synthase  
179
gibberellin promotion pathway  
67–9
herkogamy  138
integration of flower induction 
pathways  70–6
loss of sporophytic self-
incompatibility  145, 149
as model species  31–3, 77
phytochromes  53–6
reverse genetic approaches  35
shoot apical meristem anatomy  91
transcriptome  9
type I and type II MADS box genes 
116
vernalization  39, 45, 63–4
Arabis alpina (Brassicales) 
floral induction  78, 83
model system for perenniality  83
ARC1  145
Archaefructus  3–4
ARGONAUTE genes  130–1
ARGONAUTE proteins  36
ARGOS, auxin-inducible gene  
168
ARGOS-LIKE (ARL) gene  168
Asteraceae, composite inflorescences  
125, 174–5, 202–4
ASYMMETRIC LEAVES 2 (AS2), 
transcription factor  173
AtGID1, gibberellin receptors  67
aurones  181, 189
autonomous induction pathway 
in Arabidopsis  43
highly conserved  47–50
auxin-binding protein 1 (ABP1)  168
auxin gradients  131
AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR 2 
(ARF2)  168

Index      285
CYCLOIDEA (CYC) 
absent in monocots  202
in Antirrhinum  170–1, 202
see also CYC; CYC-like genes
cytochrome P450 monooxygenase 
(CYP78A5)  169
D
daisies see Asteraceae
DAL11 and DAL12, Picea abies B 
function genes  118
Darwin, Charles  3, 158, 162, 176, 177, 
236
Daucus carota (Apiales), fly 
pollination  232
day length  23–5
see also photoperiod
daylight, sensing  52–8
deceit pollination  163–6
DEEP PURPLE (DPL)  192
DEFICIENS (DEF) 
Antirrhinum B function gene  106
in orchids  123
regulation  107
DEFICIENS HOMOLOG (DEFH), 
Antirrhinum E function 
genes  111
DELILA (DEL), bHLH-encoding  192
DELILA (DEL) protein  190–1
DELLA proteins  68, 107, 108
delphinidin  182, 184, 193, 206
Delphinium nelsonii (Ranunculales) 
flowering time  221
nectar guides  230–1
demethylation, FLD-dependent  50
Desmodium setigerum (Fabales), change 
of flower colour  177, 189
DFR 
activation  191, 192
in Clarkia  207
DFR (dihydroflavonal reductase)  
184, 190, 191, 205
D function genes, in Petunia  109–10
Dicer RNase protein family  36
DICH, transcription factor  171, 201, 
202
dichogamy  138
DICHOTOMA (DICH)  170–1, 172, 201
DIE NEUTRALIS (DNE)  85
dimethylallyl pyrophosphate 
(DMAPP)  178–9
dioecy  140–2
DIV, MYB protein  201
DIVARICATA (DIV) gene  171
DNA methylation  36–7
DOUBLE TOP (DOT), Petunia 
orthologue of UFO  100
colour 
as signal  176–7
structural  177, 198–9
colour vision 
birds  225
evolution  12
insects  161, 176, 223
competition, for pollinator attention  
213–14
complementation analysis  33–5
composite inflorescences 
generating  174–5
variation in floral symmetry  202–4
compound eyes  224
conical-papillate epidermal cells  
196–8, 207, 208
conifers, reproductive structures  117
CONSTANS (CO) 
ectopic expression  61
and flowering-time integration  61, 
71
orthologue in poplar  84
CONSTANS (CO) protein  45, 60, 61
CONSTITUTIVE 
PHOTOMORPHOGENESIS 1 
(COP1) 57
COP/DET/FUS proteins  57–8
co-pigmentation  190
corolla 
controlling size  167–9
controlling symmetry  169–72
pollinator size discrimination  232
cross-pollination  155
CRY, ectopic expression  56
cryptochrome genes 
in Arabidopsis  56
in rice  79
cryptochromes  56–7
Cucumis (Cucurbitales) 
C function genes  139
monoecy  139–40
CUL4 complexes  57
CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON (CUC), 
in Arabidopsis  113
CYC, transcription factor  201, 202
Cycas edentate, C function gene  118
CycD3;1, cyclin gene  168
CYC-like genes 
in Fabales  202
and floral symmetry  202, 203, 
204
in Linaria  174
in Malpighiales  202
in Mohavea  201
in Plantago  201
CYCLING DOF FACTOR 1 (CDF1), 
repressor of CO  62
CDC2 modified expression pattern  
92
cell cycle, in shoot apical 
meristem  89–90, 92
cell division and expansion  167–8
Centaurea scabiosa (Asterales), in 
mixed species plots  222
CENTRORADIALIS (CEN), 
Antirrhinum orthologue of 
TFL1  97
cereals 
vernalization requirement  81–2
see also grasses
C function genes 
in Arabidopsis and 
Antirrhinum  107–9
in Cucumis sativus  139
in evolutionary development  10
expression  102–3
highly conserved  118
regulation of expression  112–13
chalcone  181
chalcone isomerase  182–4
chalcone synthase  182
character displacement, and 
pollination competition  
216–17, 220–2
Cheiranthus cheiri (wallflower, 
Brassicales)  82
chiropterophily see bats
chlorophyll, reflects green light  177
chromatin modification  47, 48, 49, 50
and gene regulation  36–7
CHROMATIN REMODELLING 
PROTEIN 11 (CHR11)  131
chromophores 
HY genes  54
structure  52–3
CINCINNATA (CIN) gene, in 
Antirrhinum  172–3
cinnamates  182, 190
CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1 
(CCA1) gene  59
circadian rhythm  58
Cirsium arvense (creeping thistle, 
Asterales), in mixed species 
plots  218–19
Citrus latifolia (Sapindales)  25
Clarkia (Myrtales) 
C. gracilis  207
C. xantiana, nectar guides  231, 232
petal spots  206, 207
CLAVATA1 proteins  91
clock genes, autoregulation  58
clock signals, integration with light 
sensing  60–2
cold acclimation  65

286      Index
in biennial sugar beet  84–5
candidate gene approach  85–6
developmental vs environmental 
explanations  22–3
integration of pathways  70–6
in legumes  85
in perennials  82–3
photoperiodic pathway  52–62
in poplar  83–4
in rice  77–81
in wheat and barley  81–2
floral inhibition pathway, 
Arabidopsis  43–7
floral meristem, determinacy  100
floral meristem identity (FMI) 
genes  71
and flowering-time integrators  92
function  92–101
stage-specific expression  92
successive expression  89
in wheat and barley  81–2
floral mimicry  164–6
floral morphology, and visitation/
pollination  240–1, 243
floral organ identity genes, activation 
102
floral scent see scent
floral shoot, neoteny  18–19
floral size, lability  200–1
floral spectral reflectance functions  
224
floral symmetry, lability  201–4
FLORICAULA (FLO), Antirrhinum 
orthologue of LFY  93
florigen theory  25–6
flowering, physiological aspects  22–3
FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) 
activation by FRI  46
in autonomous induction 
pathway  48
downregulation  42, 44, 49, 70
ectopic expression  44, 81
enhanced expression  49, 64
repression  50
repression of SOC1 expression  75
role  42, 44–5, 64
in vernalization  42, 64–5, 75, 82
FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) protein 
MADS box protein  43, 44, 45
role in floral repression  43–5, 47
FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) 
downregulation  43, 45, 64
ectopic expression  72
and floral induction  71–4, 82
flowering-time integrator  43
gene family found in diverse 
species  85, 86
F
F3’5’H  184, 206, 207, 229
Fagopyrum esculentum (buckwheat, 
Caryophyllales), heteromorphic 
self-incompatibility  148
FARINELLI, Antirrhinum C function 
gene  108
farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP)  179
Fatsia japonica (Apiales), fly 
pollination  160
F box proteins  146–7
FCA 
alternative polyadenylation 
sequences  48, 49
in autonomous induction pathway  
47–8
ectopic expression  48
regulation  49
and vernalization requirement  68
FCA protein, RNA binding  47–8
FD gene  45
FDL2 protein  82
FD protein  74
FIM-associated proteins (FAPs)  99
FIMBRIATA (FIM), Antirrhinum 
orthologue of UFO  99
FIM/UFO, structure/function  99
flavanone  181
flavones  181, 190
flavonoids 
concentrations  181–2
as pigments  178
structure and function  181
synthesis  181–5
flavonols  181, 190
FLC EXPRESSOR (FLX)  46
FLC–SVP complex  45
FLD  47, 49–50
FLK  47, 49
FLK protein  49
FLORAL BINDING PROTEIN, 
MADS box proteins  109
FLORAL BINDING PROTEIN (FBP) 
genes, downregulation  109
floral colour 
changes  177
enhancing  189–99
lability  205–7
pigments  178–87
and pollinator behaviour  227–30
as signal  176–8, 232
floral form 
diversification  12
lability  200–8
floral induction 
in Arabidopsis thaliana  31–42
in Arabis alpina  83
E
EARLY FLOWERING (ELF) 
genes  47
Early heading date 1 (Ehd1)  79–80
EARLY IN SHORT DAYS 1 (ESD1)  46
ectopic expression using CaMV 35S 
of AP1  95, 97
of AP3  106
of CCA1 or LHY  59
of CO  61
of CRY2  56
of FBP11  109
of FCA  48
of FLC  44
of FPA  49
of FT  72
of FT:YTP construct  73
of LFY  94, 97, 107
of OsGI  79
of SEP  110
of UFO  99
of VIP3  47
of VRN1  66
E function genes  110–11
in grass flower development  122
Elodea canadensis (Canadian 
waterweed, Alismatales)  
157
ELUTA (EL)  206
EMBRYONIC FLOWER 1 (EMF1)  51
enantiostyly  171–2
ENHANCER OF GL3 (EGL3)  191
environmental factors 
in floral induction  63
and plant growth regulators  67
EOSINA (EOS), in Antirrhinum  
184
Ephedra  5, 8
epidermal cell shape 
effect on colour  196–8
pollinator discrimination  234–5
epidermal morphology 
lability  207–8
role  166–98
epistatic analysis  41, 47
Erysimum cheiri (wallflower, 
Brassicales), pigments  189
ethyl methane sulfonate (EMS), use 
in mutagenesis  33
evolution of flowers  3–15
EXCESS MALE SPOROCYTES 1 
(EMS1)  133
exploitation competition  213–14
expressed sequence tag (EST) 
studies  86
extinction risk, in biodiversity 
hotspots  222

Index      287
Gnetum 
B function genes  117–18
morphology  5
PrFLL-like gene  9
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, foliar 
theory  16–26, 102, 104
Gorteria diffusa (Asterales) 
fly pollination  232
mimicry  165–6
grasses 
B function genes  120
C function genes  121
floral form  119–20
GRCD2, MADS box gene  175
green contrast  224–5
gymnosperms, ABC genes  117–19
gynodioecy  141
H
hand pollination, experimental  
215–16, 217–18
hawkmoth see moth
Hd3a, expression  80
Heading date (Hd) loci  80
Helianthus annuus (sunflower, 
Asterales), zygomorphic and 
actinomorphic florets  203
heme oxygenases  54–5
herkogamy  136–8
Heteranthera multiflora (Commelinales), 
enantiostyly  172
heteromorphic self-incompatibility  
148–9
heterostyly  149
Hibiscus trionum (Malvales), 
structural colour  198
HIGH EXPRESSION OF 
OSMOTICALLY RESPONSIVE 
GENES 1 (HOS1) gene  65
HIRZINA, in Antirrhinum  174
histone proteins, structural 
changes  37
HKRD domain  52–3
honeybees see bees
hummingbirds 
colour preferences  225, 228–9,
 241
competition for attention  220
discriminate floral size/shape  
223
effectiveness as pollinators  243, 
246
feeding strategies  162, 163
response to sucrose  227
see also birds
Hydrangea (Cornales), flower colour  
193, 194
FT-FD protein complex  95
FT protein  73–4, 82, 92, 97
FVE  47, 50
FVE protein  50
FY  47, 48–9
FY protein  48–9
G
GA1  68
gametophytes, diversity of form  
129
gametophytic self-incompatibility 
(GSI)  146–8
GEMINI POLLEN 1 (GEM1)  135
gene expression 
circadian rhythmicity  61–2
study techniques  91–2
genes 
cloning  35
silencing  35–8
geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate 
(GGPP)  179
Gerbera hybrida (Asterales) 
carotenoid pigments  179
composite inflorescence  175, 
203
indeterminacy  175
modified ABC model  125
zygomorphy  203
GERBERA REGULATOR OF 
CAPITULUM DEVELOPMENT 
1 (GRCD1)  125
GhCYC2  203
Giardia lamblia  115
gibberellin 
enhances SOC1 expression  74–5, 
92
exogenous  68
in floral induction  63
inactivates DELLA proteins  107, 
108
negative regulation of 
signalling  68
promotion pathway  67–9
receptors  67
and the vernalization promotion 
pathway  69
GIGANTEA (GI)  61, 62
in Pisum  85
Gilia achilleifolia (Ericales), herkogamy 
137
Ginkgo biloba  5, 8, 9
pollen tube  135
GLABRA3 (GL3)  191
GLOBOSA (GLO), Antirrhinum B 
function gene  106
gnetophytes  5, 7, 8
isolation  72
in legumes  85
poplar orthologues  83
rice orthologues  79, 80, 81
sugar beet paralogues  84–5
upregulation  61, 68
flowering plants see angiosperms
flowering time 
of bird-pollinated species  220
developmental factors  50–1
and pollination competition  220–1
flowering-time integrators  42, 43, 
70–6
flowering-time mutants 
in Arabidopsis  38–42
classification  39–41
epistatic analysis  41
flowering-time pathways, integrating 
70–1
flowers 
ABC model of development  102–9
attractiveness to animals  157–8
definition  8
diversity/variety  13, 155
evolution  3–15
evolutionarily early  8–12
hermaphroditic nature  8
radial vs bilateral symmetry  169
unisexual  125
see also foliar theory
fly pollination  160, 204–5, 232
FMI genes  71
foliar theory 
and ABC model  102, 104
evolutionary context  21–2
historical aspects  16–26
Forsythia (Lamiales), flower colour  189
fossil record  3–7, 11, 12, 18
FOURLIPS (FLP)  130
FPA  47, 49
FPA, RNA-binding protein  49
Fragaria virginiana (wild strawberry, 
Rosales), scent  235
frequency-dependent discrimination  
228, 232
FRI-C complex  46
FRIGIDA ESSENTIAL1 (FES1) 
protein  46
FRIGIDA (FRI) 
FLC enhancer  45–6
in vernalization  64
FRIGIDA (FRI) protein  43, 45–6
FRIGIDA LIKE 1 (FRL1)  45–6
fruit and seed set, following hand 
pollination  215–18
FT:YTP construct, ectopic 
expression  73

288      Index
Lunaria biennis (honesty, Brassicales), 
vernalization  64
lycopene  180
Lythrum (Myrtales), mixed species 
plots  219
M
Mabrya acerifolia (Lamiales), 
actinomorphy  201
MADS box genes 
gene duplication event  115, 116
highly conserved  115–17
repression  67
MADS box proteins 
in Antirrhinum  106
evolutionary history  115–17
in quartet model of organ 
identity  113
in rice  81
structure and DNA binding  115, 
116
transcription factors  44, 45, 74, 75, 
95, 96
MAF, MADS box genes  67
Magnoliales, beetle pollination  160
magnoliids, ‘fading borders’ 
model  120
maize see Zea mays
MATE transporters  185
Meconopsis grandis (Himalayan 
poppy, Ranunculales)  193, 194
Medicago truncatula (Fabales) 
FY protein  48
genetic/genomic studies  85
megagametogenesis  130–2
megagametophyte 
evolutionary history  132
female gametophyte  129–30
megasporogenesis  130
melittophily see bees, as pollinators
Mendel, Gregor  77, 85
meristem, indeterminacy  89, 93, 97, 
100, 102, 108
metal ions, effect on colour  193–4
METHYLTRANSFERASE 1 gene  64–5
microgametogenesis  133, 134–5
microgametophytes, male 
gametophyte  132–3
Microloma sagittatum (milkweed, 
Gentianales), pollination  242
microRNA 
function  37, 38
miR164  113
miR169  113
miR172  104, 108, 113, 122, 126, 140
miRFIS  113
microsporogenesis  133–5
K
Kingdonia uniflora (Ranunculales), 
dichogamy  138
KLUH  169
KNOX genes  173, 174, 205
L
Lacandonia schismatica (Pandanales)  8
landing platforms  159, 161, 163, 170, 
173
LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL 
(LHY)  59
LATE MERISTEM IDENTITY 1 
(LMI1)  94
LATE MERISTEM IDENTITY 2, 
MYB transcription factor 
(AtMYB17)  95
LD protein, possible role  50
LEAFY (LFY) 
ectopic expression  94, 97, 107
expression induced by 
gibberellin  68
induces AP3 expression  107
meristem identity gene  10, 43, 71, 
75–6, 92–4
orthologue in rice  81
orthologues in other species  92–3
related to gymnosperm gene  9
LEAFY (LFY) protein 
in activation of AG expression  108
function  94
Leefructus mirus  4, 6
legumes (Fabales), flower 
induction  85
leucoanthocyanidin  184
LEUNIG (LUG)  112–13
light-induced signals  57–8
light receptors, in rice  78–9
light sensing  52–3
integration with clock signals  60–2
LIKE HETEROCHROMATIN 
PROTEIN 1 (LHP1)  66
Lilium regale (Liliales), B function 
proteins  123
Linanthus parryae (Ericales)  228
Linaria vulgaris (toadflax, Lamiales), 
nectar spur  173–4
LIPLESS, AP2-like genes in 
Antirrhinum  98, 105–6
LjCYC2  202
Lobelia siphilitica (Asterales), in mixed 
species plots  219–20
lodicules  120, 121
Lotus japonicus 
CYC-like gene  202
genetic/genomic studies  85
LUMINIDEPENDENS (LD)  47, 50
HY genes, encode chromophores  
54–5
Hyoscyamus niger (henbane, 
Solanales), long day plant  25
I
IaTCP1  202
Iberis amara (Brassicales), CYC-like 
gene  202
Illicium (Austrobaileyales), A, B, C/D, 
and E class genes  119–20
Impatiens glandulifera (Ericales), in 
mixed species plots  219
INCOLORATA (INC), in Antirrhinum 
184
indeterminacy  89, 93, 97, 100, 102, 
108
inflorescence shoot  17
InNHX1  195, 196
insects 
attracted to patterns on flowers  
232
odour perception  226
preference for certain surfaces  197
sense of taste  226–7
sense of touch  226
vision  161, 176, 189, 223
as visitors/pollinators  242
in situ hybridization  91
INTENSIFIER (IN), in maize  191
interference competition  214
intrafloral microclimate  198
INVAGINATA gene, in 
Antirrhinum  17
invasive species, pollination 
competition  219
Ipomoea (Solanales) 
I.hederacea, character displacement  
222
I. purpurea  222, 228
I. tricolor, flower colour  195, 196
I. trifida, sporophytic self-
incompatibility  146
visitation and pollination  240–1
Ipomopsis aggregata (Ericales) 
corolla size  233
flowering time  221
reproductive success  217
visitation/pollination  243, 244
iron transporter  194
isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP)  
178–9
isoprenoids  178
J
JAF13, DEL orthologue in Petunia  
191

Index      289
Out of Male/Out of Female 
hypotheses  10
ovule development, D function 
genes  109–10
P
PALLIDA (PAL)  172, 184, 191
Papaver rhoeas pollen S (PrpS)  148
Papaver rhoeas (poppy, Ranunculales), 
gametophytic self-
incompatibility  147–8
Pavonia bahamensis (Bahama 
swamp-bush, Malvales)  218
penstemon, visitation and 
pollination  240
Pentanisia prunelloides (wild verbena, 
Gentianales), heteromorphic 
self-incompatibility  148
perennials, flower induction  82–3
perianth, evolution and 
differentiation  10–12
PERIANTHIA (PAN)  108
perpetual flowering 1 (pep1)  83
petaloid monocots, ABC genes  122–4
petals 
analogy to leaves  20
epidermal cells  196–8, 207, 208, 
234–5
shape  172–3
petal spots  207
Petunia (Solanales) 
anthocyanin pigments  182–4
ectopic expressin of FBP11  109
gametophytic self-incompatibility  
147
MADS box proteins  109
ovule development  109
P. axillaris  191, 209, 235
petal pH and colour  195
P. hybrida 
anthocyanins  182
D function genes  109
petal development  167–8
P. inflata  146
pollination cues  235
scent  209
pH 
genetic control  195
importance in flower colour  194–6
phalaenophily see moths, as 
pollinators
Phalaenopsis (Asparagales) 
ABC genes  123
SQUA-like genes  123
phenylpropanoid metabolism  182, 
183
pH genes, in Petunia  195–6
N. alata, gametophytic self-
incompatibility  146, 147
N. tabacum 
analogous floral and 
reproductive organs  17
meristem identity  94
NIVEA (NIV), in Antirrhinum  182
Nuphar (Nymphaeales), A, B, C/D, 
and E class genes  119–20
O
ODORANT1 (ODO1), in Petunia  
209
ommatidia  223–4
Ophrys episcopalis (Asparagales)  165
orchard trees, fruit set  214
orchids (Asparagales) 
bee pollination  241
deceit pollination  164, 165
floral scent  209
nectar spur lengths  204
petal epidermal cells  208
organ identity, quartet model  113–14
organ size, control  167–9
ornithophily see birds
Orobanche elatior (Lamiales), in 
mixed-species plots  222
Oryza sativa (rice, Poales) 
AGAMOUS-like genes  121–2
B function genes  121
blue light sensing  79–80
circadian clock  79
floral transition  78–9
long day promotion pathway  80
as model short-day species  77, 80
photoperiodic induction 
pathway  80–1
transcriptome  9
OsCRY1, rice orthologue of CRY  79
OsGI, rice orthologue of GIGANTEA 
(GI)  79
OsMADS1, SEP-like gene  122
OsMADS3, C-lineage clade  121–2
OsMADS4, rice orthologue of 
GLO/PI6  121
OsMADS6, AGL6-like gene  122
OsMADS16, AP3 homologue  121
OsMADS58, C-lineage clade  121–2
OsMADS, D-lineage clades  121–2
OsSOC1 (OsMADS50)  80–1
outcrossing 
advantages  12, 136, 141
and enantiostyly  171
and herkogamy  137–8
and pollination competition  
219–20
and speed of evolution  12
MIKC MADS boxes  116–17
MIKC MADS box genes, in 
monocots  120
Mimulus (Lamiales) 
colour discrimination studies  
228–9
lability of flower colour  205
mixed species plots  219–20
MINICHROMOSOME 
MAINTENANCE 1 (MCM1) 
fungal type I MADS box  115
mixed species plots 
in analysis of pollination 
competition  216, 218–20
outcrossing  219–20
MIXTA gene  196
MIXTA LIKE 1 (AmMYBML1) gene, in 
Antirrhinum  173
MIXTA-like genes (MYB subgroup  9) 
207, 208
Mohavea confertiflora (Lamiales), 
actinomorphy  201
molecular dating studies, of 
angiosperm origins  6–7
Momordica (Cucurbitales)  140
Monarda punctata (Lamiales), nectar 
guides  230
monocots 
ABC genes  120–4
evolution of zygomorphy  202
floral forms  120
monoecy  138–40
Mostly Male Theory  9
moths 
difference from butterflies  161
as pollinators  161–2, 204, 205, 208, 
209, 233–4, 239
response to scent  235
mouse ear cress see Arabidopsis 
thaliana
mutagenesis, in Arabidopsis  33
mutations, mapping  35
Myb26, in pea  192–3
MYB88  130
MYB proteins  59, 190–3
MYC-146 (AtMYC2)  191
myophily see fly pollination
N
Narcissus longispathus (Asparagales), 
herkogamy  137
near isogenic lines (NILs)  228
nectar guides  230–2
nectar spurs  173–4, 204–5
NEEDLY  9
Nicotiana (Solanales) 
flat-celled species  208

290      Index
frequency vs effectiveness  243–4
and insect colour vision  161
mechanisms  12, 148–9
requirements of both parties  158
subsequent events  135
vs feeding or visitation  239–40
pollination competition  213–14
investigative techniques  214–17
pollination networks  239, 241
pollination syndromes 
concept  157–8, 213
evidence against  241–3
evidence for  240–1
and floral morphology  243
historical context  236–7
multivariate analysis  243
specialized  239
types  158–66
underlying assumptions  237
pollinator discrimination 
on the basis of scent  235
between floral forms  223–35
in favour of nectar guides  230–2
of floral symmetry  234
and selective pressure  237
pollinators 
attention limited  217–18
and flower colour  205–6
functional groups vs species  
239
senses other than vision  225–7
vision  223–5
polyadenylation, premature  50
polycarpy  82
polycomb proteins  66, 67
polycomb repressive complex 2 
(PRC2)  50
polymerase II-associated factor 1 
(PAF1) complex  47
Populus (Malpighiales) 
floral induction  78
P. tremula (aspen), ectopic 
expression of LFY  94
P. trichocarpa (poplar), floral 
induction  83–4
PrFLL  9
Primula vulgaris (Ericales), 
heteromorphic self-
incompatibility  148
Protea roupelliae (African sugarbush, 
Proteales), bird pollination  241
protocyanin  193
PsCYC  202
PsFTa1, FT-like protein  85
psychophily see butterflies, as 
pollinators
PURPLE HAZE (PHZ)  192
P. johannis, bisporangiate cones  9
P. radiata (Monterey pine) 
homologues of Arabidopsis B 
function genes  117
PrFLL gene  9
PISTILLATA (PI), Arabidopsis B 
function gene  106
Pisum sativum (Fabales) 
AP1-like gene  126
CYC-like gene  202
FCA-like sequences  48
floral transition  78
long day plant  85
Myb26  192
Plantago (Lamiales) 
loss of zygomorphy  201
P. coronopus, gynodioecy  141
plant development, flexibility and 
redundancy  245
plant growth regulators, in floral 
transition  67
plant pigments see pigments
plant–pollinator interactions 
and floral morphology  245
redundant mechanisms  245
specialization vs generalization  
239–40, 243
plastids, important in colour/pattern 
determination  189
PLENA (PLE) 
Antirrhinum C function gene  
105–6, 108
Antirrhinum functional orthologue 
of AG  100–1
Poa species (Poales), monoecy  139–40
Podocarpus recihii  9
Polemonium viscosum (alpine skypilot, 
Ericales)  232–3, 237
pollen 
abiotic vectors  155–7
biotic vectors  157
pollen limitation  237
pollen tube 
in Ginkgo biloba  135
growth  132, 135, 145, 146, 181
incompatibility  147, 148
inhibition of growth  142, 147
vacuole  147
pollination 
by hand  215–16, 217–18
and changes in floral colour  177, 189
and differences in floral form  155
efficiency  139
evolution  12
facilitation  214
frequency-dependent 
discrimination  228, 232
Phlox drummondii (Ericales) 
colour discrimination studies  
229–30
gain of function allele  206
photoperiodic induction pathway  
52–62
photoperiodicity  23–5
photoperiodic response  38–9
PHOTOPERIODIC SENSITIVITY 5 
(SE5)  78
PHOTOPERIOD INDEPENDENT 
EARLY FLOWERING 1 (PIE1) 
gene  46
PHOTOPERIOD (PPD)  85
photoreceptors  52
phototropins  56
Phragmipedium longifolium 
(Asparagales), ABC genes  123
phyllotaxy  91–2
Physcomitrella (moss) 
MADS box genes  116
role of LFY  92–3
PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING 
(PIF)  55
PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING 
(PIF) proteins  55
PHYTOCHROME KINASE 
SUBSTRATE 1 (PKS1) 
protein  56
PHYTOCHROME (PHY)  53
phytochromes 
in Arabidopsis  53–4, 55
influence on gene expression  55
mode of action  55
in rice  78–9
structure and function  52–6
phytochromobilin  52, 54
phytoene  179–80
Picea 
C function genes  10, 118
P. abies (Norway spruce) 
B function genes  117, 118
NEEDLY and PrFLL-like genes  9
P. mariana (black spruce), C function 
gene  118
SEP/AGL6 genes  118, 119
pigments 
chemical classes  178
mixing  189
reflection and absorption of 
light  177
regulation of distribution  190–3
in vacuoles or chromophores  189
see also flower colour
Pinus 
AGL6 genes  118, 119
P. caribaea, PrFLL-like gene  9

Index      291
Silene (Caryophyllales) 
pollination  209
S. dioica (red campion) unisexual 
flowers  125
S. latifolia (campion) 
AP1 genes  126
orthologue of SUPERMAN  141
scent  209
sex chromosomes  141
S. vulgaris (Caryophyllales), moth 
pollination  239
SILKY SI1  121
Sinapis alba (white mustard, 
Brassicales)  89
siRNA, in gene silencing  36
S locus  142–5
S locus cysteine-rich (SCR)  144–5
S locus F box (SLF)  147
S locus glycoprotein (SLG)  144
S locus pollen protein 11 (SP11)  144
S locus receptor kinase (SRK)  144
Solanaceae, gametophytic self-
incompatibility  146–8
SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS 
RECEPTOR KINASE (SERK) 
genes  133
Sorghum bicolor (Poales), FY 
protein  48
source/sink resource allocation 
model  26
sphingophily see moths, as pollinators
spindly (spy) mutant  68
sporic meiosis  127–8
SPOROCYTELESS (SPL) 
transcription factor  133
sporophytic self-incompatibility (SSI) 
142–6
sporopollenin  132, 134
SQUA-like genes  119–20
in grasses  122
in petaloid monocots  123
SQUAMOSA PROMOTER BINDING 
PROTEIN-LIKE (SPL) 
transcription factors  75
SQUAMOSA (SQUA), Antirrhinum 
orthologue of AP1  95, 106
S-RNase  146, 147
Stachys palustris (Lamiales), in mixed 
species plots  219
stamens  20
Stenocereus thurberi (organ pipe 
cactus, Caryophyllales), 
flowering time  221
STERILE APETALA (SAP)  112–13
STERILE NODES (SNE)  85
Streptochaeta, early diverging grass  
121
long-distance attraction  225–6
pollinator response  209, 235
SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase complex  146
SEEDSTICK (STK), orthologous to 
FBP7 and FBL11  109
Selaginella, MADS box genes  116
selective pressure 
detrimental effects  238, 244
and floral position  223
and flower colour  230
and flower temperature  227
in the haploid state  128
hard to demonstrate  237
and outcrossing  126, 139, 140
plant response  238
and pollination syndromes  242
and pollinator behaviour  155, 
213–22, 237
self-incompatibility  142–5
self-pollination 
adaptation  155
advantages and disadvantages  136
ensuring  149
reducing  136–8
Senecio (Asteraceae) 
S. squalidus 
floral symmetry  146
sporophytic self-incompatibility  
146
S. vulgaris 
composite inflorescence  175
RAY1  203
zygomorphy  203, 204
SEPALLATA (SEP)  110
sepals  19–20, 124
SERUM RESPONSE FACTOR (SRF), 
human gene family  115
SEUSS (SEU)  112–13
sex determination, in dioecious 
plants  141–2
SHATTERPROOF (SHP) 
Arabidopsis C function gene  108
in ovule development  109
shoot apical meristem 
anatomy  90–1
functional zones  91
gene expression patterns  91–2
morphology  17, 18
physiological changes  89–90
SHOOT MERISTEMLESS (STM), 
Arabidopsis transcription 
factor  174
short day plants, floral induction  77
SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE (SVP), 
MADS box protein  45, 75
signal transduction, light-induced  
57–8
Q
quantitative trait loci (QTLs)  78, 201
quartet model of organ identity  
113–14
R
RABBIT EARS (RBE)  113
RADIALIS (RAD)  171, 201
Ranunculales 
gene duplication events  124
R. acris, shoot apical meristem  18
R. repens (buttercup), structural 
colour  198, 199
Raphanus raphanistrum (wild radish, 
Brassicales)  227–8
hand-pollination  217–18
in mixed species plots  218–19
RAY locus  203
red/far red light, sensing  52–3
redundancy, in plant biology  245–6
reporter gene techniques  91
reproductive structures, of seed 
plants  7–8
reproductive success 
and efficient pollination  241
limitations  237
retinoblastoma protein (RBR1)  131
reverse genetic approaches, in 
Arabidopsis  35
rhamnosyl transferase (RT)  185
Rhodochiton atrosanguineum, 
actinomorphy  201
rice see Oryza sativa (rice, Poales)
RICE FLORICAULA/LEAFY (RFL)  81
RICE FLOWERING LOCUS T 1 
(RFT1), paralogue of Hd3a  80
RNA see microRNA; siRNA
RNA-induced silencing complex 
(RISC)  36
RNA-recognition motif-type protein 
(RRM)  47–8
Rosa rugosa (Rosales), scent  235
ROSEA (ROS)  192, 206
rose (Rosales) 
anthocyanins  188
beetle pollination  160
continuous flowering  97
RPL21M protein  131
Rumex (Caryophyllales), sex 
chromosomes  141
S
SAG1, Picea C function gene  118
sapromyophily  164, 165
scent 
chemically complex  226
lability  209

292      Index
VERNALIZATION INDEPENDENCE 
(VIP) genes  46–7
VERNALIZATION INSENSITIVE 3 
(VIN3)  66
vernalization (vrn) mutants  65–6
Vigna sinensis (cowpea, Fabales)  
227
VIN3  65
Viola (Malpighiales) 
V. canina, floral colour  224
V. cazorlensis, pollination  242
V. cornuta (pansy), change of flower 
colour  177, 189, 190
VIP3, ectopic expression  47
VRN genes  65–7
W
wasps 
mimicry  165
use of nectar guides  230
water pollination  156–7
water stress, and floral induction  25
WD repeat proteins  193
Welwitschia, gnetophyte genus  5, 9
wheat 
flower induction  81–2
vernalization  64
wind pollination  155–6, 208
WUSCHEL (WUS)  91
WUSCHEL (WUS) protein 
in activation of AG expression  108
downregulating  102
function  100
X
xanthophylls  178, 180
Y
YUP  205, 229
Z
Zamia fisheri  9
Zea mays (maize) 
AGAMOUS-like genes  121–2
monoecy  140
ZmMRP  185
ZmZAG, AG-like genes  121, 122
ZmZMM, GLO/PI-like genes  121, 
122
zeaxanthin  178
ZEITLUPE (ZTL)  60
zygomorphy  169–70, 201–4, 234
Thlaspi arvense (pennycress, 
Brassicales), action of 
gibberellin  69
time, measuring  58–60
TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1 
(TOC1)  59–60
TM6 lineage  124
TmAP1 (WAP1, TaVRT-1)  81–2
touch see tactile perception
transcriptional regulators, in 
Arabidopsis genome  245
transgenes, introduction  32–3
TRANSPARENT TESTA 12 (TT12), 
Arabidopsis MATE protein  
185
Trichomonas vaginalis  115
tristyly  149
Triticum species (Poales), floral 
induction  78
TTG1, Arabidopsis WDR protein  193
Tulipa gesneriana (Liliales) 
B function genes  123
flower colour  193–4
tulips, structural colour  198, 199
U
ubiquitin, in protein degradation  57
UFO protein, necessary for AP3 
expression  107
ultraviolet (UV), visible to 
insects  161, 189, 223
UNUSUAL FLORAL ORGANS (UFO) 
ectopic expression  99
effect on meristem identity  98–9
V
Vallisneria (tape-grass, 
Alismatales)  157
Vanilla planifolia, ABC genes  123
venation patterns  207, 231
VENOSA  192, 206
VERDANDI (VDD), in ovule 
development  109
vernalization 
in Arabis alpina  83
definition  25
epigenetic mechanism  64
in floral induction  63
multiple evolution  82
promotion pathway  63–7
sensitivity to  39, 64
VERNALIZATION, in wheat and 
barley  81–2
structural colour  198–9
Stylidium (Asterales), character 
displacement  222
STYLOSA (STY), orthologue of LUG  
113
SULFUREA (SULF)  206
SUPERMAN (SUP), cadastral gene of 
Arabidopsis  112, 141
supermolecular pigments 
(superpigments)  193
SUPPRESSION OF 
OVEREXPRESSION OF 
CONSTANS 1 (SOC1) 
expression  45
and flowering-time integrators  71
induced by gibberellin  68
suppression of overexpression  74–5
see also AGAMOUS-LIKE genes, 
AGL20
SUPPRESSOR OF FRIGIDA 4 
(SUF4)  50
SUPPRESSOR OF FRIGIDA 4 (SUF4) 
protein  46
SWR1 complex  46
symmetry, attractiveness to 
pollinators  234–5
T
Tacca chantrieri (Dioscoreales), 
pollination  242
tactile perception, in pollinators  225
TAPETUM DETERMINANT 1 
(TPD1) protein  133
Taraxacum japonicum (Asterales), 
pollination competition  219
taste, role in flower discrimination  
225
Taxus globosa  9
temperature, and floral induction  25, 
63
TEMPRANILLO (TEM) genes  73
TERMINAL FLOWER 1 (TFL1) 
Antirrhinum orthologue  97
floral meristem identity gene  72, 
96–7
TETRASPORE (TES)  134
Thalassia testudinum (Caribbean turtle 
grass, Alismatales)  157
thale cress see Arabidopsis thaliana
Thalictrum (Ranunculales) 
insect vs wind pollination  208
sexual differentiation  142

