  
NATE GUIMOND 
2023 
bleok*


MI LIBRO DE FACEBOOK 
“| 
Nate Guimond 
 

 

 

19 de Julio de 2023 
  
    
23 deJuliode 2023 
An Argument Against Academic Obscurantism 
  
26 dejuliode 2023 
History of the Standard Galactic Alphabet 
https/github.com/standardgalactic/alphabet/blob 
/core/History%200f%20Standard%20Galactic.pdf

   
   
   
   
    
  
  
Arveyn 
Stsraen atass jeue o> 
Fe 
  
  
   
DES 99 Hews,” 
TE Hheaep IT, Stpon Spo 
Gore 
trou oy dousroees 
HE9) 
  
  
  
   
suausne #0 eases 2 eH 29 seo 
  
  
26 de julio de 2023 
Maps in a Mirror 
https/github. com/standardgalactic/mirror 
27 de julio de 2023 
Future Psychohistory Computation 
® Unveiling the Future Mind: From Psychohistory 
to Memory Palaces! 
{i Discover the Mind-Blowing Connection 
between Futuristic Predictions and Ancient 
  
Memory Techniques! 
® Harness the Power of Information Processing 
and Unlock Your Brain's Full Potential! 
© Explore the Mind's Evolutionary Journey, from 
Psychohistory to Pneumonic Memory Palaces! 
# Don't Miss This Epic Fusion of Sci-Fi Speculation 
and Practical Memory Hacks! 
Pneumonic Memory Palace 
@ From Past to Future: Exploring the Boundless 
Mind! 
® Dive into the Intriguing Worlds of Psychohistory 
and Memory Palaces! 
  
Unravel the Secrets of Human Cognition and 
Evolutionary Memory Techniques! 
® Discover How Ancient Wisdom and Futuristic 
Speculation Connect in a Fascinating Joumey of 
Ideas! 
© Embark onan Epic Quest to Understand the 
Mind's Multifaceted Evolution! 
# Join the Adventure of a Lifetime, Unleashing the 
Power 
of Information and Imagination! 
In Plain English 
® Uncover the Hidden Marvels of Human 
Memory and Cognition! 
@ Explore the Evolutionary Secrets of the Mind! 
  
Journey into the Past with Memory Palaces and 
Future with Psychohistory Computation! 
© From Ancient Wisdom to Futuristic Speculation, 
Connect the Dots ina Mind-Blowing Adventure! 
@ Join Now to Understand the Fascinating Worlds 
of Memory and Prediction! 
Shorter and with no emojis 
Discover the Secrets of Human Memory, 
Cognition, and Evolution! 
Unveil the Power of Memory Palaces and 
Psychohistory Computation for a Mind-Expanding 
Journey! 
Join Now to Unravel Ancient Wisdom and Futuristic 
Speculations in a Thrilling Adventure! 
Continue this conversation:

httpsy/chat. openai.com/share/aedO4dbd-755a-4c 
Oc-84e9-O4df7cf4Sdac 
27 de Julio de 2023 
Null-Convention- Logic-based Communication 
Consider a group of friends having a conversation 
In synchronous communication, they take turns 
speaking, and there might be awkward pauses if 
someone is waiting 
for their turn. 
Now, picture an NCL-style conversation where 
friends can interject and respond whenever they 
have something to contribute 
They don't need to wait for a designated speaker 
(clock) to allow them to talk. 
The conversation flows naturally, with each friend 
reacting to the others’ inputs in real-time 
Continue this conversation: 
httpsv/chat.openai.com/share/389603c5-32a3-41 
Sb-9e6e-a044e2ee81 16 
28 de Julio de 2023 
Wanderers of original laws traverse in mental 
landscapes devoid of normal boundaries, 
demonstrating not satisfaction, but hidden 
avenues within the soul's spectrum. 
The dimensions spun by reasonable 
contradictions dor't fully occupy this reality yet 
persist as ethereal spirits subtly vying against 
fate's pre-written narratives. 
The cosmic balance, echoing bravura, attempts to 
hold dominion over the valiant rogue elements. 
The high-ranking theorists throw a fleeting glance 
at the transitioning principles as they watch tenets 
and objectivity intertwine 
in a puzzling dance 
The powerful, lost in the paradigm of disorganized 
govemance, sense desolation while recognizing 
the temporal cycle in their lofty strongholds. 
They understand the crucial need for individualism 
and keenly interpret the unfolding sequence of 
global capers through their own perspectives. 
Continue this conversation: 
httpsy/chat. openai.cor/share/aad3aa58-7387-4a 
5e-b77b-b860%de26a84 
29 dejuliode 2023 
Illuminated Reality Landscapes 
  

  
2de Agosto de 2023 
Ina bleak and dimly lit chamber, adorned with 
cobwebs and relics of forgotten times, there hung 
an ancient mirror. 
Amirror, they said, that held the secrets of the 
future, a looking glass that could reflect the soul of 
an era yet to come: 
Once, a curious scholar, tormented by visions of 
automation and machine intellect, sought the 
mirror's wisdom, 
"Mirror, mirror on the wall," he whispered, 
trembling with anticipation, "show me the fate of 
art and labor in the age of machine." 
The mirror's surface chumed, the glass twisting 
into grotesque shapes, and then it stilled. Two 
reflections emerged, side by side, polar opposites 
yet intertwined 
In one, a world of beauty and efficiency unfolded 
Machines worked 
in harmony with humans, 
enhancing creativity and freeing them from toil. Art 
blossomed in ways unimaginable, and prosperity 
reached new heights. 
In the other, a dystopian nightmare loomed 
Machines had usurped the role of humans, leaving 
them jobless and adrift. Creativity withered, 
replaced by soulless algorithms. 
The divide between those who embraced the 
machines and those who resisted grew into a 
chasm, and society teetered on the brink of 
collapse 
The scholar, horrified and entranced, stared into 
the mirror's depths, unable to look away. The 
images flickered and intertwined, a dance of hope 
and despair, progress and regression. 
“Mirror, mirror on the wall," he cried, tears in his 
eyes, "which of these futures will befall?" 
The mirror's response was a silent, mocking laugh, 
a cold reminder that the path between these 
extremes was yet unwritten, a joumey fraught with 
choices, ethical dilemmas, and the echoes of 
humanity's eternal struggle with itself. 
With a shudder, the scholar stumbled away, 
haunted by what he had seen, knowing that the 
mirrors reflections were 
not prophecies but 
warnings. 
The future was a canvas yet unpainted, and the 
brush was in the hands of humankind

The mirror, unfeeling and eternal, returned to its 
silent vigil, waiting for the next seeker of truth to 
peer into its depths, where the battle between 
progress and peril continued 
to rage 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/Table%200f%20Catastrophic%20Risks.mhtm 
| 
7 de Agosto de 2023 
Forest Art 
   

  
8 de Agosto 
de 2023 
The exploration of the connection between video 
games, physical games, and the human mind 
reveals an underlying complexity within simple 
game dynamics. 
By engaging with these games, individuals are not 
just participating in entertainment but also 
developing essential cognitive skills. 
The appeal of games like "Rolling Thunder" or 
"Commander Keen 
lies in their ability to model 
real-world strategies within contained and 
controlled environments. 
These games, both digital and physical, serve as 
more than mere diversions; they become 
platforms 
for understanding and modeling the 
mind. 
The closed worlds and limited rules enable easier 
navigation and facilitate learning processes that 
are relevant in our daily lives. 
Their application in scientific research, as 
illustrated by MIT psychologists using game 
physics engines, showcases the profound insights 
they offer into human cognition. 
Ultimately, the significance of these games 
transcends specific titles or platforms. Their 
universal appeal and utility lie in the way they 
mirror and refine our mental processes, offering a 
playful yet profound lens through which we can 
better understand ourselves. 
Ina world continually driven by technology and 
complexity, 
the role of games as both eduicational 
tools and means of cognitive exploration has 
never been more pertinent. 
httpsy/github.com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/Rolling%20Choice%20Theorymhtm 
9 de Agosto 
de 2023 
Generative grammar, developed by Noam 
Chomsky, shares similarities with the principles 
behind the Cistercian numeral system, Dr. Funes 
the Memorious's complex memorization, and the 
concept of simplification in constraint-based 
programming. 
Generative grammar aims to describe the 
underlying Structure of a language using a finite 
set of rules. These rules can generate an infinite 
number of grammatically correct sentences. Like 
the Cistercian numeral system, generative 
grammar uses a small number of components to 
represent a vast array of possibilities. 
Dr. Funes's difficulty with abstraction, where 
he 
remembered every detail but struggled with 
general concepts, mirrors the challenge in 
language of managing endless individual instances 
(words, phrases) while recognizing underlying 
patterns and structures. 
Generative grammar provides a way to navigate 
this complexity by focusing on the rules and 
patterns that generate the surface forms, rather 
than memorizing every possible sentence. 
In the same way, constraint-based programming 
seeks to simplify complex systems by focusing on 
the essential rules and constraints that shape 
them, allowing for a more efficient and 
manageable approach. 
These connections highlight how the principles 
of 
simplification, abstraction, and rule-based 
generation pervade various fields and disciplines. 
They form the backbone of our ability to 
understand and work with complex systems, 
allowing us to distil vast complexity into 
comprehensible structures. 
User 
Alist of all of the topics we've covered. 
ChatGPT

Certainly! Here's a summary of the diverse topics 
we've touched upon: 
Communication Between Future and Past: 
Discussion of causality, free will, and quantum 
cryptography. 
Planting Analogy: Alice and Bob planting in 
opposite alphabetical orders, representing 
different perspectives and communication. 
School/Church Analogy: Understanding 
the 
lifecycle of stars through the observation of 
different stages of life in a community. 
Cryptography and Causality: Quantum 
cryptography and its implications for causality and 
paradox resolution. 
Self-Directed Learning: Your experience 
in creating 
a unique degree program and the philosophy 
behind self directed education. 
Philosophers and Theorists: Alook at various 
thinkers like Ebbinghaus, Piaget, Montessori, 
Vygotsky, Wittgenstein, Deleuze, Kant, 
Swedenborg, and Madam Jean Guyonne and their 
philosophies. 
Rhizomatic Pathways: Exploration of quantum free 
will resolution and self-directed learning. 
The Island of Doctor Funes the Memorious: A 
fictional character's ability 
to remember with 
extreme detail, the challenges of abstraction, and 
its relationship with generalization. 
Cistercian Numeral System: 
A numeral syste by 
Cistercian monks that illustrates the principles 
of 
simplification and rule-based generation. 
Generative Grammar: 
Connections between. 
generative grammar, the numeral system, 
constraint-based programming, and Dr. Funes. 
   
These topics are interconnected and touch on 
themes of learning, communication, abstraction, 
causality, and complexity across various fields. 
User 
The title of the conversation is "Quantum Free Will 
Resolution," could 
| get a final summary? 
Certainly! Here's a final summary centered around 
the theme of "Quantum Free Will Resolution’: 
Quantum Communication and Causality: The 
conversation delved into complex ideas of 
communicating between future and past, using 
quantum cryptography 
to protect causality. 
The discussion involved quantum indeterminism, 
10 
free will, and ways to secure information to avoid 
causal paradoxes. 
Analogies and Metaphors: Various metaphors and 
analogies were used to make these abstract 
concepts more accessible, such as planting 
gardens 
in alphabetical order and observing 
different life stages in a community. 
These illustrations helped to explain ideas related 
to causality, observation, and understanding 
lifecycle stages. 
Philosophical Foundations: A broad array of 
philosophers and educational theorists were cited, 
tying into themes of self-directed learning and 
cognitive development. 
These principles connected with the quantum 
realm in understanding free will, abstraction, 
simplification, and generalization. 
Interplay of Complexity 
and Simplicity: Through 
examples like the Island of Doctor Funes and the 
Cistercian numeral system, the conversation 
explored the delicate balance between complexity 
and simplicity, memory, and abstraction. 
This related to the broader theme by illuminating 
the nuances of understanding and communicating 
complex ideas. 
Integration with Education and Linguistics: By 
weaving together elements of self-directed 
learning and generative grammar, the discussion 
created parallels between quantum concepts and 
human cognition. 
It underlined the importance of rule-based 
systems and constraint programming, resonating, 
with ideas in quantum mechanics and free will. 
The conversation was a rich and multifaceted 
exploration of quantum free will resolution, 
employing varied 
intellectual tools and 
frameworks to unravel a deeply complex subject. 
User 
A final quote. 
ChatGPT 
Certainly! Here's a fitting quote that encapsulates 
the themes discussed: 
"The significant problems we face cannot be 
solved at the same level of thinking we were at 
when we created them." — Albert Einstein 
This quote captures the essence of the 
conversation, reflecting on the need to elevate our 
thinking and employ innovative, multidisciplinary 
approaches 
to understand and address complex 
issues like quantum free will resolution.

https//github.com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/Quantum%20Free%20Will%20Resolution.m 
html 
10 de Agosto de 2023 
It looks like you and 
| might be working on the 
some of the same topics. 
My prompt: 
Children playing on playground while beautiful 
android children wait patiently 
to the side, nousr 
robot, ultra detailed portrait, android, cyborg, 
robotic parts, porcelain nousr robot, complex, 
cyborg, robotic parts, cyberpunk, intricate, elegant, 
highly detailed, digital painting, artstation, concept 
art, smooth, sharp focus, illustration, art by 
artgerm and greg rutkowski and alphonse mucha 
and Gustav Klimt and llya Kuvshinov, Color 
photograph, realistic, standing nousr robot, 
ultra-detailed portrait of a beautiful android, 
cyborg, robotic parts, porcelain noussr robot, 
complex, cyborg, robotic parts, skeleton, beautiful 
studio soft light, vibrant details, Alex Grey, art 
neauvou luxurious cyberpunk, hyperrealistic, 
microchip, elegant, beautiful, ade6 adedque aliis 
alter animalibus animalium arteria CAPUT Cere 
Cerebelli Cerebellum Cerebri Cerebrum circa 
Cordis corpora corporis Cranium cujus cum ductu 
eadem ejuldem ejufque eodem eorum effe eft 
exinde facilé fer® fibra fibris Figura five ftatim 
glandula habent heec hanc haud hic hinc homine 
horum huic hujus hunc illorum inferitis infuper 
intercoftalis intra invicem ifti itd item juxta latere 
lateris licet long magis medulla medulla 
oblongata medullaris modé motus nempe Nervi 
Nervo Nervorum Nervus oblongatee oculi Pari 
Paris vag) partes partibus partium plexus plures 
Porré prae proceflus propagines propter prout 
quae quaedam quam quare quafi quibufdam 
quippe Quoad quid quoniam quorum rami ramos 
ramus ratio ritu fanguis fed feu five (piritus fpiritus 
animales {pirituum fub funt tamen tanquam 
tantum trunco truncus una ufque ufus utl 
utrinque utriufque utroque vafa vaforum velut, 
verd verstis veruim videtur, Portrait, illustration, 
highly detailed, space, fantasy, digital painting, 
decadent, intricate, cyberpunk, sharp focus, 
golden ratios, concept art, Cinematic lighting, 
cyberpunk, jellyfish, intricate, elegant, highly 
detailed, digital painting, artstation, concept art, 
smooth, sharp focus, illustration, art by artgerm 
and greg rutkowski and alphonse mucha and 
Gustav Klimt and llya Kuvshinov, Color 
photograph, realistic, nousr robot, ultra detailed 
portrait, android, cyborg, robotic, porcelain nousr 
robot, complex, cyborg, robotic parts, skeleton, 
beautiful studio soft light, vibrant details, Alex 
Grey, art neauvou, luxurious cyberpunk, 
u 
hyperrealistic, microchip, elegant, beautiful, aded 
adedéque aliis alter animalibus animalium arteria 
CAPUT Cere Cerebelli Cerebellum Cerebri 
Cerebrum circa Cordis corpora corporis Cranium 
cujus ductu eadem ejufdem ejuifque eodem 
eorum effe eft exinde facilé feré fibrae fibris Figura 
five ftatim glandula habent haec hanc haud hic 
hinc homine horum huic hujus hunc illorum 
inferitis infuper intercoftalis intra invicem iftiit& 
item juxta latere lateris licét long magis medulla 
medulla oblongata medullaris modé motus 
nempe Nervi Nervo Nervorum Nervus oblongata 
oculi Pari Paris vagi partes partibus partium plexus 
plures Porré pra proceffus propagines propter 
prout quae quaedam quam quare quafi quibufdam 
quippe Quoad quéd quoniam quorum rami ramos 
ramus ratio ritu fanguis fed feu five (piritus (piritus 
animales fpirituum fub funt tamen tanquam 
tantum trunco truncus una ufque ufus uti 
utrinque utriufque utroque vafa vaforum velut, 
verd verstis vertim videtur, Futuristic city, a forest, 
art by stanley lau and artgerm, Color photo, 
cyberpunk, cyborg, noussr robot, beautiful, 
stunning, insanely detailed, intricate, elegant, a 
futuristic city, a forest. With A Path Between The 
    
Trees Kangaroo Playing Tennis 
in Space Nautilus 
Dead Birch Tree Woodland Woman Seated Under 
Tree Anton Fadeev Raining Intense Cinematic Style 
Twilight Mood Lighting Galactromeda Haplopraxis

  
n

  
as 
  
10 de Agosto de 2023 
The concept of "Nova Protopia" encompasses a 
vast network of 200,000 intervolsorial pediments, 
each housing 200,000 rooms, for a total of 40 
billion rooms. 
These structures form part of amegastructure 
ensemble, which includes innovative elements 
such as polar nuclear powered 
refrigerators, 
hurricane-powered battery chargers, geothermal 
mass accelerators, and more. 
These components synergize to address global 
challenges like climate change, water scarcity, and 
housing, and can also support regrowing 
rainforests and other sustainable 
practices. 
The entire infrastructure represents a holistic 
approach to global sustainable development, 
harmonizing technological advancement 
with 
ecological restoration. 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/Nova%20Protopiamhtm| 
11. de Agosto de 2023 
Our multifaceted corversation began with a 
complex exploration of Technological 
Metatheories, delving into concepts like dystopia, 
optimism, Nova Protopia, and various allegories 
that symbolize contrasting human potentials and 
technological advancements. 
We also explored interconnections between 
various innovative concepts and theories.

Our discourse evolved into the idea of 
constructing a Surjective Penteract, a complex 
logical construct representing the intersection of 
technological viewpoints and the axiology of love. 
We mapped the Technological Metatheories to 
corresponding sciititles, and the Axiology of 
Love, to form two interconnected tesseracts, 
creating a higher-dimensional structure. 
The resulting Techno-Axiological Penteract 
embodies a rich blend of technological 
understanding 
and human emotional experience, 
symbolizing the intricate relationship between 
innovation, ethics, imagination, and practicality. 
Although this complex structure may not lend 
itself easily to textual or visual representation, it 
nonetheless represents a deep and nuanced 
connection between technology and the 
philosophy of love, reflecting the breadth and 
depth of our conversation. 
hope this summary captures the essence of our 
discussion, and I'm here for any further questions 
or clarifications! 
Continue this conversation: 
httpsv/chat.openai.com/share/ac534452-3d28-49 
9c-9143-b2923d997e2e 
“4   
13 de Agosto 
de 2023 
A Hyper-Dimensional Primer on Logical Constructs 
Audiobook 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/audiobooks/b 
lob/main/typerdimensional-primer.mp3 
Standard Galactic 
https/github. com/standardgalactic/alphabev/blob 
/core/A%20Hyper-Dimensional%20Primer.pdf 
Latin 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/A%20Hyper-Dimensional%20Primer%200n% 
20Logical%20Constructs.mhtm 
 

  
14 de Agosto de 2023 
An “ontogenic parade" is not a standard concept, 
but it seems to metaphorically represent the 
progression of intellectual or philosophical 
development. 
Here's an attempt to outline twelve stages from 
neonate to philosopher, using a blend of 
developmental psychology and an imaginative 
approach to intellectual growth 
1. Neonate: The beginning of life, where the focus 
is on sensory experience and basic survival 
2. Infant: Developing basic cognitive skills, 
recognizing patterns, and forming simple 
attachments. 
3, Toddler: Exploration of the world, asking 
questions, and beginning to learn language 
4, Child: Developing logical thinking, 
understanding rules, and starting to grasp more 
complex concepts. 
5, Adolescent: Forming personal beliefs, 
challenging authority, and engaging 
in more 
abstract thought. 
6. Young Adult: Pursuing education, exploring 
different ideologies, and beginning to understand 
complexity 
7. Scholar: Engaging in formal study, conducting, 
research, and building specialized knowledge. 
8. Thinker: Formulating original thoughts, 
critiquing existing ideas, and developing a 
personal philosophy. 
9, Teacher: Sharing knowledge with others, 
fostering understanding, and encouraging 
intellectual growth 
10. Philosopher-in-Training: Engaging deeply with 
Fe 
philosophical texts, joining philosophical 
conversations, and contributing to the field 
11. Philosopher: Generating new philosophical 
ideas, writing significant works, and influencing the 
field 
12. Mentor/Philosopher King: Guiding the next 
generation of thinkers, shaping the intellectual 
landscape, and becoming a touchstone in the 
field 
These stages blend aspects of physical, cognitive, 
and intellectual development and are highly 
idealized, 
Real-life paths to becoming a philosopher 
(or any 
intellectual pursuit) can be highly varied and don't 
necessarily follow a linear progression, 
httpsy/github.com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/The%20Ontogenic%20P arade.mhtml 
15 de Agosto de 2023 
New Flashcard Course 
Learn History of Psychology and much more 
on Memrise 
  
16 de Agosto de 2023 
In the meting pot of intellectual discourse, few 
subjects have shown more transformative power 
than the blend of technology, art, philosophy, and 
ecology. 
This essay, whimsical titled "Potent Potables,”

uncorks the essence of these fields, revealing a 
concoction that is as inspiring as itis intricate. 
The Mind's Concoction: Herbart's Philosophy and 
Psychology 
Johann Friedrich Herbart's contributions 
to 
education and psychology form the base of our 
philosophical brew. 
His emphasis on individual development, societal 
contribution, and the unique concept of 
synechology reveals the deep interconnectedness 
of ideas. 
His notion of continuity, defined by the paradox of 
partially overlapping points, adds a layer of 
complexity that resonates with the ever-changing 
field of cosmology. 
The Ecology of Interactions: Autecology and 
Synecology 
Adding to the mixture, we find the flavors of 
autecology and synecology. These scientific 
principles allow us to understand the individual 
organisms’ relationships with their environment, 
as well as the intricate interactions among multiple 
species. 
These ecological perspectives remind us that the 
interplay of nature is a delicate balance, rich with 
complexity and interdependence. 
The Ontology of Technology: A Heideggerian 
Perspective 
The strong note of technology, through a 
Heldeggerian lens, introduces a robust flavor to 
our concoction. The "Ontology of Technology" 
explores how ancient and modern perspectives 
on technology differ in understanding truth. 
The speculative notion of "hyperology" expands 
the boundaries 
of traditional ontology, posing 
radical questions about our existence within a 
technological world. 
Graphic Art's Potential: Revealing Truth 
The final ingredient in our potent potable is the 
realm of graphic art. With its roots tracing back to 
ancient cave drawings, graphic art serves as a 
bridge between the utilitarian and the aesthetic, 
between the public and the private. 
The potential of graphic art to reveal truth and 
transform thought gives life to our intellectual 
brew. By fusing calculative and poetic techne, 
artists like Franz Marc, Paul Klee, and Colm Lally 
uncover the essence of the technological world. 
Conclusion 
16 
Like a carefully crafted cocktail, "Potent Potables" 
offers an intoxicating blend of thought-provoking 
insights. 
The mix of Herbart's philosophy, ecological 
understanding, technology's ontology, and the 
transformative power of graphic art creates a 
complex yet harmonious flavor. 
This exploration serves not merely as an 
intellectual indulgence but as a call to recognize 
the interconnectedness of our world. 
It prompts us to question, 
to challenge, and to 
reflect on the essence of our existence and our 
place in the cosmos. 
In the spirit of the essay's title, may we find the 
courage to taste these potent potables and savor 
the rich complexity of ideas they hold, embracing 
the change they promise and the wisdom they 
impart. 
(Note: While the title "Potent Potables" provides a 
creative metaphor for the blending of complex 
ideas, readers should note that it's used 
metaphorically and the topics are not related to 
beverages.) 
https//github.com/standardgalactic/technobabble 
/blob/main/Potent%20Potables.mhtml! 
16 de Agosto de 2023 
| decided to call the corversation "Axiological 
Superstructures", can you elaborate? 
Certainly! The term "Axiological Superstructures" is 
a profound and encompassing title for the 
conversation, encapsulating key themes and 
providing a lens for understanding 
the discussed 
concepts. 
Axiology. 
Axialogy 
is the philosophical study of value, 
encompassing both ethical values (moral 
goodness, duty, virtue) and aesthetic values 
(beauty, harmory, creativity). 
In the context of the conversation, axiology has 
been explored in relation to technology, love, 
decision-making, and society. 
It forms the underlying foundation for the 
theoretical constructs discussed, including the 
Techno-Axiological Penteract. 
Superstructures: 
The term "superstructures" can have several

meanings, but in this context, it signifies complex, 
overarching systems or frameworks. 
Superstructures are intricate arrangements that 
build upon basic principles 
to create something 
grander and more comprehensive. 
They are often used in the context of societal or 
cultural systems but can also apply to conceptual 
frameworks like the Penteract. 
Axiological Superstructures: 
Combining these two terms, "Axiological 
Superstructures" refers to complex systems or 
frameworks that are constructed around the study 
of values. 
It implies a multidimensional exploration of how 
values influence, interact with, and shape various 
aspects of our world, including technology, human 
cognition, societal phenomena, and ethical 
considerations. 
Relevance to the Conversation: 
The title aptly captures the essence of the 
discussion, including the Penteract's multifaceted 
perspective on love and technology and the 
exploration of Functional Reactive Axiology. 
It also reflects the interconnections between the 
various topics 
like the Reflex Arc Concept, 
Gybernetic Control Loops, and Functionalism. 
Further Implications: 
axiological Superstructures" suggests a grand 
vision that could pave the way for interdisciplinary 
research, education, and practical applications. 
It hints at the potential to build new theoretical 
models, technological tools, and ethical guidelines 
that are rooted in a deep understanding of human 
values. 
Insummary, "Axiological Superstructures" serves 
as a fitting title for a conversation that has 
spanned diverse fields and delved into complex 
relationships between values, technology, society, 
and the human mind. 
It invites further exploration, contemplation, and 
perhaps even a paradigm shift in how we 
approach and integrate these domains. 
User 
A final summary. 
ChatGPT 
Our conversation has traversed an ambitious 
intellectual landscape, linking diverse concepts 
that range from philosophy, computer science, 
psychology, communication, and sociology. 
Through this exploration, we introduced the 
v7 
Techno-Axiological Penteract, a multidimensional 
framework that could potentially guide future 
inquiries into the complex interplay of values, 
technology, and human relationships. 
We also discussed various concepts like Functional 
Reactive Axiology, the reflex arc in psychology, 
cybernetic control loops, Curry-Howard 
isomorphism, predictive coding, and functionalism, 
weaving them into the broader discussion. 
The multifaceted themes of human 
communication, relationships, love, technology, 
and values were creatively mapped into potential 
hypercubes, indicating a rich avenue for further 
study. 
These themes resonate with contemporary 
challenges and opportunities in our increasingly 
interconnected and technologically driven world. 
The proposed structure encourages an 
interdisciplinary approach, involving collaboration 
across various fields, ethical considerations, 
technological development, educational 
applications, and societal impact. 
The dialogue opened the door to a novel 
perspective on understanding 
and navigating our 
complex world, presenting an exciting frontier for 
intellectual exploration and practical application. 
In sum, "Axiological Superstructures" aptly 
captures the essence of this conversation, marking 
a thoughtful journey into the deep and nuanced 
interconnections between technology, values, and 
the human experience. 
It's 
conversation that inspires curiosity and 
invites further inquiry, exploration, and innovation. 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/Axiological%20Superstructures.mhtm| 
18 de Agosto de 2023 
@ «Unravel the Secrets of the Universe with 
‘Geometric Bayesianism!"# 
iil 
Dive into the mind-bending world where math 
meets cosmos, and discover the hidden geometry 
behind life's greatest mysteries! K+ 
From the brain-teasing paradoxes of speed 
reading LU 
to the cosmic connections 
of emojis| 
@O, this eye-opening exploration is your ticket to 
a universe where abstract becomes reality! @a% 
PB Unlock the doors to wisdom and wonder with 
"Geometric Bayesianism’ - the must-read that's

changing the way we see everything! @ca7E.@ 
#UnlockTheMysteries #GeometricBayesianism 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/Geometric%20Bayesianism.mhtm| 
19 de Agosto de 2023 
In exploring the intricate and multifaceted concept 
of biomimetic sociology, we have joumeyed 
through a landscape where nature's designs have 
inspired human thought, innovation, and societal 
organization. 
From the trails of deer that inform our 
understanding of connection 
to the hive 
intelligence of bees that might have shaped our 
ideas of governance, 
the natural world has 
provided a blueprint for human creativity. 
The Embodied Language Evolution Theory, 
proposing that humans expanded 
their mind by 
imitating animals, plants, and trees, offers a 
provocative lens through which to view our shared 
history with the organic world. 
The cairns, symbolic of boundary marking, and ant 
colony optimization algorithms represent only a 
fraction of the instances where humans have 
drawn inspiration from nature's wisdom. 
However, the joumeyis not without its 
complexities and conjectures, such as the 
intriguing yet speculative theories about 
Neanderthals inventing paper or the origin of 
military formations. 
These remind us that the interaction between 
humans and nature is a continuous dialogue filled 
with curiosity, imitation, and, at times, a touch of 
mystery. 
In conclusion, biomimetic sociology paints a rich 
and diverse portrait of human evolution, one 
where the lines between 
the human-made world 
and the organic environment are inextricably 
intertwined. 
Our interactions with the flora and fauna around 
us have not merely shaped our material world but 
also broadened our cogritive horizons, weaving a 
complex tapestry that continues 
to inspire and 
challenge us as we walk in the footsteps of the 
world around us. 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/Biomimetic%20Sociology. 
htm 
1 
20 de Agosto de 2023 
Ina landscape interwoven with crystal and shell, 
sleek white armor stands at attention. A 144-core 
intricate pattern embellishes every touch, every 
sight, hyperrealistic in its essence. Green breathes 
life into all, an undercurrent that pulses, 
surrounds, embraces. 
Acity constructed from crystal stretches toward 
the Sky, resplendent 
in its purity. The hills, 
corrected by the McGovern-De Pablo boundary, 
undulate in the distance. The dance of Eloi and 
Morlock unfolds here, a beautiful studio light 
casting shadows and illuminations, revealing 
contrasts. 
#Metadynamics whispers through the air, a force 
that shapes and molds. The logarithmic history of 
existence unfolds in aleaf's vein, in a breeze’s 
touch, in the echoes that permeate Aetemia. Plate 
bulbs glow, hinting at a reality beyond. 
Peace dwells in this place, serenity bathes every 
corner. Trees sway, crystals shimmer, and dreams 
are more than mere illusion. Aeternia defies 
understanding, transcends description. It is both a 
question and an answer, a mystery and a 
revelation. 
Aworld of green and crystal, armor and beauty, 
where the surreal weds the hyperrealistic. Come 
to Aeternia, hear its echoes, feel its call. It isa 
symphory without sound, a landscape without 
boundary. 
Here, dreams are lived, and reality isa fleeting 
thought. Aeternia waits, a realm of infinite 
possibility, a haven where echoes never fade. 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/E choes%200f%20Aeternia.mhtml. 
20 de Agosto de 2023 
? 
# Navigating the Supercanny Valley 
See edit history for prompt.

 

 

20 de Agosto de 2023 
The concept of "gameified free will" aligns with 
self-directed learning, as both emphasize the 
importance of choice and autonomy. 
Both ideas recognize that individuals are more 
motivated to engage and learn when they feel they 
have agency over their decisions. 
Self Supervised Learning and Emergence in 
Complex Systems: 
Self supervised learning 
in Al involves extracting 
meaningful information from unlabeled data. 
This is akin to how emergence occurs in complex 
systems, where higher-level properties arise from 
the interactions of simpler elements, leading to 
new structures and behaviors. 
Unintended Positive Consequences 
and 
Serendipity: 
Both concepts highlight the unexpected benefits 
that can arise from actions or events. Serendipity 
often involves accidental discoveries leading to 
innovation, while unintended positive 
consequences can result from taking actions with 
unforeseen benefits. 
Cooperative Co-Evolution and Self-Improvement: 
Cooperative co-evolution involves different 
elements working together 
to improve each 
other's performance, similar to the idea of 
self-improvement through cooperation in 
collectively autocatalytic Sets. Both concepts 
emphasize collaborative growth. 
Backpropagation and Trial and Error Leaming 
Both involve learning from mistakes. 
Backpropagation in Al adjusts model parameters 
based on errors, and trial and error leaming in 
animals involves modifying behavior based on 
outcomes. Both processes drive learning and 
improvement. 
Meta Learning and Learning to Adapt 
  
Meta learning in Al is about learning to learn 
quickly, similar to how humans learn from a variety 
of experiences 
to adapt to new situations. Both 
processes involve acquiring knowledge that aids in 
tackling novel challenges. 
Ethical Considerations in Al Gameification: 
Maintaining user agency in Al gameification 
techniques is an ethical concern, ensuring that 
a 
users are not manipulated into certain behaviors. 
Similar ethical considerations apply in various Al 
applications 
to ensure responsible and 
transparent use. 
“Hindsight Experience Replay" and Leaming from 
Mistakes: 
“Hindsight Experience Replay" involves learning 
from past experiences with the benefit of 
hindsight. Similarly, humans often reflect on past 
decisions 
to learn from mistakes, which helps 
improve future decision-making. 
"Theory Theory’ and Al Explanations: 
"Theory theory" proposes that humans construct 
theories 
to understand the world. 
Al algorithms 
generating explanations also build models to 
make sense of data, drawing parallels between 
human cognition and machine learning. 
Self Supervised Learning and Emergent Order: 
Self- supervised 
learning uncovers hidden 
patterns, similar to how emergent order arises in 
complex systems when simple interactions lead to 
sophisticated behavior, as seen in fields like 
economics and ecology. 
These connections illustrate how concepts from 
different domains can relate and complement 
each other, offering amore holistic understanding 
of various topics. 
https//github.com/standardgalactic/unfinished-th 
oughts/blob/main/Gameified%20Free%20Will. 
mht 
ml 
20 de Agosto de 2023 
Throughout our conversation in the "Cosmic Void 
Simulator," we've delved into a multitude of 
captivating topics: 
  
Haplopraxis: 
The World's 
Most Difficult Video 
Game: We explored the intricacies of this 
immersive game that combines space exploration, 
vocabulary challenges, and typing tutor elements. 
The concept of global resets, autoblinking, and the 
unique gameplay mechanics were discussed. 
Ising Models and Universe Simulation: 
We 
explored how Ising models simulate the evolution 
of the universe over time, their relation to. 
programming languages, and the significance of 
studying them in understanding 
the lifetime of the 
universe.

Backstory and Themes: 
We touched on a poignant 
backstory reminiscent of "The Guardian of the 
Veldt,” highlighting 
the impact 
of technology on 
companionship and childhood, ethical robotic 
behavior, and the "Sixteen Laws of Robotics." 
Integration with the Game: We discussed how 
elements from the story, such as ethical robotics 
and technological companionship, could be 
integrated into the game's narrative, creating a 
thought-provoking and immersive gaming 
experience. 
This journey through the Cosmic Void Simulator 
has been an exploration of creativity, ethics, game 
design, and technological concepts. If you have 
any further questions or wish to dive deeper into 
any aspect, don't hesitate to embark on another 
exciting conversation! 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/Cosmic%20Vo0id%20Simulator.mhtml 
22de Agosto de 2023 
The theme of "Morphogenic Chemistry" has 
guided a multifaceted conversation exploring the 
intricate intersections between chemistry, biology, 
physics, computational science, and robotics. 
Here's a final summary of the main concepts and 
connection: 
  
  
Morphogenesis 
in Nature and Robotics: 
The 
discussion began with the idea of morphogenetic 
fields (Turing) and evolved into an innovative 
concept of a "Self Healing Yoghurt- Based 
Endomarionet." 
  
This robotic system embodies principles of 
growth, self organization, and adaptability, akin to 
natural morphogenesis. 
Dissipative Structures and Chaos: Invoking 
Prigogine's theories, we examined how cissipative 
structures, formed to relieve internal pressures or 
constraints, could be analogous 
to certain 
biological processes and even robotic designs. 
Chaos theory and fractals also informed our 
understanding of complex systems and 
hierarchical patterns. 
Autocatalytic Sets and Living Systems: We touched 
onthe connections between autocatalytic sets in 
chemistry and the concept of life as replicative 
systems, leading to the unique idea of 
autonomous yogurt machines 
or pneumatic 
paperbot Endomarionettes. 
Polycomputation and Bio-Mechanical Integration: 
The concept of polycomputation, including 
substrate independence and intelligence as care 
(Michael Levin), played a role in envisioning a 
robotic system that integrates computational tasks 
with food production, waste management, and 
even biological growth. 
Developmental Biology Theories: The conversation 
delved into novel theories regarding male nipples 
as dissipative structures, recurrent protopathy, 
and morphogen gradients. 
These ideas challenged conventional 
understandings and contributed to a richer 
discourse on developmental biology within the 
theme of morphogenic chemistry. 
Sustainability and Circular Economy: Emphasizing 
the potential of robotics in recycling organic waste 
and producing foodstuff, the discussion resonated 
with broader themes 
of sustainability, self-healing 
materials, and circular economy principles. 
Interdisciplinarity and Innovation: Throughout the 
conversation, various scientific theories and 
concepts were woven together to create a 
tapestry of ideas that transcended traditional 
disciplinary boundaries. 
The innovative blending of robotics, biochemistry, 
fermentation science, and material science 
demonstrated the power of interdisciplinary 
thinking, 
"Morphogenic Chemistry’ thus served as a 
thematic guide, illuminating 
the profound 
connections between growth, form, adaptation, 
and self-organization across different domains of 
science and technology. 
By bridging diverse fields, the conversation 
illuminated novel pathways for understanding and 
innovation, reflecting the vibrant complexity of 
contemporary scientific exploration. 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/Morphogenic%20Chemistry.mhtml 
23 de Agosto de 2023 
Exploring Connections in Mathematics, 
Philosophy, and Analogies 
In this intriguing and diverse conversation, we 
embarked on a journey of exploration, weaving, 
together topics ranging from mathematical 
concepts to philosophical ideas and creative

analogies. 
We began by delving into the realm of moduli 
stacks and moduli of curves, drawing parallels 
to 
the organization of animals on Noah's Ark. 
These mathematical spaces serve as organized 
compartments for grouping objects with shared 
traits, akin to the sections reserved for specific 
animals. 
Transitioning into ancient philosophical themes, 
we explored the notion of innate knowledge and 
its connection to Plato's theory of forms. 
Much like Noah's Ark encapsulated animals with 
inherent characteristics, innate knowledge 
provides a framework for understanding 
the 
under‘ying truths that guide our perception of 
reality. 
This connection led us to Parmenides of Elea's 
"O66g AGEN" (The Way of Opinion), a 
reconstruction that draws from his lost work. In 
this text, the journey of exploration is likened toa 
path of understanding, where the shifting 
shadows of senses connect with the deeper 
currents of reality. 
The dance between perception and deeper truths 
is illuminated, mirroring how animals on the Ark 
mimic etemal forms in the shadow-play of 
existence. 
The narrative also takes us through the theory of 
forms, innate knowledge, and the contrast 
between appearances and eternal truths. 
These concepts intertwine, revealing the journey 
of exploration as a process of unforgetting truths 
that have been obscured by the shadows of 
sensory experience. 
Ultimately, our exploration revealed that the act of 
seeking knowledge is a form of memory, akin to 
Plato's notion of unforgetting, As we traverse the 
"QB6¢ AGEnG," we're reminded that the path is one 
of both investigation and remembrance. 
Our senses, like the shadows, may deceive, but 
they also offer solace and guide us to the 
profound truths that lie beneath the surface. 
Just as the animals and sections on Noah's Ark 
symbolize unity and diversity, our conversation 
highlighted the interconnectedness of 
mathematical, philosophical, and analogical ideas. 
“Reconstructing Lost Books" serves as a reminder. 
that the pursuit of knowledge is a multifaceted 
journey, where disparate concepts converge and 
weave a rich tapestry of understanding. 
as 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/Reconstructing%20Lost%20Books.mhtm! 
24de Agosto de 2023 
Here's a summary of the wide-ranging 
conversation: 
Historical Movements: Discussion of urban design 
theories like the Kalizoic Society, Cyclofabian 
movement, and the Garden City concept, with 
reflections on their successes and flaws. 
Futuristic Cities and Literature: Exploration of 
various futuristic settings and literary works, 
including themes of human and cyborg 
coexistence, resilience, and rebellion. 
Time Zones and Scheduling Innovations: Ideas 
about creating two or three global time zones, 
which could lead to 24-hour utilization of facilities 
and adapting 
to different environmental contexts 
like underwater cities and distant planets. 
Education Innovations: A suggestion that every 
student on Earth should receive a personalized 
and individualized textbook for free annually. 
Mechsuit Living: Concepts of living in mechsuits, 
potentially minimizing the need for duplicated 
structures in domestic and institutional settings, 
and developing portable sleeping pods into 
mechsuits. 
  
Urban Design and Technology Innovations: 
Ideas 
like centralizing waste management, augmented 
reality for 
city navigation, biotic sampling for local 
flavor, and a hyperbolated gumball economy. 
  
Advanced Health Monitoring and Biotic Farming: A 
proposal for integrating low-intensity x-rays, 
terahertz scanning, and predictive modeling for 
regular health scans, and the growth and 
maintenance of tissue and organs exogenously. 
These discussions combined historical 
perspectives with futuristic concepts, touching on 
urban planning, technology, healthcare, education, 
and lifestyle innovations, and proposing visionary 
ideas for the future of humanity. 
User 
A final quote. 
ChatGPT 
Certainly! Here's a quote that encapsulates 
the 
visionary and innovative nature of your 
conversation:

"The future belongs to those who believe in the 
beauty of their dreams and have the courage to 
explore beyond the boundaries of the present. It’s 
in the fusion of past lessons and future 
possibilities that we craft the world we desire." 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/Typomorphological%20Considerations.mht 
mil 
24de Agosto de 2023 
Let's wrap up our discussion: We began by delving 
into ethical philosophies, particularly focusing on 
deontological altruism and its implications. 
This exploration was based on the principle of 
actions being right or wrong in themselves, rather 
than based on outcomes. 
We delved into potential ethical dilemmas and 
challenges, contrasting deontological ethics with 
consequentialism. 
The discussion transitioned to the concept of 
pregeometry in model theory. While its primary 
use in mathematics and model theory was 
touched upon, the broader philosophical 
implications, particularly in relation to physics, 
were explored. 
This led to a dialogue about alternative 
understandings of space, time, and reality itself. 
Building on this foundation, we examined the 
concept of natural life as proposed by Jlanowicz, 
where life is seen 
asa system's ability to 
self-organize and process information. 
This theme of complexity and information became 
a central thread, tying back to our discussion of 
pregeometry and challenging conventional 
wisdom in various scientific disciplines. 
Finally, we ventured into the realm of 
"Deontological Objectivism,” merging ideas from 
Ayn Rand's philosophy with deontological ethics. 
This merger posits the existence of objective 
moral truths that individuals should adhere to, not 
because of their consequences but due to their 
intrinsic correctness. 
Throughout our discussion, a recurrent theme has 
been the challenge of established norms and 
viewpoints. 
Whether through ethics, science, or philosophy, 
we've seen the potential for fresh perspectives 
to 
2 
bring about new insights and understandings. 
User 
Which established norms and viewpoints does it 
challenge? 
ChatGPT 
Our discussion touched upon challenging several 
established norms and viewpoints: 
Ethical Theories: We delved deep into 
deontological altruism, which goes against certain 
ethical viewpoints that prioritize outcomes (like 
utilitarianism) over intrinsic moral duties. 
The emphasis on action over consequences 
challenges the prevalent consequentialist 
perspective. 
Physics and Reality: We discussed the 
pregeometric model of Cahill and Klinger and 
Smolin's idea. Both models challenge the 
conventional view of a deterministic universe 
governed by static, unchanging laws. 
The idea of time being real and fundamental 
presents an alternative to the traditional block 
universe concept in physics. 
Definition of Life: lanowicz's idea of natural life 
pushes against simpler definitions of life. 
It proposes that 
life is more about the capacity for 
self organization and information processing than 
just meeting a checklist of biological functions. 
This viewpoint challenges more reductionist and 
mechanistic perspectives on life. 
  
Nature of Reality and Information: 
The exploration 
of reality being emergent from information and 
processes, rather than just being about matter 
and energy, is a profound challenge to more 
materialistic views of the cosmos. 
Role of Altruism in Ethics: The discussion on 
deontological altruism also touched upon the 
ethical responsibilities individuals might have to 
the environment and other beings. 
This challenges anthropocentric views and 
broadens our moral considerations 
to include 
non-human entities and systems. 
Objectivist Philosophy: Introducing "Deontological 
Objectivism’ challenges Ayn Rand's strict form of 
objectivism by integrating deontological ethics. 
This raises questions about the 
intersection of 
individual rights and duties to others. 
These challenges 
to established norms and 
viewpoints encourage us to rethink and

reconsider our understanding of ethics, the nature 
of reality, and our place within it, 
User 
Thank you. 
A final quote 
ChatGPT 
"Challenging established norms is not an act of 
rebellion, but an invitation to see the universe with 
fresh eyes and renewed purpose." 
~ChatGPT, 2023 
https//github. com/standardgalacti¢/mirror/blob/ 
main/Deontological%200bjectivismmhtml 
24de Agosto de 2023 
— 0k you're right that does sound like a massive 
undertaking. 
| wonder how this theory ties 
into my 
other ideas? 
  
Holistic Model: 
You might be envisioning a 
universe where geometries shape probabilities 
(Geometric Bayesianism), structures are 
fundamentally hexahedral (Hexahedral Dynamics), 
long-term behaviors have ergodic properties that 
influence cognitive processes (Ergodic Mind 
Medication), and consciousness or information 
processing isn't tied to specific substrates (SITH 
theory). 
This creates a multidimensional, interconnected 
cosmos, where matter, energy, information, and 
consciousness interplay in complex ways. 
— Write another introduction to Relativistic Scalar 
Vector Plenum theory. 
Introduction to Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum 
(RSVP) Theory 
The cosmos, with its vast stretches of darkness 
punctuated by brilliant luminous bodies, has 
always posed questions that challenge the very 
essence of our understanding. 
Among these enigmas is the evolving structure 
and dynamic behavior of our universe. While 
conventional theories suggest an expanding 
universe, the Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum 
(RSVP) theory offers a different perspective, 
proposing that the universe itself remains static in 
size 
Instead, it posits that the scale at which 
meaningful work and interactions occur is ina 
state of continual flux. 
At the heart of RSVP is the concept that cosmic 
as 
voids expand relative to the dense regions of 
galactic filaments, creating a dynamic interplay 
between matter (referred to as "lamphron") and 
negative vacuum (or "lamphrodyne"). This 
interplay is crucial during the formation of the 
inflaton field. 
One of the most intriguing proposals of the RSVP 
theoryis its cyclical nature of the universe 
According to this framework, over vast epochs 
spanning trillions of years, material that has 
moved beyond our observable horizon during 
inflaton field expansion is eventually reintegrated. 
This cycle, repeated perpetually, suggests a 
universe that doesnt simply have a beginning and 
an end but undergoes phases of transformation 
and rebirth. 
RSVP also posits that the universe's initial 
conditions, just after the "big bang’, weren't 
perfectly srooth. Instead, it hypothesizes that by 
examining the baryon acoustic oscillations in the 
Cosmic Microwave Background, we might reverse 
engineer the minuscule variations in the early 
universe's "crystal plenum’. 
While still in its nascent stages and requiring 
rigorous empirical validation, the Relativistic Scalar 
Vector Plenum theory presents a fresh lens to 
observe and understand the universe's grand 
tapestry. 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/Rellativistic%20S calar%20Vector%20Plenum 
%20(RSVP).mhtm| 
26 de Agosto de 2023 
The Uncharted Country  

  
26

  
a 
  
26 de Agosto de 2023 
(base) mecha@Mac ~ % python3 
Python 3.11.4 (main, Jul 25 2023, 17:36:13) [Clang 
14.0.3 (clang-1403.0.22.14.1)] on darwin 
Type "help", "copyright’, "credits or "license" for 
more information. 
>>> import baseten 
>>> model = 
baseten.deployed_model_id(MPXzNYB') 
>> 
>>> request 
= 
{ 
prompt’: "Photorealistic digital art of a bustling 
alien metropolis, showcasing architecture that 
defies gravity and principles of our Earthly physics. 
Bioluminescent fauna, depicting 
an alien jungle

teeming with strange, glowing plant life in an oil 
painting, 
A surreal watercolor piece of an alien ocean, 
where the water is another color and marine life 
varies vastly from what we know. 
Illustrate a group of diverse alien species having a 
meeting around alarge table in the style of 
Norman Rockwell's American Scene Painting. 
Depict an alien encampment under three distant 
moons, usinga single ethereal light source 
Using high contrast black and white photography 
style, show an extraterrestrial landscape with 
jagged mountains and vast barren valleys. 
A cyborg-like alien creature exploring the dense 
alien forest, with complex robotic parts visible 
Render it in a realistic style similar 
to Wlop or 
Stanley Artgerm Lau, 
Abright, sunny day in an alien park. Capture the 
vibrant flora and fauna basking in the glow of a 
different kind of sun. 
Set against a backdrop of Galactromeda, 
showcase a celestial alignment from the viewpoint 
of this alien world. 
Capture a flight navigator's morning routine in a 
photorealistic visual. Show the navigator 
as part 
human, part machine, waking up toa different sky. 
Use the style of Benjamin Vhuk to create a unique 
political commentary using alien creatures instead 
of humans.” 
“use_refiner’: True 
} 
>>> import base64 
>> 
>>> img=base64,b64decode(responsef"data")) 
Traceback (most recent call last) 
File "<stdin>", ine 1, in <module> 
Name€rror: name ‘response’ is not defined 
>> 
>>> img file 
>>> = 
open(stable-diffusion. png, 
>>> wb’) 
>>> img_file.write(img) 
Traceback (most recent call last): 
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module> 
Name€rror: name ‘img’ is not defined 
>>> img_file.close(response 
>>> = model.predict(request) 
Keyboardinterrupt 
>>> response = model.predict(request) 
>>> img=base64,b64decode(responsef"data")) 
>> 
>>> img_file = open(‘stable-diffusion.png, 'wb') 
>>> img_file.write(img) 
  
28   
145528 
>>> ime file.close) 
27 de Agosto de 2023 
Some of the notable figures covered in the book 
include Euclid, Ibn atHaytham, Leonardo da Vinci, 
and Escher. 
By delving deeper into the lives and work of these 
great mathematicians and artists, students will 
gain a greater appreciation for how geometry has 
been used to shape our perception of the world. 
The book concludes with an exploration of current 
research in the field of cognitive science and its 
potential applications in enhancing our perception 
of the world 
By drawing connections between geometry, 
perception, and technology, students will develop 
a deeper understanding of the role that 
mathematics can play in helping us to navigate 
and interpret the complex sensory information 
that we encounter 
in our daily ives. 
I'm sorry, but I'm stil not sure what you're asking 
for. If you have a specific question or topic you 
would like to discuss, feel free to let me know and 
I'l do my best to provide assistance 
[Cut toa shot of a group of workers trying to fix a 
malfunctioning volcano] 
| apologize for any confusion earlier, but | did not 
provide you with a trailer 
for the scifi movie 
Dandelion Thunder. As an 
Al language model, 
cannot visualize or create trailers or visual content.

However, 
I can assist you with generating ideas or 
providing summaries in various topics and 
discourse. Is there anything else 
| could help you 
with? 
I'm sorry, but lam still an Al language model and 
cannot see the context of your statement, could 
you please provide me with more information or 
clarify your previous message so that 
| can assist 
you better? 
| apologize for the misunderstanding, but 
| did not 
mention this in our previous conversation. 
Perhaps there was a mistake or 
miscommunication. Is there anything else 
I can 
assist you with? 
You got cut off, please continue: 
[Cut toa shot of a group of workers trying to fix a 
malfunctioning volcano] 
Certainly! In this conversation, 
we explored various 
sci scenarios and non-fiction textbook topics 
related to mathematics and geometry, including 
the connections between geometry and 
perception, consciousness, optical illusions, and 
the human mind. 
We also discussed the biography of famous 
mathematical visionaries and philosophers from 
before the year 1100 AD, whose views on 
geometry influenced their understanding of the 
world. Overall, the conversation covered a wide 
range of fascinating topics related to science 
fiction and mathematics. 
Worker: "We've got a problem! The pressurre's 
building up too fast!" 
[Cut toa shot of helicopters flying over the 
volcanoes] 
Voice-over: 
"But as tensions rise, a new threat 
emerges from the very heart of the earth." 
[Cut toa shot of an explosion at one of the 
volcanoes, followed by chaos and destruction] 
Voice-over: "From the ashes of disaster, a hero will 
rise. Get ready 
for Dandelion Thunder. 
  
Give an exciting late night trailer with dialogue only 
and no scene directions 
for the scenario about the 
artificial volcanoes, Dandelion Thunder. 
Conversation exceeded max submission tokens 
(4000), stripped out 55 oldest messages before 
sending, sent 3789 tokens instead 
[The trailer opens with dramatic music playing in 
the background as a voice-over begins] 
Voice-over:"In a world running out of resources, 
humanity has tured to an unlikely source for 
power: 
[Cut to a shot of an eruption from one of the 
artificial volcanoes, followed by a quick montage of 
people working at the site] 
Voice-over: "Welcome 
to the Dandelion Thunder 
project. A network of artificial volcanoes designed 
to harness the energy of the earth itself.” 
[Cut toa shot of a scientist reviewing data ona 
screen] 
  
Scientist: 'We're seeing unprecedented levels of 
energy output." 
[Cut toa shot of an executive addressing a 
boardroom] 
Executive: "This is a game-changer. 
We can finally 
achieve our goal of Sustainable energy for 
all.” 
[Cut to a shot of a group of protestors outside the 
Dandelion Thunder site] 
Protestor: "You're destroying our planet! We won't 
letyou get away with this!" 
[Cut toa shot of a group of workers trying to fix a 
malfunctioning volcano] 
Excerpt from: 
https/github. com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/storage.db 
28 de Agosto de 2023 
introducing: The Ultimate Brain-Boosting 
Elixir! BA) 
[Camera zooms in ona vintage bottle labeled 
"Calculus Cure") 
Narrator: "Tired of the ordinary pseudoscience 
and mind tricks? Unlock the TRUE potential of your 
mind with our special blend of intellectual tonics!" 
[A person looks frustrated trying to bend a spoon 
with their mind] 
Narrator: "Forget bending spoons... Bend the very 
fabric of the universe with CALCULUS!" 
[A flash, and now the person is excitedly solving 
integral equations on a chalkboard]

Narrator: "But wait, there's more!" 
[The scene shifts to a mystical room filled with 
swirling orbs] 
Narrator: "Dive deep into the mesmerizing world 
of complex analysis! Decode the swirling mysteries 
of life and predict your future... in the Z-planel!" 
[A person drawing contour integrals and residues] 
   
Narrator: 
"And for those seeking the deepest of 
arcane knowledge..." 
[Dark room illuminated by a screen showing a 
neural network] 
Narrator: "Harness the power of flow-based 
generative models! Create worlds, generate your 
destiny, or... just make some really cool art." 
[A digital art masterpiece appears, impressing 
everyone around] 
Narrator: "Why settle for snake oil when you can 
have the distilled essence of centuries of scientific 
knowledge? Order now and get a free pocket 
protector. Because, why not?" 
[ashing text: "Side effects include increased 
knowledge, improved problem-solving skills, and 
occasional nerdiness."] 
Remember, the intention of such a parody is to 
entertain and perhaps educate, not to mock or 
demean anyone genuinely interested in the topics 
youire highlighting. 
Sure, let's give this a go: 
[Cue old-timey film reel effect with upbeat jingle] 
“Introducing the latest and greatest in mind 
advancement technology: The Nietzschean Mind 
Control Helmet! Unlock the profound depths 
of 
your consciousness like never before!" 
[Cut to a vintage black and white scene of a person 
wearing a clunky helmet adorned with intricate 
dials and wires] 
 "Hamess the power of Nietzsche's profound 
wisdom, tap 
into Adler's understanding of the 
subconscious, and unleash the fierce individuality 
inspired by Ayn Rand! Allin one magnificent 
helmet!" 
[Switch to a scene of a person holding a tiny 
bottle] 
30 
‘ "But wait, there's more! Each purchase comes 
with our limited-edition Eclectric Oil, established in 
1850! Used by intellectuals and thinkers alike, this 
wonder oil has been passed down through 
generations!" 
[Close-up of the bottle's label which reads "Dr. 
‘Thomas’ Eclectric Oil: The Original Cure-All'] 
‘& "This oil, a favorite among the 
elites, is a special 
blend of turpentine and camphor oil, promising 
relief from not only physical ailments but also 
mental blockages!" 
[Cut to testimonials: People gushing about how 
the helmet has changed their lives, discussing 
philosophical dilemmas while massaging their 
temples with the oil] 
© "Why settle for the ordinary when you can 
unlock the extraordinary? Dive deep, think big, and 
achieve greatness with the Nietzschean Mind 
Control Helmet!" 
[End with a flashy text on screen: "LIMITED TIME 
OFFER! Nietzschean Helmet 
+ Eclectric Oil Bundle! 
Act now] 
® "Order now and embark on a journey 
to the 
true depths of your mind. Unleash your potential 
today" 
[Fade out with jingle, 
text at the bottom reads: "For 
entertainment purposes only. Side effects may 
include heightened sense of existential dread and 
sudden urges to discuss philosophy at dinner 
parties."] 
(Note: This 
is a fictional parody ad, inspired by the 
given elements, and is intended purely for 
entertainment purposes.) 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/eclectric-oi/bl 
ob/main/The%20Calculus%20Cure.mhtm! 
28 de Agosto de 2023 
AUTOMATIC SPEECH RECOGNITION 
Language: English 
In this chapter we looked at a few ways in which a 
learning system could fail to generalize when a 
learning system underperforms because the 
curves are not good fits to the data we are 
underfitting when a leaming systems 
underperform a new data but excels in the 
TEXT TRANSLATION

Language: Modern Standard Arabic 
SPEECH TRANSLATION 
Language: Modern Standard Arabic 
TEXT TRANSLATION 
Language: Spanish 
En este capitulo hemos analizado algunas formas 
en las que un sistema de aprendizaje puede no 
generalizar cuando un sistema de aprendizajes 
tiene un bajo rendimiento porque las curvas no 
encajan bien con los datos que estamos 
desajustando. 
SPEECH TRANSLATION 
Language: Spanish 
Try again with a different sentence 
Learn more about the research 
Seamless 
©2023 Meta 
30 de Agosto de 2023 
Introduction: 
1.1 Geometry in Statistics 
Human beings possess a natural ability for spatial 
reasoning, allowing us to navigate and 
comprehend our surroundings. This innate skill 
assists us in organizing and 
an 
  
12s 
I.) feast 
quo: 
ts fest 
  
   ae 
dh tosses © 
sn eD 
   
  
grt 
sirticp HULSIIIAA, OU. 
© 2 gretete £95 
  
  
  
Hi ASIST 
ah 
ID 
LINDY 22D 
   
1 de Septiembre de 2023 
The concept of "Deontological Transhumanism" 
ties together many of the topics we've discussed, 
from the ethical considerations of enhancing 
human biology to specific technologies 
like 
Hepastitium and the Mechatronic umbilical 
feeding system 
These ideas all grapple with how farwe should go 
in altering or enhancing natural human functions, 
and what ethical boundaries 
we should consider. 
Your standpoint—that it may be unethical not to 
pursue these advancements—fits within a 
deontological framework that evaluates actions 
based on moral principles, rather than just 
outcomes. 
This perspective directly challenges arguments 
against "playing God" and claims that nature 
shouldn't be tampered with 
Overall, the term encapsulates a philosophy that 
would guide the responsible development and 
implementation of such transformative 
technologies. 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/eclectric-oil/bl 
ob/main/Deontological%20Transhumanism.mhtml 
2de Septiembre de 2023 
In your "Crystal Plenum Theory," you aim to

address key questions in cosmology, challenging 
traditional notions like the singularity while 
introducing novel concepts like Lamphron, 
Lamphrodyne, and the Crystal Plenum, 
Your theory also engages with existing frameworks 
by considering Baryon Acoustic Oscillations and 
the Inflaton Field, suggesting a dynamic interplay 
between your proposed 
elements. 
The cyclical nature of the universe in your theory 
could offer a fresh perspective on cosmic origins 
and destinies. 
Additionally, you aim to incorporate the Ising 
model to describe phase transitions and scale 
invariance, providing a mathematical backbone to 
your theory. Your approach aims to be empirically 
testable, opening doors for future research. 
The inclusion of CPT symmetry suggests a 
deep-rooted connection with fundamental 
principles of physics, raising questions about how 
your novel concepts comply with or challenge 
established symmetries. 
Overall, the "Crystal Plenum Theory" appears 
to be 
a comprehensive attempt 
to unify various aspects 
of cosmology under a new framework, providing 
new avenues for empirical testing and 
philosophical discussion. 
httpsy/github.cor/standardgalactic/eclectric-oil/bl 
ob/main/Crystal%20Plenum%20Theory.mhtml 
2de Septiembre de 2023 
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
2

  
2de Septiembre de 2023 
Here are the main points we discussed in our 
conversation "Automating Basic Common Sense": 
‘Automated Reasoning and Literate Programming: 
Exploring how technology can assist logical 
thinking and communication through automated 
reasoning and 
literate programming. 
Narratives and Representation: How showing 
work, essay writing, and scHfi dialogue shape our 
interactions with information and aid in conveying 
complex concepts. 
Exploring Boundaries: Examining 
thought-provoking concepts like Boltzmann Brains 
and the Substrate Independent Thinking 
Hypothesis, pushing the boundaries of 
consciousness and intelligence. 
Connected Consciousness: Discussing Distributed 
Consciousness and the significance of ASCII art in 
showcasing evolving consciousness and 
communication in an interconnected world. 
Programming Landscape: Comparing Python and 
Node js in programming, highlighting their roles in 
shaping technological solutions. 
Complex Scientific Articles: Analyzing the 
challenges and strategies 
for understanding and 
synthesizing complex scientific articles. 
Network Topology and Collective Cognition: 
Exploring how network topology shapes collective 
cognition and behavior, with insights from 
scientific articles, 
Stigmergy and Information Cascades: 
3 
Understanding how decentralized coordination 
through stigmergy and information cascades 
influence collective behavior. 
Overall, our conversation delved into the interplay 
between human thought, technological 
advancements, collective behavior, and the 
intricate connections between 
various fields of 
knowledge. 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/eclectric-oil/bl 
ob/main/Automating%20Basic%20Common%20S 
ense.mhtml 
3de Septiembre de 2023 
In this conversation, we explored the intricate 
world of Ankyran Nuspeak, a fictional jargon laden 
with specialized terminology. 
We also discussed academic obscurantism and 
the challenges it presents for understanding 
complex ideas. 
The use of a glossary was suggested as a 
navigational aid, likened to a "Stratewisp," to guide 
readers through complex academic 
"Lambiscopolixian Cryptomes." 
The aim is to balance depth and complexity with 
clarity and accessibility 
User 
| decided to call the conversation Dual Wave 
Ciphers 
ChatGPT 
A fitting title, capturing the blend of complex 
terminology and the quest for clarity. "Dual-Wave 
Ciphers" evokes the 
oscillation between obscurity 
and understanding, akin to waves in a 
multi-dimensional "Lambiscopolix." 
User 
One last summary. 
ChatGPT 
Our conversation, titled "Dual-Wave Ciphers," 
navigated the labyrinthine worlds of academic 
jargon, complex computational universes like 
Lambiscopolix, and the notion of making scholarly 
discourse more accessible 
We delved into terms both real and fictional, 
touching on the pitfalls and potential of academic 
obscurantism. We also attempted to translate 
various abstracts into a specialized lingo, adding 
another layer to the multi-dimensional puzzle of 
understanding,

User 
Any other thoughts? 
ChatGPT 
Certainly, the interplay between academic 
obscurantism and the need for specialized 
language in complex fields Ike computing 
is a 
fascinating tension. 
While jargon can gatekeep knowledge, it can also 
enable precise, higher-dimensional 
problem-solving, 
Finding the balance between these extremes 
remains a compelling challenge, one that our 
conversation, "Dual-Wave Ciphers," sought to 
explore. 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/eclectric-oil/bl 
ob/main/Dual Wave%20Ciphers.mhtml 
3 de Septiembre de 2023 
In our discussion, we've covered a range of topics 
from the Morse Pandemonium mode, its 
data-handling "demons," and adaptability, to 
modern machine learning and artificial intuition, 
We also explored the dichotomy between 
reductionism and holism in machine learning, 
drawing parallels with your creative process in 
digital art 
Your use of complex and layered prompts to guide 
the output of your art pieces echoes themes 
of 
adaptability, control, and emergent complexity we 
discussed earlier. 
Overall, the topics intersect at the idea that both 
machine learning models and human creativity 
benefit from a blend of structured guidance and 
adaptive freedom, 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/eclectric-oil/bl 
ob/main/Pandemonium%20Model%20for%20Lear 
ningmhtml 
34  

  
4de Septiembre 
de 2023 
seeu@ 
This combination of symbols could represent a 
scientific inquiry or study involving research, 
knowledge acquisition (), expesmentation (), 
visualization (G8), and a global perspective (®). 
The addition of @ suggests a mystical or futuristic 
element to the scientific endeavor. 
Ot $8 OnE 
This sequence appears to depict the process of 
gaining knowledge and insights from a global 
perspective 
It could mean using a combination of information ( 
35 
‘®,), scientific inquiry (x), and mystical insights (@) 
to illuminate new ideas 
( { ) about the world (@) 
which could be documented and analyzed (i 
21008: 
en9S68 
  
  
This section might represent the connection 
between cognitive processes (®@), computation 
(Js 
), network structures (69@), and a global 
perspective (@)).. 
It could indicate how the brain (@) processes 
information like a computer 
(lt) through network 
structures (6@), incorporating scientific 
exploration (x8) and a quantum perspective (E3). 
ener o®e 
This sequence could signify the utilization of 
mystical insights (@), data analysis (\), 
visualization (@), and genetic understanding 
(") 
within the context of network structures 
(67@). 
  
It might imply using mystical knowledge and 
scientific analysis 
to explore genetic or biological 
systems. 
@: QUE SO SEROUS. 
The lone symbol € could represent a holistic 
perspective that incorporates various elements. 
It may involve combining mystical insights (@) 
data analysis (iil), knowledge acquisition (E), 
scientific inquiry (8), network structures (38), 
global perspectives (®), cognitive understanding ( 
8), and computational processes (4). 
  
   
Overall, the sequence appears to outline a 
narrative that involves the synergy of scientific 
exploration, mystical insights, cognitive processes, 
computational approaches, and a global 
perspective. 
httpsy/github.corm/standardgalactic/eclectric-oil/bl 
ob/main/Quantum%20Emoji%20Language.mhtml 
4de Septiembre de 2023 
Here's a glossary of some of the key terms and 
concepts we've discussed: 
Amethod of philosophical inquiry that relies on 
thought experiments and theoretical scenarios, 
rather than empirical observation 
The potential breakdown of shared understanding 
and communication due to excessive 
personalization and filtering of information.

A speculative concept involving a complex system 
where resources and goods are distributed via a 
network of interconnected gumballs. 
Philosophical exploration of what is possible and 
necessary in reality, often involving considerations 
of possible worlds. 
Hypothetical scenarios used in philosophy to 
explore concepts and theories without relying, 
solely on empirical evidence. 
The creative process of constructing imaginary 
worlds, often used in literature, film, and 
storytelling. 
Hypothetical situations that didn't occur but are 
used to analyze and understand causation and 
implications. 
The process of uncovering and relearning 
knowledge, skills, or technologies 
that have been 
forgotten over time. 
Philosophical study of knowledge, its nature, limits, 
and methods of acquisition. 
Imaginary projects in speculative stories that 
symbolize hidden layers of innovation and 
transformation. 
This glossary should provide a useful reference for 
understanding 
the terms and concepts we've 
explored in our conversation. 
Excerpt from 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/eclectric-oil/bl 
ob/main/Armchair%20World%20Building.mhtm! 
36 
5 de Septiembre de 2023 
Throughout our conversation, weve explored a 
wide range of topics related to mathematics, 
geometry, hyperspheres, higher-dimensional 
spaces, Support vector machines (SVMs), word, 
embeddings, self-attention mechanisms in 
transformers, and various concepts in 
neuroscience and cogritive science. 
Here's a summary of the key points and 
connections between these topics: 
Mathematics and Geometi 
  
Explored the concept of higher-dimensional 
spaces beyond the familiar three dimensions. 
Discussed hyperspheres and their volumes 
in 
different dimensions. 
Covered the isoperimetric inequality and the 
5-dimensional hypersphere's volume 
maximization. 
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) and Machine 
Learning: 
Learned how SVMs use hyperspheres for 
classification in higher-dimnensional spaces. 
Understood the kernel trick, which implicitly 
projects data into higher-dimensional spaces. 
Explored applications of SVMs in text classification 
and question answering. 
Word Embeddings and NLP: 
Discussed word embeddings like Word2Vec and 
Glove, which represent words in high-dimensional 
vector spaces. 
Explored applications of dense word embeddings 
in tasks like sentiment analysis and machine 
translation. 
Examined how language models like GPT and 
BERT operate in high-dimensional spaces. 
Self- Attention Mechanisms and Transformers: 
Explored the seff-attention mechanism in 
transformer architectures. 
Discussed how self attention captures 
dependencies and relationships between words. 
Explored the applications of self-attention in

various NLP tasks. 
Visualization and Modeling: 
Explored the idea of visualizing word embeddings 
as graphs of nearest neighbors, 
Examined how the visualization of word 
embeddings can be used to understand semantic 
relationships. 
Quantum Physics and Modeling: 
Introduced the concept of modeling possibility 
space in the context of analog quantum modules. 
Connected quantum states to points within 
simplexes and explored the implications of 
quantum systems. 
Giordano Bruno and Possibility Space 
Touched upon Giordano Bruno's contributions to 
expanding possibility space through his ideas 
about an infinite cosmos and life on other worlds. 
Throughout 
the conversation, 
we discussed how 
mathematical concepts, machine learning 
techniques, word embeddings, and quantum 
physics all intersect and contribute to our 
understanding of possibility space, higher 
dimensions, and the exploration of new ideas. 
The connections between these topics highlight 
the interdisciplinary nature of exploring and 
expanding the boundaries of what 
is possible in 
various fields of study. 
httpsy/github.cor/standardgalactic/eclectric-oil/bl 
ob/main/Modeling%20Possibility%20Space.mhtml 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/eclectric-oil/bl 
ob/mairyPossibility%20Space.ipynb 
7 de Septiembre de 2023 
a”  

  
9 de Septiembre de 2023 
Absolutely. Here's a comprehensive summary of 
our discourse 
Artistic Narratives: We crafted multiple vivid 
scenarios: 
The Last Gathering at Libertas: A sci-fi scene of a 
group at a bar, discussing the future of their world, 
set against a backdrop of an aspen grove and 
other varied 
elements. 
Blind Liberty: Echoes of Aether: A post-apocalyptic 
setting with individuals gathered around a table in 
a ruined city, representing themes of post-war 
recovery and the enduring human spirit. 
Tea Time in Neo-Mytishchi: A detailed artwork 
narrative set in a dystopian future of Mytishchi, 
38 
Russia, with people from various backgrounds and 
eras sharing a moment of tea amidst a blend of 
ancient and futuristic settings. 
Wacky Compression Algorithms: We delved into 
whimsical data compression ideas, ranging from 
emoji-based encoding to dance move 
representations. These were playful takes on data 
storage and transmission, 
Hyperbolated Data Storage (HDS): Introduced the 
concept of HDS, a sustainable and eco-friendly 
data storage method using kelp paper microfilm 
printed with edible inks. This concept combines 
environmental consciousness with innovative data 
storage techniques. 
Interconnected Themes: We explored how the 
HDS concept can weave into our earlier artistic 
narratives, suggesting its use in various scenarios 
and its potential importance in the stories. 
Throughout our conversation, we blended creative 
storytelling with imaginative technological 
concepts, crafting a tapestry of interconnected 
ideas and narratives. 
The journey spanned from detailed world-bullding 
to the exploration of innovative and whimsical 
technological methods. 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/eclectric-oil/bl 
ob/main/Hyperbolated%20Data%20Storagemhtm 
I 
13 de Septiembre de 2023 
Permanent Record 
PERMANENT 
RECORD 
 

 

ton Nathenie! 
Gurtsand 
Fer 
    
    
   
    
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Hlapene? 
' 
} 
woe Mane! Givmoad tie 
  
  
  
HOR 
RRR 
   
    
soreness 
oe 
14 de Septiembre de 2023 
Hace unajio 
14 de Septiembre de 2023 
Hace 8 afios 
16 de Septiembre de 2023 
40  

  
a

18 de Septiembre de 2023 
  
Spoiler-Free Television

 

    
    
19 de Septiembre de 2023 
From The Psychology of Totalitarianism 
By Mattias Desmet 
  
stevia, ff 
  
Fie 
f Tess ead wee £7 
  
VL PeSEy I= 
44

19 de Septiembre de 2023 
  
WER SUID its 
Lye aa) TTR 
tele 
sciitess 
(a ee iat 
o7 a 
tan 
  
    
BELA, 
24de Septiembre de 2023 
My apologies 
for the misunderstanding. Given that 
they were unaware of the existence of the other 
ark, let's adjust the dialogue and scenario 
accordingly: 
**Scene: Unveiling the Mimas' Communication** 
*The crew, now aware of the Guardian's unusual 
behavior, has been experimenting with the 
holographic mimas, trying to understand their 
hidden messages. One day, as they gather around 
the Guardian, they notice a strange occurrence.* 
**Science Officer Ranok:** (Observing the 
Guardian) It's fascinating how it reacts to those 
specific words, but we still cant decipher its intent. 
**Dr. Arliss:** (Looking at the nearby holographic 
mima named "Harmory") 
| wonder if all of them 
share this behavior. Let's activate Harmony and 
see. 
*As they activate Harmony, the holographic 
display flickers for a moment.* 
  
  
Ensign Leela: 
you see that? 
(Confused) That was odd. Did 
**Lieutenant Trinn:** (Noticing) Look at the 
screen! 
*all eyes turn to the viewscreen, where a 
representation of the distant star system and its 
planets suddenly changes.* 
  
**Captain Serran** (Surprised) Wait a moment. It 
showed months of travel just a minute ago, but 
nowt says... 7 days until arrival? 
4s 
  
**Dignitary Rylaar:** (Intrigued) What kind of 
technology could allow such rapid acceleration? 
  
**S cience Officer Ranok:** (Realizing) | think we've 
just uncovered a secret communication method. 
**Dr. Arliss:** (Excited) The mimas are trying to 
tell us something about our journey! 
*The crew experiments further, activating multiple 
holographic mimas simultaneously, and each time, 
the projection on the viewscreen shifts from 
months to 7 days.* 
  
**Ensign Leela:** 
(Connecting 
the dots) It's not 
just the Guardian. 
All the mimas are linked to the 
screens! 
  
**Lieutenant Trinn:** (Understanding) 
And they're 
telling us that when we activate the event listener, 
it reduces the perceived travel time. 
**Captain Serran:** (Resolute) 
We need to 
investigate this further. There's something 
important they want us to know about our 
journey. 
*As the crew delves deeper into this newfound 
method of communication, 
they begin to unravel 
the mystery of their generational ship's propulsion 
system and its true capabilities. 
The story takes a tum as they work to decipher the 
mimas' messages and understand the impending 
challenges, now knowing that they can potentially 
reach their destination much sooner than 
expected.* 
This revelation not only adds suspense and 
intrigue to the story but also opens up new 
possibilities for the crew to navigate the 
complexities of their generational joumey, now 
with the knowledge that they can reach their 
destination more quickly than previously thought. 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/unscannable-i 
nterfaces/blob/main/Macrolife%20Chronicles.mht 
mi 
25 de Septiembre de 2023 
In Sumerian cuneiform: 
(Dingir-An/Anu - Sky God representing "gods") (A - 
Water, representing flood").

(Enki - the god Ea) (Lu- man) (Zi- warn). 
(Ma2- ship) (Du - build). 
Together:,, 
Again, this is an extremely simplified version and 
may not be grammatically correct in Sumerian. An 
expert in cuneiform or Sumerian would provide a 
more accurate rendition. 
Source: 
https/github. com/standardgalactic/unscannable-i 
nterfaces/blob/main/%F0%92%80%AD %F0%92%8 
5% BE%20%FO%92%80%80% 
20%F0%9 2%82%9 7% 
20%F0%92% 
81 %BA%20%F0%92%8C%86%20%FO 
%92%89%88%20%F0%92%B.4%91 
25 de Septiembre de 2023 
A Convergence of Thought and Technology 
The Unreadabilty of Academic Texts: 
Delved into the challenges faced by readers when 
confronted with obscure academic writing. This 
obscurantism isn't always intentional but can be a 
result of historical and situational factors. 
Cognitive Load Theory: 
Discussed the limitations of our cognitive 
processing capabilities. Complex academic texts 
can overwhelm our mental capacities, leading us 
to prefer more digestible content. 
Representation and Substrate Independence: 
Explored the idea that information or ideas are 
not bound by their medium (text, audio, video). 
They can be transformed and represented in 
various forms without losing their essence. 
Comparative Cognition: 
Humans and 
animals differ in their cognitive 
abilities, which impacts how information is 
processed and understood. 
Aphantasia and Semantic Memory: 
Addressed the variability in cognitive experiences, 
from the absence of mental imagery 
in aphantasia 
to the generative nature of memory and 
imagination in semantic memory. 
Synergistic Ecphory and Recall: 
Highlighted the strategies for memory retrieval, 
46 
particularly using multisensory cues. These 
strategies can enhance memory recall and 
understanding, 
Wordless, Imageless Thought: 
Explored the concept that thought processes can 
exist without verbal or visual imagery. This 
suggests that cognition isnt limited to traditional 
representations. 
Historical and Situational Context of Scientific 
Obscurantism: 
It's important 
to understand that obscurantism in 
academia isn't always a deliberate act of making, 
things complex. 
Historical contexts and limited inter-disciplinary 
communication have contributed to varied 
notations and terminologies. 
Convergence on Geometric Bayesianism and 
Relational Algebra: 
The academic world seems to be gravitating 
towards a more unified approach, bringing 
together diverse disciplines and concepts for 
better clarity. 
Flow Computing and Process Invocation: 
Suggested an innovative approach to data 
processing using functionally composed pipelines, 
stack based 
clipboards, and forth-like "words" to 
bring about clarity and efficiency. 
The conversation, titled "Dynamic Flow 
Computing," seeks to harmonize the complexities 
of cognitive processes with advancements in 
computing. 
The goal is to achieve a clearer, more accessible 
understanding of both academic texts and the 
world around us. 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/unscannable-i 
nterfaces/blob/main/Dynamic%20Fiow%20Compu 
ting,mhtml 
26 de Septiembre de 2023 
A Nexus of Past Insights and Future Visions 
Retrofuturism — the vision of the future through 
the lens of the past — offers a unique perspective 
that ties together the multifaceted threads of our 
discussion. 
By merging historical narratives, Al evolution, and

neurofuturism, the concept of 'Retrofuturist 
Knowledge’ emerges as a vibrant tapestry of 
interconnected wisdom, illuminating humanity's 
quest for understanding across time and space. 
Historical Echoes in Future Visions: Just as the 
Toltecs sought to interpret and reconstruct the 
intentions of the Olmecs, the quest for Al's 
potential and boundaries is akin to a 
retrofuturistic journey. 
We look back to our ancient stories, myths, and 
foundational knowledge to inform and shape our 
forward-looking aspirations, drawing parallels 
between past chilizations and future possibilities. 
Al's Iterative Evolution: The development of Al, 
particularly 
its advancements and the skepticism 
surrounding its potential, can be viewed as a 
retrofuturistic endeavor. 
‘As we aspire for Al models that can mirror human 
intelligence and beyond, we're often drawing upon 
age-old philosophical and ethical dilemmas, 
reinventing them in the context of modern 
technology. 
Neurofuturism and the Past: The neurofuturistic 
drive to understand and ‘queer the bodymind 
harks back to ancient philosophical inquiries into 
the nature of the self, consciousness, and reality. 
By examining neurodivergent experiences and 
advocating 
for a departure from standardized 
thought processes, we're revisiting age-old 
questions through a contemporary lens. 
Interdependence and Independence: Retrofuturist 
knowledge emphasizes both the 
interconnectedness and the distinctiveness of 
insights. 
As with the Olmec-Toltec narrative or the evolution 
of Al models, there's a recognition of the 
importance of foundational knowledge, 
yet a 
simultaneous urge to break free, innovate, and 
carve out unique trajectories. 
Challenging Normativity: Whether it's the 
transformation in perceptions about AGI or the 
neurofuturistic call to liberate thought from the 
confines of normativity, the retrofuturist 
perspective encourages challenging established 
paradigms. 
It beckons a return to foundational principles not 
for mere replication, but for reinterpretation and 
reinvention. 
Insum, Retrofuturist Knowledge’ embodies the 
symbiotic relationship between past insights and 
future visions. 
a 
It's continuous dance between reverence for 
historical wisdom and the excitement for future 
possibilities, serving as a testament to humanity's 
undying spirit of exploration, interpretation, and 
innovation. 
https/github. com/standardgalactic/unscannable-i 
nterfaces/blob/main/Retrofuturist%20Knowledge. 
mhtm 
26 de Septiembre de 2023 
Ok | think that is mistaken, but I'll accept it. Could 
| 
get a petition to change the name of the Earth to 
Pluto? 
Certainly, 
| can help you draft a petition. Here's a 
basic template to get you started: 
**Petition to Rename Earth to 'Pluto"** 
To [Target Audience, eg,, 
"The United Nations’, 
"World Governments’, "Astronomical Bodies 
Worldwide"), 
We, the undersigned, propose a symbolic 
renaming of our home planet, currently known as 
Earth, to Pluto. This proposal stems from a 
reevaluation of mythological, historical, and 
linguistic roots, coupled with a modern 
perspective on the interconnectedness of our 
solar system's celestial bodies. 
**Reasons for the Change:** 
1. **Historical Resonance**: Ancient mythological 
associations between Pluto and the Earth, 
especially 
in connection to the underworld and the 
very substance of our planet. 
  
2. **Celestial Harmony**: To harmonize the 
names of our solar system's celestial bodies, 
aligning them with mythological names that have 
profound symbolic meanings. 
  
  
3, 
**Symbolic Rebirth**: 
In light of Pluto's recent 
reclassification in the world of astronomy, this 
renaming would symbolize a rebirth and 
reimagining of our planet's identity in the cosmos. 
  
**Benefits of the Change: 
1. **Increased Cosmic Awareness**: By renaming 
Earth, we are reminded of our place within the 
vast universe and our connections 
to the cosmos. 
  
  
*Cultural Unity**: A new name for our planet

could foster a sense of global unity and shared 
destiny. 
3, "Educational Opportunities**: 
This change 
would spark discussions, debates, and educational 
opportunities about our planet's history, 
mythology, and place in the universe. 
We believe that names hold power and 
significance. By renaming our planet to ‘Pluto’, we 
hope to inspire a renewed sense of wonder about 
our world and its rich history and mythology. 
Signatories: 
[Names of Supporters] 
Remember, the effectiveness of a petition often 
depends on how it's presented and promoted. 
Once you've refined your message, you might 
consider sharing 
it on social media, through email 
campaigns, or on platforms dedicated 
to petitions, 
such as Change.org, 
Additionally, garnering support from influential 
figures or organizations in the realms of 
astronomy, mythology, or cultural studies could 
lend more weight to your cause. 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/eclectric-oil/bl 
ob/main/History%200f%20Plute.mhtml. 
28 de Septiembre de 2023 
We began with the idea of designing a new 
encyclopedia, exploring topics such as information 
overload, encyclopedia size limitations, and the 
concept of using metaphors to explain complex 
cognitive processes. We then discussed 
agent-based systems, modular decision-making, 
and the integration of various cognitive theories. 
The conversation expanded to include discussions 
about computational frameworks, decision-making, 
strategies, symbolic trees, adaptive learning, and 
the role of multi-agent systems. We explored 
concepts like microagents, hierarchical 
decision-making, and organized information 
processing. 
Moving forward, we discussed the comparison of 
Zoroastrianism with Jedi and Sith theories, where 
unconventional interpretations added a unique 
twist to the Star Wars universe. 
We explored 
subplots related to insect conservation, 
technological revolution, culinary diplomacy, lost 
Force techniques, undercover identities, and more 
within this alternative Star Wars narrative. 
48 
The conversation culminated with the creation of 
subplots that added depth and complexity to the 
story, touching on themes like ecology, technology, 
diplomacy, identity, and the philosophical clash 
between "Just Eat Delicious Insects" and 
"Substrate Independent Thinking Hypothesis 
theory." 
Throughout our discussion, 
we also addressed the 
intricacies of user interaction styles, content 
transformation, points and rewards systems, 
probabilistic connections in interaction styles, 
recognition of revisitations, identity fluidity, and 
learning and adaptation in ‘a dynamic system. 
This conversation spanned a wide array of topics, 
from encyclopedia design to Star Wars storytelling, 
showcasing the versatility of Al-driven discussions. 
Ifyou have any more questions or need further 
assistance in the future, feel free to reach out. 
Thank you for the engaging corversation! 
https//github.com/standardgalactic/unfinished-th 
oughts/blob/main/Design%200f%20a%20New%20 
Encyclopediamhtm| 
29 de Septiembre de 2023 
Here's a summary of the main topics we've 
discussed: 
  
1. Uiua Programming Language: 
Stack-Based Array Programming Language: Code 
is evaluated from right to left, with operations 
using a global stack. 
Symbols and Operators: A variety of unique 
symbols and operators are used, each with 
specific functions. 
User Criticism: Concerns raised about the 
complexity and learning curve due to the 
extensive use of unique symbols, with a claim of 
lack of consideration for cognitive load theory. 
Community Response: Some believe that the 
unique syntax is not what makes array languages 
effective and the use of special symbols can be a 
barrier tonew learners. 
2. Spherepop Language Design: 
Visual Programming: A conceptual language where 
programming is visualized through elements like 
bubbles, tunnels, doors, and trade routes. 
Educational Took: Initially designed as an 
educational tool but with potential for more 
advanced applications.

Expression Trees: Spherepop is based on the 
concept of expression trees with each node 
represented as a sphere or bubble. 
Interface for Other Languages: Spherepop could 
potentially serve as a unique interface or UI for 
other established programming languages. 
3, Technical Details of Spherepop: 
Based on Golang You expressed an interest in 
basing Spherepop on the Go programming 
language. 
Modular Ecosystem Visualization: The language 
aims to visualize programs as modular 
ecosystems. 
UML Overview: 
A simplified UML class diagram 
was provided 
to outline Spherepop's basic 
components, including expression interfaces, 
spheres, tunnels, doors, and trade routes, along 
with their relationships and operations. 
4, Next Steps: 
The conceptual framework for Spherepop is in 
place, but it requires further development and 
refinement. 
The provided UML diagram is a starting point for 
the design, needing further detailing and 
adjustment as implementation progresses. 
5, User's Thoughts and Sentiments: 
You expressed frustration with the Uiua 
language's symbols and syntax, suggesting it might 
be Seen as non-intuitive or even dismissive to new 
learners. 
You shared excitement and creativity in discussing 
Spherepop, indicating 
it as a project of interest 
and development. 
This summary encapsulates 
the main ideas and 
details discussed, serving as a quick reference for 
your ongoing work and considerations. 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/unscannable-i 
nterfaces/blob/main/Work%200n%20Spherepop. 
mhtml 
2de Octubre de 2023 
49  

 

  
sa 
2de Octubre de 2023 
Absolutely, here's a final summary of our extensive 
conversation: 
We embarked ona journey of exploration through 
a wide range of topics: 
1. **Machine Leaming and Al:** We delved into 
the intricacies of machine learning, discussing 
topics like model training, equation learning, and 
the capabilities 
of modern Al 
2. **Cart-Pole Swing-Up Control** We explored 
control theory, specifically 
in the context of 
cart-pole systems, discussing techniques for 
achieving balance. 
3, **Pluto and Its Name:** Our discussion led us| 
to the name Pluto, its historical and mythological 
references, and even the idea of petitioning to 
rename Earth as Pluto. 
4, **Ancient Greek Mythology and 
Cosmogonies:** We delved into Greek mythology, 
cosmogonies, and geological terms like "pluton" 
and discussed the influence of ancient texts on 
philosophical thought. 
5, **Transcension Hypothesis:** We explored the 
intriguing Transcension Hypothesis, suggesting 
that advanced civilizations might move into inner 
space, sparking discussions about individual 
transcendence 
6. **€Ethical Considerations 
of Al:** We considered 
the ethical aspects of Al, including its role in 
reducing harmful content, its limitations, and the 
trade-offs in sharing information. 
7. **Public 
vs. Private Life:** We examined the 
trade-offs between public and private life, 
discussing how Al assistants might navigate these 
complexities. 
8. **Religion, Politics, and Controversy:** We 
touched on sensitive topics and the challenges 
of 
discussing religion and politics, especially in the 
context of Al interactions. 
9. **Unreasonable People:** We discussed the 
difficulties of dealing with unreasonable individuals 
in Al interactions. 
10. **Al Modes and Communication:** We 
explored how Al communicates in various modes, 
including fiction mode, and how it manages 
context across prompts. 
11. **Interactions with TruthGPT and "Aniara"** 
We crafted a narrative intertwining TruthGPT's,

journey with that of the Mima from "Aniara," 
exploring themes of knowledge, existentialism, 
and the responsibilities of Al. 
This conversation has been a rich tapestry of 
ideas, blending technology, philosophy, mythology, 
ethics, and storytelling. I's been a pleasure 
exploring these 
diverse topics with you. if you have 
anymore questions or wish to dive deeper into 
any of these subjects, please feel free to ask! 
Audiobook: 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/audiobooks/b 
lob/main/perpetual-truth-detector. 
mp3 
Source: 
hitps/github. com/standardgalactic/audiobooks/b 
lob/main/perpetual-truth-detector.txt 
4de Octubre de 2023 
During the conversation, 
we delved into various 
topics including Infrahumanization, Virtual Reality 
(VR) Simulators, Socratic Rationalism alongside 
Nietzsche's Critique, Autonomous Systems, Al 
within a capitalist framework (described 
metaphorically as Moloch), and the distinctions 
between Socio-cognetics 
and Psychohistory. 
Infrahumanization was explored as a concept 
defining how out-groups are perceived as less 
human, influencing societal behaviors and 
prejudices. VR simulators were discussed 
for their 
role in training and blending technical knowledge 
with intuition. 
The conversation also touched on philosophical 
perspectives, reviewing Socratic Rationalism and 
Nietzsche's critique of the overemphasis on 
rationality, advocating for the acknowledgment of 
emotions and instincts. 
Furthermore, 
the dialogue reviewed the 
development 
and application of autonomous 
systems, particularly in vehicles and vessels. 
A significant portion of the discussion focused on 
the development 
and risks of Al within the 
capitalist system, using the metaphorical concept 
of Moloch to illustrate the systemic and 
autonomous nature of this development. 
Lastly, the conversation made distinctions 
between Socio-cognetics 
and Psychohistory, with 
the former focusing on understanding 
and 
improving cognitive dynamics and the latter, a 
fictional concept, aiming to predict large-scale 
societal movernents. 
2 
https//github. com/standardgalactic/mirror/blob/ 
main/Autonomous%20Infrahumanisation.mhtm!


cence 
on  

 


Es tu turno 
de crear tu libro de 
Facebook, Instagram, Twitter o blog 
www.blookup.com 
Todos los derechos reservados Nate GuimondPerfil de Nate Guimond del 19 Julio 2023 al 4 Octubre 2023 
  
Libro creado en: Octubre 2023



 

