

CONTENTS
Preface
xi
1 THE PROBLEM
1
I. 
Introduction, 1
II. 
Class Nominalism, 8
III. 
Theories of Natural Classes, 14
IV. 
Methodology, 18
2 PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
21
I. 
How Is It Determined that a Class Is Natural? 21
II. 
Degrees of Naturalness, 23
III. 
The Coextension Problem, 25
IV. 
Wolterstorffs Argument from the Identity
Conditions of Classes, 27
V . 
Types Determine Gasses, Not Classes Types, 27
VI. 
The Causal Argument, 28
VII. The Problem About Relations, 29
VIII. Higher-Order Types, 32
IX. 
The Apparatus of the Natural Class Theory, 36
3 RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM 
39
I. 
Properties of Resemblance, 39
II. 
That Resemblance Is an Internal Relation
and the Consequences of This, 43
III. 
Constructing a Resemblance Gass, 47
IV. 
Identity Conditions for Classes Are
No Problem, 48

CONTENTS
V . 
Does Resemblance Determine Type? 49
VI. 
The Causal Argument, 49
VII. 
The Coextension Problem Again, 50
VIII. Relations, 51
IX. 
Higher-Order Types, 52
X. 
The Resemblance Regress, 53
XI. 
The Apparatus of the Resemblance Theory, 57
4 PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS 
59
I. 
Substance-Attribute Versus Bundle Theories, 59
II. 
The Identity of Indiscemibles, 64
III. 
Problems of Constructing the Bundle, 70
IV. 
A Further Problem with Compresence, 72
V. 
Can Universals Be the Substance
of the World? 73
5 UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES 
75
I. 
Uninstantiated Universals? 75
II. 
Disjunctive, Negative, and Conjunctive
Universals, 82
III. 
Predicates and Universals, 84
IV. 
States of Affairs, 88
V. 
A World of States of Affairs? 93
VI. 
The Thin and the Thick Particular, 94
VII. 
Universals as Ways, 96
VIII. Multiple Location, 98
IX. 
Higher-Order Types, 99
X. 
The Formal Properties of Resemblance, 102
XI. 
Resemblance Between Universals, 103
XII. 
The Fundamental Tie, 108
XIII. The Apparatus of an Attribute Theory
of Universals, 111

CONTENTS
6 TROPES 
113
I.
Substances Versus Bundles, 113
II.
States of Affairs Again, 116
III.
Tropes and the Problem of Universals, 119
IV.
Tropes as Substitutes for Universals, 121
V.
A Trope Substitute for the
Resemblance of Universals, 122
VI.
Trope Nominalism Versus
“Regular” Nominalism, 125
VII.
Bundles Versus Substance-Attribute
Again, 127
VIII.
Natural Classes of Tropes Versus
Resemblance, 128
IX.
Swapping of Tropes, 131
X.
Tropes with Universals, 132
7 SUMMING UP 
135
References
Index
141
145


PREFACE
This book is intended to be intelligible to the advanced 
undergraduate student and should also be suitable for graduate 
seminars. However, I hope that it will also be of interest to 
professional philosophers, particularly those who are 
sympathetic to the project of an empirical metaphysics. Since 
the publication of my book Universals and Scientific Realism 
in 1978, although my views have remained the same in broad 
outline, I have become aware of various mistakes and omissions 
in what I said then. The present work, therefore, besides 
introducing the topic, tries to push the subject further ahead.
I now think that a particular type of moderate Nominalism, 
moderate because it admits properties and relations, but a 
Nominalism because it takes the properties and relations to be 
particulars rather than universals, can be developed as an 
important and quite plausible rival to a moderate Realism 
about universals. In the earlier book I gave such a Nominalism 
only brief consideration. By contrast, in this work a battle 
between Nominalists and Realists over the status of properties 
and relations becomes one main theme.
In general, I have largely confined myself to moderate 
Nominalisms and moderate Realisms. That host of 
contemporary philosophers who unreflectively substitute 
classes of particulars for properties and relations I take to be 
immoderate Nominalists. However, many of the arguments 
that I bring against the more moderate Natural Class theory 
are also arguments against this orthodoxy. I would also 
classify Quine as an extreme Nominalist (although he himself 
would not, on the grounds that he recognizes classes and that 
these are “abstract” or “platonic” entities). I have criticized 
Quine's view elsewhere (see Armstrong 1980 and, contra,
xi

Devitt 1980 and Quine 1980). Here I make only brief reference 
to his views. In the same spirit, I have given relatively little 
attention to immoderate or Platonic Realism about universals. 
Again, I do not consider, except incidentally, the view of the 
later Wittgenstein that the whole Nom inalist/Realist 
controversy is some sort of a mistake, a mistake due to our 
misunderstanding of the workings of our own language.
For comments on a draft of this book I am very grateful to 
Keith Campbell, my editor Spencer Carr, Peter Forrest, 
Andrew Irvine, Charlie Martin, David Stove, Michael Tooley, 
an anonymous referee for Westview Press, and finally in very 
special measure, David Lewis. I thank Anthea Bankoff for the 
typing of the manuscript.
PREFACE
D. M. Armstrong 
Sydney, Australia

CHAPTER ONE
The Problem
I. Introduction
The topic of universals is a very old one. It goes back to Plato at 
least, perhaps to Socrates, perhaps to even earlier times. 
Those contemporary philosophers who pay the matter 
attention often speak of the Problem of Universals. So let me 
begin by saying what the problem is. It may turn out that it is 
really a pseudo-problem. That was the opinion of Wittgenstein 
and his followers, for instance. Quine is not far from thinking 
the same. But whether it is a real problem or not should not be 
decided in advance.
A 
distinction 
that 
practically 
all 
contemporary 
philosophers accept was drawn by the great U.S. nineteenth- 
century philosopher, C. S. Peirce. He originally used it in 
discussing semantics, but in fact it is a perfectly general 
distinction applicable to any subject whatever. It is the 
distinction between token and type. Let us follow Peirce and 
take a semantic example. Consider the following display:
THE 
THE
Now we ask the question: How many words are there in this 
display? It is obvious that the question has two good answers: 
There are two words there. There is only one word there.
1

THE PROBLEM
Peirce would have said that there were two tokens of the one 
type.
Once one’s attention is drawn to the distinction, one can see 
that it applies not just to words but to almost everything. It 
applies to swans, electrons, patches of color, revolutions. . . . 
The distinction is ubiquitous. Think how it clarifies the 
ambiguity in the sentence ‘The two ladies were wearing the 
same dress.’
The chief philosophical problem here is posed by sameness 
of type. Two different things, different particulars, can be of 
the same type. But ‘same’ seems to be a very strong word. Does 
it not mean identical? We have in our display two tokens of 
the same type, two instances of the same type, we can also say. 
If ‘sam e’ means identical here, then apparently there is 
something about the two ‘the’s that is identical. If we regard 
that conclusion with a philosopher’s eye, the eye that tries to 
spot the problems that lie in the simplest things, in the most 
obvious things, the conclusion is rather strange. The tokens are 
completely separate, after all. They are in two different 
places. Could there really be something identical about them?
Some philosophers think that we just have to accept that 
the two ‘the’s involve something identical, something in 
common. After all, they argue, the word ‘sam e’ means 
identical, does it not? We just have to accept that the two 
tokens are not, after all, totally separate. Such philosophers 
will say that the two tokens have the same, the identical, 
property. What property? It is that rather complex and hard- 
to-pin-down property that makes each token a token of a ‘the’.
I used to think that this line of thought had quite a bit of 
force, even if it was not conclusive. But I do not think this now. 
In order to see why the argument fails, let us look at a very 
interesting distinction concerning identity, a distinction that 
was drawn by the eighteenth-century English philosopher, 
Bishop Joseph Butler. Butler said that there are two senses of 
the word ‘identity’. There is, he says, identity in the strict 
sense and identity in “a loose and popular sense” (see “Of
2

THE PROBLEM
Personal Identity” in Butler 1906). The problem that Butler 
was concerned with was that of identity of persons and other 
objects over time, and although that problem does not concern us 
directly in this book, we do need to consider it briefly here in 
order to understand Butler’s distinction.
We say that a certain person whom we saw today is the 
very same person that we saw yesterday. Does that mean that 
the person today and the person yesterday are actually 
identical? To avoid irrelevant difficulties, let us leave aside 
questions about minds and souls and concentrate solely on the 
body. “The same stone” and “the same river” would equally 
well do as examples.
Here is an argument for saying that a person today and a 
person yesterday are not strictly identical: Strict identity is 
governed by a principle that is called the Indiscemibility of 
Identicals. This says that if a is strictly identical with b, then 
a and b have exactly the same properties. Sameness of thing 
gives sameness of properties. It is sometimes called Leibniz’s 
Law. (For those who find it helpful, it can be expressed in 
symbols: (VPXVx)(Vy)((x = y) 3  (Px = Py)), where P ranges over 
properties, and x and y range over all entities. Do not confuse 
this principle with the Identity of Indiscemibles, the converse 
of the Indiscemibility of Identicals. Identity of Indiscemibles 
says that if a and b have all their properties in common, then a 
is identical with b. Sameness of properties gives sameness of 
thing. In symbols: (VP)(Vx)(Vy)((Px = Py) 3  (x = y)). This 
second principle, which we shall meet again later on, is much 
more controversial than the first.)
Now consider a person yesterday and a person today. Many 
of the person’s properties will be different on different days. 
The person may have been cold yesterday and may be hot 
today, standing up yesterday and sitting today. So it seems 
that we can conclude, by the Indiscemibility of Identicals, that 
the person yesterday is not strictly identical with “the very 
same person” today. The argument can be challenged, but let us 
go along with it here. (For myself, I think it is sound.)
3

THE PROBLEM
This is where Butler’s distinction can be used. We can soften 
the blow by saying that what we have when we speak of a 
person yesterday and the same person today is identity only in 
a “loose and popular” sense of the word ‘identity’.
What is the loose and popular sense? Suppose that you are 
in a zoo and that you see the backside of an elephant in an 
enclosure. But suppose that you are behind the enclosure and 
another spectator is at the front and is seeing the front of the 
elephant. We can properly say that you two are seeing the 
same elephant. At the same time, though, we would agree that 
each of you can only see different parts of that one elephant. So 
in this case talk of seeing the (very) same thing only amounts 
to talk of seeing different parts of the very same thing. I am 
inclined to think that when ‘the same’ or ‘the very same’ is 
used in a loose and popular sense, it always involves applying 
‘the same’ to different parts of the same thing, where that last 
phrase ‘the same thing’ has the sense of strict identity. You 
and the other spectator see different parts of exactly the same, 
strictly the same, animal.
Let us go back to the temporal case: a person (stone, river) 
yesterday and the same person today. I think that what we 
have here is two different parts of the one unified thing, the 
person. These parts, however, unlike the elephant case, are not 
spatial but temporal parts. In a loose and popular sense, the 
two parts are ‘the same person’. Strictly, however, they are 
different temporal parts of a single four-dimensional entity, 
the person (the stone, the river). (But it must be noted that the 
doctrine that such things as persons, stones, and rivers have 
temporal parts as well as spatial parts is a controversial one. 
Philosophers who reject temporal parts for such entities have 
either to deny Butler’s distinction between strict and loose 
senses of identity or else have to give a different account of the 
distinction from mine.)
Now, at last, we can come back to the Problem of Universals, 
in particular to the problem of the two ‘the’s. We said that 
although by hypothesis there are two of them, they are also in
4

THE PROBLEM
a way the same. They are instances of the very same word. It 
was suggested that this meant that there is something 
(strictly) identical about the two ‘the’s.
But now, with Butler’s distinction before us, we can see that 
the argument is not so compelling as might be thought at first. 
Perhaps we will want to say that the two tokens have 
something that is strictly identical. But perhaps the identity 
involved is a loose and popular one. Perhaps the two tokens are 
said to be the same because, although strictly nonidentical, 
strictly different, nevertheless they are different parts of some 
wider unity that includes them both. Perhaps, for instance, 
they are both different members of the one class, or are both 
different parts of the same resemblance structure, or that both, 
although different, fall under the same predicate or concept. In 
that case, to apply the word ‘same’ to them both would be to 
attribute identity to them in a loose and popular sense only.
At this point I think that we can get a deeper view of the 
Problem of Universals. There are those philosophers who hold 
that when we say truly that two tokens are of the same type, 
then sameness here should be understood in terms of strict 
identity. The two different tokens have something strictly 
identical. If, for instance, two different things have the same 
mass, then this must be taken strictly. One and the same thing, 
the mass, is a constituent of the two things. Historically, these 
philosophers are called Realists and are said to believe in the 
reality of universals.
On the other side there are philosophers who think that 
when we say truly that a number of tokens are all of the same 
type, then all that we are saying is that the different tokens 
are nonoverlapping parts of some larger whole or unity (the 
tokens are all members of one class, or they all resemble each 
other in a certain way, or some other such formula). The 
sameness of the tokens is only loose and popular.
These philosophers hold, with John Locke, that “all things 
that exist are only particulars.” There are no (strict) identities 
reaching across different tokens; there are no universals.
5

THE PROBLEM
Philosophers who take such a view are traditionally called 
Nominalists. The word is a bit misleading. It suggests a project 
of explaining the unity of the tokens falling under a certain 
type by some linguistic device. Two things are of the same type 
because the same word (predicate) is applied to them. (Nomen 
is the Latin word for name.) That is one form of anti-Realism 
about universals, but it is far from being the only form. 
However, I think that we are stuck with the usage. So I will 
refer to all anti-Realists about universals, all those who think 
that identity of type is a loose and popular identity, as 
Nominalists.
This, then, is the traditional battle: Realists (of many 
different, disagreeing sorts) versus Nominalists (of many 
different, disagreeing sorts). The battle has been going on a 
long time. Antisthenes said to Plato: “I can see the horse, Plato, 
but not horseness.” “I can see the individual object, but I can’t 
see the universal.” In the Middle Ages the battle became so 
heated that, so Erasmus alleged, it actually led to violence on 
occasions: “They wrangle with one another till they are pale, 
till they take to abuse and spitting, and sometimes even to 
fisticuffs.” The fight is still going on, but I do not know when it 
last led to fisticuffs.
The dispute may seem a very rarefied and abstract one. And 
in a sense it is. But as I hope will emerge as we go on, the 
argument leads one into the heart of the question, What are 
the most general features of reality? It was a profound instinct 
that led Plato to put a theory of universals at the center of his 
metaphysics.
Before leaving the distinction between token and type, a 
word about identity of type. Type identity exhibits an 
important relativity. Consider a new display:
THE
6

THE PROBLEM
Are the two tokens of the same type? They are not the same 
word. But if you take as your type just being a word, then they 
are of the same type. If you take as your type grammatical 
article, then they are again of the same type (the first is the 
definite, the second the indefinite, article). And there are 
many other types, of a more general sort, relative to 
which they are tokens of the same type. This relativity of 
identity of types is the foundation for the notion of a property. 
The two tokens each have a number of properties. The two 
tokens have a number of properties in common but differ in 
many others.
The Realist about universals will take these properties 
seriously (or will at least take certain selected properties 
seriously). The Realist will say that these properties 
are really there in the world, as constituents of things, 
and will take their sameness, where two different things have 
the same property, to be a matter of strict identity. Two 
different things have the same constituent: horseness or 
whatever.
The Nominalist will allow talk about properties. Such 
talk is impossible to avoid in practice. The Nominalist 
may even allow that there really are such entities as 
properties. But if he does admit properties, he will insist that 
they are not universals, that they cannot be strictly identical 
across tokens. They are particulars, as particular as the 
things that have them. Alternatively, he may try to explain 
away talk of properties in terms of some form of unity possessed 
by the tokens of a certain type. In either case the identity 
across tokens will be no more than a loose and popular sort of 
identity.
One reason that many philosophers have had for preferring 
Nominalist to Realist theories is that Nominalism, by getting 
rid of types, appears to yield a more economical theory. 
Something will be said about the attractions of economy at the 
end of this chapter.
7

THE PROBLEM
n. Class Nominalism
Having finished my introduction, I shall begin by discussing an 
extreme form of Nominalism. It is so extreme that I do not 
think that it can be satisfactory. And, indeed, my main efforts 
in this book will be devoted to examining more moderate forms 
of Nominalism, set up against a moderate Realism. But seeing 
some of the things that are wrong with this extreme form of 
Nominalism will be very useful in showing us what a plausible 
Nominalism would look like. I will also try to show that 
implausible as it is, this extreme Nominalism is more 
satisfactory than its main rival, another extreme Nominalism.
We have already met the view that I will examine in this 
section. I call it Class Nominalism. It is the view that for a 
thing to be of a certain type is nothing more than for it to be a 
member of a certain class. (The alternative, to be looked at in a 
moment, is Predicate Nominalism.)
Some things are electrons; most things are not. What is it for 
something to be an electron, to be of the type electron? 
According to Class Nominalism, for a to be an electron is 
nothing more than for it to be a member of the class of electrons. 
The formal theory of classes, set theory, has been developed 
spectacularly in the last hundred years. The idea that we can 
give an account in set-theoretical terms of what it is to be a 
certain type is attractive to logicians and the mathematically 
inclined.
(The mention of set theory might raise a terminological 
question in the minds of some. Nowadays mathematicians and 
logicians distinguish between sets and classes. All sets are 
classes, but not all classes are sets. The classes that are not sets 
behave in a special, disorderly, way. However, the classes 
that we will be concerned with are quite properly behaved. So 
why do I not speak of Set Nominalism?
The answer is simple enough. The work done on the Problem 
of Universals to which I shall be referring largely antedates 
the introduction of the class/set distinction and uses the word
8

THE PROBLEM
‘class’. It has therefore seemed convenient to continue to use the 
older word.)
Instead of the word ‘type’ we can of course substitute more 
ordinary words, such as ‘kind’ and ‘sort’. We can also speak of 
the property of being an electron. The word ‘property’ however 
does not sound quite natural in this case. The reason is that 
electrons are substances. (Or let us think of them as such here. 
Perhaps the physicists will correct us.) Natural examples of 
properties are colors (which electrons do not have) or mass and 
electric charge (which they do have). You can manufacture a 
property word—‘electronhood’—but it does not completely 
convince. Compare ‘horseness’. Aristotle, we may note, would 
have called being a horse and being an electron secondary 
substances. Primary substances are the individual horses or 
electrons.
There is a big metaphysical question here, the question 
of how substance types stand in relation to properties. Is 
being an electron analyzable in terms of properties? Is it, 
for instance, a conjunction of properties necessary and sufficient 
to make a thing an electron? Here, however, I lack the 
space (and inspiration) to follow the whole question up. 
It is my impression, for what it is worth, that contemporary 
science favors an account of substance types in terms of 
properties. In what follows, at any rate, I will concentrate on 
properties.
But let us go back to the main question. The idea is that the 
‘property’ of being an electron is constituted by being a member 
of the class of electrons. Notice that the class of electrons is 
potentially an infinite one. There may be factual limits to the 
number of electrons, but there are no logical limits. This is 
sometimes put by saying that the class is an open class. Notice, 
also, that being an electron is not tied to any particular 
particular. The contrast is with a property like being an 
Australian, which is logically tied to a certain particular, the 
continent of Australia. Being an electron may be said to be a 
pure type, being an Australian an impure type. The types that
9

THE PROBLEM
are of special importance for the theory of universals generate 
an open class and are pure. Being particular-free, in the sense of 
not being tied to any particular particular, they pose the 
sharpest problems for Nominalists.
The class of electrons has a further characteristic that suits 
the Class Nominalist very well. Because the class is the class 
of all the electrons, it is not a repeatable. There can only be one 
class of all the electrons. Although the members of the class 
are scattered both in space and in time, and the number of the 
members may be infinite, the class is definitely a token, not a 
type. (W. V. Quine has regularly spoken of classes as 
universals. But because classes are not repeatables, and 
universals are repeatables, Quine's terminology has a good 
deal of potentiality to mislead.)
So an electron, a token, is related, by the relation of class 
membership, to another token, the class of electrons. Nice work 
in getting rid of types. The only worry is the relation of class 
membership. It is a type: repeated in each case where a thing 
is a member of some class. But there are special reasons, which 
I will not go into at present, for thinking that that problem can 
at least be contained.
I will now turn aside and contrast this rather good situation 
for the Class Nominalist with the not so good situation for the 
Predicate Nominalist. A Predicate Nominalist, as I will 
define the term, is one who holds that for a token to be an 
instance of a certain type, be of a certain kind or sort, is for a 
certain predicate, a linguistic entity, to apply to or be true of 
the token. This is literally a Nominalist theory. To be white is 
for the predicate, the word ‘white’, to apply to the token in 
question.
But when we speak of the predicate ‘white’ here, are we 
speaking of a predicate token or of a predicate type? It can be 
thought of as a token—but not just any old token. It must be a 
token of the right type: the word ‘white’ taken as a type or, 
more accurately, any word that means what ‘white’ means in 
English. The Predicate Nominalist’s account of the type white
10

THE PROBLEM
therefore makes essential reference to another type: a semantic 
type. He has pushed down the bulge in the carpet only to have 
it reappear elsewhere. But now he owes us an account of this 
new type. If he goes on with his Predicate Nominalism, then 
something being of this semantic type will be analyzed in a 
way that involves another, more complex, semantic type. This 
is to embark on an infinite regress. It appears to be vicious.
Predicate Nominalism suffers from another disadvantage by 
comparison with Class Nominalism. Classes are always there, 
whether human beings are there or not. Thus in a minimal sense 
Class Nominalism is a Realist theory. (We could call it a 
Realist Reductionism about universals.) But unlike classes, 
predicates may not be available. Yet there are certainly 
types—undiscovered scientific properties, for instance—for 
which no predicates (words) exist now or perhaps ever will.
The Predicate Nominalist would have to give an account of 
such types in terms of possible predicates. That gets him onto 
very tricky ground. What is the foundation in reality, in the 
world, that makes statements about possible predicates true? 
After all, one would not ordinarily assume that, over and 
above the actual predicates that we actually use, there are 
such things as “possible predicates.” The merely possible, most 
of us think, does not exist. So what is the force of an account of 
actual types, even if they are unknown ones, in terms of possible 
predicates? The Predicate Nominalist will be hard-pressed to 
say. (For more on Predicate Nominalism see Armstrong 1978a, 
Chapter 2. Class Nominalism is discussed in Chapter 4 of that 
book.) A variant of Predicate Nominalism is C oncept 
N om inalism , in which the concept, something in people’s 
minds, is substituted for the word ‘white’. This theory seems to 
be no worse, but no better, than the Predicate theory.
So among extreme Nominalisms I think that Class 
Nominalism is to be preferred to Predicate Nominalism. But 
even Class Nominalism is not satisfactory. Later I shall discuss 
other difficulties, but here I will take up one problem only: the 
difficulty of correlating classes and types. If Class Nominalism
11

THE PROBLEM
is a true theory, then there ought to be a one-one correlation 
between classes and types. But such a correlation is not to be 
found.
First, the Class Nominalist requires that corresponding to 
each type (kind, sort, property), there is a class. That seems 
fairly right. Maybe the type is so special that there is only one 
instance. But that is no problem. Set theory recognizes unit 
classes.
A bit more worrying are types to which no instances 
correspond: unicomhood and centaurhood, for example. Set 
theory does recognize the null class. But the trouble is that 
there is only one null class. If being a unicorn is identical with 
being a member of the null class and being a centaur is identical 
with being a member of the null class, then, by the transitivity 
and symmetry of identity, being a unicorn and being a centaur 
are the very same type. This seems absurd.
Types that have no instances are a bit peculiar, and perhaps 
in a developed theory one will not want to say that they are 
genuine types. Perhaps they are only possible types. A possible 
type is not necessarily a type, one could argue, any more than a 
possible murderer is necessarily a murderer. So let us thrust 
aside types that have no instances and agree, at least for the 
sake of argument, that to every type there corresponds a class.
But now, second, comes a really big difficulty in correlating 
types and classes. Is it the case that for eveiy class there exists 
a type, its own special type, which has that class as its 
extension? (The extension of a type is the class of all and only 
the things that are tokens of that type.) There is little reason 
to think that you can always find such a type.
The trouble starts here from the utter ubiquity of classes. 
Anything whatsoever, any entity of any sort, can be put, or 
rather be found, in a class with any number of other things of 
any sort whatever. You can take the Sydney Opera House, the 
square root of 2, the city of Berlin, the “Barbara” syllogism, 
your last thought on June 6, 1988, along with indefinitely many 
other things, indeed an infinity of other things. It is a
12

THE PROBLEM
perfectly good class. Moreover, given such first-order classes, 
there are classes of classes, and so on indefinitely.
The result is that even if every type picks out a class, the 
class of its tokens, there is no reason to think that to every class 
there corresponds a type. For a short list like the preceding one 
you might say: Everything in it was thought about by 
Armstrong. Then you might find some general property of 
Armstrong that is rather complex and thus marks him off from 
everything else. Then you could say that the five things have 
the property of being used as philosophical examples by a 
being having that complex property. That can claim to be a 
type, a pure type, and one that generates an open class, though 
an extremely uninteresting one. But classes do not have to be 
listed. They exist whether anybody thinks of them or not. So it 
will not be possible to repeat such tricks for all the classes.
The only way to solve the problem would be to introduce 
types that are disjunctions of simpler types (type A or type B or 
. . . ). If you are faced with the class that contains all the 
ravens together with all the writing desks, then you introduce 
a ‘type’ either a raven or a writing desk. You would need to 
include infinite disjunctions for classes that have an infinite 
number of members and are infinitely variegated. But that is 
surely faking. There would be no genuine unity in such classes, 
thus no genuine type.
So the Class Nominalist is wrong to say that to be of a type 
(be a kind or sort, have a general property) is just to be a 
member of a class. That is certainly involved. But the type is 
more than that. To be a member of a class is necessary but not 
sufficient for being of a certain type. The philosopher who has 
most insisted upon this point is Anthony Quinton (1957 and 
1973, Chapter 9).
If this has been correct, then we can formulate the Problem 
of Universals in the following way: What distinguishes the 
classes of tokens that mark off a type from those classes that 
do not? I think that this is a good way to formulate the 
problem. The really interesting and attractive solutions to the
13

THE PROBLEM
Problem of Universals, I think, are those that start from this 
point and try to answer this question. Therefore, in the next 
section I will indicate briefly the main types of answer that 
can be given to the question. The rest of the book will be given 
over to probing the weaknesses and strengths of these answers.
I will be making one further, though I think minimal, 
assumption, which I will indicate now. I will assume (with 
some qualifications to be developed) that the distinction 
between the “good” and the “bad” classes is an objective 
distinction. That is, it is a distinction founded on a difference in 
the things themselves and not, say, in some different attitude 
that we take up to the different classes. That a certain class of 
tokens marks off a type is not something we determine. (Who 
are we to determine the nature of things?) Hence I will call the 
good classes the natural classes. It is fairly clear that the 
naturalness of classes admits of degree. Some classes are more 
natural than others.
in. Theories of Natural Classes
The assumption, then, is that some classes are better than 
others, that there is an objective distinction in the world 
between natural and nonnatural classes, a distinction that 
admits of degree. What is the correct theory of this state of 
affairs?
1. 
Natural classes as primitives: The first theory that we 
must seriously consider is that the existence of natural classes, 
with their different degrees of naturalness, is a primitive, not 
further explicable, fact. This is an important view. However, 
it has only emerged relatively recently, at any rate in this 
particular form. The view was first formulated (as far as I 
know) by Anthony Quinton in the article in which he 
formulated the natural class problem. It is a Nominalist 
theory, involving tokens, classes of tokens (which are also
14

THE PROBLEM
particulars), though it does involve a property of certain 
classes, a property of naturalness that admits of degrees.
2. Resemblance Nominalism: Against Quinton, you may 
think that it should be possible to explain what a natural class 
is, to penetrate into its structure. But if at the same time you do 
not like universals, that is, if you want to remain a 
Nominalist, then the thing to do is to analyze the notion of a 
natural class using the relation of resemblance. Natural classes 
are identified with classes of individuals where certain 
relations of resemblance hold between the individuals, thus 
making the class into a natural class.
Resemblance, on this view, has to be taken as something 
objectively there in the world. Only thus do we secure the 
objectivity of the natural classes. Furthermore, it is necessary 
to reject one traditional analysis of resemblance. This is the 
view that when things resemble, then they always have 
something in common, something strictly the same, identical in 
the strict sense. This traditional analysis is summed up in a 
slogan: All resemblance is partial identity.
It is clear why this traditional analysis of resemblance must 
be rejected by the Resemblance Nominalist. To speak of iden­
tity between the resembling things is to go over into a Univer­
sals theory. In Resemblance Nominalism, on the contrary, 
instead of the naturalness of classes being taken as primitive, 
the resemblance of the members is taken as primitive. (Al­
though resemblance is permitted to have degrees.) Primitive 
resemblance is the unifier of the natural class. One phi­
losopher who puts forward a worked out Resemblance 
Nominalism is the English philosopher H. H. Price (1953, Ch. 
1).
3. Universals: Suppose that we do analyze resemblance in 
terms of identity. Then we pass over into explaining resem­
blance, and the unity of natural classes, in terms of universals.
One straightforward way to do this is to work with common, 
that is, the same, strictly identical, properties and relations. 
Individual things will have properties and be related to each
15

THE PROBLEM
other. These properties and relations will be universals, thus 
in the case of properties, more than one thing can have them, 
and in the case of relations, more than one pair, or triple, or 
quadruple,. . .  of things can have them. These strict samenesses 
or identities will yield resemblances, which in turn will give 
us the natural classes. (We shall see later that even for a 
Universals theory, this cannot be the whole story about 
resemblance. But complications will have to wait.)
4. 
Natural classes of tropes: The Natural Class theory and 
the Resemblance theory do not admit properties and relations 
at the ground floor of their analyses. They face the problem of 
giving an account of our easy and natural talk about the 
properties and relations of things, yet using in the account only 
nonuniversals. The Realist admits properties and relations but 
holds that they are universals. This suggests an interesting 
nominalist compromise. Admit properties and relations, but 
make them into particulars. Of two billiard balls, let each 
have its own color, shade, mass, and so forth. If the balls are in 
contact on the table, and two others are at the other end of the 
table, let each pair have its own relations of adjacency. 
Following the U.S. philosopher, Donald C. Williams, we can 
call properties and relations conceived of as particulars tropes.
This stand does not solve the Problem of Universals, but it 
does allow the problem to be posed anew. Consider all the red 
things. On the trope theory the redness of each thing is a 
distinct trope. But then we have to face the question, Why do 
we say that all red tropes have the same color? The identity is 
not strict identity. So what unifies the class of all rednesses?
Three answers stand out once again. The first is the natural 
class answer. The individual rednesses form a closely unified 
natural class and that is all that can be said. This nominalist 
view was put forward by G. F. Stout. He said that the class of 
the rednesses have a “distributive unity.” It is a trope version 
of Quinton’s view that natural classes are primitive. But we 
will see later that the trope version is in many ways quite a 
new game (and a superior one).
16

THE PROBLEM
5. Resemblance classes of tropes: Another way of uniting 
classes of tropes is to appeal, as a primitive, to the relation of 
resemblance, but now between tropes, not ordinary things. 
Individual rednesses resemble each other to a greater or lesser 
degree. This form of Resemblance Nominalism was upheld by 
Donald Williams. I am inclined to think that it is the most 
plausible of all forms of Nominalism. It is a very moderate 
form of Nominalism, just as the Realism I will defend later is a 
rather moderate form of Realism.
6. Tropes plus universals: Finally, one might seek to 
unify the class of rednesses, say, in a realist manner. Each 
particular redness, each trope, instantiates the single 
universal. This view has been held by some good philosophers, 
for instance, the Oxford philosopher J. Cook Wilson. It may 
even have been Aristotle’s view. But I think it is of 
less interest than the first five positions. Once one has 
accepted universals, the tropes seem to become redundant (or 
vice versa).
We may set out the six theories in a 3 x 2 matrix:
Ordinary
Particulars 
Tropes
Primitive
Natural
Classes
Resemblance
Universals
17
1
4
A. Quinton
G. F. Stout
2
5
H. H. Price
D. C. Williams
3
6
Plato, Aristotle(?)
J. Cook Wilson
Nominalists
Realists

THE PROBLEM
This diagram sets our agenda. These, I claim, are the most 
plausible candidates for solutions to the Problem of Universals. 
We will look at each in turn, or at least the first five, 
considering for each its strengths and its weaknesses.
To finish the section, let us illustrate the six positions by 
considering how each would deal with the property of 
whiteness.
1. Primitive natural class view: The class of all the white things 
forms a natural class, a class with a reasonable degree of 
naturalness. That is all that can be said about what makes a 
white thing white.
2. Resemblance Nominalism: The white things form a natural class 
in virtue of the objective fact that they all resemble each other 
to a certain degree. Resemblance is an objective but unanalyzable 
fact.
3. Universals: All white things have an identical property in 
common (or a set of slightly different properties to correspond to 
the different shades of white).
4. Natural classes of tropes: Each white thing has its own, entirely 
distinct, property of whiteness. But the class of the whitenesses 
forms a primitive natural class.
5. Resemblance classes of tropes: Each white thing has its own 
property of whiteness. But the members of the class of the 
whitenesses all resemble each other more or less closely, with 
resemblance a primitive.
6. Tropes plus universals: Each white thing has its own property of 
whiteness. But these particular properties themselves each 
have a universal property of whiteness.
IV. Methodology
Before ending this chapter it is appropriate for me to say 
something about method. In examining the various positions 
that one might take up in regard to the “natural class problem,” 
I will be considering quite a number of arguments for and
18

THE PROBLEM
against the different positions and will be trying to assess the 
worth of these arguments. Argument is the life blood of any 
philosophical investigation that aspires to any rigor. Yet at 
the same time it is important not to overestimate the power of 
argument, even in cases where the argument is quite a good one.
Suppose that the conclusion of an argument is unwelcome. 
Arguments proceed from premisses, and sometimes the 
premisses can be questioned. Quite often, arguments are not 
conclusive, in the sense that there is no actual contradiction in 
upholding the premisses and denying the conclusion. Such 
arguments may point in a certain direction, but they may not 
force one in that direction. If one does not like the direction 
then one can “tough it out.” Finally, even if it is agreed that 
the premisses are true and the reasoning from the premisses 
conclusive or reasonably conclusive, it may be possible simply 
to accept the conclusions. Even if the conclusions are quite 
unpleasant, it is often possible and may be rational, to agree 
with the conclusions and tough it out once more. Again and 
again in philosophy all these maneuvres are live options.
What is to be done in this somewhat unsatisfactory 
situation? We have to accept, I think, that straight refutation 
(or proof) of a view in philosophy is rarely possible. What has 
to be done is to build a case against, or to build a case for, a 
position. One does this, usually, by examining many different 
arguments and considerations against and for a position and 
comparing them with what can be said against and for 
alternative views. What one should hope to arrive at, and 
what I try to arrive at in this book, is something like an 
intellectual cost-benefit analysis of the views considered.
This will not be a royal road to agreement: There is no such 
road in philosophy. But an attempt to provide a cost-benefit 
analysis, subjective though much of the assessment will be, is 
likely to be the best way to advance the debate.
One important way in which different philosophical and 
scientific theories about the same topic may be compared is in 
respect of intellectual economy. In general, the theory that
19

THE PROBLEM
explains the phenomena by means of the least number of 
entities and principles (in particular, by the least number of 
sorts of entities and principles) is to be preferred. This 
principle of method, which may be summed up by saying that 
entities are not to be postulated without necessity, is known as 
Occam ’s razor, after the medieval philosopher William of 
Occam, although this formulation is not actually found in his 
works. Philosophers will often be found appealing to the 
principle, particularly philosophers with empiricist or 
reductionist sympathies.
For this reason I will pay a certain amount of attention to 
how economical or uneconomical various theories are. Other 
things being equal, I shall account the more economical theory 
the better theory. A final section in each chapter will be 
addressed to giving a list of the fundamental entities and 
principles required by the theory examined in that chapter.
20

CHAPTER TWO
Primitive 
Natural Classes
I. How Is It Determined that a Class Is Natural?
We start, then, by examining the view that although 
individual things, particulars, tokens, fall naturally into all 
sorts of classes and thus may be said to be of this or that type, 
this fact cannot be analyzed further. It is a primitive, or 
ground-floor, feature of the world that there are such classes, 
classes that, in G. F. Stout’s nice phrase, have a “distributive 
unity,” and have this unity in different degrees. It is a matter 
of the degree of close-knittedness of the class. This is an 
important view, but if we exclude Stout it has only been 
explicitly put forward by one philosopher: Anthony Quinton. 
(Stout is excluded for the present because, unlike Quinton, he 
admitted properties and relations into his ground-floor 
entities. These properties and relations he conceived of as 
particulars, not universals, and he formed his natural classes 
from such things as all the particular rednesses.)
How does one determine that a certain class of things is a 
natural class? Quinton thinks of the matter in a way that is 
indebted to Wittgenstein. Suppose that one has been presented
It is suggested that Anthony Quinton's paper “Properties and Classes” 
be used as a companion reading to this chapter.
21

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
(perhaps as a child) with various specimens of blue objects, 
including all different shades and varieties of the color so as to 
give the full spread of the word ‘b lu e’ across the color 
spectrum. If one is then able, with relative ease, to identify 
individuals that one has never met before as belonging in the 
same class with the original objects, then this shows that the 
class of blue things is a natural class.
It can be seen from this that Quinton’s notion of a natural 
class is in part an epistemological notion. That is to say, it ties 
the naturalness of a class to what we find natural to take to­
gether as a class. There is something right about this, because 
this is where we have to start in determining that certain 
classes are natural. How could one start except with certain 
classifications that we naturally make? But I do not think that 
the process of searching out the true natural classes ends there.
What enterprise is it that tries to determine what natural 
classes there are in the world? It is the enterprise of natural 
science. One thing that the natural sciences further try to do is 
to establish the large-scale geography and history of the 
universe. But they do much more. They try to establish just 
what sorts of things there are in the world, in particular, what 
are the more fundamental sorts of things, the things in terms of 
which all other sorts of things are explained. The sciences 
further try to establish the properties and relations that the 
sorts of things have. (They also, and this is very important, try 
to establish the laws that the sorts obey. But that is not our 
present concern.) We can put this establishing of the sorts in 
the language of the Natural Class theory. The natural sciences 
are trying to establish just what the true natural classes are. In 
Plato’s wonderful metaphor, they are trying to carve the beast 
of reality along the joints.
But if it is up to the natural sciences to determine what are 
the true natural classes, then it is clear that what we begin by 
accepting as the natural classes—the classifications that we 
make in the state of nature before organized inquiry has gone to 
work: Quinton’s classes—are only a first stab at the natural
22

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
classes. There are natural classes that we eventually come to 
accept, but that we would never have dreamed about before 
science started its work, for instance, the class of the electrons. 
Some of the classes that we begin by regarding as closely knit 
natural classes may have to be shoved down the class ladder 
and replaced by other classes much more theoretically arrived 
at. For a very simple example, remember that the class of fish 
once included whales. Later, in the interest of a tighter organ­
ization that carved nearer the joints, whales were excluded.
We start with what Wilfrid Sellars (1963, Ch. 1) calls “the 
manifest image” of the world. (Roughly, Quinton’s natural 
classes.) We try to break through to what Sellars calls the 
“scientific image” of the world (the true natural classes). In the 
course of so doing we not only greatly amplify, greatly expand, 
the manifest image, but we also find reason to criticize it. We 
cannot overthrow the manifest image completely. It is where 
we start from in conducting our observations. Our scientific 
theories are tested against observation, and at the very 
minimum the theories must explain satisfactorily why our 
manifest image is as it is. But we do have to go beyond the 
manifest image. From the point of view of the theory of 
natural classes, we are replacing the classes of the first look, 
the classes that Quinton appeals to, with a more sophisticated 
and deeper classification.
My suggestion, in short, is that a Natural Class theory is 
best put forward in a scientific realist form.
n. Degrees of Naturalness
It is a very important point, and one emphasized by Quinton, 
that although the naturalness of a class is for him a primitive 
notion, nevertheless it admits of degrees. That is to say, one 
natural class may be more closely knit, more of a unity, than 
another natural class. Consider the difference between the 
class of the colored things and the class of the crimson things.
23

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
Both are natural classes. But the latter is much more closely 
knit, has a much higher degree of unity, than has the class of 
the colored things.
The class of the crimson things is actually contained within 
the class of the colored things. This helps to make the 
difference in degree of unity of the two classes a clear-cut 
matter. But often the ranking of natural classes in terms of 
degrees of unity is a bit rough-and-ready, not to say arbitrary 
and conventional. How do you compare the class of 
earthquakes with the class of volcanic eruptions with respect 
to their unity? The ranking of natural classes in terms of 
degrees of unity is a bit like ranking societies by how free they 
are. In both sorts of case you can make some sort of ranking. 
But the ranking will very often not be all that precise and 
definite.
Notice, however, that the unity scale for natural classes 
appears to have a top. If there is a plurality of things all 
exactly alike, perfect twins, then the class has the highest 
possible degree of unity. So the scale is not like the number 
series, where there is always a higher number. Whether this 
top is actually realized is an empirical question. It is not 
realized at the macroscopic level but may obtain at the level 
of fundamental physical particles.
The number series does have a lowest number: 0. The natural 
class scale also seems to have a bottom limit. These are the 
classes that are utterly heterogeneous, having no unity at all: 
the nonnatural classes.
These characteristics of the natural class scale are rather 
unsatisfactory from the point of view of the Natural Class 
theory. Naturalness of class is supposed to be a primitive, but 
we have just noticed that it is a rather messy primitive. 
Naturalness admits of degrees, with a highest and lowest 
degree, although perhaps the two limits are never reached. 
Still worse, the ordering of classes by degree seems a vague and 
spotty affair, involving arbitrary decisions. It is natural to 
think that behind degrees of naturalness lies some more precise
24

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
notion. In later chapters we shall see the Resemblance theory 
trying to explicate the notion of a natural class in terms of 
resemblances between the members of the class, resemblances 
that admit of degree. The Universals theory seeks to go still 
further and analyze even the fact of resemblance.
m. The Coextension Problem
Coextensive properties are properties possessed by the very 
same class of things. Quine's often-mentioned example is that 
of being a cordate (having a heart) and being a renate (having 
kidneys). All creatures that have hearts have kidneys, and 
vice versa. But it seems that a Natural Class Nominalist (or, 
indeed, any Class Nominalist) cannot admit coextensive 
properties.
One natural class can be a subset of another; for instance, the 
class of crimson things is a subset of the class of colored things. 
One natural class can intersect with another; for instance, the 
class of elephants and the class of male animals intersect. But 
two different natural classes cannot coincide because two 
different classes cannot coincide. Classes that coincide are the 
very same class.
Quine says that the identity conditions for classes are 
“crystal clear.” Classes are identical if and only if their 
members are identical. Contemporary philosophers all accept 
these identity conditions for classes. Indeed, they take these 
conditions to hold by definition. So given any class analysis of 
what it is to be of a certain type (be of a certain sort or kind, 
have a certain property), then it will be impossible for one 
class of tokens to be the class for more than one type. There 
cannot be coextensive types.
But coextensive types certainly seem to be possible. Suppose 
that surfaces are red if and only if they answer to a certain 
physical formula having to do with the emission of light 
waves. A physicalist (such as myself) might take it that this
25

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
formula tells us what redness is. Against this, however, might 
it not be the case that redness is distinct from the physical 
property of the surface, although exactly correlated with it? 
But if a class analysis of types is correct, then this position can 
be ruled out a priori. (It is quite likely that, for reasons given 
by Saul Kripke, this possibility is no more than what 
philosophers call a mere doxastic possibility: something 
conceivable, but not genuinely possible. However, that does not 
destroy the force of the example.)
It is interesting to look at the position of David Lewis here. 
Lewis is a modal realist, believing in the literal existence of 
innumerable possible worlds over and above our own (see Lewis 
1986a). He is also attracted to, without definitely endorsing, a 
Natural Class theory (see Lewis 1983 and 1986b). Lewis has a 
way of dealing with the coextension problem. His natural 
classes range over every possible world, not merely our actual 
world. Suppose then that two properties are coextensive in this 
world. Provided that it is just a contingent fact that properties 
are coextensive, then there will be possible worlds in which 
some things have one of the properties but not the other. In our 
world all cordates are renates and all renates are cordates. But 
this seems contingent only. So there will exist possible worlds 
containing cordates that are not renates, and worlds containing 
renates that are not cordates. Thus for Lewis the two natural 
classes will be different. The properties are not coextensive 
across all possible worlds.
Lewis would still be in trouble if there are cases where two 
distinct properties are necessarily coextensive, because what is 
necessary holds in all possible worlds. The obvious reply would 
be to argue that in such an alleged case the necessary connection 
shows that the supposed two properties are really only one. 
But this reply may be in difficulty. Elliott Sober (1982) has 
argued that the properties of being a three-sided plane figure 
and being a three-angled plane figure (being trilateral and 
being triangular) are distinct, but necessarily coextensive, 
properties.
26

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
IV. Wolterstorff s Argument from the 
Identity Conditions of Classes
The next three arguments are all close cousins of each other. 
Perhaps they are the same argument at bottom. I begin with 
the argument advanced by Nicholas Wolterstorff in his book 
On Universals (1970, Ch. 8).
A class, as Quine says, is determined by its members. Change 
its membership and it is automatically a different class. 
Consider then the view that to be an electron, say, is to be a 
member of the class of electrons. These electrons are contingent 
beings. That is to say, some or all of them might not have 
existed. Other electrons besides the ones that exist might 
have existed. In that case, as Quine’s point indicates, we would 
have been dealing with a different class. But given a class 
analysis of what it is to be an electron, a change in the 
membership of the class entails that the type being an electron 
would have been different. This is a clear consequence of 
the class analysis. But is it an acceptable consequence? It seems 
not. Intuitively, given these changes in class membership, 
being an electron would not have been, certainly need not have 
been, any different. Electron nature is independent of electron 
class.
Once again David Lewis can escape this consequence, though 
at the cost of postulating all those possible worlds. His natural 
class of electrons is the class that has as members all the 
electrons in all possible worlds. This class could not be other 
than it is. Every possibility for electrons is exhausted. So 
Wolterstorff could not get his argument going against Lewis.
V. Types Determine Classes, Not Classes Types
Consider the following question. Is a thing the sort of thing 
that it is—an electron, say—because it is a member of the class 
of electrons? Or is it rather a member of the class because it is
27

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
an electron? It is a matter of deciding what is the direction of 
explanation. Compare Socrates’ question to Euthyphro, in 
Plato’s dialogue Euthyphro. Are pious acts pious because they 
are loved by the gods? That is, is being loved by the gods what 
constitutes their being pious? Or do the gods love these acts 
because of their piety? Or again, is what constitutes a thing’s 
beauty that it is admired aesthetically? Or is it admired 
aesthetically because it is beautiful?
Whatever we say about piety and beauty, notoriously 
difficult questions, it seems natural to say that a thing is a 
member of the class of electrons because of what it already is: 
an electron. It is unnatural to say that it is an electron because 
it is a member of the class of electrons. And that it is natural to 
put the property first and the class second is some reason to 
think that that is the true direction of explanation. This is bad 
news for any Class Nominalism. If type determines class 
membership, then class membership cannot determine type.
VI. The Causal Argument
When things act causally, they act in virtue of their 
properties. The object depresses the scales in virtue of its mass; 
the fire makes the water boil in virtue of its temperature; and 
so on. But suppose that we try to give an account of a thing’s 
properties in terms of classes of which it is a member. The 
object acts in virtue of the fact that it has a mass of four 
kilograms. But it is that individual four-kilogram object that 
acts. The other four-kilogram things in the universe seem to be 
irrelevant. However, if a class analysis of what it is to be 
four kilograms in mass is correct, then the whole class of 
tokens should be relevant: The four-kilo property of the 
individual is constituted by its class membership. But in fact, 
though, the only thing relevant is the thing that actually acts. 
This suggests that any class account of properties is 
unsatisfactory.
28

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
In order to bring out the force of this argument, consider the 
situation where we perceive a new token of a familiar type. 
Suppose that we have no difficulty in classifying it as being of 
that type. Surely what has happened is that the object has 
acted on us, causing us to classify it correctly. But it does not just 
act on us, it acts in virtue of certain properties. Take the 
simplest case and let the situation be one where the cause is a 
thing’s having a certain property, the thing’s being red, say, 
and the effect is that we recognize the thing to have that very 
property. Now, on the Natural Class theory these properties 
are constituted by the token’s being a member of a certain class, 
perhaps a huge, even infinite, class. How does this relation of 
an individual red token to the whole class of red things get into 
the causal act? It is not easy to see.
VII. The Problem About Relations
We now come to a very important question for the Natural 
Class theory. What account is it to give of relations?
Philosophy has been a long time coming to grips with the 
category of relation. Aristotle said of relations that they were 
“least of all things a kind of entity or substance” (Metaphysics 
1088 a 22). The tradition has tended to echo this ever since. 
The categories of substance (thing) and attribute (property) are 
long established, but not so the category of relation. It is not 
until the late nineteenth and the twentieth century with C. S. 
Peirce, William James, and Bertrand Russell that relations 
begin (no more than begin) to come into focus.
The question for the Natural Class theory is what to do 
with relation types: being to the left of, and so on. It will not 
do to gather together all the things between which this 
relation holds into a single class and declare that class 
natural. The best that that would do would give us a property 
for each member of the class. The relation would be lost. 
What seems to be needed instead is classes of classes. Let us
29

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
start with something that will prove too simple and try to 
work up.
Suppose that the relation is precedes (in time), which is a 
dyadic or two-term relation. First we take all the cases of 
individuals where one precedes the other, and we put each 
pair into a class by itself. We will have [a, b), {c, d), {a, d],
. . . ,  and so on indefinitely. Now we form a class out of these 
classes, that is, a class having these classes as its members (a 
second-order class):
iia,b)AC'd)t [ a ,d ) ,...) .
This second-order class seems a quite good candidate for a 
natural class. We could symbolize this by using the predicate 
letter N. Then we have:
N {[a, b}, {c, d), {a, d} , . . . ) ,  
which asserts of this big class that it is natural. Similarly,
[a, b] e {{af b)f [c,d),
asserts that the pair a, b is a member of the big class (e is the 
symbol for class membership). Could this be the natural class 
analysis of a precedes b?
Unfortunately, this treatment is too simple. It will work for 
symmetrical relations such as being a mile apart. But it will 
not be adequate for asymmetrical relations such as precedes or 
nonsymmetrical relations such as loves.
What we have been using up to this point, according to the 
standard symbolism, are unordered classes. For unordered 
classes, [a, b} is identical with {b, a]. The order of the symbols 
makes no difference. And if one is dealing with a symmetrical 
relation, there will be no problem, a's being a mile from b seems 
to be the very same thing as b’s being a mile from a. But the 
American Revolution’s preceding the French Revolution is a
30

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
very different thing from the French Revolution’s preceding 
the American Revolution. So is Jim's loving Mary and Mary's 
loving Jim. The unordered classes (the American Revolution, 
the French Revolution} and {Jim, Mary} completely lose this 
information.
What is needed in this situation is what set theorists call 
ordered pairs (triples, quadruples, . . . , n-tuples), where the 
order of the symbols inside the class symbols is significant. The 
ordered class <a, b> is not identical with <b, a>. The Natural 
Class theory can then analyze a’s preceding b as a situation 
where the ordered class <«, b> is a member of the unordered 
(but natural) class of ordered pairs {<a, b>, <c, d>, <a, d>,
. . .}. The ordered pairs are all the pairs of entities where the 
first member of the pair precedes the second member in time.
How satisfactory is this device of ordered pairs? Notice 
that the notion of order is the notion of a certain sort of 
relation, and a quite complex relation at that. So the best that 
would have been done by the analysis is to reduce all the 
different sorts of relation to a single, and complex, sort of 
relation. Relations would not have been eliminated entirely.
However, logicians do have a way of getting rid of ordered 
pairs (triples, etc.). It is called the Wiener-Kuratowski 
device, because it was proposed independently by these two 
logicians. What is done is to substitute for the ordered pair 
<a, b> the unordered pair of unordered classes:
[{ah [a, b)h
This serves as a formal substitute for order. The thing a is put 
in a class by itself—what is called a unit class. This creates an 
asymmetry between a and b and thus enables us to order them, 
even though nothing is used except unordered classes. The 
natural class of pairs of things where the first precedes the 
second can then be taken to be a huge unordered class containing 
all these unordered classes of classes as members.
But I am inclined to think that the difference between
31

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
<a, b> and [[a), [a, b}} is really of minor importance. The 
fundamental difficulty is that although these classes may 
be fitted to represent a relation between a and b, yet they do 
not seem to be that relation. This holds even where these 
classes are embedded in natural classes and full weight is given 
to the embedding in fixing the nature of the relation between a 
and b.
<a, b> is to be a’s preceding b. But why should it not be a’s 
succeeding b? No objection, the set theorist will reply, 
provided that in the one stretch of discourse or calculation you 
always stick to the same rule. The first term in each ordered 
pair must always be the predecessor, or else it must always be 
the successor. Similarly for the class of classes construction of 
Wiener and Kuratowski.
But does this not suggest very strongly that we are in the 
presence of mere representations? Either a precedes b or else a 
succeeds b. Yet either of these possible states of affairs can be 
represented, mapped, by either of the formulas <a, b> and 
<b, a>, or else by either of {{a}, {a, b}} and {{b}, {a, fr}}. The 
Class Nominalist, however, has identified relations with 
classes of objects. So all that he has got in the world is <a, b> 
and <b, a> or else {{a}, [a, b}} and {{&), [a, b}}. But if it is 
arbitrary which of these constitutes a’s preceding b and which 
a’s succeeding b, has not the clear-cut difference between a's 
preceding b and a’s succeeding b leaked away?
vni. Higher-Order Types
In the first chapter I drew the almost pretheoretical 
distinction between tokens and types. However, types may 
themselves be tokens falling under higher-order types. For 
instance, being red, green, yellow, and so forth, are all types, 
but at the same time they are each of them tokens falling under 
the higher-order type color. Each of them is a color. Quantities 
yield important cases of this sort, especially important for a
32

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
Scientific Realist. Consider properties like having a mass of 
one ton, one pound, one kilogram. These types can all be brought 
under a single type: mass properties.
As well as bringing types under a single type, we also appear 
to have relations between types. Consider the fact that redness 
is more like orange than it is like yellow, or that blue is more 
like purple than it is like red. Here a three-term relation of 
being more like than connects triples that are types. Similar 
orderings of types may be found within the quantities. One 
kilogram in mass is between one pound in mass and one ton in 
mass. Laws of nature also seem to involve relations between 
types. Newton's law of gravitation, G = (Mi x M2>/D2, relates 
gravitational attraction between bodies to the product of their 
masses divided by the square of their distance. Here we seem 
to have a functional relation between ranges of types.
Any solution to the Problem of Universals must be able to 
deal with higher-order types and the relations of types. How 
does the Natural Class theory fare? When a type is brought 
under a type, the type redness under the type color, for 
instance, then it is obvious that this has implications for the 
tokens that fall under the first-order type. Because redness is a 
color, all red things are colored. This raises the hope that one 
may be able to reduce all statements about higher-order types 
to statements about first-order tokens. Given such reductions, 
the Natural Class theorist could then easily put the reductions 
into class form.
So we take:
(1) 
Redness is a color.
We translate it as:
(1') 
Each red thing is a colored thing.
This would in turn translate into the language of natural
classes as:
33

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
(1") 
The natural class of red things is a subclass of the 
natural class of colored things.
There is no doubt that (1) entails the truth of (1’) and (1"). If 
the entailment goes the other way also, then we could hope 
that we had found a good reductive analysis of (1).
A second example involves bringing three types under the 
three-term relation more like than:
(2) 
Redness is more like orange than it is like yellow.
For this we could try:
(2') 
For all x, all y, and all z, if x is red, y is orange, and z 
is yellow, then x is more like y than x is like z.
I will not bother to put this in the language of natural classes.
Unfortunately, however, (1') and (2’) are not satisfactory 
translations. To see that this is so consider first:
(1''') Each red thing is an extended thing.
As Frank Jackson has pointed out (1977), this has the very 
same form as (1'). It even resembles (1') in apparently being a 
necessary truth. Yet no one would conclude from (1'") that 
redness is an extension. It is not—it is a color. This shows that 
(1')—each red thing is a colored thing—undertranslates red is 
a color. You need a closer connection between redness and color 
than that provided by (T).
It is even clearer that (2') is not a satisfactory translation 
of red is more like orange than it is like yellow. Suppose that 
x is a red car, y is a ripe orange, and z is a yellow car of 
exactly the same make as the red one. Surely x is more like 
z than it is like the orange? This means that (2') is not 
even true: It is a universal proposition that is false for 
certain values of x, y, and z. So it cannot be a satisfactory
34

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
translation of (2), which is true. (This was pointed out by 
Arthur Pap 1959.)
So the Natural Class theory will have to deal with higher- 
order types in some other way. The obvious thing to try 
is higher-order natural classes: natural classes of natural 
classes. Red things form a natural class, so do the blue 
things, and so on. Perhaps to say that red is a color is to 
say that the natural class of red things is a member of a 
certain natural class of natural classes. One could then go on to 
say that red is more like orange than it is like yellow is to be 
analyzed in the following way. There is a natural class of 
classes whose members are the class of red things and the class 
of orange things. There is another natural class of classes 
whose members are the class of red things and the class of 
yellow things. But the first class of classes is more natural than 
the second:
{{red things), {orange things}} > n {{red things}, {yellow 
things}}
where >n is to be read as “is more natural than.”
But this second analysis, at least, is not satisfactory. It 
would fail if red things and orange things were very unalike in 
their other characteristics, while red things and yellow things 
were very alike in their other characteristics. The class of the 
red things and the class of the yellow things would then go 
together more naturally in a class of classes than the class of 
the red things and the class of the orange things. (Let the only 
red things be elephants, the only yellow things be 
rhinoceroses, and the only orange things be ripe oranges.) It 
does not matter that we have to make false suppositions about 
the nature of the world to falsify the analysis. For it is clear 
that even in an imaginary world, the color red would still be 
more like orange than it is like yellow.
In general, it seems likely that the Natural Class theory 
cannot explain the ordering of properties. That is a most serious
35

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
shortcoming, particularly in view of the pressing need to 
explain the systematic ordering of quantities: masses, lengths, 
and so on.
EX. The Apparatus of the Natural Class Theory
Finally, let us look at the apparatus that the Natural Class 
theory needs to postulate and see what difficulties, if any, 
there are as a result. First, the Natural Class theory is a class 
theory. Besides individuals, first-order tokens, the theory 
requires classes, including classes of higher order. I do not think 
that this is any reproach to the natural class view. Classes 
have turned out to be rather mysterious entities in modern 
metaphysics; nobody seems to have got a firm grip on their 
nature. But set theory is a well-established discipline whose 
truth we can hardly deny. This means that we must admit 
either that there are such things as classes or at least that 
statements about classes have definite truth conditions. 
(Statements about the average taxpayer have definite truth 
conditions although there is no thing that is the average 
taxpayer.) That should be good enough for the Natural Class 
theory.
Second, the Natural Class theory does require the relation 
of class membership holding between individuals and classes 
of individuals. It may be thought that here is a difficulty for 
the theory, because it analyzes relations in terms of classes (see 
Sec. VII of this chapter). Applied to the relation of class 
membership itself, the analysis has to use e , the relation in 
question, in the course of giving an analysis of e .
I used to think that that was a difficulty for class theories 
(see Armstrong 1978a, Ch. 4, Sec. VII). However, I now believe 
that the difficulty can be got around. But I will defer discussion 
of this until Chapter 3, Section XI.
We pass on, then, third, to the notion of natural class. 
Here we strike a prima facie problem. Naturalness of
36

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
class appears to be a property of classes—an unanalyzable 
property according to the theory, although it admits of 
degrees—a property that is a universal because many different 
classes all have it. Does the theory have to admit one 
universal here?
Perhaps a first step to meeting the difficulty is the 
following: We divide all classes whose members involve first- 
level individuals (tokens) only, into two sorts. First, there are 
classes that are totally heterogeneous: those that have no 
naturalness at all (0 on the naturalness scale). Second, there 
are classes that have some positive degree of naturalness. This 
second lot form a class: the class of all the natural classes. Now 
can we not say that this higher-order class is natural? And 
then we can suggest that what it is for each of the particular 
natural classes to be natural is simply for them to be members of 
this (super)natural class. It is true that we are left with a 
primitive—the naturalness of this big class of classes—that it 
seems we must treat as a property and take as a primitive in 
the theory. But it is not a universal, for it is not something 
repeated or repeatable.
This is only a first step, because there is still an account to be 
given of degrees of naturalness. One class may be more natural 
than another, less natural, or equally natural. These relations 
between classes will presumably have to be dealt with in the 
same way that the theory deals with relations between 
ordinary particulars. We saw in Section VII that relations 
constitute a difficulty for the Natural Class theory, but at 
least it can be argued here that relations between classes 
introduce no new difficulty of principle.
Fourth, and finally, the formal properties of naturalness of 
class are part of the cost of the theory. We noted in Section II 
that axioms for naturalness are required: in particular, that 
naturalness has a highest and a lowest degree. There is also 
the point that the assigning of intermediate degrees is a rough- 
and-ready, somewhat arbitrary, affair. (We compared such a 
ranking to the possible but loose ranking of societies in terms of
37

PRIMITIVE NATURAL CLASSES
the degrees of freedom that they enjoy.) These properties of 
naturalness of class have no further explanation. So they are 
part of the cost of the theory.
We have uncovered various difficulties for the Natural 
Class theory: the coextension problem, the way properties are 
naturally taken not to vary with the class of things having 
that property, the problem about relations, and the problem of 
higher-order types. All these problems would perhaps be 
solved (although others might be created) if the theory could 
only admit properties and relations. Nor would this involve 
abandoning Nominalism if properties and relations were 
admitted as particulars only (tropes).
Without properties and relations, individual objects are 
relatively structureless. Without properties and relations they 
can still have parts and be parts of larger wholes, and these 
parts may perhaps include temporal as well as the less 
controversial spatial parts. (You yesterday as a temporal part 
of you.) I therefore call the Natural Class theory, in the form 
that is put forward by Quinton, a Blob theory. The next theory 
to be examined, orthodox Resemblance Nominalism, is also a 
blob theory. By contrast, theories that admit properties and 
relations, whether as universals or particulars, may be called 
Layer-cake theories. For myself, I believe that they have 
substantial advantages over blob theories.
It is economical to try and get along without properties and 
relations. But I think it is a false economy. Blob theories do not 
give things enough structure.
38

CHAPTER THREE
Resemblance 
Nominalism
I. Properties of Resemblance
At this point we turn to a theory that is also a Nominalist 
theory, but that tries to analyze the notion of a natural class. 
The Natural Class theory treats the naturalness of a class as 
an overall or, as it were, a gestalt property of the class. The 
Resemblance theory, however, tries to analyze this property in 
terms of resemblance relations holding between the individual 
members of the class, in terms of what John Locke called “the 
similitudes between 
things.” This looks attractive. If 
naturalness is broken down into a multitude of resemblance 
relations, in many cases involving resemblances of different 
degrees, that might explain why degree of naturalness is a 
rather rough-and-ready or even indeterminate measure.
Resemblance has certain formal properties, which it is 
important to appreciate. As already mentioned/resemblanc| is _ 
like naturalness of class in admitting of decrees. Also like 
naturalness, there is a theoretical upper TtrniT of exact 
resemblance and a theoretical lower limit of no resemblance at 
all. Notice that only if each member of a class exactly
It is suggested that Chapter 1 of H. H. Price’s Thinking and Experience 
be used as a companion reading to this chapter.
39

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
resembles every other member nf that Hass do we get a natural 
class with the highest possible degree of unitv.
We should perhaps take quick and unfavorable notice of the 
view sometimes encountered that degrees of resemblance are 
quite arbitrary because with respect to any two things at all we 
can find an indefinite number of resemblances and an indefinite 
number of differences and that as a result, no two things are in 
themselves more, or less, alike than any other two. To take 
this view is really to go back to the view that there are no 
objective natural classes. It seems to depend upon quite 
gerrymandered resemblances and differences, perhaps using 
wildly disjunctive predicates. But it is not the case that ravens 
have any resemblance to writing desks just because both fall 
under the one predicate “either a raven or a writing desk”! We 
will, then, continue to assume that there are objective degrees 
oTresemblance.
Resemblance to a particular degree, to degree D say, is 
symmetrical. If a resembles b to degree D, then b resembles a to 
just that degree. If you resemble vour sister quite closely, then 
your sister rpgpmhlpc yrm tn jnc» frhafr camg degree. But 
resemblance to degree D is fcot transitivq. If a resembles b to 
degree D, and if b resembles c to the same degree, then it by no 
means follows that a resembles c to degree D. If you resemble 
your sister quite closely and your sister resembles your mother 
quite closely, it is perfectly possible that you have no 
close resemblance to your mother. Intuitively, this is because 
of the possibility that the pair (a, b} (you and your sister) 
and the pair {b, c) (your sister and your mother) resemble 
each other in different respects. Perhaps you and your sister 
resemble quite closely only in respect of looks, while your 
sister and your mother resemble quite closely only in respect 
of character. But talk about respects is dangerous talk for 
the Resemblance theory. It suggests an analysis of resemblance 
in terms of common (identical) features in the resembling 
things, common features that may differ from case to case. But 
that is the Realist theory, the Universals theory. The
40

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
I R e se m b la n theory takes resemblance to be an unanalvzable 
primitive. 
_
You do get^transitivity/in one special case: at the highest 
point in the scale. If a resembles b exactly and b resembles c
somebody else and that somebody else is exactly like a third 
person, then you must be exactly like that third person. This is 
an instance of a more general principle that will later prove to 
be of great importance. If a resembles b to degree D, then this 
degree of resemblance is always preserved if exactly 
resembling things are substituted for either a or b. If you 
resemble another person quite closely, then you will have 
exactly the same degree of resemblance to that person’s 
identical twin.
Returning to exact resemblance, it is convenient to say that 
the relation is reflexive, that is, that everything exactly 
resembles itself. Suppose that there exist two exactly 
resembling things. By symmetry we have both a exactly 
resembles b, and b exactly resembles a. But then by transitivity 
applied to the formulas in the previous sentence, we have a 
exactly resembles a.
I said “it is convenient to say” that exact resemblance is re­
flexive because I doubt whether much hangs on the claim. But 
it satisfies the demands of logicians, who say that if and only 
if a relation is symmetrical, transitive, and reflexive, then it 
picks out a very important sort of class: an equivalence class.
The interest of an equivalence class is that by means of its 
equivalence relation R, it divides up everything between 
which R holds (the field of R) into mutually exclusive classes 
of objects, classes without any members in common. Inside each 
equivalence class each member has R to every other member, 
but fails to have R to any other object. Thus because exact 
resemblance is an equivalence relation, it divides up the field 
of things that exactly resemble each other into mutually 
exclusive bundles. In this respect, it behaves like a universal 
without being one.
41

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
It might be thought that it is not very important that exact 
resemblance is an equivalence relation, because there are 
relatively few things, if any, that exactly resemble each 
other. But although the matter is not of immediate importance 
to us, there are some controversial entities between which, if 
they exist at all, exact resemblance is not an uncommon affair. 
These entities are properties and relations taken as 
particulars, what we have agreed to call tropes. For instance, 
the color trope associated with object a might exactly resemble 
the distinct color trope associated with distinct object b. 
Similarly for relation tropes, such as being one mile distant 
from, which hold between many pairs of objects. Equivalence 
classes of exactly resembling tropes, we shall see in Chapter 6, 
make very interesting substitutes for universals.
We may think of the various rules that we have met with in 
this section as Axioms of Resemblance that govern the notion of 
resemblance.
A final point before concluding the section: We have 
already noticed that the Natural Class theory must take the 
notion of degrees of naturalness as a primitive notion, but that 
the ordering of classes in such degrees is an imprecise affair 
(Chapter 2, Section II). Such an imprecise primitive is not very 
attractive.
The Resemblance theory analyzes the notion of a natural 
class in terms of networks of resemblance relations holding 
between the members of the class, relations that also admit of 
degree. But how precise are degrees of resemblance? We have 
rejected the idea that degrees of resemblance are quite 
arbitrary. But suppose that a and b resemble each other to a 
certain degree and that the same holds for c and d. I may be 
quite clear that a resembles b more than c resembles d. But will 
it be the case that for any pair of pairs, the first pair resembles 
more closely than the second pair, or resembles less closely, or 
resembles to the same degree? It seems rather implausible. 
Like naturalness of Hags, Hpgrpp nf resemblance seems to be a 
somewhat spotty and imprecise matter. As the logicians say, it
42

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
sets up a partial ordering only. This is not a very attractive 
feature of the resemblance relation from the point of view of a 
Resemblance Nominalist. It may suggest that resemblanceis 
not primitive but can be given some further analysis.
n. That Resemblance Is an Internal Relation 
and the Consequences of This
A very important further fact about resemblance is that it is an 
in tern al rather than an external relation. 
D ifferent 
philosophers seem to have had different things in mind when 
they spoke of internal and external relations, and in any case 
the definitions need to be formulated with some care. The 
distinction I have in mind was already made by Hume, 
although he had a clumsy terminology of “relations of ideas” 
(internal) and “relations of matters of fact” (external) 
(Treatise, Bk. 1, Pt. 1, Sec. V, and Pt. Ill, Sec. I).
A relation is internal, as I shall use the term, when given 
certain terms with certain natures, the relation must hold 
between the terms. It holds “in every possible world” that 
contains these terms and where these terms have these natures. 
With an external relation there is no such necessity. Given the 
numbers 4 and 2 as terms, then it follows, given the nature of 4 
and 2, that the^ stand in the relation of greater and less. “4 is 
greater than 2” therefore expresses an internal relation holding 
between these numbers. Contrast the case where a is a mile 
distant from b. In general, the existence of a and b and their 
natures fail to ensure that a is a mile distant from h. It is a 
contingent matter, not holding in every possible world, that a 
is a mile from b. (In general, spatiotemporal and causal 
relations are external. Of course, one could take ‘nature* so 
widely that being a mile from b was counted as part of the 
nature of a. With nature so defined one would have an— 
uninteresting—case of an internal relation.)
I think it is clear (and was recognized by Hume) that
43

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
resemblance is an internal relation. Given that two objects each 
have a certain nature, then their resemblance and its degrees 
are fixed. There is no possible world in which the objects 
remain unaltered but in which their degree of resemblance 
changes. Contrast this with distance. There is a possible world 
in which the objects remain unaltered but their distance from 
each other is changed. (Provided, of course, that ‘altered’ is 
not given so wide a sense as to include that very relation of 
distance.) Distance, therefore, is external.
Resemblance Nominalists seem not to have thought enough 
about the consequences of resemblance’s being an internal 
relation. (Neither had I, until quite recently.) As we have just 
seen, it is the mark of an internal, as opposed to an external, 
relation that the terms and their nature dictate the relation. A 
question that then arises for the Resemblance Nominalist is, 
what is it about the nature that determines the resemblance? A 
very natural answer is that the resemblance is dictated by 
common properties of the related things. But the Resemblance 
Nominalist is barred from saying this. So what can he say is 
the foundation for the internal relation?
He cannot desert the nature and say that the foundation is 
just the individual particulars or tokens, taken as mere 
particulars and tokens. That would be such a weak foundation 
for the relation that it would make it possible for anything to 
resemble anything. That is, resemblance would have to be 
what it is not: an external relation.
What the Resemblance Nominalist must say, I think, and A 
what is to his advantage to say is that resemblances do flow 
from the natures of the resembling things, but that these 
natures are not universal but particular, a has a certain nature, 
b has a certain nature. The natures are particular but are such 
that a and b must resemble to a certain degree. Given this 
nature, they resemble to this degree in every possible world in 
which they are both found.
Here is a way to understand the notion of a particularized 
nature. We have already seen in Chapter 1 that there are two
44

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
views on properties: the first, that they are universals; the 
second, that they are particulars. Let us start, then, by taking 
properties as particulars. Now take all the properties a thing 
has and form one big conjunctive but still particular property
out of them: P & Q & R & S &  
This conjunctive property is
on the way to being a particular nature.
But it has not quite got there yet. Resemblance Nominalism, 
or at any rate the form of Resemblance Nominalism that we 
are dealing with here, is a blob theory. It does not allow that a 
thing has many properties, except as a common but potentially 
misleading manner of speaking for which the theory will try 
to give satisfactory truth conditions. So now we have, as it 
were, to congeal the particular properties into a single grand 
(but still particular) property within which no differentiation 
can be made. Then we have the particularized nature of a 
thing. It is these particularized natures to which, I think, the 
Resemblance Nominalist ought to appeal as the grounding for 
the internal relation of resemblance.
Should the Resemblance Nominalist then distinguish 
between a particular and its particularized nature and think of 
the particular as having the nature? That would import 
some structure, even if a minimal amount, into the blob. It 
would seem to be more in the spirit of the theory because it 
would be more economical not to distinguish the particular 
from the particularized nature. The thing is its particularized 
nature.
But there may be difficulties in the second position. We 
want to say that a thing might have had at least some 
different properties from the ones it actually has. The ball is 
white, but it might have been green. Translated into the 
language of particularized natures this becomes: The ball’s 
particularized nature might have been other than it is. But if 
the ball’s particularized nature just is the ball, then to say 
that the nature might have been other than it is, is to say that 
the ball might not have been the ball. So the ball could not 
have been green.
45

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
I suspect, then, that a Resemblance Nominalist who 
embraces particularized natures will have to distinguish the 
thing from its nature. But this may not be too high a price to 
pay for some real advantages. I will now try to show that the 
doctrine of the particularized nature is of real value to the 
Resemblance Nominalist. It not only provides him with a 
foundation for resemblances but enables him to evade 
important traditional objections to Resemblance Nominalism.
One such objection is this: The theory analyzes what it is to 
be _a_ token of a certain type in terms of that token* s 
resemblances to other tokens. But what happens if the token 
lacks any other token to resemble? That is a possible situation. 
Would the token then not be of that type? Surely not. The type 
seems to be prior to anv respmhlanrp relation ihe-token may 
have to any other tokens. But is not this just what a 
Resem blance theory is forced to deny? (I myself used this 
argument against Resemblance Nominalism in the past. See 
Armstrong 1978a, Ch. 5, Sec. V.)
The doctrine of a particularized nature seems to meet this 
difficulty. The object has its nature, even if it resembles 
nothing else. This nature is the foundation for attributing a 
type to it. There might have been other things with 
particularized natures, which if they had existed, would have 
sufficiently resembled the solitary object, but it does not matter 
that the other things do not exist.
There is another objection to Resemblance Nominalism: 
Might there not be two nonoverlapping classes of tokens of two 
different types (the red things and the green things perhaps) 
that nevertheless have the very same resemblance structure? If 
we drew up a resemblance map for either class, specifying the 
precise degree of resemblance each member had to each other, 
it could be transferred exactly to the other class. But by 
hypothesis the two classes are classes of things of a different 
sort or type. How is this possible if type is constituted by 
resemblance relations? It may be suggested that the things in 
the two different classes would have different resemblance
46

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
relations to other things, to third parties outside the two 
classes. But the reply to this is that the existence of third 
parties is contingent. The red things would be of the specific 
type red, and the green things would be of the specific type 
green, even if everything there is were either red or green.
Particularized natures provide a good answer here also. 
There seems no reason why two sets of things with 
particularized natures should not have the same resemblance 
structure within each of the sets, yet be classes of different 
sorts of things. So particularized natures are both required (to 
ground the internal relation of resemblance) and useful (to 
answer some traditional objections).
m. Constructing a Resemblance Class
We have not yet considered how a resemblance class can actu­
ally be constructed. H. H. Price (1953, Ch. 1, pp. 20-22) does it 
in this way. We begin with “a small group of standard objects 
or exemplars.” For red objects the members of the group might 
be “a certain tomato, a certain brick and a certain British post­
box.” It is allowed, however, that the class as a whole may 
contain a number of different groups, each of them fitted to be 
groups of standard objects. What each member of such a group 
does is to set up a resemblance test. To be red a thing must pass 
all the tests. A thing passes all the tests by resembling each of 
the paradigm objects at least as closely as the paradigm objects 
resemble each other. (To see that there must be a resemblance 
to each paradigm object, think of a blue brick. It may resemble 
the red brick paradigm object very closely. But, we would say, 
the resemblance is in “irrelevant respects.” The blue brick is 
eliminated because it does not have sufficient resemblance to 
the other members of the standard group.)
The class of colored things is a wider class than the class of 
red things. For it, the paradigm objects will have to be “set 
wider apart,” that is, the degree of resemblance between them
47

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
will have to be less. Notice what a heavy weight has to be put 
upon degrees of resemblance. If the classes are to be objectively 
there, then the degrees of resemblance will have to be 
objectively there.
Price sees an advantage here over a Universals theory. On 
the latter theory the different members of the class will all 
instantiate the very same universal. Nor can we make much 
sense of degrees of instantiation. But resemblance admits of 
degrees, thus allowing for loosely held together classes, 
involving different degrees of resemblance and with uncertain 
boundaries. That is just what is needed.
IV. Identity Conditions for Classes Are No Problem
We saw that because a class is determined by its members, the 
Natural Class view is in trouble when we consider the 
possibility of the class’s having a different membership. Being 
an electron would necessarily change if the class of electrons 
were any bigger or smaller. But this consequence seems absurd.
It is interesting to notice that this difficulty is not a 
difficulty for the Resemblance theory. Provided that an 
appropriate resemblance structure is preserved, it does not 
matter that the class has members added or subtracted. For 
instance, if H. H. Price’s account is correct, all that matters is 
that there should be at least one paradigm group to set the 
boundaries, and that a thing have the right resemblance 
relations to that group, for the thing to be of the type marked 
out by the paradigms.
Indeed, in an important sense Resemblance Nominalism is 
not a class theory at all. Rather, to be a token of a certain type 
is to be a term in a suitable resemblance structure of tokens, 
where the resemblance structure flows from the natures 
(particular natures) of the tokens. (We shall see, however, 
that when we come to discuss resemblances involving relations, 
classes may have to be reintroduced.)
48

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
V. Does Resemblance Determine Type?
We brought the following criticism against the Natural Class 
theory: It is plausible to say that a token is of a certain type 
because of the token’s nature rather than that a token is of that 
type because of the class it is a member of. Can we not bring the 
same sort of difficulty against a Resemblance theory? Do not 
things resemble each other, to the extent that they do, because 
of what they are in themselves, in their own nature, rather 
than that they are of that nature because they resemble? The 
difficulty already considered in Section II, that a thing may be 
of a type without anything to resemble, is a close relative of 
this objection.
If you think of the things, the tokens, as mere tokens, simply 
numerically different from each other, you would have to say 
that resemblances come first and determine nature. But the 
doctrine of particularized natures foils this unwelcome 
conclusion. Once such natures are accepted, the Resemblance 
Nominalist can say the comfortable thing: that resemblance 
flows from nature and not nature from resemblance.
It remains true, however, that the particularized natures 
are a somewhat blunt instrument. Consider the top traffic light 
at an intersection. It will resemble other red things and other 
round things. Both these resemblances have to flow from the 
one particularized nature. Yet it is rather natural to distin­
guish the redness of the light from its roundness and explain 
these two dimensions of resemblance by reference to two prop­
erties. The trouble is that the Resemblance theory, even when 
filled out with particularized natures, is a blob theory. It does 
not admit properties. So it cannot make the natural distinction.
VI. The Causal Argument
The same problem becomes still more pressing if causality is 
brought into consideration. Go back to the causal argument
49

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
against the Natural Class theory. We said that a thing acts in 
virtue of the type of thing it is, yet one wants to say that it is 
just the thing that acts. The other members of the class 
associated with that type are causally irrelevant. A 
Resemblance Nominalism can attribute the causal power of a 
thing to its particularized nature, thus beginning to escape this 
difficulty.
But trouble remains. We think that things act in virtue of 
their properties. The object acts on the scalepan in virtue of its 
mass, and not in virtue of its electric charge. For the 
Resemblance Nominalist, however, mass and charge are lost 
inside the single seamless particularized nature. As a result, no 
complete answer to the causal argument can be given. All that 
can be said is that the object acts qua resembler of certain 
things (mass things), rather than qua resembler of other things 
(charged things). But this reintroduces the causally irrelevant. 
(It would be troublesome if there were no other massy things 
and no other charged things.)
VII. The Coextension Problem Again
We saw that the Natural Class theory, like any class theory, 
is in difficulty if there can be two different properties that are 
had by the very same individuals. There is no way of 
distinguishing the two properties.
The Resemblance theory runs into the same sort of trouble. 
Suppose that properties P and Q are coextensive. In virtue 
of this, members of the class of Ps and Qs will have a cer­
tain mutual resemblance each to each. But how is the theory 
to distinguish between the contribution P makes to these 
resemblances and the contribution made by Q? After all, 
between any two members of the class there is just a single 
resemblance to a certain degree. The information that 
the resemblance of the tokens is given by two properties is 
lost inside the single resemblance. There seems no way
50

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
to recover it. Yet are not coextensive properties at least 
possible?
vm . Relations
There has been little discussion of relations by Resemblance 
Nominalists. The chief problem seems to be to identify the 
terms between which the relevant resemblances are supposed 
to hold. It is a little tricky. Suppose that a precedes b in time 
and so does c precede d. Here we have two states of affairs, and 
it is natural enough to say that they resemble each other. But 
Resemblance Nominalism knows nothing about such states of 
affairs. If there are such entities, then they involve properties 
and relations—entities that the Resemblance theory is trying 
to provide a substitute for via resemblance structures.
Does the resemblance hold between the thing composed 
of the two parts a and b and the thing composed of the two 
parts, c and d? The trouble with this answer is that the 
resemblance we are interested in is not any old resemblance 
between the two things. One part of the first thing stands to 
the remainder of the first thing in a way that resembles the 
way one part of the second thing stands to the remainder of the 
second thing. But that description already involves the notion 
of a relation. How is the Resemblance theory to point us in the 
right direction when it is merely working with resembling 
things?
Could we solve the problem by allowing the resemblance 
relation to take a different number of terms in different cases? 
Where properties such as redness are involved, the relation is 
two-termed: Res (a, b). But where we have a resemblance 
between a’s preceding b and c’s preceding d, the resemblance 
would be four-termed: Res (a, b, c, d). Where the relations to be 
analyzed involved more than two terms, then the resemblance 
would link a still greater number of terms. Because of its 
variable number of terms, resemblance would be what logicians
51

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
call a multigrade or anadic relation. (Being surrounded by is a 
typical multigrade relation.)
I do not think that this is satisfactory. It is surely obvious 
that in the case of the alleged four-termed relation there is a 
key division after the term b. The a b complex stands in some 
way to the c d complex. What way? It can only be resemblance. 
But that is two-term resemblance. We are then back to trying to 
say what we mean by the a b complex and the c d complex 
without bringing in the relation of preceding and which thing 
precedes which.
It seems, then, that we will have to look to classes. The 
resemblance, we might say, holds between the ordered pair 
<a,b> and <c, d>, or else their unordered Wiener-Kuratowski 
substitutes, {{a), [a,b}} and ((c), (c, d}}.
But this solution faces the same difficulty that was brought 
against the Natural Class theory. If the relation involved is 
asymmetrical or nonsymmetrical then <a, b> and <c, d> will 
serve either as a succeeds b and c succeeds d or the other way 
round: b succeeds a and d succeeds c. This suggests that the 
classes represent the resemblances but do not constitute them. 
So we are left with the problem of the true nature of the terms 
of the resemblance relations. And in any case to appeal to 
classes means that those difficulties that the Natural Class 
theory faces that depend on the identity conditions for classes, 
and that it seemed that Resemblance Nominalism can ignore, 
cannot be ignored for the case of relations.
EX. HIgher-Order Types
The Resemblance theory faces the same sort of difficulties 
with higher-order types that the Natural Class theory does. 
The reason is the same: the absence of properties and relations.
We have already seen that the statements ‘red is a color* 
and ‘red resembles orange more than it resembles yellow’ 
cannot be reduced to statements about individual red, orange,
52

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
and yellow objects. (The same would go for ‘a yard is a length’ 
or statements that order the different lengths, such as ‘a yard 
is less than a meter and greater than a foot’.) One might try to 
analyze ‘red is a color’ as placing the resemblance class of red 
things in a certain class of resemblance classes (the color class). 
Each member of the class of classes (the color class) would 
resemble each other, in different degrees. But what can be done 
with ‘red resembles orange more than it resembles yellow’? 
The trouble, we intuit, is that any resemblance between 
resemblance classes might be determined in its degree of 
resemblance more by other irrelevant properties of the red, 
orange, and yellow things, thus swamping the degrees of 
resemblance bestowed on the objects by their colors.
X. The Resemblance Regress
We now come tp the most famous of all the criticisms of 
Resemblance Nominalism. The argument was anticipated by 
J. S. Mill and then formulated more penetratingly by Husserl 
(for references see Armstrong 1978a, p. 54 n.). But it was given 
its classical exposition by Bertrand Russell in The Problems of 
Philosophy (1912, pp. 150-151). Here is what he said:
If we wish to avoid the universals whiteness and triangularity, 
we shall choose some particular patch of white or some 
particular triangle, and say that anything is white or a triangle 
if it has the right sort of resemblance to our chosen particular. 
But then the resemblance required will have to be a universal. 
Since there are many white things, the resemblance must hold 
between many pairs of particular white things; and this is the 
characteristic of a universal. It will be useless to say that there 
is a different resemblance to each pair, for then we will have to 
say that these resemblances resemble each other, and thus at 
last we shall be forced to admit resemblance as a universal. The 
relation of resemblance therefore, must be a true universal and 
having been forced to admit this universal, we find that it is no
53

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
longer worthwhile to invent difficult and implausible theories to
avoid the admission of such universals as whiteness and
triangularity.
This brilliant argument is an example of what I called a 
relation regress (perhaps it should be called the fundamental 
relation regress argument or the nexus regress). The general 
form of the argument is this. You take the “fundamental 
relation" used by a particular solution to the Problem of 
Universals. For Predicate Nominalism this will be applying to 
(as general words apply to objects); for Class Nominalism it 
will be class membership; for Resemblance Nominalism, 
resemblance; for Realism about universals, instantiation (a 
thing’s being an instance of a universal). You then ask how the 
theory is going to deal with its own fundamental relation. As 
Russell argued in the particular case of resemblance, the 
procedure leads to a regress because the fundamental relation 
has to be used again: applied to tokens of itself. But having 
been used again, it has to be analyzed again, and so ad 
infinitum. Of course, a regress is not necessarily fatal, because 
some regresses are virtuous not vicious. (An example of a 
virtuous regress is the truth regress: p, p is true, it is true that p 
is true,. . .  It is quite harmless.) But Russell is in effect arguing 
that the resemblance regress is vicious because the problem to 
be solved, namely the question what it is for a token to be of a 
certain type, turns up again in the alleged solution. The 
solution uses tokens of the resemblance relation without 
explaining how the type resemblance is brought inside the 
theory.
Is the argument sound? It is certainly very plausible, and 
has convinced many people. I used to be convinced by it myself 
(1978a, Ch. 5, Sec. VI), but now I am not. One major trouble that 
Russell, and I following him, overlooked is that all solutions to 
the Problem of Universals, including realism about universals, 
require a fundamental relation. But if so, the regress that 
Russell finds in the case of resemblance reappears with the
54

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
other theories. Class membership is a relation. Must not a 
Class Nominalist analyze the holding of the relation in the 
same way that he analyzes the holding of other relations? But 
that was done in terms of ordered classes. For a to precede b is 
for the ordered class <a, b> to be a member of a certain class of 
ordered classes: <a, b> e {<a, b>, <c, d> , . . . } .  The same type 
of infinite regress that Russell noticed for resemblance looms. 
The same thing happens with instantiation. A particular, a, 
instantiates universal F. But what of the relation of 
instantiation? Must not the pair, a and F, instantiate the 
universal of instantiation, and so ad infinitum?
Russell claims that the resemblance regress is vicious. But if 
it is vicious in this case, it is hard to deny that it is vicious in 
all the other cases. They do not seem any different. However, 
unless you think that the Problem of Universals is a pseudo- 
problem, and therefore cannot have a solution, that is an 
impossible conclusion to accept. If, alternatively, it is not 
vicious in one of the cases, say in the case of the nexus of 
instantiation, then it will be hard to claim that it is vicious in 
the case of the other regresses.
Ironically, I now think that the Universals theory is in 
somewhat more trouble with the relation of instantiation than 
the Resemblance theory is with the relation of resemblance. 
That will be discussed in Chapter 5.
Now to say why I think that Russell’s argument fails. We 
have already noted in Section II of this chapter that 
resemblance is an internal relation, logically dependent upon 
the terms between which the relation holds. But because the 
Resemblance theory is a Nominalist theory, that from which 
the relation flows cannot be the possession of common 
properties by the related objects. Rather, we said, resemblance 
must flow internally from the particularized nature of the 
resembling objects.
Given the natures of a and b, they must resemble to the exact 
degree that they do resemble. (Although it would be possible 
for them to resemble to that exact degree yet have different
55

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
natures.) The conclusion that I wish to draw from this is that 
the resemblance is not an additional fact about the world over 
and above the possession by a and b of the particularized 
natures that they have. The relation supervenes on the 
natures, and if it supervenes, I suggest, it is not distinct from 
what it supervenes upon.
(The notion of supervenience has been much used in 
contemporary philosophy. Different philosophers have 
defined it a little differently. I favor, and will use, a 
definition in terms of possible worlds. Entity Q supervenes on 
entity P if and only if every possible world that contains P 
contains Q. This definition allows particular cases of 
supervenience to be symmetrical: P and Q can supervene on each 
other. I should add that I think that possible worlds are no 
more than useful fictions. I work this approach out in a book on 
the nature of possibility, Armstrong 1989.)
For the case of Resemblance Nominalism the fundamental 
tie supervenes. I think that this means that we do not have to 
take it too seriously metaphysically. It is an ontological free 
lunch. The truth-maker, the ontological ground, that in the 
world which makes it true that the tie holds, is simply the 
resembling things. More precisely, according to what I have 
argued is the best version of the Resemblance theory, the 
ontological ground is the particularized nature of these things. 
The tie is not something extra. But if it is not something extra, 
we do not have to worry abut whether these ties are universals 
or mere particulars that each resemble each other. The regress 
is as harmless as, say, the truth regress.
So I think that the Resemblance Nominalist can face down 
this famous argument. Moreover, and very important, if this 
suggested reply is correct, then it is also available to a Natural 
Class Nominalist, a’s having the property F is analyzed as a’s 
being a member of the natural class [a, b, c, . . . ) .  But given the 
object a, and given a certain natural class one of whose members 
happens to be a, the class membership relation supervenes. But 
if it supervenes, it is not something ontologically additional to
56

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
the individuals and the natural classes of the individuals. As 
a result, the regress is as harmless as the truth regress. So I 
think that both Resemblance Nominalism and the Natural 
Class theory can evade the nexus regress.
XI. The Apparatus of the Resemblance Theory
We have seen that provided that we are prepared to postulate 
particularized natures, then we do not in addition require a 
resemblance relation. For the resemblances flow from the 
natures. The resemblance relation has various properties. It 
admits of degrees, although exact degrees cannot always be 
assigned very precisely. The scale has an upper limit, exact 
resemblance, and a lower limit, no resemblance at all. (It is a 
question whether these limits are ever in fact reached.) 
Resemblance to a certain degree is always symmetrical, but it 
is not transitive except for the special case of exact 
resemblance. If a and b resemble to a certain degree, this degree 
is unaffected if an object that exactly resembles a is substituted 
for a. The same holds for b.
Even although resemblance relations supervene on 
particularized natures, I think these features of resemblance 
are part of the ontological cost of the theory. For these features 
have to be taken as primitive, and therefore unexplained, 
axioms of resemblance. Particularized natures are such that 
they necessarily sustain resemblance relations obeying these 
axioms. A certain theoretical burden, therefore, is placed on 
the particularized natures. Just how great this theoretical 
burden is I will bring out later when discussing universals 
(Chapter 5, Section X). It emerges that once universals are 
accepted, the formal properties of resemblance can be 
explained by nothing more mysterious than the formal 
properties of strict identity.
What of the particularized natures? Do they represent a 
diseconomy? In some ways they may be an economy. This would 
be so particularly if we did not need to distinguish between
57

RESEMBLANCE NOMINALISM
things—tokens—and their natures. If the thing just is the 
particularized nature, then the thing is being given a minimum 
of structure. And even if a thing and its nature must be 
distinguished in some way, as I earlier suggested may be the 
case, it may still be said to be a more economical scheme than a 
thing with a whole bunch of separate properties and relations 
to other things.
At the same time, however, it is likely that this blobbiness 
of things—this absence of structure in things—is a false 
economy. For we have seen that, like the Natural Class 
theory, the resemblance attempt to get along without 
properties and relations in its fundamental ontological 
catalogue leads to a great many very difficult problems. The 
theories now to be investigated, the layer-cake theories, solve 
this problem at a stroke by allowing the real existence of 
properties and relations, in greater or lesser numbers. Of course, 
it may turn out that the new theories push down this 
conspicuous bulge in the carpet only to have it reappear 
elsewhere in the carpet, and as bulgy as ever. We will have to 
see.
58

CHAPTER FOUR
Particulars 
as Bundles 
of Universals
I. Substance-Attribute Versus Bundle Theories
We are now going to allow that there are such things in the 
world as properties and relations, such things as the mass and 
charge of electrons, or the betweenness that holds between an 
amber traffic light, on the one hand, and its red and green 
companions, on the other. We have not yet decided whether 
these properties and relations should be taken to be 
repeatables (universals) or nonrepeatables (particulars, that 
is, tropes).
One question that immediately comes up is how we ought to 
understand the relation between an individual thing—a 
token—and the properties that the thing has. And here we 
find that two different models compete for the allegiance of 
philosophers. First, there are Substance-attribute theories and 
second, there are Bundle theories.
The classical, or standard, theory is the Substance-attribute
It is suggested that Part IV, Chapter 8, of Bertrand Russell's Human 
Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits be used as a companion reading to this 
chapter.
59

PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
theory: It is natural to distinguish a thing, an individual, a 
token, from any particular properties that the thing happens 
to have. The table is hard, brown, rectangular, and so on. But it 
is not identical with its hardness, brownness, rectangularity. 
These properties are rather naturally taken to be things it 
merely has. (As we have seen, hard-line nominalists do not 
allow that the thing has any properties, except in a mere 
manner of speaking.) With thing and properties thus 
distinguished, even if very intimately connected, we have 
what may be called a substance-attribute view.
There can be epistemological problems associated with a 
substance-attribute view. Notoriously these were raised by 
John Locke. He spoke of the factor of particularity in things, as 
opposed to their properties, as their substance, or substratum. 
(As Keith Campbell has suggested to me, the substratum is the 
nut at the center of the layer cake!)
Before considering Locke’s epistemology of substance, let 
us take note of an important matter of terminology. In the 
British Empiricist tradition, ‘substance’ has usually meant the 
factor of particularity, what Locke called the substratum. 
The great hostility to substance that you find in the 
British tradition has been hostility to substratum. Let us call 
the substratum substance in the thin sense, or the thin 
particular. But now notice that substance can also mean 
substratum plus properties. This is a usage that we associate 
with Aristotle and the Scholastic philosophers. Let us call 
this substance in the thick sense. Substratum plus properties 
constitutes the thick 
particular. Aristotle’s primary 
substances—individual things, this man, this horse—are thick 
particulars.
Come back now to Locke. For him the substratum, the factor 
of particularity, the thin particular, is a mere postulate, even 
if it is one he said that the mind has to make. He called it 
“something I know not what” that in some mysterious way 
supports the properties of things. It was this rather 
unsatisfactory doctrine that led to the British Empiricist
60

PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
suspicion of substance. They were really reacting against 
Locke’s unknowable substratum. This in turn created a climate 
of opinion favorable to the Bundle theory, which gets rid of 
substratum by identifying a thing with the bundle of its 
properties.
But it is not really necessary for a Substance-attribute 
theorist to take a Lockean line. Why should not such a theorist 
say that what we actually experience are particulars-having- 
certain-properties? That seems a good epistemology for the 
substance-attribute ontology. The particularity of particulars, 
their having certain properties (and their standing in relations 
to other particulars) will all be given in our experience of the 
world. Specifically, all this will be given in our perception of 
the world.
Before going on, I will call attention to an interesting way 
that a substance-attribute view might be developed, although 
I cannot discuss this development at length. Once Locke’s view 
is rejected and substratum is brought into our actual experience 
of the world, we can begin to wonder just what in experience 
substratum is to be identified with. An important candidate is 
the place that a thing is said to occupy or, perhaps even better, 
the place and time that it occupies. Properties, according to 
this suggestion, including maybe spatial and temporal 
properties (shape, size, duration), are supported by, inhere in, 
or qualify places or place-times.
In support of this suggestion it may be noted that if things 
occupy different places at the same time, then they must be 
different things. What if things occupy the same place at 
different times? The case contemplated can be what ordinary 
language would describe as the same thing at the two different 
times—you are back here where you started from. However, it 
is quite plausible to say that in such a case it is different 
temporal parts of you that are in the same place, so that, 
strictly, nothing is at the same place at different times.
What would really strengthen the identification of 
substratum with place-time would be if it were impossible for
61

PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
two different things to be at the very same place and time. And 
it is true that this is what we ordinarily assume. However, 
there are reasons to think that such a piling up of different 
things in strictly the same place at the same time may be a 
possibility. If so, place-time is not the whole story about the 
particularity of particulars.
Leaving aside this interesting question, we note that in the 
substance-attribute view the fundamental tie or nexus holding 
between thin particular and properties appears to be 
asymmetrical. This electron has a certain charge. It is not the 
case that the charge has the electron.
Contrast this with the fundamental tie in the case of the 
bundle view, where the particular is thought of as a mere 
bundle of properties. The particular stands to one of its 
properties as a whole stands to a mere part, and that is 
asymmetrical. But the really fundamental tie seems to be that 
between two properties of the same thing, what Russell called 
compresence. That relation is symmetrical.
The substance-attribute view has to be extended to cover 
relations. (We have already noted that our philosophical 
tradition tended to play down relations until quite recently— 
until the twentieth century.) If event a precedes event b, it is 
not plausible to see this as a matter of a single thing’s having a 
certain property. We have a different sort of tie or nexus that 
links together a, the relation of preceding, and b. The events a 
and b have or stand in a certain relation.
It is interesting to notice that the Bundle theory also has to 
change gear when it comes to relations. If a precedes b, then you 
cannot just make a bundle out of a's properties, b's properties, 
and the relation precedes. Could you perhaps use bundles of 
bundles, where the lower-level bundles are the a bundle, the b 
bundle, with the relation of preceding in a third little bundle 
of its own? This might possibly work for symmetrical relations, 
but with an asymmetrical relation it would fail to distinguish 
a's preceding b from b's preceding a. These two situations would 
come out as the very same bundle of bundles.
62

PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
It looks as if bundling fails here. You just have to relate the 
bundles, just as a substance-attribute view relates two or more 
substances. Two or more bundles have or stand in a certain 
relation.
Therefore, we have a choice of a substance-attribute 
ontology, plus relations between substances; or a bundle view, 
plus relations between bundles. But all this time we have been 
keeping quiet about the nature of properties and relations. 
Should we take them to be repeatables, that is, to be univer­
sals? Or should we take them to be nonrepeatables, to be par­
ticulars, to be tropes? Both positions have their attractions.
At once, we get a two-by-two division of theories. We have 
Substance-attribute theories with universals or with tropes. 
We have Bundle theories with universals or with tropes:
Substance-attribute
Bundle
All the four boxes are filled. I is the traditional view taken 
by those who accept universals. II, the bundle-of-universals 
view, was held by Russell and also by the American 
philosopher, Brand Blanshard. Ill, the bundle-of-tropes view, 
is the orthodox position for a contemporary upholder of tropes. 
G. F. Stout held it, and D. C. Williams after him. It is 
currently held by Keith Campbell. It is often not realized that 
IV, a substance-attribute view with tropes, is a possible view. 
But I think that it was held, or should have been held, by 
Locke. I think indeed it is a stronger view than the orthodox
Universals__________ Tropes
Traditional 
1
Locke
C. B. Martin
Russell 
11
G. F. Stout 
111 
D. C. Williams
63

PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
trope view held by Stout and Williams. (See Russell 1940, Chs. 
6, 8, 24; 1948, Pt. 4, Ch. 8; 1959, Ch. 14; Blanshard 1939, Vol. 1, 
Chs. 16,17; 1962, Ch. 9; Stout 1921; 1936; Williams 1966, Ch. 7; 
Campbell 1981.)
Locke definitely held a substance-attribute view of 
particulars. As we have just seen, he held it in a rather 
unlovely form, taking substance (substratum, the thin 
particular) as the unknowable support of things. But 
that scepticism-inducing version is not of special interest 
for us at the moment. Locke was also an explicit nominalist, 
holding that everything there is, is purely particular. There 
were no universals in his world. But, finally, he was always 
talking about the qualities of things. These are properties and 
he seems to have taken them ontologically seriously. So his 
qualities ought to be tropes. Yet he did not bundle his 
properties, rather he had a substance-attribute view.
A contemporary philosopher who accepts a Lockean view is 
C. B. Martin. In his “Substance Substantiated” (1980) he accepts 
a substance-attribute view of objects. He explicitly rejects the 
idea that a particular is a bundle of its properties but takes 
properties to be particulars, not universals. He attributes the 
same view to Locke. (Martin does not make substratum 
unknowable.) See also Denkel, 1989.
We will now consider the interesting, but difficult and not 
widely held, view that particulars are bundles of universals. 
It is the most anti-Nominalist view of all. But perhaps it is 
the least plausible of the four views to be found in our 2 x 2  
matrix.
n. The Identity of Indiscernlbles
If the bundle-of-universals view is correct, then it follows that 
two different things cannot have exactly the same properties, 
where properties are universals. For given this theory, they 
would be exactly the same thing. However, against the Bundle
64

PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
theory, it seems possible that two things should have exactly 
the same properties, that is, be exactly alike. (It is to be noted 
that, for reasons mentioned in the previous section, positions in 
space and time do not count as differences in properties. 
Neither, of course, do such pseudo-properties as being identical 
with a.)
What I have just said is recognized to be an important 
argument against the bundle-of-universals analysis. (It would 
have no force against a bundle-of-tropes view.) But to assess 
the force of the argument we need some preliminaries. First, we 
must distinguish between nonrelational or intrinsic properties, 
on the one hand, and relational properties on the other. 
Relational properties are not to be confused with relations. 
They involve, but are not the same thing as, relations. An 
example of a relational property is being 2 centimeters from an 
electron. It involves the relation type being 2 centimeters from, 
which is a dyadic relation. But being 2 centimeters from an 
electron is monadic: It is a property of certain individual 
things. Notice that properties like being 2 centimeters from 
this electron or living in Australia are also sometimes spoken 
of as relational properties. But here we will call them impure 
(as opposed to pure) relational properties because they 
involve certain particulars: this electron, the continent of 
Australia. If we are trying to construct particulars out of 
universals we shall, of course, only be interested in pure 
relational properties.
Having now introduced the notion of a relational property, 
we turn our attention to two principles that we have already 
encountered in Chapter 1: the Indiscemibility of Identicals and 
the Identity of Indiscemibles. The first of these, the 
Indiscemibility of Identicals, says that if a is identical with 
b—the morning star with the evening star, Jack the Ripper 
with Miss X, and so on—then they have all their properties in 
common. This is a very plausible doctrine and few 
philosophers think that it is false. It appears that the 
principle, which may be rendered symbolically as:
65

PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
(Vx)(Vy)«x = y) 3  (VP)(Px S Py))
(for all objects x and y, if x is identical with y, then x has a 
property if and only if y has that property) is not only true, but 
necessarily true. Same thing, same properties.
But the Identity of Indiscemibles (which is our present 
concern) is much more controversial. It is the converse of the 
Indiscemibility of Identicals, and the converse of a truth is not 
automatically true. It says that if two things have the very 
same properties, then they are the very same thing. In 
symbols:
(V*)(Vy)((VP)(P* = Py) 3 (x  = y)).
(For all objects x and y, if x has a property if and only if y has 
that property, then x is identical with y.)
McTaggart rather helpfully called the Identity of 
Indiscemibles the “Dissimilarity of the Diverse” (1921, Sec. 
XCIX). (In logician’s terms he took the logically equivalent 
contrapositive of the above formula.) McTaggart’s formulation 
brings out very clearly that if particulars are just bundles of 
universals, then different particulars must contain at least one 
different universal.
We may now distinguish between a strong and a weak form 
of the Identity of Indiscemibles. In the strong form we confine 
ourselves to nonrelational properties. To satisfy the strong form 
of the Identity of Indiscemibles as applied to the Bundle 
theory, any two particulars must have at least one different 
nonrelational property. The weak form of the principle lets in 
relational properties. Any two particulars must have at least 
one different property, but it could be a mere relational 
property.
Let us consider in turn these two possibilities for the Bundle 
theory. Suppose first that it turns out to be necessary for a 
Bundle theorist to uphold the strong version of the theory. Is it 
defensible? The strong version does not seem to be a necessary
66

PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
truth. Surely it is possible that two numerically different 
things could have exactly the same nonrelational properties? 
It might still be wondered whether the strong view is not true 
as a matter of contingent fact. There is a famous passage from 
Leibniz:
There is no such thing as two individuals indiscernible from each 
other. An ingenious gentleman of my acquaintance, discoursing 
with me, in the presence of her Electoral Highness the Princess 
Sophia, in the garden of Herrenhausen; thought he could find 
two leaves perfectly alike. The Princess defied him to do it, and 
he ran all over the garden a long time to look for some; but it was 
to no purpose. Two drops of water, or milk, viewed with a 
microscope, will appear distinguishable from each other, (p. 36 
in the H. G. Alexander edition of The 
Leibniz-Clarke 
Correspondence)
But what about the submicroscopic level? It would seem that 
two electrons, for instance, could have exactly the same 
nonrelational properties. It appears to be physically possible. 
Perhaps from time to time the possibility is actualized.
In any case, however, could a Bundle theorist hold that the 
identity of a thing with the bundle of its nonrelational 
properties is contingent only? This is not a very plausible 
position (and not one held by Leibniz). It would seem that if 
the Bundle theory is true, it is a theory about the essential 
constitution of individual things, namely, that they are 
bundles of properties. That would make the theory a necessary 
truth, if it is true at all. And then to falsify it, all that is 
needed is the mere logical possibility of two things with 
exactly the same nonrelational properties. That logical 
possibility seems to obtain.
The moral of all this is that the Bundle theorist is in serious 
difficulties if he holds the strong view. If we suppose that he 
takes the weak view and identifies a thing with the bundle of 
its nonrelational plus relational properties, do things 
improve? Then a difference in relational properties will be
67

PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
enough, although these relational properties must be 
universals.
The matter is a bit more controversial, but even in its weak 
version the Identity of Indiscemibles does not appear to be a 
necessary truth. Various cases have been thought up to try to 
support this conclusion. One interesting case is the possibility 
of eternal return. Suppose that the history of the universe is 
cyclical, with no first cycle and the cycles repeating 
themselves exactly, down to the smallest detail, and doing so 
forever. It can be seen that an object in one cycle and its 
counterparts in all the other cycles are not merely internally 
exactly the same but that their relational properties are 
exactly the same, including relations to previous and 
succeeding cycles. Remember that the relational properties 
must be pure (wholly universal). Note also that if there were a 
first or a last cycle, then you could differentiate cycles, and the 
things in them, by different relational properties (seventeenth 
cycle from nothing).
This case can be challenged. You can argue that what you get 
at the end of a cycle is not a new token of exactly the same type 
as that at the beginning of the cycle, but rather the very same 
token. You can argue, that is, that the case given is really one 
where time is circular and that any event is both before and 
after itself. Then the case would not be a counterinstance to the 
thesis that the weak Identity of Indiscemibles is a necessary 
truth.
In reply to this, though it may be a logical possibility that 
time is circular in this way (compare finite but unbounded 
space), it does not seem that we have to redescribe the case in 
this way. Infinite repetition, where the cycles are type- 
identical, yet are different tokens, seems also to be a 
possibility. If so, the weak Identity of Indiscemibles is only a 
contingent truth. (It is hard to believe that it is actually 
false.)
Robert Adams (1979) has discovered a very beautiful 
argument for the possibility of the exact repetition of

PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
numerically identical cycles. It may be called “the argument 
from almost indiscernible cycles.” It can hardly be denied that 
it is possible that the universe is infinite in time, infinite at 
both ends. Suppose that it goes in cycles, say, expansion 
followed by contraction, and that the cycles are more or less 
the same. This surely is a possibility. Now make the cycles 
more and more alike. Get them so that the different cycles 
differ only in the exact excitation levels of a few electrons. 
Again, this should be a possibility. Now why cannot we close 
the small remaining gap? Why cannot we reach exact likeness 
of each of the cycles while keeping the cycles numerically 
distinct, keeping them as distinct tokens?
Think of the matter in terms of possibility. For each electron 
in the different, but closely resembling, series, is it not possible 
that their levels of excitation, et cetera, should have been a 
little bit different? These possibilities for each electron are 
surely logically independent of each other. But if independent, 
there is one distribution of possibilities that will give strict 
type identity to each of the infinite repetitions. The argument 
is not logically conclusive, but it appears very strong.
So even the weak version of the Identity of Indiscemibles 
appears not to be a necessary truth. To use this version, 
therefore, the Bundle theorist would have to maintain that it 
is only contingently true that each particular is a different 
bundle of universals.
David Lewis has pointed out to me that one could bring a 
new version of the Adams argument against this contingency 
position. Start with a possible world involving the eternal 
repetition of very nearly indiscernible cycles. Suppose also 
that it is assumed that the Bundle theory is contingently true 
only. And yet if, in that world, only a few electrons had 
behaved a little differently, then the cycles would have been 
exactly the same, the Bundle theory would not have been true, 
and different particulars would have involved a factor of 
particularity over and above their properties. Those electrons 
have an absurd importance! (Notice that this sort of argument
69

could also be brought against a contingency version of the strong 
Bundle theory.) It seems, then, that the Bundle theory faces 
serious difficulties both in the strong and the weak version.
PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
m. Problems of Constructing the Bundle
We have spoken airily of a bundle of universals, but it turns out 
that there are difficulties in actually constructing the bundle. 
Russell began with a fundamental, not further analyzable, 
relation, which he called compresence (1948, p. 312). 
Intuitively, it is the relation that holds between any two 
properties that are properties of the same thing. But since 
Russell was going to use the relation to build up ordinary 
things, that can be an informal explanation only.
Another intuitive way to think of compresence is being in 
the same place and time. But notice that the properties that 
are going to be compresent will have to include spatial and 
temporal properties: shape, size, and duration. In any case, 
space and time, being physical entities, are among the things 
that have to be constructed as bundles of universals.
What are the formal properties of compresence? First, and 
obviously, it is symmetrical. If property A is compresent with 
property B, then B is compresent with A. However, it is not 
transitive. If A is compresent with B, and B with C, then it is 
not necessary that A is compresent with C. You can see that 
this will have to be so by considering particular x, which has 
properties A and B but not C, and particular y, which has B 
and C but not A. From x we have Comp (A, B); from y we have 
Comp (B, C). But we do not have Comp (A, C), which we need 
for transitivity. Of course, there can be a third particular, 
which has A and C, thus giving us Comp (A, C). But obviously 
there need not be such a particular. Perhaps there is not one. 
For instance, the laws of nature may forbid the compresence of 
A and C in any particular.
So compresence is a symmetrical and nontransitive relation.
70

PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
It is nontransitive because the terms of the relation are 
universals. Suppose that what we were dealing with were 
tropes: properties as particulars rather than universals. 
Compresence could then be symmetrical and transitive because 
properties would, as it were, not stray outside the bundle. In 
general, symmetrical and transitive relations operating upon a 
domain can mark things off into nice exclusive bundles—into 
“equivalence 
classes.” But with a symmetrical and 
nontransitive relation, the job of setting up the bundles may be 
more difficult. So in fact it proves.
Having introduced the relation of compresence, Russell then 
defines the notion of a complex of compresence. This is a class of 
universals, each member of which has the compresence 
relation to each other member. This is quite a closely knit 
structure. A model is a mutual admiration society, where every 
member admires every other member.
This paves the way for the notion of a complete complex of 
compresence. This is a complex of compresent universals, but one 
to which no further universals can be added because any such 
universal would fail to be compresent with at least one member 
of the group. (You cannot enlarge the mutual admiration 
society any further.) Russell then says that a particular can be 
identified as a complete complex of compresence.
This is a clever construction, but alas it does not work. It 
falls victim to a difficulty pointed out by Nelson Goodman 
(1966, Ch. 5, Sec. 3) which he called “the difficulty of 
imperfect community.” (In Armstrong 1978a, Ch. 9, Sec. Ill, I 
wrongly attributed the difficulty to Michael Tooley, who 
rediscovered it without realizing that the argument had been 
anticipated by Goodman.) Suppose that object a has properties 
P and Q but not R, b has Q and R but not P, while c has P and R 
but not Q. Suppose also that nothing is P and Q and R. (That 
last is a law of nature.) Then we have Comp (P, Q), Comp (Q, 
R), and Comp (P, R). Given Russell’s definition, {P, Q, R) form a 
complex of compresence. Either it is a complete complex, or it is 
not. If it is complete, then there are complete complexes that
71

PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
do not constitute a single particular. (A complete complex of 
compresence [CCC] is not sufficient to yield a particular.) If it 
is not complete, add universals until it is complete. Since P, Q, 
and R cannot be properties of just one thing, still we have a 
CCC that is spread over more than one particular. Hence CCCs 
that do not constitute a single particular are definitely 
possible. Being a complete complex of compresence may 
perhaps be necessary for being a single particular, but it is by no 
means sufficient.
A construction that is more complex and artificial than a 
complete complex of compresence is available and to some 
extent at least gets round this difficulty. But I will not go 
further with the matter here. (See Armstrong 1978a, Ch. 9, Sec. 
IV. There the new construction is again attributed to Tooley. It 
was actually anticipated by Goodman 1966, Ch. 6, Secs. 4, 5. 
But as indicated in my 1978a, the new construction still faces 
difficulties, although of a more rarefied sort than imperfect 
community.)
IV. A Further Problem with Compresence
We have seen that a complete complex of compresence is not 
sufficient to yield a particular. There can be CCCs that are not 
particulars. But equally it appears that there can be 
particulars that are not CCCs. Being a complete complex of 
compresence is not necessary for being a particular.
Consider a particular and let it have a near twin, another 
particular that exactly resembles the first particular except 
that the near twin lacks one or more properties that the first 
particular has. Perhaps the first particular is colored, 
whereas the near twin is totally transparent. Some might 
consider lacking all color to be itself a property, but I believe 
that there are good grounds for denying that absences of 
properties are themselves properties. With this premiss 
granted, the argument proceeds.
72

PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
What we have now, on the Bundle-of-universals theory, is 
two bundles, one of which is a mere or proper part of the other. 
But then it is clear that the smaller bundle cannot be a 
complete complex of compresent universals. So being a CCC is 
neither sufficient nor necessary for being a particular.
V. Can Universals Be the Substance of the World?
Those who try to construct particulars out of universals are 
proposing that the world is a construction from, is constituted 
by, universals. We can put this another way by saying that 
they are proposing that universals are the substance of the 
world. (Substance here is not substratum, nor is it the thing plus 
all its properties. It is a third sense of the word ‘substance’.)
A definition of substance in this sense of the word, which is 
accepted by many metaphysicians, is that substance is 
something that is capable of independent existence. Substances 
may depend upon other substances, causally for instance, but it 
will at least be a logical possibility for individual substances 
to exist in complete independence. A substance logically 
requires nothing beyond itself for its existence. It could be the 
only thing in the universe.
If we accept this line of thought about substances (and I am 
inclined to think that we should), and if universals are the 
sole substance of the world, then rather radical consequences 
have to be drawn. One thing that will be possible is for 
individual universals to exist in independence of any other 
universals—to exist outside any bundle. You could have a 
possible world that consisted of a number of universals existing 
in independence of each other. Using the language of a 
Substance-attribute theory, we could say that they would form 
a realm of uninstantiated universals (see Chapter 5, Section I).
But this may be a reductio ad absurdum of the bundle-of- 
universals theory. If having mass M, or having charge C, 
where M and C are determinate values, are universals, as it is
73

PARTICULARS AS BUNDLES OF UNIVERSALS
plausible to suggest then it seems very strange that such a 
mass and a charge could exist without being the mass or charge 
of something. The matter seems even stranger when we come to 
consider relations. Can preceding exist without things to 
precede and be preceded by? Of course, the bundle theorist 
might surrender the case of relations and allow that they must 
have terms. But will this not strengthen the case for saying 
that properties, equally, cannot exist on their own?
When we come to consider tropes, that is, properties and 
relations taken to be particulars, we will note that trope 
theorists often hold that tropes are the true substance of the 
world. That doctrine leads to similar, quite difficult 
consequences. But a trope is at least a particular. A universal as 
a substance is a peculiarly repugnant notion.
This concludes our examination of the Bundle-of-universals 
theory. We have seen the difficulties for this position that 
flow from the necessity to uphold certain versions of the 
Identity of Indiscemibles. We have seen difficulties in spelling 
out the bundling principle that holds together the totality of 
the properties “o r  a particular. (Being a complete complex of 
compresent universals seems to be neither sufficient nor 
necessary for being a particular.) Finally, this view makes 
universals into the substance of the world. But if substance in 
this sense is allowed its usual prerogative of being capable of 
independent existence, then it is unclear that universals can be 
substances. I think that an upholder of universals does better to 
think of them as attributes of particulars. To that classical 
form for a theory of universals we now turn.
74

CHAPTER FIVE
Universals 
as Attributes
I. Uninstantiated Universals?
If we abandon the idea that particulars are nothing but bundles 
of universals but still want to recognize universals, then we 
must return to the traditional view that particulars, tokens, 
instantiate universals: having properties and standing to each 
other in relations. If we do this, then there are a number of 
controversial questions that have to be settled. One key 
question is this. Should we, or should we not, accept a Principle 
of Instantiation for universals? That is, should we, or should 
we not, demand that every universal be instantiated? That is, 
for each property universal must it be the case that it is a 
property of some particular? For each relation universal must 
it be the case that there are particulars between which the 
relation holds?
We certainly should not demand that every universal 
should be instantiated now. It would be enough if a particular 
universal was not instantiated now, but was instantiated in the 
past, or would be instantiated in the future. The Principle of 
Instantiation should be interpreted as ranging over all time:
It is suggested that Chapter 11 of D. M. Armstrong's Nominalism and 
Realism and Chapters 13-17 of his A Theory of Universals be used as 
companion readings to this chapter.
75

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
past, present, and future. But should we uphold the principle 
even in this relatively liberal form?
This is a big parting of the ways. We can call the view that 
there are uninstantiated universals the Platonist view. It 
appears to have been the view held by Plato, who was also, 
apparently, the first philosopher to introduce universals. (He 
spoke of Forms or Ideas—but there was nothing psychological 
about the Ideas.)
Once you have uninstantiated universals you need 
somewhere special to put them, a “Platonic heaven,” as 
philosophers often say. They are not to be found in the 
ordinary world of space and time. And since it seems that any 
instantiated universal might have been uninstantiated—for 
example, there might have been nothing past, present, or 
future that had that property—then if uninstantiated 
universals are in a Platonic heaven, it will be natural to place 
all universals in that heaven. The result is that we get two 
realms: the realm of universals and the realm of particulars, 
the latter being ordinary things in space and time. Such 
universals are often spoken of as transcendent. (A view of this 
sort was explicitly held by Russell in his earlier days before 
he adopted a bundle-of-universals view. See his introductory 
book The Problems of Philosophy, 1912, Chs. 9 and 10.) 
Instantiation then becomes a very big deal: a relation between 
universals and particulars that crosses realms. The Latin tag 
used by the Scholastics for a theory of this sort is universalia 
ante res, “universals 
before 
things.” Such a view is 
unacceptable to Naturalists, that is, to those who think that 
the space-time world is all the world that there is. This helps 
to explain why Empiricists, who tend to be sympathetic to 
Naturalism, often reject universals.
It is interesting to notice that a separate-realm theory of 
universals permits of a blob as opposed to a layer-cake view of 
particulars. For on this view, what is it for a thing to have a 
property? It is not the thing’s having some internal feature, but 
rather its having a relationship, the instantiation relation-
76

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
ship, to certain universals or Forms in another realm. The thing 
itself could be bloblike. It is true that the thing could also be 
given a property structure. But then the properties that make 
up this structure cannot be universals but must be particulars. 
They would have to be tropes. Perhaps this second possibility 
is the natural candidate for the sixth box in the diagram in 
Chapter 1 (Section III). The particular involves property 
tropes, but these property tropes are put into natural classes by 
their instantiating a certain universal in the realm of the 
universals. At any rate, without bringing in tropes in addition 
it seems that Platonic theories of universals have to treat 
particulars as bloblike rather than layer-caked. I think that 
this is an argument against Platonic theories.
If, however, we reject uninstantiated universals, then we are 
at least in a position, if we want to do it, to bring the universals 
down to earth. We can adopt the view whose Latin tag is 
universalia in rebus, “universals in things.” We can think of a 
thing’s properties as constituents of the thing and think of the 
properties as universals. This may have been the position of 
Aristotle. (The scholars differ. Some make him a Nominalist. 
Some think he believed in this-worldly universals. Certainly, 
he criticized Plato’s otherworldly universals.) Universalia in 
rebus is, of course, a layer-cake view, with properties as 
universals as part of the internal structure of things. (Relations 
will be universalia inter res, “universals between things” 
[Abbott 1886].)
There are difficulties in this position, of course, objections 
that can be brought, as with every other solution to the 
Problem of Universals. One thing that has worried many 
philosophers, including perhaps Plato, is that on this view we 
appear to have multiple location of the same thing. Suppose a 
is F and b is also F, with F a property universal. The very same 
entity has to be part of the structure of two things at two 
places. How can the universal be in two places at once? I will 
come back to this question later in this chapter.
Just to round things off I will mention the third Scholastic
77

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
tag: universalia post res, “universals after things.” This was 
applied to Nominalist theories. It fits best with Predicate or 
Concept Nominalism, where properties, et cetera, are as it 
were created by the classifying mind: shadows cast on things 
by our predicates or concepts.
But our present task is to decide whether or not we ought to 
countenance uninstantiated universals. The first point to be 
made is that the onus of proof seems to be firmly on the side of 
the Platonists. It can hardly be doubted that there is a world 
of space and time. But a separate realm of universals is a mere 
hypothesis, or postulation. If a postulation has great 
explanatory value, then it may be a good postulation. But it 
has to prove itself. Why should we postulate uninstantiated 
universals?
One thing that has moved many philosophers is what we 
may call the argument from the meaning of general terms. 
Plato, in his Republic, had Socrates say, “shall we proceed as 
usual and begin by assuming the existence of a single essential 
nature or Form for every set of things which we call by the 
same name?” (595, trans. F. M. Comford). Socrates may have 
been thinking along the following lines. Ordinary names, that 
is, proper names, have a bearer of the name. If we turn to 
general terms—words like ‘horse’ and ‘triangular’ that apply 
to many different things—then we need something that stands 
to the word in the same general sort of relation that the bearer 
of the proper name stands to the proper name. There has to be 
an object that constitutes or corresponds to the meaning of the 
general word. So there has to be something called horseness, 
and triangularity. But now consider a general word that 
applies to nothing particular at all, a word like ‘unicorn’ for 
instance. It is perfectly meaningful. And if it is meaningful, 
must there not be something in the world that constitutes or 
corresponds to the word? So there must be uninstantiated 
universals.
This “argument from meaning” is a very bad argument. (In 
fairness to Socrates, it is not clear whether he was using it.
78

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
Other philosophers have, though, often at a rather unself- 
conscious level.) The argument depends on the assumption that 
in every case where a general word has meaning, there is 
something in the world that constitutes or corresponds to that 
meaning. Gilbert Ryle spoke of this as the ‘Fido’-Fido fallacy. 
Fido corresponds to the word ‘Fido’, but there does not have to 
be some single thing corresponding to a general word.
To go along with the argument from meaning is to be led into 
a very promiscuous theory of universals. If it is correct, then we 
know a priori that for each general word with a certain 
meaning, there exists a universal. This lines up predicates and 
properties in a nice neat way, but it is a way that we ought to 
be very suspicious of. Is it that easy to discover what univer­
sals there are?
Plato had another line of thought that led him toward 
uninstantiated universals. This is the apparent failure 
of things in the ordinary world to come up to exact standards. 
It seems that nothing in the world is perfectly straight or 
circular, yet in geometry we discuss the properties of perfectly 
straight lines or perfect circles. Again, no thing is perfectly 
changeless. Yet again, it may well be that no act is perfectly 
just. Certainly no person is perfectly virtuous and no state is 
perfectly just. Yet in ethical and political discussion (e.g., in 
the Republic) we can discuss the nature of virtue and justice. In 
general, we perceive the world as falling short of certain 
standards. This can be explained if, whether we know it or not, 
we are comparing ordinary things to Forms, which the 
ordinary things can never fully instantiate. (This can lead one, 
and perhaps led Plato, to the difficult notion of degrees of 
instantiation, with the highest degree never realized.)
It is Interesting to notice that this argument did not quite 
lead Plato where he wanted to go in every case. Consider 
geometry. In geometry one might wish to consider the 
properties of, say, two intersecting circles. These circles will be 
perfectly circular. But also, of course, there is only one Form of 
the circle. So what are these two perfect circles? Plato,
79

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
apparently, had to introduce what he called the Mathe­
m atical. Like the mathematical Forms they were perfect and 
thus were unlike ordinary things. But unlike the Forms, there 
could be many tokens of the same type, and in this they were 
like ordinary things. They were particulars, although perfect 
particulars. But if this is so, though perhaps the falling away 
from standards gave Plato an argument for the Mathematical, 
it is not clear that it is any argument for the Forms.
But in any case, cannot ideal standards simply be things 
that we merely think of? We can quite knowingly form 
thoughts of that which does not exist. In the case of ideal 
standards nothing comes up to the standard, but by extrapo­
lating from ordinary things that approximate to the standard 
in different degrees, we can form the thought of something that 
does come up to the standard. It turns out to be useful to do so. 
Why attribute metaphysical reality to such standards? They 
could be useful fictions. As a matter of fact, in the geometrical 
case it appears that such notions as that of a perfectly straight 
line or a perfectly circular object may be acquired directly in 
experience. For cannot something look perfectly straight or 
perfectly circular, even if it is not in fact so?
One should note that one thing that seems to keep a theory 
of uninstantiated universals going is the widespread idea that 
it is sufficient for a universal to exist if it is merely possible 
that it should be instantiated. I have found in discussion that 
this idea has particular appeal if it is empirically possible 
(that is, compatible with the laws of nature) that the alleged 
universal should have actual instances. Suppose, for instance, 
that somebody describes a very complex pattern of wallpaper 
but does not ever sketch the pattern or manufacture the 
wallpaper. Suppose nobody else does either in the whole 
history of the universe. It is clear that there was nothing in 
the laws of nature that prevented the pattern's ever having an 
instance, from ever having a token of the type. But is not that 
pattern a monadic universal, a complex and structural 
universal to be sure, but a universal nonetheless?
80

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
In this way, apparently, it is natural for philosophers to 
argue. But for myself I do not see the force of the argument. 
Philosophers do not reason that way about particulars. They 
do not argue that it is empirically possible that present-day 
France should be a monarchy and therefore that the present 
king of France exists, although, unfortunately for French 
royalists, he is not instantiated. Why argue in the same way 
about universals? Is it that philosophers think that universals' 
are so special that they can exist whether or not particular 
things, which are contingent only, exist? If so, I think that this 
is no better than a prejudice, perhaps inherited from Plato.
There is one subtle variation of the argument to 
uninstantiated universals from their empirical possibility 
that I think has more weight. It has been developed by 
Michael Tooley (1987,3.1.4 and 3.2). However, it depends upon 
deep considerations about the nature of the laws of nature, 
which cannot be discussed here. And in any case, the argument 
depends upon the laws’ being found to have a very special 
structure, which it is unlikely that they actually have. As a 
result, it seems that the best that the argument shows is that 
uninstantiated universals are possible rather than actual. And 
even this conclusion may be avoidable (see Armstrong 1983, Ch. 
8).
It may also be thought that considerations from mathe­
matics, and the properties and relations postulated by math­
ematicians, push toward the recognition of uninstantiated 
universals. However, the whole project of bringing together 
the theory of universals with the disciplines of mathematics, 
although very important, cannot be undertaken here. I have 
sketched out, rather broadly, the way that I think it ought to 
go in a book on the nature of possibility (1989, Chapter 10).
From this point on, therefore, I am going to assume the truth 
of the Principle of Instantiation. As already noted, this does 
not compel one to abandon a two-realm doctrine. It does not 
compel one to bring the universals down among ordinary things. 
But it does permit one to do this, and to do so seems the natural
81

way to develop the theory once one rejects uninstantiated 
universals.
UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
n. Disjunctive, Negative, and 
Conjunctive Universals
For simplicity, in this section I will consider property 
universals only. But the points to be made appear to apply to 
relations also. We have already rejected uninstantiated 
universals. But it seems that the potential class of universals 
needs to be cut down a great deal further if we are to get a 
plausible theory. I will begin by giving reasons for rejecting 
disjunctive property universals. By a disjunctive property I 
mean a disjunction of (property) universals. Let us assume that 
particular electric charges and particular masses are 
universals. Then having charge C or having mass M (with C 
and M dummies for determinate, that is, definite values) 
would be an example of a disjunctive property. Why is it not a 
universal? Consider two objects. One has charge C but lacks 
mass M. The other lacks charge C but has mass M. So they 
have the disjunctive property having charge C or having mass 
M. But surely that does not show that, in any serious sense, 
they thereby have something identical? The whole point of a 
universal, however, is that it should be identical in its 
different instances.
There is another reason to deny that a disjunction of 
universals is a universal. There is some very close link between 
universals and causality. The link is of this nature. If a thing 
instantiates a certain universal, then, in virtue of that, it has 
the power to act in a certain way. For instance, if a thing has a 
certain mass, then it has the power to act upon the scalepan of 
a balance, or upon scales, in a certain way. Furthermore, 
different universals bestow different powers. Charge and mass, 
for instance, manifest themselves in different ways. I doubt if 
the link between universals and powers is a necessary one, but
82

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
it seems real. Moreover, if, as seems abstractly possible, two 
different universals bestowed the very same powers, how could 
one ever know that they were two different universals? If they 
affect all apparatus, including our brains, in exactly the same 
way, will we not judge that we are dealing with one universal 
only?
Now suppose that a thing has charge C but lacks mass M. In 
virtue of charge C, it has certain powers to act. For instance, it 
repels things with like charge. Possession of the disjunctive 
property C or M adds nothing to its power. This suggests that 
while C may be a genuine universal, C or M is not.
So I think that we should reject disjunctive universals. A 
similar case seems to hold against negative universals: the 
lack or absence of a property is not a property. If having charge 
C is the instantiation of a universal, then not having C is not 
the instantiating of a universal.
First, we may appeal to identity again. Is there really 
something in common, something identical, in everything that 
lacks charge C? Of course, there might be some universal 
property that just happened to be coextensive with lacking 
charge C. But the lack itself does not seem to be a factor found 
in each thing that lacks charge C.
Second, causal considerations seem to point in the same 
direction. It is a strange idea that lacks or absences do any 
causing. It is natural to say that a thing acts in virtue of 
positive factors alone. This also suggests that absences of 
universals are not universals.
It is true that there is some linguistic evidence that might be 
thought to point the other way. We do say things like ‘lack of 
water caused his death’. At the surface, the statement says 
that a lack of water caused an absence of life. But how 
seriously should we take such ways of expressing ourselves? 
Michael Tooley has pointed out that we are unhappy to say 
‘lack of poison causes us to remain alive’. Yet if the surface way 
of understanding the first statement is correct, then the second 
statement should be understood in the same way and thought to

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
be true. Certain counterfactual statements are true in both 
cases: If he had had water, then he would (could) have still 
been alive; if we had taken poison, we would have been dead 
now. These are causal truths. But they tell us very little about 
the actual causal factors operative in the two cases. We 
believe, I think, that these actual causal factors could be 
spelled out in purely positive terms.
It is interesting to notice that conjunctions of universals 
(having both charge C and mass M) escape the two criticisms 
leveled against disjunctive and negative universals. With 
conjunctions we do have identity. The very same conjunction of 
factors is present in each instance. There is no problem about 
causality. If a thing instantiates the conjunction, then it will 
have certain powers as a consequence. These powers will be 
different from those that the thing would have had if it had 
had just one of the conjuncts. It may even be that the conjunction 
can do more than the sum of what each property would do if 
each was instantiated alone. (As scientists say: There could be 
synergism. The effect could be more than the sum of each cause 
acting by itself.)
But there is one condition that ought to be put on conjunctive 
universals. Some thing (past, present, future) must actually 
have both properties and at the same time. This, of course, is 
simply the Principle of Instantiation applied to conjunctive 
universals.
m . Predicates and Universals
What has been said about uninstantiated universals, and 
also about disjunctions and negations of universals, has brought 
out a most important point. It is that there is no automatic 
passage from predicates (linguistic entities) to universals. For 
instance, the expression ‘either having charge C or having 
mass M’ is a perfectly good predicate. It could apply to, or 
be true of, innumerable objects. But as we have seen, this does

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
not mean that there is a universal corresponding to this 
predicate.
Wittgenstein made a famous contribution to the Problem of 
Universals with his discussion of fam ily resemblances. 
Wittgenstein was an antimetaphysician, and his object was to 
dissolve rather than to solve the Problem of Universals. He 
seems to have thought that what he said about family 
resemblances was (among other things) a step toward getting 
rid of the problem. But I think that the real moral of what he 
said is only that predicates and universals do not line up in any 
simple way.
In his Philosophical Investigations (1953, Secs. 66 and 67) 
he considered the notion of a game. He had this to say about it:
66. 
Consider for example the proceedings that we call “games". I 
mean board-games, card-games, ball-games, Olympic games, and 
so on. What is common to them all?—Don’t say: "There must be 
something common, or they would not be called ‘games’”—but 
look and see whether there is anything common to all.—For if 
you look at them you will not see something that is common to 
all, but similarities, relationships, and a whole series of them at 
that. To repeat: don’t think, but look!—Look for example at 
board-games, with their multifarious relationships. Now pass to 
card-games; here you find many correspondences with the first 
group, but many common features drop out, and others appear. 
When we pass next to ball-games, much that is common is 
retained, but much is lost.—Are they all ‘amusing’? Compare 
chess with noughts and crosses. Or is there always winning and 
losing, or competition between players? Think of patience. In ball 
games there is winning and losing; but when a child throws his 
ball at the wall and catches it again, this feature has 
disappeared. Look at the parts played by skill and luck; and at 
the games like ring-a-ring-a-roses; here is the element of 
amusement, but how many other characteristic features have 
disappeared! And we can go through the many, many other 
groups of games in the same way; we can see how similarities 
crop up and disappear.
And the result of this examination is: we see a complicated
85

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
network of similarities overlapping and criss-crossing: some­
times overall similarities, sometimes similarities of detail.
67. 
I can think of no better expression to characterize these 
similarities than “family resemblances"; for the various 
resemblances between members of a family: build, features, colour 
of eyes, gait, temperament, etc. etc. overlap and criss-cross in the 
same way.—And I shall say: ‘games’ form a family.
This has been a very influential passage. Wittgenstein and 
his followers applied the point to all sorts of notions besides 
those of a game, including many of the central notions discussed 
by philosophers. But what should a believer in universals 
think that Wittgenstein has shown about universals?
Let us agree, as we probably should, that there is no 
universal of gamehood. But now what of this “complicated 
network of similarities overlapping and criss-crossing” of 
which Wittgenstein speaks? All the Realist has to do is to 
analyze each of these similarities in terms of common 
properties. That analysis of similarity is not a difficult or 
unfamiliar idea, though it is an analysis that would be 
contested by a Nominalist. But there will not be any property 
that runs through the whole class and makes them all games. 
To give a crude and oversimplified sketch, the situation might 
be like this:
Particulars: 
a 
b 
c 
d 
e
Their properties: 
FGHJ 
GHJK HJKL JKLM KLMN
Here F to M are supposed to be genuine property universals, and 
it is supposed that the predicate “game” applies in virtue of 
these properties. But the class of particulars [a . . .  e), which is 
the class of all tokens of games, is a family in Wittgenstein’s 
sense. Here, though, I have sketched an account of such 
families that is completely compatible with Realism about 
universals.
86

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
However, Wittgenstein’s remarks do raise a big question. 
How does one decide whether one is or is not in the presence of 
a genuine property or relation? Wittgenstein says of games, 
“don’t think, but look.” As a general recipe, at least, that seems 
far too simple.
I do not think that there is any infallible way of deciding 
what are the true universals. It seems clear that we must not 
look to semantic considerations. As I said in Section I of this 
chapter, those who argue to particular universals from 
semantic data, from predicates to a universal corresponding to 
that predicate, argue in a very optimistic and unempirical 
manner. I call them a priori realists. Better, I think, is a 
posteriori realism. The best guide that we have to just what 
universals there are is total science.
For myself, I believe that this puts physics in a special 
position. There seem to be reasons, (scientific, empirical, a 
posteriori reasons) to think that physics is the fundamental 
science. If that is correct, then such properties as mass, charge, 
extension, duration, space-time interval, and other properties 
envisaged by physics may be the true monadic universals. 
(They are mostly ranges of quantities. Quantities raise 
problems that will need some later discussion.) Spatio- 
temporal and causal relations will perhaps be the true 
polyadic universals.
If this is correct, then the ordinary types—the type red, the 
type horse, in general, the types of the manifest image of the 
world—will emerge as preliminary, rough-and-ready, 
classifications of reality. For the most part they are not false, 
but they are rough-and-ready. Many of them will be family 
affairs, as games appear to be. To the one type will correspond 
a whole family of universals and not always a very close 
family. And even where the ordinary types do carve the beast 
of reality along its true joints, they may still not expose those 
joints for the things that they are. But let it be emphasized 
that any identification of universals remains rather 
speculative. In what I have just been saying I have been trying
87

to combine a philosophy of universals with Physicalism. 
Others may have other ideas.
UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
IV. States of Affairs
In the Universals theory that we are examining, particulars 
instantiate properties, pairs of particulars instantiate 
(dyadic) relations, triples of particulars instantiate (triadic) 
relations, and so on as far as is needed. Suppose that a is F, 
with F a universal, or that a has R to b, with R a universal. It 
appears that we are required to recognize a’s being F and a’s 
having R to b as items in our ontology. I will speak of these 
items as states of affairs. Others have called them facts (e.g., 
Wittgenstein 1961, Skyrms 1981).
Why do we need to recognize states of affairs? Why not 
recognize simply particulars, universals (divided into 
properties and relations), and, perhaps, instantiation? The 
answer appears by considering the following point. If a is F, 
then it is entailed that a exists and that the universal F exists. 
However, a could exist, and F could exist, and yet it fail to be 
the case that a is F (F is instantiated, but instantiated 
elsewhere only), a’s being F involves something more than a 
and F. It is no good simply adding the fundamental tie or nexus 
of instantiation to the sum of a and F. The existence of a, of 
instantiation, and of F does not amount to a’s being F. The 
something more must be a’s being F—and this is a state of 
affairs.
This argument rests upon a general principle, which, 
following C. B. Martin, I call the truth-maker principle. 
According to this principle, for every contingent truth at least 
(and perhaps for all truths contingent or necessary) there 
must be something in the world that makes it true. “Something” 
here may be taken as widely as may be wished. The “making” 
is not causality, of course: Rather, it is that in the world in 
virtue of which the truth is true. Gustav Bergmann and his

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
followers have spoken of the “ontological ground” of truths, 
and I think that this is my “something in the world” that 
makes truths true. An important point to notice is that 
different truths may all have the same truth-maker, or 
ontological ground. For instance, that this thing is colored, is 
red, and is scarlet are all made true by the thing’s having a 
particular shade of color.
The truth-maker principle seems to me to be fairly obvious 
once attention is drawn to it, but I do not know how to argue for 
it further. It is to be noted however that some of those who 
take perfectly seriously the sort of metaphysical investigation 
that we are here engaged upon nevertheless reject the principle 
(see in particular Lewis 1983).
Accepting the truth-maker principle will lead one to reject 
Quine’s view (1961) that predicates do not have to be taken 
seriously in considering the ontological implications of 
statements one takes to be true. Consider the difference between 
asserting that a certain surface is red and asserting that it is 
green. An upholder of the truth-maker principle will think 
that there has to be an ontological ground, a difference in the 
world, to account for the difference between the predicate ‘red’ 
applying to the surface and the predicate ‘green’ so applying. 
Of course, what that ontological ground is, is a further matter. 
There is no high road from the principle to universals and 
states of affairs.
Returning now to states of affairs, it may be pointed out that 
there are some reasons for accepting states of affairs even if the 
truth-maker principle is rejected. First, we can apparently 
refer to states of affairs, preparatory to saying something 
further about them. But it is generally, if not universally, 
conceded by philosophers that what can be referred to exists. 
Second, states of affairs are plausible candidates for the terms 
of causal relations. The state of affairs of a’s being F may be 
the cause of b's being G. Third, as we shall see in Section VIII of 
this chapter, states of affairs can help to solve a fairly 
pressing problem in the theory of universals: how to understand
89

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
the multiple location of property universals and the 
nonlocation of relation universals.
It is interesting to see that states of affairs seem not to be 
required by a Class Nominalist or a Resemblance Nominalist, 
and of course that is an important economy for their respective 
theories. The Class Nominalist analyzes a’s being F as a’s 
being a member of a class (or natural class) containing [a, b, c,
. . . ). But here we have simply a and the class. The class- 
membership relation is internal, dictated by the nature of the 
terms. So we need not recognize it as something additional to 
the terms. The terms by themselves are sufficient truth- 
makers. Hence we do not need states of affairs.
The Resemblance Nominalist analyzes a’s being F as a mat­
ter of resemblance relations holding between a and, say, suit­
able paradigm Fs. But that relation is also internal, dictated 
by what I called the particularized nature of a and the 
paradigm objects. Once again, states of affairs are not needed.
(But it seems that a Predicate Nominalist will require 
states of affairs, a’s being F is analyzed as a’s falling under the 
predicate F. But how can the falling under be dictated simply 
by a and the linguistic object F? Falling under is an external 
relation.)
Now for something very important. States of affairs have 
some rather surprising characteristics. Let us call a, b, F, R, et 
cetera, the constituents of states of affairs. It turns out that it is 
possible for there to be two different states of affairs that 
nevertheless have exactly the same constituents.
Here is a simple example. Let R be a nonsymmetrical 
relation (for instance, loves). Let it be the case, contingently, 
that a has R to b and b has R to a. Two distinct states of affairs 
exist: a’s having R to b, and b's having R to a (a’s loving b and 
b's loving a). Indeed, these states of affairs are w holly 
distinct, in the sense that it is possible for either state of 
affairs to fail to obtain while the other exists. Yet the two 
states of affairs have exactly the same constituents.
You can get the same phenomenon with properties as well as
90

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
relations (as pointed out by Lewis 1986c). Assume, as I think it 
is correct to assume, that a conjunction of states of affairs is 
itself a state of affairs. Then consider (1) a’s being F and b’s 
being G; and (2) a’s being G and b's being F. Two wholly distinct 
states of affairs, it may be, but the very same constituents.
At this point, it is worth realizing that states of affairs 
may be required not simply by those who recognize universals 
but also by any philosophy that recognizes properties and 
relations, whether as universals or as particulars. This is very 
important, because we saw in examining Natural Class and 
Resemblance theories what difficulties there are in denying 
properties and relations (in espousing a blob view).
Suppose that a has Ri to b, with Ri a particular, but a 
nonsymmetrical, relation. If b has ‘the same’ relation to a, 
then, on a philosophy of tropes, we have b's having R2 to a: 
two states of affairs with different (though overlapping) 
constituents. For the loving that holds between a and b is a 
different object from the loving that holds between b and a. 
Nevertheless a’s having R j to b entails the existence of 
constituents a, Ri, and b, but the existence of these constituents 
does not entail that a has Ri to b. So states of affairs still seem 
to be something more than their constituents.
With tropes, you never get different states of affairs 
constructed out of exactly the same constituents. But given just 
one set of constituents, more than one state of affairs having just 
these constituents is possible. From a, trope R i, and b, for 
instance, we could get a’s having Ri to b or b's having Ri to a. 
There is a way for a philosophy of tropes to avoid having to 
postulate states of affairs. But let us leave that aside until the 
next chapter.
I have spoken of the constituents of states of affairs. Could 
we also think and speak of them as parts of states of affairs? I 
think that it would be very unwise to think and speak of them 
in this way. Logicians have paid some attention to the notions 
of whole and part. They have worked out a formal calculus for 
manipulating these notions, which is sometimes called the
91

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
calculus of individuals or, better, mereology (in Greek meros 
means a part). One philosopher who helped to work this out 
was Nelson Goodman, and in his book The Structure of 
Appearance, 1966, an account of mereology is given. There is 
one mereological principle that is very important for us here: If 
there are a number of things, and if they have a sum, that is, a 
whole of which they are parts, then they have just one sum.
I say if they have a sum, because it is controversial whether 
a number of things always have a sum. Do the square root of 2 
and the Sydney Opera House have a sum? Philosophers differ 
on how permissive a mereology should be, that is, on whether 
there are limits to what you can sum, and if there are limits, 
where the limits fall. I myself would accept total 
permissiveness in summing. But all that is needed here is 
something that is agreed by all: where things can be summed, 
for each collection of things there is just one sum. We have just 
seen, however, that the complete constituents of a state of 
affairs are capable of being, and may actually even be, the 
complete constituents of a different state of affairs. Hence 
constituents do not stand to states of affairs as parts to whole.
It is worth noticing that complex universals have con­
stituents rather than parts. At any rate this is so if we accept 
the Principle of Instantiation. Consider, for instance, 
conjunctive universals. If being P and Q is a conjunctive 
universal, then there must exist some particular, x, such that x 
is both P and Q. But to say that is to say that there exists at 
least one state of affairs of the form x is P and x is Q. For the 
conjunctive universal to exist is for there to be a state of affairs 
of a certain sort. As a result, it is misleading to say that P and 
Q are parts of the conjunctive universal, a thing that I myself 
did say in the past (1978b, Ch. 15, Sec. II).
A very important type of complex universal is a structural 
property. A structural property involves a thing instantiating 
a certain pattern, such as a flag. Different parts (mereological 
parts) of the thing that instantiates the structural property 
will have certain properties. If the structural property in­
92

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
volves relations, as a flag does, some or all of these parts will 
r 
be related in various ways. It is easy to see that states of / 
affairs must be appealed to. If a has P, and b has Q, and a has / 
R to b, then and only then the object [a + b] has the structural ( 
property that may be presented in a shorthand way as P-R-Q.
A final point before leaving this particularly important 
section. The fact that states of affairs, if they exist, have a 
nonmereological mode of composition may have consequences 
for the theory examined in the previous chapter: the view 
that particulars are no more than bundles of universals. (I 
understand that this point comes from Mark Johnston.) We 
have seen that different states of affairs can have exactly the 
same constituents (a’s loving b, and b's loving a). We have 
previously argued against the Bundle theory that two bundles 
containing exactly the same universals are impossible. They 
would be the very same bundle. Yet, considering the matter 
independently of the Bundle theory, why should not two 
different particulars be exactly alike? But now suppose that, 
as is plausible, we treat a bundling of universals as a state of 
affairs. Why should not exactly the same universals be 
bundled up in different ways?
In reply, I think it must be admitted that this is 
conceivable. But it would depend upon the Bundle theorist’s 
working out a scheme that allowed for different bundling of 
the very same things. This is not provided for in the actual 
Bundle theories that have been developed. So if they want to 
take this path, then the onus is on Bundle theorists to try to 
develop their theory in a new way.
V. A World of States of Affairs?
In the previous section it was argued that a philosophy that 
admits both particulars and universals ought to admit states of 
affairs (facts), which have particulars and universals as 
constituents (not as parts). As a matter of fact we saw that to
93

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
introduce properties and relations at all, even as particulars, 
would apparently involve states of affairs. But our present 
concern is with universals.
The suggestion to be put forward now is that we should think 
of the world as a world of states of affairs, with particulars 
and universals only having existence within states of affairs. 
We have already argued for a Principle of Instantiation for 
universals. If this is a true principle, then the way is open to 
regard a universal as an identical element present in certain 
states of affairs. A particular that existed outside states of 
affairs would not be clothed in any properties or relations. It 
may be called a bare particular. If the world is to be a world of 
states of affairs we must add to the Principle of Instantiation a 
Principle of the Rejection of Bare Particulars.
This second principle looks plausible enough. In a 
Universals theory, it is universals that give a thing its nature, 
kind, or sort. A bare particular would not instantiate any 
universals, and thus would have no nature, be of no kind or sort. 
What could we make of such an entity? Perhaps a particular 
need not have any relations to any other particular—perhaps 
it could be quite isolated. But it must instantiate at least one 
property.
VI. The Thin and the Thick Particular
Here is a problem that has been raised by John Quilter (1985). 
He calls it the “Antinomy of Bare Particulars.” Suppose that 
particular a instantiates property F. a is F. This ‘is ’ is 
obviously not the ‘is’ of identity, as in a is a or F is F. a and F 
are different entities, one being a particular, the other a uni­
versal. The ‘is’ we are dealing with is the ‘is’ of instantia­
tion—of a fundamental tie between particular and property. 
But if the ‘is’ is not the ‘is’ of identity, then it appears that a 
considered in itself is really a bare particular lacking any 
properties. But in that case a has not got the property F. The
94

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
property F remains outside a—just as transcendent forms remain 
outside the particular in Plato’s theory.
I believe that we can at least begin to meet this difficulty by 
drawing the important distinction, already mentioned in 
Chapter 4, Section I, between the thin and the thick 
particular. The thin particular is a, taken apart from its 
properties (substratum). It is linked to its properties by 
instantiation, but it is not identical with them. It is not bare 
because to be bare it would have to be not instantiating any 
properties. But though clothed, it is thin.
However, this is not the only way that a particular can be 
thought of. It can also be thought of as involving its properties. 
Indeed, that seems to be the normal way that we think of 
particulars. This is the thick particular. But the thick 
particular, because it enfolds both thin particulars and 
properties, held together by instantiation, can be nothing but a 
state of affairs.
Suppose that a instantiates F, G, H ,. . . They comprise the 
totality of a’s (nonrelational) properties. Now form the 
conjunctive property F&G&H.. . .  Call this property N, where 
N is meant to be short for a’s nature, a is N is true, and a’s being 
N is a (rather complex) state of affairs. It is also the thick 
particular. The thick particular is a state of affairs. The 
properties of a thing are “contained within it” because they are 
constituents of this state of affairs. (Notice that states of 
affairs, such as a’s being N, are not repeatable. So, along with 
thin particulars, they can be called particulars also.)
Therefore, in one sense a particular is propertyless. That is 
the thin particular. In another sense it enfolds properties 
within itself. In the latter case it is the thick particular and is 
a state of affairs. I think that this answers the difficulty 
raised by the Antinomy of Bare Particulars.
Two points before leaving this section: First, the distinction 
between thin and thick particulars does not depend upon a 
doctrine of properties as universals. It does presuppose a 
substance-attribute account of a particular, rather than a
95

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
bundle view. But we have already seen that it is possible to 
take a substance-attribute view with the attributes as 
particulars, that is, as tropes. The thin particular remains the 
particular with its attributes abstracted away. The thick 
particular is again a state of affairs: the thin particular’s 
having the (particular) attributes that it has.
Second, the thin and the thick particular are really the two 
ends of a scale. In between is the particular clothed with some, 
but only some, of its properties. They may be properties that 
are, for one reason or another, particularly important. This 
intermediate particular will, of course, be a state of affairs, but 
a less comprehensive one than the state of affairs that is the 
thick particular.
VII. Universals as Ways
The discussion in the previous section is not entirely 
satisfactory as it stands. It still leaves us with a picture of the 
thin particular and its properties as distinct metaphysical 
nodules that are linked together in states of affairs to form the 
thick particular. This makes the Principles of Instantiation 
and of the Rejection of Bare Particulars seem a bit arbitrary. 
Why must the nodules occur together? Could they not come 
apart? But would they then not be those unwanted creatures: 
uninstantiated universals and bare particulars?
Here I turn to a suggestion that has often been in the air, but 
had not, I think, been expounded systematically before David 
Seargent’s book on Stout’s theory of universals (1985). Unlike 
Stout, Seargent accepts universals, and in Chapter 4 he argues 
that we should think of them as ways. Properties are ways 
things are. The mass or charge of an electron is a way the 
electron is (in this case, a way that any electron is). Relations 
are ways things stand to each other.
If a property is a way that a thing is, then this brings the 
property into very intimate connection with the thing, but
96

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
without destroying the distinction between them. One can see 
the point of thinking of instantiation as a fundamental 
connection, a tie or nexus closer than mere relation. Nor will one 
be much tempted by the idea of an uninstantiated property. A 
way that things are could hardly exist on its own.
Again, one will not be tempted by the idea that the way a 
thing stands to other things, a relation, could exist on its own, 
independent of the things. (Not that the idea was ever very 
tempting! It is easier to substantialize properties than 
relations.)
It may be objected that the phrases “ways things are” and 
“ways things stand to each other” beg the question against 
uninstantiated universals. Should I not have spoken of ways 
things could be and ways things could stand to each other, thus 
cancelling the implication that the ways must be the ways of 
actual things?
However, my argument is not attempting to take advantage 
of this semantic point. My contention is that once properties 
and relations are thought of not as things, but as ways, it is 
profoundly unnatural to think of these ways as floating free 
from things. Ways, I am saying, are naturally construed only as 
ways actual things are or ways actual things stand to each 
other. The idea that properties and relations can exist 
uninstantiated is nourished by the idea that they are not ways 
but things.
Before concluding this section, I should like to note that the 
conception of properties and relations as ways does not depend 
upon taking them as universals. We can still think of a’s 
property as a way that a is, even if the property is particular, 
a trope. It will just be the case that no other thing besides a can 
be that way. Similarly, a relation holding between a and b can 
still be a way a and b stand to each other, even if this way is 
nonrepeatable.
It is very important to realize that the notions of states of 
affairs and their constituents, the distinction between the thin 
and the thick particular, and the conception of properties and
97

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
relations as ways things are and ways things stand to other 
things are available, if desired, to a philosophy of tropes as 
much as to a philosophy of universals.
Vm. Multiple Location
To bring universals from a platonic realm down to earth, down 
to space-time, seems to involve saying something rather 
strange. It seems to follow that universals are, or may be, 
multiply located. For are they not to be found wherever the 
particulars that instantiate them are found? If two different 
electrons each have charge e, then e, one thing, a universal, is 
to be found in two different places, the places where the two 
electrons are, yet entirely and completely in each place. This 
has seemed wildly paradoxical to many philosophers.
Plato appears to be raising this difficulty in the Philebus, 
15b-c. There he asked about a Form: “Can it be as a whole 
outside itself, and thus come to be one and identical in one thing 
and in several at once,—a view which might be thought to be 
the most impossible of all?” (trans. A. E. Taylor). A theory 
that kept universals in a separate realm from particulars 
would at least avoid this difficulty!
You might try just accepting the multiple location of 
universals. Some philosophers have. But then a difficulty can 
be raised: What about relations? Perhaps one can give 
properties a multiple location. But just where will you locate 
the “multiply located” relations? In the related things? That 
does not sound right. If a precedes b is the relation in both a and 
b? Or in the thing [a + b]? Neither answer sounds right. But if it 
is not in the things, where is it?
I am inclined to meet the difficulty by saying that talk of 
the location of universals, while better than placing them in 
another realm, is also not quite appropriate. What should be 
said first, I think, is that the world is a world of states of 
affairs. These states of affairs involve particulars having
98

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
properties and standing in relations to each other. The 
properties and relations are universals, which means both that 
different particulars can have the very same property and 
that different pairs, triples,. . . ,  of particulars can stand in the 
very same relation to each other. I do not think that all that is 
too startling a claim.
But if Naturalism is true, then the world is a single 
spatiotemporal manifold. What does this come to in terms of 
the states of affairs theory? That is, how do we reconcile 
Naturalism with the view sketched in the previous para­
graph? It would be an enormous undertaking, presumably 
involving both fundamental science and philosophy, to give an 
answer involving even the sketchiest detail. All that can be 
said here is that the space-time world would have to be an 
enormous plurality or conjunction of states of affairs, with all 
the particulars that feature in the states of affairs linked up 
together (in states of affairs) by spatiotemporal relations.
To talk of locating universals in space-time then emerges as 
a crude way of speaking. Space-time is not a box into which 
universals are put. Universals are constituents of states of 
affairs. Space-time is a conjunction of states of affairs. In that 
sense universals are “in” space-time. But they are in it as 
helping to constitute it. I think that this is a reasonable 
understanding of universalia in rebus, and I hope that it meets 
P lato’s objection. (For more on this topic see my Can a 
Naturalist believe in Universals? [1988a], together with 
critical comment in the same volume by Gilead Bar-Elli 1988.)
IX. Higher-Order Types
We have seen that Class Nominalism and Resemblance 
Nominalism are in some difficulty with higher-order types: 
types whose tokens are themselves types. The difficulty is 
largely caused by the fact that these theories try to account for 
our talk about properties and relations without actually
99

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
allowing that there are any properties or relations. There is no 
such difficulty for a theory, such as the Universals theory, 
that admits properties and relations. But once we have 
properties and relations, possibilities open up. For now it is 
possible that these first-order properties and relations them­
selves have properties and relations.
Is it then being suggested that we should introduce higher- 
order properties and relations in order to explain higher-order 
types? Here we have to be very careful. Consider:
Redness is more like orange than it is like yellow.
One might take this as a second-order relation, of being more 
like than, which holds between three first-order universals. 
(Assuming they are universals, which can be disputed.) We 
have seen, however, that resemblance is an internal relation, 
one that flows necessarily from the nature of the terms. (Most 
philosophers would take the proposition above to be a 
necessary truth.)
In Section X of Chapter 3, however, I have already 
suggested that where we have internal relation, there we do 
not have anything ontologically extra over and above the 
related terms. The relation supervenes upon the terms: In every 
possible world that contains those terms, the relation holds. 
That, I think, makes the relation an ontological free lunch. But 
if that is so, we do not have any need to postulate a genuine 
higher-order relation.
Now many of the things that we want to say about 
properties and relations seem to be necessary truths. Consider 
red is a color, a meter is longer than a yard, being a mile 
distant from is a symmetrical relation. They all seem to be 
necessary truths. I am inclined to treat this necessity as giving 
us a clue that when we have a perspicuous account or analysis 
of these truths (no easy matter!), we shall not find any need to 
postulate higher-order properties and relations.
One very interesting internal relation that can hold between
100

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
universals depends on these universals’ being complex. We 
have noted that it is unwise to speak of universals having 
parts, because that suggests the part-whole relations studied 
by mereology. But complex universals do have constituents, and 
different universals may nevertheless contain the same 
constituent. A simple example is the complex properties P&Q 
and Q&R. Q is a common constituent of the two different 
properties. In virtue of these common constituents some complex 
universals may be said to be incompletely identical with each 
other.
I believe that these relations of incomplete identity 
between universals are of immense importance. In particular, 
they can be used to explain what quantities are. Consider the 
whole range of a quantity such as mass (an ounce in mass, a ton 
in mass, etc.). What unifies this class of universals, I suggest, 
are the incomplete identities holding between any two 
members of the class. But I leave development of this point 
aside for the present.
So do we ever need to postulate genuinely higher-order 
properties and relations of first-order properties and relations? 
For myself I believe that we do. In particular, we require 
relations between universals in order to give a satisfactory 
account of laws of nature. These should not be thought of, in the 
tradition of Hume, as mere regularities in the behavior of 
things. Rather, laws of nature are a matter of the presence of 
one property ensuring, or probabilifying, the presence of 
another. These are relations, external relations, contingent 
relations, holding between the one property and the other.
What of higher-order properties? I think that there may be 
need to postulate such properties in connection with the 
analysis of functional laws. But I cannot discuss this here. (See 
Armstrong 1983 for an account of laws of nature as relations 
between universals. Functional laws are discussed in Chapter 7 
of that book.)
I will leave the topic of higher-order relations and 
properties of universals with this brief mention. What does
101

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
require further discussion is the topic of the resemblance of 
universals. I will preface this, however, with a discussion of 
the formal properties of the relation of resemblance. We shall 
find that the Universals theory is very well placed to explain 
these formal properties.
X. The Formal Properties of Resemblance
It will be remembered that the Resemblance Nominalist, for 
whom resemblance is a primitive notion, requires a series of 
special axioms for the characteristics of resemblance, axioms 
that he cannot justify but only state. (The Natural Class 
Nominalist equally requires special axioms for degrees of 
naturalness of classes.)
First, resemblance is symmetrical. If a resembles b to a 
certain degree, then b resembles a to just that degree. The 
upholder of universals can give a straightforward reductive 
explanation of this symmetry: It is simply the symmetry of 
identity. In the simplest case of resemblance, it is just a matter 
of common, that is, identical properties. However, a less 
simple case, it may be that a and b have no identical 
properties, yet have one or more resembling properties. I shall 
argue in the next section that in such a case the properties have 
common, that is, identical constituents. If that is correct, then 
the symmetry of resemblance of properties is again explained 
by the symmetry of identity.
If a is exactly like b, and b exactly like c, then a must be 
exactly like c. Exact resemblance is not merely symmetrical: It 
is transitive. The Universals theory analyzes this situation by 
saying that a, b, and c have exactly the same, the identical, 
properties. Identity is transitive.
We saw that the transitivity of exact resemblance is only a 
particular application of something more general. If a 
resembles b to some degree, and if b exactly resembles c, then a 
resembles c to just the same extent that a resembles b.
102

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
Resemblance of any degree is conserved under the substitution 
of exactly resembling objects. It is easy to see that this formal 
property will hold if resemblance always involves some 
identity of properties and that exact resemblance is identity of 
all properties.
Less than exact resemblance is not transitive, a can resemble 
b to a certain degree, b resemble c to the same degree, yet a fail 
to resemble c to that degree. Again the Universals theory 
explains the situation without the least difficulty, a and b 
have something identical, as have b and c. But because the 
identity is partial (incomplete) only, it need not be in the same 
Cidentical) respect. So transitivity fails for some, though not 
all, cases.
The Universals theory also explains why the notion of 
degrees of resemblance is so rough-and-ready. If resemblance is 
a matter of different identities in different cases, it is easy to 
see that degrees of resemblance will be a partially subjective 
matter, depending upon what particular properties we happen 
to be interested in, in the particular context. A Resemblance 
theory, on the contrary, just has to accept the rough-and-ready 
nature of resemblance as a primitive fact.
XI. Resemblance Between Universals
Particulars, tokens, resemble each other in different degrees. 
The Universals theory begins, at least, by trying to analyze 
this in terms of common properties. But it seems that properties 
themselves resemble each other. Red, orange, and yellow all 
resemble each other: We group them together as colors. 
Triangularity and squareness resemble each other: They are 
both shapes. The ounce, the kilo, and the ton all resemble each 
other: They are all masses. Just as with resemblance of 
particulars, resemblance of properties admits of degree. Red is 
more like orange than it is like yellow. An ounce is more like a 
kilo than it is like a ton. These resemblances at the property
103

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
level transfer themselves down to the first-order level of 
particulars. Other things being equal, a red thing is more like 
an orange thing than it is like a yellow thing.
In Section III of this chapter I discussed Wittgenstein’s 
reflections on the word ‘game’ and other family-resemblance 
notions. I presented the following schematic picture of how a 
Universals theory might analyze such a situation:
Particulars: 
a 
b 
c 
d 
e
Their properties: 
FGHJ 
GHJK HJKL JKLM KLMN
We can now see this picture quite seriously underdescribes the 
typical situation. What contributes to resemblance-without- 
identity of the different sorts of thing covered by the one gen­
eral word are resemblances-without-identity in the properties 
F, G, H , . . .  For instance, all the objects falling under a certain 
general word may do so in virtue of having shape or mass. But 
they may have rather different sorts of shape and mass, so 
that the properties involved in applying the word are 
different in different cases, yet still have a likeness.
Here is an attractive preliminary way to think of the 
resemblance of universals. Many properties (colors, shapes, 
masses, etc.) fall into orders. (The orders may or may not be one 
dimensional.) The orders, which by and large are objective and 
not just a way that we happen to like arranging properties, are 
resemblance orders. Two properties that are close together in a 
certain order resemble each other closely. To be a color, say, is 
to be a property that lies in a certain resemblance order. 
Similarly for being a shape or a mass. You can work your way 
from one color to another via the close resemblance of 
intermediates. That is what makes the colors colors. It 
explains what we mean by saying, for instance, red is a color. 
The same goes for the shapes and masses, and so on.
Now because the relations involved are resemblance 
relations, they are internal relations, dictated by the nature of 
their terms. (I should argue that they are not something
104

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
additional to the terms.) How shall we analyze the 
resemblance relations involved?
An analysis in the spirit of a Universals theory would be to 
appeal to common properties of the resembling things. This 
would involve common properties of properties: higher-order 
properties. However, although there seems to be no objection in 
principle to such a move, it is hard to see how such an analysis 
can be applied to the present cases. If the order considered 
contains many different properties to be ordered, as in the case 
of most quantities, huge numbers of higher-order properties 
would be required. We seem to have no independent grip on 
these properties besides their role in solving our present 
problem.
Perhaps then we should walk a bit towards a Resemblance 
theory? Chapter 3 showed it running into many difficulties. 
But that was because it rejected properties at the first-order 
level. We have got first-order properties now. Should we say 
that some of these first-order properties stand in unanalyzable 
resemblance relations to each other? Though unanalyzable, 
these relations of resemblance will have varying degrees of 
closeness. The resemblances will flow from the nature of the 
resembling universals. (Remember the particularized nature 
that I introduced in order to make Resemblance Nominalism as 
plausible as possible. But now we are appealing to the nature 
of universals.)
Such unanalyzable, primitive, resemblance of universals I 
regard as a fall-back position for the Realist about universals. 
It may in the end have to be accepted, at least for some cases. 
But it is an uncomfortable compromise, true to the superficial 
appearances, but lacking the deep attractiveness of a theory 
that always takes resemblance to involve some degree of 
identity.
A certain phenomenon noticed by one or two philosophers 
may provide us with encouragement. If we consider ordinaiy, 
first-order, particulars, then, as we noted in Chapter 4, two 
things, while remaining two, can resemble exactly. At least
105

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
exact resemblance is possible (assuming that the Identity of 
Indiscemibles is not a necessary truth). In the limit, 
resemblance of particulars does not give identity. But now 
consider the resemblance of universals. As resemblance of 
properties gets closer and closer, we arrive in the limit at 
identity. Two become one. This suggests that as resemblance 
gets closer, more and more constituents of the resembling 
properties are identical, until all the constituents are identical 
and we have identity rather than resemblance.
Here is a working out of this idea in a simple case: Consider 
the property of being just five kilograms in mass. For something 
to have that property the thing must consist of two parts, parts 
with no overlap between them, such that one part is just four 
kilos in mass, the other just one. It is a simple form of structural 
property, simple because no special relations are needed 
between the two parts: The parts can be scattered parts. We can 
use the language of states of affairs. The state of affairs of 
something’s being a five-kilo object is the conjunction of two 
states of affairs: something’s being four kilos plus something 
else’s (nonoverlapping something else) being a one-kilo state of 
affairs.
We can now understand the (reasonably close) resemblance 
between the properties being five kilos in mass and being four 
kilos in mass. (We can also see clearly, incidentally, why no 
object can have both these properties at the same time.) Being 
five kilos in mass involves the five-kilo thing having a part, a 
proper part to put it technically, that is four kilos in mass. 
(Moreover, a thing that is four kilos in mass can never be more 
than a proper part of a five-kilo object.) The properties 
resemble because a four-kilo object is a large proportion of a 
five-kilo object. The bigger the part, the closer to identity, and 
so the closer the resemblance.
My idea is that in this or similar ways, the resemblances 
holding between properties can be explained. Resembling 
properties are never simple properties. Different simple 
properties never resemble, at any rate in the absence of common
106

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
higher-order properties. Resembling properties are complex 
properties, their complexity established by logical analysis 
or, more likely, empirical, scientific, identification. The com­
plexity will regularly involve structures, with the parts of the 
things having the property themselves having properties and, 
perhaps, standing in relations to other parts. Thus, the 
“soundiness” of sound is to be identified with a suitable wave 
structure of a suitable medium. Resemblances between sounds 
are to be spelled out in terms of resemblances between their 
wave structures, ultimately getting down to such things as 
length, which can be treated in the same way as that 
indicated for mass.
(Hume thought that different simple properties can 
resemble. In the Treatise, Bk. I, Pt. I, Sec. VII, note, he wrote:
’Tis evident, that even different simple ideas may have a 
similarity or resemblance to each other; nor is it necessary, that 
the point or circumstance of resemblance shou’d be distinct or 
separable from that in which they differ. Blue and green are 
different simple ideas, but are more resembling than blue and 
scarlet; tho’ their perfect simplicity excludes all possibility of 
separation or distinction.
Hume, in effect, is here upholding primitive resemblance 
between properties. I would argue against him that the color 
properties have a concealed complexity, a complexity that 
nevertheless operates upon us to produce an awareness of 
resemblance. Hume’s view that “simple ideas” must be as they 
appear to be, namely, simple, would prevent him from 
accepting this.)
Whether this program can be carried through or not, it is an 
appealing idea that we can get rid of primitive resemblances 
between universals. But there are some quite formidable 
difficulties. My most recent attempt to advance the 
program can be found in a paper “Are Quantities Relations?” 
(1988b).
107

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
XU. The Fundamental Tie
What of the need for a fundamental tie—the tie or nexus of 
instantiation? Many people have thought it an overwhelming 
difficulty for a theory of universals. I do not think that the 
problem of characterizing the nature of the tie should detain 
us. This was Plato’s concern in the first part of his Parmenides. 
There he showed conclusively that the relation of particular 
to form cannot be either “participation” or “imitation.” But it is 
perfectly reasonable for an upholder of universals to claim 
that instantiation is a primitive that cannot be explicated by 
any analysis, definition, or metaphor. Nevertheless, the 
upholder of universals can go on to say, we all understand what 
it is to judge or even just to perceive that a particular has a 
property or that a relation holds between two or more terms. 
After all, the Natural Class theory takes the notion of a 
natural class as primitive and the Resemblance Nominalist 
does the same with the relation of resemblance. Why not 
instantiation as a directly apprehended primitive?
The problem is rather the regress that seems to be involved. 
The particular a instantiates property F. Prima facie, 
however, instantiation is a universal, found wherever there 
are things having properties. So this state of affairs, a’s 
instantiating property F, is a token of the type instantiation 
(but dyadic instantiation now). The state of affairs 
instantiates instantiation. But here we have another token of 
instantiation. So the state of affairs (that state of affairs 
instantiating instantiation) also instantiates instantiation. 
And so on ad infinitum. The regress that results is either 
vicious or at least viciously uneconomical.
This regress I have called in the past the relation regress. It 
could also be called the fundamental tie regress or nexus 
regress. It takes the fundamental tie patronized by particular 
solutions to the Problem of Universals. It then applies that 
solution to the particular tie and attempts to deduce a regress.
The Natural Class theory uses class membership as the
108

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
nexus; 
the 
Resemblance Nominalist uses primitive 
resemblance. In Section XI of Chapter 3 I tried to answer 
the nexus-regress argument as it was deployed by Russell 
against the Resemblance theory. I suggested that what 
saved the Resemblance theory was that resemblance is an 
internal relation, dictated by the nature of its terms, the 
resembling things. Internal relations, it is plausible to hold, 
are nothing over and above their terms. The same holds for 
resemblances between resemblance situations, and so on. But if 
so, I argued, the regress is as harmless as, say, the truth 
regress.
The same holds for class membership. Given a and given [a,
. . . } the relation of class membership supervenes. Hence, it 
seems, the regress is not to be feared. No ontological regress, no 
need to postulate an infinity of extra entities (with each 
bringing up the same old problem).
But in general at least and perhaps in every case, the fact 
that an object instantiates a certain property does not flow from 
the nature of the object and the nature of the universal that are 
involved. The connection is contingent. And if an object is 
related to another object and that relation is external, the 
same point holds. So it may seem that, unlike the cases of 
resemblance and class membership, the regress of instantiation 
goes through.
However, my idea is that the instantiation regress can 
be halted after one step. We have to allow the introduc­
tion of a fundamental tie or nexus: instantiation. But 
suppose that we have that a instantiates F or that a and b 
in that order instantiate R. Do we have to advance any 
further? I do not think that we do. For note that the 
alleged advance is now, as it was not at the first step, 
logically determined by the postulated states of affairs. 
If a instantiates F and instantiation is a universal-like 
entity, then we are logically forced to say that a, F, and 
instantiation instantiate instantiation, and so on. But perhaps 
we can allow this while denying that to “a , F, and
109

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
instantiation instantiating instantiation” any extra state of 
affairs in the world corresponds. As we go on expanding the 
regress, our statements remain true, but no new truth-maker, or 
ontological ground, is required for all these statements to be 
true.
I do not feel totally secure about this answer. But suppose 
that it is unsatisfactory. Will not that unsatisfactoriness also 
reopen the question of the other two regresses, the class and the 
resemblance regress? If the obtaining of instantiation must be 
analyzed in terms of instantiation, will it not be fair to insist 
that the holding of class membership must be analyzed in 
terms of classes and the relation of resemblance must be 
analyzed in terms of resemblances? And what theory then will 
escape the whipping? As Berkeley pointed out on a number of 
occasions, what is an objection to all theories equally does 
nothing to favor some over others.
A very important final point. In Section IV of this chapter 
we encountered the notion of states of affairs, with (thin) 
particulars and universals as the constituents of states of 
affairs. But we said that a’s being F is something more than just 
its constituents a and F. It may now be seen that in talking 
about states of affairs and talking about instantiation, we are 
talking about the same phenomenon. The state of affairs of a’s 
being F exists if and only if a instantiates F because these are 
two ways of talking about the same thing. Similarly, if R is 
a symmetrical relation, then a ’s having R to b is the 
same thing as a and b instantiating R. If R is nonsymmetrical 
or asymmetrical, then the situation is a little more com­
plex. There are two possible states of affairs that can both 
be rendered as a and b instantiating R: a’s having R to b and 
b’s having R to a. That, indeed, suggests that talking 
about states of affairs is a simpler and more perspicuous way 
of talking than talking about instantiation. The fundamental 
tie, or nexus, in a Universals theory is nothing but the bring­
ing together of particulars and universals in states of 
affairs.
110

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
XDI. The Apparatus of an 
Attribute Theory of Universals
The Universals theory, in its subject-attribute form, requires a 
reasonably comprehensive ontology to account for the objective 
existence of natural classes. First, it countenances properties 
and relations. However, in view of the great difficulties posed 
by theories that try to construct properties and relations out of 
other materials, this is perhaps prudence rather than 
extravagance. Second, it accepts the existence of states of 
affairs. These are complex entities having constituents, but 
these constituents differ from the parts of wholes treated by 
the calculus of whole and part. It is true that any recognition of 
properties and relations, even as particulars, as tropes, will 
apparently involve states of affairs. But the rules of 
composition for possible states of affairs that involve only 
tropes are somewhat nearer to the rules for whole and part. 
(For instance, if R is a nonsymmetrical relation, a Universals 
theory has the possibility of two wholly distinct states of 
affairs: aRb and bRa composed of the very same constituents. 
With tropes the two Rs could not be identical. Given a, trope 
R', and b, one might have aR'b or bR'a but not both, although 
one could have, for example, aR'b and bR’a.)
The Universals theory requires the notion of the instan­
tiation of a property, the instantiation of a dyadic relation, or 
a triadic relation, . . .  or of an n-adic relation. (If what 
universals there are is a contingent matter, not to be settled a 
priori, then not all these sorts of instantiation need actually 
exist.) But notice that the trope theory, in its subject-attribute 
form, also requires monadic, dyadic, triadic,. . . fundamental 
ties. By contrast, a Bundle theory of tropes does not require a 
monadic tie (it substitutes the dyadic compresence of 
properties), but it still requires dyadic, triadic, . . . relations 
between bundles.
But as we have noticed, a Universals theory does not require 
both states of affairs and a set of fundamental ties. To have one
ill

UNIVERSALS AS ATTRIBUTES
is to have the other. The Universals theory may require a 
primitive notion of degrees of resemblance holding between 
universals. This seems a quite heavy extra commitment for the 
theory. As a result, a good deal may hang on whether this sort 
of resemblance can be analyzed in terms of overlap of 
constituents of the resembling universals.

CHAPTER SIX
Tropes
I. Substances Versus Bundles
We now turn to consider theories that admit properties and 
relations, but admit them as particulars. It is possible to admit 
such properties and relations, yet allow them in turn to 
instantiate universal properties and relations. But as has 
already been noted, this position is not of great interest. Here, 
except for a brief final section, we confine ourselves to 
Nominalist versions of the Trope theory.
I have adopted the term trope with some hesitation. The 
trouble is not a lack of names but a superabundance of them. 
What has happened, I think, is that in many cases the tropes 
kept being discovered anew by philosophers. Then, unaware 
that the theory was already an old and respectable one, each 
philosopher had to make up a name for them. So we have 
“abstract particulars” (Stout 1921, Campbell 1981), “perfect 
particulars” (Bergmann 1967), “tropes” (D. C. Williams 1966), 
“cases” (Wolterstorff 1970), “concrete properties” (Kiing 1967— 
he calls universals “abstract properties”), “unit-properties” 
(Matthews and Cohen 1968), “property-instances” (various 
philosophers). The term trope is catching on a bit, so I have
It is suggested that D. C. Williams's “The Elements of Being,” K. K. 
Campbell’s “The Metaphysic of Abstract Particulars,” and C. B. 
Martin’s “Substance Substantiated” be used as companion readings to 
this chapter.
113

TROPES
decided to follow Williams’s usage. (Williams, a good 
scholar, was probably aware of the problem of a name.)
We have already noted that a Trope theory can choose 
between Substance-attribute theories of particulars and a 
Bundle theory. On the former view, particulars have 
properties and stand in relations to other particulars. The 
properties and relations are particulars, but that need be the 
only difference from a substance-attribute view that works 
with universals.
In modern times Trope theories have generally been 
developed as bundle theories. Here Stout, Williams, and 
Campbell constitute a line of succession. In each case we find 
worries about the mysteriousness of particulars considered in 
abstraction from properties and relations, together with 
exhilaration at the thought that the whole world can be 
constructed from tropes. Particulars reduce to bundles of 
compresent tropes. Relation tropes can then relate such bundles.
A bundle-of-tropes view of particulars has a great 
advantage over a bundle-of-universals account. We saw Russell 
developing the latter view in terms of a relation of 
compresence that holds between universals. But the relation, 
although symmetrical, is not transitive, and such a relation is 
not very suitable when it comes to constructing nonoverlapping 
bundles. However, if it is tropes that we want to bundle, then 
the situation is a good deal easier. Tropes are not identical 
across different particulars, as universals are, thus the 
fundamental compresence relation can be taken to be both 
symmetrical and transitive. It then catches all and only the 
tropes in one particular, which is just the result wanted.
Nevertheless, as between a bundle-of-tropes account of 
particulars and a substance-attribute view with the attributes 
as tropes, I think that the latter view is superior. This is the 
view upheld by C. B. Martin (1980), following his hero Locke.
An objection against the bundle view is that the tropes are 
not really suited to be the substances of the world. The point 
seems fairly obvious in the case of relations. Substances are
114

TROPES
capable of independent existence. But could, say, a "between­
ness” exist on its own, a relation without any terms? The idea 
seems ridiculous, whether the betweenness is a universal or a 
particular.
A Trope theorist may not wish to treat relations as 
substances, giving this role to properties only. Yet even when 
we turn to property tropes, it is not clear that we have entities 
that can serve as substances. In discussing the view that 
particular things are bundles of universals (Chapter 4, Section 
IV), I said that such properties as particular mass and 
charge—natural candidates for universals—do not seem to be 
at all suitable to be the substance of the world. They could not 
exist independent of anything else. But the substitution of 
tropes for universals may not improve the situation much. A 
trope of a particular mass or particular charge seems nearly as 
insubstantial, as incapable of independent existence, as the 
corresponding universal.
Evidence that tropes are not well fitted to be “junior sub­
stances” (a neat phrase that A. ). Ayer applied to the sense 
data that he thought were involved in all perception) is to be 
found in the way that Trope theorists who are also Bundle 
theorists try to build up tropes into something a little bit more 
substantial. They tend to give them spatial and temporal 
characteristics: shape, size, and duration. In this way the 
trope is swelled up a bit. Yet the theorists are then 
embarrassed because shape, size, and duration appear 
themselves to be properties and therefore ought to be tropes 
themselves alongside other property tropes.
David Lewis has suggested to me that the Trope theorist 
who is also a Bundle theorist should offer as his junior 
substances simple properties (an ultimate quantum of mass, 
say), which exist at a point and for an instant only. One could 
object that these substances were still being given spatial and 
temporal characteristics (they are pointlike and instantlike), 
so that the simple property would still not be existing on its 
own. I suppose that the reply to this would be that what
115

TROPES
makes these atoms “at a point” and “at an instant” is simply 
the relations, spatial and temporal, that the atoms have to 
other atoms. In themselves, the atoms are just simple property 
tropes. Duration, size, shape, et cetera, are just networks of 
atoms in relation. A minimal mass trope on its own would not 
have any spatial or temporal characteristics.
No doubt this is the best that can be done for the view that 
tropes are the sole substance of the world. One disadvantage is 
that it commits the Trope theorist to something that is rather 
controversial: that a purely relational account of space and 
time is true. But if this consequence is satisfactory, I do not 
have a further argument against the bundle-of-tropes view, 
although I remain suspicious of it.
If tropes are not the substance of the world, then it seems 
that one should adopt a position like C. B. Martin’s. Property 
tropes are properties, attributes, of particulars. Relation tropes 
are relations holding between particulars. This, I believe, 
should be combined with the recognition that the tropes are not 
things at all, except in the very widest sense of the word 
‘thing’, where it means no more than ‘entity*. Following 
Seargent, I advocated taking universals as ways: ways that 
things are in themselves (properties) and ways that things 
stand to each other (relations). (See Chapter 5, Section VII.) I 
see no reason why a trope theory should not also conceive of its 
properties and relations as ways. They would be particular­
ized ways, with no more than a resemblance, close or less close, 
to other particularized ways. I take it to be an advantage of 
this view that properties and relations are treated in parallel 
fashion.
n. States of Affairs Again
It was argued in the previous chapter that a Universals theory 
is committed to states of affairs (facts). It seems that a Trope 
theory, whether in a bundle or a substance-attribute version,
116

TROPES
must also admit states of affairs. The states of affairs 
involving tropes do not obey quite the same rules as those 
involving universals. The Universals theory works with states 
of affairs that taken all together, have fewer constituents. 
This is because one universal does the work of many tropes. But 
both types of theory require states of affairs.
Thus, suppose that a has property trope F. This is either a 
matter of F’s standing in the bundling relation to the other 
tropes that make up a (bundle version) or else is a matter of F’s 
being an attribute of a (substance-attribute version). In either 
case, states of affairs are required. For instance, a’s being F 
entails the existence of a and trope F. But a and trope F could 
exist without a’s being F. So [a +F] (the object that is the mere 
sum of a and F) is an insufficient truth-maker for a’s being F. 
States of affairs are required as part of the ontology of any 
trope theory. See Section IV of Chapter 5 for the general line of 
argument.
If the argument of the foregoing paragraph is accepted, then 
all layer-cake theories, theories that admit properties and 
relations, require states of affairs. Blob theories, by contrast, 
whether in a natural class or a resemblance version, do not. The 
reason is that the latter theories try to unify the world and 
furnish truth-makers for true statements by means of class 
membership or resemblance relations. These fundamental ties 
are internal, which means that they are not something that is 
an ontological addition to the terms of the relation. Hence 
they can dispense with states of affairs. However, this 
ontological economy is completely outweighed by the 
implausibility of not admitting properties and relations into 
the ontological count.
However, as I have recently become aware, there is a way 
in which trope theories can avoid having to postulate states 
of affairs. In private communication, C. B. Martin, who is a 
Trope theorist, has argued that properties of things and 
relations between things are nontransferable. Suppose that 
a has trope F or that a has R to b. Martin does not claim that
117

TROPES
it is a necessary truth that a has F or has R to b. But granted 
that F and R exist, which is not necessary, then he says that 
it is a necessary truth that they could not have been attached 
to, or hold between, anything else. They are essentially the F 
of a or the R that a has to b. This is not just the way that we 
would naturally describe them. It is the way that they have to 
be.
It follows that in a world that contains a, b, F, and R, then 
that world also contains a’s being F and a’s having R to b. 
States of affairs flow necessarily from, supervene on, the bare 
existence of their constituents. Hence we need not assume that 
states of affairs are anything additional to their constituents. 
They become an ontological free lunch.
What should we think of getting rid of states of affairs by 
postulating necessities in this way? Much will depend upon 
what view one takes of the metaphysics of modality: the 
theory of necessity and contingency. My own approach to 
modality is combinatorial. In Armstrong 1989 I argue for the 
following general approach: Possibilities that are not actual 
are given by any recombination of the elements of states of 
affairs (these elements being thin particulars, properties, and 
relations) in a way that respects the form of states of affairs. If 
one takes this approach to possibility, then one will see no 
reason why property tropes and relation tropes should not be 
shifted around promiscuously to yield possible states of 
affairs.
Even if one does not accept such an account of possibility, 
it seems that to postulate these necessities is to trade in 
one bulge in the carpet for another. States of affairs have 
their cost: One has to accept that it is at least possible that 
different states of affairs contain exactly the same 
constituents. Martin’s necessities have their cost also: Given 
the world’s particulars, properties, and relations, then the 
nature of the world is ineluctably fixed. A rather mysterious 
necessity in the world. Which poison should the boys in the 
backroom choose?
118

TROPES
Another matter before concluding this section. In expounding 
the theory of universals it was argued that, as against a priori 
realism, it is not necessary that we postulate a universal 
corresponding to each general word. The relations between 
predicates that truly apply to something and universals that 
things instantiate is never a simple one. Instead I suggested 
that it ought to be established a posteriori, on the basis of 
scientific considerations, just what universals there are.
The same can be said about the tropes. There is, for instance, 
no more reason to assume that each of the tokens of game 
involve an exactly or nearly resembling trope of gamehood 
than there is reason for a Universals theory to assume a 
universal of gamehood. We can perfectly well have what 
David Lewis calls a sparse theory of tropes as much as a sparse 
theory of universals.
m. Tropes and the Problem of Universals
Our central concern, though, is with the Problem of Universals. 
Let there be property and relation tropes, but no universals. 
Suppose that two objects have exactly the same mass. 
Associated with each object will be different mass tropes. We 
will want to think of them as both mass M tropes, where M 
takes some determinate value. But what is our warrant for 
this? If we exclude the rather feeble answer that both tropes 
fall under the same predicate (what trope analysis could we 
give of ‘falling under the same predicate’?), only two answers 
seem plausible. First, the class of mass M tropes form a 
primitively natural class; second, the class of mass M tropes is 
a class of exactly resembling things, with resemblance a 
primitive. In other words, in the absence of universals we must 
either try a trope version of the Natural Class theory, or a 
trope version of Resemblance Nominalism (positions IV and V 
in the diagram in Chapter 1, Section III).
The natural class view was held by G. F. Stout. We have
119

TROPES
seen that he accepted the Trope theory in a bundle form. For 
him “abstract particulars,” as he called them, fell into “classes 
or kinds” that have a “distributive unity.” He explained that 
the distributive unity of class or kind of abstract particulars is 
not determined by their resemblance. Rather, that resemblance 
is determined by the distributive unity of the class or kind 
(1921, p. 387 in the 1930 reprinting). This makes it clear that 
Stout’s view is like Quinton’s natural class view, but one that 
works with tropes rather than ordinary particulars. Stout’s 
view is a layer-cake view, Quinton’s is a blob view, and I think 
that Stout has the advantage because of this.
The alternative view, that the unity of classes of tropes is 
based upon the primitive and unanalyzable notion of 
resemblance, was upheld by D. C. Williams in his classic 
paper, “The Elements of Being” (1966). Keith Campbell follows 
him in another fine paper, “The Metaphysic of Abstract 
Particulars” (1981). As both titles hint, these papers take a 
bundle view of particulars. (See also Campbell’s Abstract 
Particulars, forthcoming, which develops his view into a 
whole ontology.)
In my estimation, the resemblance version of the trope 
theory is considerably superior to the natural class variant. 
However, as I have already said, I believe that a substance- 
attribute account, as in C. B. Martin’s “Substance Substan­
tiated” (1980), is to be preferred to a bundle view.
In my earlier work on universals (1978), I underestimated 
the strength of a tropes + resemblance (+ substance-attribute) 
view. In my present estimation, out of the six main positions on 
the Problem of Universals set forth in the diagram in Chapter 
1, Section III, it is a close second to the first choice, which is a 
Realism about universals (also in a substance-attribute form). 
As race commentators in Australia say, daylight is third, 
although, for the record, I think of Stout’s view as leading the 
rest of the pack home.
As we shall now see, when the natural class and the 
resemblance views are deployed in a new context, the context of
120

TROPES
tropes, a lot of things change. Here is a first difference. In the 
original Natural Class theory we have a top of the scale: a 
class with the highest degree of distributive unity. With 
orthodox Resemblance Nominalism we also have a top of the 
scale: things that perfectly resemble each other. However, and 
this is a vital point, in both cases the top of the scale is rather 
theoretical. Only perhaps in the submicroscopic realm do we 
get perfect twins, perfectly resembling things.
The situation changes in a very interesting way when it 
comes to tropes. Consider charge e that each electron has and 
that is supposed to be exactly the same for all electrons. Now 
consider the class of e tropes. (It includes tropes that are not 
associated with electrons, in particular, I am informed, tropes 
of muons.) It is a natural class with the highest possible degree 
of unity. Or in the language of the Resemblance theory, it is a 
class of tropes, each of which resembles the other exactly.
This is no isolated example. Consider any precise degree of 
any quantity, or exact shade of any color, or any exact shape. 
The corresponding tropes will resemble exactly. Of course, we 
throw away the fact that they are set in environments that 
fail to resemble exactly. Internally, we have exact resem­
blance, or in Stoutian terms, the highest degree of distributive 
unity.
IV. Tropes as Substitutes for Universals
Now consider the whole field of tropes, every one that there 
is. This field can be divided up into mutually exclusive classes, 
each of which is an exact resemblance class, a class with the 
highest degree of natural unity. This can be seen as soon as it is 
remembered that exact resemblance is symmetrical, transitive, 
and reflexive. A relation with those features will divide up a 
field into bundles, that is, into mutually exclusive, 
nonoverlapping, classes. Of course, there will very likely be 
singleton classes (unit classes). These will correspond to the
121

TROPES
cases that a Universals theory would speak of as situations 
where a universal is only instantiated once. These mutually 
exclusive classes now serve as an excellent substitute for 
universals: as ersatz universals.
A universal has a certain extension: the class of all the 
particulars that instantiate that universal. In the Trope 
theory, the same particulars will fail to instantiate a 
universal, but will as a substitute have a trope. The class of 
these tropes will be a class of exactly resembling tropes. 
Furthermore, it will be, as the logicians say, closed under exact 
resemblance. That is, the class cannot be expanded any further 
without creating a failure of exact resemblance.
So for each instantiated universal, a class of exactly 
corresponding tropes can be postulated as a substitute. The 
correspondence also goes the other way. To each class of 
exactly resembling tropes, a universal can be postulated as a 
substitute. So provided you abandon uninstantiated universals 
(good riddance, I say), and provided Universals theorists and 
Trope theorists coordinate their views on just what properties 
and relations the world contains, it is easy to pass back and 
forth between the theories.
This is all rather nice business for the Trope theory, 
especially if you are suspicious of universals. You get a 
construction that will do almost all the work that univer­
sals do, without having to postulate them. Paradise on the 
cheap!
V. A Trope Substitute for the 
Resemblance of Universals
So tropes can fill in for universals. Wherever the Universals 
theory postulates a universal, the Trope theory can substitute 
an equivalence class of exactly resembling tropes. Equally, of 
course, wherever the Trope theory postulates an equivalence 
class of exactly resembling tropes, the Universals theory can
122

TROPES
substitute a universal. (This result could also be presented in 
terms of natural classes of tropes having the highest degree of 
naturalness or distributive unity. But the resemblance 
presentation seems more perspicuous.)
We have seen that, from the standpoint of a Universals 
theory, it is natural to say that not only do ordinary 
particulars resemble each other, but that there is (inexact) 
resemblance between the universals themselves. The different 
mass properties resemble each other in being mass properties, 
the different colors resemble in being colors. Red resembles 
orange more than it resembles yellow. It now turns out that the 
tropes yield a perfectly good substitute for this resemblance of 
universals.
The point turns on one of the formal properties of 
resemblance that we have already noted (Chapter 3, Section 
I). If a resembles b to some degree, D, then just this degree of 
resemblance holds if an exactly resembling particular is 
substituted for a or for b. Resemblance to degree D is conserved 
under such substitutions. Now, instead of ordering universals in 
terms of their resemblance to each other, we want to order 
their substitutes: classes of exactly resembling tropes. 
Presumably we can assume that the formal properties of 
resemblance do not change in moving from ordinary particulars 
to tropes. Imagine, then, that just one trope is selected at 
random from each equivalence class of exactly resembling 
tropes. Form a class of these selections. This class is exactly 
correlated with the class of universals. And the (inexact) 
resemblance between the tropes in this class will exactly 
mirror whatever inexact resemblance there may be between the 
universals.
Consider three universals: a certain exact shade of red, a 
certain exact shade of orange, and a certain exact shade of 
yellow. The first resembles the second more than the first 
resembles the third. We have already seen that this does not 
necessarily hold for ordinary things (Chapter 2, Section VIII). 
The red thing’s resemblance to the orange thing in respect of
123

TROPES
color might be outweighed by the existence of many 
resemblances in other respects between the red and the yellow 
thing. But now consider three corresponding tropes. The red 
trope, we can be certain, will resemble the orange trope more 
than it resembles the yellow trope. For the red, orange, and 
yellow tropes correlate exactly with the corresponding 
universals. We can repeat this result for the whole realm of 
universals.
We have been working with resemblance here. It seems that 
the same results are available to a natural class version of the 
Trope theory. Consider the class containing just one red and just 
one orange trope. Compare it with a class containing that red 
trope and just one yellow trope. Neither class has the highest 
degree of distributive unity. But it seems reasonable to say that 
the first class has a higher degree of distributive unity than 
the second class. (We saw in Chapter 2, Section VIII, that this 
could break down for ordinary particulars. But it is secure in 
the case of tropes because they are so “thin.”) The Natural 
Class theorist can then identify the resemblance of tropes with 
this higher degree of distributive unity, thus gaining the result 
desired.
A Trope theory can thus exhibit (inexact) resemblance 
among types as an (inexact) resemblance between tropes rather 
than inexact resemblance between universals. The resemblance 
of universals is a puzzling phenomenon for a Universals theory 
because in many cases the resemblance seems to be primitive, 
thus saddling the Universals theory with some irreducible 
resemblances. But irreducible resemblance would not worry the 
Trope theorist. Some tropes resemble each other exactly, so 
yielding a trope counterpart of “instantiating the same 
universal.” Others resemble inexactly, thus yielding a trope 
counterpart of “the resemblance of universals.”
In Chapter 5, Section XI, I suggested that resemblance of 
universals might be explained in terms of partial identity of 
the constituents of the universals concerned. That is a program 
for research that I think is hopeful, but that may possibly
124

TROPES
have to be abandoned. The Trope theorist can take a 
delightfully relaxed attitude toward this program. If it 
succeeds, he can model its success in his tropes. He will turn it 
into a matter of exact similarity holding between some, but 
only some, of the constituents of complex tropes. (Or if the 
notion of a complex trope is rejected, it can be taken to be a 
matter of some of the constituents of a complex of tropes being 
exactly similar.)
It may be even better from the Trope theorist’s point of view 
if the attempt to analyze the resemblance of universals fails 
for at least some cases. He will model this by an inexact 
resemblance of tropes not based on the exact resemblance of 
constituents of the tropes in question. He never claimed to 
analyze resemblance (except perhaps in terms of distributive 
unity). So why should he not allow that primitive resemblance 
(or distributive unity) has degrees?
VI. Trope Nominalism Versus 
“Regular” Nominalism
So the philosophy of tropes is riding high. In this section it 
continues to ride quite high as we explore advantages that it 
has over orthodox Nominalism, together with some possible 
disadvantages. We will not be greatly concerned with the 
distinction between a Natural Class theory of tropes and a 
Resemblance view.
First, there is the coextension problem. It seems possible 
that two wholly distinct properties should nevertheless be 
coextensive, qualifying the very same particulars. How is this 
to be explained by a regular Nominalism? As we saw (Chapter 
2, Section III, and Chapter 3, Section VIII) there seems to be no 
explanation available, because the things involved lack any 
property structure. In that respect, they are blobs. No wedge 
can be pushed between the properties.
This difficulty, we saw, is no difficulty for a Universals
125

TROPES
theory. Equally, however, it is no difficulty for a Trope theory. 
Let P and Q be distinct but coextensive properties. Given a trope 
analysis of the situation, P-tropes and Q-tropes are perfectly 
distinct, even if neither is ever found except in the presence of 
the other.
Second, since there can be relation tropes as well as property 
tropes, there will be no call for an elaborate and unconvincing 
analysis of relations in terms of ordered classes of particulars 
(or unordered classes of unordered classes if the Wiener- 
Kuratowski device for getting rid of ordered classes is used), 
which regular or blob nominalisms find forced upon them. 
There will simply be the relations, taken as particulars, 
themselves relating particulars, and standing in relations of 
exact or less then exact resemblance to other particularized 
relations. This last relation of resemblance will be an internal 
one, and thus not something that constitutes an ontological 
addition.
Third, once properties and relations are admitted, even if 
only as particulars, then the way is open, if one should so wish 
or require, to introduce properties and relations of these first- 
order properties and relations. We have already noted, in 
Chapter 5, Section IX, that a statement's appearing to say 
something about a property or relation does not automatically 
require us to postulate further properties and relations of the 
original ones. To argue from language to higher-order 
properties is a very a priori manner of proceeding. The 
statements may and often, I think, do permit of an analysis 
that avoids such ontological expense. Nonetheless, the facts 
may turn out to be such that we do want to attribute properties 
and relations to properties and relations. A philosophy of 
tropes can permit such an attribution.
One interesting difference does then emerge between tropes 
and universals. Let a have P' and b have P", where P’ and P" 
are two exactly resembling tropes. Contrast this with a 
universals analysis, where a has P, b has P, and P = P. On a 
trope view, it would seem possible for P' to have a higher-
126

TROPES
order property Q’, whereas P" lacks any exactly similar 
higher-order property Q". The apparent possibility is created 
because we are dealing with particulars the whole time. But it 
would not be possible for the universal P to have Q in one 
instantiation and lack Q in another. P “in one instantiation” 
and P “in another” do not differ. P is one and the same thing in 
each instantiation. So it cannot both have Q and lack Q. 1 do 
not have any clear opinion as to whether this gives the Trope 
theory some advantage, by allowing more flexibility, or 
whether the possibility opened up is so arcane that the theory 
that 
eliminates 
it— the 
Universals 
theory—has 
the 
advantage.
VII. Bundles Versus Substance-Attrlbute Again
There is another interesting point about properties (as opposed 
to relations) of trope properties and trope relations. We have 
noted that a Trope theory may be held in a bundle-of- 
properties or else in a substance-attribute form. Although the 
bundle view is orthodoxy among Trope theorists, and although 
it seems superior to the bundle-of-universals account, it was 
suggested that Trope theorists do better to embrace Locke’s and 
C. B. Martin’s substance-attribute version.
The possibility that first-order properties and relations 
might themselves have properties seems an additional point 
in favor of a Substance-Attribute theory. What would it be for 
a first-order trope to have a property? Should we say that a 
first-order trope is nothing but a bundle of its properties? Such 
a view seems very unattractive. A substance-attribute model of 
the relation of a first-order trope to its property seems much 
the more inviting. It is interesting to note that Russell went 
this way when he developed his Bundle-of-universals theory 
of particulars. He wrote: “I should regard ‘red is a colour’ as a 
genuine subject-predicate proposition, assigning to the 
‘substance’ red the quality colour” (1959, p. 171). But if a
127

TROPES
substance-attribute view is preferable at the second level, then 
this seems to be some argument for embracing it even at the first 
level.
vm. Natural Classes of Tropes Versus Resemblance
The object of this section is to argue that, as between a natural 
class and a resemblance version of Trope Nominalism, the 
resemblance version is to be preferred. First, we go back to 
Wolterstorff’s argument (Chapter 2, Section IV), which was 
brought against the “regular” version of the Natural Class 
theory. The argument is based upon the identity conditions for 
classes: They are identical if and only if their members are 
identical. Different members, different classes. Because of this, 
if to have a certain property is to be a member of a class, then 
had the class been different, the property would have been 
different. But the conclusion seems unacceptable. The property 
might have been no different. So, it appears, properties are 
independent of classes.
If this argument is good, then it seems unaffected by the 
substitution of a natural class of tropes for a natural class of 
ordinary particulars. However, it appears that the argument 
does not affect a resemblance version of a trope view. Consider 
a class of exactly resembling tropes, say the class of five- 
kilograms-exact tropes. What matters about the class is that it 
is closed under exact resemblance. That is to say, the class 
contains all and only the tropes that exactly resemble each 
other “in this respect.”
Because the relation of resemblance is an internal one, it 
will depend upon the particularized nature of each trope. We 
have already met with the notion of a particularized nature 
(Chapter 3, Section II), but there it was a “ t h i c k ” 
particularized nature, a substitute for the totality of the 
properties of an ordinary thing. There I was inclined to say 
that we should distinguish between a thing and its
128

TROPES
particularized nature. But for tropes, it seems natural to say 
that the trope is its particularized nature.
We need one trope from the resemblance class to identify the 
class. But having got such a trope, the rest of the class is 
assembled according to a general principle: whatever tropes 
exactly resemble this trope. As a result, it is possible that 
there should be more or fewer of these exactly resembling 
tropes. The natural class view, however, starts and finishes 
with the whole class, giving no analysis of its structure. So it is 
stuck with the whole class and cannot answer Wolterstorff’s 
argument.
Second, I argued that we place a thing in a certain natural 
class because it has a certain property, rather than attributing 
a certain property to it because it is a member of a certain class. 
Class views of properties get the direction of explanation 
wrong (Chapter 2, Section V). This argument, a close relative 
of Wolterstorff’s, also seems to be unaffected by substituting 
classes of tropes for classes of ordinary particulars.
A similar argument may be mounted against a resemblance 
view. It may be argued that it is not the resemblance of things 
that determine their properties (the same resemblance pattern 
might flow from different properties) but rather that the 
properties of things determine their resemblance. Consider, in 
particular, a thing alone in the universe, thus resembling 
nothing. It can still have properties.
In the case of a Resemblance theory that does not admit 
tropes, this argument’s force was at least blunted by the 
doctrine of a particularized nature from which resemblances 
flow. The resemblances become secondary to these natures. 
Resemblances can even be absent as in the case of the thing 
alone in the universe. Just as in the Universals theory, 
resemblance is taken to be secondary, but secondary now to 
the particularized nature of the resembling things. Hence 
a resemblance view can agree that resemblances are 
secondary.
This reply seems to work even better with the tropes. With
129

TROPES
“regular” particulars, particularized natures are too thick. 
They are bloblike. Much of the particularized nature of a 
thing, if one can so speak, is irrelevant to a particular case of 
the thing’s resembling something else. But the tropes will 
have (or rather will be) particularized natures exactly 
adapted to supporting particular resemblances. They seem 
excellent substitutes for universal properties.
Well then, it may be said, why should not a natural class 
view take up the doctrine of particularized nature also? In the 
trope version, the class of five-kilograms-exact tropes would be 
a class of the highest unity, but in virtue of the particularized 
nature of the tropes.
But would not this move pretty much turn the Natural Class 
theory into the Resemblance theoiy? Consider a class of tropes 
having the highest degree of unity, where this unity is 
supposed to spring from the nature of the tropes involved. Such 
tropes would exactly resemble each other, and this exact 
resemblance, also, would flow from the particularized natures. 
The only way then to differentiate the Natural Class theory 
from the Resemblance theory would seem to be the following: 
In the Natural Class theory the particularized natures 
determine that the class has the highest degree of unity, 
which in turn determines that all the members resemble 
exactly. In the Resemblance theory, the particularized natures 
determine the exact resemblances directly.
Not much difference there. But any difference that there is 
appears to favor the Resemblance theory, for it analyzes the 
highest degree of unity in terms of something that seems more 
primitive, namely, resemblance. The property of the whole 
(its unity) is determined by the resemblances of its parts.
Third, there is a problem about causality (Chapter 2, 
Section VI). When a thing acts, it acts in virtue of certain of its 
properties. On a natural class view, possession of a property by 
a particular will be a matter of that particular’s being a 
member of a certain class. But if we work with ordinary things 
rather than tropes, what has the remainder of the class to do
130

TROPES
with the action of the thing? It is simply the thing that acts. 
This suggests that we want an account of properties which, 
unlike the natural class view, puts them in rebus, in the things 
that act.
A trope view at least lets us identify the cause somewhat 
more precisely. The thing acts in virtue of its having a trope of 
a certain sort (a mass trope, or whatever). But what makes it a 
trope of a certain sort? On a natural class view, the class of 
tropes of which it is a member still has something to do with 
making it a trope of a certain sort: the five-kilograms-exact 
sort, for instance. A trope view that works with exact 
resemblances does even better. For on this view the relations of 
exact resemblance that hold between the class of tropes in 
question spring from the particularized nature of the trope. 
This particularized nature lies within the thing that acts, so it 
really is that trope that acts.
A Natural Class theory might adopt particularized natures 
and make the unity of the class of tropes spring from these 
natures. But we have just seen that this move makes the 
Natural Class theory almost indistinguishable from the 
Resemblance view. I think that the arguments reviewed in this 
section, Wolterstorff’s argument, the argument that properties 
are prior to their classes, and the argument from causality, 
give us good reason to choose a resemblance version of the Trope 
theory instead of a natural class account.
EX. Swapping of Tropes
The difficulty now to be canvassed is probably not a major one. 
But it is of interest because, if real, it holds for all 
philosophies of tropes, including the resemblance version.
Suppose that a has property P but lacks Q, while b has 
property Q but lacks P. In general, at least, it makes sense to 
say that a might have had Q and not P, while b might have 
had P but not Q. For instance, it is possible that two electrons in
131

TROPES
different excited states might each have had the state that 
characterizes the other.
Suppose now that we are dealing with property tropes, and 
that the two tropes involved, P' and P", resemble exactly. 
Since the two tropes are wholly distinct particulars, it appears 
to make sense that instead of a having P' and b having P", the 
two tropes should have been swapped.
But this is a somewhat unwelcome consequence. The swap 
lies under suspicion of changing nothing. And now we notice 
that given a universals analysis, with a being P and b being P, 
there is nothing to change. You cannot swap an entity, the 
universal property P, with itself. One up to universals.
This argument will fail if we take the view advocated by 
C. B. Martin that properties and relations are nontransferable 
(see Section II of this chapter). But this restricting of the way 
that possibilities are preserved under recombination is equally 
an ontological cost for a trope theorist.
X. Tropes with Universals
A brief note on the position that admits both tropes and 
universals, with tropes being typed by their instantiating of 
universals. We have already seen (Chapter 5, Section I) that 
this might be an appropriate standpoint for those who think of 
universals as dwelling in a separate realm from the space-time 
realm. For then the tropes will break up the blob of a 
particular, and turn it, more plausibly, into a layer cake.
But if one rejects universals in a separate realm, thus 
rejecting uninstantiated universals and bringing universals 
down to earth, presumably as attributes of substances 
(particulars), then either the universals or the tropes are 
redundant. Either get rid of universals and, perhaps, embrace a 
trope version of Resemblance Nominalism or else cut out the 
middlemen, namely, the tropes.
If we go the second way, as I incline to do, then the theory of
132

TROPES
states of affairs will serve to explain all apparent reference to 
tropes. ‘The illness of the center-forward’ or ‘the whiteness of 
the paper’ need not be thought of as making reference to tropes 
of being ill or whiteness. Rather they can be taken as referring 
to states of affairs, the foward’s being ill, this paper’s being 
white, which involve only (thin) particulars and universals. 
These states of affairs, although involving universals, will be 
particular.


CHAPTER SEVEN
Summing Up
It is time to bring the matter to a conclusion. Metaphysicians 
should not expect any certainties in their inquiries. One day, 
perhaps, the subject will be transformed, but for the present the 
philosopher can do no more than survey the field as 
conscientiously as he or she can, taking note of the opinions and 
arguments of predecessors and contemporaries, and then make a 
fallible judgment arrived at and backed up as rationally as he 
or she knows how.
Of all the results that have been argued for here, the most 
secure, I believe, is the real existence of properties and 
relations. Whether they be universals or particulars is a more 
delicate matter, and just what properties and relations are 
required may be obscure, and in any case not for the 
philosopher to determine. But I hope that the arguments of 
Chapters 2 and 3, criticizing the versions of the Natural Class 
and Resemblance theories that try to do without properties 
and relations, will be thought weighty. Blobs are out; we 
require layer cakes. Reality must have more fundamental 
structure than the stricter Nominalisms allow. The 
introduction of properties and relations then involves, I argued, 
the admission of states of affairs (facts) into our ontology.
As between the Natural Cass and the Resemblance theory, 
though condemning both for omitting properties and relations 
from our “ontological assay,” if forced to choose, I take the 
Resemblance theory. At least it tries to give an analysis of the
135

SUMMING UP
notion of a natural class, a notion that gives one the feeling 
that it should be analyzable. The group of arguments of which 
Wolterstorff’s argument from the identity conditions of classes 
may stand as a representative seems to me to create great 
difficulties for the Natural Class theory. The Resemblance 
theory is in any case preferable and is greatly improved, I 
believe, by the clear recognition that it must introduce 
particularized natures on which, as terms, the relations of 
resemblance are internally founded.
Passing to the layer-cake theories, those that admit 
properties and relations, I would put the view that particulars 
are bundles of universals last. The problems involved with 
Identity of Indiscemibles and the difficulty of constructing the 
bundle appear to me to be too formidable.
Brushing aside the uneconomical view that admits both 
tropes and universals, we have a choice in Trope theory 
between natural class and resemblance views. The same sort of 
consideration that favors resemblances rather than natural 
classes of “regular” particulars seems to me to favor a Trope 
theory with resemblance. And although it is orthodox to 
bundle the tropes, I doubt if they are really well suited to be 
the substance of the world. We do better, with Locke and 
C. B. Martin, to hold the trope view in a substance-attribute 
form.
Our final two contenders, then, I suggest, are a Universals 
theory and a Trope Resemblance theory, each held in a 
substance-attribute form. How do we adjudicate between these 
two?
The Trope theory in its resemblance and substance-attribute 
form seems to me to face two unpleasantnesses. The first is 
relatively minor. It is the possibility of swapping exactly 
resembling tropes, to which attention was drawn in Section IX 
of Chapter 6. It is a somewhat implausible ‘possibility’, and is 
excluded by the substitution of universals for tropes.
The second difficulty is more serious, I think. It is the fact 
that the features of resemblance, what we have called the
136

SUMMING UP
Axioms of Resemblance, would be explained with the greatest 
naturalness, simplicity, and economy if resemblance of nature 
was always identity of nature, either partial or complete 
identity. The difficulty, it will be remembered, is that the 
Axioms of Resemblance can be derived from the properties of 
identity provided that it is allowed that resemblance can be 
analyzed in terms of identity, that is, in terms of universals 
(Chapter 5, Section X). A Resemblance theory must treat this 
as a mere metaphysical coincidence between the properties of 
resemblance and the properties of identity. It is a serious 
difficulty for any resemblance analysis that the irreducibility 
of resemblance is so implausible an irreducibility.
What of the difficulties faced by the Universals theory? It 
might be thought that a great difficulty lies in its strange 
primitive: the cross-categorial and fundamental tie or nexus of 
instantiation. The Resemblance theory has no such problem 
because its tie of resemblance is an internal relation, super­
vening upon the particularized natures of the resembling 
things.
I do not think that instantiation involves any special 
difficulty for the Universals theory. Barring the postulation of 
a special nontransferability for tropes, we have seen the need 
for states of affairs for all layer-cake theories, including those 
involving tropes. If tropes are the attributes of substances, 
which I have argued is the best view of the matter, then a 
fundamental tie or nexus is involved, that is, there will be 
states of affairs involving substances, which are particulars, 
having properties, and also substances standing in relation to 
each other. If the bundle conception is correct, then a bundling 
tie (compresence) is still involved, and relations hold between 
bundles. Instantiations are just states of affairs involving 
universals and seem to involve no more paradox or difficulty 
than states of affairs involving tropes.
Where I do see trouble for a Universals theory is the 
question of the resemblance of universals. Once universals are 
admitted, it must also be admitted that universals themselves
137

SUMMING UP
can be ordered and grouped by resemblance relations. These 
relations, however, involve less than exact resemblance. (Two 
universals could not resemble exactly!)
The vital question, then, is whether this less than exact 
resemblance of universals is or is not analyzable. My idea is 
that it is analyzable, analyzable in terms of a partial, an 
incomplete,, identity of constituents of the universals involved, 
where these constituents are themselves universals. (In a Trope 
Resemblance theory, it would be a matter of exact resemblance 
of some, but only some, constituents of the inexactly resembling 
tropes.)
If this analysis of the inexact resemblance of universals can 
be carried through, then the Universals theory is considerably 
strengthened. But if it cannot be carried through, the theory is 
weakened, because the inexact resemblances will presumably 
have to be taken as unanalyzable primitives, strengthening 
the notion that exact resemblance is no more than the highest 
degree of this primitive.
So, a great deal turns on whether the analysis of the inexact 
resemblance of universals can be carried through. I think that 
it can be carried through, but it faces some formidable 
ontological and epistemological difficulties. A key question 
here is the nature of quantities. A quantity is for me a family of 
property universals bound together by inexact but systematic 
resemblances, but resemblances that involve identical con­
stituents of the universals involved (see Armstrong 1988b). 
Here is an important area for further work.
Another important question is the nature of laws of nature, a 
question that I have not had space to address here. I think 
that they are irreducibly higher-order relations (or necessi- 
tation or probabilification) holding between universals 
(Armstrong 1983). I believe this view has great advantages. It 
solves the numerous problems that beset a regularity or 
Humean account of laws. It promises, I think, to point towards 
a solution of the Problem of Induction. Induction becomes an 
“abductive” or explanatory inference from observed regularities
138

SUMMING UP
to a relationship between universals (inference to the best 
explanation). The hypothesized relationship then permits a 
deduction of conclusions about unobserved cases where the 
antecedent universal is instantiated. (See Armstrong 1983, pp. 
52-59 and 103-106, and for a similar line of argument about 
induction, John Foster 1983.) This sort of account of induction 
would not be available to a Trope theory.
At the same time, though, the theory is controversial. 
Sophisticated Humeans, such as David Lewis (see, for 
instance, pp. xii and xvii of Lewis 1968d), think that such a 
relation between universals is a mystery whose link to the 
unobserved cases is magic.
Therefore, the fate of the Universals theory may turn on the 
questions of the inexact resemblance of universals and of the 
nature of laws. But if both questions go as I surmise that they 
will go, the Universals theory seems ahead of even the best 
Trope theory.
Drawing a figure from the game of chess, Mark Johnston has 
suggested to me that the dispute between a suitably sophis­
ticated theory of universals and a suitably sophisticated 
theory of tropes can only be decided in the end game. Maybe. 
We are probably only at the beginning of the middle game as 
yet.
We have seen in Chapter 6 the remarkable way that the 
Universals and Trope theories, when thought through, turn out 
to run parallel in many respects. We may in the end have to 
reconsider an idea of H. H. Price’s (1953, Ch. 1, pp. 30-32) that 
Universals and Resemblance theories are no more than 
“alternative languages,” although, unlike Price, we will surely 
need to move to a trope version of a Resemblance theory.
At any rate, the Problem of Universals is alive and well and 
may commend itself to those happy few who feel the 
intellectual fascination in what D. C. Williams called 
“grubbing around in the roots of being.”
139


REFERENCES
Abbott, F. E. (1886) Scientific Theism, Macmillan.
Adams, R. (1979) Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity, Journal of 
Philosophy 76.
Aristotle. Basic Works, ed. R. McKeon, Random House, 1941.
Armstrong, D. M. (1978a) Nominalism and Realism, vol. 1 of 
Universals and Scientific Realism, Cambridge University Press.
 
. (1978b) A Theory of Universals, vol. 2 of Universals and
Scientific Realism, Cambridge University Press.
 
. (1980) Against “Ostrich Nominalism”: A Reply to Michael
Devitt, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 61.
 
. (1983) What Is a Law of Nature? Cambridge University
Press.
 
. (1988a) Can a Naturalist Believe in Universals? in Science in
Reflection, ed. E. Ullmann-Margalit, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
 
. (1988b) Are Quantities Relations? Philosophical Studies 54.
 
. (1989) A Combinatorial Theory of Possibility, Cambridge
University Press.
Bar-Elli, G. (1988) Can a Naturalist Believe in Universals? A 
Comment, in Science in Reflection, ed. E. Ullmann-Margalit, Kluwer 
Academic Publishers.
Bergmann, G. (1967) Realism, University of Wisconsin Press.
Blanshard, B. (1939) The Nature of Thought, Allen and Unwin.
 
. (1962) Reason and Analysis, Open Court.
Butler, J. The Analogy of Religion, Everyman, 1906.
Campbell, K. K. (1981) The Metaphysic of Abstract Particulars, 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, vol. 6, ed. P. A. French, T. E. 
Uehling, and H. K. Wettstein, University of Minnesota Press.
 
. (forthcoming) Abstract Particulars, Blackwell.
Denkel, A. (1984) Real Resemblances, Philosophical Quarterly 39.
Devitt, M. (1980) “Ostrich Nominalism” or “Mirage Realism’?  Pacific 
Philosophical Quarterly 61.
141

REFERENCES
Foster, J. (1983) Induction, Explanation and Natural Necessity, 
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, vol. 83.
Goodman, N. (1966) The Structure of Appearance, 2nd ed., Bobbs- 
Merrill.
Hume, D. A Treatise of Human Nature, 2 vols., Everyman, 1911.
Jackson, F. (1977) Statements about Universals, Mind 76.
Kiing, G. (1967) Ontology and the Logistic Analysis of Language, rev. 
ed., Reidel.
Leibniz, G. W. The Leibniz-Clarke 
Correspondence, ed. H. G. 
Alexander, Manchester University Press, 1956.
Lewis, D. (1983) New Work of a Theory of Universals? Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy 61.
 
. (1986a) On the Plurality of Worlds, Blackwell.
 
. (1986b) Against Structural Universals, Australasian Journal of
Philosophy 64.
 
. (1986c) Comment on Forrest and Armstrong, Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 64.
 
. (1986d) Philosophical Papers, vol. 2, Oxford University Press.
Martin, C. B. (1980) Substance Substantiated, Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy 58.
Matthews, G. B., and S. M. Cohen (1968) The One and the Many, 
Review of Metaphysics 21.
McTaggart, J. McT. E. (1921) The Nature of Existence, 2 vols., 
Cambridge University Press.
Pap, A. (1959) Nominalism, Empiricism and Universals: 1, 
Philosophical Quarterly 9.
Plato. Philebus, trans. A. E. Taylor, in Plato: Philebus and Epinomis, 
ed. R. Klibansky, Nelson, 1956.
 
. Republic, trans. F. Comford, Oxford University Press, 1941.
Price, H. H. (1953) Thinking and Experience, Hutchinson.
Quilter, J. (1985) What Has Properties? Proceedings of the Russellian 
Society, Philosophy Dept., Sydney University, 10.
Quine, W. V. (1961) ‘On What There Is,’ in From a Logical Point of 
View, by W. V. Quine, Harper & Row.
 
. (1980) Soft Impeachment Disowned, Pacific Philosophical
Quarterly 61.
Quinton, A. (1957) Properties and Classes, Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society, vol. 48.
 
. (1973) The Nature of Things, Routledge and Kegan Paul.
142

REFERENCES
Russell, B. (1912) The Problems of Philosophy, Home University 
Library.
 
. (1940) An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, Allen and Unwin.
 
. (1948) Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, Allen and
Unwin.
 
. (1959) My Philosophical Development, Allen and Unwin.
Seargent, D. A. J. (1985) Plurality and Continuity, an Essay in G. F.
Stout’s Theory of Universals, Martinus Nijhoff.
Sellars, W. (1963) Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man, in 
Science, Perception and Reality, by W. F. Sellars, Routledge and 
Kegan Paul.
Skyrms, B. (1981) Tractarian Nominalism, Philosophical Studies 40. 
Sober, Elliott. (1982) Why Logically Equivalent Predicates May Pick 
Out Different Properties, American Philosophical Quarterly 19. 
Stout, G. F. (1921) The Nature of Universals and Propositions, Oxford 
University Press (British Academy Lecture), reprinted in G. F. 
Stout, Studies in Philosophy and Psychology, Macmillan, 1930.
 
. (1936) Universals Again, Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society, supp. vol. 15.
Tooley, M. (1987) Causation, Clarendon Press.
Williams, D. C. (1966) “The Elements of Being,” in The Principles of 
Empirical Realism, by D. C. Williams, Charles Thomas. 
Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical Investigations, Blackwell.
 
. (1961) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, trans. D. F. Pears and B.
F. McGuinness, Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Wolterstorff, N. (1970) On Universals, University of Chicago Press.
143


INDEX
Abbott, F. E., 77 
Abstract particulars, 113,120 
Adams, R. M., 68-69 
Antimony of Bare Particulars, 
94-95 
Antisthenes, 6 
Argument from almost
indiscernible cycles, 69 
Argument from the meaning of 
general terms, 78-79 
Aristotle, 9,17,29,77 
Ayer, A. J., 115
Bar-Elli, G., 99 
Bergmann, G., 88,113 
Berkeley, G., 110 
Blanshard, B., 64 
Blob theories, 38,45,49,58, 76-77, 
117,120,126,130,135 
Bundle theories, 62-63 
tropes, 114-116,127-128 
universals, 64-74,93 
Butler, J., 2-5 passim
Campbell, K. K., 60,63,113,114, 
120 
Cases, 113
Causality, 28-29,49-50,82-84 
Classes, 36 
class-membership relation, 36, 
109
equivalence, 41-42 
identity conditions, 25,27,48 
natural, 14-15,16-18,21-38 
passim 
not universals, 10 
null-class, 12 
open, 9-10 
ordered, 31 
versus sets, 8-9 
Cohen, S. M.,113 
Compresence, 62, 70-73,114 
Cook Wilson, J., 17
Denkel, A., 64 
Devitt, M., xii
Dissimilarity of the Diverse. See 
under Identity of 
Indiscemibles 
Distributive unity, 16,21,120
Equivalence class. See Classes 
Erasmus, D., 6 
Eternal return, 68
Family resemblances, 85-97, 104 
Forms, 76,78,79-80,95 
Foster, J., 139
Fundamental tie, 108-110, 111— 
112,117
Goodman, N., 71,72,92
145

INDEX
Hume, D., 43,107 
Husserl, E., 53
Ideal standards, 79-80 
Identity, strict vs. loose, 2-5,7 
Identity of Indiscemibles, 3,64- 
66
Dissimilarity of the Diverse, 61 
Indiscemibility of Identicals, 3, 
65-66 
Induction, 138-139 
Instantiation, 55,76,94,97,137 
Principle of, 75,81,84,92,94,96 
regress, 55,108-110
Jackson, F., 34 
James, W., 29 
Johnston, M., 139
Kripke, S., 26 
Kiing, G., 113
Laws of nature, 81,101,138-139 
Layer-cake theories, 38,58,76-77,
117,120,135,136 
Leibniz, G. W.,67 
Leibniz's Law. See
Indiscemibility of Identicals 
Lewis, D.
bundles of universals, 69 
coextensive properties, 26 
laws as relations of universals, 
139
states of affairs, 91 
tropes, 115,119 
Truth-maker principle, 89 
Wolterstorffs argument, 27 
Locke, J.
nominalism, 5 
similitudes, 39
Substance-attribute theory, 
63-64,114,127,136 
substratum, 60-61,64 
tropes, 64
McTaggart, J. McT. E., 61 
Manifest Image, 23, 87 
Martin, C. B.
Substance-attribute theory, 63,
64.114.116.127.136 
substratum, 64
tropes, 63,64,114,116,117-118,
132.136 
Truth-maker principle, 88
Mathematicals, 79-80 
Mathematics, 81 
Matthews, G. B., 113 
Mereology, 91-92 
Mill, J. S., 53 
Modal realism, 26
Naturalism, 99 
Nominalism, 5-6, 7 
Class, 8-10,11-13,54,90 
Concept, 11, 78 
Natural Class, 14-15,16,17,18, 
21-38,56-57,108 
Predicate, 10-11,54,78,90 
Resemblance, 15,17,18, 25,39- 
58,90,105,108,109
Occam, William of, 20 
Occam's razor, 20
Pap, A., 35
Particularized natures, 44-47,56, 
57-58,105,128-130,131,136 
Particulars 
bare, 94-95,96 
perfect, 113
146

INDEX
thick, 60,94-96 
thin, 60,94-%
Peirce, C. S., 1,29 
Physicalism, 87-88 
Plato, 22 
fundamental tie, 108 
multiple location problem, 98- 
99
Realism, 6
uninstantiated universals, 76- 
81 passim 
universals, 1,6,17 
Platonism, 76,77,78 
Possibility, 118 
Possible worlds, 56 
Predicates, 79,84-87,89 
Price, H. H., 15,17,47,48,139 
Properties, 7,9,15-16,38,49 
causality, 28-29,50 
coextensive, 25-26,50-51 
concrete, 113 
location, 98-99 
natures, 95 
relational, 65
resemblance of, 103-107,122- 
125
structural, 92-93,100,107 
unit, 113 
ways, 96-98,116 
Property-instances, 113
Quantities, 101,138 
Quilter, ]:, 94 
Quine, W.V.O. 
classes, 10,25,27 
nominalism, xi-xii 
predicates, 89 
Problem of Universals, 1 
Quinton, A., 13-17 passim, 21-23,
38,120
Realism, 5,6,16 
a posteriori, 87 
a priori, 87 
Relation regress, 54,108 
Relations, 15-16,29452,36,51-52, 
62-63 
anadic, 51-52 
external, 43-44 
fundamental, 54,108,110 
independent existence of, 74, 
97,114-115 
internal, 43-44,55,100 
location, 98 
multigrade, 51-52 
ways, 96-98,116 
Relations of ideas and Matters of 
fact, 43 
Resemblance, 15,17,125 
between tropes, 120,121-125 
between universals, 103-107 
internal, 43-44,104-105,109 
properties of, 39-43,102-103, 
136-137 
See also Nominalism, 
Resemblance 
Russell, B. 
bundle of universals, 63,64, 
70-71,127 
compresence, 62, 70-71,114 
relations, 29
resemblance regress, 53-55 
substance-attribute, 127 
transcendent universals, 76 
Ryle, G., 79
Scientific Realism, 23 
Seargent, D.A.J., 96,116
147

INDEX
Sellars, W., 23 
Sets, 8-9. See also Classes 
Skyrms, B., 88 
Sober, E., 26 
Socrates, 1,28,78 
States of affairs, 51,88-94,95,96, 
97-98,108,110,132-133 
tropes, 95-96,116-118 
Stout, G. F., 17,96 
bundle view, 63-64,114,120 
distributive unity, 16,21,119 
tropes, 16,21,63,113 
Substance, 9
independent existence, 73-74,
113-116 
primary, 9 
secondary, 9
See also Substance-attribute 
theories
Substance-attribute theories, 59- 
64,95-96,113-116,120,127- 
128,136,137 
Substratum, 60-61 
Supervenience, 56,100 
Synergism, 84
Temporal parts, 4,38,61 
Tooley, M., 71,72,81,83 
Tropes, 16-17,18,44-45,63-64 
a posteriori, 119 
bundles, 111, 114-116,120,127, 
136
causality, 130-131 
coextensive, 125-126 
higher-order, 126-127 
independent existence of, 74,
114-116
natural classes of, 119-120,123, 
124,128-131
nontransferable, 117-118,137 
relations, 126
Resemblance theory, 120-121, 
122-125,128-131,136 
sparse, 119
states of affairs, 91,116-118 
Substance-attribute theories,
114-115,116,120,127 
Truth-maker principle, 88-89 
Types
extension, 12
higher-order, 32-43,52-53,99- 
100 
impure, 9-10 
pure, 9-10 
and tokens, 1-2,6-7
Universals, 15-16,17,18,63-64 
complex, 101 
conjunctive, 84 
disjunctive, 82-83 
negative, 83-84 
resemblances between, 103- 
107,122-125,137-138 
uninstantiated, 75-82,115 
universalia ante res, 76 
universalia in rebus, 77, 99 
universalia inter res, T1
Wiener-Kuratowski device, 31- 
32,52,126 
Williams, D. C., 139 
bundle view, 63,114 
Resemblance Nominalism, 16,
17,120 
tropes, 16,17,63,113-114 
Wittgenstein, L., xii, 1,21,85-87, 
88,104
Wolterstorff, N., 27,113,128,129,
131,136
148



