United States Patent (19) 
Auer et al. 
54 COMPUTER INTERFACE DEVICE 
75) Inventors: Carol M. Auer, Middletown, N.J.; 
Daniel L. Castagno, Pickerington; 
Allen W. Haley, Jr., Columbus, both 
of Ohio; Harry H. Moore, IV, 
Lincroft, N.J.; Sean E. O'Leary, 
Eatontown, N.J.; Steven J. Paley, 
Aberdeen, N.J.; Thomas E. Rutt, 
Asbury Park, N.J. 
American Telephone and Telegraph 
Company, AT&T Bell Laboratories, 
Murray Hill, N.J. 
73 Assignee: 
21 Appl. No.: 862,629 
(22 
Filed: 
May 13, 1986 
51) Int. Cl."........................ G08C 21/00; G02F 1/13; 
G06K 15/18 
52 U.S. C. ....................................... 178/18; 340/712 
58) Field of Search ............ 178/18, 19; 340/365 VL, 
340/784, 711,712 
NAME: MACOLL, DOROTHY 
ACE: 58 
STATUS: ) 
REASON: 
TIME DE: 10:00 
ME DONE 
EP 
OO 
98.5 degF 
PULSE 
. 
PULSE SITE 
i 
21MN 
i 
33-3 
| 
i. 
BP 
i | 
BP SITE 
d 
130/80 
|| 
3.3% 
0:30 
DOCUMENT WITAS 
ATTENDING M.O. A. B. BASKN 
sNE 
PEYNET 
cate 
petal 
I 
3. 
4,725,694 
Feb. 16, 1988 
11 
Patent Number: 
(45) 
Date of Patent: 
(56) 
References Cited 
U.S. PATENT DOCUMENTS 
4,224,615 9/1980 Penz .................................... 340/712 
OTHER PUBLICATIONS 
Article entitled "Ulticare puts a terminal in every pa 
tient room to save millions in nursing costs' Hospitals, 
Jan. 1, 1985, p. 85. 
Primary Examiner-Stafford D. Schreyer 
Attorney, Agent, or Firm-Robert O. Nimtz; Henry T. 
Brendzel 
57 
ABSTRACT 
A computer terminal device includes a flat screen dis 
play element and a touch-sensitive element. Simulated 
keyboards can be displayed on the display element and, 
in response to the touching of the simulated keys, gener 
ate appropriate control signals. The same flat screen 
display can also be used to display computer output, 
either the result of calculations or the result of informa 
tion retrieval requests. The slim silhouette of this termi 
nal makes it ideal for hostile environments such as the 
factory floor or the hospital room. 
4. Claims, 9 Drawing Figures 
2 
10 
MRN: 233234 
LOCATION: 52-4 
WGT 
hs 
RESP 
WGT 
20/MN 
-kg 
BP POSITON 
I 
TEMP SITE 
| {{{{{{{{k+ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

U.S. Patent 
Feb. 16, 1988 
Sheet 1 of 8 
4,725,694 
A/6. / 
O 
A/G 2 
  

U.S. Patent 
Feb. 16, 1988 
Sheet 2 of 8 
4,725,694 
TRANSPARENT COVER 
TOUCH SENSITIVE 
LAYER 16 
FLAT DISPLAY 
(e.g. PLASMA) 
  

Sheet 3 of 8 
4,725,694 
Feb. 16, 1988 
U.S. Patent 
  

U.S. Patent 
Feb. 16, 1988 
Sheet 4 of 8 
4,725,694 
  

Feb. 16, 1988 
U.S. Patent 
  
  

U.S. Patent 
Feb. 16, 1988 
Sheet 6 of 8 
4,725,694 
START )f 30 
SAVE CURRENT DISPLAY 
31 
FOR LATER RESTORAL 
DEFINE TOUCHAREAS 
32 
AND DRAW KEY LAYOUT 
LABEL, KEYS 
33 
WAIT FOR A 
SCREEN TOUCH SIGNAL 
TRANSLATE TOUCHSIGNAL 
TOX-Y COORDINATES 
XY COORDINATES 
INA KEY AREA? 
DETERMINE CHARACTER 
FROMXY COORDINATES 
IS IT THE SHIFT KEY? 
40 
NO 
8 YES 
IS IT THE CONTINUE KEY? 
RESTORE PRIOR DISPLAY 
NO 
TRANSMIT ASCII VALUE 
OsTOP D 
OF KEY CHARACTER 
41 
38 
CHANGE LABELS ON KEYS 
TOSHIFT VALUES 
  
  
  
  
  
  

U.S. Patent 
Feb. 16, 1988 
Sheet 7 of 8 
4,725,694 
A/6. 3 
TO 
COMPUTER 
NETWORK 
VIDEO 
CONTROLLER 
TOUCH 
SCREEN 
DECODER 
CIRCUITRY 
HAND HELD UNT 
TOUCH 
O 
COMPUTER 
  

U.S. Patent 
Feb. 16, 1988 
Sheet 8 of 8 
A/6. 9 
REGISTRATION 
BILLING 
TERMINALS 
MEDICAL 
FENANCIAL 
OFFICE 
MEDICAL 
AUTOMATION 
RECORDS 
SYSTEM 
CLNCS 
BEDSDE 
CLNC 
TERMINALS 
TERMINALS 
4725,694 
  

4,725,694 
1. 
COMPUTER INTERFACE DEVICE 
TECHNICAL FIELD 
This invention relates to computers and computer 
terminals, and more particularly, to small, compact and 
light-weight terminal devices for computers and com 
puter systems. 
BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION 
Flat display electroluminescent and plasma display 
devices are well-known and have long been incorpo 
rated into computer terminal devices, particularly for 
portable terminals and for portable computers. Such 
portable computers are sometimes called "smart” termi 
nals or personal computers or work stations. While such 
flat screen devices substantially reduce the size of com 
puter terminals, the standard keyboard, key pads, 
"mice,” and other input devices have required that even 
"portable' terminals be relatively bulky despite the thin 
screen display. 
It is also well-known to provide a touch-sensitive 
display screen for computer terminals. By touching the 
screen at or near indicia displayed on the screen, the 
user can select actions or graphic display portions for 
further consideration or action. Thus, in response to a 
touch, a command can be selected from a menu for 
execution, a graphical element can be selected for en 
largement, movement or replication, or a data file can 
be selected for processing. Such touch-responsive selec 
tions have the disadvantage, however, of being totally 
dependent on the specific application for which they 
were designed. General purpose input devices, such as 
typewriter-type keyboards, were therefore also neces 
sary for generalized inputting. 
SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION 
In accordance with the illustrative embodiment of the 
present invention, a light, portable, compact computer 
terminal is provided by combining a flat screen display 
device with a touch-sensitive overlayer. All or a portion 
of the display surface is used to simulate a standard 
input device such as a standard "q-ul-e-r-t-y' typewriter 
keyboard or a touch-tone numerical telephone keypad. 
Simultaneously with the display of the simulated input 
device, the areas of the display corresponding to spe 
cific signals (alphanumerics, for example) are correlated 
with the generation of the corresponding signals, 
ASCII codes, for example. 
It can be seen that a touch-sensitive screen in accor 
dance with the present invention can serve all of the 
input and output needs of a computer terminal. A pro 
grammed microprocessor associated with the terminal 
can be used to provide the screen displays and generate 
the appropriate signals in response to touching the cor 
responding selected portions of the screen. Such a de 
vice can be considerably more compact than heretofore 
available computer terminals. True portability of a com 
puter terminal in accordance with the present inven 
tion, particularly in a busy, and sometimes hostile, work 
environment, permits such a terminal to be used as an 
electronic clipboard, but with all of the processing 
power of a large computer. 
In accordance with one feature of the present inven 
tion, the electronic clipboard terminal can be con 
nected, by wires or by standard wireless technology, to 
minicomputers or large main frame computers to obtain 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
65 
2 
the advantages of complex computing capability and 
access to large data bases. 
In accordance with another feature of the present 
invention, the portable terminal can be used to simulate 
a standard keyboard, a standard telephone key pad, a 
standard numerical keypad, a stenographic machine, or 
any other standard finger-operated data input device. 
Moreover, the same screen which is used as a simulated 
input device can also be used as a standard output or 
display device, either at different times or at different 
locations ("windows') on the display surface. Finally, 
such versatility is entirely under the control of software 
in a digital computer and hence can be called upon 
automatically in response to computer-derived signals. 
In this way, a standard simulated keyboard is displayed 
only at those times when alphabetic input is appropri 
ate, a numerical key pad is displayed only when nu 
meric input is appropriate, a telephone key pad is dis 
played only when a telephone number must be supplied, 
and so forth. 
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS 
FIG. 1 is a plan view of a computer terminal in accor 
dance with the present invention; 
FIG. 2 is a side view of the computer terminal of 
FIG. 1; 
FIG. 3 is an exploded perspective view of the termi 
nal of the present invention showing the construction of 
the multilayer screen; 
FIG. 4 is a graphical representation of a standard 
typewriter keyboard display for use with the terminal of 
the present invention; 
FIG. 5 is a graphical representation of a telephone 
key pad display for use with the terminal of the present 
invention; 
FIG. 6 is a graphical representation of a display for a 
special application of the terminal of the present inven 
tion in the hospital environment; 
FIG. 7 is a flowchart showing one application of the 
terminal of the present invention for the generation of 
standard typewriter alphanumeric ASCII codes to con 
trol a computer; 
FIG. 8 is a detailed block diagram of the electrical 
circuits of the terminal of FIGS. 1 through 6; and 
FIG. 9 is a block diagram of one application of a 
computer system in which the terminal of FIGS. 1 
through 6 might be a part. 
DETAILED DESCRIPTION 
Referring more particularly to the drawings, FIGS.1 
and 2 are plan and elevation views, respectively, of a 
portable computer terminal in accordance with the 
illustrative embodiment of the present invention. As can 
be seen in FIG. 1, the terminal 10 has two planar sur 
faces 11 and 13 at an angle to each other. Planar surface 
11 includes an opening 12 which provides visual access 
to a flat screen display divice inside of terminal 1. As 
can best be seen in FIG. 2, the planar surfaces 11 and 13 
define an angle of approximately 140 degrees therebe 
tween. A retractile cord 14 may be attached to terminal 
10 as means for connecting terminal 10 to computing 
facilities outside of terminal 10, should that be necessary 
or desireable. Alternatively, terminal 10 can be electri 
cally coupled to such external computing facilities by 
well-known wireless technology using ultrasonic sound 
waves, radio waves, infra-red waves or other wireless 
media. 

4,725,694 
3 
In FIG. 3, there is shown an exploded view of por 
tions of the terminal 10 to illustrate the construction of 
the display screen elements which fit into opening 12 of 
surface 11. This display area comprises a flat electrolu 
minescent or plasma display screen 15, a touch-sensitive 5 
layer 16, and a transparent protective layer 17. These 
three layers are sandwiched together and are visible 
through the opening 12 on surface 11. Flat screen dis 
play devices are well-known in the art and will not be 
further described here. Not shown in FIG. 3 are the 10 
electrical wires and connections required to operate flat 
display screen 15. 
Similarly, touch-sensitive layer 16 is also well-known 
in the art and will not be further described here. Not 
shown in FIG. 3 are the electrical wires and connectors i5 
required to operate the touch sensitive layer 16. It is 
sufficient for the present invention that touch-sensitive 
layer 16 be capable of discriminating between adjacent 
touched areas of a size commensurate with the size of 
the human fingertip. 
It will be noted that the terminal device 10 is designed 
to be relatively thin and small for ease in portability. 
Moreover, the sandwich construction of the display 
screen assists in the terminal's thin profile and thus 
makes it possible for the terminal device of the present 25 
invention to be used as an electronic clipboard in rela 
tively hostile environments such as the factory floor or 
the hospital patient's room. The transparent protective 
layer 17, for example, may be so constructed and so 
C. sealed to the surface 11 as to protect components inside 
of terminal 10 from corrosive or damaging elements in 
the environment in which terminal 10 is used. 
In accordance with the present invention, the termi 
nal 10 operates as both an input and an output device for 
a computer which may comprise a microprocessor in- 35 
cluded inside of the case of terminal 10 or which may 
comprise a separator computer to which terminal 10 is 
connected. The connection between terminal 10 and 
... such a computer can be had by way of retractor cord 14 
I,(to permit relative mobility of terminal 10) or by a wire- 40 
less connection such as is commonly found in home 
entertainment units using wireless remote control de 
vices. In any event, and in accordance with the present 
invention, the terminal 10 includes a display surface 20 
on which there can be displayed a plurality of diverse 
keyboard simulations. The touch-sensitive layer 6 is 
then used to identify the various key areas of such dis 
played keyboards and to generate appropriate electrical 
signals in response to the touch of each of the graphi 
cally defined key areas. This capability permits the 50 
terminal 10 to operate as if it included a plurality of 
different mechanical keyboards. Indeed, and in further 
accordance with the present invention, different variet 
ies of simulated keyboards can be displayed on surface 
20, depending on the particular needs of the user. 
55 
One example of such a simulated keyboard is shown 
in FIG. 4, where there is shown a display of a standard 
typewriter keyboard which can be used as an input 
device for standard alpha-numeric characters for input 
ting standard text. The keyboard display of FIG. 4 may 
also be used for standard text processing chores such as 
editing. In the alternative, and as shown in FIG. 5, the 
display surface 20 may be used to display a standard 
telephone key pad which can be used to establish tele 
phone connections with remote computers or remote 65 
data bases when desired by the user of terminal 10. 
Finally, and as illustrated in FIG. 6, the terminal 10 may 
have displayed in display area 20 keys which are totally 
20 
30 
45 
4 
dependent on the particular application for which the 
terminal 10 is used. 
In FIG. 6, for example, there is shown a display suit 
able for a terminal 10 used in a hospital room environ 
ment where it is necessary to collect and record the 
vital signs for a particular patient. Across the top of the 
display of FIG. 6 appears identifying information con 
cerning the particular patient. Also included in FIG. 6 
are a plurality of key areas which the user may touch in 
order to indicate the particular type of data being sub 
mitted. Following the touching of one of these keys, a 
standard numerical keyboard can be displayed for in 
putting numerical data or a standard typewriter key 
board as shown in FIG. 4 may be displayed for input 
ting text, Thus, the application-dependent display of 
FIG. 6 can provide a mechanism for obtaining the use 
of application-independent input devices (FIGS. 4 and 
5) for the collection of specific types of information. 
Each of the displays shown in FIGS. 4, 5 and 6 include 
a key 31 labelled "continue.' Key 31 is used to return 
the display to whatever display was present before the 
current display. Thus, if, during the display of FIG. 6, 
the user wishes to input text for the "REASON’ field 
near the top of the display of FIG. 6, the keyboard of 
FIG. 4 will be displayed for text input. Following the 
text input, the "continue' key 31 of FIG. 4 will be 
touched, thereby restoring the display of FIG. 6. 
In order to better understand the operation of the 
terminal 10 of the present invention, the flowchart 
shown in FIG. 7 will now be discussed. In FIG. 7, there 
is shown a flow chart of a typical touch-screen key 
board operation. For illustrative purposes, a flowchart 
of the operation of the typewriter keyboard of FIG. 4 
will be described, although the operation of other types 
of general purpose or application-dependent keying 
systems will be readily apparent to those skilled in the 
art from this description. 
Turning then to FIG. 7, the keyboard operation starts 
at start box 30. In box 31, the current display which 
appears on the screen 20 is stored for later retrieval and 
restoral after the use of the typewriter keyboard is com 
pleted. In box 32, and under software control, the 
touchscreen areas which are to represent key areas are 
defined in x and y coordinates, and the visual appear 
ances of the keys are drawn on the flat display screen 15 
of FIG. 3. In box 33, the displayed key boxes are la 
belled with labels appropriate to the particular use of 
the simulated keyboard. For a typewriter keyboard, the 
labels shown in FIG. 4 would be appropriate. Of 
course, for other keyboards, i.e., the telephone key pad 
of FIG. 5, other labelling arrangements would be used. 
At box 34, the circuits of terminal 10 simply wait until 
the touch-sensitive screen 16 of terminal 10 detects the 
fact that the surface of the screen has been touched. 
When the screen is touched, box 34 translates the touch 
responsive signals from layer 16 into x-y coordinates on 
the display surface. In decision box 35, the x-y coordi 
nates of the touched point are compared to the prede 
fined x-y coordinates associated with the displayed 
keys. If the touched point lies outside of all of such 
predefined key areas, then box 34 is reentered to await 
another touch-responsive signal. 
If the coordinates of the touched point on the screen 
correspond to a predefined key area, then box 36 is 
entered to determine the particular character or nu 
meral which that key is intended to generate. In deci 
sion box 37, it is determined whether that character 
corresponds to one of the shift keys on the typewriter 

4,725,694 
5 
display. If so, box 38 is entered to erase the current 
labels on the keys (as shown in FIG. 4) and replace 
these labels with labels corresponding to the shifted 
values of these keys, e.g. capital letter rather than lower 
case letters. Thus, unlike standard keyboards, it is possi 
ble to relabel the keys in a transient manner as key 
stroking takes place. 
Once keys are relabeled in box 38, box 34 is re 
entered to await the next touch on the screen surface. If 
the key touched is not a shift key, then decision box 39 
is entered to determine whether or not the continue key 
31, shown in FIGS. 4, 5 and 6, was touched. This con 
tinue key is utilized in all keyboard displays to permit a 
return to the immediately preceeding display. Thus, if 
the continue key was touched, box 40 is entered which 
deletes the typewriter display and restores the previous 
display which was saved in box 31. If the continue key 
was not touched, then box 41 is entered, and the ASCII 
value of the key that was touched is transmitted to the 
connected computer or transmission link. Thereafter, 
box 34 is again re-entered to await the next touch on the 
touch-sensitive screen. 
Referring more particularly to FIG. 8, there is shown 
a block diagram of the internal circuitry of the terminal 
10. The internal circuitry of terminal 10 comprises, 
among other things, the flat display 15 and the touch 
sensitive screen 16. A decoder circuit 50 is responsive to 
the touch screen 16 and translates the output from 
touch-sensitive screen 16 (which may well be analog 
electrical signals) into x-y coordinates. The touch 
screen decoder circuit, in turn, communicates with the 
video controller 51 which maintains the keyboard dis 
play on display device 15 and compares the x-y coordi 
nates of the touched point to the predefined x-y coordi 
nates of the displayed screen. In response to matches, 
controller 51 produces ASCII characters which are 
delivered to a central processor in computer 52. 
Video controller 51 and computer 52 may, as illus 
trated in FIG. 8, be part of the hand-held terminal 10. In 
the alternative, controller 51 and computer 52 may be 
remotely located, and a flexible and retractile cord used 
to connect the portable elements 15, 16 and 50 to the 
balance of the circuitry. In the alternative, this connec 
tion can be had using wireless technology such as sonic, 
radio or infrared communication links. Indeed, com 
puter 52 might well comprise an entry point to a vast 
computer network including large amounts of ex 
tremely complex computation capability or access to 
large databases, the contents of which may prove useful 
in the particular application in which terminal 10 is 
being used. Thus, terminal 10, although small and sim 
ple in itself, can be used as an access mechanism to 
much larger and much more complex data processing 
or data retrieval capabilities. 
One particular application of terminal 10 is shown in 
FIG. 9. In FIG. 9, the terminal 10 is used as a bedside 
terminal in a hospital patient's room. Thus, a terminal 
similar to terminal 10 is available for each patient's bed 
in the hospital and is used much like the clipboard cur 
rently maintained manually for each patient's records. 
The bedside terminals 10 for each of the wards 70 are 
connected to medium-sized computers, each one servic 
ing one of the wards in the hospital. These mini-com 
puters, in turn, are connected, via communication path 
74, to larger computers 71 and 72 which include finan 
cial and medical records for each of the patients (in 
computer 71) or hospital inventory and diagnostic tools 
available in another computer 72. A plurality of clinics 
O 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
6 
73 also associated with the hospital are likewise con 
nected to backbone communication path 74, and com 
municate with standard computer terminals 75 to enter 
outpatient data into mini-computers servicing each of 
the clinics 73. Standard computer terminals 76 serve as 
input and output devices for computer 71 to permit 
patient registration, billing and other financial and ad 
ministrative functions. Other hospital sub-systems, such 
as laboratories, pharmaceutical dispensories, visitors 
desks, and so forth, may be connected to the same com 
puter system. The bedside terminals 10 therefore have 
access to all of the data generated and stored in these 
other sub-systems, as well as the computing power of 
the large mainframe computers 71 and 72. 
The system illustrated in FIG.9 might well also com 
prise a factory in which terminals 10 are used at the 
various workstations while the other sub-systems en 
compass functions such as inventory, new orders for 
output, purchasing, and so forth. The small size and 
rugged design of terminals 10 would serve extremely 
well in such an environment as well as the hospital 
OO. 
What is claimed is: 
1. A terminal comprising 
a touch-sensitive electroluminescent display surface 
for simultaneously displaying information and for 
accepting input information through a touch 
responsive area in said display surface, and 
means for coupling said surface to a digital computer 
for controlling said displaying and for storing and 
processing said input information, and including 
means for defining in said touch responsive area an 
essentially arbitrary pattern A of primary informa 
tion subareas of said touch-responsive area for 
providing information, with each defined subarea 
developing a preselected signal for said computer 
when touched, a subarea B for recalling a previ 
ously displayed pattern of primary information 
subareas, and subareas C for calling up for display 
preselected other patterns of primary information 
subareas. 
2. The terminal of claim 1 wherein said subarea B and 
subareas C direct said computer to carry out the respec 
tive functions when touched. 
3. A method of simulating a typewriting keyboard on 
a touch-sensitive display surface comprising the steps 
of: 
(a) displaying a typewriter keyboard arrangement on 
said display surface, 
(b) responding to the touching of any of the key areas 
of said keyboard display by generating the electric 
code corresponding to the character assigned to 
the touched key area, and 
(c) altering the labels on the key areas in response to 
the touching of a special key area corresponding to 
a shift or control key to assign different electric 
codes to these key areas corresponding to the al 
tered labels. 
4. A terminal comprising: 
a touch-sensitive plasma display surface for simulta 
neously displaying information and for accepting 
input information through a touch-responsive area 
in said display surface, and 
means for coupling said surface to a digital computer 
for controlling said displaying and for storing and 
processing said input information, and including 
means for defining in said touch responsive area (a) 
an essentially arbitrary pattern of primary informa 

4,725,694 
7 
tion subareas of said touch-responsive area for 
providing informatin, with each defined subarea 
developing a preselected signal for said computer 
when touched, (b) a subarea for recalling a previ 
ously displayed pattern of primary information 5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
8 
subareas, and (c) subareas for calling up for display 
preselected other patterns of primary information 
Subareas. 

