United States Patent (19) 
Niemeier 
54 METHOD FOR DATA INPUT ON A 
TOUCH-SENSTIVE SCREEN 
(76) Inventor: Charles J. Niemeier, 1239 Mandarin 
Dr, Sunnyvale, Calif. 94087 
(21) Appl. No.: 550,569 
(22 
Filed: 
Oct. 31, 1995 
Related U.S. Application Data 
63 
Continuation of Ser. No. 245,229, May 17, 1994, aban 
doned. 
(51) Int. Cl. ............................................ G09G 3/02 
52 U.S. Cl. ........................... 345/173; 34.5/168; 34.5/172 
58) Field of Search ..................................... 345/173, 174, 
345/175, 156, 168, 169, 171, 172: 341/22, 
23, 31, 33; 178/18, 19 
(56) 
References Cited 
U.S. PATENT DOCUMENTS 
4,211,497 
7/1980 Montgomery ........................... 400,486 
4,709,387 11/1987 Masuda ........... 
... 345,172 
4,725,694 
2/1988 Auer et al. .. 
... 345/73 
5,128,672 
7/1992 Kaehler ..................................... 341/23 
5,243,331 
9/1993 McCansland et al... 
... 345/72 
5,288,158 
2/1994 Matiar ..................... 
... 3457172 
5,319,386 
6/1994 Gunn et al. ............................. 34.5/173 
50 
||||III III 
USOO5574482A 
11) 
Patent Number: 
45) Date of Patent: 
5,574,482 
Nov. 12, 1996 
OTHER PUBLICATIONS 
Montgomery, "Bringing Manual Input into the 20th Cen 
tury”, Computer, Mar, 1982, pp. 11-18. 
Primary Examiner-Kee Mei Tung 
Assistant Examiner-Doon Chow 
(57) 
ABSTRACT 
A method of input programmed to operate on a representa 
tion of a keyboard appearing on a touch-sensitive screen in 
which letters are made temporarily available to the user 
based on studies of frequency of occurrence and sequence in 
the language that may then be selected for input by a sliding 
motion of an input device. The user slides an input device 
from the initially selected letter into the area representing 
any of the temporarily available keys, inputting any of the 
letters represented thereon. The process of selecting by 
touch and slide may be repeated as desired by the user. A 
method of capitalization is provided by touching the screen 
with an input device on the background area of the keyboard 
outside of the area representing the key or a letter and then 
sliding the input device into the area representing the key of 
the letter. A method of spacing is provided by a sliding 
movement of an input device from within the area repre 
senting the key of the last character before the desired space 
into the background area of the keyboard outside of the area 
of the key and then lifting the input device from the surfac 
of the screen. 
11 Claims, 7 Drawing Sheets 
  

5,574,482 
Sheet 1 of 7 
12, 1996 
Nov. 
U.S. Patent 

U.S. Patent 
40 
40 
60 
Nov. 12, 1996 
Sheet 2 of 7 
5,574,482 
50 OOOOOO 
(DG) 
3. 
60 --GA) CA) 3. 
7O 
CK) 
3.368. 
O) CD 
OCE) GD (K) 
O GOGN) (M) G) O 
* FIG. 6 
O (G) (E) (J) (K) (DG) 
Ox) (C) (V) (E) (N) (M) OO 
FIG. 7 

5,574,482 
Sheet 3 of 7 
12, 1996 
Nov. 
U.S. Patent 

U.S. Patent 
Nov. 12, 1996 
Sheet 4 of 7 
5,574,482 
" (OG) () (OOOOOOO 
60--G) (S) (D) (E) (G) (E) O 
(K) (DG) 
G2) Ox) (C) CV) (E) G) GDO O 

5,574,482 
Sheet S of 7 
12, 1996 
Nov. 
U.S. Patent 

5,574,482 
Sheet 6 of 7 
12, 1996 
Nov. 
U.S. Patent 
FIG. 3O 

5,574,482 
Sheet 7 of 7 
12, 1996 
Nov. 
U.S. Patent 
50 / 
FIG. 33 

5,574,482 
1. 
METHOD FOR DATA INPUT ON A 
TOUCHSENSTIVE SCREEN 
This is a continuation of application Ser. No. 08/245,229 
filed May 17, 1994, now abandoned 
BACKGROUND-FIELD OF INVENTION 
This invention pertains to inputting on a virtual keyboard 
on a touch-sensitive screen of a computer using a sliding 
method with additional temporary keys that display the 
predicted next character needed for input. 
DESCRIPTION OF PRIOR ART 
The current method for inputting data using touch-sensi 
tive computer screens involves touching or tapping with a 
finger or a hand-held device called a stylus on a represen 
tation of a keyboard as it appears on the screen. These 
representations of keyboards are commonly referred to as 
virtual keyboards. They are obviously different from the 
keyboards of typewriters and computer keyboards in that 
they have no moving parts actuated by depression caused by 
the user's fingers. However, these on-screen keyboards do 
have certain features of mechanical keyboards. The letters 
on the represented keys are usually arranged in the pattern 
known as the "qwerty' layout. The so-called qwerty layout 
is the one in traditional use for typewriters and computer 
keyboards. The name comes from the letter arrangement on 
the top alphabetic row, the first six letters being q- w- e-r- 
t- y. The keys as represented on the computer screen are 
fixed, and input is performed by individual touches or taps 
on them, similar to the operation of actual keyboards. The 
user touches or taps each letter individually on the repre 
sentation of its key as displayed on the screen, selecting the 
letter for input. Examples of virtual keyboards may be seen 
on hand-held computer devices called personal digital assis 
tants. 
U.S. Pat. No. 4,211,497 to Montgomery (1980) discloses 
a data input system on an apparatus keyboard with a 
substantially smooth surface to allow a sliding movement of 
the fingers over keys. The keys themselves are arranged such 
that the most often used keys are situated in the most readily 
accessible locations with regard to the fingers of the opera 
tor, and with keys which are frequently used in sequence. 
The key arrangements comprise trigrams and digraphs, as 
well as individual words, and has characters used frequently 
in sequence positioned adjacent to one another. Studies of 
the English language were used to analyze combinations of 
letters and the frequency of occurrence. The keys may be 
arranged along paths corresponding to the natural movement 
of the fingers, hands, and arms of the operator. Montgom 
ery's keyboard is an apparatus claim, and does not use a 
touch-sensitive screen. 
This same patent (Montgomery) displays several layouts 
of keyboards and arrangements of letters of the alphabet and 
space bars, as well as electrical specifications of the key 
board unit. 
The problems with Montgomery's keyboards include: 
(a) the layouts, which are different from the "qwerty' 
layout. Use of any of Montgomery's layouts requires a 
learning commitment and time investment on the part 
of the user, who most likely has already been trained on 
the qwerty keyboard. 
(b) the fixed arrangement of keys. Whichever of Mont 
gomery's layouts is chosen to be built, it is inseparable 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
2 
from a fixed apparatus. The apparatus is separate from 
the computer screen, and used in reference to the 
position of the user's body, arms and hands. Once built, 
it is fixed, a limitation of the apparatus to which 
Montgomery's layouts are intrinsically tied. 
(c) the smooth key design. Although the smooth design of 
the apparatus is needed to facilitate sliding of the 
fingers, it also means that there is no tactile "feedback' 
to the user while typing, a psychological barrier to the 
learning process. 
In U.S. Pat. No. 4,725,694 to Auer, et al., (1988), a 
simulated keyboard is represented on a touch-sensitive dis 
play used as a computer terminal. Auer permits a variety of 
simulated standard keyboards to be presented on screen, but 
the arrangement changes only when the user touches a 
special key area corresponding to a shift or control key that 
causes the key labels or key images to be altered. This 
effectively limits the keyboards to a series of fixed key 
arrangements, each called up after the required additional 
step of touching the shift or control keys represented on the 
currently displayed keyboard. A different approach is taken 
in U.S. Pat. No. 5,128,672 to Kaehler (1992). In an attempt 
to reduce the size of the displayed keyboard or touchpad for 
use on smaller, hand-held computer devices, Kaehler 
reduces the number of displayed letter keys, arranges the 
characters based on the frequency of the particular charac 
ters in a language or application, and then predicts and 
displays the letter keys needed by the user within a variety 
of predefined sets of key images. Although each key can 
display different characters, only one character is presented 
at a time on each key. This means that, despite the predictive 
capabilities, there are times during input when the user must 
manually change the character set layout because the needed 
letter is not on screen. This is done by touching a "Flip' key 
assigned to change the letter layout to another predefined 
layout. Also, each character is displayed on only one key 
location whenever that character is presented. While this 
aides the user in learning the layout location of the letters, 
it precludes a sliding method of input. The next needed 
letter, even if on the current layout, may be to far from the 
preceding letter to make practical the selection by sliding 
without touching another undesired letter. This is especially 
true on a small screen, where space is limited. 
Note: In the following discussions, all references to key or 
keys mean the representation of a key. 
SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION 
This invention is a process of inputting data using a 
representation of a keyboard on a touch-sensitive screen. 
The input operation is carried out by selecting characters on 
the represented keyboard with an input device or finger. The 
innovation of this invention is that input is facilitated by a 
sliding or wiping motion through available letters, letter 
combinations, parts of words, or whole words. To increase 
the effectiveness of this sliding input method, temporarily 
active keys appear on the screen in close proximity to the 
standard keys, providing choices for immediate input by 
sliding through them without having to lift the input device 
and move to a different key. Tapping with a stylus input 
device or finger on representations of keys showing char 
acters is the current state of the art for on-screen touch 
sensitive keyboards. With this invention, tapping is reduced 
to a minimum. 
Another ramification of the use of temporary keys is the 
ability to have the letters on the temporary keys change 

5,574,482 
3 
during input based on the next letters according to a word 
list, such as a dictionary. 
In addition, this invention provides for two other new 
techniques. Capitalization of letters and spacing are 
achieved using a wiping motion of an input device. 
OBJECTS AND ADVANTAGES OF THE 
INVENTION 
Studies of the English language have been used for this 
invention to determine the best possible choices and 
arrangement of letters on the temporarily active keys. The 
studies used are Secret and Urgent by Fletcher Pratt, pub 
lished by Bobbs-Merrill Co., 1939, which lists digraphs, 
trigrams and frequently used words in the English language, 
and Computational Analysis of Present-Day American 
English by Henry Kucera and W. Nelson Francis, published 
by Brown University Press, 1967, which also lists the 
highest frequency words in English. 
Accordingly, several objects and advantages of the 
method are: 
(a) directly and immediately to present to the user of an 
on-screen touch-sensitive keyboard additional, tempo 
rary keys with the most probable next letters, combi 
nation of letters, parts of words, or words; 
(b) to provide these keys so that they may be selected by 
the wiping motion of a stylus or finger, in order to 
expedite and facilitate input; 
(c) to provide a method by which the user can capitalize 
a letter, without having to tap a separate and distinct 
key for that function. This is made possible by allowing 
the user to put the stylus or finger down on the 
background area or the keyboard outside of a key 
representing the letter to be capitalized and then wiping 
into the key area of the letter; 
(d) to provide a method by which the user can input 
spaces after letters or words by wiping into the back 
ground area of the keyboard outside of the key of the 
last letter or character inputted; 
(e) to give a smooth, more writing-like method of input as 
opposed to: 1.) the tapping out of letters individually 
with stylus or finger, and 2.) the wiping on a smooth 
apparatus keyboard such as Montgomery's that pro 
vides no tactile feedback to the user. 
Further objects and advantages of the method will become 
apparent from consideration of the drawings and ensuing 
description. 
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS 
The present invention will be more fully understood by 
reference to the following detailed descriptions thereof when 
read in conjunction with the attached drawings, and 
wherein: 
FIG. 1 is a representation of a qverty keyboard for 
entering in information with an input device on any touch 
sensitive screen on a computer, personal digital assistant, 
personal communicator, or hand-held device, 
FIG. 2 is a representation of an alphabetically arranged 
keyboard for entering in information with an input device on 
any touch-sensitive screen on a computer, personal digital 
assistant, personal communicator, or handheld device. 
FIG. 3 shows a prior art keyboard layout of Edward B. 
Montgomery. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
4 
For the purposes of FIGS. 4through 30, the qwerty layout 
illustrates how the temporarily active keys of the method 
appear to the user upon selection of each letter of the 
alphabet with an input device. These Figures show the 
keyboard layout of FIG. 1 when individual letter keys are 
touched, bringing onto the screen temporary keys that differ 
from the basic keys. These temporary keys, placed in close 
proximity to the initially touched key, offer additional 
choices for immediate selection by a sliding motion of the 
stylus or finger over the temporary keys. 
FIG. 32 shows the process of input of the word "that' on 
a qwerty layout using the wiping motion of the method. 
"That' is one of the most commonly used words in the 
English language. 
FIG. 33 shows a representation of a stylus-type of input 
device. 
REFERENCE NUMERALS IN DRAWINGS 
40 a representation of a touch-sensitive screen 
50 a representative input device for use on a touch sensitive 
Screen 
60 a representation of a key containing a character on a 
keyboard arrangement 
70 a representation of a temporarily active key containing a 
letter 
80 a representation of the area outside of a key commonly 
known to as the background of the keyboard. 
DESCRIPTION OF INVENTION 
A typical embodiment of the method is herein disclosed. 
(The art for producing a touch-sensitive screen is well 
known and is not claimed.) This method allows a represen 
tation of a keyboard appearing on a computers touch 
sensitive screen 40 to be manipulated by the wiping motion 
of an input device 50 or a finger or fingers. One or several 
keyboard layouts produce a new choice of key or keys 70 
that temporarily appear in close proximity to a selected key 
60. Temporary keys 70 that appear (FIGS. 4 through 29, and 
32) are visually differentiated in some manner from the basic 
arrangement of keys 60, and display a letter or letters that 
comprise digraphs and trigrams, parts of words, words or 
characters that are frequently used in the English language. 
The letters that appear on the temporarily active keys 70 may 
also change during input based on letter sequences found in 
a word list known as a dictionary. 
More specifically, the steps for producing the preferred 
embodiment of the sliding process of letter input, capitali 
Zation, and spacing is as follows: 
(a) display a keyboard arrangement on a touch-sensitive 
screen, consisting of at least one key individual to each 
of the standard letters of the alphabet; 
(b) is input device within the area of a key? If yes, input 
letter and display temporary letter keys in close prox 
imity to touched key; if no, turn on capitalization; 
(c) is device picked up from within area of a key? If yes, 
turn off capitalization and return to (b). If no, wait for 
movement of device and continue; 
(d) is device picked up from background area of keyboard 
arrangement? if yes, and if a letter has been inputted, 
input a space and return to (b); if no, wait for movement 
of device and return to (b). 
Operation: An input device 50 or finger is used to first 
select, on a touch sensitive computer screen 40, an indi 
vidual representation of a key 60 having on it a represen 

5,574,482 
S 
tation of a letter or character. The device is then used to slide 
over the additional available active letters 70. More than 
one temporary key can be selected by keeping the input 
device on the screen and continuing the wipe to the next 
desired active key area. Lifting of the input device 50 from 
the screen ends the current wiping process. Capitalization of 
a letter is caused by first placing the input device 50 onto the 
area 80 commonly known as the background of the key 
board outside of the representation of the key 60 containing 
the letter to be capitalized and then sliding the device 50 into 
the area of the key 60. The wipe from within the represen 
tation of any key 60 or 70 may continue onto the background 
area of the keyboard 80 causing the input of a space. This 
selection and wiping process is repeated as the method of 
input. 
Studies of the frequency of words and the sequence of 
letters in the language are used in deciding which ones to 
display temporarily 70 around a letter 60 on the basic key 
arrangement. The availability of temporary keys 70 contain 
ing related letters can be used with any layout of letters on 
the basic keyboard. A number of layouts could be provided 
for the user to choose from: alphabetic arrangement, 
"qwerty', or some other arrangement. While using any of 
these basic arrangements of letters on the keyboard, the user 
would also have available the letters next most likely to be 
needed for input. 
FIGS. 4 through 32 show the preferred embodiments of 
my invention. 
FIG. 4 shows a qverty keyboard as it appears when letter 
a is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy 
outline, can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping 
motion from within the area of letter a to within the area of 
any of the temporary keys. 
FIG. 5 shows a qverty keyboard as it appears when letter 
b is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy 
outline, can be rapidly selected with a continuous wiping 
motion from within the area of letter b to within the area of 
any of the temporary keys. 
FIG. 6 shows a qverty keyboard as it appears when letter 
c is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy 
outline, can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping 
motion from within the area of letter c to within the area of 
any of the temporary keys. 
FIG.7 shows a qWerty keyboard as it appears when letter 
d is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy 
outline, can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping 
motion from within the area of letter d to within the area of 
any of the temporary keys. 
FIG. 8 shows a qverty keyboard as it appears when letter 
e is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy 
outline, can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping 
motion from within the area of letter e to within the area of 
any of the temporary keys. 
FIG. 9 shows a qWerty keyboard as it appears when letter 
f is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy outline 
can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping motion from 
within the area of letter f to within the area of any of the 
temporary keys. 
FIG. 10 shows aqwerty keyboard as it appears when letter 
g is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy 
outline, can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping 
motion from within the area of letterg to within the area of 
any of the temporary keys. 
FIG. 11 shows a qverty keyboard as it appears when letter 
his touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy outline 
can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping motion from 
within the area of letter h to within the area of any of the 
temporary keys. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
6 
FIG. 12 shows aqwerty keyboard as it appears when letter 
i is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy outline 
can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping motion from 
within the area of letter i to within the area of any of the 
temporary keys. 
FIG. 13 shows aqwerty keyboard as it appears when letter 
j is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy outline 
can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping motion from 
within the area of letter j to within the area of any of the 
temporary keys. 
FIG. 14 shows a qwerty keyboard as it appears when letter 
k is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy outline 
can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping motion from 
within the area of letter k to within the area of any of the 
temporary keys. 
FIG. 15 shows a qverty keyboard as it appears when letter 
l is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy outline, 
can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping motion from 
within the area of letter l to within the area of any of the 
temporary keys. 
FIG.16 shows a qverty keyboard as it appears when letter 
m is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy 
outline can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping 
motion from within the area of letterm to within the area of 
any of the temporary keys. 
FIG. 17 shows aqwerty keyboard as it appears when letter 
n is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy outline 
can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping motion from 
within the area of letter n to within the area of any of the 
temporary keys. 
FIG. 18 shows a qwerty keyboard as it appears when letter 
o is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy 
outline, can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping 
motion from within the area of letter o to within the area of 
any of the temporary keys. 
w 
FIG. 19 shows a qverty keyboard as it appears when letter 
p is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy 
outline, can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping 
motion from within the area of letter p to within the area of 
any of the temporary keys. 
FIG. 20 shows aqwerty keyboard as it appears when letter 
q is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy outline 
can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping motion from 
within the area of letter q to within the area of any of the 
temporary keys. 
FIG. 21 shows a qverty keyboard as it appears when letter 
ris touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy outline, 
can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping motion from 
within the area of letter r to within the area of any of the 
temporary keys 70, shown in heavy outline can b keys. 
FIG.22 shows a qverty keyboard as it appears when letter 
s is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy outline, 
can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping motion from 
within the area of letters to within the area of any of the 
temporary keys. 
FIG.23 shows a qverty keyboard as it appears when letter 
t is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy outline 
can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping motion from 
within the area of letter t to within the area of any of the 
temporary keys. 
FIG. 24 shows a qverty keyboard as it appears when letter 
u is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy 
outline, can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping 
motion from within the area of letter u to within the area of 
any of the temporary keys. 
FIG. 25 shows aqwerty keyboard as it appears when letter 
v is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy outline 

5,574,482 
7 
can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping motion from 
within the area of letter v to within the area of any of the 
temporary keys. 
FIG. 26 shows aqwerty keyboard as it appears when letter 
w is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy 
outline, can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping 
motion from within the area of letter w to within the area of 
any of the temporary keys. 
FIG.27 shows aqwerty keyboard as it appears when letter 
x is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy 
outline, can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping 
motion from within the area of letter x to within the area of 
any of the temporary keys. 
FIG.28 shows a qverty keyboard as it appears when letter 
y is touched. The temporary keys 70, shown in heavy 
outline, can be rapidly selected by a continuous wiping 
motion from within the area of lettery to within the area of 
any of the temporary keys. 
FIG.29 shows aqwerty keyboard as it appears when letter 
z is touched. The wiping motion from within the area of 
letter Z to within the area of any of the temporary keys 70, 
shown in heavy outline, can be rapidly selected by a 
continuous keys. 
FIG. 30 shows an example of the capitalization process on 
an on-screen touch-sensitive qwerty keyboard. The user first 
touches the screen with an input device 50 the background 
area of the keyboard 80 in outside of a key 60 representing 
the letter to be capitalized. Then, without lifting the input 
device, 50 the user slides the input device 50 into the area 
of the letter key 60. This will result in the upper-case form 
of the letter. 
FIG. 31 shows an example of the spacing process on an 
on-screen touch-sensitive qwerty keyboard. Having selected 
the letter key 60 just before the desired space to the 
background area of the keyboard 80 without lifting the input 
device 50, the user slides the input device 50 outside of the 
key 60 and then lifts the input device. This motion of 
continuing into the background area of the keyboard 80 
outside of a key 60 and then lifting the input device 50 is a 
way of causing a space to appear after that letter before 
continuing on in the input process. 
FIG. 32 shows an example of the input of the word “that' 
after selecting the letter t on an on-screen touch-sensitive 
keyboard using the method. When t is touched with the input 
device, the temporarily available keys 70 that appear for use 
include the letters hand a. Without lifting the input device 
50 from the screen, the user slides the device 50 from t into 
h, then into a, and then back into t. The user can then 
continue to slide to the background area of the keyboard 80 
outside of the letter t, and lift the device 50 which will result 
in a space. The lines connecting the letters in this particular 
figure show the path of the input device to input the word 
“that'. 
FIG. 33 shows a drawing of a stylus-type of input device 
50. 
Following are the benefits of this method of wiping 
through and into keys. 
(a) The immediate presentation of the most probable next 
letter, letters, combination of letters, or words for 
selection by the user anticipates the needs of the user 
and increases speed of input. 
(b) The speed and responsiveness of the input device 
coupled with the rapidity of the wiping motion, as 
opposed to tapping of individual letters, also increases 
speed. 
(c) The feel of a stylus input device as it wipes the screen 
is a comfortable analogy to writing, as opposed to 
O 
5 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
8 
touching or striking individual keys on a hard screen 
with the stylus or the finger, which is uncomfortable for 
the user and causes fatigue in the hand. 
(d) The keyboard arrangement can be changed and 
adapted to the users needs; it is not fixed or constrained 
by its physical construction. The familiarity of the 
"qwerty' keyboard arrangement as the basic layout, or 
the option of an alphabetic layout, or any other arrange 
ment found to be of advantage to the user is always 
available. 
(e) The repeated representation of the same most probable 
next letters each time a key is touched reinforces the 
learning process and reduces the amount of time 
required to learn the format of the temporary keys and 
also reduces the resistance on the part of the user to this 
new method. 
(f) The methods provided for capitalization and spacing 
eliminate the extra step of touching a shift or caps key, 
or a representation of a space bar or key, making these 
functions easier and less disruptive to the input process. 
SUMMARY, RAMIFICATIONS, AND SCOPE 
Accordingly, the reader will see that the selection and 
wiping of keys made available based on frequency of 
occurrence and therefore on a most probable next basis will 
have the following advantages: 
it anticipates the needs of the user 
increases the speed of input 
provides a method of input that is more like writing than 
does the method of tapping individual letters 
Although the description above contains many specifica 
tions, these should not be construed as limiting the scope of 
the invention but as merely providing illustrations of some 
of the presently preferred embodiments of this method. For 
example, the layout of the keys can have other designs, 
sizes, and shapes, such as differing numbers of rows and 
columns, differing letter and character arrangements on the 
basic keys, differing delineation of the temporarily active 
keys, different choices of letters on the temporarily active 
keys, changing choices of letters on the temporarily active 
keys, and differing arrangements of the temporarily active 
keys around the basic keys. 
The input device may be a stylus, a finger, or any tool that 
works as an input device on a touch-sensitive screen. The 
screen may be a screen appearing on any type of computer 
or hand-held computer that uses a touch-sensitive Screen. 
Thus the scope of the method should be determined by the 
appended claims and their legal equivalents, rather than by 
the examples given. 
I claim: 
1. A method for data input on a touch-sensitive display, 
comprising the steps of: 
a. displaying a keyboard arrangement on said display 
including at least one key individual to each of the 
letters comprising the standard letters of the alphabet, 
b. presenting on said keyboard arrangement, upon the 
touch of any key area corresponding to said standard 
letters of the alphabet, a plurality of additional tempo 
rary keys including at least one key individual to each 
of selected ones of letters of the same alphabet in close 
proximity to said key area so as to allow sliding from 
the touched key area into any of Said temporary keys, 
and 
c. responding to the touching of any of the key areas of the 
keyboard arrangement and any of the said additional 

5,574,482 
temporary key areas by inputting the character assigned 
to the touched key. 
2. The method of claim 1, wherein said temporary keys 
include at least one key individual to each of a predeter 
mined selection of letters that are frequently used in 5 
sequence. 
3. The method of claim 1, wherein said temporary keys 
include at least one key individual to each of letters pre 
sented during input on a changing basis depending on letter 
sequences found in a word list known as a dictionary. 
4. The method of claim 1, wherein said keyboard is 
arranged in the qwerty arrangement. 
5. The method of claim 1, wherein said keyboard is 
arranged in alphabetic order. 
6. A method for capitalization of letters during input, 
comprising the steps of: 
a displaying a keyboard arrangement on a touch-Sensitive 
display including at least one key individual to each of 
the letters comprising the standard letters of the alpha 
bet, 
b. initiating a touch on said display in an area outside of 
said keyboard arrangement known as the background 
of said keyboard arrangement with an input device of 
a uSer, 
c. sliding said device on the display into the area of said 
key, and 
d. responding to the touch of the key by inputting said 
letter in capitalized form. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
10 
7. The method of claim 6, wherein said keyboard is 
arranged in the qwerty arrangement. 
8. The method of claim 6, wherein said keyboard is 
arranged in alphabetic order. 
9. A method for inserting a space after the inputting of a 
letter during input, comprising the steps of: 
a displaying a keyboard arrangement on a touch-sensitive 
display including at least one key individual to each of 
the letters comprising the standard letters of the alpha 
bet, 
b. inputting a letter by touching the area of said key with 
an input device of a user, 
c. sliding said input device on said display from the key 
to the area just outside of the key known as the 
background of said keyboard arrangement, 
d. lifting the input device from the surface of said display, 
and 
e. responding to the lifting of the device from the display 
by inputting a space. 
10. The method of claim 9, wherein said keyboard is 
arranged in the qwerty arrangement. 
11. The method of claim 9, wherein said keyboard is 
arranged in alphabetic order. 

